LT,* HISTORY

of

mum SOUTO

I was born in the little village of * Perrol de paliciam,

Spin in June of - 1658, I have reached the advanced age of

77 years.

father was a stoneecatter, toiling from sun up

until night, my mother wus born and raised in the country.

I am, therefore a plebeian. MY parents were poor people,

and in those days a poor man could only look forward to a

very meagre education. This was the education that 1 aee

quired. I never obtained a degree or title of any kind. 1

was especially interested in Universal History and Geogruphy.

These were my pot studies.

On October 30th of 1870, a friend took me to Havana,

Cuba, lthough usually the people from Galicia ( my province)

went to -rgentine and Uruguay; while the Asturtanos and

those from the region of Santander TPent to Cubs.. I ,as than

only twelve years of age. This friend put me to work, at

that tender age, in a bat factory situated in Unto street

No. 165. I was very badly treated during the time 1 worked

at this place. Part of my duties consisted in going every

day to a coaleyard and fetch coal with -which to heat the

flat irons. The owner of this coal+yard was a kind and

sympathetic man. I made him a confidant of all my troubles,

(1) Mt. Souto is 3ecretry of the Centro Sepanol ( )a nish

Club).

26086

telling him of the 111 treatment I was receiving at the

hat factory. This man had a nephew who owned a variety

store in the town of 4antiago de laa Veggs, some seven*

teen miles from Havunu. 4se day, to my immenee joy, he

took me there to work far his nephew. In c. com,mrutive

short time I knew everyone in torn, and ves muce esteemed

by 21. Here I passed the best years of my life.

It was the custom o(. the owner of this viety store

to purchLee old newspapers at a very lor price. A.th

these newspapers he would wrap the different a rtioles

that were sold. I remember that I used to dig into this

pile of old newspapers, rending avidly every scrap of

news I could find. One day, while looking over to,:se

newspapers, I 08140 upon a very old number of t,1,3 "Jaoet.A,

de In Aabana" (3pecte of llamas') in which I found muslY

interesting articles or the Civil ar of the United *Assts.,

depicting the various ik„ttles that nad been fought between

the north and the South. Irma then on I ould seek every

bit of news from the United1States, reading with the tamest

interest ,. nything about 7;a shington or Lincoln; in fact

anything I could get a hold of that dolt yith the United

.2tatess

I.remember well a song in Spanish that once a?pesred

in a newspaper, and rhich I memorized rord for rords

II yus then eighteen years of age.)

TO • 31II107

I remember when very young a beautiful foreaead I saw,
4 man standina near your image, one day I disclosed.
landid, ignorant, with stuttering lipes
"rho is ha? I sked, * His name I implore."

And rhile rith hie riaht your image he a hored, with radiant Joy, his face to me he turned.
'1.th so norous accents, that pride denoteds

(1)

'A about this time I met a clastameker by the name

of on ?ederico, Mho had been in Ilea York for many years.

! told him that I rse very desircve of galt s. to the

7nited .! tates, but did not know rhat to do, foraalthough

I should, be able to save slittle money, what ars I to do

in Ire:- York when this money gave out, not even knowing

ho a to liptolt 1:nglieh. He then told ma that the beet thing

I could do vas to lerrn how to rake cigars. In that manner

rcould easily find - ork in ?ter York. I, therefore, de*

aided to learn the trade, and come to the rnited 2tatee.

hen I iMparted my decision to the or ner af the

variety store, he told me that it rots pure foolhardiness,

that the cigar-makers rere a laaye needy, an1 that I

should remove such a foolish idea from my head. He took

the rtole thing hard, but nothina daunted ne. I went to

see scigar manufacturer, who was a ftiend of mine, in •

Santin40 de lte Vegas, and he told me that I must pledge

myself to rork two years ',le an apprentice. There and

then I signed the contraot o and bent all my energies to

the leIrning of the cigar haloes*. AS soon as I left

the variety store, the owner closed that store and

another branch he had.

4t the end of the tro years I wms well versed

in the cigar industry. It VRO about this time that I

came across a friend of mine s who had been a , o.worker

vith me at the variety store. He well: at that time

pinn-in on netting up a general variety store, and

asked me if I would go to work with Ma. - foresaw

that thin re the very thing I needed in or ler to ob.

tam nsufficient funds for my trip to New York, rrorked

one year and eleven months at this place, during 'which

time I saved everything I could.

(1) Reouerdo que my rano, a tan hombre vila fronts,

delante de tu Image:* tan dia desoubri.
I outdid°, ignorante, con lablos balbuoientees
"Alen en* ° se decirle, * au timbre puedo oirY'

Y en tante que su diestra tu Lmagen sanclaba, con jubilo radiants, Cu rostro a ml volvio;
Y con so noro a cento r que or gullo demostrabag

TashingtoW me did°, * per el soy libre yo."

%nether thing that proved favorable to me was

that Mr, Diego Lopez Trujillo WGS established in

New York City, operating a enall cigar factory. Re

had been a resident of Santiago de las Vegas. so L

procured myself with a recommendation to him. .6 #

soon as I reached New York City ( the place of my

dreams) I was employed by Lr. Trujillo, and my rorries

for the present were over.

One of the first things I did was to become u

citizen of my chosen country. Uy citizenship , a pers

were issued on October ] 5th, 1884. ( 1)

It was in this same year that I married the

daughter of Ur. Diego Lopes Trujillo. te had three

children in New York: two daughters and ono eon.

these, two died a girl and a boy. The little girl

died or scarlet fever, due to a verjoesTiorggrit house,

which my brother had chosen for me. For several days

we were unable to bury her due to iterrible blizard o

and a great a mount of snov that nevi fallen. e had to

wait until . the railroad tracks between Broadwy and

vAlliamsburg to Cypress Hill Cemetery had been cleared.

(1) Mr. Souto showed me the citizenship paper, a,proved

by the Court of Common Pleas of New York City, a very old document showing yellow in some places.
Then he carefully refolded it, and placed it baok in the safe of the 3panish Club.

The reader can well imagine the anguish we rent through

seeing our little daughter in state day in and day out.

The boy died hen he we teething.

Shortly after my marriage, my fAtherftinplar moved

his little factory to Key "'set. There, fortune smiled

at his constant efforts, and he built one of the largest

factories in Toy -est * He became immensely rich.

In the year 1889 there rail a grent epidemic of " flu"

in new York City. It spread like wild fire throughout

the city. Hy rife contracted the disease, and as a result

her lungs were seriously affected. Axe to her coadition

/ found it impossible to allow her to remain in New York

City during the winter months, so I took advantage of an

invitation from my fntherwinsplar to, come to rey est with

my ir.ire and °ilkr remaining daughter and pass the winters

there, as the climate was vary temperate.

Upon my arrival in rey vest with my wife and little

daughter, I found that a strike had been declared in all

the cigar factories. The cigaramakers were demanding

it 1.00 in crease Der thousand on the cigar brands, and also

that a Regulation Committee be Gppointed.

esing this

state of affairs, and realizing that if I remained there

I would be living off my father...in-law, I decided to

return to /ow York, and leave my wife and daughter in

rey ' set, until winter as over.

On my way to New York, however, I passed through

Tampa, and noted that everyone was well satisfied and

working hard. Her I found an old friend of mine from

new York, Mr. Marie* Pandas of the factory of Lozano

Pendan

Co. Talking with him, he showed me the many

advantages in Tampa, and prevailed upon me to remain.

I, therefore, decided to stay here and work for Yr.

Pendas. rhen winter wee over, I went back to Key Test

for my family, and from there returned to New York City.

There I - eat to work at the principal factory of Xi*.

7nrique Pendas which was situated on Pearl artist.

:everal years afterwards, however, Ur. Peados removed

that factory, and enlarged the one in Tampa.

In the winter of 1890, my wife once more took sick,

and I hurried her off to Toy rest. I remained a lone in

New York, and experienced the severest cold weather that

I can remember. I would think of the wonderful winter

I had passed in Tampa, and remember that -bile winter

wee at its worse in New York, the flowers bloomed here.

I felt something akin to homesickness for Tampa, although

I had spent only a few rlonthe here. One day while look..

Lag over the various things of my rife, and rhioh goes to

make a home, I decided that I would not remain another

day in AWR York. I, therefore, wrote to m, wife saying

that I was leaving for Tempos bade * goodobbye" to all my

friends in New York, and arrived here in January of 1991.

3ince than I have remained here for good.

I am surrounded here by friends, even the " paving stones"

in all Thor City know me. Ili wife was finally cured here.

he

presented me with another son here, v4ho is now 31 years old,

11 daughter r smarried here and has three sons. The old*

est is working for Lykes Brothers; another one has a poultry

market; and the youngest is stu4Aing radio. They do not loiter

about CA, 'treats, smoking cigarettes, and using profane

language* like most of the youths of today in Thor City. They

enrn what they eat. They have been brought up properly.

ry son, who was born in Tampa, is married and has three

small boys. He works at the factory of Bantaella as picker,

and is much esteemed there.

I rorked at the factory of Lozano Pandas , Co., up to

the time the factory was consumed by fire.

In New York I had been workinz rith Mr. Cuesta, Mr. Ray,

rr. Santaells and several others. They had been oigar*makers.

'Ana° then the above mentioned men becpme great cigar

manufacturers in Tampa.

Then the factory of Lozano Pandas :k Co. has been dts*

strayed by fire * I went to work with nr. Cuestas He was

then part owner of the Cuesta*Ballard tw. Co. which was

situated where Hav*a*Tamga.is today locateds corner 22nd

treat and 10th venue. While working here the cigar.

(1)
makers requested that I rend to them. I took up these

(1) A reader at the cigar factory is one who retds npvele,

stories * newspapers, etc.* while the cidar*makers are
-lorking. It was in etructive Rnd educational, yet tile manufacturers abolished it. The cigar*makers went on strike but lost. It was abolished November 27, 1931.

duties willingly, making cigars part time and reading A. other

times. I used to translate for them the " New York HeralV,

"The 4tigen" of Jacksonville, and " The Tampa a ulia.ILeer.

Later Mt. Cueeta separated from Mr. Ballard, setting

up a cigar factory with Yr, Rey in rest Tampa. I rent with

Hr. Cueeta and worked for him for over twenty years, rtg"iings,

translating nnd makinc, cigars, all within the days work.

groat friendship sprung between Ur. Cuestu and myself,

a friendship that had started in New York. Although be is

nor very old, feeble, and barely able to g.t around, he comes

to the panish Club in his car to see me. i.e be is unable

to get out of the car rithout help, he Usually sends in the

chauffeur to let me know that he is here. I then go out and

have a *ice little that with him.

I rsa app ited 3ecretery of the Centro l'epanol in the

year 1900, end served until 1906. In 1906 I went back to

work at the cigar factory. However, in 1916 I was again

recalled to the Spanish Club. Since than I have held this

position permanently. ( 1)

/ have a brother, now 70 years of age, living at ?ells

Village, Connecticut. He is a true Yankee, and a great Am

mIrer of tr. Roosevelt.

I have a lrays dressed -ithin my means, or in other words,

wear only that for which I amiable to pay, not like many

who go about dressed like a guillienalre, without a cent in

their pocket and owing Money to every store in Tampa.

(1) Mr. Souto is eonsidered by many as " Fermin, the 'Secretary

without an equal".

Upwards of $2,000,000 have passed through my hands since

I have been Secretary of the Centro lspanol, and although it

has never been requested of me, I have placed myself under

bond with two companies.

Many of our members are unable to pay their monthly fee,

cs they are not rorking. However, we do not cz.st him a side

because the effects of the depression have reached hia.

administer medical cid and medicine whenever he is sick. The

receipts unpaid of the Club sum up to $2,99?. " The Seocion

de 1.ropegandas, a department of the Club that takes care of

investigating all unpaid receipts, paying the receipts of

those rho are out of work. has paid nearly all of the above

sumo and having a balance now of $949.00.

On March 27th we paid for doctors and help at the sallow.

to rium as follows:

Doctors ..•••••••••••••••••,•••••• 14381•66

(1)

a mployees of the Sanatorium.......

Ma*

It will be noted that I paid this a mount four days before

the end of the month.

Many or the members have so much faith in me that they ale's

me their money to save for them. ( 2)

(1) Of this a mount Dr. Panielle receives $ 5,5.00 monthly for his services as Medical Director. Other doctors and a isistants receiving from $ 75.00 to $ 175.00.

(2) Mr : Saute has asked me to insert the follewing clause

of the Clubs

The objects of this corporation shall be to render voluno

try assistance and relief to all worthy members in case of misfortune or distress, to extend to than educational facilities, and to encourage and promote a mong them, and '
their families, recreation and social intercourse; but in no case shall any member be entitled to as receive any pecuniary gain or profit from as, of the operations or transactions of the Corporation. Its grincipal office shall be in the City of Tampa, County of Hillsborough and the Stats of Plortda, but its establishments for relief, recreation or entertainment may be located any.
where in the said county of Hillsborough* .

Ky personal opinion of the cigar industry is that it

is going from bcd to worse. If conditions are not remedied

soon in Thor City, we will soon be in the deplorable coo.

litters rey rest found itself recently. The machineries

for making cigars are at the root of all this evil. Over

600 women, who were employed as cigar bander., have been

thrown out, due to the cigar banding machine. Countless

numbers of cigarwsutkers are today unemployed due to cigarw

making machines.

On the other hand, the cigar manufacturers here try to

compete with the manufacturers of the North in the produo.

tion of cheap cigars. twhat cost, however, to the few

Cuban and 3panish cigar...makers who are working. These expert

cigarwmakers are forced sto work with the rorst tobacco

material obtainable. The manufacturers pay than a miserw

able rage in order to compete with the cheap cigars, prow

duced by machineries, in those Northern cities.

The manufacturers are now purchasing only the small

leaves from the lower stem of the tobacco plant, rhich is

nothing but trash. 4 decent cigar cannot be made from such

a unall leaf. The purchase of the fine " vueltL.a bujo"

tobacco has reached such

low level that the government

of Culx is eariously considering the suppression of plant.

jag this good tobacco for the coming your.

I am reminded of a conversation between a trench

peastalt and n'm erican tourist in ?ranee: In his travels

the tourist came across the ?reach peasant, who was pa..

tiettly ploring his field 7:ith the help of an ox and an

old time rooden plow. The tourist was greatly astonished

at this primitive form of plowing the field. ,ond said as

riuch to the peasant, who replied* * Stance consumes all the

'heat produced in this country and in its co.on ies. rhile

there is one bushel left, France will not purchase from any

other country. We, therefore, roll the bushel for ! 1.50,

rhile the United States with all the machineries Plov'ieg

the fields, cutting and handing the rheat out in bushels,

have had to sell as low as 5010 per bushel. This has never

happened in Trance.*

do not 71sh to be interpreted, however, that 1as

aWerSS to ril ferns of machineries. I realize the great

step forTard that has been taken by means of them. West

machineries have bettered the condition of the people, but

others htve proven detrimental.

rany of sly old friends are today in desperate means,

and whenever I nest them I stand them a cup of coffee, a

sandwich or any other thing. Many are the times that they

coma to my office, and I immediately dig it my pocizet

and hand 'them out a dollar.

I nm erLrninii: only Tenual salary. yet I =neje to

:Inve rliatever I can. Every month I send so neting to my

brother in Connecticut as he has been suffering from the

etomneh for - lay years.

-hat salary I earn at the 3panith Club to paid mos as

bookkeeper, not AS Seoretery as no .of finial of the Club

receives one cent for his services. They render their

services for love of the Club, and not because of any

pecuniary gain.