Mari Tomasi

k-q

Recorded in
Writers' Seetion Files

DATE: c rn 3 1940_

FOUR WOMEN

1.

Scotch Quarryman's Widow.

The yellow house on Quarry Hill had seen better days.

Two tiers of kitchen porches sagged beneath the weight of iceboxes and chairs. The woman spoke from behind the screen door

of the lower porch. She fumbled with her apron, and wiped

her red hands dry. " Sure, come in." A good natured mails

wrinkled the corners of her blue eyes and wide, firm mouth.

"Alex said you would be coming today. Come in.

"This used to be • rooming and boarding house for quarrymen. My mother-in-law ran it when she came from Scotland.

She did well. Her husband worked in the quarries. They worked

full time those days, and what with the board-and-room money

and being thrifty, and having only one child--that was my husband,

Johnny - they were able to buy the house for their own. No, I

was born in Barre. Me and Johnny, its came here to live after

his folks died. There aren't so many single quarry workers

as there were years back so we did away with most of the roomers.

We've made it into two apartments. The family upstairs have

no roomers at all. I've taken in two since Johnny died, that

was three years ago. Lots of the single fellows have oars now,

they'd rather rids back and forth to work, and live in Barre

where there's more going on.

"They haven'tbeen very busy in the quarries this spring.

My roomer Alex is working only three days a week now. And

pretty moon there'll be a two weskit' rest. There always is

after Memorial Day.

"My husband didn't di. of stonecutters' t. b. but I've

seen it take plenty around here. It was an accident he had,

right here in our yard. It was the fall of the year and the

kitchen steps were slippery with the first snow. He slipped

and out his arm on the axe he'd been chopping kindling with.

He got infection, and on top of that he had to have an operation.

It WAS too much for him, All those times he climbed up and

down the quarries, with me worrying and begging him to be careful, and he never got any more than a crushed finger. And then

to have it happen on his own doorstep, it seemed more than I

could bear. Of course, there're accidents in those holes,

there's bound to be. One fellow was killed last year. have

you over watched a good quarryman climb up and down those granite

walls? It's worth your time. I used to hold my breath watching them; I still do. I know one old man, a Frenchman, who's

been here, he says, since 1892. he swings a couple of 5- ft.

iron bars across a shoulder, and steps down those dangerous

walls without so much as laying a finger to the granite for

support. he works in a small quarry. Sometimes his hat, face

and clothes are so grey with dust that he looks like a loosened

piece of the stone wall, rolling to the bottom.

"Most of the quarrymen are Union men. Both my roomers

are. It pays to belong. They've got a quarry life a head of

than and they night as yell enjoy the Union benefits. Sone

of the older sines don'tseen to ears any, more, they slip up

3.

on their dues.

*I have two sons. Good boys they are * too. They didn't

want to work here after they left school * nor did I want them

to. Their father always said it was like burying yourself in

a stone grim and hardly knowing there was a world and sun

around you * and what pay do you get? Good enough * by the day,

but there ' a always a month or two you lose in the winter when

the snow's bad, and the Is*. Then thore are seasons when the

business is slow * like now. It doesn't pay * there's no future

for a young fellow. I was glad my boys got °larking jobs in

Barre.

*They're both married. John * tho oldest * marriod an Irish

girl * a neighbor Niro * her father'd had a small quarry ' way

up back there. It wasn'tgood granite, he didn't do well so

he stopped working it. The other boy married a Bootah girl.

*The oldest boy doesn'tmake much monsy, Be was thinking

of coming bask here and taking the upstairs apartment * it would

cost him less than living in Barre. But much as I would like

to have him hero with me * X advised him against it. It's no

plow* to bring up lively children. I had my hands full when

John and Pets were littlo ones and always that osier to explore thaw* hills of waste granite and the quarries. And high

up as we are hero with always a little broom, * X can'thelp

fooling that the air is full of dust. Sometimes when the wind

is strong you'll see whole clouds of grey up there * almost as

if a storm was soloing up. Now Me * he'd like me to live with

him in Barre * but I'm still capable of taking oar of myself.

sq don'tmind the Worry Moises. I've been bore so long.

4•

If I a wake at night, I sort of miss thaw. And days when they

don'twork I miss them, Looking at those piles of mast* granite

isn't 4 pretty sight, but I can look out my window at night

and see the lights of Barro w It's a nioe,pioturo w And day

thus I ean moo for miles around, I can so* hills that are goose,

and fields that in the spring are just brown, upturned earth i

I can watch them through the summer getting green with grope.

It seems good to look at green bills that aren'tspoiled with

quarry holes and those gray waste piles.'

1114114HHHHO011.

2•

Tranoh Utterer's Widow.

The woodbine shaded perch overlookod the cement highway

and the river taboos which lay the long gray string of Barris'

stone sheds, Brew Lachance sat in a reeker pooling potatoes,

You will oxeyes me if I go right on and pool,* she said.

have last so much time before supper, and so many things

to be done • Potatoes4 I hay* to cook mountains of thorn to

satisfy the men. Ten of them here, and all but one are stone

cutters.

Is Ilvo had as many as eightson boarding here, but with

that number I have to take on an extra girl. With only ton,

my daughter and voyeelf manage. /f my daughter happens to want

the evening we him a girl from next door to hiltp with the dishes.

"I haven'talways taken in boardormw It is only sines

my husband died nine years ago. Before that, I didn'thave to.

He made enough for us to got along well* Bo was a letter carver.

5.

Seventeen years he'd worked at it. Most of the time in Barre,

but one year in Montpelier*

RI don't take roomers, you can see the house isn't big

enough for that. Since two of the girls were married we've

given one upstairs bedroom to the family on the other side.

My youngest girl graduates from high school next year. There

was an older boy, he died at the time of the ' flu'. He WAS

just a baby.

"I was born here in Barre. My husband came down from

Chambly, Canada, with his folks when be was a boY. They were

a farming family. He started working in the sheds when he was

eighteen. Doing odd labor, but he worked up to letter carver.

He made good money, but I wasn'thappy having him in the sheds*

It's bad, especially for a man with a family, and most of the

French stonecutters around here have large families* Sometimes

I think granite isn'tworth all the sorrow it brings, but it's

there in the earth, it's worth money to the owners, and if a

man works there, well-- there's no one to blame but himself.

My husband used to say so, he still said so when he was flat

on his back. You'd think it would have made him bitter. It

didn't. He was resigned to it. He accepted it as something

he had expected all along. He didn'tmind talking to me about

it, but when his friends visited him--other stonecutters--

neither he nor they would mention the sickness that takes so

many of them. Perhaps they are all like that. They'll talk

about it only to those who are dear to them or, sometimes,

to a stranger they never expect to see again. *

Mrs. Lachance paused to give orders concerning the supper

6.

to her daughter who had appeared at the kitchen door. She was

a small girl with her mother's red cheeks, and an abundance

of black, wavy hair. Underneath the apron she wore a blackand-white checked taffeta dress.

When she had disappeared into the kitchen, the mother confided in a low voice, "She's going to a dance tonight at Joe's

Pond. That's why she's all dressed for going out. She goes

with a ?rench boy ---* She hesitated as if undecided to'continue. "Well, I guess I don'tmind your knowing it. She goes

with that boy I was telling you about, the one who lost his

father and two brothers from t.b. He's a fine boy, I like him,

but I can't help wish that it was someone else. Someone strong

and well. I'd hate to think of her losing her husband as I

did. Usually they are sick for along time. And afterwards,

to be left a lone with your children. To struggle the best you

can. Ah, yes, it's a hard life. Sometimes I've wanted to speak

to her, but then I think: she knows the story as well as I do.

It won't do any good, she'll do what she wants, and it's her

life to live."

The potatoes were piling up. Oho smiled. *Almost enough.

Now my other two daughters have married well. One with a Frond)

boy from Chambly. Loot& met him when she was visiting her

father's people. They're living there now with her grandparents.

My father-in-law didn't like a to necutting. He went back to

the farm in Canada after a few years. The other girl is married

to an Italian. He sells insurance here in Barre.

"I've lived here all my life. I could have moved to 4uiney

when / married. My husband had an offer from a shed down there.

7.

But I was satisfied with Barre. It's just large enough, the

stores are good, and it's always been lively enough for the

children. The only fault I find with Barre is that there aren't

enough jobs in town for the young people when they get out of

high school. Many of them get office jobs in Montpelier, the

rest have to go to larger cities. Not many of the high school

boys go into the sheds. You can'tblame them. There's no

future for them there now.

'II don'tknow much about the big strike. I used to. My

husband struck along with the rest of them. I used to hear

him talk about it a lot, but you hear so little about it now

that I've forgotten. I do remember my husband saying that some

of the unskilled French who came in to break the strike could

be excused. That was quite a statement from my husband * he

was as much against them an anybody* One of those strike breakers

was a friend of his. They'd grown up together in Chambly„ good

friends. Re hadn't seen or heard from him for years, then all

of a sudden he sees him parading through town with the rest of

them. My husband was dazed, he could hardly believe it. Thin

friend, Pete was his name, came up to the house to see my husband the next day.

"Perhaps Petels story is the same as many of those strangers'

who came into Barre. I don'tknow. Pete was badly in need

of money. His farm, like so many other French farms that year,

wasn'tpaying. The crops a mounted to nothing. He had a wife

and three children to feed. Be could see no signs of work for

him in Chaubly. Not for months. Then this opportunity for

work in Barre came to him. Work meant keeping his family to-

a.

gether. Can you blame him for accepting it? I don't. He'd

never worked in granite. 2eld heard, of course, of Barre and

the granite workers. But e '4.new of them vaguely, just as he

knew of miners and steel workers. I mean, how hard the work

was, and dangerous. But he had to be amongst the workers, live

with them and do their work, before he could really appreciate

the fact that they needed a strike to better their conditions.

I haven't seen much of him since my husband died. But I know

he's a Union man now, and a good one."

Mrs. Lachance called to her daughter that the potatoes

were ready. She leaned back in her chair and began to rock

lazily, comfortably. " You know," she said, " the longer you

live in this world the better you realize there are always two

sides to a question. And it isn't fair to judge until you

study both sides. I wasn't thinking only of the Strike. Right

now I'm thinking of an Italian woman who lives down the street.

She sells beer and wine. She's had to pay a fine twice for

selling without a license. She still sells. Some of the neighbors look down on her. They don'twant their children to play

with hers. her husband died a few years ago. Ris lungs. ,11,

was a stonecutter. She has six children. None of them big,

enough to be working. Her hip was badly crushed the year after

her husband died. %hat could she do? It's hard for her to

get around. There aren'tmany kinds of work she can do. The

easiest way-- so it seemed to her--was to sell liquor in her

own house. That way she could be at home all the time to look

after her children. It's illegal. But there's her side, too.

She wants her children. She's proud. She doesn'twant charity.

g.

Sic does Italian baking, too. That brings in a little money,"

Mrs. Lachance sighed. " I don't blame her."

**********

3.

Spaniah Stonecutter's Widows

She was a large, swarthy-faced woman. Heavy black hair

was drawn to a shiny coil low on her nook. Today she was

crocheting an edge for a linen tablecloth.

"I have crocheted for so long now that I can make my own

*patterns." Mrs. Vialez hold up her work for Inspections

not this one. This one I make for a woman on Barclay Bill.

A rich woman. She show ma the pattern from the book and she

say, ' Go a head and make this one, I will pay what you ask.'

She pays good. I'do work for her for twenty years. My husband

used to out stone for her husband. Me, I used to clean her

house once a week. After my husband die, this lady did not

forget me. I used to take my crocheted work from house to

house to try to sell it. She bought some.

"I had three children. She say it was too hard for me

to go from house to house. Sometimes I bad to take the youngeat baby with me. She say I would make more money if I stay

home, and if people want the crocheted work they would come

and order it. She speak the truth. I have make enough to raise

the three children. The two girls are married. The boy is

work in the woods in Bakersfield, near the lumbar mills.

"I been in America twenty-seven years this August. Me

and my husband are both born in Biesca, Spain. On the Ebro

10*

River. That is a pretty river for you. Near our town the

river is narrow and deep. It flows past rocks that aro a little

like granite, but not good enough to work* They got big streaks

of yellow, red, and orange. From far away they look pretty.

But you get close and you see that they are dirty from the years

that water has run over them. All summer small blue flowers

grow between the rocks. I never see anything like them in

America. They are shape like daisies and very, very blue, but

in the center whore the daisies are yellow, these are pure white*

"11. lived just three hours' carriage ride from Saragossa..

That is whore my husband learn to out granite. A large city

with many beautiful buildings, it make ten or twelve of Barre.

He cut stone from the day he was seventeen* We are married

sixteen months when we decide to come to America* To Barre.

Another stonecutter and his wife from our town come with us.

We take the train to Bile°, and from there the boat. I didn't

like that boat and I didn't like the trip. I was used to ride

only in a wagon or carriage, and that boat it make me sick all

the time. I carry my first baby then. She is born four months

after we get to Barre. All that trip I am sick enough to die*

I want to be a lone, but even that I couldn'thave. The stonecutter and his wife from our town share our room, and besides

them there are two other couples.

"I an too sick to bother to look at New York. My husband

used to say it was lot like Saragossa. But, he was so busy

to take care of me that he didn't see much himself. Besides,

he WAS always say that when you look quick and short at big

cities they all look the same.

U.

"My husband was a good artist, more for pictures than

for stone, I think. In Spain there is a picture of our river

that he paint, and a good picture of his school teacher, then

we left Cpain both of them were hang in the school house.

Many times I have wish that he kept at his paint instead of

granite.

"He used to earn extra money in the sheds, then a customer was not satisfy with the designs the boas show, then he

ask my husband to draw solTe special ones at home at night.

Many times he do this and the boas was very please with him.

"When my first baby is born he draw a pictures of a beautiful bedspread. All in roses, a chain of roses. Together we

figure out how many and what kind of stitches to make to crochet

it. 7iverybody like it very much. My first girl is married

five years ago. For a present 1 make a spread just like the

first one.

'":7 husband die from pneumonia at the time of the in fluenses

But the doctor say that if his lungs were not already full with

dust, maybe he would have got well. It was Lard for me to get

along after he die.

"I learn to crochet in the old country. There was a convent of white veil nuns just outside of Biesoa. Every Caturday

they give lessons free to anybody who want to go. Sewing,

crocheting, linen work. Their work is the beat I have ever

see. ahe linens they send to the cathedrals in the big cities,

Altar linens. I always say it is lucky for me that I learn

to do this work. How else then could I support myself and

three children, except that I scrub floors and do hard work

all the time?

"I have people left in Spain. I think I have. I have

not heard now for two, three years. The people of my husband,

they stop from writing just as soon as he die, so them I don't

count. My own father and mother are along time dead. There

is only a brother over there, and I don'tknow if he is dead

or a live. I don'thear from the ltotters I write, I don't get

them back, I don'tknow what to think. There is nothing there

for me now. This is my home. As long as I got my eyes and

my hands I can earn enough money here to pay my rent and live

pretty good. I am satisfy."

*****411****

4.

An Irish Shed Owner's Widow.

The house, a large terreted wooden structure, stood in a

quiet residential street close to the city's business section.

Irises lined a stone path to the kitchen door, shrubbery bordered

the front walk.

"I was born here in Vermont," Mrs. McCarthy said. " But

John, my husband, came over from Ireland. He was already owner

of the shed when I met and married him. People said he had a

fine future, he was a good workman himself and he understood

the business thoroughly. he was a hardworking, sober young

man those days. We were happy. He talked granite day and

night. I didn'tmind. It was good to see him so in terested

in the business. It all changed when his uncle died. His

uncle had been a carver in Ireland, a skilled one. He'd worked

13.

in Barre only five years when his lungs went bad. He and John

were very close friends. His sickness was a blow to John. It

seemed to loose some devil in him. lie began to drink heavily.

Pretty soon it was every day. It wasn'tunusual to see a couple

of his workmen half carrying him home after the shed closed

for the day.

Of course, business suffered. It had to with a drunken

mind supervising it. I tried to talk to him. I told him I

understood the friendship between him and his uncle, but nothing

could bring him back. He had to think of the living. tie had

to think of his wife and his three children. He wouldn't listen.

When one of his employees, a good friend of his, was forced to

leave work, too, because of his lungs, it was rore than John

could bear. He drank more than ever. I suggested putting a

manager in the shed. He wouldn't hear of it. Business became

so bad that we had to borrow money on the house to put into

the shed. We borrowed twice.

"I loved this home. We'd bought it from the people who

built it. They owned the old hotel on Main street. It was

torn dawn years ago. I liked the privacy of this house. But

a seventeen room house for five people was a burden in those

ti- es when little money was coming in. It could be an asset.

I sew my duty even though it was a painful one, and I did it.

John was so deep in liquor he never even raided a finger to

stop me. / went up to the shed one afternoon and talked to every

one of the unmarried men. I explained the situation to them,

though God knows they must have known it, and told them I would

be zlad to have any of them as roomers. They were good men,

14.

they were eager to help. By the end of the next week six were

rooming at the house - three Irish, two Scotch, and one Italian.

"The extra money was a God-send. I went further. I boarded

those men. It was hard work even with a maid, but it was worth

it.

"I had hoped that my willingness to cooperate and my example

would straighten John. It didn't. He let go completely. He

didn't die of stonecutters' t. b., it was drinking that killed

him. But I ,can'thelp feeling that the granite industry which

had taken his uncle and his friend was in directly responsible.-

"After his death one of John's best workmen assured me

that under his management the shed could again be operated on

a paying basis. He was a sober minded man and trustworthy,

but I'd had enough of the granite industry. I felt it had

robbed me of a husband, and the children of a father. I was

eager to sever all association with it. I sold the shed, and

paid back pert of the money we'd borrowed on the house.

"I kept the roomers. The children were growing, I wanted

to give them a good education. Neither of the boys lives in

Vermont now. One became an electrical engineer, the other a

doctor. They have both done well, my daughter married a local

merchant.

"About twenty years ago, she, her husband and two children

came to live with aid. She wanted privacy as much as I did,

we gave up the roomers. She and her husband paid off the rest

of the mortgage. Part of the house really belongs to them now.

It's just as well that way. I don't think the boys will ever

come back to Vermont. Not to live. They've families of their

15.

"There are eight of us in this house now. Five grandchildren, my daughter and son-in...law, and myself. The children

are grown. The oldest girl graduated from college last year;

the youngest boy will finish high school next year.

"The three grandsons know that their grandfather was in

the granite business. They don't seem to be interested in it.

I'm glad of that. I seldom speak to them of those past years."