On January 14, 1892, Penelope mohairs gave birth to

her sixth son in tho maim* tomn ef Ahem, Greve. Because she had

epee be to Amorist, and beemmee she believed her semi woad fimd a

maoh bright*? Mere in the United States than in her motive eountry,

she gime her new-bora child the popular Smells& name of °George,* not

at all realising that this name, like herbaria men of Greek origin

and mem* *firmeri." The family IOW poor, and Geerge's tither had

died two meths before he was loamy but the nether was determined

that her beys should oome to Anilinno She sold abet little limPert7

she had; berromed rasney rAMM, her kinillkn o and mint George* *mho

was but three years eldi a lone with his brothers mho vee sixties, to

NSW Yorke

The two Greek boys more taken in sharp by an uncle

mho had scan to henries several years bednro sod mho operated a anall

restaurant in Brodklyma Louis, the elder of the two bye, immediately

vent to work for his unele• George was sent to *Sheol when he was six

years old, attending the public *Sheol during the moraine mad the Greik

*shod durine the afternoons la spare immmeste, he helped his brother

Nnd his uncle in the reetemramt.

George finished high (wheel in 1909 and vent to work

for Steve Bokettas, who had purebasod his unole's restaurant. The

death of his nether in Grease0 and the foot that four of his brothers

were ill with tubereolosis and Amble to a erko *ens's* hints retura

to his native gauntry. There, for a whiles he engaged in taming.

the. literally justifying his none. Later, he booms a teethwts

lAa had only a flaw seldoels in armor where Beglish

was taught,

rge said. "At that time there were many Greeks

who planned to moo othis muntry. The immigration lam mere

net se it riot in those days. Most everybody she had smug* money

for their beat passage mold get into the United States. Gene of

them people wanted to learn to speak Beglish. 1 earned erlOuthbr

tarnishing Beglish to semi of these people total= ear, of welt and

my 'risk brothers. my mole and brother in Brooklyn sent no money to

help out. At last, I had mew* noney to ear. fir my brothers ter

a while, and I cane book to Amorist.

"In New York, an old ftheed and 1 put our noney

together and opened up a resteurunt. U. bit eft more than we mould

ohm. ( George's Haglish shows a mastery of eollootialisno bet has

maw in diestions of his foreign origin in its in fleetions aid phrases).

we couldn't pay for the expensive fixtures me beught. In three smiths

we were broke and had to *close our plaices I found myself with ne

money and no j0b. Semi friends get as a jet ia a Greek seheel.

had way twenty pupils. I taught Ore& to Cheek children mho had been

born in this 00UStry. I aidn'tmake mesh manw, but Iimaged to

save a livle and to send a little to my brother..

"Nothing mutat else happened to no till the War. /

enlisted in Now York and eane to Spartanburg with the Mk Division.

When I enlisted, the *Meer told me I would be used as an interpreW.

US said there were a lot of Greeks in the division who didn't urder•

stand English. lhen we got to Camp Wadsworth, they put me to cooking

in Company "C: 106th Infantry, and there wasn't a Greek in the *hole

company. I was never used as an interpreter.

"Do you remeihor that big snow!" had when the *amp was

here/ I da0 .:: remember the exact date, but anyhow, I slipped on

the anew and fell from the 'hawk of the mess stook. I broke my ankle.

It was a bad break. They took me to the hospital and operated.

They took two bones out of wy foot. Than they told as I could never

walk again without limping. Six long weeks I stayed lathe hospital."

Apparently. George's experience with his broken ankle is

one of the outstanding experienses of his life. When he discusses

it, he seem to slough off his a squired shell of comsat Bmglish,

and begins to speak in the broken English so oemmenwith the

majority of Greeks today.

"The ' Moors come around see no." George continued.

"They say I can get honorable discharge. I danft want to go. /

beg them let me sty when I get well. ,:or nelius Vanderbilt, Jr.,

comes to the hospital. I tell him by troubles. and he goes to see

his father, Colonel Vanderbilt. Two or three days, officers tell

me I can "bey after doctors let me out of hospital.

*I went back mess sheik an crutches. They told as I

didn't have to go bask yet. I wanted to. / .it in the kitohen

and supervise all cooking. Meats, pies, everything. Soon word

starts around that we move out any day for France. I was still

crippled. I want to go with the boys, but Captain Cline tells

-4

ma I can't go. The boys in the oompany hear I *ain't go. They

sign paper asking officers let me go with them and do the (looking.

go book: to hospital for another exeminstion, but they say

no use. It almost breaks my heart to see the boys go. I cried

lots."

When the 17th Division left for France, George remained behind. lie does not like to discuss this period of his

war reoord. e had formed friendships with many men in the

company, many of whom lost their lives when the rfth and 30th

Divisions crashed through the Hindenburg Line.

"After the boys left," George said, " I womb bank to

the mess shim* on or utehes. Igot rid of them*. soon as possible.

I went to this officer and thst officer and asked then what company

I was to work with. They said they would take it up with headquarters, but I guess they were too hu' with other things because

nothing happened. For about two months, I was just loafing around.

slept on a oat in my old mess shook. I folded it up every morning

and packed it sways I ate with the new men that came in. They were

from Indians and belonged to the 91st Division. They wore swell fellows.

"By this time, I could walk a most without a limp. My pay

stopped coming. The oaptain told me to go to headquarters to see

about it. I hung around there about three dgys before I could get

any attention. Then an officer heard my story. Bs told me to go

beak to my mess shack and stay there until something was done. I

went back and began to work in the kitchen. The boys liked to have

me there because it made less work for them. Inspect ion day came

along, and the officers vented to lmow what I was doing there. They

said my name was not an the a ompair list. For about the hundredth

times itold my story. About a voik labors Immo or iaaer came in

the mess shook and told me to go with Mato hoodimarters. Mien

I get that, * some °Moors told me that a miatake had been mode in

the retorts. They said that the 'words shoved 1 had bees die•

a harged about two mouths Wire. They told as that the paper,

had got loot a nmodual. They had the (looters at the hospital look

no ever again. Then they shoved a let of'papers atme to sin.

I don't know nob vie& ins in than but I didn't 04244 IVOR glad

that somebody was paying some attention to as, They told me to

go hook to the mess shook sad start to verb. A flew dorm after

that, Captain Johnson ems in and told me that I had boom assigned

to the esmpamy. On top of that, I got paid for the two a mmtho s

tad did that money look good. I gimes for these tee ninths, I

was just lost to the ',baited Antes Army:

"Armistiso asy was a greet asp' at the on,* Our

sempommy had not used up its allot:mot of toed for the period.

The quartermaster *melded to put as a spread*

vemt to

Spartanburg and bought tarty,. it took us all day, even with

an extra details to gat resift'. Rut we had a swell dinner that night."

After his disehargo trot the a rvar. George fogad

himself, like mow other soldiers, without a 3016. For a labile he

worked ta a restaurant sealed by his Wither. who had not gem* to

war, and who had profited during the period when some nun a massed

fortunes.

wilbrother and I decided that it would be nooessary

for one of us to go to areas* to look after the property,thet

'nolo Louis had left us. Ilrbrother said I was freer to go than

he was. The trip woo my second trip home. Immal 1064, to get it

because the immigration * Metals told no / would bee, * hard tine

getting back. TTIms they found out I isms an A-orison elitism' and

that I served luring the mar, I didntt bees any trouble at ale

I stayed in a rises about threa month's, and then sane besokheeim

"I stayed in Alm York fur * while, and then eassisaak

to Spartanburg* I had always vested to some beak here. / lived

here with some Greek friends for & while* / took up sibool

teaselling again while Isms loAcing around fer somMtldngbettera

Two 0 nybrothers in ()reales died within tan dove of eaOh other*

They left no about three hundred dollars in Merle= nommye

"hat did you do with the monoy," I alibied himm

*nal you, Bdb, it was like this. I found an senor of

a small restaurant hire . not mentioning aey nesse ... that goaded

some capital. lItti what I had and what I borrowed frumpy. brother,

1 welt into business withhj

lur business Nipped up feat, and

ve had to hire extra people to take wire of the trade. We more

open day mad night. That his wits booms, silk - or Should I

say tilt

he had the sawitssaec that killed my brothers. Hie

decided to take her to Arizona for her health, and he waited to moll

out to se. I bought it and -Ass broke in loos three six nomthe. I

couldn't get it out of my heed that I wanted the best restaurant

fixtures that now oould bey. I was sakieg good UMW but it

sums% opeagh to nest the exposes of

now fistulae*. And I was

also playin- the WMooksmirkst. (kul day. Ins of my customers shoved

as haw muah moor he vas making in the market. I had never mom

thought about the stook market beforo. 'Tor a bra !am I looked

at the market page in the newspapers. It looked good to me, and

I bit with whet you !elks oall 'hook, line and sinker.' All the

money I took is, I put into stooks. Tho first days of October in

1929 made me feel like I was riebis- The a to oks / bought had game

up and up. Tweld some of that/land bar* ethers• loftmthought

about what mr mother had said and that was 'You'll get rioh in

America so medoy, I should have paid for my fixtures. but I figured

I oeuld ploy than anytime You mi ht thiSk / would have kmmeibetter.

but I didavt. I figural T *mild pay mr

&Ms aly time. and I just

lot tlen ride.

*rroUhlo It me hard durinc the loot day of October

of that year. I had bosom so in tereated with the market that /

let mr mwm business go do. I vaan't those half the time, load

py ovn pleas of business as a please to I1KAC around in, 3usinees

dropped off. but I didn'tsere ' so use I wns making plentymaney

in the market.

"arin the last days of octOber, my stooks began to

drop. I was tiaMbliag on the margin. 741)P broker called me and told

me I vould have to put up more oash4 T wort to the bank and put up

911 the oath I had in the bank vith my broker. It seemed to me that

things ,ould solo got better. / sent a telorlram. to my brother and

he sent as one thousand dollar*. I had about five thousand dollars

in vested. 4k that lay of October 29, they toll no I needed mere

oash to cover up. I coulanft got it. I was miped out that dxy.

"I gueso disappointment =WS mil*, hard to some

people, but that almost killed no. 7)rbrother lost in the nark*

like no, and he oouldet help no out. I considered killing

nyiel4 soma* I had nothing left. I found out *lot a fOol I

had beam. I did monoto to prir PV dObte by selling my oaf* at

rook bottom priees. I learned a lesson than. Tb almost killed

me to see my oaf* go at gush a dump price. It taught no that

you've got to pay your dabts to got along.

Alt long after my WO was sold. I not a niee Oro&

girl nomad Penelope. Same as that of oy. mother.

Hada seemed

what you ° all matohed for each other. 3he lived In Charlotte ad

ease here to sem her brother whom I not her.

otorted to going

together. edecided to get married, but / didn'thove umah to got

married on. ,S i7ot married settee and struggled a loft em almost

nothing. The ' flu , took her after we had been together about six

months. -ha lootor said it Nes ' flu' but I think it mos peoumonia.

Talk about °omitting guide*, 1 felt like it than sum enough.

dust before he led, she raked me to look out for her brother.

:e -3ms always getting into some kind of trouble.

nano was Niok.

lived with is. I got Aok s job in Oroenville. :!la stole moo

monsy from lus Trakas when ho oas larking there. T told Gus I Nould

pow everything book if he 1,:ouldet htve him or reeted. Gus turned

710k ovor to moo T aont In to Orecumille

he made good thank.

Ovos a small interest in ono of the best restaurants in that ton.

.'41 paid re back ovary oent I over spent an him.

!:.1e root of my life - them's nothigg mueh to it.

I have boon working and saving nv mmasy. I on an lutenist in

this cafe. ! fa pretty woll fixed on,! I LPN= to hare a lot of

friends and I'm happy here."

Sao ge spends most of ht oapare tin in reading

such nagasinsa as ami 1111aaers'.Agggts eta., but his favorite

magasins is Lit!" because he says he often finds in it articles

conserning his native country.

a has many Interesting stories to tills. *this

exporisnoes in the reetaA-ant business, but his favorite øuo

is what he or als the "Tram Mark."

wr)-e dNy a firc years ago," George said." a tramp

came into .17 place and wanted something to eat• 14 said he had

net amorthino7 to eat for throe days. as tied he mould maoh the

dishes or do a nythinc I wanted Mato do if Imould give him

something to at. I gave him a meal an soma small ohmage I

had in my pocket. 111,:: next days elout

nen oame in with hard

luck stories.

11119ry day after Vitt, a bunch of mln would coop

in Arul pek for something to eat. I toV1 a friend one day' thret

I couldn't figure out whore all the hoboes lore ooming from. T:40

said I must have a "Tramp

on ntr buiring. 1 had never hoard

of a "Tramp lark" before. Aa said that -,114$3, hoboes found a place

where they could ot a meal for nothings thly mould put a mark an

tho buil'ing so thnt othor tromp would kna.,7 thet the plane was a

plows to get a free meal. I merit beta to my lame and lookmd

around.

the back door, I t.1 the mark. It ums a circle that

- 10

somebody heti put there in ohelk. ft was about as big around as

a sawyer, an0 It } aid mouthing in it like a areas. I rObbed it

out. From than 0n I looked ever the building every day to ow

if there was any marts, Thome helm.* had about at ne out at a

goo. of business. There was a lot of hoboes then. Don't find

so loamy nom."

"Vhieh do you find the hardest to please, George,

eon or ImmaenT"

"What you oall the average man: George replied4

"loan so particular. 4'11 pink up the nom, glom at it a

'mond or so, mad thee say, ' Give no a roast beer dinnor.' or

something like that. lie never tells you mho* vegetibielOte meats

to got one With his dinner. That's the average none 'llut'there'

are sane like old maids that vent everything just ee mood 00e

"Take the average mamma, now. She studies the menu

a bug time bet're the orders anything. Then abs will ear just

what vegetables she Ilumbis. Womms eat lean then nen, mad a lot of then

will order ease kind of a sandmieh in steadofm regular noel."

George believes that Anerteane/meuld greatly improve

their health if they-would be 'ere earefUl Ubeut their diet and

would eat nom eloolye

"s me like neat knerioans eat just tome* they

have to," George mid. *Eating should be a yleoeure and not just

something you have to do4 en ruth in, order something, and gobble

dams their flood, It takes thee about five minutes to eat. nverbody

shouV tmhe at least a half hour to eat. They always may they are

-11

in a hurry.

Well, they may be in a hurry but they are just

hurrying to the grave when they gobble down their food."

George is pessimistic about the future of his native

country, a lthol:gh he says Greece is in far better financial

condition today than any other country.

"There is no unemployment in Greeoe," George said,

"and everybody would be happy over there if the rest of the

world would leave them. a lone. But they. are all seared of Hitler.

Bels heading that way, and the Greeks think it won't be long

before he takes over the Balkan states, and then he will want

Greeeo. Nobody has stopped him yet in anything he wants, and

the Greeks believe he vents Greeee. Than they think he will

take Egypt and move an to India. They think hells trying to form

a Aorld empire.

"That may sound what you call ' far-fetched' to people

over here," George oontinued, * but they believe it will happen

unless somebody steps Atlas'. The Germans and Greek hate each other.

Greeee can't stop Germany by herself. Italy don't like Greets..

Roumania don't like Grew). And you know from history what the

Turks think about Grease. The Greeks' best friends are the English

and. the Americans. They might help out if the Greeks get in danger,

but there is no promise of help. That's why they worry so much."

If a stranger went into George's restaurant today, he

would probably find him in the kitchen, supervising the cooking.

During the morning he busies himself in the kitehen and making the

neeessary purchases of few!.

At noon, he oases out of the kitehen

in a clean white u4iform and around white oap to talk with his

customers. t two o'clock in the afternoon, he leaves his

restaurant to take his " siesta."

"In Jreece," George said, " everybody stops work from

twelve till two. It is what you folks say is an old Spanish

ourtom.

veto take mine from two till four. I spend that

time in resting and rending. The hours I like most are at night.

: oback to work at seven and work till nine. People are through

with their work and In no big hurry. They like to sit around and

talk, and that suite me fine. I talk too much, I know, because I

learn more from listening than from telleleg."

About nine o'clock, George turns over is restaurant

to the nicht shift. The he in variably goes to his room and reads,

retirin

12 says, 4bout eleven a' clash each night with his alarm

clock

seven the next morning.

"George," I asked him, " I have always heard Jut expression

t-t-tt * The Gree,lre ]lad a word for it.*

Do you know the origin of that

saying?"

"I don't, Bob," George laughingly replied, " but I oan tell

you this. a for me, and for thousands of other Greeks mho are happy

here, I'd say that that word is ? The United States."