a spreng weather. Tame, ain't it? We hed along

cold spreng.

"An' ain't thiere bin a lotta sickness though?

I niver seen the laike a all the pneumonia thierets

bin. Ant most in ybody thet ya see on the stratets

tstrere.t4 got a cold.

"But at thet, it ain't sa biad laike I knowed it

ta brtmlnyls the tame in Lynn sence I come hire. D'ya

remimber the flu thet come the time a the war? Alwiays

a war brengs so methint an I a lwiays thought thet flu

wuzn't jest the flu. It wuz more laike the buabatic

pli -ague (1441bibilid,411040. Anywiays a lotta thim

thet daied a it, tirned black, jest laike thiey wuz

said ta heve timed, black in Ireland in ' 46 ant ' 47

whin thi4 hed the bumbatic pliague there.

"Thra ( three) months the rage a it wuz hire in

this city. Down in Philadelphia ant a roul thet wiay,

I hierd it wuz a lot the worse, Thiere I guess thiey

w

...da1444-11eHar-Vhnnrir
.

"Wuz-atd-wnetter-bi-eve-tpoo.. The paople wuz scared

iverywhi;re. Most iverybody wore a bag with so methin '

in it ta pravent tpreY/ en-t4 gettint it. Somethinl laike

moth balls thiey wuz thet wuz in that bag. I wore one

laike all the rest.

"I verybody wuz a drekin' whiskey too ta prAvent it.

I balave 044004 it helped too, Inywi.yit did Ma.

wuz in Boston whin I felt it comipl on mi. I

took a coupla drenks ant ya know I hardly felt ' em

a tall. my other tame ant I'da bin a feelin' good

from the drenks I took, but thim I didn'tfeel a tall.

"Whin I got ta Inn, .L took a couple more, an'

thim I din't feel neither. Jest laike I niver heda one.

Whin I get home, I said to ma wife, ' I got the flu an'

whin I get in bed, I went ya ta give mg some more a

this whiskey ta drank.

11 0=140= an' did I sweat/ I'hed ta kape

changinl mi naightclothes two, thr; tames. But ya

know, it done the trick all raight. I wuz a lot

better in the mornin'.

"I had ta kape a wiay from the shop fir about a

wake ty

though, an' sure felt wake

fir

about a month. But I din't daivt144 laike a lotta

others did. I thenk it wuz thet whiskey that staved

ma.

"Whin I wint back ta wirk, thiere wuz only about

four min in the renk isimi4 whin there shoulda bin

.so•

a roun' fifteen. Thiey wuz all sick with the flu.

Thim thet wuz thiere looked at ma whin I come in in'

said, ' You're as pale as a ghost.'"

Consumption in the Shoe Shops.

n the old diays tinre wuz an awful lotta

consumption in the shops. Thin, the doctors said thetlItAt

disease run in families. Ant I bal;ve it does. Inywiays thin, thiey dintt do nothint about it, fir there

wuziatt the hospitals ant the laike ta tiake care a

4)/

thim. So most of thim fellas thet hed it, jest kept

• JPNIC

I-

raight on wirkint jest as ?tong as thiey could. Miny's

the one to uld spit up bllod so metames, but thiey

kept on wirkint.

"I knowed one fella that wirked at the bench with

mi, thet hed it ant hed it'biad. But he dintt play

no spAcial a ttintion ta it. He wuz a lwiays cheerful.

Well, one diay he hed a hemorrhage raight thiere

bZfore us. Thiey took him home ant the next diay he

"Yes, thigre wuz a lot laike that. A body thet

dintt hove it, dintt thenk thiere wuz my hope a tall

fir in ybody thet hed the consumption. But the one

thet hed it wuz a lwiays cheerful ant to uld try ta

miake Eralave ie dintt heve it a tall.

"Thet ts uhe wiay with thim. But I bal-ave it runs

in families. Don't you?