Interview with Dr William W. Wood, White Pioneer, Waco, Texas.

"I wqs born in Coosa County Alabama , October 7th, 1862. My father

was Pr 3aeon B. Wood, a practicing physician and slave owner and plantation operator in Alabama. My mother was Miss, Sarah Barrett, a daughter

of James Barrett and wife...Tames Barrett died and my grandmother came to

Texas with her sons Prank, Reneau and Thomas. Mother died in 1899 , at

the age of fifty years and. at er ,raiggpnZife ember of 1907. Their

children were,

..taAjoe•-v"-"/

7-ffragenees '

" My father preparet for his mediced profession in Jefferson Medical

Oollege, in Philadelphia, graduating in 1856. He practiced in Coosa County

only abandoning his profession when he retired to his farm because of ill

health, after coming to Texas. During the war between the states he served

in the a astern l'epartment of the Confederacy ad eaptain, we* captured and

sent a prisioner to Johnson's Island, Lake Erie. He was interested in eduoation and belonged to the Baptist church, of which he was an active

member.

" I was a small boy when we left Alabama but 4 can remember crossing

the iiissippi river at Vicksburg, and as we reached the opposite side,who

should be standing there but one of our former slaves, on seeing as he

cried out" Hello Massa, 'die de fast time I is see any of you lns sPie I

,

lef' fur de war wid MaAe Henry, I wuz wid Mars Henry Wen de iankee's

kill him, an' I see him pat away, jes 4as I promise him I would".

FOLKLORIC?

.Miss Riffle Cowan,

Molgennan county, Texas,
District 8.

Pile NO: 240.
Page NO. 2.

"When we left Alabama we earns by wagon train driving oxen and males,

there were twenty - five families in the train. We reached the Trinity .

river in about sixty days after crossing the MissitP4OV, m4he whole country

O

was a nder water and we had to wait for the water to recede before we could

cross and made camp where we remained for about two reks. Then we drove

into Athens Texas, where we lived on a rented farm/ne*or two years .

"My father practiced medicine here with a - r Gardner and my mother seoured

the couttry school and taught for a time.

"About this time my

t4.t$r decided to leave the timber country and moved

to Hill county and bought a farm of two hundred acres ., sig miles east of

Mount Calm Texas. We children attended the school at Habbard which was also

near as lAntil we were old enough to attend college. Oar fathers brother-inlawUr Barrettpilso bought two handsed acres and lived near as.

" While we lived in the Navasota bottom Ben Wallace homesteaded land, and

no better man ever lived are+,., had such a noble wife, we called her Aunt Mary

Jane. Now they are all gone, but we cherish their memory , the children a lsoo

While living there and making a crop the men wigigme to the prairie and

built three log houses, split rails and improved their homes , on the prairie

"I can emnember how it began to snow while we were in OaMP before oar

homes were built, and how 'one of the oxen froze to death in the nightj and

the next day when we went back to our home in the bottom we rigged up sleds

and teams and sharpened our knives ready to akin dead cattle , we dressed

them for a week 11„; skinned them and sold the 'hides for a goodiprice and

FOLKLORE
McLennan County, Texas,
District 8.

File NO. 240.
Page No° 3.

it enabled as to purchase rations and supplies which were so much needed.

Turkeys were wild bat were plentiful everywhere. Grandmother Barrett's

gandmother took a string and fastened it to a crib door where she could

see it, and when forty six wild turkeys went into the crib for feed she

closed the door on them and we had plenty of trukeys to eat for some time.

I recall my iincle building a turkey pen of rails with a tunnel leading into

it, he baited the roads leading to the pen and caught a,pen full, I can

remember hovicin his haste he hurried into the trench and the turkeys gave

him quite a lashA4f. When we went back to work on the prairie houses

we left a servant girl to sprout the ground ready for planting, she heard

the dogs barking at something , and they had a deer cornered in the creek

bed. Ste took the woode* rake and helped the dogs to kill the deer. This

goes to show that we reached Texas in time for the wild turkeys and deer°

" Another incident of my yrlath which impressed me was my father sending

me to Waco to purchase a cog for our sorghum mill . He had given me a

pony and I rode him over to *WO good ride), The foundry was located

on the bank of the Brazos river and I spent the night in a hotel . on ,Frankli4 street, I can remember how a live oak #ree grew tip thro the porch

of the hotel, and have often wondered what became of this place. When I

went back halime I tied the cog to the saddle , and the Anistion of the horse

ruined the cog as well as blistering the horse sshoulder.

"It' 1879 fatter sent rather and myself down to Waco to place me in Baylor

University, paying my tuition with a load of bacon we took with us.1I went

home for the holidays, so happy with so mach to tell, 'ben I returned the

Folklore,
Uctennan County, Texas,'
District 8.

File NO.'240.
Page NO. 4.

first of January) I rode horseback to Waco and on arriving I turned the

horse loose with a note 7:pinned to the saddle saying" Please let this hor4e

with saddle pass. to farm'ofAir B.B.Wood unmolested". Three weeks, later

father came down and said the horse had not returned and on making inquiry

we found him it East Waco, just as' he bad: left.

An the summer father sent pie to to uidiana with horses we bad bought

in Mexico , we had 117 head . We went down Jacksons traa and came to

a house where we camped that night iI had sOme corn for the horses,, and

found aH . man just returnrtn from a drive with a big back.I traded the

corn for a whole ham of the back , oarried•this to camp and with along

pole passed ' thro'. the tem-String,I barbecued it and today I can say it

was0h4e, best barbecue I ever ate.

" We cooked at the camp and made clothes out of wagon sheets that served

118 well, but they sometimes became so fall of grease and dust -they almost.

stood on end t(after being removed9I recall the night after the heavy

snow I mentioned Icwhen the cattle froze. I could not find my so cks and

shoes while trying to make the fire so had to proceed to.a neighbors,by

name e 3 01) iane w,barefooted. When we returned homtgra Pane made_ me wear

her stockings and shoes, after giving as a lovely dinner. Long after-ward

when I was practicing medicine I often reminded her of her ktndness in

lending me her foot wear. 4 his also reminds me of the fate of oar $ oke

of oxen which bro,aght ail from Alabama. We would hobble them at night

together so they could not stray far from camp. One morning when we found

FOLKLORE
• Miss Effie Cowan,

UcLennan County, Texas,
District 8.

iile NO. 240.
Page NO. 5.

them they were both dead from eating frozen mustard : Oh, how sad- we

were and lnnely with Buck and Bill gone, 0what shall we do/ was oar cry.

),

rather made the best of our hard luck and's aid"we will skin them and

buy coffee' which we did, and things took a turn' for the better.

Another time my father was oat of to:Sips:coo , it was 25 miles to the nearest market,Mexia, I had instruction to start to town bat if I met any

one who had any tobacco to ask for some, I met another old-timer and.

heighbor , Bill Powell, and secured an abundant supply and thus thro'

the neighborly kindness was saved the trip.

"Time passed on and I completed my course at Baylor University at Waco j

Texas,taaght.a yearithen,attended my fathers Alma- Mater , the Jefferson

41edioal Oollege and coMpleted my coarse there in 1887. I graduated from

(p44,24.132.4v•-

Baylor in 1885 . Afterwards took pos/gnadaate work in the New York Poly

-clinic

in the New Orleans Polyclinic and two courses in the Chicago

Institute of that olass.

" In January of 1910 our firm of Wood and Wood purchased the property

of the Hubbard Hot Well and sanitarium, which represented the in vestment

of thirty-five thousand dollars, and at the time was one of the leading

health resorts of the state. As all of the medeoal profession) hmore, I

have stored in my memory many a masing incidents connected with my profession. ,One of the most impressive incidents was when I first commenced

the practice of medicine and meeting an older doctor in consultation,

POlklore,
Mips Effie Cowan,
Meenhaft Comity, Texas,
District 8.

Pile NO 240.
Page NO.6.

a man whom I loved honored and respected. After disonssing the case

before as heisaid" I would give him this and that', remidies for the

particular case, to which I oonsented; then I saggested something else

to meet another symptom. The old doctor said" No, we have given him enough

lets give him a chance to get well".

"I recall another in stance which impressed me in one of my patients,

He _had a malignant type of trouble and I told him so ialso that it was

unnecessary for me to call every day, but he in sisted and his good wife

always had the best of. eats, snobk fritters, chicken, steak, pease and

cakes,With something hot to drink. The minutia she ,:entered with a platter

of these eatables be would begin:Mollie I am a very- sick meal your limn-

_tlty takes my appetite" ; ben I would try to go: and he would say"I do love

to see you oome anOate to see you go", but / thought it time to go:

blue day be said" Bring your bill tomorrow, I want to see you paid before

the triggers fall, you. know I have some sons - in --lawl " I knew them and

decided to present my bill as' requested., once before be in sisted on paying me with twenty-seven pigs and said" You know that a man with twenty

seven pigs and nothing to feed them is broke , and convinced me it was

my duty to accept the pigs:

" I married on the 4t of April 1888, - iss Nina J.ynn Jamesona daughter

,1

of Dr James who came to Texas from Georgia. N elived at Hahhard,where

I practiced medicine with my father until our children were ready to

enter college, It was with a feeling of sadness that we left this little

town .of good people which bad been our home for so long.

Folklore,
McLennan County, Texas,
District 8. •

File NO . 240. -
Page NO. 7.

"Our children are Nina Lynn Wood Friley(deceased ). She died of/Influenza

at College Statitm, Bryan, Texas in 1918. Her husband was Chas. E.

Priley , who is now President of Iowa State University at Ames Iowa.

Our other daughter was 41allie Byrd who died at the age of four years.

My sons 'are William gaxwell who is in the live- stock business at Gallup

New Liexico. James lenneth Wood and family of two children , Zenneth and

Lydia Iynn , live at Corsicana, he is in the in vestment business.

David Eason Wood and wife Gecil live at Shiro and both are teachers.

Eugene Carroll Wood lives in :6eattle Washington and is a lawyer. Walter

Putnam Wood lives in Waco ard is in the in vestment business.

" In 1904 to lessen my expenses and place my children in Baylor 'Maly-

-ersity I sold out my Sanitarium and other holdings at Hubbard and moved

to Waco, Texas, where I am now living. When the World war included our

country and the army camp and base hospital were located at Waco, there

were around fifty thousand soldiers at one time. During the winter the

influenza epedemic was raging and civilians and soldiers a like were dying

like sheep. We held a medical convention and diseased what steps could

be taken to reduce the death rate. We had a regime prescribed by one of

the army men, but it did not stop the epedemic.

"At •the meeting I could not keep silent and a rose and stljd" It is not

customary to digress from the visiting doctors prescribed treatment, but

if I am allowed the or ivilige of speaking , if you will open the doors

and windows and give them plenty of fresh air, I will be responsible for

Folklore,
Miss 3ffie Cowan
McLennan County, Texas,
Disttict 8.

'File NO: 240
Page NO. 8.

the reduction of the death rate& There were cries from all over the

house of "Amen, Amen". The suggestion was adopted and after the treatm

omit was changed in favor of fresh air , the death rate began to subside.

" In the year 1914 I attended the American Surgical Convention which

met in London, my wife accompanying me. We boarded the Celtic , leaving

"cow York and arrived at Cherbonrg Prance our first stop. I had a pecnl-

•

-iar experience on the vessel. My friends had fillet my valiale with good

cigars to enjoy on the tripo tefore arriving in France we were advised

that we should pass our smokes a roun.d to our friends on the boat because

the duty on that was so great that it would be prohibitive to smoke Amen-

-can tobacco a broad. I did not like the European tobacco s so I gait smok-

,

-ing a ndhave not, done so since.

" When we arrived in Paris the mail carrier at oar hotel brought- our

mail and said; I bring you geetings from home, I pope it is pod news".

We later learned that this was the only English that he could speak.

4fter seeing France we went to Vienna,and in crossing the Danube river,

a man with a megaphone callefut.to as to,xook to oar left and see the

Saroophaygi that.to mmorrow would contain the remains of i4erdinand and

Sophie who were murdered at Sarijari l% And this is said to be the canoe

of the world war.

, on our way

" The next day we proceeded to Vienntxto the hotel , after driving for

some time in a taxi, I inquired of the driver as to the extent of the trip.

Re advised me that he was making a circuitous route of fifteen miles to

a void contacting the Royal Funeral, to be held at midnight. I told bin not

FOLKIJOR3

gotennan County, Texas,

District 8.

Pile RO. 240.

Page NO. 9.

to carry as to the hotel but let as see the funeral. He drove as on and

put as out just in front of the procession/which contained two hearses,

one for Ferdinand and the other for Sophie, followed by Prances Joseph,

the Emperor.

"This was the first time we realized that war was impending , for Fran-

-cis Joseph constantly remarked to his subjects on either side, " I was in

hopes that I would be spared seeing my people thrown into another war".

he city was in total darkness , as was the castitm at Royal Funerals.

Only long torches were carried by the footmen who were guarding the two

hearses. 'fie Americans were restless and of course began to whisper, bat

were hashed immediately by the crowd. .tt was not long thereafter until

some one else began to whisper and again the crowd signaled to as to hash.

"We were so impressed by their loyalty that we remained silent from

then on daring the procession, it was so Viet that one could-almost have

bea*d a pin fall. We could not but respect them for their loyalty. inch

the Americans could learn from them. We stood for three hours as the -1q-o-

cession passed by,, Atter it was over the lights were turned on and one:

of oar crowd had imbibed too freely. Across the street there were two

life size statues on a three story building and on looking apo the one

who had been drinking saw the figures and said, " Dont jump,'we will rescue

you '. a owever we were so impressed by the procession that we did not joke

him about his utterances. We were thinking seriously of the outcome of .

this funeral and well we might have in view of the consequences:

" From Vienna we went to Brussels and from there twelve miles down

to visit the battle of Watterloe the monument was built by cutting, down

Folklore,

Miss of fie Cowan,

cLendan County, Texas,

District 8.

Pile NO. 240.'
Page NO. 10.

twenty acres of earth and as there was no elevator , we bad to climb

the steps to get to the top. On reaching the top we found a large bronze

lion surmounting it. It was a beautiful vision in the evening, I said

to the guide when he showed as where Blutcher, (hatcher and Wellington

met that it was the prettiest thing the eye ever looked upon ,W Re said

"Yes, Xes, " I said -'1 he world is in peace , the whole world aver", and -

we walked down the 385 steps to the panorama of the battle of Waterloo,

and both a greed that it was a fine reproduction of the thing we had just

viewed.

"There we met the Lord- Mayor of ;oaten,. Mrs Wood secured bis signature telling him we would be in town soon. Re assured as we would have a

good time. Instead of koing back to Brussels by train we went by taxi and

•

on approaching the main street , we found the army, cavalry, and rapid fire

guns drawn by dogs and following was the ring and his children. fie went

a crbss the street and made in air as to what it was for and they in formed

.vezkoh.

as that it was merely a review" -)N passing before the king. We had heard

this so much until we believed it. But in a few minutes we could hear

he guns firing at Liege. We could see that something terrible was hap-,

-pening without being told.

" It was not long thereafter that we were told that we were in war. We

were advised to return to oar 2inglish speaking people and we returned to

Lond4n, crossing that night through the hook of Holland. I was disgusted

with the newspaper reports and happenings of the hoar, so I inquired of

a policeman as to the war and he replied, " Go home, and remember this,

that after the war is over, the Anglishman will have fought(fifteen minutes

Folklore,
Liss ffie Cowan,
McLennan Cbunty, Texas,
District 8..

Pile Na.240
Page.Np.11.

longer than any one else"." We took his advice and attempted to return

to oar country but were detained thirteen days before we could secure

passage, on account* of there being such a rash of Aimericans tryinc, to

do the germ thing. And the demand for room On the steam- boats.

" We secured passage finally and came home with portholes covered and

sa4ing like a stack of blakc cats in the darkness with no lights , fear-

<-ing any minute that we might be sunk by a sub- marine. When we arrived

in New l ork, three miles out, I saw tears of thankfulness for our safe

return to our loved ones, more tba I ever saw on any other occasion in

my whole past life. tow this twenty-four years later , from somebody's

in descretion it begins to look as if we were going into the same maelstrom of war again.