( ~·Usa Baker) Protest. . . . . . '\'ell, I think: or course, we tr gamzed It in 1960.
It came Into being In the ran our organ12at!on, In the fall of 1960 • •••• •

The Initial meeting In April or ' 60 and then subsequent monthly meetings

throbghout !he summer. One of Irs first concerns was to worlc with

the people who were in the black belt area . This was IX' edlcated upon the

concept that there was a need to develop Indigenous, what we caU

Initial

Indigenous leadership and ub whereas In the i'6Kill stages the overall

pattern of sit in protest ;J There waa before 1961 qulte a discussion going on

·4 (

lltKw~X ,. duel thrust. In !act there was a posslbllity that seemed to

Joom that there WDUld be two different groups. ()ne that WOUld emphasize

direct non-violent action and the other that would engage t elf In voter

reglstraJaon. lthink one of the early uh, thrusts ln that direction, stems

irom the , some direct contact llflth persona who had been th!nlclng along

the lines of political •... of uh. • . • • . one of \tJ lch was Tim Jenkins who

at that time was serving the NSA as Its national uh national , I think they

call It civil r1ghts director. national activities, national activities I believe.

And be had been a party to a discussion with LII{X some old people uh ln . ..••

Virginia about tile question of registration and I think the vote(?). He began

to ppol around him persono like Chuck McDew, Charles Sherrod, uh and

uh I thln~ose three. Chuck, Carlle, Charles J nes and they began series

of discussions with persons out!lide the South. One for many •...... Harry

Beiafome was one such person and then as part of t11e protest uh, [hes~

fellas well on ~:~everal occasions were at the department of Justlce, as~

L/ /(!;'.//~

ELLA BAKER

questions a hout uh some aspects of dlscrlmlnation and ub I think their

first meeting or subsequent meetings with Bobby Kennedy who was then the atty. general1 /Je tried to s ell them on the Idea of voter registration

as belng the salvation and this generated a good deal of resistance In SNCC

because it bad full of the earmarks of uh implimentlble concern on the

part of the Kennedy mrces who were sure of getting voting strengtn In the

South by having: Negroes register to vote. lt waB more that, than their

concern for breaking down the barriers of dlscrlmlnatton . I think this

Indicates something of their earlier sta~es. Uh, However, I think lt

also ought to be born In mind that uh when the Issue was posed as to whether the~~oupt should go Into voter registration or continue

direct nonviolent act ion . ••• , there were those, especially Charles Sherr od

who felt that you couldn'tpossibly engage in uh community organizing In

the deep blaclr belt areas without eventually running Into the problem with

the l&N and lf you went tr1fo\tpolltical education you'd still run into problems

with the law and you'd still have to have m sa action .•.. . .. demonstration.

So I think that the realities of the situation demonstrated to the young people

that there was no need for a gr eat divLsion between voter registration and

mass direct a ctlon. \\ben they first thought of getting Into Mississippi ,

in 1960 uh, the summer of 1960 Bob Moses was In Atlanta. Apparently be

bad made an agreement with people of New York representatives of SCLC

to go down and do t:li!eVolunteer work. But when he arrived, ub no one

v\'1M

In SCLC bad made any plans for hlrn. 1 was serving then as the executive

director of SCLC on my way out and so he and rstruck up a relat ionship

with \ , james Stemlidg:e(7) .vbo was serving a.s the secretary of SNCC

ELLA BAKER

l s

that summer and out of t hls uh he had some opportunity to learn a bit more

about the South because I had certain experiences over a long period of years .

And because there was a the fall plan for the conference of SNCC. One of the

des Ir es was to ifllR{ reaop the Negro youngsters In Mississippi. Louisiana(?)

and Alabama. And 'so undertook a trip part of which was to N:tslsslppl &lld

.,.;} }

be was put In rouch with a person like Amzle Moore . Amzie Moore who bad

been talklng since. as far as lknow , since 1950 something this whole big

concept the need for organizing political ....... In the Delta seemed to have

Inspired Mr. Moses and he decided to go back to Mississippi In summer of

' 61. He was committed a ppently to teach the wlnter of ' 60-' 61 , but In

the summer of ' 61 he came back and went Into Mississippi went to McComb

Mlssisslppl and thls was the begtnnlng of the efforts. He was followed by

other young people, Jolm Hardy who was uh uh ~ perhaps as a result

of an attack on hlm by a r:eglstra be was tl)ebasis of the first x-eal suiteon the Mississippi registrar and some of the other ldds like Charles Jones

went down to McComb and as you perhaps have ~ard the McComb story

. . • . . . this developed Into a program of voting resistance and tbe need tor

s national telephone llne .... . •• Bob stayed there. Others went to Southwest

Geergla. And the patter n for voter reglatration and political education which

was one of lnterests(7) whlcb Chuck: McDew should be credited with uh

emphal.zed thls tram tbe beglnnlng, he Indicated he was dtiq.XXX not just

Interested In or~a nlzing people to register to vote, he was interested in

.n I'

organizing 'for political action ••• ...•. •

(Anne)

Shall we go Into the ..... .

(Miss Baker) lnaudlble

(Anne)

weU uh, you weren' t Involved in . • ... you say an. ' 64 was

I n ../ 'fjt't>lt II'/ {?

~

ELLA BAKER

was the only place . . .•.

( Miss Baker)

Jan. ' 64 no 1 wasn' t, you see/Ill 1 never waa based

In Mlsslsslppl. 1 DflfMXX was called in frequently In workshops, consultations

etc. but 1 was not based there. And un the or ganiz a tion, the concept of

organization or or ganizing the MFDP or or ganizing the Freedom Vote

really emlnated from SNCC at regular monthly meetings or periodic

meetings b.:cause uh, while Boll ftr~:~t gd Into Mlsslsslppl for political

a crion there were others 1GCX who h~eived pthe Idea filar they called . .'.'.C • • move on Mississippi 1fhls was a massive movement.
They bad aet up beadqueaters In Jackson, Mlssisslppl • Diane L<evel,

Diane Nash at the time, John, Jim Bevel and Paul Brooks and 1 think llernard LaFayette eJI bad ln mind a pushing at the •... • nonviolent,

direct action. So with these two forces already . • • • . to function in

Mlsslss lppl you had a great deal d discussion about SNCC. . . • • • • and ub

the progress from 1961 with the first efforts tMXX with the first effcns

which were made In the fall. Bob' s ub C!>Dtinuin~ staying in Mlssi.Bslppl,

helping out l think with such things as a political campaign which was onr normal level with Rev. R. L. p' Smith I believe, in Jackson.
And uh, this spread from one tlirg to another and then the .•• • ••... was

the freedom vote that was held ln '63. So personally l wasn' t there. I was

set to go In but the way It was • • . • ...•.. the ffiX exchange of discussion

wlth the young people and of course their relations alp wi lh the people in

Mlsslsslppi,R-rhaps you C4D devine that one at the major emphasis of SNCC

fcom the beginning was that of working with in degenous people, DJIII working

for them but trying to develop the capacity for lee.dersblp and for they

h&l a lot to do with decisions that were made uh prior to the formation

ELLA BAKER

s

of an~'thl~ like the FOP or Freedom Fund. \\ell 1 don' t thinlc you can

really pinpoint In that way because uh I think there are youngsters who came

Into SNCC &BCil{X at that point who were people who ?.>ere dedicated to the concept of other people a the rights of others and whereas maybe they

may have picked up the phrBBe of Indigenous leadership from something
I can' t say(?)
•...•. .. .•. uh I would not d1scla1m, I think that there Is very Hale that

Is original In human expressions and uh Its true that all my llfe my concern

hBB been that the most important things shoold be the development of people

to talce care of themselves, you see, I never believed In the strong leader.

Because the strong leader exaults aDd produces a weak following so that

I thln,k, so lf I had any influence I think lt lodges In the mraQC direction af

the leadership concepttthat 1 beUeve In namely that leadership shouldn' t

be centered uh1 fu should Instead of having what you call a leader centered

group you have a group centered leadersH p • Now do you get the difference?

That the major conceon lB that of the group and Instead of trying to develop

a symbolic leader you try to u+all the difference possible Is the group so

that you can develop leadership -'in the group.

'

(Anne}

The spring of '64 you were working here In New York for SCEP?

(Miss Baker) Nope,

(Howard?}

There was one question 1 wanted to ask before you go on.

You mentioned Kennedy and I wonder did he follow up at aU to help the

voter registration and besides .••••• • .•••. . •.......•

(Miss Baker) Well, from what lunderstand. he was BB l say Instrumental

In persuading certain groups ln New York that they could contribute.

(Howard?)

That It was legitimate.

(Miss Baker)

Yes, tm It wa.s legitimate.

MISS ELLA BA KB R

(Howard?)

In what way .

r

(Miss Baker) No, not jus' a question of contributing to SNCC. There was an organ12atlon formed. so methlrg calle~ the Leadership c .. nference what waa It called, thls fellow Steven Cur~ 7.kbat just got kllled a few

days ago , he and a some others had begun a series of meetings with

heads, personall of the NAACP, tbJ Urban League, the SCLC, SNCC

etc. Tills came about to a large exre11t lthink because In the lJltlal stages

of the Mlssh;s!ppl front, especially ln 1962 and '63 Bob Moses and uh

Dave Dennis of coR( had conceived of the plan of trylng to develop
/
a sort of unlted front and uh the 11 (hey were trying to do this because

of to Involve such as the local NAACP and to a void the usual wrangle

of who gets the money. They proposed an umbrella a lruatlon \\bleb

was called COFO and out of the COFO concept and you see there were a

conferences

number of d6K~oanstance, 1 think lwent with Bob once to talk

to someone In the NAAC~but there was correspondence 31XX with the

top level of the NAACP and with other persons and so In the process and

of course, Kennedy 111'8!1 interested in developing all the posslble political

support he cnuld In the Sou~ and so In the process I' m sure he used bla

Influence on such peM~X persons as heads of foundations or monied people which gave them the right to  make this lclnd of contribution~ As you lcnow

tax e~mmpt basis anything that comrlbutes to poll tical action ub Is not

so easily exempted. I thlnk that is the possible answer. As far as [' ,m

concerned, I know that's about all rhe help he gave. I' ve heard that he

help In Plf!rsuading these people, this could happen and I do know that the

speed With whtch It happened was greater than the usual speed that you

ELLA BAKER

get in applications for exemption.

(Hpmard ?) And the other two thlngs 1 wanted to ask, you talked a few

minutes ago ll.bout, you said that SNCC realized after McComb the

need for national help and [ wondered you jUiit talk about !t, bow they

conceived of mobilizing the nation and also the second thing, tllat, which

I guess was part of thE reason for brlnglng in t be wbltes for the freedom

vote. And maybe you can talK about the problem of the freedom vote. I

knpw there Is a lot of discussion

about whether to bring In whites

and all that stuff , way back you know and If you could tallr about those

two things.

(Misll Baker) Well, ub, as far as the uh the national help. the national

help of course, the first efforts were In the direction of financial help

because there was need for money and where else can you get It except

outside of the South. That holds true even ECX now. And of course,

in l think there is another factor here that has to be considered, namely

the degree to which )MifXX people were sort of romantically or otherwise

a ttracked to what was happening to the Scuth. l thlnlc you could never

underestlmce the fact that up until say from the late 30' s until then

you had had primarily a silent generation. People who had not been

accustomed to protest. People who had not voiced their opinion. They had

been under the impact of the McCarthy period and when these Negro

students began to submit ther::JselYes to all kinds of physical violence,

intimidation and the things spread as It did with such rapidity. lt became

a sort of a magnet for the rest of the country . S It wasn' t just a questlon

ot developing a national support it was a so a questlCin of provldlng

:,it ,,~

opportunities for that drive on the part of young peopl~and otbers

- 8-

who had social vision, especially 1o the North and the West, to help wlth

something. So that was the ftrst stage. Nllw as far as the whites getting

I nvolved, there were sofTie few wblte students Involved from the beginnlng.

As you know, one ol the ,6utstandlng , If you don' t know you can find It

Jl'I09t

by looking lr up, one of the most ourstanillnu; student slr· ln efform \1flJ

to

Nashville, Tennessee, and I think: all tbe .. . I believe that was his name,

he was one of the first who was badly }'!eaten and lle was wlllte, and there

were several other wbltes who had participated tn different ~t-mdemonstrarlons and so what you bad then was all rig-ht In the pattern of~ovolv. ment,

';~!P'/J and a blgher de~ee of desired for Involvement. And so In
• ~ '63 .,
~en the Idea of the freedom ballot was conceived In Misslss,ppl, to fact before that tlme even, yru had white students from the North and otller

/,

parts of tbe country seeking a lflllatlon with SNCC, so th"ywere there.

And when Misslsslopi began to have reaction to Missl.ssippl, yoof1f't¢11/'i'l'lfll

more, and '/>##¢/ you had people/r/41~#/./. coming In and I think he had some

like Alan Lo~tetn

1 nterest b,rbeing tnvclved In different levels, and he in volved some students

attracted people

rut tn Eerlc;eley, I belleve It was Berkeley ••. , so lt wasn' t a question of our

staying calm.

,t.tthat stage It was a question of &absorbing people 11N)UOUQD

" ~{,_<{,.It<· •
"

to what we lhougllt we could a bsor.b. That was tn '63.

(man' s voice) £here Is a quesrlo nhere that .. . talked at>out •• •• tak<!n over

~il.tdLNb!iHM abr\lda.

reorganize people, they just couldn' t, It was

physically impossible.

-~~.!d{ (,(/

Ttft" Well, the flrst, I am sure tills was true because they d1d not b.ave the

experience. 1 em sure, and also It bed so methtng to d'l with t11e fact that those

who were already organizers or project directors had soee concern abru t tile

extend Wblch they would rellnquisb. their roles , and uo 1 understand that ln the

- 9-

N ~ember ' 63 election that they did have some trouble about whites taklng over

but this I can understand too. See what you had was, In j:erms to tile Whites,

.j,4 .. ,; .. ,"' (.

y ou bad people who had verbalized more of a pt'yeophleal than political

to a large extent

had

a>ncept than/the Southern Negr0Cl7' students. They ... lived .•. politic~

change and they were much more adept toward It, which In any situation I

t hin1c where two grotp s of people meel, they are both trymp- to acquaint themselves

with each other In some way. and so the whites no doubt have resorted to

and to wrttc easUy

. .. tbeLr capacity to ta llc/ which might have been the same for the Negroes,

and the Negroes may have fallen baclc on their own experience, thelr superiority

1 nexperience of la)owtng the.! ropel! as It were for the situation, you now had the

sense of content and It was DOl, however, until ' 64 program th.nt there was a

very highly. ve:-y c0!18clous effon to Involve whites. And one of the major reasons

f or that was political.

l don ' t know Whether anybody has mentioned this, but when

you are replng with the fact thar John Smith and all the other Negroes of

Mlsslaslppl , who could get killed o.rwhat have you, just ~eanother person killed,

hurt, or so forth, the rest of the countyy would not a rouse aoy concern. And so

what we came to grips wlth ls the fact thtt/ 4NAla~ construction , the South bad

stnc:e re

been left to deal with th~ race problem "as It /4) fit,"

\lolth the passage of

SllW

agreement with the re~>t of the country. How then were you to a rouse the reiSt

of tile country to sense tills.. . How do you speak to it. You don'tspeak tb lt

through the death of John Stnlth from Mississippi. But you do speak to It through

t he harrassment of congre•mads son or ll governor' s son or persons who have

presence in their community. So there was the conscious effort of opening tbe

de'nands

doors to the great;. .. you dldr'thave to go ... they were there pushlng against

the ll3tes wanting t'> get In where the action was.

'This Is s c-methlng that

- 10we will always have to deal with, and so we ~pened the gates on a consclence

basis for me pollllcal lmplct that it could handle with the rest of the eot~ntry.

N"W I ur.Jeratand that there are differences, wide differences • ... respective

of

evaluation ll! this movement.

I understand some people feel very guilty having

ways

t

fou ght ln sn many... They feel that perhaps It dld mnre harm than go:"d, but

the way It did titlce place

I am nd here tf\ evnbalte1 that. This Is his\or lcsl .•. rake place.
were working for SCEP

(woman' s voice) In the spring of '64, ynu. ~.In New York.
/J~1_,_. t!''lii~t t<
'Heward) N..,, you see 1 by '64 I had bec.,me associated with S6KXX but l wa!i

SCEF

was, a,

s till In Atlanta, and it was In the summer of '64 1 decided to move back: to

New York as far as base was concerned.

I always made ..•••.•• home, but

1 shifted and ~X IJllVe up my Atlanta base, and uh, Bob Moses

and soJIJe others raJ sed the question of the need for somebody to organize

t he national support. And I was ssked to do It starting late Peb, late March

and uh, even before I moved. before t moved back uh we went to the

'YJ!encver lt was

United Automobile Workers Convention In Atlantk: Clry.~ It may have been

in M.ay, 1 don' t know, U. was warm . And we saw Joe .Rau~h and somebody

else there and sort of exploring what their support might be.

(,Anne)

~"Ina nels! as well as •.••• ••

(Miss Baker) Well, that would he ~ raised but uh I don'tthink

we got very much financial support from them, but we drew around(?)

the woman and got her name , [ think abe ia in the headquarters of Troy •

Neither of them were in positions to commit, they could only use their

in tluence and uh,

(hll'le)

What about Bob?

( Mrs. Baker) B b bad a a bort time to talk with Walter Reuther but Walter

ELLA BAKER

---11---

uh, didn' t do too much that be uh. How we got to talk to him a.t the convention

as I recall was In a luncbeonjession that had been arranged for Walter

to meet with the young people who were there. It was Bob and someone from

SDS 1 forget his lUll me now 1 could dig lt up and someone from some a her

youth group who were on this program, After they bad told their program, what they weTe doing, Walter gets up, acting as if nothi~ had re en sald,

be preceeded to talk about what be was pl a nning to do see, so be did not speak

to their needs at all. And they didn' t , I lbn' t think , he had lo mind a program

that would !ocus Walter. And ub, so that , that' s as much as happened there.

At the convention. So we also ~XX conferred with persoott llke

A. Philip Randolph and other tN:ople here in the New York area and one of

the posltloos 1 took was that the leadership for this nadonal effort should

come from out of Mississippi, It should not be turned over as so often

this happens to a New York based committee. So uh this Is t he way we

started, We set up office. First we began to function out of so mebody' a dflce

here and then we set up a full tlme office ln Washington . And such persona

as Walter Tillow, I think he Is, I'm not sure whether he' s at the U. B.

now organizing, you can talk to him.

(Anne)

1 already have

(Mrs. Baker) Yes and uh, other persons, let see V'a lter and then there

was this gHUXX guy named Rich Pondd from ~a shlngton and uh, several

people, Prank Smith who' s now in ub Mlsslsslppl and uh others you know.
were
HG'zXpeo;Jle 'h'Orking clllKX out of that office. Oh, Mike Miller who is now

I think working •••••• I thlnk he' s based now In Kansas. t-..~Mlke was

from the V.est Coast. And uh, these because the pivots around which

entry was galned to different political a genc!e.,, And county, and conventions you see

ELLA BAKER

---12- - -

DllCYlii'~XX ~uld you go Into your strategy a little bit .•• • . • •• you lQjow,

(Anne)
first
B of all do you know mucb about the financial ---did you organize it or who

support.

was sort of encbarge of uh

(Miss Baker) Well yr>u see It waBn' t l.lr<>ken down Into financial and political

we had ncentral office and we made an effort to rea,...h the political leadershlp

ln the Democratlc Party In particular. At their convre tiona and so fourth

and dGCXX had resbluttona passed and copies of some of them are somewhere

t here now. But these various resolutions were passed wirb the Idea of bring

preBsure to bear upon tb,e political leadership that woold be at the convendon.

And there were enough states that had committed themselves at one degtee

or another In support of the Mississippi or petition

to have won at the

conve:trlon. This you see as far now In the process of meeting with groups,

getting thelr resolutions you also attempted tO get flnanclal support. And then

in that stage SNCC still had a very good financial machinery. So uha !ar;;e

part of flnanc.! really carne from SNCC. And the }ittonal~ouncU of@hurcbes,

~mmisslon on Religion and/tace becamevery closely associated ,vtth the

efforts they made and they made contributloDB as J remember. But our big

thrust from tile Washln.gton office ;vas trying ~to generate the political climate

and support. So when you \\'ent to the convention uh you would have support for the seating of these people. But, I suppose uou beard about uh Mr.

VIce- President Humphrey having been delegated ~y the president to go and  use his liberal relatlonshlp or bls reputation as a liberal to uh really

undermlne any !:upport.

(Anne)

Now, l( I WMted to ask: you. V 'a lter said that within a short

period you had say bullt up at leastest 11 delegations, one right after

another

ELLA BAKER

- - -13·· -

(Miss Baker)

That' s rlgbt

(Anne)

and then all of a sudden it just stopped and at the sametime

and at the same time the editor of the U. A. 'V'l. legislative newsletter who had

had a lot of ••• • • •• in that was a soddenly cut off too and Walter didn' t

go lnto tbls he

just sald you lcnow •• • • • labor

(miss Baker)

Well we of course tarned through tt.ese stages. ln the process

of bulldlng support you don'talways have the time to foluow up your loses,

which you' re doing to continue to mount suppor~. Especially when you don' t have anything, you don' t have tlme, money/ /t;6 didn' t have money to send people to all conventions and you don' t have enough personell, so you continue

to try to mount yoor support by whatever nt thode you could you see. And
~~onal &uncu of@urches, ~mmissloo on ~llglon and/(_ace especially helful In reaching the religious group& and In Influencing some of the top

civil rights groups to some extent. But, the counter force which waa that which

was mounteo by Mr. Johnson I'm surej}3XX in sending Humphrey out to

meet with our chief, J'(ltentlal support and persuade them to ~econtrary.

Ub, he was ll~fqXseeldng the vice- presidency and uh, this was his

1 think, this dC was the way Mr. Johnson was di1a.a urlng his capacity

to be vice- president. See because he, there was botb Humphrey and another

man fiOm Minnesota uh

(Anne)

~il!i'IXX Mundall

(Miss Baker)

no, no lt was another name, ~he was another,

McCarthy a very 1!liliX tlne young man seemingly, bur both were potentials, but

uh. so the carrot was being dangled befor7 Humphrey and he was assiduously
WOIIdng to uh off set these delegates {' f,t/ later learned that , forelnstanc8

ELLA BA'KRR

---14---

at the convention we learned even at the convention we began to see support

wane. Uh at the convention uh, people like Edith GJ:eene, was so disgusted

with wha.t maneuvers that ,had been taken place In that she had some

concern, even express~ concern about whether she ~ pught to

contlnu5 to me at least in im@lfiXRi:IX dlscuaelon.Jhether abe ought to

continue In political action, I mean In the realm of politics. And uh, some

women from Cal!to rnla who was a delegate I don' t know who she wa.s, the

one whose husband was promised the judgeship and overnight he was sort

of reminded that the judgeship cwld be taken a, withheld and so one body else who

bad so mepolltlcal J)r maybe some economic problems bad been pl'omised some k!nd of

.

support.;. ~Is was the kind of tWng that happened at the convention. More

importantly, I think tile thing that happened, was that at the convention the

delegations of different stares bad no opportunity to vote over anything, this

was a party maneuver to keep the issue l\lly Issue, to keep tbi,tesue f1·o•.: coming

up they had .,..

llterP.lly Ia d to keep anv Issue from coming up before the

delegation. 1 remember the ub, the time, the day on which it was announced

that our delegates had flnally a greed to this compromise, I was visltlng the

Nebraska delegation, tile delegation from Nebraska and they ub, the man who

was enchnrnge of the meeting apparently had reen a lerated to the stallln

untll he got some feedback or report from the man who I thlr~·as governor

of the state and when the guy who was goverll(lr came ln uh, 1 could tell what

had taken place. The governor got up and oh, greal kinds of fanfare, ch what

have you • how he bad been envolved in certain klnd of discussion and

indicated that this bad taken place and then uh, nc knowledged my presence,

of course With the hope that I wottldn' t have m. ything to say. Of course,

I took the position that the grestXA'Il<was that of the people~'610C who were

Joss

ELLA 5ABS:.R

_K~

at the convention, convention delegates who had had no op(l<lrtunlty to

participate in any decisslon making. And I spoke to this effect and you

can see that the people were let down, but the maneuvering had taken place

Now Mr. Aaugh, fOI!in stance was fK wearing many hate. He was a good friend

of Hubert Hu mpbrey over many years, he was Walter !l.t-ugherli paid councll

and he was htgb In Democratic circles, and at that stage 1 understand he was

stUl interested In the possibility of heing made the first mayor of whatever

else you Ill ve In Washington, If home rule came. And so he had, 1 suppose, and he was special council for the M. F. 0 , P, Jo take all these dlfterent hats, you see t he pressures of being torn. I remember at one stage of the game, he ClUlle Into

the delegations. when the delegates, you perhaps have heard when the delegates

about the delegation being spolo:l.'lt to l'>y such peoflle as Mr. Senator Wayne

Morse, Uayard RusLln said be had been called by Walter Reuther to come down.

(Anne)

He said he bad been called by Walter Reuther to come down

because he could not reach any key or

(Miss Bak<:r) yes, yes that' o right

(Anne)

or Aaroo Henry l)r Ed King. Now wasn' t Ed King there and

........
(Miss B!d:er) \\ell nor, but they were the typical supposedJy , or they

were ll~ xcondldered to be pivotal in the Misslt~sippl Delegation.

And when you said reached, that was certainly opened to debate as to ~x · · ·

what he J?Jc:t ,;'r

by reach

Cllll~~ because In terms of reaching them 1-ytelephone he could

have done 90 because we had 24 hour '!llbllc terdephones In a very crowded

slutalion but It was publlc. So we Interpreted that statement,/ of reaching to

mean t1a t he could.ll' t get to them to Influence thej and so Bayard was

sent as h1s emlsary and uh, lets see •• , ,t, • •• • • • what he meant by reach oli

.

I ~<t "' 1'

ELLA BAKER

---16- - -

kat difference dees lt make we know v.hat they meant by reach (laughter)
at least we at that stage did, you k can do wbat you Uke ub, when ub, uh

let me tblnk the man who WBB councU for the tbmml.sslon of &glon 81:Jd~e

.1

forgotten his naene now

for the patlonal ~ncU }aclt so meb~ jack Pratt yeah ••••• ••• so thnt .••••

ub he spoke and tlnumber of other people spoke and uh trying to Martin King,

to accept tnis compromise

showing that this was the great opportuni~llat ub it wasn' t a loss, It was

a victory and a WliRXX whole lot of other stuff. But un, Bob ll.loses had

something to say, and 1 only had, 1 responded to something that Raugh,tj.3aid

Walt, lmean ~augh made this pitch in this vein, that we had been k:nown and demonstrated 1n the sit, ln movemem: and so fourth and so on 1 ~great heart of the Negro people bad demonstrated its capacity for forgiveness and

understanding and be would hope that In this situation we would still he able to

demonstrate de tbls cpaclty for understanding and that Mr. Humphrey, Hubert

Humphrey was running for the vice- presidency and the chances are he could

lose lt see. And so I got up at that polnt and made the statement to the effect.
rot this was the ldnd of thing tha we had to come to grips with and
<(_
who claimed to l>e wlthus would be with us iitiiHX wben the golng got rocgh

aa well as when it '~as easy • .lWi called upon~ to be understanding of

And to

us

Mr. Humpbn:y's desire to win was saying forget what you need, your

winning and support his winning. So a nyho).V this is the way the story went.

I'm sure you gotten XX others who, I wasn' t part of but one ee sslon of the

Jlo not the----

consultation see,~ so ••• • •.• but with some of the other people I dorfJ know

wbo was there at the time but uh tbey ........ Klng' s suite you see.

(Anne)

we you see uh

(Miss Baker)

but the}' soon, they rever invited me back.

ELLA BAKER

- --17---

(Anne)

Killft(ll(X In King' s suite, I undea-stand there were, there was a group ln

the Uvi ng room ofa'edentlals committee supporters and there was a group In

the bedroom, Bob and Al Lowenstein and you

(Miss Baker) I was In the bedroom at that point, at one point

(Anne)

And Joe ~gb sald tbat at tbat time he understood that like Al

t old him or so mebody told him later that In that room they went through

eter possible comtromlae that could be offered and decided and Bc•b

talked about you know what he would encourage the delegation or what he

would be willing ro accept • •••.•• •• you know, what would l-egood for the

one

delegation and uh. thls ~ well they said what If the seat half the delegadon,

what lf they seat a quarter of the delegation
1t

what If they gtve two and rumor has It that Bob

(Miss Baker)

( /.nne)

Raugb

(qo Raugh wasn' t In that gr~

&ugh~ I meant~ whoever told Raugh this, said that

the seating of rwo \Wuld be acceptable

(Miss Balcer)

Never, never, rm sure tbat Xi!IJKX never Bot' s position

and Mrs. Hammer was In that room

Vnoe)

Mrs. Hammer was In that room

(Miss Baker) and she jumped as hlgb as heaven and whoever told Raugb that

they misrepresented that. Of course I don' t have any recording of It, but

there was never a quefltion of the kind of seating that they would talk of

which was uh a courtesy seiting and as .•• , . , • as l rem ember yes, he

didn' t a gree. The thing that we were mostly supporting or stood by, or at least

felt that that was the only viable compromise and that was all the delegates,

'>'ll (()\':v>

r~ I

l'i-

both th~regulars and the M. F . D. P, be sup,jected to I a cliii the loyalty test

BLLA BAKER

---18---

and those \Ill o t:pok the loyalty oath would be seated. And If tbls rre ant that

so many of the regulars took It, tbst there was only room for two of M, 0?. 0 , P,

then we could consider that. That' s about all you see. The •• •• ••.•• was those

who would take the Loyalty oarh or some other coruslderarton tbsr .•••• • ••••••

that' .s entirely different from a courtesy seating of two 'ilithout power of any sort.

(/1 neO One other tblng th.at Raugh said, that uh this bas come up in many

tapes, In fact In Waltet' a t~ discussion, that right Wore , this was on j f ""' .. ~ •

Tuesday. Right before Raugb went to the final critical period, the delegates M. F. D. P.

uh at the convention met and discussed the possible comjll!'mlses and what they

were going to accept Md uh Walter said that the F . D. P.

that Bob brought up

what if you are offered two seats would you take It and they said no we6X we would

not and ·~augb was In that room and It was Walter ~ilfJ( maklng that stand

• •• • • • •

wana' t golng

·~

and Raugh~ to take that as tbe final stand and augh said what It this . , ••••
Raugb was told by~euther that this was the flnal stand. (Very muddled and in audlilile)

(Ml s Baker)

Ibe other top level operation

1 (.A~e)

l " >nil 4/e '' J#~,t~
tf n ,~.,. ·r

'

(anne)

that this was going to be the compromise and according to

'fe11dy • • • • , •••• Raugb should zve gone it,~e ,n~

. h ~ ~

C ,l(( 'f

• tpr ~~~ --

(Miss Balcer)

,.,/
/1.-£ /fi'.,P/1~

and gettet:~ ~"':rm s tOft ~ffi'IH!edeleg~~.tes Instead r1 that

lnaudlblc

\l S/ltlf.
, Instead of that \vhy, ltalJgll said that be dld

1 • • • • • • and sard .••..••.• • •• • we Ia ve/not done tbls and cannot accept this~\
1:. ,, 1711{ he • ,;. t ,t 1 tt> ~~ l" •'R. YO {. cu:X ~ TI-lt< ,,~4iTJJ-IIJ ?_;
1h U
• •,, , • • • •, •, • •, • etC

)./~ W/1' 1 Hf;.. L""J..:.

t J c_

i.. '1

( l!ls~o Bao<er)

I don' t think It came out that way. t\t !'hat time. Bf course

.T dr,. f. o~J;,,.y, 1f'i,j

.<'>t·AVtl,.~tcame back :'there Is no way for us to know, ve can only take what' s being

said

ELLA BAKER

---19---

( Anne}

He told~ resolutions, the people iXX to Integrate the

committee YP\l know that as far as he was concerned you know It seemed pretty

goodbut that he had to vote against It, I have to vote against It

(Miss Baker) Yes, but you see this is uh, uh double standard which Is of course,

uh bas a as far as he was concerned be was not really representing the people

you see, be couldn' t be a mbivllent, he was supppsed to be the people's

representative

(Anne)

Lnaudlble

( Miss Balcer) he bad to fight for that. What uh, anyway this is what did take

place and both Mendy and Walter , Bob and uh , ub Eleanor Norton down here

at ACLU, ub they perhaps were closest to the negotlations that I, but they

didnjt have any faith In them, plus tbe fact that I' ve always taken the position

that the people wbo were the delegates and the people who were workinl!

closest with them, they were the ones to be in the lead of things. And Mrs.

Hammer was called in, but then she was dropped from the re gotlatlons and

\

uh, there was some rumors to the effect that Ed King and uh Aaron Henry

hod accepted this compromise of plthe courtesy delegation, the courtesy seating

-t!j ..... ~

1 think there was, I think afterwards they said they did not accept It that way.

I don' t lcnow, but the point Is that the delegates as a whole never accepted It

that way at all. They took the position that they would rather go back home and

say, and a go back home without anything then to make thar kind of a

compromise you see.

(Anne)

How do you, let' s go on to my next question. How do you think

affected Boh for one and you In you a him as a representative .• •• to· vard

political Involvement In the Negro South 1wltbin the Democratic Party ami f l'lrln

IJ.'t£. I

ELLA BAKER

---20---

In tbe mainstream of American polttlcs7

(Miss Baker) Well, I would Imagine that certainly settled any debate he

might have bad about the possibility ftJ<ilfilijfiK~~OODtl~KX~:X of tuncHonlng

through the mainstream of the Democratic Party especially If we were

pertained

tlonshtV that ••• ••• you see, because havtng to have a coalition type rela

basically ~XX this was a foaltlon,...Jie were depending on rhe Ul.ieral

Democrates, and the uh wttbln the •. •••• ••••• of cour se that' s the only

thing you could have done there was no wayof getting It carried msldepbe

IJ,lready

party caucases unleiB you had pocple"~lns1de, so 1 dm' t know how he was affected
~ but 1 woll.ld think if he had any "~ote", you see personally I

dld' t have any

(Anne)

Inaudible

(Miss Baker) no, no you see I didn' t have, It was a poUtlca.ldifference

l' m not a good politician but you see uh, 1 didn'thave any ~X hopes

didn' t expect people to be seated In the first place fAnne>
(Miss Baker) no I didn' t expect lt to happen because what was there to be

and you

how could you expect It of a president wbo bad very much concern about

winning and who bad evidenced his capaclty to undermine by having sent

certain people out to counter whatever was being done. You see, from the

beginning 1 dld]Jt expect, I think that I don't hope for these mtraculoiB

things

to happen. And uh, but when you worlc wtth those, at the convention when

you' re talking wtth delegates, I can see that It calld have happened If

people had the chance to vote. But lknow j6CIXX I knew enough about polJtlcal

, , t , •• )

chicanery to know tbar If a vote Is likely to go against you the power that be

try to find ·,~,ays of keeping that thing from coming to a vote.

ELLA BAKER

---21---

And so this is what they did. Now 1 don' t know tliaJ: Bob really believed that

they would be seated, Now maybe they did. 1 thlnlr: there were some people

who r~~ did belleve, and I can understand from the political

1\

from the, let' s call It the emotional cllmate that surrounded the whole

\64 summer and Mississippi Issue and the and the logic of lt from the

stand point of lack of loyalty as far as the lv{isslsslppl Democrates and the vlo\a tlons
•• • , • •

of Democratic rights that had pertained over the ~ ars, On

the logic of It would dictate It, but t le political ub consideration, political

,

evaluation of the couldn' to ffer this as a proJlllse, but 1 don' t think, But I haven' t

talked wlth Bob •••• • • • , , • • •

about this

but 1 should Image Lt bad great Impact on him,

1 don' t know. And ub, to some extent, I think the Mlsslsslppl Freedom

DemocratiC Party was not organized to prove that you could function through

the existing party. Uh, th~ey followed the legal requirements, In order to

jU3ttfy the lr presence at the Convention and It was a testing force, and I think

alerting process for people. I don' t know. You have read, now who bas,

who knows, have you foo.ru:l anybody who expected the Mlsslsslppl delegation

to be seated?

(aone)

Well fl..frs . Hammer

(Miss &Iter) Mrs. Hammer said she dld

(Anne)

Al least from the beglnningup to the Convention . (something

about Raugh) she knew that

Howard

_.\
(&m;lf~ see Raughyou wer:e at . • • • • • Convention, see .daugh, tKKX

,.

CfiMI:IXIKXH61WlfN:IJX 1 was at the convention, the speech that Raugh made,

1 mean I was there see l worked on the proJect, aru:l 1 though , I ~X couldn't

conceive of how the thing could look,

I mean I really, of course I really

ELLA BAKER

---22---

l didn' t understand tbe .•• •

(tvf.lss Baker)

!I was at the convention

I mean the way laugh presented It • • • • • • he had ll votes

(Howard)
out of pthese 100 delegates
(Miss Baker)

yaah, 1 know

('~oward)

•••••• peq>Je country •• •• • especially, you lcnow

I' m Southern, I'm 'from Louisiana, but I had a vety exaggerated about

how llberal the Nor th was you know,

( M.l s Baker)

and how much tnfluence they could weal

(Howard)

yeah

( Mist> Balcer)

Well. 1 could understand how Miss Hammer would think

because after all she, It is sort of an emotional, rellgous type thing. you

know a moral type thing

(Anne)

yeah

(Miss Baker)

And you can' t e1tpect a person who ln '62 wa.s a sharecropper

without any political expcrelcre to have reached In ' 64 to have doubts about

uh the thing and as you said tbe manner ln which Raugh explained lt, would

give anybody gr~ for sayl~. you see that's tbe logic of It, that's the J,a wlaut.

(Howard)

he was pretty opeb, of course when be • • • •

(.A.nne)

no he ~;ald ••••

(M•ss Baker)

i think Raugh was wearing several bats all along.

(Howard)

1 don' t lcnow, he was

(1\'iss Baker)

(anne)

(Howard)

how did he justify his position.
, ce sald that that

Well

he realized the Jlmltst lon you know, he realized., .,

ELLA BAKER

---23- --

bow much he was against it. But 1

( Miss Balcer) Well I don'tthlnlc you had to get to the convention to realize

that .

( Anne)
tab interest(?)
par ticipate(?) that he you lcnow In bade of his mind, hi" kept saying In

No, I think he said that all through rhat he decided to

back ot my mlnd I knew that •• •• • was something th~y' dnever accept •• • ••

He told me •• •. • yes lt ls. He told me he decided to pur. It out of hls mind(?)

(Howard)

he just put lt out of his mlnd

(Anne)

He said that was the most • •••.• polltJcal pressure thot be

has ever b1!en Involved In or ever he&.rd of • • • • • • • • • • • • these politicaL •• • • ••

(Mlss Baker)

Now lf be bad his doUbts, 111aybe he has uh ub a certain

a mount at visionary capacity you know, and maybe this,.riloall can make

!"'"

be even more generous maybe he can have enough of of hope you see U.ke

others hope that people would act J mean mayhe It may 1-e that but I could see

ver yearly In the game that he was playing, wearing many hats because uh

w hen you confer with hlm and then J mean be was there and then ub he would

have a call wculd corne tbrougb from Humphrey and uh he ~ would

absent yourself you see and uh, bur I lhcugbt he]{ at least had, wbar I call

legal dft.XX Integrity which he was giving the l:.~st that be had of Je gal advice

for the procedures, 1 think, I would give him credit for rbat, but I didn' t bave

any, any doubt that he was

( /'..nne)

had several allegiances

(Miss Baker) ye~J ,

these a lleglnncet~ were there, and 1 , I felt that they

were bound ro catch up. TI1at lf th~re was a choice tetwcen allegiance

(Anne)

Well 1:.

(Howard)

he wouldn' t chose F . D. P~

ELLA BAKBR

---24---

(l"11ss Baker)

the F. D.P. with Harllp(?) that he would advocate all others

of course.

(howard)

I tblnlc I, In fact • • •• , • lndaudlble., •• • ••

(Miss Baker) Well, I would, I guess it's too much to ask l'd lllce to

wh<\t ub, see some of these, seE' what hEs evaluation was at some stage

I never talked with hlm
•
can send you a copy of the

(Anne}

, •••••••••

(Ml.ss Baker) yeah, I like that

(Anne)

The University of Wisconsin Do you have anything else to 1 •'-'

(tl.iiss Blcaer)

no