(.Anne) Where were you from before you came to Mlsalsslppl?

(Moses) I was from Harlem, New Yorlc and I was born and raised

there.

(Anne) \J.'here did you 1!'0 to school?

(Moses) I went to New York City school system and then to Hamilton

College which Is a small college upstate New York and then c!Jd some graduate

work at Harvard.

(.Anne) Old you complete your master's or PhD or what?
(Mo&ea) 1 completed a masters. rn philosophy.

(II nne) What year?

(Moses) 1957.

(IInne) When did you first come to Mlaslsalpp~?

(Moses) The first time was In the summer at 1960.

l was worldng on

a tour for SNCC and 1 went through parts of Alabama and Mississippi, Loul1lana,

to get students to come to a conference. That was to be the first fall conference In the fall of 1960 and they would-

(Anne) Was that In Ralel~h?

(Moses) Atlanta. The Ralel!!h conference was the spring of ' 60 and

then they planned at that conference to have another one In the fall and rwent

and got names of people to come to the conference.

(Anne) When c!Jd you decide to work fullUme In Mississippi?

- 2 -

(Moses) Well, when I was in Mississippi thar summer, I talked to a

person named Amsy Moore, who was wttb the NAACP In Cleveland, Mississippi,

about posslbilltles of a voter registration proJect In the delta. He was very

Interested in that. He wasn'treally interested ln cbe slt-Lns and integration

of lunch counters and so forth. So we mapped out the areas whue 1111 a voter

registration drive could take place and an Idea for a program whlch lsent

back to the SNCC office ln Atlaru:a. And I decided later on that summer that

lwould come back: and work: on lt.

(Anne) On voter registration?

(Moses) Right. So lcarne back the following year, July of 1961, back

to Cleveland to start to work on this program and it turned oot chat It was

easier to start In McComb so I went down there and that'& •••a a when we

started what people consider the first phase of SNCC vot er registration

project In Mlsslsslppl.

(Anne) Could you trace your activities or the events of 1961-2· 3 that

lead up to the offJclal MFDP? Is that too broad a question? I' m not exactly

sure bow co sale I c.

I don' t know very much about lt.

(Moses) There are some, I think, key stages that you can trace that

wm help you. 0ne was simply an lnltlal stage of an exploration of whether

or not you could make sense of, say, a person, llke myself coming and living

In a community and conducting a voter registration campaign, and whether lt

was possible to get people from the area to work. My feeling, after the

in itlal,n-w• say, program in McComb wblch lasted about four months, was

- 3-

that that was worthwhile, that you coold do that. You could get local people

to work wlth you and finally that you could get young people to leave school

and work. So out of that first campaign we did get Curtis Hayes and Hollis

Watkins as field secretaries, who had just graduated from high school and

instead of going on to college right away decided to work for a year. And

they went into Hattiesburg to start a simllar campaign. So that the Idea of

developing a group, a force of young people from Wlsslsslppl, v.bo would

spread out into different areas of the state and begin to work on the voter

registration really tOI')k roots out of that firs t program In McComb.

didn' t

So even rhouldl that program IIJdactually register any one,D'Ii you got

about thirty-six people to go down wblch waa Ln Itself a huge brealc:trhougb

because ln the last ten years yoo hadn' tgotten twenty people who had attempted

to register.

So tbe next year was really-- You can look in one sense upon the develop·

ment from ' 61 through until say ' 63. fall of '63 as a process In wblch yo11

were working at thar Level. That was you were consciously trylng to build

a grou p of young people in t..1J.sstssipp1 who would work and view themselves

as having the right to work on this klnd of prot-elm. That It would become

something that was legitimate for ;young people to do and that, in fact, it was

a lcind of work for young people and the most pressln17 wor k to be done, more

Imporranr, say, than going through school In tour years. And for some, more

important than continuing school, Like Guyot, for Instance, had finished

Tougaloo and was planning to go to law school, but I think altered those plana

- 4 -

with the idea that it was more important to work than to go on to law school.

So that a certain tone, rationale, spirit, I tblnk, began to develop In those

years a mong some ot the youn!." people.

.And that, at tbe end of two years

you had about twenty-five or thirty youn!!' N~oes between tbe a!fe of 18

and 26 who were from Mississippi, who viewed themselves as some kind

of unit, who Identified with SNCC ln terms of or ganlz~tlon of national Identi

fication and who identified witb each other In terms of, sort of working In

Mlsslsslppl context, of being from Mlaslsslppi and more or less thlnldng

that their job and even their llfe' s work would be to work to make some sense

out of Uvlng In Mississippi.

It was on that base that all the other work rose, the organization of COFO,

the organization of the Freddom Democratic Party, the coming In of the

Mlsslsslppl SUmmer Project, and the running of political campaigns. 1 think

the real one, I' d say, In terms of a thesis, to find out what, writing a history

of PDP or any of those organizations that one thing that would be Important

to do would be to get the list of those people starting with Curtis Hayes and Hollis

Watldns, LOuis Peacock, Sam Block, Lawrence Guyot, James Jones, McLaren,

~ }J

'

and others who were part of that Initial group and who are still working, who

are now, either--They' re In school, some of them, Some of them are running

some of the organizations In Mississippi. And really~ their history, which

Is, I think the kernel of a lot of the history of these organizations, more so

than say volunteers or people who came In from the outside.

Now watchin1 that crrow-- What your first, was the development of a

relatlonship between some of those people and some people ln rural areas 1n

- s -

different parts of the state: 7'he Steptoes (?) and others, Weathersby and

other peQple lo the county, Mrs. Hamer, MacDonalds and some other people

In Sunflower County, some of the people In and around Forrest County and

around Hattiesburg.

The initial base-- You see I think you tended to have two prongs. That

is, as a base in the young people,ar:n a small rroup of them conceiving them·

selves as workees, fulltl'lle, and developing a certain kind of moblllty,

moving out, usually, !rom the area where they lived to so other town and then

some of them moving from area to area. And then the people that they

initially worked with being by and large not from the city such as they were

in Mlsstssippi, but from rural areas and then by and large nor from the

plantations Initially, but from the small in dependent farmer wbo had their

own little plots of land.

Tbe o•her thing which entered early. In fact, the next program that

I personally worked on after the McComb program was a program, a plltlcal

program where Reverend Smith, who was from jackson, ran for Congress

on the Oert"ocratlc prlmaryx ticket. He announced In January of 1962. So

It was about 6 months after I first came. The election wasn' t until that

June but we used the whole winter and spring to campaign and to do vOter

registration. At that time, of course, there was no chance of winning. There

was no chance of polling any votes; no one waa registered. But there was a

chance of raising the issue of voter registration of more organization--they

set up csmpalngo commltteess--gettlng on TV with the equal time provlslon

and so speaking to white people as well aa Negroes, and of operatlng over

a Congressional district. So In eeeence what happened was we pulled out

ot McComb and operated In a wide pollttcal unlr whtcb Included McComb u

a aubdlvlalon of tbe Third Congressional dfstrlct and continued with tbe

voter registration program that we had begun In McComb.

1 think that, for me, that experience lead to a feeling that in the whole

area of poUtlca there waa room wblcb wasn'tavailable In an area, say, Just

f1 voter registration. Because, for one thing, you could get on TV. For

another, local person felt be bad a right to run ao you had the whole platform

for proJection of a local person aa opposed, say, to the organizers for clvll

rights organization and that ldnd of thlng. And ln response to that projection,

other local people who knew him would feel Uke they could come out to

support him, whereas they would maybe be reluctant to support SNCC aa

a ctvU rights organization. So that you had a whole new dlmention for

organizing around the direct involvement In polltlca, even though theTe

wasn't a chance of wlnnlng.

So that waa where, I thlnlc that flrat ldea came of the direct political

Involvement and, of course, out ot that the Whole question about political

party was raised out of that campaign. 1 mean certainly in my own mind

tbegan to tblnk through what waa a political party.

BOB PARRIS MOSES

lntervtewed by:
Anne Romaine
Pttrr n

(m08es)Well, Lt wu out of that that 1 first began to ''*'"&'• thlnlc through

wbat was a polltlcal party, bow doea a polltlcal party get formed, wbat Ia

the structure, wbat'a the base, all those questlon.a whlch bad never really

been real questions for me before. Then Smith, after tbe campaign was

over, went on to try and develop democratic clubs In the different counties

where he'd gotten a hue for the campaign but they later faded. There was

no real manpower to worlc on them. So that didn'ttake hold at that tlme.

1 guess the other thlng which was Important out of that was that you

began to lay a baae for a cooperation of dlfferent civil rlghtll organizations

In a program. Because around such a campaign there was a bula tor the

people wbo were ln working with SCLC and the people wbo were In worlclng

W1th SNCC and with OORE( not overtly NAACP because iiE at that tlme they

were taking the position that they couldn'tparticipate dlrectly In politics} to

worlc together on a given program, aa oppoa~ to the kind ot thing you get

where a given organization has Ita program.

At tbe same time, In response to Reverend Smith's campaign, you bad

programs ln the delta Mlaslssippl ..• they ran Jill candidates, too. Flrlt

Reverend Tremel and then be suffered a heart attack during the campaign

and died and then Reverend Lindsay took his place.

(Anne) .•. thla person?

(Moses) Merrtll Llnds:J'.i I've forgotten Tremel's first name.

(Anne) ... Reverend~. where Ia he?

ay

(Moses) ReY. Llndaay'a ln, out of West Polnt, Ml . . l.a alppl now.

• 2.

James Bevel, who was wtth SCLC at that time, worked wltb and supported

Rev. Lindsay's campaign in the delta. Some of the others of us were worklng

in the southwest part of Mtaslself>pl.

The next developmenr., the next stages in the summer of '62, Ln the mean·

time the program w1ID tbe voter registration program which consolidated

around and through what we call COPO began. Now COFO had Lte start in

..

••

the summer of '61 when a whole slew of or ganizations got together to seek

,,

a meeting With Barnett under the leadership of Rev. Smith, Medgar Btuna,

Aaron Henry. T ey set up what they call the Council of Federated Organl·

zatlona to present a united front to Barnett.

(Anne) •.• SNCC ••. 1

(Moaea) No. SNCC wun' t, didn' teven have a base in Mlsalsalppl at

that time, In the summer of '61.

l was in McComb.

l d tdo'teven know

about COPO or a boot the meeting with Barnett.

(Anne) There was no office then •... even have a base?

(Mosea) Not only not an office, no program, no people who knew or

worked or Identified with SNCC. or anything. Not because we . • .

SNCC

program started In McComb in July of '61, and thla group bad formed in

the a prlng when the freedom ndes came ln.

In the winter some of us, we bad a aeries of meetings with Aaron

Henry, Medgar, and other people, Dave Dennis of CORE, around the concept

of a unlfled voter registration program In the state or a program where the

- s -

dltferent organizations would be complementlngxxx. not warring, or anything

like that. The f~llng was that COPO waa as an organizational form, was a

form through which such a program iould be channeled.

ln part there was

another focus of pressure from what waa the Voter Education Project then.

which Jud money to put Into voter registration and the question waa how

should that money be channeled In Mlaataalppl. and so forth. There finally

was some agr~ment to channel It through COPO, aa an organizational

a tructure, with myaelf 18 fleld director of the voting program, with Dave

Dennis as an a aaletant from CORE, and with Aaron Henry aa the president

of CO.PO.

The was, of course, that at that ti me then COF O essentially then had

a staff, and what happened was the group of young Mlselaalppl people that

I referred to before became the staff for COPO' s voter registration progra.m.

EaaentLally then, that staff then Identified with each other and SNCC and

there were a few that Identified wtth Dave Dennla and CORE, but the bulle

of the a taff from the beglnnlng were these young people who were primarily

Identified with SNCC. They all made up tlte staff of COPO's voter registra

tion program.

(Anne) How many were there?

(Moses) At that time there were about thlrt~n.

(Anne) All lou! people?

(Moaea) There waa myself, Just me, I gueaa. Dave Dennla waa from

- 4-

Loulslana. Otberwlae the rest of the a tatf waa from Mlaslaalppl.

(Anne) . .. any high a chool people?

(Moses) They had flnlabed high a chool, ••. Curtla Hayes and /dice Watkins

\\,~

from McComb and •.. , and McDowell waa from McComb. We had Guyot who

had flnlahed college ..• ; McLoren and James Jonea was from Jaclcaon and

had flnlshed hlgh school; Will Peacock and Sam Block. Sam was from Cleve·

land and Wlllie was hom Charleston, • • • Sam11 flnlahed high school and

wuue was ln college at the tlme.

. •. ,he had flnlahed high school, ;he

waa hom Jackson. We bad lome others.

WeU, that summer worked about 10 a reaa of the state under thla COPO

program. Moat of them Located ln the delta, then a project In Jackson,

Mlaslaalppl, and Hattleaburg. That work contlnued really, well, there waa

an in itial project wlllch started that summer, wenVfor a few montha just

through ua,

••-x•h'•••w•• f* *9:&1HXX as the summer program. Then after the summer

there was another meeting and a declslonto continue our program through

the year with some differences In the a dmlniatratlon of funds and things

Uke that, a.nd lome of the projecta were cut out.. Those programs continued

through the fall of '62 and on lnto the &UlJl.IIler of ' 63.

lt wu In that period

that you began to get a different formation where out of these voter registra

tion projects you got community--not really or ganlzadons·-they were like

community meetings, What usually happened, you had a place, or a church

where a group of people J'llet, either once a week or once every two week:a

or once a month, and began to get a sense of themselves as a people In the

- 5 -

community and In that county, say, who were willing to take a stand and

take some risk around this voting. It waa out of those meetings that you

began to get the book-up between people In one county wbo would go visit

a nomer counry meeting. And then, a deliberate planning of joint meetings

between different counties. These were run as COPO meetings, so that

people In, say, a Holmes County meeting, got a sense of themselves as

a unit ln COPO and tbey would go to COPO meetings whlcb were meetings

where people from other units like from ... get together and tal.lc about what

they were doing, get some sense of strength. you lrnow, that tbere were

other people doing that same kind of work, and ~ make plana for the

programs.

That really was tbe basta for your Freedom Democratic Party In the

senae If you look at what the roots of the flarty were ln people and in units,

organizations and neighborhoods .•• the roota can be traced back to these

small meetings and to the sense of Identify which began to grow out of meetings

between counties and regional meetings and then statewide meetings, which

began to take shape In the summer of '62 and continued at a very slow pace

through the whole winter 62-63 and on into the summer o! '63. It was In

mat winter of '62·63 that you had tbe Greenwood campaign. We had the

first national focus around the Voter Registration J!roject and COFO and tt\e

relationship of COPO to clvll rights organizations and the whole work that

was going on there.

part In

Now that Greenwood ca~algn Is described I!Vthat record. • •• some

lliiJlnlx ducrlptlon or It, you tcnow It was three stage&. Thar flret etage wltb

- 6-

Sam and Willie go Into Greenwood. Sam went first--Sam Block went first.

It Ia a part of thla overall proceaa In ' 62 where the workers spread out into

these ten different areas so that Sam . . a part of that went Lnto Greenwood.

All of them came .. • Mltol'** Ln the,/a ummer of '62 and they had a

as

early

meetlng here.

( Anne) •• • 7

(Moses) 1 didn' t ata.y. 1 came and 1 helped brlng people and then ••. there

waa a lot of things to do aad in M1salae!ppl. Wbat we were doLng was settlng

up these programs and arrM-nglng for places for the workers to IWjiCJWOcx stay

and all of that.

AJJyway they were b.ere for at least a week and they mapped out what

they wanted to do, wbat, you know, they discussed different concept& of the

voter regiattatlon program and mapped out the prograJtSba for themselvea

for the summer tbet they were golng to work on.

(Anne) ••.• 7

(Moses) 1 don'tlcnow, you sb.ould ask Miles about that. But that was an

important meeting.

(Anne) 1962?

(Moses) Early summer 1962. In the a prlng of that year the NAACP had

that drive In Jackson which partly wu in response to what happened In Green

wood and the partly in responae to what bad happened In Birmingham. Because

right after Greenwood King opened up tb.ia drive ln Birmingham which waa the

- 7 -

drive which led to tbe Marcb on Washington, that huge march. And then, of

course, In that Jacksoo drive, that was when Medgar was killed, which waa

Into

you know, really tbe first time we got izllls'natlonel prominence; the whole

had

thing about tbe ... and .•. string of deaths, you know, that_,bccurred in

Mississippi during that pet"tod when people were organizing.

(Anne)

.... 1

(Moses) No.

(Anne) And what -IIIIJI·.._~caused •.• 1

(Moses) Well. Medgar, of course, was the state field secretary for the

NAACP so therefore--

(Anne) ... ?

(Moeea) Yes, but It was hie or ganlzatlonttlconnectlon and tbe fact of

hla being a state leader In tbe NAACP and that all of the pressure of the

as a

NAACPii XXX national nt"ganlzation ••. lots of other groups had moved in .•.

and-- The !act of ..• is always x"""'related to the connectedneas of tbe

individual ln so far as either wblte or Negro libllll" they're connected to tbe

larger society and tbat'a where you get the projection and the attention.

(Anne) ... ?

(Moses) Right, not connected. Or, like Mendy was talking about .••

being problema and textile workers and poor white peaple. They're also not

con.nected and lnsofa"l.? the way the unions fare not making the connection for

them, they're not organizing ln anything, then they have no way to brlng

- 8 -

pressure or focus or attention.

Now It happened, simply, that llbs before the rise of the clvll rights

organizations most Negroes were not connected, just all a by-product of

segregation. So that, ln a sense Negroes could be ldlled with Impunity be

cause they simply, they weren'tconnected up at all.

The summer of ~ '63. Now, that summer found most of the people

concentrated In and around Greenwood. Really a carrfover from the

Greenwood campaign because after Jlmmy waa shot we collapsed most of

the workers Into Greenwood ln a conceotrated campaign whlcb began around

February, March I guess and went on Into the summer.

(Anne) '63?

(Moses) '63. The work: In the other areas reaUy son of suffered, Including

the whole process of this linking up of dltferent community groups and everything. Because with most of the workers In a given area then-- So then the Greenwood campaign then sort of went JDc••••I1'JI:!x: through a natural

period and ended up In the summer wltb workshops and with other students

who came down to work wttb SNCC for that summer towards the e,nd of the

summer there and sort of congestion because of, you wcund up with a lot of

people ln jaU that summer, some demonstrations, lt was Impossible to ral.ae

the money to get them out so you were In that bind where you couldn'treally

demonatrate because people were not ready to

f i• stay ln jail. You couldn' t

, there was no protection for your demonstratlons:la'IX from the Federal government.

-9-

0nce you were in jail, you couldn'tralse the huge fund money to get people

out. After going down certain numben and numbers of times then people

feel like they' ve had enough of going down to the courthouse. So, you know,

what to do, how to move, what, and then In that situation then the workers

get certain frustration and turn on each other and, you know, ao you have

internal problems and things at that point.

(Anne) By this tlme how many people did you have working for SNCC

In Mlasl&slppl?

(Moses) Within tbla gen!!ral operation you were up In the summer close

to thirty-five, forty people.

(Anne) Were these COFO volunteers or SNCC volunteen 'I

(Moses) Well, the most of the staff they were both, you see. Most of

the staff of COFO were SNCC people from the beginning. As they added on

to lt, of course, the people who joined tended to identify with SNCC and so

they, I mean, It then became s vehicle !or the Mlsslsslppl people who joined

and worked there became Identified with SNCC. %liaS'~ There were a

few more CORE people but not that many, most of them were SNCC. NAACP

didn' thave a tulltime subsistence young people working. SCLC bad its bue

in, what they call, citizenship education program, but that really didn't

carry a strong organization ldentlflcat lon with SCLC, but rather with a literacy

education program. So that what you got there wu people over the course, say

from spring of 1962 when Bevel and Diane moved to the delta and began to worlc- -

- 10 -

(Anne) Diane?

(MilSes) Diane Bevel, Bevel' s wlte. She was Diane Nash before she met.

They began working, taking people to Dorchester, for the citizenship tralnlng

programs whlch was another program whlcll waa developecbbqx ..•

developed It as part of thet{!ghlander staff ln the a ebttr)eajslands and In

South Carolina, the literacy program. And when Highlander lost Its tax

exemption that program was given over to King' s organization, SCLC and

they set up a cltlzenahlp education program as part of his organization.

Some of the staff from Hlgblander went to work for them for a while to

help develop that program. That program was carried Into the delta

Mlsslsalppl by Bevel and Dlane. They began taklng people to Dorcheater for

the llteracy training program. They began to develop on that work of

citizenship teachers and classes around the a rate which fed into the work ot

COFO In the sense th.at these people would come to thto COFO meetings,

COFO meetings would be meeting places wbere the Citizenship.,.,, people

xnJ!he""xcould recruit people to go to the work, you know, to pay for

classes and aort of working complementing each other.

But the people In the cltl.zenablp classes Itself were , few didn't get an

or ganlzatlonalldentlflcatlon out of It except u they got drawn Into COFO and

wasn't

Mlsslsalppl ldentlficstlon, but there was .-x no ... really. SCLC . - set

there

up so that " 1' ~~txwaa easy arliM&J.,.hle• k!llculll]lll( way for them to have an

ldentlficatlon as member, or as a part of SCLC. Because SCLC was )lased In

the mlnlaters and In the a tflllatea. But in Mississippi we weren'to rganizing

- 11 -

a fflllates of SCLC, and Bevel wasn't. We were organizing loc~ts which

were, viewed themselves as a part of C()PO as a statewide unit.

So, the picture Ln the summer of '63 then, Is that you have s ort of a,

demoostcatlons In Jackson which ran Into tbe similar problems, that Is

after Medgar was kllled and tbe demonstration people went to )ail, and you

have the hu~ ball money, hundreds of thousands of dollars to raise which

have to be ralaed outside ->f Mississippi. People ... raise tbat money say

stop the demonstrations because we can' t ralse unllmlted quantities of ball

and It' s all gof.ng doing In an endless pit ln MLaslsalppl. The people In the

deomonstratlons not really ready to stay In Jail, tbat whole jell no ball move

ment really never took off the ground. Partly, I think, because the leadership

or the direct action people were not wllllng themselves to stay ln jaU ...

1111 focus around the concept of a tayln{l f.n jail.

So then, what to do a galn. We started demonstrating y~ get In jell,

costs too much money. So then what does the Movement do, It can' tdemon

strate, lt can . • . So you bad that stalmate in Jackson, similar state In

Greenwood around voter regis rrat ion. .And you ltad your march In Was hlngton

so a lot of people went to Washington for that, came back and tben we had

lhe meeting where we outlined the program for a partie patton In the fall of

'63 ln the Mississippi Governor's election.

(Anne) .... caused by thls stalemate .•. 1

Would there have been

these white people ... ?

- 12 -

(Moses) No, no white people In M ssl.sslppl at this time. Very consciously.

People had not wanted white people to come In the.fJelta. They bad too many

problema lUIJil< Without having the problem of an Integrated staff. That was

not part of your prol>lem.

'our problem was simply the ques tion of the staff,

which was mostly Mississippi people, figuring out what program that they

could work on that made sense. And, then, the question of just surviving and

the wear and tear now for some of themi two solid yeat'11 of work.; People

lllce Curtis and Hollis who had started in the summer of '61 and then worked

straight through now to the summer of ' 63 and then some would worlc and

going back to school. Really It had been emotionally all tied up with the

Movement ln one way or another for two years now, and really not seeing

any breakthroughs at all. Tbe only thing that was v1slble for them was thelr

own growth. That there were more of them and that that process would con·

tlnue. Tben, the growth and watching local people who were paralyzed by

the fear and everything break through that and begin to worlc and do tbinlls

tb,emselves; that kind of thing. That' s what you were sustained on at that time.

It was about that rlme that our ... came throug:h in the summer of '63 .

. . . the whole concept of the freedom vote for Governor. There had been some

thinking, not much discussion about the , you know l bad thought, about the

posslblllty of someone rullllioo for Goverlll)r on the regular ticket In '63. But

we just never really moved nn lt. There were a lot of problems. We had held

a lcind of freedom vote in connection with the pr mary that summer and the Idea

for that bad come out o! some of the law scb..,ol students who were down Ln

- 13 -

Jackson dolng research.

In tact they Wet'e the first white students down there.

Some law school students came down ln jaok8on and they uncovered- -

(Anne) .... ?

(Mo&ea) Well, Tlrn jenlclns, be's not wblte, he was there but 1 don't

remember the other guys' names. Tiro~~ Is. 1 think he'e either in Pbiladelpbla

or the UN. They uncovered a law wblch aUowed for caatlng protest ballot In

the primary. Anyone who felt that they should have the rlgbt to vote, who

sbould have been regl5tered but waa not could cast a vote and then presumably

It went to the board of dlrecrors and they would say whether It was legitimate

or not.

It wu a procedure obviously for people within the general framework

who, say, white people who had tried to register and for one reason or

another their reg!a ttatlon waa rejected and they thought It was unfair and

they wanted to cast their vote because the elections were coming up and so

forth .

We had people do this In Greenwood. We bad hundreds of people who had

t rled to register, go down on the day of the primary around the Governor's

election and so forth and cast a vote as a klnd of freedom ballot. That was

really In one sense the first voting that we got people to do outside of the

regular voting tblllg. Then this Idea of having freedom vote and runnlng,

Aaron Henry and Ed King on a freedom ticket carrying thelr own polls and--

(Anne) How were they ..• ?

(Moses) The problem, of course, at that point, there was no base for

choosing people except the staff and some agreement that the staff would be

- 14 -

willing to work for the people who were going to run because If the staff

wasn'twilling to do It there was nobody who would do lt. Of course the other

problem was to get anybody to run.

It wasn' t as If you hsd a case where In

those daya, a choice of a lot of different people who would run. It was lila--

the act of doing something like that was In Itself revolutionary act klnd of

thing there, without any precedent .... saying we should be the Govern.or,

the Governor Is illegal. The only other procesa of choice was that people

wbo bad Identified themselves aa having some white support withlll the

;?eedom jtbvement, people who had themselves taken some ata.nd.s, who were

part of the Freedom Moveme11.t, bad t&ken some risks, who bad aome following.

Henry a gteed to run and King tlnally a gteed to run.

(Anne) What were some of hJs reservations?

(Moses) KJng had a quest1on of whether he wanted to enter In sa a really

public figure and whether be felt this was the beat way he coujd-·

It was the

whole question of hillk•wwhat bla own function should be. He was chaplain

ar.dthla relatlonablp to Tougaloo. He was white, his tamlly, Mississippi.

That whole question.

That campaign then provided-· Before that decialoo there bad been a

decision a mong the staff anyway to spresd out Into f,ve congreaalonal districts

In Mississippi and they sat down and debated about what they should do In

the year '63. Many of them now had made a decision out of that summer

program to seay out of school or to go on working so that you bad a sound

baa is. You had, going Into that fall roughly about fifty people who were

- 15 -

working now across the state.

(Anne) ..•. ?

(Moses) Only... Molltly from Mississippi, mostly identified with SNCC,

moetly working Ln wlth COPO contacts.

(Anne) What were you doing at that time?

(Moses) When they made the <leclalon to spread out Ln the five congressional

districts, they also made a decision to set up a Jackson office. So iwent to

jackson to help set this office a.e the ftret really statew de office, central otrlce.

(Anne) Mendy gave me the Impression that the central of flce Idea and

the Idea of people working Ln the otrlce and just bav .ng a ba.ee, sort of came

when the staff became Integrated, came with the whites.

(Moses) That, ln fact, the two things coloc lded. The Integration of the

staff and everything, I tblnk, was much more around the Freedom Vote cam

paLng, when not only did for the first time some other SNCC people were

a.elced to come Into to work on the campaign and bllllding these ba.eea In the

five congressional districts but the students from Stanford and Yale cam e

down, about eighty students came from the two colleges and they took off

from school for about a two week period just before the vote and spread out

across the state to work so that that was really the germ of the Idea. The

students coming down to work on programs and the college base of the white

broad middle class countty comlog to work. Again, that was Lowenstein's

specific dimenrion of contrth.itlon. He had been at Yale Law School, be knew

the studenta there, lle llad been the <lean of freshmen at Stanford and knew

- 16 -

a rudents there so be bad me connections.

lt was hla speaking and rallylkng of

the students which brought them down. Then there waa the decision wlrhln

me state to, that to set that as a part of me way of getting really focus on rhe

campaign. There was teoalon around the whole question of rhe building of

the a taff wlrhln the state and what parr they, since those a tudenrs were comtng

just for two weeks there was an acceptance of that.

That, then, carried into November and chat vote and marked really the

first a tatewlde program and the really, the spreading of the concept of COFO

around tbe state because It got a lot of project ton because of that. Then the

building was out of that, me procesa that had started before .•• coming to

gether, meeting& began because In the context of that campaign there was

some more, many, many more meetings In areas around the states at campalgn committees for Aaron Henry and so forth were set up. Here you see

you have, wba.t you had easeotlally were the little groups who wh,eo the

campaign started rhey just transformed themaelves Into a group to work for

Henry aa a part of ~tprogram In the Freedom Movement. So, say, the

Denton County Civic League would become a campaign un!t for Henry and

through that grew some more In his own community. After the C8JllP&Ign

waa over, It was back .aet the Demon County Clvlc League wltb the voter

ll"

registration program or what have you. These units grew out of the campalgn and then after tbe campaign you had a program of calllng Into jackson

what we calted COFO meetings, statewide COFO meetings. The first one

- 17 -

you bad, I thlnlc, ln December and then you bad one every month fairly regularly

for all the way lnto the Mlsslaalppl Delta Project. You began to puU two hun

dred, three hundred, four hun.dred people from around the scare to this meeting

where they talked about programs, where tbey exchanged with the a taff, wbere

they could get a sense of the development of themselves as a Mississippi Movement, where they got some Identify.

The people who wanted to work ln the

a tate and from dlfferent groupe baa a chance ro meet other people and have

an . . . So the National Council h ot Churches met with people In this framework. They met people at the BBsembly aDd our ot that they developed their

~Ita Mlululppl Project. Tbe lawyers groups that ctme down could ldentlfy

with thls as a movement, Mississippi M vement lclnd ot this as opposed to

s1mply to worldng for s smgle organization.

That continued through the winter. Within the staff there waa a hugh

debate which raged about wbether or not they should bave s summer project,

w bether or not they should open up the state !or volunteers to come In, wlllcb

went on;1 gatn Highlander held a workshop In Mlsalsalppl this tlme, In

Greenville, In early December, right after the campaign WBB over, or late

November-•nd the staff gathered and discussed what the wuvw•K pros and

mna were ot that campaign, ot the students coming down and at chat time we

f1rat began having the xttua discussion about the Negrocwhlte •r*"' question

all ot that. Thal debate and dlacuasion was carded through a aeries of staff

meetings Ol'l Into the end of January when there WBB final~ some decision or

- 18 -

, agreement that we should have a summer proJect and that we should ha~

students come down.

(Anne) What were some of the arguments ..• ?

(Moses) Your argument revolved around question of what doea It take

to open up Mississippi, what kind of forces did you have to bring to bear on

Mlsaisslppl;. what the relatioi!Jiblp of Mississippi was to the country and

bow could you get out the facts about Mlsslltslppl to the country because

obviously, the students brought with them part of the country and so the

whole focus, like a searchlight as they carne they brought a searchlight

from the rest of the coontry on Misslsalppl•d• w pUB so that It was

possible to get out a whole set of facts a boot what really was happening. The

feellng of whether or not, what we were going to do ln the state. The staff

wu exhausted and they were butting up a galnst a stone wall, no breakthroughs

for them. How long could yoo expect them to survive working In that kind

of laolatlon. Where was the help to come from. The civil rights organizatloDJI

were not prepared to make Mlsalssippl a focus. The deba{e for SNCC earlier

that fall w8 had asked SNCC to move Its national headquarters to Mississippi

and to make Misalsslppl a k real focus and they retu.ed to go that far.

(Anne) Why did they refuse?

(Moses) Well, they bad big dlscussloi!JI about whether they would, that

would mean the destruction of SNCC to go Into Miuiaslppl and get demolished

wllettler they could really operate In Mississippi. Then the other projects,

- 19they were afraid that that wouldn't, Georgia .•• all the other projects would just

nol fUnction.. • It was clear that the NAACP and SCLC and CORE, none of

them were really wllllng to put a major drive toto Mlsatsaippl. .. they were

called for working UJI in other parts of the South first . . . And NAACP's

whole policy wu work all around the state.

The question the people from Mlsslsslppl were faced wtth, and here you

got to remember that these, tbe staff we-reo primarily people- who grew up In

the concept of themselves u civil rights workera out of the movement of

Mississippi and whose primary loyalty an.d ldentlflcatlon was doing something about Mlaslaslppt which was their home. There were some people

In the staff who felt that they should .•. what attitudes were available to

do something. That they a bould be used. The quearlon of whether or not the

white students coming In would take over the Movement would dominate, set

back the whole process by whlch the local development people and everything

was a r ,sk but not as Important as the rlsk of not being able to do anything

at all, not being able to make or break. . That was the pole between them and there
~re really very very deep heated dlscusslo.D8 about that.

As fer as the local people as expressed u COFO meetings, It was clear

that there feeling was that they needed help, they looked upon the students

who came down ln the Aaron Henry campaign as bringing help, they telt that

If more students came down In the summer that there would be more help and

that they should come. It waa clear that If there was the vote put to the

- 20-

- z assembly of COFO people that they would vote that the students come Ln.

..• of course, that the Movement rested on the baclca of the staff, that they

were tbe ones that carr led th.e bulk of the work and that you bad to have a decision whtch they carried, 1n other words, whlcb they were wllilng to work

on lt you were golng to get any of your work. Because you hadn't as yet

evolved to a stare where adults, as residents of a community, working, were

really wllllng to worlc ll§mtlme, or work psrttlme ln the whole processes

fullof canvassing, of talclng people to the coUrthouse, all of that. Y~"u see that

was to come only after ' 64 and after the !or mation of PDP. At that tlme the

work, If the work was to be done then you had to carry the staff with you.

Now there was a blg debate about whether there was a question of democracy there of the staff mlklng these declalons and my feeling, my position

at that time wu that the people wlx> dld the work should make the decision.

And, that all long as the staff was carrying the baltx bulk of the work well

then they bad to carry the bulk Of the decisions.

That carried you lnto tbe spring. That January program ln • • • where thls

whole process of the outside world coming down was extended to mill latera

sixty

ao that you had about ~ministers who came down through the Commission

on Religion and Race of the National Councll of~ Churches to

Hattiesburg around the Voter Registration Project in the beginning of January.

There was the first demonstration where people were not arrested wholesale.

So we began to !ncb away at the whole right to ptcll:et and to demonstrate around

- 21 -

the voting and a galn that wbole thing of the ln!luence o!~people what:p:

peopl9 brought to bear from the outalde and that whole thing u a tool for

opening up Mfsslaslppi for getting Information and for making the people

ID Mtulsslppl hear different thln~; the whole spotlight of people who were

d!menaton that

coMected up to the larger society. Then the whole thingW. moral./. the

mlnlstere brought. Then the involvement that people-- Y~u see wbat

DJ11 happened Is people came and saw for themselves and then they went

back home they got Involved and they talked to people ID the•r churches and

everything and carded stories ;In the local papers ... saw what happened ao

that the word spread to that pan of the coo.ntry.

Moet of that spring then, after the decision was made to carry out the

project, you had preparations around the state; meetings, getting ready for

the Summer Project.

In was In that tlme that you hac!J: some of these more

murders, lJ2XDOt a lot of people were murdered llllld: In two counties In the

a pace of about two months In southwest Mlsalaslppl. You had, after the

March on Wuhlnyton, you had the formatton of the Society for theJI8

e

Preservation of the White Ra.ce that formed along with •.• new chapters of

the White Citizens Council and Klan In the southwest corner of Mlsalsa1pp1.

As a response, In part, to the national concensua that was growing and that

waa rea> gnized by the March on Washington and then by the WI ole proceaa

of the 6IMI:xclvll rights lill and the evidence that there wasn'tgoing to be

a filibuster wblch was to be effective and all of that because you had all of

that nationwide going on at that time, they pulled off--the Societlea and the

Klan9-pulled oft some spontaneous crou-burninge ID the area. They had

- 2! -

eighty counties at one tlme bad cross-burnings in one nlgbr. Later on areas

Including Loulslana and Mississippi. Then some bombings and then s1ome

shootings and kllllnga of people.

One point that 1 thinlc Is Important, just ro rurn to the history of that

That partlculart phenomenon was a reaction, Ln part, to the IW*iuwc! natlon·

wide development, lDix of the civil rights taw that was to be passed and the

concensua about Integration, and anticipated the announcement about the

Summer Project because you see Lt wasn'treally projected until the staff

made up Ita m1nd In january and you didn'tbegin to get national pro)ecrlon

mcause there waa no projection from MLsslsslpp1 of the Project, and there

w as agreement not to form a national committee to project the Project

because of the whole thing of the focus of declsion· maklng on the ststt and

on the people In Mlsa1ssippi rather than on some nationwide committee.

The projection of the Project began to slft through •><bat as Individual colleges

recrulred people and then at the AP and the UPl VIJXX began to spot check

colleges)otbaiiDJI across the country and found out, yes there were ten

people from this college and fifty people fr ' mthls college and they were all

planning to come to MlsslasiJIJJl and so then they began to run stories of the

college students planning to come down.

That built up Into the J!lprlng and then you had your liummer tJroject.

I don' t know. That Summper Project, l mean there' s a lot of territory here

to cover.

- 23-

(Anne) •.•• 7 I think you left out something pretty important u far u

biographical data that happened,

(Moaea) What' a that?

(Anne) Didn't you get mad?

(moaea)Yea,

(Anne) That waa pretty Important.

(M':llee) Yes, dnmatlc, ! a uppoae.

(Anne) Well, would you rather do that aome other t1me7

(Moees) The Summer Project?

(Anne) yea,

(Mosea) What do you want to know about that? '.\'hat kJnd of tblnp do

you want to know. 1 mean, there's ao much written .•• people.