INmRVIEW WI'lli ELIA JO BAKER, FORMER ADVISOR OF SNCC
New York City
May 5, 1972

CARSON:

I'd like to start with the beginning, and I guess you can define

. ·I
Jt17

that better than I.

I 've talked to the Bradens for example and

they were involved in the South before 19to. Even though the

sit-in movement began in 19to, there was a history before that.

I wonder if' you can describe from your point of view where you

see the roots of that movement.

BAKER:

Personally I .think it would have to go back to the beginning of

a..ll the struggles of' the black people. Perhaps in terms of

organization, some of the outstanding contributions came from

one of the organizations now which most people feel is almost

discredited--that is the NAACP.

I worked for several years as

a field person with the Association and traveled throughout the

South. At certain stages, say in the 30's and 4o's and early

50's, the one organization that you had of any import was the

NAACP. And in various sections of' the country what leadership

[there was] was provided by persons like Harry T. Moore in

Florida.

I think of' him especia.il.ybecause in 1946, Christmas

night, his house was bombed and he and his wife were killed in

a 11 ttle place called Mims, Florida.

I knew him very well.

thought of it primary because of' a..ll the adulation that has been

heaped upon the late Herbert Hoover, FBI Hoover.

I think of the

fa.ct that never could he find a.cy clues for such an act as that.

And so if you ask what was happening before 19to. You mentioned

the Bradens. The Bradens are part of an organization called the

Southern Conference Educational Fund. And I'm sure they told

you about the beginnings of that, and about what I think was its

initial meeting in Birmingham. The same Bull Conner who was

famous in the la.te 50's and CO's, he was a factor in arresting

people for having a mixed gathering there. And so if you ask

'What was there beforehand, you had people I suppose, you can't

just say middle class--they came from all cla.sses--but you had

a number of the professionals in the leading roles such as

Presidents of NAACP branches and the like.

I think of Binning

ham as an example, where a number of people I could recall who

were professionals and 'Who had carried on a struggle in Birming

ham against the repressive atmosphere tha.t had prevailed for a

long time.

I ca.n think of people who were in the labor movement,

in the United Mine Workers and the Steel workers in Birmingham.

I think of an individual 'Who stood out and was pioneering in such

things as in sisting upon riding in first-class on trains. He

would come from Mobile to go to Atlanta. ~ust for the sake of

testing. And that's John La.Flore 'Who is still in Mobile. At

tba.t time he was in the Post Office and he almost lost his job,

because he did take certain stands.

In the 50's he was especia.l.ly

persecuted and long before the 50' s. So I don't know, when you

say Wba.t came first.

CARSON: Do you recall an::r specific examples of student activism during

the 50's?

BAKER:

No. Student activism was not a force in the 50's. In fact,

the thing I remember most is the characterization of the studa~ts

of the l.950's as the 'silent generation.' And to some extent

that's understandable, because they had been the heirs of the

McCarthy period which had silenced large numbers of activists,

especia.l.J.y the more radical., and the more radical. movements had

been driven underground. And so I don't recall much st.udent

activity per se, but young people were involved in such things

as the work of the NAACP in equa.lization of teacher's salaries.

~e of the first persons to test it was a young woman in

No~olk, Virginia. And then there were others in dif.ferent

parts of the country.

CARSON: When?

BAKER:

You got me on D.'tY' dates.

I was tra-.reling with the NAACP .from

1940 to 1946; it was in the ear~ 1940's. Such persons as

'Whose names you might now know--Wil.liam Hasty, who I think just

retired from a federal judgeship in Philadelphia--he and his

cousin Charlie Houston. Charlie Houston had been one of the

architects of the NAAC~rograms on equalization, on developing

a program for legal. action on the question of equal. educational

facilities. The Association had challenged the discriminatory

practices in various state universities.

I think the University

of Maryl.a.nd was about the first, and then they moved into busing

facilities, equalization of busing facilities. Which is now of

course so hot, but at that stage black children didn't have bus

facilities to ride to school, a.nd white Children did.

Then the question of equal salaries for black teachers.

And you had some heroes in that.

I mentioned Moore. He was

/

one of the three black teachers, principals I think, who were

fired in Florida ove~ the issue of equalizing black teachers'

.

salaries to those of whites. So you had that type of thing,

but not much student activism.

CARSON: So would I be correct in assuming that when the student movement began in 196o and caught hold and spread around, you were

surprised at this?

BAKER:

No, I don't guess I was, becau/e you see it

so happened that

having worked with young :pe ~e I knew that

there was sensiti vi ty on the :part of yo

:people. And then of course the

"""""""nt in Montgomery/

here were ~ peop~einvo~ved in it.

But I suppose ~ of p.s were unprepared for the speed with

'Which the sit-ins esca.l.a.ted.

I don't k:now how you a.n.a..lyzed it,

but, i f I were ~ing it, one of the first things that comes

to my- mind is th/ fact that it came at a time when the news

media. didn't hS.ve a.n::r great excitement. For in stance, if' this

had occurred

t the same time as the Vietnam War or the going

to the moon,l it wouldn't have received the same attention. And

this became a. part of the mechanism through which the thing

esca.J.a.ted. So from the standpoint of the speed with which the

thing spread, it was surprising or it was not :predictable. But

maybe if I say I was not surprised, but maybe I just don't

know how 1 to be surprised when :people take action which seems to

be nonnaJ.. Because it was a normal thing for Blair in Greensboro

to be wa.J king through the five-a.nd-ten cent store and buying

:paper and :penciJ..s and whatever else he could buy and couldn't

~a soda. at the fountain. It's normal for him to be irritated

by this, because generations of us have been irritated, and

some of us have taken certain action. Sbmetimes the action may

not have spread beyond that immediate area where you were. So

that was normal; but the fact that it caught on, that it spread,

was due to .a large extent because it came on the scene at a

time when a great dea.J. of attention cou.l.d be given to it.

And a.J.so that it followed the very historica.J. thing of 50,000

black peopl.e in Montgomery, Alabama wa.J king instead of riding

on a segregated bus. And yet when you know something about

what's in back of that, you would be as surprised either, but

you're deal.ing with students so • • •

CARSCU: What a.t that time did you feel you shoul.d do? What was your

reaction to this movement?

BAKER: Well, in the first place I was then in Atlanta for the purpose

of, I had been there a coupl.e of years, to set up the office of

the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. The whol.e concept

r

of a Southern-based mass membership organization was something

that some of us :f'el.t was very necessary. So I was in Atlanta.

When the sit-ins started, I

'WaS :f'amil.ia.r enough with the states

and the a.rea.s where things were happening both in terms of' the

locations of school.s and in terms of' persons who were in the

area. And when something popped up in Raleigh, in Duxham or

Greensboro or so meplace in Virginia, these were areas that I

knew about. And al.so I happened to have been serving then as

the Executive Secretary of' the Southern Cbristian Leadership

Conference and was booked to end rtry stay with them in August or

a.t least in the summer. So in February when this happened, I

proposed that a. meeting shoul.d be cal.l.ed of' the student leaders

from different cities. Prima.ry because it seemed as if' there

didn't even seem to be any communication, real communication

between one city and the others. There was a certain element o~

communication which was stimulated the reactions o~ dirferent

campuses. For in stance, a brother may have been in school let's

say in Greensboro and a. sister was ill school somewhere else.

And he would write and tell her, why shouJ.dn 'tthey do something.

This is the way 1 t escalated. So at the point where personal

concern began it was to raise the need for at least trying to

bring the leadership of the groups that had emerged together to

establish basis for communication, and hope:f'ul.l.y some viable

coordination. Tl:lat was the original concept. Since I was with

the SCLC, I couched it in the idea of a leadership training

thing. So it was a. rather simple letter that I sent out. It

was sent out with the idea. of having one hundred to one hundred

twenty-five, no more, present a.s a leadership thing. The a ssump

tion being that the SCLC, being a.n advocate of the nonviolent

philosophy--it didn't necessary mean that I believed in the non

violent philosophy as such a.s a. way of li:fe, but it was a. tactic

that had been successfUlly ~loyed and the leadership of SCIC

were advocates of it. And so I proposed that we have such a.

meeting. And then I undertook to go to a. couple o:f places. At

first through correspondence and through telephone calls I tried

to set up a meeting a.t the site of the beginning of the sit-ins,

which would be Greensboro. But, it had a. meeting scheduled, so

I couldn't get the facilities there.

I am not too sure 'Whether

A & T turned it down; they probab~ did.

I may have it in

papers around. And so then I went to Raleigh.

I happened to

have gone to school in Raleigh and also a.t that time the Dea.n

of the Tileological School was a. young minister who was very

active anyway and had indicated a.t other meetings a.t which I

had been present a certain kind of drive. And so I got in

touch With him, and we secured space a.t Shaw for holding the

meetings and then we sent out· these letters specifying how

ll18Jl7 people we suggested should come from a given place. But

what happened was that this became sort of a summit thing and

instead of, say, the hundred or the one hundred a.nd twenty-five

from the areas where the sit-ins were taking place, you had

over two hundred students a.s I recall from dif:ferent parts of

the South.

I think there were nineteen schools that were present

from the East and the Middle West a.nd down the Eastern Seaboard,

both white and black. And so that's bow it was, and the concept

was to establish ·communication and perhaps coordination.

CARSON: A:f'ter this point, during the summer and the fall of that year,

it seemed that at the October conference of that year some

decisions were made about whether it would be an on-going or gan

ization. During this time, there was only one person in the

office.

BAKER:

Jane Stembridge, she's somewhere in Cali:fornia. now.

CARSON: At what point did the concept of the group that you had brought

together change to an organization -which would go on and have

some on-going +unction?

BAKER:

Even a.t the Raleigh meeting it became clear that the young people

wanted something of their own. There were forces at work to try

to attach the young people to on-going organizations.

'nlere

were people from CORE and there were people from the SCLC. With

the SCLC having sponsored the meeting and with the personality

of Dr. King as a lodestone, I ouppose, there was an assumption

that the young people would just become a part ot: an existing

organization. And the issue was fought out, and they decided

not to become a part of any organization.

I think whatever

resolution finally came out was something to the effect that

they would like to feel that they could relate to all other

organizations, but they did not want to lose

their identity.

So the proposal developed for a continuations committee. And

even at Raleigh they called them the Temporary Student Nonvio

lent Coordinating Committee. Anyway, it was a temporary arrange

ment whereby delegations from the representation there were to

meet in Atlanta every month until fall. And out of these meet

ings in the summer came the October meeting at which the idea ot:

an ongoing organization more or less je~ed.

CARSCN: What advice did you give during this period? What was your hope?

BAKER:

We~ my' basic hope from the begi nni ng was that it would be an

in dependent or ganiza~ion of young people.

I thought they had

the right to direct their own a.tf'airs and even make their own

mistakes. You see I've been around long enough and I suppose

seen enough of what can take place. How people and their ideas

can be captured by those who have programs of their own and who

may not be as sensitive as they should be to what the other

group that they are trying to capture is trying to do. And I

have al'W.ys had great respect for people and for ideas and for

the rights of: young people to have their chance to make their

own 'Illistakes and develop. And so 'When they met in Raleigh

there was effort a.s I said to capture and I refused to be

party to the effort.

I also took a position of not permitting

the press in on the policy-ma.ld.ng meetings.

I perhaps could

have been in a. pos:f:. tion to dictate this, because I happened to

have been the person coordinating it, but I didn't ha.veto do

that. Because the justification of the position taken, namely

tha.t rights of the group to make its own decisions a.nd to

determine where it wanted to go, it was part of the inner thinking

of the Y'OUilg peop~ethemse~ves. And so they were handling that.

Out of that meeting you had a very strong sense of direction in

terms of identification. Certainly out of the meetings that

took place bet~ Apri~ and October there was more that came to

the surt"ace to show tha.t if they wished to survive and do what

~thought was important, they had to maintain a.n in dependent

distance as against being a. part of any other organizations.