Allama Mashriqi’s Warnings — The Time Has Come To Wake-up 


By Nasim Yousaf 



Allama Mashriqi, October 06, 1950 (Lahore) 1 


http://www.allamamashraqi.com/historicphotos.html 


Allama Mashriqi, a great thinker and visionary, issued multiple warnings during his time (1940s-1950s) 
based on his observations of the prevailing political conditions. Mashriqi’s predictions surrounded the fate 
of the Indian sub-continent at various time periods. Yet instead of listening to a man who fought for their 
freedom until the end, the leadership of Pakistan turned on him. With time, it became evident that Mashriqi 
had great vision and what he had foreseen indeed came true! 

In 1942, Mashriqi made the following prediction to Quaid-e-Azam M.A. Jinnah regarding the partition 
plan: “I told him in 1942 that his present Pakistan of the two provinces 1400 miles apart could not last and 
this [partition] would result in the ruin of one crore Muslims and the complete decimation of five crore 
Muslims of remaining India.” In addition, Mashriqi had repeatedly warned the All-India Muslim League 
(AIML) that division of the country into Pakistan and India would bring human devastation and create two 
hostile neighbors. He warned that the spread of communalism was dangerous and that it was important to 
stop spreading Islam in danger in united India for political ends. Based on what Mashriqi had been 
observing regarding the misleading and self-centered policies of the AIML, Mashriqi’s weekly Al-Islah in 
1946 gave a detailed account of the Muslim League’s flawed and detrimental politics in its various 
volumes. 

Mashriqi’s final and momentous warning came on May 14, 1947. Addressing a gathering of 50,000 people 
in Patna, Mashriqi stated: 

“ ...transfer of power handed over to men who have been trained in British way of thinking will bring 
nothing but worse form of British Raj again. This Raj will be ten times more tyrannical, more deformed, 
more ghastly, more imperialistic and non-Indian than even the worst form of British Raj. It will, in fact, be 
a travesty of all truths and a parody of every good or bad thing that the British have given to India during 
the past 100 years. It will be, in fact, an anarchy in order, a stereo-typed tyranny, and a confusion worst 
confounded. It will be a perpetual reign of Atom Bomb and Rule of Terror. It will be regalised genocide 
and state killings. It will justify murder of children in mothers ’ wombs, wholesale destruction of all 
cultures, suppression of all true History’, murder of Philosophy, total wiping out of honourable traditions, 


1 








and wholesale slaughter of ideas. Handing over power to one or many political parties in India would 
mean a rule of worse imperialism, worse capitalism, worse halakuism than all the History’ has yet 
produced. It will, in fact, be British Raj without British traditions. It will be a reign of ‘Hell on Earth ’. It 
will decimate the beautiful culture of Asia, the beautiful code of Asiatic Moral Laws, the beautiful 
philosophy of Peace and Tolerance, in fact the beautiful Fundamental Truths that Asia has ever given to 
Mankind during the last 5000 years ...The present plan of transfer ofpower, to my mind, is the Diabolical 
Plan of the relentless ride of Birla, Brahmin and Khan Bahadur Raj where arrogance, money and tyranny 
will rule rather than human beings. (“Al-Islah” dated May 23, 1947) 

Yet no lesson was learned from Mashriqi’s above timely warning and the situation that followed continued 
to deteriorate. The following provides background on the circumstances that took place post-partition. 

In 1947, against the wishes of all Muslim political parties (except Muslim League), united India was 
divided for political reasons; Muslims lost their homeland to which they had ruled for almost 1,000 years. 
Devastation and hostility followed and the seeds of hatred between Muslims and Hindus, who had lived 
amicably for centuries, were sown. 

Quaid-e-Azam M.A. Jinnah became the first Governor General of Pakistan against the desire of Lord 
Mountbatten, who wanted the slot for himself (Mountbatten took revenge and a border line was drawn in 
favor of India; in addition, Mountbatten as Governor General of India sent the Indian Army to Kashmir in 
October 1947). Jinnah wanted all power to reside with him. As such, he also took over as the President of 
the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan (CAP) while maintaining the office of the President of the Muslim 
League. Furthermore, Jinnah did not declare the judiciary independent and did not present a constitution for 
the newly formed country. To keep the feudal lords happy, Jinnah did not demolish the feudal system; in 
addition, he did not develop an education policy, which was desperately needed to steer the country in the 
right direction (the feudal lords wanted no such policy in order to maintain their rule over the impoverished 
and uneducated). Corruption escalated and the Government failed to form a policy to control it. Moreover, 
Jinnah continued to maintain his luxurious lifestyle, when Pakistan had no money even to purchase paper 
and pencils. 

Unfortunately, Jinnah’s mistakes did not end there. Instead of giving free space to the opposition and taking 
steps to create institutions to lay the foundation for a strong country, he issued signals to suppress all 
political opponents. Mashriqi was among the most prominent victims of this policy. Harassment of 
Mashriqi and his family began, and his followers were intimidated and physically beaten by pro-Muslim 
Leaguers, police and intelligence agencies. To deny Mashriqi’s pivotal role in the freedom movement and 
to distort the facts, raids were conducted at Mashriqi and his followers’ premises and the Khaksar Tehrik’s 
extensive material was confiscated; no one knows where that material is. To prohibit political activity, the 
doors of the media to Mashriqi were virtually closed; if needed, only censored versions were allowed. 

After Jinnah’s death, the late Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan not only continued with an anti-Mashriqi 
policy, but rather adopted even more repressive measures. On October 03, 1950, Mashriqi was arrested 
(along with his two sons); he was released on bail, however, on January 11, 1951, he was again arrested 
(prior to elections) without legitimate reasons. After Liaquat Ali’s death (October 16, 1951), the 
Government remained hostile. Despite country-wide protests, Mashriqi was kept imprisoned without trial 
for almost 2 years (released on July 09, 1952), while his followers throughout were subjected to cruelties 
and suppression. 

Such vindictive behavior towards Mashriqi and other political opponents was being watched by people 
across the country, and the Muslim League began to collapse. As a result, in the first election in East 
Pakistan in 1954, the public gave its verdict and the Muslim League lost the election miserably; thereafter, 
it could not survive for long and in the next few years, it was completely wiped out. (With the failure of 
the League in the said election, Allama Mashriqi, Abul Kalam Azad and others’ claim, that the Muslim 
League’s victory in the 1946 elections was on the crutches of the powerful bureaucracy of British India, 
became evident to the people). 


2 



Again the non-Khaksar leadership sought no lesson from this failure in the elections. Viewing the alarming 
state of affairs, Mashriqi issued another monumental warning at a public gathering at Minto Park (now 
Iqbal Park) in 1956. 

“Ye Muslims! Today from this platform I sound you a warning. Listen carefully and ponder. Sometime in 
the future, probably in 1970, you will be confronted with a perilous situation. In 1970—I see it clearly—the 
nation will be stormed from all sides. The internal situation would have deteriorated gravely. A panic of 
widespread bloodshed will sweep the nation. The frenzy of racial and provincial prejudices will grip the 
whole country. Zindabad and murdabad will defean your ears. Plans will be initiated to dismember the 
country’. Take it from me that in 1970, Pakistan will be plagued with a grave threat to its sovereignty. You 
might actually lose it if the reigns of the country were not in the hands of courageous and unrelenting 
leadership...I warn you to prepare from now to face the situation which will emerge in that year. ” 

Indeed, Mashriqi’s calculation turned out to be true, and in 1971, East Pakistan sought independence and 
Bangladesh emerged. The above are just some of his predictions that have come true. 

Instead of seeking guidance from Mashriqi’s timely caution, the rulers decided to silence Mashriqi forever, 
and in 1958, Mashriqi was treacherously implicated in a murder case of an ex-Chief Minister of West 
Pakistan. Mashriqi was arrested and brought to court handcuffed. In jail, he was maltreated, and every 
effort was made to force him to confess his involvement in the murder, so that he could be convicted and 
taken to the gallows. Fraud witnesses of the prosecution failed and the Judge had to acquit Mashriqi. Even 
after acquittal, his life was made difficult by keeping him under house arrest and through harassment by 
intelligence agencies until he died in 1963. By implicating him in a fabricated case and making his life 
difficult since independence (of the sub-continent), an unpardonable crime was committed toward a 
statesman who had fought for the freedom of the Indian sub-continent and did not rest until his people were 
liberated. 

A methodical campaign to distort Mashriqi’s image and deny his role in the freedom movement has 
continued since 1947 and still prevails. No efforts are being made to enlighten the public of his major role 
in bringing freedom. Works continue to be published from the perspective of the All-India Muslim League 
and glorification of the AIML leadership prevails. Blatant lies and twisted facts have been spoken and 
produced in many works, including those by well-known historians and intellectuals, and the public is 
being forced to read and listen to the AIML’s side of the story. 

To conclude, what Pakistan is paying today is the cost of what was sowed in the initial years; the lack of 
governance and the vindictive and selfish attitudes of the early leadership in fact laid down the principles 
for the future management of the country. Newspapers and television channels are still not realizing that 
the public’s destiny is more important than personalities and that the public is entitled to know why 
Mashriqi and all Muslim leadership (except for the AIML) were against the division of India. 

But, time has come now for change. In times of hopelessness and grave circumstances, Pakistanis can still 
learn from Mashriqi’s vision and life and times. They need to elect selfless leaders like the great Allama, 
but if the people fail to wake-up still, then I foresee another break-up of Pakistan. 

Remember! Those nations perish which ignore the bygones and seek no lessons from history’. 

Nasim Yousaf is a scholar and historian who has presented papers at U.S. conferences and written many 
articles and books. His forthcoming book entitled, “Mahatma Gandhi & My Grandfather, Allama 
Mashriqi”, shall also uncover many hidden realities. 

Copyright © Nasim Yousaf 2011 


3 



Article appeared in: 

Global Politician (USA), March 16, 2011 

http://www.globalpolitician.com/26791-mashriqi-india-pakistan-fiitiire 

Make Pakistan Better, March 17, 2011 

http://makepakistanbetter.com/why how what forum.asp?GrouplD=l 2&ArticlelD—1 3 199 

News from Bangladesh, March 18, 2011 

http://b angladesh-web.com/view.php?hidRecord=350898 

The Frontier Post, March 23,2011 

http ://www.thefrontierpost. com/News. aspx?ncat=ar&nid=541&ad=23-03-2011 

Pakistan Chronicle (USA), March 25, 2011 
http://www.pakistanchronicle.com 


1 In 1950, at a historic Islam League (founded by Allama Mashriqi in October, 1947) congregation in 
Lahore, Mashriqi responds to a salute from 100,000 civilians and 3,000 uniformed Razakars of the Islam 
League. 


4 









