INTERVIEW WITH ANN WILKINS DALTON 


INTERVIEWEE Ann Wilkins Dalton 
INTERVIEWER AND 

TRANSCRIBER Pat Fitzpatrick 

INTERVIEW DATE March 27, 2017 

INTERVIEWEE ADDRESS 9 Squirrel Hill Rd., Asheville 28804 
LENGTH OF INTERVIEW Approximately three hours 


Pat Fitzpatrick: I'm at my home in Asheville with Ann Dalton and 
we're going to do an interview. The time is 1:50. Ann is a neighbor of mine 
whom I've known for some years. I knew she was an Asheville resident, 
North Asheville. And she's already told me a few experiences. I told her we 
needed to wait and get those on tape, because they were interesting and 
they're not the usual ones we've been getting. And Ann, by way of 
introduction, has how many dogs now? How many dogs do you have, Ann? 

Ann Dalton: Eight. Gosh, we may not want to put that down. 

PF: What part of North Asheville did you grow up in? 

AD: It was the lake section, actually, they called it Beaver Lake or, 
you know, the part of Beaver Lake that was-- You know, there's two sides. 
So coming down Merrimon, going north, we were on the side that was on 
the right. The left side is where my father, when they first moved to 
Asheville, they moved into that side, when his mom and dad came here for 
his father's health. 

PF: And where did they live? 


AD: I was trying to remember if it was Farrwood. They built one of 
the first houses on that street. I can't remember exactly. That was the street, 
if you go up over the dam and, I guess you would make a right and just keep 
on after you go over the dam. Just keep going to the right and it's that first 
street that goes up through there, and that's the house that they built when 
they moved here from Alabama, to be their summer home. And they moved 
here in 1926 and Daddy was 16. And his father was in bad health, and back 
then Asheville was the place to go if you had any health issues, especially 
respiratory issues. So they built that house so that in the summertime, when 
it was so hot in Alabama, they could come here. Well, they knew that 
Daddy's father was in bad health. He was 15 years older than Daddy's 
mother. And he had also smoked. He was in just bad health. His lungs and 
all of that. So they sent Daddy away to Europe, to be with his brother, 
Joseph, who was an opera singer over there. And his sister-in-law, Daddy's 
sister-in-law, was a concert pianist. So they performed all over Europe. So 
they knew that my grandfather was going to die, Daddy's mother did, so they 
sent him over there to be with Joseph. And sure enough, he got the news on 
a train somewhere in Europe that his father had passed and he needed to get 
back to the states. And Daddy was about 18, I think, when his father passed 
away. And then they moved over near Grove Park Inn. That would be my 
grandmother. She moved over there and Daddy and Mama were married in 
1934, and they moved in with her in about 1936 when my first sister was 
born. 

PF: Do you know what street that was? 

AD: The house that's over there was built by the same man that built 


one there at Beaver Lake. They're identical houses and it's right there as 


you--it's of those first streets there. Actually, there's a big church there. The 
Unitarian Church. 

PF: On Macon? Is that where you turn up? 

AD: Yes, I think that's where it is. Macon. I think it's Macon. 

PF: The church on the left of it is St. Mary's? 

AD: Right. That's it. Well, St. Mary's is where my aunt was a big 
member of that, because that was my father's sister. So, of course, he and 
his sister both lived here and stayed here. 

PF: What was the sister's name? 

AD: Henrietta. 

PF: And the last name, Wilkins? 

AD: Daddy's was Wilkins, but when she married she was a 
Talmadge. And she lived on Kimberly after that in a great big house up on 
the hill there. And Burl Ives used to come and entertain at Christmastime. 
Because he knew my--Joseph, and I guess the family was all into music. 
And I was probably about three or four, I guess, and I remember Burl Ives 
sitting at the piano and he was singing and playing and I was sitting on the 
floor right at his feet, you know, and he was singing Christmas songs. But 
Mama and Daddy moved in with my grandmother, because Daddy was her 
favorite child, I think. 

PF: And what was their name? 

AD: Their name was--well, Daddy's name was Wilkins, and that was 
his father's name, was Wilkins also. Was he William Wilkins, also? Gosh, I 
can't remember my own grandfather's name. I think so. But Daddy's name 
was William Wilkins. And I believe he was named after his father. Isn't 
that right. I can't remember. But anyway, Mama had moved here from Ohio 


in 1916. Of course, Daddy had moved here in '26 and they eventually met. 


But they married in '34 and in '36 they had my sister and moved in with my 
grandmother over there on Macon. I guess it was Macon, a big house there. 
And she had servants. And so Mama was sort of a caretaker of my 
grandmother and drove her where she wanted to go, because she was pretty 
much up in society. So the maids or whoever was there would take care of 
my first sister, then my second sister was born in '38. So they lived there 
with my grandmother until about 1941 when my grandmother said she 
wanted to go back to Alabama and live in the winters. In the summer she 
would come up here and live with them. And she gave them money, some 
money, to buy that piece of property in Beaver Lake [Kingwood and built 
that house, there on the corner of Kingwood Place and Wembley. And she 
said, "I just want a place to come in the summer, so I'll give you so much 
money and you can build me a section of the house," which they did, a nice 
big bedroom and a big bathroom that was separate from them. It was a two- 
story house. And so she would come back in the summer. She died in 
December of '49, so I never met her, because I was born in March of '50. 
But she knew my sisters and then my aunt, Daddy's sister, had two children, 
also. And so she came to see the grandchildren, you know, that's why she 
wanted to come back to Asheville, I'm sure. Because I don't--I don't really 
think that my parents went back to Alabama when she would go in the 
winter, at all. I think they pretty much stayed here. My mother didn't even 
go to the funeral because she was pregnant with me, about to have me, in 
December, and didn't want to do the road trip, so she didn't go back with 
Daddy to the funeral for my grandmother. But her portrait is in the Capitol 
Building in Alabama now. It hangs there because she was the first woman 
legislator from the State of Alabama? 


PF: Your grandmother was. 


AD: My grandmother. And her name was Hattie Hibernia Hooker 
before she was married. 

PF: Oh, my gosh. Your grandmother was a Hooker. 

AD: Exactly. Before she was married, she carried a pearl-handled 
pistol and rode a horse and taught school. A one-room schoolhouse, all the 
grades. From the very earliest up until I guess they finished school. And 
that was what she did before she met my grandfather who ran the candy 
factory in Selma. And that's--I'm not sure how they met. I don't know that 
much about that, but that's the way that all got started. And then with his 
health and them moving here and then Daddy and Mama-- And then they 
built that house over there and in about 1941, '42, right during the war, when 
the war was getting started, and prices were up there. You couldn't get 
copper, you couldn't get a lot of stuff, but my grandmother, I guess, had 
given them enough money and that's why they bought two lots. So the lot 
next door was where we moved in '58 and built another house, after my 
sisters went to college and moved away, got married. But I grew up in that 
first house for eight years. And my sisters being 12 and 14 years older, they 
were mostly, to me, not so much sisters as babysitters and people who told 
me what to do. My brother was born 19 months before I was, so he knew 
my grandmother. He did meet her. 

PF: So there were four children in your family. 

AD: There were four children all together. She had one miscarriage 
before she had my first sister and then--or maybe between the two sisters. I 
can't remember that exactly. This is my mother. And then she had the baby 
born full term, forcep delivery, that the doctor killed with the forceps. And 
that was their best friend, Dr. Burton. They went everywhere together. 


Daddy hunted with him, and it was just an accident. Then they knocked 


women out, they ethered them, you know, and then you woke up and you 
had a baby. And my mother woke up and didn't have a baby and Daddy had 
already had it cremated. So she never saw the baby. It was a beautiful girl. 
And had that not happened my brother and I wouldn't be here. She would 
have had three girls and that would have been it. But that age difference 
there, that's why my sisters and I are so much age difference. And she 
having the boy, and I guess she figured she'd have another boy, and she had 
me instead. So she was--Daddy was 40 when I was born. Mama was about 
28, so later-in-life children. But we wouldn't have been here if that had not 
happened. But what I think is that, from what they told me, they buried her 
ashes outside of the house. The baby, the house I grew up in, her ashes were 
buried outside the kitchen window there, or outside the window of the 
house, so that every time Mama looked out, she saw that. But she blamed 
my father very much for not ever letting her see the baby. You know, she 
didn't have that closure. So he just made that decision to have her cremated. 
I guess Mama was knocked out and they just said, "What do you want to 
do", and that was the decision he made. But that may have led to her 
alcoholism. That's what she said. But Daddy and Mama both drank a lot, 
you know. They were big partyers. And that's what she always said, was 
because Daddy had done that, she became an alcoholic. You have to blame 
it on something. But I--you know, that's the way it ended up. But 
everybody else in North Asheville, like we talked about, the neighbors all 
seemed to be very similar to the way my parents were. 

PF: You can elaborate on it. You and I talked about it, but we didn't 
get it on tape at the time. Anything you want to say about it. Don't feel like 


you have to speak about that. 


AD: But it was an open childhood. Everybody, you know, all the 
children were sort of turned out in the morning and, unless we were in 
school, we were all climbing trees and riding bikes and hiking all over 
Reynolds Mountain. We used to go up there all the time. Even when my 
little nephews came to town. Because my sister was so much older, she had 
two children who were only-- Well, one was eight years younger than I was 
ands the other was six years younger than I was. So I was more of a sibling 
than I was an aunt to them. But my sister had to move back here after her 
divorce. She moved back to Asheville for a brief while. And during that 
time, when she worked, then I would take care of her children. I was, you 
know, maybe nine. So we would walk up Reynolds Mountain. I was totally 
in charge of these little children. So we would walk up Reynolds Mountain 
together and spend the day, and I'd make their lunch. Because Mama wasn't 
really the kind of person that wanted to take care of children. Because like I 
said, she had help. The whole time that I was growing up we had a live-in 
maid. And then after we had the incident which the maid that was caught 
with the male friend in the basement and they let go, then we had a day 
maid. But we did have a live-in maid for probably the first, I would say the 
first six years of my life, maybe. 

PF: Do you remember her name? 

AD: I don't remember her name. I really don't. I think Lillian is the 
first one and then we had another one named Camilla after that. They 
moved with us. Camilla I remember more in the house in '58. That was 47 
Kingwood Place. But 53 was where we had the live-in. 

PF: So she was just daily, Camilla was? 

AD: Yeah, and Camilla was more like three days a week and Lillian, 


at the other house, was five days a week. We did have a five-day-week maid 


but she didn't cook. She left, Daddy would drop her home, you know, that's 
when we would take her back down to Valley Street or around in there, 
where the black folks lived down there, every day. She'd ride the bus to us, 
usually, but I'm not sure why we took her home unless it had something to 
do with safety. Maybe Daddy didn't want to have her try to walk down and 
catch the bus later in the afternoon. Maybe it was just part of the agreement, 
I don't know. But it was mostly room and board for the live-in. That was 
mostly her salary, not much else. And she had a little bit of time off on 
Sunday, and that was pretty much all. She was pretty much a babysitter or a 
cook. You know, she washed, she ironed. Everything was ironed back then, 
sheets, everything. And, you know, I just thought everybody had maids, 
because most of the people in our neighborhood did back then. And when 
you'd go in a house, you know, their maids would be there doing whatever 
they did, you know, working. 

PF: Do you remember her last name at all? 

AD: No, but I probably wasn't trained to be independent, certainly, 
because I didn't, other than just taking care of my own self, I didn't really 
have much else to do. My mother did sew some, but she kind of gave that 
up when I came along. She sewed much more for my sisters, and she would 
make, I don't know if you knew the Halls or not, Nora Hall. Her father was 
a lawyer. They lived in the big house that's now a bed and breakfast that's 
there where Reynolds Mountain and all that's been developed. It's a great 
big old brick home that's a big bed and breakfast. And Nora and her family 
lived there and they had a swimming pool in front. And she was one of my 
friends growing up. And she was my age but a bigger girl. So her stuff 
would come to me and I'd be able to wear it two years after she did, but 


Mama wouldn't fix it and make it fit. She hard nice clothes. But Mama did 


like to sew when she wasn't drinking. When she was drinking, of course, 
she didn't--she probably didn't get into that. And I think that may be why 
she--because it was more and more. But my sister does tell me, her memory, 
she drank a lot when they were small, too, even though, she said, it was 
about the baby. Ruth said, "No. I don't think so. I think she was an 
alcoholic". Because of the partying, probably, that they did. Because Mama 
and Daddy did do a lot of that, partying with their friends and stuff. Then 
the bridge games that I told you about, where all the women would come to 
the house and they had highballs and cigarettes. If there were children in the 
house, they got to partake of the alcohol, too, or the dog or whatever 
happened to be. I guess the ladies were, by the afternoon, they were all 
happy and all. They drove. You know, back then. 

PF: Not a many cars on the road. 

AD: No. And my mother had close calls several times. 

PF: You mentioned walking around and going all over Reynolds 
Mountain. Where was the Reynolds mansion? 

AD: Oh, the Reynolds Mountain mansion was up on top of the hill. 
You would go up the driveway, it was just a gravel driveway, and that's the 
way we would go up. And Daddy would go up there sometimes in the car, 
and take-- I can remember when I was a little girl and we'd go up there to 
see it. And I don't think there was anybody living there but a caretaker, 
after-- She committed suicide and then the Senator left here. And I don't 
really know all of that history. I probably should know more. I think Bill 
really does know a lot more of that history. But the mansion was sitting on 
top and it was sort of a concrete block looking thing. I mean, it was not the 
mansion that you would think of. And they had windows around. We used 


to go up there all the time. And then there was a big, like observation tower. 


And it may still--parts of it may still be there. It's kind of like when you 
would go up on Grandfather Mountain and they used to have that big 
observatory up there that they've since torn down. But that's what this thing 
was. There was one there, but I think they were going to try to leave it there, 
although I heard they sold that lot. And whoever bought the lot was going to 
try to incorporate that, obviously, that thing somehow in the house. 

PF: I think I've seen the house you're talking about. But it wasn't like 
way up as high as Reynolds Mountain development goes now, was it? 

AD: It was up pretty high. We went back and tried to find it and it's 
gone. So I'm thinking they've used that space to build, probably to build 
houses up there. I think it was on top, as I remember it. I remember going 
up there and it was--I know the observatory was off from the house. The 
observatory probably was on the best area for seeing everything around. 
And I haven't been up there in a long time to see what they've ever done with 
that particular lot. But it was a premium lot, I know that. And they were 
going to charge more for that lot because of the way it sat. You could see 
all, you know, all the way around. But we used to walk up there constantly. 
I mean, you know, just go up in there. It was kind of a creepy thing for 
children. There was this big old house and nobody lives there. And I think 
they had--I've forgotten how they got their water. But they had problems 
with their water. I think there was a water tank or something they kept up 
there, because it was hard to get water up Reynolds Mountain. 

PF: There is a big tank up there now. And there's a fire tower. 

AD: I've seen that. 

PF: Was the house up beyond the fire tower? 

AD: I really don't know since they've changed it up there so much. I 


just remember walking up that gravel road, up to the very top. And it was, 


10 


you know, wasn't gated off or anything. Anybody could go if they wanted 
to. But like I say, I told you that my parents bought that house and the lot. 
Mostly the lot for a farm. So during the war, she raised the chickens and the 
ducks. 

PF: That was back on Kingwood. 

AD: Right. On Kingwood, right. That's why they had the two lots. 
And then I guess they decided that the big house was too much for them 
after my sisters moved away, and that's why they built in '58 right next door. 
But Daddy said the lots there were $500 apiece or something. And had he 
had the money and known, or probably his mother would have even wanted 
to invest, but he had no idea that those lots would go for what they 
eventually went for, and that it would be as significant of a development as it 
is now. But Robinhood is all up in there. We used to walk all the way up 
into Robinhood and all those places. It was a great place to ride your bike. 
The golf course that was there then was not the Asheville club. It was the 
City golf course that was owned by Wolfson, Mr. Wolfson that lived out 
Beaverdam eventually. And Wolfson's family sold all of that property to the 
Asheville club, probably after Bill and I left here in the seventies, early 
seventies. And they built the Asheville club up on the knoll where we used 
to play. All the kids used to go up in the woods there and we had, you 
know, makeshift tree houses and all sorts of stuff up there. So that was our 
play area, where the club is now. 

PF: The country club. 

AD: The country club. Right up there, yeah. And, of course, the 
country club used to be up where the Grove Park Inn is. So that's where we 
were members. The Asheville Country Club was there when we had our 


wedding reception and everything. And they, I guess the Grove Park Inn 


11 


said, "Well, that one sits right here where we are. It would be great if we 
could buy all that, we'd then have all of the golf course. We'd have the 
swimming pool". And so they acquired that and then Ashville City-- 
Asheville club didn't have a place to go, so that's when the Wolfson people 
offered them that property. There was already a golf course there. So they 
didn't have to do much but build a clubhouse and a swimming pool and 
tennis courts. But we used to go up on the eighteenth green up there, that 
went straight down, and we'd go sledding. And whenever it would snow, we 
would have the most fun. You know, your mother would send you out all 
dressed in six layers of coats. You could barely move, and we'd pile on the 
sled. Usually, I'd be--I don't know why I'd be on the bottom, I was so little. 
But I'd be on the bottom and everybody, like three or four people, stacked on 
the sled. And it was those old Radio Flyer wooden sleds. They were great 
though. We had the most fun. You'd pull it up the hill and do it again. We 
did that when we didn't have school. There was some big snows back in the 
late fifties, early sixties. And we wouldn't go to school for maybe, you 
know, two or three weeks sometimes. And you remember the blizzard of 
‘83, with no power and all that. We never lost power, that's what gets me. 

PF: And you're right behind us and we lost it for four days. 

AD: No, we lost power then. When I was growing up, we never did. 
I don't understand why we lose power now, or why we did, and then back 
when I was growing up I never remember losing power. And we had big 
snows back then, too. But I just don't remember every being without power. 
Of course, we had a fireplace. We had two in the first house and then we 
had a coal-stoked furnace and Daddy would have to get coal in and stoke the 
furnace every morning before he'd go to work to keep the house warm. 


That's how we heated the house. Now they've switched it over, I'm sure, to 


12 


some other method. Then Mrs. Covington, like I said, bought the house 
from us in 1958 and has lived there ever since. 

PF: On the corner. 

AD: Mrs. Covington. 

PF: Tell me about her. You mentioned some things about her. 

AD: They came-- He was in the Navy and retired to Asheville and 
worked for Enka. I don't know what year, whether they moved here to 
Asheville to work. They lived in the apartments on Merrimon Avenue. 
Those are now condominiums, because that's where Bill and I first lived 
after we were married. They lived there when they bought our house. They 
had two children then and they had two more children, living in that house. 
So they ended up with four children. They were Catholic. And I just 
touched base with Margaret not long ago and she's up in Pennsylvania and 
we shared some stories. And she had a picture of the house and told me her 
mother's 91, still lived there. So in '58 I was eight. I'm sure Mrs. Covington 
was probably in her late thirties, maybe. And let's do the math. She had 
those two more children and still there. I can't imagine, by herself in that 
house. That's a lot of house. Because I don't remember how many square 
feet that house had. But our house was, the one that Mama built in '58, was 
really a pretty good-sized house, too, because we had a basement that was, 
you know, a big huge room, rec room kind of like thing underneath, and then 
a garage beside that, in which we'd roller skate. In and out of the big room, 
into the garage, out on the driveway, and back again. The roller skates with 
a key, that was a big deal. We'd do it with neighbors, and I think Margaret 
probably was one of the ones that I was skating with, more than likely. 


PF: Now, where did you go to school? 


13 


AD: I went to St. Eugene's, the Catholic school, because my sisters 
went to St. Genevieve's, which was the big Catholic school downtown, near 
the Asheville High. And I went there-- I had gone to Carolina Day, to a 
kindergarten. I had gone to St. Genevieve's to a kindergarten. 

PF: Now, is that the Carolina Day that was out in North Asheville? 

AD: Yes. 

PF: I didn't realize, until just this week-- 

AD: It was where the church is. Where the Presbyterian Church is. 
They used to have a school there, which was one where I went to. But I 
started like at three in kindergarten, and because, like I say, Mama was ready 
for me to go someplace and so I did kindergarten at St. Genevieve's, I did 
kindergarten at Carolina Day, which was Asheville Country Day then, and 
then I did kindergarten at St. Eugene's. So three years of kindergarten and I 
was probably ready to go to-- I remember when they dropped me off at St. 
Eugene's in kindergarten, all the kids were crying. I'm going, "Why are they 
crying? What, they don't want to leave their parents?" My brother and I 
both went to St. Eugene's, because it had just been built. It was a new 
facility, pretty much, and nice, and close to the house. I mean, Daddy could 
take us on the way to work and Mama picked us up. And that worked until I 
wanted to bea nun. And then my sister said, "You need to get Ann out of 
that school and you need to send her a parochial school, where she won't 
be"-- Because I loved the religion, I thought it was beautiful. I can recite 
and memorize. 

PF: And it was a pretty picture after what you had at home, I suppose. 

AD: Yeah. Yeah. But then my brother was a mess there. Like I say, 
he was 19 months older. He needed discipline, but they were ready for my 


brother to go. I mean, he was a mess and just constantly in trouble and 


14 


never able to really sit still and had lots of problems. But I just loved the 
religion. The only thing, they wouldn't let me go to communion because I 
wasn't a Catholic. So they made me sit, by myself, unless I converted to 
Catholicism, and that was all my whole thinking. Well, I'll just tell them I 
want to be a nun, they'll let me go to communion. And everybody was 
getting these wafers. I knew it was a special thing. 

PF: Like a tea party. 

AD: But I wasn't sure why, I mean, why were they leaving me out. I 
thought maybe if I just tell them I'll bea nun. And I had real long blond 
hair, then. My mother tried everything. "Well, they're going to cut your hair 
off, you know. You can't wear clothes, you have to wear these black outfits 
all the time". But I had the best third-grade teacher. She was so sweet. 
And, you know, people have bad experiences with nuns. Bill went to Joan 
of Arc and had terrible experiences with nuns. But I guess I did everything 
they wanted to do and I wanted to learn and so I was cooperative. If you 
didn't give them problems, then I'm sure they really appreciated that. But 
the ones that were discipline problems, well, that was like my brother. So 
then they had, they had just built Jones Elementary, Ira B. Jones Elementary. 
There was a big school that sat on the hill above that. That was the first 
elementary school. And they built Ira B. Jones about the time that I went, 
probably in fourth grade. So my mother took us out in fourth grade and I 
went there fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh, to Ira B. Jones. And my brother 
did, too, and all the teachers would say, "Oh, my god. Are you another 
Wilkins? I can't take another Wilkins," because my brother had already-- 
You know, they had already been shown what he could do. So anyway, no, 
and they saw that I was not like him so I think they were pleased about that. 


But, oh, yeah, he had the sort of a reputation. And from there to David 


15 


Millard, which is gone, but as you know, they've got that office complex up 
there. And before that, it was the hospital where I was born. That was 
where I was born, on that hill there. And so David Millard was torn down, 
of course, and I went there eighth and ninth grade. And then went to Lee 
Edwards after that. They only had tenth, eleventh and twelfth. My 
graduating class as over 600. It was a big class that year. So that's, you 
know, that's kind of the way with Asheville city, that's kind of the way we 
would go, the progression you would go, unless you went to private school. 
And then most people went to St. Genevieve's. A lot of my friends went to 
St. Genevieve's. But the good times back then. Good times. 

PF: You alluded to some adventures you and your brother had, the 
other day, which I thought were just hilarious. Tell me about those. 

AD: Oh, yeah. Well, I always grew up with animals. I've always 
loved animals and my first dog was a collie, like Lassie on TV. And that 
was-- My mother also raised Pekingese, and we did have some of those, 
also. She kind of got out of that when they got to be too much and she was 
getting some bad checks from folks and stuff like that. And Daddy said it 
just, we just needed to, you know, we needed to just scale down on the 
animals. So instead of all the ones in the yard, you know, I had Queen and 
she stayed with me constantly, and I can't remember when Queen came to 
us. Tricia Coxey who lives in our neighborhood, maybe-- She had a collie 
too, and she may be able to remember that. She's three or four years older 
than I am, but we were backdoor neighbors and she was in my wedding. But 
Queen was always with us. My mother would send my brother and me out 
and say, "You all enjoy your day". Here I was four or five years old and my 
brother was, you know, how he was. It was just amess. So we were always 


getting into trouble. And so one time we had winter coats on and they had 


16 


some new construction on the corner there at the Algary house. And we got 
up on the roof, because there was a ladder there. And my brother said, "You 
know, Santa Claus comes down through the chimney. Why don't we try to 
get in this part of the house through the chimney and see what's going on." 
We were always curious about what we could see in other people's houses 
and we were just on our own. So he lifted me up, jacket and all, big wool 
coat that I had on, and set me into the chimney with my arms by my side, so 
I couldn't move one way or the other. And he saw that I was stuck and he 
couldn't get me out. He was just, you know, not even two years older than I 
was and he could not lift me up because I had gotten stuck in there. And 
Queen, down by the ladder, looked up and she started barking and she ran 
home. My brother ran off. I don't know where he went, but he ran off. And 
Queen went home and barked and barked and barked. And Mama saw, 
"Well, the children are not with her. Wonder where they are". So she went 
out and Queen took her up to the Algary house, which was really just across 
the street and up from us just a little bit, to where the ladder was, and Mama 
could see up on the roof what was going on. And I guess it was Mama that 
got up there and got me down. And, of course, the minute she got me out, I 
said, "Well, Bill put me in here", not like I had anything to do with it. I 
didn't say "Okay". I didn't say "That would be fun". So she, of course, she 
beat my brother. And that's what she would do. He got a big spanking, 
usually with a belt, if he misbehaved. That's what they did with children 
back then. He knew how to hide and so did I. Because in that house, we 
had a big closet in my sister's room that went all the way back into the--it 
was a Slanted big closet. And you could go all the way back in the closet 
and hide. And usually, if my sister was there, which I think by this time she 


might have been. I can't remember. I guess I was so little she might have 


17 


been 16, 17 years old. She would help us hide. So if we had done 
something we weren't supposed to do and Mama was after us with a belt, she 
would just say, "Go in my closet and hide down there as far as you can and 
I'll close the door". So Mama knew where to look, eventually, and she 
would find us. But sometimes we would get pretty lucky and usually I didn't 
get a spanking. It was just my brother who always got a spanking. Because 
my mother didn't know how to deal with boys, I think. She had had girls 
and then me, but she wasn't real sure how to deal with a boy. And she 
thought it would be all right just to beat the devil out of him, just beat him 
with this belt. And it happened a lot. And my brother ended up eventually 
fighting back, which wasn't a good thing. And my sister--my oldest sister 
was that way and I have vivid memories of sitting at the breakfast table and 
my sister who was 14 years older would take my mother on. And there 
would be some incidents of slapping and all that stuff with my sister, even as 
a teenager. A lot of abuse. Daddy didn't step in that much, because he knew 
better than to get between my mother and her anger. Those are the bad 
memories, because there was a lot of abuse that I saw as a child that I didn't 
realize didn't go on everywhere. But when you look back on it, you know 
that the terror that you felt was probably not normal, you know. That after 
you had seen the way other people lived. But my mother, when she was 
drinking, she was just uncontrollable. She didn't remember it the next day. 
But Queen also saved my life another time when my brother and I-- We had 
a big lime pit in the backyard on that other lot. So this must have been 
before I was eight, another time when I was probably about four or five. 
And there was a big line that went all the way across the lime pit. It was all 
in a big fenced area. 


PF: What is a lime pit? Is it natural? 


18 


AD: It was where they threw all of the scraps so that it would all 
disintegrate and mulch. I don't know if they even had their trash carried off. 
I don't know. But the lime pit was where you threw trash and, I guess, 
whatever they had they put in there that wasn't, you know. Back then there 
wasn't much plastic, so I guess it was a lot of food scraps and things like 
that. And then I don't know what they did with the lime after. But I just 
know that the lime was caustic and it would burn you if you fell into it. So 
my brother said, "Well, I can do this. Can you do it too?" You know, 
"Watch me". And so he handed--he would go hand over hand and he did 
this across the lime pit and I said, "Sure, I can do that". And I tried. I got 
about halfway through and I couldn't hold on anymore, and I feel into that 
lime pit. Well, of course, Queen was right outside the fence. And this is 
another time my brother just took off, and so my brother came--I mean, my 
mother came and she saw that I was in the lime pit and took me right out. 
And I don't remember whether I had any burns or anything from that. I had 
on clothes, of course, you know. But she had gotten me out within about 
five minutes of me falling in. But it was Queen that went to the back door. 
Another time, Bill and I--this was after we moved, though. It seems like to 
me that I was in kindergarten. So maybe we hadn't moved. I don't guess we 
had. I must have been about five or six. And I was at kindergarten at St. 
Eugene's. And it was the summer and we walked down to the golf course. 
Mama had locked us out again and we just--after breakfast we started 
wandering around. It was a Sunday and we walked down to the golf course 
that was then the municipal golf course, the City golf course. There wasn't 
an Asheville club then. And there was a big creek bed down there that was 
real kind of muddy and mushy. And we got down into the creek bed and 


there wasn't water in there but I just remember mud. And my brother was 


19 


getting out, scrambling out. We weren't supposed to be down there, of 
course, because people played golf on the golf course and with the golf balls 
and all, you probably shouldn't have ever been down there. But that was one 
of the places that we went all the time. And as I started up the muddy bank, 
I fell backwards and face first into a yellow jackets nest. Queen wasn't with 
us then. But my brother, of course, was running on, and I had the bees all 
over me. They were--they covered my--they were stinging me everywhere. 
And then when we got home, I remember Bill screaming because they were 
already beating him. "Where's your sister?" But the men on the golf course 
that were playing, said "What are you children doing here on this golf course 
ona Sunday?" Didn't offer to help or anything. They said, "You should not 
be here. You go straight home". And I guess they didn't see that I had bees 
all over me. 

PF: Were you yelling and crying. 

AD: I was yelling and crying. 

PF: Well, then they knew something was going on. My word. 

AD: I got home and it was the first house. It was 53. So Iran 
upstairs and they stripped off my clothes and the bees were everywhere, they 
were flying everywhere. Mostly it was my face. And I sort of went into a 
coma. And they didn't take me to the hospital. The doctors came to your 
house back then. If you needed a doctor, you called the doctor, and the 
doctor came out to the house. And they put me to bed and my face swelled 
up. Oh, it was horrible. And they said that if I ever got stung by a yellow 
jacket, chances were that I would be allergic. If that ever happened again. 
But the only other thing that I did step in, a bumblebee nest a couple times. 
Put one foot in. That hurt so bad, I stepped in it with the other foot. Had 


both my feet. But that was in the Pinkston's yard, right catty-corner to our 


20 


yard. I didn't think bumblebees, I didn't think bumblebees stang, stung. I 
don't know if they do. Anyway, that was another episode with the bees. But 
to this day, I remember we were sitting at the picnic table, at the Pinkstons. 
They always would have cookouts with the drunk parents. Daddy never did 
really grill out. Daddy didn't, he didn't believe in that kind of thing. So the 
Pinkstons would have food, so we'd go over there and have dinner with them 
sometimes. And I remember the yellow jackets flying all over the food, and 
me just sitting there terrified. And Mr. Pinkston would say, "What is wrong 
with you? Don't worry about it". But I remember not wanting to eat and 
being just scared to death of those yellow jackets, and still to this day. 

PF: Yeah, well, when you know it's going to have a reaction like that. 
Did he know what had happened to you? 

AD: Oh, yeah, everybody kind of knew bout it. But still, you know, I 
guess they were tough. People were tough back then. "Get over it. What's 
wrong with you? Why don't you like bees". But I don't remember, Queen-- 
I don't remember when Queen died, that dog, and Tricia probably, her Collie 
may have died before mine. Their collie, I think, was black and white and 
ours was just like Lassie. But the next dog I got was probably about 
kindergarten time, not long after that episode with the bees, probably, that 
was a little Chihuahua. So I had Patrick, we named him Patrick because my 
birthday is on the day after St. Patrick's Day, and we got him on St. Patrick's 
Day. So he was my little companion after that. Not much protection. Back 
then, the dogs roamed all over the place. Nobody--they didn't have any kind 
of rules or regulations about dogs. So they just wandered the 
neighborhoods. And my little dog, when I was away to college, ended up 
getting into a fight, because my mother had my sister and her children, their 


grandchildren there and she wasn't watching my little dog. And another big 


21 


dog got him and he had puncture wounds and died from that. I got home 
from college to find him almost dead. So Mama didn't take him to the vet. | 
He just passed away from the injuries. He was probably about twelve, I 
guess. That was Charles Pinkston who was just a little bit younger, he was 
born in the summer, I was born in the spring, March, and he was probably in 
June or July. And he was really a good friend, too. I mostly boy friends, 
because there weren't too many girls in the neighborhood. And we would 
climb up into trees and find where the tree would fork into a V. And we 
would cut it to make slingshots, you know, and everybody was in 
competition to see who could make the best slingshot. And you'd have to 
have a real sharp knife in order to be able to cut-- Usually we'd get into little 
dogwood trees and things where it was easier to cut it. But one time I 
remember, I took the knife--it was a really, really sharp knife, and I wasn't 
supposed to ever go home during the day, so this is some of the stuff we 
would do. So once I got in the tree and found this perfect thing, and I started 
cutting, the knife slipped and it cut me on the finger, cut a pretty good chunk 
out of my finger. And I remember that I said, "Well, I can't go home. I can't 
tell Mama because she know I'll have this knife". So Charles's mother had 
been a nurse. I loved Mrs. Pinkston. She was a drinker, too, but she would 
do whatever. She'd feed you or whatever. She'd do that. So we ran in and I 
showed her my finger and she dressed it for me and fixed it. And I don't 
know-- She and Mama got along sometime, because they traded flowers 
back and forth through the fence, iris bulbs and things like that, and if one 
liked something that somebody else had, then they would trade off. And 
they got into some sort of a fight that I don't know what it was about. It 
might have been the flowers. But then there was a spell there where they 


didn't talk. And Mama would never go to these cookouts. It was pretty 


22 


much just send my brother and me over there. We'd go to the cookouts, you 
know. And the Pinkstons had fruit trees in the backyard, and we picked 
cherries and things like that. We were destroying people's trees, basically. 
We were cutting and making slingshots. And we would shoot each other 
with the slingshots. My brother had a BB gun. He actually shot Charles 
with it. And they finally came to blows on some of that. Like, you know, 
you can't have your son shooting my son with a BB gun. A BB actually 
went into his leg. My brother was up at the Gudger house, which was the 
seven-gable house right there that faces the club now. Mr. Gudger, they had 
sort of an open door--they had a big courtyard in the back. That house is 
absolutely amazing, if you've ever been there. Well, Bill and I, as children, 
we'd love to go and see what was going on there. So, the wall was right at 
our backyard. They built a big brick wall that went the expanse of our yard 
and their courtyard. So we could climb that wall and go into their courtyard 
and into their house, because they didn't lock the back door. They had it 
courtyarded off. So my brother went over there, took a big knife one time 
and carved up their beautiful cotton hammock, in little bitty pieces, with his 
knife. And that wasn't good. The Gudgers didn't like that at all. And then 
Mr. Gudger had a train room up above the garage, all of his trains. And we 
would go in there and just wander around. I don't think they ever knew what 
was going on. They had two children. They had a boy and a girl. And the 
girl, I think, went to St. Genevieve's with my sisters, knew them more than I 
did, because they were that much older. The boy was older, too. But when 
my mother locked us out, she had no idea what we were doing most of the 
time. And didn't care. She didn't have help much, you know. The help that 
was inside was probably doing the cleaning and she didn't have anybody to 


watch us outside. So we were pretty much on our own. There wasn't a 


23 


whole lot of traffic back then. So my brother, to teach me to ride a bike and 
keep up with him, he just put me at the top of the street there on Kingwood 
Place and pushed me down the hill. I fell off so many times, I finally 
figured "If I don't learn to ride a bike, he's going to kill me". So when I 
finally learned, he put me on the grass--it was Mama, Daddy and Bill were 
having breakfast in the room that looked out over the little piece of yard we 
had that went down there from the driveway, and I got onto my bike. I was 
so proud of myself. I was riding and I was looking right at them and I went 
smack into a tree. 

PF: Oh, my gosh. Oh, poor baby. 

AD: And another time now, I was sitting on my brother's tractor, and 
he said, "You get off my tractor or I'm going to throw this knife at you." He 
always had a knife. I don't know, my parents must not have ever--and he 
was always throwing it at something. And I said-- 

PF: You mean like a toy tractor? 

AD: Yeah, this is a toy tractor. One of those little yellow-- 

PF: A pedal one? 

AD: --pedal toy tractors. He probably was ix, so then I was probably 
four. And I said, "You would never throw that knife at me." And he--right 
in the corner of my eye. It stuck right into the corner of my eye. He was a 
pretty good shot of everything, good eyesight. And so--I don't remember it 
hurting, but I remember screaming, because I wanted him to get in trouble. 
And so my mother, here again--and Daddy would spank Bill with the belt 
sometimes, but that time he chased him up the steps in the house. I 
remember that and pulled his pants down and wore him out with that belt. 
But we sold the house when Mama died. She died in--Daddy died in '84 and 
Mama died in '95. And when she died, the summer before she died that fall, 


24 


we had sold the contents of the house while she was still living because she 
said she wanted Johnny Penland to auction everything off. She wanted to 
know what her things would bring, because she was proud, very proud of her 
antiques. That was her life, her flowers and her antiques. She had searched 
far and wide for most of those antiques. And she went to some auctions. So 
we had that auction and Johnny Penland auctioned things off on the front 
steps of that house. And we were not allowed to take but one thing from the 
house, each one of us, there were four children. Anything else we wanted, 
we had to bid on, along with the crowd. So a big crowd showed up that day. 
Paul Rifkin was there. I know he was. And Alan from Alan's Jewelry and 
Paw came. He bought my mother's old Victorian chairs for his Victorian 
house down in Weaverville. And I bought a few things. My sister bought a 
few things, because things went pretty high. And my sister's children 
wanted to buy some things that they couldn't afford, because the prices were 
going pretty high. Some things weren't. The china wasn't going high. Her 
needlepoint chairs, I got those. I new Mama had done the needlepoint. And 
I know that they were covered in nicotine. My sister whispered that to me, 
"Do you really want those chairs? They're covered in nicotine". And I said, 
"Well, I'll get them cleaned. I want her chairs". So I have those, still with 
the same needlepoint on them. Mama did a lot of that. She did a lot of 
crocheting, knitting, needlepoint passed the time. I think that's some of the 
stuff that kept her busy. That was after my grandmother passed away in '49. 
Mama didn't have the same social life she had had when my grandmother 
was living, of course, because she didn't have the same contacts and they 
didn't--she didn't do the same things. Mama stayed home probably too 
much, and especially after the bridge games sort of, you know, ran its 


course. All of the women got older, the children were going away from 


25 


home, and they just didn't have the same social networking that they had 
had. But Mrs. Burton, who wrote for--she was Dr. Burton's wife, and Dr. 
Burton was the one that did the forcep delivery on my sister that didn't go 
well. And Dr. Burton was also the one that hunted and fished with my father 
and had a plane. Dr. Burton even had a private plane, where they flew to 
Florida to do some fishing once. So I didn't even know about this but they 
have it on--my sister sent me a little film that they had of that. It would have 
been, probably, in the, I would say the early forties, maybe. But Mrs. 
Burton wrote for the paper. So when any--they needed something for the 
paper, she would call Mama. And so we were in the paper quite a bit. "Ann 
and Bill sitting with their Halloween costumes on". And my brother, one 
time when we moved next door and built the other house, we had a big oil 
tank there. And my brother thought it would be fun to fill the oil tank up 
with whatever he could find, rocks and sticks. He worked on that for a long 
time, until the oil tank finally stopped up. And they dug the oil tank out and 
found out what had happened. They had to dig the whole front yard up at 
that point. And, of course, they weren't happy about that, about my brother 
doing all that. I mean, we were left by ourselves. So we did a lot of things 
that we shouldn't have done and didn't know we weren't supposed to do. It 
seemed like fun, at the time. I wasn't part of that. I can tell you that. I 
wasn't a part of that. I probably put him up to, but I wasn't a part of that. 
But, you know, we sold that house in '95 and I think that the people that 
bought it are still there. And Madeline and Matthew McCauley, the little 
children that have grown up since in that house, they were in my class when 
I taught at Asbury. And the mother, Louise is her name, and Mike is the 
dad. As far as I know, they still live in that house, and they bought it in '95. 


And we seldom-- When we went to church, I saw where they were asking 


26 


about that. If I went to church, it was usually with the Pinkstons, who were 
members of the Presbyterian Church. And we were Presbyterians, the First 
Presbyterian downtown, but my parents, they donated to the church, but they 
didn't go. And because I loved the Catholics so much, and once we got out 
of the Catholic school, I went to the Presbyterian Church sometimes with the 
Pinkstons on Sundays and got to stay over and have fried chicken at their 
house. I knew there was a big lunch afterwards. So we did that, too. But I 
didn't go to church that much. I was married in the Presbyterian Church 
downtown, but I didn't go to church much after I got up a little bit. Probably 
ten, I quit going to church. My brother never went. But I went because I 
used to think it was special, you know, even though my parents didn't want 
to go. They were married in the courthouse downtown, in 1934. I've seen 
pictures of that. Daddy died in'84. That was 50 years after they were 
married. They got married in, I'm thinking it was, September and Daddy 
died in November. 

PF: What did he do for a living? 

AD: Daddy was a, he worked as a Vice-President at Asheville 
Savings Bank, which was Asheville Federal Savings & Loan. He went to 
work there in 1952. He had been with the optical company that the 
Fluhartys ran. He worked for the Fluhartys for a while. He worked for 
Harry's for a while. Mama and Daddy lived in Tennessee to begin with, 
Johnson City. And Daddy had a business where he sold sheets to people. I 
don't know what that is. Some sort of business. He sold sheets to the guy 
that started Kentucky Friend Chicken., Colonel Sanders. He used to live 
down in Sanders Court there on Merrimon Avenue. But my grandmother 
was always helping my father, because I told you--well, I don't guess I told 


you. But my father had a little brother that drank lye when he was about two 


ze 


or three. They had black servants, too, but they had a whole house full of 
black servants. Because they lived out back of the house in Selma. And the 
black servant was supposed to be watching my little--Daddy's little brother. 
And he drank lye that they made the lye soap with, and it killed him. So 
when Daddy was born, he probably wouldn't have been, because his brother 
and sister were already much older. And then that baby died. So then 
Daddy was born because his mother was so heartbroken when she lost that 
baby. So there was a mammy assigned to Daddy, 24 hours a day. And 
Daddy was not all that well. He had some breathing problems and stuff, too, 
and I don't know the extent of all that. I know he was a heavy smoker later 
in life. But as a child, he was not well, and probably because my 
grandmother doted on him so much, and wanted to make sure nothing 
happened to him. Daddy started driving at ten and smoking at ten. He had a 
Model T Ford he drove. And Daddy was a wild child, too, pretty much like 
my brother. Because they really couldn't manage my father. He came here 
and went to the high school here for just a short period of time, and then his 
father, before he died, sent him to Staunton Military Academy in Virginia, 
just to try and straighten him out. And Daddy had a hard time learning, too. 
I think he had some problems there. And then from Staunton he went to the 
University of Virginia and dropped out of the University of Virginia after 
about a year. He was a gymnast there. He was an amazing gymnast. He 
could do just amazing things. He just couldn't do the schoolwork. My 
brother was really not capable of doing schoolwork much, either. I don't 
know what that means. I don't know if they had the same sort of learning 
problem, or what it was. But Daddy wanted to be a CPA. That was the last 
thing after he sold sheets and worked for Harry's and worked for the optical 


company. And his mother said, "Well, you know, you've got to do 


28 


something. You want to go to CPA school and maybe learn how to do that". 
And he couldn't pass the exam. But he got hired at Asheville Savings & 
Loan to be their person that does the books, even though he hadn't passed 
the CPA. I think he was studying, maybe, at the time, but just never passed 
it. But he stayed on there and was the treasurer, what they called the 
treasurer, I guess for the years there. He started working there in '52 and he 
retired in, I'm thinking '74 or '-5, maybe. And then we had moved to 
Durham and in '77 Daddy-- Mr. Westall, who had taken over being 
president of Asheville Savings & Loan, passed away unexpectedly. And 
Daddy had gotten a fellow that he knew that worked at IBM, Mr. Prescott, to 
come and interview for that job, for the president's job. And Mr. Prescott 
got the job. And I think he felt a little bit like he owed Daddy something, 
you know, for helping him get that job. And so when we were in Durham, 
Daddy called us and said, "I want you back up here. I need help". Mama at 
that time was worse and Daddy was drinking, too. They neither one could 
really manage too well. And they didn't know my children and I knew they 
never would if I didn't come back up here, because they weren't one to travel 
and do that kind of thing. So Daddy said, "I can help with a job", because 
Bill was managing the food stamp program in Durham County, at that time. 
He said, "Come on up and interview for this job". And Mr. Prescott gave 
Bill the job. So he started working there in '77. 

PF: Wow, and he retired from there. 

AD: Yeah, after 38 years, in 2015. 

PF: Now, the Prescotts, did they live down on North Griffing? 

AD: Yeah. 

PF: And they had a son Neal? 


29 


AD: Neal. And then Pat, their daughter, and another daughter. They 
had just three or four. I can't really remember. They lived on-- 

PF: I knew Neal through antiques. 

AD: Pat married a McClellan, Tom McClellan, who's an attomey. 
And they live over in North Asheville now, like there at the golf course on 
one of those streets that goes right up through there. And they had four 
children. They had twins and then two others. But, you know, Mr. Prescott 
was a really sweet guy. Still lives-- He married a high school sweetheart 
when his wife died. When Mrs. Prescott died, he hooked up with somebody 
at a high school reunion and married her. So he's married again, and I think 
South Carolina may be where they live. I'm not positive about that. But he 
sends us a Christmas card every now and then. He was really good to Bill. 
But Bill started out as a branch manager. Wherever he was a branch 
manager there was a robbery. Seemed like they never had robberies before, 
armed robberies with masked people, you know, where they locked you in 
the vault. He opened up the one on Tunnel Road, Bill did, as the branch 
manager, they were robbed there. He came back downtown, they were 
robbed. They'd never been robbed. He got robbed out on, the one on Patton 
Avenue. There's been three or four robberies. I don't know. But I didn't 
know--I had little children and I really didn't know what was going on until 
it was over with and he called me on the phone and said, "I can't say much 
about this, but we were locked in the vault by people with semi-automatic 
weapons, you know, and they were masked and we thought we were--" I 
guess they thought they were all going to die. And Bill being the branch 
manager, you know, he was forced to do whatever he had to do, open the 
vaults or whatever he had to do for them. But there were some scary 


situations. They even hard a hostage situation one time where Bill was 


30 


downtown and his branch manager called him and said, "They have my 
daughter and they're watching the branch". And they first got me. I don't 
know where Bill was. They had to find him. I think maybe he was off. I 
don't know what was going on. But Becky called and said "They have my 
daughter and if I don't do this, this and this, they're going to kill her and what 
should I do?" And so I got Bill somehow, wherever he was, and they found 
out it was all a hoax. Because Becky found her daughter, but the guy was 
actually in the K Mart shopping plaza watching the bank to see if they would 
do what he said. 

PF: And did they get the guy then? 

AD: I don't know if they ever caught him. But Becky's daughter was 
safe. But the situations, they had never had robberies in Asheville much to 
amount to anything. 

PF: I guess these cameras help cutting that down. What do you recall 
around Beaver Lake and that area, the lake itself. Was the pool there when 
you lived in the area? 

AD: No. Now, my mother, you know I told you she lived on Evelyn 
Place. They moved here in 1916. And my mother would take the streetcar, 
the trolley that ran from Charlotte Street and the last stop was there at the 
swimming pool. So I've seen pictures of that, but the swimming pool was 
completely gone by the time that, when I was a little girl. We could wander 
all over Beaver Lake. A duck actually followed me home one day. I hada 
pet duck. I think it was a baby, as a matter of fact. But we used to go down 
there and there was a big culvert down there that we crawled through that 
was really dangerous. And I know the sheriff was after us, I think, at one 
time, my brother and me. This was when we were older and should have 


known better. This was when we were like 12, around in there. And I was 


31 


still hanging out with all the boys, because there really weren't many girls. 
We just were all over. Charles was with us, I know that. And Bill and, oh, 
I'm trying to think of the people down the street. The Grooms, you know the 
Grooms? You don't know the Grooms much? Well, they grew up in that 
big sort of Tudor house there at the bottom of--it was Windsor and 
Wembley, and Kingwood, right down there. And they had I think six 
children maybe. I can't really remember. And Ellen Carr, who was Ellen 
Resnikoff, whose family started the Tops for Shoes, and we all used to walk 
home from the bus together. Because the bus stop was right down there at 
the bottom of Wembley. But Beaver Lake was a draw. It wasn't as much as 
a walking place, as I remember, as a child, as it was just a place to, you 
know, to be there for kids. But there was no swimming pool at all and you 
weren't allowed to swim in there. You could take the boats in there. I never 
did take a boat, that I remember. Daddy didn't have a boat down there 
either. So I don't know that that was, as far as recreation, that we could do 
anything like that. But being that my parents were older, I guess, and I was 
not supervised, crossing Merrimon Avenue--I guess it wasn't nearly as 
dangerous as it is now. But we had to watch because, of course, there were 
more cars down there than there would have been in our Neighborhood. But 
I remember that that whole area over there, the clubhouse sat there for the 
golf course, that's now where the little shopping center is. And I think that 
was a restaurant, maybe, at one time. But they had a rat problem down 
there. So they had to close that restaurant. 

PF: That was a steakhouse, I remember. 

AD: Yeah, they had to close that because of the rats. I guess from the 
lake area, I guess it was. But there as a clubhouse for a while there. Of 


course, Rolling Pin Bakery was there that the Wrights ran. 


32 


PF: Oh, yes. 

AD: And Rebecca was one of my friends from high school and she 
worked there every day after school. She got off the bus there and worked 
with her dad and mom. And probably worked there in the morning, too. 
They were the hardest-working people. They had the best food. 

PF: Everybody got their cakes from there, I remember, when we 
came here. 

AD: If you want a cake that's very similar, Heidi down here at the 
Bake Shoppe, her mother and grandmother used to work there. They had 
some of the old recipes. And as long as Heidi holds on, I still get my cakes 
from her. She does make some pretty good cakes. Just order ahead. She's a 
kind of a laid-back person, so if you have to check and see if she's there or 
whatever. But they bought a lot of the equipment when the one out in South 
Asheville, Mountain Bake Shop, what was it called. It went out of business 
recently and they also were relatives of the Wrights. I think it was his son- 
in-law that was running that one. Carolina Mountain Baker I think is what 
they called it. But Heidi bought some of the equipment, the old equipment 
that had been part of the bakery from the Wrights' bakery. But it used to be 
Moore's Bakery. It was the bakery to go and that's where my wedding cake 
came from, Moore's Bakery. It was on Merrimon Avenue. It ended up 
being a music shop later but Mr. Wright learned how to be a baker from Mr. 
Moore. 

PF: Oh, I know where you mean. 

AD: So when he decided to go out on his own, he moved from the 
Moore's Bakery and opened up his own shop, the Wrights' Bakery. So a lot 
of the old recipes from Moore's Bakery went to the Wrights, then Heidi has 


33 


some of those. She doesn't have a variety of things like the Wrights’ bakery 
used to have. 

PF: Did you know, a little bit further out on the left, there was a farm. 
Goodmans had a farm. Sort of down by where Reece's Tire is now? And 
then in front of that, kind of. 

AD: I don't remember that. 

PF: Two people have mentioned that. 

AD: Down below the lake? 

PF: Well, beyond the lake, you know, going on out near what was 
Beaver Lake Restaurant. Across from that and in there, there is a big church 
there where kids play baseball. 

AD: Yeah. Yeah, the only time we pretty much went out 
Weaverville Highway was to go to Hadley's. It was out Reems Creek Road. 
It was an outlet for Hadley's sweaters, years ago. And the only--for some 
reason, Mama didn't think you were ever supposed to go into Woodfin. I 
don't know. I had that boyfriend I told you about that lived in Woodfin. She 
said, "Do you want to live like this?" She took me to see where he lived 
there in Woodfin. But my sister, when she would come back to town, when 
she was married and all, it was a big deal to go out there to Hadley's because 
they had cashmere sweaters and lamb's wool sweaters. And they had big 
tables of them. So you just had to find your size and they were a whole lot 
cheaper than if you went to buy them. Then that brand was sold to Dalton 
and Dalton sweaters now. And I guess, as far as I know, the Dalton brand is 
still out there. But Hadley was run by Mr.--I'm trying to think of their-- 
Taylor, Mr. Taylor, who lived there near the Grove Park Inn and then had 
the twins, Sally and Bam. And Sally was the queen of the Rhododendron 


34 


the year I was presented. But Mr. Taylor ran the factory out there, Hadley's 
factory. 

PF: What year was that when you were presented? 

AD: I was presented in 1969. You had to be not engaged and not 
married and you had to have two escorts. And, of course, Bill and I were 
secretly engaged before that. And my dress that I wore was going to be my 
wedding dress, without the train. So we got double use out of that. But my 
sister was the queen of the baby parade, in the Rhododendron. They used to 
have a big parade downtown. They stopped doing that after the war. I don't 
think they ever had another parade. This was before the war. She would 
have been three which would have been about 1941. She was the queen of 
the baby parade and she had a beautiful white dress and a crown and all. 
I've seen pictures of that, too. But as Daddy was a member of the Royal 
Brigade of Guards, and if you were going to be presented, you had to be a 
member or you had to be recommended by a member to get into the Brigade 
of Guards. And that was right before I was going to be married and then it 
was a question as to whether or not Mama was just going to pay for me to 
run away, because she didn't think the marriage was going to last to Bill, 
probably, or because I was in the Rhododendron. And then in January this 
would have been June, and then in January I was married in '70, so it wasn't 
much time there. So she was not wanting to spend all the money on both. It 
was a big deal, a lot of money, because you had to buy the white dress, you 
had to go to the parties. There were several parties. And the men had to be 
trained on etiquette, too, the escorts. It was a pretty big deal. But I said, 
"My sisters did it, you know. I want to do it, too". They got married in a 
white dress, although my sister that got married, my first sister that got 


married, they got married in Hawaii. He was in the Navy. Mama just sent 


35 


her dress over there. They didn't go. Her first child, she didn't go to the 
wedding. We had a reception at the house beforehand and then she was just 
shipped off to Hawaii. And then I didn't see my sister again for four years, I 
guess. That sister. And then that marriage didn't last. Mine did, but hers 
didn't. She did end up being married quite a while, though, before it broke 
up. Because she had the two children and moved to Florida. After she 
moved here with the boys, he managed to get back with her. I guess she 
forgave him or whatever and they moved to Florida together for a little 
while. And they didn't divorce until about the time Bill and I got married in 
1970. And she probably got married in, two years before Ruth. Ruth got 
married in '58 and Jean got married in '56. So Jean's marriage lasted from 
about '58 until about '70. But it was a rocky relationship after he got out of 
the Navy and I don't know what kind of a job he had in Florida. But Ruth's 
been married. She married the boy next door, because B.A. was in the 
Algary house, which was on the corner there of Wembley and Kingwood, 
the brick house where I went in the chimney. She married B.A. who was a 
little bit younger than Jean, but a little bit older than Ruth, my sister. So my 
oldest sister had a crush on him, too. But because she was a little bit older 
than the younger sister, Ruth married him. So when he went to Chapel Hill, 
Duke and then Chapel Hill Med School and was a doctor in Greenville, 
South Carolina, after he went into the Army, he was an Army doctor for a 
while. You know, just to do your--the basic, what is it, two or three years. 
But Mr. Algary ran Penney's here. He moved here from South Carolina. 
They transferred him here to run the Penney's here. And Katherine was his 
sister. And Katherine was a little bit younger than--maybe she was about the 
same age as Ruth. Younger than Jean but about the same age as Ruth, 


maybe. And Katherine now lives in Greenville, also, close to them, his 


36 


sister. But Ruth, my sister, he was a heart doctor for Eisenhower when he 
was in South Carolina. Was it Columbia, maybe? I remember going there 
when I was about 12, and it was so hot there. You couldn't go outside. It 
was terrible. And he was stationed there and happened to be President 
Eisenhower's heart surgeon. Because Eisenhower was playing golf there at 
one of the big golf courses. I'm not sure even what that was. But has a 
signed plaque on his wall from Eisenhower saying "Thank you". I think he 
had a heart attack, actually, while he was there. But B.A. was not ever able 
to operate because he had--his hands shook. So he did catheterizations 
instead. So he wasn't an actual surgeon. But he was just a heart doctor. But 
anyway, Ruth and B.A. settled in South Carolina. In fact, near where Mr. 
Algary's family was, the older man, this would have been her father-in-law, 
back near there. Greenville was probably near the home place, where they 
all grew up. I don't know much about Mrs. Algary other than she was very 
similar to Mama, other than the fact that Mama didn't take pills, as far as I 
knew. But Mrs. Algary took pills and she drank, too. So she was pretty 
much out of it most of the time. And she was older, like my mother, and she 
came down to talk to Mama occasionally. But I know Katherine, the 
daughter, was closer to my mother than I was. And I was closer to Mrs. 
Pinkston than I was to my mother. Certain girls found, I guess, you know, 
somebody that could help them more than their own mother would. 

PF: Role model, mentor. 

AD: Yeah. But Ruth married sort of the next-door neighbor. And 
then Jean married Louis, and that may be some of the fights that she had 
with my mother at the table. Because Mama didn't like that family either, 
and didn't really want her to marry him, I don't think. I was a little girl, so I 


did like B.A. That's Ruth's husband. I didn't much like Louis, either. He 


Sy 


was not somebody I felt comfortable with. I just, you know, he always used 
to want to put me on his lap and stuff like that and I just didn't--I didn't take 
to that. But he's still alive. My sister's passed away. She died in 2008 of 
cancer, Jean did. But she smoked a lot, you know, she drank a lot of Coca- 
Cola. She was in the banking business, too, and she retired pretty much 
from that in Florida, in Tampa. That's where she ended up settling. But she 
came back here after Mama died. She moved back here in '96. Said she 
would never come back to Asheville until Mama was gone. Because, | 
mean, they literally fought all the time. Kind of like my brother. She and 
my brother fought a lot. So they were not happy memories for Jean. Or for 
Bill. But Ruth and I were similar and we did everything that we could to 
make Mama happy. Whatever it took, you know, we went out of our way to 
do more in the house and help her or do whatever, you know. We were 
cooperative children. You didn't want to be uncooperative because it wasn't 
a pretty picture. But and those memories, I guess of the abuse, were-- What 
I didn't realize, you know, until later, were not normal. But like I said, you 
could see a nice house in North Asheville and not know what is going on 
behind the walls. Know it was maybe upper middle class so it didn't matter. 
Similar things went on everywhere, I'm sure. So it's not necessarily as 
happy as you thought it was, but if you're a survivor and you look at the 
bright side, that it made you stronger, you know, I think that's a good thing, 
because you survived it, and came out the other side knowing how to maybe 
make your family life happier. 

PF: Right. You have a second chance with your own family. 

AD: Yes, with your own family. And so, in a way-- Tricia and I talk 
about that. Because her family was a lot the same way, with the abuse and 


all that. Her father actually abused her mother. But we both talk about how 


38 


we were protective of our children and maybe too protective of them, that 
they didn't know the real world as much as we did when we left there. And 
Tricia ended up having to adopt. She never could really have her own 
children, which was sad. She loved animals a much as I did. But she--and 
you might need her in an interview, Tricia. She probably knows a lot about 
North Asheville and would remember a lot more than I can. 

PF: You're doing pretty good. 

AD: Yeah, Windsor was that other street that was where she grew up. 
She was one street back behind. 

[Took a break. ] 

PF: Do you remember a trailer park over where Steinmart is now? A 
couple of people have remembered a trailer park where Steinmart is. 

AD: A trailer park where Steinmart is. That was always a shopping 
center, when I was a little girl, as I remember it. Well, the big shopping 
center was down there where Marco's Pizza and the grocery store are now. 
That was the big shopping center where A&P was, probably down there. 
Then they had the Winn-Dixie, too, down the street. But a trailer park? I 
don't remember that. There was a nightclub up there on Merrimon Avenue, 
at one time, there below St. Eugene's. Right there on the road, there was a 
Chez Paul. I've only been in there maybe once, but my brother was there 
quite a bit, I'm sure. When he probably wasn't supposed to be there. 

PF: Well, how did your brother turn out. We keep hearing about him. 

AD: Well, he joined the Marines in '68, I guess. He had a really bad 
traffic accident in Biltmore Forest. '67, I guess. He was a senior, I guess. 
He was drinking. There was a big party at that Town Hall there in Biltmore 
Forest. And maybe they had been someplace else before that. But Bill had 
the car, it was a great big old--Daddy's great big old Cadillac, probably. 


39 


And it held a lot of people in that car. And Bill felt capable of driving and 
he wasn't. And they took off down the main drag there, Biltmore Forest, the 
main road. Victoria Road, I guess it is. And there are some big trees that 
you might see there as you go down, in the median. There's a grass median 
there and big trees there. And Bill thought that was part of the road. And so 
he was going really fast. And he jammed that car in between those two 
trees. And one boy lost an eye. Bill was damaged really bad. He had, his 
leg was really messed up and we got the call late at night in '67. I think I 
answered the phone and Daddy had to go down to the hospital, of course, 
and there were some lawsuits from that, the boy that lost his eye especially. 
And they proved that Bill was driving under the influence. I'm surprised the 
Marines took him, but in '68, of course, was Vietnam. They wanted 
everybody. So he trained at Camp Le Jeune and went in as a Private and 
made Private First Class. But he had some episodes over there where he 
drove a general's Jeep into a swamp, you know. He did some things, the told 
him to go sweep a minefield and he said, "No, you go sweep it." You know, 
he disobeyed orders, which kept him alive, I guess. Got malaria and got 
shipped back to San Diego and ended up back in Asheville, probably in 
about '70-- Was he here in my wedding? He was in my wedding in '70, so 
he probably was back here then. Two years. And busted back to a Private. 
He made Private First Class but he was busted back to a Private. And 
Daddy really couldn't help him too much. He tried. He sent him to the 
school downtown, tried to get him a business degree. Daddy finally got him 
a job at the Trust Company of Georgia in Atlanta. It was a pretty good job. 
And Bill started doing drugs. And he had been married here and the woman, 
Bill found out she was having an affair. Of course, that's not what she said, 


but I think he did catch her once. And Mama had gotten them a house out in 


40 


Beaverdam and completely furnished it. And Bill was holding down some 
sort of job here, again, but the girl claimed spousal abuse and had bruises, so 
Daddy pretty much said, "You need to get out of the marriage. I'll just buy 
you out. She gets to keep everything, the house, the furniture, everything". 
So then Bill went to Atlanta and he met somebody else there and got into 
some bad episodes with drugs. He married another girl there whose father 
was on the Board of Directors of Coke. He was a big lawyer in Atlanta. But 
she was into drugs, too. And they bought a big house together and the guy 
just bought Bill out of that relationship. Just said, "I'll give you so much 
money. Just leave my daughter." He blamed Bill, but he didn't blame his 
daughter. But, of course, Bill's side of the story was that she was doing 
drugs and having other men. But he never had children, thank heavens. 

And he has finally gotten a hundred percent disability from the Marines. So 
he's able to live, but any inheritance that he got from my parents was all 
gone. He pretty much took it and spent and then didn't invest it wisely and 
ended up with nothing. He did have his house, but he had to mortgage that 
and then the money, he's had people after him. You know, money problems 
ever since. He moved back to Atlanta. The hundred percent disability may 
help him survive. We don't see him like we used to. But he used to come 
here when he needed money. And we were so close growing up that I 
probably would have done anything to help him, but my husband's afraid of 
him, because he had a big gun collection, and all this. But, you know, and 
he has tattoos. He doesn't look dangerous but, I mean, I know he wouldn't 
hurt me. But Bill just doesn't trust him. And my sister that's living in 
Greenville, she doesn't trust him either, and she won't have him at her house. 
But now he's doing okay with that hundred percent disability. He's 


managing to make it day to day. He does have a little thing on the side 


41 


where he cleans pools, I think, and does that. I think he's got one or two 
customers there. But he worked for so many different kinds of people there. 
He worked for a trucking company. He worked for a wrecker company. 
And he always would lose his job doing something foolish. So it's been a 
tough road for him. But he's like my oldest sister. He always has just not 
wanted to get along, you know. It's just been tough for him. It's just a good 
thing he never had children. But it's hard, you know, because we were close 
growing up and we kind of separated in high school because he had a couple 
of girlfriends and some things happened and he attacked me in the school 
lunchroom one day and almost broke my arm. And I had to call Daddy. 
Somebody had told him something I had said, which I had never done. And 
he kind of had, you know, images of that was the beginning of the end, I 
guess, you know, knowing that he had to go into the Marines. But the bruise 
was like that much of my arm. And I was dating Bill at the time. And I 
think that's another reason why he just never did trust him. But he does have 
sort of fits of rage. You just never know. Some of the neighbors where he 
lived, he's shot at them and he's had some problems with the police. He's 
been in jail a couple of times there. 

PF: And with his disability from the military, at least he will have 
medical care, he will have the VA, which they say bad things about the VA, 
but it's there and it tries. I've had good reports with them. I think this one 
out here is just a wonderful place. 

AD: Well, he had to commit himself at one point because he said, 
"That's the only way I can get a hundred percent is if I just commit myself 
and let them give me drugs and try to straighten me out." She had to act 
really crazy, and that wasn't a stretch, and so, you know, after you're 


committed a couple of times and then he had a bad fall at the house, too, 


42 


where it really messed his leg up. Once he fell off the roof on a ladder. My 
sister did end up-- But she went to that wedding when he married Lucy, the 
one whose father was on the Board of Directors of Coke. Ruth, my sister, 
actually went to that wedding. She said it was absolutely beautiful. Didn't 
work out though. And then he hooked up with somebody else who ended up 
dying of something. That was his other wife. I think he's been married three 
times all together. 

PF: I remember reading an article, 20 years ago or more, in the paper 
they had a nice article about a preschool that you began with a couple of 
other women. Tell me about that, because that is kind of a neat thing. 

AD: Yeah, I was 32 when we started that school. I started there in 
1982 and the school had been at the Episcopal Church that was right below 
there on-- Oh, shoot. I can't think of the names of streets. But the 
Episcopal Church that sits on Merrimon Avenue. There was a little school 
there when William went. He started up in Weaverville, all of my children 
went to the Weaverville preschool up there. 

PF: Is that the one that sits on the hill across from Fresh Market? 

AD: Yeah, the really pretty church up on the hill with the red door. 
Well, they had started, William started school there. He was in the three- 
year-old program and the one in Weaverville, and then he started the four- 
year-old program in the Episcopal Church. And when they were there, it 
was in the basement. There was a small little school and the church didn't 
really seem to support it too much. And one of the teachers there, Wendy 
Trevette I think was her last name, she wanted to move it. She wanted to 
move the school to a better facility, a bigger facility, because she saw the 
need for that area for preschool, for children, you know, for parents for part 


of the day out. That one was 9 till 12, when I took William. And she asked 


43 


me if I would be interested. And I was 32, had three children, and William 
basically was the last one I had and I thought, well, sure, I could probably 
work part time. And Maureen Patchel, who used to live down here at the 
lake, she was another one who said "You ought to do it, Ann. You love 
children and I'm sure that everything would work out for you". And I didn't 
finish college. I had gone to Western for two years in early childhood 
education but hadn't finished because Bill and I got married and we moved 
away. So I never went back to it, because I had to work, for us to make ends 
meet. We both worked in Durham, until I had children, and then after I had 
my first one in '74, I didn't work until I started in when I was 32. That 
would have been '82. So I had eight years where I had the children and 
didn't work. So I said, "Sure. Part time, 9 to 12. Seems like maybe we can 
do it". So they talked it over and there was Wendy and Miss Beth, was 
William's teacher, and maybe a couple--and Miss Pam, Pam Morrison, and 
they decided, sure, they'd look for a facility. So they found the facility at 
Asbury Church there on the corner of Kimberly and Beaverdam. And talked 
it over with the minister and the minister said, you know, that we could rent 
some space there. So I was kind of like, I was sort of naive in the fact that I 
had never been in a business before. I was just really going in because I, 
you know, wanted to help with the children. And so I said I would do the 
three-year-olds three days a week and Wendy was going to do them two 
days a week. And the way that they did it was the parents signed up and 
they paid the teacher by the day, ten dollars a day for their child. If the child 
didn't come, the teacher had to get on the phone and call a substitute list to 
bring another child in in order to make her money for the day. Because we 
had to give so much of the money we made back to the school. You know, 


it was not for profit, to buy our supplies and things. They wanted us to 


44 


furnish the classrooms, to bring everything in. And, of course, it was where 
the people, they had Sunday school for the children on Sundays. But the 
facility basically was empty and it was where I had gone as a Girl Scout, 
down in the basement of that same facility when I was a little girl to see 
about being a Girl Scout. But here was another thing, my mother was trying 
to get rid of me. She said, "Sign up for these Girl Scouts. You get to do all 
these fun things outside". And all we did was stay inside and do stuff and I 
didn't want to do it. But that was my experience. I remember that room 
being huge but when I went back to teach there, no, it was not. You know 
when you're little how things look. So when I was 32 and I guess that was 
1982, I said, "Okay, I'll sign on for this. We'll see how it goes". So we did 
that for a year. I did the three-year-olds. And then another teacher was 
going to have a baby. She had to leave and couldn't do the four-year-olds 
but a certain number of days a week. So could I maybe do the four-year- 
olds and work five days a week. So I said, "Well, I guess I could. I'm 
already doing the three days. It gives me two more days". But I didn't want 
to work in the three-year-olds and the four-year olds. So when the chance 
came up and they said would you do the four-year-olds five days, then I 
said. Well, actually it was up to us, because it was group of-- I don't know 
if you know Paula Pastalopolus or not. She was the Greek girl that came on 
and she was about five years younger than me. She was about 27. She took 
the two-year-olds because Beth had to leave. She moved out of town. She 
was one of the ones that helped us move. It was just sort of a combobulation 
of--it was a mess. Because we didn't realize that the church really didn't-- 
what they wanted was a preschool. So once we got this all together, and we 
had run it for a couple of years and it was successful, the minister and one of 


the mothers there, that was real close with the minister, decided they wanted 


45 


it for the church. They didn't want us there, but yet they still wanted the 
school to pay rent back to the church, even though they took it over. So we 
tried to move it at that point to another facility. Wendy didn't want to go in 
with the church. They said, "This is your option. This is our place. You 
either leave or you stay and work for us and see how it works out". So this 
is my first experience with the way the Christians can do things. Am Arnie 
[Corrier] did want it because it would look awfully nice if the minister 
started a preschool in his facility and it was successful and it was bringing in 
money and helping the church. And he said, you know, "So you either work 
for us or you leave." That was our choice, after we had done the 
playground, we put up the fence, got all the playground equipment, we 
furnished that downstairs room where I was a Girl Scout briefly. The 
playground equipment. Brought in our own stuff and when we got all this 
going, and this was August. We were supposed to start in September. I 
said, "What do we do? Are you going to take our enrollment list and keep it 
or can we take our enrollment list and find another facility and take our 
people that we have with us?" And they said, "If you can find a facility, 
that's up to you". So I had three children at home. I had this little part-time 
job. Because it was 9 to 1 then. We had bumped the hours up. I said, "How 
can I run a small business, you know, and Wendy was all for it. She quit. 
Because she said, "No, I'm not going to work for the church. I'm not going 
to work with them. This was our business and they're taking it away from 
us. And it's up to you, if you stay," but she said, "I can't do it." So she left, 
that two-year-old teacher, and that's when Paula started. I guess that was 
probably the year she started, or maybe she started before that. She was 
working part time. But we had babies, twos, threes and at that time, one 


class of fours. There was a basement, too. And there were two classrooms 


46 


down there, but they didn't want us to use those. So, of course, after they 
took it over, it was like, yes, we'll open up the basement, too, and we'll have 
two four-year-old classes and two three-year-old classes upstairs and feed 
the threes into the fours. And two two-year-old classes now is what they 
had. So they were trying to feed, make sure we had enough space for 
everybody. So I stayed on and, you know, I'm not sure why, other than the 
fact that it was, you know, a good job for me. But I did start a daycare. 
After that, I said, "Well, you know, if you guys are going to do this, then 
you're going to pay me so much money, and there's no reason--" And 
Wendy was doing that before she left. She had a group of children that she 
took home every day and kept them until the parents could get them. 
Because 9 to 1, some people worked. They couldn't get their children. So I 
did before school there in the facility for a while. Then I did after school. 
So I would show up there at 8 and keep children from 8 to 9, then I would 
work from 9 to 1 and keep children from 1 to 2. And the 8 to 9 was mine 
and the 1 to 2 was mine. And then they came and said, "You know, if you 
want to do this, you're going to have to pay us to use this facility. Also, 
you'll have to have your own insurance, because we have liability insurance 
and you don't". I did at home, when I took the children home. Then I was 
taking them home from 2 to 6, sometimes more. So I said, "No, I'm not 
going to pay you to do this. I don't make enough as it is." I was charging 
like 50 cents an hour. So I said, "I'm taking it home". So I had these people 
drop their children off at 8 in the morning at home. Bill was gone usually in 
the mornings to go to work by then. So, and my children caught a bus or he 
would take them. And if they had a doctor's appointment, Bill usually did 
that, too. He was really--he helped me out quite a bit. And I had to up my 


liability insurance at home and make sure everything was up to code. I had 


47 


to get certification to get a daycare because sometimes it was more than, you 
know, two hours. Sometimes it was 1 to 6. Sometimes it was 1 to 7. And 
you have to be classified as a daycare if you have more than two children 
that are unrelated in your home, by the State. So I had to be licensed by the 
State to be a daycare. I had to have inspections and had to have, you know, 
fire extinguishers. I had to have a thermostat for my refrigerator. I really 
was kind of a hassle. But the parents, you know how nice it was to have 
somebody take their children from the school. 

PF: Now were you still teaching there then? 

AD: Yeah, I kept my job as a teacher. And then took the children 
home in the afternoon and then the director said that I couldn't leave at 1 
o'clock. But if I had other children that I was taking care of, they were in 
my class. I said, "No, I have a business that I run at home now. I have to 
leave at 1 because I have no liability insurance here at the church, as you 
told me, because I couldn't do it here. And I have to take these children with 
me home. So if there are children left over at 1 o'clock that are still in my 
class, I can't be responsible for those children, if you're saying we don't have 
liability insurance." And so then she told me they did have liability 
insurance for about 15 minutes after. I mean, she came up with all this. It's 
just unbelievable how she did me. I had a child in my class that came, she 
was there at five minutes of 9 one morning. She fell on the table. She 
somehow got on the table and fell and hit her jaw on the table and cracked 
her bone and that director was in there within five minutes. Because I called 
the parents and said, "Come get her. I think something's wrong. She's 
complaining quite a bit". She said, "You know, this is not covered by 
liability insurance. It's your responsibility if these parents decide to sue or 


they decide to, you know. You have to pay for this". And he was a doctor, 


48 


the father was. They were really upper-class folks, doctors and lawyers, 
who brought their children there. And I knew most of the people. And I had 
grown up with some of the people and gone to school with some of the 
people whose children I was taking care of. So he said, "You know, it's 
absolutely fine. We're going to take care of all this". But I said, "So we 
don't have liability insurance here? Do we have anything that covers the 
teachers whatsoever? Or is it just covering the church?" And there was no 
liability to cover the teachers at all. So if something happened to a child and 
a parent wanted to sue the teacher. So Bill and I were nervous the whole 
time, because they could take everything. And we didn't have people like 
that, as a general rule, back then. But it could happen. It could happen. I 
mean, I had several instances. I took children into the graveyard because we 
didn't have much, places to go there. And we would, you know, take little 
walks around the church grounds and into the graveyard there, and walk 
around in there. And there was a yellow jacket's nest in there. And my 
children got attacked by the yellow jackets. One little boy stepped in it and 
my director didn't want to call the parents. She said, "It's just bee stings". I 
said, "These are three-year-old children who may not have ever been bee 
stung. You call every parent and you give them, if they want to come get 
them, then you give them the right to come pick them up. So we called 
parents and the parents were all really nice and everything was okay. And 
no child had a reaction, but they could have. That anaphylactic stuff is 
dangerous stuff. And there were a lot of things that came up in preschool, 
there's reasons I left, because the parents wanted you to give them medicines 
and stuff. And I said, "No, I can't be responsible for that". And if the 


director wants to do it, I mean, she became the director. She was the one 


49 


who seemed to take it over with the minister from us. And she, as far as I 
know, she's still there. 

PF: Oh, my gosh. 

AD: But she knew that I knew the history. And she was so glad 
when I retired, I'm sure. Twenty-five years is a long time to do that kind of 
thing. And as you get older, it's not fair to the children. 

PF: You did that for 25 years? 

AD: Twenty-five years. And I did my daycare from about 1984 until 
about--Mama died--probably about 1995 or '96, I did the daycare. And I had 
some of the sweetest children and I had parents that would show up at my 
door at 6 or 7. I had already fed their children. "I'm so sorry. We were out 
on the golf course. We completely forgot we were supposed to pick up our 
child." But, you know, they were sweet. And they would overpay you and 
they would give you nice gifts. And I had my children, so my children 
learned that, you know-- We had a little house then. We hadn't added on. 
You know, to me, it was just part of the day. And I was younger. I look 
back on it now and wonder how I got six in the car, maybe eight in the car. 

PF: And they didn't do the seat belts like now. 

AD: They didn't do the seat belts like you do now or car seats. Car 
seats were the thing that--we had to start taking-- I stopped taking field 
trips. 

PF: We went back and forth across the country, I don't know how 
many times, with four kids, and, you know, no seat belts and no air 
conditioning across the desert. 

AD: I would double seat belt them in the back so there would be six 
back there and sometimes two in the front in the seat belt, and the day I had 


eight I was pulling out of the parking lot of the church and a girl was flying 


50 


down the road, down Beaverdam Road. She was a babysitter for somebody 
else and had that child in the backseat of the car, I guess, and she hit me. I 
saw her coming so fast, I could hardly put it in reverse fast enough, and she 
hit my front end. There was eight children in the car. So I called Bill and he 
came and got me and I took us all home, all the eight children. Of course, I 
called all the parents and told them what had happened. And there was a 
policeman there. He switched it. He switched her as the driver of my car 
and me as the driver of her car. It was a mess. So the insurance was hard to 
figure out. Finally, they ended up paying for the damage they did to my car, 
because she was speeding. And they could tell that she was speeding on that 
road. And it was a horrible place to pull out. It was terrible. If there was 
anybody else parked in the lower parking lot of that church, you could 
hardly see around them. And the people coming around Beaverdam Road, 
there was a curve. So that kind of taught me a lesson. That was too many 
children to put in the car. I mean, my liability insurance started at 1 o'clock 
at the car and the house. So if there was an injury, I was covered, but still, it 
was taking an awful chance, it really was. There were days we had snow 
days. It would start snowing at like 11 o'clock. We closed at 1. The parents 
were at the mall and they couldn't get there to pick up their children. And 
the director would say, "Oh, you can't leave until your kids come home". 
And I'm going, you know, "I've got dogs at the house. I can't stay here. | 
can't keep kids here for, I don't know, three or four hours, while it's pouring 
down snow". I'd call Bill and he'd come with chains, pick us up, and take us 
down Kimberly, delivering the children. It was really, it was an experience, 
it really was. But I wouldn't take anything for it and I would have stayed 
longer, if I probably had-- I felt like my health, you know, at 57, after 


you've done it for 25 years, do I really want to stay there, even the four hours 


ol 


a day. And the children deserve better. They deserve younger people. I had 
the energy, but it was tough. It really was tough. And I really did miss the 
children. But I didn't miss the politics of that place. 

PF: It sounds awful. 

AD: But they took me before the Board one time and this was after, 
this was when I had been there, I guess, 20 years, maybe, 21, 22 years. They 
took me before the Board because I had a child in the summer who had 
Down's Syndrome. And my director knew that special needs children, I 
didn't think should be in our facility. It wasn't a locked facility. It wasn't a 
place for children who had special needs, I mean of any kind. I had done 
Cerebral Palsy, I had done twins, I had done lots of other things. But this 
child with Down's Syndrome, in the summer. I knew her mother and she 
had--was actually older than she should have been to be in the class. 

PF: And were they open in the summer? 

AD: Oh, yeah, we had summertimes. I worked at there summers for 
23 years. No air conditioning. And it was 9 to 12, three days a week, 
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. I changed it from Monday, Wednesday, 
Friday. I said, "Huh-uh. Why don't I do Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday so 
I have long weekends". No air conditioning. And parents didn't know it. 
They just assumed the facility was air-conditioned. They dropped them off. 
They had no idea. And it was hot, the basement was cool, and so we had 
popsicles in the afternoon. See, they closed at 12. Our director that took 
over for summer when our other director went to Europe said "We'll do 9 to 
12. It's too hot in this place to keep the kids till 1 o'clock". I had them do 
water play. I had them do anything I could to keep them from getting in that 
building, it was so hot. But--whatever I was talking about. I forgot what it 


was before. But I did work summers. But that was the summer I had the 


52 


girl with the Down's Syndrome. And she hit other children and, to me, 
putting a child like that in time out, they don't understand. And it's not really 
going to help their behavior. It's just going to make me feel bad for putting 
them there, and knowing that they don't understand why I put them there. 
So I went to my director and I said, "She's hit another child and I don't think 
I'm capable of doing this." Because during the year when she was with us, 
there was a shadow person. They had somebody from the County that came 
and helped out. In summer they didn't have funds for that. And my helper 
was 13, I think, in the school. So she wasn't going to help me at all. So she 
just got Madelyn, she would just get children to help so she wouldn't have to 
pay them much, to be helpers. And they'd get a little experience. You 
know, it was okay, I guess. So I told her, I said, "Should I tell the mother 
about this or what should I do?" And she said, "You can talk to Cheryl, but I 
don't think it's a good idea. Just do the best you can until summer school's 
over". And I was not one to do the best I could, usually. I couldn't keep my 
mouth shut. So I told the mother that morning when she brought her. I said, 
"You know, I've had some issues with your child. And she hit another child 
and I just am not capable of putting her in time out, and she doesn't have a 
shadow person this year. And I don't know what you want me to do but", I 
said, "I don't think it's fair to her for her to stay in that class". She went 
straight to the director, told her everything I'd said. And then she went 
straight to the Board and the Board brought me up on charges. 

PF: Charges of what, though? 

AD: Of not being someone who was accepting to children with 
special needs. The little girl had already gotten away from her mother at one 


time in that same facility, because it wasn't a locked facility, and they found 


53 


her up in the area between the graveyard and the field that they have up there 
now, wandering. 

PF: And that had been while she was in her mother's control? 

AD: That was when she was in her mother's control. And I hada 
classroom of 12 children, plus this Down's Syndrome, and a 13-year-old I 
was trying to supervise. So they brought me before the Board and I said, 
"You know, folks, listen. This is not a locked facility and this is not a 
facility that should accept special needs children. We've done it before. I've 
had a child with a broken leg I've tried to manage. I've had the Cerebral 
Palsy child. I've done the best I can. But with these kinds of children", and 
I even probably put it that way, "I can't manage. I feel sorry for her and I 
cannot discipline her". And they said that I had had lots of good 
recommendations and that they said that if there was another issue that they 
would probably have to fire me. I said, "Really? What would I be losing, 
actually?" Because the pay was not that good. | It was more of a volunteer 
position. I had no benefits whatsoever. The pay was, you can imagine, 
minimal. And I had no assistants for 15 years. They finally decided to hire 
assistants so you could go to the bathroom. Because I had a little bitty 
bathroom between two rooms, where the children went. And if I had to go 
to the bathroom, I had to leave the door open to the bathroom. It's horrible. 
And then you get in situations with children, you know, and all that. Can 
you be in a bathroom with another child, by yourself, without somebody to 
help. There was lots going on that changed during that 25 years. There is 
lots that changed. So I decided it was time to go. Because my director was 
never going to be sympathetic and she really-- She knew I knew everything, 
so when I left, she was glad, I'm sure, that I was retiring. 


PF: And now it will be archived in the library. 


54 


AD: But Susan Reinhardt did an article one time, a Mother's Day 
article. She came after I'd been there about 20 years. 

PF: That must have been the one I read. 

AD: And Madelyn wouldn't have anything to do with it. She said, "I 
don't want anybody in here. I don't want anybody, you know". So she said, 
"If you want to talk to her, that's up to you". So I did. I told Susan, you 
know, a lot of things. And she put it in the paper and Paula agreed to talk to 
her, too, because Paula had had a little girl. I'd had both of her children, 
both of Susan's children. Susan was a great person. You know, she did a 
talk to William's class. William needed a grade for something. I said, "Let 
me get Susan. She'll help you in class". And, oh, the teacher just loved it. 
So William got a good grade, in literature I think, for that semester, 
something out there at North Buncombe. But she was a sweet person and 
Madelyn just didn't want our doors open to anybody and everybody. And 
there was an issue with one of the teachers, that I observed, some of the 
abuse. And I went to Madelyn about that. And the girl, I mean, I had 
worked with her and liked her. But Madelyn said, "Well, nobody else is 
going to see this. Don't you say a thing". And I said, "Well, but the child, 
the children are in danger of being injured. I don't want to be a part of that if 
I believe there's something". And next thing I know, that woman is in my 
class as my assistant. That's the way she dealt with stuff. If you complained 
about another teacher, or somebody, then chances are you're going to end up 
with that assistant in your class. The one who was working in real estate, 
that had a phone to her ear constantly, I went to Madelyn and complained 
about her. Next thing I know, she's my assistant. And if you're going to be 
somebody's assistant, shouldn't she be in the room and not off drinking a 


coffee or talking on the phone, or-- And the assistants pretty much learned. 


55 


You know, they worked there, they were making less than I was. You 
know, it's hard work if you're going to work with little children. And that's 
why I left the twos, because with changing diapers. And two-year-olds, they 
don't really want to be there. Two-year-olds don't know why they're having 
to leave their mothers. Three-year-olds can talk back and they appreciate 
what you do for them and there's a mutual respect between, you know, a 
three-year-old an adult. And there's still some training there, with the toilets 
and all that, but three-year-olds were just easier for me. They were just 
physically easier for me and mentally easier. 

[Break. | 

AD: The two-year-olds, by the end of the year, you know, you can 
see a lot of change. But when they start, and Madelyn was pushing younger 
and younger ones into the two-year-olds because the babies-- Don't ever go 
into a facility like that unless you want your eyes wide open. I mean, she 
would leave babies upstairs asleep by themselves, in the area where we had 
a TV and we could take children in there to watch a video sometimes. She 
would leave them in there and they would be screaming, and if you would 
pick them up, "No, no, they have to learn. They have to learn". I don't 
know. We had children who would use the Y across the street and 
sometimes to go over there and play. We'd go over there in the spring 
because the Y said it was okay. We had a teacher who told a little boy, he 
was for years old, maybe going on five, he could go to the bathroom. Well, 
he didn't know there was a bathroom there at the Y and nobody went with 
him. She where did he go? Back across the street, by himself, back to 
Asbury. And when they came back across the street, there he was. She had 
never missed him. I caught several just trying to run into the road, who 


wandered. And I said, "You know, this is just an accident waiting to 


56 


happen". I mean, these are children we are dealing with. So there were a lot 
of things that just--that you-- 

PF: Wow. Now when did you start getting multiple dogs? Did you 
always have multiple dogs? 

AD: I probably always did, because, let's see. I had Charlie, Charlie 
and Coco when Bill and I got married. Coco was my first dog after we got 
married that Mama bought, because she said, "You husband doesn't want a 
dog, so I'm going to buy you one". So she bought that dog. She also bought 
me a dishwasher because he didn't want one of those, after Russell was born. 
"You need a dishwasher. I'm getting you a dishwasher". Bill didn't want 
any appliances because they were trouble and knew they were going to 
break. His mother always hand-washed the dishes, you know. But she got 
me that little dog and soon after we got Coco, then Bill agreed to let me get 
Charlie, because we both worked and we weren't home all day. I don't know 
how those two little dogs survived in that apartment in Durham. So we got 
the little Yorkshire Terrier. So we had a little Yorkshire Terrier and that 
little Chihuahua in the apartment in Durham. And we'd come home and 
things would be chewed up. They chewed up the woodwork. We had to fix 
all that, because we had a deposit on the apartment. So when we moved 
back to Asheville, we had those two. And then I guess Coco-- Charlie got 
old or ran away. Somebody found him, thinking he was a puppy, and 
brought him back. Coco we had to have put to sleep right before that. We 
had Charlie put to sleep. And then I guess we got the Cocker Spaniel for 
Bradley, and then after-- We sort of got more and more. And when I didn't 
work, it was easier for me to have more. I guess that's it. But with Mama 
having 50 Pekingese at one time, you know, I was used to dogs. And I 


helped, I'm sure, with all of that. And like I said, I watched them being 


57 


born, I watched them with they fought, I fed them and all that stuff. So I 
always grew up with animals and we had the skunks, we had the possums, 
we had chickens, rabbits, ducks. I can't think of much we didn't have. And 
at my house we had-- 

PF: Right there in North Asheville, huh? 

AD: Right there. Oh, yeah. We raised guinea pigs in the basement 
for a long time. Tricia and I exchanged Guinea Pigs and we had hamsters. 
And Guinea Pigs have babies right after they have babies. They get 
pregnant again and had more babies. Then flying squirrels that we had from 
just the trees. You know, we had flying squirrels and gray squirrels that we 
raised, just from the trees. Mama bought the skunks from a catalog, 
descented. And those were like cats and they just wander around and use a 
litter box. And the possum that got killed in the front yard, had about six or 
seven babies and they pouch those babies. And we couldn't get any of them 
to live but the one, so we had that possum as a pet for a long time. And we 
never had cats but we always had lots of dogs and birds. Mother liked 
parrots, little parakeets, and I have parrots. Two of those at the house and 
plus the fish. She never had fish but we got us a pond full of fish in the 
backyard. Big koi, you know, and we've had them in there since '97. 
They're huge. We've got six of those and some shubinkins and goldfish, too. 
But the dogs, I didn't have so many when I was working. But I got home at 
1, so it wasn't so bad, or 1:30. So if I had the dogs, I was leaving them at 
about 8:15 and get back home about 1:30 and they were okay with that, I 
guess, most of the time, and had a litter of puppies along about '84 with the 
silky terrier that I bought. So we had one litter of puppies during my time. I 
would never do that again. I know what my mother must have gone 


through. That is something. You just want to get them all to where you 


58 


could place them and then trying to place them with somebody that you felt 
like they would be good with and there were six of them. Then I started 
with the Maltese for a while, couple of those. I don't know. Just habit, I 
guess, hobby or something. Keeps me busy for sure. 

PF: Well, can you think of anything more about North Asheville? 
My goodness. What are the other activities you did, like the Rhododendron 
and all that stuff? I don't have any real society stuff yet. 

AD: Well, and I didn't, as a child, because I didn't do the Girl Scouts, 
but it would have been there at Asbury Church. That's where the North 
Asheville group met, was right there. I think Nora Hall was probably in that 
group. Probably some of the other people that I knew, too, were probably in 
there. And Dr. Watts, I grew up with his little girls. They were twins and he 
had two other children. Dr. Watts lived up on Town Mountain. And Helen 
and Ruth, I met them, I guess early on, but ended up meeting back up with 
them at Jones School. So a lot of the girlfriends that I had early on that 
didn't go to St. Genevieve's, were back at Jones. That may be another reason 
why my mother, because she knew the mothers, so maybe another reason 
she put me in school back at Jones, rather than the nuns, you know, and I 
wanted to be a nun. I don't know, but a lot of my girlfriends that I knew, of 
course, were in the Rhododendron. Quite a few of those with me in that 
presentation. Like I say, Sally was the queen. She was in my high school 
class. And Bam, I believe, was the king. That was her twin brother. I 
believe that year brother and sister were king and queen. 

PF: And what was their name? 

AD: Taylor. His name was Granville Taylor. I think his dad's name 
was that, too. And they lived over near the Grove Park Inn, one of those 


back streets over there off Kimberly. And Becky Reynolds whose father 


59 


was a contractor. We were good friends. And both of the Watts girls were 
in the Rhododendron with me. There were a lot from-- I guess there were 
probably, I bet there were twelve girls, maybe, and that's a lot. Nowadays 
they have them from all over, the girls in the Rhododendron, and they keep 
ita secret. They don't publicize the Rhododendron like they used to because 
at one point the paper took issue with them because the black girls didn't get 
the publicity that the white girls were getting. And the Rhododendron didn't 
allow Jewish people, black people. I mean, it was one of these Southern, 
things like I was telling you about my dad. So in order to get into the 
Rhododendron, you had-- The club didn't allow Jewish people to go, the 
Asheville club. Jewish people, black people, none of that. I mean it was a 
lot of segregation in the fifties and sixties, of course, and that didn't all 
change, really until the seventies. Asheville High was not really integrated 
until after I graduated in '68. We had a few black folks in my class. Some 
of the basketball players. There were two girls that I remember in my 
graduating class, but not that many. And that was one reason why people 
went to private schools, I suppose. Daddy didn't really want us with black 
people at all. So I thought something might be wrong. They were, of 
course, at the house, so I thought "What could possibly be wrong?" I don't 
know. It's something about growing up in the South, I guess, in the deep 
South. In Alabama, I'm sure Daddy's father probably knew people in the Ku 
Klux Klan. But Daddy's father, that's what he staffed with in that candy 
company. There was no air conditioning, it was open air, to make that hot 
candy, stir it in pots. And they would say "nigger done white-eyed", and 
they'd move him out and move in another one? That's what Daddy said. 


PF: What does white-eyed mean? 


60 


AD: Meant they fainted. Their eyes rolled back in their head. And 
they just laid out on the floor. And they'd carry those out and bring in 
others. They had to make the money, to do that job. That's how Daddy's 
father made his money was in that candy company. I mean, the times were 
different and people, you know, they take issue. Because Bill said, some of 
the stuff you might say might get into the wrong hands. Like the Spicer- 
Greene billboard ad thing that's going on now. You know about all that. 

PF: I read about it, yeah. It's how you decide to take it, almost. 

AD: Like you decide--exactly. And history is history. And it's the 
way that folks were then. 

PF: It's out of context, when you look at it later, when you don't know 
times were then. 

AD: And if you didn't really experience anything else, and now all of 
a sudden you've got people that are--you've got all the children that are 
coming into the Alabama schools, the black people, those people were going 
crazy, but I'm not sure why. Because the way of life was changing, they saw 
this as them being able to get an education, them being able to take their 
jobs, them coming into the community not being separate. 

PF: Much like the immigration thing that's going on right now. 

AD: That's going on right now. 

PF: But it's been each nationality, each ethnic group, as they've come 
in they've had to fight that battle, all the way back. Even Irish people that 
look like everybody else. Or white Europeans. 

AD: Exactly. Or women. Still their fighting. And my grandmother, 
being the first woman legislator from the State of Alabama, she was a 
trailblazer there, because she did all that picketing and all that, the women's 


right to vote back then. She couldn't vote. And then she got the right to vote 


61 


and then she got in--she was all about children and trying to change things 
for education. That's how she got elected. But she worked hard and she 
wasn't home. I mean, she was definitely a suffragette that, where you look 
back and "your place is in the home with your children". She wasn't that. 
So she was definitely-- She went to, I think it's Peabody University in 
Nashville. They had a home, they actually moved there so she could go to 
school there. Because a lot of women didn't finish college, they didn't go to 
college. So all along my grandmother was really-- And I don't know that 
much about her background, other than her mother and father were well to 
do. I know that. And I'm sure that may be why she was so much younger 
when she married my grandfather, because maybe they didn't want her to 
marry somebody that wasn't well to do, and that could support her. She 
really supported herself and she did fine. But, of course, she lost her 
husband. I guess he died, like I said, in '28 and she didn't die till '49. That's 
what, 18 years? 

PF: Twenty-one years. 

AD: Twenty-one years. Yeah. So that's how much longer she lived. 
And she did go back and forth to Alabama, I know that, to live in the 
wintertime. She'd go back to Alabama. And live probably in that house on 
Dallas Street up until then. Up until she died. That's been tumed into a 
State historic site and the people that lived there did let us go through there 
years ago in the downstairs area. We got to see the cookhouse out behind 
and the slave area where the slaves lived. It was like going back in time. 
But it was interesting to see that. And then Mama, see, came from Ohio, and 
her father was a dentist. So, you know, she came from a pretty good family, 
too. Although, when she came here with her mother and moved in with her 


grandmother and her mother's sister, then they ran that rooming house there 


62 


on Evelyn Place. It was a room and board, so that's the way her 
grandmother, Mama's grandmother, made her money. 

PF: What number was that? 

AD: It was the one that got torn down there where the Unitarian 
Church is. The only house on the street that's ever been torn down. To 
begin with, when they moved here in--they built that house and it had 
already been built when Mama moved here in '16. So they must have built 
that house a couple of years earlier. And then my grandmother and her 
daughter, Aunt Ruth, tried to run it. And then when--and Aunt Ruth also 
was working for Mr. Seely, I think mostly my grandmother was probably 
running it to keep them going. And it was room and board. So you could 
rent a room for the day, like Thomas Wolfe's mother did. Thomas Wolfe's 
mother rented out rooms, too, to people that were sick. That's how Thomas 
Wolfe got tuberculosis, because she took in that guy that time that had TB, 
and that's where Thomas Wolfe caught it. 

PF: What did she do for Mr. Seely? 

AD: She worked for the homespun shop. 

PF: Oh. 

AD: Yeah, she worked for the homespun shop. 

PF: Do you know anything about that? 

AD: No, not much. We got some fabrics from there. I think she 
helped in the fabric area. She helped with that part of it. She might have 
helped, also-- I'm thinking back now. It seems like Mama told me that she 
might have been like his secretary. She did some book for him, too, maybe, 
Aunt Ruth did. 

PF: Yeah, they took a lot of orders. 


63 


AD: Yeah. And Aunt Ruth was the one that shot herself, you know, 
when her sister took her beau away. So Aunt Ruth, even though she shot 
herself, I guess she was pretty smart, and never married. So here you were. 
My mother was being raised by three women. Her mother and her aunt and 
her grandmother. And she was an only child, my mother, so she would 
never let me forget that, because she would tell me stories about what my 
grandmother-- She slept with my grandmother. What my grandmother 
would do when she came home from dates and stuff. My mother was weird 
but she was weird, I think, because of her upbringing, I guess. She said boys 
tied her to a tree one time and she told me all these weird-- I don't know if it 
was all true, but she was abused, I guess, at some point, by somebody, 
especially her mother, at least in the bed. Do things to my mother and my 
mother said things you probably wouldn't even want to know about. So I 
guess-- And Mama didn't marry until she was 21. Daddy was 24 when they 
got married. So Daddy was a quiet, shy, reserved person and my mother 
was this outgoing crazy table dancer, you know. Daddy was attracted to her, 
I'm sure because she was worldly. My [paternal] grandmother didn't like her 
at all. But finally she did after Mama drove her around and was her servant, 
basically. I don't think she liked Mama's background. 

PF: And your mother didn't like any of her sons-in-law. 

AD: Oh, and that may be why. Well, she was one to think that you 
ought to always marry within your station or above your station. 

PF: Was that why she didn't like Bill? And he's the nicest guy. 

AD: That's why she didn't like any of them. Because he came from a 
mill town and his mother worked and I guess she found out eventually, she 
found out his father had committed suicide. She may have known that 


before I did. But they, whenever I would date anybody, they would find out 


64 


where they lived, what they did. Daddy had a shotgun on the front lawn one 
day, chasing off a boy. And he lived right over there off, down there where 
the--oh, what is that place--the toy shop, that street that runs by the 
Presbyterian Church. Right there. He lived right off that street right there, 
and she didn't like him, but he was a little bit older than I was and he was a 
good friend of my brother's and she was afraid that he was doing things that 
he shouldn't have been doing. And he came to the house to pick me up or 
see me or something one day. And Daddy picked up the shotgun and said, 
"Boy, you go home and you don't come back here". But he used to let me go 
to school with him. He had an open-air Jeep with no top on it. He'd pick me 
up and pick Bill up, and he dropped me off at David Millard and then he 
dropped Bill of when they went to school. Because they were in the same 
grade. So I guess I got to know Brit a little bit that way and I, you know, 
your brother's friends, you know. And so he started liking me. And I 
thought, well, you know, why not? I'll go out with him every now and then. 
And I guess Mama and Daddy figured that wasn't such a, you know, I was 
15. And, you know, 15, you and I talked about, is a dangerous age. But, 
yeah, Daddy was out there with a shotgun. Daddy was a character. He was 
really a character. He had certain things, he wouldn't eat tomatoes. That 
was a Southern thing. He wouldn't eat any tomatoes. He wouldn't eat any 
pork. He said pigs were not food that you should eat. Mama had a hard 
time, I'm sure, once the maids left. And his steak, he had to have it shoe 
leather. So if we were going to eat steak--of course, Mama wasn't 
overcooking anything, because she just wanted somebody to complain so 
she would--it was so funny and dinnertime was the worst. So you didn't 
open your mouth at dinnertime. And my brother loved it, so he would 


always open his mouth. And my oldest sister did. And there were fights at 


65 


the dinner table, you know, all the time. But now Bill finally hit her one 
day. He finally hit my mother. And it wasn't good, but she kept pushing 
him and she should have known, you know. He's a grown man now, you 
can't--and he tried to move back in with them when he came back from 
Vietnam. She was fond to tell him you can't come in at this time, you're 
going to have to work, she was in his face all the time. They should have 
never let him move back in there. That would have been the best thing to 
do. But they, his whole life, they gave him a car, gave him money, gave him 
what he wants. And then, all of a sudden, say no? I mean, you know. So he 
was on his own and it wasn't easy for him, because he didn't have an 
education. And he wasn't going to get an education. Blanton's is where they 
tried to send him and he couldn't do it there either. I don't know what was 
wrong. He did have roseola as a child. And he had a high fever and my 
mother and then my father, every time he would take him out he fell on his 
head. My mother blamed it on Daddy. But he said he wasn't quite right 
because he had that high fever and then he had that, the falls, where he hit 
his head several times. I don't know. But we were awfully close. If I hadn't 
had Bill, you know, growing up as a child, because we were just like this. 
We just had each other. And Mama would send us up to take a nap every 
day when you normally don't do that when you're five and six. And so Bill 
and I slept in the same room, and I would just tell him stories until he fell 
asleep. Then he would go to sleep and I'd still be talking. And then the next 
day he'd say, "You going to tell me more about Mr. Osborn", because that 
was the character I made up, and tell the long stories to him and he'd just go 
to sleep. I didn't read him stories because I couldn't read. And he was older 


than I was, but he didn't ever want to read. He never did have a book that I 


66 


can remember. That's part of his problem, that he never liked to read. Never 
did really like books. Growing up is tough for anybody, I suppose. 

PF: Well, you had an interesting life, I'll give you that. 

AD: Yeah. I should bring you that book over sometime. My great 
uncle, who would have been my grandfather's brother, fought in the Civil 
War. He wrote a book called War Boy, and it sort of gives a lot of family 
history. For Christmas last year, I guess it was, he found me a first edition 
of War Boy. There weren't many out there. And he had to pay pretty much 
for it, but I think we may have one. I can bring you the first edition, but 
Bill's not really allowing me to touch it. But there is one that we Xeroxed 
and I may be able to put my hands on that. 

PF: And who is the author of it? What was the name? 

AD: Well, he would have been a Wilkins. And there were eight 
children, I think, in the family. He would have been one of the oldest. 
Daddy's father was one of the youngest. He didn't go to the Civil War. But 
you can imagine, if he fought in the Civil War in 1864, he must have been 
born-- And I think he went at 15, maybe, into the war. So it really is an 
interesting book. I'll try to find it. I'll see if Bill can find it. We had a, like I 
said, we Xeroxed it. It had Confederate money in the back of it that he had, 
I guess we had put there, somebody had put there. But Mama sold that years 
ago. She took it out of the back of the book and sold it. And my 
grandmother's pearl-handled pistol that she carried on that horse to that one- 
room schoolhouse, my nephew has that, my sister's son has that, the pearl- 
handled pistol. So it still exists. It was to go to my brother, but when that 
time came, my sister said, can I buy that from you. Bill didn't have any 
money much then, and she just--whatever Bill wanted, then she just, 


whatever was supposed to be his, that she would just buy it from him. We 


67 


had a beautiful domed clock that they had buried in the backyard during the 
Civil War. It came over on the boat from France. It was one of those clocks 
that they use mercury on to make the gold on it. You know, it was so 
poisonous that people died from putting on the gilt, you probably know 
about that. The dome was glass and blown and probably about this big. 
Well, when the Yankees were coming through, the mother of the house, 
whoever that would have been, that would have been maybe my 
grandfather's mother, they dug a big hole in the backyard and anything that 
they wanted to save they put in this hole so the Yankees wouldn't take it. 
Because if they came and took your house, then they would take your stuff, 
too, of course. So it was kind of like the Nazis, I guess. So they buried that 
clock and that clock ended up being dug back up after the war and saved. 
And it was in my grandmother's house. And then it went from my 
grandmother's house to Daddy's house and sat on the mantlepiece in North 
Asheville for years. It had to be hand wound. You had to take the globe off 
and it had the handle under it. And there was the trouble with the big globe 
and Mama had to stand up on a stool and--didn't want to make it. So when it 
was time for Bill to get the clock, my brother, my sister bought it from him. 
Said, "No, I'm going to give you $50 or whatever. She bought it for 
probably nothing. And Bill agreed to it because he needed the money. She 
took it to somebody in Greenville who electrified it, because she didn't ever 
want to wind it. 

PF: I would think it would be impossible to do it. 

AD: No, she has electrified that clock. And my husband Bill, he just 
about died. He said, "I cannot believe that". But my mother's antiques, she 
had so much stuff. She had coin silver. She sold all of that years ago when 


she thought she wanted money when silver went way up way back when. 


68 


All the coin silver went. She sold Daddy's saxophone that was absolutely 
gorgeous. Daddy used to play the saxophone. And the whole family was 
musical. I told you that my Uncle Joseph, he was the opera singer. And 
Daddy could sing. Oh, my father had a beautiful voice. But his father said, 
"Boy, we can't have performers in this family until somebody makes money, 
so you cannot do music". So Daddy, he did sing in a couple of things in 
college. I think The Pinafore, he was in that. Taught me some of the lyrics 
from that. But Daddy loved to sing and had that beautiful voice. And then 
Joseph and Marie were the ones, they ended up teaching at the university of 
somewhere. He ended up being a music teacher after he did all of the 
touring with the opera groups. And she played the concert pianist, piano. 
And so they ended up settling--I can't remember. I don't think it was Ohio. 
See, my own husband can remember a lot of these details much better than I 
can. He knows my family better than I do, because he retains and I don't. I 
don't retain very well. But that clock is now in Ruth's house, on Ruth's 
mantle, electrified. But probably you'll hear about Tommy Rizzuto in some 
of this [interviews], too, won't you? 

PF: I don't know. 

AD: Have you ever heard about Tommy Rizzuto? 

PF: Did he have an antiques place down on-- 

AD: On Beaverdam. 

PF: Oh. 

AD: He was arestorer. He could take any piece of furniture, copy it 
or fix it to make it look-- We had a wash stand that came from Alabama 
with a marble top on it. And the wash stand was open underneath. And 
Mama wanted it to have drawers. And I remember I used to go out with 


Mama to Tommy Rizzuto's out in Beaverdam Road. And I would have to sit 


69 


there, as a little girl, while she went through his stuff and told him what she 
wanted to do, maybe for a couple of hours. And he had a boy who wasn't 
right. I guess he had brain injury from birth. I can't remember his name. 
But they went to the Asbury Church, too. And he was a little bit scary for 
me. That may be what it all goes back to, to people with special needs. I 
don't know. But I was always afraid of him and he would like to come 
around and try to talk to me and | couldn't understand anything he said, 
because he couldn't really speak right and he kind of couldn't walk right. 
And so while Mama was off doing that, I was kind of left alone with this 
guy. And he was older than I was, too. And so I was afraid to go with her. 
Tommy Rizzuto could do anything that you asked him. That was Mr. Oats. 
I'm sorry. Tommy Rizzuto was downtown. He could, too. He was an 
antiques dealer. 

PF: Yes. When we came here, there was his name on a glass pane, 
right down on Biltmore near Blue Spiral. 

AD: Wright down Mr. Oats, because you may eventually find out 
some things about Mr. Oats. 

PF: Was it O-a-t-s? 

AD: I guess it was O-a-t-s. And he lived down Beaverdam, down 
there, and he had a big shop down there and could do anything with 
furniture. Mrs. Oats went to the Presbyterian Church and recently died, 
maybe five years ago. And I think her son died shortly before she did. She 
kept him and took care of him all of his life. And she was a really sweet 
person, too. But I didn't get to see her much, because Mama didn't let me go 
in the house. I had to stay in the yard. Mr. Rizzuto was the one that Mama, 
where Mama would go downtown and deal with. And he would get antiques 


from all over the place. So he had jewelry and stuff, too. My first ring came 


70 


from them, I think. She found a little set in a jewelry junk box and took it 
and had somebody uptown make a wonderful ring for me. But Mr. Rizzuto, 
who took over his place? 

PF: Mr. Bunn? 

AD: Yes! 

PF: Okay. Yeah. Yeah. 

AD: That's where all the antique stuff goes back to, Mr. Bunn. Mr. 
Bunn had took over Tommy Rizzuto's stuff, I guess when he died. And Mr. 
Rizzuto was actually from Italy. So he had broken English, too. He used 
that to his advantage. So if she was trying to deal with him, he pretended he 
didn't understand a lot of times. 

PF: They do that even in Italy. We lived there for five years and they 
understand what they want to understand. 

AD: It was sort of aruse. Oh, they know, yeah. But Mama got lots 
of stuff from Tommy Rizzuto. If she got it there and it was broken down, 
she'd take it to Mr. Oats and Mr. Oats would fix it. So if Mama had 
problems with any-- She'd go up in Tennessee, during the Depression, and 
places like that. And she would ask people, she would go and knock on their 
door and ask people "Do you have anything you want to sell?" Because she 
had money. "You want to buy our table? Our dining room table?" And she 
would buy furniture out from under people. That's all they had. Maybe an 
old cherry table. And Mr. Oats would refinish it, or it would be in good 
enough shape that she would use it. And I don't think--she didn't really deal 
with it as far as selling it later on. It's just stuff that she wanted. So most of 
the stuff that she wanted, I think the bed that we still have, that I slept in in 
North Asheville, it's a poster bed, a canopy bed, and it's wormy chestnut, 


maybe was from Mrs. Gudger up the street. The person that had the seven- 


71 


gable house. And when she got ready to change out her furniture, then 
Mama got that bed from her. So she'd go in other people's houses and that 
was her whole thing, if you want to sell this I'll buy it. She took Mrs. 
Gudger's old carpet. I do remember that. She said, "Well, nothing's ever 
been on this carpet. I'm just going to use it". She took the rolls of carpet 
and she put it in the hall. Because we had dogs and, you know, you had to 
get rid of your carpet, eventually it was pretty bad. So she would put down 
their carpet, whatever. 

PF: Did you know, by any chance, in that area where you grew up 
there, John Young? 

AD: Yeah. 

PF: Ralph Young was his brother. 

AD: Yeah. His mother had that house there that he ended up moving 
into? 

PF: Yeah. And he died, oh, I want to say, ten years ago, if that. And 
he was the grandfather of-- Well, his daughter Kim was a stepdaughter but 
for all intents and purposes, he was their father, and she married my 
youngest son. So her two boys, her two older boys, are my grandsons that I 
have here in Asheville. So he was their grandfather and he was wonderful. I 
mean, it was a loss to our whole family when he died. 

AD: Oh, gosh. This is John Young? 

PF: Yeah. 

AD: Wow. Well, see, I didn't know him personally. I think I knew 
of him. A lot of people in Asheville knew of him. Yeah. 

PF: Yeah, he was just such a great person. 

AD: Didn't he take care of his mother then for a long time, or did he 


just move into her house? 


72 


PF: Oh, no. He bought that house later, much later. 

AD: Really? 

PF: Yeah. From somebody else and then they redid it. I mean, they 
did a beautiful job of it and then they flipped it. They often did that. They 
would buy a house and then fix it all up. 

AD: Yeah, I knew he did. Because I think he did another one or two 
on that street. 

PF: It may be. It seems to me I remember him--I mean, they lived in 
that house when they came into our family. And then they bought a house, 
well they moved over to the new section over here. 

AD: Okay. I lost track of him. 

PF: It was behind John Carroll's house, you know, where you turn. 

AD: Right. 

PF: They were on that comer where there's a lot of property and then 
there's a house. Or it might have been the one beyond that. But it was one 
of those nice houses along there. And then they bought a house out in that 
Hawk's Landing. 

AD: Oh, yeah. 

PF: That somebody had, he was always doing the deal thing. And 
somebody had-- 

AD: Started it. 

PF: --started it and then he bought it. 

AD: Iremember. We rode by to see that house. 

PF: I think there was a divorce or something. So he bought it and 
finished it how they liked it. I mean, they did it how they wanted it. And 
she still lives there. She has remarried, I don't know, five, six years ago, I 


guess. She didn't really intend to. 


73 


AD: [Laughing. ] 

PF: But anyway, I really like her, as well, Carolyn. But she grew up 
on the west side, she grew up in West Asheville. 

AD: Well, you'll probably find a lot of people tied to a lot of different 
people, when you do all this. 

PF: I always ask people if they knew him. Paul Rifkin knew him 
fairly well. 

AD: I think a lot of people knew John Young. And Bill knows a lot 
of people. from the bank. You know, people you wouldn't otherwise think 
you would, you know, from all the loans and stuff that people, you know, 
just coming in there. Are there any other questions? 

PF: Well, I think we pretty well covered it. And you really have 
some doozies there. This is the most interesting one that-- 

AD: Well, like I say, you could probably talk to several people that 
grew up right around in there and you'll find some of the same stories. I 
mean, and it's ashame. It's a shame. 

[First recording ended. Began again. ] 

PF: You mentioned a big brick house on Wembley. 

AD: Right on Wembley. As you come up Wembley, it's, I guess it's 
after, you know, there's a little cut-through street right there that goes to the 
golf course [Fairway?]. And then it's the second house up on the right. Big 
brick house, two stories, looks like the houses at Enka. And they built that 
there for the executives to stay over, whenever they came to Asheville to 
visit, sort of, you know, right there at the lake. I guess it was a great place 
for them to come and visit and a nice area. And they probably had some of 
those also in Enka. I imagine they built a couple of those in Enka, also. 


Because I know the executives lived in big homes over there that looked like 


74 


that. But this particular one was for dignitaries that came from out of town. 
And that's the house the Buckinghams ended up living in. They came and 
moved in over there when Susan was in high school and lived in that house. 
And my brother actually dated Susan, which was, believe me, Mr. 
Buckingham was not happy about. But Susan got into the Rhododendron. 
Daddy wanted to get her in because we were such good friends. She went to 
St. Genevieve's and I was at Lee Edwards. And she and my brother started 
dating and we were close friends so I guess she was over there a lot and she 
met Bill and, I guess, I don't know, I guess she liked him for a little while, 
until the dads kind of stepped in. My father and her father stepped in. 

PF: Now what did Mr. Buckingham do? 

AF: He was, I guess you'd say independently wealthy. He had 
apartment houses all over Kenilworth, properties. And I don't know, you 
know, as children you don't really know. But I think his family had a lot of 
money and they moved to Asheville at some point. They weren't Asheville 
natives, and he bought up apartment houses all in Kenilworth. Fixed them 
up and rented those out, several. And the Orrs did the same thing. Mr. Orr 
was an attorney in town and Meredith Orr was a good friend of mine and he 
had apartments all over, on Kimberly and all over there. Meredith grew up 
over that way. She didn't grow up actually in right where I did but right 
there at the Grove Park Inn. So Susan's family lived in that house and as far 
as I know, up until the last five years, her mother passed away I think in the 
last five years, but I haven't found the obituary and I need to really look for 
that. They were happy there. Mrs. Buckingham did have cancer, breast 
cancer, and then I think she had throat cancer, also, and I think that's what 
she passed away from. Then they had one other daughter, Sarah, that was 


older than Susan. But Susan and I were so close and she ended up marrying 


75 


an airline pilot. And you know how airline pilots are not home much and 
tend to have maybe other relationships, and that's what happened with her. 
She had two children and then she found out about that. And she was big 
into redoing homes, too. And she ended up living, I've forgotten where. I've 
lost touch with Susan completely, but she redid an old Colonial house 
somewhere than then they divorced and I think she lost that house and I 
don't know where she's ended up. I think she was sad because that happened 
and that's why we lost touch. She didn't know how to react. 

PF: Yeah. I've had that experience. 

AD: But when her dad died, I saw her. That's the last time I saw her 
because they had a reception at the house and I came and I saw her there. 
And she had somebody else with her, you know, another man. I don't know 
if they ever married. We caught up a little bit then. But that was, oh, 20 
years ago, I think. Her mother lived beyond, even with all the medical 
issues she had. I suspect Sarah might have moved back in with her. Maybe 
her daughter moved in and helped with her. Yeah, it's amazing, that house 
right there. I don't know if people know that. And it's since been taken over 
by somebody who looks like they're doing amazing things with that house. 

If you drive by there. They fixed up the yard. And I don't know if they've 
done stuff--the Buckinghams did a little bit inside. I can't think of much 


else. I probably can, but-- 


END OF INTERVIEW 


76 


