August  4,  193V. 
Mr..  Irene Lake, 
Iianist, 
1847 Pearl- et., 
Jacicsonville,  Florida. 
Rose  Lhephord,  writer. 

MRS.  IN LAKi, 

yrs.  Lake had  boon  recording en the  piano  some  old 

Plattation songs -  rowing songs,  negro  spirituals,  lullaby., 

work songs. 

The  ease with which  she ° aught  the  melody 

from the  rendition by  an  eighty-five year-old lady,  singing 

from a ohildhOod memory  of the glamorous Florida  in  the  days 

just  preceding the Y4kr  bltwaon the  States -  the latter 1814's, 

to  be  exact;  the  quick ear which caught  the  Atria as  the 

craoked  voice  strived  to  reach the high notos  and  flattened 

on the lower ones;  the nimble  fingers  ruoing up and  down in 

deft  rune  to  enliven  the  original  negro  interpolations;  the 

right  hand markin4 the notes  an the  rUled  moore  paper,  as 

the  left  softly  struck the  keys to aoufirm  the tune --

all  brought  an exolamation of " Marvelous!"  from those  in  the 

room,  who  bad Leen attracted by  the  unusual  prooeeding. 

Mrs.  Lake  is  a woman  of  mall stature,  probably  five 

feet  tall,  fifty-two years  of  age.  Her blond  hair,  now mostly 

gray,  w 4..24  parted  in  the  miAdlo  44.ud  waved  softly  over  tho  ears 

to  a small  knot  low  on the  week in the bauk.  Her  blue  oyes, 

set  wide  apaist,  below a wide level  forehead,  lighted with 

interest  arid  enthusiasm aF14  9he wcreswiftly,  oompleting the 

four scings  is the rough  in  the  short  space of  two  house. 

;ho  wall  dressed  eomArtably - the da4„. was  quite  hot - 

in an inexpeesive  voile dress,  with blue,  her  favorite  color 

predominating. .  pale  blue oil  lain parasol  leaned against 

26044 

Uri.  Irene  Lake,  Pianist 

2. 

the  piano.  Rain or whine  wha  earries 4 parasol -  oven her 

most  intimate  friends  in  Jaeksonville  have never seen her 

wearing a hat. 

"How  to  you do  it?"  she was asked. 

"Well,  I suppose  it  is  a talent  I inherited  from my 

merther, who was a very  fine  musieian. 

he  was born in 

nthens,  leorgia,  in 14440. 

"Her father wt  lib*  Heinrich von der Lieth, 

lerman, 

whose  father  was  tailor  to  the :Aperer of Germany,  not 

Xaiser Wilhelm,  but  his father.  One  of his  duties was  to 

embroider the  royal  orest  and  coat- of-arms  on the  iimperor's 

olothing,  48 well  as all  household linen.  He wma  a net VI 

o.  Hanover,  Germany. 

"My  grandmother,  his wife,  claw*  from Bolivia  Diepmult, 

Germany..  where  she was born in 1804. 

"Grandfather  fled ';: ermany  booeuse  he  did not  approve 

the  first 

of the  oompulsory  military  training instituted.  by/Kaiser 

He landed in Charleston,  3outh  Carolina,  after a 

thirty days'  trip in orossiw; the  ocean. 

There he met my 

grandmother,  they  were  married,  and oame dirge% to  the 

nthene,  loorgia  eaution. 

"Hy  mother 10i44  born  there  in  IOLA -  she was  just  a 

smell  girl  durirw the iii‘r  between  he :Autos 

"My  father was  James .lired  rant , whose =easter' 

Game  to  ialerioan  on  the  fmmous  yeyflower. 

"One  of his most  famous  relatives was  Josiah Bartlett, 

a signer  of the DeoluALtion of  Independence.  I have  a very 

old  book with  a reproduction of the  lAsolaration  of Independenee 

and  Josiah  Barlbett's  name  is  very  prominently written thereon. 

lire.  Irene Lake - 

anist 

3. 

"Leonard  Grunt,  my  father's paternal  unolo,  !;*),VO 

Grant's  Park to -tlanta,  new 

beautiful  landmark of  the 

leorgia uity. 

"I went  to  the  publio  yahoo's  in _, thens,  and  then 

attended  the  IMMO  priv.ito  euhool  for  girls in .Ahenc that 

my  mother had attended  in hr young girlhood. 

"The  sollool  was  in oharge  f Ni es  Caine  oenowski, 

Ruesian lady  of eduoation, (suitor*  and  refinement. 

"By  the  way,  tfiss .: osnowski's ni4oa m4,rried  Tharlee 

Horty,  famous :or  hls  experiments  in the  in.  and  turpentine 

industry,  and  his  divoovory  oi  the  grouses  of oonverting 

surub slaeh pine  into  paper used  oommeroially in r-Iyer 

bag manufauture and also  manor containers,  and other  byproduote 

of the  pulp paper industry. 

'I  took  the regular grades  through Mks* 8osnowski's, 

also  studied musiu  t ore.  There was an eirleoially  fine  mumio 

department  in oonneotion with the  eohool. 

"When  I'graduated,  she  thouRht  I possessed unusual  talent 

as  a pianist and  seoured  ior  me  a year's  scholarship in the 

Alioago  Llislual  College. 

"1  had  wonderful  trainin  there,  and after  ITraduated 

ent baok to . thens,  then a your  or  Co letter,  I went  to 

Boston und  enrolled  in  the  aelton kianeforte  -chool,  from 

whioh  I also  graduated. 

"My  studios  in  tho  two  northern cities  brought me  into 

oontaot h.th meaty  famous Eu41(310416.  I knew  Josef Hoffmann 

personally,  and was  influenced  a ,rat deal  by his  kindiy 

Mrs.  Irene  Lake,  Pianist 

4. 

interest &aid  aodvioe. 

"'trange to  say,  in Alioago,  i Was  thrown more with 

the  thoutrioal  element,  rathor  than musioians.  Howover, 

ll  tho  largo theaters  had  famous orohestrars,  and  their 

olaosioal  renditions ond  masioal  adaptations to the  tempo 

of the  play, tore liko  hish  olass oono.srts  themsolves. 

"I  met  Joseph  Jefferson,  fa,mouii  interpretor 

Then  thore was  Aohard ?malefic&ld, .tose  Ooghlau 

and  flf)r  brother,  ,liories,  Louis .:- -orrison,  renowned  A:or  his 

portrayal  of I ephistopheles  in  1Paust. 

"In Boston  met "axine  aliott,  a most beautiful 

woman, ...nd  Z1  aotrese  of no  rtiom.D.  tolent.  There I heart 

YaW  in conoort. 'Jhe  posseesed.  a marvelous 

voioe  of great  flexibility and wide range -  from  below 

middle ' C'  to almost  on  ootove  above  high ' C'. 

"It  WaS  a reat  4s.dvanti4ge  oulturol,  I suppose,  to  most 

thoo.  fatuous  !-,00 -01e,  but %%Ion you „a.°  a girl ,,. ou do not  think 

of  thee thiroza  so  muoh. 

"In Boston we woo reguirod  to  attond notod  recitals 

to  note eapeoially  the  manner  and  tooluiiquo  of  exports. 

Then we would -,..11/4  oonoorts at  tho  sohools,  for whioh 

invitutiono were  sent  to  o.  solautud  f,sw,  ki.xid  thus  WO 1110A, 

,juired  polish,  poise, .oid , ho +lase  u.Countoot of pro:rot:atonal 

musicians. 

remorob, r one  thins  yin distinctly in those reoitals. 

Tko  trtiaja,te wore not &allowed  in  the  owort hall  before 

Mrs.  Irene Lake :amnia% 

01 

our proper appearanoe on  he  program,  Wo wore  required 

to  romain in an upper,  somewhat  remote  room,  so  that  we 

would  n . t be ' jittery'  or  unnerved  by  the  possible errors 

or misinterpretations  of  tk.,  scores  by  ono preuoling 

Thu o whon  it  oame time  for oaoh one  to  porform,  tho  pupil 

was oolm,  eolloctod,  ond  48  fresh  4P  if  just  opening the 

program.  I practiced six house  a day  at  Faelton School. 

"I  came to  Jaoksonvillo  in eoptimber,  1906.  It  seems 

a long time  ago,  and it  SOOMA muuh longor when  I look bauk 

upon my musical  career,  whiuh etartod when i was  so  small 

I had  to  be  lifted upon the  piano  stool. 

"ny  mother was vor5, musical,  anJ  also  possessed  a 

beautiful  contralto  voice.  ry  father also  poosessed sow 

ability  as  u musician,  my  two  sisters  were  oduoutod  in music, 

so  vo  lived  in rothor a musioal  atmosphare  always.  U y sisters, 

howovor,  did not  kw', up  their music,  but  took business  oourees 

and  lator married,  an  livin6  in  otlatta an"  tho  other,  on the 

old  homo  place  near - thong. 

"Shortly  oiler coming to  JaocionviLlo,  I mot my  husband., 

who  is  a brother of Forrost 

one  of  the moot  famous  uit-

tens  of  tho  city  of  2,anford,  Florida,  i whioh ho  W44  1q4or  for 

fourteen conseoutive  terms.  Ea is  load now,  oftar a rather 

stormy  career io  his latter  days. 

husband  one  I are  di-

vorood,  and  I divide  my  time  teotoon my  two  children,  4  son 

in  Jaakeolivilla  azid 4 daughtor, who ha o  dancing school  in 

Most  Palen  Boadh,  Florida. 

Mrs.  Irene  Lake,  l'ianist 

6. 

"1  have taught  music  at difforent times,  playod  in 

oonuerts,  both amateur and  professional,  and  carnnd  quite 

a reputation no an auoom,Innist. 

"I  nev)r  played  in orchestras,  however,  u.  til  after I 

°am('  to  Jacksonville. 

"Whon radio  assumed  its  oarly  proportions as  a dystem 

of distributing mualo  to  tho  pablio,  I was thrilled by  its 

possibilities,  and  eagerly aosioted  in .broadouste When  the 

first  little  stltion vne  established in nn old  shed down 

blhind  tha  Florida Timas-Union luilding on t,ent Alums  trust. 

"When WJAX,  tho munioipal broaduasting stution,was 

opened  in  Jacksonvillo  vith 

progi-am which lasted until 

throe  eulook tho  nst  m rning a.rter Thanksgiving Dui  in 

1926,  I wi..s  acoompunist  on  soveral  of  th.1  numbers,  and  contin-

ued  .or  my  aars,  plkiving  tha  actor°  for  Henry  Cornely 

and his  a.,3oosilates,  Pros.  LePaige,  and many  others. 

"I  was  glad  to  soo  the : ed.eral  uaio  Projeet  established 

in 1936.  I have  ben ausooiatod rith  tho  pftgram  in £1orida 

from  tho  ingi  ring,  alta;06 working in  some  oapauity,  and 

us  id.00mnanist  in uonu:rts  for both  publiu  and  orivats 

entertainmerts,  the  2odoral  Theatro,  and  otkors.  It hum 

boon  the  ealavation  for  old musioians,  and  an oasis  in the 

lnnd  of  Yrromise  er  tho  .4:cuner  element who  needed  its  oo-

ordin,Lted  training,  and  I am  in hopes  that  some way  mu4 - os 

opened  for  its  oontinuation. 

"I  think Previdont Aoosevelt's  administration vill go 

down  in  history  as  thn  greatoot  endeavor  in humanitnrianism 

evier  promulgated,  and  i ac-.  heartily  in  As.vor  of  it.  If he 

is  able,  or oan  be  prevailed  upon  to - acoopt  a third  term, 

1 am a11  for  it!" 

