1. Date and time of in terview 4/3. - 4/5 - 4/5 - Evenings 2, afternoon 1.

2. Place of in terview

4820 South Elizabeth Street, homect in formant

3. Name and address of in formant Mrs. Betty Piontkowsky

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant.

Molly Yampolsky

.5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

None

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc. Two story wooden house, stove

heat, four families living in sub-divided rooms, 10 rooms in all.

Betty and family have 3 rooms in the back first fl. reached by walking through a narrow side passage unpaved, half covered by rotten broken board lengths. Very clean inside. Shares toilet with front family. No bath tub. Probably one family on her block possesses bath. Very rundown frame cottages and flats on the block.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing the proper heading and the number ta which the material refers.)

W36.1 1'

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

CHICAGO FOUST uFF

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

1339 South Troy Street

DATE

April 5, 1939

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

Betty Piontkowski

1. Ancestry

American born-Polish parentage

2. Place and date of birth 24 years old - 5208 S. Hermitage -Back of yards.

3. Family Harried 6 years - one child 5 - expecting another in May- husband

left her twice, for months each time, but is now at home.

4. Places lived in, with dates

Back of the yards all her life.

5. Education, with dates

Hamlin Grammar School to 8th grade. Enjoyed dramatics in shhool.

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates Has been stockyards worker, off

and on, and in various departments, since she was 13 years old.

7. Special skills and interests

None discoverable, so far.

8. Community and religious activities- Roman Catholic, attends church irregularly,

observes all hol*lays and rites and fasts, etc. Her husband who is
Irish, is wholly irreligious. There are bitter quarrels on that account.

9. Description of in formant Haggard as a result of sick pregnancy, but rather appealing in spite of being extremely hard and generally suspicious minded. Can speak Polish well but uses English at home. Betty hasn't been outside the yards district for 3 years and doesn'tcare to go.

10. Other Points gained in in terview

Uses obscene language continuously without any inhibitions whatsoever or any offensiveness realized or in tended.

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedit0d)

CHICAGO FOLKS TUFF

FOLKLORE

"7."- •

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUTJECT

1339 South Troy Street

April 5, 1939

NAME OF INFORMANT

Betty Fiontkowsky

Kid, I always worked at Armour's. Some of them places in the

yards ain'tworth as--t. My sister Anna works in one of them two by

four joints some cheap Jew owns. Armour's aint so bad, and some departments like the ore I work in, they call it the lard refinery, it's pretty

clean there. What I do is operate one of these big a utobatic carton

machines. These machines are up on a high platform and after I feed the

empty carton and wrapper into a machine it comes out on a belt and the carton's

packed with lard, and goes down on the floor by belt to the check girls. My

machine is fixed for a rate of sixty cartons a minute. We used to stitch the

boxes but now there's a great big machine and all them boxes are glued automatically. Say, lots Of girls are out on account of that machine doing their

work.

They got a new rule now. They won'ttake no women over thirty. You got

to go through a doctor's examination if they lay you off more than sixty days *

every time, even if you're an old timer. There was a woman in our department *

she was a big, fat woman. We used to call her Mama. She was laid off once

and when she came back they wouldn'ttake her. Miss McCann, she's in charge

of hiring all the women, she come out with her ass stuck out and she said,

FORM D

Extra Comment

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

FOLICLORE

CHI CAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

1339 South Troy Street

April 5, 1939

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT Betty Piontkawsky

Doesn'twant her name used, nor her address. Very fearful that her chance to get back to work will be jeopardized in same way. Hasn'ttold too much because she's not yet accepted interviewer's visits as wholly without suspicious motives.

'Mama, don't you know it's for your own sake we can'ttake you back.

'Why you might have a heart attack at work and then the company would be

held responsible. You shouldn't be working at this any more.

Say, kid, you shoulda heard Mama. She was so madt She started

yelling and hollering about haw she was good enough to work there 4

months ago and haw she was only 15 pounds heavier than when they laid

her off last. She was a 215 pounder, but there was nothing wrong with

her. She was stronger than most of us, like an ox. She didn'thave no

weak heart. But old piss-in-the-face McCann just didn'twant her anymore

and she wouldn'ttake her back. Mama called her every name she knew in

Polish, before she went.

I remember when they had them fights in the yards over the Unions.

Same of the men got stabbed. -Jesus, they had cops all over the place

for along time. It was kind of exciting. But I didn'tknow what it was

all about anyhow. Didn'tcare to know, either.

I worked in the refinery this last time until I was more than five

months gone with what I got. It didn't show so much then. If they knew

I was that way they wouldn't let me go to work. I got a bad eye lately

FORM 0 - page- a -

CHICAGO FOLKSrurio

too, my luck, My machine needs good eyes else I could get a

hand mashed easy. It's a good thing we get 15 minutes morning

and afternoon relief. We have half hour lunch. One minute late

and we get dooked half an hour.