Marsh 29.  1939. 
Mrs.  xoba L. Ball 
(Margaret Pearson) 
544 Bellwood Avenue, 
Jacksonville, Florida. 
Rose Shepherd, Writer. 

S.  JOHN L. (MARGARET PEARSON) HALL 

MULBERRY GR NE PLANTATION 

Its.  Ball was interviewed at her home,  544 Bellwood Avenue,  and 

seemed eager to talk about the old Mulberry Grove Plantation,  site of 

the proposed Norval Air-Bass in the Orange Park coition, extending apost 

to the Clay County line. 

"I was born there in 1883,  and lived there until I was about eight 

years of age. 

"My grandfather, Arthur N. Reed,  settled there in the latter part 

of the War between the States,  at a time when there was danger of bombard. 

sent by the Federal gunboats then in the harbor.* 

She handed me a oopy of the Jacksonville Tolerant, dated Oetober 11, 

1930,  on the front page of which is the following: 

*Lots of this would be  just so much Paper today, 

But once here it was Genuine Mossy. 

(Illustration of $5.00 note issued by lank of St.  Johns October 

le 1839), 

*Keep Jaeksonville Money in Jacksonville was a slogan in 1858 even 

as it is now.  This ancient bill of the Bank of St.  Tabu demonatratee 

it. 

*ROTE:  This is another of a series of historical novelties prepared by 

journal writers with assistance of Florida Bisto2ical Society. 

26026 

2 

"Today in 7eeksonxille the phrase Bank of St.  aims means  just  some 

of the land along the river, but back in 1858 it meant one of the city's 

modern and substantial banking establishments. 

"The bank was first organised in 1858 by A. M. Reed.  It stood at 

Bey and Ocean Streets,  and  just behind it was his ham, where the Palace 

Theatre now sits. 

"The bill shown above was issued by Mt.  Reed's bank.  After the Civil 

War the bank was closed.  During its lifetime may bills were issued under 

its name,  just  as  is  done by banks today.  But every bill that was offered 

to the president for redemption after his bank was closed, was taken in at 

face value by him,  and paid for out of his personal fortune. 

"Only thre such bills as the one produced above are said to exist. 

The one above Ions  saved by a Axon as a souvenir. 

"It  is unique,  therefore,  not only because of its intricate design, 

but also because of  its scarcity.  Not that five-dollar bills are ever 

plentiful, but the bills are almost  as  extinct as the famous dodo. 

"The energetic little at 

engine shorn on this bill is especially 

significant,  because the bank held a considerable amount of bonds of the 

florid*, Atlantic and Cult Central railroad,  the first railroad built into 

Jacksonville. 

"Jacksonville's first bank was called the Bank of Zatksonville.  It 

opened in 1837 and had a fine reputation in 1039 when soddenly the president 

disappeared.  He left $132 on hand for the public and stockholders to 

fight over.  The St. Augustine paper headline writer had quite a lot 

3 

of exeltement in his paper that day.  His headline said: 'Bank Mystery* 

?resident is FlAunt° " 

Mrs Nall sontinued:  Illy grandfather was a native of Connecticut, 

and my grandmother Harriet ( Douglas)  Reed was a daughter of ZUdlie Thomas 

Douglas,  also a native of Connecticut, eh° settled in St. Augustine in 

1826.  Kr great.ignandfather Douglas vies  appointed as Judge of the Supreme 

Court of Florida in 1826 by John Quinsy Adams,  then President of the 

Molted States,  and  served in this office for nineteen years,  being reap-

pointed by three successive Presidents. 

Mere is ;Udall DougIadAutobiogrepty," she said,  presenting a small 

volume bound in red leather with gold lettering. 

flio  started exiting it, 

and after his death it was completed and published by his family. 

"In addition to the lank,  grandfather Reed also operated a neroan-

tile establishment, but I do not know just where it was located. 

_; 

"He felt that his family were in imminent danger, when the Federal 

gunboats arrived in the harbor at  Jaeksonville in 1862,  and retired to 

this old plantation with his family,  out of the war zone. 

heard 

"I havo/a Colonel or Captain Hicks mentioned as  the immediate pre-

decessor,  and before him the land was part of the NOIntosh ,grant.  It 

'comprised considerably more ten fourteen hundred acres.  It was a grand 

old place as I remember it during my early childhood. 

"The large house faced east along the St.  Yohns River,  which runs 

almost due south to north there.  Xmas a frame,  two.story structure, 

painted "Mites with a rod  in root.  A long wide porch ran the full length 

of the front,  and around to the south. 

"A, wide hall ran through the middle of the house.  On one side was 

a large living roam,  a dining roam,  also a smaller roaa used as a sitting 

roam.  On the other side, were two large bedrooms and a bathroom.  There 

was an artesian well on the place,  lithioh  furnished running water in  LW. 

bathroom. 

•  "The wide stairs ran up in the center of the hall,  and there yore 

two lovely bedrooms on this second floor,  the back part being a storage 

room and attic. 

"There was a door out of the dining rooms leading into a side hall, 

off which was a looker or pantry,  where supplies and linens more kept. 

The hall con-inued to the beak of the house where was my grandfather's 

large library,  off which wai a back porch with steps leading down to a 

brink walk that ran to the little brick kitchen ehere the family cooking 

was done.  There was never wow* done in the house, nor meals cooked. 

"Late one evening when my grandfather had first located on the 

place,  two middle-aged Negroes with two little pickaninnies oame drifting 

down the river in a rowboat and tied up at the landing.  They were free 

Negroes,  as the result  of the 1Mancipation Act,  and had no place to live. 

Grandfather Reed promptly hired them,  and they became an integral pert 

of the plantation life-AJnele George and Aunt Nancy Races--as we knew 

them.  The little bays were named Abram and :Lick.  Afterwards four more 

were born on the plaoe.grank, 76e,  Ike and Sam.  They were all grown 

when I Gould first remember them. 

5 

"Tank came into Jacksonville and learned the carpenter's trade,  and 

he did all the building and kept up the repairs on the place. 

"Abram attended to the cattle,  attending to the ailviag and looking 

after the herd of beef cattle, which was rather large. 

"Fro* and Toe worked in the fields,  in SOSACM4  and Ike and Sommer* 

house boys.  They brought up the food from the  kitchen on big trays and 

waited on table at all meals. 

"Afterwards Aunt Ilemay4 s sister,  Clifford Brawn and her husband, 

Cornelius Brom, can, to live on the plass.  Clifford was the laundress. 

Cornelius had charge of the stables,  about a block:west of the big house, 

in match were kept about ten horses and the males used to do the farming. 

Re also acted as ooacaman,  driving the family carriage.  I remember the 

first team was bays, than there was a perfectly matched p4.111'  o2  blacks, 

of which Cornelius took great care,  bruahing and currying then until their 

coats shone like bleak satin. 

"Than there was Maria Lyles,  a housesarvant for asny years,  and ay 

grandmother's personal maid.  When grandmotheas became old and feeble, 

Maria slept on a cot at  the foot of her bed,  and was with her day and 

nijat.  Abrea performed the same  personal service for morgramatather 

Reed. 

"The darkiee 

were punished ' if we sailed them vniagere) were 

all paid for their 'park.  I do not know how amok,  but I know they mere 

well taken eare of.  Some of the neighbors said they were spoiled and 

made pets of, but they all worked hard and eertainly deserved lama they 

were paid. 

6 

"There was a two-room frame laundry away from the kitchen,  and here, 

Eliza, who was Abrem's wife and had only one eye,  did the family laundry, 

assisted by CliYford.  They had only old fashioned tubs and washboards, 

but they did wonderful work.  In one of  the rooms was  a stove where they . 

heated the water and boiled the clothes in the old time meaner.  The 

nen's shirts were snowy white,  the bosoms,  some of which were tucked,  and 

the attached °oilers and cuffs starched stiff and highly polished with 

their hot irons,  heated on top of the stove. 

"The voments and children's clothes were adorned with many ruffles, 

and thee they fluted.  It was fun to watch as they heated the rods red. 

hot,  run than in the fluting-iron which was turned with a crank and the 

ruffle passed through. 

"To the  south of the house was a la:ge flower garden,  where there 

were many roses,  geraniums,  and the usual perennials  of that  tine.  fly 

mother tot* care of the flowrs.  Another brick walk led down to the 

greenhouse, with its glass top,  its bins for bulbs,  and shelves for the 

geraniums and more tender plants. 

Trron the  front  porch a long avenue flanked by large oaks,  inter-

twining overhead,  and carpeted with St.  Augustine grass led  to the river 

about three hundred feet awiy.  There were a few old mulberry trees 

scattered around,  the remains of the silk.worm industry started many 

years before at St. Augustine.  I presume this gave the name  of the Old 

910.10erry Grove PlantatiGn'  to the place,  as it  bore that name "rheumy 

grandfather settled there. 

"On the river at the  end of the oak avenue was a long doel.  River 

traffic was heavy then,  and  the beets used to land if we put up the flag 

for the purpose of Shipping freight into jackeonville,  and they would 

deliver orders o ftod, 

"Among these river boats were ti t ' Creteent City,'  thetflary Draper,' 

the 'Manatee,"  and net mes the ' Three Friends,'  would tie up at  the dock. 

I remember one day, mr brother, Reed Pearson,  told me I might blow the 

whistle of the ' Three Friends.,  I was hardly eight, but I climbed aboard 

importantly,  and  seized the rope,  giving it a stout yank.  The whistle 

shrieked,  and the  rope came olemoring down behind me with a Ilbiam4 0 that 

nearly soared the life out of me. 

"In the boathouse under the docks my grandfather kept two boats--

the  vjebn Perry'  end the 'Fanny Perryt--four-oared rowboats  in which he 

used to come to jaeksonville.  In later years, when telephones same into 

use,  there was a telephone in the house and also in the boathouse,  and 

we used to telephone around over the place and the neighborhood, where 

'phones had been installed ! 

"The brick walk ran sound the house from the front door to the 

back yard,  divided--one walk going to the greenhouse and the other to the 

kitchen,  where o12,  Aunt ViSnay held  vow.  She did the cooking for every-

body,  the white folks at the big house,  as well as  for the darkier and 

field bands. 

"There was another frame kitchen beyond the little brick kitchen, 

which was the quarters  of  the Reeee'e. 

"There was a stone smokehouse in the back yard,  where a kind of 

commissary wls kept.  You see it was away out  in the country and  it was 

9 

oeiled room upstairs was kept the dried peas for the family use. 

"I remember having great fun and running up and down the stairs of the 

old cotton house--it wa3 atiTe with rata--and sometimes we would stags bat-

tles with them. 

"There were chickens raised in great numbers,  as well  as other tow]..... 

turkeys, ducks,  geese,  guineas--tPotraokingt  around--and later my brother 

had  a few peafowls.  Aunt Nancy used to Aol: the down from the breasts of 

geese and make down clilLs.  This process did not hurt the geese,  as they 

shed the dawn anyway. 

• 

"Orange trees surrounded  the place,  and  these took a lot of attention. 

Finally in the late 1330's a freeze killed the trees right down to the 

ground,  and they were not replanted,  In the early days quantities of 

orange. were gathered,  packed and  shipped from the old  place.  There were 

other fruit trees,  too;  pears,  peaches,  plums,  also strawberries,  and black,. 

be:ries.  Under the old kitchen 'share Melo George and Aunt Nancy and their 

family lived was a big ceAar, and here was stored the surplus fruits which 

had been canned,  or mnde into perserves aud  jellies.  This was is2t locked 

at  all times. 

"Enormous trees were all around-live oaks,  water oaks,  tell pines 

and palms,  and the few mulberry trees,  too,  were immense.  They were filled 

with birds—mockingbirds, redbird s,  jays,  sparrows—their ohaWm,Ims 

consent,  and nobody tholght of harming them or shooting then. 

"Beyond the mulberry trees and 19 in the  oats field was a large In-

dian eamp and burying ground,  quite large and high and overlooking the river. 

10 

Arepresentntive of the Smitheoniaa Institution did some excavating there 

and found twenty-four bodiee down deep in the ground.  There was the re-

:mains  of the old  sort  of fireplace deep underground,  and  the skeletons 

were all around that,  arraujed in a circle with their heeds towards the 

hearth.  Thc skeletons.  as I remember, were of  enormous size. 

"Vie  had c'eat fun eith the Negrooe,  the pickapirmies of Clifford 

and Cornelius,  Eliza and Abram,  and I never remember hiving been punished 

for associating with them.  They all loved us and we loved than  just as 

if they were a . art of the family.  After supper we used to tear down to 

the old kitchen, where Aunt Nancy and Uncle George would play with us. 

I never remenber of them telling us any stories of any kind.  They 

seldam sang any sonGs,  but they did hum a great deal,  suiting the rhythm 

to their work. 

"Old Uncle Ceorrr.a  died in  that  old kitchen,  an  nfter Aunt Nancy 

got too feeble to work,  she went to live with one of her sons who had 

married and  lived in a cabin in the woods nearby. 

"Iraudfather and  grandmother were  great  eoule,  and were wonderfully 

good to us. ',/e led  n happy life at old Mulberry Grove Plantation. 

MA after grandfather passed omen the plantation descended to nqf 

oldeet brother, Reed Pearson, who Wee named for him,  and then we moved 

to Tackeonville." 

