EXTRACT 

Fromm 

A True  Story  of  Some Eventful Years in, 

Granpals Life 

By 

Henry  E.  Perrino 

Land was granted by  Congress  in  1838 to Dr.  Henry 

Perrin. ( a native  of  New Brunswick, No J.,  and later,  in  1827, 

Consul  at Campeche, Yucatan) for a township, with a view of en-

couragement  in  his enterprise;  the  introduction  of  useful tropi-

cal  plants  and  seeds  into the  Territory  of  Florida,  including 

the  tea plant*  His  choice had been Cape Florida, but  awing to 

the  Seminole War he  and his  family ( his  wife,  two daughters  and 

a son  of thirteen years)  were  established at  Indian Kg)",  s sup -

posed place  of  safety. 

Indian Key was  a small  island about twenty  miles 

south of  Cape  Sable  and four  or five miles  inside  from the  so-

°ailed Florida Reef. 

THE 
ISLAND 

The  island comprised only  twelve  acres.  Captain House-

man was  the  proprietor  of  the  various cottages;  shops, 

stores;  hotel  and warehouses,  while Mr.  Charles Howe was  the Post 

Master  and Deputy  Inspector  of  Customs.  Three  large  wharfs stretch-

ed out  from the northeastern  side  of  the  island* 

The  foundation  of  the  Perrine house  was built  in  the 

water,  thus  the  cellar was useful,  during high tide,  as  a bathing 

pool  into which the  family  descended through a trap door,  with 

steps  leading down. 

c- 61 2 o' 

(2) 

WATERY 
rOUNDA-
TION 

Between the  house  and the wharf in  front there  was 

a connecting dark  passageway  so built  as  to appear 

from without  as  being built  of  solid masonry.  In the  early 

days  of  the  Seminole  war a small boat had been kept  in  this 

place  of  concealment,  providing means  of  escape  in  the  event 

of  a night  attack from  the  Indians. 

During the  Seminole war the  government  establish-

ed a station at.  Tea Table  Key ( a diminutive  island,  one  and one-

half  mile  away  toward the  northeast  and near the  lower end of 

another  island,  Upper Matacumbe)  for  invalid soldiers.  This 

FANCIED  fact gave  to the  inhabitants  of  Indian Key  a false 
SECURITY 

sense  of  protection,  and despite the  intelligence 

received at  one  time  from Colonel  Harney,  who  landed at  Indi-

an  Key  from a turtle  schooner,  that  he  had just  escaped from 

the  terrible massacre  of  his  soldiers by  the  Indians  at  Caloo-

sahatchie,  on  the  river  of  that name  on  the west  coast  of 

Florida,  they  still  felt  security  as no  one  believed that  the 

savages  would dare  to venture twenty  miles from the  mainland 

to  attack  a settlement  apparently  under the protection  of  U. 

S.  soldiers. 

Small palmetto piles had been driven  down  into 

the  marl  all  around the  npool" under the  house, which were 

spiked to  the  upper timbers,  thus  obstructing all  passages 

TURTLE 
CRAWL 

from  the  wpool le  to  the  open sea,  but  leaving suf-

ficient  space.  for  the  ingress  and egress  of  the 

tide.  This  space  was  called a turtle  crawl  in which the  green, 

or loggerhead turtle,  when captured,  would be kept for 

further disposal. 

The  house  was  three- storied,  with a cupola and 

having an  upper and lower piazza across the  front.  Entrance 

to  the  cupola was  made  through a trap  door.  There  was no 

TYPE 
OF 
HOUSE 

lath nor plaster,  the rooms being all  celled and 

lined with yellow pine. 

Henry,  Dr.  Perriness son,  and also  author  of  this 

book,  early  learned to  row and skull  a boat,  which  skill  short-

ly  was  to  be  of  inestimable value  to many  individuals. 

* * * * * 

Henry,  in  company  with Mr.  Howe,  in  his  boat  which 

was  handled by  negro  slaves,  takes  an  excursion  to  an  island 

about  seven miles away,  a great nesting place  for sea fowl.  Ap-

proaching their destination  they  beheld throngs  of  cormorants 

and pelicans,  also  cranes,  which rose  filling the  air with their 

SEA 
FOC. 

discordant  cries.  The  negroes  captured a number  of 

young cormorants ( which had not  learned to fly)  while 

Henry  carried home  a crane,  which was  easily  tamed and became 

an  interesting pet. 

Quite  a number of  men were  engaged in  the  capture 

of  green turtles,  etc.,  for the  northern markets.  This was  their 

principal  source  of  livelihood.  In  latter years the  procuring of 

LUCRA- 
TIVE 
INDUS- 
TRY 

sponges  superseded the  turtle  industry,  as  being more 

profitable.  Men the  surface  of  the  water  is  rough the 

spongers  are  able  to  examine the bottom as  their boat 

glides  slowly  along,  by  using a small Iss or box,  in  the  bottom 

of  which a pane, of  glass, is  securely fixed.  litt  pressing this 

into  the water below the  ripples, they  can  see  the  bottom almost 

well  as  on  a calisAg.." ( a glass-bottom boat): 

The  collecting of  rain  water in  cisterns  built  above 

ground,  and  in  casks was  their  only  means  of  obtaining water to 

drink,  or  for laundry  purposes.  During  the  dry  season  they  fre-

quently  had  to procure  water from the  neighboring  island,  Lower 

Mataoumbe,  where  they  filled barrels  from a sink hole,  about 

thirty  yards  back  from  the  beach.  The  water had to be  strained 

previous  to  drinking to  rid  it  of  embryo mosquitoes. 

For  the  purpose  of  developing a nursery  for useful 

tropical  plants,  Mr.  Howe  had his  slaves  prepare  the  soil near 

a sink hole,  or natural  well  of  fresh water,  on  Lower Mataoumbe. 

The  labor was  peculiarly  difficult  inasmuch as the  ground was 

permeated and -interlaced in  all  directions with the  roots  of  the 

gumbo  limbo  trees  and the  various vines which had  to  be  out  an 

every  hand with the  grub  hoe. "The  gumbo limbo tree  has wonderful 

vitality;  the  posts cut  from  it  will  take  root  and throw  out 

branches,  so  that  for  fencing purposes  there  is  no  danger of  decay. 

It  is  said  that  a log of  this  tree,  laying upon  the  ground,  will 

throw  out  roots  into  the  ground  and branches  will  grow  from above." 

In  the  channel,  near Tea Table  Key,  Henry  sees  a slave 

catch a murray ( accent  on  last  syllable).  This  is  a salt  water eel. 

Its bite  is,  like  the  rattlesnake's poisonous.  Its  body  is  of  mot-

tled green,  and hideous.  Whenever one  is  caught  the  fishing  is 

THE 
MURRAY 

spoiled  in  that locality  for the  time  being.  Negroes (ton-

eider this  eel  edible. 

Henry  beholds  a fish-hawk suddenly  drop  into  the  water, 

and as  he  rose  into  the  air carrying a large  fish in  his  claws,  a 

(54) 

large  bald eagle  came  flying  swiftly  from  above.  The hawk gave 

A 
WINGED 
BATTLE 

an  angry  scream,  dropped the  fish and  sped away,  while 

the  eagle with nearly  lightning speed swooped down  and 

carried off  his  prey. 

Peculiar  to  this  region  is the water  spout,  which Henry 

sees during a rain  storm,  high up  in  the  heavens;  beginning with a 

WATER 
SPOUT 

cloud from which descended to  the  mean a long,  sinuous 

body  like  a snake,  twisted and bent by  the  wind as it 

sped along the  surface  of  the  water.  After traveling about  a mile 

it  struck Matacumbe when  most  of  the  body  suddenly  disappeared, 

although the  cloud preserved its oone-like appearance  for a mile 

longer.  A perfect water  spout: 

On  a water trip  in  search of  oysters,  Henry  and party 

anchored at Sand Key,  a then nearly  barren  island about  a mile 

from Cape  Sable.  He  describes the  scene  as  one  of  rare  beauty  and 

UNUSUAL 
SCENE 

interest,  where,  in  the  water,  an  land and in  flight, 

were  multitudes of  birds:  pelicans,  cranes,  flamingoes, 

gulls,  frigate  birds,  cormorants  and killdeers. 

Dr.  Perrino plants  a few seeds here',  at Sand Key; 

among others,  date  seeds  and " it  is  possible  that  some  of the 

palm trees  later grown there were  the  offspring  of  his  thought-

fulness." 

After passing westward along the  capes  they  shaped 

their course  northwardly,  casting anchor off  the mouth of  a 

small  stream,  lined with mangrove  trees.  The  bottom of  the  bay 

seemed covered with oysters and the  tide  being at holt  ebb,  an 

oyster bank  stood uncovered.  They  landed and enjoyed a feast. 

In  the  small  hours  of August 7th,  1840,  the  fami-

ly  were  awakened by  the  Indian warwhoop,  the  discharge  of  guns 

and the  falling  of  window glass.  Mrs.  Perrino  and the throe 

THE 
MASSACRE 

children,  in  their night garments,  hastily  went 

through the  trap door,  down  into the water beneath 

their  house,  secreting themselves  in  the  turtle  crawl,  where 

the  water was *cold and even with their necks.*  Dr.  Perrino 

would not  follow them  thinking that by  his remaining behind, 

in  the  house,  he  could pacify  the  savages by  speaking to  them 

in  Spanish ( as  their grievance  seemed to be  only  against Ameri-

cans)  and telling  them that  he  was a physician.  This he  did, 

from the  upper piazza,  but  of  no avail.  Their yelling ceased 

temporarily  however,  and they went away.  In  the meantime  Dr. 

Perrino  drew a chest  of  seed  across the  trap, door concealing 

his  family  in  the  cellar from the  savage eyes,  and ascended 

into  the  cupola,  only  to be  found,  later,  by  the  bloodthirsty 

Indians,  who forced their way  to  him and finished their work 

with horrible  howls  of  satisfaction,  heard by  the  trembling, 

fearful,  grieving family  below. 

Very  soon  afterward the  smoke  and terrible heat 

in  the  watery  cellar,  acquainted the  refugees  of  their burn-

ing home,  which would cave  in  upon  them.  They kept their 

faces to  the water,  plastered their heads  with marl  and threw 

the  water  over them constantly  to keep the  air  in  motion,  and 

to cool  it,  in  order that  they  might breathe,  at  the  same  time 

throwing marl  upon  the burning  planks  above  their heads. 

Henry  decided that he  would rather be killed by  the 

(7) 

Indians  than  to be  burned to  death,  following his decision 

with his  marvel-min  esoape  by  forcing aside  a palmetto post, 

which made  an  opening  only  large  enough for him  to  barely 

go  through.  With a sorrowful  glance backward toward his 

mother and  sisters,  he  passed through the  turtle  crawl  out 

into  the  open  space.  As  though inspired,  Mrs.  Perrino  than 

delved  into  the  marl with her fingers finally  drawing  out 

g few  posts  from  the  bottom,  which enabled all  to pass  from 

their prison  into  the  water near the  wharf.  Emerging from 

the  hole  at  the  end of  the  wharf  they  discovered a launch, 

its  bow resting  on  the  shore,  The  boat  belonged to  six 

Indians who were ( at  that  moment)  in  a store  near by  prepar-

ing to bring their loot  to  this  launch. 

Henry,  his  mother and sisters were  quick  to  enter 

the  boat,  and although only  thirteen,  skillfully  handled the 

craft,  with his  sister's  aid,  until  they  were  out  of  rifle-

shot  distance.  From this  boat  they  were  taken  to  the  schoon-

er,  Medium,  where  they  found Mr. Howe  and his  family,  also 

Captain  Houseman.  Intelligence  of  the 'Massacre was  sent  to 

Cape  Florida,  about  seventy  miles up  the  coast,  by  a small 

boat,  and shortly  there  came to assist them,  the  U. S.  S., 

Flirt,  commanded by  Lieut.  McLaughlin.  From  the Flirt  they 

boarded the  government  steamer,  Santee,  which took them to 

St.  Augustine,  where  they were  supplied with adequate ne-

cessities;  the  citizens  calling upon  them and  offering gener-

ous  assistance. 

From St.  Augustine,  the  Perrino  family ( trusting 

(8) 

that  by  some  happy  miracle  Dr.  Perrino  was  still  alive)  secured, 

through the kindness  of  Dr.  Edward Worrell,  U.  S.  A.,  free  pas-

sage  on  the  water  and  an  the  railroad to Auburn,  N.  Y.,  from 

which place  they  rode for "half-fare"  in  a carriage  to  Palmyra, 

New York,  their former  home. 

Many  of  the  inhabitants  of.  Indian Key,  like  the 

Perrines,  effected marvelous escape from the  Indians,  but  the 

island was  reduced  to  dust.  Many  were brutally  slain.  Among 

those  who escaped were  "Mr.  Henry  Goodyear,  of the Goodyear 

Rubber Company." 

The  interior  of the  lighthouse  at Cape Florida was 

burned while  the  keeper was  upon  the  summit  of  the  highwall. 

He  was rescued by  flying a kite  and  dropping  the  line where  he 

could reach it, by  which means he  was able  to  draw up  a oorct 

sufficiently  strong to bear his  weight.  By  fastening it  at  the 

top  he  let  himself down,  hand  over  hand,  until  he  reached the 

ground. 

*** *** 

While  in  New York Henry studies  law  and is  admitted 

to the Bar.  He  later concludes he  should have  chosen the  study 

of  medicine,  instead,  becomes discouraged,  and after trying vari-

outc odd  jobs  and  positions  is  induced by  uncle  and cousins to 

join  the  procession  of  1849  to California.' 

He  sails  in  the  Bustin  G.  Owens,  around Cape Horn. 

Full  complement  of  the  ship was  169  passengers;  passage  faro  in 

the  cabin was $ 250 each.  Before  entering the  tropics they  saw 

TRIP 
TO THE 
WEST 

large  schools  of  porpoises, which were  different  from 

the "unwieldy  monsters"  seen near the  Florida Keys. 

These  were  only  four  or five  feet  long,  leaping their entire 

length out  of  the  water.  There  were  also visible  Portugese 

Men- of-War,  beautiful  red,  purple  and blue  curiosities  of 

the  sea.  They  have "upon  their backs  a sort  of  sail  by  means 

of  which they  are wafted over  the waves.  As  the  rays-  of  light 

strike  them  they  are  radiant  at  times,  with rosy  hues changing 

from  pink  and violet  to the  deepest blue. ( Here  the  author 

compares  the  scene  to that  of  Indian Key). 

June  1st - " A number  of  passengers rowed  over to 

the  barque,  Simlar,  bound for London,  to  send letters home. 

EXCERPTS 
FROM 
DIARY - 
SEA 

June  2nd - "Running along now about  four knots an 

hour.  Spoke  with Norwegian barque,  Antelope,  con-

ing  from California,  bound for °Gottenburg.  Monotony 

of the voyage again broken by  a word with the  French barque, 

Sophie Cesar,  from  the  Mozambique,  bound for the  Harve -deo-Grace. 

During a heavy shower caught  several  casks  of " delicious"  drink-

ing water." 

June  3rd - "A shark,  four and a half  feet  long,  was 

caught  during the  night  and served for breakfast."  Henry  com-

pares  the  vessel  and the  sea to  that mentioned in, *The  Ancient 

Mariner." 

It  is  the  Sabbath and Henry  retires  to the  quarter 

deck during the  religious  service,  preferring solitude  and his 

thoughts  to  a "Service  read by  a grey-haired sinner who deals  out 

liquor  during the  week to  the  passengers,  and who " took  a horn 

before  service." 

June 13th - "Saw many  fish called Albicares,  around 

the  bow.  They were  in  pursuit  of  the  flying fish which were  con-

stantly  starting by  thousands  from  the  water, and  skimming 

over the  surface  like  swallows." 

June  14th - *Crossed the  Equator.  A speciet 

of  shark called the  dog-fish was  caught  today." 

June  16th,- "We will  pass  the  dreaded Cape St. 

Roque today.  We  now feel  the  full  force  of  the  southeast 

trade  winds  and hope  to  reach Rio by  a week from tomorrow." 

June  24th - " Instead  of  reaching Rie we  are now 

becalmed about  30  miles  from Cape Frio,  whose  lighthouse  is 

visible.  Saw a bird called the  marline  spike.  It  resembles 

the  frigate  bird of  Florida." 

June  25th - * I am  really  gazing upon  the  coast 

of  South America,  and right before  me  is Brazil.  As we  near 

the  entrance  to  the  harbor we  behold a scene  of  grandeur  and 

beauty.  On  the  left  is a peak about  900 feet high,  called 

the  Sugar Loaf.  One  can  imagine  a loaf  of  sugar which had had 

its  base  partially  melted." 

June  25th - "We  enter this  wondrously  beautiful 

harbor and drop  anchor.  The  city  of  Rio Janeiro is  about three 

miles  farther  in.  The  passengers hired a boat  to  take  them  in. 

to  the  city.  Boats are  moving in  every  direction,  rowed by 

negro  slaves.  The  roofs  of  all  the  buildings are  tiled,  re-

sembling long rows  of  flower-pots cut  in  half.  Lengthwise, 

and laid side-by- side  and fitted into  each other in  reverse 

order.  In  the  markets  are  varieties  of  fruits,  vegetables, 

fish,  poultry,  birds  and monkeys.* 

"Crowds  of  half-naked negro women  are  washing clothes 

at  the  open  square.  Across the  bay  is  a small  steamer, 

the San  Domingo.  I saw  men wearing iron  collars  and 

chained to  each other ( a chain gang).  Had to submit to 

the  imposition  of  20 percent  reduotion  on both gold and 

silver coin,  in  exchange  for bulky  copper " dumps  and half 

dumps." 

The  emperor complimented their behavior while 

they were  in the  city. "Mr. Wise,  of  Virginia,  is  the 

consul  at Brazil.  NOTE:  Probably  Henry A. Wise,  afterwards 

Governor  of  Virginia when John Brown was hanged." *** The 

streets were  very  narrow;  the  Portugese  were 'distinguished 

from the  Negroes  only  by  their straight hair.  The majority 

of  the  soldiers  were  Negroes.  In  the  churches there  the 

candles  burned in  solid silver candlestieks.  The music was 

noteworthy.  He remarks upon  the  brass bands. "The loveli-

ness  of  the  feather flowers made  here  aro  indescribable." 

There  was marvelous  diamond  jewelry  in  the  jewelry  shops. 

Henry  mentions  the  sloop- of-war,  Falmouth,  from 

Boston,  bound for California.  National  salute  of  thirteen 

guns  is  answered by  the Brandywine.  Sight  of  the  American 

flag stirs  his  emotions.  He visits  a picturesque  plantation, 

located between  two  mountain  cliffs,  where "grew in  boundless 

profusion tropical  fruits  and flowers."  The  Fourth of  July 

was  celebrated  in  Rio Janeiro.  An  extemporized military 

company  paraded under command of  Lieut.  Wheeler, " an  officer 

lately  returned  from Mexico."  National  airs  were  sung and 

the  Declaration  of  Independence was  read;  guns were  fired 

and an  impromptu  oration was  delivered by  a Mr.  Moreland, 

of  Cincinnati. 

July  6th,- "We  are  one-third the  distance 

from Rio to  the  Horn.  There  is  a great  change  in  the  weath-

er as we  go  farther South.  It  is nearly  mid- winter here. 

An  overcoat feels  comfortable.  Cape  pigeons  and Cape hens 

are  flying around the  ship,  indicating  severe  weather at  the 

Cape,  as  the  captain  says they  seldom ever come  so  far north." 

August  7th - " South Pacific  Ocean  off  the  Pata-

gonian Coast:  The waves  towered far  above the bulwarks.  be-

fore  passing Cape  Horn , we  were  followed by  a school  of  whales,' 

several  of  which came within  two  hundred yards  of  the  ship. 

For  a number  of  days  the  sun rose  at  about  8:30 and sot  corre-

spondingly  early.  Hours  of  darkness  and damp,  chilly  weather, 

dead of winter here,  and a snow storm." 

Henry  is  disappointed  in the  Southern  Cross as  the 

four  stars,  of  which the  constellation  is  composed, " are not, 

says  he, " at  all  suggestive  of  a cross,  nor do  they  equal  in 

-brilliancy  many  of  those  seen  in  northern  skies."  He  was im-

pressed with the  so-called Magellan  clouds  seen  in 

Southern 

heavens  on  any  clear  and star-lit night. "Upon  the  Milky Way 

are  some  apparently  black oiouds.  The  phenomenon  is  caused by 

a total  absence  of  stars or  nebulas  in  those  vast  depths,  and 

the  resulting darkness  is  made  more  apparent by  the  light from 

the  innumerable  stars  surrounding the  spaces  thus  left vacant." 

Sept.  3rd, -  The Chilian Coast  is  not,  Henry  thinks, 

comparable  to  the  Brazilian  Coast,  the  harbor  is "a miserable  one. 

The  city  lies  in  scattered directions.  It  is  spring weather; • 

peach trees  are  in  bloom and children  sell  flowers  an  the 

streets."  The  absence  of  the  slave population  is  noticeable 

as  compared to Rio.  The  streets  are wider,  cleaner  and more 

beautiful.  The  men,  both of  mixed and pure  blood,  have  straight 

features  and are  handsome. 

October  12th - "Today  we  arrived at  the  San Fran-

cisco Harbor.  The  gun  squad  fired a national  salute  of  thir-

teen  guns,  just  outside  the  entrance."  Large  flocks  of  pelicans 

and cormorants  hovering,  aroused in  Henry memories  of  Florida. 

"The  passengers eagerly  scanned the  scenes before  them as we 

slowly  sailed through the  Golden Gate." 

Few  of  the  buildings  in  San Francis** had architec-

tural beauty,  and the  majority  of  them were  only  tents.  Henry 

sees a few adobe  buildings  with tile  roofs, " relics  of  Mexican 

SAN 
FRANCIS-
CO 

occupation."  In  every  direction wooden  buildings 

were  in  progress  of  erection.  There were signs  of 

business  activity  everywhere.  The  streets  were unpaved and 

muddy. 

Carpenters were  receiving $ 12 a'day;  they  struck, 

asking  for $ 16,  but  were  given 1114,  with promise  of  an  increase. 

PRICES 
IR 1849 

Skilled mechanics  received from $ 12 to $ 20 per day. 

Ordinary  laborers  earned $ 1 an  hour.  Lumber was $ 500 

per thousand.  From eight  to  fifteen  percent  a month was  paid i in 

advance  for the  use  of  money with real  security.  Board was $30 

a weak  or $8 per day,  eta.,  etc. 

Quoted from "Annals  of  San  Francisco",  compiled and 

:edited by  Frank Soule,  and  others: 

5 

"Nearly  40,000  immigrants landed in San Francis-

cc)  in 1849.  Three  or four thousand deserted from the  many 

;hundred ships  lying  in  the  bay.  About  thirty  thousand came 

etcross  the  plains.  There  were  few women  and  children  at the 

close  of  that year.  No  such thing as  a home  could be  found; 

scarcely  even  a proper house  could be  seen.  Only  the  great 

gambling saloons,  the  hotels,  restaurants  and a few publio 

buildings  and stores,  had any  pretensions to  size,  comfort  or 

elegance.  Horses,  mules  and oxen forced a way  through,  across,: 

and over every  obstruction  in the  streets  and men waded,  and 

toiled after  them.  Gambling was carried an  in  the most public 

4manner  in  the  hundreds  of  saloons which were  thronged day  and 

With companions  from Trenton,  N.  J.,  Henry  takes 

7passage  an  a schooner for Sacramento,  to  locate  somewhere  Ia 

the  mountains,  near the  place  where  gold had first been die-

covered,  for the  purpose  of  finding his  share.  After passing 

18ACRA-
3MENTO 

the  straggling settlement  of  Benicia they encoun-

tered darkness  and a dense  fog,  driven  on  by  a chill-

ing wind 

which enveloped them,  dampening their spirits as well 

-.ets  their 

clothes.  Henry finds Sacramento,  in  many  respects, 

aike San 

Francisco,  except "there  were  no hills to  surmount." 

The town 

was  situated in  the  midst  of  a live  oak grove.,  hand-

somely  laid out  with wide  streets  running at  rigkt  angles with 

one  another.  With other gold seekers,  they  pitched their  tents 

there,  in  the  grove,  for  the  night,  and the following day  starts. 

ed for Culloma,  the  place  where  gold was  first  discovered at 

Sutter's Mill.  The  country  was  covered with " oak  openings - 

succession  of  beautiful oak groves;  destitute  of  underbrush 

and although there  were  no  fences,  there  was  such an  appear-

ance  of  regularity ( as  in  orchards)  that  at  each turn  in  the 

road they  expected to  see  a farm  house. *Cooper  describes 

such scenery  in ' The  Bee Hunters'." 

Henry  meets  an  acquaintaince  from Buffalo,  on  horse-

back,  roughly  garbed,  who tells him that  he  has  dug $ 3,000 

worth of  the " golden  dust*  and  is  returning home. 

The  party  passes  several  Digger  Indians, *a miser-

ably  degraded race  whose  food,  according  to  report,  consists 

of  acorns,  worms  and  insects.  These  Indians  had  just  thrown 

INDIANS 

one  of  their  old men  into the  fire,  merely  because 

they  were  weary  of  taking care  of  him., 

At Culloma was a deeply  out  road and  a settlement 

containing forty  or  fifty  buildings.  The  situation was upon 

the  South Fork  of  the  American River.  Woods  rose  on  every 

CULLOMA 

hand.  The  river was  spanned by  a tall  bridge,  one 

hundred  or  two  hundred yards  above  the  famed Butter's Mill. 

"It  was where  the  tailrace  of  this mill was dug and the  water 

let  through,  that  Marshall  discovered the yellow  particles, 

which were  to be  the  means  of  revolutionizing the  trade  and 

commerce  of  the  world." 

While  walking along the  edge  of  a shallow  stream 

Henry  mistook  the  yellow,  glittering  scales  of mica on  the 

bottom for gold,  but  learned that  gold seeks  a lower level  and 

"modestly  hides  its  face  deep  in  the bosom of  the  earth." 

Members  of  the  party  built  a log hut,  similar to  the  others 

there,  and to  this  hut  they  walked seven  miles up  the  moun-

tain. 

About  a quarter  of  a mile  from the  cabin  was an 

Indian  village, - " a collection  of  rude  wigwams made  of  bark. 

The  men  were  nearly  all  away  but the  squaws were  frequently 

seen  as  they  wandered around with large  conical baskets  upon 

their backs.  A few  of  the  men  and women were  wearing ' mourn-

ing',  a material  composed of  tar and charcoal,  smeared upon 

the  middle  of  their noses,  on  each cheek,  and upon  their fore-

heads.  Their beauty  is  not  enhanced by  the  frescoing." 

Henry  is  not  successful  as  a gold digger,  and de-. 

cides  to  go  to  his uncle's  ranch below San Jose,  where  he  is 

developing a cinnabar mine.  While  there  he  was  placed in 

charge  of  a mule- team " engaged in  hauling the  ore  from mine to 

CIMMABAR  Embarcadero,  eight  or nine miles."  His uncle's 
MINE 

house  was situated four miles  south  of  San Jose ( the 

Capitol)  near the  San Juan Bautista hills,  in  which the  cinna-

bar  leads  had been  found.  A hundred yards  west  of  the house 

was  the  small  range  of  hills,  and  from  their  tops,  looking 

still  towards  the west,  across  another beautiful valley,  was 

the " lofty  coast  of  range  mountains,  in  which was  the  cele-

brated New Alamaden and Guada  lupe  cinnabar,  or  quicksilver 

mines,  said to be  the  most valuable  in  the world.  The  plains 

were  luxuriant  with grass  and carpeted with flowers.  The mus-

tard plant,  growing near  the  Townsend ranch,  reached nearly  the 

height  of  the  branches  in which the ' fowls  of  the  air'  could 

easily  have  rested."  A red,  rich  ore  was  obtained but not  a 

twentieth part  sufficient to  pay  the  expenses,  as  over $ 10,000 

had been  invested  in  the  enterprise. 

Mr.  Townsend's ( Henry's uncle)  enterprise  is & fail-

ure,  apparently.  In later years Henry  reads  in  a California pa-

per "An account  of  certain  holes that  had been  discovered  in  those 

very  hills,  supposed to have  been  worked by  Mexicans many years 

previous,  and parties who  followed up the  traces  of  cinnabar found 

therein  had  already  gotten  out  several hundred tons  of  the valuable 

ore  from the  same  holes which our  men had opened up  in  1850." 

Henry returns to the  gold mine.  He  agreed to work his 

friend's  share in  the Tuolumne  River,  in  exchange  for  two-thirds' 

of  the  amount  he  might  receive. ( He  emerged through worse  than 

pioneer  difficulties)  to  find that  the  company  had  obtained between 

$34,000  and $ 35,000 worth of  fine  scale  gold,  of  which his  share 

was  only  one  108th.  He  returns  to San Francisco to find " many 

brick buildings  had been erected and  the  city  had begun  to  extend 

far  into  the  bay.  On  the  plaza was a row  of  saloons,  such as no 

city  in  the  United States  could produce  or  equal  in  splendor.  At 

many  of  the  gambling tables were  female  gamblers. 

Henry  expresses  gratitude for his  early  training which 

imbues him with wise  judgment,  protecting him from the " gambling 

places,  etc.,  attractively  presented." 

Mail  steamers  arrived twice  a month;  postage  per letter 

was  forty  cents. 

On  the  evening  of  May  23rd,  1851,  a fire  started,  pre-

sumably  in  a paint  shop.  Fed by  a fiercely  blowing wind,  with.-

in  a few hours  the  whole  business  section was an  entire  mass  of 

flames  and  in  a brief  period the " whole  region  glowed,  crackled 

SAN FRAN- 
CISCO FIRE 

and blazed,  one  immense fiery  field.  The  reflection 

from the  sky  of  this  conflagration was  said to  have 

been  visible  at Monterey,  nearly  one  hundred miles am.  On  all 

sides  in  the  doomed city  was heard the  fierce  roar  as  of  many 

storms that  drowned the  shouts  of  men  and the  shrieks  of  women. 

The  damage was moderately  estimated at $ 10,000,000  to $12,000,000. 

Seven weeks afterward a second fire  occurred,  which loss was esti-

mated at $ 3,000,000. "The  veriest haunts  of  crime  and lurking 

places  of  wicked,  black-hearted villains  were visited by  this 

scourge." 

Henry,  with a partner,  is  established in  the  grocery 

business.  He  selects Stockton,  California for this work as  Stock-

ton  was  a shipping point for the  Southern mines  and a team and 

packtrain center.  He  begins  to enjoy  a measure  of  success,  when 

he  decides  to  return  to the  East  on  a visit. 

Leaving San Francisco  on  the  side-wheel  steamer, 

Golden  Gate,  he  sails  via Panama. "Panama"  he  writes: " is  walled 

in,  abounding  in  churches  and cathedrals,  with extensive  ruins  in 

the  heart  of  the  city." 

Henry  rides  a mule  across the  Isthmus,  passing  a 

Treasure  Train,  guarded by  dirty,  barefoot  soldiers,  wearing soiled 

Panama hats and scant,  dirty  clothing.  He  sees many  boxes of " gold 

MULE-BACK 
RIDE ACROSS 
THE ISTHMUS  soldiers."  He  meets the  celebrated Texas Ranger,  Col. 

dust"  protected  only  by  two, "half-naked apologies for 

(19) 

Jack  Hayes,  on  a mule  holding a child in  his  arms.  He  is 

robbed  of  his  trunk  during the  night,  while  a guest  in  the 

."so-called American  hotel,  at Cruces,  on.the  Chagres river" 

but  discovers  it "after a thorough search in  the  bushes, 

eto.„"  under the  house,  or " hotels,  hidden there  by  the 

landlord,  who  probably  thought  it  contained lumps  of  gold. 

Henry  arrives  in New York,  and  on  March 2nd, 

1853  he  is  married to Miss Cornelia S.  Hall,  of  Byron,  New 

York.  He  returns  to California,  with his bride,  to  primi-

tive  quarters,  where " real  happiness was  experienced." 

HIS 
MARRIAGE 

They  remain  in  California until  their daughter  is 

about  a year  old when Henry  decides to  again  return 

to  the  eastern  states.  He  finally  becomes  established  in 

business  in  Buffalo,  New York,  but  suffers from the  panic  of 

1875,  when he  again  turns his face  toward southern Florida, 

where  he  goes,  with his  two  sons,  to  try  to  settle  the  town-

FLORIDA 
AGAIN 

ship  of  land,  granted to his family  by  Congress. 

He  was  encouraged by  the  glowing accounts that he 

read of  the  beauty,  healthfulness,  and productive  soil  of 

the  country.  He  reaches  south Florida  in  October,  1876. 

Among the  changes  since  his  residence  at  Indian 

Key,  was  a lighthouse  on Alligator Reef,  five  miles  distant. 

They  saw  evidences  of  a recent  hurricane near Key West. 

Shortly  before  reaching the  channel  through the  Reef,  they 

saw a hammer-head shark ( a rare  species)  glide  over the  rook-

y bottom.  While  at  Key West Henry  renews  old acquaintances: 

Charles  and Edward Howe,  formerly  of  Indian  Key,  were  living 

there,  also,  Col.  Maloney,  who had been  a clerk  in  the House-

man  store  before  the  Indian  massacre.  Col. Maloney  exhibits 

to him beautiful  specimens  of  large  masses  of " snow-white fin-

ger coral,  which had been  procured from Carysfoot Reef. 

Henry  and sons  are  invited to visit Col. Maloney's 

home.  The  grounds were  surrounded by  a barrel  stave  fence;  no 

grass but  an  abundance  of  calcareous rook.  The "garden present-

ed an  untidy  appearance."  Growing  there were many  kinds  of 

KEY 
IncaT 
HOME, 
1876 

fruit  trees:  sugar apple,  Sour- sop,  sapadilla,  guava, 

shaddook,  alligator pear,  pineapple,  orange,  lemon, 

lime,  date-palm and banana.  The  hurricane had strip-

ped nearly  every  tree  of  its  fruit.  There were  two handsome 

tame  deer  on  this  place.  The  entire  city  had a shiftless  appear-

ance. 

While trolling  in  the water,  enroute  to  Indian Key, 

one  day,  they  caught  a scaleless fish which was  only  three  inches 

in  width;  shole  like "burnished silver",  and 42  inches long.  Pro-

TRICHI- 
URUS 
LEPTU- 
RUS 

fessor Charles Linden pronounced it  to be  the "silvery, 

hair-tailed  or  scabbard fish or  the  trichiurua lepturus." 

While  on  a visit  at  Indian Key, Henry  observes an  epi-

taph.  In  front  of  the  spot where  once  stood Capt. - Houseman's house, 

OLD 
EPITAPH 

lay  a marble  slab with these  words  inscribed thereon: 

HERE 

Liath The  Body  of 

Captain  Jacob Houseman, 

Formerly  of  Staten  Island,  State  of  New York 

Proprietor of  the  Island 

Who Died By  an Accident 

May  let,  1841 

Aged 41  years  and Eleven Months. 

To His Friends He Was Sincere, 

To His  Enemies He Was  Kind 

To All  Men Faithful. 

This Monument Is Erected By His Most  Disconsolate  Though 

Affectionate Wife, 

Elizabeth Ann Houseman 

Sic  transit gloria mind/. 

Henry  and his  sons  find the "Bleeding-Tooth"  shells 

clinging to  the  rooks  on  the  southern  portion  of  the Key.  They 

also  find a few Sisal Hemp  plants  on the  island,  offsprings  of 

the  plants  brought from Yucatan by  Dr.  Perrino. 

While wandering  over this  memorable  island,  Henry 

discovers  the  cistern  in  which the  sailor,  Beiglett,  and young 

Sturdy  were  concealed when  the  Indians fired the  warehouse  above 

them.  A dwelling house  was  erected  over  it.  Leaving there  and 

-passing Upper Mataoumbe they  saw a number  of  buildings  washed off 

their  foundations by  the  hurricane. 

November 5th,  1876, -- Off Caesar's Creek, An  Open-

ing Into Biscayne,  Between the  Upper End of  Key Largo  and 

Elliott's Key. "Set  sail  about  three  o'clock a.m.  Nearing the 

opening between  the  Keys we  pass  a sponge corral  in  which sponges 

EXCERPT  are  placed after they  are  dead,  to be  washed clean by 
FROM 

LETTER  the  ebb  and flow  of  the  tide.  Now we  are  fairly  upon 

the  magnificent Biscayne Bay.  Slowly nearing the  long looked-

for  landing place.  We  can  just  catch a glimpse  of the  roof  of 

Addison's house  through the  trees.  Anchor  is  dropped nearly 

half  a mile  from  shore  and  a sail  boat  is  on  the way  to  us.. 

"Mr.  Addison,  who has lived here  for the  past fif7 

teen years,  met  us  cordially.  His house  consists  of  a very  ordi-

nary  log kitchen,  about  15 feet  square.,  with a verandah on  the 

north side  of  it  and a rough board building about  the  same  size, 

containing  one  room,  about  ten  feet  in  front between  the kitohen 

and the  bay.  His wife  is  tall,  thin,  with a kindly  face,  showing 

evidence  of  culture  and refinement." 

Henry  remarks upon  the  balmy  Florida , air  and luxuriant, 

semi- tropical  growth,  but  is  disheartened to  find rook near the. 

surface  of  the  soil  everywhere,  and scrub palmetto  in  every  direc-

tion,  leaving no " place  for a plow."  He  is  encouraged,  however, 

by  the  discovery  of  a road cut  through a part  of  the  hammock,  at 

the  end  of  which was  an  open  space  of  about  two  acres,  whioh had 

been  cleared ( he  learned)  by  the  expenditure  of  a vast amount  of 

toil,  and which showed a dark  and apparently  rich loam.  The  lime 

trees  were  in  bloom,  but  some  of  them had been  injured by  the 

hurricane.  Morning-glory vines  were  prolific.  They  came upon a 

large  banana field,  and upon  growing sweet potatoes.  An  explora-

tion  through the  hammock brought  them  to  the  open  pines  facing the 

bay.  Between  the  woods and the  bay  lay  a space  of  salt  marsh, 

about 120 yards  wide;  the  line  of  the  shore  making a curve  inward 

from the  point  in  front  of  the  hammock.  From the  point  in  front 

of  the hammock issue  two  streams  of  fresh water from among the 

(23) 

mangroves.  At  one  of  these,  the  spongers who  frec&ent the  bay, 

in  search of  sponges,  often  obtain  their supply  of  drinking wa-

ter.  At various  places near " our  first  place  of  landing", 

springs of  fresh water well  up  through the  salt  water',  so  that 

"it  is  possible  by  placing an  open  cask  in  the  sand,  with the 

top  above  the  surface  of  the  bay,  to  obtain the  best  of  all . 

-beverages,  uncontaminated by  the  surrounding brine.  This water 

comes  through underground crevices  in  the  rock from  the  Ever-

glades." 

In  their attempt  to  erect  a tent  they  found it  dif-

ficult  to  get  holding ground for their wooden tent pins,  owing 

to  the  oolitic  rock  strewn  everywhere. 

Henry  plants  corn,  which is  destroyed by  the "bud 

worm."  Peach pits  prove  a failure.  He  discovers a bear track 

(resembling a human  foot)  on  his  melon  beds,  and panther  tracks 

FIRST 
CROP 

on  his  citrus  seed beds.  Within  a short  period they 

had plenty  of  vegetables,  but  potatoes  had been at-

tacked  by  ants. 

During  three  or four months  of the year,  Henry  found 

that  they  could  reach; " dry-shod",  through the  beautiful prairie 

back  of  Addison's  house,  a sink  hole  filled with clear water, 

FISH " margined with lily  pads"  and teeming with fish  of  dif-
ABUNDANT 

ferent  variety;  numerous  bream,  black bass ( called 

trout)  which were  easily  caught.  And near Henry's  garden  spot, 

in  the  edge  of  the  dense  hammock,  were  deep  rock holes  in  which 

"swarmed" bullheads  and bream,  and "many  more  black bass  inhabit-

ed a larger depression  beyond." 

(24) 

Over the  smooth surface  of  the  bay  they  see  quanti-

ties  of  bubbles,  after which they  watch Mr.  Addison  oast  his  net 

and catch,  with " one  thrown,  fifty  fine  mullets ( an  excellent 

pan  fish)  and "probably  the  most  abundant  of  any  kind  in  them 

waters."  The  mullet's  dreaded enemy,  the  barraoouta,  seems 

constantly  lying in wait for  it.  On  one  occasion, " so  great 

was  the  number and  so  great the attacks  of  their enemies,  that 

the  sound caused by  their leaping was  like  the  rush of  waves 

upon  the  beach,,  and  its  appearance  was  similar  to  a crest of  an 

incoming wave." 

The  barraoouta is  a beautiful fish. having a long 

and nearly  round body,  a long,  sharp-pointed head and sharp 

teeth,  which enables  it  to  out  through an  ordinary  seine  and 

also  to  cut  a heavy  fish line  when  attached directly  to  the 

hook.  They  lie  apparently  motionless near the  bottom,  but al-

most  instantaneously  dart  away  like  an  arrow from  a bow when 

disturbed.  The  flesh  is  white  and  is  excellent food. 

They  practiced catching large  fish at  night;  two 

men would go  in  a boat at  the  beginning  of  high tide;  one 

would stand  in  the  bow with a long pole,  the  end of  which was 

inserted  in  the  socket  of  a fish spear,  called the  grains.  To 

NIGHT 
FISHING 

this  spear  is  attached a long,  stout  line  having the 

other end fastened to  the  boat.  Just  behind the  man 

in  the  bow  is  a short  pole,  placed  in  the  mast  hole,  on  the 

upper end of  which is  an  arm  extending beyond the  side  of  the 

boat  and upon which an  iron  grating  rests,  filled with bits  of 

burning pitchpine.  The  light  from the  fire  attracts the  atten-

(25) 

tion  of  the  fish,  as  the  boat  is  slowly  pushed by  the  aid of 

the  pole,  by  the  man  in  the  stern,  and. while  the  fish are  gaz-

ing  at  the  blaze  they  are  more  easily  captured than by  daylight, 

"Although we  were  in  a region  below  26  degrees N. 

there  were  heavy  frosts.  The  thermometer showed 33 

The  suffering from cold was keen.  Hundreds  of  fish 

were killed in  the  bay."  The  banana plants  were  dam-

aged.  The  beneficial  results were  relief  from mos-

latitude, 

degrees. 

FROST 
IN 
1NOVEMBER 

quitoea and the  destruction  of  the  morning-glory vines. 

In  late November  they  bought venison  from Jumping 

Johnny  and Cypress Tom,  who  came  from the  north trail.  The 

Indians'  appearances were  villainous;  each wore  a plaid,  wool-

INDIAN 
TRADERS 

en  shawl,  turban  effect, around his head.  One  wore 

no  trousers,  only  a long  shirt.  They  carried powder 

horns,  shot  and  other pouches.  Knives  suspended from their 

waists  and shoulders.  Jumping Johnny  had been banished from 

Dade  County  for stealing.  Old Tigertail,  and  others,  paid to 

keep  him  out  of  prison.  These  Indians  pretended to understand 

but  little  English. 

Henry's young son,  Harry,  in  company  with "Will 

Rogers",  mistake  the  puffing  sound  of  the  porpoise,  and the 

barking,  or hoarse  cry  of  a crane,  for  bear cubs. 

A fresh breeze  in  January washes  ashore  thousands 

of  Portugese Men- of-War,  also  a large number of  small  blue  nau-

tilus  shells. " It  is  probable  that  the  ancients  procured from 

these  shells  the  celebrated Tyrian  purple;  for  the  occupant  of 

the  shell  secretes  a liquid of  a deep  purple color.  After 

(26) 

such a breeze  there  was nearly  always found a few  sea beans 

upon  the  bead).  These  so-called beans  are  not 

a product  of 

the  sea.  They  are  said to  be  growing on  some 

of  the West 

India  islands  and are  washed down by  mountain 

torrents to 

the  sea,  and then by  the  force  of  the  winds  and  ocean  cur-

rents  finally  reach the  Florida Keys and the  beach of  the 

mainland  as  far north  as  Georgia.  The  bean  is  nearly  round, 

about  three-fourth 

of  an  inch in  diameter and three-eighth 

of  an  inch thick. 

The  sides  have  a rough surface  varying in 

color from a light 

to  a very  dark brown,  the  rim  being  smooth 

and nearly  black. 

The  shell  is  very  hard and is  susceptible 

to  a high polish. 

These  are  often  fitted with a gold band 

and sold for watch 

charms.. 

Henry  goes to  Soldiers'  Key,  a small  island di-

rectly  opposite  his  place,  to  secure  crawfish  and  conchs 

for bait, and  to  find mioramock  shells.  South of  Soldiers' 

Key  are  three  small  islands  called Ragged Keys, - one  about 

SOLDIERS'  a mile  long,  named Sander's Key,  which  is  sopa-
KEY 

rated from Elliott's Key  by  a space  of  about  fif-

ty  yards,  termed Sander's Cut,  through which the  tide  swiftly 

passes  at  its  ebb  or flow.  Each side  of  the  cut  is  densely 

lined with mangrove bushes. 

Sighting the  smoke  of  a steamer  at  Cape  Florida, 

they  visit the  Cape,  and find the  steamer to  be  the  govern-

ment Lighthouse Inspecting  and Supply Boat.  While  at Cape 

CAPE 
FLORIDA 

Florida they  caught  a large  snapper and a heavy 

striped sheepshead.  A guide  takes the  party  up,to 

the  lantern  in  the  lighthouse  and upon  the  narrow balcony 

surrounding  it.  He  tolls  them that  a great number  of 

birds  are  killed at  night by  flying against  the  thick 

glass  surrounding the  light.  Mr.  Prow was the  lighthouse 

keeper. 

They  are  towed to  Henry's place,  the "Hunting 

Grounds".  Enroute,  they  reach Bahia Honda channel ( called 

there,  Bay  of  Hundy)  said to  be  a treacherous  place  in the 

event  of  storms. 

Henry  Discovers  an  Indian mound a short  distance 

back  in  the  hammock,  near his  place.  The  mound consisted of 

a pile  of  the  rough  oolitic  rooks  and soil,  about  ten  or fif-

INDIAN 
MOUND 

teen  feet  in  diameter  and about  four feet  in  height. 

A gumbo limbo tree,  two  and one-half  feet  in  diame-

ter,  was  growing upon  the  top.  Pick and  spade  were utilized, 

uncovering skulls  and bones  of  both children and  adults,  buried 

with their faces  downward and  with the  tops  toward the  center 

of  the  mound.  Henry  secures  two  good specimens  of  skulls,  in-

tending to  present  them to the academy  of  Natural Science,  in 

Buffalo,  but  forgot to  pack them when  leaving. 

Coming through a banana field they  sea 

and kill  a 

seven foot  rattlesnake,  almost " as large  around as 

a boa con-

strictor."  They  out  off  tan  rattles.  The  snake  was  stretched 

RATTLE- 

his  full  length and "lazily  lifted his head" when  they 

.SNAKE 
UNRESIST-  came  toward him but  offered no  resistance. 
ING 

The  only  market  at Key West  was  uncertain  as  all 

produce  was  sold at auction  upon  arrival,  and good and bad prices 

(28) 

played at  see- saw.  Henry  realizes that  it would require many 

PRODUCE  years there  of " semi-savage life"  ere  he  could hope 
AUCTIONED 

to  profit from his  labors.  This,  together with the 

fact that  he  could obtain  no  cooperation from  others in  supply--

ing  the  necessary means  for  developing the  property,  precipi-

tated his  decision  to  return  to  the  northeastern  states,  and 

finally  to  Palmyra,  New York. 

They  boarded the  sloop yacht belonging to  Mr. 

Brickel,  of ",Mama";  spent  the  night on  Indian Key;  saw  a 

watermelon  patch on  the  island  of  Vitae  Key,  where, " in  the 

HOME- 
WARD 

end of  every  one  was a small  hole,  perhaps an  inch • 

and a half  in  diameter and the  interior  of  each had 

been  cleanly  scooped  out by  racpcooms."  During this  trip  they • 

also  saw  a curious denizen  of  the  seat  the  sea-pigeon.  So 

called on  account  of  its  resemblance,  both in  color  and shape, 

to  a wild pigeon with outspread wings,  as  it  floated 'upon  or 

near  the  surface  of  the water. 

Henry  Perrino was  compelled to  share  his  state-

room with a young man,  of  nice  appearance,  but who  drank 

constantly  from a "flask  of  liquor"  and finally,  becoming in-

sane,  suddenly  died ( probably  from fright, as  the  captain had 

threatened to  throw him  overboard)  and was  buried,  with prop-

er  service,at  sea.  Before  passing  on,  he  became  sane  again 

and gave  his  grandfather's  address, ( in  New York)  to Henry 

Perrino,  who notified the  grandparent  of  the  tragedy. 

Upon hearing  of  the  death of  his  mother,  Henry 

Perrino remarks: "Her children knew of  her  sterling worth, 

her untiring industry  and struggles to  give  us a fair  edu-

cation. ***  She  earnestly  desired  our  spiritual  as  well  as 

TRIBUTE 
TO HIS 
MOTHER 

our  temporal  well-being,  and  it  was  the  thought 

of  her,  and  of  my  sister - far away,  which made  me 

firm  in  my  endeavor  to  do right when  I was  a young man  upon 

the  distant  Pacific  Coast." 

* * * * 

Extract  made  by 

Elizabeth 010.  Ledbetter 

