Place of or igin Chica;c , I11inos Date 6/22/39

Label

Project worker Abe Aaron

Amount

Project editor

16p

Remarks

Forms to be Filled out for Each Interview

FOLKLORE

FORM A

Circumstances of Interview

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF 'WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

Illinois

Abe Aaron

5471 Ellis

6/22/39

American Lis
Post Office Workers - ( Carriers)

1. Date and time of in terview

6/12-03-6/14-6/16-6/19-6/20

2. Place of in terview

47th St. and Cottage Grove Ave. - Canal & Van
Buren Sts. - Jackson and Dearborn

3. Name and address of in formant

Several. Initials permitted, names and addresses withheld. E.F., B.D., S.B., H.F., J.C., G.R..

4. Name and address of person, if any,

who put you in touch with in formant. M.F. &

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying ycu

B.D.

6. Description of room,house, surroundings, etc.

All interviews, except that with A. D., in

restaurants, taverns - and in B. Ws home.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing

the proper heading and the number to which the material refers.)

W 3 , r1c1

FORM c

Text of Interview (Unedited)

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF INORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

Illinois

Abe Aaron

5471 Ellis Ave., Chicago,

6/209

Post Office Workers - (Carriers)

NAME OF INFORMANT

M.F., B.D., S.B., H.F., J.C., G.R.

They're mostly old people in this hotel. They bother hell out of you every

time you bring in the mail, as if it's your : ault they don't get anything.

There was one old goat at the hotel who didn'thave nothing to do but sit

around waiting for bedtime all day, and he was always concerning himself with

the temperature and the calendar--held come down early to the lobby some mornings

and he'd just chortle with glee if the last day's sheet hadn'tbeen pulled off

the calendar; he'd rush over to the calendar and pull off the sheet and he'd tell

everyone who'd listen about it for hours. He had scads of money.

Lots of people, and especially old people, rich old people like the ones

around this hotel, are always trying to raise trouble for the carrier. But I

bullcrap them to a million, and they never know it; I've been on along time,

long enough so I really have a neat way of handling them. I can't describe how

I do it, I de it, that's all; the trick's mostly to keep agreeing with them and

keep twisting their statements inside out as you go along--after a while they

think you're a goof, and a goof can get away with anything, almost. You've got

to know how to laugh a bit, too, at their jokes. It's the guys who're smart,

smart and a gressive, who - t in dutch.

Post Cffice Yorkers

FORM C

But this old goat-- I'm glad you reminded me--he'd just chortle with glee

when the calendar wasn't changed; he was normal in most repects, but he had

scads of dough. One week I was off for three days, and when I came back on

the route he wasn'taround; he'd fallen from his bedroom window and killed

himself. There was one case where there wasn't any question of suicide. He'd

just leaned too far out of the window to read the thermometer, and he'd

slipped off the ledge while doing it, got dizzy or something. But the funny

thing was that everybody in the place was glad he was gone. You could see the

smirks on their faces when they talked about it. Most people ought to die

before they get a chance to grow old, by God.

Three times I've been asked why I'd hanged a INTA check. ( leaving it

hanging over box instead of handing it to a dressee in person)-- But I don't

hang them, I never do. I ring the bell where it says the guy's name and someone

comes out and says he's that guy. But he's not, and he takes the check. Then

he figures he can't get away with nothin' and puts it in the box. I get a

kickback on it.

I had a funny one happen to me the other day.

You know how the Negroes live. You'll find a fmmily in a room and a

whold colony in a flat. And they're always movin' or havinl to move. Some of

them haven't any to ilts an' some of them don'teven have any water. The lalls

are dark, and even if they weren't you wouldn't be able to tell who lives there

from the names over the mail boxes--you ought to see it. You can ride through

the neighborhood or even walk around it it and never have a hint of the way

they actually live, of the kind of dirt and misery they have. I feel honest

to God sorry for the pocr bastards, honest to God, I do.

Post Office 1 or kers

FORM C

I've got a check to deliver to a guy named H. G. His name's not up, but

I sort of remembered that an H. G. Id lived on the first floor so I ring the

bells for the first floor. A guy comes out and says he's not H. G. but H. G's

brother-in-law; H. 7. lives with him, he'll take the check. I give it to

'him, and while I'm distributin' the rest of the mail for the building H. G.

himself comes down from upstairs and aksw for his check. I tell him I'd

already given it to his brother-in-law. " I got no brother-in-law," he says,

so I had to go ir with him and get the check. This other guy was standinl

there--you could see his lips moving spelling outletter by letter what was

on the check.. All H. G. ' ddone WRS move from the first floor to the third.

Talkin , about kickbacks, I get lots o' them from dames on my route who

don'thave enough to do to fill in their day. One day I got a kickback on an

open letter. I'd hung it in the wrong box-- I was responsible, I gues, I

don't know--ant the dame callee the staticn. Well, the person I'd give the

letter to, she'd opened it, but she claimed she didn't read it, an' I took

it myself to the dame who should of got it in the first place an' explained

what had happened an' asked if everything WRS all right. She read the letter

an , said sure, everything was all right. When I got back to the station,

she'd called up about it an made a complaint. I told the super, " If she has

a beef, let her come in." If we listened to all the complaints we'd go screwier than we do; I always say for them to come in if they've got a beef.

Lots more carriers want to transfer to clerks right now than the other

way around. ThaIT's because they're beint ridden. An' there's no chance for

promotion. Take an in spector's job, for in stance. They never take a carrier.

Clerks want to transfer usually only when the weather's gettin' nice. I was

talkin' only yesterday to B. who transferred to clerk a coulle weeks ago. The

FORM C

first thing he said was, " Jesus, I'm glad I'm out o' that!"

The fellow he transferred with is stortin' to notice the length of the

workin' day already. The only thing is, he wa:., sent to my station, an' my

station's the worst station in the city; they send them to this station to

'get fired. S. is gettin' fired.. L. will probably follow. There's been so

many guys fired out of that station, T. mentioned a fellow to me the other

day who'd been workin' there two years a goan' I could hsrdly remember him.

They sent N. here to be fired. He'd got along so far on a couple

reductions, but they final4 fired. him. I've been tryinl to transfer fer

almost a year now. Seems you can't even buy a transfer, these days -- I

mean, if you're a carrier. It's easy enough if you're clerkinl. Ant if

you're in this station, it's practicay useless to try.

R. got fired out of this station. He's a coal salesman now; anyway he

says he is. T. was tellint me about him. He's called about ten times on T. now,

tryinl to sell tim some coal. Finally T. gave lim an order for ten tons, but

he waited ant waited an' that ten tons never did come. Every time he called

on T. he talked about the buck le'd lent S. when he was workin' at the station.

S. owed the buck all right, an' T. kept after S. Finally, he said, " Do

so methinl, a nythingi - Jesus!. - give me the buck* - anything to get rid of

him." S. wouldn't cheat anyone out of a dime, but about this guy, he just

wants to see how far he'll go. R. never was a coal salesman; it's just a

pretext to call on T. and try to collect that buck S. owes him. S. says if

he'll call on him he'll pay the buck, but for 1% not to say anything to R.

about that. Carryin' does that to a guy, makes ' urn batty.

C's clerkinl now; he's detailed down to Donnelly's. There's a sweat shop

• FORM C

if there ever was one. I wouldn'twant that detail. Those girls work piece

work and you have to keep up with them. A girl sits at the conveyor an' puts one

page of a catalogue on the piles as they go past, one page, the same page,

all day long, Millions of ' em. The conveyors go so fast thyt girls don'teven

have time to talk to one another. I don't see haw they can stand it without

goinl nuts. The clerks from the p. o., they sick these Sears Roebuck catalogues,

put the names of the towns on them an , send ' em out; they aren'thandled again

till they get to that town; it's very economical.

That old baldheaded bastard, he comes and stands right behidjou. That

station's as bad as any factory could be. It isn't like that in most of the

stations.

his place's got a rep all over the city - in the service, I mean.

They fire ' em out oithere, one after the other, everyone knows that. They

say investi7ators are comm' out from Washington to look into the situation,

especially in that station; but generally because of the new speedup we've

got everywhere.

But you're always hearing things like that, an' nothin' seems

to come of it.

The carriet's a heel to everyone, the public, the clerks, even to the

guys on WPA. There's one fellow I know who quit the service because he couldn't

stand it any longer. He isn't even making fifty-five dollars a month; he's not

on WPA, he's on relief. I meet him one day; it's snowing and I'm lugging a

full pack around, and you know that he says to me? - " Boy, I'd hate to be

lugging your bag around" -- he's never been sorry he quit.

There're about ten-thousand clerks an' only about three-thousand carriers.

The carriers' union's always bison weak, the clerk's stronger ant more active,

too, an' thyt's why they aint driven like us. They get things done.

FORM C

For that matter, a clerk does everything but clerk. He fill sacks,

drags them around, throws manic yes, sometimes even cleans up garbage. He

does everything but clerk. It's damn few detains you ever need a pencil on.

I remember when I was takin' the exams. There was a big burly lad that

ought to've been drivin' a truck or something; he yells out, %here d'you

put your name for clerk on this?" I thought, you big goof, you'd be lucky if

you got high enough on the list to get a job carrying, let a lone clerking.

We take the same exams, but most fellows put down they want to be clerks an'

it's harder to get high up on the clerk's list. You sign up for carrier an'

hope after you get on someone'll be goofy enough to want to transfer with you.

I like carryin 1, only they drive us too much. They really do; they drive us

like all hell.

My wife comes home with a story the other day. D's wife ' stellin 1 her

about her husband bein' called to work in the post- office not long ago, at

fifty bucks a week an , his pay's goin' up five a week after six months. She

tells me that line o' bullcrap an , looks at me as if to say, "Ant, why can't

you do that, if S's husband can?" Hell. I ask around an' find out he's temrin 1.

(working as a part-time temporary substitute clerk -- A.A.# He's lucky if

he's knocking out twenty bucks. What do you suppose he was doin' bcfore? -

workin' ih one of these chain shoe stores. How much could he have made workin'

for one of these outfits? Imagine handin 1 out the line 01 crap they do,

especially to mailmen, who know conditions.

FORM C

The only time there was life in that damn postoffice was when them Goddamn

temps were there. That was because they could tell the boss to go to hell.

I've been clerkin$ only a little while now. I finally managed to make it.

The thought of a uniform is very funny to me now. I was a boy scout. I was

an usher in a theater. And then I was a mail carrier. If I had to be in uniform again now, Id quit the service. A fellow in uniform is always stereotyped.

I'd like to take an exam for one of those Washington jobs. Jesus, when

they call you to work on one of those jobs, they treat you as if you were a man.

When they tell you to report, they tell you be telegram. Here, they hard you

around like a bunch of cattle. I remember when I was taking the exam.

There's a little fellow there, and they line us up at the elevator. He

gets sore as hell. " Look at thee he says, " look at them; they're regimentin'

us already." Sure, it's funny, but it's pathetically funny, because there's

more truth in it than you'd ever &ass.

It takes a congressman and a senator, at least, to make you a field

foreman. The opportunities in the service are very limited. For example,

there's only one field foreman to about thirty men. Policemen have one in ten.

And the firemen, I think, have a lieutenant to every eight men.

The guys are always gripin' about their jobs, but what the hell, I say

they're better off than most guys in private industry - an' look at all the guys

who don'thave no jobs at all. Sure, they drive us all right, an' I don't like

it no moreln the next one, an' I'd like to see so methin' done about it. You'd

think the government would set an example; but it don't; it drives the hell out

FORM C

og you in the service, just like anyone else. but where else can you be sure of

a job for life long Is you keep your nose clean. What would these guys do if they

did lose their jobs, quit or get fired or so methinl? What are they fitted to do?

Ant even if they're fitted for so methinl, what the helli -they'd find out soon

enough there aint so damn many jobs fl(a tinl around where they'd make nearly as

much. They get around an , they know that as well as I do; you notice there aint

so many of ' em quittint, don't you? - they're holdin' on all right, ypu bet they

are. If I 1,st my job today I wouldn't even know where to start lookin , for a

job -- I was thinking of it only the other day; I was feelinl so damn lousy when

I come home.

XVIII

This job's sure got me down. All I want to do when I get home at night

anymore is take off my shoes ant lay eround till it's time to go to bed. I

don't even want to read anymore. The wife says I'm gettin' old. I aint thirty

yet.

Are you in the service?

No, I didn't think you were. You don'thave that beatendown look.

Most of the fellows are always in debt. Sometimes, of course, it's because

they have their share of hard luck. But it's so damn easy- to get credit when

you're in the service.

That credit union--between the Irish and the Jews, they've got things

sewed up; they're out to make money.

There's one temp in the station now, an Irish lad, who hates Negroes. He's

so dark himself, he almost looks like a Negro himself. He's always saying some-

-

Post Office "Workers

FORM C

thing or other that he thinks is funny to the Negroes in the station, things

like "Move over, it's gettin lkind o' dark around here." We fixed him last

Christmas though. We sent him two presents. We went down to a butcher shop

. and bought a big mangy bone and a smoked fish. We sent eac one in a separate

package. The bone was marked " From the Bishops of Forwestville Ave.," and the

fish " From the Chamber of Commerce of Vincennes Ave." But the best one was

the one the little Negro newskid pulled on him outside the station. The kid

said, "Hey, mister, ya want a Defender?" He went

around kicking packages and

mailbags out of his way all day. He kept saying,

"That's the last straw,

that's the last straw," and he blew up because we

wouldn't stop laughing at

him. He's sure wacky.

XXIII

A. gets stiff every night. He comes to work with his face absolutely

cut to ribbons. But willing to work though. He'll work like a horse.

L. gets stiff every night, too. But he's not like A. A. gets into fights

somehow all the time, but it's all in the nature of fun to him. L. gets the

tar kicked out of him'beoause he's the sort-of guy who, if you leave your wife

a lone for a minute in the tavern while you go to the can, he'll come up to her

and make a pass at her.

C. gets into fights because lie's drunk and so's everyone else and it

just happens. L. gets beat silly by the boys who're so ber. L's on the way out.

I guess C. is too; they drink too much.

They sent P. to this station a couple of weeks ago so's to fire lim out ol

the service. M. an' me, we see him for the first time, ant we both say at the

same time, " Boy, look at that bar fly," an' we started to laugh. He's so goofy

because he's always drunk. He's even goofy enough to pay for C.O.D.s himself

when the people aren't at home or ' re short o' dough.

FOR/ C

When we were temps, on payday they'd never give us our checks in the

morning. If they did we'd get drunk and siappear and they'd never find us.

AAS

The subs now, they're the pride of the sertioe. It's so tough getting work

these days, half the lads subbing are college boys, who've graduated.

There's a guy we don't like very much--no one likes him-- who was put on

one of the toughest cases in the station. So we go around singing, " Someone

Had to Carry Number --, That's why S. S. wPs born." We yell it.

XXVII

Did I ever tell you about one of the elevator operators down at the main?

I'm in the elevator an' someone says so methint about a steady job. " Steady

jobl" he says, "steady jobl" an' slams the door shut. He slams the lever an'

says, "My brother-in-law's always talkint about na steady job. He makes anyway

•
twice what I make, an' if he wants to, he can lay off a week an' not notice it.

I'm goddamn sick ant tired of hearin' about steady jobs. What's a steady job

anyway? Only so methin' to bury yourself in, that's all. Ya get tired o'

hustlinl an ya want a steady job. But what the hell ya gonna do about it? Ya

got a wife an' kids ant ya gotta keep your steady job.

XXVIII

This guy, he lives way over his head. He'll take some punk girl out an'

blow a fortune on her. If you want to put on a front, why, Christi - put it

on in front of strangers, not in front of people you know.

When we were temps, being in uniform, we'd never have to pay for smokes

or eats or drinks. But when payday came....111hy, when payday came I had a sheet

of paper a mile long, with 5X I owed to this person, and a dime to that one,

and 15-20 cents to someone else.

FORM C

It used to be a point of honor with us not to pay oarfares. We had lcts

of trouble with conductors. Because we didn'thave thofull uniform, only the

hat. One fellow used to wear an overcoate - imagine delivering mail in an

overcoat. Some of the conductors wanted us to pay fare if we didn'thave the

full uniform. Especially on Sundays. I used to start out early to make sure

I'd get to work on time. If I got kicked off one street car, I'd take the

next one.

D. once wore a white linen suit while drivin' truck. People who saw him

thought someone was stealing a govit. truck, and calls bean to come in about

him. Why, they had inspectors out looking for him. He only had a date and

he didn'twant to change.

F., the first thing he did was lose his badge. We told him a IPA crew'd

found it in a gutter; he was always drunk and in a fog; he would remember

up to a certain point but that was all.

DOE

You'd be surprised the number of wcmen who live on streets next to the

Negro neighborhood who keep big vicious police dogs. I've been bitten twice

delivering mail to them. Some of the carriers won't go up to the door; they

make the women come out for their mail. Most of them are old maids anyway.

When you want to transfer, jou go down to the union office and hand them

your name. If you're a carrier, you go to the clerks' and they say, " Sure,

sure, we'll take care of it." But they don't. They forget all about it. If

you want to transfer, you have to find a man to transfer with yourself. The

union won't do anything about it because it means losing a member.

Some old dame, she calls me from four doors away. " Carrier," she says,

XXIII

Fost Office Workers

FORM C

" come here." Imagine that: carrier tame here! -pursing hp her lips and

being prim and commanding about it.

Me, I say, " If you want to see me, come over here."

Finally she comes over. She says, " Do •you have my check today?"

I say, I don't know; I have WIA checks and old age pension checks,

wait till I ,4et to your door and I'll see. If you stop and look through

your mail for anyone who stops you, you'd never get through, you'd soon

be in a hell of a mess. We get hell if we do it. But that isn'twhat

gets the dame sore. She says: - she says ( she draws herwaf up straight

and indignant) - she says: "An old age pension check! A WPA checkt" She

snorts. "I work for the Board of Education!" she says, "I'm a teacher'
ft

I knew who she was then and I said, "No, I don't have your check

with me, it's in the relay box."

So she wanted me t ,Fet it for her.

But I couldn't do that, not till I'd got to it on the delivery.

ThPtld be an tour or so, I told her. " Very well" she says, and she

walks away-- she's sore as hell, too.

A little later I'm crossing the street and she sees me. I haven't

been to the relay box yet, but she thinks may be I have and comes on

over. " Do you have the check now?" she asks me.

I said, " No, lady, I don'thave your check yet. I haven't been to

the relay box yet. I have my mail to deliver."

You know what she says? She says, "Well, I can'twait any longer.

I'll tell you what I want you to do. VMhen you ;et my check, I wat you to

wrap it up and put a piece of string around it. The people I live with,

they wouldn't steal it, but they are now. I want you to wrap it up and

make a package out of it."

How in hell did she think I was going to do a thing like that?

FCRM C

XXXIII

One day I tore a woman's blouse right off her. It wasn't my fault;

it was hers. She wanted her ?WA check. I had it all right, but she couldn't

wait. She sees a government envelope sticking out of the pouch and she

says " That's my check," and she reaches right over my shoulder and grabs

it. I grab it right back. She snatches it again and when I go to take it

from her she steps back and I grab hold of her blouse instead and it tears

in my hand. I got a complaint on that, but I talked my way out of it all

right.

xxxry

The last ten days I've had eleven complaints. Seems like we spend half

our time these uays arguing with people at the windows.

A guy comes in and wants to know what I did with his check a week ago

Tuesday. And the dumb clerk at the window, he'll came back and say, " So

and sots out there. What did you do with his check Tuesday of last week?"

I deliver maybe ten to twelve thousand pieces of mail in that time

and he expects me to know what I did with that piece of mail a week ago

Tuesday. All I know is, if I had it I delivered it. Someone in the

apartment accepts it and then finds out it's not for him - probably knew it

in the first place - and then hangs it.

But what you oan't beat into their dumb heads ia the fact that in these

boarding and rooming houses - you'd be surprised the crappy joints that call

themselves hotels--you have to hand all the mail to the lady who runs that

joint, or leave it in what they call the office. They seem to have the idea,

yhat if they don't get their mail--especially when it's checks, the carrier's

holding it.

But it's funny sometimes. These rooming houses. The landladies know

just when the checks are due and they're out there to grab them. They get

FORM C

the rent out of those poor bastards before they give up the checks.

Sometimes you find a landlady and maybe four-five WPA workers all waiting, and

they start fighting with the landlady right off, even before you hand over

the checks--they ask you for then and so does the landlady and they all

begin screeching ft you and at each other, all at the same time. You have

to ham:, all the mail over to the landlady; she's the householder, and she

distributes it to the guests. Guests! -that's a funny one.

I've got a refugee from Germany on my route who meets me on the corner

livery day. He's a swell old duck, and funnierin hell. He's always so damn

anxious to hear from his family over there, he begins to hop up and down

when he sees me coming. He doesn't ask for his mail a head of time, though,

just begins hopping from one foot to the other when he sees me. I tell him

if I have anything, and then he walks down to his house and waits for me

there. He's funny and pathetic, both at the same time. He's an old man.

A couple times I wanted to give him his mail at the corner, but if I did

someone would be sure to see me, and I'd have to do it with everyone; I'd

never get my mail delivered.

XXXVII

The men in the service and the guys on the police force, they're the

aristocrats down in the Negro neighborhood.

XXXVIII

They're always catchin' someone stealinl. I don'tknow why they do

it; they know they'll get caught sooner or later. An' guys with years of

service, too, even twenty-thirty years of service, they still try it.

That goofy L., ' els gettin' punchier every day, ' els gettin' really

XXXIX

FORM C

wacky. SEIB a big goofy carrier. We was standinl at the

registry window

one day, an' he was signing for thirteen registers. But

'a' didn't know

how to spell " thirteen", so ' eturns around an' asks me.

I tell lim ant

te writes it down. Then, fer no reason . t all, le begins to talk about

•

suicide. There've been three fellows killed theirselves outta our office

the past few months. L., he says, " I wouldn't commit suicide." Ya oughtta

see tim talk--' is shoulders keep jerkin'. I think tels goinl goofy. 'E

says, HI wouldn' ever do that; there's too many women around." 1E says,

"If I was to get fired from my job an' I couldn' find nothin'

else, I wouldn'

bump myself off. Nossir. Ya know what I'd do? - I'd get me a

big wooden

beak an' put it on my nose an' follow the horses like the birds. Ya notice

they're all fat an , happy.

The fellows believe so many guys commit suicide because of the pressure

of the work; they're beint pushed around. Let's talk about so methint else,

huh?

One old guy, every year, the day before Christmas he tips the carrier

two bucks. But he doesn't care what carrier he tips. The first one he

meets when he goes out on the street is the one he tips. S's been on the

route for years. Three times in the last seven years the guy's tipped

someone else, because S. didn'thappen to be on when he came out the day

before Christmas.