r,:g.a 47.1--ewragMIRIMPUIPIRFIFFICAU7M7— 

*utak 80,  1939. 
".  a.  Harley,  0.  3. 
loon Do.  1, 
Durkee  nldg„ 
nay .&  Sawnan-ste., 
Juaksonv jibe alorita. 
nose ohneherd,  writer. 

it wile  ruining,  and  the  low-hung elouds made  the  stairway 

aM oo:ridors  of the old eurkee minding dark,  as  i turned  the  knob 

on the  door  of Itoom  no.  1 at  2p.  m.  A  dim light  shone  through the 

glass  upper half.  ubtaining no  response,  I took a turn  the  length 

of the  eorridor  and  returned,  trying the  door  amain- " Como  in, 

said  a vJioe,  und 

slightly  shook  the  knob to  *how  that  the  look 

was on. 

A t this,  the door was opened  by a slight  man,  with lined 

f4L:e,  faded blue  eyes,  and  thin graying light  hair.  In answer 

to  my  question asking  if  he were  vr.  naeley,  he  said: "be, 

must*  nurley,“  and  )ntinned to hold  the door  open  about  six 

inahoe. 

explained  I  as  interviewing  some  of  the  more  i)romi-

*tent  eitizens  rolhtibe to unrecorded history of Jacksonville  and 

importi ,nt  events  in their lives.  Me answered  that he would  not 

b  tu.  outhori4  on history,  and  nothing iTlportunt  had  ever hap-

pened  in  his  life.  iiothing  daunted,  j then  told  him I was  trying 

to  100(.40  u rather remarkable  topigraphieul  map of  eirwksonville 

of  the 1880's,  i understood  he  had  a valuable  aolleution of florida 

maps  of  different ' ,Iriods,  and  thought  he miAtt  be able  to help me 

identify this  partioular map,  or  perhaps he ml  ht  have a copy. 

"Come  rikr,ht  in.  i am pretty busy and haven't mush time  to 

spare,  but 

talk to you for mffew minutes." 

4.,nd so  the  door opened wide and  i entered  a room,  the  most 

prominent  equipment  being u large  sized drawing board,  immuoulate 

26027 

tt• 

Marley,  o. 

Z. 

in  its neatness -  a noz  oover of light wrapping paper  having been 

recently  adjurtod with thumb Wilts - and in the  center a squat 

lamp,  its motel  shade  pollod  almost  to  the  bottom of the  single 

small  bulb,  gave  tho  dim light  i had  soon ralsotod through the 

door. .6n old-fashioned wiokor armohair  and  two straight  chairs 

wero in a row  along the  east wall  of the long room,  which faced 

the_ north whore  two long unourtained windows looked  out  on bay 

utrest.  All  the  chairs were  filled with  tightly  rolled maps and 

blueprints. 

un  the  floor,  more maps,  more blueprints  in steaks 

between  the  chairs,  with the exception of two high cushioned 

stools  flanking each side  of  tho  drawing board,  there owl  no  oth• 

er  furniture.  The walls wore lined with maps  of Florida. 

"You have  a large collootion of mars?"  L vonturod. 

"Yon,  rawithah,"  ho  drawled d. "About  s2,000 worth.  sow,  hdro 

is  an  old map,"  he  said  pointing to  one on the west wall,  and 

speaking oagorly: " It was  drawn by brigadier-oonwal bornard,Anginser, 

O.  D. 

an  member of  the  Beard of kublio  Improvoment,  and  you 

will  aoties  it  bearo  the  date of 1829,  with  tha legend ' map  of 

• 

Florida  from Northern  boundary  to  atorn 27 30 •  even  at  that 

early  date,  the  government  and  the  people  of  Florida were  interested 

in a arose- state Gana.  xou wiU obsorve on  this  map two  proposed 

routed are  indicated: 

"The first,  up  the  nt.  Johns  from  the ocean,  through blaok 

ureek  to  the  banta is  alver  aid  into  the  pt.  Johns. 

"The  second,  through the  ut.  mary's mivor s &Grose  the  ukeil-

fenokeo  Dump,  an1  almost  luo  wont  to  2ort  bt.  Joe  and the  oulf of 

Mexico. 

"These are the  first  recorded  rocords  of  efforts  to  obtain 

a ship ° anal  through ylorida. 

Marley,  U. 

3. 

"Barge .anal re no  longer popular.  the least depth of 

water possible  for  an  efficient  intraooastal  waterway is  eight  to 

ton feet. . ship  eanal would  have  to  be deeper.  in the  early 

days,  shipping interests 4111  private yacht  owners wJre satisfied 

with five  or six  feet  depth  to  a burgo °anal,  but  new  even  these 

hLive  to  be  deeper. 

"You have read my artiole  in the Plorida nistoricel  iiociety 

,uarterly utout  aloridu maps,  and  the early  rspamish map of 1763, 

which is  in ma  oolleetionY" 

told him i had,  Laid  coneidered  it  very seholarly and  quite 

enlightening. 

"Now  here  is  a map which will  finally beoome  oustamary and 

will  be  extensively used - aerial maps or  maps  from the air -  be-

cause  they  shov  detail  so  verfeetly.  In all  old style  maps,  there 

is alwals  the  quetion as  to their accuracy;  if they  are not  uJow. 

rate,  they  have  no  value." 

Here he  picked  up an  aerial  photograph  of u subdivision in 

the  suburbs  of miami,  taken  from  an airplane several  hundred feet 

up,  si!le  about  twelve  by  fourteen  inches. 

*See  this  ii: tie while  crows  over on the  northr he questioned, 

indicating a white  mark about  an eighth  of an  inch.  "Well,  that 

is  a cross nude by  tying two  forty  by forty yard sections  of utp, 

bleached  calico ( muslin;  and  opposite,  just adjoining this  roadway, 

you will  sew another v:  hits  cross made in  the  same mariner*  between 

those  two  crosses  is  exactly one mile.  l'hie  picture with this  unit 

of measurement  gives us  the  scale from which a map of  the  section 

owl be  drawn with the  greatest  aoCuraoy as  to  detail  shown by  the 

view.  The  roads,  highways,.or  railroad  tracks offer the  most (tow, 

• 

Harley,  u. 

venient  system of  bounduries on which to  astablish markers. 

"nap making changes  in style .evor  so  often.  by  the  way,  did 

you notice  in  the 1829  Ylorida map how  the engineer drew little neat 

four-liabed  trees with tent-liko tops  to  indicate  the  forest **otiose 

of that  Period,  and  the  shaded white  portions  to  portray  the  shores 

and barren regionsy  fhat ipue  the  style in those duys. 

"The Bemis  map you  see looking for wee a little before my  time 

I teatime  city  ingineer  of  Jaoksonville in 1890. 

"Yes,  I am  a native of  4ngland,  Where 

was  born sixty-odd 

yours ago,  and where  I reeeived my eduaation and  training. 

"I  came  to  Amoriou  in  1886,  going  first lo nhio,  where  I 

will 

reeeived  strenuous training  in i‘merican  methods,  whieh  i/tell  you 

about  latter  on. 

fter  a your  in  Jackeonrille„  A.  want  to work for a railroad, 

oompany of  texas,  which way doing time  pioneer work,  but  came  back 

to  Juokson ills  in 1891,  first  as assistant,  then finally eity  engi-

neer,  viers I remained  until  practically 1898.  During this  period 

I was  Count,  lingineer  as well. 

"At  that  time  the  engineer's  office was located at  the  foot 

of  market  Street  on  the waterfront.  The members  of the board of 

Public  Works,  by whoa I was  employed,  were:  Dr.  John Lidinglo, 

James A.  Shoemaker,  und  aeorge A.  DeOottes,  and  they served without 

pay.  The department of tLe  city waterworks and other  divisions  of 

the eit4  and county were  governed  by different  boards.  I do  not 

now remember any  of their names. . Dr.  Henry nobinson,  I remember, 

was one  of  the  mayors  of  Jaoksonville  in my  term of service. 

"We were kept  busy at  that  time  in laying out the  streets 

of expanding Jacksonville,  also building the sidewalks and  laying -

a now  sewer  system.  At  this  period  the bridge at  bridge  Street 

(now called Brand  StreetJ  was built  over  the  railroad  tracks  beating 

Ads  1.  Barley,  U.  36 

11. 

into  smock:1m where  the  present  concrete  strueture  is;  we  also 

paved a number of streets  with vitrified brie, an well as  certain 

portions  of our  county roads with  Plorida flintroek.  Sven in those 

early  days when  funds were United,  the  oity  did extend its main 

sewers out to deep water in the  tits  Johns Xiveir. 

"I  sometimes  think  the gentlemen who served  the  city without 

pay  deeerve more  redit  than  the  preeent-dey  city  offleisle who 

make  a political  football  of  their °Mee, and do not  always use 

the  best  judgment  or  consult and  consider the people as  to their 

baste  interests in the administration of the city's  affairs. 

"At  that tine Jacksonville had a population of &round 40,000 

to  60,000,  a () comparatively  small  place.  of course,  it  has  grown 

very rapidly  wince  the Ylorida suet  West Xallway vas extended to 

west eels seaohif and  th4t eeetion developed. 

and Mami e 

*Tale  is  a benuron imp of Jaoksonville - a plat nap of  188b 

showing the extent  of  the  city  at that  time *" he  said, crossing 

the room and  indicating a large nap on the east  wall. 

slier s is  one  of the  latest  government maps,  a new system  of 

triangular-coordination"  he went  on,  pointing to  a oomparatiliely 

new  map adjoining,  with triangular markings all along tke  border. 

*You will observe hundreds  of lines conneeting places to-

gether.  There  is  practically no  portion of  the state of  Yloridis 

that  has  not  been  triangulated.  This  nap le  first  and  foremost  for 

the  purpose of  asoertaining Ihe coast  line  on each . id ,)  of the  pen-

insula of Oloridu.  You will see a number  of rivers triangulated 

and  the rroposed slorida ship canal  route;  in fact,  there is  very 

little more  work to  be  done  to  bring this  nap up to  date. 

this 

system may  be a little  monfusing,  but its  name - Iplame-oeordinations-

is  not  difficult  to understand. 

A..  ts  Rail4q,  C. 

6. 

"!Carly  surveyors muds  their  traverses in a north  and  south 

direction,  und un east  and west  direction.  But  this  proposed 

method will  connect up the  entire  state,  and  the  position of one 

settlement in gay,  the northwest  quarter of the state  can  be very 

readily  approximated  by  its  distanee,  say,  to  Cocos or itookledge 

flown  on the east  coast. 

"The  purposes  of the map are many.  then extensive develop-

ments are under way,  especially  should a speedway be built  eventually, 

in order to  nave dietanoes and  avoid dangerous  railroad  crossings, 

and  other  good  and  sufficient reasons,  this  map will be of extreme 

importanoe. 

"Yurther,  in  regard  to  this  subject  of plane-coordination, 

a bill will  probably be introduced  into  tin  next  Legislators  per-

mitting the  description of property by  plane-000rdination as  an 

alternative  to  that whim is  now  in use of location by section, 

township  end range,  of land in the  state of ilerido. 

"The  very  probable adoption of the  plow- coordination system 

in the  bear  future  should  warrant  boys  in the  higher grades to 

study a little  more vigorously the ordinary rules of trignometry. 

Hardly any boy leaves school  or  college now whose training in 

mathematic)*  ie worth a hurrah. 

"It  is  absurd,  of course,  to  believe  that  any ' shoal in 

engineering can  give  sufficient instru,stion in mathematics to 

carry an v.  K.  through institutions of higher learoina  the  fins 

points must  invariably  come  from experience - certain things Seitudan 

cannot  learn in school,  but must  get  from  his employers because in 

school  It Was not  forced  into his mind sufficiently. 

4%.  d.  Barley,  C. . 

7. 

"After I left  sohool  in 'Augland,  my  first  job was with  the 

London-fiorthwestern itailroad.  You know  in tinglend  the  govornment 

owns  transportation lines an4  other public  utilities,  so  the  rally( 

road  system is  well  planned  for  officient  operation,  and  the  train-

ing off'rod  in my  first  assignment was  thorough  laid ‘irthutioal. 

"When I oaten  to  hmorloa,  A seoured work  with an engineer  of 

the  dtate  et uhio.  It  seemed  i-ipofisible  to  eleaso  him;  ever7thing 

did was  criticized  for  its  bud points  and  poor  exeoution,  the  good 

points,  if  thoro w:re any, , ere  minimized,  und  he had  no  hesitancy 

in raving and cursing his  office  force  for itsA stupidity,  oolleotive-

ly  and  individually.  I did  not  enjoy my  service there.  Re  kept  ins 

on duty until 11  or 12  o'clock at  night,  that  called  me  at  6 in the 

morning for  some  spooial  work.  I did my  best,  but  he was  mit eatie-

fled;  it  was  dash ---  blank:  blanket: - dash - blank:  all  the 

time.  it  seomed  j.  was  to  blame  for everhinT that  went wrong.  I 

had  made up my mind,  Yshon  this  particular  job Was  completed.,  I would 

love,  so  one morning i told  my  iseployer  I was leaving that  day. 

He  said: ' You  aro  not  going,'  and  j.  replied: "Yes,  1 um  going 

down  south.''  lie  said; ' 3o,  you're  not.  You are not  going any-

whore.  I have  just secured  a government  contract  for dredging, 

widening,  and  improving the muskinguis laver,  and  you  ere going with 

me as  rki  assistant  at  double your  rrrosent  salary.' 

":.A:)  it  turnect  out  the  severe  training he  subjected  me  to 

was  only  to  test  me;  to  aecertain if I 4OUld  work under diffioult 

situations,  could  competently  execute work under strain and  in 

the  face of discouragement - in  other  words,  what  stamina  i.  had, 

ape,  my abiliti to  carry on in the  I told  of  engineering. 

"I  believe  in alloy ing the mind  to  develop naturally. ?or 

instanue,  take  a group of  children  and ;riving thorn  paint and drawing 

A.  Av  Harley,  U. .. 

8 

material,  not  as a matter  of keeping than out  of mischief,  but  to 

learn if  there  is  any talent  for  the  work.  If only  one  of  the 

group  shows  an aptitude  for  dolineation or  intelligence in his as-

sociation of colors,  then  04ve  him an opportunity  to develop this 

talent by  all cleans.  mass  education in wrong. 

"Children  Should  be allowod  to  mako  their awn selection,  and 

thus  avoid tho loss  of time spent  in seviral  years,  training in a 

school  or college when  thou are  not  likely  to continue  in  that  par-

ticular  line  of work. 

"vhen in high  sdhool  4  remember i used to have to  spend  sev-

eral  hours  eaoh  niht studying Latin;  I had no  inalination for 

languages,  espeoially  a dead language,  yet  i was roquirod  to  learn 

it,  and  j.  have  Lover had  any  nractical  use  for  it  to this  day.  A 

physioian  or lawyer  probably  has  more  use  for Latin,  but  for  most 

stuAonts it  is  a loss  of valuable time.  I did  have  a natural  talent 

for  mathematics -  trignometry,  oaloUlue,  :maid - and  took delight 

in  moving a nroblem in  thn various  methods. 

"It  is  surprising  to  ma  the  oomparativelx little  tuition now 

given  to  mental  arithmetie. ;Ample problems like -  6 ti  es 11  minum 

20  divided  by  2 and multiplied  by  4  dealing with addition,  sub-

traJtion and  multiplication,  should  be  Yorked  out  without reoourse 

to  potion  and  napar,  but  ly seems  childron are  now given no  training 

in mental  arithmatio. 

"Vocational  training should  be  foremost  in all educational 

eyste!_s.  tork vith the  child  as an individual;  find out  what  ton-

denotes and  abilities  ho  may have,  than allow  the mind to  develop 

naturally  along  thaws  spouts).  lines.  That is  the ma tug of geniuses. 

A.  &.  Barlog.  C. -.. 

9. 

"It  is not  so much theory  i would  have the  Children taught; 

i would  like  them  to  teach  themselves.  rut  the essentials  in the 

room and  let  them  go to work.  if it  is  young  engineers,  give  thei 

the  instruments  and  let  them  team to use them.  I have had as-

sistants  isrtraining come  to  me und say  the  inetrumonts were  out 

of  order.  The instruments * ere  perfect,  hut  they  just  did  not  know 

how  to  handle  them. 

"At  one time, then  i *as  city engineer of Jacksonville, & 

had  a number  of young men  in  the  officio.  stems during the  rainy 

season,  and the  question with me  was  how  to keep  those youngsters 

employed until  the  ruin stopped,  so  that  we coald  go  cut  and  con-

tinua  our fieldwork. 

oo,  as  an experiment, 

gave each  a map 

to  be copied or  traced.  tine  of the lot  did- his  work very oredit• 

ably;  the  others  spoiled  the  naper on which they  were to  treas. 

The result *as  that  this  one young man  was  kept  in the  office,  and 

in a few months vas copying the  maps that came in to the  county 

clerk's  office for record,  and  in a manner  infinitely  bett-Ir  than-

the  maps had  before . eon curled;  which  prior  to that ei night say, 

had  been arawn by  engineers employed to nt,km  such maps for  tho 

owners of property.  This  young man's name r.ae  Thompson. 

"In another instance  I can remember  a young man  who accept-

ed  employment It a very nominal salary.  Me beeame  so  useful  that 

i was asked  to part with his  services  to  the  standard uil  uompany, 

who wire anxious to employ him.  His salary under me had been  so 

smell  that  I told  them  I would  e:Irt  with his  eerviees  only  on the 

basis  that  his  salary Tould  be  increased 60  percent. / t was  agreed, 

and  he vent  to  v4trk at once for the  utandard uil  Company,  becoming 

so  efficient  that  in time  he was made auditor  with a very large ter-

ritory.  This boy was nay  Bailey. 

A.  A.  Harley,  k;. 

10. 

"Another young man who has done  somo  wonderful work came 

to  me  here  as an ordinary  Irodmak  and  ohainman.  During the world 

war I was  on  engineering duty  near  nordaaux,  and was  surprised 

one day whan a young man oamo  to  attention and  saluted,  to recop-

nize him an one  of the young men  i had  said  goodbye  to  in Jackson-

ville.  He  told  me  ho was then on board a submarine vessel -  24 

hours  on duty and  24  hours  off duty,  and  spoke  of  his  exporienoes 

in  this submarine chaser  jumping from wave top  to wave  top,  und 

being thrown from one  side  of the  vessel  to  the  oth ,r conitantly. 

"This  young man  on hip  raturn  to Olorida was employed by 

the  u. 

3ngineer's  office on  the  ot.  John"  sivor work.  Thua he 

obtained  positions tith  several  different  states in road depart-

ment  work,  until  finally  he was employed by  the rot of  Mew York 

Authority  in  rovidinig , suitable  approaohes  to recent bridges 

that  ppm the nudeon niver,  i  order  that  vehioular traffic  coal 

be !yroporly  Provided  for.  This  young man is  now  the father of a 

family,  and has  reoeivod many  citations  mud  honorary degrees  for 

his  splendid work  in  the  sngineering profession.  He  is  often  ealled 

upon by  oolleges  to  come th)re and looture to  certain students on 

engineering problems.  Thin  young man is  Charles no/ntosh moble. 

mhhon he returned  to  Jaieksonwille  on a visit  a few years ago, 

he 'as  invited  to address the  local  snginaers Club, and also spoke 

before  other organizations regarding his work,  and  it  was  reported 

very faithfnily in the Florida times- union. 

"/  understand  ho  is  now  enginoer for the  state of  rennsylvamia 

and  has  taken °Tor  railroad work,  including overpass's,  und straight-

ening out  the  old  roadbeds which will  finally  be  converted  into  a 

public  thoroughfare. 

A.  I.  Harley,  9. -1. 

10A. 

"I  resigned my work  in Jacksonville  in 1898  to acoept  t. 

position on  the  etaxt of floury  is. /Flaglor,  who sum then developing 

the Atlantic  seaboard  of  slorida  through  the extension of his 

rlorila suet  uoset  nailway. 

"I  went  to  miring  isecteh  an  laid  out  the  oity  of  staid 

while h was  then a swamp,  und  the  only  thing indicating a tom was 

u.  boarding house and  three  barroom,  and  one little  store. 

"My  training in uhio with  the  eroohety  old  engineer steed 

me  in goal  service  then,  as  the  prospeet  was  very  discouraging. 

mosquitoes,  malaria,  heat -  and  see  thisy"  he  slaid,  pointing 

to  a d.ressed  skin of a largo diamondbook rattlesnake  strehod 

out  on the float,  arparently  ten feet long.  "There wore plSn

- 

of those.  Although,  a must  say,  this  part iaular one was  not ,& 

very  hard  speeimen  to  deal with,  as he  seemed  sick,  and woo  bed 

little trou.blki  in dlepatehing hin. 

"I  continued with  ilagler  for  a number  of years,  laying out 

other tcx me  on  tha  east  coast,  then did some  ork  for  real  est&to 

promoters,  ooming back  to  JaJksonville  Titter()  I have Blame been 

,InRag,ed  on -rivilta  ,Iontruots. 

"Hy  long exparianuo  in rlorida and dealing with  a groat 

many neophytes  in  engineering hue led so  to  oxamins  their  leek, 

of  education,  or  perhaps  I should  say,  the  shortuomings  of  the 

system under which  they  are  trained. 

"The qualifidatiOne  of a lot  of  boys- in eoliege  ure  perhaps 

a mistake,  and  mena -.;  arid  time  are lost,  whereas u more  oureful 

study of the young mind would  develop geniuses,  for which  there 

is  always a demand. 

"The work,  for example,  of major eaves  in the field  of  musi-

cal  training and  edueation.  The man who does the employing can 

quiokly  800  if the  individual  has  any aptitude  for  the work for 

which  he expects  to  oolleet  pay.  Of course, willingness iE  al-

ways oommeniable,  but  there  is  a waste  of  time  in trying to de-

velepeany  individual  for  vaeanciee that  are  riot  to  his  liking 

or his  natural  ability  to  master. 

"Of course  it  would  be  a :moat  mistake to  glut  the market 

eith  people developed along en*  Am* or one  profession;  the 

individual  eharaoter  and ability  of a student  should  always .be 

kept  to  the  fore. 

"I  remember  as  a child  in  ngland, we were  kept  busy and 

taught  a great  deal  at  home.  My  father was a great help in this. 

we  eolleeted  stamps  throughout  the oountry and from foreign lands, 

-but my  father had  already  sturted  those oolleotions and helped 

us  on.  The *lame way we  colleeted  coins,  adding to those he al-

ready  had,  thus learned  their value.  When J.  tam  an army  engineer 

in trance during the world War,  I had no  trouble in figuring out 

the rates of exohange  whet  tills  came  in,  an  j had  been taught 

to  figure  in pounds,  shilling,  farthinge,  and  pone.,  as  well  as 

;ranee  and  marks,  in addition to dollars  and cants;  while  in other 

departments  there was great  to-do  in  trying to  make  adjustments 

on  prop**  payment  of a Prenoh invoioe  for  supplies.  Sometimes  the 

check T4ould  be  returned and  the  whole matter referred to the  u.  S. 

Department  at  washington,  then  bank  to 'ranoe again,  taking weeks, 

Marley, 

12. 

„ 

befora the  proper amount in . u.  -.0nohangooufl  bo  arrivad, at  and 

the aorreot  chock dant. 

"Then we  children )re  put  to * ark  in the garden,  each  given 

a plot  of  ground and the  atime  inambor  of  plants or seeds,  Lind ** 

*ould vie with each othfir  in  tryin.7.  tc  vow things,  giving Ihem 

the greatost  care  a.=.1.  attention,  itit  rey  father standi  • g  ready 

to  aorreat or advise. 

"The lack of purontal  interest  and  dinciplino„  i beliave,  is 

one fault  of our  nrosent-day  eduoation.  My  father  always  had  time 

to  spend with his  ohildron,  but  paronts nowadays  rush about  too 

muoh,  laving a  rtat  daal  of their work  to  servants,  or  allowing 

their  children  to  run  around  without  any  supervision,  expecting 

them  somehow  or  other  to  turn  into  fine  oitixene;  vhile  disoipline 

and  eduaLition  arc  left  ontirely  to  tau:hars. 

"And  this  WP/  is  a mess.  If they want  lalm•Amonts  eflioient o 

why don't  they  put  the  right ' eoPle at  the  heady  System 

affi clan-

oy -  orderliness,  of uourse,  if it is  just  eao.ttor of some  kind 

of work - any kind -  to  earn monaw  to  keep -eoplo  from Ecing hungry, 

that  is a different  matter.” 

"'Yes,  bat  out  of  it  all  some people,  in faat,  a grout many 

of thorn,  are  getting a particulL:.r  training in this  government work 

that  viii  rehabilitate  thxn  and  fit  thom  for welt along a pArtiou• 

lar lint  that  thay  thomaelves never could  afford- or  biLve  had the 

opportunity  for  training,"  I vontured, " and  this  is  along your 

theory of individual  devolopmant." 

eII,  I 11,0.d  nav)r thought of that,  or  in thb.t  particular 

light.  I suppose you are  right." 

It was  now  iiourly  5 p.  m.  and he cordially shook  hands as 

he  said  goodbye. 

