Place of originehiCagC.e Ii.111201111 Date...4/1.9/4.9

Project worker BOtty ,butrk•

Accession no.

1. 3615

Date received

10/10/40

Consignment no.

Shipped from hash. Office

Label

Amount

Project editor

ep

Remarks

Forms to be Filled out for Each Interview

FOLKLORE

maw° FOLKSTUFF

FORMA

Circumstances of Interview

CHI CAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 South Troy Street

April 19, 1939

Stockyard worker's job

1. Date and time of in terview

April 14, 1939, 6 p.m.,and after

2. Place of in terview

6401 Ellis Avenue

3. Name and address of in formant

Mary Siporin, 6401 Ellis Avenue

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant.

None

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

None

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.

Lives with husband in kitchenette apt. ( one room) in rooming house.
Outside yards district. Says when she lived right there on top of the yards, there on Ashland, she used to get the cheapest toughest rottenest meats. Handling the best meat in the world at work and when you come home you can'tbuya decent piece of meat for love or money in the whole neighborhood. Says housing facilities are terrible and rents very unreasonable and high, in spite of the fact that fire hazards and unsanitary, in adequate plumbing, if any, is the rule.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing the proper heading and the number to which the material refers.)

W3615

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

CHICAGO FOLKSiukk

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 South Troy Street

April 19, 1939

Packinghouse worker

NAME OF II1FORMANT

1. Ancestry

Polish, American born

2. Place and date of birth - Back of the yards, 24 years ago

3. Family - Three grown brothers, one crippled. The other two have worked

in the yards for years. One hates the yards, always has. Father used

• to work there. Too old now, for that kind of work.

4. Places lived in, with dates - Back of the yards until a year after marriage.

Went to France with her husband for a short time. Lives near Chicago Universit

• at present.

5. Education, with
10 hours a day,
3 days a week.

dates . Eighth grade grammar school. Went to work in the yards, came home, ate, went to Englewood nite school, 3 hours a nite,
Did that for four years.

6. Occupations and

Has worked

accomplishments, with dates in more than ten different departments in the yards.

7. Special skills and interests - Packinghouse union first interest. Belongs

to progressive youth groups. Supports new housing project for the yards distriot, on a community committee working for it.

8. Community and religious activities - Raised as strict Catholic, not religions.

9. Description of in formant.. Blonde, big and soft looking. Sociable, likes to get

around. Talkative. Usually has all sorts of meetings keeping her busy evenings

le. Other Points gained in in terview

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedi0d)

CHICAGO FOLKSTUT

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 South Troy Street

April 19, 1939

Packing house worker's job

NAME OF INFORMANT

I'm in the sliced bacon. The work is very simple but very fast.

They brought a lot of new machinery in. The man who ,makes all that

detailed machinery is only a worker. Be gets paid a little more and

the girls who lost their jobs because of his junk, Jesus Christ you

couldn'tcount tem. In sliced bacon where there were 20 girls working

there's 6 now. Once I went up to that guy, he was on the floor, and I

asked him how much the machinery was stepping up production. My God,

kid, you should have seen the superintendent rush up and tell him not

to talk to me and for me to mind my own business and get back to my

table. Then for in stance here's one thing you ought to put dawn about

sliced bacon department in Swift's. I used to think Swift's was the

cream. You know, they pat you on the back and make out you're just one

of the family, a great big happy family. Lots of the girls go for that.

And than they start laying them off right and left and some of these girls

even then will say ' well, they were nice about it, they said they were

sorry to have to do it.' Amway, in sliced bacon, that's supposed to be

the cleanest, lightest place to work in, why they wouldn'ttake on a Negro

girl if she was a college graduate. There's plenty of them doing all

kinds of dirty jobs in the yards but sliced bacon, oh, that's too good

FORM D

ExtrA Comment

CHICAGO FOLKSturF

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 South Troy Street

April 19, 1939

Packing house worker's job

NAME OF INFORMANT

to give a colored girl. In Swift's now, they're laying off this way

too. Say if a married couple work there they lay off one of them.

There's many like that, you know.

Reminds me of Wilson's. Boy, what a crapholeA In ' 34 they had me

going like a clock 10 and 12 hours a day. I used to get home so tired

I'd just sit down at the table and cry like a baby. That's where I was

blacklisted. Some spy found out I was friendly to the union, you know.

It took no along time to catch on to why they kept laying me off. They

broke up my seniority that way, see, and then finally they wouldn't put

no back at all. Well, I went to see the head employment manager, I didn't

waste my time fooling around with the foremen and the small time guys around

the office. I asked him how it was that I wasn't put on when I knew other

girls were working, girls in my department. He just looked at me a while,

Then he said ' We've got the girls in that department like this,' and he

clenoiled his fist. ' That's the way we'll keep them. You couldn't do a

thing with them, even if you had the chance - - which you won'thave.

Of course, you van go out and sit in the employment office and wait.

Come every day if you want to. That's all he said, didn'tmention union,

FORM C - page -5-

CHICWO FOLKSTune

organizing, not in so many words, but I knew I was through as far as

Wilson's was oonoerned.

Here.'s the psychology of a girl it the yards. She tries to forget she

works in the yards after work. She'll tell people she works in an

of fioe, at best, she'll say she's an office worker in the yards. She'll

go around with everyone except yards girls. That's the single ones.

Married ones are different. Of course the union hasphanged that attitude

to a certain extent. But say like in Swift's, sew s Swift beat the union

to the draw. They raised the wages before the union got established theya

and so the workers think Swift's is the nuts. They fail to realize that if

it hadn'tbeen for the union they wouldn'thave got that in the first

plaoe. And if the union don'to atch hold there they'll get out so fast

they won'tknow what struck them.

You know, thousands of yard workers have occupational diseases.

Rheumatism, varicose veins, cardiac conditions, all those sicknesses

are widespread. There's a rash they get called hog's itch. It looks

awful, irritating and sore, and it spreads. A fellow I kapr had to

quit his job 3 years ago and the doctors can't (sure him. EW can'twork.

Lots of them get that,

My brother worked in the hog kill for 8 years and work's getting so

scarce they're starting to cut into the 8 -year seniority bunch. Be la

was lucky they just transferred him to beef kill. In 1919 my brother

walked out with the others, you know, and while he was walking through

the yards a watchman called out 'who goes there!. Well, my brother

FORK O page -4 -

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

was damned if he was going to report to a squirty watchman and

so he didn'tanswer. The watchman shot him in the leg, put him

in the hospital for a year. You'd think that'd teach him something but it didn't. BM never joined the union. He's just a

suckhole for the company. He sticks up for Swift (1 Company like

he owned the damn place. That's all right, though. KM can get

along without guys like him.