Place of originShi_41,1.9.... I11.1119144 Date 6/16/09

Project worker bitty Burk*

Project editor

16p

Remarks

Fdirme to be Filled but for Each Interview

FOLKLORE

/**7., CHICAGO

Circumstances of Interview

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER Betty Burke

ADDRESS.

1339 S. Troy

BITE

June 15, 1939

• JUL 6 1939

SUBJECT ( Fmckinghouse workers) - Marge Pao*, Pat Christie, Margaret

ftegler, Stella Janacek, Agnes Sullivan, SSanley Xulenski,
Helen Woos.

1. Date and time of in terview

from May 26 - up to June 15

2. Place of in terview

Packing house, Union Hadquerters
Sikora Hall, 4750 S. Hermitage.

3. Name and address of in fornmt

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you

in touch with in formant.

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any Ai the forms, each

bearing the proper heading and the number to whidh the material refers.)

W3627

Packinghouse worker
Marge Paoa, 24 years old
Irish, married to a Pole union member

June 15, 1939

TRxt of Interview

The meat specialties, that is about the coldest place in

the yards. That's where they prepare medicinal extracts from

meats, for hospitals, I guess. Anyway, they have a roam there

that's 60 degrees below zero. Nobody is supposed to ably there

•

longer than 3 minutes, but some of the men go in there for 15

minutes at a time.

I used to have to pack the brains in cans. They would be

frozen stiff and my nails would lift right up off ay fingers

handling them. It's always wet there and very, very cold. I

had to wear two and three pat*s of woolen stockings, 2 pairs of

underwear, a couple of woolen skirts and all the sweaters I had,

and on top of that I had to wear a white uniform. My own. But

I couldn't stand it there, it was so cold. It's easy to get

pneumonia in a place like that.

In cleaning brains you have to keep your hands in ice cold

water and pick out the blood clots. They have the most siokening

odor. Cleaning tripe, though, that's the limit. Rotten, yellow

stuff, all decayed, it just stank like helll I did that for a

few weeks.

Then I worked in the sausage department. In the domestic

sausage. lold have to do the pork sausages in the cooler. Sometimes we wouldn't be told wh4t kind of sausage we'd have to work

on and then when we'd come to work they'd say ' pork for you'

-2-

and we'd have to throw any dirty old rags we could pick up

around our shoulders and go to work in that icebox. If they

had any sense or consideragion for the girls they could let

them know a head of time so that girls could come prepared with

enough clothes.

In summer sausage, they stuff very big sausages there.

That's very heavy work. A stiok of sausage weighs 200 painds,

five or six sausages on a stick. They have women doing that.

It's a strong man's job and no woman should be doing that work.

The young girls just can't, so they have the older ladies, and

it's a crime to see the way they struggle with it. On that job

I lost 27 pounds in three monts. That was enough for me. Item

a strain on your heart, too. Women get ruptured. They pick the

strongest women, big husky ones, you should see the muscles on

them, but they can'tkeep it up. It's horses' labor.

In chipped beef the work is much easier. You can make

better mcney, too, but the rate has to be topped, and it's very,

very fast work.

Packinghouse worker
Pat Christie
Irish American-25 yrs.

Betty Burks
June 14, 1939

Text of Interview

First I was in pickled gigs feet, where they pack and

prepare only pigs feet. I'd have to bone them, wash them, wash

the jars the stuff came in, and set them up on a table. I'd

handle five jars in one hand, a finger holding each one. Quart

jars they were, and the girls on that job would rush past each

other with ten quarts of glassware stuck on the ends of their

fingers, looking like a Buck Rogers creation.

You know how the tops of glass jars are, sharp and jagged

edges, and we'd out ourselves all the time. Then.besides that,

after that we had to take these jars, filled with pigs feet over

to the vinegar table where we put in the vinegar solution. And

when that vinegar juice slops onto the cuts between a girl's fingers, wowlei That really hurts1

We had to argue and talk and fight before they furnished us

with rubber gloves on that job. And then they only furnish two

pairs a week and the girls have to buy at least five pairs because they wear out a couple pairs a day when there's a lot of

work.

I got a skin rash working in that vinegar. It splashes in

your face and your eyes no matter how careful you are. I got

big red blotches all over my face and nook and arms prom it.

It took me six months to get rid of it and I had to quit that

job. They usually put the colored girls on that vinegar job.

Me and another girl used to to a lot of talking and they knew we

were in the CIO union so they stuck us on that job to get on our

nerves and maybb make us quit. Well, it worked, but not until

-2-

all the girls had union cards, so much good that one was. All

the colored girls, they jumpat the chance to be in the union as

soon as they're asked. It's different with some of them. The

Polish girls, some of them they'll say, vAh, let my husband

join. Let my husband go to meetings. Let the men do it, it's

not for women to do.' But once they get interested, boy, oh

boy, they'll get up and talk their hearts out and they'll fight

like troopers for the union. Once they really get the idea and

the feel of the union, you can'thold them down. Some of the

most religious Polish women in the union are the most surprising.

They really go to to wnwhen they get started with the Union.

And the Mexican women, they're all fighters. They know their

rights and they fight for all they can get, every time. A boss

can't say boo to them, they'll came right back at him. You know

sometimes the foremen try to push them around, and call them

Negroes. There's nothing makes them so angry and they won't let

anybody get away with that, if he's the super himself. They're

very proud of being Mexican.

I worked in Cudahy's and Wilson's sausage. Wilson's,that's

a wet floor, and greasy. The meat is put in a stutter, a machine

and then three girls on eackside of the table where the sausages come out, they link it and then at the end of the table are the women who hang the

sausages on the cages. Those sausages weigh a lot, the smallest is about

twenty pounds. Then one woman would have to carry a full cage

away to a different place. They'd have a Negro woman to do that,

she'd have to pick up so metimes 200 pounds on a cage, up off the

floor and lug it around. I did that for a while and sometimes I'd

have my finger joints cut to the bone and that's no exaggeration.

Packinghouse wkr.
Margaret Hueyler
German, American born,
21 years old

June 13, 1939

Text of Interview

I do all kinds of trimming of meats in the cook roam. Like

boning tongues, slicing the tongues, things like that.

There's a conveyor belt that comes down over our tables. It

comes from a half floor above us where they wok the meat. The

men up there dump it and it comes down to us steaming hot. We

have sort of rakes and we have to rake the meat off the conveyor

onto our tables every so often and no matter if our tables are

full or not. Otherwise we'd clog the line and the belt would

have to be stopped and then a lot of confusion an bawling out.

In boning the tongues there's two small bones in a beef

tongue nemr where it's out off and I have to stick my finger in

there and sort of work it so I can pull those two little bones

out. I have blisters on my fingers from handling that hot meat

all the time. You don'tknow how awfully hot that meat is, lust

boiling. Sometimes nobody could touch it, not even the old

hands, you know, the old ladies who've been there so long their

hands are tough and calloused all over. Then the boss would

oame around and holler at us to get busy and we just had to, Whether

we could stand it or not. You can'tprotect your fingers in any

way because it's a delicate operation and you've got to be abl e

to feel quickly with your fingertips. You can't do it when yoar

fingers are tapid.

In lots of the trimming jobs you have to use a kW.. I like

those jobs better than boning because I hate to have my hands

looking like red lobsters and all blistered up all the time. Of

course, there's plenty of accidents with knives, too, but at

least if you out yourself you can get it taped up audit doemn't

hamper your work so much as blistered hands do.

I've worked for Armour's two years. Not steady, though.

I've been laid off twice, so far.

Packinghouse wkr.
Stella Janaoek
Bohemian, 20 years old union somber

Text of Interview

I'm in the soup roam. That's where they have the vegetables

for different kinds of soup made. I peel about every vegetable

under the sun, slice them up and make them ready for the soup vats.

I used to peel 90 pounds of potatoes an hour, now they've

got a maohine they put the potatoes in and they're partially

peeled so a girl can do 350 pounds in one hour. Nobody likes

potatoe peeling though, because you have to work so fast and

sometimes you'll get these great big potatoes thet weighi a couple

of pounds a piece and after you spend your time peeling it you

slice it and it's all black and rotten inside. You have to throw

it away and you don't get paid for the time you spent on it and

that happens often and outs into your pay, believe me. They

scale all that kind of work.

I peel on ions, too, great big on ions, half rotten and they

smell so bad, and I sit there with tears just stremming while I

do that job. You can hardly keep your eyes open on that job, and

you keep blinking away the tears to see what you're doing with

the knife. It doesn't do any good to wipeyour eyes tyou just have

to sit there and cry, and keep working. It's really funny to watch,

if you don'thave to do it yourself.

That's all I do there. I haven't Men in Armour's so very

long.

Packinghouse worker
Agnes Sullivan
Irish, 24 years old union member

June 6, 1939

Text of Interview

I oan do quite a few jobs. Here's how they work in the

stuffing roam. I used4 to be a paokere On that job they

usually have one scaler to three packers. The scalers weigh the

meat and then the packers stuff it in the cans. On the fancy

meats where the meat has to look nice, like tongues, we don't

handle them much with our hands, we have one of those wooden

sticks, you know, like the doctor uses to look down your throat

with, and we pack them in neatly with that. But iith most of

the meat we just stuff it in the cans with our hands, we know

just about how much should go in each can.

It's piece work, and you have to go very fast. You have

to handle the rough tine a ndjust can'tkeep from cutting yourself

all the time. Sometimes girls would have all their finger joints

taped up because of so many cuts.

Then canning hot tamales. That's a dirty job. You know

they have to put in a lot of that hot sauce over the tamales.

You have to scoop it out of a vat with a wooden ladle and if you

get any of that hot sauce on y ur skin it burns like fire. You

can'ttouch your eyes with your fingers no matter what happens,

unless you want to burn your eyes out. It's a sight to see,

especiallywhen it's real busy, the girls working with the sweat

dripping from their faces and they can'ttake time to wipe themselves with a handkershief and they don'tdare brush the sweat

off with a sleeve because that stuff splashes on their clothes.

-2-

Whatever they put in that sauce, its so strong it even eats

into the girls' clothes, makes it acme a part and you can't

hardly wash it out. It stains everything. Ruins your stockings.

That job's no good. They had what they call a safety plan.

They'd plaster the walls with placards saying 'What's Your Hurry?'

'Safety Pays' and things like that. And they know when a girl's

on piece work or even on straight rate she's got to produce or

Mho. They give you a certain bonus if you produce over your

rate for a certain leggth of time. You can'twork for a bonus

and follow their safety rules at the same time, very well, and

they know that.

Packinghouse worker
Stanley Nulenski
Polish, 28 yrs. old

June 3, 1939

Text of Interview

That do I do at Armour's? I'm a tractor man, miss. I Pun

one of them tractors that haul out the finished products packed

and readyfor the freights and trucks. They used to have one man

doin' the cheokin , and drivint a tractor on one job. That's

what they had me doin' a couple of years. Run me ragged. Now

they got regular checkers on steady.

I aint got qa steady job, see. I been working there longer

than same of the guys they put on steady checking, guys that used

to be tractor men alongside o'me. The company knew I was a union

man so I wasn't in on it when same of these other guys got promoted to checkers. I didn't put up a squawk, see, because I

didn'twant to be a checker at the time.. I didn'twant the job

anyway, for the reason, drivinl a tractor, they don'texpect so

much from you, the job has less respomsibility attached to it.

If you're a checker it's easier for them to get something on you.

They're out to get a union guy any time, Armour's is, and the

way they do it is, a cheoker can only do so much work and then

he's bound to make mistakes because he won't be able to handle

the volume of or ders and all, it'll be comini in so fast. So

They'll keep weempint him with work until they pin enough mistakes on him to can him. I figure to keep on this job at Armour's

so I tint kiokint just now. I got a job to do for a while yet.

And wait'll they find out I tint the only guy in the union. All

them checkers are union buys. 1111 they burn: Most of the tractor

men are union, too. It won't be long till we get our contract

out of Armour's. That's what we're counting on when Lewis hits

town.

My address? net for? You wouldn't kid me, would you, sister?

Oh, sure, I understand! You just tell tem Sikora Hall, Union

headquarters, anybody wants me oan see me there, when I'm not

workinl. Sure I got an address, but that tint so hot, sister,

cominl ' round to union meetings for addresses. G tyourself into

•

trouble doin't that. Somebody might get the wrung ideabout your

business here. It tint healthy for Armour spies and stoolies,

I'll tell you that. That's a llright, I know you're ok, I'm Just

givin' you some good advice about a skinl union members their a ddresse

that's all.

Packinghouse worker
Helen Macs

May 26, '39

Text of Interview

I can'ttalk to you much about work. I guess it's about

the same wherever you go, if you have to make a living and take

care of children and home, it's hard work and there's never no

end to it.

At Armour's in the canning roams where I worked on the night

gang we would go to work about three o'clock in the afternoon

and finish sometimes 11 pm, sometimes 121 or 11 am, in the morning. That was in the winter time and when we would get out we,

used to stand out there freezing and shivering on the corner

and we'd have to wait sometimes hours for a street oar to take

us home. At night like that it's always colder than in the day

and the wind and snow would blind us and sometimes when a street

ear would come it would be so stormy and dark they'd go right

past us and we'd just be ready to die, but we'd have to stand

there just the same, and wait for the next one. Every half hoar

they would come, but if it was a big snow storm then it would

take hours. Sometimes the girls couldn't 'tend it, it would be

so cold and they would go across the street and go in one of the

saloons to keep warm. But mpst of the time we'd stay outside

because it isn't very nice in those saloons, you can understand.

Once it was 4 o'clock in the morning before I got home, because

of a big snowstorm, and I was sick and hadto stay in bed the next

night and when I came to work after that the forelady always

picked on me when there was somebody had to be laid off because

-2-

she said I wasn'tdependable and stayed out from work that time

and she never forgot about it. I hated her. She was Polish,

too, but she was a mean devil.

On the night gang shift there's always a lots of rats.

They don't acme out in the *time so much because there's so

many people working add the trucks and the noise keeps them sway.

But they come out at night because it's quieter and run on the

floors and even sometimes along the tables, especially where it's

warnu,like in the cook roams. They run up and into the barrels

of meat that the girls have to out, and we'd hate to put our

hands in deep in the barrels for fear we'd touch a live rat instead of a piece of meat.

Some of the girls wear those overalls, you know, to keep

from getting so dirty and for warmth in some of the* oXilly rooms.

Sometimes a rat would get into the trouser leg of a girl and it

would scratch and scramble and bite, trying to get out and the

girl would be screaming and fainting and naturally the other

girls would get so frightened it would start them screaming for

the men. Once a girl had a rat, a great Igik thing it was, run

up her leg and she was doing work that had to be done with a knife

and she let go of it sc fast it shot across the table into another

girl's face. It made a deep slash and the blood just poured and

here was the one who did it in a dead faint half on the table and

sliding off. She was bit in three places by this rat. It was

like a crazyhouse that time, girls crying and screening, the men

chasing the rat that had gotten out and was squealing and running

along under the table, and girls sitting and standing on the

table trying to keer their legs up in the air. Nobody was fit

-3-

to do any more work that night, with all that excitement. *Every

time an accident happens like that, the girls get so nervous

they can'twork. But the worse thing about that time is that

the doctor was gone and there was nobody but one of these nurses

who don't know how to patch up a sore finger right. It was

about 12 pm when that happened and the doctor only stays until

llpm. The way they fixed this girl up at the plant they left

her with a big soar on her mouth and cheek.

That's the worst I ever saw there, but accidents are always

happening there, all the time.

Industrial Folk Lore
(Comment)

May 26, 1939

Told by Helen Moos, an Armour worker, 26 years old, of

Polish descent, Amerioan born. She is Catholic, attended a

parochial grammar school and her one ambition in life, until

she was forced by family poverty into the yards at the age

of 16, sod was to become a nun. At 14 years, she married a

yards worker, has five children now. Considers herself fortunate in that she was able to conceal her pregnancies and worked

in the yards until the 6th month of carrying each one of her

children. The rule at work is that pregnant women cannot stay

on the job but as Helen says," there's lots of Inman who can't

afford to lay off and so they do all kinds of things to fool

the bosses and keep on. If you work for a woman boss it's easier

to (tt .taway with it, because who'll feel sorry for a woman. But

a man gets mad if he finds out you're pregnant and still working,

and he'll send you hoe right away."

She has her mother living with her, making 8 people in Ave

extremely small rooms, no bath room, outside toilet in the yard,

and their roams are on the second floor. For the smaller children

there is a slop bucket on the back porch, emptied twice a day

into the privy downstairs. Her mother is a tubercular, and is

supposed to be taking tmeatments in a city clinic,but because

someone must take care of Helen's house and children, she rarely

has an opportunity tc get to the clinic. Besides the t.b. her

mother suffers some sort of mental derangement which Helen says

is due to ' change of life'. Notwithstanding all this, the house

is kept clean by the mother. Pretty shabby,vorn out rugs and

-2-

linoleum, beds in every room except the kitchen, no closets, but

clean.

Helen's greatest worry at present is the fear that her

husband will lose his job at Armour's, since there is supposed to

be a new rule tn effect that husband and wife cannot both hold

a job there. Neither of them have any seniority having both

been laid off many times. She has done work in may of the yards

plants, btt never could get work lasting more than a few months •

at a time.

She is a member of the union, thinks a lot of it. Being

very religious, she laments the fact that in her ohuroh the priest

has told the women to remain away from ulion meetings, saying

that the union leaders are a theistic. If only she could in duce

the priest to come and see for himself he would not say that,

he would see how good the union is for the yards people, but she

is afraid he won't listen to her and she doesn't like to have him

displeased with her. So now she stayd away from union meetings.

She just pays her dues and tells her husband, a union member also,

to bring her back news of what goes on.

She has not time to go anywhere except to church about three

times a week. Doesn't like to dc her shopping outside the yards

neighborhood. Her children are sickly, but they've never seen a

doctor yet, for which she thanks God. She hates all she's ever

seen of doctors, never could afford a deoeht hospital when she

had her babies, the county's all she had, and it reminds her of

the stookyards, the way they treat the women in the maternity

wards, there.