Noy  10 6 19301 

Mrs. *AU° Ja4kson. ( 01) 
Volusia  uounty Plower 

"The  uedars" 

-tone Bauch,  florida 

(Cedur-st.  Set.  beach 
and PulMetto-ets.) 

Hose Shepherd,  writer. 

34R.  MATTI',  JACKON 

Mrs.  Jackson,  considered  the  most reliatle  saurus  of  the 

authentio  hist ry  of this  seetion of Volusia vounty,  was inter-

viewed ut  her  home - " The  uedare" - a feemerly  prosperouS  tourist 

hotel,  the  appointment huving been  muds  by  Mr.  Fitzgerald,  pub-

lisher of the lavtona  Aeull ubserver.  Mrs.  Jaokson unswered  the 

bell.Che  is a slight  woman,  burely five  feet  tull,  mild  weighs 

a little over one hundred  polinds.  Alo  moves  411  talks  quiokly,  but 

without amvousnePs. 

"Yes,  I am  a pioneer,"  she  said  simply, ' a.nl  Uhout  the  only 

one  ieft  of  the  early  settlers. 

"1  wus born  Jsuiuury  gl,  18b8,  in isodney,  u small  town flour 

villiamsoort,  rennedlvuLia.  y futher waif  J.  C.  Maley,  u nuteh 

emigrant,  while  my  mother wue  of  Irish uncestry.  Iwus the  eldost 

of ufi1y oi  five  children. 

"Iu the  surly  pu.t  of 1867,  mr.  J. 

Mohan, u neighbor of 

mire,  mud()  it  trip  to  Ploridu  in seureh of u milder climate end 4. 

business location in this  frontier country,  irld  found ', hut  he  de-

sired  ut  rem. Park,  litter  known as  kart vrange,  on the malifux 

reninsulu,  whe-e about  u yer before  pr.  J.  m.  Hawks  Akti  eetublished 

a sawmill.  Thia  section  it  that  timak)  hi murvelous  stunds of live 

(mats.  Hexing made arrangemonte with Dr.  Hawks  to work ut  the  saw-

26034 

Sri.  mekttio  Jaekson 

2. 

mill,  ha r)turned to Yennsylvania,  persuading my father  to amnia-

puny  his baok with his wife and two ohildren. 

I was  eight yours 

of age  at  this  tine. 

"We  embarked on a steamer at  bultimore  for  davannah,  which 

we reached  in the course of eight &ay e after having been  oonsid-

*rubbly  tossed about by a severe  storm.  At  uavannah we boarded 

the  steamer Darlington, coming  through  the  second  stage  of  our 

journey  on  the  inland waterway to  Yernandina,  to  Jaoksonville, 

then via the  bt.  Johns  to  anterpriss, ( now known as banson 

sprinap).  We  spent  the  night  there  vegy  oomfortably at  the 

brook Roues,  owned by  Jacob brook,  an surly  ut.  Johns River 

steamboat  uaotain.  The  steamboat Darlington wus  one  of a libe 

of  river  boats  he  also  owned and  operated. 'rho next day we 

tent  by wagon trail  to  new  myrna and from there  to our  destina-

tion on the  Halifax Yaninsula to  Ponce rark,  abit six miles 

north of hare.  Two weeks had  elapsed  since we  left  our  home  in 

?enneylvania. 

"The  sawmill  neYer wus  a suooess as  a business  venture, 

because it  was  toOldifficult  to  market  the  lumber -- thew  had  to 

depend  on intarmittent  sohooners  to  oarry  the ourgo  to  coastwise 

ports.  They were none too sturdy,  and more  than one was  beached 

in heavy  storms,  or wreaked by  the heavy. lumber shifting oausing 

the bouts  to ° opals*,  se  that many months of work and  effort 

became  a prey to the angry (wean,  with no  finanaiel  riturn.  How-

ever,  those  pioneers wero  hard w and persistent,  and in the  next 

few years three sort)  families  had  been added  to  the settlement, 

and or.  Hawks  established  the  post  office,  which ho  named  rort 

nrangs,  on account  oi  the  groves which  were  being set out  in 

mrs.. Jwakson - Daytona 

3. 

native 

this  seotion  and  also  the  preva3.enoe  of sultaiy  of the/aOur orange 

trees. 

ur.  Hawks  claiirod  that  a letter siLtply addressod ' Port 

urunge • '  wouli.  bo  delivered  promptly  to  this  Florida poet  office, 

as  it was  the  only  oneso  named in the  entire United :Autos.  in 

yryar  or so  9,2..  Hawks  s:bandonod  the  sawmill  business,  lcaving 

this  locality  and  founding the  town of Hawks i-oint,  nos  known as 

.dgewator,  farthor down  the  ooast.  kio  v•rota  a most  authentic) 

his tory  of thie  sect ion,  now  out  of  print,  entitled  The :last 

uosst  of tolorida.' 

ritsgeraldoeto  huAe authored a most orodit-

abls  history  of  Yolusia county,  has my cory  of la.  Hawks'  book, 

irOi  whi. 

ho  used  a good  rtualy  exoerpts,  taid  I must  got  it  buck, 

i.axou:,.d  not  port i th  it  for  anything. 

"UritttjAtIlAy linEl lieUMIPW r OKR8 

Att nti , 

tidal rprise 

when the  ottv..mbout/Litrived  from  Jacksonviall with a passengor who 

wao to  IYIJODIO  famous  as  th-1  devolOpor  o.  this  territory - L Mr.  De.Y. 

or  Hansfield,  uhio.  Ho was , lookin!7 for 

location to  establisji 

oolon,y.  Wi  drove  over to  kort orange  with my  father,  spending 4b 

1Vi)Ok  or  so in  our  home,  during whioh  he  scd fathor went up u.nd 

down the  Halifax Hivor looking  for 

spot  for  t o loca.tion 

of tho  propos/3d  colony.  This  section rit7ht  here,  a  rt  of the 

old  iiliamecn qrant  of ;,) pani$h days,  was filially  soleoted,  and 

in tho  f.11 of  1870  Dtora  nisnod  for  mr.  pay.  of Mansfield, 

uhio,  ni  not  for  the  to 

of paiton,  uhio,  us  is  soteeti7.08  er-

roPe.ously  stated - was establi shod with nino  fsmilios from the 

uhio  city. 

"ouring tho  summer 

.ay  iraoted u sawmill  nearby,  had  lumbar 

cut,  and built  a large building out  of  thip  native product  of  his 

mill,  riamincr  it  the  suolony House'  in whi3h the colonists  wore to 

mos.  Jaakson - oaytona 

4 

live  until  they  were 61,blo  to  Yet  Rattled  in that r own  homes. 

zsin!e  then we  have tdv,ays  had  a hotel  of some  El o...t  in ps,ytorsk 

called  the ' uolony house.' 

are.  Mary  Hoyt  bought  the  original, 

°hanged the  .1 41)10  to  the  lealmetto  House'  said  operated  it  as a 

small hotel,  the  first  hostelry by the way,  of  Volusia  uounty. 

it  burned  down about  twelve years ago,  everythint being totally 

destroyed. 

he buildiagwa  vaount at  the time,  wid it  is sup-

posed .the fire  was  started  by  tramps  or  other vagrants  sleeping 

temporarily  in the  building,  it  e lams  too  bad,  as it was such  a 

famous landmark  4i4 _: onneeting link via.  the o u ny d 

"Mr.  tray  alid  my  father beearie  fir -, friends,  and  a year later 

he  induoed  ay  father  to leave  ro  t urange  which bud  beamse  almost 

ttepopult.ted  after  the  decline  of the local  sawmill,  so in 1871  we 

came to  iruytonu. 

"I  forgot to  say  that pr.  Hawks'  company was  oulled  the  Florida 

Ikand  and  ilumber  uompally,  and  the sawmill  WWI  kncon as  the rort 

orange mills. ?here %Aore  a few  negro laborers who  ease down with 

the  sills. 

er.  Hawke'  depatture,  the  post office was  dis-

eontinued,  ,331  the  llama  given to  another  post  office  six  miles 

south of here.  previously known as ' HoDaniels.'  So  the  original 

rort vrange and the  rresent town of that  name,  were really  twelve 

miles apart. 

"In the ien4ultime,  our  old  l,ennawlvania  neighbor,  mr.  Witohell,' 

bought  an  orange  rove at oak mill  below  now  smyrna,  und  located 

there. 

"Tuktons.  prospered from the  first.  Mr.  Day  was a fine  bust-

a good  mitnager,  and seemed  to  think of  everything.  Pty 

father built a splendid, hone  for  that 'eeriest  right  on the oorner 

of this  street -  Uedar street  awl what  is  now  Reach Venue. 

The buildimr was  oonstruoted of  lumb3r  from the  looal  mill. 

Mre.  Jackson - vaytena 

b. 

"The next  year,  Captain swift,  u eontraetor Xer  the  Unite& 

btatos  government, (sumo  dmn from ROW beilfort,  massaohusetts, 

with a ere*  of  between four  and five hundred mon - liveoak cutters. 

The  gov)rnment  had  some sort of a oontraet,  perhape  such as is 

known as ' timber  righta,'  for  the Williamson grant.  Largo s' 

mills  ire  established,  and this  Lamy  of men busied.:,  themselves 

for u number  of years  during the  full  and winter  period  in out-

ting a4d  sawing into lumber  the liveouk timber  for government 

ship-building.  The men lived  in camps,  and  oaptain  swift  operated 

a oommiesarg from which  they  obtained  their food  supplies. 

"My  ft4ther worked  ut  anything he  oould  get  to do.  Re * as 

ourponter,  aso u bluokemi'h,  and  between the  two  trades  be k)pt 

fairly busy.  Then,  too,  he  set  out  an orange  grove, * Ilia)  he 

tended  himself,  soiling the fruit  at  fair prioes.  Like the .other 

early  settlers,  he  had  to  adapt  himself to  many situations then 

it  am* to  ao.rning a living in thiv  new  3ountry.  If  ho had  been 

likl  some  people  today,  vith only  one  trade, * o woula have had a 

hard  time  getting along. 

"The fir  t sehool * ad established  in 1872,  taught by  J.  W. 

Smith.  hie  daughter,  bertha,  tUrs.  Charles :smith -  she  ma,ried 

al  matt  of  the  sumo  LUmei  is  still  living hero.  She  is  a few years 

older thar:  I,  and  is  the  only  one  of the early  settlers  besides 

myself xftmg living here.  Her  grandeon is  it.  L.  smith. 

"imong  the  other  41eidents  when we eume here were:  Miley 

Vick and family, . he  sulkers,  the  burdieks,  t;aptain K.  H.  MoIntyre, 

Arthur west;  an Angliehmun,  John Trist and  his  family,  Dr.  Coleman 

ant  his  family,  vith sir.  Johnson,  are.  Coleman's  father.  Mr. 

Chambirlain, 

botaniat,  ha.i  a piaci))  witL  greenhouses on beach 

tors.  Jaakson .aay tons 

6. 

btrast  whero  he  bad e splendid  eollaction of  native  Alorida 

plants  srid  flowers.  It WQ4  Just a hobby with  him,  as  ho  Lovor 

pretended  to  oommaroialihe  on  his  collection. 

"Then  thorow was mr.  Day's  couoln,  vaivib yay,  tith  his  two 

eons,  nattio  and  J,comis - Loomis Jivenuo  is  named  for one son. 

"Mr.  George Woodruff wae another early settler,  and Geer* 

and vharley 

vith  thole sister,  fors.  Townsend  - all  from 

Ohio. 

"Mrs,  7,4)lie Ling 6wett,  of mow  omyrna,  ie u desoendallt  of 

one  of  th)  Pion)er families -  the  hol  one - who went from 

oit veange  to  that  oeution. ; ho  is  a great-granddaughter  of 

sirs. 

ui  hes  lots  of  historioal data, 

gra.  A.  r.  Lou, 

daughter  of  are.  t:heldon,  is  aleo  living. 

"Wi...lime king *Lis  another  early 'Attie:,  he was is.  tacholor. 

On the  othor  site  of  the  river was  J.  H.  Betephuer,  unothor of 

the konnsylvania Dutch. 

"My  husband,  villiam Jaokson,  ww , a nut ve at  Glasgow, 

Scotlamd.  He  oame  to  Jacksonville  in 1872,  and was  a bookkiepor 

for  John Olarko,oporating a general  merohandise  and  liquor =,tore 

on bay  streort,  serviLg mostly  as  a ship shandler,  45  the  Jacksonvill • 

hurbor was alive with stoamboats  in  those days,  ai  ho  hud  44  mod 

businees.  Ha lived with  tho ()larks  family  on seWnah Artist.  Ho 

knew  Judge  John Looke yoggott,  and  othors  of the  pioneer  families 

of Jacksonville. 

nAr . Jaikson came  to  veytona early  in 1876 and he ad * erdo 

ma,..ried  that  same year.  We  had  a big wedding,  everybody  oame, 

and  etiLl had  u good  time.  tie,  they did not  oherivari  us,  but  there 

wail  a weddin,g dinner  and  ohampagno  anA  plenty  to eat.  We lived 

with my father's  family  for  *seven :ieurs o until vs built  this  home 

Mrs. &mason 41-  Daytona 

T. 

, Mere  in  the middle  of the bleak on velar Street,  alijoining My 

father's  place  on  the  earner of beach ntreet.  When we  went  to 

housekeeping,  my  mother ':ave as ay sister,  Nether,  the youngest, 

and  twin of my brother  John.  Maley.  She  said, ' You 

huve her, 

ae we have so nee/ ether, to  take cure  of.'  Nether  hes  bon a 

greet  help and  of mu<sh  sonfort  to ms  during the long years  past. 

There  she  sits,  always 'busy  at  something,'  she  said,  direating 

her eyes  to  a slender white-haired woman sewing by  the window  is 

the adjoining roan. 

"Mr.  William P.  Burr 11,4 the  fispt store  in PaYtosa.  He  ilea 

shortly uftur my  husbancl  and  I wore  married  in 1874,  and Mr.Jacklen , 

bought  it,  operating it  for a veat  many years.  Is  oarried  geser.. 

al moruhandise,  dry  goois„  boots., shoes,  hurdin.re,  groceries aid 

provisions  of all kinds. 

"MY husband beacma  -prominent  in  thebueiness  a:fairs  of  the  eity, 

was  OLA  the  euhool  hoard,  a mumbr of  the  heard  of  4tty 0Onmiesioners, 

and was postmaster whoL  he  died  in 1917.  Mt mother * ea postmistress 

first,  he  eating .o ho:  leputy, ;_ aa  vihnn sho  PUSOia on,  he ° beeline 

postMastery  We  had  five  daughters -  two  lying in infancy.  I re... 

member my  youngest daughter,  Isabel,  saying one  lay  to a visitor 

who  patted  her  on  the  YAWL  and  asked  if  she  ht ax y brothers,  and 

she  answered: ° N0,  sir,  putt  us three  girls,  and  not  4 boy anon, -

1 

'em.'  Isabel 

th,  nam)  your ao  ny  husband,  and another laugh 

ter  tmo 4ears later. *sideline,  a clerk in  the naytona Nook and 

Ltationcry  titers,  232  Louth  beach  treet,  is the only one of my 

children  left. 

"Nitre  is a picture  of  the  first,store  Kr.  Jackson owned," 

she  said,  returning'  from tho  bookease with u bundle of faded photo-

"And  this  is  the  ens he built  a fors  yeurs.latet & essoit-

levier builtIng,  es the Iowa fiber was a hall where all ogle.. 
arstifflas yore hal o in fast,  it was 

Ars.  JaJkoon -  ouytonu

5 . 

tha only  place  i21  the  1880'e Ikhare  public  Aatherinvi  could  be 

a0commodatod.  The first  sasoniu  lodge WWI organised and mot hors 

_ragaurly for many i044.441. 

"You .nay  bo  internoted  in thin -  the sense  of tha  banquet 

:tendered  tho  officials  o:  the  t.  Johns  and  Halifax uiver niilrotd 

on vs.:ember  2,  1886,  upon  the  extenoion of  tho  live  to thiac 

5015P 

oxtail 

IWAST 

Perkey  rituffed -  Ursnborry  rAtuce 

Kentucky sutton 

aapor diA1100 

Bow  York beef - Irish  qravy 

VoluSia vounty  near 

VIIMPUS  

A.t.ahed ; ut4tole 

kakad  w3ot  otatooe-  ziquasn -  Turnips - nests 

karsnips 'Jarrote 

otiatona  •  Suet  Coast 

4rnon  ?sus 

SNTR33  

Llystes 

-  Tongue -  Cold Ham 

1214i:14:13  

uolory 

•  Lottnes - audishos - Aoki's  •  Jollies 

FIV-Ma  

iQoareaci -  ACIAGL  ioacream  orargno 

Arploo,-  auto 

bananas -  uoffne -  Tea 

(Printed  bi tho  Halifux  P:inting uompany). 

• 

Ai 

"On)  1,hing  Aot  on the  menu,  of %MLA Olari  was  thn  retest 

abu4Antle, %% 43  Champagne.  it  was  waito u big affair. 

Mrs.  isbokson ”aytona 

9. 

"The  et.  Johns  and Halifax uivor nailrnad  isotor  beethrLe  uu 

important link  in the rlorida soot  uoast -  or rlastor  oyatum. 

"At  Om time  of the  banquet,  an  i.e  faotory  had  boon in oper-

ation here for  a short time previous.  It was  established  by  a 

Mr.  Bush In 1686 on North touch  treet.  before that,  mr.  Jaci.son 

supplied  tho  town's  require- onto by having ice  vhi9ped  by  schooner 

daily  from  Ja4Lvonville. !,eople  learned  quiokly  to  mako  and  freoss 

iusorsam,  which wav  always  u feature at picnics  and parties. 

Ao  not  know  just what  the ' Roman'  cream was,  listed  on the  monu, 

unless  it  was flavored  with Italian wine. 

"This iv u riuture  of the  old  Uolony  House;  and this  is  the 

(mean  View,  a later hotel,  incorporated  now  in the  frince  400rge. 

This  is Nr.  Jackson', old  store,  fad  this  the  new  one,  shioh he 

sold  the (14  'fors  he  died.  This  13  Ovi  firnt home  of  my  father, 

J.  C.  Maley,  on the  Jorner  of.heach  L.,ad  usdor ;Areet.  ihis  is 

my  hueband's  ple:.su,..7e  bout,  the  cteumer   is.  Whits, which  lived 

to  run between Yore  and  the  indian miver.  At was too early,  how-' 

evor for  such large water ° raft  to  be  popular,  anti  in 18V6 he sold 

it  to  the  Jaoksonville, *

pa  and  Loy west  noilrood, .;:or ' uss  in 

their  service at Key  West. 

"All  those  photographs were made  by  s.  4.  Nartflp,tho  first 

photographer  to  locate  in vigitona.  mr•  Harries  be Nassed  usay, 

but  his  daughter,  miss Uslia Harris,  still  lives  here  uud may 

have  other'  early  pictures  of  this  section. 

"Wait  until  I Alet  my  other  glasses -  I have nevAr  had  bi-

foculs,  as  4 nevrir thought  A would  like than -  so  i use  ilia  separate 

reading glases - and 

SOO  if  I can't locate  Mli  old  paper. 

Mrs  Saekeen 

inky tens 

10. 

nee, here it  to 

the sunder #eytona smash pews Animal, 

February 19,  19$0,  giving a write-up of the  first train into 

imytena assah  tide was when they hell the  celebration and 

banquet in neoember,  1094y, with 00111  of the  old  photographs 

ill,strating the  artiele. 

"You oan see in this  pleture of Mr.  Amok/ones  first store 

how oleo* it was to the river,  with a rowboat beached right  in 

front.  that  was. the * ay we used to travel  in the  early days. 

Seek family  had  a beat s and  they  used  to row  up and .down  the  river 

on tinniness  and  to  vieit eaoh  other. 

eome had  eailloets.  Cs * eat 

to  the  teach  in or boats,  as  there were  only  sand  traile over the 

peninsula,  ,ad it vas  hard  eolnuto drive there. 

"We had good times  in the  old days - we  were all oath.%  same 

sooial  level,  and financially,  toe.  there * Ire  no eliques or elan., 

everybody  was  sociable,  one mould  not afford,  tots ' high-bat'  as 

it meant isolation..  nits was  not  so momplioatet,  and pearl°  did 

not have  so muoh to worry about  as they do now.  iolittoiane  emd 

grafteruhad not  oomm  into  tha  pieture,  gambling Oha  ether vices 

were taboo.  was wants were simple,  our pleasures were wholesome, 

and,our  parties  aud  dame* wore  grand'  we enjoyed genies on the 

beach,  eaming our  lunehes over with um  in tho rowboats. 

"There was alwais  plenty to  eat,  irat  sometimes  not  a .rreat 

variety.  ln  some seasons 

would run mompletely  out  of wheat 

flour,,  but  there was always  morn to be 'had.  sac& family  hail  a 

small grist mill,  the  oorn\was  ground sad  sifted,  the  finer part 

being used  for  bread...making,  and  the  grits  for  ehleken feed.  If 

vve  had no °efts!,  vi,e 'smoked morn and wheat and brewed  that  to drink. 

Mrs.  47u,skion 

inhytona 

10. 

"Yee,  here it  is -  the  unday Dayton,* beaoh mews  Journal. 

February  19,  1926,  giving awrite-up of  the  fir  t train into 

Jaytonis.  smack -  this  was when they held tha:=  celebration and 

banquot  in December,  1886 •.  with some  of th.)  old  photogral..hs 

ill  strating  the  artiole. 

"rm..  can see  in this  picture  of mr.  Jackson's  first  store 

how-  close  it was to  the  river,  tNith 

rowboat  beachod  right  in 

front.  that  was  the way Nke  used to  travel  in  the  early 

ch fandly  ,_ad  a boat,  and  th.ly  lqled  to  row  up  urt  i  tho  river 

on  business  ttliii  to  vi ui t t94/011  other. 

oome  had  sailboats.  to slant 

to  llot  b3aoh  in  our bocte,  as  there  lucre  only  sand  tr.iis  ovor  the 

rstlinsulu,  nd  it t,a, h. rd .;roing to  drivLo  tA)re. 

"1 -.-0 had  geo4  tizAs  in  tho  Old  d44.ys - 0  ure au  014  th-.1 

MO 

social  level,  awl financi,illy,  too.  There ix - re  no  cliques  or clans, 

everybody  was  sooiable,  ono etn.I.J.  net 441:ford  te 

'high-ht' al 

it  meant  isolation. 

not  so  complicated,  antk  -oorlo  did 

net 

o  nah  to  worry  about  ao  thri.  O 1OW.  :- olit to iti.be  Lund 

gra.fters  had not , ,ome  into  014  ,)ioturo,  &Ambling  ana  other  vices 

',Jiro  taboo.  uur wants * ore  silarle„  our 71-ow:lures were mholasame, 

anti  our  m.xties 

liances 'Nero ,trand:  ffr)  enjoyed pinion  on the 

beach,  curring our  lunch's writ vith us  in 1-,h3  rotbot4t3. 

"There WW1a.L%a,u  1.011%;  to 

t, 

somotiAos  not  i.

'A..lat 

variety.  iL  ome  sealunlif 

run somfdt4lj  oat  oi wheat 

flour,,  but  there no.:.,s  4.1v.ays '.; orn  to  be  had. !such  family  hi.04  a 

small  grist  mill,  the  corn *ad  groun&  aitd  sifted, ti  linor  Part 

bling used  or  bread-making, 

th-3  grits  for  chicken food.  If 

vno  Lai  no  eoiiie ,  o parcheu  corn 

brewed  th..t  to  drink. 

Mrs.  Jackson 

-  Daytona 

11. 

Toa we  im=.14  ty  steeping buy leavos.  There weri  acOra4o  vegetablos, 

anA  v.4  raised  qua..titios  of *waist  potatoss.  aeafood -  fish, 

er4bs and  shrirp,  wore  nlentiful,  and  oucaeionally we had oysters. 

Venison * as not  taro,  and  sometime v.,  had bear moat.  Thou  onus 

in a vstile  a settler would  kill  a beef and we  had  to Livia. it  up 

..mougth  ifferent faallies so  it  mad be  udod  right &Melly,  winos 

%and ic  toe,  und  rofrigeration was unknown then. 

c"comen  sewed and knit  and  mude  the  fumily's clothing.  a.  haws 

made almost  44  ry  garment %. ern by men,  viomon,  or uhildren.  we 

would  get dry  ?moa4 - cotton,  gingham,  sheeting -  by  the  bOlt, 

making it  into  elothing and household  tarnishing.  ha would  get 

jauns and tailorge *applies  and  makesuoats,  vests,  and pants  for 

tha  mon and  boys.  We would  take  the  palmetto  bug s bleaoh it,  out 

it  into  strips  and braid  it,  and mother would  fashion it  into  hats 

by  sowing it  into  stripe.  Eon,  women and ohildren * oro  these,  they 

were  eomYortable  and  most  eorvioeable. 

"OaPtain MUM when the winter's work was completed,  would 

ship the livooak  timbor  north to  the  United  ntates  mavy  lard at 

vorielk -  j have  e'en ten  or tvolve large  suhoonors anahored here 

in tha Halifax savor loading this lumber  aboard.  Then before he 

would  loaNa with his  several  hundrld nelpers,  he would  close  out 

tha  eommiseary,  and  Lho  settlers would  Le  tibl-ci  to  paruhaso  quanti-

ties  of firiad  and  smoked meat,  flour,  salt,  aass or half biwrels 

or maokerel,  4.,n‘l  other food  wunplioe  at  va*  reaaonablo  rates. 

bohoonare would  deck at  Anterprise,  uomin,7  from banfor(i  or Jack-

sonville with FrouJrias  and  dry  goods,  but  it  wam  forty milee to 

ant  rnrise  and  a long hiArd  tri  in those days to  go  shopping.  I 

remember one  tiiv* started  in a wagon which  broka ctown  und we 

finiahod the  journey in  a borrowed  cart. 

Mr*.  Jeikekson - 

ttraii. 

1/: • 

"The weather vlia  about tho name then as now  - I to  not  see 

wAy 'Aiffronoo in th-1  a.imute•  i remembor one very  oold  winter 

- whorl te  livod ut ronoe rurk,  or  rort urunge. 

"the mosquitoes were  telvus  Lud,  but wo bud nets. 

he  sound., 

flios,  howevor,  worn  the  most  annoying,  und  every  family  had  to 

supply  its  beds sith note  of  real  fino mesh,o4lled  sandfly  netting, 

us  a -proteotion. 

"Thlre wt*P1 

4-reat  aoa o  siokneos - ohills 

fevers,  ad 

thore were  one  or  two deuths  from yellow  fevor.  re  had  poor drink.. 

ingwuter,  just  dug wollv  or surfaoe water,  but  1.uter  on artesian 

wells wxo born4,  and  us  soon us  flawing wells were established, 

th4 

tho  L:okarann“.,  Lotcun  to  improve. 

"or.  Uoleman wum  thn  first  physioisn.  He was  .. era  when we 

oune,  und  later a Dr.  Gordon loouted  in Iniit-ona,  but  he did  not 

stay  long,  roturnini; to Olio. 

"In  tho  ourly 1890's,  Dr.  G. 

Klook built  the first  hospi-

tal, 

nrivnte  one.  It  is  small,  but  is  still  in existenoe. 

"The  Holifam aonnral  aospital  is  more reonnt,  and  is  probably 

lur34r  thuii  our  requIramoata (sun  for ° von now. 

Tho firut newspaper  was the Halifax  Journal,  ostablished  in 

tho ourly  laidO's  by  Mr.  Y. 

Mann. 

"Tha  first  amatory was  out  on miigewood Avenue.  mr.  J.  W. 

zklaith,  tho  first sohool  toucher h,lro,  entlred  a horesita  in  that 

section,  un  v,hon  livtlo duughtor  cf  hi*  died  she  was  buried  on 

the  pluon.  Th 

1ot * as  set  aside us 44  community  buryinfr 

und 

unit  Qulled ' aersonto ,.  1;ost  of tho early settlors were buried 

thoro when thoy  nassAd  away.  It  is  now  culled ' Pinewood,'  and  is 

1,eurly  oomplotely filled. 

JAWAUOU 

DOmitOlig

12. 

"There were two log housee in this  section who  v  oamo  here 

ih 1871.  Onn true  on  befall  tr:int,  and  tbm  other was flArthar  don 

where !twee  etore  now  is  looated,  und  it W 4.3  used  ae  u store  build-

ing. 

"Ito  had (" toms 

tha equinootial  period  then,  tha same 

43 now,  but  thie  seation  has  never suffered  so  VW, rely  us  Palm 

Beuuh  und Miami. 

"I  remember end terrible  storm on August 16,  1871,  altays 

referred  to  us  thn  iLadona  storm'  beeauee a steer named  Liadona 

went ashore  that  night  at  Oupe  Canaveral.  It wua  bound  from 

Saw  York to  Oalveston.  The :Arohants of the Texas oity  had.  ion= 

to  tha  north  and PItgie  their  winter  Htook purchases, which were 

loaded  in  the  ill-fated  iihir  for  delivery.  hhen the  tide  wont 

out the  shir was high und  dry  oh tha  Cam aonsidorally damugnd, 

but without  loss of life  to  her  utiin und  crew.  tord  soon 

• 

spread  through  the  east  ucuet ecr:tion  of the wreck,  and  all 

the  wagons uni  trtain9  poseible  to  amour. ! aro  headod  towards  the 

point.  Ladders were  platted  up  aesii  c 1:  the  ahip,  and  T: ,x,:ole 

just  helped  therneelVaa  to  quantities  of hi.te,  boots,  shoes,  and 

bolts  of dry  goods -  ehirtiag,  dress;  goods,  bleuahed  &Ltd  Wibletiuhed 

muslin,  etc. 

"Yes,  ma;;;•be  if we had hud  the  orose-stute  useatl  tat  that  tine 

the  ,1111.p  wou.3.1,  h va 

abia  t‘,  ride  out  the utormilnd  save  its 

vqiuuble outgo  of 

7c411„  I hopa  ilorida gets  this 

()anal.  There  seems  to  ba  a di Zfarati.:i  of  opihion as  to ith3thlr 

it youl  dam a our  splo-did  supply  of water from flotling 

but  experts  have  testified  both  for  and aos,tinst  this  question, 

too  its  oostmeroi..1  voilue  to  florid& and  other wult States in the 

Mrs.  Osokeon 

Dsk  ona 

P.14 

matter  of  JOUVOU13034 aud  money saving in shipping say offset 

other objeotienable conditions. 

"Be e there wore no  Indians in  this  seotion when we looated 

hJra  in MOIL  Many of the  Old plantations had  been aiandoned 

during the Seminole  war period -  this  old Williamson Oraat wus  ens 

of  them - and the Lndlans  had been  taken eith=lr  to the  Indian 

Territory  or  those wko refused to  go,  had taken up reisidaao• in 

the  gvorgladee of  Aortae..  I remember onoo siestas t.wo  zeminolee 

on the  train going in to  Jadkoonville where they were to take  part 

in the Upoeition, as one  of the attraetions  there. 

'This  hotteews,  built  by ay -husband in 1802 and wo have  lived 

hero  eines.  Tt Is really u small. hotel  uud has nlwa)s been knots 

as ' The  OedarIW  named  by sy husband for tha oodare which tormarli 

grew  in the yard  and were planted  along tho  front walk.  It afford.. 

ad  ttLi.  splendid living' until tho beaeh  sideway developed,  when 

.for  twenty yours,  ox 

peorle started  going ovr there,  so  us  to  La  afur  the  Gowan.  I 

elosed my dining room two yours ago.  We have  several  pormarient 

roomers,  told  have ohanged the  titiei  of the  house into  small  apart-

ments for which  th9re is  ready demand,  end oeoasionaily have  tour-

lets  for 

short  time,  But  times have 'hanged - people  to  not  went 

to  oat Where they  sleep,  aud do  LOt talIt  to  stay  anywhere ovor a 

night or  so.  The aatcaotila  has  broaght  this  ohange,  and  they 

park and out  in drug stores,  or  in  the  5-a1.4101  stores,  or  at 

wagons  or  filling ligation*  aletI the road.  They  take  thoir noels 

Just  wherever the)  happen  to  be. 

"MA I don't  ever want to see  another  boon..  It  gave  norida 

such  a t,ad  nem*  ant  ruined  cc !: A.1.4"  people.  Some  of our friends 

soli  their property  on a down  payment,  and what  thew  oonsitore4 

an onenseue  return on their Investnent,  but after the  new  owners 

• 

- 

Mrs.  fa4Lson *.  Daytona 

Le. 

had  sooupied the  Yroporty for)  a few years,  they were unable  to 

(orgy ee6  and  the  property went bask to the  original owners.  The 

furnishing. were worn out  or destroyed,  the  properly  in bad re* 

pair,  tho  taxes unpaid 

it was terrible.  One map told ne  it  cosi 

kin 06 6000 to  restore his pines to its  former condition. 

daughter • mad I spent the summer of 1924 in the Morth, 

and we had  trantie telegrams one after  mother iron an melted 

real  estate operator  to  name a prioe on our hois t but we stead-

fastly retested  awl  I have  teen glad a hundred tines that we did 

not bargain to sell  it  then,  althoug, it  is  a cie.etion  now what tO 

do with a throe- story house with such  large roons. 

sly daughter sad I,  when  the  slump came  the  seeond year after-

tards olost  all  our money in the puitoui bank failure - our  savings 

which had  been put aside to  take  care  of  us  in later  yours. 

It was 

pretty  hard sledding for a while,  but  we have  managed to  got  along. 

• 

and one  thing, we  have  never loot  faith in our neighbors nor  in 

Daytona mooch am a leae to live.  Our finansial  disasteiswere 

gauged,  for  the most  part,  by total  outs/lire and speoUlators. 

"Before you go,  A want you to come pith mo  to  the  nook yard 

and see our noyel  Palm,  the  only  one here." 

Os wont threagh  the  largo  living room,  doom the hall, and 

through a screened-in porch  to where  the  baskyard with its  many 

trees,  vines an i flowers ,; ould  be voen,  and there by  the kitchen, 

on the  southeast  side of  the  house,  where it would be  pretested 

rron  the  cold  north winds,  a tall Imre' rain reseed its smoift, 

polished body  thirty  foot  upwards,  extending beyond  the  high roof. 

"Twentr-five years ago  a friend brought it  to my daughter, 

Isobel, from Miami. ' It was • tiny  little plant in a flower pot. 

It . Outgrow the  pot end we put it  in a bucket,  it  outgrow the  basket 

Mrs.  Jaeksim 

3.06 • 

and we visaed  it  in a tub.  Then when the  tub got  too heavy to 

lift,  we  JUA1  set  it  out  in the yard,  and  there it hard  grOwn 

to  our wonder and  delight.  BoietiSee the louveo  frowas instate,. 

but  new  ones so ne  out- in the  spring., 

deeayed  spot developed, 

as  on øsø,  o. a lime with  the  eaves  of the house,  but we  hut  a time 

surgeon come  and patoh it  up,  and now  It  Seems as'etrong me  evils. 

"And  did  you over see anything like  this wisteriar  she 

quarried,  milling attention  to a pergola next door  ueverod with 

a speoial imported  spool's  of  Japanese wisteria. "leu will byre 

to (some  upstairs  to  let  e.good 

Back  along the  porch,  through  the  hail,  up  the marrow stairs 

to  the  second- floor  hall,  mni  out through & sereenod-in *looping 

porch di. i duplioate of tho  ono downstairs -  to  the  side  of the 

house, whero .on  glancing down ye baheld  the  top of the  pergola 

solid  mass of  green vine uud tarkto-lightd-purple blooms liko 

an arm boquet a foot &arose. 

" IA thing of beauty  is  a Joy  forever,' "  quote& Mrs.  ieukson. 

a marvelous plant,  and  i.  never  sit tired bf looking at  it." 

As we  Said goodbye,  she  said: " I wish i had kept & diary, 

1 had  plonty  of time,  unit  it ifotal  helm hmlpsd as now  to verify 

dates.  I used  to  1.4ve  a good  memory,  but  in later years 

um 

not  so  sure  of myself.  I:know  that  tomorrow  a.  will  remember  a lot 

or interostioe thing  I might  have  told you,  60  ir you think of 

.04  other  queetioue,  just  let we know and  I'll  be glad to  give  any 

other information possible." 

