Place of or igin.th.1(11149.....MIAV ... Date 4/13/59

Project worker.N.6.14_011_Algral

Project editor

7p

Remarks

Forms to/be Filled out for Each Interview

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO FoutsTurr

FORM A

Circumstances of Interview

CHICAGO

;1.- 6

STATE Illinois

NAME OF WORKER Nelson Algren

ADDRESS 3232 Victoria Avenue

DATE

April 13, 1939

SUBJECT Industrial folkare of Chicago

1. Date and time of in terview

April 3, 1939

2. Place of in terview

Davey Ley Luggage Shop
1019

B. 47th Street

3. Name and address of in formant

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant.

none

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

none

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.

Wellmeguipped luggage shop in a Negro neighborhood,

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing the proper heading and the number tb which the material refers.)

W3613

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

Utii6A00 FOLKSTUFF

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Nelson Algren

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

3232 Victoria Avenue

April 13, 1939

Industriii folklore of Chicago

NAME OF INFORMANT

1. Ancestry

Of Russien-Xewish extraction

2. Place and date of birth Chicago, Illinois

3. Family

Single. Mother, father, three sisters and a younger brother.

4. Places lived in, with dates

Has lived around the west-side most of his life, but at present is living " in a northeide hotel"-, did not care to divulge details.

5. Education, with dates

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

7. Special skills and interests

8. Community and religious activities

9. Description of in formant

Five feet nine aad one half inches, weighing, stripped, one hundred

and thirty-five pounds. Rangy, raw-boned, dark eyes and hair, lends

10. Other PointseginfinntRyiftilvinsmed, of man 'sighing about one hundred and fiftra five pounds.

FORM C

Text of Interviet (Uleditea)

CHICAGO FOLIC3TOFF

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Nilson Algren

ADDRESS

DATE

3232 Victoria Avenue

April 13, 1939

SUBJECT

Industrial folklore of Chicago

NAME OF INFORMANT Davey Day

" You're from that newspaper I guess? I always come down for a

newspaper man - I guess there's a story in this alright* Aint

there?

" Yep, I'm him, Davey Day, that fast-stepping XeWboy on his

way up, all fight and fancy footwork. And nothin , wrong with the

old heart, I guess you know, was you listenin'

nday night.

Well, that one's over now, but Pian(Cosemanager) is going to

get him again for me at the ball park* I'll beat him(Henryixtstrong)

there, this is my lucky town* Dropped just one pro fight in my life

here, that was in 1931, my fourth fight* I've licked everybody you

want to name right around this town 0 • Ftankie Segni°, Roger Bernard,

Bobby Paoli° and I guess maybe a hundred others* And you can bet that

Armstrong will got on that list, tool ' cause little Davey is on his way

up and he got that ol'oonfdence.

I licked Lou Ambers too, but that was in N. Y. and he was the

champ, so they tossed him the duke, Wait'll I'm the champ though -

I'll keep it righthere in my old home town, and they'll be to ssint the

duke at no like that too* I'll be the houseman then.

FORM D

Extra Comment

CHICAGO FOLESTUFF

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Nelson Algren

ADDRESS

3232 Victoria Avenue

DATE

April 13, 1939

SUBJECT

Industrial Folklore of Chicago

NAME OF INFORMANT

•

Reason I lost to Armstrong was I coudn't see him 120 more.

I was real han'icapped. Wasn't for not bein' able to see him

I could have gone twenty rounds ' cause I got determination, I

got that old confidence.

w

I never got a cut eye in my life, but in that twelfth round

I was prayin' Atd slice that eye side open on me then I'd a been

able to see through it, I might of gone on to win even, but I

couldn't see at all, that's the reason the ref called it. It

swollen up tight as a drumstick on me."

•

Yoh, his eye was out up a wright too

they looked at it in

the eighth and I guess if that was a white guy they would of

stopped it on a tko and give it to no. But you know hovrit is

with a burc-head, - they'd let him get killed in there ' cause that's

how it is. He didn'thave no lip left when he was through fightin'

AMbers, but he got the duke just the same. You think they'd would

of let a white guy go on in that shape? Say, you know how many

stitches they took in that lip Ambers give him? - fourteen, that's

how manyeArmstrong told me hisself, he swallowed so much blooi

he was sick for two days a fteri.

FORM 0 page

3 .0

CHICAGO FOLEBTUFF

a

I don'tknow where they get the idea Armstrong hurt me though.

He certainly disappointed me with the power he showed, I'll say that

much for myself . . But you got to give that jig credit for one thing,

he never quits swingint. If you'd of brought a windmill into that

ring and turned it so fast that it got ma too dizzy to stand up any

longer, and I toppled, that would have been nearly the same effect

as Armstrong beating me. In that twelfth, for in stance, I VW

covering my right eye, and waiting for him to let up for a second

so I could open up again, but he kept swinging so often that it '

got me a little dazed, and that gave him the opening for the punch

that knocked me down.

if

No, I wasn'thurt. I even wanted to put up a argument for

Fitzpatrick calling the fight, but Pian stopped ma. I wanted to

take nine counts and then get up after him again, I could easy have

finished the round. Be can't hit. He wasn'tthrowint nothint but

hands.

w Bbved I feel? - Never better in my life. I went in there in the

pink . I live right, I guesaeyou know. Armstrong found that out.

He started getting sour toward the eighth. I could almost hear him

saying: 4Whatts wrong with this guy? Why doesn't he go down like the

others?* But I stayed up just in spite. And he felt darn lucky when

he seen me bend in in that twelfth, and even luckier when they

stopped it.

But Armstrong's a wright. Be never said a word to me either

before or after the fight, but next day be come up to my hotel where

I was stayint ant said he was sorry be swelillup my eye. Well, I'm

awt

0FORM-C page -4 -

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

sorry he didn't rip that thing wide open. He'd of give ms a

chance to see that way. But he's an in telligent man, he aint

like lots of fighters. You know, reads books and things, real

bright, you can tell that when you talk to him", he's a smart

jig."

Caere the in terviemer interposed that, in listening to the

match over the radio, the announcer had said that, going back

to his own corner between the fifth and sixth round's, Armstrong

had been muttering to himself. The announcer said he had dohs

this between rounds of several recent fights, and had questioned Armstrong about the habit. Armstrong had then replied that

when he felt that he was certain to win, he began memorizing

his radio announcement, at the close of the bout. ' When I know

I'm going to win I start thinking up so metling to say' Armstrong

had explained. The interviewer now asked Day whether Armstrong's

confidence was really so substantial as this right indicate.

Day was of fended at the implication that Armstrong was certain the

fight was as good as over so early as the sixth round:

Don't let nobody kid you, fella. Be teaks to hisself cause

he's gettin' punchy. Be done that first in the Ambers fight and he

wasn't figurin' on no radio announcement then - if you seen that

one. It was Ambers should a been taikin' to hisself if that was

the case, an' same thing with me. Say, when you see a fighter goin'

back to his corner talkin' to hisself it means jest on4thina, that

his heels is beginning to click. You can take my word on that one,

that burrhead's heels is getting rounder every out. Why don't he

FORK C page - 5-

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

fight Angott then?

Say, you come around when I fight Mantanos. That one' 11 be

in the ball-park too I hope. Then they'll give me another crack

at that Armstrong. If they do, Pian is going to make them let ma

have him here. 0 I'll beat him a wright the next out, less'n Angott

gets him first. Angott got that oll confidence. I got it too, that

old determination, that's why I get along. Any time you want a story

for your newspaper you just drop in here an' tell the cal man you

want it an' I'll one down. I don't live in this neighborhood o'course,

I live in a hotel ui on the northside. But I'll come over a wright.

Every little bit helps you know. Say, a dame wrote me a fan letter.

I looked like George Raft she said. He us4to be a pug too. I guess

somebody must of told her I was punchy a wready, I would believe anything.

Say, I don't look like no George Raft. Be got a interest in Angott

though.