SPIRITED biographical sketch of a-man whose name is known to all the
A world as the savior of Belgium, the Food Administrator of America, and the
Director-General of Relief in Europe. Many millions of Europeans revere the name of Hoover, dispenser of relief from famine; many millions of Americans admire him as a great administrator; yet his personality remains strangely little known either at home or a broad. Few know what Hoover actually is as a human individual, what are the secrets of his success as a leader of men and women, what are the inner details of his methods as in itiator and director of great organizations, and what his life had been before he burst into public view at the outbreak of the war as the director of relief in in vaded Belgium.

-The story of the boy without any pull, but blessed with sufficient pluck and push to compensate for this lack, is told by a man who has kept in touch with
Hoover for a large part of his life. Vernon Kellogg traces Herbert Hoover's picturesque early career from his orphaned childhood, through his Quaker schooling and his college days in California, to his achievements as a mining engineer in Australia and China, and his settlement in London as a consulting engineer of world-wide reputation. . Here Hoover was ready for the call that came with the outbreak 'of the war in Europe, and the story continues with the dramatic record of his work in Belgium and occupied France, his administration of the food resources of the United
States to feed both America and our Allies, and his organization of relief in the devastated and faminestricken areas of Europe liberated by the signing of the armistice The book gives the intimate details in the life of this great man. It tells of his colossal accomplishments in the face of seemingly in surmountable obstacles. The almost superhuman executive and administrative ability of Hoover both as boy and man is shown on every page. An amazingly full biography is packed into one small volume.

876 pages, with portrait. Cloth $2.00 net. By mail, $2.15

The Complete Life Story of the Man Who Saved Nations

and Civilizations By His Superhuman Efforts

Why and How
HERBERT HOOVER

Ran away from home and _ grandfather Miles.
Resisted the 75c. table d'hote.

Passed his college entrance examination in English in his senior year.
Won the girl in the geology department at his university.
Learned to typewrite in four days to get a start in the mining world.
Grew a beard at twenty-two to look thirty-two.
Rode on horseback in China while his sedan chair was carried in empty state.
Made good a $1,000,000 defalcation without being bound by law.

Took a risk of several hundred thousand dollars on American honesty.
Solved the problem of pigs, producers, and packers.
Received a white rabbit from the grateful Belgian children.

The Man Who
Kept Faith Against All Odds

D. APPLETON & COMPANY
85 West 32nd St., New York

Enclosed find $2.15, for which please send me prepaid, a copy of

HERBERT HOOVER

The Story of the Man Who

Studied mining in California and became a great mining engineer.

Reorganized the mining industry of
China.

Developed a new profession; making good mines out of bad, and bankrupt mining concerns solvent.

Showed such a remarkable capacity for administration that he was called upon to save starving Europe.

Kept the food in tended for the Belgians from the Germans.

Organized the C. R. B., and solved the problem of ''secours."'

HERBERT

HOOVER

y
VERNON KELLOGG

Member of the Commission for Relief in Belgium and formerly Professor of Zoology in the University of
California

This is an Appleton Book

NN

. APPLETON & COMPANY
85 West 32nd St., New York

Enclosed find $2.15, for which please send me prepaid, a copy of

HERBERT HOOVER

Name
Sly cel cc

T-396

CHAUNCY'S AND SEWALL'S COPY.

85 HOOKER, Thomas. A Survey of the Summe of Church-Discipline.
Wherein, The Way of the Churches of New-England is warranted out of the Word... 4to, original vellum. London: John Bellamy, 1648. 1500.00
First Edition of the author's masterpiece, a major American literary work of the 17th century, with poetical tributes by Samuel Stone of Hartford, John Cotton of Boston and Ezekial Rogers of Rowley, Mass. A more desirable association copy could hardly be imagined; it belonged to Charles Chauncy, second President of Harvard and Samuel
Sewall, merchant, magistrate and diarist; in 1840 it belonged to Henry Barnard, noted
American educator, revivor of popular education. At top of title-page is the signature
"Chauncy's"; at top of A2 is "Saml. Sewall. Augt. 16, 1728"; on front cover "H. Barnard
1840." There are five brief marginal notes and two scorings in Sewall's hand. A rear fly-leaf is covered by a florid ownership inscription of Samuel Myles, rector of King's
Chapel, Boston, who laid the corner-stone of Christ Church, Boston and died in 1728.
Two holes in blank portion of title-page were caused by the long-ago in king-out of a name. Wing H 2658. Sabin 32860.

86 [HOOVER, Herbert]. KELLOGG, Vernon & TAYLOR, Alonzo E.
/ The Food Problem. With a Preface by Herbert Hoover. 12mo, orig.
cloth. New York, 1917. 45.00
First edition of an important work on an ever-present problem. Signed on title-page by all three authors. Corner clipped from first two leaves and clippings tipped to blanks.

87 [HORNE, Richard Hengist]. The Goulburn Vineyard Proprietary; being a company formed for the cultivation of the vine, and the making of wines, on the banks of the Goulburn River. Leaflet, folio, 4 pp. Melbourne [1860]. 85.00
An apparently unknown writing of the author of Orion, who was "Hon. Sec." of the company of which this is the prospectus. This is accompanied by the envelope signed by Horne and addressed by him to William Makepeace Thackeray. Also here is Horne's covering letter to Thackeray saying that he was too personally involved to write an article about in The Cornhill Magazine but that maybe someone else would write about it.

88 HOUGHTON, Claude. I am Jonathan Scrivener. 8vo, orig. cloth.
London [1930]. 45.00

First Edition. With this intimate presentation inscription, "Paul Bewer in friendship
Claude Houghton February 1930." Below this is "Inscribed, two years later, for Richard

pers, 21 p. Lewiston, Idaho: The Author, 1887. 75.00
First (and almost certainly only) Edition. An early sample of Idaho Muse, printed by The Telephone Printing House, M'Minnville, Oregon. Presentation copy from one poet to another, "To Mr. E. C. Stedman, with every good wish of the Author." With the Stedman bookplate.

GEBHART TRUCHSESS VON WALDBURG'S COPIES
92 [INCUNABULA]. MARGARITA DECRETALIUM. Annotationes Margaritarum Decretalium. [Sebastian Brand, ed.]. Gothic type,
(final blank lacking) 42 11, 52-54 lines & headlines, double columns, capital spaces blank except for guide letters. Lightly browned throughout, few light stains, 3 small wormholes in lower margins. Basel: Nicolaus
Kesler. [ca. 1490]. Editio princeps. Hain *10755. Stillwell M 228; 7
copies. Bound with:
MARTINUS POLONUS. Margarita Decreti seu Tabula Martiniana decrett. Gothic type, 106 11. (final blank lacking), 52 lines, double columns. Little light browning & few stains. Strassburg (Georg Husner?] 1493. 2 vols. in 1, folio, marbled boards, rebacked. 200.00
Hain *10847. Stillwell M284; 5 copies.
With the ownership signature of Gebhart Trucksess von Waldburg, elector & archbishop of Cologne (1547-1601). The Britannica remarks unkindly, "Gebhard was a drunken and licentious man, who owes his prominence to his surroundings rather than to his abilities."
93 [JERROLD, Douglas]. Mrs. Caudle's Curtain Lectures. By "Punch."
With illustrations, by Leech. 12mo, orig. printed wrappers, 42 pp. Philadelphia: Carey & Hart, 1845. 45.00
The International First Edition, containing the first ten "Lectures." This was Jerrold's most celebrated work, although the D. N. B. says, "It has been reprinted and translated times without number, but Jerrold was undesirous of being estimated simply as a 'wit'
or a farcical writer." Presentation copy from Margaret Fuller [Ossoli]: "G. W. Kuhn from S. M. F." With this are two variant copies of the Second dition, containing the

first fifteen "Lectures," one with the William Taylor and the other E. Winchester imprint, both New York. The complete edition was published in London in 1846.

94 [JOHNSTONE, Charles]. The Reverie: or, A Flight to the Paradise of Fools. 2 vols., 12mo, contemporary calf. London, 1763. 45.00

Lou Henry, the girl of the geology class, afterward Mrs. Hoover.

HEN Chang Yen Mow, the new head of the new Department of
Mines of the new Chinese Government, began to wok about for a

foreigner who should know much about mines and be honest, and who would therefore be a fit man to occupy the new pest of Director-General of Mines, he bethought himself of an English group of mining men with whom he had once had some business relations. The principal expert adviser of this group had been the man who was now the head of the great London mining firm for which
Herbert Hoover was working, and working very successfully, in West Australia.
Chang applied to this group for a recommendation of a suitable man for him..

Herbert Hoover was named and Chang
Yen Mow, acting on the recommendation, offered the place to the youthful Quaker engineer, and the competent and confident young man of twenty-four, always ready for the newer, bigger thing, promptly accepted it.

On to a Bigger Job

N :TWO weeks after the cable offer and

answer, a feverish fortnight devoted to a rapid clearing up of things in Australia,
Hoover was on his way to London, to report personally to his employers about their own affairs as well as to get some in formation about the new undertaking.
He wanted to find out before he got to
China, if he could, something of what would be expected of a Director-General of Mines of the Chinese Empire. Perhaps he had in mind the possible necessity of "getting up"' a little special knowledge about Chinese mines and mining ways before he tackled his new job, just as he had got up enough physiology in twenty-four hours to help get him into
Stanford University, and enough typewriting in a week-end to fit him for en-
3 Everybody's Magazine, April, 1920

The Story of Hoover

By
Vernon Kellogg

CHINA, LONDON AND THE
REST OF THE WORLD

This is the third of five articles in which
Vernon Kellogg - one of Hoover's closest personal friends and active assistant in all his war undertakings - tells what sort of man Hoover is, the romantic story of the years of constructive work that lay back of his world-famous war achievements, and the secrets of his more and more notable success as a leader of men and women. The preceding articles described his boyhood struggles, his college days and his spectacular youthful success as a mining engineer. The next will deal with his work in or ganizing the famous Belgian Relief.

trance into Louis Janin's office in San
Francisco.

So after two weeks in the metropolis, eight or nine days on the Atlantic, two or three in New York, and five on the

transcontinental trains, he found himself again in California and ready to make from there his second start to the faraway lands from which his loudest calls seemed to come - tready, that is, except for one thing.

He was now, let us remember, at this beginning of the year 1899, not yet twenty-five years old, not that by half a year, in deed, and a half year could mean, as we have already seen, a great deal in Herbert Hoover's life. And he was a boy-man with a record of achievement already behind him, and a pos tion already in his hands of much responsibility and cpportunity. So he declared that the time had now come for the carrying out of the decision he had made in his college days of three years before. It was the little matter, you will promptly guess, and guess correctly, of marrying the girl of the geology department.

He arrived in San Francisco the. first of February, 1899. He spent the next few days in Monterey, "the old Pacific capital" of Stevenson's charming sketch, but of chief interest to Hoover as the place where Lou Henry lived.
And here he was married at noon of Friday, February tenth. At twoo'clock they left for San Francisco, and at noon the next day sailed for the empire of China.

Into the sleepy, half Mexican, historic town on the curving sands of the shores of the blue Bay of Monterey this swift, breathlessly swift, boy-engineer had come from distant Australia, by way of Mar-

Hoover in 1903, at twenty-nine, with a world refutation as mining engineer.

seilles and London, had clutched up the beautiful daughter of the respected town banker, and was now carrying her off to distant China, where she was to live in all the state becoming. the wife of the
Director-General of Mines of the Celestial Empire.

The Honeymoon

T WAS a bit too much for the old Pacific

capital, which, of course, would hardly know - because she did not tell it - that the sudden appearance of the meteor bridegroom had been preceded by astronomical warnings to the prospective bride, of the nature of electric messages that came first frem Australia, and then from other places along the yet unseen meteor's path. So there are solemn residents there to-day who shake their heads seriously when you remind them of this incident, and are inclined to suggest that nobody could be completely married in any such time and manner. Anyway, it wasn'tquite fair to the town, which tries to maintain old
Mexican traditions that go back to Spain of a full assortment of festivities incident to any proper marrying.

The hurrying couple at least had time for breath-taking - and honeymoon -
when once on board ship. For it is a month's voyaging from San Francisco to
China, or at least was then. They had for seat-mates at table Frederick Palmer, the war correspondent, and wife, which was the beginning of a friendship that still endures. And there were, for other interesting companions, a secretary of our legation at Peking and his wife, and a quaint missionary pair who may or may not have survived the Boxer massacres.

The work in China was at first rather simple. Mines, of course, there were, and had been for uncounted centuries. But what was needed by the new department was some sort of survey of the mineral resources and mining possibilities of the empire, and a tentative framing of a code

THE STORY OF HOOVER

The smelter of the Kyshtin mines in Centra] Russia, one of the great industrial enterprises reorganized by Hoover, who historic establishment upon which a suffering and hopeless laboring population

of mining laws, so that the new development of the mines of the country which
Chang hoped to in itiate could be carried on to best advantage, and in such a way that private enterprise could participate in it.

For centuries the mines had _ been crown property, and the ruler had simply let them out directly or through the viceroys, for either a stipulated annual rental or for as much "squeeze" as could be wrung from the lessees in any of several various ways. And there had to be some rental or squeeze for each of the many officials that could get within arm's length of the mining business. The tenure of the use of the mines by the lessees was usually simply the period of the continued satisfaction of the lessor.

The Chinese Mines
AS this had not made for any extensive new opening up of the country's resources, or for the scientific development of the mines already long known. One could not afford to put much capital into prospecting or into modernizing the mining methods when each improvement simply meant either more rent or squeeze, or the giving up of the mine.
So the ores were mined and the metals extracted from them by the miners according to the methods of their ancestors as far back as history or tradition went, and it was all done under a set of mining laws as primitive as the mining methods themselves.

There were enormous possibilities of improvement. It would have been hard for any mining engineer to do anything at all to the situation without improving it. For
Hoover, with his technical education in metallurgical processes, his experience in handling various and difficult mining situations and his genius for organizing and systematizing, the opportunity was simply unique. He plunged into the work of examining and planning and codifying with the zest of a naturalist in an unexplored jungle. In the daytime he made his examinations; at night he studied the mining laws of all time and all the world.

He built up a staff as rapidly as it could be put together and correlated with the tasks before it. He had sent in advance for two of his most able and dependable associates in Western Australia, Agnew, a mill expert, and Newberry, a metallurgist, son of a distinguished geologist and mineralogist, and both of them devoted to
"the Chief." That was Hoover's so briquet a mong his early mining associates; just as it was later in his various offices; and as it was still later a mong the members of the Commission for Relief in Belgium, and the Food Administration and the
American Relief Administration. He has just naturally been ''the Chief" a mong his coworkers and associates from the beginning. It is significant.

His Caucasian staff of perhaps a dozen was greatly overshadowed in number by his Chinese staff, composed chiefly of semi-technical assistants, draftsmen, surveyors' assistants, interpreters, etc. A few of the Chinese helpers had had foreign training; there was one from Yale, for example, and another from Rose Polytechnic; this latter so devoted to American baseball that he was greatly disappointed in the new Director of Mines when he found the latter was not a baseball player.
But he thought better of him when he learned that the director had at least managed his college team.

The staff had its headquarters in
Tientsin, where were also the principal

laboratories for the mineralogists, assayers and chemists. Some of the men gave their time to the technical work, and others were engaged in collecting and correlating everything that had been published in the foreign languages about the geology and mines of China, while Chinese scholars hunted down and translated into
English all that had been printed in the
Chinese literature.

Lord High Director

UT the director and most of his immediate experienced assistants were chiefly occupied with the exploring expeditions into the interior, and the examination of the old mines and new prospects. Especially did some immediate attention have to be given to the mines already being actually worked, for the Minister let it be known that he expected the new director to pay the way of the department as soon as possible from the in creased proceeds of the mines which were to a rise from the magic touch of the foreign experts.

These expeditions were elaborate affairs, contrasting strangely with Hoover's earlier experiences in America and Australia.
The Chinese majordomo in charge insisted that the make-up and appearance of the outfit should reflect the high estate of the Director of Mines, so that every movement involved the organization of a veritable caravan of ponies, mules, carts, men on foot, and sedan-chairs carried by coolies. These chairs were for the director and his wife, who, however, would not use them, preferring saddlehorses. But the proud manager of the expedition insisted that they be carried along empty, to show the admiring populace that, even if the strange foreign potentates amazingly preferred to ride in a rather common way on horseback, they

|
|
|
|
|

- - S -

THE STORY OF HOOVER

not only built the elaborate works and the entire new village, where over 7,000 people were housed, but rehabilitated an of 170,000 Russians in an area as large as Belgium were dependent for their support.

could at least afford to have sedan-chairs.
Imagine a prospecting outfit in the California Sierras or the Western Australian bush with sedan-chairs! And there were cooks and valets and cot beds and folding chairs and tents and bed curtains and charcoal stoves and an array of pans and pots like Oscar's in the Waldorf kitchens, and often a cavalry guard, superduous but insistent, and always hungry, of twenty-five to fifty men. Whether the expedition found any mines or not it was at least an impressive object-lesson to the Celestial myriads that the new
Imperial Department of Mines knew how to hunt for them in proper style. When some foreigner asked one of the interpreters of the cavalcade why such an elaborate outfit was considered necessary, the answer was: ''Mr. Hoover is such important man to my country we can not let him die for want of small things."

Social Life in Tientsin

SIMILAR state had to be lived up to in the director's home in Tientsin.
The house was a large, four-square, wideverandaed, palace affair, in which a dozen to fifteen servants, carefully distinguished as "'No. 1 Boy," "No. 2 Boy,"
and so on down the line, waited, according to their own immemorial traditions, on the director and his wife. These servants had curious ways, and a curious language in the odd pidgin English that enabled the door-boy to announce that
"The number one topside foreign devil joss man have makee come," when the
English bishop called, and the table-boy to announce a dish of duckling as "One piecee duck peeps," or of chicken as ''One piecee looster."
The social scale a mong the few foreign residents was very precisely defined, and

Everybody's Magazine, April, 1920

the social life of the foreign colony highly conventionalized, so that the unassuming, practical-minded young engineer of the high title and social position, who was terribly bored, as he is to-day, by so cial rigmarole, and who was thought rather queer by the conventional-minded small diplomats and miscellaneous foreign residents because, as one of them put it, "He always seems to be thinking,"
was glad to be out of all this as much as possible and on the road, even if it had to be with the ludicrous caravan of state.

Some of the results expected from this expensive miner were rather startling.
For in stance, age-long rumor had it that the emperor's hunting-park at Jehol overlay immensely valuable gold deposits. The Minister intimated to the director that he would like to know the real facts about this as soon as possible.
As the park lay in a little-explored region of southern Manchuria and was a place of much historical as well as geological interest, the director decided to make a personal examination of it. After the expedition had been out several days, he was told that on the next they would come in sight of the great royal park.
Accordingly on the next day the guide of the caravan took him, with one or two of the Caucasian members of his staff and an in terpreter, off from the road the grand retinue was following, and by winding paths up to a hill-top which commanded a superb prospect.

"There," said the interpreter, with a wave of his hand toward the stretching prospect of beautiful valleys, low broad hills and mountainside, "there is the hunting- park of Jehol.'' Then turning complacently to the Director of Mines, he asked simply: "Is there gold under-

neath it?"? And interpreter and guide, and, later, even more important officials, were stupefied to learn that the wonderful imported man who knew all about gold could not say offhand, from his vantage-point, miles away, whether there was gold under the park or not. And, more disturbing still, that he probably could not say anything certain about it at all without actually tramping over the sacred soil and perhaps sacrilegiously digging into it.

Chinese Inefficiency

UCH occasionally necessary confessions

of in competence made a little trouble, but only a little. However much he under men lacked knowledge about minerals and mines, and how to find out about them, the head of the department,
Chang, knew enough to know that if his young director confessed in ability to meet certain demands it was because there was more wrong with the demands than with the engineer.

But the real fly in the ointment soon began to make itself visible. It was not a disillusionment on the part of the
Chinese officials in connection with their foreign expert, but a disillusionment on his part in regard to his real position and opportunities for accomplishing something for China. He began more and more clearly to realize that he could investigate and advise as much as he liked, but that he could really do, in his understanding of doing, comparatively little.
The modern West can not make over the immemorial East in a day or even a year.

Gradually the young engineer came to realize that while his examinations and reports were all very welcome, and whatever he could suggest for improvement in technical detail, resulting in immediate

THE STORY OF HOOVER

greater output of the mines already working, was gladly accepted, there was no willingness to accept advice leading to changes in administrative and general organization matters. And to the modern engineer, efficiency in these matters is as much a part of successful mining as skilled digging and good metallurgy.

Suggestions looking toward getting more work out of the men, or cutting down the payrolls by removing the thirty per cent.
of the names on them that seemed to have no bodily attachments, were frowned on.
These things interfered with' squeeze, and squeeze was a traditional part of Chinese mining. Foreign advisers and_ helpers were all very well when they found gold, but not so well when they found graft.
A crisis was visible in the offing. But this particular crisis did not arrive, for another larger and more serious one came more swiftly, and arrived almost unheralded. It. was the Boxer Uprising.

The Hoovers and the Boxers

HE outbreak found Hoover at Tientsin in his "palace," recently returned from Peking with Mrs. Hoover, and both just recovering from severe attacks of in fluenza. If opportunity for thorough organizing of the mines of China had failed him, he now had full scope for organizing a military defense of his home and wife and his many employees, foreign and native, for Tientsin, for a month, was the scene of hot fighting.

It was a besieged household in a beleaguered city. Hoover could have got out with his wife and few Caucasian assistants at the beginning of the trouble, but he would not desert his few hundred Chinese helpers and their families, and his wife would not desert him. So they stayed on together through all the rifle and shell fire and conflagrations of the Tientsin siege, building and defending barricades of rice and sugar sacks, organizing food and water supplies, and cheerfully "carrying on" in the face of certain death. and worse, if the outnumbering fanatic Boxers happened to win.

But there were occasional lighter incidents amid the many grave ones of the fighting weeks. Mrs. Hoover tells one, her favorite story of those days, in something like the following words:

"We had a cow, famous and influential in the community, which cow was the mother of a promising calf. One day the cow was stolen, and Mr. Hoover set out to find her. But his first attempt was fruitless. Then he had an in spiration.
He took out the tiny calf one night and by the light of a lantern led the little orphan, bleating for its mother, about the streets in the safer part of town. Finally, as they passed in front of the barracks of the German contingent of the international defending army, there came, from within, an answering moo, and Mr. Hoover, addressing the sentry, demanded his cow.
The sentry made no move to comply, but, summoning all his Wérterbuch English, countered with the inquiry: 'Is that the calf of the cow inside?' Upon receiving an affirmative reply to his Ollendorff question, he calmly declared: 'Also, then, calf outside must join itself to cow inside.' And thereupon, by aid of a suggestive manipulation of his bayonet, he confiscated the calf, and sent Mr.
Hoover home empty-handed."

As one of the results of the Boxer affair Chang Yen Mow got into the bad graces of the government, gave up his position and was forced to flee from Peking and take refuge in Tientsin. Even here he was dragged out of his palace and stood up before a firing squad, and escaped with his life only through vigorous interference by his Director of Mines.

As a result of this. and also because he thought that he might save from confiscation a valuable coal-mining property at
Tongshan, about eighty miles from Tientsin, he offered to transfer this property outright to Hoover's name. Hoover refused to accept the gift, but a greed to go to Europe and organize a company to finance the working of Chang's mines, and pay the old Chinaman a reasonable share of the profits. Chang gladly a greed, and Hoover, the Boxer Rebellion now quelled and
Tientsin freed from siege, went to London, organized an English company with certain Russian and especially Belgian participation, and returned to China to superintend the real development of the great property.

But he found a change in the spirit of
Chang's dreams. The wily old Celestial, finding that China was not to be partitioned by the powers that had defended it against the Boxers, and that private property was not to be confiscated, now proposed to break his contract so willingly made. And there seemed little hope that Chinese justice would compel him to recognize his previous agreements. But there was something in the persistent, indomitable pressure of the young American who had given his word to his English and Belgian backers, and in the assisting pressure of a quiet but firm young Belgian, named de Wouters, who had come back with Hoover, which did finally compel the old Chinaman, after much trouble and delay, to live up to his contract.

And then the situation, with kaleidoscopic picturesqueness, took on another hue, and Hoover found himself defending
Chang's interests from the overzealous attempts of some of his foreign backers to get more out of the mines than was their fair share. In the course of this struggle he became acquainted with another
Belgian, named Emile Francqui, of keen mind and great personal force, who, together with de Wouters, were, strangely enough, later to be chief and first assistant executives, respectively, of the great Belgian Comité National during the long hard days of the German Occupation.
It was with these men a mong all the Belgians that Hoover was to have most to do in connection with his work as in itiator and director of the Commission for
Relief in Belgium.

A Real Job at Last

UT we are now, in the story of Herbert Hoover, only in the year 1900, and the Belgian Relief did not begin until
1914. And Hoover was still to have many experiences as engineer and man of affairs, before he was to meet his Belgian acquaintances again under the dramatic conditions produced by the World
War.

He had now his opportunity really to do something in China in line with his own ideas of doing things in connection with mines, and not with those of Chinese mining tradition. As consulting engineer

and later general manager of the Chinese
Engineering and Mining Company he attacked the job of making Chang's great Tongshan coal properties a going concern. This job involved building railways, handling a fleet of ocean-going steamers, developing large cement works, and superintending altogether the work of about twenty thousand employees. A special one a mong the undertakings of the twelve months or more given to this enterprise was the building of Ching
Wang Tow harbor to give his coal a proper sea outlet.

Altogether it was a "mining'' job of all the variety and hugeness of extent that the twenty-seven-year-old miner and organizer found most to his liking. And despite obstacles and complications due both to his Chinese and Caucasian company associates, he did it successfully, enjoyed it immensely, and got from it much education and experience. But he was ready, after about a year of it, to turn his attention to the rest of the world.

In 1902, and now twenty-eight years old, he returned to London as a junior partner in the great English firm with which he had been earlier associated as its star field man in West Australia. But though with an actual headquarters office in London, he spent comparatively little time there. "He was still the firm's chief engineer and principal field expert, although now with the standing of partner instead of that of salaried assistant. Upon him fell much of the responsibility of the great firm's actual mining operations in the field as distinguished from its financial operations in the "'city."

But in the various short periods of work in London that intervened between his many flights to the various parts of the world where the mining interests of his firm called him, he learned much of the ways of "mining" as it is conducted in the world's greatest center of mine finance.
But most of his work for his firm coincided with his own real preferences. He probably spent little more than a tenth of his time in London, and this was also true in his later career when he had given up his connection with the firm and was wholly
"on his own" as in dependent consulting engineer and mine-organizer.

Hoover Honesty

ND this explains what has often puzzled many of the people who came

to know him and his household in
London. He and it were so little "English."" His home in London seemed a iways to be a bit of transplanted America, and, in particular, a bit of transplanted
California. As a matter of fact, in all his period of London and wide world connections there were but two that did not see him and his family in America, and few that did not include a stay in California. He maintained offices in New
York and San Francisco and had no slightest temptation ever to become a real expatriate.

But this is getting a head of the story.
There is one outstanding happening in his London experience that insistently demands telling. It is the happening that meant for him the greatest setback in his otherwise almost monotonously successful career. And yet, although this happening meant temporary financial ruin for him, it was, in its way, only. another

success, a success of revealing significance to those who would like to know the reall man that Herbert Hoover is.

After one of his returns to London, he discovered a defalcation of staggering proportions. By the issuance and sale of false stock and by other means the firm, or its creditors and clients, had been committed to a loss of over a million dollars.- Technically. the operations of the defaulter were of such a character that the firm could not be held legally liable. But the junior partner swept the technicalities a side with a single gesture. He announced that they would make good all of the obligations incurred by the defaulter.. This meant the immediate loss of his own personal fortune, and it meant a serious difference of opinion with the absent head of the firm, whose frantic cables came, however, too late to overrule the decision of the junior partner.

Then ensued the long, bitter struggle, most of it falling on the junior partner with the Quaker conscience, to make good the losses without actually putting the firm out of business. For going on with the business was essential to the making good. It was a grueling four years' struggle, but with success at the end of it. And then the Quaker engineer, now grown forever out of youth to the man who had experienced the down as well-as the up in life, gave up his connection with the firm and launched on that career of in dependent and self-responsible activity which has been his ever since. This was in 1908.
Herbert Hoover was now thirty-four years old, and he could probably be called the leading consulting mining cngineer in the world. ;

His work soon took him back to Australia, the land of his first notable success, but this time into South Australia instead of West Australia. Here he took personal charge of a large constructive undertaking in connection with the rehabilitation of the famous Broken Hill
Mines. These mines were in the in hospitable wastes of the Great Stony Desert, four or five hundred miles north of Adelaide, the port city. By his technical and organizing ability he brought to life these two or three abandoned mines and added to them some adjoining lower-grade min2s, converting the whole group froma state of great but unrealized possibilities into one of highly profitable actualities.

An important factor in this achievement was his origination and successful development of a process for extracting the zinc from ores that had already been treated for the other metals and then cast a side as worthless residues.

Noted Achievements

E ALSO introduced new metallurgical processes for the profitable handling of the low-grade sulfid ores that constituted most of the mineral body of the mines, and this brought them froma state of dormancy to one of throbbing life. Indeed, this work in South Australia did much to help prove what has long been one of his cardinal beliefs, namely, that the safe backbone of mining lies in the handling of large bodies of low-grade ores.
All this successful work in South Australia occupied but seven months. Back

in London again, he gathered about him a remarkable staff of skilled young mining engineers, thirty-five or forty of them,

Everybody's Magazine, April, 1920

THE STORY OF HOOVER

Hoover's house in Tientsin, where he and Mrs. Hoover were besieged and bombarded for a month during the Boxer Rebellion.

in deed, not on salary or fixed appointment, but men eager to attach themselves to him for the sake of working with him or for him in connection with the everincreasing number of his large enterprises in the way of reorganization and rehabilitation of mines scattered all over the world. He became the managing director or chief consulting engineer of a score of mining companies, and the simple association of his name with a mining enterprise gave investors and other engineers a perfect confidence in its success and its honest handling.

Two of his largest undertakings were in Russia, one at Kyshtim, in the Urals, the other at Irtish, on the Siberian plains near Manchuria. The Kyshtim property was a great but run-down historic establishment, on an estate of an area almost equal to that of all Belgium. One hundred and seventy thousand people lived on the estate, all dependent on the mining establishment for their support. The ores
Were of iron and copper, but the mines were so far from anywhere that not only did these ores have to be smelted at the mine mouths, but factories had to be erected to manufacture the metal into products suitable for profitable transportation. When Hoover took over the bankrupt properties he found himself not only with mining and manufacturing problems to so lve, but with what was practically a relief problem to face. For the underpaid workmen and their unfortunate families were in a state of great misery. He succeeded not only in modernizing and rehabilitating the material part of the great establishment, but at the same time in rescuing and revivifying a suffering and hopeless laboring population of helpless Russians.

The Irtish properties were near the
Manchurian border, a thousand miles up the Irtish River from Omsk, a mere remote bleak spot on the wild, bare Siberian steppes. But at this spot lay extensive deposits of zinc, iron, lead, copper and coal, all together. He had first of all to build three hundred and fifty miles of railroad to make the spot at a llaccessible. And the actual "mining" operations included

everything, from digging out and smelting -
the ores to manufacturing all sorts of things from metal door-knobs to steels rails and even steamboats to ply on the Irtish River.
He put a great sum of English, Canadian and American money into the work of building up a great establishment, which was just on a paying basis when the war broke out. It is all now in the hands of the Bolsheviki, with a most dubious outlook for the recovery of any of the millions put into it.

His Greatest Mining Victory

THER large operations under his direction were in Colorado, Mexico,
Korea, the Malay Straits Settlement, South
Africa, and India (Burma). The Burma undertaking has been, in its outcome at least, and in deed in many other respects,
Hoover's greatest victory in mining engineering and organization. It is to-day the greatest silver-lead mine in the world, although it started from as near to nothing as a mine could be and yet be called a mine. It took him and his associates five years to transform some deserted works in the heart of a jungle into the foremost producer of its kind in all the world. This mine is far away in the north of Burma almost on the Chinese border.
They had first to build eighty miles of railroad through the jungle and over two ranges of mountains, a_ sufficient feat of engineering in itself, and then to create and organize at the end of this line everything pertaining to a great mining plant. Thirty thousand men were employed in establishing the mine.
Altogether Hoover and his associates had in their employment, in: the various company undertakings under way in 1914, about one hundred and_ seventy-five thousand men, and the annual mineral output of the mines being handled by them was worth as much as the total annual output of all the mines in California.
And almost all of these successful mines had been made out of unsuccessful ones. For Hoover practically developed a new profession in connection with mining, a profession of making good mines out of bad ones, of making bankrupt mining

THE STORY OF HOOVER

Herbert, Jr., and Allan Hoover and their in separable companion, ''Rags."'

concerns solvent, not by manipulation on the stock exchange, but by work in the earth, in the mills, in the mine offices.

He works with materials, not pieces of paper. It takes him from three to five years to bring a dead mine to life; the mine must have mineral in it, to be sure, to start with, but he does all the rest.
That little matter of having mineral in it is the whole thing, you may think. But if you do, you must, think again. The history of mining is more a history of how mines with mineral in them have not succeeded in becomiig mines where the mineral could be profitably got out of them, than of how such mines have succeeded. A successful mine is in finitely more than a hole in the ground with mineral at its bottom. It is railroads and steamers, mills, housing for men, men themselves, organization, system, skill, brains, all-around human capacity. Herbert Hoover is a great miner because he is - I say it deliberately and not from any blind hero-worship - a great man.

His Energetic American Family

F HE is, he can do more than mine

greatly; he can do other things greatly.
Well, he can,. and he has done them.
We come to that part of his story now, the part that begins when the World War began, when the world saw with amazement that grew into ever greater amazement an unknown miner, that is, unknown except to other miners, calmly do things that only great men can do. But we who know now the story of the boy and the man of the years before the war are not so much amazed. We know that he is the kind of man and one with the kind of experience, the kind of world education,

who with opportunity can do things the world calls great and be the great man.
But just for a few minutes before we begin with August, 1914, the time the world began a new epoch in its history and
Herbert Hoover a new chapter in his work, let us have a glimpse of this man outside of his mines and his offices. Let us see him with his family, with his books, if he has any, and with his friends, of whom he has many.

His two children, Herbert and Allan, were born in 1903 and 1907, respectively.
Living first in apartments near Hyde
Park, the Hoovers felt that they and the boys and the dog Rags needed more room, or perhaps better, different kind of room, room for an energetic family of
Americans to live.in western American fashion, even during the time they had to be in London, and so they found farther west, in a short street just off Kensington
High Street, and close to Kensington Gardens, a roomy old house with a garden with real trees in it, and some grass and flower-beds.

It had been built long before by so mebody who liked room, and then rebuilt, or at least made over and added to, by Moncure Conway, the Alpinist and author. It was called "The Red House," a name that became in the succeeding years more and more widely known to Americans living in, coming to or passing through London, for it became a house of much American foregathering. Its hospitality became coextensive with its size and comfort, and although it was not one of the few "great houses" in which Americans could visit in London and still feel in some degree on
American soil, such as Dorchester House, when Mr. and Mrs. Whitelaw Reid had

it during Mr. Reid's ambassadorship, the
Red House was pleasant refuge to uncounted temporary American expatriates, a little 'fed: up" with foreign ways.

I knew it first in 1912 when I was doing some work in the British Museum library.
The bedroom to which my wifé and I were shown was in habited already by a happy and very vocal family of little Javanese seed birds and green parrakeets, a part of the boys' menagerie which had to find refuge from the- other animals already housed in their a djoming rooms. Out in the garden were pigeons fluttering in and out of a cote and hens solemnly inspecting the newly seeded flower-beds.
A big yellow-Persian cat, and a smaller silver Siamese one, regularly attended breakfast, and Rags irregularly attended everything. The cats were Mr. Hoover's favorites. He liked to have one on his lap as he talked.

There were book-shelves- in all of the rooms, and I noted that the ''master" - for the servants, who were not American, would call him that - never went up to bed without a book in his hand. 1 came later to know how fixed this night-reading habit had become, for in the Belgian
Relief years, when we had frequently to cross the perilous North Sea together on our way from Thames-mouth to Holland or back in one of the little Dutch boats, which used to run across twice a week until most of the boats had been blown up by floating mines, Hoover used always to fix an electric pocket lamp or a stub of a candle to the edge of his bunk and read for a while after turning in. He has had little time for reading in the daytime, but yet he has read enormously. It is this night-reading that explains it.

He Knows Books

HE shelves in the Red House contained many books about geology and mining and metallurgy. But they contained many others as well. Especially were they burdened with books on economics and political science. And they bore lighter loads of stories. 'Sherlock Holmes"
was there im extenso. The books on civics and economics and the theories of finance were well-thumbed and some of them margined with roughly pencilled notes. I should say they had been studied.

A frequent evening visitor, who came by preference when there had been no guests at dinner, was a well-known careful brilliant student of finance and economics, formerly editor of the best-known English financial weekly, and now editor of a very liberal, not to say radical, weekly of his own. He and Hoover held long disquisitions together, each having clearcut ideas of his own and glad to try them out on the keen intelligence of the other.
As a mere biologist, whose little knowledge was more of the domestic economy of the four and six footed inhabitants of earth than of the social science and politics of the bi-pedal lords of creation, my rdle was that of fascinated listener, for the debate was an enthralling exhibition of reasoning and argument.

Although he likes books and even likes writing, Hoover makes no claims to authorship himself. Nevertheless he has found time to put something of his knowledge, based on first-hand experience of the fundamentals and details of mining geology

(Continued on page 126)

- Ser Wa
CUNARD
ANCHOR

FAST REGULAR EXPRESS
Services by
IMPERATOR AQUITANIA MAURETANIA
K. A. VICTORIA CARMANIA CARONIA
SAXONIA PANNONIA ROYAL GEORGE
COLUMBIA ITALIA

To British Isles, Continent,
Mediterranean and Levant

Schedules on application

21-24 STATE STREET NEW YORK CITY

or Branches and Agencies

How to Reduce
Your Weight,

You CAN do it in a dignified, simple way in the privacy of your room and surprise your family and friends.

I KNOW you can, because
I've reduced 35,000 women from 20 to 85 Ibs., and what I have done for s0 many I can do for you.

Don'treduce by drugs or diet a lone. You'll look old if you do.
You should have work adapted to your condition,

No woman need carry one pound of excess fat. It is so simple to weigh what you should, and you enjoy the process. My cheerful letters and your scales keep you enthused,

I build your vitality, strengthen your heart and teach you how to stand, walk and breathe correctly, as I reduce you,

Don'tendure fat when it is so easy to reduce.

If you send me your height and weight I'!] tell you just what you should weigh. No charge - and I'll send you"an illustrated booklet
FREE, showing you how to stand correctly. Write me! I will respect your confidence,

Susanna Cocroft
Dept. 20, 624 8 Mic! higan Blvd., Chicago

surnUNNO POTEET

Dye Old, Faded -
Dress Material

"Diamond Dyes" Make Shabby Appare'

Stylish and New - So Easy Too.

Don'tworry about perfect results. Use
"Diamond Dyes," guaranteed to give a new, rich, fadeless color to any fabric, whether wool, silk, linen, cotton or mixed goods, - dresses, blouses, stockings, skirts, children's coats, draperies, - everything!

A Direction Book is in package.

To match any material, have dealer show you "Diamond Dye" Color Card.

@ PURITY CROSS |

Chop Suey

Made sy a Master Chef in aModel Kitchen
Handy Tins~-- All Quality Stores

Also makers of @ Deviled Chicken @ Deviled Ham
@® Lunch Tongue, etc.

} and

|a condensation

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

The STORY of HOOVER |

(Continued from page 38)

mining methods and organization, into a book which, under the title of
"Principles of Mining," has been a classic
|for students of mining engineering since its appearance in 1909. The book is of a course of lectures

|given by the author partly in Stanford

and partly in Columbia University. Although it contains an unusual a mount of or iginal matter and old knowledge or igi-

| nally treated for the kind of book. it pro-

| fes
| approved mining practise,

| ment of his work.

s to be, namely a compact manual of the author's preface is a model of modest appraise-
One of its paragraphs simply demands quotation:

The bulk of the material presented in this book is the common heritage of the profession, and if any may think there is in sufficient reference to previous writers, let him endeavor to

| find to whom the origin of our methods should

h | dred years ago.

| ing.

the

| work and bonus systems,

be credited. The science has grown by small contributions of experience since, or before, those unnamed Egyptian engineers, . whose works prove their knowledge of many funda mentals of mine-engineering sixty-eight hun-
If I have contributed one sentence to the accumulated knowledge of a thousand generations of engineers, or have

thrown 'one new ray of light on the work, I shall have done my share.

In the later chapters of the book Hoover, having 'devoted the earlier chapters to technical methods, treats of the administrative and financial phases of min-
The last chapter is devoted to the
"character, training and obligations of mining-engineering profession,' in which he sets up a standard of professional ethics for the engineer of thevery highest degree and reveals clearly his own genuinely philanthropic attitude toward his fellow men. In the discussion of mining administration there is a concise but illuminating treatment of the subject of labor-unions. After discussing contract he says:

There is another phase of the labor question which must be considered, and that-is the general relations of employer and employed. As corporations have grown, so likewise have the labor-unions. In general, they are normal and proper antidotes for unlimited capitalistic organization.

Labor-unions phases.

usually pass through two
First, the inertia of the unorganized

| labor is too often stirred only by demagogic

| me

Address: Orange, New Jersey | Toug

| on,
| rights of their employers and to the reflection

ans. After organization, through these and other agencies, the lack of balance in the leaders often makes for in justice in demands, and for violence to obtain them and disregard of agreements entered upon. As time goes men become educated in regard to the

of these rights in ultimate benefit to labor itself. Then the men, as well as the intelligent employer, endeavor to safeguard both interests. When this stage arrives, violence disappears in favor of negotiation on economic principles, and the unions achieve their greatest real gains.

Given a union with leaders who can control the members, and who are disposed to approach differences in a business spirit, there are few so under positions for the employer, for agreements honorably carried out dismiss the constant harassments of possible strikes. Such unions exist in dozens of trades in this country, and they are entitled to greater recogni-
| tion. The time when the employer could ride hshod over his labor is disappearing with

the doctrine of ''laissez-faire,"' on which it was founded. The sooner the fact is recognized, the better for the employer. The sooner some miners' unions develop from the first into the second stage, the more speedily will their organizations secure general respect and influence.

The crying need of labor-unions, and some employers as well, is education on a fundamental of economics too long disregarded by all classes and especially by the academic economist. When the latter abandon the theory that wages .are the result of supply and demand, and recognize that in these days of in ternational flow of labor, commodities and capital, the real controlling factor in wages is efficiency, then such an educational campaign may. become possible. Then will the employer and employee find a common ground on which each can benefit.

There lives no engineer who has not seen in sensate dispute as to wages where the real difficulty was in efficiency. No administrator begrudges a division with his men of the in creased profit a rising from in creased efficiency.
But every administrator begrudges the wage level demanded by labor-unions, whose policy is decreased efficiency, in the false belief that they are providing for more labor.

Three years before publishing the "Principles of Mining" Hoover had collaborated with a group of mining authors in the production of a book called "Economics of Mining." And three years later, 'that is in 1912, he privately published, in sumptuous form, with scrupulously exact reproduction of all of its curious old woodcuts, an English translation of Agricola's
"De Re Metallica," the first great treatise on mining and metallurgy originally published in Latin in 1556, only one hundred years after Gutenberg had printed his first book. "De Re Metcllica'" was the standard manual of mining and metallurgy for one hundred and eighty years.
Georgius Agricola, the author, was really one Georg Bauer, a German of Saxony, who, following the custom of his time, used for pen-name the literal Latin equivalents of the words of his German name.

Working for Recreation

HIS translation, with its copious important added notes of editorial commentary, was the joint work of Hoover and his wife - it was Mrs. Hoover, in deed, who began it - and occupied most of their spare time, especially their evenings - and sometimes nights - and Sundays through nearly five years. They had been for some time collecting and delving in old books on China and the
Far East and ancient treatises on early mining and metallurgical processes, and had accumulated an unusual collection of such works, ransacking the old bookshops of
London and the Continent in their quest.
In 1902, Mrs. Hoover, while looking up some early geology prints in the British
Museum library, stumbled on to Agricola, and becoming fascinated by it, reported her find to her husband. By invoking the services of one of their friends a mong the old book-dealers they soon owned a copy. Caught especially by the many curious and only half understandable pictures in it they began to translate bits from ithere and there, especially the explanations of the pictures, and in a little while they were lost.
Nothing would satisfy them short of

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

She had taken his hat and coat and hung |
them up. Now as he moved slowly to-|
ward the sitting-room she stopped him. |
"Dad," she said timidly.

He looked up and met her fresh young eyes. He had never seen them more brilliant. 'Well, Nance?"

"Ehe"

"He - he came up to tell me.
you want to ask him to dinner?
he's a little tired, too."

"Ask him to dinner?" he choked.

"Oh, Dad, why not?" she. pleaded.

Yes, the fight was all over. He knew that, and yet even now it was a difficult |
thing to admit. In the silent hall the old clock in the corner made itself heard. He |
turned, and faced it a moment in defiance. |
The little second-hand moved briskly on, utterly in different to his frown.

He heard his daughter's voice again -
the voice of youth.

Don't

Hazleton smiled grimly. Ralston was not waiting. He was coming down the home-stretch as fast as his legs - the legs |
of youth - would carry him. He could|
almost hear Ralston's rapid footsteps -
almost catch the sound of his quick]
breathing. It was he himself who was |
waiting, who from this time on must wait, |
for if he didn't - if he started running - it |
would only bring him the faster to the final goal. And that would not spell
Victory but Defeat. The penalty for winning that last race was the loss of everything. For the sake of the eager|
eyes waiting for his answer he must put that off as long as possible.

Hazleton squared his shoulders. He took a sharp breath and gripped his jaws.

"Come," he said to the girl. '"We - we will get Fiske, and go in to dinner."

She moved toward him like a fawn, and he felt her kisses on his lips - kisses that were like the breath of spring; kisses that sent his thoughts back thirty years;|
kisses that quickened his blood as he led her, now grown suddenly shy, into the next room, where Ralston sprang forward as across the tape.

The Movies

By Mary Carolyn Davies

War took its way across the
And the week's work in east
Was placed between

This season's styles in hats and gowns
And panoramas of strange towns;
And, for the rest, '
Cartoons and jest -

And then a little tale of love

Almost too real for thinking of.
These things I scarcely saw; no line
Of grief, or rapture gay and fine

I read. I only felt your rough
Unconscious shoulder touching mine.

screen; and west

I think | |

| = Loa bie)
W.L.DOUGLAS WAS PERMITTED

TO ATTEND SCHOOL FOR SHORT
PERIODS DURING THE WINTER
MONTHS WHEN THERE WERE
SLACK SPELLS IN THE WORK

wearer at one profit.

Serre the price on every pair of shoes as a protection against high prices and unreasonable profits is only one example of the constant endeavor of W. L. Douglas to protect his customers. W.L. Douglas name on shoes is his pledge that they are the best in materials, workmanship and style possible to produce at the price. Into every pair go the results of sixty-seven years experience in making shoes, dating back to the time when W. L.
Douglas was a lad of seven, pegging shoes.

besides our own stores.

W. L. Douglas shoes are sold through 107 of our own stores direct to the
All middlemen's and manufacturing profits are eliminated. W. L. Douglas $9.00 and $10.00 shoes are absolutely the best shoe values for the money in this country.
the retail price stamped on the bottom guarantees the best shoes in style, comfort and service that can be produced for the price.

W. I. Douglas shoes are for sale by over 9000 shoe dealers
If your local dealer cannot supply you, take no other make. Order direct from the factory. Send for booklet telling how to order shoes by mail, postage free.

CAUTION. - Insist upon having W. L. President W. L, DOUGLAS saturate Behar ea sen ees ssa Eta stamped on the sole. it has been change a]
or mutilated, BEWARE OF FRAUD. BROCKTON - - MASS.

W.L.DOUGLAS
PEGGING SHOES

OCCASIONALLY HE HAD TO FACE
PUNISHMENT FOR TARDINESS
BECAUSE HE WAS KEPT AT THE
WORK BENCH PEGGING SHOES
UNTIL THE LAST MINUTE

W.L.Douglas name and

Ty quality of W. L. Douglas product is

guaranteed by more than 40 years experience in making fine shoes. The smart styles are the leaders in the fashion centers of America. They are made in a wellequipped factory at Brockton, Mass., by the highest paid, skilled shoemakers, under the direction and supervision of experienced men, all working with an honest determination to make the best shoes for the price that money can buy. The retail prices are the same everywhere. They cost no more in San Francisco than they do in New York.

$5000:-2° a year without experience or capital!

Ee 2c for sending a coupon like the one below - that's all it cost Arthur T. White of Massachusetts to start in business

for himself.

He now receives from us $5000.00 a year and

more for a little pleasant work.

You can do the same - and you need only use your spare

time - hours that would otherwise be waste

. All you subscribers to EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE,

around

THE

DELINEATOR, ADVENTURE, THE HOME SECTOR,
THE DESIGNER and ROMANCE are sending in their new

and renewal subscriptions to us diréct. €
a tive in your vicinity to look after this business.
all supplies and instructions.

We wanta represent.
We furnfs
It costs you nothing to start,

but you can earn in your spare time what hundreds of our other a gents are earning - all the way from $5.00 to

$100.00 a week.

ip the coupon below and mail to-day -

there is no obligation in doing so.

- eoerananr scanner ae ee ee Clip and Mail Now - - - - - -

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE
Box 531, Butterick Bldg., New York, N. Y.

Gentlemen:

Please send me full particulars about your money-making plan.

Ba fn Sv ae as Pa cpt eet rn re oe ASE
State ...

- - - -

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE |

making a complete translation. It be-|
came an obsession. It was at first their recreation; then, because it went very |
slowly, it seemed likely to become their |
life a vocation.

They found an early German translation, |
which, however, helped them little. The translator had apparently known little of |
mining and not too much of Latin. They |
went to Saxony, to the home of Agricola, |
hoping to get clues to the difficult things i in |
the book by seeing the region and mines |
which had been under his eyes while}
writing it, and finding traditions of the |
mining methods of his time. But it was |
as if a sponge had been passed over Agric- |
ola and his days.

Fire had. swept over the towns he had known, and all the ancient records were gone. The towns, rebuilt, and the mines of |
which he had written were there, but of him and of the ancient methods he wrote about there was hardly record or even tradition. |

They went to Freiberg, where has long existed the greatest German school of mines, the greatest mining school in the Woman's Most Exquisite Adornment world, in deed, until the American schools |
were 'developed - probably the Germans | HE simple, beautiful lines of a would not admit even this qualification - | La Tausca necklace - the won- ,

are ay7 , | 3 Panama-Pacific and there they found no more to help them drous oriental fire and lustre, cannot Daan:

than in Agricola's own towns. In fact, | Bateads riot the beauty AE Hoops pies i Beach lenge gis the Freiberg professors seemed rather 24-inch length . $20

irritated by the advent of these searchers gorinch length... $22
for ancient mining history, for, as the savants explained, the Freiberg methods and machines were all the most modern :
in the world; there were 'no left-overs, : |
no worn-out rubbish of those in efficient j ms ages" around Germany's great school of mines. |
So the Hoovers, unrewarded by their pilgrimage to Germany for help in their attempt to resuscitate tLe Saxon Agric- |
ola, went back to London. But they kept on mining in the big tome, and finally in the fifth year of their devoted spare-time labors they had before them a completed translation.
So what with looking after his mining |
enterprises, entertaining friends in the |
Red House, translating Agricola and mo- |
to ring on occasional Sundays or less occasional whole week-ends, the days when he was not in America or Russia or Burma |
or Korea or elsewhere in the world where mines are, went on. |
And then came the sudden interruption. |
August, 1914, came, and since then Herbert |
Hoover has done other things, things the world has looked on with amazement and |
praise and gratitude.
The May instalment of The Story of Fisovert will give the account of his remarkable war-time services in the relief of Belgium.

Watchers Sleep in Style!

By Bernard Raymund

Beside the lane the Lombardies
Stand and look ;
Over the tops of the other trees
Over the brook, SINCE 188}

Beyond thehedgen | Pajamas & Night Shirts

To the line of purple hills a sleep

Ob he Sa ie carefree wind | "The The NIGHTwear of a Nation!"

Passes by j BAUTIMORE-NEWYorK - CHICA CHICAGO. E. ROSENFELD. & CO.Maxers
Do you long to leave the farm behind

Take wing and fly?

PRE AIRI RISO AA RAAB LESS

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

YOU CAN EARN
$100 to $150 a MONTH as a "New Way"

TYPIST

motes Accuracy and Puts Wings on Your Fingers

_ Almost over night the 'New Way" has revolutionized the whole typewriting situation. Already thousands of stenographers and other typewriter users who never exceeded 30 to 40 words a minute are writing 80 to 100 words with half the effort and greater accuracy - earning salaries in creased in proportion.

BE PRIVATE SECRETARY

. Typewrite the NEW WAY and get a better position and bigger pay. New Way typists earn $25
to $40 a week. Learn at home in spare time - 1l0
easily learned lessons-MONEY REFUNDED if results are not satisfactory.

TYPEWRITE THE NEW WAY
Win that better position you haveinmind, Don't be satisfied with small pay. ree Rook which explains why ''New Way"' must bring results - speed, accuracy, in creased salary. Mail coupon Now!!
Pn
THE TULLOSS SCHOOL
1474 College Hill, Springfield, Ohio.
Please send Free Typewriting Book.

Name

AGGPOSS 6 65d oan .0.0/4.0 5.6.9). 4¢:8 ples wp Eroivit 0 5010/8 1a ee sb viele ©

The Inhalation Treatment for Whooping-
Cough, Spasmodic
S Croup, Colds, Catarrh, aAsthma, Influenza,
Coughs, Bronchitis.

Simple, safe and effective, a voiding internal drugs.

Vaporized Cresolene relieves the paroxysms of Whooping-
Cough and Spasmodic Croup at once; it nips the common cold before it has a chance of developing into something worse, and experience shows that a neglec/ed cold is a dangerous cold.

Mrs. Ballington Booth says: **No family, where there are young children, should be without this lamp."'

The air carrying the antiseptic vapor, in haled with every breath, makes breathing easy and relieves the congestion, assuring restful nights.

It is called a 600 by Asthma sufferers.

Cresolene relieves the bronchial complications of Scarlet Fever and Measles and isa valuable aid in the treatment of Diphtheria.

itis a protection to those exposed.

Cresolene's best recommendation is its 40 years of successful use,

Sold by Druggists. Send for descriptive booklet 12

Try Cresolene Antiseptic Throat Tablets for the irritated Throat, composed of slippery elm bark, licorice, sugar and Cresolene.
They can'tharm you. Of your druggist or from us 10c. in stamps.

THE VAPO-CRESOLENE CO. 62 Cortlandt St., New York or Leeming-Miles Building, Montreal, Canada
Story-Writers Wanted
NOTHING PAYS LIKE SUC-
CESS IN WRITING FICTION - 2
cents to 10 cents A WORD. We sell stories, scenarios, and book MSS. on commission ; we revise them and tell you where to sell them. STORY-WRITING taught by mail. Send for our free buoklet,

"WRITING FOR PROFIT," tells

how; gives proof.

THE NATIONAL PRESS ASSOCIATION

Dept. 87, Indianapolis, Ind.

STAMMER

If you stammer attend no stammering school till you get my big new FREE book and special rate. Largest and most successful school in the world curing all forms of defective speech by advanced natural method. Write today.
North-Western School for Stammerers, Inc., 2312 Grand Ave., Milwaukee, Wis.

RE A BANKER

Prepare by mail in spare time for this attractive profession in which there are great opportunities for both men and women. Send at_once for free book, '"'How to

° Become a Banker,'' by EpGar G. ALcorn, President.

American School of Banking, 73 McLene Bidg., Columbus, 0.

MONEY-MAKING FARMS - 17 STATES

$10 to $100 acre. Stock, tools, crops often included to settle quickly. Write for big illustrated catalogue.

E. A. Strout Farm Agency, 2026BP. Sun Bldg., New York

Established 1879

NEVER SAY DIE

(Continued from page 75)

Nevertheless, he would do it. He pulled the paper out of the crevice between the window-sashes, opened the window and looked down. He saw the back stoop and there was a dirty mop beside it; there was an ash-can, and there were two garbagecans there. And there was a starved cat that sat and looked up at him. He hada tremor and drew back and covered his face with his hands as he thought of that cat - that knowing cat, that loathsome, that obscene cat.

collect his strength and summon his resolution. The cockroach had crawled to the head of the bed and seemed to wish to partake of his thoughts.

'Damn you, Old Archibald Hammil!"
he cried. And he scooped the cockroach into his hand with a sudden sweep and flung it out of the window. The in sect fell without perceptible discomfort, and at once began to climb up the outside wall again, making for the window.

The door opened and Mrs. Hinkley entered, her face cleft with a grin, and a tray in her hands.

"Mr. Gooley," she said, setting it on the wash-stand, "'I'll bet you ain't had nothing to eat to-day!"

N THE tray was a bowl of soup, a half

knife, a pat of butter, a boiled egg and a cup of coffee.

"No, nor yesterday, either," said Mr.
Gooley, and he looked at the soup and.at the long keen bread-knife.

"Here's something else I want to show

dodging out of the door again instantly. She bore in her hands this time a surprising length of flexible gastubing, and a small nickel-plated pearlhandled revolver.

"Vou see that there gas-tubing?" she said. "That is what that blondined party in the next room had onto her gas-plate -
the nerve of her! Strung from the gas-jet
| clear across the room to the window-sill.
And when I throwed her out, Mr. Gooley, she wouldn't pay her rent, and I took this here revolver to part pay it. What kind of a woman is it, Mr. Gooley, that has a revolver in her room, and a loaded one, too?"

Just then the door-bell rang in the dim lower regions, and she left the room to answer it.

And Mr. Gooley sat and looked at the knife, with which he might so easily stab himself, and at the gas-cord with which he might so easily hang himself, and at the loaded revolver with which he might so easily shoot himself.

He looked also at the bowl of soup.

He had the strength to reflect - a meal is a meal. But after that meal, what?
Penniless, broken in health, friendless, a failure - why prolong it for another twentytour hours? A meal would prolong it, but that was all a meal would do - and after that would come the suffering and the despair and the end to be faced all over again.

Was he man enough to take the pisto!
and do it now?

Or did true manhood lie the other way?

He sat down on the edge of the bed to |

loaf of bread with along keen bread- |

you, Mr. Gooley," said the landlady, |
and back in |

LUTALUNUIDVLUUUOUVOVENCUEUUUAOURUORGUEAAEA DEUCE

Suppose -

you are offered a wonderful job
 - good pay, a real future and pleasant, interesting work.

_ Suppose -
this job keeps you healthy and happy, outdoors in the fresh air and sunlight.

Suppose -

you can earn all the money you want, work as many hours a day as you like, and take off as many days as you please, with no one to order you around.

Suppose -

you need no experience and no capital, and yet will be helped to build up for yourself a business of your own, permanent and growing, paying you a regular in come.

Isn'tthat the kind of a job you want?

Well, take your pencil, cross out every ''suppose'' in this ad.
There is no supposition about what remains. It is a fact.

I am actually offering you

this job right now!
I can prove to you that on this very job, many other men and women, situated just like yourself, are earning $25.00 - $50.00 -
$100.00 a year in spare time, and
$2,000.00 to $4,000.00 for full time. I can give you their names and addresses, and even show you their pictures.

To get started, all they did was to sign a coupon like the one below, and send it in to us promptly.
You do the same, and before the end of another month, you will be looking back on the day you read this ad as one of the luckiest days in your life, becausevery soon you will be earning from
$100.00 to $4,000.00 a year, according to the time you can give to the work.

HERE'S THE COUPON

Sign and mail it now - - - 4

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE |
532 Butterick Bldg., |
New York, N. Y.
Please send me full particulars at once

about this splendid opportunity to earn money. I have some spare time to sell.

Name

Street___

State

EMM MM

Photo by White Studio.

Ten years ago (in "The Fortune Hunter'').

To-day.

The r Two Barrymores
By Alexander Woollcott

HE phrase "the two Barrymores'' summons the thought of the famous brothers joining forces in such plays as "The
Jest;"' but consider this time not
Lionel and John Barrymore, but

rather Jack and John, the one actor with the two careers; on the one hand the aimless comedian, who drifted idly through so many trashy farces in seasons past, and on the other the commanding figure 'that holds to-day the most interesting position in the English-speaking theatre,

It has been no mere automatic coming of age. Rather it was a sudden dramatic change wrought overnight, a decision made quietly to claim his inheritance and registered in a single evening. That evening was April 4, 1916, when the young vagabond of the Drew-Barrymore clan held a spellbound and wondering audience through the agonies of Galsworthy's "Justice.' It was when this play was followed by a program of steadily mounting ambition, culminating in his bold adventure this year into Shakespearian tragedy, that there became apparent to all playgoers an extraordinary design being woven into the fabric of a/player's life.

The surprise of it still hangs in the air.
Who, when Mansfield died and all the country speculated vaguely as to whence

Everybody's Magazine, June, 1920

his successor would come, ever dreamed it would be taken by the negligent and facetious farceur then wandering idly from play to play? Who that in 1911 saw Barrymore embroidering in an obscenely witless opiate called "Uncle Sam" would have ventured to predict that within nine years the ash-barrels would proclaim:

JOHN BARRYMORE in
Seats Eight Weeks in Advance

and that straightway an eager box-office line would form as though for a musical comedy?

Yet it came to pass. Richard, until the star's illness, was a huge success. The mystery is not that this actor of resourceful mind, winged imagination, and a. genius for the theatre should now be doing the work for which so few are fitted. The mystery is that, through fifteen wasteful years, he waited until! his thirties before he even began.

The explanation of that mystery Is guesswork here. Probably Barrymore began with a certain horror of and contempt for the actor's calling. After dabbling as a newspaper cartoonist, he drifted on to the stage from sheer inertia, secretly laughing at the pompous vanity of the craft, utterly unable to keep a straight face while mount-

ing a lighted platform and proclaiming to the groundlings he had just left: "Behold me!"? A real shyness, a certain pessimism, a crippling sense of humor, a horror at even seeming to take himself seriously - these determine his lackadaisical career, the while his irrepressible mind outran his work and conceived the bigger and finer things that ought to be done by some one.

Tt needed some one outside himself to discern his possibilities and take seriously one who constitutionally could not take himself so. That part was assumed by the playwright Edward Sheldon who, in a forgotten road venture observed a flash of this unutilized art, saw a great light and went to work on the program that has placed Barrymore in his present position.
It was Sheldon. who selected "Justice"
as preparing the way for the four subsequent productions 'in thevery texts of which he has had a hand.

"Justice" was chosen because it was without a vestige of laughter, without a single excuse for a smile. They dreaded for the comedian, who was turning tragedian in an evening, the fate of that solemn temperance lecturer at whom the audience laughed heartily under the impression that he was Mark Twain. There was no laughter at "Justice." The bridge was crossed. It now lies far behind.

Photo copyrighted by Underwood § Underwood,

Herbert Hoover.

ERBERT HOOVER was thrust into four distinct crises after
America went into the war.

They were world crises - tests upon which hung the welfare of millions of human beings.

The first crisis came when America went

intu the war.

Put yourself in Hoover's place when the
President called him back from the Belgian relief work to be the Food Administrator of the United States. Here were a hundred million people unaccustomed to government interference with their personal affairs; above all, of their affairs of stomach and pocketbook, their affairs of personal habit and private business. What would you think of your chance to last as a new kind of government official, set up in defiance of all American precedent and tradition of personal liberty, to say how much and what kinds of food the people were to eat and how the business affairs of millers and bakers, commission men and wholesale grocers and all food manufacturers were to be run?

The stomach and private business of
Americans are the seats of unusually many and delicate nerve-endings. To hit the
American household in the stomach and the American business man in his pocketbook is to invite a prompt, violent and painful reaction. Yet this is what President Wilson asked Hoover to do and to face.

A Democratic Food Dictator

OOVER realized the full possibilities of

the situation. He had seen the rapid succession of the food dictators in each of the European countries. Their average duration of life - as food dictators - was a little less than six months. 'I don'twant to be food dictator for the American people," he said plaintively a few days

after the President had announced what he wanted him to do. "The man who accepts such a job will lie on the barbed wire of the first line of in trenchments."

But besides trying to put yourself in
Hoover's place, try also to put yourself

of Hoover

By
Vernon Rellogg

FOOD ARBITER OF AMERICA
AND EUROPE

again in your own place in those great days of America's entrance into the war, and you will get another, and a less terrifying, view of the situation. Remember your feelings of those days as a perfervid patriotic
American, not only ready but eager to play your part in your country's cause.
Some of you could carry arms; some could lend sons io the khaki ranks and daughters to the Red Cross uniform. Some could go to Washington for a dollar a year. Yet many could, for one sufficient reason or another, do none of these things. But all could dig trenches at home right through the kitchen and dining-room. You could help save food if food was to help win the war. You could help some one who knew remodel temporarily the whole food business and food use of the country to the great advantage of America and the Allies in their struggle for victory.

Well, Hoover put himself both in your place and in his own place. And he thought that the food of America could be administered - not dictated - successfully if he would try to do it in a way consonant with the genius of the American people.
Hoover had had in his Belgian relief work an experience with the heart of America.
He knew he. could rely on it. He also believed he could rely on the brain of America.

The first thing to do was to tell the
American people what ought to be done.
He showed them the needs and the way to meet them, and asked them to follow him.
He asked them to make the fundamental decisions. America's decision in regard to food and its uses during the war was, therefore, absolutely democratic. While the food controllers of European countries relied on or ders, the American Food Administrator trusted in an appeal to the people.

Aside from your voluntary action and mine in regard to the use of food during the war, there finally, however, a rose a necessity for issuing regulations in regard to trade and manufacturing processes. Business has its fixed and set customs. The minute it departs from these customs it is

The Story

Photo copyrighted by Bachvac':

Mrs. Hoover.

no longer business. "nd there came times when Hoover saw that it would be necessary for business to desert its customs in order to further success in the war.

Hoover and the Business Men
UT with business men he acted as he had acted with the general public. He held conference after conference in Washington with groups of business men. Hy consulted wit eben as to what ought to be done by then if America was to do her best in the war. He told them what fixed customs of business it seemed to him it would be necessary for them to break. He had a way of painting a picture to business men that had two sides. One side showed their own self-interest. The other side showed the welfare of America in the war.

There was no choice. The American business men in large part, like everybody else in America, turned the self-interest side of Hoover's picture to the wall and lived in their business by the picture of
America triumphant in the war. Hoover laid all his cards on the table. Almost always he won. The business men had faith in his fairness, and his knowledge and resourcefulness won them. He knew he was playing with dynamite. He laughed, for in stance, at a cartoon of black Matilda in the kitchen. Over her oven it said:

"Mistah Hoovah goin' to show me how to cook'cawn-pone? Well, I reckin not."

Hoover knew that business men might have Matilda's feeling about any action of his which might seem unjustly to in terfere with their business.

I remember a group of large buyers and sellers of grain, men who dealt on the grain exchange of the Middle West, who came to Washington, not at his request, but on their own determination to have it out with this man who was threatening to in terfere seriously with their affairs; in deed, who threatened to put many of them out of business for the period of the war. They came with big sticks. They met in the morning for conference with the object of their wrath. Then they went off and met in the afternoon together. They came

ae

a

the next morning for another conference.
And they met again a lone to pass some resolutions.

The resolutions commended the Food
Administrator for the regulations he was about to put into force, and recommended that they be made more drastic than he had originally suggested!

It is true that as time went on there were individuals in various parts of the country who endeavored to beat the game - there were such persons in almost every sphere of activity and in every country during the war. 'The same people who made reluctant gifts to the American Red Cross tried to evade their honest duty in the war and to profit out of food. Hoover found it necessary to have them forced into control by cetain regulations. These control measures were~ery sharp ones at times, and even extendeito the point of putting persistent profiteers vit of business. The favorite form of penaiiation for first offenses, however, was to alloy such persons to make gifts to the Americar, Red Cross.

'
No Maximim Prices

OOVER'S friends find him a stanch adherent of progres through individual initiative. Laws that unnecessarily control personal a ctior or that hamper ambition find no assent ia his mental makeup. This belief of Hoova's took a striking turn in the regulation 0} food. He didn't believe in fixing maximun prices. He had seen this principle fail ir Europe. Whenever a maximum price was set on certain foods in European counsries, that food usually disappeared from jhe open market and was bartered in secretly by speculators.
One of the striking features, therefore, of the American food-control as administered by Hoover, when he fourd law necessary at all, was the absence ¢ffixed maximum

prices.

As a matter of fact, Hoover worked many months without any legal food-control at all. The Food-Control Act was in consideration by the House Committee on
Agriculture by April twenty-first, but it was not until four months had passed that the bill became a law. And on that day the
President issued an executive order establishing the United States Food Administration and appointing Hoover United
States Food Administrator.

A Hoover soup-kitchen for children in Esthonia.
3 Everybody's Magazine, June, 1920

THE STORY OF HOOVER

In Vienna: the children of the relief.

"TI will take the job," said Hoover, in effect, "with the understanding that I receive no salary and that I be allowed to build up my staff on this same volunteer basis."'

President Wilson's official United States
Food Administration was in reality only a continuance of Herbert Hoover's unofficial food administration which he had been carrying on ever since America went into the war.

For three months Hoover had conducted his unofficial administration and for five additional months President Wilson's official bureau had been in operation under
Hoover, when one day in January of 1918
there a rose the second crisis in Hoover's
Food Administration experience. On. this
January day in his office in the hastilybuilt wooden building in Washington he picked up, a mong other papers on_ his desk, a cablegram which was sent by Lord
Rhondda, the English food controler,

If you can imagine the excitement which came to the British Cabinet when General
Haig sent word during the terrible March drive, "We are fighting with our back to the wall," if you can imagine the tension which was caused in Washington when
Lloyd George shouted across the Atlantic

'"Ships! Ships! We must have more

ships!" you can comprehend the sensations which must have gone through the mind of
Hoover when he read the message from
Lord Rhondda.

England 8 Appeal
T WAS a desperate cry for help, It held out a prospect of England and the Allies being starved to their knees and losing the war in spite of all their desperate military efforts. This message ran as follows:

Unless you are able to send the Allies at least seventy-five million bushels of wheat over and above what you have exported up to
January first, and in addition to the total exportable surplus from Canada, I can not take the responsibility of assuring our people that there will be food enough to win the war. Imperative necessity compels me to cable you in this blunt way. No one knows better than I that the American people, regardless of national and individual sacrifice, have so far refused nothing that is needed for the war, but it now lies with America to decide whether or not the Allies in Europe shall have enough bread to hold out until the United States is able to throw its force into the field.

And we in the Food Administration offices in Washington thought that we had been doing all that we could. And the
American people thought that they, too, had been doing all that they could. And now came this demand, seemingly almost impossible of fulfilment. Here was the test of the great machine which Hoover had built up. Here was the test of how deeply he had impressed upon the minds of the
American people the necessity for sacrifice.
If they failed in meeting this demand. it would not be their fault. They were willing enough, God knows. But it might have been Hoover's fault. They were looking to Hoover for sound in formation and for the facts, and if Hoover had failed in giving them these and in showing them not only what ought to be done but how to do it, the blood of the Allies might have been upon his head. :

Could his machinery stand thé test? We in the Food Administration Bureau didn't know. We asked: "Can Hoover do the impossible?" I know now that Hoover didn't ask this question in regard to himself.
What he asked was: "Can the American people do this almost: impossible thing?"

'THE STORY OF HOOVER

i buy it with thought
2+ cook it with care
3- Serve just enough
4-Save what will keep
$-eat what would spoil
G6-home-grown is best

dont waste It.

American save-the-food poster.

His cablegram in response to Lord
Rhondda's was immediate and simple. It ran:

We will export every grain that the American people save from their normal consumption.
We believe that our people will not fail to meet the emergency.

"Every grain saved from normal consumption!" This meant every grain of wheat that could be taken directly from
American tables. It meant every grain of wheat which was on its way to American mouths, that could be diverted to ships.
This didn'tmean wheat taken from surplus supplies in storehouses, for that surplus wheat had already gone to our Allies. We had sent them every grain of it. This desperate cry of Lord Rhondda must be answered by wheat which we Americans in the ordinary course of events would have eaten very shortly. No cry for help that went up in the whole war attracted more attention a mong the American people than the appeal which Hoover sent out to the public after he received Lord Rhondda's cablegram. President Wilson himself issued a special proclamation to this same end.

America's Response

HE response was instantaneous. On

every table, in every home, in every neighborhood, on the remotest farms, where wheat was abundant, as well as in the greatest cities where the most luxurious tables were set, the American people saved wheat, grain by grain. These grains were piled up at the Atlantic coast. The piles grew and grew. This food that would otherwise have been on American plates was put on the ships that threaded their way across the submarine-infested Atlantic.

And when all was done that could be done, when we had saved every grain that we could save, we had sent the Allies, in response to Hoover's request, ten million tons more than the Allies had asked us to send. Afid the threatened breakdown of the Allies' effort was averted.

But in all this supreme effort to get food to the Allies, Hoover saw a danger line in America. There was a point beyond which we could not send food to the
Allies. He couldn'ttrust the Allies, who

were in a state of panic, to keep their demands moderate. They were willing to spend money without stint to get food.
And there came times when they might have overbought in our market and left us in a plight respecting food almost as grave as their own.

To meet this danger Hoover formed a close working alliance with the War Trade and Shipping Boards who controlled exports, so that not a pound of food could be sent out of this country without the consent of the Food Adminstration. The time was not one for the working of the law of supply and demand - it was one for equal distribution of all the wealth and possessions of the Allies. And Hoover developed, after some negotiations with various boards and war agencies, a plan for the pooling of purchases not only for the Allies but for neutrals and our own Army, Navy, Red
Cross and the other large welfare organizations in the war.

This Division of Coordination of Purchase oversaw the expenditure of over a billion dollars in food stuffs in the last eight months before the armistice. Through the Food Administration the tangled maze of American business to which we are accustomed in peace time was combed out so that its threads were all straight and

TRANCAIS

EN |
ECONOMISANT le PAIN

Vous nserver, les navires

pour plus de
!

combatants ameéricains

VOUS AIDEZ
_NOS SOLDATS!

French save-the-food poster.

clear. Every one of these threads centered in Washington. Under the licensing system, which was the sharp teeth of the food-control law, over two hundred and fifty thousand food-handling corporations, firms and individuals were under regulations.

The most important, or at least the most dramatic, control that was exerted by the
Food Administration was upon wheat.
Congress realized the importance of controlling the wheat supply when in August,
1917, it passed a law guaranteeing a price of two dollars a bushel for the 1918 wheat crop. Congress fixed this price in order to stimulate production. It was in tended by Congress to benefit the farmer. Wheat had shown signs of going out of sight a

"to bring you Bread.
"Use it carefully- Seon
"one piece every 4

British saw-the-food poster.

month after the yar began. It was selling at three dollars and twenty-five cents a bushel in Chicago, and the price of bread was soaring, bu' the farmer was not getting his benefit Of this three dollars and twenty-five cents the farmer received, according to th: Department of Agriculture, only one Collar and forty-four cents a bushel. The middlemen and profiteers were getting tie rest. It was necessary to hit them in che knuckles, to loosen their

hold.
The Epic of Wheat

A Nien Congressional law put new problems before Hoover. Congress had guaranteed only the 1918 crop. The twodollar-a-bushel law was passed in August,
1917, when the 1917 crop was coming on the market. The farmers who were getting only one dollar and forty-four cents a bushel for their 1917 crop naturally wondered why, if wheat would be worth two dollars a bushel in 1918, it shouldn't be worth two dollars a bushel in 1917. It immediately became apparent that the farmers must be guaranteed a fair price for their 1917 crop. So President Wilson appointed a committee composed of representatives of leading farmers' and consumers' organizations, together with a number of agricultural experts, to fix on a "fair price" for the 1917 crop.

Hoover had no of ficial part in the delimination of this price. He was not on this committee appointed by President
Wilson, and President Wilson later said that Hoover took "no part in the deliberations of the committée" nor"'in any way intimated an opinion regarding that price."

The result of the committee's work was that the "fair price" of the 1917 crop was fixed at two dollars and twenty cents a bushel, which was the same price that had been fixed by Congress for the 1918
crop, plus an addition of twenty cents later made by the President.

There was only one thing for Hoover to do after this action by the President's committee, and that was to hold the price of wheat up to this two-dollar-and-twentycent level. He established the United
States Grain Corporation which could

'

7 a

-

THE STORY OF HOOVER

Caftain ''Tommy'' Gregory (second from left), Hoover's director o

frelief in South-east Europe, with American, British, French and

Italian officers of the Interallied Relief Mission, in Austria,

deal in wheat, either }uying or selling to in fluence the price, and licensed all handlers and millers of wheat, and prohibited dealing in futures. These three steps did the job.

One of the first results was that while the farmer was getting, in the year just before the war, about twenty-seven per cent. of the cost of each loaf of bread for the wheat in it, to which che miller added about six and one-half per cent. and the middlemen and bakers the remaining sixty-six and one-half per cent., and in
1915, after the war began, the respective proportions were thirty per cent., eleven per cent. and fifty-nine per cent., in 1918, after the Food Administrator's control was in force, the farmer got forty per cent., the miller three per cent., and the others fifty-seven per cent. Or, as another illustration, while in 1917, when there was no food control, the difference between the price of the farmers' wheat and the flour made from it was about six dollars per barrel of one hundred and_ninety-six pounds, during the period of food control this difference was only about three dollars and a half.

Men who claimed to represent certain agricultural interests in the United States,

including some farmers criticized Hoover for taking these steps. In fact, Hoover felt it necessary at one time to make a statement about what he had done in regard to wheat. In this statement he didn't dodge responsibility, as he might have done by saying: "I didn't fix the price of wheat. It was done by others, and it was only my duty to keep it fixed and carry out the rules which they had made."
Instead Hoover said: "I a gree with the contention of some farmers that they would have received five dollars and perhaps ten dollars a bushel for wheat had it not been for the restraint imposed by the government, but I would say to those farmers that they would have been taking money, not only from the blood of our soldiers and from the suffering of the poor sections of our consuming centers, but every farmer in the land would himself have paid fifty times over in national damage resulting from reactions from labor and in stability in our population that would have thundered at the farm door sooner or later."'
History may well say that the control of wheat during the war was one of the most dramatic incidents of that great contest.
How this great reservoir of wheat in America was filled and protected, how streams

In Finland: feeding the children.

Everybody's Magazine, June, 1920

of wheat went forth from it in steady but properly regulated currents, with almost every grain counted and traced, is a story that belongs to an epic of wheat, the fit third part of the trilogy that Frank Norris began with 'The Octopus" and "The Pit?
and had at the call of death to leave unwritten.

After Peace

NE must almost believe that Hoover

foresaw the armistice which came in
November of 1918, for he was astonishingly well prepared to demobilize his department and to help American business reenter its old ways. To my mind, as I observed him, none of the vindictiveness of war remained in his mind one minute after the
Germans had said 'Kamerad" to the world. Within twenty-four hours after the armistice of November eleventh,
Hoover met his state and federal administrators in final conference.

For Hoover the war was over. He wished the war to be over for them too.
America must become her old self again immediately. All autocratic control must cease. Personal liberty, both in business and in in dividual life, must be restored as rapidly as possible. While the German troops were still marching away from their front, within twenty-four hours after the armistice had been declared, Hoover told his state administrators what he thought of laws that interfered with individual initiative. At this time he said:

"The Food-Control Act will expire at the signing of peace with Germany and as it represents a type of legislation only justified under war conditions, I don'texpect to see its renewal. It has proved of vital importance under the economic conditions and psychology of war. I don't consider it as of such usefulness in the economic conditions and psychology of peace. Furthermore it is my belief that the tendency of all such legislation, except in war, is to an overdegree to strike at the roots of in dividual initiative.

"The law has well justified itself under war conditions. The investigations of

THE STORY OF HOOVER

A Hoover soup-kitchen for children in Warsaw.

our economic division clearly demonstrate that during the first year of the Food Administration farm prices steadily in creased by fifteen per cent. to twenty per cent. on various computations, while wholesale prices decreased from three per cent. to ten per cent., according to the basis of calculation. Thus middlemen's costs and profits were greatly reduced. This was due to the large suppression of profiteering and speculation and to the more orderly trade practises introduced under the law.

"It is my desire that we should all recognize that we have passed a great milestone in the signing of the armistice; that we must get upon the path of peace; that therefore we should begin at once to relax the regulation and control measures of the Food Administration at every point where they do not open a possibility of profiteering and speculation. This we can not and will not permit so far as our abilities extend until the last day that we have authority under the law.

'When we entered upon this work eighteen months ago, our trades were rampant with speculation and profiteering.
This grew mainly from the utterly in sensate raids of Europe on our commodities.
But the major necessity for law in repression of speculative activities is to my mind rapidly passing. It is our duty, however, to exert ourselves in every direction to so handle our food during reconstruction as to protect our producers and our consumers and to assure our trades from chaos and panic."

Behind the Curtain of War

HAVE described the crisis in which

Hoover first became Food Administrator, and also the crisis in which he enabled Americans to divert wheat from their own. tables and mouths to the Allies. And now we come to the third crisis, which to my mind is the most dramatic of them all.
For years the curtain of war had hung between us and our enemies. The armistice raised this curtain to a small degree, just enough for us to catch glimpses and sounds of horrible things. Behind that curtain was an in ferno of human suffering, of starving women and children, of disordered minds and disorganized mass-thinking.
Behind this curtain was the maddest and

most disheveled world that this civilization has perhaps ever known.

Help must be given immediately. The new states which we had helped to create -
Poland, Czecho-Slovakia, Jugo-Slavia -
and the liberated peoples such as the Armenians, were our moral creditors for food.
It was our duty to make life tolerable for these free peoples immediately. And it was our duty to relieve whatever sufiering we found a mong our former enemies, after we had put our friends on their feet.

The European Allies were in almost-as bad a way as our former enemies. They had no food to spare, and. little money with which to purchase it. America had all the food, all the strength, and almost all the money. The Allies turned to America to meet this great situation.

Hoover and the A. R. A.

EN days after the armistice, President

Wilson asked Herbert Hoover to go to
Europe to direct the participation of the
United States in the relief of the liberated countries. The President didn'thave to think twice in selecting Hoover for this job. No man knew the European 'situation, especially the terrible situation behind the curtain of war, better than Hoover, for in the Belgian days he had been behind this curtain. And no man realized more clearly than he that these people must be relieved of suffering before the peace and stability of the world could be restored.
All Europe to him, after the armistice was signed, was one great field of misery, its people one great mass of suffering humanity, appealing to the world, and especially to rich, strong America, for help.

Hoover went to Paris. He immediately saw that he must have representatives in every part of Europe. He drew upon his associates in Belgian Relief and American
Food Administration and upon the American army in France for these. With an ability for selecting the right man for the right place that was almost uncanny,
Hoover reached into the army and out of two millions of Americans at hand selected some eight hundred men, who in reality were part of thevery cream of efficient
American business and administrative life.

The vanguard of these men were toeing the mark in nervous preparedness for effort

when the war curtain was finally raised and the word was given by the Allies to go into former enemy country with help and food. These Americans, like runners at the tape, jumped, when the word was given, into Germany, Austria-Hungary, Poland,
Bohemia, Turkey, Armenia, Finland, and many other parts of Europe to see what they could do to save human life. The
Supreme Economic Council, which was made up of representatives of the Allies of America, sat in Paris reviewing European conditions, and very shortly they chose Hoover to administrate their participation in the revictualing and the rehabilitation of Europe. Hoover became a sort of Marshal Foch of the Allied Rel':
Administration.

It was an unspeakably, in descibably tangled world which Hoover's xén found in the country which had beeroccupied by the enemy. Although, theoretically, with the Peace Conference officials at Paris there were no definer frontiers, until the
Peace Conference Jad described and declared them, nev¢theless by the laws of human nature thre were already actual frontiers between 'he new peoples and the old that bristled with guns and men and barbed wire and hate and distrust. The money of one cqintry was of no value in the adjoining land. People of one country wouldn'tpermi: either their locomotives or their freigh-cars to go into other countries. The war fury seemed to be as deeply imbedded in the minds of the new peoples as it had been in the minds of the old, ard the conditions were so bad that the task of securing a free circulation of food and a free system of buying and selling and of efficient distribution seemed almost hopeless.

Hoover had some money to work with.
The American Congress, expressing the sympathy of the American people, appropriated one hundred million dollars as a working fund for the American Relief Administration in Europe. The British provided a relief fund of sixty million dollars. The United States Treasury made monthly loans of several million dollars each to Roumania, Servia and Czecho-
Slovakia. President Wilson started Hoover off with a contribution of five million dollars from the special Presidential fund, and Hoover used this latter sum to get his work under way while waiting for the
Congressional appropriation. Italy and
France also helped out, either in money or provisions or shipping or by other means.

Untangling Europe

ITH the coordination of the Allied governments, with a financial support from Congress, and with a control of shipping which placed in the Administrator's hands the greatest fleet of ships that had ever been under the disposal of one organization, Hoover set about untangling the almost hopelessly tangled situation in
Central Europe.

There was evercontinuing war in certain parts of Europe. Armistice meant something real on the west and Austro-
Italian fronts, but it meant little to eastern Europe. There was a score of very lively little wars going on at one time over there. Poland a lone was fighting with four different adversaries, one at each corner of her land. The whole thing was literally international anarchy.

(Continued on page 86)

me

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

June Mornings

Bubble grains on berries

Mix these airy, flimsy bubbles in' every dish of berries. Use Puffed Rice or Corn Puffs. The blend

_ is delightful. It adds what
) crust adds to a shortcake.

At breakfast, also, serve with cream ard sugar -
any of these fragile, fascinating grains.

June Evenings
Whole wheat c

steam exploded

For suppers, float Puffed
Wheat in milk. That means whole wheat with every food cell blasted.
The grains are puffed to eight times normal size.

They seem like tid-bits, but every flaky globule is a grain of wheat made easy to digest.

June Afternoons

Airy, nut-like confections

For hungry children, crisp and douse with melted butter. Then
Puffed Grains become nut-like confections, to be eaten like peanuts or popcorn.

Use also like nut-meats as a garnish on ice cream. Use as wafers in your so ups.

Puffed Wheat Puffed Rice Corn Puffs
Also Puffed Rice Pancake Flour

Prof. Anderson's creations

In Puffed Grains every food cell is blasted by a steam explosion.
A hundred million steam explosions occur in every kernel. Thus digestion is made easy and complete. Every atom feeds.

The grains are toasted, crisp and flimsy. They taste like nut-meats puffed. Never were grain foods made so in viting.

But remember the great fact. Every element is fitted to digest.
They are ideal grain foods which never tax the stomach.

In summer serve at all hours, and in plenty. Keep all three

kinds on hand.

The Quaker Oats @mpany

Sole Makers

(os)
(or)

The STORY of HOOVER
(Continued from page 36)

Hoover's first men in central Europe were scouts, men whom he had selected to survey the situation and inform him. Already in early December Dr. Alonzo Taylor and I were listening for Hoover in
Berne to the pitiful plea of representatives of starving Vienna. By January Hoover was well in formed as to the problems in various parts of Europe, and his missions were in Trieste, Belgrade, Vienna, Prague,
Budapesth and Warsaw, and they were not only investigating, but they were even beginning to deliver food.

In February, Dr. Taylor and I were reporting the German situation from Berlin.
It was a splendid thing to be an American representative of Hoover's administration in those wonderful days. Hoover's name was known over Europe; it was one to charm with. When word spread through the suffering countries that Hoover had taken charge of feeding the hungry, the word acted like magic in restoring hope to despairing millions.

When the first food mission to Poland, making its way in the first week of January, 1919, with difficulty and discomfort because of demoralized transportation conditions, had reached that part of its journey north of Vienna which brought it into
Czecho-Slovakia, our train was halted at a station gaily decorated with flags and bunting, a mong which the American colors were conspicuous. A band was playing vigorously something that sounded like the "Star Spangled Banner," and a group of top-hatted, frock-coated gentlemen were the front figures in a great crowd that covered the station platform. I was somewhat dismayed by these evident preparations for a reception, for we were not going to try to help Czecho-Slovakia, but Poland. I told my in terpreter to hurry off the train and explain the situation.

He returned with one of the gentlemen of high hat and long coat, who said in broken French: "Well, anyway, you are the food mission, aren't you?"

"Yes," I replied. 'But we are going to
Warsaw. We are only passing through your country; we can not do anything for you."

"Well, then, it's all right." He turned and waved his hand at the band, which responded with in creased endeavor to play the "Star-Spangled Banner," while the crowd cheered and waved home-made
American flags. And we were received and addressed and given curious things to drink, and a little food - a very little food.
We gave them some Red Cross prisoner packages which we carried along for our own maintainance, and then we were sent on into Poland with more cheers and hearty
God-speeds.

Hoover's Maps

LL this time Hoover stayed in Paris with his eye on two of the most remarkable maps that were prepared, I presume, during the entire war. One was a map of the seven seas of the world. The other was a map of Europe showing all the new half-formed and unfrontiered nations

' EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

- America's Exclusive Knight-Six

{ T IS impossible to compute the life of the R & V :
Knight motor because it is a motor that improves \
with use. The longer it runs, the smoother it |

doperates - the more powerful it becomes. There are |
| ' / no valves to get out of order; carbon only adds to its

/ efficiency - time makes it more flexible.

tees
Aa
Aol

| The R&V Knight chassis and body are of masterful idesign and construction, as carefully built as the 1} Ales
7 motor - characterized by those refinements in equip- er

sment which lift the car from the commonplace. 2)

Until 1910 the car made by this company was known /

e | as the Moline; from 1910 to 1913 as the Moline- /
ag Dreadnaught; from 1913 to 1919 as the Moline-Knight; 4
. ; and it has now been christened the R & V Knight. 4

4 \ ; a 0 w 7. Passenger Touring - 7 Passenger Sedan - 4 Passenger Coupe
4 {yt %, 4 Passenger Sport - 2 Passenger Roadster oa \

ROOT & VAN DERVOORT ENGINEERING CO.

\ East Moline, Illinois

pe Ae

et ae ee Se en ea

oe T e ge

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

which had been born in the war. The sea |

map, which hung on the wall of the Food
Administration headquarters in the Crillon
Hotel in Paris, was dotted with tiny flags -
many hundreds of them. Flags of one color showed loaded ships bearing help to suffering millions. Flags of another color showed empty ships returning to America or Canada or South America or China or
Japan or Australia or anywhere else in the world where food could be obtained to be reloaded with help for Europe.

Hoover in these days seemed to have his fingers on the remote ends of the earth.
He 'saw not only the dangers of the whole great general situation, but the a mount of detail which he carried in his head, minute detail, small facts about food situations or political or military situations in

this far-away corner or that, was fatigu- |

in gly vast.

'What is the hungriest spot that you've found?"? some one asked Hoover as he sat in a chair in the Crillon barber-shop in Paris.

"Armenia," he said without hesitation.

"How hungry are they?" asked the interrogator.

"As hungry as people can get," said
Hoover. ''They are eating human flesh."

"Cannibalism?" he was asked.

"No, cannibalism is the last step," said
Hoover simply; 'they haven'tgone quite that far in Armenia. They have been eating their dead."

"What is the most difficult agricultural region in Europe?" Hoover was asked one day.

"Northern Finland, I believe,' he said.
"That part of the world is all flat rock.
Black earth blows into small basins in this rock and forms little areas only a few feet in circumference. The Finnish farmers plow up these little areas with sticks, because steel tools would be spoiled on the rock. They do their harrowing with pine trees from which the branches have been partly cut away, for the same reason.
Every blade of wheat is hand-tended.
Finnish farmers have several of these little wheat gardens. And then the danger of crop failure is so great that after the crop is planted the Finnish farmers go into the woods and take bark from the trees to grind into flour so that if the wheat crop fails their families may have bread of bark during the long winter."

Playing the World

ONE of the thousand stories that came

to Hoover from his men in Europe

seemed to escape his mind. He listened

to them all with extreme interest and seemed to remember them all.

I recall how he was affected by a story from Finland which: showed that even while the northern Finns were eating bread made out of bark of trees they were observing the eodes of civilization. For in stance, the poor people, when they went into the woods to get bark, would take this bark only from dead trees, respecting the rights of the forest owners. Bread made from the inner bark of pine-trees contains a modicum of food value, but isn'tpleasant to look upon. On the other hand, bread made from the wood of birch-trees, not the bark, is a very pretty bread, white and attractive, but contains no nutritive substance. Hoover found it very amazing that this white bread made of birch sawdust, but without food value, brought

GRAFLEX

There is certainty in picturemaking with a Graflex. The user of the Graflex brushes a side the usual handicaps - he almost disregards subject, time, place or light.

The 1-1000 of a second snap that stops the bird on the wing, the slow snap for an in door portrait, the prolonged time exposure - all are easily within its scope.

Graflex widens the possibilities of pictorial achievement.

Eastman Kodak Company
Folmer &§ Schwing Department
Rochester, N. Y.

Catalogue free at your Dealers or by mail.

nce

EVERYBODY'S MA GAZINE _

ABA' CHEQUES GO ROUND THE WORLD

ee are strange and out-of-the-way places

in this world, but none of them is strange to
"A.B.A." Cheques - The Best Funds for Travelers. Wherever civilization has penetrated, these cheques have become a familiar medium of exchange and brought comfort and aid to thousands of to urists.

OTELS, stores and transportation companies everywhere know and accept them, and those who use them are in dependent of banking hours, free from the annoyance of money exchange and protected from loss or theft. Your countersignature, written in the presence of the acceptor, automatically identifies you. Without it the cheques are valueless.

N denominations of $10, $20, $50 and $100.
I Conveniently carried in a small, compact wallet. Issued by the American Bankers Association composed of 20,000 leading American Banks and Trust Companies.

"A-B-A' ee" Cheques

"the BEST funds for travelers"

For further particulars write

BANKERS TRUST COMPANY
New York City

| more money in the Finnish towns than the

rough but valuable bread made out of pine bark.
With the accumulation of all these re-

| ports and stories and in formation about

food habits and agriculture from every

| part of Europe, I suppose it is safe to say

that Hoover knew more about the food situation in Europe than has ever before been gathered together in one human head.
In his office in Paris, with his fingers on buttons of the mighty machine which he

| had created, Hoover and his staff did dramatic things.
If the port of. Trieste got blocked and

| food was not permitted to go to the

north by that port, Hoover merely pushed a button and out in mid-ocean ships which were heading for the Mediterranean turned north toward the Arctic Circle and came into Baltic and even German ports, and the northern peoples had their food without delay.

Hoover and his men always played two strings, if not more. They were always

| prepared not only for existing conditions

but for anything that might happen, for

| any change of politics or government or

any military exigencies that might a rise.

er? :
I'm W or king for Hoover

HE spirit which Hoover put into

his wiling American men in Europe was one of resource and in dependence.

| He had so carefully selected his men that in

many in stances they acted first and told
Hoover about it afterward, One of Hoover's rules was that his Army men, although they wore the uniform of the American
Army, were not to use military titles. This uniform, only a few weeks before symbol of America's military might, became under
Hoover's use of it changed into a symbol

of human sympathy and help. And it

won its way for Hoover's men through

| all wire entanglements and obstacles en-
| gendered by hate, suspicion and in terna

tional greed.
The self-reliance which Hoover in stilled in his men in Europe brought out a record

| of fine American deeds. I was in Vienna
| when the first train of American relief

food came in from the south. The Italians

| Were attempting to send in some supplies,

yut so far all the trains which had started

north had been blocked at some border

oint. The train of American food was in charge of two snappy doughboys, a cor poral and a private. When it reached the frontier blockade; the corporal was told hat he could go no farther. He asked

| why.

1e was answered. "But this train is moving," he said. He called _to his private. "Give me my gun," he ordered.
With revolver in hand he climbed into

| the engine and said to the engineer, 'Now

you go on." And the train went on. When
I asked him in Vienna if he had been worried at the border about the customs and military regulations, he answered with a

| cheerful smile:

"Not a worry. Hoover's men at Trieste told me to take the train through and it was up to me to take her. These wop kings and generals don'tcount with me.
I'm working for Hoover."

But it soon became only too apparent that a new crisis was a rising. Wherever suffering was greatest, anarchy and the

| Overthrow of government seemed most

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE _

HERCULES
POWDERS

Scene in one of the Hercules
Powder Company's packing houses.

The Dynamite Maker and the Food Supply

The dynamite maker's service to all of us does not consist so lely of placing explosives in the hands of the miner for the production of our coal and metals. The labor of these men in the Hercules plants is also closely connected with the most fundamental of all industries - agriculture. Their work helps to provide the food that nourishes us.

With the in crease in the country's population, new agricultural lands are required to sustain it, and these are being secured by reclaiming our vast areas of stump and swamp land. Hercules Dynamite is being used extensively in developing these sources of food supply that have hitherto lain dormant and unproductive.

The sixty million acres of swamp land in this country - now a menace to public health - a wait the product of the dynamite maker to transfer them into fertile, productive farms. It has been stated by Government authorities that one man with dynamite can dig as much ditch as six men with picks and shovels.

In many sections of the. country, our Agricultural Service
Men are demonstrating the use of explosives to land owners and contractors. If you desire further in formation, write the
Agricultural Department of the Company at Wilmington,
Delaware. ''Progressive Cultivation', a 68-page booklet, gives full in formation about the use of explosives for agricultural purposes.

HERCULES POWDER, CO.

Chicago St. Louis New York
Pittsburg, Kan. Denver Hazleton, Pa.
San Francisco Salt Lake City Joplin
Chattanooga Pittsburgh, Pa. | Wilmington, Del.

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

Ep a 2 omen a i
Se iT

-

Out of a deep sleep he woke her. She thought she knew him so well. Yet, now, at two in the morning, he burst on her with this terror - this mystery - this what?

It's the beginning of one of the best mysteries ever solved by the great detective

CRAIG KENNE

TheAmerican Sherloch Holmes';

ARTHUR B.

TheAmerican Conan Doyle ~ VE

He is the detective genius of ourage. He has taken science - science that stands for this age - and allied it to the mystery and romance of detective fiction. Even to the smallest detail, every bit of the plot is worked out scientifically. For nearly ten years, America has been watching his
Craig Kennedy, marvelling at the strange, new, startling things that detective hero J would unfold. Such plots - such suspense -
with: real, vivid people moving through the maelstrom of life! Frenchmen have mastered the art of terror stories. English writers have thrilled whole nations by their artful heroes. Russian ingenuity has fashioned wild

rtales of mystery. But all these seem old-fashioned - out of date
 - beside the in finite variety - the weird excitement of Arthur B,
Reeve's tales.

: FREE - POE

To those who send _ the coupon promptly, we will give FREE a set of Edgar Allan Poe's works in 10
volumes.

When the police of New York failed to so lve one.of the most fearful murder

mysteries of the time, Edgar Allan Poe
¢ far off in Paris - found the solution.
The story is in these volumes.

He wasa detective by in stinct - he was a story-teller by divine inspiration.
Before or since - no one has ever had his power to make your hair stand on end - to send chills up your back - to hold you in terror- horror!

This is a wonderful combination.
f Here are two of the greatest writers of mystery and scientific detective stories.
You can get the Reeve at a remarkably low price and the Poe FREE for a short time only.

) HARPER & BROTHERS
Established 1817

"sma Ur a

ee

Harper & Brothers, 10 Franklin Square, New York

Send me, all charges prepaid, set of Arthur B. Reeve - in 12
volumes. Also send me, absolutely free, the set of Edgar Allan Poe
 - in 10 volumes. If the books are not satisfactory I will return both sets within 10 days at your expense. Otherwise I will send you $1
within 5 days and $2 a month for 14 months.

Name -

Address

Occupation =

high German official in a town some miles away. They told their story shortly:
"You fellows want potatoes. We know where there are lots of them. You've got more coal than you can use. We'll fix up a deal by which you can trade your coal for potatoes. We want to talk to your coal miners,"' they concluded.

The German officer had common sense.
Instead of sending the American officers to the somewhat in accessible mines, he asked the mine-owners to come some miles across country to meet the Americans. In one short conference the Americans fixed up the deal. The mine-owners said they would furnish the coal. The German officer said he would permit the trains to pass. The Poles had already said that they would send back the potatoes. The
Americans gave their word of honor that the Poles would do this. The transfer was made. The system was established. For months after these American officers had left this district these German mine-owners and the farmers of Poland exchanged coal for potatoes at a fair rate which they had fixed upon between themselves.

Easter Cakes

tee patience and tact used by these
Hoover men at times in carrying out
Hoover's desires that the hungry should be fed at all costs were supreme. I have in mind an in stance in the town of Lodz.

| A Hoover man in Lodz received a telephone message asking him to hurry to the town of Pabinitz, twenty miles away.
The mayor and the board of aldermen, he was told, were besieged in the railroad station by thousands of citizens who wanted to kill them. When the man in
American uniform stepped off the train

| at Pabinitz an hour later, the crowd

cheered him and made a pathway to the railroad station. He entered the station and found the mayor and aldermen herded together fearing for their lives. "What's the matter?" he said.

"You've got us into trouble," said the mayor. 'You said you were going to send us white flour. Our people always have white cakes at Easter in peace-time and we promised that they should 'have their white cakes this year. But to-day, when your flour came from Lodz, we found it wasn'twhite, and now the people want to kill us."

"Where is the flour?" asked the officer.

"No use looking at it," said the mayor.
"Here is thé bill of lading. It says 'five thousand pounds of dark flour.'"

"But I want to see the flour," said the officer. "Have you opened it yet?"

"No," said the mayor, "the crowd heard about the bill of lading from the stationmaster and then they went crazy."

"Why don't you come down to the warehouse and look at it?" asked the officer.

"Oh, we'll go down if you'll come with us," said the mayor.

The food man led them out through the crowd, which made way for them. They jumped into an automobile and went down to where the food-cars were standing. The
American opened the door, hauled out a sack of flour, and looked at the label.

It was snow-white American flour, from
Minneapolis!

"You're in no trouble; I guess I can go back to Lodz," said the officer. The mayor returned to the station square, made a speech to the crowd, the aldermen came

?

out of hiding, everbody gave three cheers for the American officer, and the Pabinitz folks returned to their homes to get ready to celebrate Easter with white cakes.

This toleration of American food men was often put to severe tests. Sometimes the people in one district, after they had been well fed, would fail to realize that the people in some near-by district were hungry and needed food. One American food man, for in stance, received an order in the town of Cracow to load thirty cars with pork, lard, corned beef and cottonseed oil, the latter to be used by the Hebrews for kosher cooking. These cars were to go to the town of Lemberg where people were starving. But the American man couldn't get the Cracow railroad men excited about the need for haste. The yard men couldn't get around to loading the cars. For three days he tried to in terest them in the venture without success. Finally, one day he took off his American army coat and in his army breeches and leather leggings began the task of loading the cars himself.
He succeeded in getting fifteen men, which, of course, was.only a handful for the task.

A Cracow railroad official of high standing, who knew the American officer, saw him working in the yards and said to him:
"Why is it necessary for you do do this hauling and _ lifting?"

"Because I can't get enough men to do the job," he said.

This official made a speech to the railroad men in the yard, and the entire yard crew became enthusiastic and he soon had all thirty cars on the way to Lemberg. "I was a soldier in the war," said one of the railroad men, "and when I saw an army officer working with day laborers I felt a shamed of myself. I knew then that he must want the job done."

However slowly things might go in
Paris, however deliberate the statesmen might be in reaching their political conclusions, Hoover, who was on the firingline in the war against Bolshevism, realized that time was the essence of strength in the great combat. He urged haste. He continually pointed out the dangers of new revolutions and of new unsettlements.
The statesmen might sit in Paris and make their wise declarations, but Hoover's men out on the firing-line saw these declarations count for naught a mong the persons with whom they were dealing.

Hoover's men had been able to commandeer the telegraph lines throughout
Central Europe and connect them with
American Army Headquarters at Coblenz and connect there with Paris. At a time when the statesmen-councillors themselves were unable to communicate freely with many parts of Europe, Hoover was talking between Paris and Vienna, exchanging messages in five minutes. The jealous contending small nations might establish censorships between themselves, they might even refuse to permit their wires to be connected with the wires of other nations, but when Hoover's food men made the connections there was no censorship and no refusal.

Hoover's Eye on the Children

of Europe

iB THE midst of his solving of the many complicated political and military problems, Hoover always kept his eye on the children of Europe. His experience in

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE_

oes He Know Feet

Or

nly Shoes?

Ask yourself that question before you entrust your feet to a salesman to have them fitted with shoes. Whether he knows /ee¢ or not may be the point upon which your present and future foot comfort and efficiency will depend.
Just as it is possible for a stupid or ignorant clerk in a drug store to make serious mistakes which a pharmacist would never make, it is possible for an unscientific shoe fitter to cripple a foot and cause endless suffering through lack of that knowledge of foot anatomy and foot needs which is the equipment of all

GRADUATE PRACTIPEDISTS

Every graduate Practipedist has made a thorough study of the anatomy, debilities, malformations and discomfort producing conditions of the human foot, together with the most modern and scientific methods of preventing the progress of such incipient tendencies as his (or her) trained eye and hand may detect, and of correcting such defects as have already developed. Every graduate Practipedist has passed a rigid examination in all these subjects and has demonstrated the completeness of his understanding of all principles involved, and each has a diploma from the educational institution which vouches for this knowledge.

Thousands of shoe dealers now have these =
trained Practipedists in their store to give

DOES HE WEAR

This profession of Practipedics is a comparatively new one, being an outgrowth of the last few years, but it has developed wonderfully as its place in the scheme of things

became increasingly evident. Now, there are
25,000 people in the United States and Canada who have either graduated in Practipedics or are taking that course. They will be found in-the better class of shoe and department stores everywhere, and millions of people already owe them gratitude for their deliverance from torturing foot troubles or for the prevention of such troubles.

Now, the members of this profession have banded together in this Association for the purpose of further improving their usefulness, by the exchange of experiences and for the purpose of

THIS BUTTON?

Free Examinations and Advice

to their patrons regarding the care of their feet, the prevention of foot troubles and the correction of such foot discomforts as may already exist. Such preventive and corrective measures are always of a simple nature, consisting of the scientific choice of shoes and the use of such simple mechanical devices in the shoes as may be required for the correction of the particular trouble. Neither style nor appearance of the shoes is ever sacrificed, nor are any larger sizes required.

Letting the Public Know

about the advantages it will gain by in sisting upon the services of a graduate Practipedist preferablya member of thisA ssociation, wearing the button illustrated herewith and displaying his or her Certificate of
Membership - in the shoe store or shoe department patronized, If you do not know what stores in your locality are prepared to render this free service to their customers, we will be pleased to send you a list of them upon receipt of your request. You are entitled to foot comfort.

Assoc ATION

RACTIPEDISTS

SUITE 607 - 109 NO. DEARBORN ST.
CHICAGO

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

Lift off Corns

with Fingers

Doesn'thurt a bit and

costs only a few cents

Freezone

You can lift off any hard corn, soft corn, or corn between the toes, and the hard skin calluses from bottom of feet.

Apply a few drops of ''Freezone'' upon the corn or callus. Instantly it stops hurting, then shortly you lift that bothersome corn or callus right off, root and all, without one bit of pain or so reness. Truly!
No humbug!

Tiny bottle of "Freezone" costs few cents at any drug store

For living and sleeping outdoors. As open to the air as an wmbrella, but instantly closed weather tight. Shutters moving grooves are operated by cords from inside and may be ed for any degree of ventilation.
reened in sect proof. Firmly anchored to the ground.
Erected or taken down without removing bolts or using tools, and rolled into bundles without detaching canvas from frame parts.
For camping, sanitariums, hotels, golf links, etc. Put it on your lawn for a cool retreat in 'daytime and to sleep in of nights.
For tuberculo ervyousness, in so mnia and ill health, sleep outdoors, Nine sizes. Catalog free.

CLOSE-TO-NATURE CO., 475 Front St., Colfax, lowa

BECOME AN EXPERT

CCOUNTANT

xecutive Accountants command big ene
Thousands of firms need them. Only 2

Certified Public Accountants in U. S. any are earning $3,000 to $10,000 a year. We train you thoroly by mail' in spare time for
G. P. A. examinations or executive a ccountunnecessary to_begin - we prepare you from the ground up. Our course and ser; vice are under the jerk ey Gia of Willia
B. Castenholz, A. M., C. P. A., Former
Comptroller and Instructor, University of
Illinois assisted by a staff of C. P. A's, including members of the American Institute f Accountants. Low tuition fee - easy terms. Write now for in formation and free book of accountancy facts.

LaSALLE EXTENSION UNIVERSITY

The Largest Business Training
Institution in the World
Chicago

Dept 643-H

ing positions. Knowledge of bookkeeping |

Belgium and northern France had taught him how necessary was the special care of children. While he was working with the funds which had been put at his disposal by the various governments, he saw that the children everywhere were especially well fed.

And when at the end of his great task the governmental funds were either exhausted or withdrawn, Hoover with the foresight which is one of his most marked characteristics, was in a position to continue feeding two and a half million children of Central and Eastern Europe daily. To this day these children are being thus fed.

Seven and a half million dollars of money from the original congressional appropriation was devoted by Hoover to the special feeding of undernourished children from the Baltic to the Black Sea. Additions to this charity have been made by the eastern European governments themselves and by nationals of these eastern countries who live in the United States.
Hoover is determined that the racial de-

| terioration which grew out of the Thirty

Years' War and out of the Napoleonic wars must be a voided as far as possible and at

| all costs, in connection with the great war

which has just been concluded.

The children who are the immediately coming generation and who will be the producers of the ones to follow must be cared for. During his relief work Hoover has kept his object in mind, and now that the official duties of the American Relief Administration have ended, Hoover is still spending most of his time and energy in feeding these two and a half million undernourished children of Central Europe.

Hoover became, in a word, general economic and life-saving manager for the eastern European countries. It is from my personal knowledge of his achievements in this extraordinary position during the first eight months after the Armistice that
I have declared my belief earlier in this account that it was owing more to Hoover and his work than to any other single influence that utter anarchy and chaos and complete Bolshevik domination in eastern Europe (west of Russia) had been so far averted. In other words, Hoover not only saved lives, but nations and civilizations, by his superhuman efforts. The political results of his work were but incidental to his life-saving activities, but from an historical and international point of view they were even more important.

Altogether twenty countries received supplies of food and clothing under Hoover's general control acting as Director-
General of Relief for the Supreme Economic Council. The total a mount of these supplies delivered from December 1, 1918, to December 31, 1919, was about four and a quarter million tons, of a total approximate value of one billion dollars.

The twenty countries sharing in the supplies included Belgium and northern
France (through the C. R. B.), the Baltic states of Finland, Esthonia, Latvia and

Lithuania, a small part of Russia, Poland,
Czecho-Slovakia, Germany, German Austria, Hungary, Roumania, ~Bulgaria,
Greater Servia, Turkey, Armenia, Italy, and the neutrals, Denmark and Holland.

A New Weapon Against
Bolshevism

T WAS in evitable that the power which
Hoover exerted through the distribution of food should have its influence in holding back Bolshevism. This ham-bone was the mightiest weapon against anarchy that could be swung. Hoover made a rule that food could go 'only into regions where it could be safeguarded and controlled.
That was a smash against Bolshevism.
Bela Kun, the Bolshevist dictator of Hungary for a time, when he scorned the advances of all other messengers, graciously received Hoover's American food men and went so far as to permit them to wear uniforms in Budapest. He was able to play a winning game in Hungary against the Peace Conference and the Supreme
Council at Paris, but he was outplayed by soft -voiced, square-jawed Captain
"Tommy" Gregory, Hoover's general director for Southeast Europe. And _ it was this same California lawyer in khaki, turned food man, who, when the communist Kun had passed and the pendulum had swung as dangerously far in the other direction, allowing the audacious Hapsburg, Archduke Joseph, to slip into power, had done most to unseat him.

Gregory, by means of the commandeering of telegraph wires, was able to keep
Hoover advised of all the news not only promptly but in good Americanese. His laconic but fully descriptive message to
Paris announcing the archduke's passing read: "August 24th. Archie went through the hoop at 8 p.m. to-day."

Governments in Central and Eastern
Europe that were not orderly and that were contrary to the wishes of the people had little power when they came into contact with the power of Hoover's ham-bone.

I say again, and many men in the governments of eastern Europe and even in the mighty councils at Paris have said, that Hoover saved Eastern Europe from anarchy and held Bolshevism to its original frontier, and that meant saving Western Europe too.

Then Hoover came back to America to be an American private citizen again.
That is what he is now.

The story of Hoover - as far as I. can write it to-day - is that of an American who saw a particular kind of service he could render his country and humanity in a great crisis. He rendered it, and in so doing he- most truly helped make the world safe for democracy and human ideals. It would only be fair to add to his Belgian citation the larger one of Citizen of the World and Friend of All the
People. But he would only be embarrassed if any one attempted to do it now. We can safely leave the matter to history.

66°THE Little God of Hunches," by Arthur Crabb, is one of the nine short stories in the July
EVERYBODY'S. Sam Hicks, whose queer quirks EVERYBODY'S readers are beginning

to know intimately, misses his guess at last. It's the other man who has a hunch this time,,. and

Sam who doesn'tbelieve in it.

He gaily helps work it out 'just the same, being interested in

lovers as usual, and again furnishes Mr. Crabb with a delightful story, one of the c'everest he has

ever written.

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

ie

i ee

EN times a smany bands as have ever been organized in any one year of
American history will be or ganized this year. People are hungry for bands. Election time is coming on. Here's opportunity for you; get busy.

Any number of renowned virtuosos have built their fame with
Conn Instruments. Nine-tenths of the brass instrument artists of all the leading American concert bands and symphony orchestras use them.

They are famous for their ease of

Sousa and His Band 1919-1920

A Band LikeThis=
And Y

ou

blowing, lightness in action, perfect in to nation, exceptional tone quality, artistic design and finish.

They are made with the best instrument-building facilities in the world and embody all of the finest and latest improvements. A guarantee bond accompanies every
Conn Instrument sold.

Free Trial---
Easy Payments

Choose any instrument from the
3,000 different classes we manufacture for six days' free trial. If you keep it you can pay for it on our easy payment plan.

FREE BOOK NOW is the time co prepare for a our gband. Gert a Conn Instrument NOW; you can quickly master Just mention the instrument in which you are in tere sted and we will send a specia sliboovlee aa beautiful photo of it, free.

=a Conn Bldg.

EOE. cal

WORLD'S LARGEST MANUFACTURE

Branches in all large cities qd.

NLY in Conn Instruments are the taper branches ee : by ny

a guate a *

ay

Ltd. A cag Cornet. most pad rful in e aig rm =
blowing, ah roe ect

richest 1 canal quality. No. Be a cornet can compare with it

Ralph E. - ey Tr ombon!
hSo usa's 7Bu an care

ve s and a rich y - a poechaviare tha tis a work r

aes Eu phos t of Sou

jobe J.Eats uoso and S

F BAND D_ ORCHESTRA INSTRUMENTS

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE

19° 4
eee ba 12 iat pe 8

Tee us = , Be

"$100 a Week!
Think What That Means To Us!"

"They've made me Superintendent -
and doubled my salary! Now we can have the comforts and pleasures we' ve dreamed of our own home, a maid for you, Nell, ond no more worrying about the cost of iving!

"The president called me in today and |

told me. He said he picked me for promotion three months ago when he learned
I was studying at home with the International Correspondence Schools. Now my chance has come - and thanks to the
I. C. S., I'm ready for it."

Thousands of men now know the joy of happy, prosperous homes because they let the International Correspondence Schools prepare spare hours for bigger work and better pay.

Why don't vou study some one thing and get ready for a real job, at a salary that will give vour wife and children the things you would like them to have?

You can doit! Pick the position you want in the work

you like best and the I. C. S. will prepare you for it right |

in your own home in your spare time.

Yes, you caz doit! More than two million have done it in the last twenty-eight years. More than 100,000 are doing it right now. Without obligation, find out how you can join them. Mark and mail this coupon!

- ee ee ee me TEAR OUT HERE 2 te ee ee oe

INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS
BOX 2655, SCRANTON, PA.

Explain, without obligating me, how I can qualify for the
Position, or in the subject, before which I mark X.

OELEOTRIOAL ENGINEER SALESMANSHIP
Electric Lighting and Kys. ADVERTISING
Electric Wiring ' Window Trimmer
Telegraph Engineer , Show Card Writer
Telephone Work ' Sign Painter
MROHANIOAL ENGINEER Railroad Trainman
Mechanical Draftsman ILLUSTRATING
Machine Shop Practice Cartooning
Toolmaker BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
Gas Engine Operating Private Secretary
CIVIL ENGINEER BOOKKEEPER

Psarreving and Mapping
MINE FOREMAN or ENG@'R *
STATIONARY ENGINEER
Marine Engineer
Ship Draftsman
ARCHITECT
Contractor and Bnildor
Architectural Draftemen
Concrete Builder
Structural Engineer
PLUMBING AND HEATING
Sheet Metal Worker
Textile Overseer or Supt.
OHEMIST
Navigation

Stenographer and Typist
Cert. Pub. Accountant
TRAFFIC MANAGER
Railway Accountant
Commercial Law
GOOD ENGLISH
Teacher
Common School Subjects
Mathematics
CIVIL SERVICE
Railway Mail Clerk
AUTOMOBILE OPERATING
Auto Repairing Spanish
AGRIOULTURB French
OC Poultry Raising Italian

Name.

Present
Occupation -

7-25-18

- _ - State_

GET WELL - -BE YOUNG- - GROW TALL

ee

ydiscovery is the most important health invention of

It remakes and rejuvenates the Human Body. It

It frees i

corrects conu é s, shortened ligaments, eliminates con.

gestion, impre circulation and drainage of the body. It will in crease the body's length.

THE PANDICULACTOR 00., 1526 Prospect Ave., Cleveland, 0.

°

Story-Writers Wanted

NOTHING PAYS LIKE SUC-
CESS IN WRITING FICTION - 2
cents to 10 cents A WORD. We sell
Stories, scenarios, and book MSS, on commission ; we revise them and tell you where to sell them, TORY-WR taught by 1 Send for our free booklet,
"WRITE FOR PROFIT," tells

how; gives proof.

THE NATI L PRESS ASSOCIATION

Dept. C7, tadianapolis, tad.

| death ran

| gulf them.

them in |

| conferred

| imminent, and before long we were facing

an enemy who was as tangible and real

| and dangerous as the German army had

been. This enemy was Bolshevism. Here a rose Hoover's fourth crisis. It devolved upon him and his men, including the representatives of Allied countries, to feed the people and. keep them as contented and quiet as possible until the statesmen in

| Europe had completed their own effort to

restore order,

The menace of: Bolshevism held out the prospect that all the starving portions of
Europe would shortly be flooded with literal anarchy while red and howling over all. Bolshevist Russia, just over the eastern borders, was constantly threatening to come across and en-
Russian a gents were working everywhere a mong the people. There were

| everywhere the sinister signs of the swift

advance of the frontiers of Bolshevism.

A Modern Samson

N PARIS the eminent statesmen and

famous generals of the Peace Conference and the Supreme Council sat and debated.
They sent out occasional ultimata ordering fighting to cease, ordering the retirement from a far-advanced frontier, and ordering this and that, none of which was obeyed. Interallied economic and military commissions came and looked on and and returned, but nobody stopped fighting, and the conferences settled nothing. The Allies were in no position - this need be no secret now - to send adequate forces to enforce their orders. An Interallied Military Mission of four generals of America, Great Britain,
France and Italy started by special train from Cracow to Lemberg to carry personally an order to the Lithuanians and Poles to stop fighting. The train was shelled by the Ruthenians east of Przemysl and the generals came back. Eastern Europe expected the Great Powers to do

| something about this, but nothing hap-
| pened; the great men in Paris took no
/ action and the discount of Peace Conference orders became stil! more marked.
Somebody had to do something that counted. So Hoover did it. It wasn't

| only lives that had to be saved; it was

nations. It wasn't-only starvation that had to be fought; it was approaching
5S in}

| anarchy, it was Bolshevism.

I used to think of the Relief Administration at that time as a Samson wielding not the jawbone of an ass but the thigh-bone of a hog. This thigh-bone was not bare of meat and muscle. It was padded with fat, and in further preparation it had been smoked to a nice, rich, fragrant brown. With this weapon in one hand and with a handshake in the other and a smile on their faces, Hoover's doughboys and navy gobs and officers started out to slay the greater giant of discontent.

The first historical slaughter with this

| weapon that I.am able to discover happinged and irritated nerves, |

pened in Danzig. ~-Hoover had rushed food to Europe from America even before he had the money to pay for it. Within a few weeks after the armistice had been signed American food ships began arriving in Danzig, which at that time was a center of German antagonism to Poland.
Hoover's men tried to get stevedores to unload the ships. The stevedores went out to the docks, but they wouldn'twork.
They wanted to hold a debate about

_lard for cooking purposes.

money. An American disappeared into the hold of a ship. He shortly reappeared with a hog's padded thigh-bone in each hand. The Germans gazed for a moment or two at the doughboy's weapon and before twenty-four hours had passed the ship had been unloaded without a strike.
In Montenegro, one day, word came to a town where the American Relief Administration men were quartered that a revolution was on foot and that the revolutionists were approaching the town. Two of the food men with motor-cycles loaded up the cars with some of their "weapons" and dashed out to meet the revolutionists.
They returned an hour or two later with their side-cars filled with revolvers, rifles and several machine guns. "We just traded ham for guns," they explained.
In the area where Jews: predominated it was necessary to distribute oils instead of
A vast quantity of fat in this form was sent to those whose religious scruples did not permit them to eat pork.
It would have been impossible, even for a Harriman, to have untangled the railroad situation in Central Europe as it existed because, as I have pointed out, the people of one country wouldn'tpermit their cars or locomotives to go into another country, fearing that they would not be returned.
Hoover ended this condition by asking the
Economic Council to take charge of all the railroads in Austria-Hungary and in the new countries which had been created by the war. Before many days had passed the entire railroad system in central
Europe was under Hoover's control.
Hoover's men moved locomotives about from one country to another as they pleased, and they took cars where they found them and moved them wherever they were needed. As long as locomotives and cars were in control of the Relief Administration the various nations could not object, and in this way the free circulation of food was brought about. Some of the blood-clots of hate in the commercial veins of Central Europe were purged away.
Foover often found in one place a surplus of certain supplies with an almost fatal lack of others. Although these supplies could not be bought for money, they might often be traded for necessities in another part of Europe, provided barriers could be removed. Hoover therefore set in motion a system of barter without the use of money between various portions of the countries involved.

Potatoes for Coal

NE in stance of how Hoover's idea of barter worked out runs as follows:
hate and distrust between Cermany and Poland. The town of Posen in Poland had potatoes but no coal. The potatoes couldn't be moved without coal. Across the border in Beuthen, Germany, there was coal in plenty, but the people were hungry. Two
Americans jumped into an automobile and started across the German line. The
Polish people threw flowers at them as they started on their errand of mercy. But the German soldiers arrested them at the frontier. _

"What are you two American officers doing in Germany?" asked a_ brusk
Prussian. 'Trying to get you fellows to trade coal for potatoes," said the Amercans. The Americans were led before a

The National Research Council.
1201 16 St.
Washington D. C.

Secretary Kellogg

Arkansas college
Miss Sara
Ark.

$4,609 made in Mousoiri by Mr. Hoover for Commision Reliefof Food Administration.In coaporating with Research
Council Dr. Barrows spoke of raising a fund for the children of England, Europs, and Siberia. After that the council held a meeting to talk over the plan, and it was soon adopted. DR. Barrows when he heard that ordered men to go to England arrange things there and get the men interested in the fund, That was most important.Other men went to siberia, andBurope.All soon
Or more or less quickly became interested in the fund.
Then came aset of delagates to manage the fund.the council set to workon reading papers from the three differ ent territories. Hoover raised$12,645 for the fund by putting taxes on certain foods.

Secretary Kellogg.

March 14, 1928

THE COMMONWEAL

1175

nan nn ESSN TnSCn cI SUNS

cision in the contest filed against his election in 1924.
Of the remaining three, Senator Blaine took his seat in the Senate at the beginning of the present session of Congress, Senator LaFollette was elected in 1925, and Senator McMasters in 1924.

Compare the list of chairmen for the present Congress with that for the same committees at the beginning of the Sixty-Seventh Congress - the first Congress of the Harding administration. When that reign of normalcy began: Senator Lodge of Massachusetts was chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations;
Senator Nelson of Minnesota was chairman of the
Committee on the Judiciary; Senator Colt of Rhode
Island was chairman of the Committee on Immigration; Senator Smoot of Utah was chairman of the
Committee on Public Lands and Surveys; Senator
McLean of Connecticut was chairman of the Committee on Banking and Currency; and Senator Spencer of Missouri was chairman of the Committee on Claims.
The elder Senator LaFollette was chairman of the
Committee on Indian Affairs, the lone Progressive a mong those then heading these Committees.

The stability of the Progressive movement indicated

by the facts heretofore briefly sketched, is now recognized in the Senate. It is not unusual for a resolution providing for the creation of a special committee to specify that it shall be "composed of three Republicans, including one Progressive Republican, and two Democrats." During the interim between the Sixty-Ninth and the Seventieth Congresses several of the Progressive senators formed an in formal conference of their own to discuss anticipated legislation. This may be the forerunner of a definite Progressive organization in
Congress.

The Progressives hold the balance of power in the
Senate today. But that advantage is not particularly valuable because on fundamental issues, particularly economic issues, the Democrats a revery likely to combine with the conservative Republicans rather than allow Progressive principles to be enacted .into law.
However there are some students of public affairs who believe that the present situation may contain the germ of a drastic re-alignment of parties involving the discarding of outworn shibboleths and a division as between conservatism and Progressivism: that is, a distinction with a difference.

HERBERT HOOVER AS WOMEN SEE HIM

By CHARLOTTE KELLOGG
OW Cardinal Mercier knew men! During the

course of a very memorable interview he said to me:

Mr. Hoover - Ah, there is a man! - a man the world needs, for it needs synthetic vision. The masses are crying for understanding and constructive help, and yet one after another program fails because those who launch them lack the capacity for the circumferential view and for correlation which Belgium's friend has. He is one of the few men living today whose imagination visions the whole, and who, having seen the goal, can create the mechanism necessary to its attainment and drive to it.

Thus one of the greatest spirits of our time put his divining finger on what distinguishes Herbert Hoover from other men.

His effort seems often but to begin where that of another might end. In all the colossal European war and post-war work, for in stance, which the Cardinal had followed, and especially strikingly in that in disrupted eastern Europe, we saw him carry on his beneficent counter-war against hunger, disease and cold. But he did more; he at once began paralleling it with a far-reaching work of economic reconstruction. He saw not only the lives of millions of people threatened, but that nations and even civilizations would go down unless courage and at least a measure of self-sufficiency could be soon restored in the tottering human groups.
Ports must be opened, railways rehabilitated, credits advanced, trade and employment made possible. All

his business and engineering experience he put at the service of his creative imagination as he constructed his vast humanitarian machine.

It seemed to rise as if by magic, so quickly did staffs and officers and their administrative network cover an imperiled area. In the end the lines stretched from the
Baltic to the Black Sea and from the Atlantic to the
Volga; from ten to twelve billion dollars had been handled and scores of millions of lives saved. And there was magic in all this. It represented the biggest
"big business" the world had yet seen - honest business, sound economics, sound sociology, sound statesmanship, skilled scientific method, tender sympathy with human pain wherever found; but without the welding fire of the creative imagination, Europe would not have been succored as it was. It was there that the magic lay.

I have been asked to write about Herbert Hoover, the man and his world importance, and I find that I have begun at the end, for I believe that when the final estimate of his work is made the emphasis will be placed where the great Cardinal put it. But I should like to leave such appraisal a moment, for a more intimate look at Mr. Hoover as he appears to his friends and neighbors in peace time.

Though in a sense he can count on no period of peace ("Oh, Monsieur Hoover, ce spécialiste dans les calamités publiques," said an ambassador recently arrived in Washington) for his is apt to be the first aid sought now in any catastrophic circumstance. In fact,

~

the picture uppermost in my mind at this time is of an evening during a breathing spell in his most recent relief undertaking.

The worst flood crisis in our memory had passed.
Mr. Hoover had returned from the waste of mud and water and cattle camps and human camps to report the situation and set in motion machinery for further work, and incidentally to check up in his own rather exacting
Department of Commerce. We dined with him that first evening. The small table was set on the veranda looking from the rear of the comfortable red brick house on part of Washington's early forest, for the
Hoovers have guarded practically all the trees they found on their land.

Below the veranda balustrade in long outer flowerboxes blossomed twenty-four varieties of gourds. The
Secretary had planted the seeds before he was called to the flood area (Mrs. Hoover in rivalry setting out corn and tomatoes and beans in the outlying ones) and he had returned to find the first globes forming. He made a humorously meticulous tour of farm inspection before we sat down, walking quietly - he moves quietly, though he always gives the impression of power
 - tall, very broad-shouldered, his head not lifted but rather lowered as from the habit of thought, his hair, at fifty-four, slightly greying; on one side his adored first grandchild, two-year old Peggy Ann, who so deliciously, at times so comically, resembles him; on the other his dog. His blue eyes vividly reflected happiness in this return to the back porch; he preferred gourd blossoms to all rare blooms, and the gourds themselves to all known farm products. This was necessary compensation farming, offsetting the tribulations of his actual agricultural enterprise in California. Next season he would double the planting!

Then to table - disturbing a little the wrens in their gourd houses at the tops of the veranda columns which had also chosen that hour for their dining. Familiar
Leon was putting on the soup plates. Everything had been leading up to this moment. As we sat down we were in tensely ready for the tragic, dramatic story, for the big figures, the great plan.

"Do you know anything about quilts?" asked our host. ''There's a group of colored flood victims down in Mississippi who can make handsome ones and a white woman who is trying to organize their talents into a supporting industry. We ought to make it possible for that white woman and those colored women to do this. They don'tneed charity, only constructive help.
Couldn't a woman, or several women here, who want

. to do something about this flood, get behind them?"

And he pictured the sanitary central workroom already achieved and the hope of the colored women as they stitched the Rose of Sharon quilts and the Crown of
Thorns quilts, until each of us listeners cried ''Quilts for all!"

Then he turned from the detail to the whole, painting on a vast canvas, with powerful strokes, the flood picture. Hours were given to problems of finance and

1176 THE COMMONWEAL

March 14, 1928

engineering, to tracing effects to causes. Who in our country makes so clear, so comprehensive, so thrillingly suggestive a report as the present Secretary of
Commerce? But before we left, he returned to the quilts, outlining a plan for securing a market for them.
Incidentally, I discovered that he had himself bought enough to make possible an in itial 'quilt tea" where interest might be kindled. These were already on their way north.

In this simple, characteristic incident, carrying that quality of his that we call his humanness, lies one answer to the question I have several times heard asked,
"Why do women find in Herbert Hoover a great leader?"

When in 1917 the United States Food Administration faced its Atlas task, Herbert Hoover said, '"We must rely on the women of America to see it through."
Without futile talk about women's capacities versus those of men, he assumed that they were equal to the biggest undertaking upon which American women had yet embarked. And he proceeded to lay it out. We remember how.

First of all, women, as well as men, must see the whole before their imagination is fired, for without that quickening, effort dies. He pictured the goal, in vented the symbol, the slogan - which of us did not hang up the little window card showing that we had our "visitor in the house"? He drew a straight path, a shining path, between the patriotically manipulated ingredients of a kitchen pot and that line of misery -
the bread line of the world. And this was no sentimental stimulus; his peripheral view held always the objective, saw always the vast and complicated organization operating at the tin cup end, before the outstretched hands of children. 'Therefore, he a ureoled the cheated garbage can.

Such pauses as those over the detail of the quilt in the overwhelming flood pattern, or over the Food Administration kitchen apron (it must be the most effective possible, and the proof that it was is its place in the market today) or to interpret the importance of a least act of housekeeping in the vast mosaic of human effort, have their part in the explanation of why he won a loyal and lasting support a mong women. 'There is tragic inhibition in adult as well as in child life. His instinct sensed this and he made it possible for the most isolated woman suffering from her conviction of the futility of her apparently petty and unrelated task, to feel her shoulder against that planetary wheel that was grinding the grain of the world's bread. Or, by means of another symbol or logical exposition, he connected her far hilltop or sage-brush plot with a firstline trench. And he freed her from the feeling of frustration as he reiterated that truth (which incidentally his own work has so brilliantly illustrated) that men or women can reveal as much greatness in the a melioration of war's results as in the conduct of war itself.

This type of direction he has given so far as he has

+1

March 14, 1928

THE COMMONWEAL

1177

had time to, to our present Better Homes movement and to the work of the American Child Health Association, in both of which he is so genuinely interested.
And it will undoubtedly offer the same thrilling experience in service whenever he calls women to work -
or men.

And justhere I should like to pause. One of the saddest things in our multifarious activity is to see -
as we often do - interest a wakened, some person undertake with enthusiasm a certain piece of work and demonstrate capacity, and then, once the immediate task is finished, to find him or her dropping back, often with discouragement, into in activity. The aid hardly knows what he has done, does not see where it leads.
Over and over this has happened because after a specific accomplishment the director felt no responsibility for educative review or evaluation. Energy that might have been held for further service has been lost. There has been much social waste here.

Because of Mr. Hoover's habit of such review many people in Europe as well as in our own country enjoy the happiness of in creased and in creasing usefulness.
As I write I read from one of his reports of the
Mississippi disaster:

Some 200 organizations have been involved in the relief operations, the Red Cross taking the major burden. A multitude of or ganizations have shown devotion and a fine spirit of codperation and great efficiency in action -
the result of all of which is the better care of disaster.
This whole relief operation marks a more distinct step in progress in our national sense of responsibility, in effectiveness in saving life and in the mitigation of suffering, than is found ever before in our history.

This happens to be but part of a general statement.
Were there time I could list in numerable in stances of specific analysis and comment.

I confess to being less interested in Mr. Hoover's having, early in life, reconstructed wrecked mining enterprises across the world, in his having saved so-a ndso many millions of people from starvation, in his having steadied these or those nations, helped restore flood-ravaged territories, or built up a department of commerce that has invigorated and stabilized the nation's businesswed am less interested in these achievements in themselves, however important, than in what has happened to the ideals and the happiness in work in the men and women with whom and through whom he has accomplished them. For with his kind of leadership, that will to put them through, and that developed capacity that put them through, should be passed on in our social training, insuring future effort and future happiness, and thus add to the nation's true wealth.

I have been asked often, sometimes with annoyance, what is the secret of the extraordinary personal attachment of those who work with Mr. Hoover to their
"Chief." Part of it certainly lies here. He takes time to look backward, while he at the same time stimulates a forward-looking attitude, a feeling of continuity in

action - one thing but leads to another. In our day of cynicism and disillusionment, is not what we most need to believe, this - that there is always something very much worth doing, and that we can do it? We are grateful to, we attach ourselves to, the man who by example and pronouncement encourages this attitude in ourselves.

Obviously this is no complete explanation, nor could there be one. There are in tangibles in such relationships that escape tabulation. However, quite as obviously, certain things are clear. This man whom many see only as building up vast, strongly centralized organizations, some think of as engaged chiefly in decentralizing them. No sooner is the general scheme assured, than the work of relegation begins. Such relegation may be accomplished by one man in one way, by another in another. The way Mr. Hoover does it, that particular gesture of confidence with which he turns over responsibility and control, is apt to win what some call exaggerated devotion and loyalty.

And here is another point. The assistant may have thought of his chief as a superman in brain and skill, as supremely meriting preferment and reward. He sees him brush both a side, while reducing his personal needs to their simplest forms. And what is more stirring, he soon realizes the great dependence, personally, of this person of extraordinary powers, on his group of helpers. Through conferences, through discussion, through confidences, he clarifies his own thought, sharpens his idea. He follows while he leads. It is quite natural that out of the soil of such realization should flower an unusual relationship.

It is a musing to those who know him, to hear the
Secretary of Commerce criticized as in expressive, ungenial. I know of no one who leans more heavily on the companionship of friends and collaborators. His house is open to them. One of them said, as we talked of this, '"He makes it necessary for us to defend him against our sense of possession!" 'There may be debate in the little study with its fire and "smokes" for those who want them, or just quiet talk and gaiety, for he likes good stories and a laugh, and at times the
Secretary may turn to his desk and jot down something while the talk continues or the radio or victrola makes music. Whenever he is free he wants his friends about him.

One may ask what these last paragraphs have to do with the question of Mr. Hoover's world importance. Much, I believe. I go back, as I do again and again through the days, to things the Cardinal said:
"What the world most needs today is a great leader . . . ." How often he repeated that! To ask what kind of leader Mr. Hoover is, then, is pertinent.

But I must turn from the attempt at a partial answer to that question, to ask another: What beliefs are determining factors in this leadership? One, at least, I think I can indicate.

Hoover believes - and with the passionate in tensity of youth - that certain things are worth doing. And

1178

he believes simply and honestly in the capacity of the
American people to do them. And that they will do them voluntarily, once they are convinced they should be done. His Credo begins here. Turn again to his work as Food Administrator facing the necessity of unprecedented codperation and regulation in the use of food. Europe had faced that problem and many of us have seen the bewildering series of spectrum-hued coupons and permits it issued to cover the minutiae of each day's living. They represented the same kind of direction that gave orders to the army. Mr. Hoover saw that system working in Europe; he knew that it would not work here. He knew his United States, that the life principle of democracy is voluntary effort.
The government's gigantic system of control must rest on that foundation, otherwise it would have no

THE COMMONWEAL

March 14, 1928

strength in it. The people who had willed the democracy were capable of self-direction, self-elected sacrifice.

Was he right? Is he right? Let the pages of what is now the history of the United States Food Administration answer. And remember that when ten years ago he put the matter up to our people he had comparatively little authority, little power.

All of which means that Mr. Hoover believes in our democracy as an effective working form of government. There has been much debate of this thesis -
not all feel as the Secretary of Commerce does. But all must admit that if improvement or change are needed, they will come because of someone's belief that such improvement is possible and that our people are capable of bringing it about. His positive faith makes him important, not only to us but to the world.

CONVENT NIGHT

By EREC CERE

HERE were thirty-two beds in the dormitory at
Saint Genevieve's, four rows of eight alcoves, each separated from its neighbors by full-length, white duck curtains strung on oaken frames lifted seven feet off the floor. Our tiny cubicles were sacred to privacy, small squares shut in by linen walls, every one a castle.
A pale blue chair, Virgin's blue, a pale blue dressing table (but without a mirror) an iron bed painted pale blue, with a ruffled lawn cover in pale blue -
thirty-two strongholds, each safe, secure, one's own

still retreat. There were no mirrors in the convent except two from-floor-to-ceiling ones in the parlor. We scarcely saw these, however, the frames were too exciting: fat, vine-engirdled cupids with out-puffed cheeks chased each other about those imprisoning rectangles, forever running, never getting anywhere, but fearfully in tent upon a mimic haste.

The long stretch of the dormitory, its enormous height from dazzling waxed floor to white, white ceiling made one, even an eight-year-old girl tall for her age, breathless with distances. The room was great in generosity: as if big enough to lose them in itself, it opened its wide, hospitable Gothic windows to the crumpled chain of eleven Alleghany peaks which on west and south and east jealously fenced us about.

There was so much air to breathe, up a mong those hills. There was so much to see on mountains where color walked, a peripatetic. Never was that paletted horizon still. Thevery light was diffused, shattered as through a spectrum - sometimes leaves were red, much too young to know the frost; bouldered mountain slopes turned from orange to turquoise in a wink.

On some mornings in early spring as we peeked at the dawn while dressing, our lungs ached with the lively floods of air which rushed at us to be breathed, our eyes ached with the magnificence of the sky and the

hills, our hearts ached at our speechlessness before such a liberal earth.

But at night after the wicks were turned down to a glimmer which shed shadows instead of light, dreads or pleasures haunted my alcove and stayed there until the last star had gone.

Walls are such pitiless enemies. What strength is the strength of an eight-year-old against a mighty sixsided phalanx which, through a silence on ear for a sound, advances steadily, steadily. The silence seems almost to ring with sound, as if remembering it, as if wishful of but not quite daring to be an echo, a silence like that in the cup of an old bell that has lost its clapper. Steadily, steadily, come the walls, not like enemies now, certainly not like friends. Small, smaller grows the cube which closes in the air and me.

Shut off are we from the world - so were the holy hermits. Saint Anthony was shut off from the world in the desert. Saint John the Baptist was in the desert too. He ate locusts and wild honey. Wild bees living in wild places make wild honey. One day Major came in covered with burs and wild honey, he had been eating it. Sister Léocadie and I pretended it was such a job to wash him off. Inside, really, all three of us laughed - Mazjor laughed with his mouth a tiny bit.
Another time we washed Major for fleas. I must write my father asking if ever he has used creosote.
Millions of little fleas came tumbling out. They looked like the puzzling dots which one is asked to count, sometimes.

My! Major is a dog who knows more about good manners than many children do. I must tell my father in that letter that the other day Major ate half of my banana. Of course, he did it to please me because anyone knows that dogs do not naturally like bananas.
Another day he ate a piece of my dill pickle; but he spat it out when he thought I wasn'tlooking. Oh!

IBOUT thirty years ago a lithe, blithe young woman
( > arrived in a desert mining

LY, ©), settlement, choked with
INGCWGAT dust and lack of water.
Roads - where were they? Housing, sanitation? Of a most primitive sort.
Shade trees, gardens - how could there be any, in a world of sand and sun?
She looked out on the barren disharmony with eager blue eyes. What great things were doing here, as man pitted his own against Nature's forces, until she yielded her ancient treasure of gold. What stimulus in nearness to the energies winning this battle. How interesting the possibility of achieving here at least a modicum of comfort in living conditions. Perhaps there were, after all, some drops of water daily to be spared, to which some species of plant would thirstily respond. A few women, earlier arrived, had children.
There would be opportunity to work and play with them - horseback rides with a train of youngsters over these great flat sandy stretches - there was potential joy.

About a year and a half ago a lithe, blithe woman passed through a highgrilled gateway into the green-swardedg tree-embowered beauty of the national executive in closure, in the midst of which is set, in soft white loveliness, the Executive Mansion. From the rhythmic pillars of its central portico spread friendly wings at either side.
She surveyed this scene, rich in harmonies of Nature's and of man's contributing, with eager blue eyes. How wonderful to be able to touch the subtle, potent influences that have flowered up through a people's developing and were here caught and held where, in.a sense, that people might look at itself as in a mirror - see there what it aspired to be!
Sometimes the nation got discouraged with itself; but it was, after all, always better than the sum total of its daily effort, just as an individual was. And this "'better'' in a very real, though in tangible, way it expressed in its national home, in the actual building and in what happened there.

How interesting that within these historic walls, despite the artificial forms inherent in the setting up of a governmental structure, living could be kept simple, natural, true, as the people would have it! . . .

Ake Studen tof Humanity

WOMAN whose husband's profession carried her to

parched Kalgoorlie; or to remote reaches of Russia; or to Tientsin in the throes of a Boxer Rebellion, where bullets whistled gayly through her windows and shells tore their way from the back of the house out through the front door, might be expected to develop a hesitant, critical attitude of approach. Mrs. Hoover never has. Challenges to courage of every description she has encountered. She bore her children where she could. Some women cannot take their babies from
Washington to New York without getting them out of order.
She often had to pick her two boys up at a moment's notice and head for a frontier outpost. She made no fuss about it, and mostly they kept well. Before her first-born was three years old, he had been around the world three times. There was a day in China when the young miting engineer pushed desperately along eighty miles of railroad carrying his unconscious wife from Peking, where there was temporarily no doctor, to Tientsin, where somebody might be able to save her life. But none of these experiences have lessened the force of Mrs. Hoover's presumption that there is something interesting in every situation.

In law a man is in nocent until he is proved guilty. So with
Mrs. Hoover. She presumes that a person, a village, 7s interesting, has something to give her, where many would demand that the place or the person first prove this. Which means that she accepts the whole of life's offering; therefore her life is exceedingly rich.

PHOTO. BY BACHRACH

LADIES' HOME JOURNAL

THE LATEST PORTRAIT OF THE

OMps. floover

By CHARLOTTE KELLOGG

The biologist would classify her as gregarious! Her presumption in favor of people, her human interest, lead her beyond the individual to the many; she likes human contacts. Indeed, one usually sees her in the midst of a group.
In California girlhood days she delighted the round-up of neighborhood children with successive installments of some in vented serial; in college, she was the life of excursions and collective enterprises; later she helped develop university clubs, community and national and international organizations. Much as she loves mountains and sea, streams and trees, people are the most interesting part of her world.
Because they give her something, something she prizes.
Because, instinctively, utterly naturally and undeliberately, she wants to give them something. The quirks and queernesses of people do not trouble her. On the contrary, she has the artist's delight in them as the flavor of personality and character. This is the kind of in terest which makes afiy cross-section Village or town gathering, with its doctors' and pastors' wives, its teachers and shopkeepers and mothers and workers in every field, in finitely richer in meaning than any social group all of a type could be. It is an interest which, when catried further, has prodticed the great epic stories of our people.

A White House usher, ripe in four decades of experience, said, "I have been stirred by the revelation of the past year.

I am the one who accompanies, day after

day, the hundreds and thousands who are

presented to the First Lady. I thought of

her as an unusually intelligent and unusually trained person who would meet this continuously

WHEN LOU HOOVER
WAS TWENTY-ONE AND A
BRIDE IN FAR-OFF CHINA

FIRST LADY OF THE LAND

September, 1930

in flowing tide of citizens in an executive, effective way. But little by little I came to realize that capacity and training were not the major factors in the situation. The striking, moving factor was that despite this physically wearying, apparently never-ending line of in vading humanity, here was just a simple, human woman who wanted to see every one of these people."

The First Lady is not essentially different from other wornen. She has what other women have, but in different proportions. Nor does living in the White
House mean to her a new set of attitudes and interests. It merely gives her a unique opportunity to expand those she has always had. So she welcomes it, likes it.

Now beyond Mrs. Hoover's fundamental attitude of favorable presumption, what is her make-up? Had a painter truly painted her, what would shine from her portrait as we approached it from across the room?
First, from her face, with its lovely oval line, broad forehead, generously spaced blue eyes, and lips set for a smile, certainly this spirit of good will. Then from the whole straight, vibrant pose of her, vitality.

Olhe Ofriend

ER outstanding characteristic is a peculiar mental and physical vitality, a bubbling, outpouring vitality, a physical and mental tirelessness. This is something we cannot, by our own willing, acquire; it is something brought to fortunate ones in the stream of in hetitance. And it is quite a part from brain capacity. One person may have a good brain and keep it busy; another may have a similar brain, but tire easily, not tise it much. X debates all night, Y wearies in two hours. Ask the scientist whence this vitality comes, and he replies, "'We don'tknow - it is due to a certain arrangement of chromosomes and genes, but the true whence and why of it are mystery still."
Sometimes this endowment of in tense vitality concentratedly turns in ward, as it has, for in stance, in Madame
Curie. In the lonely attic room of her student days, in the later cold, leaky lean-to shed where with sublime patience she broke through, one by one, the walls that had from the beginning of knowledge shut from us the light and power of radium, in the laboratory, in her pursuit of truth since then -
always she has shut herself away from the outside world.
Or such vitality may reach outward as it does in Madame
Curie's sister, Doctor Dluska, a physician, director of a large sanatorium, today the almost in credibly active executive secretary of the committee that has achieved the concrete realization of her sister's dream of a radium laboratory and cancer hospital for Warsaw. Partly because of Doctor
Dluska's outward-streaming vitality, the gram of radium which American women last year gave Madame Curie will soon be put to its beneficent uses in Poland.
Mrs. Hoover's type of vitality is that of Madame Curie's sister.
Het marvelously enriching gift - for it enables her to do much more than others less fortunately endowed - is not manifested iti abstruse debating, yet she is keenly intelligent and her knowledge covers wide fields. Though she would be in terested in some problem of economics if the President were discussing it, her chief reaction would be to see that the persons responsible for its solution were taken care of, made comfortable and happy.
Her vitality centers on human interest, on people, their sorrows and joys; but she is always more apt to see the humor than the bitterness in things - her laugh is hearty and infectious. It is manifested in amazing activity,

September, 1930 LADIES' HOME JOURNAL

ODEs Grelen "iu

By PATTEN BEARD

The Pathway, a dish picture of a rocky meadow.

HE practice of c sh pictures is centuries old. It or igi

nated in Japan. There it is an art governed by schools and

70 formulas of construction and plant culture which we busy

ol Westerners have no desire to follow, even had we the poetic

= f° and artistic background of that wonderful nation of artists

whose diminutive landscape pictures in metal or pottery bowls have been

copied everywhere by those who love to bring Nature in doors in barren winter months to make decorative plant interest in the home.

For many years we have had the so-called Japanese dish garden in its commercial form, but this is not true to its Eastern origin and is often monotonous and uninteresting. It is made to sell and made by those who are commercial. In it the same plants repeat endlessly the jumbled

(Continued on Page 210)

Other articles on Gardens will be found on pages 205 to 209.
The Garden of Lan
Fang was built in a dull-blueFapanese dish.
Itreproduces a real garden with tiny fence and gate, green trees, garden pool, stepping-stones and lanterns.

The Lovesome Spot was designed for use at a
Shower-luncheon party.
A golden English pottery dish was used, with maidenhair fern for shrubbery, pool and bird house for accent. A path of slated steppingstones led to the lovers, made of Staffordshire pottery and about five

OPhotographed | ee Ne Pas *y ! " s ; ' inches in height.
in CNatural (olor '
Pao e
CNickolas OMuray

September, 1930

in generosity, in an outpouring of friendship, in anunwearying thoughtfulness, an unfailing consideration of others. She has an unusually developed sense of doing things for other people. Wherever she has been she has left a trail of kind things, of friendly things, done. To such a degree has she carried her passionate art of sharing that a friend said to me once in the S Street house in Washington, " Haven't you the strange feeling here of our having to defend the Hoovers against our sense of possession?"

Before we analyze further this blessed quality of vitality, let us look for a moment at its simplest manifestation in the First Lady's day. As mistress of the nation's home, it enables her, I repeat, to put enormously more personal thought and direction into her task than those with less energy could give. She begins where all true housekeepers begin, with the daily meals. She looks over the menus, knows what is going to be served. She gives orders as to certain ways which meats or fish or vegetables should be cooked, because ''the President likes them that way" - does just what any wife would do to keep her husband happy. And how often she has thrilled a guest by remembering that he especially liked this or that. Only the other day - one of the busiest White House days - utter surprise and pleasure lighted up the face of one such visitor when a small apple tart topped with whipped white of egg and cream was set before him - his favorite birthday dessert; it was his birthday and she had remembered!

Olhe CHomemak er

INCE so many gifts inundate the Executive Mansion, one might expect them to be accepted more or less casually.
They are not. If they happen to be food, Mrs. Hoover interests herself in seeing that they are especially prepared.
When they appear at the table they are commented on, and the comment is apt to be of this nature: ''This marmalade

came from the South. I wonder if Mrs. A made it herself."

PHOTO. BY P. & A. PHOTO

GIRL SCOUTS AND HORSEBACK RIDING

ARE TWO ACTIVITIES THAT GREATLY
INTEREST MRS. HOOVER

Or: 'These chocolates from New England were made by Mrs. B. I must get her recipe."" Such things mean something to her, and her interest concentrates not on their size or value, but on the personal contribution in the offering. One remembers, as one listens, a saying of the President's, '"'The time will come when people will not ask who paid for a thing, but who built it."

And then one remembers this something more: that in variably the Hoovers' pleasure in such gifts is rooted in their joy in

PHOTO. BY WIDE WORLD PHOTOS

LADIES' HOME JOURNAL

PHOTO. BY UNDERWOOD & UNDERWOOD - CULVER SERVICE

sharing them. At breakfast beside a silvery, starry Christmas tree, after the distracting last Christmas Eve fire, with smoke still in the air, and when on the President's mind was the whole question of where the nation's business was going to be conducted on that and succeeding days, he suddenly set down his coffee cup to say across the table, "' Mother, there are all those men downstairs who expected to have
Christmas Eve and morning with theirchildren and their own trees, and instead have been tied up here hard at work all night rearranging telegraph and telephone lines - and there's that big box of fruits and candies just arrived from the
West. Can't we have someone pull the top off it and tell those men to dive in? Tell them to take all they want for their families, and there'll be plenty left for us too.'' Ah, there was the characteristic note; this was not merely giving, it was sharing.

The menus and table arrangements having been considered, there comes the general review of the Mansion itself. In so large an establishment the housekeeping is, of course, well systematized; a competent, cheerful staff see that each morning the nation's house is ready for the arduous day's demands upon it. One might think that if its mistress did

not add to her heavily charged program time for especial

thought of the arrangement of the rooms for the day those going in and out would not be conscious of something missing. But justhere lies the difference - they would be!

Is tea to be served in the Red Room, and for a dozen?
Then, ''Wouldn't it be more cozy to have the table here and the chairs grouped in this or that way? Those pink roses there, perhaps, and the new photographs of the grandchildren, Peggy Ann and Peter and Joan, here. Yes,

the fire is properly laid, but that can hardly be, on the mantle above it - yes, it is'' - laughingly, but firmly - ''a speck of dust!" Will there be tea in the Blue Room for thirty, or in the dining room for several hundred, or out under the magnolia trees for more? Will breakfast or luncheon be served on the porch overlooking the south lawns and trees and fountain? Then, such and such arrangements of tables and chairs would be pleasant. It is just this in tensely interested attention, which to some might seem superfluous, to details over and above the general housekeeping that gives the atmosphere of the White House its individual note of today. Its objective is comfort, lack of setness, warmth.

Mrs. Hoover has a quick eye, an almost uncanny awareness of atmosphere. Over the President's desk in the S Street house hung the engraving of Lincoln and his cabinet which now hangs in the study in the White House. Hundreds had looked at it literally hundreds of times, yet apparently only Mrs. Hoover had noticed that a chair at the right had four little cloverleaf openings carved near the top of the back. She had not been long in the White
House when one day she saw tucked away in an unimportant corner a small chair with four clover-leaf openings carved on

the back. ''But surely, I've seen that chair before" - and in a flash she remembered the engraving. The chair was promoted to a place beneath it and a search was made through the house for others; today there are four in the President's study.

Other furniture and works of art that particularly interest this President and First Lady have been given new rank. The large portraits of George and Martha Washington now add welcoming meaning to the great East Room, and the Monroe settees and chairs have been brought up from the ground floor to make this apartment more comfortable.

But though she is constantly rearranging, all about the White
House are evidences of strong attachment to old things and.old ways.
For decades the Mansion has had

Sr "i
Y UNDERWOOD & UNDERWOOD - CULVER SERVICE

THE STATE DINING ROOM, WHERE THE CHARMING
INTIMATE MEALS WITH PREMIER MACDONALD AND
ISHBEL WERE SERVED

very few of the small accessories of beauty that give '"'a tmosphere,"' so that each President's wife brings with her her own personal treasure. In the rose drawing-room upstairs are the
Chinese screen and Chinese lamps of S Street, on the piano the photograph of Mrs. Coolidge - there was a true affection, there is a continuous friendship and interest, between Grace
Coolidge and Lou Hoover. In the President's study is the picture which, ever since the war, has hung where he works, the picture of a Belgian woman painted against the background of her ruined village, in her face all of war's tragedy.

Olhe Oferst Lady

Boe the President and Mrs. Hoover are interested in the history of the White House furnishings and have read all the books to be found on the subject. They ask what their previous uses have been, the inclination being to preserve the best of the old, while making the Mansion practical and

homelike. Nor in this interest in furnishings have the servants' quarters been overlooked. There has been, since
1909, an in ventory kept, but this has been primarily a mere listing for insurance purposes, the '"'one mahogany table, second floor" type of in ventory. Mrs. Hoover is in stituting a card-catalogue system, which will record the history and legend of each article and indicate its approximate location.

The table, the rooms - then some attention must be paid to the wardrobe. Again, though busy mistresses might leave selections and decisions largely to others, Mrs. Hoover prefers making them herself. In parenthesis, one may add that she seems always to be knitting a sweater for a grandchild, or a couch cover for a son, or a muffler for a friend. In her choice of clothes, determining criteria are simplicity and in formality; she especially likes sports and outdoor garments.
But though this is true, she does not neglect that part of the wardrobe important to a First Lady who represents her country before all the other countries of the world.

(Continued on Page 182)

HEN his wife deserts him to run off with another man, life loses its savor for John Huyler Heath.
Disillusioned and embittered, he forsakes his trade as a cabinetmaker, turns his back on the
Maine town that has meant both happiness and

misery, and after several years of alcoholic wandering finally finds a haven in the village of Nauticook on the Massachusetts coast.

Here he becomes a sober, industrious "'codder," whose armor of reserve his fellow villagers have as yet failed to pierce. The little he says is clothed in a mild sarcasm, his pessimistic philosophy is embraced in two words, "All nothin'."" His domestic arrangements are in the hands of
Lorenzo Weeks, a man of all housework.

Suddenly, after eight years, the calm of John Heath's life is broken by the receipt of a letter from an Ohio clergyman.
John Heath's wife has died, leaving an or phaned boy, eleven years old, and the boy, it seems, is Heath's own son, born in
1893, about eight months after the woman deserted her husband.

Much against his will Heath arranges a meeting with the minister and Raymond Condon in Boston, with the result that Raymond returns to Nauticook ostensibly to visit his new-found "'Uncle John."

The boy's coming gives John Heath a new interest in life.
Encouraged by a friendly summer resident he resumes cabinetmaking and builds up a paying business. He enlarges and modernizes his little home. He sends Raymond to college.
All his thoughts and ambitions are for Raymond. His dreams are of a day when his boy can at last be permitted to know the secret of his paternity.

The days are lonely ones with Raymond away at college, and domestic arrangements at Seven-up, the Heath home, are anything but satisfactory, for Lo Weeks is having one of his periodical spells of religion. Lo neglects his duties and hints that he needs assistance. Heath does not want to discharge his factotum, and so he inserts an advertisement for a housekeeper in the local paper. He journeys to a neighboring town to in terview Mrs. Susan Harwell. She impresses him mightily, but as she has another offer in Nauticook no definite arrangement is made. Heath returns to Seven-up and finds the supper table laid for three. Lo Weeks appears, garbed in his Sunday best, hems and haws, and then

LADIES' HOME JOURNAL

September, 1930

OBlowing (Lear

By JOSEPH C. LINCOLN

introduces Mrs. Hulda Bascom, one of the lights of the evangelical Society of the Pure in Heart, as his bride. Lo, it appears, has found a housekeeper of his own choosing.

IX.

Tuere was a great deal of talk during supper. 'The newly wedded pair furnished almost all of it. They were far too excited to eat and they explained

and narrated alternately or in chorus. John Heath said little and ate less. He was dimly conscious that the food was better cooked and served than any he had tasted at that table for along time, but appetite was lacking. A person who has been sandbagged and whose brain is still bemused from shock is not likely to be greatly interested in food. As for talking - well, there was a sufficiency of that, and more would have been superfluous. With Mrs. Weeks speaking shrilly and continuously and Lorenzo - when he felt an in terjection necessary - trying to outshout her, even listening with comprehension required more stability of mind than
Heath possessed just then.

He gathered that the marriage was a sort of spur-of-themoment affair. Of course, so Hulda explained, with an elephantine simper, there had been what you might call an understanding between her and Lorenzo for some time. They had realized that they were just suited for each other; both of them all sole a lone in the world and both interested in the same things, as you might say. And she had seen from the very first that the poor dear soul - with a beaming smile across the table at her husband - '"'needed somebody to look after him and keep his feet in the straight and narrow
Dace 5 jcteen

And so on. The Society of the Pure in Heart was about to lose its preacher, he had received a louder call from another congregation in New Hampshire, and, as Mrs. Weeks declared with the enthusiastic approval of her husband, he was a perfectly wonderful man and everybody thought so much of him. He, it seemed, had been let into the secret of the understanding between his two parishioners and had expressed his regret at not being permitted to remain long enough to join them in wedlock. And then one of the pair -
Hulda said it was Lorenzo, but Lorenzo looked surprised when she said it - had been inspired to suggest that he do it that very day. After all, what was the use of waiting?

After the ceremony they had dined together at the Wayfarers' Rest and then, after a few hours of preparation on both sides - preparations for something evidently to be disclosed later - Hulda had hastened down to Seven-up to help prepare the supper they were now enjoying.

"'Huldy, she done 'bout all the cookin'. Pretty good job, too, I call it; don't you, Hi?"

John Heath asked a question then, one which had been forcing itself upon his attention during the latter part of the touching love story.

"Well? And what's next on the program?" he in quired.

Bride and groom looked at each other. Hulda simpered and Lorenzo looked particularly foolish.

"You tell him, dearie,"' urged the lady.

"Well - er - well, I tell you, Hi. We hate to leave you all a lone, but if you can get along by yourself for a couple of days we was cal'latin' to go up to Brockton on - on what you might call a weddin' trip. We're goin' over to Denboro tonight - Huldy's got cousins there, you know. We'll stay to their house till tomorrow mornin' and then we'll take the early train to Brockton. Be back Wednesday. Think you could spare me that long, Hi? "Twould be kind of nice if you could."

Heath thought he could and said yes so promptly that
Lorenzo seemed rather taken a back.

"'T - that is, we realize it'll be kind of hard for you, but -
well, you see how 'tis. Fellow don't get married every day in the week, now does he? We'll wash up dishes and the like of that a fore we go. You needn'tworry about that part."

So far as the dishwashing was concerned Heath was not in the least worried. He was, however, recovering slightly from the effects of his sandbagging and other matters were beginning to trouble him.

"You'll be back Wednesday," he repeated.
Then what?"

The couple again exchanged looks. Lorenzo spoke hastily.
"Oh, we've got that all planned out," he declared. '"'Somethin' you said to me a spell ago give me the notion. You

"Um-hm.

"Dearie!"'

"Eh? Yes?"

"We a greed we wouldn'ttalk about that yet. Now you help me clear off; we'll have to start pretty soon."

OM, rs. CHT. oover

(Continued from Page 25)

Preceding the state dinner for eighty-one given in honor of Prime Minister Mac-
Donald, when the guests had assembled in the white East Room and the appearance of a ides in gold-braided uniforms and the traditional fanfare of trumpets announced the arrival of the Chief Executive, there was an eager leaning forward. And as the
President entered, with Mrs. Hoover on his arm, in periwinkle-blue velvet with along train, her lovely white hair waved youthfully back from her forehead, the blue of her eyes which radiated friendliness heightened by the velvet's blue, there was a moment of thrill and admiration.

But a brief article can no more than hint at activities such as those incident to housekeeping and wardrobe, whose place in the White House day, seen in its larger aspects, is, after all, so subordinate that

we are apt to forget they exist. Therefore,
I have referred to them here before further attempting to analyze that gift of mental and physical vitality which makes it possible for Mrs. Hoover to give as much thought as she does to "'lesser'' duties.
Vitality is in herited, though environment, what we call conditions of education, can develop and accentuate it, as they have in Mrs. Hoover. We have learned scientifically in the past fifteen years more about the influence of environment than in all time before, more about the positive reality of it, just as we have about the positive reality of heredity. In using this new knowledge in analysis of character, we turna spotlight on its composition.
Heredity determines the possibilities of an

(Continued on Page 185)

vine in the forced intimacy of married life that corrodes and destroys its fineness. Marriage is an art; it has its rules, its mode of procedure, its technic, and if a woman wants to deliver marriage from the well of stagnation it has fallen into, she must safeguard her premises by an elimination of the ugly familiarities of close living. This is the scissors that cuts and undermines its strength. I have seen few lastingly happy marriages; one of the rare exceptions is my own mother's and father's.
To love with greatness is to touch the heart of things. It can teach us more in one experience than all the events and circumstances of the world can teach us in a lifetime; but what I am contending is that love is not all of life. It is only a part of life, a magnificent part, one that makes the pageant of it, and the poetry and the beauty. It underscores it and emphasizes it; but when it becomes rapacious and controlling, women pay too heavy a price. I have never let any emotion dictate to me or make laws for me.
Once in my life I was called upon to prove that love was not the whole of life;

sheer. But due to this new process, it Is

snag-proof. Every thread is extra-fine

all points of wear are so cleverly reinfo many extra days of service are add ultra-modern in style, with the smart [
Crepe Finish, and double Picot top. T

only $1.95...
creation by style number 4250. Other
Allen-A styles from $1.25 to $2.50, incl famous "Dancing Chiffon" with Picot tog
The Allen-A Company, Kenosha, Wis., and Toro

Ask to see this superb

might find it sufficiently taxing in this field of entertaining to do no more than receive the armies of school children - who come from as far away as Michigan and
Illinois - which with each return of spring inundate the capital, and the groups of young people who follow them.

Mrs. Hoover's interest in our public schools - she insisted that her own two boys should graduate from them - is so keen that she welcomes any opening to keep in touch with them.

Added to the above multitudes are the ceaseless numbers of just individuals of this and other countries wishing to be presented. They are arranged for in smaller groups, customarily in the afternoon at teatime, but often, too, during the morning or early afternoon. Then, while these seemingly constant receptions progress, there are hospitals and homes, girl-scout headquarters, institutions and celebrations of every description to be visited and encouraged. And into the fleeting interstices of the fantastically filled day must be fitted supervision of several aids and three secretaries, and a correspondence so formidable that one wonders what courage is equal to approaching it. Of course it has been impossible from the first for Mrs. Hoover to attempt to read and give thought to every written communication addressed to her. She has not hours enough in the day to read them all, even had she nothing else to do. So one secretary opens and glances through the mail, distributing it according to its content to other secretaries for attention. Particularly, because she is so much moved by misfortune, did she- try to have someone consider every appeal for help. But as the size of her task loomed, she was forced to concede that such philanthropic work must, after all, be relegated back to local organizations designed to perform it.

Does the importance of Mrs. Hoover's inherited physical and mental vitality begin to appear? Or of her good will? Her tolerance? Intelligence means tolerance, and she has it in broad measure. Not the shilly-shally kind, for, though respecting the opinions of others, she adheres firmly to her own standards. It is the kind that says, "I understand how you see it, and you have a right to your way of seeing it.'
All these things mean swift, direct approach, without wasted time.

lhe Outdoor 7 lls O1eait

OMEONE has said that the joy of a

soul, its capacity for play, isa measure of its force. Mrs. Hoover has always played, she likes to play today. She encourages children to play, is not afraid of what they will do. And she has nerve and calm if they appear to be in danger. At the close of the war, when part of the French army was returning to Lunéville, where she happened to be, she noticed that a crowd had gathered in the square in front of her hotel and that its attention was riveted on some point beyond her window. Looking out, she saw her small boy, Allan, tiptoeing along the narrow cornice across the front of the hotel! She remained silently and calmly at the window until he was within reach.

No load of of ficial protocol will ever crush, in Mrs. Hoover, buoyancy and spontaneity. She will go through with her stupendous program without sparing herself and with vivid interest in each part of it; but at its end she must, as must the
President, find somewhere, somehow, a quiet, in formal hour with friends. Hence the number of in timate suppers and picnics that still manage to get squeezed into the month. They did not, when they moved from S Street to the White House, start an entirely new kind of life and entourage; they took their old friends with them to share their larger environment.

The President has never been dependent on exercise, and he now has the morning medicine-ball practice. Mrs. Hoover, who has always tramped and camped and bicycled and ridden horseback, has always been an active, bubbling woman of the

West, a kind of personification of its buoyancy, now has but a mast Be a opportunity to do any of th hings
Week-ends at the Rapidan Camp, which she loves, offer something, but they are in frequent.

Yet when she first drove a car out through the White House gates and down into the greenness of Virginia, some murmured disapproval. I like to remember what a leader of the Democratic opposition said to me at that time: "I haven't told her so, but I would like Mrs. Hoover to know with what gratification and admiration many of us watch the way she is conducting herself as First Lady. How we applaud her success in proving this position can be occupied naturally, unartificially, humanly, honestly. That people of all degrees can be received with simplest cordiality, without fluff and feathers, yet with appropriate dignity. That a woman can remain the fine woman she is despite office. How it did me good to see her drive her car! Why shouldn't she, if she wishes to? In this democracy are White House walls those of a medieval autocracy?"
That was a genuine tribute, for being oneself in the White House is, after all, vastly different from being oneself in another house.

Chhe OLeader

ASHINGTON attracts preferment

seekers from all quarters; here there is a concentration of wealth, the atmosphere is surcharged with false appraisals, with the "I go where my brother cannot"
attitude. The Hoovers crash through all of this. For them the White House is a great mixing bowl; one always goes away from gatherings there realizing the mixed elements of our society.

With the conception of all our people as part of one fabric, with this sense of loyalty to the whole body, run strains of in tense individual loyalties. We might make a whole group of Mrs. Hoover's loyalties - to connections, aids, servants, friends; to or ganizations, to schools she has attended, towns she has lived in, to her country. In selecting a helper, she would choose not a more attractive person, but rather would honor an old friend. In doing so her judgment might at times err, but on the right side. Once she said, "I have gone all round the world looking for the best place to bring up boys in, but I have never found a better one than the
Stanford campus from which I started."

So brief a sketch as this must omit overtones - all the iridescence, the artistic play of a temperament sensitive to the most fugitive presence of beauty, all Mrs.
Hoover's in definable charm and graciousness, which are interestingly and happily the notes of the new decade we are entering. No one is better qualified than she to lead us in our return to a more cultivated expression of life than that characterizing what Mary Roberts Rinehart calls '"'the chaotic decade" from which we have just emerged.

More than a year has passed since the lithe, blithe woman whom we had made the Lady of the Nation crossed the White
House threshold. Today she looks out from it to the one hundred and twentyfive millions, her people, her family, with blue eyes in which the meaning has deepened. She has liked being in the White
House even more, perhaps, than she expected to.

Good will, intelligence which squares to truth and reality but which holds always a favorable presumption; vitality, spontaneous, joyous, outflowing physical and mental vitality; loyalty, tenacious, expressing itself in what many would call superfluous remembering, loyalty that changes not - are not these precisely qualities to which we a spire for ourselves collectively, which we covet for the American people? How fortunate, then, that Mrs.
Hoover, as she brings to the crowded hours of the White House day her loveliness, her buoyancy and eagerness, typifies them to us!

(Continued from Page 182)

individual, while environment makes of that individual, inside the limits of heredity, what he is. Heredity determined Lou
Henry's possibilities; environment, how much they would get used. With her heredity she might, under a different environment, have turned out to be a woman distinguished for quite different activities.

If we attempted to chart in an extremely simplified way her make-up, we might set down something like this:

HEREDITY
Intelligence; physical and mental stamina.

ENVIRONMENT
Western out-of-doors, camping, sports; nomad, pioneering, widely varied experience.

QUALITIES
Good will, the presumption that things are right; vitality; loyalty.

I have not known the grandmothers to whom for a considerable time Lou Henry was only grandchild.

But her father's brother,

Uncle Will Henry, has

talked to me of one of

them, his adored mother,

telling me that those

who knew her best a gree

that Lou Henry draws

straight from her in appearance, in her features, including her fine

straight nose, and in

many other characteristics. This was the grandmother who, when in the

Middle West in '59 it became the burning fashion to remove tonsils, summoned the family doctor for Charles, but when the good medico insisted on doing a "family job" stood her ground firmly before Will's tonsils. ''I cannot see," she said, "'any benefit to be derived from taking out any boy's healthy tonsils." Today, at eightytwo, Uncle Will, with sound tonsils still, proudly justifies her!

HIS grandmother, as Mrs. Hoover is

today, was - while her husband was busy helping develop towns in Ohio - surrounded by young people and children.
But she let it be known that her house was not, after all,a créche for babies whose mothers might prefer neglecting them for something else. She had her own ideas and dignity.

She had three sons, Addis, Charles and
William, all bankers. Charles, her father,
Mrs. Hoover resembles in many ways.
From him she acquired that habit of careful reserve essential to the banker custodian of the town's secrets, and which served her well when history began writing itself on her front doorstep. Lover of outdoors, he taught her to take complete, in dependent care of herself on mountains or by sea.
When he was nearing eighty she had but to say to him, "Father, how would you like me to drive you up over the Sierras and on to Washington?" to have him get busy at once with his small traveling bag.

Yet in her natural, bubbling expressiveness and humor, she seems perhaps more strikingly like her uncle, Will Henry.

From her mother, too, Lou Henry inherited unusual vitality. This was, again, the Doctor Dluska type, pouring outward in work for schools, clubs, philanthropic organizations, expressing itself in many kinds of neighborhood and community effort. Her joyous interest in people she passed on to both her children; for Mrs.
Hoover's younger sister, Jean Large, has a marked gift for observing and analyzing not only moods of Nature but also the character and temperament of human beings. Her laughter is as swift and infectious as her sister's.

Intelligence, vitality, natural joyousness - these gifts the stream of in heritance brought to Lou Henry. Nor would it be easy to imagine an environment better

calculated to develop them than the one
Fate assigned her.

Her university education has not bothered her; it has not got in her way. It was largely scientific and gave her breadth and a certain feel for realities. There is a kind of surgical honesty about everything the Hoovers do.

The pioneering existence following college and the chance to dominate pioneering conditions, which she seized, have given her additional strength and versatility.
The whole world has come into her experience. And going into the White House has been just a broadening of this experience; to her not a burden, but meaning an in creased horizon.

Our paramount interest, however, is not in the sources of Mrs. Hoover's striking characteristics - her good will, her physical and mental vitality, her loyalty - but in their exercise. Which takes us again to the
White House, where over and above the housekeeping, there is a fixed, definite demand upon her which the country scarcely realizes. Not a few, I suppose, picture her

as sitting with folded

hands when she is not

giving a few tea parties.

Her first duty, of

course, is to the President. He says little

about his dependence on

her, but anyone who has

seen him enter a room,

look about and ask

quickly, ''Where's

mother?" senses it.

From the hour when,

after breakfast - usually

with guests - on the

south porch, the First Lady accompanies her husband down the gracefully curved flight of steps and along the garden to the executive office wing, to about half-past ten at night, when, in the white reception room or the smaller blue or red or green one on the first floor, or in the rose room on the second floor, they take leave of their guests, the President depends in an altogether unusual way on the particular kind of cooperation his wife gives him. This is an instant, always-there kind of codperation.

Mrs. Hoover's nonhesitancy is an enormous time-saver. Her habit of quick decision and action enables her to do even more than her exceptional vitality a lone makes possible. If she were shipwrecked with a boatload of castaways on an uninhabited island, she would be the first to take the observations and make the decisions - to achieve living conditions. Then she would see that they all had a good time together. She would make of such a situation a lark and not a tragedy.

he CHostess

OW, though Mrs. Hoover's first thought and constant thought is of the President, the greater part of her time seems to be taken up with doing things for the American public. During the first year of the present Administration there have been more than three thousand guests at meals and an average of nearly thirty house guests a month. Teas seem continuous.
Looking at this social activity in its most formal expression we see, for in stance, last
January starting with the successive New
Year's Day receptions, attended by 4471
persons. These were followed the ensuing week by the Judiciary Reception for 726, then by the Vice President's dinner for thirty-six and a musicale for eighty-one.
Next came the dinner of thirty-eight for the Chief Justice and the Supreme Court, with ninety-four additional guests for music; then the reception to the members of the Senate, with 920 present. February began with the Speaker's dinner and musicale and the diplomatic dinner and musicale; and thus 1930 was under way.

And such occasions are merely the conspicuous pillars of a vast social structure. All through the week, often one after another during the day, come the representatives of or ganizations anxious to shake hands with the First Lady. Many

THE HOOVER LIBRARY ON WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE

STANFORD UNIVERSITY
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA

HERBERT HOOVER ARCHIVES

irs, Vernon

Route 1,
Carmel, California

mwoicn

Thank you so
Archives.
re which I note stamps in i

to look at the fine illustrations.

Herbert Hoover Archives

HE time-honored rituals of cur-
T tailing athlete's foot by wading through antiseptic foot baths, dousing floors with disinfectants, sterilizing bath mats, towels, slippers and socks may be well and good for keeping areas in and around swimming pools, gymnasiums and shower rooms clean. But as far as killing off athlete's foot is concerned, they are as in effective as sulphur and molasses.

This, at least, is one expert medical opinion. For the past 22 months, Dr.
Rudolf L. Baer and his associates at
New York University have been investigating ways to wipe out that pesky fungus that feasts on the toes.
While their research, financed by the
Army, is only partially completed, they have turned up some heartening
 - if not startling - news for feet on the shower room floor.

For many years most everyone has believed or been warned that athlete's foot is highly contagious. This idea that you ''catch"' the itching, burning infection directly from another person's infected feet is behind the maze of regulations which city and state health departments have set up to restrict the spread of the disease.

But Dr. Baer and a number of other dermatologists over the past 25 years have never gone along with this theory.
In their opinion, flare-ups of athlete's

NOVEMBER 29, 1954

HEALTH

FEET ON THE
SHOWER ROOM FLOOR

The latest study of athlete's foot shows that the rule book on how to prevent the pesky fungus infection should be rewritten

foot rarely result from a new, outside infection. Almost everyone, they believe, picks up the fungus in childhood and, like the bacteria which causes boils, it lives harmlessly on the skin for years. Only when an in dividual's resistance becomes lowered can the fungus, already on the feet, get a toehold.

To prove the point, Dr. Baer's team ran a series of tests on more than 100
doctors, nurses and technicians who served as guinea pigs. In one experiment, they selected a group of volunteers known to be free of athlete's foot fungi, then deliberately tried to give them an a cute infection. For 30 minutes at a time, once a week, the subjects bathed one of their feet in a pan of water containing 100,000 times the a mount of fungi they could possibly pick up from a shower room floor. At the end of six weeks, the researchers found that while more than half of the exposed feet harbored fungi, not one had developed a single infection.

INEFFECTIVE AND HARMFUL

From all the evidence collected, concludes Dr. Baer, most of the measures commonly used today to prevent athlete's foot are not only in effective but are potentially harmful and should be discarded.

e It is useless to douse areas around bathrooms, showers and swimming pools with fungicidal a gents since there is no proof whatsoever that these are breeding grounds for the fungus.

e It is equally useless to attempt to sterilize shoes and socks. While they may contain fungi, sterilization does nothing to the feet, which continue to carry the microbes. In fact, it is likely to do more harm than good; chemicals used in sterilizing may irritate the skin to such an extent that dormant fungi can stage a full-scale invasion.

e It is naive to expect that wading

for a few seconds through a basin of antiseptic solution will help ward off the disease. These stagnant, unhygienic puddles should be abandoned.
¢ There is no reason to exclude persons with athlete's foot from public facilities since the relatively small number of fungus particles they might drop is unlikely to cause trouble.

What then can be done to guard against athlete's foot? Dr. Baer answers with six suggestions:

1. Wear perforated shoes whenever possible, to allow perspiration to evaporate. Moisture makes the skin between the toes soggy and the chemical skin reaction, normally acid, becomes neutral or alkaline. Either of these conditions lowers resistance to the fungus.

2. Wear wool or cotton socks which will absorb moisture, rather than nylon, rayon or other nonabsorbing fabrics.

3. Regularly use a dry, mild foot powder that contains a fatty acid.

4. Insert lamb's wool between the toes if the web of skin tends to be soft and moist.

5. Carefully dry feet and toes after bathing and change footgear whenever the socks and shoes become wet.

6. Use nonalkaline so apless detergents when washing the feet rather than ordinary toilet or other soaps.

YESTERDAY

LOREN HUNT, California fullback, played for the heavier and more experienced team - and lost.

HERBERT HOOVER, undaunted by the trials of the first
California game, still managed Stanford football in 1894-95.
No wonder, for in his first game as manager he had proved

R'S GOLDEN GATE

No one, including the teams and business manager Herbert Hoover, was prepared for the first frenzied Stanford-California football game

HENEVER Stanford and California
\ renew their football rivalry, as they did last week at Berkeley's Memorial Stadium, they rekindle a hot, old fire. More than 80,000 can gather comfortably around the conflagration at Berkeley today. But no wellplanned event in this series is likely to provide such extravagant entertainment as the first game, which was played before less than 10,000 fans, half of whom were not expected.

In some ways Stanford and California did plan for their March 19,
1892 meeting. But if it had not been for a Stanford undergraduate named
Herbert Hoover, who tried to extract sudden order from delirious chaos, the kick-off might never have taken place.

The quaintly fantastic adventure which has been recorded as the Far
West's first intercollegiate football game began when California, which for

10 years had played high school and club teams, decided to go big time and challenged Stanford. The junior college was not precisely prepared for such an event. But the students -
particularly one John Whittemore -
would not admit the fact. Whittemore had come to Stanford from St. Louis
University, where he had played a couple of seasons of football. Delegating himself the left halfback, he beseeched his friends to rally to the cause. The young men who turned out were neither massive nor experienced. But they were eager, and they called Whittemore ''Coach."'

Meanwhile students chose a young
Hoover (class of 1895) to arrange the
California game. Gambling on the gate, he approached Dave Goulcher,
San Francisco sporting goods dealer, with an order for new uniforms - all on credit. Goulcher acceded. Hoover and

himself eminently qualified for the job by taking in bagfuls of silver and gold coins from the huge crowd of almost 10,000 fans.
Here he is flanked by players Arthur Burnett and William Soper.

SPORTS ILLUSTRATED

FIRST FOOTBALL TEAM at Stanford posed for this picture about the time of the 1892 California game. The loungers in front may have been advertising the class of 1895. None of the

his California counterpart, Herbert
Lang, rented the Haight Street baseball grounds in San Francisco for $250.
And, in a burst of optimism, Hoover ordered the printing of 5,000 tickets.

On the eve of the contest college students boiled through San Francisco streets. Flashing their school colors they banged, rattled and blew a variety of noisemakers in a concerted effort to draw attention to the mayhem of the morrow. The next day, while players started toward the field from downtown hotels in gaily bedecked tallyhos, Hoover was confronted with a curious problem at the scene of impending action. The 5,000 tickets (priced at $2) had been sold, and still drays and carriages arrived laden with fans.
Gold and silver currency already was spilling from bags over the floor of the ticket booth. The frantic Hoover quickly sent assistants to scour the neighborhood for wash boilers, dishpans, bathtubs - anything to hold more coins. Hastily organizing a force of student police, he directed them to escort a customer to the gate in return for each cash payment. By game time

NOVEM BER 29, 1954

5,000 jammed the stands and several thousand more jostled in a driveway around the field.

BUT WHERE WAS THE FOOTBALL?

Between bets which made the heayier California team 10-1 favorites, the boisterous throng sounded off with fish horns, Chinese fiddles, conch shells, rattles, bazoos and bells. The noise continued after the players rolled up in their tallyhos and took the field.
Soon, however, they quit the gridiron amid a mighty silence. There was no football!

Horrified, Hoover begged Goulcher, who had come to see his uniforms in use, to ride into town and get one. That unhappy man made the trip but could find no bladder for a football.
Instead he put a punching bag bladder in the pigskin, creating a not-so-prolate spheroid. Over an hour passed before he returned to the field with his awkward invention.

Whittemore, who won the toss, quickly noticed that the ball was misshapen, and chose to kick off. When unsuspecting California fumbled a few

players in the Far West's first intercollegiate game wore numbers. Stanford boys felt resplendent in new cardinal jerseys and moleskin vests and pants, procured on credit by Herbert Hoover.

plays later Stanford took over on the
Bears' 45. They tried a great experiment which they had been practicing under Whittemore's direction. The ball was centered to Quarterback Tom
Code, who gave it to Whittemore.
While Code and Fullback Carl Clemans led him to the center of the line, the other halfback, Paul Downing, who had received the ball in a hand-off, ran unnoticed down the sideline. It was probably football's first reverse play.
When the confused Californians finally turned around they saw Downing squatting on the ball between the goal posts. Almost an hour and three-quarters later the referee blew the final whistle. Stanford had won, 14-10.

Hoover, Lang and a squad of assistants spent 'the night counting receipts in a room at the California Hotel.
By 3 a.m. Sunday morning nearly $20,-
000 had been stuffed into cloth bags.
Hoover put the bags under the mattress of his hotel bed and told a group of Stanford students to sleep on it. Only then did the future President relax enough to reflect that he had been too busy to see the game.

"My last request is that they serve me with

Durkee's FAMOUS!"

DURKEE'S FAMOUS

SAUCE

Not only cold turkey, but many other foods take to Durkee's FAMOUS "just naturally". It adds a unique, @2==>
delicious flavor to sea food,

and it's a perfect seasoning

for casseroles, salad dressings

and sandwiches. Take your

cue from famous dining

places and use this distinctive

sauce to pep up your menus.

One of Durkee's Famous Foods

You Never Tasted Beer
Like Heineken's Beer

lleinekken's
Omported from Holland

Van Munching & €Co., Inc., New York 36 N.Y.

POWERBOATS continued from page 57

in the APBA-sanctioned regatta at
Lakeland, Fla. On Aug. 9 he set class B and C outboard hydro records under

| the APBA at Seattle, then followed by
| winning the nationals in the same

classes at Pasco, and topped it all off

| by setting still another class C record

in the NOA's speed trials at Knoxville.
Tenney is not the only racer to compete under both associations. But NOA and APBA have carried on a three-year tug of war for boats and drivers, climaxed this September by an APBA black-list issued against 19 men who drove at Knoxville.

At the APBA meeting in New Orleans, a motion to rescind the black-list

|
|
'

Pe i

Inboard Division

48 CU. IN. HYDRO: Gillette Smith, Sept.
6 at Long Beach, Calif.

91 CU. IN. HYDRO: Sam Crooks, Feb.
6 at St. Petersburg, Fla.

135 CU. IN. HYDRO: J. C. Townsend,
Aug. 1 at Louisville, Ky.

136 CU. IN. HYDRO: Wallace Rowland,
Sept. 6 at Millville, N.J.

225 CU. IN. HYDRO: Dr. W. P. Linss,
Aug. 22 at Cincinnati, O.

NATIONAL CHAMPIONS

ft

266 CU. IN. HYDRO: Ray Gassner, Nov. |

7 at Salton Sea, Calif.

7 LITER HYDRO: Ray Fageol, Aug. 15, |

at Buffalo, N.Y.

PACIFIC ONE DESIGN: Marion Beaver,
Nov. 7 at Salton Sea, Calif.

Sept. 6 at Millville, N.J.

*CRACKER BOX RUNABOUT:
Maginn, Nov. 7 at Salton Sea.

CLASS B RACING RUNABOUT: Ernest
Rose, July 18 at Merced, Calif.

44 CU. IN. RUNABOUT: William Ott, |

Carl

CLASS C RACING RUNABOUT: Les

Trafton, Feb. 7, St. Petersburg

CLASS E RACING RUNABOUT: Bob
Willis, Aug. 15 at Buffalo, N.Y.

*CLASS D SERVICE RUNABOUT: Harry
Bickford, Aug. 15 at Buffalo

CLASS E SERVICE RUNABOUT: Bill
Engle, Aug. 15 at Buffalo

CLASS F SERVICE RUNABOUT: H. G.
Hibbert, Aug. 15 at Buffalo

CLASS I SERVICE RUNABOUT: C. Hickman, Sept. 14, Ocean City, N.J.

*Record-breakers |

was brought up, but no action taken.
During the further course of the meeting, some progress was made through peace feelers sent out by both organizations. To date, no concrete move toward cooperation or affiliation has been made by either party. But boatracers and enthusiasts all over the U.S.
are hopeful that the next few years will bring a union of the major groups in the country. Then at year's end there will be one set of champions whose supremacy will be unquestioned, and who can be singled out as the true representatives of their classes for any international challenges that may be made in the upcoming seasons.

OCIATION | |

Outboard Division

| CLASS M OUTBOARD HYDRO: R. Frawley, Sept. 25-27, Pasco, Wash.
}

CLASS A OUTBOARD HYDRO: Orlando
Torigiani, Sept. 25-27 at Pasco
CLASS B OUTBOARD HYDRO: W. L.

Tenney, Sept. 25-27 at Pasco
CLASS C OUTBOARD HYDRO: W. L.
Tenney, Sept. 25-27 at Pasco
CLASS C SERVICE HYDRO: QO. Dupuis,
Sept. 25-27 at Pasco
CLASS C RACING RUNABOUT: W. L.

Tenney, Sept. 25-27 at Pasco

CLASS C SERVICE RUNABOUT: W.

Rankin, Sept. 25-27 at Pasco

CLASS F HYDRO: P. J. Owens, Sept.
25-27 at Pasco

CLASS F RACING RUNABOUT: W. Siemsen, Sept. 18, Vallejo, Calif.

Stock Outboard Division

CLASS JU RUNABOUT: Michael Helm,
Aug. 28-30 at De Pere, Wis.
CLASS AU RUNABOUT: Richard O'Dea,
Aug. 28-30 at DePere, Wis.
CLASS BU RUNABOUT: Eddie West,
Aug. 28-30 at De Pere, Wis.

CLASS CU RUNABOUT: Ronald Loomis,
Aug. 28-30 at De Pere, Wis.

CLASS DU RUNABOUT: John Jackson,
Aug. 28-30 at De Pere, Wis.

CLASS ASTOCK HYDRO: D. Baldaccini,
Aug. 28-30 at De Pere, Wis.

CLASS B STOCK HYDRO: Bob Parish,
Aug. 28-30 at De Pere, Wis.

CLASS D STOCK HYDRO: F.. Huebner,
Aug. 28-30 at De Pere, Wis.

SPORTS ILLUSTRATED

a rmel Highlands Resident Presents
Banquet Cloth to Hoover Library

Nou
N€

oO bral a i clo
Vel sloth was handwrought by the grateful women of Belgium yecial ''thank you'' to Mrs
Kellogg for her work as the only wo f > of Hoover's Commission for the Relief of Bel

in the early vears of W ite needlework uring Six D3 bit ea - : . '- * sash nts the labor of ee I ee a : oan

cemakers for two or

Flandres bob-|

border, in sets, and|
12 meda bearing the Belgian|
and Allied arms, are in needle-|
point : oe
The ccompanied :  ont, i BK rece.
the gift, repre Ke PEAY 2 Sis Sib proximat 4

This document has also been}

presented to the museum by its

Relief Commission |
Wi World War I broke out,! (Herald vhoto)
Border detail is shown above of the Belgian lace banquet cloth which is being presented this week by Mrs. Vernon Kellogg of Carmel Highland to the museum of the Herbert Hoover War Library
Vernon Ke I-| at Stanford University.
Stanford Uni-|}
1 known in Carmel, |Carmel (then at U.C.), when a tel-| Accordingly, she returned tol/en and their "Big Four' or ganiza-
1aintained his summer|egram was delivered to her, bear-|this country at the end of 1916,|tions.
homeyvolunteered his services on|ing just two words, relayed via|and in the following year wrote | This led to further books and the commission, Obtained a leave|cable, ''Come. Hoover." "Women of Belgium," with an|articles and a close friendship of absence and reached Sronsela| She insisted upon making her|introduction by Herbert Hoover.|with the great scientist, Marie early in 1915, way a lone down the Tenaya trail|It was published by Funk & Wag-|Curie, from which grew her Eng-
At that time only men were ac-|to Yosemite, paused briefly in|nalls Co. and at the close of the/lish translation of ''The Life of cepted on the commission, so Mrs.|Carmel and set-off for London | war was brought out in French/pjerre Curie,'' for McMillan pub-
Kellogg continued to commute be-|and Brussels. There she was|translation in Brussels. llication, and such books as ''Jadtween Stanford and an office in|equipped with a car flying the! Mrs. Kellogg also became one/wiga, Poland's Great Queen" and
San Francisco from which she|CRB flag (a faded mementolof the most active public speakers/a juvenile, ''The Girl Who Ruled was organizing the California|which she still treasures) and pa-jon behalf of Belgian relief,)}a Kingdom."

then in London,

Committee for Relief in Belgium|pers permitting her to travel and|throughout the United States and| Prolific Writer and Northern France investigate relief work a mong the|in Canada, appearing on plat-| Articles, stories and poetry by,
By the spring of 1916 she had|Belgian women in all parts of|forms with such dignitaries as|Mrs. Kellogg have been published

practically given up hope that she|the country except that directly|ex-Presidents Theodore Roosevelt|in Atlantic Monthly, The North

would be allowed to enter occu-|behind the firing line. and Howard Taft, Gen. John|American Review, The Woman's pied B m. She was on a brief! Only Woman |Pershing and others. At*or reskil-|Home Companion, The Ladies'
iday je in Tuolumne Mea-| As the only woman on the com-|@delphiasmeéting-a lone;-a stotabof |Home Journal, Vi 1ington Post, vs with a group which included | mission (a graduate of the Uni-| more titan=$250;000was~raised,|The Saturday vening Post, the late Prof. Joseph LeConte of | versity of California with years of arid=thesover-all.to talveferesponse|Christian Science Monitor and oS | : =: "jae . }

7 har nd x rea ¢ rot numerou ot}

rpublicat

fiable ft leak § is EE ai y 2 a study of con-
Pe 1 > French, I in and Ger neanw e, turning out articles ditior n and Yugoslavia man) Mrs. Kellogg had been as-/for the Atlantic Monthly and other |. harkinge-for the latter country signed a particular task by Hoo- publications. on the first flimsy craft to brosk ver. He was disturbed by the Back to Europe the blockade on the Danube, a trip

way publicity about American aid] She returned to Europe in 1918, which narrowly escaped disaster overshadowed the valiant work of | finding herself in Paris at the|when the boat struck a submerged the Belgians themselves, and had|signing of the Armistice on Nov.|object. Later she accompanied]
delegated Mrs. Kellogg to famil-|11,. She learned that Belgium was/|the U. S. Technical Mission under |
iarize herself with efforts being] not to be freed until Nov. 17, and|Col. William Atwood into Yugothe women of the coun-|her determination to be on hand/|Slavia, getting material for an try and the conditions a mong/for that liberation won her, fin-|article for The Nation's Business.
them toward the 'end of publiciz-|ajly, a permit to travel via Dun-|| On this occasion, when her speing them widely in articles and|kirk to Bruges. cial passport failed to get her speeches. with through, the way was miraculous-|.
ly opened by a letter she carried|'
from Hoover, requesting courtesy|'
and assistance in her travels.

made by

She started out a lone, jinapsack, and by a combination of in trepidity and good luck (on
One occasion hitch-hiking a ride in a Belgian general's private| Back in the United States, Mrs.
car en route to fetch him from|Kellogg was a speaker for the U.
the front) she pushed as far as|S. Food Administration, making|
Brussels, in time for the dramatic|4S Many as 432 addresses in one|
liberty celebration with her Bel-|year. After her husband resigned gian friends. from Stanford to administer The
5s National ,Research Council, the couple made a home in-Washington, D.C., and Mrs. Kellogg campaigned actively for Hoover when}
|he became a presidential candi-|
date. The Saturday Evening Post

During this stay in Belgium,
Mrs. Kellogg began her in tensive study of lace-making, later recorded in her ''Bobbins of Belgium,"' published in 1920 by Funk
& Wagnalls. In that same year Pe :

D. Appleton & Co, published her commissioned her to write the article on President Hoover for

book, "Mercier: The Fighting}... ~~ "al editi
Cardinal." its in augural edition.

World War Il
Following her husband's death, |
Mrs. Kellogg returned for a time|Kellogg were made recipients of|
to Carmel, but at the outbreak of/an impressive list of decorations; loge also received her Polish visa | ort War IZ went back to Wash- for their devoted humanitarian |
and began her investigation of the |'78/°" . to organize the National work. Vernon Kellogg was made}
amazing work of the Polish wom.|G®™ mission for Polish Relief, at/Commander of the Order of the|
ea he request of the Polish Embas-|Crown of Belgium, commander

She directed this or ganiza-|also of the Order of Leopold IZ|
to neiffom New York offices from|and officer and commander of the
1199 until illness forced her to/Order of Polonia Restituta. His|
B iresen hem post in 1948. Wife is Chevalier of the Belgian|
| "Siace that time she has lived/Order of the Crown and an Officer|
quie#y at her home in Carmel/|of the Order of Polonia Restituta. |
Highlands, continuing her writing.| Both were a warded the Medaille|
The Viking Press. plans to bring/Commemorative du Comite Na-|
out next year her latest work, a tional of Belgium. Mrs. Kellogg!
biography Of a gmace sPaderewski,|holds also the Medaille de la|

In 1919, Hoover sent Vernon
|Kellogg to Poland as chief of his ifirst relief mission to that country. After a short wait, Mrs. Kelwho became one of her many|Reine Elizabeth of Belgium the|
'lose fri summer Work|Medaille: Reconnaisance Franwith Polis h RY caise from France, and a certifi-
Between them, Mp and Mrs.\cate from the President of the non , meee. States, commending her|

for "'eminent service in human-|
"ian war relief during World|
War II." i
Kelloge's decorations include}
jthe Gold Medal of Poland, the}
iCross of Gold of Poland and the|
ribbon of Chevalier of the Legion|
of Honor of France.

. Monterey Pentrsls Herald Monday, May 23, 1955

Out For Armed Forces |

(He
Standing in his jeep, Maj. Gen. E. K. Wright (at right) inspects troops of his 6th Division at Fort Ord irday. With

Brig. Gen. Wilbur E. Dunkleberg, assistant division commander who served as commander of troops for the review. Thousands of civilians were on hand for the morning review, a highlight of Fort Ord's Armed Forces Day program Saturday. Troops inspected above are of the 20th Infantry Regiment of the 6th Division.

P...

p Costumes of all nations are displayed during a skit at the Army during a demonstration of in struction in Chinese at the Army Language School program Friday. The Armed Forces Day event
Language School, was for invited guests.

A Polish dance is performed by Army Language School students

Friday. Dancing and singing are important features of in struction

at the ALS since students study the culture as well as the language of a given country.

yer @ modern tank display at Kore i in the 6th Division Review Saturorning.

HE ROO BROINS TIPee Le AND: LIDRAK®

ON WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE

Stanford University
Stanford, California

17 February 1956

Mrs. Charlotte Kellogg
Route 1, Box 1\1
Carmel, California

For most of last year the Hoover Archives and the
Treasure Collections were on a caretaker basis only, because the woman who had served a number of years as archivist died suddenly and it took some time to find her replacement. The new archivist joined the staff last quarter. He will be responsible for the
Herbert Hoover Archives and for the treasures in the Hoover Collections.
A rearrangement is being made of the three floors in use, and a treasure roan is being set a side in the new arrangement where we can display many of the things of the C.R.B. period and later.

You may be sure that we do not consider your lovely cloth a "problem," beyond the always present problem of proper display of delicate things that require careful handling. I think the planning for the treasure room will solve this.

Here is the way the gift was reported for the
Annual Report to the President: "Mrs. Vernon L. Kellogg of Carmel
Highlands in July 1955 added to the Belgian treasures in the Hoover
Collections a beautiful lace banqet cloth which was hand wrought by the grateful women of Belgium as a special *thank you' to Mrs.
Kellogg for her work as the only woman member of the Canmission for
Relief in Belgium in the early years of World War Ie The letter which accompanied the gift, representative of approximately 5,000
lace workers whose industry was kept a live during the war by the international agreement brought about by Mr. Hoover, was signed by various members of the Belgian nobility who headed the country's welfare organizations during the occupatione This letter was included in Mrs. Kellogg's gift." I hope this statement is satisfactory to youe

My best personal wishes to you and your daughter.

Sincerely yours,

Inez Gs Richardson

THE HOOVER LIBRARY ON WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE
STANFORD UNIVERSITY
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA

HERBERT HOOVER ARCHIVES

THE HOOVER LIBRARY ON WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE

STANFORD UNIVERSITY
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA

HERBERT HOOVER ARCHIVES

March 20, 1956

Mrs. Charlotte Kellogg
Route 1, Box 141
Carmel, California

The following were received from you yesterday afternoon:

Vernon Kellogg, 1867-1937 (2 copies)

Germany In the War and After

Headquarters Nights (2 copies - French & English)

Mercier, The Fighting Cardinal of Belgium
Jadwiga, Queen of Poland

12 magazine articles by Vernon Kellogg

20 Ms 4 " Charlotte Kellogg

La Libre Belgique, July-1916 (French ami nglish)
Histoire des or igens fe la "Libre Belgique"

Galley proof of article re Queen Elizabeth, 1919

Broadside - message of Queen Elizabeth

Broadsides (2) re Popular Science Award

Folder re Belgian Lace

Program of Belgian Mission, San Francisco, 1917
"Pencil Rubbing trelief3" of Gold Medal a warded to Vernon Kellogg by Polish Govt., 1919

Pictures (2) re League of Nations Committee on
International Intellectual Cooperation

Photograph - Staff Luncheon, U, S. Food Adm.
July 3, 1918

Pledge card - Calif. Committee for Relief in
Belgium and France

C.R,B,. Pennant

The above-listed items will be retained as a permanent part of the
Herbert Hoover Archives.

I have also received your letter of March 16th. The bibliography of your writings will bevery helpful, and I am pleased to find you were so thorough in dating your articles.

While on the subject of your writings, did you retain the original manuscripts of your published books?

Sincerely yours

a5) ends Map A) ae

Thomas T, Thalken
Archivist

BELGIAN AMERICAN EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION, INc.

ESTABLISHED BY
THE COMMISSION FOR RELIEF IN BELGIUM

HERBERT HOOVER GRAYBAR BUILDING TELEPHONE MURRAY HILL 3-1496
CHAIRMAN 420 LEXINGTON AVENUE
NEW YORK 17,N. Y.

March 23,1956

Dear Charlotte:

Your card of March 20th is herewith its fine news about your gifts to the Hoover Library and that treasure

from Jean also. I know the Chief and

the people there will be pleased.

Yours sincerely,

THE HOOVER INSTITUTE AND LIBRARY
ON WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE

Stanford University, Stanford, California
30 March, 1956

Mrs, Charlotte Kellogg
Route 1, Box 141
Carmel, California

I have just seen the lovely treasure which you sent us,

We are grateful to you and your daughter for being willing to share with many this beautiful necklace which was a gift of special significance for you both,

As Mr, Thalken and Mrs, Richardson have told you,

we have set a side space for a treasure room in which can be displayed some of the presentation pieces which

were given years ago as expressions of the deep-felt gratitude of the people with and for whom you and others

worked so effectively. The room is smaller than we should like for the purpose, but with careful planning we think it can be attractive and certainly interesting,

You may be sure that this lovely miniature will have a featured place, When the room is ready we shall want you and Miss Kellogg to pay us a visit. In the meantime, our sincere appreciation for placing this beautiful piece in our keeping,

Faithfully yours, ZL , a G As 4 a

C. Easton Rothwell
Director

THE HOOV ERVINSTITU TE AND LIBRARY
ON WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE

Stanford University
Stanford, California

March 22, 1956

Miss Jean Kellogg
Route 1, Box 141
Carmel, California

Dear Miss Kellogg?

The Portrait of the child princess, Marie
José, of Belgium arrived this morning. It has been placed in a safe and will remain there until the
Treasure Room, and a suitable display case, are ready.

The great interest in the Treasure Room, shown by you and your mother, is very pleasing to us; and your gifts are deeply appreciated.

Sincerely yours,

Ra 6 Beets pis et ae

Thomas T, Thalken
Archivist

THE HOOVER INSTITUTE AND LIBRARY
ON WAR, REVOLUTION, AND PEACE

Stanford University, Stanford, California

30 March, 1956

Miss Jean Kellogg
Route 1, Box 141
Carmel, California

Dear Miss Kellogg:

You are most unselfish to part with that exquisite miniature of the little Princess Marie Jose of
Belgium, for it represents appreciation expressed in a very personal way to you for the service that

your mother gave so freely to the mothers and

children of Belgium.

We sincerely appreciate the gift, and you may be sure it will have a special place with the treasures of the Hoover Collections.

Faithfully yours, a silaiaameaitien 2 Fhoree
C. Easton Rothwell ah

Director

itive ewots wy
Citizens Committee a %,

Fo r Th e Ho oO vD e r Rep O rl (CITIZENS COMMITTEE FOR REORGANIZATION OF

THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE GOVERNMENT, INC.)

777 FOURTEENTH ST. N.W., WASHINGTON 5, D. C. A, 441 LEXINGTON AVE., NEW YORK 17, N. Y.
Terling 3-4244 MUrray Hill 2-0755

+ ruease ADDRESS REPLY wt

Honorary Chairman
Tue Hon. HERBERT HOOVER

Chairman
Clarence Francis

Chairman, Finance Committee
Colby M. Chester

Treasurer
N, Baxter Jackson

Assistant Treasurer
Keith M. Urmy

Executive Vice Chairman
Charles B. Coates

Research Consultant Mrs. Vernon Kellogg
Robert L. L. McCormick Route HL
Vice Chairmen Box Vy

ot Ne R. Blyth Ca rmel California
. B. (Jack) Garrett b )

B. E. Hutchinson

Frank P. Leslie

Julian S. Myrick .
eee fen Dear Mrs. Kellogg:
Allen Rushton

Freeman Strickland

yeepneees: Thanks very much for the delightful anecdote about

Tracy S. Voorhees

Mele ha Mr. Hoover and your daughter. It is just the
Board of Directors kind of thing we need to show what a kind, human

Charles Dana Bennett

E. LaMar Buckner person Mr. Hoover is and we are glad to add it

ee to our collection. As you know, it will end up
Willian E, Cotter in the Hoover Library at Stanford.

General William J. Donovan

Ferdinand Eberstadt

James A. Farley Sincerely yours,

Clarence Francis

Clinton S. Golden

Richard J. Gray ,
Robert Heller e

John B. Hollister

Solomon C. Hollister

ah Robert L. Johnson ie
Henry Kearns 4 5 =
Mrs. Oswald B. Lord Neil MacNeil it :
Neil MacNeil

Roswell Magill

Sidney A. Mitchell

Admiral Ben Moreell

Herschel D. Newsom

Dr. Fred D. Patterson

Neil Petree

Stanley Resor

Capt. Edward V. Rickenbacker

Wallace H. Savage

Joseph P. Spang

Steve Stahl

Robert G. Stores

John Stuart

Advisory Board

Warren R. Austin
Colgate W. Darden, Jr
Charles Edison

Henry Ford II

John N. Garner
Lessing J. Rosenwald
Dr. Robert G. Sproul
Anna Lord Strauss
Charles E. Wilson
Harry H. Woodring

@ A VOLUNTARY BIPARTISAN ORGANIZATION FOR PUBLIC
EDUCATION IN SUPPORT OF FEDERAL REORGANIZATION

Contributions are deductible for federal in come tax purposes

On the Stanford Campus hill when Herbert and Lou Hoover lived next to Vernon and Charlotte Kellogg, Herbert saw a little girl scampering a eross the rough open fields after along-eared white Rabbit. He quickly transferred the name 'Rabbit': to Jean. He calls her'Rabbit' today.

In the fall of 1938 the New York Ferargil Galleries announced a one-man exhibition of oils and water-colors by Jean Kellogg. She had prepared for college in Washington D.C. where she lived again practically next door to the Hoovers. During the World War Vernon Kellogg worked almost continuously with Herbert hoover and then followed closely his

years as President of the United States.

Vernen died in 1937.

Ferargil announced the exhibition during a depression period that had threatened to end all sales for paintings. But when Mrs. Bayard
Cutting came as friend and hostess, to preside, she brought with her all the eclat of New York's golden days. There were masses of flowers, vases and helpers, to make sure that arrangements were perfect.

On the Gpening day I was standing not far from the entrance.
Suddenly a group of men entered, one, in the lead. He moved directly toward Jean. "I've come to see the pictures Rabbit- you show them

to me,i"

Amidst the stir and excitement Jean and her friend went from canvas to canvas, then stopped longer before a large marine- a grey sea off Point Lobos. The group that had accompanied Mr. Hoover stepped forward, snapped their photograph s.It appeared the next morning in the New York Times above the caption,

a

" Two Californians Looking at a Picture."

o

No personal publicity. But Herbert Hoover understood fully the

value of this personal presentation.

Thevery next day the Director of a neighboring gallery hurried in to thank Ferargil for a great "Success"; for having broken through their gloom.

How many stories have been told to explain the never-failing rememberance, the unceasing effort, the generosity, of Hoover friendship?

But who could tell more than 'Rabbit'?

Lda HE Ke 10? Sg

Christmas Message
FORMER pistineats HERBERT HOOVER

We approach this Christmas day with the tide of a theism rising to more violence than.at any time since, the Sermon on the Mount.

This Christmas should be a rally of all the religious faiths to preserve the minds of mankind from degradation. All faiths are in danger - Christian, Jewish, the teachings of Buddha and Mohammed.
Now is the Armageddon between faith in

a Supreme Being and materialistic a gnosticism.'

At Christmas time, those of us of the
Christian faiths will renew our courage and determination that moral victory can yet come to mankind. This is the season, too, when we renew the pledges of. our charity to the helpless and needy. We assemble our children in happy. meetings, with the traditions of the Star of Bethlehem, the Christmas tree. and Santa Claus.
Families are reunited, friendships are renewed.

The hunger fer peace lies deep in the human heart, and we can hope and pray that the mandate of Christ will not be

by the forces of evil.

"nd.

silo

res
§ Must

Mistletoe

Tinsel

A Proposal For Greater Safety
For America

The Assurance That We Are Not in the Decline and Fall of the American Way of Life

Address by
HERBERT HOOVER

Dedication of the
Herbert Hoover Presidential Library
August 10, 1962

hen the members of the

Congress created these
Presidential Libraries they did a great public service. They made available for research the records of vital periods in
American history - and they planted these records in the countryside instead of allowing their concentration on the seaboard.

Already the three libraries of President Roosevelt, President Truman, and President
Eisenhower, by their unique documentation, serve this purpose, and today we dedicate a fourth - my own.

Within them are thrilling records of supreme action by the American people, their devotion and sacrifice to their ideals.

Santayana rightly said:
"Those who do not remember the past are condemned to relive it." These institutions are the repositories of such experience - hot off the griddle.

In these records there are, no doubt, unfavorable remarks made by our political opponents, as well as expressions

of appreciation and affection by our friends.

We may hope that future students will rely upon our friends. In any event, when they become sleepy they may be a wakened by the lightning flashes of American political humor.

A Proposal for Greater
Safety for America

It is exactly 88 years since I first came to Iowa. Since that visit, I have seen much of peoples, of governments, of their institutions, and of human woes. I can count fifty nations with which I had something to do. I was not a tourist; I worked with their people. In my professional years I brought to them American technology with its train of greater productivity and better living. In two wars I served a midst famine. And in the warshattered aftermath, I directed reconstruction in many nations. I have worked with great spiritual leaders and with great statesmen. I have lived under governments of free men,

of kings and dictators, and under Fascism and Communism.

Uppermost in the minds and prayers of the plain people everywhere was that war should cease and that peace would come to the world. They treasured a confidence that America would maintain freedom and that we would cooperate to bring peace to all mankind.

During my long years, I have participated in many world negotiations, which we hoped would promote peace. Today we have no peace.

From all this experience and now as the shadows gather around me, I may be permitted to make an observation and to offer a course of action.

Leaders of mankind have for centuries sought some form of or ganization which would assure lasting peace. The last of many efforts is the United
Nations.

The time has come in our national life when we must make a new appraisal of this organization.

But first, let me say that I have, in all my of ficial life

believed in a world organization for peace. I supported the
League of Nations when it was unpopular. I went down to defeat when, as President, I urged the Senate to join the
World Court. I urged the ratification of the United Nations
Charter by the Senate. But I stated at that time, "The American people should be under no illusions that the Charter assures lasting peace."

But now we must realize that the United Nations has failed to give us even a remote hope of lasting peace. Instead, it adds to the dangers of wars which now surround us.

The disintegrating forces in the United Nations are the
Communist nations in its membership.

The Communist leaders, for forty years, have repeatedly asserted that no peace can come to the world until they have overcome the free nations.
One of their fundamental methods of expanding Communism over the earth is to provoke conflict, hostility and

hate a mong other nations. One of the proofs that they have never departed from these ideas is that they have, about one hundred times, vetoed proposals in the Security Council which would have lessened international conflict. They daily threaten free nations with war and destruction.

In sum, they have destroyed the usefulness of the United
Nations to preserve peace.

When Woodrow Wilson launched the League of Nations, he said:

"A steadfast concert for peace can never be maintained except by a partnership of democratic nations. No autocratic government could be trusted to keep faith within it or observe its covenants."

More unity a mong free nations has been urged by
President Truman, President
Eisenhower, and President
Kennedy. In cooperation with far-seeing statesmen in other free nations, five regional

treaties or pacts have been set up for mutual defense. And there are bilateral agreements a mong other free nations to give military support to each other in case of attack. Within these agreements are more than forty free nations who have pledged themselves to fight against aggression.

Today, the menace of Communism has become worldwide.

The time is here when, if the free nations are to survive, they must have a new and stronger world-wide organization. For purposes of this discussion I may call it the
"Council of Free Nations." It should include only those who are willing to stand up and fight for their freedom.

The foundations for this organization have already been laid by the forty nations who have taken pledges in the five regional pacts to support each other against aggression. And there are others who should join.

I do not suggest that the
Council of Free Nations re-

-

place the United Nations.
When the United Nations is prevented from taking action, or if it fails to act to preserve peace, then the Council of Free
Nations should step in.

Some may in quire where the offices of such an or ganization should be. Fortunately, there are ample buildings in the

world's most accepted neutral nation. Geneva has been the

scene of great accomplishments in peace until poisoned by the
Communists and the Fascists.

Although the analogy of the
Concert of Europe formed in
1814 is not perfect, yet, with much less unity and authority, it fended off world war for a hundred years.

Some organized Council of
Free Nations is the remaining hope for peace in the world.

The Assurance That We Are
Not in the Decline and Fall of the American Way of Life

Another subject lies heavily on American minds today. Our people are deeply troubled, not only about the turbulent world around us but also with internal

problems which haunt our days and nights. There are many despairing voices. There are many undertones of discouragement. The press headlines imply that corruption, crime, divorce, youthful delinquency and Hollywood love trysts are our national occupations.

And amid all these voices there is a cry that the American way of life is on its way to decline and fall.

I do not believe it.

Perhaps amid this din of voices and headlines of gloom,
I may say something about the inner forces from which come the strengths of America. They assure its future and its continued service to mankind.

The mightiest assurances of our future are the in tangible spiritual and intellectual forces in our people, which we express, not by the words The United
States, but by the word America. That word America carries meanings which lie deep in the soul of our people. It reaches far beyond the size of cities and factories. It springs from our religious faith, our ideals of

individual freedom and equal opportunity, which have come in the centuries since we landed on these shores. It rises from our pride in great accomplishments of our nation and from the sacrifices and devotion of those who have passed on. It lifts us above the ugliness of the day. It has guided us through even greater crises in our past. And from these forces, solutions will come again.

This representative government, with its 186 years of life, has lasted longer than any other great republic in history.

If you look about, you will see the steeples of tens of thousands of places of worship.
Each week a hundred million people come to reaffirm their faith.

If you will look, you will find that the Bill of Rights is an enforced law of the land; that the dignity of man and equality of opportunity more nearly survive in this land than in any other on earth.

If you look, you will also find that from our educational

system there comes every year a host of stimulated minds.
They bring new scientific discoveries, new inventions, and new ideas. It is true that they revolutionize our daily lives.
But we can readily adjust ourselves and our government to them without the assistance of
Karl Marx.

I could go on and on reciting the mighty forces in American life which assure its progress and its durability.

Perhaps on this occasion it would not be immodest or in appropriate for me to cite my own life as proof of what
America brings to her children.

As a boy of ten, I was taken from this village to the
Far West seventy-eight years ago. My only material assets were two dimes in my pocket, the suit of clothes I wore. I had some extra underpinnings provided by loving aunts.

But I carried from here something more precious.

I had a certificate of the fourth or fifth grade of higher learning.

I had a stern grounding of religious faith.

I carried with me recollections of a joyous childhood, where the winter snows and the growing crops of Iowa were an especial provision for kids.

And I carried with me the family disciplines of hard work.
That included picking potato bugs at ten cents a hundred.
Incidentally, that money was used for the serious purpose of buying firecrackers to applaud the Founding Fathers on each
Fourth of July.

And in conclusion, may I say to the boys and girls of
America that the doors of opportunity are still open to you. Today the durability of freedom is more secure in
America than in any place in the world.

May God bring you even more great blessings.

HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY

WEST BRANCH, IOWA

THE COVER

The cover depicts the Presidential Seal as it appears above the entrance of the Presidential Library Building. This
Seal existed between 1880 and '1945, including the Administration of President Hoover, and shows the eagle facing the war weapons in its talons. In 1945, the eagle's head was turned to face over its right shoulder toward the olive branch of peace.

Ee

a}

Photo by Philippe Halsman

|
|
HERBERT HOOVER, 88
|

THE HERBERT HOOVER LIBRARY
AND THE PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY SYSTEM

The Herbert Hoover Library at West Branch, Iowa, is a Presidential Library operated by the National
Archives and Records Service of the General Services Administration as a part of the national archives system. At present there are three other Presidential Libraries in operation under the direction of the
Archivist of the United States: the Dwight D. Eisenhower Library at Abilene, Kansas; the Harry S.
Truman Library at Independence, Missouri; and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library at Hyde Park, New York.

Presidential Libraries are a relatively new addition to the Nation's archival institutions. For 166 years there was no systematic provision made for the preservation of the papers of the Presidents. Consequently many were lost, dispersed, or destroyed. Others were preserved, often by mere chance, and some, although preserved virtually in tact, were long not available for research use. Yet almost from the birth of the Republic it was recognized that Presidential papers formed an important part of our national heritage. Why, then, were they not systematically preserved from the outset as a part of the Nation's archives?

In the United States, the Office of the President is a constitutional office having a separate and in dependent status in the governmental system. Every President since Washington has considered that this status extended to the papers of his office - that they were personal property during and after his administration.
So from Washington on Presidents have taken their papers with them when they left office - or, if they died in office, their heirs took over the papers.

Congress, recognizing that the Government and the people had a vital interest in Presidential papers, appropriated considerable sums of money during the 19th Century to purchase the papers of our earliest Presidents. These were eventually deposited in the Library of Congress, which by gift or purchase, also managed to acquire substantial quantities of the papers of 19 later Presidents from Van Buren to Coolidge.

In recent times, the volume of papers accumulated by a President while in office has in creased so greatly that the space required for their safekeeping has multiplied many times over. The combined papers of
Presidents Washington, Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe now in the Library of Congress, for example, comprise only about 75,000 manuscript "items." The papers of the Adams family in the Massachusetts Historical Society, including those of two Presidents and spanning a period of two and one-half centuries, number some 275,000 manuscript pages - the equivalent of about 75 modern file cabinet drawers. In contrast, the papers of Franklin D. Roosevelt would fill some 2500 drawers; Harry S. Truman, 1600 drawers; and Dwight D. Eisenhower, 2000 or more. In addition to papers, modern Presidents accumulate thousands of printed items - personal libraries, in effect - and countless gifts and mementoes, many of which have great cultural or commemorative value. It is no accident, therefore, that the concept of the Presidential Library has appealed to our recent Presidents.

Presidential Libraries within the national archives system were made possible when Congress, with bipartisan support and without dissenting vote, passed the Presidential Libraries Act of 1955. This legislation authorizes the Government to accept as gifts to the Nation the papers of any President or former President of the United States and buildings, privately financed and constructed, to house them. It also designates the
National Archives and Records Service of the General Services Administration to operate such libraries as

,

EGGERS AWD HIGGINS ~ ARCHITECTS

THE COMPLETED PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY

President Hoover offered his public papers and related historical materials to the United States as a gift in
December 1960. On the same date, the Herbert Hoover Birthplace Foundation, Inc., which had raised funds for and supervised the construction of a Hoover Library at West Branch, offered the building, equipment, and grounds to the Federal Government as a gift. The Hoover birthplace cottage and other structures in the
28-acre Hoover Park were included in the gift. Congress authorized the acceptance of the gifts in March,
1962.

The nucleus of the Hoover Library's holdings is, of course, the large collection of papers accumulated by
Mr. Hoover during his long years of public service - especially while he was Secretary of Commerce, President of the United States, and later, as Chairman of the First and Second Commissions on the Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government (the Hoover Commissions). They do not include, however, the President's notable collection of ""war and peace" documents which he earlier gave to Leland Stanford
University at Palo Alto, California.

It is anticipated that the Hoover papers will be supplemented to the extent possible by gifts of personal papers deposited by leading associates and contemporaries or by the acquisition of microfilm copies of such papers when not available to the Library in or iginal manuscript form. The Hoover and related papers will be further supplemented by the President's collection of books and memorabilia.

The President's memorabilia include a wide variety of items associated with his long and distinguished career. Among them are the desk, chair, flags, and associated items he used in the White House; unique, interesting, and significant mementoes pertaining to historic events in which he participated; countless to kens of esteem and thanks presented to him on behalf of the millions of grateful men, women and especially children, whom he saved from starvation by his relief work in years of war and peace; objects d'art presented to or acquired by him during his travels; and evidences of all kinds reflecting his life-long devotion to the public service. Many of these are on display in the Library's exhibit galleries.

The Library building is a compact, one-story stone structure of some 6,000 square feet, designed by the architectural firm of Eggers and Higgins of New York and the associate architects Wetherell-Harrison-
Wagner of Des Moines in consultation with President Hoover and the Foundation. Contractor was the
Viggo M. Jensen Company of Iowa City. Appropriately situated adjacent to the birthplace cottage in beautifully landscaped, well-kept Hoover Park, it in cludes exhibit galleries, a handsomely-paneled but simply furnished "library room," staff offices, and stacks for storage of papers, books, and mementoes. Completion of high-speed Interstate Highway 80 east and west from Iowa City, with its exit at West Branch, will make the Library easily accessible to to urists, as well as scholars.

In accordance with current plans, the present building will shortly be expanded to in clude two additional tiers of stacks, a commodious research room, a small auditorium, a photographic laboratory, and several more staff and work areas. This addition will be to the West of the building now standing, and will be of
9,000 square feet. The Foundation, in consultation with President Hoover, Eggers and Higgins, and
Wetherell-Harrison-Wagner, will supervise construction of the addition which, upon completion, will operate with the help of the National Archives and Records Service as an integral part of the properties given to the
Government by the Foundation in 1960. The original structure will then be devoted almost exclusively to museum displays.

WORK ROOM
242" x 15)

=

FILEROOM =2
154 x 366

FILEROOM #1
154 x 548

FLOOR PLAN - FIRST SECTION

GALLERY
242° x 52

STACK ROOM
196" x 38'5

BOILER
ROOM
8 x 124

OFFICE
188 x 109

le

CORRIDOR |

GALLERY
56 x 242

ENTRANCE
LIBRARY 242° x 28
23° x 18'2

CLOSET CLOSET

The Presidential desk. Mr. Hoover was the first y President to have a telephone on his desk.

te ie renee A display of some of Mr. Hoover's

peel) ayy) : personal items.

7 aa i

The book sent to Mr. Hoover in 192:
of grateful children in Lodz, Polar fed by one of the Hoover Food

The "library-room" set up for a conference.

Ss

=
=, bea)

= oe - -

nel oF eat N as a
& 3. e
% gee

~"2

A few of the many embroidered and painted flour sacks that Mr. Hoover received from the European people in thanks for his work on the American Commissions.

r. Hoover in 1921, bearing the names en in Lodz, Poland, who had been the Hoover Food Commissions.

Photos on these pages courtesy of the Des Moines REGISTER

THE PARK

The Herbert Hoover Birthplace Park is located in West Branch, Iowa, a small town of some 800 population ten miles east of Iowa City, site of the State University, 25 miles south of Cedar Rapids, and 135 miles east of
Des Moines, the State Capital.

Development of the Park by the people of West Branch began in the 1930's, after Mr. Hoover had visited
West Branch as a candidate for the Presidency in 1928, and after he had visited there several times after he left the White House. The two-room cottage, which had been converted into a kitchen for a local home, and in which the future President was born on August 10, 1874, was acquired. A small tract of land was then obtained for the statue of Isis, the Egyptian Goddess of plenty, which was given to Mr. Hoover in the early
1920's by the people of Belgium in appreciation of his relief work for them during the First World War.
In the decade that followed, additional land was acquired; trees planted; a caretaker's home established; a shelter-house was built by contributions from the Boy Scouts of the area; the restored blacksmith shop, operated by Jesse Hoover, Mr. Hoover's father, was constructed in 1957 from material taken from a nearby barn, built at about the time of the shop, 1871; and the Presidential Library was completed in 1962.

The Park has two main entrances, one for automobiles leading to the back space of the Park; the other leading to the cottage and blacksmith shop. The gate of the latter entrance is of pergola design, and within it is the large bronze plaque given to Mr. Hoover in 1951 as an especially-created "Iowa Award."

The Park itself is of 28 acres, rectangular in shape, and is cut diagonally by the west branch of the Wapsinonoc Creek, hence the name "West Branch." The area is level along the little stream, with a swell toward the south and west as the ground rises to a hill. Willow trees grow beside the creek, and several hundred trees, set out as the Park was developed, lend their beauty to the rest of the Park.

In the extreme northeast corner of the Park, on location almost exactly that of the original structures, stand the cottage and blacksmith shop. The interior of the cottage mirrors the time of the President's birth, and thousands of visitors go through the cottage each year to see the household items of a time gone by.
The blacksmith shop is filled with old-time objects and tools, making it a small museum for the middle west.
Nestled in a bower of evergreens on the bank of the creek, across a small mall, facing the cottage, sits the statue of Isis. The Presidential Library, situated in the eastern portion of the Park, and the Boy Scout shelterhouse in the northern part of the Park complete its grounds.

* * * * *

The Park was acquired by the Birthplace Society, a local and regional organization formed in 1939. This society made the birthplace cottage available to the public.

The Foundation was formed in 1954, and it and the Society co-operated in handling the Park, notably in restoring the blacksmith shop of Mr. Hoover's father.

In the late 1950's the two organizations merged, and now operate as the Herbert Hoover Birthplace Foundation, Inc., a non-profit corporation with nearly 100 trustees in various parts of the United States, of whom
Chairman is Admiral Lewis L. Strauss of Washington, D.C., former Secretary to Mr. Hoover, and President is William B. Anderson of West Branch.

The Herbert Hoover Birthplace Cottage as seen through the door of the Blacksmith Shop.

$i ' anemia
 - = rs

: Rsmith Shop operated by Jesse Toover.

oma, We

The Park, showing the' small footbridge ac¥oss .the
Wapsinonoc Creek, and Isis, Goddess of Plenty.

ts Oe 2

a Se OE aie ce.
ets DNs ¥

Sag Fi

ae

HERBERT HOOVER BIRTHPLACE FOUNDATION, INC.

OFFICERS
Oy 0Te UT gan  eee ae een CRA eo Se Ea HONORABLE LEWIS L. STRAUSS Vice President. s5-. <2 sce csscctscshccees bay est 1s (V0 ni seer ce ee a es WILLIAM B. ANDERSON "RGRSUTEN esse. ccneeenet a eee ears oat
Nice-Presigenty 225s. cn et ROBERT K. GOODWIN Assistant Treasurer ...............:...0:.0008
IV 1G PORIG GING 2 ocosoepcnccettcsathedesnsteackes ALLAN HOOVER OCHO CATV is ete cace vases receererstesteke ses
ASSISTANE: SSCCTOUALY) se vackesiv. a vcctasscentesaviv eeteetana HEDO M. ZACHERLE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
CRAELIE Ny NAN ae< eac osc oton Sette ccnayeceagease tases oskeecs FRED MAYTAG II Vice a sriniatt. ier ccee ten tets nc ese
WILLIAM B. ANDERSON HERBERT HOOVER, JR.
RALPH EVANS NEIL MAC NEIL
REGINALD FIGGE HANFORD MAC NIDER
FRANKLIN G. FLOETE A. C. MATTEI
GEORGE C. FOERSTNER GEORGE NAGLE
ROBERT K. GOODWIN VINCENT STARZINGER
HOWARD HALL LEWIS L. STRAUSS
DR. VIRGIL M. HANCHER DR. ROBERT C. SWAIN
WALTER HARNISCHFEGER DE WITT WALLACE

ALLAN HOOVER HEDO M. ZACHERLE

HERBERT HOOVER, JR.
REGINALD FIGGE
FLOYD FAWCETT

VINCENT STARZINGER

JOHN M. HENRY

BOARD OF TRUSTEES

MRS. GEORGE AKERSON
398 Linden Street, Wellesley Hills, Mass.
BEN S. ALLEN
Point Lakeview, Lower Lake, Calif.
WILLIAM B. ANDERSON
EDWARD ANTHONY
444 East 52 Street, New York, N. Y.
HONORABLE WILBER M. BRUCKER
Penobscott Building, Detroit 26, Michigan
DR. L. R. CHANDLER
Stanford University Hospital, San Francisco, Calif.
ARTHUR A. COLLINS
President, Collins Radio Co., 855 35th St., N.E., Cedar Rapids, Iowa
JUDGE JAMES D. COONEY
President, Wilson & Co., Inc., Prudential Plaza, Chicago, Illinois
GARDNER COWLES
488 Madison Avenue, New York, N. Y.
ARTHUR A. CURTICE
630 Fifth Avenue, Room 1516, New York, N. Y.
J. DOYLE DE WITT
President, The Travelers Insurance Company, 700 Main Street, Hartford 15, Conn.
SUTHERLAND DOWS
Chairman of the Board, Iowa Electric Light and Power Co.,
Cedar Rapids, Iowa
NORTHCUTT ELY
Ely, Duncan & Bennett, Tower Building, Washington, D. C.
RALPH EVANS
1135 East Central Park Ave., Davenport, Iowa
FLOYD FAWCETT
REGINALD FIGGE
Room 1130, Merchants National Bank Bldg., Cedar Rapids, Iowa
FRANKLIN G. FLOETE
P. O. Box 14, Osterville, Mass.
GEORGE C. FOERSTNER
Amana Refrigeration Co., Amana, Iowa
PERRIN C. GALPIN
975 Esplanade, Pelham Manor, New York
ROBERT K. GOODWIN
Central National Building, Des Moines, Iowa
GENERAL LESLIE R. GROVES
Dellwood Road, Darien, Conn.
FRED G. GURLEY
President, The Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway System, 80 East Jackson Blvd.,
Chicago 4, Illinois
HOWARD HALL
Iowa Manufacturing Company, Cedar Rapids, Iowa
DR. VIRGIL M. HANCHER
State University of lowa, lowa City, Iowa
WALTER HARNISCHFEGER
4400 West National Ave., Milwaukee, Wis.
H. J. HEINZ, JR.
H. J. Heinz Co., Pittsburgh, Pa.
JOHN M. HENRY
3901 S. W. 31st, Des Moines, Iowa
CHRISTIAN A. HERTER
150 E. 42 Street, New York 17, N. Y.
JOHN B. HOLLISTER . :
603 Dixie Terminal Building, Cincinnati, Ohio
ALLAN HOOVER
Room 2325, 420 Lexington Ave., New York, N. Y.
HERBERT HOOVER, JR. 3
Statler Center Building, 900 Wilshire Blvd., Los Angeles 17, Calif.
CHARLES F. HORNER
6233 Howe Drive, Mission, Kansas
ROY W. HOWARD
230 Park Ave., New York, N. Y.
PATRICK J. HURLEY
301 Hillside Avenue, Santa Fe, N. M.
B. E. HUTCHINSON
1580 National Bank Building, Detroit 26, Mich.

H. V. KALTENBORN

167 East 64th Street, New York, N. Y.
CLARENCE B. KELLAND

Port Washington, Long Island, N. Y.
NEIL MAC NEIL

3100 Chrysler Building, New York, N. Y.
eo = NIDER

Yorthwestern States Portland Cement Co., Mason City, Iow:

FRANK E. MASON ah

3100 Chrysler Building, 405 Lexington Ave., New York, N. Y.
A. C. MATTEI

215 Market Street, San Francisco, Calif.
GEORGE NAGLE

Nagle Lumber Co., Box 230, Iowa City, Iowa
FRED MAYTAG II j

The Maytag Company, Newton, Iowa
M. M. MEYERS

Insurance Building, Omaha, Nebraska
JEREMIAH MILBANK

44 Wall Street, New York, N. Y.
LESLIE MILLER

325 Hynds Building, Cheyenne, Wyoming
SIDNEY A. MITCHELL

36 E. 72nd Street, New York, N. Y.
RAYMOND MOLEY

120 East End Avenue, New York, N. Y.
FELIX MORLEY

Gibson Island, Maryland
W. C. MULLENDORE

Chairman, Southern California Edison Co., P.O. Box 351, Los Angeles 53, Calif.
MAURICE PATE

Union League Club, 37th and Park Ave., New York, N. Y.
EDGAR M. QUEENY

1700 South Second Street, St. Louis, Mo.
L. C. RUMMELLS

First State Bank, West Branch, Iowa
EDWIN P. SHATTUCK

42 Broadway, New York, N. Y.
GEORGE E. SOKOLSKY

300 West End Ave., New York, N. Y.
HARRISON SPANGLER

Public Service Building, Portland 4, Oregon
VINCENT STARZINGER

715 Locust Street, Des Moines, Iowa
J. E. WALLACE STERLING

Stanford University. Stanford, Calif.
HONORABLE LEWIS L. STRAUSS

Mercury Bldg., 1925 K. Street, N. W. Washington, D. C.
R. DOUGLAS STUART

345 Merchandise Mart, Chicago, Ill.
DR. ROBERT C. SWAIN

859 Berdan Ave., Wayne, New Jersey
ROBERT TAFT, JR.

603 Dixie Terminal Building, Cincinnati, Ohio
LOWELL THOMAS

Pawling, N. Y.
JOHN THOMPSON

WILLIAM HALLAM TUCK

Perrywood, Upper Marlborough, Maryland
WILLIAM J. WAGNER

500 Hubbell Building, Des Moines, Iowa
DE WITT WALLACE

Reader's Digest, Pleasantville, N. Y.
GENERAL A. C. WEDEMEYER

Rheem Manufacturing Company, 477 Madison Ave., New York, N. Y.
CHARLES WHITE

Republic Building, Cleveland, Ohio
MRS. GILES WHITING

740 Park Avenue, New York, N. Y.
HEDO M. ZACHERLE

715 Locust Street, Des Moines, Iowa

This brochure was prepared by the Herbert Hoover Birthplace Foundation, Inc.

J HOOVER INSTITUTION

GIN IW TAG Re ee Re Ee Ve @ple aU) slegll Oo eAg INP mse an a nats

Cs Bs ie

my Po |

OPINION PAGE

Background and Interpretation of the News

Honterev Peninsula Uerald

Monterey, California, Friday, October 23, 1964. 34
ALLEN GRIFFIN ARTHUR Jr.
President and Publisher
TED DUREIN R. B. GIFFORD
Manacine Editor Business Manager

There Goes That Great

%

Sedertnece

© 144, Chicago's Americ:

Liberal and Magnanimous

- __..

Samaritan

Hoover In Retrospect

It is hard to recapture for those who did not know Herbert Hoover during the first World
War the brilliance of his reputation and the personal fascination of the man.

The nation had entered the war reluctantly and resentfully. The American people were predominantly isolationist, believing that our ramparts were the two oceans, and there were pacifists and they hated war.

C n ENLLO ) "
war, had in fact intervened spectacularly long before Woodrow Wilson felt himself forced to ask
Congress for a declaration of war.

Hoover had intervened by the gallant enterprise of saving the Belgian people during the German occupation. This struck a deep response in a nation which realized that neutrality was in glorious and probably impossible, but yet recoiled at the butchery.

*

cLol

*

When this country entered the war, Hoover was already a legendary figure. He was also an entrancing talker. Many felt, as I did, that they had never met a more interesting man,anyone who knew so much of the world and could expound so clearly what to almost all Americans in 1917
were the in scrutable mysteries of European politics.

When the war ended in
1918 and the presidential election of 1920 began to take shape, Hoover was the first choice of nearly

es ae pv etchar

By WALTER LIPPMANN

all the Wilsonian idealists, of the progressives and liberals in both parties. Destiny had marked him, I have always thought, to be the natural heir of Woodrow Wilson, and in fact he was launched into national politics by men who belonged to Wilson's following.

He chose, however, to declare himself a Republican, and this decision, which brought him to the presidency eight years later, opened up a breach

h the pros iv 2 i liberals. it was deepened and envenomed by the
1932 campaign, and it was not until much later in his life that the breach was healed, thanks to the initiative of President Harry
Truman.

At a time like this it would be foolish to attempt to anticipate the verdict of history. But those, of us who knew
Hoover during his public career may, perhaps, allow ourselves a few reflections. I would venture to say that for the disaster which engulfed him in the White House Hoover was in no way responsible.

In the 1920s when the great repression was brewing, there was no one, no politician or financier, who had any clear idea as to how the world should be reconstructed after a devastating war.
It was then normal, though almost no one remembered it, that in modern history a- great war is followed by a great crash.

We a voided such a crash after the second
World War because we had so well learned the lessons of the first World
War. So far as I know,
Hoover himself never accepted the tenets of the modern school of monetary and fiscal management which are applied in all advanced countries today.

om % "

But it is an in teresting historical fact that as president he adopted pragmatically vir tually all the main principles of the early years of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal.
The reader will find th basic test for this

accepting the Re nomination on Aug. 11,
1932.

Writing three years later in the light of the unfolding New Deal program, I ventured to say that Hoover's 'historic position as a radical innovator has been greatlyunderestimated and. .
Mr. Roosevelt's pioneering has been greatly exaggerated.

It s Mr. Hoover who abandoned the principles

of laissez-faire in relation to the business cycle, established the conviction that prosperity and depression can be publicly controlled by political action and drove out of the public consciousness the old idea that depressions must be overcome by
"private adjustment.''
In the 1932 speech of acceptance, Mr. Hoover said that ''the function of the federal government in these times is to use its reserve powers and its

P¢
strength "for the protec- - "s7i

tion CILIZCUS. cdibG dO governments by support to our institutions against forces beyond their control.''

Hoover's recovery program included a deliberate policy of in flating the base of credit, the use of government credit to supplement the deficiency of private credit, reduction of the normal expenses of government but an in crease of the extraordinary expenditures - the expansion of public works in order to create employment; the assumption by the federal government of the ultimate responsiblity for relief of destitution where local or private resources were in adequate. This in crease was not to be covered by taxation, but by deficit financing.

+ .

While Hoover is remembered now as a great objector to the course of affairs since 1932, this was, I believe, the effect of his disastrous accident in 1929 - his being run over by the Great Depression. His negativism was not in harmony with his generous, liberal and magnanimous nature.

In the field of war and peace, however, Herbert
Hoover remained true to his original nature, that of the bold and brilliant philantrophist who binds up wounds and a voids inflicting them. Hoover fed the defeated Germans, and though he hated communism he fed the Bol-
S

te of all of never believed in rica as é with milit litical comn ents
Ce . He and, insc far as his beliefs could be reconciled with his duties as president and commander-in-chief, he was a conscientious objector.

I remember him affectionately. Thus. in 1928
when he was nominated for president, I sent him

'ratulations and good rishes. He replied to me at my office in the New
York World, which was supporting Gov Smith, that "I do not expect you to love me publicly until after November."'

<+ yn

seocpcst oct

ir t

tt is pq
Ir

in ze

tha ou pe

Television

SHonterey Veninsula Werald soos, specie

MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA, FRIDAY, OCTOBER 23, 1964. FOURTH SECTION - 33

California Hospital Service Office
Assn. Elects Tonkin

'Helps Veterans

(Herald photo)

' Navy Day Tactics

Rear Adm. Charles K. Bergin, superintendent of the U.S. Naval Postgraduate
School, demonstrates to Navy League members J. O. Tostevin (center), and John ancy, chairman of Navy Day program, Navy precision in lining up the setting

r the Oct. 29 dinner. The public is in vited to the Navy Day observance at which
Vice Adm. P. D. Stroop, commander of U.S. Naval Forces Air, Pacific, will be featured speaker. Reservations at $4.50 per person may be made through the

.| Navy League office, 375-3141, or tickets may be purchased at the door. The dinner
| will be held in the Bali Room at NPGS.

ool='Pleads Guilty"
jong poets GUMyYe™ - - ™ Monterey Police Harassed and|Carrying Loaded Gun

|. Terrance B. Heain of 7 By q String of Burglaries

Hitchcock Rd., Carmel Valto-|ley, yesterday pleaded A rash of burglaries was| Victims were William T.|
ar's|guilty in Monterey Munici-|reported to Monterey po-|Archer of Santa Fe Springs en-|pal Court to a charge of |lice Wednesday and yester-|and Guy C. Martin of Las onal having a loaded firearm in |4@y. Vegas, Nev., staying at the the his car. At 3 a.m : pueotnads fhe: pa "or a gian H.
roup | . at | James Cok ack ane oO 5 aul, inn.

bnds|in the rear of Heath's car|C@Sh had been stolen from | den Motel.
Archer reported the los

par-| which was parked at 1261 his room at the Serra Howill| 9th St. itel, Tyler and Del Monte. [of a $2 pair of sunglasse bund Wednesday, police were | Martin lost $300 worth qd

tter- told that someone had en- clothing and a revolvd

vy the New Donner Highway tered the St. John's Chap- while Kane reported thé b Pa- el at Fremont and Sylvan theft of an $80 movie pro ach- DONNER SUMMIT iroad and taken $7.50. jector
(UPI) - A new four-lane| Three burglaries of auto-|__ Moye? S~ gers Sa kses, highway over Donner Sum-| mobiles parked at Munras and|mit in the Sierra will bej/a venue motels were rebh k e|dedicated Nov. 1. 'ted Wednesday.
ert on ars > <= : SST Es LTE aT

hly}

on REMINDER

Standard Time returns October 25th at 2 A.M.

don'tforget to set your watch back one hour

DATE-DIAt,
SEAMASTER DEVILLE nnu- $120 TO $460
own |

and

nacnally |
cific |
palled |
. This weekend, when you move the hands of your wristwatch back a full 60 minutes, ed think a little about the watch you are wear~

alley ing. Is it absolutely accurate? Perhaps it's ap- time to choose 2 modern Omega. See our con esday | plete collection of Omega watches for men and ital to | women, $65 to over $1000.

erald 3

or ives |e Crescent Jewelers

ers in}
Petkus | 472 Alvarado St. Downtown Monterey

post |
Specialise te Omega..the Worle Most Wanted Watch

2 osdngeles Times
Part 1-B - Thurs., Sept. 12, 1974

en

Presidency o
Hoover Gains
New Stature

BY STEVE NEAL
Knight News Service

PHILADELPHIA - He r-

bert Clark Hoover was

perhaps the unlpyckiest

man ever to be elected

President of the United

States. It was his misfortune to enter the White

House just seven months

before the Wall Street |
crash of 1929, the begin. | >

ning of America's worst economic depression

Rightly or wogiet
Hoover bore the blame for }
the Great Depression. He was mocked and scorned by millions of his countrymen, His name and disast- sionist Nistorial er became synonymous. Appleman Williams, au-
The shantytowns in which thor of "The Contours of thousands of jobless per- American History.
sons lived were called "Before his defeat in
"Hoovervilles." And, for a 1932, Hoover had pulled
Zeneration, Democratic oul every a ntidepression presidential candidates ex- tool the progressives ever ploited this unpopularity owned."
by campaigning more Hoover was, :
against him than against ways, an al ned their actual opponents. Re- |; et ny publicans never men- President peta z tioned him. Wilson's h - Give shied
Times have changed. and a strong Pe at a as
Last month marked _ the League of Nations. 1s

;

beginning of the Hoover secretary of commerce, he centeihial.

The late President was born on Aug. 10, 1874, in
West Branch, Iowa. And, as is often the case with centennial celebrations, there has been a resur-
Zence of in terest in Herbert Hoover.

was considered the most liberal member of-the Harding-Coolidge cabinets
And with good reason.
Secretary Hoover worked |
for the prohibition of child |
labor, bluntly told the steel industry that the 12-hour dav and 84-hour week w ere barbaric, fought the oil
No ot ah r a fallen hero; } companies on ci eta
Hoover is, at last, ge in ate tal issues, and pushe¢

recognition ; as one of the development of water most activist Presidents in reseurcee 2enub- |
our history, an immensel Wall Street and BeguD:
Capable, honest, hard- | lican power brokers ee working administrator. ed no part of Hoover when |
Rexford G. Tugwell, a President Calvin poet ee member of President announced his retirem¢ ne
Franklin D. Roosevelt's but the GOP had no ie ee brain trust and the leading choice but "ie! oe proponent of the New him. In the public.
Deal, said, "We didn't ad- Hoover was tne-only mit it at the time. But big enough fot practically the whole New Presidency
Deal was extrapolated a from programs that Hoov- He was swept into office er started, by a landslide, carrying 40
"When the depression tates. Then came the began, Hoover had already crash :
set up a man to work Hoover was swept out of out a program for- public office four years later by vork AS iar | an even greater landslide ployment was ¢ mcerned, barely managing to win
Hoover lent money to the six states. Deeply wound states. And to help' banks ed by this rejection, Hoov and businesses, he set up a er later wrote:-"I knew reconstruction finance ad- from the bitter experience ministration." of all public men from
Hoover was responsible, George Washington down
Tugwell said, for seminal that democracies are fickle
Studies of America's and heartless. When the business cycle and its social ultimate bump came, I was rConsequences As well fortified to accept secretary of Commerce, philosophically and,
Hoover asked some of the fact, to welcome nation's leading economists democracy is a harsh to help prepare these reports. So Hoover was : we ee uniquely prepared to cope _ Presi de ie ht with the depression. Peurnan e'rec. Socains
Hoover's reputation DY apbo 0 } rman of pointing nim cnairma
E emoved Idly and : Ks Com aS

forcefully. Oe ianig
By bringing the banks, seen CATER railroads, insurance com- executive which bec panies, farmers and the . Hoover Comunemployed into federal missions a ssued economic programs, Hoov- authoritative reports. on er was making a radical streamlining and departure from the Ameri- economies in government '
can tradition of local re. By the time he died, at |
sponsibility. the age of 90, Hoover had }
These actions, however won vindication !
necessary, were painful In 1923, shortly before his steps for this champion of +h President Warren G. |
American - individualism.
Hoover's gloomy predic- you knew of ea G tions about massive feder- | § n our administration, al in tervention under- would you for the good ol mined his popular support. the country and vere' wee |
In speech after speech, pose it or would you bury
Hoover warned, "The it?"
moment responsibilities of Hoover quickly replied, }
any community, particu- "Blow it out at once! The |
larly in economic and so- blowing will prove the in- |
cial questions, are shifted tegrity of the a dministra- |
from any part of the na- tion."
tion to Washington, then that community has subjected itself to a remote bureaucracy. It has lost a large part of its voice in the control of its own destiny."
Hoover probably could have enlisted more popujar support for his programs if he had not made relief a moral issue. "Roosevelt and Hoover didn't disagree," Tugwell said.
"Hoover just had a lot more principles. He was afraid' of in juring the free enterprise system, afraid of ruining people's character. Roosevelt thought

feeding hungry people was

ploy er."

ion on

known as the

creating |

re important than prin ciple

"More
20th centur
Hoover' S reputation is t product of

and a distortior

e x

IL 6 P.M

wntown L.A. closed Sunday)

¥

lin Arnel® velou

+

ww, 4 et

Downtown LA. closed Sund.

Celanese Arne e. Flag-wavin

ASTORIA

ba ya
PARK AVENUE 49TH 'to 50TH STS., , NEW YORK 22, Ne ¥-

MEMORANDUM

October 16, 1964

Iam enclosing a pamphlet Herbert Hoover
Public Positions and Honors. I thought you might enjoy having it.

With every good wish,

5 tage

Ul ALY aes muidebeth lat
Secretary to Mr. Hoover

November 27, 1964

Miss Elizabeth Dempsey ecretary to Mr. Hoover

Waldorf Astoria Towers

Park Avenue

New York 22, New York

Dear Miss Dempsey:

It was so good of you to send the last Hoover book as well as the beautiful pamphlet of the Public Positions and Honors. I was touched that you found time to do this so promptly a midst all the pressure of these last weeks.

I cannot tell you what a great experience it was for me to go to
West Branch for the burial services. It was an extraordinary occasion on that glorious Iowa autumn afternoon to see family and friends gathered there and all the thousands of farmers and citizens in the green fields of the Presidential Park. There was an atmosphere of completion and peace which I fee] Mr. Hoover's own life and effort brought about.

My husband and I have moved to a new address -

Ford and Story Roads

It is not far from Carmel, and if you ever come this way please do come and see us.

Again with thanks for your thought of us,

With warm remembrances,

It's a Regular White House Tradition

Carter's Not the First to Sell Off the Yacht

WASHINGTON (AP) - The selling-of the-presidential-yacht in the name of taxpayer savings has become another White
House tradition.

Like President Carter's recent decision to put the 104-foot wooden yacht Sequoia up for auction, a number of past presidents have done the same thing - and then ended up cruising down the Potomac anyway.

President Herbert Hoover did it. So did
Dwight D. Eisenhower. And Lyndon B.
Johnson. And Richard M. Nixon.

The procedure is usually to decommission one yacht, often denouncing it as a waste of taxpayers' money, and then gradually take over another boat from the
Navy's fleet.

The Navy has maintained and operated presidential yachts since the administration of Rutherford B. Hayes, a Navy spokesman, Bill Harlow, said Tuesday.

In 1929, Hoover' ordered the USS Mayflower to be decommissioned as a presidential yacht in the interest of economy,
Harlow said. That yacht had been used by
Presidents Theodore Roosevelt, William

Howard Taft, Woodrow Wilson, Calvin
Coolidge and Warren Harding.

A year after Hoover decommissioned the Mayflower, he began using the
Sequoia, according to a White House spokesman.

Harlow said that Nixon brought the
Sequoia, also used by President Franklin
D. Roosevelt, back into presidential use in
January 1969, right after his inauguration.

That was just before Nixon ordered the selling of two other yachts used by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson to save the yearly maintenance costs.

In 1953, after his inauguration, Hisenhower announced he was retiring the Williamsburg, President Harry Truman's yacht, because he considered it a ''symbol of needless luxury."

But Eisenhower then acquired two other Navy yachts and renamed them after his two granddaughters, Barbara Anne and Susie EB.

During the Kennedy administration, the
Barbara Anne became the Honey Fitz and

the Susie E. became the Patrick J., the

names of President Kennedy's grandfathers.

When Johnson became president, he announced he had no use for the two yachts, but newspaper clips indicate that he used the Honey Fitz from time to time.

Though Carter has ordered that the
Navy auction off the Sequoia, the Navy is not sure exactly what the procedure will be.

"It's unlikely that it will be auctioned off in the traditional sense,"' Harlow said.
"Usually what happens is that it's given to the defense logistics agency to see if it's needed anywhere else in government
... If not, we may accept bids from the public,"

And what if on a sticky August evening
President Carter decides he wants to cruise down the Potomac?

"He's commander in chief," Harlow said. 'I guess he can have any naval vessel he wants."

For example, Harlow added, the commander of the Naval District of Washington has a little 40-foot cabin cruiser that
Carter might borrow.

LEARN THIS AMAZING CRAFT

Make leather jackets, shirts, etc. without*a sewing machine!
Handcrafted leathers are worth hundreds. See some examples at the Big Sur Craftsmen's Shop in Laub's Country Store, Ocean at
San Carlos, Carmel.

This is a 6, 2-Hour Session Class, completed in 2 weeks. You learn to

lace, cut, pattern, and assemble your own tas
Enrollment is limited so call now 6

Officials sought warrants for

| the searches after Hanafi leader
| Hamaas Abdul Khaalis' person-

| al recognizance bond was re-
| voked and he was jailed last
| Thursday.

A judge ordered the jailing af-

| ter testimony that Khaalis was
| overheard making threats on a

telephone line tapped by police.

charged with armed kidnaping '
in the seizure of 134 hostages in three Washington buildings
March 9-11. All members of the group are in jail, a waiting action by a grand jury.

In addition, Abdul Aziz,
Khaalis' son-in-law, was jailed last week on a charge of buying weapons after a prior felony conviction

Brake Relining
- SPECIAL &

54"

TOP} Disc Brakes i Slightly Higher
£ Installed, bonded brake lining
Rebuild all wheel cylinders
* Turn drums - pock front wheels
* All American cars and VW's

SAFETY FIRST!

BANKAMERICARD - MASTER CHARGE

MATT'S GENERATOR and

BRAKE SERVICE v
1637 DEL MONTE BLVD. SEASIDE 394-6294

100% the life of the car. Leber
'and other parts gvarenteod 12 moaths or 12,000 miles.

VOLKSWAGEN SERVICE

REBATE CHECKS

AMY SERVICE PURCHASE

$20-49.99
50-99.99.
100 and over

REBATED AMOUNT
5.00
10.00
15.00

Proof to you that we can service your VW better and

save you money too.
Conditions:

1. One te @ customer toward any repair of $20.00 or more

2. Cannet be used toward previous charges or repairs
3. Net redeemable for cash
ALL WORK GUARANTEED 6 MOS. or 6000 MILES

WESTER VOLKSWAGEN

The Auto Showplace, Seaside

Usien Oi

394-6081 - tod

Bring this coupon. Expires April 15, 1977

Stendard
Oil Card

MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA, SUNDAY, JUNE 8, 1980.

SECTION C

Hoover Institution
Is 'Think Tank'

For Conservatives

Palo Alto Scholars Work Among
Nation's Largest Private Archives

By Mike Feinsilber

PALO ALTO (AP) - Herbert Hoover got a bargain in 1919 with a $50,000 gift.
He founded an in stitution that preserves his name - and the kind of conservative thinking he'd be comfortable with.

That institution, established "'to demonstrate the evils of the doctrines of
Karl Marx," now provides the intellectual underpinnings for Ronald
Reagan's conservatism.

In running for the presidency, Reagan has tapped into some of the thinking that goes on at the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and
Peace.

If elected president, he could be expected to surround himself with some of the thinkers.

'Think Tank'

The Hoover, one of the nation's first
"think tanks," could serve Reagan the way the Brookings Institution in Washington has served Democratic presidents - as a pool of talent and a school of thought.

That prospect stimulates the Hoover scholars, too. Instead of just urging on policymakers with words on paper, they can visualize standing up to the
Russians at the conference table and unshackling the economy.

'Reagan comes here occasionally to meet. with our people," says Hoover historian Peter Duignan. '"'When he does, it's like a faculty seminar. He has no difficulty with our free enterprise economists. In fact, with them, he's always on the left: he winds up wanting to protect the steelworkers, the auto industry, from foreign competition, and our economists say let the free enterprise system work."

Honorary Fellow

Reagan feels so much at home at the
Hoover and the Hoover is so comfortable with him that the institution made him an honorary Hoover fellow.

At the Hoover, scholars are paid not to teach, but to think - and to write and testify and make speeches

(AP Photo)

LANDMARK - W. Glenn Campbell poses in front of the main tower of the

Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace at Palo Alto, of which he

is the director. The Hoover Institution, one of the nation's first ''think

tanks," was founded by Herbert Hoover in 1919. It now provides the intellectual underpinnings for Ronald Reagan's conservatism - its founder's

purpose was to "demonstrate the evils of the doctrines of Karl Marx." The tower has been described as one that leans to the right.

¢

The Hoover is housed in and around a
285-foot tower, which juts up like a thumb on the landscape of Stanford's flat campus. It is the university's architectural trademark.

When John Anderson came to Stanford to campaign for the presidency recently, he could not resist making a wisecrack, one bearded with age: He said he had seen the Leaning Tower of
Pisa in Italy and now, at Stanford, he had seen a tower that leans to the right.

Leans to the right?

With detente disputed and Keynesian economics in disrepute, the Hooverites think their ideas are on the cutting edge of the 1980s.

Mainstream Moved

Says Hoover Institution director W
Glenr. Campbell: "The mainstream has moved toward the Hoover Institution more than the Hoover Institution has moved toward the mainstream."

It started with Herbert Hoover's penchant for collecting the raw materials of history.

Hoover, who later became the 3ist president of the United States, was
America's young relief coordinator in
Europe in World War I.

Unwilling to see the raw materials of history going to waste, he gave his alma mater, Stanford University,
$50,000 to establish a library.

Stanford persuaded Gen. John J. Pershing, commander of the American Expeditionary Forces, to release young scholars from military service so they could go on collecting expeditions. Soon crates of materials about the upheaval in Europe were crossing the Atlantic and winding up at Stanford.

Added Funds

Hoover made another $100,000 available and by 1921 the Hoover War Collection had. 80,000 items in it. And it is still growing.

"Hoover is the greatest packrat of all time,"' Stanford University president
Ray Lyman Wilbur remarked. ""Whenrer ne sa ton of food, he 7 i D

Today, the Hoover houses the largest private archives in the country. It is separate from the Hoover library at his birthplace, West Branch, Iowa, which holds papers and memorabilia connected with his presidency.

Even the Russians had to come to
Stanford to look at - and ask for a microfilm copy of - the first edition of
Pravda.

On three miles of Hoover shelves are the boyhood diary of Nazi Heinrich
Himmler, and snapshots of Mao Tsetung taken in the 1930s during the famous '"'long march."

Gestapo Book

For the price of a carton of cigarettes, a Stanford-educated G.I. in occupation Germany bought from a Gestapo member a grisly document for the
Hoover collection - the only existing complete copy of a 1940 Gestapo book listing (in alphabetical order, with blanks left to add more names) residents of Britain who were to be rounded up for execution when the Nazis invaded.

Among those on Hitler's enemies list were: Winston Churchill and his cabinet; Sigmund Freud; pianist Ignace
Paderewski, Poland's premier in exile and Eduard Benes, exiled president of
Czechoslovakia.

For a time after World War II, the
Hoover tower served as a sanctuary where Eastern European intellectual emigres gathered to research their memoirs.

Even today, the chief archivist is
Milrad Drachkovitch, whose father, minister of the interior in Yugoslavia's first post-World War II government, was assassinated by the communists.
And Vasili Romanov, nephew of Czar
Nicholas II and prince of Russia, is honorary curator of the Imperial Russian collection - the most significant accumulation of material on pre-1917
Russia anywhere outside the Soviet
Union.

Says San Francisco-born Duignan, with a grin, 'I got my job here 20 years ago because the director wanted someone on the staff who spoke English as his native tongue."

(Continued on page 4C)

X > J U Cc pelspicacity of California voters that they were able to see through the murk of misleading advertising in behalf of Propositions 9, 10 and 11
this year and voted down these initiative and referendum frauds in

last Tuesday's primary election.

But once again faced with a bewildering array of ballot issues, citizens of this state probably could think of 11 more reasons why there must be a better way of translating popular will into public laws.
Added to local issues, the state propositions in many communities resulted in dizzyingly lengthy. and complicated ballots.

And not helping voters in the least in clarifying matters was the sheer volume of partisan in formation on the state ballot issues. It seemed to be particularly overwhelming in volume this year and mind-boggling in its complexity.

Obviously a great deal of it was self-serving, written by thevery special interests that the California initiative and referendum procedure was devised to guard against. Far too much of the voter education process this year also was Calculated distortion in tended only to deceive.

In the past 10 years there have been no less than 145 state issues submitted to California voters, in most election years in double-digit numbers. It is no wonder that ballot excesses of 1980 have added to the growing reaction against the initiative and referendum process.

Undoubtedly both can be improved. The Herald believes that the requirements for putting an in itiative before the voters should be to ughened. At the same time, some very basic rights must be protected

For in stance, the state constitution requires that all bond issues and amendments to it must be voted upon by the people. Californians surely would not want to deny themselves this essential protection against temporal whims of the Legislature.

Nor, do we believe, would the citizens of this state want to deprive themselves entirely of the right to in itiate laws or constitutional amendments themselves. But things obviously are getting out of hand

When it comes to reform of the initiative and referendum pro-

The Usefulness of Primaries

LOS ANGELES Defenders of the presidential primary system point out that without it, John F. Kennedy could not have demonstrated that Protestants would vote for a Catholic, and
Jimmy Carter could not have proved that Northerners and blacks would support a
Southern white man.

The usefulness of primaries is that they give lesser-known candidates, and those fighting regional, religious or other bias, a way to compete for the presidency

But Kennedy in 1960
ran in only four contested primaries, while Carter in 1976 competed in 26 -
and that is a world of difference.

After Kennedy had won ' key primaries in Wisconsin and West Virginia, he still had to convince party leaders and elected officials in the non-primary states that he was fit to carry the party banner. Without them, he would not have had the votes to be the nominee.

That process forced Kennedy to build alliances with other leading Democrats

alliances which served him well as
President. Carter, by contrast, gained virtually all the votes he needed from the primaries and entered the presidency without the allies who might have helped him succeed in the job.

Broder

R. B. Gifford
General Manager

cedure, the lines are narrow. The right to petition must remain in tact. Likewise, while there are frequent advertising and petition gathering a buses, California should not want to limit legitimate freedom of speech.

But initiatives often are drawn up by narrow interest groups -
such as the landlords' sponsorship of Proposition 13 two years ago and
Proposition 10 this year. Once passed, self-serving initiatives like these cannot be modified by the
Legislature unless the original initiative allows for such changes.

Although the initiative process probably is here to stay in California, it should be the means of last resort to bring about change after the legislative machinery has failed beyond hope. What is needed is reform of the initiative law.

For example, the fee of only
$200 required to circulate a petition in support of an initiative is far too low. It does not even begin to cover the cost of a fiscal impact statement from the attorney general, plus a title, summary and other paperwork provided by the secretary of state.

The number of signatures required to qualify an in itiative for a vote - 8 percent of the number of votes cast in the previous gubernatorial election for constitutional amendments, 5 percent for a change in state law - should be in creased.

The traditionally low turnout in primary elections, as evidenced by last Tuesday's results, suggests that initiatives should be allowed only in general elections, held in
November every even-numbered year.

Town hall government by in itiative is uncompromising and cumbersome. And it is dangerous because it permits excesses of caprice and simplistic solutions. If
Californians wish to retain it, they should insist on reform.

The Legislature undoubtedly could find ways to curb some of the more blatant misuses of the initiative and referendum process. In the long haul, however, the cure to the volume and complexity of propositions will be found in the Legislature itself. If it did a better job by keeping a more sensitive finger on the public pulse, the need for propositions would diminish in direct proportion

Between 1960 and 1976, there was a revolution in the nominating process -
a revolution which continued in 1980
when the number of primaries reached three dozen.

The revolution had its origins in the
1968 Democratic Convention, when the
''insiders''
McCarthy, the survivor of the primaries, and chose Hubert H. Humphrey instead. The perceived in justice of that outcome was probably more the result of the murder of Robert F. Kennedy than any failure of the system.
But it led to a complete revision of the
Democratic delegate-selection procedures. And those new rules, in turn, led to a doubling of the number of primaries. By 1976, 80 percent of the delegates came out of the primaries - and that was the ball game.

The proliferation of primaries reflected the instinct for self-expression dominant in the culture of the '60s and also the Vietnam period's hostility to in stitutions and leaders. The belief was that "'the people,"'' not the politicians, should choose the presidential candidates, even though ''the people" often turned out to be mainly political activists.

But that judgment was irrelevant in a presidential nominating system where your reputation with your peers and your leadership skills counted less than your willingness to spend years in-

The Monterey Peninsula Herald

P.O. Box 271, Monterey, California 93940
Telephone 372-3311

C. W. Gilmore
Editorial Director

Albert Cross
Executive Editor

rejected Eugene J.

gratiating yourself with small groups of voters in the presidential primary states - especially those early in the calendar.

With more primaries, and less money to spend under new federal laws, candidates learned that the biggest rewards came in winning early contests and letting the mass-media magnification of those narrow plurality victories build momentum for the Jater and larger states.

The result is perpetual candidacy.
George McGovern, the first non-incumbent to test this new system, announced an unprecedented 18 months before the 1972 convention - and won.

Carter started just as far in advance of the 1976 convention. But while
McGovern was burdened with being a senator, Carter had no public responsibilities after leaving the Georgia governership and was able to spend 260
days campaigning in 1975.

Observing Carter's success, George
Bush applied the same time-table and tactics to the 1980 Republican nomination. He would have won, too, except that he had an opponent in Reagan who has had no other full-time occupation for the last six years (six years!) than running for the Republican nomination.

In the present nominating system, the determinants of success are the size of the candidate's ambitions, the extent of his leisure time, and the tolerance of his family, his budget and his job for almost unlimited travel.

Those characteristics have almost nothing to do with the qualities that make an effective President - as the results show. It is a recklessly haphazard way to choose the candidates for that demanding office.

It is too late to go back to 1960, when four primaries were sufficient for Kennedy, but there are practical remedies available for the excesses of the present system. And the parties have the power to put them into effect themselves

4C The Sunday Peninsula Herald, Sunday, June 8, 1980.

Hoover Institution ls Top 'Think Tank'

For Conservatives

(Continued from page 1C)

For a time, Hoover research was considered suspect, tinged by ideology.
As proof that that reputation is out of date and that Hoover finds places for a spectrum of thought, not just laissezfaire economics or hard-boiled anticommunism, they point to two present staff members: Democrat. Seymour
Martin Lipset, a sociologist who is an expert on the drifts of public opinion, and philosopher Sidney Hook, who calls himself a sociologist of the Norman
Thomas stripe.

says director Campbell.

Hook, 77, taught for 42 years at New
York University, and still seems out of place in an open-neck polo shirt and a
California suntan.

Give-and-Take

While he finds libertarian economics peculiar, he likes the Hoover. "'I find more intellectual give-and-take here than at NYU, where almost everyone a greed with me on everything," he says.

In 1960, with the institution nearly bankrupt, Herbert Hoover, then in his
80s, went to work to restore the institution's fortunes and reputation.

He selected Campbell, who had been an economist with the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce and the director of the
American Enterprise Institute in
Washington, to rejuvenate the tower.

Campbell and Hoover teamed up to raise money. Campbell tripled the budget, tripled the number of research scholars to about 100, brought scholars to Hoover from around the world for conferences and seminars and established the institution as a major publisher of scholarly works.

Few Federal Ties

Campbell is pleased that the Hoover draws only 7 percent of its revenue from the federal government and does little contract research for the government.

Staff researchers draw salaries comparable to those paid to college faculties. They don'thave tenure but they are virtually assured of continued employment as long as they keep working productively.

Under another Hoover program, young, postdoctoral scholars are given an office, a phone, clerical help and a year's pay. In exchange, they are expected to publish something.

It's worked. In 10 years, 125 fellows have produced a shelf of 75 books on subjects ranging from ''Civil War in
South Russia 1919-20" to ''Problems of
Sea Power as We Approach the 21st
Century."

Working Conditions

Working conditions, in the tower and two associate buildings - one of them the official federal monument to the former president - could hardly be better. Duignan keeps a bucket of tennis balls in his office. The courts are nearby. Some scholars bicycle to their office. There is no time clock to punch, plenty of time to think about the issues of the times.

By tradition, Hoover scholars drop everything at 3 p.m. for an hour's interdisciplinary chatter over coffee and cookies.

Jokes one junior fellow: *'We work in enforced isolation until 3 o'clock, when we get together for one hour of enforced conviviality."'

In revitalizing the institution, Campbell persuaded prominent business people to serve on the board of overseers and induced some of the a cademie world's heaviest thinkers to
California.

Three Nobel prize-winners are asso-

FOUNDER - In 1919 Herbert Hoover, then U.S. food administrator, gave $50,000 to fund an or ganization to demonstrate the evils of Marxism and that group has become the prestigious Hoover Institution on War,
Revolution and Peace on the Stanford University campus. In his travels around the world as mining engineer, businessman, lecturer and relief director, Hoover collected documents that were the raw material of history, and these became.the basic library of the institution. This engraving of Hoover was made in
1928, the year he was elected president of the United States.

ciated with the Hoover - economist
Milton Friedman, who along with his wife, Rose, is the author of the bestselling 'Free to Choose,' which spells out their economic theories; economic theoretician Friedrich A. Hayek; and
Russian writer Alexander Solzhenitsyn, an honorary fellow and an in stitution favorite.

Solzhenitsyn's portrait pops up everywhere - almost as often as Herbert Hoover's. Or Ronald Reagan's.

Others stars on the Hoover staff are nuclear physicist Edward Teller, ''the father of the H-bomb''; tax expert Dan
Throop Smith; welfare expert Martin
Anderson; economist Thomas Gale
Moore; and Richard Staar, a Russianspeaking chronicler of Soviet affairs.

All could go to Washington in a Reagan administration.

UC Regent
-Campbell took a leave of absence to work in Barry Goldwater's 1964 presidential campaign and Reagan, as governor, appointed him to a 16-year term as a University of California regent.

But Campbell feels that the Hoover is needed more by Washington for its ideas than the manpower it could provide. He sees the Hoover's role as grappling with the broad policy questions of the times "'rather than the crisis of the day." For that purpose, being 3,000
miles from Washington can be beneficial.

Campbell says he's not concerned about the Hoover's conservative reputation as long as it is known, too, for solid scholarship.

"Compared. to Harvard, Yale or
Berkeley, we are conservative, but we're closer to the mainstream than they are,' Campbell says.

'What would bother me would be a reputation for low quality research.
But I think you'll find widespread acceptance of the work that's done at this place."

rich luxury fabrics, natural fibers and easy-care blends. Everything you'll need for the magic of midsummer and beyond. The newest, most dazzling designs under this summer's sun. Over
50,000* dresses to choose from. Styles for everyone! Shop early for best selection. Sorry, no mail or phone orders. Dresses - all Macy's

eMISSES eMISSY PETITE

eHALF-SIZES eJUNIORS
@JUNIOR PETITE - snotcan express" cara

*Number based on styles available in all stores at the on set of this sale

Use your Macy's

"OB6L ' eunr 'ADpunsg 'pjpse}y Djnsulueg ADpung oy)

3e

March 18,1970

_Pe. Franz G. Lassner

Director of Archives
Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace
Stanford, California 94305

Dear Dr. Lassner:

Thank you for your kind letter of March 13. Since you are engaged in reorganizing the Archives Department at the Hoover
Institution, I think I owe you a brief summary of the events starting January 1968 regarding my offer of Motherts remaining papers to that Institutions an offer first welcomed, then totally ignored in the following manner.

My husband and I a greed on the necessity of proper disposition of these papers.It was a personal debt on my part, the papers themselves being of decided historical interest. At the suggestion of Dr. Raymond Henle,who came here to in terview me, for the Herbert Hoover Oral History Program, I wrote Dr. Campell who extended us a luncheon invitation which was accepted. Dr. and
"rs. Campbell made us welcome and gave us a tour of the premises.
It seemed logical to offer the papers which, at that time, included rare and valuable letters to my Mother from Madame Marie
Curie, a rarity in the United States.I did not feel that Dr.
Campbell quite understood nor appreciated the weight of such an offer which included letters and data covering Madame Curie's two visits to the U, 3. €or eceive the grams of radium presented to her by the women of the United States. I had previously asked the Koseziusko Foundation, of which Mother was a Life Member, to print some summary of Mothef's contributions to modern Poland in return for which I would give them all the papers pertaining to Poland. The vice- president, Kusielewicz,said he was going to Poland int that swamer of 1964 and would have reproductions made of any Kellogg correspondence in the Paderewski Papers. He #-
said there would be similar items in the House Papers, in the
Hoover Papers, at Stanford, in the Wilson Papers, in the National
Archives and in the Library of Congress. He said he would like to visit with us here, but never did so. Not hearing further I felt free to offer the papers to the Hoover Institution.

Dr. Campbell said he knew a scholar at San Francisco State who would research the material, and that he and Mrs. Campbell would personally come to Carmel that summer to transport the papers and memorabilia which my husband and I had offered to bring to them. Mrs. Campbell expressed interest in the untold history of the Paderewski Fund.

I must say I had doubts about impartiality in the Polish

Dept. under Mr. Sworakowski. Mother's efforts were on the liberal side. She sent the Quakers in to occupied Poland. But the Paderewski

Hospital itself was constructed in Edinburgh to serve soldiers

and the Poles in exile. At the end Mothere resigned from her own
Fund rather than give in to ugly pressures within.The correspondence of this period- 1939-1949- constitutes a small but vital missing ace the history of the times, and may properly be called
Archives.

Since the Campbells never came nor communicated with us as they had promised, I asked Dr. Henle to make an enquiry, on the in formal side.Mrs. Campbell said she(or they) had decided the pa papers were not valuable enough. ( She had never seen them!)
If by value one means money, the Curie letters were an oversight. If on the other hand it was as "Archives" , then the papers were underestimated. I was personally hurt, and my husband indignant.

A year later Dr. Glazier of the Stanford University Library was sent by Dr. Campbell to get some photostats of a few of the letters.Ur. Glazier was totally ignorant of what had gone before.

Upon hearing this tale and glancing at some of the files, which

he pronounced "valuable! he proposed the idea of a special

Charlotte Kellogg Collection at the Stanford library and in dependent of the Institution. I a greed, asking only that some of the material

be used or published in some pertinent historical format. I demanded nothing. Perhaps he misunderstood, for he failed to return as he said he would, the following July. Nor was there any word of explanation,

This second experience determined me to look elsewhere.
I had no further desire to deal with nor trust in Stanford as repository. Yale is my AlmaMater. I was there three years in the
Arts when Dr. Angell was President. They already possess papers and books of mine .I have recently been led to believe they wuld be very happy to receive and use my Mother's papers. I a wait final resolution of this long delayed magter.

If this letter seems Jong and tedious, the affair has been just that. I only hope that in your new efforts you will not be handicapped by other experiences such as mine.

appreciate your sentiments and thank you for them.

§

ALLAN HOOVER
60 EAST 42nd STREET
Suite 1650
New York. New York 10165

(212) 370-0958

February 9, 1983

Mrs. James Dickie
428 Monroe
Monterey, CA 93940

My father, President Herbert Hoover, long pondered the question, "How can we keep America strong and in sure that the basic principles of democracy shall continue to guide the nation?" One of his most significant answers was that we must both preserve and disseminate the best in our heritage -- those economic, political, and spiritual ideals which have made ours the strongest, freest nation on earth. The Hoover Presidential Library Association

has embraced this answer as its primary mission.

More specifically, the Association -- through the dedicated work of public-minded citizens -- acquired the land, built the Hoover Presidential Library and Historic Site, and donated the whole to the American people in 1962. Today the Association's activity involves encouragement of the broad use of this primary national resource and support

of educational programs that relate my father's thought

to current policy debate.

That you may learn more about this vital work, I have asked
Dr. Malcolm Peel, Director of The Herbert Hoover Endowment, to visit with you when he is in California February 20 -
March 5, 1983. When he telephones for an a pointment, I
Shall appreciate your making every effort to see him.

Please know that you have my personal thanks in advance for your response to this request.

Sincerely,

Ulanlhing

Allan Hoover

POO Vere a Sos Teler a e

ONMUWAR REVOL UTLLON? AND PEACE

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

December 15, 1967

Mrs. James Dickie

Your letter of December 12 arrived during
Dr. Campbell's absence from the Institution.
I talked to him on the telephone today and he suggested that you and Mr. Dickie come

up Thursday, January 4 and be his guests for luncheon.

Sincerely yours,

L ' y f os

#1 katy
(Mrs.)E. S. Fabinyi
Secretary to the Director

HOOVER ENSATEUTLON

ON WAR, REVOLUTION AND PEACE Stanford, California 94305 ¢ (415) 321-2300

March 13, 1970

Mrs. James Dickie
Carmel Valley, California

I certainly was pleased to have been able to talk with you on the telephone yesterday about the papers of your parents, and may I take this opportunity to assure you of my continuing interest in these materials. As I mentioned, should the negotiations with Yale not be entirely to your satisfaction, perhaps we could discuss this matter further.

I think in the near future we shall try to prepare an in dex to your father's materials here at Stanford, including those that form part of the American Relief Administration and the Commission for Relief in Belgium collections. If possible, I also should like to look into the matter of papers that may be available in
Warsaw or elsewhere, and I certainly shall keep you posted on any developments.

With best wishes, I an,

Very truly yours,

SA 7 .
ae y fg 'Gises '

Ys et Yy,y yy YY
Sof A ' FA V Z J / jj

&. Vf,

Franz G. Lassner
Director of Archives

1500 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W. '
Washington, D. C. 20005 202/296-3971

Raymond Henle, Director

STANFORD UNIVERSITY

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA

13, 1959

Dear Mrs. Kellogg and Miss

I should like to in vite you to attend a reception in honor of King Baudouin of Belgium at 10:10 a.m.
Friday, May 22, in the Lou Henry Hoover Room of the Hoover Institution.

Other local residents affiliated with the Commission for Relief in Belgium have been invited. I am sure that the King will be pleased to meet people who did so much to help his country.

The reception is expected to last until 11 a.m.

I am sorry that we were unable to reach you by telephone with advance in formation about this reception, which I hopevery much that you both can attend.

Sincerely yours,

E. Wallace Sterling

. Vernon Kellogg

s Jean Kellogg
Route 1, Box ll
Carmel, California

A Project of The Institute for Social Science Research

RAYMOND HENLE Marco Island, Florida
DIRECTOR February 26, 1969

Mrs. James Dickie
Carmel Valley, California 935924

Thank you for your letter of the 20th.
Perhaps the change of direction at Stanford will yet result in something agreeable to you. Let us hope so.

You were kind to send the books for my personal library and I dare say that in due course they will find their way to West
Branch. Meanwhile they will be of much interest to me in my work.

Mrs. Henle joins in every good wish to you and your husband,

Sincerely yours,

Lprt Mit

RH/ck

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N. W., Washington, D. C. 20036 -

A Project of The Institute for Social Science Research

RAYMOND HENLE Dictated from Marco Island, Florida ert April 26, 1968

Mrs. James Dickie

No letter I have received has given me such pleasure as yours in which you tell of your decision to give those valuable papers to The Hoover Institution, and that Dr.
Rita Campbell is sending a team to examine your holdings.

This is something that occupied the "worrying section"
of my mind ever since I saw you. The documents will be so ideally suited to the purpose of the Institution, and perhaps I may be pardoned if I feel a good deal of pride in thinking that our oral history program and my visit with you in pursuance of it helped this wonderful thing to happen.

I know you yourself must be delighted with the oustanding cooperation and planning which Dr. Campbell is giving to make your collection the important adjunct to the Institution which it surely will be.

Your transcript is on its way to you. You did an outstanding job for us.

I hope we shall meet again when I return to California in July.

Good wishes.

Sincerely yours,

- _ |
fj (EZ Vee LPL Res > ae

AN

RH/ ck cc: Dr. Rita Campbell

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N.W., Washington, D. C. 20036 .-

te ho tnt, bekuh t lo

prow xe MU ah-b ey mes Suu dries 1.

Ll a dew) Bly tke Jun > Lal%ah)
a age hit, ar AG Brauch - a4, by 2, , thera how Sher Kio Wtrod tal) #2

fon baw a etene 0
by, ene Vande

OF PHOENIX
2247 EAST V@@ BUREN STREET
PHOENIX, ARIZONA

Mh. Lan Halles, 9 broke

Po. box c

linmel Vallee, labyy. 9392 Y

oe WUO Bane Cut 1.7. W.
BD LD oe LOG wn BC.

W
200 Ib

THE NATIONAL
THE HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL PARK SERVICE THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
LIBRARY ASSOCIATION AND RECORDS SERVICE

regent M é Eee: of your p CODOVUCE'
al Bhai & celemontts convmem or aling y ie conten mee | of ie fe
RS ee tes billy
Ort Leh day afer VPOOVW, we len hn of August
C C wh deo
&
OVE Se nv d. Mtrne ye pilred ant Leven ty fou Ud
Wisk iid

oes

te te ho
29 me7 f

HERBERT HOOVER
ORAL HISTORY
PROGRAM

(Third Report)

A Project of the

HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY
ASSOCIATION

on behalf of the

HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY

and the

HOOVER INSTITUTION ON WAR,
REVOLUTION AND PEACE
Stanford, California

f Page third report to the participants and grantors in the Herbert Hoover Oral History Program brings up to date the progress made since our report of August 1968.

The work has in creased substantially in volume and tempo and it has forged a head at a pace consistent with our financial resources and a small staff.

During our past fiscal year our a greed-upon period of sponsorship by The Institute for
Social Science Research ended. On November
1, 1969 sponsorship was transferred to the
Herbert Hoover Presidential Library Association. The Association then matched a new foundation grant which, together with generous individual contributions, enables us to carry forward the work of the Program which has expanded substantially beyond what was contemplated as necessary at its beginning.

As of April 1, 1970 interviews with 332
persons had been recorded. Those interviewed since our last report include President Johnson, who not only gave a notable statement of recollection and opinion, but also provided documents from his personal papers and the taperecording section of his own Presidential
Library.

Still on our lists and scheduled for interviewing - hopefully during our current fiscal year - are some 70 persons in the United States and about 30 in England, Belgium, France,
Finland, Germany and Switzerland.

While the period between an in terview and submission of the transcript runs three months or more, we are closing the gap. As of this date, 47 interviews are in the backlog of tapes a waiting transcription and dispatch to respondents for their perusal, correction, additions and

final approval. This is the lowest number in some time. We ask those who have not yet received their transcriptions to bear with us.

All transcriptions returned to us as approved are in various stages of work on research, checking of names, dates and places, preparation of footnotes where advisable and compilation of appendixes (in many cases in themselves voluminous collections of letters, memorabilia, documents, etc.) and then to be completely retyped in final library form and bound between hard covers.

As soon as the work on a group of in terviews is completed, the bound copies are deposited in the two Hoover libraries, thus becoming the property of the libraries and ready for such public use as the libraries may determine.
Only a few of the respondents have specified restrictions as to time and nature of use, which gives the libraries suitable latitude in making the in formation available.

The bulk of the interviewing has been done by the Director of the Program. During the past year it became evident that more personnel should be employed to speed up the interviewing if our commitments were to be fulfilled, and the services of two interviewers were obtained on a fee basis. Charles T. Morrissey, Director of the Vermont Historical Society, an experienced Presidential oral history interrogator, consented to undertake a limited number of in terviews in New England. Robert Cubbedge, who is an associate of Lowell Thomas, has chief responsibility to complete our interviewing in the greater New York area. The Program is in debted to them for their outstanding work.

The duty of preparing the interviews in a form most efficient for use by historians and

other authorized researchers falls upon the
Assistant Director, Catherine J. Kenny. The original transcribing from raw tape is by Mary
F. Hurley. The typing of the final library copies is by Patricia C. Seis. The Director finds it difficult to adequately commend their dedicated services. Their work has received generous praise from many respondents.

This report also gratefully acknowledges the helping hands of the Director of the Herbert
Hoover Presidential Library at West Branch, the Director and Chief Archivist of the Hoover
Institution at Stanford and the Archivist of the
United States. The Hoover Institution consistently has made a sizeable annual contribution to our payroll account. And we gratefully record the assistance of The Institute for
Social Science Research during its sponsorship of the Program. This agency's generous grants of office space, use of secretarial equipment and quantities of office supplies released basic foundation and individual gifts of money for travel, research and library preparation work.

After all interviews have been deposited in the Hoover libraries, a comprehensive index of the entire collection will be prepared. It is hoped that, inasmuch as the collection then will be in the public domain, the Archivist of the United States will be successful in obtaining funds from Congress for the indexing. The collection could not hope to provide maximum value and convenience to students and researchers without an adequate index.

The Director has no hesitancy in saying to all who have contributed recollections, time and funds to this Program that, when its full results are deposited in the Hoover libraries at
West Branch and Stanford, there will be available a monumental collection of significant personal reminiscences which otherwise largely might have been lost to posterity. He is moved to observe that no future attempt to delineate the life and times of Herbert Hoover would be adequate without reference to this oral history collection.

RAYMOND HENLE
Director

NEw ADDRESS:

1500 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W.,
Suite 840

Washington, D.C. 20005

May 1, 1970

HERBERT HOOVER
ORAL HISTORY
PROGRAM

(Third Report)

A Project of the

HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY
ASSOCIATION on behalf of the
HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY and the
HOOVER INSTITUTION ON WAR,

REVOLUTION AND PEACE
Stanford, California

HERBERT HOOVER
ORAL HISTORY PROGRAM

A Project of
THE INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH on behalf of
HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY and

THE HOOVER INSTITUTION ON WAR,
REVOLUTION AND PEACE

HE Herbert Hoover Oral History Program

was initiated twenty months after the death of Mr. Hoover. Preliminary work commenced in August 1966 and the first interviews were recorded in late September of that year.

As of this date sixty-five interviews have been recorded and nearly one hundred cartridges of one-hour tape have been used. It is anticipated that over a projected three-year period more than three hundred persons may be in terviewed if funds suffice.

The Program initially was financed by an anonymous foundation grant of $30,000 in in stallments of $10,000 in each of three years.
This grant is being matched by contributions from individuals, other foundations and organizations, thus providing $20,000 in each of three years.

The grants and contributions are made to
The Institute for Social Science Research, a

wholly tax-free organization which is sponsoring the program for the benefit of The Herbert
Hoover Presidential Library, West Branch,
Iowa and The Hoover Institution on War,
Revolution and Peace, Stanford, California.

Raymond Henle, a former Washington newspaper correspondent and radio news editor of long experience, a friend of Mr. Hoover and a member of the Advisory Board of The
Hoover Institution, was designated Director of the Program. Mr. Henle serves without compensation.

The purpose of the Program is to record the recollections of persons who knew Mr. Hoover in any of the various stages of his public life, so that there may be deposited in the two
Hoover libraries in formation which may not be available in written or published works and records already in those libraries, or which will significantly enrich or supplement the written or published documents.

The Program seeks, a mong other things, to in quire into the human side of Mr. Hoover's operations and into the humanity of Mr.
Hoover himself, as this often was obscured by his personal predilection and by political machination.

The Program also seeks unknown facets of his family life and welcomes recollections of
Mrs. Hoover, herself a person of in tellectual attainment whose influence on the life of her husband is in dicated but not adequately understood.

While the number of persons who have first-hand in formation of Mr. Hoover's relief operations during and after World War I, and of the Cabinet and Presidential years, is diminishing, there are many who knew him in his post-Presidential years and his Elder Statesman years.

There also are many with rich memories of his work as Chairman of the two Hoover
Commissions which investigated organization in the United States Government during the
Truman and Eisenhower administrations, and of his monumental efforts to relieve misery after
World War II as a relief emissary of President
Truman.

Mr. Hoover's interests were widespread and his life touched those of literally millions of persons of every race and creed. His impulses to improve the physical well-being of his fellowmen were so strong that it is obvious there still are living many scores of persons who remember the objectives and methods of these operations.

At present, because of the relatively modest funds available for the Program, all interviewing is by Mr. Henle only. The procedure is to take a tape recorder of unique design and capabilities into the office or home of a respondent, after correspondence, phone calls

and even warm-up sessions have established a groundwork.

A valid transcript is made from the tape and sent to the respondent with a copy for his files. In due course his corrected original is used to make a final copy for each of the
Hoover libraries for use by authorized historians and students.

The Program itself has no plan to use the material for any literary or other undertaking.

All respondents are asked to give a release which insures ownership of tape and library copies by the Hoover libraries, except that respondents may make any stipulations on their use as they may deem advisable. Thus far very few such stipulations have been made, but any such conditions will be honored scrupulously by the Program, the libraries and their staffs.

The tapes are being preserved subject to a future decision on their ultimate disposition, and subject to the wishes of the persons giving the interviews.

Beyond the broadest generalizations in which the Director of the Program occasionally may indulge for purposes of acquainting interested persons with the methods and purpose of the
Program, the confidential character of every interview is zealously protected, and the security of all the materials collected carefully is maintained.

The Director presently has two a ides,
Catherine J. Kenny, Assistant to the Director, and Mary F. Hurley, Transcriber. These three, together eventually with officials of the Hoover libraries, are the only persons familiar with the recorded material.

As of this date not a single portion of the recorded material has been discarded as useless or meaningless or of any other doubtful value.
This, with thevery limited personnel engaged

in the Program, greatly enhances the prospect of economical operation and the collecting of valuable in formation. Indeed, the material already recorded enlivens the prospect that recollections still to be obtained will comprise a mass of significant political, social and economic in formation which will enrich and flavor the work of historians who in the years to come will seek an appraisal of the works of
Herbert Hoover and of Herbert Hoover, the man.

August 1967

HERBERT HOOVER
ORAL HISTORY PROGRAM

A Project of
THE INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH on behalf of
HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY and

THE HOOVER INSTITUTION ON WAR,
REVOLUTION AND PEACE

baits ERA
SCRIPTA

WIVES Of
OS My,

a
>"
=
=)
%

t

PRESIDENTIAL
LIBRARIES

Ti careful preservation of papers,

records, and documents has always been a distinguishing characteristic of great nations, for the archives of any country are a mong its most valuable cultural resources. Without them history cannot be written. When we preserve such materials we prove our commitment to the values on which our society has been built, and it is from these materials that posterity will make its judgments of our lives and times.

These were the factors that led the
Congress, in 1934, to create the institution it called the National Archives, which has since become the National
Archives and Records Service of the
General Services Administration. This
Service administers a nation-wide system of depositories where there are preserved and made available all classes of papers and documents that are important for the study of American history. This system includes the four Presidential Libraries now in operation and the two that are in process of creation.

The Presidential Libraries Act of
1955 gave statutory recognition to the special importance attached to the preservation of papers and other historical materials of the Presidents of the United
States, together with the papers of their associates and contemporaries. Bringing into the National Archives system the papers of the Presidents, and of the men and women who helped them shape national policies, makes the study and understanding of a particular Presidential era easier. As part of the National

Archives system these papers are administered by the same agency that has responsibility for the preservation of the official records of our Federal Government, which show how the decisions and policies of a President and his advisors were carried out.

The four Presidential Libraries now in operation are:

Herbert Hoover Library, West
Branch, Iowa

Franklin D. Roosevelt Library,
Hyde Park, N. Y.

Harry $. Truman Library, Independence, Mo.

Dwight D. Eisenhower Library,
Abilene, Kans.

When completed, the John Fitzgerald
Kennedy Library at Cambridge, Mass., and the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library at Austin, Tex., will also become a part of the National Archives system.

The four existing Libraries, which are, in effect, branches of the National
Archives, have proved to be important centers of research and educational activity both for the geographical areas in which they are situated and for the entire country. They contain not only the papers and files of four Presidents of the
United States, but scores of collections of the personal correspondence, diaries, and other historical materials of the men and women who served with them or who played important public roles. The
Libraries also have large collections of books and printed materials as well as

still pictures, motion pictures, and memorabilia that bear on the historical periods with which the Presidents are associated.

Presidential Libraries offer many advantages to persons confronted with the problem of how best to preserve their personal papers. Papers deposited in them are kept in tact as separate, named collections. 'They are safe from the physical hazards that often beset manuscripts in private hands, for they are housed in buildings scientifically designed and equipped to in sure their preservation.
They are in the care of a professional staff specifically trained in the techniques of preservation, arrangement, and indexing and fully conversant with recent
American history, so that intelligent help or guidance can be given to all who use them.

Presidential Libraries are specialized depositories whose holdings relate to clearly defined eras and fields of study.
The archivists in charge of them can give a higher degree of expert attention to the papers under their care than can be given in a depository whose holdings range over along span of time and widely different fields of in terest. And the right of donors to place limitations on the use of their papers is specifically recognized by act of Congress. Such restrictions, stipulations, and conditions as donors choose to place on the use of their papers are scrupulously observed.

Because Presidential Libraries are a part of the National Archives system, persons who wish to have their papers

near at hand for a time before depositing them in the library of their choice may place them temporarily in the National Archives in Washington or in one of the several Federal Records Centers located throughout the United States.
In either case, donors will be given facilities for personal use of their papers as well as professional reference service on them and reproductions of particular documents a mong them.

PRESIDENTIAL
LIBRARIES

| Herbert Hoover Oral History Program

A Project of The Institute of Social Science Research

RAYMOND HENLE September 14, 1967
DIRECTOR

Mr. and Mrs. James Dickie
Route 1, Box 101
Carmel, California

Dear Mr. and Mrs. Dickie:
The enclosed brochures fully explain our program.

Mr. Henle now is in California on an extended interviewing trip and will be there until the
14th of October. He would likevery much to see you.

As he will have a complicated traveling schedule throughout the state, he would greatly appreciate it if you would use the enclosed stamped and addressed envelope to let him know your preference of a date and time best suited for you to see him.

Mr. Henle will recheck with you the day before the interview is scheduled.

He looks forward to seeing you.
Sincerely yours,

- _ 7
<e LID |

Catherine Kenny
Assistant to the Director'

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N. W.. Washington, D. C. 20036 + 202-296-3971

To be read by JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE, cor to Mr. Henle. Any substantial ti

on a separate

KELLOGG DICKIE Story Road
Carmel Valley, Calif.
October 14, 1967

you about Mr. Hoover.
 Vernon Kellogg, was practically a lifelong

Mrs Hoover, was he not?

MRS. DICKIE: 't was perhaps jost significan

part of Mr.

MR, HENLE:

the records, which are considerable already

ninnnaa: *hevsivte a vervwher:
places; cney "re everywnere.

Would you gust record itseif -- while-I'n

"u &

MRS. DICKIE: his 1 ip with

as in at

MR ITNT We
MR. HENLE:

MRS. : Well, Father wes born in Emporia, Kansass
Lyman Beecher (ti f the State of

had formerly come there from New England. I

came from the border between
England and Scotland; I': einyway, Father laid the

foundations in Kansas, as a young mae 7 & scie 'ic career.

he walked the

ry

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 2

miles te school every day and began his studies which brought im into his career of biology, entomology and evolution.

was an authority in a number of fields. He and William Allen
White werevery good friends, and there ther distinguished yen in hisclass at Kansas University <-- and people in the scientifie field. But he was drawn to the West Coast and

especially to Stanford University, where David Starr Jorden was president.

Exactly -- a vem distinguished professor.
Fothin

i]
yniden Wt
. DICKIE: V A very brilliant man and a great leader, too. Ha spent a brief
"\

MRS time at sy Of California before moving on to i He met my mother here

Ae

Stanford. In 1908 he was at Stanforé

in Carmel -- they were both vacationing -- when there was no

Carmel. They were really early hikers.

MR. HENLE: Well? just a wilderness.
urslhele
But Father had an -a scetit side to his nature

Just a wilderness.
his first view of this country,

MRS. DICKIE:
which was greatly affected by ux Stanford so he got in the habit of coming

and it was rather nea
The first group ef - msen who came here were chiefly)

down here,
, fi pr
Sterling, Verge An ivy, and

writers: Jack London, George many others. Father was the only scientist, really, in the group. His base was Stanford University where, of course, he
At

met Herbert Hoover -- and destiny is an interesting thing.
first his chief relationship was with David Starr Jordan and

they went to the South Pacific together to study fishes, which

was Jorden's specialty. Then Father began his extensive writing on in sects. He had laboratory at Stanford and he was an authority on bees. had bee hives in his office end he had house, which was a bit of a trial to my

¢
Pal

mother. [Taughter]

spider cages in his

I dare say.

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page

MRS, DICKIE: He was already becoming very well known in science and as 4
teacher, but I don'tthink at that time he envisaged leaving the professorial career at all. It was Mr. Hoover who played this key role in Father's life, and, looking back on it, I was thinking before you came, Mr. Henle, what out of all could select as our particular facet of Mr. Hoover's

UA A (Vid uid

tion in a person's personal - development. And I think was especially important in both my parents' lives -= not just
Pather, but also as a consequence in Mother's life -- because both my parents had abilities which perhaps would not have been brought out by the strictly professorial environment, if thet had been continued -- research writing and teaching. I don'tknow exactly the moment in which Mr. Hoover and Father became well-acquainted -~ I haven't had time to look it up in our filing cabinethere where the records are -- but I do know that
Mr. Hoover must have known Father's character and personality very well before America entered the World War, because Hoover, ag you undoubtedly know or have in your records, made an agreement with the German High Command to take the food into Europe --

Belgium and France specifically -- before we actually entered

the war.

MR. HENLE:

MRS. DICKIE: And in order to get permission to do that, he hed to a gree toot fhe Ox Vin put an American in high command as a kind of hostage, literally,

and for some reason he chose my father. This was the beginning.
Father had studied in Leipzig alse as a young man. He spoke
German well and he understood the Germen mind fairly well -~- he
- mp:
MA tith le TH dol had a number of friends there -- so they "accepted ny father on those grounds. Hoover sent Father to the headquarters of the
German Army where he met the Kaiser and von Palkenhayn and all

of these people who were planning strategy of one kind or

another, and Hoover began his massive work of feeding the starving

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 4
people in occupied territories in Europe. Then when we enters the war Pather had to be withdrawn, of the whole condition changed, but Hoover went on with his work,

nevertheless.

MR. HENLE: Yes, because they required eneutral. Now, Mrs. Dickie, I would like to ask you -- this is very interesting account that you're giving -- it's obvious that your father and your mother

were what would be called, today, "intellectuals".

They were; yes, both of then.

It would be in teresting if you could contribute anything as to

why they and Mr. Hoover were drawn to each other.

MRS. DICKIE: Well, I would like to make a suggestion. I cannot tell you
?
exactly why because I was too young to be a ware of this moment

in my parents' lives ,

MR. HENLE: Yes, exactly. Your in formation would heve to be something that

was handed down to you.

Wot only that, it would have to be my in stinct, having grown up

with my parents

MR. HENLE: Precisely.

MRS. DICKIE: because, being a practicing artist, and my father having been

a scientist but with a se of the unity of life wherein he ay. Fa
(09 | brAce felt the ascetic and spiritual and scientific elements were one,

and my mother being a poet but married to a scientist -- and who also had this great feeling for people -- I would like to say that they combined perhaps the two essential elements that naybe
Mr. Hoover also had in even larger degree or in different degree, we'll say, because each person is distinctive in his contributions. But they all were intellectuals, and my father was accomplished and respected in his field, my mother had integrity

in hers, and Mr. Hoover as sn engineer, as he was at that time,

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 5

end, technically, absolutely competent in every way.
feel that the thing that drew these three people together ing for humanity -- was the feeling for service --
was the desire to in tegrate this intellectual development with active, human service. I think that combination made this thing work, because I know thet even recently someone sent a copy of The Saturday Review and I was surprised to see an article in there stating that my father had been one of the first men who ever popularized science without stepping it downs
He believed in getting science to the people without diluting it,and in making it useful, and Hoover believed in getting competence in various fields down to where it worked.
even believed, as President, that one drop of dishonesty top filtered through the entire political structure --

wards, I mean <-- poisoning the whole thing.

MR. HENLE: Precisely.

MRS. DICKIE: Therefore I hazard a guess, coming to think of it now as you ask mé this question, that those common attitudes, which were not bonds but attitudes, drew those three people together and made it possible -- for what happened was that Hoover selected

Father as he did other men. He had a great genius for picking
& oS >

out the right man for the right job, end he had in tense, personal

loyalty to these intimate friends and they to him. Even through political weather which was difficult later on, and difficulties with groups of people, these personal effinities were sustained throughout my lifetime and they were a key to the personal integrity of the people involved. So because Hoover sent Father to Europe -- end then all things <aa@tflowed afterwards and flowed
A "dq

rwards for Hoover siso -- the bond was broken that tied my father to a smaller stage. He immediately stepped out onto the world stage. All his abilities were then called into play and he went on to his really important contribution. Thé same could

said of Mr. Hoover, because when he came back and became
>

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 6

Secretary of Commerce and then went on to the presidency, he

ostepped into an entirely new role. So I would say, to go back to this first question -- this seems rather wordy but it's not an easy thing to answer a question like that ~- that it was because of the fact that these intellectuals, so-called, were not ivory-tower intellectuals, and that they both had the ability to touch people. They were urbane in a sense, and they

had charm. Even despite Hoover's Shipnesd- he had a great

U

ytated

personal magnetism, end my father had enormous charm -= and Rat if

openness and frankness and mobility which enabled them to meet with many different kinds of people and carry over their ideals beyond the national setting. So that's what I think made it

work.

I think you've stated it most brilliantly, Mrs. Dickie, and I appreciate it. You mentioned the urbanity -- the personal charm of these men. Wow Mr. Hoover we remember, of course, as a

man who was quite in ward in many ways
MRS. DICKIE: Very.
MR. HENLE: perhaps as many people have described him, shy.
MRS. DICKIE: Yes.
MR. HENLE: Was your father of that type, or was he an outgoing type?

MRS. DICKIE: Well, he was only in ward or shy for different reasons -~ that is; asn't as robust, physically, as Mr. Hoover and he labored under handicaps all of his life. It caused him to withdraw a certain number of hours a day, and to even decline certain social
Commitments though he was a marvelous host in his home and much

+

sought after in other people's halls. He found that when he

Bros and o erg served on all these boards -- Carnegie, Rockefeller and-atl oe he wasn't shy -- he could do this job very well -- but he did

have to protect himself, Mr. However took a little nap every day,

by the way, which kept him going.

BAN KELLOGG DICKIE -~Page

MR. HENLE: Well, he was ¢ of these men who slept only four hours a

night, you know,

MRS. DICKIE: Yes. sy was that way, bet fhe was also almost extsemesimpulsive in personal contacts. He was humorous <-- suppressed humor many times but humorous nevertheless ~- and had a warmth and immediacy where he fe ase, and he felt at ease with his friends, of course, and with men and he theirs. And with me, because I was my parents' child, he was very much at ease and he promptly called me "Rabbit",

I don'tknow why. He sustained these things throughout my

life, and when I beeams married at a rather late time in life

he congratulated me under the same name, "Rabbit", and wrote

the letter to "Rabbit" and all of that, which was very touching, my husband was deeply touched by this. And this skips to the

end of my story, but in Mr. Hoover's last months and years when

he was so ill, we were smazed that every single thing of this

faithfulness carried over -~- this human thing - to the end.

Every single publication of his and everything he thought of

interest to us he sent and in scribed it, "To Rabbit and her

husband," you see, and to my husband alse he sent one in his own

name. Well, Hoover was in ward. I've known other very great,

creative people, and I think it's almost a necessary condition

of real creativity.
MR. HENLE: Do you think so?

MRS. DICKIE: Oh, I do. I think there srevery few, like Wagner and others,

Lote Ata fo you see, to jwet-live in the world completely -- well, Mozart

did. But the great men that I have known -- and women like
Madame Curie -- and even Paderewski who was always out in the

YW : ; a7 rie!
world +-,these people -- you see, there is this thing -- thie - 07"
contact with the creative. source which is deep within, and they

[LQ Unuey VOL C®

can'thear treat if they're outgoing all the time. I mean I think that's why they have to turn in ward.

or they're very sensitive really, personally too, more then many\yiU

so they protect themselves a little bit, perhaps.

AIT
Five

MR § .

MRS

¢
.

HENLE :

DICKIE:

DICKIE:

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page

How very interesting, Mrs. Dickie. I don'tthink I've ever had that theory advanced; certainly I haven't in this program.

Well, perhaps because I'm a practicing artist and I have a

dy preally Can KM)

> ; aoe . v ys ; = Pa 4

feeling that creativity is some-kKin in sll the fields...

Have you said about as much on that es would apply to Mr. Hoover, or do you have some more? Anything that you can contribute in

that respect   s

Well, I have a little more to say, also, that would cast light on
Mrs. Hoover, whom we loved very much, too. She was a remarkeble woman who was an in timate friend of my mother. But to carry this on a bit, after Father came back from E er suggested to my father that we needed a National Research Council in America.
He had seen in Europe that hioneys for pure research were being liberally applied, and in this country which thought of itself es.in the forefront of scientific achievement we had no such thing. And so Father remained in Washington after the war to help build up the Netional Research Council, of which he was Executive
Secretary until he had to retire because of iil health, and that was his last great undertaking. Now that covered the years when
Hoover was Secretary of Commerce and later President. 'teen I

came out to the West in the meantime to pursue a painting career, and one thing or another, and I was outhere a good deal, even though my parents were living in Washington in our home there.

But I would like to mention this personel incident, because I think it's a key and it also underlines everything that we've

been saying. It so happened that my father was stricken with
Parkinson's Disease, for which there is still no eure. It's a very difficult and unhappy illness, and the care of wy father

elso struck my mother to the point where she had a coronary occlusion. Being here on the Coast, I wasn'treally a ware,

quite, of how serious the situation had become, because there

are no other close relatives, and there was no one living in f 4 /

24) VS

Washington, so Mrs. Hoover .~ - ~+

A ¥, $- Fens - - i A
RO TOT F 2, Cbharactar € ee : a tiate |

3 Wir tulLy y Ya M ih. Cline ttt

"ea
Uv

oO
+4

MRS.

MRS.

MR.

wMDoOa
MIND.

DICKIE:

HENLE:

DICKIE:

HENLE ¢

DICKIE:

JEAN KELLOGG

They were in Washington at

,
4 A Ate
My permis Harve.

They were there. He was President, and I got this telegram
A 7 2 -

which we still have a mong our papers, and I thought this would

interest you, Mr. Henle.

Tndeed so.

Qne day when I was going about my business here, a

came from the White House.

was short and very specific. She said, "Your father extremely
411. Your mother also ill. Both confined to the house. The
President thinks that you would come if you knew the situation."
Such a beautiful telegram involving them both -- so simple --
so evident what to do. So I was on an airplane within

time and I went to Washington.

Even in those days you got on an airplane?

Yes, it seems to me it must have been a plane at=skai--- oh,

yes -~- and I arrived to find this all too true. Then, as the weeks and months went by, as we came to grips with this situation, I would like to say thet there wasn't a day that passed -- Mrs.
Hoover received, as most First Ladies do, all kinds of gifts --
flowers and things -- it would be impossible, almost, to fill the
White House with them -~- but she had a way of picking out certain things that she thought my mother could enjoy, and my father.
Every single day the White House car drove up to the door with some offering which I would then arrange and take to my mother.
And the constant attention that both the President and Mrs. Hoover paid to the health of my parents... . The President took Father on his fishing trips down to the Keys and other places as long as

Father was able to move. This went on to the end of our livesy

ped ter sas

On that point, these attentions from the White House, Mrs. Dickie, roughly were in the latter part of their Administration? Could

you roughly place them?

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE-~-Page 10

they were, because my father died in '37 and these

were about five years, or six, before.

MR. HENLE: So these attentions came in the midst of their Depression

troubles?

MRS. DICKIE: When he was harassed with every other kind of thing and when

" Y FTA 2 a? L221 ~
qya] Vane fin me Ag S he mea?

MrSe HOOVEl +e - e - And I'd like to say thet in those days, of

\

=

course, it was not the fashion to call First Ladies by their first names ~~ and on top of that Mr Hoover had a very natural dignity -- but I would like to point out that she also had a marvelous sense of humor. She was very warm:'in

& personal way, and in this particular case of my own family, which is the one I know about, I cannot imagine a more outgoing and faithful friendship than this on the part of both of them. And I loved Mrs. Hoover very much. She was very sweet to me. So this went on then, and my mother got some-

}

what better; my father did not. Finally, my father died in

Hartford, Connecticut in 1937. Immediately afterwards it was
( Pt, fatheae Ubu Can Cautatryat}

Mr. Hoover who suggested that Hie Foundation underwrite and

prepare a proper memorial volume to Dad

MR. HENLE: Whaese Foundation?-

_

ii"

MRS. DICKIE: The-CRR_<"the-educational feuntation - a

with the moneys left from the Belgian Relief. So many distinguished people contributed, and it turned out to be a

A , ns ' 7) wh.
very outstanding book -- the first one of its kind. Et*s (Lei dea

} a abeen copied a number of times by other people. te

MR. HENLE: was in the nature of a biographical nenorish, would you

MRS. DICKIE: Yes, it was, and it in cluded testimonial writings from many

>

1 Pe ¥ tiud tu (he l(hrrvo . Ka Tifton

/

b

~

MR. HENLE:

MRS. DICKIE:

HENLE:

MRS. DICKIE:

HENLE:

MRS. DICKIE:

MR. HENLE:

MR, HEN

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 11

personages, plus excerpts from my father's own

presented him in a perfect light and it made

Mr. Hoover thought thing. In its particular form it a a)

had never been done -- in that particular way -- and

everyone who saw it afterwards thought it was a creation.

~v

Hoover outlined neral form?

whole purpose and form, and even the general

appearance, believe, of the book, which shows that he

this creative ability in other ways.

Yes. As a matter of fact, Mrs. Dickie, this leads

Evans] to ask 7%, a-guestiontkere, but first of all let

say, parenthetically, that it is quite similar to things that

he did even of lesser import. For in stance, he would personally

ise the selection, sometimes, of

his nurses, and so on and so forth.

Well yes, that is part of the same point of view; well,

point of view heart he had.

"

lo petirm /))

aa RS Jous "4
WF | ULI liry ; y
-Let - me_intesjecet at Ahie- peiat./ ¥ / You have made a number

references to records and letters, and now you speak of

biographical memoriam volume that had been done.

Yes.

2re your father's papers?

Well, my mother was a very orderly person and she gave most of what she thought was important, immediately after Father's

death, to the Hoover War Library, where they are preserved.

MR.

MRS.

MR ©

ada
MRS.

Ww
MUNe

DICKIE:

HENLE :

DICKIE:

HENLE:

HENLE :

DICKIE:

HENLE :

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page

And I suppose there are some in the National Research Council.

Then I had a letter from Mr. Rickard immediately after my

mother's death i 960, asking that if there were any further

papers or memorabilia, would I please see that they got to the
Stanford collection. There are some rather important things, and other people -- the Polish groups in America -- have asked to give them the letters f Medame Curie and Paderewski and all that. That relationship a rose from the fact that Hoover sent Father to Poland, and Feather played s big role there. Anyway, I have kept these papers temporarily because I want to sort them out again. I also am thinking of writing or seeing that some estimate of Mother's work is written, so I have held back temporarily, but I in tend that all things that are relative and important shall be preserved, and naturally the Hoover War

Library seems the logical place.

Since the beginning of your father's collection is there?

Most of it is there .

You think it should all be together?

plus objects, such as laces and books and things from Belgium and from Europe. But the Polish thing was important because

it in troduced Father to Paderewski. Hoover's sending him there started this whole train of events, and Wilson finally asked
Father to take the message that made Paderewski Prime Minister of Poland. And then my mother got to know Madame Curie and

rought her over here to get the gram of radium, and so on.

You still have these letters?

T have letters from these people which a revery valuable, but

I am keeping them.

Yes. Mrs. Dickie, many of the records that your mother had,

the Poles -- that is, the Kosciusko Foundation in New York --

MRS.. DICKIE:

MR, HENLE:

MRS... DICKIE:

MR, HENLE:

MRS. DICKIE:

MR. HENLE:

MRS. DICKIE:

MR.. HENLE:

MRS. - DICKIE:

MR. HENLE:

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 13

>

+

. 22> ; ga af is making a real effort to get, and you have not yet decided.

I have not yet decided, because I feel that I want the records near me as material for a published account, which I think would be highly valuable, of those years of effort on behalf

a of Poland in which my mother played a key part, and I wish to keep these papers until I am sure what the best disposition is

for the papers.

So that you really are keeping in the back of your mind the possibility of depositing them with the Hoover Library at

Stenford?

I am definitely keeping that in mind, be e it's all part of

ne larger picture. Even though there were specialized efforts along the way, they stem from the same beginning when my parents

went to Europe with Mr. Hoover

Exactly.

and that, as I seid before, affected the life course of both of

my parents.

And we have to remember that the Hoover Institution at Stanford

now has become really an outstanding .

A world center.

a world center for study on these various to pics.
¥ i

Exactly -- and scholars from all these countries come here. to find material relative to their particular nation at a certain

time, so I realize that.

Well, that's fine. You say you went to the West Branch funeral?

Yes, I did. The femily was kind enough to in vite me to go, and
I went there from here in Carmel and I have a very vivid memory

or feeling about the completion -- the cyclic kind of thing --

¢

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 14

that there the sun was setting behind that low hill -- the corn
Lath Men ViComex atl,

field -- the one windmill going as the sent said lowered into

the ground itself -- and having witnessed, even though I was very young at the beginning, a great portion of this so-called

Hoover cycle, I had a strong feeling that something was

completed -- something terribly significant in this returning

the earth -- and that it had been allowed to be completed

for a spiritual reason, and that Hoover's last years were almost he most importent years of his life because he was given time to prove, and did prove, the great qualities of his character, which in eluded his utter faithfulness to principles and to his friendships... And when I was there in Iowa I felt this

had been done, and I said to my husband when I came back,

some are given this chance; others are taken away." But you

have to earn it, I feel, spiritually, and he had completed this

Ohial]) Wr Crug, , git j : ?), And it's a very impressive thing in American History.

V/

MR.

MRS.

MRS

/

HENLE:

DICKIE:

DICKIE:

It is, in deed. Mrs. Dickie, do you subscribe any of Mr. Hoover's

actions and inner being to his connection with the Quaker faith?

Oh yes, I do. I think, unlike some practitioners of faith, we'll say, this was an in tegral part of his character to which he was faithful until the time of his death. I think simplicity and directness, love of peace, hatred of dishonesty are other qualities which are prime in the Quaker faith -- and a sense of reedom. If they think a thing is right, they go. to any length to do it, which hes been proved even in recent days. I think these things were woven into his character, and I think in this ease the faith and the man were one thing. 'There wasn't the

mental division that there sometimes is.

Mr. Hoover, of course, was not a Quaker fundamentalist.

No, because he wouldn't be a fundamentalist about anything

man of his wide human experience and breadth of mind.

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE~-~Page 15

MR. HENLE: Yes. And there, of course, were some Quakers who were unhappy

about some of his diversions -- say, for in stance .  .

MRS. DICKIE: Well, that happens in any great religious faith. In Budhism and Catholicism and other faiths there always have been very enlightened free spirits who, nevertheless,have been within the confines of this particuler belief because they felt that it was a way toward the truth and to full human being. He was one of those in the Quaker group because of his stature, and therefore I feel that sometimes they are the people who best exemplify the faith, because the founders of the faith are

usually the freest spirits that ever exist in that faith.

oC hia
Other people who come after them are always a bit more CiVifried

live Hheo-qimatic 4 oe /
yisremeayt-e---e END OF SIDE "A" OF TAPE 130/

TAPE JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE (cont'd.)
SIDE "B'

MR. HENLE: I have never myself attended a Quaker meeting, but dre? you able

to attend one?

MRS. DICKIE: Apparently I did -- I must have. I seem to see it in my mind,

as though I did -- occasionally someone rising.
At any rate, you don'trecollect that Mr, Hoover ever rose?
I can'ttell you that I remember.

MR. HENLE: But regardless of that, because of your long association, you have carried away over the years the distinct feeling that
Mr. Hoover's inner self was of the character that 1t was because

of his connection with the Quaker faith?

MRS. DICKIE£: I think so, and because, too, of the roots in the Middle West there and the kind of American life that he sprang from. I

think his integrity and ruggedness and directness and his many

MRS.

DICKIE:

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE~-Page 16

other qualities -- even qualities that made things more difficult f him in his presidential career .. .

A while back we were talking about a drop of dishonesty

At top levels -- filtering down to all levels -~- in this case he sthinking of Government <- and poisoning things --
poisoning the people, really. I think that was a fundamental

lA principle of him,and I think he adhered

to it to a degree which interfered with political expediency, and even the art of politics
@s an art, because he was so direct and so definite about this principle. And in that regard, this too grew out of his having done humanitarian work. He was handling public moneys all the time -- great sums of public money -- and he wouldn'thave dreamed of letting one cent of this not only be misused, but wasted, He couldn'tstand that. My parents, who helped him

and were on his relief group, were trained in how to handle public funds and how to run a relief office, and, as I remember, my mother told me that she was allowed one percent for the overhead. Now, of course, in these days, if you have to rent a building or something, that would be impossible, but at the time, generally speaking, you were allowed one percent for your overhead, so that all the rest of the money that even poor people were giving out of their pockets to help somebody whom they had never seen in their lives, and never would, would be properly handled and would get to those persons. The reason it comes to mind now is because my mother strictly adhered to this

principle during her nine years of Polish relief work that she

frtma 7 1939 RIFLES -
performed after my father's deathy She performed it in New York

in an office which was given to her by a brother or a nephew of

Je P. Morgan, and she performed it on a one percent overhead.

happen to have had a number of reminders recently that tt!

of in tegrity doesn'texist any mores You have to have all kinds

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 17

of public relations people and you have to have expenditures of

In my own little businesa, which happens to be_

\

\

\
y in the Carmel Valley, I have had a
\ \ \

\

\

@ sharp reminder -~ off the great\gul
\

that ideal and the raiding and digtribution |
\ \
eit' + . ee hd oe . pa n very important sculptor\in our region recently

\ \ \
\
his work and all his building and equipment in a

\
\

fire,\ and some\people, thought it would be welll to have an auction
; \ \ \ \
\of works of art \donated by fellow-artists to rebuild the\studio
\ \ \ \
\ \
de this\excellent artist who has done \civic mon\ments all \over
\

\
\ \ \
\ \ \

cn} comnts In the paper the other evening I read that su¢h &
auction ves going to be held and that the works of art Gas\ wie
\ \ \ \
to be ls were te be sold at very iow prices, ang ten per¢ent
\ \ \
of the proceeds was oing to be given to the beneficlary =~ to
\ \ ' \

\

the artist.
|Only \ten percent?

MRS... DICKIE: , ten percent, Mr. Henle. So it oceurred\ to me and my husband
\ \ \ \ '
vo Lind\ out where the other gett gine ag wes going. I won't

bore you\with these details, but I just want to\ point out the
\ \ \ \
differs ence between @ one percent overhead in the\handling o
\ \ i \
cS that are oe and this very small in ciden\ which has \no
\ \ \
a ttical relation to the other. It simply has a relation in\
\ \ \ \
principle. [t's a iekna 4 thinking -- and therefore\I think that
| } \ \ \
| ' \ | \

\
\ \ i \

taese things * 6 |
\

\

|

\

|
\ |
MR, HENLE: Well, would you mind saying where, ten eS percent

is going?

MRS. DICKIE: Well, as fer as I can see, it's going to the gallery house

space to the auction, and possibly to a man who's

eself-appointed coordinator. I\do not wish to say who \these

people or places are, but I'm merely stating that this is\ the z k

VY

kind of| thing that is a foil for the sort of impersonal principle

JEAN KELLOGG DICKIE--Page 1°

~

that Mre. Hoover Rad. It hyppened

example -+ a very good

a

So I\aid want to speak of this\business \of ove:

moneys\that ake given\to you by the public for 4@ Cause.
geo Pay

+
u
C) a ;
'PurAe A, A 7, Q LEH 'A tiavk y le

MR. HENLE: 'That's a very good exemple of a changes hat Res-come over US

in a cultural and moral eclipse.

Ts de AF OE. ne ae
MRS. : nvery much interested to

DICKIE:
and I think that the things that Mr. Hoover moral sphere will hopefully re-emerge in this country, because,

if they don't, I r e wi lave a very hard road in tne

future. It has been a great pleasure to be able to tell you

Well, it certainly has, and I want to thank you very much for

this very inspiring interview, Mrs. Di e In closing, may I

ask you if, after you have approved the enscript which will from this recording, it

you have given me, on being deposited in the Hoover Presidential

Library, West Brench, and the Hoover Institution, Stanford,

shell then become the property of those libraries to be used

for authorized historical research?
MRS. DICKIE:

MR. HENLE: 2 much /END OF INT

A Project of The Institute for Social Science Research

RAYMOND HENLE
DIRECTOR January 8, 1968

Mrs. James Dickie

Mr. Henle is wondering if you can give us the title of the book, pamphlet or other writing of your father in which he discussed the occasion when the Germans accused several men of the CRB staff of spying. Mr. Hoover forced the Germans to retract.

We are slowly coming out from under our overload of work which accumulated in California and are hoping to send you your transcript in not too long a time.

Sincerely yours,

F "
Dl he t1etie

Catherine J¥ Kenny
Assistant to the Director

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N. W., Washington, D. C.

Na

October 18, 1967

ia

Mrs. James Dick
Story Read
Carmel Valley, lifornia 93924

Mr. Nicholas Roosevelt wrote Mr. Henle that you would like to see him the morning of
October 21.

Unfortunately, Mr. Roosevelt's note arrived after Mr. Henle had departed for Washington

and Oregon, and was received here today.

He will be sorry to have missed you and will be in touch with you at a later date.

Sincerely yours,

Catherine J. Kenny
Assistant to the Director

A Project of The Institute for Social Science Research

RAYMOND HENLE
DIRECTOR

Dictated from Marco Island, Florida
May 27, 1968

Mrs. James Dickie

Your two cordial letters arrived while I was deep in recording and transcript reading work, and I am only now catching up.

Your cordial invitation was greatly appreciated and
I most surely would like to drive down and talk with you and see the material you mentioned. Just when we will get to California remains uncertain, but I shall let you know by phone after we arrive.

The corrections you suggested in your May 15th note are fully justified and will be made according to your wishes to be reflected in the final copies.

Mrs. Henle joins in every good wish to you and Mr.
Dickie.

Sincerely yours,
A a c / f y
Cy Y YR ~. rpc Ke 7c ce

/

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N. W., Washington, D. C. 20036

Herbert Hoover Oral History Progra m

A Project of The Institute for Social Science Research
"se

ee ee Dictated fy m Marco Island, Florida
May 28, i '

Mrs. James Dickie

On re-reading your letter of May 4, I find I should have been more specific in my reply.

Let me say I don'twant you to alter your
August NYC trip plans. I think if I can't make it to California in July, I'll wait until September or October.

Sincerely yours,

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N.W., Washington, D. C. 20036 + 202-296-3971

delightful luncheon,
Carmel Valley was the highlight of this trip.

Itll collect some thoughts and write you about the reterded children's art program from our
West Virginia hide-away later in the month,

As to the Collection, why not

hold all in ebeyance until I consult a friend who Itll see on or about
August 5, You can count of me to

Be in touch with you,

Good wishes

Yours

Raymond Henle

A Project of The Institute for Social Science Research

Sa vaa Sate ERL Dictated from Marco Island, Florida
DIRECTOR August 19, 1968

Mrs. James Dickie

I have been delayed writing you, as complications a rose in this part of the world and only now am I able to get down to neglected affairs.

First, on your husband's desire to in terest someone in his drawing ideas:

As I stated in your home, I would be happy to write the
Secretary of HEW, Mr. Cohen, if you think that course advisable. Otherwise you probably will end with the most satisfactory results by dealing with a publisher.

A pubiisher undoubtedly knows the ins and outs of government assistance and, while his arrangements

with you probably would be less remunerative, you also could figure he actually is acting as an a gent and therefore entitled to financial consideration.

Now as to your collection:
If you have decided against The Hoover Institution, then

the place for it is in the Hoover Presidential Library,
West Branch. They would welcome it enthusiastically.

You indicated that for personal reasons you would like to place one or two of Mme. Curie's letters up for sale.
If you do, then do consider getting an evaluation on the remainder and sending it to West Branch.

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N. W., Washington, D. C. 20036 + 202-296-3971

Mrs. Dickie 8/19/68

My suggested course would be to send the residue to Mr.
Allan Hoover so that he will know what the collection comprises. He would turn it over to the proper custodian.

If you have any reservations or further questions, please write me. I want to help.

As to an evaluator, you might want to consider phoning or writing Mrs. Ben S. Allen in Palo Alto. She recently told me she had a very good evaluator in San
Francisco. After you get his name, you could discuss fees with him and, if you find it in expedient to deal with him, you might want the evaluation made by Mr.
Hoover's representatives.

I will be eager to hear from you.
My wife joins in sending every good wish to you and

your husband. We did so enjoy our day with you in
Carmel Valley.

Sincerely yours,

ae)
Jy
Fee CU Vt

A Project of The Institute for Social Science Research

RAYMOND sRNLE Marco Island, Florida
February 12, 1969

Mrs. James Dickie
Carmel Valley, Cal. 93924

How nice to hear from you and to receive your books, WOMEN OF BELGIUM and FIGHTING
STARVATION IN BELGIUM.

You did not indicate if they were sent on loan or if I am to keep them for eventual deposit at West Branch. When you have a chance please give me your guidance on this.

My wife joins in sending every good wish to you and your husband.

Sincerely yours,

A bee

Suite 807, 1200 17th Street, N. W., Washington, D. C. 20036 + 202-296-3971

TA LY Mme fubu of

RAYMOND HENLE
DIRECTOR

Mrs. James Dickie
Peo = BOX 5
Carmel Valley, California

We are preparing the final copy of your interview

for presentation to the Hoover libraries and will

appreciate having two copies of your biography and two photographs to be bound with them.

These are of great interest to researchers and archivists.

Thank you very much,

Sincerely yours,

oO - |
f , i} .
So, 2 Cag  tee A 44 aes
; z /
Catherine " Kenny he
Assistant Director

Suste 1206, 1140 Connecticut Avenue, N. W., Washington, D. C. 20036 + 202-296-3971

|
re

FOR THE ARCHIVES OF HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY AND HOOVER INSTITUTION
ON WAR, REVOLUTION AND PEACE

RAYMOND HENLE

DIRECTOR June 20, 1970

Mrs. James Dickie
PO Box 25

I am writing you because the question has a risen about protecting you and all the others who have so generously given their recorded interviews to the Herbert Hoover Oral History Program against any possible misuse of your material by persons who might wish to exploit it for commercial purposes.

May I emphasize that this appears to be in deed a remote possibility. However, we have been advised by legal counsel that

it might be wise if each of our interviews were copyrighted in the name of the Herbert Hoover Presidential Library Association.
This non-profit Association which now sponsors the Oral History
Program was created specifically to encourage the study of
Herbert Hoover and his times, and to advance the interests of the Presidential Library.

The Association will continue to deposit all our interviews in the Presidential Library, as well as in the library of the
Hoover Institution at Stanford University, and will encourage the use of the interviews without charge for historical research and other non-commercial purposes.

I enclose a letter prepared by our attorneys which when signed by you would give your consent to the copyright of your interview in the name of the Herbert Hoover Presidential Library
Association. This would help provide effective and continuing protection of the material you gave the Oral History Program.
A return envelope is enclosed for your convenience.

You have made yourself a contributor to an historic program and in asking you to return the enclosed letter I again express my gratitude for your participation.

Good wishes.

Sincerely yours,
¢

A PROJECT OF THE HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION. INC.

1500 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W., Suite 840, Washington, D.C. 20005 + 202-296-3971

ie bf2 2/70
title V7. A Pp hw 3
A Seon Slat her ry 2?

FOR THE ARCHIVES OF HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY AND HOOVER INSTITUTION
ON WAR, REVOLUTION AND PEACE

RAYMOND HENLE
DIRECTOR

Hoover and
'
America in sw York rece!

the ok? I'd like it for our Lou Henry Hoover and Herbert
Hoover portrait

Professor

L ~
[ (trl Grthn f

brit: tid tay W1CAAAA;

a. . ;
/ 47 A dice > A 7 ¢
pS . f . L@

A PROJECT OF THE HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION. INC

1500 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W., Suite 840, Washington, D. C. 20005 + 202-296-3971

FOR THE ARCHIVES OF HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY AND HOOVER INSTITUTION
ON WAR, REVOLUTION AND PEACE

RAYMOND HENLE
DIRECTOR

A PROJECT OF THE HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION. INC

1500 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W., Suite 840, Washington, D. C. 20005 + 202-296-3971

FOR THE ARCHIVES OF HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY AND HOOVER INSTITUTION
ON WAR, REVOLUTION AND PEACE

CATHERINE J. KENNY

ASSISTANT DIRECTOR

January 20, 1971

Mrs. Jean Kellogg Dickie

We have requested the two Hoover libraries to remove the appendix material from your interview and to eliminate the footnote on page 16.

This does not affect the record at all, as the Vining memorandum is discussed in at least one other interview.

Sincerely yours,

Eade Nee OO

(io Zé ee ae at : Ae oe ee v4
WA, {f é if

A PROJECT OF THE HERBERT HOOVER PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION. INC

1500 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W., Suite 840, Washington, D. C. 20005 + 202-296-3971

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
National Archives and Records Service

Herbert Hoover Presidential Library
West Branch,Iowa 52358

'ADMINISTRATION Yy

ty &

22 April 1971

Mrs. James Dickie
Carmel Valley
California 9392)

The Herbert Hoover Presidential Library is compiling for publication a guide to the Library's historical materials which will include a descriptive list of the oral history transcripts. We are identifying each interviewee by his or her position relative to the contents of the interview.
In your biographical sketch we would like to note the inclusive dates

that your mother, Charlotte Hoffman Kellogg, was a Director of the Commission for Polish Relief. She assumed the position in 1939 when the group was organized. We hope that you can provide the year that she concluded the Polish Relief activities.

Thank you very much for any assistance that you can give us.
Sincerely,

Gptttusecttrertetrak debybcle

Carole Sue Warmbrodt DeLaite
Archivist

Keep Freedom in Your Future With U.S. Savings Bonds

Hoover Presidential Library Association, Inc.

November 15, 1975
Jean Kellogg Dickie
Story Road - Box 25
Carmel Valley, Calif. 93924

Dear Friend:

The Herbert Hoover Library Association is now carrying forward the activities it began during and immediately after the Centennial, and is developing new projects appropriate to its charter. The success of these activities and projects will be due in large part to the continued support of the Associate
Members and Trustees.

Our special Centennial publication, THE UNCOMMON MAN, is receiving wide distribution. It is being sold directly to the public at the sales desk of the Library and in the Visitors' Center of the National Park Service.

Distribution of the volume is also being made to the elementary and high schools through the EDUCATOR'S INDEX OF FREE MATERIALS, and requests are being received from schools in more than 40 states. Copies are being sent also to the 60 Herbert Hoover schools located in 16 States of the U.S.A.

The papers given at the four Centennial seminars are being edited for publication, and the winning essays in the contest on the Free Enterprise
System, funded by the Garvey Foundation, will be published and distributed to
3,900 college and university libraries by the end of the year.

In our 1974 letter we in formed you of the large-scale acquisitions project being conducted by the Library to locate and copy Hoover letters in other libraries and in private hands. Tom Thalken, the Library Director, visited the San Francisco, Los Angeles, San Diego, Washington, and New York areas during the past year, and the fruits of his searching are more than encouraging.
The net result was 377 new Hoover letters which were not in the Library before the trip. Xerox copies of 369 Hoover letters were made, and an additional eight letters were donated. One Hoover letter was dated 1695, and another written from Australia was dated 1898. Tom is making another trip to the West
Coast in October, and one to the East Coast in November.

We would like to take this opportunity to ask our friends to help us locate all Herbert Hoover letters that may come to their attention. In the not too distant future, the Association will initiate its most ambitious undertaking to date -- the editing and publishing of the The Private and Public
Papers of Herbert Hoover. Before we can begin, however, we must locate and copy and bring into the Hoover Library a copy of every Hoover letter we can find.

Dr. George Nash, who received his PhD from Harvard University bigl AUMCIAES'
and whose most recent study, "The Conservative Intellectual Movement, in
America Since 1945", is being published by Basic Books, to appear in February has begun research on a multi-volume biography of Herbert Hoover. Dr. Nash's project is being funded by a grant from the J. M. Foundation in New York.

The success of these research and publication programs depends upon the continued support of the Association's members, and we in vite the friends and admirers of Herbert Hoover to assist us in carrying out these projects.
Your support and your contribution will be greatly appreciated.

sincerely, '
n SP.

é é 4A SVC
Lobes Speer

Hoover Presidential Library Assoc.

Aims and Purposes of the Hoover Presidential Library Association

as set out in its Articles of Incorporation.

"To collect, preserve and utilize, for the purpose of public education, all historical material and data relating to the life and times of Herbert Hoover, thirty-first president of the United
States.

"To assist and cooperate with the United States Government, the State of lowa and governmental agencies in the maintenance and operation of the Herbert Hoover Presidential
Library at West Branch, lowa, and the Birthplace of Herbert Hoover at West Branch, lowa.

"To assist and cooperate with other governmental institutions and other nonprofit institutions described in Section 501(c)(3) and exempt from taxation under Section 501(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code that are depositories of materials relating to American history.

"To promote the acquisition, preservation and utilization for educational purposes of historical papers and other materials reli ting not only to Herbert Hoover and his times, but also to other contemporary statesmen and persons.

"To promote the acquisition and use for educational purposes of books, reference works, newspapers, photographs, films and other materials in the field of American tradition and history, politics, public law, foreign policy, economics, sociology, and related disciplines.

"To promote scholarly research and teaching in the above-mentioned ftelds by means of grants to scholars for investigation, conferences of scholars, and teachers, and other aids to historical research and teaching.

"To foster public education by the dissemination of the results of scholarly research by means of conferences, public lectures, publications, public exhibitions, documentary films and similar

activities.

"To undertake such other charitable and educational activities as may be necessary and

appropriate in order to accomplish the purposes herein stated.

- and -

"To use any part of the principal and in come of the Corporation to promote the advancement and diffusion of knowledge and understanding by aiding schools, institutions of higher learning, individuals, scientific research and useful publications, and by such other agencies and means as shall from time to time be appropriate therefor, and to make a wards, grant scholarships and create endowments for the purpose of promoting or carrying on any of the Corporation's objects or purposes."

Hoover Presidential Library Association, Inc.

December 22, 1975.

Mrs. Jean Kellogg Dickie,
Story Road,

Carmel Valleu, Calif., 93924
Dear Mrs, "ickie:

Thanks you for your good letter citing to us papers of in terest to the Hoover library here. I have given your letter to Tom
Thalken, director of the Library and you will be hearing from him.

During the past few months we have

received in formation about a lot of Hoover

it
"papers" we had not realized were available.

The result is an entrance into 1976 with a lot of enthasiam.
Wishing you the season's best, I am

Sincerely, y
( ae ba IOP n
Mprnw Mm i{Gar24 -

/ John M. Henry, secretary,
{/ Moover Library Assoc.

A