DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 393 716 



SO 025 220 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 



Matthews, Gail; Patterson, Don 

Learning from Your Community: Folklore and Video in 
the Schools. A Classroom Curriculum for Grades 
A~8. 

South Carolina Arts Commission. 

National Endowment for the Arts, Washington, D.C.; 
South Carolina Humanities Council, Columbia. 

91 

72p.; Tested and revised with Mrs. Melba Payne's 
Fifth Grade Class, Mayesville Elementary School, 
Mayesville, South Carolina. 

McKissick Museum, University of South Carolina, 
Columbia, SC 29208 ($5). 

Guides - Classroom Use - Teaching Guides (For 
Teacher) (052) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Art Education; ^Community Resources’, Elementary 
School Curriculum; *Film Production; *Folk Culture; 
Hurricanes; Intermediate Grades; Junior High Schools; 
Mass Media; Nonprint Media; Oral History; Oral 
Tradition; Personal Narratives; *Production 
Techniques; Video Equipment; Videotape Recordings 
Artists in Residence Program; *South Carolina 



ABSTRACT 

This curriculum guide describes a unit of study 
designed to help students learn academic and technical skills 
necessary for creating a video. Mayesville Elementary School (South 
Carolina) teachers and their students collaborated with a 
videographer and folklorist in a series of 3~week school residencies 
requiring students to develop stories using the video format. 

Students interviewed members of the community about their perceptions 
of hurricane Hugo and the impact the storm had on their lives. This 
curriculum guide provides background on the project, a project 
schedule, sample lesson plans, class interviews and interview 
criteria, support materials, information on basic video skills 
necessary for production, a glossary of terms, and 31 references. 

(NP) 



Vf Vc V? Vc Vc Vc Vf Vc Vc * V? * * Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc V? V? Vc Vc * Vc Vc V? Vc Vc Vt V? Vc * Vc it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it i: it it it i: it it it it it it it it it it it 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

from the original document. 



it 



it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it * i: it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 



o 



Learning From Your Community: 
Folklore and Video in the Schools 

A Classroom Curriculum 
For Grades 4-8 



o 




0 

Co 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OUice of Educafional Research and Improvomeni 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

•O This document has boon reproducad as 
received from Iho person or organization 
ofigmaling i| 

O Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions staled m this 
document do not necessarily represent 
olliciat OERI positron or policy 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
' DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 

D HAS been (WANTED BY 

. UeML^. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER <ERICl 



2 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







Learning From Your Community: 
Folklore and Video in the Schools 



A Classroom Curriculum 
For Grades 4-8 



Gail Matthews, Ph.D. 
Don Patterson, M.S. 



South Carolina Arts Commission 
South Carolina Folk Arts Program 





Developed by 

Gail Matthews, Ph.D, (folklorist) 

and 

Don Patterson, M.S. (videographer) 



As part of the 

"Our Stories of the Storm" Project 



Cosponsored by 

The South Carolina Arts Commission 

and 

The South Carolina Folk Arts Program, U. S. C. 



With Funding from 

The National Endowment for the Arts 

and 

The South Carolina Humanities Council 



Tested and Revised with 
Mrs. Melba Payne's Fifth Grade Class 
Mayesville Elementary School 
Mayesville, S.C 
Spring 1991 




4 





Dedicated to the Memory of Michael Fleishman 




Instructor Don Patterson teaches video basics to a Mayesville Elementary School student. 




5 





Learning F rom Your Community: RWkloro ai^d Video in the Schools 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

(VC) indicates that this section of the cuiriculum 
is represented in the accompanying video companion. 



Introduction: Project Background 7 

Student Selection 9 

Class Format (VC) 10 

Choosing a Topic 11 

Video Curriculum Companion 11 

Suggested Schedule 12 

Lesson Plans 14 

Ice Breaker 15 

Introduction 16 

Demonstration Interviews 18 

Stories (VC) 19 

Interviews and Conversations 20 

Questions 21 

Types of Questions (handout) 22 

Hugo Stories (optional) 23 

Siuvivors (optional) 24 

Critique of Sample Interviews 25 

Class Interviews (VC) 26 

Class Interview Critiqique 27 

Video and Interview Critique Guide (handout) 28 

History and Historians (VC) 29 

Brainstorming: Setting the Rules 30 

Brainstorming Video Ideas (VC) 31 

Titles and Tying It All Together (VC) 33 

Program Openings (handout) 34 

Video Skills, Terminology, and Jobs 35 

Production Personnel (handout) 36 

Video Terminology (handout) 37 

Production Tenninology (handout) 38 



ERIC 



6 



Pages 



lA\irnin^ Fron^Your Community: Ft^lklorcand Video in the Schools 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

(Continued) 



Lesson Plans (cont.) 



Project Discussion and Refinement 39 

Rap/Song Writing Assignment 41 

Scriptwriting (VC) 43 

Script Log and Contact List (example) 45 

Script Log (handout) 46 

Contact List (handout) 47 

Glossary of Terms 48 

Support Materials 57 

What Makes Your Comer of the World Special? (handout) 58 

"Our Stories of the Storm" (article) 63 

Selected Bibliography 65 



Page 6 




V 




lAMrnin^ 1 r<im Vtuir C ommumly: l olklnrc and \'idco in the Schools 





l.cMrnin^ I’rom Your C oii'miunitv: I olklon* and Vido(> in tho Schools 



INTRODUCTION 



Project Background 

"Hugo: Our Stories of the Storm" 
was initially designed to help students 
attain the academic and technical skills 
necessary to make a video about the 
impact that hurricane Hugo had on their 
communities. For this project a team of 
one folklorist and one videographer 
performed a series of three-week school 
residencies that helped children share 
their stories with each other, interview 
selected community members on video- 
tape, learn basic med ia production skills, 
and finally produce a video that cre- 
atively communicated some of their 
perceptions of the storm experience. 
Representatives from the Arts Commis- 
sion (Ken May, Michael Fleishman, Su- 
san Leonard) and the Folk Arts Program 
(Dr. Douglas DeNatale, Dr. Gail 
Matthews) involved with designing the 
project postulated that this documen- 
tary process would have a healing and 
empowering impact on the students. 

Don Patterson and Gail Matthews 
comprised one of the folklore/ 
videographer teams that worked with 
Mayesville Elementary School. As they 
drew up the specific lesson plans for 
their residency, they realized that the 
lessons for this project could be revised 
into a more general model curriculum to 
help students document cultural, his- 
torical and social topics in their commu- 
nities on video. 



Children respond enthusiastically 
to video. With the following lesson 
plans, educators can use this student 
enthusiasm to its best advantage, en- 
couraging students to be curious about 
their local environment and to expand 
their expertise. In interviewing family 
and friends, students come to under- 
stand that learning is a fun part of every- 
day life, not just a boring routine con- 
fined to their schoolgrounds. 

In addition to discovering art and 
history within their own community, 
making project content decisions, and 
developing their own presentational 
strategy, students practice a number of 
vital technical and academic skills dur- 
ing a community video project, skills 
involving; decoding and word meaning 
(BSAP), technical media details, team 
work or interpersonal relations, perfor- 
mance/public speaking, attention to 
detail (BSAP), identification of the main 
idea in a conversation/event/writing 
(BSAP), analysis of oral and ^vritten lit- 
erature (BSAP), research /planning, criti- 
cal and analytical thinking (BSAP), cre- 
ative/artistic development, language 
arts. In addition to these skills, the 
students are introduced to an inclusive 
conceptualization of history and an 
awareness of their presence in the his- 
torical process . To make this curriculum 
teacher "user-friendly" we give goals 



Page 8 




9 



Lciuning lYom Your Community; F'olki.orc andX'idoo in the Schools 



and objectives in addition to listing the 
skills practiced during each lesson. The 
companion video tape also lists primary 
lesson messages for each video clip 
shown. 

Perhaps the most important feature 
of a project like this is that the students 
play an integral and active role in all 
phases of the documentary and deci- 
sion-making process. The students work 
as a team to write the script, run the 
cameras, do the interviews, and design 
the segments. 

Instructors may be tempted to 
modify the script to accommodate their 
own "teacher aesthetic." There is also a 
danger that the video product will be- 
come more important to the instructor 
or school than the learning process. Our 
experience with this project suggests 
that it is better to conclude the project 
with a less-than-polished product that 
is entirely student made than to create 
a "perfect" video by either pressiuring 
or making decisions for the students, 
cheating them out of valuable learning 
experiences. 

The following lesion plan is d€J- 
signed for a class of about 20-30 students 
ages 10-12 and assumes that two teach- 
ers (hereafter referred to as "folklorist," 
"videographer," or "instructor") will 
spend between two to three hours each 
day working with the students. In these 
lessons the "folklorist" works with the 



class on creative, content and documen- 
tary skills while the "videographer" 
teaches technical media skills. In order 
to accommodate the attention span of 
children it is suggested that instructors 
teach two lessons per day; one lesson in 
the morning and one in the afternoon. If 
instructors are working with any other 
age group, group size, or time variables 
they may want to modify the lesson 
plans to suit their needs. We estimate 
that students in grades 4-8 will respond 
well to this curriculum as it is written or 
with minor modifications. 

Student Selection 

Because team building and a 
sense of in-group community are in- 
tegral to this kind of project, we sug- 
gest that the student group remain 
constant throughout the project. Team 
members need to be able to get to 
know each other day by day, building 
trust and alliances. 

Creative and alternative curricula 
are often reserved for gifted and tal- 
ented student classes. While a project 
such as this will work well with a 
gifted and talented group, we have 
also discovered that learning-disabled 
students and children dealing with 
at-risk factors thrive while working 
with video. Students who have not 
responded well to the traditional class- 
room environment often demonstrate 
amazing initiative and leadership 




10 



Page 9 





Learning F rom Your Community: F olklore and Video ii> the Schools 



skills during community-based video 
projects. Some of the hardships and 
difficulties that these non-traditional 
students contend with in their daily lives 
give them a creative and alternative per- 
spective on life. A conununity-based 
video project taps into student creativity 
and puts that energy to good use. We 
urge you to involve a wide range of 
students in your project. 

Class Format 

This kind of project works best when 
the classroom environment is trans- 
formed from the traditional rows of 
chairs into a discussion circle or semi- 
circle (depicted in video companion). 
The emphasis of this kind of a project is 
on teamwork and a circular seating ar- 
rangement encourages communication 
among students. The instructor stands 
in the center of the circle while teaching, 
playing the class like a theater in the 
round so that each student gets to feel 
included in the brainstorming and deci- 
sion-making process. At first the stu- 
dents will inevitably look to the instruc- 
tor for set answers. During the initial 
lessons it is extremely important for the 
instructor to nurture student input and 
opinions while avoiding passing judge- 
ment. As the project progresses and the 
students gain the skills that they need to 
create their own work, the instructor 
gradually becomes less of a teacher and 
more of a project consultant for the stu- 
dents. After the students J;\ave been 
assigned to their video production teams. 



the instructor should refer students with 
content or directing questions back to 
their production team director and pro- 
ducer instead of making content deci- 
sions for the team. 

These lesson plans rely heavily on 
questions for group discussion. For your 
convenience the lesson plan questions 
are printed in bold type. Terms that are 
defined in the glossary are underlined . 
Following most of each lesson's ques- 
tions we haveprovided sample answers. 
Your students may come up with per- 
fectly good points that we have not in- 
cluded in our sample answer. These 
questions are not fact-oriented — they 
have many possible good answers. Stu- 
dents usually respond well to these dis- 
cussions and are attentive if they realize 
that they are being listened to and if they 
know that they will not "fail" or be 
publicly humiliated by answering "in- 
correctly." 

Before the project begins, set up a 
rotation system for the children. Each 
lesson is videotaped by the students, 
each child working the camera for 15 
minutes at a time before rejoining the 
class and allowing the next person in the 
rotation schedule to work with the video 
equipment. In this way the videogr apher 
can work with each student individu- 
ally on camera technique while the rest 
of the students learn documentary and 
content skills. This student practice video 
footage was used extensively in the video 
curriculum companion. 




11 



Page 10 




Learning Fr(>m Your CJommiu'iUy . lolkloreand Video in the Schools 



V < 



It is also important to allow plenty 
of time for video playback and critique. 
In this way the students can teach them- 
selves by evaluating their own work. 

Choosing a Topic 

The project topic can be chosen be- 
forehand by the instructors or the selec- 
tion process can be incorporated into a 
pre-project class lesson plan. Good top- 
ics are relevant to the students' immedi- 
ate lives and culture. You may want to 
use the exercise "What Makes Your Cor- 
ner of the World Special?" based on a 
handout developed by Dr. Betty Belanus 
of the Office of Folkliife Programs at the 
Smi thsonian Insititution, which we have 
included in the support materials to 
brainstorm project ideas. 

We have also included a selected 
bibliography of other publications con- 
cerning folklore in the classroom. (Cita- 
tions selected from a 25 page bibliogra- 
phy of works on folklore and education 
compiled by Dr. Jan Rosenberg and 
Kathy Condon. The complete bibliogra- 
phy can be obtained through Dr. 
Rosenberg at TRAHC, P.O. Box 1171, 
Texarkana, AR/TX 75504-1171.) Often 
folklore documentation and collection 
projects stimulate so much interest that 
the class wants to continue on with other 
topics. The citations in this bibliogra- 
phy contain additional lesson plans and 
exercises that you can use in class. 



Video Curriculum Companion 

For your convenience we have com- 
piled a tape of representative clips from 
our in-class videos so that you can get a 
feel for how students respond to the 
lessons. This tape will also help you 
think about how you might go about 
implementing your own class project. 
We conclude each clip with a few words 
about the larger messa ges that the project 
and the lessons communicate. At the 
end of this tape a teacher and school 
principal talk about what the project 
meant for them and for their students. 
Most of the clips that you see on this tape 
were shot by the students at Mayesville 
Elementary School. All of the photographs 
used in this curriculum were taken by stu- 
dents. 

One of the lesson plans, "Critique 
of Sample Interviews," asks the students 
to evaluate interviews that were per- 
formed by other students. These sample 
interviews can be found on the second 
video tape included in the kit. Follow- 
ing the interviews is a sample completed 
student video for educators who want to 
see what other children have done. 

FOR A COPY OF THE VIDEO 
CURRICULUM COMPANION, CONTACT; 

THE MEDIA ARTS CENTER 

SOUTH CAROLINA ARTS COMMISSION 

1800 GERVAIS ST. 

COLUMBIA, SC 29201. 



o 



12 



Page n 




Learning F rom Your Community: I blklorc and V'idco in Iho Sdtools 



Suggested Schedule 



Week I: Follow in-dass lesson plans to teach and practice basic content and 
interview skills necessary for the project; teach and practice video production 
terminology, skills, and protocol (i.e., accepted norms of behavior or code of 
etiquette); brainstorm video segment ideas; compose topic interview questions; 
assign students to production teams; design the overall script and segment plans; 
set production schedule. 



Week II: Work in production teams to practice video skills and reinforce 
team job responsibilities; build any necessary sets; co-author songs, poems, or raps; 
choreograph dances; arrange for interviews; perform practice interviews with class 
members; choose music (to save time, the instructor can work directly with each 
team producer or pre-select several music samples for them to choose from); design 
opening and closing credits. Practice sessions should be videotaped and videos 
should be evaluated by the student director and team members. Evaluation should 
include attention to video quality and sound quality as well as the on- camera skill 
of the student "talent" or interviewers. 



WGCk III: Shoot video segments and credits. Bring along a 35mm instamatic 
camera (not polaroid — too distracting and unreliable) so that one student can 
document the shoot experience. These photos can be sorted later to make a comic 
book-like storyboard of the projected edited piece. They can also be incorporated 
into a classroom bulletin board display about the project. Only one team should go 
on a shoot at a time — students without jobs who are just observing tend to disrupt 
the shoot. 



■ 



ERIC 



13 



Page 12 





Learning From Your Con'tnumily: Folklore and Vidci) in the Schools 



Week IV: Edit the video. This part of the project is extremely tedious and 
time-consuming. Editing with an entire production team tends to be frustrating for 
all parties. Only the director and the producer for each team should work with the 
videographer on editing. In order to educate the entire class about the editing 
process, arrange a special demonstration session. 

While the videographer works with the team producers and directors in the 
editing room, the class instructor can have the rest of the class practice putting 
together storyboards of possible edits using the shoot photographs. The instructor 
can use popular comic books to explain the notion of a "storyboard." Instructor 
addresses publicity/distribution when class writes "press release" articles for 
school newsletter or local newspapers about upcoming video "screening." 



Page 13 






ERIC 



14 




Learning I rom Ygur Comnuuuly; l-olkk)rc and Video in tlie Schoolb 



Lesson Plans 




A student-run production crew on location. 







Page 14 





Learning f r<>m Your C'omnumity: Iblklori.* and Video in tin* Schools 



Ice Breaker 



Lesson Material: 

Students interview the person to 
their right for three to five minutes. 
They ask factual questions, such as the 
person's name and age. They also ask 
"fun" questions, such as the person's 
favorite color or favorite food, their fa- 
vorite/least favorite television show, 
movie, or local radio DJ. After five 
minutes of information gathering each 
student stands up and introduces the 
person on his or her right to the rest of 
the class. 

Example Questions: 

What is your name? Is there a story 
behind how you got your name or who 
you are named for? How old are you? 
Where were you born? What is yom 
favorite color? Why do you like that 
color? What is your favorite food? 
What is your favorite television show? 
What is your favorite movie? What do 
you like to do during your free time? 



Objective; 

To compose extemporaneous ques- 
tions and relate the question answers to 
the rest of the class. 

Goal: 

When the students talktoeachother' 
in an informal and fun way they are 
actually practicing rudimentary inter- 
viewing skills, easing into the role of 
interviewer. This exercise encourages 
the students to think of fellow class- 
mates as possible sources for interesting 
information and take the risk of asking 
their peers about their lives and inter- 
ests. The instructor, paying close atten- 
tion to the students as they interview 
and introduce each other, may be able to 
identify students who have not excelled 
in the traditional classroom, but have 
exceptional verbal or leadership skills 
that can be nurtured during this project. 

Skills Practiced: 

Attention to Detail (BSAP); Main 
Idea (BSAP); Interpersonal Skills; Pub- 
lic Speaking 



Note: Remember to set up a videocamera before beginning these lessons and establish a fifteen 
minute rotation system for the students to practice (one-on-one with the videographer) running 
the camera, videotaping the exercises and lessons as they are taught. 





Page 15 





Lctirning f rom Your Communily: i blkloro aiid Video in liu' Schools 



Introduction 



Lesson Material: 

The instructors stand up before the 
class and introduce the students to the 
roles of folklorist and videographer . 

Videographers: 

What do videographers do? A 
videographer is someone who utilizes 
moving or still pictures to tell a story to 
an audience. Sometimes the 
videographer works with made-up 
scripts, special effects and indoor sets 
that will help communicate the story. At 
other times the videographer goes out 
into a community to videotape actual 
events and interviews with local people 
that will help communicate the story. 
These videos of actual people and events 
are called documentaries . Sometimes 
videographers blend fact and fiction 
together to create "tall tales" that are 
essentially true, but larger than life. The 
decision to video made-up, real-life, or 
fact/ fiction blended scenes depends on 
the story that needs to be told and how 
the videographer feels that he or she can 
best tell that story. 

In order to make videos that look 
and sound good a videographer needs 
to learn about and practice technical 
skills. A videographer knows how to 
move the camera slowly and steadily, 
how to shoot pictures that are not too 
dark or too light, and how to get good 



clear sovmd. The videographer then 
uses his or her skills with lighting, audio 
(sound), video and editing to create and 
deliver messages that will hold the 
audience's interest. 

Folklorists: 

What do folklorists do? Many im- 
portant things about history and about 
people never get written down. For 
example, we know a lot about Abraham 
Lincoln, but we do not know much about 
the average American who lived at the 
same time as President Lincoln. 

We write down and preserve many 
facts about American life, but we often 
forget to record "fun" things like the 
songs that we sing, the dances that we 
dance, and the stories that we tell. Folk- 
lorists are people who document the 
parts of history that get left out and the 
"fun" things that we sometimes forget 
to record. 

Thefolkloristoften interviews mem- 
bers of a community to hear them tell 
about their culture and their history in 
their own words. This is how folklorists 
research and document things that have 
not been written down in the past — 
things that you cannot find in books. 



Page 16 




17 





Luirnin^ EVom ^\>cir Con’iraiunity: Folklorc^aiK^ Vidoa in the Schoob 



Introduction (Cont.) 



Objective: 

To examine the essential goals of videography and of folklore. 

Goal: 

Through this discussion the students are exposed to two new concepts. First, 
that video can be used to tell stories. Second, that folklore examines the parts of 
culture that often get overlooked or forgotten. This second notion also begins to 
expand student notion of history. 

Skills Practiced: 

Decoding and Word Meaning (BSAP); Reference Usage (BSAP); Technical 
Media Skills; History Skills 




Students interview each other about their experiences as members of a community. 



Page 17 



ERIC 



18 






lA’jrnin^ Frc^m Your C'ommiinuy: Folkloro tind Vidoo in tho Sch(H)ls 



Demonstration Interview 



Lesson Material: 

How would you go about inteiy 
viewing/conversing with another per- 
son? What kinds of things would you 
like to know? 



Objective: 

To formulate practice interview 
questions and evaluate the success of the 
sample questions. 

Goal: 

Interviewing can be a little fright- 
ening for some people. In this exercise 
the students ease into the interview situ- 
ation by formulating questions that are 
asked by the instructor. The instructors 
model good interviewing skills and pro- 
vide a sample interview that can be 
criticized without risking student loss of 
face. 

Skills Practiced: 

Reference Usage (BSAP); Critical/ 
Analytical Thinking (BSAP); Research/ 
Planning Skills; Team Work and Inter- 
personal Skills 



The class calls out questions that 
they want the videographer to ask the 
folklorist or the instructor. The 
videographer writes the questions down 
and then interviews the folklorist or the 
instructor in front of the class using their 
questions. 

Which questions worked the best? 
How cotild you reword questions that 
did not work as well? 

The class then calls out questions 
that they would like the folklorist to ask 
the videographer and the folklorist in- 
terviews the videographer using those 
questions. 



Page 1 8 




13 




Learning From Your Coii’iiminilv: I’oiklorc and Vidci) in tho Schools 



Stories 

(Depicted in Video Companion) 



Lesson Material: 

Folklorists listen to and document 
other people's stories. 

How do you feel when other people 
really listen to you when you tell a 
story? Most people feel very important 
when people listen to them closely. 

Do stories have to be about things 
that are fictional (made up)? Some 
stories can be based on things that really 
happened, such as Hurricane Hugo (use 
pertinent local example), while other 
stories tell about a make-believe world 
or things that we would like to have 
happen. 

Are stories only told with words? 
Sometimes you don't need to talk to tell 
a story — songs, dances, photographs, 
puppet shows, and many other things 
tell stories. 

Can you thirdc of other ways that 
we tell stories? Drawn pictures, quilts, 
raps, poems, etc., even video itself. 

What makes a good story? Good 
stories are interesting and hold the lis- 
teners' attention. Stories are interesting 
when they are put together well, include 
vivid details, and are well timed. Be 
thinking about how you could tell the 
"story" of your topic well on videotape. 



Objective: 

To analyze the many possible ways 
that stories can be told. 

Goal: 

This lesson helps to expand the stu- 
dents' definition of the word "story" 
and to explore the role that "storytelling" 
plays in our daily lives. 

Skills Practiced: 

Decoding and Word Meaning 
(BSAP); Analysis of Literature (BSAP); 
Language Arts Skills; Creative/ Artistic 
Skills; Interpersonal Skills 




2u 



Page 19 





Learning From Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



Interviews and Conversations 



Lesson Material: 

Interviews and conversations are 
one way to collect stories. 

Where do we hear or see inters 
views and conversations on the radio 
and on television? Who is your favor- 
ite TV interviewer? Why do you like 
him or her? 

When interviews are good, why 
are they good? How would you like to 
be treated when you are interviewed? 
When an interview does not go as well 
as hoped, what factors prevented a good 
interview experience? What things stop 
the flow of conversation or make the 
person who is being interviewed feel 
unimportant or not listened to? Inter- 
views are good when the interviewer 
asks questions that get the other person(s) 
talking. Interviewers also need to listen 
and be interested in the world around 
them — especially in the people that 
they are interviewing. 



Objective: 

To identify places and times when 
we hear interviews and evaluate criteria 
for successful interviews. 

Goal: 

This lesson sensitizes the students 
to the role of interviews and conversa- 
tion in their day-to-day world. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical and Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Creative/ Artistic Skills 



Page 20 



O 

ERIC 



21 




Lciirning. Fron^ Your Ci^mniunity: FoIklc)rcand Video in theSchi>ol!> 



Questions 



Lesson Material: 

Use the 'Types of Questions" hand- 
out on the following page to explore the 
different types of questions that can be 
asked during an interview. Ask the 
following questions to insure that the 
children understand the distinction be- 
tween the different question types. 
Check the glossary of terms for example 
questions if the class has any difficulty 
with composing sample questions. 

What is an example of a "closed" 
question? What is an example of an 
"open" question? Try to always ask 
"open" questions during an interview. 

Think about your topic and work as 
a group or individually to come up with 
questions that you might ask during an 
interview. 

What would be good examples of 
questions that ask for facts? What 
would be good examples of questions 
that encourage storytelling? What 
kinds of questions ask about feelings? 
What kinds of questions ask about 
meaning? 

Do you want to talk about some- 
thing that has taken place gradually 
over a long period of time, such as the 
struggle for civil rights? Do you want 
to talk about something from the past 
that has changed and is very different 



now, such as clothing styles? If so, you 
will need to ask past, present and future 
questions. 

What would be examples of ques- 
tions that ask about the past, present, 
and futiure? 

Imagine out loud the answers that 
you might get when you ask your ques- 
tions. What would be some good fol- 
low-up questions to these answers? 



Objective: 

To distinguish between different 
types of questions and demonstrate un- 
derstanding by formulating appropri- 
ate sample questions. 

Goal: 

Asking a wide range of interesting 
que5.tions is fundamental to the art of 
interviewing. This lesson introduces 
the conceptof "question types" andhelps 
the students begin to formulate an inter- 
view schedule for their topic. 

Skills Practiced: 

Attention to Detail (BSAP); Inter- 
personal Skills; Research/Planning 
Skills; Language Arts Skills 




22 



Page 21 




LiMming From Your Community: Folklore and V'ideo in the Schools 



Types of Questions 

Good questions are very important for successful interviews. One kind of 
question that kills the flow of conversation is a " Closed" question, or a question that 
can be answered with a yes or no. " Open" questions are much better because the 
interviewee cannot answer with a yes or no and has to give a fuller answer. 

Questions can ask for many different types of information: facts, stories, 
feelings, emd meaning. A good interviewer will ask a wide range of questions, 
encouraging the interviewee to explain the facts pertaining to the interview topic, 
tell their story, share their feelings, and explain what all this means to them. 

Fact questions ask who, what, when, where, how long, how much, how many, 
etc. 



Story questions ask for the story of what happened, a person's story of their 
own experience, or a performance of a made up story that they are known to tell. We 
live in a world that places a high value on facts and figures and often forget to ask 
for stories. Stories are important because they give us "word pictures" or images to 
go by. 

Feeling questions help listeners get a sense of what it must have been like for 
the person before, during, and after the experience. Feeling questions also give us 
a sense of the other person's likes and dislikes. 

Meaning questions ask "\ hy?" or "what do you make of this?" or "what does 
this mean to you?" It is very easy to assume that you know the meaning that an event, 
story, traditional practice, or statement holds for the interviewee when you do not. 
Try to ask meaning questions even when the meaning seems clear to you to give the 
person that you are interviewing can talk about the meaning in their own words. 

Questions can ask about the past, present, and future . Questions can also cover 
an entire event, asking what it was like, what happened, and what it is like now. 

Sometimes the answer that an interviewee gives leaves out information that 
might be interesting to you. Then it is important to ask a Follow-up question . For 
exantple, if you asked the question "What was your most vivid memory about 
hurricane Hugo?" and the interviewee answered "The Trees," you might want to 
ask the follow-up question such as "Why trees?" Be on the lookout for possible 
follow-up questions. 




23 





Learning Froi^ Your ComniUnity: Folklore and Vidcc^ in the Schools 



Hugo Stories 

(Optional) 



Lesson Material: 

Have you heard your pareirts or 
friends tell stories about (Hugo)? If so, 
would you feel comfortable telling the 
class? Did you like the stories? Why 
do we tell tliese stories? What makes a 
(Hugo) story interesting? How do you 
feel when you hear these stories? What 
kinds of things would you like to say 
to tell yorir (Hugo) story? 

People around the world are very 
interested in hearing about your (Hugo) 
experience. Other children who have 
been through scary things will be helped 
by your video. Your work is very im- 
portant. 



Objective: 

To relate personal experience sto- 
ries, compare and evaluate the stories, 
and assess the features that are essential 
to a successful narrative. 

Goal: 

The children begin the session by 
reporting family and friend stories that 
are relatively safe because they are one 
step removed from their own personal 
life. They then examine the beneficial 
role that this storytelling plays in their 
lives, make aesthetic judgements about 
the stories and conclude by constructing 
their own personal experience story. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical/ Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Creative/ Artistic Skills; Lan- 
guage Arts Skills; Public Speaking Skills; 
Interpersonal Skills 



Note: The lesson plans pertaining to Hurricane Hugo are included because, with modifi- 
cation, they may be useful for classes recovering from a traumatic event such as a natural 
disaster. Some events that garner community-wide attention and stimulate storytelling 
are not tragic. Class members may have stories to tell about an annual festival or fair, an 
eclipse that they saw, an outrageous or embarrassing event, etc. It is very helpful to this 
kind of project for students to practice and become comfortable telling their unwritten 
stories to the class. 



Page 23 




24 




Learning Prom Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



Survivors 

(Optional — to be used with traumatic event topics) 



Lesson Material: 

What does the word survivor mean 
to you? Survivors are people who have 
been through a difficult time, encoun- 
tering disappointments, scary situations, 
setbacks, and obstacles, but who have 
not been defeated by their ordeal. 

Are you a siuvivor? You, your 
friends and family have done lots of 
things to get better since Hugo hit your 
town. 

What kinds of things have you 
and your commxmity done to get bet- 
ter? Otherpeoplewhoaregoingthrough 
difficult times will be helped when you 
tell them what you have done to become 
survivors. Common answers included 
working together, prayer / faith/ church, 
a positive attitude, becoming actively 
involved in physical clean-up efforts. 



Objective: 

To define the word "survivor," ex- 
amine students' role as survivors of a 
disaster, and evaluate the operative fac- 
tors in that survival. 

Goal: 

After a disaster, area residents are 
usually identified as "victims." Initially 
this label is not a problem because the 
residents do often feel like victims. 
However, this "victim" label can be- 
come problematic over time, especially 
for communities that have worked very 
hard to recover with limited access to 
resources. This exercise gives the chil- 
dren the positive word "survivor" for 
self-identification. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical/ Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Decoding and Word Meaning 
(BSAP); Attention to Details (BSAP); 
Inference (BSAP); Interpersonal Skills 




Page 24 

25 




Learning I-rom Your Community: F'olkh^re and Vidoo in tho SchcH>l 



Critique of Sample Interviews 



Lesson Material: 

Videographer shows video clip of 
other children doing interviews (on 
video companion tape 2). Each clip is 
followed by general questions on the 
video screen, asking the students about 
the question types asked during the in- 
terview, the information learned, and 
interviewer behavior. What do you like 
about these clips? What don't you 
like? How would you do these inter- 
views if you were in charge? 



Objective: 

To evaluate interviews, identify fac- 
tors involved in interview success or 
failure, and relate this interview to stu- 
dents' own future interview behavior. 

Goal: 

This is another exercise that helps 
the students attain basic interview skills 
and aesthetic imderstanding without 
having to lose face in an actual inter- 
view. After this lesson and the previous 
exercises, they will be well prepared for 
their first actual interviews during the 
next lesson. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical/ Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Attention to Detail (BS AP); Tech- 
nical Media Skills 



Page 25 

26 



ERIC 





}Ti)ni Your CimMiuinity: rolkloro and Video in the.Schot))s 



Class Interviews 

(Depicted in Video Companion; 



Lesson Material: 

Class members number off into 
teams of three. Team number one lines 
up to act as interviewers. Team number 
two lines up to act as interviewees. Team 
number three helps run the camera.* The 
students then interview each other about 
their topic. Each person gets experience 
in each role because after interviewing 
in team one, the student goes to the end 
of the line in team two. After being 
interviewed in team two, the student 
goes to the end of the line in team three. 
After running the camera in team three, 
the student goes back to the end of the 
team one line. This is done until each 
student has experienced each role. 



Objective: 

To compose interview questions, 
perform several interviews and video- 
tape other student interviews. 

Goal: 

In this exerdse students experi- 
ence the feeling of an actual interview, 
discover that fellow dassmates can act 
as sources for important information, 
and practice video team work. 

Skills Practiced: 

Decoding and Word Meaning 
(BSAP); Attention to Detail (BSAP); In- 
terpersonal and Team Work Skills; Pub- 
li c Speaking Skills; Language Arts Skills; 
Technical Media Skills 



* If you are working with a large group and have two cameras, divide the class up into 
two sets of three. 



Page 26 



O 

ERIC 



27 





l.i^arnm^ I ron^ Yoiir C ommunilv: I olklort‘ and Video in the Scliool^* 



Class Interview Critique 



Lesson Material: 

Playback the in-class practice inter- 
views. The students critique their inter- 
views and camera work usingthe "Video 
and Interview Critique Guide" handout 
on the following page. 

After the critique have two students 
do a practice interview trying to correct 
some of the earlier interview and video 
problems. 

Review and critique this two-stu- 
dent practice interview 



Objective: 

To evaluate student interviews. 
Goal: 

The students are now used to the 
idea that interview critiques are a nor- 
mal and non-threatening part of educa- 
tional feedback. They now take respon- 
sibility for self-examination, evaluating 
their own performance and applying 
their post-critique insights to future in- 
terviews. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical and Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Attention to DetaU (BSAP); Tech- 
nical Media Skills; Public Speaking 
Skills; Language Arts Skills 



ERIC 



28 



Page 27 





Video and Interview Critique Guide 



Questions to Ask About Camera Technique: Is there too much space 
above the person's head in the picture? Is the shot centered and does it include all 
the information that needs to ^ included? Are there good close shots of people 
when they talk? Is there any unnecessary camera movement or jiggling? 

"Dos and Don'ts" of Video; do have the director yell "quiet on the set — 
roll the tape" and the camera person respond "tape is rolling" so that team members 
will know when the shoot is beginning; do check the red blinking light to make sure 
that the tape is in fact rolling; after the tape is rolling, do have the floor manager count 
down from five to one (counting out the last three numbers silently on his or her 
fingers) before beginning your scene or interview; don't point the camera into the 
light because it will hurt the camera; don't videotape people who are standing in 
front of a light, a window or a bright background because they will look like 
silhouettes; do use and external microphone and have a sound supervisor wear 
headphones to make sure that you are getting sound on your tape. 

Questions to Ask About Interviewing Technique; Do I ask open 
questions that cover a wide range of information? Are there any follow-up questions 
that I didn't think to ask? How do I look? How can I relax more? How do the things 
that I say come across? Do I talk loud enough to be heard? Do I remember to move 
the microphone from in front of my mouth to in front of the interviewee when he 
or she answers my questions? Do I cover my face or turn away from the camera? 
Am I friendly and warm towards the interviewee? Do I listen attentively to the 
person's answers? Do I treat the interviewee with kindness, warmth and respect? 

"Dos and Don'ts" of Interviewing; don't forget to breathe, this will help 
you talk louder and you will look more relaxed; don't cover your face with your 
hands while talking; don't fidget with your hands; do relax and try to think well of 
yourself — this will give you the confidence that you need to be outgoing with the 
interviewee; do look at the person that you are talking to; do practice "active 
listening," nodding head or verbally indicating that you are interested in what the 
person is saying; do actually listen to what the interviewee is telling you — people 
can usually tell when you have "tuned them out"; do try to make your interviewee 
feel important, special, and as comfortable as possible. 



ERIC 



2 ^ 





Looming From Y(>ur Community: l olkloro anti Video in the Schools 



History and Historians 

(Depicted in Video Companion) 



Lesson Material: 

What does the word history mean? 
Is something that happened ten years 
ago history? Is something that hap- 
pened five years ago history? Is some- 
thing that happened just last year his- 
tory? Everyday events happen in our 
own communities that are history in the 
making. History doesn't have to be 
something that happened in the distant 
past to only "important" people. Even 
things that happened yesterday to your 
family or friends can be considered to be 
history. 

Who are historians and what do 
they do? Historians record, document 
and interpret history. 

Can you be an historian? You all 
have first-hand experiences within your 
community and can provide valuable 
historical information about life in your 
part of the world. 

Is there anybody else who knows 
more than you about what it is like to 
live in (fill in name of the town)? You 
are experts on what is like to live through 
this kind of historical time and in this 
place. You can be historians — all you 
have to do is figure out how you want to 
collect, document, interpret and com- 
municate the things that you wemt other 
people to know about your community. 



Objective: 

To examine the words "history" 
and "historian," compare the meaning 
of these words within the students' own 
lives, and argue or prove that they can 
be historians and history is part of their 
daily lives. 

Goal: 

Through this lesson, students dis- 
cover that events in their community are 
part of history and that they have some- 
thing important to offer in documenting 
their local culture. In documenting local 
culture, the students become self-in- 
vested in the subject. 

Skills Practiced: 

Decoding and Word Meaning 
(BSAP); Attention to Detail (BSAP); In- 
ference (BSAP); Language Arts Skills; 
History Skills 



Page 29 



30 





Lciirnin^ Trom Yo\ir Community: I’olklorc and Video in tlie Sch(H)ls 



Brainstorming: Setting the Rules 

(Depicted in Video Companion) 



Lesson Material: 

What does the word "brainstorm- 
ing" mean? Brainstorming is a time 
when people get together and call out as 
many creative ideas as they can about a 
given project. In order to feel comfort- 
able sharing our wackiest ideas out loud, 
we need to be able to trust that nobody 
is going to make fun of us or put our 
ideas down. Brainstorming is a way for 
us to be very creative — ^ifs a time to 
explore possibilities. 

We want you as a class to set the 
rules for how you want to treat each 
other and to be treated during this brain- 
storming session. If you are going to 
risk calling out new and creative possi- 
bilities, how do you want the other 
class members to treat you and your 
ideas? 

Each class member tells the instruc- 
tor how they want to be treated during 
this brainstorming session. The instruc- 
tor writes this student feedback down 
on a piece of paper or blackboard. These 
wishes become ground rules for how 
the students will treat each other during 
class brainstorming sessions. Sample 
brainstorming session ground rules in- 
clude things like not saying that any 
ideas are silly or stupid, listening to 
others, not interrupting, etc. 



Objective: 

To examine student feelings about 
ideas and risk- taking, assess the essen- 
tial criteria for successful brainstorm- 
ing, and construct a set of behavioral 
rules for class project formulation. 

Goal: 

In allowing the students to create 
their own set of behavioral rules, the 
students again become self- invested in 
the project development process. They 
will be more likely to adhere to these 
rules than to rules that are dictated to 
them. 

Skills Practiced: 

Decoding and Word Meaning 
(BSAP); Attention to Detail (BSAP); Team 
Work Skills; Creative Skills; Research 
and Planning Skills 



O 



ERIC 



3l 



Page 30 




lA'iiming IV(>m Your Community: Folklore and. Video in tlieSchcK>ls 



Brainstonning Video Ideas 

(Depicted in Video Companion) 



Lesson Plan: 

We have talked about the many ways that people tell stories (the instructor may want to briefly 
review the many ways that stories can be told). Today we will brainstorm ideas for scenes in the 
video that we are going to make. 

Provide the class with some sample ideas for things that they could do with their topic that 
"prime the pump" and help them get started in their own brainstorming process. Make sure that 
they understand that the sample ideasare suggestions only and that they will be designing their own 
project. 

What are some creative ways that 
we can tell our story or work with our 
topic? What places, people, or images 
are important to telling this story? How 
do you want to tell your story? Synop- 
sis of ideas that the class generates are 
written down on the board. The school 
teacher writes down class ideas on the 
board and numbers them. Make sure 
that you save all the student ideas for a 
future session — don't erase any ideas, 
even ones that seem silly or imfeasible. 

Go around the room and ask each 
student to tell the class which idea he or 
she likes best and why. This gives shy 
students and students who can' t think of 
an idea a chance to contribute to the 
project formulation without feeling pres- 
sured or inadequate. 



"PUMP PRIMING" EX- 
AMPLES USED AT 
MAYESVILLE ELEMEN- 
TARY: 

1) Pretend that you are talk- 
ing to Hugo; tell him what you'd 
like him to know 

2) Take a walking tour of 
your community, point out sites 
that remind you of Hugo 

3) Photograph things that 
remind you of Hugo, say why. 

4) ^me things about Hugo 
may make us feel very angry. 
Join together to make an "angry 
machine" that will show others 
how you feel. You could also 
make a "scared" machine, (this 
idea may work best with younger 
students) 

5) Make up a skit or puppet 
show that tells your story. 

6) Find people and images 
that will help tell what it was like 
before, what happened, and what 
it's like now. 




32 



Page 31 




Learning I Your Q'nui'mnity: LolLlore and Video in the Schools 



UNEDITED EXAMPLES OF IDEAS 
GENERATED BY STUDENTS IN MAYESVILLE: 

1) dances 

2) interviews 

3) take pictures of damaged houses 

4) make up songs about Hugo 

5) make up a rap about Hugo 

6) do a play or skit 

7) do a dramatization of Hugo in which Hugo is a mean man who yells 

8) make models of houses and trees and crush them 

9) draw pictures of what it looked like during and after Hugo 

10) have one student act like a strong man who isn't afraid of Hugo 

11) show people helping clean up after Hugo 

12) do commercials for the school 

13) show a party for the survivors of hurricane Hugo 



Overnight Homework Assignment: 

Think about the ideas that we have 
discussed. Remember any ideas that 
come to you after class. Think about the 
ideas that you like and why you like 
them. Which ones do you not like? 
Why? An idea that may have seemed 
great during class may not seem as good 
when you have some time by your self to 
think about it. An idea that you may not 
have liked at first may "grow" on you or 
you may think of a minor adjustment 
that will turn a not-so-good idea into a 
terrific idea. 

As you watch T. V. this evening, do 
you get any more ideas about possibili- 
ties for your video project? Tomorrow 
you will vote on how you will make 
your video. 



Objective: 

To create a wide range of scene 
options for possible inclusion in the 
upcoming video and begin to evaluate 
those ideas. 

Goal: 

The students leave this brainstorm- 
ing session with an understanding that 
there are lots of good and creative pos- 
sibilities for their video project. They 
also have the space to mull these ideas 
over at home alone, to think through 
some of the project on their own. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical and Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Creative/ Artistic Skills; Team 
Work Skills; Research and Planning 
Skills; Technical Media Skills 



Page 32 




33 





Learning Lrom Your Community: F(>lk loro and Video in the Schools 



Titles and Tying it All Together 

(Depicted in Video Companion) 



Lesson Material; 

In addition to deciding what you 
want to do for your video project, there 
are two otlier things that you need to 
decide. First, you need to think about 
how it will all fit together. For ex- 
ample, will each segment be introduced 
by a host, will the parts be labeled, will 
there be the verse of a song between 
segments? Brainstorm possibilities for 
things that would give your video con- 
tinuity. The school teacher writes the 
class ideas down on the board and num- 
bers them. 

Titles and openings are another in- 
teresting part of videos. Call out some 
of your favorite television programs. 
How do these programs begin? (e.g., 
'TheBillCosby" opens withacloseupof 
eachfamily member dancing; "The Fresh 
Prince of Bel Air" opens with a rap story 
about how the Prince came to Califor- 
nia; "A Different World" opens with 
shots of the main characters doing typi- 
cal things in different rooms; "Davis 
Rules" opens with crayon titles and pic- 
tures of the actors; "Cheers" opens with 
song, old photographs and music) 

After the students have discussed 
the ways that their favorite shows open, 
give them a copy of the "Program Open- 
ings" handout. Tell them that this hand- 
out does not cover all the possible ways 
that the students could open their video. 



but covers some of the most widely used 
openings. Compare the handout with 
their discussion list, noting examples 
they called out tiwt fit the opening types 
described and congratulating them if 
some of their opening ideas go beyond 
the types that are mentioned in the hand- 
out. 

How do your favorite television 
programs handle their titles? Brain- 
storm possibilities for titles, numbering 
them as the instructor writes them down 
on the board. 

Objective: 

To identify popular television pro- 
grams, examine the organizing prin- 
ciple/introductory framework for each 
program, and use this base of informa- 
tion to propose ideas for their own 
project. 

Goal: 

In this exercise the students criti- 
cally examine programs that they would 
normally merely watch passively. The 
students then use the media as a re- 
source for structural and creative ideas. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical and Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Attention to Details (BSAP); 
Research and Planning Skills; Technical 
Media Skills; Creative and Artistic Skills 



Page 33 



34 





LL\unin^ Frc>fn Your Q>mmunity: Folklore and Video in the Schtn^ls 



Program Openings 

The Newscast ; Narrator begins by giving a list of the top stories for the pro- 
gram as viewer sees people busy at work preparing for the program. There are 
lots of variations — ^look at newscasts for ideas. 

The Documentary : Program begins with a review of the project, topic de- 
scription, project goals. This can be done with printed credits (e.g., 'What you 
are about to see...") or voice-over narration and a collage of images about the 
project. 

The Formal Start ; The program begins with a personal welcome by the 
show's host, who then introduces and comments on the upcoming program. 

The Teaser ; Showing particularly funny scenes, interesting interview questions 
or answers, or highlights from the upcoming show before the opening titles. 

This is similar to a movie preview. Be careful not to give away too much! 

The Crash Start ; Takes the viewer straight into the program, which may seem 
to have begun already. The show has already begun as titles roll over the action 
or edited inbetween action shots. 

The Introduction Start: A rapid display of the main character(s) in situations 
that are typical or a brief story about how they got to be where they are. This 
provides an introduction to the characters and gives the background to the story 
situation (called a premise). 

The Eavesdropping Start : The camera is used like a person who has come 
onto a scene unnoticed — characters are saying revealing things about themselves 
that they might not otherwise mention to outsiders. 

The Coy Welcome : The camera pans over to someone who is supposedly 
preoccupied. Realizing that they are not alone, they say something to the effect 
of "Oh, there you are!" 

The Commercial : This is a "false" beginning, copying the way that you see 
several commercials before coming to tire actual beginning of a program. 



35 




Loarhing From Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



Video Skills, Terminology, and Jobs 



Lesson Material: 

Instructor introduces class to the 
range of video equipment, tells them 
what this equipment costs, explains the 
parts of the video camera and what each 
piece of equipment does, and shows 
them how to hold and work the cam- 
eras. 

The class is introduced to and writes 
down the terms for camera shots (e.g., 
wide, long, close) and movement (e.g., 
zoom, pan, truck, etc. ) They are told that 
the experienced videographer is able to 
use a variety of camera movements and 
put together an interesting combination 
of long and close shots so that viewers 
see both the surrounding location set- 
ting and catch important details. 

During the week before this lesson 
is taught, make video dubs of popular 
television commercials and the intro- 
ductory sequences of current television 
shows. These dubs can be shown to the 
students to help them practice identify- 
ing shots and camera movements, shot 
pacing, and analyze why those shots or 
movements were chosen. This tape can 
also be used to reinforce the information 
that they learned in the "Titles and Ty- 
ing it All Together" lesson. 

The class also learns and writes 
down the jobs entailed in a video pro- 
duction (e.g., producer, director, cam- 



era operator, audio technician, floor 
manager, set designer, talent). The in- 
structor may then want to hand out the 
following pages of terms and defini- 
tions: 'Troduction Personnel," "Video 
Terminology," and "Production Termi- 
nology." 

Overnight Homework Assignment: 
Watch T. V. tonight and look closely 
at the CTedits to note what kinds of jobs 
are involved in making a video. Also 
pay attention to the kinds of shots that 
are used in making up your favorite T. V. 
shows. 

Objective: 

To identify and describe the jobs 
and specialized involved in video pro- 
duction. 

Goal: 

This lesson introduces the class to 
the technical terms and skills that they 
will need to practice and master in order 
to complete their video project. They 
also learn that large-scale projects are 
the result of many people working to- 
gether as a team. 

Skills Practiced: 

Decoding and Word Meaning 
(BSAP); Attention to Detail (BSAP); Lan- 
guage Arts Skills; Team Work Skills; 
Technical Media Skills 




3d 



Page 35 




Learning I rom Your Community: f olkI(.irc uud Video in theSchoolb 



Production Personnel 



Producer; Takes care of organizing the team. This person also handles "ad- 
ministrative" work — paperwork that needs to be done, getting permission from 
the teacher or principal for unusual shooting sites or fieldtrips, arranges with the 
teacher to get a bus /driver and makes sure that his/her team members have 
signed release forms, fundraising if you need money to complete the project. 

The producer also works with the Director to design the team video scenes and 
assign other team members their jobs. 

Director ; Responsible for staging the production as well as directing the per- 
formers and crew. This person makes the final decisions about the script words, 
images, talent, and locations. 

Floor Manag er; Responsible for orderly team behavior during a shoot, team 
safety and discipline. Makes sure that all equipment is treated with respect and 
packed up neatly after the shoot. Cues the performers with "Five, four, three, 
two, one, action!." 

Set Designer ; Plans, designs, and organizes sets and helps the Director pick 
the scene settings. 

Li ghting Director ; Designs, arranges and controls the lighting if any is 
needed. Decides when to use extra lights. 

Camera Operator ; Responsible for camera operation. 

Audio Technician ; Responsible for all microphones and cables. Lets the 
talent know if they are not speaking loudly or clearly enough. Reminds other 
crew members and shoot observers to be quiet during the shoot. Wears sound 
headphones at all times during a shoot to make sure that the talent's microphone 
is on and working. 

Talent ; Responsible for interviews, performing any scripted dialogue, acting or 
dancing in front of the camera, and voice over commentary. 



O 

ERIC 



3V 



Lt'tUnin^ I rom Yc^r Community; 






Video Terminology 



Tripod : Three-legged support for a television camera. 

Monitor : A high-quality display device that looks like a television screen and is 
used in television studios and control rooms to review the video footage and 
evaluate the video and audio quality. To view videotape, the monitor needs to 
be hooked up with cables to either a VCR or a camcorder. 

Viewfinden A small television set built into a television camera that displays 
the picture as it is generated by the camera. 

VCR ; An electronic recording device that is separate from a camera that 
records both the audio and the video signals on cassette for later playback or 
editing. 

Camcorder ; A video camera that is actually a combination camera and VCR. 

Bum-In ; A problem that happens when the camera is focused too long on an 
object with strong contrast (light on dark, black on white) or a direct light source. 
Bum-in means that the image is retained by the camera pick-up tube after the 
camera leaves the subject. 

Level ; Measure of the audio and video signal strength. If the signal is too 
strong, the sound will be distorted and the colors will look faded. If the signal is 
too weak, the sound will be muffled and the colors will look dark and muddy. 
Many cameras, tape recorders, and editing decks have meters (measuring de- 
vices) that help you keep track of the audio and video levels. 




Ix’arnrng fVcuri Your C(>mmunily: l olklorcand Vidoc^ in iho Sch(H)ls 



Production Terminology 



Key Lig ht: The principal light source. 

Fill Lig ht; A soft form of light vised to soften the shadows created by the key lights. 
Back Lights ; Lighting from behind the subject, and opposite the camera. 

Pan ; Horizontal turning of the camera from right to left or left to right. 

Tilt: To point the camera up and down. 

Truck ; To move the camera toward or away from the object when the camera (and 
sometimes tripod) are actually mounted on wheels and can be rolled. 

Zoom ; A lens that you can adjust to go from a wide shot to a close-up or the reverse in 
one smooth motion. 

Headroom; The space between the top of the talent's head and the upper screen 
edge. 

Script ; Written copy of the audio and video plan for a television production, includ- 
ing detailed directions for the shots. 

Long Shot; Also known as the "full shot." A distant view of the subject, taking in all 
action. While this shot is good for letting viewers know about tlie general setting, any 
details are lost in the distance. This shot can be used to establish a mood, relating a 
general impression of a shoot setting or location. 

Close Shot ; Also known as a "tight shot." A close up, detailed view of the subject. 
This shot concentrates our interest on one thing or person. It can let the viewer in on 
individual responses and emotions that might otherwise be overlooked. 

Wide Shot ; A wide-angle shot capturing the image of a place and action — covers a 
great area. The wide shot is inbetween the long shot and the close shot. A long shot 
may show an entire street, but a wide shot would show only one or two storefronts. 

Covershot ; Camera shot showing the subject from the waist up. 



O 



39 




LA'iirning f rom Your 0>rnmunitv; Folklore and Video in theSdioois 



Project Discussion and Idea 
Refinement 



Lesson Material: 

What is your opinion of the ideas 
that we generated yesterday? Are there 
any new ideas that you thought of 
during the ni^t? Do you want to 
include any other community or school 
members in your project? Class asks 
the videographer about the technical 
details and limitations of ho w they would 
go about videotaping each possible 
idea — ^some ideas may not be feasible 
with low budget video. 

Vote On Project Content and Design 

Each student gets to vote for two 
segment ideas, one "continuity" idea, 
one opening idea, and one title idea. 

The six most-voted-for segment 
ideas will be in the video. The class will 
also go with the continuity idea, open- 
ing idea and title idea that gets the most 
votes. The class will break up into pro- 
duction teams each team will be as- 
signed two of the six segment ideas. 



Scheduling and Team Choice 

The instructor divides the class up 
into three teams and chooses a producer 
and director for each team. In addition 
to assigning children that will be able to 
handle leadership as directors and pro- 
ducers, remember also to divide up stu- 
dents with special artistic skills evenly 
among the groups. If one of the ideas 
involves a song or dance, try to put 
students who are interested in song or 
dance together on one team. Assign two 
segment ideas to each team. The teacher 
announces the teams and roles and seg- 
ment assignments to the class. 



Note: It is best to do this lesson the next day after the project idea brainstorming session. This gives the 
s tudents some time to mull over their ideas on their own. Copy the list of class ideas for segments, 
openings, and titles from the previous brainstorming session onto the blackboard. 



Page 39 




4U 





lA'armng IVom Yoiir Community: Folklore* and Video in the Schools 



Project Discussion and Idea 
Refinement (cont.) 



EXAMPLE OF 
MAYESVILLE FORMAT 
AND SCENE SEQUENCE 
DECISIONS: 



Scene One — Introduction 

Hello, my name is 

(5 people). I am a survivor of 
hurricane Hugo. 

Standing behind these five people 
will be the entire class. The class will 
say, "We are all survivors of 
hurricane Hugo." 

Scene Two — Rappers and dancers 

Scene Three — Model of House 
being blown down with Tiffani 
Wilson reading the script. 

Scene Four — Interview Tiffani's 
father and Tonika's pastor. 

Scene Five — Commercials 

Scene Six — Interview Mrs. Tomlin, 
Mrs. Fulwood and Willie will talk 
about Frederica Smith's house. 

Scene Seven — Commercials 

Scene Eight — Pictures with music 
in the background. 

Scene Nine — Rappers 



Objective: 

Through evaluation and discussion, 
students will revise their ideas, vote, 
and work as a group to plan their video. 

Goal: 

The initial discussion allows the 
students to present ideas and refine- 
ments that they have developed on their 
own to the group. The group vote en- 
sures that each student has a say in the 
projectcontent and structure. The group 
will work more effectively as a team if 
all the team members contribute to the 
project design. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical and Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Attention to Detail (BS AP); Cre- 
ative and Artistic Skills; Research and 
Planning Skills; Team Work Skills 



Final Scene — Class letting go of 
balloons and cheering. 




41 



Page 40 




lAMniinj:; I n>m Your C'omnuinitv: Tolkloro and Video in the Schools \ 



Rap/Song Writing Assignment 



Lesson Material: 

If the class decides to do a song or a 
rap in one of their video scenes, the 
teacher asks each student in the class to 
write rap/song lyrics about their topic 
as a homework assignment due the next 
day. The students may want to choose 
one rap to perform, combine the best 
lines and ideas into one composite class 
rap, or review the class writings, discuss 
the similarities /differences between 
their experiences and write a group rap 
that can speak for everyone. This last 
"group rap" idea is especially effective 
in helping students process and reflect 
on their experience after a traumatic 
event or disaster. 



Objective: 

To compose original verse related 
to a specific topic, compare/ assess the 
class writings, and create a class verse 
that represents the spectrum of class 
experience. 

Goal: 

Students create their own artistic 
statements about their topic, yet work 
together to write a piece that represents 
the total class experience. 

Skills Practiced: 

Analysis of Literature (BSAP); De- 
coding and Word Meaning (BSAP); At- 
tention to Detail (BSAP); Language Arts 
Skills; Creative and Artistic Skills 




A production still photo of a student rap group performing their "Hurricane Hugo Rap." 




Page 41 



42 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





Lciirning F'ron^ Your (\vnimuniiy: I'olkloro VkIoo in, the Scluu>ls 



UNEDITED EXAMPLE OF RAPS WRITTEN BY MAYESVILLE 
STUDENTS: 

#1 They said it was coming I didn't think it was true. Hugo came 
and he swept right through. Early one night as I was lying around, there 
was a loud noise that frightened the town. Everyone began to panic and 
run. The wind was blowing and the rain came down I was still confused 
running around in my govra. Then a tree came down and almost hit my 
head. "Oh Lord!" I said. I just knew I was dead. I grabbed my heart 
to see if I was alive. I was so scared it wasn't no jive. Everything was 
falling to the ground real fast. Light poles, buildings, broken glass. I 
looked for my keys to get into my car, but I couldn't see anything near 
or far. We went to the den seeking safew there, but couldn' t see nothing 
the room was bare. Another day was gone it was time to eat. No water 
to drink or to wash our feet. We walked down the street to check on our 
friends. They were all crying because their cars were caved in. Trees 
were down on cars, houses and land. Beach houses were down lying 
flat in the sand. Now the moral of this storm is very true he's coming 
back for me and you. 

#2 Hugo is no friend of mine. I saw plenty of people in the welfare 
line. I was helping out people in the neighborhood, ^cause the stores 
were dosed I was feeling good. Hugo happened about a year ago. We 
got knocked down and got back up real slow. 



RAP COMPOSED BY GROUP AFTER REVIEW- 
ING INDIVIDUAL RAPS: 

Here's a little story that we have to tell about 
some people who weren' t aware. The hurricane came 
without delay — destroyed everything in its way. 
Hurricane Hugo was a bad storm, he made some 
people feel alone. But we are survivors as you can see. 
We made this rap for you and me. Peace! 





43 



Page 42 




Learning ’From Your Community: Folklore and Vid^.K> in iheSch<H>ls 



Scriptwriting 

(Depicted in Video Companion) 



Lesson Material: 

Class breaks into their assigned 
teams and sits in a cluster with their 
group. Instructor begins the session by 
teaching a lesson on script development. 

A script is a detailed outline of what 
you want in your video. The script 
includes information about the images, 
words, location, and talent for each shot. 
Everything has to be spelled out in de- 
tail or the project will not turn out well. 
A script allows every person working 
on the project to know what is going on. 

Hand out several script logs on large 
pieces of paper to each person in the 
class. In addition to handing out the 
logs, also write an example of a blank 
script log on the board. 

The Type of Shot(s) refers to long, 
close or wide shots. For each scene you 
may want to shoot a variety of shots , For 
example, you may come back to your 
class after a shoot and be disappointed 
because you only have interview close 
shots with no long shots to give a sense 
of the interview setting. What kinds of 
shots do you want to include in this 
scene? Is. there any special camera 
movement (e.g., pan, truck) that will 
work especially well in this scene? 



The Imag e is what the camera per- 
son will see through the camera lens. 
What picture will be on screen? Note if 
cmy sets need to be built or pictures 
drawn. What materials will you need 
to make these sets and who will make 
them? 

The Words are what the audio per- 
son or viewer will hear. If there is a 
song, what are the words to the song? If 
there is narration, what will the narra- 
tor say? If there is an interview how 
will the interview begin, what ques- 
tions will be asked, and how will the 
interview end? If there is a skit, what 
words what words will be spoken dur- 
ing the play? 

Location is the specific address 
where the shoot will take place. Where 
will your video take place? Will cer- 
tain backgrounds be especially suit- 
able for your project? Are there some 
ideas that have to be shot in a special 
place to work? When you are writing 
down your shooting location don't just 
write "in the school" or "Jane's house, " 
Be specific, as in "school cafeteria," and 
'Jane's house at 221 Main Street." Make 
sure that you check out locations with 
other teams to make sure that there aren't 
any conflicts and that the completed 
video won't look confusing. 



Page 43 




44 




Learning From Your Coninumity: f'olklore and Video in the Schools 



Scriptwriting (cont.) 



Talent refers to the people who will 
be in front of the camera. Who will 
stand in front of the camera? If they 
will be interviewing people, who will 
they interview? If you are planning 
interviews with community members 
or other school teachers, put together a 
list so that the interviews can be sched- 
uled in advance. 

Contact List : This list gives the 
names and contact locations or telephone 
numbers for anybody that you want to 
interview and anyone who you will need 
to work with during the course of your 
project. For example, you may want to 
get help from the school art teacher or 
music teacher for one of your scenes. 
Who will you interview or work with 
during your project? Add the names of 
anybody else that you want to help you 
with your project to the list of potential 
interviews. Hand this contact list in 
with the script. 

The instructor works with the class 
to fill in the sample script on the board. 
After the class has demonstrated an 
understanding of how the script works, 
they work within their teams to write 
their own script. An aduit is assigned to 
each group to act as a facilitator. If the 
children look to the adult for decision- 
making, the adult is to refer them to the 
group producer or director, saying "X is 
in charge of the final decisions for this 
group." 



During a later session each group 
can report back to the rest of the class on 
the status of their script. If any group is 
having problems with their script, the 
rest of the class can help them figure out 
how to solve the problems. 

The student producer and director 
are responsible for handing in a final 
script at the beginrung of Week Two. 
Based on the scripts that are handed in, 
the instructor devises a shooting sched- 
ule for Week Tnree and posts it. 



Objective: 

To evaluate the project ideas, de- 
velop idea details, constructing a de- 
tailed outline and plan of work for the 
proposed project scenes. 

Goal: 

This lesson provides direction and 
focus for the upcoming weeks of prepa- 
ration, practice and project execution. 

Skills Practiced: 

Critical and Analytical Thinking 
(BSAP); Attention to Detail (BSAP); De- 
coding and Word Meaning (BSAP); Re- 
search and Planning Skills; Team Work 
Skills; Creative/ Artistic Skills; Language 
Arts Skills; Technical Media Skills 



45 



Page 44 




r 



Learning From Your Community: f olklore and Vide6 in the Schools 



Script Log (Example) 



Address Interviewee 

Type of Shot Image Questions or Words Location and Talent 



Scene 1 
Shot: 










Scene 2 
Shot: 






* 




Scene 3 
Shot: 










Scene 4 
Shot; 











If you need more room for your "words," write them out on a separate piece of 
paper and staple or clip the paper to the log. 

Compile a contact list of the people that you need to interview and any other 
people who have special skills who can help you (such as the art teacher or music 
teacher). 



CONTACT LIST: 



Name: 

1. Mr. Smith 

2. Ms. Brown 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 



Where They Can Be Reached: 
Green's Market; #555-8868 
School Art Room 



What They Will Do: 

Interview 

Help Us With Sets 



46 



Page 45 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



1 



<y 

& H 
ii 



CA Ch 
CD O 

i"rt ^ 
2 ^ 
2 ® 



W) 

o 

hJ 

a 

•w 

u 

(/) 



tfj 

"O 



;h 

o 

C/J 

6 

o 

• ^ 
4 -* 

CO 

o» 

Id 

a 



a> 



o 

XI 

CD 



o» 

d( 



O) •• 

^ o 
<y ® 
X 
CD CD 



Q •« 

^ o 
<y 2 

X 
CD CD 



o; «« 

go 

cj X 
CD CD 



o» 

c; 



O 

X 



CD CD 



Q «« 
^ O 

<y o 

cj X 
CD CD 



QO 

rf^ 






o» «* 

go 

u 

C/5 C/5 



o 

ERIC 



Contact List 



Where They Can 

Name: Be Reached: What They Will Do: 




■ 4 ^ 

ERIC 





Learning I'fom Yoiir Coniniiinity: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



Glossary of Terms 




Community-based student video projects encourage pride and interest in local culture. 
Here, a student rap group proudly poses for the camera after shooting their rap performance. 



Page 48 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

o 

ERIC 



5U 




Learning From Your C'ommuiutv: Folklore and Vido(^ in lhoSch<H>ls 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS 



Audio Technician; Video production job. Responsible for all microphones 
and cables. Lets the talent know if they are not speaking loudly or clearly 
enough. Reminds other crew members and shoot observers to be quiet during 
the shoot. Wears sound headphones at all times during a shoot to make sure 
that the talent's microphone is on and working. 

Back Lights; Lighting from behind the subject and opposite the camera. 

Bum-In: A problem that happens when the camera is focused too long on an 
object with strong contrast (light on dark, black on white) or a direct light source. 
Bum-in means that the image is retained by the camera pick-up tube after the 
camera leaves the subject. 

Camcorder: A video camera that is actually a combination camera and VCR. 

Camera Operator: Video production job. Responsible for camera operation. 

Contact List: A list of the names, addresses, locations, and telephone numbers 
of people that you want to interview and people outside the class who you want 
to ask for help with your project. 

Covershot: Camera shot that covers the subject from the waist up. 

Director: Video production job. Responsible for staging the production as well 
as directing the performers and crew. This person makes the final decisions 
about the script words, images, talent, and locations. 

Documentary: A videotap>e that communicates a story about real people, their 
way of looking at things, and actual events in their lives. Documentaries often 
use footage of interviews and real-life scenes. 

Fill Light: A soft form of light used to soften the shadows created by the key 
lights. 





Learning From Your Community: Folkloroand Video in the Schools 



Glossary of Terms (cont.) 



Floor Manager: Video production job. Responsible for orderly team behavior 
during a shoot, team safety and discipline. Makes sure that all equipment is 
treated with respect and packed up neatly after the shoot. Cues the performers 
with "Five, four, three, two, one, action!." 

Folklorist: Folklorists are people who document the parts of history that get 
left out and the "fun" things that we sometimes forget to record. The folklorist 
often interviews members of a community to hear them tell about their culture 
and their history in their own words. 

Headroom: The space between the top of the talent' s head and the upper 
screen edge. 

Key Light: The principal light source. 

Level: Measure of the audio and video signal strength. If the signal is too 
strong, the sound will be distorted and the colors will look faded. If the signal is 
too weak, the sound will be muffled and the colors will look dark and muddy. 
Many cameras, tape recorders, and editing decks have meters (measuring de- 
vices) that help you keep track of the audio and video levels, 

Lighting Director; Video production job. Designs, arranges and controls the 
lighting if any is needed. Decides when to use extra lights. 

Monitor: A high-quality device that looks like a television screen and is used in 
television studios and control rooms to review the video footage and evaluate 
the video and audio quality. To view videotape, the monitor needs to be hooked 
up with cables to either a VCR or a camcorder. 



O 

ERIC 



52 



Page 50 





Learning From Your Cc^mmunily: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



Glossary of Terms (cont.) 



Openings: 



The Newscast — Narrator begins by giving a list of the top stories 
for the program as viewer sees people busy at work preparing for 
the program. There are lots of variations — ^look at newscasts for 
ideas. 

Tlie Documentary — Program begins with a review of the project, 
topic description, project goals. This can be done with printed 
credits (e.g., "What you are about to see...") or voice-over narration 
and a collage of images about the project. 

The Formal Start — The program begins with a personal welcome 
by the show's host, who then introduces and comments on the 
upcoming program. 

The Teaser — Showing particularly funny scenes, interesting 
interview questions or answers, or highlights from the upcoming 
show before the opening titles. This is similar to a movie preview. 
Be careful not to give away too much! 

The Crash Start — Takes the viewer straight into the program, 
which may seem to have begun already. The show has already 
begun as titles roll over the action or edited inbetween action shots. 

The Introduction — A rapid display of the main character(s) in 
situations that are typical or a brief story about how they got to be 
where they are. This provides an introduction to the characters 
and gives the background to the story situation (called a premise). 

The Eavesdropper — The camera is used like a person who has 
come onto a scene unnoticed — characters are saying revealing 
things about themselves that they might not otherwise mention to 
outsiders. 



Page 51 




53 




Learning From Yiuir Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



Glossary of Terms (cont.) 



Openings (cont.): 

The Coy Welcome — The camera pans over to someone who is 
supposedly preoccupied. Realizing that they are not alone, they 
say somelMng to the effect of "Oh, diere you are!" 

The Commercial — This is a "false" beginning, copying the way 
that you see several commercials before coming to the actual 
beginning of a program. 



Pan: Horizontal turning of the camera from right to left or left to right. 

Producer: Video production job. Takes care of organizing the team. This 
person also handles "administrative" work — paperwork that needs to be done, 
getting permission from the teacher or principal for unusual shooting sites or 
fieldtrips, arranges with the teacher to get a bus /driver and makes sure that his/ 
her team members have signed release forms, fundraising if you need money to 
complete the project. The producer also works with the Director to design the 
team video scenes and assign other team members their jobs. 

Program Openings See "Openings." 

Questions: 

Closed questions — a question that can be answered with a yes or 
no. 



Example: Have you ever shopped at Green's Market? 

Fact questions — ask about definite things, facts and figures, such 
as: who, what, when, v/here, how long, how much, how many, etc. 

Example: What did you buy at the grocery store? 




54 



Page 52 




Looming 1 rom Your C^ommunity: Folklore ond Video in theScliools 



Glossary of Terms (cont.) 



Questions (cont.): 

Feeling questions — ask a person to talk about how they felt 
before, during or after an event or how they feel about some- 
thing that is going on in the present. Feeling questions also ask 
about the other person's likes and dislikes. 

Example: How do you like the way the cashier 
treats you when you buy things at the store? 

Follow-up Questions — ask the person that you are speaking 
with to give more information about something that they have 
just said. Follow-up questions ask the person to clarify or elabo- 
rate on their topic. 

Example: (Read feeling question example first) 
Have you always felt that way about the cashier? 

Meaning questions — ask for information about the reason 
why things happen the way that they do and the importance 
that these events have for the people who experience them. 
Meaning questions ask "why?" or "what do you make of this?" 
or "what does this mean to you?" 

Example: Why do you think that the store goods 
are organized in the way that they are? 

Open questions — a question that is phrased in such a way that 
it cannot be answered with a simply "yes" or "no." 

Example: Will you tell me about some of your past 
experiences shopping at Green's Market? 




LcMTnin^ l-rom Your Comnuinity: Fo!kk>ro and Video in the Schools 



Glossary of Terms (cont.) 



Questions (cont.): 

Past/Present/Future Questions — cover an entire event, asking 
what it was like, what happened, and what it is like now. 

Example: I've heard that Green's Market used to 
look very different fifteen years ago. How did it used 
to look and in what ways has the store changed? 

Story questions — ask for the story of what happened, a person's 
story of their own experience, or a performance of a made up story 
that they are known to tell. 

Example: Sue said that you told her a very funny 
story about a time when the rootbeer bottles exploded 
at Green's Market. Will you please tell me all about 
it? 



Script: Written copy of the audio and video plan for a television production, 
including detailed directions for the shots. 

Script: 

Words — What the audio person will hear — the exact script dia- 
logue, voice over narration, interview questions, or song words. 

Location — The specific place where the shoot will take place, 
complete with the address. 

Image — What the camera person will see through the camera 
viewfinder. 

Set Designer: Video production job. Plans, designs, and organizes sets and 
helps the director pick the scene settings. 



O 

ERIC 



5 b' 



Page 54 




Learning Fn>m Your Conin^unily: Folklore and Video in theScliools 



Glossary of Terms (cont.) 



Shots: 

Close Shot — Also known as a "tight shot." A close up, detailed 
view of the subject. This shot concentrates our interest on one 
thing or person. It can let the viewer in on individual responses 
and enaotions that might otherwise be overlooked. 

Long Shot — Also known as the "full shot." A distant view of the 
subject, taking in all action. While this shot is good for letting 
viewers know about the general setting, any details are lost in the 
distance. This shot can be used to establish a mood, relating a 
general impression of a shoot setting or location. 

Wide Shot — A wide-angle shot giving the basic orientation of a 
place and the action; covers a great area. The wide shot is 
inbetween the long shot and the close shot. For example, while a 
wide shot may show an entire street, the wide shot may show only 
one or two storefronts. 

Talent: Video production job. The people who will be in front of the camera. 
Responsible for interviews, performing any scripted dialogue, acting or dancing 
in front of the camera, and voice over commentary. 

Tilt: To point the camera up and down. 

Tripod: Three-legged support for a television camera. 

Truck: To move the camera toward or away from the object when the camera 
(and sometimes tripod) are actually mounted on wheels. This platform with 
wheels is called a "dolly." Creative videographers often save equipment money 
by making homemade dollies with things like shopping carts or rolling office 
chairs. 




5V 



Page 55 





Lctirning From Your Community: Folklore diid Video in the.Schop^^r 



Glossary of Terms (cont.) 



VCR: An electronic recording device that is separate from a camera and can 
record both audio and video signals on cassette for later playback or editing. 

Video grapher: A videographer is someone who uses moving or still pictures 
on video to tell a story to an audience. 

Viewfinder: A small television set built into a television camera that displays 
the picture as it is generated by the camera. 

Wide Shot: Wide-angle shot giving basic orientation of a place and the action; 
covers a great area. 

Zoom: A lens that you can adjust to go from a wide shot to a close-up or the 
reverse in one smooth motion. 



Page 56 

O 

ERIC 



58 




Learning From Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



SUPPORT MATERIALS 






5B 



Page 57 



O 

ERIC 




Learning From Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



What Makes Your Comer of the World 

Special? 



Every region of our country has special sayings, holidays, events, occupations, 
geographic features and other shared knowledge that makes it "special." This 
Liowledge is part of the region's own "folk culture." 

What special knowledge defines your community's "folk culture?" The follow- 
ing questions will help you identify topics that you may want to document for your 
class project. Work together in small groups or brainstorm as a class to answer the 
following questions. Write the answers to each question down on a separate sheet 
of paper. You may want to talk with your parents about these questions to see if they 
can think of other good answers. 



1. What do you call the area that you live in? Not its official name, 
but the name that local residents use. Think in terms of your neighbor- 
hood and your community. 

Example: Chicago is called the "Windy City." 



Adapted from an exercise developed by Dr. Betty Belanusfor the Smithsonian Institution 




60 



Learning From Your Community; Folklore and Video in the Schools 



2. What are three occupations that help give your area an ident ty? 
These can be present-day occupations or historic occupations. 

Example; If you live in Maine, you might answer "lobster fishermen." 



3. What are the festivals, holidays, or events that involve most of 
the members of your community? Don't forget reunions, bazaars, 
harvest time activities, auctions, etc. 



Example; If you live in New Orleans, you might answer "Mardi Gras." 




Learning From Your Con^muinity: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



4. Name three plants or trees that are native to your area, with their 
special use if you know them. 

Example: If you were from California, you might say "avocados, used to eat in 
salad." 



5. Name three animals found in your area. Are they wild or 
domestic (tame)? Are they useful or a nuisance? Are they admired 
from afar or hunted? 

Example: In parts of the West with sheep farms, coyotes are wild animals that 
kill sheep. 




62 




Learning From Your Qmimunity: Folklore and Video in the SchociFir 



6. Can you think of three expressions that people in your area use 
that are not used in other parts of the country? 

Example: People in Southern New Hampshire call soda pop "tonic"; people in 
Southern Indiana call green peppers "mangoes." 



7. Name three special f oo ds that are eaten in your area. What makes 
them special — are they particular to an ethnic group, do they use local 
ingredients, are they served at special holidays? How are they differ- 
ent from other places that may serve similar foods, or use the same 
name but serve something different? 

Example: People in Northern Michigan eat meat pies called "pasties" intro- 
duced by Cornish miners, using available meats and vegetables. 




63 




Learning From Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



8. What is special about your place and your community that these 
questions didn't ask? 

Example: historic events that shaped how the community is now, origins of 
place names, geographic features that make this place special. 



After you have finished answering these questions, go back and review each 
question one at a time. At the bottom of each answer sheet, write dovm the names 
of people in your community that you think would be able to speak at length about 
that particular topic or question. This will give you a good list of potential 
"interviewees." 




64 





] 



0 

J 

lai 



CDiaV^ StoH 



STORM 



^fvjtct aysponsond hr X . *"* 

a'S 4 SJ^.trrS^ 5 S£,£': 

w midtncj at MawmUip *i Gad Mauketn ji^»; 



P**"<«* process of disasi 
'^'-oviTy. H ilMw i» inily po» 

lul|» i^vr^ ?i''c.*^ '>H‘^c hmv nM y 

««<.-soflax-*wcwjr^.Zri i ! ■■'' ''■'"“«••• 

oflhe.U.k-,c«nnSilt'''"« oih- i 1>- 



VIDEO AND FOLKLORE IN 

+Ke ^\cxsst^ooir\ 




»>>c0vcrMiiMiOicirl«n 

“oai of p 

n«ny Purposet — H jcied aTa vkiinis serv 



Gail Matthews 








0» Mho iJSSS^IISUini <M F«»*lc» SmMM 

65 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 





lha( could be gleaned from Uiis disaster. After a iraumalic 
evert. slofytcUing helps people process their experiences, 
gndually conung to identify (iientseivos as survivors nithiT 
tlun as victims, eventually rcgainiicg a sc*iise «f control or 
mastery their own lives. 

Re^izitv the impoiUrKc of this cominunlty dialogue and 
the role that the arts and hunruniiics could play in facilitating 
this healing process, the South Carolina Arts Commission 
jwilacted the Folk Arts Program at McKissick Museum to 
^nslwm aiwi pnfcct powibilities. The result was “Our 
btones M the Stonn,* an innovative vidco/folkkxe documem 
taiyprt^kir school children in heavily daniaged areas. 

AccoidwgloScottSanders.ExeculiveDirert 
^nuss^ Dm obje^e of the project was to “help stu 
denis, thor funilitt and their communities share their Hugo 
«tp«jefices and, in the process. TukI catharsis and ftaffirma- 
Um that conlribule to thdr emotional and psychological 
also hoped that this project would deliver a 
fint-haod kssoo to students and others about the 
and unportaoce of the arts and jmnunistic disciplines in 
tnoir ud m our society.* “Our htorir-s of the 5iion«“ 
S*«"' Carolina I lunKuiili..* <W 
•*'i’ Natwnal bnJowniml for Ihe Arts and ih« Suoih Car- 

“ * cooperaliye 

WMmori^^CcamMMiooaad Uk Folk Arts Pkosnim. 

AActm aUtUlmnincKtawafor alladull partidpinls.a 
tearo compcii^ of one MkloriK and one videoenpher Irav- 
***** *?■**? *^*^”^ MM ihcchikIrendtSm thdr 

lIujo^S resF 
wMta. piinng my residency wkh videog- 
raMr Don (^lo^ m MayctvSIe iitenKnUiy Schoot, the 
Menlalioo week of lessons 
10 accomplish three aeu of goals. Fmsi, creative 
**•'* the children basic skills in quesUon 

helped Ihe children undetsland dul ihey had lived Ihroueh 
an mipo^i hislorical ewnl. had a (irei-liand ex|)ertise aboul 
CJw bufTjcane and were therefore wdl equipp^ to act as his- 
Ijinans doromentirtK their community's i-xiKWncc. Hnally. 
liK* ebss exarmned the whole notion of storytelling — why 
stones are told and the many possible art forms that can tell 



stories (for example: dance, puppetry, song, even video 
itsclO. 

At Ihe end of the fust week, the diildren decided how they 

fitted la k-ll IlKir own hurricane Hugo story on videotape. 
Tnc children told their story by taping a variety of short 
yigndtes, and editing them together to create a loitger piece. 
Interviews with community members, co-auiSored rap songs, 
images of damaged buildings, drawings with narrated 

VKMOUped* 

AjthiMigh Uie duMren o(M reliW vivid M Wshien 

slortM abiMH ibeir hu^oe espcrieoces in clsss. ihty 
decided that they wanted their final videotape to primarily be 

an ^iTOsUoo «< Ibdr survival This B poh.ps because 

resultnoesocomtd ooe yi^ Bora, at a lime when 

Ihey were ready and wlUng to view the pastUauma in the 

mostposun:* !:ghL 

In reviewing Uto resulto o( these school residojdes. we 

feel that we have many insights to share with others who 

wairt to^smiiliriOTjecls. Ooreatpeifcnce suggests that it B 

absofouly crucial fv the chiUren to have o^le control 
M for them to also perform 

iiKist. if not ai, of the vidcoti|)inc and editing. To acconuno- 

The resideocies worked best when the folklorisl and 
Videographer acl^ as (adlilators, as opposed to primary 

execute th^ project oil their own. In order to 

»«io, the df*a was divided 

up mW thro produclroo teams each coBshting of aboul six 

'**” *'** * Migaaled producer, director, 
sodio techaidano CMnen operator aod ulntf. Ahhou^ ih* 

changed jobs from shootlo shoot as needed, 
initial coocemiliatrt^^ 

lenlly danuge the video equipment, we found that if the chil- 
dn-n mre taught the vak«^ oftbe equipment and how to liali- 
die A with care they monubiy treated k wUh lespccl. Wc also 
discovered that children in low income communili« 







responded especially well to working with professional 
equipment on in-depth project. All of the children 
anxious to work on sometliing “a^al* and cnilmsiastk 
being taken seriously as cultural documcnlarians. 

This hand son. experiential orientation to video 
classroom Iransfonns traditional notions of vkko as pn 
into one of video u process. We discovered that the i 
impof^t aspect U Hk! projitl was tlic ex- iciKv: t|. 
<^of helping the children decide Iww ilu , wanted lo 
tlw story, the ^Ijl’ical discoveries that die diildren 
as Ih^ cntjqoed thar own work, and the rapport tlui o. 
^ between the their teachers, the vkko/lolk 

tadhtator team, and the larger comrounity. 

We believe that this fortuitous combioation of vide 
folklore in ^ classroom has tremendous polembi b< 
our work with hurricane stories. Similar projccis couk» . 
students create videotapes about pressing soc^ issues, !• 
lore, or just aW any other topic. Imagiae projccis i 
ttKourage students to go out Into their communilics 

about their expcfi^ 

the ^ rights en or Ihe Penian Ciolf War. TCs use of ■ 
Iiivohvs Hr. community in ilic educatUnul urtH^•s.s ; 
li ““Mu to think of leamine as a pui^ miyi 

Wearecuiremlyrevisingthelluftoresideiicylessooi 
to gen^e a more general cuiriculum that could be o« 

have videotaped the prepanlory less. 
*!J*'*^*y**villc site and are editing a video that will alt 
wewaa fliinpae^howt^ kstoothe^chiUres acr 

M^nuwluqu the claaa le^ 

educaiore who w. 

fo together wnilar prejccu of their own. For more inf< 
™ South Carofina Arts Comm 

«on, 1800 Gereais Street. Cohinibii, SC 29Z01-35IIS. 

. '* "• “ Mum y.ij. 

Uj) and Mdi am adimmet taulion w He Umitemly rfSomlh Ca 
fy. Sir m» mr rtf eomu. 

maMhr amr aflke nuienej learns. Sir it cmrreallf vori 
as a freelance folUarisi. tasei in Cdnmbia. SvM Cirofiao. 



AH photos by 
Melba Payna‘s fifth 
grade aludenU at 
Mayesvilk Elementary 
Schoot In Mayesvilk, 
South Carofina. 



El2^inTare *»*»«vlit. 



o 

ERIC. 



66 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



J 




Learning From Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schoob 



Selected Bibliography 




Learning From Your Community: Folklore and Video in' the Schools 



SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Folklore and Community-Centered Education References: 

Ball, John, ed. n.d. "Folklore and Folklife: A Teacher's Manual." Washington, D.C.: Office of 
Folklife Programs, Smithsonian Institution. 

Barnet, Judith M. n.d. "Culture's Storehouse: Building Humanities Skills Through Folklore." 
Intercom 90/91. 

Bartis, Peter. 1979, 1990. Folklife and Fieldwork: A Layman's Introduction to Field Techniques, 
Washington, D.C.: American Folklife Center, Library of Congress. 

Belanus, Betty et al. 1985. Folklore in the Classroom. Indianapolis: Indiana Historical Bureau. 

Cohen, Cynthia. 1987. Designing an Oral History Project: A Workbook for Teachers and Community 
Workers, Cambridge, MA.: The Oral History Center. 

Cutting-Baker, Holly, et al. n.d. "Family Folklore: A Model Course Outline for Secondary 
Schools and Colleges." Washington, D.C.: Office of Folklife Programs, Smithsonian Institution. 

Donley, Susan. 1984. Hands-on the Past: The Riverview Children's Museum Center Project, 
Pennsylvania Ethnic Studies Newsletter. Spring: 1-3. 

DuBois, Rachel Davis. 1984. All This and Something More: Pioneering in Intercultural Education, 
Bryn Mawr, PA.: Dorrance. 

"Folksong in the Classroom," a newsletter for teachers of history, literature, music, and the 
humanities. Available through Lawrence I. Seidman, 140 Park Hill Avenue., Great Neck, New York. 

Grider, Sylvia. 1988. Children's Folklore: A Manual for Teachers, with curriculum materials by 
Nancy J. Nusz. White Springs, FL.: Bureau of Florida Folklife Programs. 

Indiana Communities Project. 1983. Sharing Our Lives: A Handbook for Community Oral History 
and Folklore Research Projects, Bloomington, IN.: Indiana Communities Project 

MacDowell, Marsha. 1985. "Foodways: A 4-H FOLKPATTERNS Project" (4H1329). East 
Lansing: Michigan State University Cooperative Extension Service. 

. 1982. "FOLKPATTERNS: 4H Leader's Guide" (4H 1222). East Lansing: 

Michigan State University Cooperative Extension Service. 




68 



Page 66 




Learning Fn>m Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



2 ^ 



Montell, Lynwood and Allen Barbara. 1981. from Memory to History: Using Oral Sources in Local 
Historical Research. Nashville, TN.: American Association for State and Local History. 

Silutzer, Randi and Beth Gildin Watrous (eds) 1990. Drawing from the Well: Oral History and Folk 
Arts in the Classroom and Community, Greenfield, MA.: Pioneer Valley Folklore Society. 

Simons, Elizabeth Radin. 1990. Student Worlds, Student Words: Teaching Writing Through 
Folklore, Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Heinemann, 

Sturino, Franc. 1979. Oral History in Ethnic Studies and Implications for Education. Canadian Oral 
History Journal. 4:1: 14-21. 

Tallman, Richard S. and Laura A. 1978. Country Folks: A Handbook for Student Collectors. 
Batesville, AR.: Arkansas College Folklore Archive Publications. 

Taylor, David A. 1985. Duval County Folklife: A Guide for Fourth Grade Teaefters. Jacksonville, FL.: 
Duval County Public Schools. 

Tiedt, P. and 1. 1986. Multicultural Teaching: A Handbook of Activities, Information and Resources. 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon 

Weitzman, David L. 1975. My Backyard History Book. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 

. 1976. Underfoot: An Everyday Guide to Exploring the American Past. New 

York: Scribner. 

Wigginton, Eliot. 1985. Sometimes a Shining Moment: Twenty Years in a High School Classroom - 
The Foxfire Experience, Garden City, NY.: Doubleday, 

Media References: 

Brown, Laurene Krasny. 1986. Taking Advantage of Media: A Manual for Parents and Teachers. 
Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

Doing the Media: A Portfolio of Activities, Ideas and Resources. 1979. Kit Layboume and Pauline 
Cianciolo, Editors. Chicago: American Library Association. 

Gaffney, Maureen and Gerry Bond Layboume. 1981. What to Do When the Lights Go On. 
Phoenix: Oryx Press. 

Layboume, Kit. 1979. The Animation Book A Complete Guide to Animated Filmmaking — From Flip 
Books to Sound Cartoons, New York: Crown. 

Miller, Hannah Elsas. 1979. Films in the Classroom: A Practical Guide, Metuchen: Scarecrow 
Press. 



63 

o 

ERIC 



Page 67 



Learning From Your Community: Folklore and Video in the Schools 



Millerson, Gerald. 1985. The Technique of Television Production. Boston; Focal Press. 
Singleton, Ralph S. 1986. Film Maker's Dictionary. Beverly Hills; Lone Eagle Publishing Co. 
Swain, Dwight. 1981. Scriptwriting For Video and Audiovisual Media. Boston; Focal Press. 



Page 68 




70 





SCHOOL INFORMATION [1987/88 - 1992/93] 



School Year (Fall) : 92 FIPS State Code: 45 

MAYESVILLE INSTITUTE ELEMENTRY 
BOX 128 



MAYESVILLE 


SC 29104 


Phone : 


803-‘453-‘5511 



Agency Name : 


SUMTER SCHOOL DISTRICT 02 


State Agency ID: 


43-02-000 


NCES Agency ID: 


4503720 


NCES School ID: 


01070 


State School ID: 


43-02-015 


Locale : 


RURAL 


Locale (code) : 


7 


Type: 


REGULAR SCHOOL 


Type (code) : 


1 


Status : 


SCHOOL OPERATIONAL 


Status (code) : 


1 


Classroom Teachers 


(FTE) : 12.6 R Schc )1 Size Rank (Nation): 69,566 


Total Students : 


190 School Size Rank (State) : 983 



Student /Teacher Ratio: 15.1 Low Grade: KG 

Free Lunch Eligible: 161 R High Grade: 06 



+ 

- + 

+ 

-+ 

o 

FRIC_ 


71 

i 







i 



MEMBERSHIP INFORMATION 



School Year (Fall) : 92 FIPS State Code: 45 

School Name: MAYESVILLE INSTITUTE ELEMENTRY 



Prekindergarten : 


0 


R 


Kindergarten : 


30 


R 


Grade 1 : 


35 


R 


Grade 2 : 


15 


R 


Grade 3 : 


25 


R 


Grade 4 : 


26 


R 


Grade 5 : 


34 


R 


Grade 6 : 


25 


R 


Amer Ind/Alaskan : 


0 


R 


Asian/Pac Island: 


0 


R 


Hispanic : 


0 


R 



+- 
- + 



Grade 7 : 


0 


R 


Grade 8 : 


0 


R 


Grade 9 : 


0 


R 


Grade 10 : 


0 


R 


Grade 11 : 


0 


R 


Grade 12 : 


0 


R 


Ungraded : 




A 


Total Students: 


190 


T 


Black : 


190 


R 


White: 


0 


R 


Minority Student % : 


100 . 0% 


T 



72 




