“} » 


sbnatee Tapes Collection . ' ‘ 
Opkland Neighborhood History Project ee a re 

@ Sabian BITS Lathe Ss 
. _Oekland Bistory Rocu | 


. Be | ~ 
or lt Se bf Ck AZ my ana Le reqé vA Matt , 
; (narrator _ (interviewer) 


do hereby give to the Oakland Neighborhood History Project 
for such scholarly and educational uses as the Project Director 
hall determine the following tape-recorded interview(s) | 
ecorded on (date) | ‘as an unrestricted gift and 
ransfer to the Camron-Stanford House Preservation Association 
egal title and all literary property rights including 
popyright. This gift does not preclude any use which we may 
want to make-of the-information in the recordings ourselves. 


a 


. : Lo 
anon : remy Srna owe — en eee 


OF a RE OED | mere: 


, Signature of narrator 


Reurtd Scelwe ws Cues. 
Name of narrator 


6 ‘NARRATOR FIA 2. FREES Vn tleg Ko Lig Fmyete 
‘Address Cantre’. 
tof 3e/ Fy 


(dated) 


pewreee men 8 ‘ a EL Ut Act LEG AR OI OS REPT ILLINOIS 


Signature of interviewer 


1 
| Ecwine f2. FSFO a1 ae oe 
Name ‘of interviewer 
INTERVIEWER ede6 Cre Crrsn Yao 
Address of interviewer 
| 
Fl 


lYwlaer Creer. Caer 99S 


ecepted for the Oakland Neighborhood History Project 
: by 
© s "(Project Director), (Dated) A 


- 


” ; » 
Pd e 
nih Tapes Collection 
) ; . 
Oakland Neighborhood 
History Project 
General lTopic of Interview West Oakland History 
pate_1b/og/a1____—Place_Rasidense “Iatayatie. Gh bengtn | Tbr 40 mins. 
1 
. Narrator - Interviewer 
Neme_ irs. Ruth Schwers piv) Neme_ Plaine 2. Hammil] 
Adress UU? Relies Uillex Bd TetayertMléress 305 Ta isa Via, Yalmut Gnesk: 
‘ CA. 
Relationship to narrator [friend, neighbor, etc.] 
Aunt of friend, Clayton Russell 
Birthplace wect Oakleng Length of acquaintance 
Birthdate 1894 _ ot Occasion of interview Huxkk Oakland 
: — Neighborhood History Project 
H “+ : 
ccupetion(s) Sep tenn 
interview Data 
| . ‘ 
Subjepts covered,. in approximate order, spelling out names of persons and places mentioned 
. -.. . . ty . . ” 
Estimates Time on ‘Tape Contents STes Give Ferere 
1 Side. A Part I From Kayisas ome to SF; run stables 
IT, ~ “Ta Kem" Iron S,oves SF 
days, iron works Oakland at nite (2nd & Cast 921908 
I enter 5t = lst house 
: ets it ~ nT toy a : 
, 1 & Gp,ove = end house . 
; father engineer; mother 1893 ain 
| uth born 1894 at Center St. home ; 
68, Myrtle Sts ae house nt og 
70 | : ; awakened by fire near foundry; 
. | ' mother catches glassware in niteszown; necple coning 
| ; fr. SF; father fell watching from cu Q at_iron wrks. 
1 es ~home" phone 
106 East Bay Hospital above 14th=l1st hospital: Oakland 
14 mother died 2 yrs, after father ee 
. dl? | } orphaned with $150 per month , 
120 . . . 48th AV E = : a 
133 | , Lake Merritt Wayne sve -6th house (Sth=Fairfax) 
~ @= i 1904 move to Melrose ize ; c 
4 “water, $1.50-per mon. , 
Lt 4 .. father's eng, degree bv re 


180 randfaterh had owned land in Lafayette while still 
se back of sheet if necess - . 
un SF (near where Mrs. g. now lives) 


em AN Devid Cill wartner at iron vomis 1°71; variole covers 
200 Phoenix Tron Jforis ="end of Calloenc" 
eléA 3 hyrtle St. neighborhood; €5' house; aniials; | 
| Mackay's Lumber in SF; wealthy homes; 7th @' Pine 

St. house; sea captains 


235 mudiin streets of Okland 
248 Thompkins School, 3rd & Linden (Filbert); Mrs. Walton 


principal (has picture); schoolday; Italians; Italian 
neighbor from 45rd St. becomes neighbor in Lafayette. 


, 280 food shopping; ,Iven & N’rs on 7th St; bakery Sth & 
i . Myrtle; Chine rardage st » 5¢ per ya. 
314 , Italian neighbors making wine; neighbors all invited 
325 to SF by ferry with mother 
355 3rd & Folsom in SF for 1 yr to "please mother"~ 
"more going on in SF than in Oakland" 
345 mother's German"Turnverine? GErman School ; 4rd & 


‘ Jackson; 14th & Markét; dances 
370 {° children walk to Take Merritt "all marsh there, 
you 11 sink inthe ma" 
388 John Davies & girlfriend 


398 Pardee; de Fremery 
428 . Shellmound Park picnics with mother; swampland; 
; outdoor dance; horse races 
461 toys made from cast-offs; scrap-iron trains' 
435 Mrs. S. working in foundry 
492 no women worked outside home; "hands full at home" 


Schleuter store = Mrs. S's first job 9 years old; 
cash girl, $2 per week; tips 


532 Phoenix Foundry workers (has picture) 

548 | paying workers by cash ed 

554! 8 yr. old to Alameda to get worker (8th St. to High 
; St. bridge) 

570 Alameda shacks; Italian poor 

5911 7th St. train to Fruitvale, then Melrose; Fruitvale 


farmland, "good place to raise kids"; "best weather 
around Bay" — 


Leona Heights quarry above Lincoln Ave; source of cla: 


_ 9 apple orchard for kids 
non este ‘ SP. workers 1st to live in Fruitvale (melrose); 
ae e miles to nearest transportation 
20' ! ‘schools attact more people 
22 lumber yard in Melrose E, 14th=1 of few businesses 
35 ‘Streetcar line (ygnacio Ave) petitioned by people 
48 Fremont High School on Foothill=2nd Oak. h/s 
58 Brother Bam to new Tech. High to learn pattern 
making; brother George started out sweeping 
78 grandparents came to SF by wagon; Uncle Tom's 62nd 
; & -Hillegass~garage 1908 
107 : Uncle Sam-in SF brigging candy; early Mill Valley 
a -. commuter . 
123 Bay Bridge; ferry boats -safer 
‘133 ‘ WWII ‘& brother Sam 
148 ~Howard Terminal site=-all mud 
165 ‘Mayor Mott's wedding cake (City Hall); opening 
~~ ¢ ; ceremonies. t 
178 bridge at 12th St across Lake Merritt; "stunk terribl: 
92 ‘ > rowboating on Lake; muddy sides 
199 Ever3;8 jome; Rudgear/Johnson family of Waknut Creek, 
ae - ‘Oakland, SF (Simmons “Bedding family) 
290 Cameron/Stanford House 
292 


carly education; "lucky to go to h/s" (rather than wr 
nn 


eet nd al A ane 


01g 4 bor- 
sood (FL 


Se eran Te 76 76 
Italians at icsrble 3t neishbor’® ool 
talian women's cress; not wafied 
Gernan section 14tn @ Myrtle 
hinese peddlers 
rag, bottle. sacks man; children taunt 
milk man; nearest dairy end of Fruitvale Ave; 
making cottage cheese 
remebers no discrimination; baby sitting 8 yrs old 
no crime; no key to house 
fire dept across fr. friend's house 43rd & Jackson 
bums sleeping in pipes at iron works (foundry fire) 
Depression "heard fr. breakfast to dinner"; worked 
s rubbing floors for firend 
Mrs. S. lst marriage, 2nd 
Fruitvale: cannery; sister's in-law's "liquor-cure" 
next to cannery; everyone worked at cannery 
Old Harbor Bank=lst bank in Oakland; moved to 
St. Marks Hotel site; bacame Central B.nk. 
Giannini not liked, foreclosed hor 
only wealthy bought houses 
cable car on Braodway 
Pantages, Novelty, Liberty Theaters; Chioda C@ndy 


DISREGARD 
Chioda Cangybusiness beginnings; 28th & Peralta 


END 


SONOMA STATE UNIVERSITY 
ACADEMIC FOUNDATION, INC. 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES CENTER Foundation Center, Bldg. 300 
ULTURAL RESOURCES FACILITY 1801 East Cotati Avenue 
07 664-2381 FAX 707 664-4155 q Rohnert Park, California 94928-3609 


OAKLAND NEIGHBORHOOD HISTORY PROJECT 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Interview October 28, 1981 in Lafayette by Elaine Hammill 
for the Oakland Neighborhood History Project. Verbatim 
transcription and summary prepared by Karana Hattersley- 
Drayton, November 1994, Anthropological Studies Center, 
Sonoma State University Academic Foundation, Inc. for the 
Cypress I-880 Replacement Project, District 4, CALTRANS. 


Ruth Schwerin was born in 1894 at the family home built by 
her paternal uncle at 5th and Center Streets in West 
Oakland. Her maiden name is unfortunately not included in 
the interview. Her father was of Scotch-Irish descent and 
came to San Francisco from Leavenworth, Kansas. He worked 
for Steiger and Kerr in San Francisco and made iron stoves. 
_ According to Mrs. Schwerin he began to "moonlight" at a 

@ foundry in Oakland, eventually starting the Phoenix Iron 
Works in 1901. His partner was David Gill and the Works 
made (initially) cast iron manhole covers. Eventually the 
company employed up to thirty workers. 


Mrs. Schwerin’s mother was a German(-American ?) also from 
Kansas although she had grown up in San Francisco. Her 
mother belonged to the local German Turnverine Club and took 
her daughter along with her to dances and social events. 


The interview draws a very poignant portrait of a poor, 
German-American working class family at the turn-of-the- 
century. Mrs. Schwerin attended the Thompkins School where 
most of her classmates were Italians. She also worked as a 
nine-year-old for the Schluter (?) Store as a Cash Girl at 
Christmas time. 


(The following transcription is a verbatim text in standard 


English with little or no editing. Project funds—did net 


axzDO O. © 


. wanes = . 
memati ttre nse pcan sation ein Aiea ea Ni ce tng ROCA NCR Dec SAUNA ALi MG Rei: al in Al ce IR LR mee ee MCR a nal NRTNNR AiO immense. 


et INA NO Rial etc lee ahaa I 


lmcatencam Sema; mi Anse Recs yh 


OAKLAND NEIGHBORHOOD HISTORY PROJECT 

Interview with Ruth Schwerin 
{Interview 28 October 1981 in Lafayette by Elaine Hammill 
for the Oakland Neighborhood History Project. Verbatim 
transcription and face sheet prepared by Karana Hattersley- 
Drayton, November 1994, Anthropological Studies Center, 
Sonoma state University Academic Foundation, Inc., for the 
Cypress I-880 Replacement Project, District 4, CALTRANS. ] 
[Tape is cued up.] 
Elaine Hammill: "Mrs. Schwerin, we’ll plunge right in as I 
told you and 1/11 ask you first of all about your 
grandparents then, who lived in Kansas. Is that right? And 
what brought them to Oakland?" 
Mrs. Schwerin: "I really couldn’t tell you." 


Hammill: "Ok. You don’t remember about the grandparents." 
Schwerin: "No." 
Hammill: "All right." 


Schwerin: "My mother’s ... grandmother died when she was 
eleven years old. So then he took the children himself [?] 
and then they came out, he brought them all out to San 
Francisco." 


Hammill: "This is your mother’s father?" 


Schwerin: "This is my mother’s father. And then they lived 
in San Francisco." . 


Hammill: "You don’t remember why they came particularly 
then to San Francisco?" 


Schwerin: "No. And he and his cousins owned this stable 
and the name was Foley-" 


Hammill: "In Kansas?" 


Schwerin: "No. Here in San Francisco. And they had a 
hearse that they used to bury people or to get them married. 
They had this one hearse with the horses. And he helped 
them run that for years." 


Hammill: "...what part of San Francisco did he [?]...2" 


Schwerin: "I couldn’t tell you-" 


fhe ean Mel no Aen a iene ALA Me dS RS Bk Ar tm se em Omi me tence anata 


secant; Aol LR EARN. <i MS Ba 


[Lh keke Pace eR AORN lA, Ace Antal AL 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Hammill: "So your mother grew up in San Francisco." 
Schwerin: "Yes." 


Hammill: "All right. And then your father meanwhile, he 
came from Kansas also." 


Schwerin: "He came from Leavenworth, Kansas." 


Hammill: "They didn’t know each other, the families didn’t 
know each other." 


Schwerin: "No. And then my father worked for Steiger and 
Kerr, the people that made stoves, iron stoves. And he got 
interested in iron. So then he wanted to start a business 
of his own. So what he did, he started the business of his 
own but he worked in the daytime for Steiger and Kerr in San 
Francisco. Then he’d take the 5 cent nickle ferry across 
the Bay and go to work at night and pour iron and cast iron 
and cover it with dirt. And then the next day, when it go 
cold, he’d take all the dirt off of the iron and have iron. 
They made all these manhole [covers] all around Oakland." 


Hammill: "Oh even then, they started out doing manhole 
covers." 


Schwerin: "Yes. But of course they were rougher than they 
are now." 


Hammill: “He lived then in San Francisco and commute over 
to work?" 


Schwerin: "Yes." 


Hammill: "...and his family had come with him? How old was 
he when he came to San Francisco?" 


Schwerin: "I couldn’t tell you." 
Hammill: "He was a young boy and unmarried, at any rate." 
Schwerin: "Yes, he was unmarried. And then-" 


Hammill: "And then he became interested in the foundry 
business-" 


Schwerin: "The foundry business. So then he come over at 
night, and where the foundry was, at Second and Castro, was 
an old old, terrible old building, but for iron you had to 
have the dirt. So it didn’t really matter and they did 
business in that old building until two or three years ago 
and then they sold it to the City. And then the City never 
used it." 


Page - 2 


pioenaemancntets mS noma: mien ns Se mle - . 


és rs ee a cinen eee, SR me 
easel His ia tte sey eile ie i RR AER A RE Set RCCL LNs Rit RIN a na 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Hammill: "They just moved to their new location." 


Schwerin: "And they moved to the new location. That’s what 
made them move." 


Hammill: "So it was a going foundry business. Was it 
called the Phoenix Iron Works at that time?" 


Schwerin: "No, no." 
Hammill: "Do you remember what it was called?" 


Schwerin: "Uh, they didn’t have a name for it. They just 
did odd things... but when my father started it in 1901 is 
when he gave it the name Phoenix." 


Hammill: "Because of San Francisco?" 


Schwerin: "No, I don’t know why. Phoenix means something. 
It always had a picture of a man.... Then when he married 
he moved over her, Fifth and Center Street and lived with 
his mother and father. And they had a two-story house that 
my uncle built." 


Hammill: "Oh, at Fifth and Center?" 


Schwerin: "At fifth and Center. And then my uncle built 
this waterwheel, a great big water wheel that pumped water. 
The dogs would get in it and run the mill. And then the 
people complained that it was cruelty to animals so he had 
to take it down but that’s the way they got their water." 


Hammill: "You mean it was dog-powered....?" 


Schwerin: "Dog-power made it go around. Then we lived with 
my grandmother and grandfather for quite some time. And 
then from there we moved up to Fifth and Grove, right near 
Fifth and Grove. Then my grandfather up and died in the 
meantime and then my grandmother came to live with us then. 
Then my mother had four children and my grandmother and my 
father and my uncle Sam, he lived with us." 


Hammill: "All right, so the family had gradually moved over 
from San Francisco. Father and his parents. And where did 
your mother and dad meet in San Francisco...?" 


Schwerin: "Well evidentially, my father was an engineer. 
And he worked on these engines. And for some reason or 
another my mother used to go and visit him. And they got 
more acquainted and more acquainted. My mother was a very 
jolly person and she was German and she was out for a good 
time! And so then they married-" 


Page - 3 


fp 


6 eancneatcananionmeammncamelaminte Cd AiR, eRenig NAC uli 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Hammill: “What year was that? Do you recall the date?" 


Schwerin: "Gee, they were married eleven months from when I 
was born. So it must have been 19 [she’s thinking about the 
date. ] 


Hammill: "Ok, let’s ask you when you were born." 


Schwerin: "See I was born, I think they were only married 
about a year and a half when I was born." 


Hammill: “And you were born in 1890-?" 

Schwerin: "1894, in November." 

Hammill: "In Oakland." 

Schwerin: "In Oakland. Yeah. On Center Street." 


Hammill: "At home? Were you born at home at Center 
Street?" 


Schwerin: "Oh yes. Everybody was born at home. And then 
my sister came along. And then we moved from there up to 
Fifth and Grove. And we took my grandmother with us--- 
wasn’t a very big house. But they all lived with us. And 
my mother took care of all of them. And from there we moved 
back to Myrtle Street." 


Hammill: "Ok. Now what made you move...?" 


Schwerin: "The house was bigger and we had a chance to rent 
it. And we lived in that house when the earthquake came out 
(?]" 


Hammill: “And old were you? You were ten [sic]." 


Schwerin: "Ten years old. [Ed. note: She would have been 
eleven.] And in the middle of the night my father said, ‘I 
hear the fire engines and they sound like they’re near the 
foundry. Get up and go down and look and see where it is!’ 
This was 2 o’clock in the morning. Me, ten years old! So I 
went ... down, came down and told my father that the foundry 
was burning. It so happened that there was a big warehouse 
next to us, next to the foundry, and that’s what was 
burning. So then of course my father got up and called the 
fire department which was a little one horse rig with a 
horse and it took them an hour or so to get down there. But 
they saved the foundry. See, there wasn’t much to burn 
inside. It was all dirt and iron." 


Hammill: "And your father had gone up to the cupola?" 


Page - 4 


| 
: 
. 
| 


| 
! 
| 
| 
: 
} 


hem cine ts AN ae enn a lt 


pene any 
ss cen itt mellem Aone mma the I renee ee wy 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: "So then after that, then’s when the earthquake 
came. And the morning of the earthquake, my poor mother 
stood with her nightgown catching the beautiful glassware 
that came from Germany that she put way up high so we kids 
wouldn’t break it. So here she’s catching it in her 
nightgown. And so then we-" 


Hammill: "So this is 4 o’clock in the morning...?" 


Schwerin: "Six o’clock.... Then all of a sudden we saw all 
these people coming, with no clothes on, bird cage and 
whatnot. See, San Francisco was burning. So then the 
people that came over on the train [sic] and they dumped 
them any old place in Oakland. And we lived on Fifth Street 
and the train ran on Seventh Street." 


Hammill: "They come over by ferry and then get on the train 
and then just be taken to somebody’s house or something?" 


Schwerin: "Well, they just dumped them. They were getting 
them out of San Francisco. ...then that night, my father 
went down to see the fire burning and he went up the ladder 
to the roof. And they had taken out the big cupola, the day 
before. And he’d forgotten that and he had a candle. And 
the candle went out. And he tried to find his way and he 
fell down through that hole, and fell on a piece of iron. 
And cracked his ribs. Then it happened that Mr. Gill, my 
father’s partner’s son, he was going to do the same thing: 
he came down and he heard my father crying and hollering so 
he got my father in his horse and buggy and took him to the 
doctor. Then, we had two telephones in the house. One was 
called ‘the home phone.’ And you paid a dollar a month for 
that. And if you were in business you had to have both 
phone[s]. But eventually, American Tell and Tell bought the 
Home Phone Company out and now today the phone is run like 
the home phone company was. Push button. 


And then I was only ten years old [sic] and so of course I 
had to go up to the hospital where my father was every day 
to visit him. Cause my mother had three children home, the 
baby, she had to take care of." 
Hammill: "... what hospital?" 


Schwerin: "East Bay they called it. They called it East 
Bay Hospital." 


Hammill: "And where was that located, do you remember?" 
Schwerin: "Oh, it was an off-street of Broadway." 


Hammill: "Not far. Not as far up as 14th maybe...2" 


Page - 5 


Uk aed COANE eR a I a le tl nan 


aan: te Rein ks acnain pained ana OA ARNE Lai EAs a Pines Wate ml An ne ace MR Rca meade WE allel AAD kh oman! me ea em arma acne 


aan ie ON ti A SM 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: "No, it was further up than 14th. It was kind of 
wilderness and they built this---it was an old home they 
turned into a hospital. And then from then, then’s when 
they built Fabiola. Yeah. And then-" 


Hammill: "So you visited your father while he was in the 
hospital?" 


Schwerin: “Oh yeah." 


Hammill: "Actually, you... mentioned in an earlier 
conversation that he really died from that injury...." 


Schwerin: "Yeah, because they bound him, his broken ribs 
up. In those days they used to do that. And one of the 
ribs grew into the valve of the heart and that’s what killed 
him. And then my mother died, two years later, I think more 
of grief, and four kids to take care of and whatnot. But he 
did leave a little money. He made a will out before that 
and he left a little money in trust for us children. And we 
got a $150 a month to run the house with. And I was the 
oldest one and I had to run the house with a $150." 


Hammill: "For heavens sake. So you stayed? Did you stay 
then?" 


Schwerin: "Well... before my mother died we moved out to 
East Oakland. Right near Fremont High School." 


Hammill: "By this time you were two girls and two boys in 
the family?" 


Schwerin: "Yes, uh-huh. My father died then, at that 
house. [Uncle Tom had built this new house---built like the 
‘Rock of Gibraltar.’ House theoretically ‘temporary’ but 
used 2 x 6" lumber, dug a well. Stayed there for ‘quite 
some time.’ Moved to a larger house which they rented in 
Melrose. They then moved to a flat near Lake Merritt. 
Mother died at this residence. Mrs. Schwerin was sixteen at 
the time. Moved back to 48th Avenue. Sister and she fought 
about house budget of $150. Mrs. Schwerin got married. 
Grandmother stayed with three siblings that were left. ] 


Hammill: “Well tell me, to back up just a little bit. You 
moved from West Oakland then to Melrose on 48th Avenue 
mostly because you needed a larger place...." 


Schwerin: "My father wanted to build a house so he bought 
this land." 


Hammill: "Ok. So it was wide open then in those days. 
Were there some houses around-" 


Page ~- 6 


items A Mee GD I SA ein Nl A 


bo et CL IN Meee eRinme mete mam ne hk itt 


cee eet 
Sn ened MAEM ECARDS Seno ime! ome epee WiNTIne RR ANNONA eM RO A AA RAC kN Ms MI Spina SO ~ 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: “Very few, very few. The high school wasn’t 
there and the street car wasn’t there.... [Fremont High 
School and street car line put in later. Moved around 1904? 
Father bought a city block and then sold all the land except 
the corner lot which he reserved for them. Dug well and 
sold it to other owners for $1.50 a month; other residents 
of block could use all the water they wanted. Mrs. Schwerin 
had to go and collect the money. Difficult to do at times. 
After father died they moved to Fairfax Avenue. Mrs. 
Schwerin was always told that she took after her father: 
enterprising. ] 


Hammill: "When he [your father] came from Kansas did he 
have an engineering degree...?" 


Schwerin: "He did it by correspondence. He had books that 
he sent for. And he’d sit up at night and he got an 
engineering degree from a correspondence course." [His 
parents came out from Kansas, eventually lived right down 
the street from then. ] 


Hammill: "[Recaps father’s history, came to San Francisco, 
self-educated, eventually started up Phoenix Iron Works. ] 
And then he brought in Mr. Gill. What was Mr. Gill’s first 
name?" 


Schwerin: "David Gill." 


Hammill: "David Gill, as a partner, so he could afford to 
buy the foundry. And that was in 19-" 


Schwerin: "I think there were 900 shares. And my father 
bought 500 shares and Gill owned 400 shares. And then 
eventually, after Mr. Gill died, my father bought Gill’s 
shares." 


Hammill: "And that was in 1901 that they established this 
partnership. And ... their main business then was making 
the cast iron manhole covers, or did they do everything?" 


Schwerin: "That was about all the iron business was in 
these days, that’s about all you could make out of iron." 


Hammill: "What was your memory of what it was like in the 
neighborhood? What did the neighborhood look like, both 
where your homes were (your Center Street and Myrtle Street) 
and the Phoenix Iron Works." 


Schwerin: "There was nothing down there. And finally, I 
think it’s a gas company came in and put in a great big tank 
right next to the foundry." 


Hammill: "So the foundry was alone down there." 


Page - 7 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: "It was alone there, just an old shack." 


Hammill: "Do you remember the piers that would be, like at 
the foot of Broadway? ...wasn’t there the nickle ferry...?" 


Schwerin: "Nickle ferry came in after. But the foundry was 
as far as Oakland went. It was a tract of land---the 
foundry was on Second Street---and there was a tract of land 
on First Street and then it was marsh. It was all marsh. 
And my father wanted to buy that but he couldn’t afford to 
do that and then the foundry too. So he didn’t buy it. But 
that marsh land is worth a fortune now...." 


Hammill: "...so where were the first houses then? On what- 
w 


Schwerin: "Well, I would say up on Fifth Street were the 
first houses that were built." 


Hammill: "And in your first house, that was on Myrtle, were 
you old enough to remember what that looked like?" 


Schwerin: "The house on Myrtle Street? Yes. The next door 
to us was the MacKey’s, people by the name of MacKey’s that 
owned a big lumber yard. And they had a lovely home. But 
our home, I think, was 25’ wide. But it ran back and we 
used to raise chickens and ducks and things like that in 
that little bit of a yard." 


Hammill: "And what were the other neighbors, do you 
remember any of the other neighbors? Where was the MacKey’s 
lumber yard, for example?" 


Schwerin: "I think that was in San Francisco. But then 
West Oakland, all the wealthy people had a home there. They 
were big homes. [Hammill asks about Ghiradellis. Mrs. 
Schwerin says they built on Lake Merritt. Tries to remember 
another large home which is still there, 7th and Pine. ] 

That was a great big old house. See, they were all sea 
captains. And they were used to the sea. So they wanted 
everything big." 


Hammill: "...the large houses would be in the center of a 
large tract of land?" 


Schwerin: "Yea. At least had three or four acres." 
Hammill: "You must be remembering then before, when the 
streets weren’t paved, there were horses and carriages. Do 
you remember when the oak trees were still in the middle of 
the street? And that sort of thing?" 


Schwerin: "Yes. And the mud would be about two feet thick 
when it rained. And of we’d have to plough through the mud; 


Page - 8 


| 
| 
) 


| 


4 


i ‘ re eee lection 
pecs ean Ano LNT Na er NUEietiniesetninR He Via NO URE ei RA ie A A RM lc lh MANN om ak neh ST Rim aN 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


we'd bring boards and put them down, and sacks and put them 
down. And then little by little they’d pave ’em. But they 
didn’t pave them nice like they do today." 


Hammill: "How long were you at the house on Myrtle Street? 
Until you were how old?" 


Schwerin: "We moved there when I was about eight years old 
and we moved when I was ten." 


Hammill: “Oh, then it’s Center Street I guess I’m thinking 
of, that’s where you were born." 


Schwerin: "Center Street... well, that’s, my sister was 
here. So I must have been about six years old." 


Hammill: "What do you remember of the Center Street house 
then?" 


Schwerin: "I know that it had a bannister and we kids used 
to slide down the bannister and my sister fell off and they 
blamed it onto me, that I pushed her off! [Laughter]" 


Hammill: "Oh dear. Do you remember anything about what the 
street looked like?" 


Schwerin: "It wasn’t paved. ...when it rained it was 
nothing but mud and slush." 


Hammill: "Do you remember what your neighbors were 
like...?" 


Schwerin: "I was too young." 


Hammill: "So Myrtle Street was your first [memory]. ... do 
you remember any of your neighbors [besides MacKey’s]." 


Schwerin: "No, I don’t. There was a Thompkins School that 
I went to. And... the teacher told my mother that I didn’t 
see too good and that I should have my eyes examined. So 
she did and the doctor put glasses on me. And I as a kid 
didn’t want the ones with the rim on [she talked her mother 
into letting her have these. A ball was hit and knocked off 
and broke the glasses and thereafter she had to have glasses 
with a rim.] That was the old Thompkins School on Third and 
Linden, between Linden and Filbert. And then the name of 
the principal was Mrs. Walton. And she was a 2 by 4. And 
every class was in one room, you know, in those days." 


Hammill: "How many children were in the school?" 


Schwerin: "I have a picture of ’em and I don’t think there 
was more than thirty children in the whole school." 


Page - 9 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Hammill: "Of all ages." 
Schwerin: "Yeah. All ages. From Kindergarten on up." 
Hammill: "...was it a school day like we have today?" 


Schwerin: "Then we got out at 2 [pm]... and then we went 
home for lunch. Yeah." 


Hammill: "Two o’clock you’d go home for lunch?" 

Schwerin: "No 12 o’clock." 

Hammill: "Oh, and then you’d come back- 

Schwerin: "You see, everybody lived within walking 
distance. Kids, it wasn’t known that kids would be driven 
to school. Everybody would have jumped on them and kidded 


them. You wouldn’t dare come in a horse and buggy." 


Hammill: "So there was one teacher for the thirty 
children?" 


Schwerin: "Well, I think there was the Principal and then I 
think there was only one or two, one other teacher maybe." 


Hammill: "What were you taught? What were the subjects, do 
you remember?" 


Schwerin: "The regular school: reading, writing and 
arithmetic. We didn’t have any football and basketball and 
all that kind of junk." 

Hammill: "No special stuff?" 


Schwerin: "No. No we were lucky to get school." 


Hammill: "Were there children there who were different 
ethnic groups who didn’t speak English...?" 


Schwerin: "Mostly all Italian. Later on when we bought 
this place, the man who used to live across the street used 
to live right near me on Third Street but I didn’t know hin. 
They come over from Italy. And there were rooming houses 
and then they’d work for their room and board." 


Hammill: "What was his name?" 
Schwerin: "Rossie." 
Hammill: "... where would you do your shopping? Where 


would your mother go shopping, food shopping when she was on 
Myrtle Street?" 


Page - 10 


| 


ennai Ans Sos lM mm cieAR IR tte ian em am SA na lA 


dann, RL nm man pan tan cane eanuanes mina Mama ed OA rah ne eh MINT A a 


snetnae ee: amtmeeraermemenmiciatiscnireinnitie sata im timeeMcns blink Ra 


ie me mn sn Rati 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: "On Seventh Street." 
Hammill: "Ok. ...what do you remember about 7th Street?" 


Schwerin: “Seventh Street was Iben and Nors [?]. There was 
a big ol’ grocery store there called Iben and Nors. [She 
spells it.] They were partners and they had this grocery 
store and they sold everything." 


Hammill: "On Seventh Street about where?" 
Schwerin: "On ... the corner of Seventh and Myrtle." 


Hammill: "Oh ok. So that was big enough to handle the 
weekly shopping?" 


Schwerin: "Oh everybody did their shopping. But they 
didn’t have money enough in those days. You shopped every 
day. And there was a baker, the big bakery, a French bakery 
on 5th and ... Myrtle. And they used to sell, they never 
used to wrap the bread in those days, and you could get 
French bread that was a day old, maybe four or five loaves 
for twenty-five cents." 


Hammill: "What was the name of the French bakery, do you 
remember?" 


Schwerin: "I couldn’t tell you, I couldn’t tell you. But 
my mother would send me up with 25 cents, and we come home 
with a whole stack of bread." 


Hammill: "What other stores were there? Were there 
clothing stores that you remember?" 


Schwerin: "Well there’s, Chinese sold yardage, like a 
department store. It was a little one horse thing. But 
they did send material. In those days, everybody had to 
sew. You couldn’t go up and buy a dress or anything like we 
did. You could buy the whole shop for the price you pay for 
a couple of dresses today." 


Hammill: "And so you’d buy yardage." 


Schwerin: "And I could remember buying, I wanted to sew, 
and I needed three yards to make a dress and it was five 
cents a yard. So I had fifteen cents, I don’t know or I had 
saved it up. And I got three yards and I made a dress. And 
I made the pleats, the skirt was pleated and evidentially I 
turned the skirt over and pleated it so when I put it on the 
pleats ran the wrong way. And I went to the party, some 
party that they had. And this woman said, ‘Oh, you made the 
pleats wrong, the wrong way.’ And it made me so mad that I 
never ran a pleat the wrong way again as long as I lived!" 


Page - 11 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Hammill: "... did you play right out, with your schoolmates 
and so forth, right out of school-" 


Schwerin: "In the street." 


Hammill: "Yeah in the street. Who were your playmates, do 
you remember?" 


Schwerin: "Well, they mostly all were Italian. And they 
made their own wine. And they’d get a big truck of grapes 
would stop in the front of their house and the next day the 
men would all go in the basement and step .on these grapes 
and crush grapes with their feet. And they’d make wine. 
Then they drink the wine and they’d all get @runk." 


Hammili: “Have big parties. Would they invite you, would 
your parents be invited?" 


Schwerin: "You didn’t invite people in those days. No, 
it’s in the neighborhood, there’s only about six or eight 
neighbors there. You all knew, you came if you wanted to, 
if you didn’t want to, you didn’t come." 


Hammill: "So your parents would go back and forth with the 
Italian neighbors?" 


Schwerin: "My parents, my father was always too busy. He 
never had, never, all his life, he was never [sic] too busy 
to do anything." 


Hammill: "And your mother, however, would she then take you 
kids?" 


Schwerin: "Well my mother’s sister lived in San Francisco. 
You could go to San Francisco and back for 30 cents. You 
could walk to the nickle ferry and pay a nickle. Then you 
could take the streetcar in San Francisco and go out to see 
my mother’s aunt, for a nickle. And then you could come 
back and take the nickle ferry and walk to my house. I 
guess it was twenty cents. And my mother had a hard job 
getting my father to give her twenty cents, to go to the 
City. He said, ’If I give you anymore I wouldn’t see you 
for a week!/" 


Hammill: "Where did your mother’s sister live in San 
Francisco?" 


Schwerin: "[Can’t remember]. "Then one time, my mother 
loved San Francisco, she hated Oakland. So my father 
condescended [stops to remember], my brother Sam was born in 
San Francisco. And we moved to San Francisco on Third and 
Folsom Street. And we only lived there about a year. And 
my brother Sam was born. And then we moved back to Oakland. 


Page ~- 12 


ae SR cc iam ate MN eee I, ale EARS Ay 


i ATA Mlle ARM, Ae Hs AA Oe POS 


imeneiomcnateincemecieninnis ameaings ll taped ag cagA seine ns ea LI Mi, WR ESR et 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


My father did it to please my mother because she loved San 
Francisco and the highlights and everything." 


Hammill: "Because there was so much going on there?" 


Schwerin: "Yeah. Well, in those days, there wasn’t much 
going on. But there was a lot more than was going on in 
Oakland." 


Hammill: (That was between the Myrtle House and the 48th 
Avenue house.] "Let’s go back to when you were a child in 
Myrtle Street for example. What did your parents do for fun 
then? Your father really didn’t do much of anything. Were 
they members of a church...?" 


Schwerin: "My mother was German, so she belonged to the 
German Turnverine. That was a big club in Oakland, a German 
club. German Turnverine. And of course my mother wanted me 
to learn to speak German and my father would laugh when I 
talked. So finally he realized his mistake and he sent me 
to a German School. And then I learned German pretty good." 


Hammill: "And where was that? Was that sponsored by this 
German [{club]?" 


Schwerin: "A church on 14th and Market: there was a German 
church. And I’d go up there and take German lessons. I 
still have the German book." 


Hammill: "And ... was your mother an active member of that 
church?" 


Schwerin: "No. My Mother---she was too busy cooking for 
all the kids and the relatives." 


Hammill: "So the outings which you had as a family-" 


Schwerin: "She would walk to the German Turnverine and that 
must have been on Third and Jackson." 


Hammill: "Now what does ’Turnverine’ mean? Is that the 
name of a society?" 


Schwerin: "Turnverine, I don’t know. They called it the 
German Turnverine. And we’d go up there and then they’d 
dance and make music and oh, she loved that. And she’d take 
me with her. And I’d get so tired and I thought, ’Oh, if 
she’d only say ‘Auf Widersein,’ and go home. I couldn’t 
wait till she said that. And of course they said that a 
half a dozen times before they got [through]." 


Hammill: "That would be her only outing then, to go there?" 


Page - 13 


ae at: trae Ala tein aa lL Te nM AAAS miata A Mite Settee me 


ss a mai i 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: "That’s the only outing I ever remember my mother 
had. Yeah." 


Hammill: “What would you do for fun as you grew up then? 
You mention going to Lake Merritt. What did your mother say 
about going as a child...?" 


Schwerin: “Well, we children would go for a walk. And then 
they built the City Hall. So we wanted to go up and see 
that big building they were talking about. So we’d walk up 
there from Myrtle Street to the City Hall. That was a long 
walk. And my mother would say, ‘Don’t go down past the City 
Hall because that’s all marsh.’ And that’s Lake Merritt and 
you’11l sink in the mud. And don’t go down there. There’s 
tules and all the bad men are down there. And don’t go down 
there." 


Hammill: "That was obviously before they started building 
homes around the lake and cleaning it up." 


Schwerin: "Well, they filled in the marsh." 
Hammill: "Before they built the dam." 


Schwerin: "Yes. That’s when they filled it in. They built 
the dam and then filled that in." 


Hammill: "Do you remember as a child your parents talking 
about some of the ’big names’ of Oakland? Like Carpentier 
and any of these people, Adams. Do you remember?" 


Schwerin: "The Adams family, yeah. And another one that 
began with ’D.’ And then there was a mayor of Oakland. And 
he was a great big fat fella and he rode a little horse and 
buggy around and he always wore a carnation." 

Hammill: "John Davie?" 


Schwerin: "Mayor Davie. And then he had a girlfriend. And 
she, I think, was a mistress." 


Hammill: “And she was with him?" 

Schwerin: "She was a great big fella [sic], person, and she 
wore a great big hat with feathers in it, and she’d sit with 
him and they’d ride around." 

Hammill: "Oh, nodding to all the people [{chuckles]." 
Schwerin: "...they called her a madame. But her real name 


was I don’t know. But this Mayor Davies wore a great big 
funny hat and a mustache." 


Page - 14 


“item a Miele Pn) MinaaSaninpein tonal Sain ect dN re atin RCN nis Ni eed, se danas met ale aa a ame YN mE Uo MRE wee le cRNA nC EDO RI AEA cl OS ca oe nc Aha nN CRT YL AeA TaN, li ar a 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Hammill: "Yeah, I remember my parents talking about him 


too. Do you remember the Pardee Family, their house was on- 
" 


Schwerin: "Pardee. ‘’D.’ That’s who-" 
Hammill: "Is that who you were thinking of?" 


Schwerin: "Pardee. Yeah. They lived down in West Oakland. 
And they had a great big home." 


Hammill: "One of the sisters is still alive and living in 
the house." 


Schwerin: "I was gonna say: I bet someone’s still living 
there." 


Hammill: "It’s, uh Helen." 
Schwerin: "Yeah, Pardee...." 


Hammill: "So that was the home that you were mentioning 
that was nearby yours. You think?" 


Schwerin: "Well, it was on 7th Street... and Filbert, I 
think they were on Filbert, 7th and Filbert. They had about 
a whole block. [Hammill mentions that she only knew about 
Pardee house on 11th and Castro. Didn’t know that there was 
an earlier home in Oakland. Another family on 7th with big 
house also, They discuss this confusion. Hammill wonders 
if she is referring to the DeFermery House which also 
stands. Yes, this is the name Mrs. Schwerin was trying to 
recall.] "Yeah, that was a whole square block and they had 
a fence around the whole thing." 


Hammill: "That they called what, ’the Grove’ or something?" 
Schwerin: "I forget the name, I didn’t know the name." 


Hammill: "Do you remember the ... races that they used to 
have, the horse races, or any of that sort of thing...?" 


Schwerin: "In Oakland? ...not that far down. It was up 
more towards Emeryville. Emeryville then of course was just 
swamp." 

Hammill: "Do you remember going to the parks? Any of the 
parks, ...Shellmound Park. Did your family do any [of 
that] ?" 


Schwerin: "[(Quickly] Shellmound Park, we used to there for 
picnics." 


Hammill: "You did?" 


Page - 15 


Pe ANE Ai gh G ea ea NREL SSARRN INNER i tN NAL A oe RL IT tt Ak? cea: mR EONS -ciinmNn MIR RNAS, enciseihciamo ht 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: "Oh we kids couldn’t wait until the day come that 
we go there for a picnic. Cause we had sack races and... 
they probably gave you a nickle if you won." 

Hammill: "How, how would you get there?" 

Schwerin: "Walk." 

Hammill: "You’d walk." 


Schwerin: "“We’d walk. We walked every place." 


Hammill: "Would your whole family come, was it a picnic day 
for the whole family?" 


Schwerin: "My father never did, he never had time. But my 
mother’d take us." 


Hammill: "Mother and the children." 


Schwerin: "She had one baby in the buggy and another 
standing and holding the buggy and another one hanging on to 
the buggy." 


Hammill: "What did it look like there at Shellmound 
Park...? I understand they had a big dance [stand?]" 


Schwerin: "Just swamp, just swamp. And that place must 
have stuck out and it was dry. But there was water all 
around it." 


Hammill: "So there was a large dance floor with lights 
around it?" 


Schwerin: “Outdoor dance floor..." 
Hammill: "That was built right on the shellmound." 


Schwerin: "Yes. Shellmound Park, that was the only park 
that I could ever remember." 


Hammill: "And all your friends liked to go there and they’d 
spend the day?" 


Schwerin: "Shellmound Park: that’s where they used to have 
the horse races." 


Hammill: "It was, out in that area. Do you remember seeing 
those? Some of these people I understand who built the 
large homes in West Oakland would have horses and so forth 
and would race them out there." 


Page - 16 


1 Ate tet HS i A i Ba RE nn ee RICO, NAC: | lll eens te hel 


ns let ec, 


Pir Shaan tom NOI ee ere SIAC ACA, Naa Nc RRR NGA ArmA ace ne lA So, ny mY Ses RU 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Schwerin: "Right. But no, my mother would never let us go 

near there: she couldn’t keep track of us. [Notes that they 
were wild for a while and her mother had difficulty keeping 

‘track of them.’] 


Hammill: "But you would spend the day out there. You’d 
take a picnic lunch?" 


Schwerin: "Oh yeah. Take a lunch and stay all day. Never 
wanted to go home." 


Hammill: "Were there rides or anything like that...? What 
would you do?" 


Schwerin: "There might have been a merry-go-round. An old 
fashioned merry-go-round, and we never had any money to get 
on it." 


Hammill: "Would you play games then, make up your own 
games? How would you spend the day?" 


Schwerin: "No, just fightin’ [both laugh]." 
Hammill: "...all this time running around and fighting!" 


Schwerin: "Yeah. Well we never had all these toys that the 
kids have today. The only kinds of toys I had was when we/’d 
go lookin’ through people’s garbage and if there were some 
old wheels that they discarded from a baby buggy, we’d take 
them home and take a week to make a coaster. And then we’d 
ride it and then it would break and then we’d come back and 
spend the next week makin’ a coaster again. And then my 
folks were in the iron business so we’d go down and go down 
thru the scrap iron and in those days they had a little iron 
train and when they’d break they’d throw them in the scrap 
iron. And we’d go through the scrap iron looking for the 
pieces of the little train." 


Hammill: "What do you mean by train?" 


Schwerin: "Cars, little cars that are made out of cast, 
made out of iron-" 


Hammill: "Oh they really were ... little trains." 

Schwerin: "They really were little trains, and they’d make 
them out of iron. See, when they’d break they’d throw them 
in the junk and then the cast iron people would ‘put them in, 
and sell the cast iron." 

Hammill: "Oh, and melt them down again. Yeah." 


Schwerin: "And we’d sit and [?]" 


Page - 17 


AS AOS Me le NO Al A ae ale 


pe eee nen RR re MN i ie tN i MR cen A OS 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


Hammill: "So in other words, the foundry was almost in the 
toy business too? They were actually making little trains?" 


Schwerin: "No, no dear. The people that he bought the cast 
iron from, and that was scrap iron, was called ’scrap iron,’ 
and in that scrap was broken trains. (Hammill: "Oh I see, I 
see."] And we kids would look through it to find little 
pieces of broken-" 


Hammill: "Anything that they can melt down in other words." 


Schwerin: "They got so they could but we wanted to play 
with it." 


Hammill: "I see.... At the foundry itself, did you have 
jobs there as kids?" 


Schwerin: "I did. I went down and scrubbed the floor and 
scrubbed the black windows with a a little black iron [?]. 
And many times I scrubbed those old windows and my father’d 
say, ‘You didn’t get them clean yet.’ I think he did it to 
keep me out of mischief." 


Hammill: "But the boys didn’t particularly?" 
Schwerin: "They were too small. They were too small." 


Hammill: "They were too small at that time. ...of course 
women didn’t work. Did women in your neighborhood work? 
Your mother didn’t have an outside job." 


Schwerin: "No, nobody had a job. They had their hands full 
washin’ by hand and cleaning the clothes and cookin’. No 
they never. The first time I ever worked I was nine years 
old. And the Schutter * family was another family that had 
a big home down there. And the Schutter Store sold 
Christmas ornaments. And at Christmas time they needed a 
cash girl. So at nine years old I went up to the Schutters 
and, afterwards I knew them socially, but they were kids 
too; one of the Schutter boys was in my grade at school. 

And he said, ‘Go up to my father’s place and he’1l give you 
a job {as} Cash Girl.’ And in those days the Cash Girl 
meant that they had a rope with a basket and you’d pull the 
rope down and put the stuff in the basket and pull the chain 
and it would go to the wrapping counter and they’d wrap it, 
see. And so I went up and got a job. And they paid me 
$2.00 a week. And I was a Cash Girl. And of course I’ve 
always been small and always been quick. And so they let me 
stay there and work, see. 


* (Ed. note: although Mrs. Schwerin appears to be saying 
"Schutter" there is in fact no business listed by that name. 
The 1900 and 1915 City Directories do list, however, a 
Schlueter Store, at 13th and Washington Streets. ] 


Page - 18 


a ey 


amet ie le kell pee anemia sh 


centennial, mlm 


Interview with Ruth Schwerin 


So I’d get up there in the morning and I didn’t want to lose 
my job and then the first time they’d call ‘’Cash,’ I brought 
the basket over and this woman gave me ten cents. And I 
thought, ‘My God! What’s that for?’ And evidentially I 
told the other girls and they 

said that’s what they call a tip. She tipped me ten cents. 
Well all [ ] had to do was [ ] up, another way to make 
money. So when ever they hollered ’Cash!’ I’d run like mad. 
And I’d get some of these wealthy people would give me a 
nickle or dime, and boy, that was good money! But they sold 
Christmas ornaments. The Schutters always had a beautiful 
Christmas tree. They were German, from Germany. And they 
always had beautiful Christmas trees. And so that’s the way 
I earned my first money." 


Hammill: "Isn’t that marvelous! Who were the workers at 
the foundry? Your father, I think you said, was of English, 
Irish and Scotch descent. [Schwerin: "Yea."] Mr. Gill was 
a Scotchman. How many workers did they have? Who were 
they?" 


Schwerin: "The kids have got a picture of it; I hada 
picture and I gave it to them. ...finally, one time they 
had a big bunch of men, thirty men, and they took their 
picture. But there wasn’t any color in those days." 


Hammill: "Were they mostly Scotchmen or-" 


Schwerin: "Well, I think they mostly were Scotch because he 
belonged to a Scotch organization. And I think he’d get 
them from there. And then ... when they paid their men off, 
they didn’t have any checking---these men, they were 
ignorant, they wouldn’t ever make a check out and the bank 
wouldn’t know what to do with them. So, when they paid 
them, why they paid them in cash. And one time, when ny 
father wanted a man to come to work, I had to take the 
street car, as a little kid, eight years old, and go to 
Alameda where the man lived, and tell him to come to work 
the next day. Eight years old! And I’d say to my father, 
‘Can’t my sister go with me?’ ‘No, you can’t go alone? You 
don’t have to go.’ [She has said this in a slightly deeper 
voice] Oh no, I wanted to go because I wanted to please 
him. And so I’11 go tell that man to come to work." 


Hammill: "Now, how would you go to Alameda from your 
house?" 


Schwerin: "The street car." 


Hammill: "The street car. You’d catch it on 7th Street?" 


Page - 19 


nterview w Rut chweri 


Schwerin: "We had to---no, the street car ran on 8th 
Street. On Eighth Street. And then we’d have to transfer." 


Hammill: "Where would you transfer?" 
Schwerin: "And I had a lot of walking to do." 


Hammill: "yeah, I would say, how would you get across, the 
High Street Bridge?" 


Schwerin: "It would go out to the High Street, there was an 
old funny bridge there. An old rickety bridge. And it 
would go over that and where I went was right at the other 
side of the bridge. Alameda was a mud flat too." 


Hammill: "I was going to say: there weren’t many houses 
over there, were there at that time?" 


Schwerin: "No, no. Shacks. Little old shacks." 
Hammill: "Who lived over there mostly do you think?" 
Schwerin: "They were mostly all Italian." 


Hammill: "And they were people who were not well-to-do who 
would just put up these little shacks-" 


Schwerin: "Oh no. They were all Italians. They’d come 
over here and bring their brother, sister, just don’t have 
any money at all and they’d come over ... down in the bottom 
of the boat. Russie [?] used to tell how he came over and 
he was down in the hull of the boat and they had to stay 
there all across the Atlantic Ocean," 


Hammill: "Because that was the cheapest passage." 
Schwerin: "That was the only passage-" 

Hammill: "The only passage they could get." 
Schwerin: “Yeah, and they didn’t have much money." 


Hammill: "And so then they’d come and then stay maybe with 
someone who had-" 


Schwerin: "Some other Italian family here. And they’d 
sleep, they didn’t have sleeping bags in those days either. 
They’d sleep on any other thing, cover themselves up with 
rags or carpets or any old thing." 


Hammill: "Do you remember, as a ten-year-old child ... on 


Myrtle Street, that was before the transportation corridors 
was really evolved on 7th Street. Wasn’t it then?" 


Page - 20 


ne a NL OME cc ns sma sbiMn Mik nis be hm 


SP-C: SE Re a oe Sear tenNe mt ele h AM Ite Ment RL, let saa nite mare 
ems emerson Em aR a NAR NR SE A ap Mecano 


ew W Schwerin 


cr 


Schwerin: "We had a train." 
Hammill: "The train was there at that time-" 


Schwerin: "The train only went to Fruitvale. And then 
later on it went to Melrose." 


Hammill: "How did you feel about those neighborhoods of 
Fruitvale and Melrose? Were they considered better than 
West Oakland or better than Oakland at that time?" 


Schwerin: "Well, it was all greens and new---that was 
really farmland." 


Hammill: "That was country." 


Schwerin: "That was country. And we used to love the 
country." 


Hammill: "So, in other words it was very well thought of-" 
Schwerin: "But that’s why my father moved out there. He 
figured it would be a good place to raise kids. The weather 


was good; today, that’s the best weather around the Bay 
here, is Fruitvale." 


Hammill: "And so you remember, as you say, when you moved 
out there, it was just ... large open space." 


Schwerin: "All open space. We used to play games--~every 
place I went I had to take my little brother and that would 
make me mad. So we’d play hide-and-go-seek and we’d hide 
him in the woods and then we’d go off and forget him." 
Hammill: "This was Sam?" 

Schwerin: "George. ... because the kids would be going ona 


picnic up to Laona [?] Heights and I wanted to go and I 
didn’t want to take him and a dog." 


End of [original] Tape 1, Side 2 


Tape 2, Side 1 


(The first part of tape is of a woman speaking in Rumanian 
(or perhaps Russian?) with a man translating. ] 


[Schwerin interview continues. Tape is cued up by 
interviewer. ] 


Page - 21 


~ meee 


| 


ew _ with Rut chw 


‘ 


4 


Hammill: [They recap discussion about Chiodo Candy Company. 
Company started in a garage. Husband was a jobber and had a 
truck. He bought candy from them and resold it. The 
company moved into an old house on 24th and Peralta. Chiodo 
made gumball candy. Due to the shortage of sugar during the 
war the Schwerins loaned them $10,000 to buy cactus sugar in 
Mexico and import it. They made this transaction with a 
note. Company paid "every nickle back." The Schwerins 
doubled their investment as they were able to sell candy at 
a time when no one else could get it. Chiodo Candy Company 
maybe worth two million dollars; they are still in 
business. ] 


End of Interview 


Page - 22 


a I NH a CO: NR RTC ee Rie Hh Ae ng SG A NM A a 


z :_INTERVIEW WITH RUTH SCHWERIN 


Alameda, p. 20. 


childhood activities, (see also Thompkins School) 
10-12, 14-19, 21. 


Chiodo Candy Co., pp. 21-22. 


Christmas, p. 18. 


Chinese, p. 11. 


Davie, Major John pp. 14-15. 


East Bay Hospital, pp. 5-6. 


earthquake, pp. 4-5. 


ethnic groups in area, p. 10. 


Pp- 


(See also Chinese, Germans, Italians, Scottish) 


Germans, p. 3, 13, 18. 


German Turnverine Club, pp. 13-14. 
Gill, David (Phoenix Iron Works), p. 2, 19. 
ferries, p. 2, 8, 12. 
foodways, p. 11. 


Fruitvale, p. 21. 


housing (Schwerin family), pp. 3-4, 6, 8. 


menial 


rT ee 


Iben and Nors, p. 11. 


Italians, p. 10, 12, 20. 


Lake Merritt, p. 14. 


Mackey (Lumber Yard), p. 8. 


neighbors/neighborhood, p. 9, 12. 


Oakland City Hall, p. 14. 


Pardee family, p. 15. 


Phoneix Iron Works, pp. 2-4, 7-8, 17-19. 


workers (at), p. 19. 


San Francisco, p. 12. 


Scottish, p. 19. 


Schutter store, pp. 18-19. 


Schwerin, Ruth (and family history), p. 2, 3, 5-7, 12-13, 


21. 


Seventh Street (West Oakland), p. 11. 


Shellmound Park, pp. 15-17. 


shopping, pp. 10-11. 


social life, pp. 12-14. 


Steiger and Kerr, p. 2. 


malin ne A eT lt AORN Maes Aa iemniak? he bin 


street cars, p. 5, 7, 19-20. 


streets (surfaces, depeatiitay,, pp. 
telephones, p. 5. 
Thompkins School, pp. 9-10. 
trains, p. 20. 


women’s work/social life, p. 18. 


8-9, 


12. 


