annem net ee ee 


“TOWNS, ROYAL 


Royal Towns, Index to Interview 


000 
3:45 


015 
3:55 


143 


175 


215 


225 


335 
340 


440 


560 


Elsie Stackler 


nicknames of WO kids (not derogatory names) 
10 minutes of nicknames 

Arabians were merchants, linens, haberdashery 

Royal called "George Washington Sugar Doughnuts" 

going thru bulletin articles, letters ; 


change names--Slavs took off "ich" 
Charlie Silva changed to Forest 
Merkovich to Merko v 


because of discrim 
Irish names changed 


how Royal T got his promotion in fire dept. by doing survey of 
black firefighters 
last black appt'd in fire dept. for 15 yrs 19797 ct 


rookie for 15 yrs 
names--ethnic goes thru list \A7 


St. Joseph's Inst got jobs w/RR 
Father Mack looked out for them 


W of Mrk Boys Club excluded blacks 


the day Royal was born, dif names...WO must be heaven 

excluded foreign-born, Asians, had to be native-born, parents 
couldn't belong 

W of Mrkt Boys Club & Oldtimer's Reunion 
mbrs overlapper 

W of M By's Club--lots of businessmen 

Oldtimer's--social function 

Re-Union to give recognition due 

All extra money given to charities 


hot waters, key route had own elect’. washed boilers out 
34th & mb 


descrip of photos 
American House--rooming house, SP men, 7th & Wood 


End 


Tape 2, Side ] 


000 


the "shoots" 


ae a, 


010 


045 
050 


075 


095 
120 


140 
150 


190 
220 


260 


295 


320 


334 


black harboring refugees for 1906 quake & fire 
black section in SF destroyed 

memory of quake, bricks fell fr chimney 
Baptist Church at & fell apart 
refugees came by ferry then train on 7th 


Crick Route, 5¢ ferry for horse & wagon at Ist & Brdwy 


everybody came over w/in a couple of days 
blck section of SF So of MiSsion btwn 3rd & Bay 
bicks lived out nr the Presidio nr their wk 


most blcks came fr SF quake to 0 

O not much until then 

were bicks in 0 previously, wd for pullman 

bicks ran salloons--most blck busness were saloons, poolrms 


saloons, dif nationalities had their own (he names) 


no racial fights in WO 
SP brought Irish into 0 
& bicks, Greeks, Portuguese 
SP great impact 
father Mack resp for getting them jobs as engineers 


Slavonians came in 1904-5 & many aftr quake 


Dagos vs. Italians (had the busness) (just came over) 
Portuguese vs. Portugee 
Colored vs. Niggers--2 dif classes 
Arabians--door to door then get stores 
(names dif ethnic businesses) 


livery stables 


bicks got jobs according to color, associate w/other groups 
intermarriage 


do anything to get a job 
"don't tel] them what you are" 


13th St. btwn Sutter & Kirkham 
tin can alley because Its were scavengers 


prob's btwn Itr bicks & dkr blcks over jobs 
most important thing to get a job 


swimming in estuary 

after 1914 bicks brought to wk in shiphards 

they were laborers fr Texas, LA, Alabama 

they segregated themselves & looked down on other bicks (estab) 
for mixing 

def swimming places 

no eetd line--when he was young 


color 


| 


state 


SE rer neren 


370 


375 


415 


480 


666 


000 


045 


060 


070 


095 


105 


125 


130 
133 


140 


Royal walking w/father, mother 
wht kid blick kid 


1860 grave at Mt. View (1874) of Royal's family 
grave moved fr older cemetary 18th (16th) & Alice 
other side of Scott family--Placerville, CA gold country 


grandfather didn't share experience 
because of "manners" 


his father--looks Me ican, Indian, could speak Spanish 
went to Chinatown--descrip of Chinese 
father speaks Chinese--learned while steward at Occidental 
Chib--when Big 4 were. Learned Chinese--fed Chinese who 
worked on transcon RR 


End Tape 2, Side 2 | 
. Aes 


mother's family in 0 before 1860 
father's family in 0 before. 1880's 
pic of Lincoln School 1881 
father lived in SF 1865--steward at Occidental Club 
father worked at transcon 


mother saw 1st transcon come into town 
father--pullman porter 
pullman palace car & cooked 


1870's--dad steward on steamer, Amelia 
running btwn Suisun & SF 
1874--transcom came into Sacramento fr there :to 0 & SF by boat 


later bridged river & went to Suisun 
couldn't go further because of marshland there 


family in SF in late 1870's then moved to 0 (Town's side) 
1898--Royal's parents married both for 2nd time 
each had children fr other marriages (mother's Ist husband 
Steward on stmr that blew up in Vallejo--he was killed) 


great grandmother died in 1895 at 100 yrs old 
was a nurse, has picture 
Grandma Neal 


father paralysed when Royal was 8 
fr steamer accident 


brother ran barbership at 10th & Broadway 


parents married in 0, lived at 5th & Ctr 
mother's children lived w/them 


1499 5th St. Royal b. there Feb. 10, 1899 


190 


218 


224 


230 


235 


240 
245 


260 
264 


270 


296 
300 
310 


Royal's name on birth certificate 
named by godfather--W. Indian after crown prince of England, Edward 


mother never worked, dif addresses in WO 
brothers took care of mother--sold pprs & supported family 
rented in WO--moved for cheaper rent 
4 boys & 1 girl fr mother's Ist marriage 

wd ppr boys, shoe shine on ferry boats 

all worked groc store 

Ike worked in clubs 

Richard, eldest, pullman porter 

he married in 1910 & left family 


more moves for better rent, better conditions, rented entire house 
5th & Henry--flat upstairs 
moving more northerly 


mother died in 1920, Royal married in 1920 


Royal's jobs-ppr route as kid 
learned trade--machinist at Marshall Calculator Machine Co.--6 yrs 


worked in shipyards, machinist 
Moore Shipyards 

Bethlem Shipbuilding in Ala 
Union Ironworks 


no other blacks worked there too, that was when he was a "Portugee" 
unit 1921 


1921--wkd SP for 6 yrs on dining cars as waiter, head waiter 
as a "Portugee" was mostly nerve 

told him "we're not hiring colored people anymore" 

Royal “that's too bad, how are they going to make it?" 
picked up Portuguese fr nghbrhd & father 

bottom fell out of shipyards aftr WW] so took SP job 


unions--Royal couldn't get in because he was black 
shipyards had unions 


RR wk 
1927 got job w/fire dept. 


most shipyard employees belonged to union 
union--dining car cooks & waiters formed c. 1925 


wages main --most money fr tips 


te ee Al aN: cam 
hn Ri aamacttbane sine, 


320 story of how made fire dept. contact on train 


365 made better money as machinist for shipyards ($620) than as a 
waiter 


380 descrip of self as "salesman" trade tricks as waiter 
405 made good money in tips--able to keep 
420 union helped situation by giving them a spokesman in SF office 
430 how got job w/fire dept, pays $200/mo in a lump a/o 1 trip $50 
another $70-80 
depended on people you had 
trained for fire dept job w/help of childhood friend 
455 fire dept. colored, but only wht officers 


470 reflections--everything in life is a reflection--if you're nice 
to people, they're nice to you, if you're nasty, etc. 


490 all wht officers 

520 13th blck appt'd in fire dept, all blick company w/wht officers 

550 Royal Ist to break into wht hierarch in fire dept. Then co-workers 
(wht) realized he too recognized a good-looking woman, had an 
appetite, ate same things they did, had likes & dislikes & sd, 
"one thing we have in common--don't like to have feelings hurt, 

. so think when you talk to me" 

567 appt'd engineer, only colored engineer 

570 appt'd Itnt--then put in a mixed (racially) house 

577 "fighter for what he wanted" 


600 w/fire dept. 35 yrs for 194 -1962 
supported wife & 3 children 


615 every other nite spent in firehouse, 2 nites home, 1 nite 
firehouse--worked for these conditions 


655 bick nite life on 7th, blacks spent "blood money" there 
he never bothered w/ 


666 End Tape 2, Side 2 


Tape 3, Side ] 


000 "blood money"--money they needed to support their families w/ 


006 social groups 
wife--junior 500 club, still in existence 
bicks fr Louisiana 
Masonic Lodge--30th & San Pablo 
bicks had own hall--30th & San Pablo 


025 Prince Hall--founder of blck masons 


130 visit to Brooklyn shipyards to see son story 
Royal uses brogue 


060 Prince Hall--Royal has history bk on 


064 retired railroad men 
photos at EBNHS of railroad & crews 


080 Cooper AME Zion--dad's church 
grandfather brought to CA 
Royal goes to Unity Church of --multi-denominational 


110 moved to 27th St. btwn Grove & West aftr marriage until 1929 
35th & Grove until bit frwy 
St. of CA bought house at Rosal where been last 30 yrs 


125 mother shopped at 6 St market 
even later days Royal & wife shopped there 


144 depression--had good job during--fire dept. 
credit good 


150 1912 Royal left bowels of WO 


158 W of Ctr = WO boundaries 
W end of his operations 
W of Mrkt = official boundaries 


165 Royal's circle of friends were kids played baseball w/ at 
PF Park for 1912 on 
only playground W of Lake 


175 vacant 
Oak Ball--pk nr Nabisco--vacant lots 
vacant lots--mentioned locations 
baseball big sport 
neighborhood kids teams 


205 city bought DR--rec. center--gangland 
/ 


rings, nghbr kids 
slides around DR 


* 
‘ata: OL nein 


225 soccer played at DF 


230 WO Arena--8th & Pine--boxing 
Pat McClaine's Gymnasium--rth & Union 
Aloha Club--18th & Peralta 


242 Olympic Saloon--Link Dennis' place 
Lee Johnson--names big WO boxers 
Bob McAllister--list in OT Re-Union 
Pete Tavis 
Cecil Tompson--wltr wght champion of world 


260 article "do you remember" reads this 


305 famous WO families 
"no. 3" rich w/info 


335 swimming at estuary 
sewage ran out in estuary 
high tide OK 
low tide--defensive way of swimming 
nice beach--estuary use to run to 5th St. area of landfill 


363 skinny dipping 
then suits after ships came in 


365 bath houses 
Sutro/Piedmont Baths 
Ist time knew prejudice when practicing for swim team 
said he was cousin of Portuguese 
other blacks didn't get in 


410 wherever you were at 12:00 that where you ate describes nat'] 
dishes at friend's homes 


420 crime in WO--never locked your house, nothing to steel 
vagrancy--most crimes in wht woman w/blck man 


445 families w/money 
commission merchant 
McDermott 7th & Chester 
lived in section together but didn't associate 
Melts 
Meese (w/Reagan) 


465 poor people were most of WO people 
485 dif classes in ea nat'l group 


490 lot of people had their own little businesses 
e.g. restaurants, saloons, barbers--names 


495 country outside of city 
Acme brewery 


545 
62] 


moving out of area for better living conditions 
rich moved out to fancier, poor moved into better 


nobody always welcomed in dif nghbrhds 


End Tape 3, Side 1 


ie 


i 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES. CENTER 


Sonoma State University 
Foundation Building 300 
1801 East Cotati Avenue 
Rohnett Park, CA 94928-3609 ROYAL WARD TOWNS 


[Biographical essay by Karana: Hattersley-Drayton, Sonoma 
State University Anthropological Studies Center for the 


, Cypress Freeway Replacement Project, Caltrans District 4. 


Essay based on interviews conducted. ‘by Pamela Morton, 


‘ October 1981 for the Oakland Neighborhood History Project 


(see attached). Additional information from Bill Sturm, 
Oakland History Room. See also Pp. 81 and photographs as 
reprinted in Pioneer-Urbanites: A Social .and Cultural 


History of Black San ae by Douglas Henry Daniels, 


1990.] 


se 


Introduction bo Cat a ‘ 


Royal ekland ‘Lown: born in tbe okhna. point wise of 
West, Oakla He tists 10th, 1899. “Mir. ,Towns, worked for 
ees: age lany epartment for 35 yeah ‘Feachy ng the rank 
sutendang, dnb Was, the first afvican-anérioth to break 
tng oir barrie? ae “pi ck officer for an- all-white, engine 
any. He, wa ‘also. “Gespecked. giidkeur histérian/“and- 
fretgient guest ‘spe gtor local jhistof¢i¢al groups. 
eLlic ént:,< gré Soak and i er econo Towns 


Inte 

brought - is-'ine PRIAS of pre- West" 0% land to life 
through: is: ab lity to. peaks eee ‘Yes using a variety of 
ethnic: ac ent :, His skill with language was uncanny. For 
example, - a occasion he: ore s able. to use his West 2 
Odkland- 19% ao Peggee to ti Ri: ik his we 2 past fan, Trish © a 
watchusnt Hook} pn . ship rd. I Peore maybe “ 


coerahelans hy the A laingy m, the Peden turned 3.8 


feliow: levee. 3 nd_, bos Lai bond inceae g\ Take this ; 
Irishman} cael the oat} "s Photos, Be. 38 Ae AS 
, j “tb ‘ 
ae i. re mes 2 gee 
Biograph ~9f Ro al. —fowns ae ‘ MN ak 


Towns probabiruhnehivea ty, » Yan Gifayes from his 
father who..spdoke*~ at He ae Luding: Spanish and 
Chinese. eran Tow. Ss wae cb, Siete n Mexico in 1843 
of Jamaican gmnjor se s named: "Torres". —~Whentthis part of 
Mexico becamé.the Rep Riic of, Texd the family Changed *their 
name to "Towns", to ae id the* ag {dination handed: out to 
Spanish~surnamed residents< thie Bility to switch codes 
and switch identities became crucial to the economic 
survival of the family. = 


According to family history, Royal’s paternal grandfather 
came west as the ‘chaplain for .General Fremont’s army. The 
family settled in Monterey. Following California’s 
admission to the Union. they moved to San Jose where Royal’s 


PHONE: 707 664-2381 FAX: 707 664-4155 


| 


inmates pees 


kee, 


Oe ahead, nutans 


grandfather established the first AME Zion church in 
California. William Towns grew up with Spanish as a second 
language. Although Royal attributed this to the Spanish- 
language environment of post-Gold Rush San Jose, it is also 
probable that the Towns family (Torres) were of mixed 
Spanish-African descent. Royal described his father as 
looking Mexican, "like a Yaqui Indian." 


At some point the family moved to San Francisco where they 
remained through the 1880s. William Towns worked as a 
steward at the Occidental Club in the City, circa 1865. The 
"Big Four" (Collis P. Huntington, Leland Stanford, Charles 
Crocker and Mark Hopkins) apparently lunched at the club. 

On one eccasion they called Towns over to their table as 
they were concerned with the issue of how to adequately feed 
the Chinese crews that they were thinking about hiring. 
Towns apparently told them not to worry, and offered to set 
up a kitchen for the Chinese on rolling stock that would 


.follow the gangs. He also assured the investors that 


language would pose no problem: "Oh, don’t think nothing of 
it. Just put me in with those Chinese for two to three 
weeks and I/11 be able to talk with them. Because I already 
speak two or three different languages." (Royal Towns 
interview, p- 15). Whether or not any part of this story 


- is apocryphal or not is difficult to say. Regardless, 


William Towns apparently worked for the Central Pacific 
through the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 
1869. — 


During the 1870s the Towns family lived in Suisun, the 
terminus of the railroad, as William worked as a steward on 
the steamer Amelia. By the 1880s he had settled in West 
Oakland and worked for the Pullman Company, probably as a 
cook. In 1907 Towns was paralyzed in a work-related 
accident. 


Elizabeth Ann [Scott] Town had an equally prestigious 
connection to early California history. Her father, Charles 
Humphrey Scott, came to California in 1848 and worked as a 
miner in Placer County where he was a member of the Masonic 
Lodge. The Scotts were in Oakland by 1860. During the 
Civil War the family left the United States and resettled in 
Canada, where they apparently lived in a prosperous section 
of [town/city unknown]. The Scotts returned to Oakland by 
1869 and ran a grocery store between Washington and 
Broadway. 


Elizabeth Ann [Scott] Clark married William Towns in 1898, 
the second marriage for both. Mrs. Towns’ first husband was 
a ship steward who perished in the explosion of the steamer 
Julia. William Towns had several children from his first 
marriage to Alice Rochford Towns. Clark had four boys and 
a girl from her previous. marriage including Thayer, Al, Ike 
and Richard. Richard worked as a Pullman porter, and with 


| 


Allin nant Aim etme, nel 


ieee 
emcee 
Am NNN NT a Nl ie we 


his other brothers helped support the family after his step- 
father was injured. Mrs. Towns was apparently quite fair 
'and looked like a little "old Irish lady". 


Royal Towns was born at the family home at 1449 Fifth Street 
in 1899. At birth he was given the name of the attending 
physician, Alphonus Percival. Towns was later named "Royal 
Edward" by his West Indian godfather who, in a gesture of 
patriotism, suggested that the family name their son after 
the crown prince of England. 


The Towns family moved frequently, a common practice in West 
Oakland, although from 1898 to 1912 they stayed within a 
five-block radius. From 1449 Fifth Street they moved to a 
house on Center. By the 1906 earthquake they were living at 
7th and Campbell. They then moved to 7th and Peralta, 5th 
and Henry, and finally to 1657 5th, at Campbell. In 1912 
the Towns moved from "the bowels of West Oakland" to 16th 
and Campbell. Royal’s mother died in 1920 at the house they 
then rented at i6th and Peralta. 


Royal’ Towns grew up playing with a mix of kids who 
represented the polyglot, multi-ethnic society of West 
Oakland. Nicknames abounded in West Oakland during this 
time and Towns’s moniker was "George Washington Sugar 
Doughnuts," because he was first each morning at the local 
store to buy his favorite delicacy. He spoke Spanish which 
he learned from his father as well as from neighbors. He 
also could clearly get by in several other languages, 
including Portuguese. 


Circa 1915 a friend landed him a job as an apprentice 
machinist at the Marchant Calculating Machine Company. 

Towns was hired only because he could pass as Portuguese. 

As he recalls, "Hell, I’d be a Chinaman to get a job!" 
Although in the 1990s this kind of ethnic code-switching may 
seem /politically incorrect,’ it was in fact an essential 
survival skill for many groups in West Oakland through the 
1940s. The "passing" of lighter complexioned African- 
Americans for other ethnic groups, however, did not go 
unnoticed by other blacks, and Towns, as an example, was 
rebuked and ostracized for his actions. 


Following six years of employment with Marchant Calculating, 
Royal Towns briefly worked as a machinist at the Union Iron 
Works, Moore Shipyards in Oakland, and Bethlehem 
Shipbuilding Company in Alameda. Due to mass layoffs at the 
close of World War I, and Town’s inability to join a Union, 
he left the better-paid skilled labor of. machining to go to 
werk as a waiter for the Southern Pacific. Although he 
clearly impressed his superiors, the work was not very 
satisfying. As Towns later quipped, "It took me three years 
to dislike it and three years to get away from it (Town, p- 
27). 


i 

'Through a fortuitous meeting with his former Marchant 

; Calculating supervisor, Royal Towns landed a job with the 

| Fire Department in 1927. Although in these interviews Mr. 

i Town mentions that he was the 13th black employee hired, in 

| actuality he was the itth black, and was initially assigned 

| to an all-black company, although managed by white officers. 
Using his former work connections, Towns made a cross- 

| country trip aboard the Southern Pacific in the 1940s to 

' conduct a survey of blacks in fire departments in other 

| major U.S. cities. Armed with this information he was able 
to apply for and receive a promotion. He was appointed as a 

| Chief Operator which placed him in an all-white company. He 
was eventually appointed an Engineer and finally a 
Lieutenant. His pioneering efforts for racial integration 
within the Department were, however, not easy personal 
victories as Towns was criticized by both black as well as 
white firefighters. It would appear that his early years on 
the racially-tolerant, albeit tough streets of West Oakland 
helped him develop tenacity and bravado. He retired in 1962 
after 35 years with the Department. 


Royal Towns married his wife Lucille in 1920. The couple 

| had three children. Mr. Towns was instrumental in 

| organizing several West Oakland Oldtimers Reunions, an 
inclusive group which partially offset the racial 
discrimination of the West-of-Market Street Boys Club. He 

| was also a. Founder of the East Bay Negro Historical Society. 

He died in 1990. 

| 


fe) hist tervie 


Towns for the Oakland Neighborhood History Project under the 
aegis of the Stanford-Cameron House. These interviews were 
not transcribed although copies of the tapes were donated to 
the Oakland History Room. The following indexed 
transciptions were produced in April 1996 by Karana 
Hattersley-Drayton, Staff Folklorist for Sonoma State 
University Anthropological Studies Center, with funding from 
Caltrans (Cypress Freeway Replacement Project). 


| In 1981 Pamela Morton conducted two interviews with Mr. 
4 
| 


These candid interviews provide an extraordinary resource 

, for the study of (African American) history and community in 

j pre-1912 West Oakland. Highlights include a detailed list 

‘ of West Oakland nicknames, a description of the impact of 
the 1906 earthquake, important insights into ethnicity and 
identity, anecdotes regarding the prevalence of "old boy" 
networks and job discrimination, and occupational lore. Mr. 
Town’s years with the Fire Department, work largely 

| accomplished outside of West Oakland, are also well- 
documented. 

‘ 

i 


U f UIDE TO SCRIBED INTERVIEW 


® i The following represents a nearly verbatim transcription of 
the interview. Exceptions are made only for consistent 
false starts, that is, when a narrator typically begins a 

[gentence with a few words and then immediately starts the 

' sentence again. In addition, common extensions (such as 

| "you know") are minimized in the transcription if their 

frequency of use is distracting in the read manuscript. 
In a few cases, names of individuals referenced have been 
deleted in order to protect the privacy of the individual. 


‘These interviews are in standard conversational English. 
Thus no attempt has been made to edit or "clean up" speech 
patterns, or even to correct grammatical errors on the part 
of either the speaker or the interviewer. Interviews are 
considered primary historical documents. Just as marriage 
records or census data are not edited in their original 
form, so these records have also not been altered. As such 
these transcriptions record and celebrate the linguistic 
traditions of a variety of regional, occupational and ethnic 
| ‘ 


groups. 


The following punctuation marks are used throughout to 
signal certain editorial decisions: 


[euace] indicates that an entire sentence or 
thought has been deleted from text 


i 

| --- three dashes denote that the speaker’s 
thoughts are disjunctive, that is, they 

have switched ideas mid-sentence 

| 7 a single dash at the end of a sentence 

: indicates that the speaker has been 
interrupted, normally as part of the flow 
of conversation 


three dots are used to show that a few 
words (but not a complete sentence) have 
been left out of the text 


as it was recorded by the speaker 


[ } brackets may include clarification of, or 
additional information, as provided by 
either the interviewer or interviewee. 
Pronunciation of local place names or 
personal names is also recorded when 


| [sic] indicates that material as transcribed is 
| appropriate. 


All transcribed interviews include indexes. 


samme. 


OAKLAND NEIGHBORHOOD HISTORY PROJECT 
Interview with Royal Towns 


1 


; [Interview conduced 23 October 1981 by Pamela Morton with 
| for the Oakland Neighborhood History 


| Project. Verbatim transcription prepared April 1996 by 
Karana Hattersley-Drayton for Sonoma State University 


| Anthropological Studies Center, Cypress Freeway Replacement 


ne ammnanicinitte 


Project, Caltrans District 4.] 
[Labeled Tape 2, Side 1 (according to summary) } 
[Tape begins in mid-conversation] 


Towns: "“[....] And another thing I noticed in there was 
‘the shoots.’ My dad used to take me to ‘the shoots’ when I 
was a little kid, but I never knew where the shoots was. 

Not the shoots at the beach, this shoots was up around 10th 
Avenue and Haight Street, near Golden Gate Park. Up in 
there. Then there was a picture of the Shoots ... and where 
you used to ’shoot the shoots.’ You got in this sort of a 
round tub-like thing and you shot the shoots." 


Morton: "Like a slide?" 


Towns: "“[{He notes that "Tony" has a book that apparently 
shows a picture or talks about this. He notes that this 
book only mentions one black man’s name in San Francisco. ] 
San Francisco had a whole black section burn out there 
during the fire. I know because we had a lot of refugees at 


my place." 

Morton: "You did?" 

Towns: "I was seven-years-old then." 
Morton: "Of blacks?" 


Towns: "When the earthquake came. We had three or four 
people living with us, we lived on Campbell, Seventh and 
Campbell at that time." 


Morton: "Do you remember where else---like churches and 
organizations that had tents and things set up for people?" 


Towns: "Well, there were some organizations. But ours was 
just our family goodwill [chuckles]. It was all, toward our 
friends that we knew and they stayed there with us. Yes, 
there were organizations that helped a whole lot." ~ 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


1 


Morton: "So you knew people in San Francisco [Towns: 

"Oh sure!"] that after the earthquake came right to you 
[Towns: "That’s right"]. because they knew who you were and 
knew you would help then." 


Towns: "Right because, well the Towns family, geez they 

were part of San Francisco until 1880 and then they moved 
| over here. You saw that picture 1881 ... Lincoln School, 
; 1881. class of Lincoln School." 


| Morton: "In San Francisco, and then they moved here." 


Towns: "...oh I remember vividly, that morning, what 
happened. I remember my brother saying ’Oh Lord, have 
mercy. Lord have mercy.‘ ‘Bout that time the bricks on the 
chimney came down [slight laugh] into our house." 


Morton: "In West Oakland?" 
Towns: “West Oakland. Yeah." 
Morton: "You felt it pretty badly then...?" 


Towns: "Oh yes. Well you couldn’t get out the front door. 
You had to go out the back door. We had a dog there, and it 
scared that dog so much, all you had to do was make a noise 
and that dog would run and cower." 


Interviewer 2: "Did that happen all over the neighborhood, 
this bad, of chimneys falling down?" 


Towns: "Well yes, several buildings in Oakland were 

damaged. The Baptist Church there, at 21st and Telegraph 
there, shook that all to pieces. I had a picture around the 
house some place showing that." 


| Morton: "Well was that a brick church, was it brick, the 
Baptist Church?" 


Towns: "Stone. It was stone, yes." 


Bay...?" 


Towns: "Oh yes. Yes, I was just going to tell you that. 
That morning, that was around 5:30 when that happened, 5:20, 
5:30. And so about 6 o’clock, we was up, it was bright, you 
know. So I seen that train coming down Seventh Street, the 
old steam train, people were all on top of the cars and 
everything." 


| Interviewer 2: "Did you witness people coming across the 
| 
Mortone "And did they take a ferry to [Oakland] ?" 


Page - 2 


FO 


| Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Towns: "Yes, they took the ferry. Of course, you know,- you 
come down Seventh Street and the Seventh Street local to the 
pier. And down at the pier you got on the ferry boat’and 
went to San Francisco." 


Mortons "Yeah, so a lot of the refugees came by the ferry 
boat. Did you see any of them coming across on their own 
boats, or rafts or-" 


Towns: "Well, we saw people coming, over and we saw some of 
them get the horse and wagons and they get out. But there 
used to be a special ferry boat to carry the horse and 
wagons, called the Crick Route. It used to come in at First 
and Broadway. Uh-huh. They would call that the nickle 
ferry. And those of us who didn’t have money enough to go 
to San Francisco, pay a dime to go on that train, we’d walk 
up to First and Broadway and get on that nickle ferry and go 
on to San Francisco, We could go over and come back for a 
dime, which costs a dime to go just one way, see? Yeah." 


Morton: "How many people actually came over, right after 
the earthquake?" 


Towns: "I couldn’t give you [figures}, a whole lots of 
people came over.": 


Morton: “Yeah, but was that happening over weeks? Were 
they still coming, or did they come all sort of within a 
couple of days?" 


Towns: "Well I think within a couple of days, I think 
within a couple of days, because when you’re burned out, you 
have to find some place to go. And those people found 
friends over in Oakland." 


Morton: "And did you say the entire black section in San 
Francisco was destroyed?" 


Towns: "Yes, the entire black section went out. Now this 
fella that wrote this book, Professor Daniels [Ed. Note: 
Pioneer Urbanites: A Social and Cultural History of Black 
San Francisco], the one that had my picture in there, he 
lectured over there in San Francisco one day at the 
historical group over there, and he was telling that San 
Francisco was a city that never had ghettos and they had no 
black section, so forth. I didn’t want to interrupt him! I 
let him talk [slight laugh], I knew better than that! 
Because I know, my dad used to carry me to San Francisco. to 
see friends of ours. They all lived down around, oh [stops 
to think] its south of Mission Street there, between 3rd and 
the Bay, south of Mission Street. There was a whole colored 
section in there, where lots of colored people got burned 
out during that [fire and earthquake}." 


Page - 3 


y 


iInterview(s) with Royal Towns 


jMorton: "Were there other sections, as well. Or is it just 
© | the one?" 


iTowns: "Well it was just that one there. And then of 
course there was a whole lot of blacks that lived out near 
j; the Presidio, because after the Spanish American War, a lot 
of them were stationed there at the Presidio. And 
consequently, they got places near them to live, those that 
didn’t want to live on the encampment. They lived near 
] there. We used to go out there quite [frequently]; out 
there, oh Sergeant Meyers’ home. Sergeant Meyers and 
Lieutenant Rose, we used to go out there. That’s way out, 
what they cail Cow Hollow now. And when you would look from 
there, down where oh the fair [the Panama Pacific 
International Exposition of 1915] was, in those days the Bay 
came way up, and they filled all that in. The railroad 
train used to run, oh from Fillmore Street to Sutro Baths 
but it would go way out there in that water. But they 
filled ali that land in there to make the Exposition, see?" 


Morton: "So when that black section was destroyed in the 
earthquake, did all of those people come to Oakland?" 


Towns: "Most of them came to Oakland, most of them came to 

Oakland. They settled over here in Oakland. San Francisco, 

after that fire, it put a lot of fear, well it brought a 
@ lots of people over here to Oakland. Oakland wasn’t much 

until that fire. Brought lots of people over here." 
Morton: "Were there many blacks in Gakland before the 
fire?" 


Towns: "Oh yes, West Oakland, yeah because of the Pullman 
Company and the Southern Pacific. That was where most of 
the employment was, in Oakland. Because the Pullman Company 
hired blacks as porters and the Southern Pacific hired cooks 
and waiters. At one time around here, it’s all they had was 
cooks and waiters, Red Caps and things." 


Mortons "So those were the main jobs that blacks had." 
Towns: "Yes. That’s right." 
Mortons "And did they run saloons and boarding houses?" 


Towns: "Oh yes, they had saloons. Oh, they had all kinds 
of saloons and things like that. Yeah, I think I told you 
about that man coming in from Old [?] College and he wanted 
to know about West Oakland. Finally, when I got through 
talking to him, he says, ‘Geez, Mr. Towns, I notice you’ve 
got a variety of saloons there.’ ‘Yeah’ I said, ‘I guess 
you must have thought I was a wino or something, huh?’ And 
he says, ‘Well I commenced to wonder.’ I said, ‘No,’ I 


: 
| 
| 
! 
: 
| 
| 


Page - 4 


Interview(s), with Royal Towns 


heave. ‘Most all of the blacks that had businesses in West 

‘oakland were saloons, or pool rooms.’ You see? 

{ 

{And then of course there were groups of saloons, according 
to the nationalities too. They had racial saloons. The 
Portuguese had two or three saloons: Rose’s, Joe Birnadi 

; (?], and Sarment. And the Italians had their saloons: it 

{was Pasquini, Portola, and, well an Italian bought out Joe 

i Raymond.... And then there was Slovonian saloons. The 
Irish, the Irish: there’s two places the Irish went, that’s 
to church and to the saloons." 


Morton: "To.the saloons. Did they have most of the saloons 
then in West Oakland?" 


Towns: "I beg pardon?" 
Morton: "Did the Irish have most of those saloons?" 


Towns: "Oh, the Irish had three or four saloons: there was 
Lynch’s and Connallys, and Ryans, Simpson, yeah there was a 
lot of, Olsens and-" 


Morton: "And so then did these national saloons cater to 
the same group?" 


| Towns: "The same group mostly. And they, there might have 

been some intermixture there.... . But the blacks had their 

| own saloons, they had their own. They had Turner and 
Dotson, had the Turf, uh Link Dennis has the Olympic, that’s 
where Jack Johnson used to train. And they used to get the 
kids in the neighborhood:. one of the black kids and one of 
the white kids, and we’d have the Johnson and Jeffries fight 
there [slight laugh]. Then the Williams and Lionel and 

| George Gordon’s Oak Leaf, and Fisher’s ... and the Keystone, 

| oh it was all kinds. And then of course the other national 
groups, the Italians had, the Toscanos, they had their 

; Saloon. Grand opera, we didn’t have radio to hear that but 
all those same songs that they sang at the Grand Opera, we 
used to go down Saturday night and listen to those Italians 
sing the songs. Get drunk in there. They had their 
particular group. And the Slovonians, they had their 

| saloons. 


So, but there never was any mixtures between groups 
fighting. I never saw a racial fight in West Oakland, an 
interracial fight. Oh, kids, kids, you know, they fight 
over a drop of the hat, or something." 


Morton: "Why was that? Was it because they were all on the 


same sort of economic level? Was there something they had 
in common?" 


Page ~- 5 


lrnterview(s) with Royal Towns 


‘Towns: “Well yes, I would say, I would say that. I would 
| say the Southern Pacific brought the Irish into Oakland. 
They brought the drish in, as Paddies to work on the tracks 
; and things like that. And they brought a lot of the blacks 
jin to work on the railroads. And then later on the Greeks, 
, they brought in the Greeks. And then there was Portugee 
gangs and Mexican gangs that they brought in to, you know, 
*build up the railroad yards down there. So, the Southern 
Pacific had a great impact down there in West Oakland. But 
| they did a lot of hiring. And of course I know that Father 
Mac was responsible for lots of fellas that were engineers 
and things for the Southern Pacific, down there. Yeah." 


Interviewer 2: "What about the Swedes and the Arabians: 
| They didn’t work on the railroad. How did they end up 
there?" 


Towns: "The Swedes, they---I don’t know. I know the 
Janson’s {he pronounces this in a Scandinavian manner, 
‘Yantzen’; could also be spelled ‘’Johnson’] lived around the 
corner from me. Swede Janson, he worked some of the 
factories or something around there." 


Interviewer 2: "But you don’t know what brought some of 
these other groups here? We know the railroad brought some 
of the other groups." 


Towns: "Yeah, we know the railroad brought a lot of then. 
No. I don’t know too much about these other imports. You 
know?" 


you remember what period they came in?" 


| 
| 

| Morton: "Now when do you remember, like the Slovonians. Do 
i . 

| Towns: "Oh, I would say around 1904, 1905. In through 
there." 


Morton: "Before the earthquake." 


Towns: "Yeah, then of course a lot of Slovonians I was just 
telling you, came from San Francisco over here, after the 
earthquake. Tony would tell you his family came over here, 
see?" 


i 
Interviewer 2: "What groups do you remember dramatically 
increasing after the earthquake? Do you remember a big 
increase in Greeks or-" 

| 


Towns: Well, I don’t know. My favorite groups were the 
Italian, they were the nicest people. I still have many of 
my friends that are Italian that were down there. Course, 
those days I guess the main---I/1l tell you a story. This 
teacher out here at Bishop O’Doul School here, I think 
that’s what they call it. He came to me and he wanted to 


Page - 6 


; nterview(s) with Royal Towns 


| 
i 


{ 


so 


th nena atari, 


write something about what happened in West Oakland about 
the national groups down there. See? I said, ‘Well they 
had different classifications of people. They had the Dagos 
and they had the Italians.’ You understand? But the 
Italians were the people that had business or something like 
that. A lot of the Italians, Dagos, worked for them, those 
were the people that just came in here, from the Old World." 


Morton: “So the difference was that the established 
Italians and then the newer arrivals?" 


Towns: "That’s right. And then they had the Portuguees and 
the Portuguese. The Portuguese were the people that [ran 
businesses] .... If you were a Portugee, you’re just an old 
working class man, see? And then there was the colored 
people and the niggers. There was two different classes. 
And then, what else was there down there. Oh, the Arabians. 
And A-rabs, we called them, A-rabs. They all had some sort 
of business... mostly mercantile goods. They used to have 
fellas go around with a big suitcase and go to your house 
and show you different things. And then of course later on, 
they established stores. 


And you could go by the names of the stores we had in West 
Oakland. Here was Lekas’s, they were Greeks; they had a big 
grocery store in West Oakland. And then the ... Shaneen, 
Shaheen: they had a big place down there that they sold 
things. And Bomarod, they had a store, they were Arabians. 
And then look at the drug stores: Gonzalez, that’s a Spanish 
name. Gonzalez, Sandlin; Sandlin I guess, Sandlin might 
have been a Swede." 


Mortons "Now were these all on Seventh Street?" 


Towns: "On Seventh Street. Yes. Except when you went to a 
drug store. You either went to Glyons, to Gonzalez, or you 
went to Sandlins." 


Morton: "And what time period were these all?" 


Towns: "Oh, this was on up to, well 1912. Up to 1912 in 
there. Because I moved away from down in there in 1912. 
See? And then the different. stores: you had Iben and Nuer: 
Iben (German), Nuer (German). And then Lavue, Frenchman, 
ran a butcher shop. Teaque [?] was one of the Irishmen that 
run the saloon there. Then Nor, Nor, Andrew J. Nor ran the 
big livery stable. Now the livery stable was just as 
important in those days as taxi cabs are today, because when 
people wanted to travel, they would, you know they go down 
there and rent a hack, a horse and a buggie, things like 
that. And then the furniture company, McIntyre. McIntyre 
was a Scotchman. Across the street was McAlister; McAlister 
worked on stoves. McAlister was Irish. And then Mrs. 
Holtz; Mrs. Holtz had a store in there and she was German. 


Page - 7 


W i?) 


i 

3 . 

| Then Dragovitch ran a grocery store. He was Slovonian. 
Those guys, they come in here with some sort of business. 
You see?" 


Morton: "Yeah, that’s quite a list. Well, just to 
backtrack for a minute, when you talked about the conflict 
then between the two groups: for example, with the Italians, 
did the established Italians help out the newer arrivals or 
what?" 


i 
1 
j 
4 
i 


Towns: "They, they helped the new arrivals. Sure, ... you 
was an Italian, you was, what do they call them, paisano. 
Yeah [slight laugh], you were a countryman. Yes, they all 
worked toward helping each other." 


also conflicts between those two groups: the more 
established and the new arrivals. What group constituted 
those newer arrivals? When did they come in and where 
from?" 


Towns: "Well they were sort of ostracized for a while, 
until they proved themselves. You know, they came in here. 
There wasn’t too much that a black man could do around here, 
{ outside of being a janitor and a cook or a waiter or 
something like that. There was very few: some men, oh one 
er two of them were in banks, worked in the bank. Johnson 
and Lee worked in banks. But Lee was taken off of the 
dining car by a Mr. Fleischacker, was one of the San 
Francisco millionaire bankers. Lee used to wait on him all 
the time and he says, ‘With a personality like you got, you 
belong in my bank.’ And so he made a teller out of him. He 
was the first black teller and Willie Johnson. Willie 
Johnson, the first man I ever heard, says sprained his wrist 
[begins to laugh] counting dollar bills! Yeah. So, some of 


Morton: "And with the black then too, you said there were 
| them had good jobs. 


according to their colors. If you could get by for 
something else, well you went on. You either intermarried 
or you---there’s lots of intermarriages. We know lots of 
people here in this community that, well, they say a man is 
black if he’s got one drop of black blood in him. Well geez 
then there’s a whole lot of blacks that we know that are 
Hawaiian [?/White?]." 


Morton: "Well how did that work then? Was a black with a 
lighter complexion, did he associate himself with a 
different group and dissociate himself from the blacks?" 


Towns: "Well later on he did, after he, or she married into 
another group. They formed a different group altogether. I 
got it in my family. I’ve got a nephew, he’s the head of 


But then of course there were lots of Negroes had jobs 
| one of the big automobile establishments in San Francisco. 


Page - 8 


2 


| Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


He’s my, well, my brother-in-law’s kid. And there are 
numerous others. I had a fella just recently come here from 
New York. He hadn’t been here for years and he was pleased 
to see me. And he says, ’Geez I went to look up certain 
fellas and I couldn’t find them because if they get by for 
white, they don’t want [you] to bother them.’ And I belong 
to that historical association over there. And we talk 
about old-timers. And I, say, There’s an old-timer by the 
name of Captain Lun that was a Negro, was a Captain. I 
says, but they didn’t know what Lun was. He had some sort 
of disease that made his face all white. And his hands all 
white, but his body was all black [short laugh]. And so, he 
got to be a Captain. And so I was telling the folks over 
there, said ‘Well Shorey wasn’t the only colored Captain on 
the coast. There was a Captain by the name of Lun.’ And 
they said, ’How do you know?’ And I said, ’Because he told 
me!’ I said, ‘I was. in the firehouse one night and he come 
out and he said, ‘Towns, I know your family better than you 
do. He says I know your grandmother established the Old 
Folks Home out there in Beulah, which is now Mills 
College.’" 


Morton: "Oh what was the name of that?" 


| 

| 

| Towns: "It’s called Scotts ..... He said before there was 
an old folks home, my family home was the old folks home. 

| My grandma’s home was the old folks home. And he got to 
talking so my aunt was living then. I said, ‘Aunt Emma, did 
you know a man by the name of Captain Lun?’ And she says, 
‘Oh yeah, he was a seafarin’ man. He married Auggie Lun, 
that was one of our friends.’ So, you very seldom do you 
hear about a white man marrying a colored woman, that is 

| those days. They’d live with them or something like that. 

| But anyway, I told the curator over there at the Negro 

/ Museum over there on Grove Street about it. And he went 

! down to look it up, and he says, ’Oh no,’ he says, ‘that man 
was an Indian.’ And I said, ‘Oh hell,’ I’d say, ‘they’d be 
any damn thing to get the job.’ I said, ’I’11 give you an 
experience of mine.’ I says, ’One of the Italian boys down 
in West Oakland, by the name of Scazafava met me one day and 

{ he says, ‘Roy, are you workin’?’ He says, ‘No.’ He says, 

| ‘You need a job?’ I says, ‘Yes, I do.’ He said, ‘Well I’m 
going to get you a job but don’t get mad at me.’ I said, 
‘Don’t get mad at you for what?’ He says, ’Don’t tell them 
what you are.’ I said, ‘Hell, I’d be a Chinaman to get a 

| job.’ [Slight laugh] You know? And so, I worked in this 
particular plant but this brother was the boss out there and 

| nobody could say anything against me. One fella thought 
he’d be wise one day and he says ’Towns, I know you’re a 
Negro.’ He says, ‘I know you’re just like a friend of mine, 
Charlie Vinneval [{?]. Charlie speaks with a foreign accent 
but he’s got no language to black [back?] it up.’ ‘Well,’ I 

| said, ’I don’t speak with any foreign accent.’ I said, 

| ‘from associations with Portuguese and Italian and things 

| 

i 


Page - 9 


SARA nas sma: a meimeeriecdliltlin ss: 
CN AONE ARNIS nA th eee es 


i Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


| down there, I picked up a few words and things like that.’ 


He said, ‘But I know you and I know that guy over there are 
colored.’ ‘Well,’ I says, ‘just to show you how wrong you 
are, ‘I said, ‘you call him over here. Don’t say Vien ici [ 
pronounced "Viniki"], any fool knows that means ’Come here’ 
in any Latin-derivative language. I said, ‘But tell him, if 
you’ve got a few minutes, I’d like to hold a conversation 
with you.’ So, he told him that in Italian, see? This 
fella, well they talked for about ten minutes, I went on 
back to my machine. So later on he come over and he 


j apologized to me. He said,. ‘I’m sorry Roy.’ And I said, 


‘Well you know, there’s a whole lot of white-black people in 
this world, and there’s a lot of black-white people. And 
you don’t know who’s who. I says, ‘You find it in my race, 
uh fair with blue eyes, blond hair to black as the ace of 
spades with brown eyes. Uh, this fellow, he was talking to 
him, he was from one of the islands off of the boot [of 
Italy] down there. Yeah. And he spoke Italian well, we 
forgot all about it. He said, ’Geez, I didn’t know that.’ 
He said, ‘He just saw his complexion.’ I said, ’Can’t you 
think of some black battalions that you’ve got?’ He said, 
‘Sure. You know some black battalions?’ Because I know if 
there’s any group that’s ever prejudicial it’s that Italian 
group. Those Italians that live up around Genoa, they have 
no respect for the Italians that live down around the Boot." 


Morton: "That’s true. Has that happened here, too?" 
Townss "Yes." 


Morton: "In that the Italians from Genoa who are now in 
Oakland do they, are they prejudiced against other 
Italians?" 


Townss "Ohhh, no, not so much. Not so much. In the 
districts where they lived, they were all, all mixed, the 
Genoveses and the Polentanos [?], and they were all mixed 
together. They, later on, as they grew up, they went to a 
different place. Course now in West Oakland, Thirteenth 
Street was known as ‘/Tin Can Alley.’ MThat’s where all the 
Italians lived. Thirteenth Street between Sutter and 
Kirkham Street. See, Cypress didn’t run through then.” 


Morton: “And why was it called ‘Tin Pan [sic] Alley’?" 
Towns: "Weli ‘Tin Can Alley’ because most of the Italians 
that lived in there worked for the Scavenger Company, which 
turned to be the Oakland Scavenger Company." 


Morton: "Oh. Oh I see so that was their business. They 
were collecting scrap metal and-" 


Towns: "That’s right. You know, the refuse and things you 
turn out, garbage. They were garbage collectors. I 


Page - 10 


. ‘. 


| 


nterview(s) with Roya own 
i 


| remember when they used to pay two bits a month [slight 
laugh]."* 
1 
Morton: "And getting back to the black now, you were 
talking about---well do you think that was true for most of 
the blacks ... that they had the same feeling you did. That 
they’d do anything to get a job? That that was the most 
important thing?" 


Towns: "I think so. I think so. I know that there were 
lots of light Negroes that got jobs that they didn’t know 
what they were, that the blacks couldn’t get. And of course 
that set up sort of an enmity between the two of them: they 
didn’t like that at all. The Blacks didn’t, you know?" 


Morton: "You mean, the blacks had problems within 
themselves, between the lighter and the darker complexions?" 


Townss "Yes, that is certain people when they know you got 
the job so, ’Oh he wants to be a Portugee or some other damn 
thing’ and gets that [?].’ I had that when I went to the 
firehouse, when I went to work at the firehouse. I had some 
of the white fellas say, ‘What’s he going in as? Is he 
going in as a Negro, is he going in as white? Because he 
speaks three or four different languages.’ See? Because 
they knew that down there in West Oakland that’s the only 
thing you did was talk with them guys in their native 
danguage. Some of the kids come over from the Old Country, 


| that’s all they could talk. And you remembered what they 


said. And then when I got out with the colored fellas, 
‘Geez that guy, he wants to be white. He worked for years 
for the Marshali Calculating Machine Company.: Now the 
Depression or something’s hit in here and’ now he wants to 
come in here.’ See? One of the guys told me one day he 
says, ’...you were a Hindu or some other damn thing before 
you come here. What did you come in here for?’ I said, 
‘Well I suppose the last six years I worked on the railroad 
I was getting by for a Chinaman, huh?’ [Laughs] And that 
ended all, ali the conversation there. But I had to live 
all that down. Because of the way we were raised in West 
Oakland. 


Now, let me give you an example: we all used to swim down in 
the estuary. And those pictures, you see all different 
colors. All those pictures were taken hefore 1914. After 
1914 and the War and they started bringing a lot of blacks 
to work in the shipyard and laboring jobs, and things like 
that. Weil, they brought in a lot of artisans, a lot of 
black carpenters and things [?] couldn’t get jobs before. 
But they were carpenters in the south where they worked, and 
cement workers and things like that. And so, anyway, ... 
the kids, we all swam down there together. When they 
brought these blacks in here, from Texas and Louisiana and 
Alabama and Georgia and every place, doggone [hits table] if 


Page - 11 


i 


i 


-Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


they didn’t find a different place for themselves to swin. 
lines is eeqeaguting their own selves." 


|Morton: "Really?" 


Towns: "Yes, they found a place where we never bothered 
about the place-" 


Morton: “Just because that’s what they had done in the 
South?" 


= "That’s what they were accustomed, they wasn’t 

i accustomed to that. Because we swam down there they looked 
dewn upon us because we swam down there with the rest of 
those kids. So, I don’t know. It was funny, course, within 
my own family, see I was the only one: I’ve got two sides of 
my family, my mother’s side and my father’s side. And, on 
my father’s side, they’re all older than I. And, on my 
mother’s side, ...all of them were older than me. I was the 
kid brother, the half-brother. So anyway, most of my 
brothers were raised down there in West Oakland. They 
played baseball and everything else: they didn’t know 
nothing about no color line. They ran around with all the 

| kids and things like that. So, of course, when these other 
guys come in here, they couldn’t see that, because that 
wasn’t the way they were raised. They didn’t run that way." 
I 


Morton: "Yeah. But with you... as kids together, everybody 
got along fine." 


Towns: "That’s right." 


Morton: "How about the parents of those kids? Well how did 
they feel about your mixing?" 


Towns: "We got along all right. Parents got along fine." 
Morton: "Did the parents mix, as well?" 


Towns: "Well, they were nice, they were always nice, nice 
to my mother. Course my mother looked like you. Oh yeah, 
my mother looked like an old Irish woman just to see her. 
Cause if I go down the street with my father, they would 
say, ‘Look at the little white kid with the colored man.’ 
And if I went with my mother down the street, they’d say 
‘Look at the little white lady with a colored boy.’ So that 
was the difference between. Because all the brothers on my 
mother’s side, they’re all fair. All very light. But on 
the other side, they were all my color." 


Morton: "Tell me a little bit about your family. How long 


have they been in Oakland? I know that you said: you had six 
generations in California." 


i : Page - 12 


ne 


,; Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


| Towns: “Well, I could go back to, go out to St. Mary’s 
j College there, St. Mary’s cemetery and find a grave, 1860. 
| There's a grave, 1860. . And I had a historian from San 
Francisco, Mr. James de Abajian, I guess maybe you’ve heard 
‘of him, and he and I worked together quite a bit. And so I 
was telling him about the grave. So we went on out there to 
: look at the graves. So he said, ‘Well let’s go inside and 
get some information.’ So we went inside and found out who 
was in the grave. And so the fella says, ’Oh,’ he says, 
‘but that 1860, that’s wrong; this cemetery didn’t get here 
until 1874.’ So I told the guy, ‘Well, ’ I says, ‘You know, 
you should learn a little more about your job.’ I said, 
‘,..I just take that as ignorance, you don’t know any 
better. But, ’I says, ‘at one time the cemetery was down 
here at 18th and Alice Street. And they moved the cemetery, 
as Oakland grew.... [His grandmother used to take a 
streetcar and get off at this site?] 


"At 1860, we got that there. And then of course on the 
ether side, the Towns, that’s the Scott side, and-on the 
Towns side, they came here with Fremont’s army, before there 
was a California. And old man Scott came here in the days 
of the gold mine. Old man Scott was a goldminer and in fact 
Debadjian found his name up in Placer County in 1848. And 
just recently ... one of the librarians has been in touch 
with me about old Masonic lodges .... And he had a paper 
there and this paper showed the notice of dissolution of 
property where Scott sold out to charity, See? Now, that 
seemed funny there. But in my inquisitiveness, I’ve always 
been inquisitive. When I was a kid, I couldn’t ask my 
grandfather nothin’. I/’d say ’Hello Grandpa, goodbye 
Grandpa.’ I had specific orders to do that. Not to hold 
conversation with him, unless he spoke to me first." 


Morton: "Uh-hmm. That was the manners then." 


| 
Towns: "That was the manners, that’s what you were taught. 
That reminds me of the night, I spoke over to the 
Westerner’s Corral. The Westerner’s Corral is a group of 
historians, west of Chicago. And they call themselves a 
corral rather than call themselves a lodge and things like 
that. So I had to speak over there.... So when I finished 
talking to them, the first man jumped up was a professor at 
Stanford University down there, Lap, Professor Lap. And he 
|; said, ‘/Mr. Towns, did you ever sit down and talk to your 
grandfather about the days in the goid mine.’ I says, 
| {slight laugh] ’Geez Mr. Lap,’ I said, ‘do you know when I 
was raised I had a specific code of orders and that was, 
they taught us manners, youngsters how to get along with 
Grandpa. And I was to say Good morning Grandpa or goodnight 
Grandpa, whatever the occasion was, and to speak when I was 
spoken to. Other than that, I was to be seen and not heard. 
So many times, Hello grandpa, Hello Grandpa; I’d see Grandpa 
in different places.’ But Grandpa, if he had shared his 


Page - 13 


| 


i interview(s t ova ow 


experiences, Shoot! I wouldn’*t have been sitting here 
talking to you now. I would have had, you know, a better 
education and look forward to other things. I had to wait 
juntil after I got to be a man to find this thing out. 


So after I finished making this talk over there, this man 
who owns a whole gang of drugstores in San Francisco, called 
me up; oh, three or four different people called me up. 
Says, ‘Royal, we were really pleased with your answer last 
night. Your answer was worth that whole talk. Because in 
my car going home I had six men with me. And there wasn’t a 
man in that car that wasn’t raised like that. And three or 
four other fellas where we talked in that gathering last 
night said, Geez, this guy was raised the same way we 

; were!/" 


Morton: "Yeah, that was the Victorian way." 


Towns: "So anyway, I used to listen to my mother talk. I 
learned a lot by listening and my dad taught me that, years 
and years ago. That when somebody telis you something, you 
listen, and let it sink in and go. And he used to 
experiment with me, going across to San Francisco on a boat. 
He’d say, ‘Roy, you see those two boats out there?’ I say, 
‘Yes, sir.’ Said, ‘'They got names.’ I said, ‘They have? 
What’s their names?’ You know a little kid, he’s 
inquisitive. And oh, this was way before the earthquake, 
yeah before the earthquake. And he says, ‘Well one of them 

| is the State of California and the other’s the Pueblo.’ And 

i then the old man would take me all different places. The 

| old man had an idea of educating me by showing me things and 

' telling me to remember this and remember that. So that 
night, we got home and had dinner, got ready to go to bed. 
I guess he thought I’d forgotten about what went on. He 
come up in my room he said, ‘Royal, I took you for a ride 

( today in San Francisco.’ ‘Yes,’ I said, ‘I liked that very 

| nice, it was very nice, dad.’ Course we had a regular route 

i too. We left there, we stopped at Lynch’s Saloon: the old 
man had a shot of whiskey and I had a saspirilla. That’s 
as---any time I went out with the old man, I knew I was 
going to get that. Because when I came back home I told my 
mother that Papa had ‘/whicky’ and I had ‘’sasparwiwa’. 
[Laughs] You know?. So anyway, he comes up into the bedroom 
and he says, ‘Did you enjoy yourself today Roy?’ I says, 
‘Yes sir.’ He says, 'I showed you two boats out on the Bay, 

didn’t I?’ ‘’Yes you did Dad.’ ‘’What was their names?’ I 

| better tell him: State of California and the Pueblo. See? 

| And that was just, the way. 


But the thing: it was common to go down the street. The old 
man, he was a different color than I. He looked like one of 
them Mexicans. ... he had that kind of a Mexican color. I 
go down to Tijuana today, I see him, or any place in Mexico, 
I see my father, it looks just like him. Looks like one of 


Page - 14 


| | 


| 


!rnterview(s) with Royal Town 


é 


| 


! 
i 


them Yaqui Indians. So, we go down the street in San 


Francisco and somebody would walk up to him and say 
something in Spanish. The old man would tell them, such and 
such a place, because the old man could speak two or three 
different languages, see? But this day, he took me over to 
Chinatown. And [they] all looked like they were going to 
bed, they had the black pajamas on. The women wore black 
clothes and the men wore black clothes. And the men had 
queues and the little caps on their head. And the women had 
beautiful shoes on. And so, we were walking along there and 
my dad was telling me about different things and so, he saw 
some Chinaman and he said to him: [Mr. Towns speaks as 
though in a Chinese dialect]. That’s the way it sounded to 
me, you know. And the Chinaman looked at my dad, he kept on 
going. And my dad hollered [speaks again as if in Chinese]. 
The Chinaman started talking and I. started laughing. The 
Chinaman come to realize that the old man could talk that. 


But I never learned until I was a man, how the old man 
learned Chinese. I was married and my brother Wallace came 
back. My brother Wallace left when I was around three- 
years-old. And I was around 21 or 22 and he come back and 
he was asking me stories, telling stories about the old man. 
I told him that one about the memory and about the boats and 
I told him that one about Chinatown. He said, ‘Well didn’t 
Dad ever tell you about how he learned Chinese?’ I said, 
‘No, he never.’ I sdys, ‘In fact Dad and I never sat down 
and talked by ourselves. We went on trips and things like 
that and we talked about things on the trips.... So anyway, 
I says, ‘No he didn’t.’ And he said, ‘Well when they built 
++. the transcontinental railroad, the Central Pacific, your 
dad was a steward at that time when they were contemplating 
that at the Occidental Club in San Francisco. And the 
Occidental Club, the ‘Big Four” fed. note: Collis P. 
Huntington, Leland Stanford, Charles Crocker and Mark 
Hopkins]... they were all there. My dad was a steward in 
that club. And so they had problems and so they thought 
they’d discuss problems with my old man, being the steward. 
He fed the men in the club so they figured he’d have to know 
something about feeding these Chinese that they were going 
to bring in. So he told them, he says, ‘Well Billy, we’re 
going to bring in a bunch of these Chinese from, well 
coolies from China. But we’re going to run into a problen./ 
‘Oh what is that?’ ‘We haven’t got enough money to put an 
eating house for them every ten miles, to, feeg them.’ Says, 
‘We don’t know how to do it.’ So my old man says, ‘Well 
that’s easy.’ Says, ’Well what I do, you’ve got the cars. 
Put a range in a car and put the tables in the car and move 
along with it.’ And so he says, ‘Well, we’ve got another 
problem.’ ‘What’s that?’ ’A language barrier.’ So the old 
man says, ‘Oh, don’t think: nothing of it. Just put me in 
with those Chinese for two or three weeks and I’1l be able 
to talk with them. Because I already speak two or three 
different languages.’ 


Page - 15 


jinterview(s) with Royal Towns 


iSee he was raised in San Jose. And those days, when he was 
raised in San Jose, nine out of every ten people spoke 
‘Spanish. So Spanish was the second language in the family. 
iThen as he grew up he got a job in the post office, and the 
job which was very similar to what rural free delivery would 
be today. And he had to go to these different places and 
deliver these letters to these foreigners who were working 
as farmers on these different places. So-‘he picked up, you 
know, just conversational, ‘How are you?’ weather, things 
| like that [to have] conversation with them. So that’s how 
he got that. Of course Spanish down in San Jose, those days 
the stores down there. I seen some of the old pictures he 
had, they were after I got married and after I left home. I 
left all them old pictures of all them old railroad 
trestles, and the building and the construction of the 
Central Pacific.... And I left them with my brothers and I 
don’t know what become of them. And so, anyway, why Dad 
showed me these pictures of these stores where they had on 
there carneceria, ’butcher shop,’ written underneath it. 
See? And sasteria, tailoring shop, tailer shop. Then all 
different things like that. Was all in there. So it was 
only natural for him to pick that up." 


Morton: "Yeah, so that was sort of part of adapting as you 
said. Identifying yourself with different ethnic groups or 
that that’s really how he came up with jobs. That he had to 
be that way, really, in order to survive." 


Towns: "That’s right. That’s right." 


Morton: "Be flexible. Course ... my family background on 
that side, they came from Jamaica to Mexico. The part of 
Mexico that they settled in, they saw that turned to the 
Republic of Texas. My dad was born in 1843 in the Republic 
of Texas. Then they saw it, a State of Texas. And then 
when Fremont [pronounced Free-mont, with accent on second 
syllable] and that group of -the army, they joined the army 
and came west. And that’s when my dad, they brought the 
whole family out to Monterey. Then after California became 
a state, then they moved to San Jose. My grandfather 
established the first AME Zion church there, in San Jose. 
He was evidently a chaplain in Fremont’s army. So that’s 
the history there, along that side. But our family name 
wasn’t always Towns, according to some of my brothers. It 
was ‘Torres.’ And ... after Texas was declared a Republic, 
if you had a Spanish-sounding name, you didn’t get a job. 
So that’s when the old man changed his name to Towns." 


Morton: "“Uh-hmm. Another adaption." 
Towns: "That’s right. That’s what I gather. You see, 


being the kid brother, my next oldest brother on the Towns’ 
side was 21-years older than I. The next brother on the 


Page - 16 


ean aeanemitotei 


ln Nea me seam cae 
conenememineummemie leer er Te 


j 
j 
jinterview(s) with Royal Towns 


Clark side, my mother’s side, was 11 years older than I. 
Course, we had a little closer friendship. I was always my 
brother’s ‘little brother.’ But he was always finding [?] 
me, my brother Thayer. But I didn’t get the chance to talk 
too much but I listened and I iistened and I listened. And 
I heard my mother talk about the Civil War days, when they 
left here and they went to Canada. And she went to school 


,in Canada. And oh, different things like that. So, I 


always figured, if I ever got a job, got some money, that’s 
,where I’d go. So, after I worked a few years in the fire 
department and I had enough money to go off on a vacation 
trip, we went on up to Canada. And I went to the Canadian 
archives. [He notes that a nice young woman helped him. 
Towns mother’s family lived in Canada from 1861-1865 but he 
does not say which town. He mentions that family lived in 
the Bay Area, which he verifies from uncle’s gravestone 1860 
at St. Mary’s Cemetery. He looks through the Canadian 
directory for 1863. Grandfather’s name was apparently 
Charles Humphrey Scott; he lived in one of the better 
sections of town.] 


End of Tape 2, Side 1 


Tape 2, Side 2 (as identified in the summary) 


[Tape begins in mid-conversation. ] 


Towns: ...and the letters, that was when that was a 
Provincial Territory up there. And he read letters from the 
Secretary General regarding his property. And it seemed 
like the Hudson Bay Company didn’t want my grandfather to 
have this because he was black. But then it was overruled 
by the Secretary General up there. And {he] had these 
letters, and he went on to show me how this place had 
changed hands. First it was the King’s taxes, the 
government took it for the king’s taxes. And since then it 
was sold a couple of times so it cost me quite a bit of 
money to get it. Well I told him I wasn’t interested in it 
but I knew that they had some land up there in the [?] River 
Region. So anyway, he said ’Mr. Towns, could you send me 
some pictures of your grandmother and your grandfather?’ I 
said, ‘Well what do you want them for?’ He said, ‘Well I 
want to put them qn exhibit up here in the archives.’ So I 
said, ‘Sure, I could do that.’ [He continues this 
narrative; he goes to the St. Anne’s Academy for further 
information about his mother who attended school there 
between 1861-1865. He meets an old nun, 98-years-old, who 
has information about the past. Towns’ mother had told him 
that when they ordered groceries from the store, the Indians 
would deliver them. There were several black families in 
this community. Towns asks her how they fared---apparently 
some were business owners and had lovely homes. ] 


Page - 17 


jInterview(s) with Royal Towns 


Pamela Morton: "That grave marker, that had 1860 on it, 
that means that your mother’s-" 


‘Towns: "That we were here!" 
;Morton: "-family was here in Oakland." 
q 
Towns: "Oh we were here in. Oakland, sure." 


Morton: "And your father’s family: when do you think they 
were first in Oakland?" 


Towns: "Well, they were San Jose people. ...they came up 
here in later years. I think my father came to Oakland in 
the 1880s. Because like I say, the closest that I could 
figure to that is the picture of the Lincoln School in 1881, 
that’s a hundred years ago. So I chased down dates of my 
father. Now my brother told me that my father worked at the 
Occidential Club in San Francisco. Oh crazy history 
reminded me---I had to go to San Francisco and go through 
the directories over there and find out. And I sure did. 
found my dad was a stewart at the Occidential Club in 1865, 
I guess it was." 


Morton: "Uh-huh. Does that mean that he was living in San 
Francisco or-" 


My brother, Bill, was born in San Francisco. And then I 
started tracing the following years. And then I found out 
that, well of course I knew that my dad worked on the 
construction of the railroad. That finished around, oh 
(18]69, the first transcontinental train came in here. And 
my mother saw it from my father’s grocery store, here in 
Oakland, on Center Street between Washintgon and Broadway." 


Morton: "She saw the train come in?" 


Towns: "She saw that train come in. My mother saw that. 
But my dad, evidently, he worked with the railroad. He 
died, when he died he was paralyzed: he worked for the 
Pullman Company. But he worked for the Pullman Company when 
the Pullman Porter not only did the making up the beds and 
things but he did the cooking. Those Pullman Palace cars 
that they first put out, they had the dining section in 
there. And the Pullman porter cooked far the people. A lot 
of people in later years thought the Southern Pacific 
Company diners were Puilman diners, you see? 


So anyway, I started looking up these different names up 
into the 70s. And I saw where my dad was in the 70s, where 
he was a steward on the steamer Amelia. And the steamer 


Towns: "Yeah, that’s right. They lived in San Francisco. 
| Amelia ran between ... Suisun and San Francisco. ...see 
i 


Page - 18 


He eae eee Renee dace ee pthenn eeoensats 
stmt tad 


{ 


\Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


[when the first transcontinental train came into California, 
it only came to Sacramento. And then they came from 
'Sacramento to Oakland and San Francisco by boat. Then later 
,on they bridged the river and started building down, and 
they got down as far as Suisun and they couldn’t go no 
further, because of the marsh land there. And I spoke up in 
the college, up at Solano, recently, I told them, ‘You know 
you folks are rich with history around here. At one time 
this was, the Western Metropolis of the Central Pacific 


Railroad." 


Morton: "Oh the terminus." 


| Towns: "It was the terminus there. And so, I said to my 
brother, Wallace was born here in “72. So the time that I 
| speak of, from ‘72, it’s around ’72. [A professor at the 
college called back a week later to say that his students 
| had done research to verify Towns’ accounts. They 
researched birthdate of brother, etc. Mr. Towns notes that 
| the hook he used to research his family’s history in San 
Francisco (city directories?) was missing from the library. ] 
",..And I found my family records where they lived in 
different places in San Francisco, up into the 70s, the late 
70s. But then after that, well they moved over here to 
Oakland. That’s a long way to teil you about how long that 
family’s been in Oakland. That’s the Town side of ‘the 
family." 


Morton: "Well when did your parents marry?" 
Towns: "...in 1898." 

Morton: "In 1898? And now-" 

Towns: "That was his second marriage." 
Morton: "For your father?" 

Towns: "Father and my mother." 

Morton: "And your mother?" 


Towns: "Yeah, because they both had children on both sides. 
My mother had her children by the first husband, who was 
killed by the way---it shows you these steamships have 
something to do with my family background---my father was a 
stewart on the steamer Amelia, and her first husband was a 
stewart on the steamer Julia, that blew up in Vallejo and he 
got killed in that. So anyway, that’s how I happened to get 
these things .... [He talked to historian James de Abajian 
about Towns’ grandmother. Abajian told him to look for a 
particular issue of a newspaper with his great-grandmother’s 
obituary. Town looked at the microfilm and saw that his 


et intuit 
Semmemenemieisiereaneets a 


i 


te ew(s) with Roya owns 


great-grandmother died in 1895, aged 100. She was a nurse, 
he has a picture of her.] "She was a great big black woman, 
she’s six feet tall." [This was his Grandma Neal.] "My 
father was paralyzed when I was eight-years-old. That meant 
I never had no more communications after ... 1907 with my 
dad. My other brothers---there wasn’t too much love between 
the families. You know my brother was---they were nice to 
us during the earthquake. He ran a barbershap in Oakland 
here on 10th and Broadway." 


Morton: "Now let me clarify something for a minute: when 
your parents married, both for the second time in 1898, did 
they marry here in Oakland?" 

Towns: "Yes, they were married here in Oakland." 


Morton: "And then where did they live then in Oakland, after 
their marriage?" 


Towns: “Uh, Fifth and Center." 


Morton: "Fifth and Center. And did the children of both 
your parents-" 


Towns: "No, my mother’s children lived with us." 
Morton: "Your mother’s children." 


Towns: "But my father’s children---like I told you, they 
were all men." 


Morton: "Because there was such an age difference." 
Towns: "J .sure." 

Morton: "Fifth and Center was the [address]?" 

Towns: “Yeah, 1499 Fifth Street. I never forget that." 
Mortons "1499 Fifth." 


Towns: "See I was born in that house there in February 
10th, 1899." 


Mortons: "You were born in that house?" 


Towns: "Yes. It was a funny thing that happened: just 
before I retired I met a Captain in the Fire Department and 
he says, ‘Royal, I heard you’re going to take your pension.’ 
I says, ‘Yeah.’ He says, ’You got a birth certificate?’ I 
says, ‘No, I haven’t but I guess the records are upstairs.’ 
He says, ‘Well you better go up there and look.’ He says, 
you won’t get your pension unless you got your birth 
certificate.’ So I went up, and I went to the Vital 


Page - 20 


ha Nt ini, 


| 


! 
|Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


i 


|Statistics Department, see got this 1899, the date. And I 
said, ‘Geez, something’s wrong, my name’s not there. I was 
born here on that day. I know that I had a registered 
doctor.’ And she says, ’Well look under the name of your 
mother and father.’ And I looked and there was my name, 
‘Alphonsus Percival,’ instead of Royal Edwards, see? I was 
raised Royal Edward Towns, Royal Edward Towns now. But 
evidently when I was born they gave me the doctor’s name, 
Alphonsus Percival. So I understand that later, later 
years, my godfather was a West Indian and he named me after 
the crown prince of England at that time who was Edward. He 
later became, you know, the King of England. So... that’s 
how I got that name." 


Morton: "...so in that household, and you say that your 
father was paralyzed in 1909 [sic] did that mean that your 
mother went to work, and did she care for all-" 


Towns: "No, no. My mother never worked a day in her life, 
un-huh. ...see we had moved from Fifth Street then we moved 
to another location on Center Street. And then we moved 
from there to Fifth, between Fifth and Seventh Streets on 
Campbell. MThat’s where we were when the earthquake was in 
1906. No, my older brothers took care of my mother. My 
clock, my clock-" 


Morton: "Oh so they were old enough to hold jobs and 
support the family-" 


Towns: "No, they sold papers and things like that. That’s 
all they could do." 


Morton: "They were able to support the family through 
that?" 


Towns: “Yeah. We were able to exist on it." 


Morton: "And these three addresses: were these houses 
rented or owned by your family?" 


Towns: "No, no. No, no. We rented." 

Morton: "Rented, uh-hmn." 

Towns: "Like an old Irish lady said [in broque] ‘’You’re 
always a-moving, you’re always a-moving.’ [Laughs] I guess 
you were moving to get cheaper rent and things like that." 
Morton: "So how many children were there, from ... your 
mother’s first marriage, that lived in the household with 
you?" 


Towns: "There was five. There was one, two, three, four 
boys and one girl." 


Page - 21 


| 
| 
jInterview(s) with Royal Towns 


i 
{ 


Mortons "And they worked as paper boys?" 


Towns: "I beg your pardon?" 
Morton: "The boys took jobs as paper boys." 


Towns: "Oh yes, they sold papers. And then later, shoe- 
shine business, things like that. They worked on the ferry 
boats, you know, .shining shoes.... The most reliablé 
brother, he shined shoes ... on the ferry boats and later on 
he went into business of his own. ...He knew how to shine a 
shoe. A lot of people didn’t know that. Then you’d have 


{your shoe shined by certain people, they come back to hin. 


And then the other brothers, they sold papers. Then later 
Al worked in the grocery store. And Ike worked in a lot of 
clubs. He was a waiter in clubs. Then Richard was always, 
my oldest brother, was always a Pullman porter. But after 
1910 Richard got married and left the rest of us to 
ourselves." 


Morton: "And did you remain then at this house on 
Campbell?" 


Towns: "Oh no, no, no, no. We moved from there to Seventh 
and Peralta. Then from Seventh and Peralta to Fifth and 
Henry." 


Morton: "And all these moves, what was the reason behind so 
many...?" 


Towns: "Oh better rent, better conditions. A lot of people 


j lived in West Oakland had nice houses, had good jobs, moved 


different places, we’d move there, see. And we moved from 
there to Fifth and Campbell Street-" 


Morton: "After Fifth and Henry you went to Fifth and 
Campbell?" 


Towns: "Yes, Fifth and Campbell. On Fifth Street, near 
Campbell." 


Morton: “And when you rented, was it just a flat in the 
building or did you rent the entire house?" 


Towns: "Well we’d rent the entire house. Yeah. Well, we 
lived at Fifth and Henry it was flats, lived upstairs and 
downstairs. The people lived upstairs and we lived 
downstairs. But on 1657 Fifth Street, well we lived ina 
little bungalow. Then we moved from there up to 16th 
Street, 1912." 


Morton: "So from Fifth and Campbell, where did you move 
then?" 


Page - 22 


j 


A UGS NNN OL I EN Cl ORR EM Winn wantin sullen tienen emmaiieme MZ Min. 


eA DNAL ENR aR AAT LERNER ne ame bn tne ee meee G RE Rn tamale, 


nterview(s) w Royal Town 


Towns: "Uh Sixteenth and Campbell." 

Morton: "Sixteenth and Campbell. So let’s see, is the 
direction, is there a trend through all this? You’re moving 
more and more-" 

Towns: "What?" 


Morton: "Is there a trend in this? Are you moving in one 
direction?" 


Towns: “Well I think, you know, you got better places. We 
maved north there-" 


Morton: "So you were moving more northerly?" 

Towns: "Yes. We moved to Sixteenth Street, Sixteenth and 
Campbell. And then we moved from there to Sixteenth and... 
Peralta." 


Morton: "Sixteenth and Peralta, uh-hmm. Was there a move 
after that as well?" . 


Towns: "No, no. Oh I got married after that." 

Morton: "Then you got married." 

Towns: "My mother died, then I got married. My mother died 
there, on Sixteenth and Peralta in 1920 and then I got 
married." 

Morton: "What year did you marry?" 

Towns: "1920." 


Mortons "In 1920." 


Towns: "Somebody said I didn’t let my mother cool off in 
her grave, before I got married [slight laugh]}." 


Morton: “Was she aware of your plans, your mother?" 


Towns: "Oh she knew I was going to marry that girl. She 
knew that I was nice about her, yeah." 


Morton: "And Royal, ... as a child what jobs did you have?" 


Towns: "Well I carried papers as a kid. I had paper 
routes. That’s why I knew so many people. I had paper 
routes. And then my first job was with this Marshall 
Calculator Machine Company. I learned the trade there. Ah, 
we should put that down, I learned the trade at the 
Marshall, I learned to be a machinist at the Marshall 


Page - 23 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Calculator Machine Co; [Morton apparently is filling out a 
biographical form.]" 


Morton: "How long wére you doing that?" 

Towns: "“’Bout six years there." 

Morton: "For six years." 

Towns: “Yeah. And theh I worked in the shipyard. I was a 
machinist in the shipyard, in the Union Iron Works, Moore 


Shipyards and in Bethlehem Shipbuilding Company in Alameda." 


Morton: "Union Iron Works, the Moore Shipyards and what was 


. the other one?" 


Towns: "The Bethlehém Shipyards in Alameda." 
Morton: “And were other blacks employed in-" 


Towns: "No. No, no, no, no.... Not in any of those places 
there; that’s when I was a Portugee." 


Mortons "Uh-hmm. I see." 


Towns: "Anyway, that lasted until around 1921. In 1921 I 
worked for the Southern Pacific, I worked six years for the 
Southern Pacific on the dining cars." - 


Morton: "Were you cooking?" 

Towns: "No, I wae a waiter." 

Morton: "You were a waiter." 

Towns: "I was head waiter when I left there." 


Morton: "Now let me back up again for a moment. Now: you 
Say you were a Portugee during those times. How did you--- 
how did that happen?" 


Towns: "Well, these jobs I worked on, the Negores didn’t 
have, machinists’ jobs." 


Morton: "But did you prove that you were Portugee? Was it 
an accent that you [picked up]?" 


Towns: "Oh it was just mostly your nerve. I walked into a 
place and the guy, and one of the guys says, ‘We’re not 
hiring colored people anymore.’ I says, ‘Geez that’s too 
bad. How are they going to make it?’ And then the guy 
says, ’Did you ever work. here before? ... I knew enough 
about it from running around with the other fellas to get 
by. You understand what I mean? [Morton: "Yeah."] And so, 


Page - 24 


aren ee) 


eh a eH 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


in that way, I got there. And then of course I could always 
speak, you know, I always knew Spanish pretty well." 


Morton: "That you had picked up from the neighborhood 
children?" 


Towns: "From the neighborhood, my dad too." 
Morton: "From your father?" 


Towns: "Sure. I could always talk that, and then of course 
my mother would come and collect my check and there was no 
doubt when they see here, what I was. They didn’t bother 
with me, see. But then the bottom fell out of the shipyards 
and things. And then I went to work on the dining cars." 


Morton: "So in 1921, so in other words, the bottom fell out 
after World War II then." 


Towns: “"That’s right." 
Morton: "I mean World War I." 


Townss "And then I found out I couldn’t get into the union. 
That was a hard job, getting in the union. I couldn’t get 
in the union." 


Mortons "Oh yeah, tell me about the Union. So there were 
unions involved with the shipyard?" 


Towns: "That’s right. I couldn’t get in the union." 
Morton: “Because you were black?" . 


Towns: "That’s right. See. Couldn’t get in there. Well 
most of the unions there, like at Marshall Calculating 
Machine Company, that was a Masonic Lodge. And I didn’t 
know that you had to request to become a member. I thought 
that they just took you out and made you a member, see, of 
that union. So I didn’t get that. But then when I worked 
for the railroad ... I had to pick it up from scratch. I 
didn’t know nothing about waiting tables or anything like 
that. But as I say, I come out of there Head Waiter. I 
worked on some of the best trains. And when I got promoted 
to Head Waiter, well Mr. Pollock was head of the Southern 
Pacific Company and Mr. Butler was the Superintendent down 
there. He says, ‘I get more complimentary letters about 
this man then any waiter that works in this system.’ He 
says, ‘One day I’ve got a good job for him.’ And he told me 
when I left to go to the Fire Department, if I were you I 
wouldn’t go.’ I said, ‘Well £’d like a leave of absense.’ 
‘Well we don’t issue leaves of absense.’ I said, ‘Well, I’da 
like to be able to come back if I don’t make good in the 
Fire Department.’ See, that was in 1927. So of course 


Page - 25 


Amoommemmmmiene Kk oe et 


Simao ome Cat A RN mi fei Simcoe 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


thank goodness, I never did go back. ,But of course in 19- 
{he tries to think of exact date]... this must have been 
about 1941 or 42, or 42, sometime in there, I went down 
there and I made'a couple of trips to Chicago. Course I was 
interested in this black survey of colored firefighters and 
that would allow me to get into Chicago and talk to those 
black firemen there. And also to Gary, Indiana. So some of 
these boys that I communicated with, were there." 


Morton: "Ok, I want to get back to that again.... Now did 
that mean that while you were working at the shipyard, that 
most of the employees belonged to the union?" 

Towns: "Most of them." 

Morton: "And how did that affect working conditions for 
you, being outside of the union? Did you get the raw end of 
the deal, or-" 

Towns: "No. No, they knew that I worked in this Marshall 
Calculator Machine Company and they wasn’t too hard on 
fellas that didn’t belong to the union." 

Morton: "Uh-hmm. So it wasn’t too bad." 

Towns: "No, I didn’t have a hard ‘job there." 


Morton: "And as a waiter was there ever any union 
organizing?" 


Towns: "Oh yeah, later on we organized the Union." 
Morton: "With the S.P.?" 

Towns: "Yes, the Squthern Pacific." 

Mortons "What union was that?" 

Towns: “The Dining Car Cooks and Waiters." 

Morton: "Do you remember what year that [was organized]?" 


Towns: "I don’t remember what year that was. It was 
somewhere around, oh I guess ’25, in there." 


Morton: "And what kinds ef issues were you concerned with, 
as a Union?" 


Towns: "Well wages, the waiters were paid very poor wages. 
Waiters were paid very poor wages, because we made most of 
our money in tips. And they knew damn well if we worked for 
$60 a month, in those days, and we must have been making 
more than that in tips. See what I mean? So they just 
depended on tips. But I always tell them that I worked six 


Page - 26 


nn 


1 


terview(s Royal Town 


years with the Southern Pacific Company; it took me three 
| years to dislike it and three years to get away from it." 


Morton: "Yeah, yeah, yeah." 


\ ; 

| Towns: "See? And I’ve had different men talk to me. In 
otherwords, one morning this here people think maybe I’m 

| cuckoo or religiouys-crazy or something like that, but this 

1 actually happened to me. I used to work on the Breakfast 

| train, the Padre and the Lark, they call them. One day we 
go to San Francisco, one day we come into Oakland. So this 

| morning I was waiting on these four men, Now I didn’t know 
them from, oh, that piece of furniture over there. And so 

| this fella orders strawberries, well I brought him 

| strawberries. I took them out, the strawberries to him, and 

| I put the cream over it. ‘Here,’ he says, ’I don’t like 

' cream.’ I says, ’I know you don’t.’ He says, ‘How do you 

| know I don’t?’ Well I was going to tell him, ’Well you just 
told me you didn’t.’ Well, I thought that would be it. I 
said, ’I guess you don’t think I know you.’ He says, ’No.’ 
oI says, ‘You used to be my boss!’ /’Oh,’ he says, ‘now 
you’re all wet, I know you’re wet.’ JI said, ‘Wait a minute, 
wait a minute now fella. Let’s digress a little. Your 
sister. was my first schoolteacher.’ And he says, ‘Yeah my 
sister was a schoolteacher.’ ‘And your brother George is a 

| County Clerk. Now do you think I know you?’ He says, ‘Yeah 

| but where were you my boss [sic].’ ‘Marshall Calculator 
Machine Company.’ He says, ‘Well, what are you doing on 
here?’ I said, ‘Well they found out I was black.’ So I 

| said ’I had a hard job getting in the unions and things like 

; that.’ And he said, ‘Is this the best you could get.’ I 

said, ‘No.’ iZ says, ‘I took the post office examination, 
the police department examination, and the fire department 
examination.’ He says, ‘Which one do you want?’ I says, ‘I 
would like to have the fire department job.’ ‘Well’ he 
says, ‘you come and see me tomorrow up the Niles Athenian 
Club.’ And I says, ’Geez, I won’t be in town tomorrow.’ He 
said, ‘Well will you be in town the next day.’ I said, 
‘Yes, I/11 be in town the next day.’ ‘’... you come down and 
see me the next day.’ 


see Mr. Gross. ‘Well Mr. Gross, here I am.’ He says, ‘Well 
wait a minute, I’m going to call the head of the Public 
Health and Safety over there. And so we called ‘em up, 
Frank Corbett was the man in charge. Says, ‘Hello Frank? he 
says. ‘This is Charley Gross,’ he says. ‘I’ve got a very 
good friend of mine,’ he says, ‘used to work for me. And 
he’s got a family and everything and he’s taking a job 
[application] at the fire department. I’d like to know when 
he’s going to get appointed.’ So, there was a little lapse, 
‘Oh,’ he says, ’on February the 14th. Huh? All right,’ he 
says, ‘now you take care of him. That’s my boy!’ [laughs]. 


1 

So I went down to the Niles Athenian Club, went in there to 
| 

j 

So that was the end of that. So I got my job at the Fire 

\ 

| 


Page - 27 


cvs wt acl 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Department. By just remembering---I didn’t remember, but 
something brought that out to me, at that particular time." 


Morton: "Oh, that’s wonderful." 


Towns: " I don’t know if I’m physic-or what it is but it 
was something. And I know I’ve listened to a couple of 
church ‘sermons that’s telling about different things that 
happen to people. I said, ‘Well that’s what happened to 
me.’ 


Morton: "Amazing. Well let me ask you then: Does that mean 
that your work as a machinist in the shipyards, and then 
your work as a S.P. waiter, ... does that mean you were 
making better wages in the shipyards than you were as a 
waiter?" 


Towns: "Oh yes, yes, yes...." 
Morton: "Was there a big discrepency?" 


Towns: "That‘’s right. Not a big discrepency but I was 
making more than what I made there in the shipyards. ... 
Six twenty, I think, was the union scale." 


Morton: "So the problem came when the bottom fell out of 
the shipyard business then what was available to you. What 
could you have done apart from being a S.P. waiter?" 


Towns: "Well, one of the fellas I worked with said, ‘’Geez, 
you’d make a good dining car waiter.’ He said, ‘’You’re just 
the type, and so forth, so on.’ I had to get a job. My 
wife’s got a young baby there to take care of so. So then I 
went on down there and I got into that. And then in the 
course, during the time that IE was a waiter I studied 
salesmanship. I wasn’t just an ordinary waiter, I didn’t 
just bring the food to you, I practically sold you the food. 
And gave you the food the way you wanted it. And you wrote 
down what you wanted and i stopped and I questioned you, 
asked you these things. Maybe you had a salad, ’Do you want 
your salad before your entree or would you like it along 
with it?’ Or so forth and so on. See?" 


Morton: "That must have been very difficult work." 


Towns: "Oh yeah. I had certain people on there, ‘I want, I 
want that waiter there. I want him.’ And this trip, this 
trip I took back East there in the late 40s, you know, I 
told you I went down there, I made a couple of trips. 
Because Mr. Butler down there always did like me. He always 
told me if there’s anything you want, Royal, you come down 
and I’1l do it for you. So they arranged for me to make 
this trip. And I told them why I wanted it. And so anyway, 
to make a long story short, there was a lady and these two 


Page = ‘28 


Interview with Royal To 


fellas sat down. And so this waiter next to me, ‘Hey boy, 
you’ve got a pretty good table there. That lady pays two 
dollars and those fellas pay a dollar a piece. I said, ’Ok, 
thanks.’ 


So anyway as the meal ended up I said, ’Did you enjoy your 
meal.’ She says, ‘Yes.’ I says, ‘You know why you enjoyed 
your meal?’ Says, ’No, I don’t know.’ ‘Because you had a 
waiter that was interested in you. ...he saw that you got 
what you wanted. And that’s my job, I’m here to see that 
you get what’s right. It’s not just what you order.’ So 
then the next morning this fella [waiter] saw this lady come 
in [Towns says this eagerly] ‘Sit here, I want you to sit 
here!’ She says, ’No I want to sit over here, this waiter’s 
interested in me!’ {laughs]." 


Morton: “Well Mr. Towns, being as popular then, you must 
have made good money in tips. Were you able to keep the 
tips that you made? You didn’t have to split them with the 
other waiters?" 


Towns: "Oh no, no, no, no, no. I kept my own tips. Of 
course, this is another story. I had always been taught 
from the time [I was a child] to bless my food when I sat 
down to eat. And these waiters used to see me, and they 
used to laugh at me. One day one other waiter said, [Towns 
says this with distinct accent] ‘I’m going to bless my food 
too, this guy’s having lots of luck making money!’ [laughs 
hard]. So I don’t know, it may have paid off in the long 
run..." 


Morton: "So when the union was finally organized for the 
dining car cooks and waiters, did that improve the 
situation...?" 


Towns: "Well it gave us a spokesman in the office over 
there, in San Francisco. It gave us a spokesman, it did 
help. But I left right after that, see? And they’re still 
in existence today.... [He notes that he has arranged to 
bring down some pictures to the meetings of the retired 
group. ]} 


Morton: "...so that’s how you got your job in the Fire 
Departemnt, was through your<-" 


Townss "Well how I got my job at the Fire Department is 
another story. £ was working on the Sunset Limited, running 
between San Francisco and New Orleans and I was on there, 
‘one day, and — saw a fella, George Allen. And George was a 
fireman. I said, ‘Hello George, how are you.’ ‘Fine.’ He 
says, ‘Well what are you doing, Royal?’ I says, ‘I’m 
working on the railroad.’ He says, ‘You can’t make much 
money there. Why don’t you take the fire department 
examination? It pays $200 a month.’ ‘Ooh ...that sounds 


Page - 29 


Phiatiae mente wea ane Mamie 


Maly Saki bate enmeertintammniamsinays clan Leica Kal Hey 


nterview wit a owns 


pretty good.’ Course that’s $200 in a lump, rather than 
maybe one trip I’d make fifty, or sixty dollars, and another 
trip, maybe $70 or $80. So forth, so, according to the 
people that you had. People tipped according to their 
experience and the manner in which you waited on them. And 
I say, ‘Gee George, I don’t think I’m smart enough for 
this.’ ‘Well come on, we’1ll train you for it.’ So I went on 
with them and I started training ... so I got the job." 


Morton: "Was this man George Somebody you knew as a child?" 


Towns: "This is Charlie [sic], he was with the 12th engine 
fire department. So we studied together and of course, like 
I said, I made one mistake is when EI made my application. I 
said I noticed a colored fire station and if I got appointed 
it would be my ambition to become an officer in that fire 
house, which I eventually did. Course, it took me fifteen 
years to get it, but anyway, that was my ambition. But I 
couldn’t get it because they wouldn’t let me go. I had the 
ability but no, no, they marked me down. I had good marks, 
I know it was good marks. I made good marks on the written 
but the oral examination, put the thumbs down on me, you 
see. I know that because---well just recently in my 
experiences, this boy who is the Chief of the Fire 
Department new, he was one of my boy scouts. I quit the 
fire department a month early so he’d get a lieutenant’s job. 
in the fire department. And now, he’s the Chief of the Fire 
Department, black man. 


And, I went to his reception and two white fellas came up 
and they kissed me, both of them were battalion chiefs. I 
said, ‘Hey, I’m not a homosexual, why kiss me?’ I says, 
‘Why all this personal infatuation?’ So one fella told me, 
he says ‘You know Royal, you taught me something in the fire 
department that I’ve used all through the fire department.’ 
And I said, ‘What was that?’ ...And he said, ‘’That’s 
reflections.’ And I said, ‘Well what did I tell you about 
that?’ ‘Well’ he said, ‘when we first came here we were the 
first whites that were mixed in with. a black company. And 
you told me, ‘Now everything in life is a reflection. If 
you’re nice to people, they’re nice to you. If you’re nasty 
te people, they’re nasty to you. And so forth and so on. 
Anyway,’ he says, ‘’I used that all throughout the fire 
department.’ This other guy, he’s a battalion chief also, 
he was one of the four guys that was named the Chief of the 
Fire Department. And he kissed me. And I said, ‘What’s 
your story?’ And he says ‘’Well Royal, you gave me the best 
advice of any officer that I ever had in the Fire 
Department.’ I said, ‘What did I tell you?’ ‘You told me to 
keep my head in the books.’ So that’s the way, they 
reflected. 


Then of course there were lots of things that happened in 
the department that were funny. Like we used to have all- 


Page - 30 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


white officers out there. And some of these guys would get 
to the officers and say, "Look out for Towns, he’s a wise 
guy.’ Or some other thing, or he likes to argue, or 
something like that. So this guy, I think his name was 
Cunningham, he came in there. And we used to have 
assignment drills that would be.an imaginary fire ina 
certain district. Certain companies would go and there were 
certain rules regarding the response of things to these 
different places. So I pegged out something and he says 
‘That’s wrong.’ ‘Ok.’ So he says, ‘Why did you peg that 
way?’ ‘Well you said you didn’t want any arguments.’ [He 
continues this narrative. He was actually proved correct in 
this incident. He felt that the other guys "downed him."] 


Morton: "Well, were you the first black in the fire 
department?" 


Towns: "No, no. No, no. We were all blacks in this 
department, but he was a white fella. He used to send white 
officers over there." 


Morton: . "So there were other blacks in this department 
already when you-" ; 


Towns: “Oh yes. I was the 13th black appointment in the 
Fire Department. We had a company, was all black in that 
company. They were ali black men in that company." 


Morton: "Oh I see ...." 


Towns: [Mr. Towns reiterates the point that the officer 
thought he wasn’t applying the rules to this training 
maneuver, Actually Towns had been taught in school to 
follow the procedures his way. He talks about how he was 
able to solve hydraulic problems... he worked these out by 
using mathematical formulas.] I think back about those 
days, I think that---Sam come up under different conditions 
than { did. Sam didn’t work with an all-black company where 
they were ali afraid that one guy was going to get ahead of 
one another. That is what I think was troubling in a house 
of ali blacks. We were all scared that one of us was going 
to be boss." 


Morton: "But you’re the one that really broke that...." 


Towns: "... I broke the ice. I was appointed Chiefs 
Operator. That put me into a white company. And that 
started it. And then they come to find out that, the guys 
found out there, that my eyes also, when they looked at, 
when you saw a good-looking woman they didn’t see anything 


‘different than what they saw. And then they found out that 


I had an appetite: that I ate the same things that they did. 
They found out that I had likes and dislikes. And like I 
told them, there’s one thing you and I got in common: and we 


Page - 31 


erview ith Royal Towns 


don’t like to have otr feelings hurt. So think when you 
talk to me. See? 


Then the next thing you know, I got appointed to Engineer. 
Then I was the only colored engineer I think that they had 
in a white house, in those days. And then when I got 
appointed Lieutenant and they started breaking us all up, 
they put us into a house where we were all mixed together. 
We had a colered Captain, and I was the Lieutenant and then 
they had a white lieutenant, all in that same house. But, I 
was always a fighter for what I wanted. I didn’t ask them 
for it. The Captain, this colored fella, I told him, he 
said well, ‘I don’t know.’ [Towns answered} ‘Well, I’m 
going to get it.’ So then I’d put in for it, I’d get it. 
See, but I was always a fighter." 


Morton: “Uh-hmm. From the very beginning, it sounds like 
{slight laugh]." 


Towns: "That’s right! [He mentions the fact that he had a 
fist fight with another firefighter.] Like this fella Bash 
was the Assistant Chief and Wilds was the supply man. And 
Bash says, ‘Well we’re going to run him out of there in two 
weeks.’ He says, “Oh no, you’re not going to run him out of 
there.’ He says, ‘You might run some of them other guys 
that work out there on 22 engine out, you know, but you 
ain’t going to run Towns out. Towns [is] one of those 
mixed-blood guys and he’1l fight, he’11 fight! So that’s 
why they didn’t fool with Towns, they knew that Towns would 
fight. See?" 


Morton: "So how long then did you stay with the fire 


‘department?" 


Towns: "I stayed with the fire department 35-years." 
Morton: "Thirty-five years." 
Towns: "Yep. From 1927 to 1962." 


Morton: "And ... so yeu were supporting your wife and one 
child-" 


Towns: "Two children, two children-" 
Morton: "And then you had two more." 

Towns: "Two children, yes, yes." - 

Morton: "Are they’re three total children?" 


Towns: "Yeah, ... when I went to the fire department, I had 
three." 


Page - 32 


eens ces 


LL a ARN NTR AN vie eR A: | LC, a in elt AR RRM clan aan haent ein etna LOIN a 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Morton: "Qh, by the time you were in the Fire Department." 
Towns: "I had three children, yes." 


Morton: "Well it must have been nice for your wife, because 
when you were working for the S.P. you’d be gone for long 
periods." 


Towns: "Yes, I was gone. The Fire Department I was only 
gone ... every other night, I was in the firehouse. And 
then it got so we spent two nights at home and one night in 
the firehouse. But those conditions I worked for. When 


_they were getting beat in their parts of town, down in West 


Oakland, we put the thing over. So at this reception ... 
one of the Assistant Chiefs, a white fella, he introduced me 
to a fella. He said, ’This is Lieutenant Towns, he’s 
responsible for a lot of our good conditions that exist here 
in the Fire Department today: the pension going on to the 
widows, and the working system.’ See? So I did a lot of 
work. Toward the end, the Fire Department wanted me to go 
down to West Oakland, I wouldn’t go down there. So the 
Chief asked me, Chief Sweeney, he says, ‘Why don’t you go 
down there?’ I said, ‘Well I can’t go down there because a 
lot of those fellas there, they’re political bosses, they’11l 
ask me ... [{to] show me a black man in one of these houses 
down here and I can’t show it to them.’ So. I said, ’Send me 
out to Brookfield Village or someplace like that.’ That was 
one of the last campaigns that I was in. But then when I 
retired, this Chief Sweeney, he liked me a lot, he said, 
‘One thing about you Roy, you tell what you think about.’ 
And he says, ‘A lot of these guys, I just give them the 
badge and wish them well. But you, you retire---you come in 
my office, I want to sit down and talk to you.’" 


Morton: "They learned respect for you. Mr. Towns, I’m 
wondering, during the 20s when you first began, well when 
you were working as an S.P. waiter and also with the Fire 
Department, how much involvement did you have with the black 
nightlife that was happening along Seventh Street, with the 
yazz?" 


Towns: "Oh, <I never bothered with that. I never bothered 
with that. The money that they spent down there, I tell 
them, that was ’blood money.’ The people weren’t making the 
money but still and yet they could go and spend all that 
money down there at Slim Jenkins and those various places 
that they had down there." 


do a e 


Page - 33 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 
Towns: "...you know, doctors, lawyers and things around 
there, they could afford it." 


Morton: "So when you say ‘blood money,’ in other words it’s 
the money that they needed to survive on." 


Towns: "They needed to support their family with, yeah. 
Yeah they was down there blowing big shots down there, 
buying booze and things like that. Oh I’d buy a bottle of 
booze to take home. You know, three dollars, something like 
that. It was cheap those days. And we’d have our shots at 
home. But I didn’t [?] want to show off, going down there." 
Morton: "What kind of socializing did you do?" 

Towns: "Gh we had our social groups, Well, my wife’s club, 
her club is called the Junior 500 Club. Those women still 
exist today [slight laugh]." 

Mortons "And that’s a social club?" 

Towns: "That’s a social club there-" 

Morton: “Was that interracial?" 

Towns: "I beg your pardon?" 

Morton: "Was that a mixed group?" 

Towns: "No. Well, all different groups of colored people, 
from New Orleans and Louisiana. The Louisiana group there 
we met." 

Mortons "Oh, but there were all black then?" 

Townse "All black, all black. And my association was with 
the Masonic Lodge. I spent quite a bit of time with the 
Masonic Lodge. I was a Master of one of the lodges, I 
worked my way around. And, like I said, I was editor of 
that magazine for ten years." 

Morton: "Yeah, where was the lodge located?" 


Towns: "Thirty-first ahd San Pablo. Thirtieth and San 
Pablo." 


Morton: "And the blacks had their own-" 


Towns: "Yeah, had their own hall. Yes, uh-hmn." 


‘Morton: "Yeah, cause that’s interesting to me. So there 


were black Masons and there were white Masons and they 
stayed apart.™ 


Page - 34 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Towns: "Yeah, there’s a split because of color, just like 
there’s a difference between you and I because you’re white 
and I’m black, as far as associations are concerned. But 
when you look back into the annals of the Masonic 
organizations, I was with a Masonic historian in (this is a 
white fella), in Boston. And they took me to the white 
Masonic tempie. And we went through there and down in the 
trophy room there’s a great big picture of who? Prince 
Hall. Prince Hall is the founder of black Masons. So he 
said that. the Grand Lodge in Massachusetts, if it hadn’t 
been for one or two fellas, would have recognized us. 
Because he knew that we were just as regular as they were. 
They knew that our charters came from the same places." 


(Interview is temporarily interrupted. ] 


Towns: [Relates a story about visiting his son at the 
Brooklyn shipyards. Towns’ access was blocked by an Irish 
Watchman who spoke with a heavy brogue. Towns countered by 
speaking brogue which he learned from his Irish neighbors in 
West Oakland. The watchman answered him, ’Pat come here: 
take this Irishman down to the boat!’ After visiting the 
ships he struck up another conversation with the guard and 
apparently convinced him that he was ‘black Irish.’] 


"Course down there in West Oakland with all of those kids 
and things, just come over from the Old Country, like Neil 
O’Boyies. Say Neil, ‘When did you come over?’ ‘I come over 
Thursday’ [said with a brogue]. And you know, you pick up a 
lot of that stuff -down there." 


Interviewer 2: "You’ve got a great accent! You should go 
into acting." 


Towns: "Well it’s so funny that, that when I was a kid we 
did have a fella, Muso O’Brien. Muso was a blackamoor. And 
he traced his family back to the Spanish Armada: they were 
Moors. And they settled in there. And so it was always 
funny to hear Muso O’Brien.... talk [laughs]. But then one 
of my best friends was Tom Mulcane and Tom’s folks were from 
the old sod. And we’d go over there. The old man would 
teli us all about the banshees and the different things like 
that, you know? And his experiences over there in Ireland. 
And he had a bregue a mile long. We’d talk about dogs 
[proneunced dawg.] A dog was a ‘dawg.’ [Laughs]. " 


{Another interviewer is briefiy present and wonders whether 
Mr. Towns has talked about a certain subject. Interview is 
again temporarily stopped. } 


Morton: "Mr. Towns, I’d like to go back to Prince Hall. 


Could you tell me a little bit about---he was the founder 
now of black Masonry." 


Page - 35 


terview W 


Towns: 


Roya ° 


"Yeah, of black Masonry. Yes. ...I can let you 


have a book that has more on that than I can tell you." 


Morton: 
Towns: 


Morton: 


organizations that you were involved in? 


"About the Masons?" 
"Yeah, if you’d like to have it...." 


and then were there other sort of social 
Your wife had that 


club, and you’re involved with the-" 


Towns: "No, no. The Masons, mostly. And retired railroad 
men." 

Morton: "Retired railroad men?" 

Townss "Yeah, retired railroad men." 

Morton: "Now is that different that the ”’0ld Rail Club’.... 
Are you familiar with that group?" 

Towns: “No, I think that that’s an off-spring of this." 
Morton: "That this is the larger group of retired railroad 
men." 

Towns: "Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Retired railroad men. I think 
that-" : 
Morton: "And is this group still around?" 

Towns: "Well they had an exhibit here, a while back...." 
Morton: "At the Oakland Library?" 

Towns: “No here." 

Morton: "Here at the house! [Cameron-Stanford House. The 
exhibit was on the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Mr. 


Tewns has a few pictures from that era that were in exhibit; 


also he has others at the African American Museum....] 


"And 


was there a church that your family belonged to in West 
Oakland?*" 


Towns: 
church: 


which that’s a part of, to California. 
been an actual church member, belong to any church. 


"Well, the Cooper AME Zion Church was my dad/s 

In fact, my grandfather brought the AME Zion Church 
But I have never 

I go to 


church, I go to this church over here: the Unity Church of 


Christianity.... 


Mortons: 


Are you familiar with the Unity books?" 


"No, I’ve heard of them...." 


Page - 36 


2 a aR CRRA ANOLE INRA ER ie ARONA ARN NAN NRK ci ANN A AN Ee MII ea ee RMR RRR eee ui oe 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Towns: "You’ve never seen any of those? They’re very fine 
reading. And it’s nondenominational. Jews come there, and 
Catholics and [chuckies] everything else.... [He talks 
briefly about the Unity philosophy which is somewhat akin to 
that of the Christian Scientists.] "When you look at a 
Chinaman and you want to get mad at him. If you’re truthful 
to yourself, well he’s the same as you are, except your . 
facial makeup is different. Or Hindu or Jew, anything. And 
they believe in a supreme being.... 


I go to different churches .... I go to Mass, Catholic 
Mass. I’ve gone to, well a Jewish group and different other 
groups. They’re almost all the same ...." 


Morton: "And how when you married, and you moved out of 
the house at 16th and Peralta, where did you move to at that 
point?" 


Towns: "Oh, on 27th Street .... MTwenty-seventh between 
Grove and West." 


Morton: "How long were you at that address?" 


Towns: "Oh, I was there until, oh, let’s see 1929. I guess 
1929. Then we moved over to 35th and Grove. I bought a 
place there on 35th Street. And I lived there ... until 
they built the freeway and the freeway cause me to move. 
[State of California bought his new house. He has been 
there for 30 years.] 


Morton: "And where did you do most of your shopping? Was 
your wife ... responsible for the shopping?" 


Towns: "Well Safeway, we had Safeway Groceries. My wife 
did most of the shopping.... And then downtown, downtown at 
Washintgon Market in the old days. The Washington Market 
and the Free Market, the Tenth Street Market." 


Morton: "Do you remember where your mother used to shop?" 


Towns: "Well my mother used to shop mostly down at Sixth 
Street Market. Those days, they called it the Sixth Street 
Market, a free market, on Sixth Street. ... even in later 
days my wife and I went to that Sixth Street Market. We’d 
go down there, and of course my brothers, their names were 
all Clark. They were all Clarks. And *Hey Clark how are 
you?’ ‘’Fine, fine.’ ‘What, what do you want?’ I said, ‘My 
wife wants three pounds of those sweet potatoes.’ Three 
pounds for 15 to 20 cents, something like that. This guy 
would go get a great big sack. And he said, ‘Three pounds, 
huh?’ And he starts putting that stuff in here [laughs]. 
Next thing you know, he handed me this bag. I could just 
barely pick it up, see? But that was some of the West 
Oakland boys that I was raised with. They didn’t care about 


Page - 37 


A cnet NN: ah tae, lm 


Devers Speman ren eee caer nt a Linnell RE ARC itn aN otk wn 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


that.... [In later years the Towns shopped at first Piggly 
Wiggly and then Safeway, always in Oakland. ] 


Morton: [She asks him about the Depression. Towns had a 
good job throughout and thus wasn’t adversely affected. He 
made $200 a month at the Fire Department. He went to the 
Fire Department in 1927. He bought his home in 1929.] 


"Was there an affect that it had on West Oakland, generally, 
that you’re aware of?" 


Towns: "After I once got away from West Oakland there, say 
in 1912, I got away from the bowels of West Oakland. And I 
never went down there much for anything after that, except 
for friends that I knew, or some occasion that carried me 
down there. But the commissary was in West Oakland, where 
we shipped out of there for the Southern Pacific dining 
cars. That’s the only thing that brought me down in there." 


Morton: "What would you consider West Oakland? What were 
the [boundaries]?" 


Towns: "West Oakland, I considered, was anything west of 
Center Street." 


Morton: "West of Center Street? And why was Center Street 
the division?" 


Towns: "Well Center Street was the east end of my 
operations. But West Oakland was considered from Market 
Street south, Market Street to the West of Market. That’s 
where the guys got that West of Market Street boys." 


Morton: "Uh-huh. That was the more officially accepted. 
But the West of Center was in your sort of circle." 


Towns: "In my circle, that’s right. That’s right. As I 
stated before, my circle of friends down there were mostly 
kids that we played basebali with. De Fremery Park was the 
center, see? From 1912 on, from 1912 de Fremery Park and 
playground. I was very active in athletic activities over 
there, see? Because I moved to 16th Street in 1912." 


Morton: "So that was the closest sort of playground, or 
park area?" 


Towns: "...that was the only playground." 
Morton: "In West Oakland? That was the only one?" 


Towns: "That was the only playground, that’s right. In 
fact that was the only playground west of the lake." 


Page - 38 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Morton: "I read something, I think it was in the West of 
Market Boys Journal about Father McNally getting help fron, 
I think it was even from the Italians in the scavenger 
business, to help him ...fill in an area for a park. He 
created some sort of baseball park." 


Towns: "I don’t know nothing about that. [I don’t know, he 
might have got some money. There was two or three places 
where they played baseball, where there was big openings. 
One was there at Twelfth and Union, Twelfth and Poplar 
Street, Union Street where the shredded wheat company 
{is].... They used to play ball, they used to call that the 
‘Oak Ball./" 


Morton: “Oak Bali?" 


Towns: “Oak Ball. O-A-K B-A-L-L. The oak trees, they had 
them little balls on them, you know. Besides the acorns." 


Morton: "...Was it called the ’Oak Ball Park?/’" 


Towns: "Oak Ball, Oak Ball is what they used to call 
that.... That Oak Ball Park." 


Morton: "Was it owned by the Nabisco?" 


Towns: "No. It wasn’t owned by anybody. It was just 
vacant see, and the kids used to play ball there." 


Morton: "So these were all sort of just vacant lots?" 


Towns: "That’s right. Vacant lots. Then there was a 
vacant lot at 16th and Willow." 


Morton: "Uh-huh. So was baseball a big sport then, when 
you were growing up?" 


Towns: "Yeah baseball was. Football, nobody cared about 
football. Only the Mics who came over from the Old World 
played soccer. And the other place was at 9th and Pine, 
Pine Street. Then there was another one at First and 
Adeline, and another one at Fifth and Kirkham." 


Morton: "So that’s quite a few then." 

Towns: “Yeah! And then of course the kids, we used to play 
in Longs lot, Longs lot was on Seventh Street, between 
Campbell and Willow." 

Morton: “Just another vacant lot then?" 


Towns: "Long, it’s another vacant lot there. Long was the 
butcher, one of the butchers in West Oakland." . 


Page - 39 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Morton: "Between Campbell and Willow.... Were these 
unofficial baseball teams...?" 


Towns: “Unofficial. Just kids teams, -just kids teams. 
That’s all. Yeah. Then of course later on, when the City 
bought DeFermery’s residence down there, then DeFermery Park 
became the DeFermery Playground team. But we never had 
unifarms or things like that." 


Morton: "But it was an official recreation center?" 


Towns: "That’s right, recreation center. Even that was 
sort of a gangland affair. If you were Portugee or Italian, 
and lived up in that district, you got to play on the 
things. But if you came from some other place and you 
didn’t play, they had gangs of kids up there that would 
fight you off. Now when I get up there and get on the 
things, they start after me and the guys‘say, ‘Hey, leave 
him alone. That’s Ike Clark’s brother.’ My brother was a 
tough guy [laughs]. See what I mean?" 


Morton: "So, does that mean, at all these different vacant 
lots-" 


Towns: "No, I’m speaking of DeFermery Park." 

Morton: "...oh this is just DeFermery Park." 

Towns: "DeFermery Park. They had the rings and the 
apparatus where kids could get on, slides and slide down the 
pole. And they had the rings where you could swing from one 
to another, and things like that." 

Morton: “And were you saying that the kids formed gangs?" 


Towns: "Oh there was a gangland ... the group that lived in 
that neighborhood." 


Morton: "Around DeFermery?" 

Townss "That’s right...." 

Morton: "Were they made up of one group-" 

Towns: "No, no, no, nod. Made all different groups. All 
different groups. You could even be a black guy in that 
group. And there was. Yeah. But outside of that, I can’t: 
think of anything else." 


Morton: "Were there other games that were played?" 


Towns: "There’s ‘soccer, soccer. Yes, we played soccer. We 
had a soccer field there at DeFermery Park ...." : 


Page - 40 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Morton: "And what about boxing? I understand that that was 
a big sport in West Oakland." 


Towns: "Oh boxing later on, in later days, they had boxing 
down there. There was a West Oakland arena, that was at 
Eighth and Pine. Then they had Pat McClane’s Gymnasiun, 
that was at Fifth and Union, where a lot of them used to 
train. And what else: the Aloha Club, at Eighteenth and 
Peralta." ; 


Mortons "And did Link Dennis have a place where they 
trained?" 


Towns: "ink Dennis had a place there. The Olympic 
Saloon." 


Morton: "That was the name of his place?" 
Towns: "Jack Johnson used to train there." 
Morton: "So who were the big West Oakland boxers?" 


Towns: "Oh gee, Lee Johnson, Battling Ortega, Pete Tavis, 
oh let’s see .... It’s all in there .... In here there’s a 
list of the ... old cards of the guys that fought down in 
West Oakland. Bob McAlister, Pete Tavis—" 


Morton: "Did many local boys make good through their sort 
of athletic-" 


Townss "Yeah, yeah. Cecil Thompson became the welter- 
weight champion of the world.... {He reads from an article, 
‘Do You Remember?’ There was a Railroad Market at Eleventh 
and Wood, aiso a beer garden at Seventh and Bay Street. 
Dalton’s Pharmery [sic] at the foot of Tenth. Slattery 
Brothers Store in the ‘’triangle,’ 7th and 8th and Goss. The 
Old Chicago Market at Sixteenth Street, ‘Tin Can Alley.’ He 
lists more businesses. He also names families, including 
names of Italian garbagemen. First dump was at 22nd and 
West Grand; kids used to tie their wagons to the back of 
garbage wagons and ride to the 14th Street wharf. (Ed. 
Note: Hopefully this article is in the collection of the 
Oakland History Room.) He reads a letter from Leroy Johnson 
who sent money for the West Oakland Old-timers Reunion. Mr 
Towns goes through his collection of papers. ] 


Morton: "Did you ever do any boxing?" 


Towns: "I used to box. My mother would never let me---my 
mother says, ‘I know too many fighters. And the good Lord 
don’t give you much brains and they don’t need to go in 
there and get their own knocked out.’ I was pretty good.... 
[He finds an article about famous West Oakland families. 


Page - 41 


LA nl CL TANTRA RCN SRS e RR ae a Cine eel 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


They used to have Four Round games. He reads through a list 


of names of fighters; clearly a multi-ethnic group. A lot 


of Irish and Portuguese. Mr. Towns remembers running into 
the Oakland Tribune sports editor. He mentioned to him 
about these fight cards.] 


Mortons: "And then another activity, which we were also 
talking about earlier, was swimming down at the estuary." 


Towns: "Oh the estuary? Oh yeah, ...famous names from the 
estuary: Ralph Kindriek was the Pacific Coast backstroke 
champion. Ralph was the one who taught me all I know about 
swimming." 


Mortons: "I was going to ask you. So you learned to swim in 
the estuary?" 


Towns: "Uh-hmm. Uh~-hmn." 
Morton: "What was the water quality like...?" 


Towns: "Uh, it was good enough for us kids. You couldn’t 
pay me to swim down there now [slight laugh]. No, because 
the sewage all ran out in the estuary. At high tide, you 
never noticed the difference. But when the tide come low, 
and it started coming out, it brought all this sewage along 
with it, ...the defensive way of swimming." [Ed. note: Mr. 
Towns is probably referring to the joke about the breast 
stroke, in which you ‘push’ the stuff away from your face. 
West Oakland-born Ben Albanese made the same remark in his 
interview when he recalled swimming in local waters. ] 


Morton: "So even then, even when you were little, that was 
the situation." 


Towns: "“Yeah...." 
Mortons “Was there much of a beach?" 


Towns: "Oh, nice beach, nice beach. Cause you see what 
happened was, at one time the estuary ran up almost to Fifth 
Street. And that was all filled in down there, from time to 
time filled in, to make the Southern Pacific shipyards. And 
then they filled in down there to make the Moore Shipyard. 
And then they filled in up to the tracks, and finally they 
filled in up to Fifth Street. All that’s made land. 

---{if] one of those little grains of sand could talk, it 
would tell you say ‘Hey! Buddy, I was once a part of San 
Francisco Bay’ [{laughs]." 


Morton: "So it was actually a sandy beach down there?" 


Page - 42 


i 


Re ce eso ines aly rls 


Oem” Ser Toe ane UNTER ERE NETEOONE DE Ye nPON STORES TR TOTORIESY OUI Urt aE Oren RE TE ee See e ner Tren 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Towns: "Yes, it was sandy. Yes, uh-huh. And then where we 
used to swim, there was a bulkhead there. And that bulkhead 
served the purpose for us to put our clothes up and-" 


Morton: "You were skinny dipping?" 


Townse "Oh yes, skinny dipping. Well we didn’t start 
putting on bathing suits until they started anchoring yachts 
around there. They started anchoring::yachts and then we had 
to put on bathing suits. Smith Brothers had a sale, bathing 
suits, ten cents. Just trunks. And then we went up there, 
yeah. Course then we’d go around to the bath houses: 
Piedmont Baths and Sutro Baths in San Francisco, Lurline 
Baths." 


Morton: "What were those like? ... was it hot water?" 


Towns: “Hot water, yes." 
Morton: "Was it mineral baths?" 


Towns: “Sutro Baths had a variety of tanks. They had one 
tank there that was cold. It stored the water outside ina 
pool outside. And whenever they filled that tank they 
filled that tank from that. And then they had other ones 
that was so hot that it was almost like swimming in a bowl 
of hot soup. Then Piedmont Baths-" 


Mortons "Did you go very much to Piedmont Baths?" 


Towns: "Oh yeah, I used to go. I used to go quite a bit to 
Piedmont Baths. Yeah, I used to go." 


Morton: "So was that more therapeutic than---you couldn’t 
really swim, could you?" 


Towns: "Oh you could swim in the Piedmont Baths. Piedmont 
had a little place they used to call the ‘soup bowl.’ You 
got in there, and the steam was turned on into that water 
and it’s just like taking a steam bath." 


Morton: "And would you go-+-would there be parts for men 
and parts for women...?" 


Towns: "No, no, no, no, We all get in the same soup pot. 
Yeah. But the first time I knew prejudice was when I was 
practicing for that team. I used to go with all these kids- 
--these kids would take me. I/’d go with these Italians and 
Portugees, and some of them were blacker than I am. And 
there never was any question about it. But one time, I went 
to Surf Beach Park in Alameda and the fella pointed out the 
group. He says “You can go in and you can go in and you can 
go in. And he pointed at me and he says, ‘But you can’t go 
in.’ So one of these little Portugee boys spoke up. He 


Page - 43 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


said, ‘Why can’t he, he’s my cousin.’ So he says, ’Oh, he’s 
your cousin?’ ‘Yeah’ so I went in. So hell, after that I 
never had no more trouble [laughs]. ... but the average 
West Oakland colored boys didn’t do that, because they 
didn’t run around with the Portugees. I ran around with 
Portugees for a long time. In fact at this McClymond’s 
Reunion here, a couple of months ago, I went to that and a 
lot of guys you didn’t know. But you saw on the badge what 
their name was. Then you spoke to them in their native 
language. If it was Greek, ’Hey [Towns says a Greek 
surname]. [He repeats this for Portuguese, Italian, 
Spanish.] So it was funny. Then you got around and the 
guy’s name was ’O’Toole.* And then I says [in brogue] 
‘O'Toole, did you ever learn how to speak English?’ 
[Laughs]. It was funny.... But that’s the way you were 
raised down there. 


And then the kids... wherever you were at 12 o’clock, that’s 
where you went to eat. And bread had all kinds of names." 


Morton: "You mean, you’d go to that kid’s house?" 


Towns: "Yeah, you went to that kid’s house. If you was up 
in front of his house at 12 o’clock his mother [would say], 
‘Hey come on boys, come on in. Have something to eat.’ You 
go and eat in there. Linguisa (Portuguese sandwich), salami 
(Italian stuff), everything, spaghetti." 


Morton: "So then the neighbors looked aut for each other." 
Townss "Yeah, there was no animosity." 
Morton: "Was there crime, in West Oakland?" 


Towns: "Yes there was crimes, there was some groups that 
were criminals. Like I often remember a group down there 
and the name’s Reposa, well this boy was always in jail. He 
was a chronic thief. But his mother’d just say, ‘Well he’s 
a good boy. He’s a good boy....’ ‘Then there was Maloney: 
Maloney ended up on the gallows, over at San Quentin. But 
he was always a crime, thief, stealing things." 


Morton: "But ... yeah, that’s what I was going to say. Was 
there much burglary, or-" 


Towns: "Not much burglary, because people down there didn’t 
have nothing! No, you left your house open. You never 
locked your house. ...but these kids, like Maloney, he got 
hanged: they found him stealing some money or he killed 
somebody, some place fer money. And Delushy [?]) that got 
hanged down there, he kiiled a guy who took his diamonds 
away to give to his girlfriend, And this girlfriend, they 
found her with these diamonds, and they wonder how she got 
them, poor girl, from West Oakland down there. How did she 


Page - 44 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


get the diamonds...? ...down there in West Oakland most 
crimes were vagrancy, men and women, see? Or a white woman 
associating with a colored man. Or something else like 
that." ; 


Morton: "...in the West Oakland area, ... were there 
families who had a lot more money than other families?" 


Towns: "Oh yes, eh yes, yes, yes. There were people down 
there, like the Aikins, the father was a big merchant. And 
there was that big residence there at Seventh and Center 
Street, for years, the McDermott Property. And of course 
across the street the Moynihans. Of course the McDermotts 
were the ‘lace curtain Irish’ and the Moynihans were the 
‘shanty Irish.’ But the shanty Irish, they had a big paper 
business and things like that." 


Morton: "But were they mixed in, or was there a [?] 
section?" 


Towns: "Well they all lived in that same section, together. 
But they didn’t associate together. See? Yeah. So there 
were lots---oh there were Motts, and Meeses. The same 
Meeses, well one of their relatives is qn that committee 
with [President] Reagan [Ed Meese] and he was the District 
Attorney here. But the Meese’s had a big piece of property 
down there at Thirteenth and Willow Street. And then the 
Conigs [?] and the Motts. Oh, there was lots of them...." 


Morton: "And who were the poor people? Who were the real 
poor people...?" 


Towns: "Well the average person down there, you’d have to 
start naming everybody! People were just working. They had 
jobs, some people. I remember when the Lorries got an 
automobile down there: that’s the first family in West 
Oakiand that had an automobile... in that part of West 
Oakland. Down in the other part of West Oakland, when I 
lived there, Peterson got an automebile. Ever since there 
was automobiles, Peterson had an automobile. Then the 
Traceys, they were painters.... They made good money. The 
McAlisters were plumbers and things like that. They made 
good money." 


Mortons "So maybe there were sort of two economic levels?" 


Towns: "Yeah, yeah. They recognized one another. Like I 
was telling you, I was telling this fella out at Bishop 
O’Doud School there about people down there. There were 
different classes in each national group, see? [....] A 
lot of those people down there had little businesses and 
things like that. They got in. Joey Oaks’s family, they 
had grocery stores and the Driscolls. Hansen’s had a big 
Saloon up there at Tenth and Webster. That’s in the days 


Page - 45 


one ee Sik Ne 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


when Tenth and Webster was in the part of Oakland. On 
Fourteenth Street, you were out in the country. And if you 
went east of Harrison Street you went out in the country. 
The people had nice jobs. A lot of them were barbers, like 
Justil Baraz [?] was a barber and Freddie Luz, took over the 
barber business from him. And there was Frank Henry, had a 
big barber shop down there. And oh man Levis, had barbers." 


Morton: "And would these all be on Seventh Street then?" 
Towns: “on Seventh Street." 
Morton: "The majority of these businesses?" 


Towns: “Yeah. Well Teaques Saloon and Brakenfelters [7] 
And then Brakenfelter opened up the Acme Brewery there on 
Seventh Street. The Rosheeney’s had a grocery store, the 
Hays’s and the Haushildts had the plumbing place. Now those 
people were always in the better, circumstances than the 
average poor person in West Oakland. And the McCanns. And 
Schaefers. Oh geez I could name hundreds of them. The 
Ibsens. Captain Ibsen, he was a satling man.... And they 
lived in West Oakland until I guess he made enough money to 
get out of West Oakland. Mabel Ibsen was a beautiful girl. 
I wonder what ever became of her? Mabel and [?], they were 
nice-looking girls." 


Morton: "What about moving out of the area? When people 
started to move out .of the area what were the reasons, or 
where did they move? Or did they move as groups?" 


Towns: "Well they moved for hetter living conditions. A 
lot of those people lived in shantys down there. And they 
got a chance. You find, that in life, it’s a whole---the 
wich get richer and the peor get poorer. You know? But 
there is a group of the poor that they start to get richer, 
they move out of the neighborhood. Now suppose now for 
instance, you lived in a real nice house here. But you see 
some place oh maybe over in Lafayette that you want, that’s 
better than that. You move over to Lafayette. Some other 
person, looked at your house [admires it and they move from 
the slums to this new house. ] 


And everybody wasn’t welcome into every neighborhood that 
they moved into. If you moved into a neighborhood, ’Oh here 
comes some Slavs,’ or ‘’Here comes some Dago,’ or ‘Here comes 
some Portugee” and so and so. And blacks the same doggone 
way. But they learned to live with each other. There was a 
time here when the black man couldn’t get a piece of 
property. in a certain place because of written covenants. 
People said Well we’1l not show our property to blacks, and 
that was that. [He mentions his Uncle Fred who moved from 
Fifth and Lewis out to East 18th Street., Mr. Towns only 
owed $500 on his home in 1935. His brother paid off the 


Page - 46 


atlas eebamiismctio Rdtnaninh Nemec estan mans pan ne 


terview wit ° owns 


balance for him, out of the blue. Also, Royal’s other Towns 
brother died and apparently left him some money. This 
brother had owned the northeast corner of Moss Avenue and 
Broadway, now MacArthur and Broadway. They sold the 
property in 1912 and moved to Allensworth, California. Thus 
they were one of the pioneer families of this all-black 
settlement. Mr. Towns notes that it is time for him to go. 
He notes that his wife is not weil. ] 


E ° ° interview 


Page ~ 47 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


{Interview with Royal Towns by Pamela Morton and 

for the Oakland Neighborhood History Project. This tape 
appears to be a follow-up session to the original interview. 
Transcription April 1996 by Karana Hattersley-Drayton for 
Sonoma State University Anthropological Studies Center, for 
the Cypress Freeway Replacement Project, Caltrans. ] 


[Tape is not cued up. Interview begins as Mr. Towns is 
repeating an anecdote about a woman who slaps a man for 
being fresh. Mr. Towns also apparently has historic 
materials+---newspaper articles, photographs and a list of 
West Oakland nicknames---which he refers to in this portion 
of the tape.] 


Royal Towns: "Anyway, what I started to tell you, one of 
these here, that has all of the nicknames [from West 
Oakland. He searches through his. papers.] Well anyway, 
this fella calis me up and he says, ’Elmo died.’ I 
said, ‘Gee, that’s too bad.’ And he says, ‘Yeah, he had 52 
grandchildren.’ ... and he says ‘’My brother-in-law also 
died.’ And I says ’Oh, I knew Edgar very well.’ {[Mr. Towns 
continues to look for his list of nicknames.] And so then I 
called up Tony and I told Tony that this boy had died, and 
also Edgar Benson. He says, ‘Geez, I don’t remember Edgar 
Benson.’ ‘Oh,’ I said, ‘sure, you know his uncle used to 
run the blacksmith shop there at 7th and Campbell Street.’ 
And he says, ’No, I don’t remember.’ And I says, ‘You know 
Sanddab!i’ ‘Yeah, I know Sanddabs! But he didn’t know Edgar 
Benson, see what I mean?’ [He looks through his papers for 
this list of nicknames and finds it.] ...there’s all the 
nicknames of the kids in the community, that we knew." 


Interviewer 1: "Now were any of these tied to racial or 
ethnic things, or just probably unrelated?" 


Towns: "Oh no, listen, when you speak of West Oakland, West 
Oakland was interracial." 


Interviewer 1: "I know, that’s why I was curious whether it 
did get reflected here." 


Towns: "No, no, no. There’s no names there that would make 
any of them feel bad, such as nigger, or dago or Portugee or 
something like that." 

Interviewer 1: "Here’s one: watermelon." 

Towns: "Well watermelon, his name was Jesse. Mattis and they 
called him watermelon because his head looked like a 
watermelon!" 


Interviewer 1: “Oh! No kidding. Now how about ’Moracco’?" 


Page - 48 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Townss "Morocco? Well, that’s a kid, all he could talk. 
about is, ’in Morocco. In Morocco this, in Morocco that.’ 
So that’s how he got that nickname, ‘Morocco.’ See?" 


Interviewer 1: "He was an Arabian?" 
Towns: "An Arabian. That’s right." 


Interviewer 1: "What did the Arabians do down there, West 
Oakland?" : 


Towns: "Some of them had stores, they were merchants." 


Interviewer 1: "Really? What kind of [stores]. Clothing, 
or-" 


Towns: "They sold goods, sort of haberdashery like. Oh and 
sheets and pillow cases and things like that. And I was 
trying to think of a fella’s name, Shaheen ... I can’t 
think of Charley’s name there. But one day, a fella came 
into the firehouse: there were all of us blacks in this 
firehouse and this guy thought this guy was just being funny | 
one day he come in. He says, ‘Hey, is Sugar Doughnuts 
here.’ He says, ‘’We’ve got nobody here by the name of 
‘Sugar Doughnuts.’ ’Oh yeah, he was on the rig yesterday.’ 
He said, ‘Well if he was on the rig yesterday, he’1ll be here 
tomorrow [pronounced ‘’tomorra’]. See, because we worked 24 
{hours] on and 24 off. 


So at roll cali that morning they says ‘Is Sugar Doughnuts 
here?’ And I said, ’Well I’m George Washington Sugar 
Doughnuts’ [laughs]. He says, ’Well there’s a guy in here 
looking for you yesterday.’ I said, ‘It must have been 
‘Spicer.’ Well it was Spicer looking for me. They call me 
‘Sugar Doughnuts’ because those days we didn’t have a bakery 
down in our section of town, where we lived. But the 
grocery store used to get the doughnuts and things in the 
morning. And I used to be the first one there to get the 
sugar doughnuts. So they called me ’George Washington Sugar 
Doughnuts’ because I was the first [one there]. [Slight 
laugh]. But Pete was a Portugee, Al Batz [?] was 
Portugee; most of its Irish, and a black Irishman at that. 
He was one of the blacker boys from [slips into a brogue} 
from back in Northern Ireland. And he had a broooogue a 
mile tong! {Laughs]. And Zeebeke, ’Portugee Beans.’ This 
guys was always talking about Portugee beans. ’Gimethat’: 
Gimethat, Gimethat, Gimethat! And Crumb, Youz [Youz guys, 
youz guys, youz guys}. And Honey, Dynamite, Biscuits. When 
Biscuits died, they never did know what his last name was. 
Everybody called him ’Biscuits.’ And Stump, Reptile, 
Dippity-Dags, Memphis-Sah, Fleas, Ray~Ray. Well Ray was 
Raymond Cosey, he was a little French boy. And Dodo was 
Irish, Zado-was a Portugee; no, one of those Hispano- 
Americans. He come from one of those countries in South 


Page - 49 


Ace Pet hin th 


ae a ly Eh eM RR Ln NA A eth sted nena depen amelinatnte hte! 


te ew W fe) fe) 


America, I don’t remember which one. Leatherhead, Meow- 
Face: I think he had a face like a cat. And George 
Reckelberg, put that down. George Reckelberg, Alameda." 


Pamela Morton: "How do you spell his last name?" 
Towns: "R-E-C-K-E-L-B-E-R-G." 
Morton: "He’s in Alameda now?" 


Towns: "Yeah, he’s the only Reckelberg in the phone book. 
You talk to him: his mother ... worked for the Century Club 
down there, that same thing but this was in later years. 
And he could tell you a lot about that. And then Meow-face 
and Cat face, and Stuie, Cut-face (fella had a cut across 
his face). And Babe, Normie (Norman), Ted (Teddie) Foots, 
Midnight (was a colored fella down there, was very very 
black). And-" 


Morton: "But that’s sort of an affectionate term, isn’t 
it?" 


Towns: "Yeah-" 
Mortons "It wasn’t like that-" 


Towns: "Yeah, and there was another colored fella down 
there. And then Paulie, Alabalala (Portugee), Applehead; 
Applehead was in the fire department. His name was very 
apropos in those days, it never did change. Buckles, Tinker 
McCann, Balloon-head, Toots and Goldie (brothers), Lucky, 
Morocco, Rabbits; Johnny Roberts, that’s what they used to 
call him, ‘Rabbits.’ Because you asked him what his name 
was... Shy Red, Kicky, Bocce, [?], Carrots, Big Foot. 
Bullhead. It’s alli kind [of names]. Back there, in my 
estimation, would make something very nice for your group. 
[He is undoubtedly referring to the group’s planned 
reception and exhibition.] Because. old-time people coming 
in, look at this: look at that, Kanaka!" 


Morton: "Portuguese?" 
Towns: "Put down Hawaiian Islands, ‘yes." 


Morton: “Hawaiian, yeah. Yeah, I saw ‘Honolulu’ and 
‘Swede./" 


Towns: "Swede yeah, Cutchie. And Ibane was a Swede. But 
they weren’t derogatory terms, they were loving terms that 
you called a fella. I went into Mother’s Cookie, they had a 
piace down there at 5th and Adeline. And we used to go 
swimming down at the estuary a lot. And so I went in there 
one day and I saw these Portugee boys from West Oakland, you 
know. Say [I said] ‘Hey Costai‘ You know, basic Portuguese 


Page - 50 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


things that you pick up down there, you learned. They never 
talked English, those guys. So this fella come in, he had 
an impediment of the throat, he’s born without a palette or 
something, and his conversation [he mumbles]. So he came 
in, and I says ’Ee-ah!* Boy, I got the coldest shoulder you 
ever saw in your life. [Slight laugh] He just ignored me. 
So I told the fellas, I says, ‘You tell Ee-ah that I didn’t 


‘mean that derogatorily. I said that as a loving gesture. 


If he mistook it, it’s his hard luck.’ 


But one day when I was in the fire department we had a fire 
out on Wood Street. And this little fella come up and he 
said ‘Hey midnight! [And then Towns mumbles incoherently: 
"That’s not your regular fire engine"] I said, ‘’No, it’s 
not.’ And I says, ‘How do you know, it’s not my regular 
fire engine?” He said [response is purposely garbled]. I 
say, ‘Was your father’s name Johnny?’ He says, ‘Yeah, ...my 
Pa was named Johnny.’ His father before, his mother 
evidently married again. And he was barn with that same 
impediment of speech. But of course today, that would have 
been overcome.... 


So when I look at this thing here [the list of nicknames] 
Hump-dididdy: Humpdididdy was a man who used to sell 
tamales, a colored fella who used to make tamales. And it/’d 
be nobody in sight and he’d be coming down the street, he’d 
say ‘This is Humpdididdy, don’t crowd me folks [laughs 
hard). Get your tamales here.’ See? There’s nobody in 
sight, you know? But that was just his way. But he made 
good---Gaggley-gee was a man, I guess we would say that 
Goggley~gee wore cataract glasses. He’s a very intelligent 
man but to look at him he didn’t look like he had any sense. 


‘And then Sore Eye, you know you always have a kid that has a 


sore eye? Willy Ha Ha, Hot Cakes, Rupee, Big Nose, Manny, 
Wicky, Sewer, By George--~’By George such a such a thing. 
By George this is so, By George, so and so.... Any time he 
weuld stop and talk with you, ‘’By George, I think we’l1l go 
downtown. By George, that’s a nice colored thing you got 
on. -e- Oh, when you go through this, it brings back the 
days when you were a kid. And I was telling Miss Pam here, 
that those days ... the only people that you knew in the 
community, were those that had kids. Cause you ran around 
with the kids and you knew that she was Mrs. So-and-so or 
Mrs. Samuels .... And that was the thing. 


[He refers to an article written by Walter Johnson, "Let’s 
Take a Walk." Apparently the author walks through West 
Oakland, beginning at 16th Street, the John Irish home. He 
has another article, "Remembrances," by Bill Oidimat, a 
Policeman who attended St. Patrick’s. Mr. Towns also has 
several West Oakland fight cards. He also reads a portion 
from an article from the Qakland Tribune, June 29th, 1913. 
which refers to Mr. Towns winning a second in a 50 yard 
event. He refers to a Johnny Asanovitch. ] 


Page - 51 


Intervi Roya ° 


Interviewer 1: "Would you repeat what you said about 
Asanovitch changing his name to Anthony?" 


Towns: “Well I don’t like to say these things because he 
actually changed his name. Because Asanovich---any 
foreigner that had names [that sounded foreign] were 
ostracized because of that." 


Morton: "...what did you say before ... just in general. 
You said people changed very often down there-" 


Towns: "Yeah, yeah, but there are many that changed their 
names down there. I know a fella, his name is Charlie 
Silva. Charlie went into a lodge one night and Alfa [?] 
Costa, one of the boys I showed you in the pictures, said 
‘Hello Charlie Silva! How you doing!’ He says, ’My name is 
‘Forest, my name is Forest.’ Well, Silva and forest are the 
same. Silva ... that’s forest in Spanish and Portuguese, 
and Silva, so he changed his name to Forest. And then I 
knew another fella, he worked for the Southern Pacific for 
years, and his name was Markovitch. He took examination 
after examination, he didn’t pass! So he knocked the 
‘vitch’ off of his name, and he just used Marco. Next 
examination he topped the listi" 


Morton: "The main point that you made is that there was 
discrimination." 


Towns: "That’s right. There’s lots of those---oh even some 
of them Irish names down there changed, the guys changed 
their names." 


Morton: "We heard also that black fighters taking Irish 
names, isn’t that it?" 


Interviewer 1: "Well even Italian fighters---well the Irish 
names seemed to be names that were identified with the big 
fighters. So I think a lot of people took on those names. 
Have you heard that?" 


Towns: "Well, I know maybe twenty, thirty of them that 
changed their names down there. Because they didn’t have a 
chance, see? Because they figured that, well they’d take an 
examination some place, when the application got there they 
see’d the name was Scazafa or something like that, they’d 
pull it and throw it aside. And then they’d take the 
Americanized name. That went on for a long time. I was on 
the committee that went back to Washington to work against 
discrimination against ethnic groups, for the International 
Association of Firefighters. They paid my way. I could 
have had the job in Washington if I wanted to live in 
Washington. But I didn’t want to live in Washington. But I 
went there and I set up a program. And these various things 


Page - 52 


ess a 


eaten Oh aes agen 


ce eS LI SSI lla) een ALE OAR ARNON OL 


nines ss nel ts nan, ie se tema nathpin eae Ieee bea mete mereilin i eens BEN Mic Me i A aT 


nterview ith Ro Towns 


we accused the Civil Service for it, of using their own 
judgement on those things. Whereas if they left those . 
things alone, these men would get in there, they had the 
abilities. As a result, we got Chinese, Japanese, every 
other thing in the fire department. 


I meant to bring that program down here for you, that I had 
when I had a school here; it was published in Chinese. 

This doctor down in Chinatown, ... he and I worked on it. 
The Chinese looked at the fire department job as not 
necessary evil: ‘We/re not interested in the Fire 
Department.’ I said, ‘Maybe you’re not interested in the 
fire department, but that fire department pays from two to 
three hundred dollars a month.’ That was those days. 
...they’re getting pretty good salaries today. . 


Anyway, I helped them set up this program, back there in 
Washington, and then I had to take an examination against 
fellas that was my Chief! And I was on the Fire Department 
ten years. But this year they were looking for ability and 
not for color. And they picked me for that." 


Morton: "That’s how you got in? I was going to ask you how 
you got in." 


Towns: "Yeah, yeah.” 


Morton: "It just happened to Pe one year, you applied at 
the right time?" 


Towns: "Well I didn’t know I knew the right thing [?]. 
Course, in order for me to get an officer’s job in the Fire 
Department, I had to make a survey [pronounced sur-vey, 
accent on second syllable] of the blacks in the Fire 
Department. I went back to the days of George Washington. 

I had a picture of George Washington, the father of our 
country, fire man is there, posing with his helmet on, right 
behind him is John Q. Sambo, a black man. That goes back to 
1700, 1700 somewhere." 


Mortons: "What is it, you showed these photographs [sic]-" 


Towns: "No, no, no, no. Just made up this survey. And it 
was done by fellas that had never seen each other. One 
fella in Baltimore, one in Plymouth and one in Detroit. 

-..L was appointed to Chief’s Operator in 1941. And it 
appeared in some of the black papers in the East. And these 
fellas wrote me congratulatory letters and so we become pen 
pals. Then [one] says Well I heard there’s a fire company 
here, I heard there’s a fire company there. So, before you 
know it, we got all these figures together. So then I had a 
friend up on the Civil Service Board, one girl that was very 
friendly toward me, ‘cause the rest of the Civil Service 
Board, they didn’t care nothing about me. But this girl 


Page - 53 


ene 


imine dma mtn tien AiR cena UN Nn nA ROR NOR MS ci 


said, ’Oh yes, there’s black officers in other places, and 
we ought to have them here.’ So I got a promotion." 


Morton: "So that’s how you got your promotion, was through 
research work?" 


Towns: "Yeah, I had to survey, in order to get that. Sure. 
I had to convince them. iI was the last black appointed in 
the Fire Department for fifteen years. I was a rookie for 
fifteen years. They never hired another one, after that." 


Morton: "What year was that?" 

Townss “That was 1927." 

Morton: ""So right. before the Depression?" 
Towns: "It was just before the Depression." 


Mortons "Yeah, so that was prohably part of it then to, 
jobs got harder to get." 


Towns: "Well no, there was always some place, there was 
always use for firemen. In fact, my heart bleeds when I see 
them cutting out these different fellas. Here’s a name 
‘Bubblerod’ [?] No those are Arabians. [He list a series 
of clearly ethnic surnames. He notes an incident where one 
side of a family changed their name, the other didn’t: 
Barbara versus Barbaca. J] 


Morton: "J have a question for you: which groups do you 
remember specifically working for the railroad, and do you 
remember different groups doing different jobs?" 


Towns: "Well a lot of the fellas that went to St. Joseph’s 
Institute got jobs with the Southern Pacific as brakemen, or 
switchmen, engineers, firemen. Father Mac looked after 
them. In fact, they helped them in the police department 
and everything else. Now this Jim Flynn died, he was an 
inspector, retired inspector. And before he died, my 
brother died just previously, and he said ’I see your 
brother Bill died.’ I says ‘Yeah. ... he’s buried the day 
after tomorrow ... and the funeral’s private.’ And he says, 
‘It’s not private for me! [{laughs].’ Because Bill got me 
the job, Bill took me to Father Mac [laughs]. See? It just 
goes to show you how they worked, those days. [He 
apparently refers to some letters and pictures in his 
collection. He has a list of the girls’ names from West 
Oakland... are these nicknames? They find the name of 
Bernice Rydman, a woman also interviewed during this 
project. Apparently Mr. Towns. helped put together several 
reunions of West Oakland oldtimers. There are letters and 
testimonies from some of these people. One person wrote 
about the history of St. Patrick’s, Father O’Brien, Father 


Page - 54 


re " . 3 


terview(s) with Royal To 


Higgins, Father Dempsey, Father Hayes.... There was also a 
Father Houlihan. The Oakland Neighborhood History Project 
staff make arrangements to borrow and copy some of this 
material. Mr. Towns shows off a picture of his 
granddaughter. Mr. Town and the interviewers look through 
old photographs that were apparently used for one of the 
reunions. He refers to a Joey Oaks, who was a prominent 
cartoonist from New York. Towns shows interviewer several 
cartoons by Oaks. } 


Towns: “Now you spoke about the West-of-Market Street Boys. 
I’ve got three or four copies of their magazine they put 
out, in here." 


Morton: "Did you get along with any of them, or-" 
Townss “Oh, we never had no argument." 
Morton: "They just excluded you." 


Towns: "That’s all, they excluded me. I went to one of 
their affairs. They had Firemen’s Night, they couldn’t kick 
me out, being a fireman. So I went there and I had a speech 
all ready for them. But they just said, ‘Take a bow.’ And 
I took a bow. So Joe Casin was County Clerk... well Joe 
carried me around when I was a baby. And I was telling him 
about it. Joe said, ‘What was you going to tell then, 
Royal?’ Well I was going to tell them about the day I was 
born [slight laugh]. I says, ‘You know those days, wé never 
went to hospitals. We were [bern] there at home. And I 
heard them calling all these different names, like Mrs. 
Silva and Mrs. Morerro and oh, German names, everything 
else. I says, Geez, where is this place? [Someone] says, 
This is West Oakland. Well Geez, West Oakland must be 
heaven, And yes I says, West Oakland was heaven. But you 
guys missed. the boat when you put on your applications, ’For 
White only.’ Because there was so much intermixing down 
there...." 


Morton: "Is that where they drew the line: they didn’t 


_ allow any Asians or-" 


Towns" "No, they wouldn’t let any Asians or any Europeans! 
Nobody-" 


Morton: "No foreign-born, yeah, no foreign-born." 
Townss "You had to be native-born." 


Interviewer 1: "So what were they, sort of Methodists and 
Presbyterians and [siight laugh]-" 


Page - 55 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Towns: "No, I don’t know what they were. I don’t know, 
they just had that old West Oakland, West~-of-Market-Street 
Boys." 


Morton: "When was that founded, do you know? West-of- 
Market-Street Boys?" [The group briefly discusses this: 
Town remembers circa 1946. Morton thinks that they put out 
publications in the 30s. ] 


Towns: "But Eddie, Eddie Halley was a Captain in the Fire 
Department and he used always, because he knew my interest 
in West Oakland, and many times, he and Walter Johnson and 
them other guys would come to me to find out about West 
Oakland, you know?" 


Morton: “And Mr. Towns, you told me last time that some of 
the members of the West-of-Market Boys Club were also 
members of your group." 


Towns: “Oh yes, yes, oh yes, oh yes. Lots of them were 
members of our group too. Ours was just a group of fellas 
that got together and decided that we were going to give 
something to bring the old [neighborhood] together. We 
never had any formal meetings, other than the business 
meetings that we had." 


Morton:: "So it was purely a social club?" 
Towns: "That’s right,, that’s right, that’s right." 


Morton: "Did the West-of-Market Boys Club have a slightly 
different purpose?" 


Towns: "Yes, they had an organization. They had meeting 
nights and everything else like that. ...I was just telling 
you, I was invited to one of their meetings." 


Morton: "Uh-hmm. Were they more than a social club?" 


Towns: "No, they weren’t any more than a social club. They 
were a lot of business men, in town that belonged to it. 

{He shows pictures, ‘scenes’ from West Oakland Old-timers 
Reunions.}] There’s every nationality imaginable that you 
could have in there. And of course, one of the fellas said 
to me says, I said ‘Why didn’t you come to the West Oakland 
Old-timers [Reunion]?’ /No,’ he said, ‘You always wanted to 
be Portugee of some other damn thing.. And we thought it was 
just that.’ And I said, ‘’No!’ I said, ‘the reason I gave it 
was because we wanted to give the recognition due to the 
group in West Oakland, as they were.’ See? But that’s some 
of my own kind, that didn’t want to come [slight laugh]. 
See?" 


Page - 56 


_aetaemnati ateenanh maintenant ntl nicatei remnant paioinatscnuameesnatvenmemtne Naini game es itn nn Re tA a Tin ACN ALLAN RAL RNMNN! et elm N win men im 
aA NNR IE iO te ns i Rt i sie ena 


Interview(s) with Royal Towns 


Morton: "I also notice that there was the night the Boys 
Glub had special events like Slavonic nights. That must 
have been an attempt on their part to bring-" 


Towns: "A special what?" 
Morton: "A special event called ‘Slavonic Night’?" 


Towns: "Oh yes, yes, yes. They had ... different groups 
there. But the boys that belonged to the club: they could 
belong to the club but their fathers and mothers couldn’t 
belong to to. So there’s lots of Slavs down there." 


Mortons "You mean, if they were born here." 
Towns: "If they were born here." 
Morton: "Oh! I see, I see." 


Towns: “Yeah, you had to be native-born. [He shows 
interviewers additional historic photographs including 
pictures of Johnny Roberts and Joey Oaks. Roberts was a 
printer in town.}] And Joey Oaks, when he came here, there 
was only certain guys that he wanted to see.... And he 
reached up and he grabbed me and he hugged me. Boy, I never 
received any of that from my fondest girlfriends! I don’t 
think my wife even grabbed me like that. He was so glad to 
see me. And gee whiz, it was funny how we were raised in 
those days. [He talks about eulogy for Johnny Roberts’ 
funeral, which he wrote. Apparently it was Roberts and 
Towns who started the idea of West Oakland reunions. The 
eulogy was the only piece read at the memorial service. Any 
funds left over from these reunion dinners was donated to 
charities in West Oakland, e.g. St. Patrick’s and St. 
Joseph’s Institute. He shows off a letter in Korean which 
he had interpreted. ] 


{He apparently has a picture of a boarding house, The 
American House, also pictures of the estuary, Goat Island 
and "Hot Waters."] 


Morton: "Hot waters? Where were they?" 


Towns: "Well the hot waters was a place---you see, the Key 
Route used to furnish their own electricity. And they had 
to have an ample supply of water to wash those boilers out. 
And they wash those boilers out and that hot water would 
come right there in a part, well, it would be about 34th and 
Wood Street. And the Santa Fe had a trestle over there, see 
that’s the Santa Fe trestle there. And we would go swimming 
in there. This here is Mogre Shipyard ... in background; 
(here] is Tom Mulkey and a bunch of us kids down there. 
That’s Moore‘s in the background there. [He reads a note 
from a former. buddy. ] 


Page - 57 


Interview(s), with Royal Towns 


Morton: "What did you say this was on 7th Street?" 


Towns: "The American House. The American House, 7th and 
Wood; it ran almost that whole block there." 


Morton: "What was it?" 
Towns: "It was a rooming house-" 
Morton: "Rooming house?" 


Towns: "Yeah, where a lot of the railroad men stayed there, 
worked for the Southern Pacific Company. [He notes that 
they got information aboyt West Oakland history and 
whereabouts of old-timers by writing to anyone they knew, 
who had roots in the community. He reads one of the 
responses, regarding the names on a Prescott School 1919 
February [mid-term] graduation ribbon. G.E. Mortensen was 
the Principal. The teachers are listed, all of them are 
"Miss." Kids in the class included Georgie - 
an "Arabian." George Chin (Chinese), John Wall 
(Portuguese), Herman Brillian (?) (Portuguese), Lavinia 
Maro, Sylvan, Powell, Barbica (Slovonian).] But yeah, you 
see, that’s how we got that information.... [The letter with 
this information was written in 1956. The group looks 
through newspaper articles which Mr. Towns has saved. Royal 
is referred to as a "great historian" by one writer. 
Apparently Mr. Towns was a competitive swimmer of some 
merit. ] 


Morton: “But tell me about the 1915 Pan-Pacific Exposition. 
I understand that a lot of blacks from Oakland had put on 
some sort of exhibition or had participated in the fair. Do 
you know anything about that?" ; 


Towns: "Well I don’t know. [He apparently participated in 
activities sponsored by Oakland Parks and'Rec., "Playground 


Department." The interviewer makes arrangements to borrow 
Mr. Towns papers. ] 


° forma ew 


Page - 58 


i NA AAA AR AN iA eA A mAs Di kant i a Ledroeed mae aim netntsnalconsninneiness uamineltnane—a sans veniam Rate Malan narrate whivitaeh tn iD Attia 
rh inca, mel Ame, Nn annem A i 


EX:, IN Vv 8) WITH RO (°) 


Abajian, James de, p. 13, 19 
Acme Brewery, p. 46 


African Americans, 
community in Oakland, pp. 4-5, 8-9, 11-12, 24, 
community in San Francisco, pp. 1-4, 18 


discrimination against, pp. 8-11, 24, 30, 43 
Allensworth, California, p. 46 
AME Zion Church, p. 16, 36 
American House, p. 57 
Arabians (in West Oakland), p. 7, 48, 53 
barbershops, p. 20 
boxing, p- 5, 41-42, 51 
Canada, pp. 17-18 
Central Pacific Railroad, pp. 15-16, 18~19 


children’s life/activities (see also nicknames), p. 
13-14, 21-23, 25, 38-40, 42-43, 51, 56 


gangs, p. 40 


Chinatown (San Francisco), p. 15 


34 


rena tape dale nha Ae 


Chinese, pp. 14-15, 52 

crime, p. 44 

de Fremery Park, p. 38, 40 

Depression, the, p. 38, 53 

Dining Car Cooks and Waiters, pp. 26-27, 29 
discrimination (see also African Americans), pp. 51-52 
Dennis, Link, p. 5, 41 

economic groups, p. 5, 45~46 


ethnic groups in West Oakland, pp. 5-7, 9, 11, 35, 40, 43, 
48-50, 54, 57 


ethnic identity, p: 12, 14-16, 24, 35, 44, 47, 51-53 


ethnic relations, p. 5, 9-11, 24-25, 43-44, 46-47, 54-55 


intra-ethnic relations, pp. 7-12, 31, 45, 56 
etiquette (manners), pp. 13-14 
foodways, p. 44, 50 
housing, p. 46 
“Hot Waters," pp. 56-57 
Irish (in West Oakland), p. 5, 35, 45, 51-54 


Italians (in West Oakland), pp. 5-11 


dase Ma sessment nash mgmcaneenmm ncaa st tt Hg Dh A AOR tea a ELE (NARACOORTE lini Sn 
am ieniies — ennnantme 5 


Junior 500 Club, p. 34 
Lun, Captain, p. 9 
McNally, Father, p. 39, 53-54 
Herchauh 
MarshatT Calculating Machine Company, pp. 24-25, 27 
Masonic Lodges, p. 13, 34-36 
Mother’s Cookies, p. 50 
nicknames, pp. 47-50, 54 
Oakland Fire Department, pp. 25-33, 48, 50, 52-53 
Oaks, Joey, p. 54, 56 
Occidental Club (San Francisco), p. 15, 18 
Panama Pacific International Exposition, p. 4, 57 
peddlers, p. 50 
Piedmont Baths, p. 43 
Portuguese (in West Oakland), p. 5, 7, 24, 51 


Presidio of San Francisco, p. 4 


Pullman Company, p. 4, 8, 18, 22 


Redcaps, p. 4 


recreation (see also children’s life; boxing) p. 1, 33-34 


religion, pp. 36-37 


saloons (in West Oakland), pp. 4-5, 14, 33, 41, 45 


San Francisco, pp. 1-3, 15 

San Francisco earthquake of 1906, pp. 1-3, 21 
San Jose, p. 16 

Seventh Street, p. 7, 33, 45-46 

Sixth Street Market, p. 37 

Slim Jenkins, p. 33 

Southern Pacific Railroad, pp. 4-5, 24-29, 42, 
St. Mary’s Cemetery, p. 13 

stores, p. 7, 37, 41, 48, 50 

Sutro Baths (San Francisco), p. 4, 43 

"Tin Can Alley," p. 10 


Towns, Royal 


family history, p. 2, 9, 12-22 


personal/work history, p. 9, 11, 17, 20-33, 


41-42, 46, 52-54 


residences, pp. 1-2, 20-23 


Transcontinental Railroad, p. 15, 18-19 


51, 53, 


38, 


57 


eter esha aD salma Ant 
am tas ena ip, A IR nl te km tii ninmasnnc omni emanaimnarenTerecenedemmmaainsieithinmminetiin 


transportation, pp. 2-3, 7, 18 


ferries, pp. 2-3, 22 
St. Joseph’s Institute, p. 53 
unions, pp. 25-27, 29 
vacant lots (folk names), p. 39 
West-of-Market-Street Boys, p. 38, 54-56 
West Oakland (boundaries), p. 38 
West Oakland Oldtimer’s Reunion, p. 41, 54-55 
Westerner’s Corral, p. 13 
women’s role/work, p. 21 


World War 1, p. 11 


