University  of  California  •  Berkeley 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 


University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California 


Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  Series 


THE  KNOXVILLE  MINING  DISTRICT,  THE  McLAUGHLIN  GOLD  MINE, 
NORTHERN  CALIFORNIA,  1978-1995 

Volume  I 


James  Anderson 
Will  Baker 
Norman  Birdsey 
Brice  Bledsoe 


HOMESTAKE  VICE  PRESIDENT-EXPLORATION 

CITIZEN  ACTIVIST 

METALLURGICAL  TECHNICIAN 

DIRECTOR,  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT 


With  an  Introduction  by 
Duane  A.  Smith 


Interviews  conducted  by 

Eleanor  Swent 
in  1994  and  1995 


Copyright  o  1998  by  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


Since  1954  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  has  been  interviewing  leading 
participants  in  or  well-placed  witnesses  to  major  events  in  the  development  of 
Northern  California,  the  West,  and  the  Nation.  Oral  history  is  a  method  of 
collecting  historical  information  through  tape-recorded  interviews  between  a 
narrator  with  firsthand  knowledge  of  historically  significant  events  and  a  well- 
informed  interviewer,  with  the  goal  of  preserving  substantive  additions  to  the 
historical  record.  The  tape  recording  is  transcribed,  lightly  edited  for 
continuity  and  clarity,  and  reviewed  by  the  interviewee.  The  corrected 
manuscript  is  indexed,  bound  with  photographs  and  illustrative  materials,  and 
placed  in  The  Bancroft  Library  at  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  and  in 
other  research  collections  for  scholarly  use.  Because  it  is  primary  material, 
oral  history  is  not  intended  to  present  the  final,  verified,  or  complete 
narrative  of  events.  It  is  a  spoken  account,  offered  by  the  interviewee  in 
response  to  questioning,  and  as  such  it  is  reflective,  partisan,  deeply  involved, 
and  irreplaceable. 


************************************ 


This  manuscript  is  made  available  for  research  purposes.  All 
literary  rights  in  the  manuscript,  including  the  right  to  publish, 
are  reserved  to  The  Bancroft  Library  of  the  University  of 
California,  Berkeley.  No  part  of  the  manuscript  may  be  quoted  for 
publication  without  the  written  permission  of  the  Director  of  The 
Bancroft  Library  of  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley. 

Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  publication  should  be 
addressed  to  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  486  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley  94720,  and  should  include 
identification  of  the  specific  passages  to  be  quoted,  anticipated 
use  of  the  passages,  and  identification  of  the  user. 

It  is  recommended  that  this  oral  history  be  cited  as  follows: 

To  cite  the  volume:  The  Knoxville  Mining  District,  The 
Mclaughlin  Gold  Mine,  Northern  California,  1978-1995, 
Volume  I,  an  oral  history  conducted  in  1994  and  1995, 
Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1998. 

To  cite  an  individual  interview:  [ex.]  James  Anderson, 
"Homestake  Vice  President-Exploration,"  an  oral 
history  conducted  in  1995  by  Eleanor  Swent  in  The 
Knoxville  Mining  District,  The  Mclaughlin  Gold  Mine, 
Northern  California,  1978-1995,  Volume  I,  Regional 
Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University 
of  California,  Berkeley,  1998. 


Copy  no. 


I 


Cataloguing  information 


KNOXVILLE  MINING  DISTRICT,  THE  MCLAUGHLIN  GOLD  MINE,  NORTHERN  CALIFORNIA, 
1978-1995,  VOLUME  I,  1998,   vii,  312  pp. 

James  Anderson  (b.  1935),  geologist:  Kennecott  Copper  Co.,  1960-1967; 
Occidental  Minerals,  1967-1975;  Armand  Hammer,  Gore  family;  vice  president, 
exploration,  Homestake  Mining  Co.,  1975-1987,  researching  mercury  hot  springs, 
gold  discovery  at  Manhattan  [renamed  McLaughlin]  Mine;  environmental  aspects, 
community  relations;  member,  chairman,  California  State  Mining  and  Geology 
Board;  CEO,  Minven,  1987-1995.   Will  Baker  (b.  1935),  professor  of  English,  UC 
Davis:  Capay  Valley,  CA,  community  activism;  opposing  Davis  Creek  Dam, 
efforts  to  block  approval  of  environmental  impact  report,  concerns  about  air 
and  water  pollution.   Norman  Birdsey  (b.  1957),  metallurgical  technician:  U.S. 
Navy,  boatswain's  mate,  1975-1979,  1981-1984;  Homestake  Mining  Co.,  1979-1981, 
Bulldog  Mine,  CO,  mill  operator;  1981-1995,  McLaughlin  Mine,  startup  training, 
autoclave  operator,  process  specialist.   Brice  Bledsoe  (b.  1927),  director, 
Solano  Irrigation  District:  formation  of  Solano  County  Flood  Control  and  Water 
Conservation  District;  McLaughlin  Mine,  SID  demands  satisfied  for  fail-safe 
containment  of  tailings,  regulation  of  cyanide  transport,  daily  monitoring, 
future  oversight. 

Introduction  by  Duane  Smith,  Professor  of  History  and  Southwest  Studies, 
Ft.  Lewis  College,  Durango,  CO. 

Interviews  conducted  by  Eleanor  Swent  in  1994  and  1995  for  the  Western 
Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  oral  history  series. 


DONORS  TO 

THE  KNOXVILLE  DISTRICT /McLAUGHLIN  MINE  PROJECT  OF 
THE  WESTERN  MINING  IN  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY  ORAL  HISTORY  SERIES 

1993-1997 


The  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  on  behalf  of  future  researchers,  would 

like  to  express  its  thanks  to  the  following  corporations,  organizations, 

and  individuals  whose  encouragement  and  support  have  made  possible  this 

oral  history  proejct  of  the  Knoxville  District /Mclaughlin  Mine. 


Corporations  and  Organizations 

Bechtel  Foundation 

Chemstar  Lime  Company 

The  Gamble  Foundation 

The  Hearst  Foundation,  Inc. 

Homestake  Mining  Company 

Mining  and  Metallurgical  Society  of  America 
One  Shot  Mining  Company 


Individuals 

Anonymous,  in  memory  of  Donald  Delicate 

Anonymous,  in  memory  of  Robert  S.  Livermore 

Christine  W.  S.  Byrd,  in  memory  of  Langan  W.  Swent 

Kenneth  S.  Canfield 

Rosemary  and  Harry  Conger 

Douglas  W.  and  Margaret  P.  Fuerstenau 

Launce  E.  Gamble 

James  and  Virginia  Hickey 

William  A.  Humphrey 

James  Jensen 

Kritikos  Family,  in  memory  of  William  Kritikos 
John  S.  Livermore 

Roger  A.  Madsen 
Sylvia  C.  Mclaughlin 

Marion  Onstad 

Eleanor  Swent,  in  memory  of  Langan  Swent 
Jack  Thompson 

and 
The  J.  Ward  Downey  Bequest  Fund 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS- -The  Knoxville  Mining  District,  the  Mclaughlin  Gold  Mine, 
Northern  California,  1978-1995,  Volume  I 


PROJECT  HISTORY  i 

INTRODUCTION  by  Duane  A.  Smith  vi 

INTERVIEW  WITH  JAMES  ANDERSON 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY 
BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 

I  EARLY  YEARS,  1935-1965  1 
Growing  up  in  Eureka,  Utah,  a  Silver-Lead-Zinc-Mining  Town  1 
Ann  Sutherland  3 
Harvard  Graduate  School;  Geology  Professor  Hugh  McKinstry  4 
The  Ph.D.  Thesis  on  Using  Manganese  Oxide  as  a  Guide  to  Ore 

in  the  Tintic  District,  Utah  5 

II  EXPLORATION  GEOLOGIST  FOR  KENNECOTT  COPPER  CORPORATION,  1960  TO 

1967  6 

Developing  and  Refining  Procedures  for  Copper  Exploration  6 

Research  on  Leached  Cappings  7 

Traveling  the  World  in  Search  of  Copper  8 

III  VICE  PRESIDENT  OF  EXPLORATION  FOR  OCCIDENTAL  MINERALS,  1967  TO 

1975  12 

Paul  Bailly  12 

Armand  Hammer  13 

The  Gores  of  Tennessee  14 

More  About  Armand  Hammer  15 

IV  VICE  PRESIDENT  OF  EXPLORATION  FOR  HOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY,  1975 

TO  1987  16 

Homestake's  Desire  to  Find  a  Major  Gold  Deposit  16 

Advances  in  Exploration:  Mineral  Zoning  of  Deposits  19 

Classifying  the  Gold  Deposits  of  the  World  20 

The  South  African  Rand  Deposit  21 

Carlin  and  Homestake  Gold  Deposits  21 

A  Vacation  Spent  Researching  Mercury  Hot  Springs  24 

Donald  Gustafson  Researches  Old  Homestake  Files  25 

Wilbur  Hot  Springs;  Cherry  Hills  Deposit  26 

V  THE  MANHATTAN /MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  28 
The  One  Shot  Mining  Company  and  Bill  Wilder  28 
Reassuring  Bill  Wilder  about  His  Rights  30 
The  Gamble  Ranch  32 
Awareness  of  the  Environmental  Aspects  34 
Presenting  Homestake  to  the  Community  35 
Delays  Caused  by  Vocal  Opponents  of  Mining  36 


Key  People:  Gustafson,  Kalk,  Previdi,  Stoehr  38 

Member  of  California  State  Mining  and  Geology  Board  40 

Determining  Economic  Feasibility  41 

Getting  Reliable  Assays  a  Challenge  43 
Moving  a  Project  from  Exploration  to  Operations:  Before  Development 

or  After?  44 

VI    OTHER  VENTURES  50 

Minven:  CEO  also  Means  "Chief  Environmental  Officer"  50 

More  About  the  California  Mining  and  Geology  Board  51 

The  California  Desert  Conservation  Area  53 

The  Summitville  Disaster  55 

The  Importance  of  Sand  and  Gravel  Mining  56 

INTERVIEW  WITH  WILL  BAKER  59 

CONTENTS  60 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  61 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  62 

I  EARLY  YEARS,  1935-1970  63 
Education  in  Idaho,  Washington,  Paris,  Hawaii  63 
Graduate  Student  in  Berkeley,  1960-1964  64 
Teacher  at  Reed  College,  Filmmaker,  1964-1969  65 
English  Teacher  at  Davis  from  1969  66 

II  THE  CAPAY  VALLEY,  SORT  OF  OVERLOOKED  68 
Newcomers  Radical  in  Preserving  Things  as  they  Were  68 
Working  Together  to  Oppose  a  Highline  Canal  70 
A  Long-Running  Controversy  Over  In-stream  Gravel  Mining  74 
The  Williamson  Act  to  Preserve  Agricultural  Land  75 
A  Zoning  Ordinance  Amendment  Which  Benefited  Gravel  Miners  77 

III  HOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY  AND  DAVIS  CREEK  80 
Water:  Crucial  for  Farmers  and  Miners  80 
A  Public  Meeting  in  the  Guinda  Grange  Hall,  1980  82 
Gold  Triggers  a  Pleasant  Exhilaration  82 
Trying  to  Block  Approval  of  the  Environmental  Impact  Report  83 
Concerns  about  Air  and  Water  Pollution  85 
Information  as  Ammunition  87 
Homestake's  Historic  Stream  Pollution  in  South  Dakota  89 
The  Front  Line:  Conflicting  Philosophies  and  Principles  90 
Sometimes  a  Matter  of  Definition  92 
Supervisors  Broke  the  Rules  to  Thwart  a  Referendum  on  the 

Zoning  Amendment  93 

Concluding  that  Lawmakers  are  Wasteful  97 

One  Goal  Salvaged:  to  Make  it  a  Responsible  Project  98 

Jobs  versus  Songbirds  99 

Continuing  Citizen  Activism  101 


INTERVIEW  WITH  NORMAN  BIRDSEY  107 

CONTENTS  108 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  109 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  110 

I  GROWING  UP  IN  CREEDE,  COLORADO,  1995-1975  111 
Father,  Norman  Birdsey,  a  Miner  at  the  Emperious  Mine            111 
Building  the  Tailings  Dam  115 
Father's  Work  in  the  Mine  117 
Father's  Fatal  Accident  119 
Four  Generations  of  Miners  122 

II  AN  INTERLUDE  IN  THE  NAVY,  1975-1979  126 
Marrying  a  Girl  from  Oroville,  California  126 
Boatswain's  Mate,  Second  Class,  an  Interesting  Rating            127 
Learning  to  Operate  Equipment  128 

III  BACK  TO  CREEDE  AND  A  JOB  WITH  HOMESTAKE,  1979  TO  1981             130 
Entry-Level  Laborer  130 
Learning  a  Lesson  about  Safety  133 
Promotion  from  Crusher  Operator  to  Mill  Helper  136 
Learning  to  Operate  a  Rod  Mill  138 
A  Hateful  Earlier  Job  Dredging  Tailings  143 
Helping  the  Refiner  Pull  Zadra  Cells  144 
Silver  Price  Drops  and  the  Mine  Closes  Down  145 
Asking  Joe  Young  for  a  Job  at  McLaughlin  147 
Another  Hitch  in  the  Navy  147 

IV  THE  MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  SINCE  1984  150 
Joe  Young  Comes  Through  After  All  150 
Like  Going  From  a  Glider  to  a  747  152 
John  Turney,  Expert  Teacher  153 
Assigned  as  a  Counter-Current  Decantation  Operator  157 
Start-up  Problems  157 
The  Crusher:  "That  Baby  Was  a  Nightmare"  160 
The  Autoclaves:  When  the  Fun  Begins  161 
A  Better  Job  in  the  Refinery  164 
Assistant  Foreman  on  the  C  Crew;  A  Big  Promotion  168 
Accidents  with  the  Autoclaves  170 
Foreman  Over  B  Crew  175 
Special  Training  for  Foreman;  How  to  Treat  People  177 
A  Move  Up  to  Process  Specialist  in  the  Metallurgy  Lab  178 
Temporary  General  Foreman  181 
John  Turney 's  Inspiration  182 
Weekend  Dredging  for  Gold  184 


INTERVIEW  WITH  BRICE  BLEDSOE  188 

CONTENTS  189 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  190 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  192 

I  THE  SOLANO  PROJECT,  BUREAU  OF  RECLAMATION  193 
Training  in  Architecture  and  Civil  Engineering  193 
Designing  the  Distribution  System  for  the  Solano  Irrigation 

District,  1958-1962  194 

II  THE  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT,  1948  196 
Pre-World  War  II  Forerunner,  the  Solano  County  Water  Council  196 
Solano  County  Flood  Control  and  Water  Conservation  District,  1945  198 
Monticello  Dam  Is  On  a  Three-County  Corner  199 
Designed  to  Accommodate  a  Future  Power  Plant  199 
Assistant  District  Manager,  1967  200 
SID  Funding  from  Water  Sales,  Standby  Charges,  Special  Assessment  201 

III  MANAGER  OF  THE  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT,  1967-1995  203 
Reconsidering  a  Power  Plant,  1977  203 
Gravel  Mining  in  Putah  Creek  204 
The  Putah  Creek  Diversion  Canal  and  Pipelines:  A  300-Mile  System  205 
Trying  to  Transfer  the  Solano  Project  to  Local  Authority  208 

IV  THE  MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  BECOMES  A  SOLANO  COUNTY  CONCERN  211 
1981:  "We  Were  Going  to  Have  to  Take  Notice"  211 
Betsy  Marchand  Gives  a  Warning  212 
Concern  for  Protecting  Water  Quality  in  the  Berryessa  Watershed  214 
Ray  Krauss,  Surprised  at  Solano  County  Interest?  215 
Mounting  a  Legal  Threat  Unless  Solano  County  Is  a  Player  in  the 

Planning  216 

Concern  Both  for  Domestic  Population  and  Industrial  Water  Users  218 

Demanding  Absolutely  Fail-Safe  Containment  of  Tailings  219 

Meetings  in  San  Francisco  with  Officials  and  Attorneys  220 

Requiring  More  Monitoring:  Daily,  Not  Monthly  222 

Ensuring  Future  Oversight  224 

The  Result:  "Outstanding;  One  of  the  Cleanest  Mining  Operations"  225 

The  Future  of  SID:  Inevitable  Adjudication  Over  Water  Rights  226 

Regulating  the  Transport  of  Cyanide  229 

After  Many  Years,  No  Threat  to  the  SID  Waters  229 
Water  Law  Specialists  Minasian,  Minasian,  Minasian,  et  al.  of 

Oroville  231 

Porno  Indians  Are  Now  A  Constituency  232 

TAPE  GUIDE  233 


APPENDIX 

A     JAMES  ANDERSON 

1.  Homestake  Mining  Company  Board  of  Directors  meeting, 
November  14,  1980,  approval  of  request  for 
expenditures  for  Mclaughlin  Project  234 

2.  Report  of  Exploration  Division  in  Homestake 

Mining  Company's  1980  Annual  Report  235 

3.  "Gold—its  history  and  role  in  the  U.S.  economy 
and  the  U.S.  exploration  program  of  Homestake 
Mining  Co.,"  by  James  A.  Anderson,  Mining  Congress 
Journal,  January  1982  236 

B     WILL  BAKER 

Letter  to  the  Editor  of  the  Woodland  Daily  Democrat. 

April  18,  1984  244 

C     NORMAN  BIRDSEY 

Information  on  autoclave  pumps  245 

D     BRICE  BLEDSOE 

"Observations  of  Containment  and  Control  for  Potential 
Water  Quality  Modifications  from  the  Homestake  Mining 
Company  McLaughlin  Mine  and  Mill,"  Report  for  Solano 
Irrigation  District,  April  1994  248 

E     GENERAL  McLAUGHLIN  MINE  INFORMATION 

1.  Note  on  Manhattan  Quicksilver  Mine,  Mining  and 
Scientific  Press.  April  7,  1877  260 

2.  (partial)  Report  from  California  Journal  of  Mines 
and  Geology.  State  Mineralogist's  Report  XLI, 

April  1945  (41:2)  261 

3.  Table  19  from  "Mercury  Potential  of  the  United 
States,"  U.S.  Department  of  Interior  Bureau  of 

Mines,  (1965),  Information  Circular  8252  265 

4.  (partial)  "The  New  California  Gold  Rush,"  by 
George  0.  Argall,  Jr.,  Engineering  &  Mining 

Journal,  December  1987  267 

5.  "Tertiary  Gold  Bearing  Mercury  Deposits  of  the 
Coast  Ranges  of  California,"  by  Larry  M. 
Vredenburgh,  California  Geology.  February  1992        269 

6.  McLaughlin  Mine,  "General  Information  Summary," 
Homestake  Mining  Company,  August  1992  272 

7.  "McLaughlin  Mine,"  from  Homestake  Mining  Company's 
"Supplemental  Information  1995"  (internal  document)    290 

8.  Tables,  "Gold  Production  in  California  (1848-1996), 
Dollar  Value,"  and  "Gold  Production  in  California 
(1848-1996),  Troy  Ounces,"  Department  of 
Conservation,  Division  of  Mines  and  Geology,  n.d.     291 

9.  Production  data  for  mercury  production,  U.S.  Bureau 

of  Mines,  for  the  years  after  1961  293 

10.  "Gold  Hits  $850  in  Zurich—Dollar  Gains  in  Europe," 

San  Francisco  Chronicle.  January  22,  1980  294 

11.  "Big  Gold  Find  in  Napa  County,"  San  Francisco 
Chronicle.  August  28,  1980  295 


12.    "Gold  Rush  of  1980  Is  Raging--A  New  Breed  of 

California  Prospectors,"  San  Francisco  Chronicle, 
September  1,  1980  296 


F     WESTERN  MINING  IN  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY  ORAL  HISTORY  SERIES 

Preface  298 

Donors  301 

Advisors  304 

Series  List  305 

INDEX  308 


PROJECT  HISTORY- -Knoxville  District /McLaughlin  Mine  Oral  History  Project 


The  development  of  the  McLaughlin  gold  mine  in  the  Knoxville 
District  of  Napa,  Lake,  and  Yolo  Counties  in  California  in  the  last 
quarter  of  the  twentieth  century  was  a  historically  significant  event. 
The  mines  of  the  district  had  been  major  producers  of  mercury  since  1861. 
In  1888  an  official  report  by  G.  F.  Becker  on  the  quicksilver  deposits 
mentioned  the  presence  of  free  gold  which  could  be  obtained  by  panning. 
It  took  almost  a  century  before  this  knowledge  could  be  acted  upon  when 
Homestake  Mining  Company  signed  an  agreement  with  James  William  Wilder, 
owner  of  the  Manhattan  Mine,  in  1978. 

Advisors  to  the  oral  history  series  on  Western  Mining  in  the 
Twentieth  Century1  who  were  also  Homestake  directors,  Professor  Douglas 
Fuerstenau,  principal  faculty  advisor,  Clifford  Heimbucher,  and  John 
Kiely,  all  urged  the  Knoxville /McLaughlin  oral  history  project,  as  did 
advisor  Sylvia  McLaughlin,  widow  of  the  Homestake  chairman  for  whom  the 
mine  was  named.   It  was  decided  it  should  be  a  community  oral  history,  in 
contrast  to  the  previous  volumes  in  the  series  which  documented 
individual  careers. 

The  five  historically  important  aspects  are:  the  history  of  the 
Knoxville  mercury  mining  district,  with  its  periodic  booms  and  busts;  the 
effects  of  a  large  industrial  development  and  influx  of  technically 
trained  workers  in  an  economically  depressed  rural  area;  the  efforts  to 
obtain  permits  to  develop  a  mine  near  a  center  of  environmental  activism; 
the  continuous  pressure  oxidation  system  which  was  pioneered  at  the 
McLaughlin  processing  plant;  the  reclamation  of  the  mine  site.   The  life 
of  the  McLaughlin  mine  was  projected  to  be  about  twenty  years,  and  most 
of  the  key  players  were  available  for  interviews.   It  is  a  nearly  unique 
opportunity  to  document  the  discovery,  development,  and  closing  down  of  a 
mine  while  it  is  happening. 

The  chronology  of  the  McLaughlin  Mine  is  as  follows:  in  1961, 
following  publication  of  a  Professional  Paper  by  USGS  geologist  Ralph  J. 
Roberts,  Newmont  geologists  John  S.  Livermore  and  J.  Alan  Coope  found  a 
major  deposit  of  micron-sized  gold  on  the  Carlin  trend  in  Nevada.   It  was 
economic  to  mine  because  of  technological  advances  in  explosives  and 
earth-moving  equipment,  and  development  of  new  methods  such  as  heap- 
leaching  for  recovery  of  gold  from  ore.   This  led  other  mining  companies 
to  search  for  similar  deposits  of  "invisible"  gold. 

In  1969,  the  National  Environmental  Protection  Act  was  passed, 
followed  in  1970  by  the  California  Environmental  Quality  Act. 


'Information  on  the  Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  oral 
history  series  appears  in  Appendix  F,  page  298. 


ii 


In  the  1970s,  "Bill"  Wilder,  principal  of  the  One  Shot  Mining 
Company,  was  reclaiming  batteries  for  Mallory  Company  in  the  furnaces  at 
the  Manhattan  mercury  mine.   Environmental  concerns  had  made  mercury 
mining  unprofitable,  so  Wilder  was  crushing  the  beautiful  colored  rock  on 
his  property  and  selling  it  as  decorative  stone.  An  assay  from  several 
years  before  had  showed  gold  was  there,  but  at  that  time  mercury  at  $75  a 
flask  was  more  valuable  than  gold  at  $35  an  ounce,  the  official  price 
from  January  1934,  when  the  United  States  went  off  the  gold  standard, 
until  15  March  1968. 

In  August  1971,  President  Richard  Nixon  terminated  the 

convertibility  of  the  dollar  into  gold,  and  the  price  climbed  to  $700  an 
ounce  in  1980.   In  1977,  Homestake  Mining  Company  underwent  a 
restructuring  and  embarked  on  a  program  to  find  a  world-class  gold  mine. 
Their  search  revealed  geology  reports  in  their  files  from  the  1920s  which 
encouraged  exploration  at  hot  springs  near  the  Knoxville  mercury  mining 
district  of  northern  California.   In  1978  Donald  Gustafson,  Homestake 
geologist,  visited  the  Manhattan  Mine  at  the  place  where  Napa,  Yolo,  and 
Lake  Counties  meet. 

The  history  of  the  Knoxville  District  begins  in  1861  with  the 
incorporation  of  the  Redington  quicksilver  mine,  also  known  as  the  XLCR 
or  Knoxville  mine,  then  employing  as  many  as  300  men.   The  town  of 
Knoxville  had  thirty  or  more  buildings,  including  a  store,  hotel, 
postoffice,  Wells  Fargo  office,  school,  and  cemetery.   In  1872  the  state 
legislature  transferred  prosperous  Knoxville  Township  from  Lake  County  to 
Napa  County,  although  it  is  separated  from  the  Napa  Valley  by  mountain 
escarpments.   Lake  County  was  compensated  with  a  one-time  payment  of 
$3500. 

In  1869  R.  F.  Knox  and  Joseph  Osborn  opened  the  Manhattan  Mine  on 
the  same  lode  as  the  Redington.   The  Oat  Hill  or  Napa  Consolidated  Mine 
was  opened  in  1872.   A  report  on  the  metallurgy  of  quicksilver  issued  by 
the  Department  of  the  Interior  in  1925  says,  "In  1874,  the  Knox 
continuous  shaft-furnace  for  the  treatment  of  both  fine  and  coarse  ores 
was  first  used  in  California."   [Bulletin  222,  p. 5]   The  Knox-Osborn 
design  was  further  augmented  by  a  fine-ore  natural-draft  furnace 
developed  by  mine  superintendent  Charles  Livermore.   The  district 
prospered  until  1905,  for  a  decade  around  World  War  I,  and  from  1927- 
1936.   Demand  for  mercury  rose  during  wartime  because  it  was  used  as  a 
detonator  for  explosives. 

Knoxville  was  linked  by  road  through  Sulphur  Canyon  with  the  town  of 
Monticello  in  fertile  Berryessa  Valley.   Farmers  descended  from  early 
Scots  settlers  grew  pears,  prunes,  wheat,  and  barley  and  occasionally 
worked  in  the  mercury  mines.   After  World  War  II,  when  California's 
population  was  growing  rapidly,  a  dam  was  built  which  by  1956  flooded  the 
valley  to  create  Lake  Berryessa.   It  attracted  vacationers,  and  for  most 
of  them  it  was  the  end  of  the  line.   The  unpaved  road  from  Lake  Berryessa 


iii 


to  Knoxville  was  impassable  when  rains  filled  the  creek  bed.   In  the 
other  direction,  from  Knoxville  to  Clearlake,  there  was  a  similar  little- 
used  road  through  Morgan  Valley. 

Although  it  is  only  a  few  miles  from  the  densely  populated  San 
Francisco  Bay  Area,  in  1978  Knoxville  township  had  few  telephones, 
surfaced  roads,  or  bridges.   Populated  by  ranchers,  miners,  seasonal 
hunters,  and  outlaws,  it  was  one  of  the  most  economically  depressed 
regions  in  California,  with  high  unemployment.   In  1991,  Napa  historian 
Robert  McKenzie  called  it  "truly  the  last  frontier  of  Napa  County." 

Mining  companies  are  familiar  with  developing  mines  in  remote  and 
rugged  locations,  with  the  attendant  logistical  problems.   In  this  case, 
there  was  the  further  challenge  of  obtaining  permits  to  develop  a  mine  in 
the  jurisdiction  of  three  counties,  regional  and  state  water  quality 
districts,  three  regional  air  quality  districts,  various  state  agencies, 
and  the  Bureau  of  Land  Management.   It  took  more  than  five  years  and  cost 
millions  of  dollars  to  secure  the  327  required  permits  which  made  a  stack 
of  paper  more  than  eight  feet  high.   In  addition,  the  ore  itself  was 
finely  disseminated,  fairly  low  grade,  and  as  it  turned  out,  highly 
refractory.   Traditional  methods  of  benef iciation  were  ruled  out  by 
environmental  concerns,  so  Homestake  metallurgists  developed  a  high 
pressure  oxidation  system,  incorporating  technology  from  South  Africa, 
Germany,  Canada,  and  Finland,  which  has  now  been  widely  copied. 

The  eventual  design  was  for  a  mine  pit  with  adjacent  crushing  plant 
and  a  five-mile  pipeline  to  conduct  slurry  to  a  zero-discharge  processing 
plant  using  a  variety  of  technologies,  including  autoclaves.   Reclamation 
in  the  mine  and  on  dumps  began  almost  immediately,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
mine's  life,  it  was  to  be  a  part  of  the  Nature  Reserve  system  of  the 
University  of  California,  for  research  by  scholars  at  both  the  Berkeley 
and  Davis  campuses. 

In  1991,  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  began  to  explore 
possibilities  for  funding  the  Knoxville /Mclaughlin  oral  history.   A  four- 
year  project  was  outlined  to  include  about  thirty-five  interviews 
averaging  three  hours  each,  for  a  total  cost  of  $100,000.   The  initial 
plan  was  to  schedule  and  begin  interviews  with  key  Homestake  and 
community  personnel  in  the  first  year,  and  to  transcribe  and  edit  these 
interviews  concurrently  with  continuing  interviews  through  the  second  and 
third  years.   The  fourth  year  would  be  devoted  to  the  final  editing 
tasks.   The  product  would  be  a  set  of  three  volumes  covering  the  mercury 
mining,  the  gold  mining,  and  the  resulting  changes  in  the  surrounding 
community. 

The  Hearst  Foundation  granted  $20,000  to  document  the  gold  mine,  and 
the  Mining  and  Metallurgical  Society  of  America  gave  $6,000  to  document 
the  earlier  mercury  mining.   Homestake  and  Chemical  Lime  Company  each 
donated  $2,000,  which  enabled  interviewing  to  begin  in  March,  1993.   As 


iv 


the  project  went  on,  other  organizations  and  individuals  joined  in  the 
funding  effort.   They  are  all  listed  on  the  donor  page. 

The  best  laid  plans,  however,  can  be  spoiled  by  circumstances  beyond 
control.   One  of  the  first  names  on  the  list  of  interviewees  was  John 
Ransone,  Homestake's  construction  project  director.   He  sent  helpful 
background  documents  in  preparation  for  a  scheduled  interview;  however, 
before  it  could  be  held  he  died  of  lung  cancer.   The  project  manager  for 
the  construction  company,  Klaus  Thiel,  in  the  meantime  had  been  assigned 
to  work  in  Brisbane,  Australia,  so  he  could  not  be  interviewed.   Several 
of  the  other  Homestake  people  had  scattered:  James  Anderson  to  Denver, 
Jack  Thompson  and  John  Turney  to  British  Columbia,  David  Crouch  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  Donald  Gustafson  to  jobs  in  Namibia  and  Kazakhstan,  Joseph 
Strapko  to  Maine.   William  Humphrey  and  Richard  Stoehr  both  underwent 
major  surgery. 

Similar  problems  occurred  on  the  list  of  community  leaders.   Some 
died  and  others  moved  away.   All  of  this  led  to  a  revised  plan  to  use  the 
available  funding  to  press  ahead  with  recording  all  the  interviews,  and 
to  leave  the  processing  of  the  tapes  for  later. 

There  is  a  perception  that  the  former  mercury  miners  are  all  dead, 
killed  by  mercury  poisoning.   In  fact,  Dean  Enderlin,  a  geologist  at  the 
McLaughlin  Mine  and  also  a  Napa  County  native  and  historian,  helped  to 
locate  some  who  were  remarkably  healthy,  and  who  were  interviewed.   Elmer 
Enderlin  in  his  eighties  spends  summers  working  at  his  tungsten  prospect 
in  Idaho  and  winters  in  Lower  Lake.   Anthony  Cerar,  also  in  his  eighties, 
actively  maintains  several  historic  mercury  mines,  including  La  Joya  and 
Corona.   William  Kritikos,  operator  of  the  Oat  Hill  Mine,  was  nearly 
seventy-three  when  he  died  following  a  stroke,  but  was  in  good  health  at 
the  time  of  his  interview.   Ed  McGinnis,  who  worked  around  the  Reed  Mine 
as  a  boy,  is  still  active  in  his  seventies.   Bill  Wilder,  who  owned  the 
Manhattan  Mine,  is  a  relative  youngster  in  his  seventies  and  in  good 
health  in  Upper  Lake. 

By  1998  a  number  of  members  of  the  local  communities  had  been 
interviewed:  a  county  supervisor  from  each  of  the  three  counties 
involved,  Napa  County  planners,  the  Lake  County  school  superintendent, 
community  historians  and  pioneers,  merchants,  and  ranchers.   Some  of  the 
most  vocal  opponents  of  the  mine  were  also  interviewed.   Interviews  were 
conducted  with  many  of  the  Homestake  officials  and  employees  involved  in 
key  roles  in  the  discovery  and  development  of  the  mine.   The  project 
comprises  forty- three  interviews  in  all. 

Two  of  the  interviews  were  completed  in  1996:  William  Humphrey,  who 
was  Homestake's  executive  vice  president  of  operations  in  charge  of  the 
mine  development,  and  William  Wilder,  owner  of  the  Manhattan  Mine.   The 
oral  history  of  Langan  Swent  completed  in  1995  also  contains  relevant 
information. 


We  are  grateful  to  all  of  the  interviewees  for  their  participation. 
There  are  many  others  who  have  helped  also.   Homestake  Mining  Company  has 
cooperated  with  the  project,  lending  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  a 
computer  and  printer,  and  making  available  for  research  the  archival 
video  tapes  and  files  of  newspaper  clippings  and  news  releases,  as  well 
as  the  environmental  studies,  the  environmental  impact  report,  and  the 
environmental  impact  statement.   Early  on,  a  day  tour  of  the  property  and 
box  lunch  were  provided  for  a  van  load  of  ROHO  staff,  interested 
students,  and  faculty  from  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley.   The 
conference  room  at  the  mine  and  the  San  Francisco  offices  at  650 
California  Street  have  been  used  for  interviewing. 

James  Jensen  made  available  his  extensive  files  on  mercury  mining 
and  processing  and  mercury  poisoning.   Anthony  Cerar  led  a  vigorous  hike 
around  the  Knoxville  mine  site,  identifying  foundations  of  long-gone 
buildings  and  workings.   John  Livermore  conducted  a  tour  by  jeep  of  the 
Knoxville  district,  and  suggested  the  importance  of  the  Morgan  North 
papers  at  The  Bancroft  Library.   Staff  members  gave  help  at  the  Napa 
Register,  the  Napa  Museum,  and  the  Sharpsteen  Museum  in  Calistoga.   At 
the  Lake  County  Museums  in  Lower  Lake  and  Lakeport,  Donna  Howard  and 
Linda  Lake  were  particularly  helpful.   Ron  Churchill,  Ralph  Loyd, 
Kathleen  Twomey,  and  Les  Youngs  provided  useful  data  from  files  of  the 
California  Department  of  Conservation  Division  of  Mines  and  Geology. 

The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  was  established  in  195A  to  augment 
through  tape-recorded  memoirs  the  Library's  materials  on  the  history  of 
California  and  the  West.   Copies  of  all  interviews  are  available  for 
research  use  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and  in  the  UCLA  Department  of 
Special  Collections.   The  office  is  under  the  direction  of  Willa  K.  Baum, 
Division  Head,  and  the  administrative  direction  of  Charles  B.  Faulhaber, 
James  D.  Hart  Director  of  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley. 


Eleanor  Swent,  Project  Director 
Knoxville  District /McLaughlin  Mine 
Oral  History  Project 

January  1998 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 

The  Bancroft  Library 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 


vi 


INTRODUCTION  TO  KNOXVILLE  by  Duane  A.  Smith 


Imagine,  if  you  would,  what  it  would  be  like  to  have  a  series  of 
interviews  from  people  of  all  walks  of  life  from  a  nineteenth  century 
mining  town  and  district  —  for  example,  a  Fiddletown,  California;  a 
Silver  City,  Idaho;  or  a  Caribou,  Colorado.   Would  it  not  be  exciting  to 
"hear"  first  hand  the  stories  of  miners,  store  owners,  lawyers, 
teachers,  and  a  variety  of  other  folks  that  make  up  the  mining  West? 

Such  a  series  of  interviews  would  be  the  perfect  answer  to  the 
Roman  statesman,  orator,  and  philosopher,  Marcus  Tullius  Cicero,  who 
observed  more  than  2,000  years  ago:  "History  is  the  witness  that 
testifies  to  the  passing  of  time;  it  illuminates  reality,  vitalizes 
memory,  provides  guidance  in  daily  life,  and  brings  us  tidings  of 
antiquity."   Imagine,  then,  what  the  Knoxville/McLaughlin  oral  history 
project  is  going  to  mean  to  future  generations. 

The  Knoxville,  California,  mining  district  has  a  long  mining 
history.   It  started  in  the  1860s  with  mercury  mining  and  continued  into 
the  1990s  with  Homestake  Mining  Company's  McLaughlin  gold  mine.   Under 
the  guidance  of  Eleanor  Swent,  and  as  part  of  the  Regional  Oral  History 
Office's  Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  series,  a  comprehensive 
oral  history  project  of  this  mining  district  was  launched  in  1993. 
These  fascinating  and  significant  volumes  are  the  finished  projects. 

While  obviously  impossible  to  go  back  beyond  the  turn  of  the 
century,  interviews  were  conducted  with  miners,  ranchers,  journalists, 
teachers,  and  merchants  who  were  in  the  district  before  the  arrival  of 
Homestake.   The  words  of  these  people  provide  an  exciting  look  at  a 
district  in  transition  and  decline.   Then  came  Homestake  and  their  world 
changed. 

Some  gold  mines  had  been  operated  here  in  the  nineteenth  and 
twentieth  centuries,  but  they  were  nothing  like  what  occurred  when  a 
major  mining  company  became  interested.   Homestake 's  geologists  found 
enough  gold  to  warrant  development.   The  concept  would  be  an  open  pit 
mine  and  mill  that  would  impact  Napa,  Lake,  and  Yolo  Counties  in 
northern  California  for  a  generation  and  provide  for  the  future. 

Five  and  one-half  years  went  into  planning  for  the  McLaughlin  gold 
mine,  including  327  approvals  needed  for  the  mine's  development.   Not 
only  were  some  mining  ideas  new  and  ground  breaking,  but  the  operation 
was  sitting  in  one  of  the  most  environmentally  aware  states  in  the 
country.   Homestake  spent  over  $283  million  in  start-up  costs,  before 
mining  commenced  in  March  1985.   The  first  year's  production  of  83,836 
ounces  of  gold  showed  that  the  planning  and  work  had  been  worthwhile 
from  a  dollars-and-cents  aspect.   Homestake  was  proud  of  its  operation. 


vii 


"The  McLaughlin  mine  is  the  site  of  the  first  successful  commercial 
application  of  the  autoclave  processing  technology  for  extracting  gold 
from  ores.   The  operation  began  production  in  1985  and  is  a  showcase  for 
environmental  responsibility." 

Homestake  would  continue  to  mine  the  pit  into  1996  when  mining 
ceased,  except  for  processing  previously  stockpiled  lower-grade  ore  to 
be  worked  for  approximately  another  eight  years,  "using  a  conventional 
direct  cyanide  leach  process."  Reclamation,  which  has  been  conducted 
simultaneously  with  mining,  would  also  continue  into  the  next  century. 
As  Homestake 's  annual  report  in  1995  stated,  "Reclamation  of  mine  waste 
dumps  is  scheduled  for  completion  in  the  latter  part  of  1996  with  the 
final  placement  of  top  soil  and  hydroseeding.   The  planting  of  oak  trees 
and  other  indigenous  vegetation  will  continue  seasonally  until  the  area 
is  completely  reclaimed." 

All  this  makes  the  oral  history  project  that  much  more  exciting; 
it  was  conducted  while  the  district  still  operated  and  memories  were 
fresh  and  riveted  on  a  host  of  topics  and  concerns.   This  multi-volume 
series  covers  almost  every  conceivable  aspect  and  impact—it  is  a 
monument  to  a  refreshing,  innovative  way  of  approaching  mining  history. 

These  volumes  provide  a  case  study  of  twentieth  century  mining, 
environmental  issues,  and  regional  concerns,  the  successes,  failures, 
tensions,  and  developments  that  go  to  make  up  a  1980s  and  1990s  mining 
operation  and  the  people  involved  from  all  walks  of  life.   They  are  a 
gold  mine  of  primary  documentation  and  personal  memories  of  an  era  that 
is  passing  into  history.  A  perusal  of  the  table  of  contents  will  give 
the  reader  an  idea,  but  the  interviews  need  to  be  "assayed"  carefully  to 
grasp  the  whole  story  of  what  went  on  at  the  McLaughlin  mine  and  why  its 
impact  was  so  significant.   This  is  a  "high  grade"  effort  all  the  way. 

Cicero  would  be  proud.   These  volumes  do  illuminate  reality, 
vitalize  memory,  and  provide  guidance  in  daily  life.   Without  question, 
they  testify  to  the  passing  of  time  and  will  eventually  bring  "us  the 
tidings  of  antiquity." 

Duane  A.  Smith 
Professor  of  History  and 
Southwest  Studies 

September  1997 
Fort  Lewis  College 
Durango,  Colorado 


Regional  Oral  History  Office  University  of  California 

The  Bancroft  Library  Berkeley,  California 

Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  Series 
Knoxville/McLaughlin  Project 


James  Anderson 


HOMESTAKE  VICE  PRESIDENT-EXPLORATION 


Interview  conducted  by 
Eleanor  Swent 
in  1995 


Copyright  o  1998  by  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


James  Anderson,  1974, 


INTERVIEW  WITH  JAMES  ANDERSON 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY 
BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 

I  EARLY  YEARS,  1935-1965  1 
Growing  up  in  Eureka,  Utah,  a  Silver-Lead-Zinc-Mining  Town  1 
Ann  Sutherland  3 
Harvard  Graduate  School;  Geology  Professor  Hugh  McKinstry  4 
The  Ph.D.  Thesis  on  Using  Manganese  Oxide  as  a  Guide  to  Ore 

in  the  Tintic  District,  Utah  5 

II  EXPLORATION  GEOLOGIST  FOR  RENNECOTT  COPPER  CORPORATION,  1960  TO 

1967  6 

Developing  and  Refining  Procedures  for  Copper  Exploration  6 

Research  on  Leached  Cappings  7 

Traveling  the  World  in  Search  of  Copper  8 

III  VICE  PRESIDENT  OF  EXPLORATION  FOR  OCCIDENTAL  MINERALS,  1967  TO 

1975  12 

Paul  Bailly  12 

Armand  Hammer  13 

The  Gores  of  Tennessee  14 

More  About  Armand  Hammer  15 

IV  VICE  PRESIDENT  OF  EXPLORATION  FOR  HOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY,  1975 

TO  1987  16 

Homestake's  Desire  to  Find  a  Major  Gold  Deposit  16 

Advances  in  Exploration:  Mineral  Zoning  of  Deposits  19 

Classifying  the  Gold  Deposits  of  the  World  20 

The  South  African  Rand  Deposit  21 

Carlin  and  Homestake  Gold  Deposits  21 

A  Vacation  Spent  Researching  Mercury  Hot  Springs  24 

Donald  Gustafson  Researches  Old  Homestake  Files  25 

Wilbur  Hot  Springs;  Cherry  Hills  Deposit  26 

V  THE  MANHATTAN /MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  28 
The  One  Shot  Mining  Company  and  Bill  Wilder  28 
Reassuring  Bill  Wilder  about  His  Rights  30 
The  Gamble  Ranch  32 
Awareness  of  the  Environmental  Aspects  34 
Presenting  Homestake  to  the  Community  35 
Delays  Caused  by  Vocal  Opponents  of  Mining  36 
Key  People:  Gustafson,  Kalk,  Previdi,  Stoehr  38 
Member  of  California  State  Mining  and  Geology  Board  40 
Determining  Economic  Feasibility  41 
Getting  Reliable  Assays  a  Challenge  43 
Moving  a  Project  from  Exploration  to  Operations:  Before 

Development  or  After?  44 


VI    OTHER  VENTURES  50 

Minven:  CEO  also  Means  "Chief  Environmental  Officer"  50 

More  About  the  California  Mining  and  Geology  Board  51 

The  California  Desert  Conservation  Area  53 

The  Summitville  Disaster  55 

The  Importance  of  Sand  and  Gravel  Mining  56 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY--James  Anderson 

James  Anderson  was  vice  president  of  exploration  for  Homestake  Mining 
Company  in  1975  when  gold  was  discovered  at  the  Manhattan  Mine  in  Napa 
County,  California.   His  name  was  obviously  one  of  the  first  on  the  list  of 
interviewees  for  the  oral  history  of  the  Mclaughlin  Mine  (as  it  was  later 
called),  but  it  was  some  time  before  we  could  arrange  an  interview  because 
Anderson  had  left  Homestake  and  moved  to  Colorado  to  pursue  independent 
mining  interests.   In  September  1995  I  was  in  Denver  to  present  the  oral 
history  of  Simon  Strauss  at  the  annual  banquet  of  the  National  Mining  Hall 
of  Fame,  and  Jim's  travels  were  curtailed  because  of  the  failing  health  of 
his  father,  who  made  his  home  with  Jim  and  his  wife  Ann  in  Englewood.   We 
took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  hold  the  interview  in  the  afternoon  of 
23  September  1995  at  my  hotel  in  downtown  Denver. 

Jim  is  tall  and  fit;  his  glasses  give  him  a  scholarly  appearance.   He 
has  an  enthusiastic  and  optimistic  disposition.   Exploration  geologists  are 
almost  by  definition  chary  of  giving  out  information,  and  Jim  is  addition 
ally  known  for  his  careful  attention  to  detail.   He  appeared  cautious  at 
first  about  the  interview,  but  once  we  began,  he  was  forthcoming  as  he 
recalled  his  career  as  exploration  geologist  for  Kennecott  and  vice 
president  of  exploration  for  Occidental  Minerals  before  joining  Homestake 
in  1975  and  becoming  a  member  of  the  California  State  Mining  and  Geology 
Board  in  1977.   In  the  interview  he  recounts  with  evident  pleasure  his  work 
in  classifying  the  gold  deposits  of  the  world  and  doing  the  research  on 
mercury  hot  springs  which  culminated  in  the  McLaughlin  discovery.   He 
discusses  in  some  detail  the  discovery  itself,  the  efforts  to  obtain  rights 
to  surrounding  property,  determining  the  feasibility  of  the  mine,  and 
directing  the  development  of  the  project  until  it  was  turned  over  to 
operation  several  years  later.   He  left  Homestake  in  1987  to  found  his  own 
company,  Minven,  working  out  of  Denver,  although  he  continued  to  serve  as 
chairman  of  the  California  State  Mining  and  Geology  Board  until  1992. 

The  tapes  of  the  interview  were  transcribed  in  the  Regional  Oral 
History  Office,  lightly  edited,  and  sent  to  Anderson  in  April  1997  for 
review.   He  reviewed  the  transcript  carefully,  making  a  small  number  of 
changes  to  correct  and/or  clarify  details,  and  returning  it  promptly.   The 
manuscript  was  corrected  and  indexed  at  our  office.   The  tapes  are 
deposited  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and  are  available  for  study. 

The  James  Anderson  interview  is  one  of  more  than  forty  interviews 
which  were  conducted  by  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  from  1993-1997  in 
order  to  document  the  development  of  the  McLaughlin  gold  mine  in  the 
Knoxville  District  of  Lake,  Napa,  and  Yolo  Counties,  California,  from  1978- 
1997,  as  part  of  the  ongoing  oral  history  series  devoted  to  Western  Mining 
in  the  Twentieth  Century.   The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  was  established 
in  1954  to  record  the  lives  of  persons  who  have  contributed  significantly 
to  the  history  of  California  and  the  West.   The  office  is  a  division  of  The 
Bancroft  Library  and  is  under  the  direction  of  Willa  K.  Baum. 

Eleanor  Swent,  Project  Director,  Research  Interviewer/Editor 
September  1997 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
Room  486  The  Bancroft  Library 


University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California  94720 


BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 
(Please  write  clearly.   Use  black  ink.) 


Your  full  name 


Date   of  birth     (%£C.H 


Birthplace 


A 


Father's    full  name    V)gK)0£>N  L- 


Birthplace 


Mother's   full  name      ft^Nl^S       U3  . 
Occupation 


Birthplace   Cn.g1toK.gg    J.OUJ  A 


Your   spouse  »OM 


A» 


Occupation   H^YV\g/7)AXbT^ 

Your  children 


Birthplace  b.URgK/9^ 


Where  did  you  grow  up? 


(T£> 


A?g 


Present  community 


Q 


Education  University  of  Utah 

Harvard  University 

_  Harvard  University 

Stanford  University 
Occupation(s) 


BS 

MA 

Ph.D. 

Certificate  of  Completion 


1957  Geological  Engineering 

1960  Mining  Geology 

1965  Economic  Geology 

1978  Executive  (MBA)  Progr; 


Bxptoration,  research  and  development,  economic  and  pre-feasibility  studies,  land  acquisition, 
company  start-up  situations  encompassing  acquisitions  and  mergers.  Broad  based  background  includes 
international  financing  strategies,  accounting  and  finance,  marketing,  operations,  government  affairs, 
environmental  permitting,  .securities  regulations,  investor  relations,  negotiating,  human  resources 
management,  Am^  ftftUi  p»u<.y  .  Skilled  communicator  with  heavy  exposure  to  making  key  presentations 
to  board  of  directors  and  financial  institutions. 


Other  interests  or  activities 


Ce>J^cjFtt.  joj  iq     ;  M/uctftl 


?  AMD 


Organizations  in  which  you  are  active— 


e>p     bc.e>Krtimic. 


\.   r\   .•" 


\ 


I  EARLY  YEARS,  1935-1965 


[Date  of  Interview:  September  23,  1995]  I*1 


Growing  up  in  Eureka,  Utah,  a  Silver-Lead-Zinc-Mining  Town 


Swent:     This  is  Eleanor  Swent  interviewing  James  Anderson  in  Denver, 
Colorado,  on  September  23,  1995. 

Let's  just  start  with  you  in  Iowa.   You  were  born,  you 
said,  in  Aurelia,  Iowa,  in  1935.   Tell  about  your  mother  and 
your  father,  if  you  don't  mind. 

Anderson:   We  were  farmers,  and  my  father  joined  the  navy  in  1941.   My 

mother  was  a  schoolteacher  in  Iowa,  as  well  as  running  the  farm 
while  he  was  away  in  the  war.   She  came  to  Greeley,  Colorado, 
and  got  a  degree  in  elementary  education  there.   Then  she  and  I 
moved  to  Eureka,  Utah,  which  is  a  mining  town- -that  was  in 
1942.   My  father  was  in  the  navy  until  1945,  and  when  he  was 
discharged  we  stayed  in  Utah.   My  girlfriend's  father  was  a 
mine  manager  at  one  of  the  mines  in  this  little  mining  town, 
and  I  got  a  further  interest  in  mining  from  that;  that's  how  I 
got  started  in  mining. 

Swent:     Were  most  of  your  friends  in  school  connected  with  the  mining 
in  one  way  or  another? 

Anderson:   Yes,  I'd  say  probably  50  or  60  percent  of  the  residents  were 
involved  somehow  with  mining  activities. 

Swent:     What  were  the  mines  there? 


'##  This  symbol  indicates  that  a  tape  or  tape  segment  has  begun  or 
ended.   A  guide  to  the  tapes  follows  the  transcripts. 


Anderson: 

Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 
Anderson: 
Swent : 
Anderson: 
Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 
Anderson: 

Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


They  were  primarily  silver-lead-zinc  mines.   There  was  one 
called  Chief  Consolidated  Mine,  which  was  probably  the  biggest 
one  at  the  time. 

Was  that  part  of  a  larger  company? 

No,  it  was  a  separately  listed  company  on  the  Salt  Lake  City 
Stock  Exchange,  called  Chief  Consolidated.   And  then  there  were 
three  or  four  other  mines—one  was  called  Tintic  Standard—and 
all  these  companies  were  just  listed  on  the  Salt  Lake  Exchange, 
so  they  were  small.   I'm  not  sure  whether  they  were  listed  on 
any  bigger  exchange  or  not.   Tintic  Standard,  and  the  North 
Lily  Mining  Company,  and  the  Eureka  Standard  Mining  Company 
were  the  main  producers  at  the  time. 

Lily,  I  think,  is  where  the  mucking  machine  was  developed. 

That's  correct. 

Were  you  aware  of  that? 

No,  not  at  the  time. 

Did  you  visit  any  mines? 

After  I  got  out  of  high  school  I  went  to  the  University  of 
Utah,  and  during  my  summers  I  would  work  in  the  mines  or  with 
surveying  crews  or  whatever  exploration  was  in  the  area.   So  I 
didn't  spend  a  lot  of  time  in  the  mines  there  in  Tintic  until  I 
graduated. 


And  these  are  silver  and-- 


Silver  and  lead  were  the  main 


Silver-lead-zinc  mines, 
products. 

No  gold? 


Minor  gold.   North  Lily  was  actually  a  gold  mine,  but  that  gold 
ore  zone  was  mined  out  by  the  time  I  moved  to  Eureka.   It  also 
had  lead-zinc-silver  ore  deposits.   It  was  a  very  rich  gold 
mine  in  its  day. 


Did  the  schools  tie  in  with  the  mining  at  all? 
emphasis  in-- 


Was  there  an 


Not  particularly,  except  they  had  a  program  for  schoolteachers 
that  some  of  the  students  could  attend  which  was  an  evening 
course  in  geology  and  rocks  and  minerals  and  sort  of  a  history 


of  the  earth.   So  you  got  some  flavor.   It  was  taught  by  one  of 
the  exploration  managers  for  the  E.  J.  Longyear  company,  and  he 
just  did  that  on  a  volunteer  basis.   There  were  no  course 
credits  or  anything,  but  it  was  just  community  interest.   He 
really  inspired  a  lot  of  enthusiasm  for  me  in  terms  of  how  the 
earth  was  formed,  what  minerals  were,  and  how  they  were 
recovered. 

Swent:  You  enjoyed  that? 

Anderson:  Yes. 

Swent:  Who  was  the  person  who  taught  it? 

Anderson:  His  name  was  Gephardt. 

Swent:  He  was  not  a  schoolteacher. 

Anderson:   No.   He  was  a  full-time  employee  of  the  E.  J.  Longyear  company, 
which  in  those  days  was  an  exploration  and  diamond-drilling 
company.   They  had  a  lot  of  drilling  contracts  in  the  Tintic 
Mining  District. 

Swent:     Did  many  of  the  boys  from  your  class  go  on  into  mining  or 
geology? 

Anderson:   To  my  knowledge  only  one  other  one,  and  more  as  a  prospector 
rather  than  a  professional  in  the  business.   The  graduating 
classes  were  twenty-four  to  thirty  people  when  I  graduated  in 
1952. 

Swent:     Small  town.   You  graduated  from  high  school  in  '52? 
Anderson:   Yes. 


Ann  Sutherland 


Swent:  And  Ann  was  in  the  same  high  school? 

Anderson:  She  was  in  the  same  high  school,  one  year  behind  me. 

Swent:  And  what  was  her  name? 

Anderson:  Her  name  was  Sutherland. 

Swent:  And  then  did  you  both  go  on  to  the  University  of  Utah? 


Anderson:   Yes,  we  both  went  on  to  Utah,  and  she  graduated  in  home 
economics  and  English,  and  I  graduated  in  geological 
engineering.   From  there  I  went  to  Harvard,  and  she  took  a  job 
teaching—she  had  her  teaching  certificate  as  well.   She  took  a 
job  teaching  in  the  Boston  schools  for  three  years  while  I  went 
on  for  my  master's  and  doctor's  degrees. 

Swent:  You  went  right  on  from  college  to  graduate  school. 

Anderson:  Yes. 

Swent:  Did  you  work  summers  when  you  were  in  college? 

Anderson:  Yes. 

Swent:  In  mines? 

Anderson:   Yes.   Well,  it  was  with  Kennecott,  with  their  exploration 
group.   I  spent  the  summers  in  the  field  in  the  West  on 
exploration  projects. 

Swent:     Where? 

Anderson:   There  were  several  projects  in  Arizona  and  around  the  Ely  area 
and  the  Battle  Mountain  area  in  Nevada.   In  Arizona  it  was 
around  Ray,  Arizona,  and  Kingman,  Arizona,  and  even  around  the 
Morenci  and  Safford  areas. 


Harvard  Graduate  School;  Geology  Professor  Hugh  McKinstry 


Anderson:   I  picked  Harvard  as  a  graduate  school  because  of  [Hugh] 

McKinstry,  who  was  one  of  Don  Mclaughlin's  students  in  the 
early  days. 


Swent : 


Swent : 


I  knew  Hugh  McKinstry. 


Anderson:   Hugh  McKinstry  was  a  fabulous  educator,  very  successful  in  the 
mining  exploration  business,  and  I  knew  of  him  through  my 
undergraduate  career,  and  I  wanted  to  go  to  Harvard  because  he 
was  there. 


Had  your  geology  teacher  known  Hugh? 


Anderson:   No.   I  just  read  his  book  on  mining  geology  and  heard  a  lecture 
that  he  had  given  at  one  of  the  mining  clubs  in  Salt  Lake  at 


one  time  when  I  was  going  to  school, 
wanted  to  go  to  Harvard. 


So  he  inspired  me,  and  I 


Swent:     He  was  a  lovely  man. 

Anderson:   He  was.   And  so  after  the  first  year  I  became  a  teaching 

assistant  with  him  and  taught  his  ore-finding  class  and  ore 
mineral  laboratories.   And  he  was  my  thesis  advisor. 


The  Ph.D.  Thesis  on  Using  Manganese  Oxide  as  a  Guide  to  Ore  in 
the  Tintic  District.  Utah 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


Oh,  I  see.   And  what  was  your  thesis? 

It  was  on  the  Tintic  District  in  Utah.   It  was  an  exploration 
thesis  on  the  use  of  manganese  oxide  minerals  as  a  guide  to  ore 
in  that  district.   It  was  an  exciting  field  and  laboratory 
program,  and  when  I  went  to  work  with  Kennecott  they  were 
starting  to  explore  in  the  Tintic  District,  and  we  were  able  to 
use  that  with  success  in  finding  some  of  the  ore  bodies  related 
to  the  Burgin  Mine,  which  was  found  and  developed  by  Kennecott. 
It  was  a  silver-lead  mine  on  the  very  eastern  part  of  the 
mining  district. 

And  manganese  oxide  led  you  to  find  it? 

Well,  in  part;  not  the  main  mine,  but  some  of  the  ore  bodies 
there.   Some  of  the  manganese  oxides  were  just  related  to 
weathering  of  non-ore  minerals,  and  others  related  to 
weathering  of  ore  minerals.   You  can  distinguish  them  by  x-ray 
and  by  chemical  analysis. 

So  you  finished  your  Ph.D.  in  three  years?  That's  pretty  fast. 

Yes.   Along  the  way  I  got  my  master's  and  then  my  Ph.D.--I 
finished  the  course  work  in  1960,  and  then  I  went  to  work  for 
Kennecott  full-time  and  actually  finished  my  thesis  in  1965. 
So  there  was  a  gap  where  I  didn't  go  to  school  but  worked  for 
five  years.   Then  the  company  gave  me  three  or  four  months  off 
to  finish  the  thesis,  which  I  did,  and  graduated  in  '65  with  a 
Ph.D. 


II  EXPLORATION  GEOLOGIST  FOR  KENNECOTT  COPPER  CORPORATION, 
1960  TO  1967 


Developing  and  Refining  Procedures  for  Copper  Exploration 


Swent:     So  you  finished  your  Ph.D.,  and  there  was  of  course  no  job- 
hunting  because  you  were  already  working  for  Kennecott;  is  that 
right? 

Anderson:   That's  correct. 

Swent:     What  was  your  role  at  Kennecott?  What  were  you  doing? 

Anderson:   My  first  role  at  Kennecott  was  a  research  job  to  develop 

exploration  technologies  primarily  for  copper  deposits.   There 
was  a  research  facility  in  Salt  Lake  City  called  the 
coordinating  unit,  and  their  sole  purpose  was  to  refine 
exploration  procedures  and  develop  new  procedures  for  copper 
exploration. 

Swent:     So  you  were  not  out  just  tramping  around  the  fields  picking  up 
rocks? 

Anderson:   Well,  that  was  part  of  it.   I  mean,  you  had  new  ideas  and 

approaches,  and  we  had  to  go  out  and  sample  a  lot  of  deposits 
and  then  study  the  rocks  and  see  what  they  told  us  and  see  if 
there  was  some  continuity  between  hundreds  of  deposits,  which, 
it  turned  out,  there  was.   So  that's  why  I  spent  a  lot  of  time 
in  the  field,  but  traveling  all  over  the  world  looking  for 
copper  deposits  to  try  to  refine  some  of  these  ideas. 

Swent:     It  sounds  as  if  it  was  more  theoretical  and  intellectual  work. 

Anderson:   It  was  at  the  start,  but  it  became  a  very  sophisticated  and 
very  successful  exploration  technique  with  time. 


Research  on  Leached  Cappines 


Swent:     How  did  it  differ  from  other  techniques? 

Anderson:   Well,  it  used  many  of  the  new  techniques  of  exploration, 

particularly  trace-element  analyses  and  physical  chemistry  and 
thermal  dynamics  of  the  formation  of ^minerals  to  look  at 
surface  outcrops  of  mineralized  zones  to  determine  whether 
there  had  been  copper  in  them- -and  whether  there  was  copper 
that  had  been  there  and  leached  out- -how  much  had  been  there, 
and  if  it  would  be  reprecipitated  and  enriched  at  depth  they 
were  called  chalcocite  enrichment  nodules. 

Swent:     Reprecipitated-- 

Anderson:   Copper  would  be  dissolved  out  of  the  surface  rocks  and 

reprecipitated  at  greater  depths  in  an  enriched  zone  called  a 
chalcocite  enrichment  blanket. 


Swent:     Is  this  also  called  "secondary  enrichment"? 

Anderson:   Right.   It's  secondary  copper  enrichment.   And  the  rocks  at  the 
surface  were  called  leached  cappings,  and  this  research  was 
focused  essentially  on  leached  cappings. 

Swent:     And  this  was  something  new  at  that  time? 

Anderson:   Yes.   It  was  very  proprietary  for  maybe  twelve  years  or  fifteen 
years  in  Kennecott,  but  eventually  it  was  published,  and  it's 
in  a  publication  of  the  Arizona  University  of  Tucson,  the 
porphyry  copper  volume.   It's  generally  practiced  now,  but  in 
those  days  they  considered  it  very  proprietary.   You  couldn't 
talk  about  it;  you  just  had  to  be  an  employee  to  learn  about 
it. 

But  that  took  me  around  the  world,  because  once  we  had 
developed  and  proved  the  concept  in  the  United  States  we  wanted 
to  check  it  in  different  climatic  conditions,  in  jungles,  in 
deserts,  and  in  different  geological  terrains.   So  that's  why  I 
spent  a  lot  of  time  away  from  home.   Chile,  Peru,  Mexico, 
Australia,  Canada,  U.S.,  all  over.   Primarily  it  was  the  copper 
areas . 


8 


Traveling  the  World  in  Search  of  Copper 


Swent:     Primarily  looking  for  copper. 

Anderson:   Yes,  right. 

Swent:     Where  were  you  in  Chile? 

Anderson:   I  visited  all  the  then-known  porphyry  copper  deposits  all  the 

way  from  Chuquicamata  in  the  north  to  the  Braden  or  El  Teniente 
deposit  in  southern  Chile.   In  Peru,  I  went  all  the  way  from 
southern  Peru  at  Toquepala  and  Cuajone  all  the  way  up  to  the 
northern  part  of  the  country.   And  I  looked  at  a  few  of  the 
copper  deposits  in  Mexico,  particularly  the  ones  near  the  U.S. 
border. 

Swent:     These  were  places  that  Kennecott  was  not  yet  operating? 

Anderson:   They  were  operating  the  Braden  deposit  in  Chile,  but  not  other 
South  American  areas.   We  were  able  to  make  arrangements  with 
other  operators.   Geologists  wanted  to  see  everybody  else's 
mines--we  got  to  see  theirs,  they  got  to  see  ours,  and  then  see 
what  you  could  put  together  from  it.   We  visited  just  about  all 
our  competitors'  mines,  but  the  competitors'  geologists  visited 
ours  as  well. 

Swent:     Sounds  like  fun. 
Anderson:   It  was  quite  competitive. 

So  after  that  was  done,  it  led  to  some  good  successes— 
Swent:     What  were  some  of  the  successes? 

Anderson:   We  found  several  deposits  in  new  areas,  plus  new  deposits  in 
existing  operating  areas.   It  also  allowed  you  to  conduct  the 
exploration  a  lot  cheaper,  and  walk  away  from  barren  areas  very 
fast  and  not  spend  a  whole  lot  of  money  testing  areas  that 
didn't  have  much  potential.  Because  of  that,  Kennecott  had 
been  approached  by  some  Middle  Eastern  governments,  namely 
Saudi  Arabia,  Turkey,  and  Iran,  to  evaluate  the  copper  and 
other  mineral  potentials  of  those  countries.   In  those  days 
they  were  getting  very  low  royalties  for  oil;  they  needed 
another  mineral  income.   I  was  assigned  to  a  special  project-- 


Swent : 


This  was  in  the  late  sixties? 


Anderson:  It  was  in  '63,  '64.  Middle  sixties.  And  I  spent  six  months  in 
each  country  doing  reconnaissance  for  copper,  gold,  and  silver- 
lead-zinc  deposits,  but  with  the  primary  emphasis  on  copper. 

Swent:     You  alone? 

Anderson:   Yes.   I  had  all  the  help  I  needed  from  the  various  geologists 

in  the  countries  that  I  was  a  guest  of,  and  in  Saudi  Arabia  the 
French  Bureau  of  Geological  Research—called  BRGM--was  there  to 
aid  me  in  getting  me  around  and  showing  me  some  of  the  geology 
areas.   In  Turkey  there  was  a  Turkish  government  geology 
research  group,  and  in  Iran  it  was  similar- -some  Iranian 
geologists  that  knew  the  terrain  and  generally  where  there  were 
occurrences.   So  I  spent  six  months  in  each  country  just 
looking  at  occurrences  and  trying  to  determine  if  there  were 
any  of  value.   Iran  is  full  of  huge  copper  deposits  that  still 
have  not  been  developed. 

Swent:     Amazing--as  long  as  they've  been  mining  there. 

Anderson:   Exactly. 

Swent:     Thousands  of  years,  isn't  it? 

Anderson:   It  is.   One  deposit  was  developed  after  I  recognized  its 
potential- -one  called  Char  Chesmah. 

Swent:     Oh,  I've  heard  of  that. 

Anderson:   It  was  a  very  large  copper  deposit,  and  I  told  Kennecott  about 
it,  but  I  was  very  worried  about  the  nature  of  the  arrangements 
you  might  make  with  the  government.   If  it  were  a  huge  copper 
deposit,  and  since  the  military  ran  the  only  copper  refinery  in 
Teheran,  I  was  worried  that  this  would  become  a  very  strategic 
military  development  and  it  might  be  confiscated  by  the  Shah. 
Sure  enough,  after  it  had  been  developed  by  several  other 
companies  —  investing  probably  well  over  $100  million—it  was 
confiscated  by  the  Shah  after  it  was  in  operation.   When  the 
Shah  got  kicked  out  it  was  closed,  and  I  think  it's  just  rusted 
since.   It  just  sits  there  in  Iran,  near  Isfahan.   It's  a 
fabulous  copper  deposit,  but  there  are  two  or  three  others  that 
are  even  more  fabulous  than  that  that  haven't  even  been  touched 
yet. 

Swent:     So  did  Kennecott  go  into  any  of  these? 

Anderson:   No,  they  decided  not  to  because  of  the  business  risks. 

Clearly,  of  the  three  countries,  Iran  is  geologically  more  like 
the  western  United  States.   There's  a  thrust  province  and  a 


10 


mountain  building  zone,  but  instead  of  an  uplift  like  the 
Colorado  Plateau,  geologically  it's  a  stable  area  called  the 
Great  Dasht  Depression  where  the  rocks  went  down  rather  than 
up,  so  that's  the  only  difference.   You  have  all  the  thrust 
belts  and  porphyries  and  intrusives,  all  of  the  things  that  are 
required  for  major  ore  deposits,  and  they  have  them  all  there. 
But  it's  not  been  touched,  really. 

Turkey  has  a  lot  of  potential  for  silver,  lead,  and  zinc, 
primarily.   And  in  Saudi  Arabia- -it  turned  out,  Kennecott 
wasn't  really  interested- -it  was  gold.   There  was  an  old  mine 
that  operated  in  King  Solomon's  time;  it's  called  the  Mahad 
Dhab  Mine,  and  that's  now  being  operated  by  the  Saudis.   They 
drilled  it  out  below  the  water  table,  and  it's  a  very  nice 
deposit;  it's  probably  two  million  tons  of  2-ounces-per-ton 
gold—in  that  order  of  magnitude.   It  was  mined  by  King  Solomon 
in  his  day.   You  could  see  spiral  staircases  used  for  access  in 
the  shafts.   They  mined  to  the  water  table  and  had  to  stop. 
The  gold  was  in  quartz  veins.   The  miners  took  all  the  quartz 
out  of  the  vein,  brought  it  up  to  the  surface  and  hand-sorted 
it  there. 

Swent:     And  you  saw  that? 
Anderson:   I  saw  that,  yes. 

Swent:     I  think  Newmont  was  interested  in  Char  Chesmah  also,  weren't 
they? 

Anderson:   Oh,  sure.   Let's  see,  I  think  it  was  RTZ,  Rio  Tinto  Zinc,  who 
started  it,  and  Anaconda  became  operator  after  the  Shah 
confiscated  it.   I  believe  Anaconda  got  a  management  agreement 
with  the  Shah  to  run  it.   Then  the  Shah  was  kicked  out,  and 
that  was  the  end  of  it.   It  was  just  in  the  startup  phase; 
maybe  it  had  been  operating  for  six  months  or  a  year,  maybe  a 
little  more. 

Swent:     You  were  there  for  Kennecott,  but  were  you  also  advising  these 
people  who  accompanied  you? 

Anderson:   I  was  there  for  Kennecott,  and  my  advice  went  to  Kennecott 
management,  they  decided  what  to  do  with  the  information. 

Swent:     Were  you  advising  the  governments  of  these  countries  at  all? 

Anderson:   No,  except  they  had  geologists  along  who  could  speak  English 
very  well,  and  they  could  see  what  I  was  looking  at,  and  they 
probably  prepared  their  own  reports.   But  they  didn't  have  the 
experience  of  leached  cappings  and  knowledge  of  major  copper 


11 

deposits  that  I  did,  so  they  could  see  the  areas  we  visited, 
and  they  probably  could  see  some  of  my  enthusiasm  or  lack  of  it 
by  the  questions  I  asked  and  how  long  I  stayed  there. 

Swent:     How  did  you  feel  about  Char  Chesmah? 

Anderson:   Oh,  I  think  it  is  a  fabulous  deposit.   As  I  say,  there  were  a 
couple  more  that-- 

Swent :     But  Kennecott  did  not-- 

Anderson:   No,  they  didn't,  because  of  the  economic  risk. 

Swent:     And  political. 

Anderson:   Primarily  political  risk,  yes.  And  that  turned  out  to  be  the 
right  assessment  after  all  was  said  and  done. 


12 


III   VICE  PRESIDENT  OF  EXPLORATION  FOR  OCCIDENTAL  MINERALS, 
1967  TO  1975 


Paul  Bailly 


Swent :     So  then  you  left  Kennecott  and  went  with  Occidental.   You  were 
the  vice  president  of  exploration.   How  did  that  come  about? 

Anderson:   My  boss  at  Kennecott  left  to  form  a  hard  minerals  division  for 
Occidental.   He  reported  directly  to  Armand  Hammer  and  formed  a 
minerals  division.   So  I  applied  to  him  for  a  job  because  I 
liked  working  for  him  very  much. 

Swent:     Who  was  he? 

Anderson:   His  name  was  Paul  Bailly.   He's  a  world- renowned,  successful 
geologist  working  for  Kennecott  from  the  time  he  made  his 
career  start  and  worked  up  to  be  president  of  the  exploration 
subsidiary  called  Bear  Creek  Mining  Company.   Then  he  formed 
Occidental  Minerals  for  Armand  Hammer,  and  I  think  he  did  that 
in  early  1967.   The  dates  I'd  have  to  look  up.   Then  I  joined 
him  in  late  '67  until  1975. 

Swent:     And  where  were  their  offices? 

Anderson:   Here  in  Denver. 

Swent:     In  Denver.   So  you  had  been  primarily  based  in  Salt  Lake. 

Anderson:   That's  correct.   Well,  my  wife  and  I  moved  twenty- four  times  in 
twelve  years  prior  to  moving  to  Denver,  so  we  never  owned  a 
home;  we  always  just  rented  apartments. 

Swent:     Was  she  able  to  go  to  places  like  Arabia  and  Iran? 

Anderson:   No,  she  didn't  go  to  those  places.   She  would  meet  me  after  a 
trip.   In  that  case  I  was  gone  eighteen  months  without  seeing 


13 


her,  and  when  I  came  back  we  met  in  Cairo  and  toured  Egypt  and 
Israel  and  Greece  and  came  home.   While  I  was  gone  for  eighteen 
months,  she  lived  with  my  parents. 

Swent:     Oh,  that's  a  long  time  without  a  break. 

Anderson:   Yes. 

Swent:     These  twenty-four  moves  you  made  were  in  the  Southwest? 

Anderson:   Primarily  the  southwestern  United  States,  that's  right.   From 
one  mining  town  to  another,  or  one  mining  project  or 
exploration  project  to  another. 

Swent:     That's  a  lot  of  moving. 

Anderson:   So  then  we  moved  to  Denver.   Occidental  Minerals  was  primarily 
interested  in  copper,  although  gold  was  an  important 
consideration  in  those  days. 


Armand  Hammer1 


Anderson:   Armand  Hammer  took  a  real  interest  in  the  minerals  group,  and 
he  would  call  me  personally  every  Saturday  night  about  eleven 
or  twelve  at  night  from  Beverly  Hills--but  here  it  would  be 
about  one  or  two  in  the  morning.   Every  Sunday  morning  he  would 
want  an  update  on  some  of  the  projects  we  were  working  on.   He 
was  very  keenly  interested  in  those  things,  so  he  would  call, 
and  I  would  have  to  go  to  bed  at  seven  or  eight  at  night  on 
Saturday  night  and  get  up  at  midnight  knowing  the  call  would 
come  and  be  prepared  to  give  him  a  rundown  on  the  week's  —  it 
was  every  week;  sometimes  he  would  call  from  Europe,  sometimes 
it  would  be  from  L.A.,  sometimes  he  would  be  in  Argentina  or 
wherever.   He  was  very  interested  in  several  of  the  projects: 
one  of  the  copper  projects  we  were  working  on  and  a  zinc 
project  in  Tennessee.   So  he  would  call  up  and  get  a  progress 
report  once  a  week. 

Swent:     No  matter  what  time  it  was. 


'For  more  on  Armand  Hammer,  see  Gunther  Franz  (Frank)  Joklik, 
Exploration  Geologist.  Development  of  Mt.  Newman  Mine,  President  and  CEO  of 
Kennecott.  1949-1995;  Chairman.  2002  Olympic  Winter  Games  Committee. 
Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley,  1997,  pp.  251-253. 


Anderson:   Well,  it  was  when  he  was  ready.   He  would  go  out  for  a  swim  or 
exercise  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night  at  his  home  in  Beverly 
Hills  and  then  he  would  call  after  he  got  back  in.   He  didn't 
care  what  time  of  day  it  was;  he  wanted  to  know. 

Swent:     What  would  happen  if  you  weren't  there? 
Anderson:   He  would  probably  chase  me  down  wherever  I  was. 
Swent:     Did  he  do  this  to  other  people  as  well? 

Anderson:   I  think  some  of  the  foreign  oil  and  gas  people  got  similar 
calls,  but  in  the  minerals  group  I  was  about  the  only  one, 
because  I  was  in  charge  of  the  U.S.  program,  and  he  was  very 
interested  in  that. 


The  Gores  of  Tennessee1 


Swent:     And  it  was  through  him  that  you  got  to  know  the  Gores. 

Anderson:   Yes.   They  have  a  farm  in  Tennessee  which,  it  turns  out, 

overlies  a  zinc  deposit.   I  had  heard  about  the  discovery  and 
went  back  there  to  look  at  it  and  found  drill  rigs  lined  up  on 
their  property  boundary,  so  I  started  negotiating  with  the 
Gores.   I  didn't  know  it,  but  it  turned  out  they  were  very 
close  friends  of  Armand  Hammer's,  so  that  helped  the 
negotiations  a  bit  in  some  of  the  competition.   We  acquired  the 
property  and  drilled  it,  and  there  was  a  zinc  deposit  under  the 
Gore  farm. 

Swent:     You  actually  bought  it  from  them? 

Anderson:   Occidental  had  a  lease,  and  I  think  that  lease  has  been  now 
assigned  to  the  company  that  mines  that  whole  zinc  area. 
They've  acquired  New  Jersey  Zinc's  interests  and  Occidental's 
interests  and  a  smelter.   It's  a  major  zinc  producer. 

So  I  met  Senator  Albert  Gore  and  his  son,  who  is  now  the 
Vice  President  of  the  United  States—Albert ,  Jr. --and  his 
mother,  Pauline,  who  is  a  very  brilliant  lady. 


'For  more  on  the  Gores,  see  Simon  David  Strauss,  Market  Analyst  for 
Non-Ferrous  Metals  and  Non-Metallic  Minerals.  Journalist.  Mining 
Corporation  Executive.  1927-1994.  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The 
Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  1995,  pp.  236-241. 


15 


Swent :     You  said  you  actually  worked  with  her? 

Anderson:   Oh,  yes.   I  did  most  of  the  negotiations  with  her. 

Swent:     I  hadn't  realized—you  said  she  was  an  attorney. 

Anderson:   Yes,  very  brilliant.   She  was  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  somehow 
involved  with  the  TVA,  the  Tennessee  Valley  Authority.   Very 
brilliant  businesswoman. 

Swent:  Tough  negotiator? 

Anderson:  Absolutely. 

Swent:  Really? 

Anderson:  Yes,  a  lot  of  fun  though.   It  turned  out  to  be  a  lot  of  fun. 

Swent:     So  you  were  involved  not  only  in  just  the  geologic  exploration 
but  also  the  negotiations. 

Anderson:   All  the  business  aspects  of  exploration  plus  development,  up  to 
the  point  where  you  turned  it  over  to  operations,  the  people 
that  will  build  and  operate  the  mine. 


More  About  Annand  Hammer 


Swent:     Did  you  en joy- - 

Anderson:   Yes,  I  enjoyed  that.   It  was  a  very  unique  opportunity.   I 
would  hear  about  Hammer's  exploits—we  would  go  down  to  his 
house  probably  once  every  couple  months  and  meet  with  him  in 
his  home.   Every  time  we  went  in  his  home  he  had  a  different 
art  collection.   His  brother  had  a  fabulous  Russian  art 
collection  that  he  acquired,  and  every  time  you  went  there  was 
a  new  series  of  art  on  the  walls.   It  was  fabulous. 

He  was  a  brilliant  man.   He  would  listen  to  an  hour 
presentation  and  then  ask  one  or  two  questions  which  were 
really  at  the  heart  of  it.  He  just  had  a  keen  ability  to  sense 
out  where  the  key  issue  was,  the  important  business  decisions. 
A  very  dynamic  person.   It  was  exciting.   But  then  a  more 
exciting  opportunity  came  along,  which  was  to  join  Homestake 
and  work  with  Don  McLaughlin  and  Paul  Henshaw. 


16 


IV  VICE  PRESIDENT  OF  EXPLORATION  FOR  HOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY, 
1975  TO  1987 


Homestake's  Desire  to  Find  a  Major  Gold  Deposit 


Swent :     How  did  that  come  about? 
II 

Anderson:  It  was  November,  1975,  when  I  joined  Homestake.  Homestake  had 
decided  to  make  a  search  for  vice  president  of  exploration  for 
the  U.S.  They  talked  with  my  boss,  Paul  Bailly--tried  to  hire 
him— 

Swent:     Who  had  talked  to  him?  Do  you  know? 

Anderson:   It  was  the  search  committee  represented  by  a  management 

consultant  group  out  of  New  York.   I  think  it  was  Anderson 
Consulting- -no  relation  to  me.   I  forget  the  name  of  the 
person. 

Swent:     Headhunters? 

Anderson:   Yes,  headhunters  [laughs].   They  talked  to  my  boss,  and  I 
didn't  know  it  at  the  time,  and  apparently  he  was  very 
satisfied  with  what  he  was  doing,  so  then  they  talked  to  me, 
and  we  had  a  series  of  interviews  with  every  one  of  the  senior 
management  and  board  members.   I  remember  distinctly. 

Swent:     Where  did  you  have  these? 

Anderson:   I  had  to  travel  to  wherever  they  were.   Sometimes  in  San 
Francisco.   I  met  Don  Delicate  for  the  first  time  at  Lead 
[South  Dakota]  and  spent  a  couple  days  up  there  interviewing 
with  him.   It  was  a  very  thorough  interviewing  process.   All  of 


17 


the  key  people  in  the  company- -Dick  Stoehr1--!  even  remember 
talking  to  the  attorneys.   I  met  with  Langan  [Swent]2  there  on 
one  of  those  trips,  and  also  John  Gustafson.   But  Don 
McLaughlin  and  Paul  Henshaw  were  the  key  players  in  terms  of 
the  interviews,  arranging  them  and-- 

Swent:     Don  McLaughlin  was  chairman- 
Anderson:   No,  at  that  time  John  Gustafson  was  chairman.   Don  had  retired 
from  the  chairman  position.   Paul  was  president. 

Swent:  Okay.  Don  was  emeritus,  and  John  Gustafson  was  chairman,  and 
Paul  was  president.  And  they  were  all  geologists. 

Anderson:   All  geologists.   All  had  exceptional  careers  in-- 
Swent:     All  Harvard  geologists. 

Anderson:   All  Harvard,  and  they  understood  the  risks  of  exploration  and 
the  business  parts  of  exploration.   Since  I  really  wanted  to 
focus  on  exploration  rather  than  convincing  senior  management 
of  the  risks  involved  in  exploration,  I  wanted  to  take  some 
amount  of  money  and  patience—that  was  already  built  in,  so  it 
was  an  exciting  time.   And  Homestake  had  not  done  any  serious 
gold  exploration  since  probably  the  forties,  after  the  war, 
when  the  Homestake  Mine  was  closed  down  for  a  while.   Then  they 
started  looking  for  copper,  lead,  zinc,  silver,  and  uranium 
very  successfully,  but  had  not  looked  for  any  gold  because 
there  was  no  economic  incentive.   By  1975,  of  course,  the  gold 
price  had  been  freed,  it  was  quite  high,  and  it  offset  the 
inflation  of  operating  costs  and  became  a  real  window  of 
opportunity  to  find  economical  gold  mines.   Secondly,  during 
the  period  of  the  war  and  for  the  next  twenty  years  afterwards 
--into  the  mid-seventies--there  had  been  great  advances  in 
exploration  technology  and  knowledge  of  deposits  and  geological 
modeling  and  concepts. 

Swent:  I'd  like  to  be  a  little  more  specific  about  those.  First,  if 
you  don't  mind,  I'd  like  to  have  you  just  tell  what  —  it  might 
have  been  Don  Delicate  who  told  you  about  the  power  plant. 


'Richard  Stoehr,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine /Knoxvi lie  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 

2Langan  W.  Swent,  Working  for  Safety  and  Health  in  Underground  Mines; 
San  Luis  and  Homestake  Mining  Companies,  1946-1988.  Regional  Oral  History 
Office,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1995. 


18 


Anderson:   Oh,  yes,  it  was  Don  Delicate  that  said  that  Homestake  had  this 
very  profitable  coal  reserve  called  Wyodak  Coal  and  had  built 
the  Black  Hills  power  plant,  and  that  the  Homestake  Mine  was 
using  a  significant  amount  of  its  power  from  the  Black  Hills 
power  plant.   I  think  they  were  making  extra  power  and  were 
selling  it.   And  during  that  period  of  time  anyway,  and  before 
that,  the  profits  of  the  mine  were  very  minor  or  sometimes  loss 
years,  and  the  power  facility  was  making  more  money  than  the 
mine. 

Swent:     Gold  was  thirty-five  dollars. 

Anderson:   Yes,  gold  was  thirty-five  dollars  an  ounce,  and  at  that  time-- 
this  was  before  the  discovery  of  uranium  and  lead--he  told  me 
that  Homestake  had  been  worried  that  they  were  going  to  be 
regulated  as  a  public  utility  because  that  was  their  main 
business.   So  they  decided  to  sell  the  power  plant  and  lease 
the  coal  reserves  to  Black  Hills  Power  and  make  it  a  royalty 
income  rather  than  actual  operating  income.   But  then,  of 
course,  I  think  you  know  it  changed  a  bit,  but  that  decision 
had  already  been  made,  and  they  had  already  sold  it.   The  Buick 
lead  mine  became  a  very,  very  profitable  mine  and  so  did  the 
Grants  uranium  deposit  which  you  and  your  husband  were  so 
intimately  involved  in.   And  that  was  one  thing  that  impressed 
me  about  Homestake:  they  understood  when  they  had  a  significant 
deposit  and  could  go  ahead  without  having  to  spend  months  of, 
shall  we  say,  convincing  everybody  to  determine  whether  it  was 
going  to  be  a  mine  or  not.   I  think  all  three  of  those  fellows 
--and  Langan  too--could  see  that  if  you  had  a  1 -percent-uranium 
deposit,  and  everybody  else  was  mining  f ifteen-hundredths- 
percent-uranium  deposits,  you  probably  have  a  pretty  good 
deposit.   And  the  paperwork  was  minimal. 

Swent:     How  did  Homestake  compare  in  size  with  Kennecott  and 
Occidental? 

Anderson:   A  lot  smaller.   Much  smaller.  And  also,  profits  were  good  in 
those  years;  they  were  in  some  years  as  profitable  as  the 
bigger  companies,  but  the  revenues  and  the  number  of  people  and 
so  forth  were  an  order  of  magnitude  smaller  at  Homestake.   It 
was  more  a  family.   You  could  feel  like  you  could  achieve 
something,  and  if  you  did,  you  would  have  a  major  impact  on  the 
company,  which,  I  think,  the  McLaughlin  discovery  did.   I  mean, 
the  stock  doubled  in  a  year  after  that  discovery  was  announced. 
I  enjoyed  going  from  a  bigger  corporate  environment  to  a 
smaller  group  where  everybody  worked  together  closely  as  a 
team,  you  knew  everybody,  and  you  knew  where  you  could  go  to 
get  help  directly  without  having  to  go  through  layers  of  staffs 
and  people  to  find  somebody. 


19 


Advances  in  Exploration;  Mineral  Zoning  of  Deposits 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


I  really  kind  of  interrupted  you,  but  you  were  going  to  say 
that  there  were  these  new  developments  in  exploration  geology 
as  well. 

Right.  In  most  of  the  developed  countries  by  the  late  fifties 
and  sixties,  most  of  the  areas  where  ore  bodies  outcropped  at 
the  surface  had  been  pretty  well  looked  over  and  mined  already. 
So  you  had  to  find  deposits  that  are  concealed,  basically—not 
outcropping  at  the  surface.   So  you  had  to  look  at  subtle 
indications  that  there  might  be  something  at  depth. 
Geologically,  there  had  been  a  lot  of  advances  in  what's  called 
zoning,  mineral  zoning  of  deposits,  so  you  can  tell--if  you 
visualize  a  target  with  a  bull's-eye  in  it--the  bull's-eye 
being  the  ore  zone—and  there's  rings  around  that—that's  very 
simplified,  but  you  could  see  what  the  rings  were,  and  each 
type  of  deposit  had  different  types  of  rings  around  it  so  you 
knew  that  if  you  were  in  a  copper  province  what  sort  of  things 
to  look  for  on  these  outer  rings  that  might  be  exposed  at  the 
surface— and  the  ore  deposit  buried.   The  halos  are  much  bigger 
than  the  ore  body.   Let's  assume  in  a  copper  deposit  maybe  the 
altered  zone  is  three  or  four  miles  in  diameter,  and  the  ore 
body  is  maybe  a  half  a  mile  in  diameter.   I'm  talking  about  a 
porphyry  copper  deposit.   So  if  you  can  visualize  the  ore  body 
as  being  sort  of  the  center  of  a  bull's-eye,  and  it's  buried  a 
thousand  feet,  you  still  see  these  other  halos,  other  zones,  at 
the  surface.   And  you  can  tell  about  how  deep  it  might  be  to 
the  ore  body,  and  also  whether  there  might  be  ore  there  or  not. 

Do  you  just  see  them  visually  with  your  eyes? 

Well,  that  was  part  of  my  research  at  Kennecott:  to  determine 
visual  indications  that  were  refined,  and  also  use  geochemistry 
as  well  and  try  to  decipher  out  of  the  outcrops  using  visual 
indications  of  what  minerals  were  there,  plus  geochemistry, 
which  is  really  a  combination  of  chemistry  and  trace  element 
amounts  of  copper,  lead,  or  zinc  or  other  indicator  elements— 
that  might  be  there. 


And  how  do  you  do  the  geochemistry? 
send  it  to  somebody? 


You  pick  up  a  rock  and 


You  collect  samples  and  then  send  them  to  a  laboratory  that  has 
a  spectrometer  to  determine  small  amounts,  like  parts  per 
million  in  copper— ten  or  twenty  parts  per  million,  which  is  a 
very  low  amount . 


20 


Swent:     And  these  are  things  that  could  not  have  been  done  fifty  years 
ago. 

Anderson:   That's  correct.   Until  the  invention  of  the  mass  spectrometer, 
you  couldn't  do  any  of  those  things  at  all.  And  of  course  with 
that  invention,  which  was  really  first  used  in  Canada  to 
determine  illnesses  related  to  lead  contamination  around  the 
Trail  smelter  in  British  Columbia--.   A  geologist  had  developed 
a  methodology  of  sampling  and  analysis,  and  proved  that  there 
was  lots  of  lead  contamination  around  the  smelter,  but  it  was 
in  very  small  amounts,  like  one  or  two  to  ten  parts  per 
million,  which  is  a  very  low  percentage.   And  assay  techniques 
would  never  detect  any  amounts  of  lead  even  there  but  this  new 
approach  did.   So  we  had  all  that  technology  available  for 
copper,  lead,  and  zinc  deposits,  and  at  Kennecott  we  researched 
all  that.   I  did  a  lot  of  that  research.   So  we  knew  what  these 
bands,  if  you  would,  around  the  bull's-eye  looked  like,  and  we 
knew  what  elements  would  be  concentrated  in  them  in  trace 
amounts  and  what  minerals  would  be  there.   And  so  the 
opportunity  was  to  apply  that  to  gold;  it  had  never  been  done 
when  I  was  thinking  about  joining  Homestake.   And  Homestake 
hadn't  done  any  of  that  work,  and  they  were  still  looking  for 
lead  and  zinc  and  copper  all  around  the  world,  basically,  using 
sort  of  a  shotgun  approach,  which  had  worked  very  well  for  its 
day,  but  not  for  gold.   So  we  really  took  a  rifle  approach  in 
looking  for  gold  deposits  in  the  U.S. 


Classifying  the  Gold  Deposits  of  the  World 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


These  would  be  not  just  the  old  traditional  vein  deposits? 
it  something  else? 


Was 


Swent : 


Well,  the  first  thing  I  did  after  I  joined  Homestake--it 
probably  took  about  a  year  and  a  half  of  research,  which  I  did 
mostly  at  night  because  I  didn't  have  time  in  the  day  to  do  it; 
we  were  too  busy  trying  to  organize  and  evaluate  properties 
that  were  already  in  hand- -was  to  conduct  research  of  the 
various  types  of  gold  deposits  around  the  world  and  also  to 
find  out  if  gold  deposits,  like  every  other  deposit,  had  these 
indicator  halos.   So  we  did  some  research  on  that,  and  put 
together  a  chart  that  shows  —  at  that  time—the  known  types  of 
gold  deposits  in  the  world. 

You  said  that  there  were  five,  I  think? 


21 


Anderson:   Major  types.   There  were  more  than  five,  but  of  the  major  ones 
that  would  be  of  interest  to  Homestake  there  were  about  five. 


The  South  African  Rand  Deposit 


Anderson:   Clearly,  one  of  the  major  deposit  types  in  the  world  is  the 

South  African  Rand--the  Witwatersrand  deposits  were  major  gold 
deposits,  but  they're  very  limited  in  extent  in  other  countries 
of  the  world.   There's  some  in  a  few  other  countries  but 
they're  very  small,  not  developed  to  the  extent  of 
Witwatersrand.   So  that  became  a  geological  target,  and  we 
looked  in  those  areas  that  were  permissive  for  them  but  really 
didn't  find  anything  that  would  be  suitable.   Even  if  you  found 
the  Witwatersrand  in  the  United  States,  you  couldn't  mine  it 
because  of  the  environmental  and  safety  procedures  required  in 
the  U.S.   They  mine  those  "veins"  one  meter  wide--I  mean,  it's 
not  a  vein,  it's  a  bed.   That's  three  and  a  half  feet,  and  the 
drillers  and  the  miners  can't  stand  up;  they've  got  to  crawl 
around  on  their  knees  and  elbows.   The  backs  were  very  unsafe 
and  in  this  country- - 

Swent :     The  backs  of  the  mines,  you  mean. 

Anderson:   In  the  U.S.,  we  would  have  to  mine  it  probably  ten  feet  high 

rather  than  three  and  a  half  feet  high,  and  if  you  had  to  mine 
that  much  more  waste  it  would  not  make  those  deposits  economic. 

Swent:     You've  called  that  a  fossil  placer. 

Anderson:   Yes,  right.   It  was  a  placer  deposit  at  one  time;  it  had  been 
eroded  from  veins  and  coalesced  in  gravels  and  streambeds. 
Then  those  beds  were  further  buried  and  subjected  to 
metamorphism  and  burial  at  depth.   So  the  placer  became  solid 
rock  again.   That's  what  they  mined. 

So  those  are  major  deposits  of  the  world. 


Carlin  and  Homestake  Gold  Deposits 


Anderson:   There  are  disseminated  gold  deposits  like  Carlin,  Nevada;  there 
are  vein  deposits—high-grade  and  lower  grade.   The  Homestake 
Mine  is  a  specific  type  of  gold  deposit  that  occurs  elsewhere 
in  the  world  besides  Homestake  Mine. 


22 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Swent : 
Anderson: 

Swent : 
Anderson: 

Swent : 
Anderson: 


What  characterizes  that? 

It's  basically  gold  that  occurs  in  an  iron  formation;  it's  been 
metamorphosed.   It  doesn't  have  to  be  metamorphosed,  but  it 
usually  is.   And  those  deposits  occur,  of  course,  in  South 
Dakota;  they  also  occur  in  Brazil;  there  are  some  in  Canada, 
and  so  one  of  our  objectives  was  to  find  some  more  Homestake 
Mines  not  only  in  the  Black  Hills  but  elsewhere. 

I  was  wondering  why--and  you  explained  one  reason  why—you 
identified  these  five  major  types  of  deposit,  and  then  you 
selected  only  two  to  concentrate  on.   You've  explained  that  one 
reason  was  just  that  you  couldn't  work  people  in  a  three-foot 
vein  in  this  country.   What  were  some  of  the-- 

Well,  in  this  country  the  geological  terrains  have  to  be  right 
also.   Different  types  of  gold  deposits  occur  in  different 
geological  settings,  and  if  those  geological  settings  are  not 
present  in  the  country  you're  in  then  you  can't  look  at  those 
types  either.   My  focus  at  that  time  was  the  U.S.   The 
stockwork  disseminated  type  of  deposits  were  really  the  key 
thrust,  plus  the  Homestake  Mine  type. 

And  where  did  you-- 

We  looked  for  those  all  over,  primarily  in  the  western  United 
States. 

Where  have  the  types  been? 

The  Carlin  Mine1  in  Nevada  is  a  stockwork,  a  typical  example  of 
what  I'm  talking  about.   A  disseminated  gold  deposit.   That 
mine  was  known,  of  course;  it  was  fairly  substantial. 

That  was  found  in  the  early  1960s. 

Exactly.   So  we  put  together  this  list  of  mines  around  the 
world,  but  we  also  knew  that  other  people  at  least  knew  of  some 
of  those  types.   I  mean,  they've  been  reviewed  in  the 
literature,  in  hundreds  of  publications.   But  nobody  had  really 
put  them  together  in  sort  of  one  piece,  at  least  that  I  could 
determine,  and  I  did  a  lot  of  research  on  it.   So  we  put  it 
together,  formed  our  focus,  but  then  I  also  decided  that  we 
needed  to  have  something  new  and  exciting  that  would  be 
different:  try  to  find  a  new  type  of  gold  deposit  as  compared 


'For  more  on  Carlin,  see  John  S.  Livermore,  interview  in  the  Western 
Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  series,  in  process  1997. 


23 


to  just  finding  more  of  the  same.   From  my  experience  at 
undergraduate  school  in  thermal  dynamics  and  physical 
chemistry—and  more  at  Harvard--!  had  deduced  that  gold 
deposits  ought  to  occur  in  hot  springs,  and  if  so,  there  are  a 
lot  of  hot  springs  around  the  world  to  go  look  for  it.  All  the 
literature  that  I  had  read  had  indicated  that  gold  did  not 
concentrate  in  hot  springs,  and  that  was  very  discouraging.   So 
I  took  a  vacation-- 

Swent:     You  had  mentioned  Waldemar  Lindgren  earlier. 

Anderson:   Right.   Lindgren 's  publications  on  gold  did  not  really  focus  on 
hot  springs,  and  there  were  a  few  memos  by  him  in  various 
obscure  publications  plus  some  other  reports  by  the  United 
States  Geological  Survey  that  had  endeavored  to  evaluate  hot 
springs  for  mineral  potential,  and  nobody  ever  found  any  gold 
in  those  hot  springs  and  therefore  [that]  would  suggest  that 
even  though  theoretically  it  might  be  possible  to  find  gold  at 
a  hot  springs  environment,  it  didn't  exist.   That  bothered  me 
greatly,  so  I  took  a  vacation  for  a  couple  of  weeks  in  Southern 
California,  in  the  San  Diego  area,  and  during  that  vacation  I 
spent  every  day  at  the  UC  [University  of  California]  San  Diego 
library. 

Swent:     When  was  this,  do  you  think?  Can  you  remember? 
Anderson:   It  was  probably  late  '77,  October  or  so. 

Swent:     I  hate  to  keep  interrupting  you  but  I  noticed  that  you  had 

attended  this  special  course  at  Stanford  [University]  shortly 
before  that. 

Anderson:   The  Stanford  course  was  after  that. 

Swent:     After  that,  okay.   I  was  trying  to  ask  whether  that  course  had 
any  influence  on  the  way  you  set  up  your-- 

Anderson:   No,  we  set  up  the  program,  and  then  we  had  an  initial  discovery 
at  the  McLaughlin  long  before  it  was  announced.   It  took  us  two 
years  to  drill  it  out.   So  I  think  after  the  management  of 
Homestake  knew  that  we  really  were  on  to  something  at 
McLaughlin,  they  sent  me  to  Stanford.   So  that's  the  way  it 
worked.   It  wasn't  the  other  way  around. 


24 


A  Vacation  Spent  Researching  Mercury  Hot  Springs 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Okay.   Well,  let's  get  back. 
Coronado,  you  said. 


You  already  had  a  place  at 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


Yes,  right.   We  just  stayed  there,  and  my  wife  was  very 
interested  in  art  so  she  spent  a  lot  of  time  in  the  art  museums 
in  the  area,  and  I  spent  all  my  vacation  days  and  evenings  at 
the  UCSD  library  researching  all  the  obscure  publications  I 
could  to  find  out  whether  or  not  gold  occurred  in  hot  springs 
or  not. 

What  sorts  of  publications? 

There  are  a  lot  of  United  States  Geological  Survey 
publications.   There  were  publications  by  various  societies 
like  Economic  Geologist,  publications  by  the  Mining  Journal, 
mining  publications  in  general.   Some  of  them  were  published  in 
German,  some  of  them  in  French;  I  tried  to  read  all  of  the 
literature  that  would  be  available.   I  have  a  reading  knowledge 
of  those  languages  but  not  a  speaking  knowledge. 

In  one  very  obscure  observation—and  these  reports  were 
restricted  to  hot  springs,  not  just  all  mineral  occurrences, 
but  looking  for  hot  springs  —  one  obscure  observation  mentioned 
that  all  of  the  work  done  to  that  time  had  been  done  by 
panning,  and  nobody  had  found  gold  in  hot  springs.   I  read  into 
that  since  at  Carlin  the  gold  was  micron  gold  and  couldn't  be 
panned,  and  you  couldn't  see  it  without  a  high-powered 
microscope,  that  if  nobody  had  ever  assayed  for  gold  and  it  was 
too  fine-grained  to  pan,  then  it  didn't  prove  that  gold  was 
absent  in  hot  springs  deposits.   It  may  occur.   It  wasn't 
positive,  but  it  didn't  eliminate  it  completely  either,  because 
a  lot  of  people  had  looked  at  hot  springs. 

I  came  back  and  discussed  the  concept  with  Don  McLaughlin, 
I  recall,  and  Paul  Henshaw,  and  suggested  that  we  consider 
implementing  a  major  reconnaissance—a  part  of  our 
reconnaissance  program  for  a  new  type  of  deposit  that  I  termed 
"mercury  hot  springs  gold  deposits."  Hot  springs  commonly 
contain  mercury  and  arsenic  and  antimony,  and  if  there  were 
those  indicator  minerals— sort  of  like  in  the  halo  of  the 
bull's-eye  I  talked  about  before,  around  the  bull1  s-eye—that 
there  would  be  arsenic  and  antimony  and  mercury  and  silver  in  a 
hot  spring  environment.   And  if  there  were  trace  amounts  of 
gold  there,  it  might  be  a  real  important  indicator.   So  what  we 
should  do  is  go  up  to  the  Homestake  Mine  and  examine  files 
representing  a  hundred  years  of  investigations  of  gold  deposits 


25 


not  just  in  the  United  States  but  in  many  places  around  the 
world.   Find  out  if  any  of  the  gold  prospects  had  indications 
that  they  might  be  associated  with  hot  springs  and  look  at 
those  first. 

Homestake  had  a  fabulous  set  of  files  at  Lead  in  the  vault. 
It  was  covered  with  spider  webs  and  dust  and  everything.   There 
were  a  couple  senior  geologists  at  Homestake  that  I  really  had 
a  lot  of  confidence  in,  and  I  asked  them  to  start  researching 
those  files. 


Donald  Gustafson  Researches  Old  Homestake  Files 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


And  who  were  they? 

The  most  successful  one  was  Don  Gustafson,1  who  eventually  went 
up  and  looked  in  the  files.   The  second  geologist  didn't 
believe  in  the  concept  and  didn't  want  to  go  get  involved  in 
it,  so  he  left  the  company.   So  Don  Gustafson  and  I  were  the 
sponsors  of  the  concept. 

What  gave  you  the  idea  of  looking  at  hot  springs  at  all? 

Well,  it  was  my  knowledge  of  minerals  and  the  formation  of 
minerals.   Each  mineral  is  really  an  indicator  of  temperature 
and  pressure  and  the  environment  around  it.   In  studies  at 
Harvard  particularly,  we  studied  environments  of  hot  springs, 
and  my  knowledge  of  gold  and  the  thermal  dynamics  and  physical 
chemistry  of  gold  and  minerals  suggested  it  should  occur  and 
concentrate  in  hot  springs.   So  it  was  just  an  idea  based  on 
theory  from  my  knowledge  of  thermal  dynamics  and  physical 
chemistry  that  it  should  occur  there.   I  persisted,  and 
fortunately  I  had  the  time  when  I  took  the  vacation  to  do  the 
research,  because  if  I  wouldn't  have  found  some  indication  that 
there  was  at  least  a  slight  chance,  that  the  literature  really 
ruled  out  gold  being  in  hot  springs,  we  wouldn't  have  followed 
up.   But  it  didn't  rule  it  out;  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  sort  of 
opened  the  door  a  bit. 

Don  Gustafson  probably  spent  three  months  looking  at  files 
on  every  prospect  that  had  ever  been  examined  by  Homestake  for 


'Donald  Gustafson,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine/Knoxville  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


26 


signs  of  hot  springs  —  siliceous  sinter,  including  mercury  and 
arsenic  and  antimony  occurrences  as  low-temperature  minerals, 
such  as  stibnite,  orpiment,  and  realgar,  which  are  arsenic 
minerals.   There  is  antimony  in  them  as  well.   And  to  look  to 
see  if  there  are  any  of  the  gold  occurrences  that  had  some  of 
those  indications,  particularly  either  the  siliceous  sinter 
from  a  hot  spring—or  evidence  of  a  hot  spring  itself—or  those 
minerals.   He  probably  came  up  with  four  or  five  out  of  looking 
at  thousands  of  prospects  in  the  Homestake  files,  and  it  was  a 
property  that  Homestake  had  looked  at  in,  I  believe,  the 
thirties.   I'm  not  sure  of  the  exact  time.   It  was  called 
Wilbur  Hot  Springs,  and  we  renamed  it  Cherry  Hills. 


Wilbur  Hot  Springs;  Cherry  Hills  Deposit 


Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 


Where  was  this? 

This  is  in  Lake  County,  probably  about  ten  to  fifteen  miles 
north  of  the  McLaughlin  Mine.   There  was  an  old  mercury  mine 
there.   There  was  also  a  hot  spring  that  erupts  every  two  or 
three  hours.   There  were  several  tunnels  that  Homestake  had  put 
in  the  sinter,  and  there  was  gold.   So,  in  effect,  it  proved 
the  concept.   We  drilled  that  property,  and  it  turned  out  to 
have  only  several  million  tons  of  one-tenth-of-an-ounce  gold. 
It  wasn't  economic,  not  big  enough.   But  it  proved  the  concept. 


You  started  to  say  you  called  it  Cherry  Hills, 
select  that  name? 


Why  did  you 


Anderson:   I  think  there  was  an  area  downstream  from  the  area  that  was 
called  Cherry  Hills. 

Swent:     What  had  the  old  mine  been  called?  Do  you  remember? 

Anderson:   I  forget  the  name  of  the  old  mine,  but  it  was  a  mercury  mine. 
Mayacamas,  or  something  like  that.   I  forget  the  name  of  the 
mercury  mine. 

Swent:     But  you  did  find  some  gold  there. 

Anderson:   Yes,  and  we  found  several  million  tons  of  maybe  a-tenth-of-an- 
ounce  gold,  which  wasn't  of  interest  to  Homestake  for  several 
reasons.   One,  it  was  too  small  to  develop,  not  enough  tonnage 
at  that  grade.   Also  was  a  refractory  ore  in  the  sinter  like 
McLaughlin  is.   So  you  need  a  higher  grade  to  be  economic.   But 


27 


it  did  one  very  important  thing:  it  proved  the  concept  that 
[gold]  occurred  in  the  hot  spring  environment. 

From  there  on  I  went  to  the  board,  and  we  allocated  a  major 
portion  of  our  U.S.  reconnaissance  program  to  search  for  more 
of  those.   And  we  made  maps  that  showed—actually  USGS  had 
published  a  lot—all  the  known  hot  springs  in  the  United 
States,  all  the  known  gold  occurrences  in  the  United  States, 
all  the  known  arsenic  and  antimony  occurrences,  and  we  just 
overlaid  maps  of  the  occurrences  and  then  visited  methodically 
those  that  had  all  of  the  indicators. 


Left  to  right:  Paul  Henshaw,  Donald  Mclaughlin,  and  James  Anderson 
cutting  the  ribbon  at  the  McLaughlin  Mine,  1981. 


01 

60 
T) 
•H 


cfl 

o 


o 

N 

•H 
M 
O 


C  4-1 
O  Ol 

H 

a 

e  e 

o>   o 

i-H  4-> 
0)  4-1 
03  O 

,a 


d 

•    ed 

4J    iH 

S    O. 


u  p. 

a)  e 

S  <o 
to 

00 

c  >» 

•H  C 

Ai  CO 

O  P. 

o  e 

hJ  O 


.  oo 

-i  C 

00  -H 

01  C 
-H  -H 

^  s 

(0    01 

0  .y 

cfl 
-  4J 

01  to 

5  § 


s  •• 

•r^  VJ 

iH  0) 

J3  4J 

00  C 

3  0) 

to  U 


C  0) 

A  4-> 

4->  C 

4J  -H 

CO  10 

•g-0 

2  S 


28 


THE  MANHATTAN /MCLAUGHLIN  MINE 


The  One  Shot  Mining  Company  and  Bill  Wilder 


Anderson:   The  very  first  one  we  visited  after  Cherry  Hills  was  the  old 
Manhattan  mercury  mine.   Don  Gustafson  was  the  geologist  on 
site  and  met  the  owner  of  One  Shot  Mining  Company,  Bill  Wilder,1 
and  made  arrangements  with  Bill  to  evaluate  the  property  with 
the  idea  that  if  we  saw  something  we  liked  we  would  try  to  get 
an  exploration  and  mining  lease  from  him  for  mining.   Well,  I 
think  he  believed—from  my  perspective  anyway—that  we  were  not 
only  after  gold  but  we  were  after  geothermal  wells.   It  was  an 
old  active  geothermal  area,  and  he  was  pretty  knowledgeable 
about  the  Geysers  area,  which  is  only  about  twenty  airline 
miles  away.   He  probably  thought  that  there  was  more  value  in 
geothermal  than  in  gold,  because  he  had  never  found  any  gold  at 
the  Manhattan  mercury  mine.   He  was  at  the  time  mining  the 
sinter  for  ornamental  stone  and  shipping  it  to  Sacramento  and 
selling  it  for  stone  on  driveways  and  flower  beds  and  roofs. 
It  was  beautiful  sinter;  it  was  very  colorful,  very  pretty—and 
sold  for  just  a  minimal  amount:  maybe  ten  or  fifteen  dollars  a 
ton.   At  the  bottom  of  the  pit  where  he  was  mining,  Don 
Gustafson  went  in  and  sampled  and  found—on  the  faces  that  were 
exposed  over  several  hundred  feet—gold  values  averaging  about 
an  ounce  a  ton. 

ii 

Swent:     I  think  you're  going  a  little  fast  here.   You  identified  this 
area  as  a  place  where  antimony  and  mercury  and  the  other 
indicators  all  came  in  together  from  these  maps.   Did  you  tell 
Don  to  go  up  there  and  look  at  it  or  did  you  go  and  look  at  it? 


'James  William  Wilder,  Owner  of  One  Shot  Mining  Company;  Manhattan 
Mercury  Mine.  1965-1981,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft 
Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1996. 


29 


Anderson:   Don  had  of  course  visited  what  we  called  Cherry  Hills  and 

recommended  that  we  drill  it.  We  acquired  that  and  drilled  it. 
Then  he  said  the  next  priority  on  his  list  was,  as  I  recall, 
the  Manhattan  mercury  mine  which  was  just  ten  miles  away. 
There  were  some  old  sinters  there,  so  he  went  up  and  got 
permission  from  Mr.  Wilder  for  a  one-day  reconnaissance.   He 
covered  a  lot  of  ground  in  one  day.   He  took  samples,  and  Mr. 
Wilder  approved  that  and  took  samples  at  the  same  time  Don  did. 
Whenever  Don  took  one,  Mr.  Wilder  took  one. 

Swent:     Had  you  ever  met  Wilder  yourself? 

Anderson:   No.   And  I  think  Don  had  not  prior  to  then  either.   We  assayed 
the  samples,  and  as  I  said,  we  found  a  zone  that  ran  over  one 
ounce  of  gold  in  the  sinter  that  he  was  mining.   This  was  a 
very  exciting  property  because  it  was  very  large.   Wilder  had 
his  chance  to  run  assays—but  I  think  he  just  put  the  samples 
in  his  trailer  house  and  forgot  about  them. 

Swent:  How  did  you  actually—Don  took  this  sample- 
Anderson:  It  was  probably  a  hundred  samples  that  he  took. 
Swent:  And  he  mailed  it  to  an  assay  place- 
Anderson:  An  assay  lab,  right. 
Swent:  Where? 

Anderson:   I  think  in  those  days  we  were  using  Union  Assay  in  Salt  Lake 
City. 

Swent:  And  then  the  results  came  back  by  phone?   By  mail? 

Anderson:  Both.   By  phone  at  first  and  then  by  mail. 

Swent:  First  to  Gustafson? 

Anderson:  Yes. 

Swent:  And  then  he  picked  up  the  phone- 
Anderson:  And  called  me. 

Swent:     Tell  me  the  story;  how  did  it  happen?  When  did  you  first  hear 
this? 

Anderson:   Well,  I  heard  it  from  Don.   I  guess  it  was  over  the  phone.   He 
said,  "I  really  have  some  exciting  results  here.   We  need  to 


30 


acquire  this  property."  He  told  me  something  about  it,  and 
then  he  faxed  me--I  think  in  those  days  we  had  faxes.   Either 
faxed  or  mailed.   I  think  it  was  probably  before  the  fax;  close 
to  it  anyway- -because  I  know  that  during  the  major  assaying 
campaign  during  the  development  and  drilling  we  had  faxes. 
Maybe  at  this  time  we  didn't. 

Anyway,  he  came  over  and  showed  me  his  maps  and  the  sample 
results  plotted  on  them.   He  wanted  to  acquire  the  property,  so 
I  said,  "Please  do.   Go  ahead  and  see  if  you  can  negotiate  an 
arrangement  with  Mr.  Wilder."  That  took  a  lot  longer  than  I 
had  ever  dreamed  it  would  or  hoped  it  would. 

Swent:     Why? 

Anderson:   I  think  it  took  six  or  eight  months,  and  we  were  sitting  on 

these  fire  assay  results  in  a  completely  new  geological  model 
type.   In  the  meantime,  of  course,  we  continued  the 
reconnaissance  looking  elsewhere.   Don  had  prioritized  all  of 
the  known  occurrences:  Cherry  Hills  was  number  one,  Mclaughlin 
(Manhattan  Mine  in  those  days)  was  number  two. 

So  it  took  a  long  time  to  acquire  the  property,  but  we 
finally  did,  and  the  first  ten  holes  he  drilled  were  ore  holes, 
and  about  the  average  thickness  and  average  grade  of  the 
deposit . 


Reassuring  Bill  Wilder  about  His  Rights 


Swent:     Were  you  involved  in  the  negotiations  to  acquire  the  property? 

Anderson:   Yes,  on  several  occasions.   I  met  Bill  Wilder  and  went  up  to 

give  him  the  commendment  of  Homestake's  management  that  indeed 
we  were  looking  for  gold  and  not  geothermal  wells,  and  that  we 
would  exclude--!  think  I  was  the  first  one  that  maybe  told  him 
we  would  exclude  geothermal  rights  if  he  was  worried  about 
that.   He  could  maintain  geothermal  rights  and  develop  those  on 
his  own,  and  we  would  have  to  work  out  an  arrangement  if  the 
gold  mining  interfered  with  the  geothermal  and  how  we  would 
handle  that.   I  wasn't  worried  about  geothermal;  I  didn't  think 
there  would  be  any  geothermal  potential.   And  if  there  was,  it 
was  probably  off  to  the  side  of  the  property  that  we  then  knew 
as  being  of  interest  anyway,  so  there  wouldn't  have  been  any 
real  problem  with  mining  and  geothermal  wells  themselves. 
Geothermal  wells  can  be  angle  holes  and  drilled  by  directional 
drilling  methods  and  go  quite  a  ways  away  from  the  surface 


31 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Swent : 
Anderson: 

Swent : 
Anderson: 


Swent : 


location.   The  geothermal  potential  would  have  been  probably 
seven  or  eight  thousand  feet  to  the  source,  rather  than  a  few 
hundred  feet. 

I  didn't  realize  there  was  any  active  geothermal  activity 
there. 

Right  there,  probably  a  million  years  ago,  it  was  very  active, 
but  there  are  still  some  hot  springs  that  are  depositing  what 
we  call  calcareous  sinter.   It's  a  form  of  calcium  carbonate, 
instead  of  a  silica  sinter.   And  you  can  see  on  very  rare 
occasions  those  are  bubbling  up.   Usually  they're  warm;  they're 
not  hot  enough  to  be  steaming,  but  warm  water  is  coming  out  of 
the  springs  and  depositing  calcium  carbonate.   So  it's  the 


waning  phase  of  volcanic  activity  in  that  area, 
the  edge  of  the  geysers,  obviously. 


It's  off  to 


So  we  finally  negotiated  an  arrangement  with  Mr.  Wilder, 
and  we  had  a  royalty  which  we  could  buy  half  of.   I  insisted 
that  he  keep  the  other  half,  so  that  if  we  found  something  very 


large  and  big  he  would  be  treated  fairly, 
what  happened. 


It  turns  out  that ' s 


After  we  drilled  these  first  ten  holes  and  assumed  that  we 
were  probably  on  to  something  at  least  economic  if  not  major,  I 
was  particularly  worried  about  environmental  attitudes  and 
development  attitudes  in  northern  California. 

Did  you  have  your  own  drillers? 

We  had  contract  drillers.   It  was  a  well-known--!  forget  the 
name- -contract  driller  that  provided  all  the  equipment  and  the 
manpower.   We  just  collected  all  the  samples. 

The  reason  I  asked  that  is  I  was  wondering  if  there  was  any 
concern  for  security. 

Of  course.   Very  elaborate.   I  mean,  the  drillers  could  not 
touch  the  samples,  they  couldn't  see  the  core.   It  was  very 
clear  that  it  was  top  priority,  confidential  drilling.   But 
they  couldn't  see  the  gold  in  it  anyway,  but  we  still  took 
those  precautions. 

Was  Wilder  pretty  excited  when  you  told  him,  or  did  you  tell 
him  the  extent  of  the  samples  you  had  gotten?  Did  you  let  him 
know  how  rich  it  looked? 


32 


Anderson:   We  told  him  we  found  gold  in  the  samples,  but  we  didn't  give 
him  any  assay  data.   We  didn't  have  any  obligation  to—unless 
we  acquired  the  property. 

Swent:     This  is  part  of  your  negotiation;  you  pretend  it's  not  as  much 
as  you  think  it  is. 

Anderson:   We  negotiated  with  the  idea  that  we  were  after  a  gold  mine.   He 
had  taken  samples  in  the  same  places  we  did,  and  all  he  had  to 
do  was  assay  them  but  he  didn't  think  enough  of  the  gold 
potential  to  even  assay  them,  I  think.   That  was  probably  what 
happened. 

He  did  not  know  the  extent  of  what  he  had  until  we 
announced  the  discovery,  because  that  was  very  important  too. 
We  didn't  have  all  the  land  we  wanted,  it  turns  out.   We  staked 
a  lot  of  claims  around  him,  but  to  the  south  of  us  was  the 
Gamble  Ranch.   The  Gambles  didn't  want  to  make  any  deals  with 
anybody  on  the  ranch.   He  had  the  old  mercury  mine  on  his 
property  at  Knoxville. 


The  Gamble  Ranch 


Swent:      You  couldn't  stake  any  claims  on  his  property. 

Anderson:   No,  because  that  was  private  fee  land.   It  was  the  very 

northern  end  of  his  ranch,  which  goes  all  the  way  down  to  Lake 
Berryessa.  His  ranch  house  is  on  the  shore  of  Lake  Berryessa. 
He  has  a  lot  of  acres;  it's  a  beautiful,  beautiful  ranch. 

We  must  have  drilled  for  two  years  before  we  knew  the 
tonnage  and  grade  and  if  it  was  economic,  and  we  had  a  process 
for  it--the  autoclaves. 

Swent:     What  arrangement  do  you  make  with  somebody  to  be  drilling 
before  you  actually  acquire  the  land? 

Anderson:   Oh,  we  didn't;  we  had  a  lease.   We  couldn't  drill  until  we  had 
the  lease  agreement. 

Swent:     I  see,  but  you  had  done  the  sampling  first  just- 
Anderson:   Just  in  his  old  pit  there  where  Mr.  Wilder  was  mining  and 

selling  the  ornamental  stone  and  the  whole  surface  area,  that 
was  all.   Remember  I  told  you  about  how  there's  a  bull's-eye 


33 


and  the  rings?  We  sampled  the  rings,  and  we  could  tell  about 
how  big  the  gold  deposit  was  going  to  be. 

Swent:     But  you  just  get  his  permission  to  go  in  and  sample,  is  that 
it? 

Anderson:   On  the  first  pass.   We  just  got  his  verbal  permission.   We 
said,  "You  can  join  us,"  and  he  did;  he  walked  with  Don,  I 
think,  to  every  sample  site.   You'd  have  to  check  with  Don 
whether  he  took  a  sample  at  every  site,  but  I  know  he  took  some 
samples.   But  he  didn't  believe  there  was  gold.   As  I  told  you, 
I  think  he  thought  that  we  were  after  geothermal  rights.   But 
he  had  the  complete  set  of  samples  that  we  had- -he  had  taken 
his  own- -so  he  could  have  assayed  them  if  he  wanted  to.   I 
don't  think  he  did,  but  he  may  have. 

Swent:     It  took  you  two  years. 

Anderson:   At  least  two  years.   We  started  drilling  in  '78,  I  think,  and 
we  announced  it  sometime  in  late  1980. 

Swent:     I  think  the  announcement  was  in  August  of  1980. 

Anderson:   Whatever  the  date  was,  you  can  look  it  up.   I  can't  recall 
exactly. 

Swent:     Well,  that's  a  long  time  later. 
Anderson:   Probably  four  hundred  drill  holes. 
Swent:     A  lot  of  money  spent. 

Anderson:   Yes,  it  was  about  six  or  seven  million  dollars  by  then.   And 
the  day  we  announced  it,  there  were  probably  fifty  mining 
companies  the  next  morning  over  there  looking  for  open  land. 
We  had  staked  claims  for  everything  we  needed  for  waste  dumps 
and  mill  sites  and  everything,  so  we  had  all  we  needed  except 
Mr.  Gamble.  Mr.  Gamble  wasn't  prepared  to  make  any  deals,  but 
it  turns  out  he  finally  did  after  I  left  Homestake.   He  made  a 
deal,  but  there  wasn't  anything  on  his  land  anyway.   We 
predicted,  from  our  mapping  of  the  zones  and  so  forth,  that  it 
would  be  right  at  the  edge;  there  might  be  a  little  ore  a  few 
hundred  feet  on  his  property,  but  not  very  far.   So  after  a 
while  we  said,  Okay,  we  can  make  this  announcement  because 
we're  not  going  to  give  up  half  the  ore  body.   If  we  were  to 
give  up  anything  away  it  might  be  5  or  10  percent. 


Awareness  of  the  Environmental  Aspects 


Swent:     I  think  I  interrupted  you  a  little  earlier.   You  started  to  say 
that  you  were  aware  from  the  beginning  of  the  environmental 
aspects. 

Anderson:   I  commissioned  what  we  called  in  those  days  a  "white  paper," 
where  myself  and  one  of  the  prestigious  law  firms  in  San 
Francisco  went  up  and  interviewed-- 

Swent :     Which?  Can  you  say  who  it  was? 

Anderson:   I  think  the  law  firm  was  Thelen  Marrin  [Johnson  &  Bridges]. 

They  had  a  person  very  knowledgeable  about  the  environment  laws 
and  practical  aspects  of  it.   He  and  I  spent  a  lot  of  time  in 
Napa  and  St.  Helena  and  Calistoga  and  all  up  and  down  the  wine 
country  talking  to  the  board  of  supervisors,  the  important 
business  people,  some  of  the  wine  growers  and  vintners. 

Swent:     Do  you  remember  the  name  of  the  lawyer  that  went  with  you? 

Anderson:   I  forget  his  name.   He  did  a  lot  of  the  work.   We  didn't 

necessarily  just  travel  together;  he  would  go  up  on  some  days, 
I  went  up  on  other  days,  and  we  both  picked  out  a  list  of 
people.   The  white  paper  was  written  by  him;  it's  in  Homestake 
files  somewhere.   But  after--!  think  it  was  probably  six 
months—we  had  probably  by  then  spent  about  a  half  a  million 
dollars. 

Swent:     This  was  while  you  were  still  drilling? 

Anderson:   Just  the  initial  drilling  after  the  first  ten  holes.   We  knew 

we  had  something.   But  if  we  had  something,  could  we  permit  it, 
could  we  develop  it  and  so  forth?  The  deposit  is  sort  of  out 
of  sight,  up  in  the  far  reaches  of  the  county—it's  as  far  away 
from  developments  as  maybe  the  Geysers  area  was,  and  it's  all 
in  rugged  terrain.   But  the  general  public,  the  business 
leaders  in  the  community,  and  even  the  board  of  supervisors  and 
the  city  officials  were,  I  would  say,  reasonable.   They  weren't 
anti-development;  there  were  some  people  that  were  completely 
anti-development.   On  balance,  I  concluded,  as  well  as  the 
lawyer  from  Thelen  Marrin,  that  if  we  found  something  there, 
there  would  be  careful  and  reasonable  consideration  and  that  if 
we  took  the  proper  precautions  we  could  probably  develop  a 
mine.   This  was  at  the  same  time  that  the  big  refineries  at 
Richmond  were  being  proposed  and  killed  by  the 
environmentalists.   And  the  labor  unions  were  against  them, 
too.   So  there  was  a  lot  of  pressure  not  to  do  anything. 


35 


Ray  Krauss1  tells  me  that  after  we  got  all  our  permits  and 
so  forth,  that  the  attitude  in  Napa  County,  particularly, 
changed,  and  that  had  we  done  it  five  years  later  we  probably 
wouldn't  have  had  the  support  in  Napa.   As  it  was,  there  was  a 
group  of  very  vocal  anti-development  people  in  Yolo  County,  and 
a  very  well-versed  and  eloquent  speaker  from  the  English 
department  at  UC  Davis  who  led  the  Yolo  attack.2  Ray  has 
probably  told  you  all  about  those  things. 


Presenting  Home stake  to  the  Community 


Swent:     Specifically  who  were  some  of  the  people?  Do  you  remember  some 
of  the  people  you  talked  to  in  Napa  County? 

Anderson:   No,  I  don't  remember  the  names. 

Swent:     I  was  wondering  how  you—you  don't  just  walk  in  and  say,  "We 
think  we've  found  a  big  gold  mine." 

Anderson:   No,  no,  we  said,  We  represent  Homestake  Mining  Company,  we  are 
contemplating  doing  some  exploration  and  development  in  your 
county  in  out-of-the-way  areas,  and  if  we  found  anything  what 
would  your  feeling  be  about  responsible  development?  We're 
responsible  developers,  and  we  would  be  bound  to  not  leave  a 
mess  and  to  do  it  right  so  that  the  communities  impacted  would 
feel  good  about  it- -without  saying  what  we  were  looking  for  or 
where  we  would  be  for  sure.   Just  a  hypothetical  "what  if." 
Basically,  as  I  say,  the  consensus  was  that  they  were 
reasonable,  and  if  you  could  convince  them  that  you  had  a 
reasonable  plan  you  would  get  it  approved. 

That  was  a  very  important  part  of  the  program  at  that  time 
because  we  could  have  spent  another  four  or  five  million  in 
exploration  up  there;  I  think  at  that  time  we  had  spent  a  half 
a  million  or  less--$400,000  comes  to  mind.   We  needed  to  know 
whether  to  continue  or  whether  to  walk. 

Swent:     Had  you  known  of  any  other  mining  people  that  had  done  this 
kind  of  thing,  going  out-- 


'Raymond  Krauss,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine/Knoxville  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 

2See  the  interview  in  this  volume  with  Will  Baker. 


36 


Anderson:   Well,  I  had  done  it  before  in  my  career  when  I  was  with 

Occidental.   We  had  found  a  zinc  deposit,  as  I  told  you,  in 
Tennessee,  and  part  of  that  zinc  deposit  extended  under  a  city. 
So  we  proceeded  to  talk  to  the  city  fathers  and  acquired  leases 
for  zinc  rights  under  their  homes.   The  deposit  was  a  couple 
thousand  feet  below  the  surface,  so  the  homeowners  would  have 
never  even  known  that  you  were  there.   But  we  leased--!  think 
we  got  99  percent  of  the  lands  under  the  city  leased:  under 
city  buildings,  all  the  residence  areas.   I  had  also  done  this 
once  before  in  Arizona,  the  same  thing,  under  a  town.   I  found 
a  copper  deposit  that  was  partially  under  a  town. 

Swent :     Where  was  that? 

Anderson:   In  Miami,  Arizona.   It  was  under  the  town  of  Miami,  and  we  did 
the  same  thing  there.  So  I  had  a  lot  of  experience  in  those 
sort  of  things.   Most  people  don't  do  it. 

Swent:     You  don't  think  of  that  as  something  that  a  geologist  gets 
involved  in. 

Anderson:   As  I  say,  my  whole  view  of  the  world  was  economic  discovery, 

not  just  discovery  of  something  you  couldn't  do  anything  with, 
and  the  whole  program  was  geared  on  a  risk/reward  ratio,  and 
the  board  made  the  commitments  not  knowing  much  about  me  other 
than  the  interviews.   I  was  convinced  that  I  could  find 
economic  mines.   We  ran  economic  models  every  time  we  drilled  a 
hole.   We  would  do  metallurgical  testing,  we  would  see  if  that 
changed  the  concept,  the  economics  of  what  could  be  there,  and 
if  the  minerals  and  elements  in  it  were  very  hazardous  or 
whatever  if  that  would  change  the  project.   Every  time  we 
drilled  a  hole  we  looked  at  that.   We  looked  at  that  at  least 
six  hundred  times  at  Mclaughlin  as  we  explored  and  developed 
the  deposit.   But  as  you  went  further  and  further  you  knew  more 
about  it,  so  there  weren't  any  real  major  surprises.   We  did 
that  on  every  project  for  Homestake. 


Delays  Caused  by  Vocal  Opponents  of  Mining 


Swent:     If  you  had  run  across  your  English  professor  in  Yolo  County 
early  in  the  game,  what  might  have  happened? 

Anderson:   It  could  have  had  a  substantial  impact  on  the  decision  to  go 
ahead. 

Swent:     Do  you  think  you  might  have  backed  away  from  it? 


37 


Anderson:   If  it  were  just  him  personally,  probably  not.   But  if  he 

represented  a  huge  group,  and  the  community  leaders  felt  the 
same  way  about  it,  then  I  think  you  would  have  a  problem.   If 
you  had  two  or  three  eloquent  speakers  very  dedicated  against 
something—but  basically  if  the  community  was  open-minded,  it 
would  listen  to  reason.  And  that's  what  we  found,  even  in 
Yolo,  that  the  leaders  and  the  supervisors  or  city 
commissioners  or  whatever  they  call  them  were  open-minded,  even 
though  this  guy  was  probably  not- -they  didn't  know  about  him 
either  at  that  time.   He  tried  to  raise  their  hackles,  and  I 
remember  Ray  Krauss  telling  me  every  time  we  went  to  a  meeting 
this  guy  would  come  up  and  scare  the  heck  out  of  the  leaders. 
So  instead  of  getting  something  approved  at  that  meeting  after 
we  had  done  all  our  research,  we  would  have  to  have  another 
meeting  to  have  more  input  from  independent  consultants  and 
everybody  else.   Then,  at  the  third  meeting  you  would  get  the 
approval.   So  it  delayed  every  permit  by  two  meetings.   Every 
permit.   He  was  just  there  for  every  one.   It  was  a  delay.   Two 
hundred  permits.   Ten  million  dollars  on  all  the  environmental 
studies  and  the  permitting.   But  it  was  worth  it,  but  it  was  a 
challenge.   But  we  concluded  that  you  could  probably  develop  a 
mine,  and  it  turned  out  that  we  were  right.   There  was  a  time 
frame  where  we  were  worried  about  the  change  on  the  board  of 
supervisors  in  the  counties.   The  most  work  we  had  done  was  in 
Napa,  not  realizing  that  part  of  the  ore  body  went  into  Yolo  at 
that  time,  and  secondly  that  the  facilities  would  be  in  Lake 
County.   As  soon  as  we  saw  that  we  then  expanded  the--. 

Swent:     How  did  you  become  aware  of  the  Lake  County  siting? 

Anderson:   It  was  very  early  on,  after  we  had  actually  drilled  the  first 

ten  holes  and  knew  we  were  on  to  something.   We  started  looking 
for  areas  for  waste  dumps  and  for  tailings  disposal,  and 
tailings  is  always  a  grave  concern  environmentally,  and  this 
area  in  Lake  County  was  one  of  the  prime  areas  for  the  mill 
tailings.   So  we  acquired  that  very  early  on  through  options 
and  claim  location.   [coughs) 

Swent:     Would  you  like  a  glass  of  water,  Jim? 

Anderson:   No,  I'm  fine,  thank  you.   That's  part  of  my  philosophy  of 

economic  discoveries,  that  you've  got  to  have  all  the  land  that 
you  need  to  run  everything.   You  can't  have  just  the  ore  body; 
you've  got  to  have  the  site  for  the  waste,  you've  got  to  have 
the  tailings,  you've  got  to  have  the  mill  site  for  the  mill  and 
access  and  power  and  everything  else. 

Swent:     That  might  be  one  of  the  things  you  would  list  as  a  new 
development  that  affects  your  exploration:  this  whole 


38 


environmental  consideration  that  you  wouldn't  have  had  to  think 
of  twenty-five  years  earlier? 

Anderson:   Indeed,  and  I  think  that  became  a  paramount  part  of  our 

program.   We  hired  a  couple  of  environmental  specialists,  the 
Danny  Brothers:  Joe  Danny,  and  I  forget  his  brother's  name. 
And  we  hired  a  government  relations  person,  Bob  Reveles,  to 
help  us  get  professional  expertise  on  those  areas  concerning 
our  entire  program,  not  just  at  the  McLaughlin  property. 

So  it  was  a  team,  and  I  think  it  could  have  happened-- 
Homestake  being  a  small  company,  everybody  understood  the 
risks,  and  were  prepared  to  take  them.   Probably  many  other 
companies  would  not  have  undertaken  them  because  of  the  major 
defeats  that  the  oil  companies  had  in  northern  California  in 
trying  to  bring  refineries  in  there.   And  the  labor  unions. 


Key  People:  Gustafson.  Kalk.  Previdi.  Stoehr 


Swent :     In  addition  to  just  drilling  the  holes,  I  presume  you  had  to 
build  up  quite  a  staff  then  too,  didn't  you? 

Anderson:   We  added  the  staff  as  needed.   I  think  at  the  outset--as  I 
said,  we  had  contract  drillers,  so  they  provided  their  own 
people.   Don  Gustafson  had  a  key  project  manager  because  Don 
was  in  charge  of  reconnaissance  as  well.   I  don't  know  if 
you've  talked  to  him,  but  his  name  is  Tom  Kalk.   He  was  the 
project  manager  under  Don  Gustafson. 

Swent:     You  had  mentioned  here  four  managers  [looking  at  document). 
Anderson:   Right,  project  managers  and  reconnaissance  managers. 
Swent:     Gold  reconnaissance,  target  exploration. 

Anderson:   Right.   Don  Gustafson  started  out  as  reconnaissance  manager, 
and  when  he  found  McLaughlin  I  appointed  him  to  be  the  target 
exploration  manager.   And  then  he  hired  a  project  manager  under 
him  because  he  had  several  reconnaisance  and  drilling  projects 
going  on  at  the  same  time. 

Swent:     That  was  Tom  Kalk. 

Anderson:   Tom  Kalk,  yes.   Tom  did  a  lot  of  the  drilling.   He  was 

responsible  for  drilling  and  plotting  the  holes  on  the  maps  and 
doing  the  initial  ore  reserves. 


39 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Swent : 


Swent : 


There  was  a  very  important  engineer  that  I  hired  for  the 
exploration  group,  a  very  practical  engineer:  his  name  is  Bob 
Previdi.   He ' s  a  mining  engineer,  and  he's  here  in  Denver.   He 
was  instrumental  in  doing  the  ore  reserve  estimates,  and  a  lot 
of  help  on  the  economic  modeling  and  so  forth  at  McLaughlin. 

Dick  Stoehr  and  I  traveled  to  South  Africa  to  find  out 
about  the  autoclaves  because  we  knew  there  would  be  several 
processes  to  treat  this  refractory  ore,  which  in  this  case  the 
gold  encapsulated  in  silica.   I'd  say  I'd  give  a  big  part  of 
the  credit  to  Dick  for  his  contacts  and  knowledge  and 
persistence  in  following  up  on  autoclave  technology  which  we 
ran  across  when  we  were  in  South  Africa,  and  he  enlisted  the 
service  and  help  of  several  South  African  firms.   They  were 
thinking  about  much  bigger  operations  for  autoclaves  in  South 
Africa,  to  treat  some  of  the  big  huge  waste  dumps  they  have, 
and  they  would  use  our  three-thousand-ton-a-day  facility  as  a 
pilot  plant  for  their  own  much  bigger  one.   I  mean,  Dick  did  a 
lot  of  those  things  that  were  very  important  at  that  time  for 
that  autoclave,  because  the  other  alternative  was  to  use  a 
process  called  the  Sherritt  Gordon  process  —  they  wanted  a  huge 
royalty,  and  it  was  much  more  expensive  and  capital-intensive 
to  build  a  plant. 

And  you  are  supposed  to  be  aware  of  all  of  these  options  in 
order  to  make  your  recommendation. 

We  had  developed  a  metallurgical  process.   I  hired  outside 
consultants.   Langan  [ Swent]  was  involved  in  a  lot  of  those 
decisions,  picking--!  think  it  was  a  firm  in  Toronto.   I  forget 
their  name  now.   It  was  a  close  friend  of  his,  and  he  had  used 
them  in  the  uranium  days . 

Al  Ross? 


Anderson:   Al  Ross,  that's  the  one.  Absolutely.   He  was  the  one  who  laid 
out  the  options  that  we  had,  including  the  Sherritt  Gordon,  and 
I  think  he  even  probably  said  that  the  South  Africans  he  was 
consulting  for  were  looking  into  autoclave  technology.   As  I 
said,  after  we  got  the  first  ten  holes  I  started  all  these 
things  immediately:  the  investigations,  whether  you  could 
permit  it,  was  it  metallurgically  economic,  could  you  recover 
it,  what  are  the  economics  going  to  look  like.   Those  things 
were  updated  almost  daily.   It  takes  that  to  be  successful. 


Awfully  complicated,  isn't  it? 


Anderson:   It  was  fun. 


Swent:     It's  more  than  just  finding  colors  in  a  pan. 

Anderson:   Exactly.   And  at  the  same  time,  we  were  exploring  other  sites 
and  locations. 

There  were  at  least  two  properties  with  potential 
comparable  to  Mclaughlin.   One's  under  a  town,  and  another  is 
in  a  state  park  which  will  never  be  mined.   Ever.   Well,  maybe 
two  hundred  years  from  now,  but  not  now. 

Swent:      Socially  impossible. 

Anderson:   Yes,  socially  impossible.   So  Mclaughlin  was  socially  possible. 

Swent:      Just  barely. 

Anderson:   Yes.   Right  on  the  edge.   A  lot  of  permitting.   I  had  met  Ray 
Krauss  when  he  was  on  the  [California  State]  mining  board.   He 
had  lived  in  Sonoma  and  was  a  county  planner  in  Sonoma,  and  had 
been  involved  in  developing  a  plan  for  mining  sand  and  gravel. 
And  it  was  a  very  good  plan  and  a  very  reasoned  and  practical 
plan,  and  most  of  the  mining  companies  went  along  with  it. 
There  was  a  lot  of  smoke  from  some  of  the  environmentalists, 
but  it  was  approved  by  Sonoma  County.   Ray  was  on  the  mining 
board-- 


Member  of  California  State  Mining  and  Geology  Board 


Swent:  And  you  were  also. 

Anderson:  And  I  was  on  the  mining  board. 

Swent:  You  might  mention  that.   When  did  you  go  on  the  mining  board? 

Anderson:  I  think  it's  on  my  resume,  but  it  was  1977. 

Swent:  Oh,  yes.   [Looking  at  document]   This  is  the  California  State- 
Anderson:  California  State  Mining  and  Geology  Board. 
Swent:  In  1977  you  went  on  that. 

Anderson:   Right.   I  started  on  the  board  in  1977  and  became  chairman  a 
few  years  later,  and  I  think  it  was  because  of  the  permitting 
success  that  we  had  and  also  fulfilling  the  promises  that  we 
had  to  the  communities  there  when  we  were  first  starting,  I 


41 


think  Don  McLaughlin  and  Paul  Henshaw  probably  recommended  me 
to  be  on  the  mining  board.   And  their  recommendation  carried  a 
lot  of  weight  in  Sacramento.   That's  how  I  think  I  got 
appointed.   It's  an  appointment  —  I'm  a  Republican,  and 
[Governor  Edmund  G.]  "Jerry"  Brown  appointed  me,  so  I  was  the 
token  developer,  I  guess,  on  the  mining  board.   I  eventually 
became  chairman  of  the  board  and  stayed  on  the  board  until 
1992,  and  it  just  became  too  much  of  a  burden. 

Swent:      So  that's  how  you  met  Ray. 

Anderson:   Yes,  then  I  hired  him.   I  said,  "You  have  to  quit  the  mining 
board.   We'd  like  you  to  come  to  work  at  Homestake."   He  did, 
and  he  became  the  environmental  manager,  and  he  knew  all  the 
people,  of  course,  having  worked  in  Sonoma  and  knew  a  lot  of 
the  planners  from  the  other  cities  and  communities.   He  was  a 
key  player,  no  question  about  it,  in  getting  that  mine 
permitted.   Of  course  Jack  Thompson,1  with  his  great  ability  to 
communicate  with  people  in  those  early  permitting  days  —  to  be 
able  to  describe  mining  to  them  in  terms  they  understood  was 
very  important. 

Swent:      But  he  came  quite  a  bit  later. 

Anderson:   Later,  but  he  came  during  the  construction  phase  when  a  lot  of 
the  operating  permits  were  being  applied  for,  and  that's 
another  level  of  complication.   I  talked  about  just  permits  to 
get  started;  then  in  addition  you  needed  permits  to  operate 
[chuckles] --like  blasting  permits  and  rock-moving  permits  and 
hauling  permits  across  roads  and  transporting  hazardous 
material  like  cyanide  and  stuff  across  roads  in  the  state. 


Determining  Economic  Feasibility 


Swent:     Now  whose  bailiwick  was  that?   Did  that  come  under  the 

geological- 
Anderson:   Until  the  board  approved  the  construction,  its  feasibility,  and 

allocated  the  money,  it  was  my  responsibility.   All  of  it. 

Swent:     How  did  you— 


'Jack  Thompson,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine/Knoxville  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


42 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


Swent : 


Anderson: 


it 

When  you  went  to  actually  get  authorization  to  go  ahead,  was 
that-- 

Oh,  well,  the  board  already  was  so  intimately  knowledgeable 
about  it- -we  would  give  them  updates  monthly,  and  they  would 
see  our  economic  models  as  we  would  do  updated  ore  reserves 
officially  once  every  quarter,  probably. 

So  that  wasn't  a  big  dramatic  thing. 

It  wasn't  unknown  to  them,  and  the  main  questions  of  the  board, 
I  think,  were,  What's  the  price  of  gold  going  to  be?  And, 
technically,  is  it  there?   I  think  Don  Mclaughlin  visited  a 
number  of  times  because  his  name  was  being  applied  to  the  mine; 
he  didn't  want  it  to  be  a  failure.   My  studies  showed  that  out 
of  ten  properties  that  start  up,  eight  of  them  are  failures 
after  they've  started  up.   That's  another  factor  in  the  risk 
that  a  lot  of  people  don't  know;  they  think  that  once  you  start 
a  mine  it's  going  to  go,  but  a  lot  of  them  fail.   We  knew  all 
those  things,  and  all  those  things  were  discussed  at  the  board 
level.   I  think  it  was  a  board  meeting  or  two  before  the 
feasibility  study  was  approved  and  submitted.   Don  Mclaughlin 
endorsed  having  his  name  put  on  the  property,  so  I  think  that 
really  sort  of  helped  with  the  rest  of  it.   But  it  was  a  big 
investment  for  Homestake  in  those  days.   It  started  out  to  be 
about--!  think  the  budget  was  $180  million  or  $190  million.   I 
think  it  turned  out  to  be  $250  million  by  the  time  we  were 
through.   It's  a  lot  of  money.   Fortunately,  we  had  the  cash, 
didn't  have  to  borrow  it.   I  think  Homestake  had  a  million 
ounces  of  gold  in  the  vaults  at  Lead  in  the  days  when  they  were 
worried  about  production  commitments  to  people;  if  there  would 
be  a  mine  cave-in  or  a  shaft  cave-in  or  something,  they  needed 
production  so  they  had  a  million  ounces  in  the  vault,  and  I 
think  we  sold  a  good  part  of  that  at  $800  or  $700  an  ounce.   So 
it  financed  the  Mclaughlin  Mine,  in  effect. 

There  were  a  lot  of  management  changes  at  Homestake  at  that 
time  and  the  way  they  were  doing  things.   I  remember  that  you 
had  retreats  for  your  staff,  and-- 

Yes,  for  the  exploration  group  we  had  our  own  annual  budgeting 
session,  and  those  were  opportunities  to  talk  about  programs 
and  progress  and  knowledge  that  had  been  learned  by  various 
exploration  teams.  We  would  meet  in  Reno  or  Denver  and  share 
knowledge  about  these  concepts.   We  were  doing  lots  of  things, 
there  were  new  staff  members,  and  they  had  to  be  brought  up  to 
the  date. 


Getting  Reliable  Assays  a  Challenge 


Anderson:   We  found  that  the  assay  labs  would  not  handle  the  samples  the 

way  we  needed  them  to  be  done,  because  gold  assaying  depends  on 
the  coarseness  of  the  gold  and  how  fine  you  have  to  crush  the 
sample  before  you  even  take  a  split.  And  most  of  the 
commercial  assay  labs  will  crush  the  rock  to  minus  Jg  inch  and 
then  take  a  sample.  Well,  we  found  that  the  size  that  you  have 
to  crush  to  before  you  take  the  first  sample  depends  on  the 
coarseness  of  gold  in  the  rock,  and  sometimes  you  have  to  grind 
it  to  100  mesh  before  taking  a  split  for  assaying.   We  would  do 
very  thorough  metallurgical  and  assay  studies  to  find  out  what 
the  size  of  the  gold  was.   The  first  time  we  would  hit  an  ore 
hole  on  a  property,  of  ore  grade,  we  would  do  all  those  studies 
to  find  out  the  coarseness  of  the  gold  and  the  metallurgical 
characteristics  and  so  forth.  We  would  then  tell  the  assay  lab 
what  size  we  needed  to  crush  the  rock  to  before  they  took  the 
split  for  assay.   We  found  that  our  samples  were  always  in  the 
storage  area  for  weeks  or  sometimes  months,  because  they  would 
do  the  standard  ones  first;  they  didn't  have  time  or  the 
interest  in  doing  this  special  processing.   So  we  built  a 
sample  preparation  lab  in  Reno,  and  that  was  part  of  the 
growth.   That  lab  would  prepare  all  the  samples,  and  then  send 
[them]  out  to  assay  labs  for  assay,  but  we  would  prepare  all 
the  samples  meticulously.   With  each  group  of  a  hundred  samples 
sent  to  an  assay  lab,  we  would  send  five  to  ten  of  what  we 
called  standard  samples.   We  put  together  large  volumes  of 
material  that  would  run  .01,  .1,  .3,  and  send  those  with  codes 
only  we  knew—and  if  the  assay  lab  didn't  come  out  with  the 
same  answer  on  those  unknown  samples  then  they  would  do  the 
whole  batch  over  again,  and  we  knew  there  was  a  problem  if  they 
didn't  get  the  right  answer  on  those  samples.   We  did  that  on 
every  batch  of  samples  from  every  prospect. 

Swent:     You  would  send  them  to  several  different  labs? 

Anderson:   As  well.   But  we  would  send  our  standards;  if  the  lab  that  we 
sent  them  to  didn't  get  the  right  answer  on  the  standards,  our 
agreement  with  them  was  that  they  would  have  to  do  them  over. 
And  they  didn't  know  which  samples  were  standards  and  which 
ones  were  just  the  regular.   So  that  was  a  very  sophisticated 
part  of  the  program.   It  gave  us  the  confidence  that  the  assays 
that  we  had  were  correct,  that  the  reserves  were  there,  and  to 
me  that's  the  battle:  if  you  don't  have  reliable  assays  you 
might  as  well  forget  the  whole  project.   If  you  need  to  spend 
$200  million  to  build  a  mine  —  and  we  knew  early  on  it  was  going 
to  be  over  $100  million,  and  by  the  time  it  was  finished  [it 
was]  $180  to  $200  million  with  the  size  that  we  were  going  for. 


44 


Swent:     If  only  the  price  of  gold  had  stayed  up  to  six  hundred. 

Anderson:   Well,  that's  right  —  if  it  had  stayed  at  six  hundred  it  would 
have  been  a  smashing  success.   But  I  think  in  part  a  lot  of 
companies  started  exploring  for  gold,  and  you'll  see  that  in  my 
paper  here  that  every  one  of  these  things  is  time  sensitive, 
just  like  copper.   In  my  days  of  copper—when  I  was  really 
focusing  on  copper  with  Kennecott—once  there  were  so  many 
copper  deposits  found  the  copper  price  started  dropping— 
because  somebody  wanted  to  put  their  new  deposit  into 
production  and  they  could  undercut  the  price  a  bit  and  still 
make  money.   That  happened  in  gold,  and  I  think  now  what's 
happening  is  every  time  gold  reaches  approximately  $400  an 
ounce  everybody  sells  forward,  and  all  the  producers—except 
Homestake  and  a  couple  others—bring  it  back  down.   So  it's 
ranged  from  $375  to  $395  for  the  last  five  years,  and  in  part 
producers  do  that  to  themselves  by  selling  forward  to  lock  in  a 
price  at  $400  or  thereabouts. 

The  business  changed  with  time.   Now  is  not  the  time  to 
start  an  exploration  program  for  gold;  it's  the  time  to  explore 
for  something  else,  some  other  metal  or  some  other  commodity. 
But  at  the  time  I  joined  Homestake  gold  was  very  much  in  my 
mind  as  being  the  opportune  element  and  the  opportune  company 
and-- . 

Swent:     Oh,  you  hit  it  at  the  right  time. 
Anderson:   It  sure  was. 


Moving  a  Project  from  Exploration  to  Operations;  Before 
Development  or  After? 


Swent:     I  wanted  to  talk  a  little  bit,  if  you  don't  mind,  about--! 

think  it's  a  critical  point,  and  I'm  unclear  about  it  myself. 
When  your  exploration  group  turns  a  project  over  to  the 
operations  people,  how  do  you  know  when  that— how  does  that 
happen?  Would  you  like  to  discuss  how  the  McLaughlin  Mine- 
Anderson:   To  me  it's  very  simple;  it's  not  grey.  A  lot  of  people 
probably  believe  it's  grey,  but  I  think  once  you  have  a 
feasibility  study  that's  been  prepared  by  an  outside 
independent  group  and  verified  by  your  internal  organization- 

Swent:     You  ordered  the  feasibility  study,  did  you? 


45 


Anderson:   Exactly.  We  did  it  inside  but  we  also  had  some  outsiders  look 
at  it,  but  that  was  the  exploration  group.   And  then  we  turned 
the  data  over  to  Bill  Humphrey's1  group.   And  Don  Delicate 
(while  he  was  still  active  in  the  company) ,  every  time  he  came 
to  a  board  meeting  he  would  spend  two  or  three  days  with  me. 
We  would  go  up  to  McLaughlin.   So  we  always  had  his  input, 
almost  every  month—a  couple  days  of  his  input  as  to  whether 
there  were  problems  he  could  see  or  whether  these  assumptions 
were  wrong.   For  many  years  after  he  retired,  I  used  him  as  a 
consultant  in  the  exploration  group  to  help  because  he  was  a 
very  practical  guy  who  had  no  axes  to  grind,  and  he  just  really 
knew  the  sort  of  rule-of-thumb  assumptions  that  you  could  make 
and  be  very  close  for  operating  costs  and  labor  and  permitting 
and  everything  else. 

To  me,  once  you've  completed  the  feasibility  study  and  knew 
you  had  a  reserve  that  would  make  it  on  the  maps  for  Homestake, 
which  was  a  couple  hundred  thousand  ounces  a  year- -it  would  be 
about  the  size  or  bigger--it  would  grow  hopefully  to  the  size 
of  the  Homestake  Mine.  We  started  out  with  a  couple  hundred 
thousand  ounces  per  year,  and  then  we  did  a  feasibility  at  that 
size  and  turned  it  over  to  operations,  they  looked  at  it  and 
concurred  with  the  numbers  and  thought  they  could  do  it.   At 
that  point  in  time  the  feasibility  study  was  submitted  to  the 
board. 

Now  there's  a  lot  of  concern,  I  think,  in  a  lot  of  groups 
as  to  whether  the  exploration  group  ought  to  do  development -- 
which  we  did.   We  did  the  development  work.   I  think  that's 
essential,  myself.   It's  critical  that  the  people  that  are 
doing  the  exploration  and  know  the  most  about  the  deposit  have 
within  their  group  the  capabilities—not  necessarily  the  same 
people,  but  within  their  group—of  doing  the  evaluation.   It's 
so  important;  you  want  to  stop  it  immediately  if  something 
along  the  way  shows  up  as  being  bad,  not  at  the  last  minute 
when  you're  ready  to  think  about  spending  $200  million.   But 
I'm  thinking  about  going  from  400,000  to  600,000,  from  600,000 
to  a  million,  from  a  million  to  two. 

Swent:     What  were  some  of  these  junctions  at  which  point  you  might  have 
stopped  or  had  to  consider  whether  or  not  to  go  on? 

Anderson:   There  was  a  very  clear  one  after  the  first  maybe  $400,000  and 
thirty  or  forty  drill  holes.  What  does  that  show  us?   Is  it 


'William  A.  Humphrey,  Mining  Operations  and  Engineering  Executive  for 
Anaconda.  Newmont.  Homestake.  1950  to  1995,  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1996. 


economic  for  the  reserves  we  have?  Can  we  permit  it?  What  is 
the  capital  cost  going  to  be  and  the  operating  cost?   Is  it 
going  to  be  profitable?  We  would  do  that  almost  on  a  drill- 
hole-by-drill-hole  basis  in  the  early  days,  from  drill-hole 
thirty  up  to  drill-hole  100,  and  after  that  it  would  maybe  be 
once  a  month  that  we  would  see  if  the  next  thirty  holes  had 
improved,  because  we  were  extending- -we  had  already  had  a  core 
of  reserves,  and  we  were  trying  to  expand  them,  and  we  already 
knew  the  core  of  reserves  was  profitable,  but  not  maybe  the 
size  that  Homestake  would  like.   So  the  question  is,  Do  we 
continue?   Is  there  a  good  enough  chance  to  make  it  something 
big  enough  to  be  of  interest  to  Homestake  versus  just  selling 
it  as  a  joint  venture?  At  this  point  those  were  the  main 
considerations . 


Swent :     So  that  could  have  been  a  possibility. 

Anderson:  Exactly.  And  it  was,  even  up  to  probably  a  few  days  before  the 
board  decision.  Several  people  in  Homestake  wanted  to  sell  the 
property. 

Swent:     How  did  you  feel  about  that? 

Anderson:   The  story  is  sort  of  like  this:  each  day  I  would  hear  some 

negatives  of  why  we  shouldn't  do  it  and  why  we  should  sell  it, 
and  I  would  go  home  and  spend  the  whole  night--and  I  did  this 
for  about  ten  days,  thinking  of  the  positives  to  counter  with-- 
and  the  next  day  discuss  those  and  then  I'd  hear  the  negatives 
again,  and  that  kept  on  going  for  ten  days,  and  finally  the 
decision  was  to  go  ahead  and  submit  the  project  to  the  board 
for  approval  of  development  and  operation  by  Homestake.   I 
think  that  was  Paul  Henshaw's  decision. 

Swent:     To  go  ahead? 

Anderson:   Yes.   But  he  was  —  listening  to  both  sides,  devil's  advocate,  if 
you  would,  and  I  think  that's  the  way  it  should  be  done. 
Here's  the  pros,  here's  the  cons.   Every  project  is  a  risk, 
particularly  for  Homestake,  with  a  $200-million  investment.   It 
would  break  the  company  if  it  wasn't  reasonable.   I  think  Paul 
handled  that  process  very  well,  though  it  was  hard  on  the 
player--me  [laughs].   So  I  didn't  sleep  much  for  ten  days. 

Swent:     You  get  sort  of  a  proprietary  interest  in  it,  don't  you? 

Anderson:  You  think  you're  trying  to  be  objective,  and  I  was  convinced 
the  reserves  were  there.  I  mean,  clearly  the  big  risk  in  my 
opinion—and  probably  in  most  people  "s--was  the  price  of  gold. 


47 


That's  a  bet  the  gold  company  probably  has  to  make  if  it's 
reasonable. 

Swent:     It's  anybody's  guess. 

Anderson:   If  gold  would  have  stayed  at  $600,  it  would  have  been  a 

fabulous  project.   At  the  time  we  were  doing  the  feasibility 
study,  gold  was  $650  to  $700  an  ounce. 

Swent:     Were  you  the  one  who  picked  a  price  for  the  feasibility  study 
to  be  based  on? 

Anderson:   We  picked,  I  think,  three  prices:  we  had  a  $400  gold  pit,  a 
$500  gold  pit,  and  a  $600  gold  pit. 

Swent:     Did  you  personally  select  that  price? 

Anderson:   After  talking  with  a  lot  of  the  people  in  Homestake,  we  thought 
600  would  be  a  high  end,  and  400  would  a  low  end. 
Unfortunately,  it  was  more  like  350  as  the  low  end,  not  400. 
Those  numbers  were  discussed  with  marketing  people  and  with 
Paul  and  Don  [McLaughlin]  .   We  tried  to  cover  the  range—if 
gold  is  $400  an  ounce,  does  it  make  sense  to  go  ahead?  Well, 
it  was  very  marginal.  And  if  you  have  any  loss  of  recovery, 
which  they  apparently  didn't,  but  if  you  have  operating  costs 
or  higher  capital  costs,  it  changes  the  economic  results. 

Swent:     Well,  it  turned  out  to  be  a  wonderful  thing. 
Anderson:   I  hope  so.   I  hope  Homestake 's  happy  with  it. 
Swent:     How  do  you  feel  looking  back  on  it? 

Anderson:   Oh,  I  think  it  was  one  of  the  more  exciting  and  stimulating 
parts  of  my  career. 

Swent:  When  did  you  leave  Homestake? 

Anderson:  In  1987. 

Swent:  In  '87.   So  it  was  well  on  the  way  by  then. 

Anderson:  It  had  been  in  production  for  four  or  five  years  by  then. 

Swent:     So  you  knew  how  it  was  going  to  turn  out.   Is  there  anything 
else  that  we  need  to  say  about  McLaughlin,  do  you  think?   I 
don't  want  to  leave  out  any  of  the  major-- 


Anderson:   No.   I'd  say  if  you've  talked  to  Don  Gustafson,  you've  talked 

to  Ray  Krauss,  Jack  Thompson—you  should  talk  to  Bob  Previdi  if 
you  have  a  chance.   He's  here  in  Denver,  he's  a  mining 
engineer.  He  was  quite  instrumental  in  the  engineering  aspects 
of  the  feasibility  study. 

Swent:     I  came  up  to  Denver  last  year  to  interview  John  Ransone,  but  he 
died  before  I  got  here. 

Anderson:   He  was  instrumental  in  the  metallurgical  end,  and  so  was  a 

fellow  by  the  name  of  Doug  Halbe.   He  was  Ransone 's  boss  for  a 
while,  and  then  I  think  Ransone  got  transferred  to  Mclaughlin. 

Swent:     Ransone  was  the  project  manager. 

Anderson:   He  became  project  manager,  but  not  at  the  start. 

Swent:     No.   I  really  felt  quite  crushed  by  not  being  able  to  interview 
him.   I  have  not  talked  to  Previdi. 

Anderson:   I  think  he  was  a  key  player.   He's  probably  got  some 

perspectives  about  the  risks,  and  he's  coming  from  the 
engineering  standpoint.   He  was  very  instrumental  in  all  the 
engineering  and  ore  reserve  calculations,  and  I  relied  on  him 
to  work  with  the  metallurgists  to  come  up  with  the  economics 
there.   He  lived  here  in  Denver.   It  was  a  teamwork  effort; 
lots  of  players,  and  all  dedicated  to  try  to  figure  out  whether 
the  assumptions  were  reasonable.   I  think  probably  the 
assumption  that  was  off  the  worst  —  from  about  the  time  I  left- 
was  the  fact  that  probably  the  infrastructure,  the  roads  and 
stuff,  cost  more  than  people  had  expected.   I  think  the  county 
demanded  the  road  be  paved  rather  than  just  a  nice  gravel  road, 
and  it  had  to  be  built  to  highway  specs  in  terms  of  width  and 
such,  so  it  was  no  longer  just  a  little  quiet  county  road. 

Swent:     That  must  have  added  a  lot. 

Anderson:   It  probably  did,  I'm  not  sure.   I  don't  remember,  but  it  was 
probably  a  couple  million  dollars. 

Swent:     Of  course  the  whole  environmental  permitting,  I  think,  took 
longer  than  anybody  realized  it  would. 

Anderson:   It  sure  did.   It  was  just  three  delays  for  every  permit—this 
guy  from  Yolo  County. 


Swent : 


Hard  on  everyone  [chuckles]. 


Anderson:   I  think  that  pretty  well  covers  it.   It  was  a  wonderful 

experience.   I  think  the  Homestake  team  was  exciting  to  work 
with.   I  finally  left  because  I  had  an  opportunity  to  run  a 
company.   We  put  together  three  or  four  developments  together 
with  an  operating  mine  and  built  them  up  in  a  short  period  of 
time.   After  that,  the  environmentalists  became  more  successful 
at  delaying  projects,  and  I  decided  after  that  success  that  I 
didn't  need  to  spend  another  eight  years  of  my  life  trying  to 
get  another  mine  permitted  in  the  United  States. 

Swent :     Were  you  doing  a  similar  kind  of  thing  with  the  companies 

you've  been  with  since  then?  Have  you  been  able  to  continue 
the-- 

Anderson:   We  didn't  have  much  exploration.   We  had  mostly  development, 
feasibility  and  financing  and  startup,  more  the  operating  end 
of  it.   We  put  together  an  operating  company  with  three 
development  projects  and  a  couple  joint  ventures  that  we  bought 
into  to  form  a  stand-alone  company,  which  was  sort  of  like 
starting  a  Homestake. 


50 


VI   OTHER  VENTURES 


Minven:  CEO  also  Means  "Chief  Environmental  Officer" 


Swent:     Which  one  is  this?   Fulcrum?  Or  Minven? 

Anderson:   Minven  is  the  company  that  I  really  started.   There  were  assets 
that  Fulcrum  had  purchased,  and  I  put  them  all  together  and 
started  the  company  and  developed  three  mines  and  participated 
with  joint  venture  partners  on  two  other  ones  that  were  put 
into  production  and  were  successfully  profitable  mines. 

It  was  exciting—sort  of  the  operating  end  of  things  and 
getting  to  talk  to  financial  people  around  the  world.   I  met  a 
lot  of  exciting  people  all  over  the  world:  shareholders  and 
bankers  and  investment  bankers  and  lawyers. 

Swent:     Geology  certainly  covers  a  lot  more  than  just  looking  at  rocks 
and  especially  in  your  experience. 

Anderson:   Depends  on  the  person,  I  think.   Some  geologists  are  only 

interested  in  the  rocks.   And  I  was  only  interested  in  economic 
result.   That  was  my  pure  interest. 

Swent:  And  that  gets  you  off  into  a  lot  of  other  areas,  doesn't  it? 

Anderson:  Exactly,  yes. 

Swent:  Personnel  and  economics  and-- 

Anderson:  Environmental. 

Swent:  Yes. 

Anderson:   I  remember  when  I  was  with  Minven,  I  used  to  tell  particularly 
the  governor  of  South  Dakota--!  was  CEO,  and  I  said,  "Do  you 
know  what  that  means?"  He  said,  "Yes,  chief  executive 


51 


officer."   I  said,  "Yes,  I'm  that,  but  I'm  also  chief 
environmental  officer."  And  I  think  that  ±s^  the  role  of  the 
CEO  these  days;  he  has  to  be  the  chief  environmental  officer  as 
well.   That's  probably  just  as  important  as  having  the 
confidence  of  the  shareholders,  to  be  a  very  reputable  and 
credible  environmentalist.   And  it  costs  money,  unfortunately. 


More  About  the  California  Mining  and  Geology  Board 


Swent:     Would  you  like  to  talk  at  all  about  your  work  on  the  California 
Mining  and  Geology  Board? 

Anderson:   It's  responsible  for  the  Surface  Mining  and  Reclamation  Act 

[SMARA]  and  also  responsible  for  geological  studies  throughout 
the  state,  both  from  the  standpoint  of  resources  and  from  the 
standpoint  of  environmental  and  from  the  standpoint  of  public 
safety.   The  new  areas  that  I  really  found  fascinating  and 
critical  involved  public  safety—particularly  landslides, 
seismic  hazards,  and  areas  prone  to  flooding. 

Swent:     Do  you  have  any  real  clout  or  are  you  just  advisory? 

Anderson:   It's  an  advisory  board. 

Swent:     Do  you  have  any  leverage  you  can  use? 

Anderson:   The  only  leverage  you  have  is  to  convince  the  governor  or  a 

senator  that  this  is  a  practical  program  and  that  it  should  be 
followed.   And  we  had  several  outstanding  successes  in  that 
regard,  in  that  miners  typically—particularly  in  the  southern 
California  desert—have  some  real  problems  with  urban  sprawl. 
You  have  a  mine  out  in  the  middle  of  the  mountains  or  the 
foothills,  then  all  of  a  sudden  the  city  is  encroaching—  people 
are  starting  to  build  houses.   It's  sort  of  like  the  Stapleton 


Airport  and  the  noise  problem  in  Denver. 
objecting  to  the  mines. 


People  start 


We  got  some  important  things  implemented.   One  was  that  we 
developed  an  inventory  system  that  would  be  done  by  the  state 
and  accredited  by  the  state,  and  if  there  were  mineable 
reserves  in  an  area,  it  would  have  a  certain  designation—  MRZ3, 
mineral  resource  zone  three,  which  meant  there  were  economic 
reserves  and  that  this  area  also  had  some  additional  potential. 
Potential  ground  would  be  designated  an  MRZ-2  area,  and  that 
whole  area  would  be  known  as  a  mineral  resource  zone  area,  and 
it  would  be  plotted  on  all  the  county  maps  in  every  county. 


52 


And  when  a  developer  or  a  land  owner  came  in  to  buy  a  parcel  to 
develop  they  would  be  confronted  with  the  knowledge  that  there 
were  mineral  resources  and  developments  in  the  area. 

Swent:     Oh,  so  they  couldn't  claim  later- 
Anderson:   --that  they  didn't  know  about  it.  Most  counties  adopted  that 
criteria  as  part  of  the  SMARA,  the  Surface  Mining  and 
Reclamation  Act,  and  incorporated  it.   I  think  that  was  a 
wonderful  thing  for  the  public  as  well  as  for  resource 
developers,  to  sort  of  say,  Hey,  here's  an  area  that  has 
substantial  resources  for  the  people—and  a  lot  of  these  were 
sand  and  gravel  deposits—you  can't  move  the  sand  and  gravel 
very  far;  the  freight  costs  too  much.   For  example,  Bakersfield 
or  Fresno  or  Barstow,  Palm  Springs,  have  very  significant  needs 
for  sand  and  gravel.   And  they  all  have  proven  reserves  and 
permitted  reserves,  but  usually  the  permitted  reserves  are  not 
the  size  of  the  proven  reserves  or  the  needs  of  the  community. 
Areas  with  potential  reserves  were  delineated  on  the  maps  as  a 
mineral  resource  zone;  therefore  when  people  were  contemplating 
and  conducting  residential  or  commercial  development  they 
wouldn't  be  surprised  and  legally  wouldn't  have  a  case  to  fight 
an  application  for  a  mining  operation. 

So  that  was  one  of  the  achievements,  I  think,  that  was  a 
balance  between  public  use  and  development  use  that  I  thought 
would  stop  a  lot  of  controversy  and  fights.   One  area  of  public 
safety  that  I  continue  to  be  frustrated  about  and  never  had  any 
real  impact  on  was  the  fact  that  people  build  in  flood  plains 
or  in  landslide  areas.   You  have  the  flood  or  you  have  the 
landslide,  the  government  loans  them  money  at  a  very  cheap 
interest  to  go  back  and  rebuild  in  the  same  area,  only  to  have 
the  same  flood  or  landslide  happen  again.   My  feeling  is  that 
most  of  these  areas  have  been  mapped  very  well  now.   The  board 
implemented  a  ten-year  program  to  identify  landslide  and 
earthquake  hazard  areas,  and  this  work  has  been  completed  for 
most  urban  areas.   They  are  also  recorded  on  county  maps.   At 
the  very  least,  I  think  somebody  should  be  stopped  from 
building  a  new  building  in  these  extremely  hazardous  areas,  and 
secondly— if  possible—if  they  have  damage  to  existing 
improvements,  give  them  a  low-cost  loan  to  build  elsewhere  and 
not  in  the  site  of  the  same  devastation  as  before.   But  that's 
almost  impossible  to  do  because  the  land  values  are  already 
there,  and  you're  disrupting  somebody's  land  values  in  the  area 
if  they  are  excluded  from  low-cost  government  loans.   My  idea 
was  that  if  somebody  wanted  to  go  back  and  build  there,  they 
acknowledge  that  they  are  in  a  hazardous  area  and  be  prepared 
to  take  the  risk.   Then  it's  their  property  value  that's  at 
risk  and  not  the  public  responsibility  to  provide  low-cost 


53 


loans  to  rebuild.   You  have,  unfortunately,  so  many  areas  that 
are  already  built  over,  but  if  this  approach  is  applied  to  new 
expanding  areas  like  the  areas  in  the  southeastern  desert 
particularly:  Barstow,  Bakersfield,  Fresno,  all  those  areas, 
you  could  do  some  really  good  geologic  planning  ahead  of  time. 

So  that  was  an  exciting  part;  I  got  to  see  a  lot  of  the 
state  and  expand  into  new  areas  of  public  concern  and 
involvement,  and  I  met  with  just  about  every  environmentalist 
in  the  state  of  California  personally  in  various  meetings. 
That  was  real  stimulating  in  that  it  created  knowledge  and 
rapport  and  credibility  with  people  that  you  know  and  find  that 
you  can  talk  to  them  and  make  sense  and  have  a  discourse  that 
has  productive  results. 


The  California  Desert  Conservation  Area 


Swent : 


Were  you  involved  at  all  in  the  desert  protection  act? 


Anderson:   Oh,  sure. 

Swent:     What  was  the  state  board's  role  in  that? 

Anderson:   The  state  board's  role  in  that  particular  case  was  to  advise 

the  governor.   The  governor's  office  had  the  only  authority  in 
the  state—other  than  the  two  senators  and  the  congressmen—to 
go  back  to  the  politicians  in  Washington  and  make  a  statement 
about  values  and  how  the  state  felt  about  either  excluding  or 
developing  the  southwest  desert.   The  large  CDCA- -California 
Desert  Conservation  Area—was  on  the  dockets  for  many  years, 
and  we  inventoried  all  the  known  mine  prospects  and  potential 
areas  that  were  known  at  the  time.  We  also  did  a  lot  of 
geological  mapping  and  resource  mapping,  to  indicate  areas  for 
potential  future  mines.  We  published  all  that  information  and 
made  it  available  to  the  governor's  commission  that  studied  it. 
We  put  together  a  set  of  maps  that  identify  the  impact  on  known 
and  potential  new  resource  areas,  and  I  think  it  changed  the 
configuration  of  the  areas  that  were  withdrawn,  significantly. 

II 

Swent:     So  you  did  have  a  significant  role;  I  didn't  realize  that. 

Anderson:   We  advised  the  governor,  and  in  this  case  it  was  Governor 

[George]  Deukmejian,  and  Governor  [Pete]  Wilson  too.   I  think 
both  governors  were  rather  reluctant  to  take  a  strong  vocal 


opinion  in  public  about  development,  but  I  think  deep  down  they 
felt  that  there  should  be  reasonableness  about  it  and  did 
everything  they  could  to  try  to  influence  the  outcome  in  a 
manner  that  would  certainly  recognize  the  major  mineral  areas. 
I'm  sure  there  have  been  some  important  mineral  areas  that  for 
whatever  reasons  have  been  withdrawn  and  it  will  take  an  act  of 
Congress  before  these  areas  can  be  considered  for  their  mineral 
resources.   But  I  think  we  saved  a  number  of  areas  for  multiple 
use  and  future  consideration. 

Swent:     How  did  you  feel  about  the  final  result? 
Anderson:   I  don't  think  the  final  result  is  all  in  yet. 
Swent:     Well,  they're  still  fighting  about  it,  yes. 

Anderson:   I've  been  away  from  it  a  couple  years  now,  but  I  think  it  was 
still  excessive—withdrawal.   I  think  that  exploration  should 
be  allowed  in  the  withdrawn  areas,  and  if  a  very  viable  deposit 
is  proven  and  the  development  plans  provide  reasonable,  prudent 
safeguards  to  the  environment,  it  should  be  allowed  to  proceed. 
Right  now  in  these  areas,  you  don't  even  know  if  there's  a 
resource  there  for  sure  because  you  can't  even  get  in  to  look. 

Swent:     Can't  explore. 

Anderson:   Exactly.   The  exploration  process  doesn't  do  much  land  damage, 
particularly  if  you  do  it  properly  these  days.   You  don't  have 
to  take  a  bulldozer  out  and  scrape  up  hundreds  of  miles  of  turf 
to  know  what's  there.   To  some  extent  these  withdrawals 
represent  an  effort  to  withdraw  as  much  land  as  possible, 
without  consideration  of  multiple  use.  And  on  the  other  hand, 
I  think  some  small  parts  of  this  land  should  be  withdrawn--! 
mean,  certainly  Yosemite  Park  and  Mono  Lake  and  very  select 
other  places  have  outstanding  beauty  and  development  should  be 
preserved,  but  there  are  other  areas  that  are  sort  of  gray. 
Let's  leave  them  open  to  consideration  as  time  goes  on.   And  I 
feel  the  same  way  about  the  federal  government  withdrawal  of 
most  of  Alaska  from  exploration  which  was  accomplished  by 
signature  of  President  Carter  on  his  last  day  in  office.   That 
was  not  a  future  look  to  the  welfare  of  the  country;  it  was 
more  of  a  selfish,  "Let's  withdraw  as  much  as  we  can  before  we 
leave"  sort  of  approach.   If  you  read  a  book  titled  Stones  of 
Destiny, '  I  think  it  becomes  very  clear  that  those  sort  of  acts 
seal  your  destiny  if  you  can't  reverse  them.   Once  a  major 


1975. 


'by  John  Ross,  Michigan  Technological  University,  Houghton,  Michigan, 


55 


decision  like  that  has  been  made,  it  takes  an  act  of  Congress 
to  overturn  them. 


The  Summitville  Disaster 


Swent:     Yes,  it's  awfully  hard  to  change  it. 

Anderson:   I'm  for  balanced  use.   I  think  we  have  to  be  concerned--! 'm  a 
geologist,  and  most  geologists  are  concerned  about  the 
environment.   I  think  the  safeguards  are  there;  there  are  some 
very  bad  actors.   I  think  those  actors  ought  to  be  banned  from 
getting  mining  permits.   I  have  talked  to  several  industry 
leaders  about  really  one  major  environmental  disaster  here  in 
Colorado  called  Summitville.   Now  that  same  owner  has  had 
environmental  disasters  elsewhere. 

Swent:     Fortunately  cyanide  does  degrade;  it  isn't  as  bad  as  mercury. 
Anderson:   Yes,  but  it  takes  so  long.   But  that's  right. 

I  think  there  is  little  public  tolerance  of  a  trace  amount 
of  cyanide—people  don't  understand  it.   They're  scared;  it's  a 
panic.   Any  at  all  is  bad.   It's  interesting--!  think  it  was 
Dick  Stoehr  that  pointed  this  out  to  me  that  there's  a  lot  of 
double  standards  around.   For  example,  the  selenium  content  of 
uranium  tailings.   There  was  also  a  big  concern  with  selenium 
in  central  California-- 

Swent:     With  the  birds  at  Kesterson. 

Anderson:   Yes.   The  regulations  on  mining  are  very  strict  for  selenium. 
You  could  have  a  thimble  full  of  selenium  sulfate  in  a  body  of 
water  the  size  of  Lake  Tahoe,  and  it  would  be  too  much.   Now 
let  me  tell  you  what  you  can  do  tonight:  you  can  go  down  to  the 
grocery  store  and  buy  a  hair  shampoo  called  Selsun  Blue,  which 
is  50  percent  selenium  sulfate.   You  rub  it  in  your  hair,  you 
get  it  in  your  eyes  and  your  pores-- 

Swent:     I've  had  it  recommended  to  me  by  the  dermatologist. 

Anderson:   It's  50  percent  selenium  sulfate,  which  means  it's  25  percent 
selenium.   You  can  buy  it  in  the  grocery  store,  but  you  can't 
put  a  thimble  full  of  it  in  a  lake  the  size  of  Lake  Tahoe  if 
it's  a  mining  project.   So  there's  some  very  directed  focus 
about  how  to  use  environmental  laws. 


56 


Swent:     Well,  a  lot  of  people  just  don't  like  mining. 

Anderson:   And  the  other  thing  is--and  I've  read  an  interesting  article 
that  was  in  a  newspaper  called  Investor's  Business  Daily.   It 
said  that  if  the  government  provides  research  support  in  the 
form  of  dollars,  the  federal  government  then  has  the  option  to 
pick  and  choose  the  data  from  the  results  of  that  scientific 
research  to  fit  their  desires  for  regulation  or  policy.   In 
effect,  they  can  warp  the  scientific  method  to  fit  their  needs. 

Swent:     That's  the  risk  in  funded  research  always. 

Anderson:   I  think  so,  because  the  f under  wants  to  be  able  to  do  something 
with  it.   It's  a  federal  law,  not  just  the  way  it's  done.   It's 
a  federal  law.   And  I  think  the  scientific  method  should  not 
be,  shall  we  say,  twisted.   I  think  the  facts  ought  to  be 
there,  and  then  you  make  clear  what  the  facts  are,  and  here's 
our  interpretation  or  here's  what  we  think  is  right  for  the 
public  —  fine.   Let's  distinguish  between  what  we're  concluding 
and  what  the  facts  really  suggest.   It's  like  the  ozone  layer 
and  global  warming.   That's  still  a  big  issue  obviously.   But 
the  scientific  evidence  isn't  conclusive.   But  the 
interpretations  are  that  it's  very  conclusive.   That's  enough 
on  those  subjects. 

Swent:     Are  you  involved  in  any  political  or  advisory  work  right  now  or 
have  you  done  anything  here  in  Colorado  like  that? 

Anderson:   No. 

Swent:     Mining  Congress,  which  is  now  the  National  Mining  Association? 

Anderson:   No,  I'm  not  involved.   There  isn't  much  mining  in  Colorado; 
there's  not  that  much  activity  here.   I  think  if  I  were  in 
California,  I  would  be. 


The  Importance  of  Sand  and  Gravel  Mining 


Swent:     Sand  and  gravel.   You  mentioned  sand  and  gravel,  and  I'm 
becoming  aware  that  that's  where  the  real  frontier  is  now, 
isn't  it? 

Anderson:   Absolutely.   Gold  was  the  frontier  in  the  U.S.  when  I  joined 
Homestake,  and  I  think  non-metallics--particularly  sand  and 
gravel  and  some  clays  that  are  used  for  environmental  control, 
to  stop  leaking  of  hazardous  materials,  are  now  on  the  frontier 


57 


in  the  U.S.   There's  a  great  opportunity  there  to  do 
environmental  good  and  also  to  further  society. 

Swent:  Nobody  wants  a  quarry. 

Anderson:  No,  that's  right. 

Swent:  But  we  all  want  concrete. 

Anderson:  That's  right  [laughter]. 

Swent:     That,  I  think,  is  where  the  big  battles  are  coming.   Well, 
they're  already  happening. 

Anderson:   There  was  a  very  interesting  example  in  Los  Angeles  County, 
near  the  outskirts  of  Los  Angeles  County.   Interstate  5  goes 
over  the  area;  it's  just  south  of  the  Ventura  turnoff.   There's 
a  beautiful  setting  there  if  you  come  up  the  long  grade,  and  on 
both  sides  of  1-5  were  major  sand  and  gravel  operations.   They 
probably  mined  millions  of  tons  a  year  for  decades  out  of  these 
two  properties  and  made  a  profit—probably  of  a  couple  dollars 
a  ton  for  the  sand  and  gravel.   When  I  was  on  the  board  we 
reviewed  that  area.   It  had  just  been  approved—the  two 
remaining  sites  left  in  Los  Angeles  County—to  dump  Class  I 
waste.   Class  I  waste  contains  no  organics;  it's  concrete, 
metal,  things  like  that,  but  no  garbage:  no  paper,  no  tires, 
nothing  like  that.   We  visited  the  site,  and  the  operators  were 
charging  thirty  dollars  a  ton  to  deposit  the  waste  in  these 
holes.   That  was  ten  times  more  than  they  made  from  the  sand 
and  gravel  mining.   The  operation  consisted  of  a  scale  with  a 
weigher,  a  manager  to  tell  you  where  to  dump  it,  and  a 
bulldozer  with  an  operator  in  the  bottom  of  it  moving  the  stuff 
around  five  days  a  week.   And  they  made  ten  times  more  than  the 
miner.   Eventually  it's  going  to  be  developed  as  a  commercial 
and  a  residential  area,  including  a  golf  course.   The  area  west 
of  1-5  is  already  a  golf  course  and  residential  area,  and  this 
other  area  will  probably  be  sold  for  millions  of  dollars  for 
subdivisions  once  it's  all  compacted  and  engineered.   That's 
how  valuable  landfill  areas  are  in  California.   So  not  just 
having  sand  and  gravel  to  mine,  but  once  it's  mined  you've  got 
a  hole  that  you  can  put  these  materials  in.   A  fabulous 
opportunity  if  people  would  just  think  of  it  that  way. 

Swent:     It  would  solve  a  couple  of  problems. 

Anderson:   It  would  solve  a  couple  of  problems.   I  hate  to  see— I  go  to 

San  Diego  quite  often— and  I  see  these  barges  going  out  to  sea 
with  garbage  on  them.   They're  just  going  out  twenty  miles  or 
whatever  and  dumping  it— the  same  in  San  Francisco.   They  just 


58 


go  out  to  the  Continental  Shelf  and  dump  the  stuff.   Much 
better  to  bury  it  and  encapsulate  it. 

Swent:  Yes.  And  it  can  be  compacted  enough  to  build  on. 
Anderson:  Exactly.  Well,  look  at  Foster  City  [California]. 
Swent:  Is  that  what  that  is? 

Anderson:   It  wasn't  a  waste  dump,  but  it  was  an  engineered  landfill. 
During  the  earthquake  there  was  very  little  damage  there  as 
compared  to,  say,  the  old  Marina  area  in  San  Francisco.   And 
the  Marina  area  was  landfill  all  right,  but  it  wasn't  an 
engineered  landfill;  it  was  landfill  from  the  destruction  of 
the  1906  earthquake.   They  just  dumped  it  in  and  graded  over 
and  built  on  it.   It  wasn't  compacted  and  engineered.   But 
compacted  and  engineered  landfill,  once  it's  settled  and  really 
been  around  for  ten  years,  is  a  great  building  site.   In  San 
Diego,  if  you  go  on  the  freeway  that  goes  east-west  into  San 
Diego,  you  go  past  the  big  baseball  and  football  stadium,  and 
on  both  sides  there  are  major  high-rises  and  malls  and 
everything  else.   Most  of  that  area  is  engineered  landfill  from 
sand  and  gravel  operations  in  San  Diego  County.   It's 
beautiful.   I  mean,  you  can  restore  things  to  a  much  better  and 
higher  value  than  they  were  when  you  started  if  you  let  the 
mining  occur  in  the  first  place. 

But  there's  not  going  to  be  another  generation  of  ghost 
towns  [chuckles]  for  maybe  fifty  or  a  hundred  years  in  the 
U.S.;  maybe  the  cycle  takes  that  long  to  come  back.   They'll 
probably  go  to  Iran  and  mine  there  before  they  come  back  here 
[chuckles]  to  develop  new  mines;  existing  ones  is  different. 

So  we  can  turn  the  tape  off  now.   Maybe  that's  enough. 
Swent:     Thank  you,  Jim. 
Anderson:   You're  welcome. 


Transcribed  by  Gary  Varney 
Final  Typed  by  Shannon  Page 


59 

Regional  Oral  History  Office  University  of  California 

The  Bancroft  Library  Berkeley,  California 

Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  Series 
Knoxville/McLaughlin  Project 


Will  Baker 


CITIZEN  ACTIVIST 


Interview  conducted  by 

Eleanor  Swent 

in  1994 


Copyright  c  1998  by  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


Will  Baker,  1997. 


60 


INTERVIEW  WITH  WILL  BAKER 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  61 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  62 

I  EARLY  YEARS,  1935-1970  63 
Education  in  Idaho,  Washington,  Paris,  Hawaii  63 
Graduate  Student  in  Berkeley,  1960-1964  64 
Teacher  at  Reed  College,  Filmmaker,  1964-1969  65 
English  Teacher  at  Davis  from  1969  66 

II  THE  CAPAY  VALLEY,  SORT  OF  OVERLOOKED  68 
Newcomers  Radical  in  Preserving  Things  as  they  Were  68 
Working  Together  to  Oppose  a  Highline  Canal  70 
A  Long-Running  Controversy  Over  In-stream  Gravel  Mining  74 
The  Williamson  Act  to  Preserve  Agricultural  Land  75 
A  Zoning  Ordinance  Amendment  Which  Benefited  Gravel  Miners  77 

III  HOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY  AND  DAVIS  CREEK  80 
Water:  Crucial  for  Farmers  and  Miners  80 
A  Public  Meeting  in  the  Guinda  Grange  Hall,  1980  82 
Gold  Triggers  a  Pleasant  Exhilaration  82 
Trying  to  Block  Approval  of  the  Environmental  Impact  Report  83 
Concerns  about  Air  and  Water  Pollution  85 
Information  as  Ammunition  87 
Homestake's  Historic  Stream  Pollution  in  South  Dakota  89 
The  Front  Line:  Conflicting  Philosophies  and  Principles  90 
Sometimes  a  Matter  of  Definition  92 
Supervisors  Broke  the  Rules  to  Thwart  a  Referendum  on  the 

Zoning  Amendment  93 

Concluding  that  Lawmakers  are  Wasteful  97 

One  Goal  Salvaged:  to  Make  it  a  Responsible  Project  98 

Jobs  versus  Songbirds  99 

Continuing  Citizen  Activism  101 


61 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY--W111  Baker 

Professor  Will  Baker  of  the  Department  of  English,  UC  Davis,  was  an 
articulate  opponent  to  the  development  of  the  McLaughlin  Mine.   I 
telephoned  to  him  in  the  spring  of  1994  and  asked  whether  he  would  be 
willing  to  grant  an  interview,  and  he  readily  consented.   The  invitation 
letter  sent  in  June  1994  was  promptly  answered.   He  came  to  The  Bancroft 
Library  on  8  August  1994  and  I  interviewed  him  for  two  hours  there. 

Professor  Baker  came  to  the  interview  dressed  the  part  of  poet  and 
establishment  gadfly:  his  long  hair  in  a  ponytail,  and  wearing  a  handwoven 
Guatemalan  shirt.   He  was  born  in  1935  in  Idaho,  began  his  education  at  the 
College  of  Idaho  as  a  chemistry  major,  and  then  went  on  to  study  English  at 
the  University  of  Washington,  at  the  Sorbonne  in  Paris,  and  at  the 
University  of  Hawaii.   He  worked  for  a  time  as  a  member  of  the  crew  of  an 
oil  tanker.   He  was  at  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  as  a 
graduate  student  of  English  from  1960  to  1964.   After  receiving  his  Ph.D. 
degree,  he  taught  first  at  Reed  College  in  Oregon,  and  since  1969  has 
taught  at  Davis.   He  also  owns  and  operates  an  almond  farm  in  the  Capay 
Valley  on  Cache  Creek  about  forty  miles  from  Davis. 

In  his  interview,  Professor  Baker  recalls  organizing  community 
activism  to  oppose  the  mine,  and  evaluates  the  results  of  those  efforts. 
His  opposition  to  the  McLaughlin  Mine  is  still  firm,  principled,  and 
willingly  expressed.   He  maintains  that  the  mine  as  it  developed  had 
environmental  effects  that  were  less  harmful  because  of  pressure  brought  to 
bear  on  Homestake  by  his  constituency.   He  does  not  take  himself  too 
seriously,  however;  the  note  accompanying  his  photo  for  this  volume  says, 
"I  didn't  even  change  my  shirt  (I  was  knocking  almonds  that  a.m.),  but  the 
logo  [pain  in  the  ass]  might  be  an  appropriate  reflection  of  how  Homestake 
viewed  our  Silly  Seven!"  The  complicated  and  costly  process  of  permitting 
the  McLaughlin  Mine  gave  full  play  to  the  democratic  system,  in  which 
voices  such  as  Will  Baker's  are  heard. 

The  tapes  were  transcribed  in  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
lightly  edited,  and  sent  to  Professor  Baker  in  April  1997  for  review.   He 
made  several  minor  clarifications  of  diction  and  returned  the  transcript 
promptly.   The  manuscript  was  corrected  and  indexed  at  our  office.   The 
tapes  are  deposited  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and  are  available  for  study. 

The  Will  Baker  interview  is  one  of  more  than  forty  interviews  which 
were  conducted  by  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  from  1993-1997  in  order 
to  document  the  development  of  the  McLaughlin  gold  mine  in  the  Knoxville 
District  of  Lake,  Napa,  and  Yolo  Counties,  California,  from  1978-1996,  as 
part  of  the  ongoing  oral  history  series  devoted  to  Western  Mining  in  the 
Twentieth  Century.   The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  was  established  in 
1954  to  record  the  lives  of  persons  who  have  contributed  significantly  to 
the  history  of  California  and  the  West.   The  office  is  a  division  of  The 
Bancroft  Library  and  is  under  the  direction  of  Willa  K.  Baum. 

Eleanor  Swent,  Project  Director,  Research  Interviewer/Editor 
September  1997 


62 


Regional  Oral  History  Office  University  of  California 

Room  A86  The  Bancroft  Library  Berkeley,  California  94720 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 

(Please  write  clearly.   Use  black  ink.) 

(.  L^iwin } 

Your   full  name  £/„•/  [   t~^  ^    ^  r     Kz  l<L&r- 


Date  of  birth   /H  ^  /  C  I'-f 3  -£~ Birthplace   Qj^u^i  C^t '/,  -/c/ai  h  c 

L,     ,  /       ^  / 
Father's  full  name 6^ '2,/d D  >.  /5r!  kf>  r~ 


I  ^^^.ion  i<5/<?  '/0  ^  I  K.  q 

Occupation  _  Lgc/q  e  r~  _     Birthplace  _  •>        ' 


Jj 


Mother's    full   name       l6^gg/>  Me)  f  ^  ^  7>a  &    ((3^  4.  e  v-  ) 

Occupation  _  I  €  dC-hf  r-  __     Birthplace  C  gg/g-?  ui  !  l 
Your   spouse        ,^t  Q^  ,'  ,t  p^  _  re  ,.,  vn 


Occupation       lj(7  g  g  U'g  y~/j.  Celt  f>  e-  ,2-e  r~  Birthplace 

Your  children        [J)'\  ^1     ~f  ^         ?>  L  f  v-  ^?  2  ) 

---.  ^ 


Where   did   you   grow   up?          L  A  £  l\  C 


Present    community  (^>  M_I  i^l^/ -   K^U4^-i-Sex         C /f 

/   ^ 

Education          (2.  .4      ..'(/  /r        t^/i  p      ^     u  *  j.'.C 

—  ~~ 


Occupation(s)    H^V'i'W.r.  T 


Areas  of  expertise    V;g.Tr,vCX^  •<-  Ala  Ae  r^  /_>i  Lc^  a  Tyi. 


Other  interests  or  activities    /ft^>/<^   twh  s,  aJ  h:s 


Organizations  in  which  you  are  active 


63 


I   EARLY  YEARS,  1935-1970 

[Date  of  Interview:  August  9,  199A]  I*1 

Education  in  Idaho.  Washington,  Paris,  Hawaii 


Swent:  This  is  Eleanor  Swent  conducting  an  interview  with  Professor  Will 
Baker  in  Berkeley,  California,  on  August  9,  1994.  We're  going  to 
discuss  the  development  of  the  McLaughlin  Mine. 

Before  we  get  to  the  mine,  Will,  I  want  to  just  place  you  in 
context.   If  you  could  tell  us  about  some  of  your  background, 
where  you  were  born  and  when,  and  how  you  came  to  the  stance  that 
you  had  at  the  time  that  this  all  began  in  1981  or  so. 

Baker:   I  was  born  in  Council,  Idaho,  in  1935  and  raised  mostly  there.   I 
went  to  school  at  the  University  of  Washington,  and  then  went  to 
school  in  Paris  for  a  year  and  then  came  back  and  moved  to 
California. 

Swent:   What  was  your  field  of  study? 

Baker:   I  was  an  English  major.   I  was  a  chemistry  major  for  two  years  and 
then  switched  to  English,  under  the  influence  of  a  teacher. 

Swent:   Would  you  like  to  name  the  teacher? 

Baker:   Yes.   His  name  was  Frank  O'Hara.   He  was  a  University  of  Chicago 

John  Hay  Whitney  professor.   They  took  retired  professors  from  big 
universities  and  sent  them  around  to  little  podunk  colleges,  of 
which  the  College  of  Idaho  was  one.   He  was  a  very  inspiring  and 
interesting  teacher.   He  taught  a  writing  class,  and  that  was  the 
first  writing  I  had  done.   So  I  got  hooked  on  it. 


ltt  This  symbol  indicates  that  a  tape  or  tape  segment  has  begun  or 
ended.   A  guide  to  the  tapes  follows  the  transcripts. 


Swent:   And  where  is  the  College  of  Idaho? 
Baker:   It's  in  Caldwell,  Idaho. 
Swent:   Did  you  go  four  years  there? 

Baker:  No,  just  two,  and  then  I  went  to  the  University  of  Washington.  I 
got  out  of  there  and  went  to  the  Sorbonne  because  I  had  picked  up 
French  by  that  time.  I  liked  languages. 

I  came  back  and  started  graduate  school  at  Washington,  and 
after  a  year  I  went  on  to  Hawaii  and  got  an  M.A.  [Master  of  Arts] 
there. 

Swent:   What  time  period  are  we  talking  about  now? 

Baker:   That  would  be  '56  through  '60,  I  think.   I  worked  my  way  back  from 
Europe  on  an  oil  tanker,  and  I  wanted  to  do  that  some  more  —  it  was 
good  money- -but  my  shipmates  didn't  want  to  encourage  me  in  a 
sailor's  life.   So  I  ended  up  going  back  to  Washington  for  a  year, 
and  then  I  got  a  teaching  assistantship  in  Hawaii.   I  spent  two 
years  there.   And  then  in  1960  I  met  my  first  wife  there  in 
Hawaii,  and  we  came  back  to  California  and  started  graduate 
school.   She  was  in  zoology  and  I  was  in  English. 


Graduate  Student  in  Berkeley,  1960-1964 


Swent:  And  where  did  you  do  that? 

Baker:  In  Berkeley. 

Swent:  I  see.   And  this  was  1960? 

Baker:  Yes,  '60  to  '64. 

Swent:  Exciting  times  to  be  in  Berkeley. 

Baker:   Well,  it  was  just  before  things  got  exciting.   The  spring  I  got 
out  was  the  spring  before  the  free  speech  business  and  Vietnam-- 

Swent:   But  there  must  have  been  some  ferment  all  the  same. 

Baker:   There  were  some  signs.   I  dismissed  them  at  the  time,  but  I  can 
see  now  they  were  real  signs. 


65 


Swent:   Can  you  recall  any? 

Baker:   Robert  Scheer  gave  a  speech  one  noon  about  what  was  going  on  in 

Vietnam.   This  must  have  been  '62  or  '63,  so  it  was  very  early  in 
the  U.S.  involvement  there  under  Kennedy- -he  sent  some  so-called 
"advisors."  There  was  a  Catholic  connection;  the  country  was  then 
being  run  basically  by  the  disciples  of  the  French  Catholics  who 
had  it  as  a  colony. 

Swent:   This  is  Vietnam  you're  talking  about. 

Baker:   Oh,  yes.   So  he  gave  a  speech  that  was  a  very  flat-footed, 
straightforward  reading  of  the  facts,  and  it  was  fairly 
astonishing  and  appalling.   I  remember  thinking  there  was  a  rather 
large  number  of  people  there,  and  I  had  never  heard  of  Vietnam,  so 
it  was  all  new  information  to  me.   But  within  two  years,  of 
course,  there  were  several  thousand  people  out  there  raising  a 
ruckus . 

Swent:   In  Hawaii  you  hadn't  thought  much  about  Southeast  Asia? 

Baker:   No.   We  had  some  exchange  students  at  the  East-West  Center,  and 
some  of  them  were  Thai  and  Vietnamese—and  the  Vietnamese,  I 
remember,  were  very  well-educated  Mandarins  from  the  wealthy 
classes.   Things  began  to  fall  into  place  in  the  sixties  for  me, 
like  everyone  else,  although  I  was  by  that  time  a  young  candidate 
for  a  job.   1  was  close  enough  to  the  student  population  to  absorb 
the  spirit  of  that  time.   I  taught  at  Reed,  which  also  had  a 
reputation  for  activism. 


Teacher  at  Reed  College.  Filmmaker,  1964-1969 

Swent:   You've  been  at  a  lot  of  good  colleges.   You  did  your  doctorate, 
then,  here  at  Berkeley? 

Baker:  Yes.   My  first  job  was  at  Reed. 

Swent:  And  what  was  your  field? 

Baker:  English. 

Swent:  What  was  your  dissertation  topic? 

Baker:   I  worked  under  Jo  Miles,  and  it  was  the  syntax  of  poetry  that  I 

undertook  to  study- -between  1870  and  1930.   Eventually  got  a  book 


66 


out  of  it;  she  taught  me  how  to  do  research  and  how  to  put  things 
sagaciously  and  economically. 

I  went  through  change  at  Reed,  and  got  interested  in  film.   I 
finished  off  the  first  marriage,  came  back  to  California  to  teach 
at  [University  of  California  at]  Davis,  and  I  basically  stayed 
there.   I  was  looking  for  a  place  in  the  country,  so  I  scouted  out 
the  Capay  Valley  and  I  liked  what  I  saw. 


English  Teacher  at  Davis  from  1969 

Swent:   When  was  it  that  you  came  to  Davis  and  the  Capay  Valley? 
Baker:   I  started  teaching  there  in  1969,  in  the  fall. 
Swent:   You  were  thirty-five  at  that  point? 

Baker:   Yes.   I  lived  in  Vallejo  first,  and  then  I  lived  in  Berkeley.   1 
lived  briefly  in  San  Francisco. 

Swent:   And  drove  up  to  Davis? 

Baker:   Yes.   A  lot  of  people  did.   There  was  a  carpool.   But  I  figured 
out  that  l--at  the  time  I  was  trying  to  be  a  filmmaker;  that's 
what  I  thought  I  wanted  to  do.   So  I  was  making  experimental 
films,  and  it  helps  to  be  in  a  city  for  that.   After  a  certain 
number  of  years--! 'm  a  slow  learner--!  figured  out  that  it  was  an 
expensive  high-pressure  hustle  to  make  films.   I  was  really 
interested  in  the  imaginative  part  of  conceiving  them,  so  I  should 
stick  to  writing.   1  started  to  write  fiction  at  that  point,  but  I 
had  figured  out  that  I  basically  am  not  a  city  type.   And  I  spent 
quite  a  bit  of  time  looking,  and  Capay  Valley  was  close  enough  to 
Davis. 

Swent:   How  far  is  it? 

Baker:   It's  about  an  hour.   It's  forty  miles.   Well,  from  one  end  of  the 
valley  it's  only  a  half  hour- -twenty- five  miles—but  from  the 
other  end  it's  an  hour. 

Swent:   You're  at  the  upper  end.   You  live  at  Rumsey,  which  is  on  Cache 
Creek  and  about  forty  miles  northwest  of  Davis.   Not  far  from 
Cache  Creek  Canyon  actually,  is  it? 

Baker:   No.   It's  a  couple  miles. 


67 


Swent:   And  you  have  an  acreage  there? 

Baker:   I  bought  an  old  almond  farm,  or  what  was  left  of  one—twelve  and  a 
half  acres  and  for  eight  to  ten  years  I  brought  in  the  crop. 
Again,  I'm  a  slow  learner  [chuckles],  and  I  figured  out  finally 
that  it  was  really  an  expensive  hobby.   So  I  finally  cut  down  most 
of  the  orchard  and  put  in  oats.   I  had  married  again,  and  my  wife 
had  a  couple  of  horses,  so  we  had  to  feed  them  anyway.   So  we  made 
a  pasture  and  an  oat  field  and  just  kept  a  little  fruit  orchard 
and  a  couple  or  three  acres  of  trees.   I  sell  that  crop  some 
years,  if  I  have  a  good  crop. 

Swent:   Still? 

Baker:   Yes.   It  pays  the  water  bill. 


68 


II   THE  CAPAY  VALLEY,  SORT  OF  OVERLOOKED 


Newcomers  Radical  in  Preserving  Things  as  They  Were 


Swent:   Was  this  a  time  when  a  lot  of  people  were  coming  in  there? 

Baker:   Not  a  lot,  but  they  were  a  different  kind  of  person.   That  valley 
got  sort  of  overlooked,  partly  for  some  good  reasons.   It's  one 
way  in  and  out.   There's  only  Highway  16.   To  get  to  Marysville, 
let's  say,  or  Yuba  City  or  Arbuckle,  you  have  to  go  way  around. 
At  the  time  it  was  a  little  bit  beyond  the  commute  for  Sacramento 
people;  it's  like  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes  or  so  from  there. 
And  it's  very  hot  there  in  the  summer,  pretty  dry.   It's  a  small 
valley.   It  has  no  exploitable  timber;  it  has  mostly  small  farms; 
there's  no  big  employer  in  the  area. 

Swent :   Some  of  the  farms  were  owned  by  people  who  had  been  there  for 
generations . 

Baker:   Yes,  their  whole  lives.   A  couple  of  my  neighbors.   One  of  them  is 
eighty-four  now,  I  think,  and  he  was  born  there.   There  are 
several  of  them  I  can  think  of  where  that's  the  case.   It's  a 
racially  integrated  place.   Freed  slaves  settled  there  in  the 
1870s  and  1880s,  and  their  descendants  are  still  in  the  community. 
There  are  lots  of  things  about  it  I  liked,  but  primarily  the  fact 
that  it  had  been  over looked- -people  in  the  Bay  Area  had  never 
heard  of  it;  people  in  Davis  usually  had  never  heard  of  it. 

Swent:   Now  the  community  comprises  Rumsey,  Guinda,  Brooks- 
Baker:   And  some  people  would  say  Esparto  too,  but  I  think  that's  changed 
now.   That's  getting  more  into  Woodland. 

At  about  the  time  I  moved  in,  a  number  of  other  urban 
refugees—or  people  who  were  looking  for  some  kind  of  different 
and  more  relaxed  life  —  showed  up.   So  there  was  a  group  of 
somewhere  between  ten  and  twenty,  probably—maybe  fifteen,  as  a 


69 


guess--and  they  all  came  within  a  space  of  about  three  to  four 
years.   And  that  marked  a  difference,  because  ever  since  then 
there  have  been  little  waves  of  immigration  like  this,  and  they 
tend  to  be- -well,  it's  now  changing  again:  there  are  now  some 
wealthy  people  who  are  buying  places  around  there  for  retirement 
purposes,  and  they're  putting  a  lot  of  money  into  the  places, 
which  is  good  for  the  local  people  who  take  care  of  their  orchards 
and  remodel  their  houses,  that  sort  of  thing.   But  it's  beginning 
to  get  known. 

Swent:   That's  a  change,  though;  I  presume  you  were  a  do-it-yourselfer. 

Baker:   Yes.   One  of  the  elements  that  went  into  this  mine  controversy  was 
just  the  fact  that  you  had  people  who  had  recently,  in  a  way, 
staked  on  this  place  their  hope  for  their  future  and  their  dreams 
of  what  kind  of  life  they  were  going  to  lead.   They  had  staked  it 
on  a  piece  of  property  that  they  had  sunk  their  money  into  and 
they  wanted  to  form  a  community.   They  were  immediately  more 
radical  than  most  of  the  old-timers  in  terms  of  preserving  things 
as  they  were,  which  is  an  irony  pointed  out  to  us  often  and 
somewhat  acerbically  by  the  old-timers,  that  we  were  more 
conservative  than  they  were  in  terms  of  preserving  things. 

Swent:   They  welcomed  some  of  the  changes. 

Baker:   They  had  had  their  fill  of  preserving  it,  and  they  wanted  to  sell 
some  [laughter]. 

Swent:   They  wanted  to  see  some  modernization,  I  suppose,  that  you  didn't 
want. 

Baker:   Yes.   That's  why  some  several  of  the  older  farmers  were  in  the 

Homestake  camp  and  believed  it  was  good,  straightforward  American 
business  enterprise  at  work  and  that  it  was  going  to  benefit  the 
economy.   They  seemed  like  nice,  considerate  people. 

Swent:   Were  you  welcomed  when  you  first  went  there? 

Baker:   Yes.   It's  a  hospitable  community,  so  we  fairly  quickly  felt  at 

home.   I  had  been  there  six  years  by  the  time  this  came  along,  and 
most  of  the  people  that  were  activists  there  had  also  been  there 
for  anywhere  from  three  to  seven  or  eight  years,  I  guess.   So  we 
very  soon  found  ourselves  linking  up  and  working  together--f irst 
of  all,  to  resist  that  canal  I  told  you  about. 


70 


Working  Together  to  Oppose  a  Highline  Canal 


Swent:   Yes,  let's  just  get  that  background  in  here  too.   Nothing  ever 

comes  into  just  a  vacuum.  There  had  been  the  canal  and  also  the 
gravel  mining  on  Cache  Creek.  Let's  talk  first  about  the  canal. 
This  was  about  1976  or  '77. 

Baker:   Yes,  '76  or  '77.   If  you  recall,  there  was  a  bad  drought  and  they 
had  just  completed  building  a  reservoir  at  Indian  Valley,  but 
there  was  no  water  in  it  because  the  two  years  after  the 
completion  were  the  driest  years  in  about  a  century.   There  was  a 
severe  drought  in  '76  and  '77,  so  people  were  very  conscious  of 
their  water  supply.   The  Yolo  County  Flood  Control  and 
Conservation  District,  which  is  the  local  quasi-public  water 
agency  (or  power) ,  hatched  this  plan  to  build  what  they  called  a 
highline  canal  all  the  way  from  Rumsey,  using  the  bed  of  the  old 
Rumsey  Ditch  all  the  way  to  Lamb  Valley  and  Esparto.   Twelve 
miles,  about.   They  wanted  a  big  concrete-lined  canal  with  an 
access  road. 

Swent:   You  said  that  Mr.  Rumsey  a  century  ago  had-- 

Baker:   Yes,  he  dug  the  first  ditch  with  a  dragline  and  a  mule,  in,  I 
think,  1877,  "78,  or  '79,  or  something  like  that.   It's  been 
defended  in  court  now  as  a  riparian  stream  because  it  precedes  the 
California  water  laws. 

The  same  flood  control  agency  tried  to  get  control  of  that 
water  and  assess  the  people  the  way  they  did  on  the  extension  to 
the  ditch  that  was  resurrected  in  1908  or  1909,  or  something  like 
that.   There  was  a  little  local  organization  called  the  Rumsey 
Water  Users  Association,  and  that's  just  the  people  that  still 
live  on  that  ditch  and  use  the  water  and  clean  it  out  themselves 
and  keep  up  the  little  diversion  dam.   The  county  wanted  to  make 
them  pay,  so  they  went  to  court,  and  the  court  said  you  can't  do 
that  because  these  people  were  here  before  the  law  was  even 
drafted.   So  they  had  essentially  a  riparian  right. 

Swent:   Even  though  it's  not  a  natural  watercourse  it  still  is  old  enough. 

Baker:   Yes.   If  it's  old  enough  it  gets  natural  after  a  while,  I  guess. 
But  anyway,  the  payment  plan  for  this  big  canal  was  to  place  a 
lien  for  forty  years  against  all  the  properties  that  had  joined 
the  canal.   It  was  kind  of  an  iron  payment  scheme  you  were  locking 
yourself  into,  and  when  people  discovered  what  it  was  really 
about  —  in  the  beginning  a  number  of  people  had  favored  it  because 
they  said,  Sure,  more  water  coming  down  sounds  good  to  us.   But 


71 


when  they  saw  what  was  involved  in  paying  for  it  and  got  a  notion 
of  the  scope  of  it,  they  reacted  very  belligerently  against  it, 
and  the  county  had  to  drop  it . 

Swent:   You  might  mention  the  wording  of  this  agreement. 

Baker:   The  people  that  signed  the  original  petition  actually  signed  a 

document  that  had  a  phrase  in  it  that  they  voluntarily  gave  up  any 
constitutional  right  to  withdraw  or  protest  or  anything  else.   So 
we  featured  that  quote  prominently  in  the  public  hearings,  and  it 
was  right  there  in  black  and  white:  we  essentially  agree  to  give 
up  our  constitutional  right  to  sue  or  whatever  [laughter]. 

Swent:   Pretty  astonishing. 

Baker:   Yes.   That  was  our  first  exposure  to  what  kind  of  situation  we 

were  in,  and  it  has  not  changed  since  then.   There  has  been,  in  my 
memory,  no  time  since  that  we  have  not  found  ourselves  in 
opposition  to  some  scheme  to  bring  some  form  of  prosperity  or  some 
new  benefit  from  industrial  society  to  our  poor,  backward,  little 
area.   We  now  know  each  other  pretty  well,  and  we  are  constituted 
as  a  loose  and  informal  activist  group  which  gets  labeled  with  the 
term  "environmental";  I  suppose  that's  accurate  in  the  sense  that 
we  care  about  the  place  we  live,  so  we  end  up  having  to  watch 
publications  from  the  county,  watch  the  paper.   It's  a  kind  of  a 
grapevine,  and  when  something  surfaces,  why,  we  get  in  touch  and 
start  activating  the  machinery.   The  first  really  serious  and 
long-term  battle  was  with  the  Homestake  people. 

Swent:   This  flood  control,  the  Rumsey  Ditch  project—you  were  successful 
in  getting  that  stopped. 

Baker:   Right. 

Swent:   And  this  brought  together  a  group  of  you  that  had  a  common 
interest. 

Baker:   That  one  was  very  broadly  based.   There  were  some  tough  old 

farmers  on  the  steering  committee  there,  and  some  of  us  newcomers. 
It  was  very  representative. 

Swent:   And  it  brought  in  people  other  than  those  who  actually  lived  right 
on  the  ditch? 

Baker:   Yes,  actually  it  did.   And  also  some  absentee  people  who  had 

property  then  that  happened  to  adjoin  this  proposed  canal,  and  all 
of  a  sudden  they  get  a  letter  saying,  "You  will  be  obligated  for 
forty  years  to  pay  a  fee."  They  didn't  like  that  [chuckles]. 


72 


Swent:   And  this  was  water  they  had  been  getting  anyway. 

Baker:   Well,  no.   They  had  wells.   They  were  nowhere  near  the  river,  and 
what  they  were  told  is,  We're  going  to  construct  a  canal  across 
your  property  or  across  the  edge  of  your  property,  and  you're 
going  to  be  assessed  for  it. 

Swent:   Whether  you  want  it  or  not.   I  see. 
Baker:   Because  that's  the  only  way  they— 

Swent:   But  you  had  told  me  some  people  were  getting  water  by  gravity  from 
the  river. 

Baker:   Well,  some  people  already  were  on  the  creekfront.   The  Rumsey 
ditch  runs  close  to  the  creek  in  places.   It  was  within  a  few 
hundred  yards.   People  that  had  a  piece  of  property  between  the 
two  could  pump  from  the  river--had  a  riparian  right—so  the  flood 
control  people,  up  to  that  point,  had  said,  Go  ahead  and  take  it 
from  the  ditch.   It's  the  same  water;  it  will  just  save  you  the 
cost  of  pumping  it.   What  the  flood  control  people  were  interested 
in  was  not  really  flood  control;  it  was  selling  water  to  farmers 
in  the  Woodland  area,  because  where  the  river  peters  out  in  the 
gravel  beds  out  in  the  main  valley  there's  two  big  canals  there 
that  take  what's  left  of  it  out  into  farmland  all  to  the  west  of 
Woodland.   Those  people  pay--I  mean,  by  California  rates  their 
water  is  cheap,  but  they're  large  farms,  some  of  them,  and  they 
draw  a  lot  of  water.   So  the  flood  control  people  basically  sell 
them  water.   That's  their  main  business.   But  in  the  case  of  the 
people  who  were  on  the  river  already,  those  people  could  pump  the 
water  out  of  it  anyway.   But  under  the  new  provisions  of  this 
highline  canal,  they  weren't  going  to  offer  them  that  deal;  they 
were  going  to  have  to  pump  it  out  or  else  pay  for- -or  actually,  I 
guess  they  had  to  pay  for  the  ditch  anyway,  whether  they  used  it 
or  not.   They  tried  to  make  it  an  ironclad  thing,  where  if  you 
were  serviced  by  this  ditch,  you  had  to  pay  for  it  whether  you 
needed  it  or  not. 

Swent:   This  flood  control  district—these  are  people  who  are  appointed  or 
elected?  Are  they  local  people? 

Baker:   They're  local  people;  they're  appointed.   The  so-called  districts, 
there  are  flood  control  districts,  there  are  reclamation 
districts  — 

Swent:   Air  and  water  quality  districts? 


73 


Baker:   I'm  not  so  sure  about  them—and  soil  conservation  districts. 

Those  operate  under  a  charter  from  the  state.   They're  not  profit 
organizations.   On  the  other  hand,  they're  not—strictly  speaking 
--state  government  or  county  government;  they  operate  under  the 
authorization  of  the  county,  but  they  are  just  an  appointed  board, 
and  they  have  equipment  to  service  the  ditches,  and  they  operate 
the  dam  at  Indian  Valley.   The  man  from  the  State  Water  Resources 
Control  Board,  I  think,  is  who  I  called  to  try  to  find  out  what 
was  going  on  with  this  thing,  and  he  said  it's  a  quasi-public 
body.   It's  a  murky  sort  of  thing.   They  don't  wear  state 
uniforms,  and  they  have  an  office,  and  they  have  a  budget  that  I 
suppose  the  accountants  go  over  and  make  sure  that  it  balances. 
But  there  are  no  stockholders. 

Swent :   But  this  was  where  you  cut  your  teeth  then  as  a  community 
activist,  shall  we  say?   Is  that  the  term? 

Baker:   I  guess  so,  yes  [chuckles]. 
Swent:   Spokesperson,  anyway. 

Baker:   The  thing  about  it  that  is  good  no  matter  what  the  outcome  is,  is 
simply  that  it's  still  a  small  enough  place  so  that  when  something 
like  this  comes  up,  people  talk  about  it,  phone  each  other,  and 
there's  generally  a  public  meeting  of  some  kind. 

Swent:   And  these  are  held  at  the  Grange  Hall?   Is  that  the  place? 

Baker:   The  Grange  Hall  or  the  Rumsey  Improvement  Club,  which  has  an  old 

opera  house--!  mean,  that's  a  fancy  term  for  it,  but  it  used  to  be 
for  entertainment.   It  has  a  little  stage  and  some  backdrop  cloths 
that  are  left  to  us.   It  was  built  in  1903  and  leaning  [laughter]. 
It's  big  enough  to  hold  a  couple  or  three  hundred  people,  so  we 
would  have  meetings  there  or  at  the  Grange  Hall.   And  sometimes  in 
the  senior  citizens  center  in  Esparto.   So  it's  a  kind  of  town 
meeting  place. 

Swent:   Is  there  a  local  pub  or  corner  store  or  filling  station  or 
restaurant  or  something  where  people  meet? 

Baker:   Now  there's  a  place  called  Nichols"  Rest  Stop,  which  is  in  Guinda. 
There  used  to  be  a  Guinda  Hotel,  and  it  had  a  bar.   It  has  since 
been  abandoned  and  the  building  is  falling  down. 

Swent:   But  this  was  the  place  where  the  gossip  and  the  news  was 
exchanged? 

Baker:   Then  there  are  two  little  corner  stores.   Some  transpired  there. 


Swent:   Guinda  is  kind  of  a  central  place,  I  guess. 

Baker:  Well,  it's  kind  of  centerless.  I  mean,  the  post  offices,  wherever 
they  are,  are  the  places  where  the  posters  go  up  and  people  notice 
things . 

Swent:   Announcements  of  meetings  and  so  on. 
Baker:   Yes. 

Swent:   I  guess  we  shouldn't  get  into  too  much  detail  on  that,  but  I  think 
all  this  bears  on  what  developed  later.   You  did  mention  to  me 
yesterday  that  one  of  the  current  fights  is  over  establishment  of 
bingo  games;  we  won't  get  into  that,  but  it's  an  area  where  people 
have  been  active  as  community  people. 


A  Long-Running  Controversy  Over  In-stream  Gravel  Mining 

Swent:   And  then  the  gravel  situation  does  have  a  bearing. 
Baker:   That's  a  long- running- -. 

Swent:   That's  continuing,  and  it  started  before  the  Homestake  project 
came  in.   I  was  told  that  Cache  Creek  gravel  is  the  standard  by 
which  all  gravel  is  judged  in  California.   It's  the  finest  gravel 
there  is. 

Baker:   It's  the  best,  yes.   It's  called  "Portland  Cement  Grade";  it  means 
that  basically  you  can  scoop  it  up  in  places  and  put  it  in  the 
cement  mixer,  because  it's  sand  and  gravel  in  the  right 
proportions. 

Swent:   And  it  has  been  mined  for  a  long,  long  time. 
Baker:   Yes.   Well,  since  the  1960s,  I  think. 
Swent:   I  thought  maybe  before  that. 

Baker:   I  don't  think  it  was  in  any  big  way;  I  think  that  Syar  and 
Teichert  and  the  big  operators  have  all  come  in  in  the  last 
twenty- five  or  thirty  years. 

Swent:   And  there  was  the  Williamson  Act  that  we  need  to  mention  because 
that  is  definitely  part  of  the  scene.   This  is  an  act  that  had 
been  passed  saying  that  agricultural  land—if  it  was  dedicated  to 


75 


agricultural  use  the  taxes  were  lower  and  it  could  not  be  used 
then  for  any  commercial  mining  or  gravel.   It  was  aimed  at  gravel 
at  that  time,  wasn't  it? 

Baker:   It  didn't  even  have  to  be  functional- -no,  it  was  aimed  at 
subdevelopers. 

Swent:   But  it  was  long  before  the  gold  mine  came,  right? 

Baker:   Yes.   I  think  the  act  dates  from  the  fifties.   One  of  the  old-time 
political  leaders  in  the  valley  was  a  man  named  Lowrey,  and  he-- 

Swent :   What  was  his  first  name? 

Baker:  I'm  trying  to  think;  it  will  come  back  to  me.  His  son's  name  is 
Jan  Lowrey.  Why  can't  I  think  of  stuff  like  that  any  more?  But 
anyway,  he  was  instrumental  in  supporting  that  legislation. 


The  Williamson  Act  to  Preserve  Agricultural  Land  ## 

Swent:   So  Mr.  Lowrey  supported  the  Williamson  Act. 

Baker:   Right.   Lloyd.   Lloyd  Lowrey.   It  was  a  state  law;  he  was  a  state 
representative  in  his  time.   He  did  a  couple  of  invaluable  things, 
and  that  was  one  of  them.   The  other  was  that  there  was  once  a 
plan  afoot  to  dam  up  the  whole  valley,  to  place  a  dam  at  the  mouth 
of  it  near  Capay  and  dam  up  the  whole  Capay  Valley.   It  was  a  plan 
that  —  for  a  considerable  portion  of  the  past  century  that  has  been 
the  game  in  California- -to  dam  up  all  the  rivers  and  take  the 
water  and  ship  it  somewhere  where  there  isn't  any  in  order  to 
raise  something  or  start  a  community  or  whatever.   So  it  had  quite 
a  bit  of  support  in  the  legislature,  and  as  I  understood  it  Lowrey 
practically  singlehandedly  sank  that  proposal.   For  one  thing,  he 
had  lived  a  good  part  of  his  life  in  that  valley,  and  he  had 
neighbors  that  he  didn't  want  to  see  flushed  out.   There  were  all 
kinds  of  places  in  the  West,  of  course,  where  exactly  this 
happened- -some  beautiful  valley  was  turned  into  a  reservoir.   And 
the  people  who  had  ranches  and  farms  in  that  valley  were  paid  off 
and  evicted. 

He  stopped  that- -or  was  very  instrumental  in  stopping  it.   But 
in  the  case  of  the  Williamson  Act,  the  people  saw  some  time  ago 
that  as  the  cities  began  to  grow  and  spread,  the  value  of 
adjoining  farmland  went  down  as  farmland  and  in  the  meantime  the 
taxes  on  it  went  up  because  they  kept  changing  the  boundaries  of 


76 


cities  and  assessing  taxes  on  that  land  which  was  formerly  ag 
land. 

So  they  devised  this  legislation  to  try  to  keep  land  in 
agricultural  production  or  to  keep  it  as  a  reserve;  it  was  called 
the  Agricultural  Preservation  Act,  and  the  way  it  defines 
agricultural  land  includes  grazing  land  and  it  allows  land  for 
something  that's  just  called  "open  space"  or  recreation.   So  they 
were  trying  to  make  a  very  broad  protective  shield  over  so-called 
marginal  lands,  as  well  as  agricultural  lands.   The  way  they  did 
it  is  that  they  offered  people  a  tax  break  for  signing  up  in  a 
nine-year  contract,  an  agreement  that  the  land  could  not  be 
subdivided. 

Swent :   But  the  owner  had  to  actually  commit-- 

Baker:   Yes,  he  had  to  commit  for  nine  years,  and  you've  got  a  nine-year 

tax  break.   At  any  time,  you  could  buy  out  of  the  contract  but  you 
had  to  pay  all  the  back  taxes—not  at  the  special  rate  but  at  the 
same  rate  as  land  that's  not  in  the  preserve.   So  it  had  a  safety 
valve,  in  a  sense,  or  developers  would  look  at  it  that  way  because 
when  the  pressure  got  intense  enough  on  a  piece  of  land  that  is 
protected  by  the  Williamson  Act,  a  developer  who  had  the  bucks 
would  step  in  and  say,  "I'll  pay  all  the  back  taxes.   I'll  take  it 
out  of  the  contract."  Originally,  I  believe  the  act  only  allowed 
you  to  buy  out  every  nine  years.   That  is,  once  you  were  in  it  for 
nine  years  you  couldn't  get  out.   Then  I  think  they  changed  that-- 
I'm  not  sure  about  this;  you'd  have  to  check  it,  but  my 
understanding  is  now  that  you  can  buy  out  at  any  time  as  long  as 
you're  willing  to  pay  the  accumulated  tax  bill  on  the  old 
assessment  or  the  current  version  of  the  assessment  rate.   That 
became  a  central  issue  in  this  controversy  because-- 

Swent:   There  had  been  pressure  to  amend  this  act—the  county  was  able  to 
amend  the  act  on  its  own. 

Baker:   Well,  they  amended  a  zoning  ordinance.   The  weakness  in  the 

Williamson  Act  turned  out  to  be  a  provision  that  allowed  uses 
compatible  with  agriculture. 

Swent:   How  you  define  "compatible"  then  was  the  issue. 

Baker:   Exactly.   And  it  allowed  counties  some  leeway  in  administering  the 
act.   For  example,  the  requirements  in  Mendocino  County,  I  know, 
are  as  specific  as  saying  that  you  have  to  be  able  to  support  a 
certain  number  of  head  of  livestock  on  a  place  in  order  to  qualify 
for  the  Williamson  Act- -and  the  minimum  acreage  limits  are 
different.   When  I  first  got  my  place  I  had  twelve  and  a  half 


77 


acres,  and  you  had  to  have  twenty  in  order  to  qualify  for  the 
Williamson  Act.   But  that  has  now  shifted  in  Mendocino  County;  you 
have  to  have  160,  I  believe,  to  qualify,  and  I  think  in  Yolo 
County  someone  told  me  the  other  day  that  it's  up  to  seventy-five 
acres  to  qualify. 

Swent:   So  they  were  considering  amending  the  zoning. 

Baker:   This  zoning  regulation  that  they  amended  was  a  regulation  which- - 
probably  it  was  the  county's  recognition--!  mean,  it  has  its  own 
so-called  A-l,  and--it  must  be  A-2  and  A-3,  but  I'm  not  sure  about 
that.   But  A-l,  I  know,  is  prime  agricultural  land,  and  that's  the 
zoning  that  is  set  by  the  county,  the  acreage  limits  on  it.  And 
AP  land—so-called  agricultural  preserve  land--is  land  that  is 
covered  by  the  Williamson  Act.   But  the  specifics  of  how  that  is 
defined  are  apparently  left  to  the  counties  to  enact  as  zoning 
regulations. 


A  Zoning  Ordinance  Amendment  Which  Benefited  Gravel  Miners 


Swent:   Then  this  amendment  would  somehow  benefit  this  subdividing? 

Baker:   Well,  what  the  amendment  specifically  did  was  allow  people  to 
impound  water  and  make  reservoirs  to  support  business  activity 
that  was  not  directly  related  to  agriculture  and,  in  particular, 
mining.   The  actual  wording  of  the  zoning  regulation  amendment 
stipulated  that  you  could  impound  water  for  mining  purposes  as 
long  as  you  didn't  diminish  the  agricultural  potential  of  the  land 
and  as  long  as  your  impoundment  might  ultimately  serve  the 
benefits  of  agriculture.   But  it  seemed  perfectly  clear  to  us  that 
this  was  twisting  around  to--I  never  have  understood  why  the 
county  didn't  just  allow  Homestake  to  buy  out  of  the  contract, 
because  they  would  have  improved  their  tax  revenues  incredibly. 
The  tax  revenues  that  they  expected  under  the  Williamson  Act  was 
something  like  $39,000.   Homestake  had  some  2,000  acres  overall 
that  were  in  the  AP  zone,  and  the  tax  bill  on  that  without  the 
Williamson  Act  protection  would  have  been  a  million  something.   I 
don't  know  why  they-- 

Swent:   Something  that  I  read  in  one  of  these  newspaper  articles—a  couple 
of  points--!  think  that  this  amendment  was  already  under 
consideration  before  Homestake  even  came  into  the  picture,  wasn't 
it?   I  mean,  the  zoning  ordinance  wasn't  amended  just  for 
Homestake. 


78 


Baker:   It  certainly  looked  as  if  it  was  to  us. 
Swent:   I  thought  that  that  was  already-- 

Baker:   There  was  consideration  of  zoning  regulations  regarding  gravel 

mining;  that  was  already  going  on.   It's  true  it  fitted  into  that, 
but  this  particular  change  and  the  timing  of  it  seemed  to  us 
clearly  and  directly  related  to  Homestake. 

Swent:   There  was  one  newspaper  article,  and  I  guess  I  don't  have  the  time 
to  hunt  it  right  now,  but  it  did  say  that  the  point  you  just  made 
--the  spokesman  for  Homestake  said  that  they  could  opt  out  but 
that  they'd  rather  wait  for  the  zoning  ordinance  amendment.   I 
think  the  county  would  have  allowed  them  to  probably  pay  the 
higher  taxes,  wouldn't  they? 

Baker:   Well,  I  don't  know  why  they  didn't.   Politically,  they  could 
argue--!  mean,  they  might  be  trying  to-- 

Swent :   [looking  through  papers]   This  was  from  the  Sacramento  Bee  in  May 
'83.   Betsy  Marchand.   These  are  just  my  notes,  in  regard  to  Davis 
Creek:  "HMC  land  under  contract  to  be  agriculture  under  the 
Williamson  Act.   Marchand  suggested  HMC  take  its  land  out  of  the 
Williamson  Act  contract.   This  would  incur  a  tax  liability. 
Krauss  said  the  county  planning  staff  recommended  against  this 
because  county  was  considering  zoning  amendment  to  allow 
reservoirs  for  sand  and  gravel  mining  on  ag  preserve  land.1  HMC 
will  wait  for  this." 

Baker:   Of  course,  sure  they  would. 

Swent:   Now  wait  —  this  was  in  the  Clear  Lake  Observer  from  May  28,  '83. 

So  clearly  it  was  to  Homestake 's  advantage  to  pay  the  lower  taxes 
[laughs] . 

Baker:   Of  course  it  was.   But  since  they  offered  to  buy  out,  I  don't 

understand  why  the  county  didn't  take  them  up  on  it.   I  suppose  if 
it  was  common  knowledge  that  they  were  considering--!  mean,  it  is 
true  that  gravel  companies  wanted  to  mine  gravel  on  AP  land,  and 
the  argument  that  they  were  using  was  that  it  was  bank 
stabilization  and  erosion  control.   There  are  circumstances  in 
which  the  old-timers  tell  me  that  that's  correct;  you  can  re- 
contour  the  river  course  to  minimize  the  erosion  of  a  certain 


'Raymond  Krauss,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine/Knoxville  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


HILL  AND  KNOWLTON 


78a 


HILL  AND  KNOWLTON 


78b 


8— Clear  Lake  Observer,  Thursday,  April  28,  1983 


¥  TT  /O\  T&  /fl"  IP*  O  HP   A    ¥>^  T"1      IT"1  ¥  IT* 

HOMESTAKE  EIR 


ed  from  persons  arguing  that  pollution 
can  and  will  be  carefully  monitored 
and  controlled. 

"The  drfcft  EIR  is  a  very  complete 
and  sensitive  document,"  said  Jack 
Sireblow,  president  of  Napa's  Basalt 
Rock  Company. 

"It  is  important  to  note  the  high 
reputation  that  HMC  has  as  a  respon-' 
siblc  mine  operator,  going  back  for 
more  than  a  century.  These  people 
have  the  capability  to  control  en 
vironmental  effects  of  the  gold  mine 
project,"  Streblow  said. 

Ray    Krause.    Homestake's    En- . 


vironmental  Manager  for  the  project 
said,  the  company  has  taken  un 
precedented  measures  10  be  sure  the 
mine's  effects  are  adequately 
mitigated. 

"We  are  committed  to  local  hiring 
and  we  understood  Lake  County's  con 
cern  that  the  project  not  impact  on 
local  schools.  We  have  already  met  to 
discuss  training  opportunities  for  local 
workers,"  Krause  said. 

Dave    Crouch,    HMC    Corporate 

Manager  for  Environmental  Affairs 

said  dust  particles  generated  from  the 

'mine  project  will  fall  onto  HMC  pro- 


perty  within  one  and  a  half  kilometers 
of  the  open  pit. 

Less  than  a  gram  of  asbestos  dust 
will  be  generated  daily,  he  said. 

Hydrogen  cyanide  dust  generated 
will  be  one  tenth  of  the  acceptable  level 
for  worker  exposure,  he  added. 

And  he  said,  "There  will  be  in 
significant  emissions  of  mercury." 
"None  of  the  regulated  pollutants' 
from  the  operation  will  reach  or  exceed 
50  percent  of  the  accepted  state  stan 
dards,"  Crouch  said. 


79 


bank—if  there  is  a  good  field  there.   So  one  of  the  things  you 
can  do  is  take  out  gravel  upstream  of  that  from  a  certain  place  in 
the  bend,  and  it  will  keep  the  water  further  away  from  undermining 
that  bank.   There  are  limited  specific  cases  in  which  that's  true. 
But  even  then,  before  Homestake  ever  came  along,  anyone  who  looked 
at  it  understood  that  this  is  not  a  matter  of  a  farmer  re- 
contouring  the  bed  strictly  for  that  reason;  this  is  a  side 
benefit  of  the  removal  of  massive  amounts  of  gravel  for  profit. 
That's  what's  going  on  here.  And  because  the  Williamson  Act  tries 
to  protect  agricultural  land,  in  order  to  get  at  it  they  have  to 
have  a  cover  reason.   They  have  to  have  a  justification  in  terms 
that  that  act  uses.   So  if  you  can  argue  that  you  are  stabilizing 
a  bank  or  controlling  erosion,  then  you  can  remove  the  gravel. 

In  terms  of  Homestake,  of  course,  it's  a  much  harder  case  to 
make  because  the  reservoir,  for  at  least  twenty-some  years,  is 
going  to  be  exclusively  devoted  to  supplying  water  to  a  slurry 
line  to  process  ore;  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  agriculture. 


80 


III   HOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY  AND  DAVIS  CREEK 


Water:  Crucial  for  Fanners  and  Miners 


Swent :   So  now  we  come  up  to  the  Davis  Creek  Reservoir.   Let's  clarify 
that.   So  the  gravel  mining  was  already  in  the  picture,  and  you 
had  been  involved  as  a  community? 

Baker:   I  had  not. 

Swent:   But  there  were  community  concerns. 

Baker:   Especially  the  people  who  lived  next  to  the  gravel  mining 

operation.   They  were  the  ones  who  were  keeping  track  of  it  and 
bringing  it  to  our  attention.   But  it  had  not  really  coalesced 
into  a  powerful  issue--!  mean,  the  gravel  companies  were  already 
set  up  and  running  and  had  been  for  years ,  and  there  was  not  much 
hope  of  rolling  that  back-- just  the  hope  of  containing  it. 

Swent:   So  then  we  come  to  1980,  when  Home stake  made  its  announcement--! 
think  it  was  August  of  1980--that  they  had  this  gold  mine,  which 
was  in  Napa  County.   At  that  point,  Yolo  County  wasn't  even  in  the 
picture.   It  wasn't  until  later  down  the  road--!  don't  know  when 
exactly- -but  they  needed  water  and  they  looked  around  for  possible 
sites  and  selected  Davis  Creek. 

Baker:  I  think  even  without  the  reservoir  there  was  still  a  corner  of  the 
county—most  of  the  mine  lies  in  Lake  and  Napa  County.  In  fact,  I 
think  most  of  it  is  in  Napa  County. 

Swent:   The  mine  is  mostly  in  Napa,  but  there's  a  little  bit  in  Lake  and  a 
little  bit  in  Yolo.   But  then  the  impact—well,  the  mine  would 
have  of  course  an  impact  on  the  county  too,  but  then  they  selected 
Davis  Creek  as  the  best  place  to  dam  for  the  water  that  they 
needed  for  construction,  I  think,  as  well  as  for  processing. 

Baker:   It  was  a  crucial  component  of  their  whole  operation  because  they-- 


81 


Swent:   And  that's  when  they  had  to  get  the  permits.   I  guess  they  had  to 
get  permits  to  mine  also,  from  Yolo  County. 

Baker:   Yes.   But  that  was  not  as  significant  as  the  permit  to-- 

Swent:   It  was  the  Davis  Creek  Reservoir  that  really  put  the  fat  in  the 
fire,  didn't  it? 

Baker:   On  the  other  hand,  it  was  their  strongest  selling  point  to  the 
supporters  they  did  have  in  our  county,  because  people  are  so 
water- conscious  there  that  anybody  who  impounds  some  and  keeps 
water  that  would  otherwise  run  off  is  going  to  be  positively 
assessed,  other  things  being  equal.   They're  going  to  say,  We  can 
always  use  the  water,  and  we  don't  care  what  the  purpose  of  it  is 
if  it's  going  to  be  there  indefinitely  and  it  supplies  water  then 
they  can't  oppose  it. 

Swent:   Davis  Creek  didn't  run  year  round. 
Baker:   No,  but  it  runs  enough. 
Swent:   Cache  Creek  does. 

Baker:   Yes.   But  in  the  rainy  season  it's  a  big  enough  little  corner  of 
the  watershed  so  that  it's  a  reservoir  of  180- some  acres. 

Swent:   And  it  runs  directly  into  Cache  Creek,  does  it? 

Baker:   Yes,  the  course  of  it  does,  and  when  it's  running  in  the  rainy 
season  it  runs  into  it. 

Swent:   There's  a  dam  at  the  end  of  Clear  Lake  which  lets  water  go  into 
Cache  Creek. 

Baker:   Yes.   It  raised  the  level  of  Clear  Lake  nine  feet.   And  that  water 
belongs  to  the  Yolo  County  Flood  Control  and  Conservation 
District. 

Swent:   The  top  nine  feet  of  Clear  Lake  belongs  to  Yolo  County  [chuckles], 
although  Clear  Lake  is  in  Lake  County. 

Baker:   Right.   They  bought  it  from  a  bankrupt  water  and  land  company,  who 
bought  it  from  another  water  and  land  bank  company  who  acquired  it 
from  a  railroad  and  land  company  in  the  great  nineteenth-century 
giveaway.   It's  the  story  of  the  West. 


82 


A  Public  Meeting  in  the  Guinda  Grange  Hall,  1980 


Swent:   So  all  of  that  comes  into  the  historical  picture  on  all  of  this. 

The  first  public  meeting  that  we  know  of  was  not  until  a  couple  of 
years  later—the  1980s--when  the  announcement  was  in  the  papers 
that  this  gold  had  been  found.   But  then  public  meetings  weren't 
held  for  quite  a  while. 

Baker:   No,  I'm  pretty  sure  we  had  a  meeting  in  the  fall  of  '80.   It  had 
to  be.   It  was  in  the  Grange  Hall,  and  it  was  styled  as  an 
informational  meeting;  it  was  a  presentation  by  the  Homestake 
people . 

Swent:   This  was  the  Guinda  Grange  Hall. 

Baker:   The  Grange  commonly  does  that.   When  there's  an  election,  it 
invites  the  candidates  to  come  up  and  talk. 

Swent:   That's  their  function. 

Baker:   Yes,  and  they  do  it  very  well.   So  the  Homestake  people  were 
there,  and  they  sketched-- 

Swent:   Do  you  recall  who  it  was? 

Baker:   That  guy  was  only  around  during  the  preliminary  stuff.   It  was  a 
medium-sized  blond-headed  guy  who  seemed  to  be  leading  it. 


Gold  Triggers  a  Pleasant  Exhilaration 


Swent:   It  could  have  been  Don  Gustafson;  he  was  the  geologist.1 

Baker:   It  could  be.   He  was  very  smooth,  well-spoken.   One  of  the  old- 
timers  said  that  he  had  run  across  him  up  in  the  hills  up  there- 
he  was,  I  don't  know,  hunting  or  just  cruising  around--and  he  ran 
into  this  guy  up  there,  and  the  guy  gave  him  some  misleading  story 
about  why  he  was  there.   I  mean,  he  clearly  had  a  pickup  and  tools 
and  was  doing  some  kind  of  assay  or  assessment  or  survey  work  of 
some  kind.   I  forgot  what  the  cover  story  was,  but  they  both 


'Donald  Gustafson,  interview  in  the  Mclaughlin  Mine /Knoxvi lie  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


83 


laughed  about  it;  the  guy  was  not  going  to  use  the  word  gold, 
obviously,  that  early  in  the  game.   But  they  recognized  each  other 
and  had  a  laugh  about  it.   Everybody  laughed  about  it,  and  I 
remembered  that  was  one  of  the  times  when  I  was  alert  to  the  fact 
that  in  the  West,  in  California,  if  you  raise  the  prospect  of 
gold,  for  many  people  that  triggers  a  pleasant  blend  of 
exhilaration  and  inquisitiveness  and  adventurousness .   There  were 
already  figures  in  the  billions--a  billion  or  two  billion  in  gold 
is  there—and  there  were  eyes  shining  in  the  room,  I  could  tell, 
and  the  whole  thing  set  off  my  alarm  system  [laughs]. 

Those  early  meetings  may  very  well  have  gone  unrecorded  except 
maybe  in  the  local  paper  and  maybe  not  even  there.   They  were 
doing  their  ground  work,  their  PR  work. 

Swent :   They  were  informational  to  tell  the  public  what  was  going  on. 

Baker:   I  remember  there  was  a  little  speech  about  how  the  days  of 

corporate  rapacity  were  long  gone,  and  they  were  going  to  do  this 
right,  and  that  was  the  line  from  the  beginning—we  want  to  be 
good  neighbors,  and  we  want  to  do  a  clean  project. 

Swent:   You  didn't  feel  it  was  sincere,  though? 

Baker:   Oh,  I  wouldn't  say  that.   I  would  say  it  was  very  difficult  to 

assess  the  level  of  sincerity.   It  is  difficult  for  me  to  assess 
that  level  because  I  think—well,  we've  all  had  plenty  of 
experience  with  hype,  and  at  this  point  no  corporation  now 
operates  without  it.   Their  message  is  that  they  are  very  good  for 
us  and  very  good  for  the  environment  and  very  good  for  the  future. 
So  it's  what  you  expect  to  hear;  you  can't  say  right  offhand  how 
deep  this  runs.   They  did,  I  think,  when  they  finally  got  into 
building  and  operation.   In  terms  of  their  trade  and  that  context, 
I  think  it  is_  a  clean  project  and  a  well-run  project  and  probably 
one  with  minimized  impacts.   I'm  willing  to  grant  all  of  that. 
But  I  also  think  that  a  significant  measure  of  that  cleanliness 
and  commitment  to  monitoring  and  restoration  are  the  consequence 
of  our  having  kept  the  fire  under  them  the  whole  time.   They 
admitted  that  to  us  a  couple  of  times,  and  said  that  this  would  be 
a  very  different  project  if  it  weren't  for  you  people. 


Trying  to  Block  Approval  of  the  Environmental  Impact  Report 


Swent:   Okay,  so  now  we  get  to  what  you  did.   The  first  thing  they  had  to 
do  was  to  get  the  environmental  impact  report  approved  by  each 


county,  and  that's  when  you  started  your  efforts  to  block  them, 
right?  Was  it  clear? 

Baker:   It  was  not  clear  to  us.   We  had  people  in  our  group  who  said 
blocking  it  is  just  out  of  the  question,  and  they  were  right. 
Realistically  I  think— 

Swent:  Even  at  the  beginning- 
Baker:  Oh,  yes.   Robert  Speirs  and  Avery  Tindell--1 
Swent:  Tindell  was  a  long-time  resident? 
Baker:  No,  he  bought  in  after  I  did,  I  think. 
Swent:  Oh.   He's  older  than  you  though,  I  guess. 

Baker:   Yes,  late  seventies.  Actually  he  had  only  been  there  a  couple  of 
years. 

Swent:   And  Speirs? 

Baker:   Speirs  also  was  about  the  same  time  I  came-- '75  or  '76. 

Swent:   You  said  the  old-time  people  were  not  so  skeptical  about  all  this. 

Baker:   No.   Sure—mine?  Gold?   If  they'll  make  some  money  at  it  and 
employ  some  people  and  it's  over  the  hill  there—and  they  were 
right,  from  their  perspective.   We  overestimated  the  impact. 

Swent:   It  is  pretty  remote  from  you;  it  is  over  a  hill. 

Baker:   Yes,  it  definitely  is.   And  it's  mostly  in  another  county,  and 

they  were  right  that  we  had  very  little  control  in  the  end  because 
it  was  a  three-county  thing,  and  any  time  you've  got  two  of  them 
going  the  same  way,  then  what  was  the  little  third  county  going  to 
do?  Oppose  the  whole  thing? 

Swent:   I  think  I  kind  of  interrupted  you.   You  were  saying  it  wasn't 
clear  at  the  beginning  which  way  you  would  go. 

Baker:   Speirs  and  Tindell  were  saying  things  like,  We  had  better  have  a 
plan  for  assuming  it  is  going  to  go  through,  because  we  want  to 


'Avery  Tindell,  interview  in  the  Mclaughlin  Mine /Knoxvi lie  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


85 


make  sure  that  they  do  do  it  right.   And  we  want  to  make  it  as 
safe  and  minimal  a  project  as  is  possible  to  make  it. 

Swent:   So  that  was  sort  of  a  compromise  position  right  from  the  start? 

Baker:   I  think  Speirs  always  held  that  position  and  wanted  to  make  sure 

that  some  extraordinary  sensitivity  to  the  environment  was  part  of 
that  project  from  the  beginning.   When  he  got  into  the  actual 
fray,  sometimes  he  would  forget  and  speak  pretty  strongly  as  if  he 
wouldn't  mind  if  the  whole  thing  went  down  [chuckles].   But  that 
happened  to  all  of  us;  we  got  caught  up  in  the--. 


Concerns  about  Air  and  Water  Pollution 


Swent:   Did  your  feelings  evolve?   If  you  can  remember  how  you  felt  at  the 

beginning- 
Baker:   Oh,  yes.  At  the  beginning  I  was  a  fairly  new  resident  and  I  liked 
the  place  and  we'd  been  through  the  thing  with  the  canal.   So  when 
they  started  talking  about--! 've  forgotten  what  it  was--30,000 
tons  or  so  of  particulate  matter  going  into  the  atmosphere  and  I 
forgot  how  many  parts  per  million  of  sulfur  dioxide  and  carbon 
monoxide;  the  fact  that  there  would  be  tailing  ponds  full  of 
cyanide-treated  residues  a  couple  thousand  feet  higher  than  where 
we  were  in  the  drainage  system,  and  the  fact  that  the  whole  thing 
did  sit  on  a  fault  zone—in  the  beginning,  those  were  all  things 
that  I  was  concerned  about  and  got  involved  with. 

Swent:   Where  did  you  get  this  information? 

Baker:   From  their  own  sources,  and  the  company  had  its  estimates  for  how 
much  ore  they  were  going  to  move.   So  then  we  took  a  trip  up  to 
look  at  the  valley;  I  actually  had  never  been  there  until  this 
came  up.   I  had  been  close,  but  I  had  never  been  to  the  very  site. 

Swent:   To  the  Davis  Creek  or  the  Manhattan- - 

Baker:   To  Morgan  Valley.   It's  a  beautiful  place.   That  entered  into  it. 

Swent:   It  had  been  pretty  ravaged  by  earlier  mining;  it  wasn't  untouched 
by  any  means . 

Baker:   That's  true.   But  relatively,  compared  to  a  mile-long  pit  seven  or 
eight  hundred  feet  deep.   Anyway,  that  was  operating  in  the 
beginning,  and  then  as  we  got  into  it  we  found  out  that  they  had 


86 


polluted  South  Dakota,  that  they  were  being  sued  someplace  in 
Nevada,  I  think  it  was. 

Swent:   New  Mexico.   I  think  you  mentioned  the  suit  in  Milan,  New  Mexico. 
II 

Swent:   So  it  was  the  air  and  the  water  pollution  that  particularly 
concerned  you. 

Baker:   And  mercury.   One  of  the  things  that  the  group  did—again,  this  is 
mostly  Speirs's  influence;  he's  a  pathologist,  retired—we  were 
assembling  a  small  library  of  papers  and  facts  about  the  company 
and  its  history,  but  also  about  various  kinds  of  heavy-metal 
pollution.   There  was  a  whole  controversy,  for  example,  about  the 
mercury  that's  in  the  area  that  exists  as  a  mineral  deposit.   It's 
not  cinnabar;  I've  forgotten  the  exact-- 

Swent:   There  is  cinnabar. 

Baker:   Yes,  but  it  seemed  to  me  there  was  another  one.   They're  all  red 
[chuckles].   The  mercury  in  that  form  was  supposed  to  be  mostly 
harmless  because  it  was  not  readily  soluble.   But  Speirs  pointed 
out  that  rainfall  over  the  whole  continent  has  gotten  more  acidic 
and  gets  more  acidic  annually,  so  we  should  have  more  up-to-date 
information  on  what  was  going  on  with  the  streams.   So  monitoring 
that  mercury  level  became  an  important  issue,  and  we  built  into 
the  final  plan  a  pretty  comprehensive  testing  system  to  make  sure 
that  that  did  not  endanger  the  water  in  that  reservoir.   It  turned 
out  that  we  were  at  least  partly  right  there.   The  question  of 
runoffs  from  various  mineral  salts  and  soils,  that  picture  has 
changed  because  of  acid  rain.   It  does  change  the  concentrations. 

Swent:   I  don't  suppose  anyone  had  thought  of  monitoring  the  water  for 
mercury  before. 

Baker:   Oh,  we  had  thought  of  it,  but  the  first  couple  of  geologists  that 
they  brought  up  had  glibly  said  that  this  is  an  insoluble  form  of 
mercury.   We  were  able  to  get  up  right  after  that  and  say,  That 
that  has  been  true  historically  until  very  recently,  but  because 
of  acid  rain  there  are  different  concentrations.   And  also 
agricultural  runoff  affects  that  to  some  extent.  Anyway,  what  I 
meant  to  say  is  that  we  were  compiling  information-- 


87 


Information  as  Ammunition 

Swent :   Doing  a  research  operation  on  your  own. 

Baker:   Yes.   And  that  was  fun,  but  it  also  made  us  pretty  fully  aware,  I 
think,  of  the  size  and  scope  of  the  operation,  and  that  there 
would  be  effects.   The  part  that* still  I  have  some  qualms  about  is 
the  degree  to  which  both  sides  were  using  information  simply  as 
ammunition.   At  some  level,  again  on  both  sides,  I  think  it  leads 
to  a  disrespect  for  information  as  such.   In  other  words,  whenever 
it  doesn't  qualify  as  ammunition  for  your  position  you  ignore  it 
or  suppress  it,  and  that's  bound  to  be  unhealthy  ultimately.   To 
say  that  it  will  work  itself  out  because  people  expect  you  to  be 
partisan-- 

Swent:   If  it  balanced,  it  would. 

Baker:   But  when  you  have  balance  in  the  form  of  someone  who  calls  himself 
a  scientist  and  has  a  reputation  as  such,  and  they  are  testifying 
basically  for  one  position,  and  another  scientist  equally 
qualified  is  testifying  on  the  other  side—for  the  people  who  are 
supposed  to  decide  policy  sitting  in  between,  it  looks  as  if  both 
sides  are  at  some  point  not  being  quite  honest.   In  theory,  it 
should  be  possible  in  such  a  debate  for  one  of  the  people  to  say, 
"Your  figures  are  more  accurate  and  up-to-date."  But  they  never 
do  that.   In  a  real,  open  exchange  of  scientific  information  it's 
been  my  experience  that  scientists  do  respect  each  other  for  being 
willing  to  yield,  because  the  truth  is  staring  them  in  the  face. 
And  in  many  of  these  hearings  they  just  look  like  hired  guns. 

Swent:   It  wasn't  done  for  scientific  inquiry. 

Baker:   No.   And  if  you  think  about  it- -they  call  up  somebody  and  say, 
"We'll  pay  you  a  fat  fee  and  fly  you  to  California  and  pay  all 
your  expenses.   We  just  want  you  to  go  over  this  case  and  present 
it  for  us."  That's  not  really  quite  kosher,  in  my  view  anyway.   I 
understand  how  it  seems  to  be  getting  harder  and  harder  in  the 
whole  social  order  to  reach  that  ground  where  an  issue  is 
discussed  with  a  real  commitment  to  find  out  what  the  truth  is. 

Swent:   Was  Speirs  the  only  scientist  in  your  group? 

Baker:   No,  there  was  also  a  guy- -he's  gone  now,  and  I  don't  remember  his 
name- -who  was  a  chemist. 

Swent:   So  you  did  have  some  scientific  knowledge  on  your  side. 


88 


Baker:   Yes.   And  Tindell  was  an  insurance  specialist.   We  got  some  people 
from  the  university  a  couple  times  who  gave  us  some  data.   But 
Speirs  was  definitely  the  guy  [inaudible]. 

Swent:   So  you  were  simply  going  to  a  lot  of  these  meetings  that  were 
called? 

Baker:   We  developed  press  releases.   We  were  perfectly  aware  that  the 

campaign  was  for  public  sentiment.  And  Homestake  understood  it; 
they  opened  an  office  in  Woodland  and  met  all  the  Chamber  of 
Commerce  people  and  had  slide  show  presentations  and  all  that. 
They  were  applying  a  lot  of  grease,  and  they  did  it  well.   They 
have  money,  and  they  bought  talent  that  knows  what  it's  doing. 
They  had  good  lawyers,  and  Krauss  is  a  masterful  PR  [public 
relations]  person.   They  ran  a  very  good  campaign. 

Swent:  Did  you  call  meetings  of  your  own? 

Baker:  Yes,  sure.   In  the  thick  of  it  we  were  meeting  every  day  or  two. 

Swent:  Not  public  meetings,  though-- just  your  own? 

Baker:  No.   Just  our  group.   But  we  also  had  public  meetings. 

Swent:  You  wrote  a  lot  of  letters  to  the  editor. 

Baker:   Right,  we  did  that.   And  whenever  there  was  a  public  hearing- -we 
even  went  to  some  in  Napa  County. 

Swent:   The  papers  that  you  dealt  with  were  the  Sacramento  Bee,  the 
Solano-- 

Baker:   Right.   The  Clear  Lake  Observer,  the  Woodland  Democrat,  the  Davis 
Enterprise. 

Swent:   You  were  mostly  concentrating  on  those  local  papers. 

Baker:   The  [San  Francisco]  Chronicle  came  up,  and  they  did  a  story  on  it. 

Swent:   But  you  were  having  your  contacts  more  with  the  local  papers. 

Baker:   Yes.   1  think  from  their  point  of  view  they  underestimated  us  at 
the  start  because,  you  know,  it  was  a  real  funky  place.   The 
Guinda  Grange  Hall  is  just  an  old  grange  hall  and  just  a  few  old 
farmers,  and  they  seemed  to  be  amenable  to  it.   And  it's  a  small 
rural  area. 


89 


Home stake's  Historic  Stream  Pollution  in  South  Dakota 


Baker:   They  were  going  to  appear  before  the  [county  board  of]  supervisors 
and  make  a  presentation  open  to  the  public  and  that  people  could 
speak  at.   They  were  already  pumping  very  strong  this 
environmental  line  about  what  stewards  of  the  land  they  were  and 
so  forth.   I  knew  that  their  main  operation  was  in  South  Dakota, 
but  I  picked  up  a  mention  that  they  were  at  one  point  involved  in 
paying  a  fine  to  the  State  of  South  Dakota  for  polluting  a  stream. 
So  I  called  the  attorney  general—his  office—in  South  Dakota  and 
said,  "What's  the  story  here?" 

The  guy  just  told  me  what  was  going  on,  that  yes,  they  were 
cited  for  the  stream  and  "Did  you  know  that  they're  the  only 
corporation  that's  ever  been  cited  twice?   It's  a  Superfund  site." 

I  said,  "No,  I  didn't  know  that."   So  I  took  all  this  down. 

When  this  meeting  came  about,  they  went  into  their  performance 
on  their  environmental  responsibility.  When  we  would  get 
something  juicy  like  this,  we  would  parcel  out  the— instead  of 
having  one  person  deliver  the  whole  thing,  since  you  only  get 
three  or  five  minutes  before  the  supervisors,  one  person  would 
give  a  part  of  it  and  then  the  next  person  up  would  give  the 
second  part  of  it  and  so  on.   So  we  just  laid  out  this  string  of 
charges  and  suits  and  fines. 

Swent:   "We"  meaning  your  group—seven  or  eight  of  you. 

Baker:   Yes.   And  I  could  say  legitimately  that  I  did  not  invent  this,  but 
I  spoke  to  Mr.  So-and-So  in  the  attorney  general's  office  in  the 
state  of  South  Dakota,  and  this  is  directly  what  he  told  me.   One 
of  the  things  he  said  is— I  said,  "What  about  this  creek?" 

And  he  said,  "Well,  it's  not  a  creek  any  more;  it's  just  kind 
of  a  sludge." 

I  said,  "This  is  what  happened  to  a  creek  in  South  Dakota,  and 
I'll  quote  the  attorney  general's  office." 

So  I  think  they  learned  after  that  that  they  had 

underestimated  the  opposition  a  little  bit.  They  had  to  get  their 
lawyer  to  call  the— the  head  of  the  company  is  buddies  with  the 
governor  of  South  Dakota—or  was  at  the  time— so  I  imagine  this 
got  back,  and  immediately  the  next  meeting  their  lawyer  got  up  and 
read  a  letter  from  the  attorney  general  himself  saying  that  we 
must  not  misinterpret  this,  that  Homestake  has  had  a  wonderful 


90 


contribution  to  make  to  South  Dakota  and  so  forth.   That  was  a 
sign  that  we  had  stung  them  there. 


The  Front  Line;  Conflicting  Philosophies  and  Principles 


Baker:   That  got  to  be  the  pattern;  we  would  have  our  science  and  our 

testimony,  and  they  would  have  theirs  and  we  would  show  up  at  the 
meetings  and  start  in  on  it.   In  the  course  of  doing  that  we 
realized  that  the  only  thing  that  really  matters  in  this  project 
as  far  as  Yolo  County  is  concerned  is  this  reservoir.   The 
justification  under  which  this  reservoir  was  being  created  is  very 
thin;  it  has  to  take  place  under  the  rubric  of  this  Williamson 
Act,  and  the  whole  point  of  that  act  was  to  ensure  things  like 
open  space  and  recreational  use  of  the  land.   That's  clear  in  the 
language.   What  they're  saying  is,  We  want  this  to  remain  farmland 
or  potentially  farmland,  and  not  be  used  for  industrial, 
commercial,  or  any  other  purpose.   It  got  down  to  that  issue,  and 
it  was  important  to  them  because  they  had  to  have  the  water,  and 
to  get  it  another  way  would  have  been  really  troublesome  and 
expensive;  they  wanted  that  water  very  badly.   So  that  became  the 
front  line. 

Swent :   As  a  strategic  matter,  then. 

Baker:   Yes.   I  meant  to  point  out  that  I  finally  decided  that  the 

undercurrents  in  this  conflict  really  didn't  have  so  much  to  do 
with  air  pollution- -that  is,  they  could  demonstrate  that  it  was  at 
a  tolerable  level.   They  were  far  removed  from  any  urban  center. 
The  chances  for  water  pollution  from  those  tailings  ponds  was 
slight;  it  was  there,  but  it  would  be  fair  to  say  that  it  was 
slight.   There  was  no  getting  around  the  aesthetics  of  the  mine; 
there  was  certainly  no  improvement  over  what  was  there,  but  it's  a 
remote  area.   And  there  is  already  a  road  in  there;  it's  not  like 
it  was  a  wilderness.   All  of  those  various  levels  were  points  of 
encounter.   Their  case  was  pretty  good,  and  if  you  stuck  to  it  on 
what  I  call  normal,  rational  grounds,  there  would  be  a  very  strong 
chance  that  they  would  prevail  and  that  it  wouldn't  do  any  lasting 
and  severe  damage  to  anybody's  life- -except  that  there  were  a 
couple  of  people  who  had  property  in  that  valley.   Of  course,  they 
lost  it  and  eventually  sold  out—there  was  a  holdout  for  a  while; 
they  didn't  want  to  sell. 

Swent:   In  the  Davis  Creek  Valley,  you  mean. 


91 


Baker:   Yes.   So  that's  when  I  thought  of  the  whole  thing  in  terms  of  what 
I'll  call  the  philosophical  level.   There  were  issues  of  principle 
involved  that  transcended  the  particulars  of  the  case.   I  think 
other  people  in  the  opposition  group—although  we  seldom  talked 
about  it  in  any  direct  way--I  think  they  were  motivated  on  the 
same  grounds.   Conversely,  I  think  some  of  the  people  in  the 
Homestake  camp  were  equally  committed  to  what's  called  a  moral 
vision,  (you  can  call  it  that),  so  that  they  were  fighting  in  part 
on  grounds  of  principle,  too,  that  there  is  a  very  high  place  to 
be  given  now  to  the  responsible  corporation,  who  acts  sort  of  in 
the  name  of  the  whole  society.   And  when  government  sides  with 
them,  it  confirms  that  view  of  themselves  and  their  mission.   They 
go  from  their  point  of  view  as  far  as  they  can  go  in  terms  of 
saying  we'll  try  to  restore  the  land  to  what  it  was  after  we're 
through  with  it  and  while  we're  conducting  this  operation  be 
sensitive  to  the  traffic  patterns  in  the  area  and  so  forth.   They 
went  as  far  as  they  felt  they  could  reasonably  go.   To  those  of  us 
who  were  arguing  from  a  different  set  of  principles,  that's  not 
far  enough.   In  our- -to  their  point  of  view- -benighted  way  of 
looking  at  it,  we  also  represent  a  direction  that  society  could 
take,  and  I  was  equally  committed. 

Swent :   I  think  you  used  the  phrase—when  we  were  talking  earlier—that 
there  were  just  two  different  versions  of  reality  here. 

Baker:   Yes.   The  newspaper  woman  from  the  Woodland  Democrat—they  had  a 
very  good  one  who  did  an  excellent  job  of  reporting  on  this  whole 
thing- -what  was  her  name?   Susan? 

Swent:   I  don't  remember;  I  have  it  somewhere  too. 

Baker:   Maybe  it  will  come  back  to  me.   But  anyway,  one  of  her  stories  was 
basically  interviewing  me  and  interviewing  [Harry]  Conger.1  It  was 
interesting  to  me  to  look  at  the  two  views,  because  a  couple  of 
the  things  he  said,  from  my  point  of  view,  didn't  square  with 
reality.  And  I'm  sure  some  of  the  things  I  said  must  have 
galvanized  him  in  a  similar  way.   One  of  the  things  he  said  was 
all  these  fears  of  exploitation  and  exhausting  the  planet's 
resources  were  misguided  because  the  resources  of  nature  are 
infinite.   And  I  thought  immediately,  No,  my  friend,  we  measured 
it:  the  planet  is  not  quite  8,000  miles  through  and  24,000 
something  around,  and  that's  it.   That's  finite.   We've  figured  it 
out.   But  what  he  meant,  of  course,  is  that  human  ingenuity  will 


'Harry  Conger,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine/Knoxville  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


92 


find  a  way  to  keep  combining  and  recombining  and  mining  asteroid 
belts  or  whatever  we  have  to  do  so  that  this  pattern  'of 
development  and  progress  is  never  going  to  end.   And  I  realized 
that  probably  most  people  in  the  country  agree  with  him;  they 
still  think  that  the  human  race  is  capable  of  a  kind  of  infinite 
command,  gradually  increasing  over  the  universe.   I  deeply  do  not 
believe  this.   When  something  like  this  mine  comes  up,  underneath 
the  particulars,  I  could  sense  the  conflict  of  these  visions  and 
sets  of  moral  values. 


Sometimes  a  Matter  of  Definition 


Baker:   Sometimes  it  was  a  matter  of  definition.   Ray  Krauss  got  really 
upset  at  me  once  because  I  found  out  that  Homestake  had  borrowed 
money  to  float  this  project,  in  layman's  terms.   Actually,  in 
financier's  terms,  they  didn't  borrow  it;  what  they  got  are  called 
short-term  loan  guarantees,  which  means  they  shop  around  on  the 
international  money  market,  and  they  say  basically,  We're 
Homestake,  we've  got  these  assets,  we're  a  flourishing  company, 
and  now  we've  got  this  project  developing.   We  want  to  know  if  you 
would  guarantee  a  loan  if  we  take  it  out  on  this.   When  they  had 
that  guarantee,  then  they  could  borrow  at  the  lowest  interest 
rates.   But  when  I  said  they  had  to  borrow  money  for  this,  of 
course,  technically  that  wasn't  true. 

Swent :   It  was  hypothetical  loans,  I  guess. 

Baker:   It  was  an  advance  credit  line,  is  what  it  amounted  to. 

Swent:   That's  a  semantic  thing. 

Baker:   But  just  the  term  "environment,"  the  term  "impact,"  the  term 

"significant."  What's  significant  and  what's  unsignif icant?  Lots 
of  those  little  definitions  and  word  plays,  underneath  them  I 
would  sense  these  sort  of  tectonic  plates  of  attitude  butting  up 
against  each  other. 

I  would  think  this  is  worth  fighting  out  even  though- - 
actually,  it  occurred  to  me  this  morning,  one  of  the  things  I 
would  tell  myself  when  I  would  be  sitting  through  these  committee 
hearings  or  supervisors  meetings  or  planning  commission  meetings, 
and  here  was  this  whole  row  of  high-priced  lawyers  and  experts  in 
geology  and  engineering  and  so  forth  in  their  suits  flown  in  from 
God  knows  where  and  their  own  slide  projector  and  show  and  whole 
staff  ready—who  were  we  kidding  ourselves  that  we  were  going  to 


93 


stop  these  people  in  their  tracks?   I  would  think,  Of  course  not. 
Of  course  it's  going  to  go,  and  eventually  they  will  get  their 
mine.   So  what  are  you  sitting  in  here  for,  and  what  are  you  doing 
here?   It  occurred  to  me  a  couple  of  times—actually,  a  hundred 
years  from  now,  in  our  chambers  anyway,  even  in  Yolo  County, 
they're  recording  the  meeting,  and  they're  filing  the  tapes.   And 
I  thought,  Someday  some  historian  is  going  to  be  going  through  the 

wreckage  of  this  civilization—if  they  still  have  tape 

recorders--! 'm  exaggerating—they're  going  to  look  through  that 
and  they're  going  to  say,  Well,  not  everybody  signed  on  to  this 
thing;  here's  a  couple  of  wackos  off  here  saying,  Wait  a  minute, 
you  guys.   Do  we  have  to  have  every  gold  mine?  Do  we  have  to  have 
every  freeway?  Does  this  have  to  keep  going  on  or  not?  We're 
saying  that  no,  it  doesn't,  and  we're  sitting  down  here.   Of 
course  the  bulldozer's  going  to  run  over  them,  but  at  some  point 
the  historian  will  say,  Well,  there  was  some  opposition. 

Swent:   And  every  bit  of  delay  is  — 

Baker:   So  that's  what  I  ended  up  saying  to  myself,  to  keep  myself  in 

those  meetings.   Once  we  saw  them  hasten  that  zoning  regulation 
through  in  spite  of  their  own  rules  and  get  away  with  it,  then  we 
knew  they  were— 


Supervisors  Broke  the  Rules  to  Thwart  a  Referendum  on  the  Zoning 
Amendment 

Swent:  Yes,  you  spoke  quite  strongly  that  the  supervisors  had  to  break— 
if  you  want  to  mention  that. 

Baker:   Yes.   The  regulations  call  for— the  legislation  at  the  county 

level  follows  a  certain  procedure,  and  usually  a  draft  resolution 
appears  before  the  supervisors,  submitted  by  the  planning 
commission  often.   They  revise  the  draft,  decide  on  the  final 
language,  and  then  they  vote  to  adopt  it.   It  doesn't  simply 
become  law  at  that  point.  What  the  law  says  is  that  first  of  all 
you  have  to  publish  the  legislation  in  the  nearest  format,  in  the 
local  paper. 

Swent:   This  was  the  proposed  change  to  the  zoning  amendment. 

Baker:  Yes.  But  it  could  have  been  any  resolution.  For  it  to  become  an 
ordinance,  it  has  to  be  published,  it  has  to  be  read  at  the  first 
meeting,  and  then  it's  supposed  to  have  a  second  reading.  Then 


94 


thirty  days  from  that  period,  from  the  second  reading,  it  becomes 
law.   Well,  we  had  this  referendum-- 

Swent :   Yes.   Let's  mention  that  and  make  clear  what  it  is. 

Baker:  We  thought  that  if  we  could  get  a  measure  on  the  ballot  which  asks 
the  voters  to  approve  or  disapprove  this  reservoir- -the  big  impact 
or  the  big  change- -Davis  Creek-- 

Swent:   Was  the  referendum  specifically  for  the  reservoir  or  for  the 
zoning  change? 

Baker:   The  zoning  change  was  going  on  anyway.   The  referendum  would  have 
intercepted  it  and  said  that  the  voters  of  the  county  want  this 
put  to  a  vote. 

Swent :   The  referendum  was  not  whether  or  not  to  approve  the  reservoir. 
It  was  whether  or  not  to  approve  the  zoning  change;  am  I  right? 

Baker:   Yes,  but  everyone  understood  that  the  reason  for  the  zoning 
change -- 

Swent:   --was  for  the  reservoir,  but  the  words  of  the  referendum  were  not 
clearly  saying  that. 

Baker:   What  it  basically  said  is  that  you  can't  take  agricultural  land 
and  use  it  for  this  other  purpose  and  pretend  that  you're  not 
[laughs],  to  put  it  from  our  perspective. 

Swent:   Yes.   I  just  wanted  to  make  clear:  the  referendum  was  on  the 
zoning  amendment . 

Baker:   Yes,  I  believe  that's  right.   But  in  shorthand  it  meant  that 

Homestake  can't  build  their  reservoir  because  the  voters  have  said 
they  can't.   And  that  was  a  stronger  force  than  the  supervisors. 

Swent:   So  for  your  referendum  you  needed  to  collect  signatures. 

Baker:   We  needed  4,400  signatures.   We  just  got  onto  it  after  the  first 
reading,  see.   We  thought  we  had  thirty  days.   In  the  first 
twelve,  I  think  it  was,  they  got  3,500  signatures.   But  then  the 
county  counsel  said,  No,  we  have  bypassed  the  second  reading; 
we're  not  going  to  have  a  second  reading.   It's  going  to  become  an 
official  resolution,  basically  at  the  end  of  two  weeks  instead  of 
thirty  days. 

It  seemed  perfectly  clear  that  they  were  spooked.   We  also 
explicitly  asked  for  an  extension  if  that  was  the  case.   I  said, 


95 


Why  don't  you  make  an  exception  to  your  new  policy  [laughs]  and 
allow  the  time  period  that's  been  allowed  for  years  for  every 
other  piece  of  legislation? 

They  of  course  refused  to  do  that,  and  it  was  perfectly  clear 
at  that  point  that  they  were  spooked  enough  that  they  wanted  that 
resolution  to  become  an  ordinance  before  we  had  a  chance  to  get 
those  last  900  signatures,  because  we  most  certainly  would  have 
gotten  them  in  two  weeks . 

Swent:   You  got  a  lot  of  them  on  campus,  I  think.   Is  that  true? 

Baker:   And  also  just  on  the  street.   We  had  people  out  there  with  tables 
at  shopping  centers. 

Swent:   At  UC  Davis  there  was  a  mobilization  for  this. 

Baker:   I  unfortunately  was  not  part  of  that  final  mobilization.   For  one 
reason  or  another  I  had  to  have  a  break,  and  I  wanted  to  get  back 
to  a  place  in  Peru  that  I  had  been  four  years  before  and  had  good 
friends  there  in  an  Indian  community,  and  I  wanted  to  get  back  and 
see  them.   That  was  my  chance  to  do  it--in  the  summer  before-- 

Swent:   So  you  were  there  [in  Peru)  that  summer. 

Baker:   Well,  for  six  weeks,  and  it  happened  to  coincide  with  when  the 
registration  draft  went  on.   I  wrote  that  particular  letter  you 
showed  me  after  I  got  back,  and  I  found  out  all  the  particulars. 

Swent:   So  that's  the  letter  to  the  editor  of  the  Daily  Democrat  of  April 
18,  1984. 

Baker:   It  was  already  all  done. 

II 
Swent:   That  was  your  best  chance. 

Baker:   Yes.   That  was  our  best  shot  at  stopping  it.   I  had  already  picked 
up  clues  from  the  supervisors  in  meetings  that  they  were  not  going 
to  abide  by  what  seemed  to  me  the  clear  spirit  of  the  Williamson 
Act. 

Swent:   Excuse  me,  but  I'm  confused  about  this.   It  was  May  of  1983  when 
the  planning  commission  rejected  the  EIR  [environmental  impact 
report],  and  this  amendment  was  in  1984,  this  signature 
referendum. 


96 


Baker:   It  was  proposed- -no,  the  signature  referendum  was  in  the  summer  of 
'83.   Probably  July  or  August. 

Swent:   The  EIR  was  rejected  first  in  May  of  '83. 

Baker:   Yes,  I  was  dealing  with  that,  so  I  was  still  around  then.   The 
referendum  must  have  been  August,  yes.   But  there  was  intense 
agitation  going  on  at  that  point.   The  county  was  vulnerable  on 
that  issue;  when  you  read  the  Williamson  Act,  the  language  of  it 
is  very  clear.   It's  to  preserve  remote  areas  like  this,  and 
grazing  land  and  marginal  places  where  somebody  might  want  to  put 
an  industrial  or  residential  development- -those  were  the  two 
forces  that  were  to  be  kept  at  bay.   To  us,  open-pit  gold  mines 
were  definitely  industrial,  definitely  commercial.   And  they  had 
nothing  to  do  with  agriculture.   That  seemed  perfectly  obvious  to 
us.   But  by  the  extent  to  which  they  were  contorting  the  logic,  it 
was  clear  that  the  supervisors  wanted  to  do  it,  that  they  were 
under  heat  from  both  the  company  and  probably  the  supervisors  in 
Lake  and  Napa  counties  too--I  had  that  impression. 

There  was  an  urgency  to  get  it  done,  and  when  this  petition 
surfaced,  they  thought,  Oh,  my  God,  if  they're  allowed  to  get 
these  signatures  and  they  get  it  on  the  ballot—or  once  it's  even 
slated  to  be  on  the  ballot,  we  can't  hurry  through  and  try  to  do 
some  jerry-built  legislation  in  the  face  of  that.   So  that's  why 
they  departed  from  standard  procedure  and  didn't  do  the  second 
reading;  that  two  weeks  would  have  been  enough. 

That  was  the  other  lesson  I  got  from  it:  the  laws  that  are 
supposed  to  protect  you  and  the  procedures  that  are  supposed  to  be 
ensured  as  part  of  due  process  are  not  dependable.   You  have  to  be 
very  alert,  and  you  have  to  have—hopefully,  as  an  organization, 
the  first  thing  you  should  do  is  build  as  big  a  bankroll  as  you 
can  get  because  you're  going  to  need  a  lawyer  and  you're  going  to 
have  to  threaten  them  with  that  to  get  anywhere.   Otherwise,  they 
will  take  the  words  and  fabricate  a  new  structure  and  say  that  now 
it's  okay,  it's  now  "legal."  As  I  read  the  law- -I  mean,  I  went 
into  the  law  library  in  the  county,  and  there  was  one  of  those 
secretaries--!  could  just  tell  by  the  way  she  handled  herself  and 
knew  the  calendar  that  this  is  the  head  secretary;  she  knows  more 
than  anybody  else  in  this  whole  office,  that  would  be  my  guess. 
She  said,  "What  are  you  looking  for?" 

I  said,  "I'm  looking  for  the  statutes  that  cover  the 
procedures  for  passing  county  ordinances." 

She  said,  "Okay,  right  over  there  is  the  county  code  and  I 
think  it's  volume  whatever." 


97 


I  said,  "Just  as  a  matter  of  curiosity,  what  if  you  have  a 
proposed  ordinance  and  it's  been  adopted,  but  it  doesn't  receive  a 
second  reading?   It's  published  in  the  paper,  but  it  doesn't 
receive  a  second  reading." 

Just  as  quick  as  that,  she  said,  "Well,  then  it  doesn't  have 
the  force  of  law."  That's  interesting  [laughs]. 

When  I  contacted  the  grand  jury  people  and  wrote  them  a 
letter,  when  the  guy  responded  finally,  he  said  they  were  not 
going  to  initiate  any  indictments,  but  that  they  were  going  to 
reprimand  the  county  because  it  was --he  said  technically  they  have 
the  power  to  forego  that  second  reading,  but  it  takes  some  kind  of 
mitigating  circumstance;  usually  there's  an  emergency,  public 
health  and  safety.   He  said,  "We  don't  think  that  this  qualified. 
So  there  will  be  a  formal  reprimand."  But  at  this  point  they  were 
already  building  the  reservoir  so  it  didn't  matter. 

But  you  learn  there  that  you  can't  depend  on  attorneys  general 
or  you  can't  depend—the  courts  are  your  last  hope  now  and  to  play 
that  game  you've  got  to  have  money  so  that  you're  in  the  same 
ballpark  as  your  opposition—you  become  an  interest  group  and  you 
buy  your  talent  and  you  go  in.   But  there's  something  about  that, 
as  I  said  earlier,  that  rubbed  me  the  wrong  way.   I  wanted  it  to 
be  a  situation  where  the  law  was  there,  and  people  had  their  minds 
at  work,  and  you  went  in  and  presented  your  case,  and  someone  else 
presented  theirs.   Then  the  people  empowered  to  make  the  decisions 
would  act  on  that  information.   That's  a  very  naive  and  idealistic 
view.   This  process  cured  me  of  such  innocence. 

Swent:  Were  you  at  this  all-night  meeting  when  they  finally-- 

Baker:  Oh,  at  the  planning  commission? 

Swent:  When  they  rejected  the  EIR? 

Baker:  Yes. 


Concluding  that  Lawmakers  are  Wasteful 


Swent:   That  must  have  been  pretty  emotional.   That  was  one  that  you  won. 

Baker:   Yes.   Well,  it  was,  but  it's  deceptive  because  I've  now  been 

through  this  process  also  in  other  cases,  and  as  I  said,  I  think 
one  of  the  grim  conclusions  you  can  reach  is  that  a  body  of 


98 


lawmakers  now  will  take  the  path  of  the  absolutely  most  wasteful 
and  exhausting  expenditure  of  resources  as  a  way  to  partially 
satisfy  all  parties.   In  terms  of  this  situation,  they  could  have 
possibly  in  some  surgical  way  right  at  the  outset  said  either 
openly  or  clandestinely,  There's  no  way  this  county  is  ever  going 
to  turn  its  back  on  this  gold  mine;  it's  not  going  to  happen, 
people,  so  forget  it.   Would  have  saved  ourselves  a  tremendous 
number  of  meetings  and  a  tremendous  amount  of  effort.   But  what 
they  do  is  they  say  that  they're  going  to  be  open  to  persuasion, 
and  they  even  at  some  point  will  take  an  action  like  the  planning 
commission  took—one  agency  in  the  bureaucracy  will  get  swayed  and 
carried  away  and  act,  and  then  it  will  be  a  whole  procedure  to  get 
that  countermanded  to  then  get  this  thing  back  on  track.  At  least 
that's  the  cynical  view  of  it.   Avery,  probably,  and  Bob  Speirs 
would  both  tell  you  that  no,  we  did  salvage  the  other  goal,  which 
was  to  make  this  a  responsible  project—to  build  in  a  corrective 
mechanism. 


One  Goal  Salvaged:  to  Make  it  a  Responsible  Project 

Swent:  You  did  get  a  lot  of  monitoring  built  in. 

Baker:  Yes,  and  by  good  people. 

Swent:  Goldman.   You  respect  Goldman? 

Baker:  Yes.   He's  a  well-respected  scientist,  and  that  was  his  specialty. 

Swent:  Goldman  was  a  fish—I've  forgotten  the  term— ichthyologist? 

Baker:   No,  he's  a  pond  and  reservoir  expert.   He's  an  aquatic  biologist, 
and  his  specialty  is  things  just  like  this  reservoir. 

Swent:   So  he  tests  it  periodically  and  reports. 

Baker:   And  there's  a  whole  body  that  reviews  and  checks  those  things. 
From  that  point  of  view  the  process  worked.  But  what  I'm 
referring  to  is  the— I  guess  politicians  are  in  the  position  where 
they  have  to  appear  open-minded  whether  they  are  or  not,  and  they 
make  efforts,  too,  the  best  ones.   I  think  probably  I  wouldn't  be 
any  better;  I  mean,  they  are  trying  to  stay  open  and  listen.   But 
the  economic  and  social  pressures  that  are  brought  to  bear  on  them 
make  it  extremely  difficult  to  think  straight.   The  prevailing 
mythology  in  the  culture  is  in  accord  with  Conger's  view  that  we 
have  an  infinite  scale  to  work  on  and  that  development  is 


99 


something  that  has  to  be  gradual  and  sensible,  but  it  is 
inevitable—what  can  you  say?  Well,  it's  not  inevitable.   Look  at 
the  Dark  Ages;  that  would  be  a  terrible  example  [laughter].   We 
need  a  model  of  a  productive  retrogression,  and  I  still  think  we 
could  come  up  with  one,  but  the  kind  of  values  that  we  were  trying 
to- -or  that  I.  at  least  was  trying  to  think  my  way  through- -sound 
completely  wacky  and  alien  to  someone  like  a  Homestake  executive. 


Jobs  versus  Songbirds 


Baker:   If  you  start  talking  about  respect  for  other  species  on  the 

planet--!  said  to  Jack  Thompson  once,  "Your  report  here  says  that 
you're  going  to  destroy  the  habitat  of  some  5,000  songbirds."1 

And  he  said,  "It's  unfortunate,  but  there's  really  no 
alternative."   I  understood  fully  that  on  his  scale  5,000 
songbirds  is  not  worth  one  worker's  job,  from  that  perspective. 
But  from  the  perspective  I  was  working  my  way  toward,  it  was  worth 
maybe  a  number  of  jobs.   Maybe  we're  too  addicted  to  the  notion  of 
a  job  and  that  we'll  drive  the  bulldozer  no  matter  what  the  object 
of  it  is.   You  can't  blame  the  bulldozer  driver  because  his  world 
has  been  devised  and  set  up  in  such  a  way  that  you  can't  think  of 
another  way  to  function.   Most  people  cannot  think  or  function 
without  a  job  because  we  don't  have  any  more  really  self-reliant 
and  self-sufficient  farms.   They're  all  dependent  on  the  economic 
fabric. 

So  that  mythology  is  in  place  and  it's  very  powerful,  and  if 
you  try  to  substitute  another  one--if  you  start  to  talk  about 
whole  biological  systems  and  trying  to  look  at  the  future  in  terms 
of  thousands  of  years  and  not  decades,  you've  gone  off  into 
fruitcake  land  as  far  as  most  of  them  are  concerned.  A  lot  of 
these  thoughts  were,  of  course,  just  to  myself,  and  I  never  take 
that  line  publicly  except  in  terms  of  an  occasional  allusion. 

Swent:   That's  what  gave  you  your  strength,  your  ability  to  hang  in  there. 

Baker:  Yes.  My  ultimate  conviction  was  that  if  we  don't  sometime  reach  a 
point  where  boards  of  supervisors  look  at  a  big  project  with  a  lot 
of  jobs  attached  to  it  and  say  No,  thanks,  because  we're  trying 


'Jack  Thompson,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine/Knoxville  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


100 


for  a  community  here  above  all;  we're  trying  for  a  kind  of  way  of 
living  on  the  earth  that  involves  as  little  of  what  you  represent 
as  possible.   Until  we  get  to  that  point,  then  things  are  going  to 
continue  on  the  path  that  they  have,  and  people  are  getting 
conditioned  even  as  we  speak  to  paying  less  and  less  attention  to 
the  immediate  world.   In  lots  of  areas  the  immediate  world  does 
literally  stink,  and  it's  definitely  getting  harder  to  see  those 
hills  out  there,  and  there  are  definitely  some  weird  and 
devastating  viruses  loose  and  there's  something  bad  happening  to 
our  infant  mortality  rate  and  our  sperm  count  and  a  number  of 
factors.   That's  not  just  New  Age  alarmism,  because  as  we  were 
saying  the  other  day,  we  compiled  massive  amounts  of  information 
that  ought  to  be  able  to  deal  with  these  things—and  we're  not 
doing  it.   Instead,  we're  talking  about  virtual  realities  and 
entering  cyberspace  and  getting  into  some  new  version  of  reality 
that  doesn't  carry  these  uncomfortable  smells  and  shocks  and  so 
forth.   But  from  my  point  of  view—it's  not  that  I  want  to  go  back 
to  the  caves,  but  we're  just  talking  about  going  back  to  an 
awareness  of  what  else  is  alive  around  us  and  how  to  live  in  some 
fashion  with  that,  that  leaves  our  kids  with—not  a  clean  place 
but  an  interesting  and  alive  and  fertile  place  where  their  future 
will  include  things  like— I  was  thinking  walking  over  here— who 
was  the  old  Nature  Conservancy  [Sierra  Club]  head?   Some  old-time 
Berkeley  environmentalist.   Dave  Brower?  Yes,  David  Brower.   He 
said  when  he  was  a  kid— he's  eighty  years  old  now  or  getting 
close— in  Berkeley  the  salmon  still  ran  up  Strawberry  Creek,  that 
little  creek  that  runs  through  the  campus  here.   I've  been  aware 
of  it  in  other  parts  of  the  West,  things  that  I  took  for  granted 
and  saw— clear-cut  and  the  streams  are  dead— there' s  nothing  or 
very  little.   I  just  think,  God,  I  took  that  for  granted,  and  I 
really  want  my  kids  to  know  what  that  was  about. 

Swent:   I  don't  want  to  divert  you— 
Baker:   I've  gotten  off  the  subject. 

Swent:   No,  that's  the  subject,  all  right,  but  we  haven't  mentioned  the 

specific  organizations  that  grew  out- 
Baker:   Yes,  I  saw  you  have  YCPC  [Yolo  County  Planning  Commission]  down 

there  [on  the  notes]. 


101 


Continuing  Citizen  Activism 


Swent:   You  had  mentioned  CPC;  that's  the  Yolo  County  Planning  Commission, 
YCPC.   [looking  through  notes]  I  think  there  were  a  couple  of 
others  here,  too.   There  was  the  Concerned  Citizens  of --okay,  here 
we  are.   Cache  Creek  Basin  Resource  Coalition. 

Baker:   That's  the  one  I  was  telling  you  about.   That's  the  current  gravel 
mining—Cache  Creek  Coalition,  I  just  called  it.   I  forgot  the--. 

Swent:   And  they  are  holding  the  ground  against  the  gravel  mining. 
Baker:   Yes. 

Swent:   Then  George  Stevens  organized  something  called—or  was  the  contact 
person  of  something  called  Concerned  Citizens  of  Capay  Valley. 

Baker:   That  was  a  very  early  title  we  had.   I  remember  that  name.   But  we 
went  on  to  something  with  CPC  in  it . 

Swent:   There  was  something  you  thought— Coalition  of  Concerned  Citizens, 
maybe  that's  that. 

Baker:  Yes,  that's  how  it  started,  but  we  changed  our  name  [chuckles]. 

Swent:  There  was  something  called  the  Friends  of  Cache  Creek. 

Baker:  Yes,  that's  a  dif ferent— that ' s  later. 

Swent:  That's  still  there? 

Baker:   Yes,  that's  still  in  operation.   But  the  other  one,  the  one  we 

ended  up  with,  was  not  the  Concerned  Citizens  of  Cache  Creek.   It 
was  something  like  Citizens  for  Agricultural  Preservation  or—it 
seems  to  me  "Yolo"  was  in  it.   I  don't  even  remember.   We  did  have 
a  name  that  we  gave— 

Swent:   The  reason  that  I  think  this  is  important  is  that  there  have  been 
succeeding  generations  of  groups  which  still  exist;  these  things 
don't  die. 

Baker:   The  people  don't  change  [laughs];  they  are  still  the  same  people 
involved. 

Swent:   And  other  people  come  in  as  well;  I'm  sure  there  are  younger  and 
newer  residents. 


102 


Baker:   Cliff  Cain.   I'll  call  him  tonight  and  ask  him  because  he'll 
remember  what  the  name  of  that  was. 

Swent:   But  what  you  did  is  still  reverberating  out  there.   There  are 
still  groups  that-- 

Baker:   Yes.   Not  all  of  it  good.   Many  people  in  the  valley,  I  think, 
have  written  us  off  as  environmental  nuts. 

Swent:   Some  people  called  you  "The  Silly  Seven." 
Baker:   Oh,  yes. 

Swent:   I'm  trying  to  think  who  the  seven  were.   Was  Stevens  one  of  the 
seven? 

Baker:   Yes,  I  guess  he  was. 

Swent:   I  think  maybe  he  was  the  seventh.   We  were  trying  to  think 

yesterday- 
Baker:   He's  moved  out. 
Swent:   George  Stevens,  is  it? 
Baker:   Yes.   He's  since  moved  away. 

Swent:   Robert  Speirs,  Avery  Tindell,  Will  Baker,  John  Ceteras,1  Frances 
Looney,  and  Clifford  Cain.   That  would  be  seven. 

Baker:   Actually  we  always  thought  of  John  and  Gretchen  Ceteras,  Grace  and 
Avery,  David  and  Frances  Looney,  Cliff  and  Marian  Cain-- 

Swent:  They  were  the  core  of  the  group,  the  ones  you  could  count  on. 

Baker:  They  were  one  unit  in  the  center  that  we  didn't  differentiate. 

Swent:  Was  your  wife  involved  as  well? 

Baker:  I  wasn't  married  then. 

Swent:   She  wasn't  in  the  picture  at  that  point.   So  the  fallout  has  been, 
I  guess,  the  monitoring. 


'John  Ceteras,  interview  in  the  McLaughlin  Mine/Knoxville  District 
oral  history  project,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process  1997. 


103 


Baker:   Yes,  that.  And  we  have  a  sort  of --it's  not  an  organization,  but 
we  have  a  community  of  sorts  that  we'll  muster  around  these 
issues,  and  we're  now  veterans. 

Swent:   You've  been  around  the  track. 

Baker:   The  good  part  is  we  know  some  of  the  moves;  the  bad  part  is  that 
we're  a  little  jaded  now. 

Swent:   Have  any  of  these  people  got  into  political—have  any  of  them  run 
for  office  and  been  elected  or  gotten  appointed  to  the 
conservation  district? 

Baker:   Jan  Lowrey,  the  son  of  Lloyd  Lowrey,  was  running  the  planning 

commission  when  we  did  manage  to  stop  it.   He  did  a  very  good  job 
of— 

Swent:   He  got  himself  appointed  to  that. 

Baker:   Yes.   Twyla  [Thompson]  appointed  him.   He  was  the  chairman,  so  he 
--well,  in  this  long  meeting,  he  picked  the  moment  to  bring  it  to 
a  vote  when  there  were  a  couple  of  people  who  were  obviously 
uneasy,  but  they  were  in  a  big  room  and  there  were  a  lot  of  people 
there  and  most  of  them  had  heard  enough  about  this  environmental 
impact  report.   You  saw  some  of  the  things  in  the  letter—they 
hired  a  firm  that  had  one  of  the  worst  records  in  this  part  of  the 
world  because  of  that  McClellan  mess. 

Swent:   We  should  clarify  that.   This  is  a  letter  that  you  wrote  to  the 
editor,  criticizing  the  company- -Brown  and  Caldwell,  I  think  was 
their  name—who  had  written  the  EIR,  and  they  had  had  problems 
with  a  previous  EIR  from  McClellan  Air  [Force]  Base. 

Baker:   And  also  Homestake's  problems  in  South  Dakota.   There  were  lots  of 
things  that  made  people  uneasy.   These  planning  commission  members 
knew  that  the  board  of  supervisors  can  always  override  their 
decision—though  in  this  context,  at  this  moment,  if  they  found  it 
inadequate— on  the  other  hand,  it  wasn't  an  irrevocable  thing— and 
back  and  forth,  and  I  think  Jan  saw  that  they  were  in  that  kind  of 
queasy  bog  and  might  lean  our  way  and  he  brought  the  meeting  very 
swiftly  to  a  close  and  a  vote  after  all  this  testimony,  and  sure 
enough,  the  couple  of  doubtful  ones  went  along  with  it.   So  we  had 
that  one  moment  of— 

Swent:  And  then  you  did  get  this  technical  review  panel  stipulation.  And 
some  of  your  group  were  on  that,  and  I'll  be  talking  with  them,  so 
I  guess  you  don't  need  to  go  into  that. 


104 


Baker:   They  will  be  more  up-to-date. 

Swent:   That  has  been  a  continuation  of  your  efforts.   It  wasn't  all 
completely  lost. 

Baker:   No,  no.   From  some  long  view  we  are  keeping  alive  the  chance 
that  — 

Swent :  What  about  the  university  involvement—were  any  of  your  students 
involved  or  interested  in  it? 

Baker:   A  few  were  helpful.   Not  my  students  personally,  but  I  mean 
students  from  the  university.   There  were  some. 

Swent:   Your  teaching  was  apart  from  this. 

Baker:   It  would  have  been  unethical  to  introduce  any  of  that  into--my 
classes  have  nothing  to  do  with  this. 

Swent:  There  was  a  group  on  the  campus,  CalPIRG--it ' s  California  Public 
Interest  Research  Group—which  is  not  only  at  Davis  but  all  over 
the  state.  But  there  was  a  group  there  that— 

Baker:   We  had  some  meetings  with  them— 

Swent:   --evidently  took  this  on  as  sort  of  a  project,  didn't  they? 

Baker:   They  did  some  work  with  us,  for  us.   They  were,  as  I  remember,  a 
little  more  conscious  of  the  gravel  mining  as  a  context  for  all 
this  because  the  farming  community  is,  to  some  extent,  divided, 
and  the  division  tends  to  be  between  the  small  farmers  and  the  big 
farmers . 

Swent:   You  mentioned  Deseret  Farms,  which  is  a  large  farm. 

Baker:   Also,  see,  some  of  the  gravel  companies  also  farm,  and  they 

specialize  in  farming  land—I  mean,  they  dig  the  gravel  first  and 
then  put  the  topsoil  back.   Of  course  it's  lower  then. 

Swent:   But  that  puts  them  on  both  sides  of  some  of  those  issues. 

Baker:   Except  that  gravel  mining  is  much  more  lucrative  than  farming,  so 
that  farming  is  a  side  benefit,  and  it's  politically  very 
advantageous  for  them.   Their  stooges  can  be  on  the  Farm  Bureau, 
they  can  be  supervisors,  they  can  say  they  are  farmers,  and  that 
is  mainly  what  they  do,  but  they're  doing  it  on  gravel  company 
land.   The  CalPIRG  were  more  aware  of  that. 


105 


We  also  had  a  little  connection  briefly  with  people  in  Nevada 
City  [California]  who  were  looking  at  the  same  thing  at  about  the 
same  time.   A  Canadian  corporation  was  sniffing  around  up  at  San 
Juan  Ridge  looking  to  revive  a  gold  mine  up  there.  And  there's 
more  of  that  that  has  gone  on  since. 

Swent:   There  was  a  big  article  in  the  paper  just  yesterday,  the  front 
page  of  the  Chronicle.   I  don't  recall  if  it  was  Canadian. 

Baker:   There  was  one  in  Sonora  [California]  just  a  few  years  after. 
Swent:   That  one  1  think  is  closed. 
Baker:   Could  be. 

Swent:   Just  recently.   I  think  that's  the  one  it  said  in  the  paper 
yesterday  had  closed. 

Baker:   Well,  they  come  and  go.   That's  the  way  that  mining  is.   There's 
nothing  to  hold  them  when  it  peters  out. 

Swent:   I  came  across  the  name  Shelf ord  Wyatt,  which  hasn't  been 
mentioned. 

Baker:   The  curious  story  there  is  that  he  owned  a  hardware  store  in 
Esparto  for  many  years  and  had  a  beautiful  farm  out  in  Capay 
Valley.   But  he's  a  classic  believer  in  individual  enterprise  and 
business,  and  he's  a  good  businessman  himself.   And  if  Homestake 
was  going  to  put  in  a  reservoir,  he  was  for  having  the  water  for 
the  farming  community.   So  he  spoke  for  the  project,  and  he  got 
the  support  of  the  Capay  Valley  Water  Users,  I  think. 

Swent:   That  was  another  of  those  groups  of  farmers. 

Baker:   Right.   But  he's  an  honorable  man,  and  although  he  was  sort  of  a 
villain  to  us  at  the  time  because  he  was  a  well-known  person  in 
the  community  and  he  spoke  in  favor  of  the  mine,  of  course  that 
grated  on  us  because  we  were  trying  to  get  community  support  to 
run  the  other  way.   As  I  said,  subsequently  he  has  seen  what  the 
gravel  miners  are  doing  and  how  they  are  operating,  so  he  has 
ended  up  on  the  same  side  as  "The  Silly  Seven."  In  fact,  he  very 
generously  contributed  a  considerable  amount  to  support  the  court 
case  against  Cache  Creek  Aggregates,  which  is  a  company  that  wants 
to  build  a  gravel  processing  plant  right  at  the  mouth  of  the 
valley.   He  installed  drain  fields  and  pipelines,  sewer  systems, 
for  years ,  so  he  knows  groundwater  and  he  knows  about  the  river 
and  its  flow  patterns.   He  and  a  couple  of  the  other  old-timers, 
they  have  been  invaluable  in  this  whole  thing  because  they 


106 


remember,  for  example,  little  things  like—nobody  ever  had  a 
problem  with  erosion  around  this  bridge  until  they  started  mining 
this  stretch  of  the  river.   Then  promptly  a  couple  of  the  pilings 
started  to  wash  out.   It  explained  to  you  how  if  you  lower  the 
river  there  you  build  up  velocity  and  increase  erosion. 

That's  another  benefit  I  got  out  of  all  this.   I  came  to 
respect  and  honor  the  savvy  and  the  grit  of  a  lot  of  these  old- 
timers.   Finally  figured  out,  I  guess,  that  I  wanted—and  was 
actually  moving  towards  —  river  of  Time,  after  all  this  is  ten 
years  ago  now— becoming  an  independent  old  codger  myself,  and  kind 
of  liked  the  idea. 


Transcribed  by  Gary  Varney 
Final  Typed  by  Shannon  Page 


107 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 


University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California 


Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  Series 
Knoxville /Mclaughlin  Project 


Norman  Birdsey 


METALLURGICAL  TECHNICIAN 


Interview  conducted  by 

Eleanor  Swent 

in  1995 


Copyright  o  1998  by  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


Norman  Birdsey,  1997. 


108 


INTERVIEW  WITH  NORMAN  BIRDSEY 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  109 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  110 

I  GROWING  UP  IN  CREEDE,  COLORADO,  1995-1975  111 
Father,  Norman  Birdsey,  a  Miner  at  the  Emperious  Mine            111 
Building  the  Tailings  Dam  115 
Father's  Work  in  the  Mine  117 
Father's  Fatal  Accident  119 
Four  Generations  of  Miners  122 

II  AN  INTERLUDE  IN  THE  NAVY,  1975-1979  126 
Marrying  a  Girl  from  Oroville,  California  126 
Boatswain's  Mate,  Second  Class,  an  Interesting  Rating            127 
Learning  to  Operate  Equipment  128 

III  BACK  TO  CREEDE  AND  A  JOB  WITH  HOMESTAKE,  1979  TO  1981             130 
Entry-Level  Laborer  130 
Learning  a  Lesson  about  Safety  133 
Promotion  from  Crusher  Operator  to  Mill  Helper  136 
Learning  to  Operate  a  Rod  Mill  138 
A  Hateful  Earlier  Job  Dredging  Tailings  143 
Helping  the  Refiner  Pull  Zadra  Cells  144 
Silver  Price  Drops  and  the  Mine  Closes  Down  145 
Asking  Joe  Young  for  a  Job  at  McLaughlin  147 
Another  Hitch  in  the  Navy  147 

IV  THE  MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  SINCE  1984  150 
Joe  Young  Comes  Through  After  All  150 
Like  Going  From  a  Glider  to  a  747  152 
John  Turney,  Expert  Teacher  153 
Assigned  as  a  Counter-Current  Decantation  Operator  157 
Start-up  Problems  157 
The  Crusher:  "That  Baby  Was  a  Nightmare"  160 
The  Autoclaves:  When  the  Fun  Begins  161 
A  Better  Job  in  the  Refinery  164 
Assistant  Foreman  on  the  C  Crew;  A  Big  Promotion  168 
Accidents  with  the  Autoclaves  170 
Foreman  Over  B  Crew  175 
Special  Training  for  Foreman;  How  to  Treat  People  177 
A  Move  Up  to  Process  Specialist  in  the  Metallurgy  Lab  178 
Temporary  General  Foreman  181 
John  Turney 's  Inspiration  182 
Weekend  Dredging  for  Gold  184 


109 

INTERVIEW  HI STORY- -Norman  Birdsey 

Norman  Birdsey,  mill  foreman  at  the  Mclaughlin  Mine,  was  recommended 
for  an  interview  by  John  Turney,  Homestake  metallurgist  who  designed  the 
autoclave  system.   I  interviewed  him  in  the  conference  room  of  the  office 
at  the  mine  site  on  Morgan  Valley  Road  on  17  October  1995. 

Norman  Birdsey  recalls  his  career  as  a  fourth-generation  worker  in 
the  mineral  industry.   Born  in  1957,  he  grew  up  in  Creede,  Colorado;  his 
great-grandfather  was  a  speculator  in  mines;  his  grandfather  operated  his 
own  bentonite  mine  and  his  father  worked  in  an  old  silver  mine,  the 
Eirperious  or  Commodore  Mine.   He  recalls  hearing  the  "comforting"  sound  of 
the  crusher  at  night,  playing  with  his  brothers  around  the  tailings  dam, 
and  occasionally  even  going  underground  and  playing  with  his  brothers  on  an 
old  motor  near  where  his  father  and  uncle  were  working  as  miners.   When  his 
father  died  in  a  mine  accident,  the  uncle  began  to  work  as  a  mill  operator, 
and  Norman  became  interested  in  processing  ores.   After  graduating  from 
high  school  he  worked  as  a  butcher,  served  a  hitch  in  the  navy  and  achieved 
the  rating  of  boatswain's  mate,  learning  valuable  skills  as  an  equipment 
operator  before  returning  to  Creede  where  Homestake  was  operating  the 
Bulldog  Mine.   He  rose  from  laborer  to  mill  operator  before  the  mine  was 
closed  down,  served  another  hitch  in  the  navy,  and  was  hired  at  the 
Mclaughlin  Mine  in  1984.   His  weekend  hobby  now  is  "sniping"  for  gold  in 
the  Sierras. 

Birdsey  modestly  chronicles  his  rise  from  laborer  to  mill  foreman, 
praising  the  supervision  and  encouragement  of  John  Turney,  and  outlining 
the  knowledge  and  skills  he  acquired  with  each  increase  in  responsibility. 
It  is  a  contemporary  story  in  a  longstanding  American  tradition,  includes  a 
loving  stepmother  widowed  and  left  with  five  sons  at  the  age  of  twenty,  and 
ends  with  an  optimistic  look  into  the  future  after  the  closing  of  the 
Mclaughlin  Mine. 

The  tapes  of  the  interview  were  transcribed  in  the  Regional  Oral 
History  Office,  lightly  edited,  and  sent  to  Birdsey  in  April  1997  for 
review.   He  made  several  minor  corrections  of  facts  and  returned  the 
transcript  promptly.   The  manuscript  was  corrected  and  indexed  at  our 
office.   The  tapes  are  deposited  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and  are  available 
for  study. 

The  Norman  Birdsey  interview  is  one  of  more  than  forty  interviews 
which  were  conducted  by  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  from  1993-1997  in 
order  to  document  the  development  of  the  McLaughlin  gold  mine  in  the 
Knoxville  District  of  Lake,  Napa,  and  Yolo  Counties,  California,  from  1978- 
1996,  as  part  of  the  ongoing  oral  history  series  devoted  to  Western  Mining 
in  the  Twentieth  Century.   The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  was  established 
in  1954  to  record  the  lives  of  persons  who  have  contributed  significantly 
to  the  history  of  California  and  the  West.   The  office  is  a  division  of  The 
Bancroft  Library  and  is  under  the  direction  of  Willa  K.  Baum. 

Eleanor  Swent,  Project  Director,  Research  Interviewer/Editor 
October  1997 


110 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
Room  486  The  Bancroft  Library 


University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California  94720 


BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 
(Please  write  clearly.   Use  black  ink.) 
Your  full  name  fVb/-/n>Q/l/ 


Date  of  birth  j   fipfc  S~  1          Birthplace 

l\/O&nA  /U 
Occupation    ^/t^-  _  Birthplace 


Father's  full  name  J)/Q 


Mother's  full  name 

Occupation 
Your  spouse 

Occupat  ion 
Your  children 


f]/AD*<.*\J 


Where  did  you  grow  up? 
Present  community 
Education 


Occupation(s) 


J_  ^   Me  suit*. 


Areas  of  expertise 


.YJ  /t-U 


Q 


Other  interests  or  activities  fYl  2-  (-2  i- 


j~  2  C  "/  //U 


Organizations  in  which  you  are  active 


Ill 


I   GROWING  UP  IN  CREEDE,  COLORADO,  1995-1975 

[Date  of  Interview:  October  17,  1995]  it1 

Father.  Norman  Birdsey.  a  Miner  at  the  Emperious  Mine 


Swent :    We  are  on  Morgan  Valley  Road  in  Lower  Lake,  California,  on 

October  17,  1995.   Let's  start  by  telling  us  where  you  were  born 
and  when. 

Birdsey:   I  was  born  in  1957,  in  Del  Norte,  Colorado.   That's  about  forty 
miles  south  of  Creede,  I  think.   It's  down  in  what  we  called  the 
San  Luis  Valley.   My  mother  was  Anna  Birdsey  and  my  father's  name 
was  Norm  Birdsey.   We  lived  in  Creede,  Colorado,  where—it  was  a 
silver  mining  district,  and  lots  of  silver  mines  around. 

Swent:    Was  your  dad  a  miner? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  my  father  was  a  miner  at  the  Emperious  Mining  Company,  in 
Creede. 

Swent:    How  do  you  spell  Emperious? 

Birdsey:   [spells]  Emperious.   I'm  not  really  sure;  I  never  really  thought 
about  it. 

Swent:    You  lived  in  Del  Norte  but  he  worked  in-- 

Birdsey:   No,  we  lived  in  Creede. 

Swent:    But  you  were  born  in  Del  Norte? 


ltt  This  symbol  indicates  that  a  tape  or  tape  segment  has  begun  or 
ended.   A  guide  to  the  tapes  follows  the  transcripts. 


112 


Birdsey:   I  was  born  in  Del  Norte  because  they  didn't  have  hospitals  or 
doctors  in  Creede,  so  we  had  to  go  forty  miles.   That's  where 
they  took  everybody.   I  guess  it  was  quite  a  ride  back  then 
because  you  had  to  go  through  what  they  call--I  can't  remember 
names—but  anyway,  they  had  to  go  down  through  South  Fork  along 
the  river,  and  it  was  pretty  treacherous  in  the  winter.   Lots  of 
stories  about  how  they  tried  to  get  people  to  the  hospitals  and 
stuff.   So  he  was  a  miner-- 

Swent:    Was  this  an  old  mine? 

Birdsey:   This  was  an  old  mine;  it  was  an  old  silver  mine.   The  portals 

were  called  Commodore  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  it  was  different  levels  up 
the  hillside.   It  had  probably  been  in  operation--boy--thirty, 
forty  years.   I  know  the  owner  was  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Ty  Poxen. 
He  was  the  owner  of  the  mine.  As  a  kid  I  remember  the  mill  used 
to- -went  into  town  and  I  remember  they  used  to  bring  the  ore  down 
on  the  dump  truck,  and  take  it  to  the  mill  which  was  at  the  end 
of  town.   So  they'd  bring  it  down  the  canyon  from  Commodore,  and 
the  workings  up  there,  and  they  got  it  downtown  and  John  Wardell 
and  Bobby  Wardell  were  the  truck  drivers.   I  remember  as  a  kid, 
we'd  stand  out  there  and  have  them  honk  the  horn  and  stuff  as 
they  went  by. 

Swent:    Just  one  truck? 

Birdsey:   Just  one  truck.   One  dump  truck. 

Swent:    Small  mine. 

Birdsey:   Real  small.   And  they'd  take  it  down  and  drop  it  off  at  the  mill, 
and  on  quiet  days  you  would  actually  hear  them  dump  the  ore  into 
the  crusher;  you  could  hear  the  crusher  running.   I  remember  at 
night,  when  it  was  quiet,  it  was  kind  of  comforting  because 
normally  you'd  hear  the  crusher  running,  chomping  up  the  rock, 
and  when  you  didn't  hear  it,  I  remember,  it  kind  of  made  me 
uneasy,  because  something  wasn't  right- -the  mill  was  down  or 
something  wasn't  right.   You  kind  of  got  used  to  hearing  that 
crusher  at  night,  crushing  when  it  was  quiet  out.   This  was  when 
I  was  a  little  kid;  I  remember  that:  laying  there  in  bed  and 
listening  to  it. 

Swent:    I  grew  up  with  stamp  mills  and  they  said  the  same  thing,  that  if 
the  stamp  mill  stopped  everybody  got  worried.   [laughter] 

Birdsey:   [laughter]   I  remember  as  a  kid  we  used  to--when  I  got  a  little 
older—we  used  to  play  in  the  old  tailings  dam  at  the  end  of 
town,  and  we  used  to  go  play  around  there  and  watch  them-- 


113 


Swent:    You  didn't  swim  in  it? 

Birdsey:   No,  we  didn't  swim  in  it.   There's  a  lot  of  things  that  you  do 
back  then,  and  I  don't  think  you're  really  allowed  to  now.   I 
remember  my  mother  and  father  got  a  divorce  when  I  was  about 
five,  and  there  were  times  when  either  dad  couldn't  get  a 
babysitter,  or  whatever,  and  I  remember  him  taking  us 
underground,  and  he'd  be  working  overtime,  so  he'd  take  us 
underground,  and  put  us  off  in  the  heading.   He  and  my  uncle 
would  go  under  and  do  what  they  had  to  do;  whatever  they  had  to 
do  at  the  time,  and  then  take  us  back  out.   Nowadays,  you 
wouldn't  be  able  to  do  that. 


Swent:    You'd  sit  there  for  the  whole  shift? 

Birdsey:   It  wouldn't  be  a  whole  shift;  it  would  be  just  on  the  weekend,  or 
something  like  that  when  they  had  to  do  a  little  bit  of  whatever 
they  had  to  do.   They'd  take  me  and  my  brother  down  and  give  us 
some  light,  and  we'd  just  sit  back.   It  would  only  be  maybe  a 
couple  of  hours.   But  just  the  thought  of  doing  that  nowadays; 
you  don't  do  that.   It  was  interesting. 

Swent:    What  kind  of  equipment  were  they  using? 

Birdsey:   At  the  time,  I  never  got  to  see  because  he  worked  up  in  the 
raise,  and  I  remember  he'd  tell  us  not  go  past  the  heading, 
because  maybe  the  rocks  would  fall  down  and  hit  us.   So  I  was 
sitting  back  on  an  old  motor—that '  s  what  they  call  it,  to  bring 
the  ore  cars  up  from  underground.   We'd  just  sit  there,  and  we'd 
play  on  the  motor,  trying  to  get  it  started.  We  had  this  little 
lamp.   I'd  see  him  and  my  uncle  go  up;  every  once  in  a  while 
rocks  would  fall,  but  nothing  really  big.   I  was  a  little  kid;  I 
expected  boulders  to  come  down,  but  nothing  really  big  came  down. 
But  you'd  hear  them  working  up  there.   So  he  took  us  underground; 
I  could  remember  two  times  for  sure,  maybe  more.   They  may  have 
slipped  my  memory  now.   It  was  interesting.   I  remember  one  time, 
before  my  mother  and  father  got  a  divorce,  he  took  us  all  back 
underground,  and  mom  lost  the  diamond  out  of  her  wedding  ring.   I 
remember  thinking  that  it  would  be  interesting  if  one  day  we 
might  find  it.   I  was  a  little  kid,  of  course,  hoping  we  might 
find  it. 

Swent:    She  was  underground  with  you? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  we  all  went  underground  for  something;  I  can't  remember  what 
it  was.   I  just  remember  I  was  very  small.   I  remember  she  was 
very  upset  because  she  lost  the  diamond  out  of  her  ring.   I 
remember  thinking  when  I  was  kid  that  somebody  might  think  it  was 


114 


a  diamond  mine  or  something  if  they  found  this  diamond.   We  lived 
a  pretty  normal  life— 

Swent:    Tell  a  little  more  about  the  mill.   Did  they  crush  all  the  time 
then? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  they  crushed  all  the  time. 

Swent:    Even  with  just  one  truck  going  back  and  forth? 

Birdsey:   One  truck,  yes.   They  just  put  it  in  an  ore  bin,  and  I'm  not  sure 
exactly  how  it  was  fed.   I  remember  the  first  time  I  was  in  the 
mill,  Mom  and  Dad  were  still  married,  and  I  was  small  enough  that 
Dad  was  holding  me,  and  I  remember  walking  in- -and  I  don't  know 
if  it  was  the  crusher  we  were  looking  at--but  I  just  remember 
this  big,  huge  wheel—the  sheave,  I  know  now—with  a  big,  old 
rubber  belt.   That  thing  must  have  been  a  foot  and  a  half  wide, 
maybe.   No  guards;  just  sitting  there  flapping,  and  it  was  really 
noisy  and  I  was  really  scared,  and  I  wanted  out.   I  remember  Mom 
walking  up  and  laying  her  hand  on  the  rubber  belt  to  show  me  that 
nothing  was  going  to  hurt  me.   I  remember  them  carrying  me  around 
the  mill,  and  it  was  the  f lotation--what  I  know  now  as  a 
flotation  cell—at  the  time  I  didn't  know  what  it  was.   One  of 
the  old  mill-hands  up  there,  his  name's  Toughy  Lambert,  who, 
later  I  worked  with--Maynard  was  his  first  name- -who  I  eventually 
worked  with  for  a  while  with  Homestake.   I  remember  him  sitting 
up  there,  and  him  teasing  me  that  he  was  going  to  throw  me  in  the 
float  cell.   Started  my  fear  all  over  again.   The  second  time  I 
was  in  the  mill  was  probably  after  my  father  died.   He  was  killed 
in  the  mine  he  worked  in.  We'll  get  to  that  later.   I  remember 
going  in  there—and  what  it  was,  it  was  a  crusher,  and  it  went 
down  to  a  cone  crusher.   You  got  a  crusher  feeding  a  cone 
crusher. 

Swent:    The  first  was  a  jaw  crusher? 

Birdsey:   A  jaw  crusher.   Then  it  went  down  to  what  I  believe  was  a  cone 
crusher.   I  wasn't  still  too  familiar  with  mining  equipment.   I 
believe  it  was  a  cone  crusher,  and  from  there  it  went  to  a— a 
ball  mill  was  one,  and  I  think  there  might  have  been  a  rod  mill 
there,  but  I'm  not  really  sure  about  the  rod  mill.   But  there 
was  a  ball  mill,  and  it  was  ground  into  flotation.   Normal 
flotation. 


115 


Building  the  Tailings  Dam 


Swent:    And  thickeners? 

Birdsey:   There  was  no  thickeners.   It  was  gravity  fed;  it  was  up  on  a  hill 
and  it  was  all  gravity  fed.   I  remember  what  now  I  think  is  very 
interesting—back  then  it  was  just  an  everyday  occurrence—the 
mill  was  on  one  side  of  the  hill  at  the  end  of  town  and  there  was 
like  a  canyon  that  went  across  to  where  we  had  the  tails  dam. 
The  tails  dam—there  was  a  big,  wood  trestle,  and  that's  not 
there  now,  because  that  blew  it  down  probably  1970,  1969.   The 
trestle  blew  down;  it  was  a  big,  huge  trestle.   But  anyway,  the 
pipeline  from  the  tails  ran  across  this  trestle  through  lines, 
then  I  remembered,  that's  how  they  made  the  tails  dam:  they  had  a 
trailer  with  these  cyclones.   I  don't  know  if  you're  familiar 
with  cyclones  or  not— 

Swent:    Sort  of. 

Birdsey:   --the  underflow  of  the  cyclone  is  what  they  would  use  to  build 

the  sides  of  the  dam  as  they  drove  around  in  a  circle.   The  sands 
would  come  out  and  pile  up.   That's  what  they  made  the  sides  of 
the  dam  with,  and  the  overflow  of  the  cyclone  shot  out  into  the 
center,  which  was  more  liquid.   So  you  had  the  heavier  solids 
coming  out  of  the  bottom  building  the  dam  as  they  drove  this 
around,  and  then  the  lights,  or  the  overflow,  put  out  there  in 
liquid,  and  that's  how  they  made  the  tails  dam.   It  was  a  pretty 
common  occurrence  to  see— I  can't  remember  the  guy's  name  now, 
but  he's  always  the  same  guy  out  there  driving  that  truck;  we 
used  to  wave  to  him  and  stuff. 

Swent:    So  he  drove  it? 

Birdsey:   Yes.   It  was  a  truck,  and  the  trailer  was  hooked  to  the  truck, 

and  the  cyclone  was  on  it,  and  he'd  just  run  around  the  dam,  and 
then  I  guess  he'd  come  in  and  make  a  road,  and  he  just  kept 
building  it  up,  and  it  kept  spraying  water  out  the  center.   I'm 
sure  it  wasn't  water;  water-type  stuff.   In  those  days,  it 
probably  didn't  have  to  be.   I  remember  seeing  that  out  there, 
and  watching  it. 

Swent:    Would  be  fascinating  to  watch. 

Birdsey:   I  remember  growing  up,  sometimes  they  closed  the  mill  down,  shut 
it  down  for  some  reason,  and  Dad  would  be  without  work  for  a 
while,  so  we'd  do  other  things.   He'd  work  for  the  Forest 
Service,  part-time  jobs  and-- 


116 


Swent:    Do  you  have  any  idea  how  much  he  made? 
Birdsey:   I  sure  don't.   I  don't  have  any  idea. 
Swent:    Just  wondering. 

Birdsey:  I  remember  seeing  some  contract  sheets  when  he  was  on  contract  in 
the  mine.  I'm  trying  to  remember  how  much  it  was;  I  can't  really 
remember. 

Swent:    Did  you  have  a  company  house? 

Birdsey:   No.   We  owned  our  own  house. 

Swent:    What  kind  of  work  clothes  did  he  have? 

Birdsey:   Used  to  be  Levi's  and  lots  of  flannel  shirts.   They  were  plaid 
and  stuff  like  that.   He  was  also  a  carpenter;  so  he  was  an 
underground  miner,  and  I  remember  him  taking  work  to  putting 
cribbing  and  stuff  like  that  around  the  underground  mine.   They 
used  to  make  cribbing  to  keep  the  dumps;  they'd  bring  the  ore  out 
of  the  waste,  they  dumped  in  the  cribbing,  and  they  would  have  to 
crib  it  up,  because  it  was  in  big,  huge  canyons,  so  they  actually 
made—where  all  the  buildings  and  stuff  were  was  actually  dump, 
and  they  built  cribbing.   I  remember  him  building  sheds  and  stuff 
for  them;  taking  us  up  and  watching  him.   We  used  to  go  out  and 
play  on  this  old  trestle.   They  used  to  bring  ore  cars  all  the 
way  up  to  the  mine  at  one  time;  and  they  had  the  old  trestles  and 
the  cribbing  and  stuff  along  the  canyon  with  the  railroad  tracks 
they  no  longer  used,  but  we  were  kids  and  we'd  go  up  there  and 
play  on  those  trestles  while  Dad  was  building  the  sheds.   I  think 
one  time  he  worked  on  an  ore  shed.   What  they'd  do:  they'd  come 
out  and  built  this  big  ore  shed  where  the  train  cars  would  come 
in  and  dump,  and  then  the  dump  truck  would  pull  out,  and  they 
just  had  these  ore  chutes;  they'd  open  up  and  all  the  ore  would 
go  into  the  truck.   All  they  were  was  just  wooden  chutes;  they'd 
slide  up  and  allow  the  ore  to  gravity-feed  into  the  truck. 

Fill  the  dump  truck  up,  and  they  would  close  the  chute,  and 
Bobby  would  take  it  into  town  to  crush.   Another  interesting 
thing  about  it  was  they  had  a  little  loader—man,  I  don't  even 
know  what  type  of  loader  it  was.   So  at  this  end  of  town,  they'd 
drive  it  out  of  the  canyon  and  bring  it  all  the  down  to  the  far 
end  of  town,  crush  it;  the  concentrate,  then,  would  be  loaded 
into  the  same  dump  truck.  When  he  was  headed  back  up  to  get 
another  load,  he'd  load  it  with  concentrate,  and  they  would  back 
up  to  box  cars.   They  had  this  little  loader,  and  I  used  to  watch 
them  drive  the  loader  into  the  back  of  the  truck  and  they'd  load 
these  box  cars  full  of  concentrate.   That's  how  they  sent  the  ore 


117 


out  of  town—was  on  railroads, 
town. 


The  railroad  came  right  into 


Swent:    So  the  concentrates  were  shipped  out  to— 

Birdsey:   --to  a  smelter--! 'm  not  sure  which  smelter  it  was.   When  we  were 
kids  we  used  to  watch  him,  and  every  once  in  a  while--!  remember 
two  or  three  times  —  it  was  exciting  for  us  kids—I'm  not  sure  the 
operator  was  so  happy—but  he'd  miss— every  once  in  a  while  the 
motor  would  be  wrecked  or  something,  and  it  was  something 
exciting  at  the  time.   That's  pretty  much  how  we  grew  up. 


Father's  Work  in  the  Mine 


Swent:    I  was  going  to  ask  a  little  more  about  what  your  father  wore. 
Did  he  have  safety  boots? 

Birdsey:   His  mining  equipment  was  rubber  mine  boots;  I  do  not  know  if  they 
were  steel-toed;  I  imagine  they  were  but  this  was  back  in  pre- 
'66.   It  was  '63  or  '64.   For  mining  equipment  he  had:  rubber 
boots;  he'd  wear  Levi's  and  a  shirt;  he  had  a  hard  cap  with  a 
lamp  that  you  hooked  onto  it,  and  a  battery  and  a  light.   He'd 
come  home  every  night,  and  I  remember  we  kids  used  to  take  turns 
--he  used  to  have  a  battery  charger  for  his  light,  and  you'd  have 
to  slide  the  light  in  there  and  turn  this  thing,  and  take  the 
light,  and  we'd  all  get  to  put  on  the  charger.   I  remember  he'd 
always  make  us  mud  balls  out  of  some  kind  of  clay  he  worked  with 
underground;  he'd  make  little  balls,  and  when  he  had  lunch  he'd 
let  them  sit  there  for  a  couple  days  in  the  sun  so  they'd  get 
really  hard  so  he'd  always  bring  us  these  marbles  home.   When  we 
were  kids  we'd  play  with  them. 

Swent:    What  about  lunch?  He  carried  a  bucket  then? 

Birdsey:   He  carried  a  lunch  box;  it  was  a  plastic  lunch  box  like  you  see 

nowadays.   Peanut  butter  and  jelly  sandwich  was  his  favorite,  and 
he  always  had  an  extra  one  when  he  came  home  to  share  with  us. 
Oranges  were  his  favorite  fruit.   Peanut  butter  and  jelly  and 
oranges,  and  coffee.   That's  what  he  used  to  take  to  work.   I 
remember  for  a  while  they  used  to  come  and  pick  him  up  in  the 
company  truck;  it  was  an  old  pick-up  that  had  tin  sides— like  a 
camper  shell— only  it  was  made  out  of  tin.   They'd  come  by  and 
pick  all  the  miners  up,  and  take  them  up  the  hill,  and  then 
they'd  drop  them  off --that's  another  thing  I  just  remembered:  in 
Thanksgiving  they  used  that  old  ore  truck  and  filled  it  full  of 


118 


turkeys  and  brought  turkeys  around  to  each  of  the  families,  which 
was  interesting. 

Swent:    Really? 

Birdsey:   But  he'd  go  to  work  in  that  old  truck- - 

Swent:    What  time  of  day?  What  sort  of  shifts  did  he  work? 

Birdsey:   He  worked  all  day  shifts  that  I  remember.   I  don't  remember  him 

working  the  graveyard  [shift];  he  worked  some  weekends,  depending 
on  overtime.   I  remember--!  can't  remember  how  old  I  was--he  had 
an  accident  there  one  time,  and  I  remember  it  was  really  strange 
because  I  remember  waiting  for  him.   Me  and  all  my  brothers--! 
had  three  brothers—and  we'd  go  out  and  wait  for  him  to  come  home 
in  that  truck,  and  I  remember  the  truck  came  by  and  he  wasn't  on 
it.   Mom  wasn't  home  at  the  time  and  I  really  didn't  know  what 
was  going  on.   What  ended  up  happening  was:  he  was  underground 
and  he  was  setting  up  a  blasting  pattern,  and  he'd  taken  the 
blasting  caps  and  set  them  up  on  a  rock  and  a  slab  in  the 
overhead  fell  off  and  landed  on  the  blasting  caps  and  blew  up, 
and  he  couldn't  see--his  face—he  was  full  of  rocks  from  the 
blast,  and  he  walked  out  of  that  mine.   He  couldn't  see,  but  he 
had  worked  it  enough  that  he  knew  just  by  feel--he  walked  most  of 
the  way  out  before  he  got  help-- 

Swent :    He  was  working  alone  then? 

Birdsey:   He  was  working  alone,  yes.   I  don't  know  how  common  that  was  back 
then;  I  don't  know  if  they  worked  in  pairs  or  not,  but  I  believe 
he  was  working  alone  at  that  time,  because  I  remember  him  saying 
that  he  had  to  walk  out.   For  years  after  that  I  know  he  was 
pulling  rocks,  and  he'd  be  sitting  there  and  rocks  would  be 
working  out  of  his  body;  small  rocks  from  the  blast.   He  always 
had  a  really  bad  spot  in  his  mouth  where  a  rock  had  gone  through 
his  cheek  and  did  some  damage  to  his  jaw;  I  guess  the  bone 
fragments  would  work  out  once  in  awhile.   It's  not  a  pleasant 
thought,  but  we  would  be  sitting  at  dinner,  and  he  would  say, 
"Oh!,"  and  pull  out  a  little  small  bone  fragment  out  of  his 
mouth . 

Swent:    Oh  my!   Had  they  taken  him  to  a  hospital  nearby? 

Birdsey:  What  they  used- -they  had  an  old  station  wagon,  the  ambulance, 
that  was  kept  up  at  the  mine,  and  that's  what  they  did:  they 
loaded  him  up  in  the  ambulance.   Usually,  it  was  such  a  small 
town  that  if  anything  happened  up  there,  everybody  knew  about  it 
instantly. 


119 


Swent:    Of  course. 

Birdsey:   So,  protect  the  kids  and  stuff;  as  kids  we  wouldn't  hear  much 

about  it.   I'm  not  very  good  at  what  year  this  ambulance  was--it 
was  a  big,  old,  white  station  wagon  with  one  red  light  on  it. 
They  took  him  out  in  the  ambulance  and  took  him  down  to  Del 
Norte.  They  had  a  county  nurse--! 'm  trying  to  remember  her  name 
--she  was  school  nurse,  county  nurse- -Dorothy  Steel  was  her  name. 
She  was  the  one  that  took  care  of  him;  they  called  the  county 
nurse,  and  she'd  ride  down  to  the  hospital. 

Swent:    He  was  in  the  hospital  for  a  while? 

Birdsey:   He  was  in  the  hospital  for  quite  a  while  because  I  remember  them 
taking  me  up  and  holding  me  up  to  the  window  so  I  could  look  in 
and  see.   We  weren't  allowed  in  the  hospital,  but  they'd  take  us 
around  to  his  room.   I  remember  him  coming  home,  and  he  had  to 
wear  patches  on  his  eyes  for  a  while  because  of  the  blast,  but 
then  he  went  back  to  work. 

Swent:    He  got  his  sight  back? 

Birdsey:   Yes.   Everything  was  back.   He  never  talked  too  much  about  his 

injuries,  but  he  seemed  to  be  okay.   He  was  an  avid  fisherman  and 
that  didn't  stop  him.   So,  I  never  saw  him  come  and  get  off  the 
truck,  so  that  was  one  little  memory  that  popped  in  about  that. 

Swent:    Pretty  powerful  memory. 

Birdsey:   Then  my  uncle  started  working  with  him.   He  graduated  from  school 
and  they  started  working  up  on  Commodore  Five,  I  believe  was  the 
name  of  the  level  they  were  on.   They  were  driving  their  own 
raise;  they  called  it  the  Birdsey  raise,  because  of  the  last 
name.   They  worked  on  it  for  probably  a  year--a  year  and  a  half. 


Father's  Fatal  Accident 


Swent:    Is  this  like  a  leasing  arrangement? 
Birdsey:   No,  this  is  for  the-- 
Swent:    Contract. 

Birdsey:   --contract  mining  company;  they  were  driving  the  raise  up.   I'm 
not  really  sure  what  happened--! '11  tell  you  what  I  think 
happened:  they  drove  the  raise—they  were  a  hundred  and  sixty 


120 


feet  up,  and  they  drove  the  raise,  and  now  they  were  starting  a 
stope  off  the  raise,  and  they  put  up  what  they  call  bulkheads, 
and  I  guess  that  was  to  keep  the  fly  rock  from  coming  back  down 
and  knocking  the  timbers  down  they'd  used  for  support- -cribbing 
and  stuff  up  the  raise.   They  set  some  powder  off,  and  the  powder 
didn't  burn;  it  didn't  go  off,  it  burned  or  smoldered  or 
something.   Anyway,  it  created  a  poisonous  gas  and  when  they 
pulled  this  bulkhead  apart,  the  poison  gas  come  out  and 
overwhelmed  them,  and  knocked  them  out,  and  they  fell  down  the 
raise—both  my  uncle  and  my  father.   My  father  fell  all  the  way 
down  and  was  killed  instantly  when  he  hit  the  ground;  and  my 
uncle- -he  bounced  down  the  cribbing,  down  the  support,  and  got 
his  foot  hung  up  on  one  of  the  pieces  of  wood,  and  it  saved  his 
life.   He  didn't  die,  but  he  hung  upside  down.   That  was  in  1966; 
that's  when  my  father  was  killed.   I  remember  that  day  the  same 
ambulance—and  I  knew  something  was  wrong  that  day.   My  uncle 
never  went  back  underground  again.   He  went  to  work  for  the  mill 
as  a  mill  operator.  My  first  interest  in  milling  actually 
started  from  there  with  my  uncle. 

Swent:    Was  he  injured  badly? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  he  was  injured  pretty  bad.   He  had  a  broken  neck,  a 
concussion—the  worst  part  was  his  leg— when  he  caught  he 
dislocated  the  ankle,  the  knee,  and  the  hip  and  he  hung  upside 
down  for  a  long  time,  and  he  was  kind  of  spinning.   So  it  did  a 
lot  of  damage  to  his  leg,  and  he  can  walk,  and  we  always  kind  of 
tease  him  now  because  he  has  to  wear  a  big  super-nylon  type 
material  to  squeeze  his  leg  together  because  if  he's  on  it  for  a 
long  time,  it  swells  up  and  gets  out  of  shape  from  the  damage. 
So  we  tease  him  about  wearing  pantyhose  and  stuff  like  that, 
[laughter]   He  survived  it,  and  he  never  went  back  underground 
again.   He  went  to  work  in  the  mill,  and  that's  when  I  first-- 
actually  by  talking  to  him  I  got  interested  in  milling. 

Swent:    Did  you  go  to  school  there  in  Creede?  Was  there  a  high  school? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  there  was  a  high  school;  there  was  a  kindergarten  through 

twelfth— actually  it  was  first  grade  through  twelfth,  they  didn't 
have  kindergarten.   My  senior  year,  from  kindergarten  through 
twelfth,  there  was  eighty-four  kids  total.   It's  kind  of  amazing 
because  in  a  small  town  like  that— I  grew  up  all  the  way  through 
first  grade  all  the  way  through  high  school- -we  kind  of  ended  up 
being  more  like  brothers  and  sisters  than  just  friends.  Most 
everybody  I  grew  up—their  parents  were  miners;  they  worked  at 
either  Homestake  or  Emperious  Mining  Company.   Emperious  closed 
down— probably  around  '69  or  '70,  and  they  were  bought  out  by 
Chevron,  I  think,  and  then  it  was  sold  to  Western  Pacific  or 
something.   Some  mining  company--! 'm  not  sure— they  did  a  bunch 


121 


of  stuff.   Actually,  I  think  the  final  closure  was  probably 
around  1970s.   They  finally  closed  it  down  and  Homestake  came  in 
in  '66.   As  I  remember,  my  dad  was  trying  to  decide  whether  to  go 
to  work  for  Homestake  or  stay  with  Emperious.   He  had  a  lot  of 
people  calling  him  wanting  him  to  go  to  work,  and  a  lot  of  his 
friends  that  had  worked  at  Emperious  had  gone  to  work  for 
Homestake.   I  remember  lots  of  discussions:  if  you  want  to  stay 
with  Emperious  or  stay  with  Homestake,  and  he  never  went  to  work 
for  Homestake,  he  stayed  with  Emperious. 

Then  my  father  after  he  died-- 
Swent :    How  old  were  you  then? 
Birdsey:   I  was  about  eight  or  nine. 
Swent:    When  he  was  killed? 
Birdsey:   When  he  was  killed,  yes. 
Swent:    And  your  mother  had  left-- 

Birdsey:   Had  left.   In  that  time  frame  my  father  had  married  my  step 
mother,  Janis  Nelson,  or  Janis  Brown  at  the  time.   He  had  married 
her,  and  then  he  was  killed,  so  she  was  left  with  five  boys,  and 
I  think  she  was  like  twenty,  and  she  had  to  raise  these  five  boys 
by  herself.   But  she  kept  us,  she  raised  us—beautiful.   Great 
mother;  great  person.   Then  she  married  in  '66;  Homestake  came 
in,  and  a  lot  of  the  miners  from  Grants  and  everybody  came  up  to 
open  up  the  mine,  and  she  met  a  miner  from  Grants  named  Jack 
Nelson,  and  ended  up  getting  married  to  him.   He  brought  three 
children  into  the  family  from  his  previous  marriage,  so  we  ended 
up  with  eight  kids  there  at  one  time. 

Swent:    Were  the  five  of  you  all-- 
Birdsey:   No,  just  the  four  of  us. 
Swent:    I  see,  so  she  had  one? 

Birdsey:   She  had  one  of  her  own.   It  was  just  a  little  baby—Terry  was 
just  probably  six  or  seven  months  old. 

Swent:    Five  boys. 

Birdsey:   Yes,  she  had  boys.   Then  Homestake  came  in,  and  I  remember  where 
they  were  putting  in  where  the  houses  were  where  the  Robertsons 
lived  and  stuff  up  there.   I  remember  when  they  were  putting 
those  houses  in,  they  were  trying  to  lay  sewer  lines  and  stuff, 


122 


and  they  had  to  blast  into  solid  rock  to  put  the  sewer  lines  in, 
and  we'd  go  up  there  as  kids—there  used  to  be  nothing  up  there 
but  the  graveyard—we'd  go  up  there  and  we'd  watch  them  drill. 
It  was  like  being  underground.   We'd  watch  them  open  the  prill, 
and  they'd  let  us  help.  We  would  grab  handfuls  of  prill,  which 
is  an  explosive  agent  they  used  underground.   They'd  let  us  pour 
them  down  in  the  hole --we  were  kids.   [laughter] 

Swent:    This  was  all  before  OSHA,  wasn't  it?   [laughter] 

Birdsey:   Yes,  I  think  it  was.   [laughter]   Now  and  then  they'd  be  setting 
off  blasts;  no  horns,  no  alarms,  they'd  just  tell  you  to  get 
back— they'd  make  sure  all  of  us  kids  were  out  of  there. 

Swent:    I'm  guessing  that  you  obeyed  knowing  that  it  really  was  — 

Birdsey:   Oh,  definitely.   One  of  the  biggest  faux  pas  a  person  could  make 
when  they  were  small  was  to  get  caught  playing  around  in  the  old 
mines,  and  there  were  old  mines  everywhere- -old  tunnels  and 
stuff.   It  always  amazed  me  that  you  could  be  out  there  playing 
around  in  one  of  those  things  and  before  you  got  back  to  town 
your  parents  knew  about  it.  As  kids  we  were  taught--!  was  taught 
really  young--!  knew  what  a  blasting  cap  was,  I  knew  what 
primacord  cord  was  and  not  to  touch  it,  and  not  to  play  with  it. 

Swent:    You  knew  it  was  dangerous.   I  was  just  thinking  when  you  said 

your  dad  took  you  in  the  mine  and  said,  "Sit  there,  and  don't  go 
there,"  and  you  knew  better— 

Birdsey:   Exactly.   They  taught  you  about  the  primacord,  and  blasting  caps. 
Swent:    And  not  falling  in  old  mine  holes. 

Birdsey:   Exactly.   And  not  to  go  underground;  I  knew  about  gas— bad  gas 
and  stuff  like  that.   My  grandfather  was  also  a  miner.   We  have 
pictures  when  he  was  very  young  of  his  mule  and  his  horse,  and 
his  ore  car. 


Four  Generations  of  Miners 


Swent;    Your  father's  father? 
Birdsey:   My  father's  father. 
Swent:    This  is  in  Creede  also? 


123 


Birdsey:   This  is  in  Creede  also. 
Swent:    Was  he  Cornish? 

Birdsey:   Well,  it  wasn't  really  Cornish;  it  was  pictures  of  him  when  he 
was  a  little  kid  underground- -not  a  little  kid,  but  fifteen, 
sixteen  maybe. 

Swent:    Do  you  know  where  your  grandfather  was  born? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  he  was  born  in  Creede--around  the  Creede  area  there 

somewhere.   He  used  to  talk  about  when  he  was  a  kid--when  the  old 
prospector  turned  the  mules  loose,  they  had  a  whole  bunch  of  wild 
burros --he  was  talking  about  when  he  was  a  kid  and  he  and  his 
brother,  my  uncle,  would  go  up  and  catch  these  mules  in  the 
summer  and  use  them  all  summer,  and  then  turn  them  loose  again  in 
the  winter.   I'm  not  sure  which  mine  he  even  worked  at;  there  was 
so  many  mines  up  there:  King  Solomon  and  a  whole  bunch  of  them. 
He  worked  at  one  of  them  when  he  was  a  kid,  and  so  did  my  great- 
uncle.   In  fact,  my  great-uncle  died  from  consumption,  or  black 
lung,  or  whatever  you  want  to  call  it  nowadays. 

Swent:    Miner's  con  [consumption]. 

Birdsey:   Miner's  con;  there  you  go.   My  grandmother's  father  had  something 
to  do  with  mines  up  there.   He  either  invested  in  them  or-- 
because  I  remember  talking  to  my  great-grandmother--Grandma  Virge 
we  called  her—she  died  when  she  was  ninety-eight--she  used  to 
talk  about  her  husband  was  a  speculator  or  something  for  these 
mines.   She  talked  about  when  she  came  to  Creede,  she  came  in  on 
a  wagon.   We  used  to  talk  to  her  a  lot  about  the  train. 

Swent:    Was  his  name  Birdsey  also? 

Birdsey:   No,  his  name  was  Alspagh.   That  was  my  grandmother's  father. 

Swent:    How  do  you  spell  that? 

Birdsey:   I'm  not  really  sure.   He  was  a  mining  speculator;  I'm  not  really 
sure.   Anyway,  then  my  grandfather  opened  up  his  own  mine.   It 
was  a  bentonite  mine  and-- 

ii 

Birdsey:   --old  clay  mine;  right  there  on  the  airport  corner.   It  used  to 

be  the  airport  corner  and  an  old  mine  sits  there.   What  it  is,  is 
an  old  ore  bin  where  they  used  to  dump  the  clay  and  my 
grandfather  built  that,  and  that's  where  the  mine  was. 


124 


Swent:    Was  that  underground? 

Birdsey:   That  was  underground  also,  yes. 

Swent:    What  did  they  use  bentonite  for  in  those  days? 

Birdsey:   They  were  lining  some  reservoir;  they  were  using  it  for  water 

proofing  and  reservoirs.   I  guess  it's  like  a  clay,  so  they  were 
lining  some  reservoir,  and  I  guess  he  had  a  contract  to  sell  it, 
and  they  started  this.   I  remember  when  I  was  kid- -we  weren't 
supposed  to  do  it- -but  they  covered  in  the  portal,  so  you 
couldn't  get  into  it,  but  up  on  top  they  drove  a  ventilation 
shaft,  and  my  brother  and  I  found  out  where  that  ventilation 
shaft  was,  and  we  used  to  try  to  climb  down.   We  never  made  it 
all  the  way  in.   You  got  down  to  one  spot  where  there  was  a 
ladder,  and  it  was  loose,  and  we  were  afraid  that  we  were  going 
to  fall,  so  we  never  did.  We  weren't  supposed  to  be  playing 
around  there;  but  we  used  to  climb  down  there,  and  we  never  made 
it  down  the  sides.   There  were  mines  all  over  that  place. 

Swent:    Did  your  father  finish  high  school? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  he  did.   He  graduated  there  in  Creede.   I  think  he  wanted  to 
go  into  the  military,  but  he  had  shot  himself  when  he  was  a  kid 
when  he  was  out  rabbit  hunting.   It  had  gone  through  his  arm  and 
it  damaged  his  nerve,  and  he  could  not  hold  his  hand  out  right 
because  one  of  the  nerves  was  damaged,  so  he  didn't  pass  his 
physical.   So  he  went  to  college  and  became  a  gunsmith,  and  he 
had  a  country-western  band  also.   That's  what  he  did  through 
college,  and  then  he  moved  back  to  Creede  and  went  to  work  in  the 
mines . 

Swent:    You  finished  high  school  there? 

Birdsey:   I  finished  high  school  there,  and  then  I  had  a  chance  to  sit  back 
and  think.   I  used  to  cut  meat  at  the  local  grocery  store.   1 
started  working  at  the  store  when  I  was  in  the  eighth  grade  there 
at  Kentucky  Belle- -that  was  the  name  of  the  store,  and  I  cut  meat 
as  a  meat-cutter  and  a  clerk,  and  whatever  they  needed, 
basically,  until  I  graduated  out  of  high  school. 

Swent:    What  were  paid  for  that?  Do  you  remember? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  I  was  paid  $1.25  an  hour  when  I  first  started.   When  I 

graduated  from  high  school  and  I  quit,  I  think  I  was  making  four 
bucks  [$4.00]  an  hour. 

Swent:    That's  pretty  good. 


125 

Birdsey:   That's  pretty  good,  yes.   I  was  making  good  money.   Then  of 

course,  on  the  side,  out  of  season,  we  made  quite  a  bit  of  money- 
-we  had  to  wait  until  after  store  hours  because  it's  against  the 
law  to  cut  wild  game  during  the  store  hours,  but  after  store 
hours  you'd  cut  it.   So  we  used  to  cut  deer  and  elk,  and  we 
charged  seventy-five  dollars  an  elk,  and  forty-five  dollars  a 
deer.   So,  we  made  a  little  money  on  the  side  doing  that.   Then 
one  day  1  was  sitting  there  wondering  what  I  was  going  to  do.   I 
had  graduated  from  high  school,  and  I  had  a  job  there,  and  this 
mining- -mines  were  around- -but  I  decided  that  I  wanted  to  see 
more  of  the  world,  and  what  better  way  to  get  started  than  to 
join  the  service?   So  I  went  into  the  United  States  Navy  in  1975, 
and  was  in  the  navy  until  '79. 


126 


II   AN  INTERLUDE  IN  THE  NAVY,  1975-1979 


Marrying  a  Girl  from  Oroville,  California 


Swent:    Where  did  you  go  in  the  navy? 

Birdsey:   I  went  to  boot  camp  in  Great  Lakes,  Illinois,  and  was  stationed 
in  San  Diego,  California,  on  an  LST;  landing  ship.   I  went  all 
over  the  western  Pacific.   I  was  in  Hong  Kong,  Korea,  Singapore, 
the  Philippines  —  all  over  in  the  western  Pacific. 

Swent:  '75  to  '79? 
Birdsey:  '75  to  '79. 
Swent:  Just  at  the  end  of  the  Vietnam  War. 

Birdsey:   Right.   In  fact,  when  I  picked  up  the  ship,  they  were  just  coming 
back  from  the  evacuations  of  Vietnam. 

Swent:    What  was  the  name  of  the  ship? 

Birdsey:   U.S.S.  Barbour  County;  LST  1195.   That's  where  I  met  my  wife—was 
in  the  navy.   I  met  her  through  a  letter,  actually.   I  had  a 
girlfriend  back  in  Creede,  and  being  in  the  navy  and  stuff,  of 
course  it  did  not  work  out.   I  had  a  good  friend  in  the  navy,  and 
was  talking  to  him  one  day,  and  I  asked  him  if  he  had  any  friends 
I  could  write  to.   He  said,  "Yes,  my  girlfriend  has  a  friend, "  — 
it  happened  to  be  my  wife— but  I  sent  her  a  letter.   I  said,  "You 
don't  know  me.   My  name's  Norm,  and  I  know  Rick."  So  she  wrote 
back,  and  we  started  writing,  and  I  was  overseas  at  the  time, 
which  was  a  nine-month  deployment,  so  we  wrote  back  and  forth  for 
nine  months,  and  I  asked  her  if  she'd  like  to  come  down  and  meet 
me  at  the  ship.   She  said,  "Sure,"  so  she  came  down,  and  it  was 
love  at  first  sight,  and  we  ended  up  getting  married. 

Swent:    And  it's  lasted? 


127 


Birdsey:   And  it's  lasted,  yes. 
Swent:    Isn't  that  wonderful? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  it  is.   I  got  married  in  '79.   It  was  one  of  the  good  things 
I  got  out  of  the  navy. 

Swent:    Where  was  she  from? 

Birdsey:   She  was  from  Oroville,  California,  right  up  here.   It's  right  up 
the  road  here.   Then  I  didn't  know  what  I  was  going  to  do  so  I 
went  back  to  Colorado,  and  I  started  cutting  meat  at  this  store 
in  Grand  Junction—actually,  it  was  in  Fruita,  Colorado--!  was  a 
meat  cutter.   I  worked  there  for  about  a  month  and  a  half --two 
months.   I  soon  realized  that  the  store  owner  and  I  were  not 
seeing  eye-toreye  on  a  few  things-- 

Swent:    Let  me  backtrack  just  a  bit:  what  was  your  rating  in  the  navy? 


Boatswain's  Mate,  Second  Class,  an  Interesting  Rating 


Birdsey:   I  was  a  second  class  boatswain's  mate. 

Swent:    Did  you  learn  any  skills  from  that  that  helped  you  at  all? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  actually,  I  learned  how  to  paint.   Boatswain's  mate  was  a 
very  interesting  rating.   When  I  first  went  to  school  in  the 
navy,  I  was  going  to  become  a  gunner's  mate.   A  lot  of  things 
played  into  this--I  was  out  on  my  own  for  the  first  time--I  grew 
up  in  this  small,  small  town,  and  all  of  a  sudden  I  was  in 
Chicago,  Illinois—very,  very,  very,  very  homesick. 

I'm  sure. 

Not  understanding  the  city  life  at  all.   I  felt  like  I  was  the 
only  person  in  the  world.   Needless  to  say,  I  didn't  do  very  well 
in  school,  and  then  I  started  finding  out  about  night  clubs,  and 
to  be  honest  with  you,  I  started  drinking  a  little  bit.   When  I 
should  have  been  studying,  I  was  out  partying,  and  it  didn't  take 
the  navy  long  to  say,  "Hey,  you're  out  of  here."   So,  I  lost  the 
schooling  for-- 

Swent:    Had  you  done  well  in  high  school? 

Birdsey:   I  had  done  fairly  well  in  high  school,  yes.   I  could  say  I  was  in 
the  top  ten  because  there  was  only  ten  of  us.  [laughter]  I 


Swent : 
Birdseyi 


128 


Swent : 
Birdsey; 


carried  probably  about  a  B-average  in  high  school.   I  attribute 
it  to  being  young,  and  stupid,  and  homesick.   Anyway,  I  lost  my 
position  in  the  gun  school,  so  they  sent  me  out  to  the  fleet. 
They  said,  "You  get  out  there,  you  can  strike  for  anything  you 
want;  when  you  mature  a  little  bit  more,  find  out  what  you  want." 
So,  I  went  out  there,  and  they  put  you  out  on  deck  force,  which 
is  what  everybody  starts,  painting,  swabbing  decks  and  stuff.   I 
started  liking  it  because  there  are  other  things  that  a 
boatswain's  mate  rating  leads  to—it's  kind  of  like  things  you 
see  sailors  do:  I  got  to  steer  the  ship--I  thought  that  was  just 
great;  standing  watch  with  the  spray  hitting  against  you. 
Sometimes  I  thought,  "Wow,  this  is  all  right."  There  were  other 
jobs:  there  were  cooks,  and  radarman,  and  gunner's  mate  stuff, 
but  this  seemed  to  be  what  the  navy  was  like. 

Real  sailing. 

Right,  real  sailing  stuff.   Then  we  started  doing  replenishing  at 
sea,  and  they  sent  me  to  school  to  learn  how  to  land  helicopters 
and  guide  them  into  the  ship,  drive  the  landing  craft  up  on  the 
beach.   I  enjoyed  that  so  I  stayed  in  that  rating.   There's  a  lot 
of  things  that  helped  me  out  a  lot.   The  biggest  thing  that 
helped  me  that  would  relate  to  mining  would  be  operating  a  piece 
of  equipment.   Every  type  of  equipment  is  basically  the  same:  you 
have  to  start  it,  you  have  to  run  it,  you  got  to  shut  it  down. 


Learning  to  Operate  Equipment 


Swent:    And  know  what  to  do  when  there's  trouble. 

Birdsey:   Exactly.   So,  even  though  I  was  running  winches  and  cranes,  and 
driving  a  boat,  it  all  kind  of  gives  you  that  basic  for 
operating.   How  to  run  a  piece  of  equipment;  be  it  a  loader  or  a 
24-foot  SAG  mill.   So  I  guess  that  helped  me  in  mining.   So  I  got 
out  of  the  navy,  and  I  went  to  work  there,  and  it  didn't  work 
out,  so  I  thought  I'd  go  to  school  and  use  the  G.I.  Bill 
[Serviceman's  Readjustment  Act  of  1944],  but  my  stepbrother  was 
driving  up  to  Creede  to  see  if  he  could  get  on  as  an  underground 
miner.   I  rode  up  with  him  that  day  just  for  something  to  do;  I'd 
already  quit,  and  I  didn't  have  a  job. 

Swent:    In  Fruita? 

Birdsey:  In  Fruita,  right.  My  brother  was  working  for  a  company  called 
Crest  Motors  delivering  mine  equipment  and  he  was  tired  of  it, 
and  he  wanted  to  see  if  he  could  get  on  at  Creede,  and  I  didn't 


129 

have  anything  to  do  because  I  had  already  quit.   So  I  decided 
that  I  would  go  ahead  and  ride  up  with  him;  what  did  I  have  to 
lose?   I  could  see  my  parents  while  we  were  there.   When  we  drove 
up  to  the  mill  while  I  was  there,  I  decided,  "Ah  heck,  I'll  just 
throw  an  application  in  and  see  what  happens."  Well,  it  just  so 
happened  that  they  needed  somebody  and  they  hired  me  that  day. 

Swent:    Were  you  married  already? 
Birdsey:   Yes,  I  was  married;  Sue  was  there. 
Swent:    How  did  she  feel  about  that? 

Birdsey:   Actually,  I  think  my  wife  was  still  in  shock  with  being  in  a 

small  town,  but  she  was  happy  that  I  got  a  job  because  she  was 
worried  about  me  quitting,  and  we  were  young,  and  you  know  how  we 
all  start  out  when  we're  young.   Not  too  much  in  the  cupboard. 
So  she  was  pretty  happy  that  I  got  a  job,  and  that's  where  I 
started  my  milling  career-- 


130 


III   BACK  TO  CREEDE  AND  A  JOB  WITH  HOMESTAKE,  1979  TO  1981 


Entry-Level  Laborer 


Swent:    Back  in  Creede  [Bulldog  Mine], 
Birdsey:   Back  in  Creede. 
Swent:    Where  did  you  live? 

Birdsey:   When  I  first  moved  there,  my  parents  had  some  property  near  town 
that  my  mother  had  inherited  from  her  father.   They  had  a  little 
trailer—a  camper  trailer—and  they  rented  that  to  us  for  twenty- 
five  dollars  a  month  until  we  could  find  something;  something  to 
rent  in  Creede.   So  we  lived  in  that  camper  trailer  and  had  all 
our  stuff  in  storage—we  didn't  have  much  at  that  time.   We  moved 
there  and  we  lived  in  that  trailer,  and  I  started  to  work  at 
Home stake. 

Swent:    They'd  been  there  for  ten  years,  but  you  had  not  ever  worked 
there  before? 

Birdsey:   Never  worked  there  before,  no.   I  had  been  working  at  the  store, 
and  I  had  been  in  the  navy. 

Swent:  How  much  did  they  pay  you  there? 

Birdsey:  There,  I  was  getting  $6.00  an  hour  as  a  laborer. 

Swent:  Entry  level? 

Birdsey:  Entry  level,  yes. 

Swent:  Were  there  benefits? 

Birdsey:  Yes,  we  had  medical  and  dental  and  eyeglasses,  I  believe. 


131 


Swent:    Was  there  a  dentist  in  Creede? 

Birdsey:   No,  there  was  not  a  dentist  there,  you  had  to  go  down  to  the 
valley  forty  miles  away. 

Swent:    Everything  was  in  Del  Norte? 

Birdsey:   Everything  was  in  Del  Norte.   That's  where  it  started,  in  Del 

Norte.   If  you  wanted  to  go  shopping,  you  probably  had  to  go  to 
Alamosa,  which  is  seventy  miles  away,  and  the  movie  theater  was 
in  Del  Norte;  everything  was  pretty  much  in  Del  Norte.   I 
remember  starting  there,  and  I  remember  I  was  so  proud  because  I 
had  a  job,  and  that  made  me  feel  good. 

Swent:    What  was  it?  What  were  you  doing? 

Birdsey:   I  was  a  laborer.   My  first  job  was—actually  I  was  out  with  a  guy 
by  the  name  of  Jimmy  Hosselkus. 

Swent:    Hosselkus? 

Birdsey:   Hosselkus,  yes.   [spells]  Hosselkus. 

Swent:    What  was  his  first  name? 

Birdsey:   Jimmy.   It  only  lasted  a  couple  days,  but  we  were  busting  rocks 

on  a  grizzly.   They  would  bring  the  ore  cars  out  of  the  mine,  and 
they'd  dump  the  ore  through  the  grizzly  and  then  it  had  rocks  out 
there  above  the  crusher.  We'd  have  to  go  out  and  bust  those 
rocks.   I  remember-- 

Swent:    That's  kind  of  dangerous  work. 

Birdsey:   I  remember  sitting  there  with  that  sledgehammer  cracking  these 

rocks  thinking,  "If  this  is  what  milling's  all  about-- [laughter] 
--this  is  going  to  be  a  little  rough."  But  we  didn't  have  to 
bust  for  too  long  because  the  mine—somehow  responsibility 
shifted  to  the  mine,  and  they  ended  up  taking  care  of  it.  Then  I 
moved  in  to  the  crusher  operator,  and  my  job  was  to  keep  the 
place  clean,  shovel  up  any  spilling  at  the  end  of  the  shift,  and 
watch  the  jaw  and  cone  crusher,  because  it  came  up  the  feedbelt 
from  underneath  the  camelbacks  there  in  the  ore. 

Swent:    Underneath  the  what? 

Birdsey:   The  camelbacks,  where  they  dumped  the  ore  cars.   It  would  spill 
onto  the  grizzly;  big  rocks  separated,  and  then  it  would  fall 
down  into  the  ore  pile--coarse-ore  pile,  over  an  apron  feeder. 


132 


Swent : 
Birdsey : 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 

Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Then  the  apron  feeder  would  feed  onto  the  feedbelt  which  took  it 
to  the  jaw  crusher. 

Were  you  given  any  kind  of  training  at  all? 

Yes,  we  were  given  the  three-day  MSHA  [Mine  Safety  and  Health 
Administration]  training,  and  familiarization  training  and  stuff 
about  going  underground  and  what  to  wear  and  stuff  like  that 
because  we  did  have  to  go  underground  from  time  to  time.   I 
started  with  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Doug  Hatton. 

Hatton? 

Hatton;  and  he  ended  up  being  a  very,  very,  very  good  friend  of 
mine--still  is.   He's  a  general  foreman  at  Barrick  right  now,  in 
Nevada.   He  and  I  started  together  and  he  went  in  and  they  put 
him  in  as  a  helper,  for  one  of  the  helpers  that  had  left;  mill 
helpers.   And  I  used  to  work  with  Charlie  Atencio  out  on  the 
crusher. 

Who? 

Charlie  Atencio.   He  was  the  crusher  operator.   So  my 
responsibilities  included  keeping  the  floors  clean  underneath  the 
belts  and  seeing  and  watching  the  cone  crusher.   What  we  had  to 
do  was:  when  you  had  really  muddy  ore,  the  cone  crusher  could 
take  it,  so  we  had  to  pull  this  handle—this  big  rope--we  would 
ring  a  buzzer  up  by  the  crush  operator  and  he's  shut  the  feed 
off,  and  allow  me  to  unplug  the  crusher.   Some  days  that  job  was 
great.   It  would  run  perfect;  if  they  got  a  lot  of  mud  out  from 
underground,  or  they  were  cleaning  one  of  the  sumps  from 
underground,  it  would  be  all  sticky,  and  it  was  just  a  son  of  a 
gun.   You'd  be  there  for  a  day  just  trying  to  get  the  stuff  to  go 
through  the  crusher. 

Did  you  have  a  shovel  or-- 

I  had  an  airlance--this  airlance--you  just  jammed  it  down  in 
there,  and  tried  to  blow  it  through  the  crusher. 

It's  connected  to  compressed  air? 

Compressed  air,  right,  and  you  just  turn  a  knob  and  keep  jamming 
it  down  in  there  trying  to  get  that  mud  that ' s  hanging  up  on  the 
side  plugging  it  up  to  work  through.   You'd  use  water;  but  we 
didn't  like  to  use  a  bunch  of  water,  because  it  weighted  the  ore 
down- -the  ore  bin. 


Swent:    Was  this  dangerous? 


133 


Birdsey:   No,  it  really  wasn't  dangerous.   I  remember  I  learned  my  first 
lesson  about  ore  and  silica  because  I  had  just  got  my  brand  new 
safety  glasses-- 

Swent:    Did  they  provide  those? 

Birdsey:   They  provided  them,  and  I  just  got  my  brand  new  ones,  and  I'm 
sitting  there  blasting  this  stuff  out-- 

Swent:    Sitting? 

Birdsey:   Well,  I  should  stay  standing.   I'm  standing  up  on  this-- 

Swent:    Okay,  I'm  trying  to  picture  where  you're-- 

Birdsey:   Well,  a  big  cone  crusher  is  about  four  feet  tall,  and  I'm  up  on 
the  side  of  the  cone  crusher  bending  down,  and  all  this  mud  is 
flying  back  at  my  face  from  the  air.   It's  getting  on  my  glasses, 
so  I  take  my  glasses  off,  and  take  my  shirt  tail,  and  try  to  wipe 
the  mud  off  my  glasses,  when  I  got  them  all  wiped  off,  I  put  my 
glasses  back  on,  and  I  couldn't  see;  I'd  scratched  them  because 
that  silica  had  cut  right  in  there,  and  ruined  my  glasses  in 
about  thirty  seconds,  so  I  learned  my  lesson  on  that.   So  if  you 
ever  work  and  get  mud  on  your  glasses,  wash  them  off  with  water 
first.   I  just  tried  to  wipe  it  off,  and  I  couldn't  even  see  out 
of  them.   I  sliced  them  right  up.   You'd  sit  there  for  hours  just 
trying  to  get  this  thing  to  go,  and  you  wouldn't  get  any  tonnage, 
and  the  thing  was  if  you  had  really  good  runs  and  you  didn't  have 
to  mess  around  with  the  cone  crusher,  you  could  fill  that  ore  bin 
up  by  12:30,  1:00.   Then  you  could  go  ahead  and  do  clean-up  from 
1:00  until,  lets's  say  2:00,  and  then  you  could  fire  the  crusher 
and  everything  back  up,  and  top  the  ore  bin  up,  and  you  have  a 
full  ore  bin;  enough  to  last  a  couple  days  or  whatever.   But  if 
you  had  really  bad  runs-- 


Learning  a  Lesson  about  Safety 


Swent:    Then  you  could  relax  a  bit. 

Birdsey:  Then  you  could  relax  a  bit,  and  get  clean-up  and  maintenance  done 
and  stuff;  but  if  you  had  bad  runs,  then  you  were  always  trying 
to  keep  the  mill  going.   It  was  constant.   Sometimes  you'd  end  up 
working  over,  and  in  the  winter,  it  was  really  different  because 
--Homestake' s  been  a  very  safety-conscious  company  since  I've 
worked  for  them.   There  was  a  few  times  —  in  the  crusher--it  "d  be 
winter  in  Colorado  and  it  would  be  cold,  really  cold,  and  we  had 


134 


water  drip  down  from  the  roof  or  something,  and  it  would  freeze 
on  the  catwalks ,  and  you  would  be  walking  up  the  belt  and  you 
would  hit  one  of  those  icings,  and  one  time  I  was  walking  up  the 
belt,  and  I  had  a  hammer  in  my  hand  because  the  rollers  would 
freeze  —  it  would  be  so  cold--so  you'd  have  to  get  under  there  to 
hit  the  roller  to  break  it  free  to  get  it  to  spin.   So  I  had  the 
hammer  in  my  hand,  and  I'm  walking  up  to  knock  these  rollers 
free,  and  I  fell  and  the  roller  went  into  the  belt,  and  sucked 
that  hammer  right  out  of  my  hand  and  grabbed  my  thumb  through 
between  the  belt  and  the  roller  which  fortunately  wasn't  loaded 
and  the  belt  was  sticking  up,  so  it  didn't  really  do  much  but 
just  skin.   That  taught  me  a  lesson;  another  lesson  to  learn! 

Swent :    But  what  else  could  you  do? 

Birdsey:   Well,  pay  more  attention  for  one  thing,  and  1  shouldn't  have  been 
on  that  side  of  that  roller  for  one  thing,  1  should  have  been  on 
the  other  side  of  the  roller.   So  if  I  would  have  fallen  it 
wouldn't  have  pulled  me  in,  it  would  have  pushed  me  out. 

Swent:    I  see. 

Birdsey:   But  I  was  on  the  wrong  side  so  when  I  fell,  I  went  in. 

Swent:    Had  you  been  told  this? 

Birdsey:   Knowing  me  I  had  probably  been  told  that,  but  —  technically ,  I 

don't  know  whether  I  had  been  told  or  not,  but  I  imagine  I  had, 
knowing  Homestake  the  way  I  do,  I'm  sure  I  would  have  been  told. 
It's  just  that  sometimes  you  don't  listen;  sometimes  you  learn 
the  hard  way. 

Swent:    You  don't  understand  until  you've  tried  it,  I  guess. 

Birdsey:   Exactly. 

Swent:    But  they  did  give  you  safety  training? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  they  did.   They  gave  us  lots  of  safety  training:  a  lot  was 
underground;  how  to  use  your  self -rescuer—we  used  to  have  to  go 
underground  probably  a  quarter  of  a  mile— 

Swent:    Even  as  a  mill  worker? 

Birdsey:   Right,  because  we  used  to  pump—they  had  what  they  called  the 

sand  dam— and  we  would  pump  our  tails— which  is  sand- -underground 
so  they  could  use  that  sand  for  backfilling  the  stopes,  and  the 
mill  was  responsible  for  the  line  from  the  mill  all  the  way 
underground  to  the  first  set  of  valves  that  was  back  there.   I 


135 


really  don't  know  how  far  underground  it  was;  I'm  just  saying 
maybe  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  if  that  far.   We  used  to  have  to  go 
underground  and  hook  up  an  airline  and  close  off  the  valves 
blowing  the  sand  down,  hook  up  an  airline,  and  backblow  that  sand 
line  back  into  a  sump  in  the  mill  building,  or  it  would  freeze. 
Then  we'd  be  in  trouble  because  we'd  have  to  take  it  apart  and 
thaw  frozen  sand.   So  we'd  have  to  back  blow  it  so  the  line 
wouldn't  set  up.   Then  the  mine  took  care  of  that  valve  back 
underground;  that  was  their  responsibility. 

I  hated  going  underground.   I  hated  it  because  to  get  there, 
you  had  to  go  through  square  sets,  and  that's  just  braces  that 
they  used  for  the  ground,  and  the  square  sets  were  probably— 
three-quarters  of  my  trip  back  was  in  square  sets—and  you'd  have 
block  lights;  they'd  be  red  and  green  for  the  motors  coming  in 
and  out,  they'd  make  them  red  and  green  telling  the  motors.   I 
hated  it  because  we  had  to  walk  back  and  it  seemed  like  every 
time  you'd  get  there,  a  train  would  come  out,  so  what  they  did  is 
every  other  eight-by-eight  they  had  removed  so  you  could  get  in 
between  them  and  let  the  ore  car  go  by—because  there  wasn't  much 
room  between  the  ore  car  and  the  side— 

Swent:    And  you're  a  pretty  big  guy. 

Birdsey:   Right.   I  remember  laying  there,  and  the  car- -you  see  the  ore 
cars  going  by  like  this:  zoom,  zoom,  zoom.   One  day— 

Swent:    You  were  standing? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  you  were  standing.  We  stepped  in  the  back  as  the  ore  cars 
go  by.   I  hated  it.   One  day  I  was  sitting  there,  and  usually  I 
stood  on  one  side,  because  you  had  more  room  on  the  right  side 
going  in— you  had  more  room.   The  left  side  was  really,  really 
skinny.   One  day,  I  was  on  the  left  side  going  in  when  the  train 
came  out  so  I  got  back  up  on  the  square  set,  and  there  wasn't 
quite  as  many  square  sets  missing  on  the  left  side  as  there  was 
the  right  side.   They  had  red  reflectors  that  you  could  see 
that's  where  you  need  to  stand.   Anyway,  I  was  on  the  left  side, 
and  I  could  hear  this  thunk,  thunk,  thunk,  thunk,  thunk,  thunk— 
and  what  had  happened  was  one  of  the  ore  cars  had  had  a  piece  of 
timber  in  it,  and  it  was  going  down  smacking  those  eight-by- 
eights  on  the  other  side,  and  if  I  had  been  on  the  other  side— I 
don't  know  if  it  would  have  hit  me  or  not,  but  it  could  have 
because  it  was  hitting  those  square  sets.   I  always  hated  that, 
so  what  I  used  to  do  is  when  I  saw  that  the  light  was  red,  I'd 
either  stand  there  until  it  turned  green  or  wait  for  the  train  to 
come  out  because  I  didn't  like  going  back.   I  had  no  business 
back  there.   It  was  a  different  world.   Anyway,  we'd  have  to  go 
back  and  blow  those  back,  so  they  gave  us  a  lot  of  training  on 


136 


underground  using  our  self-rescuer,  and  we  used  to  have  to  get  a 
brass  tag  out  of  the  shift  foreman's  office  in  line,  and  hang  it 
up  on  the  board  to  tell  everybody  that  a  mill  hand  was 
underground.   Everybody  had  brass  tags--it  had  an  M,  for  mill—so 
if  something  happened,  they  would  know  who's  underground.   I 
remember  one  time  I  forgot  to  put  the  brass  tag  up  and  I  was  told 
about  that.   You  got  to  learn.   I  pretty  much  tried  to  stay  out 
from  underground;  I  didn't  really  understand  it,  or  have  anything 
to  do  with  it. 


Promotion  from  Crusher  Operator  to  Mill  Helper 


Birdsey:   Anyway,  I  worked  as  a  crusher  operator,  and  then  they  moved  me 
over  to  the  mill  as  a  mill  helper.   My  responsibility  there 
included  keeping  the  floe  full  in  the  grinding— 

Swent:    Keeping  the— 

Birdsey:   --floe  [flocculent]  tanks  full;  all  the  reagent  tanks  full—all 
the  chemicals  we  needed  for  milling.   Keeping  all  that  full. 

Swent:    I  think  that's  flocculent? 

Birdsey:   Right,  flocculent. 

Swent:    But  you  call  it  floe  tank. 

Birdsey:   Floe  tank.   [spells]  Floe.   Keeping  that  full  so  the  con 
thickener— 

Swent:    The  what? 

Birdsey:   Concentrate  thickener. 

Swent:    Con  thickener. 

Birdsey:   Con  thickener  would  settle;  using  all  our  collectors  and 

promoters,  which  was  xanthate,  404-249— they  had  to  keep  that 
full,  and  the  lime  full,  and  keeping  other  reagents  full- 
charging  the  mills  with  balls,  grinding  media;  making  sure  the 
mill  is  full— charging  the  rod  mill  so  it  was  kept  full  of  rods. 

Swent:    Do  you  remember  the  brands  of  any  of  these  things? 

Birdsey:   Let's  see:  our  float  cells  were  Gardner-Denvers  and  they  were 

small;  I'm  not  sure  what  the  rod  and  ball  mill- -what  brands  they 


137 


were;  we  had  Galigher  pumps,  of  course--our  tails  pumps;  we  had 
Joy  air  compressors;  I  think  we  had  some  Wemco  pumps,  I'm  not 
really  sure-- 

Swent:    What  tonnage  were  you  doing? 

Birdsey:   We  were  running  about  320  tons  a  day,  which  comes  to  about  seven 
or  eight  tons  an  hour. 

Swent:    How  did  this  compare  with  the  mill  at  the  Emperious?  Was  that 
how  much-- 

Birdsey:  1  think  the  mill  at  the  Emperious  probably  ran  about  the  same 
amount.  Maybe  not  quite  as  much.  I  really  don't  know.  They 
were  about  the  same  size;  similar  or  the  same  size. 

Swent:    So  you  were  moving  up  the  ladder? 

Birdsey:   I  was  moving  up.   I  went  from  helper  in  the  crusher  to  helper  in 
the  mill.   Crusher  operator  was  kind  of  a  good  job  to  get  because 
it  was  straight  days  —  five  days  a  week.   That  was  kind  of  a  nice 
thing,  but  it  was  such  a  small  place,  that  I  didn't  think  Charlie 
was  ever  going  to  leave,  so  I  didn't  think  I  would  be  moving  up 
in  the  crusher  ranks.   So,  I  went  over  to  mill  helper  and-- 

Swent:    That  was  shifts? 
Birdsey:   That  was  shifts,  yes. 
Swent:    Around  three  shifts? 

Birdsey:   Shifts.   Around  the  clock,  twenty- four  hours  a  day.   My  first 
shift  schedule  was  a  bad  one  because  I  was  on  what  they  call, 
relief  crew,  and  on  it  they  didn't  work  a  seven-day  rotation;  you 
worked  five  days,  and  then  you  had  two  days  off,  and  then  you 
worked  five  days.   So,  you  worked  five  graves,  and  then  you  had 
two  days  off;  but  those  two  days  you  were  off  on  graves,  the 
relief  crew  would  come  in  and  work  two  graves,  and  then  you'd 
come  back  in  and  you'd  work  another  five  days  of  graves,  and  then 
you  had  two  off,  and  then  you  worked  swings,  two  off,  swings,  two 
off  days,  two  off  days.   On  your  two  days  off,  that  relief  crew 
was  constantly  coming  in,  and  relieving  who  was  ever  off,  so  on 
the  relief  crew  you  might  work  two  graves,  a  day,  and  two  swings 
every  week. 

Swent:    So  graves  is  eleven  to  seven? 
Birdsey:   Eleven  to  seven. 


138 


Swent:  And  swing  is  three  to  eleven? 

Birdsey:  Three  to  eleven. 

Swent:  And  days  is  seven  to  three? 

Birdsey:  Seven  to  three. 

Swent:  So  you're  body  just  never  got  a  chance  to  get  used  to  anything. 

Birdsey:   That  shift  was  just  terrible.   Then  after  you  moved  up  another 
one,  then  you  got  on  a  crew  permanent,  so  you  got  permanent 
shifts. 

Swent:  That's  tough;  and  your  wife  was  getting  used  to  this  too. 

Birdsey:  Exactly.   She  was  having  some  trouble  adjusting  to  it. 

Swent:  Did  you  have  children? 

Birdsey:  No,  we  don't  have  any  children. 

Swent:  Because  sleep  schedules  get  a  little  complicated. 

Birdsey:   Yes  they  do,  yes  they  do.   It  always  brought  back  memories.   I 

remember  my  stepfather—he'd  work  shift  work.   When  we  were  kids 
he  used  to  yell  out  the  window,  "Would  you  please  shut  up?"  We 
thought,  "Why  he  is  always  upset?  He  sleeps  all  day,  I  don't 
know  what's  wrong  with  him."   It  kind  of  adds  a  new  meaning  when 
you  start  working  it.   That's  what's  neat  about  a  small  mining 
town:  after  a  while  you  learn.   You  hear  kids,  "Don't  go  down  to 
his  house,  he's  working  nights  tonight."  You  hear  your  mother 
saying,  "Don't  go  down  to  Scott's  house.   His  father's  working 
tonight."   It's  pretty  interesting  how  that  works  in  a  mining 
town. 

Swent:    Yes,  it  is.   People  help  each  other. 

Birdsey:   Exactly.   I  started  working  shift  work  and  I  learned  to  operate  a 
mill—the  rod  mills. 


Learning  to  Operate  a  Rod  Mill 


Swent:    What  did  that  involve?  More  than  just  turning  on  a  switch? 


139 


Birdsey:   More  than  turning  on  a  switch.   You  had  to  watch  that  rod  mill 
because  you  fed  off  of  a  belt  feeder  that  fed  into  the  mill. 
There  was  a  handle  you  just  go  up  and  you  crank;  it  was  a  clutch- 
fed,  and  you  cranked  this  baby,  and  you  run  it  up- -and  we  had 
numbers,  two,  four,  six,  the  last  goes  one,  two,  three,  four, 
five,  six— and  you  knew  that  if  you  put  in  about  two  and  a  half, 
it  would  give  you  six  tons.   Then  you  had  a  big  Foxboro  chart 
recorder.   That  would  tell  you  how  many  tons  you  were  running;  it 
came  off  a  weightometer  and  it  would  run  off  this  Foxboro  chart 
recorder,  and  you  could  tell  how  many  tons  you  were  running  by 
cranking  on  this  belt,  by  speeding  the  belt  or  slowing  it  down 
which  you  fed  into  your  rod  mill.   It  was  ground  up— 


Birdsey:   So  you  had  to  watch  this  rod  mill,  and  watch  the  discharge.   Here 
we  call  them  the  densities;  but  in  Creede  we  called  them 
gravities— and  you  had  to  take  your  gravities  and  find  out  how 
thick  the  stuff  was  coming  out  of  the  mill.   That's  how  you 
controlled  the  mill— by  adding  water,  and  taking  water  off  to  get 
your  grind,  what  they  called  the  grind  on  the  mill.   So  you'd 
have  to  take  the  density  off  the  front  of  this  mill  and  you  can 
tell  by  the  way  the  punch  plate  was  starting  to  load  up  with 
rocks  how  hard  the  ore  was  because  it  wasn't  being  ground  up,  and 
you'd  adjust  tonnage  to  compensate— to  keep  the  grind  up.   Then 
you  had  to  run  the  ball  mill— same  thing— watch  your  amperage  on 
the  ball  mill,  and  take  your  densities  and  your  gravities, and 
make  sure  the  grind  is  fine. 

Swent:    These  are  on  a  graph? 

Birdsey:   The  chart  recorder  for  the  tonnage  is  on  a  graph,  the  density  is 
taken  by  hand;  you  use  what  they  call  the  Marcy  scale— it's  a 
one-liter  cup  and  it  holds  one  liter,  then  you  take  the  sample 
slurry  and  you  hang  it  up  on  the  scale,  and  it  feeds  out  the 
sides  of  the  Marcy  cup  to  give  you  one  liter,  and  it  tells  you 
what  your  percent  solids  are.   How  much  solids  you  have  to  water. 
That's  how  you  control  the  mill.   They'd  say,  We'd  like- -on  the 
rod  mill  I  believe  it  was  a  60  to  70  percent  slurry  coming  out. 
Then  the  ball  mill  I  think  was  40  or  50.   Then  you'd  bring  it 
down  to  a  28  to  30  percent  density  to  feed  the  float  cells. 

Swent:    How  often  did  you  have  to  do  these  readings? 

Birdsey:   Every  hour  we  had  to  do  a  reading;  basically  just  watching  the 
mill.   You  know,  you  get  those  old-timers  like  my  partner,  John 
Wagner,  was  a  great  mill  hand.   He'd  been  doing  this  stuff  for 
years,  and  years,  and  years,  and  I  think  he  could  actually  smell 
when  things  were  going  wrong. 


140 


Swent:    He  probably  just  knew  by  intuition. 

Birdsey:   I  remember  he  used  to  really  go  out  of  his  way  to  help  me  out. 
I'd  be  asking  questions  and  he'd  stay  over  and  go  over  things 
with  me;  a  very  good  teacher  and  a  very  good  gentleman.   I 
remember  one  day  though  he  got  really  upset  at  me:  the 
maintenance  crew  had  just  relined  the  rod  mill.   That  is  putting 
new  liners  aside,  and  they  have  lifters,  and  I'm  not  sure  if 
you're  familiar  with  the  mill,  but  they  have  a  lifter  in  there, 
and  you  got  a  liner  that  protects  the  shell,  and  then  you  got 
pieces  of  metal  and  there  are  different  styles  and  different 
shapes  that  stick  out,  and  what  they  do  is  they  pick  up  the  rod 
and  let  it  drop  so  it  just  doesn't  roll  around  inside  the  mill; 
it's  picked  up  and  dropped.   So  they  got  a  lifter  and  a  liner— 

Swent:    What  is  the  lining?  Metal? 

Birdsey:   Metal;  solid  steel.   They're  made  out  of  different  things,  and  a 
lifter  is  steel.   Well,  we  had  just  relined  it  and  Toughy 
Lambert --the  guy  when  I  was  a  kid  who  I  now  worked  with  who  was 
one  of  the  operators  up  there—was  on  vacation,  so  they  asked  me 
to  operate  the  mill  in  his  place  and  they  had  just  relined  the 
mill.   So  we  started  it  up,  and  everything  was  going  fine,  and 
we're  running  some  pretty  good  tonnage  right  off  the  bat,  and 
pretty  soon  I'm  starting  to  get  some  rocks  out  on  the  punch 
plate,  and  stuff  just  isn't  grinding  good.   So  I  thought,  "This 
stuff  is  really  hard,"  so  I  go  ahead  and  back  down  on  tonnage  and 
it  works  okay  for  awhile,  but  pretty  soon  it  starts  not  working; 
I'm  starting  to  get  more  rocks  out  on  the  punch  plate,  and  I  see 
how  my  grind  is.   So  anyway,  I'm  down  to  probably  a  ton  an  hour 
by  the  time  the  morning  gets  there—this  mill  is  not  grinding. 

Old  John  Wagner  comes  in—he's  my  relief— and  says,  "How's 
it  going,  Norm?" 

I  said,  "Not  bad,  John.  The  ore's  really  hard." 

He  says,  "The  ore  is  really  hard,  huh?" 

I  said,  "Yes,  it's  not  grinding." 

He  says,  "It's  not  grinding  at  all,  is  it?" 

"No,  it's  not." 

He  says,  "Go  shut  your  mill  down." 

I  said,  "Why?" 


141 


He  said,  "Go  shut  your  mill  down." 
the  rod  mill  down. 


So  I  went  down  and  shut 


Swent : 
Birdsey ; 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 

Swent : 
Birdsey: 


He  handed  me  a  flashlight  and  he  said,  "You  look  in  there, 
and  you  tell  me  why  it's  not  grinding."  All  of  the  lifters  — 
where  there  were  the  two  pieces  of  metal  coming  out—this  would 
be  a  lifter  here—this  is  your  mill—that's  the  shell,  then  you 
have  the  liner,  and  you  have  the  lifter,  then  a  liner,  then  the 
lifter,  then  it's  like  that  all  the  way  around  the  mill.  What 
happened  was— 

They're  like  cogs? 

Right,  but  only  they're  long.  What  that  does  when  this  thing 
rolls:  it  picks  the  rods  up  and  drops  them.   Since  they're  new, 
these  are  nice  and  tight— they 're  big  enough  that  three  rods 
would  hang  up  in  there.   So  all  my  grinding  medium  is  hung  up 


There's  a  few 


inside;  so  there  was  nothing  in  there  to  grind, 
rods  left,  but  most  of  them  are  hung  up— 

--between  the  lifters. 


--between  the  lifters.   He  told  me  about  that  just  the  day 
before:  he  says,  "You're  coming  in;  remember  those  lifters  are 
going  to  be  new,  it's  possible  that  your  rods  are  going  to  hang 
up  and  you're  going  to  need  to  run  the  mill  dry  for  a  while  and 
knock  those  rods  back  out."  I  forgot  all  about  it,  so  he  let  me 
know— taught  me  a  few  words  — told  me  how  stupid  I  was.   And  I 
felt  stupid.   But  again  I  learned  something. 

And  you  won't  forget  it. 

Right.  [laughter]  Seems  like  when  you  really  get  embarrassed, 
that's  the  best  lesson.  So  that's  what  happened,  and  he  picked 
that  up  as  soon  as  he  walked  in,  and  he  knew. 

He  probably  could  tell  from  the  sound. 

Exactly.   So  I  learned  something  in  that.   I  always  remembered 
that;  he  was  a  little  hot.   He  taught  me  about  flotation,  and  he 
told  me  what  to  look  for,  and  he  was  a  really  good  float 
operator.   When  to  add  chemicals,  when  not  to  add  chemicals. 

I  remember  another  time  I  was  working  with  John  Wagner.   I 
just  got  in  the  mill  as  a  helper  and  part  of  our  job  was  to  clean 
the  change  room- -the  dry- -on  swings.   We  had  to  mop  it,  and  clean 
the  sinks  and  stuff  out.  We  used  Pine-Sol  to  disinfect  with. 
Well,  not  being  familiar  with  the  float  circuit,  I  took  that 
Pine-Sol,  after  I  got  through,  I  went  out  and  dumped  it  in  the 


142 


Swent : 
Birdsey; 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


floor  trough  in  the  mill  building.   The  floor  trough  went  to  a 
pump,  and  that  was  our  recovery  water- -our  mill  water—which 
pumped  back  in  behind  the  rod  mill. 

So  you  were  getting  more  Pine-Sol— 

So  I  got  Pine-Sol  into  that  float  circuit,  and  I  just  tell  you  it 
was  everywhere.   There  were  bubbles  coming  out--I  had  the  whole 
place  full  of  bubbles.   [laughter]  Wagner—he's  running  around; 
he  doesn't  know  what  happened.   He's  trying  to  figure  out  what 
the  heck  is  going  on  with  this  float  cell.   There  are  bubbles 
everywhere.   So  again  I  learned  a  lesson.   He  was  a  little  miffed 
on  that  one  too.   [laughter]   He  took  very  good  pride  in  his 
circuit;  he  loved  his  circuit. 

So  I  worked  there  as  a  float  operator,  and— 
Again:  were  there  any  physical  dangers  to  you? 

I  don't  think  there  were  any  physical  dangers.   The  one  danger  I 
didn't  like  was—you  had  to  be  careful  when  you  had  to  move  the 
rods.   These  rods  were  ten  feet  long,  probably  four  inches  in 
diameter;  solid  steel  rods.   We'd  have  to  move  those  and  load 
those  in  the  mill,  and  you  had  to  watch  out  for  your  fingers— 
they'd  shift  and  stuff --and  we  had  to  use  a  crane  to  pick  them  up 
from  one  side  of  the  building  and  bring  them  all  the  way  across 
the  building.   You  had  to  watch  your  fingers  because  you  could 
smash  them  and  stuff.   Then  your  normal  moving  equipment  and 
belts  and  stuff. 

From  the  chemicals? 

Chemicals?  We  never  really  used  anything  up  there.   The  only 
time  I  ever  really  had  a  problem  was:  we  had  our  soda-ash  tank. 
We  used  that  for  our  buffering  agent,  and  it  would  scale  up,  and 
I  was  working  in  my  rubber  boots;  I  slipped  on  the  bottom  of  the 
tank  for  de-scaling  and  I  fell  down  and  scraped  my  arms  on  the 
side  of  the  crystals  that  would  build  up  on  the  side  of  the  tank. 
Soda-ash  is  a  high  alkaline,  and  I  didn't  wash  them  off  or 
anything,  and  about  three  hours  later,  I  had  some  pretty  nasty 
burns  on  my  arms  where  I  scraped  them.   But  that's  the  only  thing 
that  ever  happened.   The  other  chemicals  and  stuff  were  pretty 
basic;  pretty  easy  and  pretty  safe.   Over  on  the  CIP  [carbon  in 
pulp]  side,  of  course,  you  had  cyanide. 

You  had  cyanide  there? 


We  had  cyanide  there.   I  worked  in  the  CIP  area  as  a  relief 
operator,  but  I  never  had  to  operate  it  for  any  given  time. 


So 


143 


they  told  us  about  cyanide  over  there  and  the  pH. 
the  only  thing  dangerous  over  there. 


So  that  was 


A  Hateful  Earlier  Job  Dredging  Tailings 


Birdsey:   Then  one  summer—it  had  to  be  the  first  summer  I  was  there—they 
moved  me  over  on  the  dredge.   In  the  summer,  we  had  a  new  tails 
dam—when  the  plant  was  first  open  in  "66,  and  we  were  re- 
dredging  that,  and  sending  that  over  to  the  CIP  side  because  it 
had  a  lot  of  silver  in  it  and  they  were  using  the  cyanide  to 
leach  it,  and  strip  it,  and  pour  silver  bars.   So  they  put  me  on 
the  dredge  to  run  the  tails  over  to  the  plant.   And  the  way  the 
dredge  worked— it  was  just  a  huge  boat;  we  had  the  dredge  arm 
that  came  out,  and  it  had  these  rakes  on  the  front  that  would 
scrape,  and  we'd  drive  it  to  the  slime  layer  of  the  fines  of 
these  tailings— 

Swent:    Was  it  floating? 

Birdsey:   It  was  floating,  yes.  We  used  the  cables  off  each  corner  of  the 
dredge  and  tied  them  to  separate  ends  of  the  ponds  by  heaving 
around  or  pulling  on— like  if  you  wanted  to  go  forward,  you'd 
slack  off  the  cables  in  the  back  and  pull  around  the  ones  in  the 
forward,  or  move  the  ones  on  the  sides  back  and  forth.   You 
didn't  have  to  move  very  far  because  you  had  the  whole  dredge  and 
the  whole  slime  layer  out  there  in  front  or  you.   We  ran  off  the 
pressure;  and  I  think  we  kept  it  around  ten  or  fifteen  pounds, 
and  you  just  take  it,  and  put  the  dredge  edge  down  and  jam  in  the 
slime  layer,  and  keep  it  up  to  about  fifteen  pounds  of  suction, 
and  those  rakes  rake  that  stuff  up,  and  you  pump  it  up  over  the 
hill  to  the  storage  tank;  the  big  surge  tank,  and  then  during  the 
midday  we'd  fill  that  up,  and  then  at  night,  they'd  suck  out  of 
that  surge  tank  to  a  thickener  where  they  thickened  the  slimes 
and  pump  that  into  their  CIP  tanks,  and  cyanide  it  to  dissolve 
the  silver,  and  put  it  on  carbon.   So  my  first  summer  there, 
that's  what  I  did;  it  was  only  a  summer  job  because  the  tails  dam 
froze  over  the  winter.   First,  it  was  a  very  fun  job,  and  then  I 
hated  it  after  a  while  because  all  you  had  to  do  is  sit  there  and 
run  this  thing  every  day. 

I  used  to  really,  really  hate  it  because  you  got  some 
operators  that  like  to  run  tonnage,  and  you  couldn't  go  home 
because  you  had  the  surge  tank  full  enough  to  make  it  through  the 
night,  and  so  those  operator  would  actually  run  that  tonnage 
faster— out-running  you  during  the  day,  so  you'd  be  sitting  out 
there  for  three  hours  dredging,  and  not  gain  anything  on  the  tank 


144 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 
Swent : 
Birdsey: 

Swent : 
Birdsey: 


because  they're  out  running  you  in  the  mill  building.   There  are 
a  few  little  tricks  you  could  do  which  I  was  taught  by  some  of 
the  operators.   What  you  could  do,  is  you  could  hit  a  sand  layer 
--you  didn't  want  to  get  the  sand  because  there  wasn't  any  value 
in  the  sands,  there  was  just  the  waste,  but  the  slime  layers  were 
where  the  silver  was  still.   What  you  do  is  you  just  go  up  there 
and  hit  some  of  that  sand  layer,  and  when  that  sand  went  down  and 
hit  their  thickener,  it  would  just  torque  up  in  a  heartbeat,  so 
they'd  start  slowing  the  tonnage  down  to-- 


They  would  torque  up  in  a  what? 
In  a  heartbeat;  just  real  fast. 


Oh ,  okay . 

They  would  start  getting  torqued  because  that  sand's  heavy,  so 
they'd  start  slowing  the  tonnage  down  to  keep  the  torque  under 
control,  which  allowed  you  time  to  start-- 

--to  get  a  little  rest. 

Which,  I'm  sure,  if  the  company- -they  would  frown  on  that  if  they 
ever  saw  me  do  it.   But  you  can't  stay  there  forever.   That  was 
one  of  the  tricks  you  could  do.   Sometimes  they'd  get  on  you, 
because  I'm  sure  the  company  knew.   There  was  a  couple  times 
where  you  knew  if  you  tried  that  you  might  go  a  little  far  and 
give  them  too  much  sand,  and  then  they're  f ighting--they ' re  not 
getting  any  tonnage  because  they're  getting  all  this  sand,  and 
then  they  would  be  on  you;  you  have  got  to  quit  all  this  sand. 
But  I  hated  that  job  because  it  was  just  in  the  hot  sun,  and  you 
are  out  there  running  this  equipment,  and  nothing  is  happening. 
It  was  very  boring. 


Helping  the  Refiner  Pull  Zadra  Cells 


Birdsey:   So  I  was  glad  when  the  summer  was  over,  and  they  put  me  back  in 
the  mill  building,  and  I  helped  the  refiner,  Charlie  Rivera.   He 
was  the  refiner  when  I  was  there,  and  I  helped  him  pull  Zadra 
cells—that's  the  round  cells  they  use  for  elect rowinning- -wrap 
steel  wool  around  it,  and  they  set  inside  this  plastic 
polyethylene  tank  and  put  a  charge  on  it;  it's  like  a  big  battery 
table.   You  hook  it  to  the  Zadra  cells,  and  they  plate  the  silver 
up  on  the  steel  wool,  and  then  you  flux  off  the  steel  wool.   So, 
I  helped  him  get  in  there,  and  clean  up  the  Zadra  cells,  and  I 
really  enjoyed  that.   I  started  getting  interested  in  the 


145 


refinery.   But  unfortunately,  it  was  just  a  one-man  job;  they 
just  had  me  there  to  help  him  because  he  had  a  bunch  of  cells  to 
pull  one  day.   So  I  worked  on  and  off;  whenever  he  needed  help, 
and  then  I  had  to  go  back  and  be  a  mill  helper  or  a  crusher 
helper- -whatever  they  wanted.   Then  they  put  me  on  crew 
permanently  as  a  helper.   I  worked  there  like  that  for,  I  guess, 
going  on  almost  three  years.   Then,  when  I  went  to  work  for 
Homestake,  silver  was  forty-nine  dollars  an  ounce,  and  when  they 
laid  me  off,  it  was  down  to  four  dollars  and  something. 


Silver  Price  Drops  and  the  Mine  Closes  Down 


Swent:    So  you  could  see  the  handwriting  on  the  wall? 

Birdsey:   Right.   They  always  said  we  needed  nine  dollars  an  ounce  to  make 
a  profit  to  pay  for  the  underground  mine  and  all  that.   When  it 
was  down  to  four  and  five—but  actually  I  thought  it  dropped  all 
the  way  down  to  like  three,  and  they  didn't  lay  nobody  off.   I 
believe  they  asked  us  to  take  a  pay  cut,  and  there  was  a  few 
little  layoffs,  but  nothing  really  serious.   Then  silver  started 
coming  back  up,  so  I  thought  we  had  made  it  through  the  hard 
time;  silver  was  coming  back  up.   So  I  was  kind  of  surprised  when 
we  got  laid  off. 

Swent:    When  was  that? 

Birdsey:   That  was  in  1981;  it  was  August  of  '81. 

Swent:    How  did  you  get  the  word? 

Birdsey:   By  accident,  actually.   John  Penzine,  my  mill  superintendent,  who 
is  now  dead,  from  Lead,  South  Dakota— 

Swent:    That's  a  good  old  Cornish  name,  there. 

Birdsey:   He  was  excellent  as  the  mill  superintendent;  that  guy  taught  me  a 
lot.   Anyway,  I  called  up  to  talk  to  Doug  Hatton;  and  Doug 
Hatton,  he  never  missed  a  day  of  work—never  late,  never  missed  a 
day  of  work.   We  were  going  to  go  up  and  do  some  salmon  fishing 
and  try  to  catch  some  salmon—lake  salmon— called  Blue  Mesa 
reservoir.   So  I  called  him  up  to  ask  him  what  time  he  wanted  to 
leave,  and  he  was  working  day  shift,  and  he  was  getting  off,  and 
I  was  on  my  four  days  off,  and  he  was  going  to  take  vacation— but 
anyway,  we  were  going  to  get  together,  so  I  called  him  up  to  ask 
him  what  time  he  wanted  to  go.   I  called  the  dog  house,  the 
control  room— we  called  it  dog  house— and  the  mill  superintendent 


146 


answered  the  phone,  which  was  really  kind  of  strange,  but  in  the 
background  I  could  hear  the  Galigher  tails  pumps  running.   When 
you  hear  the  tails  pumps  running,  the  means  the  mill  is  down, 
because  if  the  mill  was  running,  you  couldn't  hear  those  pumps, 
but  when  the  mill  is  down,  you  could  hear  those  pumps.   We  had 
been  having  troubles  with  our  shaft  to  the  ball  mill—it  kept 
snapping—so  I  thought  the  mill  was  probably  down  because  we  lost 
the  shaft  again.   So  I  asked  John,  I  said,  "John,  is  Hatton 
there?"  And  he  said,  "No,  he's  not."  And  I  thought  that  was  a 
little  strange,  because  Doug  never  missed  a  day,  and  I  said,  "Is 
he  sick?"  And  John's  exact  words  to  me  were:  "Norm,  aw  hell, 
when  do  you  come  in?"  And  I  said,  "I'm  supposed  to  come  in  on 
swings."  He  said,  "Don't  come  in."   I  said,  "Don't  come  in?"  He 
said,  "No,  we've  closed  the  mill  down."  And  I  said,  "You've 
closed  the  mill  down?"  He  said,  "Yes."   I  said,  "Okay."   I  was 
just  in  shock.   Everybody  in  town— Homestake  had  been  going  since 
1966  now  it's  1981  — 

Swent:    No  warning  at  all? 

Birdsey:   Not  really;  not  for  me  anyway.   It  was  like,  whoa!   This  is 

different.   So,  I  told  my  wife;  she  was  a  little  emotional,  and  I 
went  and  called  my  father,  and  he  was  just  in  shock— the  plant 
has  been  there  twenty  years,  and  it's  like  somebody  saying,  "Hey, 
the  Empire  State  Building  is  gone  now."  So,  I  was  sitting  around 
the  house,  wondering  what  I  was  going  to  do,  and  the  phone  rang— 
it  was  John,  and  he  said,  "I  need  you  to  come  up  here  to  work." 
I  thought,  "Great,  maybe  I  kept  my  job."  But  all  they  wanted  me 
to  do  was  clean  my  locker  out.   So  I  got  up  there,  and  that's  how 
we  all  got  laid  off:  Doug  Hatton,  and  I,  and  Gary  [Lappin]  went 
downtown  and  went  to  my  house.   By  this  time  I  had  purchased  a 
house;  about  eight  months  before  this.   We  went  to  my  house,  and 
proceeded  to  have  a  party,  and  get  a  little  drunk.   Then  they 
ended  up  shutting  down  and  laying  everybody  with  ten  years  and 
below  off;  which  was  pretty  fair. 

Swent:    Did  you  get  some  sort  of  severance  pay? 

Birdsey:   Yes.   What  I  got  for  severance  at  that  time  was  two  weeks  pay; 

that  was  it.   Just  plain  two  weeks  pay.   They  gave  us  letters  of 
recommendation  if  we  wanted.   I  talked  to  John-- John  Penzine  at 
the  time- -he  didn't  know  if  anything  was  going  on.   I  do  have  to 
back  up  here:  during  this  time  frame— this  is  very  important—Joe 
Young  became  the  mill  superintendent  in  Creede  before  these  lay 
offs  happened.   My  wife's  mother  came  down  with  cancer,  so  my 
wife  kind  of  wanted  to  get  back  out  here  to  be  with  her  mother. 
So  I  knew  Joe  Young  was  working  on  this  project. 


147 


Asking  Joe  Young  for  a  Job  at  Mclaughlin 


Swent:    He  had  come  out  here? 

Birdsey:   He  was  scheduled  to  come  out  here  as  the  mill  manager--!  guess 
that's  what  his  title  was  here  on  this  project.   He  was  leaving 
Creede  to  come  out  here,  so  I  stopped  him  and  I  said,  "Joe,  how 
about  letting  me  go  out  there?"  He  said,  "Well,  when  we  build 
the  place,  or  whatever,  then  we'll  talk.   There's  not  much  going 
on  right  now."   I  said,  "Okay."  So  he  left,  and  then  in  about 
eight  or  nine  months,  the  plant  closed  down.   I  didn't  know  what 
I  was  going  to  do.   Gary  went  and  got  a  carpenter  job,  and  I  went 
back  to  work  at  Kentucky  Belle  cutting  meat,  and  I  was  on 
unemployment  and  things  were  kind  of  tough. 

Swent:    Your  wife  wasn't  working? 

Birdsey:   My  wife  wasn't  working  at  the  time.   She  was  a  dental  assistant, 
but  in  Creede  there  wasn't  any.   So  I  called  up  my  old  boss,  Ron, 
who  I  worked  for  when  I  was  in  high  school,  and  worked  out  a  deal 
with  him  that  I  would  work  part-time,  and  he  would  pay  me  food; 
so  that  would  help  with  the  income  and  stuff.   We  did  that,  and 
he  said,  "It's  just  going  to  be  for  the  summer  because  when 
winter  comes,  Norm—you  know  how  slow  it  gets  around  here--I 
won't  be  needing  you."   I  said,  "Okay." 

Swent:    This  is  still  in  Creede? 

Birdsey:   Still  in  Creede.   I  didn't  know  what  I  was  going  to  do.   My 

wife's  mother  was  getting  worse  and  worse;  she  needed  to  go  out 
there.   So  we  scraped  a  bunch  of  money  together—the  rest  of  our 
savings--!  bought  her  an  airplane  ticket,  and  flew  her  out  to 
California  so  she  could  at  least  see  her  mother.   I  was  sitting 
home  alone,  and  I  don't  know  what  to  do,  and  I  don't  have  a  job, 
and  Ron's  telling  me—this  is  December  of  '81.  What  do  I  do?   I 
go  down  and  I  join  the  navy  again. 


Another  Hitch  in  the  Navy 


Swent:    Good  old  Uncle  Sam. 

Birdsey:   Good  old  Uncle  Sam.   So  I  went  back  in  the  navy— this  is  a  bad 

time.   My  wife— she  really  wasn't  too  happy  about  me  doing  it. 

didn't  really  talk  to  her  about  it  because  she  was  already  out 
here.   Anyway,  I  joined  the  navy  and  we  ended  up  getting 


148 


stationed  in  Virginia,  and  I  got  put  on  an  aircraft  carrier:  the 
U.S.S.  America.   I  was  going  to  make  a  career  out  of  the  navy;  I 
didn't  mind  the  navy.  When  I  got  on  the  aircraft  carrier,  I  was 
never  home.   I  think  the  two  years  I  was  in  the  navy,  I  was  home 
three  months .   So  I  did  another  two  years  in  the  navy  on  an 
aircraft  carrier,  and  I  called  Joe  Young  when  I  was  in  Virginia. 
I  said,  "Joe,  remember  me?  My  name  is  Norm,  and  I  worked  for 
you?" 

He  said,  "Yes." 

I  said,  "You  told  me  once  that  you  couldn't  do  nothing 
because  the  mine  was  just  being  built;  it's  two  years  now,  I'm 
calling  and  I  want  to  know  if  you  would  hire  me?" 

He  said,  "Come  on  out  here." 

I  said,  "I  have  a  chance  of  getting  a  job  in  Virginia  here; 
I  need  to  know  do  I  have  a  job?" 

He  said,  "Come  on  out." 

I  said,  "But  do  I  have  a  job?" 

He  said,  "Come  on  out."  He  wouldn't  give  me  an  answer. 

I  talked  to  my  wife,  and  I  said,  "Listen,  he  says  I  got  to 
come  out  there." 

She  said,  "Do  you  think  you'll  get  a  job?" 

I  said,  "I  don't  know  why  he  wouldn't  hire  me.   I  never  did 
anything  that  he  would  be  upset  about,  and  I  always  tried  to  be  a 
good  employee.   Let's  give  it  a  chance.   I  have  a  job  here  in  the 
shipyards,  but  I'd  rather  not  work  in  the  shipyards;  I'd  rather 
get  back  into  mining.   We  would  be  with  your  mother." 

She  said,  "Okay,  let's  do  it."   So  we  packed  up  and  sent 
everything  out  here,  and  I  arrived,  and  stayed  with  my  friend 
Gary  who  works  up  here,  because  he  had  already  gone  back  to  work 
in  Creede--they  had  a  rehiring  for  something,  I  can't  remember 
what  it  was.   He  worked  there  for  awhile,  then  he  transferred  out 
there.   So  I  stayed  with  him,  and  I  came  up,  and  said,  "Joe,  I'm 
here . " 

Joe  said,  "Sign  this."  He  had  everything  ready. 

I  asked  him,  "Why  didn't  you  just  tell  me  you  were  going  to 
hire  me?" 


149 


He  said,  "You  can't  believe  how  many  people  say  they  want  a 
job,  and  then  I  reserve  it  for  them,  and  they  never  show  up.   So 
I  had  to  make  sure  you  were  serious  about  coming  out.   You  moved 
out  here,  you're  here,  fine."   So  he  hired  me,  and  that's  how  1 
started  out  here:  Joe  Young. 


150 


IV  THE  MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  SINCE  1984 


Joe  Young  Comes  Through  After  All 


Swent : 
Birdsey : 

Swent : 
Birdsey: 

Swent : 


Birdsey: 
Swent : 
Birdsey: 


This  is  in  '83? 

This  was  in  '84.   Actually,  I  went  into  the  navy  in  January  of 
'82,  and  I  got  out  in  December  of  '84.   Two  years  in  the  navy. 

So  this  is  winter  of-- 

This  is  winter  of  '84.   I  was  out  here  in  California  December  28 
of  '84.   I  started  working  for  McLaughlin  January  8  of  '85. 

That's  a  good  place  for  us  to  take  a  little  break.   [tape 
interruption] 


So,  here  you  are 


We're  starting  after  just  a  little  break, 
in  January  '85.   You're  living  in  Lower  Lake? 

I'm  living  up  on  Cobb  [Mountain]. 
Where  you  still  are? 


Where  I  still  am.   Gary,  my  friend  who  works  out  here- -he  and  his 
wife  had  rented  a  four-bedroom  home.   That's  all  they  could  find 
when  they  moved  out  here.   So,  as  you  could  imagine,  rent  was 
kind  of  high,  and  money  was  kind  of  tight  because  prices  around 
here  were  kind  of  high,  so  we  decided  that  we  would  share  the 
rent  on  this  four-bedroom  home.   My  wife  and  I  had  one  bedroom, 
and  Gary  and  his  wife  had  one  bedroom,  and  their  two  kids  had  a 
bedroom.   We  lived  together  until  we  could  get  set  up  to  buy  a 
house. 


Swent:    And  your  mother-in-law  was  still  in  Oroville? 


151 


Birdsey:   She  had  passed  away  when  I  was  in  the  navy.   My  wife's  father  and 
all  of  her  family  is  in  Oroville  and  the  Bay  Area. 

Swent :    That's  not  too  far. 

Birdsey:   That's  not  too  far.   So  it's  a  good  place  for  my  wife,  and  I  like 
Cobb.   It  reminded  me  of  Creede:  pine  trees  and  everything. 

Swent:     Quite  a  drive  though. 
Birdsey:   Yes  it  is;  but  it's  worth  it. 
Swent:    How  far  is  it? 

Birdsey:   It's  seventeen  miles  to  Lower  Lake;  and  seventeen  miles  up  here. 
So,  thirty-four  miles  one  way. 

Swent:     That's  not  bad. 

. 

Birdsey:   It's  not  bad;  people  do  that  a  lot.   So  we  were  living  up  there 
at  Cobb,  and  I  hadn't  been  out  to  the  plant  yet. 

Swent:  Where  did  you  get  the  job? 

Birdsey:  I'd  been  up  here,  but  I  hadn't  been  out  in  the  plant  yet. 

Swent:  You  were  hired  on-- 

Birdsey:  Hired  on;  and  then  I  had  to  get  my  physical  and  all  that  stuff. 

Swent:  What  sort  of  pay  did  you  get  then? 

Birdsey:   I'm  trying  to  think.   I  think  when  I  started  on,  I  was  making  ten 
dollars  an  hour  here.  Which  I  thought  was  great;  this  is  good, 
good  pay. 

Swent:    And  benefits? 

Birdsey:   And  benefits.   I  was  hourly,  and  I  had  my  medical  and  glasses  and 
stuff  like  that.   A  couple  things  Gary  told  me;  he  said,  "Norm, 
you  can't  believe—this  place  is  big.   It's  really  big." 

And  I  go,  "How  many  tons?" 

He  said,  "We  run  three  thousand  tons  a  day." 

I  said,  "Gee,  really?"  You  know,  we  were  talking  350  tons 
[in  Creede],  and  three  thousand--.   I  said,  "Man!" 


152 


Swent : 
Birdsey ; 

Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Gary  said,  "Yes,  you  can't  believe  the  size  of  some  of  these 
pipes." 

Anyway,  even  though  I  had  mining  experience,  and  they  hired 
me  as  an  experienced  operator,  I  had  no  idea.   [laughter]   I  knew 
a  little  bit  about  flotation,  and  I  knew  about  a  little  rod  mill, 
a  little  ball  mill,  but  I  had  no  idea.   We  took  a  walk  around  the 
plant  up  here  at  this  end,  and  the  autoclave  building  wasn't  even 
there  yet.   The  framework  was  going  up,  but  the  autoclaves 
weren't  inside.   People  were  working—they  had  one  thickener; 
they  had  water  in  it,  and  they  were  using  it  for  water  treatment. 
The  other  thickener  was  built,  but  none  of  the  pipes  were  hooked 
up  yet;  the  preciptitation]  thickener  wasn't  hooked  up  yet. 

Was  it  already  in  operation? 

No,  this  is  during  construction.   We  haven' t  — they ' re  still 
building  stuff  here.   We  waited  for  some  more  people  to  come  in, 
and  then  they  started  the  training  classes. 

Of  course,  Joe  Young  knew  how  much  you  knew. 
Right . 


Like  Going  From  a  Glider  to  a  747 


Swent:    He  was  aware  of  what  you— 

Birdsey:   He  was  aware  of  everything  I  had  done.   That's  what  they  kind  of 
needed:  just  an  idea  of  basics.   It's  kind  of  like  somebody--! 
would  use  the  analogy  of  somebody  flying  a  glider  airplane  and 
then  all  of  a  sudden  being  put  in  the  seat  of  a  747.   It's 
humongous;  it's  unbelievable  for  me.   They  sent  us  to  class  and— 

Swent:    Where  were  the  classes? 

Birdsey:   Classes  were  held  down  in  the  core  shed  in  a  trailer.   This  is 

the  first  time  I  met  John  Turney.   The  guy  impressed  me  right  off 
the  bat.   Without  sounding  corny,  he  was  just  like  a  wondrous 
pool  of  information;  great  personality--!  was  just  drawn  to  him 
right  off  the  bat.   I  didn't  really  know  who  he  was;  he  was  this 
guy  giving  this  class.   He  explained  things  where  I  could 
understand  him.   So  we're  in  this  class  and  we're  starting  to 
talk  about  P-and-I-D's.   What  is  a  P-and-I-D? 

Swent:    How  many  people  were  in  the  class? 


153 


Birdsey:   I  think  there  was  probably  about  fifteen  or  sixteen.   We  were 
starting  with  an  operating  crew;  the  start-up  crews. 

Swent:    What  is  a  P-and-I-D? 

Birdsey:   Piping  and  instrumentation  diagram.   You  got  a  picture  that  tells 
you  where  all  the  pipes  are  going  and  coming  from.   So  we  would 
go  to  class,  and  we'd  go  through  the  P-and-I-D1  s.   We'd  take  a 
circuit,  and  we'd  look  at  it.   They  hired—the  guy's  name  is 
Johnny  Grider,  Performance  Associates  —  is  who  they  hired  to  teach 
the  class  and  make  all  the  training.   They  made  training  manuals 
for  each  of  the  circuits.   They  told  us  what  the  circuit  was  for, 
how  it  operated,  and— 


Birdsey:   --so  we'd  take  each  area  and  we'd  go  over  it,  and  during  this 
time  we  had  people  from  all  different  areas,  and  we  had  people 
that  worked  in  copper  mills  and  mines,  and  we  had  people  that 
worked  in  uranium  mines,  and  we  had  people  in  mills,  and  these 
people  were  starting  to  talk  about  things  that  I  was—  from  that 
little  mill  in  Creede—  that  I  never  had  experience  with.   So  I 
started  meeting  all  these  people—  interesting,  interesting.   I'm 
learning  things  from  them  as  they  were  talking:  "Really?"   I 
learned  there's  actually  a  whole  new  world  of  milling  out  there. 
Actually,  I  thought  Creede  was  state-of-the-art.   That  was  twenty 
years  old.   We're  doing  all  this  stuff.   I  remember  one  thing 
that  really  just  amazed  me,  totally  amazed  me:  a  rake-lift 
mechanism.   It  lifts  the  rakes  in  the  thickener  when  the  torque 
gets  too  high.   I  was  just  amazed  that  they  could  do  that.   Back 
in  Creede  we  had  a  big  wheel  that  we  had  to  turn  to  raise  the 
rake,  and  here  it  did  it  by  itself.   It  knew  when  it  had  too  much 
torque,  and  it  raised  by  itself.   I  was  just  amazed,  and  John 
Turney  is  the  one  that  got  me  really  interested  in  this  because 
he  started  explaining  to  me  what  a  control  loop  was  and  he  used 
two  things:  rake  mechanism  secondly;  but  first  he  used  a  simple 
water  tank  and  a  guy  using  a  valve  and  he  says,  "This  is  a 
control  loop." 


John  Turney.  Expert  Teacher 


Birdsey:   He  used  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Randall  Rumery.   He  says,  "I  tell 

Randall  Rumery  I  want  this  tank  kept  at  fifty  percent  level."   So 
Randall  goes  up  there  and  he  sees  the  tank  level  is  dropping;  he 
opens  up  this  water  valve,  and  fills  the  tank  back  up  until  it 
gets  half  full,  and  then  he  shuts  the  water  valve  off,  and  he'll 


154 


watch  that  tank  until  the  level  starts  going  down,  and  then  he 
opens  up  the  water  valve  and  he  fills  the  tank  up.   He  says, 
"Now,  that's  the  control  loop.   But  now,  instead  of  Randall  doing 
that,  the  instruments  are  going  to  do  that.   We  have  a  sonic 
level  indicator  here  that's  going  to  watch  the  tank  for  us  in 
place  of  Randall.  We're  going  to  have  a  valve  here,  and  as  that 
tank  level  drops,  it's  going  to  open  up  this  water  valve  because 
the  sonic  level  indicator's  telling  it  to,  and  we're  going  to 
fill  the  tank  up.   That  is  a  control  loop."   It  hit  me,  because 
we're  told  that  these  control  loops  are  one  thing,  and  we  go, 
"Oh,  my  goodness,  I'm  not  an  instrument  guy,  I  don't  know  how  to 
read  these  things."  But  John  Turney,  with  that  simple 
explanation  broke  it  for  me  to  run. 

Swent :    So  you  weren't  afraid  of  it? 

Birdsey:   Right.   It's  like,  wow,  I  understand  that.   Then  the  next  thing 
he  did  was  the  thickener,  because  I  was  really  impressed  about 
these  thickener  rakes  raising  by  themselves.   I  wanted  to  know: 
how  did  they  do  that?  He  says,  "Let's  look  at  the  control  loop." 
Then  he  showed  me  how  to  read  the  control  loop,  and  it  clicked. 
John  had  that  way  with  people.   It  didn't  not  only  for  me  click, 
but  it  did  for  the  whole  class.   "Wow,  I  think  I  understand 
this." 

Swent:    You  say  you  read  it.   Is  it  a  printout  of  some  kind? 
Birdsey:   Yes,  it's  a  printout.   I'll  show  you  here. 
Swent:    These  I  haven't  seen. 

Birdsey:   These  are  the  training  books.   This  right  here  is  the  P-and-I- 
D's.   It  shows  you  where  the  flows  are;  where  they  go.   I  think 
the  control  loops  are  right  here. 

Swent:    There,  I  see. 

Birdsey:   What  this  is  telling  you  right  here  is--you  got  a  level 

indicator,  a  level  transmitter,  and  a  level  recorder.   That's 
setting  a  signal  down  to  your  OIU;  which  you're  reading  all  this 
stuff  off  an  OIU. 

Swent:    What's  OIU? 

Birdsey:   Operator  Interface  Unit.   That's  the  control  panel  monitors. 

When  it's  in  a  square  like  this,  that  means  it's  in  an  OIU;  it's 
like  when  you  have  a  television  screen.   So  you  got  a  level  alarm 
high;  that's  LHA.   It's  recording  the  level  on  a  trend.   It's  got 
a  level  indicating  controller.   So  what's  that  doing  is:  as  the 


155 


level  goes  up,  it  takes  the  pump  and  speeds  up--the  level  is 
getting  too  high,  we  need  to  bring  that  level  down.   So  it's 
going  to  a  speed  controller  which  is  running  the  level 
controller.   Just  by  him  doing  the  thickener  one  and  the  little 
one,  it  showed  us  how  these  things  work. 

Swent:    When  you  say  you  read  it,  you're  reading  these— 

Birdsey:   --diagrams  here.   If  I  was  — 

Swent:    Were  you  actually  given  one  of  these? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  I  was  given  one  for—right  here—that's  the  circuit  I 
started  up. 

Swent :  CCD . 

Birdsey:  CCD.   Counter  Current  Decantation  and  Neutralization. 

Swent:  Counter  Current  Decantation  and  Neutralization. 

Birdsey:  That's  the  circuit  I  started  up. 

Swent:    This  huge  binder  was  given  to  you  to  learn?  No  wonder  you  were 
overwhelmed.   It's  two  and  a  half  inches  thick. 

Birdsey:   So  that's  what  they  had  given  me  to  learn;  that  was  my  area  to 
start  up.   When  I  first  stared  here,  we  were  going  through  this 
course—nobody  was  assigned  an  area  yet.   Nobody  was  even  on  a 
crew  yet;  we  were  just  all  learning  the  plant. 

Swent:    There  are  three  volumes  there:  the  CCD  and  Neutralization;  and 
then  the  acid  wash,  which  is  the  same  size;  and  one  that's  even 
thicker  that ' s  three  inches . 

Birdsey:   The  autoclaves,  I  believe,  were  two. 

Swent:    That's  utilities  and  reagents.  And  then  there's  autoclaves  too. 

Birdsey:   There  were  numerous  books.   Autoclaves  were  the  size  there;  only 
there  were  two  volumes. 

Swent:    That  would  be  six  inches. 

Birdsey:   They  had  the  whole  plant:  each  area  done,  and  the  control  loops 
and  how  things  are  supposed  to  run  and  stuff.   So  we  were  all  in 
this  room,  and  they  didn't  have  any  crews  yet,  and  they  were  just 
starting  up.   So  we'd  go  through  the  plant,  and  we'd  go  to  school 
during  the  day,  and  then  we'd  study  an  area,  and  then  we'd  go  out 


156 


and  they'd  show  us  the  area.   I  remember- -we  were  talking  about 
grinding,  and  grinding  was  pretty  much  done,  or  getting  close  to 
being  done.   Everything  up  here  hadn't  been  done  yet,  but  we  were 
going  to  run  direct—we  were  going  to  run  oxide  material  stuff 
that  didn't  need  to  be  oxidized;  it  had  already  been  treated, 
Mother  Nature  had  already  done  that  for  us,  and  we  were  just 
going  to  run  that  through  CIP;  we  were  going  to  use 
neutralization,  CIP,  and  grinding. 

So  those  three  areas  were  pretty  much  completed;  the  rest  of 
the  plant  was  still  in  the  process  of  being  built.   I  say  they 
didn't  have  crews,  and  they  really  didn't  have  crews,  but  they 
had  already  taken  some  of  the  people  that  were  hired  before  us, 
and  sent  them  down  to  grinding  to  help  get  started  for  start-up. 
So  we  were  walking  around,  and  I  was  used  to  this  little  rod  mill 
and  ball  mill,  and  I  walked  in  that  mill  building,  and  I  looked 
at  that  big  old  SAG  [semi-autogenous  grinding],  and  I  just  was 
impressed.   When  I  was  in  Creede,  I  looked  through  the  E&MJ,  the 
Engineering  and  Mining  Journal,  and  I'd  see  these  pictures  of 
these  sags,  but  I  never  really  put  two  and  two  together;  I  just 
thought  it  was  some  strange  new  looking  mill  they  had.   I  never 
thought  I'd  ever  be  running  one.   But  I  went  down  to  grinding  and 
there  they  were:  this  big  SAG  and  this  big  ball  mill.   You  could 
walk  in  these  things!   These  were  humungous,  you  know.   It  just 
amazed  me. 

So  we  went  through  class,  and  finally,  they  came  in  one  day, 
and  said,  "All  right,  we're  going  to  start  grinding  up."  They 
had  to  do  a  twenty-four-hour,  or  thirty-six-hour  run  on  it,  or 
something  for  the  construction  company  to  turn  it  over  to  us.   So 
they  came  into  the  class  one  day,  and  they  picked  these  people- - 
maybe  six  or  seven  of  them- -and  put  them  out  on  crews  as 
grinding.   I  remember  one  of  them  was  this  girl  by  the  name  of 
Terry  Moore,  and  she  and  I  got  to  know  each  other  from  the  class 
--I  remember  she  was  just  scared.   She  did  not  want  to  go  down 
there  amongst  that  big  old  mill,  and  run  those  pumps.   I  kept 
telling  her,  "Terry,  it's  not  going  to  be  that  bad."   She  became 
an  excellent  operator.   I  think  today  if  she  had  to  think  about 
it,  she'd  probably  laugh.   She  doesn't  work  here  anymore.   One 
thing  that  made  me  laugh:  she  was  worried  about  breaking  her 
fingernails.   I  always  thought  that  was  funny.   I  said,  "Terry, 
the  least  of  your  worries  is  your  fingernails."  But  anyway,  they 
took  these  people  down  there,  and  they  started  the  mills  up,  and 
we  continued  to  stay  in  class  and  go  through  the  process  area. 
They  used  these  people  they  took  out  as  helpers  and  laborers  down 
there  for  the  start-up.   We  continued  to  go  through  class,  and 
then  all  of  a  sudden,  they  came  in  one  day  and  said,  "Well,  we're 
going  to  stop  the  classes.   We  need  some  more  help  down  here 
grinding,  and  we're  going  to  put  you  out  on  your  crews." 


157 


Assigned  as  a  Counter-Current  Decantation  Operator 


Birdsey:   They  gave  me  my  crew  assignments:  Alan  Jones  was  my  assistant 

foreman;  and  Dan  Prothro  was  my  shift  foreman.   He's  the  one  that 
picked  me  to  run  CCD.   He  said,  "You're  going  to  be  my  CCD 
operator,"  and  he  put  me  up  there.   I  went  up  to  CCD.   When  I  got 
there,  one  of  the  thickeners  was  for  water  treatment,  and  I  used 
to  help  with  the  water  treatment  on  it.   The  other  two  thickeners 
weren't  running.   They  had  no  piping  into  the  precip  area  yet, 
and  the  autoclave  building  had  walls  now  on  one  side.   There's 
still  people  running  all  over.   So  we  spent  most  of  our  time 
tracing  pipes:  finding  out  where  pipes  were  going;  where  they're 
coming  from;  and  what  the  pumps  are  doing;  and  where  the  floor 
sumps  are.   They'd  built  a  model--!  don't  know  if  you  saw  the 
model-- 

Swent:    Yes,  I've  seen  the  model,  and  I  was  just  going  to  ask  if  they 
didn't  use  that  to  teach  you? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  they  did.   They  took  us  up  there  a  lot  on  the  model;  and 

then  I  used  it  a  lot.   I'd  go  up  there  and  follow  lines,  and  take 
notes,  and  then  go  out  in  the  plant  and  try  to  find  them. 
Unfortunately,  a  lot  of  it  still  wasn't  there  yet,  they  hadn't 
built  it.   We  got  the  general  idea  of  how-- 

Swent:    Looking  at  a  little  model  is  a  little  different. 

Birdsey:   Right;  exactly.   Then  they  took  us  down  to  grinding,  because  with 
the  start-up  they  were  having  problems,  like  most  start-ups. 
Pumps  weren't  working  right-- 


Start-up  Problems 


Swent:    What  were  some  of  the  problems  at  start-up? 

Birdsey:   Some  of  the  problems  that  I  experienced  were:  they  had  trouble 
keeping  the  mills  running  for  one  thing  because  of  the 
interlocks.  You  got  that  computer  system,  and  it  will  shut 
itself  down  when  it  sees  an  alarm.   So  tuning  in  the  system- 
there  's  a  lot  of  nuisance  alarms,  like  you  would  see  a  high- 
temperature  on  a  bearing  shut  itself  down  when  there  wasn't  a 
high  temperature.   It  would  be  just  a  false  reading  that  wasn't 
tuned  in  right.   I  found  out  a  couple  of  pumps  were  designed  too 
small,  and  couldn't  handle  a  load.   What  else  were  some  of  the 
problems?  Most  of  it  was  instrumentation,  and  your  normal  start- 


158 


up  problems:  if  things  aren't  wired  in  right;  wrong  cabinets  and 
stuff  like  that. 

But  our  major  problem  was  the  mills  when  we  first  started; 
getting  those  mills  to  stay  running.   They  needed  to  get  a 
thirty- six  hour  run  constantly;  grinding  so  much  ore  and  stuff. 
They  had  troubles  reaching  that.   In  fact,  I  don't  know  if  they 
ever  even  reached  that.   I  think  they  finally  said,  "Okay,  fine, 
we ' 11  let  our  people  get  in  here  and  start  running  it . "  We  had 
some  really  good  foremen.   We  had  A.  B.  Gonzalez,  who  had  been  in 
mills  all  his  life;  and  I  think  he  was  probably  one  of  the  better 
SAG  mill  operators  or  foremen.   He  could  probably  teach  me;  he 
was  excellent.   We  had  Dan  Prothro,  who  was  very  strong  in 
grinding,  and  Dan  had  done  numerous  things. 

Swent:    Had  these  people  been  with  Homestake  before?  Do  you  know? 

Birdsey:   No.   A.  B.  hadn't  been  with  Homestake;  and  Dan  hadn't  been  with 
Homestake.   We  had  Al  Bishop,  who  had  not  been  with  Homestake. 
He  had  been  out  on  Cotter's,  and  they  had  an  autoclave  out  there; 
a  little  small  one  they  used  for  uranium  to  help  oxidize  uranium. 
I'm  not  sure  exactly  what  it  was  used  for,  but  that's  why  they 
hired  him,  because  he  did  have  a  little  bit  of  autoclave 
experience—because  these  were  something  brand  new.   Then  we  had 
Mel  Heath,  who  came  from  many,  many  years  of  mining  and  milling. 
Those  were  the  four  foremen  and  A.  B.  was  down  there,  and  he's 
the  one  that  really  kind  of  helped  get  the  grinding  going, 
because  he  had  a  lot  of  experience  in  it.   And  Al  Bishop  actually 
had  a  lot  of  experience—in  fact  he  was  on  the  early  design  stage 
of  the  SAG  mill  when  they  were  first  trying  them  out;  he  worked 
on  that.   So  Al  was  very  knowledgeable.   So  we  had  some  very  good 
foremen  and  we  learned  a  lot  from  them.   I  remember  one  mess. 
The  grates  in  the  SAG  mill  were  too  small,  so  we  couldn't  get  the 
tonnage  through,  so  we  ended  up—couldn't  get  the  high  tonnage 
because  the  SAG  mill  has  grates  in  it  which  allows  floe  to  come 
through,  so  you  got  to  get  it  ground  up  really,  really  small  in 
order  for  it  to  get  through— well,  it  takes  a  while— you  have  to 
grind  that  up,  so  you  have  to  slow  down  your  tonnage  while  it 
gets  ground  up.   Well,  by  opening  up  the  grates,  you  get  more 
through— more  tonnage  through.   So  we  had  troubles  with  that.   So 
we  were  trying  numerous  things.   I  remember  dumping  oversize, 
what  we  call  critical— the  stuff  that  comes  out  of  the  SAG  mill, 
and  it's  too  big  to  go  through  the  screen— the  cyclone  stops  and 
it  goes  back  into  the  SAG  in  the  return  loop- -we  dumped  that  on 
the  ground,  so  we  weren't  putting  that  stuff  back  in  the  SAG,  we 
were  getting  fresh  tonnage  and  putting  it  with  these  big  piles  of 
rock  out  there  in  the  yard,  and— rains— the  yards  were  muddy,  and 
they  were  slop-- 


159 


Swent:    Wouldn't  this  happen  in  any  case?   I'm  wondering  why  that  would 
be  a  problem?   I  think  that  this  would  be  kind  of  a  standard 
situation. 

Birdsey:   It  is  a  standard  thing;  it's  just  working  through.   I'm  not 

saying  it  was  a  serious  problem,  but  you  couldn't  get  tonnage; 
you  needed  to  get  tonnage,  and  you  couldn't  get  it,  and  that  was 
why;  because  the  grates  might  have  been  too  small  so  in  order  to 
try  and  get  the  tonnage  through  and  keep  the  tonnage  up,  other 
things  were  happening  like  piles  of  recycle  were  all  over  the 
place,  and  we're  trying  to  get  that  ran  through. 

Swent:    I  would  think  anybody  that  was  designing  a  mill  would  have  known 
that  though. 

Birdsey:   I  guess  it's  very,  very  hard  to--I  see  stuff  like  that  happen  a 
lot  of  times.   It's  just  part  of  start-up;  they  ended  up 
increasing  the  grate  sizes,  and  that  took  a  while  to  get  it  up  to 
snuff.   Another  problem  we  had  was  ball  handling.   We  put  massive 
amounts  of  balls  in  the  ball  mill,  and  they  come  in  fifty- five- 
gallon  barrels,  and  you  have  to  cut  the  tops  off.   Reach  these 
barrels,  and  take  a  crane,  and  pick  these  barrels  up--and  I'm 
talking,  you  got  to  load  like  three  or  four  tons  a  night,  with 
these  balls  in  these  mills.   You  might  be  moving  six  or  seven 
barrels  a  night,  and  cutting  the  tops  off;  we  had  one  of  the  mill 
operators  get  hurt  doing  this.   She  started  to  cut  the  top  of  the 
barrel  off,  and  something  happened—she  turned  the  acetylene  on-- 
that '  s  what  it  was  —  and  went  to  turn  the  oxygen  on,  and  didn't 
have  a  wrench,  so  she  set  down  the  acetylene  and  didn't  turn  it 
off  so  it  was  running  the  whole  time  she  went  to  get  the  oxygen, 
and  it  filled  the  barrel  with  acetylene.   So  she  finally  got  the 
oxygen  on,  and  she  struck  the  torch,  it  set  off  the  acetylene  in 
the  barrel,  and  blew  the  top  of  the  barrel  off,  and  broke  her 
thumb.   What  they  ended  up  doing  is  saying:  "Well,  if  you're  not 
qualified  on  the  cutting  torch,  which  they  should  have  been,  then 
maintenance  had  to  do  it."  So  she  needed  the  balls,  but  she 
couldn't  cut  the  top  off,  so  she  had  to  get  maintenance  down  to 
cut  the  top  off;  so  it  was  getting  to  be  a  real  pain.   That  was 
one  of  the  problems  you  had. 

Another  problem  was  the  Gehos. 
Swent:    The  what? 

Birdsey:   The  Geho  pumps;  the  slurry  pumps.   They're  a  very  good  pump,  I 
believe,  but  they're  very  hard  and  complicated  to  understand. 
You've  got  pumps  running  pumps  on  these  things.   They  were  a  new 
pump,  and  people  didn't  understand  them,  and  getting  those 


160 


started  and  getting  the  pump  line  up  and  running;  we  sanded  it  up 
a  couple  times.   But  basically,  it  was  a  pretty  smooth  start-up. 


The  Crusher;  "That  Baby  Was  a  Nightmare" 


Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 

Swent : 
Birdsey; 
Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


The  biggest  problem  we  had 
nightmare,  and  it  remained 
and  got  the  gyro  in.   The 
three  stories;  the  crusher 
story,  the  rock  would  come 
jaw.   The  jaw  then  dropped 
then  dropped  down  another 
up  the  tunnel,  and  out  to 
big--so  far—the  rock  fell 
when  they'd  come  slamming 
come  off  the  jaw  and  down. 


was  the  crusher.   That  baby  was  a 
a  nightmare  until  we  quit  using  it, 

crusher  was  underground.   There  was 
was  on  three  stories.   The  first 
in,  and  slid  down  a  chute  into  the 
down  onto  the  transfer  belt,  which 

chute  onto  the  conveyor  belt  that  went 

the  radial  stacker.   The  drops  were  so 
so  far  that  it  just  tore—major  damage 

down  into  the  jaw,  or  when  it  would 
Spillage  everywhere. 


The  pit  was  already  so  deep? 

No,  this  is  for  the  environmental  permitting;  the  crusher  could 
not  be  above  ground.   It  had  to  be  down  in— 

Oh,  this  is  not  in  the  mine? 

No.   This  is  here.   This  is  done  in  grinding. 

But  it  had  to  be  under— 

It  had  to  be  underground  for  environmental  reasons.   So  anything 
you  had  to  work  on  had  to  be  craned  down.   Spillage,  which  was 
massive,  had  to  be  mucked  up  and  hauled  out  of  that  place.   I'm 
talking  it's  deep.   So,  it  was  just  a  mess.   Belts  wouldn't  track 
right.   It  was  just  a  real  pain.   That  was  one  of  the  problems  we 
had:  was  the  crusher.  When  we  first  started  up— I  remember,  Dan 
came  and  got  me  up  here,  and  we  still  hadn't  started  this  side  up 
yet,  and  I  had  been  tracing  lines,  and  he  says,  "Come  on, 
everybody  that  is  up  here  go  to  grinding."  They're  taking  wet, 
sloppy  mud  from  the  mine  and  tried  to  dump  it  in  the  crusher,  and 
it  was  so  wet  it  just  poured  through  everything,  and  three 
triple-seven's  worth  of  that  stuff  is  three  or  four  hundred  tons 
of  mud  and  slop. 

The  triple-seven  is  a  truck? 

A  haul  truck,  right.   They'd  brought  the  triple-seven  from  the 
mine— it  was  just  full  of  watery  slop.   It  was  so  watery  that 


161 


Swent : 


Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey; 


when  it  went  down,  it  ran  through  all  the  cracks,  and  the  whole 
bottom  of  the  crusher  was  full  of  this  mud.   We  spent  days 
shoveling.   The  day  we  shut  down- -the  day  we  took  the  crusher  off 
the  line --it  was  the  same  way.   You'd  have  mounds  of  dirt  down 
there  because  of  spillage  everywhere.   It  was  just  a  pain.   Like 
I  said,  it's  like  four  stories  all  the  way  down  to  the  bottom;  so 
you  had  to  get  that  stuff  out  of  there  somehow.   I  was  happy  to 
see  that  one  go. 


How  did  you  get  around  it  though? 
underground? 


Didn't  the  gyro  have  to  be 


No,  the  gyro  did  not  have  to  be  underground.   I  don't  know 
whether  they  changed  permitting  or  whatever;  so  the  gyro  now  is 
above  ground.   We  still  have  lots  of  spillage,  but  it's  a  little 
bit  easier  to  take  care  of. 

Much  easier  I  would  guess. 

So  that  was  one  of  the  problems—was  the  crusher.   Then  grinding 
was  basically  pretty  easy  after  that.   It  was  just  getting 
familiar  with  the  beast:  learning  the  equipment;  learning  how  to 
start  everything  up  and  shut  it  down.   Actually,  it  all  came  on 
line  pretty  good.   I  was  taken  back  out  of  there  after  they 
started  running,  because  we  were  getting  ready  to  start  up  here. 
That's  when  the  fun  begins  for  me.   I  wasn't  familiar  with  the 
autoclaves. 


The  Autoclaves;  When  the  Fun  Begins 


Swent:    Nobody  was  I  guess. 

Birdsey:   Nobody  was,  no.   I  didn't  even  study  it;  I  didn't  even  look  at 
the  autoclave  P&ID's  because  there  was  a  lot  to  it;  and  hearing 
people  talk  and  stuff,  I  was  kind  of  leery  of  them,  and  I  had  to 
learn  my  own  circuit  anyway- -the  CCD's.   Anyway,  we  started  up, 
and  I  was  probably  one  of  the  worst  CCD  operators  anybody  ever 
saw  I  would  think.   [laughter]   I  had  some  troubles.   We  all  did, 
but  I  was  trying  to  over-operate. 

Swent:    And  you  hadn't  had  this  at  Creede? 

Birdsey:   No,  I  hadn't  had  this  at  all.   I  knew  where  my  flows  were,  I  knew 
what  was  supposed  to  be  going  on,  but  the  pumps  were  undersized; 
the  pumps  couldn't  handle  the  flow.   The  other  problem  was  with 
the  autoclaves—they  were  trying  to  get  the  autoclaves  on  line, 


Swent : 
Birdsey : 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


162 


and  they  would  have  one  autoclave  up,  and  then  they'd  have  it 
down.   Then  they'd  have  another  autoclave  up,  and  they'd  have  it 
down.   Then  they  would  have  three  autoclaves  up,  and  then  two 
would  down.   Then  they'd  have  three  autoclaves  up,  and  all  three 
would  do  down.   And  they'd  have  all  three  autoclaves  up--so, 
you're  sitting  here  running  the  thickener, and  you're  getting  all 
this  flow,  and  then  getting  no  flow.   Then  you're  getting  a  whole 
bunch  of  flow,  and  you're  getting  no  flow.   Then  you're  getting  a 
little  bit  of  flow,  and  then  a  whole  bunch  of  flow.   So  you're 
trying  to  run  these  thickeners,  and  pretty  soon  after  they  got 
the  autoclaves  kind  of  steadied  out,  they  started  pumping  all 
this  tonnage  to  you  where  your  underflow  pumps  couldn't  handle 
it.  You'd  have  your  underflow  pumps  maxed  out-- 

Your  thickeners  came  after  the  autoclave? 

Right.   So  I'm  sitting  there  trying  to  keep  these  thickeners 
under  control,  and  I  can't  suck  them  down  because  the  pumps  were 
too  small,  and  they  were  getting  too  thick,  and  it  won't  pump 
them.   In  the  meantime,  CIP  was  used  to  the  oxide  ore-- 

That's  later? 

That's  later.   That's  where  I'm  sending  my  slurry;  I'm  receiving 
the  slurry,  and  then  I'm  sending  it  over  to  CIP.   We  started 
using  this  acidic  slurry  out  of  the  autoclaves,  and  you  smack  it 
with  that  lime,  and  it  just  gets  as  thick  as  paste.   Then  we're 
trying  to  pump  that  over  to  CIP;  the  tanks  are  running  over.   So, 
I'm  sitting  there  calling  the  CIP  operator,  and  the  operator  is 


calling  me  saying,  "It's  got  to  slow  down, 
over;  you  got  to  slow  down." 


My  tanks  are  going 


I'm  calling  the  autoclave  operator,  and  he  says,  "I  ain't 
slowing  down.   I  just  got  them  on  line,  I  can't  slow  down." 

So  what  ended  up  happening  is  we  shut  the  leach  feed  pump 
off;  keep  everything  running,  and  we'd  let  the  floor  fill  up.   So 
for  four  months,  I  never  saw  the  CCD  floor;  it  was  hip-deep  in 
mud.   You  could  sit  there  and  clean  it  up,  but  the  next  day  it 
was  back  because  of  all  the  trouble. 


Swent:    It  was  in  a-- 

Birdsey:  --contained  area.  It  was  Just  full;  and  the  contained  area  goes 
down.  It  would  be  waist-deep  with  this  stuff.  Then  pretty  soon 
things  would  line  out;  you'd  start  running,  and  get  time  to  hose 
up—get  everything  get  cleaned  up  off  the  floor,  and  then  they'd 
get  the  third  autoclave  on  line,  and  there's  too  much  slurry,  and 
it  started  getting  thick,  and  the  CIP  started  going  over.  We 


163 


used  to  run  our  CIP  tanks  in  series:  it  would  go  one,  two,  three, 
four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten,  back  and  forth.   But  we 
could  only  get  about  twelve  hundred  gallons  a  minute.   The  tanks 
were  constantly  running  over  their  baskets,  which—you'  re  losing 
gold  out  the  tails.   Things  got  pretty  serious,  so  somebody  up 
above  regrouped. 

What  they  ended  up  doing  is  making  two  parallel  circuits; 
they  took  the  tanks  which  was  one  to  two  to  three  to  four;  they 
made  an  A  and  B  side,  and  then  you  ran  down  straight.   You  had: 
A,  one,  two,  three,  four,  five;  B,  one,  two,  three,  four,  five. 
And  you  just  run  them  down  in  parallel  circuit.   Now,  instead  of 
getting  twelve  hundred  gallons  a  minute  through  each  tank— 
because  you're  running  a  series—you  could  get  twelve  hundred 
gallons  a  minute  down  each  side.   So  if  you  were  running  fifteen 
hundred  gallons  a  minute,  let's  say,  or  sixteen  hundred  gallons  a 
minute,  you're  actually  getting  eight  hundred  gallons  a  minute. 
Each  side,  so  the  tanks  could  hold  them. 

Swent:    Which  you  could  handle. 

Birdsey:   Whoever  came  up  with  that  idea--I'd  give  them  a  hug.   I  think  it 
might  have  been  John  Turney.   I  tell  you  what:  that  just  lined 
things  right  out.   That  helped  us  because  now  we  could  pump  over 
there,  and  keep  tonnage  up,  and  we  didn't  have  to  worry  about  the 
tanks.   So  now  we  could  get  rid  of  the  slurry,  and  in  the 
meantime,  they  had  made  the  pipelines  bigger  from  the  underflow 
pumps,  and  they  put  bigger  motors  on  the  underflow  pumps  before 
we  could  get  slurry  out  of  the  thickeners.   Then  the  CCD  started 
coming  around;  it  was  a  lot  easier  to  operate.   And  by  this  time, 
the  operators  had  learned  what  buttons  to  push  and  stuf f--things 
started  lining  up. 

One  thing  I'll  never,  ever  understand:  engineers.   They 
always  told  me  the  shortest  place  between  two  points  is  a 
straight  line.   Engineers--!  don't  know—they  love  them  nineties 
--because  I  tell  you,  those  pipelines  had  nineties  everywhere. 
And  all  those  nineties  just  cause  all  kinds  of  friction  and  the 
pipe  could  bend  and  scale  up,  so  they  ran  new  lines  —  straight 
lines— and  things  lined  out,  and  actually  CCD  became  a  pleasure 
to  operate;  the  precip  and  everything  just  fell  right  into  place. 
So  I  was  just  getting  the  hang  of  it.   Well,  the  refinery  started 
up,  and  I'd  had  a  little  bit  of  refinery  experience  in  Creede  and 
they  needed  another  person  there,  so  I  put  a  bid  in  to  get  into 
the  refinery.  And  I  had  probably  worked  as  CCD  operator  now 
eight  or  nine  months.   I  had  probably  been  there  about  a  year  and 
a  half  total,  and  I  worked  as  a  CCD  operator  about  eight  or  nine 
months.   I  put  my  bid  in  to  work  in  the  refinery,  so  they 
accepted  my  bid,  and  I  transferred  off-- 


164 


A  Better  Job  in  the  Refinery 

Swent:  Is  that  a  better  job? 

Birdsey:  Much  better  job.   Straight  days,  weekends  off. 

Swent:  Better  pay? 

Birdsey:  Pay  was  about  the  same. 

Swent:  But  better  hours? 

Birdsey:   Better  hours,  and  you  went  from  hourly  to  salary  non-exempt,  so 
you've  got  a  little  bit  better  benefits  and  stuff;  which  was  a 
good  move  for  me.   I  liked  it.   It  was  very,  very  interesting.   I 
was  excited.   When  I  worked  for  Charlie  Rivera,  I  used  to  watch 
him  pour  the  molten  silver  out,  and  I'd  think,  "Boy,  I  wish  I 
could  do  that.   I  bet  that  would  be  hard.   I  don't  think  I'll 
ever  get  to  do  that."  Now,  all  of  a  sudden,  I'm  going  to  get  to 
pour  gold.   So,  I  went  into  the  refinery  and  met  all  the  guys  in 
there.   Dave  Barr,  the  refinery  foreman-- 

Swent:     Who? 

Birdsey:   David  Barr.   He  was  an  excellent  individual.   I  was  very 

intimidated  at  first  because  of  the  security,  because  they  had 
high  security  in  there.   So  they  took  me  upstairs,  and  I  went  to 
work  on  the  electrowinning  cells.   That's  where  they  plate  the 
gold  off  the  strip  solution.   They  showed  me  how  to  pull  these 
baskets  and  I  was  just  amazed;  you'd  pull  out  these  baskets  and 
that  wire  would  just  be  a  nice  yellow  color.   You'd  pick  the 
basket  up  and  it  was  heavy;  the  gold  was  heavy,  heavy,  and  you're 
just  going,  "Man!"   It  just  amazed  me.   And  all  this  sludge  was 
gold  value.  They'd  tell  me,  "Be  very,  very  careful.  Don't  be 
throwing  the  stuff  around,  it's  all  got  gold  value.   Remember 
everything  up  there  has  gold  value.   You  take  your  gloves  down 
and  you  wash  them  off  before  you  taken  them  downstairs  and  put 
them  in  the  washing  machine,  and  make  sure  you  hose  off  your 
aprons,  and  keep  all  this  stuff  because  it's  all  got  gold  value." 

So  it  was  very  meticulous;  it  always  amazed  me.  And  then  I 
went  to  watch  them  do  a  pour  in  that  big  old  furnace.  I  watched 
them  pour  gold,  and  then  Dave  Barr  said,  "Well,  are  you  ready  to 
pour?" 

And  I  said,  "I've  only  been  here  a  week,  Dave." 


165 


He  says,  "Starting  Monday,  you're  going  to  start  learning  to 
charge  the  furnace  and  we'll  be  right  behind  you,  and  we're  going 
to  start  showing  you  how  to  do  this."  Dave  started  me  off  mixing 
the  flux  that  you  use  in  the  furnace;  I  already  knew  how  to  do 
that. 

So  I  got  ready  and  started  the  furnace  up,  and  I  started 
loading  it.   They  showed  me  how  to  stir,  and  Dave  says,  "You're 
not  pouring;  stand  back  and  watch  them  pour."  He  took  me  through 
step  by  step. 

it 

Birdsey:   So  he  let  me  stir  and  then  they  poured. 

Swent :    There's  a  real  physical  hazard  here,  isn't  there? 

Birdsey:   Oh  yes,  there  is.   There's  a  big  hazard  here.   But  they  let  me 
stir  it;  put  on  the  fire  suit,  reach  in  there  and  stir  it  so  I 
could  see  how  thick  it  was.   Pouring  gold—I  thought  it  was  going 
to  be  very,  very  technical,  and  basically  it  was  nothing  more 
than  cooking  soup . 

Swent:    Extra  hot. 

Birdsey:   Extra  hot,  but  you  got  to  feel  it,  and  you  feel  how  thick  it  is, 
and  you  could  tell  by  looking  at  when  it's  ready  to  pour.   But  I 
hadn't  got  to  that  point.   The  next  day,  we  had  another  pour,  and 
they  let  me  run  the  controls.   I  poured  three  bars,  and  didn't 
spill  any.   I  was  pretty  happy  that  I  poured  three  bars;  it 
wasn't  that  hard,  I  thought,  "This  is  pretty  neat."   So  then  I 
started  getting  interested  in  exactly  what  was  happening:  why— 
pouring  is  good,  but  what's  going  on,  and  why  did  you  use  all 
these  different  chemicals?  The  chemicals  we  used  were  niter  for 
oxidation—to  oxide  the  impurities  in  the  steel  wool.   We  used 
borax,  which  thins  it  out,  and  makes  it  thin  and  makes  it  more 
fluid.  We  used  a  sand,  which  combined  and  helped  with  the 
collecting  of  the  purities,  and  helped  separate  it.   We  mixed 
that  up,  and  I  can't  remember  what— I  think  it  was  like  fifteen 
pounds  of  niter  to  twenty  pounds  of  sand,  to  eight  pounds  of 
borax.   We  had  the  cement  mixer,  and  we  mixed  it  up,  and  poured 
it  in  this  big  tub,  and  we'd  flux  it  throughout  the  pour. 

So  I  wanted  to  know  what  the  chemicals  did,  and  I  started 
learning  about  how  to  control  the  furnace  and  stuff.   I  started 
getting  pretty  good. 

Swent:    What  fueled  the  furnace? 


Norman  Birdsey  holding  the  first  McLaughlin  Mine 
gold  bar,  1985. 


4J 
M-l 

0) 


C 
0) 


S 

« 
a) 
4-> 
w 

a) 

0) 


43 

4-1 
•H 


0) 

cfl 
iH 
U 

o 

4-1 


(0     U 
O     03 


I  1       \  J 

C  <U 
CO  4-1 
•H  C 
P.  <U 

O 

00 

C  • 
•H  4J 

w    C 

CO  CO 
9)  iH 
U  p. 
O 

M    C 

P.   0) 

00 

(U  >* 
C  X 

£° 


•H  C 

•H  3 

J3  O 
&0    M 

3  00 

CO  ,* 

J  O 

O  CO 

S  43 


166 


Birdsey:   It  was  an  electricity  field.   I'm  trying  to  think--!  can't 

remember  the  name  of  it  right  now.   It's  not  convection,  but  it 
worked  by  electrical  field:  [induction?]  furnace  was  what  it's 
called.   It  worked  just  by  sending  this  electrical  field  through 
the  molten  steel,  which  got  it  hot.   If  you  put  your  hand  in 
there—if  you  had  a  ring  on,  the  ring  would  heat  up  just  like 
that  and  burn  you.   So  that's  what  it  ran  on:  electricity.  We'd 
get  it  up  to  two  thousand  degrees,  more  than  that.   You  learned 
to  look  at  it,  and  tell  by  the  color,  and  how  white  it's  getting, 
and  how  much  gold  you  have,  because  you  could  see  the  gold  and 
slag  floating  on  top.   Then  we  poured  into  steel  molds,  which  we 
coated  with  diesel  fuel— 

Swent:    Just  like  buttering  a  muffin  pan. 

Birdsey:   Exactly,  exactly.   Coat  it  with  diesel  fuel,  and  you'd  pour  into 
it.   There  was  a  hazard  there:  Gary- -who  has  a  beard  like  I  have 
--he'd  pour  these  things,  then  pour  diesel  fuel,  and  the  diesel 
fuel  would  most  usually  catch  on  fire  and  burn  off,  and  you'd 
also  soot  them.   You'd  put  them  in  with  these,  and  you'd  also 
soot  them  up,  so  the  soot  helps  keep  them  sticking.   You'd  soot 
them  up,  and  then  you'd  diesel  fuel  them.   When  you  poured  the 
molten  gold  in,  it  would  catch  on  fire  right  away.   One  time 
Gary—they  poured  the  bar,  and  then  we  set  it  off  to  the  side, 
and  you'd  get  a  pipe,  and  you  grab  the  bar  with  these  fire  gloves 
and  you  flip  it  over,  like  you  do  a  bread  pan,  and  when  Gary 
pulled  the  mold  off  the  gold,  the  diesel  fuel  hadn't  caught  on 
fire  because  I  guess  it  didn't  have  any  oxygen,  but  as  soon  as 
that  bar  got  out  of  the  mold,  oxygen  got  in  there  and  it  flashed, 
and  he  caught  his  beard  on  fire.   So  we  all  learned  something 
there. 

Swent:    Was  he  badly  hurt? 

Birdsey:   No,  he  wasn't  hurt  bad  at  all.   He  wasn't  hurt  at  all;  just  kind 
of  shook  up.   The  dangers  of  that  was:  you  have  to  watch  out  for 
molten  stuff  coming  out  around  the  furnace;  you  have  to  wear 
protection. 

Swent:    You  wear  a  welder's  mask? 

Birdsey:   Actually,  what  we  use  now  is  what  the  firemen  wear  at  airports: 
the  big  silver  suits.   That's  what  they  use. 

Swent:    I  see. 

Birdsey:   So  Gary  got  that  flash.   The  only  really  bad  thing  that  we  had 

happen—nobody  got  hurt— was  when  we  poured  the  slag  off --that's 
the  waste  product  coming  off  the  melt  in  these  big  steel  cone 


167 


molds  —  they  're  shaped  like  a  pyramid—and  you  pour  the  slag  off, 
and  they're  on  a  hinge,  so  the  next  day  after  it  sets  up,  you 
turn  them  upside  down,  and  then  smacked  them  and  all  that  slag, 
which  is  like  obsidian--glass--falls,  and  then  we'd  do  through  it 
because  you  get  little  gold  pieces  in  there—and  we  would  re-melt 
it,  so  we  got  to  separate  it  and  go  through  it,  and  process  it  in 
the  refinery  so  we  could  get  the  gold  values  that's  in  there,  and 
we  go  ahead  and  transfer  the  slag  down  to  mining  and  run  it  back 
through  the  mill  just  to  make  sure  we  got  all  the  gold.   They  had 
one  of  these  things—they  were  on  wheels— and  they're  probably 
about  three  feet  tall— top  is  about  three-foot  by  three-foot 
square  and  it  goes  down  to  the  cone— that's  quite  a  bit  of 
liquid.   We  had  it  full  of  molten  liquid— and  they  were  pulling 
it  off  the  pouring  floor  and  one  of  the  wheels  hit  a  rock  or 
something  and  it  tipped  the  whole  thing  over,  with  this  molten 
stuff  in  it.   Nobody  was  hurt,  but  it  filled  the  whole  floor  up 
with  this  molten  stuff,  and  it  was  so  hot  that  it  actually  blew 
chunks  of  cement  off  the  floor.   We  hit  it  with  water  hoses  and 
fire  extinguishers.   Nobody  got  hurt,  but  it  was  something  scary; 
a  refinery's  on  fire,  there's  so  much  smoke  and  stuff.   Nobody 
was  hurt,  and  another  lesson  learned.   After  that,  we  started 
putting  a  ramp  up,  and  we  made  sure  the  place  was  swept  up  good. 

Other  than  that,  everything  went  really  smooth  in  the 
refinery.   It  was  a  very  good  thing  for  me  to  do.   I  enjoyed  it; 
I  learned  a  lot.   After  about  three  years,  though,  I  started  to 
get  tired  of  the  refinery  because--!  hate  to  say  I  quit  learning 
--but  it  was  like  once  you  know  how  to  pour  it  was  kind  of 
getting  old.   So  I  went  and  talked  to  Phil  Walker  who  was  the 
mill  superintendent  at  the  time,  and  1  told  him  that  I  was 
getting  bored  in  the  refinery,  and  I  was  thinking  about  going  to 
back  to  operations  as  an  operator  again.   So  we  had  a  little  talk 
and  about  a  month  later,  he  called  me  into  Dave  Barr's  office  in 
the  refinery  and  says  that  he  wants  to  talk  to  me.   So  I  go  in, 
and  he  says,  "Norm,  you  want  out  of  here?" 

And  I  said,  "Yes." 

He  says,  "Well,  I'm  going  to  make  you  an  assistant  foreman 
on  Mike  Shaw's  crew." 

I  said,  "Excuse  me?"   "On  C  crew,  I'm  going  to  make  you  the 
assistant  foreman.   Do  you  want  the  job?"  I  had  already  raised  a 
kind  of  stink  about  wanting  to  get  out  of  there  and  stuff,  so  I 
kind  of  felt  obligated  to  take  it.   So  I  told  him  sure,  I'd  take 
it. 


168 


Assistant  Foreman  on  the  C  Crew;  A  Big  Promotion 


Swent:    What  does  C  crew  mean? 

Birdsey:   We  got  four  crews:  A,  B,  C,  and  D.   He  put  me  on  C  crew  and  Mike 
Shaw  was  the  foreman.   I  think  one  of  the  other  foremen  quit  or 
something,  so  they  moved  Mike's  assistant  up,  or  something. 

Swent:    There  was  an  opening. 

Birdsey:   There  was  an  opening.   So  they  moved  me  up  to  Mike  Shaw's 

assistant,  and  I  was  scared.   I  knew  the  grinding;  I  operated  CCD 
a  little  bit;  I  knew  a  little  bit  about  CIP.   I  didn't  know  a 
thing  about  the  autoclaves  though.   I  didn't  know  anything  about 
it.   I  didn't  know  anything  about  the  02  plant  —  the  liquid  oxygen 
plant.   I  was  just  saying,  "Well,  this  is  amazing,  but  I'll  give 
it  a  try."   So  I  came  out,  and  Mike  introduced  himself,  and  we 
started  on  the  graveyard  shift.   That's  what  I  had  to  make:  I  was 
on  straight  days,  but  now  I  had  to  go  to  graves.   Shift  work 
again. 

Swent:    Bottom  of  the  heap  again. 

Birdsey:   So  I  went  out  and  started  working  with  Mike.   Mike  had  a  very, 

very  interesting  way  of  training  people:  he  liked  to  kick  you  in 
the  fire  and  stand  back  and  see  what  you're  made  of. 

Swent:    See  what  you  were  what? 

Birdsey:   See  what  you  were  made  of.   See  what's  going  to  happen.   That's 

the  way  Mike  trained.   He  was  there  to  coach  you  along  and  stuff. 
So  I'd  been  here  about  a  week  and  a  half.   I  didn't  know  where 
the  autoclave  building  was,  yet  alone  what  was  inside  it.   I  was 
the  assistant  foreman,  and  I'm  kind  of  nervous.   Anyway,  the 
autoclave  operator  called  in  sick,  and  Mike  says,  "Go  up  and  run 
the  claves." 

I  said,  "Mike,  I've  never  ran  it." 

He  said,  "I  don't  care,  get  them  running."  So  he  made  me  go 
up  there,  and  I  had  to  run  the  autoclaves.   He  had  another  guy  up 
there  who  was  also  an  autoclave  operator,  and  he  told  Tom 
[Fisher],  "You  be  Norm's  helper  tonight." 

I  was  a  nervous  wreck;  I  had  no  idea  what  these  'claves 
were.   So  I'm  sitting  down;  I'm  trying  to  get  an  idea  of  how  they 
should  run,  and  Tom's  there  helping  me.   I  told  Tom,  "Listen,  I 
don't  know  anything  about  these.   You  go  out  and  you  get  your 


169 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 
Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 


Birdsey: 


samples,  and  you  get  your  rear  right  back  in  here,  you  understand 
me?"  That  guy  would  go  out  and  stay  forever.   I'm  sitting  there 
the  whole  time  sweating  blood.   I  didn't  know  it,  but  Mike  Shaw 
was  down  at  one  of  the  other  control  rooms  watching  on  the  OIU 
making  sure  that  I  didn't  do  anything  wrong,  but  I  didn't  know 
that. 

What's  OIU?   I  know  you  told  me  once,  but  I've  forgotten. 
Operator  Interface  Unit. 
Okay,  all  right. 

That's  the  monitors,  and  they're  all  inter-tied  in  the  plant. 
You  can  operate  anything  from  any  control  room.   He  was  down  at 
one  of  the  other  control  room  watching  me;  making  sure  that  I 
didn't  make  any  mistakes,  but  I  didn't  know  that. 


But  you  didn't  know  that, 
foreman's  responsibility? 


What  exactly  is  the  assistant 


They  started  out  with  just  a  foreman,  but  as  you  know,  we  have 
the  grinding  plant  five  miles  away  from  the  process  plant.   The 
grinding  plant  was  taking  so  much  of  the  foreman's  time  that  they 
needed  somebody  at  this  end,  to  run  this  end  also.   They  started 
out  with  control  room  supervisors  when  they  first  started  up,  and 
there  were  four  metallurgists,  and  their  job  was  to  stay  in  the 
main  control  room  and  supervise  the  operation  of  the  plant  in  the 
control  room;  the  control  room  staff  point.   They  were 
metallurgists;  if  they  had  something  going  on,  they  could  give 
you  advice  or  whatever.   It  got  to  be  so  time  consuming  for  the 
foreman  down  at  grinding  that  the  control  supervisors  had  to  come 
out  of  the  control  room  and  actually  be  like  an  assistant  foreman 
up  at  this  end;  keeping  it  in  touch  with  the  main  foreman  down  at 
grinding.   Then  what  happened  was:  they  needed  the  metallurgists' 
knowledge  in  the  lab.   They  were  starting  to  have  some 
metallurgical  problems  in  the  plant,  so  they  said,  "Let's  not  use 
the  metallurgist  as  an  assistant.   Bring  them  into  the  lab;  we 
will  pull  a  couple  of  senior  operators  and  make  them  assistants." 

So  that's  how  that  got  started.   Some  of  the  control  room 
supervisors  and  metallurgists  ended  up  staying  as  foreman  because 
they  had  to  change  right  away,  and  the  others  went  to  the  lab  as 
metallurgists.   So  I  became  an  assistant.   So  an  assistant  ran 
one  end,  and  the  foreman  runs  the  other  end.   The  foreman's  in 
charge  of  the  crew,  but  you  have  an  assistant  that  helps.   Mike 
and  I  used  to  rotate  every  month.   One  month  I'd  stay  up  at  this 
end  and  he'd  stay  down  at  grinding,  and  then  the  next  month  we'd 


170 


swap;  I'd  stay  down  at  grinding,  and  he'd  stay  up  at  this  end. 
But  the  foreman  still  is  in  charge  of  the  crew. 

Swent:    You  could  give  orders? 

Birdsey:   Yes. 

Swent:    And  reprimand  if  necessary? 

Birdsey:   If  necessary,  with  the  foreman.   And  you  start  working  together 
as  a  team.   Mike  Shaw  and  I  became  a  very,  very  good  team,  and  I 
gave  him  full  control.   I  work  for  you,  Mike,  you  tell  me  that 
you  want;  and  it  works  very  well  that  way.   So  I  was  his 
assistant  for  probably  four  years. 

Swent:    And  you  learned  how  to  work  the  autoclaves? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  I  learned  how  to  work  the  autoclave.   I  learned  how  to  run 
them.   In  that  four  years'  time,  we  had  two  accidents. 


Accidents  with  the  Autoclaves 


Swent:    Tell  about  them. 

Birdsey:   The  first  one  was:  we  had  a  feed  line  that  goes  into  the 
autoclave,  the  slurry  line  goes  into  the  autoclave.   The 
autoclave  runs  about  400  degrees  in  the  back  end  and  259  degrees 
in  the  front.   So  you're  feeding  this  ore  in;  about  230  degrees 
in  the  front.   As  it  goes  through  the  autoclave,  it  heats  up  to 
about  400  degrees.   You  used  gaseous  oxygen  you're  injecting  into 
the  'claves  to  keep  the  reaction  going.   'Clave  pressure  is 
running  about  260  to  270  pounds  depending  on  the  temperature  that 
you're  running.   When  we  shut  an  autoclave  down  to  work  on  it  for 
maintenance,  or  when  we  got  to  do  what  we  call  the  depressuring 
pressurizing—take  all  the  pressure  off—to  cool  that  down  so 
there's  no  pressure  on  it,  takes  anywhere  from  four  to  six  hours. 
That's  opening  up  both  vents— it's  like  a  pressure  cooker.   You 
can  open  up  the  pressure  cooker  and  let  it  depressurize.   You 
open  up  both  ends—the  auxiliary  and  main  vent—and  shutting 
everything  off  takes  between  four  and  six  hours,  usually  closer 
to  six  hours  to  take  it  down.   Sometimes  you  can  do  it  in  four 
depending  on  the  what  the  slurry  level  is.   So  what  happened  on 
us,  we  were  sitting  there  running,  we  had  Charley  train,  we  got 
three  'claves:  A,  B,  and  C.   We  got  Charley  train  down,  because 
it  had  a  leak  on  the  feed  line  going  to  the  'clave.   Now  the  feed 
line  is  pressured  up  to  'clave  pressure;  it's  running  about  280 


171 


pounds.   We  had  a  leak  on  it  that  was  blowing  a  little  bit  of 
slurry,  so  we  shut  that  "clave  down  and  we  were  depressurizing  it 
so  we'd  get  that  leak  fixed  on  that  slurry  leg. 

Swent:    Slurry  what? 

Birdsey:   Slurry  leg,  coming  in. 

Swent :    Okay . 

Birdsey:   We  did  not  realize,  however—the  reason  the  leak  was  there  was 
because  the  titanium  line  was  really,  really  thin--we  did  not 
realize  that  the  A  'clave  was  in  the  same  condition.   We  just 
thought  that  the  C  'clave  was  our  only  problem.   So  what  happened 
was,  you  have  your  pipe  from  the  autoclave—it  got  so  thin  that 
it  just  did  this— 

Swent:    Just  opened? 

Birdsey:   Just  opened  right  up.   Now  you  have  full  'clave  pressure  coming 
off  that  autoclave.   We  depressurized  that  "clave  in  nineteen 
minutes— remember  it  takes  six  hours  usually.   We  did  it  in 
nineteen  minutes.   It's  very  hard  to  tell  somebody,  but  the  noise 
level  was  so  loud  that  up  in  the  control  room,  Mike  Shaw  was  up 
there,  my  foreman,  he  was  asking  me  if  I'd  shut  the  02  line  down 
yet,  but  all  I  could  do  was  feel  his  lips  moving  on  my  ears.   He 
was  yelling  into  my  ear,  but  I  couldn't  hear  him.   That's  how 
loud— everything  was  vibrating— the  building  was  vibrating.   It 
was  just  ungodly  loud.   I  don't  know  how  to  describe  it. 

I  was  really,  really  scared  because  right  before  this 
happened,  I  drove  by  the  autoclave  building,  and  one  of  the 
autoclave  operators— Wallace  Dickinson- -was  going  into  the 
building  by  A  'clave— was  going  up  inside.   I  drove  around  the 
autoclave  building,  and  I  got  down  on  the  bottom  road  and  it 
blew,  and  the  last  thing  I  knew  was  that  Wallace  was  inside  that 
building.   So  I  got  back  up  there  and  I  tried  to  go  inside  that 
autoclave  building  in  three  different  ways.   I  couldn't  do  it. 
I'd  get  inside,  and  there  was  so  much  heat  and  steam,  and  I 
couldn't  get  to  Wallace.   I  was  scared  because  I  thought  maybe 
that  guy  died.   I  can't  describe  that  feeling:  you  got  all  this 
noise  going  on,  I  can't  find  one  of  my  operators,  you  can't  hear, 
you  can't  use  the  radios.   It's  Just  loud!   There's  steam 
belching  out  everywhere,  the  building's  rumbling  and  shaking,  and 
I  was  just  really  stressed.   I  kept  trying  to  tell  Mike  that  I 
couldn't  find  Wallace.   I  can't  find  Wallace--!  don't  know  where 
Wallace  is.   Mike  tried  to  get  into  the  building  a  bunch  of 
times.   Finally  I  met  Mike  outside,  and  the  noise  is  starting  to 
calm  a  bit  because  it's  losing  pressure,  and  I  look  over  across 


172 


the  parking  lot  and  there's  Wallace  standing  behind  one  of  the 
tanks.   After  I  saw  Wallace  then  everything  else  was--I  didn't 
care  what  happened.   Everything  else  was  fine.   I  went  over  and 
hugged  him.   We  waited  for  everything  to  depressurize  and  called 
everybody  out.   Now  we  had  C  'clave  down  because  we  had  a  weak 
line.   A  'clave  just  blew  because  it  had  a  weak  line.   So  we  went 
and  measured  B,  and  B's  was  thinner  was  the  rest  of  them.   So  we 
ended  up  shutting  them  down,  and  getting  everything  fixed.   That 
was  one  of  the  worst  nights. 

Swent:    And  nobody  was  hurt? 

Birdsey:   Nobody  was  hurt. 

Swent:    How  did  Wallace  get  out? 

Birdsey:   He  said  when  he  heard  that  thing  pop,  he  doesn't  remember  how, 
the  next  thing  he  knows  he  was  going  over  the  hill  at  the  CCD. 
He  got  out  of  that  building;  he  was  gone.   He  hadn't  made  it  all 
the  way  up  the  stairs.   Nobody  got  hurt,  and  it  actually  took  us 
about  three  hours  to  fix  the  pipe,  and  we  started  bringing  her 
back  on  line.   I  take  it  back:  they  were  going  to  do  that,  and 
then  what  happened  was  that  'clave  lost  pressure  so  fast  that  it 
was  sitting  there  just  whining.   Going  [makes  descriptive  noise]. 
It  was  sitting  there  cooling  down,  and  it  was  popping  and 
clinking  and  they  thought  they  may  have  had  some  brick  damage  in 
it.   So  they  went  ahead  and  went  into  a  mini-p.m.  on  it.   It  was 
fine;  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  it  and  they  patched  her  up  and 
put  her  back  on. 

Swent:     Mini-p.m.? 

Birdsey:   Planned  maintenance.   A  little  planned  maintenance.   They  didn't 
do  a  full  p.m.  on  it;  they  just  checked  bricks  and  pulled 
agitators,  and  checked  gaskets  and  stuff  like  that.   Made  sure 
there  wasn't  any  stress  fractures  or  anything  like  that. 

Swent:    The  other  ones,  you  just  replaced  those  titanium  lines? 

Birdsey:   --those  titanium  lines,  and  back  on  line.   We  had  two  'claves  up 
and  running  probably  within  five  or  six  hours.   It  started  to 
heat  back  up—they  weren't  running  because  it  takes  four  or  five 
hours  to  get  it  back  up  to  pressure  too.  Within  a  day,  we  had 
two  'claves  going. 

Swent:    That's  quite  a  story. 

Birdsey:   Then--I  was  on  vacation  at  this  time.   We  were  taking  a  'clave 
down,  and-- 


173 


Swent:    Why? 

Birdsey:   It  had  a  leak  in  it  or  something—a  leak  in  one  of  the  lines. 
Anyway,  we  were  depressurizing  it,  and  we  were  down  to  250 
degrees;  at  250  degrees  on  the  'claves,  we  shut  the  oxygen  off. 
You've  got  to  keep  the  oxygen  going  at  250  degrees  and  above, 
because  if  you  don't,  the  hot  slurry  gets  up  in  the  oxygen  lines, 
and  it  bakes  in  there  and  it  could  plug  the  lines.   So  you  got  to 
keep  the  oxygen  going  to  keep  the  lines  from  blowing  out  so  they 
don't  plug  up.   We  were  at  250  degrees  and  the  clave  was  going 
down,  so  the  problem  you  have  on  an  autoclave—or  one  of  the 
problems  you  have—is  all  three  claves  looked  identical.   This 
had  the  same  valves,  the  same  pipe  arrangement  as  this  one,  as 
this  one.   On  the  outside  out  here,  where  your  oxygen  lines  are, 
they're  identical  with  exception  of  the  oxygen  lines  are  moved 
down  one.   So  there's  nothing  here  in  front  of  C  'clave  for 
oxygen  and  the  C  ' clave 's  oxygen  valve  that  feeds  that  'clave, 
sits  in  front  of  B.   B  sits  in  front  of  A,  and  A  sits  clear  out 
here.   We  were  pressurizing  the  A  'clave;  it  came  time  to  shut 
the  oxygen  off. 

Proper  procedure  for  shutting  the  oxygen  off  is:  you  go 
ahead  and  go  to  minus  five  on  your  oxygen  control  valve;  you  then 
go  over  to  the  three  main  blocks  on  the  header,  and  you  close 
each  individual  block,  and  you  lock  it  out.   You  then  go  back  to 
your  oxygen  control  valve,  and  you  crack  it,  and  you  bleed  all 
the  pressure  in  that  line  off  in  the  'clave.   Then  you're  done. 

What  happened  was:  the  operator  went  out  to  do  that.   Like  I 
said,  B  'claves'  02  lines  are  sitting  in  front  of  A.   So  he  went 
and  he  closed  off  the  main  blocks  on  the  B  'clave. 

Swent:    Instead  of  A. 

Birdsey:   Instead  of  A.   The  operator  didn't  notice  that  the  B  'clave  02 
valves  were  closed.   He  should  have  saw  that  on  his  OlU—he 
should  have  seen  the  pressure  drop  off.  When  you're  running 
three  'claves,  it's  kind  of  hard- -you 're  only  taking  one  down 
anyway.   Where  the  operator  made  his  mistake  was:  when  it  came 
time  to  bleed  the  line,  when  Tom  said,  "Okay,  go  ahead  and  bleed 
the  line,  I've  got  the  valves  closed,"  instead  of  cracking  it,  he 
went  105;  just  opened  the  valve.   Tom  had  never  closed  those 
blocks,  so  he  took  three  hundred  pounds  of  02  and  just  slammed  it 
into  that  "clave.   He  started  a  titanium  fire  on  one  of  the 
titanium  lines  that  goes  in,  and  it  burned  out  through  the  side 
of  the  'clave  and  caught  on  fire,  and  melted  right  out  to  the 
top.   Big  old  fire  ball!   We  had  a  man  in  the  building  welding  at 
the  time,  and  stuff  was  flying  around  him.   It  broke  right 


174 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 
Swent : 
Birdsey: 

Swent : 
Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 


through  the  side  of  the  "clave.   Again,  we're  fortunate  nobody 
was  hurt. 

It's  amazing.   You  weren't  there  actually  to  see  this? 

No,  I  was  on  vacation.  I  was  fishing  actually  in  the  mountains. 

Good  place  to  be. 

I  didn't  get  to  see  this  one,  and  this  one  they  said  wasn't  loud, 
but  there  was  blue  flames  everywhere.  Again,  we  learned  a  lesson 
here. 

Terribly  lucky. 

And  these  'claves  are  kind  of  scary.   They're  to  be  respected  and 
it  was  something  new.   The  newer  'claves,  like  they  have  in 
Barrick  and  Lone  Tree  —  they  seem  to  be--you  figure  they  got  ten 
years,  they  were  brand  new,  and  they  made  all  kinds  of 
innovations,  and  they're  easier  to  operate  and  run. 

Those  are  smaller,  I  think,  also--aren't  these  unusually  large? 

No,  actually,  these  hold  about  thirty  thousand  gallons--!  can't 
remember  the  cubic  feet,  but  the  ones  in  Barrick  are  bigger. 
They're  making  them  bigger.   Lone  Tree's  may  be  a  little  smaller; 
but  Barrick1 s--they' re  getting  bigger  and  holding  more  pressure. 
Our  max  pressure  is  325  pounds;  three  hundred  and  we're 
panicking.   I  shouldn't  say,  panicking,  but  three  hundred- -hey, 
that's  not  good.   Two  ninety,  we're  worried,  three  hundred  is  not 
good,  and  325,  it's  too  late.  The  other  'claves--like  in 
Barrick- -they  run  450  pounds  on  it.   They're  up  there.   So, 
that's  the  kind  of  the  things  I  got  when  I  was  assistant  foreman 
working  on  the  autoclaves,  and  I  got  to  learn  to  know  them.   Then 
Mike  Shaw  quit  and  went  to  work  for  Asarco  in  Arizona.   They  made 
Mel  Heath,  who  had  one  time  been  a  foreman,  and  then  he  had  a 
heart  attack- -they  took  him  off  as  foreman  and  put  him  as  labor 
foreman- -they  took  Mel  Heath  and  put  him  back  as  foreman  on  C 
crew  as  my  foreman.   And  I  worked  with  Mel  for  about  a  year  and  a 
half;  still  being  an  assistant.   Dan  Prothro--who  was  general 
foreman  down  at  grinding- -he  left  and  they  took  one  of  the 
foremen,  and  put  him  down  there  as  general  foreman.  Rick  Jensen 
--they  moved  him  up  to  general  foreman.   So  that  left  an  opening 
in  the  operations  department,  and  they  put  me  as  foreman  over  in 
B  crew.   And  I  was  foreman  for  two  years. 


175 


Foreman  Over  B  Crew 


Swent:    Is  this  an  easier  jump  to  make? 

Birdsey:   No.   I  thought  it  was  going  to  be  easier.   First  of  all,  there 
was  a  little  bit  of  hard  feeling  to  start  off  with.   If  I  ever 
had  to  apologize  for  any  of  my  actions  in  life,  I'd  like  to 
apologize  for  the  way  I  acted  when  they  made  us  switch  crews. 
What  it  was:  everybody  had  been  on--I'd  been  with  C  crew  now  for 
five  years.   I  had  good  friends--Don  Horn—he  was  another  foreman 
who  had  been  on  his  crew  eight  or  nine  years.   So  we  all  had  our 
crews  we  had  been  on  for  a  very  long  time.   When  Rick  went  to 
general  foreman,  what  they  did  was,  they  took  the  foremen  and 
made  them  switch  crews,  and  that  upset  me. 

Swent:    So  you  were  taken  from  C  crew  to— 

Birdsey:   --to  B  crew.   I  was  C  crew  assistant  to  B  crew  foreman,  and  I 
acted  pretty  much  like  a  little  child.   It  upset  me  because  I 
knew  these  people,  I  knew  how  they  acted,  and  there  was  a  lot  of 
time  I  was  unsure.   It  was  like  I  was  a  foreman  on  a  new  crew--I 
don't  know  the  people. 

Swent:    Do  you  have  any  idea  why  they  did  this? 

Birdsey:   No,  I  really  don't. 

Swent:    I  wonder  if  there  was  some  theory  that  it's  better? 

Birdsey:   I  think  that  it  was  supposed  to  stop  favoritism  if  there's 

favoritism—and  there  probably  is.   I  have  to  be  honest  —  there1  s 
people  you  like  more  than  other  people  on  the  crew,  and  if  you're 
on  there  long  enough,  you  get  too  familiar,  and  you  start  giving 
people  breaks,  and  some  people  not,  so  you  change  crews.   I  just 
had  a  hard  time  dealing  with  it.   I  stayed  up  here  four  days  on 
my  days  off  trying  to  talk  them  out  of  doing  this,  and  it  finally 
got  down  to  the  point  where  it  was:  do  it  or  leave.   It  actually 
turned  out  very,  very  good.   I  took  over  and  became  foreman,  and 
once  I  settled  into  the  job,  it  was  a  whole  new  aspect.   As 
assistant—you're  doing  the  same  exact  job  you  were  but  instead— 
as  assistant,  you  had  a  security  blanket:  "Go  talk  to  the 
foreman."  If  you  don't  want  to  make  a  decision,  talk  to  the 
foreman,  he  can  make  it.   Now,  there's  no  one  to  talk  to;  you're 
out  here  all  by  yourself,  and  you  run  into  different  situations 
that  you  don't  know  what  to  do  about.   You've  got  to  make  calls. 

The  biggest  calls  that  bothered  me  is  the  safety  calls. 
When  you're  on  the  autoclaves  and  you  got  something  going  on, 


176 


they  call  you  up  and  say,  "Norm,  do  you  think  we  should  take  it 
down?"  You're  looking  at  this  leak,  and  you're  going,  "1  don't 
think  it's  bad  enough  to  go  down,  but  do  I  want  to  take  a  chance 
of  hurting  somebody?"  So  you  got  to  make  these  calls:  "No,  don't 
take  it  down,  we'll  run  it."  You  still  got  to  get  production; 
you  still  got  to  keep  the  tonnage  coming  through.   You  got  to  pay 
the  bills  here.   If  you  take  one  autoclave  down,  that's  one  third 
of  your  production  there.   I  didn't  like  making  those  calls;  but 
as  time  went,  they  became  easier.   A  lot  of  the  other  stuff—the 
stuff  you  don't  see—like  an  accident  on  Morgan  Valley  Road. 
You're  the  foreman,  they  call  you  down  there.   You  got  to  have 
them  call  the  ambulance,  you  go  down,  and  you  try  to  give  your 
assistance.   Things  like  that.   All  kinds  of  stuff:  running 
people  off  the  Davis  Creek.   Nobody's  supposed  to  be  down  there, 
and  you  have  to  chase  people  off,  and  they  get  violent—not 
violent,  but  rude.   They  don't  understand  why,  and  you  say  it's 
just  the  law:  "You  can't  be  fishing  here.   Get  out."  You  got  to 
argue  with  them. 

Swent:    You  had  control  on  that  territory? 

Birdsey:   Yes.   We  got  pumps  down  there  we  have  to  check. 

Swent:     Every  day? 

Birdsey:   Every  day.   We  got  to  drive  the  pipeline  everyday;  make  sure 

there's  no  spill  environmentally.   We  got  the  seepage  ponds  we 
got  to  check  every  day.  All  this  is  for— 

it 

Birdsey:   --usually,  you  get  your  people  off  the  labor  crew;  people  that 

work  on  the  labor  crew.   When  you  need  somebody  new,  the  next  guy 
on  the  labor  crew  will  come  unto  your  crew.   Firing,  I  don't  have 
the  direct--!  cannot  say,  "Get  out  of  here;  hit  the  road."   I 
cannot  do  that.   It's  got  to  go  to  a  hearing,  which  is  fair. 
It's  up  to  me  to  keep  the  documentation.   It's  up  to  me  to  make 
sure  that  they  know  they're  doing  wrong,  and  to  have  it  set  up— 
if  I  want  to  get  rid  of  somebody,  I'd  better  have  documentation, 
and  then  it  goes  to  the  personnel  manager,  and  it's  kind  of  out 
of  my  hands.   I  recommend  I  want  him  fired.   I  can  make  the 
recommendation.   If  they  fire  him,  it's  up  to  them.   It  makes  it 
fair;  that  way  I'm  out  of  the  picture.   If  I  had  a  personal 
problem  with  the  guy  I'm  not  going  to-- 


177 


Special  Training  for  Foreman;  How  to  Treat  People 


Swent:    Were  you  given  any  extra  training  when  you  became  foreman? 

Birdsey:   Yes,  they  gave  us  lots  of  training.   We  went  to  all  kinds  of 

classes,  seminars--Homestake' s  very  good  in  that  way.   I  think 
Homestake  picks  their  people,  uses  their  people  most  of  the  time, 
and  sets  their  people  up  most  of  the  time  to  do  their  job. 

Swent:    What  sorts  of  training  were  you  given? 

Birdsey:   Okay,  we  went  to--the  personnel  manager  had  little  seminars  on 
how  to  deal  with  people.   Basically,  things  that  I  like  to  say 
you  learn  in  kindergarten:  treat  people  like  you  want  to  be 
treated-- 

Swent :    Be  reminded. 

Birdsey:   Exactly.   How  to  deal  with  employees  that  aren't  doing  their  job 
--what's  the  best  way  to  do  that.   How  to  sit  down  and  talk  to 
people.   One  of  the  best  classes  they  ever  sent  was  called 
Dominic  Portolise.  The  guy's  name  was  Dominic  Portolise.   I  saw 
a  book  here  somewhere  when  I  was  sitting  here.   It's  a  Dominic 
Portolise  class;  he's  a  gentleman  that  they  let  us  talk  to  about 
how  to  treat  people,  and  teach  you.   What  he  tells  you  is--he  has 
pilots,  not  passengers.   In  other  words,  everybody's  in  charge  of 
their  own  plane.   When  you're  out  there  flying,  and  you're  doing 
your  job,  and  you're  flying  your  formation—it '  s  my  job  to  keep 
everybody  in  formation,  but  everybody's  in  charge  of  their  own 
plane.   If  you  want  to  keep  the  formation,  that's  fine,  but  you 
can't  run  the  plane  for  them.   So  you  got  to  make  them  want  to 
stay  with  the  formation.   Yet,  if  they  don't  want  to,  they're 
still  in  charge,  basically,  of  their  own  plane,  and  they're  going 
to  go  ahead  and  go  wherever  they  want  to  go  unless  you  guide 
them. 

Just  things  like  that:  little  motivational  courses  and  stuff 
which  I  find  to  be  very  interesting.  Tomorrow,  we  have  a  seminar 
on  anger  and  emotional  control.  That's  where  everybody  is  today. 
Which  is  very,  very  good.  We  all  need  anger  and  emotion  control. 

Swent:    Some  days  more  than  others. 

Birdsey:   Some  days  more  than  others,  right.   So  Homestake  sets  you  up  to 

really  get  that.   As  foreman,  they  send  me  to  these  things.   They 
sent  me  up  to  Winnemucca  for  an  operator's  seminar  on  heap 
leaching.   So  Homestake  takes  care  of  their  people  really  well. 
So  anyway,  I  was  foreman  on  B  crew  for  two  years.   Had  an 


178 


excellent  assistant,  Clay  Prothro.   He  and  I  worked  together  as  a 
team.   Had  a  pretty  good  crew. 

Swent:    Is  this  the  son  of  Dan? 

Birdsey:   The  son  of  Dan,  yes.   Worked  very  good  together  as  a  team; 

excellent,  excellent  person.   I've  always  been  interested  in  why 
things  happen  the  way  they  do.   I  do  not  have  a  college  degree  or 
anything  but-- 

Swent:    Doesn't  mean  you're  not  educated. 

Birdsey:   Right.   I've  always  been  interested  in  why  things  happen.   What's 
going  on  here?   I  know  what  a  precip  is,  but  what  is  precip?   I 
ask  a  lot  of  questions.   I've  always  been  interested,  and  I've 
always  been  very  loyal  to  Homestake;  because  I  grew  up  with 
Homestake:  1966,  they  moved  in.   I  saw  them;  my  father  worked  for 
Homestake,  my  brother  works  for  Homestake.   If  my  uncle  hadn't 
gotten  hurt,  he  probably  would  have  worked  for  Homestake.   All  of 
my  friends'  fathers  were  in  Homestake.   So,  I'm  very  loyal  to 
Homestake,  and  I  want  to  see  Homestake  do  good.   I  like  to  repay 
my  debts  to  Homestake.   So  I  maybe  try  to  be  a  little  bit  more 
dedicated. 

They  came  up  with,  We're  now  going  to  be  shutting  the 
autoclaves  down  in  a  year,  or  thereabouts,  because  we're  running 
out  of  ore.   So  they  were  short  a  metallurgist  in  the  lab.   Now, 
they  didn't  think  it  would  probably  be  right,  or  to  their 
advantage  to  hire  a  metallurgist  and  say,  "It's  very  possible  in 
a  year,  you're  going  to  be  laid  off."  So  what  they  did  was,  they 
put  it  out  for  bid:  was  there  any  foreman  out  here  who  would  like 
to  come  to  the  lab,  and  work  as  a  metallurgist  in  a  metallurgist 
position,  and  help  with  the  change  over  to  direct  en  (cyanide), 
and  learn  a  little  bit  about  metallurgy? 


A  Move  Up  to  Process  Specialist  in  the  Metallurgy  Lab 


Birdsey: 

Swent : 

Birdsey: 


So  I  said,  "Hey,  I  think  I'll  give  that  a  try. 
days;  back  off  shift  work. 

Direct  en? 


It's  straight 


Direct  en.   Direct  cyanidation.   Instead  of  going  through  the 
autoclaves,  we're  going  to  be  running  just  like  we  did  when  we 
first  started  off  the  oxide  ore.   So  we  got  the  stock  piles  down 
there,  and  we  got  to  move--Ray  [Krauss]  could  probably  answer 


179 


more  about  the  move—but  we've  got  between  eight  to  ten  years  of 
stockpiles  that  we'll  be  running  through  the  plant,  so  they'll  be 
laying  about  half  the  people  off  here.   So  until  then,  they 
needed  somebody  to  help  them  as  a  metallurgical  trainee.   So  I 
volunteered,  went  for  an  interview,  and  I  ended  up  getting  that 
position.   So  I  moved  off  the  shift  from  shift  foreman,  into  the 
lab  as  a  metallurgical  trainee. 

Swent:    Is  this  a  better  job? 

Birdsey:   It's  a  better  job;  it's  a  break  for  me,  although  I  am  ready  to  go 
back  to  operations  now  probably.   But  for  a  while,  you  get  a 
little  stressed  as  a  shift  foreman,  and  you  get  tired  of  dealing 
with  people  problems,  and  it's  like  I  told  my  new  boss,  "You 
could  put  me  back  on  shift  work,  and  I  probably  wouldn't 
complain.   You  could  put  me  on  a  seven-day  rotation,  and  I 
probably  wouldn't  complain.   However,  you  put  me  in  charge  of 
some  people,  and  I  might  whine  a  little  bit,  because  I  get  tired 
of  the  people."  The  equipment  is  fine:  it's  either  working  or 
not  working.   You  can  fix  it.   The  people  are  a  whole  different 
animal,  and  after  dealing  with  them  for  eight  years,  I  kind  of 
wore  out.   So,  it's  nice  being  able  to  work  in  the  lab,  and  I'm 
learning  stuff.   And  what  I'd  like  to  say  is--I  tell  the  people  I 
work  with,  "I'm  learning  from  you  guys  every  day,  you  guys  had  to 
pay  for  your  college,  I'm  getting  it  free—I'm  learning  from  you 
guys  every  day."  I'm  learning  so  much.   They  take  me  in,  and 
it's  a  wonderful  job. 

Swent:    What  are  you  doing? 

Birdsey:   My  title  is:  process  specialist.   Basically,  they  give  you  areas 
of  responsibility  in  the  lab.   My  areas  of  responsibility  are: 
the  lime  slaker;  the  CIP  area,  carbon- in-pulp  area;  flotation 
plant;  and  the  carbon  handling.   And  you're  basically  monitoring 
the  systems,  and  make  sure  they're  performing  right.   If  they're 
not  performing  right,  it's  kind  of  your  responsibility  to  find 
out  why.   Then  your  monthly  reports  have  got  to  be  in.   You  learn 
how  to  do  costs;  find  out  how  much  things  cost,  and  why  they 
cost.   Is  it  worth  putting  this  pump  in,  because  how  much  is  it 
going  to  cost  to  put  this  pump  in,  and  how  much  are  you  going  to 
gain  out  of  it?   So,  we  learn  all  that  stuff  with  this. 

Swent:    That's  something  new. 

Birdsey:   Brand  new!   It's  a  way  I've  never  had  to  think  before,  which  is 
very,  very  good,  because  some  day  I  hope  to  be  a  general  foreman 
somewhere.   This  is  part  of  being  a  general  foreman:  it's  not 
only  running  the  plant,  but  it's  figuring,  watching  the  cost, 
watching  the  budget,  so  this  is  going  to  help.   That's  why  I  did 


180 


this.   I  know  it's  only  going  to  be  a  year,  and  I  might  even  be 
laid  off--I  don't  even  know.   But  to  me,  it  was  worth  the  move  to 
add  this  to  my  career.   I  think  it's  a  good  career  decision, 
because  I'm  learning  things  in  here  that  I  never  expected  to 
learn.   I'm  in  charge  of  the  CIP;  I  need  to  watch  the  carbon 
concentration,  how  much  carbon  is  in  the  tanks,  grams  per  liter; 
making  sure  the  operators  are  keeping  those;  watching  the 
loadings,  how  much  gold  is  on  the  carbon  in  each  tank,  because 
you  can  lose  gold  if  you  don't  watch  it;  you've  got  to  do  cyanide 
monitoring—it  controls  the  amount  the  amount  of  cyanide 
residual.   I  get  to  run  that  and  monitor—make  sure  that's 
staying  up  and  running.   I  did  some  work  at  the  lime  slaker.   I 
hope  it  helps;  I  ran  that  lime  slaker  for  years,  and  never  really 
gave  it  much  thought.   We  used  to  sit  and  complain  about  bad  lime 
coming  in,  and  causing  grit  problems  throughout  the  plant,  and  I 
sat  down  one  day  and  realized  that  bad  lime  doesn't  cause  grit 
problems;  it's  the  way  we  run  the  slaker. 

So  I  went  and  studied  about  the  slaker,  and  learned  about 
how  the  classifier  really  works  and  how  the  attrition  cells  work, 
and  I  made  a  few  changes  down  there,  which  I  hope— and  it's  very 
hard  to  measure- -but  I  think  it's  going  to  save  us  some  lime 
consumption. 

What  I  figured  out  was:  you  might  have  bad  lime,  and  it  may 
not  slake  right,  it  may  not  dissolve  into  the  limestone,  and  it 
may  leave  a  waste  gangue,  or  waste  rock,  but  the  slaker  is 
designed  to  get  rid  of  that.   It  shouldn't  be  going  over,  and 
getting  up  in  the  tanks  and  causing  screens  to  plug  up  and  stuff 
like  that.   It  was  the  way  we  were  operating,  and  it  just  needed 
something  to  be  looked  at;  I  don't  think  I  came  with  anything 
great— 

Swent:    The  fact  that  you  had  done  the  operating— 

Birdsey:   --probably  helped.   I  started  thinking  about  it,  and  I  said, 

"That  shouldn't  be  a  problem.   It  was  designed  to  get  rid  of  the 
grit;  let's  find  out  why  it's  not."  We  used  a  few  little 
operating  adjustments  that  I  made,  and  I  read  up  on  it,  and  what 
I'm  trying  to  get  at  is:  by  going  into  the  lab,  and  looking  at  it 
from  that  aspect,  I  learned  a  whole  bunch  about  a  lime  slaker 
that  I  would  never  learn  if  I  hadn't  gone  into  the  lab.   It  was 
just  a  piece  of  equipment  I  had  to  run,  and  I  don't  know  why  it's 
working  or  not  working,  I  never  really  thought  about  it.  But 
going  into  the  lab  changed  that  perspective,  and  I  learned  a  lot. 

We  had  a  fine  carbon  collection  system— we ' re  utilizing  that 
now- -we  never  really  utilized  that  too  much  before.   But  we're 
utilizing  that  now;  we're  collecting  fine  carbon  so  we  could  go 


181 


out  and  find  a  place  to  put  it;  sell  it,  and  get  the  little  bit 
of  value  that's  on  it  back  so  we're  not  wasting  it  or  throwing  it 
away.   That's  what  I'm  also  working  on.  I'm  working  on  hidrostall 
pumps,  a  new  type  of  pump-- 

Swent:    What  kind? 

Birdsey:   Hidrostall.   [spell]  Hidrostall.  What  it  basically  is,  is  a  fish 
pump;  it  pumps  fish.   They  use  it  to  pump  fish  in  the  fish 
hatcheries,  but  it's  very,  very  gentle  on  carbon  and  it  doesn't 
tear  the  carbon  up  when  we  move  it.   One  thing  we  worry  about  is: 
carbon  collects  gold.   Fine  carbon  collects  gold  too,  and  if  it's 
fine  enough  to  go  through  the  screen,  it's  collecting  gold  and 
going  right  out  the  tails.   We  need  to  keep  that  fine  carbon  from 
happening.   So,  right  now  we're  using  the  eductors,  and  the 
eductors  are  very  damaging  to  carbon.   These  hidrostall  pumps, 
since  they  could  pump  fish,  and  they're  very  gentle--put  carbon 
with  them  and  see  if  it  could  lower  our  carbon  consumption  down 
and  keep  from  producing  these  fines  which  will  save  us  in  gold 
over  the  years.   So  I'm  working  on  that.   Again,  it's  only 
because  I  went  to  the  lab;  I  would  have  never  thought  or  heard  of 
a  hidrostall  pump,  or  even  considered  it,  but  it  opens  some  new 
eyes.   So  I'm  working  in  the  lab  now  as  a  metallurgist  trainee 
basically. 


Temporary  General  Foreman 


Birdsey:   This  week,  like  I'm  saying,  they  moved  me  up  to  a  temporary 
general  foreman  for  this  week  because  the  general  foreman  is 
gone,  so  I'm  basically  running  the  crews,  and  I'm  going  back  to 
the  lab.   So  they're  letting  me  go  up  and  do  a  little  bit  of 
that.   Not  much  general  foreman  experience,  but  they're  letting 
me  do  that. 

Swent:  That  would  be  the  logical  next-- 

Birdsey:  Right. 

Swent:  --step.   You've  doing  everything  now  in  the  plant? 

Birdsey:  Yes  I  have.   So  that's  where  we're  at  right  now. 

Swent:  So  what  happens  in  2005,  or  whatever  it  is? 

Birdsey:  Well,  I'll  tell  you  what:  I  hope  I  stay  with  Homestake. 


182 


Swent:  Do  you? 

Birdsey:  I  like  Homestake  a  lot;  I  grew  up  with  them— 

Swent:  You  said  your  father  worked  for  Homestake  but  — 

Birdsey:  My  stepfather. 

Swent:  Your  stepfather,  okay,  because  your  father  did  not. 

Birdsey:  Right.   No,  my  father  worked  for  Emperious. 

Swent:  Right,  but  your  stepfather  did.   So,  it's  several  generations. 

Birdsey:   Yes  it  is.   Actually,  one  night,  what  made  me  decide  to  join  the 
navy  right  off  the  bat--I  probably  should  have  said  this  before  — 
we  were  out  at  a  party—we  got  together  after  graduation—and  I'm 
sitting  there,  and  I'm  looking  at  all  these  kids  that  I'd  gone  to 
school  with,  and  there's  other  kids  that  have  already  graduated  a 
couple  of  years  ago,  and  they're  out  at  this  party,  and  I'm 
looking  and  I'm  saying,  "His  dad  is  a  miner.   His  dad  was  a  miner 
and  still  here.   He's  still  here."   I'm  looking  at  all  these 
kids,  and  I'm  saying,  "Man,  everybody's  still  here.   Isn't  there 
something  else  out  there?  Do  I  want  to  stay  here  and  be  like  one 
of  these  people?" 

One  of  my  friends—he  isn't  going  to  leave,  he's  never  going 
to  leave;  he's  going  to  be  there  the  rest  of  his  life.  Nothing's 
going  on  there  right  now.   But  I  said,  "Do  I  want  that?"   I  said, 
"No,  I  don't.   I  want  to  go  out  and  see  what  else  is  out  here." 
So  that's  one  reason  I  joined  the  navy.   It's  the  one  way  for  me 
to  get  out.   I'm  not  too  much  of  a  gambler,  so  I  figured  it's 
kind  of  hard  to  get  fired  from  the  navy,  so  I'll  go  out  there  and 
give  it  a  try. 

Swent:    Sounds  as  if  you  learned  from  every  experience  you've  had. 
Birdsey:   Yes  I  have. 


John  Turney's  Inspiration 


Swent:    Wherever  you  are,  you're  learning. 

Birdsey:   I'll  tell  you  why:  I  met  lots  of  good  people  in  every  aspect.   I 
met  a  lot  of  people  who  have  been  an  inspiration  to  me.   One  of 
the  ones  that  I  keep  saying  is  John  Turney.   I  don't  know  what  it 


183 


was,  but  he  never  failed  to  answer  a  question  for  me;  he  never 
did.   I  bet  if  I  called  him  right  now  and  ask  him  something,  he'd 
probably  answer  it  for  me.   He  never  failed  to  answer  a  question 
for  me,  and  he  has  a  good  sense  of  humor.   Thank  goodness  he  has 
a  good  sense  of  humor,  because,  boy,  you  talk  about  a  faux  pas 
one  day,  and  I  tell  you- -remember  that  show  the  Bob  Newhart  show. 
He  owned  a  restaurant,  and  they  had  these  three  crazy  guys: 
[Larry,  Darrell,  and  Darrell?]. 

Swent:    No,  I  didn't.   I  was  out  in  places  where  we  didn't  have 
television.   [laughter] 

Birdsey:   Okay.   [laughter]   Well,  Larry,  Darrell,  and  Darrell  were  just 
these  guys  that  are  just  nuts,  and  I  after  I'd  do  a  graveyard, 
you  get  a  little  dingy  in  the  morning.   1  had  a  pretty  good  sense 
of  humor,  and  I  thank  God  John  does  too.   So  I  was  sitting  there, 
and  I  come  into  the  foreman's  office.   I'd  come  up  from  grinding 
and  go  up  to  the  foreman's  office--!  was  still  an  assistant  at 
the  time  —  and  they  used  to  meet  up  there  at  the  foreman's  office, 
or  the  mill  superintendent's  office  every  Monday  morning  to  find 
out  what  happened  over  the  weekend.   I  don't  know  if  he  had 
something  going  on,  but  I  pulled  into  the  parking  lot,  and  there 
were  all  these  cars--trucks--and  I  couldn't  get  into  the  parking 
lot.   Boy  there  are  a  lot  of  people  here.   So  I  walk  into  the 
door,  and  I  look  right  into  the  foreman's  office,  and  Rick  Jensen 
and  one  of  the  foremen  were  sitting  there  at  the  desk.   I  was 
just  in  a  good  mood,  and  usually,  Phil  Walker,  the  mill 
superintendent,  John  Turney,  the  mill  manager,  and  Ron  Parker, 
the  general  manger  of  the  property,  would  go  into  Phil's  office 
and  have  a  meeting.   I  was  in  a  good  mood,  and  I  was  just  joking 
around  and  I  see  Rick  standing  there  and  I  said,  "Well,  it  looks 
like  Larry,  Darrell,  and  Darrell  are  here,  huh?"  And  I  walk 
around  the  corner,  and  there's  all  three  of  them  staring  at  me. 
[laughter]   So  John  Turney  said  something;  I  was  so  embarrassed  I 
quit  hearing. 

Rick  said  something  to  them  to  cover  for  me,  and  I  was  still 
embarrassed.   So  I'm  sitting  there  going,  "Man,  I  really  messed 
up."   So  the  phone  rings,  and  it's  John  Turney  and  we  wants  to 
talk  to  me.   He  was  asking  me  something  about  the  plant,  so  I 
answered  it.   I  said,  "John,  are  you  having  a  good  day?"  He 
says,  "By  the  way,  Norm,  which  one  am  I?"   [laughter]   That's 
just  John.   The  guy  just  has  been  an  inspiration  to  me. 


ISA 


Weekend  Dredging  for  Gold 


Swent : 


Birdsey: 


Swent : 
Birdsey: 

Swent : 
Birdsey: 


He  is  great.   What  do  you  do  for  recreation  around  your—what 
you've  enjoyed  about  living  on  Cobb  Mountain. 

Actually,  what  I  do  for  a  hobby  is—believe  it  or  not— gold 
detect.   I  got  a  gold  detector,  and  I  go  up  in  the  Sierras,  and  I 
have  a  dredge  and  gold  pan.   So,  my  hobby  is  basically  what  I  do 
for  a  living.   There's  not  much  to  do  like  that  around  here. 


You  have  a  dredge? 

I  have  a  little  two-inch  dredge, 
little  backpack  two-inch  dredge. 


Not  a  great  big  one;  those 


Sniper?   Is  that  what  they're  called? 

Exactly.   That's  sniping,  right.   New  rules  and  regulations— the 
way  the  environmental  is  nowadays,  they're  even  getting  rid  of 
those.   And  I  could  see  why:  as  the  gold  prices  go  up,  more  and 
more  people  get  out  there,  and  you  have  people  that  just  don't 
think.   I  went  to  one  place  up  in  Sonora— they  used  to  allow  gold 
dredging,  and  the  guys  said,  "No,  I'm  not  allowing  nobody  on  my 
property."   I  started  talking  to  him,  and  he  says,  "Let  me  show 
you  something."  He  takes  me  down  to  this  pasture,  and  there's 
oak  trees  knocked  down  where  they  undercut  the  oak  tress  from 
dredges.   He  said,  "You  see  where  my  pasture  land  is?  That  used 
to  be  a  150  feet  closer.   They  dredged  all  that  out.   I'm  not 
allowing  no  more  dredging."  And  the  federal  government  is  doing 
the  same  thing.   People  are  sneaking  in  with  their  dredges  and 
starting  to  dredge  during  the  salmon  spawn  and  all  the  silt  gets 
in  the  water,  and  people  are  not  taking  respect  for  the  land. 
That's  another  thing  about  Homestake  I  like:  Homestake  respects 
the  environmental  thing. 

But  anyway,  that's  what  I  do  for  a  hobby.   I  do  a  lot  of 
gold  panning  and  dredging,  and  I  fossil  hunt.   I  like  fossils, 
and  going  out  and  finding  shells  and  stuff. 

Swent:    Do  you  do  that  around  here? 

Birdsey:   I  do  that  around  here.   It's  a  good  area  for  it.  A  lot  of  my 
time  is  spent  up  here.   I  like  my  job,  and  most  of  my  time  is 
spent  here.   Of  course,  I've  got  my  computer;  I  like  my  computer, 
and  I  play  on  my  computer  all  the  time. 

Swent:    Has  your  wife  enjoyed  it  here? 


185 


Birdsey:   Yes,  she  loves  it  here.   She's  working  for  a  dentist.   She's  an 

RDA;  she's  working  down  at  Clearlake  for  a  dentist.   She's  worked 
there  nine  years.   She  enjoys  it;  she  likes  it  here.   If 
Homestake  lays  me  off,  or  whatever  happens,  so  be  it,  but  I  hope 
--you  got  a  few  little  projects  starting  up  in  Nevada,  and  maybe 
I  could  transfer  out  there,  but  I'd  like  to  stay  with  Homestake. 
My  wife  isn't  too  happy  about  Nevada. 

Swent:    She'd  like  to  stay  here. 

Birdsey:   But  she  would.   I  could  see  why:  her  family  is  all  around  her. 

Swent:    Well,  that's  a  ways  down  the  line.   But  people  are  beginning  to 
talk  about  the  wind-down  now. 

Birdsey:   Unfortunately,  it's  not  really  a  surprise.   That's  what  happens 
with  ore  bodies:  there's  only  so  much  gold  there. 

Swent:    But  a  disappointment  I  think. 

Birdsey:   I  think  it  has  been  a  disappointment.   I  think  it  was  supposed  to 
be  a  twenty-year  project.   But  things  happen. 

Swent:    It's  going  to  be  about  twenty  years,  actually. 

Birdsey:   Actually,  yes.   It's  not  going  to  be  twenty  years  of  autoclave 
production. 

Swent:    I  suspect  that  there  was  a  lot  of  hope  that  they'd  really  find 
more  ore. 

Birdsey:   Yes  there  was.   There  was  a  lot  of  hope.   Not  for  lack  of  trying. 
They've  been  doing  underground  exploration.   And  there  still 
could  be;  it's  very  possible.   High  hopes. 

Swent:    Do  you  ever  go  back  to  Colorado? 

Birdsey:   I've  been  back—about  three  years  ago  I  was  back  for  my  brother's 
wedding. 

Swent:    Is  anything  going  on  in  Creede? 

Birdsey:   Creede  is  shut  down.   It's  a  tourist  town  now.   They've  done  lots 
of  good  things:  they've  got  a  mining  museum  in  there;  they've  got 
the  old  steam  motors  that  pulled  the  ore  cars  out.   I  think  they 
even  have  my  grandfather's  pictures,  and  they  have  some  of  my 
stepfather's  stuff  in  there.   For  a  book,  if  you  really  wanted  to 
hear  some  good  stories  about  mines  and  underground,  you  could 


186 


talk  to  my  stepfather  and  Tankersley--well,  he's  dead  now—all 
those  old  miners  could  tell  you  stories. 

Swent:    I  think  you're  pretty  good. 

Birdsey:   I  was  always  listening  to  them  when  I  was  a  kid.   And  my 

grandfather—he '  s  passed  on  now,  but  he  had  some  good  stories. 
As  I  was  growing  up,  he  even  had  Old  Key—we  called  him 
[Chappy?] --Key  Lozot  was  his  name,  and  he  was  this  old  miner,  and 
he  lived  in  this  old  shack  in  the  town,  but  he'd  been  there— 
since  I  was  a  kid,  I  remember  him— and  he  always  had  this  black 
dog  with  him.   We'd  be  out  backpacking,  and  there  would  be  Old 
Chappy  there  in  the  mountains  walking  the  old  mines,  and  talking 
about  the  old  mines.   I  don't  know  if  he  was  a  miner,  or  what  he 
was,  but  he  used  to  have  a  lot  of  stories  about  it.   Some  good 
t  ime  s . 

Swent:    A  special  kind  of  appeal. 

Birdsey:   The  old  mining  town.   Rolltop  desk—I  don't  why—I  always 
associate  a  rolltop  desk  with  mines,  I  don't  know  why.   I 
remember  when  I  was  growing  up  one  time,  my  grandfather  should 
have  never  ever  showed  me  this— but  when  we  were  small  we  had 
lots  of  old  storage  sheds  from  the  old  mine  times,  and  there  was 
this  one  shed  across  the  street— doors  were  hanging  off  and 
stuff --we  were  kids  in  there  playing  around.   I  was  drinking  a 
cup  of  water,  and  there  were  these  rocks  over  in  the  corner,  so  I 
tossed  this  water  over  in  the  corner,  and  it  hit  these  rocks. 
Smoke  started  coming  up.   I  was  running  around  with  them,  and 
pouring  water,  and  watching  all  the  smoke  coming  out.   It  kind  of 
smelled  kind  of  bad.   I  come  walking  in  the  house  with  this 
stuff,  and  my  grandpa  saw,  and  said,  "What  are  you  doing?   Give 
me  that.   What  are  you  doing  with  that?"   I  said,  "What  does  it 
do?"  He  should  have  never  done  it- -because  he  had  this  big 
cement  fish  pond  with  no  fish  in  it.   He  gets  the  water  hose  and 
fills  it  full  or  water,  throws  the  carbide  in  there,  and  takes  a 
match  and  lights  it.   I'm  surprised  he  didn't  burn  the  town  down. 
We  had  these  little  bomb  bottles;  we'd  light  it,  and  it  would 
catch  on  fire  back  in  these  sheds.   [laughter]   I  remember  old 
carbide  lamps;  those  used  to  be  common  around  the  house.   Worth 
some  money  now. 

Swent:  I'm  sure,  yes.   Antique  collectors. 

Birdsey:  That's  what  it  was:  carbide. 

Swent:  Well,  you've  got  a  lot  of  great  stories  yourself. 

Birdsey:  I  hope  I  have  a  lot  more  too. 


187 

Swent:  I  hope  so  too.   I  guess  we  kind  of  covered  the  field? 

Birdsey:  That's  pretty  much. 

Swent:  This  has  been  just  wonderful.   I  certainly  thank  you. 

Birdsey:  You  bet  you. 

Swent:  It's  been  wonderful. 


Transcribed  by  Estevan  Sifuentes 
Final  Typed  by  Shannon  Page 


188 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 


University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California 


Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  Series 
Knoxville/McLaughlin  Project 


Brice  Bledsoe 


DIRECTOR,  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT 


Interview  conducted  by 

Eleanor  Swent 

in  1995 


Copyright  C  1998  by  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


Brice  Bledsoe,  1989. 


189 


INTERVIEW  WITH  BRICE  BLEDSOE 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  190 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  192 

I  THE  SOLANO  PROJECT,  BUREAU  OF  RECLAMATION  193 
Training  in  Architecture  and  Civil  Engineering  193 
Designing  the  Distribution  System  for  the  Solano  Irrigation 

District,  1958-1962  194 

II  THE  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT,  1948  196 
Pre-World  War  II  Forerunner,  the  Solano  County  Water  Council  196 
Solano  County  Flood  Control  and  Water  Conservation  District,  1945  198 
Monticello  Dam  Is  On  a  Three-County  Corner  199 
Designed  to  Accommodate  a  Future  Power  Plant  199 
Assistant  District  Manager,  1967  200 
SID  Funding  from  Water  Sales,  Standby  Charges,  Special  Assessment  201 

III  MANAGER  OF  THE  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT,  1967-1995  203 
Reconsidering  a  Power  Plant,  1977  203 
Gravel  Mining  in  Putah  Creek  204 
The  Putah  Creek  Diversion  Canal  and  Pipelines:  A  300-Mile  System  205 
Trying  to  Transfer  the  Solano  Project  to  Local  Authority  208 

IV  THE  MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  BECOMES  A  SOLANO  COUNTY  CONCERN  211 
1981:  "We  Were  Going  to  Have  to  Take  Notice"  211 
Betsy  Marchand  Gives  a  Warning  212 
Concern  for  Protecting  Water  Quality  in  the  Berryessa  Watershed  214 
Ray  Krauss,  Surprised  at  Solano  County  Interest?  215 
Mounting  a  Legal  Threat  Unless  Solano  County  Is  a  Player  in  the 

Planning  216 

Concern  Both  for  Domestic  Population  and  Industrial  Water  Users  218 

Demanding  Absolutely  Fail-Safe  Containment  of  Tailings  219 

Meetings  in  San  Francisco  with  Officials  and  Attorneys  220 

Requiring  More  Monitoring:  Daily,  Not  Monthly  222 

Ensuring  Future  Oversight  224 

The  Result:  "Outstanding;  One  of  the  Cleanest  Mining  Operations"  225 

The  Future  of  SID:  Inevitable  Adjudication  Over  Water  Rights  226 

Regulating  the  Transport  of  Cyanide  229 

After  Many  Years,  No  Threat  to  the  SID  Waters  229 
Water  Law  Specialists  Minasian,  Minasian,  Minasian,  et  al.  of 

Oroville  231 

Porno  Indians  Are  Now  A  Constituency  232 


190 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY- -Brice  Bledsoe 

Brice  Bledsoe  was  director  of  the  Solano  Irrigation  District  [SID] 
during  the  years  when  Homestake  was  seeking  permits  to  develop  the 
McLaughlin  Mine,  and  he  played  a  critical  role  in  that  process.   His  name 
was  given  to  me  by  Ray  Krauss  of  Homestake  and  also  by  Twyla  Thompson  of 
Yolo  County.   I  telephoned  to  him  and  found  he  was  willing  to  be 
interviewed,  but  it  was  a  long  time  before  we  actually  scheduled  the 
interview  because  he  was  enjoying  retirement  and  travel.   The  invitation 
letter  was  sent  to  him  and  returned,  and  the  interview  was  conducted  on  31 
August  1995  after  a  postponement  because  he  came  home  from  Switzerland  with 
a  respiratory  illness. 

The  SID  headquarters  on  Elmira  Road  in  Vacaville  is  a  new  Spanish 
mission-style  building  which  dominates  a  hill  and  projects  an  image  of 
housing  an  agency  of  major  authority.   We  met  in  an  interior  conference 
room  at  an  enormous  walnut  horseshoe  table.   The  only  decorations  are  an 
American  flag  on  a  standard  and  a  large  aerial  photo  of  Monticello  Dam,  its 
concrete  apron  holding  back  Lake  Berryessa.   Brice  Bledsoe  had  trained  as 
both  a  civil  engineer  and  an  architect,  and  he  is  rightfully  proud  of  the 
building  which  he  helped  to  design  for  the  agency  he  directed.   He  is  tall, 
slender,  well  dressed,  and  looks  younger  than  his  years.   Skilled  at 
dealing  with  people,  he  was  well  prepared  for  the  interview.   He  gave  me  a 
copy  of  the  history  of  SID  which  had  been  printed  for  its  fortieth 
anniversary  and  a  map  of  its  locations.   He  had  the  latest  report  from  the 
Colorado  firm  contracted  to  oversee  the  McLaughlin  monitoring  for  more  than 
seventy  years,  as  well  as  the  final  legal  agreement  hammered  out  between 
Homestake  and  SID. 

Much  is  made  of  the  fact  that  the  McLaughlin  project  lay  within  three 
counties:  Napa,  Lake,  and  Yolo.   The  water  from  the  Knoxville  District 
drainage  basin  goes  through  Lake  Berryessa  and  into  the  Solano  Irrigation 
District.   This  put  SID  in  the  picture,  although  it  had  no  power  to  grant 
or  deny  permits.   The  Solano  Irrigation  District  is  unique  in  California; 
it  is  not  a  part  of  either  the  federal  or  state  water  projects,  and  it  lies 
entirely  within  one  country.   It  thus  has  autonomy  and  local  authority.   It 
supplies  water  to  several  growing  municipalities,  to  rich  agricultural 
land,  and  to  significant  food  and  beverage  processors.   The  purity  of  this 
water  is  of  vital  importance  to  millions  of  people. 

As  we  conversed  before  beginning  the  taping,  I  realized  that  this  was 
a  story  of  many  tangled  jurisdictions.   The  SID  was  established  after  World 
War  II  as  an  independent  entity,  and  the  Monticello  Dam/Lake  Berryessa 
project  has  a  long  history  of  delicate  negotiations  involving  Napa,  Yolo, 
and  Solano  Counties,  as  well  as  the  Bureau  of  Reclamation  and  the  state 
Department  of  Resources.   Bledsoe  came  into  the  picture  when  the  SID  was 
building  the  canals  and  pipelines  and  the  Bureau  of  Reclamation  was  still 
in  control.   Later  SID  took  over  control  of  irrigation,  and  still  later, 
when  he  was  director,  gained  control  of  the  power  plant  and  distribution. 
This  all  involved  dealing  with  multiple  agencies  and  units  of  government. 
At  the  time  that  Homestake 's  venture  came  along,  the  major  challenge  for 
SID  was  gaining  control  of  the  power  plant. 


191 

Bledsoe  was,  in  his  own  words,  "upset"  at  not  being  included  from  the 
beginning  in  the  McLaughlin  planning  process.   He  learned  about  the 
proposed  mine  through  a  telephone  call  from  a  Yolo  County  supervisor,  and 
not  through  Homestake.   So  things  got  off  to  a  poor  start.   In  the  end, 
however,  after  many  meetings  and  much  work  for  two  sets  of  lawyers,  a 
satisfactory  agreement  was  reached,  and  now  Bledsoe  is  satisfied  that  he 
guaranteed  that  the  water  distributed  by  SID  is  of  the  highest  purity. 

The  tapes  of  the  two-hour  interview  were  transcribed  in  the  Regional 
Oral  History  Office,  lightly  edited,  and  sent  to  Bledsoe  for  review.   He 
made  several  minor  clarifications  of  diction  and  returned  the  transcript 
promptly.   The  manuscript  was  corrected  and  indexed  at  our  office.   The 
tapes  are  deposited  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and  are  available  for  study. 

The  Brice  Bledsoe  interview  is  one  of  more  than  forty  interviews 
which  were  conducted  by  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  from  1993-1997  in 
order  to  document  the  development  of  the  McLaughlin  gold  mine  in  the 
Knoxville  District  of  Lake,  Napa,  and  Yolo  Counties,  California,  from  1978- 
1996,  as  part  of  the  ongoing  oral  history  series  devoted  to  Western  Mining 
in  the  Twentieth  Century.   The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  was  established 
in  1954  to  record  the  lives  of  persons  who  have  contributed  significantly 
to  the  history  of  California  and  the  West.   The  office  is  a  division  of  The 
Bancroft  Library  and  is  under  the  direction  of  Willa  K.  Baum. 

Eleanor  Swent,  Project  Director,  Research  Interviewer/Editor 
September  1997 


192 

Regional  Oral  History  Office  University  of  California 

Room  486  The  Bancroft  Library  Berkeley,  California  94720 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 

(Please  write  clearly.   Use  black  ink.) 

Your  full  name    Brice  Bledsoe.  Jr. 

Date  of  birth   Sept.  21  .  1927 Birthplace  Navasota .  Texas 

Father's  full  name   Brice  T.  Bledsoe 

Occupation Rancher Birthplace   Gilmer.  Texas 

Mother's  full  name   Ha  Mae  Bledsoe 

Occupation Teacher Birthplace   Texas 

Your  spouse Wanda  L.  Bledsoe 

Occupation   Housewife  (ex-secretary)    Birthplace  Allen,  Oklahoma 

Your  children   Mary  Kathleen,  Janet  Lynn,  Brice  Jeffrey 

Where  did  you  grow  up? South  Texas 

Present  community Vacaville,  CA  (35  years) 

Education University  of  Texas  (4  1/2  years  Engineering) 

Occupat  ion  ( s )  Retired  (Executive  Pi  rector—Sol  ano  Irrigation  District) 
Areas  of  expertise Water  supply  and  distribution. 


Other  interests  or  activities   History,  architecture,  travel 


Organizations  in  which  you  are  active   Association  of  California  Water  Agencies, 
National  Water  Resources  Association,  Central  Valley  Project  Water  Association, 
Sol ano  Water  Advisory  Commission,  Sol ano  Water  Authority 


193 


I   THE  SOLANO  PROJECT,  BUREAU  OF  RECLAMATION 


[Date  of  Interview:  August  31,  1995]**1 


Training  in  Architecture  and  Civil  Engineering 


Swent:     All  right,  Brice,  we're  getting  started  now.   You  just  returned 
from  a  trip  to  Europe  and  now  we'll  have  to  get  back  to-- 

Bledsoe:   Back  to  reality? 

[Mr.  Bledsoe  returned  from  his  trip  abroad  with  a  severe  cold.] 

Swent:     To  Solano  County,  back  to  reality,  yes.   To  begin  with,  let's 
have  you  tell  about  where  you  started  from  and  your  background 
and  training  before  you  came  here  to  Vacaville.   You  said  you 
were  born  in  Texas,  on  September  21,  1927. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  near  the  Gulf  Coast,  near  the  city  of  Houston—a  small 
town.   And  graduated  high  school  there- - 

Swent:     What  was  the  town? 

Bledsoe:   Navasota--an  Indian  name.   It's  about  forty  miles  north  of 
Houston.   And  then  went  on  to  college  at  the  University  of 
Texas;  started  out  in  the  School  of  Architecture;  decided  to 
change  my  major  after  a  year  and  a  half  to  civil  engineering. 
Let's  see,  that  was  —  left  college  in  late  1950. 

Swent:     Was  water  a  particular  interest  of  yours  for  any  reason? 

Bledsoe:   To  begin  with,  structures,  primarily.   Of  course,  my  interest  in 
architecture  and  changing  that  to  concrete  and  reinforced 


lff  This  symbol  indicates  that  a  tape  or  a  segment  of  a  tape  has  begun  or 
ended.   A  guide  to  the  tapes  follows  the  transcripts. 


194 


concrete  structures  were  my  major  interest  —  although  I  had  an 
interest  in  geology,  too.   My  career  after  college:  I  began 
working  with  a  company  as  a  surveyor  in  my  younger  days,  and  was 
transferred  to  California  in  1952.   So  I've  been  in  California 
now  forty-three  years. 

Swent:     But  that  was  in  southern  California,  you  said. 

Bledsoe:   First  to  Santa  Barbara,  yes.   I  thoroughly  enjoyed  a  year  in 

Santa  Barbara,  and  then  moved  to  Vallejo.   From  there,  I  met  my 
wife  in  Vallejo;  and  we  were  married  there  about  a  year  after  we 
met.   And  all  three  of  our  children  were  born  in  Vallejo.   So  I 
guess  after  forty-three  years  of  my  life,  I  have  to  say  I'm  all 
Californian,  no  Texan. 

But  I  came  to  work,  first—in  Vallejo,  I  took  a  job  with  a 
consulting  engineering  firm,  and  a  lot  of  the  work  I  did  while 
there  for  about  four  years,  I  believe,  included:  construction  of 
the  Fairf ield-Suisun  City  sewage  system  and  their  first  sewage 
treatment  plant;  also  some  work  in  the  Isleton-Rio  Vista  area  on 
sewage  treatment.   The  firm  I  was  working  for  specialized  in 
that  type  of  engineering.   Then  the  project—when  I  realized 
that  the  Solano  project  was  nearing  completion  and  that— 

Swent:     And  what  was  the  Solano  Project? 

Bledsoe:   The  Solano  Project—the  Bureau  of  Reclamation  project,  which 

includes  Monticello  Dam,  Lake  Berryessa,  the  Putah  Diversion  Dam 
on  Putah  Creek,  and  about  thirty- five  miles  of  Putah  South 
Canal--  that  part  of  the  project  was  constructed  by  the  Bureau 
of  Reclamation;  it's  still  federally  owned.   But  after 
completion  of  that  project,  Solano  Irrigation  District  was  about 
to  start  construction  of  some  three  hundred  miles  of  pipelines 
and  canals  to  convey  the  water  to  the  farms— in  some  cases  to 
the  urban  areas— within  Solano  County.   And  that,  of  course, 
piqued  my  interest,  too. 

I  started  work  for  the  consultant  who  was  doing  the  design 
work  for  the  district,  for  its  distribution  system.   Stoddard 
and  Karrer. 


Designing  the  Distribution  System  for  the  Solano  Irrigation 
District.  1958-1962 


Swent : 


What  was  the  name? 


195 

Bledsoe:   Stoddard  and  Karrer.   [spells] 
Swent:     And  they  were  the  consultants  to--? 

Bledsoe:   They  were  the  consultants  designing  the  distribution  system  for 
SID.   I  started  work  with  that  in  the  local  office,  working  with 
the  engineers  in  charge  of  construction;  did  that  for  four 
years. 

Swent:     When  was  that? 

Bledsoe:   Let's  see.   That  started  in  '58.   That  was  my  first  time  on  the 
project  in  1958;  as  I  recall  that  was  in  October  '58.   Then  in 
October  of  '62,  as  we  were  wrapping  up  our  construction  of  the 
distribution  system,  the  district  asked  if  I  would  consider 
staying  on  permanently  on  the  district  engineering  staff.   And 
certainly,  since  I  had  bought  a  home  here,  and  my  family  had 
settled  in  Vacaville,  that  was  very  appealing.   So  I  did  then 
become  a  regular  employee  in  October  of  '62  for  the  district 
directly. 


196 


II   THE  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT,  1948 


Pre-World  War  II  Forerunner,  the  Solano  County  Water  Council 


Swent:     Let's  go  back  just  a  little  bit,  if  you  don't  mind.   This  might 
be  a  good  time  to  reconstruct  some  of  this  organization  of  the 
district;  although  some  of  it  you  weren't  actually  personally 
involved  with,  but  I  think  it's  background  that  we  need.   You 
just  showed  me  a  little  pamphlet  that  indicated  that  there  were 
local  people  as  early  as  1940  who  were  interested  in  this  dam-- 

Bledsoe:   Right.   In  setting  the  stage  for  that  concern  and  that  interest, 
I  think  too:  in  the  late  thirties,  the  increased  well  pumping-- 
both  in  Solano  County  and  the  neighboring  southern  part  of  Yolo 
County- -were  causing  a  large  overdraft  in  the  groundwater,  which 
was  a  primary  source  up  to  that  time  for  most  of  the  water  in 
Solano  County.   Obviously,  that  created  a  concern:  the 
groundwater  was  being  used  both  for  domestic  use,  urban  use,  and 
some  irrigation. 

Swent:     What  were  they  growing  here  at  that  time? 

Bledsoe:   The  irrigated  crops  were  primarily  orchard  and  some  vineyard, 
but  mostly  orchard  crops—heavy  in  prunes,  walnuts,  peaches, 
pears,  apricots.   There  was  some  irrigated  pasture.   I'm  not 
sure  what  other  crops  were  being  grown  at  the  time.   But  most  of 
the  area  was  dry-farmed;  I  mean,  the  limited  groundwater  supply 
did  not  allow  the  area's  irrigated  agriculture  that  we  have 
today.   Possibly  25  percent  of  what  later  became  the  irrigation 
district,  maybe  25  to  30  percent  was  actually  irrigated 
originally.   The  other  was  in  dry  crops—winter  wheat  and  native 
pasture. 

Swent:     And  each  individual  farmer  was  doing  his  own  well  pumping  and 
irrigation? 


197 


Bledsoe; 


Yes.   The  wells  were  individually  owned, 
irrigation  district  prior  to  1948. 


There  was  no 


Swent : 


Bledsoe: 


Swent : 
Bledsoe: 

Swent : 
Bledsoe: 
Swent : 
Bledsoe: 


There  had  been  a  number  of  proposals.   In  the  eastern  part 
of  the  county,  there  was  a  reclamation  district  that  early-- 
probably  established  maybe  as  early  as  1920:  the  Reclamation 
District  2068,  which  is  east  of  Dixon.   But  they  were  using 
delta  water  supply. 

This  first  organization  that  you  showed  me  a  little  pamphlet  for 
is  called  the  Solano  County  Water  Council.   So  that  was  just  an 
ad  hoc-- 

It  was  an  ad  hoc  group  although  it  had  been  authorized  and 
approved  by  the  county  board  of  supervisors  to  investigate 
possible  water  projects  and  water  supply.   It  had  a  number  of 
county  leaders,  citizens,  who  worked  very  hard.   [pause;  coughs] 


That  was  created 


There  was  the  Solano  Water  Conservation--Flood-- 

Flood  Control  and  Water  Conservation  District, 
much  later. 

That  was  later. 

Yes,  that  was  much  later. 

Okay. 


The  Solano  County  Water  Council  was  studying  and  investigating 
various  possibilities  prior  to  World  War  II.   The  investigations 
certainly  were  halted  during  the  war;  the  council  became  very 
active  again,  however,  in  '45  at  the  end  of  World  War  II-- 
realizing  that  they  still  had  a  problem,  and  hopefully  that  some 
of  the  federal  funding  which  had  been  concentrated  on  the  war 
effort  could  be  turned  to  some  internal  programs  and  hoping  to 
be  able  to  get  some  federal  financing.   So  they  became  very 
active  again  in  1945--which  I  guess,  at  that  point,  we're 
getting  very  close  to  the  1948  creation  of  Solano  Irrigation 
District. 

At  any  rate,  when  it  was  determined  that  possibly  the 
federal  government  might  be  willing  to  construct  a  project, 
under  reclamation  law,  it  was  very  necessary  that  they  had  some 
entity  to  guarantee  the  repayment  of  the  project  cost—because 
all  of  the  cost  had  to  be  repaid  to  the  federal  government  over 
time.   This  led  to  the  formation  of  SID  then  in  1948.   They  held 
an  election  of  the  landowners  in  the  proposed  district,  and  it 
was  approved  by  a  large  margin  to  go  ahead  with  the  formation. 


198 


That  allowed,  then,  further  activity  at  the  federal  level  to 
take  place.   They  began  to  file  some  proposals  and  reports  with 
Congress  at  that  time.   In  fact,  I  believe  the  earliest  report 
by  the  Department  of  the  Interior  actually  was  dated  1948  or 
1949. 


Solano  County  Flood  Control  and  Water  Conservation  District, 
1945 


Bledsoe:   So  the  formation,  which  you  already  mentioned,  of  the  Solano 
County  Flood  Control  and  Water  Conservation  District,  then 
followed  about  three  years  after  the  1948  formation  of  SID,  when 
it  was  decided  that  at  least  five  of  the  cities  were  going  to 
take  an  active  part  in  contracting  for  part  of  the  water  supply. 
And  rather  than  have  the  irrigation  district  contract  for  the 
sale  of  that  water  to  the  cities,  they  felt  that  a  regional 
umbrella  organization  should  be  set  up  to  act  as  the  primary 
contractor  then  with  the  federal  government;  and  that  led  to  the 
formation  of  Solano  County  Flood  Control  and  Water  Conservation 
District. 

Swent :     There  must  be  an  acronym  or  easy  nickname  for  that  district. 
What's  it  popularly  called? 

Bledsoe:   Well,  now  that  district  has  been  totally  reorganized  and 

renamed.   It's  now  the  Solano  County  Water  Agency,  which  locally 
is  referred  to  as  "SCWA."  Much  easier  to  handle  than  the  Solano 
County  Flood  Control  and  Water  Conservation  District,  which  we 
never  found  an  acronym  for. 

Swent:     Isn't  that  funny.   So  by  the  time  you  came  on  board,  then—well, 
when  you  were  with  the  consulting  group- -the  SID  had  already 
been  set  up  and  was-- 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  that's  right.   It  was  operating  and  in  fact,  had  secured 
federal  loans  for  the  construction  of  its  own  distribution 
system.   That  system  was  built  with  a  federal  loan  program,  and 
it  was  totally  SID's  responsibility,  then,  for  repaying  that 
cost.   As  opposed  to  the  cost  of  Monticello  and  the  Putah 
Diversion  Dam,  which  we  also  paid  for  under  water  rates  that 
were  established  by  contract. 


199 


Monticello  Dam  Is  On  a  Three-County  Corner 


Swent:     I  don't  want  to  get  mixed  up  on  what  we  talked  about  before  we 

taped,  but  the  major  dam  is  the  Monticello  Dam;  and  this  is,  you 
told  me,  on  the  county  line. 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   Actually,  the  location  of  the  dam  is  what  historically  was 
referred  to  as  Devil's  Gate  on  Putah  Creek,  a  very  narrow 
canyon.   It  happens  to  be  on  a  three-county  corner,  with  Yolo  on 
the  north  and  east,  Solano  on  the  south  and  east,  and  Napa  to 
the  west.   So  there's  a  three-county  corner.   There  has  been 
some  argument  with  Napa  over  the  exact  location  of  that  county 
boundary,  with  Napa  claiming  that  Monticello  Dam  is  just  inside 
of  Napa  County.  According  to  the  records  that  we  have  here  and 
the  surveys  that  the  Bureau  made,  clearly,  the  Dam  is  at  least  a 
hundred  yards  inside  the  Solano  County  boundary.   The  exact 
location  of  that  boundary  has  never  really  been  determined 
legally,  but  only  by  early  description  of  the  ridgetop  and  where 
the  ridgetop  crossed  the  canyon. 

Swent:     But  there  might  be  a  choice  of  ridges,  you  said. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  there  are  apparently  two  possibilities.   Of  course,  Napa 
wants  the  eastern  possibility  and  we  insist  the  western 
possibility  is  the  boundary,  but-- 

Swent:     And  then  Putah  Creek  is  the  division  between  Yolo  and  Solano. 

Bledsoe:   Putah  Creek  is  the  boundary  between  Yolo  and  Solano,  at  least  to 
a  point  out  in  the  Yolo  bypass  where,  actually,  the  boundary 
makes  a  jog  south  between  the  two  counties.   For  the  most  part, 
it  is  the  boundary  between  the  two  counties,  yes. 

Swent:     So  is  there  a  chance  that  the  north  toe  of  the  dam  would  be  in 
Yolo  County? 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   In  fact,  we  have  documents  that  support  that  the  north  toe 
of  the  dam  is  in  Yolo  County  and  the  south  toe  in  Solano  County 
--but  none  of  it  in  Napa  County.  And  I'm  sure  there  are  a  few 
people  in  Napa  County  who  would  dispute  that. 


Designed  to  Accommodate  a  Future  Power  Plant 


Swent:     At  the  time  that  the  dam  was  built,  you  told  me  a  provision  was 
made  for  power. 


200 


Bledsoe:   Yes.   The  Bureau  did  include  a  penstock  design  which  would 

accommodate  future  installation  of  a  power  plant.   But  it  was 
not  economically  feasible  in  1954,  when  we  were  actually  doing 
the  design  work.   In  '54,  they  made  a  decision  that  they  would 
not  construct  a  power  [plant]  at  that  time.   But  later,  of 
course—this  was  about  1978,  '77  I  think—we  looked  at  the 
rising  energy  cost  and  informed  the  Bureau  that  we  felt  they 
should  take  another  look.   In  fact,  we  were  willing  to  sponsor  a 
feasibility  report  to  determine-- 

Swent:     We  being- - 

Bledsoe:   SID--willing  to  sponsor  a  feasibility  report  to  determine  the 
feasibility  of  going  ahead  with  the  power  plant  construction. 
At  that  time,  the  Bureau  agreed  with  us;  they  did  take  a  look. 
We  asked  our  congressman  to  introduce  legislation. 

Swent:  Who  was  your  congressman? 

Bledsoe:  Congressman  Bob  Leggett  from  Vallejo. 

Swent:  Let's  see.   You  came  in  "58  as  an  engineer. 

Bledsoe:  Right. 


Assistant  District  Manager.  1967 


Swent:     And  then  you  rose  somehow  to  manage-- 

Bledsoe:   In  about  1967,  I  believe,  I  became  assistant  district  manager. 
The  then  manager  was  James  Wiggins.   I  became  his  assistant  and 
I  think  it  was  about  '68  as  I  recall,  '67  or-- 

Swent:  Had  there  been  an  assistant  before  or  was  this  a  new  position? 

Bledsoe:  No,  there  had  not  been;  this  was  a  new  position. 

Swent:  You  were  paid  by  the  county. 

Bledsoe:  Paid  by  SID. 


201 


SID  Funding  from  Water  Sales,  Standby  Charges.  Special 
Assessment 


Swent :     But  then  their  funds  come  from-- 

Bledsoe:   No,  no.   The  SID's  funds  come  from  three  sources.   You're 

thinking  of  the  funding  for  the  Solano  County  Water  Agency  which 
comes  from  property  tax.   The  SID  funding  is  from  three  sources: 
the  sale  of  water;  standby  charges,  which  is  an  acreage  charge; 
and  special  assessment,  which  is  similar  to  property  tax  but 
levied  on  the  land  value  only  and  not  improvements.   Our  funding 
is  totally  different  from  the  county  water  agency  funding. 

Swent:     I  see.   So  you're  a  civil  service  employee? 

Bledsoe:   The  irrigation  district  is  actually  a  creature  of  state 

government,  not- -well--  It  is  an  agency  of  the  state,  not  a 
state  agency--an  agency  of  the  state.   You're  probably  not 
familiar  with  the  California  Water  Code,  but  the  California 
Water  Code  provides  for  a  variety  of  water  agencies:  irrigation 
districts,  county  water  districts,  and  so  on—and  each  of  those 
operates  under  a  special  code  provision.   But  it  is  a  creation 
of  the  state  and  as  such,  my  board  of  directors  is  elected  by 
all  the  residents  within  the  district  boundary.   It  is  an 
elected  board. 

Swent:     And  they,  in  turn,  hire  you? 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   I  have  a  five-member  board.   They  hire  the  staff.   The 

manager  serves  at  the  pleasure  of  the  board  directly.   The  rest 
of  the  staff  generally  is  hired  by  the  manager. 

Swent:     So  you  were  hired  by  Wiggins  who  was  the  manager. 

Bledsoe:   By  Mr.  Wiggins,  yes. 

Swent:     Was  it  sort  of  implied  that  you  would  succeed  him? 

Bledsoe:   Well,  I  think  so.   He  did  hire  me  originally,  yes,  as  an 

engineer,  and  promoted  me  later  to  assistant  manager.   In  1972, 
Mr.  Wiggins  died  quite  suddenly  in  February  of  '72,  and  the 
board  then  appointed  me  as  manager.   So  the  manager  position  is 
totally  at  the  discretion  of  the  board  of  directors.   I  was 
appointed  by  the  board  in  '72.   I  served  until  this  year,  1995, 
January  of  this  year. 

Swent:     And  you're  still  continuing  as  a  consultant. 


202 


Bledsoe:   Yes,  I  have  been  continuing  on  a  part-time  basis  as  a  consultant 
to  assist  on  certain  projects  that  I  left  unfinished. 


203 


III  MANAGER  OF  THE  SOLANO  IRRIGATION  DISTRICT,  1967-1995 


Reconsidering  a  Power  Plant,  1977 


Swent : 
Bledsoe : 

Swent : 
Bledsoe : 

Swent : 
Bledsoe : 


Well,  you  have  a  lot  of  important  things  to  follow, 
when  you  took  over  as  manager,  the  power- 


So  in  '72 


Swent : 


Bledsoe; 


The  power  plant  had  still  not  been  constructed  and,  as  I  said, 
it  was  1977  I  believe,  when  we  decided  to  take  a  look  at  it 
again,  at  the  feasibility  of  it. 

And  '73  was  the  big  energy  crisis. 

Yes,  and  energy  prices  were  getting  quite  high.   If  you  remember 
the  lines  at  the  gas  stations  to  get  gasoline  and  so  on. 

Because  the  population  here  was  booming  also. 

Yes--the  sharpest  increase  began  to  show  about  1972,  in  the 
early  seventies.   We  were  experiencing,  like  most  of  California, 
a  rather  large  increase  in  population- -some  of  it  due  to  a  shift 
in  Bay  Area  population. 

When  the  water  was  used,  let's  say  in  the  late  sixties-early 
seventies  when  you  were  here,  were  you  testing  the  water?  Was 
the  quality  of  the  water  any  concern? 

Yes.   The  water  quality  has  always  been  a  concern- -even  in  the 
pre-project  stages,  before  the  Bureau  built  the  project,  and 
certainly  after  construction.   Because  beginning  in  1962,  let's 
say  the  early  sixties—it  could  have  been  as  early  as  1960--the 
cities  were  using  some  water  out  of  the  project,  so  that 
automatically  means  that  you're  going  to  have  to  start 
monitoring  water  quality  for  safety  reasons  and  health  reasons. 
So  at  least  within  two  years  after  the  project  was  completed, 
there's  been  pretty  constant  monitoring  of  the  system. 


204 


Swent:     And  how  did  you  do  that? 

Bledsoe:   These  were  samples  that  were  originally  taken  at  Lake  Solano, 
which  is  at  the  Putah  Creek  Diversion  Dam.   This  is  the  point 
where  the  water  enters  the  Putah  South  Canal  for  distribution  to 
the  county. 

Swent:     Between  Monticello  and  Putah,  it's  just  flowing  along;  you're 
not  using  it? 

Bledsoe:   Flowing  in  the  creek,  yes,  flowing  in  the  creek  about  seven 

miles  between  Monticello  and  the  Putah  Creek  Diversion  Dam  is 
about  seven  miles  and  one  of  the  best  trout  streams, 
incidentally,  in  the  state.   Trout  were  not  a  native  fish,  but 
were  introduced  by  [the  Department  of]  Fish  and  Game.   A  very 
popular  and  very  prolific  trout  stream  in  that  seven  miles.   I 
think  it  should  be  pointed  out,  since  I  mentioned  fish,  should 
be  pointed  out  that  Putah  Creek  in  almost  every  year  was  dry  for 
five  or  six  months  out  of  the  year  during  the  summer  period, 
particularly  downstream  of  the  Devil's  Gate  which  is  now  the 
Monticello  Dam  location.   Any  point  downstream  of  that  was 
essentially  dry  in  the  summertime.   So  there  has  been  quite  a 
change:  you  now  have  year-round  flows  in  the  creek,  down  at 
least  to  Interstate  80. 

Swent:     And  this  has  been  because  of  capturing  the  runoff  at  the  rainy 
time  of  year? 

Bledsoe:   Right.   Storing.   A  decision  of  the  California  Water  Resources 

Control  Board,  who  issues  the  water  rights  permits,  required  the 
operator  to  maintain  a  year-round  release  from  the  dam  into 
lower  Putah  Creek,  primarily  for  recharge  of  ground  water,  and 
assuming  that  a  continuous  flow  into  the  gravelly  areas  of  the 
creek  would  provide  adequate  ground  water  recharge--and  provide 
for  fishery  as  far  downstream  as  possible.   They  established  a 
fixed  release  schedule  for  each  month  of  the  year- -in  other 
words,  the  amount  of  water  to  be  released  in  cubic  feet  per 
second  from  the  dam  into  the  creek.   And  this  is  not  a  constant 
amount;  it  does  vary  from  one  month  to  the  next,  but  the 
schedule  is  fixed  by  the  state. 


Gravel  Mining  in  Putah  Creek 


Swent:     You  mentioned  gravelly  areas.   Has  there  been  gravel  mining  in 
Putah  Creek? 


205 


Bledsoe:   Yes,  there  has  been.   In  fact,  the  areas  immediately  downstream 
of  the  Putah  Creek  Diversion  Dam  were  heavily  mined  by  gravel 
operations.   See  in  the  aerial  photographs  there  are  large  mined 
areas,  gravel  pits. 

Swent:     Do  they  still? 

Bledsoe:   No. 

Swent:     That's  another  can  of  worms,  is  it? 

Bledsoe:   [chuckle]   Well,  yes;  there's  a  story  behind  that,  too.   I  found 
myself  having  to  voice  loud  objections  to  the  renewal  of  one 
permit  back  in  the  early  seventies,  I  believe,  because  there  was 
evidence  that  continued  mining  and  degradation  of  the  channel 
was  beginning  to  undermine  foundations  at  the  Putah  Creek 
Diversion  Dam,  which  was  a  rather  serious  matter.   But 
obviously,  continuing  to  take  gravel  out  of  the  bottom  of  the 
creek  and  alongside  had  created  an  erosion  problem.   It  was 
partly  responsible  for  creating  this  erosion  and  it  was  dropping 
the  flow  line  of  the  creek.   The  concern  was  that  this  could 
eventually  endanger  the  structure.   I  objected,  and  the  County 
Planning  Department  did  refuse  to  renew  the  permits.   So  there 
has  been  no  gravel  mining. 

Swent:  So  it  was  the  Planning  Department  that  issued  the  permits? 

Bledsoe:  Yes.   Right.   The  County  Planning  Department. 

Swent:  That  was  your  advice. 

Bledsoe:  Yes.   Another  chapter. 


The  Putah  Creek  Diversion  Canal  and  Pipelines:  A  300-Mile  System 


Swent:     Let's  get  back.   You  then  did  the  Putah  Diversion  Canal,  and 
that  was  completed  when? 

Bledsoe:   Incidentally,  it  wasn't  just  canals.   There  were  three  hundred 
miles  of  water  system,  some  of  it  pipeline,  and  I'd  say  the 
majority  in  canals,  yes.   Maybe  two  thirds  in  canal  and  one 
third  in  pipelines. 


Swent : 


The  main  canal  you  said  was  thirty-five  miles  long? 


206 


Bledsoe:   The  main  canal,  though,  was  built  by  the  Bureau  of  Reclamation. 
So  our  system  included-- 

H 

Swent:     Your  system  consisted  of  the  lateral  canals  and  pipelines-- 
Bledsoe:   And  pipelines  for  distribution  of  water  within  SID. 
Swent:     Hundreds  of  miles  of  it. 
Bledsoe:   About  three  hundred  miles  total. 
Swent:     And  you  decided  who  got  this. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  basically.   Designing  and  constructing  all  that  system  was 
more  than  a  four-year  project  to  get  it  constructed.   Quite  a 
few  millions  of  dollars  in  special  contracts  were  awarded  to 
construct  it. 

Swent:     And  when  was  that  completed? 

Bledsoe:   The  official  completion  date  was  1962,  the  end  of  '62.   It  began 
in  early  '58,  through  '58,  '59,  '60,  '61,  '62--so  almost  five 
years. 

Swent:     And  then  that  was  sort  of  a  stable  picture  for  a  few  years. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  there  was  some  incidental  construction  going  on  after  that, 
after  I  changed  jobs  from  consultant.   The  consultant  had 
finished  up  his  work  in  '62;  and  I  transferred  then  to  the 
district  payroll  directly.  We  did  some  incidental  construction 
after  '62,  but  it  was  minor  compared  to  what  we'd  been  doing. 

Swent:     The  big  leap  was  in  "78  when  you  went  into  the  power. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  that  was  the  next  big  project.   Yes.   Incidentally,  after 
we  received  our  license  finally  from  the  Federal  Energy 
Regulatory  Commission,  who  issues  power  licenses,  then  we  had  to 
go  to  a  bond  election  and  sold  district  revenue  bonds,  which  had 
to  be  approved  by  our  district  voters  to  fund  it.   As  I  recall, 
that  was  an  $18-million  bond  issue.   The  price,  of  course,  would 
be  much  higher  today  to  build  what  we  built  then.   Construction 
costs  keep  rising. 

Swent:     You  had  mentioned  that  your  Congressman  Leggett  was  the  one  who 
introduced  this. 


207 


Bledsoe: 

Swent : 
Bledsoe : 

Swent : 
Bledsoe : 

Swent : 
Bledsoe: 


Swent : 
Bledsoe: 


Swent : 

Bledsoe: 


Leggett  introduced  the  legislation,  first  to  authorize  federal 
construction.   The  Department  of  Interior  had  a  brand  new 
secretary  in  1977.   And-- 

Who  was  that?  Do  you  remember?   I  don't  remember. 

I  thought  I  would  never  forget.   It  may  come  to  me  in  a  few 
minutes.   I-- 


Let's  see:  Carter  was  president. 

Carter  was  president,  yes,  and  newly  elected, 
the  new  Secretary  of  the  Interior- 
Was  that  Andrus? 


He  had  appointed 


Andrus--yes,  yes.   Mr.  Andrus,  yes.   And  Mr.  Andrus  had  decided 
that  he  was  going  to  severely  cut  the  Bureau  of  Reclamation's 
budget  and  activities.   You  may  recall  that  he  issued  a  "hit 
list"  on  federal  projects  at  the  time—what  was  referred  to  as  a 
"hit  list"--and  chopped  off  funding,  or  at  least  put  everything 
on  hold  for  a  period  of  time. 

They  testified  at  a  congressional  subcommittee  hearing 
that  they  would  be  opposed  to  constructing  the  power  plant  at 
Monticello.   We  were  then  asked  by  the  subcommittee  chairman 
whether  or  not  we  were  able  and  would  consider  constructing  a 
power  plant  with  local  funds.   I  indicated  that  yes  we  were  able 
to  do  that,  and  we  would  have  an  interest  in  looking  into  it. 
Fortunately,  in  order  to  hold  the  license  because  of  possible 
competition,  we  had  already  filed  a  preliminary  application  with 
FERC,  just  to  hold  onto  the  rights  to  generate  power  at  that 
location.   So  even  the  federal  government  would  have  had  to  have 
permits  in  order  to  generate  power  at  that  location.   We  had 
filed-- 

Excuse  me,  what  is  FERC? 

FERC  is  the  Federal  Energy  Regulatory  Commission,  and  is  a  part 
of  the  Department  of  Energy.   They  have  full  jurisdiction  on 
energy,  including  natural  gas,  electric  power,  and  so  on  within 
the  U.S. 

But  you  had  the  permit  already  processed. 

Well,  we  had  filed  for  it,  yes.   It  was  in  preliminary 
processing;  but  that  filing  date  is  important.   Just  a 
sidelight:  the  filing  date  gives  you  first  priority  or  second 
priority,  depending  on  which  order,  chronologically  speaking. 


208 


So  we  were  the  first  to  file  and  therefore  held  the  first-in- 
time  priority. 

Swent:     Had  you  thought  of  that? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  because  we  had  a  rumor  that  the  Department  of  Water 

Resources  in  California  was  considering  filing;  and  we  beat  them 
by  about  four  weeks . 

Swent:  Oh,  it  must  have  made  you  feel  very  good. 

Bledsoe:  So  we  did  hold  the  priority  in  time. 

Swent:  Where  were  these  hearings  held? 

Bledsoe:  The  hearings  were  held  in  Washington. 


Trying  to  Transfer  the  Solano  Project  to  Local  Authority 


Swent:     So  you  went  back  to  Washington  for  that. 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   I've  been  a  frequent  traveler  to  Washington,  D.C.,  over 
the  last  few  years  for  that  purpose  and  also  for  our  five-year 
attempt  to  get  legislation  which  would  transfer  title  of  the 
Solano  Project,  Monticello,  to  the  local  agencies. 

Swent:     From  the  Bureau  of  Reclamation? 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   So  it  would  be  a  federal  title  transfer.   Eventually,  our 
contract  requires  us  to  repay  all  the  cost,  and  our  proposal  was 
that  we  accelerate  that  repayment,  and  pay  off  now,  but  acquire 
title.   We  actually  spent  about  five  years,  starting  in  1988,  up 
until  '93--attempting  to  get  that  legislation  through  and  we 
didn't.   We  did,  in  fact,  get  it  past  the  House  of 
Representatives- -very  successful  there;  ran  into  some  obstacles 
in  the  Senate,  however,  because  of  some  of  the  other  issues 
locally  and  so  on,  decided  to  put  it  on  the  shelf  for  a  while. 
You  may  have  read  in  the  papers  that  Contra  Costa  County  is 
negotiating  with  the  Department  of  the  Interior  right  now  to 
take  title  to  the  Contra  Costa  Canal  and  their  federal 
facilities,  a  very  similar  proposal. 

Swent:     And  the  opposition  in  the  Senate? 

Bledsoe:   The  opposition  in  the  Senate  came  chiefly  from  the  Chairman  of 
the  Senate  Subcommittee,  none  other  than  Senator  Bradley  from 


209 


New  Jersey.   He  is  considering  running  for  president  these  days. 
Bradley  was  concerned  chiefly- -and  this  is  getting  off  the 
subject—with  the  fact  that  we  had  agreed  with  Napa  County  that 
under  no  circumstances  would  we  consider  taking  title  to  the 
lake  or  the  recreation  area.  And  we  agreed  with  that;  we  had  no 
problem.   Senator  Bradley  felt  that  if  we're  going  to  take  any 
part  of  the  project,  we  should  take  all.   He  did  not  want  the 
recreation  left  in  federal  hands.   That  left  us  in  an  awkward 
position  because  of  our  agreement  with  Napa  County,  and  the  fact 
that  we  really  had  no  interest  in  operating  recreation  which  is 
totally  in  Napa  County.   All  the  recreation  areas  are  in  Napa 
County. 

Swent :     No,  there's  no  question  about  that. 

Bledsoe:   Right,  and  we  had  no  interest—unless  in  fact  Napa  was  willing 
to  work  out  some  sort  of  joint  agreement  to  operate  the 
recreation,  because  it's  mostly  in  their  interest  and  certainly 
in  their  jurisdiction.   But  we  had  agreed  already  that  we  would 
not  take  title  to  that  part  of  the  project,  only  the  dam  and 
everything  downstream;  the  lake  and  the  recreation  area  would 
remain  with  the  federal  government.   So  Senator  Bradley  put  me 
in  a  rather  awkward  position  as  I  was  testifying  and  at  one 
point  said,  "If  we  insist  that  you  take  the  recreation  area,  i-s 
that  a  deal-breaker  or  not?  Yes  or  no.   [chuckle]   What  do  you 
say?" 

Swent:     What  did  you  say? 

Bledsoe:   I  said,  "Senator,  that  creates  a  serious  problem.   I'm  not  going 
to  say  it's  absolutely  a  deal-breaker,  but  there  are  many  things 
that  would  have  to  be  considered,  and  I  would  have  to  review 
this  with  the  local  agencies."  And  left  it  at  that.   I  refused 
to  answer  "Yes"  or  "No." 

Swent:     What  would  be  the  advantages  in  getting  the  dam  locally? 

Bledsoe:   Well,  there  are  two  things.   We  find  that  not  only  are  we 

repaying  the  original  construction  cost,  but  each  year  we  pay 
administrative  cost.   Because  the  Bureau  takes  all  of  its 
expenses  and  divides  it  up  among  the  many  water  projects,  they 
prorate  it  out,  we  get  stuck  with  certain  expenses  in  their 
Washington  office,  their  Denver  office,  their  Sacramento  office. 
It's  pretty  hard  to  track  sometimes.   They  admit  it  is 
arbitrarily  allocated,  and  it  amounts  to  over  a  quarter  of  a 
million  dollars  for  us  in  their  administrative  costs— which  is 
not  repaying  the  project.   It's  paying  for  administration,  and 
yet  we  operate  and  maintain  the  project  entirely.   It's  become 


210 


increasingly  difficult  for  us  to  see  the  benefit  in  paying  all 
these  administrative  costs.   That's  one. 

Second,  because  of  tight  federal  budgets  they  had  deferred 
a  lot  of  the  necessary  maintenance  on  the  project.   That 
disturbs  us  because  that  tends  to  snowball  in  time  like  the  lake 
problem  up  at  Folsom  with  the  defective  gate  which-- 

Swent:     Just  recently. 

Bledsoe:   --which  had  been  mentioned  needed  repair  some  time  ago.   Anyway, 
these  are  two  of  the  major  things.   If  deferred  maintenance 
creates  a  problem  with  the  project  which  interrupts  the  water 
supply,  it  doesn't  hurt  the  federal  government  but  it  sure  hurts 
here. 

Swent:     Yes. 

Bledsoe:   So  it's  in  our  interest  to  have  direct  control. 

Swent :     So  that ' s  ongoing  now? 

Bledsoe:   Well,  we  have  put  the  proposal  on  the  shelf  for  now.   If  the 

recreation  continues  to  be  a  problem  as  far  as  getting  approval 
from  Congress,  I  don't  know  what  the  solution  would  be.   So 
we're  not  doing  anything  right  now. 

Swent:     So-- 

Bledsoe:   We'll  come  back  to  it  sooner  or  later.   I  thought  it  was 

interesting  that  Contra  Costa  is  now  attempting  to  get  title  to 
their  facilities. 

Swent:     A  similar  situation.   So,  you  did  get  the  power  plant  going? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  in  1983  we  generated  the  first  power.   Started  construction 
in  '81. 


211 


IV  THE  MCLAUGHLIN  MINE  BECOMES  A  SOLANO  COUNTY  CONCERN 


1981:  "We  Were  Going  to  Have  to  Take  Notice" 


Swent:     So  at  the  same  time  that  the  gold  mine  was  coming  in,  probably 
your  major  attention  was  really  going  to  the  power.   This  was 
a-- 

Bledsoe:   Right,  yes,  it  was. 

Swent:     This  was  a  little  minor  diversion  at  that  point. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  but  I  realized  very  quickly  that  we  were  going  to  have  to 
take  notice. 

Swent:     So  the  discovery,  most  people  say,  was  in  "78;  that  the 

geologists  found  this  gold  up  there  in  Napa  County;  and  you  said 
you  first  heard  of  it  a  couple  of  years  later. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  I  think  in  '81. 

Swent:     It  was  announced  in  the  papers  in  1980,  August  of  '80,  but 
Solano  County  was  never  mentioned. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  of  course,  the  point  is  the  proposed  project  was  in  Napa 

County,  Lake  County,  and  with  a  water  storage  reservoir  in  Yolo 
County.   So  definitely  the  project  and  their  main  focus  in 
providing  the  notices  that  generally  go  out  within  affected 
jurisdictions  went  to  those  three  counties. 

Swent:     Davis  Creek  is  in  Yolo  County.   This  is  where  they  decided, 
fairly  early,  to  put  a  little  storage  dam  with  their  water 
supply  for  the  mine  and  mill. 

Bledsoe:   So  basically,  none  of  the  project  was  in  Solano  County;  but  we 
thought  at  the  time  that  the  oversight  was  this  rather  huge 
interest  in  Lake  Berryessa,  and  the  proposed  project  was  being 


212 


built  alongside  tributaries  to  Putah  Creek,  and  therefore 
Berryessa.  Whether  or  not  they  simply  did  not  realize  the 
concern  we  might  have  on  the  water  quality,  I  felt  it  was  an 
oversight.  But  anyway- - 

Swent:     Was  there  public  feeling  that  it  was  not  oversight? 

Bledsoe:   Well,  yes,  there  was  some  public  feeling  that  perhaps  we  had 

deliberately  not  been  notified  because  of  the  public  sentiment 
regarding  possible  water  quality  problems  up  here. 

Swent:     How  was  this  conveyed  to  you?  How  was  it  expressed? 

Bledsoe:   Expressed  to  me  by  certain  political  figures,  members  of  city 

councils,  board  of  supervisors.   I'm  getting  it  third-hand,  but 
apparently  some  of  their  constituents  had  come  and--  At  any 
rate,  because  we  were  operating  in  '81,  we  were  actually  in 
process  of  signing  a  contract  with  the  Bureau  to  take  over 
complete  operation  of  Monticello  and,  of  course,  had  been  for 
some  years  operating  the  rest  of  the  project—the  Putah  South 
Canal. 

In  discussing  it  with  the  county  supervisors,  they  felt 
that  it  was  appropriate  for  SID  to  pursue  this,  to  communicate 
with  the  proponents  and  with  the  various  county  planning 
agencies.   Apparently  early  on,  I  guess,  it  was  decided  that 
Napa  County  would  be  the  lead  agency  on  the  environmental 
reports  and  so  on. 


Betsy  Marchand  Gives  a  Warning 


Swent:     You  might  say  how  you  first  heard  of  this. 

Bledsoe:   I  received  a  phone  call  from  a  Yolo  County  supervisor. 

Swent:     Who  was  that? 

Bledsoe:   This  was  Betsy  Marchand.   Betsy  was  apparently  attending  a,  I 
believe,  a  planning  commission  meeting,  during  which  Homestake 
was  making  a  presentation  on  their  proposal,  and  including  their 
proposal  on  the  Davis  Creek  reservoir.   Betsy  asked  if  I  had 
heard  about  it  and  I  said,  "No.   I  wasn't  aware  of  any  gold  mine 
proposal. " 

And  she  said,  "You  realize  it's  going  to  be  in  the 
Berryessa  watershed." 


213 


I  said,  "No,  I  haven't  heard  anything  about  it."   So  I  did 
attend  the  meeting  that  night,  just  to  get  some-- 

Swent:     Where  was  it? 

Bledsoe:  The  Yolo  County  engineering  and  planning  section  is  not  actually 
in  the  county  buildings  downtown;  it's  actually  on  the  outskirts 
of  town.  It's  their  Public  Works  Center. 

Swent:     Outskirts  of  what  town?  Woodland? 

Bledsoe:   It's  in  Woodland.   All  the  county  offices,  I  believe,  are  in 
Woodland.   They  may  have  some  branch  offices. 

Swent:     I  think  so.   I  was  asking  because  they  did  have  a  lot  of 

meetings  out  in  Guinda  and  Rumsey  and  those  places,  too,  but 
this  is-- 

Bledsoe:   These  were  some  of  the  early  sessions,  and  I  think  it  was  in,  as 
I  recall,  '81.   I  think  they  were  just  filing  their  permits 
finally  in  '81,  weren't  they?  They  were  just  at  the  point  of 
beginning  their  environmental  impact  report. 

Swent:     The  spring  of  "83  is  when  things  all  came  to  a  head. 

Bledsoe:   And  in  '81,  they  were  starting  their  environmental  impact 
report,  their  environmental  assessments,  whatever. 

Swent:     Napa  was  chosen  as  the  lead  agency  in  June  of  "82,  but  by  then 
they  were  well  along. 

Bledsoe:  I  can't  say  that  I'm  absolutely  accurate  on  the  date,  because  as 
I  remember  it  was  '81;  it  could  have  been  even  early  '82,  but  it 
seems  to  me  that  phone  call  came  during  the  wintertime,  I  think. 
So  it  may  have  been  late  '81. 

Swent:     So  you  attended  that  meeting. 

Bledsoe:   I  attended  the  meeting. 

Swent:     Who  else  was  there?  Do  you  remember? 

Bledsoe:   As  I  recall,  Ray  Krauss  of  Homestake  Mines  was  there  and  I  don't 
recall  any  other  players;  but  I  believe  that  was  the  first  time 
I  got  introduced  to  Ray  Krauss. 

Swent:     And  it  was  the  Yolo  County  Planning  Commission? 


214 


Bledsoe:   Yes,  the  County  Planning  Commission  as  I  recall.   Betsy  Marchand 
was  following  it  very  closely  and  very  concerned. 

Swent:     What  was  your  reaction  to  this? 


Concern  for  Protecting  Water  Quality  in  the  Berryessa  Watershed 


Bledsoe:   Well,  I  was  somewhat  startled  and  came  back,  reported  to  my 
board  and  also  to  county  officials,  and  suggested  that  we  at 
least  had  better  correspond  or  communicate  with  Homestake  and 
with  Napa  County,  in  particular,  and  Lake  County.   We  did-- 

Swent :     What  was  your  concern? 

Bledsoe:   Our  concern  was,  number  one:  I  did  learn  early  on  that  they 
would  be  using  cyanide  in  the  processing;  that  was  a  concern 
right  away,  but  we  were  already  very  aware  of  the  fact  that 
mercury  was  present,  heavy  metals  in  that  area,  because  of  the 
old  mercury  mines  or  quicksilver  mines.   Obviously,  more  open- 
pit  mining  in  the  area  could  increase  our  heavy  metal 
concentration  in  Lake  Berryessa.   These  were  the  primary 
concerns. 

Swent:     You  had  been  monitoring  for  mercury  all  along. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  from  at  least  1958  or  '59,  had  been  monitoring  the  water 
quality.   So  these  were  the  primary  concerns:  water  quality. 
After  all,  that  water  supply  in  Berryessa,  as  I've  indicated 
before,  provided  part  of  the  drinking  water  supply  for  a  quarter 
million  people  here  at  the  time;  that  population  now  has  swelled 
to  close  to  350,000,  I  think  in  Solano  now.  At  that  point  in 
time,  it  was  part  of  the  water  supply  and  drinking  water  supply 
for  a  large  number  of  people  in  the  county.   I  didn't 
anticipate,  hopefully,  there  was  no  way  that  this  would 
necessarily  be  detrimental  to  agriculture;  but  I  guess  that  was 
always  a  possibility.   The  main  concern- -mine  and  the  county 
supervisors—was  the  affect  it  might  have  on  the  municipal  water 
quality. 

I  believe  I  alerted  Ray  to  that  even  at  that  first  meeting 
in  Woodland. 

Swent:     Ray  Krauss. 
Bledsoe:   Yes. 


215 


Swent:     You  alerted  him  to  what? 

Bledsoe:  The  fact  that  we  were  going  to  be  very  concerned  about  water 
quality  in  Lake  Berryessa  since  his  proposal  was  going  to  be 
draining  into  tributaries  of  Putah  Creek. 


Ray  Krauss,  Surprised  at  Solano  County  Interest? 


Swent:     Did  he  seem  surprised  that  Solano  County  was  represented  at  this 
meeting? 

Bledsoe:   I  think  he  was  a  little  surprised.   And  of  course,  I  said 

basically,  "At  least  SID  has  received  no  notices."   I'm  trying 
to  remember  because  it  seems  to  me  that  either  he  or  somebody  in 
the  consulting  staff  which  was  already  working  with  him 
indicated  that  they  had  sent  a  notice  over  to  Solano  County. 
Well,  if  it  went  to  Solano  County,  it  went  to  their  Public  Works 
section  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  water  issues,  or  maybe 
to  the  Planning  Agency,  which  again—certainly  at  that  time—was 
not  involved  in  water  issues  at  all.   I  doubt  that  they  would 
have  even  realized  or  recognized  that  they  had  seen  such  a 
notice,  that  that  area  drained  into  Lake  Berryessa.   So 
basically,  the  problem  may  have  been  that  maybe  perhaps  some 
sort  of  notice  may  have  gone  out,  but  I  certainly  was  never  able 
to  locate  anybody  who  admitted  receiving  it.   It  certainly  did 
not  come  to  the  county  water  agency  or  to  SID  or  any  of  the 
cities  involved. 

Swent:     So  were  you  bothered  by  this? 

Bledsoe:   Upset,  yes.   In  fact,  I  immediately  sat  down  with  our  attorneys 
and  began  discussing  what  possible  recourse  we  had—certainly 
take  part  in  the  hearings,  hopefully  if  they  would  allow  us  to 
take  an  active  part  in  the  hearings— but  beyond  that  what  is  our 
legal  recourse  to  guarantee  that  the  water  quality  will  be 
protected.   So,  those  were  rather  uncomfortable  days  early  on; 
as  we  progressed  in  our  communication  with  Homestake,  things  did 
improve,  of  course. 

Swent:     What  did  you  do  then?  Did  you  call  Homestake? 

Bledsoe:   You  know,  I  have  no  record  of  my  first  conversation.   I  know 

that  we  did,  again,  attend  hearings  in  Napa;  there  were  at  least 
two  more  hearings  in  Napa  that  we  attended. 


216 


Mounting  a  Legal  Threat  Unless  Solano  County  Is  a  Player  in  the 
Planning 


Swent:     When  you  said  "we,"  you  mean  you  and— 

Bledsoe:   --and  our  attorney.   I  don't  know  at  that  point  in  time  whether- 
-we  had  not  brought  in  a  consultant  who  we  later  brought  in,  as 
we  sat  down  to  negotiate  after--.   I  guess,  basically,  there  was 
no  misunderstanding  that  perhaps  what  we  were  suggesting  was  a 
legal  threat,  that  action  might  be  taken  unless,  in  fact,  we 
were  offered  an  active  part  in  the  planning  for  the  project.   We 
were  not  satisfied  with  just  attending  public  hearings.   We 
wanted—essentially,  and  I  think  rightfully  so-- [to  be]  at  the 
table  making  sure  we  understood  the  planning,  the  design,  and 
the  protection  of  water  quality.  And  to  do  this,  we  had  to  have 
our  own  consultants  and  experts  sitting  down  with  Homestake  and 
their  consultants,  and  actively  involved  to  make  sure  that  water 
quality  was  protected. 

Swent:     Now  as  I  understand  it--I  may  be  wrong  on  this,  but  as  1 

understand  it  —  they  were  only  applying  for  permits  from  the 
other  three  counties.   They  were  not  really  applying  to  you  for 
anything . 

Bledsoe:   They  did  not  need  any  permit  from  us,  but  at  the  same  time  the 
Regional  Water  Quality  Control  Board  has  a  tremendous  amount  of 
jurisdiction  on  the  discharges  and  so  on  to  the  surface  waters. 

Swent:     And  this  regional  control  board  did  include  parts  of  those 
counties,  did  it? 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   Basically,  our  loudest  voice  would  be  before  the  regional 
board.   At  the  same  time,  we  were  making  contacts  with  the 
regional  board  staff,  and  announcing  our  concern. 

Swent:     So  you  felt  threatened  and  not  represented  in  the  process. 
Bledsoe:   That's  right. 

It  was  kind  of  an  awkward  situation  because  the  possible 
threat  to  us  was  so  potentially  huge,  and  we  really  weren't  sure 
how  serious—because  we  were  not  at  the  table  sitting  down  to 
fully  understand  the  designing  concepts,  and  what  measures  they 
were  taking,  or  going  to  take,  to  prevent  any  effect  on  the 
water  supply.   You  know,  obviously  weeks  passed;  there  were  a 
lot  of  communications;  I  find  very  little  in  my  file  of  written 
communication;  most  of  it  was  by  telephone,  including 
conversations  between  our  attorneys  and  their  attorneys.   It 


217 


finally  led  to  an--and  1  guess,  under  the  threat  of  litigation 
and  major  opposition  at  the  regional  board-- [they]  decided  to 
have  meetings  in  San  Francisco  with  the  major  players  at 
Home stake. 

Swent:     D'Appolonia  was-- 

Bledsoe:   D'Appolonia  was  consulting,  but-- 

Swent :     Did  you  meet  with  them? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  we  had  meetings  with  them.   We  were  also,  though,  meeting 
with  the  Homestake  officials  who  were  at  the  main  office. 

Swent:  Who  were  they?  Do  you  remember? 

Bledsoe:  Isn't  it  awful? 

Swent:  Goldstein-- 

Bledsoe:  Well,  Goldstein  was  their  attorney. 

Swent:  One  of  the  attorneys. 

Bledsoe:   Dennis  Goldstein,  certainly,  yes.   We  met  with  Dennis.   But  who 
was  the  president  or  board  chairman,  or  whoever  the-- 

Swent:  Conger? 

Bledsoe:  --the  manager—they  have  an  executive? 

Swent:  Well,  let's  see:  James  Anderson? 

Bledsoe:  No,  that  doesn't  strike  a  bell. 

Swent:  Harry  Conger  was  president,  I  think. 

Bledsoe:   I'm  trying  to  remember  the  name  of  the  gentleman—very  nice 

gentleman.   He  was  head  of  the  San  Francisco  office,  I  believe. 
He  signed  the  agreement.   [reads  agreement]  "Chairman  of  the 
Board"--!  can't  read  his  signature-- 

Swent:     Well--Conger-- 

Bledsoe:   Conger,  yes;  it  was  Conger. 

Swent:     Harry  Conger.   In  1981,  Conger  was  chairman  and  president;  James 
Anderson  was  vice  president;  William  Humphrey-- 


218 


Bledsoe:   Yes,  William  Humphrey  was  the  person  who  was  the  executive  vice 
president  and  was  certainly  present  at  many  of  the  meetings  in 
San  Francisco. 

Swent:     And  Goldstein  and  Krauss  — 
Bledsoe:   Goldstein  and  Krauss  and— 


Swent : 
Bledsoe i 


Swent : 


Bledsoe: 


Swent : 
Bledsoe: 


Concern  Both  for  Domestic  Population  and  Industrial  Water  Users 
H 

You  had  said  that  you  wanted  to  add  one  of  your  other  concerns. 

I  had  mentioned,  yes,  that  regarding  our  concerns  on  the  water 
quality  question,  the  primary  concern  about  the  large  population 
here  that  uses  this  as  part  of  their  drinking  water  supply.   But 
Solano  also  has  a  large  number  of  both  food  and  beverage 
processing  in  the  various  cities--Vacaville,  Fairfield,  and 
Vallejo.   Because  these  products  are  distributed  on  a  very 
widespread  basis,  obviously  there  was  concern  for  there  for  the 
industrial  user,  also,  in  addition  to  the  domestic  population. 

There  was  a  huge  consciousness  of  mercury  at  about  that  time,  in 
general:  the  tuna  fish  scare  —  remember  there  was  a  time  when 
suddenly  the  whole  nation  was  very  concerned  about  mercury. 

We  had  some  local  concern  regarding  Clear  Lake  and  the  fish 
population  and  warnings  going  out  in  Clear  Lake;  and  some  of  the 
coves  even  on  Berryessa,  where  they  do  find  mercury  in  the 
sediments  on  the  bottom  of  the  lake.   So  if  you  have  fish  that 
are  feeding  on  the  bottom  life  there,  there  obviously  would  be  a 
concern  about  a  steady  diet  of  fish  in  that  area.   We  find  at 
the  present  time—and  except  for  some  early  monitoring  after 
Monticello  was  finished—we  find  no  detectable  trace  of  mercury 
in  the  water  coming  out  of  Berryessa,  so  we  are  very  confident, 
at  this  point,  that  we  do  not  have  a  problem  as  far  as  the  water 
quality  is  concerned. 

That  was  your  responsibility. 

It  was  our  responsibility  to  be  concerned  about  it;  and  in  fact, 
we  knew  that  mercury  could  be  present— had  been  present— in 
Berryessa,  and  the  specter  of  increasing  this  runoff  into  the 
drainage  area  and  into  the  lake  was  obviously  a  major  concern. 


219 


Swent :     I  guess  we  should  say  this  was  naturally-occurring  mercury;  it 
wasn't  anything  that  Homestake  was  introducing. 

Bledsoe:   Right.   Except  that  the  increase  in  open  excavation  up  there 

could  increase  the  problem  or  enlarge  the  problem.   Certainly, 
it  had  existed  since  the  early  days  of  the  old  quicksilver  or 
mercury  mines  in  the  area;  and  those  mines  have  not  been  sealed 
or  closed  as  is  required  these  days. 

Swent:     So  just  the  groundwater  seeping  through  would  have-- 
Bledsoe:   Even  seepage,  yes,  from  groundwater  would— 

Swent:     The  cyanide  was  something  they  were  introducing  in  their 
processing. 

Bledsoe:   Right.   And  the  agreement  that  we  finally  set  up  with  Homestake 
has  had  some  very  stringent  restrictions  on  the  transport  of 
that  cyanide  in  and  out  of  the  site. 


Demanding  Absolutely  Fail-Safe  Containment  of  Tailings 


Swent:     The  drainage  from  the  processing  plant  was  not  going  into 
Berryessa. 

Bledsoe:   No.   Containment  was  our  first  concern.   Containing  all  of  the 
tailings  certainly  from  the  process  and  our  own  consultants, 
when  we  did  finally  sit  down  with  Homestake  to  look  at  their 
design  and  their  proposal,  and  have  our  scientists  and  experts 
checking  the  proposal  carefully—in  fact,  making  some  changes  or 
suggesting  changes  with  Homestake 's  engineers.   The  focus  was  to 
have  an  absolutely  fail-safe  containment  of  the  tailings;  and 
any  seepage  that  might  occur  from  that  tailings  area,  to  make 
sure  that  it  was  recovered  and  put  back  into  the  pond.   That  was 
a  major  concern. 

Swent:     I  guess  we're  jumping  ahead,  but  I  was  thinking  that  the 

drainage  from  tailings—even  if  it  were  not  contained—that 's  a 
different  drainage  basin,  though,  isn't  it? 

Bledsoe:   No,  no. 

Swent:     Is  that  still  in  the  Berryessa  watershed? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  that's  still  in  the--yes--Hunting  Creek  definitely  goes  in 
to  Putah  Creek—and  Knoxville  Creek.   Only  Davis  Creek  is  on  the 


220 


Yolo  side;  the  other  creeks  in  the  area  do  drain  into  Putah 
Creek  or  directly  into  Berryessa. 

Swent :     Okay,  so  you  were  concerned  all  the  way  around,  then? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  not  just  from  the  containment  of  the  tailings,  but  also  the 
spoil  area  for  the  excavated  material. 

Swent:     At  the  mine— 

Bledsoe:   At  the  mine  itself,  yes. 


Meetings  in  San  Francisco  with  Officials  and  Attorneys 


Swent:     So,  let's  go  back  then.   You  were  speaking  about  your  very  first 
meeting  in  San  Francisco  with  Conger,  Langston,  and  Humphrey. 

Bledsoe:   We  did  have  several  attorneys  from  both  sides  present,  and 

engineers,  consultants.  We  had  several  meetings,  and  some  of 
them  all-day  meetings,  in  San  Francisco.   Very  frequently, 
particularly  I  think  in  the  later  meetings  when  we  were  sitting 
down  to  have  our  consultants  review  their  plans,  the  engineers 
and  scientists  were  in  one  room,  and  the  attorneys  and 
administrative  people  were  in  another  conference  room  going  over 
details  on  the  legal  agreements. 

Swent:     So  your  concern  was  technical  and  also  political. 

Bledsoe:   Technical  and  political,  yes.   Obviously,  they're  closely 

related—because  of  all  the  people  involved  on  the  technical 
side  and  the  possible  detriment  to  a  civilian  population.   That 
can't  help  but  become  political  at  some  point. 

Swent:     Of  course.   People  always  get  involved,  don't  they? 

Bledsoe:   Yes. 

Swent:     What  authority  did  you  have? 

Bledsoe:  We  had  no  authority  to  regulate,  certainly,  and  we  were  in  no 
position  to  issue  any  permits  because  the  project  was  totally 
outside  of  our  jurisdiction—not  only  SID's  jurisdiction,  but 
also  Solano  County's  jurisdiction.  So,  yes,  you're  right;  we 
had  absolutely  no  regulatory  control.  All  we  were  able  to  do 
was  either  to  try  to  block  the  permits  at  the  regional  water 
quality  control  board  level—and  we  were  preparing  to  do  that, 


221 


do  anything  we  could  to  block  it  unless  we  were  able  to  sit  down 
with  Homestake,  and  sit  at  the  table,  working  on  design, 
understanding  with  our  own  consultants,  totally  reviewing  all 
aspects  as  it  related  to  water  quality,  drainage,  seepage,  the 
containment  of  anything  that  might  create  water  pollution.   But 
you're  right;  we  had  no  regulatory  controls,  so  all  our  moves 
had  to  be  either  through  the  meetings  with,  and  statements  and 
comments  to  the  regulatory  authorities—chief ly,  the  water 
quality  control  board  and  other  Napa  County  officials;  or,  to 
take  a  legal  course,  and  at  some  point  file  suit  on  either  the 
inadequacy  of  the  environmental  documents  that  they  were  working 
on  and  other  related  permits. 

Swent:     Did  you  feel  that  their  plan  was  inadequate? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  we  did—because  our  own  consultants  spotted  a  few  things  in 
the  — 

Swent:     Do  you  remember  what  they  were? 

Bledsoe:   No,  I  don't.   Quite  honestly,  Lee,  I  don't  recall  the  details. 
Obviously,  if  nothing  else,  perhaps  it  was  the  lack  of  detail 
that  worried  us;  and  this  comes  from  working  on  the  outside.   We 
felt  it  was  so  important  that  we  had  to  have  experts  inside 
talking  to  the  people  who  were  doing  the  design  work,  making 
sure  that  we  were  protected. 

Swent:     Did  you  have  allies  from  the  other  counties,  or  were  you  working 
on  your  own? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  we  did  have  some  cooperation—not  full  understanding, 
because  it  wasn't  their  water  supply.   But  yes,  we  had 
cooperation  from  Napa  and  Lake  counties  —  and  certainly  Yolo, 
too.   Although  Yolo's  concern  was  the  water  supply,  which  was 
not  related  to  our  problem  at  all.   We  were  on  mailing  lists  and 
did  get  due  notice  after  we  protested  loudly  that  we  were  not 
being  kept  informed;  we  did  have  cooperation  with  them  in  that 
sense. 

Swent:     Were  you  in  touch  with  any  of  those  groups  that  organized  in 
opposition  up  in  Yolo  County? 

Bledsoe:   No,  we  were  not. 

Swent:     There  were  a  couple  of  very  vocal  groups  up  there. 

Bledsoe:   Our  real  driving  force,  I  think,  was  possibly  a  little  different 
from  the  concerns  of  other  groups.   Not  a  direct  relationship 
with  them. 


222 


Requiring  More  Monitoring:  Daily.  Not  Monthly 


Swent:     So  you  had  your  own  consultants.  What  did  they  do? 

Bledsoe:   Well,  first  they  were  looking  at  some  of  the  draft  environmental 
documents;  and  then  finally,  when  Homestake  agreed  that  we 
should  sit  down  and  work  together—that  they  were  willing  to 
work  with  us--we  brought  them  into  meetings  with  Homestake 's 
consultants.   A  large  number,  I  think,  of  recommendations  for 
improvement- -at  least  on  the  containment  facilities  and 
monitoring,  we  wanted  more  monitoring  than  they  had  proposed—a 
lot  of  those  monitoring  proposals  came  from  our  consultants. 

Swent:     I  just  checked  some  of  the  newspaper  record,  the  Woodland  paper, 
that  is  the  Woodland  Daily  Democrat;  on  May  26,  1983,  you  were 
quoted  as  saying,  "I  don't  think  that  we  would  be  satisfied  with 
anything  short  of  daily  monitoring—at  least  at  the  start." 
Jack  Thompson,  of  Homestake,  had  promised  monthly  monitoring— 
this  is  monitoring  of  the  effluent. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  and  that  was  the  flows  into  Hunting  Creek,  as  I  recall, 

which  is  a  major  tributary  of  the  Putah  Creek.   That's  exactly 
right.   As  I  indicated,  our  own  consultants  finally  succeeded  in 
getting  Homestake  to  agree  that  there  would  be  even  continuous 
monitoring  at  all  the  major  points  downstream.  We  have 
recording  equipment  down  there  as  a  result  of  our  concerns  and 
suggestions;  so  the  system  that  we  have  now  for  monitoring  is 
many  times  greater  than  what  had  been  originally  proposed.   And 
after  all,  this  is  the  only  way  that  we  feel  safe  that  there  are 
no  unusual  occurrences  between  these  spot  samples. 

Swent:     So  this  is  monitoring  the  stream,  the  flow  of  the  stream, 
between  the  mine  and  Lake  Berryessa? 

Bledsoe:   Between  the  mine  and—yes— Putah  Creek.   Hunting  Creek  flows 
into  Putah  Creek  not  too  far  upstream  from  Berryessa.   It's  a 
very  short  distance,  actually,  from  that  junction  into 
Berryessa. 

Swent:     You  hired  your  own  consultants.   This  is  from  the  Sacramento  Bee 
of  May  27,  1983:  you  announced  that  you  had  hired  a  consultant 
to  determine  whether  pollutants  could  work  their  way  into  Lake 
Berryessa. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  that  was  a  consulting  firm— and  I'm  sorry,  but  I  don't  have 
that  name  in  front  of  me  right  now.   They  were  special 
environmental  consultants  advising  us  early  on,  and  then  later 
sitting  down  with  us  and  Homestake "s  engineers  to  hammer  out 


223 


Swent : 


Bledsoe: 


Swent : 
Bledsoe : 
Swent : 

Bledsoe: 

Swent : 
Bledsoe : 
Swent : 
Bledsoe: 
Swent : 
Bledsoe: 

Swent : 
Bledsoe: 


some  better  monitoring  and  even  some  additional  safeguards  with 
regard  to  containment,  particularly  of  the  tailings. 

At  this  point,  what  was  being  held  up  was  simply  the  acceptance 
of  the  EIR  [Environmental  Impact  Report],  I  think. 

I  think  so,  yes.   I  think  that  we  were  raising  substantial 
questions  which  could,  in  fact,  create  a  real  problem  if  in  fact 
Napa  had  moved  ahead  to  approve  the  EIR  with  some  outstanding, 
unmitigated  problems.   We  were  contacting  the  regional  board  at 
that  time,  and  the  regional  board  had  some  serious  concern  that 
some  of  our  comments  had  to  be  addressed. 

This  is  the  water  quality  board. 
Yes. 

Well,  it  was  July  '83,  that  the  EIS  [Environmental  Impact 
Statement]  was  certified-- 


--by  Napa. 
Home stake, 
it? 


That  was  after  the  date  of  our  agreement  with 
Our  official  agreement  was  in  June  of  "83,  wasn't 


And  what  was  the  gist  of  this  agreement? 
Basically,  the  agreement-- 
This  is  quite  a  document. 
It's  quite  a  document. 
A  lot  of  pages,  there. 

If  I  were  going  to  summarize  in  a  very  few  words,  it  officially 
sets  forth  our  cooperation.  It  locks  in  the  monitoring  program 
that  we  had  both  agreed  to-- 

Which  was  continuous? 

Yes--and  basically,  a  number  of  monitoring  points;  one  of  those 
is  continuous.   The  program  that  our  experts  had  recommended. 
Under  the  terms  of  this  agreement,  we  both  submitted  this  plan 
to  the  regional  board  and  asked  them  to  incorporate  it  in  the 
permits,  which  I  believe  they  did  in  all  cases.   So  it  actually 
went  beyond  what  the  regional  board  might  have  required. 


224 


Ensuring  Future  Oversight 


Bledsoe:   The  second  part  was  in  fact  to  ensure  future  oversight  that  we 

would  jointly  agree  on  hiring  an  expert  to  provide  some  overview 
periodically  to  report  to  SID  regarding  success  of  the 
containment  program  and  any  impacts,  if  any,  on  the  water 
quality.  This  gentleman  was  hired-- 

Swent:     Do  you  know  who  that  is? 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   Jim  Rouse,  Geochem  Division.   Their  offices  are  in 
Lakewood,  Colorado. 

Swent:     And  he's  continuing  to  oversee  the  mine  area. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  and  I  think  probably  the  most  important  and  recent  report 

after  a  long  oversight  on  this,  was  given  to  us  in  April  of  '94, 
last  year.   Very  encouraging  report,  because  he's  found  no 
impact  on  water  quality  from  the  Homestake  operation. 

Swent:     There  was  something  about  seventy- six  years,  wasn't  there? 

Bledsoe:   The  reclamation  project:  we  are  requiring,  I  believe,  fifty 

years  under  our  agreement,  a  fifty-year  reclamation  period  after 
closure.   I  believe  that's  correct,  Lee,  and  I'll  have  to-- 

Swent:     Of  course  that  is  after  closure,  and  this  is  twenty-five  years, 
so-- 

Bledsoe:   There  is  a  lengthy  period  of  monitoring  and  inspection  of  this 
site  after  closure  for  a  period  of  fifty  years. 

Swent:     That's  a  long  time. 

Bledsoe:   As  I  understand,  Homestake  is  turning  over  much  of  this  for 

research  by  the  University  of  California  and  others,  who  will 
actually  be  playing  a  major  part  in  that  reclamation  project  and 
carrying  out  some  of  their  programs. 

Swent:     Was  the  monitoring  to  be  down- scaled  later  on? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  it  will  be  downscaled;  but  here  again,  there  will  have  to 
be  continued  monitoring  where  the  drainage  from  the  area  enters 
Putah  Creek.   That  will  take  place  for  quite  some  time.   The 
other  item  that  I  wanted  to  mention:  the  fact  that,  yes,  the 
reclamation  of  the  site  was  an  important  issue,  and  it  is 
addressed  by  the  agreement.   That  was  also  important  that  they 
not  simply  close  and  walk  off  and  leave  the  site.   The  agreement 


225 


Swent : 


Bledsoe; 


on  the  reclamation  plan  was  extremely  important.   So  that  was 
part  of  the  agreement.   If  you're  summarizing  in  a  few  words, 
those  were  the  major  things  that  are  contained  in  the  agreement. 
There's  a  lot  of  legalese  regarding  what  each  is  supposed  to  do 
and  defining  all  the  terms  that  are  used  in  the  proposal. 


Were  you  being  pressured? 
from  your  constituents? 


What  sorts  of  pressure  were  you  under 


Certainly  our  constituents,  including  our  local  elected 
officials,  my  board  and  other  boards  and  councils,  city 
councils—were  getting  frequent  updates,  very  concerned  that  we 
do  everything  possible  to  guarantee  there  would  be  no  chance- 
even  a  remote  chance—that  we  would  have  major  water  pollution 
in  the  lake.   That  amounts  to  some  pressure,  yes.   I  felt  that 
we  were  doing  everything  we  could. 


The  Result:  "Outstanding;  One  of  the  Cleanest  Mining  Operations" 


Swent:     Were  they  satisfied? 

Bledsoe:   Yes  they  were.   In  fact,  I  have  made  three  or  four  trips  to  the 
Homestake  site,  particularly  to  take  some  of  the  local  officials 
up  there  and  show  them  what  we  did  achieve,  what  Homestake  was 
doing.   And  I  think  everyone  has  come  back  quite  satisfied  that 
the  operation  is  possibly  one  of  the  cleanest  mining  operations 
in  recent  history.   It  certainly  has,  I  think,  been  outstanding. 
Our  experience  has  been  very  good.   I  do  think  it  was  important 
that  we  worked  closely  with  them  for  both  our  benefits  to  make 
sure  that  there  were  no  accidents. 

Swent:     Keep  everyone's  feet  to  the  fire? 
Bledsoe:   That's  right.   For  their  benefit  also. 

Swent:     That  was  a  great  deal  of  extra  work  and  expense  for  your  office, 
wasn't  it? 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   Some  of  that  came  back  in  sharing  with  some  of  the  local 
agencies,  but  we  picked  up  the  major  part  of  the  overhead. 
However,  keep  in  mind  that  about  70  percent  of  the  total  annual 
water  allocation  up  there  does  go  to  SID,  so  we  have  a  large 
stake  in  the  total  water  supply.   And  we  now  are  using  some  of 
our  own  allocation  for  municipal  supplies,  industrial  supplies. 
So  it  is  not  only  important  to  the  cities,  but  to  SID  who's  also 
providing  water  for  that  type  of  municipal  and  industrial  use. 


226 


The  Future  of  SID:  Inevitable  Adjudication  Over  Water  Rights 


Swent:     And  the  projects  that  you're  continuing  to  work  on  now,  though, 
are  other  projects,  aren't  they? 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  for  the  most  part,  we  are  involved  in  an  inevitable  water 
rights  adjudication.   I  say  inevitable  because  of  the  very 
peculiar  nature  of  the  permits  that  were  issued  by  the  state 
board  for  the  water  rights  on  this  project.   They  were  unusual 
in  several  respects;  and  quite  honestly,  final  license  for  those 
water  rights  could  never  have  been  issued  without  either  action 
by  the  court  or  action  by  the  state  board,  a  major  investigation 
by  the  state  board  before  any  licenses  could  be  issued.   What 
I'm  pointing  to  specifically,  one  major  issue:  for  the  first 
time  that  I'm  aware  of--the  state  board  staff  tells  me  that  it's 
the  only  case  they  know  of --where  in  the  issuance  of  a  water 
right  permit,  the  state  board  set  aside  a  reservation  for  future 
filings—not  existing  water  rights.   Those  existing  water  rights 
have  a  priority,  anyway,  over  any  permit  that  we  might  have 
received,  but  the  water  right  was  restricted  to  the  extent  that 
there  was  a  reservation  for  some  33,000  acre  feet  of  future 
filings  in  the  Berryessa  watershed—in  other  words  above 
Monticello  Dam.   This  would  be  for  Lake  County  and  Napa  County 
future  filings. 

It  was  a  very  unusual  provision,  but  then  the  state  board 
said  to  the  extent  that  that  33,000  or  any  portion  of  it  had  not 
been  put  to  use  at  the  time  Solano  goes  to  final  license— which 
was  to  occur  in  1994,  that  was  the  term  of  the  program— that 
should  any  of  it  be  not  put  to  use  by  the  time  Solano  goes  to 
license,  any  unused  portion  would  revert  back  to  the  project 
water  rights  —  in  other  words,  back  to  Solano.   It  was  important, 
here  again,  how  much  water  has  been  put  to  use.   The  state  had 
estimates  only,  no  accurate  record  of  who  was  using  the  water, 
how  much  had  been  put  to  use .   It  was  going  to  take  an 
exhaustive  inspection  and  investigation,  either  by  the  state  or 
by  experts  hired  in  a  court  action,  which  is  a  court 
adjudication.   You  can  also  have  adjudication  through  the  state 
board,  too.   There  is  no  other  recourse  in  this  case,  so  for 
that  reason  I  say  it  was  inevitable  that  something  had  to  take 
place  before  licenses  could  be  issued.   All  the  permits, 
including  all  those  people  up  there  who  were  using  the  water, 
either  thought  they  had  a  right  or  did  have  a  right,  depending 
on  what  stage  of  the  process  they  were  in  on  their  permits. 

The  same  thing,  major  questions  being  asked  because  the 
state  had  decided  that  they  were  going  to  make  these  releases  in 
the  Putah  Creek  downstream  from  the  dam:  those  had  been  in 


227 


question,  and  repeatedly  they  had  the  bureau  do  a  fifteen-year 
study,  as  part  of  the  permit  requirement,  on  the  effect  of  these 
releases  on  the  creek—particularly  on  the  ground  water 
recharge.   That  investigation  was  done;  certain  recommendations 
and  a  fixed  release  schedule  was  set  up  in  1970  by  the  state 
board.   It  determined  how  much  water  would  be  released  each 
month  of  the  year.   And  this  was  put  in  place;  it  has  been 
challenged  several  times. 

The  worst  calamity  was  the  seven-year  drought,  of  course; 
the  real  culprit,  for  the  first  time  except  for  one  time  in  '77, 
I  believe:  for  the  first  time,  Putah  Creek  went  completely  dry 
in  some  areas,  particularly  around  Davis,  at  the  University  of 
California.   Our  only  requirement  was  to  release  the  amount  of 
water  stated  in  the  permit—as  far  as  we  were  concerned,  a 
mandatory  requirement  for  SID.   Keep  in  mind  we're  operating  as 
a  contractor  operating  the  project—we  must  follow  the  guidebook 
that  the  bureau  has  set  down  for  an  extensive  operating 
procedure,  which  we  had  to  follow;  that  includes  following  all 
the  permit  terms  and  conditions  and  releases  to  Putah  Creek  and 
so  on.   During  the  drought,  Putah  Creek  went  dry-- 

U 

Bledsoe:   We  heard  that  one  of  our  neighbor  agencies  in  Yolo  County  was 
preparing  to  file  suit  against  us  because  we  wouldn't  release 
more  water  down  the  creek.   [That]  led  to  a  decision  here  that 
it  was  necessary  that  we  start  the  inspection  and  investigation 
to  determine  who  has  rights  to  the  water  and  how  much;  not  only 
upstream,  but  all  the  way  down  the  creek— because  people,  we 
found  during  the  drought,  because  their  wells  had  perhaps 
dropped  off  a  little  bit,  were  putting  pumps  into  Putah  Creek. 
We  were  releasing  water  from  the  dam,  supposedly  for  recharge 
and  also,  incidentally,  keeping  fish  alive;  people  were  putting 
pumps  in  the  creek  down  there  in  the  Davis  area,  pumping  large 
amounts  of  water.   So  no  matter  what  we  did  to  increase  the 
releases,  the  more  we  released  the  more  they  were  going  to  pump. 

Caught  between  a  rock  and  a  hard  place.   What  do  you  do? 
We  didn't  want  the  fish  to  die,  either.   But  there  was  no 
question  about  it;  just  releasing  more  water  wasn't  the  answer. 
And  yet,  as  I  say,  one  of  the  neighboring  cities  was  going  to 
try  to  make  a  court  case  out  of  it  and  force  us  to  release 
water.   That  being  the  case,  we  decided  we  had  no  choice  but  to 
file  for  adjudication:  either  have  the  state  or  the  court  decide 
who  had  rights  to  the  water,  how  much  water  could  they  take,  and 
finally  settle  this  and  issue  the  licenses— which  were  really 
due,  anyway,  because  the  first  permits  were  issued  in  '55.   As  I 
recall,  the  term  of  the  permit  was  '94;  but  we  got  that 


228 


extended,  of  course.  Anyway,  so  much  for  the  water  rights 
issue.  That's  a  very  quick  summary,  and  that's  one  of  the 
things  that  we're  still  working  on. 

Swent:     You  have  a  lot  on  your  agenda  there. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  I  do  keep  busy;  but  I'm  trying  to  only  work  two  days  a 
week. 

Swent:     So  a  little  gold  mine  was  just  kind  of  a  blip  on  the  total 
picture. 

Bledsoe:   Right,  but  it  was  an  important  one.   I'm  very  pleased  that  the 
relationship  has  worked  out  finally  as  well  as  it  has.   We 
couldn't  be  happier  with  the  results  of  the  operation  up  there. 
It  has  operated  very  safely,  and  we've  had  no  detrimental 
effects  down  here.   And  in  the  meantime,  I  think  we've  worked 
out  a  good  relationship  with  Homestake. 

Swent:     You  feel  that  you  had  done  your  job? 

Bledsoe:   We  had  done  our  job;  but  whether  or  not  we  are  responsible  for 

this  success  remains  to  be  seen.  It's  really  an  unknown.  But  I 
think  we  did  our  job  and  did  the  best  we  could;  and  perhaps  some 
of  what  we  suggested  to  Homestake,  some  of  the  precautions,  have 
paid  off  for  our  benefit  as  well  as  theirs. 

Swent:     I  didn't  say  anything  about  air  quality,  but  were  you  working  at 
all  with  the  air  quality  people? 

Bledsoe:   No,  we  weren't.   I  believe  that  was  Yolo's  concern  because 

they're  downwind.   The  asbestos—you  know,  in  the  serpentine 
formations  up  there,  with  all  the  crushing  and  everything  that 
was  going  on,  obviously  there  was  going  to  be  some  asbestos 
fiber  released.   We,  at  first,  asked  our  experts  to  take  a  look: 
"What  is  this  fiber  going  to  do  as  far  as  water  contamination?" 
They  dismissed  it.   Nothing  indicates  that  asbestos  in  water  is 
harmful. 


Swent :     No . 

Bledsoe:   But  it  is  an  air  quality  problem.  We  didn't  get  into  that 

issue.   That  was  Yolo  County's  issue,  I'm  quite  sure,  one  of 
their  issues.   It  may  have  been  an  issue  with  some  of  the  other 
groups  that  were  protesting.   We  tried  to  stick  with  our  main 
objective:  protecting  the  water  quality. 


229 


Regulating  the  Transport  of  Cyanide 


Swent:     We  talked  about  the  containment,  and  I  think  we  did  briefly 
mention  the  transport  of  the  cyanide.   That  was  a  concern. 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  because  particularly  they  were  planning  to  improve  that 

road.   If  you  had  seen  the  old  road  that  had  been  there,  you'd 
really  have  concerns  [about]  the  possibility  of  their 
transporting  cyanide  in  there  during  inclement  weather  or  at 
nighttime  over  those  roads.   Because  some  of  the  little  drainage 
channels  that  crossed  the  highway,  do  get  back  into  Hunting 
Creek  or  Putah  Creek  eventually;  and  we  wanted  to  make  sure 
that:  number  one,  we  restrict  the  times  of  day  and  type  of 
weather  during  which  they  could  transport;  secondly,  to  have  a 
plan  for  immediate  containment  of  any  spill  that  might  occur- 
even  to  the  extent  of  having  some  ponds  or  sand  or  something 
ready  to  doze  into  those  channels  should  it  occur  so  that  there 
could  be  containment.   So,  yes,  cyanide  transport  —  after  we  took 
care  of  the  containment  problem—the  cyanide  transport  was  a 
concern. 

Swent:     I  guess  those  were  really  the  two  items-- 

Bledsoe:   Yes,  I  think.   As  1  understand  it--I  haven't  actually  seen  it-- 
but  I  think  Homestake  has  been  asking  for  expansion  of  the 
hauling  or  transport  periods  now.   Again,  I'm  not  sure  that  we 
can  agree  to  expand  that.   I  haven't  gotten  in  on  the 
discussion. 

Swent:     You  mean-- 

Bledsoe:   Expand  the  hours  during  which  it  could  occur. 

Swent:     I  think  at  first  they  were  only  going  to  transport  part  of  the 
year;  and  then  they  changed  that  to  a  longer- - 

Bledsoe:   And  maybe  that's  it.   I  didn't  really  ask  about  the  discussion. 
Maybe  it's  a  seasonal  adjustment. 


After  Many  Years.  No  Threat  to  the  SID  Waters 


Swent:     Because  of  the  difficulty  of  storage  up  there,  I  guess.   But  all 
seems  to  have  come  out  satisfactorily. 


230 


Bledsoe:   Here  again,  I  refer  to  Mr.  Rouse  who  has  done  the  work  on  the 
oversight.   [looks  at  report]   I  might  just  very  quickly  quote 
from  the  general  conclusion:  "Mclaughlin  mine  and  mill  is 
operating  in  accord  with  existing  permits  and  agreements"-- 
including  our  agreement.   Technical  exceedances  to  permit 
criteria  reported  during  the  winter  of  '93  resulted  from 
excessive  precipitation  events,  and  did  not  impact  water  quality 
in  Hunting  Creek  to  receiving  water.   The  reclamation  of  the 
waste  rock  is  proceeding.   Surface  and  ground  water  monitoring 
is  being  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  approved  monitoring 
plans,  and  yields  data  of  high  quality."  He's  talking  about  our 
approved  monitoring  plans.   "The  Mclaughlin  Project  is  operating 
as  designed  and  permitted,  and  poses  no  threat  to  the  quality  of 
SID  waters." 

So  this  is  after  a  number  of  years,  now,  of  monitoring, 
and  everything  is  I  think  a  sign  of  success.   And  we're  pleased. 

Swent:     You  can  feel  a  job  well  done,  then,  I  guess. 
Bledsoe:   I  certainly  hope  so. 

Swent:     Was  there  anything  else?  These  are  all  my  questions.   Did  you 
have  any  others? 

Bledsoe:   I  guess  the  question,  Lee:  did  you  want  copies  of  some  of  this 
stuff  sent  to  you,  some  of  the  narrative  pages  or--? 

Swent:     I  would  like  those  first  narrative  pages  there.   I  think  that 
would  be-- 

Bledsoe:   Okay,  sure.   I'll  copy  the  narrative  pages  and  mail  them  to  you. 

Swent:     I  would  appreciate  that  very  much,  yes.   Okay?  All  right,  well, 
we've  covered  a  lot  of  ground. 

Bledsoe:   Yes.   I  hope  we  didn't  wander  off  the  path  too  much. 

Swent:     No,  I  don't  think  that--.   Let's  see.   Unless  there's  anything 
else  that  you  would  like  to  say  about  any  of  the  people  that 
were  involved  in  all  of  this.   Were  there  other  county,  SID 
people? 

Bledsoe:   Not  really,  other  than,  you  know,  basically  on  the  site.   The 

most  active  participants  were  me,  of  course,  and  our  attorneys. 


231 


Water  Law  Specialists  Minasian,  Minasian,  Minasian, 
Oroville 


ct  al.  of 


Swent:     Who  were  your  attorneys? 

Bledsoe:   Minasian,  Minasian,  Minasian,  Spruance,  Baber,  Meith,  and 
Soares . 

Swent:     Good  gracious. 

Bledsoe:   The  letterhead  is  quite--  We  called  them  the  Three  M's.   There 
it  is  [offers  letterhead]. 

Swent:     Minasian--oh  my  goodness!   Minasian,  Minasian,  Minasian, 
Spruance--good  gracious! 

Bledsoe:  There's  only  one  of  the  Minasians  that's  still  active  in  the 
firm,  and  one  other  living.  One  is  deceased.  So  the  people 
keep  asking  why  they  don't  shorten  the  name. 

Swent:     Soares.   These  are  attorneys  in-- 

Bledsoe:   Oroville. 

Swent:     Oroville!   Why  did  you  go  all  the  way  to  Oroville? 

Bledsoe:   It's  a  long  story,  but  Mr.  Jack  Minasian--who  was  the  senior  in 
the  firm  who's  deceased  now-- Jack  Minasian  drew  up  the  formation 
documents  for  SID.   And  they  didn't  act  as  attorneys  for  the 
district  until  I  took  over  as  manager.   I  wasn't  satisfied:  we 
had  a  local  attorney  who  was  no  water  expert,  no  water  law 
expert.   And  I  was  looking—in  fact,  I  even  consulted  my  local 
attorney  and  said,  "We  have  got  to  have  a  good  water  law  legal 
counsel."   I  started  looking  back  on  the  history  and  saw  Jack 
Minasian  was  still  renowned.   So  I  called  Minasian,  interviewed 
several  others;  but  I  called  Minasian  and  asked  him  if  they 
could  take  us  on  as  a  client  for  the  first  time  since  1948. 

Swent:     Well! 

Bledsoe:  But  this  was  1972.  It's  kind  of  interesting.  Jack  Minasian  was 
in  on  the  early  project  dealings.  But,  yes,  they  are  quite  well 
known  in  water  law,  which  is  a  very  special  field. 


232 


Porno  Indians  Are  Now  A  Constituency 


Swent : 
Bledsoe: 


Swent : 
Bledsoe: 

Swent : 
Bledsoe: 
Swent : 
Bledsoe: 
Swent : 
Bledsoe: 
Swent : 


And  increasingly  important,  isn't  it? 

Yes,  I  think  right  now  the  Solano  Project,  Putah  Creek 
adjudication  will  probably  have  every  water  attorney  in  Northern 
California  involved.   I  have  never  seen  so  many  attorneys,  so 
many  parties.   Now,  the  latest,  latest  party  which  did  not  even 
show  their  heads  until  we  had  a  settlement  agreement  worked  out 
with  all  the  people  up  in  Lake  and  Napa  counties—had  worked 
with  a  multitude  of  people  up  there;  finally  reached  a 
settlement  agreement --and  suddenly  the  Porno  Indians  show  up. 
"By  the  way,  we  would  like  some  water,  because  we  want  to  build 
a  casino  up  there  in  Lake  County  reservation."  They  own  a  piece 
of  land  up  there.   So  the  Porno  Indians  raised  the  question,  and 
the  first  thing  we  know,  we're  getting  calls  from  the  Department 
of  the  Interior  Division  of  Indian  Affairs.   Well,  they  swing  a 
big  stick.   So  the  settlement  agreement  is  on  hold  right  now 
until  we  get  the  Porno  Indians  satisfied. 


Do  you  have  Indians  in  Solano  County? 
rancheria  here? 


Is  there  any  Indian 


No,  no.   Yolo  does,  and  Lake  County,  I  guess.   I  don't  think 
Napa  has  any. 

Not  that  I  know  of. 

And  I'm  not  aware  of  any  in  Solano  County. 

No.  Oh,  my. 

One  of  the  fun  things . 

Okay,  well,  does  that  do  it,  then? 

Lee,  if  you're  satisfied,  I  don't  know  what  more  I  could  say. 

Okay.   I  think  this  is  just  fine  and  I  thank  you  very  much. 


Transcribed  by  Lisa  Vasquez 
Final  Typed  by  Shana  Chen 


233 
TAPE  GUIDE- -McLaughlin  Mine,  Volume  I 


Interview  with  James  Anderson 

Date  of  Interview:  September  23,  1995 

Tape  1,  Side  A  1 

Tape  1,  Side  B  16 

Tape  2,  Side  A  28 

Tape  2,  Side  B  42 

Tape  3,  Side  A  53 
Tape  3,  Side  B  not  recorded 

Interview  with  Will  Baker 

Date  of  Interview:  August  9,  1994 

Tape  1,  Side  A  63 

Tape  1,  Side  B  75 

Tape  2,  Side  A  86 

Tape  2,  Side  B  95 

Interview  with  Norman  Birdsey 

Date  of  Interview:  October  17,  1995 

Tape  1,  Side  A  HI 

Tape  1,  Side  B  123 

Tape  2,  Side  A  139 

Tape  2,  Side  B  153 

Tape  3,  Side  A  165 

Tape  3,  Side  B  176 

Interview  with  Brice  Bledsoe 

Date  of  Interview:  August  31,  1995 

Tape  1,  Side  A  193 

Tape  1,  Side  B  206 

Tape  2,  Side  A  218 

Tape  2,  Side  B  227 


APPENDIX 


JAMES  ANDERSON 

1.  Homestake  Mining  Company  Board  of  Directors  meeting, 
November  14,  1980,  approval  of  request  for 
expenditures  for  Mclaughlin  Project  234 

2.  Report  of  Exploration  Division  in  Homestake 

Mining  Company's  1980  Annual  Report  235 

3.  "Gold—its  history  and  role  in  the  U.S.  economy 
and  the  U.S.  exploration  program  of  Homestake 
Mining  Co.,"  by  James  A.  Anderson,  Mining  Congress 
Journal.  January  1982  236 

WILL  BAKER 

Letter  to  the  Editor  of  the  Woodland  Daily  Democrat, 

April  18,  1984  24A 

NORMAN  BIRDSEY 

Information  on  autoclave  pumps  245 

BRICE  BLEDSOE 

"Observations  of  Containment  and  Control  for  Potential 

Water  Quality  Modifications  from  the  Homestake  Mining 

Company  McLaughlin  Mine  and  Mill,"  Report  for  Solano 

Irrigation  District,  April  1994  248 

GENERAL  McLAUGHLIN  MINE  INFORMATION 

1.  Note  on  Manhattan  Quicksilver  Mine,  Mining  and 
Scientific  Press,  April  7,  1877  260 

2.  (partial)  Report  from  California  Journal  of  Mines 
and  Geology,  State  Mineralogist's  Report  XLI, 

April  1945  (41:2)  261 

3.  Table  19  from  "Mercury  Potential  of  the  United 
States,"  U.S.  Department  of  Interior  Bureau  of 

Mines,  (1965),  Information  Circular  8252  265 

4.  (partial)  "The  New  California  Gold  Rush,"  by 
George  0.  Argall,  Jr.,  Engineering  &  Mining 

Journal,  December  1987  267 

5.  "Tertiary  Gold  Bearing  Mercury  Deposits  of  the 
Coast  Ranges  of  California,"  by  Larry  M. 
Vredenburgh,  California  Geology.  February  1992        269 

6.  McLaughlin  Mine,  "General  Information  Summary," 
Homestake  Mining  Company,  August  1992  272 

7.  "McLaughlin  Mine,"  from  Homestake  Mining  Company's 
"Supplemental  Information  1995"  (internal  document)    290 

8.  Tables,  "Gold  Production  in  California  (1848-1996), 
Dollar  Value,"  and  "Gold  Production  in  California 
(1848-1996),  Troy  Ounces,"  Department  of 
Conservation,  Division  of  Mines  and  Geology,  n.d.     291 

9.  Production  data  for  mercury  production,  U.S.  Bureau 

of  Mines,  for  the  years  after  1961  293 


10.  "Gold  Hits  $850  in  Zurich—Dollar  Gains  in  Europe," 

San  Francisco  Chronicle,  January  22,  1980  294 

11.  "Big  Gold  Find  in  Napa  County,"  San  Francisco 
Chronicle.  August  28,  1980  295 

12.  "Gold  Rush  of  1980  Is  Raging--A  New  Breed  of 
California  Prospectors,"  San  Francisco  Chronicle. 
September  1,  1980  296 


APPENDIX  A 


JAMES  ANDERSON 


234  APPENDIX  Al 


d0rnestake  Mining  Company 

lar  Meeting  of  the  Board  of  Directors 
14,   1980 


iloration  Division  --  Request  for  Expenditure  No.  EX-80-D-1 


At  the  invitation  of  the  Chairman,  Mr.  James  A.  Anderson,  Vice- 
president,  and  Mr.  Donald  L.  Gustafson  of  the  Reno  office  joined  the 
the  meeting. 

The  Chairman  reported  that  a  request  has  been  received  from  the 
Exploration  Division  to  expend  $10,195,000  to  conduct  deposit  develop 
ment  at  the  McLaughlin  Project.  He  recommended  approval. 

After  discussion  and  on  motion  duly  made  and  seconded,  the  following 
resolution  was  adopted  unanimously: 

RESOLVED,  that  Request  for  Expenditure  No.  EX-80-D-1 
by  the  Exploration  Division  for  $10,195,000  to  conduct  deposit 
development  at  the  McLaughlin  Project,  be  and  hereby  is  approved. 

At  this  point  Messrs.  Anderson  and  Gustafson  were  excused  from 
the  meeting  room. 


235 


APPENDIX  A2 


from  Homestake  Mining  Company's 
1980  Annual  Report 


excess  of  six  million  tons  of  ore  at 
an  average  grade  of  approximately 
0.17  ounces  per  ton,  or  more  than 


Exploration  Division 

in  1980,  Homestake  continued  its 
jggressive  exploration  program 
which  was  launched  well  before 
?old  and  silver  prices  rose  to  present 
levels  We  spent  $18  million 
an  exploration  and  development 
work  and  our  1981  budget  will 
DC  higher  Our  efforts  will  focus 
primarily  on  promising  gold  and 
silver  prospects  in  the  United  States. 
The  primary  objective  of  Home 
stake's  exploration  program  is  to 
expand  our  position  as  the  coun 
try's  largest  domestic  gold  producer. 

Our  recent  exploration  efforts 
produced  a  major  gold  discovery 
in  1980,  70  miles  from  San 
Francisco,  California,  at  a  site  where 
gold  was  not  mined  previously.  The 
Mclaughlin  Project  contains  in 


James  A.  Anderson 
Vice  President,  General  Manager 
Exploration  Division 


one  million  ounces  of  gold. 

The  Exploration  Division  has 
expended  approximately  $5  million 
to  date  at  the  Mclaughlin  Project. 
We  will  continue  exploration  and 
development  activities  over  the 
next  12  to  18  months  to  determine 
the  full  extent  and  economics 
of  the  gold  deposit. 

During  1980,  the  Exploration  Di 
vision  screened  over  800  properties 
and  conducted  field  examinations 
of  over  500  precious  metals  pros 
pects  in  the  U.S.,  Canada  and 
Australia  Land  positions  were 
obtained  on  24  properties,  bringing 
our  portfolio  of  precious  metal 
prospects  to  62.  These  prospects 
are  in  various  stages  of  the  sequen 
tial  exploration  evaluation  process, 
which  includes  Reconnaissance 
(selection  and  prioritization),  Target 


Evaluation  (initial  exploration 
testing),  Ore  Target  Evaluation 
(advanced  exploration  testing) , 
and  Deposit  Development  (deposit 
delineation,  engineering  and  feasi 
bility). 

At  year-end,  the  Mclaughlin 
Project  was  in  Deposit  Develop 
ment,  four  projects  were  in  Ore  Tar 
get  Evaluation  and  nine  projects 
were  in  Target  Evaluation  Three 
Target  Evaluation  projects  were 
completed  and  abandoned  in  1980. 

Exploration  efforts  for  silver  were 
primarily  concentrated  on  contin 
ued  evaluation  of  Homestake's  50 
percent  interest  in  the  Bachelor 
Mountain  deposit  near  the  Bulldog 
silver  mine  in  Colorado's  Creede 
Mining  District,  where  drilling  and 
metallurgical  testing  were  con 
tinued  in  1980. 

Homestake  also  continued  its 
efforts  towards  uranium,  lead,  zinc 
and  copper  discoveries  Uranium 
exploration  is  the  responsibility 
of  the  Energy  Division  Lead-zinc 
reconnaissance  is  carried  out  in 
southeastern  Missouri.  Copper 
exploration  is  carried  out  in 
Wisconsin  through  a  joint  venture 
with  American  Copper  and  Nickel 
Company. 

In  response  to  increasing  competi 
tion  for  promising  gold  and  silver 
prospects,  Homestake  improved  its 
exploration  models  and  designed 
new  computer-oriented  systems  for 
deposit  evaluation,  feasibility  studies, 
and  mine  design.  The  Exploration 
Division  expanded  its  Land  Depart 
ment  to  meet  increased  activities. 
These  and  other  efforts  will  help 
Homestake  retain  its  competitive 
edge  in  precious  metals  exploration 
and  development. 


15 


'AMES  A.  ANDERSON 

•  ,''v- :.•::••.••    H.'":t'<:.iki'  Mining  Co 


236 


bid— its  history  and  role  in  the  U.S.  economy 
and  the  U.S.  exploration  program  of 
Homestake  Mining  Co. 


APPENDIX  A3 


from  Mining  Congress 


Journal,  January  1<  82 


vs'.a\c  Ahvj'iy  Gv  has  had  a  long  and  cordial  re- 
miv  .v,1.'';  the  American  Mining  Centre?*,  which 
rc'.'i'esented  l':c  mining  industry  in  Wafhington 
-,-  ;^v.- — ;;/s.'  jo  t/i-rtr>  after  HowfSfflJtf  was  first 
'.(.!  on  the  \i"i  York  Stock  Exchange.  Over  the 
%;i  iie.'ii*  ,'•  ;!i:s  relationship.  Homcflakf  and  the 
>::';•;  G".\.'r>.»  /:iKv  witnessed  and  interacted  in 
•.VMS  vv"i''''i"'i'"'<''  policies  and  attitudes  toward 
'.  These  altitudes  arc  Ivmg  rccxamincd  today  and 
to'  /<;<•  vvrrn/wr';/  policies  that  evolve  from  this 
,?";:';.;,',v:  could  influence  the  industry'*  precious 
i  :-vr>' -at  son.  T'.T  subject  of  precious  metal  exph- 
.":  '(T'<'~(-'i.'>  J  /waiT1  >tVfv  of  activity.  These  rc- 
••(-  ;<••'.'    .' ;;:'>  i-'(»r.  'iVKS  i";  fnv  topical  considcr- 
••:-—.'  Y  i.'  S    '•'.'.n.Y/i?/  historv  of  \;old  and.  in//; 
:  ;*  •',;  • -;     :,•:,:'    Howcslflkcs  gold  exploration  in 


'';.'-  ji*cuss;o>:  shows  Hint  the  gold 
s  i?s  it  tlienno'neter  ot  the  economic 
ry  rather  thai;  the  cure  for  those  ills, 
ways  of  reading  the  thermometer  both 
success  and  failure  of  certain  federal 
cs  and  in  Homestake' s  attitude  to- 
,";  -fold  exploration  in  this  country 
'.•(  -ocon.i  :'."'/  ot  the  discussion  siuu- 
;«(•  -  i  "i.".' i  ';.'/!"/  program  and  inve*t- 
.  :.•  ,/:•.•(';•<•>•  new  gold  deposit*. 


Iome^i.iki-  Mininj;  Co.  is  the  largest  gold  producer 
.in  the  I'mted  Stntes  and  holds  the  largest  known 
•reserves  in  North  America.  Its  position  as  the 
"Ji*r  domestic  gold  mining  company  has  for  years 
f based  ivi  the  production  from  the  Homestake 
HIP  Lead.  S  H  More  than  33  million  ounces  of 
iih.nc  K'en  evtvacted  from  this  single  location 
:c  the  laM  10i'  vf.irs. 

ttmestake '•-  pos!tn>n  \\'(T-  strengthened  in  1U80  with 
.•1i<cm-er\  ot  another  major  gold  deposit,  the 
iughiin  deposit,  in  a  rem(>te  part  of  Napa  County, 
I  That  discovery  was  the  result  of  an  aggressive, 
technology  exploration  program  begun  in  1978. 
''istake  now  estimates  that  the  McLaughlin  depos- 
fitams  3.2  million  oz  of  gold — at  least  20  million 
VM  ore  with  an  average  grade  of  0.16  oz  of  gold  in 
''ion.  The  MrLuighlin  project  is  expected  to  be  in 
"firm  a-  .1  tull->-cale  mine  in  1984. 
'th  the  Homest.ike  mine,  the  McLaughlin  discov- 
1  nd  a  conlinuing  long-term  gold  exploration  pro- 
'.  Utimestakr  expects  to  remain  the  leading  do- 
•'ic  gold  producer  in  the  coming  years. 


Free  market  providing  incentive  for  gold  mining 

Major  increases  in  world  gold  market  prices  during 
the  free-market  system  of  the  past  ten  years  have 
created  attractive  operating  margins,  and  thus  new 
incentives  for  gold  exploration,  development  and  min 
ing  in  the  United  States.  The  magnitude  of  this  re 
newed  profit  incentive  is  depicted  in  the  plot  of  gold 
price  against  the  Consumer  Price  Index  in  fig.  1. 

The  federal  government  has  "fixed"  the  U.S.  curren 
cy  value  of  gold  under  various  forms  of  the  gold 
standard  for  160  of  the  last  190  years.  Conversely,  free- 
market  forces  have  established  the  value  of  gold  on 
just  two  occasions  during  the  same  period,  spanning  a 
total  of  30  years. 

The  dollar  value  of  gold  was  first  maintained  at  a 
fixed  price  by  the  1792  Mint  Act  which  established  a 
Bimetallic  Standard  for  U.S.  currency.  The  standard 
was  based  principally  on  silver  in  which  the  U.S.  dollar 
was  equated  to  0.774  oz  of  silver,  with  the  mint 
required  to  maintain  a  fixed  silver  gold  ratio  of  13:1. 
This  established  a  fixed  price  of  gold  at  S19.38  per 
ounce  which  was  maintained  until  1834  when  the 
silver  gold  ratio  was  changed  to  16:1,  elevating  the 
fixed  price  of  gold  to  S20.67  per  ounce. 

This  fixed  price  for  gold  persisted  until  1861  when  a 
free-market  system  called  the  "Greenback  Era"  pre 
vailed  during  the  events  surrounding  the  Civil  War. 

Price  of  gold  increased  to  $35  in  1934 

The  deflation  following  the  Civil  War  caused  prices 
to  fall.  In  1879,  the  U.S.  government  reestablished  the 
fixed  price  of  gold  at  the  pre-war  value  of  520.67  per 
ounce,  establishing  parity  with  the  value  of  the  dollar 
as  indicated  by  the  Consumer  Price  Index.  This  fixed 
price  was  maintained  through  the  inflation  of  World 
War  I  and  the  depths  of  the  Great  Depression.  But  in 


fig    7.  Historical  record  on  gold  in  the  United  States  since  1789 


51 


237 

1434,  the  government  finally  devalued  the  dollar  by 
increasing  the  price  of  gold  to  535  an  ounce,  restoring 
gold's  purchasing  power  to  near  parity  with  U.S. 
currency. 

The  535  an  ounce  gold  price  was  retained  by  the  1944 
Bretton  Woods  Agreement,  which  adopted  a  gold- 
dollar  standard  using  the  U.S.  dollar  as  the  official 
reserve  currency  for  the  newly  established  Internation 
al  Monetary  Fund.  Under  this  agreement,  the  U.S. 
dollar  was  defined  as  being  Vx  of  an  ounce  of  gold. 
The  U.S.  agreed  to  settle  all  foreign  accounts  with  gold 
bullion  payments  and  receipts.  Dollars  and  dollar 
credits  held  by  foreigners  were  to  be  counted  as 
reserves  equal  to  gold.  This  established  the  gold- 
backed  U.S.  dollar  as  a  world  reserve  currency  and 
stabilized  international  currencies  until  the  1960s, 
when  various  factors  reduced  the  world's  confidence 
in  the  ultimate  ability  of  the  United  States  to  redeem  its 
currency  and  debts  in  gold. 

Some  of  the  factors  that  undermined  world  confi 
dence  in  the  U.S.  dollar  were: 
1)  The  rapidly  increasing  U.S.  balance-of-payments 

deficits  during  the  1950s  (see  fig.  1); 
2\  The  rapid  growth  of  gold-backed  U.S.  dollars  as 
international  reserves  (Eurodollar  reserves)  and 
resulting  major  extensions  of  bank  credit  (Euro 
dollar  loan  liabilities); 

3i  Persistent  inflation  in  the  U.S.  (decrease  in  real 
purchasing   power  of  outstanding   money   bal 
ances  as  indicated  by  the  CP1). 
4)  Mounting  U.S.  federal  debt. 

U.S.  government  reserves  halved  in  eight  years 

This  decreasing  confidence  in  the  dollar  forced  the 
London  market  price  of  gold  to  reach  S40  (price  on  the 
London  Free  Market  for  Gold,  established  for  conve 
nience  in  1954)  an  ounce  in  October  1960,  when  the 
U.S.  foreign  balance-of-payments  deficit  exceeded  the 
total  value  of  U.S.  government  gold  reserves  at  the 
fixed  price  of  535  an  ounce.  As  a  result,  foreigners 
accelerated  their  conversion  of  dollars  to  gold,  reduc 
ing  the  U.S.  government  reserves  from  approximately 
600  million  oz  to  about  300  million  oz  between  I960 
and  1968  (see  fig.  1).  During  1968,  the  outstanding 
L.S  toreign  balance-of-payments  deficit  exceeded  the 
U.S.  gold  reserve,  valued  at  S35  an  ounce,  by  four 
times.  In  other  words,  the  deficit  was  backed  by  less 
than  25  percent  gold  reserves.  Rather  than  devalue  the 
dollar  to  maintain  at  least  a  25  percent  gold  reserve 
backing  to  foreigners,  the  U.S.  government  stubbornly 
clung  to  the  "official"  $35  an  ounce  value  of  gold  but 
implemented  a  policy  to  confine  its  gold  sales  to 
foreign  central  banks. 

Under  this  policy,  the  U.S.  Treasury  exchanged  gold 
for  dollars  only  with  foreign  central  banks  and  at  the 
"official  $35  an  ounce  value."  For  other  transactions, 
the  U.S.  government  recognized  the  free-market  dollar 
value,  but  it  did  not  exchange  gold  at  that  price.  (U.S. 
citizens  were  still  not  allowed  by  law  to  own  gold 
bullion).  This  policy  established  a  "two-tier"  gold 
pricing  system  in  the  U.S. 

The  continuing  weakness  of  the  U.S.  dollar  as  an 
international  currency  led  to  the  establishment  of  a 
new  international  reserve  system  in  January  1970, 
comprised  of  Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDR's — paper 

52 


gold),  gold,  dollars  and  toreign  currencies.  But  toreign 
central  banks  continued  converting  U.S  dol!..r-  ,nu> 
gold  at  the  "official"  fixed  price  of  535  an  ou:-,ce  IK 
early  1971,  the  U.S  government  raced  an.'thei  ci.nc.i! 
point  when  U.S.  currency  in  domestic  circulation  al-v 
exceeded  the  25  percent  gold  reserve  Kicking  at  -i>3? 
per  ounce  (actually,  Congress  had  revoked  the  leqmre- 
ment  for  a  25  percent  gold  backing  of  U.S  currenc*.  .is 
early  as  1968).  Rather  than  devalue  the  dollar,  the  L  .:•. 
government  stopped  the  conversion  privilege  ot  dol 
lars  to  gold  in  August  1971  and  allowed  the  value  ot 
the  dollar  to  "float"  on  international  monev  markets  in 
December  1971. 

Dollar  devalued  in  1971  and  again  in  1973 

For  only  the  second  time  in  our  historv,  the  govern 
ment  had  abandoned  the  gold  standard  (a  fixed  dollar 
value  for  gold).  The  previous  instance  was  during  the 
"Greenback  Era"  (1861-1879).  For  the  purpose  ot  e>- 
tablishing  its  International  Monetary  Fund  reserve 
positions,  the  U.S.,  in  an  agreement  called  the  bmith- 
sonian  Accord,  accepted  devaluation  of  the  L.S.  dollar 
to  S38  an  ounce  in  December  1971.  Again  tor  1M1 
purposes,  ne  dollar  was  devalued  to  542.22  an  oi.r.cc 
in  1973.  But  the  international  pressures  on  tin.  \  aim'  oi 
the  U.S.  dollar  have  not  ceased  Since  the  v.Vg.i!i:.'<i- 
tion  of  Petroleum  Exporting  Countries  icH'K  •  >•.. 
embargo  in  1973,  the  United  States  Kiian..v-v>!-p.n- 
ment  deficits,  federal  debt  and  domestic  inflation  rates 
have  worsened  markedly.  To  put  this  into  some  kind 
of  perspective,  were  the  U.S.  to  settle  just  one  ot  its 
outstanding  monetary  obligations,  its  toreign  Kiiance- 
of-payments  deficit,  with  its  current  gold  reserve- 
gold  would  have  to  be  valued  at  5S30  an  ounce. 

World  political  tensions  and  uncertainty  ------  .uch.  a- 

the  OPEC  oil  embargo  —  do  affect  tre<.  -:;•..<:>,>•.  .;,  ,.' 
prices  as  seen  by  wide  fluctuations,  1:1  the  ::\  •,  -:'•.:;  -M.  : 
value.  The  exile  of  the  Shah  ot  Iran  and  ma,i-i  .  :u  iv.i-es 
in  OPEC  oil  prices  during  1979  drove  the  prue  o;  gold 
from  S230  an  ounce  to  S498  an  ounce  b\  mici-L><.veiTi- 
ber.  When  in  late  December  1979  the  U.S.  go\  emmeir. 
froze  Iranian  assets  in  U.S.  banks,  the  gold  price  tor 
the  first  time  exceeded  S500  an  ounce.  Bv  the  time  ot 
the  events  surrounding  the  silver  commoditv  market 
speculation  debacle  in  March  1980,  gold  prices  had 
soared  to  $850  an  ounce.  The  question  remains  as  to 
whether  there  is  a  correlation  between  that  top  dollar 
value  for  gold  and  the  corresponding  Kilance-oi  -pay 
ments  deficit  value  of  5830  an  ounce  mentioned  eariiei 
Whatever  the  correlation,  when  the  Iranian  tensions 
eased,  oil  became  more  plentiful,  and  the  U.S.  Con 
gress  passed  the  Reagan  economic  package  to  curl1 
domestic  inflation,  gold  prices  dropped  back  to  be 
tween  $385  and  $435  an  ounce  in  August  19S1 

Incentives  for  gold  exploration  and  mining 
identified 

Homestake  Mining  Co.  has  been  producing  gold  .\: 
Lead,  S.D.  for  104  years,  94  of  which  ha\e  been  unciei 
some  form  of  a  gold  standard.  During  this  time  there 
have  been  periods  when  gold  prices  have  been  equiva 
lent  to  cost  inflation,  providing  incentives  to  find. 
develop  and  mine  gold.  On  the  other  hand,  periods  ot 
inflation  and  fixed  prices  have  produced  inflationarv 


Mining  I 


s  .lounul 


238 

cost  squeezes,  often  creating  unfavorable  climates  for 
mining  gold. 

The  mining  industry  recognizes  there  have  been 
times,  historically,  when  investment  in  gold  explora 
tion  and  mining  has  been  more  reasonable  than  at 
others  The  incentives  for  such  investment  are  essen- 
tuillv:  a)  the  ability  to  make  a  profit  on  the  investment; 
b>  improvements  in  exploration  and  mining  tech 
niques  that  make  once-marginal  deposits  economical 
to  process;  and  c)  favorable  prospects  for  the  future 
purchasing  power  of  gold. 

A  number  of  periods  in  our  nation's  history  have 
provided  profit  incentives  to  find,  develop  and  mine 
gold;  on  the  other  hand,  fixed-price,  inflationary-cost 
squeezes  have  often  created  disincentives  to  invest  in 
gold  mining.  The  190-year  relationship  between  U.S. 
gold  prices  and  the  U.S.  Consumer  Price  Index  (which, 
in  a  general  way,  reflects  mining-cost  inflation)  pro 
vides  a  means  to  identify  favorable  and  unfavorable 
periods  in  the  history  of  U.S.  gold  mining.  In  general, 


-.ihii-  ,md  unfaiwaWe  periods  tor  gold  mining  m  the 


r*  .vpt  tor  a  brief  inflationary  period  between  1812  and 

-   an  attractive  investment  climate  existed  for  U.S. 

Tuning  during  the  123-year  period  from  1792  until 

i-i?  because  the  long-term  trend  in  costs  generally 

paralleled  changes  in  the  gold  price  (fig.  2). 

Strong  inflation  beginning  in  1915  reversed  the  fa 
vorable  price-cost  relationship,  since  the  price  of  gold 
rem.iined  tixed.  This  created  an  unfavorable  climate 
tor  gold  investments  until  1934,  when  the  official  price 
ol  gold  was  increased  (dollar  devalued)  to  535  an 
ounce  The  higher  price  provided  profit  incentives  for 
gold  mining  until  1942,  when  War  Production  Board 
Order  L-208  closed  U.S.  gold  mines  during  World  War 
II  This  order  was  rescinded  in  1945,  but  many  mines 
did  not  reopen.  Many  of  those  that  did  reopen  were 
forced  out  of  business  by  1962-1963  due  to  high  post- 
war  inflation  which  pushed  mining  costs  up  while 
cold's  price  remained  fixed  A  major  exception  was  the 
HomesUike  mine,  which,  except  for  the  three-year 
po\  eminent  closure,  has  operated  continuously  since 
18~7.  Other  important  exceptions  include  the  Carlin 
and  Corte/  discoveries  in  Nevada  which  were  placed 
m  production  in  the  1960s  because  of  relatively  low 
operating  costs  attributable  to  bulk  mining  by  open-pit 
methods.  Overall,  however,  the  investment  climate  for 
gold  mining  remained  unfavorable  from  1943  until 
early  1974.  two  and  one  half  years  after  the  U.S. 
abandoned  the  fixed  dollar  value  of  gold. 


Mine  operating  costs  rising  with  price  of  gold 

The  free-market  value  of  gold  provided  strong  profit 
incentives  for  investment,  when,  in  January  1974.  the 
price  reached  5140  an  ounce,  establishing  parity  with 
the  purchasing  power  of  a  depreciated  U.S.  currency 
Since  1978,  the  incentives  have  been  even  greater 
because  gold  prices  have  exceeded  U.S.  currencv  de 
preciation  for  the  first  time  in  our  history.  In  summary, 
favorable  gold  investment  climates  existed  from  1792 
to  1915,  1934  to  1943,  and  from  1974  to  the  present, 
unfavorable  climates  persisted  from  1915  to  1974,  with 
the  exception  of  the  period  1934-1943.  Although  the 
gold  price  has  risen  substantially,  operating  costs  for 
the  gold  mining  business  have  also  increased.  The 
average  free  world  cost  of  production  of  gold  is  esti 
mated  at  5215  an  ounce  as  of  Dec.  31,  1980. 

Exploration  technology  improvements  finally 
applied  to  gold 

Major  advances  in  exploration  technology  th.it  ha\e 
been  achieved  in  the  last  35  years  were  not  generaih 
applied  to  gold  because  of  the  unfavorable  investment 
climate  that  persisted.  These  advances  include  neu 
geologic  concepts,  geologic  models,  and  improved 
exploration  methods,  which  have  been  used  success 
fully  in  the  search  for  porphyry  copper,  molybdenum, 
lead/zinc,  uranium,  and  for  other  mineral  deposit*. 
With  an  improved  investment  climate,  these  advances 
can  now  be  applied  with  great  advantage  in  gold 
exploration  programs. 

Other  factors  further  enhance  prospects  tor  profit 
able  gold  investment  in  the  United  States.  New  types 
of  gold  deposits,  such  as  at  Carlin,  have  been  recoe- 
nized  and  provide  new  exploration  targets.  Improved 
processing  methods,  such  as  heap  leaching  and  c,ir- 
bon-in-pulp  recovery  methods,  may  also  provide  low 
er  operating  costs  and  therefore  improve  the  economic 
potential  of  some  new  projects. 

Price  a  measure  of  gold's  purchasing  power 

The  dollar  price  of  gold  is  the  measure  of  gold  - 
purchasing  power  in  the  United  States  Judgment- 
concerning  future  dollar  values  of  gold  are  germane 
considerations  when  assessing  profit  incentives  to 
justify  investments  in  exploration,  development  and 
mining  of  gold. 

One  approach  to  estimating  gold's  purchasing  pow 
er  in  the  United  States  is  referred  to  as  the  "commoditv 
value."  This  approach  assumes  that  gold  is  simply  a 
commodity  and  that  its  U.S.  purchasing  power  is  <i 
function  of  the  value  of  the  dollar,  as  measured  by  an 
index  such  as  the  Consumer  Price  Index.  Based  on  this 
index  (with  1967  =  100),  the  U.S.  "commodity"  value 
of  gold  should  be  5275  an  ounce,  the  current  CPI  (fig 
1). 

Other  values  come  into  play  when  considering  pur 
chasing  power  since  gold  represents  wealth  and  can  be 
used  as  a  reserve  in  support  of  paper  currencies  and 
government  debt.  Another  method,  therefore,  of  esti 
mating  the  dollar  value  of  gold  can  be  conveniently 
termed  the  "U.S.  monetary  value,"  implying  the  U.S. 
purchasing  power  of  gold  is  related  to  such  economic 
variables  as  the  U.S.  money  supply,  federal  debt. 


239 

balance-of-payments  deficit,  etc.  These  "monetary  val 
ues"  of  gold  can  be  calculated  by  dividing  the  quantity 
ot  each  by  the  gold  reserves  held  in  the  Treasury. 
These  values  will  obviously  change  almost  daily  as  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  Treasury  positions  change. 

Assuming  only  a  25  percent  backing  by  gold  re 
serves,  the  current  "money  supply  (M1B)  value  of 
gold"  would  be  5407  an  ounce;  the  "federal  debt 
value,"  S923;  and  the  "U.S.  balance-of-payments  defi 
cit  value,"  5207  as  given  below: 


U  S  Treasury  gold  supply 


.  .  .  .   264.2  million  oz 
$  oz  gold 

25%  100°° 

reserve        reserve 


Federal  debt' 

$976  billion 

$923 

$3.694 

Money  supply  (M1B) 

$430  billion 

S407 

$1  627 

U  S  foreign  Dalance 

oi  payments  deticit  

$219  billion 

$207 

$    829 

Money  Supply  - 

US  BOPD    . 

$649  billion 

$614 

$2,456 

•as  ol  Sept.  i.  1981 

It  these  monetary  values  were  to  require  100  percent 
gold  reserve  backing,  gold  prices  in  U.S.  dollars  for 
each  category  would  be  four  times  greater. 

During  the  last  nine  years  the  base  gold  price  has 
exceeded  the  "U.S.  balance-of-payments  deficit  value" 
of  gold,  assuming  the  deficit  is  backed  by  a  25  percent 
gold  reserve.  On  the  other  hand,  the  highest  tree- 
market  price  for  gold  (S850  an  ounce),  achieved  in 
19SO,  correlates  to  the  "U.S.  balance-of-payments  defi 
cit  value"  of  5829,  assuming  backing  by  a  100  percent 
gold  reserve.  At  25  percent  coverage,  trie  "federal  debt 
value"  of  gold  of  5923  per  ounce  somewhat  exceeds 
the  highest  free-market  price  for  gold  attained  to  date. 

If.  as  some  economists  assume,  a  minimum  respon 
sible-  gold  coverage  would  be  a  25  percent  backing  for 
outstanding  money  supply  (M1B)  plus  our  balance-of- 
pavments  deficit,  the  current  purchasing  power  of 
gold  in  the  U.S.  would  be  about  5614  an  ounce.  Should 
confidence  in  the  U.S.  dollar  totally  collapse,  the  100 
percent  backing  for  the  money  supply  and  balance-of- 
pavments  deticit  value  of  gold  alone  would  approxi 
mate  52450  an  ounce.  Similar  considerations  apply  to 
various  U.S.  government  commitments  and  guaran 
tees,  which  substantially  exceed  the  official  federal 
debt  of  5976  billion  as  of  Sept.  1,  1981.  Of  course, 
similar  calculations  for  the  purchasing  power  of  gold 
for  other  countries  would  result  in  different  values, 
based  on  their  reserves  and  monetary  liabilities,  so  that 
gold  values  continually  vary  from  currency  to  curren 
cy. 

Return  to  gold  standard  under  discussion 

Another  financial  indicator  for  the  purchasing  pow 
er  of  gold  might  be  a  comparison  of  the  price  perform 
ance  of  gold  and  of  the  stock  market  in  the  United 
States  (fig.  3).  Historically,  the  stock  market  has  estab 
lished  a  long-term  growth  rate,  increasing  at  approxi 
mately  3  percent  a  year.  Gold  prices  in  dollars  per 
ounce  were  higher  than  stock  market  averages  from 
1792  to  1830,  overlapped  the  market  from  1830  to  1890, 
were  lower  than  the  market  from  1890  to  1980,  and, 
finally,  briefly  overlapped  the  market  in  the  spring  of 
1980.' 

54 


These  methods  of  estimating  the  purchasing  po\ 
of  gold  are  not  just  an  abstract  economic  exerc 
Since  precious  metal  mining  is  a  verv  capital  mten? 
industry,  we  at  Homestake  use  the>e  t\  -pe-  o!  an. 
ses,  and  others,  to  arrive  at  our  estimate  tor  :ru  u.i 
purchasing  power  ot  gold.  We  ha\e  ii'iin.:  the  .  ,.:ii 
sufficiently  optimistic  to  conimi;  a  -iib-tar.::.':.  :m 
ment  in  gold  exploration,  development  ana  m,n:n 

Recently,  economic  discussions  ha\e  kexvci  on 
possibility  of  returning  to  the  gold  standard  to  cure 
country's  economic  ills.  The  U.S.  Federal  Re-<. 
defines  the  "gold  standard"  as  the  commitment 
establish  a  fixed  relationship  between  current  an 
specified  amount  of  gold.  By  this  definition,  the  I 
has  been  on  the  "gold  standard"  for  ItiO  ot  tlu  la.-: 
years.  The  country  experienced  relativelv  -tabie  pi 
for  the  first  123  years  of  its  histon  llu-  i^n-j-'-i 
trend  lines  for  inflation  rates  a\erageci  i'  2  peivVi 
year  from  1792  until  1915.  This  stahihiv  vii.iii^ej  , 
matically  beginning  in  1915,  with  inflation  i:v;va- 
at  an  average  rate  of  3.3  percent  a  year  for  the  no  \  < 
from  1915  to  1981.  This  dramatic  change  in  mr'ia 
rates  took  place  when  the  country  was  on  the  ;. 
standard,  which,  according  to  proponents  of  i 
standard  as  a  cure  for  inflation,  should  not  h 
happened.  The  gold  standard,  clearly,  did  not  pre\ 
this  major  long-range  change  in  the  rail  o;  ,nt'Lv. 
Why  should  a  return  to  the  gold  standard  cuiv  :: 
tion  in  the  1980s7 

One  immediate  and  obvious  asMvi.:'.:o.,  .-.  ::n  : 
inflation  rates  commencing  in  1915  i>  \\orid  \\.ir  i 
the  years  of  war  and  cold  war  since  then  While  u 
and  the  cost  of  wars,  certainly  have  contribute*. 
inflation  and  to  actions  resulting  in  inflationai  v  led 
policies,  it  appears  that  the  policies  them>el\es  are 
cause  of  persistent  long-term  inflation  What  COM 
ment  policies  coincided  with  World  \\ar  11  that  Ci 
continue  to  cause  inflation? 


Fig.  3.  Price  performance  ot  gold  and  suxk  ni.jfkt-i  .n  r-.i^'- 

To  consider  this  question,  it  is  enlightening  to  ex 
ine  the  events  surrounding  the  major  increase  in 
rate  of  inflation  commencing  in  1915. 

Historical  evidence  suggests  that  long-term  infl.i 
rates  respond  to  major  government.!!  polkie- 
actions  that  cannot  be  prevented  bv  a  cold  stand 
One  of  the  actions  was  the  creation  ol  the  Fee 
Reserve  System  in  1914,  which  marked  the  begun 
of  permanent,  accelerating  federal  debt,  increasir 
an  average  long-term  rate  of  7.0  percent  a  vea: 

MlMIML    I    iHl^lf- 


240 


:\\ecn  lui-J  and  1U81.  Economists  agree  that  excessive 
cov  eminent  spending,  creating  federal  deficits,  results 
in  inordinate  demands  for  goods  and  consequently 
force«  increases  in  prices  for  those  goods.  Another 
uov  ernment  policy  that  directly  influenced  inflationary 
pre— ure*.  was  th.it  of  federal  taxation  of  personal  and 
corporate  income  initiated  in  1913.  This  taxation  re 
sults  in  higher  prices  for  products,  services  and  labor 
to  maintain  investment  returns  and  income  at  accept 
able  level-  Nonetheless,  the  rate  of  taxation  has  in- 
cieased  -teadilv  since  the  inception  of  taxation.  These 
t\\o  government  policies  clearly  influence  rates  of 
inflation — influences  that  would  not  be  prevented  by 
reestablishment  of  a  gold  standard. 


"wv  nnr'r/  e<->/rf  deposits 


The  :mt:ai  maximum  tax  rate  was  7  percent,  without 
ch-tiiictiiv.  between  capital  Rain';  and  earned  income. 
P  ll'M.  the  top  tax  rate  on  personal  earned  income 
•••  -  r'1  percent,  unearm  income,  70  percent;  and 
,  "pora:e  income,  4S  ps  nt.  U.S.  individual  and 

' 

iv:reratr  income  tax  rate-  nave  increased  at  a  rate  of 
"  ,  .-"'.f  -  2  percent  a  year,  respectivelv ,  since  1913. 
•V:::.1;  vderal  income  taxes  collected  have  increased  at 
'.'  :. •'.<.•  e:  '••  ^  peixent  a  vear  since  1913.  L'.S  history  has 
-ho\\  n  tha:  the  gold  standard  does  not  prevent  or  cure 
•r.tlat!!'".  Ke-pon<ible  go>vernment  monetarv  and  fiscal 
pi>i\:e-  a?~d  ac'ion-.  together  with  minimum  govern- 
!V'"i:  !vi-,i:h!io:i  ot  a  tree-market  system,  are  required 
!.>  m-.irt  -.'.ibilitv  ol  the  economv  and  prices.  The  free- 
niarke!  price  lor  gold  does,  however,  appear  to  be  a 
!ru-Tiome!er  that  reflects  the  success  of  the  govern 
ment  -  ettorts  to  control  or  cure  infation. 

New  growth  plan  set  by  Homestake  in  1978 

Home-take's  long-term  historical  business  emphasis 
and  commitment  to  profitable  gold  exploration,  devel 
opment  and  mining  were  reinforced  during  the  devel 
opment  of  a  new  corporate  growth  plan  in  1978.  Our 
optimistic  estimates  of  the  long-term  future  purchas 
ing  power  of  gold,  new  profit  incentives,  combined 
with  significant  geological  and  technological  advances 
in  exploration  and  processing  opportunities  justified 
accelerating  our  exploration  program  to  capitalize  on 
Homestako's  existing  expertise  in  a  timely  manner. 

A  number  of  criteria  were  considered  in  formulating 
our  L'.S  cold  exploration  objectives.  Included  among 
them  are: 

1)  Consideration  of  size  and  economic  parameters; 

2 1  C.eologv  and  geologic  tvpes  of  world  gold  depos- 


3)  Appropriate  levels  of  exploration  efforts; 

4)  Budgeting  and  scheduling  of  an  effective  explora 
tion  program; 

5)  Projected  exploration  risks  and  rewards 
Homestake's  corporate  plan  emphasizes  maintain 
ing  and  strengthening  its  position  as  the  premier  L'  S. 
gold  mining  company.  We  therefore  concentrated  our 
efforts  toward  discovery  of  large  deposits  that  would 
substantially  enhance  our  U.S.  gold  production  and 
earnings.  The  major  objectives  of  the  exploration  pv1- 
gram  were  to  discover: 

1)  Gold  reserves  containing  3  million  oz  fa  maior 
deposit)  within  ten  years; 

2)  Gold  reserves  containing  1.5  million  oz  (a  sub 
stantial  deposit)  within  five  years; 

3)  Gold  reserves  containing  a  minimum  of  0.5  mil 
lion  oz  (an  acceptable  deposit  discovered  by  "fall 
out"  from  the  search  for  larger  reserves). 

Internal  rate  of  return  considerations  (minimum  of 
15  percent)  require  that  we  find  relatively  low-cost 
mines  (in  the  lower  half  of  the  cost  curve)  and  relative 
ly  high-grade  deposits  suitable  for  bulk  surface  or 
underground  mining.  For  open  pit  mining,  our  objec 
tives  focus  on  deposits  with  ore  grades  exceeding  (V  !  5 
oz  per  ton;  for  underground  mining,  grades  exceeding 
0.3  oz  per  ton. 

Geologic  types  of  gold  deposits  studied 

Homestake   geologists    studied    major   world    cold 
deposits,  classifying  the  known  deposits  according  to 
their  geology,  size  and  grade,  and  from  thi-  data  Un 
determined  the  desirability  of  each  for  our  explo:  icon 
rograms  in  the  United  States.  The  geological  type-  o: 
iajor  gold  deposits  identified  in  the  studv  are  depv'- 
.d  in  fig.  4. 

The  contour  lines  on  fig.  4  represent  total  conta;:u  J 
ounces  of  gold  in  a  deposit  and  provide  a  quick 
reference  to  the  overall  size  and  importance  of  each 
geologic  type  of  gold  deposit.  The  largest  gold  deposits 
of  the  world  are  the  Witwatersrand  type  Fossil  Placer 
Deposits  of  South  Africa,  which  contain  grades  rane- 
ing  from  0.10  to  0.50  oz  per  ton,  with  ore  tonnage- 
ranging  from  100  million  to  over  1  billion  ton- 
After  studying  the  economics,  size  and  grade  obiei 
lives  and  the  geological  occurrences  of  the  vanou-  gold 
deposits  likely  to  occur  in  the  United  States,  it  wa- 
decided  to  search  for  Homestake-type  and  Stockwork- 
disseminated  deposits.  We  also  decided  to  conduct 
geologic  research  to  develop  new  geologic  concepts 
tha'  would  lead  to  the  discovery  of  new  tvpes  of  gold 
deposits  of  substantial  size  and  grade  to  meet  our 
corporate  objectives. 

Exploration  success  examined  empirically 

The  next  step  was  to  formulate  the  exploration 
program  and  determine  the  extent  of  the  exploration 
effort  in  terms  of  budget  and  manpower.  To  accom 
plish  this,  we  analyzed  cost  data  and  prohabtlih 
factors  for  each  of  the  recognized  sequential  stage-  of 
mineral  development.  The  stages  include  reconnais 
sance,  target  exploration,  deposit  development,  plant 
construction/mine  development  and  production. 

The  costs  of  each  activity  within  each  stage  of 
exploration  and  development  were  estimated  from 


241 

Homestake's  exploration  experience  and  records.  In 
order  to  determine  probable  success  ratios  to  apply  to  a 
gold  exploration  program,  it  was  decided  to  use  the 
empirical  approach  based  on  prior  experience.  Pub 
lished  and  privately  developed  data  on  the  success 
ratios  of  metal  exploration  programs  in  the  United 
States  and  Canada  from  1880  to  1976,  representing  a 
wide  range  of  success  ratios,  were  compiled  (table  1). 


Reconnaisance 

I 

AMC  Surv.y 
»t  41  L.rg. 
Mining  Comp«nl*i 
II  »«•»«.  U70-75) 

Pn«it«  Sumy 
ol  »  Major  Firms 

(Pr«-1tU  Thru  1M4) 

OTA  Suncy 

ol  12  Mijcx  Firmt 

(10  V««ri.  1970-761 

Number 

% 

NumM, 

s 

Numtar 

% 

5,718 

732 

? 

Target 
Exploration 
(Drilling  Project) 

536 

«5 

451 

Deposit 
Development 

83 

15 

19 

12 

32 

8 

Substantial 
Economic 
Deposit 

? 

3 

2 

19 

4 

%  ~  '»  ol  targets  advancing  beyond  drilling  stage 

Table  7.  U.S.  metal  exploration  success  rates 


qualified  personnel,  and  the  competitive  situati 
Formulation  of  Homestake's  exploration  pi- 
included  all  of  the  above  factors  in  determining  i 
gold  exploration  program.  Projected  probal 
costs  and  timing  of  the  company's  exploratio 
gram  are  summarized  in  fig.  t>  and  table  4 
graphics  show  that  substantial  expenditures  m 
made  to  test  a  large  number  of  targets  to  achie 
high  probability  of  success  in  gold  exploration  th 
desired.  Homestake's  projected  goL;  explora:: 
penditures  and  projected  return-  (i.e.,  r^k  i 
ratio),  based  on  achieving  the  five-year  program 
lives,  are  summarized  in  fig.  8. 

Exploration  team  reorganized  to  manage  by 
function 

To  take  maximum  advantage  of  the  compan 
house  expertise  to  achieve  the  major  obiectne- 
new  growth  plan,  the  exploration  team  \\.i-  i 
nized  in  November  1978  to  managv  b\  ex^n 
function  rather  than  by  geographic  location  1'i 


Reconnaissance 
Examinations 

Target  Evaluations 

Ore  Targel 
Evaluations 

Deposit  Development 


50%  CERTAINTY 

Contained  Ounces  Gold 

500.000    |    1,500,000    |    3,000.000 

Number  ol  Targets 


56 

280 

560 

B 

40 

80 

2 

10 

20 

1 

1 

1 

75%  CERTAINTY 

Contained  Ounces  Gold 


500,000 


1,500,000       3,000,000 


Number  of  Targets 


100 

500 

| 
1,000 

10 

50 

100 

2 

10 

20 

1 

1 

1 

Table  2    Co,\>  i-^j/t.f.i 
(/on  orob.ibt'i:*  .vi  i-.« 


Ten-Year  Production 

(Million  02  i 


Probability  analyses  were  then  conducted  on  the 
data  to  provide  the  statistical  framework  to  develop 
Homestake's  empirical  probability  models  for  the 
number  of  activities  that  would  be  required  in  each 
exploration  stage  to  accomplish  the  discovery  of  an 
economic  deposit  of  a  given  size.  The  results  of  two 
such  analyses  are  summarized  in  table  2. 

Once  the  probability  model  for  a  given  size  of 
deposit  was  available,  the  cost  estimates  for  each 
exploration  activity  were  used  to  determine  the  cost  of 
exploration  programs  for  a  wide  range  of  probabilities 
for  a  given  deposit  size  (table  3).  For  example,  we 
estimated  it  would  cost  $30  million  to  search  for  and 
find  a  deposit  that  would  produce  150,000  ounces  of 
gold  a  year  for  ten  years;  that  was  for  a  probability  of 
75  percent.  To  put  that  figure  in  perspective,  we 
estimated  it  would  cost  $22  million  for  a  50  percent 
probability  of  success,  and  S16  million  for  a  30  percent 
probability  of  success. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  for  a  given  budget 
expenditure,  exploring  for  a  single  metal,  such  as  gold, 
has  a  higher  probability  of  success  of  a  discovery  than 
does  the  probability  of  finding  gold  in  a  multi-metal 
search  with  the  same  budget  (fig.  5).  It  follows  that 
similar  studies  be  conducted  to  develop  exploration 
programs  for  each  metal  in  a  proposed  multi-metal 
search  effort.  The  timing  of  exploration  expenditures 
must  also  be  considered,  both  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  resources  of  the  exploring  company,  availability  of 


Certainty  Level 
_7_5%__50'-    _30J 
.5         $7        S   6        S   5 


1.5         $30        S22        $16 
3.0         $42        $36        $31 


6.0         $78        $65        $57 
All  Production  From  One  Pr 


Fig.  5.  Probability  model  for  gold  d/sccn  <v\ 


5* 


Mininii  (.  i 


n/d  evp/OM.'/n.i  budget 


B'lin.vrr/  yniii  c\pendilure  and  income— five  year  plan 

Mtiona!  rxplnration  activities  include  reconnais- 

'..•;,i':  i  \r;,':,i;ion    deposit  development,  and 

i'in:;-::v:v  ulrvipistration      The     manager^    of 

|vJ!V!tics  .i!,-  -i-sptMisible  tor  developing  plans 

isdce:-.    ^.;.ii:;\    and    quantity   standards,    pro- 

M;id  ors.im/ation  to  achieve  the  desired  results 

i:  tunciionai  areas,  regardless  of  the  geographic 

in.  Fur  instance' 

ie  sold  reconnaissance  manager  is  responsible 
r  thr  search  and  selection  of  favorable  areas, 
oiailoJ  appraisals  of  favorable  areas,  and  the 
loctiivi  and  pnoritization  of  a  queue  of  target 
pj<.  ,1^  \\-fil  a«  land  acquisition  to  control  target 
nds.  High  pnoritv  targets  are  transferred  to  the 
rget  evaluation  manager  for  further  evaluation. 
'^tor  prioniv  properties  are  retained  in  a  queue 
y r  tuturc  ciMisideration  b\  reconnaissance 
10  tar^c  ;  exploration  manager  is  responsible  for 
iti.il  exploration  testing  to  evaluate  specific  tar- 
't  areas  It  preliminary  results  and  economic 
timates  are  encouraging,  this  manager  is  re- 
•onsible  tor  conducting  additional  exploration 

delineate  the  deposit  and  to  conduct  prelimi- 
irv  enpineennp.  metallurgical  testing  and  eco- 
lic  appraisals  High  priority  properties  are 
instcrri'd  to  the  deposit  development  manager. 

flrn.  ios^rr  prioritv  properties  are  retained  in  a 
rue!  iii;e:!t- 

ic  deposit  df\  shipment  manager  is  responsible 
rbulk  sampling,  pilot  plant  testing,  metallurgi- 
I  and  engineering  appraisals,  conceptual  mine 
*id  plant  design  and  for  preparation  of  a  prelimi- 


nary  feasibility  study.  High  priority  properties 
with  acceptable  size  and  economics  are  trans 
ferred  to  the  Homestake  operations  management 
for  mine  development,  plant  construction  and 
production. 

4)  The  land  acquisition-administration  manager  is 
responsible  for  acquiring  land  control  and  admin 
istering  land  contracts.  This  manager  provides 
these  sen-ices  to  the  other  exploration  managers 
in  coordination  with  corporate  policy. 

Conceptual  approach  to  reconnaissance  used 

The  conceptual  approach  to  reconnaissance  has 
been  utilized  in  place  of  the  more  conventional  geo 
graphical  approach.  Under  this  system,  reconnais 
sance  teams  pursue  specific  types  of  gold  deposits  in 
any  favorable  area.  Applied  geologic  research  is  con 
ducted  to:  refine  geologic  models  and  search  areas 
with  potential  for  well  known  types  of  gold  deposits; 
develop  geologic  models  and  search  areas  for  poorly 
known  or  poorly  understood  gold  deposits;  develop 
theoretical  concepts  and  techniques  to  search  for  new 
types  of  gold  deposits;  and  improve  performance  and 
decision-making  at  each  functional  stage  of  explora 
tion. 

Development  of  a  prioritized  queue  of  prospects  for 
each  stage  of  exploration  has  been  an  essential  element 
of  Homestake's  exploration  program  since  this  system 
provides  ar  opportunity  to  identify  "fast-track"  high 
priority  projects,  leaving  lower  priority  prospects  in  an 
inventory  classification  for  future  consideration. 

Priority  ratings  are  assigned  to  properties  by  esti 
mating  the  geoloeic  probability  of  occurrence  of  com 
mercial  gold  deposits  which  conform  to  the  objective 
of  the  exploration  program.  Criteria  used  to  make 
these  priority  evaluations  include:  a)  the  presence  ol  a 
geologic  trap  (favorable  structural  setting  or  favorable 
permeable  host  rock),  b)  evidence  of  a  gold  source 
(presence  of  ore  grade  or  anomalous  gold  values,  or  m 
some  cases,  pathfinder  elements),  and  c)  the  presence 
of  favorable  alteration  systems  (alteration  assemblage 


Number  of  Projects 
Strategic  Obiechves 

Ta6/e 
plorat 
proba 
statist 
US  t 
progr. 
Home 
Minin 

4.  £»- 
ion 
bilit\ 
ICS  — 

5-year  plan 

10-yeir  plan 

*  Reconnaissance  turns 
•  Detailed  Evaluations 
Tp'-.^i  e»pio'jt'0" 
•  Target  Evaluations 
*  Ore  Target  Evaluations 
Resource  Development 
•  Deposit  inventory 
•  Deposit  Development 

2000 
200 

4000 
400 

•5 

16 

110 
32 

• 

4 

M 

1 

•old 
im. 
stake 
g  Co 

Mine  Discover* 
•  Economic  (C  5  million  o*  ) 
•  Substantial  M.S  million  or) 

•  Major  (3  million  or) 

Espiorelton  Expenditure* 

•  5-year  plan:  $60  million 

i 

1 
2 
1 

Table  5.  Explo 
ration  statis- 

Reconnaissance 
Reconnaissance  E 
Detailed  Evaluate 
Ta  get  Eipioratwn 
Target  Evaluations 
Ore  Target  Evaiuat 

Numbw  0)  Proi«cl» 
1*79-1111  Program 

Pt»n  to  DIM 

Rttutti  to  DIM 

••-•                    1011 
<•                           M 

1111 

K 

program.  Home- 
sfa/ce  Mining 
Co. 

17 

ions                              2 

14 

I 

Re  ource  Development 
Dtposil  Inventory                                        3 
Deposit  Development                              0 

3 

0 

Mi  e  Discoveries 
Economic  (05  million  or  I                        Q 
Substantial  (1.5  million  ox.)                     0 
Maiot  (3  million  or  I                                       Q 

! 

i 

Eiploralion  Eipenditur 

»•  lo  0>1>  12  5  vM'il  lit  million 

related  to  a  geological  model  for  a  given  type  of  gold 
deposit). 

After  the  geologic  probability  assessment  for  each 
prospect  is  estimated,  the  cost  of  arriving  at  the  next 
decision  point  for  each  prospect  is  determined.  Risk 
factors  and  present  value  estimates  are  then  deter 
mined  lor  each  property  and  a  priority  established  By 
updating  priorities  at  each  decision  point  for  a  project, 
we  are  able  to  continuously  prioritize  projects  at  all 
stages  of  the  exploration  sequence. 

During  the  first  year  of  exploration  under  this  sys 
tem,  Homestake  emphasized  the  development  of  a 
reconnaissance  queue  of  prospects.  At  the  end  of  the 
first  year,  we  had  identified  enough  high-priority 
properties  to  begin  our  target  exploration  programs. 
Target  evaluation  during  the  second  year  generated  a 
deposit  development  project  and  also  resulted  in  iden- 
tiiKation  of  several  targets  requiring  intensified  target 
evaluation  efforts.  Deposit  development  continued  on 
a  high- priority  project  during  the  third  year.  In  addi- 
t:o:i  ue  continued  fine-tuning  ol  our  reconnaissance, 
target  exploration  and  management  systems. 

Payoff  came  within  first  two  years  of  program 

Homestake  has  been  fortunate  early  in  its  explora 
tion  program  to  realize  the  soundness  of  the  theoreti 
cal  concepts.  The  company  discovered  and  began 
development  of  a  major  discovery  within  the  first  two 
\  ear-  of  the  exploration  program.  This  compares  quite 
:a\  orabiv  with  our  hopes  and  expectations. 

The  McLaughlin  gold  deposit,  located  in  a  remote 
area  ol  northern  X'apa  County,  Calif,  near  Knoxville, 
was  discovered  during  the  second  year  of  our  explora 
tion  program.  This  deposit  contains  announced  re 
serves  of  20  million  tons  at  0.16  oz  of  gold  per  ton  and 
is  obviously  a  major  addition  to  Homestake's  gold 
reserve  portfolio.  This  discovery  achieved  two  of  our 
exploration  program  goals: 

; '  1  he  deposit  meets  the  objective  of  our  ten-year 
program,  i.e.,  the  discovery  of  an  ore  deposit 
containing  3  million  oz  in  gold  reserves 

2,  Di-tovery  ol  a  new  geologic  type  of  gold  deposit, 
using  new  geological  models  and  concepts. 

I  he  McLaughlin  deposit  may  best  be  described  as  a 
Stockwork  gold  deposit  in  volcanic  and  sedimentary 
rock,  suitable  for  open  pit  mining.  In  addition,  we 
foresee  the  possibility  for  an  underground  mine  opera 
tion  on  higher-grade  gold  ore  below  the  estimated  pit 
limits.  The  cost  to  discover  and  develop  the  McLaugh 
lin  property,  together  with  establishing  a  queue  of 
more  than  60  properties  in  various  stages  of  evalua 
tion,  amounts  to  528  million  to  date,  or  approximately 
$9  per  ounce  of  announced  gold  reserves  at  the 
McLaughlin  deposit. 

An  analysis  of  published  open  pit  gold  reserves  in  19 
deposits  in  the  United  States  illustrates  that  a  large 
number  of  deposits  have  been  discovered,  expanded 
and  resurrected  during  the  last  five  years.  U.S.  open 
pit-type  gold  reserves  as  of  Sept.  1,  1981  are  estimated 
at  242  million  tons  of  ore  at  a  grade  of  0.076  oz  of  gold 
per  ton  or  18.5  million  oz  of  gold.  Grades  range  from 
0.03  to  0.22  oz  of  gold  per  ton,  with  tonnages  ranging 
from  ]  million  to  65  million.  The  average  deposit  is 
estimated  to  contain  12.7  million  tons  of  ore  at  0.076  oz 
ol  gold  per  ton,  or  approximately  1  million  oz  of  gold. 


Success  was  partly  luck 

The  profit  potential  for  gold  mining  investments  due 
to  the  free-market  prices  of  the  last  decade — after 
nearly  65  years  of  adverse  fixed-price,  high-inflation 
margin  squeezes — has  provided  new  incentive's  for 
gold  exploration;  development  and  mining 

Major  advances  in  exploration  technology  that  have 
been  developed  and  successfully  used  in  other  metals 
and  minerals  exploration  since  World  War  11  have  not 
been  intensively  applied  to  gold  exploration  because  oi 
the  adverse  investment  climate  for  gold,  lo  take  ad 
vantage  of  these  new  economic  and  technological 
incentives,  Homestake  developed  its  current  explora 
tion  strategy  and  objectives  in  1978. 

A  major  exploration  program  based  on  new  geologic 
concepts,  probability  analyses,  and  a  functional  ap 
proach  to  exploration  management  was  implemented 
in  1979.  The  objectives  included  discovery  ot  a  maior 
3.0-million-oz  gold  deposit  within  ten  vears  and  a  1.3- 
million-oz  deposit  within  five  vears.  Our  board  o; 
directors  committed  to  an  exploration  budge;  or  ap 
proximately  512  million  a  year  for  five  years,  a  major 
commitment  for  Homestake  at  a  time  when  corporate 
earnings  were  at  531  million  a  year  (1978).  Thi-  was  a 
daring  commitment,  but  the  board  expressed  its  confi 
dence — in  dollars  and  cents — in  the  expertise  Home- 
stake  had  developed  in  exploring,  developing  and 
mining  for  gold  during  its  100  years  as  the  nation  s 
largest  gold  producer. 

The  program  met  with  early  success  in  <.he  tail  or 
1980  with  the  discovery  of  the  3.2-million-o/  Mel  a.:gh- 
lin  gold  deposit  in  California.  The  deposit  ha-  tven 
named  after  Dr.  Donald  H.  McLaughlin,  the  Sv-\ car- 
old  retired  chairman  (and  still  a  director)  ot  I  lome-;akt. 
Mining  Co.  It  was  McLaughlin,  who,  as  a  geologist  m 
the  1920s,  played  a  kev  role  in  expanding  the  known 
gold  reserves  at  the  Homestake  mine  in  South  Dakota 
The  McLaughlin  discovery  has  to  be  attributed  to  the 
eflorts  of  a  fine,  dedicated  professional  exploration 
team.  It  achieved  at  the  end  ot  the  second  vvar 
Homestake's  ten-year  exploration  program  goal  1  his. 
we  admit,  was  partly  luck  but  also  a  result  ol  Home- 
stake's  excellent  and  extensive  geological  files  which 
aided  in  rapid  development  of  new  geologic  concepts 

The  long-term  commitment  to  new  exploration  idea- 
and  approaches  by  Homestake's  executive  manage 
ment  and  directors  has  provided  excellent  support  for 
our  exploration  efforts.  Our  early  success  and  our  on 
going  search  for  new  deposits  will  keep  the  compam 
in  the  forefront  of  gold  production  and  expertise  in  the 
United  States  for  vears  to  come. 


lames  A.  Anderson  is  ciuientiii  ^'u; .'.:;;•< 
vice  president  of  exploration  and  /';.>.";i>- 
development  for  Homestake  Mnun^  Co 
which  he  joined  in  1975.  Prenoiisl;,  i:c  .v.;> 
with  Occidental  Minerals  Corf    <M»>;  /-'i'.1- 
to  1975.   lasth/  iis  rice  presido::  ."   i..'  .- 
exploration,  and  kennccott  Coprc'   e'.'M 
front  I960  to  19oS.  iintialhi  .is  .i  II'MMI..'.- 
geologist  and  later  as  an  exploration  geolo 
gist.  He  has  an  MS  in  geological  engineering 
and  a  PhD  in  economic  geolog\/ 

Mining  (  unnrrs*   Icurn.il 


APPENDIX  B 


WILL  BAKER 


Homestake 


244 


KdlUr— A  few  days  ago  the  Yolo 
County  Planning  Commission  granted 
permits  which  will  allow  the  Home-, 
stake  Company  to  begin  full-scale  oper 
liton  of  its  massive  Mclaughlin  Mini- 
Winning  these  permits  was  an  imprcs 
live,  if  not  unprecedented  achieve 
ment,  and  in  this  letter  I  wish  to 
highligfit  some  of  the  more  remarkable 
successes  of  the  Nomestake  team 

Consider  these  obstacles 

1.  Soon  after  the  company  announced 
its  plans  to  dig  the  biggest  hole  in 
California  behind  Blue  Ridge,  a  small 
group  of  malcontents  discovered  and 
broadcast '  the  news  that  Homestake 
had  been  cited  twice  by  the  EPA  as  one 
of  the  "superfund"  polluters— firms  re-' 
sponsible  for  the  worst  toxic  dumps  In 
the  nation.  In  addition,  Homestake  had 
a  recent  record  of  extensive  litigation 
over  Us  failure  to  meet  water  quality 
standards  in  South  Dakota 

Z  Then,  after  many  assurances  that 
this  modern,  progressive  mining  corpo 
ration  had  left  such  sordid  matters  far 
behind,  and  even  as  local  authorities 
perused  the-  just-printed  Environmen 
tal  Report  for  the  Mclaughlin  pit,  it 
was  learned  tint  thirty-four  families  in 
Milan.  New  Mexico,  had  just  filed 
lawsuits  totalling  194  million,  charging 
groundwater  pollution  from  a  Home- 
stake  uranium  mine 

3.  Meanwhile,  the  Environmental  1m- 
pact  Report,  though  based  entirely  on 
Honestake's  samples  and  data,  was 
running  into  heavy  criticism  from  the 
Bureau  of  Reclamation,  the  EPA.  So- 
lano  Irrigation  District.  Bay  Area  Air 
Quality  Control,  and  the  state  Depart 
ment  of  Conservation  Some  Homestake 
estimates  were  held  to  be  inaccurate 
by  as  much  as  a  factor-  of  ten  So  the 
company  fle.w  in  new  experts,  took 
more  samples,  and  after  minor  adjust 
ments  the.  EIR  was  certified. 

•  4.  A  scant  few  months  later,  another 
group  of  angry  citizens  launched  a 
'multi-million  dollar  suit  because  their 
wells  were*  contaminated  by  wastes 
from  McClellan  Air  Force  Base  Engi 
neering  Sciences,  the  firm  that  did  the 
EIR  for  McClellan  (a  study  labeled 
"poor'  and  "inadequate"  by  the  US. 
General  Accounting  Officci  was  the 
very  same  firm  that  did  the  McLaughlin 
EIR 

5  In  Yolo  County  Homestake's  mam 
problem, was  to  secure  approval  for  a 
dam  and  reservoir.  They  needed  water . 
to  mill  the  ore  and  wash  away  the 
cyanide  waste  The  site  of  this  reser 
voir,  however,  was  reserved-tor  agricul' 
tural  use  according  to  the  terms  of  a 
contract  under  the  Williamson  Act 
.This  law.  in  strong  and  unambiguous 
language,  discouraged  the  conversion 
of  ag  landtfc  industrial  purposes 


Worse,  the  iand  of  troublemakers 
previously  mentioned.  mo*t4y~un£oyer- 
ished  and  asocial  farmers  from  the 
Northern  Capay  Valley,  rallied  around 
the  Williamson  Act  and  threatened  to 
submit  the  reservoir  proposal  to  a 
public  referendum,  thus  appealing  to 
the  final,  sacred  authority  THE  PEO 
PLE 

Such  3  battery  oPdifTiculties  would 
seem  insurmountable,  but  Homestake's 
"environmental"  team  began  to  work 
their  slow.  sure,  inexorable  magic 

.  They  smiled.  They  shook  hands.  They 
brought  colorful  charts,  slide  shows, 
and  booklets.  They  spoke  softly, 
clearly,  and  humbly  about  their  com 
mitment  to  jobs,  safety,  public  schools, 
scientific  research,  flood  control,  a 
favorable  balance  of  payments,  and  the 
tule  elk.  Tactfully,  they  also  mentioned 
the  showers  of  tax  dollars  that  the  giant 

"mine  would  bring. 

•'  Yolo  County  listened  A  "zoning  ordi 
nance  amendment"  was  fabricated  to 
handle  that  troublesome  Williamson 
Act.  The  new  amendment  allowed  an 
owner  to  convert  ag  land  into  a  pri 
vately-owned  reservoir  for  mining  pur 
poses—even  though  the  county's  lawyer 
said  himself  that  the  act  "disfavored" 
such  conversions  The  milcontents  bel 
lowed  at  this  hypocrisy,  chiming  that 
amendments  were  supposed  to  improve 
lawsmot  cancel  them  Homestake  re 
joined  smoothly  that  their  reser 
voir—perhaps  in  twenty-five  years, 
maybe  in  a  century— would  provide 
flood  control  and  improved  wildlife 
habitat.  The  malcontents  were  apoplec- 
•tic.  In  the  case  of  a  20-foot  rise  in  Cache 
Creek,  they  said,  the  reservoir  would 
reduce  the  flood  by  a  whopping  two 
and  one-half  inches:  and  the  idea  that  a 
mile-long  strip  mine  would  delight  the 
deer  and  quail  was  too  ridiculous  to 
warrant  intelligent  rebuttal.  • 

Homestake  smiled  and  flew  the 
.county  supervisors  over  the  mine  site, 

'  .explaining  again  how  very  sincere  they 
were  in  wanting  this  wonderful  project 
to  move  ahead.  The  malcontents  con 
sidered  starting  a  petition  to  place  the 
whole  reservoir  issue  before  the  voters. 
They  had  been  told  (explicitly  in  a 

.  memo  from  the  Planning  Commission) 
.that  the  new  amendment  would  not  be 

.  effective  until  30  days  after  a  formal 
second  reading  of  the  text.  "But  no 

,^. second  reading  was  ever  scheduled. 

'••••The  supervisors  published  a  two-week 
''notice  in  the  paper,  counting  from  the 

•  •'first  -reading.  The  malcontents  hit  the 
•  .streets  anyway  and  in  just  12  days 
j5alh£rc<H;500  signatures  for  a  referen- 
"ourn.  They  needed  another  thousand 

•••and  asked  for  a  two  week  extension. 
•pointing  out  that  the  county  had  an- 


APPENDIX   B 

April    18,    1984 

nounced  a  second  reading  and  had 
guaranteed  them  30  days. 

'  The  county  smiled  and  said  they 
were  sorry,  but  no  Homestake.  smiled 
too.  and  well  they  might  It  was  a 
stunning  achievement  They  had  per 
suaded  Yolo  County's  government  to 
overlook  its  own  error,  to  ignore  its 
citizens,  to  avoid  sounding  the  public 
mind,  in  fact  to  plan  and  supervise  for 
the  benefit  of  special  interests,  without 
regard  for  the  people's  will  In  one 
stroke  they  gained  their  reservoir, 
established  themselves  as  a  political 
power  seconcf  to  none  in  this  country, 
and  changed  the.  course  of  law. 

They  also  taught  us  a  vital  lesson 
The  lesson  is:  Gold  is  God.  Gold  can 
hire  men  and  women  to  enact  laws,  to 
reinterpret  them,  to  ignore  them.  Gold 
can  persuade  us  of  almost  any  point  of 
view:  that  strangers  who  come  from  San 
Francis^  to  blast  huge  holes  in  our 
back  yard  are  our  good  neighbors:  that 
such  blasting  makes  things  better  for 
little  wild  creatures:  that  thousands  of 
ton?of  deadly  poison  can  enter  an  area 
without  "significant"  risk,  that  all  this 
noise  and  dust  and  danger  is  important 
business  that  advances  civilization  to 
ward  some  high  destiny  It  can 
even-and  here  is  the  final  mira 
cle—persuade  the  Sierra  Club  to.  be 
handmaiden  to  Homestake  Mining  Cor 
poration,  the  twice-crowned  Superfund 
Queen 

We  would  te  remiss  if  we  did  not 
signal  the  rare  triumph  of  Mr  Ray 
Krause.  "Environmental  Manager"  of 
the  Mclaughlin  Project  He  has  ef 
fected  one  of  the  great  coups  in  the 
annals  of  public  relations  work,  and 
should  find  himself,  once  corporate 
America  learns  of  his  efforts,  a  much 
sought  and  wealthy  man  I  can  think  of 
but  one  higher  challenge  to  his  genius 
Could  he  persuade  his  client  and  the 
Sierra  Club  to  co-sponsor  an  exhibit  at 
Disneyland?. A  model  of  the  Mclaugh 
lin  mine  with  a  statue  of  John  Muir  at 
the  brink  of  the  pit.  hand  raised  in 
benediction?  Muir  was  a  loner  and  -a 
rough-looking  old  codger,  however,  so 
it -might  be  better  to  garb  him  in  a 
polyester  leisure  suit,  shave  off  his 
beard  and  blow-dry  his  hair  so  he  won't 
frighten  the  little  suburban  children 
For  a  religious  note.  Mr  Krause  could 
suggest  that  Lake.  Napa  and  Yolo 
counties  contribute  (from  their  new 
revenues)  a  little  chapel  next  to  the 
exhibit  They  could  dedicate  (he  chapel 
to  Gold  Almighty.and  call  it  Yesmister 
-Abbey.  -  —  «•  - 

HILL  BAKER 

Rumsey 


APPENDIX  C 


NORMAN  BIRDSEY 


245  APPENDIX  C 


1984  Homestake  Mining,  U.S.A. 
Ore  transport 

The  200.000  oz'yr.  McLaughlin  mine,  located  north  of 
San  Francisco,  was  commissioned  by  Homestake  in  the 
mid-eighiies.  At  that  time,  a  (environmental)  decision 
was  taken  to  locate  the  processing  plant  as  close  as 
practical  to  the  tailings  pond.  As  a  result  of  this,  ore 
from  the  open  pit  had  to  be  transported  over-land  a 
distance  of  7  km  (4.5  miles).  In  pii  crushing  and  slurry 
transport  was  identified  as  the  most  economical  and 
environmentally  sound  way  to  proceed. 

The  initial  "ground  ore"  flow  of  275  m'/h  (1210 
L'Sgpm).  at  50  bar  (725  psi).  was  supplied  by  4  GEHO 
TZPM  180  pumps.  In  addition,  at  the  processing  plant. 
pan  of  the  ore  concentrate  is  handled  in  an  autoclave 
system  The  feed  pumps  for  the  autoclaves  are  required 
to  provide  275  m'/h  at  25  bar  (360  psi).  The  slurry 
which  these  pumps  are  required  to  handle  is  95°C  (200F) 
and  has  a  pH  of  1-3.  For  this  duty  GEHO  supplied  ? 
TZPM  150  pumps,  in  stainless  steel  execution.  In  1988. 
Homestake  commissioned  an  additional  four  TZPM  180 
pumps,  in  order  to  double  the  capacity  of  their  ore 
transport  system. 


GEHO  INFO 


246 


Monthly  info-bulletin  for  sales  representatives  and  distributors 
Volume  3.  No.  2,  March  1993 


Autoclave  feed  pumps  in  the  gold  industry 


This  article  describes  briefly  certain  gold  recovery 
methods  used  to  treat  both  oxide  and  sulfide  ores, 
outlines  the  pre-treatment  of  refractory  sulphide  ores 
by  means  of  pressure  oxidation  (in  an  autoclave 
vessel),  and  finally,  Jescribes  the  specialized  pump 
ing  equipment  used  to  feed  the  autoclaves. 

Oxide  ores 

Gold  is  commonly  recovered  from  oxide  ores  in  two 
ways:  for  lower  grade  ore  by  means  of  a  heap  leach 
operation,  and  higher  grade  ore  through  an  oxide 
mill  operation. 

Heap  leaching  is  a  straight  forward  process.  The 
mine  ore  is  crushed  to  a  specified  size  fraction. 
Cementatious  material  and  water  are  added  in  order 
to  agglomerate  the  material.  This  material  is  then 
stacked  onto  a  leach  pad,  where  it  is  sprayed  with  a 
cyanide  solution,  which  leaches  out  the  gold  as  it 
percolates  through  the  heap.  The  gold  bearing  preg 
nant  solution  is  sent  to  the  mill,  where  it  is  absorbed 
by  activated  carbon.  The  gold  bearing  carbon  is  then 
stripped  in  a  similar  manner  as  mill  carbon. 

An  oxide  mill  recovers  gold  from  the  ore  by  crush 
ing  and  grinding  it  to  a  specified  size  fraction.  The 
ore  is  then  processed  through  either  of  a  number  of 
available  processes,  such  as  carbon-in-leach  (CIL), 
cyanide  leach,  and  carbon-in-pulp  (CIP),  depending 
on  certain  characteristics  of  the  ore.  After  CIL,  the 
carbon  is  pressure  stripped  of  the  gold.  The  gold 
bearing  solution  is  then  pumped  through  an  electrow- 
hinning  cell,  then  further  refined  into  bullion. 

Refractory  sulphide  ores 

While  a  certain  percentage  of  gold  is  recoverable 
from  refractory  ores  by  conventional  cyanidation,  a 
pre-treatment  step  is  required  in  order  to  yield  a 
greater  recovery  rate.  A  now  commonly  used  pre- 
treatment  process  is  pressure  oxidation,  also  known 
as  autoclaving. 

Pressure  oxidation  (autoclaving)  is  a  process  which 
transforms  the  sulphide  ore  into  an  oxide  ore,  which 
makes  it  more  amenable  to  cyanide  extraction.  The 
process  is  usually  performed  after  ore  grinding. 


The  autoclave,  essentially  a  large  pressure  cooker, 
drastically  reduces  the  time  to  minutes,  what  nature 
takes  millions  of  years  to  do. 

Referring  to  figure  #1,  acidic  gold  slurry  is  taken 
from  a  thickener  into  a  series  of  splash  heating 
towers,  in  orcVr  to  raise  its  temperature  up  to  as 
much  as  175°C  ^50°F.  The  hot  acidic  slurry  is  then 
fed  into  the  au;>  ..lave  with  a  positive  displacement 
piston  diaphragm  pump. 

During  its  approximate  hour  in  the  autoclave,  the 
slurry  is  agitated  and  mixed  with  oxygen  and  steam. 
This  enables  the  sulphides  in  the  ore  to  become 
oxidized,  which  in  turn  exposes  the  fine  particles, 
and  readies  them  for  cyanidation.  The  slurry  then 
enters  a  series  of  flash  cooling  towers,  in  order  to 
dissipate  the  pressure.  This  process  releases  steam. 
which  is  returned  to  the  splash  heating  towers,  thus 
rendering  the  system  more  efficient.  The  final  flash 
cooling  tower  cools  the  slurry  before  it  enters  a 
conventional  milling  process. 


iplath  heitlng  towers 


piston 

dlaphragn 

pump 


tlish  cooling  lowers 


•lurry  to  CIL  tanks 


Figure  1:  Pressure  oxidation 


Autoclave  feed  pumps 

The  reason  that  a  piston  diaphragm  pump  is  used  is 
because  of  the  extremely  harsh  slurry  characteristics: 

-  high  temperature,  to  175"C/350°F 

-  acidity,  pH  as  low  as  1 

-  high  abrasion,  Miller  ff  to  150 

-  high  pressures,  to  38  bar/550  psi 

-  flow  rates  to  120  m'/h  /  525  gpm  per  pump 


EnviroTech  Pumpsystems  Netherlands  bv.  PO  Box  249,  NL-5900  AE  Venlo.  phone:  I  *  31)77-3895200,  fax:  1*31177-3824844 


247 


The  GEHO  piston  diaphragm  pump  is  ideally  suited 
for  feeding  the  high  temperature  autoclaves.  The 
liquid  end  of  the  standard  piston  diaphragm  pump 
(suitable  for  slurry  temperatures  to  100°C/212°F)  is 
shown  in  fig. 2,  and  comprises  of  the  following  fea 
tures: 

-  Unique  preformed  diaphragm,  which  separates  the 
aggressive  slurry  from  the  major  pump  running 
components,  such  as  pistons,  cylinder  liners,  etc. 

-  PLC    monitored   and    controlled    stroke    control 
system,  operational  at  both  suction  and  dis 
charge  stokes  which 

ensures  optimal  diaphragm  life. 

-  Cone  type  suction  and  discharge  valves. 

-  High  and  stable  pump  efficiencies  as  high  as  95%. 

-  Guaranteed  pump  availability  of  98  %. 


Pressure  relief  valve 
Diaphragm  housing 


ID 


Figure  2:  Liquid  end  of  GEHO  diaphragm  pump. 


For  the  high  temperature  autoclaves,  GEHO  has 
developed   a   special   high   temperature  diaphragm 
pump,    capable   of  pumping   the   hot,   acidic   and 
corrosive  slurry.  Figure  #3  depicts  such  pump. 
As  shown  in  Figure  #3,  a  drop  leg  is  fitted  between 
the  diaphragm  housing  and  the  slurry  valves. 
A  cooling  jacket  surrounds  the  drop  leg,  and  serves 
to  cool  the  hot  slurry  to  a  certain  temperature  that  is 
within  the  thermal  limits  of  the  diaphragm  material. 
This  ensures  long  life  between  diaphragm  mainten 
ance  changes.  At  the  same  time  however,  the  tem 
perature  of  the  slurry  fed  to  the  autoclave  is  not 
affected  by  this  cooling  action. 
As  a  result  of  the  acidic  nature  of  the  slurry,  duplex 


Figure  3:  Dropleg  design. 


stainless  steel  is  used  for  the  wet  end  pump  compo 
nents,  that  are  in  contact  with  the  slurry,  such  as 
valves,  drop  leg,  diaphragm  housing,  etc. 

Since  the  first  3  GEHO  piston  diaphragm  autoclave 
feed  pumps  were  installed  in  1984  at  Homestake 
Mining  Company's  McLaughlin  Mine,   located   in 
California,  there  have  been  27  more  autoclave  pumps 
selected  for  various  mines  such  as: 

-  American  Barrick's  Mercur  Mine,  Utah:  1  pump. 
temp  =  175cC/350°F,  pH  =  7,  pres  =  36  bar/525  psi 

-  First  Miss  Gold's  Getchell  Mine,  Nevada: 

3  pumps,  temp  =  175cC/350°F,  pH=l,  pres-38 
bar/550  psi 

-  American  Barrick's  Goldstrike  Mine,  Nevada: 

12  pumps,  temp  =  175cC/350°F,  pH=l,  pres  =  32 
bar/480  psi 

-  Placer  Dome's  Porgera  Mine,  Papua  New  Guinea: 
6    pumps,    temp=498C/120°F,    pH  =  4,    pres  =  20 
bar/290  psi 

-  Sao  Bento  Mineracao,  Brasil:  3  pumps,  temp  = 
75CC/167°F,  pH=4,  pres=20  bar/290  psi 

-  Lone  Tree  Mining,  Nevada:   2  pumps,  temp  = 
135°C/275°F,  pH  =  2,  pres  =  19  bar/282  psi. 
GEHO  PUMPS  is  recognized  as  the  world  leader  in 
autoclave  pumping.  Experience  has  shown  that  the 
GEHO  piston  diaphragm  pump  offers  the  reliability 
and  pump  availability  that  autoclave  mills  demand. 


EnviroTech  Pumpsystems  Netherlands  bv.  PO  Box  249.  NL-5900  AE  Venlo.  phone:  (  +  31)77-3895200.  fax:  (  +  31)77-3824844 


APPENDIX  D 


BRICE  BLEDSOE 


248  APPENDIX  D 

"environmental  Stewardship" 


OBSERVATIONS  OF  CONTAINMENT  AND  CONTROL  FOR 

POTENTIAL  WATER  QUALITY  MODIFICATIONS  FROM  THE 

HOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY  McLAUGHLIN  MINE  AND  MILL 


Prepared  for: 

Solano  Irrigation  District 

508  Elmira  Road 
Vacaville,  CA     95688 


G 


Prepared  by: 

Jim  V.  Rouse 

GEOCHEM  Division,  Terra  Vac 

12596  VV.  Bayaud  Avenue,  Suite  205 

Lakewood,  CO     80228 

(303)    988-8902 
Fax:     (303)  988-0288 


April,   1994 


Project  No.  34-0048 


TCMM 

VRC 
GEOCHEM  fl  Division  Of  I 

~— . i—  —  Subsurfix*  Remediation  Sp«lollsts 


249 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


FILE  COPY 


Page  No. 

1  0 

CONCLUSIONS   

1 

?  n 

INTRODUCTION    

2 

2.  i      Bsckground    

2 

2.2        1994  Inspection  PuTPQ.SC   

2 

2.3      General  Conclusions    

3 

1  0 

TAILINGS  CONTAINMENT  FACILITY    

4 

40 

WASTE  ROCK  CONTAINMENT  OPERATIONS     

5 

5  0 

1994  FIELD  OBSERVATIONS    

7 

6  0 

STRFAM  PROFIT  F                      

9 

7.0 

SUMMARY 

10 

Table  No. 
1 
2 


LIST  OF  TABLES 


Intel-laboratory  Comparison,  McLaughlin  Mine  Area  Surface  Water  Sampling 

Field  Data  Collected  During  April  14,  1994  Surface  Water  Sample  Collection , 
Hunting  and  Knoxville  Creeks,  California 


Appendix 
1 
2 


LIST  OF  APPENDICES 

Resume  for  Jim  V.  Rouse 

1994  Scream  Profile,  HC-5  to  HC-10,  Hunting  Creek,  California  Memorandum 


250 


1.0     CONCLUSIONS 

On  April  14,  1994,  Mr.  Jim  V.  Rouse,  Principal  Geohydrologist  of  GEOCHEM  Division,  Terra 
Vac  (GEOCHEM)  conducted  his  annual  data  review  and  field  evaluation  at  the  Homestake  Mining 
Company  (HMC)  McLaughlin  operation,  located  in  the  Hunting  and  Knoxville  Creek  basins  of 
California.  Based  on  these  efforts,  and  on  the  data  made  available,  Mr.  Rouse  concludes  that: 

1 .  As  a  whole,  the  HMC  McLaughlin  operation  is  operating  as  designed  and  is  in 
compliance  with  water  quality  permits.  The  HMC  operation  presents  no  threat  to 
the  quality  of  Solano  Irrigation  District  (SID)  waters. 

2.  The  tailings  containment  facility  is  operating  as  designed,  with  no  release  of  water 
or  tailings  to  the  environment.  As  a  result,  there  has  been  no  detectable  impact  on 
downstream  water  quality,  no  change  in  quality  of  the  ground  water,  and  no  threat 
to  the  quality  of  SID  waters.  The  tailings  containment  facility  is  further  enhanced 
by  favorable  geochemical  conditions  in  surrounding  soils,  which  provide  yet 
another  level  of  protection  to  ground  and  surface  waters. 

3.  The  waste  rock  disposal  operations,  as  modified  over  the  past  years,  are  operating 
as  designed  with  the  successful  implementation  of  additional  containment  facilities. 
The  modifications  to  waste  rock  disposal  practices  have  had  beneficial  effects. 
Water  quality  in  the  receiving  waters  remains  within  limits  defined  in  the  baseline 
studies,  and  as  such,  presents  no  threat  to  the  quality  of  SID  waters. 


251 

2.0     INTRODUCTION 

2.1  Background 

Homestake  Mining  Company  currently  operates  a  major  open-pit  gold  mine  and  associated  mill  in 
the  Hunting  and  Knoxville  Creek  drainage  basins,  north  of  Lake  Berryessa,  California.  Lake 
Bcrryessa  is  operated  by  the  Solano  Irrigation  District,  for  storage  of  irrigation  water.  HMC  and 
SID  have  entered  into  a  program  which  provides  for  binding  arbitration,  if  necessary,  to  evaluate 
the  water  quality  in  Lake  Berryessa  and  its  tributaries  as  a  result  of  HMC's  activities.  This 
arbitration  agreement  calls  for  the  joint  selection  of  a  "water  quality  expert"  suitable  to  both  HMC 
and  SID.  Mr.  Jim  V.  Rouse  has  been  selected  as  this  "water  quality  expert."  A  copy  of  Mr. 
Rouse's  resume  is  attached  as  Appendix  1.  Mr.  Rouse  is  charged  with  the  conduct  of  periodic  site 
visits  to  review  water  quality,  data  collection  and  monitoring  activities.  He  has  visited  the  site  to 
observe  such  activities  in  December,  1986  and  April  of  1988  through  1994.  The  annual  field 
inspection  has  as  its  purpose: 

1 .  observation  of  HMC  monitoring  activities  and  their  appropriateness, 

2.  independent  collection  of  water  quality  samples  for  a  separate,  third  party  review, 
and 

3 .  review  of  existing  water  quality  and  compliance  with  permits. 

2.2  1994  Inspection  Purpose 

As  noted  previously,  Mr.  Rouse  has  conducted  annual  reviews  of  HMC  operations  since  1986. 
Table  1  contains  comparative  data  on  samples  collected  by  HMC  and  Mr.  Rouse  through  1993. 
Data  for  1994  samples  are  forthcoming.  The  purpose  of  the  1994  inspection  was  to: 

1 .  evaluate  conditions,  as  documented  by  stream  monitoring, 

2.  conduct  a  preliminary  review  of  1993  and  1994  water  quality  data  collected  by 
HMC,  and 


252 


3.  conduct  a  stream  conductivity  profile  in  an  area  of  observed  conductivity  increase. 
This  profile  compliments  similar  profiles  which  have  been  conducted  over  past 
years. 

2.3       General  Conclusions 
Based  on  the  reviews  described  in  Section  2.2,  it  is  concluded  that: 

1 .  The  McLaughlin  mine  and  mill  is  operating  in  accord  with  existing  permits  and 
agreements.  The  technical  exceedances  to  permit  criteria  reported  during  the  winter 
of  1993  resulted  from  excessive  precipitation  events,  and  did  not  impact  water 
quality  in  Hunting  Creek,  the  receiving  water. 

2.  The  progressive  reclamation  of  the  waste  rock  is  proceeding  in  accordance  with 
approved  reclamation  plans,  and  is  having  positive  effects  on  water  quality. 

3.  Surface  and  ground  water  monitoring  is  being  conducted  in  accordance  with  the 
approved  monitoring  plans,  and  yields  data  of  high  quality. 

4.  The  McLaughlin  project  is  operating  as  designed  and  permitted,  and  poses  no  threat 
to  the  quality  of  SID  waters. 


253 


3.0    TAILINGS  CONTAINMENT  FACILITY 

Operation  of  the  McLaughlin  mill  yields  a  somewhat  unique  tailings,  since  the  processing  involves 
oxidation  of  sulfide-bearing  ore  minerals  prior  to  processing  and  discharge  into  the  tailings 
containment  facility.  The  tailings  containment  facility  was  designed  as  an  earth  fill  impoundment  to 
retain  the  oxidized  tailings  and  associated  tailings  liquor.  The  tailings  impoundment  facility  was 
intentionally  situated  on  an  area  of  low  permeability  bedrock,  with  favorable  geochemical 
conditions.  In  addition,  the  oxidized  tailings  have  favorable  geochemical  conditions  to  fix  and 
immobilize  heavy  metals. 

Based  on  the  field  inspection  and  the  review  of  the  data  made  available  to  Mr.  Rouse,  together  with 
the  past  reviews  in  the  period  1986  to  the  present,  the  tailings  containment  facility  is  operating  as  a 
zero  discharge  facility,  as  designed,  and  in  accordance  with  existing  permits.  To  the  best  of  Mr. 
Rouse's  knowledge,  all  required  monitoring  has  been  conducted,  and  the  results  have  indicated  no 
anomalous  data.  Downstream  water  quality  conditions,  as  documented  by  surface  and  ground 
water  monitoring  and  observations  along  the  tributary  to  Hunting  Creek  tailing*;  basin,  indicate  no 
impact  on  water  quality.  The  tributary,  at  the  time  of  Mr.  Rouse's  visit,  was  flowing  clear,  with 
algal  growth  in  the  stream,  as  a  result  of  low  flow  conditions. 

The  McLaughlin  tailings  impoundment  is  an  exemplary  tailings  facility,  and  is  adequately 
protecting  both  ground  and  surface  water  resources  by  the  containment  of  tailings  and  associated 
tailings  liquor. 


254 


4.0    WASTE  ROCK  CONTAINMENT  OPERATIONS 

Open  pit  mining  at  the  McLaughlin  mine  yields  variable  quality  waste  rock,  some  of  which  has 
high  sulfide  concentrations  which  have  the  potential  for  sulfide  oxidation  and  the  generation  of 
high  sulfate  concentrations.  Partly  as  a  result  of  Mr.  Rouse's  prior  site  inspections,  the  waste  rock 
disposal  practices  were  upgraded  to  assure  that  sulfide  oxidation  products  would  be  minimized  and 
controlled.  Based  on  Mr.  Rouse's  1994  inspection,  and  the  review  of  past  data,  the  waste  rock 
containment  operations,  as  practiced,  are  exemplary  in  nature  and  are  operating  as  designed  and  in 
accordance  with  applicable  permits. 

January  through  February,  1993,  was  a  period  of  exceptionally  heavy  and  prolonged  rainfall  at  the 
McLaughlin  operation.  As  a  result  of  this  exceptional  rainfall,  the  volume  of  underdrain  flow 
exceeded  the  capacity  of  the  then-installed  pump  back  system.  The  underdrain  flow  which  was  in 
excess  of  the  collection  and  pump  back  system  capacity  subsequently  entered  a  series  of  sediment 
control  ponds,  where  it  mixed  with  surface  runoff,  and  subsequently  discharged  to  Hunting  Creek. 
As  reported  in  a  March  10,  1993  letter  to  Mr.  Steve  Rosenbaum,  of  the  California  Regional  Water 
Control  Board,  from  Ms.  Dolora  M.  Koontz,  there  were  two  technical  exceedances  noted  on 
January  7,  1993.  These  exceedances  include  the  incremental  pH  increase  between  receiving  water 
stations,  and  the  total  s  ;pended  solids  value  in  station  003.  Three  technical  exceedances  were 
noted  during  monitoring  on  January  20,  1993.  These  include  effluent  total  suspended  solids 
(TSS)  levels,  together  with  concentrations  for  mercury  and  zinc.  Effluent  concentrations,  although 
slightly  elevated,  were  negligible  in  comparison  to  receiving  stream  conditions,  with  no  impact 
observed  in  Hunting  Creek  as  a  result  of  the  discharge.  Despite  this  lack  of  impact,  Homestake 
initiated  a  program  to  immediately  upgrade  the  capacity  of  the  pumpback  system  to  prevent  further 
occurrences.  In  addition,  improved  interception  of  underdrain  flows,  through  the  installation  of 
engineered  upgrades  to  the  underdrain  system,  was  completed  in  1993. 

During  his  earlier  annual  inspection  reports,  Mr.  Rouse  noted  that  the  water  type  in  Hunting  Creek 
had  been  changing  to  a  preponderance  of  sulfate  over  carbonate  and  bicarbonate,  as  a  result  of  the 
increased  waste  rock  disposal  in  Hunting  Creek  drainage  basin.  Mr.  Rouse  suggested 
modifications  to  the  waste  rock  disposal  system,  which  were  subsequently  implemented,  which  led 
to  a  decrease  in  the  sulfate  yield  of  the  area.  The  question  of  sulfate  loading  increase  was 
anticipated  in  the  project  Environmental  Impact  Report/Environmental  Impact  Statement  (EER/EIS) 
and  supporting  documents,  as  submitted  to  and  approved  by  the  California  Regional  Water  Quality 


255 


Control  Board.  The  question  of  sulfate  levels  in  the  discharge  were  further  addressed  in  a  March 
18,  1994  letter  to  Mr.  Mike  Johnson  of  the  California  Regional  Water  Quality  Control  Board, 
Central  Valley  Region,  from  Ms.  Koontz.  She  noted  that  the  waste  rock  disposal  facility  has  been 
modified  to  implement  best  available  technology  to  minimize  the  impact  of  waste  rock  leachate, 
utilizing  a  program  of  encapsulation  of  acid  generating  waste  rock.  The  encapsulation  is  designed 
to  eliminate  oxygen  and  water  penetration  of  the  sulfate-generating  waste  rock. 

The  sulfate  loading  associated  with  the  waste  rock  was  anticipated  in  the  permitting  of  the 
operation,  and,  based  on  the  historic  database,  has  had  no  impact  on  SID  waters.  Such  loading 
should  decrease  as  a  result  of  planned  final  closure  of  the  waste  rock  disposal  facility  and 
subsequent  flushing  of  the  underdrain  system. 

As  will  be  discussed  in  a  following  section,  there  have  been  visual  improvements  to  Hunting 
Creek,  in  the  area  of  downstream  monitoring  station  HC-10,  as  a  result  of  the  modifications  to  the 
waste  rock  disposal  operations.  In  the  past,  there  was  some  iron  staining  of  concrete  in  the  area  of 
the  HC-10  flow  monitoring  facility,  but  the  staining  has  significantly  reduced  over  the  past  years. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  obvious  from  the  field  inspection  and  data  review  that  the  management  practices 
implemented  at  the  waste  rock  disposal  facilities  have  been  effective  in  controlling  potential 
contamination  from  waste  rock  disposal  activities. 


256 


5.0     1994  FIELD  OBSERVATIONS 

On  April  14,  1994,  Mr.  Jim  V.  Rouse  accompanied  Mr.  Tom  Milligan  of  HMC  on  his  routine 
water-quality  sampling  in  the  Hunting  and  Knoxville  Creek  drainage  basins.  Table  2  provides 
field  data  collected  by  Mr.  Milligan,  utilizing  HMC  field  pH,  conductivity,  and  dissolved  oxygen 
meters. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  1993  sampling  observations,  Mr.  Milligan  collected  and  preserved  these 
samples  in  accord  with  standard  field  techniques,  which  should  yield  representative  water  quality 
samples.  Field  sample  filtration  was  accomplished  in  the  field  by  means  of  a  Geofilter™  pressure- 
filtration  apparatus,  utilizing  disposable  0.45  micron  QED™  high  flow  filters.  The  Geofilter™ 
equipment  utilization  was  initially  recommended  by  Mr.  Rouse,  and  was  implemented  in  1990. 
Such  equipment  significantly  reduces  the  contamination  potential  associated  with  sample  field 
filtration.  Mr.  Milligan's  field  techniques  were  appropriate  for  collection  of  the  water  quality 
samples. 

The  weather  during  the  April  14,  1994  site  visit  was  clear,  with  stream  flow  significantly  reduced 
from  1993  conditions. 

As  a  result  of  the  low  rainfall  conditions,  stream  flow  in  Hunting  Creek  at  Station  HC-11. 
upgradient  of  Homestake  mining  operations,  was  minimal,  with  flow  occurring  through  the  rocks 

of  the  stream  bed. 

Station  HC-9  is  located  on  a  tributary  to  Hunting  Creek,  immediately  downgradient  of  the  tailings 
disposal  area.  Stream  flow  was  minimal,  with  water  occurring  as  standing  pools  in  the  stream 
bed.  This  condition  was  reflected  by  the  relatively  low  dissolved  oxygen  content  in  the  sample. 

Station  HC-5  is  located  on  Hunting  Creek  immediately  upstream  of  the  waste-rock  disposal  area. 
Flow  in  the  creek  was  clear,  primarily  through  rocks  of  the  alluvial  stream  bed.  Dissolved  oxygen 
content  was  high  due  to  aeration  as  the  flow  moved  between  the  rocks. 

When  sampling  at  Station  HC-1Q.  downgradient  of  the  waste  rock  disposal  area,  both  Mr.  Milligan 
and  Mr.  Rouse  collected  additional  blind  duplicate  samples  for  intralaboratory  quality  control 
purposes.  The  flow  was  reported  at  204  gallons  per  minute,  which  is  significantly  less  than  in 


257 


previous  years.  Mr.  Rouse  noted  that  there  was  less  iron  staining  on  the  concrete  of  the  flow 
control  structure  at  this  station  than  in  previous  years.  Such  reduction  in  staining  is  a  direct 
measure  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  waste  rock  disposal  operations. 

Flow  in  Knoxville  Creek  at  Station  KC-3  was  a  mere  trickle,  estimated  at  3  to  5  gallons  per 
minute.  The  water  was  clear,  with  minor  amount  of  algae  present  in  the  stream.  As  anticipated, 
the  conductivity  at  this  station  was  relatively  high,  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of  natural  mineral 
springs  a  short  distance  upstream  of  the  sampling  point 


8 


258 


6.0    STREAM  PROFILE 

In  evaluating  the  1994  field  data,  it  was  noted  that  the  conductivity  of  Hunting  Creek  showed  a 
significant  downstream  increase,  from  a  value  of  650  micromhos  per  centimeter  at  Station  HC-5  to 
900  micromhos  per  centimeter  at  Station  HC-10.  This  increase  was  consistent  with  past  years' 
observations.  In  past  years,  Mr.  Rouse  and  various  Homestake  personnel  have  conducted  a 
number  of  stream  conductivity  profiles  which  have  identified  the  source  of  the  salinity  increase  as 
ground  water  discharge  into  Hunting  Creek  between  Station  HC-5  and  the  upstream-most 
underdrain  collection  pond.  As  a  result  of  this  past  observation,  Homestake  has  installed  a 
collection  and  pumpback  system  for  containment  of  seepage  along  a  small  tributary  draining  from 
the  waste  rock  disposal  area  into  Hunting  Creek.  Appendix  2  is  a  memorandum  prepared  by  Mr. 
Rouse  documenting  observations  during  the  1994  stream  profile.  Mr.  Rouse's  conclusions  are 
that  the  seepage  collection  and  pumpback  system  has  been  effective  at  reducing  the  subsurface  flow 
into  Hunting  Creek.  The  minor  amount  of  saline  ground  water  which  seeps  into  Hunting  Creek  is 
in  a  relatively  localized  area  of  the  stream. 


259 


7.0     SUMMARY 

Based  on  the  1994  review,  the  tailings  and  waste  rock  disposal  facilities  are  operating  as  planned 
and  constructed,  and  as  such  provide  adequate  containment  for  potential  environmental 
contaminants.  The  past  HMC  monitoring  and  the  independent  monitoring  conducted  by  Mr. 
Rouse  have  shown  that  such  containment  is  protective  of  the  waters  of  Hunting  Creek.  The  fact 
that  the  monitoring  documented  the  trend  change  in  water  quality  type  in  Station  HC-10,  which  led 
to  the  modification  of  the  waste  rock  disposal  practices,  is  proof  that  the  monitoring  program  is 
effective  in  protecting  surface  and  ground  water.  Reclamation  of  the  waste  rock  disposal  area  is 
proceeding  as  planned,  and  is  having  beneficial  impacts. 

It  is  recommended  that  HMC  continue  to  operate  and  monitor  as  in  the  past.  Such  operations  and 
monitoring  will  provide  adequate  and  appropriate  protection  for  waters  of  the  Solano  Irrigation 
District. 


10 


APPENDIX  E 


GENERAL  McLAUGHLIN  MINE  INFORMATION 


260 


APPENDIX  El 


il  7.  i*770 


The  Manhattan  Quicksilver  Mine. 


I>ower  I*ke  Bulletin  says  This  splendid 
uuno  u  located  iu  the  uortlieru  ex- 
*  end  of  Kapa  jounly,  alittlu  uver  one  mile 
aad  a  half  from  tho  Islington  vr  Knoxvilltj 
uuut,  iu  a  northwesterly  directiuii,  and  ia  owned 
by  kleasrs.  Kuoi  A  O*liorne,  the  original  di»- 
eoTcren  and  locators  of  the  lledingtou,  oowunc 
of  the  most  complete  iu  machinery  and  appur- 
Wnann^  on  tlie  I'acific  coast.  The  Manhattan 
bas  but  one  furnace,  of  the  Kuoi  1  O*lx>rnc  put- 
tat,  Ui«  capacity  of  which  is  p/n  ton*  of  orx  in 
24  hoara.  Sixty  )utu<ls  are  eini>h>yi^l,  and  are 
vorkod  by  »l.i:  u  of  30  men  each,  uhieh  alter  i 
bate  everv  U.u  hour*.  The  ou  uers  ci|  K  (M( 
about  $-,&00  per  uumth,  and  the  mint)  )>rudu  c» 
front  lau.  -J5  llasks  of  atlvcr  jier  week.  The 
YjJuo  of  works  aud  ]>er*on.tl  property  is  eetim.i- 
UxJ  at  about  $500,000,  and,  witii  thu  mine  in- 
claded,  at  (l.OOO.OdU.  The  ownen  hato  IKX-U 
ufferod  Ui<  abo%e  sum  frctjueutly,  but  uavc  aj 
freoueuUy  refused  t..  sell  Mr.  J.  M.  ('. 
Walker,  the  Sufwrintcudcnt,  is  a  miner  of 
huge  experience  and  an  ex|icrt  «  ithai.  Having 
but  one  furnace  fur  coarse-  ore«,  thu  Supenu- 
toudent  hatl  to  devue  mean,  to  reduce  the  fmu 
ores,  aad  Uis  way  he  duos  it  is  novel  and  urtg- 
i&al  with  him.  Instead  of  making  adobes  and 
(trying  them,  as  other  miner*  do,  he  does  just 
the  opposite.  The  coane  and  the  hue  are  never 
separated  —  all  the  ore  ia  piled  together,  and 
then  water  is  thrown  upon  it  until  it  is  sntli- 
ctenUy  wet  for  the  fine  ore  to  stick  to  the 
coarse.  In  this  couditiuu  it  is  put  into  the  fui- 
•aoa.  One  might  supjmse  that  moru  sulphuiic 
acid  would  bu  Tormutl  by  tliu  proeeiui,  but  it  is 
not  thecaa*  —  the  formation  in  which  the  ciuna- 
bar  u  found  U  mostly  liine  rock  kJid  entirely 
destitute  of  nulpbur.  The  company  owu  about 
5,000  acres  of  pasture  ami  farming  laixlv  and  a 
airge  number  uf  tine  sUx.k_ 

'•  THE  engiueen  appuintod  to  examine  the    sus 
pension  Wvlg«,  Niagara  Palls,  report  it  uuttiely 


courtesy  of 
Gray  Brechin 


MINING  AND  SCIENTIFIC   PRESS 


White  House  Whitewash. 

The  AmenuiH  A/.iftv/urr«/-T  publishes  tlic 
roeiiM  for  the  » liitewash  used  on  the  ea«t  end 
of  Uie  Prcaidcniial  munition-  the  White  House: 
1'ake  one-half  buabel  of  nice.  uut>  lacked  limu, 
slock  it  with  boiliug  water;  cover  it  during  tlic 
proc«us  to  keep  in  the  steam.  Strain  tlic  luju.»r 
through  a  ftu«  sieve  or  strainer,  and  add  to  il  ti 
jieck  of  aalt,  previously  well  dissolved  in  wai  m 
water;  three  pounds  of  ground  rice,  boiled  to  a 
tliin  tmstc;  ono-half  pound  of  powder<  1  Spanish 
whiting,  aud  oue  ituund  of  clean  glut.,  »  hieh  haa 
boen  previously  dissolved  by  *o*L.  it  wull, 
ami  tin  n  bang  it  over  a  alow  tire  in  a  *iuall  ket 
tle  within  a  larger  iwe  611ed  with  water. 
Add  five  gallons  of  hot  water  to  tho  mixture, 
stir  it  well,  and  let  it  stand  a  few  days  cove  rod 
frum  duitt.  11  should  be  put  on  hot,  aud  for 
this  pin  [*>**  it  can  be  kupt  iu  a  kettle  on  a  pot  - 
UMc  furnace,  i.  is  said  that  about  a  pint  uf 
thin  mixture  will  cover  a  square  yard  U|NIII  the 
ouUido  uf  a  huustt,  if  properly  apnliud.  Kiucnr 
coarse  brushes  may  Itu  used,  aecunling  to  thu 
ncatncas  of  tlie  job  retmired.  It  aiuwen  a*  well 
as  oil  pjjut  for  wood,  briek,  nr  stone,  and  i* 
(  chuajier.  It  retain*  iU  brilliancy  for  manv 
yean.  Then  u  nothing  of  thu  kiud  that  w  dt 
coni|iare  witli  it,  oitber  for  inaiilo  or  otitaidu 
walls,  Building*  covered  with  it  will  take  a 
much  longer  tnno  to  burn  than  if  they  were 
minted  with  oil  paint  Coloring  nutter  may 
U  put  in  and  nude  of  auy  shade  deairvti. 
Spanish  brown  will  make  reddish  pink  wheu 
stirred  in,  more  or  leas  deep  according  to  tjuan 
tit  •,  A  delicate  tinge  of  tin*  U  very  pretty  fur 
nihide  walla.  Finely  pulverized  cowinmi  clay, 
well  mixed  witb  Spanish  brown,  nukes  a  ted- 
dish  atone  color;  yellow  oulier  stirrod  in  make* 
yellow  wash,  but  chronic  goc»  further,  and 
make*  a  color  generally  osteemcd  prttticr.  U 
i»  diltu-ult  to  uiake  rulua,  because  U*lea  are  dif 
ferent ;  it  would  Im  beat  to  try  i-xjicniuejiL)  on  a 
ahmglv  and  let  it  dry.  lireen  must  not  IH> 
mi  ..  I  witli  lime;  it  destroys  tlie  color,  ami  the 
col -i  has  an  effect  on  the  whitewash  which 
makes  it  crack  SJid  peel. 

'J  n*.  COMMON  SALT  (iuit  —  To  the  |>ur  eat 
accident  are  many  of  the  utilizations  of  common 
•uUtauoe*  due  Oue  of  the  producing  cauaea  i>f 
prosperity  of  the  Staffordshire  pottery  manufac 
ture  WM*  the  discovery  of  a  cheap,  durable  glaxe. 
The  discovery  was  due  purely  lo  accident  At 
Stanley  Farm,  a  few  miles  from  Burslcm,  a 
i  maid  servant  was  one  day  he=*  :;.r-  a  str.*n£  solu 
tion  of  commoti  sail,  to  be  luol  in  curing  pork. 
During  her  abtcucc  from  thu  kitchen,  the  liquid 
boiltxt  over.  Being  in  an  un^lo, .  d  earthen  vcs- 
I  sel,  the  eolation,  siireailing  over  the  outside, 
'  produced  a  chemical  action  which  site  little  uu- 
|  deratood.  and  which  did  not  coniiieuvate  her  fur 
1  the  scolding  she  received.  Some  of  the  elu- 
menu  of  the  liquid  oombiiutd  with  tho**  of  thu 
highly  heated  brown  clay  surface  to  produce  a 
vitreous  coating,  or  enamel,  which  did  not  peel 
off  when  tlie  veuel  was  eold.  The  bumble 
browDwar*  veeael  acauired  historical  celebrity. 
A  liunlem  potter,  learning  what  had  Liken 
place,  aaw  that  glaied-ware  might  poasibly  bit 
the  tasto  of  the  public;  be  introduced  the*  ays- 
tem  of  ghuing  by  mean*  of  common  aalt,  a  aye- 
Urn  at  once  cheap,  easy  and  durable;  aud  Kug 
land  has  nude  many  a  million  j-mndj  sUit-ltng 
by  tliu  aocideotal  discovery. 

A««B«TO«  Par  KB. —La  /ranee  XottoelU  give« 
the  following  aooouut  of  the  mauufacture  of  an 
incombustible  paper  from  a»1>oeUa.  The  new 
paper  costs  four  franc*  per  kilogramme.  Tlie 
paper  mill*  are  iu  tho  city  of  Tiviili,  where  Vic 
toria  mode  his  suoocaaful  attempt  to  luanufac- 
ture  \his  p»i*er,  which  is  specially  adapted  for 
valuaulu  documenU,  etc.  It  has  reocuUy  un- 
deii'oue  inoet  conclusive  tctts  by  the  Marquis 
tie  Rineie,  at  an  exhibition  of  object*  nude  of 
this  subvtanoa,  iiow  licin^huld  in  the  C<>r»o  at 
Jlome.  7Vo  card-boaM  boxes  coutaining 
n,  one  uuvlc  of  ordinary  uutorial  and  the 

lier  of  asbustoe,  were  throwu  into  thu  firv. 
The  tormur  was  entuxily  ootitumoil,  while  tho 
latter  remained  intact,  together  with  the  )«• 
{ten  it  contained.  Thu  im«t  useful  employ 
inunt  tliat  lia*  Un n  made  of  this  vubstaucc  up  to 
the  presv  nl  has  becu  the  nviimfae luring  of  it 
into  Iheatrical  naugiuga.  Tliis  ia  au  excellent 
use  of  it,  and  it  u  evident  that  if  what  is  aaid  of 
it  bu  true,  it*  sphere  of  njtefulnuss  is  likely  U»  be 
greatly  extended. 


p.-q 
oth 


s  luM,  —  IB  a  ruoont  lecture  iu 

regard  to  testing  safe  and  tlaugcrous  oil,  Ur. 
ChandJcr  showed  some  intereeting  experiments. 
Sotao  oil  wa»  placed  in  an  upun  te»ter  and  grad 
ually  heated  on  a  waUr  bath  with  a  therinom- 
etor.  It  wa*  foniul  to  Hash,  or  give  otf  combus 
tible  vajiors,  at  about  110*  Kah.;  and  it  burned 
at  1  18".  Luing  what  is  called  very  »afe  oil.  He 
then  placed  some  of  thu  a&nu-  oil  in  a  closed 
vcMeJ  ruicnililiug  a  metal  lamp,  but  provided 
wiili  a  cork  instead  uf  the  common  In  .id  or 
burner,  an  1  having  vloctric  wire*  atUchod.  Ou 
heattug  the  oil  to  63',  and  eeudtug  a  >park 
througli  the  vajMti-s,  an  eiploaion  took  place 
which  Mow  out  the  C'-rk  witli  «  loud  rcitort, 
showing  Uiat  oil  which  lias  been  c«>uai>lured 
aafc  givet  out  ctplotuvc  va|H>r  aturdinary  »um- 
inur  hoat. 

PAVjuifeiM  liuw  us  Kttou  SLAII.  —  A  new  pro- 
cea&  of  ca*ting  and  annualing  paving  bluet*  of 
fuiuare  cimlur,  eays  the  t-on  A-je,  lia->  l«en 


l,  whieJi  u  cUinuxl  to  fuminli  a 
and  nniftirni  material  that  rttauU  woar  am' 
gives  a  g««oil  fiioUng  for  homos.  Thi*  pi<Mj«« 
coiuisU  in  taking  the  *lag  as  it  lluws  fium  the 
furuactt  and  miming  il  into  luohU  placed  njn.ii 
a  eii-uulnr  ublc.  As  fast  sj>  Uie  moltbi  are  Idled, 
they  Are  moved  away,  and  left  to  ctiol  down  to 
a  dull  to  I  i.oL.r  The  molds  are  tlien  op«  uod. 
and  the  bluck*  me  taken  out  and  annealed  in  a 
furu.icc  k>  |.t  at  a  jctrtu  nl.u  Uinpcratnic  i  -t  '24 
h'.in».  They  aru  tlien  Jnii«lu:d  ami  nmy 
uaod  at  onec.  The  chief  nowlty  of  tliu  pince 
soems  to  IK.  tlie  annealing  uf  the  blocks  of  slag. 

r.triMA.  —  An  imitation   of  patina   for  btonu 
objct  ta  uf  all  kinds  cajt  be    produced,  according 
to  the  lint,  mutter,  by  prejotring  a  paiut  of  car 
Inmate  of  copiicr  und    any    li^ht    alcohi'lic    vai< 
nish,  and  appl>  ing  it  to  the  oojuct  with  a  bnuh, 
This  grvcii  color  pcuetratcn  Uiesmallubt  rcc^**t 
and  has,  when  dry,  the    appoaraiu«   of    paim 
(.'arUtimteof  utppur  gi\e»  u   blue   fialiuti,  \vi\ 
gris  A  light   giccii,  «nd    inti-rinediate    nhadc.t 
color  can  U;  ubtoined  liy  mixing  Ihc  t\\-j. 

To  Ks>.r  TUUI.S  CI.KIN.—  When  t"ol«  arc 
clean  and  bright,  they  may  be  kept  so  by  wip 
ing,  Wfoiv  ptttling  them  away,  with  a  elotl 
dipped  in  iiielurd  itaraHiuc.  If  tliey  are  rtulet 
the)  may  Ije  cleaned  by  soaking  in  keru««nc  oil 
and  then  nibbing  with  an  oily  rag  dipped  u 
Hue  emery  powder. 


Tu  M*Kk.  Hoi-krt  Di-itABLL.  —  To  prolong  th 
duration  of  rop«s  and  retard  their  uccay,  ittee; 
them  in  a  solution  of  aulj>hate  of  copi^er,  ai 
ounce  U>  a  quart  of  water,  and  then  cither  ta 
them  or  iiiunciMi  them  iu  eoaneud*,  four  ounce* 
«*f  at-ap  per  .iiMrt  t-f  water,  fa  the  Utter  c;t»< 
there  is  no  MU,  11 


Croup. 

Croup  is  au  iutl  animation  of  the  inuer  surface  o 
the  \tiudpipe.     Inflammation  implies  hunt,  an 
tliat  heat  uiuit  b«  subdued  or  tlie  patieut  will  it 
variably  dio.    If  j>roinut  efforts  arc  made  to  cot 
the   jiai  u   in  cane  of  an   attack  of  croup,  n-lu 
will  be  as  prompt  a*  it  is  surpruiug  and  delight 
ful.      All   know   tliat  cold  applied  lo  a  hoi  aki 
cool*  it,  but  all  do  not  as  welt  know  and  umlur 
aUud,  that  hot  water  applied  to  an   inflame- 
skiu  will  a«  cui-tainly  otxil  it  off.     Henvo  the  MI 
plication  uf  ice-OoKl  water   witb  lincu  cloth*,  *i 
of  almost  boiling  water  with  woolen  UannU,  ar 
very   utlicicut  iu  the  euro  of  croup.     Taku  tw 
or  three  piece*  of  woolen    rUnnel    uf  two    f,.h 
large  cnou^li  to  cover  Oie  whole  throat  iiml  nj 
pur  port  »f  the  cheat,  put  these  in  a  i  on  of  waU. 
i«  bill  a*  Uto  hand  can  Uuir,  and  kevp  it  tin 
hot  by  adding  w*tor  from  a  boiliug  lea-kcttk  u 
hand;  let    l»'u   of    the  AaniiuU    bu    in    the   In 
water  all  the  time  aud  one  on  tb«  throat  all  u 
time    with  a  dry  flannel    ooviriug  thu  wvt   01  u 
»)  a*  to  keep  the  steam  in  to  some  uXU-nt;  tl 
rl.mnels    should    not  be  So  w<;t  when    put  oil  i 
to  dribble  the  water;  for  it  ia  important  to  kcti 
the  i-lotflni'-    a*  dry    a*    ;>i*.sitjle,  and  the   U»l 
and    fcot  or  the   child   Comfortable  and    warn 
A»   s<«.n  u  one    flannel   get*  a  little  cool  put  i> 
another   hot   oin-,  witli    a«  little  interval  wf  c\ 
INieuix   a*   iKMiailile,  and  Lvep   up   Uii*  proc 
uutil    the   Utaflte*   come*,  or  until  tho  phlegu 
lotwc,  the  child  caater,  Mid  U-gins  to  fall  n*lo<.t  , 
tlien  gently  wrap  a  diy  fluuuuovur  the  «  et  »i 
which    is    on,  en    a*  t»   o-ver  it  up  thoioughly, 
ami  the  chilJ  is  aavod.     Whou  il  wak«e  uii 
both  flannels  will  be  dry.     The  aauiu  result  will 
follow  if  cold  water  i*  uactt,  the  oohlor  the  bet 
ter;  thu  cloths  should  be  of  muslin  nr  linen  and 
of  MVerol  folds  thickness,  large  enough  to  cover 
tho   whole   throat   and    the   upper   part  of  the 
brea»t  — A/cm. 


no 
avy 
effe 
ough 
arb 
ults, 
othe 
gen 
ge  con 
withi 


tine  and 
belt.  H 
ults  mad 
utions  th 
the  silica-c 
aong  the  fa 
phase  of  hydr 
cinnabar.  In 
k  at  the 
ore  o 


d 
al 
l, 


xville 
clay 
ective 
h  the 
o 
s, 
er 


na 
an 
m 


al 
act 
the 


n 
in 


gou 
ccurs 


261 


he  dip  and 
where  the 
aces  nearly 
roduced  by 
ections  on 
nsions,  but 
more  than 


APPENDIX  E2 

from  California  Journal  of  Mines 
and  Geology,  State  Mineralogist's 
Report  XLI,  April  1945  (41:2) 


, 
la 
pro 


etween  serpen 
in  a  narrow 
t  along  the  fa 
tion  of  the  sol 
its  formatio 
r  movements 
ring  the  last 
deposited 
rbonate  roc 
,  but  some 


a 


lt  contacts  be 
serpentine  i 
he  movement 
the  dissipatio 
ortly  after  it 
ly  by  minor 
,  rising  durin 
fractures  and 
the  silica-ca 
concentrated, 


»  "^      — •      r-      Qi  _ 

.S^S^.c  |-fe 

•^  -e    .  '•=  -  -  «  EE 


s  controlled  by  local  changes  in 
.  In  the  Reed  mine,  particularly, 
onate  rock  and  gouge  is  in  most  pl 
ur  under  hanging  walls  of  gouge  p 
This  is  illustrated  in  the  ross- 
the  ore  shoots  are  small  in  dime 
otinuously  for  vertical  dis  of 


w 
es. 
carb 
occ 
p. 
al,  t 
ed  • 


EL"  W  ,  Zr  •  —     w     fc-     ^^  ^•ftTrr'     *~  eg     c;  ^ 

tt          C       '  "^    3  -  —    ^         "2    *    g  f  "5    fe  .1  £ 


«•  —  J5 


:.« E='S||  T-^  -5 

2       '•S'-c'~ei"^gj;S    ?t-^  •=  J^    S  T    c 

••5     g  Sjl  e-s  I'-S  I  fe» »  s  s  " 

z  £    c;       "^   c~' ^. 


es 


six  mining  properti  in  the 
elow  in  the  following  order: 


Elephant. 
s  1  and  2. 
pected  with- 
e  had  a  long 
the  geology 
ppraisals  of 
During  this 
o  keep  pace 
at  intervals 
ad  anything 
logy  because 
abandoned. 
ine,  "At  the 


llo 
R 
ta 


rosp 
ave 
of 
a 

to 

h 
ol 
e 


m 


an 
i 


s,  Ree 
for  ea 
have  b 
proper 
rpret 
opment,  and 
quicksilver. 
ere  planned 
n  was  visited 
rson  has  ever 
derground  ge 
after  they  ar 
e  Knoxville 


ed, 
ach 
bee 
rties 
ations 
, 
il 


from 
sed 


ngs, 
en  f 
t  h 
se  p 
nter 
elo 
of 
w 
io 
pe 
un 
me 
g 


rin 
ive 
ha 
hes 
l  in 


p 
gi 
th 
th 
l 
d 
ce 
n 
re 
e 
e 
i 


*H 


Soda  S 
a  are 


t 
al 


egi 
one 
he  d 
ti  a 
th 


nces 
t  of  t 
enera 
e  of 
e  pri 
vatio 
the 
rs,  no  o 
ew  of  t 
short 
concern 


05       -£ 


t 
e 


ii- 

1.2 


n, 
dat 
urre 
Mos 
the  g 
phas 
h  the 
obser 
ough 
nee 
vie 
n  a 
te  c 


u      »»«o 


_-  £  S  .£  ti  £ 

C      *— -*-   _-     »-      4; 

2  c-  o'Zf  ^.«  «-  g 
«'«  5^,=  .-  gfTS  c-S 

•"•"—I-allliM 


*•>-* 

1^=0 


siU.  —  cc  o 


.2  c   c 


=  ~  ~   w 

e  5;!  £  £.S  p  §•- 


^  K    K    —    - 

C     ~    «    •—   — 

U          ^    ^    J  c_  - 

•^   K    c   -    c. 

g—     5 *  o ^ i * 

Cv 


IM^J|J»a131jlI 

»-«>Oc8-S-*JB;^:c|tUg:=(u5 
C   «o   «i   "   >    C  * 

*• 


C    5^0  "O  ^    eu 


262 


OD         JS  -Z 


O 

> 


•9  c 

— '    3 
5  * 

•£•« 

—     V 

s.t; 

-r  S 

-  — 

Q, 

£.£ 

"K  T3 

-  ss 
1* 

-  a" 

1  1 

u 

s*s 

£.S 
*T3 

II 


i     C3     K     C  C_  r- 

i-  g*,  j  sipiS 


J=  -j  e '?  fc  2  Is 
"^-  o.E  «- 


D   ed 


rt 

o 


-I 

.  —    — 

-    •/    - 
"5  --0 


| 

K 

O 

M 


e 


t; 
c 


•a  g-a 

•?  «  C  e  c-  S  o 
^fctSE^  c^-*^ 

€1  c^'S^'--^S-S^  1 

lllSilil.^11 

«  r-,  5  ^  ?  e-  «  £  -c  £• 
2"      — _  j, 

.C          —          —         p«  - 


It  S  -5  f 

1.1  s N ' 

tJ  ^s     *> 

_  «  S  - 

=  rs  "  g. 
|S§« 

-     *      tl      *>      ~      C 

^ft|JS|j 

•       CS    CS    N 


0) 


•    ««    S     ••  r*  *•     *3     pH     5\     i  •»     "^  ;i  ,_.     *•  N 

^    49    S  •*-    rr    "  «"N  *j    C    o  *i  •— •      ^  tr  ^o  ••*    L.  •-* 

2-S.S-^£^ctno-=«?r.Egfc--2 


^I'i 


S     M 

_          C  •-    oj   ea 

5  *i  «  u  -s  e  ^ 

_     fn     C      _.*^"*^^ 


^-8.5*^.5   •-.=  . 
Ill^Sill^lIi 

^  •  •—     O  **•     •—     y  *T7     H     :  ^     r*  ^~*     k.,4 


^J 

V 


&£« 


c 
e  j= 


B     i  E 


5  E  S*=  S 

~~^*~        c^g|'>§ 

jl]j!|141ld 

*j  w 


c 
c 


tl 

c 


cr 


"a  j: 
'E  -^ 
a? 

^  -_ 

es   O 

Ba 

u    O 

Sfe 

42  "S 
"o.  5 


!.bft 


«j  C 


a  c  -s  •==  - 
„  S  2~£ 

|l^r;l 


.  =  a«- 

aj  -.3  a;  o> 

C.  c    I-  X    C 

as  c.  Z  _£~  •" 

S    C--f    CT3 

c       b  >  .5  « 

cog-    .      e 
^  «  ^  «  ^ 

S      ^cfe§ 

tgnteS 

^lc^H^ 


•5 


s£,2§:5Bo.S;.s 


i  *(    r-    W      '      C    0> 

STS        C  -S  g   s^  -°  *  ° 

g  >      js  tc  i.  gj 


S  >       53  B  B 


JS   =-C^- 

-0    4)     £     t)   • 

!»   ft  «  5s  . 


1=1  Is 

£  o 

•£  b.£- 

|S-«2-3;SE| 
fc^-c^j^ 

ea  <ui  s~"  H*^^ 

511 IP-* 

SS3--t2-*2". 

«^-o  ^r-e-r  c 

{•gftsjsfi 

^11-^11 

"Hl-p 

™™    r^ .         «^  &£   •*   ^Z  j    * 

S     t*    4>     t^     V     Q    ^     i  ^ 


CO 

CO  -       h«  »— « 

ss|||i 

I'll  if 

lltll 

•M  ^"*    —    •• 


us 


'1»T3    ««    5 
1«151 

|g|.a? 


j| 

Jl 

'                                    "3                     I 

t 

I  = 

^ 

>,     '                                 >.   X 

e 
e 

i 

I 

^ 

0 

3               33 

X 

r 

"o 

£ 

e                      22 

o 
[5 

i 
s 

| 

w 

!   II 

e 
c. 

4   1 

-•  •? 

| 

i 

fe 

S*5  .* 

;  '-5  -5 

« 

J      gfe"H 

Z 
*  e 
•S's 

i 

Lf 

^^ 

II 

~  "^ 

z  c 

85 

j 

i  I 

J     >. 

e   ° 

f|" 

5 

o 
u 

(3 

Chark.  Wi 
and 
W.  M.  Hie 

1 

6 

u 

1^ 

II 

i 

C 

e 

S? 

o 

G.  E.  Gamble 

R.  B.  Knot 

Verne  and 
Vince  fUrrito 

Verne  and 
Vince  Hurito 

Bradley  Miiiii 
Com  puny 

Z.  Gradine 

^ 

j 

•^ 
» 

"-8 

SS 

S 

asss 

to 

t 

I 

B{> 

- 

--- 

• 

•0 

10 

•e 

pO 
Q 

d 

-• 

—    —   M 

„ 

w 

z 

_ 

t- 

i-  ac 

—    _-    — 

•" 

** 

~ 

J 

Knoxnll* 

] 

1 

-al 

1 

31 

-3    5 


S  -^ 


:°°  ."-  -a 


263 


=W   « 

-  0 


2-.£^- 


-    ~     : 

,    M- 1    OJ      C 


£ 

* 


S:'-g 

:   -S  £ 
-*  g  ° 

_l£ 

"He* 

—   ,,      c 

E-     s 

4>    4) 

155 

•2  >.g 

«:o 

t-s-g 

t  jo  g 

a.  T3   to 
C.  C    ft 

3   9 


•*   —    a,    4>  I 

•?  "5  >  5  s 


;2  .P 


» - 


S 


•     t"    4)0 
C    «  J3  O 

s^:" 

3   2-z; 

P«g£x 
£-~      2 

b  -O    _:    a 

c.«.3  E 

2  :§  a'i 

ft=    C    g 
oa  .3   O. 
C. 


5 

9 


C  «- 
03     O 


t. 
41 


2Lr 


go 


tr_^  M 


c 
5  * 


.s  « 
^". 


-o  ^ 

"8  «i 

—  -^ 
CO 


c 

c  , 


as 
s- 


i"S 


-T3 


*     «•  e       S 

*T     ^       C      O      »i 


7    4>   °   «-  —    « 
I  .e  .£  >   o  a  ft-,= 


o  <M 

in    •* 

1  si 

«  p*  ** 
£  £S 

*  So 
2o  ^ 

^1- 
.s  .a -a 

•=    ?    4>    _ 

fe  a5  | 

iflJi] 

«-S    .g 

"S-SsS 
I-li  « 

'S-a  1- 
.jgfttS 

=  -  *  I ' 
—  s 

B 

XI 


l^g     OJ 

&"££>£ 
o  a  O*'- 

jt  »-5 

fe-^  £  a 
|  co:  2 

p  *  „,  e 
•S2S.S  § 

§SO 

£.§"3 
^^•Sii 

«  «  a  a 
-3  'O  c-  n 
C-3  J=  « 

3^  t:-0 
a,  ,;  o  4> 
Js  fc  =•=. 


§W 


a  i,  j;  c 

g>S  *  8  **  ^  =  o 

aos^islil  .s^ 

,?»lill-^ 


o£|- 
•S  »•£•« 

O    4)  E 

p  c  "O  * 

c  0  v** 

—  N  !r  - 

S  a  ?3 

&<=  §^ 

J'^-5 

**    O  "5  *" 
-  —    «    O 

-1^^ 

c  we 

4>  -C    »- 
V    —     09 


c  -a  »-  t  3  cc 
3  e  _•     .  Q  — 


>  ° 

f>  o  -s  &o  ff.2 

«2rt   &.S  o  » 

bZ'flJI  g«ce  . 

0  ««'e;5  ST:  £  E'osV  -2 

fl'lilllpl 

—  •—    ;>,D._o4)C4>a:   —   <• 
at-i'4>g.uoC.=    C-«=—* 

l^ilf  IH^'-ssiil 

i     ,f     C-  ***T7flj  ^  »     T  •  "•  .  ^ 


g  £ 


&«-S-S 


ft  as  fro  g  5.2E  «  5  a 

^    ^^      -•,   ^^      *^  ^j    t> 


fto.»> 
»  ~  1    C 


.i!lH!«^i 

^tillli 

»  c  •*  i  -C  2  M 


«s  C5 


SC*>.QkAr*79liaX 

?-slfiS.lfil:!l 


-o  *•-•«  ^"J  ^-^  c  -"•= 

coi3*Ja:Cc;:?;c 

•Ilirl  2fllli 

"•—     C     S     41  CJ     41    *J  .—  .2 

>  t-  '5  —  *>      a=«-4>j=; 
!^T3.S,a-=       -i^cexi-SE 


•s^a  c  C.J: 

a    S  i  *-    u 


2  —   •--  S  t."  -  -=  "5 

^G       — «       L^     •**       -  .       •"•    "-=•       ™ 


.  -C 

!  c 

.  • 

.  S 


1  a °  °£     —  S 

~  "  ~    .         s  "s 


=  3  of  s  t:~ 


^5    ?    O    4)    O    4>  ,*J 


"a  =5  g  e  «  85 
3  o  **  •  I  .S      b 


4>    _    .     _5    ^    =    >- 

*S   3   4)  ^   C    ^  *« 


5-2  S  7   S 

*  ~    O  _9J    g 


264 


<£. 
a 


•r2    i»i    ^!  T1  sj-i    C3    «•  ~    •!  "S  *Sfi!**^2«^ 


as 

0 


5 


§•=..9, 


"o    8    =:    g    = 

t:-s,?'3s-g::-3o5' 

3         »—    —  o    O    >   -^    S 

a  !  8  •§  if-St 

"— i     v,  -r 


fS.2 


v~ctr  s^r 

l||i 

s  *e.2 


S^oB.^S-i^  =  ~"S3^3-          ^•£33 


elopmen 
obtained 
in  keepii 


Tf 

•00 


g-s 

?    3 

•n 

oa 


v 
as 

is 


^P 


ii 


ja  x^  «•= 


!  .1 


«-i    »,   : 

0  2i  J2 

d)    O  -g 

0,^3  b 

>>    «      <H 

^_> .—  a 
8  f  .3 

*J    S  'O 

-  -^     m 
»        .  S 

'is  § 

^s^ 

g    S"0 

CO  -—     ^ 

I  ri   co   * 


•rf-af  *. 


•H 

^ 

'C  3 
Ou  5 

v   — 

—     o> 

—  ft 


tion,  and  whe 
eld  several  flas 


g  J  fi-rf 

C  to  «  S 


*  2 
.2">v 


1=!^ 

O)         -5T3 

5-      .t>  d 

«         3   * 
?         O  J3 


te 
r 


II 

»  <u 

CD     P. 

58 


265 


APPENDIX  E3 


from  "Mercury  Potential  of  the 
United  States,"  U.S.  Department 
of  Interior  Bureau  of  Mines, 

(1965)  89 

Information  Circular  8252. 


TABLE  19.  -  Production  of  mercury  in  California.  1850-1961 


Year 

Flasks 

Year 

Flasks 

Year 

Flasks 

1850 

7,773 

1888 

33,469 

1926 

5,651 

1851 

27,962 

1889 

26,637 

1927 

5,672 

1852 

20,132 

1890 

23,077 

1928 

6,977 

1853 

22,431 

1891 

23,055 

1929 

10,139 

1854 

30,201 

1892 

28,177 

1930 

11,451 

1855 

33,217 

1893 

30,362 

1931 

13,448 

1856 

30,197 

1894 

30,616 

1932 

5,172 

1857 

28,390 

1895 

36,304 

1933 

3,930 

1858 

31,204 

1896 

30,967 

1934 

7,808 

1859 

13,086 

1897 

26,867 

1935 

9,271 

1860 

10,066 

1898 

,  31,297 

1936 

8,693 

1861 

35,230 

1899 

29,647 

1937 

9,743 

1862 

42,276 

1900 

26,490 

1938 

12,277 

1863 

40,798 

1901 

26,896 

1939 

11,127 

1864 

47,801 

1902 

29,163 

1940 

18,629 

1865 

53,349 

1903 

30,727 

1941 

25,714 

1866 

46,856 

1904 

29,073 

1942 

29,906 

1867 

47,309 

1905 

24  311 

i  0^3 

33,  512 

1868 

48,042 

1906 

20^043 

1944 

28,052 

1869 

34,033 

1907 

17,202 

1945 

21,199 

1870 

30,275 

1908 

16,760 

1946 

17,782 

1871 

31,894 

1909 

15,866 

1947 

17,165 

1872 

31,829 

1910 

16,985 

1948 

11,188 

1873 

27,824 

1911 

18,612 

1949 

4,493 

1874 

27,939 

1912 

20,254 

1950 

3,850 

1875 

50,581 

1913 

15,386 

1951 

4,282 

1876 

73,194 

1914 

11,154 

1952 

7,241 

1877 

79,917 

1915 

14,095 

1953 

9,290 

1878 

64,300 

1916 

20,768 

1954 

11,262 

1879 

74,169 

1917 

23,623 

1955 

9,875 

1880 

60,320 

1918 

22,366 

1956 

9,017 

1881 

61,251 

1919 

15,005 

1957 

16,511 

1882 

53,029 

1920 

9,719 

1958 

22,365 

1883 

47,032 

1921 

3,015 

1959 

17,100 

1884 

32,123 

1922 

3,360 

1960 

18,764 

1885 

32,284 

1923 

5,375 

1961 

18,688 

1886 

30,178 

1924 

7,861 

1867 

33,983 

1925 

7,514 

Total 

2,772,117 

PHYSICAL  FEATURES 

The  general  topography  of  the  mineral-bearing  areas  varies  from  gentle 
level  slopes  to  rugged  terrain  exceeding  4,000  feet  in  elevation.   The 
larger  mines  are  accessible  by  good  State  and  county  roads.   Many  of  the 
•Bailer  prospects  and  abandoned  properties  can  be  reached  only  by  poor  roads 
trails.   Electric  transmission  lines  extend  to  most  of  the  principal  pro- 


j      properties;  however,  some  of  the  large  mines  and  smaller  operators 
I  cPend  on  locally  generated  power.  Water  supplies  are  adequate  from  local 
ources.  Timber  is  trucked  from  nearby  towns  or  local  sawmills. 


266 


MERCURY  MINING  DISTRICTS 

The  mercury  mining  districts  in  California  are  shown  in  figure  7.   The 
incipal  Deposits  with  significant  production  occur  within  the  Coast  Range 
.long  a  southeast-trending  belt  extending  from  Clear  Lake  on  the  north  to 
lanta  Barbara  on  the  south.   This  belt  is  about  400  miles  long  and  up  to  75 
tiles  wide. 

Mining  districts  in  the  Coast  Range  contributing  a  major  production  are 
is  follows: 

County 


District: 

Clear  Lake 

Wilbur  Springs 

Knoxville 

East  Mayacmas 

West  Mayacmas 

Guemeville 

Oakville 

Sulphur  Springs  Mountain  (Vallejo) 

Mount  Diablo 

Emerald  Lake  (Redwood  City) 

New  Almaden 

Stay ton 

Central  San  Benito  (Panoche) 

New  Idria 

Parkf ield 

Cambria-Oceanic 

Adelaide 

Rinconada 

Cachuma 

Los  Prietos  (Gibraltar) 


Lake 

Lake,  Colusa 

Lake,  Napa,  Yolo 

Lake,  Napa 

Sonoma 

Do. 

Napa,  Sonoma 
Solano 

Contra  Costa 
San  Mateo 
Santa  Clara 

Merced,  San  Benito,  Santa  Clara 
San  Benito,  Fresno 
San  Benito,  Fresno 
Kings,  Monterey 
San  Luis  Obispo 

Do. 

Do. 
Santa  Barbara 

Do. 


Manhattan  Mine 

The  Manhattan  mine  is  in  Napa  County,  about  20  miles  southeast  of  Lower 
Lake,  at  an  altitude  of  2,000  feet. 

Cinnabar  was  discovered  in  the  area  during  the  1860 "s  and  the  mine  oper 
ated  during  1862-93  and  1895-1905.   Since  then  operations  have  been  intermit 
tent,  and  only  a  few  hundred  flasks  of  mercury  have  been  produced.   Much  of 
the  mine's  production  was  included  with  the  output  of  other  properties  in  the 
district,  but  production  estimates  are  a  little  over  16,000  flasks. 

Rocks  in  the  area  consist  of  interbedded  basalt  and  tuff  overlain  by  hot 
springs  deposits  and  underlain  by  a  northwest-trending  fault.   Cinnabar  occurs 
in  small  irregular  veins  filling  joint  cracks  in  the  volcanic  rocks,  as  local 
oicseiuinalionii  in  the  wall  rock  adjacent,  to  ciie  veins,  anu  along  a  faulc  zone 
between  altered  basalt  and  serpentine. 

Mine  workings  are  extensive  and  include  several  small  and  large  open 
pits,  a  glory  hole,  shallow  shaft,  and  numerous  drifts  and  crosscuts. 


267 


THE  NEW 


APPENDIX   E4 


from  Engineering  &   Mining 
Journal,   December    1987. 


CALIFORNIA 
GOLD 

RUSH 


George  O.  Argall,  Jr.,  Consulting  Editor 


Miles 


Some  California  gold  locations  and  operators 


1.  AsamefO  Mnef als 
2  Bently  Rescx»ces 
3.  Brush  Creek 

4  Chemgdd 

5  Cactus  GoW 


6  Castle  Mountain 

7  Centurion  Minerals 

8  Colosseum  Gold 
«  Eastmoque  Gold 

i  o  Grandview  Mr«ng 


i  i   SJver  State 
i:  GkanmsGold 

13  Gold  Fields  Mining 

14  Homestake 

is  Mintek Resources 


10  Mother  Lode 
t '   Royal  Gold 

18  Panosoni  Energy 

19  SonoraGold 

10   Terramar  Resources 


:i    Vandert*  Gold 
72    Viceroy  Exploration 
23  Yuba Gofcffietd 


Gold  production  in  California,  1 848- 1990 


4  m*on 


3m»on 


I 


2m»on 


1m«on 


1910 


CWU  DfCEMBtR  1987 


268 


California,  IMC  Golden  state,  is  experiencing  a 
new  goM  rush,  perhaps  not  so  spectacular  as  the 
rush  of  1 849  but  impressive  nevertheless.  From 
1980  through  1987,  California  gold  output  multiplied 
more  than  100  fold,  spiraling  upward  from  4,100  oz  to 
450,000  oz/yr.  In  1980,  California  was  the  ninth  largest 
US  gold  producing  state.  By  1985,  it  had  climbed  to 
second  place,  behind  rich  and  spectacular  Nevada  but 
surpassing  the  former  second  place  producer,  South  Da 
kota. 

Gold  mineralization  is  widespread  in  California.  From 
Pacific  beaches  to  the  Nevada  state  line  and  from  the 
Oregon  border  to  the  Mexican  frontier,  gold  has  been 
mined  commercially  in  47  California  counties.  Gold  has 
even  been  mined  in  what  is  now  Los  Angeles. 

California  gold  is  found  in  many  geological  environ 
ments.  Largest  and  best  known  are  the  quartz  veins  in  the 
slates  and  greenstones  of  the  Mother  Lode.  Others  in 
clude  the  hot  springs  deposit  of  the  McLaughlin  mine, 
breccia  zones  and  pipes,  and  shear  zones  and  veins  in 
granites  and  granodiorites. 

The  largest  concentration  of  California  gold  mines  is  in 
the  Mother  Lode  country,  encompassing  three  parallel, 
roughly  north-south  striking  mineralized  zones:  the  East 
Belt,  the  main  Mother  Lode,  and  the  West  Belt.  Many 
mines  have  been  developed  in  each  belt.  During  the  De 
pression  years  of  the  1930s,  an  estimated  3,000  separate 
mining  operations  produced  gold  on  the  Mother  Lode 
and  provided  jobs  for  thousands  of  men  who  had  no  other 
way  to  make  a  living. 

James  Marshall  discovered  gold  in  the  tail  race  at  Sut 
ler's  saw  mill  on  the  American  river  on  January  24,  1 848. 
California  and  the  American  West  have  not  been  the 
same  since.  In  1852,  California  produced  3,932,631  ozof 
gold,  a  peak  that  remains  unsurpassed.  Production 
slipped  over  the  years  to  less  the  500,000  oz  in  1929  and 
1930  but  rose  gradually  thereafter  to  a  second  peak  of 
1,455,671  ozin  1940. 

The  next  stage  of  decline  nearly  wiped  out  the  Califor 


nia  fnfct  m*i*ry  tmA  m  1971,  production  fell  to  a  rocfc- 
bottOTi  2,f«6  oz.  Accurate  Ifures  for  the  1970s  are  hard 
to  obtain,  because  moat  milting  was  being  done  by  indi 
viduals  and  small  partnerships  that  sold  the  gold  to  mar 
kets  other  than  the  US  mint. 

Gold  production  in  California  actually  predated  Mar 
shall's  discovery.  From  1775  to  1780,  there  was  some 
small-scale  production  in  what  is  now  Imperial  county  in 
the  southeastern  corner  of  the  state.  Interestingly,  these 
discoveries  included  gold  in  the  Cargo  Muchacho  and 
Picacho  districts,  where  major  mines  are  now  operating. 
The  Mesquite  mine  in  the  Pichaco  district  is  the  highest 
ore  tonnage  producer  in  California  today. 

MCLAUGHLIN  KEYED  RECENT  BOOM 

Without  doubt,  Homestake  Mining  Co.'s  discovery  of 
the  McLaughlin  orebody  in  1979  provided  the  key  to  the 
resurgence  of  California  gold  production.  The  McLaugh 
lin  mine  poured  its  first  dore  bar  in  March  1985,  and  by 
the  end  of  the  year,  production  totaled  83,836  oz,  nearly 
equalling  California's  total  state  production  of  the  previ 
ous  year.  In  1986,  McLaughlin  production  rose  to 
173,401  oz. 

For  the  foreseeable  future,  McLaughlin  will  be  the 
dominant  California  gold  producer.  The  McLaughlin 
orebody  is  in  a  unique  geological  environment,  and  de 
spite  long  and  extensive  prospecting,  no  similar  orebody 
has  been  found  in  the  state. 

Higher  gold  prices  and  new  technology  both  have  con 
tributed  to  growing  California  gold  production.  The 
McLaughlin  mine  is  the  only  operation  in  North  and 
South  America  using  oxidized  pressure  leaching  to  free 
gold  for  subsequent  carbon-in-pulp  recovery,  and  new 
heap  leaching  technology  has  been  a  primary  spur  to 
mine  development. 

Most  of  the  newer  California  mines  use  heap  leaching 
and  CIP  or  CIL  circuits  for  gold  recovery.  Sonora  Min 
ing  Corp.,  which  has  a  conventional  flotation  circuit  at  its 


31 


269 


APPENDIX  E5 
from  California  Geology,  Feb.  1992 


TERTIARY  GOLD  BEARING 

MERCURY  DEPOSITS  OF  THE 

COAST  RANGES  OF  CALIFORNIA 


By 

LARRY  M  VREDENBURGH.  Geologist 

Bureau  of  Land  Management 

Sacramento.  California 


INTRODUCTION 

Recently  an  unsuspected  reserve  of 
gold,  estimated  to  exceed  3.2  million 
ounces,  was  discovered  by  Homestake 
Mining  Company  at  the  Knoxville  mer 
cury  mines  in  Napa  County.  This  is  one  of 
several  occurrences  of  gold  associated 
with  mercury  or  antimony  in  the  Coast 
Ranges  of  California  (figure  1).  These 
deposits  began  forming  shortly  after  the 
implacement  of  volcanic  rocks  in  the  Mid- 
Tertiary  Period  and  continued  to  form 
through  Quaternary  time  Connate  water 
squeezed  from  sedimentary  units  was 
heated  and  eventually  found  its  way  to  the 
surface  via  fracture  zones.  Presumably 
this  hot  water,  hieh  in  chloride  (C 1) .  car 


bon  dioxide  (COj),  silica  (SiOj).and  con 
taining  abundant  hydrocarbons,  dissolved 
the  gold  and  mercury  contained  in  the 
sedimentary  units.  At  the  surface,  hydro 
carbons  may  have  played  an  important 
role  in  the  deposition  of  the  gold,  in  a 
manner  similar  to  the  Carlin-type  depos 
its  of  Nevada,  which  closely  resemble  the 
gold  deposits  of  the  Coast  Ranges.  Mer 
cury  is  presently  being  deposited  by  hot 
springs  at  the  Sulphur  Bank  mine  near 
The  Geysers  steam  field  in  the  Clear  Lake 
area  of  California . 

PREVIOUS  STUDIES 

The  earliest  and  perhaps  one  of  the 
most  comprehensive  studies  of  the  mer- 


i~  1-  Wilbur  Springs  District 
1.  Sulphur  Bank  Mine 
3.  Baker  Mine 
Shamrock  Mine 
Knoxville  District 

6.  Oat  Hill  Mine 

7.  Palisade  Mine 

8.  Stay  ton  District 

9.  Picacho  Mine 


Figure  1.  Tertiary  gold  deposit  occurrences  in  the  Coast  Ranges 
of  California  associated  with  mercury  or  antimony. 


cury  deposits  of  the  Pacific  Coast  was  that 
of  Becker  (1888).  He  determined  the 
presence  of  gold  at  mercury'  mines  at  Wil 
bur  Hot  Springs,  Sulphur  Bank  Hot 
Springs,  and  the  Knoxville  mine  area.  He 
also  reported  the  occurrence  of  gold  at  the 
Picacho  Mine,  located  southwest  of  New 
Idria.  Other  workers  (Crutchfield,  1953; 
Newmont  Exploration,  1965;  Bailey  and 
Meyers,  1949)  have  identified  gold  at  the 
Calistoga  and  Oat  Hill  mines,  and  the 
Stayton  District  (table  1). 

GEOLOGY 

The  major  rock  types  found  in  the 
Coast  Ranges  are  the  Great  Valley  se 
quence,  the  Franciscan  assemblage,  a 
mafic-ultramafic  sequence,  and  volcanic 
rocks  of  Tertiary  and  Quaternary  age. 
The  Great  Valley  sequence  and  the  Fran 
ciscan  assemblage  consist  predominately 
of  marine  sedimentary  rocks  of  Late  Ju 
rassic  to  Late  Cretaceous  age.  The  Fran 
ciscan  assemblage  consists  of  gray wacke. 
shale,  mafic  volcanic  rock,  chert,  lime 
stone,  some  of  which  have  been  metamor 
phosed  to  the  zeolite  and  blueschist  facies. 
The  Great  Valley  sequence  consists 
predominately  of  gray  wacke,  shale,  and 
some  conglomerate.  The  Jurassic  section 
of  the  Great  Valley  sequence  depositional- 
ly  rests  upon  an  accumulation  of  mafic 
volcanic  rocks,  that  in  turn  rest  upon  ser- 
pentinized  ultramafic  rocks.  The  mafic- 
ultramafic  sequence  closely  resembles 
present  in-situ  oceanic  crust  (Bailey  and 
Jones,  1970).  The  Coast  Ranges  thrust 
fault  separates  the  Franciscan  assemblage 
from  the  Great  Valley  sequence  with  out 
crops  of  serpentinite  occurring  on  the  up 
per  thrust  plate. 

Much  of  the  mercury  in  the  Coast 
Ranges  occurs  in  altered  serpentinite.  So 
lutions  enriched  in  silica  (SiOj)  and  car- 


CALIFORNIA  GEOLOGY          February  1962 


23 


270 


bon  dioxide  (CO2),  rising  along  faults, 
have  replaced  serpentinite  by  silica-car 
bonate  rock.  Silica-carbonate  rock  typi 
cally  consists  of  chalcedony,  opal,  quartz, 
magnesite.and  calcite. 

LOCALIZATION  OF  ORE 

Although  over  50  per  cent  of  the  largest 
mercury  deposits  in  the  Coast  Ranges  are 
associated  with  altered  serpentinite,  mer 
cury  also  occurs  in  rocks  of  the  Great 
Valley  sequence,  the  Franciscan  assem 
blage-,  in  Tertiary  volcanic  rocks,  and  at 
active  hot  springs  Thus,  rock  type  does 
not  appear  to  be  the  controlling  factor  in 
the  deposition  of  mercury  in  the  Coast 
Ranges  metallogenic  province. 

The  presence  of  young,  high-angle 
faults  appears  to  be  the  most  important 
factor  in  the  location  of  mercury  deposits 
within  the  Coast  Ranges.  All  mercury 
deposits  are  associated  with  faults  and 
fracture  zones.  Averitt  (1945)  suggested 
that  clay  gouge  zones  associated  with 
faulting,  effectively  channeled  mineral- 
bearing  waters,  thus  controlling  mercury 
deposition  at  the  Knoxville  mine. 

ORIGIN  OF  ORE 

The  origin  of  the  mercury,  gold,  hydro 
carbons,  and  the  w'ater,  which  acted  and 
still  acts  as  a  transporting  medium,  are  all 
intimately  associated  with  the  marine 
sediments.  In  a  study  of  thermal  and  min 
eral  waters  in  the  Clear  Lake  area.  White 
and  others  (1973)  concluded  that  the 
high  chloride  connate  waters  found  at 
Wilbur  Springs  are  chemically  and 
isotopically  similar  to  the  oil-Held  waters 
of  the  Central  Valley  of  California,  but  are 
generally  enriched  with  bicarbonates  and 
boron.  This  water  probably  evolved  from 
compaction  and  loss  of  pore  water  in  the 
marine  sediments,  but  is  also  generated  to 
some  extent  by  the  continuing  low-grade 
meiamorphism  occurring  at  depth.  Hy 
drocarbons  present  at  Wilbur  Springs  and 
Knoxville  are  common  in  many  of  the 
mercury  mines  in  this  region  and  came  to 
the  surface  in  the  same  fracture  zones  that 
hot  mineral-laden  water  did.  At  Wilbur 
Springs,  hot  water  and  hydrocarbons  (liq 
uid  and  gas)  are  ascending  in  the  same 
fracture  system. 

Moissceff  (1966)  concluded  that  the 
mercury  at  Wilbur  Springs  probably  was 
concentrated  from  sediments  in  "solu 
tions  of  metamorphic  or  connate  origin." 
It  is  likely  that  the  gold  has  a  similar  ori 
gin.  Noting  the  lack  of  flour  gold  in  gold- 


bearing  gravels  in  the  Sierras,  Graham 
(1981)  sampled  the  Great  Valley  se 
quence  (and  younger  formations),  hoping 
to  detect  the  timing  of  gold  emplacement 
in  the  Sierras.  He  noted  a  general  increase 
in  gold  with  decrease  in  age.  The  Knox 
ville  Formation  assayed  .001 -.002  oz.  per 
ton  in  gold,  and  the  Eocene  formations 
assayed  .006- .008  oz.  per  ton  (Steve  Gra 
ham,  personal  communication,  1981). 
The  high  chloride  content  of  the  water 
may  have  facilitated  in  the  re  mobiliza 
tion  of  gold,  since  in  chloride-bearing  hy- 
drothermal  solutions,  gold  is  transported 
as  the  auriferous  chloride  complex  AuCl; 
(Radtke  and  Scheiner,  1970). 

As  an  alternative  to  this  hypothesis  for 
the  source  of  gold,  Evans  (1981)  suggests 
that  gold  present  in  ultrabasic  rocks  may 
be  chemically  dissolved  and  reprecipitat- 
ed  in  placer  deposits  by  the  process  of 
laterization.  If  gold  is  present  in  the  ser- 
pentinites,  it  could  be  leached  by  the  con 
nate  water  present  in  the  system. 
Although  this  process  may  contribute  to 
gold  present  in  the  Coast  Ranges  deposits, 
it  probably  is  not  the  only  source,  since 
some  mercury-gold  deposits  are  not  near 
occurrences  of  serpentinite. 

SOURCE  OF  HEAT 

During  Tertiary  and  Quaternary  time 
the  Clear  Lake,  Sonoma,  Tolay,  Berkeley 
Hills,  Quien  Sabe.  and  Neenach-Pinnacles 
volcanic  fields  erupted  in  the  Coast 
Ranges,  generally  decreasing  in  age 
northward,  and  providing  an  ample 
source  of  heat  for  mercury  and  gold-bear 
ing  hydrothermal  solutions.  Hot  volcanic 
rocks  at  depth  in  the  Clear  Lake  area  still 
provide  a  source  of  heat  for  geothermal 
fluids.  The  Geysers  geothermal  area  is  be 
lieved  to  be  heated  by  a  silicic  magma 
body  centered  below  10  km  in  depth,  the 
top  of  which  is  within  7  km  of  the  surface 
(Hearn  and  others,  1981).  At  Wilbur 
Springs,  on  the  basis  of  a  detailed  gravity 
study,  a  series  of  100  m-deep  temperature 
gradient  holes,  and  two  deep  wells  (400  m 
and  1,200  m),  Harrington  and  Verosub 
(1981)  concluded  that  the  source  of  heat 
may  be  a  deep  magma  intrusion.  Frac 
tures  within  the  rock  provide  the  conduits 
needed  to  transfer  the  heat  in  the  form  of 
hot  water  or  steam  from  the  intrusion  to 
the  surface. 

PARAGENESIS 

A  paragenetic  sequence  for  minerals 
has  been  worked  out  for  the  Sulphur  Bank 
mine,  Wilbur  Springs  mines,  the  Palisades 


mine  and  the  Stayton  District;  however, 
the  relationship  of  gold  with  other  miner 
als  has  not  been  determined.  Where  gold 
has  been  reported  at  mercury  mines  in  the 
Coast  Ranges,  it  either  occurs  as  free  gold 
or  is  contained  within  the  iron  sulfides  of 
pyrite  or  marcasite.  The  nature  of  the 
gold's  occurrence  has  not  been  deter 
mined  at  the  Shamrock  mine,  Palisades 
mine  and  the  Stayton  District.  Investiga 
tions  at  the  Palisades  mine  (Crutchfield 
1953,  p.  49,  50)  and  in  the  Stayton  Dis 
trict  (Bailey  and  Meyers  1949,  p.  47) 
have  shown  that  cinnabar  was  deposited 
after  other  base  metals.  Pyrite  was  depos 
ited  with  both  the  base  metals  and  cinna 
bar,  but  it  is  not  known  if  the  gold  is 
associated  with  cinnabar  or  other  metals. 

COMPARISON  WITH  CARLIN- 
TYPE  DEPOSITS 

There  are  some  conspicuous  similari 
ties  between  mercury-gold  deposits  in  the 
Coast  Ranges  and  the  Carlm-type  gold 
deposits  which  have  become  the  source  of 
large  quantities  of  gold  being  mined  in 
Nevada.  Radtke  and  other  workers  (see 
Boyle,  1980,  for  a  summary)  have  done 
the  pioneer  work  on  the  Carlm-type 
deposits.  From  their  work  a  checklist  of 
geologic,  mineralogic,  and  geochemical 
features  common  to  these  types  of  depos 
its  has  been  developed  This  list  includes: 
silly  carbonate  rocks,  the  presence  of  hy 
drocarbons,  gold  associated  with  mer 
cury,  arsenic,  antimony,  tungsten  and 
thallium,  replacement  by  fine-grained  sili 
ca  and  minor  pyrite,  and  mineralization 
related  with  large  displacement  normal 
faulting.  Fluids  at  these  deposits  have 
been  shown  to  be  of  meteoric  origin 
Work  by  Radtke  and  Scheiner  (1970) 
suggests  that  the  presence  of  carbona 
ceous  materials  (hydrocarbons)  may  be 
critical  for  the  deposition  of  gold. 

In  the  Coast  Ranges  of  California,  mer 
cury  deposits  are  largely,  but  not  entirely, 
restricted  to  occurrences  of  serpentinite 
which  has  been  replaced  by  silica  and  car 
bonate.  Hydrocarbons  and  pyrite  are  very 
common  in  these  deposits.  The  presence 
of  hydrocarbons  supports  the  findings  of 
White  and  others  (1973)  that  the  water 
which  transported  the  mercury  is  of  con 
nate  origin,  and  that  the  silty  sediments  of 
the  Great  Valley  sequence  are  the  source 
of  the  connate  water.  This  water,  there 
fore,  has  a  different  source  than  the  water 
associated  with  Carlin-type  deposits  in 
Nevada.  With  some  exceptions,  gold  is  as 
sociated  with  mercury  and/or  antimony 
in  the  Coast  Ranges.  The  mercury  depos- 


CALIFORNIA  GEOLOGY          February  1962 


271 


its  of  the  Coast  Ranges  are  of  late  Tertiary 
to  Quaternary  age  and  are  associated  with 
normal  faults. 

From  this  discussion,  it  can  be  shown 
that  there  are  numerous  similarities 
between  the  mercury  deposits  in  the  Coast 
Ranges  of  California  and  the  Carlin-type 
gold  deposits.  The  Knoxville  gold  deposit 
is  the  first  major  deposit  of  this  type  to  be 


recognized  in  California.  However,  it  is 
clear  that  there  is  evidence  for  the  poten 
tial  existence  of  other  epithermal  gold 
deposits  in  California. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I  would  like  to  thank  the  following  per 
sons  who  helped  in  the  preparation  of  this 
report:  Susan  Skinner,  Bureau  of  Land 


Management,  Ukiah  District  Office;  Ed- 
mond  Lawrence,  consultant;  Christine 
Carlson,  Robert  McLaughlin,  and  Don 
White,  all  of  U.S.  Geological  Survey, 
Menlo  Park;  Steve  Graham,  Stanford 
University;  Foster  Howland,  Resource 
Exploration;  M.C.  Smith.  I  would  like  to 
thank  Roger  Haskins,  Bureau  of  Land 
Management,  for  reviewing  this  manu 
script. 


TABLE   1.  MERCURY  BEARING  DEPOSITS  (See  figure   1). 

PROPERTY  NAME  LOCATION  GEOLOGIC  DESCRIPTION 


Baker 


Knoxville  (Knoxville, 
Manhattan,  Harrison,  Soda 
Springs,  Reed  and  Red 
Elephant  mines) 


Til,  12N,  R4,  5W  MDM 


Oat  Hill 


Section  27,  28,  33,  34,  T10N 
R6W  MDM 


Palisades  (Grigsby) 


Picacho 


Section  16.T12N,  R6W  MDM  *•  Isolated  bodies  of  serpentinite  altered  to  silica-carbonate  rock  occur 

in  sediments  of  the  Great  Valley  sequence.  Minerals  include  cinna 
bar,  meta-cinnabar,  pyrite,  and  marcasite.  Marcasite  assayed  by 
Becker  (1888,  p.  368)  contained  .048  oz.  of  gold  per  ton  (Bnce, 
1953). 

^  Generally,  mercury  deposits  are  confined  to  silica-carbonate 
rocks  along  northwest  trending  faults,  which  form 
the  contact  between  serpentinite  and  sediments  of  the 
Great  Valley  sequence.  At  the  Manhattan  mine  mercury  ore  occurs 
in  altered  Tertiary  olivine  basalt  and  tuff.  Minerals  reported  from 
these  mines  include  cinnabar,  metacinnabar,  pyrite,  marcasite,  stib- 
nite,  native  mercury,  copper  oxides,  gold,  millerite  (nickel  sulfide) 
and  redingtonite  (hydrous  chromium  sulfate).  Pyrite  in  the  district 
shows  traces  of  gold  (Averitt,  1945,  p.  78)  Apparently  minor  leach 
ing  has  occurred,  yielding  free  gold  as  reported  by  Becker  (1888,  p. 
282): 

The  surface  soil  here  (the  Manhattan  mine)  and  also  near  the 
Redington  (Knoxville)  mine  contains  cinnabar,  resulting  from 
the  erosion  of  croppings,  and  accompanying  the  cinnabar  is  free 
gold,  which  may  be  found  by  panning  the  soil. 

>  The  Oal   Hill  mine  is  one  of  several   mercury   mines  situated 
along  the  crest  of  the  broad  east  ward  plunging  Mayacmas  anticline 
where  the  sandstone  has  been  broken  by  northwest  trending  normal 
faults.  At  the  Oat  Hill  mine  the  sandstone  has  been  intensely  kaoli- 
nized  and  the  rock  is  cut  by  numerous  dense  quartz  veinlets.  Fine 
cinnabar  crystals  are  disseminated  through  the  altered  sandstone, 
and  are  associated  with  calcite  and  pyrite.  Assays  of  dump  material 
at  the  Oceola  workings  were  .06%  mercury,  4.58%  iron,  .005  oz./ 
ton  gold  and  .02  oz./ton  silver.  The  material  contained  an  apprecia 
ble  amount  of  hydrocarbons  and  2-5%  pyrite.  The  dump  of  the 
Eureka  Workings  contained  a  trace  of  gold  (Yates  and  Hi  I  pen, 
1946,  p.  260-262;  Newmont,  1965). 

*Two  quartz  veins  which  strike  N  5*W  and  dip  70*W  occur  in  exten 
sively  fractured,  generally  flat  lying  andesite  flows  and  related  pyro- 
clastics.  Ore  minerals  (in  order  of  abundance)  are  chalcopyrite, 
pyrite,  sphalerite,  argentite,  polybasite,  galena,  and  cinnabar 
Gangue  minerals  are  quartz,  adularia,  and  calcite.  Marcasite,  limo- 
nite,  and  selenite  are  products  of  supergene  alteration.  Cinnabar 
occurs  in  minute  veinlets  accompanied  by  pyrite  and  is  of  later 
origin  than  the  base  metal  sulfides.  According  to  Becker  (1888,  p. 
370)  assays  of  silver  ore  contained  antimony  and  a  trace  of  arsenic. 
The  mine  has  also  produced  gold,  although  Crutchfield  (1953,  p. 
45)  was  unable  to  observe  any  in  polished  section.  He  speculates  the 
gold  may  be  contained  in  the  pyrite  and  chalcopyrite.  Cruichfield 
(1953,figurel5),shows  that  gold  was  deposited  simultaneously  with 
the  base  metals,  rather  than  the  cinnabar. 

>  Lenses  and  irregular  bodies  of  silica-carbonate  rock  occur  in  a  broad 
shear  zone  in  serpentinite  The  mercury  ore  has  been  produced  from 
shallow  open  cuts.  Becker  (1888,  p.  309)  indicated  that  gold  and 
silver  were  reportedly  present  (Averill,  1947,  p.  59). 


Section  24.T9N,  R7W  MDM 


Section  19,  20.T18S,  R12E 
MDM 


CALIFORNIA  GEOLOGY          February  1962 


25 


272 


APPENDIX  E6 
(August  1992) 


IOMESTAKE  MINING  COMPANY 

yicLAUGHLIN  MINE 

GENERAL  INFORMATION  SUMMARY 


273 


HISTORY      

The  McLaughlin  deposit  was  discovered  as  a  direct  result 
of  a  1978  reorganization  of  Homestake's  exploration 
management  structure  and  philosophy.  The  intensified 
exploration  program  was  reorganized  by  function  rather 
than  by  geographic  location  or  division.  Background  re 
search  in  company  files  led  to  the  development  of  a  new 
geologic  model  for  the  occurrence  of  gold.  Following  the 
model,  Homestake  investigated  a  California  mercury 
property  located  14  miles  to  the  north  of  the  McLaughlin 
Mine.  Although  this  deposit  did  have  gold  values,  it  was 


too  small  to  be  economic.  Investigations  there,  however, 
validated  the  new  model.  Encouraged  by  this  early  suc 
cess,  exploration  was  expanded  to  nearby  deposits.  In 
1978,  sampling  at  the  old  Manhattan  mercury  mine,  now 
renamed  the  McLaughlin  Mine,  revealed  gold  at  the  sur 
face  of  the  ground.  Following  intersection  of  the  main  ore 
zone  on  the  first  drill  hole,  exploration  and  development 
proceeded  rapidly  and  on  March  4, 1 985,  the  first  gold  bar 
was  poured. 


SIGNIFICANT  DATES 


1860's-1978 The  Manhattan  mercury  mine  produced  70,000  to  80,000  flasks  of  mercury. 

February  16, 17  &  18, 1978 Initial  examination  completed  at  the  old  Manhattan  Mine,  as  part  of  Mercury  Hot 

Springs  Reconnaissance  Program.  Gold  detected  in  surface  samples  and  impor 
tant  mineralized  system  recognized. 

October,  1978 Agreement  signed  with  property  owner. 

December,  1978 Surface  exploration  began. 

September,  1979 Core  and  rotary  drilling  program  started. 

August,  1980 Announcement  of  discovery  of  ore  body.  Environmental  baseline  studies  started. 

Aggressive  claim  staking  program  started. 

May,  1981 Exploration  completed;  design,  engineering  and  environmental  studies  ac 
celerated. 

June,  1982 Napa  County  chosen  as  Lead  Agency.  Environmental  baseline  documents  sub 
mitted  to  counties.  Engineering  Science  chosen  as  third  party  EIR  consultant. 

June  7, 1982 Detailed  engineering  begun  by  Davy  McKee. 

October  7,  1982 Lead  agency  permit  applications  accepted  as  complete.  Project  Description/En 
vironmental  Assessment  submitted  to  all  responsible  agencies. 

July  6, 1983  EIR/EIS  certified  by  Lead  Agency. 

September  2, 1983 Stage  I  permits  received,  construction  begun. 

December,  1983 Final  Use  Permits  in  Napa  and  Lake  Counties  approved.  BLM  approved  "Plan  of 

Operations." 

April  13,  1984 Yolo  County  Permits  approved. 

March  4, 1985 First  gold  poured. 

September  28,  1985 Dedication  Ceremonies. 

January,  1989 Commissioned  Low  Grade  Ore  Circuit,  doubling  the  tons  milled  per  day. 

March.  1990 Millionth  ounce  poured. 

December,  1991 Commissioned  Flotation  Circuit. 

February,  1992 1.5  millionth  ounce  poured. 

PROJECT  OVERVIEW 


Homestake  Mining  Company  has  developed  a  gold 
mine  and  extraction  facility,  the  McLaughlin  Mine,  near  the 
junction  of  three  northern  California  counties  -  Napa, 
Lake,  and  Yolo.  The  McLaughlin  gold  deposit,  a  dissemi 
nated  ore  body,  is  estimated  to  contain  26  million  tons  of 
ore  averaging  0.127  ounces  of  gold  per  ton  or  3.3  million 
ounces  of  gold.  A  detailed  description  of  the  geology  of 
the  deposit  is  contained  in  Appendix  A. 

The  Mine  is  located  in  a  sparsely  inhabited  region 
midway  between  Clear  Lake  and  Lake  Berryessa  on  the 
Berryessa-Knoxville/Morgan  Valley  Road  approximately 
1 8  miles  southeast  of  Lower  Lake  in  Lake,  Napa,  and  Yolo 
Counties.  The  "Knoxville  Mining  District,"  in  which  the 


project  is  situated,  embraces  an  area  of  approximately  50 
square  miles  and  includes  many  mining  properties  which 
produced  substantial  amounts  of  mercury  over  the  last 
125  years. 

The  project  area  is  about  50  air  miles  northwest  of 
Sacramento  and  70  air  miles  north  of  San  Francisco.  It 
consists  of  16,000  acres  owned  and  330  acres  leased  by 
Homestake  plus  mining  and  mill  site  claims  on  land  under 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  U.S.  Bureau  of  Land  Management 
(BLM).  Of  the  total  project  area,  less  than  1,000  acres  is 
currenty  disturbed  by  the  project.  Project  construction 
began  in  the  fall  of  1983  with  the  first  gold  produced  in 
March  of  1985. 


274 


• LO— ©— ^ 

WOODLAND  TO 

SACKAMENTO 


MCLAUGHLIN  MINE 
LOCATION  MAP 


PROJECT  DESCRIPTION 


GENERAL  PHYSICAL  ARRANGEMENT:  The  mine,  mill  and  associated  project  facilities  are  distributed  in  portions  of 

the  three  counties  as  follows: 

•  Napa  County  -  Open  pit  mine  (80%),  low-grade  ore 
stockpile,  waste  rock  facility,  grinding  and  crushing  area, 
truck  shop,  major  sediment  control  ponds,  ore  slurry 
pipeline,  and  environmental  monitoring  stations. 


Yolo  County  -  Open  pit  mine  (20%),  water  supply  reser 
voir,  and  environmental  monitoring  stations. 


Lake  County  -  Process  site,  administration  building,  lab, 
warehouse,  tailings  facility,  tailings  slurry  pipeline,  ore 
slurry  pipeline,  electric  transmission  line,  improved  ac 
cess  roads,  and  environmental  monitoring  stations. 


r'    ' 
^  ^r  :^^ 


MINING 


Gold  bearing  ore  is  mined  by  open  pit  methods  begin 
ning  with  the  removal  and  stockpiling  of  topsoil  for  use  in 
later  reclamation.  Six  thousand  tons  of  ore  per  calendar 
day  are  removed  along  with  waste  rock  and  low-grade 
ore,  the  latter  to  be  stockpiled  for  later  in  the  life  of  the 
project.  The  final  configuration  of  the  mine  pit  and  waste 
rock  disposal  site  is  shown  on  the  next  page.  The  pit, 
which  is  oriented  along  a  northwest-southeast  axis,  has 
maximum  plan  dimensions  of  about  5,400  feet  by  1 ,900 
feet.  Pit  depth  varies  from  an  average  of  630  feet  to  about 
800  feet  maximum  due  to  topographic  changes  around 


the  pit  perimeter. 

Drilling  and  blasting  is  used  to  break  rock  in  the  pit. 
Mining  equipment  consisting  of  bulldozers,  hydraulic 
shovels,  front  end  loaders,  trucks  and  graders,  typical  of 
large  earth  moving  projects,  is  used  to  dig  out  the  broken 
rock.  A  detailed  list  of  mine  equipment  used  at  Mclaughlin 
and  other  pertinent  mine  facts  is  shown  in  Appendix  B. 

Mine  air  emissions  (primarily  fugitive  dust)  triggered  by 
such  activities  as  drilling,  blasting,  hauling,  wind  erosion, 
and  crushing  and  grinding  are  controlled  by  wet  and  dry 
scrubber  systems  and  an  elaborate  program  using  speed 
limits,  water  trucks,  dust  suppressants,  and  wind  screens. 


276 


277 


GOLD  RECOVERY 


The  gold  recovery  process  is  shown  schematically 
below.  The  sulfide  ore  treatment  circuit  was  put  in  opera 
tion  in  1985.  This  was  followed  in  the  first  quarter  of  1989 
by  the  startup  of  a  parallel  circuit  to  treat  oxide  ores  (The 
oxide  ores  do  not  require  pressure  oxidation  treatment.) 
In  late  1 991 ,  the  oxide  circuit  was  modified  by  the  addition 
of  a  flotation  circuit  in  order  to  treat  low-grade  sulfide  ores. 
The  flotation  circuit  is  designed  to  make  a  concentrated 
stream  containing  most  of  the  gold  and  sulfur.  This  con 
centrated  stream,  called  a  concentrate,  is  then  fed  to  the 
autoclaves.  The  waste  stream,  called  the  tail,  is  cyanide 
leached. 

The  gold  recovery  process  begins  with  crushing  fol 
lowed  by  grinding  to  the  consistency  of  powder.  The 
ground  ore  is  mixed  with  water  to  form  a  slurry  which  is 
pumped  to  the  process  area  4.8  miles  away.  At  the 
process  area  the  sulfide  ore  must  be  subjected  to  an 
oxidizing  pretreatment  step.  This  is  accomplished  by 
directing  slurry  through  a  pressurized  vessel  called  an 
autoclave.  Combining  steam,  oxygen,  and  sulfuric  acid 
with  the  slurry  being  autoclaved  is  crucial  to  this  step.  After 
a  short  exposure  to  elevated  temperatures  and  pressures, 
gold  particles  within  the  slurry  are  liberated.  Following 
autoclaving,  the  slurry  is  washed  to  remove  most  of  the 
sulfuric  acid.  The  washed  slurry  is  neutralized  with  lime  to 
obtain  a  highly  alkaline  slurry  and  then  sent  to  the  cyanide 


leach  circuit.  In  the  leach  circuit,  sodium  cyanide  is  added 
to  dissolve  the  gold.  Activated  carbon  is  used  to  collect 
the  dissolved  gold  in  a  carbon  in  pulp  circuit.  When  the 
carbon  has  adsorbed  gold  to  an  acceptable  level  it  is 
removed  from  the  slurry.  This  is  achieved  by  screening  the 
much  coarser  carbon  particles  from  the  finely  ground  ore. 
The  gold  is  then  stripped  from  the  carbon  using  a  hot 
caustic/cyanide  solution.  The  gold  in  this  solution  is  then 
electroplated  onto  steel  wool.  The  steel  wool,  containing 
the  gold,  is  then  retorted  (heated  under  a  vacuum  and 
cooled)  to  remove  any  mercury.  Then  the  steel  wool  is 
melted  with  fluxing  agents  to  remove  impurities  and  cast 
into  gold/silver  dore'  bars.  The  slurry  is  piped  to  the 
tailings  disposal  facility  after  the  gold  has  been  removed. 
Carbon  is  regenerated  on-site  and  reused  in  the  process. 
Waters  containing  acid  and  dissolved  metals  are  treated 
with  lime  in  a  precipitation  circuit,  for  sulfate  and  metal 
precipitation.  The  addition  of  lime  converts  those  sulfate 
and  metal  species  that  are  in  solution  into  an  insoluble 
species.  This  allows  the  water  to  be  reused  throughout 
the  process. 

The  chemicals  used  in  the  milling  process  include  sul 
furic  acid,  lime,  sodium  cyanide,  sodium  hydroxide,  nitric 
acid,  flocculant,  and  activated  carbon.  Oxygen  is 
produced  on-site.  Appendix  C  contains  more  detailed 
information  on  the  gold  recovery  plant. 


MIX  Of  LIME 


BYPASS 


CMMNMWl 


CYAXC*  LEACH 


U HiUTRAllZATIOII  L      '    I       FLOTATION      U 


MILL  PROCESS  FLOWCHART 


FICURE  4 


278 


WASTE  MANAGEMENT 


Two  principal  types  of  waste  are  produced  at  the  Me 
Laughlin  Mine:  waste  rock  and  tailings  Not  all  the  rock 
excavated  at  the  mine  contains  gold  That  which  does  not 
is  called  "waste  rock"  or  "overburden".  This  material  is 
disposed  of  south  of  the  mine  in  an  area  with  a  capacity 
in  excess  of  100  million  tons. 

The  facility  consists  of  haul  roads,  a  series  of  waste  rock 
benches,  surface  water  diversion  ditches,  underdrains 
and  sediment  ponds  The  waste  rock  facility  at  the  end  of 
mining  operations  is  shown  in  Figure  3  The  waste  rock  is 
end-dumped  in  50- to  100-foot  lifts  Relatively  flat  benches 
are  constructed  between  lifts  so  that  the  final  overall  slope 
angle  will  not  exceed  18  degrees  (3  horizontal  to  1  verti 
cal).  Slopes  between  and  connecting  the  benches  are 
graded  to  an  angle  not  to  exceed  22  degrees  (2-1/2 
horizontal  to  1  vertical)  in  order  to  facilitate  reclamation, 
and  assure  seismic  stability 

Springs  which  occur  on  the  site  are  captured  by  the 
underdrain  system  which  discharges  to  a  sediment  pond. 
Surface  water  runoff  is  routed  around  the  facility.  Storm 
runoff  from  the  active  dump  surfaces  is  directed  to  the 
sediment  ponds  where  solids  are  allowed  to  settle. 

The  lower  benches  are  reclaimed  immediately  after 
each  bench  is  completed  The  facility  can  be  safely  closed 
either  temporarily  or  permanently  at  any  time  during  the 
life  of  the  operation 

Dump  leachate  is  collected  and  pumped  to  the  grinding 
mills  for  use  as  process  water  whenever  its  quality  is  not 
suitable  for  discharge. 

Tailings  is  the  term  used  for  the  original  gold  bearing 
rock  after  the  gold  has  been  extracted  in  the  process 
plant.  This  material  is  primarily  oxidized  rock  with  minute 


traces  of  process  chemicals.  McLaughlin  tailings  meet  the 
California  Department  of  Health  Services'  tough  tests  for 
a  nonhazardous  classification.  Nevertheless,  the  tailings 
facility  has  been  designed  to  operate  as  a  "zero  discharge 
system"  with  no  consequential  discharge  of  mill  process 
water  or  effluent  to  the  environment 

The  tailings  facility,  with  a  design  capacity  in  excess  of 
28  million  tons,  is  situated  in  a  small,  broad  valley  located 
southwest  of  Morgan  Valley  (Figure  2).  This  area  was 
drained  by  a  small,  intermittent  stream  with  a  total  catch 
ment  area  of  approximately  1 .6  square  miles  The  basin  is 
underlain  with  sedimentary  rocks  with  no  record  of  recent 
active  faulting  Permeability  of  the  rock  formations  which 
underlie  the  tailings  impoundment  are  very  low,  and  are 
generally  in  the  range  from  about  1 0-6  to  1 0-  cm/sec  (less 
than  the  permeability  of  concrete). 

The  tailings  disposal  system  consists  of  a  compacted 
earth  filled  embankment  of  siltstone  and  mudstone,  a 
tailings  delivery  and  distribution  system,  a  water  reclaim 
system,  and  a  small  seepage  collection  and  return  system 
downstream  from  the  embankment.  The  final  height  of  the 
embankment  is  145  feet  Although  the  impoundment  is 
designed  to  store  the  probable  maximum  flood,  the 
California  State  Division  of  Safety  of  Dams  requires  that  a 
spillway  be  constructed  at  each  embankment  stage  to 
protect  against  higher  flows. 

Runoff  from  the  drainage  area  above  the  tailings  im 
poundment  is  intercepted  by  a  ditch,  carried  around  the 
impoundment,  and  discharged  into  the  original  drainage 
downstream  from  the  embankment.  The  ditches  are 
designed  to  accommodate  the  100-year  flood  event. 


SUPPORT  FACILITIES 


WATER  SUPPLY:  The  project  requires  500  gallons  per 
minute  of  fresh  water  to  meet  mine,  mill,  and  potable  water 
needs  Some  of  this  demand  is  met  by  collection  and  use 
of  project  area  runoff  and  groundwater  from  the  mine  pit 
area.  A  reservoir  is  required  to  provide  fresh  water  at  a 
rate  of  550  to  655  gpm  The  reservoir  system,  named  the 
Davis  Creek  Reservoir,  consists  of  a  105  foot-high  earth 
fill  dam,  impounding  a  6,000  acre-foot  capacity  reservoir, 
and  a  piping  system.  The  dam  is  about  900  feet  long  with 
a  100  foot -wide  spillway  designed  to  pass  the  probable 
maximum  flood  flow.  Outlet  valves  are  provided  to  allow 
draw-down  of  the  reservoir  in  the  event  of  seismic  damage 
to  the  dam  and  to  release  water  flowing  into  the  reservoir 
during  the  summer  season,  as  required.  The  Davis  Creek 
Dam  is  located  in  Yolo  County  north  of  the  mine  and  is 
shown  in  Figure  2.  A  system  of  pumps  and  pipes  deliver 
water  from  the  reservoir  to  the  mine  and  mill. 

TOPSOIL  MANAGEMENT:  Topsoil  that  is  suitable  for 
revegetation  was  salvaged  from  areas  used  for  facility 


construction.  This  soil  will  be  used  in  future  reclamation. 
Topsoil  is  also  removed  and  stockpiled  prior  to  mining 
activities.  Stockpiles  are  vegetated  to  prevent  soil  loss 
through  erosion. 

OTHER  FACILITIES:  The  project  electrical  demand  is 
about  17  megawatts  A  1 15  kv  wood  pole  electrical  trans 
mission  line  was  constructed  from  the  Lower  Lake  sub 
station  to  the  mine  paralleling  Morgan  Valley  Road  (Figure 
2).  In  addition,  fuel  is  required  for  producing  steam  and 
operating  mine  vehicles.  Total  fuel  consumption  is  about 
56,000  barrels  per  year  of  diesel,  boiler  fuel,  and  gasoline. 

Mine  and  mill  employees  and  supply  trucks  generate 
traffic  on  local  roads.  Project  employees  number  350  and 
are  distributed  among  three  shifts.Truck  traffic  numbers 
approximately  13  trips  per  weekday. 

Primary  access  to  the  project  site  is  from  Lake  County 
via  Morgan  Valley  Road  which  was  improved  by 
Homestake. 

Continued  on  next  page 


279 


SUPPORT  FACILITIES  CONTINUED 


A  small  section  of  the  Berryessa-Knoxville  Road  in 
Napa  County  was  improved  and  a  one-mile  section  was 
relocated  around  the  mine  support  facilities. 
A  variety  of  support  facilities  are  required  including 


offices,  laboratory,  maintenance  shops,  parking  areas, 
solid  waste  disposal  site,  sewage  treatment  plants,  and 
lighting  for  nighttime  operations  and  environmental 
monitoring  stations. 


RECLAMATION  PLAN 


Postmining  reclamation  planning  was  an  integral  part 
of  project  design  and  permitting.  The  goals  of  the  Mc 
laughlin  Mine  approved  reclamation  plan  are  to: 

•  Minimize  erosion 

•  Stabilize  disturbed  areas  with  a  permanent,  diverse 
vegetative  cover 

•  Maximize  productive  land  use 

•  Provide  postmining  land  uses  that  are  socially  and 
environmentally  beneficial  and  compatible  with  ad 
jacent  land  uses 

•  Satisfy  requirements  of  regulatory  agencies 
Homestake  is  reclaiming  the  project  site  for  postmining 

use  as  an  environmental  studies  field  research  station. 
This  station  is  being  developed  in  cooperation  with 
regional  colleges  and  universities  to  provide  research  and 
instructional  opportunities  in  the  physical  and  biological 
sciences,  environmental  management,  and  mining  en 
gineering.  Project  facilities  to  be  made  available  to  the 
research  station  include  physical  improvements  such  as 
roads,  parking,  power,  telephones,  water  supply,  sewage 
treatment,  office,  shops,  and  laboratory. 

In  addition  to  these  improvements,  Homestake  will 
donate  to  the  research  station  resources  such  as  environ 
mental  baseline  data,  monitoring  data  accumulated  over 
the  life  of  the  project,  numerous  sets  of  aerial 
photographs,  extensive  mapping,  and  geologic  core.  Al 
though  Homestake  intends  to  retain  ownership  of  project 


lands  pending  future  mining,  it  is  expected  that  the  re 
search  station  will  be  established  as  a  nonprofit  corpora 
tion  and  managed  by  a  board  of  directors  representing 
participating  institutions  and  Homestake. 

The  reclamation  plan  proposes  postmining  land  uses 
for  each  facility  as  summarized  in  Table  1 .  The  mill  is  on  a 
ridge  dominated  by  Blue  Oak  Woodlands  which  are  of 
moderate  wildlife  value.  The  tailings  impoundment  will  be 
closed,  covered  with  topsoil  and  appropriately  revegeta- 
ted.  Ultimately  this  area  will  be  returned  to  grazing. 

The  pit  will  be  fenced  to  provide  for  public  safety  and 
vegetative  screening  will  be  established  along  the  road 
and  upper  benches  to  minimize  visual  impact.  Reclama 
tion  of  the  waste  rock,  mine  facilities  and  low-grade 
storage  pads  will  provide  approximately  485  acres  for 
wildlife  habitat.  Wildlife  habitat  value  and  visual  composi 
tion  will  be  enhanced  by  both  grasses  and  woody  plants. 

Following  mining,  the  reservoir  in  Yolo  County  will  be 
maintained  at  maximum  normal  pool  to  provide  water  and 
habitat  for  wildlife.  A  permanent  water  body  in  this  location 
will  provide  long-term  wildlife  benefits. 

Other  facilities  including  the  process  plant,  crushing 
plant  and  grinding  mills,  slurry  pipeline,  and  hydrologic 
control  structures  will  be  removed  and  the  areas 
reclaimed  to  be  compatible  with  surrounding  land  uses 
and  habitat  types. 


280 


TABLE  1 

Comparison  of  Premining  and  Postmining 
Land  Use  by  Facility 

FACILITY 

COUNTY 

ZONING 
CLASSIFICATIONS 

LAND  USE 
PREMINING                         POSTMINING 

Mine  Pit 

Napa 

Agricultural 
Watershed  (AW) 

Mercury  Mining 

Potential 
Mineral  Resource, 
Wildlife 

Yolo 

Agricultural 
General  (A-1) 

Grazing/Non 
commercial  Woodland 

Mining  Facilities  Area 

Napa 

Agricultural 
Watershed  (AW) 

Wildlife/Watershed 

Wildlife, 
Watershed 

Mill 

Lake 

Unclassified 

Grazing 

Research  Station 
Headquarters 

Reservoir 

Yolo 

Agricultural 
Preserve  (AP) 

Grazing 

Water  Supply, 
Recreation, 
Wildlife 

Tailings  Site 

Lake 

Unclassified 

Grazing 

Closed  Waste  Disposal 
Facility,  Grazing, 
Wildlife 

Waste  Rock  and 
Low-Grade  Ore 

Napa 

Agricultural 
Watershed  (AW) 

Wildlife/Watershed 
Recreation 

Wildlife,  Watershed 

ENVIRONMENTAL  MONITORING 

PROGRAMS 


Environmental  monitoring  programs  initiated  during 
baseline  data  collection  have  been  continued  to  provide 
early  indication  of  adverse  changes  in  the  local  environ 
ment.  Programs  implemented  include  the  following: 

Air  Quality 

Meteorology 

Surface  and  Groundwater  Quality 

Aquatic  Ecology 

Vegetation 

Wildlife 

Geologic  Hazards 


•  Cultural  Resources 

•  Noise 

•  Socioeconomics 

Homestake  has  implemented  a  multipurpose  land 
management  program  on  their  lands  contiguous  to  the 
mining  area.  Management  units  are  as  follows: 

Intensive  agriculture 

Mixed  woodlands 

Chaparral 

Preservation  areas 

Reservoir 


281 


Environmental  Monitoring  Program 


RGURE  5 


282 


GEOLOGY 


APPENDIX  A 


The  Mclaughlin  deposit  occurs  along  a  major  thrust 
fault  which  strikes  N40  degrees  W  and  dips  variably  north 
eastward.  The  upper  plate  rocks  are  composed  of  bedded 
sltstones,  mudstones,  and  sandstones  of  the  Upper 
Jurassic  (150  million  year)  and  younger  Great  Valley  Se 
quence.  The  lower  plate  rocks  consist  chiefly  of  a  serpen- 
tinite  melange  derived  from  the  Coast  Range  ophiolite  and 
lesser  Franciscan  Complex  lithologies.  The  fault  zone 
contains  a  mixture  of  both  upper  and  lower  plate  rocks 
that  have  been  intensely  sheared  The  resulting  material 
consists  of  coherent  blocks  set  in  a  matrix  of  flakey  fault 
gouge. 

About  2.2  million  years  ago,  the  thrust  zone  was  in 
vaded  by  basaltic  magmas  resulting  in  two  stages  of 
volcanic  activity  The  earlier  stage  involved  small  but 
violent  eruptions  resulting  in  deposits  of  volcanic  ejecta, 
small  craters,  and  fragmental  intrusives.  The  second 
stage  resulted  in  the  emplacement  of  olivine-pyroxene 
basalt  sills,  domes,  and  minor  flows. 

Hydrothermal  activity  accompanied  lithification  of  shal 
low  magmas  Fluid  flow  paths  were  related  to  both  early 


fault  zone  permeability  and  later  volcanic  vents  All  rock 
types  in  the  deposit  are  hydrothermally  altered  and  locally 
host  gold-bearing  veins.  Early  silica-flooding  hardened 
the  poorly  indurated  materials  permitting  the  develop 
ment  of  open  fractures  as  a  result  of  regional  strike-slip 
stress  These  open  spaces  were  filled  with  vein  matter, 
creating  a  stockwork  deposit.  Surface  geysers  and 
hotsprings  deposited  a  chalcedonic  sinter  terrace. 

Mercury  (as  cinnabar)  was  localized  in  the  shallow  parts 
of  the  system  and  was  the  object  of  early  mining  efforts. 
Native  gold  occurs  as  submicroscopic  to  rare  coarse 
grains  in  the  chalcedony-quartz  veins  together  with  silver 
(as  sulfosalts)  and  a  va'iety  of  other  minerals  including 
stibnite,  pyrite,  barite,  caicite,  dolomite,  and  adularia 

The  Mclaughlin  deposit  is  considered  one  of  the  best 
preserved  and  finest  examples  of  a  hot  springs  type 
epithermal  gold  deposit  on  Earth.  Geologic  research  will 
continue  throughout  the  mine  life. 


LEGEND 

01   hi  /IM 

LJ  »0  10 

I     I  »0  0«0  U  »0  M9 


TYPICAL  MINERALIZATION 
CROSS  SECTION 

(LOOKING  N  W  ) 


FIGURE  6 


10 


283 


GENERALIZED 
SURFACE  GEOLOGY 
OF  THE 

MCLAUGHLIN  MINE 


p^rp>-^.«    v  f  s" 


s^fcvir* 


EXPLANATION 

CHALCEDONIC    SiNTES        (S, 


K    •i      r  I 

I'"1    TT  I       OLIVINE     BASALT     FLOWS     (dot 


OLIVINE  BASALT   INTRUSIVE    (Ub.) 
PYROCLASTIC   DEPOSITS    (Q*J 
MIXED  LITHOLO&Y  CATACLASITE(M,, 
MUDSTONE  CATACLASITE    (K,j 
KNOXVILLE    FORMATION    (j»j 
PLAGIOCLASE  BASALT    (j,») 

SERPENTINITE    MELANGE 


284 


OPEN  PIT  MINE 


APPENDIX  B 


ORE  RESERVES  as  at  January  1992 


15.650,000  tons 


AVERAGE  GRADE 


0.113  ounces  gold  average  per  ton 


CONTAINED  OUNCES 


1 .775,000  ounces  gold 


CUT-OFF  GRADE 


0.06  ounces  gold  per  ton  for  Sulfide  Ore 
0.02  ounces  gold  per  ton  for  Oxide  Ore 


WASTE  ROCK 


40,000,000 


ULTIMATE  PIT  DIMENSIONS 


Length 

Width 

Depth 


5,400  feet 

1 ,900  feet 

800  feet  maximum 

630  feet  average 


RAMPS 


In  Pit  8% 

Waste  Dump  8% 

Width  1 00  feet  from  berm  to  berm 


MINING  SCHEDULE 


Year 
1985 
1986 

1987-1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 


Shifts  Per  Day 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 


Tons  Per  Year 
4,200,000 
12,000,000 
13,300,000 
12,000,000 
15,000,000 
12,000,000 


12 


PIT  EQUIPMENT 


APPENDIX  B 


HYDRAULIC  SHOVEL 


FRONT  END  LOADERS 


TRUCKS 


DRILLS 


MISCELLANEOUS 


1  375A  Komatsu  Dozer 
1  D9L  Caterpiller  Dozer 
1  824C  Caterpillar  R.T.  Dozer 

1  Finning  Secondary  Drill 

2  Caterpillar  16G  Graders 
1  Boom  Truck 

3  14,000  gal.  Water  Trucks 
1  Lowboy  and  Tractor 

3  pit  Lube  Trucks 

1  998  Caterpillar  Loader 


1  O&KRH  120  C 

Cubic  Yard  Bucket  Capacity         17  yards 
Operating  Weight  469,000  Ibs. 

Crowd  &  Breakout  Force        202,400  Ibs. 
Rated  Horsepower  1200 

1  P&H  1550 

Capacity  151/2  Cubic  Yard 

Operating  Weight  463,000  Ibs. 

Crowd  &  Breakout  Force  1 84,000 

Rated  Horsepower  1,100 


4  Caterpillar  992-C 


Cubic  Yard  Bucket  Capacity     1 3.5  yards 
Weight  200,000  pounds 

Width  157" 

Height  17'9" 

Rated  Horsepower  690 


14  Caterpillar  777 


Truck  Capacity 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Tires 

Total  Truck  Weight 

Rated  Horsepower 


85  tons 
32'1" 


27.00-49,42  PR(E-3) 

65  tons  empty; 

150  tons  loaded 

870 


3  Ingersol  DM  45  Crawler 

Mast  Height  36  feet 

Weight  70,000  pounds 

Rod  Length  25  feet 

Diameter  of  Hole  6  V2"  to  7  7/8" 

1  Driltech  D40K  Truck  Mount 

Reverse  Circulation  Drill 
Mast  Height  35  feet 

Weight  54,800  pounds 

Rod  Length  25  feet 

Diameter  of  Hole  5"  to  7  7/e" 


1  D10N  Caterpillar  Dozer 

1  DSL  Caterpillar  Dozers 

3  R35  Trucks  Euclid 

2  Caterpillar  235  Backhoes 

4  Caterpillar  Forklifts 

1  4,000  gal.  Water  Truck 

1  Pit  Service  Truck 

13  Pickups 

1  10  yd.  Utility  Dump  Truck 
1  10,000  gal.  Water  Trucks 


286 

PROCESS  PLANT  OXIDE  CIRCUIT  APPENDIXC" 

PRODUCTION 

Schedule:  Three  8-hour  shifts,  7  days  per  week,  365  days/yr. 

FEED  RATE 


1 ,095,000  tons  per  year  or  3,000  tons 
per  operating  day  or  1 25  tons  per  hour 


MAJOR  EQUIPMENT  ITEM 


Stationary  Stacker  15,000  ton  storage  capacity 

42"  wide,  226'  long 

Semi-autogenous  Grinding  Mill  Koppers  22'  diameter 

x7'  long;  1750  HP  motor 

Ball  Mill  14'6"  diameter  by  23'  long;  3000  HP  motor 

Thickener  1 50  feet  diameter  by  1 6'high 

Slurry  Pumps  GEHO  positive  placement;  Diaphragm  type  200  HP 

Slurry  Pipeline  8"  diameter  by  25,600  feet  long 

Carbon  steel  seamless 


PROCESS  PLANT  FLOTATION  CIRCUIT APPENDIXC 

Rougher  Flotation  Cells  (7)  1 000  ft3  Wemco  Cells 

Cleaner  Flotation  Cells  (3)  500  ft3  Wemco  Cells 

Flotation  Tailings  Thickener  150  feet  diameter  by  16'  high  conventional 

Concentrate  Thickener  Enviro  Clear  20  foot  diameter  high  rate 


14 


287 


PROCESS  PLANT  SULFIDE  CIRCUIT 


APPENDIX  C 


PRODUCTION 


Schedule.  Three  8-hour  shifts,  7  days  per  week,  365  days/yr. 


FEED  RATE 


1 ,095,000  tons  per  year  of  3,000  tons 
per  operating  day  or  125  tons  per  hour 


MAJOR  EQUIPMENT  ITEM 


Primary  Crusher 
Radial  Slewing  Stacker 

Semi-autogenous  Grinding  Mill 

Ball  Mill 
Thickener 
Slurry  Pumps 
Slurry  Pipeline 

Recycle  Water  Pipeline 
Preoxidation  Thickener 


Autoclaves 

CCD  Thickeners 
Neutralization  Tanks 
Precipitation  Tanks 
CIP  Tanks 
Carbon  Strip  Tank 
Mercury  Retorts 


brick 


42"x66"  Gyratory  Traylor-Fuller 

30,000  ton  storage  capacity 
42"  wide,  161.5'  long 

Koppers  22'  diameter 
x7'  long;  1500  HP  motor 

15'6"  diameter  by  22'  long;  3000  HP  motor 

150  feet  diameter  by  8'  high 

GEHO  positive  placement;  Diaphragm  type  200  HP 

8"  diameter  by  25,600  feet  long 
Carbon  steel  seamless 

12"  diameter  by  25,000  feet  long 

Environclear  55  feet  diameter 
High  rate  316  stainless  steel 

Three  horizontal  cylindrical,  four  compartment,  mild 

steel  shell,  leadlined  and  bricked  with  two  courses 

13'9-V2"  inside  shell  diameter;  53'1-Vs"  overall  length. 

Enviroclear  55  feet  diameter  High  rate  316  L  S.S 

Three  42,000  gal.  capacity,  20'  diameter  x  20'high 

Three  83,500  gal.  capacity,  25'  diameter  x  25'  high 

Twelve  120,000  gal.  capacity,  27'  diameter  x  30'  high 

4,600  gal  capacity,  7'  diameter  x  23'4"  high  100  PSIG 

Two  Saracco  tanks;  vacuum  retort  type, 
water  bath  condenser,  36  kw 

Continued  on  next  page 


15 


288 


PROCESS  PLANT  SULFIDE  CIRCUIT 


APPENDIX  C 


MAJOR  EQUIPMENT  ITEM  CONTINUED 


Melting  Furnace 
Bullion  Molds 
Regeneration  Kiln 
Lime  Silos 


Tilting  induction  type,  250  kw 

1 ,000  troy  oz.  capacity 

Indirect  fired;  35  Va"  diameter  x  35'  long 

Four  450-ton  live  capacity 
21  '6"  diameter  x  52'  high 


TAILINGS  SYSTEM 


TAILINGS  DAM 


Height  of  dam 


Surface  area 
Tails  line  length 
Total  disturbed  area 
Length  of  dam 

WATER  SUPPLY 


Phase  I  -  98  feet 

Phase  1-10  million  tons 

Phase  1 1  -  145  feet 

Phase  II  -  28  million  tons 

360  acres 

13,770  feet 

560  acres 

3,950 


Supplied  by  surface  waters  impounded  behind  Davis  Creek  Dam 

Height  of  Dam 

Width  of  Dam 

Capacity 

Surface  area 


105  feet 

953  feet 

6,000  acre  feet 

190  acres 


Water  usage 


POWER  SUPPLY 


1 ,200  acre  feet/year  fresh  water 


Provided  by  13  mile  1 15  KV  power  line  from  Lower  Lake. 

A  1 2  kv  underbuilt  line  provides  power  to  residents  along  route. 


16 


O 


d  COMMENDATIONS 

LJ 

X 

^ 

u 

C. 

3 
c 

Q) 

E 

Q) 

CN 

en 
en 

en 

1 

en 
en 

1 

'£. 
'o. 

CO 

IB 

en 

01 

1 
~c 

CD 

E 

CD 
CD 

L. 
C 

D 
0 

O 

cr* 

1 
"Q. 

00 

CD 
TJ 
D 
0) 

_J 

"5 
"c 

CD 

E 

c 

en 
en 

i 

0 

en 
en 

1 

TJ 

O 

^^f 

•  — 

C 

o 
o 

c 

CD 

E 

CD 

en 

00 

en 
1 

c 

D 
U_ 

D 

00 

en 

1 

0 
CD 

E 

o 

oo 
en 

T— 
1 

C 

o 

D 

c 

CN 

^ 

^ 

Q_ 

C 

o 

i_ 

C 

L_ 

.® 

~D 

CO 

D 

_C 

S 

D 

0) 

D 

Q) 

D 

*> 

c 

D 
CD 

D 

.C 

iZ 

•  | 

o 

CO 

C 
CD 

§ 

C 
LJ 

>- 

< 

£ 

m 

LJ 

>" 

JZ 
LJ 

o 

c 

E 

<£ 

CD 

<D 

c 

V. 

CD 

^ 

0 

£ 

"5 

15 

D 

C 
O 

"5 

0 

H- 

o 

C 
CD 

CD 

C 

r 

| 

~C 
0 
0. 

u 

0 

~D 

15 
D 

0 

-t— 

CD 

~o 

servali 

o 
o 

JQ 

D 

;~ 

CD 

D 

D 

O 

CD 

1_ 

c 

O 

CD 
**- 

r 

JO 

^ 

Q_ 

0 

C/) 

*•••» 

O 

CD 

M— 

Q_ 

o 
o 

D 

-Q 

Q> 

(    . 

CL 

^ 

. 

CD 

"o 

Q. 

^ 

L. 

L. 

^— 

O 

E 

2 

_J 

O 

c 

•  -^ 

E 

•^^ 

j 

*o 

CD 

< 

or 

] 

LJ 

0 

m 

Li_ 

LJ 

< 

m 

CO 

CO 

290 


MCLAUGHLIN  MINE 


APPENDIX  E7 

from  Home stake  Mining   Company 
"Supplemental   Information   1995' 
(internal  document) 


Ownership: 
Location: 

Initial  Production: 
Properties: 
Mining  Method: 
Mill  Capacity: 


Recovery  Process: 


Production: 


Homestake  owns  1 00% 

Knoxville  Mining  District,  junction  of  Napa,  Lake  and  Yolo  counties, 

northern  California 
1985 

Approximately  16,200  acres 
Open  pit 
During  1996  modifications  will  be  made  to  the  mill  circuit  which  will 

increase  plant  capacity  to  6,500  tons  per  day  for  the  processing 

of  stockpiled  ore. 
Autoclaves,  cyanide  leach,  carbon-in-pulp  and  flotation.  The  autoclaves 

will  shut  down  in  mid-1996  when  mining  is  completed.  Processing 

of  low-grade  stockpiles  by  direct  cyanide  leach  will  continue 

for  an  additional  eight  years 
Gold  dore 


Ore  Reserves: 

Tons  (OOO's) 
Average  grade  (oz/ton) 
Contained  gold  (oz  OOO's) 

Production: 

Ore  mined  -  tons  (OOO's) 
Stripping  ratio  (waste:ore) 
Ore  milled  -  tons  (OOO's) 
Grade  (oz/ton) 
Recovery  (%) 
Gold  produced  (oz  OOO's) 

Total  Cash  Cost  per  Ton  Milled 

Costs  per  Ounce: 

Direct  mining  costs 

Inventory  movements  and  other 

Cash  Operating  Costs 

Royalties 

Total  Cash  Costs 

Depreciation  and  amortization 

Reclamation 

Total  Production  Costs 

Operating  Earnings  (Loss)  ($000's) 
Number  of  Employees  at  December  31 


1995 


2,056 

5.9:1 

2,296 

0.120 

88 

242 

$26 


$353 


$7,848 
346 
25 


1994 


1993 


2,667 

5.6:1 

2,244 

0126 

87 

250 

$28 


$328 


2,043 

6.5:1 

2,164 

0.154 

92 

305 

$27 


$300 


1992 


2,608 

4.6:1 

2,051 

0.164 

87 

291 

$29 


$325 


$13,746 
343 


$18,464 
343 


($9,415) 
321 


1991 


19,342 

22,064 

22,042 

14,296 

15,650 

0.068 

0.075 

0.083 

0.105 

0.113 

1,315 

1,665 

1,839 

1,504 

1,775 

2,353 

5.7:1 

2,298 

0.125 

91 

263 

$25 


$245 
(11) 

$233 
8 

$188 
(3) 

$191 
2 

$208 
3 

234 
8 

241 
8 

185 
8 

193 
9 

211 
8 

242 
102 
9 

249 
74 
5 

193 
103 
4 

202 
119 
4 

219 
117 
3 

$339 


$4,942 
336 


291 


APPENDIX  E8 


292 


o 
"o 


< 
> 


<-» 


K  g  3   5 

iiii 

O  U, 


293 


APPENDIX  E9 


Page  No.    1 
12/05/97 

YEAR   IC8252PROD   REL 

•.i-,,--,             i  «<-n«  ii   _ 

1962 

15951 

A 
Y 

1963 

13592 

Y 

1964 

10291 

Y 

1965 

13404 

Y 

1966 

16070 

Y 

1967 

16385 

Y 

1968 

21384 

Y 

1969 

18491 

Y 

1970 

18604 

Y 

1971 

13489 

Y 

1972 

5835 

Y 

1973 

1219 

Y 

1974 

1311 

Y 

1976 

296 

Y 

1977 

•e- 

Y 

1978 

•O- 

Y 

1979 

151 

Y 

1980 

226 

Y 

1981 

->  r\  A  i  /-__ 

&^F^n^o^ 

85 
-1  BG-173 

Y 
<3-^. 

r  Jt  /0-e\A-£ 

y'-CiX.t  i'-ct 

*  1  /  r 
r^~  i  --^ 

r 

»  Y- 

(+t.*ci  <'  01? 

i> 

SOURCE 


MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 
MINERALS 


YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK  R 

YEARBOOK  R 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 

YEARBOOK 


/t>7 

ft  ttt 

AV  Q^TA 


*e.  6,.V<  MC-(. 


6'- 


., 
L-(  ^"'  >C''< 


/  9  7$ 


y 


-au*. 


z- 


courtesy  Ron  Churchill,  Senior  Geologist, 
State  of  California  Department  of 
Conservation,  Division  of  Mines  and 
Geology. 


294  APPENDIX  E10 


&ii7mriKt  CV»atrtr  •       TUESDAY,  JAN  22.  1980 


gold  Hits  $850  in  Zurich 
—  Dollar  Gains  in  Europe 


--  CeM  turfed  to  a  rwrort  sw 
u  ounce  close  In  Zurich  yester- 
diy  ,  and  «UVTT  hit  Mf  in  ounce  «t 

—wee  petnC  wtth-prtcaa  of  both  - 
mruh  fOlnf  'up,  itown  »nd  «>a>-  - 
wiy»"  before  closing  m  New  York 

"  it  m  UK)  MB  an  ounce,  rapec-' 
lively. 

Tbc  US  dollar  closed  stronger 

'  on  mod  European  markets  .yester 
day. 

Cold  closed  In  Zurich  at  a  new 
record  &u>h  ol  1850  an  ounce,  up' 
110  from  the  prevloua  European 
.record  of  two  aet  in  Zurich  at 
Friday's  close  At  one  point  during 
afternoon  trading  .  It  hit  WO  ___ 

In  London,  cold  hit  a  record 
•90  at  tbe  afurnoon  price-fixing. 
bat  wit  IBS  an  ounce  at  the  ckae.- 
down  from  «8»  at  Fnday'i  clow. 

In  New  York,  fold  traded  In  a 
ranfe  of  B'.SWB?  an  ounce.  Deal- 
en  aid  the  wide  ruge.  however. 
wu  more  an  ItxUcaiion  of  thin 
markets  than  the  true  level  of 
bullion  trading  Gold  (till  doted 
above  the  Friday  New  York  clow 
«-  KM  reran  H10  Silver  was  fl 
'lower  than  on  PrMay  at  M8  an' 
ounce  at  the  cloae.  Tb-  Comrx 
tMUemcDL  prtcct  were  B290  for 
(ok)  and  (44  an  ounce  for  silver. 

The-  New  York  Commodity  Ex 
change  did  not  open  trading  in 
diver  untU  1.30  p  m  When  trjdmc 
opened  It  wu  for  liquidation  Hell 
ing)  of  contracts  only.  Thto  t>  an 
iticmpt  to  force  long  positions  to' 
wll.  preventing  a  "corner",  or 
~aqueett"  In  physical  silver.  ; 

.  .  But  dealers  art  prevtons  lim 
tts  OB  the  number  of  contnds  an 
'Individual  can  bold  accomplKBed 
that  purpoae-aad-toM.  n  i  result 
of  tbe  latest  action,  many  posit  tons 
will  be  twitched  to  European  mar- 
hen.  .  -  •- 

..Tiii«liyV  trading  hi  Europe. 
our  follow  the  pttlrm  of  im*t_ 
i»c«t   trtdinf  "d»n     a»M~-  one- 
dealer  ycMerdiy.  "New  York  (dls 
•down  «ad  Hoof  Kon(  and  Europe 
bU  thf  prie*  an."  .     •  .  _____ 

The  Comex  Mriler  Intretied 

the  margin  <c*sn>  required  to  buy 

I  fold  contract  to  115,000  from 

COOO  and  tbe  International  Mone- 

-~ury  Market  la  Chtcago  raised  tbe 

-marfta  toMOOfroaMHOt     — 

_  ^.Foreign  eichanfe  .  marketa 

~«er*  quiet,  dealers  aaM.  wtth  tbe 

dollar  chalking  up  gains  on  moat 

markets.  European  closing  prices 

.with  New.  York  clcje  In  parembc»- 


Zurich  IJMO  Swis  franct.  up  ' 
Tram    1.US8    (1  W45>  'Frinkfun 
1  728S  -mirki,  down   from   1.7300 
(1  T3>.  Farls.  4  OOa^raocs.  up  from    . 
FrMay's  4001&.  MOUOh  Bruwis 
2IJB5  Bcljiio  franca,  down  from 
fflWS   dice-    Amsterdam.   I  MM 
gullders,  up  from   M&X  II  goe>  . 
J4U.n.  806JO  lL-f.  up  from  8W  80 
«B06t  Friday. 


THURS,  AUG    28.  1980 


Sao 


295 


APPENDIX  Ell 


Big  Gold  Find  in 

i 

Napa  County 


ll\  Timnili* 
Mining  Co  said 
M-strrday  it  ha' div-oxered  "'ipnifi 
rani  cold  inini-rali/aimn"  ahoul  'JO 
mili-s  north  of  Ijke  td-rr.M-.sa  in 
Sapa  t'ountx  that  w  »orth  more 
Mian  JH.10  millmn  ai  eurrent  market 

•^  Th<'  San  Fram  ism  company. 
*»hlrh  is  tin1  nation's  tarciM  cold 
|  producer,  said  the  cold  depo«it  1< 

•  Inrated  in  hilK  era/me  land  north 
'.  of  Knoxville  »h<  re  th«-  Napa.  iJkc 

•  .ind  V'olo  rouniN  lin*-.  rrnvt 

•  Ham     V     Concur.    pr<-.»Ii  nt 
I  jnd    chief    iM'iutni     offu  IT  'of 
|  llnmrsiaki    said  pre(Tnunar>  ti-sts 

•  imlirair  thai  the  drpe*it  may  rnn 
!  t  jin  in  rv  rss  nf,l  millinn  oun<  r\  oj 
;  L'tih!  In  l.»mlon  ihr  pricr  rf  ti^ld  ai 

'.  mini  r 

'    <  •'   "V    » 

;          CunC'  r  .sjirt  thi-  t'Jlifi'rnu  cnM 

•  i.  in  "fmi'K  rii*«Mrniin.i!ril  pjrtir U-> 
'.  uliirtl  unnot  hi'  pjnni'd  ami  3tir 


C.  Garlnrr 

m 

not  visible  to  the  «\v  Kor  this 
reavin.  prosp«nor*  durinc  the  IW.i 
California  Cold  Rush  h>  passed  the 
arra  »<  unpromisinc  " 

Me  uid  he  profern-d  to.  use  the 
trrm  "mineralization"  instead  of 
vein  or  ore  deposit  until. thr  find  i< 
offinally  eonfirmed  hy  extensive 
li-slmc  "We  tbmk  it's  economically 
fcasihle."  Conrer  sjid  'hut  until 
that  s  proved  hevond  ,in>  rt'Hibi, 
we'll  ronlinui'  to  eall  u  3  imin'rali 

I'nrli-r  tlii  dimtion  nf  JJIIH-. 
A  "AlMk-rson.  llom^aki •*•  x  n  !• 
preMdrnt  of  i-vplnrati'iii.  tin-  mm 
pjrt>'  over  thi1  past^jwn  \t-.ir.  li:i. 
laiirc  hed  alf  ji'2r«;ssixr  (.\plni.iiiiin 
prnt'rain  M  i  \|*9*nl  fni'l  |ir"i!m 

Thi-  Kiu'x.'ilii;  ;ir.-a  hj«  lu-i-n 
ijuni-d  (nil  rrcMcniJ*  fur  the  |.j.t' 


Gold  Find  in 
Ndpa  County 
Announced 


Gold  Prices  Rise 

»  • 

—  Dollar  Slips 


From  Pigf  29 


100  years,  but  It  is  an  area  where 
gold  was  not  previously  rrrmed. 

For  12  months.  10  Homestaki- 
employws  and  three  drillmc  rigs 
have  been  at  work  in  the  northern 
corner  of  Napa  County  During  that 
time  they  have  punched  63  holes  — 
at  depths  of  300  feet  —  to  take  core 
samples. 

The  results  are  that  Horriestake  . 
estimates  the  deposit  contains  In 
excess  of  6  million  tons  with  an 
avenge  grade  of  approximately 
0.17  ounces  of  gold  per  ton.  contain- 
Ing  some  1  million  ounces  of  gold. 

That  recovery  figure  Is  some 
what  similar  to  the  ore  presently 
being  mined  at  the  company's  main 
gold  mine  at  Lead.  S  D ,  in  the 
Black  Hills.  An  estimated  280.000 
ounces  of  gold  will  be  mined  at 
Lead  this  year. 

Conper  said  Homestake'so  far 
has  invested  about  $2  million  in  the 
Knoxvlllo  gold  find.  He  said  the 
company  w III  conduct'  more  exten 
sive  engineering,  metallurgical,  en 
vironmental  and  economic  studies 


New  York 

The  U.S  dollar  closed  lower  In 
Europe  yesterday,  firmed  slightly 
in  New  York,  then  slipped  again  in 
the  late  afternoon. 

In  Zurich  gold  closed  at  $<VT290 
an  ounce,  compared  to  Tuesday's 
close  of  $fi29  50 

In    London    the    close    was 


$63450.  up  from  $631.50    In  New 
York -gold  closed  at  $63350.  com 
.pared  to  $63025  the  previous  day 

1  The  Comex   settlement   prico 
was  KM2..10.  compared  wrth  $630^0 

In  London,  tho  pound  moved 
ahead,  closing  at  J2..W10.  compared 
to  $238.  and  11  rose  to  $2.'RKJ5  in 
New  York 

I  nil, -it   I'rf.. 


of  the  deposit  over  the  next  J2 
months    tx-fore    making    a-flnll* 
decision  on  opening  a  mine. 

"But  wetf  disclosing  tho  dis 
covery  now  because  our  inu>  show 
this  is  a  material  event  for  the 
company."  said  Conger. 

'Based  on  current  expecta 
lions,  we  could  have  a  mine  and 
mill  in  operation  for  early  19K4."  he 
uid 

The  project  could   ultimately 
take  10  years  and  r^st  around  Sinn 
•million  and  emt)lo"jrl50-200  j>mons. 
said  Conger 

The  deposit,  which  now-  runs 
about  a  quarter  of  a  milo  lone  by  an 
indeterminate  width,  is  shallow  nnrt 
can  he  mmnl  nv  surfan-  methods. 


Conger  said  IIomestake\nvisions 
open  pit  mining,  which  is  a'verticlc 
type  of  drilling,  to  nvovvr  tho  gold 

In  the  niack  Hills.  Homestakr '•. 
is  mining  ore  at  depths  up  to  PJ 
mih-s.  — 

Honu-Mjkr   rontrnK. 
through  dinvt  ownership  or  miner 
al  rights.  anout-IO  square  mil«>s  of 
property  at  the  California  sjttv 

In  addition   to  gold   mining. 
Homestakc    protluces   silver.  >ur3- 
nium.  lead  and  7tnc  In  thr'flrst  half" 
of    IS80.    llrtmtxtak.- -earn»-<l    JSt. 
million,  up  N7  perceni  o\-fr  a  yr'aV 
ago.  on  sah«  of  $172  million  'Th«- 
average  selling  price  for  cold  was  •' 
5587  an  ounce  compared  to  S24!)  a 
year  c.irllcr. 


Tilt  LjrfOTt  Dally  Ci  -eolation  In 


California 


MONDAY.  SEPT.  U1980 


Gold  Rush 

Of  1980 
Is  Raging 


APPENDIX  £12 


Marvin  Jeffries,  an  lot*  conirrurttorrworker,  panned  hit  cloim  en  Italian  Bar,  near  the  town  of  Columbia 

A  New  Breed  of  California  Prospectors 


TJir  gold  minli  rifrs  with  tntrnsr  vigor, 
anil  «  carrying  off  in  victims  hourly  tnd 
..«•»'&•.    _ 

—  New  York  Herald,  Drr  I1.1MI 

f?y  Vfrp/irn  Mnfnfnini 

T>wy  are  leaving  Orange  County  con 
struction  jtltes.  PennsytvinU  print  shops  and 
*  hoc  f.rms  in  Kansas  for  din\    abandoned 
mine  shifts   in   Allegbany.   ancient    river 


channels   In   CaUveral   County   and   rhillv 
rrrck5  throughout  the  Mother  Lode 

They  are  using  RVi.  off  road  vohK-lcv 
Porschw  and  mul«;  pans,  turtion  ar^gc. 
"sniffers"  (oversized  medirine  dropprrsi. 
"gold  hounds"  (automatic  panning  oVvk-n). 
sluice  bom  and  trommels  (devices  similar  In 
_wa.shirtg  marhineil^"doodle  hug"_ulrcdgt&  . 
•barges  with  drag  lines).  tuckTioes  and  dyna 
mite  -  whatever  lime  and  money  will  afford 


—  to  ferret  out  the  gold 

From  the  soft,  steamy  banks  of  the 

Stanislaus  River  to  the  rugged  Sierra  moun 

lain  ranees.  California  of  1MK)  is  having  that 

recurrlnr  golden  dream.  A  new  breed  of 

prus|m'tors  —  with  a  resolve  that  would  do 

the  4'M-r\  proud  —  Is  sifting  through  nrean 

beach  sands,  picking  through  Mojave  Desert 

"dry  » ashes  and  staking  claims  in  virtually 

PtgrlCol  I 


297 


The  Gold  Rush  of  1980  Rages  in  California 


>  i»»  r.r.  I 


, 

t  •»*   I--  in.    tulK  jfl.-f   ih.    c 

ftn-ri   i  "T.    .!' 

'«*th-!   ml.    j   mt.,1 


TV-r.   jr.    ,.     i,    ,...,>.,,„„ 
hfii-     .>ti     tn\      rt**n     »,-  k.-fi-i 
L  h       ru>»     in    fit  if  i  >'m»        MH) 


•  •I  (Kt  HO'ifmrmhrr  I.OM 
'  TI    \-«..  aiwn  of   \nv-rw  i  — 
«.h'    P.    onl>    ttlltrj    IVHJ-    tbr 
^i     i»      purvf      mirvm    wbo 
«f»r    Mjmmif    »brn    ihr    »»tcr    a 
r»»    »fv< 
rvrrt>«t»    ai     fUdb-trukr     Culrb 


'  R--fi.fr  lhi>  \-k-ir  J  ivvrr  r» 
HTM*)  in  q4rt  ^rf     MM] 


..    ft-  fc    M    MM.  k,,..    runtime 
jr«unj*  On    rum  tfiff'a  n>  »tyj 

i  -•••,    •••if   ihr  whotr  flnrk  run* 
•i'i»f    f     Thit  *    «  hai  i 
-  >tli  L'-<l<J  fin-.  in*: 


TV      »-.    known  vtrtoukfy  si 
a*  »  vronjuu.    »r,o 


Ih*  f»re  of  otKT  ri>.  py  towns 


Bwrrau    of 


Uim-    rvpuru  lh*l  rvr.  rUirru  ir« 
fiw*i  41  •  r»u  Or  1500  i  month 
-   l»m  »    manv  as   * 
i"    Tljuu  nunuif  <Uim>  uo  fin- 
<  aliform* 


•  In   it*   tint   in    mwnitu   of 

th*-  ttl 

and  C»rrw  MI**  vyr  rrfuUr 


in  «ll  of  1V7V  ind  SIC  IB  Hi  of 

ThH  >  '' 


imnlw  niuifm 
until  ml*JuK  »r  had  itt 
111  »•»  MIX  r  UM  Ortrfnf 

rv» -\k-viik    ttiifi  i  pnfiuUlkin 
of    XU    ud    t    mm    huuunii 
un<trr  tbt  imiM<  i 


buDtm  »ko  twarnird  into  Stern 
County  tk»  NmnM-r 

Tor  rar>  «"*r  an-onllnc.  lo 
Strrra    County    Wrifarr    fnrt*iiv 
Contur  bmnrtl  Ikrrr  arrdurrtttirf 
flillaodrn  wkoor  drtiaii   havr 
•ourrd     ~TbrrT    nil    brvtt    a    X* 
o*rr  Hot  yrar  to 
on  vrtfarr 

—       .mint  I0u> 

It    aoomno.a    — r«    Ihot    arr 
m    of    iMmry 


thr 


TW  nary  •  U*  urrw  (hrouf h 
nil  Ibr  HollMT  Uttr  NrUDMrini 
Ntvftd*  tOHBIy.  for  tump4«>.  n- 
pon*d  •  100  prrmt  larrcMr  ID  I  h. 
mmpFT  of  «tHlirr  tffUninn, 

IfTV 

•A»  «VM  mrtood  Ikk  r»ir 
h»  km  rtuarm  Irvmi  M  tfucK 
ud  mu  oo  mimn,  rum  «nk  no 


«o«oe  MAjsif 

•100.000  »ilil.  p-c,,p^ 


-Grinn*  n  owl  rrvooaik-alt)  » 
annthrr  qyrailon  Vrr>  small 
amuunu  arr  arvnriMr  lo  Ihr  tilth1 
Cu>  M.*l  limtnrrtiiic  yoy  II  firwl  r> 
MM  dn*r  «nh  a  at*]  |wn  byl  a  4 
•  nrr)<jmr  nrtup  i  brirfrur  aaj 
k  tfirrr  ptnvtyit 

Tkrrr  arr  BOB  row  dBtrrl> 
n  Cahfurnu  and  prrhapi  70  onrrai 


kkU     -Thry 

bklk«  to  thr  Hrrami  *r  o>«  I 
vkal  lid*  LO  Mffrr  hrrkyac  thrir 
pomu  an  falmini  Ibtt  drram  or 
""fc'y  R  o«  IA.  muuac  rlura. 

*Wo  tw  kid  a  raar  a  -rr«  no 
of  Ikno  d*tf  bNtn  nk  tkrrr 
rtltd>ro,  ok*  m»r  km  hritmnr 
Ikr  trro.i  droam  and  thwrd  mr  . 

U>y  btUt  borur  Mb  nrnr  fUkr>  in 


taunt    Mil    ihr    roM    rrmalns   a 

rlo*.  I.  Bu«rd.-d  ai«r>i 

K.-...I,    I...,-    i.,    ihr  fS    Mi. 
IMy  ut  Mm.-  a,    *  OVrruHvr  .. 

mtim  n  ...n.,  a  imii  of  »Nn 
o»r««  1^,1  ,,„  -  lr»  IkM  kill 
tkr  7«n  .IUKYI  r 


•<rt  on  Uirv  natwkr  Can 
i  ranfcj  a  pitiful  llih  In  ihr 


IMM^    10    or    tZ    irK 
•iwmrtrfi  romparrtf  »nh  ainr 
v.  M  6Ker»  irwi  only  t«o  m  im 

•  IB  Itn  ll^rv  *«rr  onf,  IP 
ofwrninc  fold  mUM«  to  Calif  ornu 
»rr*rdiM  to  Clwrtai  Srkittu  w- 
M»nor  for  Ihr  tJ  MMr  Vfm 
»ad  Itnhh  AdmuiMrwtM  In  im 


TWkdwJa  kkd  qun  ikolr  BO, 
kl  O.VJkkk.0.  IB  Pmon  l»ui^  and 
mrolod  day  aad  okxbi  uy«<t  oui 
km  lo  flad  mad  ftqukSfomi 
out  km  for  tkrr.  .iiaa  aad  thry 
•»r»  don  lo  k*  food.  DO  monr> 
ao  )oe  kad  M  ptorr  lo  f«  a  k* 
Tkry  kad  bms  Urroui.  u  a  ru.  m 
prop*  to  i  renter  poavorrr  rir 

II  *mnm  m*  tkit  Ikry  dont 
fk»  *M  larikiai  Morr  rkry 
<•*»."  »Qkiin  laid  -Tfcn-r.  .1. 
LB*  »»!*»»  loba.  Ikry-n  fKkkt  .p 
rVofyteM  to  {***•  Ikk  (OH  rv*k 
ktaal  of  IkOkl  tdia.  la  Ik.  fan  Ikry 
road  u  mirk)  tact  fa*)  nfknlliM 
I'd  nut  k«  .  ur*  «*r  to  Ihr 
kUk.  for  aioal*  km  II  an  ihr 

rtrktolWy  i 


•tin  aank  of  Uk.  Brrrynal  to 
Napa  Coyoly 


!•       tkr.ootud.rflk.TywyAk.ka,     I. yCiW  rk.  fmr  r» 
kaM  rtoUlod  Qjjy  ki  tkt  ««itot      «<y,  ta— « 


to   JiBi>*a»m.   UM   •wtbm 
Mher  ted«.  M*ratirt  i»ro«d 


l*a»  It  -  'lad  I  OMI  thni  »  , 

T.  I  think  11  JM  kUrtaH- 
MW  -t  antlnpkir  tkal  by 
Ikk  Ui«r  or ii  rrw  tkai  fvrur.  win 
•auktr  aialii  Tam'i  a 


of   fon«H. 

Mroien  rraa  Vu  Nvy« 
I  If  *ow  thrn  i  M  cnm  Pl 
***  tMI  Ukrm  Wf  to  Mrrfc  « 


A»d  t»«r»  otkrr  <ir.  ike 

dr«.  k  rrikkdM  1  kid  I  kjw 
but  r°Uf  0>1»  «ltt  M>  my  offlrr 

ok»  »»•  oko  mud  u  oo  away  a 

M  of  moji  taof  frooi  a  ton,  a»* 

Hd  Ik.  kkjkl  b»f»,  -  »r«B  ..»,     . 

.""»  »*•  «•!  »•  oo»  fool  *•*•»  M 
Ik.  rlrw  tku  Ik.  prrrbM  n>n 
kkf  IkKlUkW  Mr  akf»*t  or  u 


krarb  B.  uoiribint  i  ktvvm 

Ihr  onr  nand    Ikr  lam- 

1  b*v<!  Tn>>  lk>W  Indus 
inn  I  .id  .  *h«  h  oprrain  thr  Blaj 
inn  Siar  Mini-  in  Hm  Potni 
Callrrru  rounty  Ml  had  travklr 
airrilnt  riproin  Troy  Gold 
»kirn  brfan  wllllu  .1  t  a  kkkrr  In 
ItfTI  and  ipuaird  lo  a  rtdd>  114.  kaj 
faUm  bork  10  aa  a  ikarr 

Ok  Ikr  otkrr  kind  Dkrkry 
Eaptorilion  Co  a  lOHMo  oarraiior, 
to  AUrtkmr.  SKTT.  Coykly  lyraM 
Ik*  ok)  Ortnlal  Mia.  toto  Ikr 
krrond  larrrff  (old  produrvr  to  Ik. 
UnHrd  Sum  to  1*71  aad  ink 

DOB    Pkrkoy.    wko    kM    brre 

unj  IIIK*  I«B  Did  hm  So  I 
to  t'lllfomu.  but  Ikbaki  ko  kka 
fkkrn  orfcimj  Vote 
akbrk  njkk  •  kyraatka. 
oprritlok  aoar  burrmkr 


Owm    lk>  RoUn  tuk 


-     -  •**•    • 

komrL-  «»ld  Sim  nut*. , 

kM  ouuir,  of  Ikr  Motkrr  Lodr 
I"*  Sko»  •  Sorrklkoklk.  -*.  rr 
Ihr  Urr-.'  «,».  M  Ihr  ~»«  f.. 


Huff 


CkUforakM  aartiw  mnl  bnk 

roalkla  Ik.  kriokt  rrrvlktoj  (Old 
orpcotu  to  Ikr  UkXrd  SUUk.  ar 
rordttd  i*  ra>  US  lurm  of 

"Marry  karrM  of  Ikr  foU  k 


APPENDIX  F 


WESTERN  MINING  IN  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY  ORAL  HISTORY  SERIES 


298  APPENDIX  F 


PREFACE--Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century 


The  oral  history  series  on  Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century 
documents  the  lives  of  leaders  in  mining,  metallurgy,  geology,  education 
in  the  earth  and  materials  sciences,  mining  law,  and  the  pertinent 
government  bodies.   The  field  includes  metal,  non-metal,  and  industrial 
minerals.   In  its  tenth  year  the  series  numbers  thirty-five  volumes 
completed  and  others  in  process. 

Mining  has  changed  greatly  in  this  century:  in  the  technology  and 
technical  education;  in  the  organization  of  corporations;  in  the 
perception  of  the  national  strategic  importance  of  minerals;  in  the  labor 
movement;  and  in  consideration  of  health  and  environmental  effects  of 
mining. 

The  idea  of  an  oral  history  series  to  document  these  developments  in 
twentieth  century  mining  had  been  on  the  drawing  board  of  the  Regional 
Oral  History  Office  for  more  than  twenty  years.   The  project  finally  got 
underway  on  January  25,  1986,  when  Mrs.  Willa  Baum,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Philip 
Bradley,  Professor  and  Mrs.  Douglas  Fuerstenau,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Clifford 
Heimbucher,  Mrs.  Donald  McLaughlin,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Langan  Swent  met  at 
the  Swent  home  to  plan  the  project,  and  Professor  Fuerstenau  agreed  to 
serve  as  Principal  Investigator. 

An  advisory  committee  was  selected  which  included  representatives 
from  the  materials  science  and  mineral  engineering  faculty  and  a 
professor  of  history  of  science  at  the  University  of  California  at 
Berkeley;  a  professor  emeritus  of  history  from  the  California  Institute 
of  Technology;  and  executives  of  mining  companies.   Langan  Swent 
delighted  in  referring  to  himself  as  "technical  advisor"  to  the  series. 
He  abetted  the  project  from  the  beginning,  directly  with  his  wise  counsel 
and  store  of  information,  and  indirectly  by  his  patience  as  the  oral 
histories  took  more  and  more  of  his  wife's  time  and  attention.   He 
completed  the  review  of  his  own  oral  history  transcript  when  he  was  in 
the  hospital  just  before  his  death  in  1992.  As  some  of  the  original 
advisors  have  died,  others  have  been  added  to  help  in  selecting 
interviewees,  suggesting  research  topics,  and  securing  funds. 

The  project  was  presented  to  the  San  Francisco  section  of  the 
American  Institute  of  Mining,  Metallurgical,  and  Petroleum  Engineers 
(AIME)  on  "Old-timers  Night,"  March  10,  1986,  when  Philip  Read  Bradley, 
Jr.,  was  the  speaker.   This  section  and  the  Southern  California  section 
of  AIME  provided  initial  funding  and  organizational  sponsorship. 

The  Northern  and  Southern  California  sections  of  the  Woman's 
Auxiliary  to  the  AIME  (WAAIME),  the  California  Mining  Association,  and 
the  Mining  and  Metallurgical  Society  of  America  (MMSA)  were  early 
supporters.   Later  the  National  Mining  Association  became  a  sponsor.   The 


299 

project  was  significantly  advanced  by  a  generous  bequest  received  in 
November  1997  upon  the  death  of  J.  Ward  Downey,  UC  Berkeley  alumnus  and 
early  member  of  the  mining  series  advisory  committee.   His  own  oral 
history  was  completed  in  1992.   Other  individual  and  corporate  donors  are 
listed  in  the  volumes.   Sponsors  to  date  include  nineteen  corporations, 
four  foundations,  and  113  individuals.   The  project  is  ongoing,  and  funds 
continue  to  be  sought. 

The  first  five  interviewees  were  all  born  in  1904  or  earlier. 
Horace  Albright,  mining  lawyer  and  president  of  United  States  Potash 
Company,  was  ninety-six  years  old  when  interviewed.   Although  brief,  this 
interview  adds  another  dimension  to  a  man  known  primarily  as  a 
conservationist . 

James  Boyd  was  director  of  the  industry  division  of  the  military 
government  of  Germany  after  World  War  II,  director  of  the  U.S.  Bureau  of 
Mines,  dean  of  the  Colorado  School  of  Mines,  vice  president  of  Kennecott 
Copper  Corporation,  president  of  Copper  Range,  and  executive  director  of 
the  National  Commission  on  Materials  Policy.   He  had  reviewed  the 
transcript  of  his  lengthy  oral  history  just  before  his  death  in  November, 
1987.   In  1990,  he  was  inducted  into  the  National  Mining  Hall  of  Fame, 
Leadville,  Colorado. 

Philip  Bradley,  Jr.,  mining  engineer,  was  a  member  of  the  California 
Mining  Board  for  thirty-two  years,  most  of  them  as  chairman.   He  also 
founded  the  parent  organization  of  the  California  Mining  Association,  as 
well  as  the  Western  Governors  Mining  Advisory  Council.   His  uncle, 
Frederick  Worthen  Bradley,  who  figures  in  the  oral  history,  was  in  the 
first  group  inducted  into  the  National  Mining  Hall  of  Fame  in  1988. 

Frank  McQuiston,  metallurgist  for  the  Raw  Materials  Division  of  the 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  vice  president  of  Newmont  Mining 
Corporation,  died  before  his  oral  history  was  complete;  thirteen  hours  of 
taped  interviews  with  him  were  supplemented  by  three  hours  with  his 
friend  and  associate,  Robert  Shoemaker. 

Gordon  Oakeshott,  geologist,  was  president  of  the  National 
Association  of  Geology  Teachers  and  chief  of  the  California  Division  of 
Mines  and  Geology. 

These  oral  histories  establish  the  framework  for  the  series; 
subsequent  oral  histories  amplify  the  basic  themes.  After  over  thirty 
individual  biographical  oral  histories  were  completed,  a  community  oral 
history  was  undertaken,  documenting  the  development  of  the  McLaughlin 
gold  mine  in  the  Napa,  Yolo,  and  Lake  Counties  of  California  (the 
historic  Knoxville  mercury  mining  district),  and  the  resulting  changes  in 
the  surrounding  communities.   This  comprises  forty-three  interviews. 


Future  researchers  will  turn  to  these  oral  histories  to  learn  how 
decisions  were  made  which  led  to  changes  in  mining  engineering  education, 


300 

corporate  structures,  and  technology,  as  well  as  public  policy  regarding 
minerals.   In  addition,  the  interviews  stimulate  the  deposit,  by 
interviewees  and  others,  of  a  number  of  documents,  photographs,  memoirs, 
and  other  materials  related  to  twentieth  century  mining  in  the  West. 
This  collection  is  being  added  to  The  Bancroft  Library's  extensive 
holdings.  A  list  of  completed  and  in  process  interviews  for  the  mining 
series  appears  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 

The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  is  under  the  direction  of  Willa 
Baum,  division  head,  and  under  the  administrative  direction  of  The 
Bancroft  Library. 

Interviews  were  conducted  by  Malca  Chall  and  Eleanor  Swent. 


Willa  K.  Baum,  Division  Head 
Regional  Oral  History  Office 


Eleanor  Swent,  Project  Director 
Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth 
Century  Series 


January  1998 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 


301 


The  Regional  Oral  History  Office 

would  like  to  express  its  thanks  to  the  organizations 

and  individuals  whose  encouragement  and  support  have  made  possible 

The  Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  Series. 


DONORS  TO 

THE  WESTERN  MINING  IN  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY 

ORAL  HISTORY  SERIES 

1986-1997 


Organizations 

American  Institute  of  Mining,  Metallurgical,  and  Petroleum  Engineers, 
San  Francisco,  Southern  California,  and  Black  Hills  Sections 

Woman's  Auxiliary  to  the  AIME,  Southern  California  and  Northern  California 
Sections 

California  Mining  Association 

The  Jackling  Fund  of  the  Mining  and  Metallurgical  Society  of  America 

National  Mining  Association 

South  Dakota  School  of  Mines  and  Technology 


Corporations 

ASARCO 
Bechtel  Group  Incorporated 

BHP  Minerals 
Cyprus  Amax  Minerals  Company 

Chemical  Lime  Company 

EIMCO  Process  Equipment  Company 

E.  M.  Warburg,  Pincus  &  Co.,  Inc. 

Freeport-McMoRan 

Hazen  Research,  Inc. 

Hecla  Mining  Company 

Homestake  Mining  Company 

Kennecott  Corporation 

Krebs  Engineers 

Magma  Copper  Company 

Newmont  Mining  Corporation 

Phelps  Dodge  Corporation 

United  States  Borax  &  Chemical  Corporation 
Wharf  Resources,  Limited 


The  J.  Ward  Downey  Bequest  Fund 


302 
Patrons 


Charles  and  Lois  Barber 
Bechtel  Foundation 
James  Boyd 
Arthur  C.  Bradley 
Catherine  C.  Campbell 
Norman  Cleaveland 
Barbara  H.  and  James  T.  Curry,  Jr. 
Donald  Dickey 
Wayne  Dowdey 

J.  Ward  and  Alberta  P.  Downey 
Mr.  &  Mrs.  Warren  Fenzi 
Launce  Gamble 
James  M.  Gerstley 
Robert  M.  Haldeman 
The  Hearst  Foundation,  Inc. 
Mrs.  Paul  C.  Henshaw,  in  memory  of 
her  husband,  Paul  C.  Henshaw 


William  A.  Humphrey 

James  H.  Jensen 

Arthur  I.  Johnson 

G.  Frank  Joklik 

Arthur  H.  Kinneberg 

Mrs.  Lois  B.  Lippincott 

Dean  A.  McGee 

Mrs.  Frank  W.  McQuiston,  Jr.,  in 

memory  of  Frank  W.  McQuiston,  Jr, 
George  B .  Munroe 
Gordon  B.  Oakeshott 
Vincent  D.  Perry 
Plato  Malozemoff  Foundation 
Public  Resource  Foundation 
Carl  L.  Randolph 
Joseph  Rosenblatt 
Berne  Schepman 
Langan  and  Eleanor  Swent 


Individuals 


Claude  J.  Artero 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  E.  W.  Averill,  Jr.,  in 

memory  of  Catherine  Campbell 
Rebecca  Bender 
Bruce  A.  Bolt 

Clemence  DeGraw  Jandrey  Boyd 
James  Brown  Boyd,  Harry  Bruce  Boyd, 

Douglas  Cane  Boyd,  and  Hudson 

Boyd  in  memory  of  James  Boyd 
Philip  and  Katherine  Bradley 
Albert  T.  Chandler 
David  J.  Christie 
William  B.  Clark 
Rosemary  and  Harry  Conger 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  James  T.  Curry,  Sr. 
Stanley  Dempsey 
Elisabeth  L.  Egenhoff 
Christine  Finney 
H.  S.  Pete  Fowler 
Richard  Friedlander,  in  memory  of 

Catherine  C.  Campbell 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Douglas  Fuerstenau 
Louis  R.  Goldsmith 
Jayne  K.  Haldane 

Bonnie,  Russell,  and  Steve  Harford 
James  H.  Hickey 
Mason  L.  and  Marie  J.  Hill 
Gael  Hodgkins 
Mrs.  Bruce  S.  Howard,  in  memory  of 

Henry  Harland  Bradley 
Lewis  L.  Huelsdonk 
Ruth  B.  Hume 
Howard  Janin 


Jack  M.  Jones 

Alfred  Juhl 

Evan  Just 

Sheila  Kelley 

James  C.  Kimble 

Noel  W.  Kirshenbaum 

Nancy  H.  Landwehr 

Carl  F.  Love 

Plato  Malozemoff 

Sylvia  C.  McLaughlin 

Sylvia  C.  McLaughlin,  in  memory  of 

Jay  Kimpston  Swent 
Frances  B.  Messinger 
L.  Arthur  Norman,  Jr. 
Patrick  O'Neill 
George  F.  Reed 
John  J.  Reed 
Richard  W.  Rees 
Jane  A.  Rummel 
Richard  M.  Stewart 
Simon  D.  Strauss 
John  R.  Struthers 
Virginia  Bradley  Sutherland,  in 

memory  of  Helen  R.  Henshaw 
Jack  Thompson 
James  V.  Thompson 
John  J.  Trelawney 
William  I.  Watson 
Barbara  A.  Whitton  in  memory  of 

William  B.  Whitton 
William  B.  Whitton 
Sheldon  Wimpfen 
Judy  D.  Woodward 


303 


Marjorie  D.  Bjorlo 
Christine  W.  S.  Byrd 
John  and  Dagmar  Dern 
Sylvia  C.  Mclaughlin 


In  Memory  of  Langan  W.  Swent 


Eleanor  H.  Swent 

Jeannette  F.  Swent 

Richard  L.  Swent 

Regional  Oral  History  Office  Staff 


Fenelon  Davis 
Lowell  Dygert 
Mary  Freedman 
Marilyn  Glover 
Virginia  Goldsmith 
Barbara  Henderson 


In  Memory  of  William  B.  Clark 

John  Matschek 
Hilda  Schramm 
George  Shutes 
Barbara  Vollmer 
Mary  Witt 
Mary  Woods 


Willa  Baum 
Douglas  Fuerstenau 


In  Memory  of  J.  Ward  Downey 

James  Jensen 
Eleanor  Swent 


304 


ADVISORS  TO  THE  SERIES,  WESTERN  MINING  IN  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY 

Professor  Douglas  Fuerstenau,  Principal  Investigator 
Plato  Malozemoff  Professor,  Department  of  Materials  Science  and 
Mineral  Engineering,  University  of  California,  Berkeley 


Robert  R.  Beebe 

Senior  Vice  President  (retired), 

Homestake  Mining  Company 

Philip  R.  Bradley 

Former  Chairman,  California  State 

Mining  and  Geology  Board 

Henry  Colen 

President,  San  Francisco  Mining 

Associates 

Professor  Neville  G.  Cook 
Department  of  Materials  Science  and 
Mineral  Engineering,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley 

*J.  Ward  Downey 
Engineering  and  Industrial 
Management  Consultant 

Professor  Richard  Goodman, 
Department  of  Civil  Engineering, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley 

Professor  Roger  Hahn,  Department  of 
History,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley 

*John  Havard 

Senior  Vice  President  (retired), 

Kaiser  Engineers,  Inc. 

Clifford  Heimbucher,  C.P.A. 
Consultant,  Varian  Associates,  Inc. 

*John  R.  Kiely 

Senior  Executive  Consultant 

(retired),  Bechtel,  Inc. 

Noel  Kirshenbaum 
Manager,  Mineral  Products 
Development,  Placer  Dome  U.S. 

*Plato  Malozemoff 

Chairman  Emeritus,  Newraont  Mining 

Corporation 


Joseph  P.  Matoney 

Vice  President  (retired) 

Coal,  Kaiser  Engineers,  Inc. 

Mrs.  Donald  H.  McLaughlin 
Founder,  Save  San  Francisco  Bay 
Association 

Professor  Malcolm  McPherson 
Massey  Professor  of  Mining 
Engineering,  Virginia  Polytechnic 
Institute  and  State  University 

*Professor  Emeritus  Charles  Meyer, 
Department  of  Geology,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley 

Professor  H.  Frank  Morrison 
Department  of  Materials  Science  and 
Mineral  Engineering,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley 

Professor  Joseph  A.  Pask 
Department  of  Materials  Science  and 
Mineral  Engineering,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley 

*Professor  Emeritus  Rodman  Paul, 
Department  of  History,  California 
Institute  of  Technology 

*Langan  W.  Swent 

Vice  President  (retired),  Homestake 

Mining  Company 

*  Deceased  during  the  period  of  the 
project 


305 

Western  Mining  in  the  Twentieth  Century  Oral  History  Series 

Interviews  Completed,  January  1998 

Horace  Albright,  Mining  Lawyer  and  Executive,  U.S.  Potash  Company,  U.S.  Borax, 
1933-1962,  1989 

Samuel  S.  Arentz,  Jr.,  Mining  Engineer,  Consultant,  and  Entrepreneur  in  Nevada 
and  Utah,  1934-1992,  1993 

James  Boyd,  Minerals  and  Critical  Materials  Management:  Military  and 
Government  Administrator  and  Mining  Executive,  1941-1987,   1988 

Philip  Read  Bradley,  Jr.,  A  Mining  Engineer  in  Alaska,  Canada,  the  Western 
United  States,  Latin  America,  and  Southeast  Asia,  1988 

Catherine  C.  Campbell,  Ian  and  Catherine  Campbell,  Geologists:  Teaching, 
Government  Service,  Editing,  1989 

William  Clark,  Reporting  on  California's  Gold  Mines  for  the  State  Division  of 
Mines  and  Geology,  1951-1979,  1993 

Norman  Cleaveland,  Dredge  Mining  for  Gold,  Malaysian  Tin,  Diamonds,  1921-1966; 
Exposing  the  1883  Murder  of  William  Raymond  Morley,  1995 

James  T.  Curry,  Sr.,  Metallurgist  for  Empire  Star  Mine  and  Newmont 

Exploration,  1932-1955;  Plant  Manager  for  Calaveras  Cement  Company, 
1956-1975,  1990 

Donald  Dickey,  The  Oriental  Mine,  1938-1991,  1996 

J.  Ward  Downey,  Mining  and  Construction  Engineer,  Industrial  Management 
Consultant,  1936  to  the  1990s,  1992 

Warren  Fenzi,  Junior  Engineer  to  President,  Director  of  Phelps  Dodge,  1937  to 
1984,  1996 

Hedley  S.  "Pete"  Fowler,  Mining  Engineer  in  the  Americas,  India,  and  Africa, 
1933-1983,  1992 

James  Mack  Gerstley,  Executive,  U.S.  Borax  &  Chemical  Corporation;  Trustee, 
Pomona  College;  Civic  Leader,  San  Francisco  Asian  Art  Museum,  1991 

Robert  M.  Haldeman,  Managing  Copper  Mines  in  Chile:  Braden,  CODELCO,  Minerec, 
Pudahuel;  Developing  Controlled  Bacterial  Leaching  of  Copper  from 
Sulfide  Ores;  1941-1993,  1995 

John  F.  Havard,  Mining  Engineer  and  Executive,  1935-1981,  1992 

Wayne  Hazen,  Plutonium  Technology  Applied  to  Mineral  Processing;  Solvent 
Extraction;  Building  Hazen  Research;  1940-1993,  1995 

George  Heikes,  Mining  Geologist  on  Four  Continents,  1924-1974,  1992 


306 

Helen  R.  Henshaw,  Recollections  of  Life  with  Paul  Henshaw:  Latin  America, 
Homestake  Mining  Company,  1988 

Homestake  Mine  Workers,  Lead,  South  Dakota,  1929-1993,  interviews  with 
Clarence  Kravig,  Wayne  Harford,  and  Kenneth  Kinghorn,  1995 

Lewis  L.  Huelsdonk,  Manager  of  Gold  and  Chrome  Mines,  Spokesman  for  Gold 
Mining,  1935-1974,  1988 

James  Jensen,  Chemical  and  Metallurgical  Process  Engineer:  Making  Deuterium, 
Extracting  Salines  and  Base  and  Heavy  Metals,  1938-1990s,  1993 

Arthur  I.  Johnson,  Mining  and  Metallurgical  Engineer  in  the  Black  Hills: 
Pegmatites  and  Rare  Minerals,  1922  to  the  1990s,  1990 

G.  Frank  Joklik,  Exploration  Geologist,  Developer  of  Mt.  Newman,  President  and 
CEO  of  Kennecott,  1949-1996;  Chairman,  Salt  Lake  2002  Olympic  Winter 
Games  Committee,  1997 

Evan  Just,  Geologist:  Engineering  and  Mining  Journal,  Marshall  Plan,  Cyprus 
Mines  Corporation,  and  Stanford  University,  1922-1980,  1989 

Robert  Kendall,  Mining  Borax,  Shaft-Freezing  in  Potash  Mines,  U.S.  Borax, 
Inc.,  1954-1988,  1994 

Marian  Lane,  Wine  Doctor's  Wife  in  Mexico  During  the  1920s,  1996 

Plato  Malozemoff,  A  Life  in  Mining:  Siberia  to  Chairman  of  Newmont  Mining 
Corporation,  1909-1985,  1990 

James  and  Malcolm  McPherson,  Brothers  in  Mining,  1992 

Frank  Woods  McQuiston,  Jr.,  Metallurgist  for  Newmont  Mining  Corporation  and 
U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  1934-1982,  1989 

Gordon  B.  Oakeshott,  The  California  Division  of  Mines  and  Geology,  1948-1974, 
1988 

James  H.  Orr,  An  Entrepreneur  in  Mining  in  North  and  South  America,  1930s  to 
1990s,  1995 

Vincent  D.  Perry,  A  Half  Century  as  Mining  and  Exploration  Geologist  with  the 
Anaconda  Company,  1991 

Carl  Randolph,  Research  Manager  to  President,  U.S.  Borax  &  Chemical 
Corporation,  1957-1986,  1992 

John  Reed,  Pioneer  in  Applied  Rock  Mechanics,  Braden  Mine,  Chile,  1944-1950; 

St.  Joseph  Lead  Company,  1955-1960;  Colorado  School  of  Mines,  1960-1972, 
1993 

Joseph  Rosenblatt,  EIMCO,  Pioneer  in  Underground  Mining  Machinery  and  Process 
Equipment,  1926-1963,  1992 


307 

Eugene  David  Smith,  Working  on  the  Twenty-Mule  Team:  Laborer  to  Vice 
President,  U.S.  Borax  4  Chemical  Corporation,  1941-1989,  1993 

Simon  Strauss,  Market  Analyst  for  Non-ferrous  Metals  and  Non-metallic 

Minerals,  Journalist,  Mining  Corporation  Executive,  1927-1994,  1995 

Langan  W.  Swent ,  Working  for  Safety  and  Health  in  Underground  Mines:  San  Luis 
and  Homestake  Mining  Companies,  1946-1988,   1995 

James  V.  Thompson,  Mining  and  Metallurgical  Engineer:  the  Philippine  Islands; 
Dorr,  Humphreys,  Kaiser  Engineers  Companies;  1940-1990s,  1992 

Interviews  In  Process 
Robert  Clarkson,  Clarkson  Company 
John  Livermore,  geologist 
Alexander  Wilson,  BHP-Utah  Minerals 

Knoxville  District /McLaughlin  Mine  Oral  History  Project 

Individual  Interviews  Completed 

William  Humphrey,  Mining  Operations  and  Engineering  Executive  for  Anaconda, 
Newmont,  Homestake,  1950  to  1995,  1996 

William  Wilder,  Owner  of  One  Shot  Mining  Company:  Manhattan  Mercury  Mine, 
1965-1981,  1996 

Mult i- Interview  V- -umes  Completed 

James  Anderson,  Will  Baker,  Norman  Birdsey,  Brice  Bledsoe,  The  Knoxville 
Mining  District,  The  McLaughlin  Gold  Mine,  Northern  California,  1978-1995, 
Volume  I,  1997 

Interviews  in  Process 

Anthony  Cerar  John  Landman 

John  Ceteras  Roberta  Lyons 

Harry  Conger  Roger  Madsen 

Jay  Corley  Beverly  Magoon 

William  Cornelisc  Edward  McGinnis 

David  Crouch  Robert  McKenzie 

John  Drummond  Harold  Moscowite 

Elmer  Enderlin  Marion  Onstad 

Claire  Fuller  Ronald  Parker 

Dennis  Goldstein  Patrick  Purtell 

Rex  Guinivere  Richard  Stoehr 

Donald  Gustafson  Joseph  Strapko 

Bonnie  J.  Hanchett  Jack  Thompson 

James  Hickey  Twyla  Thompson 

Irene  Jago  Avery  Tindell 

James  Jonas  John  Turney 

Dolora  Koontz  Delia  Underwood 

Raymond  Krauss  Walter  Wilcox 
William  Kritikos 


INDEX- -McLaughlin  Volume  1 


308 


Anderson,  Ann  Sutherland  [Mrs. 
James],   1,  3-4,  12-13,  24 
Anderson,  James,   Int.  1-58 
CEO,  Minven,   50 
education,   1-6 
exploration  geologist, 
Kennecott  Copper 
Corporation,   6-11 
vice  president-exploration, 
Homestake  Mining  Company, 
16-49 
vice  president-exploration, 

Occidental  Minerals,   12-15 
assays,  gold,   29-30,  43 
Atencio,  Charles,   132 
autoclave  technology  for  gold  ore 
processing,   39,  170-174 


Bailly,  Paul,   12,  16 

Baker,  Will,   35,  36-37,  Int.  59- 
106 

education,   63-65 
Capay  Valley  community 
activism,   69-106 

Barr,  David,   164-165 

Barrick  Mine,  NV,   174 

Bear  Creek  Mining  Company,   12 

Berryessa  watershed.   See  Solano 
Irrigation  District 

Birdsey,  Norman,   Int.  107-187 
grandfather  Alspagh,   123 
mother  Anna,   111-114 
stepmother  Janis,   121 
father  Norman,  Sr.,  111-121 
wife  Sue,   126-127,  129,  146- 

148,  185 

U.S.  Navy  service,   126-128, 
147-148 

Bishop,  Al,   158 

Black  Hills  Power  plant,   18 

Bledsoe,  Brice,   Int.  188-232 
education  and  early  career, 
193-203 


Bledsoe,  Brice  (cont'd.) 

manager,  Solano  Irrigation 
District,   203-232 

Bradley,  William  [Senator],   208- 
209 

Brower,  David,   100 

Brown,  Edmund  G.  "Jerry",   41 

Bulldog  Mine,  CO,   130-146 

Burgin  Mine,  UT,   5 


Cache  Creek,   81 

Cache  Creek  Aggregates,   105 

Cache  Creek  Basin  Resource 

Coalition,   101 
Cache  Creek  gravel,   74 
Cain,  Cliff,  and  Marian,   102 
California  Desert  Conservation 

Area,   53 
California  State  Mining  and 

Geology  Board,   40-41,  51-55 
California  State  Water  Resources 

Control  Board,   73 
CalPIRG  [California  Public 

Interest  Research  Group] ,   104 
California  Water  Resources  Control 

Board,   204 

Capay  Valley  community,   68-69 
Capay  Valley  Water  Users,   105 
Carlin  Mine,  UT,   22,  24 
Central  Valley  Regional  Water 

Quality  Control  Board,   216 
Ceteras,  Gretchen  and  John,   102 
Char  Chesmah  Mine,  Iran,   9 
Cherry  Hills  Mine,  CA,   26,  29,  30 
Chief  Consolidated  Mine,  UT,   2 
Clear  Lake,  and  Yolo  County  water 

allocation,   81 
Clear  Lake  Observer.   78 
College  of  Idaho,   63-64 
Commodore  Mine,  CO,   112-121 
community  activism,   68-106 
Concerned  Citizens  of  Capay 

Valley,   101-103 
Conger,  Harry,   217,  220 


309 


Creeds,  CO 

mines,   111-124 
tailings  dam,   115 


Danny,  Joe,   38 

D'Appolonia  Consulting  Engineers, 

Inc.,   217 
Davis  Creek  dam  and  reservoir, 

78,  80-82,  211 

Delicate,  Donald,   16-18,  45 
Deseret  Farms,   104 
Deukmejian,  George,   53-54 
Dickinson,  Wallace,   171-172 
dredging  for  gold,   184 


electrowinning,   144-145,  164 
Emperious  Mine,  CO,   111-121 
environmental  concerns  and  mining 

waste  disposal,   57-58 
Eureka  Standard  Mining  Company, 

UT,   2 
exploration,  minerals 

and  environmental  protection, 

54 

for  copper,   6-11 
mineral  zoning,   19-21 
research  on  leached  cappings, 
7 


Federal  Energy  Regulatory 

Commission,   206-210 
Fulcrum  Company,   50 


Gore,  Albert,  Sr.,  Albert,  Jr., 

and  Pauline,   14-15 
gravel  mining,   56-58,  77-80,  104- 

105,  204-205 
Grider,  John,   153 
Guinda  Grange  Hall,   73,  82,  88 
Gustafson,  Donald,   25-26,  28-30, 

33,  38,  48,  82 
Gustafson,  John,   17 


Halbe,  Douglas,   48 

Hammer,  Armand,   13-15 

Hatton,  Doug,   132,  145-146 

Heath,  Mel,   158,  174 

Henshaw,  Paul,   17,  24,  41,  46 

hidrostall  pumps,   181 

Homestake  Mine,  SD,   21-22 

Homestake  Mining  Company 
Anderson,  James,  vice 

president,   1-58 
Birdsey,  Norman,  metallurgist, 

107-187 
Creede,  CO,  operations,   130- 

146 

community  relations,   80-99 
employee  relations,   181-182 
environmental  policy,   34 
exploration  program,   16-27 

Horn,  Don,   175 

Hosselkus,  Jimmy,   131 

Humphrey,  William,   45,  218,  220 


Indian  Valley  dam,   70,  73 


Galigher  pumps,   137,  146 
Gamble  family,   32,  33 
Gamble  Ranch,   32 
Geho  pumps,   159 
Geochem  Division,   224 

Gephardt,  ,   3 

G.I.  Bill,  [Servicemen's 

Readjustment  Act  of  1944), 
Goldman,  Charles,   98 
Goldstein,  Dennis,   217 
Gonzalez,  A.  B.,   158 


128 


Jensen,  Rick,   174,  183 
Jones,  Alan,   157 
Joy  compressors,   137 


Kalk,  Tom,   38 

Kennecott  Copper  Corporation,   5, 

6-11 
Kesterson  National  Wildlife 

Refuge,   55 
Knoxville  Mine,  CA,   32 


310 


Krauss,  Raymond,   35,  37,  40,  48, 
78,  88,  92,  178,  213-215 


Lake  Berryessa.   See  Solano 

Irrigation  District 
Lambert,  Maynard,   114 
Langston,  William,   220 
Lindgren,  Waldemar,   23 
Looney,  David  and  Frances,   102 
Lowrey,  Jan,   103 
Lowrey,  Lloyd,   75 


Mahad  Dhab  Mine,  Saudi  Arabia,   10 
manganese  oxide  as  guide  to  ore, 

5 

Manhattan  Mine,   28-32 
Marchand,  Betsy,   78,  212-214 
McKinstry,  Hugh,   4-5 
McLaughlin,  Donald,   17,  24,  41, 

42 
McLaughlin  Mine,  CA 

community  relations,   35,  80-99 

discovery,  28-33 

environmental  standards,   34- 
35,  85-99 

permits,   83-88 

processing  plant,   39,  151-183 

startup,   152-160 
mercury  hot  springs  gold  deposits, 

24-27 

Miami,  AZ,  mine,   36 
Miles,  Jo,   65-66 
military  service 

U.S.  Navy,   126-128,  147-148 
mill  operations 

autoclaves,   161-162,  170-174 

carbon  in  pulp  [CIP] ,   156, 
162,  179 

counter-current  decantation 
[CCD],   155,  157 

crushing,   114,  131-133,  160- 
161 

flotation,   136-137 

refinery,   144,  164-167 

rod  mill,   138-141 


mill  operations  (cont'd) 

SAG  [semi-autogenous  grinding] 
mill,   156 

startup,   157-160 

tailings  disposal,   115,  134- 
135,  143-144 

training,   152-156 
Minasian,  Minasian,  Minasian, 

Spruance,  Baber,  Meith,  and 

Scares,   231-232 
Mine  Safety  and  Health 

Administration  [MSHA] ,   132 
mine  accidents,   118-121 
mine  and  mill  safety,  113-114, 

132-134,  142,  165-167 
mineral  inventory,  CA,   51-52 
mines 

Barrick,  NV,   174 

Bulldog,  CO,   130-146 

Burgin,  UT,   5 

Carlin,  NV,   22 

Char  Chesmah,  Iran,   9 

Cherry  Hills,  CA,   26,  29 

Chief  Consolidated,  UT,   2 

Commodore,  CO,   112-121 

Emperious,  CO,   111-121 

Eureka  Standard,  UT,   2 

Homestake,  SD,   21-22 

Knoxville,  CA,   32 

Mahad  Dhab,  Saudi  Arabia,   10 

Manhattan,  CA,   28-32 

McLaughlin,  CA,   28-49,  150-183 

Miami,  AZ,   36 

North  Lily,  UT,   2 

One  Shot,  CA,   28 

Rand,  South  Africa,   21 

sand  and  gravel,   56-58,  77-79, 
104-105,  204-205 

Summitville,  CO,   55 

Tintic  Standard,  UT,   2 

Wilbur  Hot  Springs,  CA,  26 

Witwatersrand,  South  Africa, 
21 

zinc  deposit,  TN,   36 
Minven  Company,   50-51 
Monticello  Dam,   199-200.   See 

also  Solano  Irrigation  District 
Moore,  Terry,   156 


311 


Nichols'  Rest  Stop,  Guinda,  CA, 

73 
North  Lily  Mine,  UT,   2 


Occidental  Minerals  Company,   12- 

15,  36 

O'Hara,  Frank,   63 
One  Shot  Mining  Company,   28 


Parker,  Ronald,   183 

Penzine,  John,   145-146 

Porno  Indians,   232 

Portolise,  Dominic,   177 

Poxen,  Ty,   112 

Previdi,  Bob,   39,  48 

processing  of  gold  ores.   See  mill 

operations 
Prothro,  Clay,   178 
Prothro,  Dan,   157-158 
Putah  Creek,   204-208 
Putah  Diversion  Dam,   205.   See 

also  Solano  Irrigation  District 
Putah  South  Canal,   205-206.   See 

also  Solano  Irrigation  District 


Shaw,  Mike,   167-172 
Sherritt  Gordon  metallurgical 

process,   39 
"Silly  Seven,"   101-104 
Solano  County  Planning  Department, 

205 
Solano  County  Water  Agency  [Solano 

County  Flood  Control  and  Water 

Conservation  District] ,   198 
Solano  County  Water  Council,   197 
Solano  Irrigation  District,   194- 

230 
Solano  Project,  Bureau  of 

Reclamation,   194 
Sorbonne,   64 

Speirs,  Robert,   84,  86-87 
Stevens,  George,   101-102 
Stoddard  and  Karrer,   194-195 
Stoehr,  Richard,   17,  39,  55 
student  activism  in  the  1960s, 

64-65 

Summitville  Mine,  CO,   55 
Surface  Mining  and  Reclamation  Act 

[SMARA],   52 
Swent,  Langan,   17,  39 
Syar  Company,   74 


Rand  deposit,  South  Africa,   21 
Ransone,  John,   48 
Reed  College,   65-65 
Reveles,  Robert,   38 
Rivera,  Charles,   144-145,  164 
Ross,  Al,   39 
Rouse,  Jim,   224,  230 
Rumsey  ditch  and  canal,   70-73 
Rumsey  Improvement  Club,   73 
Rumsey  Water  Users  Association, 
70 


Teichert  Company,   74 

Thelen  Marrin  Johnson  &  Bridges, 

34 

Thompson,  Jack,   41,  48,  99,  222 
Thompson,  Twyla,   103 
Tindell,  Avery,   84,  88 

and  Grace,   102 

Tintic,  UT,  mining  district,   2,  5 
Tintic  Standard  Mine,  UT,   2 
Turney,  John,   152-154,  163,  182- 

183 


Sacramento  Bee.   78,  222 
safety,  in  mines.   See  mine  and 

mill  safety 
sand  and  gravel  mining,   56-58, 

77-79,  104-105,  204-205 
Scheer,  Robert,   65 
selenium,  and  environmental  risk, 

55 


Union  Assay  company,   29 
United  States  Bureau  of 

Reclamation,  Solano  Project, 

194 
University  of  California, 

Berkeley,  1960-1964,   64-65 
University  of  California,  Davis, 

66,  104 


312 


University  of  Hawaii,   64 
University  of  Washington,   64 


Wagner,  John,   139-142 

Walker,  Phil,   167,  183 

Wardell,  Bobby  and  John,   112 

waste  disposal,   57-58 

water  quality,   203,  214,  218-220, 

222-230 

Wiggins,  James,   200-201 
Wilbur  Hot  Springs,  CA,  26 
Wilder,  James  William  [Bill],   28- 

33 

Williamson  Act,   74-79 
Wilson,  Pete,   53-54 
Witwatersrand  deposits,  South 

Africa,   21 

Woodland  Democrat.   91,  222 
Wyatt,  Shelf ord,   105 
Wyodak  coal,   18 


Yolo  County  Flood  Control  and 

Conservation  District,   70-73, 

81 
Yolo  County  Planning  Commission, 

213-214 
Yolo  county  zoning  ordinance 

amendment,   77-78 

referendum  on,   93-97 
Young,  Joe,   146-149 


Zadra  cells,   144 
zinc  deposit,  TN,   36 


Eleanor  Herz  Swent 

Born  in  Lead,  South  Dakota,  where  her  father  became  chief 
metallurgist  for  the  Homestake  Mining  Company.   Her 
mother  was  a  high  school  geology  teacher  before  marriage. 

Attended  schools  in  Lead,  South  Dakota,  Dana  Hall  School, 
and  Welles ley  College,  Massachusetts.   Phi  Beta  Kappa. 
M.A.  in  English,  University  of  Denver.   Assistant  to  the 
President,  Elmira  College,  New  York.   Married  to  Langan 
Waterman  Swent,  mining  engineer. 

Since  marriage  has  lived  in  Tayoltita,  Durango,  Mexico; 
Lead,  South  Dakota;  Grants,  New  Mexico;  Piedmont, 
California. 

Teacher  of  English  as  a  Second  Language  to  adults  in  the 
Oakland,  California  public  schools.   Author  of  an 
independent  oral  history  project,  Newcomers  to  the  East 
Bay,  interviews  with  Asian  refugees  and  immigrants.   Oral 
historian  for  the  Oakland  Neighborhood  History  Project. 

Interviewer,  Regional  Oral  History  Office  since  1985, 
specializing  in  mining  history. 


1  f 


