In another hour it will be 1939. After an all.day drive from

Zacksaavill., Witte and I have arrived an the outskirts of Tampa's

Latin settlement, Irks City. A fat red.fased man in overalls in

standing in front eta bar, and I ask him to direct no to tho address

of

uifees relatives. lie boa imbibed too &ear to even understand

my a ilestions, no I thank Ms and drive on.

We an a dog...oe track, which has drawn a largo crowd. Tao young

Nigro non are standing on the curbing, and I ask them for directions.

Although well-in to xicated, they sem amnions to please and the directions

they offer are so berant.

Ndith is in patient: Ohs wants to reach her slater's house in time

to celebrate the New Tear with her. We soon locate the how., a dilapidated, unpainted two.story from building, divided into raw apartments.

A barrage of Spaaish greets Edith WI Mho goon up to the parch, and

there is much budging. I an in troduced amid vigorous handshaking. Childret

gather in from* of the house, and in 3panishs INees an Amorioan. Re sure

looks it, too. Ton can tell by looking at him." Estrella and her husband Pedro °reside...nod and have four °Midwest, two girls and two

boy's.

We are a lherod into the front roam, whioh is tarnished with a

modern dresser, and an old iron bed neatly covered and topped with a

2606

befeathered oaruival doll. There is a calendar meads well, and a

framed oard proclaims

npttokhorver ver the upp 4oth now

SUM heart ic casdi, to have it Os

3, Wei IWO% qFb t"4.

so vow it WANK 1140 loar

1.0P w

There are no chairs, so we sit on the bed. Ve,are not invited

to maid up after our trip.

"Tau 'sill have to forgive our poor house," MP VAtreila. *10

use to have a nice place and nine fersiture but it all got basted up.

That ono dresser is the only

thing we saved out of the Wile house.

It just node we sick. Pedro

was at work, the kids in sdhool, and /

was visiting 4th a friend.

then I oeme hose it um all termed. All

oar clothes and everything sas goes and that's My we haven't got hardly anything now. Zeman eh° owned the house built it back again because

he had immune*, but we didn'thave none booms* it cost too moh."

"I know pou use to have the nicest things," says &litho wdemati.

fa sloe Meets and tablecloths, everything handmade end . just beautifUl.

then I saw this house and furniture I couldn'tbelieve it me Mere yen

lived.*

"I know. Vie UAO to have nice things I had been making and saving

for a longtime After the fire Pedro went to his boss at the oiger

box fostoryand told his how it was with us and asked him if he could

barrow som money. M A boss asked hies how mph and Pedro asked for

twenty dollars and his boss game it to him. That was nice of Mita'

right."

4.3.•

*I worked for hiss long time,* says Pedro, *he know I pay his

back all right. .:You lent some wins? You like a sweet wine? I go

get some wine, we celebrate the New Year.*

HA leaps *shin bicycle and disappears down the street. Estrella

hesitantly puts on Edith's new fur coat. ahe stands before the dresser

and turns at various angles, ruining her fingers slowly through the

fur. "/tsure is soft s* she says, " I don'tguess I'm ever going to have

no no coat like this one. It seems his ehat you haven't gat is ghat

you always went,*

*You don'tneed a heavy cast in Tama,* replies Edith, "It's too

mum to wear a coat like that her.."

"I sure so uld like to go to Key

at to see mama,* says Fatrella

/ haven'tseen moms in nine years. You know, uhen I'm working I can't

leave, and when I'm not workine; I haven't got any money to go, so you see

I don't get to see her. How is MW now? I guess she is getting fatter

than ever. I sent her a right pretty little lamp, like you set an the

table, for Christmas. I wish I could have sent her something more better.*

"I think that was a aloe present,* Edith says. *We wanted to send

her a Beautyrest

ttrees for Christmas, but we just couldn'tafford it,

Beautyrests eost thirty-sine dollars and ninety-five cents; we can get

than for wholesale price, about twenty-five dollars, but we still can't

afford it this year. tb sent her three sheets instead. I know she

needs sheets bad. I sure wish we could have sent her the mattrose,

cause you know a oma is getting old and it would be nice if she could have

a good mattress to sleep on. /he Beautyrest oompany advertises *Spend

one.third of your life like a millionaire.* It's too late for mes& to

do that, but / wiah dhe could at least sleep good for ono, in her lifs

before she dies. I know it mould poke her feel a lot better.

ninon needs teeth and glossae but it doesn'tlook like Wagon ever save

411414111

up enough to get either one. lhe trios all her beet to save enough to

COt then, but nomething a lynys °mos up and day boo to spond the moomp...

&nobody gets °lak e or Anoheles work stops, or something always happens.

to has to oat soup end everything aoft. Ulama allays liked to eat good

foot!, too. And abs liked to rend all the tine, but now she can'treed

oo abo liatens to the noye from Cuba over the radio. They bay. good

nova frau Who; they say everything by saying double neanine and e.-j--

body understands but the government met atop the broadoasta booms*

they say overythingdemble waning."

"My kids would all like to live in nor Nest, bemuse of the headwa ll *

says : AtrolLa. "In nor City there in no place for them to play and have

a good time."

ofbu said that right," sego one of the boys. "ellen Tom in 70y lest

/ rya to the bee& ovary day. nut I like the schools here bettor; I have

all good Umbers except one.sboye ihe sore is touch4 She to lla us: 'If

you don't set down rill knock you out of your seat** Cho's tough all

right. I have to yalk tyslve bilooks to school everyday, but Pause

to it by now.'

Dodro returns, laving a loft en unoleheled quart bottle half filled

Ilth mine. "Come book to the kitchen," he seys,

lb peas through the oecond roon, thich in furnishod with tmo iron

bode, a straight chair without a back, and sore on londare. Clothes Sr.

hung an a cord behind the door. The kitchen is equipped with a

three-burner oil stove, two unpainted wooden tables, and four chairs.

Pedro pours the sine into glasses and drinks what is left flan

the bottle. "You like some coffee" he asks. Ws nod. The strong

black Cuban coffee is soon mad*, and served in glasses with evaporated

milk. A long loaf of ctiban bread is broken into pieces mad buttered.

"You see I keep the bread basket up over the stove,' Pedro elatlains.

"I throve leetle bits bread over in there and then some weeks when

coney is snares we take out those stale breads and wane then lathe oven.

--This is good fresh bread; I got it this afternoons*

ons will have to hurry," says nstrella. *Ina fewsinutes it will

be twelve o'clock and we hafta go out in the street to see the New Tear in."

we finish hmrwiedly and go out to the porch. The greatest noise

lamed* by the Children who fill the street; some of them shout in Wog.

lish, Spanish, Italian, or in all three languages. Several firecrackers

"Zest a few more minutes,* says Pedro.

Two blocks down the street the upper balconies of the Italian

Club are visible and the or dhestrn can be heard playing °Chan and Amerisan dame MAO* Suddenly we hear five shots, and ass a pelisse= silhouetted an the balcony of the Italian Club. He reloads his revolver

and fires five more times into the sky.

"It's l9598" shouts a neighbor. 3veryone yells and laughs; only

the children do not sound famed and artificial. They rase about the

street, shooting a few firecrackers. There is a barrage of Abot-gue fire

from several a ectorre„ ate soon the shots spatter beak upon the roofs.

The amll boys in front of the house are trying to &use the lead out

of WOO Shot uun shells, so they can tire the caps.

mall

so reflv. Mw fingers split by tin explodinc fireernekere

run6 down

the street wailina•

ten cent TIMM candle is ale:harped from tle house TbLi xt dome;

tho heiaht of the .lisplay, it is admired b;,, everyone. It as mt long

bofore the) limited cupply of firecrackers texhausted. .:strella Dane

to her :311114re:1, nually she civets up °ailing, (rid ohtzes then in the

street. She catches each one,

holds then aqui:mi.% while she kisses

then on Vie cheek,

elktdenly it is oppressivel:tquiet. Pedro moms . w:lell s I iNnee

thatto al. It's 1939 and it don'tfeel me different to me."

trey:* yells a noidthor in 13pratish„

Sce.lione ( the ftmeral

hono next du) to acme pick up the dead cool*

441114 dead ono** caeca Pedro•

01933,"

fra: Rai* laughs 2odzo„ "You got to tixtt time all rijtt. I bit

ritt on to that ono,"

"Itiuld you lila to rio somewhere tonight?* sake :Ltrtre.

slrrt oaf° of a om sort - Newtthare let on dance and buy drinks.

*You don'trasa a jook joint, do you?"

a sins. "Socking is

for uniArried pone"

*Matta at you think.," roplies .7edro, "-plenty married swum Poly.

"I knrst they do, but that's gt)i

°Toe don'tknow "ghat looking means. looking areas baying a

good ties anywhere, drinking and dewing. We go so mewhere nice. We

leave the kids with sr brother. He don'tmind to stay with theta;

we give Mae a lietle a line and he be alright."

"Tms put on your tie," Estre.U.a tells Pedro. H edoesn'tseem to

like the idea, but goes into the lamer bedroom and emerges with a tie

under the oilier of his polo shirt.

*Pedro, etantt you wear a shirt tonight? That tie don'tlook good

without a real shirti• Pedro grambles as be puts on a heavily starehed

white shirt.

One of the children appears with Pedro's brother, who is rubbing

his eyes sleepily,

*noes is my brother, Thomas,* says Pedro.

"I'm very pleased to meet you*" says Moses, "We ins meeting

you to cams yesterday or earlier today.'

"Madre de Diosto suddenly *ries r.strella. "Pre torn my *taskings

on this rough old furniture.the only pair I've cot decent that I can

war out* I just bought them for Christmas. Oh, this makes me slaki

My only pair: I just paid sixty- mine seats for them and nom they are

torn and

lame uhen I can buy me another pair. Well, no use

to cry over it. But it makes ne feel. terrible; I minted to take such

good oare of them so they would last me a lonz time but now just look

at them, ruined,"

oval, you all better get started," says lgions• *I wish I could

go et th you, bat I guess so embody bas to stay with these kids. Maybe

I can go with you before you leave. Don'tforget to send one of the

kids nfter some wins.*

7tle send one at the ehildren for the wine; he Gan get the empty

bottle half filled again for fifteen mints. Our driving off attracts

the attention of everyone in sight.

"*.re to?* / alk.

'we san drive up and down seven th Avenue." says Natrona. *That

is the only lighted-up street in Thor City Shire there is amythinE, to SINN

I guess you will want to drive over to l'Ellapa.*

I assure her that we would prefer to stay in nor city, in we

drive along Seventh Avenue. Marrow, and with a street oar track down

the minter, it is well lighted with neon signs. Met of the ihope have

Italian and 3panigh names, The Woo, barrooms, and restaurants are

thronged vith people, many of them dressed in tunedos and maniac gm's.

The restaurants are being .heavily patromised by Amerleans frau Tampa.

ISdet's drive by the Cuban Club and the 4penigh Club,* suggests

Estrella. *They haven'tseen t

There are big dames at all the axes

tonight; Me Years is the time or the best dames.*

Both the Wham and Spanish Clubs, impressive structures of some

erehiteetural beauty, are surrounded by :mem parked automobiles.

*I have male a model of the Cuban Oldb," says Pedro. "I siGoe it

to you when we go home. Tou blow. I lee make it for pretty; / no have

nothine else to do so rmake a loodel of the elub. After I paint it, if

it look good I teke it and put it in the club.*

*The °Oen OlUb kes a social medicine Society that has its ova

Climb, nurses, doctors, everything," says Setrella. *It sure is a

big help to poor people like us, They have individual and twill

policies; we have a family palsy for sixty cents a week. Not lOnc age

I had to have an operation and / went to the a isle aed had it, and it

didn't met me a cant o whenever mnybody in the really gets Disk and needs

medicine or a doctor, the insurance pays for it."

we drive back to seventh Avenue, park the ear, and walk along the

sidewalk looking at the Whops.

remarks Rdith. "Dresses, Shoes, hats, everything..everything costs

ivies this much in Jacksonville.*

*Grub is plenty Cheap in Thor City, too," sera Pedro.

Almost every shop has a poster in itmeindoe, labeled: AID THA

saVT151 710TIlis or MAOIST ADORUSsION. Ilbe posters show a small ehild

crying amid ruins, and bombing planes flying overhead.

?giro mays. "The Cubans, Spaniards, and Italians here are all feel

sorry for the Spanish people. Sven the Italians boo Mossolini eh=

he comes on the.sereen. The Italians here sure hates Anesolini all

right."

se pass a gagman* stand, which includes in its display a number of

measines printed in Spanish. a erie is OM 'eosins, Mug" laid: has

on its cover a groop of Spanish women and children with their arms up.

stretched in horror, *bile overhead are pictured bombers with the

Italian faalat inaigAiaand the Rani swastika. The cover is labeled,

in Spanimb, "Glory to Sod in the Highest' and Pease on italtn 110 UMW M R

of Coed 1111." I open the *over and see that bient is published by

40.

the University of Lehor il lialeo Oltn lineente Lambardo Toledamty

editor.

We speed several hours Ina small oafs. eating

an sandwiehes

and a dming,MAtswith Romrloo mad Gooapeola. There is a jookorgan ( a lekelodien). Which offers a seleetion of eight swords of

Cubm music, acd teo mord' of Anerleen amide. There are maples

present who dames the Ameba gala and again. Isabella and Pedro

donee the *melba also. Apparently they, are both enjoying themmelvee.

'Ws dead to go out and have a good time with your husband,*

says Estrella.

like to go to Ganoes and all that but Pedro don't

take ne mmoh. I don'to are so much about Showroom, kids is mire

snug about then, and they go two or three times every week. The

kids can as. two shows for ten Gents.'

It is five-thirty lathe morning when,* finally decide to go

home.

'This is the latest I ever stayed out in

llfel" Estrella

emelalms.

with and / are offered the front 'oma; the four children are

all sleeping in embed lathe bask rams, and Zstralla and Pedro will

sleep in the other bed.

*You vont some coffee before you go to sleep," asks ?ear°.

"If I drink eoffee now I won't be able to sleep." I reply.

"Mane a littly swallow coffee before you ep to bed make you

sleep pod. Ouhen eoffee don'tkeep you a wake like Amerlean coffee."

I insist that I do not want so ffee. I try to pull down the

paper shades over the windows, but they will not roil. There is

nothing to do but turn out the lifOts and mdress in the dark.

"Are you vans enough?" calls a strella from the other room.

0 7.5, 0 Mdith replies, mwe are sleeping in aar robes."

14y Pedro don'tlike for me to sear too much clothes to bed,"

laughs ::strolia. rua don'tlike Mr= to wear pajamas; he likes

gowns. Suva ICu have no sea appeal in pajamas. You should see

me lathe ones I'vu got ounce."

D. nest morning we are a wakened when a nen and two young

girls, about eighteen and twenty, walk in the front door without

knocking. They all any "Pardon us,' and walk harriedly through

the room. The _girls blush and look towards the wall.

After dressing, we go into the kitchen. We sash our tapes

and brush our teeth at the sink on the beak port, ditch serves

both downstairs apartments.

"You bettor look out for the ceiling over the sink," warns

Sstrolla. "The sink upstairs isn'teonneeted to no pipe, and the

water drains through that hole and falls doun into the sink dove here.

Sometimes if you aren't °a real it (to mes down on top of ye:Lublin

you are not espeeting it and ruins your clothes."

"They shoulda tor. this house down long asp," Pedro says, as

be prepares the coffee for breakfast. "That floor leaks 'verities

they scrub upstairs, too. The Jana ( toilet) for these apartments

is on the bask port% but it doesn'thave any water oonneeted to it

eo we have to pour tinter in it to flu& it. The non who owns this

hones is a deputy sheriff. TI. lives upstairs and raises hell all

the time about living in such a slum house and says he is SWAG

to tear it down and build a garage apartment but he never does. Re

La sassy end ndbody likes him. Tait bemuse he's a dainty

sheriff he thinks Mos a big shot, I guess."

"Pedro was tsim to paint the wills," says .71strella.

ean

bey °beep paint and paint it himself. He painted the other house we

lived in all by himself. nets a good painter. Dot the landlxid

keeps saying he is liming to tear the house dove, so Pedro doesn't

paint it. He's been saying he mut gonna tear it dote for three

years and he hasn'tdone it yet.

*Thor City is the slum section where only very poor people live.

Mb live in Thor City beams* we Gantt afford to live nowhere Wis..

like everybody who lives in 'Thor City. They don'tlike it but it is

all they oen do without more money. There are lots of aloe, quiet

apartments in Hyde Park over in Tampa, tut they are expeosive."

*se pay a dollar and a quarter a week rent on this pla0e. We

don'thave no bath or to ilet or nothing like that. I don'tmind

bathing in a tin tub cause I been use to it all my life. You should

seen no &hen I went to visit Alicia in kLiesi. She has a beautiful

bathrooms, tile all around and everything; a perfect Johnny and

mirror and everything just perfeet. I got in the shower and stayed

all day most. I sung and song in the shower and turned on the radio

and had the best tine."

**hat time is it?" I ask, after we finish a breakfast of

grapefruit, ()arrow, and bread.

"That (cook is fast," ;Citron& &wars. *Idy husband, he

always sets it fast so I will got up- in tine to get the children

off to school. I mks up and the clock says seven - thirty so I go

book to sleep and then wake up end the °lock says eight, so 1 gay

*let no get up frOm here so the Children won't be late' and it is

really only seven-thirty."

"IrmnIr slamming ehen / get up I fix one lestle imailas of coffee

and drink it, then go to the pamaderie for hot Caen breads and mime

back and have IWO coffee with bread, then go to my work," Pedro says.

01 went to Show you the model of the on ban Olub I make," he continues, and loos into a closet on the beak porch. He returns with a

wetly made model, several feet high and long. °I just make this frma

lay mind; I no have nothing to go by. See inside* the ballroom upstairs,

and the place for the orchestra. / make it with paper and shellac I get

from the factory. I'm golw3 to paint it white--/ wiehI had better

oelloPhane for the windows.

"•, -1,at you writing dew" Estrella asks no as I begin to take notes

openly.

/ explain something of the life history program of the Moral Writers'

PrOjfilete

"I don'tknow why you vent to write stories a bcmt us, but don't put

our real nese in it. Call me 'Estrella; / like that name better than any.

I a lmoye did want people to call me restrella. Its a pretty name.

/ can say forswear is that I've done my duty by Mole Saw-P-

I had four kids before / was twenty years old. That was !network. But

them days is none forever. It's nice to have kids if you can afford to

take care of this end give this some of the things they need. You know

I want to try ard give wry kids an edueation. If I can dolhat I die

happy to tom that they got eduoated„ becamee without no education you

oan'tmake a living these days. It's hard to maks a living even if

you have gat an education, nush loss witiout one.

°MY kids all hate to go to school, except Carmenp.dhe has a very

good head and makes good grades in everything. Tha other kids has gccd

beads too, but they sure hate school. They rather play with marbles,

I guess, Dut if I can just gat them all educated through the twelfth

grade I will got satisfied." •

"You out to read scma good books yourself," says jiith4

husband is mmking ma read educational books.*

"I J now I ou4ht to," admits :strella, "bat I liks to road something

with a little life azd lame to it. I read love, romance, silk stocking,

and detective madazines. It scams like I Nat can't get my mind on

education books, and I can'tunderstand than anyway. In Ely West when

I went to school they didn'tteach us enough Aaglist words to read those

kind of books. I know it's good to read good books."

"nhat'a the story of your life?" I ask iledro.

'It ain'tmuch of a story,' he replies, latmother is fiftymeour

and I'm thirty-six, and the baby of twelve kids. ny nothor died when I

as four years old. You know it's bad for kids not to have no mother;

that's the most worst thin. That's why I didn't got no education; but

I wan reed a 'esti() and write my pane.

"An old Negro messy raisod my fuoil.Y. She sure as good to us. She

is vary old and sick now and me and my brother have to pay for her to go

to the hospital all the time.

"I tall you eamethIng what happen in xey West before I moved to

Tampa. / didn'thave nothing to do so I got a Job in a restaurant

-15hitg dish for sit dollar a week. Then one day the cook leave town

without telling &IOW end the restaurant open up one scram without

no cook. I to/1 the munaapr I cook pretty good so he tell me go a head

try. I maTce the pancake for breakfast; make two for him to try first.

I put a leetle melted butter on each ono and a square of =elle butter

on too of the top pancake and he like mood.

'I cook plenty black bean with rice and lotea good things that

day and alla customers ttey like good and the manager he say I can be

cook elle time. / ask him how much be pay me to cook and be say ten

dollar a week. 'Tell, that day X had workod froi six-thirty in to

morning to ton that night so I tell him I no cook for tan dollar but

if he mart to eive me fifteen dollar a 'peek thatte all rie,hL. 7o tell

moat() finish warking that week till he could get another cook, so the

next day / lust didn'tcome back.

*Tms / work in a cigar box factom We make forty thousand boxes

a day. The A-rle dress thom booms up mighty pretty. 2he itctory sure

is u r1txi, too. I kinda hats to start work because I know I'll have

to keep on workini; steady until this time next year. 3s work stet:4

all the this. The box factory don'tclose COM like tLfe cigar factories

cause we always got orders coming in from all over the country.

"Lots of cigar factories closes down after Christmas over year

because them is not very good boatmen right after Christi. At This

box factory they give everVoody *to worked there ten dollar fibr

a hrietwes present. That was nice. I wantod to buy mw kids ewe clothes

with it but I thought maybe I.better save it so in case there is sickness

or so nethinr, like that haNet rhave a leetle scriathinr.

-16-

'There is about tante hundred people workiug in the boa festory

se I guess that makes about three thousand dollar they give avow to us

for Ohristwas. But they oan afford it; that cOmoany Ls waking

fur tha owners. 04mmulnent men ivan investigation loet year to see

howinuch than owners are makin4L. dad they published has much it wos in

the

le sae one of Uhem papers over L.ers, end we read Where the

plant director is tua;:inz eighteen thousand dollar a year. LAS, me was

plenty da,41n sore."

"Some fellers day quo a rtakiw; all that sway evarY sear and welarking

like , aves for twelve dollar a weekie You know than government fellers

in vestii:uting oan learn anything.

been working fifteen years lathe box mill. Fifteen years is a

lone time. 'le make the leetle thin paperwood out of cedar to wrap the

good edgers In; that keeps them fres drying , and keeps out tho Lugo too.

Oe leernee bow to leaks that And of wood-paper. 11,4 ang: my helper is

the only OPUS the meager trusts eith loading those oars to Lo into

the / tome. le vas thee/Lee &loved him tho way to do it. Ike vanted

to put that paper.thin mod right in the steam but wo told him it ought

to havu a heavy wood two or three Lnehee thick: on top to :tiou,p it from

warpin nid burning. 30 he told us to do

an try it Inel when be

seen how good it oame out, to pretty, he told us to go a head and alleys

do it that way.

. .jurin6 the Ohristmes rush they triad to put another Seiler to

loading those ears for the steon, mud the nu didn'tblow how to do it

end the ear burnt up, all bleak. Min ethee cars oast plenty noesy too.

The Chop nen had the oar Gleaned up and didn't say swathing about it or

the men who did it would lose his job.

*There loons NOgromenimrk there, seventy.five years old. He

been working in that basin'ss for sore than fifty.five years. He is the

only colored ma working taws and he has another colored man to help help.

A lot of croakers fraa out in the 11600d0 10 working there. 01, 0006 pt

no union started cause them crackers will cork for anything. Them wild

cracker people have their ova a arden; they work for *lough to buy a

little bacon ands sack of flour and they is satisfied.*

W6 all go out maths front porch; there are no chairs, some perch

on the railing.

Two young COban menaerose the street are busily repairing flat

tires man old modal Wok, the top at vhish has been cut off so the

rear can be used as a truck. Pedro says that eadh moraine, it has at

least two flat tires, which most be fined before they drive to the city

dump heap where they salvage wrap iron* The iron is then takaato Port

Tampa and sold for a mall sma per pound.

"1 think they ship all that iron to Zupan,* says Pedro* *People

been digging iron out of that junk heap for years, and it looks like it

never Oives out.*

An aged and *rippled Negro nen stops in front of a house on the

corner, where a group, of children, in oludine Negroes, smlattoes, Spaniards,

Cabana, and 11.1 ions, are 'Wind nimblea in the black dirt of the front

yard. 4-' light-a/dinned a hild runs into the house, and returns with a

very bleak Regrow:am, tho gives the crippled man several colas. No

removeslais hat, bokie his heed, t%anka her, and shuffles on down the

street.

.c7You. may not believe it," says hatralla, *but that 'a ogra amat is

that white-looking kies mothers Thaw are al/ oalored peopla in that

house - they aro very nage people, too. Zoos kids all bAriQ egosa

tine iiIering together during the hau.sys. %Ls crolamd klas, OWL

the uhite-looking mos, have to ga to separate schools.

'I try to help anybody all I can. Xi I can treat a urbody nice

I try all ny best to trout tam all right. You know, I oonaldar myself

tna 194u0 as everrbody• .a ioryboay in this world in • af GVUTS0

sons :a eopie has more mow taan others but that don'tmaio no di:a nnum)

*1004 that riot people think they are better than poor .i.eopita, -

A young Cuban nan, about tuwaty.two years old, stops by I.o see

fvdros 1e sits on tLe porab railing, and glucose t1routp. a pala-papsr

penpala entitleu:

Li rAe2s

Aad Lawn be Oply Ons wief oc :301244

%0 'W04011 it tome with a laugh,

donn believe thora Is any tact* it it," he says. '4aoate craw

nan gave it to ue faul t11417i kgiketi

i: 1 w4u1u saattributo° a dime. I

Vold hitt °Loll no.' "Aaal people go all x.ound a lvitg away thaa booim

and a olleatik; fivu <mats bore atd taut:mita 1driO and it all WWILMI up.

I don'tbellow ithat kind o ood e bat I 4o bulieve that a aara is so arthing graator that us that a obady knows a rwthint): about. -

in a aanitlial the panOlat, I sae Inlaid* Una wear tao folloaing:

or auah imam-tame are taata fasts that Judas RutbartorCla speeah at

loyal Labe:Al:Au. London, naland, vas try-am:Mod by raio boa:awe

direot lino aim, to othar auditorium in oorJ that 50 a ltiaa it Zia

-19.

Unitad Litatos, Oamada s Great Britain, mustralia, Now Zwealand, and

';lasaania, we, ull to dothar, nor° than 150,000 a meahled in ools,..

volution. Jiaultaueoulay it was Oroadsast by utransoontinsztal obaia

o IIC Unite4 :-,tatas mdio stations. It is now putiLiodad twit millions

Mat, AL,Y f'wd, rizh4lj tzoa tiro raots, aad bo Lastin61y bonofitad,"

10,000,000 copies

IA= MIER

Sihio and Traat Sooieti

International Bible Stadent Asemiation

Brooklyn, 214.

Itianah a ftioas:

Lotdon, Buenos _Arun,
Berne. Shanghai, and other cities.

Zaronto, Strathriald, CA.* rota,

*I just got in off or a boat from Ontia," emtimes the young nen.

*40 hadn't no so oner got off the boat *hen the international Somme

Union officers tried to get us** are stimbers to sign an agreement that

if there was any

fighting with the National Maritime Union us woad

pitch in and help the MU. It seems that not low ago the NMU sent a

bendh of gays to an lBU meeting to bring up some controversial issues.

• theimeeting ended in a fremoforwall„ end the bell weal wreaked.

*Then when the mu coiled emitting, the ISU went to their meting

and wreaked their hail: they broke all the windows and chairs and everything. Than the or ganiser explained all that to us lima we got off the

boot, we eailed a meeting to talk it oier. se decided to tall him,

'ball no, we muldn'tfight,*

Ifty should we get Mad up in mah

foallihness? Lots of than boys in the IMU is good friends to us, so

My Shdeld we fijils wittithan just because a few union leaders wont

us to fight'

7hen, T fellows I!h

iU1 tht.t nit-down st-le7 -7 or. the 1.1. MBA

l'ast ; ear rTte weinc; J.9-Air feet funtor then their heeds, 1tri.thyT, aint

no ebilrlts 171:,,e.rpra, ttrft. Lhey rhotatta

lawyer to

at the shies

Gout-rots bears) they Iltertotl Pitrthin:-•,,, Ton see, the

7110, a rail

oontraet with the United !7t,r.ttes novernestnt, r,rte the contrri-ot Pro14, we..

thin:7 j:114711 4t the mil not holm'. brad M I Vr-fro tn two week:a• ilrit'a 'kr

all .tf-rl lytirts mtelt -.k.7.trutt t %LIAM, beCEDX(10 the 8t"11:0 1'110A cr the

mil. 'IT tly:fy haft jttet coiled off the otrils

rtirri.p1,e

1vriN before

thono two !moll; worn u7, ervl then stortod tho strike all 117M" P.'L rine the

union won't?! havn 11311 ont. ltit non all 421(rt boys hlve lost their jobs

1.7.11 cftritt r7ot

bee:.

henr4, that the eite7)mly offered to tn met of

V'eri

thorr would renter firms the union, b,.it only 0. few or fri did."

11171,7 omplexionod 1.r1 posses the house; atm has an attractive

film) !ma TIonrs;

Imes.

nronetteg° eels 7474 d r 0 •

LI not r

womm," tv:131a Ina 70t-ail.c. "-, is net !Tarried;

she 7noe with ear: odzr. Ihe r!o itn,n;r7oAy far fifty certe--losa than

ttvit--4'or r !.!trel

l!frten't rhe ;r13't erre dt2nnio"

Af dmet kraw,* mowers ?ftto,

*T.0 elic, a

rTO, her nothor 1t nban; T don't „lacer her of fil MO-the_ ?mown leo

her father L3. ftto loolceliker 7ue /*an I 1: 13e61 there vrql Anse

VI 3 fnnoo."

"k*

cla -mgo placcJ vita her," : Atrell% sayo with con-

'lotion. :to with four

la-het I an to ore bettor off then she

13, 7.3,1ro was nast7 to ne .ror twMlo.lat new !if43, realize:3 th-A what he

41.

has at boom is more bettor than what he eon IVA on the streets."

"I:strella is plenty jealous," Pedro loughs. "I like warn with

?lardy jealous end temper so I can tame eLdots,"

I have enjoyed vir visit to Thor City so latoh that I begin to

oonsiderr the possibility of remaining lower than I had planned.. I sok

Neb.° if it would in convenianoe him greatly for us to delay our departure for several days.

"You have a good tiams?" he a tiks, ' O.K. yuu stay as long ea yoa

want, lbu know we don't. 71evo meh but we do the best we sun for you

to be happy as long as you oan stay,'

So 7edro and I drive to the telegraph of ficio to wire my State

director of wy & ones of plans. Pedro watches, we earefully as I draft

the telegram, Ss is amazed Alan I send it oolleot, and wall: out without

Paiiatc. "imam scatter" he ask*. not& no have to Ay for telegram!

Wm, how you do that?"

then we return to the house, With has seen her other sister, Aassia,

oho he in vited us to a perd the next tow days with her. We paak our Wattle

assisted by Pedro, 7artre13.a, and the children.

"Tou come by to Gee us every day atiLlo you are here," says zetoolla,

widh you would stay with us, but We Ulm; .4fanda hes more mate

As we leave, Pedro says,. 0/ hope you find lots of stuff to write

good stories. I tell& you so oethings if you tell wrerYbodi you is a

Pederal "triter that sake them thin% you is a salsa or something and

they no talk to you; if you just may you area '11:P, millet writer tbarr

will talk to you such more better,*