"This place is a mess," the woman said. " I just moved

in today. I'm going to have my shop in the big front room,

and live in the back part. There's plenty of space, you see.

I wasn't in the block that burned. Just decided to move,

that's all. The other girl and I decided to split up. We got

along all right, but I wanted a place of my own. The equipment

was most all mine anyway. This is a pretty good location, don't

you think? Just off the square here. L_tI'fl llk lb fine.

And I know most of the old customers will follow me up here.

was-the

that drew them, you know,-- They all 4estew-EA-la-i-they

clidnItlmord-tlae-otha,r,gjr1..,",

"Well, where's your husband?" the man asked. " The last I

knew you were married."

"Which husband?" Lila asked, laughing. " I've had three s

Married l I Fuess I've been married. i-lA_mueh,7

marrte,d-woman r -Arrtiaux6.. But I'm single again now. And glad of

it."

"You're still looking pretty nice," Arthur told her. " Still

young and fresh, Lila. How do you do it anyway? Look at me, I'm

getting to be an old man now."

"You've still got your hair and you're not fat, Art. You

look pretty fit. You haven't been 1,ound here for along while,

have you? Oh, lots of people ask me how I keep so young- looking.

2.

But I'm not so old, you know. I'm only thirty-four, Art."

"Well, I've been around along time, ,_ rt. I was married

when T was seventeen; the first time, I mean. Just my daughter's

age now. You wouldn't think I had a girl seventeen years old,

would you? There's a picture of her. Isn't she a sweet kid? She

graduates from high school this year. And there's my picture

beside hers. You wouldn't think that was mother and daughter now,

would you? Looks more like sisters. Lots of people take us for

sisters when we're out together. Yes, she looks like me all right."

Lila was tall and well- formed, with a manner of easy composure. Her speech was frank and brisk like her walk. It was

impossible to imagine her ill- at- ease under any conditioivrHer

skin was wonderfully clear. Only in her eyes and about her mouth\

did her age, and experience, show at all, and she was undoubtedly,

older than thirty-four. She liked men and she liked liquor but

dissipation had not marked her. There were no false pretenses

about her. Arthur regarded with her admiration.

"Oh, it helps to have a beauty shop of your own," 4,1k said.

A

"I'll admit that. It makes a lot of difference when you take all

kinds of care with your skin and your hair, and not spend a lot cr'

A j

money doing it. A woman needs a lot more care than a man. Look

at lots of women my age, even younger. They get married and let

themselves go. They get fat and sloppy. They spread all over the

place. They think because they got their man that nothing else

matters. Then they wonder why their husband steps out on them/

You can't blame a man for stepping when his wife get like that.

3.

Well, I never let myself go, but my husbands used to step out

on me just the same." Lila sighed. " I guess all men are that

way."

Arthur inquired slyly. " Seems to me you used to cheat a little,

Lila. Remember when you were waiting on tables in the hotel?"

Lila laughed. " I wasn't living with my husband then,

Arthur. Sure, I cheated -- if you want to call it cheating. If

a man can't support you why be true to him? I was making my own

living. Well, I lost that job because the men paid too much

attention to me. That old senator -- what was his name? I can't

even remember it, or where he was from. Up north somewhere. He

was quite an old sport6)44440mm4 He used to spend money like a

Guess he had. plenty of it. He sure threw it around anyway.

It was really on account of him I lost my job. I couldn't help

it. I couldn't get rid of the man. He was after me every minute.

Then I worked down to Montpelier in the Pavilion. He followed

me there. Old Hafer said I was the last young waitress he'd ever

hire. I guess he's never hired another young girl. The ones .ac's

got in there now are old enough to die. They can just about move

around. Soup gets cold while they're bringing it in from the

kitchen,"

"Did you marry that lieutenant you used to go round with?

He was an engineer on that East Barre Dam. He was a pretty good

boy, I thought."

cL,

"Yes, I married himl-L-ttn - sa+d - ecrol - fb-i-etferl., °God, but he

was a good-looking manl He was the last one, Art. It didn't

4.

last long. He was too damn good-looking. How the women went

for that guyl He was the last one and there won't be any morq50

We used to have some good times with Eddie though. He was a lot

of fun. Remember the week- end we went up to Gallagher's in

Phillipsburg? That was a time. We started for Montreal but didn't

get beyond Phillipsburg. Yes, we did too, we got as far as St.

John's. We stopped to dance there, and the girls tried to make

you men. We found out later they were professionals. That was a

tough joint, Art. 8,0; It's swell in Phillipsburg. Right on the

water there. Mississquoi Bay right at your feet. I remember how

the breeze blew in the window in the morning. Fresh and clean

off the lake.fAnd I had a hangover; oh what a hangoverl I don't

have 'em either. j The water was dark blue that morning and

r---

there were white sails way out in the middle. That crazy Eddie

r LH drank bottles of ale before he even got out of bed. What a man
6/) _
LIbat Eddie wasl... Say, Art, how come you never got married?"

"Never had time -- when I had the moneyo

4'
4Now I got all kinds of tine and no money. I'd look pretty asking a girl to marry me the way I am now. Forty-two years old and

broke. You know what I'm doing now? I'm working on WPA, a whitecollar job. Fifty-eight dollars a month. I used to make that

much a week. I used to make that much in one day. And spend it

in one night. Fifty-eight dollars a month! 'What can you do with

that? And Lila, you know what I was doing all fall? I was out

with a pick and shovel. Right on the old chain- gang. Well, it

put me in shape anyway. Took about four inches off my waist.

See how loose these pants are. This iE a tailormade suit too.

5.

Boy, it was tough, that job. But I liked it. I liked it better

than the one I'm on now. I feel kind of a shamed to c'co up to that

State House where we work. You know how it is. I know everybody

up there and they all know me. -I'm le4n4--epf-A.s.hanted-

-rod un off lop proof-reading, All we do is proofread -- when we do that. Sometimes the fellow I work with don't

show up at all, and then I just sit there. You know, one of uo

-do that a lono. It's a hell of a jolbrAfts--a-Foaft-etryweeir. But what

you going to do?"

"Yes, but I got laid off. Didn'twork at all for almost

a year. They couldn't afford so many clerks so they let me go.

I know more a buut shoes than any man in town, too. I really

know shoes, and I can fit shoes.

loafed for

almost a

year. That ate up all the money I had in the bank. I still

got some in one bank but I can't get it out. It's been tied up

since the bank holiday in thirty-three. I drew some unemployment compensation for a while. It was tough, Lila. I ran up a

big bill at the restaurant where I eat. I'm still paying on it.

My goddamn check is gone as soon as I get it. Fifty-eight bucks

a month! That's not even cigarette money. When I was on the

road I used to spend that much a month on tips. I always had

good jobs, Lila, but I can't get one now." r

-.411,06641r

Arthur was a .44Kmaw.#4,1,44W...44**414.man with 41144muscular hands.

He had a homely fed face and AtQjaaioecl...ZIatialait..0161Peee...

Nis

6.

false teeth were very noticeable. 4Wommiam.neatIpLiiresmod

double-breasted suit of -s-1-i-rigeieftly

  oxford gray.

A

SAftm!gd WAVite

m-40 Wa-414i...r.k.a43 .1 ntito mi441

persma// affracM/e,

40;7e, pe126 SkWy,

(xi it

A ipti"

.a.446.1m0,4054Amaqe

I remelvtle,r

"Yes," Lila said. "741:Qa,a44.14-*4441,-Mg

ge44-mn.dr-ifireTe

when

you used to cone in the shop. I remember the first time I did

your nails. You were pretty fresh too, Arthur my boy, pretty

fresh. But nothing like the guy I had today. He was so fresh

I wouldn't even take his money. When you called me he got ma

because I left him to answer the phone. He was a wise guy i...-.I.

P

thinh h

ew. Ayvta y...he thought he was a big shot. Big

city stuff, you know. I told him what I thought about him before he left. I wouldn't take his money for the manicure. That's

how burnt up I was. He won't be back -- I hope. Nobody'll mioo

him."

"That was a good job 7g4r.th,-1.4.11-19firld-NtleAms," Arthur said.

"Sixty dollars a week and expenses.

itedg,J-iree4 good outfit to

work for. I made plenty extra on my expense account, too.

They're very liberal. They expect you to stay at the best hotels

and eat the best food. Boy, I was living high in those days. I

had the old mazuma and I spent it."

"Don't I know itl" said Lila. " And you had a girl in every

port too, sailor. A woman in every town you hit."

Arthur grinnod a ploaood taa4n3- "Sure, I could do it in

those days. I had a car, plenty of money, the best clothes,

everything. If I went out on a party I expected to spend fifteen

7.

or twenty dollars anyway. Now what have I got? Nothingtri--

--41ft*etrue-4mre4.68.-mr, I was checking up the other night. I've

only got four decent shirts left. I'm law on so cks and underwear too. I only got this one suit. I need a new hat. Jiliww.

I've never been so low in my life. I'm right on the old rocks

for faira 35.1.4a-."

"Don't let it get you, Art," advised Lila. " Don't let it

get you down. You'll come back all right. They can't keep a

man like you down. You remember Helga Larsen, don't you? 4Yettsery

---ezier749-eder-ieritmrsers She's younger than I am but she's been

kicking round jttst as lone, or longer. -44se-aza.c...gplagm a=2.„,vaaim..e

-.4iter,-14etriterrarrb--45ite

fr'n

Helga always went for married men. Well, Helga

just got herself married.

4;1144/'.411" I rilical945t

r eNt" 1.116/Whibifea"

.

Of course the man is

from out of town. RoAo APow P4a.cai.144mee-iIrrierantret,e14.4evoioaaigift

ifellow. I went out with him myself. He's a big tall guy, over

six feet, Ifore they

and handsome. I was out with him njust a few nights bewere married. Nobody thought he took Helga very serious.

But she got

him all right. Everybody says she hooked him quick

before he found out about her reputation. He's kind of a funny

fellow. I mean he's moody. Sometimes he'll sit there smoking

his pipe and not saying a word. Sometires he won't talk to anybody. Then again he'll talk and laugh and tell stories, be a

lot of fun. He's c-ot a swell job, makes good money. But he's

kind of tight with it. He's a hot-blooded man too6

.140.tiatexima.4 vela looks awful since she got married. Blue circles

s.

under her eyes. I never could stand that girl. She always

thought she was better than anyone else, and she certainly

wasn't. I know plenty about that girl. I've seen her in action

with my awn eyest?

4'414 miumilmwww

--Yon-

"There's another girl from that crowd going to get married,

they say. This dumb young lawyer is going to marry her. Nobody else that lived round here and knew her would marry her.

She's the one that fixed Doc Carter up last winter, and she

gave it to a boy in I:on tpelier too. Doc gave it to Velma Burke,

and she passed it around. The town was plastered with it all

winter. They say the whole Ski Club crowd had it. I don't know

about that, but I know quite a few of them gave up skiing all of

a sudden, and quit drinking too. Now the girl that started it is

cff

going to get married, the sweet little thinglidIim an awful cat,

aren't I though? I'm no angel -nd never pretended to be. 44m -

.4rtà But these girls that pretend to be so damned

nice give me an awful pain. This town is full of them. They

act so sweet and innocent. But you aught to see them when they

get with a man and have a few drinks in them. Innocent all rightl

Hot little sluts, all of them."

"I know the one you mean that fixed Doc up," said ,-_rthur.

"I went out with her once, but I didn't make any passes at her.

She looks pretty good."

"Good thing for you didn't, I guess," said Lila grimly.

"A wonder she didn'tmake passes at you though. Yes, she looks

all right

if you care for that type. Did she show you her

scar. She's always showing her scar when she gets drunk. Ap-

 ______

• • •

•

9.

"How do you like the Christmas decorationso

You know

the Granite City got a big writeup a few years ago in the Boston

papers. Praising the Christmas decorations. Some of the private

homes have some lovely things too. This town is quite livewire

in that way. They get out and do things here, you have to give

them credit. Y o, Ohricisman io comiiv a geth.. I feel kind of

old at Christmas time. The years go faster and faster. Christmas

doesn'tmean much now. I always think of Christmases when I was

a kid back on the farm.

..,Alfewrillesaptim All the glamor girls come from the farm, you knowaW

-air•cs-riesida.t.libellravisn Now it only means drinking and dancing

at the Elks Club or some other place. The same guys, the same

gals, the same gags. You have to drink to stand it. If you

drink enough you think you're liking it. I don't drink an awful

lot though. I take it pretty easy. At my age it begins to show

on your face and figure. Remember that sons, " Stay Young and

Beautiful?" That's my businessimila. Make others beautiful

and keep myself that way -- or try to.

you see the big funeral procession todayeAdrie An-

other stonecutter's funeral. I did his wife's hair& .v - iettew.

She'd never been in before. 44as - vmse 2 lovely little Italian

woman. She cried all the time, couldn't stop the tears.

didn'tknow who she was16)(4 - owamasda. She didn't say a word. Most

of these women talk your ears off. She had a face that was sad

and noble, kind of. It made you feel like crying to see her. When

10.

she was leaving I said: ' I hope you'll come back again.' She

said: ' No, I don't come back again. I don'tneed to come any

more.' Afterwards I found out who she was. A stonecutter's

wife -- widow, I should say. Her husband had just died. I

wondered why she had her hair done. Somebody must have made her

come. She won't ever care how she looks any more@

yraise hell

but the women are straight. They're brought up that way. Italian

men dnn't stand for their sisters or daughters or wives playing

around. All Europeans make a laughing- stock of American husbands

anyway."

"1 guess they got a ri7,ht to. Most husbands here are scared

to death of their wives. I know plenty of them that get tight

or something and don't dare go home. I almost got married when

I was in the army. One of those sweet southern gals -- with a

mother who might as wellIve carfied a shotgun. That's when I

was down at Camp Wadsworth, ipartansburg, North Carolina. I

enlisted at Fort Slocum, New York, you know. I was one of the

first men from round here to join the army in 1917. I was just

a kid... Well, one night this old southern belle came in and I

was with her daughter. We were mussed up maybe but nothing had

happened. All innocent, see? But the old lady was going to

have us married right away. Well, I never called on that baby

again!

"In Spartansburg there was a military school and the boys

h- duniforms that resembled our officers uniforms. In the army

you salute the uniform, not the man. That's the understanding.

11.

Well, these kids used to get a great kick out of standing on

the streets and making the soldiers salute them. But we got

wise to those tin soldiers. One night we ganged up on a bunch

of them, rushed ' em down an alley and did a good job on them.

After that they weren't so cocky."

"I was supply sergeant. Yes, I got across but I didn't

get into action. I sailed from New York to Brest on the Leviathan, and I think it was the only troopship that went across

unconvoyed during the war. It was originally a German boat, you

know, a prize ship. I think there were 10,000 soldiers on board.

And about 200 or 250 died of in fluenza on the way across. We

flew the yellow flag all the way, the plague flag. They were

dying right and left like flies. The 57th Pioneer Infantry, an

all Vermont regiment, was on the boat and lost lots of men.

"We went into rest camp at Br est; then to a reclassification

.camp at Le Mans. After the Armistice I was stationed at the

Central Records Office in Bourges. Central Headquarters was in

Chaumont. In Bourges there's a cathedral with two towers, that

they call the " Butter Towers." Peasants sold butter to pay for

them. I picked up a girl in Lyons and took her down to Nines,

which is near Montpelier, the town our capital was named after.

I remember there was a bridge in Lyons dedicated to Woodrow

Wilson. This girl stayed with me fourteen days. She didn'twant

any money for it either. All she took was an American dollar for

a souvenirs That was about ecuivalent to six francs at that time.

She kind of wanted to get married too, and come back to the

United States to live. But I couldn't see it that way, Lila.

12.

Those French girls thought all American soldiers were rich. The

American private drew a dollar day, while the French poilu drew

about two cents a day. As supply sdrgeant I drew about threeeighty a day : so I was really in the money, see? And of course

we scattered francs around like they were nothing at all,

"I spent some time in Paris. Stayed at the Hotel Continental

there. I remember the Crystal Palace where Jack Pickford's wife

died and there were naked dancing girls, and the soldiers and

girls promenaded on the make for each other. It was a great war --

but not for the poor guys 11D front in the mud and blood. And what

a crime it'll be if they start fighting over there again now. What

a slaughter. I mdan if they really start fighting on land on the

Western Front. Phillip Gibbs says the Maginot Line is practically

impenetrable and could be taken only with the most awful slaughter

you can imagine.

"Well," Arthur said finally. " I kick on being over here

on the WPA. And you kick about going round to the same places

with the same crowd. But I guess we're both pretty lucky at

that. What kind of a Christmas do you think it's going to be for

most of the people over in Europe?" At least the people on ':;PA

can have some kind of a Christmas, not much) but something. And

no bombs dropping down chimneys instead of Santa Claue9-ny--