As I approach the house of Ratio Owens, I recall the time

when it was necess ,-41y for me ta go to the homo in her time of

deapair. What a contrast today/ The house, still unpainted, is

surrounded with blooming flowers, the yard in can, and rubbish

removed, a line of freshly washed clothes drying in the sun, all

show the gallant fight of a woman for her children and home.

Lievaral little girls are playinj in the yard and one of them sees

no as I walk 11:) the path to tLe little cabin.

"Too-boo, Ass jmith, coe in, i.to-m will be rIt with ye",

said the child.

"Howdy", said Reale. "Patty Rose, go git ass Smith a glass

o* cool buttermilk. as jest been a-chuanin* an* ther milk is good

an' fresh. 1 guess 1911 be =kin' butter that rest oi my life for

my family is so big hit tae.ee all that or eam I can it ter keep

ohill*un in butTer. k.,111 Bess is a good cow an* I don'tknow

what gelid done widout her, fox' manys a time we*ud only have bread

an* milk gravy far our meals. Patty Rose here is one o° that

smaller ones. Tes/um„ we have 15 ohill*un but with all o9 my troubles, ther Good Lord has blest me too.

I vent ter wori,„: in a hosiery mill in Winston when 1 was

14 yira old. Lo an* my st ,ter , who was eleven then, went to work

an* we made .7,urty good money too.

got paid ever two weeks an*

o.ot I * member I was paid a 410.00 gold piece, 5 OM'S ant some

silver in et- 1;:e. 1 waAter ter keep hit so much for hit was so

purty but had to give hit up fer my boerd an' keep. Sister is still

workint at ther same mill. She has been thar $1 years now.

de used ter walk ter work,an ° one dny we missed a gang ol men

workin' on some ' lectrio lie. Thar was a real good lookint boy

in that gang ran' evor mornie we passed them he would aorta smile

like. I wished I eould meet himlan' oho' nuff I did, ter one of ther

girls who worked next ter me in ther mill knew him an' she in derdueed

us. I Wlieve John an' I fell in love all at onct,fer we started

got& together reeler at ther fust.

"Pa's birthday was soon, an' we chill'un ' aided ter give him

a party on a Sunday, so I **cited John ter go along with Sister an t

I ter home. That Sunday was ther happiest day, I shall never fergit hit. 13 months later we was married.

'John was a lireman an' -lade ' bout 42.00 a day. That was good

money then. We Sound us a little cottage an' funished hit with

new furnishure. I worked ' till we &Tot ther funishure paid ter, an'

then I quit for my baby was a-comin ° along then. Little Julie was

born 9 months a tter we was married. John an' A3 was so happy in our

little hhme an' with our new baby.

"One day wheq Vier baby was a few months old, I heered a cyar

stop out in front o' thor house. I got up an' went on ther -poreh.

Thar was 2 strange ien in thor cyor an' hit loo:ed like so mebdy was

a-layin s on ther back seat. One 0' ther man ;ot out ant opened ther

back cyar door. I was 30 sc,ared I couldn't speak. I saw them take

John out o' thor cyar. I jest knew he was daid. They brought him

in ther house an' nelped it hit. in ti,or bad. Then the doctor come.

lie was therc tor ther company sent a tter John fell. Thor doctor

said he was hurt riht bad but re'4 be all right soon. You $ee, ho

pull od a liement in his haek ant it bothered him up till their time a'

As death: Atter John got up we ' aided ter move ter ther country.

John's mother had a big farm ' bout 30 miles from wiaatea,

helped her farm for 6 years. Vaneous s Paul ;Inmost, an Harvey was

born at John's mothers. Van !Jul searlet fever an' was mighty sick an

3right .sdisease for two years att%T.

e ' aided we needed a place a° our own as ther little ones was

comi

of ast, so John went in debt for this pleee. It has 40 acres.

Ify husband cut an' so wed ther lutlber for trier hzelse an' butlt hit only

with erriff ra:.:m ter do us at that time. * aimed ter add on ter ther

ha but it jeat soon lik#4= we nlver could o' do hit ' count of sickness an' one thing elnother. Clarence was born that spring. He was

a zood ;)aby. john startet our crap ant plowed up *Wier gyrden for I was

goin' tor t Ice care o' that. I planted soe oabbesge an' wanted ter

plant so lle on ions too. I went over tor a neibor's house am' she sold

me a=o or on sets.

he meas,lrod ttiom out o' at old bucket that was

anda eert Inside. I t00% them home an' sturted settle them out.

&meat tin' ilarvey was A.a yint ' round ;14a

i;ent a tter 4 for some on ions

ter eat. I gave t!lem st.x;e an* wont on ttLalt my lantie. :A,xty soon,

tot% ter .4oys was sic an vonIttie sumpin awful an' nothie I elid

a ruld atop them. I sent Ju.i tsr t or doctor a in a snort ti,a-c he

was. rther house. ' rore Yre.White „:ot that.. I was most scared ter

death for Harvey

at stiffened nut an' I thou - t he was did. Thor

doctor !-Iad ter prise tLs in eth 07)on ter . ve ! Iim some

deoine

he

se!d he or tme jet ! r1 tine or else : 7mrvey w41101,0 died in ' bout 30 mei

min es. You see. ti oy U43 pawned by ther -arts green let' in ther

frum thar year ' fore. My neighbor was awfully upset over ther

cnill'un bein' sick but she said she didn't think about tear young

'uns estin' ther on ions.

"1 guess you ' member the? flu a pedimic. Back in 191,8 1 Dilieva.

IlatS pne 99 that' :ust ft:Alias here a bots ter AVIII hit an' ever

bodily wa So afraid ol hit they would n. tvula In ther house but would

call outin they yard

put food on ther porch far us. Virgil was

borned

-.;; ear an' I tool;. ther flu when

was 3 days cold. Thar

two oldest chill'un didn'thave 4It but they wae too wr.all ter de

enyt.incs A, all was awful sick bat 1. mawed ter it up an did

as ma* far ther uhill'un as I oo -ad. hit's a !wonder I didn't die

an* I've been not strong ever si-lca. John had hit worsen thaw rest

0 us an' 1,,ti wasn't able ter work any a-tall ther nee suer.

Dale VAS born nee ter Virgil an' I was sick along spell.

Rheumatiz set in so bad I couldrOt walk tar a lort tia. 3oon's I

was better

t, I had a nervr.3us breakdown.

it was fall nein ' fore

Itts tiA:e ter be up ant dot'.

*lilt wasn'tlong ' fore I knew I was big agin, an' iearl was

born ther nes* vit-. ' Tore I quit nusein' her, Ylinnie Ruth cams

along en' I had ter hv a octor with nie ttLat a-tirle. I a llors

had a midwife but yhealth

bad s an' 1 didn't get along so well

with her either.

Then Pearl was 2 or 3 ;ears old we went tar see ny brother.

Brother Joe lived on a tarn like us an' he dug yarbs tar sell.

Thar was a llers a bunch 0 ' em dryin' ' round their place. ile nada

good money those days sellin' yarbs but you can'tmake much sellin'

them now-e•days.

. 5 .

"The second day we was thar„ ' bout dinner time, Pearl an' Dale

came in an tsaid they was sick. They was a-vomittin t an* actin* jest

like ther time Ernest an' Harvey got pizoned. Both o* them was too

sick ter tell me what they had been satin'. John went a tter ther doctor as fast as he could an' when he came he had tarwork over than fer

along time. When they got better, so as ter talk, Pearl said they had

chewed some ol Uncle Joe's ebaccer which was a-layin* out thar on ther

table in ther yard. Brother Joe had dug up some poke root an' was a-

dryinl hit ter sell. Thinkin t lit was * baocer ther chill'un took a chew

o' hit. They got well in a few days tho' an' I was mighty happy ter

see them runnin' an' playin" agin.

"When Billy was a wee baby, Julie WAS *bout grown an' she took

off one day ant got married. I hated ter see her leave me for she was

so much help, helpin' me with ther baby.

"Billy was two years old when Betty was born. Our house was so

crowded with all ther babies omin' so fast. We jest couldn't git

enuff money a-head tel .' pay off our debts ant build onto our house.

"Well oit seemed like so methin t was a llers happenin* ter our

family. Hit was jest one thing er nuther. Ernest was a big boy an'

he kept fussin' fez' a gun s but, John, my husband, wouldn't let him

have one ant then we didn't have no money ter buy one. But Ernest was

so anxious for hit, that he got some parts frum old guns that other

boys let him have an' Aade him one fer hisself. Hit would shoot real

good, too, an t he kept us in rabbits ant squirrels. One mornin' jest

'fore Thanksgivinl he went off ter ther woods ter git rabbits. He

wasn'tgone so long ' fore he was back agin an' when he was comm' up

ther path I noticed he was holdin" hisself lie he was earryie so methin' awful heavy. I couldn't unnerstand what hit was he had killed

that was makin' him walk like that but when he 2ot oloster ter ther

house I saw he was draggin' his foot an' his side was all covered with

blood. I got ter hia7as fast as I could an' put him ter bed. One ol

ther chill'un ran ter my neighbor's ant got him ter go for ther doctor in his cyar. Ernest was so weak ' cause he lost so much blood that

when the doctor come, he out him in his eyar ant took him ter ther

horspittal in Elkin. I went, too, an' stayed at ther horspittal*while

they took pitohers ter find whar ther builit was. They could see hit

in ther pitoher an' I saw hit,too.

They said they had ter oplrate

ter git hit out. The doctors out in his side, but when they got

inside, they couldn't find hit. Then they op/rated on his back, ant

still they couldn't it hit, but hits thar yit ' cause I saw hit in

ther pitcher.

'e had a little money saved up then, but hit took all we had

ter pay ther horspittal an' doctors, an' then thar wasn'tenuff.

We've never been able ter pay hit yit.

"PWWohn got sick right a tter that. He had high bloodl anl

a large heart an' kidney trouble. He c;ouldn'twork much but would

tell ther boys what ter do. That was in ther winter ol 1932 an' 1933

"We had twelve chill'un ter home an' with so many mouths ter

feed an' sickness an' all, we got in debt good an' plenty. We were

a ffiered ter ast for mol credit an' we didn'thave nary a cent ter

run us either, Our wheat an' corn had give out ant ol course, that

meant we couldn't have 71read. SAlieboddy tole us ' bout ther Relief

people in Yadkinville an' I went down thar ant ast fer some help

till we could git on our feet agin. They was mighty fine ter us ant

AO sure did ' prostate hit tact * farm, didn'thave noth - tall.

,a couldn'teven send the

ter school far they didn'thave

clothes ter w4 ar. That was A tarrrao winter an' then I was gittin'

big agin. raUay was born tar nexe spring. 4 hoalth was bad at'

John was still unable ter work. 1134, we

a loai, them Lord only

*Tans was ther only one o' -4r boys that 3ave us any trouble*

1 71t ter runninl ' round with sone 0' ther boys th&twtire tough am'

didn't have a good name. Ue

John tried ter naU) him stay ter

ae but boys hien age wolidn't listen terthar

s an Pa's word,

they th ,.iwht t.e:i know re'n *eam.anyone. So ont night t is gang

broke in an

t.louse. Vans stood on ter a utside

watched.

Thor 'whole bun

o' ' est got caw,t, rie ' awe any cy ter

it him out o' jail, so

had tar o on thar roads. shad ter take

nit

cine n' Alt !Ade a -Ian out 0 him, They let him off

a tter he stayed or' t!ar roads 4 months, ' cause hc was a good boy.

lie had

6 months

He larn't his ,esson ' cause theta V'er only

tVas e ,c;t. In trouUa.

When he was ol ,.2 tmurf te se7t

stayed

thar ' til tt%er money run o,lt

thur 1.:a a honorable dip -

,

charge.

wPatty Rose was born next an' Cien VerA.o s

"It was when patty

no wns born, you was our caseworker.

You tzember ivin' me that order tar bad ulotzles

dishes.

didn't nava snuff -lates so we culd all at at =et. I'll never

forgit what you ant ther reIlaf did ler us.

"1 was nick a lorL: :: se1.4. a tter Fatty Rose was /Joni. john was

good t5r ;ae. r.(:zwas wie o' thur bent . en on ywherss. 2ver morninv

be went o4t aM rnyed " fere he went ter wafts t4e bsioed ter ther

PentoestIll olüese ' urcb. 1 still ee thar ever obese* I it.

m- on Verdi°, V;er baby , as 1 months old John yes taken bad

oleic .tn' had ter go to rourteen dayn later he died. Ho didn't

have eny ' surance but burial ' surence an' it wasn'tsnuff ter pay

all ther ' spinosa. I owed than 4t4.00 attar. I put Zahn away nice

en' t7arter 7urtlost rlowers. He had been so eood tor me an' ther

:oung ' une s felt like

ldn't do enuffibr bias We had his tunml at ter -church an' tn frlunds were all thar. Ttor choir sung

lots of hynms in' ther proecber talked 30 nice like ' bout mY Jahn.

Nit was a

fun'ral

gPeoele wanted mo ter yu .'• ther little ones in a " sylun but I

a zuldn'tgive tzem e7 Me I ad ter give up john.

"John tad 3 good fox hounds so

sold tie- tar 430.00 an' give

ever penny tor ther unnertaker. I aimed ter pay over cent I owed for

John's fun'ral an' I did. I don't owe them wortaitalair nothin. e.tall

now

"We had Riood crap les° year. Thor best we ever had I b'll eve.

I nearly

out

debt. Atter pann° ther fert'lizer bill, I had

44 C,00 left. I I have a good crap this yer I can it out og debt

but I'm a feered their crap ain't , 7oint ter be SO 100dep

"Clarence was A ther at.4map 11 metes. he is ther best one a° toy

.-e.ver took onv Ciinf7 that be1orwee ter enrIne else. Onet s

whenwa.. in

NJ p his Lieutenant wrote meter sent elarmum

money far hls bue fre. I aent him a doll r but ': lrenoe came home

'fore ne elt

zoney. '4hon he ot uc& ter camp he sent ther

41.00 baolz ter cae.

naves% merriod goon a tter Zahn died. He wont ter Virginia an'

got a job in a wee' =kin" $25.00 a week. Vane se hist site are

livin" thar toe, an' he works at the? same pleas whir Xrneet dom.

He makes 48040 a vow. Ho has one little baby an" I id.shalt

see har. She's real outs an' smart too. Lasteeek4 Clarenee went

ter Virgisis for they had a job for his too. He is angle back

home 3unday a tter his oddlmobile. He * int married yit but 1 as

he'll be soon as be makes enuff monay ter 'map a write. Zahn taught

all thar boys how ter work on oyars. Se had a old one here for a

long Una ant they was forever tinkerin" with hit.

"Tbe older chill'un didn't git much larnIn" when they was little,

but 1 =aka ther younger onee go ever day ' less ther weather's too

roughs X tells then eddimahun means a lot ter people nowadays.

only mutt thr340 Um' 5th grimilLame John didn't go a-tall. When we

was married he couldn't awn write his name or count. I taught him

all I could. He was real in ert an" lamed good.

"Yee.um4 Paul ant Earvey are married but Paul ain'tlivin" with

his wits.

he's a sweet little tin g but Paul is sort 01 hernmsOMIWUK

like ant ain't emm ter mettle down.

"Thar ain't but 9 a hilliun ter home now-Aut when Dale come

tharill be 10 o° um hero. I glt fifteen dollars • month fer ther

little luale unmar 16, thaea six o" ' ems Hit helps a lot far hit

keeps my gr000ry bill paid up mosi a' then tine an" so matimes I

managed ter git a dress for myself or for one o" then young tunes

fkly health aim' any too good now. I'm gall bladder trouble

an! I'm havin' all ay teeth pulled out. :eat have 3 left. I don't

know ..,,hen

he able ter git me some or those stars tooth but

10 0,

ther doctor said ap iiid'teet12

jest likevediesa ter we, an' I wed

reel better 'hen they was ell out.

*I prey for ay ohill'un ever night, specially op, bays. Lie

week I want ter cherub an' when I got home I prayed mos" all night*

Atter I wlnt tor sleep, I had a dream er * vision: I thought John

was with am an' we were in an apple a wait lain' up apples. The

tree was Jost full oi big purt, ones* All ther little ehill'inn was

with us an' we all was so ha!py: I than thought the:. end 8 time had

omen an' 'John was no easy frun as but ther 1itle ehill'un was still

with me. Them, I tu4t I waft eilowed tar go in New &Drumlins's'

sew ther streets all paved with gold. I bslieve hit was a.visioa

'stead o' a dream: nits awful Are ter sit a lonr widout Iehn: I

dram ' bout him so =Loh. 3=stlnes my drowns are so real. I wake up

bolievini that John is a tili ulth c. Vie sot aloes good an' we never

got glad

nonstiguis John umeld poet

lewd

eve never be a,2_ ter add an ter er finish our house as

John • planned, Hit needs a sew roof an' palette too, but I

don'tknow if I'll ever be able ter 4o all that needs ter be done*

I try ter keep tiler % awe clean an' ther yard neat. Mere some day

t er ehill'un will help le fix hit up:

wires, were in lots better shape than we was a few years ago, bul

I'm still lonesome fer Zohr even wlel ell !ly little ' Zs ° round as.

ifilbe hit won't be no long ' fore Zahn um4 no will be together Raja**