My parents, although not French, were born in Canada and

lived under conditions much similar to those under which the

French Canadians of that period lived. Having been brought up

in a town that had - and has today - a large French population;

and having gone to school with French children; worked with

French people in the woods, on the boom, and in factories; I

think I understand then well enough to write something about

them. Of the many French Canadians I have known, a number

stand out from the others in my memory.

Father Trude', one of the early priests of the parish, saw

the new St. Josephs brick church erected just before he died.

He was a shrewd, kindly man who had a habit of looking over his

glasses at people when he talked to them. He was short, stout,

gray haired, and pink cheeked. He was always complaining about

how poor he was, but he could never refuse a request for aid -

financial or otherwise.

There used to be a popular superstition here a mong Canadians

that a priest could cure any disease if he wished to. There was

also a story of how a fellow who attempted to hit a priest found

that his arm had become paralysed. Whether or not a priest possesses miraculous ,powors might be a subject for debate, but in

the caEe of Sandy Savoy ( Frnch Canadian) there seemed no doubt

about it.

Sandy, a picturesque character, had developed tuberculosis

and had been compelled to give up his work as a woodsman. People

who saw him on the street wondered just how long he would live.

Maine
Old Town - 2

One evening Father Trudel answered a ring at his door and found

Sandy lying on the porch and suffering fro,:- a hemorrhage of the

lungs. Sandy, after he had been taken into the living room and

some how revived, begged the priest to cure him of the disecIse

which was threatening his life. Father Trudel knew something of

medicine, but as Sandy's case had been pronounced hopeless by

the doctors, there didn't se-mmuch that could be done. Father

Trudel promised to help the unfortunate man and from that time

Sandy commenced to improve. He went to work a lit le later in

a local -,:, round wood mill where he vorked until his death at a

ripe old age. Sandy was never without a cigar. He told me once

that he smoked a box ( 50) a week.

Whether the following story is true or not is hard to say.

A lot of people, including Sandy's nephew, Eddie, swear it is.

If it is true - and anybody who knew Sandy would see no reason

to doubt it - then truth is stranger in deed than fiction.

It was about the time of the world war when there was an

epidemic of in fluenza raging in Old Town. Strict precautions

were being taken to prevent a spread of the disease. An old man

Tind died and Sandy and a friend had volunteered to sit up all

night at the dead man's home. A harassed doctor who looked into

the room when he called to see a patient at the house, saw Sandy

and his friend sitting there smoking cigars.

"Boys," said the doctor, " we want to stop this epidemic,

and every one should help. Germs are everywhere. If you people

are going to stay 1.1.,xe you should wear masks. Please get them."

"Masks prote,tfrom de germs, eh doe?" asked Sandy.

"Absolutely," said the physician. " With masks you are safe. ti

Maine
Old Town - 3

"Hokay, doe," said Sandy. " Doan worry. We get tem.

They did, too. A priest who looked in a little later was

horror stricken to see two men sitting in the room, smoking

cigars and wearing Fourth of July masks:

Another French Canadian, Bill Chamberlain, used to give

his particular friends a cherished recipe for a stimulating drink.

"You take wan hunnert percent alcohol, an' add 50 percent

prune juice to it - she make de bes' peach brandy you ever taste."

Bill could never understand the difference betwecn 100 per

cent and 100 proof.

The Busheys, Gene and Albert, used to live in a new house

they built on tam Street. They were married and lived a lone except for a relative who kept house for them. Both were regarded

as " good catches. " T hey were well educated but Albert spoke iglish

Maine
Old l'own -

most modern in equipment. The town wasn't big enough for two

theaters, and after the skirmish which followed, Gene was glad

to sell his theater to rival interests.

He returned to woods work, this time as an in dependent operator. He was losing money steadily in his wood cutting operations

when he fell in love. Ill luck continued to follow him, however,

for the lady refused to become interested. One day in a fit of

despondency Gene fired a bullet from a revolver into his head.

The attempt at suicide vv.s just another failure, but although the

bullet missed his brain, it severed some nerves back of his eyes

and so destroyed his sight. I used to see him on the street sometimes, still slim and dapper, but wearing blue glasses over his

sightless eyes. Some times a friend would guide him by holding

his arm, and sometimes he would get around by feeling his way with

a cane.

"Humse Michaud, another French Canadian, used to work as a

clerk in Fred Allen's clothing store on Main Street. In the winter Humpy would go up into the lumber woods to measure the lumber

jacks and take orders so that when the woodsmen came down in the

s'pring new suits would a wait them.

Humpy, who was a hunch back, was below middle height. He

had long arms, large hands, and immense good nature.

Old timers will remember that getting a fit ir a ready made

suit of clothes in the 90s was something of a problem. A coat

that didn't pinch across the shoulders was apt to be voluminous

about the waist a pair of pants that was long enough was usually

large enough for a circus fat man. To even things up the vest was

generally made from four to six inches too short. It was an education to watch Humpy dispose of one these nightmares. He would

Maine
Old Town - 5

measure the customer and assure him that the pants were practically made to order. The vest and coat were tried al next and

while the customer was inspecting the fit in a _ rirror, Humpy

would gather in the folds of the coat at the back. When the customer turned around to see how it looked in the back Humpy would

hold the garment olst in front and assure the man that it was almost moulded to his figure. If the customer complained that the

vest was too short, Humpy would deliver some ribald flattery, and

double his victim up with a resounding slap on the back as he

pulled the vest down to cover an expanse of sllirt front. When

the customer got one and got a. chance to see how the suit really

looked, he was apt to come charging back with murder in his heart,

but he would generally go out

of the store wearing a topcoat to

hide the suit. People always

expected to be victimized when they

traded with Humpy, but he was

such an engaging fellow that nobody

ever complained - very much.

When the French Canadians first came to Old Town they made

their homes either on an island close to the island of 0 1d Town,

or in a farming section that later came to be known as French

Settlement. The island on which they settled ( Treat and Webster

Island) came to be popularly known as " French Island." As the

tide of immigration continued French Island came to be very thickly

settled. The early homes were bArdly more than shacks, and a few

of these still survive. A great many of the homes today are stall

and set close together. Any vacant land - and there isn'tmuch of

it - is utilized for a flower or a vegetable garden. A number of

Frenchmen have told me that they would rather live in shacks that

they owned than in much better homes that some one else owned.

Maine
Old Town - 6

There is a public school on the island, but a great many of the

children - even little ones - walk nearly a mile to attend the

convent in Old Town. These children used to imperil their lives

by running all over the road on their way home from school, but

last fall the sisters equipped some of the older boys and girls

with white sashes and instructed them to lead the children in an

orderly manner along the sidewalks and home by the safest route.

These older pupils are doing the job very iell.

;then the French first came here industry was represented in

the town only by saw mills. The French who didn't settle in

French Settlement to take up farming, generaly lived on French

Island and worked in the saw mills, in the woods, and on the

drives. There were few exceptions, one of which ( the Morin Family)

has already been mentioned. As the irench population in creased it

became the custom for owners of stores to employ at least one

French clerk to attract the important French trade.

his custom

is still observed.

The town gradually developed in an industrial way. The saw

mills disappeared as the lumber gave out, but in their stead there

appeared two woolen mills, two pulp mills, two box mil s, and a

number of smaller industries. A large proportion of the workers

in these factories are French Canadians or their descendents.

Practically all of the French here now can speck

glish, but the

in ability of the early comers to use the language waE never a bar

to their employment, for as Mr. Ovide Morin said, " You see there

were bo many French." In the weave shop of the Old Town Woolen

plant about 50 per:ant of the weavers were French.

The que.tion of unionism was never raised a mong the early

French Canadians here. Several a ttegipts '.: ere made to unionize

Maine
Old Town - 7

local industries in recent years, and during such attempts the

idea was always opposed by the older inhabitants. Their descendents however - the younger Frenchmen - showed no hesitation

ab:ut joining.

There were fights occasionally between Frenchmen and those

of other nationalities, but these fights were the result of some

personal difference and had no connection with race or creed.

I've seen : rDuble a rise between two Frenchmen who exchanged such

epithets as " Canuck," " Pea soup eater," or " frog." As a rule

Frenchmen were - and are - well lilfed. whey are good natural and

ready to laugh even if the joke is on them.

It wa, the custom in Canada a nong French Catholics to use the

steps or the space in front of the church for a meeting place where

various matters might be discussed. * The French Catholics who came

here followed this custom for a time. Before every mass on Sunday

numbers of them would gather on the walk or in the yard in front of

the church to tdk things over, The custom has died out in recent

years.

The early immigrants were generally poor and not well educated.

They worked, with few exceptions, as common laborers or woodsmen.

A sense of in feriority, due perhaps to their lack of education and

their in ability to speak English well, prevented them from mixing

to any extent with those of other nationalities in a social way,

or of taking any part in politics. The picture is much different

today.

*French Canadians in New England, Smyth E. C.; page 17; Hamilton
Press; 1892.

Maine
Old Town - 8

About two thirds of the approximately 150 WPA workers in

the city are French. So are all of the foreman and most of the

sub- foremen. A high percentage of the workers in the stores

and factories are of French descent, while there are many of

this nationality occupying much higher positions. Alec Latno,

now the proprietor of a large retail shoe company, was mayor

of the town for several terms just before the present mayor was

elected. George Desjardin, owner of a local harness repair shop,

was for along time collector of taxes: he is now postmaster.

Three of his four sons and both of his daughters attended the

University of Maine. One of the boys works in the harness shop,

one is a school teacher, and one is an extra mail carrier. Two

of the full time mail carriers, one of the clerks, and both the

porter and the janitor at the building are French. The latter,

a fellow named Paradis, has a small farm and sells eggs. One

of the four permanent firemen, half the call men, two of the

three regular policeman and many of the special officers, several

school techers, the overseer of the poor, and three members of

the city council are also French. In the city proper French people operate 3 large grocery stores ( and four or five small ones),

2 wholesale and retail fruit and confectionery stores, 2 restaurants, 6 barbe shops, 4 beauty parlors, I undertaking establishment, $ cobbler shops, 1 drug store, and 1 monument works. There

are 4 insurance salesmen, 2 garage owners, 2 salon keepers, and

I French doctor. I don't think there wcs ever a French lawyer

here, and the one French dentist remained but a short time.

Maine
Old Town - 9

The French who live on French Island are apt to resent any

disparaging remark concerning the place, but many of those who

have moved to other sections of the town sometimes feel superior

to those living across the bridge. A French woman who lived in

this part of the town was telling a friend and me about what a

nice home some newly married couple had acquired. She described

the place in glowing terms but added, " Of course, you know, it

is on da hieland."

Up until ten years ago there was only one Catholic church

(St. Josephs) here. To satisfy the church goes who understood

no French, the assistant to the pastor was usually Irish. The

pastor was always French and often people who couldn'tunderstand

that language had to sit through a sellmon delivered in aforeign

tongue. Dissatisfaction in creased a mong these people after one of

the Irish priest,, who was transferred was replaced by a Frenchman,

and the proposal' to create a new parish and erect a new church,

found high favor. St Marys, an attractive brick church, was built

on Main Street but a few minutes walk from the city square.

Shortly after it was completed many of the French who objected to

what they referred to as the grasping tactics of the pastor of St.

Josephs, deserted that parish and joined St. Marys. The Irish of

the latter church offered no objections: they were satisfied so

long as they had an Irish parish priest and sermons in English.

"Coffee Parties," held in the local town hall and staged for

the benefit of the Sisters of Mercy, used to be a feature in the

life of the town. Alley were held once a year and usually lasted

three or four evenings. There were booths of various kinds about

the hall, and on long tables at one side suppers were provided for

Maine
Old Town - 10

the hungry. The stage program was different every night. One

night there might be a musical program; the next, vaudeville

acts, featuring local actors; the third, a three act comedy or

a minstrel show, during the progresb of which prominent local

characters were lampooned.

or many weeks before the entertainment chances were sold on various articles. Lucky persons had

their number drawn from a box on the stage at the end of the

final evenings performance. Five and ten dollar gold pieces were

sometimes used as prize.. The practice of selling chances and

holding lotteries came under the fire of reform elements a number

of years ago and the objectionable custom was abandoned. In late

years it has been the practice to hold lawn parties, carnivals,

and bridge parties to help defray parish expenses. The French

are ardent workers in these causes.

The French people are not a;ways blindly devoted to their

pastors in Old Town, and when they are not, it is because of some

real or fancied fault in the character of the priest. Father

Clary, an Irish priest who was an assistant at -St. Josephs about

forty years ao, was so well liked by the French as well as the

Irish, that members of both races requested the bishop to appoint

him pastor after the death of Father Trudel from diabetes.

Father Clary was so dark complexioned that some people thought

he had negro blood in his veins. He had dark brown ( almost black)

eyes, black wavy hair, and an extremely vital and. likable personality. He made many converts anonE Protestants and many of that

faith used to go to hear him speak on ''undays.

Maine
Livin,1 Lore
Old Town - 11

On the other hand Father Legennec, a French Canadian who

preceeded the present pastor of St. Josephs, Father Willett,

was unpopular with the French. Some of them complained that he

lived in a very fine house and wore the best clothes while they

had nothing. They said hd thought of nothing but money - and

still more money. Priests with more engaging personalities were

never criticized in this manner. His unpopularity was in creased

by an incident that gave him no choice but to act as he did. It

happened in this way:

Clarence Mushrall was a very likable young fellow who worked

as a - lumber. he married an attractive and popular French girl

named ,, lorence La Bell, whlo worked in one of the woolen mills.

The couple had only one child who grew

to resemble her mother.

For a time everything went well with the young mar ied pair, but

after they had been married several years Florence contracted

pneumonia and died. After the death of his wife, Clarence, who

grieved very much because of his loss, took up drinking. He also

stopped going to church. One night after he had been drinking

heavily he started home a cros the railroad bridge. It was a

perilous trip for a drunken man. Whether he jumped off the bridge

or fell off nobody knew, but his body was recovered a week later

at the end of the island. He was buried in the family lot in Forest Hills Cemetery and it seemed as though fate had written finis

at the end of the Chapter.

To understand what followed it is necessary to knnw so:ethIng

of the regulations governing the Catholic portion of the burying

ground at Forest Hills. A Catholic cemetery is " consecrated

ground," and any one not a Catholic or a Catholic whphas died

Maine
Old Town - 12

"Outside the fold" may not be buried there.

About a year after young Mushrall had been laid to rest

some persons brought to the attention of Father Legennac the

fact that a man who had forsaken the church., who had died in

his cups, and who had very likely committed suicide was buried

in consecrated soil. In justice to the priest it must be said

that in spite of an overwhelming feeling that the body of poor

Mushrall should be allowed to rest where it was, church laws

left him no choice in the matter: he was compelled to order

the removal of it. Much bitterness was felt and the old accusation was raked up that while lots in the Catholic cemetery

were expensive, the land itself had been bought by the

priest

"for a song." Relatives of Mushrall refused to comply

with the

order and the case was brought to the courts. Lawyers

for the

defendants contended that the lot in question had been

eurchased

by relatives of the dead man, that the deed was in their possession, that the lot had been fully paid for, and that in consequence their clients were free to use the land in any way they

gefe fit. Opposing lawyers brought out the fact that while the Mushrails did in deed hold the title to the land it had been sold with

certain binding restrictions that would prevent the interment of

persons not in good standing with the authorities of the church.

Judgement was rendered against the Mushralls * and they had to remove the body. Friends of Father Legennec claimed that persons

who wished to in jure the priest had brought the matter up. Much

sympathy was felt for the Mushralls, and the priest acted the part

of the unwilling scapegoat.

-*Proof of citation is available, but the facts arc common Knowledge in Old Town.

Maine
Livins Lor,
Old Town - 13

Father Marquis, a French Canadian priest who was an assistant here just before Father Clary, was also well liked by the

French - and in deed by every one - but the bishop felt it necessary to remove him from the parish because of alleged irregularities in his conduct. He was young, florid, and a good "mixer."

He wasn't bad in any sense of the word, but he liked to drink,

smoke cigars, a tend prixe fights, and mix with the b)ys in a

pool room. It was thought that his actions constituted a bad

influence a mong the youth of the parish.