"Ily wife jokes me about my wearing a fresh red carnation on the

lapel of my coat every day, by saying I do so to show my customers that

I practice what I preach. But she knows it's my love of flowers that

accounts for my habit." And Charles L. Sligh smiled and looked at his

bouquet.

"Oh, well, why not a life story?" mused W. Sligh. "But mine has

been the life of a plodder. It is not in any sense a spectacular career

to date, nor yet one with sinister climaxes. My relations have been exceedingly friendly with sheriffs and policemen, which is equal to saying

that mine is the life of a country boy who came to town and lifted himself

into a little business by tugging at his own bootstraps.

'I was born on my father's plantation in Newberry County, South

Carolina, on May 17, 1884. There I spent my childhood and early youth. In

The autumn and winter I attended the old field public school, and in the

spring and summer I worked on the farm, hoeing corn, chopping cotton, setting

out yellow yam sweet potato plants, and,in short, all such tasks as a rise on

a country plantation. Father and the entire SIisirfamily was industrious, and

our farm was a good one, but crops were just as uncertain as any business

I know about. Beginning in 1888 $ there were several lean years on our farm.

"Sometimes our cotton was cut short by lack of rain just when the plants

needed moisture. And in other years there was too much rain, and the plant

would bush, but bear few bolls. Cotton was our chief money crop, and if

it failed, we were pressed about paying taxes, or buying clothes and shoes.

And other crops such as corn and potatoes failed because of weather conditions.

One example may illustrate the point. The summer before we quit the farm, a

great wind and hail storm cane along when our corn was just beginning to

tassal. After the storm passed, father and I went to see how the crop had

stood it. The sight sickened us. Much of the corn had been broken, and the

rest, though still rooted and whole, was as flat as a pancake.

"Sorrowfully we viewed the ruins of a crop which had looked so vigorous

and promising the night before. Nothing could be done about it so late in

the season. Toil, money for fertilizer, and hopes were gone with the wind

and the hail. The Irish potatoes, too, were short, due to lady bugs on the

vines. In fact, that year, every crop was cut by drought, rain at the wrong

time, or storm. We were a blue family as winter began to approach. Debts

began to press us for payment, and we had nothing to sell to raise the a mounts

we so badly needed. The old joke about letting the other fellow do the worrying is not funny to the man who wishes to treat his fellow man in the same

spirit as he would have the other fellow treat him.

"The situation I am describing was our experience in 1898, and similar

lean years had been pretty common to farmers in Newberry County. Weather

conditions are one of the gambles the farmer has to deal with any year. The

disaster of 1898, though, is typical of average seasons.

"That winter I heard my parentsmeriously discuss the subject of quitting the farm. One night, as we were seated before a rousing wood fire,

rather said, ' Mama, I have been thinking of leaving the farm and engaging in

something that is less uncertain about making a living.'

"Llama replied, without stopping her knitting, ' But, Papa, there is a

hazard to most everything. I'm reminded of it by an experience I had when

I was a little girl. IN had a water mill, and ground corn and wheat for the

neighborhood. We could hear the water falling over the embankment from the

house. One day, after along rainy spell, my mother told me to run down to

the mill under the hill and see if everything was all right. I did. The mill

was not there, and I was so excited I ran all the way hone and shouted:

"bother, it's all gone but the dams"

"After the laughter suosided, following Mother's story, Father rejoined:

'But, Mother, I'm not aiming to engage in the mill business. Instead of that,

I think a well-conducted grocery store in a populous co-Inunity ought to support our family. I think I know a locality in Columbia where the trade

ought to be brisk. If I were running it, my plan would be to trust in God,

but all others should pay cash, or the goods would remain on the shelf.'

"That plan sounds safe,' said Mother, ' but I wonder if we can sell

the farm for enough cash to pay our debts and still have sufficient money to

get properly settled in business at the capital city.'

"The 6ligh farm was up for sale the next day. That satisfactory counsel around the old home fire had convinced every one of us that change of

base was a proper economic step. As soon as our crude 'For- Sale' sign was

up, a buyer came to see us. There was at that time a man in the community

who owned vast forests of timber and great acreage, and he always appeared

to have money. He said he heard the a ligh farm was for sale and he decided

to ride over and take dinner and discuss the sale, adding, ' I hear you're

quitting the farm to practice law;'

"Father replied he would 3ell the best farm in Newberry County for a

fair price, but he saw no reason to put in the comedy about him quitting

the farm to practice law. Dinner interrupted the bargaining, and afterward

the investor and Father sat and smoked and dickered until nightfall. Meantime, the visitor's horse had twice been fed. 4upper was served, and soon

the visitor put up a sum of money, to be forfeited if he failed to close the

deal at the court house in Lexington next day. The price Father received

for the farm was, perhaps, less than it would bring today, but it was con -

sidered a pretty good price then.

"Soon afterward,the:liigh family was busy packing and loading the house-

hold goods, and in selling hogs, horses, and cattle. In the month of

January, 1899, we were in Columbia, searching for a house to live in and

a building to open a grocery store in. I think we reMained at a boarding

house only two weeks, before we began the game of living in a big town and

doing business where competition in all commercial lines was keen and brisk.

'Father was pretty long-headed, and he was also determined to succeed.

He never failed to tell a customer that he was not financially able to extend credit and that his safety required that he either keep his goods or

pocket the cash. Operated on this sound principle, the store boa_4an to prosper. The Sligh family lived, to a great extent, on foods from OUr store.

And the cash sales were usually sufficient to pay for our goods and to assure

a surplus for clothing and other4amooasary:_meads,

"The three big, over- sized

boys and their two sisters had plenty

of good, wholesome food ) but we had practically no spending money, like most

of our boy and girl acquaintances had.

"We boys helped father at the store and picked up small change at other

tasks elsewhere when we got a chance. The grocery store, with plenty of

competition, just wouldn't support the family in any sort of luxury. And I,

for one, was not prone to complain to father about my lack of spending money.

The struggles we had on the plantation, and later in Columbia, may have been

blessings in disguise. Anyhow, when we began to scratch for our own living,

we knew the importance of money, and none of us wasted it.

"My two brothers are now doing pretty well. Toole is manager of the

Studebaker Automobile Agency in Columbia. Our kid brother, J. E. Sligh, is

an engineer of the South Carolina Highway Department. My two sisters are

both happily married. They are Mrs. H. C. Tate, of Hendersonville, North

Carolina, and Mrs. P. A. Hodges, of Columbia.

"My business brings in an in come of about $2,500 a year. Only the

other day my oldest brother, Toole, was reminding me about how I acted when

I began my first job at the Stork greenhouses in Columbia, in 1904. I began work for fifty cents a day. The duties of the job included keeping the

heat at a certain temperature in the winter and giving the proper a mount of

moisture to certain expensive flowers. All told, I think I earned my

fifty cents a day.

"It takes years of physical and mental labor to gain sufficient knowledge

of flowers to make any sort of success in the florist business. The flower

is a characteristic feature of the highest group of the plant kihgdom. Flowers

of commerce are produced from flower buds, just as leaf shoots a rise from

leaf buds. These two kinds of buds have a resemblance to each other as regards the arrangements and the development of their parts. Flower buds, like

leaf buds, are produced in the axial leaves, which are called bracts. This

is what I mean by the statement that it is no easy job to acquire proficient

knowledge of the florist business. For eight years I studied, experimented,

and worked at the Stork greenhouses. Even then, I knew little about flower

culture. The constant bending of one's back in this work, however, makes

one feel at night like he had put in a day's work. My wages in creased at

Stork's as my efficiency progressed, but I never did get as much as probably

,G4141 would today. I was proud of rly three dollars that I had earned the first

week at Stork's. Over the years there, I carried away on several Saturday

nights more than three dollars, but I never got the same thrill from them.

The fact that a youngster can earn money is always thrilling to him at the

start; at least, that was my experience.

'In 1911, the idea came to me that, to succeed, a man should own his own

business, even if it were nothing but a peanut stand. So I quit at Stork's

and began to look around for something I could make a living at. I had heard

Father say many times that ' a shoemaker should stick to his last.' I had

given eight years of my life to flower culture, and I decided to follow the

old rule about ' sticking to the last' by beginning a florist business in a

small way. I had no ready cash to speak of. I was fond of the girls and a

great deal of my wages had already faded along that trail.

"One day I explained matters to a friend. He loaned me $ 20 to aid me

in the starting. And I began business in a cubbyhole space in Thomas' Drug

Store, for which I paid him three dollars a week rental. The Thomas Drug

Store was in the 1600 block of Main Street in 1912. The success I had at

the start pleased me. I soon paid my friend his 420, and sales were so good

and regular that I lived and in creased my business. The cubbyhole space was

now too small for me, and I rented a six - dollar space

at Miot's Drug Store

at 1430 Main Street. In a year or two the space again

became too small, and

I leased these quarters in the Imperial Hotel, where I

am doing business now.

"Orders for flowers arrive regularly from hotels,

hospitals, funerals,

and weddings. These are frequently very expensive designs. In addition to

these sales, there are orders from many private social gatherings and banquets.

This normal demand in creased tremendously in 1917, soon after troops began to

mobilize at Camp Jackson for training. By the spring of 1918, when there

were between 40,000 and 50,000 men and officers at Camp Jackson, the influenza

epidemic was taking a heavy death toll. The demand for flowers frequently

was so great that all the florists in this community exhausted their supply

daily. Pi.ices of everything were very high then, and I made money rapidly.

"This florist business is one of the few industries that goes right

along, I might say, regardless of economic conditions. The reason is that

deaths, marriages, and hospitals function right along whether business is

dull or brisk. many floral designs are ordered by patients at three hospitals here in Columbia. Also couples who get married don't count the cost;

and when death knocks at the door, even if the family is a humble one, flowers

are in demand. The florists kaleidoscope discloses a regularity"of sales

unknown in some other business channels.

"'Married? Yes. But not until late in life, 1925. It took the along

time to learn a trade, and a longer time to win a wife. Between the ages

of 18 and 40, J. often fell in love with a pair of pretty eyes, a classy form,

or a charming manner. But I never pressed a case to a climax, until I met

Miss Eva Greishaber, a pretty girl of German parentage. She captivated me

completely. And what a courtship we had for some years! I thought I knew a

good deal about women, but I didn't. I guess I don't know enough about them

yet to hurt me.

'Miss Greishaber and I fought it out for many years before she surrendered. She and I would attend theatres and dine together. We would attend

church, or picnics, but she appeared always ready to let it go at that. One

January day, Eva came to my flower store, where we joked and talked for sometime. As she got ready to go, she said she

had come to buy half a dozen rosebuds.

always told her she could pick her

choice here without pay.

"I went a head and fixed up a beautiful

and costly bouquet and presented

it to her with my most courtly bow.

She took it, smiled sweetly, and departed.

Shortly afterwards, I was busy at the desk enc.', discovered a $10- bill. I told

her about it and she laughed. Then she said: 'You are so careless I wonder

why you don't go broke.' The money obviously was hers, but she wouldn't

take it. She knew the value of resebuds in January as well as I did. It

was in late summer that year that I fully made up my mind to either win Eva

as a wife or lose her altogether.

"I thought of several plans but finally descarded them all but the

sympathy route. So I dolled up in a new suit, with a very fresh red carnation on the coat lapel, and skipped around to Eva's home. She greeted

me enthusiastically, as usual. After we were seated in the parlor, I began

to tell her what a dismal failure I was. Among other things I said: ' I'm

a shamed of myself, and I'm going out to Texas and carve a fortune there. If

fail there, as here, I can still walk to a bridge and jump, saying as I fall,

"Eva bud listened with sympathetic eyes and a sardonic smile. As I

finished my foolish talk, she said: ' Charles, you are ill, I'm afraid. What

sort of a fortune do you expect to gain in Texas by talking like a parrot

and acting like a monkey? For years I have passed up chances of marriage

with other young men and have stuck to you a lone. Now you threaten to walk

out on me.

You know you are the only man I have ever loved and so what---'

"The scene that followed has been hazy to me since, but I'm told I

grabbed Eva in my arms and poured out my heart to her in love. Thevery

next day, August 17, 1925, we were married. de bought a pretty home at 1707

Heyward Street, Uolumbia, and we reside there now. de have continued to be

pals, just like we were in the days before our marriage.

"I am a member of the National Florists Association, and through this

or gainzation the business code is ironed out so that we serve each other about

as efficiently as the international postal system does. For example, some

one in London, England, or Winnepeg, Canada, or Seattle, lashingten, wishes

to send a floral design to some one in Columbia. They notify me in code,

and I fill the order.

"Mowing the greater expense of producing flowers, I have preferred

to purchase them. I buy from the Shandon Greenhouse, a local wholesale

florist concern. It furnishes me most of my supply. But in case I desire

a special design that the local dealer doesn't have in stock, I get it from

similar dealers in Florida, New York, or Montreal, Canada. Express service

generally answers, but if greater speed is needed,the package comas by

airplane.

"For many years I have been a member of the Elks Lodge ( B.P.O.E.) in

Columbia. I am also a member of Richland Lodge No. 59(A.F.M.) and Scottish

Rite bodies in Golumbia tand of Omar Shrine Temple at Charleston. My wife

and I are members of Ebenezer Lutheran Church.

"So my life has run through more than half a century, with plenty of

struggle, but with -pare satisfaction of knowing that I have meri414 the

good will and respect of my neighbors and business associates as I passed

along."

L&CB

**************