Robert lives in a Negro community melee Combee, located three

and ne-half miles on State - roae e 17 between L. ,keland ane Six

-eiie Creek. Delapidated houses, built of pine end cypress, are

scattered through these quarttirs. They are unpainted and black

from exposure to the. sun and weather. There are no electric lights

no radio, and no running water. The site is considered low land

and a rter a heavy rain it is covered with eater • At this season

of the year all of the available plentinees ,ace is set cut 'in

streAlorries. Around some of the homes, there is a little s ace

set a side for vegetables fe . The soil...in this section is very rich,

and is known es "muck land."

Robert's- little farm is located on the left bevel side of

the State roaa #17 sitting beck about one querter mile from the

main highway. , The oddity of . this home, and the crudeness of its

construction male_s it unique in its a epearence.

Be,e in this humble existence he tries to earn a livlihood

for himself and his wife Rosa Lee. Be was sitting on a bench in

front of the house bepiae.a tub basking in the sunshine. Dewn the

lene he pointed out his eife coming. At lay entrance though the

gate Robert a rose end seid, ncome inn and went into the house

retuening with a reeking chair* With the dignity of a Prince he

a skea me to be seated;

Robert is five feet end ten inches in height, .very, dark in.

come lexice, bail' bee eu with a little ketch of gray hair en each

Sith, of his head. His long black mustache hangs over the side of

•

his mouth. • When ee laughs his missing tooth in the front of his

- mouth stele's out. Be keeps hiiepipe in his mouth all of the

26079

time, stating that it ws his best fiend. His .pants were patched

and resembled a quilt, His hit was slutchod on the side of his

bead, pulled in the direction of theAft. Rosa Lee, his wife,

reAlbed the house..She bad on glasses, and she to had a pipe in

her mouth. Rosa saidUthatshe was fifty two years old, z,a ndwas .

neatly dress in a wixed colored gingham dress. Her shoes were

full of holes to give comfort to 11,.r sore feet. They rested

themselves on a board on ,two boxes with logs under each end.

A tub was on the other end. This bench was used for the family ts

wL_shing,

Robert said, n I was born in Richmond County, South Caro.

Una, the second year after freedom, I remained in South Carolina, until 19(.1. There 1:engageu in farming and doing other odd

s Jobs, 4y. parents were Steven and Susan ,_cott, who were sl,ves.

Their slave waters were KelluM and Scribner. There were five

in my family,

Robert st,ted that he came t Florida in 1 Ll, and w s a

•

grown ,,_1,11 Awn he reached Florida, He worked in the tur„entine

stills from klace to place. He lived in Homassa, • Dekota county, seven wiles from . ircadia until he moved to his present 1o.

catioL in 1926.

Robert statA that be married twice. His first wife w- s

iLosa S,a nish. They were married in AgOadia 0 Florida, in 1914,

There was one child born'd uring-their wedlock. This child died

with the in fluenz,a. his second marriage was to Rosa Lee Jupiter,

They were married in their ,resent home by 1v ithell , of

Lake Wales a garch 11th, 166, He had lived the life of a Ilachelor.

u, until that time, Before he married,. his neice , -Annie Graham,

made her home with Robert.

He has no recollection of any other me,Aber of his f 4ly 1 st,ting

that he had not seen them in ye_rs, Rosa s,oke up and said that

she had three Asters, Hattie Jones, Valdosta, Georgia; Amice

'Waikur, tioultrie,'Geor b4; and Rachel p who livus in gavannah*

Ge,rgia.w Rosa was bon in Richmond, Virginia.

n Robert said p w we hallo farmed all of our lives, all I

know has been following a mule behind a plow **,

w You see I only had a little schooling, I can only write

my n._me and that is all, They had no grades when I went to school

I was raised .by my grandmother Caroline Bryant, and when her

eyesight fai_ed, I had to sto i, schol; she was and old sltive hoe -

band, I stop schol to try to make her some bread. The book that

I studied w-. s the Blue Hack Webster, I went s far as the syll-b1A,

.called Baker. The other part I took -up in my head; learning from

time to time. An education is something that every man should

Au:ye, it keeps him from getting cheated, In the olden times a

man would get a leti:er ana stick it in the band of his hat, or' in

the pocket of his shirt, and to telit until he could find s

-body to read it. When he did, the sweat from his body had mii-Ae

the writing so bd you could hardly make it out. Abut this

time I began to study abou',,omens and that settled it,"

n I always wanted a home of my own, and tried hard to have

.11 good frm„ I am happy with something growing around me, lood

some animals to cre for, At present I have a few around me, see

those fine cows out there in the field. There is three cows and

one f.ne bull, we have • a fe. chicken .Ln the back, and four hogs,

tbats eby I ;think a fellow should have something of his own. I

am always gwine to hve something. The good Lord said th t be

would take care of me, Aad I am golin to see that be does."

"I r-4-

of the time„ and belei.ve that he

4y e x%4ors. I -m a member of the Bapt 6t 6hurch, 1 joine bec use

the se irit i4 there, Th...,t littie church you see :,,tanding

over -nder, I ,- Au the k ,stor of it. I h_ve Aolt t nmewbe -i-s

when they J.l re kres,:nt. God c..LLed ae to _ re„.oh ly• lack in

" 1 blive that -very maL sbouLd be g-vern by us on -int.

'4her,, I * As young I ',ioieked on the frm -no s .etimc hired my . elf

out doltg ouu jobs. I remembered once working f r a man i1 the

week, digging . itches, we knicked off N.- turuLy -ttwelve oclock.

Be bLei hir,d us at One dolt r Arid z,evety five cents a Lay. He

took ,Jur xLmes nd s id th t he bha to go to tbe -b nK in town

to get our .11 ney, we sit a lyng sie of the road . rid w:Ated„

w-ited; but, po

back,- finally - bite sun came al ,-ng ' nd

_sked us wilt tit boys we w-it,.:4* for. We o.;,,k 1,ine to him whY

woke witing„ he said, ,1 th.. the tivi th_t WAM in Pint City,

iin his cr t . filling statatm. There we .ws, we h:_d erem.Lsed

at the store that .we would 4.;ay hia fur h.Ls rAlohs„ '1,114 we

were left in he ditch. This has bL,een to at, more than once,

foikb .. ru,A.e to eay you

leLve you .. th out apy grits.'

waeh the boo, was on I .k de frut Thr-e to F-ur dollar

day. kova I a ke Lotbial but whe tlitti. fokr. I c.:1 raise _nu sell

off of my el ce„ we c,n h-r iy sell our vog,tab_Les-'in

there 1.-5 so a kiny aoiLitr, the sJoe thing, 1 reel v- some _ ssistaince

1;r4a the . L1 ge .Assist rie,.., iittees dollars a month, which I

strtch ad far , s i can. Through the beli, of the good i.oii I mango to iive a me how. I si,ft ge to it,- 0, LAIrlittle f.rm h,_re, if the

c uie I , 11 be rUined p I m ex,ecting to hive a good

str_.wbes-ry or

„

-

While talking, all of a sudden Robert ,said to his wif,, n say

sister lets make a bargian- ain't we uine to cook: today ?

With a smile beaming all over her face, she answered, sure I is

boney en Rosa a rose fruLi the bench and went into the house.

After filling his pipe with some Hi-Plane Tobacco Robert

said, n I vottL. in South Carolina, and I never voted in Florida.

Once I started to vote,

yas told that a nigger could not

vote in a . cracker election, So I stayed fr m tie poles eirk,ry

since. I think the goveraent is ,icking up in places like soda

when mixed with cornmeal,"

If I am not able to do bard work * except what / do bele on

my little farm* I was riaptured some years ago, and I can'tlift

anything heavy. I feel good otherwise. When I feel bad I take

my sassafrastea, LI:al that brings me around, Over dart in that

Arad I keep plenty on hand.

Robert a rose am0 went in the direction of the shed to show

me his sassafras herbs. Here be started to explain how he cam, in

posession of his present site, n This land was given t me by

Mrs, Graham, Before I lived on the other side of the creek at

Castle, I could not raisevery ,..iuch Waft. The land beint low

and when a heavy rain would come it would drown out all of my

crops, After homesteading and paying four doll rs a year taxes *

she gave Jie the deeds, I have tan

two of htem are cle red *

ana the rest are woods and swampland. This old eice of house

th t you see here was built from an old house given to me in Car',

ter, I hauled the lumber one half mile in a wbeillaarrow and

built it wyself.,"

The bAise was iteatber..bourded, with XID winows *oral board

shutters. . Laughing heartily Robert said,

If that b._use had

gl,613,-is it would f 11 don, It wouldint stand Iny glasses.'

The weather boarding on the out side ,.as rough , nd the ends

as not everLy nailed on, some krotrud_ng beyond the end of the

house. The to was covered with some old second hand galvanized

tin: It was badly bent and 1 oked io be leak proof. The 'chimney

an the east side was very cruaely .bUiit. It looked like it was

ready to fail down, There IT .15 a little shed about twenty feet from

the house, where he kept . his farm_tools. It was shackly built

with klenty of .skce between the boarding. The front W-s - ide

open, and hanging on the rafters were dried seeu and keas used for

coohing. In fm.)nt of the house a well cultivated strawberry

ketch was in bloom, A crudely built cypress fence seerated the

straAperry field from the house.

Along side of the shed was a stack of wood obtained fro w his

land. His whole cleareu site was fenced in with cypress koles,

cut from the timber land.

the rear of the house there was

another acre cleared and k c.rt of it was s,t out in vegetables,

In the ea tcorner there ws a crudely built enclosure out of

cypress koies used to quartcr his four hogs. Near this enclosure

wa the out house with no roof over it. On the north side of

the field w- s a chicken yard, and next to the uhichen yard wee

Robeftss rickety built barn, Rosa.Lee said, n her chicken s

given to them for p rt

yment for washing, she did at some of

the . hite foiks homes, " The barn was built out GNIf cypress oles

ad cov(xed with old tin p and wide boards. The yard sp,ce . as

fenced in. There was , wide gate with space enough for a cat or

wagon to ka .sthrough. In this unsanitary _ rrangement the co -,. s

were milked once a day.

•In the in terier of their house there . at found some home,

built furniture* In the front room a large fire klace was the

only m 42.4of obtng beat* In front of it was irons* Rosa said,

" the fire place :, as used to beat the irons when she ironed.

The walls were covered with news aper and a agazines. The floors

were bare, with only a small rug on the front room floor. The

boaras as unevenly matched on the floor and left cracks in

between them, you could ,see the ground and feel the air coming

up through them. In this room was along table without any

covering on it, am an old type singer sewing machine. Hanging

in the middae of the room from a rafter was a bunch of eranges.

The bed rooms wavevery crowded, - with no way of letting

air or light in, except opening the sbuaders, although there

was plenty of air frea the 'cracks in the wails and floor. A

shed covered the oaen spacefttering the kitchen which set a part

from the rest of the house, It weevery small, and was crowded

with a small wood stove, a wo66 box, old trunk, an.

tble

filled with dishes.

Everything , as very clean and orderly arranged in this crude

home. They bad two barrels near the kitchen with a large galvanizei

Otpe running from the roof to catch the rain watery On top of the

barrel was a bag that was used as a filter for the water, and air

other iipe joined the second barrel*, ith a fine mesh screen and

rag over one end. Out of this barrel the water was used. It was

clear and clean, and a rourid it was lots of trinkets used in and

ar und the house. Two oldatime iron iaots were close by. tith

pride he showed we his wagon, which was a wheelbarrow, stating

that the horse was not able to pull very much ( meaning himself.)

Suddenly the small bula same walking up to the fence that •

surrounaed the house, and they immediAtely grabbed the long tope

dragging behind him, aid pulled him tiaayY He

considered to

very dangerous. He was very fat ehying the advantage of the good

grazing _ land around the little farm. -

In the delapidated shed was a kile of straw, and under it

was, sweet kotatoes. Robert said nthat they were lskt there to be

prot cted fram the frost bite.* have always saved vegetables

when I w,s in, the Spanish American War it saved me from hunger.

a maw day by knowing what to do with dried vegetable seeds I

was able to eat. I enlisted as a-soldier in the SkanishAmericanaten I w sthirty years old at Suaaaerville, N.C. I was

a member of Major Young's Company. 'We went up from Savannah,.

Georgia, an started tO. Cuba, after Lading about two oclack.

While out to sea about midnight the boat turned around and headed

back to Savannah. There we learned that the war was over, then

we were Mustered out. We left the dock . sineEnd shouting, and

every ane was on their yhome. Lawdy .:ussy ltbkire was , lenty of

trouble_ during aem , times, only folks uid1t argue.overtaings as

long as they do now. n

Rosa Lee, came bacit to the yard with a smile, lett.ng her

busbana know that his . meal as ready. He entered his small

kitchen and after saying the blessing w.Lthreverance, R bert

said," that old lady of nine can cook uk a mess. She can do more

with fat bacon than a monkey can with , eanuts. I like fat meat,

kork, collard greens, keas„ cabbage, grits, and good old corn

bread. Now and then I kill a chicken when one of the bretherns

co.4e, around. We have kleLty of eggs during laying seas.:ina.

Our meat su,kaly comes from the bogs that we butcher ata salt

down. Jaen we run out of green vegetables we fall back on the

dried vegetab,es we .. -ve stored away,'

RObertOS appetite was very good, he asked for the second.

helping. The syrup that he was us_ng was his own make. .: -pparentiy.

he liked it, . from the . 44 he s(aked his corn bread in it.

Rosa said, of we usually have two meals a day when they are

able. She also related tat she was a member of the prayer band,

they would _ Int fr_m house to house each week. u I walk all over

this place v we 'vire no other way to get around, some time my oldmai) he wLlks to a keiand, he sends his time working on the

farm

and keeping busy with his church program. When not working

you caL find him and that old stikkIng pipe sitting out'frkAat of

.tne house when the weather is gcod. 'amen it gets cold he comes in,-

siLe by. the , fire place. You see by our wo...

that we are r,,ady

for the, cold weather, Sue ttas my neighbors come over and talk!

4 old lady Robert said, of goes around more than I do. - Halida

she is a busy bo4y. Rosals eye flashed an she went on with her

In leaving he in vited me back, stating that he like(1 good

Ckinkka4y*