BOYD:Okay, this is interview number three, right? I think it is, yes.

SMITH:I think so.

BOYD:Yeah, this is interview number three. And last time--I'll say the date. Today is February 7th, 2025. And last time we talked, we had a short brief interview last time. I think it was fifty two minutes. And we--because we had a hard stop afterwards, and we talked a lot about the new album coming out.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:So, and you had finished the songs. You hadn't come up with an album title yet. Has it come out yet?

SMITH:I brought one for you.

BOYD:Yes. I'm so excited.  (Smith laughs)

SMITH:We have it. We did a CD release of "Kentucky Moon", at the Meadowgreen Music Park in January.

BOYD:Yeah, I was out of town for that one, I was so, yeah--while I was in, I was in Italy. So I wasn't, you know--

SMITH:That's not so bad. (both laughs)

BOYD:But, so did it go well?

SMITH:Yes--

BOYD:--oh fantastic--

SMITH:--yes, and we're very pleased with it. It has fourteen songs on it. So it's a nice, generous CD.

BOYD:So one thing that I always wonder, you know how these Spotify's and Apple, you know, streaming music things at the end of the year, they deliver your--what you love the most and what you listen to the most and things like that.

SMITH:Um-hm.

BOYD:And, you know, I had released a song like two years ago or three years ago, and my friend was giving me a really hard time because that song was on my, like, favorites list. Like, I had played it. Do you all listen to your own recordings?

SMITH:That's an interesting question because usually we don't, uh, so much. And we were realizing that because we also just released "Volume One" of "The McLain Family Band Collection". It's our first eight albums. And so cue seeing it--doing a little quality control. We had to listen, you know, I listened to all the tracks every second to make sure, you know, that the digitization had come through. Jeff Myers at Tower Studio in Lexington did a fabulous job.

BOYD:He's fantastic.

SMITH:Digitizing them for us from, from, um, and so we had--from the original albums, which, of course, are not all available. And so we got to listen to them (laughs) and realized, I don't know that we had listened to them after they were recorded. And after you record, then you're on to the next.

BOYD:Yes.

SMITH:You're, you're doing shows. You're touring. You're off thinking about the next record. And you don't go back.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know, because you also feel like maybe you can do everything better this week than you did last week.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And so, so we--there were some of the things I don't think we had listened to.

BOYD:So listening to some of that old material, what surprised you?

SMITH:Well, this was material from 1970 and all through the 70s. This collection set, "Volume One", has eight albums on four discs. And it's all of the eight albums through the 70s. And I was impressed with how interesting it was. First, I was thinking, well, this will be nice for those that are interested in hearing us when we were kids. I thought, well, that has, has a place, I guess. And then when I was listening to it, I realized, oh, I got it. You know, there is a place in history. This does have things that happened that impacted music that came after it. Raymond, even as a kid was a phenomenal instrumentalist and, um, our father's influence with his interest in all these different styles of music and our interest in--with the international touring you know getting to meet musicians in other countries And there are just different influences than in some bluegrass presentations. So that was interesting to me. There were things that our father did with--on the accordion with us, which was charming. And I loved getting to hear the harmonies. Because we did harmonies right away. Our father was so respectful of us as we were growing up. And he felt like we could do anything. And he made us feel like we could, you know, we could. And we didn't think about it. We didn't think of ourselves as kids. And I realized that some of those, even the earliest recordings, I was slapping the bass and we were doing this interesting three-part harmony that had different things than, than traditional and some modal things, some very Appalachian things, some that had, uh, interesting--there was one song that was going along 4/4 and then (Smith taps out a complex rhythm that the band shifted to) And it was fascinating to me.

BOYD:Well, we talked last time, and I, I will say it again. I'll say it in every interview. Your father was just this creative genius.

SMITH:Absolutely.

BOYD:who, who, you know, we talked about your time in Washington, D.C., where you have two weeks to prepare, and we're going to teach you the dulcimer, and you're going to learn these songs--

SMITH:--we just did-- (laughs)

BOYD:-you know, and--

SMITH:--we just did it--

BOYD:--and there's this sort of-- fearlessness about him that, that sort of translated down. Do you think in some ways as kids, now that you've listened to these old recordings, that you almost had an advantage because there was this fearlessness?

SMITH:It was an incredible advantage. It's, I--it makes me flush. It was such an advantage. Our father's, not only musical background, but his fearlessness, his confidence in us. You know, and he was as humble as anybody I've met, but still confident. A gorgeous balance. And he made us feel like we could do things.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:That, you know, go ahead and hit that note, you know, (laughs) okay? And, "Let's do this in three parts, but let's add a," you know, "this right here." And he just, would--"go ahead and play a break on this." You know, oh, as a bass player, as a kid, bass player. "Okay, yeah, play a break on this." And then, you know, it's just, of course. And his, his ideas, even though he was also very true to the traditions and very respectful, incredibly respectful of the traditions. And so he helped us be--also be able to do as real an eastern Kentucky version of an eastern Kentucky song as there was. So we could do shape note singing. We could the, the--do modal pieces and a cappella ballads. And then also do things where we could play with orchestras and have--and feel respected in that role, too. It was fascinating.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. How, how--you don't--you haven't been listening to these things all your life.

SMITH:No.

BOYD:You're diving back in and you're listening to these, talk about the emotional side of that. What, what, what--is there anything that's stirred up?

SMITH:Yes. So many things. When--first time, uh, I--was going to listen to them on the way to Morehead where I was teaching. And I thought, OK, well, I'll just pop this in and listen on my way, just QC it, um, because we had taken the albums to Jeff unopened. You know, we had, because there are not more of them, but we had saved a few for family.

BOYD:So these are reel-to-reel tapes?

SMITH:Well, we have some of those, but they're in different formats.

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:(coughs) So he ended up using the albums.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

SMITH:So that they could be consistent.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And, and, uh, so Jeff had digitized them. He'd--and made the files and my husband had been working with him and had the files--he put them on discs for me to listen to just, you know, to, to make sure that it was that we'd gotten what the song was, and so I was listening to it on the way to Morehead and I couldn't go in to, to my first lesson. It was overpowering. That history and those times were just so amazing, so wonderful. That life that we got to have--we still get to have. But there was nothing like those times, and you can't even explain it. And yes, it was overwhelming.

BOYD:I imagine.

SMITH:And to get to hear my father's voice.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:I mean, who gets to hear their father's voice?

BOYD:That's right.

SMITH:Of things you got to do together.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Yeah, that was--

BOYD:--I can imagine. I can imagine that that, you know, was--and, you know, the emotional question has been counterbalanced by the fact that, that--there's so much excitement about this that--that I think, you know, I don't know if you all quite realize like how excited people are going to be for this. But like Michael Jonathan, for one, you know, folk singer Michael Jonathan, he's been talking about this for ten years.

SMITH:Well, he is one of the reasons we are doing it.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Because he helped convince us that other people would be interested.  That it's not just, oh, here, if you're interested in what we did when we were kids, you know, then here. But he helped us see a perspective of this being a legacy. You know, this being something that will outlast all of us.

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:And he said it should be, it should be all of the albums. And not, we were thinking, okay, well, we could do a best of. He said, not a best of. This is the legacy set. You have all--you have the set. And so we have "Volume One" completely done, released. It's out. And I brought you one.

BOYD:I'm so excited.

SMITH:And "Volume Two". Goes into production Monday.

BOYD:Fantastic. (Smith laughs) How many albums will that cover?

SMITH:It's eight on each.

BOYD:Eight on each. Okay. And so--

SMITH:--so four discs.

BOYD:And the span of years that that represents is Seventy to--

SMITH:--Seventy to now.

BOYD:--to now. Okay. That's amazing.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:This is going to be so great.  I'm, yeah, I, I, I, I just can't say how excited people are going to be. You know, when I talk to people about, you know, and I know you guys do these wonderful shows. There's one coming up, right, at the library in two weeks, I think?

SMITH:Yes, it's this month.

BOYD:I made sure I'm in town for that, um, but--

SMITH:--on Thursday.

BOYD:You know, and so I know you feel the appreciation there, um, from the audiences that I've seen you perform to. But, but, there's something different, I think, when--about those old recordings that is going to--

SMITH:--well, we've always felt that live concerts and that connection is the most impactful. We've always felt that the connection you can have with a live audience, because it's, it's that feeling that's created and in that space and that moment, you get to share that moment. And that's not any other moment. This is right now. We get to do this with, together with the audience. And it creates an amazing space. And you can feel the vibration of the air is different in that--

BOYD:--yes--

SMITH:--in that live space. And, and so that's one reason that, you know, yeah, we might do something with the albums. Maybe somebody would be interested, but it's the live concerts.

BOYD:The energy, you know, that the audience has, too, is--we always talk about like an oral history theory, right? That this interview that we're doing here, this isn't just me hitting the recorder and story gathering. This is an interaction. This is, you know, it's both of us are feeding into this.

SMITH:That's why you're so good at this.

BOYD:Well, thank you. Thank you. But when the band is playing together, there's, you know, the same thing. You guys are collaborating and there's this vibration and, you know, sound that the physics of the whole thing--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--is happening. But the energy of the audience--

SMITH:--sure--

BOYD:--can really just--

SMITH:--It makes a difference.

BOYD:--so--

SMITH:--it absolutely makes a difference. And so we've gotten a new respect for the recordings.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:You know, our father, to help us not stress over being perfect for recordings, I think, said that it's just a document. It's a record of what we did at that moment. You know, you may do it better or differently next week, and that's fine. He said, "This is just a recording of what we did this day." You know, take the stress off. It doesn't have to be perfect. The goal was not to be perfect. Because if that's your goal, then it gets a little more sterile, (laughs) a lot more stress, and that feel doesn't happen. And so with the recordings, we always tried to have the feel. You know, we tried to do it more live, together, even now when there are so many capabilities, so many abilities to do things. You do your part today. You'll do his part next week. We'll upload it.

BOYD:Oh, "You're in Chicago. Will you put your part down and send it to me?" (Smith laughs)

SMITH:Just upload it. But we still do it live.

BOYD:Last time you said how wonderful it was recording at Rickey Wasson's because he has the booths with the windows where you all literally can see each other and it's--feels live.

SMITH:Yeah, absolutely. And we can still, you know, come in together and sing our parts and still feel that live--and some even in the same space because that's important in music.

BOYD:Yes. And as the musicians, you know, I can tell you're saying, well, you know, we're thinking about the live as, you know, you're clearly holding the live dynamic up here. The recording is just sort of this thing that you did. But the recording is the only tangible way that the audience can actually recreate that moment--

SMITH:--exactly.

BOYD:--emotionally. And so that's what I just love, that everybody I've ever talked to, beyond the Michael Jonathans and the super fans that you have, have just sort of thought for a moment and thought, who--people who weren't even bluegrass mus--you know, fans, just thought, oh my God. The McLain Family Band. And you can see like this rush of memories coming back. And so I think this is going to be great. So I just can't wait.

SMITH:Well, it's exciting for us more than we expected.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

SMITH:It's exciting for us. And there's a little booklet in the, in the CD set box of the four discs, and it has pictures of each of the albums and what was on each of the albums, and, you know, and--

BOYD:--oh, good--

SMITH:--when and where.

BOYD:Actual liner notes.

SMITH:And, well, it's not a story. We didn't include the story in it because that's a lot of songs.

BOYD:Oh, Lord. Oh, my Lord, yes. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:We stuffed song--a lot of songs on each CD and so--and I actually am going to count them this weekend because there are a lot of songs.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:And a lot of information and writers and publishing information and how long each lasts and the studios and engineers and all. And it's Jodi Miller who's helped us put the package together. She's done the whole design-

BOYD:--oh, she's been with you guys since--

SMITH:--she's done a super job.

BOYD:She was really, really super young.

SMITH:She's done a super job.

BOYD:She's great. Okay. Well, speaking of super exciting.

SMITH:Yes.

BOYD:Um, we're going to go back to--last time, last interview, we finished with talking about, really, the fire. And the fire, in some ways, I know it's not exact timeline-wise, but in my mind, it kind of represents the moment for the McLain family that you all transitioned, began that transition to Berea. And, and so, let's go back to that moment. And we talked a great deal about how, and I'm just amazed at how resilient you all were coming back from the fire. I mean, you said you had a performance the following week. Like, it was like on Tuesday you had a television performance that you had to go do, and, and--

SMITH:--it was even that week, I think. It was right away, right away. But we had instruments. And, some friends gave us some clothes.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:And there was a store in town, and so we got an outfit. (laughs) We made that work. It wasn't a question. Both of our parents were doers, and they always saw the best in things, and they always made, you know, obstacles into opportunities somehow. They always did that. And that's one of--I realize now, one of the greatest gifts that they gave us was that perspective.

BOYD:Yeah. Well, the positivity has always come out in the music, I think, too, which is amazing, so--

SMITH:--so after the fire, we moved into our father's office on The Hindman Settlement School campus. And there was a wing added, and so we had living space there also. And the little office kitchen became mother's--(laughs)--mother's amazing kitchen because of what she did in this little space. She could do anything. She didn't need a big fancy kitchen.

BOYD:Which says so much about her. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:And we could do so many things. We made our first 45 then, which was "Cimarron" on one side and "Charlie Brown" on the other side.

BOYD:Oh, Really?

SMITH:And Jeff is going to digitize that for us too.

BOYD:The 45, fantastic.

SMITH:We have one of those left, and so--(laughs)--Raymond had it. And so Jeff's going to digitize that for us too. But we had this system set up. Where Daddy printed the cover of it, and we folded it and took rubber cement and put it together.

BOYD:Wow.

SMITH:So that the forty--(laughs)--and then stuffed the 45s in it. (laughs)

BOYD:That is so fantastic. You all did that.

SMITH:We did it. And that was before our name was The McLain Family Band. It was called The Bluegrass State.

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:And we--the pic--the cover picture was from our TV show. So when you see the cover of it someday, when we get that figured out, what we want to do with it. That was fun. And so we were doing things. And you're right, it was kind of a defining time for the band. We had our instruments. We were--had the TV show. We started doing, you know, other shows and going to the Pike County Jamboree and going to Bean Blossom and becoming friends with Bill Monroe. And these--things happened before we moved to Berea. It was while we were still in Hindman.

BOYD:Right, you had hit the road, I think, in terms of performances. And we talked a little bit about that in terms of the logistics and such and how your mom sometimes would stay at home with the smaller children and such, and--yeah, so we really carried up last interview right up to Berea. So I'm going to transition here and talk about this, you know, do you remember--I don't know if you remember, but when I was a child--the idea of moving was so horrifying that we were going to be uprooted and I was going to lose all my friends. And I remember, you know, friends who would move away and it was so sad. Suddenly you're moving from Hindman to Berea. Take me back to that moment where this, you know, your, your family realizes, the kids are realizing that the parents have made this decision.

SMITH:Well, actually, it wasn't as foreign as it might feel or strange because we were already familiar with Berea.

BOYD:Right.

SMITH:Berea was a friendly place where we were comfortable. We'd gone there for Christmas Country Dance School. Our father was doing music for The Berea College Country Dancers already.

BOYD:I mean, you had the roots, I think, too, with your grandmother's involvement.

SMITH:And she--our grandmother, Bicki McLain, was involved with Berea College Christmas Country Dance School. And so we already had a really good feeling about Berea.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And so it wasn't like we were going to an unknown. We were going, actually, to a really nice place.

BOYD:Oh, okay. Well, this is good. So talk about that first house because the first--there was two houses, right?

SMITH:When we moved there, we moved to the house on Prospect Street that was owned by the college. And so we were renting, I guess, from the College. And they had, I guess, some houses that new instructors--I'm maybe not accurate about that because I wasn't involved in that part, but that was my understanding.

BOYD:I think they still do that. I think that's right, and I think they still do that.

SMITH:And so the house on Prospect Street was in walking distance of campus. And, in fact, one of our father's classes he held in our living room.

BOYD:Oh, really? (Smith laughs) Of course he did.

SMITH:And, um, that's where we also met composer in residence for the state of Kentucky who later became our friend and collaborator, Philip Rhodes. He came to our father's class there at our house. He was on campus. And he and our father made that connection that music communicates. It's bigger than style. You know, it's bigger than this style or that style. It's music.

BOYD:Yeah. Explain who Philip Rhodes was.

SMITH:Philip Rhodes was in Berea when we first, when--maybe the first or second year that we were in Berea, as composer-in-residence. And he was a prolific writer and he is living in North Carolina. He's from North Carolina. And so even though he was a classical composer, he had a heart for the music of the Appalachian region also. And our father, who had classical background and also this big heart for the Appalachian region and the music and being true to the music, They, of course, made good friends. And Philip Rhodes then composed orchestrations for some of our pieces. that we toured with the Cincinnati Symphony, many festivals. And then he was commissioned to write a full piece, a three-movement piece, Concerto for Bluegrass Band and Orchestra, which we recorded, and it will be on "Volume Two".

BOYD:Yes. (Smith laughs) So that's where the beginnings of the orchestral collaboration really sort of hatched there.

SMITH:Absolutely. And Philip Rhodes was right there in our living room. He would work with us. He would see what Raymond was doing on the banjo, you know, and he had, Daddy had a piano there too, and so he'd work with the piano and work out parts so that this wasn't just an orchestration--the concerto wasn't just an orchestration of some of our pieces, but it was a true collaboration where the orchestra is a--plays as an orchestra. They do the parts that work well for an orchestra. And we are true to a bluegrass band that did things that worked well for our instruments. And he had the musical brilliance and heart to put them together--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--uh, so well--

BOYD:--I bet--I'm just trying to imagine that moment where, you know, there--you walk through this world and, and, you know, throughout your life you meet lots of people but there are very few people who you connect with on that different level. And I'm not talking romantically, but this is like--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--where you connect with somebody and you realize oh my gosh you know It's just a higher level connection. I cannot imagine your father and Philip Rhodes, like that moment of, of, you get me, like we get each other, and we're going to collaborate.

SMITH:Yeah--

BOYD:--oh, that's--

SMITH:--that level of mutual respect--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--um, I felt even then, and I still feel it. And when we get to perform these pieces with orchestras, and I relive that moment, you know, in, in the early, early 70s when we got to do those things together for the first time.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah, imagine your dad down at--up at Denison University, you know, as a student. And I was just up there the other day--

BOYD:--oh--

BOYD:--and, thinking about him because my daughter's there now.

BOYD:Oh, nice.

BOYD:And yeah, just imagining him sort of putting these pieces together where he had this classical thing and he's got this interest in music. But I can see that moment in Berea with Philip Rhodes really being that sort of transformational moment. That's really cool. I didn't realize that, which is great. So as a kid, let's go back to you just as a kid, right? Because you are just a kid at this point. How old are you when you moved to Berea?

SMITH:I was going into eighth grade.

BOYD:Eighth grade.

SMITH:So whatever that is.

BOYD:Is that like thirteen, fourteen, twelve, thirteen?

SMITH:Yeah, something like that.

BOYD:So, um--

SMITH:--I guess it was--if it was seventy, was it maybe seventy?

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:So I might have been twelve.

BOYD:So you've got to go into a new school.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:So what do you remember about that?

SMITH:It's Berea Community School, which is 1 through 12. And they were so welcoming. And for some reason, probably... I don't know if they had grades that it was necessarily based on grades. It might have been. But I was put in 8-1, which was a little more advanced. And we got to do freshman courses. Oh, wow. The 8-1 class did. And so we went together. And it was a lot of the college professors' kids.

SPEAKER_04:Oh, yeah.

SMITH:My amazing friends that are still my friends. Julia Weatherford was the daughter of Willis Weatherford, the president of Berea College. John Ramsey, son of Dean Ramsey. Margaret Drake. Jane Hilberry. their parents were teaching at Berea College. And Susan Jones, Loyal Jones' daughter, these are still a good, solid group of friends. Susan Strickler, it was an immediate bond, and we... We had such good times together and understood each other. They were part of the country dance community, which was good and strong and still is. They still have a high school dance group in Berea for country dancing.

SMITH:Do they really?

SMITH:Yeah. Yeah, and they tour internationally. It's a--(laughs)--an amazing community and very supportive of each other. One thing dance and music provides is that concept of togetherness and appreciating each other and doing this together that I appreciate so much. So immediately--I had the support team. Immediately I had these great friends. And it's in walking distance of the campus--in walking distance of my house. And so I would walk to school. And that first year, eighth grade, I got to do the freshman classes. And we were, we were touring already and doing international travel. And I'm sure we'll--

SMITH:--um-hm. Yep-- --talk about that here in a minute. Because that started right away. After we moved to Berea, we started doing international travel. And it got to be so much that I went to school one semester a year. And so we'd go to school one semester and tour pretty much full time the other eight months. And even those four months when we were in school, we would have weekends and the TV were taping in Lexington and we'd do two shows a week so that there would be shows when we were out of town. And that's two shows of--two half-hour shows of new material that we'd have to work up each week, too. So there's a lot of rehearsal. We were incredibly busy and just having an amazing life.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Tho--the 70s--were wonderful years absolutely wonderful years.

BOYD:I imagine. I can't imagine actually. Talk about your siblings during this time.

SMITH:We've always been close. Always. From first breaths, you know, to still-- we're all best friends, um, and that's nice to know you have your support team.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

SMITH:You have your buddies there no matter what else is going on in life You can count on your brothers and sisters. I have an older brother, younger brother, older sister, younger sister.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Right--It's Raymond, Alice, me, then Nancy Ann, and Michael.

BOYD:Yeah. So how, how, how was their transition to Berea? Because was Raymond out at that point? Was Raymond in--?

SMITH:Raymond was in college. He had done some study at Lee's Junior College in Jackson while we still lived in Hindman and then went to Berea College. He was in college then and Alice and I were in high school and Nancy Ann was in grade school and Michael was in preschool. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah, yeah, yeah.

SMITH:And they were, they were all great, all involved. You know, Berea is such a lovely, welcoming, warm, friendly, culturally active place to be.

BOYD:What were some of the striking differences that you just remember between Hindman and Berea?

SMITH:Well, Hindman was also culturally active, warm, friendly kind, and so that was similar.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:That , that same, you know, great supportive community feel was, was very similar. And we still have great connections with Hindman and The Settlement School. We have friends that are working there. Raymond's on the board. We go back and do concerts and so forth. Our father's ashes are there.

BOYD:Oh, really?

SMITH:Uh-huh.

BOYD:I didn't know that.

SMITH:And there's McLain Chapel where our house used to be after it burned. And we moved there, you know, moved in his office. Later that--more recently, that was made into an open-air chapel. And that's where Elizabeth Watts and James Still are also there.

BOYD:That's amazing. Wow.

SMITH:That's a nice space. So we have a great connection with Hindman and Berea both. We feel like both have that same great feel. Berea, uh, did have the college aspect. And so Alice and Raymond and I all then graduated from Berea College, and Alice's husband, Al, too, with our father teaching there and being involved with the professor's kids (laughs) as our best friends. And so we were on campus quite a bit. And Berea Community High School, Berea Community School, and Berea College had a kind of a partnership where we could take classes. High school students could take classes at the college.

BOYD:That's fantastic.

SMITH:And it's in walking distance. So, I was able to take classes at the college while I was a high school student.

BOYD:That place is so innovative, you know, Berea over, you know, the decades.

SMITH:Absolutely.

BOYD:It's always been incredibly innovative. That's just so great.

SMITH:So that made the transition from high school to college smooth and not scary but friendly.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Um, that worked out incredibly well. It was a great place to go to school. It was an advantage was that it was on the interstate, so--near the interstate, so we could get out to go to performances easier and quicker than from Hindman.

BOYD:Well, let's talk about the performances because we talked a little bit about it last time, but I want to go back because at this point, before the international thing started to really kick into gear--talk about some of this, you know, you mentioned the, what, Pike County--

SMITH:Pike County Jamboree--

BOYD:--Jamboree

SMITH:--that we went to from Hindman.

BOYD:And Bean Blossom we talked a little bit about, but, like, suddenly, like in the bluegrass world, Bean Blossom is, you know, this is Bill Monroe's festival, right? And you're striking up a friendship with the founder of bluegrass music. Talk about performing during that time and this friendship with Bill Monroe that unfolded.

SMITH:Bill Monroe was so our friend. And looking back on it now, I think, wow, what? (laughs) How do you do that? But it just happened. And I think part of it was that we were young, and so it wasn't, you know any--there was no kind of competition thing. We had great respect for the music, and, uh, we were already comfortable performing, and so he would have us play, you know, and fill in for things when, at the beginning, we were filling in, you know, if somebody didn't make it, or even during the lunch break, or whatever, and then he started asking us to be at his festiv--his other festivals because the festival scene was exploding. There were more and more festivals and there were multiple ones then that would use his name and he could pick who to perform at it. He'd bring--they would manage it. And so he would have festivals in different locations. And so he would have us, he'd have certain groups, Flatt, uh, Lester Flatt and the Foggy Mountain Boys or Ralph Stanley, you know, and the Clinch Mountain Boys. And I think to have variety, perhaps, you have this band, a family group. Families, though, are very traditional in these styles of music. There are lots of families.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Uh, it's very, very common. That's for one thing in rural regions, that's who you're with. And so practice is easier and--

BOYD:--sure, logistics are amazing. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:Yeah. So that's kind of handy. And with the Stoneman Family and all the brother groups and so forth, there are so many families. So that wasn't uncommon. But having girl kids, I guess, might have been less common. I didn't think of it at the time. It didn't seem strange to me because I didn't think of myself that way. I thought we were just ones of the performers. And they treated us with a lot of respect. Bill Monroe always treated us with respect.

BOYD:Talk about that. How, how--give me an example of that.

SMITH:Well, one time Bill Monroe was going to do his festival in Jackson, Kentucky and that was when we had our TV show in Hazard and the--before they had the studio they had the live TV broadcasts from the transmitter building up on the hill so you'd go up on the hill into that building and that's where, so that's where we presented our show they were all live You know, nothing was taped. I wish we had tapes of those.

BOYD:I know.

SMITH:But, we--we don't because everything was live. And so Bill Monroe came on the show to help promote his festival in Jackson.

BOYD:Really?

SMITH:And there was an interviewer that was there. We did some things. He did some things with his band. And the interviewer asked Bill Monroe, he said, "Do you consider what they do bluegrass music?" (laughs) And we were kind of listening because, I mean, there's the father of bluegrass music and that's bluegrass music.

BOYD:And you guys were playing things and incorporating things like accordions at times, and things that--

SMITH:--yeah, we might do something from a different genre or something that we wrote. We did a lot of original material.

BOYD:So you had been pushing the boundaries.

SMITH:Well, we were just--I mean we weren't trying to push anything. We were just doing songs. And if we were doing his songs his way, there wouldn't be a place for us. Why would he hire a band that was just like him? And so I don't know that that was a conscious decision, but that's the way it was, is that we were different, and so there was a place for us.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. And so Bill Monroe is posed with the question, are you bluegrass?

SMITH:Bill Monroe was--so my father, you know, because they asked my father, you know, do you consider yourself bluegrass? And he didn't want to, you know, (laughs) he wasn't sure what to say in front of Bill Monroe. And so Bill Monroe stepped in and he said, "I consider them bluegrass. They better say they're bluegrass."

BOYD:That's a moment. That's really cool.

SMITH:And so he had a respect for us, and he hired us for all of his festivals. And he had festivals all over the country then, and one in Norco, California. I'll tell you a funny story that happened in Norco. This was, I don't know, seventy-one? This was probably in seventy-one. We just had our first album, the black and white cover. We had one album. And he and I, at a festival, you'd have record tables. And you'd sit with your record tables. And people would come up. So I was sitting at the record table area and I had our one black and white album (laughs) there. And he was here next to me with all of his amazing albums there. And we were visiting and people would come and talk with us. And a guy came up and picked up. our album, our black and white album, and looked at it and looked at the back cover and looked at me and looked at the back cover and put it down and looked at me and kind of walked off. And Bill snickered. And then just looked off and was going . I said, "What?" And he looked at it. And so I picked it up. And he had written in Sharpie on the back of it, "I can sing good, Ruth McLain."

BOYD:He wrote that?

SMITH:I said, "Bill!" (laughs)

BOYD:(laughs) That is hilarious. That is hilarious.

SMITH:But he was so, so our friend.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And sometimes at festivals, we would just walk. You know, we'd walk. We'd just walk. I mean, it didn't have to be a big conversation. It was never big business things or anything. We would just walk, and it was a friend--it was a friendly thing, and I think it helped that we were young, so that it wasn't, there was no romantic issue. It wasn't, you know, anything like that. It was just, we were just friends.

BOYD:And there was no politics.

SMITH:No politics, no, nothing but friends.

BOYD:And I don't mean like political politics, but like--

SMITH:--right--

BOYD:--I know with Bill, there was a lot of sort of interaction, you know, the business side of this whole thing that was happening.

SMITH:It was no business. It was just, you know, we could talk about his mule.

BOYD:The egos.

SMITH:We could talk about--no egos, no, it was just, we were just friends.

BOYD:That's really fantastic. It's so special.

SMITH:And that continued, and we were best friends with the members of his band. You know, it was--really, the other musicians were some of our best friends, too.

BOYD:So like who?

SMITH:Well, whoever was in their bands. You know, whoever was all his sidemen, all the people in his band, in Ralph Stanley's band, in Lester Flatt's band. Marty Stuart was playing mandolin in Lester Flatt's band at that time. And we're still good friends, you know, through the decades, these musician friends. Because we had these connections. You know, there were friends that I had in Berea at school, and that was nice, and they're still my friends. And these connections with the musicians, you know, that's an amazing thing that we got the advantage of. And they're still our friends, all those musicians. We just went to Buck White's memorial service last week, and they were our musician friends. And we've been friends with the Whites through all the things that have gone on through life. They're still best friends.

BOYD:Yeah. (pauses) Yeah, I mean, a lot of those sidemen became extraordinary lead figures as well.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:So, um--so at this point, you're playing, you're organized, you're touring, essentially. Had the decision been made at this point that--we're going to do this like from like a career standpoint, you know what I mean? Like, was this sort of like, are we just kind of doing this or is this going to be something we're going to do?

SMITH:Well, and possibly our mother and father had that conversation. I don't remember that conversation, but when a turning--another impactful time that I think of was in Berea, uh, When we were there, and it was probably the very first year, it was that first seventy, seventy-one, seventy-two, right in there, in--probably seventy-one, the National Endowment for the Arts Music Council met, did their--were going to do their meeting, and they decided rather than meeting in the cities, that they would come out and meet somewhere else. And Berea was chosen. And they were having dinner at Boone Tavern, and I believe it was in the Oak Room. And we were asked to do some after-dinner music, you know, entertainment for the folks.

BOYD:For the NEA?

SMITH:For the National Network for the Arts Music Council. And so we did our songs. And a gentleman came up to us as soon as we finished, and he said, "My name is Gian Carlo Menotti." Who is this amazing opera composer, wrote "Amahl in the Night", "Visitors", and so forth. And he said that he would like us to come to Spoleto, Italy, to his Festival of Two Worlds, that would be the next July, and we did that. That was an impactful moment because that time, at that, that--the beginning of our overseas tours, happened then. And it, so, so when the tour happened, it was in seventy-two, and we went for two weeks to Spoleto, Italy, to The Festival of Two Worlds, and also to Germany, to Hamburg, Hanover, Stuttgart, Nuremberg, and Essen to--and performed at the Amerika Hauses, a And then to Belgium, to Antwerp, and Jo--John--Joseph Nuyens there was a mandolin player and a musician. We stayed with them, and he had a family band that was starting, and so he had us help them and also set up a concert. So we had those three things that trip, that summer.

BOYD:How did the other two--how did Germany and--I mean, it makes sense that you did that, but how did The Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto and that connection broaden into the other two opportunities?

SMITH:Well, since we knew we were going to be in Italy, Gian Carlo Menotti had said, "We can't pay you a whole lot, but this will change your life." Which it did. But somehow, I don't know if they suggested it or somebody else did, but to make the trip more financially feasible, the contact was made for Amerika Hauses in Germany. And so they were able to set up five. And that was to help make this trip work financially.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And, and once those Amerika Hauses happened, that got us on file in Washington. (laughs) And so we had--somehow we had the reputation of of being a good representative group that could work well in international situations to represent a side of the United States Perhaps traditional music, family, you know, whatever. (laughs) And, and we're easy to work with. And that somehow made the rest of our international touring career fall into place.

BOYD:So that was the Amerika Hause tour. Those were the things that connected you to the State Department?

SMITH:I assume.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:I assume so.

BOYD:Yeah. I mean--

SMITH:--and then after that, it all just--Alice, Alice did a lot to make the next part work because, I believe it was the tour after that one. We did an international tour every year after that for a dozen--

SMITH:--that's amazing-- --years or so. And the next trip, we were invited already to Alaska. And we had bluegrass friends in Japan who wanted us to come there. And we thought, well, if we're going to be in Alaska and then Japan is that direction, right? And so Alice said, "Well, we might as well come home on around the world rather than back, right?"

BOYD:Yeah, I like that logic.

SMITH:(laughs) And so she started writing letters. She went to the library, to The Berea College Library, looked up places, looked on a map, And she contacted places. I don't think she even told Mother and Daddy exactly. I don't think that was an (laughs) official role. But she, you know, and everything was letters then. You send letters places.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:Saying that we were, you know, here and, you know, we could come here. And that tour ended up then being, uh,  Taiwan, Indonesia, the Philippines, Laos, Burma, Nepal, India, Afghanistan, Iran, Egypt, Tunisia, Lebanon, Romania Hungary and Czechoslovakia I believe on that trip--and then Iceland--

BOYD:I've got--I just want to say your memory is amazing because I have the list right here--

SMITH:--oh well-- --I could have-- --you just--(Smith laughs)--you--

SMITH:--I could have--

BOYD:--you just--(Smith laughs)--you--

SMITH:--and you just-- --you could have handed it to me--(laughs)

BOYD:--you just went down the list, um--

SMITH:--well that was in sequence--

BOYD:--you missed one and that was--

BOYD:--Poland-- --Poland. Very good--(Smith laughs)--very good--

SMITH:--I knew I'd missed it--(laughs)--

BOYD:--very good--

SMITH:--(laughs)--but I didn't think it mattered. (laughs)

BOYD:That is amazing. Wow. Wow.

SMITH:Well, it was an incredible time, Doug.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:That--and what that led to, and--because by then, once you have all of that, and they were mostly through the cultural attache, the cultural section of the embassy branch, USIA, USIS, United States Information Service, United States Information Agency, they--you know, things changed different years. But those, our file evidently (laughs) in Washington got huge real fast.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And the cultural affairs officer would move. I think their time in a place may have been three years, and so they would move to a different one. And so here was a group that worked, and so they'd be here, and then they'd be over here, and so they'd invite us, and--so then Washington got involved to help us make this work well for them and us, too.

BOYD:I'm going to go backwards, and I want to go back to Spoleto.

SMITH:(laughs) Yes?

BOYD:And in fact, let's go back to before Spoleto. And so talk to me about you as a child--but you're a teenager at this point. Talk about the lead up to this. You're about to jump on a plane and head to Italy. What do you remember about that?

SMITH:Well, I remember we were busy. We were doing lots of concerts. We were doing lots of rehearsals. We were learning new material. We were getting outfits together. You know, getting school, taking care of school. And so it wasn't really a stop and think about this. It was just part of life.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:It was just part of life. And the traveling thing became so easy.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Because it's not, okay, what should we pack? It's like, we're already packed. You know, you have your toiletries here and your home toiletries.

BOYD:You were on tour.

SMITH:It was so easy.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And so there wasn't a moment of, oh my gosh, now what are we going to do? It was, like, just a continuous roll of awesome things.

BOYD:Yeah. I mean, I asked you this last time, and I'm going to ask, I'm probably going to ask it several times throughout this project. But, you know, okay, it's one thing for Raymond to carry his banjo, and it's one thing to carry your, you know, a mandolin, and it's one thing to carry. (Smith laughs) You play the upright bass.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:How did you handle that logistic thing?

SMITH:In the United States, we ended up driving more than we flew because it's easier to drive with a bass than it is fly with one. Although we've done that many times too. And that can work. They don't love it when they see you walking up with a bass. And it means you buy a ticket. Yeah. But it doesn't actually fit in a seat. And so a bulkhead seat works better with an extension. You get seatbelt extensions.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And so it would take a seatbelt extension.

BOYD:Oh.

SMITH:Um, and Raymond was such a good help with that. He would, he would help make that work. Somehow, sometimes, at that point especially, a guy may get more respect than a little girl.

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:Um, I didn't think of myself as a little girl, but I think maybe sometimes other people did.

BOYD:Yeah, sure. Sure. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:And that's okay.  That's okay. But Raymond was such a good help. And so if one of us sat in the seat beside the base that was extended over, you put the armrest up, have it have the seat belt extension, have a bulkhead seat for it, that can work. And then we got good at borrowing basses. We'd line them up ahead of time. So if there were places overseas that you couldn't take a bass or a trip that you couldn't take a bass, we would line one up ahead of time. They would line one up for us. And so you got good at playing different basses.

BOYD:Okay, so back to Spoleto.

SMITH:Okay.

BOYD:So you are, you know, you're, talk to--take me back. So let's--

SMITH:--okay--

BOYD:--you're going to land in Italy. Take me on this journey. What happened from there?

SMITH:It's fascinating because we lived there for two weeks, actually a little more than that. The festival and the performances were two weeks, but Menotti had us come early and had us come to his what we thought of as a castle. It's a stone, a four-story stone place--his home, that's from medieval times, you know, with tall stone windows and arched, uh, arched windows and arched stone hallways, you know, doorways throughout this historic space.

BOYD:Old homes mean something different over there.

SMITH:--you're right--(laughs)--

BOYD:--than what we're used to here--

SMITH:--you're so right. And his amazing home, which we called a castle, was there on the piazza del--what's it called? Duomo. Piazza del Duomo. Which is where The Festival of Two Worlds was held. And the theater, gorgeous theater, was there also. And the cathedral and his.--castle. (laughs) His home. And so he had us come there first because he wanted to help select the material for our performances, which were in the theater. And so we brought our instruments into this amazing space--stone space. And his big piano, gorgeous piano, was there. And we played music, and he helped us select what he thought would work well for the show.

BOYD:Do you remember what he selected?

SMITH:I remember he liked, (singing) Darling, You Are My Very Sunshine. You know, as an opener.

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:That's one I remember and then if you went up this stairway there was the bathroom and it was different you know the bathroom in that building was different and Alice went first and she got so that she couldn't figure out how to get out. (laughs) So we heard and he helped with that. It was just an amazing time because not only was the space amazing and the connection with Menotti amazing, but it really was a festival of two worlds. The concept of music and traditions are global. It's not isolated. Which is a big lesson for a lot of us, for all the times. Now, then, all the times in between and all the times in the future is we share this world. We share this space. And that we're more alike than we are different. And the traditions there, the traditions here, the traditions here, they have so many similarities. And a lot of it's the feel.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And that's the same. And the joy of music and that vibration, you know, that will take your breath away. That's the same in all cultures. And that. concept of Festival of Two Worlds was happening, and we were kind of paired with an Italian folkloric group, Nunzio, Est--Eugenio, some really nice guys, and they played lutes and, you know, wind instruments and different things that were traditional, and we got to be good friends with them. And so we'd go down and get gelato, you know, and get some ice cream and stuff on the--gelato on the way to where we were staying. We stayed in homes. and would walk the cobblestone streets through and stop and get some ice cream and go through. And the soup, the minestrone soups and the breads and the cheeses and all the feels were so amazing.

BOYD:I mean, we take this for granted now because we live in this global community now, and we're so exposed to international--but you're trying gelato for the first time as a child. It's just a little different, and it's, you know, we, we--I feel like we had gelato every day for three and a half weeks over the holidays while we were over there.

SMITH:(laughs) Yeah.

BOYD:You know, because my kids were just like, "This is amazing." Talk more about that kind of awakening, that this is something you've never experienced before.

SMITH:Well, experience all--experiencing all of these things that we had never experienced before was kind of the way life was, because we got to do a lot of that. And so it became a way of life.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

SMITH:It was a way of life already.

BOYD:You already had that sort of conditioning where you just were expecting the unexpected.

SMITH:And, and you go, and you go with it, and you appreciate every day, and you appreciate each other. And you get ready for your shows. You're professional, and so, but it's is that--it's just life, it's the--we got to live--we get to live such an amazing life.

BOYD:Um-hm. Um-hm. Truly. Truly.

SMITH:And looking back at it just blows me away. At the time, it seemed very normal. All the special seemed normal because it was all so special.

BOYD:Yeah. I mean, the cars are different. The streets are different with the cobblestones. It's just all--

SMITH:--the smells--

BOYD:--the smells--

SMITH:--and the feels. But then realizing that so much is the same. The joy of the flowers and the food and each other and the music and the connections. That's the same.

BOYD:Yeah. Yes, it is. But, I will say you're not in Bean Blossom, Indiana, you know--

SMITH:--true (laughs)--

BOYD:--at this point. So was there any kind of sense, like looking back on your parents, for example, that this was different. I mean, I know you're saying that you were conditioned for this, but this really represents a moment for your family, I think. Was there a sense that this was happening in that moment?

SMITH:Perhaps for my father. I don't know, because I felt like he also was appreciating every moment as the moment unfolded you know and then another, you know, moment and every moment was was we're ready for this, this is a joy, this is this is going to be a great day. It--that feel lasted our entire life. And I expected to go back everywhere we went. I expected that we'd go back.

BOYD:Yeah, that's great. I love the analogy here of your parents basically raising you all as improvisers. Right? You just--you're going to go with it?

SMITH:It was certainly not a worry. You weren't upset or frustrated. None of those things. It was--but it wasn't like, "Oh, this is a once-in-a-lifetime thing. This will never happen again." It's like, "Yeah, okay."

BOYD:I love that. Okay, so what are your memories of the actual performance?

SMITH:In, in Italy?

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:The theater was phenomenal. The theater, made everything sound great. The sound check went lovely. I mean, all we needed was one mic. (laughs) You know, it--we weren't all mic'd separately, or, you know, where you'd have to have a sound man that understands the music or whatever. No, you just, you know, mic, we'll do what we do. And the theater had boxes, you know, where people could sit all along up, you know, layers of these boxes. And it was just a lovely theater. And so we were fascinated by that.

BOYD:How big was it, do you think?

SMITH:I don't have a concept of that, but I can tell you what theater it was, and we could look it up on Google. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah, let's do it. Let's do it. What theater was it?

SMITH:Um, I can tell you that it's the theater that's in the Piazza del Duomo in Spoleto.

BOYD:We're going to look it up.

SMITH:Yeah, and there's the theater. If you're looking at the piazza, it's the theater on the right, the cathedral straight ahead--I mean left, cathedral straight ahead, and then Menotti's stone place, along with some other nifty stone places on the right. (laughs) (pauses) And sometimes they would also put up a bandshell in the, Plaza area, so that you could do outdoor concerts as part of the festival also.

BOYD:So what time of year is this?

SMITH:It was, I think, July, June. I think it was June.

BOYD:Okay, so summer.

SMITH:Of sum--yeah, it was summer of seventy-two.

BOYD:And how many other acts were part of the festival? Do you remember?

SMITH:Maybe a dozen?

BOYD:Dozen, okay.

SMITH:Something like that. We have a poster of it. There was a tall yellow poster, and I think maybe Raymond has it. It was in my house, which was my father's and mother's house, our parents' house that--because after Prospect Street House, I think we were there. two or three years, and then we bought a house. And that's the one that when we moved back to Berea, to help take care of my mama at her house so that she could stay home. She had Alzheimer's. We were able to buy the house then after she passed.

BOYD:Where was that house?

SMITH:In Berea.

BOYD:But where in--?

SMITH:It's off Chestnut Street.

BOYD:Okay.

SMITH:One block off Chestnut Street, off the main street that goes, um, into campus so it's in walking distance of of campus--

BOYD:--and you're still there?--

SMITH:--the town, the school and that's where I am now.

BOYD:That's so, that's so, that's very special

SMITH:It is. It's like a big hug.

BOYD:Yeah, it--I bet. I bet.

SMITH:But that poster was on that wall at one point and so I'm not sure where it is now. Raymond may--Raymond may have it.

BOYD:So you mentioned outfits.

SMITH:Yeah

BOYD:So did you have sort of the concert outfit?

SMITH:Um, we had concert outfits. (laughs) And we were different sizes. And especially at that point, it was hard to find outfits, you know, in the store. And especially for all of our different sizes. (laughs) And ages. And as you grow quite a bit, you know, during those ages.

BOYD:Oh, yes.

SMITH:And our mother made our outfits.

BOYD:Oh, that's how you did it. So describe the outfits for me.

SMITH:Well, different. I mean, we had different ones all along the time. And early ones, mother made all of them. And the jackets, some of the jackets for Raymond and my father would match the dresses And then later--and she would always be working on new ones because we've changed sizes and so forth. And you don't want to wear the same thing when you go back to a festival the next year.

BOYD:Oh, right.

SMITH:And, and so she would make them. Later, my friend Julia Weatherford made outfits for us one time. We commissioned her and she made nifty outfits. And we got outfits when we were in Finland they had some dresses made out of fabric that was beautiful and woven and we got, Alice and I got dresses there. One, ----(??) for outfits--one time when we were headed to the Middle East for the State Department, we, you know, we dressed pretty conservatively anyway. But we were going to the Middle East, and we had our meeting in Paris with the, off, official offices getting us prepared and because they would do briefings of what to expect and what's, what's good, what's not you know what's appropriate in the different places if there are things we needed to know, you know, do you cross your legs or do you yes you know do a thumbs up or, you know, you know some of those things just to get and get a feel for what was coming up and to help it be appropriate and successful. And they said, "You know, going into some of these countries, you'll need to be covered from here to the floor and to here." Well, our outfits weren't exactly like that. And so we were in Paris. But, well, okay, so we have to find something that will actually be from here to here to the floor and so we went shopping in Paris (laughs) and we found something that was perfect and it's like almost Appalachian looking yeah you know just this gorgeous, uh, Appalachian looking dresses and we we got them that fit perfectly.

BOYD:In Paris.

SMITH:In Paris.

BOYD:That's fantastic.

SMITH:I think I still have that dress. (laughs)

BOYD:I was gonna ask, do you still have that dress?

SMITH:I think I do. (laughs)

BOYD:Oh that's fantastic. So, I love--so I thought about this last night because as we mentioned before we started I went to the Billy Gibbons concert and--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--he's Z.Z. Top and they wore outfits.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:Bluegrass music was one of those genres that wore outfits pretty commonly, right? At the time?

BOYD:Well, yeah. Like, coordinated.

SMITH:You'd, you dress respec--respectful and, you know, so that--you don't dress like the audience, you dress like the performer.

BOYD:But the bands were coordinated usually, right?

SMITH:Usually. But not always so much anymore. But, yeah, Bill Monroe, you know, and they wore suits.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know the--and that was respectful.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And, and they wore, you know, maybe hats, cowboy hats and suits and looked sharp. And Stan--Ralph Stanley, you know, they would wear outfits and look sharp. And things have gone through cycles with that. And then there were The Osborne Brothers that might have, you know, a shiny jacket.

BOYD:Yes, yes.

SMITH:And, and things have changed. And then some decided that they wanted to be comfortable and be themselves. And there's a band, friends of ours, who, uh, you know, look sharp normally and then they dress down for their show. And then they go back and put on their nice clothes after the show. And so bands can have an identity that, you know, musically that's consistent with their clothes or they, you know, they're just playing music. And I get it. If they're more comfortable that way and that's the image, you know, that's fine. Others want to dress up, run to Vincent, ball gowns.

BOYD:Oh, yes.

SMITH:You know, that's fine, too. Uh, there's--and right now we're doing things that coordinate, things that we're comfortable in, but look sharp. And we'll communicate before a show and say, you know, black, white, silver, gold, and burgundy. You know, and then we'll have something like that.

BOYD:Who takes the lead on those conversations now?

SMITH:Oh, we do those together.

BOYD:Together.

SMITH:Yeah. Yeah, we do those together. Raymond and Alice and I mainly, and then Al and Daxon are good, you know, "Whatever y'all want is fine."

BOYD:Whatever. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:They're, they're get-along guys.

BOYD:Yeah, yep, yep.

SMITH:And so, you know, we want to look sharp. It helps us feel like it's a show.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know, that you want to, you know, get--do a little higher level.

BOYD:Sure.

SMITH:If you're, if you're ready. It's why you don't sit like this.

BOYD:Yes, right, that's right.

SMITH:You don't stand like that. You know, you're ready. You're ready for the show. You're ready to sing. You're ready to perform. You're ready to share what you can with each other.

BOYD:But you are the performer.

SMITH:Yeah, and it's different for different bands, and I'm perfectly fine with that.

BOYD:Do you remember the outfits at Spoleto?

SMITH:Yeah, oh yeah. Yeah, they were striped. (laughs) They had stripes going up and down. We have pictures.

BOYD:Oh, I want to see the pictures.

SMITH:Okay. (laughs)

BOYD:Definitely want to see those.

SMITH:Actually, there are pictures in the book, in the "50 Years of Music" book. There are pictures from Spoleto.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And then of other tours and things, too.

BOYD:I think I've seen that now. I think I've seen the stripes.

SMITH:And they're ones Mother made, and they have little kind of sus--the dresses have little suspender straps and little, you know, skirt thing.

BOYD:Did the other acts that were playing at that festival have sort of coordinated outfits as well?

SMITH:Well, the traditional Italian group had traditional, you know, kind of more puffy linen kind of sleeves. Yeah, so that you could tell they were a band.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah, that's great. Okay. I love that you have the dress from Paris. I'm going to go back and look at the book. Yeah, I can't wait. So I'm, I'm going to wrap up because I wanted to get you to Spoleto, and I want to talk about the tour, the tours that happened in the years following that were just epic. Before we do that, let's stick with this trip and let's go to Germany and to Belgium. So, what are your--you did two weeks in Spoleto. So was it just the one performance or?

SMITH:No, it was the whole week.

BOYD:Oh, it was the whole week.

SMITH:We did performances, and we went early.

BOYD:So the festival was a multi-day.

SMITH:It was a--yeah, it was a two-week, it's two week festival.

BOYD:Oh, wow. Okay.

SMITH:And they had a Festival of Two Worlds in Charleston, I believe it was, and we played there, too. But the one in Italy was just, was, there's--it was epic. And then the things to follow were, looking back, it was--that was a major time, directive time.

BOYD:Yeah, I mean--there's something about getting old that changes time, right? And when I look back, you know, my wife and I just had this conversation about, like, you know, when we were kids, how close we were to World War II. And so you all are in Europe just, you know, not two decades at this point, not two decades after World War II, which, again, now being older, looking back, thinking that's nothing, you know, time-wise, that goes like this. you went to a lot more contentious places in the world that were actual hotspots at this point. But did you have any sense historically that you were in this place, you know, in a, so close to--was there any kind of sense in any of these?

SMITH:We were so not political.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:We never talked about it, thought about it ,we're you know as far as cultural ambassadors, yeah, looking back I guess that's what we were.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:At the time we were just--it was just what we did.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And we were with people it was--it--and there--the next trip the round the world trip in seventy-four was when I really realized it. And we were in Laos and in the theater, there were, you know, guards at the doors with different armbands.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And they were just there talking to each other, laughing and enjoying the music. And, and that spoke a whole lot. You know, we're people. Politics, whatever. Y'all do what you're going to do. That's fine. Y'all deal with that. But, .. what are we going to do?

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And we're going to appreciate each other and we're going to respect each other and we're going to enjoy life and make the best of every day.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. That's great. I mean, and that's perfect. And in some ways that makes you all perfect for that role, um, in terms of what eventually came with regard to working with The State Department. But I think, um, Yeah, I just thought, you know, being in Italy last month, we went to a small village where we have a connection. I'll talk about that connection later. But we have a connection here at the Nunn Center with this little village in the middle of nowhere. And walking around with this gentleman who was giving us a tour. And there was a house that was bombed during World War II that never got rebuilt. And it's just there. So physically there was this sense of, um, and that was really quite remarkable to see and to really kind of process that. And so, so I thought maybe just fifteen years later, if there was some sense of that. But it sounds like this was a real vibe of, on both sides, of healing and connection and trying to build things back up at that point at least with the European countries with regard to Germany and Italy so that's lovely to hear. Okay well I have so many questions, um, (Smith laughs) let's let's talk about Germany though as you as you how did you get from Italy to Germany

SMITH:Um, (pauses) I don't remember. I don't remember if it was a train or plane. Hamburg was the first one, the first town. And we did some--I mean, the things that I remember are probably different. You know, I remember the TV guys trying to figure out how to run the mic cable up my dress, you know, (laughs) and how to clip it on. And, you know, those, you know, not are we recovering from a war. (laughs) We were different, you know.

BOYD:That's a very stressful moment. Like I've--as somebody who deals with microphones a lot, it's very stressful. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:Those kinds of things sometimes were, you know, more immediate. What we were dealing with and how this bass was going to do and who, you know, where we go for the reception and, you know, who's going to be there and who should we, be--uh make sure we talk with and and those kinds of things we were busy, um, busy being and doing.

BOYD:I had I guess I got to this point and I realized we I haven't asked I just assumed is everybody there? Even--

SMITH:--the four of us. It's our father, the band. The band and that group of four was so easy. It was an easy to travel group.

SMITH:Yes. It was our father, Raymond Kane McLain, my brother, Raymond Winslow McLain, Alice and me.

BOYD:Yeah, so your mother and the two smaller children stayed home.

SMITH:Um-hm.

BOYD:Okay, okay. As you said, that would have been logistically a much easier group.

SMITH:Yeah, sometimes they would come and be with us at different times, but that's, that's the, that was the touring group that was pack it up and go.

BOYD:Sure. Yeah, that makes sense. Okay, so--

SMITH:Quick and easy and focused on what we were doing. We weren't there as tourists. We weren't there sightseeing. We were there doing, you know, with a specific role.

BOYD:So talk about these Amerika Haus venues.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:What are those?

SMITH:Yeah. Well, in the Amerika Hauses, which had a k and it had H-a-u-s, they would teach English and they would have classes and they would have guest speakers and writers. And so people that wanted to learn English or learn about the culture, you know, or whatever, they would have things there. And so they sponsored the concerts.

BOYD:Was it an American entity that ran those? Was it the State Department that was sort of doing this as, like, outreach?

SMITH:I don't know.

BOYD:I'm going to look that up. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:Yeah, you can tell me. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah, I will, because that's interesting. Um, again, rewind just a little bit, and fifteen years ago, you know, it was a very, very--

SMITH:--different group.

BOYD:--different--

SMITH:--different feel.

BOYD:Yeah, so--okay, so Hamburg was the first?

SMITH:And then Hanover, and Stuttgart, Nuremberg, and Essen.

BOYD:And how would you characterize the audiences?

SMITH:Oh, great.

BOYD:And their reactions to you.

SMITH:They were always, always nice. They were wonderful. And sometimes it would be a smaller group, you know, in a smaller area where we could have more interaction. And sometimes it would be outdoor with a great huge, you know, huge area with these lovely old buildings all around us. You know, it's so, so it was a variety. It wasn't, there was--it was different in each town.

BOYD:Um-hm. Did you find English was something that people were speaking to you or with you?

SMITH:Sometimes. Sometimes. And people wanted to learn English in those settings--

SMITH:--yeah-- --that's what the people that were familiar with the Amerika Hauses were ones that were wanting to learn English.

SMITH:Right. So that they, so they would try out their English with us. And we got good at, um, talking with people that--where English is not their main language. That's a good skill to have when you're working internationally.

BOYD:Did you all, I mean, and this is speaking broadly over the years, did you all start to pick up languages?

SMITH:A bit.

BOYD:A bit.

SMITH:A bit. Yeah. In some, in some--achtung--in some, some, uh, sometimes when we were in a place long enough, longer than others, we would learn a little more. Sometimes we were just, you know, there and do the concert and the reception and then go to the next place. And so, you know, when you're in fifteen countries, you know, in a month, we didn't learn a lot, but on the next trip in seventy-four, that incredible trip in Laos, I was trying to learn some, some how to say, you know, at least in the concert to be able to say, "Hello, we're glad to be here," whatever. And so my line was, (speaks Laotian phrase) you know, saying, "We're glad to be here." And I was practicing that in the car, and our driver kept stopping. And we realized he was thinking, I was saying, "Okay, we're glad to be here."

BOYD:Oh, it's time to stop.

SMITH:Thinking, (laughs) I meant, it was time. (laughs)

BOYD:Oh my gosh.

SMITH:We can stop. So I realized, well, maybe I was at least maybe saying it right.

BOYD:Right. Well done. (Smith laughs) Yeah. That's good feedback.

SMITH:And then I could change Vientiane to Luang Prabang, you know, if we were going to Luang Prabang, which is the old capital. And so I found that there were little things like that. And so different ones of us would learn different bits just as a respectful thing.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:You know, and a little, cultural feel that we care about them too it's not we're the best thing in the world you know America isn't necessarily the greatest because that's not a very global feel because we have as much respect for them.

BOYD:Yeah. (pauses) Again that's part of the beauty of music is, is, you know it's the great equalizer in some ways--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--and brings people together and--

SMITH:--and their cultures, my gosh, their cultures have been around for so long.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know--

BOYD:--that's right--

SMITH:--we're this new country.

BOYD:Yes.

SMITH:But, but their cultures, you know, and the Hungarian cultures where they have had these--sometimes the same tune in the same village--generation, generation, generation and they can do that--do it the same. And that's their tune and they have a pride for having that tune that, you know, their great, great, great grandparents might have sung or played that tune. You know, and the buildings are just one physical something that you can see but the culture that is passed on is worthy of a lot of respect.

BOYD:Yes.

SMITH:And we got that.

BOYD:That's fantastic.

SMITH:We so got that. In Burma, I know this is the next trip after Germany and you were on Germany, but as far as language goes, consistent with your language theme, in Burma, which is Myanmar now, In Burma, we got there and they said, "You'll be pleased. We've arranged for you to sing a Burmese song." And I said, "Well, can you tell us more?" And they said, "Yeah, yeah. And so here's the song." And this guy was going to teach it to us. And so I was elected to learn it. And I did, and he was charming, and I learned all the verses, and we did it. And here's a condensed version of it. (sings song in Burmese, making a mistake) Let me start again. It's been a long time since I've done this. (sings again in Burmese)

BOYD:You remember it.

SMITH:Well, some of it. I don't remember all of it. And that takes the last line and puts it up with part of it. (Sings in Burmese) But I would love to go back someday and, and I have it in my house. I have the words and where I tried to do it phonetically so that I could--

BOYD:--yes. Oh you have that?--

SMITH:--try to, try to do it. And so someday I'll relearn it so that I can do the whole thing.

BOYD:Oh, that'd be fantastic.

SMITH:But that kind of interaction between people, and--has been some of the most impactful for us, where we would be paired with a local folkloric group or learn a song in their language or, or speak. speaking something in their language or doing joint things together, doing joint concerts together. In Africa, we spent a day one time with drummers and we did a joint show in, in the evening. And those experiences, there's no way to share the impact that that has on us. You know, you can't understand it. How can you? It's it's--this connection that we all have in the world is not politics.

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:We have human connection that's way bigger and way more long-lasting--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--than any politician or policy It's this connection that is strong, and we all--we will survive. We all can get along.

BOYD:Um-hm.

SMITH:Yeah, there are wars here, wars there, uh, disagreements, whatever, but the biggest thing, the most important thing, is that we're all the same. We're actually not that different.

BOYD:I can't think of a better way to stop because we need to stop on that because that is perfect. So I'm going to hit stop.