GORTON:Sure.

JEFFRIES:Um--(Gorton clears throat)--I thought--so, we're hoping to talk a couple--three times, um, and this--

GORTON:Okay.

JEFFRIES:So, for us getting started--

GORTON:Yeah.

JEFFRIES:I thought we would keep things, um, kind of broad--

GORTON:Okay.

JEFFRIES:And, and, and general. And, of course, this is really all an opportunity to sort of reflect on 250Lex, really. And so, if you would care to introduce yourself and, and--(both laugh)--and state your role.

GORTON:Well, I'm Linda Gorton, and I am the mayor of Lexington, Kentucky. I'm in my seventh year as mayor.

JEFFRIES:Your--and your second term, I think, right?

GORTON:My second term, right.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:And I was looking at something--(Gorton clears throat)--recently, and, I mean, you, you just steamrollered into your second term, right?

GORTON:Oh--(Gorton laughs)--

JEFFRIES:It was like a 70 percent--I can't remember, but it was, like, really, you did--

GORTON:I think it was 71 percent of the vote.

JEFFRIES:Seventy-one percent, yeah.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:Congratulations on--

GORTON:Well, you know, I'm a real people person, if you don't know that yet. (Both laugh). And, um, I work for people. That's my whole purpose, so. It was pretty exciting to do that. I never thought I'd do that, but--

JEFFRIES:You mean run for political office--for office?

GORTON:Well, that in the beginning, and then get 71 percent of the vote.

JEFFRIES:Oh, right, yeah. (Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:Yeah. So, it's very exciting.

JEFFRIES:Well, um, you have gotten to do something pretty interesting, which is create this anniversary for the city of Lexington. Obviously, the anniversary was coming regardless, but--

GORTON:Yes, yes.

JEFFRIES:But being at the head of the table and, and kind of planning this kind of thing, I'm sure there were many, many, many irons in the fire--(Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:Many irons in the fire, and, um, so we looked--we started talking a couple years ago, and we looked at what the city did for its two hundredth birthday. They had a weekend celebration. And I said, "Well, that'll never work." (Both laugh). We have too much to celebrate, right--

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:And to, to recognize. Some of it wasn't exactly a celebration, because most cities in the South have a piece of their history that's not a happy piece. But we want to recognize our history, celebrate our history, and look into the future.

JEFFRIES:Right.

GORTON:So, I said, "How about a year-long celebration?" I don't remember how my staff reacted right then--(both laugh). But it has worked out beautifully and has touched, really, literally thousands of people--

JEFFRIES:Sure.

GORTON:Over the year. We're, you know, we'll soon be finished with our year.

JEFFRIES:I know, it's just kind of--

GORTON:Yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah.

JEFFRIES:It's whizzed by, I believe. Now, planning, if I--if I--if I remember correctly, I think planning started--(Gorton clears throat)--almost exactly two years ago.

GORTON:Yes, it did. Yes.

JEFFRIES:In September of 2023.

GORTON:Could--that could be. (Both laugh). Um, so I--the way--I'm, I'm a fairly, um--I, I think in a very organized way, which most nurses do. I'm a registered nurse. And I thought, okay, I'm gonna have a commission. We'll call it the 250Lex Commission. I'll have co-chairs--'cause I think it's always good with a big effort to have two people leading--and appoint people to it. And so, that's what I did. And it was--it has turned out to be a really good thing that we had a commission of people who were willing to work on this. And then, we got really organized and there are ambassadors for each month of the year who take it upon themselves to help plan and execute the various activities. And every month had a theme.

JEFFRIES:Yes.

GORTON:I mean, it got very organized that way. And it's worked out beautifully. I've loved it.

JEFFRIES:And it, it, it also maybe feels nice to have, sort of, set this in motion and put people in place who--I feel like you're, you're big on kind of empowering people to do their job.

GORTON:Oh, yes. I can't do everything, right? And my--

JEFFRIES:Can you tell that to some other leaders? (Jeffries laughs)--

GORTON:I, I--yeah. (Both laugh). I, I should do that. Um, and I realize I, I cannot micromanage everything. So, what I like to do is put people in places of leadership who have skills and abilities and let them--let them go. And I do that in my own staff with my senior leaders. You know, I'm not micromanaging them. But yes, I like to empower people. The, the more people we get empowered on different, you know, issues and different activities like this, the better. Because this was for all of Lexington, right? Not just a few people. And it was about all of Lexington and about all of our history and about looking into the future. And so, I'm, I'm very excited about the way it's all played out. We've had bumps in the road. Every good effort does, right? Everything. It's human beings, and it's life, but it has worked very well. I'm very proud of the effort that it turned out to be.

JEFFRIES:Yes. Um, and I, I was thinking about, you know, having delegated this so well to other people, how does it feel to you to lead Lexington at this point in its history, in, in--for--during this 250Lex year? How does that--how does that feel to you to have done that as this year sort of closes out?

GORTON:Well, we won't have another 250, will we?

JEFFRIES:(Jeffries laughs). I guess we won't.

GORTON:And more than likely, a lot of us will not be around for the three hundredth. (Gorton laughs). It has been a wonderful honor. It really has. And, um, you know, I have--I have really enjoyed seeing people's reaction to a lot of the things that we have done. People want more of it. They want it next year. (Both laugh).

JEFFRIES:Two fifty-one. (Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:But it's very--it is--it is very special for me to be able to do this. And I take it as a, a great responsibility, but a really good one for people. So, I'm really honored to have been able to do this.

JEFFRIES:You mentioned a few minutes ago that you maybe polled some of--other southern cities who said, yeah, we're doing a weekend. (Both laugh). Um, we did a year here in Lexington. Did you feel like that was too far in the other direction? Did you feel like you hit the, the right spot? The distance between a weekend and a year is a lot.

GORTON:It is a lot, but I think it's just right because it allowed us to have things like Music Month, Culinary Month, Come Home Month, which brought loads of people back to Lexington, and that was confirmed by the Hotel and, and Visitors Bureau. you know, we've had all kinds of focus--Equine Month, Arts Month. That, I think, is what people have loved the most, is there was pretty much something for everyone. I don't know how you--with that kind of a structure, I don't know how you do that in less than a year.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:Because there's so many things to celebrate. And so, it, it actually worked out well. At first we were going, okay, what are we gonna do? (Both laugh). And then we started getting ideas from everybody who was serving on the commission and from folks in my office, and it became a huge collaboration. Now, I'm big on collaborating. You know, I, again, come from that healthcare background where just about everything is teams, team-oriented. That's how you accomplish a lot of good things. I think a lot of cities would have said, oh, there's no way we can do a year, but we took it on. And I actually have another city soon coming to talk with me because they're getting ready to celebrate a big birthday in a couple years. How cool is that? We get to have a conversation about how we did this, what worked, what didn't work, you know. And so, it's, it's worked well. And throughout the year, in every month, a lot of people have had a favorite activity. And they've said, we need to do this every year. That's, that is like a legacy, right? That is bringing something really good to the city more often. So, I think it's, it's all good.

JEFFRIES:It occurs to me, too, that, um--(Gorton clears throat)--for those of us who have lived in Lexington for a long time--(Jeffries clears throat)--whenever we interact with people not from here, horse racing comes up.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:Bourbon comes up. Maybe a couple other things. But it must have been fun on a certain level, because as, as a Lexington resident, I always want to be like, but, but, but--(Gorton laughs)--there's more. There, there's lots more that you don't know about.

GORTON:There, there's a lot more. And that's what we tried to do. Think about literature. Lexington is a huge hub for writers, really good writers. We have had several Poets Laureate for Kentucky come from right here in Lexington. So, we high--highlighted literature and writing one, one month. I mean, those are things that people don't necessarily think of every day. But it is true, there is a lot of good that has come from Lexington. And I actually have been here long enough that I remember a day when there was nothing going on here except maybe sports. (Both laugh). You know, we have--

JEFFRIES:I left that out. Sorry, I left out basketball. (Both laugh).

GORTON:We, we had a Sports--we had a month dedicated to sports. And so, both Kenny Brooks--the women's basketball coach--and Mark Pope--the men's basketball coach--and I had a bunch of high school basketball coaches for basketball week. (Gorton laughs). We did the same for football week. I mean, it's, it's pretty--it's pretty cool when you can highlight, pick out those things that make us special here.

JEFFRIES:And just--and really give those a little, a little boost.

GORTON:An oomph, right.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:That's how we did it. And they all loved it. (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:I want to go back to--so, we've mentioned healthcare some, and I have thought a lot about your previous career as a nurse. Um, and I was curious, how, how do you feel--how, how do these concepts in nursing--you gotta--there's care, there's listening, there's a lot of listening. Um, my daughter's a nurse, actually.

GORTON:Oh, I didn't know that.

JEFFRIES:Right, it just occurred to me to tell you.

GORTON:That's great. That's great.

JEFFRIES:And, um, so I know she's a very caring person. I'm curious how the values that you--that were instilled in you through, through nursing have, um, manifested themselves, particularly in, again, in the course of the 250Lex years. Are there--are there aspects, are there--are there personality aspects for you about nursing and being a nurse that, that have been helpful to you as--when you transitioned into being a civil servant?

GORTON:It's a really interesting question because I never--as a nurse, I had a long career in nursing and I was still working part-time nursing when I was a council member. And I never really thought about how that might translate, but--your daughter's a nurse. Uh, if you know nurses, you know that--you know, as a registered nurse, I'm highly trained to assess things. We are all trained to, to observe, to listen, to, you know, look at body language. So, we already do that as nurses. And we also--when we're doing that, it's with a patient, right? And so then, we make assessments and we develop what we call care plans to make the health of the patient even better, hopefully, and then take action. So, assessment, a care plan, action. What does a--what does a mayor do--

JEFFRIES:This is sounding familiar.

GORTON:Every single day? I mean, I sort of half joke, I have one big patient now--(Gorton laughs)--the city. And it's not really a joke because we are constantly assessing, you know, the things that are working really well in Lexington and the things that may need a little tweaking, they're not as healthy as the ones that are really healthy. And so then, we get to work and we make a plan. We talk among ourselves, bring people in from the community, and then we take action. It is a--it transfers directly. And I love that because it allows me to get a lot done, because my team is involved in that, just like a nursing healthcare team would be. And I first realized it when I was on the council and I was involved with Lexington's first in Kentucky comprehensive smoking ordinance. And I thought, oh man, I bring a lot of knowledge and experience to this issue. And then the first year I was mayor, when everybody thought I was crazy because I said, "Let's put hand sanitizer on our conference tables." And they said, what? (Gorton laughs). 'Cause, you know, people come to a conference table to a meeting and they shake hands and then they do this, and, you know. Well, lo and behold, the next year COVID came. But I was already in tune with, like, sanitary practices for--

JEFFRIES:Yes.

GORTON:Where you're shaking hands and close to a lot of people. It works, you know? (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:And so, I have really--plus, plus nurses--in my experience, most nurses are people persons. They're very keyed in on people. They like people. We like people. You know, we like to learn about people. We want to know what makes you tick. And that's a good thing for a mayor to like people, right? (Both laugh). It's, it's good, and we can have good conversations and that sort of thing. So, it all transfers very well.

JEFFRIES:Is there anything about nursing--(Gorton clears throat)--in your experience, that you wish more public figures understood? Are there any--are there any nursing values that you kind of wish you could impart to a, a public figure here or there that you think might help them do that public figure job better?

GORTON:That's a great question. Well, nurses are--nurses are highly ethical. We deal with patients and very private information. I think that elected officials should be held to that same high standard. High ethics. Everything we do is about people, or it should be about serving people. Government doesn't exist, in my estimation, for any other purpose than serving people, if you think about what we do. And so, those kinds of things, um, I think every public servant, elected official, should strive for high ethical behavior, transparency, honesty, people, you know, serving people. I mean, there's some real basic things that I expect of myself that I really expect of other elected officials. And it's, it's a lot to say that because we have all kinds of examples, you know, around the world and at different levels of government. But it is a--

JEFFRIES:Examples of?

GORTON:Of, of ethical behavior and serving the people. And when you veer off of that mission, then you're not a public servant anymore. And I, I tell people that in Lexington all the time. If we veer off of serving people, we've lost our mission. That is our mission. And, um, you know, paying attention to the dollar. The dollar isn't mine, it's the taxpayers'. Who, who--you know, pay attention to whose money it is. I, I never forget that. I always pay attention to that. And it drives--these things drive the way I serve as the leader of our government, because I'm always conscientious about people having money in their own pocket to spend. So, it does drive some of my thinking and some of my baseline values of how we should look at the revenues and the money that come in. They're from you. They're from my husband. They're from my neighbors. They're from my church members. They're all paying taxes to us. So, we've got to be, you know, thoughtful about how we spend them. (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Um, let's, let's jump--let's jump back 250 years.

GORTON:Oh, boy. (Jeffries laughs). Should we--I could grow my hair long. (Both laugh). You know?

JEFFRIES:A frock. Maybe we need to have frocks on.

GORTON:A frock. The women were all in frocks. It, it was not particularly a, an easy time for women or men 250 years ago. Get rid of the car, get rid of the, you know, any mechanization or digital--

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:Think about it.

JEFFRIES:I've been reading a book about the founding of the Heinemann Settlement School recently.

GORTON:Oh.

JEFFRIES:And there's some archival photos in there of people out in the most unbelievable, like, fourteen layers of clothing that I've ever seen--

GORTON:Yes. In mud.

JEFFRIES:Appearing to enjoy themselves. (Both laugh). I don't know. But, yeah, that's one of the first things I think about when I think about, um, you know--

GORTON:Yes, yes.

JEFFRIES:Again, 250 years ago. But again, in particular for women who were wearing petticoats and just all kinds of stuff, right?

GORTON:Right. And, I mean, if you take yourself back and can imagine 250 years ago, people were explorers. They were pioneers. They were settlers. Our country wasn't all settled, right? And I think about the fact that, um, we were part of the territory of Virginia at the time. We were not--we were not a state. Um, and it, it--to me, it's kind of amazing. You know, we were on horseback or walking, right? (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Oh, yeah. It flabbergasts me on--regularly.

GORTON:I, I know. And you think about explorers, you think about pioneers, you think about Daniel Boone coming through the Cumberland Gap. I love--I love going down there and thinking about, there were all these forests and they were coming through on foot or on horses, blazing a trail for our future--their future. But, um, William McConnell was the same. He must have had a real spirit about him to be exploring and coming to this area. We now know it was around McConnell Springs--what we know as McConnell Springs, named after him. And I think he had a brother with him, Francis McConnell. And what a great place to start a settlement. Now, we didn't have a big river or a lake or something, but we did have the town branch.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:You know, which I think, in a way, drove how we developed. We never became a river town or an, a big industrial town on the river that needed water and needed barges and things like that. But it must have been very exciting, very hard, you know, to be that small band of people who said, let's settle here. How lucky were we that they chose that and then, you know, the revolution started and they named us Lexington after Lexington, Massachusetts.

JEFFRIES:Yes.

GORTON:The first battle of the revolution.

JEFFRIES:Yes.

GORTON:Which was another outrageous idea, right? We're gonna secede from the King of England.

JEFFRIES:Right.

GORTON:I mean, the whole history of it is, I think, fascinating.

JEFFRIES:Yes.

GORTON:How we became Lexington and what it was related to.

JEFFRIES:Well, so, and that's--if, if we can talk about that a little bit, that's--we're talking about June 1775.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:William McConnell and his--and his crew, they stopped to camp near the banks of the Elkhorn Creek.

GORTON:Uh-huh. Yeah.

JEFFRIES:And away we go.

GORTON:Away we go. And, um, you know, it was--there wasn't even--I'm--you know this, everybody knows this 'cause I say it a bazillion times, we were founded a year before the Declaration of Independence.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:Do you think that's cool? I think that's very cool.

JEFFRIES:I think it's cool and it's somewhat unexpected and improbable--

GORTON:Yes, yes.

JEFFRIES:In some kind of way, I suppose. I don't know why.

GORTON:So, good for them. They recognized a place that did have a bit of a water source. I think most towns had to have a water source of some kind, right?

JEFFRIES:Industry just--

GORTON:Yes, yes, yes.

JEFFRIES:Sprung up from, from--yeah.

GORTON:And it, it is a fascinating history. And so, um, you know, 1775 is a long time ago--(Jeffries laughs)--and they were here, and they were settling our community. And we didn't have a state yet.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:So--

JEFFRIES:It's hard to even conceive of what that looked like to me, honestly--(Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:It is. Probably, you know, a lot of sleeping on the ground--(Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:A lot of sleeping on the ground.

GORTON:Um, you know, not--no comforts of life as we know them, right?

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:But they were driven by--they were driven by exploration and settlement. And they--so, where they were in the future Lexington was on the western edge of, you know, civilization as we knew it here.

JEFFRIES:Yes.

GORTON:We were the edge. I, I think it's exciting, don't you? (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Very much so.

GORTON:Yeah--(Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Very much so.

GORTON:And I think, um, from that position as the westward edge, a lot of exploration and pioneering went out from Lexington to explore even further in the West. And it, uh--so, we became kind of a hub, didn't we, in that regard? People would come back for supplies. People would come back for--'cause we were kind of getting organized and having more people here. I mean, uh, you think about--I'm trying to think--Transylvania University, it came pretty soon after that, maybe. Was it 1780-ish?

JEFFRIES:Uh, let's see. That sounds about right.

GORTON:Yeah, I mean, Transylvania University, the first university west of the Appalachian Mountains--I mean, the Allegheny Mountains, not the Appalachian.

JEFFRIES:West of the Alleghenies, yes.

GORTON:West of the Alleghenies. First university. How awesome is that, you know? Um, and then, uh, Kentucky became a state, I think, in 1792, when Virginia--I guess they said, ah--(Jeffries laughs)--you can have your own state--(Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:We've got so much Virginia. That's hilar--

GORTON:I, I, I suspect there was a lot of negotiations about that.

JEFFRIES:Right.

GORTON:But the whole--I think the whole thing's fascinating.

JEFFRIES:Absolutely.

GORTON:And, um, we became a state.

JEFFRIES:I like, um, you know--and this is maybe the lore, I'm not sure--but so, they had set up a camp and they received news at some point of the first shots in Lexington and Concord.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:And they had this, like--this isn't quite a perfect analogy--(Gorton laughs)--but they had a kind of "Me Too" moment, right? Where they, they chose Lexington--they said, let's call ourselves Lexington, too.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:Um, as--

GORTON:We are that brave. We are that strong.

JEFFRIES:Yeah, yeah.

GORTON:I think it's great. I think it's great. You know, I, um, I--this is kind of an aside, but I got invited to the 250th birthday celebration of Lexington, Massachusetts this past year, and I wasn't able to go, but it caused some--I started researching Lexington. And there are many Lexingtons in the United States, but we are the largest.

JEFFRIES:Oh, is that right? Okay.

GORTON:We are the largest, um, which says a lot for the way we grew and developed and came along. But I like the name, don't you?

JEFFRIES:I do.

GORTON:Lexington, yeah.

JEFFRIES:And there's also, um--this is something I maybe didn't understand until "Hamilton," the musical--(both laugh)--but all the Lexingtons, more or less--am I right? All the Lexingtons are named after Lexington and Concord.

GORTON:Yes. That's where it came from.

JEFFRIES:Yeah. So, any Lexington you go to in the United States, for the most part, I would say.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:And then, you know, another interesting thing, if we're looking at that point in history, is that any place named Fayette or Lafayette is--

GORTON:Yes, after the Marquis de Lafayette.

JEFFRIES:Right.

GORTON:He visited here in Lexington. He was a very--as you know, he was a huge supporter of the colonies and the effort to--in our war. (Gorton laughs). And, um, there have been lots of celebrations of him. My children went to Lafayette High School, as did my husband. All named after him.

JEFFRIES:All named after him.

GORTON:And Fayette County, where do we think that came from? The Marquis de Lafayette. It's, it's a, it's a really fascinating story, isn't it?

JEFFRIES:It is. It kind of gives me shivers, almost, in some ways.

GORTON:Yeah. He was French. He brought the French, um, into our whole history. And it has been a good thing. You know?

JEFFRIES:And he did come--he did come to Lexington on--he was, I think, the last of the Revolutionary War heroes.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:He lived an incredibly long time when you consider how often he was putting his neck out there. (Both laugh). But yeah, and he came to Lexington, and I believe that was part of the 250Lex celebration, right?

GORTON:Yes, it was. Back in May, I think it was, to celebrate about the time he had come here. And it was good.

JEFFRIES:Um, let's see, so are there elements of that story of the, the, the founding of Lexington that you feel like still resonate today, qualities that were--that were--that were fundamental in the founding of Lexington that--do you feel--still feel like are, pardon my pun, in the water? (Both laugh).

GORTON:They are still in the water. (Both laugh). I think that the fact that Transylvania--an institution of higher learning--was the first university west of the Alleghenies really set a tone for Lexington, because education's always been very important here. And now today, 250 years after our settlement and then Transylvania coming, we are a highly educated city. We're one of the top ten in the country. That is a direct influence from our founding, Transylvania, and that sort of thing. And, um, I think to a certain degree--it's hard to pinpoint this--but to a certain degree, we have always been a forward-thinking community. What's the next step to progress, you know? We would never have been founded if people didn't think that way when they came here. They were thinking ahead. Great place for a town, a settlement. And that just kept going in people's thinking. And, you know, Transylvania, I'm always fascinated. They had the first medical school west of the Alleghenies. Now, it doesn't exist today, but then we had the University of Kentucky, land-grant university, come in 1865. Medical school came. I mean, it's, it's very interesting. I think the pioneering spirit has carried through somehow. I'm not sure how that carries through.

JEFFRIES:Right.

GORTON:I don't know that it carries through genetically. (Both laugh). But, but it does carry through in people's ways of thinking--(Gorton clears throat)--and people's ways of wanting to be better and wanting to do the next best thing. We're highly educated. We still continue to innovate right here. And you think about, throughout our history, things like, you know, IBM came, IBM transformed Lexington in the fifties. That was forward thinking, right? Our urban service boundary, the growth boundary, first one in the nation. That was very forward thinking. And mainly it was 'cause sewers were expensive and we didn't want to sprawl way out there and spend a bazillion dollars making the sewers. But you look at all those steps, going kind of fast through history, but the, the, uh, vote to merge our city and our county was huge in our history. The vote to be non-partisan. It's one of the greatest gifts our forefathers gave us, is we don't have to pay attention to political parties when we make our decisions for the city. That's a--I just did 250 years, didn't I? (Both laugh).

JEFFRIES:But that one you're right, is--and it's, it's crossed my radar--

GORTON:Yeah.

JEFFRIES:More than a few times how--what an incredibly visionary act that was, to, to make the leadership--

GORTON:Oh, yes.

JEFFRIES:Of the city nonpartisan.

GORTON:Mm-hmm. It was brilliant. And there aren't a lot of nonpartisan local governments, and there are not a lot of merged governments across the United States. We are blessed by those two things, really good. So, um, our history is one of forward thinking, always. And I take that back to education as one of the foundations here early on. You know?

JEFFRIES:Very early on.

GORTON:Mm-hmm. Very early--

JEFFRIES:Transylvania with the--with the medical school.

GORTON:Mm-hmm, yep.

JEFFRIES:And that can't really be overstated--(Gorton clears throat)--I feel like, the, the medical school.

GORTON:No.

JEFFRIES:The--maybe even--correct me if I'm wrong--pre--predated Transylvania by name? I'm not sure if, if the medical school was called--was it Transylvania? I should know that.

GORTON:It was--(Jeffries laughs)--I, I think it was.

JEFFRIES:Okay.

GORTON:And there's a plaque, I believe, at the corner of Broadway--and it's where a little parking lot is--that says the first medical school west of the Alleghenies was there.

JEFFRIES:West of the All--yeah.

GORTON:Now it's a parking lot. (Both laugh).

JEFFRIES:And I don't know if you've been to the Monroe Moosnick Museum before, but uh--

GORTON:Oh, yes.

JEFFRIES:Isn't it something? (Jeffries laughs). It's something.

GORTON:It is something. And, you know, you think about--I mean, we could go down a real rabbit hole here, but I think about, um--not John Hunt Morgan, but Thomas, let's see, Thomas--

JEFFRIES:Was he not also Hunt?

GORTON:Thomas Hunt Morgan.

JEFFRIES:Yeah, that feels right.

GORTON:Geneticist. Brilliant guy who worked on genetics right here in Lexington.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:I mean--

JEFFRIES:I'm not even sure what that meant at that time--(Jeffries laughs)--

GORTON:Right, right.

JEFFRIES:To work on genetics.

GORTON:He was really, really pretty forward-thinking, too. But there are so many people like that. Remember--you've heard, I'm sure, of Dr. Mary Britton.

JEFFRIES:Yes, I was gonna bring her up.

GORTON:We just, this summer, dedicated the Mary Britton Middle School. She was the first African-American woman physician in Kentucky. That was kind of a big deal.

JEFFRIES:Indeed. Maybe still. (Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:Yeah, still. Isaac Murphy, um, racing, all those foundational things that kind of led into--you know, racing is a pretty big deal today and the horse industry. And now we know a lot about the earth here and the limestone, the karst topography, all those caves underneath, and the limestone and the magnesium that get into the bones of the cattle and the horses.

JEFFRIES:Yes.

GORTON:We could do a whole segment on that.

JEFFRIES:Indeed.

GORTON:And it makes them strong. And it, I mean, it's--

JEFFRIES:And it makes the bourbon strong too. (Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:Oh, I forgot about the bourbon. How could I forget about that? (Both laugh). It does. So, it's, it's all, it--you know, you want to say, gosh, weren't we lucky? How much of it was luck in where we were, and how much of it was the people who took those pieces and moved us forward because of them? A little bit of each, maybe.

JEFFRIES:It kind of baked in, from the beginning, sense of community and sense of civic pride.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:Do you feel like it, it continues--

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:Two hundred and fifty years later?

GORTON:Yes, and we saw throughout this whole 250 year a huge sense of pride in people who live here. And I think part of it was related to the fact that they were being exposed to things they didn't know about, you know? And, um, it's a great thing. Our, our people are our secret weapon. (Jeffries laughs). Now I've let that out in public, haven't I? One time a few years ago, someone who was visiting--I met this person and he said, "Something really strange happened to me." And I said, "Tell me what it was, 'cause maybe I can help out." He said, "Well, I was walking down Main Street, and someone said hello to me." And I said, "Okay, what was the issue?" And he said, "Well, I didn't know them." And I said--I said, "Okay, well, that's Lexington." He was worried. (Both laugh). Isn't--think about that. Isn't that nice?

JEFFRIES:It makes me think of, um--switching gears over to music a little bit, actually. And I'm a longtime, just, you know, huge fan of music in general.

GORTON:Yes, yes.

JEFFRIES:And, um, so often--it is the rule, actually--bands that come through here frequently want to come back.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:They frequently feel that the audiences here in Lexington grant them the kind of respect and attention that they hope for.

GORTON:Yes.

JEFFRIES:Um, so that's maybe another sort of version of that in some ways.

GORTON:Yes, and we, um--in our 250th birthday year, we've, we had a month of music. You know, you think, now--okay, so now we're going down another--each of these rabbit holes could have a whole segment about them.

JEFFRIES:Sure.

GORTON:Think about, um, the Lyric Theater for a moment.

JEFFRIES:It's a great thing to think about.

GORTON:Oh, my gosh. So, during segregation and back in the fifties and sixties, it was the place to be for Louis Armstrong, for Etta James, for those musicians and singers and bands that weren't allowed to play anyplace else or sing anyplace else but in the Lyric Theatre because it was for Blacks. But the history is very deep there.

JEFFRIES:Indeed.

GORTON:Very deep. And, you know, I think of musicians now who are more or less homegrown and the things we have going on here that are homegrown. And, of course, we started our--all of this is just coming to me--we started our year by showing the video that the Lexington Lab Band had done about Lexington.

JEFFRIES:And I don't think I've seen it.

GORTON:Oh, my gosh. We've got to get that to you. It's, it's--you've got to pay attention. It's, it's like a, a song and a musical piece that has a lot of Lexington in it. People, places, and things. And I think of The Green Room and Lee Carroll and folks. I think of T. D. Young. He's well-known all over the place. I--there are all of these musical acts, people, singers. Uh, you know, Red Barn Theater. Have you heard Red Barn Theater? It's--

JEFFRIES:Red Barn is fantastic, and--

GORTON:Oh, my gosh.

JEFFRIES:I would call it a well-kept secret, and it shouldn't be. (Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:Yes, right here. WoodSongs.

JEFFRIES:WoodSongs.

GORTON:I mean, this just keeps--the history of music here is really strong. People love music. That is one of the things people are asking for out of this 250 celebration, for more of that to come forward in the future. And, um, it's pretty exciting, isn't it?

JEFFRIES:It is.

GORTON:Yeah. (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:What are some, um--have there been, let's see, as far as, like--if we reach back a little bit again--

GORTON:Okay.

JEFFRIES:Are there some--(Gorton clears throat)--inspirational things that you maybe haven't mentioned in the history of Kentucky in the last--I'm sorry, in the history of Lexington in the last 250 years? We've talked about a number of things, and it seems like the list is, is--

GORTON:Unending? (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Yeah, it seems like it's unending. Are there any particular ones that you are particularly fond of that we haven't mentioned? Um, things that you feel like in some way personify Lexington or a particular quality of Lexingtonians that, that, that you identified from something that happened, you know, maybe a long time ago?

GORTON:A couple come to mind, and neither of which was particularly positive--

JEFFRIES:There's that, too.

GORTON:But as you know, frequently out of tragedy, hard times, very difficult situations, comes good. And the first one I think about was the cholera epidemic that killed--of course, Lexington was a much smaller town then, but it killed, I think, nineteen--nine hundred people. And I think of King Solomon, the man who buried a lot of the people who died of cholera when no one else would bury them because they were afraid they would catch it. You know, cholera is related to transmission through water. And it's the, the--I don't know if it's true or if it's legend. Apparently, King Solomon supposedly didn't drink water. He drunk mostly whiskey. (Both laugh). But you know, in the medieval days, that's why, um, you know, medieval people had wine and, you know, those kinds of drinks, because there wasn't any safe water to drink. He--

JEFFRIES:It was an antiseptic, really--(Jeffries laughs).

GORTON:It was an antiseptic. He was--King Solomon was a hero. He's buried at the Lexington Cemetery, and he was a hero in a horrible time--

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:When no one else would help bury these people because they were terrified of getting cholera. And then, I also think of another terrible tragedy. I'm trying to think what year it would have been--2006, maybe, was the 5191 airplane crash in Lexington. And one survivor, the co-pilot. Many of us had friends on that plane. Yeah. You did. I did. All of them perished at Bluegrass Field. And the response of our community was chillingly wonderful. Our community, here again, steps up and people help people. When there's a huge need, Lexington will do it. You know, with their own people's resources, with their time, with whatever's needed. And it has been shown over and over and over and over again in our history. And isn't that a wonderful legacy to have? To know that you're a city that cares about people and in an urgent time you will step up big time. I think it's probably one of the biggest blessings we have here. I said early on, people are our secret sauce. They're our secret weapon. And it is, you know, tragedy into good. I'm sure we could think of a lot of other situations, but those two come along quickly.

JEFFRIES:Those are--yeah, those two are very defining.

GORTON:Very defining.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:Yeah.

JEFFRIES:And I always, I, I never can help but think having, um--this is slightly macabre, but having dug a couple of cat graves which only needed to be about three feet deep--

GORTON:Oh.

JEFFRIES:Just the simple act of digging a grave--

GORTON:Oh, yes. Well, we--

JEFFRIES:Is, is, is almost inconceivable--(Jeffries laughs)--to say nothing of the, of the cholera part of it.

GORTON:We kind of know how that is 'cause we had a ninety-pound dog. (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:That's not a little cat. That's a big--but think about that effort.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:Yeah.

JEFFRIES:So, so all praise to King Solomon for that.

GORTON:I know. Yeah, a brave man.

JEFFRIES:Indeed.

GORTON:Right?

JEFFRIES:Um, I think we're about--I want to wrap things up with, with a kind of hypothetical, which was if you could travel through time and talk to Lexington's founders, what would you say? And what would you like them to know about the celebration of the 250th anniversary of Lexington?

GORTON:Well, I would definitely talk to William McConnell. And I would want to ask him what his thoughts and hopes and dreams are for this community he founded and see if they're anything like what we've done--(Gorton laughs). Because I think he must have been--he was a brave person. He was really--you talk about forward thinking in a time when you're slashing through to make a trail. I'd just love to know what he was thinking. Was it self-preservation? Was it exploration? Was it, gosh, we could form a community here? Then, I would really like to talk to some of the women who were in the effort to pass the 19th Amendment--now more than a hundred years ago--for women's right to vote. Because I'm in awe of them. They marched in the street. They talked to the politicians. You know, it was kind of a man's world--

JEFFRIES:Absolutely.

GORTON:Back then. And I would love to talk with some of them to understand--they were brave--how they got the bravery and the, and the strength to oppose what was a national, you know, um, a national verboten issue that women couldn't vote.

JEFFRIES:Yeah.

GORTON:I would love to talk to them. I mean, there's a lot of people in our history I'd like to talk to. I'd love to have a conversation with our merger commission. I think they would be happy about how our merged government is functioning. They did a really great thing. And I'd kind of like to--not that I wouldn't--I would, would not dwell on her, but I'd kind of like to talk to Mary Todd Lincoln. You notice the theme here. There's a lot of women in there, because women at the times that we're kind of talking about were not necessarily sanctioned to be leaders and part of, you know, thinking about what was going on. I, I could talk a lot about this because when I first got married, women couldn't own a credit card. They couldn't own property without the guy--the man signing on the deed. And it was--it was still a man's world. And we--

JEFFRIES:This is very--

GORTON:And that's a whole 'nother segment.

JEFFRIES:Very recent history. (Jeffries laughs). Very recent history, yeah.

GORTON:It is recent history. That's why we burned our bras and did all that in the sixties and, and marched for women's rights, you know? So, we, we could talk more about that. (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:We will.

GORTON:But it's, it's, um--there are a lot of heroes that Lexington had. Lots of them. Men and women who were forward thinking and were willing to take a risk and be brave. You know? (Gorton laughs).

JEFFRIES:Do you think that's a good place to put a, put a pin in it here?

GORTON:It probably is.

JEFFRIES:Okay.

GORTON:Yeah.

JEFFRIES:Because I've run out of my hour with you, so I think you've probably got other things--

GORTON:I know you have, 'cause Jacob stood up. (Jeffries laughs). Jacob stood up. I know that's the hook. (Gorton laughs). Did we go over much?