CURRIS:Good morning. This is Jo Hern Curris, the interviewer, and with me is

Leonda Hensley, and I’m going to let her tell you her full name and all that

shortly, but we were in school together years ago in Benham, Kentucky. And,

Leonda, thank you so much for being willing to sit down to talk with us in this

interview because, as you know, we’re doing what we call the Benham Hern--Robert

and Pauline Hern Financial Center that we’re planning to retain the history and

the financial history of the families in our dear Benham Kentucky. And think of

us as just sitting down at the Big Store, having a barbecue sandwich with the

coleslaw--(laughs)--and a Cherry Coke, and we’ll just talk about old times.

The--I--this interview has been assisted significantly by the University of

Kentucky Louie B. Nunn Oral History Center, who has generously loaned the

recording equipment you’re using today, and that’s where this interview will be

stored. And I’m asking you to sign a document today agreeing that this recording

will be considered a gift to the University of Kentucky Nunn Center for Oral

History, open for unrestricted use, including being quoted from, published, et

cetera, and including anything that you might personally also want to use. And

so, I thank you for having agreed to sign the document, and let us just jump

into all of this. Well, good morning, Leonda. Thank you for coming in at this

early hour for you and me. (both laugh) First of all, please give me your full name.

HALCOMB:Leonda Halcomb.

CURRIS:And, you know, I always still refer to you--(laughs)--as Hensley because--

HALCOMB:--as Hensley, yes--

CURRIS:--yes, as all of the

others. But Leonda Halcomb, and when and where were you born?

HALCOMB:Benham, Kentucky, 1945. October 24, 1945.

CURRIS:The--where were you born in Benham? Were you at the hospital?

HALCOMB:I was at the hospital.

CURRIS:The--explain to people what the Benham hospital was.

HALCOMB:A very small building as we look at today, but when we were growing up,

it looked huge. (laughs) It was where everybody went when they were sick, and it

was a very family-oriented place.

CURRIS:It’s my memory that International Harvester--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--actually provided--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--the hospital.

HALCOMB:Yes. We didn’t have to pay anything for

anything. We just went when we were sick, and they took care of us.

CURRIS:Did that include medicines?

HALCOMB:It did include medicines.

CURRIS:So, that’s all company-provided.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:For our listeners, Benham, Kentucky was International Harvester’s

captive coal mine.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:A captive coal mine meant that all the coal was used by International

Harvester and not sold by others. So, did you attend Benham High School or the

Benham School?

HALCOMB:I entered Benham grade school and the high school up to my tenth year.

The school--we had to go to Cumberland or Lynch. So--

CURRIS:--well, let’s talk about the Benham part first because, when it comes to

going to Lynch, that’s a whole separate story

that is--

HALCOMB:--oh, yeah--

CURRIS:--we really need to explore. Tell me about Benham. What are your

memories of being in grade school in Benham.

HALCOMB:Everybody was so close. Nowadays, you don’t know hardly your neighbor,

but everybody knew everybody. It was a great experience. I wish my children had

went when I went. It was really, really nice.

CURRIS:We had no idea.

HALCOMB:No.

CURRIS:We had--

HALCOMB:-------------(??)-------------

CURRIS:--no idea.

HALCOMB:And children nowadays do not have what we have.

CURRIS:The--what were your sports or clubs?

HALCOMB:I was in 4-H. I was in the choir. I did not do any kind of sports. I

was just clumsy, I guess. I don’t know.

CURRIS:Well, more than that, Leonda, in those days, there were no sports for--

HALCOMB:--there was no sports--

CURRIS:--for women, for girls, at all.

HALCOMB:I can remember my sister, Pat,

playing--when she was a freshman, they started up a basketball team.

CURRIS:For women.

HALCOMB:Yeah, but that didn’t go a whole lot. They just went down there and

practiced and stuff. As far as going to other counties or anything like that,

they didn’t. But I can remember her being on that, and she was a cheerleader also.

CURRIS:Well, so, approximately what year was this, or what range?

HALCOMB:Let’s see. I wanna say the late--’59, maybe. ’60. It would be after I left.

CURRIS:Yes, after you left. Yes.

HALCOMB:Um-hm. Yeah.

CURRIS:The--who was your favorite teacher or teachers?

HALCOMB:Ms. Isom, and that’s--probably’ll be everybody’s favorite because she

was my first grade teacher, but I remember her actually at this church growing

up, talking to her,

and she was my children’s teacher also, both of ’em.

CURRIS:And that was I-s-o-m, I believe, wasn’t it?

HALCOMB:I-s-o-m. Um-hm.

CURRIS:Yes. She was truly--she was also my first grade teacher.

HALCOMB:Oh, my goodness.

CURRIS:So, it was a wonderful time. Do you remember your favorite song in high school?

HALCOMB:Well, of course, it had to be the, out anth--you know, our anthem.

CURRIS:The national anthem?

HALCOMB:Yeah, yeah, the national anthem. And then, we had a school song also.

So, as far as remembering rock and roll and things like that, I can go on for

days on that one. (both laugh)

CURRIS:Well, now, tell me about transitioning, then, to Lynch.

HALCOMB:Okay. When we heard that that was gonna happen, my father was so upset.

He was so upset. And--

CURRIS:--may I interrupt for just--

HALCOMB:--yes--

CURRIS:--a second to say that International

Harvester was closing the high school at Benham--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--and that, as a result, the high school students had to then go to

either Cumberland or Lynch.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:But this was not a voluntary choice by the students or the parents.

HALCOMB:No.

CURRIS:Okay.

HALCOMB:It was a have to thing. You either went to Cumberland, or you paid to

go to Lynch. Okay. At that time and age, our--my father was a coal miner,

and--who--where would you find the money to go to Lynch? But let me tell you, he

did. He found the money for me to go to Lynch, and I actually didn’t push it. I

mean, he wanted me to go to Lynch.

CURRIS:Why did he want you to go to Lynch?

HALCOMB:I don’t know. He just thought, well, let’s see what they got up there,

but I actually graduated up there. A lot of people left and went to Cumberland

that went to Lynch with me,

you know. We had several people to go up there with me, and a lot of ’em came

back and went to Cumberland, but I stayed up there and graduated.

CURRIS:Well, the fact that your dad worked so hard--

HALCOMB:--I know--

CURRIS:--to make sure because, when you say he was a miner, what was he doing

in the mines?

HALCOMB:Digging coal. Digging coal.

CURRIS:And about what year are we talking about?

HALCOMB:My dad was born in ’21, and he started working when he was 17 in the

coal mines, so he worked till, actually, he was, like, fifty-six years old in

the coal mines.

CURRIS:The--when we’re talking about working in the coal mines, at the same

time, I understand that your mother made a significant contribution for you to

be able to go to Lynch.

HALCOMB:Oh, yeah.

CURRIS:Tell us

about that.

HALCOMB:Well, she started working to help pay for the school, and she worked at

the Pine View, and she made fifty cents a hour. Fifty cents a hour, and she

cooked. Every day, she cooked, and she stayed there till after I was out of high

school, and when I got married, I came back, and I would go up there and help

her and learned a lot of things because they was some very talented ladies up

there that taught me a lot.

CURRIS:The--when you talk about the fact that your dad’s a coal miner--I mean,

he’s working hard.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:Your mother, in addition to all that she’s doing at home,

which we’ll discuss--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--she is working at the Pine View, fifty cents an hour, all to help you

go to Lynch School.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:What about the other children? Did they have to face this same decision?

HALCOMB:No. After that, they all went to Cumberland. My brother Chuck started

at Lynch, but then it got so bad that he had to go back to--he had to go to

Cumberland, where it was free. But--

CURRIS:--so, financially--

HALCOMB:--so, financially, Chuck couldn’t finish up there.

CURRIS:Um-hm. The--tell me about growing up in Benham and your family

particularly. First of all, describe your house.

HALCOMB:Our house was a four-room house. We had seven children, and Mom, and

Dad. That was nine. And I was telling someone this the other day. You walked

into the house, and there was a

bedroom, and that was the girls’ bedroom. Okay? And you turned left. That was

the living room. And then, straight ahead, there was the kitchen, and then there

was Mom and Dad’s bedroom. And, in that bedroom, they had bunk beds, and I had

to sleep on top ’cause the three girls got the girls’ room, and all the boys

were little, so I had to--the smallest one, I would have to be on the top and

hold him in there to all of ’em. All three of ’em. So--

CURRIS:--one at a time?

HALCOMB:One at a time as they grew. I was the one that slept in there so I

could keep ’em not falling out.

CURRIS:And so, the--were--who would be on the bottom bunk?

HALCOMB:It would be Junior ’cause he’s the oldest, and he would be--either

Chuck, and Ronnie (??) was a baby, so I--Ronnie and Chuck, I

helped them--(laughs)--grow up, I guess.

CURRIS:That is wonderfully--

HALCOMB:--yeah.

CURRIS:What a wonderful family unit.

HALCOMB:I--it was. We were close. We’re close now. We’re very family oriented,

all of us.

CURRIS:That’s fabulous.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:That is fabulous. Well, we were talking about the kitchen. One of the

aspects that I don’t think we know enough about happens to be about the women,

the wives of the miners. So, tell me, what was your kitchen like?

HALCOMB:We had a coal stove that they probably wouldn’t even know what a coal

stove was now, but it had--you had to put coal in it to burn to cook your food,

and you had to--Dad had to get coal from the coal mines, and we would--carried

it in. My mom would carry it in. She’d make

the fire. She’d cook three meals a day, and she was always busy. She was very busy.

CURRIS:When you’re talking about--the company would provide the coal.

HALCOMB:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Where would they put the coal at your house?

HALCOMB:Well, it was in the backyard as long as we had coal, but, now, we lived

close to a tipple. Okay?

CURRIS:Okay.

HALCOMB:And if we ran out, there we were, picking coal up around that tipple

and bring it home. We’d carry it from there to there.

CURRIS:How would you--how do you spell tipple?

HALCOMB:T-e-m-p-l-e?

CURRIS:I don’t know either. We’ll check on that.

HALCOMB:Okay.

CURRIS:But basically, the coal tipple, which is where they would run the coal--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--through.

HALCOMB:And it would drop off, and we would go and pick the coal up.

Eventually, Dad had to pay for that coal. They

charged a little bit, but who had the money to pay for it? So, we had to go over

there quite often and get coal.

CURRIS:So, you have the company bringing some coal, leaving it in the yard, but

that was not enough, so you would go over to the coal tipple and a--and just

pick it up from the ground.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:And how far was that away from the house?

HALCOMB:Well, there was one neighbor, and then there was a coal tipple right

beside that. So, it was a distance to carry a bucket o’ coal, which was heavy.

CURRIS:Now, would you do that in winter?

HALCOMB:All the time.

CURRIS:So, that was just part of it.

HALCOMB:Living.

CURRIS:Did--

HALCOMB:--it was just an everyday thing.

CURRIS:Did the--all the children, when they were able, then, bring in the coal,

or was it primarily your mother?

HALCOMB:It was the older ones. Okay? I can remember doing it, you know, and I

was twelve when we left there, but I can remember carrying coal.

CURRIS:Well, then, when we talk about a coal stove,

what time of day would your mother get up to start the coal, to start the stove?

HALCOMB:Oh, she’d have to get up before Dad went to work, and that was five,

something like that, every day. She never complained. Just get up and do it. Fix

the breakfast. Feed everybody. And then, they’re gone.

CURRIS:What kind of breakfast would you have?

HALCOMB:We would have not a whole lot, but it was filling. She’d have oatmeal,

maybe eggs, and bread, but as far as the meat thing, I always told people that

was a Sunday thing. We had fried chicken on Sunday, stuff like that, but not

always during the week, we didn’t.

CURRIS:So, did your parents or mother raise a garden?

HALCOMB:We had gardens. We had several gardens. We had--in the backyard was all garden.

And then--

CURRIS:--was a what garden?

HALCOMB:Garden. It was all garden.

CURRIS:Oh, all garden.

HALCOMB:It was a huge place. And then, up in the mountain (??), Dad had a

garden up there that was fenced in, and Mom and I would walk up there and hoe

the potatoes, the corn, or whatever. And then, we would go up there, and gather

it all, and bring it back home, which was a very long distance. A long distance

to go to.

CURRIS:Well, now, when you would bring things from the garden, what would you

do with them?

HALCOMB:We could bring ’em in, shuck the corn or the potatoes, put ’em in the

basement. And then, Mom would can and do things like that. We didn’t have a

place to freeze anything, but she would can things.

CURRIS:Well, did you have basically--when you say “in the basement,” did you

have some sort of storage cellar or--

HALCOMB:--it was just dirt.

Okay? A hole in the ground. You put your potatoes in there, and they would last

quite a bit long. Long time. And then, she had a place for her canning jars and

things like that. But, eventually, Dad built a shower down there. He concreted a

part of that basement and had a shower because we had no bathroom, and he would

come home from work, and he would shower, and he built us a little shower. So,

that was a fun time for us ’cause we would think we’re at a swimming pool or

something like that, and always fun to take a shower down there.

CURRIS:So, he had his shower, and then a smaller shower for the children?

HALCOMB:No, it was all the same thing.

CURRIS:Oh, it was all the same thing.

HALCOMB:It was all boxed in, concreted, had a pipe going down, and we’d stop

that pipe up, and put water in there, and act like we’re swimming. But, yeah.

CURRIS:That is a--(laughs)--terrific

story.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:But did that affect storing the food?

HALCOMB:No. It was cold down there. You have to remember how cold. (laughs) In

the old days, it was very cold, so the potatoes and things were over in the

dirt, and then the canned food was in there.

CURRIS:What about things like cabbage and--did your mother just--

HALCOMB:--she canned cabbage.

CURRIS:So, she canned the cabbage.

HALCOMB:Yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:So, cabbage, tomatoes. What all would she can?

HALCOMB:She would can tomatoes, cabbage, and she would make up garden stuff,

like carrots, potatoes, and things like that and can it all together for soups

in the wintertime.

CURRIS:I bet they were wonderful.

HALCOMB:It was. It was very good. She had, like, green beans, and corn, and

potatoes, and carrots. She would can those things.

CURRIS:Now, were you children

involved in the gardening? You were talking about the hoeing and the gathering.

So, was that a family thing? In other words, planting the garden. How did you

get your garden hoed? I mean, how did you--

HALCOMB:--we all did it. We all helped Dad do the garden thing. It was just a

part of life. We--but didn’t--have to. It was there, so we did it.

CURRIS:I can remember Dad hiring some gentleman who had a mule that would come

and plow his garden. How did you get your garden plowed?

HALCOMB:My grandpa had all that. He had pigs, cows, horses, donkeys, and all

that stuff, so that wasn’t no problem. They--Dad would always plow it up and

plant the garden.

CURRIS:What was your granddad’s name?

HALCOMB:Hence. H-e-n-c-e.

CURRIS:Now, was he on your mother’s side or your father’s

side?

HALCOMB:My father’s side.

CURRIS:Your father’s side. Now, when he was raising--

HALCOMB:--sixteen children.

CURRIS:And he was raising sixteen children.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:Oh, my goodness. Now, did the family, together, raise any pigs, or hogs,

or chickens?

HALCOMB:We did not have hogs or anything like that. We did have chickens, but

Grandpa, he did it all. He did everything. Mom would go up there and get

chickens and stuff like that for us, and Mamaw would have the milk. We always

went and got our milk at Grandma’s, Mamaw. I called her Mamaw. And, as far as

wanting for food, we didn’t have to--we never went hungry. We always had something.

CURRIS:When we talk about

your first memories of living in Benham, when you moved--when you went to school

at Lynch for high school, did anything change, or was it still the same basic lifestyle?

HALCOMB:No. At twelve years old, we moved to Hemlock Street, and life changed

so much. It was just like we were rich. It was moving, and a bathroom--

CURRIS:--where were you before?

HALCOMB:Machine Shop Holler Machine Shop Holler, we had no bathroom. We had--we

didn’t have anything like that.

CURRIS:So, when you’re twelve, and you move to Hemlock--

HALCOMB:--we thought we were rich--

CURRIS:--tell me about it--

HALCOMB:--because we had a bathroom. We had extra bedrooms. It was big. We just

thought we was moving uptown. Yeah.

CURRIS:And in a--

HALCOMB:-------------(??)--

CURRIS:And

you were.

HALCOMB:And we were.

CURRIS:And you were. The--when it came to clothes, I remember wearing feed sack

dresses. Did you--what were your clothes?

HALCOMB:My clothes was from my aunt that lived farther back up in the Holler

than I did, and she would make our skirts because we wore skirts. Every--just

about everything we had, she would make it. Mom would get material, and she

would make it for us, and that’s what we wore until we moved over to Hemlock

Street. It seemed like things changed, you know, because we got the--Mom would

go to the Benham store and buy skirts and things like that, so it--

CURRIS:--the company store.

HALCOMB:The company store. Course, they had to charge it, but we got it.

CURRIS:Well, you have mentioned to me about the--Easter and your first coat.

Tell us about this story.

HALCOMB:Oh, my first coat. I

never owned a coat. I always had hand-me-downs, and it was Machine Shop--not

Machine Shop Holler but Hemlock Street, and I don’t know. Sister Bren [Brenda

Hensley] got married, and, anyhow, there wasn’t any coats for me, so Mom took me

to the Benham store, and she bought me my first coat, and it had a little fur

around the neck of it, and I thought--as the song goes, I thought I was rich.

You know, there’s a song that Dolly Parton sings, and that’s the way I felt. I

felt like I was--

CURRIS:--”Coat of Many Colors”--

HALCOMB:-------------(??). Yes. Yes. And I had that coat forever and ever, and

I wore it to graduation. I had that coat. It seems like I could probably find

that coat somewhere if I looked because I’ve al--I never had another coat after

that. I wore that coat.

CURRIS:That coat

is a symbol, isn’t it?

HALCOMB:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Of a change of life.

HALCOMB:Yeah, change of life. I felt I was rich, honestly.

CURRIS:And you were how old?

HALCOMB:I was probably fourteen when I got that coat because I wore it all the

way through high school, and I never got another coat.

CURRIS:The--it is so fabulous that what you’re telling us is, although, when it

came to money, you might not have had much, but as a family--

HALCOMB:--we had everything we needed--

CURRIS:--you had everything.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:You had everything. Well, as you know, Leonda, I particularly wanted to

interview you because you were, in my memory, the first of us who developed her

own career as a woman. I mean, that was a spectacular achievement, and

we’re talking about, you know, ’50s, ’60s.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:And it is really important for us to hear your story, and I’ll just

begin by saying, when did you first start cooking, and what, generally, led to

your career in food preparation?

HALCOMB:Well, I always helped Mom at home. I always did. (coughs) And then, my

husband--when I got married and we came back to Benham, I had Lorie [Loretta],

and I went to work with Mom, and--

CURRIS:--at the Pine View.

HALCOMB:At the Pine View and learned how to cook all this stuff, and it just

come natural. It just seemed like, you know, it was easy for me, and even today,

it’s easy for me today, although, you know, I have this, and that, and

arthritis, and all this, and that. It’s a blessing to be able to cook.

CURRIS:Well,

let’s jump back for just a moment and tell us when you got married.

HALCOMB:1965.

CURRIS:And you married whom?

HALCOMB:Max A. Baldridge.

CURRIS:And tell us about--did you stay here? Most of the people that I can

remember, we left.

HALCOMB:I did leave. I left and came back. I--

CURRIS:--where did you go when you--

HALCOMB:--we went to Indianapolis, and my husband worked in a canning place,

and he was not a very nice man. Okay? So, it got so bad that I came home, but he

didn’t know I was coming home. My sister came up and got me, and I told her that

I was not coming back. And so, we packed what we had,

and he didn’t know it. He did not know that. And when we went home for

Christmas, I told him I wasn’t going back, and I stayed, and he left, and he

came back to Benham, and he asked Daddy if he could get a job.

CURRIS:Did he?

HALCOMB:Yes, he did. He worked in the coal mines, and eventually, he was a

foreman. My dad taught him everything. He--from day one, Daddy was his boss and

taught Max everything, and he was a very smart man.

CURRIS:And your dad’s name again?

HALCOMB:Leo Hensley. But he had to ask Dad if he could come back, and

he--Dad--and, of course, Dad said, “Well, you have to promise to be better.” And

so, we did, and we started a life down here in Benham, and it was all right.

CURRIS:So, that worked at that time.

HALCOMB:That worked

okay until he died, you know. He died of--forty-five years old.

CURRIS:That’s very young.

HALCOMB:Yeah, it is very young. He had a massive heart attack and passed away.

CURRIS:So, how many children did you have?

HALCOMB:Just two girls.

CURRIS:And their names?

HALCOMB:Blessing. Lorie and Missy.

CURRIS:Lorie and Missie. Now, so, you come back, and you’re going and helping

your mother at the Pine View.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:So, take us from there on this wonderful journey, although it was a

tough journey.

HALCOMB:It was a rough journey. It’s hard. Everything was hard. We had two

other ladies there with Mom, and Mom was a pie maker. My mom would make a

hundred pie crusts every week, and that’s what she would make every week at that

restaurant, and then they had a lady that made the rolls, and then they had the

lady--now, certain people done certain things. Everybody didn’t do everything. Everybody

had their own jobs, and the Italian lady had the Italian stuff, spaghetti and

all that, but brilliant cooks. I mean, they were very, very blessed. So, I

learned from them. I learned from them.

CURRIS:Well, I know I can speak personally to the fact that the food was

absolutely fabulous and outstanding. And when you talk about your mother making

pies, what type of pies? What kind?

HALCOMB:Cream pies. Apple pies. She’d make butterscotch, chocolate, lemon.

Coconut was everybody’s favorite, but every cream pie you can mention, she made,

and I guess everybody’s favorite was butterscotch. Butterscotch was

her--everybody’s favorite. So, she would come in, and she would make so many

every day.

CURRIS:Now, what time would she come in to work?

HALCOMB:Five o’clock.

CURRIS:In the morning?

HALCOMB:In the morning, yeah.

CURRIS:So, she’s gotten up--

HALCOMB:--because they served--

CURRIS:--

at home at what time?

HALCOMB:Now, Dad was on second shift, so this sort of worked out a little bit.

She would work early, and she’d come home, and she’d fix Dad something to eat,

and his bucket, and all that. And so, it sort of worked out for ’em then. When

Dad become a foreman, he got on second shift.

CURRIS:That would have helped--

HALCOMB:--oh, yeah--

CURRIS:--a great deal--

HALCOMB:--oh yeah--

CURRIS:--because what was the time of second shift?

HALCOMB:Oh, two, three o’clock, something like that--

CURRIS:--in the afternoon--

HALCOMB:--and Mom was already home by then. But it was normal--we thought

normal life. (laughs)

CURRIS:Exactly. Well, the--let’s jump back to the fact that you were

doing--helping your mom and that, that all of the--you have all the gardening

and so forth. Tell me, what were some of the other chores that the children

growing up now--both in Machine Shop Holler and

in Hemlock? What are some of the other chores--

HALCOMB:--we always--

CURRIS:--the children would do--

HALCOMB:--and my daughter’ll tell you today, carry coal. You had to carry the

coal or the wood, and we had this wood burner in our house, my husband and I’s

house, and I remember, in the wintertime, going across the creek and carrying

wood to put in that coal burner--I mean that wood burner stove.

CURRIS:And this was at your parents’ home?

HALCOMB:No, this was our house.

CURRIS:Oh, your house--

HALCOMB:--yeah--

CURRIS:--after you’re married.

HALCOMB:Yeah. Yeah. ’Cause it was tough then too. It was rough then.

CURRIS:Now, where were you living with your husband?

HALCOMB:Right across the street from my mom. Yeah. We bought the house right

across the street, and my dad co-signed for us, and the house was five thousand dollars.

CURRIS:This was a Benham house.

HALCOMB:This was a Benham house.

CURRIS:About what year?

HALCOMB:’67, ’68.

CURRIS:

So, this is after they have sold--

HALCOMB:--Benham--

CURRIS:--after International Harvester has sold the home to the miners--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--and then has sold Benham--

HALCOMB:--yeah--

CURRIS:--then--

HALCOMB:--yeah--

CURRIS:--to Envirodyne.

HALCOMB:Well, no, Benham was still here.

CURRIS:Oh, Benham was still here.

HALCOMB:Benham was still here because my husband worked there.

CURRIS:Oh, okay.

HALCOMB:Okay?

CURRIS:So, that worked.

HALCOMB:Yeah, so it worked out.

CURRIS:Well, now, the five thousand dollars. Did your parents--if they

co-signed, where was this?

HALCOMB:That was the Benham Credit Union. That’s where everybody went if they

wanted anything.

CURRIS:Tell me about--as you know, my dad managed the Credit Union--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--and they had asked--the company had asked Mother to come in when they

were selling the houses. So, here we are, in about 1967, and you’re buying a

house. Are you buying the house from the company, or are you buying the house

from another owner?

HALCOMB:The owner.

Their price of the house, I think, was either two hundred or three hundred

something dollars. It’s what they had to pay, and I can remember my dad’s. It

was three hundred and something dollars that Dad had to pay for the house. But I

bought that house for five thousand dollars.

CURRIS:Had they done many upgrades?

HALCOMB:No, no, no.

CURRIS:Just a change? (laughs)

HALCOMB:Just a change.

CURRIS:Right.

HALCOMB:Course, they had electric stove, you know, but you either had coal or

wood in the house.

CURRIS:For heat.

HALCOMB:Had a--yeah, Stove-o-matic [Editor’s note: Stokermatic was a maker of

automatic stoking coal stove furnaces] or something like that. We didn’t have a

furnace at first, but then we got a furnace, so we--

CURRIS:--well, let’s go back to the Credit Union because this project started

because of the financial lives--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--of miners. And then, tell me, from your perspective, what was the

position of the Credit Union in the community? How important was it? Was it a

cohesive factor?

Tell me what your memories are.

HALCOMB:Well, if you ever needed anything, that’s where everybody went. You

didn’t go out o’ town or anything like that. Everybody went to the Credit Union.

It was just like a home place. I mean, everybody just knew everybody, so that

was the place to go. That was--

CURRIS:--who was working there at the time that you bought your house?

HALCOMB:Mr. Hern was working there, and I cannot think of--

CURRIS:--was Shirley?

HALCOMB:Shirley Hensley, my aunt, was there, and it was nice.

CURRIS:Was the general expectation then that you would get a loan from the

Credit Union? And then, would you repay the Credit Union directly, or would

the--International Harvester make a payment to the Credit Union

from your husband’s wages--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--as an example?

HALCOMB:They took it out of the paycheck and gave it to the Credit Union, so it

was automatically took out, which was great, you know. So, we did not have to go

to the Credit Union to pay every month. It just came out of the check.

CURRIS:So, that worked well.

HALCOMB:Worked out great, yes.

CURRIS:The--when--while we’re talking about the Credit Union, do you remember

the annual meetings?

HALCOMB:I did remember the annual meetings, but we never went to no annual

meetings. Sometimes, we did. Sometimes, we didn’t.

CURRIS:Um-hm. That was not a major factor for--

HALCOMB:--that wasn’t--

CURRIS:--you all.

HALCOMB:No.

CURRIS:Now, so, was your dad--did he--was he a member of the Credit Union?

HALCOMB:He was. He was a member of the Credit Union and the burial fund. I can

always remember that burial fund. They had--and I’m sure it was through the company

too because it was taken out of Dad’s check, but it was just a couple dollars a

week or something like that. But you got a certain amount if somebody passed

away, and I’m talking, like, two or three hundred dollars. Not thousands of

dollars, like it costs now. But they made things convenient in the old days for

people to live, not like you have to go out now and hunt for things to take care

of yourself. It was there for you.

CURRIS:So, it made life just a--

HALCOMB:--yeah--

CURRIS:--simple--

HALCOMB:--it did make it simple. Yes. Very easy.

CURRIS:Well, the--now, when did you become a member of the Credit Union?

HALCOMB:As soon as I bought that house, I was a member of the Credit Union.

CURRIS:Now, were you working for International Harvester--

HALCOMB:--no, no, no--

CURRIS:--or just working separately?

HALCOMB:I was a housewife.

CURRIS:At that time, okay.

HALCOMB:And then, when my husband got laid off, I had to help,

so I went downtown and found a little restaurant, gas station place, called the

Shoppette and asked for a job.

CURRIS:When you say a little gas station space, tell us about that.

HALCOMB:That was a little old gas station that wasn’t big as two rooms in a

house, and--but it was a very busy little place. He had a eating place where

he’d buy hamburgers and things like that, and that’s--that was my job. I didn’t

normally have to go out front and do the register or anything like that. I was a

cook. So, between that--and I started the country club also. Dr. Schosser asked

me, at that time, could I work on Sundays at the country club? I had that job,

and I--then, again, I was working at the country club on

Sundays, cooking.

CURRIS:Now, when we say country club, are we talking about Sleepy Hollow?

HALCOMB:Sleepy Hollow Country Club.

CURRIS:There at the end of Clutts.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:And what were you fixing?

HALCOMB:They had a buffet, and I would have to fry chicken, do roast or things

like that, and you didn’t have the normal big ovens or anything like that. You

had a four-burner stove is all you had, and a oven. And how--today, I do not

know how I fixed that much food with that--what I had to work with.

CURRIS:How many people were you serving?

HALCOMB:I had people standing at lines. I’d have to go to work five o’clock.

Course, people didn’t start coming in till twelve, so that gave me a little time

to cook all this stuff, but it was a nightmare, and I would go on Saturday

afternoons, put roast or something like that in the oven and cook it, and that

would be

done. So, it was a hard job, guys. Very hard.

CURRIS:Would you say that--well, first of all, what would--would your menu be

the same every Sunday--

HALCOMB:--yes--

CURRIS:--for the buffet?

HALCOMB:It did because I did--I just didn’t have the room to fix fancy things.

It was, you know, mashed potatoes, green beans, and maybe another vegetable, but

I had salads and things like that. Missy will tell you today that I used to

stand around a -----------(??) bucket and shred cabbage for coleslaw, and Lorie

also was there.

CURRIS:How old was she?

HALCOMB:She was about six or seven, and then Lorie also. That was my help. I

couldn’t afford help, so they helped me do that.

CURRIS:Were they paid by--

HALCOMB:--my children, no. They just did it.

CURRIS:This was free labor--

HALCOMB:--this was free--

CURRIS:--to help mom--

HALCOMB:--labor until

it got so bad that I had so many customers, I hired a part-time lady from the

Pine View, that old (??) Italian lady, and boy, she was a great help.

CURRIS:Did Dr. Schosser make sure she got paid?

HALCOMB:I paid her.

CURRIS:Out of your sa--

HALCOMB:--out of mine. Yeah.

CURRIS:What were you being paid?

HALCOMB:Okay. I wasn’t being paid anything. What I earned came through the

door, and they paid me five dollars a person to eat there. All you wanted to eat.

CURRIS:So, Sleepy Hollow nor IH, International Harvester--no one’s paying you

anything. So, only the number of customers that you have who could eat anything

and as much as they want are paying you five dollars. Where do your

supplies come from?

HALCOMB:I bought the supplies.

CURRIS:From your five dollars?

HALCOMB:From my five dollars.

CURRIS:There needs to be a statue--(both laugh)--of you. -----------(??).

HALCOMB:Today, I do not know how I did it all, but my--honestly, today, I don’t

know how I managed money-wise because I could--I didn’t have the money at home

to take, you know, from there to help me with these little projects I was doing.

And then, when my husband died, I had it all myself, you know? So, it was rough.

CURRIS:It was rough.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:So, you’re doing the Shoppette during the week. Now, how much are you

being paid there?

HALCOMB:Oh, well, I got minimum wage there. I can’t remember how much it might

have been. Three dollars or something like that an hour or something like that,

but I did get paid there.

CURRIS:Okay.

HALCOMB:And my husband

worked too, so he took care of the stuff at home, you know. Finances there. So,

this was extra, but he did not work. He was drawing unemployment. I had to back

up there (??) ’cause he was out o’ work for a long time, and then he went back

to work, but I kept my jobs.

CURRIS:When you take a look back, you’re going in and helping your mother at

the Pine View when you’re still in school, and then the Shoppette and Sleepy

Hollow. Is that the foundation of who you became as a career woman?

HALCOMB:Yes, it was. It was very hard, but I made it through all that.

CURRIS:Well, when we talk about--to have a successful career, there are a lot

of skills that you have to have, and I’m listening

to one side of your--

HALCOMB:--yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:But tell me, when it came to, for example, purchasing--menu planning,

purchasing, deliveries, accounting, budgeting, all that side, the financial side

of a business, where did you learn that?

HALCOMB:Well, when I was working at the Shoppette, Mike Beavers was his name

that owned the place. He decided he wanted to leave, and he asked me if I wanted

to buy it, and I told him, “There’s no way I could buy this place. My husband

works in the coal mines.” And he said, “If I showed you and taught you how to do

this business, would you buy it?” He said, “You could make this go.” So, he did.

He showed me how I could make a payment to the person that owned the building

first because, see, he rented that place, so I had to make a--I had to have a

landlord, so I had to make a payment there. So, he showed me how to make enough

money to pay that rent, to get gas, because they supplied the gas, and how to

divide that in the checking. You know, if this goes to this, this goes this. Of

course, I had to get a accountant to figure all that out for me, but I learned

how to do all that myself. And then, I hired an accountant to take care of me.

CURRIS:So--

HALCOMB:--and that was the Baileys that used to be in Cumberland, Mr.--

CURRIS:--what were their names again?

HALCOMB:Well, Jim Bailey. I can’t think of his father’s name, but, now, he was

an accountant that started Jim off. But Jim Bailey used to be my accountant in

Cumberland, but--

CURRIS:--but, basically, you

had to learn the fundamentals.

HALCOMB:I had to learn--yeah, and I’m like, “There’s no way I can do this,” but

I did.

CURRIS:In order to hire the accountant, you had to have some knowledge.

HALCOMB:I had to have some knowledge. And, in fact, I did take accounting at

Lynch, so I knew it a little tiny bit anyhow. (laughs)

CURRIS:Well, when we’re talking about this, about what year is this that Mike

Beavers is offering to sell you the business?

HALCOMB:Okay. My husband died in 1990, so this was 1988. (pause)

CURRIS:In 1988, how long did Mike Beavers train you, basically, in the business?

HALCOMB:It was months. I wanna say six months or something like that before I

actually bought it. He would show me how to order things, how to pay for things,

how to do this and do that.

It was about six months, and then he left, and I just walked right in and took over.

CURRIS:So, how long were you there?

HALCOMB:I was there (pause) probably three or four years, and then I moved to

the Big Top.

CURRIS:Tell us about the move to the Big Top.

HALCOMB:Mr. Henson --

CURRIS:--before we go there--I’m sorry--why did you decide to make that change?

HALCOMB:Because I had so many customers. I mean, this was a small place, and

people would be lined up to get the little bit of food that I would be able to

cook in this little steam table I had. I would do fried chicken and stuff like

that. And I brought the steam table in, and the business just doubled with the

homemade food. So, people would stand out lines, and I thought, oh, my gosh.

I--I’ve run out of food because there was so many people. And then, Mr. Henson

came down and asked me if I would like to rent the Big Top.

CURRIS:Who is this?

HALCOMB:This is Mr. Henson that owned the place at the Big Top. He owned it.

CURRIS:Do you know his first name?

HALCOMB:I cannot think of it right now.

CURRIS:Okay.

HALCOMB:I’m sorry. But, anyhow, I--and I jumped right on that. I jumped right

on that. I moved in there, moved my stove up there. Just--it worked.

CURRIS:It worked. (laughs) It was the place throughout the region.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:But, before that, I thought I remembered a fire.

HALCOMB:I was just thinking about that. One Easter Sunday, and I can’t think of

the year--I can think

of the year. 1990’s when my husband died in January, and the store burned on

Easter Sunday. I was in there, cooking, and I had people working for me, and I

went to the store every morning to get fresh hamburger.

CURRIS:And this is at the Shoppette.

HALCOMB:This is at the Shoppette. I went to the store to get fresh hamburger

every morning and left the girls there cooking, and my brother was at Henry’s, and--

CURRIS:--and Henry’s was--

HALCOMB:--the food store.

CURRIS:Okay.

HALCOMB:Okay? And then, all of a sudden, I seen a lot o’ smoke coming down

out--downtown. I was talking to my brother, and I said, “Lord have mercy,

something’s on fire,” and it was the Shoppette. And, actually, it wasn’t my

people’s fault. It was the gas and stuff that was wired into the building, and

it caught on fire, and

it burned inside. It didn’t burn the outside, but it burned everything on the

inside, and I went home and called my daughter, and she made reservations--

CURRIS:--which daughter?--

HALCOMB:--Lorie, my oldest daughter--to go to Las Vegas. She said, “Mom, I

wanna get you out of there.” So, I went to Las Vegas, left everything there.

Never worried about where the next step was gonna come from. And when I got

back--I went to Lorie’s and went to Las Vegas, and when I got back, I took care

of it because I had insurance, bought everything new, rebuilt--the people

built--rebuilt the place that owned it, and everything was new. I just went

right on. But, between the

time that the fire, and the insurance, and all that, you know, came about,

people were so excited because, you know, the Shoppette’s back, you know? The

Shoppette’s back. And I ran it for a long time. And then, when I--Mr. Henson

come in, I jumped on that, but I forgot about that fire.

CURRIS:Well, when it talks about--ran it a long time, how long are we talking

about when you’ve rebuilt it? Two or three years?

HALCOMB:Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:So, now, Mr. Henson comes, and when he comes--and he owns the Big Top.

And, again, this is in Cumberland, so--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--both the Shoppette had been in Cumberland, and this was in Cumberland,

the--did he offer you the business? What did he ask?

HALCOMB:I rented it.

CURRIS:You rented it.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay.

Now, I want to jump back to the fire. Again, we’re talking about a young

mountain woman with a high school degree. Fortunately, she has taken accounting.

She is a hard worker. How does she know to have insurance on the Shoppette? Was

that part of Mr. Beaver’s training, or did you--

HALCOMB:--yes, he said--

CURRIS:--just know--

HALCOMB:--”You always keep insurance. You have to keep insurance because you’ll

never know what happened.” And he said, “People fall. You have to have

insurance, Leonda.” So, that was the first thing, you know, what--just

automatically done. And everybody had insurance, you know? You had to have

insurance. Your life insurance. Whatever you done, you had to have insurance.

CURRIS:So, that was just

part of the culture--

HALCOMB:--yeah--

CURRIS:--at that time--

HALCOMB:--yeah, yeah--

CURRIS:--that you had that.

HALCOMB:Um-hm.

CURRIS:So, then, you’ve rented the Big Top. Tell us about the Big Top because

what year are we talking about you’re going into the Big Top?

HALCOMB:That was after my husband passed away. It was in the ’90s, early ’90s,

and I was up there probably seven years before I just quit.

CURRIS:At the Big Top?

HALCOMB:At the Big Top, yeah.

CURRIS:Now, let’s talk about those seven years. So that our audience

understands that you’re going from the Shoppette, which is approximately, like,

two rooms, and you’re going to the Big Top, which my memory is that that was

built across from the Pine View or fairly close but that it was the biggest

restaurant in town.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:

What--how many people could you serve there?

HALCOMB:We could probably get seventy-five people in there because there was an

additional room on the side, so we--there were already tables and things in

there. He had built that on. So, we could probably sell--seat seventy-five

people because they had booths in the main restaurant, and then they had the

side room, and in that side room, we had all the clubs in town. The Lions Club

and all those clubs, ladies’ clubs. That’s where they would meet every month.

CURRIS:That is the true test in a small town. Where do the men’s and women’s

clubs meet? Because that’s where your best food is--(both laugh)--served. Did

they approach you about wanting to come there?

HALCOMB:Well, what I did--I used a little knowledge from Mr. Beavers.

I invited all the store owners, the bank people, all the people that owned

anything, up for a snack, and I had food to give them--not pay--they did not

have to pay--to see what they were gonna get in the years to come. So--

CURRIS:--so, a sampling.

HALCOMB:Sampler.

CURRIS:Do you remember what was in that sample?

HALCOMB:I had food. Like, regular food because I wanted them to know what they

were getting when they come to eat with me. So, they went right through the line

and filled their plates up. We had people waiting on them, you know. They did

not serve the food theirself. We had people waiting on them. But turned out to

be a great day.

CURRIS:Well, tell me what the menu was, more or less.

HALCOMB:Okay. I always had fried chicken. You had fried chicken and

roast beef or something like that. On Friday, you had fish, salmon, things like

that. But that day, I think I just went all out, and I had showed off a little

bit, maybe.

CURRIS:It’s called marketing today. (both laugh)

HALCOMB:Well, see, I didn’t know that then, but I sort of sh--

CURRIS:I don’t think any of us knew it then. (laughs)

HALCOMB:I sort of sho--I don’t know why or how I thought o’ that, but I

thought, well, why couldn’t I do that?

CURRIS:So, you put forward your money personally--

HALCOMB:--yes, I did, yeah--

CURRIS:--to have this day of invitation at no cost to--

HALCOMB:--had no cost--

CURRIS:--basically the leaders in the town.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:And that was your kick-off.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:And you were there for about seven years. Now, Leonda, do you know, at

that moment in time, were there any other career women

in the Tri-City area, Benham, Cumberland, Lynch, other than--not counting the

teachers, and the nurses, and the shop owners, of which there were very few? Can

you remember any other woman who was able to develop her own business at that time?

HALCOMB:Only thing I could think of is hairdressers. We had a couple

hairdressers, and they had their own business, and they had a place downtown.

Nails. I can remember Nails, and there was another one, but I can’t remember the

name. That’s the only ladies that I can remember having their own business.

CURRIS:Did you realize at the time what you were achieving?

HALCOMB:No. No, I did not. I never thought of it.

CURRIS:So, you were a pioneer with absolutely no recognition of that fact,

which is how true

pioneers--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--grow--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--actually. Well, the--so, you have this wonderful opportunity that you

have developed yourself based on skills that have evolved over time. What were

your favorite dishes to cook?

HALCOMB:I would say the fried chicken ’cause I--that was everybody’s favorite.

CURRIS:Well, now, we cannot have this conversation--

HALCOMB:--right--

CURRIS:--without--

HALCOMB:--the rolls--

CURRIS:--without talking about the famous yeast rolls.

HALCOMB:(laughs) Right.

CURRIS:Okay. Tell us about it.

HALCOMB:Well, back in the day, when I had the country club, although I learned

a little bit at the Pine View, the Italian lady, Helen, taught me how to make

those rolls. And

at the Pine View, when times were bad, instead of milk, they would wanna save

their milk and use water to put it in their rolls, so she taught me how to make

a roll with water to save money, and that’s what I learned from her, and she was

a great, great cook.

CURRIS:Do you remember her last name?

HALCOMB:Smith. It was Helen Smith. And--

CURRIS:--so, then, she came and helped you at--

HALCOMB:--at--

CURRIS:--Sleepy Hollow.

HALCOMB:At Sleepy Hollow, and she had a dirt floor. She lived in a house with a

dirt floor. She sure did. But it’s just memories, you know, just--I just

remember her dirt floors my mom was telling me about. But the rolls just came

natural to me, and even today, somebody asked me for the

recipe, and I said, “Well, do you know that I measure everything in my hand?”

It’s not teaspoons, tablespoons, this or that. I do measure oil, water, sugar,

but I do not measure yeast or salt. It’s all--

CURRIS:--in the hand--

HALCOMB:--in the hand. So, for you to ask me about that recipe--(laughs)--I

honestly don’t know how to measure that hand out. I’ve tried it one time to

somebody that wanted to learn. Well, it never worked, so you guys gonna have to

learn by the hand. (laughs)

CURRIS:That--learning by the hand. I--

HALCOMB:--yeah--

CURRIS:--love that. That is so great.

HALCOMB:Yeah. And my mom done that. My mom measured by the hand.

CURRIS:My grandmother and mother, to a certain extent.

HALCOMB:You would think in the old--honey, they never had teaspoons,

tablespoons, stuff like that, except what

we eat with. And then, if they measured anything, that’s what they measured

with. A regular tablespoon or teaspoon, not a measure thing like we had--very

fortunate to have.

CURRIS:Now, one of the stories that I want you to tell me deals with the fact

that, when it comes to--literally, your yeast rolls were known throughout the

region, that you now bake them for charity.

HALCOMB:Yes, I do.

CURRIS:Tell me about this.

HALCOMB:I feel like the lord’s blessed me so much, and I’m not hurting for

money, so when I--somebody asks me to make ’em rolls, and I used to charge, I

just give it to ’em because it’s a blessing to do ’em. I mean, I am very

fortunate to be able to stand up and make a roll

’cause I’m so blessed that I can even do that today.

CURRIS:Well, it is absolutely beautifully--(laughs)--appreciated. I can

absolutely assure you. Well, now, when we talk about our various memories of

Benham and so forth, after you were at the Big Top for about seven years, what

did you do then?

HALCOMB:I left the Big Top, walked out, and went to Indianapolis. I left

everything there. I never took a thing. I just walked out and left it to my

sister, Pat, and that’s what I did at the Shoppette too. There’s this lady, said

that she was interested in it, and I did not sell her the building. I just--I

mean, my business. I just

left it and gave it to her.

CURRIS:So, what did you do in Indianapolis?

HALCOMB:Well, being fifty-ish, I didn’t think I could get a job, okay? And

first place I went to hired me in a bakery. That was right up my alley. So, it

was a big, big grocery chain. Big, big.

CURRIS:Do you remember the name of it?

HALCOMB:Marsh.

CURRIS:Do you know how to spell it?

HALCOMB:M-a-r-s-h. And today, they’re out of business, but they had stores all

over Indianapolis, and that’s where I started, and I was a pie maker. Right up

my alley. (laughs) And they actually did homemade pies, believe it or not. In a

big place like that, they had a kettle (??) that would probably hold ten gallons of

pie mix that I would make the pies in, and it heated. There was no stove

involved. And the pie crusts come in already made. No, I’m sorry. I have to back

up because when they--when I first got there, they came in frozen, and I would

take each pie crust, and I would crimp the sides to make ’em look like homemade,

and yes, it was a hard job. In fact, I had this thumb where I crimped with this

thumb. It froze there. I mean--

CURRIS:--your thumb froze?

HALCOMB:It froze, and I had to have that operated on because I crimped it so

much that it froze, and I had to have a operation on it. But, anyhow, make a

long story short--and the business--oh, my gosh. The

first year I was there, they gave me an award because of the sales that we had

in that area, and I felt important then, you know? When you lease a business and

you think that, you know, you’re too old to work, and then somebody gives you a

job--and then here I am again, you know? Right on top of the world, thinking,

okay, I can do this. I can do this. At first, I didn’t think I could, but I did.

I did it. And then, I worked there for three or four years until Super Target

came into town. Brand new Super Target. They were putting two or three up in the

area, and I went in, and I got hired, but the store wasn’t built yet, so I had

to do shelving and all this stuff.

So, they put me first in the--into Starbucks. I was a manager of Starbucks.

Never drank a cup o’ coffee in my life, but I was a manager of Starbucks, so I

had to learn all these new names--you know, cappuccino and all this stuff--and

had to learn how to make it. I had--actually had to go to school to make that

stuff. And I was in there probably for three years, and I would always run down

to the bakery and do things down in the bakery too when I had time. And then, we

started to do some charity work for Ronald McDonald, so they moved me from--

CURRIS:--now is that bakery or Starbucks?

HALCOMB:Starbucks. I went to the--Starbucks to the bakery.

CURRIS:Okay.

HALCOMB:Okay? And they started to--we

started taking things down to Ronald McDonald’s house, and they had all these

things. You know, you got these big kettles. You got these big things to make

things in. You got these big mixers. So, I said, “Can we make rolls? Can we do

this? Can we do that for Ronald McDonald?” And, believe it or not, we did. We

made pies. We made rolls. We baked roasts in the ovens that were huge, walk-in ovens.

CURRIS:And this was--where was this?

HALCOMB:That was Super Target. So, I got to be a little big known there at

Ronald McDonald’s, okay? (laughs) But I enjoyed every minute of it, although it

was so hard. I enjoyed every minute of it. And, in that job, the bakery--

UKNOWN SPEAKER:Hello.

CURRIS:Hi.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:-Hey, I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to. [Editor’s note: Interruption

by unknown speaker who is not part of this interview.]

CURRIS:

So, go ahead.

HALCOMB:Oh, okay.

CURRIS:So, you made the rolls and the pies.

HALCOMB:And food. I made food food. Fried chicken, roast.

CURRIS:And this was in the McDonald House? Ronald McDonald.

HALCOMB:We--no, no, no. I took that--

CURRIS:--took ’em there--

HALCOMB:--took it there for--at the Super Target. See, youu’re gonna learn my

whole life. From Super Target, we took it all the way downtown and fed these people.

CURRIS:That is amazing.

HALCOMB:For years. For--until I quit.

CURRIS:Which was about how many years? Or when did you quit, approximately?

HALCOMB:Okay. I can’t even remember. Two thousand something. (laughs)

CURRIS:Okay. Two thousand plus. Now, when we’re dealing with all of these

different experiences, you go to Indi--you’re--you leave Cumberland.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:Off you go to Indianapolis. You go to the bakery.

No one knows you from anybody, and you get an award--(laughs)--right off the

bat. You get bored. You go to Super Target. And while they’re building things,

you go and work as manager of Starbucks. Starbucks takes items to the Ronald

McDonald House, and you discover--do I have that correct?

HALCOMB:No. They moved me from Starbucks to the bakery--

CURRIS:--oh--

HALCOMB:--and from the bakery, we took things to the Ronald McDonald House.

CURRIS:I did not realize that we were talking about the bakery in Super Target.

HALCOMB:Right.

CURRIS:Okay.

HALCOMB:Yeah, I was big time there.

CURRIS:--now that makes sense--

HALCOMB:--there. Yeah.

CURRIS:And so, here you go, and you become a big, famous

person--(laughs)--again. I just love that story.

HALCOMB:I don’t know about famous, but anyhow.

CURRIS:So--

HALCOMB:--I fed people. I’ll put it that way.

CURRIS:The--

so, here’s the big question that I have. Why come back to Benham? I mean, you

have the world. You can stay where you want to. But why--were you coming back

home? Is that what you were do--

HALCOMB:--I was coming back home. I came back home a lot when my aunt was sick

with my daughter, and we would come down here twice a week, and you know how far

that is, because she was so ill. And, actually, at her funeral, I met Jerry, my

husband, and that started the whole thing right there.

CURRIS:And whose funeral was that?

HALCOMB:My aunt Shirley’s.

CURRIS:Aunt Shirley. Shirley Hensley.

HALCOMB:Yeah, and he came--

CURRIS:--who was at the Credit Union.

HALCOMB:As--at the Credit Union.

CURRIS:So, a circle has been closed.

HALCOMB:Yes.

CURRIS:So, you come back for Shirley’s funeral, and that’s when--

HALCOMB:--I met Jerry that I went to school with all my

life except for the last two years, and--

CURRIS:--and we’re talking about Jerry--

HALCOMB:--Halcomb-- (pauses)

CURRIS:--so, he was here.

HALCOMB:Um-hm. He owns the house there in Benham, and we started talking. He

started calling, and I’d come down here, and go back home, and see him, and

eventually got married.

CURRIS:And so, your life has come full circle.

HALCOMB:Yeah.

CURRIS:What a glorious, glorious story because, again, I am run aground, doing

my own thing, but, as is true of those of us from Benham, we’ve always got a

little finger here, a little thumb there, kinda semi-keeping in touch so that I

come back, and I’m going to the Big Top, and I’m loving all

that you’re doing. And so, I have known in the back of my mind that you were one

of us who just absolutely took the bull by the horns, but you were, in my

memory, the first entrepreneurial woman basically in the Tri-Cities. I would not

limit it to Benham. And it’s my understanding from what you’re saying that you

have not recognized--

HALCOMB:--no--

CURRIS:-how critically important you were.

HALCOMB:No, I did not. I never even thought about it.

CURRIS:Well, may I say thank you for all that you absolutely achieved and the

kind of work ethic that

was really entrenched in the women. I mean, when you look at what your mother

was doing--did your mother also quilt or have--I can’t imagine she’d have time.

HALCOMB:She never, she never quilted.

CURRIS:Or any of those things.

HALCOMB:She had no time for a hobby. She did not. She was always cooking,

cleaning, doing things like that.

CURRIS:So, that ethic of hard labor and hard work--you were simply able to take

what you had seen in your own family and take it to an even higher degree. Does

your family realize--

HALCOMB:--yeah--

CURRIS:--how--

HALCOMB:--they--I guess they do because they always, you know, brag on me and

things like that, but I never considered--I never even thought of anything like

that, you know?

CURRIS:You just did it.

HALCOMB:I just did it.

CURRIS:You just did it.

HALCOMB:I just--

CURRIS:--well, today, I

want to thank you so much for coming in for this interview and ask you if

there’re any particular words that--or memories or thoughts that you would like

to close our interview with.

HALCOMB:Only thing I can say is that I had the community--the Tri-City area--to

back me. I mean, they came in. They kept coming in, and that started me off. I

mean, I felt important then because I could do something. I never thought I

could even run anything or do anything like that, but I did. I did, but I never

thought how important it was then as I do now.

CURRIS:Thank you, Leonda Hensley Halcomb.

HALCOMB:Thank you.

CURRIS:It has been wonderful, and I look forward to our opening the Hern

Financial Center and that you are going to be a part of the history that is

absolutely on show--

HALCOMB:--thank you--

CURRIS:--for the people. Thank you so much.

HALCOMB:Thank you for making me feel important.

CURRIS:Goodbye.

HALCOMB:Bye.

[End of interview.]