KOMARA:This is an interview with Cheryl Taylor on July 10th, 2023 at her home

in Lexington, Kentucky. This interview is for the Kentucky Climate Change Oral

History project. I, Zada Komara, the interviewer, I’m a faculty member at the

University of Kentucky. So, Cheryl, how are you today?

TAYLOR:I’m doing fine.

KOMARA:You’re doing fine?

TAYLOR:Mm-hmm.

KOMARA:I mean, it’s a beautiful day and--

TAYLOR:Yeah.

KOMARA:--you live on a beautiful lake, so. (laughs)

TAYLOR:Yeah, it was a horse farm. I guess that there’s a bit of guilt with that

but, you know, Ken--Fayette County is developed inside that urban planning zone

and they’re gonna take every piece they can get before they try to destroy their

land around it, so.

KOMARA:Well, it’s pretty and I’ll say this is the prettiest spot I’ve probably

ever done an oral history interview in.

TAYLOR:Oh, really? Well, good.

KOMARA:So, yeah.

TAYLOR:I’m glad you feel comfortable here.

KOMARA:So, I always like to start with some biography. So, just tell me a

little bit about yourself.

TAYLOR:Well, I was born actually in Laurel County because there was no facility

in Clay. But as a child, I lived in Manchester, Kentucky and Clay County,

Eastern Kentucky.

My dad worked for the local coal company. He was a World War II veteran and went

to college on the GI Bill. So, he was an accountant for the mine

where--actually, most of my male ancestors were coal miners of some--or farmers.

There were some farmers, but, but anyway. My mom was from that area, and he was

from--born in Pineville and lived in Harlan. So, they both grew up in coal

communities and, you know, that kind of thing. And--but the coal company started

to decline. I was born in 1956, so they started declining in the sixties. And

work was scarce, so my dad took the big step of getting a job, and we moved from

Manchester to Louisville, which was quite a culture shock. I struggled when I

got to the Jefferson County School system because I just was not even closely,

you know, ready to, to make that academic step.

We were so much--they were so behind. But eventually I--we lived there until I

was in high school. My dad got another job, and we moved to Knoxville,

Tennessee. So, I actually graduated from high school in Knoxville. I started

college a year early, University of Tennessee, and then quickly transferred back

to UK, because I like blue better than orange, so. But I went to UK. My first

degree was in social work, and I worked in mental hospitals, different sorts of

things and as a--I was twenty, twenty-one years old, and I didn’t feel like I

could make much of a difference. I, I was a little overwhelmed with what

the--you know, the serious mental illnesses (laughs) and I decided I wanted to

do something in school where I could actually predict it. Where humans are

somewhat unpredictable, science is a little bit more easy. Yeah. So, I went back

to school and I got a mechanical engineering degree. So, with the two degrees,

I started working right out of college for Procter & Gamble, and I worked for

them for almost twenty-four years in manufacturing. Most of the work early on

was engineering, operations, maintenance. I did a lot of technical work, but

about halfway through my career they needed somebody to pick up the

Environmental Permitting programs. (cheerful instrumental music) I have no idea

what that is. The Environmental Permitting programs, safety programs, that kind

of thing. And then all the permits--the, the whole--every time we put in a new

piece of equipment you had to permit it and that sort of thing. So, I picked it

up and learned it and found I just really enjoyed it. It’s kind of a nice combo

of the social work and the engineering, because I worked with a lot of people

and their behaviors. You know, we set up the very first recycling systems. We

worked on content of materials that we brought in, we planted trees, we

celebrated Earth Day. Things that had never been done there before. But Procter

& Gamble is a very accommodating

company. And they promoted women, which was also kind of unusual back in the

seventies and early eighties. So, I was allowed to really gain a lot of skill.

They sent me to many--I went to classes. I’m certified in a lot of different

areas: storm water, hazardous waste, and air quality. I mean, they really train

you well there. I had to pass a lot of tests and certifications. So, I was well

prepared, but then after working there for so many years, I had the opportunity

to go to work in government. And I took an enormous pay cut, but I went to work

for Lloyd Cress, who was the commissioner--state commissioner for the

environment and for Kentucky, as a special projects manager, technical advisor

kind of role, and loved it. I loved working in the public realm. We did all

kinds of educational things promoting--you know, trying

to get the public to understand the impact that they had. Trying to make sure

regulations were easy to understand for people and fair, trying to help business

comply. I got several grants. We started some arts kinds of things, related to

the arts and environment. And we started a program called Kentucky EXCEL, which

was a voluntary leadership program you could join for, for people that wanted to

promote environmentally conscientious work and behavior, and did a lot of

things. And then Lloyd (sighs) was promoted and the next thing I knew I was the

commissioner. So, I got promoted into his spot and I was the first female--I

think it’s still the only female commissioner for state of Kentucky for the

environment. So, there’ve been a couple of female secretaries. Actually, three

that I know of. But I was the only commissioner, which is kind of, “you run the

operations.” And so, from a state level I had the opportunity to

write regulations, explain to the community, represent Kentucky on a national

level. EPA Region 4 met regularly, so I met the leaders of other states in the

south. You know, it was, it was eye-opening, I mean, how much, how much

opportunity there is to improve, and especially if we work together. And I

really enjoyed it, but what I did discover is politics is fickle, and so as

different leadership changes your job is no longer stable. And so, I--at that

time my personal politics--I’m a very liberal Democrat. You know, I just--that’s

how I--it is. My mom was a Liberal, my dad was more of a Republican, but not

too--not like Republicans today. Eisenhower era, I like to call him, you know?

But I, I worked for a Republican governor. He, he didn’t care. He thought I did

good work and he didn’t care about my party. So, I

worked for Ernie Fletcher, who was a, a nice guy and who actually helped support

a lot of environmental initiatives. But then when he lost the election, I was

hired by Jim Newberry to be the first environmental commissioner for the city of

Lexington. Which sounds--it’s, it’s, it’s--that was one of the finest jobs I’ve

ever had, because you’re impacting things at a local level and you can see the

result. So, I took over right as Lexington went under an EPA consent decree,

because--I don’t know if you know this, but back in--gosh! I don’t remember the

year? It was 2000--early 2000s. Two young women drowned right across from the

football stadium because the storm water here was so--it was unmanaged.

There--development happened but there was no plan. And we went under a federal

consent decree to clean up our act with storm water and get--there were no maps,

even, you know? Where storm water went is just where it went.

Nobody knew. So, I, I came into that job to help get us back into compliance and

federal law, and then we also worked on our sewer systems. That was my personal

favorites. Weird. Garbage, we did all kinds of--we put in the first energy and

air programs in Fayette County. Recycling, we, we, (sighs) we bought

twenty-seven brand new garbage trucks and initiated a recycling. I bought--the

big machine that they used at the recycling center was bought when I came in the

office. And, and it was a wonderful job. I enjoyed it. But again, fickle fate.

You know, when the, when the mayor didn’t get reelected, I stayed for a little

while working for Jim Gray. He was not nearly as supportive of environmental

initiatives. Just not. Lots of things I could say, but I won’t. And so, I left

there and then I, I did several things after that. I went to work for

University of Kentucky. I had managed hospital maintenance planning for UK. I

learned a lot about hospital environment and waste streams and things. I also

went to work for an--a private engineering company based in Cincinnati, and did

environmental consulting for them. Didn’t like that kind of work as much. I

left--I went to Kentucky American Water company. I’ve just done a lot of

different things and I guess finally I wound up at Wild Turkey Distillery. So, I

did the environmental and safety management for them. So, in each one of those

circumstances, I’ve had the opportunity to impact the results of the place I

worked by making sure they were complying with the law, they were ahead of the

game, they were recycling, they were minimizing waste. You know, they were

reporting accurately, representing to the public that, you know, we were a

conscientious place or business.

So, I’ve had a lot of fun jobs, a lot of things, and then finally I retired. But

my unfortunate timing was I retired literally two weeks before the world shut

down for COVID, and after a couple of months of pure boredom, I went back to the

state. They, they needed help and so they hired me into the enforcement

division. So, I was an environmental law enforcer for the state for about two

years. We mostly worked remotely, but because I’d worked at the state I could

ramp up fast and I was able to start working productively in a matter of about

six weeks. They said most of the beginners coming in take a year to two years.

So, I was able to help them fill a gap, and I learned a lot about the

enforcement side while I was doing it. So, I’ve had a little bit of everything.

I know that’s long-winded, but that’s kind of my environmental connections, I

guess, all the way through. Lots of different types of work.

KOMARA:Yeah, this is awesome.

Jim Newberry, obviously, is the one who gave me your name. And he said--

TAYLOR:--He was a magnificent person to work for--

KOMARA:“--She has done all the things.” And I am very impressed by this list. I

will admit, I don’t a thousand percent know what some of this stuff entails, so

maybe I’ll ask you.

TAYLOR:Well, that’s not your area. So, yeah.

KOMARA:Yeah. So, like, tell us a little bit about, like, what does

environmental enforcement look like as a job?

TAYLOR:Well, environmental--the, the way that this state is set up, and it

varies from state to state, but this state has the division of air, waste and

water. And of course, you have labs and other things that work at state

government level. And air, waste, and water in Kentucky are authorized by the

federal government to act as a federal agent. So, I don’t know if you follow

that, but, but the feds--ultimately, the federal law is king, but they allocate

the actual program management and operation to states if the state demonstrates

it has the capacity

to do that correctly and well. So, those three groups in Kentucky have field

offices. There’s--well, it’s thirteen--they’re kind of consolidating right now

but I think they’re still thirteen. But offices at different locations. London,

for example. London, Kentucky has a field office. And for most--in most cases,

there’s an air, waste, and water office, and those offices house inspectors. So,

the inspectors are all trained. Kind of managed centrally, but they’re all

trained and they’re all on the job and they do the real hands-on work for state.

You know, monitoring what’s going on and making sure things are done correctly.

And if they find a place where there’s an outage or something being violated,

they attempt to get that corrected at that point. But there’s a lot of people

and companies that are just--either they, they don’t understand, which is kind

of one end of the spectrum, or they do understand and they deliberately violate

and do not care.

Coal companies are its own thing. It’s, it’s a very difficult group. But once

they recognize they’ve got an issue and they can’t control it through their own

means locally, then they report that back to the division of enforcement. And

that’s when we take over. And partly because of my age and attitude, nothing

intimidates me. So, I, I mean, I’ve tackled some big cases. They gave me a lot

of really messy cases because I’ve got the background of pol--you know, excuse

my language, bullshit. I mean, they’ll give you smoke, they’ll give you--there’s

excuses, but a lot of it is just somebody’s cutting money. Somebody’s trying to

promote themselves. There’s some greed involved. They’re too lazy. They don’t

believe--whatever reason, they’re not gonna comply unless you force them. So,

there’s a process that you go through. Once the inspector reports that, that

there’s this violation that can’t get corrected, then enforcement takes that and

makes a case, and then you get a case manager assigned. So, I was working

kind of at the basic level, but I’ve done so many things. They gave me all the

weird--we have weird cases in Kentucky. There’s coal, there’s--well, there’s

munitions, there’s, you know, all kinds of things. And so, once you get the

case, you do the background research, you compare it with the regulations and

make sure that it’s valid. And then you start to gather your data and then you

contact the party and say, “You’re in trouble. We’re gonna--we need to talk with

you about what you’re gonna do to come back into compliance or--.” Then there

will be--mostly it’s monetary fines. Now, you can get something that goes beyond

that, but monetary fines are the biggest. The biggest fine I remember--not

during my tenure, but while Lloyd was still--was Rockwell was fined almost ten

million dollars. And of course there’s still a lot of stuff going on in western

Kentucky with Paducah, gaseous diffusion, and weapons. You know, there’s a lot

of big cases here, but there have been some

pretty hefty fines levied. But, but some of the cases were as simple as, you

have empathy, but it’s some farmer that lives in Clay County or wherever and

they just like to burn their trash. You know, they burn it and burn it and burn

it and burn it. And you can’t just burn it. You know, it, it, it leaves a

sediment in the air, a particulate. It, it’s--or, or hoarders that live on a

property and they’ve collected every junk car, trailer, whatever, you know? I

mean, so sometimes I was dealing with a person who literally did not even

understand that there was a law. All the way up to great big corporations and

great big landfills and places that know better and should know better and

violate anyway. But you hold them accountable by first giving them a chance to

explain their side, then you come back. And there’s algorithms that you can use

to come up with fines but, you know, there’s a lot of--well, the city of

Lexington, comically, (laughs)

violated their--yeah, that was one of my cases. I’m like, “Look, guys, I know

exactly what that’s supposed to do, so don’t even give me a story.” Lexington,

to their credit though, was very cooperative. I mean, places that have

well-trained people running those programs try very hard to comply, and when

they go out of compliance it, it causes them grief. You know, Toyota had a issue

and they were just embarrassed, you know? So, some companies are quite easy to

work with, while others are very difficult. They dump stuff at night and, you

know. Bourbon industry, I found to be quite interesting when I worked in it,

because it’s all over the map. So, they have, they have--you know, they have

bourbon spills. They’re always by a waterway, and they spill and some of them

act like, you know, “Well, that’s the way we’ve done it for two hundred years.”

And I’m like, “Well, yeah, they were riding horses and all kinds of things two

hundred years ago. You don’t dump that in the creek. No.”

So, you have to hold people accountable. And it helps if you’ve been in my

shoes, because I know what’s okay and what’s not okay. I’ve been on both sides

of the fence. So, I--what I’ve found in Kentucky, there’s a lot of people that

care a lot about the environment here, but sometimes they don’t grasp what

they’re doing and their behavior and how that might necessarily be a negative.

Cattle farmers are bad. Dairy farmers--central Kentucky, around Columbia,

Bowling Green and around that area, some of the worst cases, “Well, I’m a

farmer. We’ve done it this way for X number of years.” But you have--you know,

cattle generate all kinds of issues. Confined animal feeding operations, they’re

bad. And, you know, they, they really pollute the water, they pollute the air,

and they’re hard to hold accountable. Because agricultural communities kind of

got its own thing. It’s, it’s complicated. You know, agriculture’s big for Kentucky.

There’s coal mines. I mentioned them. One of the problems with coal mines is a

lot of them were dug and left and the company picked up and moved. And it’s, you

know, some company in Missouri or Washington or wherever that owns it, and it’s

hard to hold them accountable, you know, today. But I, I had one case where, you

know, they kept going through bankruptcy and different mines would take over

ownership of the permit and this and that. And you’d get a situation where the

owner was a thousand miles away. Somebody’s supposed to be sampling these

forty-seven, or a hundred and thirteen, or five hundred and fifty points on a

monthly basis, and they just stop, and the stuff is running off. And we had to

get, you know, federal help with some of those. Those mine--mines have left a

terrible legacy in a lot of ways. I mean, at first it was a boon. It was a place

people came over and got work and got started. But now

what’s left is difficult. I mean, there’s nobody to manage it. And as hard as

the regulators try--we’ve got some excellent people that work for the state.

People that care. And as hard as they try, they don’t have enough resource. They

just, they don’t have the money, they don’t have the authority. It’s hard for

them to hold them accountable, but they try. I mean, they, they try. So, you

might find it interesting to talk to some of the people in environmental

enforcement. Their job is, is very interesting. It was kind of a nice way for me

to wrap up my--I guess, my work life, because it gave me hope people

are--they’re trying to hold people accountable, and it’s not always easy.

KOMARA:Yeah. I mean, that’s really worthwhile work. That’s really--

TAYLOR:--Oh, it is. It makes a difference.

KOMARA:Yeah. And I’m curious about--forgive me if I say the title wrong. When

you were the state environmental commissioner, I’m curious, like, what, what did

you do

in that role? What kind of projects would you take on and what was the legacy of that?

TAYLOR:Well, I did a lot of different things. Part of it was, I mean, it’s a

political appointment, for one thing, so, you know, you were always kind of at

the beck and call of state senators and representatives for issues going on in

their area. But--so you had some things that would get distracting. You know,

“Well, senator so-and-so has this going on and they want you to pay attention.”

So, there is a little bit of that. But in general, what you tried to do was

develop policy, which is a nice general term to say, “How are we gonna act in

this case?” So, for example, I mentioned confined animal feeding operations.

Sometimes things happen like that that didn’t exist a hundred years ago. You

know, people had a chicken house or, you know, a lot with cattle in it, but as

those things have grown and gotten more and more commercialized,

and they’re agriculture, which is difficult to control anyway, how, as the

state, are we gonna approach that issue? What are we going to do to make sure

that people can make a living, but yet they’re held accountable for what comes

off their property and how that’s done? So, you’re constantly developing

regulations, policies. We would hold meeting--a lot of public meetings. I would

represent the state and we would get the public input on, you know, “What should

we do? How should we develop regulations for this?” We did a lot of work with

our neighbors, specifically EPA Region 4, which is the Southeast United States,

because we share a lot of major waterways. And so, you know, there’s a group

called, ORSANCO, [[Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission]] Ohio River

(scoffs) you know, gosh! I can’t even remember all the acronym for it. But it’s

all the states that border the Ohio River and how we’re gonna manage that. And

then, you know, we all share that water where you pull in your drinking water,

what if I’m dumping something ahead?

So, how are we gonna set up parameters that we all behave within? The

Mississippi River, the whole thing with the nutrients going into the Gulf, I

mean, a lot of that’s coming from us. The acid, acid rain issues--we met with a

lot of states in New England about acid rain. Trying to control air pollution in

Kentucky, how are we set a standard that, you know, protects other people. So,

it was more of a regional and sometimes even national based view. And as the

representative of the state, I would sit in on those meetings and represent our

point of view. And then sometimes they would come back and say, “Here’s what we

think we want to agree to. We need to develop some regs. We need to line up with

Ohio, or--.” There, there would be a lot of battles along the river, I mean,

because of what everybody’s spewing in from their factories and what people are

drawing in to drink. Or--you know, or how boat traffic handles, or--. So, state

government is--it’s kind of longer term

thinking, broader, regional. You know, how--and then there was even some

representation in Washington. We also did a lot of work in my office to get

money and grants. I mean--so, I wrote a couple of grants and was able to get

funding for programs, particularly for resources. We also represented the state

at--the federal, the federal division of environmental enforcement would inspect

all of our offices, all of our programs, to make sure we met federal compliance.

Like, in order for us to have the authority to operate as a state without

federal coming in and telling us everything, we had to prove to them or

demonstrate to them that we had the capacity and that we were doing it properly.

So, I went through a lot of audits with federal agencies to make sure Kentucky

complied. Just--it was a, a lot of different things. It was--I mean, I,

I--sometimes I think back I’m like, “Well,

if I’d have just stayed with Procter & Gamble--.” Because they did sell, sell

the local business. I was working out of Cincinnati a lot, and they offered to

relocate. Well, I had all these kids, and, you know, I kind of--I thought,

“Well, I’ll take a dive into this public service,” and just kind of got

addicted. It’s, it’s very rewarding work. You, you know, you feel like you’re

setting a standard for the future. We did environmental education programs. We

funded--we worked with a lot of different groups, both at the state and the

Lexington level. Bluegrass Greensource is a really good group here. Amy Sohner

is--I’ve known her for thirty years. And they work really hard to make the next

generation of kids a lot smarter and better than we are, and they still haunt

me. (laughs) Like, I mean, my car, I drive it till the wheel falls out. But I

started looking for a car and my daughter says, “Mom, surely you’re looking for

at least a hybrid.” I’m like, “I’m looking. Looking, looking.” You know, they’ll

hold you accountable.

“What do you mean this is in the [inaudible 00:25:01]?” I mean, we still have--I

set up little things where--everywhere my kids went to school, we set up

recycling programs, and I, I would always come in and, and do things and talk

about the environment. And, you know, so I’ve, I’ve done a lot of personal

things because I care about it. And then from a career standpoint, I’ve had the

opportunity to develop and influence programs and, and try. Like, I

get--sometimes you get a little down about how things are. I, I went back to

school in my fifties and got a master’s in public health at UK, because I care

about the impacts of it on humans and human life. And I also care how the humans

impact the environment, so it’s a great fit for my skill set. And you can get a

little bit down about it because there’s so much--you know, it’s the hottest

summer on record and there’s tornadoes and floods that are high--you know, worst

ever in history. And all these things and you think, “Is it too late?” And then,

you know,

I had somebody from Procter & Gamble days, and I literally left there--what,

2002? It’s been that long. Somebody the other day sent me pictures of, “Look at

those little trees you gave me.” And there’s, like, beautiful tall, big green

trees. Or I go downtown now and--twelve, thirteen years ago, I invested in the

first recycling cans for downtown Lexington. And I took a beating in the council

meeting because they’re like, “Oh my god! These cans cost a thousand dollars.”

I’m like, “They’re stainless steel. We have a ten-year warranty. It’s--you know,

we want them to look good.” We had them cut Live Green Lexington and all

that--that was from my day. And I went downtown the other day and, “By god,

there’s my cans!” They’re still there. They’re still picking up recycle. And I

thought, “Okay, you know--” (sighs) You, you get to this point in your life and

you think, “I wish I could have done more.” My, my senior project in engineering

was a solar heated pig farrowing house, because farmers spend a ton of energy keeping

the pigs--the little baby pigs warm. And I built a seven-foot model and put

water thermal mass in there and showed on a January day that was seventeen

degrees you could heat the piggies up most of the day. At night you’d have to

kick in your system. But that was my project, because I thought solar was gonna

be the next big thing. And, you know (sighs) it, it’s, it’s now starting to be,

but I didn’t grasp as a young person how impactful money is. You know, money

makes things stay the way they are because people like the way it is, because

that’s how they make their profit. And it has continually ground on my nerves to

watch that unfold. How can people not want to make it better for their kids, or

their grandkids, or their nieces and nephews, or whoever follows them? Their

neighbor, you know? And it, it galls me to watch that happen, but you have to

take a breath and look around

and think, “Okay, lots of people are doing good things.” All of a sudden now

it’s hybrids. And, and, you know, the fully plugin electric cars, we talked

about that back when I worked for Jim Newberry about the green corridors in

Kentucky. So, we met, you know, as Kentucky representatives to figure out how we

could--and that was thirteen years ago, but then nobody made those cars, really.

Finally, they’re making the car. So, I’ve lived long enough to see some of the

ideas that I thought were no-brainers finally start to push their way forward.

And I think the reason is--as much as anything--is young people are not so

fooled. You know, we, we were like idealists. I, I felt like if you just show

people this is a good idea, they’re gonna do it. And I found out there’s a lot

of unscrupulous people and people that care a lot more about themselves and

their money than they do anything else. And so, I’ve had to kind of get over

that and start to realize, you know, I, I have raised six

environmentally conscientious Liberal Democrats, and that’s probably the best

legacy I could leave. But every one of them recycles, cares, conserves. They

turn off the lights. They don’t--you know, and the, they all have basic

behaviors that I think everybody should have, you know? And I know I’m not

always right. That’s my view of the world. But it just feels like maybe we’re on

the cusp of, of young people finally booting out the oldies. I--unfortunately,

I’m the tail-end of the boomers and, you know, every time I hear, “girl boomer”,

you know, I’m like--(sighs) Because I was there when we did Title IX, and, you

know, all kinds of cool things happened when I was young but, but, you know,

they didn’t sustain. So--anyway, I, I feel better now than I have in a while,

because I’m seeing young people be a lot smarter about how they position these

things. Kentucky is--you know, we have a terrible reputation.

I think during my time in public service, the thing I tried to work really hard

on is making people understand Kentucky is just as diverse as everywhere else.

And we have a lot of people here, and you better hope we stay, because we’re the

ones--the thin line holding it from (laughs) you know, going the other way. So,

we’re trying and, and, you know, we can--Lexington, for example, now they’re in

their fourteenth or fifteenth year of their consent decree compliance plan. And

we have one of the best stormwater management systems in the country in

Lexington. It took fourteen years. The, the guy that runs it here in Lexington

is phenomenal. He, he’s a very experienced engineer and he cares, and this is

his legacy. So, you have some people out there that are working really hard to

make it better, and that makes me happy. So, I, I don’t know if all of that

rambling is, is of any value. I, I--you know, I have a lot of hope for Kentucky.

It’s a beautiful state. We’re blessed with all of the rain, even though I get

grumpy about it sometimes. But the fact that we have the water we have, the

resources we have--coal is no longer in the picture. It’s, it’s really a very

minor resource and hopefully we can help those people that are still struggling

from the aftermath of those mines and what it’s doing to their communities and

their water. You know, that’s got to be addressed. But, you know, I feel like

we’ve got some leaders now that, as long as they can stay in control--I think

Governor Beshear is, is pretty good. Steve Beshear was a pretty good

environmental governor. I think Andy tries as much as he can. You know, but

Kentucky is--I, I don’t know. I, I, I feel like we offer a lot, but right now

we’re not recognized for that very well. You know, we’re still recognized as, as

a taker and a, and a polluter

, and as, as long as we’re gonna hang on to coal. But it’s slowly, slowly

dropping off. I mean, we know that. And you can heat a pig house in January in

Kentucky--we did some wind things too. Some wind experiments and, you know, it

was fun. I took a trip--two years ago we drove all the way out Westmont, Utah,

Colorado, South Dakota. We went--it was wonderful. We’re driving across Iowa and

I’m like, “Iowa--.” You know, flat, corn, corn, corn, corn, and all these

windmills, windmills, windmills. And I started looking it up, Iowa was like the,

the state with the highest percentage of wind generated power in the country.

And I’m like, “Well, how cool is that? I had no idea,” you know? And so, you

have--we kept--Colorado had a lot of wind farms and it, it’s--people are, “Well,

you can’t do that in Kentucky. You can’t have solar in Kentucky.” Well, I knew

you could have solar. I’ve done it myself. But you hear that rhetoric because

they want to cover up that we want to keep coal. But it’s, it’s--we’re

running out. There’s no more coal. I mean, that’s been obvious for fifty years.

We’re running out, and it’s dirty, and we need a change. So, here I am, the

granddaughter of two coal miners, and I could see this fifty years ago. And, you

know, I think it’s time for a change and, and I’m hoping Kentucky will not shoot

itself in the foot again. (laughs) I just hope not. I’m here and I’m trying. And

you have pockets--Louisville, Lexington, sometimes Northern Kentucky, sometimes

a little bit Bowling Green--pockets where you get people that go, you know,

“We’re gonna change this.” But it’s a struggle. Every time there’s an election,

I, I’m disappointed. You know, I’m trying. I, I still campaign. I still do

things, but--I don’t know. Like I said, I, I tend to ramble around a lot. I, I

have a mix of hope and depression sometimes about this. (Komara laughs) And I’m

a native and I want it to be better. And I tried, and I think I could have done

better. I see some

legacies I’ve left in jobs that I’ve had. You know, even going back to industry.

Like, going into the bourbon industry, I tell you that’s a good old boy system.

And, you know, telling them that they have to do what? I said, “We have to

account for all of the barrels and how much, you know, angels share they’re

giving off.” But, you know, the way that bourbon--it expands and contracts,

expands and contracts over a period of years, and it shrinks, and the volatiles

that come off are measurable. And they’re like, “Well that’s not right. We’ve

done it this way for two hundred years.” Like, I know, but we’ve got to--now

it’s time for us to be accountable. So, industries like that, Kentucky

industries--and they’re, they’re getting better. I mean, a, a lot of the newer

ones, especially the ones that are being done by young people, are complying

and, and setting up a standard that is much higher than, than some of the

historical brands have done. So, I think that’s causing some change. Another thing

is that a lot of the bourbon industries are being bought up by foreign

companies, and their standards are better than the United States, like, in a lot

of cases. Canada, for example--Wild Turkey has a lot of Canadian--it’s Italian

owned now, and they’re not so great. (laughs) But the Canadians are, and so the

Canadians have much higher standards and they’re supporting improvements in

change, for example, for Wild Turkey. A lot of the other bigger ones--I used to

meet there. We had a council too and talked about--safety was a big one too,

with workers there, besides the environment. But I don’t know if there’s

anything else that’s of interest.

KOMARA:Oh, yeah. I have so many questions I could ask you.

TAYLOR:Okay.

KOMARA:You--I, I had noticed that you had a master’s degree in public health

when I looked you up. And I like the way that you said that was attractive to

you because you wanted to balance, like, human concerns and environmental

concerns, which, to me, my reading of it is you are like, you know, social

justice and environmental justice

are always entangled.

TAYLOR:Yeah.

KOMARA:So, I, I guess I would love to hear more of your thoughts about that.

Like, the intersection of social and environmental justice in Kentucky. Like,

what are we doing? What are we not doing? What’s--like, should be on the

horizon, you know? You’ve been able to see a lot of trends and I think you are

in a good place to sort of predict them also.

TAYLOR:Oh, I don’t know. I might be a bit out of it at this point.

But--Kentucky, I think coal is the prime example there, but there’s more. I

mean, Louisville has Rubbertown. I don’t know if you’ve heard, some of the

pockets in Kentucky where we have heavy concentration of industries that are

highly polluting: aluminum processing, chemical processing. And those tend to be

focused in areas where people have the least resource to either recognize that

it’s coming in on them or, or block it or fight it. And coal was probably the

first example where--you know,

people needed jobs and coal provided them an income and those jobs. He’s going

fishing. (laughs) The income and jobs, and so nobody wanted to bite the hand

that’s feeding them. So, coal companies were allowed to come in and put (sighs)

you know, systems in place that were less than pristine. I mean, back in the

day--I’ve got--I got it out. I don’t know if you want to see before you leave.

But my grandfather, my dad’s dad, was a coal miner, but he was also a, a deputy

sheriff in Harlan County. He was killed by moonshiners in his thirties. He

was--they were raiding a still and he got killed. But he worked in the mine, you

know, too, and they drove carts with mules back into the mines. And he

built--he’s got a mule whip that he made himself, so I have his mule whip. Which

is a weird thing to have, but it was his coal mining--he used it in the mine.

And at that point

, coal mining was not like it is today. It was kind of small. It was mostly

family owned. You know, people got the, the materials out, they used it, and it

was kind of a miracle for them to have heat. You know, it was so much BTU and it

kept people warm. But it evolved quickly into invasion--an invasive thing for

people’s air and water. Of course, safety was huge. I mean, coal mining

incidents have been--you know, lost--people have been (Komara coughs) lost to

that for decades. But the water and the, the--pulling the minerals out, the

mineral rights collapsing, people--you know, people not knowing what they were

signing off on. Because coal started out kind of simple. You know, the slag

piles, the water retention ponds, all those things started to invade people’s

privacy. And it took a long time before anybody spoke up because they didn’t

want to lose their job. And of course, in the thirties, there was the big Harlan

strikes, the union,

and there was--you know, a lot of people finally voted up and said, “That’s

enough.” And they made some progress. I mean, there was unions and that kind of

thing. But then once that sort of fell out by the way and the coal seams started

to run out, then they’ve been left with the mess. And I don’t know--(sighs) you

know, at this point, my observation of a lot of those communities--especially

when I got into enforcement because a lot of the enforcement I did was against

these little communities. Little towns that had water problems or they have

sewer leaking into the drinking water or different sorts of things, and you’re

trying to enforce against them, but they didn’t have the resources. And they

don’t have money. You know, they--what little bit of money they had, they try to

put into things that are a little bit--like, the little local mayor of, you

know, Belfry, Kentucky is gonna put in a playground that kids can see because

the people will then vote for him, instead of fixing the leaking sewage

that’s blowing up out of the street. And Lexington was no better. That’s why

they were put under federal consent decree. Nobody wants to pay for sewage. You

know, the average household in, in Lexington was only paying five bucks a month

for sewage, and, and now, now it’s--what, forty? I mean, that’s more in line

with what it takes to keep these lines. My, my project in public health was “How

do we identify sewage leaks in stormwater?” And we used it with human genetic

markers. You know, it was like--one of the, the, one of the really bright--Dr.

Gail Bryan, over at--she’s just retired from UK, but she and her colleagues had

come up with a way for us to simply identify sewage leaks and find them and

track them down. But, you know, the crossover between those industries, coal,

lack of infrastructure and all of that into human health is huge. Lead poisoning

is a big deal in Kentucky. Paint. You know, maintenance,

not being able to keep up--old, old paint had tons of lead in it, and it goes in

the ground, kids play and they get sick. We have a really high percentage of

kids in Kentucky with lead in their blood. And they’re doing better now. This is

probably been ten or fifteen years ago. But those kinds of things impact

people’s health in, in a very visceral way. I mean, they, they get sick and they

lose IQ points. And, and it always kind of boils down to, “We don’t have the

resources to fix it. And even if we did, we’d probably put it on this thing over

here, because it’s either higher priority, in my mind, or it’s gonna get me

reelected.” So, I’m struggling with, you know, how do you solve a problem like

that when there’s no impetus? We do have, again, you know, candidates that see

that. So, like Booker, for example. You know, being from Louisville, the way he

is, I think he’s a very bright man.

He sees a lot of opportunity to try to improve people’s health and lives by

working with, you know, industries in Louisville and different places, but he

doesn’t get elected. He hasn’t been elected yet. You know, I, I don’t know. We

continue to elect people who want to keep things the way they are. I don’t know

if it’s, you know, fear of change or what it is, but we’re, we’re at a point

where we need a breakthrough and I’m not sure how I can help that. You know, I

think, “Well, I’ll go volunteer and do this.” Well, I’ve done these things my

whole life and I’ve never been the breakthrough. I’ve, I’ve had some good ideas

and I’ve seen some influence that I’ve had, but I, I don’t--we need--you know,

you think education, that used to be, “Well, we have to educate people.” But

I’ve found that even when they’re educated, even with the facts in front of

them--we’ve seen that at a national level--they’re not, they’re not responding.

And so, you know, do we--(scoffs) I’ve even thought, “Do we have to wait till my generation

dies off?” I mean, is that another way to do it and we just hang on until then?

You know, try to keep it. So, (scoffs) I don’t know yet. I’ve, I’ve, I’ve

struggled with that the last few years. You know, I, I don’t know how to fix it.

It’s got--it’s, it’s obvious to me; why is it not obvious to other people that

we are fouling our own nest? You know, and I am seeing, you know,

regulatory--even though at the big national level you have a lot of Looney Tunes

kind of taking the spotlight, regulations have slowly evolved at Kentucky state

level, and even at the federal level, to try to stem some of this. I mean,

Kentucky regulations slowly--you know, air is a good example. Air quality in, in

the United States is significantly better today than it was in the Seventies.

Much better. And that’s because of advancing regulations

, holding people accountable, enforcing, educating, and we’re better than we

were. Cars are slowly getting better, but it’s taken too long because of money.

The money is what drags it back. And, you know, what I’m trying to do as an

individual is, “What can I do as an individual to try to make it better? How can

I influence it?” I, I don’t have an answer yet. I, I don’t know that I ever

will, but I know we can’t all just abandon the ship. I mean, if everybody that

thinks that way leaves Kentucky, Kentucky will sink, (laughs) you know? And so,

we have to stay and try. And we’ve got pockets of people where we’re not the

weird ones. And I know a lot of, I know a lot of young people that really

impress me with their--you know, their optimism, their hope, and they’re smarter

than I was at that--they, they understand the greed factor. And, you know, environmental,

it’s almost like issues like gun control and things like that. I just do not--I

don’t have a good answer for you. I wish I did. You know, predicting the future,

I tend not to be a pessimist. I want to be an optimist. And I tend to believe

young people will make a difference. Your age people. People younger than you.

My granddaughter, I mean, she’s way smarter than me at ten. And she knows, you

know, and, and we don’t waste that. We don’t do that. You know, we value--well,

the other day a guy knocked on the door and he’s like--I go to the door and he

goes, “Oh, I’m here. I’m an insecticide guy, you know, and I spray all these

bugs and all this.” I said,--well, I said, “First off, we do a little bit of

spraying around the perimeter of our house to keep the bugs from coming in too

bad.” But I said, “I don’t want you spraying in my backyard because you’ll kill

all the spiders.” And he’s like, “Well, isn’t that what you want?” I’m like,

“No, because they eat the insects.” I don’t have mosquitoes. I mean, look where

I live, we don’t have any mosquitoes,

but I leave the bugs alone. Except if they come in and they’re crawling across

my pillow. I don’t like that. Every once in a while I’ll cave. But, but, you

know, you can’t just spray--there’s a little cafe up here called Luna’s, I don’t

know if you’ve heard of it.

KOMARA:Mm-hmm?

TAYLOR:And they put out a thing about two weeks ago, real sad, that a lot of

their butterflies had died because the adjoining property had sprayed

insecticide and it killed their butterfly--it killed their lot of them. I was

like, “What?” And, you know, because they have it, they, they’ve got the little

open air and the stuff floated over and killed their butterflies, and it made me

mad. And I’m like, “No, I don’t want your bug spray in my yard!” So, as an

individual, I’m trying, but I don’t know how--we’ve got to get people in power

that experienced what I did at that point, which is I can make the city of

Lexington comply with a federal decree that will make our water cleaner. And now

here I am, fourteen year--fourteen years later,

we have much better water quality in Lexington than we had fourteen years ago.

It is not perfect, but it is significantly better. Sewage--raw sewage does not

go into stormwater in Fayette County anymore, unless it’s a failure of a pipe or

a system. And they catch it. We test it, we find it, we know where it is, and we

stop it. So, an investment fourteen years ago--of course, granted we were

forced--but the people that worked in water in Lexington fourteen years ago knew

it was bad, but they didn’t have any money. And the federal government came and

enforced it, so money was raised, and it’s fixed. So, that--it works. It can

work if you get the right people in the spots to make it go. You know, there’s a

system that can work if people will let it. But there’s just a lot of issues

that--you have to have the right people in the right spot. Right now there’s a

lot of infrastructure money being--you know, with Biden as president,

you know, he, he’s trying to get a lot of infrastructure money released, and

that will make a big difference for communities. Like, we were talking--some of

the little communities in eastern Kentucky, one of their issues is just getting

them to work together and regionally. That’s another issue for Kentucky; I think

we have a hundred and twenty counties, which is an enormous amount. I think they

set it up that way so people could ride a horse and vote in one day. I mean, and

it’s still that way, but we ran into little towns that would--all three of them

would have drinking water and sewer outages. And they all had their own little

individual plants and they couldn’t get enough trained operators to run them,

and they’re all failing and they’re within fifteen miles of each other. So, why

don’t we put a regional facility and work all three, or if this one’s at the

highest elevation, we work this system here? And we would try to get them to

work together, and they all are so used to being independent and having their

own money

coming in, they don’t want to work together. But it needs to be forced

regionally, in my opinion. And this is kind of off the track, but I used to live

across in Dogwood, over that way, and my lot backed up to this development here

in Jessamine County. And one, one reason I got so active in water quality was,

they were gonna put a package treatment plant right behind my house for a little

development up there with a fast food and a dry cleaner and all this. And all

these little package treatment plants, they’re almost left to run themselves.

They don’t--they get monitored once every so often. But those are a lot of where

you get water quality violations, is those little plants. So, they wanted to put

one. So, anyway, our neighborhood organized and we called ourselves

Neighborhoods Organized for South Elkhorn Creek or something. Anyway, we were

all donating money and we went to court and we blocked it, and we forced Fayette

County to allow Jessemine to tie into the sewer plant.

Because, whether you know this or not, Fayette has two sewer plants. One of them

is in Jessamine. One--the one that--we’ve got the one, you know, downtown, town

branch, but the Jessamine plant is just across the Fayette border on Jessamine

property. And it was not far from where they wanted to put this package plan.

So, we had to go to court and we got an environmental judge to order Fayette to

let them tie on with--you know, they had to pay for the service and all that.

The reason they wouldn’t let them tie on is, ten years before this, the two

county judge executives got in a fight and they would never--it’s bull. But they

allowed them to tie in. And of course, that’s development out that way, but it’s

all clean. The water is now going and it’s being treated and it’s handled

properly. And otherwise we were gonna get more stuff spewing into these creeks

over here, and it was gonna smell and be polluted water. But, you know, you get

a neighborhood organized and we go, “Well, no. You’re not doing that. It’s okay

if you want to develop. We understand that.

But don’t dump your garbage in this creek behind our house,” which is what they

were gonna do. But we stopped them. And so, I guess I learned early on that if

you get enough people organized around something, and get some funding and a

resource, you can solve the problem. You know, if you’re stubborn. And, and it

works. But we just don’t have enough of that going on. I don’t know why. People

are busy. You know, people have families. People are, like, trying to work. I

know everybody’s got a full life, but you have to stop sometimes. Now that I’m

retired (inhales) and with my mom just passing, because the last two years have

consumed me taking care of her, I’m starting to think, “Well, where do I want to

put my energy now?” You know? I’m sixty-six. If I’m lucky, I’ve got some time.

You know, what do I want to do? And I don’t, I don’t know. That’s why you’ve

asked me a question and I don’t have an answer for it because I’m thinking about

it right now. “Where can I put my energy to make a difference?” You know?

Because you can make a difference if you get it

lined up. You got to have people and resources and education and, you know, and

it goes. But somebody’s got to organize it and it’s hard. It’s hard. You know,

when we stopped that, I, I went to every single house--door to door, every

single house, and explained what was going on and what was gonna happen, and

asked if they’d be willing to donate to put together a legal defense. And door

to door, people would invite me in. I’d have to drink tea and eat a cupcake.

And, you know, and I’d talk. But we raised a lot of money and we blocked it. You

know, everybody put in a little bit, but--. So, that gave me--you know, “This

is, this can work if you get it lined up right. So, don’t give up.”

KOMARA:I’m not gonna give up.

TAYLOR:Oh, no, I don’t think you will.

KOMARA:It sounds like you’re never gonna give up.

TAYLOR:Oh, no. Not until the end. Yeah.

KOMARA:And I’m, I’m interested on--you know, one thing that you’ve mentioned is

that--you’ve pretty much discussed every environmental issue I can think of in Kentucky.

You’ve worked on them all, right? And you’ve mentioned that, you know, people

don’t always see the connections between these, right?

TAYLOR:Mm-hmm.

KOMARA:And I think we have a problem with, like, the issue of scale in

Kentucky. Like, specifically not seeing this connected to global climate change.

TAYLOR:Yeah. (laughs)

KOMARA:I would love for you to talk about that a bit. Like, work that you’ve

done on climate change and just how you see, you know, Kentucky’s issues

connected to this.

TAYLOR:Well, you know, I think probably even before Kentucky saw itself

connected to this, other states started connecting us because of the acid rain

problem. And it kind of shocked me the first time I went to a--you know, they

had a, they had an eastern regional meeting with states all lined up from New

England all the way down--how they saw Kentucky and, and that we were this

pollutant. You know, we were causing them to have acid rain and it was kind of

our fault. And I also went to--Jim Newberry sent me to this wonderful

conference. It was in New Mexico in

Albuquerque, and it was on environmental climate issues. And of course, you

know, I get off the plane and they had a van to take--it was a big meeting.

There were maybe three or four hundred people at this meeting. And I climb in

the van and everybody else in the van is from Washington and Oregon and, you

know, all these cool states. And they’re like, “Where are you from?” I said,

“Kentucky.” And they all looked at me like, “Ew!” You know, and I said, “I swear

guys, I, I’m trying to fix it.” You know, and they all started laughing. But,

you know, you were just like dirt. I mean, they saw us as just clueless and, and

constantly--but then, you know, the other side of me thought, “But I bet a whole

lot of these people don’t realize that they turn their hair dryer on in the

morning and their stove and a lot of their power’s coming from coal. And, and

yes, we’re dirty, and--but you’re a user. So--you know, so we all got to talk

about this.” And so, I made some really good contacts nationally in different

places, and tried

to change, you know, where I could, the perception of us as being just clueless,

dirty people. You know, we, we, we have an issue clearly, but, you know, that

made me think pretty hard about the legacy that we’re leaving. And I

think--there’s a lot of people, especially in government, that understand our

connection. But water’s a big one. Air is a big one. You know, we, we all

breathe the same air. We share a lot of the same waterways. And, and so I think

that’s why you still see progress on regulations and all that. The public

struggles, I think, to understand. We tried a lot--when I had the opportunity to

do so, we did a whole lot of watershed education to try to help kids understand.

And they’d do sand tables, like, if you do something up here, how does that

impact down here? And it does, you know. You pour something in here--. But we

still have a lot of people

that don’t connect their daily behavior with how they, as an individual,

contribute. And I haven’t seen as much push on education for adults as I did

back when I had the opportunity. We had, you know, community meetings, we’d go

out and talk about it. And I just--I haven’t seen a lot of that lately. I do

think it matters. I think--you know, I, I guess--well, when I was in there, we

put a lot of money into the campaigns, like, you know, “No dumping to streams”.

We got together with schools, we went out and painted ducks on things. We did,

you know, a lot of, like, just right at ground level, so people understand, “You

can’t pour that down that drain. That--do you understand that goes--?” And I

think we’ve made progress in some of those things. I think educating

people--even though it doesn’t always, and we’ve got clear examples of that

nationally. “Here’s the facts,” and they’re like, “I don’t want to see the

facts.” But especially with younger people and, and even--you know,

you get people out--take them out in a watershed and you show them how things

connect, and you show them, you know, where the aluminum goes, and you show them

how that can be recycled. And with business, I think the big trick is you gotta

show them it, it saves you money. And it does. You know, if you use lighter

weight materials, it costs less to truck them from place to place. If you use

recyclable materials, the content--you can probably save yourself a few cents a

jar or a box or a whatever. Or, you know, reducing the density of the fiber

board, or--there’s all kinds of ways that you can--especially businesses really

responds to money. So, if you can show them that, “Not only are you a good

corporate citizen, you’re gonna save money by doing it the right way,” and then

you back it up with enforcement, which is, “If you don’t do it the right way,

then we’re gonna charge you a lot of money and maybe even somebody goes to jail

in a really bad situation--” (phone rings) Oh, sorry.

You know, that would make a difference. But I don’t see a real organized effort

right now in Kentucky, and maybe I’m a bit removed to help educate people. We,

we used to run ads all the time. Of course, nobody watches regular TV much

anymore, so maybe that’s part of it. Maybe our traditional ways of reaching

people have changed and we need a better way. You know, obviously, you know,

Facebook and Instagram and TikTok and everything, there’s a lot of opportunity

to get to people, but I don’t see it anymore like I used to. Like, I don’t

really even know what they’re doing in school because they’re all teaching to

content, you know? And I don’t know--there’s not that much--my, my

granddaughter’s an example. She goes to Maxwell Spanish Immersion. She speaks

three languages and she’s ten. But she--they’ve done some environmental work.

She was telling me about this year. She just finished fourth grade and they had

some projects,

and I was real enthused about it. She’s like, “Let me tell you,” because she

knows I’ll like. So, she’s telling me all about her projects and air quality and

this and that and the other. And I’m like, “Well, I’m really glad you all did

that.” She said, “Well, we didn’t do it before, but this year we did it.” And

I’m like, “Well, good.” You know, but to me, why is that not part of every year?

Why, why--you know, little kids--my daughter that got on me about buying a

hybrid the other day, in second grade she had a teacher at elementary school

that was--had them collect aluminum cans. And it’s the first time I’d ever seen

that done in a school. She’s forty-two now. So, it’s--seven years old, they were

collecting cans, and they would take the cans and then they would do things with

them that were fun. Like, they went to a UK women’s basketball game and bought

pizza for the whole class. You know, but then they would also take half the

money and do something good for the world, for the environment. So, they did

bird feeders and a butterfly garden, and they did other--you know, and she’s

held onto that lesson.

She’s forty-two and she’s still harassing me about buying a hybrid. You know,

“Don’t you dare buy a regular gas car, mom.” And I’m like, “I know. I know.”

But, I mean, that’s been part of her life, and now my granddaughter’s like that.

I mean, so, I think somehow we’ve got to educate people young enough that they

understand that you can’t just waste things and you can’t just throw them down,

and you should turn your lights off. And you--you know, you as an individual

make a difference, and then you as an individual in the working world can make a

difference in your company. You know, where you work. Lots of people work for a

company or even the--I worked for--I did--I don’t even remember if I said. I was

actually the water quality person for UK for a little while. About--it was, it

was less than a year, but then I went on to a different job. But you could make

a difference where you work. I was even hired into an environmental job and I

saw immediately there were things that were problems. I’m like, “Hey, we need to

work on this.”

And I had a boss that didn’t really want to do that, so I left. But, you, you

know, you can make a difference wherever you are. If you’re a teacher, you know,

if you’re a worker in a factory, if--you know. But I don’t see a lot of

connectedness or reward for that right now. I don’t know why. Is it not cool

anymore or (inhales) what? You know, I don’t know. (sighs) I even--you know, I

even worried a little bit about the fireworks. It’s huge. People love it.

Animals hate it. I, I have guilt feelings about it because it’s huge. I mean,

people come and they have the best time and they bring their children and

everybody. It’s community and we have a picnic and--you know, and we recycle

everything. But I think, “Well, but it’s right there and they want to come see

it.” So, I let them come see it, but while they’re here, we recycle and we have

those--I mean, we try to do all kinds of other things that make it at least--I guess

makes my guilt better, maybe, I guess, is what I want to say. But, you know,

it’s complicated, and each of us has to do what we can do, but we have to be

made aware and I don’t know how.

KOMARA:Yeah.

TAYLOR:I don’t know.

KOMARA:Well, I mean, I think you’re one of those people out there doing the

good work that makes people aware.

TAYLOR:Tried. Not enough now. I haven’t done enough now, but, you know, I’m

trying. I’m trying to get back into it and figure out, “Where can I help? What

can I do?” And I don’t know what, because it’s not that obvious.

KOMARA:Yeah.

TAYLOR:Bluegrass Greensource said I could come over there anytime I wanted to

work over there, so I, I may see what they have for volunteers. And--but there’s

a lot of--there’s Kentucky Educational, there’s a group in state government.

There’s, there’s a lot of groups--

KOMARA:Mm-hmm.

TAYLOR:--but they’re not all well-funded. They’re not all well-resourced.

There’s not a real alliance, you know? I don’t know.

KOMARA:Yeah.

Have you--I, I think, I think that when you worked for Lexington under Mayor

Jimmy Newberry, that you did some climate-specific work. I know then in 2011,

they produced that Kentucky Climate Action Plan.

TAYLOR:Mm-hmm.

KOMARA:Can you tell me, like, a little bit about any, like, climate specific

work you’ve done in Kentucky?

TAYLOR:Well, probably--I guess for the--in Lexington, one of the big things we

tried to do was start converting our, our garbage trucks. Garbage trucks cost

about three hundred and fifty thousand dollars a, a piece. And when I came into

that role, we had over a hundred and twenty-five garbage trucks, and most of

them were very old and they spewed out a lot of diesel. And public health, I’d

done some research in diesel and, you know, impacts on people’s breathing, and I

didn’t like it.

So, we had a lot of money stockpiled. People pay, you know, their, their taxes

and that includes your garbage. And we have a lot of money, or we did, but we’d

been sitting on it and it had been building. So, when I got in there, we had a

lot of money available, and all these old gas-spewy garbage trucks. And then the

way people picked up garbage routes was they just put it on, like, a map, a

piece of paper, and they had a route. And everybody went out on their route.

(inhales) It’s, it’s an unusual culture, garbage is. I loved it. It’s a lot of

fun. It’s, it’s a very African American-dominated culture as well. It’s not a

very well-paid job. You get a lot of people that, you know, they don’t have

other kind of work that they can do, so they do this. But there’s a lot of

energy and, and enthusiasm. And so, we put in place--while I was there, we

funded--I had to justify to the council--efficiency improvements for

garbage trucks, routes, and machinery. So, the--probably that was one of the

biggest capital projects I did for the city. We, we got rid of--we took--the

routes was a big deal. It was--you know, eliminating left turns, for example. Do

you know how much gas that saves? Because those trucks only get two, three miles

to the gallon, and you’re burning up diesel, diesel, diesel. So, you know, when

you’re turning left, you have to wait. And you put your signal and you wait, you

wait, you wait, you wait, and you turn left. Well, if you can make a route so

that it turns right all the time, and it’s in--you know, it follows a logical

flow, it’s logistics. So, it was a logistics improvement project. It was huge.

We bought software, we got company in, and we worked on it. It took--gosh! I’d

say a couple of--two and a half years maybe before we were ready to implement.

While we were working on those routes--and all the garbage collectors got

involved because they would give you their opinion. You know, it was kind of

cool. And then we had to put computers

in these trucks. So, we got rid of a lot of those old diesel trucks and we

bought thirty--twenty-seven, twenty-seven brand new high-efficiency engine

trucks that could be operated with one person, instead of those guys hanging off

the back and the oil leaking down the road. And we replaced our oldest ones and

then we serviced the others and converted some of them. And we got--from a

hundred and twenty-five trucks going out every day, we got it down, before I

left, to, like, eighty. So, all those trucks got eliminated, all that fuel, all

that diesel, and we could do the same a--amount of pickups with eighty trucks

that we had done with a hundred and twenty-five. And then, while that happened,

we also earmarked trucks for recycle. So, we had a new recycle path, and we

bought the recycling equipment twelve, thirteen years ago, maybe fourteen.

Because before, it was all hand done. It was all

these people that we would power in, temporary people. A lot of them were

immigrants, and they were exposed to all kinds of issues. It was belts, and they

would pick things out. I mean, it was awful. There’d be, like, ants. Like thirty

people out there, forty people picking. So, we bought this piece of equipment.

It was a four-million-dollar machine, but it was the start of the Lexington

recycling system that we have today. Now, they had problems with it last year

because they didn’t maintain it. I can tell you exactly what they did. But,

anyway. But when it started up, it increased our recycle percentage

significantly. And then we also, uhm, did a garbage study. We--Bluegrass

Greensource helped us with that. But we, we took garbage trucks and completely

unloaded them and put them in piles, and figured out that, what was going in the

garbage about--I forgot the percentages. I don’t want to give you something

incorrect. But a large percentage of what went in the truck

, somewhere around seventy percent, was actually recyclable. So, we started

gathering data, and all that to me was trying to improve, you know, all of the

pollution, all of the land pollution, water pollution, and air pollution that we

were generating. We also did a climate plan for, for Lexington, and we, and we

hired a person to be our energy manager. So, for example, the sewer systems

here--we have huge pumps that are enormous draws for electrical energy. And of

course, in order to generate that energy, most of it came from a coal plant. So,

the less energy we had to draw, the better. And we hired an energy manager

who--let’s see. I’ve seen him since--he worked for the city for a long time. Oh,

he’s at state government now, in the air quality division, actually. But anyway,

they--he worked really hard to try to improve the energy efficiency

of the pumping systems, that we had to reduce the amount of energy they had to

draw and therefore less, less waste of electricity. Which to me is a connection

to climate change. We didn’t have a lot of success with--traffic is one of the

big things here. We didn’t have a lot of success there, but we did initiate some

contacts with state and federal government about, like I said, the green

corridor. We were trying to promote electric vehicles. We met with the bus

companies here and tried to see if we could get some of those to switch over.

And they had--they did. They, they started their program back then. Buses are

not very efficient in Lexington, as you’ve probably noticed--

KOMARA:--Mm-hmm--

TAYLOR:--but we made an attempt on that one. We did a lot of work to try

to--with trees, was another one. We, we made--we did rain gardens downtown, but

we also tried to encourage planting of trees and we started a program for

neighborhoods. And in fact, we have a wetlands back here.

I didn’t do it, but the neighborhood applied for one of the grants. I didn’t

control any of it. I mean, I stayed away. But--and they were approved for a

grant to plant trees. A lot of these trees over here, see, they--you know, it’s

just runoff from the road. It needs to be better. We have a lady that

sponsored--there’s a bunch of baby trees up here, but they keep planting trees.

But we started programs to help neighborhoods plant trees, and so they could

apply for grants, and that would be to offset the carbon footprint. We did a

tree canopy study, you know, to try to show that if we would leave trees alone,

it wouldn’t be so hot. So, a lot of it was small things. The biggest stuff I

probably worked on were around the, the fleet change. At the state level, at a

policy level, mostly it was around trying to get regulations in place to make

sure that companies that generated pollution were controlled.

So, you know, I could have done more, I think. I wish I could’ve done more. But,

you know, it was a start. And then we did try to engage in a lot of regional

conversations with our neighbors to assure them that we were doing--trying to

improve our acid rain situation. And slowly coal dependency in Kentucky’s

dropping. So, that’s what I can think of off the top of my head.

KOMARA:Yeah, yeah. Like, you have truly done an impressive depth and breadth of

work surrounding, like I said, pretty much every environmental issue in Kentucky.

TAYLOR:Well, dabbled in it. Yeah.

KOMARA:Dabbled. I, I think you’ve done more than dabbled. It seems pretty

great. What are--you know, what are some of the biggest lessons that you’ve

learned from doing environmental work in all of your roles? Your many various

roles? Big lessons? Big takeaways?

TAYLOR:I guess for me, it’s

really important to try to connect to people at a personal level, (clears

throat) so that they see that they make a difference. I think that’s a basic

building block for our whole society; is if they see they have some

accountability and that they can positively make a difference, then I think they

will. I still believe that. I know there’s a lot of evidence in society today

that says that’s not the case, but I’ve seen a lot of success in connecting

people with something they feel that they can control and do. And, you know,

I--I’ve got all my wildflowers out there for butterflies. You know, I’ve seen a

lot of people start to make--think about what they’re doing: they’re planning,

they’re recycling. I think that it cannot be over-emphasized how important it is

to try, especially with business world, to make a financial connection for them.

I think you have to make them understand that failure to participate has

consequences that will

damage their business. Either, you know, maybe they’re not so afraid anymore of

environmental--a poor environmental reputation, but there really is a lot of

value in doing things to reduce waste. And if you as a business can reduce

waste, you’re gonna save money for your business. So, I think you have

to--sometimes it’s personal, like, “If I do this, I can bring more butterflies

in.” Or, “If I do this, I can save money in my business.” But somehow you have

to get people to connect to it in a way that they relate to. I think you also

have to respect that probably people do things the way they do them because

that’s--they’ve never thought of a different way. So, you have to be willing to

listen to them first and then come back with--you, you can’t beat them over the

head and get where you want to get a lot of times. Sometimes you have to, but

most of the time it’s--you have to understand where they’re coming from. And

then once you do that, maybe you can

suggest, “Hey, had you thought about maybe this or that?” Or offer this sort of

resource. And a lot of times they’ll go, “Well, hmm, no. I hadn’t really thought

about doing it that way.” Or--but I think it, it comes down to the individual in

a lot of cases, for me. And getting--and I, I don’t think that’s any big aha. I

think it’s a lot of work to get people to pay attention to this. And, you know,

I, I think there--somewhere I read, I guess back in my safety days, you know,

you can tell people, “Don’t stick your hand in there,” but there’s usually a way

to get them to think about that. “You know, if you stick your hand in there and

it gets cut off, your family does--you know, your family’s gonna suffer because

then you’re losing income.” Or, or there’s, there’s different ways to get people

to listen to you, and sometimes you have to scare them and sometimes you have to

engage them. But you have to understand that person and their communication

system so that you can try

to pull the thread that gets them to draw--that draws them in, you know? And,

and it takes a lot of one-to-one time and a lot of work to get people to engage.

And I think the last several years, as a country and maybe--and as me

personally, I haven’t engaged with people the way I, I, I know I need to in

order to get them to make a change to the way that I think they might benefit

from. And, and I think I’ve gotten tired. I think a lot of it it’s been between

COVID and the political environment in this country. I mean Barack Obama, to me,

was just--it was like the culmination of all these wonderful things that I

always thought we would be. And then you watched it plummet, you know, with a

fool in charge. And I got so disgusted by some of the things--people that I’ve

known my whole life that are not--I never thought of them as bad people--you know

, were okay with that. So, my whole view--I almost backed away for the last few

years. And I don’t--I think I, I’m reflective of other people. I have a lot of

friends that, that are liberal or they’re environmentalists and they got really

tired and backed away. But now it’s kind of like, “Okay, time to get our head

out from under the rock. How can I reengage? How can I get people to

participate?” And I think a lot of it is, you’ve got to be able to get them to

see their connection in this big scheme of things. How they’re--they belong.

They, they have a role and, and they can impact change, and don’t give up. And,

I--you know, I’ve had to get my--I guess my energy back. I, I’ve been in

hibernation for a few years from a personal level for--because of my mom’s

stuff, but also politically and COVID wise, I’ve just withdrawn a bit. And now I

see it’s time to quit whining

and get back to work. I mean, I’m at that point. I mean, if you’d have called me

two years ago, I’m not sure I would’ve wanted to talk, because I was so

depressed about, “It’s not fixed. I did all this stuff and it’s--.” But now I’m

like, “Well, you know, if Iowa can get most of their energy from wind power--,”

and I don’t think of Iowa as a particularly progressive state. You know, just

like they probably don’t think we are. But I’m driving across going, “I’ll

be--look at this!” There’s all these--and I’m looking it up and I got

in--interested. And in Colorado, they’ve got the biggest wind farm in the

country and I’m like, “Well, people are doing things out here. I shouldn’t give

up.” And, you know, Kentucky, just because we’re a bit hardheaded, I mean, we

have--I think I read, and I think it’s still true, that we have more native

Kentuckians in Kentucky than any other state has native, and so, we have very

deep roots. Very deep roots. And my family’s lived here since the seventeen--all

my ancestors came here in 1700s for work. They were probably really poor. They

lived in Scotland and England and Wales

, and they all came over here and got work. And so, they’ve been here ever since

doing it the same way, and it’s time, it’s time to fix that. I think we, we can

do good work, but it is time to evolve how we do that. And instead of being

behind the pack, we should be ahead of the pack. We have, we have water

resources here that are pretty incredible. I mean, really, hydro power. I mean,

we have all kinds of things [inaudible 01:18:23]. Dams have their own set of

issues. They have all kinds of environmental impacts too but, you know, we, we

could do better. And, you know, I wish I had a magic answer for you. I don’t.

But I think people have to feel--once again, they have to personally feel that

they can have an influence and that they’re touched by that somehow. Sometimes

you can get them with kids, their grandkids, their--you know. But some people

you have to hit them over the head with it too, so. But I haven’t found a way to

do that, that I had before when I was in public service. There, you could impact

large groups of people in

settings and meetings and engage them, and there’s a lot of energy that builds

that way. And after COVID, I think we’ve lost some of that momentum, and maybe

it’s time we start doing more things. We did an environmental concert at

Lafayette High School. I mean, we--I did all kinds of weird little things,

especially because of my kids, because all six of them are all different.

There’s musicians and actors. One of my daughters is a lecturer. She--for

biology. She’s, she’s a PhD molecular biologist, so she works at UK. The other

one works at UK children [[Kentucky Children’s Hospital]]. She’s a doctor in

physical therapy. So, I have all these different venues where I can engage. And

as they’ve grown up, I’ve tried to, you know, all the way through. And (sighs)

yeah, maybe it’s time I got my head out of sand and try it again, but I don’t

know. I know I’ve probably talked you to death, so I didn’t mean to do that, but--

KOMARA:--That, that’s what this is for-- (laughs)

TAYLOR:I don’t have good answers. I don’t have good answers, but I have a lot

of thought about it. And, you know, I think you have to be careful of the money.

You have to think about resources. You have to connect people as individuals and

how they play a role in this, and empower them. You know, you have to empower

people. It’s--you have to give them what they need to do, and then give them a

little push and then they succeed. I always felt--I’ve always gotten the

feedback. The biggest department I ever managed was the state and it was over

eight hundred people. And I don’t think I’ve ever left a job where people didn’t

cry, and it, it’s because I care a lot about people. I care about them. I care

about how they feel about their work, and I want them to succeed. And so, I

think you use the same kind of strategy when you want them to do things that are

good for all of us. How do I tie them in and make them feel important? Because

every single person is important. Every single person makes a difference. But

you’ve got to get them to believe that, and it takes engagement. And, and that takes

time and effort. And with COVID I think we all backed out of everything for a

while, and now we’re having to figure out what to do again. And, and I think, I

think we will. I, I have hope. I’m an optimist. I always have been. But boy, I

get frustrated sometimes, you know?

KOMARA:Yeah. Yeah, that’s actually something that I’m, I’m hearing from people

that I’ve interviewed from this, for this project. Particularly the

environmental activists who do, like, collective organizing work.

TAYLOR:There’s some great people in Kentucky. I mean, there’s a lot of people

that--I, I’ve worked with a lot of very active people in Kentucky, all the way

from eastern to western, and they’re inspiring. They stay engaged. And, and I, I

chickened out and backed out a little bit here and there and--you know, but they

continue to like, “Why don’t you come over here? We’re gonna have a watershed

meeting.” I’m like, “I’m not ready. I’m not ready. I’m not--” But I’m, I’m about

ready now, so, you know. I’m trying to get re-energized again, so.

KOMARA:Yeah. Well, I’ve asked you a lot of questions but,

you know, I’m always curious what question I haven’t asked people that they

think I should know. So, is there anything that I haven’t asked you that

you--I--you think I, I should know or we should know about, you know, your

environmental work in Kentucky or just environmentalism in Kentucky? Anything.

Anything you think I should know that I haven’t asked?

TAYLOR:Gosh! I’ve talked so much, (Komara laughs) I don’t know that there’s

anything else to offer. You know, I’ve just--I’ve met more people in my life

that I think want to do the right thing than those that don’t, and that kind of

continues to fuel me. So, I think Kentuckians are a hardy bunch. They’re

stubborn. They’re feisty. They have their feet on the ground. They’re hard

workers. And I, I’d like to see them put that energy kind of back into more

positive things than we’ve been seeing, you know, lately. And anyway, I, I have

hope that--I’m, I’m proud of being a Kentuckian, you know? And--but then I’m,

I’m, I’m mad (laughs) because it’s, it’s time we kind of got our head out of the

sand and did something about this. And coal in particular is the lightning rod.

And the thing about coal is it’ll die out anyway. I mean, we’ve all known for a

long time, that’s a, that’s non-renewable resource. It’s going to be gone. And

anybody that keeps thinking that that’s where you need to put your energy is a

fool. And, you know, all that, “Well, by god! The coal miners.” What do we have

left? A few thousand coal miners? And, and I respect the work. My grandfathers

were coal miners. I get it. But it’s time to move on. We need to be investing in

people. New skills, new training, new environment. You know, resources for

people, infrastructure. You know, quit--united, we stand, divided, we fall, and

we’ve operated as a divided state for a long time, in my opinion, and it’s time

to fix some of that. But I’m not

in the position to necessarily dictate any of it, but I’m hoping some of our

leaders will be. And I can influence at a local level, so I’ll do my best, you know?

KOMARA:Yeah, yeah. Well, this has been a wonderful interview.

TAYLOR:I’m sorry if it was boring and convoluted, but it’s--there’s so many

thoughts, so many years.

KOMARA:No, this is great. You’re exactly the kind of person I love to interview

because you lay some facts on the table and also do analysis about, like, how

you feel about it and why, why you think it’s important. This was, this was

really, really wonderful. I really thank you for taking the time to do this.

TAYLOR:Well, it was you that took the effort and, you know, I don’t know that I

have anything particularly bright to say about it, but I care and hopefully, you

know, you’ve found a lot of other people that care as well. And we’re all

different walks of life and ages and backgrounds and educations. But it’s--you

know, there’s enough of us out here. We ought to be able to make a difference,

so I’m gonna keep trying as long as I can.

KOMARA:Awesome.

Well, thank you so much.

TAYLOR:Well, you too. It’s nice of you to come and visit.

KOMARA:Now, let’s see. I hope--this is the moment of fear that I always have.

[End of recording]