CURRIS:--pushing that off. Good morning.

THOMAS:Good morning.

CURRIS:My name is Jo Hern Curris, and I am here at the East Kentucky Social

Club reunion, because I grew up in Benham, Kentucky--

THOMAS:--okay.

CURRIS:--and I am very interested in establishing our history. If we don't tell

our history now, we're not going to have saved it.

THOMAS:Right.

CURRIS:And so you're being recorded for purposes of your stories being there

for posterity. We're establishing the Hern Benham Financial Center at the City

Hall in Benham, and that's where a lot of this information will be used. Also, I

wanted to inform you that the UK Louie B. Nunn Oral History Center at the

University of Kentucky has loaned us the recording

equipment today, and--(cell phone ringing)

THOMAS:Somebody's suitcase going off over there or something. (laughs)

CURRIS:And we are having a slight problem, so we are going--(cell phone

ringing) With the background noise, so we'll just kind of work over this, if we

can. All right, but back to--(laughs)--the Louie B. Nunn History Center, Oral

Center, and they have loaned the recording equipment used today, and that's

where this interview will be stored. The center has asked, and you have signed,

a document agreeing that it can be considered as a gift to the center, open for

unrestricted use, including being quoted from, published, broadcasted through

all media, and any use that you might wish to make of this. First of all, let me

ask your name.

THOMAS:Vergrinia Thomas.

CURRIS:Would you spell that for us?

THOMAS:V-E-R-G-R-I-N-I-A

T-H-O-M-A-S.

CURRIS:And I believe you're known by a nickname.

THOMAS:Drena, D-R-E-N-A.

CURRIS:That's wonderful. (both laugh) Drena, my--to my knowledge, no efforts

have been made to record our financial and community lives of our coal miners

from the Benham/Lynch area, and how we supported ourselves, how our families

were so strong, and survived in good and bad times. And many of the questions I

will ask you, I may know the answer to, but I don't know them for this

recording. Now, Drena, first, may I say how thrilled I am that you have agreed

to be interviewed today. I have a personal interest in making certain that the

women of the Tri-City area, that

their stories are told, because frequently that's not what happens.

THOMAS:Right.

CURRIS:And we have been major cogs in the wheel. And it is my understanding

that you were a coal miner.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Well, Drena, we're going to jump into that, but first I wanted to ask

you: what were the names of your parents?

THOMAS:Ann Ellen Smith. Ann Smith Ellen, I'm sorry. She got married years after

I was born, and my father passed away, so I really didn't get the chance to know him.

CURRIS:Oh, that's sad.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, what about your stepfather?

THOMAS:His name was Ben Ellen, Jr.

CURRIS:Now, did your mother and Ben live in--

THOMAS:--Lynch, Kentucky.

CURRIS:Did he work in the mines?

THOMAS:No.

CURRIS:When I

look back, I'm a child of the forties and fifties in Benham, and how many of

your classmates would you say worked in the mines at either Benham or Lynch?

THOMAS:None.

CURRIS:Where did you go to school?

THOMAS:Lynch High School, and I think they called it East West School. It was,

like, for the elementary, and then they integrated.

CURRIS:Yes.

THOMAS:Then I went to Lynch High School.

CURRIS:My brother and sister did the same thing, and you may have--what year

did you go to Lynch?

THOMAS:I graduated in '74.

CURRIS:Okay, you're younger than they are. It was Bruce and Alice Hern, but

they would've been older than you--

THOMAS:--older, um-hm.

CURRIS:--so would not know. But how in the world did you become a female coal miner?

THOMAS:

I've been asked that many times. I did an interview with CNN.

CURRIS:Oh, tell me about it!

THOMAS:And I don't know if y'all--I'm quite sure y'all know Bill Turner.

CURRIS:Oh, yes.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Yes.

THOMAS:And he called and asked me to do a luncheon for him, and so I did, and

then I got to interview at the club, the Social Club, with CNN. And so I

basically was telling them about my story of being a coal miner.

CURRIS:Well, tell us now.

THOMAS:Okay. I started in 1977 as a coal miner. I graduated from '74. I went to

college, and I ended up getting pregnant, so I dropped out, and so they wasn't

hiring women coalminers at the time.

And then, you know, they had to start hiring women coalminers, so my mom, Ann

Ellen, she was the first woman that got called, and she didn't go. She got

scared and didn't go. So as they was saying we needed women coalminers, I

thought, hm. And I wasn't working at the time. I thought, well, just little odd

jobs or something. I thought, hm, that sounds like pretty good money back then,

you know, but I'm going in the coal mines, and I'm going to work just a little

bit, get enough money to go to Chicago, because that's where my people was at,

right? And so got the interview, and, you know, they asked all questions or

whatever, and they hired me on when it's '77, and I went to U.S. Steel at the

time, and I worked there

till they sold out to Arch of Kentucky. [Editor’s note: U.S. Steel sold the coal

mine in Lynch, KY to Arch Minerals in 1984. See New York Times, 9/29/1984]

CURRIS:Oh, U.S. Steel sold to Arch--

THOMAS:--yes.

CURRIS:--as well as Benham selling to--

THOMAS:I don't know if Benham sold it to Arch. I don't think--I haven't heard that.

CURRIS:There was some connection. There may have been someone in between from

the Benham. Okay, so then--so U.S. Steel was sold to Arch.

THOMAS:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:Yeah, and then, you know, I worked from Arch on till I got laid off, but--

CURRIS:--what year was that?

THOMAS:Laid off?

CURRIS:Um-hm.

THOMAS:In '83, I think, somewhere in there. I'm not for sure.

CURRIS:How old were you when you first went into the mines?

THOMAS:About, I'm going to say, probably twenty, nineteen, twenty. Yeah.

CURRIS:Nineteen, twenty.

THOMAS:Nineteen, nineteen to twenty, somewhere in there, 'cause I had my son in '77.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:

I had him in June, and I went working--he was like six months old when I ended

up going to work for U.S. Steel.

CURRIS:Now, what was your first job?

THOMAS:Ever?

CURRIS:In the mines.

THOMAS:In the mines?

CURRIS:In the mines.

THOMAS:General inside labor, they called it.

CURRIS:What did that mean?

THOMAS:That means--consisting of shoveling belts, shoveling coal, hanging

curtains, just odd jobs like that.

CURRIS:Tell us what hanging curtains means.

THOMAS:Hanging curtains is--that's to keep ventilation. When the miner goes to

get coal, like, they cut out, like, maybe forty feet or whatever, continues the

miner, and then once that get done, they back out. And then, when they back out,

the drill goes in and drill the top so it won't fall. So my job was to go in and ventilate

that section, so when they go back in there, that curtain would block that dust,

and go behind the curtain. [Editor’s note: Hanging curtains is a reference to

hanging brattice curtains for ventilation, as Thomas describes here.]

CURRIS:Now, when we're talking about a continuous miner, that is a piece of

equipment that basically is just--

THOMAS:--going. It's got bits, and it--they had--at the time, before they

upgraded, the miner had to sit in the deck of the miner, and operate little

gadgets, and--

CURRIS:So they were actually sitting on this--

THOMAS:--they were sit--

CURRIS:--on this continuous miner.

THOMAS:Yes. Yes, until--

CURRIS:--okay.

THOMAS:Yeah. Yeah. They was sitting on it--they would have to sit on the miner,

and started up, and the miner would go forward. They would, like, push forward

or push back, whatever which way they need to get--to get the coal out.

CURRIS:What was your reaction the first time you entered the mine?

THOMAS:Well,

my mom, you know, when she told me that she was--got called to go in the mines,

she didn't want to go because she heard of rates--(laughs)--and snakes gonna be

in there, and she got copped out, you know? So she really didn't say, "Don't

go," you know what I'm saying? And I talked to a guy that had worked in the

mines at the time, and he gave me a preference, or, like, "You could try it. You

know, if you don't like it, you can always quit," or whatever. But as I got in

there, you know, I seen where it was awesome. So I stayed.

CURRIS:Why did you think it was awesome?

THOMAS:Because it's just amazing how you get trolleyed in. Some of us would--

CURRIS:--when you say "trolleyed in," what does that mean, exactly?

THOMAS:Okay, you can--the belt would, like, come outside.

CURRIS:

Okay.

THOMAS:Well, you--well, to run the coal outside, but you could walk in, and if

no coal is running you can get on the belt, and you can push the level, and it

would take you inside. You understand?

CURRIS:I understand.

THOMAS:Yeah, it would take you inside. And on--some people did that, and some

people would, like, jump on the mantrip, and the mantrip--

CURRIS:What's a mantrip?

THOMAS:The mantrip is like a car. It's like a boxcar with a driver, and has

seats on each side, and the men, women would get in a seat and take them inside.

CURRIS:Now, it's amazing to me that you found it awesome. What--were you the

first--amongst the women to be in the mine, or were there others before you?

THOMAS:There was others before me.

CURRIS:Approximately

how long had women been in the mines?

THOMAS:About--I'd say about maybe a year or two before me.

CURRIS:So you're--

THOMAS:--and really, the reason why they still--they had to hire women, you

know, they had to hire--and then they had to get the Black people.

CURRIS:Absolutely.

THOMAS:They had to get the Black people, because, you know, wasn't no Black

people, women working in the mines, and that's what it really boiled down to. So--

CURRIS:--so it was really integration--

THOMAS:--integration, um-hm.

CURRIS:--and the requirement for equal--

THOMAS:--yes.

CURRIS:--types of employment.

THOMAS:Oppor--yes.

CURRIS:Well, that brings up a good question: were you paid equally with the men?

THOMAS:Yes. Yes. I mean, you know, some grades were higher than us, but we

still got treated, you know, as

our job title. You know--(clears throat)--the job title just said general inside

labor. Might've been, I'll say, twenty dollars an hour. I'm just estimating. And

then the scoop might've been two or three, four dollars higher. It went like

that. You know, the miner was the highest paid in the mines anyway, regardless.

And I did everything but the roof bolt.

CURRIS:When you say everything but roof bolting--

THOMAS:--okay, I--in general inside labor, I went to third shift, and I

serviced the miner. And service the miner was to get ready for day shift and

second shift, and that means you shut the whole place down, and you--where they

then cut the coal and stuff with rock dust, and there was, like, fifty-pound

bags of rock dust that we had to take off the

mantrip, and stack it in each section, and cut it open, and just--(cell phone

ringing) Sorry.

CURRIS:We are--we are having a momentary pause here. (laughs) Okay, we are now

recording again.

THOMAS:Okay, being a general inside labor, like I said, they shut the

mines--they shut the--what is it--the section down. And they--we had, like,

about--I don't know exactly how many sections we did have. We had, like, a E

heading and, like, a D heading. Like, maybe E heading had, like, three or four

operations on that one side; D heading had probably three or four sections on

the other side. That's like, you go to E heading and you go to

D heading.

CURRIS:So are those locations?

THOMAS:We was bussed. Yeah, we was bussed. We could go--we get up there, change clothes--

CURRIS:--into what?

THOMAS:Into our little section. The women--the women had their own bathhouse.

CURRIS:And what kind of clothing were you wearing?

THOMAS:Work clothes, like overalls, boots, and hats, and goggles, and stuff

like that.

CURRIS:Were those provided by U.S. Steel, and later Arch, or did you have to

pay for them?

THOMAS:The only thing they required us was the light that went on our head.

(laughs) You know, we had to get our hat. We had to get our boots. We had to get

our equipment to go to even start in the mines.

CURRIS:So you had to pay for that.

THOMAS:Um-hm. Yes.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:And I don't remember if they imbursed [reimbursed] us or not. It's been--

CURRIS:--too long.

THOMAS:Yeah, too long--(laughter)--to remember.

CURRIS:Well, Drena, going back to E head and D head.

THOMAS:D head, okay.

CURRIS:Okay. So you have gone up.

You've gotten into your mining clothes.

THOMAS:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Work clothes.

THOMAS:Yep.

CURRIS:And now you are on a bus.

THOMAS:On a bus.

CURRIS:And you are headed to where?

THOMAS:I'm headed to the east side, E heading.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:That's where I worked at.

CURRIS:So E head and D head just really means directions--

THOMAS:--right.

CURRIS:--different places--

THOMAS:--different places.

CURRIS:--in the mines.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Okay. Are these mines above ground or underground?

THOMAS:They underground. So when we get to the bus, they take us up there. They

have, like, a bus shack they call it, where you go in. They have seats in there,

until the boss come get us, 'cause, see, the boss had--the fire boss--to let us

know it's safe to go in the mines. So they would come back and get us, and we

get up, and that's when we go into the mines and do our work. Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, you were saying that you started with U.S. Steel.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Now, U.S. Steel was a mine

in Lynch, Kentucky.

THOMAS:Yes, they was the first--that was the ones that got the mines going,

U.S. Steel.

CURRIS:And do you know the names of any of the female miners before you?

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Or with you?

THOMAS:Yes, I know a few of them. One of them is Shirley Smith. It was another

lady, but she was from Harlan. I can't remember her name. I see her face. They

were--them three was up there before I got there, and Marcella Boggs.

CURRIS:Do you know what their thoughts were on working in the mines?

THOMAS:You know, I never really asked, because they were already there, you

know. I never really discussed--and that's a idea, to ask them, 'cause they--two

of them live up there now.

CURRIS:Oh, are still in Lynch?

THOMAS:Yeah. Well, they in

Cumberland.

CURRIS:Um-hm.

THOMAS:Yeah. So next time I talk to Shirley and Marcella, I will ask them.

CURRIS:Would you?

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:And ask them if they would consider being interviewed.

THOMAS:Oh, okay. Okay.

CURRIS:Yeah, that would be great.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Because I periodically--

THOMAS:--oh, okay.

CURRIS:--go back home--

THOMAS:--oh, okay, yeah.

CURRIS:--and that would be great.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, now, you know, we're here at the East Kentucky Social Club, which

is an African American-slash-Black--

THOMAS:--um-hm.

CURRIS:--slash-whatever.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:In talking to Ruthie Wilson, it was so--really cute, because I'd just

ask her, "How--what--?" She said, "I was born Black, and I'll stay Black." (both

laugh) Does that sound like Ruthie?

THOMAS:Yeah, it sound like her.

CURRIS:Yes.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:But that being the case, let's talk about living--were you living in

Lynch or Benham?

THOMAS:No, I lived in Lynch all my life.

CURRIS:Okay. Now, did you face any on-the-job discrimination--

THOMAS:--

there was--

CURRIS:--because of sex or race, or both?

THOMAS:Probably race more than the sex, because, like I said, females was

already up there, and my encounter was, yes, I did.

CURRIS:Is that something that you would like to tell others, so that they would

know what it was and what to look for for the future?

THOMAS:Yes. It was--matter of fact, it was a boss, and a worker. They were

friends. They were friends, evidently, before I got there, and they

just--this--the guy, the worker, he just tried to do just stuff to me, you know,

that wasn't appropriate, and talk to me appropriate. And I'm the type of person

that, hey, I can give it back

to you, you know what I'm saying?

CURRIS:I do.

THOMAS:So let's do this thing right, you know? Y'all keep messing me--with me.

Y'all be trying to let me--make me lose my job or whatever. So I had to go

higher up, or scare them.

CURRIS:Did you report them?

THOMAS:No. They stopped. When I said, "I'm going higher up. Y'all keep doing

this to me day in and day out. I'm going a little higher than y'all are." So

basically they kind of, like, backed off.

CURRIS:Can--was this a--were these Blacks? Whites?

THOMAS:They were white.

CURRIS:They were white.

THOMAS:Yeah. It wasn't many Black--I was the only Black woman up there.

CURRIS:That must've been an interesting situation.

THOMAS:Yeah, I was the on--that's--yeah. I was the only Black up there.

CURRIS:Well, how were you treated by the white women miners?

THOMAS:Good. I mean, we got along good, you know. We was, you know--some of

them was, like, on second shift. I was on third shift, and when second

shift--I'm basically

about gone when they get out, you know, so they can shower and be gone, but we

did encounter a few times, because sometimes we might have been on the same

shift, or sometimes I might stay late, or they stayed late, so we would be there

together. You know, they had their own little section of changing clothes,

showering, and I had my own little section, so, you know, it worked out good.

CURRIS:Now, where was the women's section of the--? Was it within the same

bathhouse there in Lynch, or was it in a different area?

THOMAS:It was in--it was up on the mountain, where the big company has put the

overseers of us. So they built a bathhouse, like, right next door to them. The

men went inside their bathhouse, and we can go to the right of our bathhouse.

CURRIS:Well, describe where this was located in Lynch.

THOMAS:

It was--well, as you go to Lynch--

CURRIS:--um-hm. Now, I remember where the old bathhouse was, on the left, next

to Portal One now, Thirty-one.

THOMAS:Yeah, that was--that was, like, the main office, where you got

interviewed and stuff.

CURRIS:Oh, okay.

THOMAS:Okay, but right before you get to that, there's a turnoff to the left,

and the road's still there. You go all the way up. It's about five miles up, six

or seven miles up, I guess. And you go up there, and it was at the top of the hill.

CURRIS:Interesting. Okay.

THOMAS:Yeah, I went up there one time when they had shut down and stuff, and it

was still there, the mines was still there, but I'm quite sure that all these

years that it has growed up, and, you know, I told my husband a while back, I

said, "I'd like to go up there just to see how it is now," you know? So--

CURRIS:Well, you know, you're living in Lynch, and there were--at the time that

you were working there, were the United Mine Workers union there at that time?

THOMAS:

Yes, yes. It was--it's been union, a union mine, all the time.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:And we struck. You know, if we couldn't get what we desired to get, we

would strike, if it took months and months, or years, or whatever, and then we

would even, even in the--over across to Virginia or wherever miners were, we

would go help them. If they was--had a situation or whatever, and needed our

help, we would go over there and strike with them.

CURRIS:And that would be a different mine.

THOMAS:Yes, yes.

CURRIS:A different mine.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Well, you were--we were talking about the discrimination that you faced

in the mines. Did U.S. Steel have a person designated for you or any person to

go to for any kind of whether it's sex or race?

THOMAS:Oh, yeah. We could've went to the--I don't know, I guess it was the big supervisor,

chairman or whatever. We could've went--I knew him, too.

CURRIS:Did you feel comfortable that you could've done that?

THOMAS:Um-hm. Um-hm.

CURRIS:What about Arch? When you were working for Arch Coal, was it the same?

THOMAS:It was the same. It was the same, same people, same workers and stuff

was there. But it was all the same, you know.

CURRIS:Well, when you were at Arch, was it the same kind of job, or a different--?

THOMAS:Well, it was different jobs. I mean, you can go on second shift and do a

different job, and I did, like--you can bid. And I did bid on a second shift,

where I ran a car. And when--

CURRIS:--when you say "ran a car," what do you mean?

THOMAS:Well, running a car, you had your own car, where everybody that ran that

car, the--

CURRIS:--what kind of car are we talking about?

THOMAS:It was like a boxcar with, like, a bed on it, that you go into the mine, miner,

and the coal goes in that little bucket thing. I'd say it's--it might've been

from here to here.

CURRIS:Okay, so we're probably talking about eight or ten feet.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:We're talking about a large--we're talking about a large vehicle.

THOMAS:Yeah, it's pretty big. Yes, yes. And so we would--I would go in there

and make sure the lights and the brakes and everything work and stuff, and when

they get ready to load our bucket, we would go under the miner, like this.

CURRIS:Yes.

THOMAS:And then the coal would come out.

CURRIS:Would this be the continuous miner?

THOMAS:Continuous miner.

CURRIS:So your bucket from your vehicle, you're putting it under the continuous miner.

THOMAS:Um-hm. And as it fill up, you roll back. You reverse it until it fill

up. Then you would take off. Then you would go to the belt line, and it's--it

was like a--mm, probably longer than this, where you'd

put the coal in. You'd just take your handle, put your coal in that little--I

don't know what you call it.

CURRIS:A conveyor belt type thing?

THOMAS:Yes, yes sort of thing, where it continues to go--

CURRIS:--and it would've been what, ten feet wide?

THOMAS:Yes. Your--enough for your bucket to get in there.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:So you would go, stop, and push it forward till all the coal's out. Then

you would back up, and then that coal that's in there, well, put it on a belt

and take it outside.

CURRIS:And once the coal was outside, where did it go?

THOMAS:You know what? I don't know. I'm thinking they probably had trucks out

there. I know that they put it on the ground, 'cause I never did remember seeing

it on the ground, but I think it's--it was like--would go in, like, probably a

truck or something, to where, you know, it would--they would haul it down the

hill or whatever they put it at, and dump it.

CURRIS:Did you ever have a time when you were

fearful of some sort of accident?

THOMAS:Yes, I did have an accident.

CURRIS:Oh, tell me.

THOMAS:I was--I don't know if I was on second shift or the third shift. We had,

like, the scoop--it was a scoop. It was a big machine, and I was in, like, the

(pauses) airway kinda thing. The airway is where--they had, like, a airway where

the air goes down--

CURRIS:--yes.

THOMAS:--and where the dust go down. Then they had a place where you can travel

that road to get into the mines, and that's what the scoop and all them would go

in. So the scoop come in there, and I think it was scooping or something,

like--they call it muck (??), and that's after the water that hit the coal and

just set up muck. So they would have to go in there and, like, scoop it up.

But I was in there, and I don't know if he didn't see me or whatever, or I just,

like, walked up there, but it hit my leg. Yeah, it didn't break any things, but

I had to end up going to the doctor. They had to, like--for precautions.

CURRIS:Did it break it?

THOMAS:No, it just, like, bumped it, but it felt like a break, you know. But

I--we just--they just wanted to make sure. And that was really my only accident,

per se, that happened.

CURRIS:Well, when it comes to all that you've told me, what was the most

enjoyable aspect of being a coal miner, a female, African American coal miner in

Lynch, Kentucky in the 1970s?

THOMAS:Seventies. It was awesome, because I didn't know at the time that it was

going to be,

like, "Hey, you're--" 'Cause when I tell people I'm a--I worked in the

mines--like, they ask me what I do or whatever--"Hey, I worked in the mines,"

"You a coal miner?" I say, "Yes, I've been a coal miner for, like, fourteen years."

CURRIS:Are you still a coal miner?

THOMAS:No, I retired.

CURRIS:Congratulations.

THOMAS:Yes, I retired.

CURRIS:When did you retire?

THOMAS:I retired in 2020.

CURRIS:Well, good for you.

THOMAS:Yes. And I had a birthday yesterday.

CURRIS:Congratulations.

THOMAS:I turned sixty-seven.

CURRIS:Oh my gosh. (both laugh) You do not look it. You do not look it.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Oh my goodness.

THOMAS:And it just was a blessing to be able to feed my family, you know,

of--working. 'Cause I'm the type person, I love to work. I love people, and I

love--I don't meet a stranger, you know. So I guess that's what--I know the Lord

done brought me through life, but being good to people will help you go a long ways,

too, you know.

CURRIS:That brings me to questions about living in Benham--I'm sorry, living in

Lynch. But what did you think your community experience was?

THOMAS:I loved it. I mean, it was--you know, everybody knew everybody.

Everybody knew every family. Everybody knew every kid. It was just, like,

awesome. You know, it was just, like, we didn't meet no strangers, you know.

CURRIS:Now, I'm assuming that you went to the East High School, the East Benham

High School?

THOMAS:Not there.

CURRIS:No, you would've gone to Lynch.

THOMAS:Lynch, yeah, Lynch--

CURRIS:--okay--

THOMAS:--West Main.

CURRIS:Lynch West Main.

THOMAS:Um-hm.

CURRIS:That's right. Lynch--

THOMAS:--that's on a corner.

CURRIS:Right. Now, when you went there, tell me what it was like. How--did

you--was there a lot of playing with the children?

What were your classes like? Did you like your teachers?

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:What was it like?

THOMAS:Well, see, my mom lived right across the street from the school. I can

walk around the corner and go to school. But we started in, like, the first

grade. Had teachers, real good teachers, wonderful teachers, that wanted you to

learn so you can be somebody, you know. They didn't just throw something at you,

and--a coloring book or whatever color, all that. No, they taught you your ABCs.

They taught you your ABCs, your one-two-threes, and taught you about English

literature, and the subjects that need to be taught. That's what they done.

CURRIS:Were you prepared after high school--

THOMAS:--yes.

CURRIS:--do you think, for the big world?

THOMAS:Yes. Yes, I was.

CURRIS:What were--who was your principal?

THOMAS:John Foutch was the

principal.

CURRIS:Was--?

THOMAS:And he was good. Yeah.

CURRIS:Who was your favorite teacher?

THOMAS:Up in Lynch, or the East, the East?

CURRIS:Both.

THOMAS:Both? I liked Miss Pettigrew and Miss Sweat and Miss Miller. They were

the teachers that taught you good. And up in the high school was Mr. Foutch--it

was another Mr. Foutch--I think this was Enoch Foutch--and Mr. Dossett , and

they were--and Miss Clemens, which--Miss Clemens wasn't up there--I didn't have

Miss Clemens; I had Miss Knight, Maddie Knight. Now, she was another one that,

hey, made sure that you got your education.

CURRIS:So there was no skipping

on the homework.

THOMAS:No. No, no, no. You better have your homework where you can sit down the

next day to go to class.

CURRIS:Well, now, speaking of going to class and the expectations, what were

your mother's expectations of you when you were, you know, everything from first

grade through high school. What did she expect of you?

THOMAS:My mom was a excellent mom. She was a single mom. She didn't get married

till I was grown, to the--my stepdad. So she really raised us on her own. But

she--I couldn't ask for a better mom than she was. You know, she made sure--

CURRIS:--you are so fortunate.

THOMAS:Yes, we are very--we was very fortunate, because she made sure we had

clothes on our back, food in--on our table.

CURRIS:Right.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Well, in the average day of the life of your mother--now, did she work

outside the home?

THOMAS:She didn't work.

CURRIS:Oh, she was able not--

THOMAS:--she--well, she worked

in her older years. You know, I don't remember her working while we was, like,

kind of growing up, like--

CURRIS:But did she raise a garden, or do any canning?

THOMAS:Well, she kept--she kind of kept her dad, so they basically worked together--

CURRIS:--right.

THOMAS:--you know, to raise us and stuff.

CURRIS:Tell me about him.

THOMAS:My granddad?

CURRIS:Yes.

THOMAS:Yeah, I remember my mom's dad, because he stayed with my mom, and he

ended up being in a wheelchair because he had both his legs cut off. So we

basically had to kind of take care of him, and make sure he had what he needed.

So, yeah, I remember. He was sweet. Loved him.

CURRIS:What was his name?

THOMAS:His name was Kenneth Smith.

CURRIS:Kenneth Smith.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Now, you were telling me you lived directly across from the school.

THOMAS:School, um-hm.

CURRIS:I'm assuming this was

one of the Lynch U.S. Steel houses?

THOMAS:Yes, yes.

CURRIS:Describe the house.

THOMAS:The house was three stories, like, first, second, third. Yeah. It's very

few in between with the first, second, and third floors. See, my mom's mom and

dad lived--you know, I don't know if they lived in that house, but I know some

of my mom's siblings was raised in that house, you know, because some of them--

CURRIS:--so this house goes back to your grandparents' time.

THOMAS:Yes, yes.

CURRIS:And they were able to keep that house.

THOMAS:Yes, they was able to keep it till they--it caught on fire. Yeah.

CURRIS:When was that?

THOMAS:That was back in the nineties.

CURRIS:Oh, so that was at a later time.

THOMAS:Yeah, see, they had two-story houses. They had--and this lady, she ended

up being over a hundred. She lived next door to my mom, neighbors, knew her from

way back. And so she lived next door, and then my mom had the other side. So

that's how--

CURRIS:--like a double house?

THOMAS:Like a double house, and she lived--and I'm not calling her name, but

she lived to be over a hundred. But what happened was she--I don't know if

the--never did really hear to understand it--I don't know if she had set a fire,

because it was back in early November, October, where it was cold, and I don't

know if that's what caused the fire. But I had moved out, so I had moved over

across the hill in a double wide, me and my husband, so we would walk over to my

mom's. And I told my husband, I said, "She up awful late," because it was, like,

light upstairs. I said, "She up awful late." And I said, "That ain't like her."

But we went on to my mom's house, and we was sitting around in the kitchen, so

we're like--(sniffs)

We start smelling smoke. And come to find out, it was her side of the house.

CURRIS:Oh my--

THOMAS:So we jump up and grab what we could out of my mom's house, move the car

and everything. So we're trying to get in her house, but it was double locked.

Couldn't get in, nor she was in there, 'cause she didn't go nowhere. She was too

old to drive or whatever that. So we couldn't get in, so we had to get the

police to come down there, and when he opened that door it was backfired. Yeah,

threw him back and burned, you know, his eyebrows and everything. So it

basically burnt the house up, so my mom lost the house.

CURRIS:Oh.

THOMAS:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Well, while you were growing up, how many brothers and sisters did you have?

THOMAS:I had two brothers, and I have three sisters.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:I had.

CURRIS:Ahead?

THOMAS:I had, H-A-D.

CURRIS:Got it.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:I understand. I'm sorry.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:But when you were growing up, did you

help with the chores?

THOMAS:Oh, yeah, yeah--

CURRIS:What were you expected to do?

THOMAS:--we had chores. We had chores. We had to make sure our--we did our

homework. We had to make sure the clothes was washed, and neatly, you know,

done, and as we got older, it was kind of help in the kitchen, you know, cooking

or whatever. Yeah. So we did a lot of housework, you know, for my mom.

CURRIS:One of the things that I knew growing up was that the kids would all

play with whoever was on the street.

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:Everybody would play--you might eat lunch at somebody's house, and

someone else the next day, but at night you generally went home.

THOMAS:When the lights come on, you better be in the house. (laughter) Yes.

CURRIS:And if you weren't--

THOMAS:And if you weren't, you get a beatin' when you went in. (laughter) But

we had, like, a big park, big, old baseball park, and everybody

would go there, like after school or whatever, when everybody did their chores

or homework or whatever. That's where we would all meet up and play, from the

time we got done with what we needed to do at home, after school, till, like I

say, the lights come on.

CURRIS:What were your social ac--? Let's go to high school.

THOMAS:Um-hm.

CURRIS:What were the social activities related to school and dating, the church?

THOMAS:Yeah. I was a cheerleader, and I was in the band. I was a majorette.

CURRIS:You were one of those pretty young women--(laughter)--that did all the

good things--

THOMAS:--yeah, I was--

CURRIS:--weren't you?

THOMAS:Yeah. I was a cheerleader. I was a majorette. And I didn't do no kind of

ball or nothing, because we cheered at the football games and basketball games, and--yeah.

CURRIS:Well, now, what about the church? Did the church have activities?

THOMAS:Um-mm. No.

CURRIS:No?

THOMAS:No.

CURRIS:Not many?

THOMAS:Not many.

CURRIS:So most--

THOMAS:--the only church--I went to Goode Temple.

That's where my mom went, so I went. So I ended up going--as I got grown, I

remember going to Greater Mount Sinai, and they had, like, BTU.

CURRIS:Which is?

THOMAS:Which is--it's like a schooling to teach the Bible.

CURRIS:Oh.

THOMAS:Yeah. So that's where our activities come from for--at the church. So it

was, you know, teachers teaching you about the Lord.

CURRIS:Now, I think I mentioned that my dad was manager of the Benham Credit Union--

THOMAS:--oh, okay.

CURRIS:--and later they opened the Lynch Credit Union--

THOMAS:--Lynch Credit Union, um-hm.

CURRIS:--and they had asked him to come up and open that one.

THOMAS:Oh, okay.

CURRIS:Were you a member of the Credit Union?

THOMAS:I don't think so at the time. I don't think so. I can't remember.

CURRIS:Right. (laughter)

THOMAS:I want to say it's been, what, forty years?

CURRIS:A long time ago.

THOMAS:A long time, so I can't remember.

CURRIS:Well, what about the Big Store?

THOMAS:But I do remember--the Big Store--I remember the Big Store,

because the Big Store had clothes, they had shoes, they had groceries, they had

furniture, and at the top they had, like, a skating rink where the kids can go

and skate. Yes.

CURRIS:I did not know that.

THOMAS:Yes, yes.

CURRIS:Well, the--now, this--in the seventies, it would've been a different

thing, but are you aware of whether or not your mother had to use--and

grandfather had to use scrip at any time, or whether it was always cash at the

Lynch Big Store?

THOMAS:Probably scrip. Like, U.S. Steel come in there, that's what they had to

use. You know, especially the men working in the mines, they had to get a scrip

to say--and let them take it out their payday, you know, like, groceries, you

can go get groceries, but you had a tab, you know, and after you get

paid, you go pay that tab.

CURRIS:Now, so they did not deduct that payment before they gave you cash?

THOMAS:No, no.

CURRIS:That's interesting.

THOMAS:Yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:That is very interesting.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, what--so you would buy practically everything.

THOMAS:Yeah, yeah. That Big Store was--hey, I wish it was up there today. (laughs)

CURRIS:It's my memory that both the Big Stores, Benham and Lynch, had really

top quality--

THOMAS:--yes.

CURRIS:--items in it.

THOMAS:Yes. Yes.

CURRIS:What about things like washing machines and electrical appliances and

things like that?

THOMAS:Yeah, well, you know, my mom and them, you know, they had to buy

refrigerators and stuff like that, to keep, you know, stuff going. But yeah,

everything was at the Big Store.

CURRIS:If you had to describe your most important thoughts and memories of

living in Lynch, what would they be?

THOMAS:My memories of Lynch would be

Memorial Day. Memorial Day, where people has left home, and they come back. The

houses was full. You couldn't get up the street. You had to just sit there. If

you was going up First, Second, you had to sit there for a hour or two, because

they gonna stop, and they gonna talk about old memories, or good memories. So

you just had to be patient. But that's one thing I miss. You know, everything

has--a lot of people has left. A lot of people has passed on, so it's not a big

place. It saddens me because these people that grew up there, their mom and dad

has left them houses, and they let it go down, and they're tearing them down.

They're not keeping them up. It's very few in between that's up there

that's--people can come back and live in for

the weekend, or week or two, whatever they want.

CURRIS:So they either live there or they just let things go.

THOMAS:They let things go.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:Yeah, they let their mom or dad's house go.

CURRIS:Is there anything that you would like to tell me, or tell us, that you

want to be certain is left for posterity?

THOMAS:I'm checking my sugar. (laughs) You know, I just--you know, you hope and

you wish for stuff, but it's not going to happen, because we don't have the

people to make it happen. You know, we just have to keep living on. You know, we

have to keep just giving--or just being settled with what we got. You know, I

wish it could've just stayed like it was. It would've been so,

so blessed. You know, but like I said, you know, people grow up. You know,

people move on, and that's what happened, you know. And--

CURRIS:--one--

THOMAS:--these kids today don't have what we had. They don't have what we got,

or what we had. You know, they don't have the mom and the dad to teach them

about life, the world. If they don't get taught about God to lead them in the

right direction, they're going to fail, because this world will eat you up. And

I tell my grandkids all the time, listen, you don't have no friends. You might

think you got a friend, but you don't. I said, God is your only friend, and you

better lean and depend on him, I said, because this world will eat you up. You

better get your education, you better go to college, you better get a job, and

fix for yourself.

CURRIS:

You are touching on a point also that has been very consistent, and that is

there weren't any serious disciplinary problems.

THOMAS:No. No. Well, you know, back then it was. You know, the high

school--well, the middle--the East School, too, but the high school, I remember

that the teachers, especially the principals and the superintendents, they have

a paddle. They had that paddle, and if you do wrong, if you go say, "This person

messing with me"--no bullying. There wasn't no bullying. "This person messing

with me," they bring you to the class and whoop you.

CURRIS:Right there.

THOMAS:Bend you over their knee, honey, and beat your little heinie. (both

laugh) And that's what we need today, because you got kids--you got kids that

disrespect their mom, you know, disrespect their dad,

and just disrespect you if you say something to 'em. And back then, we can talk

to these--back then, the mom--the parents could say, "Hey, I know your mom and I

know your dad," you know, and they could whoop you. They give you that whooping,

and then when you got home you got whooping, too.

CURRIS:So the parents and the school worked together--

THOMAS:Yes.

CURRIS:--and that took care of it.

THOMAS:Yeah--(laughter)--that took care of it. They took care of it.

CURRIS:Well, Drena, I cannot tell you what a joy this has been--

THOMAS:It's been good.

CURRIS:--to interview you. (laughter) As you know, I am questioning my

equipment, so don't be surprised if you get a phone call, say, "We have to do

this again."

THOMAS:That's fine.

CURRIS:But may I say, I am thrilled that your story is here. I am thrilled to

have you as a female, as--

THOMAS:--thank you.

CURRIS:--a coal miner.

THOMAS:Thank you.

CURRIS:It means the world to me--

THOMAS:--

thank you.

CURRIS:--to be able to interview you, because my grandfather was a coal miner--

THOMAS:--yes.

CURRIS:--at Benham. I mean, I understand exactly what you're saying.

THOMAS:And me and Cheryl Gist, we went together. We were interviewed together,

and we had classes together to go in the mine. She went to one mines and I went

to another.

CURRIS:Oh, that is so fun.

THOMAS:And then Patsy McIntosh, she was a coal miner, too, but she passed on.

She with the thirty-seven.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay.

THOMAS:But yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:Well, your story is now recorded for posterity. It will be stored at the

University of Kentucky--

THOMAS:--okay.

CURRIS:--Nunn Oral History Center, and will be referenced at the Hern Benham

Financial Center at the City Hall.

THOMAS:Okay.

CURRIS:And I look forward to letting you know when all of that is available. (laughs)

THOMAS:Okay, I appreciate it. Thank you so much.

CURRIS:Thank you--

THOMAS:--God bless you.

CURRIS:--so much. Thank you.

THOMAS:You welcome.

[End of interview.]