Okay. So, my name’s Ryan McCoy and I'm joined here by Lou Hirsch. Today is July

24, 2023. We are here at the Nunn Center Oral History Recording Studio. And this

is as--this is part of the Kentucky Climate Oral History Project. And--Lou, do

we have permission to record the interview?

HIRSCH:Yes, you do.

MCCOY:Awesome. Great. All right, let's get into it. So, I guess just to start,

can you, can you say a little bit about yourself, where you're from, that kind

of stuff?

MCCOY:Sure. So, my name’s Lou Hirsch. I'm an assistant professor in the

Department of Plant Pathology in the Martin Gatton College of Agriculture, Food,

and Environment, which is quite the mouthful. And--but I'm not from Kentucky, as

most eagle-eared listeners could probably (laughs) hear, I guess.

MCCOY:

I was born and raised in Phoenix, Arizona. And I lived my, you know, youth there

and then went to college in New Orleans, Louisiana, where I majored in English

and Religious Studies, which is quite a different, you know, set of disciplines

of what I'm doing now. And then during my time in college and also a bit in high

school and stuff, I got real active in scuba diving and I became a scuba

instructor and in my summers--in college, I got my boat captain's license from

the Coast Guard, too. So, after college, with my English degree, which is

difficult to find gainful employment in, I worked in the scuba industry in San

Diego. I managed a scuba diving charter company and was very much in that

industry, worked for a commercial diving company, cleaned municipal reservoirs

and stuff in the off-season for the dive boat. And then my girlfriend, now wife,

got into grad school at the University of Arkansas. So, that was kind of my fork

in the road. I took that fork and then started working at Mariachi's Mexican

Food Grill, serving

margaritas to drunk college students. And I got real tired of that in like the

first week. And then I re-enrolled with my English degree and boat captain's

license at University of Arkansas as like a non-traditional biology student,

because I wanted to do something with fish and water. It wasn't any more

sophisticated than that. I mean, incredibly naive. And then one morning, because

we didn't have any money, my wife found a job posting for a work-study

dishwasher position in a plant pathology lab. And I felt pretty qualified in

washing dishes, you know, with all my (laughs), all my degrees and

certifications. And so, I did that and I got in that lab and washed dishes

pretty well. You know, just scientific glassware. And, and then there was a

little science thing that they, that they felt someone with my background could

handle, just a cookbook sort of little science experiment. Did that pretty well.

And I just kind of kept doing stuff well. And then that kind of manifest into a,

kind of a “lean into it and just work really hard, but don't think too much”

master's degree project. Just kind of a, you know, blunt force sort of thing. I did

that pretty well. And then there was a opportunity to stay in for the lab on a

different project on--for, for my PhD. So, I did that too. And then after

graduating, I did a postdoc at the VA hospital in Charleston, South Carolina, at

the Medical University of South Carolina, doing human genetics research. Because

my project when I was in grad school was a plant pathologist focused on fungal

molecular genetics, which is a bit of word salad, but--fungi and humans are

really closely related genetically. So, the fact that I could do research in

fungi with comparatively far less infrastructure than there are for humans, it

was a pretty easy jump for me to move from fungi to humans. And I worked for the

VA hospital, working to try and identify different mutations that correlated

with, you know, suicidality, PTSD, depression, stuff like that, and combat

veterans as a means for the government to pre-screen recruits to figure out if

they have any gen, genetic predeterminants to kind of frontline

battle issues. And, and then my wife got in here--I've been following my wife

the whole time, that’s, that's the thread throughout this whole story--and then

she got in here. She was able to kind of negotiate a temporary position for me

where I was split between biology and plant pathology. And then I've kind of

made that my own thing. And I was a lecturer for a long time. Now I'm assistant

professor, and I focus now on, you know, undergrad program management, both

in--my department doesn't have a major, but we feed into an interdisciplinary

program called agricultural and medical biotechnology. So, it's just kind of

this, just genetics, but on agriculturally relevant organisms instead of like

mice and salamanders and stuff and, like, you know, that they do over in our

biology department here at UK. And I do a lot of science outreach to the

community. And that's how I think I've encountered a lot of the folks kind of in

your orbit. And I do some program admin and a lot of teaching.

MCCOY:Yeah. So, how long have you been in Kentucky?

HIRSCH:I've been in Ken--this is maybe my (laughs) seventh or eighth year.

MCCOY:

Okay.

HIRSCH:I'm thinking eighth.

MCCOY:Okay, great.

HIRSCH:Mm-hmm. Yeah. So, one year as a postdoc, I think five years--yeah, it's

eight. One, one year as a postdoc, five years as a lecturer, and then I’m

starting my third year as a assistant professor.

MCCOY:Okay. Can you talk a little bit more about the community outreach work

that you do and some of the stuff that that entails?

HIRSCH:Sure. So, it's really focused on middle school and high school science.

And something--and, and I'm kind of coming at this from what I--maybe not a

unique, but an uncommon and I think helpful angle where it's like I never did

any of these classes when I was a kid. I, I didn’t, I didn't have an aptitude

for science or I never put myself in a position where I could learn if I did, I

guess. And when I got into science professionally, it was all fun. It was all

hands-on, it was in a lab, it was experiential. You know, I'd never owned too

many science textbooks. But I noticed in, on the other side of the coin now,

when I'm the one administering classes to people, it's all or it can be

easily all textbook-based, which is so boring. And I don't think anyone likes

textbook-based stuff. Certainly--or at least in the sciences--certainly

scientists don't salivate at cracking open the next new textbook to read about

it. They don't look at textbooks at all, you know, when they're not (laughs),

you know. So, there's this huge disconnect between the process of learning

science and the process of doing science. So, all of my outreach stuff seeks to

kind of bridge that gap and provide teacher-friendly, kind of hands-on, easily

accessible things for middle school and high school science classes and their

teachers to do. Stuff that's not a, not a cookbook lab by any means, because

those aren't very exciting for the teacher after a while, but stuff that’ll work

every time. And it allows the students to have hands-on stuff and also kind of

set up their own experiments in a way that is, is, is dependable

in a classroom. You know, cons--context when you have, you have one hour every

Friday to do your experiment. Yet, there's a lot of variables that go into kind

of compressing actual science into a STEM [[science, technology, engineering and

mathematics]] context.

MCCOY:Mm-hmm. So, do these--so, what sort of disciplines are included within

this outreach? Is it just ag, ag science--

HIRSCH:--mm-hmm--

MCCOY:--related stuff, or--

HIRSCH:--so, the cool--I'm gonna answer your question with, again, a longer,

more verbose answer--what’s cool about the agricultural sciences, or at least

plant pathology specifically, is that we're not one thing. We can't be one

thing. Most science isn't, I guess, when you really get, you know, granular with

it. But for, for plant pathology--even those two words. A plant, everyone knows,

but pathology is the study of disease. So, you have to know plants, you have to

be a little bit of a botanist, you have to be a pathologist, so you have to know

how to look at symptoms, for signs. You have to be a microbiologist, because

almost all of the organisms that cause disease on plants--I'm not counting

insects, because they have their

whole other discipline called entomology--they're microscopic. So, we have to

work with bacteria, we have to work with fungi, and I’m, I'm a fungal biologist.

Most diseases of plants are caused by fungi. There's microscopic worms called

nematodes, there's viruses. There, there are other diseases that are, that have

nothing to do with microbes. We call them abiotic, think like nutrient

deficiency stuff, that's still a disease. So, yeah, my outreach is couched

within agricultural sciences, but it's just good old-fashioned sort of life

science biology stuff. We call ourselves agricultural scientists because we're

in a different college. Our research is funded by the USDA [[United States

Department of Agriculture]], you know, instead of other agencies. But it's all

the same, just sort of different target organisms we work with.

MCCOY:Mm-hmm, gotcha. Can you give some examples of kind of like the--spe,

specifically some of the, like, experiments, outreach experiments--

HIRSCH:--sure--

MCCOY:--that you'll run, or--

HIRSCH:--yeah. So,

I'll ask you a question. Have you ever had a potato go bad in your pantry?

MCCOY:Yes.

HIRSCH:Okay. So, great. And probably everyone who has ever owned a potato or

two has at some point. So, that's a disease called bacterial soft rot. It sounds

terrible--it, it sme, it smells terrible, right? So, we don't have very creative

names for our diseases. So, it's caused by a bacteria or bacterium, its symptoms

are a soft rot, so that's it. And these bacteria are present in the soil,

they're everywhere. We could go and take a spoon outside the Nunn Center right

now and find some of these bacteria. They, they just eat old dead plant stuff.

And they coat the exterior of the potato, from Idaho or wherever we got them

from. When they, when you buy them at home, then you get a bag, right, and

they’re in a plastic bag probably. And they sit on the bottom of your pantry or

s, something, where over time, there's gonna be a potato that's pressed against

that plastic bag. And then that allows a little bit of water to build up,

because potatoes are still alive, so they're gonna be transpiring, so there's a

little bit of moisture coming out of them.

So, when you have a potato against that plastic bag, eventually you're gonna get

a film of water, and these bacteria need water to start reproducing. So, at some

point, they reproduce to the point where they can infect the potato, get in

there, and they start breaking down--like, potatoes--if you think about cells

like bricks, there's a type of chemical called pectin, which is the mortar. It

keeps the bricks together in a potato. We use pectin a lot for, for jams and,

and stuff like that, because it thickens things. These bacteria like to eat

pectin. So, it's kind of like if you had a brick wall, but there was no bricks,

or sorry, no mortar. It'd be great looking at it, but if you pushed it, it would

collapse, because there's nothing keeping the bricks together. It's the same

thing for soft rot. The potato looks fine until you touch it, and then it just

gets all squishy because the cells collapse because there's nothing sticking

them together. So, it's a long story. But these are bacteria that are present on

every single potato that anyone buys ever, and they're really easy to culture,

because all you have to do

is just cut a potato in half, put them in a Ziploc bag with a bit of water, wait

a week, and it's just mush. And there's trillions of these bacteria in that

liquid. These bacteria are also pathogenic to probably every plant, in the right

circumstance. So, then a middle school science teacher can just have one gr,

gross, ooey-gooey bag of potatoes, take a toothpick, kind of swoosh it in there,

and then use that bacterium-inoculated toothpick as a source of pathogen to do

other experiments on potatoes or on onions or on squashes. And you could then

allow the students to start thinking about, well, like, yeah, like, would an

apple be different than a potato? They're both, you know, energy storage tissues

of a plant. But like, what's different from an apple to a potato? Well, potatoes

have evolved to be underground, so they probably have some defense mechanisms

against these things. Apples are sweet. They have acidity in ways that potatoes

don't. So, based upon the amount of plant products that the teacher could

buy at Kroger and how comfortable they are helping their students come up with,

you know, hypothesis-based experiments, it's really the students who kind of do

whatever they want and get some results. And I find that that is exciting for

the students because they have ownership in the process. And it's exciting for

the teacher, too, because they don't know what’s gonna happen. And that's a

little bit scary, too, you know, pedagogically. But if you’re, if you can focus

on the process of science, not the outcome, then you can talk about the process

to every single grade. It doesn't matter what they did. It doesn't matter how

they did it. And that's just fun because, I don't know--and, and every year,

it’s--I, I always do this with some of my undergrad classes here at UK. It's no

different when I do it to sixth graders than I do it to 22-year-olds. It's the

same experiment. I don't tell them that, you know. (laughs) But yeah, it's the

same thing. And I'll go to Kroger at 6 o'clock in the morning before I come to

school, and I'll spend 200 dollars on produce because I got a budget for my lab

classes and stuff. And it's just two shopping carts overflowing with whatever I can.

And if--there's always a little tropical section. So, I always try and get

something weird to me, you know, dragon fruit or, you know, something, I don't

know. And then it'll be, I don't know what's gonna happen. And so, that's also

fun for me because I get bored, too, getting in a rut with the same things. And,

and there's several different examples of stuff like that. But it's easiest, in

my experience, to use--we, we call them post-harvest pathogens or post-harvest

diseases, everyone else call them just spoiled food--to use those microbes that

cause food to spoil as a source of inoculum to set up experiments. Most normal

people throw them away. Plant pathologists and some scienti--you know, some

science teacher is like, “ooh, we can do something with this.”

MCCOY:Wow, that's really, that's really great. So where--what are the different

sorts of places that you've, you’ve done this sort of outreach stuff? Is it

across the state, or--

HIRSCH:--yeah. So, just because I'm in Kentucky and we're at a land grant

institution and we serve the taxpayers, like this video’s (??) been most of my

effort here in Kentucky. I have also done it, too, worked with sort of regional

partners in, in neighboring states. Tennessee and Ohio come to mind.

And then I'm also really active in my national organization called the American

Phytopathological Society. So, you probably didn't know that we had one of

those. (laughs) So, you know, but there has to be somewhere for, for plant

disease scientists to hang out. And I'm really active in there, or I guess an R,

sort of educational outreach and content development for like national and

international audiences. I'm actually doing a--I'm doing a Zoom science thing to

a nature camp in coastal Washington state on Wednesday. And they found--I put my

name in a hat for a program called Skype with a Scientist, which is awesome--and

they, they're in the Pacific Northwest. They have lots of mushrooms that grow

out there. I don't know a lot about mushrooms, like those, you know,

ten-year-olds are gonna be asking me questions about, but I probably know more

than they do. So, I, you know, very happy to talk about, you know, fungal

ecology and a forest ecosystem, you know, for thirty minutes with some nature

camp kids on the other side of the country.

MCCOY:Yeah. So, this, this sort of

segues a bit into the, the research side of things, like outside of service

and--so, yeah, I guess, I guess just tell me a little bit about the, the

research that you do. You know, if, you know, if there are any crops or anything

like that, that you particularly work with in particular.

HIRSCH:Yeah. So, my--I would call what I do scholarship, not research, just to

separate it apart from my colleagues who have lab coats and safety glasses and

test tubes and stuff. I don't do much of that anymore. My area of research and

scholarship is more about sort of pedagogical innovations and things like that.

With that being said, though, as, as an advocate for my discipline, I, I’m, I'm

very happy to talk about how our changing world, you know, through climate

change and other manmade sort of--what's, what's it called, the, you know, the,

you know, the Anthropocene, whatever epoch we're in now--how all of those things

are changing, not only the process of agriculture,

which there's lots of examples, but also what we expect agriculture to be in the

next, you know, ten, twenty, thirty, fifty years as, as the world's climate

changes. When--if I were to force you to buy a textbook, like--and then none of

my classes have textbooks, I'm very proud of. But I encourage students to buy

one. It's pretty good. But the first, in the first chapter of the main plant

pathology textbook, the first figure is a theoretical model we use called the

plant disease triangle. And there has to be three things at each corner of the

triangle for disease to occur. So, there has to be a susceptible host, a

virulent pathogen, and a conducive environment. So, you have to have a plant

that can get sick, a microbe that can make it sick, and then the environment has

to be good for that. The, the plants we're growing aren't changing a whole lot,

right? I mean with corn, soybean, there's a lot of differences in the corn and

soybean we grow, and there's a lot of plant scientists working really hard to

improve crop varieties. The pathogens,

they're common not so much by climate change, more just by, just people and

equipment movement, right? So, you know, 200 years ago, it was really hard for a

soil sample to get to Ohio from South Korea, you know. Now, now that could

happen in about fifteen hours on the tread of someone's boot. So, plant

pathologists are, are probably some of the best vectors of plant pathogens

probably in the world, because there's gonna be some scientist with their trusty

field hat somewhere in some other country, and then they, they probably don't,

you know, steam, steam wash that hat, probably don't bl, you know, dip it in

bleach, and then they go back to their, you know, research plots back home and

they have spores or bacteria or whatever on that hat, and then it's here.

There's plenty of examples of that happening, occasionally on purpose, but most

of it just accidental. And climate change is, is hugely impactful for

agriculture, because it represents that, that third of the disease triangle that

humans don't really have any control over. So, we can, can, to some extent,

control the plant varieties we grow. We can do the best we can to limit the

movement of pathogens, although some once they're here, they're here forever. We

can't do much about the weather. We--so, what we can do about the weather is

anticipate what it will be based upon sophisticated modeling approaches, which

again, plant pathologists don't do, but you know, close colleagues do. And then

we can try and manage the anticipated changes in agriculture based upon what we

think will happen with the weather. And, you know, luckily for science--and this

is not, it's unfortunately not reflected in the social and political realms--but

the climate change models have been remarkably accurate since the 1970s. So,

people who, who care to trust the science and follow the science have been able

to, I think, move pretty well with where things are going.

And the agricultural sciences have been on the forefront of that since, since

these models came out in the 1970s, because farmers and growers and producers

are finally tuned into the environment. And they--yes, they’re making a product,

but they, you know, their livelihoods in most cases depend upon a, a marketable

crop. And there, there’s, there's been a lot of embracing of climate science as,

as it refers to improved agricultural production. Clearly the political

discourse kind of gets in the way of that as it does, you know, with any sort of

discussion. But the agricultural community is, is aware that the climate is

changing, and they're aggressively trying to get in front of problems

that are largely anticipatable.

MCCOY:Can you think of any--I don't know if you have any examples of, of things

that might be specific to Kentucky, things that might be challenges up ahead?

HIRSCH:Sure. So, Kentucky--so, there's lots of--so, I guess the big three would

be corn, soybean, and tobacco. So, almost everywhere that grows what we'll call

row agriculture, so things you have a combine and tractor to work with. You’re,

you’re gonna have corn and soybean. And that's a, about half of the state. I

mean, if you drive from Lexington West, it looks kind of like a hilly Nebraska,

(laughs) you know, just corn and soybean. Which I'm sure I know is boring for

some people because they tell me, but I love it because it's just fun. I, I

think it's fun to drive through corn and soybean fields. Wheat as well, and

Kentucky does grow some wheat. And all, all of those crops are imperiled

both physiologically from the plant perspective, but also from--as the

environment changes, different pathogens are able to interact with their hosts

differently. And there's also insects too, which I'm not even gonna talk about,

but just because I, I’m, I'm not an entomologist, which is the area of science

that deals with, with plants and their, rather with insects and their impact on

plants. But that's clearly a huge issue too, because the climate affects all of

those things. So, in terms of--we'll say corn for example. So, the, the climate

data that, that I'm familiar with for Kentucky suggests that our average

rainfall is gonna be about the same, but it's gonna come with droughtier

droughts and floodier floods. And corn is a really thirsty crop. It takes a lot

of water. And if we get into periods of really droughty drought, well that's

gonna hit corn

a lot harder than it will other plants that are of sort of comparable value. So,

the first generation of genetically modified plants from the big agricultural

companies were developed to deal with insects and, and herbicides. The newer

generations of bioengineered plant products are now dealing with uncertain

climate trajectories. So, we're getting the introduction of more drought

tolerance in plants. The ability to thrive in reduced soil fertility, so we

don't have to fertilize them as much, because that's a big issue too. There’s--I

think it's phosphorus is--most of the world's pho--or there's three, but it's,

yeah, so, it’s not nitrogen, it's not potassium, I think it's phosphorus. A

majority of that product is in Western Sahara, which is

sort of an autonomous region of the Sahara Desert that's administered by

Morocco. And they have these big mines. So, like, you figure how many people on

the world--there's billions of people--rely upon these fertilized, you know,

these fertilizer products to, you know, to feed, to eat. And that globally

critical resource is under the control of, of, of one country, who right now is

pretty friendly, but, you know, things can change. So that's a big concern. And

we're not talking about cobalt in our iPhone batteries, you know, lithium,

what's gonna go on with these lakes in California. We don't need an iPhone, you

know. I mean, it'd be weird to not have one, I guess, but we really don't need

one. But boy (??) we need to eat, or we need to have affordable food. Some of

it--and, and there’s, you know, so, we’re, we’re not talking about mass

starvation here, we're just talking about the increase of food costs. And that

always hits the, you know, the lower socioeconomic groups more than the upper

ones, because they can afford more food. So, when we think about the

agricultural science, it's going back to your,

your use of that phrase, we're, we’re, we’re very much concerned with make, you

know, keeping food affordable and increasing agricultural productivity in a

period of time where our land is diminishing, because we're not building any

less strip malls, and the ability to grow plants is changing. Not so much now in

Kentucky, because we've still got plenty of water, but I'm from Arizona, as I

mentioned earlier. I think about out west, like it’s, it’s, I mean, the Colorado

River's drying up. And (laughs) climate scientists in the 1910s or 20s, when the

politicians put together the Colorado River Accord to partition water from the

river, they were kind of silenced by the political forces of the day when they

were saying, there's actually too much, like, like we're at a period in, in, in

this watershed where there's too much water in the river, or not too much, but

more, more like a higher than average water load in the river right now. So, if

you partition out

the amount of water that is in the river system now, that's not representative

probably of what it's going to be, it's too high right now. And then that was

before Southern California and Arizona and Las Vegas started growing. So,

they're running out of water, and that's problematic. (laughs) So, you know,

luckily we don't have that in terms of boots-on-the-ground Kentucky things. But

in February, why--you know, how is there lettuce at Kroger? Well, it comes from

Arizona. It comes from Yuma, Arizona. That's where almost all of our leafy

greens come from, because we can't grow lettuce very well in Kentucky at all,

and especially in the winter because it's freezing and lettuce will die. But

Yuma can. And Yuma is just, I mean, there's like a national or a state park or a

national park with sand dunes. I mean, it's, it's like, it’s like comically

desert down there, except where they've irrigated that land from the Colorado

River. And that's, that’s threatened Yuma specifically, because

Cali, because California gets the lion's share of, of the water from the river

based upon these contracts that were signed a hundred years ago. So, you know,

does what's happening in California, you know, directly affect what a grower's

choice will be in Kentucky? In that context, maybe not. But like, those growers

may like salad, and that product, spinach, I mean, all these things, are gonna

be really expensive if Yuma either can't keep producing or it's so expensive for

Arizona farmers to get their irrigation water, then the cost of spinach or

whatever is just gonna go way up, because that previously free input now has a

significant cost, which is gonna drive up price points.

MCCOY:Yeah. I'm thinking, I’m thinking, too, like, drawing some more

connections to what,

what's going on here in, here in Kentucky. You know, you mentioned, you

mentioned you, you know, it's not that our average rainfall is gonna increase.

HIRSCH:Based upon the model, right?

MCCOY:Yeah, based--yeah. But the idea is that, like, we're gonna have longer

periods of drought and more sort of heavy rain--

HIRSCH:--yeah--

MCCOY:--and flooding.

HIRSCH:Floodier floods. And I know that's not a word, but I just kind of like

that. Droughtier droughts and floodier floods.

MCCOY:Yeah, I like it, too. (laughs) So, like, a, alongside, alongside that,

does that, I mean, does the--are those kind of conditions that would, you know,

facilitate the growth of pathogens and things--

HIRSCH:--mm-hmm--

MCCOY:--like that?

HIRSCH:Yeah. So, so, there's plenty of exceptions, but most of the time with

plant pathogens, the wetter it is, the better it is for the pathogens, just

because these are microbes. They have to exist at least for some time outside.

And it's better to do that when they're standing water and it's a little bit

cooler, say, like following a rainstorm, than it is in the

beating sun after it hasn't rained for three weeks. So, we tend to see more

disease outbreaks following periods of standing water. And that, that, that

could be a rainfall event, just one rainfall event that happens to have the

right temperature and relative humidity following the rainfall where the

pathogen, maybe it takes--a spore splashes on another leaf. It takes that spore

a couple hours to germinate and then infect, all right. So, if it’s, if the sun

comes out right away, no problem. If it's cloudy and a little, little bit windy

for a couple hours, well, maybe that's the difference between a field-wide

epidemic and just a couple little low-lying leaves that happen to be kind of

sick. And we, as, as a, as a, you know, plant disease (clears throat) community

and an agriculture community are, collaborate with all the states in our region

and throughout the country to kind of predict or track the movements of these

pathogens over time seasonally.

Because we can, because there's--every decade or so, something new comes around

and everyone freaks out or we kind of figure out how to deal with it. But there

are, there are great systems where the plant pathologists in Louisiana will

start noticing, and it's pretty dependable because we can kind of track things

and it's all models. But like, okay, like we expect kind of--you know, April,

May, once we got our plants in the ground, okay--we expect to see this disease

start to show up in Louisiana because it's kind of warm and humid down there

before we get it. And then we can kind of track the, the movement of that

pathogen, both by models and through just firsthand reporting of plant disease

folks who are, you know, canvassing the country, to see these pathogens start

moving up through corn, through soybean, through wheat, whatever, through

apples, you know. As that environment changes, in this case it's more seasonal,

right, it gets humider and, you know, kind of rainier and warmer in the summer,

so we can track

that. And we are always collaborating with our colleagues across the country to

try and kind of keep these disease networks current and useful for growers and

plant disease scientists and industry professionals who often work with growers

too, who aren't affiliated necessarily with like university systems, to, you

know, say, okay, well, you know, the state, you know, Tennessee's getting this

real bad. So, we know it as an example--yeah, just a, just a general example.

You know, maybe we need the--it can't--if, if it’s, if it's warmer than seventy

degrees at night and it just rained, we know corn's gonna get hammered. Well, we

know the pathogen's down in Tennessee, and then here we go, we got a cold snap

and it rained, so we, we can look at the weather, we anticipate this event

coming. We can say, well, you, you may need to, you know, spray some chemical on

your plant tonight or this afternoon before the storm comes as a means to

control that. So, we didn't have those sort of tools available, you know, ten,

fifteen, twenty, thirty years ago.

We do now because of sort of, you know, comprehensive testing and monitoring and

communication between all these people who exist to keep our food, you know,

productive. Which is interesting when you figure most folks live in cities and

they just, they go to the store and the food's always there. It always looks the

same, it's always really shiny. (laughs) You know. And, and then there's this

tremendous army of people who are sometimes quite, quite literally in hip waders

and hand lenses, looking through, you know, some seedling somewhere in some

muddy field, trying to figure out what's going on so they can tell everyone else.

MCCOY:Are there any fun, new diseases that we can expect (laughs) on the

horizon in Kentucky?

HIRSCH:I'll call them fun. Other people would call them, you know, massively

disruptive and destructive to the crop. Yeah, so, one new one that's, that’s

coming in through corn is called--oh, and I'm, I’m having a--it's called tar

spot of corn because it looks

like the corn--imagine you have, like, asphalt ceiling tar kind of, and you tie

a, you take, take a paintbrush and kind of Jackson Pollock, kind of flick it on

a, on a, on a corn leaf. That's what this fungus looks like when it, when it,

when it makes, when it grows on the leaf. It forms a lesion, and it kind of

feels like braille a little bit. It's like a raised black lesion. It's really

obvious to people. It doesn't look right. And that disease is new to the U.S.

and has just been recently characterized in Kentucky. Because it's new to the

US, a lot of our native corn varieties that people grow that have been made and

bred by the agricultural companies haven't incorporated any meaningful genetic

resistance against that pathogen. So, it's kind of like Native Americans and

smallpox. It's, you know, kind of like COVID that came through a couple years

ago. There was no, you know, you know, resistance in, in the genetics of the

host against those pathogens. So, now the crop companies are having to, you

know, pretty quickly, you know, reassess their,

their research portfolio and say, okay, we've got this new thing. Now how do we

improve our crop genetics to get at that res, that, that plant disease triangle

again? You know, now, right now a lot of our corn is susceptible. Can we develop

resistant varieties of corn that are less susceptible or maybe even resistant?

And, you know, then that will affect the amount of disease and the cost of not

only lost yield, but like, management. Because we could still pray--you know,

spray chemicals. There's a lot of societal concern about that, and, and I think

to some extent, rightfully so. But also, it's expensive for the grower. It's

pretty tight margins in most agricultural commodities. So, they got to get out

there every week and spray something that's not free. It comes at great cost.

So, at some point they're spraying away all their money, and then, you know,

then it's just better to let the corn sit in the field and cross your fingers

than manage it as the textbook would suggest is the best way, because the

money's not there.

MCCOY:Mm-hmm, yeah. So,

you know, you talked about seed development as being one way in which I guess

it's a form of kind of adapting to a climate--

HIRSCH:--mm-hmm--

MCCOY:--a changing climate. Are there, are there any other sort of things that,

any other sort of methods that--

HIRSCH:--mm-hmm--

MCCOY:--that people are taking?

HIRSCH:Yeah. So, when we think about like plant disease control, one of the

means is gonna have a cultural control method. So, that's gonna be kind of what

we do with the plant and how we grow the plant. So, there, there is a lot of

work being conducted now on things that are as simple as like row spacing. It's

like you drive down the highway and you look at corn or whatever and you see the

corn is planted in rows. Well, the distance between those rows of corn is not

accidental. There's been a tremendous amount of research undertaken on the, the,

the pros and cons, the costs of benefits of that distance between those, those

rows of corn. So, the tighter they are to each other, the more corn you will get

per unit, or the more

corn plants you will grow, but they're gonna be competing with each other for

nutrients and water. So, you’ll pr--you may get a smaller ear, but also the

smaller rows you have, the, the more it's called canopy closure. Well, their

leaves will grow together, they will shade the ground, and then weeds don't grow

so much. So, if you had just a corn plant in the middle of a field with full

sun, you have to kind of hand pollinate it. But like, that would be like, you

know, it would have access to all the sun and all the water and all the

nutrients. It would be probably a very high-performing corn plant. But you have,

you know, five hundred acres of corn. (laughs) You know, so, that's not a

money-making sort of deal. So, there’s th--even just in, in, in the row spacing,

how far apart the corn kernels are planted in that row, that all matters. When

do we apply different chemicals? Do we, do we do that as a powdery treatment on

a seed? That, that, that the, the seed is treated in, in a, some water-soluble

chemicals that as it gets in the ground, those chemicals

dissolve into the water and the soil, and then protect that developing seed from

all the stuff in the soil that wants to eat it. You know, when, when do we, if

you have access to irrigation, when do you irrigate? Because that gets at the

disease triangle again. If you irrigate, the plant can't think. It doesn't know,

neither can the microbes. That's rain. So, if you choose to irrigate in the

morning on a cool day, well, that water's gonna sit on that corn plant all day.

And then it's just, that's, that’s gonna be a nice cool rainstorm, and some

pathogens love that. So, we always take a look at cultural controls. And

those--you know, even tillage. So, dust bowl stuff, people did full moldboard

plow, where they would just turn the top 18 inches of the soil over and bury all

the plant debris. That's really good for a lot of plant disease control, because

a lot of these microbes live in plant debris over the winter. So, when you bury

it, then there's no more path, you're planting in sort of clean soil. But, you

change the soil dynamics a lot, and then

if it doesn't rain for a bit and it's real windy, you get a dust bowl. So now,

since the 70s, the U.S. has gone to what's called no-till, or conservation

tillage, so you won't see a lot of fields where there's a tractor turning over

soil. And there's, and there’s really good reasons we don't do that anymore.

It's expensive, because fuel's expensive, and equipment's expensive, and it’s

takes a lot of energy to push a tractor and a, and a plow through a field. And

it results in soil erosion, and then farmers and growers will lose their topsoil

if it gets rin--you know, windy. There's, there’s a lot of reasons why no one

wants to do that. But one benefit for plant disease scientists as a profession

is that now, all of a sudden, there's all this rotten plant debris on the

surface of the soil that the next year's plants are growing through, and then it

just provides this sort of bridge of inoculum from last season to this season.

So, since the 1970s, we're seeing a big, or we have seen, kind of a big increase

in sort of sustainable agricultural practices

in terms of tillage and things like that. We've also seen a huge increase in

previously managed plant diseases, because all of a sudden, we're planting corn

into corn debris that has tons of pathogens from last year. So, as that little

seedling comes up, it's pushing through and rubbing on and getting spores and

bacteria stuck to it that then it can infect. So, you know, agri--I mean, just

like anything that's complicated, you make a change, and it has this sort of

ripple effect that people may not really consider. And then there, there's never

an option, or at least I'm not aware of any management strategy where it's one

hundred percent good. I mean, every, everything comes with a cost. So, it's a

matter of, you know, what do we want our costs to be? One example of, of a, of a

cost that I, I, I know gets people's passions fired up is genetically engineered

plants. So, and this is changing now because we have some new technologies and

stuff, but the first generation

of what I'll call GMOs--and I don't like that word. We can talk about that later

if you want. It doesn't quite have much to do with climate change, but--they

were designed to be toxic to insects and to be resistant to an herbicide. So,

the biggest yield reducer to plants in the world are weeds. The second is

pathogens, the third is insects. So, if you could control weeds, then you're

able to get more agricultural productivity because we care about the corn, we

don't care about all the other stuff. So, in, in, in the good old days, we would

full till the, you know, the field, which had all the dust bowl sort of problems

we talked about, and other ones I didn't talk about. And then you would plant

your corn, and then--you know, we're in summer break right now, it's July. The

reason kids get summers off is because you and me--and I'm a little bit older

than you, but not that much older than you--would have been in fields with plows

seventy years ago

with hoes, cutting down weeds. That was why summer break was summer break,

because there, the hands were needed on the farm. We got away from that because

we were able to genetically engineer corn plants to be resistant to herbicides.

So, we could spray herbicides over these fields, the weeds die, the, the corn

plants don't, soybean, cotton, all these other plants. That, there's issues with

that too, right? So, that, that chemical glyphosate has been shown in certain

jurisdictions to cause cancer, or at least to be a, you know, component of

people's development of cancer, mainly lymphoma, blood cancers. So, you know,

that’s, that's a problem. Also, weeds have grown resistant to, to the herbicide,

just as any evolutionary biologist could have predicted and did predict. So, now

there, now we're--kind of a new problem is that we’re, we're moving away from

chemicals like glyphosate and we're moving to sort of older,

slightly gnarl, gnarlier chemicals that also kill plants, but there was a reason

we moved away from them in the 70s, but they still work. And then when you think

about the plants being engineered to be resistant to insects, now--so, it's

called BT corn, and the BT stands for Ba, Bacillus thuringiensis, don't worry

about it. But it's a soil bacterium that makes a chemical that, when

lepidopteran insects, like caterpillars and stuff, chew on it, the chemical

kills them. So, it's toxic to insects, it's not toxic to us. And scientists took

these genes from these bacteria, genetically inserted them into corn in a very

kind of controlled way and tested these plants for fifteen years to make sure it

was okay. And then they, they're grown throughout hundreds of millions of acres

of our country right now. So, when the insects start chewing on the corn plants,

the insects die. The old way to deal with that was just spray pesticides,

like Raid. Not quite Raid, but like, I mean, stuff that isn't great for humans

because we're a lot more closely related to insects than we are plants. So,

there's some issues with exposure, especially long-term exposure, or there,

there appears to be some issues with long-term exposure to herbicides. There's

definitely problems with even short-term exposure to pesticides because, you

know, they’re, what kills insects often kills us too. So, the, the, the rise of

GMO plants, our, our pesticide use went way down, way down, but our herbicide

use skyrocketed. So, and also, our agricultural productivity skyrocketed as well

because we're, because we’re losing less yield to weeds and insects. So, if we

get rid of GMO plants--which is an option--you know, we're gonna have weed

issues and I don't know who's gonna weed those fields anymore. It's not people,

because we can't hardly get folks to harvest plants, let alone,

you know, cut down weeds for plants we're not even harvesting yet. But we're

gonna go back to spraying pesticides, which I don't think anybody wants. So,

it's a really challenging situation. I think if there was an easy answer, people

would have just answered it. We'd be moving on and arguing about something else.

(both laugh)

MCCOY:Yeah, I mean, like you, as you were saying, there, there's all this kind

of give and take and that there, there's maybe not necessarily a right solution to--

HIRSCH:--yeah, well, (sighs) and even the words right and wrong--we use those

words all the time, but those are kind of moral constructs. Those are subjective

constructs, you know. What's right for you or me as--I ain’t (??) even gonna say

you and me, just for what's right as a, for a city person who's of a

upper-middle class, socioeconomic background. It’s not necessarily right for a

city person who's of a lower

socioeconomic background. It's not necessarily right for a rural person of any

sort of, you know, background, who depends upon agriculture in a different way

than a city person does. So, you know, we always talk about good or bad, right

or wrong. And those, those aren't useful ways to talk about this, I don't think,

because your right is different than my right. Our right is different than who's

ever listening to this. So, we can't ever agree on right or wrong. We just have

to choose something and then there's gonna be a cost and a benefit. And those

can be objectively assessed and then argued about. But I think people emote a

lot in this issue just because that's how people interact with each other. And

there's a lot of energy that's invested in feeling about things, when I wish

decisions were just made and then we would do stuff. It's easy to say, right,

because we need both. We're humans, we're not robots. But I think there's a lot

of feels and there's not enough kind of objectivism, which I think

could probably be said about almost anything. (laughs) Because, because, because

it's easier, it’s easier to feel on something than it is to, like, know a fact.

And like, I think about, like, our ancestors, you know, were, you know, throwing

rocks at our food and, you know, trying to just not have wolves eat us. And

we're, and we’re walking along and we see a snake-looking stick on the path in

front of us. You know, we're not gonna clear the decks and do a

forty-five-minute snake stick investigation. We're just gonna probably walk

around it and move on with our day, because it's easier just to stereotype

things. Yes, it looks like a snake. You know, do I, do I, do I have the energy

to care about this? No, I gotta feed my family. I'm just gonna move on. So,

c--you know, could, could that scenario have played out differently where, you,

you know, with our ancestors, could that same sort of scenario play out better

now, where if we could just invest a little bit of time in learning something

instead of just feeling at people and then just getting into arguments

where there's no solution because we're not actually talking about anything

real? I think we would be better for that. That takes time. And people don't

have time, or they choose not to invest their time in stuff like this, most of

the time. (laughs) It all comes down to time. (laughs)

MCCOY:This is, this is maybe a question that ties in a little bit, you know,

some of the climate-related stuff and, and, and also the work that you do, do

within outreach and, and maybe a little bit to what you were just saying. But,

you know, I guess what, what sort of role do you see science education or ag ed,

education maybe, maybe playing in informing people about the science behind,

behind climate and climate change?

HIRSCH:You know, I think, I think the world's gonna do that work for us. The,

the sort of social discourse about the

veracity of man-made climate change is purely political. And it's, I mean, it's

largely conservative verse liberal. And of the social groups who have aligned

themselves with the science, it's almost all. Right now, in the U.S., Florida

and California are, are losing insurers. So, it, it is, it is--you cannot, or it

is very difficult to get an insurance policy on your house in Florida. It's

really hard to get it in California if you live in a fire-prone area. And

because these insurance companies have just lost--I mean, the, there’s, there’s,

there's been insolvencies, they've gone out of business, they can't cover the

cost of insuring homes in these areas because of increased risk of destruction

due to climate change. They’re, they’re looking at their current pocketbook and

Hurricane--I think it was Ivan last year that hit Tampa and just destroyed all

those communities--all the fires that happen all the time in California. Yeah,

California’s always had fires. Yeah, Florida’s always had hurricanes. But they

haven't happened to this extent. And these companies are looking at their models

and looking at math and saying “we, we cannot stay in business here.” So,

they're pulling out of these, of these countries. Educational outreach

specialists could have spent--and probably have spent in, I don't know, Florida,

wherever--their careers talking about climate change. And probably the people

who weren't gonna pay attention haven't. But then those same people or everybody

can't insure their houses anymore. You know, the system's gonna solve that for

everybody. We're gonna start to lose plants, products that we've taken for

granted. So, the U.S. hasn't had a major crop loss situation since the 1970s,

and it was corn. And it just caused commodity prices to rise, so nobody's starving

to death. It just--I mean, hurt pocketbooks, and that's real, but it's not like

folks are starving here. But like, we're gonna probably lose bananas, the banana

that we all eat. It's called Cavendish. You know, there's twelve hundred

varieties of bananas, and we eat one of them. It's really susceptible to a, to a

disease called Panama disease. And it's probably gonna go commercially extinct

in the next ten or fifteen years. And we're gonna get new weird-looking bananas.

So, there should be bananas, it’s just gonna be different. So, I encourage

people to go and buy the weird-looking bananas because we're establishing a

market for disease-resistant bananas. Coffee is gonna skyrocket due to climate

change because coffee's really susceptible to changes in climate due to the way

it's grown. But also, there's a disease that, as it gets warmer, the pathogen

can colonize more and more coffee, because coffee's grown up on hillsides where

it's cooler. As it gets warmer, that, that conducive temperature gets, you know,

higher and higher. So, these pathogens, called co--it's a disease called coffee

rust, are able to infect more coffee plants just because it's warm enough for

them on these hillsides.

So, we, we expect coffee not to go commercially extinct, but to be pretty

expensive in the next ten or fifteen years. And this has happened before. It's

why the British drink tea. Because in, in, in, in the 1700s, the same disease

wiped out a lot of the world's production of coffee. But luckily for the

English, and not so much for some of their colonial subjects, they had India,

which made tea and tea made caffeine. So, they shifted to tea largely and then

they, they kind of got, you know, they built their culture around tea

consumption and now they still do that way more than we do. So, you know, the

coffee rust has happened before. It's happening right now and will probably

happen again. So, yeah, I mean climate change, it’s--since it has to do with

that plant disease triangle, it's, it’s everything for plant, for plant

pathologists because we can't take for granted the climate's gonna be normal

because it's, it’s not. It hasn't been and we can see that even in Kentucky

with, I mean, when Maysville had that--

Eastern Kentucky had a tornado and then that same town flooded because it rained

twelve inches in twenty-four hours, you know. And that sort of thing is a

statistical improbability, but it's happening now. It's happening everywhere.

So, plant dis--er, you know, agricultural scientists can, you know, think about

our disease triangle, predict as best we can what the climate's gonna be, and

then try and make moves to address those concerns. My, one, one of my big

concerns is that--and this is just my thought--is, because I'm kind of a

pessimist, is that I think a lot of these climate models are wrong. I think, I

think they're too conservative and I think the actual global impact of man-made

climate change is gonna be so much more severe and variable than the models

account for. Because I think there's a lot of variables we, that, that the

model--and I'm not a climatologist, so maybe they account for these, but I

don't, I don’t believe we have a solid handle on how much methane's being

produced by melting

permafrost. I don't know if we have a solid handle about where all the carbon is

going into our oceans and how the impact of freshwater, glacial, and ice cap

melt is affecting the currents of our deep oceans and how that's changing the

movement of heat throughout our planet. All these things, we, I, it's, it’s too

complex for us to know. And the models are always getting better, but every

model is always wrong. That's, that’s what makes it a model. And I think our

models are too wrong and I think the future is really scary. Now with that being

said--and, and this gets into my sort of core pessimism, right? Like, as a, as

an educated consumer of food and science and a person who lives in the world and

wants it to be a better place, I have a five-year-old son, I want him to have a

better world, you know, what can we do when we're talking about a global system

that is being mismanaged? You know, I don’t,

I don't know what America can do, as, aside from pum--you know, t--sequestering

carbon out of the atmosphere. There's, there’s eight billion other people on

this world who I think have a right to cheap energy like we did for three

hundred years. And we just happen to kind of pump the atmosphere full of carbon

to a point now where things are changing in a way they haven't in, you know,

human history, or at least as far as we've been able to look back. So, you know,

is, is there anything we can do about it? I, I really don't think so. (laughs)

Which is sad. And I, I wish people would talk, not argue about, “Is, is climate

change real?” or “Do humans cause it?” I, I think those, those arguments are,

are, are, are clearly moot based upon data. I wish we would talk about, like,

“This is changing and what can we do about it?” You know, do, do we

stop mining coal and pumping natural gas? Is that a solution? It's a solution.

I, I don’t--I mean, we still need power, right? So, I don’t kn--do we, do we do

a bunch of nuclear plants? I mean, we, we could have decarbonized in the 70s,

but we chose not to because of fears of nuclear, you know, power and the storage

of nuclear chemicals. You know, s--we're not gonna get rid of coal. We're not

gonna get rid of natural gas. Is there a place for everything? Yes. And then

whatever we do, there's other bigger countries who have their own agendas and

they're gonna do what they do. And there's whole continents that are now arising

into the middle class and they need, you know, cheap energy just like we did a

hundred years ago. I don't know. I don't. (laughs) I think, I think the future

is bright in the way that our sunrises have been bright in Kentucky with all of

the smoke from the Western Canadian wildfires. I think that's how it's gonna be.

It's gonna be,

it's gonna be a different place that we can't predict as well, but will, through

change, be harder for most people. And that's where I think a sophisticated

agricultural system like we have in America and like we have in Kentucky. I

mean, our, our state has invested a lot in the Ag College, our Cooperative

Extension Service and, and, and lots of other sort of ancillary groups to, you

know, maintain and continue to improve Kentucky agriculture. Because it's not

only important for our taxpayers and the people, but just for our, for our

country, because Kentucky’s a, an, an important agricultural state. So, you

know, we're, we’re in this, we’re all in this position, but especially

scientists who engage with agriculture and the environment is to try and make

the best moves we can to maintain productivity while being sensitive to a changing

world. And I just hope we don't sort of overcorrect one way or the other. I

don't think we should get rid of all of our cows, even though they make a lot of

methane, because people still like eating beef and there's a lot of Kentuckians

who depend upon their cow herds for, you know, livelihood, you know. But at the

same time, that's a important source of, you know, atmospheric carbon. So, what

do we do? I don't have any solutions. If I did, I would be so busy with speaking

appointments and book tours and stuff that I, you know, I, I wouldn't have time

for something as useful as a, as a, as a conversation here. I'd just be lining

my pockets. And I don't think there's any answers. And I didn't mean for this to

take a dark turn. I just, I don't, I don’t see the world changing. I mean,

people change. You know, people use paper straws instead of plastic straws, and,

you know, that's fine. Doesn’t move the needle, but it, I think it makes people

feel better about stuff. You know, and, and we can choose to live more

sustainably. We can watch where our food comes from and make educated decisions

that we believe is in the interest of not only ourselves and our families and

our communities, but the world.

If you have that luxury--a lot of people don't--we just, I don't know, gotta do

the best we can. And, and I'm afraid it's not gonna be enough. But you know, I

don't think we should give up either.

MCCOY:Yeah. Well, I--actually I think that that's probably a good place to, to

sort of stop at. And, you know, I--anyway, I just want to thank you for coming

and agreeing to do this interview, and--

HIRSCH:Could I, c--can we, can we try and end on a, on a, on a, on a good note?

MCCOY:We can. We do that actually. Yeah.

HIRSCH:I don't know. Yeah, we've, we’ve kind of dug myself into this sort of

shallow morass here.

MCCOY:But you did give a really good overview, kind of a, a good sort of, I

don't know, a good overview of a lot of the different topics that we touched on.

And, and I think summarize some of that well, but--

HIRSCH:--yeah, you know. So, yeah, so like a, it’s like an, like an area of, of

growth and positivity. So, and I, I keep coming back to genetically modified

organisms, because--and this will be short because I know we're gonna get on

time. But just like, you know, there's, there’s a lot of concerns for

genetically insured organisms. I get a lot of those concerns. Most

of them are not supported by data, but that they--l, l, lead with science, lose

with science. It's what I always say when I'm talking to folks, just because it,

you know, you could have some wonky nerd talking about stuff and it doesn't

matter. People don't want to hear that. But there are some really cool

innovations coming with next generation genetic engineering of, I mean, humans

for curing cancer, but also in agriculture, where we will--if they, these

products come to fruition, we will have, I mean, very advanced ecologically

friendly and sustainable products that we, we can't even imagine. I mean, corn

we don't need to fertilize as much, drought-tolerant plants, corn that

fertilizes itself. Salmon that grow--this is now out--AquAdvantage salmon that

grows twice as fast as normal salmon. You know, does it make you grow twice as

fast? No, no, it, it's totally fine to eat. So, you know, the biotechnology

sphere is doing a lot to, to, you know, improve

agricultural production in a way that takes into account or diminished ability

to produce it, because we don't have more land. We don't--you know, every sort

of ecological system appears to not be thriving. (laughs) Not every. Most. So,

we have to do more with less. And I think biotechnology is the bridge for us to

do that and have affordable food. We can do it without biotechnology, but then

there's gonna be a lot of hunger. And I think where hunger is, war follows, or

at least that's been the track of human history. Maybe not here, maybe here, who

knows, but certainly in other places where they don't have a sophisticated

system like we do, where they can't respond to crop losses. So, I think that

there's--it’s a new era in, in our world, in our human existence. It's a new--

we, we've never been somewhere like this before. But we've also never had the

tools that we've

had now to be able to deal with it. And I hope that whoever decides these things

and the people who do the discussions that inform the people who make these

decisions, they're able to look at the tools we have at our disposal and make

educated and ethical, but useful and helpful decisions that can potentially

utilize those tools to help us all out. Something I, something I always, you

know, mention in my class, all, all these--you know, we say biotechnology, GMOs.

They’re just tools. And tools can be used for good. They could be used, they

could be accidentally misused and could hurt ourselves, or they could be used

for evil. You know, the first time--this isn't my example, but--you know, the

first time someone built a hammer or whatever, you're like, “Yeah, we, we can

build an orphanage with this hammer.” Good. You can also drop the hammer

on your foot accidentally and break your toes. And you can also use that hammer

to murder orphans. All three are plausible. We have all these tools. How do we

use them? Do we use them at all? If we don't use them, what do we give up by

their unuse? I don't know. These are all conversations that we're a, we’re

actively having as a society, but, you know, they, they will lead to solutions,

which will lead to more problems. But that's a problem for us later when we have

really important issues now. So maybe that's my, that’s my, you know, slide up a

little bit toward happiness and, and, and something more, you know, thinking

forward to the future, because we, we have tools now that we could have not

imagined ten years ago. And I think they should be used. And, and, and I hope

that use is good as a subjective moral construct. (both laugh)

MCCOY:Well, that's great. I think we'll, we’ll go ahead and, and end there. And

thank you so much again, Lou, for agreeing

to, to come and do this.

HIRSCH:Thank you. I really enjoyed this and I’m glad you’re all are having

these discussions.

[End of interview.]