MYERS:All right, so, let's get this going. All right, so if you could start, uh, just by telling us a little bit about yourself, where you're from, what's your daily routine, um. those sort of things?

NELSEN:Um, my name, right--

MYERS:--yeah--

NELSEN:--is that what you said? My name's Eli Nelsen. Um, I was the youngest--one of the youngest executives--executive chefs in southeastern Kentucky. Um, I've been working in the restaurants for a few years now. And then, my grandparents, uh, became a little ill, so I moved back up here to take care of them and, uh--just kind of DoorDashing in the middle of the night, just to kind of make some money here and there. But, um, that's really about it--but, like I said earlier, I just got a, a job here for the country club. So, hopefully I'll get back into that kind of routine. I'm not trying to get back to the top yet. It's weird being, uh, the big dog in a little yard, I guess you could say. But up here, it's a lot harder. A lot, lot harder. So, I'm not even going to fool with it because that--it drained me down there, so I'm not even going to try up here for a while, you know? You're only twenty-something for a little while. I've got my whole life to work. So, like, let's just--have some fun for a little bit.

MYERS:Do you know, uh, chef Tanya White--Whitehouse?

NELSEN:For--where's she from?

MYERS:She, uh, actually works at UK, but she used to work for Rita Michael (??).

NELSEN:Oh, really?

MYERS:If you're familiar with her--

NELSEN:--really?

MYERS:Yeah.

NELSEN:Now, see, I haven't met anyone big--cool like that. See, I'm like--I'm from like the holler--

MYERS:--yeah--

NELSEN:--in Kentucky. You know what I mean? Like, deep woods--(Nelsen coughs). And, uh, like--I was--I, I say this with no ego--(Myers clears throat)--or, like, not trying to sound like oh (??), but it, it was a big deal. Like--and I thought it was cool. Everyone else thought it was cool. Everyone was like proud of me, for once. And, uh--but then you move up here, and it's just like, you know, I couldn't even get a job at First Watch. I think it was because, you go from being the head chef of this restaurant, and then you go to this, like, egg place, and they're just like--(Myers laughs)--"What's your--what's your intention?" You know what I mean? (Nelsen sniffs) So, I think that's all that was. It wasn't that I couldn't do eggs. My name used to be Ami Mami (??). Like, that's not the problem at all, but, anyway (Myers and Nelsen laugh).

MYERS:And, um, how did you first hear about the Post Clinic?

NELSEN:Um, my great aunt, uh, Louise, she's, uh, she helped open it. I'm pretty sure she got, like, the funding for it, or something like that. And, um, I've been needing to go to the doctor just to get like--I haven't had a physical in probably six years--seven years--since high school. And, uh, I didn't have insurance and they said, "Well, we got this clinic, let's go to it," and I had really bad, like, these front cavities--I had like this big ass hole--excuse me I didn't mean to say that--in my teeth and, uh, they--[phone rings]--said, "Well, let's--she can get you in," so, they got me in and I've been here--I've been here--I've had--got everything fixed and now I'm actually kind of sad that I don't get to come back. They were like my friends, they really were--(Nelsen and Myers laugh)--those poor ladies (Nelsen and Myers laugh).

MYERS:And, how was your experience here, like, accessing the healthcare through the Post Clinic?

NELSEN:Oh, great, wonderful. I mean, I walked in, did some paperwork, you know, the usual, where you live, who are you kind of thing. And, yeah, that was really it. And then they took me [[??WORD UNCLEAR]] right in, and I just told them what was wrong, and they said, "All right, we can do this and that." And--because they have the dentist side and, like, the medical side. So, I even got to see Dr. Olga and she took care of me. She did--and she was cool, because she did like natural supplements. She tried to do everything natural. She wasn't, like, trying to get me on any kind of pills or do this and that and--it was all like natural substances you can get over the, like--just at Wal--Walgreens or whatever. So, that was really, really cool. Around here, these like smaller towns there're always kind of weird doctors and pushers and stuff like that. So, that was really refreshing. I'm not gonna lie.

MYERS:Yeah, and, um, speaking of that, like, how has your experience with healthcare been before the Post Clinic?

NELSEN:Well, um, uncomfortable.

MYERS:Mm-hmm.

NELSEN:I mean, I feel like, like everyone--just about everyone can say that. Uh, here, it felt more like they were actually--like it wasn't, like, just, like, their job just to come in and then, you know, fix you and then leave, you know what I mean? It wasn't so, like, rushed. It wasn't so--just--you know what I mean. Like, it was just-- it felt like everywhere else you've ever gone to, the doctor comes in, "Hey, how you doing? What's up? All right, well, goodbye." You know what I mean? And then he just leaves. And it's like, what is going on here? They're more thorough here, because they actually sit--take the time to, you know, talk to you and see what's going on. And, uh, so, that was really, really nice, because, um, before, it was just, you don't--you didn't even want to go to the doctor, because it's like, what's the point? Unless your, like, arm snapped in half or something, then, like, what is the point of going (Nelsen laughs)? And yeah, so like, that--I really enjoyed that here, because--it was almost like therapy, too, because I would get to talk to them. I've never even talked to a--especially the dentist, because I know everyone fears the dentist, just about. But here, they're so, like, just cautious and tender. And like--because the head doc--uh, dentist here--(Nelsen sniffs)--she worked with kids for twenty years. And if you can conquer a kid with, you know, the dentist, you can do it. Like, you can do it with just about anybody. So, they're really, really--they're really patient. They're really, just, kind, and, and that really, really helped out with the whole experience for sure.

MYERS:Yeah.

NELSEN:Any other questions? (Nelsen laughs).

MYERS:Um, so, you kind of talked a little bit about it, but how has the clinic, kind of, impacted your health or well-being?

NELSEN:Oh, yeah, wonderfully. I mean, like I said, I've never, ever, ever had the relationship I've had with the women here as I have anywhere else.

MYERS:Mm-hmm.

NELSEN:Um, they remember my name--(Nelsen laughs)--you know, first of all, that's always cool. But granted, like where I'm from, if you had anything seriously wrong with you, you had to go to Lexington, which is about--round trip, two hundred miles. And, when you get up there, you know, it's, like I said, with the doctors, they just run in, see what's wrong with you, and then they're leaving before you can even get a word in, and you didn't know what was going on. And, uh--but here, I mean, they're--it--they were just, so nice to you, and they would sit there and talk to you about your actual problems, like, in your real life, not just, "My arm hurts," but, you know, we would just talk about, you know, "What else is going on with you," you know what I mean? Like, the--my--one of my ladies here, she's got a candle store down the road. And like, I love candles (Myers laughs). And we talked about candles and, like, what to do to make it, like, more fun for, like, a downtown setting. I'm like, "You should have little candle parties," you know what I mean? I know people would love to go make a candle and dance, or something like that, like, I would--I would go to that (Nelsen sniffs). But you know, just little things like that. We would just talk about, you know, business and life and trials and tribulations and all that good stuff. And you know, that's--[phone rings]--that's more than I can say I've ever gotten at any other dentist or doctor ever, so. That was really cool.

MYERS:They (??) feel more like people--

NELSEN:--yeah, it's like, "Hey, we're people, not a, a rat lab," or what--you know what I mean? Like, I don't know, a subject, I guess you could say. But, um, but yeah, I would come here time and time again if I could. And I will, if I can, for sure (Nelsen sniffs).

MYERS:How long have you been coming here?

NELSEN:Um, my first visit was, like, three weeks ago, four weeks ago--a month, I guess you could say, about a month ago. And then, they broke up my visits into like sections because I had certain fillings, and they had to like numb you up and all that stuff.

MYERS:Mm-hmm.

NELSEN:Um, I was--I actually got really sad when they did the last one. I was like, "Well, hell. I'm not going to be able to come back here unless something's wrong," which, you know, you never want to go see your doctor because if you're healthy, then everything's good. But, it was--like I said, it's like that sense of just, you know, they just--they were almost like therapists, because they would just listen to you, they're patient. They would--they would help you out, and give you life advice because, you know, they've been there, done that, and, uh, you know, not everyone's perfect, and they understood that, and--(Nelsen sniffs)--they're not going to judge you for anything. I mean, there was reasons like, you know, because of abuse--substance abuse is why my mouth was the way it was, and, and now it's like it's getting back together--I always had nice teeth, and, uh, I really took pride in my teeth, I had braces and everything for years, and, and I just messed them all up, but, uh, but now we're back on track with them, and, it feels good. I love it, actually. And without them, I don't think it would have happened. For sure, it would not have happened.

MYERS:Yeah. Do you feel like there's kind of, a sense of community here--

NELSEN:--absolutely--

MYERS:--with your relationships (??)--

NELSEN:--Absolutely. I'm wanting to bring them, like--have cookouts this summer here. I know Mount Sterling in itself is a community-based town, like, uh, with the churches, and they're, they're all just, like, hubbed together. So, it's like, you know, help your neighbor out kind of thing. Even if you are from Lexington, or if it's because you've got messed up teeth, or if you need a coat or something, you know what I mean? They're just like, "Come on in. We've got you taken care of." And I like that feeling. It's, it's really comforting, and, uh--especially in this time of this day and age, you know, where everything seems so greedy and, you know, it's just evil and the lingering in the background. But, not here, it's like a little, uh, sense of joy, I guess you could say, and happiness here, even if you are just getting drilled in the teeth. But, it's--(Nelsen laughs)--they make it pleasant, I swear.

MYERS:Could you talk a little more about, um, the Post Clinic's, like, role in the community? Like, do you see it, like, having partnerships with people in the community, organizations--

NELSEN:--yeah, so--

MYERS:--[[?? WORDS UNCLEAR]]--

NELSEN:--if Mount Sterling--which I know is--if it's anything like the, the town I grew up in, Corbin, they're small. Everyone's--most people are poor and, if they--if they do make just enough money, then they don't get the insurance, you know what I mean? So, it's like you either are struggling or you're making it, but you can't afford the insurance, you know what I mean? So it's like, most people don't have insurance, and, uh, and that's why a lot of people are walking around with health problems and--this place, you know--as long as you ain't rich--(Nelsen laughs)--you know, you can come in here and get whatever done, help that you need. And, that's huge for this place because, like I said, all these small towns around here--I mean, Kentucky's got a lot of--it's got some of the poorest towns in America around here, you know what I mean? It's so--it's, it's crazy to see that, like, you know, people with just--it can be like a tooth thing or, whatever, blood, and if--and like if it is something more serious, they will get you to where you need to be to have that further studied. You know what I mean? So, that's huge for this community. And, um, I've seen nothing great--but great things come out of it. And, I mean, who can turn down a free checkup? You know what I mean? It couldn't hurt anybody.

MYERS:And you don't have to drive two hundred miles for it.

NELSEN:Yeah, no. Yeah--I would. Hell, I have (Myers and Nelsen laugh). But, uh, but yeah, I would do it time and time again, just because--even if it--just besides it being free, you just get that like--that like, you know, more personal experience here. You know what I mean? Like, they actually care a little bit. It's not just like a job to them, because they're not getting paid. You know what I mean? The doc--like, I think the big doctor does, but it's not much. It's just something like, "Hey, you know, we really appreciate it." But, yeah, they're not paid. And they're still doing it with a smile on their face. So, that's how you know it's--they're doing it from their hearts and not from their pockets. You know what I mean? So, that's a huge thing for sure. For sure.

MYERS:Any final thoughts, or things you wanna say?

NELSEN:(Nelsen laughs) I feel like this is gonna be wild footage (Myers laughs). I mean, you know, this place--I couldn't recommend it enough. Um, and if you're ever scared or nervous about going to the doctor, no matter how personal it is or weird or awkward, these people will--they will not show you any kind of judgment or, like, you know what I mean? They will just--they'll, they'll, they'll use discretion if they have to, or they'll, they'll laugh and be your best friend, or whatever--or they'll talk to you about your problems. It's just--whoever you are, no matter what walk of life, what race, gender, sex, whatever, it doesn't matter here. Because, I was like the weird social freak butterfly thing that came up in here and rocked these ladies' worlds--(Myers laughs)--and they loved it. And they loved it. Because they're not--I'm not the, you know, typical, you know, hillbilly that walks up in here or anything like that, but--that's what I'm saying, like, no matter who you are, you'll get treated fairly here, and com--and it'll be an experience you won't forget, for sure. You'll definitely remember this place, if you come. I know that.

MYERS:Great. (Nelsen laughs) Awesome.

NELSEN:I hope that gets edited and trimmed. Not the manual for the camera--(Nelsen and Myers laugh).

MYERS:We're not professionals--(Myers laughs).

NELSEN:Oh, it's fine. I'm not a professional--