BOTTS:How many people have you interviewed today?

SAMMONS:You're our second, or I guess third today. Um--

BOTTS:Louise? Did you interview Louise?

SAMMONS:Not yet. We're--I think we're interviewing Louise--

UNKNOWN:On the 12th.

SAMMONS:--on the 12th, yeah. Yup.

BOTTS:Oh, okay.

SAMMONS:Um, but yeah.

BOTTS:Did you interview Dr. Roberts?

UNKNOWN:We inter--we're interviewing Dr. Roberts on April 12th as well--

BOTTS:Okay.

SAMMONS:--but we interviewed, um, um, The Kendrick's, Dr. Kendrick's.

BOTTS:Okay. All right.

SAMMONS:Wonderful. Well, thank you so much again for being with us today, um, and, and helping out The Post Clinic. Just to get started, can you tell me a little bit about yourself, uh, your daily life as mayor, um, and what you love about this community?

BOTTS:So, I could speak all day on that. So, um, a little bit about me?

SAMMONS:Yeah, yeah.

BOTTS:Well, I was born and raised, uh, right here in this community, graduated high school, left for twenty years, uh, served this country as a United States Marine--

SAMMONS:Thank you.

SAMMONS:--retired, came home, and, um, ran for office, I served as city council member for four years, and then ran for mayor, and I have served as mayor for seven years now. I'm on my seventh year. So, I'd like to say that I'm mayor of the finest city in the Commonwealth. I think this is an awesome community, a community that has a lot of nice things, but it's (??) got a lot of great people, and a lot of people that do amazing things for this community that are unsung--unsung heroes every single day, so, I'm very honored that I'm able to represent them and to serve them and to do what I can where I'm at in this period of time to just try to make a positive impact in their lives and the lives of the citizens across this community and really just make it a better place, um, hopefully not just now, but for the next generation that's coming. Um, my daily activities, you can see how I'm dressed. It's every day I'm, uh, it feels like I'm running all the time. Um, um, you know, today we're dealing with storms. Tonight I've got an ROTC ball that I have to go to with the students and, you know, support them in, in their endeavors. Um, but every day is, is a, a challenge. Every day is different than the next, or the previous day. And, um, it's just very rewarding. Uh, I also serve as a city manager, so I'm not just the senior elected official of the city but I'm the city manager so I'm responsible for the day-to-day operations of the city and that includes, you know, twenty-seven police officers and staff and eight public works and then everybody that serves in city hall and then a lot of what I do as mayor is just be a cheerleader for the community and to try to support, you know, great projects like this one in The Post Clinic and to, uh, you know, just make sure that we are all lifting each other up and doing what we can, as I said earlier, in this space and time to just make sure that, you know, we're all, we're all headed in the right direction together, so. Did I miss anything? I know you asked me a lot there.

SAMMONS:No, that's, that's wonderful. Thank you. Um, can you just tell me a little bit about your relationship with this Post Clinic and the history that you have with it?

BOTTS:Well, so, um, you know, most of my relationship has, has been with trying to help grow this clinic through, you know, my work to not only promote all the good that's going on here, uh, but to help them build this new building. And then so a lot of that was, you know, working with federal and state partners to try to obtain the funds to build this, this building. It was a very long process, um, one that we hit so many roadblocks along the way, and, um, there were some days I didn't know if we were going to get it done. You know, they were doing amazing things in the building they were at, um, but they just needed more space in order to grow and to continue to serve and, and to impact as many lives as they can. That's hard to do when you're in cramped space. It's not ADA compliant. Um, so most of my relationship has been, you know, in, in the capacity as mayor, just trying to work to, to help secure funding to get them a new facility. But I do have a, you know, personal stories of, you know, my relationships with citizens who were able to use this, this facility because either they're underinsured or uninsured or had nowhere else to turn. And actually, we hosted an exchange student a few years ago. And, uh, the exchange student came to town and needed a physical before they could, uh, before he could play sports. Um, so he didn't have a doctor. He's not, you know, he's new to America. He doesn't have insurance. Where do you go? And it was pretty cool that there's a Post Clinic in town that will see anyone. And I was able to bring him up here and he was able to get his physical for soccer and then for school and then, you know, be able to go chase his dream, uh, because there was a great facility like this that was able to, you know, see him on a very short turnaround there, so.

SAMMONS:Mm-hmm. Um, I guess overall, how have you seen The Post Clinic impact residents and patients, either their health or just overall well-being?

BOTTS:Yeah, um, so, it's good to see, you know, as elected officials we're here to serve the citizens we represent. And we take for granted sometimes, you know, in our own lives how blessed we are and how many opportunities we may have or, luxuries for lack of a better term that we may have but there are a lot of people who struggle day to day and I've seen, you know, so many people who had nowhere else to turn that were able to come to The Post Clinic and to either obtain, you know, much needed health care maybe a lot of them are working it's just the, the insurance doesn't cover their needs sometimes. Um, you know, we have Amish populations that, you know, are outside of the traditional insurance coverage but they're able to use this facility. Um, I've seen people who needed a new smile, you know, needed dental work, and they were able to come here and get that, which enabled them to get a job. So when you look, there's just so many great stories that, you know, we may take for granted. Like I said, I have health care coverage. I'm good. But, you know, for folks that don't have that, to have a place in their community they can turn to, I mean, that's, this is probably one of the best projects I've been involved with as an elected official because of the, you know, impact it's having on vulnerable populations. So that's, that's very rewarding and, you know, something that I'm very proud of that I can look at people and tell them, hey, we've, we've got you covered. We've got a place that's going to be able to see you if you hit a tough patch or you just don't have anywhere else to go.

SAMMONS:Um, for the patients you've seen, um, and known that have been at the health--this health clinic, um, have you noticed a shift in relationship between patient and health care provider?

BOTTS:A shift in relationship? Like in what way?

SAMMONS:Mm-hmm. Or perception of health care.

BOTTS:Well, I think, you know, which you get very, you know, most health care professionals are, are trying to make that personal connection. And, you know, the, the bigger the health care provider, the harder that is sometimes, I think. You know, here, I really see what they do is it's almost a family atmosphere. And I think that's so very important for anyone that's coming to seek health care that you think you're being treated like family. But I think it also helps build trust. A lot of folks that have come here have not had insurance. They've just not been able to see health care providers. They probably put it off, probably not had very good experiences therefore they just kind of didn't trust the health care system so having a cl--a Post Clinic like this that's able to see anyone and, you know, to give them a safe place to come and to make them feel that, you know, they're valued and that, that, you know, that what, what's being provided is something that, you know, should have always been there for them. Um, I think that's, that's helped patients build trust with providers here. And I think, you know, for providers, they're all volunteers, I mean, you know, they're coming here to volunteer their time. And I--for a lot of them, I think they can get caught up and, you know, you're just seeing patients every day and you're trying to cycle people through and, you know, for them that this, this is a place where they come and they are providing health care maybe in a different way than they have before, They're able to slow down a little bit, they're able to, you know, build a few more personal relationships so I think it's been good for not only the patients but for the providers that volunteer their time here.

SAMMONS:Wonderful, um, overall, how has the clinic impacted the community, and how would you say Mount Sterling is distinct from other communities?

BOTTS:From this im--from the impact that The Post Clinic has, has had? Well, not just our community, um, it's the, you know, even the communities that surround Mount Sterling, so, uh, I can't remember the number of counties off the top of my head, but it's over a dozen, probably, counties that have folks that come here to use this clinic, which was a big--for us when we go--when we went to build it when we were trying to obtain funding. That's one of the selling points, that it's not just benefiting Mount Sterling, it's benefiting the surrounding communities too, by helping meet the needs of, of vulnerable populations in those communities. Um, so, for us, this is one of the nice things I talk about that we have because we're able to offer something that a lot of communities are not, that, and that is a place for people to go when they don't have any other options. You know you c--you have to be seen, I mean, if you go to the hospital, they have to see you, but there's going to be challenges of follow-on care. If you don't have insurance, there's going to be challenges of, you know, setting up other types of care, specialized types of care if you don't have insurance, um, so having a facility like this really just--I think it's something that we can brag on in our community and that we can say that we're proud that we're offering this. It's also important, I think, we have stressed with our industry and businesses here that if they, if they are having a hard time with providing insurance coverage or finding that place for somebody to be seen, that we can help. And I know that this Post Clinic has helped with certain physicals, uh, physical exams, uh, for folks, um, for particular type programs when they were not able to get in through a traditional type route in a quick way, I know they've been able to do that a few times up here. Um, so it's really helped for the--in those cases where they're not able to find, you know, a place for, for, uh, for one of their workers to go. And then I went back, and, and let me go back to when I talked about underinsured. There's a lot of hardworking people that want to be in the workforce. They're getting insurance coverage, but that insurance coverage isn't very good. And I think that helps. I won't name a business, but like a, a business that's in an auto parts type store or whatever, you know, there's challenges of being able to get a good, good income working there an hourly income, and then there's the challenges of that business being able to provide health care. You know, and then--so when you have a place, and the health care coverage may, you know, they may be providing it, it's just not, you know, it may have high deductibles. Um, having a place like this has really helped the workforce and those type of businesses, um, that they have a place that they want to be employed, they want to get out and work, but the health coverage, for whatever reason, may be a challenge at those locations that they have this opportunity to come up here to, so, it's just a win-win for our community. It's a win for local government. It's a win for our citizens. It's a win for the workforce. It's a win for, uh, industry and business. It's just a good, good, good model here that I think, you know, should be replicated throughout the state, throughout the nation, really. I mean, we have gaps in insurance coverage everywhere. You know, even though the Affordable Care Act says everybody's going to be covered, right? Well, this place is still being, they're still seeing people every single day. So that's telling you that the model that's been created still isn't perfect, that there's still people that need to be seen. And so this has been nice for our community to say, we, we offer a place for you to go when you're have--when you don't have anywhere else to go. I hope that answered it.

SAMMONS:Yeah, absolutely.

BOTTS:You can flip a switch on me. I can just talk all day, so--

SAMMONS:No, we love it, please do.

BOTTS:--I don't know if I answered the question or not. If I didn't, tell me.

SAMMONS:Please do. Um, do you have any specific sh--stories? I know you mentioned one a little bit earlier, but any other stories you could share, um, anecdotally about this clinic?

BOTTS:Now, I, I, I did mention the personal story with helping a exchange student, um, so, you know, that was my first encounter with The Post Clinic, and that was before, it's before, it might have been right before I became mayor or my first year as mayor so, when they approached me wanting to apply for grant funding, I'd already had a very positive experience, you know, here. Um, so that, you know, helped me build that relationship early there, um, so I had that personal experience but as I said before it's just, we'll run into people periodically that just did not have a place to go and we're out but we're able to say, Hey we've got you covered we've got a place for you to go, and I try to do a warm handoff in those cases and, you know, I want to make sure that they have somebody that can receive them here, uh, Louise is generally great about that, uh, all I'd have to do is make a call to Louise and she's going to make sure that they're taken care of but I've got people who work in my church that volunteer up here so there's just plenty of opportunities when I run into somebody that has not--that doesn't have options, I can say, I, I can make a phone call very quickly, which I've done, and we can get somebody seen, uh, up here. I did mention the one about, you know, for somebody to be able to get dental work and to get a new smile, for them to obtain employment. I mean, that's life-changing and, you know, that's happened up here, um, so I just think that that's truly something special that, just people have a place to go. But if ev--if everything else in the, in the regular model has failed, there's a place right here.

SAMMONS:Is there anything additional you would like to add, question-wise?

UNKNOWN:Actually, yeah. Um, you mentioned your time, um, in the service.

SAMMONS:Has that, like, impacted the way that you, like, um, like interact with The Post Clinic and help, like, help people find, um, like, healthcare through here? Like um--I just thought that was interesting.

BOTTS:Mm-hmm. So, yeah I don't know how much you're familiar with, uh, the military service model, but, you know, when you're in, I'm provided, I mean, it was free healthcare. It was part of my benefits package. And I always had very positive experiences. My spouse and son were always covered by, um, the military health care system. Sometimes you're seen on base. Sometimes they're seen off of base. But I'm a big believer in, you know, I think government systems can be very good. I saw that it was good in the military. Um, I worked for the Department of Veterans Affairs for nine years before I became mayor, and that's another excellent health care system. It doesn't get--it gets horrible media coverage, but it's a government health care system, and it's expected to be perfect. That's the problem with government. Government's always expected to be perfect. If, you know, the civilian side, as we say, you're allowed to not be perfect. But in the government, you're supposed to be perfect because it's taxpayer dollars that are paying for it. So I've had those wonderful experiences with the government systems. This one is, is a volunteer type system, but, you know, government funding helped build this beautiful building. And, you know, it uh, it's allowed them to expand what they're doing and to, um, you know, just provide better, I think, care. It's tough when you're in a cramped space. It's tough when you're not in an ADA-compliant space, as I said before. So it was good to be able to give them this building here, but, you know, it's just one of those. It's really a, a great question. You know, I, I see--everybody sees the world based on the path that they've taken in life and my path, having been in government pretty much my whole career, um, I see that the, just the value added of this, you know, for folks that have not had my experiences they may not see that this place has the--that type of value, you know, because they may have been the--private health care coverage or whatever, um, but I, I just, I see the value based on the road that I've taken because I've always had access to health care, and I'm a big believer that everybody else--nobody in America--we're supposed to be the greatest country in the world, right? That's what we say all the time. I truly believe it. We are, um, but sometimes we're not very good at some things, and healthcare-wise, we've, we've got a lot of gaps. This helps cover a lot of those gaps, having a place like this, so.

UNKNOWN:I think Louise also mentioned, um, that you all, like organized, or that you organized, um, like transportation for folks, um, that might not have transportation to this?

BOTTS:Yeah, that's a great, that's a great win for us. So when I ran for office, um, wh--and I did it the old-fashioned way, I went door-to-door, and I'd always ask people, what's the one thing I can do to make your life better? And I kept hearing from people, I nee--I don't have reliable transportation, and that was a real eye, eye-opener for me. Because you just figure, everybody can figure out a way to get around, right? But there's so many people that, that may have disabilities, that may have limited vision, that may have vision, you know, issues. Um, they may only have one car to (??) the family and there's four people sharing it, you know when, so when we looked at that, one of the first things I did as mayor was we partnered with, uh, some private entities, other go--government agencies, and we figured out a way to get a public transportation system going, so, um, it's one of the things I'm most proud of, um, that we've been able to provide that to those who need it. And then that's been a huge win for this place, when they'll tell somebody, We can see you, and the first thing they say is, Well, how am I supposed to get there? And they can say, Well, that's a great question. And we've got tickets that we can provide you to a, uh, transit system that'll be able to get you up here to get you seen. So, um, as I--I don't know if I said it earlier, but, you know, in--that's what we're supposed to be doing in government. We're supposed to be making sure that we're providing, you know, the basic necessities for everybody. And, um, having that transit system be able to be available for those that need this place here has just been so valuable and just, uh, such a great partnership between those two organizations, so. And then, you know, with, with The Post Clinic, they're seeing people here, but, you know, they're also, they're--the staff are volunteering their time to go to the community health fairs. And, you know, while--not only are they doing healthcare screenings, but they're there with, you know, a transit system who may be helping them get there, and then the, the health department who may be able to do screenings to see if there's other issues within their lives that they can help, you know, point them in the right direction. And then, you know, even on the, um, with churches that volunteer to, you know, be, may be able to, to come in and take care of a specific need that government can't because of restrictions that, that are in place with the way taxpayer dollars are spent. So, you know, this is, I say communities are, are huge puzzles, right? And, and every piece has to fit together perfectly. And this, like, this big puzzle that we have for the city of Mount Sterling of Montgomery County like every piece has to go in place and every piece has to fit in with the next and we've needed this piece of the puzzle, you know, uh, for years here, and they've been doing it to now with a brand new building, you know, they're just playing such a valuable part in this community, such a valuable role. And, you know, I'm just lucky. I'm just lucky that I get to be a part of it, so.

UNKNOWN:A lot of people we've interviewed have, like, talked about stumbling on this place. Kendrick's didn't know that this was six minutes away from their house that they just moved. A lot of, uh, patient's that we've interviewed have said, like, Oh we, we, we heard about it from word of mouth, and it changed my life. Could you speak to that more as, as a leader of this community?

BOTTS:The, the challenge of getting the word out about this place? Yeah, it's amazing all the time. No matter how good you think your PR is, you're missing someone. And, uh, it has been a challenge, uh, for us to educate folks. And I think a lot of times the best, kind of the best advertising for this place is, is the patients who come through here and have great success stories, and they're able to, you know, pass those along to others. Particularly within the Amish community that's here, um, that they're able to go back and say, hey, you know, we, we found a place that was able to see us and, you know, to, to try to educate others within that community. Um, within immigrant communities, a lot of times we have challenges, um, for a variety of different reasons, but a lot of times they don't want to come forward for obvious reasons because of their status here, and so that's been a challenge to reach those communities, and to let them know, hey if you don't have anywhere else to come, you know, we can get you here, um, so a lot of it's just those small little victories you have when you have positive patient experiences here, uh, because it is a head-scratcher. No matter how, how well you think you're doing with PR, you are missing somebody. And, um, yeah, it's, it just, it's a constant challenge to keep getting that word out. You think, you know, when a congressman comes here for a ribbon-cutting and, I think he missed the, the second ribbon cutting. But when you have that delegation of folks come and the paper's here and everybody's taking pictures and you're getting positive social media presence and, and it, the word's getting out, you would think people would, you, you just assume people know, but they don't. And it's just, uh, something we've got to work on every single day. I've got to remind myself while I'm out a lot of times to just put in a plug for The Post Clinic and make sure that, because you never know who's sitting in an audience that may need to hear that. So, another good question. Y'all are taking it easy on me today.

SAMMONS:Anything else?

BOTTS:Good questions.

SAMMONS:Is there-- No, go ahead.

SAMMONS:No, go ahead. --is there anything else you would like to share, um, with us?

BOTTS:No, go ahead.

BOTTS:Um, I'll just share, you know, how proud I am that we were able to complete this project of this new building, uh, because so many times along the way we did not, we, I didn't really let them know how worried I was but there was a lot of days I thought We're never going to get this done. We were so close in 2019, we were told the funding was there and, you know, we were ready to move forward. And then a s--a f--a piece of the puzzle that was, that, that was much needed to pay for the facility here fell apart on us. It, the funding fell through. So it caused us to go back to the, you know, kind of back to square one and, and start a process again of trying to apply for funding, um, then COVID hit and then, you know, the, the challenges with inflation that, that we've seen, um, the challenges with, you know, government focus, focusing their efforts elsewhere, where this looked like a great project early on, you know, after COVID a lot of attitudes and things change but, so bottom line, I really worried a lot of days that this just wasn't gonna happen. We ju--we just missed our opportunity and, you know, every time we seem to apply or come back to the table the cost of the project kept going up. Um, so I am just very proud. I didn't even realize it until today when I walked in that my name was out front on the plaque as you walk in. And I thought, well, that's pretty cool. I, I didn't realize that my name was on there, but, I, you know, I've said before, you know, very proud of a lot of things, but I'm proud of this project. I'm proud of the transit system pro--uh, that we've been able to get off the ground, you know, and, and it's just nice to know that whenever my term, and time as mayor ends whether that's, you know, at the end of the next term or down the road that, that I will have had some really good successes and some things that are going to continue on for years and some things that are going to continue to make the lives of people better, so, proud of that.

UNKNOWN:Let's go to my (??) next question actually, [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] I was gonna ask about like, your--Louisa mentioned how, like, you and Dr. Roberts, how instrumental you were in, like, making this happen, but.

BOTTS:Well, they gave me a lot more credit than I think is due. You know, I said just before, sometimes my role as an elected official is just to be a cheerleader, to make phone calls, to lobby, you know, um, the governor's office was very, very good to us. I mean, we can't thank Governor Beshear enough for just not giving up on our project. Um, so, you know, funding is huge. And, you know, for a city like ours, we could not afford to build this building for them. We needed help. And, um, like I said, we, we thought we had it once and it all fell through. And then COVID happened and then there wasn't any money. But just magically, you know, through the work of so many people, um, we were able to get that money, you know, put together to pay for this building. And a big part of that, you know, is, when Louise tries to give me credit, um, it's just me doing what I'm supposed to be doing and, you know, kind of being a thorn in the side sometimes to, to our state leadership or federal delegations or whatever it is and just saying this is important and I need this. And, um, you know, luckily, we had a lot of good people who also believed in this project. Every elected official that, that was involved in helping make this happen saw the benefit of what this can do to help those that just don't have anywhere else to go, so. All right.

SAMMONS:Anything else?

BOTTS:No, I appreciate you all. Like I said, you're all pretty easy on me, so this wasn't too bad.

SAMMONS:Well, thank you very, very much again, for your help, um--

BOTTS:Yes, I hope I was able to provide something of benefit here. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely.

SAMMONS:Absolutely.

UNKNOWN:Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. Oh, absolutely, yeah.

BOTTS:Okay.

SAMMONS:Thank you.

BOTTS:Okay.

UNKNOWN:It's great to hear your perspective on it, too. Just because (??) the person in charge of the community.

BOTTS:Yeah, um--