SALO:So, this interview is with Eliza Owen--it’s Elisa. I’m sorry. -- (laughs)

-- This interview is with Elisa Owen. And it’s conducted by Hayley Salo. It is

June 29th, 2023, and we are meeting in a Zoom call from Louisville, Kentucky.

The interview will be part of the Kentucky Climate Oral History Collection,

which is sponsored by the Kentucky Climate Change Consortium. The Kentucky

Climate Change Consortium is working on an oral history research project that is

sponsored by the Kentucky Oral History Commission. The Climate Research, Policy,

and Activism Kentucky project will collect interviews from Kentuckians who have

been involved in three climate-related areas: research, policy, and activism.

The collection will be housed at the Louis B. Nunn Center for Oral History and

will be fully accessible to the public. Thank you for agreeing to share your

work and experience with us.

OWEN:[?? WORD UNCLEAR] and I took a job with a consulting firm that was doing

restructuring and privatization in the electric sector. And so, I enjoyed the

work, but in the area

where we were just dealing with vertically integrated utilities, I didn’t see

how I was going to make an impact in the world with that work. I thought I was

just going to help vertically integrated utilities get richer. And so, I went to

seminary. And I--but I’ve always had this electric sector regulatory and policy

background. Right? And I know--what I would say is a lot more than the average

bear about the electric sector works. And it turns out--I believe the figure

people are quoting these days is that thirty percent of emissions are due to the

energy sector. And so, that is by no means the majority of emissions. But it’s a

pretty big chunk. And so, to the extent that we can use regulatory policy and

energy policy to make it--my tradition as a Christian [?? WORD UNCLEAR]

and Christianity talks a lot about what life abundant is. And I will be the

first to say that what I don’t think life abundant is, is trying to live on a

planet that is incapable of supporting all of God’s children. Right? And so,

that is the threat we face with climate change. And so, here with those kind of

dual aspects of my background, I have been--I kind of circled back around. I was

in the pastorate for a while. And now have circled back around to advocacy and

policy as it relates to the climate. And obviously, in the Christian tradition

as well--or maybe not obviously for people who aren’t Christian

listening to this, there is a fair amount of imperative for us to be stewards of

the natural world. And therefore, it doesn’t make sense for Christians not to

care about this issue. In a nutshell. So, here I am. And this is how I got here,

kind of with these--kind of policy on one side, and certainly moral and ethical

responsibility on both sides. Because I’m interested in policy because of its

potential to do good in the world. Right? I believe that politics has the

potential to do good in the world. And so, given all that, I arrived here at

KIPL and have been working on energy efficiency

and distributed generation and everything in between that has to do with trying

to mobilize a religious response--not just Christian, but it’s interfaith.

Mobilize a religious response in this state so, that we can make a difference in

terms of how we’re approaching the crisis of the climate.

SALO:I can definitely see where--oops, sorry. Go ahead.

OWEN:I was just going to say is that kind of what you were looking for?

SALO:Yes.

OWEN:How I got here? So, that’s it in a nutshell.

SALO:I can definitely see where the transition from working in the electric

sector to working in climate change activism has its benefits. Because as you

were saying, you have the skills that you need and the knowledge that you need

from that sector to apply it to your current work. So, that’s --that’s a

wonderful application of your former work. I was curious, too, are you from

Kentucky originally? Or did you come here after--

OWEN:--Yes, yes. I was born and raised in Kentucky. In Louisville. My father

actually still works at the University of Louisville at eighty-three. He is in

the archives. And he has--he has been on the faculty in History off and on

throughout his time there. And so, we--he--my parents were born and raised in

Louisville. And then I was born and raised in Louisville with my father on

faculty and staff at U of L. And then for college, I went away down in Atlanta.

And I was in the Northeast for graduate degrees. And then I ended up coming back

to Louisville when I got married and had children. And so--to be close to family

actually. And so,

[?? WORD UNCLEAR] Yes. Born and raised out and about back.

SALO:Did you find that the time you spent in other states impacted your

perception of climate change in Kentucky? Or is it mostly your personal

experiences growing up here in a family here that have kind of kept your ties to Kentucky?

OWEN:Certainly, I mean (pause) I’m not—certainly, family ties have kept my ties

to Kentucky. I also was very interested as a child in camping and being

outdoors. And I did some of that in Kentucky and some of that in other states.

But I also, you know, when--you don’t have to live here very long before you

know the state’s

historical connection to coal. And so, certainly as, as we were talking about in

the Nineties, when I was first doing electric sector stuff--when I was--as we

were talking about making generation at least--electric generation market based,

I was somewhat interested in that. But again, it took me a little bit to

understand how the regulatory regimes in different states were going to really

affect our ability to do what we need to do, in terms of the energy transition.

So, at this point, I’m back in Kentucky because of family. I want Kentucky to be

the best Kentucky it can be. I spend some time, but hopefully not too much,

being frustrated about how our politics makes it difficult to be Christians. As it,

as it, as it refers to stewarding the planet. I mean, for me, God calls us to

steward the climate and steward the planet. And at that--at this point, that

means moving away from coal. And it’s not--besides the fact that that’s the

case, coal is not economically viable. And we’ve got politicians in the state

that don’t talk about it like that. They act like there are enemies other than

pure economics that are driving us away from coal. And so, that’s kind of how my

association with this state affects my work. And you know, I came back because

of Midwestern values. And I appreciate those, but I also get frustrated with the

political reality here sometimes.

SALO:That makes sense. Especially, as you said, that you worked

in the electric sector before--so, you were seeing the--kind of the confluence

of challenges from different fields. Kind of all bringing together.

OWEN:Absolutely, absolutely. And I--and I also, you know, am aware that, you

know, to the extent that we refuse to address climate in our energy policy and

our regulation, we set ourselves back. And we already struggle with our number,

in terms of--in the United States, in terms of education, and you know, the

creation of jobs and all of that. And I see preparing one’s grid for the future--

SX:It’s fifteen-thirty.

OWEN:--as a job creation effort. Right? And so, it’s--I’m not sure how people

don’t see it that way. --(chuckles)-- Because in order to have the jobs--

I worked in India, right? And I know that India was struggling to get foreign

investment. Because they didn’t have a reliable electric grid. And so, if you

don’t have a reliable electric grid, then you can’t attract a Toyota to

Kentucky. You can’t attract a battery factory. And resilience and climate

resilience is very important for the electric grid. So, again, to me, it should

be a bipartisan effort to try to update our grid and make it--and prepare it to

be resilient in the age that we are entering.

SALO:Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. It also makes me wonder, too, if you had

any particular mentors or partners along the way that led you to either KIPL or

the other ways you’re--combining your history in the electric industry with the

Interfaith Society and with climate change. Or if it’s mostly kind of been a

finding your own path.

OWEN:Certainly, I’ve been doing, I've been--ever since I’ve been ordained, I’ve

been doing some pastoral ministry. And then also been doing other efforts in

nonprofits. For example, I was with Breaking New Grounds, which was a small

nonprofit the Heine brothers started to try to, to get--try to take their

grounds and grow greens with them. And they did that by mixing their greens with

some wood chips. And some spent barley grains. So, that was kind of

environmentally based, right? That was the farm to table

effort. We were trying to sell our greens to restaurants downtown. I was trying

to make it a social enterprise. And that agriculture, it--when you look at big

sectors that affect the climate, agriculture is another huge one. And so--I

don’t know what the exact breakdown is. But I think it’s close to thirty, or

maybe a little more, even. And so, given that I’ve worked, I worked there and

then I also was working on a business to try to onshore the supply chain for

hemp. So, that we could do products--material sustainability with fiber from

hemp. And so, I did some of that also. So, I only say that to say that my,my

pastoral career and my interest in sustainability has, has, you know--I think of

them as intertwined like a DNA strand, right? --(chuckles)--

You know, they kind of--I’ve done both and as I’ve--as I’ve been moving along.

And so, I don’t know that I would say mentors. But I would say--well, a mentor

would be my father, who was in the city government. Started the recycling

program in Louisville. And when we were young, would take us out to the U of L

football stadium and have us pick up all the aluminum beer cans in the stands.

And pour out beer. And we would come out of there smelling like beer. And we

were, like, seven, and nine, and eleven. And my mom would be like, “What are you

doing?” And my dad would say, “We’re going to recycle these and it’s going to be

eleven dollars.” --(chuckles)-- And so, he was a mentor.

SALO:That’s a fantastic way to start a recycling career as a kid. Going around--

OWEN:--(laughs)--

SALO:--and cleaning up the areas for the other people.

OWEN:Right. Right. You mean pouring beer on your feet? --(laughs)--

SALO:--(laughs)-- Yes.

And for, you know, the end goal of recycling them.

OWEN:Right. Right.

SALO:Which also made me think of some of the things that the KIPL website has

posted for community members to work through. Yeah. Because it seems like there

is a split there between advocacy and lobbying on, like, the grand scale of

things. And then there’s smaller actions that community members can take on

their own. Or in, like, a smaller, like a more focused way.

OWEN:Mm-hmm.

SALO:So, I was wondering if--right now, if there’s anything from KIPL that kind

of highlights the ways that it is engaging with community members, and getting

them involved in climate change?

OWEN:Well, we usually do that through churches, right? So--not churches.

Through religious organizations, right. So, we engage directly with religious

organizations. And a lot of them come to us. And they will say, you know, we’re

interested in having a--we have a green team.

Or, we don’t have a green team, but we’re interested in exploring, you know,

what we can do to make an impact on the environment. And so, you know,

traditionally, one of the things that we’ve done is help people reduce the

carbon footprint of their buildings. Right? But the way that religion is going

in this day and age, a lot of churches are so small they don’t even need a

building. --(chuckles)-- And so, then the question becomes how do you engage

those communities without a building? Or without enough money to invest for

long-term staying in the building? Right? Because that’s just the reality for

many religious organizations these days. And so, that is where the engaging the

community and advocacy comes in. Educating them about the kinds of things that

they can be on the lookout in terms of [?? WORDS UNCLEAR]

energy and regulatory policy with respect to the electric and gas sector. Not to

mention transportation and the other big contributors to global warming. But

then, I think, you know, one of the things that we do is--as a pastor, I’ve

spent a lot of time learning how to be a pretty decent public speaker, I think I

would say. And so, people will say-- we have a speakers’ bureau of which I am

one person in that speakers’ bureau that can come to a religious organization

and do a presentation, either that we’ve already done before that people are

interested in, or that I work with the community to figure out what they would

like to hear about. For instance, recently I did an adult education workshop on

food. And being a vegetarian or a vegan

and how that is--what they say is one of the biggest single things--the single

biggest thing that a person can do to reduce their own carbon footprint. There

are tons of things that we can do as individuals. But the biggest thing is to

eat less meat. Because meat is way further up the supply chain. Or further up

the production--takes a lot more inputs, in terms of water and food, for the

animals to produce it. And so, these folks were interested in eating, and how

that--you know, they might make choices week by week, day by day that lead

to--even if they don’t go vegan, at least they’re conscious of the ways that

choosing meat at every meal impacts the planet.

SALO:Right, so, kind of helping people make informed choices. You give them the

resources that they would need to fully understand the conducts for climate change

and how that affects them.

OWEN:Absolutely.

SALO:And conversely how they can affect it.

OWEN:You said it better than I.

SALO:--(laughs)-- Just summarizing what you already said.

OWEN:Right.

SALO:So, it sounds like, too, the communities that you’re primarily engaged

with are ones that are already pretty open to making changes in their lives. Is

that accurate? Or is it--

OWEN:--I’d say that’s true, simply because one of our struggles is funding. And

we--because of that, I am a part-time person. And so, it’s pretty much--I mean,

the good news is that there are a fair number of people that come to me. And so,

I don’t have to, like, beat the bushes for people to work with. But the bad news

is that because of funding struggles, I am only funded part-time. And that is

not by choice. If I had

my brothers (??) this would be a full-time job. And we would have a staff of

ten. Because there’s plenty of work to be done. There’s plenty of people to be,

to be touched by the possibility of this work. But I don’t have the bandwidth to

do it. So, I deal with people who come to me. And they are, yes, the people that

would be more naturally already predisposed to be interested.

SALO:That makes sense. I saw too on the website that there’s the sections for

donations and then the staff listing that was up there. Which I wouldn’t--I

guess I wouldn’t consider small. But it’s not massive. So, I was curious about

the funding strategies. I think you’ve answered most of those. But I was also

curious if you are able to apply for any state grants or federal grants if that

supports you in any way. Or if you’re mostly on your own.

OWEN:We have been largely funded by individuals. And by

a few--a very few individuals and a very few religious organizations that have

funding. So, you know, could we apply for state and federal grants? The answer

is, perhaps. There are a couple things to consider, though. We, though we are

not sectarian, we are religious. And so, there are some federal grants and state

grants that we might not be eligible for because we are of a religious bent.

Even though we’re not sectarian. So, that’s one issue for us going after those

grants. The other thing, and especially--this is especially true in the federal

area--yes, the IRA has a lot of money coming down to people that--but federal grants

most of the time are massive. Right? --(chuckles)-- And they take a whole lot of

bandwidth to apply for them. And if you are basically a one-person part-time

shop, to--your bang for your buck in applying for a federal grant--you know,

federal grants want to know how you’re going to implement. They want a plan. And

you know, if you say, well, please give me three million dollars and I’ll find

somebody to spend it for you. --(laughs)-- Because it won’t be me! You know?

Now, I can tell you that there--we do have a, partnership with the Louisville

Climate Action. Because they are--you’ve probably talked to them as well. I hope

so, anyway, because they--they are doing some good work. But

what we have done is we have brought them--because they have an engineer on

staff and because that person is much more qualified to do energy audits for

energy efficiency than I am, right. We spent some of our money from our

religious organization funder to pick some nonprofits that do social

justice-type work in the community. Right? Because we knew our funder would be

interested in that type of work, right. So, if you’re doing hunger or

homelessness--Neighborhood House was one of the people that we--so, we took

nonprofit. And we offered to them a free energy audit. A free--and also a free

lighting change. Right?

To change all of their lighting to LEDs if they hadn’t done that. And the reason

we did that was because our experience is that small and medium-sized

enterprises and small and medium-sized nonprofits and churches, religious

organizations as well, they’re not like Toyota, that has a whole sustainability

team, right. And so, if you come to a small or medium-sized church and you say

to the pastor, how about, how about the environment? The pastor would say, you

know, I would really like to spend time with the environment, but I have this

and this and this and this and this to do. And maybe my green team can get

together. And maybe I can--if I’m lucky, I can have a green team that

understands how to change out the lights and all of that. What we wanted to

experiment with was, what would it take, what would it take to get people to

undertake this work, right? If they don’t have the bandwidth.

And so, we said, “Let us be your sustainability. Let us do the energy audit. Let

us recommend something that you can undertake. And then let us help you fund

it.” Right? Well guess what, if you do that, people--it’s a no-brainer. People

will do it. Because it reduces their electric bill. And so, the--the sticking

point, we think, is their own budget for this kind of work, right. They don’t

have the upfront capital because they’re a small to medium-sized organization.

Plus, the bandwidth of a sustainability team to get it done. Right? And so,

we--probably the most exciting thing we’ve done since I’ve been here is do a

pilot project where we were able to, you know, take--I think it was forty-four

tons out of the air with eight nonprofits by doing lighting retrofits. You know?

You have to start somewhere, right? But what we found was

if you invite people into the work, and give them both support for building

their knowledge base and financial support, they’re on board. So, then you’re

talking about IRA money and stuff like that. But it’s hard for us to be the lead

organization to make that happen with no more bandwidth than we have. Right? And

so, if the city wanted to, you know, go after some IRA money and then make, you

know--give us some funds to help recruit people to this kind of work, we’d be

happy to do that. You know, Alcan and KIPL together, KIPL would, would. But it’s

which comes first, the chicken or the egg? Does the money come first or does the

bandwidth come first? Well, actually, the money has to come first.

But how do you then prove yourself as a worthy recipient for so much money if

you have to build out the infrastructure? So, it’s a difficult conundrum on how

to get bigger in a way that funders are excited about.

SALO:So, it sounds like, then, that there’s kind of two sides of things.

Because earlier on you said that you were being reached out to by some community

organizations and that you would go to them, and on this other side that you

just described, you’re reaching out to them and offering services. So.

OWEN:Yes, exactly. What I would say is there are--the religious organizations

that reach out to us are the ones that probably already have a green team. And

already are interested in, you know, putting their--all of their money

toward their mission and not giving it to Eltony KU (??). Right? And so, you

do--they’re like, yeah, reduce our energy bills so we have more money for our

mission. Right? So, these are some religious organizations, right? What I’m

talking about, the folks we’re reaching out to are people that have a religious

bent to their work, right? Or a social justice bent to their work. They might

have been started--they might be a neighborhood--like a--I can’t think of

the--Cabbage Patch and Neighborhood House are these in Louisville. They’re--they

were originally started by--in a, in a Christian context. And then they reach

out to the neighborhood and provide services, especially for the very low-income

folks in the neighborhood. But for everybody in the neighborhood, right?

Services and--you know, after-school stuff.

And training for young people. And all that sort of thing. Recreation, all that.

So, what we did was we thought where would our religiously based funder want us

to reach out to? And it was people that were helping people. Right? Whether

it’s, you know, St. John’s Men’s Homeless Ministry, or whether it was

Neighborhood House, or Cabbage Patch, or--so, in that case, because we had money

to spend and because we needed to go ahead and spend it down, we did this

experiment of seeing--because large churches might reach out to you. Right?

Because they’ve got the funds to do this. But the small and struggling ones

aren’t going to. And the nonprofits that were doing this kind of work just don’t

have the--they don’t have a green team, right? And so, we thought that our

funder would be pleased

by us trying this experiment. And so--yes. Both ends. You know, larger religious

organizations come to us and say, help us, we’re interested in this. But then we

also have done our share of reaching out to people that we would like to see

their mission strengthened by having them spend less money on energy and more

money on their mission. So, that’s been very exciting. And I think very fundable

as well. And it’s a partnership where, you know, I could bring the clients and

also the funding from funders that want to fund religiously-based organizations.

And then Alcan could bring the more secular clients and the ones that, you

know--and get the funding for people who really don’t want to fund religious projects,

projects. Right? This is not really a religious project. It just happens to

be--it’s--our stakeholders are religious organizations.

SALO:That led me to my next question, too. Which was--I can kind of glean this

from what you’ve said already, but how does the interfaith kind of fundamental

structure of KIPL play into the work that you do? Or how does it benefit your

outreach attempts?

OWEN:Hm, it, well, it means that we can, we can help any, any religious

organization that comes to us, right? I would argue that if we decided that we

were going to affiliate with Kentucky Council of Churches, for example,

which we thought of doing for some time (??). And we, you know, focused on

Christians in Kentucky. We might have more obvious pathway. Right? It’s hard to

be everything to be everybody. --(chuckles)-- Right? And so, interfaith is

great. Again, as long as you have the bandwidth to make inroads into all those

different places. Right? So, sometimes for me, as a part-time person, I think,

wow, if I could just focus here. Right? I’m ordained Presbyterian, so, I

thought, you know, wow, if I could just spend time trying to get all the

Presbyterian churches on board, then I could--that might give me more of a

toehold. But

what I do now is more reactive, right? It means that I can have an Adath

Jeshurun reach out to me--the synagogue--one of the synagogues here in town--and

say, we’d like to be a partner. And say, oh, here’s our partnership. And, and

you come and speak. Like, so, it--in terms of, terms of people reaching out to

us, it gives us more possibilities of people that can contact us and feel

comfortable that we want to support them, right? But in terms of our outreach to

others, as such a small organization, it’s difficult. To figure out how to best,

you know--

SALO:--Right--

OWEN:--do the outreach.

SALO:And that would go back, then, to what you talked about the funding. That

you’re only part-time. And so, if you were full-time, there might be an easier

way to balance the outreach with responding to--

OWEN:--Right--

SALO:--who comes in to you.

OWEN:Right. Right.

You wouldn’t just be responding. You would also be doing more like we did this

past summer with, with some funding that was left over from--you know, it needed

to spent down. It was left over from the pandemic era. Where we had proposed a

project that wasn’t viable during the pandemic because it had to do with

gathering people. Right? So, then we have money that needs to be spent and all

of a sudden you have to pivot and say, what can we do with this that is

effective, that this funder will appreciate? And so, that’s kind of how we came

up with doing this experiment. You know, how can we, how can we get people from

talking about how they would like to be stewards of the environment to actually

do a concrete project that reduces their emissions? And their carbon footprint.

SALO:I’ve heard from a lot of people that they noticed during the pandemic the

changes in the climate,

from the reduced cars on the road--you know, just fewer people being out. And

saw that as a positive thing. Did you see any change in community involvement or

outreach to you after the pandemic, or did it more or less stay the same as before?

OWEN:We kind of made a change in the executive directors. Right kind of in the

summer of 2021. So, it’s hard for me to say. I know that one of the things that

caused the previous executive director to search elsewhere for work had to do

with the struggle of trying to be relevant if you had relied on, you know,

educational events and gathering like-minded people. And then to suddenly have

to figure out what you were about if that couldn’t happen was challenging for

her. So, I don’t know

that the pandemic itself--you know, I think that for people who were already

thinking about the climate--you know, we don’t know exactly where COVID-19 came

from. But we know that, you know, climate change is going to increase the

possibility of pandemics like that. Because humans will be coming into contact

with animals. Because animals will be migrating. Because people will be

migrating. Because--for all kinds of reasons. Because, you know, dengue fever

and all of that will be coming more--you know, lots of, lots of different

tropical diseases that have been traditionally in those areas of the world may

come north. So, for all kinds of reasons,

the climate is going to perhaps expose us to more pandemic-like experiences. And

I think in that way, the pandemic kind of--for those of us that think about the

planet, it kind of was like, okay, here we go. You know, we’re here.

SALO:Right. And especially, too, I imagine, with as far as--I’m not from

Kentucky, but as far as I understand, the last couple of years in Kentucky have

been unusual as far as tornado season goes and the way that the general weather

patterns are going. Obviously, we’ve had flooding throughout the state and the

tornadoes throughout the state that I imagine must also impact people’s

awareness of climate change, and also their willingness or readiness to make

that kind of change. But I don’t know if you’ve, if you’ve noticed any trends

like that more recently.

OWEN:Well, I think, I think it does, perhaps, you know, I always say,

you know, those ‘rare’ December tornadoes because --(laughs)-- they’re getting

less and less rare. And if you have kind of a hundred-year flood event once

every five years, then it’s no longer a hundred-year flood event. --(laughs)--

And I’m laughing, but it’s not funny. Because people in our state have been

victims of these hundred-year events. And I don’t think you have to work too

hard to convince somebody in the floods in Eastern Kentucky last fall that we’ve

got a problem. So, in that--but I think there’s a lot more education that needs

to be done to connect the dots. You know, the, the, even the governor--who I

very much support.

But I was disappointed to hear the governor say, “We’re not really sure of why

we had these floods.” You know? Now, part of that is that he’s, he has to run

for office again. And he doesn’t want to get out on a limb. And he’s a

Democratic governor in a seventy-thirty, you know, red state tilt(??). So, I get

it, right? It’s still disappointing, though. We need his help, I think,

connecting the dots. --(chuckles)-- And saying, actually, no, we, we really do

know why these events are being more and more severe. It’s exactly what the

science predicted. It’s--you know, can we make--can we draw a direct line? No.

But can we say that generally this tendency in our state and other states is

what climate change looks like? Yes, I think we can. So, I was a bit

disappointed by that, that display by him. But generally, you know,

Kentucky for the first time, I think, in the--what are the--is it the Pew

climate research stuff? I’m trying to think of--we have a (pause) sixty-two

percent? I mean, you might know this, but they, they did interviews. And I think

a majority of Kentuckians believe that climate change is real and that it’s a

problem. And I think that certainly the events, you know, get people’s attention.

SALO:Yeah.

OWEN:My preference would be--

SX:It’s sixteen hours.

OWEN:--that we would decide to take action without having to have our teeth

bashed in. And as has happened in our state, it has been people who were already struggling.

SALO:Right. And that does--it strengthens your earlier point, too, about

looking at the connection

between what the community members can do, what has to happen at the policy

level, and what people can do as the mediators between those two. I’m going to

pause for a quick second--did you have to go right at 4:00?

OWEN:No.

SALO:Alright. Because when you were talking about the shifts from the pandemic

or changes that happened later, especially with not being able to gather people

together, I was reminded of the newsletter that KIPL puts out. Has that been an

effective way to reach out to community members? Especially when gathering isn’t

possible. Or when, you know, things are busy.

OWEN:I mean, it depends on which demographic you’re talking about. Right? We

also have a social media person, which--we got a grant to get a social media

person. And I think that there is a certain demographic younger than me for

whom, you know, even a newsletter is

too [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] Takes too much time. Too much energy, right? So, we were

trying to figure out how we could be active on social media. With me being on

leave, we haven’t done a lot of newsletter stuff recently. I think--I did notice

that when I started doing advocacy stuff in my newsletter--specifically advocacy

directed at democratizing our investor on utility here, people started giving

money and signing up for our newsletter. You know, it wasn’t, like, you know,

hundreds of people. But people seemed to appreciate that.

SALO:Right, and it’s--

OWEN:--Because,well,

because I think that people understand that our investor-owned utility is not

helping us.

SALO:Right, they’re having the one company--is it-- the issue of the (??)--

it’s usually that there was one company that doesn’t have the competition to

drive change towards--

OWEN:It’s also that--well, I mean, I could talk about this for, like, six

months. But if I can try to put it in a nutshell. Supposedly the reason that

companies have a monopoly is that energy production is a natural monopoly.

Right? It’s a network industry. And so, you don’t want, like, six companies

competing to put up transmission lines and distribution lines and all of that.

Well, recently, in the Nineties, in this country, I think ten or twelve states

have decided that at least

the generation of electricity can be competitive. Right? And these states were

largely states that did not have cheap energy. Right? Now, Kentucky has always

said, we have really cheap energy because we’re the closest to the coal. Right?

And so, we don’t have to add on a lot of transportation costs per kilowatt-hour

for the coal that you burn to get the electricity, right? But that is changing

drastically in Kentucky. Because coal is no longer economic. -- (laughs) --

Right? It no longer is the cheapest energy. Natural gas is. And so, a lot of

states have competitive generation of electricity. And so, the problem is, is

that we have forgotten that the companies that have these monopolies are public utilities

and thus they owe something to the public. And public--the public should be

having super input into their decisions about where they spend their money. Now,

there are some people, for example, on the Metro Council that said, “We can’t

pass a resolution saying we want LG&E not to build gas-fired power plants. Why

would we intervene in a private sector business?” And the answer to that

question is, you would intervene because they enjoy a monopoly statutorily.

--(chuckles)-- Right? By statute here in Kentucky. And in--they have agreed to

be regulated, right? To make sure that it’s not just their economic interests

that drive their investments, but it’s also the needs of the people of Kentucky.

Right? And so, KIPL is part of

Kentuckians for Energy Democracy--which I’m assuming you all know about. But we

are part of that coalition who are trying to--and we are trying to make a

difference at the public service commission level. Now, we--I’m beginning to

think that, that we’d be better off really trying to go to both Democratic and

Republican legislators. Right? And say to them, let’s talk about these

skyrocketing electric rates of all your constituents who I’m sure are--who are

calling you and making a lot of noise about how they can’t handle these

skyrocketing rates. Right? And the reasons the rates are skyrocketing--you know,

probably, is because natural gas prices are skyrocketing. And a lot of our base

that’s not coal is natural gas. So, you know,

yes, there’s one company. But it’s also because--the problem with the one

company is partly because we don’t use the regulator to do what we said it was

going to do, which was to look out for the consumer. Right? The marginal cost of

energy from renewable energy is zero. So, once you put in the capital, the, your

cost for every additional kilowatt-hour is zero. So, coal and gas cannot compete

with a zero marginal cost. Right? And so, so, even if the solar and storage cost

more to begin with, how much time is it going to take to make that up. And then

for the consumer, what is better is the renewables. Right? So, you don’t start

there with your Republican legislators

here in Kentucky, I don’t think. But I do think you can start with, how many

calls have you gotten from constituents complaining about high energy prices?

Right? And then from there, maybe, slowly but surely, we can whittle it down and

make people see.

SALO:So, then it’s the same goal regardless of who you’re talking to, but you

take different steps to--

OWEN:--Yeah. Right. We’re not going to--Kentuckians for Energy

Democracy--neither KIPL nor Kentuckians for Energy Democracy are going to get

one, you know, step forward going to a Republication legislature--legislator and

beginning with, don’t you want to help with our climate agenda? The answer to

that is, hell no! I want to, I want us to be using coal to generate our energy

because that’s--that’ll bring jobs to Kentucky!

And then what I say is--well, first of all, let’s not start there. But then the

response to that is, I understand that you want to use coal. Unfortunately, coal

is no longer economically competitive. It’s one of the reasons--the fact that

we’re still using it is one of the reasons that our energy is no longer the

cheapest in the nation.

SALO:Right, because the market has changed. The supplies have changed.

OWEN:The market has changed. We can’t go back to 1945. As much as we enjoyed

some steady middle-class jobs--if you want to call a coal mining job that,

right? --(chuckles)-- As much as we enjoyed, you know, coal employment in Pike

County, we can’t go back there.

SALO:Earlier on in the interview, you had mentioned that there are job creation options

within the climate change industry. Do you see those as at all being able to--I

don’t know if ‘offset’ is the right word, but balance out any job changes

because of the shutdown of coal or the reduced reliance in natural gas?

OWEN:Absolutely, as long as training is provided. I mean, you know, the

question is are you, the question is, are you going to be deliberate about

helping the folks that are hurt by the transition away from coal? Right? And

what we have discovered in a coalition that we’re a part of with Taproot, which

is--they have been doing, kind of a dialogue with people in Appalachia. You

know, people in Kentucky, people in Pennsylvania, people all up and down--and

they have been trying to figure out what the similarities are between--among regions

that are having--are going to have to bear the brunt of joblessness as that

relates to the energy transition. Right? And so, there’s a lot--if we want a

just transition, we will put some of our oil and gas subsidies--we’ll take them

out of subsidizing oil and gas and we will put them into job training programs

for people in the Gulf Coast that, you know, work in the refineries. And we will

put it into job training programs for people in Appalachia that no longer have a

job in the coal mine. Right? Because one of the things that you could do with

the strip mine is you could put a solar field on it that gets sent up to

PJM--you know, the PJM RTO. Regional Transmission Organization. And that’s

why so [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] Kentucky because they are wanting renewable power. And

you might be able to put those on some strip mine sites, for example. But we

have to be deliberate about not leaving people behind, but instead giving them

the means and the training that they need to, to learn how to--jobs in renewable

energy. I mean, I think that’s part of what a just transition looks like, is job

training for people who have been left behind.

SALO:It sounds like that, too, would then connect to what you were saying

earlier about the importance of community in bringing people together is if

you’re going to be making climate change--changes for climate change, keeping

that focus on people’s everyday lives and their livelihoods and their connection

as a community is important. Rather than just making changes

without thinking about what that effect would have on the community.

OWEN:Right. Right. And I mean, you know, obviously, the thing that’s so awful

about climate change is that the people that are most vulnerable to the changes

it’s going to bring about are the ones that don’t have the finances to be--to

make their housing, their transportation, and their employment--they don’t have

the flexibility to change those [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] And that’s why climate change

is so awful. With people that put the--the people that have the smallest carbon

footprints are the ones that are most affected by the--by the ravages of climate

change. And that’s, that’s, yeah, that’s awful.

SALO:Yeah, which is where I think your organization and the ones that you’re

partnering with are so important.

Because they help people who don’t otherwise have the means of either doing the

lobbying or finding out the information that they need. They can get that

through you. Through the support of your partners as well. Which is wonderful.

OWEN:Yeah. It’s good. It’s good. I mean, the work, I think, is very important.

But I am still struggling to figure out how to fund it.

SALO:Which reminds me of something else I was going to ask, too. Are there

moments where you find it difficult to stay motivated? Like, in this--when kind

of the whole situation is sad? Or does the idea of the better future keep you

motivated most times?

OWEN:Well, I have two daughters. One of them is fourteen. And one of them is

eleven. And, though it’s amazing to me that people aren’t in the streets every

day making sure that

people pay attention to this issue, when I think about what I could do that

would be more meaningful in terms of helping them have a future that is

characterized by abundant life and meaning, I don’t know what else I would

rather do.

SALO:That’s a wonderful way to summarize it. Was there anything else that you

wanted to add, either describing the work that you do or the changes that you

want to see?

OWEN:I think this is somewhat of a theological point. But it’s one that I want

to make. The other thing when you say, “Do you get discouraged?” Yes, of course.

Especially in this state, where

we’re hardly on the leading edge of this issue. To say it politely. But hope is

a muscle. And we can choose (pause) to give up. I’m not--I wouldn’t dare do

that. Partly because of my daughters. And partly because of how much I have been

awed by the beauty and majesty of the creation. This is--you know, I think there

was one climate activist that said, you know, “They want me to sell my soul to

the company

store.” Or something like that. They want to tell me how we have time. We have

enough time. And all I can do is show them my left thumb (??) . So, you know,

love and hope are closely connected. And if you love the creation, then your

imperative becomes the hope that you can make a difference. There’s really no

other choice.

SALO:That’s very beautifully put. So, I think I’m going to leave that point to

speak for itself, if that’s all right with you. --(chuckles)-- So, unless

there’s anything else you want to add after that, I think we can go ahead and

wrap up?

OWEN:That’s fine. I appreciate your time and your interest in the topic.

And what you’re trying to do.

SALO:I appreciate you making the time to talk to us as well. Even though I know

things have been very busy for you.

OWEN:They’ve been--it’s been a tough time.

SALO:I’m going to re-record my intro spiel. Because I think it got cut off.

OWEN:Okay.

SALO:You don’t have to stay for that if you don’t want to. Otherwise, that’s

the only thing I’ve got to add before I shut the recording off. And then we can

edit it and move it to the front. --(chuckles)-- Just pretend that didn’t happen.

OWEN:Well, Godspeed with your work. And I hope our paths cross again at some

point. But keep on keeping on.

SALO:Thank you. And I just realized, too, that I think if you leave, I’ll get

kicked out. So, maybe I do have to record it before you leave.

OWEN:Go right ahead. I’ll--

SALO:--(laughs)--

[End of recording]