MCCOY:We are rolling. We're good to go--

BRAGA:--okay--

MCCOY:--okay, so my name is Ryan McCoy and I'm joined by--

BRAGA:--I'm Leandro Braga. Everyone calls me Nachie.

MCCOY:All right, great. Um, okay, so today is July 28th, 2023. Uh, we're doing

this interview inside of the recording studio at the Nunn Center, um, and this

is a part of the Kentucky Climate Oral History Project collection and Nachie, do

we have your permission to record?

BRAGA:Absolutely.

MCCOY:Okay, great. Wonderful. All right, good to go. Get this closed down. So,

if you can, just tell me a little bit about yourself, uh, where you're from,

that kind of thing.

BRAGA:Yeah, um, so, I’m Nachie Braga. I'm thirty-eight years old. I've been

living in Kentucky probably about sixteen, seventeen years with a couple breaks

in there.

Um, I'm a first-generation Brazilian immigrant. My parents came here, um, right

after like what would have been first grade for me, basically to get their

college degrees. So, I did a lot of growing up in DC area, Maryland, and then

kind of moved around a lot as a young adult. Kind of did that thing where, you

know, every year you move to a different city, uh, live out of a backpack,

travel around. I did a lot of, I guess what you could broadly call social

justice activism, kind of under that umbrella. So, whether that be work with the

unhoused or environmental issues, a lot of economic justice type stuff, a little

bit of labor organizing. I kind of dabbled in a lot in that lifestyle. Um, I

actually ended up in Kentucky as a result of that, as a result of that, that

lifestyle where you're moving around, different communities would ask me to

come, hey, teach a workshop, do a training

here in this city, whatever. So, this was in 2006, early 2007. I was living in

California at the time, around the Central Valley. It was just sort of the--it

was time to go to wherever the next place was going to be. So, I didn't have, I

had never been anywhere in the middle of the country. I'd lived on the East

Coast, lived on the West Coast, flyover states or whatever you want to call

them, no experience. But I had a buddy from Cincinnati, an old pen pal, who was

moving down to Lexington actually to start a community center, an info shop that

was like a show venue and a bookstore and all these kind of different things for

radical literature. Uh, so, I was going to come down and, and help out with

that. As it happened, that whole operation was totally unpermitted and, you

know, very, very anarchist in its orientation or whatever. So, the, the fire

marshal shut us down pretty much the weekend before I got to town. So, my whole

reason for being in Lexington, I was like, oh, okay.

But I got stuck here nevertheless and, uh, you know, got in with the the punk

scene around here and the kind of some of the DIY, the do-it-yourself organizing

as far as putting together a, uh, music scene and some of the cultural

expressions that come along with that, um, and some political organizing as

well. And then, man, I mean, after quite a while, and we can talk about all

these things that happened over that period of my life because that's when I

started learning how to identify plants, doing wilderness survival training,

learning about permaculture and some of these things that were ultimately going

to lead to what I'm doing today. But yeah, Kentucky, you know, like I never had

any concept of, well, I'm gonna go to UK[1]eventually.

You know, that was like a decade after I'd been in Lexington that that ended up

happening. It was really surprising to me. But I ended up getting a couple

professional degrees in

natural resources, urban design, um, stream and watershed work. Uh, and so, that

has now--to the extent that I can say that I'm a professional or that I have a

career, because this is a very strange field that I work in, we're kind of

making it up as we go along. And of course, climate and ecology all around us is

shifting so rapidly that we have to make it up as we go along. But that's kind

of broadly how I ended up where I am today.

MCCOY:Okay. Uh, can you say a little bit more about some of the political

organizing and stuff that you were doing I take it around Lexington and

Lexington and maybe what some of that, some of the movements that that

organizing was around?

BRAGA:Yeah, uh. Well, so we've seen several different, um, I guess, generations

of folks come up and different um, like, for instance, Black Lives Matter in 2014

was very distinct from how kind of that same movement in a lot of ways

re-emerged in 2020. Um, and there were different people, I think, here locally

and some of the same people as well playing different roles. So, it's been

interesting to see things like that where when I first moved to town, as I

mentioned, there was that, uh, that DIY punk scene that was very--it was very

oriented towards vegan straightedge, which for those who don't know, you know,

vegan is a dietary lifestyle choice where you abstain from consuming animal

products or using them, uh, in, you know, whatever different areas of your life,

whether that be leather or shampoos and conditioners and that kind of thing. And

then straightedge is a punk rock, kind of an East Coast hardcore punk rock

subculture, uh, related to abstaining from drug use, alcohol, and those are kind

of the primary tenets.

Um, so, this very clean, like, positive outlook on life, like, we are, you know,

we are the outcast punks or whatever, so we're gonna build our own society here

and it's gonna be egalitarian and we're not gonna eat animals and we're gonna

play music and have fun together and that kind of thing. Um, and there's a

certain genre of political activity that grows out of that. It's very, like,

it's kind of lifestylist, you could say. Um, it's heavily subcultural in its

orientation, but for instance, going out and, uh, finding food that was going to

be thrown away at grocery stores and then using that food to cook meals and give

it away on the street, whether that be to unhoused people or just whoever's

walking by, um, usually under the banner of what's called food not bombs, you

know, I have a food not bombs tattoo on my neck, so I've been involved with that

organization and, you know, half a dozen or more cities

around the country, including Lexington. Um, so, that was a lot of that kind of

stuff in 2007, 2008, that was the vibe. Um, there had also been recently in

Lexington, just prior to my arrival, there had been an event called Reclaim the

Streets, which is again one of these kind of, uh, banners that people use to

describe, um, a general tactic, a protest tactic, in this case being kind of

like, we're gonna throw a spontaneous block party and it's gonna be super

anarchist or whatever, which I should say from the outset, I'm not an anarchist,

I've never been an anarchist, but you know, I've rolled with these, these punk

circles where oftentimes that's the orientation that kind of is the default for

a variety of reasons. Um, but so anyway, that was a--there was one of these

Reclaim the Streets events in Lexington and it went very poorly, uh, in that,

you know, a few people got arrested because they went out in the

street and tried to fight the cops and then a bunch of people didn't get

arrested because they didn't want to be, you know, physically assaulted by the

state. Uh, and so, then there was a big, there was a big kerfuffle in the punk

scene and a split where like, well we said we were all gonna go out in the

street and you didn't and blah blah blah. So, that was all kind of simmering and

happening as I showed up in town. Again, super subcultural, right? Like very

niche, uh, very radical, very ultra-left, um, relative to what the average

person on the street would, would think of in terms of their political

perspectives. And, of course, you had always things like Kentuckians for the

Commonwealth, uh, organizing in Lexington. They were nowhere near as big as they

are now, um, but they kind of represented sort of the more milquetoast liberal

electoral kind of strategy. And there were a couple other groupings that would

that would pop up here and there, but nothing,

you know, to my mind nothing really super significant until, let's say, 2014.

Um, I was involved in the founding of a group called Kentucky Workers League.

Um, I was the, the first chair of the steering committee for that group, uh,

which was intended to be an explicitly Marxist organization, um, with a

strategic focus, um, in that kind of organizing. And as it turned out that was a

non-viable (laughs) organization. Um, that was a really bad experience for me

actually in terms of having to take a step back, uh, feeling disillusioned about

prospects for radical organizing in Kentucky, especially in Lexington as a small

town and kind of a scale of like, okay, who's out here? Who's willing to talk

about these ideas? How serious are they? Um, so, you know, I regard that

experiment as having been kind of a, an abject failure.

Um, and that was my last real foray into that kind of political organizing. Um,

and what's so significant about it is that the disillusionment that I felt from

that experience led directly to my forming a company, my saying, okay, I'm gonna

start an LLC because then I can just be dictatorial about whatever I want to do,

you know, the, the strategy that we're gonna pursue. Um, I kind of have this

legal structure in place where if I want to get people to do something I can pay

them to do it and we can go out and make these interventions. Um, and so, that

kind of really shifted my strategic focus. And I became a lot more cynical, a

lot more jaded, and I'm kind of coming out of that cloud now, uh, which is

interesting because I still have this company and, you know, that was explicitly

set up for these reasons. But now, uh, I'm starting to think a little more

asymmetrically about, okay, how can we use this tool,

um, that I have now? I've been successfully incorporated and feeding myself

miraculously doing permaculture design work for three or four years. So, that

already has surpassed some of my wildest dreams. Uh, and, but I don't want to

lose sight of the fact that this was always intended to be, you know, not a

career per se, but a, uh, a tactical choice to say, okay, here is a form of

organization that I want to use to direct towards achieving whatever projects

are important. Um, which at this period in time, climate adaptation, food

sovereignty, housing, all these things that are very kind of wrapped up in the

general sort of under the umbrella of urban ecology, we could say, um, have been

my focus.

MCCOY:So maybe just to take a little step back here--

BRAGA:--yeah, sorry, that was a lot of stuff--

MCCOY:--no, it's fascinating. I'm really curious

what, uh, at least in terms of kind of timeline, where that kind of, you know,

bit of a disillusionment with, you know, political organizing in Lexington and

where that kind of lined up with, you said that you were at UK, right?

BRAGA:Mm-hmm --

MCCOY:--um--

BRAGA:--yeah, so I kind of skipped a piece there in my story, which I guess

would be between the time when I came to Lexington in 2007 and then when I was

involved with, uh, some of the organizing in 2014, there was another kind of

momentous turning point in my life, which was, uh, again, another cycle of

disillusionment. And in particular, kind of seeing the scope of the issues that

we're facing as a civilization and the prospects for like, okay, who's seriously

politically organizing in a way that, you know, looks like it, it, um--something

that isn't depressing (laughs), let's say, you know. I just, I didn't really see

that. And so

I, um--and this mirrors very much my stepping back from organizing later in my

life. So, I've had these ups and downs over and over, and I think a lot of

people do, where you get disillusioned and you step back and then, but you know,

if this is really in your heart and you're gonna do this no matter what, you

ultimately come back and figure out, you know, some, some different way to have

that expression. But so, for me in that time, 2009, 2010, um, it was a, it was

the--well, screw this, I'm gonna go live in a cabin in the woods by myself,

style, you know. The thing, we've all had that thought--

MCCOY:--(laughs)--

BRAGA:--um, or some version of it, you know. Oftentimes people say, well, one

day I'm gonna have a bunch of land and all my friends are gonna be able to come

live there for free and it's gonna be cool, you know. Like, we've had these

ideas, we have these discussions, everybody, um, is kind of sharing this general

goal. And so, for me, you know, I went kind of, I leaned into that and said,

well, then I got to learn what plants to eat.

I got to learn how to make a, whatever, a shelter out of what can just be found

in the woods, you know. Some of these things are a little dramatic, right, but

the wilderness survival, nature awareness, kind of naturalist training, more

informal than, than you might find in academia, but, um, that's what I pursued.

And it was coming from that place of, well, screw this, you know, obviously

civilization is gonna collapse and we're not gonna fix this, so I'm gonna have

to learn, you know, how to make medicine from what's--the weeds in my backyard,

or, you know. Very naive, very immature, very self-centered, as often you find

these things that are, that are marketed to us widely, you know, wilderness

survival is a whole industry, um, out there. But it was, it was huge for me

because what happens is, when you get into this stuff, you say, okay, I'm gonna

learn how to make friction fires, I'm gonna learn how to make,

you know, rope or cordage from plant fibers and all these things, and I was very

fortunate in that the people that I learned these things from, the, the teachers

that I sought out, uh, they were very explicit about their lineage and where

these skills came from, where they had learned from, and where humans, in terms

of our ancestral history, you know, we, we share this common heritage of some of

these earth-based skills, or whatever you want to call it, so you have to start

learning and, and become sensitive to indigenous life ways. If you're going to

learn these skills in any kind of depth, or if you're going to become familiar

with your native flora and the ethno-botanical kind of uses, um, yeah, if you're

gonna do any of that kind of stuff, you start learning about indigenous life

ways. And when you do that, you realize, um--and again, maybe I sound super

naive here, but as, as a young man, having this realization that was, was very

life-saving to me, that, um,

I mean, it's obvious, but indigenous people, land-based cultures, wherever they

are in the world, they're not, they're not wilderness surviving, right? They

have a fully developed culture, all kinds of dynamic interactions with the

landscape, um, just a really robust kind of experience of what it means to be

human that goes so far beyond, here's how you make a fire by rubbing sticks

together. So, once you start to appreciate that, then you say, wait a minute,

here are, you know, real practical models of human cultures that have existed

without degrading their land-base, their resource-base for tens of thousands of

years, right, in any kind of ecology. What the hell, why can't we at least take

some tips, right? At least, let's model a little bit, maybe not copy directly,

maybe we can use some of our modern technology here and there, um, but generally

speaking, all of a sudden, I saw, uh, I don't want to say hope, but a

discernible model of like,

okay, here's how the future--here's a coherent vision of how the future could be

better, and like, that's what we're missing in all our discussions of climate

and so forth, right? So, how can you blame people for being disillusioned and so

forth, because we don't have anything to point to, or most people don't think we

do, but actually, in looking at these indigenous land management practices and

culture more generally, um, I found something that made me want to come back and

re-engage with society more broadly, and say it's not just going to be about me

surviving in the woods as a little lone wolf or whatever, it’s, uh, it has to be

a mass movement, right? I've always understood that, that's part of, I'm a

Marxist personally, so there's, you know, that's really ingrained in kind of my

understanding of how the world works and what our prospects are to make it

better, is that it has to be, uh, a mass movement, and in order to have that, we

need to have a

compelling story to tell, something that's actually going to convince people

that, yeah, this is possible, that there is a step one and a step two and a step

three to take in these times, even if we don't know what step four is

necessarily, we can at least start doing some of these things, and so the land

management side, the ecological restoration, all that stuff, I love plants, I

love animals, I love trees, I love, you know, clean water flowing in interesting

ways through the landscape, like, that's vitality, that's amazing, um, but it

is, at the end of the day, it's like, that's the crack in the door, to just get

people thinking about materially intervening in the conditions of their lives,

whether that be, like, the planting some flowers in their neighborhood, to get

some pollinator support going, or, you know, fruit trees, or whatever, um, it's,

it's like that lowest rung on the ladder that breaks the spell for people,

because we're all so

alienated, we're so disempowered, we're so, um--we feel that way, right, we feel

like, what is the first right thing to do, nobody's providing, uh, that, that

kind of, not that we need an exact roadmap, but something, right, a coherent

vision, again, of how the future is supposed to be better, and so when we have

these practical projects of, okay, just get your hands in the dirt, get

something going, start taking ownership of the conditions around your

neighborhood, that's, I have found to be, you know, the spark that all of a

sudden enables different kinds of conversations to happen, um, and ultimately

for people to have just, just inspiration about how life could be different, and

specific, I mean, really, not in these broad, glowing, general, the future is

going to be better terms, but like, what can you do right now, in a detailed,

granular manner, in your neighborhood, in your

life, in your community, that, uh, permaculture just gives us a way to do that,

like, right off the bat, that's pretty amazing.

MCCOY:Can you, can you say, maybe say a little bit more, or talk about some of

the folks you learn things from, and with?

BRAGA:Sure, um, so as far as, like, actual indigenous people have spent some

time on the Tule River Reservation in, uh, in Northern California, or Central

California, um, as far as the wilderness survival kind of lineage, I owe a great

debt, as many people do, to Tom Brown Jr., um, and John Young, who's kind of

his, I guess, main protege, um, they together have dozens of books out, um, or

individually, I don't know that they've written any together, but much of what

we think of as wilderness survival as a

topic that you can go study, that you can go to a school out and learn, comes

from Tom Brown Jr., and so his books really inspired me, even in a way that I

don't think I really appreciated at the time, um, because his books are, they're

a little fanciful, and many people have criticized him and said, well, this is,

this is fiction, you know, you're telling this story of, like, this, this old,

this old Apache elder who took you in as a child and taught you all these

things, and people are like, well, is this really true? Is this, you know,

whatever, and it's like, it doesn't matter, honestly, at the end of the day, it

doesn't matter, because of the, the effect that this has had, and, and having

people just become more open to the kinds of communication that the natural

world is offering to us at all times, right, that we have the capacity

to, um, to be aware of as humans, but we've lost the desire and the awareness of

it in modern society, um, but it's, it's there, it's in our DNA, and it can

reawaken at any time, and, and we have that, we have so much evolutionary

history tied up in that, that there is something intrinsic that when we hear

about that, like, even if it is a little magical, it's a little fanciful,

whatever, you're still like, that's cool, I want to know more about that, you

know, and, and I read those books years before I ever ended up in any kind of

formal wilderness survival training, um, but that was, uh, that's where I ended

up, um, so I went to, Adam Rawson was my first teacher in, he's based out of

Northern California, I think, or at the time, but I was in Washington State, is

where I kind of started learning from him, and then I have to, I have to say

Dave Jackie, um,

who, he's really well known right now in permaculture circles for having written

the, the two-volume set of the, what is it called, Edible Forest Gardens, I

think, um, but it's, it's kind of the textbook, or it was, you know, ten years

ago, um, about temperate forest gardening and permaculture, so he, his whole

design process, his outlook on life, and, and kind of the methodology that he

put into those books really set me off in terms of how I'm thinking about, um,

the work that I do, the land management practices that I want to adopt, um, and,

and helped me integrate some of that wilderness survival stuff, because when

you're doing the, the wilderness survival, you know, go out for a week with

nothing but a rock and survive, or whatever, your, your point of departure

is the forest primeval, or what, you know, which doesn't exactly exist, but

you're thinking about the wilderness, which is its own cultural concept, right,

but that, even as, like, sanitized and colonial as our concept of the forest and

the wilderness is, it's still pretty far removed from, like, what people think

of in terms of what's legible to people as a garden, right, even in permaculture

circles, you still have a lot of things like raised beds and mulch piles and

things that, when you walk up to someone's property, you're like, oh, they're,

they're a permaculturist, they're a gardener, or whatever. The approach that I

take is a little more, has more of the ecological restoration side to it, where

the gardens that I prepare, or that I design, that I work on, the things that I

really like to work on, they're not necessarily legible as gardens, um, unless

you have--unless you go a little deeper, unless you, you

know what you're looking at, or you know what to look for, and that's actually

more in line with the kinds of, the kinds of ancestral land practices that would

have been on this continent prior to European settlement. And in fact, a key

aspect of European kind of colonial doctrine, um, was the minimization, the

erasure of these land management systems, because if you have, you know, if you

have a law in your kingdom, or your empire, or whatever, that says you can claim

any land as long as it hasn't been improved, right, then you are incentivized to

look at any aspect of native culture and disregard it entirely, or say that it

doesn't count, you know, it doesn't matter if there's, you know, if a group of

people has been tending a woodland for generations and generations, um, and

there's all kinds of things that take hundreds of years to develop, you know, these

really deeply interconnected systems, uh, that we don't even understand, and

because the Western mind can't see it, all of a sudden that sophistication can

just be ignored, it can be, um, extirpated from the landscape, right, physically

and otherwise. Uh, and so, that is, that is the kind of mindset that I'm trying

to bring back, the kind of repair that I'm trying to center in terms of what

we're going to do to the landscape, or what we're proposing to do to the

landscape, um, and that has been, that's been a little different than some of

the other permaculture groups or companies that are doing this work nationwide,

I've found, that sometimes they're a little more focused, they're a little more

focused on like residential clients, or whatever, individual homeowners that

have, oh I want an edible landscape, or something, oh I'm gonna work with this

client and design what they want,

and, uh, you know, they always wanted chickens or something, so there's gonna be

chickens in the design, never mind what the land's actually asking for, right,

the client wants chickens, you're gonna put in chickens. Um, that's not what

Geomancer does, you know, my company Geomancer Permaculture, we--it's difficult

to explain to people, it's difficult to really understand myself, but where we

come from, or I come from that activist background, it's much less about waiting

for clients to come find me and tell me what they want, it's more about

proactively looking at the landscape, saying what are the ecological indicators

here that are telling us, you know, an intervention in this point would be the

most effective thing we can do, uh, and then you have to kind of reverse

engineer, okay, how do I get money to do that, who owns that land, who controls

that land, right, it's more complicated than just having a, a client come to you

and say put in a garden at my house, but putting in a garden for rich people

doesn't feed my soul,

right, and it also doesn't, um, we can't replicate that at the scale that we

really need in terms of educating people that some of this stuff is even

possible, that some of these crops can be grown here, that some of these plants

are, you know, potentially well adapted to climate change, whatever, just the,

I'll say this, how do I want to say this, this is a little crazy, um, but you

know, I plant trees for a living, plant fruit trees for a living, I do a good

job of it, and sometimes we say we planted a hundred trees, and that's the money

that we get, often, you know, people are giving us grant funding and stuff to

plant trees, um, I'm, I’m not sure that any of the trees I'm planting are going

to survive, you know, there's a good chance with some of what we're seeing

happening in the world around us that, especially some of these smaller trees,

we're gonna have a hundred percent mortality, or close enough to not make much

of a difference, you know, and so then why, why am I even bothering to try this

stuff, right? Well, one thing is that maybe we're not gonna have a hundred

percent mortality, maybe we get ninety-eight or something, and then we get to

preserve the genetics of whatever, right, like that's important, and we need to

be doing that, but, you know, the important part, the thing that we need to be

focusing on, it's not the planting of the trees, but the developing of social

structures capable of planting trees, right, on a mass scale, training people to

interact with their landscape in a dynamic way that they're capable of

responding in real time as climate does whatever it's going to do, and these

trees start dying, or these other plants start dying, we, uh--it's gonna be

incumbent on us to go forth and kind of engage in this amazingly creative

process of landscape scale design, so again, we need a--it's a mass

solution, right? Me as a contractor, I can win awards that say like, oh, he's

the best environmental business, what, like, that's great, um, but it doesn't,

it doesn't actually scratch the surface of the problem, right, which is that we

need, uh, thousands and thousands of people materially intervening on the

landscape, capable of doing so, capable of identifying the plants, capable of

knowing what tools to use, um, and so that's gonna take a different social

structure, like, I don't know which one comes first, right, but the material

conditions that we're living through, the collapse of our, the food system that

we've come to rely on, that we all grew up with here in this country, that's,

you know, it's predicated on climactic stability, all these annual crops and

stuff like that, so that's gonna--that's not gonna be around for, you know, the

entirety of my lifetime, so thinking ahead, what, what are some actual

credible solutions to that? There aren't any that are just like me being one

permaculture superstar out on the landscape that everybody calls with their

questions, it's like, no, we need to completely reconfigure what it means to be

a human in Kentucky, and that's wild, that's a, that's--

MCCOY:--(laughs)--

BRAGA:--that's a lot more than I can do, right?

MCCOY:Yeah, can you, uh, well, I guess maybe if you can talk about, talk about

how Geomancer got started, um, and, and maybe specifically some of the work

that, that you've been doing, and since the time of its inception, right?

BRAGA:Sure, uh, so, so Geomancer got started--again, it all came out of this

activist kind of, and, and I keep using that word, let me, let me say that an

activist--I don't want to define myself as an activist. I'm a little, a little

contemptuous of the, the activist mindset, which is this idea that, like, I am

going to do something

and change the world, here's the problem, and what I do is going to be the

solution, and it's, you know, it centers this individual experience, um, and I

just don't think that that's the way that the world works, that history works,

you know, that we, we are confined to some extent by the conditions that we find

ourselves in, and the, the range of discussions that you can even have with

somebody are kind of circumscribed by what their life experiences are, um, and

so that is rapidly changing because of, among other things, climate change, so

we are able to have different discussions than we could even just ten years ago,

so that's been a huge, uh, piece of developing Geomancer, but, but it did come

from this wanting to actively intervene and, and create solutions, even, even if

just as, like, proof of concept for more people to be able to see what's

possible. Um, so I had been doing this in, um, in different,

different capacities all over town with ecological restoration, let's just call

it that, different projects, because of the politics here locally in Lexington,

a lot of it had to do with stormwater, just because we've had an EPA

[2]consent decree related to violations of the Clean

Water Act, and so over the past decade, all of the money, most of the money

that's been out there to fund any kind of, whatever it be, public education,

tree planting, uh, you know, whatever you might be doing, you have to relate it

to water somehow, water quality, and, and so some people have done some, some

really funny, perhaps unethical kind of things, chasing that, that pot of money,

but the water, the water has always been really fundamental to everything that I

do, it's a very fun, the, the hydrology piece of permaculture is super

important, I don't think anyone teaches permaculture without really centering

the water cycle, which is amazing, so that worked really

well for me, uh, but what ended up happening is that I was writing these grants

and seeking out funding for different projects that I saw that, you know, would

be interesting or that I thought were needed on the landscape or whatever, and

as part of managing these projects, I was hiring contractors, bringing together

different professionals, consultants, whatever, and getting them to do the work,

and so I'm sitting there, I'm looking at it, I'm like, we're having a little

success and this is great, and it washes, you know, the realization washes over

me that, like, I could be the contractor, I could just hire myself, like, what

they're doing, I can do better, or I could, you know, whatever, um, and so I

started a company and went from just being this kind of citizen advocate who was

running around looking for possibilities, trying to find money, et cetera, to,

um, to taking a more active role and saying that, um, hey, sometimes we don't

have to--look, I've lost money on a lot of projects (laughs), right, sometimes

unintentionally, but sometimes, you know, very clear-eyed about the fact that,

hey, I'm gonna do something in a public park and the city doesn't have that much

money, so I'm just gonna take what they what they have, you know, and I'm gonna

do the best job that I can with that, um, and knowing that the ultimate benefit,

the ultimate payment for me is that now Geomancer has an installation in a

public park that for years from now I can, I can bring students to it, you know,

and versus if it was in some wealthy person's backyard, never get to see it

again, community doesn't get to benefit from it, whatever, um, so I've done a

lot of not pro bono projects, but certainly projects that your typical

for-profit business would just not even, um--it's not even that they would

reject it, they just they wouldn't look at it in the first place, you know, they

would never be in a position to consider kind of pursuing that the way I have.

MCCOY:Mm-hmm. Um,

yeah, so you, you mentioned some of the, you know, consulting projects and

things like that, you know, work that you've done as a consultant, and then you

mentioned students, so can you talk a little bit more about that and the sort of

education side of things?

BRAGA:Yeah, education side of things. So, um, super important, right, like I've

kept saying that this has to be a mass movement, there's, there's no way, you

know, if I just become the famous permaculture guy in Kentucky, then we lost,

because that doesn't really do anything. Um, so, I look at it as, um, you know,

I've had people criticize or come up to me and say like, aren't you worried

about, you know, you're showing your designs, you're telling people what plants

you use, and so like, aren't people just gonna copy you, and I'm like, good, you

know, like, oh my goodness, yes, that's hopefully what we need, because, you

know, if, uh, let's say I'm in an urban area and we have

all these residential lots, they're kind of individual properties, if this

property owner doesn't want what I'm selling, there's a problem on this lot too,

and there's a problem on this, you know, there's problems everywhere, the scale

is so big that I'm not gonna run out of work, like the job security is just

baked into the fact that our civilization is collapsing, and I'm not gonna run

out of stuff to do, right, and neither is anybody else, so the more people that

I teach how to do something or, uh, you know, provide conditions under which

they can discover for themselves some of the skills that they have or that they

want to develop, that's less stuff that I have to do, and so oftentimes, you

know, the things that I'm doing right now, I'm not gonna downplay them, I think

they're pretty amazing, I think we've achieved a lot of really cool stuff, and,

uh, the credibility is starting to get there to where people are reaching out

and saying, hey, we want to see more of this, or what are your thoughts on this

, and that's, that’s so cool, um, but we're still just at the very beginning

stages, right, the things that we're doing now are barely even preconditions to

enable the kinds of projects that we want to see in the future, the much more

ambitious kind of thing, the things that, again, take a mass movement, take

conscious, um, political intervention in government, governance, in municipal

politics, in the economy at large, we're not there yet, you know, so just trying

to get there is a process of, first off, educating people, or maybe educating is

the wrong word, but spreading awareness about, like, what Geomancer is, and

maybe, you know, maybe it was a tactical mistake to make it an LLC, because

sometimes I'm asking people for crowdfunding, or for, you know, what are

essentially financial support that are not donations, like, they're not tax

write-offs, because I'm not a nonprofit, and I'm not a nonprofit for very

specific reasons, I want to deal with the board, I don't want to, you know, deal

with, you know, that government oversight of what I'm doing, and that kind of

stuff, but explaining that to people is sometimes difficult, because they

expect, oh, you're a nonprofit, oh, you're not a nonprofit, you're a for-profit,

well, then why should I help you, um, right, and I don't have a good answer to

that, I'm just gonna keep doing what I'm doing, and hopefully the work speaks

for itself, um, but the education piece is, you know, for all the reasons I

mentioned, it's intrinsically valuable, but it's also changing more so now, and

that more people are seeking me out, which is awesome, because it's, I've never

come from, I can be pretty tenacious in my, like, insistence that, like, oh my

god, we have to be doing something, let's do something, right, and so I know

that can be off-putting to some people who are just like, chill out, man,

I'm doing my thing, and, you know, I don't work for you, so don't tell me what

to do, um, so it's important to be invited, you know, like I was invited to this

interview, I really appreciate that, um, and so more and more people are

inviting me to come speak to their students, in whatever capacity that is,

whether that's formal education, at any level, you know, it's fun because I get

to go into elementary schools now, and usually, usually there I'm talking more

of, like, the career side of things, you know, I'm not doing, like, high-level

ecology or anything with these kids, just talking about how you get into the

career, what being a business owner is like, and all that, but I still get to

talk about all these, these different topics, like, hey, this, this asymmetrical

approach to what a career is that I knew that I wasn't, you know, if somebody

was doing what I'm doing, I would have gone work for them, I would have loved to

be able to just call someone up and be like, hey, your company is awesome, and I

want to go work for you, you know, um, but that wasn't available, so I had to

make it from

scratch, and so elaborating that is really important, and helping people

understand that, um, whatever your economic activity is, whatever it is that

keeps the lights on, it doesn't have to be at the expense of everything, you

know, which is, which is what participating in the mainstream capitalist economy

is, is basically buying into a death cult, right, and, and saying--resigning

yourself to, all right, we're just going to destroy the world, um, and so at

some point you have to make some conscious decisions about, like, all right,

money is not the most important thing, and I, and I really think that's true, I

think we've passed through a period of human history where money was the most

important thing, and, and was being pursued, you know, the, the most efficiency

was, was kind of in, uh, in producing capital, in producing surplus, you know,

that's what our whole culture was predicated on, and now it's going to

shift, it's in the process of shifting, because we see how empty that is, and we

see how destructive it is, and ultimately it's going to--it is leading to a

situation where the capacity of our landscapes to sustain life is at risk, and

so what, you know, the old adage of, like, well, you can't eat money, so what

becomes important at that point in time? Knowledge becomes important, the

ability to, um, to, to react to what's happening, to explain and contextualize

what's happening, to generalize that experience across wide bodies of people, so

that we can all understand that we're in this together, and that there can be a

coherent response to it, um, that's, that's I think what, what we're really

calling out for right now, and what the future just demands, right, and so

that's the kind of education that, um, that people need right now, particularly,

I mean, younger folks understand that the, the corporate ladder or whatever is just

not there for them, right, that, that, that there is no future in perpetuating

this civilization. Um, I mean, it's manifestly obvious in a way that it's been

so interesting, like I said, I was, I'm thirty-eight years old, so I've seen

everything from, you know, growing up in the late 80s into the early 90s, and

just like the, the so-called end of history, and the complete hegemonic

domination of Western capitalism, um, and saying that there is no alternative,

right, and, and that was, I mean, that was heavy, that was huge, and you really

felt it in terms of the, um, the advancements of neoliberalism, and kind of just

the, the way that you would be shut down for even daring to discuss Marxism or

anything like that, and that's not the world that we live in anymore, right, and

that change has happened, the curiosity that's there for what's an alternative,

how do we fix this, um, is, is due to material changes in the lives that we are--the

life that we're experiencing together, right, and the prospects for, for the

future that we all see kind of hurtling towards us in a disconcerting way, um,

and so that is, that's what education is to me. I, again, will use like, like I

taught a plant ID class yesterday, and that's super cool, very practical skill,

um, but it--pedagogically, I'm not really that interested in whether a student

can identify a plant, because anybody can teach anybody how to identify a plant.

What's important is getting people to physically, like materially interact with

the world around them in a way, you know, that maybe they haven't had the

opportunity to before, and getting some of that grounding back in the land that

we stand on, and how it's changing, and if you don't have anything else, you

have those plants, and the plants are going to,

you know, you can always come back to them as civilization collapses around us

or whatever, uh, you at least have that one thing that we can build back up

from, so, so I see it as a practical skill that way, but again, not teaching

anybody this stuff so that they can go out and be a botanist and make a career

out of it or whatever. I'm really interested more in what, what are the, the

effects, um, that kind of radiate out from that, in terms of getting people

together in a space to talk about, um, the, the changes that are happening in

our society, and what we might be able to do about it, um, and the plants are

just like a really helpful teacher that's there for us that, you know, we can,

there's a touchstone there that we can always come back to if we need to.

MCCOY:So like, I'm curious, as you know, a little bit earlier you were talking

about being attentive towards what the land needs,

um, and I'm curious in the time that you've been doing this, um, whether or not,

like, paying attention to that, um, you know, have you begun to notice certain

change, you know, certain changes within the ecology that are in, in, you know,

indicative of, you know, change, you know, larger changes in the climate?--

BRAGA:--absolutely--

MCCOY:--that kind of thing.

BRAGA:Yeah, um, and it's interesting, I was just thinking about this because

when I was a kid, I, already you had people talking about, well, the elders are

saying that bird migrations have changed, or, you know, this person's been

farming their whole life, and they say that things are changing, and things, you

know, this is back in the 90s again, right? And if you, you were involved in any

way with environmental activism, or those kinds of circles,

you heard this stuff, um, but I personally, you know, there was always this,

like, little skepticism, like, is that real? Or it's like, they have this, like,

extra sensory perception, and, you know, and there's, like, the, um, the--some

really problematic kind of approaches to, like, oh, the indigenous people over

there are, you know, they have, they're tapped in in a way that White people

could never be, and they're telling us things are changing and stuff, um, and,

and so, yeah, I didn't, I didn't see it, right, because I couldn't, and have the

experience. Fast forward to today, average person on the street can tell you

that things are different than when they were a kid, right, and, and sometimes

things are different than they were even last year. Um, so, yeah, so, so many

different things, whether it be kind of a prevalence of invasive species,

pathogens coming in, you know, mostly woodland plants is what I see a lot of,

but things that, you know, just weren't that big of a concern. Uh, when I moved

to Lexington, and now it's like, oh, these things are starting to pop up

everywhere, that's, that's one. The, the hydrology I mentioned before, that's,

even ten years ago, I feel like I could really count on a nice afternoon

thunderstorm in the summer, a convective thunderstorm, you know, and you could,

you could just about set your clock to it. I could go out with my buddy, we

could sit on his porch or whatever, and there would be an awesome thunderstorm.

Now, I see this pattern, you know, on the Doppler, you can even see it. We don't

have these big lingering cells, we have a front that's like this skinny, and it

just pushes through hard and fast, right, and sometimes it doesn't even do that.

Sometimes, I see this all the time because I'm checking the weather for if I

have to go out and work, you know, and maybe I have some interns working for me

or something, so I got to call them up and say, hey, it's supposed to rain this afternoon,

so we're not going to be able to be out there or whatever. I mean, I've lost

count of how many times I've made that call because, yeah, there was all kinds

of rain forecast in the afternoon. We actually get there, a heat dome forms, the

pressure can't, you know, the moisture can't penetrate that, and we don't get

rain at all. It dissipates and it goes somewhere else, but over here, you know,

here over the urban area where we have all that kind of heat island effect, we

don't get the rain. So that's been, I mean, that's just in the last five years,

really, that I've seen that and had to start reconfiguring now to where if I see

that rain forecast in the afternoon, I get a little suspicious and I'm like, I

think we're actually still going to go out there and work. I've seen the, the

water tables drop, you know, we have just really amazing hydrogeology in Fayette

County here in Kentucky. Um, so for anyone who doesn't know, it's kind of

defined by this soluble bedrock, lime--this calcareous limestone that dissolves

away into all these

cool caves and sinkholes and various just really interesting, convoluted, um,

and sometimes annoying ways that water moves through our landscape. Um, but so,

we have like artesian springs and just really cool geologic features

concentrated in this area, and it's easy to observe them and see that like we

had that huge drought, that really heavy drought a couple years ago, a few years

ago, and I've not seen some of our water levels rebound from that. You know,

I've seen projects that I've worked on where I was planting, uh, the banks of a

creek or something like that, and I look at it now and those banks are exposed,

you know, well below where I had been planting at the waterline, and it's like

that stuff's not coming back up. And some of that is a normal process of that

hydrogeology where it's dissolving that bedrock and creating new caves and the

water's finding new

ways to go, so it ends up dropping in the landscape. But some of that is just

that we've had drought, we've had extended drought, we don't have a recharge of

the water table, and, um, that's, that’s happening really fast, and that's

something that I work with directly. So, I think the water piece is maybe the

most important single aspect to be focusing on, both in terms of climate policy

and in terms of how that practically manifests, um, and in terms of the projects

that we want to put out on the landscape, and specifically what I'm talking

about, I guess, is on the landscape scale, passive water retention, water

collection. We need, uh--if we're thinking about the water cycle, it's much more

complicated than just like a cycle, one cycle, right? It's got all kinds of

cycles within it, but if we think about the water comes down, it rains, goes

into the soil, gets sucked up by the plants

and put back up into the clouds, and on and on it goes. Uh, when we have an

urban area and we kind of pave over that soil and create all these impervious

surfaces, then that water, we've cut off that part of the cycle. So, if the

water can't get into the soil, then the trees can't get it and can't put it back

out into the atmosphere, and there's so much involved in all that. But, you

know, just to bring it home to like one salient point, for instance, we've had a

huge resurgence in interest in urban forestry and all the good things that

planting trees in urban areas can do for us, the water quality, the property

values, human health outcomes, just all of it, right? Um, but if we are planting

trees into a chronically dehydrated landscape, which is what we have in urban

areas, then actually all these claims that we're making about how amazing

they're going to perform and all the things that they're going to do, they're

not going to do any of those things. And in fact, they might end up dying due to

heat stress,

water stress, whatever, because that water table keeps getting lower every year.

Um, and I'm not seeing enough of a focus on that. You know, a lot of people talk

about carbon and different kind of emissions and managing water from a

standpoint of we have more intense rainstorms, so like we need better storm

sewer systems to efficiently move it and whatever, but what about the, what's

that missing piece is how do we reconnect that broken part of the cycle? How do

we get that water into the soil, store it there as long as possible? That is

more of a permaculture approach in terms of thinking of, um, problems or

actually, when you have a problem, it's usually a resource that's not being used

correctly or is not being used inefficiently. So, if we have floods, for

instance, well that water is life, right? We all agree with that piece, so why

is it a problem? It's a problem

because it's in the wrong place at the right, wrong time and the wrong quantity.

How do we change that, right? Um, and that takes a different kind of thinking

than sort of the reductionist engineering of the 20th century that was just

like, well just get it off the property as soon as possible. Um, that's what's

gotten us into this mess, right?

MCCOY:How much, I guess along similar lines of noticing some of these changes,

how much does adaptation come into play in the way that you are designing your

projects and things like that? Also, maybe in what ways?

BRAGA:Yeah, um, well I might ask you to provide a little more focus on that

just because so adaptation, philosophically I have some problems with it because

I think when we talk about adaptation then there’s a--we've resigned ourselves

to the fact that like we can't stop climate change or whatever, which is, is, is

true. Um, so that part is

relevant but I think there has been a shift in some of the popular discourse

around with adaptation becoming deradicalized. Like adaptation I think used to

mean like degrowth and planting more trees and changing our food systems and all

these kinds of things and now adaptation means, uh, electric vehicles and

painting surfaces white and you know building shopping malls underground where

they can be climate controlled more easily and all these kinds of different

things that do not in any way fundamentally break away from the infinite growth

kind of capitalist mindset that is just going to recreate some of the, some of

the problematic dynamics that we have. So, adaptation, yes I'm finding myself

having to be like really careful with that word recently where I used to say

like yeah climate adaptation, climate adaptation

now I'm like that might not actually be what I'm doing I'm not sure depending on

how other people are using it. But, um, you know it's a more accessible word

than saying like collapse or whatever. Um, but I think, uh, in terms of what I

actually do that I would call adaptation, the food system stuff I think is maybe

the most direct. So, um, bringing a focus back to a lot of native perennial

agriculture, native because these are things that are adapted to these soils,

they haven't existed or been cultivated under conditions of like really specific

stable climate with lots of human involvement. You know they don't--these, these

plants which are potentially crops or have been crops and are

crops, um, they--they're going to be more resilient than some of the things that

we are counting on to feed ourselves right now. We also kind of--with native

plant perennial agriculture you are doing triple quadruple duty in terms of

protecting the soil, protecting the water, building up some of the diversity and

the ecology both in terms of the, the microbiology that can coexist with these

more diverse more complex kind of agricultural systems, um, and as well as the

plants themselves. You know and thinking more holistically about what an agro

ecology looks like, what--how it functions. So, we're used to seeing a field

that just has like you know one monocrop everything is the same species. Um, I'm

thinking about okay how do

we--and that's for you know density of production right the most calories out of

that piece of land but then you start to find that okay what if and of course

this depends on the crop that you're after but what if I have another plant in

that system that's going to attract pollinators for that crop. So I'm going to

actually in the case of a fruit tree or something like that I'll get heavier

fruit set because I've also created the habitat for the organism that is going

to pollinize all my fruit um, and, and so, at that point we're just talking

about two species right and so it's difficult science has a hard time with this

because with, with science when you're studying and I'm speaking specifically

about sustainable agriculture and agroforestry you know the capital S

sustainable agriculture the capital A agroforestry when you're doing that kind

of research you have to be able to replicate everything you have to be able to, um,

show a bunch of different treatments and how they vary and stuff like that so as

you add more species to the mix it becomes exponentially more difficult to, to

be able to publish anything (laughs) right so, so you see a lot of these studies

that are like we put four different species together and we're actually

producing more and you know there's all these interesting interactions it's like

that's cool and I love that you're doing that work but what about fifteen,

twenty, thirty different species all together right like we're never going to be

able to quantify that and fortunately we don't have to because we don't have to

wholesale abandon some of the agricultural production systems that we're already

dependent on it would be catastrophic to do so right but what we can do is

transition a lot of what we currently see as marginal land into a more of a

multifunctional purpose so just again as an urban ecologist that's my focus here

in the city there's

tons of land that is just being mowed right now municipal public land it's just

being mowed it's not really serving any purpose other than for those mowing

contractors to keep feeding themselves, um, and we can, we can improve all these

things that we have to improve and in the urban ecology anyway like the soil

whether it be soil stability structure volume we have to improve our urban tree

canopy, uh, for a variety of issues right we have concerns about historic equity

in different communities and neighborhoods we have the urban heat island effect

we have all the water quality stuff so if we're doing all this stuff anyway why

don't we also think about producing food and medicine, um, because that's going

to be what's right outside of people's doors oftentimes is some of these

neglected whatever it might be a vacant lot it might be a water quality lot we

have a lot of places in Lexington where there used to be houses but they were

built in a floodplain so the basements always flooded in the city tore them down

it's like let's grow food in those areas, right?

MCCOY:So, I guess maybe, maybe to, to close out with, with, with one last

question you know you talked earlier about how I think, uh, coming across these,

coming across these ideas with you know permaculture and things like that

started to make you, you know, hopeful--

BRAGA:--mm-hmm --

MCCOY:--and I think oftentimes when we're doing these interviews and having

conversations about climate change and things like that, um, you know folks can

you know oftentimes they can go in a very sort of pessimistic sort of direction--

BRAGA:--mm-hmm --

MCCOY:--so I just kind of want to ask here at the end--

BRAGA:--(laughs)--

MCCOY:--like you know like what, what is it that that maybe makes, makes you

hopeful or are you are you hopeful in certain ways about--

BRAGA:--yeah man hope [?? WORD UNCLEAR] shoot

I'm gonna try to end on a positive note let's see if I can get there, um,

because I've probably used the word hope in this interview but I want to be

careful about it because I think hope is pernicious, you know, hope can really

be something--like if you look at a lot of abusive relationships and like hope

is a reason that people stick around you know that oh this this might change

things might get better whatever and so hope kind of it, it disempowers us in a

way because it, it you know we're gonna take our agency and we'll project it

onto something else there's a hope that the next leader will do better once we

get them elected in or whatever, uh, and so I don't hope is important right a

positive outlook is important but not at the cost of lying to people about like

the reality of the situation that we face right, um, because again if I'm

talking about I just had that spiel about like maybe every tree I'm planting is

gonna die

I don't want to lead off with that right like if somebody's paying me to plant

trees I'm not gonna be like, “and by the way it doesn't matter,” but, um, at the

same time it would be disastrous for me to like not address that and then look

like an idiot when all the trees die and look like I didn't have a plan or we

didn't know this was coming or whatever right? So, never lament a closer

relationship with the truth even if it is kind of horrifying and can be

difficult to work through it's like only on the basis of that are you gonna move

forward and be able to to do anything. So, yeah I don't know--Huey, Huey P

Newton had this line about like a tank rolling over you and that it was morally

incumbent upon you to spit on it but as it did so you know it's like the least

you can do so why not, uh, and so there's a piece of that. Like I'm gonna go

down fighting you know I've done the thing

I've gone through the whole process of well screw everybody I'm gonna go live in

the woods by myself in a cabin I'm gonna learn what plants to eat and come out

of that because every problem that we have in the society is ultimately about

alienation. Whether we're alienated from the products of our labor and how we

contribute meaningfully to economic activity of society, uh, alienated from each

other you know and the way that our housing is built and the way that we're

educated and all these kinds of different things, uh, even to the point where

you know we have all these mental health crises that people are basically told

is a personal issue and that it'll just take up meditation change your diet go

hiking more and all these things are like important and valid but they are a

very individualized approach to like here's what the solution is there are no

solutions on the individual level it's only together it's only as we find each other.

And so, I can't I can't fake that I can't tell you about like how great it's

gonna be or whatever because I'd be lying to you and giving you this hope that

you need to go find for yourself. Um, and you can't you can't fake the funk

right like when you get there you're gonna know, and you're gonna realize that

even through okay this is subjective I'm not telling I'm not telling you what

you're gonna realize but for me we step foot we keep moving forward because

we're there in community with other people and we find that whether it's in good

times where everything's going well or it's literally through a global disaster

that we're all suffering through together it's in that togetherness that there's

like this spark of like--oh life is actually worth living we are social animals.

We have the capacity for hope, but that hope only exists that hope is only

credible if it is on the basis of

us coming together working together there are no individual solutions even me as

a business owner or whatever, um, and, and so I just want to I want to keep

centering that and keep giving that to people as sort of the advice and then I

think they're gonna find their own hope they're gonna find whatever the, the

spark of positivity is that's where it can be found and I'm not gonna tell you

what it is for you what the specific experience is but I want to encourage

people to don't try to do this by yourself because, uh, it's, it's, it's not as

fun and it's not gonna work we have we have to come together.

MCCOY:Great, thank you so much Nachie.

BRAGA:Thank you, yeah.

[END OF INTERVIEW]