CAGLE:All right, we are now recording. This is Lauren Cagle. I'm here with Dr.

Jerry Brotzge from Western Kentucky University. Um, we're recording via video

conferencing. Jerry is at WKU. I'm at home in Lexington. And, um, this is for

the KYCC[1]Climate Oral History Project. Today is

September 26th, 2023. So with that out of the way, let me ask you, it's either

the easiest question or the hardest question, which is tell me a little bit

about yourself.

BROTZGE:Sure, sure. I, uh, well, let's see. I'm originally from Kentucky. I'm

originally from Bullitt County near Shepherdsville, Kentucky. And I grew up

there. Uh, and at the age of eighteen, went off to college at St. Louis

University, which at the time was the closest university to where I lived with

the meteorology program. I actually visited Western Kentucky because I was given

a full scholarship to

here, but they didn't have a meteorology program at the time, and, uh, Glenn

Conner, the state climatologist, was out of town that day, so I didn't get to

meet him on my visit. So I ended up going to St. Louis University for

undergraduate, and then I went on to University of Oklahoma for my master's and

PhD in meteorology. And after graduating in 2000 with a PhD, I stayed at

University of Oklahoma, where I worked for what was called the Center for

Analysis and Prediction of Storms, CAPS. And I did, uh, some numerical modeling

work for them. And I should say, during my graduate work at Oklahoma, I went

there to do weather radar work. And in the first semester, my advisor actually

had a pretty serious heart attack. And so he was in the hospital, it would be a

fairly long recovery for

him. So I needed a new advisor and looked around the department, and the

Oklahoma Mesonet had some funds. They were just starting out, had just installed

a network there. And so, uh, I was brought on as one of the new graduate

students. And so that's kind of how I got into the observations and Mesonet field--

CAGLE:--wow--

BROTZGE:--so now when I started working for OU, for CAPS, I wasn't doing, I was

basically taking observations and improving numerical models using those

observations and testing the models. And then in, uh, nine years ago, in

twenty--what year was it?--twenty--

CAGLE:--fourteen? According to the internet, 2014--

BROTZGE:--yep 2014 I--the state of New York wanted to start a Mesonet of their

own. And at the time, there were maybe

two dozen, maybe twentystates with Mesonets of some kind. And New York had just

received some funding from FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] to start

up a program. And so I had some experience with Mesonets. And so I applied and,

uh, got the position there and so moved to New York in 2014 and started up a

statewide Mesonet there of one-hundred and twenty-six stations. And also a

Micronet in New York City and some other, uh, observational networks there in

New York. And then, and through that, I got to know quite a few state

climatologists. I got to know, uh, Stu Foster here in Kentucky. And--

CAGLE:--who we also have an interview with in this collection, so--

BROTZGE:--great, great--

CAGLE:--yeah. For the listener--(laughs)--

BROTZGE:--and so, and because I knew him, I was, and because I was from the

state of Kentucky, I saw this position open

and then applied and of course got the position. So, so that's how I ended up here.

CAGLE:And that's how you ended up here. I have many, many things I want to

follow up with. Okay, let's start with a factual one that might sound dry, but I

think is very interesting and I love hearing you talk about this, which is what

is a Mesonet?

BROTZGE:Sure, sure. So Mesonet stands for Mesoscale Network. And in

meteorology, the term Mesoscale refers to things at the scale of meso, which

means middle. And in meteorology, when we think of like middle scale, we think

of something bigger than a single thunderstorm, but smaller than a whole entire

frontal system. So basically we're trying to design a network that can measure

those things in the middle. And by that we usually mean a network spacing of

about twenty miles.

CAGLE:Okay. So it isn't a geographic scale. It's a like

weather phenomenon scale.

BROTZGE:Exactly.

CAGLE:Oh, I actually as many times as I have heard, I mean this is on me for

not picking that up. I think I had, I think I just always defaulted to thinking

of it as geographic but that makes a lot of sense. So how, backing up quite a

lot. You know, you said you selected St. Louis University, because they had the

meteorology program. How did you know you wanted to be a meteorologist and, um,

did you ever want to be a weatherman on TV?

BROTZGE:(Laughs)--uh, the second question, no, I never wanted to be on TV.

CAGLE:Okay.

BROTZGE:But I had an uncle, so I always liked the weather. I like thunderstorms

and being in Kentucky you have one wonderful thing about Kentucky is you have

four equal length seasons. Every three months you're in a new season, new

weather, you have winter weather and storms. We really get a little bit of

everything here. And so I always liked the weather. But I had an uncle who was a

forest ranger

in, uh, Letcher County, Kentucky. And on--they had a museum there at the forest

where he worked, but they also had a little weather station. And so a co-op

station, what they call a co-op, cooperative observer network. And, and so

whenever I visited him, I was able to go out with him to the weather station and

record the data and see how all the instruments worked.

CAGLE:That's very cool.

BROTZGE:So that's how, that was my introduction.

CAGLE:Yeah. And what did you think you were going to be doing then? So you go

and decide to study meteorology. Did you have a sense of, I want to do research,

I want to do--

BROTZGE:--I was a terrible student in that way--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

BROTZGE:--I really had no idea what I wanted to do and so I went to school, I

did my undergraduate work and I still didn't know what I wanted to do. So I just

stayed in school--

CAGLE:--classic--

BROTZGE:--it's a terrible

way to go about your career--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

BROTZGE:--but I think most meteorologists are actually in that position. I knew

that I didn't want to do shift work. So the weather service was not really

something I was aiming for, even though a lot of my colleagues did. And, uh, I

knew I didn't want to be on television. So that kind of narrowed the scope down

to research. And so I just kind of pursued that.

CAGLE:What exactly is shift work in the context of the weather service?

BROTZGE:Right, right. So every, as I understand it, every three weeks, they

start a different shift. So it's either the night shift or evening shift or

daytime shift. And so they do that, uh, partly, as I understand it, it's union

rules, and they didn't want anyone to make more than another. So it was kind of

a way to keep the salaries equal.

CAGLE:Oh, interesting. Yeah, I can see where that wouldn't be appealing,

necessarily. Um, especially if you have a family,

right? So you, I know in your various like biographies and things online, you

talk about enjoying traveling and spending time with family. Yeah--

BROTZGE:--right, right--

CAGLE:--yeah. Yeah. So, um, how did, how does that fit into kind of the

history, your personal history, rather, especially as you're making these big

moves from Oklahoma to New York and then back to Kentucky?

BROTZGE:Right, right. Well, a lot of meteorologists, uh, are somewhat used to

moving. And in fact, if you're in the National Weather Service, you almost have

to move to a new office to advance. And so, uh, that's somewhat part of being a

meteorologist and very few people in meteorology get to live where they're

originally from. And so that's kind of, you kind of know that going in--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--that's part of it--

CAGLE:--right. And you can prepare your family for that, I would assume.

BROTZGE:Right, right.

CAGLE:Yeah--

BROTZGE:--you kind of know that going in--

CAGLE:--yes. Not that different from academics, which you are now, sort of

.

BROTZGE:Right, right--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah. Okay. So, I'm trying to think. Like I said, I have so many

follow-ups that I want to talk about. Well, let's, let's go there then. So the

current gig, uh, you have at least three titles--(both laugh)--Right. So do you

want to talk us through how those sort of what those titles are and how they

sort of fit together?

BROTZGE:Sure, sure. So the, I guess the more mundane title is professor. And,

uh, so, historically, the, uh, director of the Climate Center and the state

climatologist have been a professor as well here at WKU. And, and as part of

that, I teach one class per semester. I, uh--and, but, but really I'm in front

of the students in order to get them engaged into the Climate Center, into the

Mesonet. And so, so that's why that's really the prime reason why, why I'm teaching

is to help with that connection, connecting students to the research.

CAGLE:Does it, I mean, how many students are involved in it? I don't know

anything about student involvement, actually.

BROTZGE:Oh, sure. I, it's, it's as much as they want to be involved or as many

students as we can take on. And for, for this semester, I think we have a total

of five students involved between the Mesonet and the Climate Center. But we

expect that number will grow over time to at least ten to fifteen.

CAGLE:Yeah. Oh, that's awesome.

BROTZGE:So--

CAGLE:--yeah. Well, and also, you know, sort of harkens back to that's what you

were doing at, at University of Oklahoma, right? As--

BROTZGE:--that's right--

CAGLE:--working with the Mesonet. Yeah. Yeah. So, okay. So that's the professor

title. Then you have the state climatologist title and the director title, which

are intermingled.

BROTZGE:Right, right. So--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--we have, so the way the

structure is here in Kentucky, we have what's called the Kentucky Climate

Center. We call it the KCC. And, uh, under that umbrella, we have both the state

climate office, as well as the Kentucky Mesonet. And so the state climate office

of Kentucky is an unfunded, uh, group. We have a physical room. We have lots of

old records. We have, which are mostly digitized now. And we have, of course,

students that either volunteer or work in the KCC under a paid arrangement, uh,

for research, um, usually in collaboration with the Kentucky Mesonet. And so

that's the state climate office and that's mostly service oriented. I mean, we

do some research with students, but it's primarily as a service to the state and

stakeholders and users--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

BROTZGE:--and so the other side of the umbrella within the KCC is the Kentucky

Mesonet. And we have a staff currently of about a dozen employees and staff. Uh,

almost nearly all scientists, most with meteorology backgrounds. And they're

actually located off campus at what's called the Innovation Center, also called

the CRD, the Center for Research and Development here at WKU. And that's

actually in an old mall off of Nashville Road, for those familiar with Bowling

Green, located a couple of miles south of campus. And the current makeup of our

staff is, uh, of course, I'm the director. We have a program manager. We have a

research scientist. We have quality control scientists. We have four field

technicians, two of whom live remotely. One lives in Georgetown, Kentucky, and a

new employee who will live in Corbin

, Kentucky--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah--

BROTZGE:--and they service the eastern half of the state--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

BROTZGE:--which saves us time and money and really is a good use of state

resources. And then we have a calibration manager in-house and two IT staff that

handle all the software and web design.

CAGLE:That’s--how many Mesonet stations are there across the state?

BROTZGE:So currently we have eighty-two--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--and our goal is really to have one station in every county. Of

course, there are one-hundred and twenty counties in Kentucky. Currently, we

have about seventy-four counties covered with at least one station. Uh, we have

a couple of larger counties with two, even three stations. But eventually we

want to have at least one station in every county--

CAGLE:--that’s--

BROTZGE:--so, yeah--

CAGLE:--go ahead--

BROTZGE:--so, yeah, we want to have in

the end when we're done building out, we hope to have somewhere between

one-hundred thirty and one-hundred fourty stations.

CAGLE:That's really ambitious. I love it. Do you have a sense of the timeline

for that? What--how long that might take?

BROTZGE:We think we can start adding roughly five stations per year.

CAGLE:That's a lot.

BROTZGE:We can usually install a station within a few days. You have to wait a

couple of weeks for the concrete to dry once you put the tower in. But after

that, after that dries, then you can finish the tower in a day--

CAGLE:--okay--

BROTZGE:--so, yeah. What takes so long is just finding the place to put it. And

the site host is willing to have a station on their property. And we couldn't do

it without a site host.

CAGLE:Yeah. So how does that relationship work? So you're not purchasing land,

right? But is it a leasing arrangement or just purely voluntary? Yeah. How does

that work?

BROTZGE:Yeah, purely voluntary

. And typically we work with a station host that's willing to have the station

there permanently at least thirty years so we can get that official climate

record. And, and the good thing is, you know, usually the site host or almost

all cases, the site host is someone that wants weather data on their property.

And so that--so we work with them to find a nice open level location and if

we're able to do it, then we put the station in. And we provide them, of course,

with free access to everything collected. And then they give us the space.

CAGLE:That's awesome. The data that's collected, do all Kentuckians have free

access to all the data? Or is there some that the site hosts are getting sort of

additional access to then?

BROTZGE:They do. Because Kentucky is really only one of two states that I know

of that actually supports their Mesonets through public funding

. And so because of that, we uh, we make the data freely available to everyone

in Kentucky. Uh, no strings attached. And that is really just a huge, huge, uh,

benefit for everybody in the state. I just can't say enough about that support.

CAGLE:Wait, which is the other state?

BROTZGE:Oklahoma.

CAGLE:It is Oklahoma. I thought so. Yeah. Why do you think that is, that

there's only the two?

BROTZGE:I think it's a combination of factors. I think probably the most

important reason is both states are susceptible to a lot of high impactful

weather. And, uh, not to say other states aren't, but we do have tornadoes and

flash flooding and high wind events and hail and ice storms. And, you know, I

could just go down the list and--

CAGLE:--wind storms--

BROTZGE:--wind storms, especially this year

. Right, right. So I think because of that, you know, I think that's one reason.

I think both states are very agricultural focused as well. And so farmers know

how to use that data. They plan their planting and harvesting around climate

data. So I think there's just a deep appreciation from a lot of different

sectors of the value of that data.

CAGLE:That's--okay--so that I have two questions that I wanted to talk about

anyway that are raised by that. One is about how people use the data. So

farmers, obviously, I'm assuming other industries, city planners, emergency

planners. But I'm just curious from from your perspective, how much you even see

how it gets used. You know, I'm guessing some of it is just people download and

you don't know what they're doing with it. Um, but I'm curious as to what you do

see and what kinds of questions you get from people and what sectors

they're coming from.

BROTZGE:Right, right. When I was in New York, we recorded, of course, the

population of New York State's twenty million and five times larger than

Kentucky. And so we had a lot of data requests. And so we recorded all of those

requests and really did a study, a deep study of who our users were. And we had

everything from golf, golf course designers, because they want to know how much

it rains. And we had we had police officers investigating crimes--

CAGLE:--okay, yeah--

BROTZGE:--they would find a cadaver, I mean, you know, a dead person and they

would, you know, if they understood the weather, that would help them pinpoint

the time of death. We had, well, you know, like you said, lots of farmers. We

had hydrologists

. One of our strongest partners is the National Weather Service. And we have,

uh, we stream all the data to them in real time and they ingest that data into

the numerical models. And so all of the official forecasts for Kentucky have

Kentucky Mesonet data included in those forecasts. And so whether they know it

or not, the whole state has a lot better prediction, a lot better forecast

because they they have a Mesonet.

CAGLE:Uh-huh, I, I did not realize it was live streaming. That's amazing. How

long has that been the case?

BROTZGE:That's a good question. At least probably at least, gosh, maybe almost

a decade.

CAGLE:Oh, wow. Yeah, um, so follow up question. You mentioned climate a couple

of times and we've been sort of, I think, talking like using these terms of

climate and weather, not interchangeably

, but as though the relationship between the two is clear. Um, and so from your

perspective as a meteorologist who also has the title of state climatologist,

how do you think about that relationship?

BROTZGE:That's a great question--

CAGLE:--thanks--(both laugh)--

BROTZGE:--and even for me, there's not a you know, basically. We when we talk

about whether we're typically thinking zero to ten days forecast wise. And so

anything that happens on that scale, we definitely refer to as weather. And then

it gets a--then basically you blend from from whether you transition from

weather to climate. And so on the forecasting side, if you start looking beyond

ten days, you're falling back on what's the climate? What's the typical climate

of the time of year for that location or what are the larger

I don't say weather signals, but teleconnections, climate signals ongoing, you

know, at the larger scale? And so if you're looking in the past. Officially, we

we always like to point to a thirty year record. And so, you know, the signals

that we can pull out from a thirty year, thirty year data set we refer to as

climate. Now, you know, historically, we've always thought that the climate, you

know, if we had thirty years of data, then that's what it was. And, you know,

that was the end of the story. Well, now we know that climate's always changing.

Climate's changed in the past. We definitely see it changing in the future. And

so I think that definition is probably changed over time. And there's no magic

number, the magic rule is thirty years is climate. And so now we're thinking,

well, maybe even a ten year period of time can point to a climate signal. So so

all that to say, it's not an easy answer, but typically in a time series wise,

zero to ten days is definitely more on the weather signal. And as you transition

beyond ten days, you're getting more into what we call teleconnections, larger

scale relationships and longer term relationships. So there's a space time

component to so that the more you move towards climate, the larger your

geographic scale of those features and and the impacts of those.

CAGLE:Yeah. So when we think about Kentucky's climate, one of the challenges

is, of course, that we're talking about a political unit, Kentucky. Right. With

politically determined geographic boundaries that may or may not have anything

to do with natural phenomena, which is certainly visible in things like

pollution, um, where air pollution, for example, crosses state lines. But I

imagine that also gets complicated thinking about weather.

BROTZGE:That's true. That's a great point. And, you know, one thing about

Kentucky. So so every state has been I forget the year these were created, but I

believe no, I'm not sure who who created these. But some government entity

invented climate division. So they took every state and and looked at the

geography and some other considerations came up with climate divisions, which in

some cases for some states make sense. Other states, I think it was just

convenience. But Kentucky is divided into four climate divisions. There is

Western, there's Eastern, basically the Western third, Eastern third, and the

middle section of Kentucky is divided north, south and north. Section is called

Bluegrass. And then there's the southern tier. So we have four climate

divisions. And honestly, in Kentucky, those four climate divisions are pretty

similar, but they're pretty well thought out. And you do see some subtle

differences between those four regions. But overall, you're correct. Those four

are pretty close to each other. It's all Ohio Valley. We see a lot of the same

features across all four. Uh, maybe you in some ways you could you could point

to the Ohio Valley, the Tennessee Valley, Appalachia, Kentucky. Those are kind

of the three larger scale features that we see. And so you do see some variety,

some difference between those three.

CAGLE:Interesting.

Yeah. And that's also the what you're describing also maps to some extent on the

geomorphic regions of the state, which I'm guessing, you know, I am not a

scientist. However, my understanding is that geology affects weather--

BROTZGE:--that’s true, that’s true--

CAGLE:--and so, yeah, right--

BROTZGE:--the soils and the soil type and infiltration and how much water the

soil can hold, that all has some impacts.

CAGLE:Yeah. Okay, so this actually could lead into something else I wanted to

talk to you about, which is, um, sort of a two parter. Um, asking the same

question, which has to do with the need for you to become a bit of a

transdisciplinary, multidisciplinary Renaissance person in your role because of

both the research side. Like I would imagine that's true for a lot of

meteorological researchers, but then also the communication side

that comes along with your position as director of the Mesonet and state

climatologist, where you are frequently called upon to give comment in the press

about things that are meteorological in nature, but not necessarily just

meteorological. So how do you how do you navigate those asks to suddenly know

things about soil or suddenly know things about, you know, urban heat islands or

suddenly know things about human population migration?

BROTZGE:Right. Right. Well, it's a joy of the position and also the greatest

challenge of the position. And the one class I'm teaching this fall is called

Applied Meteorology and Climatology. And in that class, I'll lead the students

through all the different applications of weather. And we start off focusing on

agricultural weather and how weather impacts farming and,

and, uh livestock. And then we talk about marine weather and the impacts of

weather and climate on shipping and sailing and and tropical systems and

tropical storms. And then we were talking about ground transportation and then

we're talking about health and then we're talking about space weather. And so

actually teaching this class is a real help for me because I'm relearning all of

these different aspects that meteorology touches on. Like when the Maui

wildfires happened, you know, we had a lot of media asking about climate and and

the state of Hawaii. And so we I know a little about fire weather, some about

fire weather, but I don't know a whole lot about Hawaii. So it can be

challenging, but it's also fun because you get to learn more and you read up on

various topics. So and that is one interesting thing about the

state climatology role. When you look at the fifty states and well, something

like forty-five states have a state climatologist. There's a few that don't. But

when you look across the country at the different roles that those state

climatologists play, it varies a lot. And usually it just reflects the

background of that person. But I know Glenn and Stu, my predecessors here in

Kentucky, were both geographers and and I'm a meteorologist, so I bring a

slightly different flavor to the role. But it is quite varied when you look

across the different states. And some are very focused on future climate change

and others like ours to a large degree are more focused on observations and

networks and data collection. But but it's a fun role, but it's challenging.

Like you said.

CAGLE:It's--certainly sounds challenging. It looks challenging from the outside.

Um, but you all have have recently hired, um, someone, correct, in KCC, uh, to

do kind of press media management. Is that right? I don't--

BROTZGE:--yes--

CAGLE:--I don't recall. I'm so sorry. I should have this in my notes with the

actual title is. Can you talk about that? Has that position existed before? What

led you to it?

BROTZGE:Yes. Yes. So we partly because of all the different roles that we have

here, we really needed somebody to focus almost exclusively on communication and

both communication to the public via, say, social media, communication through a

regular TV and radio media and in with the Mesonet, too, because we're hopefully

eventually in every county. We really wanted a caway to connect with those local

entities a lot better. So we created a position of

Mesonet outreach, KCC outreach, and we had a local meteorologist here on

television who had been doing it for 20 plus years and was was ready for a

change in his career. And so, uh, and his name is Shane. And I'll think of his

last name--

CAGLE:--I was going to say, I have a guess--

BROTZGE:--I’m blanking--

CAGLE:--I know also and I'm blanking. Sorry, Shane. If you hear this--

BROTZGE:--sorry Shane--

CAGLE:--we think you're great. We know you're great. Yeah--

BROTZGE:--you’re fantastic. And because he has this experience, it's just he's

brought he had, I think, or has four thousand plus followers on social media--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

BROTZGE:--yes. That, uh, expertise, he's been able to just bring that to the

Mesonet and so just immediately been able to do that. So I'll just there.

CAGLE:

Shane Holland, Holland?

BROTZGE:Holinde.

CAGLE:Holinde. Holinde okay, fabulous. Yeah.

BROTZGE:Everyone in Bowling Green knows of it, have known it for twenty-plus years--

CAGLE:--yes--

BROTZGE:--but I'm new to Bowling Green--

CAGLE:--well that's exciting, though, to recruit somebody who has that level of

community like reputation already.

BROTZGE:It's huge four, fourty-nine other states are extremely jealous of us

right now.

CAGLE:(Laughs)--I'm sure. Yeah. So how is the Mesonet and KCC funded? You

talked about having public funding. Is that being, sort of, routed through WKU's

budget or like how is that? Where does it sit administratively, I guess, is what

I'm asking.

BROTZGE:Right, right. So because the Mesonet is a service to the state, it has

its own line item within the state budget. And originally, uh, the Mesonet is is

the case with with most Mesonet's in most states was originally funded from a

grant from the federal government. And then that would establish the beginnings

of a network. And in most cases, the states are then asked to kind of take over

the operation of that network. And so that was the case here in Kentucky. And I

believe in 2016, the network here was first publicly funded. And so, uh,

initially we were asking local counties to support the operation and maintenance

of the of the network. So we were asking for local support. But, you know,

there's such a variety of funding level funding. Um, well, every county is so

different and some could afford to fund the station, but many could not. And so

to really allow for a statewide work, the public funding was really crucial. And

that's, that's been just tremendous in

helping provide funding in order to allow us to expand into areas and other

areas of the state where originally we couldn't. So, so that and so our funding

was increased several years ago, which allows us to expand and fill a lot of

these gaps that we have.

CAGLE:Do you find yourself, I mean, maybe this is part of Shane's role now

telling the story of the Mesonet in order to maintain that funding.

BROTZGE:Absolutely. Absolutely. That definitely helps. And and that wasn't it's

a nice benefit of getting that word out, because, you know, even though we have

a lot of different user groups and a lot of different partners using the Mesonet

data, there are so many more that could take advantage of that. So so that's one

of our big reasons in trying to get the word out about the network is because we know

the benefits of data, having local data. We want as many people as possible to

take advantage of that. And so and so we again, we try and spread the word about

what we have to. To, to get to those users.

CAGLE:Where is all the data stored?

BROTZGE:In the cloud.

CAGLE:Yes. Who--I guess whose cloud--(laughs)--?

BROTZGE:I believe it's Amazon's cloud.

CAGLE:I figured everything's AWS these days. Right. Yeah--

BROTZGE:--it is, it is--

CAGLE:--yeah. I mean, I guess I was wondering, it seems like it's enough data

that I wouldn't have been surprised if you said that we had our own server farm

somewhere in the state. But it makes sense to to use third party, especially

because there are other locations where it's a lot cheaper to host the data just

with like climate control. No pun intended.

BROTZGE:Right, right, right. And honestly, the Mesonet data, text data doesn't

take up much room.

CAGLE:Oh, okay. Yeah.

BROTZGE:So even though we have we collect, gosh, I think it's like

ten million or I forget. Yeah. A hundred million observations per year. Even

though it's text data, it really doesn't add up to maybe a couple of terabytes.

CAGLE:Oh, yeah. That's not so much.

BROTZGE:Right. But now we're adding cameras.

CAGLE:Yeah. Okay. I've seen you talk about the cameras. Will you talk about

that? Like, so why what value does that bring? What do we do with that data? How

cool is it to just get to watch time lapses like talk us through it?

BROTZGE:Oh, it's fantastic. I'd love to say that I had the idea for this. But a

colleague of mine in New York had the original idea of putting cameras out with

the Mesonet stations. And so we were able to do that. It turns out the cameras,

the camera is the cheapest sensor that we can deploy. Most of our weather

sensors are anywhere from a thousand to five thousand dollars each because we go

for higher end quality sensors. Uh, but the cameras off the shelf technology,

you can get a

incredible camera for two hundred, two hundred fifty dollars. And, uh, and so,

and there's a whole laundry list of benefits that they bring. One benefit is

quality control. A lot of times you'll look at the data coming from the sensors

and you'll see something odd. Well, we'll be able to look at the camera image

and know right away. Is there some rare phenomenon going on at the site or is

there a cow now in the station--(both laugh)--destroying the sensors? And that's happened.

CAGLE:Yeah. Oh, I'm imagining like the cow breathing and then that like messes

up the temperature or something. Yeah. Okay.

BROTZGE:They love rubbing up against sensors and they waste so much.

CAGLE:Oh, oh, of course. Oh, my God.

BROTZGE:They cause so much damage--(Cagle laughs)--It's terrible.

CAGLE:Yeah. So I'm guessing that's part of the like sighting conversation is

where can we keep them away from cows?

BROTZGE:It is--

CAGLE:--yeah. All right. Yeah--

BROTZGE:--so that's one benefit

. Another is, like you said, the time lapse. You know, when you're looking at

the data from the sensors over time, you can, you can guess when, say, crops are

cut nearby or plants are starting to green up. But when you have a camera that

verifies what you think you're seeing in the data. So it brings a whole new

level of understanding to the data that you're recording--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--we call it metadata, data about data--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--and that metadata just does, again, incredible things for

understanding the depth of what you're seeing. And, and again, another thing

that the camera brings is a higher level of understanding and understanding of

some phenomena that you can't record with the data, such as fog. We don't have a

fog sensor. We don't have a visibility sensor at the Mesonet stations. But when

you add a camera that allows a whole new set of users to use

that data to make that network valuable. So we love cameras--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--time lapse is just an incredible benefit. You do time lapse over a

year and you can see the green up in the spring and the brown down in the fall.

You see the snow during the winter. You see the storm in the summer. It really

is an incredibly valuable component.

CAGLE:How do you decide which direction to point the camera?

BROTZGE:Well, great question. Well, usually we like to point it in the

direction of the weather is coming from. And in Kentucky, that typically means

to the southwest or west if we can. But oftentimes it comes down to which

direction has the most picturesque landscape.

CAGLE:(Laughs)--well, I only thought to ask the question because of what you

said about, you know, being able to see in the data things like crops coming in.

And so that got me thinking like, oh, what if it's pointed away from

the crops, right? Then you wouldn't necessarily see that. But you would still

see like green up in general. Yeah, yeah--

BROTZGE:--in Kentucky, yeah--

CAGLE:--yes. Yeah. In our state in particular. Um, yes. Oh, that's so cool. And

it also I mean, what you were saying about the video as metadata. I mean, it

really speaks to the value of data that isn't immediately or easily

quantifiable, right? Just because just because a machine can't turn it into a

number for you right away doesn't mean it's not worth collecting, which is an

argument I have to make about qualitative data all the time. Like basically what

you're collecting is qualitative data about the space that you're collecting

quantitative data about, which is. Yeah--(laughs)--

BROTZGE:--absolutely, absolutely--

CAGLE:--yes--

BROTZGE:--so I have a project in New York where, uh, we were--we've been

collecting camera data now there for a couple of years. And so we have computer

scientists now applying artificial intelligence to those

pictures to extract information like visibility and precipitation type of

precipitation. And so, you know, eventually we'll have algorithms that will look

at these pictures and turn them into quantifiable data--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm, that is next level. And it also I mean, so the video is also

available, right? Like I can look up right now video from any particular Mesonet site.

BROTZGE:That's correct.

CAGLE:Yeah.

BROTZGE:I should say, still images right now--

CAGLE:--still--

BROTZGE:--eventually, eventually videos.

CAGLE:Okay. Do site hosts ever get concerned about privacy?

BROTZGE:You know, not particularly. We were concerned about that in the

beginning, but the response was overwhelmingly positive. And the only instances

where anything has been asked of us is, for example, one site host had a

swimming pool and he just wanted to make sure

it wasn't pointed at the pool. And so--

CAGLE:--sure--

BROTZGE:--absolutely. Sure--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--if there's ever a house or anything in the image, we can go in and

blur that out. And so we try and be as careful as we can not to do anything like that.

CAGLE:Yeah, absolutely. Well, and even thinking about what you said as an

example of like law enforcement using weather data, you could be inadvertently

providing data that people wouldn't want to share, but it's publicly available

if it's--yeah, exactly. So. I think I, I have a few other things, but this seems

like the right time to ask this, which is like, what is your vision for both the

Mesonet, but also the Office of State Climatologist? So you've mentioned a few

projects sort of looking forward. Yeah. Where where do you hope all of this

goes? What kinds of things do you want to keep doing and do a new for the state?

BROTZGE:Yeah,

yeah. I think I think the one major area is making the most we can of the data

that we collect. And in particular, engaging state agencies. Um, I worked with

the Department of Public Health on just some preliminary projects. One project

we were looking at mental health following the tornadoes in western Kentucky,

eastern Kentucky floods. And so we'd like to like to see a lot more of that. I

think there's just so many issues that weather and climate issues, especially in

Kentucky, that have an impact on health and and not just the severe weather

events, but, but more longer term extreme temperatures, heat indices, wind

chills. There's just a lot of different benefits that we can bring to an agency

like Department of Public Health. I think we

already work with University of Kentucky on a lot of agricultural issues. And,

and so, for example, we feed that weather--the Mesonet data into pest management

models. And so these models are driven by the local weather information that we

can collect. And, you know, ground transportation is huge. You know, when you

when you look at all the deaths nationally from severe weather, the good news

is, you know, nationally, there's really not more than one-hundred fatalities

total for the year nationally. But when you look at road fatalities related to

weather, you're talking more like five-thousand deaths per year. So, you know, a

lot of the weather impacts come indirectly through transportation, through

aviation and through health. And so I think there's just a lot of

there's so many opportunities for improving society in that way. When, um, when

I was in New York, I was working with the School of Public Health on looking at

the impacts. One project looked at the impacts of power outages on public

health. And you could you could track, uh, excess deaths when, when an area

incurred a power outage. And so, you know, when weather impacts, power impacts

public health, you know, it's an indirect mechanism. But there is a relationship

there. So, again, there's so many so many projects to do so many different

partnerships. I think that would be beneficial, beneficial to the state. I think

there's just a long way to go still. And so that's, that's one big goal that I

have. And, and, and so all the state agencies

that I reach out to have been tremendously helpful in facilitating that. Yeah, I

guess a second a second goal is to, to help make the state weather ready. And,

and a lot of individual counties are already doing this. A lot of public

agencies are working on this. But, um, we have great weather forecast offices

here in Kentucky. And so I've been working with them on, you know, both

following the floods and the tornadoes. What can we do? What can we improve so

we can lessen the impact and impacts in the future? And so a lot of my

background is in tornadoes and studying tornadoes. And so, you know, what can we

you know, is it strengthening building codes or what impacted that--what

specific changes could could help, um, with tornadoes or with floods or, you

know, looking at the

infrastructure and where infrastructure is located relative to potential

flooding events in the future? I mean, we have a great climatology of rainfall

across Kentucky. How does that translate to where our bridges and roads are and

which ones are vulnerable and in, you know, landslides? And there's so many

different aspects to this rainfall. Yeah. So that's a second. It's a second

goal, I guess, of of our team is to basically take our data, take our climate

data that we have and the records and how do we translate to that to a more

weather ready state?

CAGLE:Yeah, particularly as climate change speeds up or expands the range of

weather. Yes. Yeah, yeah

. So what have you been seeing on that front? I ask in part because, you know,

Stu and I talked about this two years ago, 2021, when I interviewed him. And,

uh, not that the trends will have changed that much in two years, but in that

two years we've seen some of the events that you have already mentioned, like

the tornadoes in December of 2021 in western Kentucky, the floods in eastern

Kentucky in July 23 or 22, the windstorm here in early 2023. Yeah. Yeah. So

what. Yes. So what are--what do we know from the Climate Center, from Kentucky

Climate Center and the Mesonet about what's happening with climate and kind of

what what weather we need to be ready for?

BROTZGE:Right, right. Well, it's been an amazing two or three years since I

blame Stu--

CAGLE:--(Laughs)--Stu retired. Little did we know Stu was single handedly

holding all the extreme

weather back.

BROTZGE:That's right. That's right. We just needed an interim, you know,

period. And you're right. I mean, the events, extreme events we've seen, you

know, you talk to the insurance industry here and they tell me just, just put

things, just slow it down, you know, for us. I mean, just all the events and

this, you know, one thing we have mentioned was the western Kentucky floods--

CAGLE:--yes--

BROTZGE:--and we probably set a new state record for twenty-four hour rainfall.

And, uh, fortunately, there were no injuries or deaths with that. And there are

a lot of reasons for that. But, you know, it's interesting when you look at the

climate of Kentucky, it's very subtle. You know, the changes that we've had and

we're probably one of the locations in the country where it's difficult to

discern a lot of change in our climate. Now, that's it. You see some pretty big

cyclical cycles in our

temperature. And we had, you know, pretty significant warming between the late

1890s and up through, say, 1940. And then we had cooling for the next forty

years and we've had warming since the 1980s. And so we've had this roller

coaster. When you look at our temperature.

CAGLE:Just in Kentucky. Right. So it doesn't--

BROTZGE:--exactly, right--

CAGLE:--this is one of the challenges as someone who does climate communication

of talking about climate that like the region does not map onto the globe.

BROTZGE:--right, right, absolutely--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--and so but then you look at, you know, precipitation and of course,

every year is different. But there's been a gradual increase in the rainfall

across Kentucky. And and so, you know, this last decade, you know, last ten

years, has seen maybe ten percent more rainfall on average than, than its prior

history in Kentucky. But the large annual variability hides a lot of that. And

so, you know, it looks like we're definitely getting more humid nights. We're

wetter overall than we've been in the past. And so there's definitely some some

changes there. Individual events, say, for such as tornadoes or floods. Our

history of recording those is pretty poor. And so we don't have a very good

record prior to say, actually, even the early 1990s. Tornadoes we have a pretty

good record going back to 1950. But most other events, we really didn't start

recording until the early ninties. But as far as we can tell, there's not an

increase in those events, at least for our state.

CAGLE:Increase in number or severity or?

BROTZGE:Either one.

CAGLE:Both, okay.

BROTZGE:Right. Now, what we do see is a lot more people in Kentucky. So we have

a lot more impacts.

CAGLE:Right, right.

BROTZGE:And that's

even if our climate wasn't changing, we'd be seeing an increase in the damage

and increase in impacts. And so--and what we have, one challenge we have here in

Kentucky is we have a lot of people moving here from out of state. And that's a

good problem to have. But a lot of those people are moving here from states

where they didn't have tornadoes and they didn't have severe weather. And we

have a lot of migrants, immigrants from out of the country. They've never seen a

tornado before and they hear a siren going off. They don't know what to do. So

we have a lot of challenges in communicating to newcomers to our state. You

know, the dangers that say tornadoes present and flooding presents. And and so

there are a lot of challenges there, even even if climate wasn't changing. And

so, yeah, the climate on top of that and, you know, it presents an ongoing challenge

for communication. And, and yeah, just what [?? WORDS UNCLEAR].

CAGLE:What are we seeing in terms of like growing seasons? I know this is

something that Stu has talked about, but and and I've seen some of the data from

KCC about, you know, yes, the overall average temperature is not increasing

significantly, but we're seeing, you know, warmer days earlier, warmer days

later, that sort of thing. Is that still what what you're seeing?

BROTZGE:Right. I mean, each year is a challenge. And, you know, for this past

winter is a good example of that. It was our second warmest winter on record.

But we also had one one of the most severe cold outbreaks within that. And so

the one cold outbreak that we had decimated the peach crop and, you know, killed

a lot of vegetation, even though

it was our second warmest winter. And, um, and then you look at the period, the

dry weather. We had a early spring drought across western Kentucky that led to a

lot of problems for some farmers. And, um, in the same year that you had a

record rainfall.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

BROTZGE:So that variability is a challenge. And and there are things that help

with that. But it's it's definitely a challenge. And you talk with farmers and

you do ask them about, you know, climate change and that. And in part because of

the annual variability, even in season variability, it's hard for them to make

adjustments really to that. Overall, the growing seasons lengthening a little

bit. But the year-to-year variability is such that they can't really change.

CAGLE:Right.

Yeah. Because I mean, you mentioned earlier the phrase that, you know, the the

variability hides the I think signal is what you said, the hides the signal. And

that's that's what you're describing here, right? That like we're so used to

talking about it in terms of average rate. On average, it was a warm winter. On

average, it was this. On average, it was that. But really, the issue is these

single extreme events that can have will not be issue, but an issue, these

single extreme events that can have long lasting knock on effects like killing

off the peach trees or killing off the peach crop rather for the year and

killing off my rosemary bush. Thank you very much.

BROTZGE:Right. There were a lot of bushes--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--there were so many I lost. I lost laurel bushes. I lost a willow tree.

I lost rosemary. Just I mean, things that I've never covered before because they

are fine, you know, and then it was so cold.

BROTZGE:Right, right.

CAGLE:It was so cold. Yeah. Yeah. And so it's that one--all it takes is one

, you know, one heavy rainfall after a lot of steady rainfall and the ground is

saturated or one heavy windstorm after a drought. And then the, you know,

branches are drier and they snap off easier. Yeah. Oh, my gosh. Okay. This is

getting depressing.

BROTZGE:No, no, no, this is [?? WORD UNINTELLIGIBLE].

CAGLE:Yeah. I mean, it's interesting, but it is very it's it seems like such a

big problem to solve. Yeah. So what role do you play or do the folks, you know,

working with you, um, play in terms of actually making recommendations then? Um, yeah.

BROTZGE:Well, I think one important role of climate office is to put, uh, rare

events and non-rare events into context. And, and, you know, there aren't many

paid to look at old data and and old events. And I think that's definitely one

thing that we can bring to the table and

whether it's helping to develop a drought plan for the state or storm water

management plan or developing what we call an Atlas 15, you know, rainfall

frequency table for engineers. I think that we can help with that and, and help

provide the context for that and to a large degree, the data to support those

recommendations. So I think I think that's the real value of of a state climate

office. And, you know, historically, the federal government did that role

largely up through the 1970s. And in the 1970s, the federal government decided

to get out of that business. And so that's why you see so many states and

Kentucky included develop their own state climate offices. Our started 1978. And

so now, now since that time

, the federal government's gotten back into the climate business. We have

regional climate centers now that that help with that role, but they still don't

do it. There are several things that they don't do yet. One is a lot of the data

collection is now at the state level through the Mesonet's and Kentucky. The

official climate record is the Kentucky Mesonet now as is decreed by the state.

And in another role that state climate office does is really connecting with

those users in state. And the regional climate office, the federal regional

climate offices provide data, provide the federal data, such as the--we call it

the ASOS[2]network and the co-op network. I mean, they

control that data, they quality control that.

CAGLE:I know ASOS from flying.

BROTZGE:Oh, right.

CAGLE:That’s what we use for flying. Yeah

.

BROTZGE:Oh right, right. That's the data at the airports. Each of those

networks have their own quirks and their own unique, uh, data. And so but it's

usually not at the local level unless you are lucky to have an airport nearby.

So that state climate office can really take all those different networks and

boil it down and then work with the state agencies and making best use of that data.

CAGLE:What--where does the Kentucky climate office sit then in relation to

larger scale entities? I know there's a national network of state climate

offices, but I'm thinking in part about how, you know, KGS is is a state agency,

the Kentucky Geological Survey, but has that sort of direct relationship with

the USGS. You know, is like NOAA analogous for you all or--

BROTZGE:--right, right. It is. And, uh, so we we have a group called the American

Association of State Climatologists, AASC. And Steve Foster used to be the

president of that society. And so we have that body. And then we kind of report

our work under NOAA through primarily what we call NCEI, the National Center for

Environmental Information. And they're located in Nashville, North Carolina. And

so we work with NCEI on data archival, metadata archival. And and they're kind

of the storage house for all things data, except for state Mesonet data. And

that's all housed individually by each state. Since most states sell their data.

CAGLE:Right, right. If they're not gathering it as a function of a public

service, that makes sense. Okay.

BROTZGE:Right--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah--

BROTZGE:--and even we sell the data to private companies. That's a bit of an

experiment for this year. We may not do that again. But, um, so we make our data

publicly available to the general public and to academia and media. For

commercial users we do charge a small fee.

CAGLE:So it's--everyone has to make a request then. So you then get to sort of

gatekeep a little bit, whether you're charging or not, based on who the--yeah--

BROTZGE:--that’s right--

CAGLE:--that makes sense. Um, so the, um, NCEI[3]

[[EDITOR’S NOTE:]] in Asheville. So they have folks who are coordinating or

helping do research or work around, as you said, like the data management. I

mean, I assume that's based on my understanding of the history of of weather

monitoring, which is almost exclusively based on Paul Edwards' book, A Vast

Machine, which I don't know if you've read that. He's a. Oh, Okay. I highly

recommend I'll send you--I'll mail you a copy. It's so good

. He's an MIT historian of technology. And this book is about the history of

weather monitoring and then how that has fed into climate modeling. And then,

um, so, so my understanding is that, you know, a huge part of the history of

weather science has been data management, figuring out how to get data to talk

to each other.

BROTZGE:Can you excuse me for just a [?? WORD UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--yes, of course. Do you need to go--

BROTZGE:--there’s someone knocking at the door and I don't know why--

CAGLE:--oh, all right. Yes, I will pause our recording. Okay. All right. We're

back after a brief interruption. The sound quality on Jerry's end is going to

change just a little bit. It's a little echoey-er in that room, but I think it

will be okay. So, I was just asking about the data management piece so, um, that

NCEI does a lot of that work, I'm assuming, in terms of both actually like

providing tools. I don't know. Guidelines, standards or how, how is that sort of

propagated across the state climatology offices

and then NWS? And yeah.

BROTZGE:It's a little, uh--well, I need to learn more about all that they do.

But, uh, you know, a large part of what they do is just try and pull it all

together. I mean, they archive all the satellite imagery and radar data. And so

they're juggling a lot of different networks. Mostly what they're doing is just

pulling that all into one place--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

BROTZGE:--but they do, uh, to the degree that they can quality control the data

at some level.

CAGLE:Okay, and then in-house, what are you all having to do? So, I mean, I

assume when you're setting up the sites, the monitoring sites, that that's kind

of built into the instrumentation. You're generating data that's compatible with

each other.

BROTZGE:Right, right. So the great beauty of a network, a state network such as

a Mesonet, is that you're deploying. Well, first of all, it starts with the

station selection. And so

you're finding locations that optimize, uh, a collection of weather data. For

example, you don't want shadows on your power anemometer and you don't want

obstructions impacting your wind speeds and wind directions. And so you find

locations. They're relatively flat and open, so every station is sited in a

similar way. And then you pick out high quality sensors. And so you try to

optimize, you know, pick the best companies and the best sensors that you can.

And then after that really the next step then is developing in-house quality

control routines that, uh, automatic--you're ingesting so much data you can't

look at all. So we have we rely on a lot of software to alert us automatically

when data starts to look funny

. And so you have certain bounds that it's looking for. You have a certain drift

or trends that the data will kind of alert you to. So, so once you're alerted,

then we have a manual team that will go in and look at the data. Sometimes it's

just a rare event and that's everything's perfectly fine. But usually it's some,

you know, a mouse is eating through a wire--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

BROTZGE:--you know, usually something really [?? WORD UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--and, and then it alerts us to to send out a field technician team to

make a repair. And so, so because we have staff looking at all the data Monday

through Friday and the automated routines, we can, uh, make repairs faster than,

say, a typical network could.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. That's great.

BROZTGE:That all helps uptime and data quality and--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm. I just--I love when

, you know, science meets the material reality of the world. Just well, there

was a mouse like, well, yeah--

BROTZGE:--[?? WORD UNCLEAR] and snails.

CAGLE:Yeah. Oh, my gosh. Snails. Um, what about older sensors? So how old is

the oldest site?

BROTZGE:We, uh--our first station here in Kentucky--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

BROTZGE:--was installed in 2007--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

BROTZGE:--and so we have a rotation period where if, uh, depending on the

sensor type, for example, our humidity sensors every eighteen months will bring

a sensor back, test it in the lab to make sure that it's calibrated properly.

Some sensors will return to the vendor and they'll do that recalibration. For

example, every couple of years, we'll send back our temperature sensors to be

recalibrated. And in the meantime, we'll swap it out with a with a different--a

new sensor that we know

is calibrated. So we have a rotation schedule for our sensors. And, and so we

don't allow any any direct sensor to stay in the field for long.

CAGLE:Yeah.

BROTZGE:Uh, now, some things like our towers are original, our data loggers,

which are the computer system at the station. We--a lot of those are original.

And one reason we need--we really needed an increase in support from the state

was to start replacing some of this hardware such as [?? WORD UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROZGE:--so, so that's this infrastructure increases allowing us to do that.

CAGLE:Oh, that's great. Yeah, yeah because if you've got the computer hardware

for like the logging from 2007, that's--I mean, that might as well be a hundred

years in computer years, right?

BROTZGE:That's true. That's true--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--we're starting to see a lot of problems in other areas because say

the data loggers are so old.

CAGLE:Oh, interesting.

Yeah.

BROTZGE:Like, uh, electrical impulses on one sensor impacting another stuff

like that. And that's because of the age of the data logger.

CAGLE:Yeah. Oh, okay. I was just thinking of it in terms of like, you know,

software incompatibility that things get, you know, degraded and or oh, what's

the word? You know, when they just aren't supported anymore or whatever. Like

the my mom talks about she was in the Air Force and she was with the Air Force

Logistics Management Agency for a while. And, you know, they had guys

maintaining these mainframes with Fortran in like 2000 because they--

BROTZGE:--oh no--

CAGLE:--you know, that's you got to have somebody to maintain these old things

because the task of turning it over is always bigger than the task of just

continuing to maintain it--(laughs)--

BROTZGE:--[?? WORDS UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--but, yeah, that makes sense. I hadn't even thought about it in terms of

the hardware itself. Yeah. Oh, that's super interesting. Are you going to--I

assume as you add

stations, then you'll have to increase staff to go along with that if there's

this rotation.

BROTZGE:And we are when I started here just last year, we only had two field

technicians at the time and we had three. We were just down one from normal. But

now we're up to well, hopefully, well, four now, but hopefully before too long,

five. And so you're right. As we add stations, we'll add staff and particularly

the field staff, uh, in order to just maintain the sites faster and more

reasonably. And, you know, something as mundane as cutting the grass is, uh,

pretty taxing on the staff. And so you have to visit every site, you know, at

least monthly, if not more. Otherwise, the grass gets as tall as a lot of the sensors--

CAGLE:--oh--

BROTZGE:--and so that can impact the data.

CAGLE:Sure. Which--yay video you can check, right?

BROTZGE:Exactly--

CAGLE:--yeah. See if the grass is creeping up. So what are the kind of

backgrounds for folks who are doing the technician work?

BROTZGE:

Right now, they all have a meteorology background. And, uh, but they wouldn't

necessarily have to have that. But typically some kind of environmental science

background is good. So they understand the impacts of various things on the

data. And--but they also need a good foundation in electronics and just being

able to diagnose problems in the field. A lot of the times it boils down to

electricity some way or another.

CAGLE:That's what it was sounding like. I was like, that is I mean, we talked

earlier about your job being a bit of jack of all trades. This sounds similar in

terms of the kinds of things that you might need to fix or be aware of. It's not

just as simple as, you know, going out with a to do list.

BROTZGE:Right, right--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--yeah, correct. And we also have a, uh--students that work in our

Mesonet operations center or we call an operations center. And

so when a field technician visits the station, they'll call back to the Mesonet

team and we'll help them diagnose the problems. And so we're, we're able to look

at the data here in the office, whereas when they're out in the field, they

don't necessarily have the visualization in front of them. So they'll usually

call back, and oftentimes it's a student that work with and together we’ll kind

of diagnose the problems. And they'll test different things at the site until

they narrow down what what the cause of the problem is. Sometimes they know,

sometimes it's easy to spot and sometimes it takes a while.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm, which I would imagine sort of adds to the challenge of the job.

Just, you know, if you're planning to do four visits in a day, like station

visits, but turns out one of them takes long. You know, I can just see how that

would have these compounding effects on someone's schedule.

BROTZGE:Right, right.

CAGLE:Yeah. Well, students--so, I said

I had just a couple of questions left. I have two that I wanted to talk to you

about. And one was about mentoring, actually. Um, so specifically mentoring

within meteorology and then meteorology as it intersects with climatology. Are

you seeing increased interest from students? Are you feeling bullish about the

future of the field?

BROTZGE:Yeah, yeah. You know, when I was, uh--so I got into meteorology prior

to Twister, the movie Twister--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--uh-huh--

BROTZGE:--and so there weren't as many people moving into the field. And then

the movie Twister came out and you saw a big jump in enrollment to all the

meteorology programs across the country.

CAGLE:So fascinating.

BROTZGE:And so that was good and bad. The good was increased enrollment,

increased interest. The bad was a lot of people wanted to make storm chasing a

career. And there is no career in storm chasing. It's a hobby

. And so you have to temper students’ enthusiasm. Well, now you do see a lot of

interest in climate because of it's in the news. And so and there's a concern

about the environment. And so you do have a lot of students now getting into

environmental science and meteorology because of the climate problems. And so,

uh, now they don't necessarily understand the field when they get in, but they

do have that interest. And so we have a pretty steady increase in enrollment

each year because of that interest. And it's good to see.

CAGLE:Yeah, because you're I mean, the department name, I think, reflects that,

right? You're in Earth, Environmental and Atmospheric Sciences, which really

covers that ground.

BROTZGE:That's right, that's right. And part of that, too, we've started an

emergency management certification--

CAGLE:--oh--

BROTZGE:--and so that also attracts

a lot of students. And again, because of the events we've had over the last five

years here in Kentucky, it generates a lot of interest for students. And most of

our students are from Kentucky or Tennessee or the region. So, um, so that's

definitely developed a lot of interest in the students coming here.

CAGLE:You--so I know you have talked about having students working with in the

Mesonet and then recruiting students through the courses you teach one class a

semester. So are you directly supervising student mentees?

BROTZGE:I am, I am. I have one graduate student currently from Nigeria, and

he's a non-traditional student in the sense of he's been an operational

forecaster for over ten years. So he has a really solid foundation in

forecasting and in weather. But he's not done climatology before, per se. So, so

that's been fun. And then we have a couple of undergraduate students that have

just started and they want to be actuaries. So

they're really interested in the data side and the statistical side, but they

don't know meteorology yet.

CAGLE:Right.

BROTZGE:So, it's been fun mentoring them because they have a really strong

computational background. They can run circles around me and in writing computer

programs. So we're a great team and they're doing the, the--for me, the teaching

meteorology is the easy part. And so I get to do some meteorology and then they

run with it. So that's been a fun project.

CAGLE:That is so much of the--that conversation we were having about, you know,

having to learn a little bit about a lot of things. I mean, so much of it is

just finding other people, finding the people who know a lot about that thing

and are interested in knowing something about your thing. And then, you know,

you sort of like create that Venn diagram and then the world's your oyster.

BROTZGE:That's right, that's right.

CAGLE:Yeah. Um, so the last question actually is about

climatology and the fact that there's a, um, it's related to the department name

Earth Environmental Atmospheric Science. You know, I've said for some years now

that in talking about the Kentucky Climate Consortium and the need for a group

that that connects people working on climate across the state. Um, I have said,

you know, we don't have a climate science program in the state anywhere, which

is true in a way, but also not true in a way, because we have climatology.

Right. And part of the point for me is that. That climate science isn't really

like one thing, right? You can't--there are some places that do have programs or

departments named climate science, but it usually is pulling together people

from, as your department does, Earth science, atmospheric science, in some

cases, marine science. Right. And then that's not even getting into necessarily

the folks working in the social sciences and the fine arts

and whatnot. So, um, I guess my question for you is, should I stop saying

that?--(both laugh)--but also, but also, you know, as someone who teaches in

climatology, how do you think about, um, how do you think about kind of own--I

don't know if ownership is the right word, right, but like other people saying,

you know, I do climate work, too, and sort of what's at the center of climate

work and how do we kind of navigate those political questions because they are

political, right, about who gets to own a discipline and things like that? It's

not a very coherent question, Jerry. I'm so sorry--

BROTZGE:--(laughs)--oh, no--

CAGLE:--but I hope you can know what I'm getting at, right, which is this this

way that climate is really more of a topic than a field.

BROTZGE:It's yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

BROTZGE:--absolutely. And, you know, what comes to mind is when I was starting

out in meteorology and you'd go to a

meteorology conference, if climate came up, it was, you know, looking at a

hundred years of data and coming up with the statistics. And then over time, the

field quickly realized, okay, we can we can run weather models now that are

pretty accurate. Let's go the next step and go towards creating a climate model.

And that was a whole magnitude of order more challenging because now it went

beyond weather. It meant that you had to understand the soils and you had to

understand the ocean and you had to understand all of these other things,

vegetation and CO2 cycles and all these feedbacks that you could ignore before

because of the time scales involved.

CAGLE:Right.

BROTZGE:And so all of a sudden to really make these climate models work, you

had to engage all these other disciplines

. And, and bring them in and have them feeding your model, just like all these

weather components. Before it was challenging enough getting all the

meteorologists lined up. But now you have to have all the scientists and not to

mention things like volcanoes and space weather and all these other things that

come into it. So, so, yeah, it's, it's you're absolutely right. I think, you

know, climatology just means so much now. And it can be a sociologist talking

about how, you know, any number of things or public health or, again, any of

these agencies or, you know, if you're designing roadways and I mean, there's

just no end to the all the different aspects that it touches on. Um, you know,

one thing I teach in my class is what's called climate determinism. And in the

early twentieth century, there was a lot of thinking that, well, all of history

is determined by the climate. And, and there were a lot of dangers in that

because, you know, they would use that to say to try and explain why one culture

didn't work or another didn't work and they would boil it down to climate. Well,

we have to be aware of that. We have to be aware that there are limitations to

the impacts of climate. And there's a lot of other things that go into the end

of this and how we react to weather and climate. But, um, but it's still

important and it touches on a lot of areas. So. I think you're absolutely right,

I think, you know, who owns the discipline, I think the meteorologists do.

CAGLE:(Laughs)--I would never say there's no climatology program in Kentucky. I

would never say that,

don’t worry--

BROTZGE:--[?? WORDS UNCLEAR] you're right, you’re right.

CAGLE:Yeah. I guess. Yeah. Climate science is sort of just a vulgar English

translation of climatology, but it is a little different.

BROTZGE:It is a little different.

CAGLE:Yeah.

BROTZGE:Yeah.

CAGLE:What was this time period that you're describing when you know that that

shift from okay, we've, we've sort of achieved this goal that this field has

been working towards in terms of accuracy of weather models so we can kind of

turn our attention to climate modeling. This would have been like sixties, seventies?

BROTZGE:During the 1980s--

CAGLE:--eighties, okay--

BROTZGE:--we were first, well, we were first starting to produce models,

numerical models that could predict down to the thunderstorm level somewhat

accurately and the synoptic scale accurately. And then--

CAGLE:--what is the synoptic scale? I'm sorry.

BROTZGE:Oh, that's like your everyday weather, your fronts, your, your cyclonic

air masses, stuff like that.

So we made a lot of improvements during the 1980s on that. Well, then the 1990s

came. We felt like we'd done what we could with the with the mid latitude

weather, the mesoscale weather. And then that's when we really turned our eyes

towards climate. And so the early ninties was really when the community came

together and started bringing in the oceanography piece and vegetation piece

and, uh, the different groups that they needed at the table. I mean, I was

always taught the climate consisted of what we call the acronym that I was

taught was ALCOB, A-L-C-O-B. And it stood for atmosphere, lithosphere,

cryosphere, oceans and biosphere. And so you need, you had to get all those by

all those groups together to create

earth system models that reflected reality. And we're still not there yet.

There's still some issues, but boy, the advancements that made since then, it's

just been incredible. And all those groups are really working well together now.

But it was a new thing. And not that long ago.

CAGLE:Yeah, I think it was Bill who talked about--Bill Haneberg, the recently

retired state geologist who first told me about this idea that, you know, earth

science is in fact, I don't know a better term, but you know, that geology is so

tightly interwound conceptually with land. That, you know, trying to get at this

idea of earth as system is the sciences like calling it earth sciences. So it

isn't just the land, it's all of all those spheres that you mentioned.

BROTZGE:Right, right, right

CAGLE:Also atmos, also ocean

, also litho, right? Yeah--

BROTZGE:--right--

CAGLE:--yeah and that really struck me because it's true. You know, when I hear

earth science, I still think geology or I did in the past at the time. But then

if you say earth, like picture the earth, I'm picturing it from space as a

complete system. And that's an interesting division.

BROTZGE:It is, it is. And, you know, just this past year, you know, we've had a

volcano that has spewed tremendous amounts of moisture into the upper

atmosphere. And, you know, historically, we think, well, you know, volcanoes,

they cool the earth when they spew out their stuff. Well, now we're learning,

well, volcanoes may not actually cool the earth sometimes. Sometimes it may

actually warm it up by putting, you know, a lot more moisture up into the air

and that may have other impacts. So, you know, we're still learning and that's

the fun of all this, but--

CAGLE:--Yeah, yeah. Oh my goodness. Do you, I, I have asked

all the questions I have, but this just made me think of one other thing, which

is just, you know, how you think about, um, the, the kind of climate denier

climate skeptic space, given that, and this is, I understand a recording. So say

whatever you're comfortable saying--

BROTZGE:--fine, [?? WORD UNCLEAR], sure--

CAGLE:--yeah. But I mean, given that it's true, right. There are lots of

unanswered questions and that gets exploited quite frequently. Um, but also it

is absolutely true that there's a lot of detail we're still figuring out in

terms of how these systems work, how the feedback loops work. Yeah. I mean, how

do you think about that?

BROTZGE:Right, right. I think that, you know, with, with so many things with a

political connotation to them, I think a lot of times it's how you ask the

question and, and, you know, sometimes people will say one thing when, whereas

when you dig down there, they're saying it because they really have some other

feelings behind it. Um, I think that, yeah, I think a lot of times people are

looking towards, okay, you're asking me this question about what are you trying

to do with the answer to that? And, and the solutions are often political and,

and, you know, there's, there's always advantages, disadvantages to different

solutions. And so I think, I think that's a lot of times behind the answers that

we get on that. And, you know, but when we talk to people and we talk about the

weather or what it did last year, people are pretty much in agreement, usually.

So I, I think a lot of times, you know, we don't ask the question, we just talk

about the topic or we, we just talk about, yeah, I guess it's,

it's been, well, a couple of, well, one story, a colleague of mine who's a state

climatologist at another, in another state said, you know, one time I tweeted

out that we had a record high and he said, you know, one side criticized me for

not taking advantage of that and, you know, turning into something more. And I

got others that complain that they didn't believe that there was a state record.

And so, so he's like, you know, I, I guess I did something right because I got

both sides. But I think that, and that's, you know, going to happen. I haven't

really gotten anything like that since I've been here in the last year. And, and

I think people that are interested in climate weather, you know, they're going

to read up on it and learn more. And, and, and that's good. And, you know,

that's one, that's one thing that we hope that we do here with our Climate

Center is, is just raise

awareness of, of, you know, what's happened, what is happening and, and build

that trust so that people believe what you do. And, and if you're open about

what you don't know, I think that helps. I think that's where maybe the

community is, is hurt themselves a little bit in that being more open and more

honest with what we don't know. Because we can come across as knowing everything

when in reality we may not. So, so that's maybe something that we can work on.

But yeah, I guess just some thoughts.

CAGLE:Oh, that's what I wanted. I really appreciate it. I think that's, I think

you're absolutely right about it feels counterintuitive to say that we need to

be more honest about what we don't know, but you got to take that first step, I

feel like. And, and also one thing I really love about the work that, that you

all do with the Mesonet in particular is that I also have a theory that is evidence

based. It's not sort of evidentiary, proven, evident, yeah, but evidence based

theory that understanding scientific methods actually helps reduce skepticism,

right? So actually knowing where data is coming from, what's happening to the

data, why we do things like data cleaning, you know, people hear cleaning and

they think, oh, you're messing with it, right? So, so really understanding. And

that's so much of what the, the interviews that are in this collection,

particularly with scientists are about is, is helping us like tell these stories

of how we would know what we know about Kentucky. So with that, thank you so

much for your time, Jerry. This has been a delight.

BROTZGE:Oh, thank you, Cagle. This has been a lot of fun.

CAGLE:Oh, good. I'm so glad it, yeah, I, you know, I, um, I really enjoy the

opportunity to let people talk about themselves because there's very few spaces

that we get to like talk about ourselves and our special interests without

feeling like, oh no, am I talking

too much? And it's like, no, that's the whole point--(laughs).

BROTZGE:Yeah, great--

CAGLE:--all right--

BROTZGE:--we like to talk about our groups.

CAGLE:Yes, exactly. All right. I am going to stop our recording.

[END OF INTERVIEW]