CURRIS:

Good morning. This is July 26, 2023. I am Jo Hern Curris, the interviewer, and I

have with me for a second day of interviewing Jeremy Williams from the

University of Kentucky Cooperative Center, Extension Center, and he is the agent

for Harlan County, specializing in agriculture and--

WILLIAMS:--natural resources, community development.

CURRIS:(both laugh) Oh.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:We forgot that one, yes. Well, thank you, Jeremy, for agreeing to come

for a second day of interviewing. I must say that all the various

information that you gave yesterday was just so wonderful that we didn't get

to--(laughter)--all the questions that we had. But just as a reminder, Jeremy,

this--these interviews are being supported by the University of Kentucky Louie

B. Nunn Oral History Program, and they're loaning us this equipment, and all of

the information that is here is the property of the University of Kentucky for

them to use for whatever purposes, which will include publication, access

to--for media literally across the world, and for your use. Do you agree to

those terms?

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am, I think it's a wonderful opportunity.

CURRIS:Thank you. Thank you. Well, Jeremy, yesterday we covered so very much.

Is there anything you think you need to add? Or should we just go through and if

you think of things, then we'll jump in with them?

WILLIAMS:Let's just jump in where we

stopped at and start there, and we'll go from there. How's that?

CURRIS:That sounds wonderful. One of the things I would like very much for you

to consider doing is telling us about your family.

WILLIAMS:Okay, yeah. My wife Robin, my daughter Ava, I have to thank them as

well because of--they put up with my love of history. They put up with me

dragging them from point to point to look at this, so they also get to hear

stories of Benham, and I guess I could say I practice on them from time to time.

So they understand it, thankfully, and I appreciate them listening to me and

being drug from spot to spot--(laughs)--as we roam around the region.

CURRIS:Give me the background of your wife.

WILLIAMS:Okay. My wife's an educator and--

CURRIS:--okay, and her full name again?

WILLIAMS:Robin Williams.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:

And she's an educator, and she--her father, grandfathers were coal miners as

well. Her dad actually, actually worked here--

CURRIS:--what was his name?--

WILLIAMS:--at Benham. Her dad's Frank Orick is his name.

CURRIS:Oh, Frank Orick, yes.

WILLIAMS:And so he worked here at--I guess it was under--it would've been under

Benham Coal at the time. So it would've been the early '80s, early to mid-'80s

when he worked here. He worked some with engineering, setting spads in the

mines, that sort of thing, so--

CURRIS:--well, that's interesting. And your daughter, Ava, how old is she?

WILLIAMS:My daughter Ava's five, so she starts kindergarten this fall.

CURRIS:Oh, this is exciting.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:This is an exciting--

WILLIAMS:--yeah--

CURRIS:--time. Well, yesterday, one of the topics that we had discussed was the

Benham housing and the Benham mines, and what I would like to do is

more fully discuss the closing--

WILLIAMS:--okay--

CURRIS:--of the Benham mine, and if known, describe that time. I believe we're

talking about the mid-1980s, is that correct?

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am, the official closing, you know--yeah, we talked a little

bit about the housing yesterday, and I'll just kind of segue into this. You

know, as we know, the houses were built for the workers and what eventually

became the town, which was very interesting that we've learned along the way.

But as the company moved into the '70s, we started to see International

Harvester as a company, not just Benham, just as a large company. Large company

started to have issues financially. So that was one of the

onsets of it. I guess you could say it started probably in the early '70s. In

1977, International Harvester sold the Wisconsin Steel Company to a company out

of California that had no steel-making experience. It was a company by the name

of Envirodyne, and when Envirodyne bought--when they purchased Wisconsin Steel,

which that's what the company--that's what the steel mill--the company--or

Benham fell under the steel mills. The coal works here fell under the steel

mills, as we discussed earlier. So when they sold the Wisconsin Steel, which

included the steel mills in Chicago, it also included the mines in Benham. They

sold it to Envirodyne. That's E-N-V-I-R-O-D-Y-N-E. So they sold it to them and

they--seems like the--they paid fifteen

million up front, and I think there was a note of fifty million at that time in

1977 at the sale. So officially due to the sale, at that point, there was a

change in things. You had a general superintendent up until this time, and the

general superintendent before the city was actually incorporated, I guess you

could say they were the mayor. They were the person that--they were in charge of

everything. If it was the water plant, it was the construction crew, miners

underground. They were in charge of everything, as their role as general

superintendent. And then there was also mine superintendents and there was

people under them. But they had kind of been the mayor of the town before the

town was incorporated. So at that point in time,

it was--began a phasing out of the general superintendent, although the general

superintendent wasn't doing what it--I guess you could say the original intent

prior to incorporating the town, the general superintendent position kind of

phased out and became a general manager position of the mines because they no

longer had a town to run in 1977. So it became a general manager. So the office

of general superintendent had changed after the town of Benham was incorporated.

CURRIS:The--if I may, I want to jump back for jump a moment--

WILLIAMS:--okay--

CURRIS:--because I want to talk about why the financial downturn and ultimate

downfall? Which I believe will go back to the production of steel, but

then has an impact on Benham.

WILLIAMS:Exactly.

CURRIS:I can remember in 1958, right before Christmas, there was a huge layoff

of miners at Benham. This was duplicated again in 1959, and I have always

considered that in retrospect as being the beginning of the fall of

International Harvester and the closing or selling of Benham.

WILLIAMS:Right.

CURRIS:As you look at this historically, what are your observations about what

happened? Was it demand? Was it technology? Was it foreign production? What were

the various reasons that IH began to falter?

WILLIAMS:I think as a whole, it was--

when you look at the parent company of International Harvester, when we think of

International Harvester, we think of farm machinery, tractors, the Farmall

tractors, the farm machinery. That was their intent. And then they dabbled in

automobiles in the nineteen-teens. But then the Scout came about, trucks,

machinery, school buses. The Scout, I heard--I saw a slogan not too long ago

that said the Scout was the original SUV, and it was one of the first. So, you

know, that was--the Scout was popular. But there were a lot. You know, pickup

trucks, things like that.

CURRIS:Do you--were there trade names other than the Scout? And you mentioned

Farmall for the tractor.

WILLIAMS:Farmall tractors,

then you had a Travelall, which was kind of a little bit longer Scout,

little--had a more of a storage area, had a--it was a little bit more roomy, had

a longer wheelbase on it. And then there were kind of different designs of the

Scout, and that--what we now refer to as SUV, kind of that--there were different

designs. Some of them had removable tops. Some of them were--you know, make them

convertibles with the soft top, things like that. So then you had the pickup

trucks. You had the different sizes of pickup trucks. You--

CURRIS:--what were they named?

WILLIAMS:They were a pickup, but I'm--I don't remember the name right off hand.

But they would've come in things like half-ton, three-quarter-ton, one-ton

pickups that you would typically see on the market today by some of your larger manufacturers.

CURRIS:So did the

demand for these products simply reduce, disappear?

WILLIAMS:And that's what was seen at International Harvester is the--they went

from being the number-one farm implement, farm equipment manufacturer to--in

the--started in the '60s, early '70s, and they were--it was all they could do to

hang onto second and third place, so to speak. So they were being out-competed

by competition.

CURRIS:Do we know which companies were coming strong?

WILLIAMS:One of the companies would be John Deere. So it was one of the things.

They were a family farm for replacing red paint with green paint. It could've

been that--was it more reliable? I'm not sure. Was it cheaper?

CURRIS:Better marketing--

WILLIAMS:--I'm not sure. It could've been better marketing, something like

that. I think there was a lot of things that went into the downturn

of International Harvester as a whole, not just one specific item.

CURRIS:So we're talking about from the 1910s until the 1960s. So we have about

fifty years of great profitability within IH because of its steel production and manufacturer--

WILLIAMS:--yes ma'am--

CURRIS:--of these--of the farm equipment and the Scout and other trucks. So

then competition enters in the 1960s. Tell me what you think happened at that

point, or historically, what evolved?

WILLIAMS:And I think--when I say competition as well, it's probably not

necessarily competition against the product that was made, but it all goes back

to that steel mill, which affects Benham, and which in turns--in turn, it's--you

have layoffs because not as much steel is needed, and I think one of the things

that happened

is you started seeing steel produced cheaper overseas. At this point in time in

the '60s, early '70s, International Harvester was--they were actually building

farm machinery overseas that--at one point in time, my family owned a tractor. I

think it was built it '74 and it was built in England. So we were seeing some

overseas production of International Harvester tractors, farm implements, just

because of the prices of steel, that steel could be made cheaper. They were

finding that steel could be made cheaper overseas, used overseas, or imported

into the states.

CURRIS:Well, you mention England, and I think, of course, about the coal mines,

the Welsh coal mines. So what other countries were they producing--was IH using?

WILLIAMS:I do know that England

was one of them, and I'm thinking that may have been the only other country that

they used. That's the only one that I've been able to research and find was England.

CURRIS:And then what evolved?

WILLIAMS:So, you know, you're looking at the end of the '70s. The steel mills

had not been updated. International Harvester had not updated the steel mills,

and it was probably due to a couple of factors, the steel mills not being

updated due to the lack of money coming in, the lack of steel production out of

the steel mill. And so the steel mills were kind of falling down under

themselves, falling down around, you know. So there were issues with that.

Just--they were rusting away, I guess you could say, even into the '70s. So I

think that's--

in my opinion, I think that's what happened is--and everything that I've read

with the company is when the steel mills began to fade as well, that's what

affected what took place in Benham.

CURRIS:Well, that would make sense because if they don't need the coke any

further, then they don't need the coal.

WILLIAMS:Exactly. So basically what was happening is they--International

Harvester was backing off the coal production because they were backing off

steel production at home. And this wasn't just happening at International

Harvester and Wisconsin Steel, I should say. This was happening in places like

US Steel, Bethlehem Steel, Inland Steel. These were companies that had coal

mines, and so we were starting to see that, even at--on a larger scale at other

steel manufacturers in the late '60s, into the '70s.

CURRIS:Did Bethlehem Steel have its

own coal mines as well?

WILLIAMS:They had mines. They had mines in Jenkins. I do know they had mines in

Jenkins, Kentucky, which is just across the mountain.

CURRIS:Absolutely. (laughs) So that brings us forward, then, as we say, to the

sale to Envirodyne in what year again?

WILLIAMS:That was in '77.

CURRIS:Now, we say that there was a sale of Envirodyne with an outstanding note

of considerable sum. What was the history from that time forward?

WILLIAMS:So I think what--the research that I've done is the--International

Harvester sold to Envirodyne. The Wisconsin Steel, which would be the

steelworks, they sold it, and that was in '77. Envirodyne paid fifteen million

in cash, which they had fifty million in note. Envirodyne had plans to upgrade

the steel mills

and--which never happened. Now, they did--they were able to start to improve

things. I won't say they were making a profit, but they improved things

initially at the steel mill. There were some issues along the way with the

payment on the note, and therefore International Harvester basically foreclosed

on the note and retained the steelworks, which included Benham, and I think that

was in about 1980 or '81.

CURRIS:So if they were retaining the steel production, the mills, then that, of

course, meant Benham.

WILLIAMS:Yes.

CURRIS:When we're talking about this '77 to approximately '80, '81 period of

time, what was happening in terms

of the mining--in the mining that was happening in Benham during that time? Were

there layoffs? Was it full production? What was happening?

WILLIAMS:There were multiple layoffs. As part of the agreement between

International Harvester and Envirodyne, Envirodyne through the steel mill would

continue to provide steel to International Harvester. The mining, they were

still mining during that time. They did not--I don't think they opened any new

mines at that time, maybe one. But mining still took place. There were layoffs.

There were hire-backs, there were layoffs. That became more numerous than

it--than it had in history, but we were also seeing that in a lot of those

mines. Like I mentioned, the past--some of those steel, those--I won't say

captive steel mines, but some of those steel mines. At that point in time, due

to the steel mills

fading and not needing as much coal, Benham at that point in time was, for that

first time in history--when I say Benham, the company, the coal company--

CURRIS:--Wisconsin Steel?--

WILLIAMS:--at that point in time--Wisconsin Steel, at that point in time, for

the first time in history, not all the--not the entire batch of coal was going

to Chicago. At that point in time, it was being put on the spot market or

contract, and this met coal was now being sold as steam coal. So it was going to

places like South Carolina Power, for one, for, you know, to power power plants.

CURRIS:What was the term you used? Spot?

WILLIAMS:Spot market. They put it on the spot market, and you're just

putting--you know, we had this coal and we have it available. You know, it's not

under contract, but we have X number of tons.

And so they, you know--here's the price on it. Do you need the coal? And so you

may have a company that's in a contract with a mine, but at the same point in

time, they need something other than what that mine is producing. You know, and

they were--here in Benham, they were actually sending coal locally. It was going

to places like Kentucky Utilities. But the coal was so good because it was

a--more of a met coal--

CURRIS:--what's met coal?

WILLIAMS:That was the metallurgical coal that was being used to produce steel.

So it's higher in heat, it produces a higher BTU. So places like US Steel, they

were having to blend the coal with another coal that didn't have--that didn't

produce as many BTUs, that was not as hot. So they were kind of having to tame

that coal down along the way. So that--like I said, the first time in history,

all of the coal was not going to Chicago.

It was starting to show up in the steam--you know, the steam process

and--thermal coal. It went from met coal to thermal coal.

CURRIS:Well, what was happening in terms of the miners themselves in terms of

their wages? Were those fluctuating at this time? Was--having a union, were they

able to keep those stabilized? What was happening to the actual miner during all

this time?

WILLIAMS:With the union, they were able to keep it stabilized, but there were

layoffs. There had to be layoffs because of the--the lack of production

needed--the lack of coal needed, so in turn, you're not needing as much

production. So--but the miners would've had basically somewhat the similar pay

because of the union being able to back them on that.

CURRIS:

Well, going from this time--so we're at 19--approximately '80, '81. Then what happens?

WILLIAMS:So in '80--you know, in that '81 period thereabouts, the company here

in Benham underneath International Harvester continued to move along.

International Harvester, those steel mills in 1970 that were fading fast, that

they were having issues with those, multiple breakdowns, rusting away, those

steel mills were having trouble as well--continued. You know, here we are four

or five years later, and they're still having that issue. International

Harvester's having an issue, and in 1985--even prior, just shortly prior to

1985, International Harvester began to sell off some of these subsidiaries, I

guess you could say,

like the farm implement division. In 1985, it was sold to the J.I. Case

Corporation, and they became--actually, it was sold to Tenneco, which was the

parent company of J.I. Case, and they became Case IH at that point, which in

turn, they now owned it--the International Harvester logo, the famous logo, the

IH logo. They now owned it. They were producing farm machinery. Things with

International Harvester that we knew that included the mines here at Benham

became Navistar in that 1985 period as well.

CURRIS:You're saying the mines themselves?

WILLIAMS:The mines themselves, the parent company over the mines of Wisconsin

Steel--or at the time, the name locally would've been Benham Coal Incorporated

(pauses) through a subsidiary. But the parent company would've been in about

1985 would've been Navistar. At that point in time, Navistar, formerly

International Harvester, International, all they had was the truck division.

They retained the truck division. They got rid of the construction division.

They sold off the construction division. They sold off the farm division because

that's what they had at the end. Those are the two divisions they had. Oh,

sorry, and the truck division, three divisions. So they sold off two of the divisions--

CURRIS:--okay--

WILLIAMS:--and retained the truck division as Navistar.

CURRIS:So Navistar at that point is only the truck division.

WILLIAMS:Only the truck division in 1985. And so International Harvester as we

knew it became Navistar as--and it was only the truck division. And your

retirees today that are still living in this--in the community that are

drawing International Harvester retirement, they are drawing it from Navistar.

CURRIS:So all the miners from Benham that were here in approximately 1985 who

subsequently retired are not technically International Harvester retirees. They

are Navistar retirees?

WILLIAMS:Due to just the name of the company. You know, my dad's an

International Harvester retiree. He was here, so he was able--he was here at the

end so he was able to draw a pension. So it--he--it was a--he's an International

Harvester retiree, but because of the name change, it's technically Navistar,

which later became International Trucks. It's currently now International Trucks.

CURRIS:Has there ever been a problem in those pensions being paid?

WILLIAMS:No ma'am.

CURRIS:It has continued?

WILLIAMS:Yeah, the--

CURRIS:--do we know why that is possible? I mean, that's kind of amazing--

WILLIAMS:

--there were--

CURRIS:--if you just think about it.

WILLIAMS:During the bankruptcy and their--(laughs)--there's a lot in the legal

proceedings, but from what I read, during the bankruptcy of the company in--I

think it was 1980 of International Harvester, Wisconsin Steel, all of the above,

one of the things that came out of it was the judge said, "You will pay these

pensions. You will maintain this pension fund. The--there may be name changes.

There may be changes across the board. But you will pay these pensions, whether

it was somebody working here in Benham or working in Fort Wayne or Louisville."

CURRIS:Now, what were the companies at Fort Wayne and Louisville?

WILLIAMS:So they--those would've been your--like, your trucks division, your tractor

divisions that built those in those cities. So they had different plants

scattered about the Midwest that built certain things, so there--

CURRIS:--let me see if I have this chain of command, so to speak. So we have

the coal from Benham being turned into coke, taken to Chicago, where it is then

turned into steel. And that steel is then forwarded to Louisville and Fort Wayne

for the production of trucks?

WILLIAMS:For the production of trucks, tractors, construction equipment. We'll

go into the war effort later. The refrigerators, appliances. We're sitting here

in the Benham City Hall, the former

office building today, and next door at the coal museum, which was the former

commissary. There are three International Harvester refrigerators over there.

From what I gather, I think one still works.

CURRIS:That is amazing.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Because we are sitting here in 2023. That is truly amazing.

WILLIAMS:And it was probably built in the '50s. But '50s and '60s--so

they--that's where the steel went. So originally they coked the coal here, but

then at some point in time around 1930, they began coking the coal in Chicago at

the steel mills.

CURRIS:Was--at that point, was the coal tonnage that was leaving here and

headed to Chicago?

WILLIAMS:It would've been coal tonnage. Instead of coke, it would've been coal

tonnage that was heading to Chicago, yes ma'am.

CURRIS:Well, as we come forward,

then, at what time did IH fully exit Benham?

WILLIAMS:So in--in ninteen--like I mentioned, 1985, and a couple years prior,

they started selling off these different division that they had. And I mentioned

subsidiaries earlier, but I guess you could say divisions. And one of the

sales--and I think it took place in '84--was they actually shut down the steel

mill in Chicago. There were labor issues up there and the steel mills were

crumbling, and from what I understand, there was a--there was even safety issues

there. Those folks--I have seen information on social media. Those folks talk highly

of their time at the steel mill just like the coal miners here talk of their

time in the mines, and they--those were great people up there that you can tell,

just like the coal miners here, that was a--there was a common bond, that steel

mill, kind of a community type thing. So I believe it was in 1984 that they

finally closed the steel mill because it was just--it was falling apart, they

were obtaining the needed steel overseas--from overseas, and then, you know,

they--there's--getting ready to sell out a--the construction division, they're

selling out the farm division, and they're not needing as much steel to make

trucks. So--

CURRIS:--Jeremy, you may not know the answer to this question, but as you're

aware, my father was manager of the Benham Credit Union which had been sponsored

by International Harvester, and it was open only to the employees of

International Harvester. Now, International Harvester may have sponsored

additional credit unions at different sites. I do not know one way or another.

But do you know whether that would have meant that they could also have been

members of the Benham Credit Union as an employee of International Harvester?

WILLIAMS:That, I don't know. I have heard of an International Harvester Credit

Union in Fort Wayne, I believe it was, so--

CURRIS:--so they would've had one on site.

WILLIAMS:Yes. Now, I'm not sure if it was--if that was developed prior to the

Benham Credit Union or after or what, but if I'm not mistaken, it was actually

referred to as the International Harvester Credit Union. So there may have been

a bigger credit union as

a whole that employees could join and--whereas Benham was probably a local

credit union.

CURRIS:I will ask Jerry Walters that because--

WILLIAMS:--he'll know that--

CURRIS:--he will know that. But until you were making your comments about the

common bond, I had not even thought about that particular issue. So at this

point, we have the--everything is selling off by 1985. What year was the

complete exit of International Harvester?

WILLIAMS:So International Harvester, like I said, that became Navistar

eventually. And, you know, it was--

CURRIS:--how did it end up Arch Minerals?

WILLIAMS:That's during the sale in 1986.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:There were companies looking at purchasing the mines, mines only, so

nothing else.

So they were looking at selling the operation and had been looking at selling

the operation for a while, and there were a couple of companies that were

looking at it, and one of them being Arch Mineral, now--what we now know as Arch

Coal or maybe Arch Coal Holdings. But they were the ones that bought the

company. In 1984--they came to--they come the area in 1984 and bought US Steel

at Lynch and all of their coal holdings in the--what was referred to as the US

Steel Lynch District. So they were familiar with the area and with the coal

reserves in the area. So in 1986, they purchased--Arch Minerals or their

subsidiary, which would be

referred to as Arch of Kentucky--that was created after the purchase of the

Lynch District--they purchased the coal reserves here at--coal reserves and land

here at Benham and surrounding area, the sixty-five hundred acres, sixty-six

hundred acres that was here, that was originally bought by International

Harvester in the early 1900s.

CURRIS:So if we are having the first coal go out in 1909 and a sale of the

mines in 1986, we are looking at approximately seventy-seven years of

significant production.

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am, and one of the interesting pieces was when they started

marketing the coal and possibly even the company or the mines as a whole, they

used a marketing--I guess you could say marketing tactic. You know, when you're

going to sell something, you've got to put a shingle out, so to speak, and

telling everybody what you have. So they actually used a system that you come

in--they had a folder. It was a nice, glossy folder, front and back, and one of

the things that's listed on the folder is, "A seventy-five year past with a

seventy-five year future."

CURRIS:Oh my goodness.

WILLIAMS:So that was kind of the way they looked at it, and I think those were

used as--probably as a marketing ploy. You know, as part of the marketing,

however you want to call that, whatever--

CURRIS:--the scheme, yes--

WILLIAMS:--that would would be--yeah.

CURRIS:That's fascinating.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, one of the most interesting issues to my mind personally is the

significant contribution that Benham coal miners for International Harvester

provided to our support of the nation, to our support of the United States of

America, without which perhaps they would not have been having the furniture and

the refrigerators, the electricity, all the bobby pins, all those items of steel

that were produced, which were enjoyed across the country and across the world,

that resulted from the only captive coal mine owned by International Harvester

at Benham, Kentucky, with its high-heat bituminous coal. And I am of the

personal opinion that without the Benham coal miners, we could very well not

have won World War II. I would like for you to tell us about exact--the type of

products that International Harvester, through its steel production, using

Benham coal, made available for our military efforts in World War II.

WILLIAMS:Sounds great. I'm glad you brought that up. I don't think that people

know the vast scale of what took place

in Benham, Kentucky. I even wonder maybe our coal miners didn't--were not

appreciated enough, maybe not known. You know, their job, they did their job.

They did a fabulous job. Their job, they knew they had to get up, provide for a

family, go into the mines every day, dig the tonnage that was requested, and

come back out and do it again the next day. But the scale that Benham was on,

producing items at that time, was great. It's really even hard to grasp. When

you put everything together, what the miners and the people, the families, the

people that built this town, and how they

helped to build a nation, especially during the times of--like you mentioned,

World War II. And I just--I took a few notes here on that. There were a couple

of periods there, specifically WWII, but there was also that--I guess you could

say war historians, they refer to as post war, and post war is post-WWII, which

would include Korea and Vietnam. So those--that post-war period, which is a long

period of time, you know, from the early '50s, early to mid-'50s, up through the

mid-'70s, let's say, early '70s. But let's look at that WWII period of what

International Harvester was called on to do, but in turn, what the miners and

their families in Benham were called on to do, and it's amazing. In WWII, the

things that helped fuel the war from International Harvester, which goes back to

Benham--International Harvester built things like--we know the tractors, we know

the bulldozers. These were supplying the war effort. They also built torpedoes,

cannon shells, anti-aircraft gun mounts--because they're made out of steel. They

even built some anti-tank guns. They build seventy-five millimeter cannon

shells. I mentioned the bulldozers. They had just track crawlers, no blades on

them, just tracks to move equipment around.

Stationary engines that would be needed for generation of lights or needed

items. The trucks that they built to go for the war effort, things like

half-ton, one-ton, two-and-a-half-ton, three-ton, and five-ton trucks for the

effort. Dump trucks, passenger buses, half-track vehicles. There was actually a

gentleman here in Benham that actually owned a half-track vehicle that was an

International Harvester, and from what I gather, he would take it to Cumberland

and ride around on Sundays and that sort of thing. But I can remember seeing

that as a child here. And then tanks--there are a few tanks that they actually

built. So when it come to World War II, they produced those needs. That's what

went directly to our US military, to the US government, but

there's another facet here that they provided. We needed food for the troops. So

we had farmers that were producing food, and guess what they were relying on?

They were relying on those Farmall tractors and those implements. What started

out with Cyrus McCormick building a Reaper to better harvest wheat in the 1880s,

now we've moved to a--more mechanized pieces of machinery--farm machinery. And

so International Harvester, this is going directly to our farmers of this nation

who were producing the food that was needed for the troops of WWII. So they

supplied--the people of Benham, miners, families,

whatever role that was being played in Benham was large at that point in time

because it all went directly to the efforts of WWII and the war efforts, because

whether it was steel that built a tractor that was used to plant corn in Iowa or

it was used to--on the war front with a torpedo, it--they supplied a lot, and

that--it's unimaginable. It's hard to grasp everything that this little town did

during that period of time.

CURRIS:I agree with you that I don't think that even the miners who were

producing the coal truly comprehended what their contribution was leading to.

This is amazing. I had no idea,

and I am--are you aware of any publications that have emphasized these contributions?

WILLIAMS:There is a really neat video that International Harvester put out

during World War II, and it was kind of a documentary type video of, "Here's

what we're doing." I don't know how well it was--I don’t know how well it was

publicized because it would've been a--I don't know if it was done at, you know,

movie theaters, you know, or--

CURRIS:--that's right--

WILLIAMS:--it's--there was very little television, but it was a really nice

piece, and it talks about the role that International Harvester, the company,

played in the war efforts. And it shows during these clips--these video clips

and the audio, and it's one of those, you know, somebody talking with a booming

voice. You know how it is, those great documentary type videos.

But it shows in there farmers farming. It shows in there military personnel

driving these trucks, tanks, that sort of thing, and that--it's kind of like,

"Here's what we're doing. This is what our company is doing for the war effort."

CURRIS:This is amazing. Let's put in context of time. So we're talking about

World War II, so we're talking about, let's say, 1940 to '45. You're right, at

that time, there were no televisions in the mountains. I think the first

televisions came in in the mid-'50s, and--which is going to be after that period

of time.

WILLIAMS:Exactly.

CURRIS:And for a video of that kind, then the only source would have been predominantly

movie theaters.

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am, larger cities, maybe.

CURRIS:And larger cities, maybe. Do you have any idea how we might access--

WILLIAMS:--I have seen that on YouTube. If I can find that again, I will email

that to you. How's that?

CURRIS:That would be wonderful. (both laugh) That would be wonderful. Well, you

know, this whole issue of what has happened with coal mining and the stereotypes

of today are diametrically opposed to what the realities were, and I believe it

should be our mission as the daughters, granddaughters, grandchildren of coal

miners to prevent this revisionist history from continuing, at least serving as

a voice for those of us

who had families who helped contribute to the modernization of America.

WILLIAMS:Right.

CURRIS:To the industrialization--

WILLIAMS:--exactly--

CURRIS:--of America. And I cannot tell you how delighted but surprised I am to

know the breadth of what International Harvester products were and how they were

used. You mentioned Korea and Vietnam. What--how would you relate the same

information to--

WILLIAMS:--okay--

CURRIS:--to Korea and Vietnam?

WILLIAMS:So some of that equipment was still being used that I mentioned above.

You know, probably some of those tanks were still being used. Probably some of

those vehicles were still being used to some point. I know at this point in

time, they're probably aging. But during World War II,

they saw a need--the military saw a need for an upgrade in small arms, that

there was a needed significant change between World War I and World War II. And

so there was a need for small arms for their infantry troops. So they--to not go

through the history of things, the Springfield Armory that was actually

ran--that was actually owned by the US government there--if you understand

firearms in today's fashion of 2023, there is a Springfield Armory that produces

firearms, but it was not the same Springfield Armory of the nineteen--the

mid-1900s. That was a--the Springfield Armory

I'm referring to is--was a government-owned facility--government and

military-owned facility. They--the government had contracted with a gentleman to

design a rifle. His name was John C. Garand from Canada.

CURRIS:How do you spell that?

WILLIAMS:G-A-R-A-N-D. And so Mr. Garand, he built some prototypes, which the

government ended up being--accepting--this was somewhere in the late '30s, early

'40s, just prior to the onset of World War II--to design a thirty-caliber rifle

that could be used on the battlefield as a small arm. The Springfield Armory and

Winchester, who's a long-time firearm manufacturer, and

there were probably a lot of squirrel hunters here in Benham--(Curris

laughs)--that probably had Winchester rifles or shotguns. But the government

contracted with those--with Winchester and then also they owned the Springfield

Armory. So they started turning out in--during World War II, they started

turning out these small arms, these thirty-caliber rifles. And it held the--what

it fired was the thirty-ought-six ammunition. So at the end of World War II, we

saw, I guess, you could say the onset of a Cold War moving into the Korea era.

So with that, and the continued need of these small arms that they had adopted,

and they--

General Patton--General George Patton, he had troops that used that M1 Garand,

and he referred to it as, “the greatest battle implement ever devised.” So

post-war, post-WWII, you have the Cold War that was during the onset of that,

and the need of--the continued need of these small arms. The federal government,

the military, contracted with the Harrington & Richardson

Corporation--Harrington Richardson Firearms, or Arms. Actually, Harrington &

Richardson Arms--to build these rifles. Well, you had Harrington & Richardson,

and I think they were in New York. You had

Springfield Armory, which was in Massachusetts, and you had Winchester, and it

was in Connecticut, maybe.

CURRIS:I'm sorry. Where was Springfield?

WILLIAMS:Springfield Armory was in Massachusetts. So there are three companies

there that are on the coast.

CURRIS:And Winchester was where?

WILLIAMS:Winchester I think was in Connecticut.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:And I may be wrong on all three of those. But they are all on the

coast. They were on the northeast and they were all close to each other. So now

you've moved--you know, we've moved in from the World War II, into the post-war

era, into the onset of Korea, but the Cold War, and they thought, "We have--"

The US military, they were thinking, you know, "We have these military--these

small arm manufacturers, but they're all close together and they're on the coast."

So they contacted their old friend at International Harvester.

CURRIS:The government did?

WILLIAMS:The government did, the US military. And International Harvester began

to build these M1 Garand rifles. They were located in Illinois. They were

centrally located into the States. So if there were an attack on this coastal

area, you know, in the Northeast, in the New England area, that they didn't--to

use the old term, they didn't have all their eggs in the same basket, so to

speak. So the International Harvester began to produce these, and it was a

former P-47 plant--it was a P-47 airplane plant. The P-47 was a plane

that was built during World War I, so they began to manufacture those there. It

was also used as an appliance manufacturing plant as well. So some of those

appliances, those refrigerators and toasters, were also being manufactured in

the same area. So they began to build a number of rifles, and I cannot remember

that number right off the top of my head, the number of rifles that they built

within a time frame post-war.

CURRIS:And so those rifles would've been produced from coal--from steel for IH

that had been produced from the coal from Benham, Kentucky.

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am.

CURRIS:That's quite a circle.

WILLIAMS:It is.

CURRIS:That is quite a circle.

WILLIAMS:It is. And so they were still supplying post-war. I mentioned

Korea because that rifle was used in Korea. I had a great-uncle that actually

carried one in Korea, carried an M1 Garand in Korea. And then into the early

portions of Vietnam, that rifle was still being used until the United States

military upgraded to a totally different small arm. So that's where it continued

to play a role. Still to this day, among collectors, that rifle, the

International Harvester M1 Garand--of all four manufacturers of M1 Garands, the

International Harvester is the most sought after.

CURRIS:You have one?

WILLIAMS:(both laugh) I will not--

CURRIS:--because if you don't--

WILLIAMS:--I will not say whether I have one or not.

CURRIS:I know someone

in my family who would absolutely adore--that is fascinating. So that--the impact--

WILLIAMS:--yeah--

CURRIS:--of the Benham coal miner in terms of our international relations and

our war efforts is continuing up through the beginning of Vietnam.

WILLIAMS:And we're still building tractors and farm machinery that's still

feeding troops and so on and so forth, so--

CURRIS:--at the same--those also up through Vietnam.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, Jeremy, this has been absolutely fascinating, and I don't know how

many other people--certainly not in terms of the local population--how many

really have connected all the dots that you have managed to do and have become

such--as I said before, you're such a storehouse--(laughs)--of information.

That these have been wonderful times of interview, and I would just have to ask

whether or not there's anything that we've covered either yesterday or today

that you would like to--or something novel that you would like to add to your

interview--which has been stellar, I might add.

WILLIAMS:Thank you very much. I appreciate this opportunity. I think it's one

of those things of--I've often told people that we're one generation from losing

the knowledge that we have, and it doesn't matter what the subject is. If it's

the subject of coal mining in Benham or what, we're one generation--whether it's

a family history. If that generation does not care about what took place prior,

we've lost it. And so we have no information to be able

to tell our future generations. It's been an honor to do this, to be able to

tell--this is not my story. This is the stories that I've heard along the way,

that I've been fortunate enough to sit at the right spot at the right time to

hear stories. The stories are immense. You mentioned connecting the dots.

There's a lot of dots out there that I wish I knew where they were. So sometimes

I know where the dots are, but I can't connect them. Sometimes I wonder why

there's a large void and there was no dot there. At times, there are things that

show up, and I think with your interviews that they will show up, that we didn't

know anything about. And it's almost like the mountains that surrounds this

little town keeps giving us

these nuggets of coal, not necessarily nuggets of gold, but nuggets of coal or

prehistoric diamonds. So I think that's--you know, that's the big thing is

trying to connect the dots, trying to find out as much information--and that's

what I have enjoyed doing and just listening to these folks. I was fortunate

enough--to have enough family members that worked at International Harvester,

Wisconsin Steel that I could tell their story, capture their story, remember

their story. And one of the things that I was telling Deno yesterday was I tell

these stories for two reasons. One, so you can know about it, and two, I

remember it, and if I continue telling that story over and over and over again,

I don't lose that story. And so if we continue to share our stories about Benham

and about International Harvester and what the company did and what the people

of the company did and how they created all this on a global scale, and what

they did and what the people here did is amazing. It's amazing. That's the

greatest part about all this.

CURRIS:Well, Jeremy, you are greatly appreciated. I hope we're able to do

additional interviews, and may I say thank you for being a repository of the

knowledge of our coal mining families and all that they have contributed to the

United States and to the world. Thank you very much.

WILLIAMS:Thank you for having me.

[End of interview.]