FERNHEIMER:I'm going to cry. I think that we weren't recording.

SHAKRA:Oh no. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Now we're recording. Oy vavoy. Great. We'll have to start--if you

don't mind, we'll go back a little bit.

SHAKRA:Okay. No problem. Whatever is important, I'll talk to you about it again.

FERNHEIMER:Yes. All right, let's try again. I realize--oh, I'm so embarrassed.

Well, today is July 19, 2023. This is Jan Fernheimer, Professor of Writing,

Rhetoric, and Digital Studies, and Co-Professor of Jewish studies, and James B.

Beam Institute for Kentucky Spirits Faculty Fellow, and I'm here with Hussein

Shakra in the beautiful city of Jaffa not too far from the flea market, Shuk

Hapishpeshim, and we are here to talk about food for the Food and Foodways in

Israel/Palestine collection that we be housed at the--(laughter)--Louis B. Nunn

Center for Oral History. And I'm a little bit (Hebrew) because we

were--(laughter)--chatting and chatting and having a beautiful conversation when

I realized that the recorder was

not recording, so--

SHAKRA:--so hello again--

FERNHEIMER:(laughter)--so hello again. We were--I guess we will continue our

conversations. We're in the middle of talking about--and I can backtrack and

sort of get--

SHAKRA:--sure--

FERNHEIMER:--we had had a lovely conversation not yet on the recording about

growing up here in Jaffa and Palestinian family ways and what it's like to be

the prestigious son--(laughter)--of a family, especially after some difficulties

having children initially. And Hussein was telling me about his experiences

moving to Jerusalem at the age of twenty-five--

SHAKRA:--twenty-five--

FERNHEIMER:--to pursue pharmacy studies at Ein Karem.

SHAKRA:Yeah, Ein Karem. Ein, Ein, Ein Karem.

FERNHEIMER:Ein Karem, yeah.

SHAKRA:Oh, I'm never sure how they say it. Ein Karem. Ein Karem.

FERNHEIMER:Ein Karem.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:So we'll come back to talk about childhood a little bit--

SHAKRA:--okay--

FERNHEIMER:--afterwards because I don't want to mess with the flow, but--

SHAKRA:--so yeah. So

we'll go--oh, I was about to tell you how I started baking.

FERNHEIMER:Yes.

SHAKRA:So a friend of mine broke her leg. She, she fell on, like, this start of

a--not a walking tour. When you go hiking, the start of Maslul.

FERNHEIMER:The path?

SHAKRA:The path, yeah. She just fell a little bit and her leg got--and she

broke her leg and she had, like, to do a surgery, and she was, like, for two

months, just stuck at home. And her birthday was coming up and she wanted to,

like, you know, celebrate and do something fun and she was going out of her mind

not moving from the couch. (laughter) So she asked me if I could help her. I'm

like, "Sure, I have time. I just finished my degree. Why not? (laughter) Let's

do something fun." And she's like, "I'll--I'm going to give you some--a list. Go

to this shop in the Shuk, Machane Yehuda--"

FERNHEIMER:

--the Shuk in Jerusalem--

SHAKRA:--the big Shuk in Jerusalem. "And it's a big pastry, baking supply shop

where you can find anything, and I need you to get me these ingredients to make

something fun for my birthday. Like, I want to surprise our friends." And I'm

like, "Okay." I took the list, went to the shop, entered my for the first time

ever baking shop--(laughter)--and I was like, "Oh, wow, what is happening?" It

was big. It's, it's a big shop and they had a lot of everything everywhere, and

I was a little confused, so--

FERNHEIMER:--what part of the Shuk is it in--

SHAKRA:--it was in--it was--unfortunately it's closed.

FERNHEIMER:Oh no.

SHAKRA:It was one my favorite shops in Jerusalem. It was--you know Pizza Flora?

FERNHEIMER:Yes.

SHAKRA:So it was in front of it. Now it's Machneyuda Restaurant. I forgot the

name of it.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, the--

SHAKRA:--you know the

Machneyuda restaurants? They have like a--

FERNHEIMER:--a little one that's next to it?

SHAKRA:They have a couple of them there.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:But with different names. I don't remember the name of it.

FERNHEIMER:It's okay.

SHAKRA:But it's in front of Pizza Flora and it was a pastry shop and baking

supply mostly, and they used to have even classes, and I went inside and the

shop owner, I remember she looked at me and she asked, "Hi, you look confused.

Did your wife send you? Do you have a list?" (laughter) And I'm like, "Exactly

that. She's not my wife, but yes. (laughter) Help me. I need this, that, this."

And she's like, "Okay, no problem. Here you go, here you go." She gave me all

the supply and mostly it was, like, fondant. I never knew fondant before.

Fondant is like sugar paste, the thing that you do to create fun-looking cakes

with that--you know, they look like clay, but you can eat them.

And I went back, and on her--on the day of the birthday, I helped her make

cupcakes. She was giving me, like, orders from the sofa and that was like doing

it in the kitchen all by myself, and that was like--really, that's the first

time I'm--I was like--

FERNHEIMER:--that's a good friend--

SHAKRA:--working in this oven. Yeah, she knows she started that, and she's so

proud of what she did.

FERNHEIMER:(laughter) What's her name?

SHAKRA:Mirav.

FERNHEIMER:Mirav?

SHAKRA:Yeah. And yeah, she gave me all the orders. I made the cupcakes. They

turned really nice. And then after I finished, we decorated them together with

fondant. We just watched a few videos on YouTube and I was, like, just amazed

that you can use sugar paste to create all these cute little, you know,

figurines that look like toys or dolls or,

you know, whatever you want. And I was just fascinated with it, and I felt like

I love--I used to draw when I was a kid.

FERNHEIMER:Oh yeah?

SHAKRA:So it felt like you can be so creative with it, and I had so much fun

that I just decided that same day, "I'm going to do this again." And, you know,

after we celebrated and we showed all the friends what we did and everyone was

so excited--everyone got, like, a cupcake that was special to him with, like,

something that--we sculpted something that is--has a meaning to him, and--

FERNHEIMER:--wow--

SHAKRA:--we just saw how fun it is and how everyone is excited, so I just

waited a few months, and then my nephew--my first nephew--

FERNHEIMER:--nephew--

SHAKRA:--yeah, my first nephew had his birthday. He was celebrating three and I decided

to make him this, like, double-tiered chocolate cake covered with fondant and

with a little monkey on top and a duck on the side. And I made the chocolate

cake from Betty Crocker's cake mix. (laughter) You know, because--

FERNHEIMER:--a staple in my house--

SHAKRA:--(laughter)--there we go. Because what do I know about cakes? Like,

this is how you make cakes, right? (laughter) Really had no idea.

FERNHEIMER:Can you get--I guess you can get Betty Crocker here?

SHAKRA:I--yeah, you can. You can get Betty Crocker or you can get something,

like, Israeli brand that is very similar to it. And that's how I made the cake.

I brought it to my family. They--like, their jaw dropped. They were, like, so

amazed. They never saw something like that. Fondant and sugar and, you know,

working with the sugar paste was very--pretty new at that time, like, eleven

years ago.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:Like,

it was new, and it wasn't that popular, so it was really exciting for them. And

then ever since, every nephew, every niece, almost every sibling,

parents--(laughter)--I, like--I had to make a cake for them. Like, it's either I

felt like I had to, I really want to, or they came and asked me--like, a niece

or nephew. "Uncle, can you make me a Cinderella cake next birthday?" "Sure, of

course, you've got it." And, you know, throughout the years, I just got better

and better and better and better. Even the flavors and the taste of the cake got

better, and it's like, you know, through time, I'm like, "I can't use Betty

Crocker all the time. Let's, like, do a real cake." Then I understood, like, you

can actually just use flour and sugar and you get a cake--(laughter)--and, yeah,

I was really working on the taste because I wanted them to enjoy the cake inside

as much as they enjoyed looking at the cake.

FERNHEIMER:When did that shift come for you? When did you feel confident

enough in your abilities to begin to consider, like, "Okay, it's not just about

the beauty of the cake, but also, like, it's got to taste good"?

SHAKRA:It was really fast. I think, like, two years into the baking, I was,

like, not just baking the cakes or the fondant. I was, like, trying out, you

know, some recipes here and there. I was suddenly, like, making macarons in my

house, which are, like, very hard to make at the beginning. You need, like, to

do it a couple of times to get it, and yeah, I just wanted to get at them. Then,

like, the--

FERNHEIMER:--you caught the bug--(laughs)--

SHAKRA:--I caught the bug, but I think the--what really caught me was the

challenge of it all. It's like, "Oh, you need, like, to really--if you can make

a perfect macaron, that means you're a good baker. So it's hard. So it's

difficult. That's a challenge. I'll take the challenge. I'll make a good

macaron." Took me, like, I don't know, ten tries, I think,

or twelve tries, but then I got a good macaron. And then I kept making more and

more, and then I, I started with the next thing, like something else. Cheesecake

or whatever. Like, I always take something and I make it a challenge for me just

to figure out how to make it and make it well. After three years of that, I

decided, "Okay, it's time to go to a class. Like, I think whatever I can learn

from videos on YouTube or just doing it at home from books--baking books--is not

enough. I need someone to just give me the--(Hebrew)." How do you say (Hebrew)?

FERNHEIMER:Oh, the tools.

SHAKRA:The tools, yeah. "The tools to do it at home and have, like, more

confidence in what I'm doing." And I went to a--

FERNHEIMER:--and this whole time, you're working as a pharmacist, by--

SHAKRA:--yeah, by then I'm a pharmacist. Then I come back. By night, I'm a

baker. (laughter) And most of the bakes just go to my family or my friends.

There were some people here and there who were trying to, like, interested--I

can sell them stuff. I tried it for a little bit, but then I, I understood it's

just hard work. It's too much to like be--to work in an actual work and then

work in the kitchen to sell cakes is not something I'm interested in. Just takes

too much time. It's not gratify--

FERNHEIMER:--gratifying--

SHAKRA:--yeah--as, as just doing it for nephews or families because it's

like--you don't celebrate it with them. It's not as fun to just give someone the

cake and take the money. Like, I can do that at work with drugs. (laughter) So I

want to celebrate with them. I want to cut the cake. I want to eat the cake. I

want to, you know, not just baking it to give it away. (laughs) I'm baking it

for myself also, not just for, you know--I don't know. That's how I always felt.

And I--there's something in it to give it as a gift.

Like weddings, I--my friends started asking me to make them a wedding cake. Oh,

how I love wedding cakes, oh my God. It is so much fun. It's--they're so tall

and such a big project and--wedding cakes, they really--something you can--buy

me? Wedding cakes. Let me make you a wedding cake. (laughter) I even convinced

two friends of mine to get married so I could make them--(laughs)--a wedding cake.

FERNHEIMER:Did you? Amazing.

SHAKRA:Yeah, it's, like--one of them wasn't sure yet. The other was, like,

ready. And then I told the other who wasn't sure, "Listen, if you get married,

I'll make you the wedding cake." And he's like, "Oh, that changes things." (laughter)

FERNHEIMER:And so they're--

SHAKRA:--and now they're getting married--

FERNHEIMER:--oh, so it's coming?

SHAKRA:It's coming. It might be next year. (laughter)

FERNHEIMER:I'll look for that on the blog.

SHAKRA:Amazing.

FERNHEIMER:When was--when did you do your first wedding cake?

SHAKRA:My first wedding cake was for a friend of mine that was actually a

neighbor. She lived downstairs

and we became friends, and she got married, and she just asked me for a wedding

cake. I did, like, the silliest cake because I was still new. That was even

before I started pastry class. I made her a, a, a double-tiered chocolate cake,

white, with, like, black stripes, and then on top, I put two penguins, a bride

and a groom, but in penguin form. Why? I don't know. I just thought them to be

cute--(laughs)--and I made them the penguins without them knowing.

FERNHEIMER:Did you make them also from fondant?

SHAKRA:From fondant.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, wow.

SHAKRA:I came to the--you know, to the wedding, presented the cake, and she's

like, "Oh my God, that's amazing. But why penguins? Is it because of Jerusalem

or like Haredi?" I was like, "No, that wasn't even my thought. But sure."

(laughter) Yeah, it was funny. I don't know why. But then I made another one for

good friends of ours, Tia and Mar. They live here.

They got actually married really close by in the old--in Old Jaffa--

FERNHEIMER:--oh, nice--

SHAKRA:--and they really like pistachios, so I made them a chocolate pistachio

cake. Yeah, it was good, and it was three-tiered this time. I, you know--

FERNHEIMER:--you're upping the ante--

SHAKRA:--yep. (laughter) And they wanted a cake that will silhouette and their,

like, story, like, so I did, like, them in a silhouette holding each other, and

then around the cake, there was, like, places of Jerusalem, like Dome of the

Rock or where they met, the (Hebrew), the old mill. It was so pretty. I really

loved it, and--

FERNHEIMER:--and these are all on the blog or not on the blog? Just--

SHAKRA:--well, some of them are on my Instagram.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SHAKRA:On the blog, I put the recipes I work. The blog came really afterwards.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, yeah.

That's why I was asking.

SHAKRA:That's all before the blog.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SHAKRA:I think it's what led to it eventually. But that was just, you know,

starting up, just making food and making cakes and trying it out and, you know,

just enjoying it. It was a cake actually that we couldn't cut because it was a

kosher place and they couldn't have the cake inside and cut it. They just

presented it, and then we cut it at home afterwards.

FERNHEIMER:Right, because for students, there's complicated rules around what

constitutes a kosher cake, and it's--even if all the ingredients are fine, if

you make it in a kitchen that is not--

SHAKRA:--kosher--

FERNHEIMER:--kosher, then by definition--

SHAKRA:--by a man who is not, you know--I'm not Jewish, so it's also a problem

because I can't turn on an oven if I want it to be kosher. Let's say the kitchen

is kosher and I need to make a cake--I need to make something. I need a Jew to

turn on the oven or the flame for me.

FERNHEIMER:Wait, no.

SHAKRA:Yes.

FERNHEIMER:That's--but there's the whole concept of the

Shabbat goy who--

SHAKRA:--except on Shabbat--

FERNHEIMER:--right.

SHAKRA:That's when I actually can turn for them the, the oven. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Whoa, I just learned something really--(laughs)--interesting.

So--but I've never heard these rules, that it has to--that the oven has to be

turned on by a--

SHAKRA:--yes--

FERNHEIMER:--Jewish person.

SHAKRA:I worked in a hotel during my studies at the desk and I remember the

hotel had a mashgiach.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, a mashgiach is a specific person who comes--usually male--who

comes and checks to make sure all the rules of kashrut are being followed to the

T to ensure that the food is kosher.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:But this is specifically--a mashgiach is usually like the rules

around the kitchen, that the meat and the milk are being kept separate--

SHAKRA:--yes--

FERNHEIMER:--and that the utensils are separate, and--this is a whole song and

dance about what is kashrut. We'll talk in class for students. (laughter)

SHAKRA:So he came every morning and turned on the oven and the flame, the

stove, for the Arab kitchen workers.

FERNHEIMER:

Wow.

SHAKRA:Every morning.

FERNHEIMER:And most of the workers in the kitchen were Arab or--

SHAKRA:--all of them--

FERNHEIMER:--wow.

SHAKRA:Jerusalem. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:Yeah, so that's how I learned, like, yeah, I can't do that.

FERNHEIMER:Interesting. I have not heard that. So for me, it's always the other

concept that you have, the idea of the Shabbat goy, which is not such a great

phrase. But goy just means not Jewish.

SHAKRA:Not Jewish.

FERNHEIMER:It doesn't have a--the derogatory--

SHAKRA:--on Shabbat, when they--yeah, when they keep Shabbat, I, I,

I--actually, at the same hotel, I remember a neighbor came to the hotel and

asked if a Shabbat goy could come to her place and turn the stove back on

because it turned--

FERNHEIMER:--off--

SHAKRA:--off for her, and she needs to keep cooking for the Shabbat, and she

can't do it because it's already Shabbat.

FERNHEIMER:Right.

SHAKRA:So I, I told her, "Don't worry, I'll come, and I'll turn the flame for

you." And I came to her house (laughs) and turned the flame for her, and that's

how I understood, "Oh, so I

can do it on Shabbat, but I can't do it the rest of the week."

FERNHEIMER:Oh, really? Interesting.

SHAKRA:Yep. Many rules.

FERNHEIMER:Many rules.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Okay. So this is the reason why the cake was enjoyed in the privacy

of home--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--with friends--

SHAKRA:--everyone looked at it at the event--

FERNHEIMER:--admired it--

SHAKRA:--no one touched it. (laughter) So weird. It was a thirty--360-degree

cake that you, like--you can just go around it and see what I did.

FERNHEIMER:Oh wow.

SHAKRA:Yeah. It was a project.

FERNHEIMER:And this was just your second wedding cake, was this--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--complicated and interesting.

SHAKRA:It was, but then the best wedding cake, like, even more complicated, it

was the four-tiered one. See, I added another layer.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, and I want to come back to the pistachio in a bit too.

SHAKRA:Well, and actually, the pistachio started with the third wedding cake.

FERNHEIMER:Okay. So with that pistachio chocolate cake, was this the beginning

of the pistachio?

SHAKRA:It wasn't actually the beginning. It was like they liked pistachio. I

made them pistachio. Didn't even think of going crazy with pistachio. I was

like, "Oh yeah, pistachio is fun."

But then friends of ours got married in Sicily and they--

FERNHEIMER:--wow--

SHAKRA:--yes--and they--(laughs)--invited me and my partner to come. He

officiated the wedding--

FERNHEIMER:--amazing--

SHAKRA:--and I made the wedding cake.

FERNHEIMER:Amazing. (laughter) Wait, so, okay, I have logistical questions. Did

you make the cake here and fly it?

SHAKRA:No, no, no, no. I packed a suitcase--a full suitcase with my baking

supplies, my pans, everything I needed, and flew over there, and I requested

they find me an Airbnb with, like, a normal kitchen where I have, like, a normal

oven and, and, and, like, a scale or anything that I can work with, and they're

like, "Totally, no problem. We've got everything, but we are very sorry. We

don't have an AC." Because they got married--

FERNHEIMER:--in Sicily--

SHAKRA:--in Sicily, in middle of summer--(laughs)--

FERNHEIMER:--oh my God.

SHAKRA:

(laughter) They didn't have--it's like a small village where, like, AC is, like,

not even invented, I guess. I don't know.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, I mean, Europe doesn't have a lot of AC--

SHAKRA:--yes--

FERNHEIMER:--and we're seeing it now with the climate change.

SHAKRA:Yep, and--

FERNHEIMER:--what year was this--

SHAKRA:--it was--it's--I can remember the year but I think it was about eight

years ago.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SHAKRA:Yeah. Eight--yeah, about eight years ago, 2012, '13, '14, something like

that. Anyway--

FERNHEIMER:--so you brought this--I want to see the look on the customs person

when you go to Ben Gurion. Like, "Sir, what do you have in your suitcase here--(laughs)--

SHAKRA:--oh my God, I can't even remember their--their--what they asked about

it. I remember opening--

FERNHEIMER:--(laughs)--"Did you pack your own stuff--"

SHAKRA:--"I did. This is mine." I think they opened it but I don't remember

what I said or how it was. And anyway, I got there. It was, like, a very lovely,

old apartment,

very hot. And now imagine turning on an oven for, like, the whole day and the

house gets so hot. I was sweating bullets--bullets--as I baked this cake while

everyone was enjoying their pizza night--(laughter)--the day prior to the

wedding, and I'm like, "I am dying here. Give me a pizza." (laughter) So it was

in Sicily, which when I came there--before I came there, I asked the bride,

"Okay, so work with me. What is Sicily? What is, like, the best--what are the

flavors there? What can I work with?" And somehow we got to pistachios and

lemon, very Sicily--Sicilian flavors. I discovered that in Sicily, there's a

volcano called Mount Etna where at the slope of it, they grow

pistachio that, you know, once upon a time, I guess, some sultan brought it

there, and now they're growing there. But they're growing there, and because,

like, some minerals they get from the lava of the volcano, they--it--they get

this very, very green color. I can show--I have, like, some leftovers here.

They're very green and when you bake with them, you get, like--when you see

cakes with pistachio, like mousse cakes or whatever with--that contains

pistachios in it, usually the green color you see in the cake is a food coloring.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:The pistachios that you get here, the Iranian ones, the whatever they

are, they're not green. They're, like, yellow-ish. But the ones from Sicily are

considered like a culinary standard, like, they use them in the best

restaurants, because the color is

already green, and whenever I use it, I get the greenest pastries or cakes or--I

don't know. Really--I got really excited about it. I started exploring, and I

have--on my blog post, I have this whole travel blog--travel post where I go to

Sicily and discover the pistachio of Sicily and how green they are. I go see the

mountain, Mount Etna, and just really exciting. We--I came back from there with,

like, five kilos of pistachios.

FERNHEIMER:(laughs) I love it.

SHAKRA:It's amazing. The city where they sell the pistachios--Bronte, it's

called--it's famous--it's a very boring city. Don't stay there--but it's

just--if you go for a day trip, every restaurant, everything on the menu is

with--(laughs)--pistachio. Everything is green. It's amazing. I have--I had

pizza with pistachio

on it. Anyway, I made the cake--four tiers, naked cake, beautiful, pistachio and

lemon cake with mascarpone--

FERNHEIMER:--wow--

SHAKRA:--cream between the layers. The mascarpone in Italy is just divine. It's

not like the mascarpone they sell here in Israel. And that's it. I presented it

at the wedding. I was so nervous when I, like, had to, like, lift it to get out

of the fridge, and just--we had to, like, empty a whole fridge to put it in.

FERNHEIMER:I was--(laughter)--going to say.

SHAKRA:It was, like, people who were, like, living in the house where the

wedding was, you know, friends coming to the fridge to take something out to

drink and then, like, they open the fridge, and there was, like, a whole--a huge

cake waiting there. They were so surprised every time. I had to take it out of

the fridge and walk to the--like, to where--the table in the middle of the--we

did it outside--in

the middle of the field and I had to bring it, and everyone was, like, looking

at me and waiting. I got, like, very nervous. I almost tripped with the

cake--(laughs)--almost, but then I hold myself. And then they were so happy.

They cut it. It was really tasty. The flavors, you can't go wrong with Sicilian

pistachios and mascarpone and lemon. I mean, it was just amazing. And remember,

the chef at the event who made the food, he sliced a slice for me of the cake,

gave it to me. After he tasted it, he gave me a handshake. (laughter) He said,

"Good job, chef," and I was like, "Wow, thank you." (laughter) And yeah, that's

what started the craze for the green pistachios. And if you go through my blog,

you'll see I have a lot of pistachios, a lot of pistachio recipes, and they're

all very green, and it's without foot coloring.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. I think this is probably around the time that somehow we

stumbled on the blog

because--

SHAKRA:--because of the pistachios--

FERNHEIMER:--my husband is also obsessed with pistachios, and his--he traces

his roots back to Sicily.

SHAKRA:Oh really?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, that's where his family is from. Probably also, you know, Arab

descent of some very, very long time ago. But the obsession with pistachios is

big--(laughter)--and so watching all the things that you've been creating with

them is just--you know, we just salivate in Kentucky. But--so this is--like,

okay, this was the third wedding cake, four tiers--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--and prepared internationally--

SHAKRA:--internationally--

FERNHEIMER:--in a foreign kitchen--

SHAKRA:--foreign kitchen--

FERNHEIMER:--that is really--I mean, because baking is such a precise art. You

need to know what your oven is and, like, whether it's hot or cold.

SHAKRA:Yeah. I think I did a test with the oven at the beginning to just see

how it bakes, what temperature I need to--like, it wasn't very exact. I actually

brought a--

FERNHEIMER:--thermometer--

SHAKRA:--thermometer that you can put in the oven and it tells you exactly what the--

FERNHEIMER:--amazing--

SHAKRA:--temperature is inside because I can't really tell from the outside if

it's the real temperature

or not. Also--(laughs)--this--you can see a picture of it in my blog post.

It--they gave me an old scale where you put, like--you have weights at one side,

and then I put the pistachio on the other side, and then I play with the--

FERNHEIMER:--like an abacus--

SHAKRA:--yeah. (laughter) I was, like, "Seriously, guys, don't you have a

digital scale? What is this?" They told me, "Don't worry. Tomorrow, we'll get

you another one." "Okay, I'll do half the cake now with this, and tomorrow maybe

I'll continue with the other scale." But yeah, it was so funny. It's just, like,

such a fun experience.

FERNHEIMER:So you can hear the joy--I mean, I can see also because

I'm--(laughter)--I'm, like, sitting across from you, but this is just audio. But

you can hear the joy in your voice, so--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--tell me kind of what about baking--I mean, you said earlier that

you love baking and you love doing it for other people and the kind of gift of

that--you know, sharing that experience. Tell me about what it does

for you. Like, you got into it by a friend--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--trying to make a friend--cheer a friend up who was going through a

pretty tough time, it sounds like. And then from there, you know, sharing joy

with family members. I haven't really asked a great question here. (laughter)

But tell me about the joy of it, that baking brings you--

SHAKRA:--it does--

FERNHEIMER:--and sort of what--how you try to share that with others. Maybe

that's an okay question.

SHAKRA:It is. I think so. (laughter) Let me try. It brings me a lot of joy.

Like, it depends how. If I do something big and it's repetitive and it's for a

big event and it's a lot of time, like, doing this certain cookie a hundred

times, it gets tiring. It's--it gets--it's a lot. But when you do something like

one thing--a cake for an event, for a family friend, for a family or friend or

someone you love--

it just--I don't know. It brings me joy. Just, like, work--first, the process of

working on it, trying to decipher what they like--like, what flavors would work

best for them, what--I always start with the flavors, by the way. Like, I start

to think, "Give me flavors--" or, if I know you good, I might know your

flavors," and then I'll create something for you." And it's a fun process. It's

like creation, thinking about it. I go to sleep. In my head, the wheels are

turning. It's like I never stop thinking about it. I watch a movie, my head is

still thinking, "Maybe I should do this layer with that layer, this flavor with

this flavor." It's really--this process captivates me. It's like what makes me,

I guess, go on. (laughs) You know, when you're just tired from work, tired from

life, everything is, like, so mundane and boring and I don't know. This is what

keeps me going and

then you create it and you try it out. You do some tests. "This doesn't work.

This--maybe it works. Oh, I can make this better." And then you get suddenly to

the flavor or the texture that you want and you're like, "Oh, this is perfect. I

can use this, I will put this with this and it will be the perfect cake and I'm

sure of it." Usually--(laughs)--it's good. Sometimes, it needs some work. But

yeah, usually I'm very happy with that, with what I get, and then I can present

it to the person and then just anticipate the moment he puts it in

his--(laughs)--mouth and tells me what he thinks about it or she thinks about

it. And I don't know, it's, like, very unnerving, and I think I live for the

moment. I think usually I try to avert my look and, like, I don't want to see

what's happening because I'm afraid I'm going to be disappointed that they do

like it. But it, like, rarely happens usually. They just--you know, they go

beyond over, and

yeah, it just makes me happy. It gives me a purpose, a purpose that, like,

there's something more to life, like, something that excites me more than

anything. And yeah, lately, to be honest, I'm baking less and less because I'm

very focused on my job here. But whenever I get the chance to do it, oh, I'm so happy.

FERNHEIMER:(laughter) And so you need inspiration.

SHAKRA:Yeah. I, I guess--inspiration, I don't lack. I have, like--my head, even

when I don't bake, it's still working on flavors. I have a list on my phone

where I keep, like, if I get ideas. I just write them right away and then get

back to them. It's, you know, a bullet list where you can just put your--put

a--put all of your ideas in bullet points, and then work on it.

Let's see. Here. Like, blog post ideas. I just write whatever I see. It starts here--

FERNHEIMER:--I'm free to take a picture of--

SHAKRA:--yeah, of course--and then if I go down, you see, it, like, continues.

FERNHEIMER:(laughter) Gingerbread pills. Oh my gosh, double pistachio milky?

Can I try that?

SHAKRA:I still didn't do that. I have to do it someday.

FERNHEIMER:Oh my goodness.

SHAKRA:It's like ideas, ideas, oh yeah, maybe I'll do this, maybe I'll do that.

It--like, I just--

FERNHEIMER:--oh my gosh, this list is, like, ongoing--

SHAKRA:--and then I've got things I actually did, see?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Amazing.

SHAKRA:Yeah, it's really--I don't know. Like you said, you can see how much I

smile when I talk about it. It's--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SHAKRA:--it really excites me. It gives me joy. But there is hard moments. I

won't lie. When you need to, like, come back from work after a long day of work

where you're just tired. It was difficult

and then you think, like, "Wow, I need to get in the kitchen now and actually

bake, and I'm--I just need to rest." So sometimes the thought of the person

who's going to get the cake pushes me to do it. And sometimes--(laughs)--I'm

just too tired, but I do it anyway because, yeah, I have to. Like, it depends

what event it is, but I rarely come to a birthday where I don't bring a cake

with me. So--and lately, I learned to, "You know what, Hussain? It's okay to go

to parties if you--and not bring a cake. It's okay." Because work is very

demanding lately, so it could be strenuous. As much as I love it, I need a

break, so--to not hate it. So to just still love it. I think if you do

something, even if you love it, so much, you'll get burnt.

FERNHEIMER:

Yeah, burnout is--

SHAKRA:--burnout, yeah. So I don't want to be burned out. I don't think it'll

happen but, you know, as long as I keep in my mind that I do this for fun, it

stays fun. That's why I don't think I'll ever, like, actually work in it, and

that's why I did the blog, I think. It's because the blog is for me. It's

like--it's fun. It's--I enjoy writing it. I enjoy--I have the recipes to, you

know, come back to and make it better. Like, I use old recipes that I have on

the blog and create another cake from it, a better cake. So--

FERNHEIMER:--and all the recipe, you come up with yourself? Like--

SHAKRA:--at the beginning, a lot of them were, like, stuff I learned from the

pastry school.

FERNHEIMER:Oh yeah.

SHAKRA:I didn't talk about the pastry school. So after three years of just

baking at home, I decided that I needed something to help me--to give me

confidence in what I do,

to help me, like--how do I make my own stuff? How do I make cakes? How do I

make, like, you know, recipes? And I enrolled in this pastry school here in

Jaffa called Bishulim and they had the--they're one of the best schools in

Israel, and they had a class every Friday in the morning. You come for, like,

four or five hours--

FERNHEIMER:--wow--

SHAKRA:--and--yeah--they teach you--the best chefs teach you how to bake something.

FERNHEIMER:Did you have to apply? Or can anything just--

SHAKRA:--anyone can. It's very expensive, actually. It's like--you know, you

need to decide if you do it--it's an expense. You need to think about it. I

decided, "You know what? It's an expense I'm willing to put so I can, like,

advance in the world--like, make myself better in it."

FERNHEIMER:An investment in yourself.

SHAKRA:An investment, yeah, exactly, invested in

myself. And I remember the first day of school, they actually told us, "Don't

expect to become the best pastry maker after this class, and--or you'll find the

best job. This is not a place where you'll find the best job. This is a

place--look at it as a gift to yourself. You're giving yourself a gift today,

the gift of learning how to make pastry, of learning new techniques, and

learning how to trust your instincts and how to better yourself in the kitchen."

And that talked to me. That's exactly what I wanted from that class.

FERNHEIMER:How many other people were in the class?

SHAKRA:We were about maybe fifteen, something like that. Up to twenty. Between

fifteen to twenty, I think.

FERNHEIMER:Tell me about the demographics of who was there.

SHAKRA:It was very different. It was, like, very, like, people who were from

the age of eighteen

to age of fifty. People, like, male, female--mostly female--secular and

religious. I remember I had two religious girls that came from Jerusalem every

Friday to that class. Well, I lived in Jerusalem at that time. I also came from

Jerusalem, but I came the day before to visit my family, stayed over, and then

the morning went to class. They actually just came for the class and went back,

and because they were religious, I mean, it's not a kosher place.

FERNHEIMER:Right.

SHAKRA:They just made the cakes, learned how to make them--

FERNHEIMER:--and left them--

SHAKRA:--and just left for people to take. They didn't--like, we can take the

cakes back to the family, but they couldn't take them back or taste them. They

didn't taste anything the whole year.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SHAKRA:That is a big investment in--

FERNHEIMER:--how do you learn--

SHAKRA:--just learning--

FERNHEIMER:--if you're not tasting?

SHAKRA:I know. I'm not--I just--I didn't understand how they do that because,

like, one--the biggest part there

was to taste whatever the chefs was making or whatever I made, and I remembered,

like, discovering new flavors and being excited about this crazy coffee eclair

with pecan--caramelized pecans on it. Oh, I--just, like, the taste, the flavors,

you have to. And you also understand that when you taste something the chef made

or something that you made, huh, okay, how did he make it this way? Like, that's

how you better yourself. But they couldn't because of the kosher thing.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SHAKRA:Welcome to Israel.

FERNHEIMER:(laughter) Right?

SHAKRA:Crazy. And I think there was something with the gelatin.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, yeah, gelatin is not kosher.

SHAKRA:Gelatin, like, they didn't use--

FERNHEIMER:--it usually comes from an animal--

SHAKRA:--yeah, but here they use mostly fish gelatin.

FERNHEIMER:Right, because Muslims also don't--

SHAKRA:--Muslims also don't eat pork. So it's a little problem, yeah. I don't

know what they used. They used something from an animal, but that was, like,

kind of kosher, but not really kosher--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah. It could've been kosher ingredients but not--no mashgiach or no--

SHAKRA:--yeah, no mashgiach, that's for sure. (laughter)

FERNHEIMER:Really interesting. So these religious girls who came from Jerusalem--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--you--

SHAKRA:--me, the only Arab--

FERNHEIMER:--so that was my next question--

SHAKRA:--the only Arab in the class.

FERNHEIMER:Really?

SHAKRA:Although now, I have--how do I say--it's not a friend because (foreign

language), not a--

FERNHEIMER:--like an acquaintance--

SHAKRA:--acquaintance--I know that he goes there and he actually said most of

his student fellows are Arab.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, interesting.

SHAKRA:Somehow it changed from all over the country. But when I went there, I

was the only one in the class who was Arab.

FERNHEIMER:What was that like?

SHAKRA:I'm used to it. Actually, in university, in school--where--I went to Tel

Aviv University also--always was the only Arab in the class. So I kind of--I

guess you get used to it and kind of like because it's, like, special.

(laughter) I'm the only

special one here. And there's actually a funny story about it. The first day,

they give you tools and they tell you--like, a bag full of, like, thermometer, a

whisk, and, like, all the tools you need to use during the--your year there. And

you need to take it home and bring it with you every time. Part of the

curriculum. And I remember it was--during the Intifada, there was a lot of

Arab--(laughs)--stabbings in Israel. Remember? I think it was--

FERNHEIMER:--2014--

SHAKRA:--between '12 and '14, something--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SHAKRA:--about--yeah, and it was a scary period where, like, people were

stabbed. Suddenly, you know, terrorists were stabbing with knives.

And we opened the bag and there's, like, these two big knives there--like, the

biggest knife I've ever seen in my whole life--a chef knife, chef's knife--

FERNHEIMER:--(laughs)--I'm getting a visual, and here you are--

SHAKRA:--listen, leave me out of it. The first thing all the kids

and--kids--all the pupils there were, like, "What? How are we going to travel

with this? I go up, I go through a checkpoint where I go--" not a checkpoint.

"--a security check when I go on the train. They won't--they will never let me

on the train." And people were like, "Well, it's scary how the--" And the police

will stop them if they find out they go with knives, you know, all

about--especially in that period where it was, like, a scary period. And I'm

like looking at everyone. I'm like, "Excuse me, what do you think I will do?

I'm, like, Arab with knives, and you guys are okay. I'm the one who's

supposed to be worried here." And they all laughed, and then the chef told us,

"Don't worry, we're giving you a slip, a permission slip, where it says that

you're a student here in our school, and you have a permission--(laughs)--to

carry knives out and about." And everyone was like, "What?"

FERNHEIMER:And did it work?

SHAKRA:Well, I was afraid to take it back with me to Jerusalem, so I just kept

it here with my mom in Jaffa. The school is, like, ten minutes away walking, so

I just, like, "Okay, I'll just walk with my knives--(laughter)--to school ten

minutes. I think I'll be fine. No one will stop me walking with a bag, because

there's no security check, so I'll be fine." But yeah, it was very unnerving,

and I remember that day, I decided to tell my friends on Facebook, like, that I

enrolled into a pastry school. And I posted the letter with my knives--(laughs)--

and made a joke, like, "Oh, well, I hope that when I get asked about it, they

won't shoot me first and ask questions later." (laughter) And it got viral.

Like, everyone shared it all over the media and I got, like--I had a crazy week

where media in Israel--like, radio, TV, whatever, you name it--they asked me if

I--if they can interview me about it because they felt--they said, "Oh, this is

a fun little story, the middle of, you know, all these crazy story knives that

we have in Israel. Maybe we'll do something about an Arab that have permission

to go around with knives. (laughs) Maybe it'll be funny." So yeah, it was my

week of fame.

FERNHEIMER:And this was before the blog or--

SHAKRA:--this was before the blog, yeah, when I just decided I want to learn,

you know, how to bake properly. And it really

gave me a lot of tools to think for myself how to do stuff, how to create a

recipe, how to bake better, and I really appreciate that. And I remember almost

not being able to do the class because I had to work every other Friday, and I

remember when I asked for permission not to work for a whole year on Fridays,

they told me, "No can do, sorry." And I told them, "Well, you know what? What's

more important to me? The thrill of baking or, you know, coming to work?" I had

this horrible place of work. I wasn't happy there. So I told them, "You know

what? I quit. I think this is more important for me. I want to do this class. I

need to see it through to see if, like, maybe I want to pursue baking, like, as

more than just for fun. Like, I need to do this class, even if it comes on just,

you know, leaving my work place and finding

some other place." And they, like, immediately tell me, "Wait, wait, wait, let's

talk about it. (laughter) Don't leave." So the--I got approved. They let me have

this class every Friday and not work for a year. I remember my--not my--my

colleagues at work, they didn't like that. (laughter) But they, like--they let

me do it and they enjoyed the pastries or the baking I brought to work when--

FERNHEIMER:--I was going to say, I imagine they, they, they exacted a kind of tax.

SHAKRA:Yeah, yeah, yeah. (laughs) And yeah, the blog came a little afterwards.

Actually, I think after I finished my pastry course.

FERNHEIMER:And so you finished in roughly 2014, 2015?

SHAKRA:It was when I was thirty-three. I guess seven years ago, eight

years ago. Yeah, 2014, '15, yeah. Right about that time.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, 2014. Yeah.

SHAKRA:Yeah, makes sense.

FERNHEIMER:And so then--and then how did you decide to do the blog? Like, what

motivated you? Who did you imagine, you know, the audience to be? And what did

you kind of hope to accomplish? I'm asking so many questions at once.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Let's start with one.

SHAKRA:Actually, how did it start? It's actually, again, you know, it's, it's

funny. The same friend that broke her leg--

FERNHEIMER:--Mirav--

SHAKRA:--Mirav--(laughter)--I was--we were sitting together with some more

friends and we were talking about, like, my class and how I finished and what am

I going to do with it? Like, I told her, "I think after I finished this course

for a whole year, I really enjoyed it, but I don't see myself selling cakes. I

don't think I like it. I don't know what to do with it. I'll need to figure it

out." And she's like, "How about just start a blog?" I'm like, "Nah,

I'm not a blogger. I don't think I'm going to do that." And then we ended

the--(laughs)--we ended the meeting--meeting, it was a lunch date--and that same

day, I was, like, looking at Daniel, my partner, and like, "A blog, you know,

maybe I'll start a blog." It was like she just put another idea in my head and I

started it. (laughs) And it was just so fun. It's like--it's a different world

because it, it, it's like another challenge, just--not just baking. You work on

more skills, skills of writing, skills of taking pictures, photographs, and

skills on how to network in the media, like, what works, what doesn't work. And

I took a few months where I didn't bake and just, like, worked on creating a

blog and designing it. It was so fun designing it. I really

love designing stuff. And I think it looks good. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, it's beautiful.

SHAKRA:Thank you. I, I, I did--at the beginning, the name, CakeLab, had, like,

macarons on it, the name of the blog.

FERNHEIMER:How did you come up with the name, CakeLab?

SHAKRA:I don't know. I think I--for a month, I sat with friends. I'm like, "I

don't know what to call myself or my page or my blog." And I don't know.

It's--because I'm a pharmacist and I have--like, I worked in a lab, and it just

makes sense. Some friends maybe suggested it, maybe Daniel. I don't remember who

thought of it, even. And I'm like, "Okay, you know what? I'll stick with

CakeLab." It's just me. It just happened. If you Google CakeLab, you'll see

there's a lot of cake labs in the world. (laughter) And yeah, but in Israel, I

think I'm the only CakeLab, and yeah, I stick--stuck with the name.

And then after a few months of opening the blog, I decided I want molecules in

my blog. (laughter) You know, my--the chemist in me was like, "I need to up my

game. It's not enough to just put pictures of macarons next to the name. I want

molecules." And every page have a different molecule. I have vanilla molecule,

coffee, chocolate--(laughs)--and lemon. Maybe a lemon--sugar, and sugar--and

every page--different page--

FERNHEIMER:--no fistuk--

SHAKRA:--it doesn't have a molecule. I, I checked. (laughter)

FERNHEIMER:There must be some, like, flavonoid or something that creates the flavor.

SHAKRA:Maybe, but yeah, I didn't, no, it didn't--it's not--it doesn't exist, so

I just, like, "Okay, no fistuk." But, you know, the acidity of the lemon, that's

a molecule. The coffee and chocolate, it's a very similar molecule that I can use.

FERNHEIMER:I'm going to ask the folks at the James B. Beam Lab if they

know all about all the molecules and the flavonoids. I'll get back to you.

SHAKRA:Actually, I have a--I had a chemist follower--blog follower who wrote to

me privately that she loved my blog and because she's a chemist, she had to

check that all my molecules are correct. (laughter) And she checked them and

they're all good. (laughter)

FERNHEIMER:You get a gold star.

SHAKRA:Yeah. (laughs) I felt so happy that, you know, she gave me the approval.

"Here you go, they work." And yeah, it was really fun. I--like, I had to write

them and, like, design them and color them and put them on the blog. And when

you press on them, you get the archive of the molecule. If you press on the

chocolate one, you'll get all the chocolate recipes. If you press on the lemon

one, which is a little yellow, you'll get all the lemon recipes. So it's like a

little fun thing I did for the blog. And I need to update my about section. I'm

sure it's very old. And the English--

well, I wanted to do that just in Hebrew because I'm in Israel, but Daniel,

being American, he wanted his friends and family to be able to enjoy it do, so

he convinced me to do, like, another version of it in English. But it's so hard

to maintain--

FERNHEIMER:--two--

SHAKRA:--two blogs, one in Hebrew, one in English, and I think at some point,

I'll just, like--I left the English one. Like, I just didn't continue with it.

FERNHEIMER:Google Translate's pretty good these days.

SHAKRA:Yeah, that's it. There's Google Translate, and yeah. I'm just working on

my Hebrew one.

FERNHEIMER:And what about Arabic? You chose not to do it in Arabic. Was it a

big deal or not a big deal?

SHAKRA:It is a big deal. I can't do it in Arabic, actually, because I'm a bad

Arab. (laughter) I am. I'm very bad in Arabic. I don't--it's like--I think it's

from school, I guess, where I learned at the Friends School, and we had

Arabic class. It's like, you know, being in America and having Arabic class or

Hebrew class. It's not strong. They don't give you all the good basic or, like,

make you good at Arabic. I think I've always been bad in learning Arabic. I

wasn't a good student. I don't know. Like, everything here is in Hebrew--the TV

shows. The TV's in Hebrew mostly. Well, at least, when I grew up, it was mostly

in Hebrew. We had, like, Arabic channels, but as a kid, I watched the cartoons

in Hebrew. I watched--I heard music in Hebrew. I'm, like--we're so close to Tel

Aviv that everything is Hebrew all around me, that I didn't feel like I needed

the Arabic so much, so--

FERNHEIMER:--what did you all speak at home--

SHAKRA:--it's Arabic but it's mixed with a lot of Hebrew words. So, you know,

when you hear Arabic in--I don't know--I guess in Morocco or other places, like,

they use a lot of words in French because they were French-occupied?

That's Jaffa. We use a lot of words in Hebrew and we don't call it (Hebrew), we

call it (Hebrew), which is the--

FERNHEIMER:--( Hebrew)--

SHAKRA:--(Hebrew) and (Hebrew), like, Hebrew and Arabic mixed together. And you

can walk here, and if you listen to people talking in Arabic, you'll hear words

in Hebrew and you'll, like, understand part of their conversation. Anyway, I've

never been strong in Arabic. I don't know how to write. Like, I can try, but I'm

so bad at it. I'm--like, every word will be not great. Like, it'll be wrong. I

can read but mostly I won't understand the fusha, the higher Arabic language.

And I can understand--

FERNHEIMER:--it sounds like the literary register--

SHAKRA:--yeah, the literary. And I can, I can talk in Arabic mostly with Jaffa

people and maybe from other areas in

Israel, but it'll be hard for me to understand them. Even at my work as a

pharmacist, I had--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, what about in Jerusalem? Because--

SHAKRA:--in Jerusalem, they had a lot--

FERNHEIMER:--the dialect is different--

SHAKRA:--it is very different--

FERNHEIMER:--from Jaffa and--

SHAKRA:--it is--

FERNHEIMER:--and Uz.

SHAKRA:Yes. And I remember having some problems at the beginning where I had to

learn a lot of new words. A customer comes, he speaks to me in Arabic because

I'm Arab and I try to, like, help him, and then he asks something for his

something, like--I don't know, like, what is that something? I don't know what

he needs. So I'd ask my colleagues who are Arabs from Jerusalem, "Help me." And

yeah, mostly Arabs think I'm a Jew who learned Arabic.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, interesting.

SHAKRA:And they praise me for my Arabic. But then--

FERNHEIMER:--so they read you phenotypically as Jewish?

SHAKRA:As Jewish. Even here in Jaffa, like, how I dress and how I act, they,

like, start talking to me in Hebrew and then they talk to me in Arabic and

they're like, "Oh,

wait a minute." So they talk to me in Arabic, they think I learned Arabic, but

when they discover I'm actually Arab, they, like, look at me, frowning. "Why is

your Arabic broken?" That's what I, like--I got asked a lot of times a lot of

times. "Why is your Arabic broken?" I don't know. I guess it is. And so that's

why I'll--(laughs)--never write a blog post in Arabic, but I do here and there

put some, like, Middle Eastern-inspired recipe.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Can we talk about the love of knafeh? (laughter) And all

things connected to it, because every time something comes up--the cheesecakes

and the, like, bars and the--for those listening who are not familiar with

knafeh, I'm going to turn it over to Hussein to explain what knafeh is and why

it is important, and I will just sit here and salivate as he does that.

SHAKRA:Oh, knafeh. I must admit, Jaffa people love

knafeh, and from a very young age, I was finicky about it. I didn't try it until

a very late age of maybe when I started baking and wanted to discover more

flavors and, you know, then I realized, like, "Huh. The family really loved

knafeh. I should try it, like, just once." And when I tried it, I was like, "Oh,

knafeh." What is it? It's a cheese basically that you melt and you--it's melted

and cooked with kadayif--kadayif noodles or kadayif--it's grounded kadayif,

which is like a--how do you explain kadayif? It's made out of water, flour--

FERNHEIMER:--it's like filo dough--

SHAKRA:--it's like--yeah, it's like a filo dough, but it's very--it's noodles

or just chopped completely to be--

not chopped, grounded to be--

FERNHEIMER:--shredded--

SHAKRA:--shredded, yeah--to be, like, soft. And the version that you find here

in Jaffa or, like, all the, you know, Israeli places are the one with the

noodles, the kadayif noodles. You cook it with the cheese that is usually

half-goat, half-cow. Goat and cow? Yeah, half, half. And the cheese is, is

supposed to be very, very, very stretchy when you cook it. If it's not stretchy,

it's not good cheese. And very sweet when you--after you're done cooking it, you

add sugar syrup to it, and you eat it as is or put it in a pita--(laughs)--and

it's supposed to be very filling. I remember my pilgrimage

for knafeh was to Shekhem--

FERNHEIMER:--Nablus--

SHAKRA:--Nablus, yeah. Shekhem in Hebrew. See how I first think in Hebrew and

then, like, "Wait, what's the word in Arabic?" (laughter) So yeah, and--

FERNHEIMER:--what is it--

SHAKRA:--in Hebrew? Shekhem.

FERNHEIMER:Shekhem. And Arabic?

SHAKRA:Nablus.

FERNHEIMER:It is Nablus, okay.

SHAKRA:Yeah, like in English, Nablus. It is said after, like, I researched it

that the best knafeh is made in Nablus, that, like, a lot of people will say it

originated there. But it's debatable, you know? The Turks will say it was

invented in Turkey. Syria will say, "No, we had it first." Like, everyone--I

mean, it's a Middle Eastern thing. Everyone wants its origin to be theirs. But

here in this area, the best knafeh is found in Nablus, and they have both kinds,

the one with the noodles and the one

with the shredded kind, the grounded one. And I remember going there one day and

deciding, "I have to try all the knafeh--(laughter)--over there to see what's

the best." And I went to the old city. There's an old--have you been to Nablus?

FERNHEIMER:Yes.

SHAKRA:There's an old city there.

FERNHEIMER:It's beautiful.

SHAKRA:And there's (Hebrew) or knafeh (Hebrew). I can't remember the name

exactly. But it's like--(laughs)--a very touristy place. It's very fun to go

there--where they--you can see them working on it, making it on this big

stove--like, big flame--and they have these big round plates where they heat the

cheese and then they flip it to, like--you know, you put the cheese first and

then the kadayif. So you melt the cheese and then you flip it and then you cut

it. It's just--you have to go there to see the process. It's really fun.

And then they transfer it right next to it, right next to them to the store,

where you see a big--it's not a line because, you know, there's Israel. There's

no lines here. A big crowd that's just, like, surrounding the cashier, who is

also the guy who cuts the knafeh for you, and he cuts the knafeh and he sells it

to you and, like, everyone comes there. It says it's, like, very cheap and

very--not nourishing--it, like, fills you up when you're really hungry in the

middle of the day and you need something to just fill up so you can keep

working. And that's how, like, it started to be so popular. Very, very sweet.

You really fill up from it, and if you want, you can have it in a pita, which is

very weird also.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, we--

SHAKRA:--it's like having ice cream in a pita--(laughs)--

FERNHEIMER:--we saw it for the first time in the mall--

SHAKRA:--here--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, the--in the--in Tel Aviv--

SHAKRA:--in Tel Aviv, uh-huh, okay--

FERNHEIMER:--they have the knafeh kaak.

SHAKRA:Oh, the kaak, the Lebanese one.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:That's Lebanese kind. They put it in kaak

and--who started it? An Arab chef named Nuf, I think? No. I forgot her name.

There was a chef that was on Master Chef, the TV show.

FERNHEIMER:Here in Israel?

SHAKRA:Here in Israel. She--I think she won, and then she started this place up

north with knafeh in kaak. The kaak, she made from her--as they did in her

family in Lebanon.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SHAKRA:Yeah, she brought the heritage here, and it's very popular. I tried it,

of course. (laughs) It's very nice. And I guess now, it's, it's being sold here

in Tel Aviv. I didn't have to go up north.

FERNHEIMER:(laughter) It's like a very sweet grilled cheese.

SHAKRA:Yeah, yeah. And so, yeah, so there's--(Hebrew), knafeh (Hebrew). You can

try it and just have the experience with the knafeh. And then we went to try it

three more places the same day. Four knafehs, I think I ate.

FERNHEIMER:You must've had a sugar headache

later.

SHAKRA:Yes. (laughs) A sugar high and just couldn't breathe anymore. I was,

like, so full. And yeah, really, really fun. I remember deciding who's the best

knafeh there, and then you can actually go back with ingredients. You can get

the (Hebrew)--

FERNHEIMER:--cheese--

SHAKRA:--the cheese that is half-goat, half-cow from there, where

it's--sometimes you get it salty and you need to--

FERNHEIMER:--remove the salt--

SHAKRA:--remove the salt by putting it in water for a day or two, and you get

the kadayif from there too and you just can do it at home whenever you want.

It's really, really fun. And so that's the knafeh, and I decided, like, "Oh,

maybe I should just do recipes that are, you know--that celebrate knafeh

somehow. Like, that they have the flavor of the knafeh. They have the kadayif

and the cheese, the kind of cheese in it--cheesecake."

And I remember doing an entrement. It's a French mousse cake where you have,

like, four or five of different layers, different in texture, different in

flavors. And it's like a French cake I learned in school and it takes some

time--it takes some to make. It's very intricate. It's like you do the sponge

cake and then the crunchy layer and then the creamy layer and then the mousse

layer and then the cover, the glaze, and it takes time and you need to be smart

about the flavors. They need to work together, and the textures are very

different from each other so, like, the bite usually is heavenly. Really, I love

mousse cakes. And I decided to make a Middle Eastern one. (laughs) So I used the

noodles, the kadayif noodles. I did the

cheesecake in it. It was sweet. It was flaky. I put pistachios in it because

usually on the knafeh, they put the--either pistachio or pistachio ice cream.

Like, pistachio usually comes with it. Like, it's decorated with it.

FERNHEIMER:Are you a fan of the rose water?

SHAKRA:Yeah, I'm a fan of the rose water, but I know a lot of people don't like

it, so--

FERNHEIMER:--some people like also orange blossom in the water, right--

SHAKRA:--yeah, yeah, you can use either rose water or orange blossom. I like

them both, I think more the rose water. And I thought maybe I should use it in

that cake, but then I was like, "Some people might not, you know, go for it." So

I didn't do it. I reserve it for, like, doing my mom cooking--my mom's cooking

with it, whatever she taught me, like the semolina cakes and the (Hebrew),

hilbe. It

all uses that rose water.

FERNHEIMER:What is hilbe?

SHAKRA:Oh, that's fun. It's like a semolina cake with fennel seed.

FERNHEIMER:Fennel? Wow.

SHAKRA:It's very bitter. You're not--you usually--what do you use fennel seeds

for in cooking, right?

FERNHEIMER:Fennel seeds. I'm trying to think. Like, sometimes in curry kind of thing--

SHAKRA:--yeah, it's--

FERNHEIMER:--to create a complex--

SHAKRA:--it's not for sweets.

FERNHEIMER:Not usually.

SHAKRA:Yeah. So my mom makes a cake out of it. She puts it in a semolina cake,

and with the syrup sugar--sugar syrup, it's very--it's, like, sweet, but you get

that bitter taste of the fennel seed, and the fennel itself is supposed to be,

like, very good for you, healthy. But I always remind my mom that with all the

sugar that you have in the cake, this is not healthy. (laughter) But it's a cute

idea that you're trying to sell this as healthy, but it's not.

It's very tasty. I remember doing a blog post about it on my blog with another

blogger in Israel, a Jewish one, Oogionet. Do you know her?

FERNHEIMER:No. Oogionet?

SHAKRA:That's how she called her blog. It's so cute. Oogio-net.

FERNHEIMER:Which means, like, little cake?

SHAKRA:In Hebrew, it's little cake, but she changed the net to, like, Internet. On-net.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, instead of (Hebrew), which is like a diminutive in Hebrew.

Oogi--anyway, this is--

SHAKRA:--it is--

FERNHEIMER:--linguistic play on words.

SHAKRA:It is, it is.

FERNHEIMER:Very sweet.

SHAKRA:It's a very smart play, and yeah, she's very successful here in Israel,

one of the biggest blogger in Israel, and she loves, like, Middle Eastern stuff,

and she always tries to do--how do you say it? When you work together?

FERNHEIMER:Collaboration.

SHAKRA:Collaboration.

Yeah, with me, and with the Arab world side of it. And I, like, try to think,

like, "Let's see, what, what does my mom make that would make her happy?" And

then I'm like, "Oh, the fennel seed cake. It'll be interesting. They don't--she

probably doesn't know it." I remember coming to her and I'm, like, telling her,

"Today we're going to do this fennel seed cake," and she's like, "What? No, you

can't use that. It's very, very bitter. I don't think you can use that in cake."

I'm like, "No, no, let's try it. You'll enjoy it." And she got so excited about

it. She uploaded on her Instagram, I remember, and people were like, "What? What

is that? How do you use that? You can eat that in cake?" There were,

like--Israeli people were, like, baffled by it, but it's very famous in the Arab world.

FERNHEIMER:When you say Israeli people, do you mean Jewish people?

SHAKRA:Jewish people. Sorry, yeah. Jewish people were very, like, surprised by

it. They didn't know it,

and it was fun, like, bringing something new to, like, "Hey, people, look what

we can do. Like, this is new to you." And whoever tried the recipe, I think they

enjoyed it.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:So that--I mean, that brings me back to kind of a question that we

haven't quite answered, but I'm curious about, like, what you see--like, what

you're going for with the blog. Like, what is your goal? Part of it, it sounds

like, is preserving the recipes so you can come back to them--

SHAKRA:--yeah, yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--perfect them and--

SHAKRA:--a big part of it.

FERNHEIMER:But it sounds like there's something else going on there too, in

terms of, I don't know, your audience, who you see and--who you see that

audience as and what you hope to do for them by bringing them something new? So

tell me about that. Who do you imagine that audience to be? What's--

SHAKRA:--well, okay. I know that my blog is--speaks to a certain type of

audience. It's not for everyone. It's--

every recipe I put there is very long, okay? And usually, it's kind of

complicated. Yeah, I complicate--not that I complicate stuff. I actually write

it in the most convenient and very informative way. I just--I don't like recipes

where you tell you, "Do this and that, and that's it." And then you're like--my

head starts thinking, "Wait, what if I--it gets to this point? What should I

do?" There's no information. There's not enough information. So I write with a

lot of information, but a little complicated than usual. I don't have simple

cakes. I don't have five-minute cakes or cakes with five ingredients only. No,

when you look at the ingredients, you'll see that there's at least thirty.

(laughter) It's very long, it's very complicated, it's going to take you time.

But I always promise if you try it out, even if you don't have the skills or,

like, you know, you're afraid, try it. Just try.

You'll be surprised that it's achievable and you'll--eventually, you'll enjoy

it. And that's the people that my blog is focused on, people who want more,

people who, like, don't want the fast recipe. They want to invest in something,

invest a few days, let's say, because I always tell people, "Bake this in a few

days. This is not a one-evening baking session. Bake it in a few days, and it's

a long process, and in the end, I promise you you'll enjoy a very intricate cake

that you only can go and usually buy it in shops." And yeah, most of the people

who follow me are people who are looking for these kind of recipes, like chef

recipes or--you know.

FERNHEIMER:

But there's--it sounds like there's also a cultural component too. Like--

SHAKRA:--I try to put in the cultural, but it's not strong. (laughter) I need

to do it more. I love flavors. Like, my blog is, like, resting upon flavors and

that's a starting point for me. I start with flavors and then I decide what to

do. And--but it's also very French for an Israeli Arab. (laughter) It's very

French. I, like--I--

FERNHEIMER:--your recipes are very French.

SHAKRA:Yes. I also explain how to make a French croissant--(laughter)--which,

like, I think it's my longest blog post. It's very, very, like, specific and it

tells you about temperatures and what to do in your kitchen and what ingredients

to use, and if you use something else, sorry. It won't work for you. You have to

get this specific brand. And it's very long and I say to people, "It will take

you a few tries. Don't think you'll succeed in the

first try because it took me, like, thirty before I got my first successful

croissant." And it's very French. (laughter) But I enjoy it because it's very

complicated. It's very--it was a challenge for me. I remember spending a whole

winter in Jerusalem, a whole month, all of January just making croissants day

after day after day after day until I perfected it. I got to this point where I

had the best croissant and I'm happy. And then from there, I sometimes try to,

you know, take it to a place where I can put myself in it. Like, okay, I did the

croissant. Let's put some pistachios in it. So I did the pistachio-filled

croissant. Oh, it was so good. And then I have, like--how do we do? An index?

Appendix? What is it? When you add to--like, you finish an article and you want

to add on it.

FERNHEIMER:Like,

a footnote? Or addendum? Addendum?

SHAKRA:I don't know, something. Like, it's an addition. It's like--it rests

upon the blog post, but it's a different blog post where you explain how to make

different types of croissant or different fillings, and that's what I did. And

there, I got my--you know, what I wanted to do with it. Like, the pistachio got

in there, and I was happy. Yes. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:So you've been doing the blog now for how many years?

SHAKRA:Seven?

FERNHEIMER:And you've got, like, a lot of followers, right? And I will confess,

I am not the follower who makes the recipes. I'm the follower who looks at the

beautiful pictures and likes the stories that go--

SHAKRA:--thank you--

FERNHEIMER:--along with it. So, like, there's a whole kind of secondary

community that comes up.

SHAKRA:Yeah, there is that community. I have, like--you're not alone. I have

people--just this week, someone wrote to me, "This looks

wonderful. I will never make it, but it looks wonderful."

FERNHEIMER:(laughter) "And I just want to appreciate how beautiful it is and

how delicious it looks and I will fantasize about one day tasting--"

SHAKRA:"--tasting it--"

FERNHEIMER:"--something like this--"

SHAKRA:--exactly. Exactly, the same words I hear all over every time, and it's

so--just so funny. It's so cute. I love these people. It's like, "This is

awesome. Let us taste it. I'm not going to do--I'm not going to go through the

hassle, but it looks wonderful." (laughter) I appreciate that too. (laughs) I

wish they would go in the kitchen and try it out. (laughter) But yeah.

FERNHEIMER:One day, when the kids are bigger.

SHAKRA:Yeah, yeah, that's a project for someday. And yeah, and what--I wanted

to say something about it. I forgot.

FERNHEIMER:Let me ask another question and maybe it'll come back to you. I

think before we started recording, even before we started pretending to

record--(laughter)--since I goofed the recorder initially, you said something

offhand that I thought was very important,

which is that for you, this kind of baking is healing.

SHAKRA:It is.

FERNHEIMER:And here we are in a place which is--(laughs)--by definition, hard.

Right? Jaffa is hard. It's--you know, Israel is hard.

SHAKRA:Israel is hard, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Arab/Israeli relations, I don't--you know.

SHAKRA:I'm--being a minority here is not fun. You can feel the hate sometimes,

and I think a few years ago, we really felt the hate, I think, for the first

time. Like, Jaffa people here always feel like we're a part of Israel. You know,

we grew up with Jews all surrounding us. We celebrate, you know, with them the

holy days. My mom makes--(laughs)--you know, the holiday cookies. You know, the

hamantaschen--in our kitchen, an Arab kitchen. So we always felt a part of

everything. And then suddenly, a few years ago, there were the--what was it?

There was a war that was going on.

FERNHEIMER:There's so--(laughs)--many ways.

SHAKRA:

Yes, there's so many wars that I can't remember which one. The one with Gaza

where they really bombarded Gaza. And it was tough, and I think--

FERNHEIMER:--is this 2018, 2019--

SHAKRA:--eighteen, '19? Yeah, I think it's about that time. And Jaffa was also

under fire. There were, like, these talks where--rumors about people from Bat

Yam coming to Jaffa to break windows and hurt Arabs and, you know, we're not

terrorists here. We're, like, normal people who are afraid. We're, like, hiding

in our hoses and, like, didn't want to go and fight people who are coming to

fight us. Like, we're usually very peaceful. And I remember it's, like, at that

time, I kind of stopped baking or blogging because I just, like, felt so much

hate online, so much hate on the network, on social networks, that I just didn't

want to be, like, fake or, like, just

posting a cake. "Here's a cake." Like, it's--I didn't feel like it was the right

time. I was, like, really into my blog at that time. But a lot of my followers

suddenly started writing me and they were, like, "Where are you? You have a

voice here to be heard. Talk. Let us know what's happening. Talk about the

situation." Like, I do sometimes talk about stories here and there that I go

through in my life, in my blog, and then I--you know, it ends in a

recipe--(laughter)--which is fun. But yeah, it gives me a space to open up. It's

like, "Dear Diary, this is what I'm going through." So after a month of not

saying anything or not talking or not posting anything, I decided, like, "Let's

talk about the situation." And I wrote about my feelings about everything. I'm

usually not--I'm not into politics. I'm not--I don't like to talk about

politics. I don't like to talk about the situation here.

I like love, not--like, love living in my bubble, and just, like, let me be in

the kitchen. Let me bake. Don't tell me what's happening around me. Like,

sometimes the world can be burning. I'm in the kitchen. I don't want to know. I

don't want to know. And suddenly--

FERNHEIMER:--as long as the kitchen's not burning--

SHAKRA:--yeah. (laughter) And then I'm, like, writing this post about, like--I

called it my pink--(Hebrew)--my pink glasses, which, you know, you can

understand. It's like how I see the world. And I put this lovely pink onto my

cake, everything pink outside. You see cherries on top, and there--I decided the

whole background will be pink. Everything pink in the picture. I've never made

something so pink in my life. (laughter) But when you cut it, it's all green

inside. It's all pistachio. (laughter) It's like a surprise

contrast of colors suddenly. And I talked about situation in Israel and how we

felt in Jaffa as part of, like, you know, the ongoing situation and everything

that was, like, scared to us, and how it felt in Gaza, how my neighbors in

Jerusalem were talking about--I remember I was sitting there at--you know,

minding my plants, watering my plants, and then I heard my neighbors talking.

And the dad was saying--an old guy was saying, like, "Oh, poor kids in Gaza.

Like, they're killing them all there and they didn't do anything. Like, poor

kids." And his daughter was like, "Yeah, but still, better us than them--better

them than us," which was like--ugh, a little compassion wouldn't hurt you, lady.

It just--yeah, I just talk, and talking about everything,

all my, like, angst about the situation. Suddenly I burst my bubble and I

finished it with, like, "You know what? I'm hoping for the best. I hope

everything will be okay. Going to keep doing my thing. Going to be a good Arab

boy here in Israel and, you know what? Here's a cake. Enjoy it." I'm like, just,

like, very exasperated. And I was afraid of the comments of people. I was, like,

"This is, like, really opening up--"

FERNHEIMER:--very vulnerable--

SHAKRA:--yeah, very vulnerable--and most people were like (Hebrew)?

FERNHEIMER:Like--

SHAKRA:--supporting--

FERNHEIMER:--supporting?

SHAKRA:Yeah, they were very supportive. Maybe one or two here were very,

like--you know, they were on the other side of the spectrum and they were, like,

"Shame on you. How dare you speak like that. You really surprised me. This has been--

like, this is, like--it's like--you should be thankful you're living here and we

give you a space here." They were, like, very nasty. "But thank you for the

recipe. I'm going to try it." (laughter) Okay, you're welcome. Actually, yeah,

one of the nasty commenters made the cake and posted the cake in his--on his

Facebook and, like, really enjoyed it.

FERNHEIMER:So what do you make of that kind of moment?

SHAKRA:I, I don't know. It was very strange to me. He was, like, very against

me and my ideas, but you know what? There's something that somehow connected us,

which is, like, my cake. He made the cake. I, like--that was born out of this

living in my bubble in this situation where, like, oh, okay. Like, there's a

connection there. Maybe, you know, through cakes, we can connect more.

We can find a bridge to, like, do something better here. I even smiled and,

like, laughed about it. I talked about the other intifada where we threw rocks

on--like, we were throwing rocks on each other. Like, you know how Arabs or Jews

threw--throw rock when, like--at checkpoints or at--there were like--at that

time, the masjid.

FERNHEIMER:Which word? Sorry.

SHAKRA:The prayer. Where you go to prayer.

FERNHEIMER:The mosque?

SHAKRA:The mosque. Sorry. The mosque in Tel Aviv, and the Intifada--I don't

remember when--when a lot of Jews came and just, like, threw rocks on it.

It's--yeah, there's a lot of times--different times, you know, crazy times that

crazy shit happened. And I remember saying that maybe we should just throw cakes at

each other and call it a day.

FERNHEIMER:Oh my gosh. Can you imagine if everyone just threw the cakes? First

of all, it'd be way more delicious. (laughter)

SHAKRA:Yes. Like, no one gets harmed, and just, like, you get a cake on your

face, eat it, enjoy it, and relax. Chill. Enough, people. Enough with the rocks.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:I mean--yeah, I was even talking about on that blog post that, like,

even my brother is thinking of leaving the country suddenly, taking the family

and just moving away, and I was like, "Oh, maybe that's not a good--that's not a

bad idea." And then some Israeli followers, Jewish followers wrote to me on my

comments like, "If you need any help, we'll help you out. Talk to us. Like,

whatever you need, we're here for you. Like, if you want to leave the country, I

know how to do it for you. Like--" (laughs) At the beginning, I thought, like,

"Are they, like--do they want me just to leave the country so, like, get out of

here, one less Arab?

But then I, like, Googled them and, like, "Oh, no, they actually help people

just transfer if they're, like, doing it out of their goodness of their hearts,"

or something like that. Not--they don't want me to leave.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Everything here can be interpreted--

SHAKRA:--yeah, it's like--

FERNHEIMER:--in two ways--

SHAKRA:--everything has two sides here. Like, "Wait, what do you mean? You want

me to leave the country because you want more Jews here? Or you want to help me

leave the country because I don't feel safe here? Which one is it?" (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. So, I mean, I guess this brings me to a different kind of

question, which is, like, you know, you talk about the very strong French

influence on your baking and also sort of bringing the flavor profiles and the

ideas also from Middle Eastern traditions with the great shared love of

pistachio. But, you know, thinking in a more serious way, like, what is the

relationship between food and national identity and--you know, there's several

times in our conversation where, you know, we--

you can use Jewish and Israeli interchangeably sometimes, but that leaves, you

know, a fifth of the population out at least, right? The Arab-identifying Israelis.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:They identify in different ways, so I don't know you identify--if

you identify as Arab, Israeli, or Palestinian Israeli.

SHAKRA:I always identify as Israeli Arab, and I think after that one, that

specific blog post, I started identifying as, like, Israeli Palestinian. Like, I

don't see any other way. I, like--it's, it's, it's both, and I, I love both

sides. I enjoy both sides. I don't live in Palestine. I live in Israel and like,

you know, technically, and I do enjoy it. I love being an Israeli. It's like I

don't hate it like other people would hate Israel, but I also hate what Israel

is doing to Palestine, so it's like--it's conflicting. But then that conflict,

like, I think it dissipates--(laughs)--

when you go to the kitchen and make something that is from both worlds you like.

It's so easy to combine them and so easy to make new stuff that is like, "Hey,

if this works in the kitchen, why doesn't it work outside?" Like, I think flavor

wise or texture or--like, both worlds--me working with a Jewish Israeli on blog

posts. You know, there's ways to get out of it, but I don't know why we're so

stuck in the little things here. It's so sad. Yeah, but I think the kitchen--I

always think it could be the solution for everything here, just people baking or

cooking or sharing their recipes together. You know, Israelis--I know Jews here,

they come from Arab origins. They love, you know, the Arab food, and we Arab

here, we are so

interested and, you know, and very curious about the Jewish food, so, like, I

don't understand how we don't work. (laughter) We should work more together.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. I have a question for you. You talked in the part where the

recording wasn't working--but maybe we can get a little bit on here now--about

how your mom, when you were growing up here in Jaffa, would bake all kinds of things.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Palestinian cuisine, but also Jewish delicacies. I'm curious,

challah, does it enter the Arab world? It's so ubiquitous in Tel Aviv, right,

but can you get it in Jaffa?

SHAKRA:Of course you can. It's like sweet dough. I don't--we call it challah,

yeah, yeah. We love it. We--did I grow up on it? I can't remember in my

childhood if we used to have a lot of challah.

I think the more I entered the Jewish community, I learned more about challah

and learned to love it more. But it is known in Jaffa and we know it as sweet

bread and we do enjoy it. But I don't think we give it any thought of, like, you

know, being served on a--in Shabbat dinner or--I don't think that my family

knows even that it's--it has any meaning in, in, in Jewish religion. I think

it's just, like, "Oh, it's sweet and it's doughy. It's fun. We eat it." That's

it. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. I mean, I think about the other breads that come the other

way. Like, there's so much--sambousek and--you know, part of it is because these

Jews lived in the Arab world--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--for so long. But, you know, and the Yemenite called kubaneh and

jachnun and we use, like, very rich traditions.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:We have

taboon breads that--yeah.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:I don't know.

SHAKRA:I--yeah, I don't know. I guess--

FERNHEIMER:--well, we've been talking for a long time, and I know it's

exhausting to talk--(laughter)--too--

SHAKRA:--it's not that exhausting to talk about cakes.

FERNHEIMER:--(laughter)--it's very delicious--

SHAKRA:--very fun--

FERNHEIMER:--to think about them.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Are there--you know, I guess as we think about, you know, cuisine,

you think about it as a very hopeful place. And what do you think if--is the

role--you know, if you want to define Israeli food or foodways--

SHAKRA:--oh, okay--

FERNHEIMER:--you know, what is the role of Arab cuisine given that, you know, a

fifth of the population are Arab-identifying Israelis, however they

identify--you know, Arab Israeli, Israeli Palestinian--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--Palestinian Israeli. You know, how--whichever part of the

hyphenation comes first.

SHAKRA:(laughs) Yeah, I don't know how--do that--I

have no idea how to say it or how it defines it. But it exists here. It's like a

lot of the Israeli food, the Jewish food here is, like, you know--it started in

the Arab world, and we see it, like, in a lot of recipes and a lot of food they

sell here. And I think the new generation, sometimes they don't actually realize

where it comes from or where it originated from, and we come in, like, "Oh, oh,

they're selling this. Yeah, of course. I know it from home." And they're like,

"No, this is Jewish." Like, yeah, maybe you think it's Jewish, but, like, check

on the origin. It's not. And it got so mixed up, so I don't know. Maybe one day,

the hamantaschen will be mixed up in our traditions and we won't remember where

it's from. But yeah, a lot of Arab food is very--you know, they got secondary

here in the Jewish food and

everyone loves it because it originated there. Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, it's local.

SHAKRA:It is very local, and when you say Israeli food, it's just a mix of

everything. It's like Arab, Jewish, Iranian, Palestinian. It's Lebanese. It's

now Ethiopian. Now the Russian community is here. It's--they're--like, Israeli

food is just multicultural. Like, you can't--there's no Israeli food. (laughs)

It's--I think that's what makes it so special.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Well, are there things that I haven't asked you about that you want

to get on record?

SHAKRA:On the record? About the baking world?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, your baking, your family, anything. And this--you know, we can

continue. (laughter) But I also know it's exhausting and--we don't have to

continue today. It's the--

SHAKRA:--I don't know if I can add anything. It's--we talked about everything,

right? The blog--

FERNHEIMER:--we talked about the blog.

SHAKRA:My school.

FERNHEIMER:

Your school.

SHAKRA:My--how I got started--

FERNHEIMER:--I guess what's next--

SHAKRA:--oh, what's next?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, I mean, you decided that professionally baking is not for you,

that there's something about the element--at least, what I heard you say--the

element of anticipation, of kind of connecting--like, this real creative energy

of, you know, being inspired by the people you're baking for and tapping into

that energy, bringing that energy to what you're making for them, and kind of

seeing that closed full circle--I know I'm mixing all kinds of metaphors.

SHAKRA:No, no, you can--yeah.

FERNHEIMER:When you, when you, when you see the delight--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--when you're presented with them, so--but there's also something

about sharing with a much broader audience through your blog.

SHAKRA:It's something just that I--you know, through recent years, through

blogging, that I discovered that is fun, but it's not my goal, actually. I see

myself sometimes, like, if I stop the blog, it'll be fine. Like, this is not my

calling. My calling

is baking inside the kitchen for the family and I think I just become a better

baker from them, because of them. It's--they better me. They make me better.

They make me work more, like, on being more creative, being, like, "How do I

surprise them this time?" It's like--it doesn't end. And, yeah, I--they're very

inspiring, and most of my blog posts, you can see, are usually my sister loves

this thing, and I thought maybe I'll try to do it in a cake form. Like, this is

how it gets created. And yeah, it just--this whole thing is more for the--for my

family and friends than actually for me. And yeah, I really think I owe it all

to them.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Well, thank you so much--

SHAKRA:--my pleasure--

FERNHEIMER:--Hussein.

This has been awesome. I--maybe another time, maybe by Zoom, we'll catch up and

kind of redo the early part that we didn't get.

SHAKRA:Yeah. I don't remember what I talked about in the beginning.

FERNHEIMER:You--well, I mean, if you have energy, we can do a little bit--

SHAKRA:--sure--

FERNHEIMER:--now.

SHAKRA:I can. I'll just go to the bathroom.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, let me--

SHAKRA:--and then you'll have to remind me.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, no problem. And yeah.

SHAKRA:Oh, sorry. I didn't offer you to eat anything. We have these from Cypress.

FERNHEIMER:Oh my goodness. What is that? It looks--are those, like, Turkish delight?

SHAKRA:Yeah, I think so, something like that.

FERNHEIMER:Thank you.

SHAKRA:Good dates. Water?

FERNHEIMER:I'm good. Maybe after. Thank you.

SHAKRA:And I thought about something. We didn't talk about the American inspiration.

FERNHEIMER:Yes.

SHAKRA:(laughs) I have that a lot too.

FERNHEIMER:These are very good.

SHAKRA:Yeah. (laughs)

Do you know Christina Tosi?

FERNHEIMER:No.

SHAKRA:So she's a very famous baker in America.

FERNHEIMER:Tossi? T-O-S-S-I?

SHAKRA:I think T-O-S-S-I. Maybe. I think if you just write it this way, it'll

correct it for you. She owns the Milk Bar. Do you know the Milk Bar? The--she

was the--I think she was the one who invented cereal-flavored ice cream--cereal

milk flavored ice cream.

FERNHEIMER:Okay, cool. No, I don't know, but I'm learning.

SHAKRA:(laughs) So she has this really, really cool birthday cake, funfetti

birthday cake, vanilla and funfetti, and it's just, like,

three-layered, small, and it just looks really nice. And I had an American

friend here who had a birthday and they really--they--he really likes the cake.

It--like, he always raves about it, and I decided to make him for his birthday.

And I looked up a recipe--her recipe--and made it for the first time. It looked

amazing but it was horrible. (laughter) I made the blog post, everything. I

wrote about it. I didn't taste it. Like, I even published it, and only

afterwards, I tasted it, and I'm like, "Oh my God."

FERNHEIMER:What was wrong? Is it too sweet?

SHAKRA:It's too sweet, too buttery, and I'm like, "That's not an Israeli

palate." The Israeli here wouldn't accept--to eat it--like, wouldn't want to

have it. It's just too much. And I remember

a follower tried to make the recipe and she wrote me. "Listen, this is too

sweet. I just can't. One bite and I'm done. I can't handle it." I'm like, "You

know what? You're right. This just doesn't work in Israel, and I'm sure it works

in America," and I even--I remember one of my trips to America, I went to her

place to try the cake to see if I made it wrong or, like, you know, when I baked

it, it was something I got wrong. But no, that's the flavor. It's so sweet.

FERNHEIMER:Yes.

SHAKRA:And it just doesn't work with the Israeli palate. And so I recreated it,

making it the softest, most, like, subtle vanilla type of cake, and it's

actually one of my favorite cakes. (laughter) Really, it's become so good, and

I, I, I did the recipe version two-point-oh--(laughs)--on my blog post and

people love it. Like, they do it and it's really a good recipe. And the funny

thing, it

was born out of hate--again, Israel. I remember being in Jerusalem, walking back

home from work, and this Haredi guy asked me--looked at me and, like, I don't

know what he saw in me. He just said, "Excuse me," and I'm like, "What?" And

then he didn't answer. I--he didn't answer, so I kept walking, he kept walking,

and then he turned back. "Say, are you Jewish?" And I told him, "No." And he's,

like, asking me. "So what are you doing here? You know, in Jerusalem or Israel."

I didn't answer and just kept going. And it's like--it really stayed with me,

and I'm like, "You know what? I'm going to write about it, make a cake and write

about it." I did--made that cake, and I remember being angry and being like,

"Yeah, this guy just asked me blah-blah-blah, and, like, it was a little rude.

And you know what, dude? You might be rude and yeah,

you don't understand what I'm doing here. But you know what? I can, I can make

cakes, and they're usually really tasty, and I do it for people I like. I don't

like you and I'm not going to make you a cake." And that's how I finished my

blog post, and then I gave the recipe. Anyway, it's funny that sometimes,

recipes were born out of--(laughs)--frustrations.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. And do you find that writing process, though, and turning to

the recipe, like, cathartic?

SHAKRA:Yeah. Yeah, yeah. It's like just working on the recipe--it--I don't know

how to say it, but it just helps you relax, helps you focus, helps you just deal

and, like, think stuff over or, like, just accept things how they are. Like, I

remember that incident just, like, left me, like, grr. It's so annoying, so

annoying. And then, like, writing about it, it's just like, "This is how I deal.

I dealt with it. Here we go. I wrote about it and I created this really good

recipe and really proud of it, and here you go, world. I share it with you.

Enjoy." So I don't know. It helps me deal--(laughs)--with what I go through here

in Israel.

FERNHEIMER:Well, and it sounds like it also gives you an opportunity to turn--I

mean, this may sound cheesy and trite--but to turn something awful--

SHAKRA:--into something better--

FERNHEIMER:--something beautiful and delicious.

SHAKRA:Yeah. I guess so.

FERNHEIMER:Which, you know, we can debate about--(laughter)--the nourishing

qualities of cake and their sugar, but there is a kind of soulfulness there--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--and a kind of--I mean, you hear this expression in American

English anyway--about feeding the soul. I don't know if something exists in

Hebrew or Arabic, but--

SHAKRA:--I agree--

FERNHEIMER:--that it may not give you all the nutrients--(laughs)--you need,

but it touches somewhere, and it does allow that--

SHAKRA:--yeah. It is food for the soul.

FERNHEIMER:

But yeah. So if you have energy and time and you want to talk about the food

from your soul, we kind of missed the beginning part with your mom and your

family background and if we could kind of--

SHAKRA:--so I talked about my background and how my mom got married at the age

of fifteen, and for ten years, she was trying to have a baby. But she couldn't,

until ten years later, I came by. She had five miscarriages, and then when I

came by, the doctor told her that if you--she wants more kids, she needs to work

on it right now, and she--that's how I got my siblings. We're just one year, one

year and a half apart from each other. We grew up very close to each other.

We're still friends to this day, and we all live nearby in Jaffa.

Have we talked about the--did we miss also the thing where I said that Jaffa

people don't--

FERNHEIMER:--(laughs)--yeah--

SHAKRA:--don't leave the house?

FERNHEIMER:Tell me about that, about your mom and her--

SHAKRA:--her drama--

FERNHEIMER:--how she reacted to your decision to go pursue your studies in

Jerusalem. (laughs)

SHAKRA:So in the Arab world, or at least here in Jaffa, as much as I know, we

stay close to the family. We don't go far. And I remember at the age of

twenty-five, when I decided to move to Jerusalem to pursue my pharmacology

studies, my mom took it hard. Like, she was very supportive, don't get me wrong.

She really loved the idea. But losing her son to Jerusalem--(laughs)--was harsh.

She spent five days--the first five days crying on my old bed in my bedroom and

that's what I heard from my brothers. And the day I had to leave,

the whole family--my siblings, their spouses, my parents--came with me to just

send me off to Jerusalem and say goodbye, see my new apartment, and yeah, it was

a harsh forty-five-minutes--(laughter)--drive. And to be honest, they hardly

even came to visit. I just came to visit here almost every week, so they never--

FERNHEIMER:--because of the mental distance or because of the challenge of Jerusalem--

SHAKRA:--the mental distance, yeah, yeah. Forty minutes, it just seems so far

for them. I got used to it, you know, but yeah, for them, it's so far. Everyone

lives just five minutes away. Like, forty minutes away by driving? Ugh, that's a

lot. Yeah, and that's my family background, I guess.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Can you talk a little bit about those food traditions and your mom's

kind of--

SHAKRA:--yeah. My mom is like a foodie in the house. She makes the best

casseroles, best Arab dishes, Palestinian dishes, stuffed--stuffed grape leaves

and stuffed zucchinis, which are my favorite. Mulukhiyah, which is like a

very--what was the words--

FERNHEIMER:--slimy--(laughs)--

SHAKRA:--I always think snotty, but it's not snotty. It's slimy.

FERNHEIMER:I mean, they're equally--(laughter)--unappealing, but slimy is more

texture-based. Snotty is more like--

SHAKRA:--slimy--

FERNHEIMER:--bodily--

SHAKRA:--green soup. (laughter) That is very weird to look at but very tasty. She--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, very healthy--

SHAKRA:--very, very healthy, yeah, although we eat it with pita sometimes. Pita

is less healthy. But yeah, with chicken and rice, very good. Oh, she makes the

best tummaniyeh --

FERNHEIMER:--rummaniyeh--

SHAKRA:--rummaniyeh, which is the dish

made out of eggplant, lentils, and pomegranate. It's like--I think it's a weird

combination, but it works so good. And yeah, she's, like, considered as a--one

of, like, the beloved cook or baker here in Jaffa, although she doesn't sell.

But, like, the family comes and eat at her house. Her sisters and people in

Jaffa orders from her--not orders. Well, you know, they ask her nicely if she

can help them or make them a kaak el Eid, which is the cookies we eat on the

holidays. They are like ma'amoul. They're made of semolina dough and filled with

dates. Well, date paste. And she really knows how to make them the

best. They melt in your mouth. What else? Oh, now we are a big family. She has,

like, nine grandkids.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SHAKRA:Yeah, tfu-tfu.

FERNHEIMER:Tfu-tfu.

SHAKRA:(laughs) And every day, she bakes--she cooks something else. Like, it's

a different dish. She has this huge, huge--not--how do you say it? (Hebrew).

FERNHEIMER:Pot.

SHAKRA:Pot. She has, like, these huge pots that, like, you can find them

in--what, in restaurants?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:And she makes a big amount for, like, twenty people--nephews, their

kids, their spouses, their--

FERNHEIMER:--oh my gosh--

SHAKRA:--husbands. Almost daily, they come and eat at her place, and

it's--yeah, she's like a big kitchen lady. She really could have opened a

restaurant here. She would've been, like--I always called her Mama

Shakra--(laughter)--the restaurant that, you know, people have missed here

because she has, like, the best

home, like, mother home feel.

FERNHEIMER:Cozy.

SHAKRA:Cozy cooking that--oh, it's being missed by--sorry, people, it's being

missed by the world. Like, really, really good stuff. And she--you know what?

She is really hard to follow. You can't recreate her recipes because she's, I

think, the only person that I know that cooks from feelings and from the heart.

She doesn't have any recipe written. It's all in her head. She--when she bakes

or cooks and I try to learn how to do it, she uses her hand as measurement. She,

like, pours the oil in her hand to show me how much. "You put this much." Like,

she just, like--it's a handful of oil. What's a handful of oil? It's not metric.

You can't really use it in a recipe. I can't write a recipe this way. I remember

for her birthday, I, I wanted to surprise her and just write all her recipes, like,

food and bakes, everything. And I was trying to learn from her, and it was just

so hard and I got so annoyed by, like, what she does in the kitchen. Every time

we wanted to learn it from the beginning, it changed.

FERNHEIMER:(laughter) Yeah, the difference--

SHAKRA:--it was something else--

FERNHEIMER:--between cooking and baking, right?

SHAKRA:Oh my God, even in baking. In baking. Even her cakes change. I don't

know how she does it. Like, every time, it's, like, even tastier than before,

and it's never the same recipe. It's like she adds a little thing here,

adds--subtracts something or uses this instead of that. And I don't understand

it. She's like a true baker or cook. Like, she's amazing. I can never be there.

Like, I need my recipes. I'm sorry. I need them to be written. So I tried to do

this book and I somehow succeeded. I think it needs a lot of polishing and,

like, going through again and again, but I did, like, beautiful pictures. I wrote

the recipes and got her excited and happy. So I was happy. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Oh, that's a wonderful document for the family and--

SHAKRA:--it is, yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--for all the grandchildren and the brothers and the sisters--I

mean, do you--you have mentioned something about who does the cooking and who's

allotted to the kitchen--(laughter)--in traditional Palestinian foodway, so--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--so you--tell me--you know, your mom was doing all these amazing

things, but you came to it later in life.

SHAKRA:I'm really--I'm so sad that I came to it so late in my life. She

always--she makes fun of it now. Like, "If I knew this was what you wanted or,

you know, what you're good at, I would've taught you from the beginning, from

the get go." Like, I told her, "Mom, thirty years. Thirty years, you haven't

taught me anything, like, at least to turn on an oven. I don't know how--I

didn't know how to do that until I was thirty because I was treated as a prince."

Arab culture. The man is the prince. Don't--he doesn't do anything at home. And

yeah, so I'm kind of sad, actually. If it would have started early in my life,

who knows, you know? I think the past--the path that I chose would've been

completely different if I knew, like, I'm good at baking and I want to pursue

it. Yeah, I don't think I would've gone to pharmacology or--and space physics.

Like, it would've been something else completely.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. You think that--like--well, we're circling back now. It sounds

like your mom was pretty supportive of your love--

SHAKRA:--she always supports my decisions. She's really, like--she gives me

everything I need. She--whenever I wanted to go learn something, she would,

like, enroll me. Piano, my drawing, whatever you want. She's--my parents are

very supportive. They always supported me. But I

think she's kind of happy I'm a pharmacist because the pharmacists and, you

know, the medicine world in the Arab world is very, very prestige, and now she

can tell, you know, her friends and family, "Yeah, my son is a pharmacist." So I

did that. She's happy--(laughs)--

FERNHEIMER:--so does that make room for there also to be the appreciation of

the kind of baking and the more high-level--

SHAKRA:--well, now she understands, like, how good I am at baking and, like,

"Oh wow, this son could've even gone--topped the prestige of pharmacology." She

could've, like--she--they do it all the time. Like, now they--I think they

sometimes forget I'm a pharmacist and tell people, "Yeah, he's a baker." No, I'm

not. (laughter) I just bake for fun. But yeah, they love me and they support it and--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah.

SHAKRA:Yeah. It's fun also to learn from her the recipes. She's now telling me

she perfected the kaak el Eid recipe. She promised me, she made it even better.

FERNHEIMER:So did she write it down is the question.

SHAKRA:She didn't, but she knows the, like, trick, and I didn't learn it yet,

and I'm like, "I have to learn it before it's too late. You have to go there and

learn it before she change it or something happens."

FERNHEIMER:God forbid. Tfu-tfu.

SHAKRA:Tfu-tfu-tfu. I need to learn it before she changes it. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SHAKRA:That's it about my mom.

FERNHEIMER:Well--

SHAKRA:--wonderful woman--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah. Well, it sounds like her love of experimenting and trying

new things and even the--you even talked about her trying--I love this image of

this very traditional--(laughter)--Palestinian woman who's known for her kaak el

Eid just being like, "You know, these hamantaschen I see in Tel Aviv? I'm going

to make those too."

SHAKRA:She loves hamantaschen and I'm with her. I'm like--I always--I have

this--we have the same--

FERNHEIMER:--and so what kind? Because there's, like, so many different kinds--

SHAKRA:--so--

no, we like the chocolate, but really like the pereg--how do you say it in

English? Poppyseed.

FERNHEIMER:Poppyseed.

SHAKRA:We love the poppyseed, me and her, and the rest of the family just like

the chocolate. I'm like, "No, poppyseed, come on."

FERNHEIMER:And so--and this is okay in your family? Because I've been in some

more traditional Muslim families, where pereg was--

SHAKRA:--what--

FERNHEIMER:--forbidden.

SHAKRA:Forbidden? Why?

FERNHEIMER:Because, you know, poppyseed has some kind of, I don't know,

connections to poppy and--

SHAKRA:--oh, I didn't know that. Wow. No, that's a first for me.

FERNHEIMER:In Khalil, in Hebron--

SHAKRA:--she said they don't touch it--

FERNHEIMER:--I remember we brought it and they wouldn't eat because--so thank

goodness, we had the prune, which is also traditional.

SHAKRA:Well, I didn't know that. I love poppyseed. It is so good. I

like--there's these cakes with poppyseed. Oh, they're amazing. I have nothing in

my blog with poppyseed and I'm like, "You know what? That's an idea. I should

work on it." But yeah, my mom never told me that it's not--well, my mom

is not traditional that way, I guess, because she loves to experiment, to try,

you know, doing the sufganiyot, the doughnuts for Hanukkah, or the hamantaschen.

But I remember she also--(laughs)--alcohol is forbidden, you know, in our

culture, and there are these chocolate with cherry liquor in them. You know what

I'm talking about. The ones that--

FERNHEIMER:--we live in Kentucky--

SHAKRA:--you eat--

FERNHEIMER:--they make them with bourbon inside.

SHAKRA:Oh, even better. (laughter) So--

FERNHEIMER:--although when we come here, I bring those and I bring also mints because--

SHAKRA:--mint, yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--there's no alcohol in the mints.

SHAKRA:So I know it's--we're not supposed to eat them. But my mom loves them.

(laughter) She just can't have enough of them, and I remember being young and, like,

tasting one. I'm like, "Oh my God, this is so good." And my mom, "Keep it a

secret. You're not supposed to eat it. (laughter) But isn't it good?" Like,

"Yes." And it's like our shared secret that we eat them without the rest of the

family knowing. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:I love it.

SHAKRA:It's ours. I know she likes it. She knows I like it. And we

always--like, if we have a chance to bring one another, we bring it to each

other. But we don't share it with the family because the rest of the family is

religious and they won't touch alcohol, so our secret. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:I love it. I love it.

SHAKRA:It's so sad because there's a lot of, you know, alcohol-based bakes that

is really fun to make, like baba rum, which is a French filled rum yeast cake.

So good, but I can't make it to the family--for the family because they won't

touch it because of the rum.

FERNHEIMER:Even though--well, the baking process cooks off the alcohol--

SHAKRA:--yeah, even--

FERNHEIMER:--it's still forbidden, right?

SHAKRA:It's supposed to be.

I tricked them sometime. I tell them, "Listen, the alcohol, I put alcohol, but,

you know, it evaporates. There's no alcohol now." So some of them will try, some

of them won't, so--but I have to respect their wishes, you know, and tell them, "Listen--"

FERNHEIMER:"--you have a choice--"

SHAKRA:"--there's alcohol--" Yeah. I sometimes try to substitute with milk but

it's not the same. Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Did you grow up religious?

SHAKRA:I actually--it's a funny thing. In Jaffa, it's becoming religious with

the years. I grew up here. It was very secular. Like, everyone was not

religious. Only my grandma was religious, and I decided to try it out and give

it a try for, like, a year or two, even. I was the only one in my family who

prayed five times a day.

FERNHEIMER:Did you go (Hebrew)?

SHAKRA:To where?

FERNHEIMER:Sorry, to--

SHAKRA:--to (Hebrew)?--

FERNHEIMER:--to the mosque--

SHAKRA:--to--yeah, I went to the mosque and I--me and my grandma used to pray

together and, like, there was some of the family used to make fun of us.

And after two years, I think I just found the light--(laughter)--and then, like,

understood, like, "Okay, this is not for me." I became more secular. And then

little by little, the--all of the family--uncles, aunts, parents, siblings--they

all became religious.

FERNHEIMER:Interesting. When was this?

SHAKRA:Just throughout the years. It's like more and more from, like, what?

From the age of fifteen, I guess. Twenty-five years ago.

FERNHEIMER:Interesting.

SHAKRA:From twenty years ago, all the way of becoming more religion--more

religious started.

FERNHEIMER:Where do you think you have--I know you--

SHAKRA:--I think--I blame the gentrification here in Jaffa. Like, the more we

felt insecure of more Jews coming here and taking over and, you know, buying

more apartments and living in, like, Jaffa, and we

felt like we're being pushed away. And I think the more pushed away they felt,

the more they turned to religion--

FERNHEIMER:--to hold on--

SHAKRA:--to hold onto something that, you know, this is us. This is our zehut.

FERNHEIMER:Identity.

SHAKRA:Identity. And, like, wait a minute, we're, like--this--I think a lot of

people became confused. I don't know. I think it's gentrification, although we

lived for many years secularly very good with Jews here. But I think, yeah,

Jaffa is--has changed so much. It is so different from what it used to be, and

it's nice that it's being so--like, it's--everything is new and it looks nicer,

but yeah, we lost a lot of the heart of it, and it's sad. It is a little. It's,

like, benefits and, you know--

FERNHEIMER:--but how you see it--even just in the last, like--

SHAKRA:--ten years--

FERNHEIMER:--ten years--

SHAKRA:--

yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--and the port has changed--

SHAKRA:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--so much.

SHAKRA:It's just amazing how everything changes here and, like, they're

building more and more and more new buildings here, and just--it's sad. Like,

yeah, sure, like, gentrify it. It's--now we understand it's nice because it's,

like, in front of the sea and there's the city and, yeah, it's--it has a lot of

potential. But yeah, like, it's--how do you say it? (Hebrew) who lived here

before. Like--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SHAKRA:--a lot of people are being turned away from their houses. Like--

FERNHEIMER:--at the price of--

SHAKRA:--the price of the people who lived here before. It's sad. There's a lot

of battles going on right now here in Jaffa on that matter. Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Oh. I hate to end things there, although it's accurate. (laughter)

SHAKRA:True. On that note--

FERNHEIMER:--on that note, back to the

kitchen--

SHAKRA:--back to the kitchen.

FERNHEIMER:To, to fantasize about how to bring it together. Thank you so much

for your time today.

SHAKRA:My pleasure.

FERNHEIMER:It's really amazing to listen to you talk about the role that--

SHAKRA:--I hope it helps. I actually doubted that I can speak about--a lot

about cake, but I guess I have--(laughs)--more to say about it--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah. Yeah, and I look forward maybe even to saying more later,

but thank you for today.

SHAKRA:My pleasure, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:And with that, I'm going to start the recorder. Thanks.

SHAKRA:And you'll find out that we didn't record anything.

FERNHEIMER:No--(laughter)--God forbid, God forbid. All right, Kopana, I'm

stopping here.

[End of interview.]