TRISTIN: All right, well, again, thank you for doing this interview with me,

and as we talk through, I hope we can have a--you know, just a fruitful

conversation about the experiences through COVID. And so, Pastor Gaines, if you

can just give us a little bit about yourself and who you are, what you do?

GAINES:Sure, I'm Richard Gaines, of course. I'm serving as the pastor of

Consolidated Baptist Church for the past twenty-seven years now, only church

I've ever pastored--

TRISTIN:Twenty-seven years.

GAINES:Twenty-seven years. I say to the congregation that I had black hair when

I came--(Tristin laughs)--now, it's pretty much all gray.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:But it's been a good journey for my family and I. I'm originally from

the state of Texas. Spent ten years in Corporate America in various sales and

marketing positions, production, and then was called into ministry in

1990, Halloween night, 1990--

TRISTIN:--Halloween night--

GAINES:--I acknowledged to the church publicly that God was calling me into

ministry. So I remained with the company until that following summer, and left

the company, and enrolled in seminary in 1991. Completed the master's program in

'95, and was called to pastor Consolidated Baptist Church here in Lexington,

Kentucky, in June of 1996, and we have been here ever since.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:My wife and I, my--our son has grown up here, he's twenty-eight now, and

was recently called to pastor a church in Detroit, Michigan.

TRISTIN:Wow, it runs in the family.

GAINES:I guess so. (both laugh)

TRISTIN:I--you know, we're talking about COVID and those experiences, and since

we've, kind of, talked about, or, you know, you've, kind of, talked about your,

you know, professional life, can you, kind of, give me maybe just a bit of

an--the experience of COVID for you and your--maybe--you know, maybe not too

broadly, but broadly of your congregation as well?

GAINES:Sure, sure, Adam. I think it's accurate in saying we are still

experiencing the effects of COVID.

TRISTIN:Really?

GAINES:Yes. I was actually in St. Louis at a fellow pastor's retirement

celebration. It was a Saturday evening, and that's when the nation locked down.

I actually made a phone call back here to say, "Lock the church down, no service

tomorrow," and this is Saturday evening, about 6:00 or 7:00 p.m. I mean, it

was--I can remember that like yesterday, I says, "We're locking down, we're not

going to put people at risk." Because, at that

time, people didn't really know how this whole epidemic was going to play out.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:And so we didn't want to put people at risk, especially our seniors who

were very loyal and would have been here if the doors were open.

TRISTIN:For sure.

GAINES:And so we just went into protection mode until we found out more about

what was going on. And so even though things have progressed greatly, there are

still lingering effects around with our seniors as far as fellowship, with our

children on the other end of the spectrum who missed a year and a half, two

years of school, not only the academic loss, but the fellowship. I had to

rethink how it affected them, especially because it was easy for me to say as an

older person, "Okay, so you missed the prom, no big deal, you'd get over that."

But for them at that age, that was the greatest thing they were looking forward

to at that point in their lives.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Even though they tend to live with their phones in their hands, I'm

finding out that the missing of the fellowship and the interaction, one with the

other, has had some deep effects on them. And we're still trying to garner some

of what was lost during that time, and so it's ongoing. Not to mention, you

know, how it affected many of our congregations economically. And so just a lot

of dynamics that work, again, that are still being played out.

TRISTIN:Sure, can you talk about that, that moment when you, you know, decided

to lock down, what led you to that decision, what--you know? I mean just because

you said you can recall that time--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--just to be specific.

GAINES:Well, it was--what made it even more challenging is that I was out of town.

TRISTIN:Oh yeah, right, right, right.

GAINES:So I was, kind of, like Dad knowing

there's danger back home, but you can't be there. You can't get to the children

as you want to, to put your arms around them, to protect them.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:And so the only thing I could do was, again, not being aware of what the

potential effect was of the pandemic and what we're going to be dealing with.

The decision was, if we erred, let's err on the side of safety, and so we made

the call to pull the plug on service, corporate worship and say, "We're going

to--you know, we're not meeting tomorrow," which then immediately took us into a

shift into virtual space. The good news is we had equipment already on-site,

unlike some of our compadres in ministry who had to start from scratch. And we

already had things like cameras and whatnot, and so we could immediately go to

live stream. And then put things in place

to deal with the finances, you know, cash app and giving online and Givelify and

all those other platforms that were available for giving. And so we had to

immediately move to get all of that fine-tuned, up and running, and just a lot

of challenges. In fact, I've said, and I still believe, that our leadership and

staff probably worked harder during that period than when things were as normal.

TRISTIN:Really?

GAINES:Yeah, yes, sir, I believe that. I think emotionally, it was much more

taxing than people are aware of, and because persons at home only saw the

broadcast, they had no idea what went into it. There were many days when we

recorded here. On Thursday, I would record the message for the

coming Sunday morning, and it might be my wife, my son, a musician, and three or

four other people in the sanctuary, if that many.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:And so we did what we did, and we ran it on Sunday, and the choir would

come in and record songs, and the media people would put all that together, and voila--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--the broadcast was there.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Those dynamics were challenging at times, but we were able to, you know,

manage through it by the grace of God.

TRISTIN:Yeah, what led you--what got you there to--just to lock it down, like

what? Was it something that was from other, you know, was it the national thing,

you know, like what led you to that decision?

GAINES:It started with the national thing, but then we spoke with our mayor and

some medical personnel both in

and outside of the church. And, at that time, there were more questions than

there were answers.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:And again, to err--if we're going to err, we wanted to err on the side

of safety.

TRISTIN:Sure.

GAINES:The last thing we wanted was to be a place where people came, contracted

COVID, and we had massive sickness in our midst. I didn't want to live with that

possibility. So I feel like we made the best decision because that was a long

journey in walking through COVID to--at the church, in the hospitals, in the

community, events where people gathered the whole nine. Man, it was just a

plethora of issues that we had to work through.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:But, yeah, the national statement, you know, from Dr. Fauci?

TRISTIN:Um-hm, um-hm.

GAINES:And our president, of course, and other national leaders, medically and

politically, state, from our governor, and from our city.

And again, what really impacted me was talking to medical people that I had high

regard for in us--in this community--

TRISTIN:--okay--

GAINES:--who said, "Pastor, we don't know what we're dealing with, we just

don't know, and we would recommend X, Y, Z," and that's the way we went.

TRISTIN:Wow, I'm sure that was--maybe not--I mean it was hard, but at the same

time, like, one, for being away but, two, just having to, you know, take such

drastic action quickly.

GAINES:Yeah, it was the unknown. I mean, it's one thing to battle an opponent

and you know what you're battling.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:In this case, nobody knew the severity of it, if it was just going to be

a bleep. I think most people thought, yeah, you know, thirty, sixty, ninety

days, we'll be back to normal.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:No.

TRISTIN:Right, yeah, I was in--my students, because I was teaching

at the time, didn't want or thought we were going to come back after spring

break, you know, were very, oh yeah, no problem, but--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--it's like, I don't know, you all. (laughs)

GAINES:I think a lot of people, even in church, figured at any time, we'd be

back open, and I just--I couldn't see it.

TRISTIN:Yeah. How did you--how was your family during this time? We talked

about your son and your wife and how did you all--?

GAINES:Well, we were in the throes of it. My son was our worship pastor at the time--

TRISTIN:--okay--

GAINES:--so we went to a--he talked a lot about what he called the church has

left the building. In fact, he did his doctoral dissertation on that topic.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:And it was really based around what he did here to shift us to virtual worship.

So we were--we didn't really have time to "grieve," if you will, because we were

concerned about producing a worship service for everybody else to keep them in,

plugged in, at least, to some degree.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:So we were part of that busy group who, again, I thought and convinced

were working harder during the pandemic than any time before. So it was a little

different in that sense. Whereas for my wife, I think it was somewhat different

because not only were we doing that, but I was still doing--hospital visits were

allowed and so the idea of being safe, mask, hand sanitizers, spacing. There was

always a concern, when my husband goes out, is he going to be safe wherever he's

going? So for her, it was that dynamic

that she was dealing with that most non-pastor wives weren't having to deal

with. Same thing for her son who was here--in and out of here. And it touched

our household because both my son and I eventually contracted the virus. I was

asymptomatic, didn't have--I mean I didn't feel tired, anything, it was just

locked away upstairs. For him, he had all the symptoms--

TRISTIN:--oh, wow--

GAINES:--so I mean he struggled through it. You know, God kept him, I mean, he

wasn't in the hospital or anything like that, but, you know, the fevers, the

cough, the sinuses, you know, issues, all of that, he dealt with that.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:So it touched our household as well.

TRISTIN:Sure, sure. I'm assuming he's recovered and everything--

GAINES:--oh yeah--

TRISTIN:--you know, okay?

GAINES:Yeah, he's perfectly fine now.

TRISTIN:Good.

If--again, if this is too personal or anything, but you talked about hospital

visits, what was that like for you?

GAINES:It was different. I won't call it a trying, but it was definitely

different. Because if you were allowed to go in, you--you know, you had to

register to the front, get the mask if you didn't have one. If you went to the

room, you were, you know, masked up. The person you were going to see where you

may--used to just handshake and even a hug, yeah, all of that was--you know, you

were encouraged not to do those things.

Because you didn't want to carry anything into the patients, and you don't want

to pick up something the patients may have had.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:So it was just a totally different environment, almost like you're

walking on eggshells. Everywhere you went, you just had to be careful, hand

sanitizer everywhere, which I understand, and it was good. You know, you--I kept

it in the car like water on the console, I kept--I had hand sanitizer there. In

fact, I still have hand sanitizer in my car; I have it in my bag. You know, if

you shook--shake hands with somebody, you--afterwards, you know. And--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--at one time, that would have been offensive, but now, it's like, hey,

I get it, I'll understand, all those dynamics. And then there were others who

you couldn't see at all; a nurse may do a FaceTime with you or a family member.

There were persons on ventilators. We have--

we experienced a number of deaths in Consolidated due to COVID. We have one

young man here now who was on a ventilator for probably ten or twelve days,

maybe longer, who looks as healthy as a horse now. We had another young man who

looked as healthy as a horse who went in on a Thursday, came home--no, went

Tuesday, came home Thursday, suddenly became ill, his wife took him back. She

came home to change clothes, and before she could change clothes, they told her

to get back to the hospital. When she got out there, he was gone. (claps)

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:We had seniors in senior care facilities in our city that we could not

go into their room, but the nurses would bring them to the window. And we would

stand outside and talk to them through the window

that you couldn't raise up but just loud enough to talk to us through the

window. When you've got somebody seventy-five, eighty, eighty-five years old

that's--you used to hugging and fellowshipping with, and they can't see even

their sons or daughters except through a window outside, Adam, those were the

difficult moments.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:When a person's passed away, there was generally a fellowship meal, and

you couldn't do that. Members of the congregation who were well-loved, thought a

lot of, typically at a funeral, you may have four hundred people there, three

hundred people there. It's confined to fifty people, mainly just family, and so

the closure that generally comes does not happen.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:Or there's no church service, it's just a graveside

with a dozen people, family members, all of those dynamics emotionally can take

a toll. So we had to--

TRISTIN:--yeah-

GAINES:--we dealt with a lot of that because we had more than our fair share of funerals.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:And you add to that the healthcare disparities of the Black and brown

community, we saw all of that firsthand, upfront, and through the whole process.

TRISTIN:Yeah, I'm sure it was an emotional toll on yourself?

GAINES:Oh yeah, yeah, I can--that's probably the understatement of the year.

TRISTIN:Yeah. (laughs)

GAINES:But God gives grace, I can--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--say that.

TRISTIN:Oh, how'd you deal with that if you don't mind me asking?

GAINES:(coughs) Excuse me.

TRISTIN:Because I used--I mean and, like, I'm--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--using your words, you said you're like the father, you know, holding

on to--you know, to protect his children, right?

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:And so

I can imagine that, you know, losing people that you work with or I mean that

you see--

GAINES:--sure--

TRISTIN:--every Sunday or weekly, you know what--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--I mean, that has to take a toll.

GAINES:A lot of phone calls, you know, people, you can't see, you don't see

now, you pick up the phone, you call them, hey, check on them, "How you're

doing, just thinking about you." I never knew a phone call could mean so much to

so many people, just a simple phone call to say, "I was thinking about you, just

called to say hello and have a word of prayer with you." Or there were times my

wife and I, on the weekend, would get in the car, and we just have a list of a

dozen, fifteen people, mainly seniors. And we just drive from house to house,

never get out of the car, just roll the window down--they come out on the porch

or whatever--just to say hello, three to five, ten minutes max.

It was good for them, but it was good for us, just those little touches that

made all the difference in the world. For me, Adam, when my stress level rises,

sometimes, I just have to, kind of, unplug. My former pastor, my late pastor

who's departed, Thurmond Coleman Sr., pastor of my Church forty-five years in

Louisville, he's my model for ministry. But he used to tell me, "Son, either you

learn to pull away or you'll pull apart," and I just, kind of, wrote that on my

brain. Even now when I get stressed, riding by myself in the car is good, maybe

twenty minutes, maybe an hour. I've seen Paris Pike,

and Winchester Road, and Highway 62, and other areas of rural Kentucky just to

unwind, just to relieve some pressure, and just have a little talk with God as I

drove, or just listening for the voice of God as I drove, just to help me deal

with the stress of it all. Sometimes I've gone into the sanctuary, never turn

the lights on, and just have a seat on the front pew, and just sit there and,

"Lord, I need to hear from you, I just need to hear from you." And then God has

granted me some dear friends, some brothers in ministry that I can do what I

call get spiritually naked in front of them. And I don't worry about it,

wouldn't see it being in the

Courier Journal in the morning. It's a safe place when you're frustrated, just

say, "Man, I just need a safe place to get some stuff out." Because there have

been times I was frustrated, not only with the system, not only with myself, but

with God. And I think God honors that kind of honesty when we're--if you're

upset, he knows anyway, so just those kind of conversations. And always looking

to meet needs of others because I find that oftentimes in meeting the needs of

others, my needs get met. But it's ongoing--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--that hasn't ended, it's ongoing.

TRISTIN:Yeah, kind of, maybe to look at how in your family—like, just what did

a typical day look like for you all?

GAINES:During COVID?

TRISTIN:During COVID.

GAINES:At the height of it, I still came to the office.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:I'm old school in a sense--(Tristin laughs)--Adam, that even though

nobody--our staff, we--well, let me back up. With our staff, rather than

requiring all of them to be here every day, we, kind of, broke up the week where

we'd have at least two here, but most were here three--two to three days a week.

Whereas I would be here literally every day at some point, you know, not all day

because, again, hospital visits were reduced. I reduced the public meeting, so I

was in my office, but we, kind of, made sure we were spaced, and everybody had

separate offices. We don't--you know, we discouraged, you know, meeting in the

closed spaces, and so that's the first thing we did just to, kind of, mitigate

the opportunities for mass gatherings. That's the first thing we did. Meetings

of different entities in the church, we took those virtual, so people weren't

coming into the building. We basically shut the building down, except for

absolutely necessary things, up to and including funerals because we were a

place where we did a lot of funerals for the people of general public. We shut

that all down, and we would do members, and even some of those were done in

other places.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:Just trying to be proactive, be careful as best--

TRISTIN:--sure--

GAINES:--we could.

TRISTIN:So in your day, you came to the office?

GAINES:Um-hm.

TRISTIN:I'm assuming did your administrative work?

GAINES:That goes on--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--yeah, that goes, sermon prep goes on,

planning. Because, at some point, you trust you're going to come out of this, so

you keep looking out to some point in the future, though you don't know when the

sun's going to rise on that open again.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:And so we work, we keep working, and then there are always things in the

community that you can work toward. We became a site for testing in the--on the

other side of the building in the gym. Also for administering vaccinations

themselves once that got, you know, put in place. There were over twenty-six

thousand doses of the vaccine administered here.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:So we got to meet people in the community that may have never come to

the church before.

I'm grateful for our governor, our mayor, the health department, and for the

people of Consolidated, and others in this community that all came together to

make that happen. Because that was a huge blessing, Adam.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:There were persons who came that probably wouldn't have gone anywhere

else, especially people of color because there's a dynamic. We still deal with

the lingering effects of the Tuskegee Experiments, so there are still a lot of

people of color that don't trust "the system."

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:That figure, well, there--there's something up, they have to get us

here, I mean literally, and I'm sharing real-life conversations, and I don't

know if I'm ready to do that. And so we gathered probably a dozen, fifteen

African American clergy here one day.

The governor was here, the mayor was here, and some other dignitaries to say to

the community, "We're in this with you, it is safe, the vaccine is good, you

need to do this." And a lot of people that, verbalized, "I wouldn't have come if

you all hadn't done that." And so we were able to reach some people that

typically wouldn't--not have been reached any other way, and they saw it as part

of the community being here at the church.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:And so we had said when we built, and we moved in here in '03, September

'03, that we were building for the community, and so this was an opportunity for

us to live that out. And so we had done, you know, other vaccines for--not

COVID, flu, flu vaccines.

TRISTIN:Sure.

GAINES:We had done blood drives, but this was

at a whole another level.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:Yeah, so we saw Black, white, just about everybody came.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:What led you all to call--? I mean was that something that the governor

and all them, you know, set up with you or wanted, you know, the clergy, if you

will, or was it something that you led, or how did that play out?

GAINES:That came through I think in conjunction with the mayor's office.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:Discussion there because when we decided, okay, just brainstorming, how

do we get people--? There was a concern from people of color that--there was a

concern that they were going to miss out, we're going to miss out, and we had to

be proactive.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:We need to do something to get people in the door. And so we

started brainstorming and said, "Well, how can we do this?" So as clergy in our

community, the church is a one just, kind of, central place that people come, at

least they trust. And so we got them all together and, you know, did some

publicizing. And the--like I said, the mayor was here and the governor was here

that day, and the rest just developed out of that. Got the word out and people

started to come and then they tell the neighbors about it and friends about it

and begin to challenge them to come. And you know, it felt like we made a dent.

TRISTIN:Um-hm, and what--I guess during that time or when you all had that

conversation, what was, kind of, talked about just that we're in it or did--?

Was there any medical professionals that would--

GAINES:--oh yeah--

TRISTIN:--talk about--

GAINES:--oh yeah--

TRISTIN:--you know?

GAINES:Yeah, definitely, yeah--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--we had we had medical professionals as part of the discussion from day one.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:Because we didn't want to get into he say, she say, I feel.

And so we felt like, okay, let's get some medical professionals that took front

and center, and we stand together and say, "This is what we know, a lot we don't

know, but this is what we do know. Now, how do we get this information to the

community, how do we get them in with their sleeve rolled up to take the shot?

We know it's good for them, but we got to convince them." And so from that, you

know, evolved the rest of the activities and discussion.

TRISTIN:Yeah, you said the--you know, the blame was on the system, we're not

trusting the system, right?

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:Which is again, completely understandable.

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:Was there any other reasons why others were not taking the vaccine at

the time or hesitant I should say, right?

GAINES:Sure, I mean you have--there are people in our population who've never

been to the doctor and feel like their

natural immune system can fight everything. Add to that the misinformation that

takes place in the media, and it has a huge and profound effect unfortunately.

We saw supposedly reputable people, medically--medical personnel and

politicians, who we're calling this whole thing a farce, who gave it no

credibility right up to the White House. And I don't want to make it personal,

you know, with the president, but just the person was saying some things. You

had other nationally known political leaders call this whole thing a hoax and

manufactured by, you know, whomever.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:Misinformation was very powerful and prevalent and present. And you had

to--we had to wade through all of that because when you talk to people who were

skeptical, it was like, "Well,

that's your perspective, but So-and-So is saying," you know, you're trying to

wade through all of that.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:And just bear your heart and say, "I'm here because we love you, we

care, we believe this is what's best, and this is what we're encouraging you to

do." I mean, that was--literally those conversations were had hundreds of times

by different people.

TRISTIN:Yeah, wow, and then to, I mean, navigate that and try to address some

of those.

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:And some, it's like you can't really say other than that's not right--(laughs)--

GAINES:--right--

TRISTIN:--you know?

GAINES:And see, as pastor, I had the privilege and responsibility on Sunday

morning to say that to a large gathering. You know in about a three-minute

period, you got--okay, you get a chance to say to persons, "You need to consider

this." It helped that I can--I could point

and say, "I've got mine, as your pastor, I want to be responsible. I have got

mine so that when I'm in your presence, you're not going to be concerned that

I'm going to bring something to you." I said, "Likewise, I want you to be

concerned about the rest of your family because it's not just about you, it's

about your family and all of those you interact with." So we were able to

present it in that fashion. And some for no other reason than that said, "Well,

I still don't know, but if it'll help my family, I'm going to go ahead and do

this." So they just, you know, come at it from all angles that we--we're aware of.

TRISTIN:Yeah, I think that's very important I guess. There's, you know, the

idea of--that individualistic idea of like, you know, I don't need it, right,

I'm good, you know--

GAINES:--right--

TRISTIN:--immune system, yada, yada, yada, right?

GAINES:Exactly.

TRISTIN:But, at the same time, well, yeah, you could be asymptomatic and give

it to someone who

is not.

GAINES:Exactly, in my case, I had no symptoms at all.

TRISTIN:Right, and so that's just--so I find that really interesting on how,

you know, even convincing others that your family or community that you would be

helping out just by taking the shot, so. Did you all have like a question and

answer at all during that time or--

GAINES:---we--

TRISTIN:--was it more of just, you know, here's laying out all the facts-type situation?

GAINES:The latter, just laying out the facts.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:Yeah, we had--I'm not sure we had formal meetings with question and answer.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:But I do remember some of those being held in the community, but I don't

think we had it here, but, again, we shared information.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Every weekend, we were sharing information with those who were present

for worship.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:And even in the virtual space when we were there, we shared information.

TRISTIN:Um-hm,

you talked about this earlier, and, you know, the pandemic really exacerbated

the problems that we have, you know, culturally in our system--

GAINES:--sure--

TRISTIN:--and all that. But, again, you talked about the health disparities

that were prevalent and, again, you know, build upon, you know, the issues with

COVID. How do you think that affected, you know, those communities? Again

broadly, right, as--

GAINES:--sure, sure, great question. I don't have the facts and figures--well,

I don't have the figures, I think I have the facts.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:The facts being that the impact on communities Black and brown were

greater than on the white community, again, due to basic--what I call basic

health disparities. Do you have insurance, do you not, can

you get good medical care, can you not afford it? So many persons without

insurance don't go unless they're really, really sick, and then they go to

emergency room. But then we know that old adage that a pound of prevention is

worth a--an ounce of prevention, worth a pound of cure, I think that's the way

it goes.

TRISTIN:Um-hm.

GAINES:A lot of things can be prevented if you can get on the front side of it.

But if you don't have access to medical care, by the time you are forced to get

it, the situation is already critical. There's this thing called food deserts,

I'm sure you're aware of.

TRISTIN:Um-hm, um-hm.

GAINES:In certain communities, there's not a Kroger or a Walmart, and so people

buy from a small--typically smaller market where the food may not be as fresh,

may not be as varied, the offering is not as broad. And so

you get what you need to survive, but it's not what you need for good, healthy,

long-term living.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:All those dynamics that the community deals with that has huge

consequences that we don't see until later on in one's life. And the list goes

on and on. I was reading an article just a couple of weeks ago about the number

of Black women, economics aside, who have difficulty and are left ill or die in

childbirth during pregnancies. Never would have thought of it until I saw the

article. And one of the conclusions was that Black women who have Black doctors

who are pregnant tend to do much better than those who have a non-Black doctor.

And the--one of the end results of the study was that

because that doctor listens to them or they don't get that in the other

scenario. Those kind of things. It's real if we look at it, and it's rooted

largely in socioeconomics. We see it as a race thing, but it's--in a lot of

cases, it's driven by socioeconomics, but in this phenomenon with women, the

socioeconomic level of the Black woman has little impact on it. So all those

dynamics out there that we're dealing with, Adam.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:And so just trying to work through all of that--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--and create what we call an equitable society, but we saw that played

out. These pandemics don't produce those things, they just highlight it, they

bring it to the front, they bring into the surface.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:Yeah, what--if you don't mind,

what did you observe or see during that time, especially with COVID?

GAINES:I saw--

TRISTIN:--again thinking about health disparity--

GAINES:--sure, sure--

TRISTIN:--and stuff.

GAINES:I saw persons, many persons who did not have insurance, who, if they,

had would have gone earlier. So they didn't get the treatment as soon as they

should have gotten it, and as a result, some of them--a significant number of

them ended up sicker than they really should have been--

TRISTIN:--right--

GAINES:--or could have been, again, because of just not having healthcare. I

saw that day in and day out, and that was the norm. That there is a--what's the

word I'm looking for--there is a reluctance

to confront some of the systems, fear of having to navigate the unknown. If you

or I got ill, you know, with insurance, we--(claps)--bam, we're gone.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:But if I had to wait like many of them waited, by the time I show up,

I'm sick, and we already had a system that's strained, it just makes it very

difficult at that point.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:You're in a survival mode.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:And so I saw a lot of that. And then for many, it reached the point of

critical mass where they just said, "Just stay home, just stay home, because

we've got nowhere to put you, just stay home." All of that--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--all of that together just became overwhelming for many persons, yeah.

TRISTIN:How about, you know, when they--the vaccine started to come out,

what--? Because you said, you know, you got it, what made you--your decision

to--you know, to accept it, right, or to adopt that?

GAINES:I'm a believer in medical care and science. My faith isn't weakened by

that. I think it's my faith that encourages me to do that, to take advantage of

that, which God has made available through us even through medicine. For me, it

was--it wasn't an option. If I had not been a pastor, if I had not been involved

in ministry of church, I would have wanted the vaccine personally. But I'm

accustomed all my life,

since college, of having access to healthcare. Growing up, did not, parents

couldn't afford it. But once I was out of college, I worked for major

corporations, insurance was part of it. My wife works in the public sector, I'm

on her insurance, it's there. I haven't been without it, so it's the norm for

me, whereas that's not the case for millions of other people.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah, and with your family, were they on the same board--I mean

on board as you were?

GAINES:Oh, yes.

TRISTIN:Yeah?

GAINES:Yeah, yeah, absolutely.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:It was not a case of forced because like I said, I was in ministry, my

son was in ministry,

my wife's in the public sector, so for us, it made all the sense in the world.

Now, some others may look at those dynamics and steal reaches the conclusion,

"I'm not doing it."

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:And I know some people like that.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:But in our household, it wasn't an issue.

TRISTIN:And, again, with the vaccine rollout, do you think--? I guess do you

think that it was equally distributed, you know what I mean, or during that

time, or is that maybe why we set something up here where--you know?

GAINES:Well, I think when things like this are rolled out--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--we roll them out with what is available. Is that equal? No, no, I can

say resoundingly, no, but that's the way the system is set at this point.

And so our being--becoming a site was to alleviate that problem. That was a

recognition among leaders and clergy because several of us gathered and

approached our city and our health department says, "We've got to make sure that

this is available in the rest of the community, not just that what you do

normally," i.e. we ended up with a site here. That's how that came to be. That

was natural discussion that we've got to be proactive to reach a community that

we typically don't reach.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:So, yeah.

TRISTIN:Yeah, and you said you had how many that took the shot here?

GAINES:Over twenty-six thousand doses were administered here.

TRISTIN:Wow, wow, and how long was that setup here?

GAINES:Oh, man, how long was that?

I'll have to check that and see, I'm not--

TRISTIN:--and it's fine--

GAINES:--it was several months--

TRISTIN:--sure--

GAINES:--I know that--

TRISTIN:--sure--

GAINES:--yeah.

TRISTIN:I don't know if it was like a month and then like, all right. (laughs)

GAINES:No, it was two or three months maybe but--yeah--

TRISTIN:--okay, okay--

GAINES:--yeah, and again, the--if it had not been available at no cost, many of

those persons wouldn't have been able to afford it.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:So whatever monies was spent from the federal level to ensure. Because

now I think if you go get a test, it's become cost prohibitive--

TRISTIN:--oh yeah--

GAINES:--for many millions of people right now. And so that was a period where

it was available and persons didn't have to spend what little they had or just

couldn't afford it, would have been left out.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah,

just to, again, slightly backtrack a little bit, with thinking about--you know,

when talking about food, food desert, was there any--you know, where there

people in your population that were dealing with food insecurity?

GAINES:Oh yeah.

TRISTIN:Yeah?

GAINES:Yeah, yeah, it's--we've--this church is over 130 years old. She's always

dealt with seeking to ensure that everybody had what they needed to survive.

There are always persons who--even now, who contact the church, come by the

church that have food needs. They're Black, they're white, they're Hispanic,

some have habits, others are just going through a difficult time in their lives.

We hear a lot about low unemployment,

everybody should be able to find a job, but if you got to work two or three jobs

to make ends meet, and none of them provide insurance, you're still up the creek

without a paddle. And that is the case with so many who are spending such a

large portion of their income for housing, which is a whole another issue about

affordable houses. And --

TRISTIN:--right--

GAINES:--we could talk in days about that, so we won't get sidetracked. But all

of those things impact the discussion we're having now.

TRISTIN:Um-hm, um-hm, wow. When you--again, I don't know if you can recall, do

you remember the first time you heard about COVID?

GAINES:The first time, probably a few weeks before the actual

shutdown happened.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:But, again, I heard from the White House and the national level, "No big

deal, don't worry about it. In just a few weeks, this thing will be behind us,

so it was like, no big deal," but then it kept coming. So, yeah, probably just a

few weeks before that actual shutdown.

TRISTIN:Wow, and was there any, again, milestones or anything that like really

said, man, this is serious, this is really something I need to start taking serious?

GAINES:That weekend in St. Louis is really—I mean, that was like--I mean, the

dominoes just came tumbling down--

TRISTIN:--why--

GAINES:--that weekend.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Because I'd been on the phone much of the afternoon with other pastors

here and around the country that I trusted, that I knew,

that we discussed things like this about. And so when that happened, it was

about--and I talked to our mayor from--and she expressed her deep concern. And

she was talking to several pastors, not just myself, in the city. And together,

all of us are on the same page literally like, "Until we know more, we need to

shut this down because--" I remember the conversation ending with the statement,

"--this thing could be pandemic-like.

TRISTIN:Whew.

GAINES:But, at that time, nobody knew it was actually going to be a pandemic,

but it had--

TRISTIN:--right--

GAINES:--the potential, but we figuring, hoping that it would not be that.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:And so to avoid potentially the worst, everybody just shut it down.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Again thinking in a few weeks, it would all be behind us if we just took

care right now.

TRISTIN:Right, right. How about your--?

You know, let's say, we're--what decide you now to open back up, right, to have

your congregation to come back into--?

GAINES:Adam, I think--I'm not sure, we'll ever get back to the normal as we

knew it then.

TRISTIN:Really?

GAINES:Yeah. But as much as normal can be, I think we're pretty much there.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:If you get in an airplane, they're jam-packed. You go on a cruise,

they're filling up again. You go to a UK game, it's packed out.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:A year or so ago, I was in New York, and I went to a Brooklyn basketball

game, man, they're jammed to the rafters. Now, you had to take a test before you

went into the game on the spot, but it was still packed. People are going on

with life,

not as much care is being given. We've gone from everybody on the plane wearing

a mask to mask optional. We've gone from mandatory mask here in our worship to

mask or optional, and only a handful of people are wearing masks now. At the

same time, I still try to be careful because people are still contracting COVID,

just not like before.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:So we made a decision, let's get back to business as usual, if you will,

whatever that means or looks like. In-person worship, we're looking to start

in-person Sunday school here in a few weeks. We still do that virtually,

Bible study virtually, so we're looking to bring all that back in-house. But we

did make a decision because virtually, we're actually reaching people that we

were never able to reach before.

TRISTIN:Really?

GAINES:Oh, yeah, most pastors, most churches would tell you, especially with

things like Bible study, they're reaching far more people virtually than ever

show up in-person at the building.

TRISTIN:That is interesting.

GAINES:Yes.

TRISTIN:I would imagine it would be in, like--you know, I've always seen it, I

guess, in-person and--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--you know, prior, I guess, but, you know what I mean, like, I just--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--would not expect that.

GAINES:For instance, I'm from Texas, you're from Texas, I have friends in Texas

that I went to college with, in high school with, you know, forty, forty-five

years ago, live nowhere near Lexington, but they tune into Bible study

regularly. They'll watch our Sunday broadcast, if not live, they can watch it

on demand. In our Sunday school, we've got people from Georgia and Carolina and

other places that join us for Bible study. We have a 7:25 a.m. prayer call we

call Morning Manna. There's a lady from California, they're three hours behind

us, she was faithful to join us every morning 7:25, which was 4:25 her time.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:That kind of stuff.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:And so others have--you know, reaching people in other countries.

Technology is a wonderful thing, but I'm old school, I don't think it can

replace the fellowship of in-person worship. And that's a big concern because

there are persons now who have found comfort at home in their pajamas with a

donut and a cup of coffee, and they're comfortable.

And so many of those have not come back to the building yet.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:So that's the concern.

TRISTIN:When you say you may or we'll never get back to where it was before,

what has changed? I mean aside from, you know, the Bible study and stuff.

GAINES:Yeah, I think that's it. We have to enlarge our scope. What COVID has

done is forced us to get out of the box of comfort and focus it on the people

that show up. As my son's dissertation was, the church has left the building,

the church is not the building, the church has left the building. It's like the

disciples, as they went out, they preached the gospel. We've been forced out to

be the church in its reality as God intended for us to be. And so I think we

have greater opportunity

than we've ever had because now, we've got a glimpse of what it can be beyond

the building, beyond the brick-and-mortar walls. So that part's exciting, it's

not a negative, it's exciting. Opportunities are even greater now, in my

opinion, than they were pre-COVID.

TRISTIN:Wow. I feel like you--and then, you know, casting your net is a lot

bigger too--

GAINES:--yes--

TRISTIN:--you know--

GAINES:--absolutely, yeah, well said.

TRISTIN:Yeah, and then, I mean reaching people that you never had or that you

would not have otherwise if that's--you know that wasn't available.

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:Again, you've shared a lot already, and is there a just one memory

during that time that just, you know, good or bad, you know, that really sticks

out when

you think about COVID itself, if you don't mind sharing?

GAINES:Sure, sure, a couple actually. Anna Jackson, one of our seniors, passed

away during COVID. She had been here, oh God, a long time. She was one of the

persons at the nursing home that we had to talk to out through the window. She

was as classy a lady as you've ever met, old school, reverent about God, loved

her church, loved the people, just sweet in every way. And to see her last days

where even her children could only talk to her through a window from outside--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--that was gut wrenching. I was feeling bad for me, and then I thought

later, I said, I'm not even one of her children, I wonder how they feel? How did

the grandchildren feel that used to--you know, her putting her arm around them

and encouraging her or encouraging them, and they got to talk to her through the

glass window?

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:That was tough, Adam.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:That was tough. One of the highlights was a young man I told you about

that was on the ventilator for all those days. To see him come home, and that

was a birthday celebration, and

people met he and his wife at a school parking lot just to see him drive by

after having come off that ventilator and come home from UK Hospital.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Man, I can't--ah, I just--I can't describe what that meant to his family

or to us as a church family. The last two weeks, I've seen people for the--some

people for the first time since the pandemic hit--

TRISTIN:--really--

GAINES:--yeah, just coming back. Persons, many are back, but many others have

not come back. They're watching from home, and if I run into them and, "Pastor,

I haven't left, I'm still a member, I just--

I'm just not ready to come back yet." I confess I struggle with that, but I pray

and let them know we love them, we missed them, and then they're starting--that

group is starting to come back as well. So when I say we may never get back to

normal, it's with that in mind.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:My concern, Adam, is that some would get too comfortable because the

longer you stay away, the easier it is to stay away. And so I'm just--I don't

wish them any bad luck, I just pray, "God just bring them back, bring them back

to fellowship."

TRISTIN:Did they say why they just not coming--

GAINES:--I've--

TRISTIN:--or do you know? (laughs)

GAINES:It's mixed, some have health challenges--(coughs)--excuse me, and they

don't want to, you know,

put themselves at risk. Others have stated in a very respectful way, "Pastor, I

love watching in my pajamas with a donut and a cup of coffee, and we're good."

Two extremes--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

GAINES:--and then there's everything in between. Others, we were basically an

hour and fifteen minutes online, hour and ten, hour and fifteen minutes. We're

back in-person, we're about an hour and a half now, sometimes an hour and forty,

depending on announcements or something. Some like, appreciate the shorter

service; I mean, just all the fluff was gone. You just came in, scripture, prayer,

singing, preaching, prayer, close, go home. All the people stuff was missing,

but some people like that, so. We learned a lot during this period--

TRISTIN:--yeah.

GAINES:--about people and about ourselves.

TRISTIN:Yeah, I think Zoom was--like Zoom meetings, right?

GAINES:Yeah, I'm, all Zoom now, by the way.

TRISTIN:Are you?

GAINES:Oh, man.

TRISTIN:You got a crash course kind of quick, huh? (both laugh)

GAINES:I mean I still use it sometimes.

TRISTIN:Sure.

GAINES:I think it's a good tool, I'm not anti-Zoom, but, man, I don't want to

live on Zoom.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:This is me, I like face-to-face where possible, but I understand, you

know, there's a lot of positives about Zoom. It allowed us to do some things

that without, we would have been in a pickle, so it's all good.

TRISTIN:Yeah,

but, you know, the--a Zoom meeting where you're trying to be productive, you can

be right, you can get that--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--twenty minutes, thirty minutes, and then you're good, right?

GAINES:Absolutely.

TRISTIN:But like you said, you know, I'm a lingerer, right. So when the meeting

ends, I'm a lingerer, I want to talk to people, "How things are going," you

know, and so--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--in Zoom meetings, you don't do that, right? You're just done with the meeting.

GAINES:Done, okay--

TRISTIN:--yeah, yeah-- (laughs)

GAINES:--see you--

TRISTIN:--oh, 9:30, end, right, because--

GAINES:--yeah.

TRISTIN:--that's the time we scheduled it for.

GAINES:Right.

TRISTIN:And so I can imagine that I mean--

GAINES:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--yeah, yeah, that people part like you said that's what--

GAINES:--right--

TRISTIN:--you're missing out on.

GAINES:And I'm a people person. A pastor friend of mine, the gentleman I went

out to St. Louis for his retirement weekend, we locked things down, had been a

pastor there twenty years and a pastor in another place about the same amount of

time. He was retiring,

and I said, "Man, what, how are you retiring, you're not that old?" He says,

"Richard, I'm first a flesh guy." He said, "I love lingering and spending time."

He says, "The church needs now a younger, technologically-oriented pastor." And

he says, "I don't want to put forth the effort to retool myself," and he says,

"so I'm stepping aside for a younger, more technologically-oriented pastor," and

he retired.

TRISTIN:Wow, wow.

GAINES:Okay.

TRISTIN:Good for him. (laughs)

GAINES:Yeah, good for him.

TRISTIN:He knew what he was comfortable with.

GAINES:He's happy, he did it on his own terms.

TRISTIN:Right, what--I mean, again, you--again, we've talked about the vaccine

stuff, but what are other ways that

the church, your church has helped the community especially during the pandemic,

how did--what--?

GAINES:During the pandemic besides the vaccines, we saw quite a number of

people who had various needs. Simply said, on the food side, yeah, we could help

with those, things like that. We saw a greater number of people in need of

rental assistance, some we could handle, others we had to connect them with

entities in the community. We weren't a clearinghouse, but we were able to

connect people with various community entities, whether it was Community Action,

Black Church Coalition,

city government, you know, code enforcement, or to the health department,

whatever it is, housing agencies, just to help them. The other thing you don't

hear a lot about, Adam, is the stress on families increased dramatically.

Marriage counselors' caseload was overwhelmingly overwhelmed. Counseling places,

couldn't find enough counselors, and it's still in that state.

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:But they tie a lot of it to COVID and its lingering impact. Spouse

abuse, child abuse,

angry children, all those things, they're able to tie directly back to the

stress and tension created and is lingering from COVID. And I don't know how

long it's going to take to clear that backlog.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:But that's one of those unknown, unseen, undiscussed, except you see the

manifestation out, and you wonder, what's wrong with him or her? There's a lot

of stuff going on, especially with our young people.

TRISTIN:Yeah. You--and we're talking about families and their stress, what--? I

mean, again, aside from the looming dynamic that's constantly there. I don't

know if you've heard or the stories or what's causing that to happen?

GAINES:A couple of things besides the pandemic. We've got a generation now, Adam,

that if you begin to talk about Biblical miracles, Jonah and the whale, David

and Goliath, you know, basic Bible stories for those who are reared in church,

will think you're talking about Saturday morning cartoons because they have no

Bible foundation. In the sixties, we had the Civil Rights Movement. In the

seventies, we had the Women's Lib Movement, followed by the sexual revolution in

the late seventies and the eighties. We started to see children leave the church

of their parents in the eighties and nineties. They didn't just go because Mom

and Daddy went, either they went somewhere else or they didn't go. Now, their

children are

parents, they have children, and they are un-churched, they have no go-to.

Great-grandma and grandma used to say, "Hey, take it to the Lord and leave it

there; honey, pray about that; boy, I'm going to put you in the hands of the

Lord." That's missing, and so they have no foundation--

TRISTIN:--right--

GAINES:--and just dealing with the issues of life with no anger, there's no

telling where you're going to end up, and that's what we're dealing with. We're

dealing--and we don't like to talk about it, but we're dealing with a non-church

society that is drifting further and further away from the biblical principles

that you and I grew up with, and it's getting worse. My pastor described it this

way years ago. He says, "I'm praying for you young bucks, the young pastors."

He said, "You all are going to have hell on your hands." He says, "There used to

be respect for the church and for the preacher," and he said, "But that's waning

real fast." He said, "The world is coming against the church like never before."

He said, "They're coming for you," and he said, "I liken it to a freight train

coming into the dock, but rather than slowing down, she's picking up speed," and

he says, "If you all don't have it wrapped on tight, they're going to run--" His

words were, "They're going to run you all slap out of these churches." We're

starting to see that, Adam.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Those who stand behind the podium, men and women today, many preach a

watered-down gospel because they don't want to upset anybody. They don't want to

take a stand against the--these societal mores of--sin has become normalized,

"Well, that's just the way it is." No, that's not why we--uh-uh.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:But courageous men and women to preach the unmitigated gospel is going

to get you ridicule today even among clergy, even among clergies. That's where

we are, Adam. We want to call it everything but sin. We got a medical term for

everything, but much of it when you peel back the onion, it's just plain, old

sin. That's my country boy analysis of it all.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah, and just, kind of, one of my last, as far as, kind of,

questions, or maybe to clarify on. You said you had medical professionals that

you--were the--

are these people--you know, part of your--you don't have to identify them at all but--

GAINES:--sure--

TRISTIN:--just part of your congregation or just people that you know or, you

know, friends, stuff like that?

GAINES:Both, both.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:They're persons that work in UK Health system, person that work in in

Saint Joe's system.

TRISTIN:Okay.

GAINES:A couple in, what, Baptist Health, I want to say Central Baptist because

that's been the names along. Persons in the health department. I've talked to

doctors who treat a lot of these ailments, I've talked to counselors, clinical

psychologists, just an array of people that spend time talking about--

talking to about these issues. On the economic side, chamber personnel, some

leaders of several of our local companies and how it's impacted them in the

workplace. The educational arena, everybody from our superintendent to several

principals. And so if I had a room with people in it, they would be just from

the vast arrays of community partners who bring their own perspective, who offer

how this has impacted them as well. You know, Toyota, you know, you can't have

people on the line, it's going to cost you millions of dollars a day. You know,

if you can't have in-person class, now with the last--with this lawsuit

a few weeks ago being settled, you've got to give them back some of that money

you charged them. That's going to be huge.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah.

GAINES:You know, that's a lot. You know, policing, and a lady here works in HR

at the jail over here, used to work downtown for the mayor's office in legal.

You know, used to go visit at the jail, especially as clergy, anybody, we can't

do that now.

TRISTIN:Really?

GAINES:No.

TRISTIN:At all?

GAINES:You've got to go through hoops to get to see somebody now. And then they

want you to set up a virtual visit rather than an in-person visit. The virus was

rampant over there because they're in such close proximity.

TRISTIN:Right,

likely forgotten too. (laughs)

GAINES:Yeah, so again, a lot of things happened that people don't see.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:And so you're dealing with all those dynamics, and, you know, Miss

Susie's saying, "Pastor, can you stop to see my son?" "Ma'am, they won't let me

in," "But you clergy," "I know, used to be, they would let us in with nobody

else, now, it's nobody."

TRISTIN:Wow, wow. I guess to end off, what's the outlook for you, what's the

outlook for your church?

GAINES:I'm optimistic, Adam.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

GAINES:Opportunities have never been greater. It just means you've got to do

things differently. It's almost like a restart. I'm having to—(laughs)--and I

laugh at myself when I say it, I'm having to sell people on things they've never

seen before.

"Why, Pastor, why do we need to spend all this money on this equipment? We had

cameras already, why do we need new ones?" "Because the other ones are not--they

really weren't that good, it's not clear," but once they see the new ones, "Oh

man, I love that picture," but you gave me a hell to get there.

TRISTIN:(laughs) Right.

GAINES:People don't know what they need until they--it's like--here it is, it's

like, Adam, I've got to create a need in people's heart that they don't know

they have a need for. We need some lights out here, I don't want to spend the

money, but if you go to a quality broadcast that young adults and youths want to

see, I mean, they look--they used to hide there going downtown to see the movie,

they see--

And then they come to church and saying, "What's that?" A friend of mine in

Dallas pastors, they're doing a two-million-dollar renovation as we speak.

TRISTIN:Whew.

GAINES:It's sound, lights, and screens. He says, "Pastor, the people we're

after and that are coming, they want the movie experience." And I'm not

suggesting Consolidated ought to offer the movie experience, but somewhere in between.

TRISTIN:Right.

GAINES:These LED walls, have you seen them?

TRISTIN:Uh-uh.

GAINES:Oh my God, they're as expensive as heck. (Tristin laughs) These guys

will spend an LED wall--have LED wall behind them, they'll spend anywhere from a

hundred to three, four hundred thousand dollars on an LED wall. It allows you to

see on the wall behind the pulpit area wherever you put the screens,

what's going on like Technicolor?

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:I'm not suggesting we go there, but the sound system we have here is the

original sound system. It's twenty years old, will be in September. I've got a

piece in here to replace it, two hundred and twenty-four thousand dollars.

TRISTIN:Oh, my gosh. (laughs)

GAINES:My thought is, simple country boy, just to replace the parts that

we--the speakers that are dying. "Pastor, the new technology won't work with the

old, you got to replace the whole thing."

TRISTIN:Wow.

GAINES:Those kind of things. Two hundred twenty for sound? But I start doing my

research, our ladies did the research, "Pastor, that's not a bad

price."

TRISTIN:Wow, that's a lot. (laugh) Wow.

GAINES:So, oh, those dynamics. I mean that's real life front and center, black

and white.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah, well, excellent. Well, thank you for sitting with me and

telling me--

GAINES:--thank you--

TRISTIN:--and sharing with me.

GAINES:Yeah.

TRISTIN:I know those are all very personal as far as stories, so I really

appreciate you sharing those with me. And, you know, it was really--it was a

really good conversation I know, and I appreciate it.

GAINES:Thank you, appreciate you asking. I'm still going to get McFarland (??) though.

TRISTIN:(laughs) Indeed.

GAINES:No, he's good with people, I love him. (Tristin laughs)

[End of interview.]

1