CRUZ-FALK:As I shift the chair and get comfy. Alrighty, this is Victoria

Cruz-Falk interviewing Mary Arthur on May 8th, 2023. Do you have any questions

before we start?

ARTHUR:I guess not.

CRUZ-FALK:I can, I can pause.

ARTHUR:That's okay.

CRUZ-FALK:Okay. Would you start by just telling me a little bit about yourself?

ARTHUR:Sure. Um, so, for the last thirty years or so, I've been the forest

ecologist at the University of Kentucky in the Department of Forestry. It's now

called the Department of Forestry and Natural Resources. Um, and in that role, I

have--my position there was largely research, so ecological research and forest

systems. And then I also taught a course called forest ecology every year, um,

which will probably come up in this interview

. And then I was also very involved with the interdisciplinary undergraduate

program in natural resources and environmental sciences. And I was the chair of

that program for ten years. Is this the kind of answer you're looking for?--(laughs)--

CRUZ-FALK:--I actually, at the start of every interview, like that question,

because I think it's interesting when someone answers--

ARTHUR:--where we go, okay--

CRUZ-FALK:--an open-ended question--

ARTHUR:--okay--

CRUZ-FALK:--and I mean, you know what the focus is--

ARTHUR:--yeah--

CRUZ-FALK:--that's where you're going--

ARTHUR:--yeah, okay--

CRUZ-FALK:--but--

ARTHUR:--okay. So I'll continue. Um, I was also, um, one of the leads on the,

um, greenhouse living learning community at UK that only lasted a couple of

years, but was an opportunity to engage students in thinking about

sustainability on campus and in Lexington and beyond. Um, let's see, I am now

retired or semi-retired. I'll be fully retired in a month or so. And I'm working

on a couple of projects

that are kind of passion projects that stem from the work that I was doing and

sort of continue some of that work, but less in the vein of ecology research and

more in the vein of, um, engaging people and thinking about what sustainability

could look like, and certainly linking that to climate change, which has been

one of the things I've been thinking and talking about for a really long time--(laughs).

CRUZ-FALK:And where are you from?

ARTHUR:Ah, I grew up in Colorado. Um, yeah, I grew up in Colorado. I grew up in

Denver, actually. Uh, I, uh--I got really interested in environment and

environmentally related things when I was in high school and, um, and so I've

been kind of my whole life, I guess, kind of seeking a path for being able to be

engaged in solutions to environmental issues and challenges. Um, so I lived

there until I was

eighteen or so, and then I went to college in several different

places--(laughs)--uh, yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:Where did you go to college? What are the different places?

ARTHUR:Well, first I went to college in Maine. It was really far away from

Colorado and I was trying to get far, far away. Uh, but then I discovered there

were too many trees there and it was too cloudy and so I left, and I moved to

California, and I took a year off. And then I moved back to Colorado and went to

the University of Colorado for a year and then discovered that it was too large.

And in the interim I worked at an outdoor school called the National Outdoor

Leadership School where I went to people on wilderness courses for like thirty

days at a time, and then I went back to Colby College in Maine and convinced

them to give me credit for a semester of academic work because the teaching that

I was doing at NOLS was being used by the students who came to NOLS as academic

credit. So I figured if they get academic credit for what I'm teaching, I should get

it for what I'm teaching--(laughs)--so they did that. And so in the end I

graduated from Colby College. Yeah. Yep. Then I did a master's at, uh, Yale

School of Forestry and the Environment, um, which was an amazing place to go to

school, not because Yale is amazing, which it's very challenged in many ways,

but the forestry school was incredible, um, and really at the time had very

little to do structurally with the rest of the university. And then I worked for

a little bit, and then I went to Cornell to do my PhD, um, mainly because I

found somebody who would work with me to do my PhD with them, but do my PhD in

Colorado. So I got to go home, uh, home and work in the mountains of Colorado

for my PhD project--

CRUZ-FALK:--cool--

ARTHUR:--which was understanding the ecology--the ecosystem ecology of a

subalpine spruce fir forest

.

CRUZ-FALK:And how'd you get to Kentucky?

ARTHUR:Right. Well, so I'm an academic--(laughs)--and so getting to Kentucky

entailed, um, you know, looking for a job. And Kentucky was the furthest south I

looked. And that year there were several jobs available and I was also pregnant.

And so I got two job interviews, but the second job interview was in Utah and it

came too late in my pregnancy for me to fly out there. And I interviewed first

here and I was offered this position. So I've lived here for thirty some

years--(laughs)--thirty years.

CRUZ-FALK:Cool.

ARTHUR:Yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:I wanted to ask about NOLS. Do you know, I think it's David Leemon.

ARTHUR:David Leemon. What did you say his last name?

CRUZ-FALK:Leemon--L--

ARTHUR:--oh, Drew Leemon?

CRUZ-FALK:Drew.

ARTHUR:Drew Leemon.

CRUZ-FALK:Maybe.

ARTHUR:Does he work--did he work--does he work in Leave No Trace

?

CRUZ-FALK:I don't know.

ARTHUR:Okay.

CRUZ-FALK:I know a friend that his father works--has worked for NOLS and that's

how he got into--

ARTHUR:--oh--

CRUZ-FALK:--everything that he does and is now working for NOLS in New Zealand.

ARTHUR:Oh wow. Yeah. I--that name sounds very familiar and it sounds familiar

in the context of the--so NOLS really, um, pioneered the Leave No Trace

curriculum. You know, the whole concept of traveling in the wilderness without

leaving a trace. And Drew Leemon, I'm pretty sure that's what he did and what he

was leading. I'm pretty sure that's his name, Drew Leemon. Yeah. And I guess he

would be my age or slightly younger. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. I mostly, I

entirely worked out of the, uh, Lander, Wyoming office in various mountain

ranges in Utah and Wyoming.

CRUZ-FALK:Cool. I'm pinning that for later--

ARTHUR:--(laughs)--

CRUZ-FALK:--of all the places

that you've lived, how did you experience this type of work differently?

ARTHUR:Mm. Yeah, I mean, that's a really interesting question. I mean, first of

all, because I've lived here for thirty years, that's a long time in the context

of awareness about climate change. Um, yeah, but even so, I think that a lot of

different things are kind of tied up together. And so, um, I remember when

I--well, I remember when I was at Colby--I'm going to talk about food now, even

though I don't know how--I don't know that at the time I thought food had any

relationship to very much. I don't know if I understood that at all. But when I

was at school at Colby, a bunch of my friends had a, um, a food co-op buying

club. And so the food would come in, I don't even remember how often, and it

would just be big boxes of stuff and we would sort through it all and then

disperse it however, based on what you had ordered. So it was like a buying

co-op. And so that was really my first exposure to co-ops. And then I moved to

New Haven where Yale is, and, um, somebody I met there said, well, Mary, you

know, you got to go to the co-op. And I'm like, okay, what's the co-op? And so

he said, well, you know, you got to go to the co-op and sign up and become a

co-op member because obviously that's how you should buy your food. And

obviously it was how I should buy my food. And, um, so I've always been a member

of a food co-op ever since. And, um, I was even saying to my husband the other

day, you know, I can't imagine, like, what are the things you couldn't imagine

living here if it didn't exist? And for me, it's the food co-op. And you know,

food co-ops are constantly challenged in part because they have a particular,

although somewhat dynamic model that doesn't fit well with our corporate model

for how food is delivered to us

. And so they have to continue to change to stay current in the contemporary,

um, employment environment while adhering to a certain set of goals, which I

think is very challenging. Um, so when I moved from New Haven to Cornell, which

is in Ithaca, New York, there was a fantastic food co-op there, um, which had to

rebuild after it was burned down. Um, but it was really a place where my

understanding of what it meant to buy food cooperatively was solidified. And so

when I came here to interview, the person who interviewed me somehow intuited

that I needed to know whether there was a food co-op. And she took me by it and

showed me there's a food co-op here. And so I--when I got home, I said, Rob,

there's a food co-op. I think we can move to Lexington. But I also felt about

Lexington that, um, you know, in certain ways, it would have been more comfortable

to stay in Ithaca. I don't feel this way anymore. Um, but at the time, it felt

like Ithaca was kind of thirty years ahead of us here. And my feeling about that

was, well, we could try to live in a place that's already figured out how to

embrace some of the progressive, um, values that we hold, or we can go to a

place where we can be part of helping to contribute to those progressive values.

Um, and so I think we came here, you know--I think--we used to say to each other

that we felt like we'd moved to America. Um, and that's, yeah, so I think I saw

this as a place that there were ways that I could become involved in things that

I cared about, where all the issues weren't already solved. Yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:And have you seen change in that since moving here? Like are there

specific things that you--

ARTHUR:--yeah, for sure. So I would say--first I would point to, um, UK. So I

always wanted to be

, um, able to participate in making higher education more focused on

sustainability issues and topics. And so when I came here, the Natural Resources

Program, which had a slightly different name then, had just started, and it

wasn't even an official major yet. It was like an individualized major,

individualized curriculum. And I'm pretty sure I was hired in large part because

I had come from, um--my own major had been environmental studies. I think it was

easy to see that I was an ecologist, but that I was also--you know, could wear

this other hat. And so when I was first hired, I was hired with this expectation

that I would contribute to that program. And I served on the steering committee

for the program pretty much my entire career. Um, and it was brand new. And so

yes, now we have this thirty plus, well, thirty year old program that's produced

a lot of students. And those students have grown into professionals. And many of

those professionals are still in our state. I could name some

of them for you. There are people who are working on, um, you know, clearly

strongly related things, related, you know, things related to sustainability and

conservation and et cetera. So there's that. Um, other things I've seen change.

Well, you know, for a whole mix of reasons, um, you know, the university now has

a sustainability coordinator, which I think Shane's been in that position--I'm

not sure how many years, Shane Tedder. Um, you know, it took a lot of work to

move the university to a place where they could imagine funding a position like

that. And it was the work of many, many people. You know, did I contribute to

any of that? Who the heck knows? Certainly, um, through leadership of the

Natural Resources Program, there was some contribution that came from me and

from others doing that work. Um, I, but I think as a result of that, the way

that sort of, uh

, the climate or the culture of our university has been infiltrated by

sustainability thinking. Um, so that's a big change. And it's significant to

have that kind of change at a large land grant university in a state like

Kentucky. Um, I think the fact that we even had a greenhouse living learning

community for a short time that was funded by the College of Arts and Sciences

and the College of Ag also speaks to this shift and this idea that it was really

important even if they couldn't keep it going. Um, so yeah, all of that. Um, but

what else do I see that's different? Um, changes related to sustainability. I

don't know. I mean, I think that Lexington is a more interesting place than I

moved to. I remember when I first moved here, I felt like it was a one-hundred

percent sport town and that it was hard--If you weren't interested

in basketball or football, there wasn't as much to do. Um, and not that the arts

have any direct relationship to sustainability, um, nonetheless, I think that

the infusion of arts and arts culture and musical culture into Lexington, the

growth of that, especially visual arts, um, makes it a place that's more

attractive to people who are likely to make the kinds of changes that push us

closer to, um, living sustainably and all that that might mean. Um, and then I

would also say that, um, although I feel that there's much work to be done, the

bicycle infrastructure here has improved. Um, it has a long way to go, but, you

know, obviously it's visible. The changes are visible. Yeah. I'll probably think

of other things later.

CRUZ-FALK:What necessarily--what sparked your interest in climate

science and climate change? Either--I'm hearing that in high school, you found

that passion, but has it--where did that come from and how has that shifted over

your career and life?

ARTHUR:Yeah, that's a great question. And I've sort of questioned myself on

that, um, because I don't know how long ago I actually understood the climate

was changing and we should be very worried about it. But I do remember being in

my early twenties, so, you know, in the late sixties--the late seventies rather,

the late seventies--being really frustrated with, um, you know, my friends who

weren't interested in, um, you know, things like conserving gasoline use, energy

use in general. And I just remember, you know, at the time I ended up in

arguments with them because they were, you know, driving gigantic

trucks and thinking it was just perfectly fine to get fifteen miles to the

gallon, it turned me inside out. And so I think I must have known then that

there was a problem with fossil fuel use and, um, and, and CO2 in the

atmosphere. But I'm also certain that my understanding of that got a lot clearer

through time, and I know that while I taught forest ecology, from the very

beginning I had a whole section where I used as one of the very first examples

in class, okay, what happens when climate is changing? Um, you know, what does

that mean that climate is changing? And what are the different ways that

changing climate might impact individual tree species, um, or populations of

trees or communities of trees or ecosystems of trees? And sort of using that as

a way, you know, like a conceptual frame for understanding the relationship between

tree physiology, individual tree survival, population survival and function,

community, uh, development and ecosystem scale functions. So I was teaching that

thirty years ago. And, you know, how, you know, of course I taught about forest

productivity. It's, it’s, it’s, it’s, it’s the basis for understanding the

relationship between natural ecosystems and, uh, atmospheric CO2 and atmospheric

oxygen, of course. So it's all tied up in learning--understanding photosynthesis

and respiration, right? You can't understand how forests grow if you don't

understand photosynthesis and respiration. And of course photosynthesis and

respiration are the exchange of gases, CO2 and oxygen. Um, yeah, so I think the

more I taught it, the more I sensed in the classroom some resistance to my

linking of that to changing CO2

concentrations in the atmosphere. And at the same time, I had, um, several

research projects where we were measuring, um, we were measuring CO2 efflux from

the soil. So carbon dioxide leaves the soil all the time. Why does carbon

dioxide leave the soil, you might ask?--(laughs). Uh, the answer is because

there's a lot of animals that live in the soil. Most of them are very tiny. And,

and so, um, of course, just like us, they're metabolizing carbon and they

release carbon dioxide just like we do. And so we have this machine, it's

called, uh, an infrared gas analyzer, it analyzes CO2. And if you breathe into

this sensor, the CO2 meter will go flying, flying up. Um, but if you clap it

onto a collar in the soil, you'll be able to measure the rate at which that CO2

is coming out of the soil. And it tells you a lot about, um, both microbial

activity, but also about the, um, root respiration. So roots are also

respiring--all respiration

leads to the release of CO2. So roots are also releasing CO2. To make these

measurements, you're making them like they're only meaningful if you know what

the background CO2 level is. And so every day that you go out to measure soil

respiration, you're measuring the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere, and you can

see it on the meter. And when I first started doing that, the amount of CO2--the

background level of CO2 was about three-hundred and eighty parts per million.

And now it's like, I'm not going to get this exact, but it's four-hundred and

fifty or four-hundred and sixty. So over those, really, I was doing that work

probably about twenty-five years ago or so. So over that period of time, I was

watching these numbers ratchet up and ratchet up and ratchet up. Um, so I think

having my own personal, you know, uh, measure of rising atmospheric CO2 really

fueled my very visceral, personal, physical, almost, um, understanding of climate

change. Yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:How, how has your frustrations translated in your relationships and,

kind of, to a larger conversation about relational organizing? I think I hear

often with people that are passionate about any subject that it starts with a

frustration, and they don't necessarily know where to put that or how to

communicate that. How do you do that? And how has that evolved?

ARTHUR:Yeah, that's such a great question. Because I think I probably--I'm sure

that there's--like, I'm sure people have written about, like, the evolution of

people trying to communicate about a, um, you know, a topic that has lots of

conflict around it. So I think in my forest ecology class, I--I think I was

pretty good at teaching the facts. And I tried to be good at drawing students to

the trough

to drink. But I think that I appeared to a lot of our students like some sort of

crazy, liberal, feminist person that made it difficult for them to hear me,

especially in a forestry department. Um, so I think that I might not have been

the most accessible messenger for some of our students. Others of our students,

I know I got through to. I remember a student who was not a forestry student,

but a natural resources student, and every day after class, he would challenge

me about climate change. And for whatever reason, we kind of--I know--I'll get

back to the question. We forged a good relationship, even though he was

constantly telling me that he thought I was wrong and why he thought I was

wrong. And I kept trying to point him to what I thought would be the accessible

data that would help him understand it. And I'm pretty sure he left--we left

kind of, you know, on friendly terms, but I think he left still not really

thinking that climate change was happening, and

then he moved to Alaska. And then I, for--I've lost touch with him since--but

for a little while, I was getting emails from him telling me that he now

understood climate change, that he was seeing the implications of it in Alaska

very, very visibly in those ecosystems. Um, and so, you know, so what am I

saying? I'm saying that, um, I know that I reached some students. That I might

not have reached them in the moment, but that they ultimately could take that

knowledge and start throwing things at it, and it could serve as sort of the

Velcro onto which things could stick, so that when they heard it again and again

or saw it, it made sense to them. Um, but I have--I also try to do a lot of

reading around climate change and climate communication, because I've been so

frustrated that we've known so much about changing climate for so long and have

done so little. And so I've been following a lot of people who are

helping to deconstruct why that might be true, and it seems that what's most

true is that we've had the facts, yes, the facts were hidden from us, well, by

fossil fuel companies for a long time, very successfully, um, but nonetheless, a

lot of people have had the facts for a really long time. And so then it makes it

clear it's not about the facts. It's actually not about the facts. And so I've

been working to modify how I talk about it. And I have had at least one

completely broken relationship along the way, while I succumbed, I allowed

myself to succumb to taunting by people who thought I, um, was not giving a

truthful viewpoint on what the facts say

. And so I've been learning how to shift the way I talk about it so that I--my

aim is to not have people treat me as an expert, because once we think there's

an expert in the room, then we think that we're absolved of our own need to

acknowledge what we already know. And so now I try to shift the way that that

goes to say, um, you know, I know you know, for example, for my friends who live

in Denver. I know you know that climate is changing because you see it. You see

all the forest fires that are happening and how many more of them there are. And

you can read in the newspaper, just like I can read in the newspaper, the causes

of that. And yes, it's a combination of drought and increased, um, beetle

killed, beetle damaged forests. And those are tied to changing climate. So I

know that you know this, even though you're saying I'm the ecologist, and so I

know it better. And so you can't understand it. So you can't have

any role to play. I'm saying no, you do understand it. You read that--I know you

read the newspaper. And so I know that you know it. And so instead, let's talk

about how you could shift, shift to having conversations with people where you

share that you do know what's happening with climate change. Um, and that's

been, um, a successful approach with a lot of people because, I think, because I

mean, um, if I think if I do it gently enough, it makes them let go of this idea

that they aren't responsible. Um, and, and gives them some potential for agency

in the work--and so--whatever that agency can look like. And then I also think

that, um, in the end, many of us do have two things. We have the observations

that we've made, we ourselves can see, maybe if not personally

. Um, through our empathy, we can see that the climate is changing, um, things

that we care about. Sometimes we can just see that people are suffering because

they're in places that sea level is rising and their countries are drowning. But

most, most people are seeing that evidence some way or, or they're just seeing

that the phenology is off--that the trees and flowers are flowering at different

times than they used to and then they're getting zapped by late frost. There's

something goofed up, you know, what some people refer to as global weirding.

It's not just warming. It's also weirding. I think Katherine Hayhoe says that.

And so when you start to ask people, well, what have you noticed or what might

you worry about or how are you thinking about this? It shifts the way we talk

about it in kind of profound ways. So that they're not doing this, “you're the

expert you deal.” They're doing, “Oh

, shoot. Yes, I do see it myself.” Um, and so I think--I kind of can't remember

the question--but I think it was about how my own evolution in the work has

shifted. Was that what it was about?

CRUZ-FALK:And frustration, and, like being the messenger?

ARTHUR:Yeah, right. And so I've started to not see myself as the messenger

anymore. I see myself as a facilitator. Yeah. And I still get really frustrated

and I still have to modulate that. And I still do not succeed at that some of

the time.

CRUZ-FALK:Which is fair--(laughs)--I have three different brain shoots.

ARTHUR:Okay.

CRUZ-FALK:One I wanted to ask, I'll start here. You mentioned you've been doing

reading about why? What is your required reading for--not people interested in

this not people that are quote unquote experts--but for people on this planet?

ARTHUR:Yeah. Oh, that's a good

question. And I probably would want to think about it a little more and run

around my house and grab the books. But, um, one book that I do suggest is

Saving Us by Katharine Hayhoe, um, because it's really, really accessible to

people who aren't scientists and who haven't been thinking about it a long time.

And, you know, it's really though, it's for an audience of people who aren't

climate change deniers, but who might be unengaged in the issue. And she's

basically laying out a template for how we can all have conversations with other

people. And she starts explaining to us what climate change is. So it sort of

takes away this problem that you think you can't understand. You can understand.

Um, so I think that's a really good book, um, that I would recommend. Um, yeah,

for people who aren't like us. I mean, that's hard because I'm not probably

reading those books. Yeah

. I really like this recent book of essays called Not Too Late. Well, let me

back up and say that the Yale Climate Connections survey of Americans about

their understanding of climate change shows that only nine percent of Americans

are climate deniers, climate change deniers. And so what that means is that

there's ninety-three percent of Americans who know that the climate is changing,

but it's a big, um, you know, it’s a range of viewpoints and beliefs about

climate. But it seems a very different task--if you realize that your job as a

person who cares about the climate and who wants to encourage change that will

make the planet livable for humans--it's very relieving to know that you don't

have to convince the nine percent who are climate change deniers. And I think

they're shouting in our ear, right? And the media is helping them shout in our

ear. And so we think it's everybody and we think, oh my God, it's helpless or

it's useless

or it's hopeless. Um, but if you realize, oh, it's only nine percent of people

and actually we don't need them to affect change. What we need then is to shift

people from each of the categories that they're in up to the next category,

right? So, so, um, you know, some people are not doing anything because it

scares them and they're hiding under their bed metaphorically. Some people are

not doing anything because they think it's hopeless. Um, some people would like

to do something, but they don't know what, and they need help kind of seeing how

they could become more engaged. And so there's people at many different stages

along the way. But one of the key messages that Katharine Hayhoe is giving to

people is, um, you have to talk about climate change. You have to talk about it

every day and you have to talk about it in ways that are not threatening that

don't shame people, but that draw them into the conversation. That it's a

completely different task than what we thought it was. It's not a task--I mean,

some people, sometimes people want to know the facts. And so, um, you know, I

likened this once--(laughs)--um, to talking about sex with your children

, you know, where the rule of thumb is answer the question that they asked.

Don't get all freaked out because they asked a question that makes you think of

something that you don't want to talk to your child about because that's not

what they asked. They asked a question that you can answer honestly with the

information that they're ready to receive in that moment. So ask the question

that they asked. That's hard, especially if you know a lot about something. So yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:Another brain shoot that I had was how did you get to be this way?

And I think a lot about that because you mentioned empathy and I have a lot of

empathy for people that are not in the place that I am with climate or racism

, all of the issues, all of the isms because of where I come from. And I think

that also has to do with my family. And so how did you get here? Was it family

related, region related?

ARTHUR:Well first of all, I think it can be easier to feel empathy for people

that you don't know than it is to feel empathy for people you do know who you

think should be doing better. So I don't want to mischaracterize myself as being

an especially empathetic person--(laughs)--but I-- what I do know about myself

is I have tremendous capacity to feel empathy for, for people living in a world

that's not fair

. So that's always bothered me. I don't know why. I come from a pretty

republican family and we, um, among my siblings we have and have had very

different perspectives and viewpoints. And you know there are some authors who

have kind of written about basic personality traits and the way they ordinate

for our belief systems and the kinds of governmental structures that we

gravitate to. So I think some of it is truly, um, difficult to pin down and

might be pretty innate. Yeah so I don't know how all that came about. You know,

I would just say when I was a teenager I became a vegetarian. I am not one

anymore, but I was for a long time. And, um, you know was kind of the family

advocate for doing things related to the environment. So I don't know where that

came from. I have no idea. Um

, I am sure it drove my desire to spend more time outdoors and work at NOLS and

I am sure that drove my desire to be an ecologist. Um, I think we, you know--I

was lucky to be a person in a position to be able to pursue the things that were

interesting to me and have that turn into a career that not only, um, supported

me financially but also allowed me to have this part of my work that was a full

expression of my values. And it didn't have to be that way. You know being in a

forestry department--if it hadn't been for the Natural Resources Program that

wouldn't have happened for me. So I think, you know, part of it is that I was lucky--(laughs).

CRUZ-FALK:I often feel the same.

ARTHUR:Yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:The third brain shoot from all of that was, um, will you tell me more

about Climate Conversations and is that one of the passion projects that you

referred to?

ARTHUR:One-hundred percent. Yeah let me back up

because I want to tell the whole story.

CRUZ-FALK:Okay.

ARTHUR:Yeah. So, um, because there's these--because, um, sometimes it's hard to

see whether the things that we've done have mattered. And, and I, so I just want

to tell you about the evolution of these things because I think we can't see the

ways that things will unfold when we step into them and so we just have to do it

anyway. So I'm going to go back a ways to like 2014. Um, so in 2014, um, a

couple of things were happening for me. Um, one is that, um, yeah let's see. I

was getting pretty frustrated that I was in a forestry department but--and that

a lot of our students were ending up working in urban systems which makes

perfect sense. That's where a lot

of our trees are in America. Um, but we weren't explicitly training them to work

on the forestry of urban systems. Um, and I realized--and I'd been frustrated

about that for a long time and I realized we're never going to hire an urban

forester in our department because we don't have enough faculty lines to commit

one to that. So we're never going to do it. Okay so right about the same time

this greenhouse living learning community opportunity showed up and I was asked

to be a co-director of the--of this dormitory based living learning community at

UK. And of course it was like you know I mean that's kind of like a dream come

true for me because it's an opportunity to work with first-year students

and--first-year students who are choosing the greenhouse living learning

community because they want to be on a campus where they get to be involved on

sustainability sorts of issues. So for me that was like, “yes of course I'll do

that.” And there were four of us, and so we each taught a module of our fall

semester course, and the module that I taught was urban food and

forests. And I wanted to think about it in the way of grounding our students in

an understanding of place. So you came to UK and it's not just a university with

a university campus that you could live on for four years and never notice

anything else but it's also a place actually grounded in geography in a certain

set of soils, in a certain climate, in a certain, um, historical context. I mean

you've landed on a place on earth and that has a lot to say about the kinds of

things that can grow there, um, even in an urban setting, like, we don't

override all of that just by our capacity to choose the plants we plant and to

water them and fertilize them or whatever. Um, and so, um, as a result of that

role with the greenhouse living learning community, um, there were faculty in

arts and sciences for whom their participation was supported by extra funding

for their salaries. But the person that me and this other person who did it from

CAFE[1]said look we

, we have twelve month positions we don't want more money. More money won't lift

off the work. We'll just have more work. It's not going to mean that we're not

doing as much research or as much teaching. Nothing else is going to go away. So

we don't want you to pay us. That would be silly because it won't help us.

Instead we want to take the money that you are offering to pay us and hire

someone to help us with the content delivery. And so that's what we did and I

hired this person Nic Williamson to help me teach this urban food and forest

thing. And he had been a student in my NRES[2]capstone

course where we did a--where every year I chose a different topic and the year

that he did it the topic that I chose was, um, urban forests in Lexington. And

he did this mapping thing with his group that looked at forest cover across

Lexington and highlighted that, uh, property values were strongly correlated

with tree cover. And so that was really like

the first report of this problem that we now fully know that we have in

Lexington which is this problem of poverty tied to redlining of course. The

correlations are strongest within New Circle not as much outside of New Circle

for also reasons of history that relate to the openness of the, um, horse farms

and the fact that when you build suburbs in those horse farms they don't start

with trees and so you have to build a tree canopy so they're behind. Um, anyway

so Nic had worked on that. I knew he was interested in it. He had just come back

to town. I knew that. I reached out to him. We, we--will you work on this with

me. And then we started to realize oh we need to be doing this urban forestry

work. And so we reached out to the forest entomologist and the three of us

created the Urban Forest Initiative. And the Urban Forest Initiative is, um, at

its best a large working group of people that draws in all the people who've

been interested in the trees in Lexington for a long time, and they look like

lots of different kinds of people. So people who work for the city and people

who work for the

state and people who work for Fayette County Public Schools and arborists and,

uh, people who manage the trees on campus and Shane Tedder who's interested in

sustainability at-large and helped us get this off the ground, so a whole bunch

of different kinds of people. Um, and, and so it was at a meeting that we

had--that was in 2014, and at a meeting that we had in 2017 by then we had

people coming to these urban forest initiative working groups and saying, “hey

how come you guys don't do this,” and, “hey I want to do this workshop and will

you help me do this workshop.” And we're like, “whoa,” you know, like this is

just a side part project that we do. This is not our real jobs. Um, but now that

there's all these people asking for these things maybe what we need to do is

create something called Tree Week. So everyone was like, “yes Tree Week yeah

we'll celebrate trees.” And I'm thinking well if we celebrate trees then we're

leading people to think about climate. So I'm excited about that. So, um, Tree

Week started in 2018. We're coming up on our sixth year. Eighteen, nineteen,

twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three--yes

our sixth year. And in 2020, I think--maybe 2021--Christine Smith who's the

executive director of Seed Leaf and who had always had some event with Seed Leaf

during Tree Week invited me to the north farm and said I'm trying to think about

what kind of event to do and I'm struggling, Mary, because you know it's really

nice to have this really fun sweet celebration of trees but why aren't we

talking about climate change. I went, “oh darn you're right. Why aren't we.” And

so that started Climate Conversations. And so Christine came over to my house

and Claire Hilbrecht and Cagle, Cagle, after a couple of meetings we drew her in

because we knew she could help us figure out how to articulate things. This, um,

person Craig whose last name I've just lost

which is terrible. He just lives around the corner from me. Anyway a group of us

got together to say well what is it that we want to do, what is a climate

conversation, what do we want to do, how would we do it, et cetera. And so that

was the first year. Let’s see, it must have been 2021 that we had actual climate

climate conversations as events at Tree Week. We've been kind of trying--we've

been stumbling along kind of trying to figure out, um, how to do it, and what to

do, and how to make it meaningful. And, um, yeah, I'm not answering the question yet.

CRUZ-FALK:So what is climate conversation?

ARTHUR:So what is climate conversations now--that's great. So I'm glad that I

said this whole story leading up to it because--let me just finish that now that

I see the question again. Um, I think it's really important to remember that

it's a little bit like this person-to-person organizing actually because when we elevate

conversations about things and then remember to infuse those conversations with

the central value that we actually bring it opens up doors and windows for

furthering those conversations. So what is climate conversations. Well it's

morphed a lot recently. Um, you know, at first it was events during Tree Week

and then you know we really thought of it as a as a opportunity to share how we

were grieving, grieving about climate change, and then to move from grieving to

like what can we do. And we created these yard signs so we have a whole bunch of

yard signs. We now have a yard sign library as of this last Sunday I have two

people who joined the yard sign library which basically means you give me ten

dollars and I give you a yard sign and when you're tired of that particular

message you let me know and we swap it out for a different message. And then

because you're paying money, um, I'm right now giving you a sign that I paid for

but when we get a few more people joining the actual

library part with their twenty dollars or their ten dollars then I'll go buy

more signs and then it'll become this continuing thing where we can always have

enough signs for everybody and replace the ones that wear out along the way. So

that's the idea behind it. Um, and the idea behind the yard signs is that

they're worded in a way that's drawing people in through their imagination. So

you know what if we had a you know I can't remember what they are, but, you

know, what if every street had trees. What if every street in Lexington had

trees or what if every child could name you know ten plants or what if we

understood that soils are alive. You know, so there's those kinds of things but

they're questions right because we're aiming to draw people in through their

imagination and through their heart I guess by asking questions that are right

here you know they're sort of right at the edge of their thought process and it

pulls them in. Um, so we had the yard sign thing and we've struggled to make

that--to really bring that along

. Then we participated in the on the table. We had a bunch of different on the

table events where we, um, sponsored those through the umbrella of Climate

Conversations. We did a, um--with Cagle we did a Kentucky Climate Consortium,

um, talk. So we've just been trying to like figure out how we can do this. And

then recently Christine went to a meeting, um, out-of-state where she came back

with this idea of first Sundays at Julietta Market, so, sort of a way to bring

community into the market for all sorts of reasons that the market could use the

community presence--to ask nonprofit organizations--we're not a nonprofit

organization--we're sort of not even an organization--but, to ask people to come

and table and participate in that. So we committed to eight Sundays--eight

monthly Sundays from March to October. And that required us to think about well

what are we going to do we don't just want to stand at a table we've got to have

something to do. And so then we had another

person join us. His name is Alex Smith. Alex, um, is both the person who sold us

our solar panels back when he worked for a company that had solar panels and we

just connected because we were thinking about a lot of the same things and then

I've sort of stayed in touch with him and he's been trying to do this. He's,

he's for years been trying to figure out how can I tap at climate, what are the

things that I can do, maybe this, maybe that. And he's tried on different

approaches to having--being able to create momentum toward working on climate

solutions. So he joined and he said hey there's this card game out there called

“We're Not Really Strangers” which people have heard of. I had never heard of it

and so we sorted through the decks of cards. They have three different levels

and we pulled out cards that we thought we could morph to fit with our climate

conversations, and so we basically built a card game of climate conversations.

And so people come to the table we say we have these four games--we have four levels

not three we say pick a card from each level and then we'll have a one-on-one

conversation with you and they're not about facts they're about feelings, um,

related to climate change. And so we've had now maybe fifteen or so of these

conversations. They're remarkable. They're profound. They're enlightening for us

I hope for the people we talk to and I think so, um, and it's an opportunity to

talk to people who are in different phases of thinking about climate. Um, yeah

so that's what it is right now and we are hoping to--we're basically

workshopping it right now we're trying to improve it through our first Sundays

events. It's like us--once a month we know we're going to show up for this and

we can like improve what we're doing. And each time it's a little bit better and

we're a little bit more together, um, and we're going to probably start to meet

once a month

in-between so that we can think about, okay, so we have this idea, we're having

these conversations, but having seven conversations once a month isn't really

going to move the needle. So how do we take this model that we've created and

replicate it, how do we get other people to take it? So that's the next thing

that we want to start to think about. How can we share our cards our questions

with other people that then they'll take it and then it'll be like a series of

volcanoes all threaded together by the by the model that we're creating to have

more and more conversations? It's pretty wild--

CRUZ-FALK:--it's very cool--

ARTHUR:--it's, it’s--

CRUZ-FALK:--I want a yard sign--

ARTHUR:--okay--

CRUZ-FALK:---I live on Nicholasville Road, so--

ARTHUR:--oh my gosh--

CRUZ-FALK:--all the cars--

ARTHUR:--all the cars. Yes, and somebody might steal it and that's okay. Yeah,

I mean, that's okay. So that's why it's good to be part of a library. Yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:Um, I wanted to for the record ask what on the table is, and I'm just--

ARTHUR:--yes--

CRUZ-FALK:--personally curious and what those conversations looked like

.

ARTHUR:Yeah, so, so, on, uh, so on the table--so, I, so I'm not an expert but

my understanding is that on the table is a, um--it's not just Lexington that

does on the table, but it's a model that comes from other places, and I think

Lexington does it every year, and this year it was sponsored, led, organized by

Civic Lex. And it's basically an invitation to people to hold a gathering either

a virtual table or a real table and invite people that they know to have a

conversation. And this year it was focused on the, uh, the--what do you call

it--the, the, uh--

CRUZ-FALK:--comprehensive plan--

ARTHUR:--comprehensive plan, thank you. And we--as Climate Conversations--um,

and this was really, much of this was Claire Hilbrecht’s, um, uh, impetus--um,

we guided conversations around our on the table events toward the environment

and how to make the environment in Lexington

more sustainable. Um, yeah and I think we had a lot of really good

conversations, and we brought people into the work. Yeah, was that your question?

CRUZ-FALK:Yeah.

ARTHUR:Mm-hmm, yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:Cool, okay. I'm trying to think of where to go now. In the same vein

as bringing people into the work, we live in Kentucky, you've been here thirty

years. What do you--and this is a personal question for me--want people outside

of Kentucky to know or realize about the state in, in regards to this realm and

maybe just generally also.

ARTHUR:Yeah I love that question. Um, during the pandemic I--one of the jobs I

had along the way

after college was that I worked at this place called Ocean Park Environmental

School which was a, like, a week-long--students would--schools would bring their

fourth and fifth graders to Ocean Park Environmental School for a week and so

we, these recent college grads, would have them for a week and teach them about

environmental education. And, um, one of the people that did that thirty years

ago or thirty, forty years ago, forty years ago, um, wanted us to all get

together. So we got together on a zoom call and I said, “well I live in

Kentucky,” and one of these people who lives on one of the coasts said, “huh,

how's that going for you?” And I felt so offended by that, and I thought oh

that's really interesting where I guess you've lived here long enough now to

feel personally offended when somebody disses your state. So what do I want

people to know? Um, well it's related, it's related to all of this and it's not

related to all of this. So, so, you know, I've lived in different places I've

lived in Maine, in California, in Colorado. I've spent a lot of time in forest

in all of those places, and people ask me what my

favorite forest is, and I don't have one because every single forest feels

different, smells different, sounds different. You could drop me in any one of

those places and I could open my eyes and know where I am, or maybe not even

open my eyes but just smell it and hear it and know where I am. And, and so I

feel, um, very attached to the, um, the forested landscape of Kentucky. And I

think that's true for a lot of people, and I think--I'm certain that it's not

true for everybody, but I think that it's a huge, a hugely important kind of

potential cultural grounding for a lot of people. And even as I say that I know

that the--what that grounding looks like has changed dramatically

with every generation as we've moved along and even the way that people

experience them. So, you know, generations ago there were no ATVs and there

weren't mountain bikes and, and so--there wasn't climbing so, or at least not

the kind of extensive climbing Mecca that we have now. So I think that when

people experience the woods more personally and more slowly they were very tied

to that nature and they could more readily see it and experience it and know it.

So at the same time that I want people to know that I live in a really beautiful

state with amazing forest ecosystems that are greatly deserving of protection,

um, I also hope for us to be able to better connect the people who live here to

those forests because, um, you know this relates to climate change. Forests are unbelievably

important in stabilizing climate. Um, there's a lot of misunderstanding about

that. There's a lot of misunderstanding about where the carbon is and how we get

the carbon there and how we keep the carbon there and, and so I've heard people

espouse things that are essentially false, um, about the need for young forests

because they fix so much carbon when the reality is that old forests fix a lot

of carbon too and they contain a tremendous amount of carbon and we need to keep

it in the ground. So, so I want people to know the forests here are really

important. We have a lot of forest cover here. We need to maintain that forest

cover here, and we need to give people the gift of, um, having a relationship to

nature so that they can also value it and protect it. And this also actually

relates to why I wanted to do urban forestry stuff and that is because urban

forests are a gateway. Many people are not going to go, you know, to the Daniel

Boone[3]to go hiking or even to Floracliff

[4]. The trees they're going to see are the trees in

their city, but it's if we can give them that gift of relating to trees in a

more personal way--knowing their names maybe, giving them names that don't even

have anything to do with Linnaeus and his classification system--but having a

personal relationship to them or even not just having a personal relationship

with them, but also then recognizing, “oh, I have a personal relationship with

that plant that I didn't even know I had until you asked,” then we start to

create the possibility that more people will understand the need to protect

them, um, and maybe even understand or develop a personal, um, value for their

role in protecting the

planet from changing climate. Did you follow that whole thread because that was

a little esoteric--(laughs)--

CRUZ-FALK:--yep, I liked it--

ARTHUR:--but that's the way I think about it I guess.

CRUZ-FALK:Um, do you want to talk more about the forest ecology course?

ARTHUR:Mm.

CRUZ-FALK:That was something I pinned earlier.

ARTHUR:Yeah, yeah well so, um, what I want to say about forest ecology and I'm

trying to figure out how to think about--how to talk about this with, um, people

who aren't in a forest ecology class. Um, I think there's a lot of teaching that

can be done, you know, on field trips with adults where I figure out how to talk

about the role of forests and climate change and make it accessible. So in

forest ecology, um, you know, you have to talk about productivity because it's

so fundamental to how ecosystems work, you know, and

productivity is driven by photosynthesis and respiration. And the difference

between those, um, is the amount of productivity that's occurring in that forest

and, and things--there are various things that influence that. So, for example,

well I mean for example how did we get fossil fuels? What does that even mean?

What is a fossil fuel? We throw that term around like we know that the gasoline

we pump into our car is a fossil fuel whatever the heck that means, and we know

that coal is a fossil fuel, and we use that word, but we don't know what it

means. And the reality is that it's plant matter. All of those fossil fuels are

plants. So what are they doing there? Well they grew in a, in an environment in

which decomposition was not, was suppressed, you know, it was wet, and after it

was wet there was pressure

. And so it's flipping plant matter. Fossil fuels are plants and, and so whoa

like that's just a--I mean that just blows you away when you think about that

right? And so what that means is that plants were taking carbon out of the air

and storing it in plant matter and then instead of it decomposing and releasing

it, you know, instead of the microbes releasing that co2--like remember the the

LI-COR[5]analyzer that I had in the forest that I could

measure that co2--instead of that happening it's getting buried, like, think of

a bog. There's so much carbon in a bog. There's also so much carbon in, um,

circumpolar forests because they have a really short, uh, short what's the word,

like, short growing season. So the trees aren't growing very fast but the

decomposition is, is very suppressed, so most of the carbon is in the soil. It's

buried. It's the reason that changing climate is so terrifying, because there's

so much carbon in those soils and they're wet

. So when they decompose--when they warm up they are no longer permanently

frozen. They not only release co2, but they release methane, and methane is a

much more powerful greenhouse gas. Okay, but what I want people to understand is

that, how did that carbon get there? Through photosynthesis. So if you're going

to understand--so once you start to understand forests and how they function,

then you suddenly understand like the how the whole globe functions in the

context of carbon; in the context of carbon movement into and out of forests and

in the car--in the context of carbon storage, like, where is the carbon stored?

And if you understand that, then at that point you understand, “oh, holy moly.”

So when I think about accessing the resources in this forest, I actually have to

think about where that carbon is, and where that carbon is going to go, and what

the implications are for the globe. And then all of a sudden you think

, “I actually care about whether the rainforest in Brazil burns down or gets

harvested so they can grow cattle on it because now I understand that, that

carbon which was stored in those forests in a very stable way was not only

keeping co2 out of the atmosphere but it was also regulating climate,” right?

Like it's the, it's the thread that if you follow it tells you almost everything

you need to know about the, the, uh, the very challenging precarious place that

we are on planet earth. So, uh, that's why I wanted just to have you circle back

to forest ecology because I tried to share that with my students. And, and if

you look at the whole globe you can actually now measure the you can measure the

co2 in the atmosphere across the whole globe. So what

that tells--it's amazing actually because you wouldn't know this and they didn't

understand it in the fifties when they put up the first co2 monitor at Mauna Loa

in Hawaii--the very first time they started to look at this seasonal, or the

annual pattern of co2 concentration in the atmosphere they were stunned to see

that it goes up, and it goes down. It goes up, and it goes down, like, every

year it goes up and down. Like, you can measure the up and down on an annual

basis. That's pretty wild, right? So then you have to go, why would it go up and

go down? Like, why would it go up and go down and when would be the up and when

would be the down? So in the summertime, in the northern hemisphere when the

trees are growing photosynthesis exceeds respiration. So that's good. They're

taking in more carbon than they're giving off, and that's really important

because otherwise how would they grow, right? They grow by taking in more carbon

than they have to release in order to maintain their cellular function, their

cellular metabolism

. Um, but in the wintertime they're still alive, and every single living cell

has to respire, so they're losing carbon all summer long. So in the summer co2

in the atmosphere dips down and in the winter it rises back up again and that

happens every year. And scientists were stunned to discover that. So that's

pretty cool, so you can see that. You can see that annual flux, and then we've

had that record now for seventy-three years. And you can see, I'm going like

this because it's been rising, rising, rising, so it's a zigzag. It zigzags with

the seasons and then it rises. And you might ask, well, why would it go up and

down when it's not just the northern hemisphere? If you're, what you're saying

is it's the global co2, atmospheric co2 concentration that it's not just the

northern hemisphere, but if you look at a globe you'll see--and it'll confirm

what you already know but forgot--that the land mass in the northern hemisphere

is a lot larger than the land mass in the southern hemisphere, so there's just a

lot more forest, a lot more

ecosystems in the northern hemisphere than in the southern hemisphere. So the

northern hemisphere swamps the signal. And then what people have done--and

they've thought okay that's interesting--now what happens if we put these

sensors up all over the world and we can really accurately measure the co2

concentration in different places? And then what you see is that of course that

the northern hemisphere and the southern hemisphere work in opposition to each

other. So when the co2 concentration is high in the northern hemisphere it's

it's at its lowest point in the southern hemisphere, um, and you can see this

whole, um, you know, like response plane of what's happening with co2. And even

across all of that you can see that on an annual basis the amount of carbon

dioxide in the atmosphere is rising. So it's really compelling, and it helps us

understand how ecosystems function. And if we understand that, then now we

understand that of course human beings are disrupting that by burning fossil

fuels by, by managing land in a way that takes away those four systems that are stabilizing

everything. Um, it just--everybody can understand that. It's, it's truly

understandable, and so, um, yeah, so I want to think about how to share that

kind of information with regular people so that they can become--so that they

can understand. You know, like I've, you know, it's not the case that every tree

we plant matters. It only matters if that tree grows up and gets big and then

when it does finally come down the wood goes somewhere else because as soon as

it decomposes that carbon goes back out to the atmosphere. It's why it's

important to compost your food scraps instead of putting them in the landfill

because when we put them in the landfill they release, um, methane instead of

co2. And at least in your compost they release co2 and then you put that a bunch

of that carbon that's, that's slow carbon that doesn't decompose readily onto

your garden and it makes your garden vegetables grow better. Like, like these

are all tied to the same incredible thing called photosynthesis and respiration

.

CRUZ-FALK:I want to come to composting and like sustainability efforts in

general. This is a very broad question. I had a friend visit me from California

that lived in Seattle and when I visited her in Seattle it's basically illegal

to not compost--

ARTHUR:--it's illegal not to compost. Basically it's so present that you're

required to compost like we're supposed to recycle, only better.

CRUZ-FALK:What would be--now I'm coming from like a city viewpoint--what would

be your perfect city as far as things that we can implement that we can actually do?

ARTHUR:Yeah, yeah, yeah. No kidding, no kidding. Yeah, yeah. That's great. Well

just riffing off of what other places have done, I mean, um, you know, we could

have citywide composting

. It's, it's interesting we have we have compost in the backyard and we--I tried

to get all my neighbors to do it and I succeeded next door because they have

kids and they're like, “yeah it'd be good for them, you know, we've done a

little composting and they need a chore.” And it's interesting because we've

talked about what to put in the compost, and yet there's things that show up in

there that shouldn't be there. So it's an educational challenge, um, and, you

know, even some of them have come from our house, right? Like I'm not pointing

any fingers here, you know, but, like, the little labels on your avocado they

don't ever go away--(laughs)--I mean, we, we knew that. Um, but even so it's

hard to remember to take them off before you put the compost in. Um, I digress.

I think that citywide--access to citywide composting, or even the requirement to

do citywide composting would be amazing, but of course then you have to have a

composting facility and the capacity to distribute that compost meaningfully. So

they must have that in, in, in Seattle, and that's amazing, and I'd love to hear

more about that. And, you know, there was movement toward composting in

Lexington. I've kind of lost track

of where that pilot project went and what happened to it. I don't know. Hannah

LeGris was involved for sure and Seedleaf, and I just don't know where that's

landed. It's a, it's a monumental amount of stuff that it would produce, so it's

non-trivial, um, and Shane has been involved in some composting efforts on

campus with, um, Aramark. Um, so there's lots of kind of, um, beginning projects

that could help us with that. Another, um, really maybe even kind of low-hanging

fruit is, um, all the waste that comes from trees. So every time we have one of

these storms we lose a lot of trees. And those trees get taken down, and then

they get mulched, or not mulched but, um, chipped so they can be disposed of,

and sometimes they show up in people's driveways like mine, and we and we spread

them around, and then they feed the carbon in the soil, but, um, an awful lot of

that goes, goes to landfills. And so what would it look like to create a more

functional distribution or, or, you know, what would it look like to turn that

into a resource and how could we do that better so that you know it would be

possible to, to, um, you know, actually access that important resource? Um,

there are cities--shifting to another thing--there are cities who you know both

through a desire to have quieter cities but also not just to silence yard

equipment but also through acknowledgement that yard equipment is on--is an

unbelievably inefficient use of gasoline. It's unbelievably inefficient. And so

people get out their lawnmowers and they're mowing with gasoline and it's, like,

um, I mean, not only is it terribly polluting and, and really problematic for

the health of the, uh, landscaping companies where people are using that

equipment all day every day, um, but it's also just a terrible use of fossil

fuels. It's really irresponsible

, and it would be better and more efficient even though our grid is mostly coal

to be using electrified leaf blowers, lawnmowers, etc. Washington D.C. now has a

leaf blower, um, ordinance, um, you--they're phasing out, um, gas leaf blowers

there's even money there to help people shift equipment. It will be much

quieter; leaf blowers are one of the loudest things there are, but if they all

became electric they would be quite a bit quieter. But it would also have the

potential to have some climate impacts too. So there's a lot of those kinds of

things, and what's hard about them is that they're--um, you know, we should have

them all, but but how do you swoop them all into one package? You have to kind

of go at each one of them piecemeal. And, and, and to get those moving forward

you need a group of people typically who are really passionate about it and

won't shut up and show up over and over and over again and provide detailed

plans for how they could be implemented, um, yeah. Yeah, so those are just three

I can think of

off the top of my head. Another one is actually--I mean urban forests are

important in the context of climate change in large part as an adaptation tool.

So, you know, they aren't really going to do anything to mitigate climate

change. They have a little bit of a role to play in mitigation which is that

they, um, they can reduce the cost of air conditioning quite dramatically

actually. Um, but they're more important in terms of adaptation in the sense

that they can make cities more livable they can reduce the heat island effect.

Um, you know, so they're, so they're really important. But not just Lexington,

but Kentucky has a problem with the way that--I don't understand this and, and

somebody like Heather Wilson would--um, but we don't have the kind of urban

forestry, uh, management infrastructure that's a city like Cincinnati has

because we can't use taxpayer money

to pay for city trees. So when you have a tree in your, you know, between the

street and the sidewalk, you actually own that tree. So when our pin oak gets

sick and it's really large and we have to take it down it will cost us thousands

of dollars because we don't have a way to use city budgets to do that work. It's

not to say the city doesn't spend a lot of money managing urban trees. They

spend a lot of money managing urban trees, but they're doing it in public land

and this isn't considered public land. And so this idea of greening individual

people's streets and making it more livable for people who live in areas that

may not have great air conditioning access, or even just to reduce the load on

the grid during those really hot days, you need trees. So I would say that's

another thing is to try to understand what the problem is with the code that

makes it so we can't figure out how to fund those things. And that would be a

great, um, great use of, um, IRA

funds, or whatever those are, you know what I mean, all those funds that are

coming to us through administrative--through the administration to help with climate.

CRUZ-FALK:Noted--

ARTHUR:--yeah--

CRUZ-FALK:--things to talk about with the big man.

ARTHUR:Yeah, yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:I'm gonna wind it down. Is there something--I have one more

question--but is there something that you want in this interview that we haven't

touched on?

ARTHUR:Oh, I don't think so. We've talked about a lot of things I didn't

imagine talking about--(laughs). Yeah, okay, I guess I'll say one more thing.

Um, I think it's really important for-- have a lot of arguments about this--um,

I personally think it's really important for dialogue around climate and climate

change and climate change mitigation and adaptation for us not to fall into the

trap of thinking that individual people

--that it's our responsibility as individual people. It's not our responsibility

as individual people. We shouldn't take the rap for what corporate America has

placed on our table for us, and when they tell us that it's our fault we need to

push back on that, okay, that being said it's not because I think that what we

do individually doesn't matter. I think it does matter; it just doesn't matter

for the co2 concentration in the atmosphere--(laughs)--so yes, I have solar

panels, and yes I loved it when we put them up and people talk to us about them.

They're much more valuable as a conversation piece than they are as a

co2--atmospheric co2 mitigation thing. It's not enough. I can compost my

vegetable scraps till the cows come home and it is keeping methane from leaking

out of the landfill but it's not enough

, and yet it's essential because it's by doing those little individual things

that we learn. Like, it relates to this, you know, what would you like the city

to do? I would like the city to have really great infrastructure for bicycling

and pedestrian and connections to buses so that I don't have to use my car. I

would love that, and we're a long way from that still. Um, so we need those

individual actions but not because they fix the co2 problem, but rather because

they engage us and they point the way to the activities that we need to make

more accessible to everybody. So that it becomes normal to compost your

vegetable scraps, so that our entire city compost their vegetable scraps, or so

that every neighborhood has actual trees that cool those neighborhoods, so they

don't have to air condition. So it's the way that those individual actions lead

to changes in policy, and policy comes about because people band together and

they say why doesn't our city have this.

CRUZ-FALK:Yeah

. I think my last question has to do with that because I think that is a very--I

think that there's a lot of despair in the thought of all of these things that

I'm doing don't matter--

ARTHUR:--yeah--

CRUZ-FALK:--and I think--

ARTHUR:--mm--

CRUZ-FALK:--my generation feels that and I think I hear a lot from my peers,

like, why bother? And this also goes to your book recommendation, book

recommendation of It's Not Too Late. but my last question which I think about a

lot in this work and I think we've talked about before is like what gives you

hope still in this, and like how would you make that argument of--

ARTHUR:--yeah--

CRUZ-FALK:--yeah.

ARTHUR:Yeah, yeah, well, I mean, I'm hopeful every day, and I'm not an

optimist. My daughter

describes me as an optimistic realist, so I'm also not a pessimist. Um, I read a

lot of Rebecca Solnit. She's, I think, one of the, the great seers of our

generation, um, and I can't recommend her work enough. Um, she writes a lot of

essays they show up a lot in the Guardian, so I read her all the time. And she

says a couple things that I, that I really take to heart. I'm pretty sure that

I've heard her say it, but she might have quoted somebody saying it, that, that

if you're like really optimistic like, you know, it's gonna be fine, you know,

it's all okay, or if you're really pessimistic there's nothing we can do, it's

over, I might as well just leave--lead my own hedonistic lifestyle because

there's nothing I can do--both of those are terribly privileged points of view.

They completely ignore the reality that many people are already right now suffering

truly horrific consequences of changing climate. So if you're sitting in one of

those two spots you are, you're living a very elite life, and it's not that I

don't think my life is pretty elite, but it's that I don't--I aim to not be

comfortable in that place. Um, and optimism is not the same thing--it's, it's,

I'm not even certain that it's related to hope. Um, so hope is a completely

different thing, and hope is not optimism, right, like I had this argument with

people, like, though, you know, all these people are talking about hope. I think

we have a confusion between hope and optimism. Hope is what happens to us when

we see that there are a lot of people working on this problem and that we can

join that. We can join the team, and none of us has to do it by ourselves, but

we're obligated to do some of that work. And, you know, there's different

quotes that, that say basically that. You know, that you, you are actually

obligated to participate as a, as a, um, you know, as a condition of being a

human in the world and on the planet in this time. And, and I think that, that

sense of obligation should make you a very--should help make you a very happy

human because in fact people are a lot happier when they work together with

other people, um, you know, in community. So Climate Conversations gives me huge

hope. Every time we do it I come away exhausted because I'm an introvert and

it's like three hours of conversing with people I don't know, um, and

unbelievably energized. And then I also really, um, I really try to read people

who are telling me about the good things that have happened

. And all of the good things have happened--that have happened--which are

happening every day around climate and also other issues--happen because

individual people work with other individual people in community to affect

change. That's it, it's the whole thing. It's the entire shooting match. And so

if I can be part of that, then my life is going to be much more--I'm going to

lead a more meaningful more satisfied, happier, more connected existence. Um,

and so, so I would just connect that to this other thing that Rebecca Solnit

always says which is that we don't know how, we don't know how it ends until it

ends. Like we don't know, we don't know, we never know, we don't know, we don't

know, you know, we don't know what's going to happen in the balance of

authoritarianism and democracy, we don't know. And so it's, um, it's like

shooting yourself in the foot to say we can't make change

. Like, why would you choose that? We don't know the outcome. And so the only

reasonable response is to get on board and do any little tiny thing. And so one

of the things that I try to talk to people about when they say well what should

I do--I kind of I get a little frustrated with the question because, I think--I

it's like why do I get so frustrated with that question? What can I do? I think,

well a little bit, I think how can you not know what to do? That seems unfair,

um, but I also think the problem is if I give you a list of things to do then

you'll do those things and you'll think you're done. It's a little bit like the

problem we have with recycling. Many people recycle and that's all they do and

actually recycling is not really that of an--that's not a very effective

approach to, um, any of the things it's meant to do, you know, because of

problems with markets. And, and also because it doesn't get--it doesn't do

anything for consumption, like, recycling is the third reduce reuse recycle it's

the third thing and so if you didn't do number one and number two then number

three isn't very relevant. But, but we've given people the opportunity to feel

good about themselves by doing that third thing. That is not very effective. So

when you--when people say what are what is it I should be doing, I get

frustrated because I think they're asking me for a checklist so they can check

it off and go on with their regularly programmed life. And, I think, well, we

can't go on with our regularly programmed life and actually, uh, is your

regularly programmed life bringing you joy or not? And so I think it's me--it's

relevant to ask people

to think about what sparks joy, and that's really a better question, you know,

like, what sparks joy? And, and then can you help them see the way that the

thing that sparks joy for them is connected to climate and climate activism.

Yeah, so, that was long-winded answer for what gives me hope. It's not something

that gives me hope it's, uh, it's, it's capturing hope for myself through

action. Yeah.

CRUZ-FALK:Yep--(both laugh)--cool. Anything else?

ARTHUR:Nope, that’s it.

CRUZ-FALK:Okay, then that concludes the interview. I'll stop us.

[END OF INTERVIEW]