Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History, University of Kentucky LibrariesEnvironment and Heritage Along the Cumberland River Oral History ProjectInterview with James David “Jamie” Pheasant, Jr., May 28, 20242024oh0217_ehcr0006_pheasantLO:  All right. So my name is Edward Lo. I'm a Lyman T. Johnson postdoctoral fellow at the University of Kentucky Appalachian Center and Appalachian Studies Program. Today is, uh, Tuesday, May 28th, and it is 7:11 PM. Uh, we're near the pawn shop here, uh, behind Rick Youngblood’s Smoke Shop Number One, uh, here in the Qualla Boundary in Cherokee, North Carolina. Uh, so do you mind

telling me a little bit about yourself and, and, uh, where you where you were born and raised and your date of birth also.PHEASANT:  I'm James David Pheasant Jr. Uh, I was born here at the Cherokee Indian Hospital. I was raised here on the Qualla Boundary. Uh, started traveling and dancing when I was probably about twenty, twenty-one years old. I started

traveling with Rick and, uh, matter of fact, it was the first time I went to the Daniel Boone Festival, when I was twenty-one, and I'm fifty-four now or fifty-three. I was born in March 3rd, 1971.LO:  What's your relationship to, to Rick, like Rick Youngblood?PHEASANT:  He-- actually, I call him dad. He's been

a dad. He's been there for me quite a bit and helped me through a lot. And showed me, uh, more, uh, the traditional ways and, uh, some of the more, uh, getting off the Qualla Boundary here and traveling. If I could tell you a story,

we went to Florida and we went to do, like, an interview like we're doing here. And it was set up in this lady or in a big condominium place. And I pulled up, we pulled up and I said, “Rick, Rick.” He said, “What's up?” I said, “Man, this is a big housing project!” (both laugh) And it was a condominium--(laughs)--and I was, I was, I had never been off the reservation and didn’t really know it, except for go to school

and come back. And yeah, that's, that was my story about, you know, uh, about being off the reservation for the first time and not knowing really what was out there, because our little town back then, you could run through it in the wintertime and there would be nobody here but the summertime, because we were a tourist town. It would be covered up. And we really didn't-- back then

there weren't many jobs and our, our parents could only do so much. We didn't go get to go out on vacations and stuff like that. So when I started going to Daniel Boone and these festivals, that was more of my vacation to get off the reservation and see what was out there.LO:  Yeah. How would you describe, uh, what the Daniel Boone Festival is if you were telling this to someone who's never been before?

So a total stranger. How would you describe that?PHEASANT:  This is, uh, a place where families come because Barbourville is like Cherokee; people go off to go to work. And when we have our fair, people come home to go to our fair. At Daniel Boone, it's the same way, these people that went off to work, they come to the fair

and they meet their families and they enjoy the week there. And I consider some of them my family up there. And it's really enjoyable relaxing just to go up there and eat a lot of chicken and dumplings, and there’s chicken and dumplings. You can eat chicken and dumplings, beans, cornbread. My favorite up there is

the chicken and dumplings, so.LO:  I’ve definitely heard chicken and dumplings from an earlier interview with Rick so--(laughs)--I appreciate hearing that, so, such an integral part of the experience.PHEASANT:  Yeah.LO:  Um, so how did you get involved with the, with going to the festival? Was it also with going with Rick? Is that how you got started? And then it just kind of became, uh, uh, something enjoyable to go to, like a vacation, you said earlier?PHEASANT:  Yes. It's, uh, like I said, I, when

I started dancing with Rick, we went up there for the first time, and then after that, I hadn't missed any years until, uh, Covid [EDITOR’S NOTE: the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in 2020] hit and I missed, like, three years. And I think last year is my first year back. And, uh, me and my girls come up and we enjoyed it. We come up and, uh, perform

. Uh, they like to go up and ride the rides and meet-- they go up there and their friends, they've met for years, they go up there and they see their friends. And like I said, they've been was able to walk. They've been going to the fair and they they met so many friends; they, they, uh, love it up there. They, yeah, they go up there and

uh-- got two older ones that they kind of got out of the dancing life, but they kind of come back here and there, and it's just, the days that they want to dance is they want to go to Daniel Boone. That's just it. They go, Daniel Boone.LO:  Yeah. Uh, can you describe to us what, um, what are some of the different, um, roles or, or songs or dancing

that, that you do at the at the festival?PHEASANT:  Well, what I share is the men's fancy dance, the hoop dance, uh, I lead the friendship dance a lot. My girls do the, one does jingle dress, one does fancy shawl, and both of them could do ladies traditional. Uh, my son, he does the grass dance.

My oldest daughter, she does fancy shawl and jingle. My, uh, nephew, uh, you met him awhile ago, uh, Rupert. He can hoop dance, fancy dance, he's a talented guy. He can do it all.LO:  So you’re really proud of all of them?PHEASANT:  Yes.LO:  Yeah. That's great, um.PHEASANT:  And we do have, uh, the little ones that dance. They,

they-- we don't force them out there to dance. They come out and they dance on their own, and they hear the crowd, and that makes them excited.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  It's like--(clears throat)--my youngest daughter last year. She was like being shy because, like, since Covid, she hadn't been out in front of public. And when she heard her name and the people clapped, she

was ready to dance. She was ready to get out there and that was at Daniel Boone.LO:  It's a wonderful feeling. Yeah, build, a confidence builder.PHEASANT:  Yeah. Then after that, she was ready to go. She was ready to get on stage.LO:  Huh. Do you feel that the, the stage itself has changed over time since you got involved? Uh, what did you see change over, since, you know, since you got involved when you were twenty-one? Um, because it sounds like, uh--(Pheasant clears throat)--from what I heard earlier, it used to be, um, set up differently,

and now it's set up sort of behind the, the courthouse. Um.PHEASANT:  There's, uh, a mural painted on a building down there.LO: Mm-hmm [affirmative].PHEASANT:  When I first started, that's where we danced at. Was it right there, where, that building with the mural? And we danced there, and we were-- we was like, we pushed down here, over here, away from what was going on.

But after the years went on, they brought us to the main stage, and pretty much a lot of people would come just to see us. I mean, I quote, this is something I don't know, but the concerts and stuff like that, and it's like here too, those concerts had nothing to do with the meaning of Daniel Boone. Just like our fair,

the concerts have nothing to do with our culture.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yeah.PHEASANT:  We bring it in, them in to share. And just like they do with Daniel Boone, it's to draw more people in. But the stage, when they brought it to us was for us to be on it one time and just, you know. And the clogging, the cloggers come up there and they dance. Y'all enjoy watching them. You

got gospel singing. I love to hear the gospel singing. And you and-- but uh, them big concerts. (laughs) No, I can’t. But that's not me, that's--LO:  Yeah, uh-huh [affirmative]. It changed the, the feel of the, of the Daniel Boone Festival over time.PHEASANT:  Yes, yeah.LO:  Uh-huh [affirmative]. So how do you feel that-- what does the festival mean to, to your community in your, in your words, with

all the dancers that you're going with? I think you may have talked about this earlier.PHEASANT:  The dancers that travel with us is family. We're all family. And if we're not from the Cherokee tribe, if they're not from our tribe, we still accept them as family because we've traveled for years together, and we all together.

And we eat together and, uh, pray together, cry together. And, uh, when we go up there, we take pride with our dancers that come from here. Because this is, uh, our home land for the Cherokees, but that also is our homeland. We can go back.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  Where, uh, trade

it for cane if our-- uh, Birdie and Geet Crow, they used to go up there. Walker Calhoun, his family, they went up there, uh, wrote-- Geet’s name is Richard. Excuse me, but Richard Crow. But they all went up there, and last year

I was getting ready. Saturday morning, I looked over and I seen a family of Cherokee from, front the reservation. I said, “Well, why, why ain’t you at our fair?” Uh, “We come up here, we, we come up here to see us (??) dance, and we also come to see the family that we met up here years ago.” And they come up there and they still consider that's their, their homeland, too. And they went up there.LO:  Yeah.

So they were also over at the, at the festival?PHEASANT:  Yes.LO:  Okay. Oh, that's wonderful. How, how would you say that the festival has shaped who you are? You know, it sounds like, uh, you mentioned earlier, opened up like a whole new, new world. So how, how did, you know, going to that festival as a vacation shape, shape, who, how you see yourself in, in this community? In this, this world?PHEASANT:  Well, there is one year Rick got sick

and Bill come to me and said, “Can you handle it, son?” I said, “Yeah, I can, I can do what I have to do to, show to go on.” He said, Well, I got this for you, this for you, this for you. And, uh, first of all, getting up, going, doing school shows, right? Like, I ain't got a drummer, Rick’s sick. So I have to go do the school shows without, without it. But I

done it. I got all our dancers and some of our dancers, as they're adults, tend to be lazy, and they don't want to be there on time. I [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] got to push it (??). Hey guys, we're set on a time. We've got to be there. We're professionals, let's get it done. We got it done and I wouldn't-- at one point, I would not be a leader like that.

I would just kind of sit to the side and say, “No, you (??) need to do what you got to do. He's going to be late.” But right then I had to step up, be a leader and make sure everybody performed and was out there, right?LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  And they helped me, uh, better just-- the lead up. Not just my kids, my nieces and nephews.

Also the adult dancers. Uh, get them, uh, we're here, just do our job.LO:  Yeah. So that's a, that's a proud moment. Do you remember roughly what year that might have been?PHEASANT:  I'm not for sure. I know Rick got, had a shoulder surgery and he got up there and it was, got staph infect, infected. And

pretty much he just-- Bill had to take him to the hospital and I think he stayed at the motel room the whole week. And just, we had to, me and his wife, Ramona at the time, uh, she kept her kids going, I kept my kids going. And we kept the show going because we had--LO: Uh-huh [affirmative]. That’s amazing.PHEASANT:  I think at that time we had three booths set up, craft booths, plus

a fourth one was a cook booth. So we had to make sure all that was going on. And plus the dance going, the dance team gotta do their job (??).LO:  Yeah, there's so many moving parts. I can't--(laughs)--imagine doing that myself.PHEASANT:  Yeah.LO:  You said there were some school shows that, that you also did. Was that in the, on the reservation? Was that over in Knox County for the school shows?PHEASANT:  It was at the Knox County at, uh, high school. Um, I think me and, uh,

some of the reenactment people went over there and done at the high school.LO: Uh-huh [affirmative]. Yeah.PHEASANT:  And I then went into elementary. And I think, I know for sure, one year I went up a week early and me and Bill went around and did little shows like that for, I don't know how many schools back then, but.LO:  This was before the

festival or.PHEASANT:  Yeah.LO: The weeks before festival, uh-huh [affirmative].PHEASANT:  Yeah. It might be like two months before the festival, we went up there. It was right when school started, so probably about August and we went up, I went up there and we-- matter of fact, Rick dropped me off because he was going to another show that week. And I took a bicycle and I, when I get done with the school shows, I rode around--LO:

With all your regalia and everything?PHEASANT:  No, I, I went back to--LO:  Oh, uh. Okay.PHEASANT:  Our, uh, well, I was staying at Harold's. I stay at Harold's, and I'd go change and I'd jump on my bike and ride around the campus, ride around Barbourville, and just meet people that, uh, like the bank lady. I still can't remember her name. I just call her bank lady when I see her. Uh, the Hardee's that burnt down. I was, I ate there quite a bit. That was my morning thing there.

Go eat at the Hardee's. Uh, there was a big old place, a big old chicken that stood (??) up there, and we ate there. I, it was a gas station or something. But that was, uh, one little mom and pop place I wish was still open. I could go up there and,  whew, man, it was good eating.LO:  Yeah, you get to know the people well, yeah.PHEASANT:  Yeah. And when Walmart finally hit that place, it was like, shoot. Like, if it hit here, it'll be like firecrackers and people will be going all in there. And that's the way Walmart

was up there--(laughs).LO:  Oh my God--(laughs). Can you tell us a little bit more about the, what the reenactment was like? Did you have a, how did they want you to, to do, do different parts? Like, uh, did you, did they ask you how you wanted to, to portray different things? At the schools?PHEASANT:  Well, they did, they did their own, they did their own little shows or talked about their weapons they carried.LO:  Like the pioneer show?PHEASANT:  Yeah, they, they did their explanations of everything. And

then I would come out and, uh, put on the stereo and dance my fancy dance, and then, uh, catch my breath for a minute. Then I'd have to explain the hoop dance. Then I'd put the stereo back on and do the hoop dance. And then, uh, I would sing my own little round, or friendship dance, and I'd let them on friendship dance. And then,

this is all at the, at the high school, when I did the friendship dance and we was in the library and man, trying to get all these kids together to do that dance and--LO:  Yeah, it’s a big circle, right? Yeah. Everyone hold their (??) hands together.PHEASANT:  Yeah, it’s a big circle (??) [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] holding hands. And it's a symbolize of a never end, uh, dying friendship. We hold our hands. And, uh, when we circle

around, like the, coil up like a snake and uncoiling. That's just the way, uh-- you know, we uncoil, we breaking that chain and coming back and holding hands with rejoining hands that will never be broken. We are friends. And that's the way Barbourville is. [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] Bill and, uh, Charlie. Uh, gosh, I can't remember all their names. Uh, all the committee members names.LO:  Oh,

yeah, there are a lot of people--(laughs).PHEASANT:  And actually, uh.LO:  [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] Because.PHEASANT:  Bill come, Bill come here about a month ago and talked to me and asked me, to make sure, “Jamie, are you coming this year? You coming?” And I told him, “Yeah, I'll be there. If the Lord's willing, I'll be there.”LO:  Yeah. So he comes around and checks up on everyone?PHEASANT:  Yes. Every year.LO:  That's good. Um, what are, you know, you mentioned different elements of the festival, right? I think

you touched on, on the, on the carnival and, um, the concert. And then there's like the three or four booths that you did during the year that you were leading, um, for, for, uh, uh, Cherokee arts and crafts. What what do you feel is the most important part of the Daniel Boone Festival?PHEASANT:  It's the River Cane Treaty. That's what it was originally set up for, was the River Cane Treaty and the homecoming for Daniel Boone. Like I said, people

going off to work, coming back, and they get to see their families. And, some of them might be gone for twenty, thirty years and never been back to the fair since they left out. But when they come home, they knew right there where the fair was. They could see family, friends they hadn't seen. And they, they meet up there.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  And there's just different aspects that you won't see out

there on the scenes that these committee members are doing to bring all this together. Like I said, Bill comes and checks on us. Uh, Charlie, they'll call me up sometime or, it, they all check on me and Rick. Rick got sick back in December. I don't know how many times my phone blew up. Bill calling me. Uh, they all checking on, Hey, what's going on with Rick? What's going on with Rick? And they, uh, they're family. Um, and they will treat you like family when they get there.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  And we used to go up there and, what (??) is that? I can't remember the guy, but he wrote a big old bull

or a buffalo through the parade. I'll never forget that, he rode it.LO:  He was part of the parade?PHEASANT:  Yeah. He got out to the parade and Troy was his name. Uh, and he rode that bull.LO: Uh--(both laugh)--oh my god.PHEASANT: (laughs)--It was crazy! But it was, it was calm. The bull was calm [?? WORDS UNCLEAR], but they said, “You’re going to get off and dance, off on the side?” I said, “No. I got red on. That bull's

right there.” I wouldn't get off that float--(laughs). Yeah, we, we used to used to get off the side and then dance on the side of it. Now my kids do it. They get on the side, they dance. I've got to the age where if I get through it, just singing, I'm doing fine through the parade, because we've danced all week. And then we got the big parade and, yeah, but yeah, the parade is something else, though. The families are lined up hollering and man, it just (??)

covered (??) up, isn't it? They get there eight o’clock in the morning, they start lining up. And I think it finally ends about four o’clock. And this place about-- and then (??) the fair is kicked off going for Saturday evening and it's day, it's the last day of the celebration. They celebrate and I know at nine o’clock everybody's wore out. They start wearing down. But we still got two more hours

to go because we got to break down all these booths, get them off the streets, then head back to Cherokee. So it's a busy week, but it's also a fun week. Like I said, it's vacation, work--LO:  All together.PHEASANT:  Yes.LO:  What, what are some stories, uh, from the Daniel Boone Festival that you'd like to share?PHEASANT:  You'd have to cut this off--(both laugh).LO:  All right. I'll ask you afterwards--(laugh).PHEASANT:

No, no, that was a joke--(Lo laughs). There was well, like the, the bull and we, we got Turtle Man come up there one year. Yeah, Turtle Man come up.LO:  Who is (??) Turtle Man--(laughs)? He's dressed like a turtle?PHEASANT:  Uh, you never heard of Turtle Man?LO:  No.PHEASANT:  He is, uh, he's on the TV. He, uh, catches turtles. Anything that's in the water, he'll go in and catch it. And

my kids, they was running all crazy and I was like, What's going on? What's going on? We're lined up in the parade trying to get, get them calmed down, but, We got to go meet Turtle Man. We gotta go meet Turtle Man. So I had to walk them about four blocks down to meet the Turtle Man. And by the time we get there, man, he's all covered up. Rick

said, “Come back, son.” He said, “Why?” He said, “Turtle Man will come over and talk to us a little bit.” Sure enough, he come over and talk to us, Turtle man. And, uh, there's, you know, there's different, I say public figures that come through Daniel Boone.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  That's, uh, been there.

Golly, I can't think of any other ones, but there, there-- see how much Barbourville has grown. The, the fair has grown, because when I first went up there, there might have been two rides, two or three rides. And now you go up there and you go all around each little block in there. There's four or five rides here, four

or five rides here. And that is for children. Children's got to have fun. And they got an art show or an art, set aside art exhibit of pictures. And my picture's been in there a couple times. Not in the funny paper, but, you know--(laughs)--in the, in that contest.

They took my picture and a couple of times that's one. My kids have been in the art show and the pictures you see; the whole town shuts down, but you'll see just different pictures throughout the, the fair in our, in our businesses to show you this is what happened, say 1954, they'll have a picture up there.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  And at the visitors booth

this year they had the video play from way back and then till now, how the, the fair has become and how, you know, it was.LO:  Yeah, it's a little, a lot of different elements have changed. Um, actually one of the things that people, some of the, the, of the other people have said, uh, is that the, I think like the window dressings or something was really important, uh, at, uh, and they, they're sad that that's not there. You know,

that's not what they used to be.PHEASANT:  Yeah.LO:  Do, do you agree with that? So sort of like, you know, the, the window dressings were an important part and they, you know, that they should still be an important--(laughs)--part.PHEASANT:  Like I said, they had pictures of the past years, and I think that should be important, because you might not, this person might not be here with us no more. But you can

remember the way they was and how they, uh, supported the Daniel Boone Festival.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative].PHEASANT:  Uh, this year I seen, I think it was, uh, kindergarten or first grade, they had that in that one shop. They had, uh, the murals of what they made of Native Americans. It was displayed in the

windows. People see that. They appreciate a-- these kids are learning and also they showing what they learned. And that's what the fair is about. It's about the Native Americans coming here for trade. And the children are learning, uh, it's in their school. And then, like I said, the window dressing is something that should stay. That's what I see.LO:  Yeah.

Um, have you ever been helping, uh, with the, the river cane? Um, collecting the river cane and, and the Cumberland River floodplain? Is that-- what do you know about that?PHEASANT:  No, I've never been up there to collect it. I know, uh, a couple of my friends that do it. I call them my friends. I really don't know them by name, but

know one's got red hair and he's one of the committee members. Uh, he rides a motorcycle. But he collects it and he tells me, “Hey, Jamie, it was a good year. I got some good cane.” And yeah, take it and show it to me and, but he-- it's all collected before we get there so.LO:  Mhm. Okay.PHEASANT:  And they get, and then,

in (??) them fields to get that river cane. You imagine the water moccasins? Snakes? It's all in there, ah!LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  Yeah, it's not for me--(Lo laughs). Water moccasins will be wet moccasins. I'm wearing them on feet (??), and that's about it--(both laugh).LO:  Uh, the, uh, so during that year when, when you were, you were leading, uh, everybody, the whole, the whole show, um, did you also need

to sign the, the Cane Treaty that year? Um, because I--PHEASANT:  I think, uh, I'm, I'm thinking that might have been the year Chief Hicks come up and signed it? I'm not for sure. (clears throat) But during that period of time is, I've got where it was at the armory, and I had to have all the kids quiet

in the back, because you get a bunch of native kids in there all in one room? They're going to get loud. And I had to get them quiet. They want to get out there and run around, so I had to keep them in the back. So I don't know who signed it that year for sure.LO:  Okay, okay.PHEASANT:  I just know, uh, my job at that time was to keep them in the back, keep them quiet. And get them ready, because you try to get a two year old ready, then

you got a three year old over here. They're fussing and fight, and then they get loud. And so my job was to get them ready and get them out there.LO:  Yeah. Um, and so this is a question I've asked, um, everybody I've interviewed, but, um, you know, how, how would you consider the, the importance of the, of the Cumberland River or, or any river, um, for, for, for, for yourself, but

also for, for your community? Because I know that down in Knox County, the Cumberland River itself has flooded over time. That's affected people locally, um, over in Knox County. But I'm wondering if it has, has had a different meaning for, for, for you and your community or if the river is also here in the reservation, have a, you know, special meaning?PHEASANT:  Uh, river. Well, the water, we go to water and we go to pray at the water, we wash

up. We do our, our, our ceremony water. We use water. Water is 90% of our body. We got to have water. Uh, water is used, uh, used back in the day to travel. Uh, you could also-- water was

, um, it's life. And that's, uh. If we keep contaminating our water systems, we're not going to have nothing. Our water is pro-life. We need our water.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  In the river, yeah. We could have more people

to go alongside the rivers. Clean it up. There is stuff (??) at different rivers that I've been to, I've seen, that is not safe for animals, nor less humans. And I'm not just saying the Cumberland River. Oconaluftee River, Tuckasegee River, I've seen it

in quite a few rivers. And y'all, our river is, we need to take care of. And, uh, Rick, he started a drum-- a matter of fact calls, I don't know if he told you about, uh, we got a paper plant up here in Sylva, North Carolina. And him,

uh, they started the drum and they was sitting up there protesting, protesting, and nobody paid attention. Finally, the news came along. They caught the news’s attention. Well, the interview come along, and they ask Rick what his name was, what (??) drum group was. Well, he looks over. He sees a

blue can paint over there, can of paint. Got blue on there and he named it Blue Earth. That was the original. Now we're called, uh, Bird Chopper. That's his grandpa's, that's who we named after now. But, but when he started off, it was Blue Earth. And that was to protest the pollution of the river up here. Because you could not fish in that river. You could not, uh, tube in that river. Now you can go down and kayak, fish that river.

‘Cause Ricky and them protested it got it cleaned up. And rivers are what we need, I mean.LO:  Yes, it's the lifeblood of the whole community. So.PHEASANT:  Yeah, yes, sir. Yeah.LO:  Um, so what, what do you think about Boone, Daniel Boone? Since the whole festival is named after this man.PHEASANT:  Well, really, he was before my time--(laughs)--but,

, uh, from my understanding, he was friend, friend to all. He wasn't just, uh, for the settlers. He wasn't, you know-- he helped the natives out. He helped out the settlers, uh, and widen a lot of trails. I mean, not, you know what I mean. Opened a lot of trails up for different people to

travel these mountains. And that's basically my understanding. Like I said, a little before my time, I couldn't tell you.LO:  Yeah. No, he's, uh, he's, uh, definitely legendary in, in many different ways, so.PHEASANT:  Yes, sir.LO: (laughs) Um, how do you see the, um, you know, what would you like to see changed about the Daniel Boone Festival? Different, different,

uh, there's a different part of it that, or the way that they do the festival, that you’d like to see different?PHEASANT:  (clears throat) No, I couldn't say from my perspective. No, I couldn't say what needs to be changed because,

uh, we're going to all evolve and it's going to evolve to what, uh, the generations, from generation to generation. It's going to change no matter-- me or you can try to set in stone. This next generation is going to move up. It's going to turn and turn and turn. And the Daniel Boone Festival, if you keep the primary

focus of this, this, was to bring home people. Also celebrate Daniel Boone. Also, you celebrating the River Cane Treaty. You bringing three components right there together that you can, you know, some people just have a Daniel Boone Festival. They don't realize that what he did with the Native Americans. But you see that Barbourville, they bring it all together

. And plus, if you watch Daniel Boone, he, and they come to that little fort, they had that little, you know, on the TV series. They all come right there. And they was family and they all shared food. They all shared what they had. And that's the way, if in God's eyes, that's the way we should be back. We should come to share and be with one another instead of looking

at one another and say, “Hey, they don't-- that's, he's not right for us.” Well, you don't know until you talk to him.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative].PHEASANT:  And you never know if you keep putting somebody down. If you walk up to them because they might have had a bad day. You never know, the way they're acting. You never walked in his shoes and he's never walked in my shoes. But when you sit down and you think about

it, I mean, he might have needed help. He just too proud to ask me. I might have, should have went and asked him. That's what we need nowadays. We need to go ask. ‘Cause some of them will sit out here. Veterans sitting out here on the streets, too proud to ask for help.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative].PHEASANT:  And they're homeless. And we need to go help them.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yeah.PHEASANT:  And need to go help our elders

or children. They need help. Because there are a lot of mean snakes. And what I mean by snakes is drugs, alcohol, and the snake pushers. These drug pushers, they got here on every corner, every city. We need to…LO:  Mhm. Just be more compassionate.PHEASANT:  Compassionate. Yes. And

our children can see it. It's right there on the street. Hey, that looks like fun. No, it ain't fun. Teach them about a snake. A snake will bite you and smile at you and walk away or slide away. And that's what them drug dealers are going to do. They're going to slide away. They're going to get you hooked. They don't care if you're six feet under, they're going to get you hooked. They're going to slide away. Slither away. Be under that rock.

They're not going to care. They're going to sit there. Got that money in their pocket.LO:  Yep. So then the Daniel Boone Festival reinforces the, being compassionate. Being, you know, treating one another with respect, being, being kind and just watching out for each other. Just like what Bill’s, you know, done for you.PHEASANT:  Yeah.LO:  Do you, uh, ever feel like, uh, it would be great to have, you know, to be in invited on the committee of the Daniel Boone Festival?

To have Cherokee representation, you know, on the committee members itself? Because it sounds like, Bill, you've been working with Bill and, uh, you know, through, with Rick for, for a long time.PHEASANT:  Well, Rick is like a liaison with Bill. And he's kind of in the, in all the committees here. Pretty much. Tell him how you need to do this. You do

that.LO:  Yeah.PHEASANT:  And if in the background there is somebody on that committee and they, they're all listening. One's listening to Rick, and maybe one's over here listening to Rick. And they all come together. Well, Rick said this. And he may not be on the committee, but he's a liaison. He puts it in their ear, what they need to know.LO: Yeah. No, that's great

to have a, you know, a liaison like that. Yeah.PHEASANT:  Yeah.LO:  Mhm. Um, is there anything else you'd like to to add.PHEASANT:  I'm just grateful that they invite me back each year. I enjoy coming up there. Some days it'll be warm and then all of a sudden it'll get cold. And you just, when you come to the Daniel Boone,

bring shorts, and also bring a heavy jacket and some pants because it does, the weather changes. And probably 20% of the time, you're going to experience rain. So just come to Daniel Boone, enjoy your, enjoy yourself, eat some chicken and dumplings, and enjoy, and enjoy the coming and watching the Native Americans

dance. And if we could break bread with you right there, we would. But we got to perform and make sure everybody's doing, enjoying the festival.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yeah. You had mentioned the there's a, you know, you've done the friendship song, you've sung the friendship song, among other songs. Would you like to sing a, a song to end the recording?PHEASANT:  No--(both laugh).LO:

All right. Well, Jamie, it's been a pleasure talking with you. Thank you so much for your time.PHEASANT:  Thank you.