PRATHER:Okay. Today is Monday, October 14th, 2024. My name is Liz Prather, and I'm interviewing Mayor Al Botts, a lifetime resident of Montgomery County, Kentucky and mayor of Mount Sterling. This interview is taking place at Mount Sterling City Hall in downtown Mount Sterling, and is part of the third Monday in October Court Day Oral History Project. All right, Al, welcome. Glad you're here.

BOTTS:Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity.

PRATHER:Yeah. So before we get started talking about Court Day, just tell me about yourself. Tell me a little bit about who you are and your history.

BOTTS:Well, um, one, I'm mayor of the finest city in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. I like saying that. And I'm so blessed to be able to serve as mayor of this wonderful community, this beautiful, historic community. Um, and just proud to be a part of the team here. Um, I was raised here and born in Lexington, but raised in Montgomery County, graduated from high school here.

PRATHER:When did you graduate?

BOTTS:1987. And I actually, um, you know, I went away. I was gone for 20 years as a United States Marine, serving our country and serving all around the world. And when it came time to retire, I came back home. I brought my lovely wife here and my son. And I wanted them to experience small town life. And this was a great place for me to grow up. And I turned out okay--

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:--being from Mount Sterling, Kentucky. So I wanted to share that with them, and it was probably one of the best decisions I ever made. I joke that it's one of the only arguments I've ever won with my wife to move here, but she kind of likes it, too.

PRATHER:Where is she from?

BOTTS:She's from Jonesboro, Georgia. So if, you know "Gone With the Wind."

PRATHER:Yes.

BOTTS:Yeah. The whole story there, um, that's where she, uh, hails from. And, um. Yeah, it's been-- it's been nice. You know, one of the differences in those communities is--in our communities--is one, Mount Sterling is much like it was when I grew up, and it much like it was when my--my mom and my grandparents grew up. You know, not much has changed.

PRATHER:So your grand--so how many generations are you here?

BOTTS:Well, as far back as we know, on my mother's side.

PRATHER:Wow.

BOTTS:Yes. Um, so, you know, that part of Mount Sterling, I think, is neat because it -- it's not changed. Jonesboro has changed a lot for my wife, and Atlanta has just kind of swallowed it. So it's kind of sad when she goes home that there's no one there that she knew growing up.

PRATHER:Wow.

BOTTS:And I think that's cool that when you come back to Mount Sterling, especially around Court Day.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Uh, if you've not been here in a while, you know, graduated from here, went away. You've had a whole other career, a whole other life. You come home, and Mount Sterling is going to be much like it was, and you're still--you're going to run into people that you went to school with, grew up with. And, you know, I kind of like that.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:I think that's cool.

PRATHER:And Court Day is kind of the point on the map and the calendar, isn't it?

BOTTS:It is absolutely. You know, there's a feel that you get with Court Day.  Today as we're interviewing was-- is one of those days where you feel Court Day. It's chilly. Leaves are starting to fall. Um, it's just kind of something in the air that, you know, Court Day's coming.

PRATHER:Describe what that is. How do you know that? That's such an interesting--

BOTTS:I don't know.

PRATHER:--interesting take on Court Day.

BOTTS:You know, it's, um. I don't know, it's kind of like, you know, people say, well, it feels like, uh. Well, you know how spring feels?

BOTTS:Yeah

BOTTS:There's a feel about spring. There's a feel about fall and football and Friday nights at the football field, those type things. I think there's a Court Day feel, and I think it's just you get that little chill in the air and the leaves start falling and it just seems like, okay, it's time for Court Day.

PRATHER:That's great.

BOTTS:And it's felt like that for the past week or so.

PRATHER:Yeah. That's great. Leading up to it and anticipation. Yeah. Um, I want to-- I want to talk about Court Day, but I do want to ask--in 20 years, you were in the Marines. Where did you go? What were some of the places that you were--[stationed]?

BOTTS:Well, I was very fortunate to serve all around the world. So stationed. Let's see, I was in Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, and I was stationed in Washington, DC for a year. Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. Camp Pendleton, California. Uh, Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii. And then Okinawa, Japan. Those were duty stations. Now, from those duty stations, you deploy, and you--you know, go around the world. So my career took me to 27 different countries, I believe, around the world.

PRATHER:Wow.

BOTTS:So just one of the best things that ever happened to me to be, you know, a small town kid from Mount Sterling, Kentucky, and then get to go experience, you know, this big, beautiful world that we have, these different cultures, you know, meet people from all across this great nation, serve with them, just have that experience. And I think that's helped me coming home and being mayor of a small town that I see, I see things differently maybe, than somebody that didn't have the opportunity to leave here, or that's been, you know, here their whole life. And, you know, certainly nothing wrong with that. The older I get, the more I like being where I'm at.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Um, but I think it's helped me be a better leader. It's helped me see things from different perspectives that I may not have had I not had that great opportunity to just see the world.

PRATHER:What skills did you pick up in the Marines--in that---- that time of your life in the Marines that now serve you as mayor of a small town?

BOTTS:Well, I think one, patience. Um, and learning to deal with adversity. Learning, you know, in the Marine Corps, no plan survives that initial enemy contact, we say. So you know, you're always having to adapt and to improvise, um, your plans. And you, also, I think the skill set, as I spoke about earlier, just being more open-minded, just understanding that there's a lot of different people that grow up a lot of different ways and see things a lot of different ways. And, you know, you've got to take that into consideration as a leader that, uh, you know, sometimes, sometimes the majority is not right in-- in the way they look at things. You know, sometimes you've got a--I think that's what we do as a society--look at, we've got to protect the most vulnerable of our society, and we've got to make sure that everybody is represented and every voice is heard. So, you know, I think that's the skill sets more than anything that I took away. And then, you know, just taking away that, um, life's-- life's good. And, you know, when you have those experiences that--that I've had, um, you know, I served in Iraq twice, in Afghanistan once. And then I was old school that first Gulf War, Desert Shield, Desert Storm. Um, you really appreciate what you have. You appreciate--you appreciate small town life. You appreciate great community festivals. You appreciate that people have the opportunity to come together here, and that we don't wake up and have some of the same struggles that so many around the world have--so many around the country are having right now. So it's just a good place to be.

PRATHER:Yeah

BOTTS:Right here in Mount Sterling.

PRATHER:Were your father or uncles or grandfather or-- or anyone in your family in leadership? In city government in any way?

BOTTS:Um, no. We used to joke that my grandfather, he probably influenced a lot of elections. He was always one of those behind the scenes.

PRATHER:What did he do?

BOTTS:He was a termite man, a Central Kentucky Termite. I don't know if you ever remember that, but, uh, Paul Toy, Central Kentucky Termite. He built a great little company here back when, you know, everything's become so corporate now. But back when you had all these little independent businessmen.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And, uh, certainly learned a lot from him growing up. He gave me probably my work ethic. And, you know, he made me work, and in our family, everybody had to work. That's just the way it was.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Um, but I so, you know, I-- I cherish some of those lessons that he taught me. And, um, you know, he-- although he-- or no one in my family really served in local government, I like to think that both my grandparents, if they were still alive, would just be super proud.

PRATHER:Oh, yeah. I'm sure. Who--How did you decide to run for mayor? This is your second term.

BOTTS:This is my second term.

PRATHER:So your term started when? What was your first?

BOTTS:2019--

PRATHER:2019.

BOTTS:--was my first year, and --

PRATHER:--and your second?

BOTTS:How did I--

PRATHER:Is it a four-year term?

BOTTS:It's a four-year term. So I'm on my second term. I'm six years in now. It's my sixth well, fifth Court Day. We had one that was canceled due to COVID, which was a tough decision to make. We may talk about that later, but, uh. So how did I decide to get involved in local--local government? Uh, told you I'd retired from the Marine Corps, and all I wanted to do was just be Dad and just, you know, go to my son's football games, track meets, you know, just be there for him. I'd miss so much of his life being in the Marine Corps. And so, you know, that's what I did. I helped with the booster club. I was just, you know, just one of the parents that just was there to help out and just did my part. And then he was graduating high school, and I thought, well, why not run for city council? I'm going to have to have something to do. Actually, my wife said, you better--better find something to do or you're going to drive me crazy. So, uh, Mayor Gary Williamson actually called me. I had not thought about running for local office, and he said, "Why don't you run for city council? I think you'd--you'd be good."

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Little did I know, I think he was trying to set me up for running for office when he retired. Um, but I did that, and I served four years as a city council member and learned so much. And really, when I got into it, I just loved it.

PRATHER:What were your-- the years of the city council?

BOTTS:That would have been--let's say, [20]15, [20]16, [20]17, [20]18. So--

PRATHER:Okay.

BOTTS:So those four years were on council, and then when Mayor Williamson decided to retire and not run, um, I just decided to put my name in the hat and see what happened, and it worked out.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Had a-- had a good election, good opponent. You know, Curt Steger. Very good man. We-- we had those, uh, one of those elections that-- that the way it's the way it's supposed to be, very civil.

PRATHER:Yes.

BOTTS:Very kind. Um. You know.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And no hostility whatsoever. And it's what small town elections are supposed to be about at the end of the day. You --you pat each other on the back and shake each other's hand and move forward. So, um, so it just I'm very fortunate that it just worked out.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And that now I have the opportunity to lead this city. And I hate to say, you know, I know my job as a leader here, but I really look at what I do is I'm just a member of the team. I just jump in and help out where I need to. Um, just try to make sure that we have the best employees possible, that they have everything they need to succeed and do their jobs. And, you know, sometimes as a leader, I need to be a good follower. And sometimes that's what I do. I just jump in and help out where I can, and sometimes I get out of their way. Um, you know, sometimes I'm not one of those mayors that's going to speak my mind on every issue that comes up. But when-- when the time comes, if I feel strongly enough about it, even if it's not within kind of my role as mayor of the city, I will speak--speak on an issue to try to help influence where I can. But I'm a big believer that, you know, local government requires so many voices. Good local government requires so many voices and so many people to be involved. And, um, I probably do more listening than I do talking.

PRATHER:Uh-huh. [affirmative] So let's-- I could talk about this all day long because I think this is a fascinating--I, you know, just, uh, just a picture of small-town government. Everyone always talks about small towns being like, cesspools of gossip and backbiting. And this is not what your-- what you--your experience has been at all.

BOTTS:Not at all.

PRATHER:And so, um, I think there's like a whole [a]nother oral history project that needs to be to be launched.

BOTTS:I've got some interesting stories. [laughing] Yeah, we.. [could have fun with it.]

PRATHER:But today we're talking about Court Day.

PRATHER:Yeah, absolutely.

PRATHER:Um, let's start with your personal childhood experience with Court Day. So you grew up here in Mount Sterling.

BOTTS:Um-hum [affirmative]

PRATHER:Do you remember your first Court Day? And just take me through, put me in a time machine and take me back to Little Al Botts. And what did he love?

BOTTS:You know, um, so there's a few memories that stand out with Court Day for me. One would be just at an early age, I can remember coming downtown with my grandfather, and how big I thought that made me, you know, that I got to come downtown with him. And just how it seemed larger than life. Everything about it. You know, the--you know, we joke about how you can smell Court Day before you see it and just, you know, the smells, the sights, the activities. Um, just-- it seemed so busy, but, um, I don't know that age, but I had to be, what, five, six? Somewhere in there?

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And then, you know, after that, it became. It was like-- my wife and I were talking about the other day, you know, how Wizard of Oz, when you were little every year, that's a big thing you can't miss Wizard of Oz because you only had one opportunity to see it, right, growing- growing up...

PRATHER:Right. [laughing]

BOTTS:Well, Court Day was the same. Like you look forward to that every year. Court day is coming, and you can't miss it. And you want to be there for every single moment.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And of course, it was three days, [a] three day festival when I was younger. But, you know, I parked cars from a young age. I could not have been--you know, I wouldn't encourage this now with kids, but-- I'm probably, like nine years old or ten-- parking cars. My--my cousin and I

PRATHER:Like, getting in a car and--

BOTTS:Oh no, we would park in our grandparent's backyard.

PRATHER:Oh, okay.

BOTTS:They, uh--

PRATHER:Kind of explain what that means.

BOTTS:Yes. So you know, we've got so many people that come to town and, um, everybody's coming here, but you got to find a place to park. And as soon as you are coming down North Maysville Road or, you know, West Main Street, East Main Street coming into the community. Um, you are--you start hitting traffic, and you've got people that are out on the sides of the roads with poster boards saying, "Park here." You know, $5, whatever it was. Um, of course, when I was a kid, we parked cars for $3, and I thought, you know, we'd make 30 bucks. That was huge. As a kid in the early 80s, like, you know.

PRATHER:Where were you parking the cars?

BOTTS:Um. Great question. North Sycamore Street, which was on a-- just a regular residential street. Um, that's how crowded the community gets with Court Day, that the main arteries are all clogged with vehicles. So cars start looking at side streets. And if you're a hustler, you can get somebody out on that street that says, you know, parking this way and start directing cars your way. And then, um, you know, we'd find them a good place to park.

PRATHER:So you're parking in where? In someone's yard?

BOTTS:It was in--actually-- yeah, my grandparent's yard. But a lot of-- a lot of property owners will do that. Even still today, you know, rent out spaces in their yards. It's just another example of how Court Day impacts the community economically.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:My--I can remember my grand--grandmother having a yard sale alongside Court Day one year, I believe. Um, but people will do that. They're having yard sales, they're--

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:You know, you'll have little kids with lemonade stands or whatever that are out. So, you know, we were talking before our interview about, you know, the vendors that come in and what they're buying around the community from local businesses. The visitors are spending money on gas. And some-- the restaurants, interestingly enough, say they do fairly well at Court Day. So I would think everybody would spend all their money downtown eating corn dogs and ribeye sandwiches. But some people are grabbing food at a restaurant on the way out of town.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:So just the huge economic impact of Court Day, what that has. And even for a little kid--

PRATHER:Yeah,

BOTTS:--there was an economic impact. I was parking cars and making some money. Now you can imagine what I did with that money. My cousin and I would run downtown, and we were eager to spend that money, however we wanted to.

PRATHER:So what would you buy? What was your-- always your go-to thing you had?

BOTTS:You know, it's- it's funny. I-- I remember spending a lot on video games, like back in the late 70s, early 80s. Video games started to become popular, and I can remember trailers coming in with video games on them, and all of us young kids thought that was the coolest thing ever, that you could play video games downtown--

PRATHER:Yeah,

BOTTS:-at Court Day. I can remember buying t-shirts. I don't know why that was a big deal, but there would be these vendors that would come in from out of town with the weirdest t-shirts, like some refrigeration service in New Jersey, but we thought that was a cool t-shirt because it had New Jersey on it, you know? So, I don't know. I probably wasted every bit-- and then food, of course. But you know how --I don't know--when we were kids--you kind of grew up-- there wasn't a lot of money being passed down from the family to us. You know, allowance was tough to get. I don't recall my family ever saying, "Here's some money, go have fun at Court Day."

BOTTS:Right.

BOTTS:I worked for my money, and then I went and had fun at Court Day.

PRATHER:So what did the video games look like? Because I'm--I'm thinking--what were-- they were actually--they were actually like Pac-Man?

BOTTS:Yeah, like Pac-Man or Galaga or whatever the-- the games were that were like, you know, when you went into--

PRATHER:--an arcade.

BOTTS:Yeah, an arcade. They had those on the backs of trailers.

PRATHER:Really?

BOTTS:For a couple of years. Yes.

PRATHER:That is fascinating because when I'm--when you said video games, I just assumed you meant like a Nintendo game that you took home and played.

BOTTS:Right.

PRATHER:But that's not what you mean.

BOTTS:No, not at all. They had the actual stand-up-- that was popular for a few years, and I remember that that was my formative years. So, you know, from 9 to 12 like that was huge.

PRATHER:That's amazing.

BOTTS:And then they may have, you know, you get kind of--get out of that after a certain age.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:But I do remember that being just me, my cousin, my friends, like having a lot of quarters and playing a lot of video games while we were down there.

PRATHER:Yeah. What did that feel like to be young and unsupervised with $30 burning a hole in your pocket?

BOTTS:Think about. Think about that. How times have changed? That--and let's go back to that $30. $30 in 1981, 1980--I mean, that was a lot of money for a kid. Um, but how times have changed? You know, so many people here in town--so many visitors, and we, as young kids, nine, ten-years-old, just running wild through Court Day, unsupervised. Never, you know-- family never had a thought of, you know, or a worry.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:Um, and then we would, you know, when it was all kind of closing up for the night, just come on back to my grandmother's house. And it was just another day.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Um, and that was kind of cool. When I moved my family back here, my son did the same thing. He would run around with his friends down there, and it may be one of the few places that people still feel comfortable with kind of letting their kids run around down there. You certainly wouldn't go to another festival. I wouldn't go to another community and just turn my kid loose.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:But I don't know. There was something about being here at Court Day, that it was all fine. And maybe it's just so many sets of eyes, so many people from the community here, you know.  [yeah] Just-- just different.

PRATHER:Yeah. I want to go back real quick. How many cars could you park in your grandparent's yard? What was the--and if there were $3 a car?

BOTTS:Oh yes, so was it like-- probably couldn't park but ten, 12 cars and then we'd rotate them out.

PRATHER:As people came and left?

BOTTS:Oh, we'd run downtown, maybe spend a little money and then come back. And in the afternoon, if we could get a car or two in there, you know, somebody's leaving, we'll--

PRATHER:squeeze another--

BOTTS:--squeeze another one in, and then, you know, here's-- here's something else that's kind of cool about that. We get a lot of visitors that come in, obviously, from out of town. We'll get a lot that come in from Ohio or Indiana. And there was a couple who we parked at my grandparent's house as kids, and I can remember my grandmother-- and I was going away in the Marine Corps--saying that every year they would come back to park, and my grandmother would just, after all the grandkids kind of cycle through. And we've all parked cars, and we're older and don't do that anymore. Um, there was no one to park cars in her yard anymore. But that couple would still come in every year, and my grandmother would let them just, you know, park. And yeah, it was kind of a freebie.

PRATHER:That's great.

BOTTS:But yeah, kind of cool that, you know, people that keep coming back every year, and, uh, that they would stop by and they would say hello to my grandmother. And, you know, they kind of built that little bond there.

PRATHER:Mhm.  [affirmative]

BOTTS:That would have never happened if it wasn't for Court Day.

PRATHER:That relationship. Yeah.

BOTTS:Yes.

PRATHER:So let's transition a little and talk about what it's like being mayor of a town that hosts the oldest festival in the Commonwealth. And it's really-- it is THE event in our community, it's the biggest event--

BOTTS:It is.

PRATHER:And we have a lot of things.  We have--we have First Friday celebrations. We have Small Town America. We have a lot of, um, you know, kind of tangential events. But this is the big event. So describe what it's like. What are your responsibilities? What's the prep like? What's your team like?

BOTTS:Yeah.

PRATHER:Give me a kind of a bird's eye view of that.

BOTTS:One, I would say--Let me just say as an elected official, there is a lot of pressure with Court Day. There's pressure to keep this festival alive. That responsibility that we carry, um, to keep improving on Court Day because everybody wants it to go back to the way it used to be. And, you know, you and I were looking at a picture before this interview started of what Court Day used to be. And it's just not that anymore. Court Day changes, like anything does. So the pressure of trying to find new and unique ways to bring people back. Um, you have to work at this festival. You cannot--you cannot sleep on this festival a bit. My first year, I didn't know what I didn't know. And so we probably didn't do as good a job in 2019, or I did not. I was just kind of on autopilot. And I'm learning as I go. After that first festival, I learned this is a 365-day-a year commitment. You know, we need to make sure that when the festival is done, we collect all of our thoughts; we collect everybody's input, and then we immediately go about planning for the next one. You know, you can't--you take about a week off and then it is time to start planning.

PRATHER:Wow.

BOTTS:And one of the things that, you know, we've really tried to do is recruit new vendors, unique vendors, antiquers, crafts, craftsmen, people that-- that-- everybody loves the old time Court Day-- well, then we need-- we have a responsibility as a festival to go find those folks.

PRATHER:Mhm. [affirmative]

BOTTS:Um, so one year I hit-- was it 2020? I went to every-- no, 2020 was COVID, so maybe it was the year after. Maybe it was a combination of both those years, I hit every festival I could, trying to speak to vendors and to recruit them here. Um, but that's all a part of the pressure that I feel with this festival, that every year we have to make sure that we don't lose anything. Um, so yeah, a lot of pressure. A lot of my gray hairs are from Court Day.

PRATHER:What did you do when you would go to these festivals? Did you hand the vendor of media kit?

BOTTS:Yeah. Great, great question. So I kind of put together a little flyer that had the map of the festival. Um, and then just kind of a little intro on one side was the map; the other side was a kind of an intro of what is Court Day. And then when I saw vendors that I like, um, then I would just kind of--approach them and then, you know, when there's a lull, and they don't have anybody in their booth, I would just ask them how they're doing, you know, how's-- how's business today, like, what you've got? And I would always say, "What would you say if I could promise you tens of thousands of people walking by your booth?" And then usually they'll light up and say, "Well, of course I'd be interested in what you have to say. And that's kind of my intro. What if I could guarantee you tens of thousands of people walking by your booth and that, you know, I can follow through on that, because we do have that at Court Day every single year. I don't think people realize how many people are actually coming into the community. You know, we--we do traffic counts, Liz, around the community to see how many vehicles are going down the street.

PRATHER:I was going to ask you--how do you--what's the metric? How do you measure that? That's really I was interested in that, uh.

BOTTS:You know, it's extremely difficult, but a lot of it is just trying to count people in space at any given time.

PRATHER:Okay.

BOTTS:And then, you know, people are moving all the time, right? When you just sit back and sit on a bench and watch people walk by and start realizing, you know, there's-- there's 100 people a minute that just walked by. I mean, there's a lot of people that come to this community during the festival. So, um, that's something we can--we can deliver on, you know, when we recruit a vendor here. So, so, you know, kind of getting back to the question, the pressure, I feel pressure with Court Day every single day. And it-- I guess part of it is, you know, it's survived this long. It's had its good days. It's had its bad days. We've been up some years, we're down some years. But my pressure is, no matter how long I'm in this seat, I need to make sure that I hand over a good festival to whoever comes behind me, and then we don't lose it. And then we got to keep improving on this festival.

PRATHER:Who's your team?

BOTTS:Big team. Um, and you've sat in on some of those meetings. But one of the things I did after that first year--after that first festival, I realized I can't do this alone. So I kind of recruited all of the property owners, everybody that rents out space for Court Day to try to bring them around the table and, um, make them part of this team. Everybody who has responsibilities during Court Day, which is namely our--uh, police, uh, law enforcement, our public works. Um, tourism to make sure they have a place. So one of the successes we've had is just bringing those people around the table and--and--and from that-- that's where your good ideas are born.

PRATHER:Um, hum. [affirmative]

BOTTS:So we've done a lot in the last five years to just try to implement new things, but that's because we're giving people a voice. Um, we've had people just like yourself who've attended Court Day meetings. We've had-- that, they said, "I have good ideas." Well, then bring them to us. Let's figure out how we can do them. Sometimes we can do things; sometimes we just can't. You know, money is a huge concern. Festivals like this cost a lot of money. And people don't realize that. You know, I joke that everybody makes money off Court Day except the city of Mount Sterling. And we do not make money.

PRATHER:You lose money.

BOTTS:We lose money.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Um, bathrooms alone are $9,500 this year. Um, so there's a huge cost that goes into that. And that is the taxpayers of the city of Mount Sterling. It's not the county taxpayers. It's the city taxpayers that are paying this. So this festival will remain around as long as the taxpayers are willing to, you know, pay that bill every year. The every police officer works during that festival. Every public works employee is on overtime during that festival. We're all pretty much overtime for the full festival. So those are huge costs. Um, there's the cost of the prep work that's done. The amount of time and effort. Our public works has to--to put in, to get everything set up. And then something that I'm very proud of--within a couple of days after the festival, everything is back to normal. I mean, there's--there's a lot of work that goes in making that happen.

PRATHER:What's the prep work? What does that look like? Just cutting off streets? Or is there more to it?

BOTTS:Absolutely. So a lot--one of that one thing is, you know, the Adena Trail is-- is where a large part of the festival is held. That's where our Farmer's Market pavilion is, and that is set up for use as a public space throughout the year. And we have to convert that over to Court Day space because we lease that property out for Court Day. So that's taking up a lot of the-- kind of a lot--we've got a lot of logs, a lot of that-- that are in place down there for the parking areas. A lot of signs have to be moved. A lot of the flower pots downtown have to be moved around and shifted around. A lot of temporary signage has to go up on poles.

PRATHER:Interesting. Yeah.

BOTTS:So it's just banners have to go up. Um, so there's just a lot, you know, putting up stages. Um, just really-- it's like when you have a party at your house, and you've got to start moving furniture around to fit everybody in. It's what we do in the city.

PRATHER:Yeah

BOTTS:It's exactly that. We just start moving things around to fit everybody in.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And then when the-- the festival is over. We-- we have a very short time to kind of put it all back in place because we need to get back to normal around here. Um, and get ready for what's coming next, which is, you know, a big, uh, big shopping--um, in November--we have, you know, kind of the Christmas shopping season. And then in December, we have a huge parade downtown where Christmas trees have to go up and-- and banners on poles. So Court Day is-- there's just a very short window to get it all set up and then tear it all back down and get on--get on back with small town life.

PRATHER:That's so interesting. But you really do work 365 days out of the year to do this four-year or four-day festival.

BOTTS:Yes.

PRATHER:Um, so this is a question that I --so that I think-- that I know the answer to, but I'm not quite sure if I do. For years, there were no rules that governed Court Day. Um, you know, people traded and bought--seller to buyer right on the courthouse square and then later down by the railroad tracks. Has the Court Day ordinance that was adopted by the city council--Is that-- is that-- how long has that been in place, number one. And then kind of describe the history and process that has transitioned from this free-wheeling kind of gathering--it's really very organic to this more formal, codified festival.

BOTTS:Right. Um, so first of all, going back, you know, the history of the festival being Court Day where everybody would come in to, uh, kind of have their cases heard before the judge or to do legal proceedings, you know,--you know--by the way, it's-- we'll trade some goods while we're in. We'll buy some goods. Um, you know, that-- that went on. That went on for decades-- with just the city government kind of getting out of the way. It just-- it was something that happened. Everybody's coming in. And then that probably went on a lot longer than people realize. You can look back 100 years ago in newspapers and it would just say, you know, this month's Court Day took place and there were this many cattle in town and, uh, you know, this many sheep were in town, whatever it was. But the city really wasn't doing anything to set up barriers or put up banners or whatever. This just-- the whole thing was just happening. So it really wasn't until, you know--

PRATHER:Crazy

BOTTS:-- mid-century or later where they're starting to close down some streets and, you know, having to take a little more of a proactive role as a local government. Um, I don't know. And I should know this, but the original ordinance, I don't think is but a few decades old. And that was just to put some basic measures in place, like what is the cost of a permit going to be. Because they quickly figured out we're going to have to start charging something to help pay for all of this. Um, and we've refined that ordinance over time. We're trying not to be overly restrictive, but, at the same time, we have to, for legal reasons, put something into an ordinance. And an example--one of the biggest changes is animals. You know, we used to have the stockyards here, so animals were traded.

PRATHER:The stockyards were where in downtown?

BOTTS:Great question. They were on Locust Street, which is in the heart--it's-- you know--one of the main arteries of Court Day. But there was a stockyards there. And so that was just part of the festival. There was just trading of animals that took place, you know, selling of animals. Um, it's a different environment now. We don't have stockyards, number one, and two-um--you know, that's something that I don't know was the best image for a festival, especially in the heart of a city.

BOTTS:Um-huh.[affirmative]

BOTTS:Maybe a more appropriate for--you know, there's nothing wrong with the county fair. You kind of expect that to take place. But--so that's one of the ways--like the festival evolves and changes. I can remember as a kid, dogs running around after Court Day, and it's because people would bring in dogs to sell or trade, and then afterwards, when they leave, they may not take those dogs with them. So there was always stray dogs. Um, so, you know, there's measures we've had to put in place to kind of keep those problems from-- from happening. Um, like I said, you've got to put certain things down in an ordinance for legal reasons. Um, you know, blocking off of streets. And here's the times and those type of things. So, you know, I think one of the-- one of the changes with Court Day is-- one of the unique things about Court Day is-- it just happens for so many years without an ordinance in place.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:And then finally, you kind of had to start putting some rules into place to-- for more than anything, just for legal reasons for the city-- before you can charge money. You know, like I said, for a space which are--I don't know--our spaces-- I don't know that we're-- have really changed much on what we're charging per space. But, you know, before you can take money from the public, you kind of got to have an ordinance in place to, you know, put those rules, uh, into effect. So, uh, good question. I really need to get the answer on that. But I'm thinking in the 80s, early 90s, we--we had that Court Day ordinance because it just happened. And quite frankly, Liz, if, uh, I don't know what we'd do if we weren't part of-- part of this whole process because Court Day would just happen. You've got property owners that are just going--they're going to rent out space, right? Because it's Court Day. It's that time of year.

PRATHER:Yeah, so- and that's just what happens on the third Monday in October.

BOTTS:That's right. [laughing]

PRATHER:Yeah. So um, how many lots? And this may be a better question for the city coordinator, but how many-- about how many lots do you have as the city-- from the city that is rented or that's--I guess--they're rented out.

BOTTS:They do. We-- we rent those out for the weekend. Um. I'm looking. I know one of our parking lots has 100 parking spaces, and I believe the other one is 63 or so spaces. So those are two of our huge city lots. Now, some people will take more than one space. They may come in and rent two or three spaces. Um, so those are the two big city lots. We have a smaller lot that we lease out. Um, and then we have the huge Adena Trail area that we lease out. So we-we take bids on those. High bidder generally gets it, and then they can make all the money they can off of that space. They just owe us whatever that, you know-- agreed upon lease price.

PRATHER:When did that start?

BOTTS:Um, I believe. [long pause] Stockyards would have been operating on their own, and the railroad still would have been running up until '87. So sometime after--I think the railroad railroad closed--

PRATHER:Okay

BOTTS:--that the Adenda Trail area would have been leased out. And I believe Mr. Mac McCormick has probably been the one who has managed that property. And Mac can probably--when you interview him--verify a little more. But, um, I believe that would have been the start of the city officially leasing that property out. Prior to it closing down, that was technically railroad property, so we would not have leased that out.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:Could some people have set up down there? Absolutely. But the city wouldn't have been involved in that. And these are--

PRATHER:And these are--

BOTTS:--our--

PRATHER:--I'm sorry. These are leased year by year? Do you have a bidding process every year?

BOTTS:We have a bidding process, and usually it's a four or five-year lease. Because if-- and I'll just give an example--Mr. McCormick will lease out spaces. The minute that festival is over, they want to know whether they have a spot next year or not. So if you do it year by year, it's kind of creating chaos. So it's best to have at least four or five-year kind of commitment there, that they are paying you a set price to lease this property, you know, from the city, and then that way they can manage it effectively.

PRATHER:And there are only two spots, the small lot that's leased out and the Adenda Trail?

BOTTS:Those are the ones that are leased out. Correct. And then the city lots--Um, you know, all I can say is, I know back in the 80s, they were leasing those out. I'm sure in the 70s they were too. But I can't recall if there was still a building on those lots, then. You know, those old tobacco warehouses-- kind of-- would fall down. That's-that's the big City Lot 1. So I don't know when that officially came down. I seem to recall-- as a kid-- that could have still been there, but uh--

PRATHER:City Lot 1 was occupied by a tobacco warehouse?

BOTTS:There used to be a big tobacco warehouse there. Yes. City Lot 3 had a couple of other buildings on that, and we just have to go back and look, so I don't know--you know, it's one of those with Court Day's been around for so long, you just don't know when and who-- you know--who's been setting up there and when and how long the city was officially leasing spaces, or if the city-- at some point-- was just taking a laissez faire attitude and just saying everybody's coming in anyway. If they set up, great. And if not, you know, whatever.

PRATHER:That's one of the things that's really hard to explain to people is the parameters, because it has shifted so much. It was originally the courthouse square and then moved down towards the stockyards area. And even in the 1960s, they referred to something called Jockey Row? Have you ever heard--

BOTTS:I don't even know. Yeah, I wouldn't know where that is.

PRATHER:I don't know. Yeah, I'm assuming it's down along Locust between the Locust and Adena Trail, but they referred to it multiple times in The Advocate [newspaper], as Jockey Row.

BOTTS:Okay.

PRATHER:And I don't know if that has to do with where they sold horses.

BOTTS:Yes.

PRATHER:I don't know, I'm hoping an historian will rise up and [explain that.]

BOTTS:Someone older than me is going to have to figure that out, Liz. I don't know. That's a great question though. Yeah. So, Court Day you know, I talk about Court Days like a big balloon sometimes. You know--on a balloon, you can push in-- in one location, and it kind of bulges somewhere else. And Court Day has been like that over time, you know. Some years--one year--one street may be really busy. And then, you know, with, uh, with a few vendors moving to a different location, another street may start showing some signs of life that it didn't have before. One of the other unique things about our festival is, you know, people call-- and all the time vendors-- and they want to know, you know, well, how much does it cost? And we can't answer that question because there are so many different property managers. Um, we can tell you what city lots cost, what city spaces do. But private property owners, you know, we can't dictate what they charge for space. So we tell people-- we encourage you to call around and get the best deal for you. You know--best location for you, the best price for you. Um, but that's just weird that when people call and say, you know, "I'd like to be at Court Day. How much does it cost?" And we can't answer that question.

PRATHER:Yeah

BOTTS:Because it's just-- it's unique. I don't know that there's another festival where-- in the downtown area--there's so many different price points. There's so many different options, you know.

PRATHER:Right.

PRATHER:If you're-- it's mostly-- it's mostly dictated by the-- or an organizer-- of a festival. But there's not really an organizer here--

BOTTS:[Yeah] --our ordinance-- if you go back and look at our ordinance, our ordinance is-- is really-- here's the-- here's the festival area, here's when the streets are shut down, here's what you can't do. Um, but it's-- it's still pretty loose.

PRATHER:Mhm. Um. [affirmative]

BOTTS:Whereas most festivals are-- you know--there's-- here's where you enter, here's where you leave, you know, here's the dates and times, and Court Day is just so different than anything else. It's just-- until you've experienced it both as a visitor and as a vendor, you probably can't describe it. I'm sure every one of those vendors that come down will say, this is not like any other festival I've been to.

PRATHER:Yeah. Let's go back to--you mentioned it briefly earlier--2022 or 2020.  Year 2020, and you made the hard decision. You and your city council, I'm sure, and a lot of other advisors to shut down for the pandemic.

BOTTS:Yes. Yeah.

PRATHER:Talk about that. And what-- and how the pressure of history at your back?

BOTTS:Oh, absolutely. Um, so, of course, you know, with the pandemic, um, everything had to change. And our intention was to have Court Day, no matter what. And, of course, you know, 2020, early in the spring, things shut down, things were reopened. We kept thinking, we'll be able to do this. And then you start-- when you're hosting a festival that has tens of thousands of people coming in--you have to look at, well, we've got to start planning.  Is this happening or not? There has to be a point where you say, "yes, we're doing it" or "no, we're not." And things were so unpredictable during that year with-- we're going into lockdown, we're coming out. Here's rules. You know, here's your-- here's your-- the new rules we have in place. Um, you know, shots or the COVID vaccinations are being rolled out like-- and there's so much conflicting information that seemed to change, you know, every two or three weeks--

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:--there's something new. There was just so many unknowns that we got to late July, I believe, and said, "We have to either say we're doing it or not."  Um, and we met with all the property owners, asked them what their thoughts are. You know, COVID being-- The-- so concerning to especially our elderly population. And we have a lot of property managers who are getting up in age. Um, there's the thought of-- do we expose our police officers and public works department to this festival? And to, you know, potentially, uh, folks bringing in, you know, uh, the virus. Um, you have the concern of liabilities. What if -- what if you have not set up your hand-washing stations correctly? What if--you know the bathroom facilities aren't being cleaned properly? Like, there's all of that. The biggest-- I think-- concern that we had-- was hearing from our school system.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:That the kids were out of school so much. And is it worth it? To bring in tens of thousands of people and possibly, uh, you know, bring in-- bring in this virus to our community that, um, will now keep our kids out of school. And that will impact our bus drivers, our teachers.

PRATHER:Mm.Hm. [affirmative]

BOTTS:That was it. You know, Court Day could happen, but then everybody leaves, and then we're the ones that are left here. So that really weighed heavily on us. What will we do to our school system and our kids? And they couldn't afford to be out anymore.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:So we made the decision. And actually that decision-- I told the council it's an ordinance. So the council would have to vote-- to say we're going to suspend it. And we went that night to a meeting. We're all wearing masks at the meeting. Now, think about that. We're--we're wearing masks.

PRATHER:Yeah. You're in July. It's July.

BOTTS:Right. And-- but we're wearing masks. So it's kind of ironic that we'd even, you know, be talking about this, but that's how much it weighed heavy. Everyone was really concerned, and I had actually just-- I told the council, uh, we have to vote on this. However, I'll just make the decision. And if you're comfortable with it, we'll just go with my decision. And my decision is going to be to cancel that. The festival. And I did that to spare them the backlash they were going to have.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:So I just felt it's easier to let everybody blame me.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:And, um, you know, and it was the right decision.

PRATHER:Did you get backlash or--

BOTTS:You know--

PRATHER:--or were people pretty understanding?

BOTTS:Um, I received backlash, and I still have backlash over that. I still have people that blame me for canceling the festival. But most people were very understanding, and most people said, "Yeah, it's the right decision."  That they were--they were--most of our citizens here, especially within the city, said, "I can't believe you all drug it out that long."

PRATHER:Yeah

BOTTS:You know that--like--why didn't you just cancel it earlier? Um, but we did not cancel it earlier because it-- really-- it was one of those-- that was just-- every day we were swaying back and forth. Do we do this or do we not do this? And when every other community around you is canceling their festivals, you know, that weighs heavy. And then, um, you know, the governor saying, "This is just not the time to be having festivals." You have to-- you have to consider that.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:So everything--everything was pointing to us-- to make that decision-- to cancel the festival. But because of the kind of historic nature of this festival-

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:--we--we drug it out to the last minute of making that decision. It was a tough decision.

PRATHER:I mean, you have, on one hand, the bragging rights of a continuously held festival. On the other hand, you have the lives of thousands of people and the community if you start a super spreader.

BOTTS:Absolutely.

PRATHER:--for the sake of upholding some, you know,

BOTTS:--a tradition--

PRATHER:--a tradition--

BOTTS:-- which you know what?

PRATHER:It rebounded. It rebounded immediately.

BOTTS:It did.

PRATHER:I mean, we--we had a great Court Day in 2021.

BOTTS:The next year was just as good. It was-- it's-- we didn't miss a beat.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:And it was, you know, looking back on it, it was the right decision to make. And I'm-- I'm--you know--100% behind that. Um, I do find it-- like I said, I found it disappointing that there's still some people that are mad about that. And it's--you know, you got to look forward. You can't look back.

PRATHER:And that's a great segue,.

BOTTS:You know, yeah--

PRATHER:That's what -that's where I want to go. What-- what is the future? Well. first of all, I have two final questions. I want to know-- I want your take on why you think Court Day has endured for as long as it has. But then also, I want you to take us forward. What is your hope for the future of Court Day? So if you can answer both of those questions, that'd be great.

BOTTS:Good questions. So why has it endured? I think part of that is because of the-- the people that are from here being a small town, and it's so much a part of our history that it just has to endure-- it just-- it's going to happen. And, you know, it's going to happen no matter what. So we'd better jump in and make it the best that we possibly can. Um, you know, times change, Court Day changes. And I think that the community has been fairly good about adapting to those changes. Um, we did not put the work we needed into Court Day for a period of time. And, you know, I-- that's kind of weighed heavy on me too-- that we need to make sure this festival doesn't fail. That-- that we do every single thing we can, um, to make sure that-- that the ship never goes down, you know, um, that we're going to fight till the very end. Times have changed. Every community has a festival now. You know, there used to be a lot of festivals, but there wasn't six or seven festivals the same weekend as Court Day, right?

PRATHER:Is that-- is that how many festivals?

BOTTS:And I'd have to look. But there are-- I'm thinking off the top of my head. There's six or seven festivals in Kentucky alone. There's also a huge antique festival that takes place-- either in Indiana or Ohio-- that draws some of our antiquers. And we'd even discussed:   do we move it a weekend to try to draw some of those antiquers down? But even having that conversation, which we attempted a few years back, [the] community wasn't having it.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:It's got to be the third Monday of the month of October.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:And it is what it is. So, um, I just think, you know, part of it is-- I grew up with Court Day. You grew up with Court Day. Now, we introduced it to a generation, and now that generation expects Court Day to be here. It's just something that's always been here. It's always been this way, and it's always going to be that way. We're just going to make sure that Court Day survives.

PRATHER:What do you hope for that future? What do you hope it will be?

BOTTS:Well, I think we've got to be adaptable to-- to the current situation. I don't know honestly how we continue this four-day festival. Sometimes I don't know if we can continue a three-day festival. Um, you know, the original Court Day was one day, right?

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:So when--when people tell me that, "Oh, how dare you get rid of a four-day or a three-day?" Well, the original Court Day was one day, and it kind of, um, people got here early, so they started trading on Saturday, but they didn't trade on Sunday because that was the day everybody went to church, you know? So Court Day's kind of adapt--you know--it kind of evolved there. And we went to four days because, at the time, there was a demand for four days. And as I look forward, I worry that that four days may be too long and that maybe we need to scale it back a day. We're already seeing on Mondays that most people leave. You know, a lot of the people that are vendors are-- have full time jobs, and some of them can't even make it in here until Friday evening. And then they're selling all day Saturday and Sunday, and then they're-- they're gone again. Um, so going forward, I think, that's one of the things we really seriously need to look at.  Going forward, I really want to focus on quality. Um, you know, over the past few years, we've seen boutiqueers. We've seen some neat crafters come in. Um, there's no bad vendor. I don't I think all are welcome at Court Day. And we need to make sure that, you know, we find space for everybody, but we want to make it a festival that people come in and say as they leave, say, "There were some really neat things there." So that's part of our challenge--is to find those vendors that are selling those really neat things. You know, you can order whatever you want off Amazon, right?

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And-- but it used to be when we were growing up, you know, to find those unique gifts, you had to go to a shop in town or you were going to Court Day, maybe-- and just finding those neat, unique gifts. So I think that's the challenges going forward. The big concerns for me, um, you know, while we're on the topic--if federal legislation changes on gun sales, um, that'll have a huge impact. And we've spoken about that internally as we talk. If it becomes harder to purchase a firearm, and firearms are part of our festival, um, that people like coming and buying or selling firearms, um, how does that change things? And it's a different world we live in now, unfortunately.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Um, and so if--if those laws change, it could change our festival. Um, I hate to be a--I hate to say naysayer, but, worst case scenario, would be if we ever had an incident in our festival--

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:--with a firearm--Um, now that legal liability--there's already a legal liability. But if anything ever happened, how could that hurt our festival going forward?

PRATHER:Sure. sure.

BOTTS:So those are--

PRATHER:That's gotta be-- keep you up at night.

BOTTS:It does. It does.

PRATHER:I mean, that's kind of one of those things that would keep a mayor of a town that has a festival that trucks largely in firearms--

BOTTS:Yes.

PRATHER:--in our current system.

BOTTS:Yeah.

PRATHER:And also, you know, we talked about people spreading rumors about-- they're not selling guns at Court Day anymore --

BOTTS:I saw that this year. Wonder were that came from?

PRATHER:I don't know, but it seems just like-- some-- for some reason, people want to engender offense and outrage and-- but that's not--

BOTTS:Right. Right.

PRATHER:I mean, guns are a part of Court Day.

BOTTS:They are a part of it.

PRATHER:It's historically--

BOTTS:Yes, I know there's some folks that don't like that. We're sensitive in our marketing, that we'll show the guns, but we don't promote it. It's not a-- it's not a gun show.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:But we like to say there's something for everybody at Court Day.

PRATHER:And there is.

BOTTS:And that includes guns or knives or, you know, boutiquers or, you know, crafters. [There's] something for everybody. So if you don't like the guns, that's fine. You don't have to go down there on Gun Alley. But it is part of our history, and we definitely want to maintain that. But that is a huge concern of mine, not only-- not only if the law changes that would prohibit something like that, but two,  if we ever had an incident. Now what we can do is we are very proactive. Our police-- we have a police presence at Court Day-- to where our police are constantly moving. We want people to see police officers, and to feel good that there is a security presence there with tens of thousands of people. I mean, that's just a must.

PRATHER:Mhm. Um. [affirmative]

BOTTS:You know, a few years ago, we bought a camera that goes up in the sky and kind of watches Court Day. And now we have drones, so we'll have a drone that's up over Court Day, that just keeps an eye on things. Um, so we're--we're doing those things to--to be very proactive with our police.

PRATHER:This is operated by the police department?

BOTTS:Police department, yes. Um, to just make sure that-- that we're doing everything we can to-- to make sure that people feel safe when they come to our festival. Last year, Liz, there was an incident, and, you know, we-- everybody talks about the good old days all the time, right? Oh, it's the good old days. It was always better. You know, Court Day was a little rough.

PRATHER:Oh my goodness

BOTTS:Back--a few decades back.

PRATHER:Well, and then-- I mean, even in the--If you look at the newspapers, people were knifed.

BOTTS:Yes.

PRATHER:You know, they were over, you know, over gambling. They would be gambling. They would have, you know, a disagreement, they would stab somebody.

BOTTS:So, uh, so we don't see that anymore.

PRATHER:Right.

BOTTS:I mean, it's-- it's been a much safer festival recently. Um, now that we don't have some of those kind of, uh, for lack of a better term--we had some billiard rooms, some honky tonk type places that don't exist anymore. So that's kind of changed the atmosphere--um--at the festival. So, yeah, I can remember as a kid, even-- there was some rough areas, and I knew that--you just didn't go in certain areas, but, you know, I never didn't feel unsafe or whatever. Um, but just an example, last year we had a call about an incident. It was 30 secs, we had police swarming there. Our police are very--very proactive in just making sure that we have eyes on--we have so many eyes on this festival--um, to just make sure that that we don't get caught flat-footed if something comes up, you know. People don't--you don't realize our our EMS, Fire, EMS, they're right in the middle of this, ready to respond.

PRATHER:Right behind the apple dumpling booth

BOTTS:That's right. It is amazing, actually, when you bring this many people to town that we don't have that many incidents. I mean, it's-- we may get a heat casualty or two, you know, we-- we may get a small disturbance here and there. But for the most part, I mean, it's a really safe festival, and there's just not much that goes on. I like to think, well, maybe it's because everybody's just having fun. It's--

PRATHER:Yeah

BOTTS:--it's fun. It's fun to come to Court Day. It's a good family-type get-together. Ran into a family last year, um, who comes down from Ohio every year. And I actually took a picture of them. I said, you all are the model Court Day visitor.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:They--there was five or six of them. Adults. Kids. They were pulling wagons. They said because we buy stuff, we don't want to have to go back to the car. So they had a couple of wagons with them. Um, just they were dressed appropriately. One of them had earmuffs on because it was cold that day, and I took a picture of them. But I'm like, you all are the model Court Day visitors. You know, if I'm telling people what you should do when you come to Court Day, they need to look at your picture because-- and they said, we just love it. Every year we come and, you know, they just stock up--stock those wagons of stuff up, and then, you know, kind of go on their merry way back to Ohio.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:Uh, but they keep coming back every year.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:And, you know, that's a challenge for when you had talked about looking forward. I need to make sure that they don't come back and say, well it's just like it was last year. Mhm. So you got to keep infusing something new.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BOTTS:That's part of the Mullet Contest was something new. Now, when we can--we've-- we've tinkered with a couple of other little contests, things-- they just never stuck. But the Mullet Contest is stuck. It's kind of cool, you know? Um, but we've got to keep doing something new, so that that family that's coming in from Ohio doesn't say, yeah, we've been there, done that.

PRATHER:Yeah. At the end, let's think about-- is there one special memory that you have of Court Day or something you haven't-- that you wanted to share with me that you haven't yet about Court Day that you can think of?

BOTTS:You know, I think the two things I told you, you know, at Court Day, I mentioned this, I think, before our interview, just how much I don't eat corn dogs during the year, but I always have a corn dog at Court Day. Like I have four Cattleman's burgers every court day. Like, you know, I don't do that on a normal day. I'm not having two Cattleman's burgers, but I love-- just the-- the food. I look forward to the food every year. Yeah, and it's food that I probably shouldn't eat at my age, but I do because it's Court Day, and I'm going to treat myself at Court Day, right?

PRATHER:Yeah, yeah.

BOTTS:I'm going to do that. But I think really my favorite memories are-- just as I look at Court Day-- of thinking back to just running around with my friends, and being ten, eleven, twelve-years-old. And just-- that was freedom. That was, you know, us get it--there was no eyes on us--we're just kids out there enjoying this festival and just all the sights and sounds of it. So, and --and I'm glad, you know, I told you I moved my wife and son back here. And I'm glad my son had that opportunity too, you know, to just run around Court Day. I can remember us sitting at my grandmother's house on the porch--um, my wife and I and my grandmother, and we're just kind of watching people walk up and down the street on Sycamore Street--uh, going to and from Court Day-- and here comes my son with his friend up the street with a guitar. And I thought to myself, he's wasted money on this guitar. He's never going to play the guitar. Well, he taught himself guitar, and he still plays to this day.

PRATHER:That's amazing.

BOTTS:So yes--

PRATHER:And he bought it at Court Day?

BOTTS:He bought it at Court Day. He bought his first guitar at Court Day. And just how cool that is. That something--that he's always going to have? That he's going to play music the rest of his life. But he bought that guitar at Court Day. Yeah. You know, how cool is that?

PRATHER:That's awesome. Yeah. Thank you very much, Al.

BOTTS:Thank you for the opportunity.