TANYA:Are you videoing it or taking pictures?

UNKNOWN:Um, we're videoing (??).

TANYA:Okay. I'm sorry, I look bad. (all laugh)

CAREY:Oh, you're perfectly okay. Uh, you don't look bad. Uh, hi, my name is Maria Carey. I grew up in Richmond, Kentucky, and I'm an undergraduate student at the University of Kentucky. Um, can you guys tell me a little bit about yourself? What are your names? Where are you from? And what's your daily life like?

BRYAN:Go.

TANYA:Uh, my name is Tanya Lintner, and I live in Frenchburg, Kentucky. Um, my daily life is being a wife and a grandma. That's about it.

BRYAN:Where are you from?

TANYA:Where I'm from is Lewis County, Vanceburg, Kentucky.

BRYAN:I'm Bryan, her husband, uh, uh, grandpa. I'm from Oregon, and, uh, I just hang out.

CAREY:Great. Um, how did you hear about The Post Clinic?

BRYAN:Uh, someone in town told me about it. I was uninsured. They told me to check out The Post Clinic, so that's how.

TANYA:And I found out through him.

CAREY:Great. Um, what has been your experience, like, accessing health care from The Post Clinic?

TANYA:Wonderful, actually. Uh, they, they've done wonderful with us. They've helped us out a lot. I can't say enough nice things about them. You know, with him and his, his issues, they've been great. An he's got a lot.

BRYAN:(laughs)--they don't know them.

TANYA:Okay, that's why I said your issues--(laughs)--and then with mine, yeah, they've been great. They've been lifesavers, actually.

BRYAN:Yeah they, they're easy to work with, so.

CAREY:Yeah, great. Um, what has your experience been like accessing health care before coming to this clinic? Have you faced any challenges finding or receiving health care before The Post Clinic? And are there any barriers that you face in managing your health?

TANYA:Well, before that, uh, I worked as a CNA, uh, for twenty-five years and then when I got hurt I lost my insurance, and the insurance is too expensive. So they--I found out through him and they took me right in, so. And they gave me all kinds of anything that I need, they kind of give me information, they've helped me, like, where I was bleeding so bad they got that taken care of. They're, they're angels they, they really truly are. They, they really are.

BRYAN:Okay.

CAREY:Um, after losing your health insurance, did you have any experience going to, like, a major hospital before The Post Clinic or, um, you just went straight to The Post Clinic?

TANYA:No, I didn't go. Didn't go because I couldn't afford it.

BRYAN:Not, not until it was an emergency.

TANYA:No.

BRYAN:You know, it had to be bad. Then we went.

CAREY:And then how has your experience been like before, um, accessing health care before coming to The Post Clinic?

BRYAN:Oh, it was fine. It was just a pain, we had, you know--

TANYA:There are certain things they won't do if you don't have insurance.

CAREY:Yeah.

BRYAN:Yep, so.

CAREY:Okay, how has the clinic impacted your health or well-being?

TANYA:Well, I came in, I was bleeding for nineteen weeks straight. They took from within a month, they had me taken care of to all connections. They just had, from day one, wonderful. They made calls, they had me appointments set up, and I, great. (??) I don't know what to say technically, but other than they really, really did do.

CAREY:So do you feel like, um, with The Post Clinic that, um, it's easy, uh, to make appointments and see them quickly?

TANYA:Yes.

CAREY:There's not a long wait?

TANYA:Mm-mm, no. Um, you call, they usually get you in within that week, if not that day.

CAREY:And then how has the clinic impacted your health at all (??)? Same?

BRYAN:Same. Yeah, they, you know, I'm diabetic and whatnot, so they make sure everything's pretty simple.

CAREY:Um, how has your relationship with health care providers here been different from your experiences elsewhere? Do you feel connected or is there a sense of community at the clinic for you?

TANYA:There is a sense of community here, and they are so pleasant, knowledgeable. Um, they explain. They take the time out to explain. Um, they ask questions. Um, you're here--the doctor, the first time was--talked to me for almost two hours. I mean, you don't get that anymore. I mean, really, truly, they, they make sure they c--they're kind, right up to the receptionist. They know you by name, they, they're just wonderful. I mean, they, they don't disrespect you. They don't look down on you because you don't have insurance. They're just--and, and the doctors are--been great for me and him.

CAREY:That's great.

TANYA:When they can break it down to you and make you understand what's going on with you and take the time to make sure you know and what your choice and your options are, are great.

BRYAN:Same. (all laugh)

CAREY:Same?

BRYAN:Sorry, she's speaking for both of us.

CAREY:No, that's fine (??). Do you guys have any ideas for any other questions?

UNKNOWN:If you had to tell anyone about The Post Clinic, like, what would you tell them? If someone's, like, concerned about coming, like, what would you say?

BRYAN:I tell everyone that--

TANYA:Yeah, we tell everybody.

TANYA:--I know that don't have insurance. Uh, uh, don't be a fool. Uh, these guys are good, and--

TANYA:They're good.

BRYAN:--you don't leave feeling--

TANYA:Belittled.

BRYAN:Yeah, yeah. You can, you know, come in and tell them what's wrong. I--all--I tell everybody I know, hey.

TANYA:They're good.

BRYAN:Yeah, yeah.

TANYA:We'll do whatever we can to repay that for them because they have done wonderful for me and Bryan.

UNKNOWN:I feel like a sense of community is the most important thing in any, like, sensitive place like The Post Clinic.

TANYA:Absolutely.

UNKNOWN:And what's been your, like, favorite aspect about The Post Clinic, is it, is it the, uh, receptionist, you know making sure that you [?? WORDS UNCLEAR], is it the doctors making sure that you--

BRYAN:Oh yeah, it's a very friendly place. You come in, you feel like you know every--well, you do know everyone. It's a small place, so.

TANYA:Right down to the, the care you get. I mean, right from the time you enter your door, they, they, they're kind. They get you right in. The doctors take the time to check you, to find out what you're here for, and make sure you have what you need before you leave. And very professional, but very neighborly, too. They're just really nice people.

UNKNOWN:So how far did y'all commute here?

TANYA:Thirty-two minutes?

BRYAN:Mm-hmm.

UNKNOWN:And you all feel like it's worth every second of the drive?

TANYA:Oh, absolutely.

BRYAN:Oh, yes.

TANYA:Yup.

BRYAN:Yeah, yeah.

TANYA:They know who we are, that when we walk in the door, they make you feel like you belong.

UNKNOWN:Mm-hmm.

TANYA:You, you feel comfortable enough to tell them what's actually going on.

UNKNOWN:Is there like anything, any specific experiences that you've had with them that maybe has like built your trust? Like, what have they done to build your trust to show that?

TANYA:When I come in here, I was walking--I felt like I was just out of body. I had been bleeding heavy for nineteen weeks, and I was at my last point when I walked in that door. Every time I left, it was a month, exactly a month. They got me qualified for Medicaid for one month, and they had me, uh, I had an ablation done and a DNC done, and I haven't bled since. And you know what? I think that's a miracle.

UNKNOWN:Yeah.

TANYA:And I thank them every day. I mean, they were on the phone, had me mammogram ordered, the whole works. Um, you can't ask for anything better than that.

BRYAN:No, she's friendly again. (all laugh)

TANYA:I've been always friendly. I'm nice.

BRYAN:Yeah--(laughs).

TANYA:I'm a nice one.

UNKNOWN:Is there anything else you want to tell us or feel like you want to share?

BRYAN:It's a good place.

TANYA:It's just a good place. And it, and, we're so thankful that the community has it because there is a lot of people that can't afford insurance right now. And, and they do great work here.

BRYAN:I come back--(laughs)--so that, that tells you something.

TANYA:Yeah, because he's a little difficult.

BRYAN:(laughs)--they make me feel comfortable. So that tells you something.

UNKNOWN:We just want to thank you so much for, you know, taking time out of your day to come talk to us.

TANYA:I know we're not very professional--

CAREY:No you did great, this interview was great.

TANYA:--in the way we talk.

BRYAN:I um, I um, I, I carried us, so don't worry about it.

TANYA:Okay. I'm glad you got me, boo.

BRYAN:I do.

CAREY:This interview was great. Thank you so much for coming out here and taking time out of your day.

TANYA:Oh, you're welcome honey.

BRYAN:Anything for them--(laughs).

TANYA:Anything for them, yeah.

BRYAN:It wasn't so invasive, was it?

TANYA:No.

BRYAN:I was kind of worried.

TANYA:I was too. I was like, well, I can tell you, I--