CURRIS:

Good morning. We are now recording on November the 2nd, 2023, and this is--I am

so excited about today. My name is Jo Hern Curris and I have the honor and the

privilege of interviewing my dear, sweet brother who I tried to beat up, but he

always beat me up, from Benham, Kentucky. And Bruce has had a fascinating life,

and he and I--we are from those generations of the 1940s and ’50s, and we are

here to celebrate the history of Benham, Kentucky and Harlan County, and we’re

recording our memories for posterity of this special time that we had in our

youth and adulthood.

We began these projects as part of a--to record Benham’s history, but more

particularly to reflect the financial lives of coal miners and their families

and to describe the Benham Credit Union and its role. But this has expanded to

capture the sense of community that has been really a very warm reception by all

as to what the history was and the comparisons made today. These interviews are

being assisted significantly by the University of Kentucky Louie B. Nunn Center

for Oral History, where this interview will be stored. Therefore, I have asked

Bruce that he sign a form agreeing that this recording will be considered a gift

to the center, open for unrestricted use, included--including

being quoted from, published, or broadcast through all media, including any use

also that Bruce might want to make of this information. As I say, my name is Jo

Hern Curris. I am a 1959 Benham graduate and our parents were Robert Bruce Hern,

Sr., and Pauline Parker Hern. Our sister, Alice, and, of course, Bruce, who

we’re interviewing today, and myself. We both--we all have attended Benham

School, and then Bruce and Alice later in Lynch. At this time, we want to

interview for the reason that we are establishing the Robert Bruce Hern, Sr.,

and the Pauline Parker Hern Financial Center, to be located in the Benham City

Council Room of City Hall, and

is supported by the mayors and the city council of Benham for which we have been

very thankful. This--the--a key element is that Benham was the site of the only

International Harvester coal camp and it was referred to as a captive coal mine,

and we will discuss that. Bruce, you are the son of Bob and Pauline and also the

grandson of Charles--Charlie--Ross Parker, Sr., who was a deep mine coal miner,

and you were the last male of the family to be associated with coal mining and

related activities, and I really appreciate your being here today to permit me

to do the recording of your history. And I would love to start with your name

and whether you have any nicknames that you want to discuss, and so let us

start. Your name and date of birth.

HERN:Robert Bruce Hern, Jr. I was born October 27, 1949 in Richmond, Kentucky.

CURRIS:And what are the names of your parents?

HERN:Robert B. Hern--Robert Bruce Hern, Sr. and Pauline Ruth Parker.

CURRIS:And your siblings?

HERN:That’s--oh, I use numbers. I don’t use names. But anyway, I’ve got so many

of them.

CURRIS:Well, just your sisters. That’s all that counts today.

HERN:Roberta Jo and Alice Diane Hern.

CURRIS:And your grandparents?

HERN:Charlie Parker and Josie Parker.

CURRIS:Aren’t those wonderful names? Those are so typical mountain

town names.

HERN:Indicative, yes.

CURRIS:(laughs) I would like to start, Bruce, with your childhood. What

memories do you have of the family or Benham or just growing up in the mountains

prior to the first grade?

HERN:Well, it was--all of Benham was like one big family. Everybody knew each

other and--but I was a little different than the--in my raising than the others

in that we lived in Clutts, which was between Benham and Lynch, and they--I was

insulated or isolated or whatever. I did not live in the coal camp. My father

had purchased thirteen acres of land and built his own home outside of the

Tri-Cities and that made me a little bit

different than the rest of the kids, and--but once I started school, I learned a

lot of things that I didn’t know otherwise, but I had a very good raising in my

immediately family in respect and love and--for the whole group.

CURRIS:It was quite--you’re right, I had not thought about that, living away

from town. We were isolated, weren’t we?

HERN:Yeah, you didn’t have that coal camp--and this isn’t a bad

thing--mentality or the way you raise your--your microcosm.

CURRIS:Yes. It was more a matter of us being a unit, almost self-sufficient, in

a way, for all those early years. Is that how you remember it?

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:Let’s jump to grade school. Where did you attend grade school?

HERN:I was at Benham up through the sixth grade, and then there was a

consolidation of schools

and Benham was going to be closed, and you had the choice between Cumberland and

Lynch, and Lynch at the time seemed to have the better quality education.

CURRIS:And what year was this approximately?

HERN:’61 or ’62, in there.

CURRIS:Okay. I couldn’t remember when it was.

HERN:Well, I researched that.

CURRIS:(laughs) Well, now, when you were in grade school, what were your

favorite classes?

HERN:Well, I guess the--and it stayed with me through high school--mathematics

and chemistry, once I got into high school.

CURRIS:Who were your teachers? Who were your favorite teachers? Let’s ask that.

HERN:There was one, Mrs. Rider (??), who was very strict but very intelligent,

and you could learn a lot from her. I had creative writing under her

and it was very good. What--that’s what led me in later life to write a book or

two, and--

CURRIS:--what grade did she teach? What subject?

HERN:English and creative writing. And then John D. Staley (??) was a chemistry

teacher, and I walked into class--chemistry class one day and sat down, looked

at his desk, and he had three beakers on his desk. Two beakers were clear

liquid, one--and one beaker was black liquid. We came in and sat down and he

just walked in the room. He picked up the black beaker and poured it into one of

the clear beakers and it turned black. Then he took the other clear beaker that

was clear--clear beaker--and poured it into the one he just poured the black

into, poured in there, and it went clear again. And I said, “I want to know why

that happens.” And that got me started off in chemistry.

CURRIS:

That’s fascinating. And what--approximately what year would this have been?

Because chemistry for us, when I was in school, was, as I remember it, somewhere

around the sophomore year.

HERN:Sophomore or junior year, yes.

CURRIS:Was that still the same--

HERN:--same, yeah.

CURRIS:Do you remember the name of your principal?

HERN:We had--at Lynch, it was Smith (??), Mr. Smith. That’s an easy one to remember.

CURRIS:(laughs) Do--did you--what--were you too young to know who it was?

HERN:I don’t remember grade school.

CURRIS:Yeah. Well, in grade school, did you have--at that time, did you have

any favorite songs? Or was that too early? (laughs)

HERN:That’s too early. I didn’t have--

CURRIS:--okay. Well, now, when you did transfer to Lynch, at that time, what

were the differences that you found between the two schools? Because you’re

entering junior high, seventh grade.

Is that correct?

HERN:That’s correct.

CURRIS:Okay. What differences did you find in the two schools, in their

culture, in their teaching? Anything?

HERN:Benham, the students were more domestic US. In Lynch, that’s--it was

established by U.S. Steel Corporation. (coughs) Excuse me. They made an effort

to get foreign workers in there. (laughs) And I was told the story that they had

people at Ellis Island, waiting for the boats to land to get people to come into

Lynch, Kentucky to work, and--but they had an element of Hungarian, Polish, a

lot of European cultures that were in Lynch that weren’t that big in Benham.

It’s different, different cultures.

CURRIS:To supplement your stories--and this comes from some of the others that

I have

interviewed--is--would support your story about Ellis Island, that they--that

there were--that they literally sent cars to Ellis Island. Also that a large

number of African American--which everyone that I have interviewed that’s

African American steadfastly refers to themselves as Black--and they came out of

Mississippi and Alabama. So what you’re seeing in Lynch is that Eastern European

culture as well as--

HERN:--yeah--

CURRIS:--the Black culture, and then, again, to supplement that story, part of

it was Benham and Lynch each had Big Stores, the Company Stores which were

fabulous, as you look back on them.

HERN:But expensive.

CURRIS:But expensive. But the--there was a great push to bring Italian

stonecutters--what--from Ellis

Island or in any way that they’d get them over to do all that stonework that was

beautifully done. You know, you could match that with anybody’s.

HERN:Yeah, there was a lot of it, too.

CURRIS:Well, now, when you were at Lynch, what were your favorite subjects there?

HERN:Mathematics and chemistry. Chemistry was--most people have got at least

one thing they’re a natural at, and some people very more. My natural is

chemistry. I really enjoyed it and it always made sense to me.

CURRIS:I am so happy to hear that because I had chemistry in high school and

all we did was look at--we just looked at things. We did not have any

experiments. We had different teachers, by the way. So when I went to college, I

failed five hours of chemistry my first semester. Thank goodness all my other

grades--(laughs)--were really good.

But--so you see, you are the hero of the family for sure when it comes to science.

HERN:I’m glad we got that on the record.

CURRIS:(laughs) Now, at Lynch, since you have such a diverse culture there, did

that affect the teaching or--by the teachers in any way? Or could you tell?

HERN:I couldn’t tell. It was equivalent across the board from my observation, anyway.

CURRIS:So really the step to--from Benham from Lynch was really more cultural

as opposed to academic?

HERN:Lynch was the better quality instruction versus Benham. Not by a great

extent, but just in the classes I was involved in.

CURRIS:Well, now, who were your favorite teachers there?

HERN:Like I mentioned, Mrs. Rider and John Staley and one honorable mention

goes to John Coppinger. He was a history major and he was the band director and

he was absolutely excellent, a genius in what he did. We won two state

championships in the orchestra-type music in our Class A school, which Lynch

was. And, I mean, he was just excellent, and he started me out on a tenor

saxophone and I got pretty good at it. He later started calling me his boy once

I could--(Curris laughs)--play the sax well.

CURRIS:Well, the--to add to the Johnny Coppinger story, his family owned a huge

amount of acreage, which he donated--and I don’t remember whether he donated it

to the county or the state--but it’s now become Kingdom Come State Park.

HERN:Oh, I didn’t know that.

CURRIS:

And that was in his--Johnny Coppinger’s family. And do you remember Bruner Gilliam?

HERN:Oh yes, yeah.

CURRIS:Okay. What are your memories of Bruner?

HERN:He--

CURRIS:--this is a shift here but I would like to get to this.

HERN:He’s a prime example of an East Kentucky mountain man, and tall, lean. One

of his hobbies was going in the mountains and chasing rattlesnakes, and he made

a sport of it out of for himself. He’d wait until mating season for snakes came

around and go looking for dens of rattlesnakes and wipe them out. And he was a

very strong man, and I was told that he had read the Encyclopedia Britannica

from cover to cover.

CURRIS:Twice.

HERN:Twice? Oh, I didn’t know it was twice. Yeah, that’s--

CURRIS:--well, to--again, to--

HERN:--an honor to him.

CURRIS:Oh,

to fill in with your story, Bruner was also assigned to the fire tower, so he

was the one that would go up to the fire tower and watch, and he and his

grandson, Joe McCauley--little Joe--he would take us up to hike to the fire

tower, and we thought that was--(laughs)--the greatest thing in the world, and

also to what is now Kingdom Come with the devil’s rocking chair out of stone.

Yes, wonderful, wonderful man. And his wife was--can you remember her name?

HERN:Fran, wasn’t it?

CURRIS:No. I’ll remember it. But anyway, she is the one who taught me to churn

milk to make butter. (laughs) Don’t we have great memories? But your principals

at your--particularly in high school, did he have any impact on your future? Did he--

was he in any way one of your mentors at all?

HERN:No, not the principals, not that I remember having.

CURRIS:What were your homework expectations by your family, by your father and mother?

HERN:It was a live or die scenario. You do your homework. (both laugh) There’s

no questions, if, ands, or buts. And it really--homework really wasn’t an issue

for me until I got into high school, but then it was pretty robust in what they

expected of you on the homework side.

CURRIS:The--now, you played sports. Tell--what sports did you play?

HERN:Really just football. Lynch was a big--and I was told a story that some of

the men that were hired at Lynch, they interviewed their male kids also to see

which ones might be good for the football team, so--

CURRIS:

--I would say that’s supported by others.

HERN:The coach I had was Ed Miracle, and he was a good coach. I learned more

about dealing with people playing football at Lynch, Kentucky with the African

Americans and the other cultures in there than anything else I’ve done in my

life. I’ve--

CURRIS:--in what way, Bruce?

HERN:Communications and understanding each other. How to communicate.

CURRIS:So being on those football field, where you’re working as a team, had

that kind of added benefit?

HERN:Yes, most definitely for me, anyway, because whatever the issues were out

from the football field, they--you were there to win a game, you know, on the

football field, and all these other nonessentials disappeared. And we went

undefeated my senior year, so that was a credit to all of us.

CURRIS:(laughs) It really

was. What--how many of your classmates would you say actually worked in the

mines after graduation from high school?

HERN:Not a big number. A lot of people left the area at the time because the

mining industry was having its troubles about that time. The same applied to me.

I’d say thirty percent.

CURRIS:Stayed?

HERN:To pick a number. Yeah.

CURRIS:What were your activities--I mean, what were your social activities in

high school?

HERN:Well, one of the things--I don’t know if anybody else has mentioned it or

not--but a big entertainment for us was the Benham Youth Center that--they’d

converted I think the old theater into it, and then Mrs. Bundy, God bless her,

she monitored that and patrolled it very well. And--but

it was a safe place to go and I wish my kids had a similar scenario. But it’s

not the case this day and time.

CURRIS:Well, to add to that story as well, for those listening, there’s an

eight-year age gap between Bruce and myself, and it really is almost as if it is

a decade difference so that some of the memories are not different but just

added to by each of us as to what was happening at our particular time. But our

mother, Pauline Hern, and a group of women worked to have the Novo Theatre,

which was right there in the middle of the town, converted to a youth center so

we would have a safe place. And she and all the other women, when it was time

for the miners to be paid, they were paid at these outside windows. They

stood down at the bottom of the steps to collect money from them to help

conversion of the youth--for the youth center. That youth center had a phone

tied directly to the police department or a buzzer of some kind, and Miss Bundy,

all she had to do was press that, and if there was a problem with any particular

person, boy, they were there lickety split. (laughs) And--but I don’t remember

in my time, Bruce, that there was very much problem.

HERN:No, at--not at my time there either. There--

CURRIS:--I think our parents would’ve taken care of it--(laughter)--at home for

the whole community at that time. Well, you know, Benham was an International

Harvester community, and International Harvester sponsored a credit union in

Benham in approximately 1935. And our father,

Bob Hern, was traveling to Florida for employment and stopped by to see his

brother, Ray, and Ray was in management in some way. We’re not exactly certain.

I think he was an engineer. And he--they had just unionized in Lynch and they

were hoping not to have to do that at International Harvester because Lynch was

a U.S. Steel mine. So in the International Harvester area, they had a group, and

he--Ray was the chair of it--that mediated between the miners and the company,

hoping to put off that. He was also on the board of the Credit Union as was your

grandfather, Charlie R. Parker. So here comes this young guy from new York who

has two years at Cornell University in New York, and at that time, that’s a lot

of education because we’re talking about 1935, ’36, somewhere in there. And they

ask him to be the director of the Credit Union, and I have given all of this to

say that--what are your memories of your dad as a child?

HERN:Just a broad brush general statement, these--there’s people you run across

in your life that you may never had met them before, but as soon as they walk in

the room, they command respect. That was Bob Hern.

CURRIS:And you realized that even as a young child?

HERN:Oh yeah.

CURRIS:That’s fascinating. As time progressed, what were your impressions of

him and the way he was raising you in the family when you were a teenager? Those

could be the troubled years. (both laugh)

HERN:

No, I didn’t, as Josie would’ve said, get into any meanness, so I was a pretty

straightforward kid. I played by the rules and I tried to smoke two times. The

first time, I got halfway through the cigarette and put it down. The second

time--I inhaled this time and got extremely ill, and that was my last cigarette,

and I thought to myself, “I can’t afford this and it’s making me sick. Why am I

doing this? And that was the end of my smoking days.

CURRIS:(laughs) So you didn’t have to deal with Bob on that?

HERN:No, I didn’t have to deal with him on that one. But no, he--Dad was--he

was a hardworking family-committed individual and he was always into projects of

some sort. I mean, he had a rose garden. He had beehives. He had a corn patch,

raised grapes. I mean, you name it. He’s always into something. He--the saying

goes, “Don’t get any moss on your tires.” Well, he didn’t have any moss on his tires.

CURRIS:(laughs) The--what about family travel? Do you have any memories of the

family travels?

HERN:I guess going to New York State where the Hern family lived, and we made

a--at least one trip out West. That was prior to interstates and so it was a

two-week ordeal to travel anywhere. But that--I guess those two are the biggest memories.

CURRIS:Did you drive both ways? Or did you fly out and pick up a car and drive back?

HERN:We drove.

CURRIS:You drove the entire trip?

HERN:Yeah, you couldn’t--we couldn’t afford flying at that time. It was--

CURRIS:--right. What did you do? Do you have any particular memories of that trip?

HERN:

Well, horseback riding, for one. And then you--we always got a cowboy hat to

wear around. (laughter) This was in my younger days. And that was when a car

would fit six people, and we--you and I and Alice were in the back seat and Mom

and Dad were in the front seat, and that’s--going that far in a car nowadays is

pretty much impossible.

CURRIS:Do you remember them separating us from time to time?

HERN:Oh yeah.

CURRIS:(laughs) It was always your fault, you know that.

HERN:“You do this one more time, I’m going to make you get in the front seat.”

I heard that more than once.

CURRIS:Well, the--at that time, did you understand what the Credit Union was,

when you were a teenager and still at home? Did you understand what it was?

HERN:By the time I was a teenager, yeah. And something else that Dad did was

they--at the annual meetings of

all the people, I handed out silver dollars to all the Credit Union members.

That was a bonus for showing up for the meeting. So I stood at the door and

handed out silver dollars. But on the flip side of that, Dad was very astute in

watching what was going on with coins. He had a coin collection, and that these

bi-metal coins were coming out versus silver, and he started trading his dollars

in for silver dollars. He had quite a collection. Then a silver dollar at that

time was worth about seven dollars, and he had hoarded a bunch of these and went

to buy a new car, and the difference between what he was going to pay for the

car and what the other--what the seller wanted was 1,400 dollars, and he went

and got 1,400 dollars in silver dollars and took them down and bought the car.

So, I mean, he was just a

great businessman.

CURRIS:Those collections of silver dollars, what I wouldn’t give to have all

those today.

HERN:Yeah, they’re thirty-one dollars, I think, now.

CURRIS:We really do. That’s quite an increase. But, you know, talking about the

Benham annual meeting, what are your memories as to the importance of the Benham

Credit Union annual meeting?

HERN:I think the community put great store in not only the institution, but Dad

as a director too. He was a very honest person, believable, and trustworthy, and

that’s what people were looking for.

CURRIS:Well, do you remember them also raffling off hams and turkeys?

HERN:Yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:And I think even a TV once, when TVs finally came into the area.

(laughs) But--well, the--what about your memories of our mother, Pauline Hern?

HERN:What a lady.

She loved her family and was a great cook. I mean, just, you name it. Any

culture you’d want, she would come up with a dish. And one of the problems I

created--got me later in life was push myself away from the table. I got used to

eating all those fine meals and didn’t know when to quit. But I do remember the

chicken liver ordeal at--it was Russian roulette. One of us three kids, any time

we had fried chicken, would have to get the liver, and we all hated it. (laughs)

When you’re sitting at the table, you don’t have much recourse, but Alice didn’t

seem to have that much trouble with it, and it took me a while to figure out why

she didn’t have the trouble with it that we did. And I watched her one time. She

got--it was her time to get the chicken livers and it was on her plate, and then

I was watching as we were eating. And as we were consuming the rest of the meal,

she looked when nobody else was looking and grabbed--caressed the chicken liver

on her plate into a napkin and then made a quick beeline to the outside for some

reason and fed it to the dog, then came back in the house. And we didn’t catch

up on this for a while. Then it was finally figured out and she got back to

eating the liver like the rest of us.

CURRIS:I can remember--you’re talking about not being able to push away from

the table--I can remember when Mother started frying on Sundays an extra

chicken, and she would say, “This extra chicken’s for Bruce--(laughs)--because--”

HERN:--that’s true--

CURRIS:“--he just loves that.” (laughs) Well, did you--what was her position in

the community?

HERN:She

was very well known and she had a propensity to help people that weren’t as

fortunate as we were. There was a family at the—bottom of Rockala (??) Hill

where we used to live, and she would take them food and clothes and--because

they didn’t have much of anything, and she was like that throughout the

community. Plus she was in--(coughs) excuse me--involved with the church, and

mainly in Benham--I don’t think as much in Lynch, but mainly in Benham--any

programs that were going on in the community and flower clubs or whatever. She’d

take part in.

CURRIS:And would sing in the choir.

HERN:Sing in the choir, yeah.

CURRIS:Sing in the choir. And did she work outside the home?

HERN:She was a secretary for International Harvester there in Benham.

CURRIS:

She--this was approximately my sophomore year in college, and International

Harvester had decided to sell the homes to the residents, and Mother was asked

to come in because she was trustworthy and they could count on her to handle a

lot of the paperwork. And in all of our ----------(??) reading and so forth,

what we have not been able to determine was whether or not she was hired to work

in the Credit Union originally and then went to the International Harvester

building or whether it was always International Harvester. Do you have any idea?

HERN:No, I don’t.

CURRIS:The--it’s been fascinating, Bruce, to look at your resume. When you

think about Benham, Lynch, Harlan County

and what you became, it’s really rather phenomenal.

HERN:I thank you for that.

CURRIS:Yes.

HERN:I thank you for the opportunity, being able to take part in this program.

CURRIS:Well, thank you for doing it.

HERN:Appreciate it.

CURRIS:Thank you. Don’t you think Mom and Dad are up there just looking down at

this and laughing like crazy?

HERN:(both laugh) Yeah, Dad’s saying, “Lordy, Pauline, where did we go wrong?”

CURRIS:(laughs) Right. So I would like to talk about you in your professional

career. First of all, where did you attend the university?

HERN:Where or when?

CURRIS:Where?

HERN:At University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

CURRIS:Had you considered any other institutions?

HERN:Yes, I had, University of Kentucky. But at that time, Kentucky did not

have an accredited chemical engineering program. UT did, so that was a

reasonable decision to go there.

CURRIS:So you knew going into

school that you wanted chemical engineering?

HERN:Yes, I--no doubt in my mind. I--and it was a challenge for me. I heard

people talking about how tough chemical engineering was and I was very attuned

to chemistry. I said, “Well, heck, that’s what I’m going to do and,” you know

the rest of the story.

CURRIS:(laughs) Yes. Well, you know, speaking of that and from your first

introduction to chemistry, were there any others and--in Benham or Lynch that

recognized your ability and were encouraging and were mentors of any kind? Or

was this pretty much self-directed?

HERN:Pretty much self-directed. I didn’t have--you know, if I asked for help, I

got it, but I just decided on my own that’s what I intend to do.

CURRIS:Well, so you didn’t just end up there. That was where you wanted to be.

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:What was your first paying job?

While you were in school or after graduation? Mine was clearing brush and trees

from Mom and Dad. (laughs) What was your first job?

HERN:My first job--and I got paid nine dollars for one day’s work, and it was

stacking bales of hay in Indiana. Uncle--

CURRIS:--Linden?--

HERN:--Linden’s place. I was working at that mill he was involved in and a

local next-door farmer needed help stacking bales of hay because he was bringing

it in, which I’d never done before. And so I volunteered and my cousin Bart was

with me, and we went and we started sunup, went until sundown, and I was

dragging. I mean--(laughs)--I wanted out of here because it--the hardest day’s

work I’ve ever done in my life.

CURRIS:Well, you were talking about Uncle Linden. Was he with the U.S.--was he

with the

steel mill or was he with something else at that time?

HERN:Steel mill. He was a personnel director for a steel mill. Continental

Steel Corporation was the name of it.

CURRIS:When we had the out migration in the 1950s, ’58 and ’59, actually, from

Benham because of lack of employment and we went to--population just went all

over Indiana, up in the coal fields--or not fields so much as the steelworks,

Detroit, all around--was Continental Steel one of the places that they had gone?

Were there other Benham or Lynch people there at that particular mill?

HERN:No, this was just local people.

CURRIS:The--I have a question for you. I’m going to jump ship here for just

a minute. You have always been involved in the coal industry. Tell me how that started.

HERN:My first job? Well, let me back up. Arch Moran, who I went to school with

his daughter Susan at Lynch, and he was a family friend. Very, very astute

gentleman. He came back as the--he was working for U.S. Steel and he ended up

being the general superintendent in Lynch, and I graduated UT in ’72 and the

chemical industry wasn’t doing all that great then. Economies were down, so--but

I knew--his nickname was Arch. I knew Arch was in town so I just gave him a

call. I graduated, told him, “I’m--

My situation, I’m looking for--to start a career,” and he got back to me, had me

put in an application. He said, “We’ve got an opening in Gary, West Virginia in

coal preparation and beneficiation.” He said, “Why don’t you come over and give

it a try? If you don’t like it, don’t stay. If you do like it, stay with us.”

And I said, “Okay.” At that time, the pay was a thousand dollars a month, which

at that time was big money, so that helped me make my decision too. And that’s

why I started in coal, and then I got into it and found out how much of a

science, the petrographics and everything that went with it. It was very

interesting for me.

CURRIS:The--in this first job, what was your title?

HERN:Preparation engineer.

CURRIS:Preparation engineer. What did that entail within the coal business?

HERN:Coal--there’s two times of impurities. One is free ash

and one is inherent ash. Inherent ash is impurities that are inside the coal

particle itself. Free ash, it’s just what it says. It’s rocks and stones, and

when raw coal comes out from underground, it’s contaminated with both, and

you’ve got to make an economic determination of where the best place is to make

the split. Most of the things that process coal are gravity separations in

general, and the other are chemical separations to get the particles out. And

we--but that’s pretty expensive, so again, as you go--

CURRIS:--so it was chemical or what, please? It was either chemical--

HERN:--free. Free. Free ash or--free means it’s distinctly separate from it.

But the--

and these coals are specific to making coke, the steelmaking process, and

that--when you burn coal in the absence of oxygen, it goes through a fluid stage

and combines with other blending materials to make coke, which is the energy and

a--supports the burden inside a blast furnace. And there’s a lot of quality

control that has to go into that because there’s lignite, sub-bituminous,

bituminous, and anthracite type coals.

CURRIS:Would you describe what each of those is for us?

HERN:That’s by age. The lignite is a fibrous type--pre-coal, I would call

it--and then

sub-bituminous is a low-carbon content. Bituminous, which that’s the only type

of coal that will make a coke, and then anthracite, which is on the upper end

but is the highest-burning material for a coal. But the--

CURRIS:--what’s its purpose? Is there a particular product from the anthracite?

HERN:It’s just utility type coal for burning purposes.

[Pause in recording]

CURRIS:We took a pause there for a minute. So now let’s get back to what

we--you were talking about on the bituminous and the anthracite. And would you

tell us again what the difference is in terms of its use, its purpose?

HERN:Well, lignite is a

fibrous type--pre-coal, I would call it--just for burning purposes and

utilities. Sub-bituminous is a higher carbon content but not adaptive to the

steelmaking process. Bituminous, which is where coking coals come from, but

there’s three types of coking coals. There’s low-volatile, mid-volatile, and

high-volatile. And the volatile matter is the liquid that comes off coal when

you coke it at 1,500 degrees, and contains hydrogen, and it’s about ninety

percent benzene, and that’s captured and sent off to make chemical processes.

But the coal

goes through a--in the absence of oxygen, goes through a liquid phase, and

that’s when it combines with the other coals that could be in the blend. The

low-volatile coals expand under coking. Mid-vols are neutral and the

high-volatile coals, volatile being fourteen percent plus, shrink when

they--when they’re cokes, so you have to come up with a blend of the three

coals, and there’s other parameters to meet also so that you don’t destroy coke

oven walls. And that’s why low-volatile coals out of southern West Virginia is

so important.

CURRIS:And so this--

HERN:--I got off track there--

CURRIS:--this is what you were responsible for, then?

HERN:Yeah, we had to track and control it to--what goes in the rail car to the mines.

CURRIS:Is there a formula for coal?

Is there a chemical formula for coal?

HERN:Coal itself is classified as a rock but it’s carbon. I mean, that--the

benzene and the other materials are separate from it, but it’s in the coal

product itself. And coal itself is just mainly carbon with volatile matter,

moisture, ash, and--to make up the complete coal particle.

CURRIS:Well, you’re talking about you’re in West Virginia, and this is with

U.S. Steel.

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:But U.S.--so you’re there because of Arch Moran, who was heading up U.S.

Steel in Lynch.

HERN:Right.

CURRIS:Benham is an International Harvester company. What are the differences

between the two companies? Is there a difference in the type of mining? In the

type of what--of the coal that’s being mined?

HERN:

The type of mining is pretty much the same. The--you know, when Charlie Parker

was underground, and our uncle C.R. was with him also. They did the pick and

shovel thing. But then in the late ’50s, I think, if I have my timing right, a

device came out called a continuous miner that eliminated a lot of the manual

labor and reduced costs by a tremendous amount. And there was a lot of design

development on these continuous miners, but it was adaptations of the same

machine, a mechanical rotating device that chewed away at the coal underground

and sent it to outside for preparation. So they were in development during the

late ’50s. It came along and then after a period of time, they--

they being the mining companies--invested in what they called a long wall system

that eliminated a lot of--again, a lot of workers and a lot of in-between costs

as far as extracting the coal from underground. But it was just a long, big,

mechanical rotating drum--two of them--that would go ninety degrees to the coal

seam underground. There’s no roof support. You just mine the coal and advance,

and then the mountain would collapse in behind it as you mined with the

hydraulic supports as you went for safety. And that really upped the volume, as

far as production in the mining industry.

CURRIS:When it comes to that time in West Virginia, did you have to actually

begin by mining coal? Did you have to be underground for any particular reasons

other than your job?

HERN:What--how they broke me is was--and they did it with all preparation

engineers or people just starting in management underground was a--as a

time--doing time studies on the equipment underground, and it wasn’t--you

weren’t really looking over the workers’ shoulders, you know, seeing what they

were doing, but getting people trained too on what goes on underground because

it’s a hazardous situation. And then roof bolting to maintain the roof and how

that interfaces with the mining operation and keeping people safe.

CURRIS:Well, now, with the roof bolting, were you doing studies on the

timing--on the--time studies for roof bolting or were you actually doing

the process of bolting a roof?

HERN:No, I was--had the pencil in hand, doing that part of it. I wasn’t

physically in--operating the machines, no. We’d have had a work stoppage if I had.

CURRIS:(laughs) Well, let’s jump from--what was your next position?

HERN:Well, I went up through supervisory level in the engineering department

and then onto plant operations and division manager was my last position with

U.S. Steel in coal preparation, which I had five different preparation

facilities that reported to me.

CURRIS:Well, then, when did you head over to Mingo? And tell us about Mingo. It

was Mingo Logan

Coal.

HERN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Is that correct?

HERN:It bordered two counties in West Virginia, and that’s Mingo County and

Logan County. That’s where it came from.

CURRIS:Well, now, what company was that? Or was there a parent company? Or was--

HERN:--Ashland Coal.

CURRIS:So Ashland Coal--

HERN:--was the parent--

CURRIS:--was the parent--

HERN:--yeah--

CURRIS:--for Mingo Logan. Tell us about your creative streak when it came to

Mingo Logan Coal.

HERN:We--any person that’s been in coal preparation and engineering wants to

design and construct their own plant with their own ideas in it. And Mingo Logan

was mine. That--(laughs)--I saw that in the job, and there were some things I

wanted to do or try to do in process control that this was going to give me the

opportunity to do. So I

went--and we went with Roberts & Schaefer Company out of Chicago and designed

this facility for a 1,200-ton an hour raw feed facility. And this was a

metallurgical coal also. But we shipped domestic and international.

CURRIS:How did you create this whole coal preparation plant? What was the

starting point?

HERN:First, you have to characterize the coal, what--how hard is it? How much

is it going to degrade in transport? How much sulfur does it have? All those

kinds of things. You’ve got to look at the individual seams. And then if it has

to be a blend or a non-blend type coal to put in the rail car for a given

customer. And then

some of the quality control instruction I’d had at UT, I wanted to try out to

see if they would also be applicable to this process.

CURRIS:Was it?

HERN:Yeah. The--one of the things--there’s an optimal point in the amount of

ash that goes into the final product that’s best both volume wise and

economically, and that’s what you try to search for. One of the processes in the

coal preparation system is gravity separation in heavy--what they call a heavy

media tank, and all that is is a suspension of iron oxide--powdered iron oxide

that makes a false gravity in a bath. And wherever that gravity set point is is

what the product ash is going to be.

Well, that changes all the time as you’re operating and when it’s too low,

you’re throwing coal away, and when it’s too high, it’s off product--off

specification product. So we--to make a long story short, the variability in the

system was like a standard deviation of point--or one-point-oh, and then with

the control, you could get that down to point-two, which would increase in that

operation yield by 200,000 tons a year. And so that’s what I was trying to do at

Mingo Logan, and it worked pretty well.

CURRIS:(laughs) Congratulations.

HERN:And I did.

CURRIS:Do you remember that I came and you took us down?

HERN:Yeah, I remember that. I was thinking of that the other day.

CURRIS:Yes. So I had the opportunity to be underground in my brother’s mine,

and that was quite an experience.

HERN:It wasn’t

my mine. I wish it had been. It wasn’t, but then--

CURRIS:--well, I thought of it as your mine.

HERN:(both laugh) Thank you for that. I’ve been promoted.

CURRIS:Well, also you had a very significant international career. How did you

jump? And what was the sequence after Mingo Logan? How did that work so that

you--what experiences did you have and then an international experience? Or is

that how it worked?

HERN:Well, when I started with U.S. Steel, I started out at Gary, West

Virginia, and I was sitting there one day and this--the superintendent there,

I’d just met him. We were talking and he was talking about this gentleman named

John Anderson, and he--John had just come back from four years working for

another company in Australia. And I was talking to John and he was telling me

all these things that he’d done in Australia. I just thought to myself at the

time that, “If I ever get the chance, I want to do this.” And

I’ll condense this here, but I worked at U.S. Steel for fifteen years and I

noticed in the latter part of that, of course, the mining industry was not in

good shape either. But everybody, they worked all year in an underground coal

mine in a dangerous situation and their only relax time was two weeks at the

annual vacation a year, and they’d all go to Myrtle Beach and go down and talk

about coal mining at Myrtle Beach. I’m thinking, “Bob and Pauline put breath in

my lungs. This wasn’t the only reason why.” And I said, “I want something else.”

And about that time, John Anderson had left and was working for another

company in China and he had lung cancer, and I called him to say goodbye,

really, and I talked to him for five minutes, and then he talked to me for

thirty minutes about this job that he had available in China. Would I be

interested? And I thought to myself, “Heck, why not? And--but I had to get the

family’s approval first because we were going to be--new ground--plowing new

ground here, and he--at the dinner table that night, I had the wife and the four

daughters there, and I told them the possibility of going to China. I said, “But

you guys have to be on board with it. If you’re not on board, we won’t do it.”

And I said, “Everybody gets one vote.” I said, “Me and your mom get fifty-one

percent and you guys get forty-nine percent.” And they said that--and I just

mentioned that--“What if we

vote against it? And I said, “Then we won’t do it.” I said, “Because you guys

have got to be a part of this.” And the vote came back--well, two--the wife was

okay with it--well, not okay, but she said okay. And two of the girls said okay

and two of them said no, so that meant we went, and we did. And--but--

CURRIS:--okay, what was your wife’s name?

HERN:Kay.

CURRIS:And where was she from?

HERN:She was from Lynch.

CURRIS:And what are your daughters’ names?

HERN:Now, that’s a hard one. That’s--because I’ve got so many of them, I use

numbers instead of names. (Curris laughs) But they--

CURRIS:--unless--

HERN:--Shanna is the oldest. Lucinda Ruth [“Cindy”] is the second oldest.

Roberta Ryan [“Bert”] is the third and Kara Lee the fourth, and I--

CURRIS:--very good. Who--which of the two kids voted against it?

HERN:Well, I was going to

say, it switched after we got over there. It flip-flopped and the two who didn’t

want to go did and vice versa. And I think it was Bert and Kara didn’t want to

go and the other two did.

CURRIS:Well, the--tell us about the mine. Whose mine was it? And where was it?

And what were you doing there?

HERN:I’d found out after I--getting that comment from John Anderson about being

in Australia, and I thought, “I’m not going to be traveling internationally in

coal preparation. It’s going to have to be something else.” And this

construction project that John was at was in China, Shanxi Province China. And

he, like I said,

was passing away with cancer, and he talked to me for a bit and he made it sound

worse than it actually was. But he made it sound worse than it actually was,

once we got over there, but he--it was a from the ground up mine.

CURRIS:It was a pit mine, wasn’t it?

HERN:Yeah, it was an open pit mine and a 4,000-ton-an-hour preparation

facility. It had four 1,000-ton modules in it and two huge thermal dryers, and

it was a billion-dollar project, when a billion dollars meant something.

CURRIS:Who were the employees there?

HERN:I’ve got to think. It was an--Occidental Petroleum, was in--

can’t think of the word to use. But they were with the Chinese government

----------(??) and--

CURRIS:--they must’ve had a contract with the government because I would not

expect you to do anything in China if--without a contract with the government.

HERN:Who’s the CEO of Occidental Petroleum?

CURRIS:Oh, I did know. I--we’ll remember it.

HERN:Well, he was at this site. He went there and he helped--I won’t say force,

but helped make it happen, yeah, with the board of Occidental Petroleum and the

Chinese and provide the money for the project, with certain milestones had to be

made over a certain period of time. And, now, this is, like I said, ground up.

There’s nothing there. And they had put in rail lines, power cables, and the whole

ball of wax--water supply, had to relocate a river, and--

CURRIS:--did--were you part of that or had that already been done?

HERN:That had already been done when I got over there. It was sixty percent

complete when I got there.

CURRIS:And how long were you there?

HERN:Four years.

CURRIS:Did you have any fears of any problems at that time?

HERN:Funny you should mention. It was pretty much secure. We had no major

problems. But this one woman, her son had been--her child had been killed

by--Antaibao was the name of the facility and all the trucks had ATB on the side

of them, so whenever you were driving down the road, the Chinese immediately

knew where you’d come from. Well, I was leaving work one day and it was about a

twenty-minute drive back to where we stayed and I noticed there was--there’s a

crowd gathering

in front of me, and what I didn’t know was this woman was stopping ATB traffic,

wanting a ransom back from the company. And she stepped right in front of my

vehicle when I got there. I--and the Chinese got in behind me and I couldn’t go

anywhere. And I made sure the doors were locked and I just sat there. And they

got up on my hood and was jumping up and down on the hood. I mean, they weren’t

violent, but they were having a little bit of fun on me. And they tried to get

me to open my doors, which I wasn’t about to do. And I was there, I guess,

forty-five minutes and I was starting to lose control, and I think, “I’ve got to

get out of here somehow.” So I started the engine up and put it in reverse,

which the back-up alarm started. The Chinese behind me split and I drove through

the split backwards as fast as I could, turned around, and the lady whose child

had been killed was up

on the hood of my vehicle. And in China, if you’re in a car accident, you try to

move the vehicle up, they’ll crawl in between your tires so you can’t go

anywhere, and I knew that, and I thought, “Well, I can’t stop.” So I went in

reverse so I got out of the crowd of people, and she’s still on my hood, banging

on my windshield, wanting me to stop. And I kept going and I turned around, and

when I was turning around, she slid off the hood, got off the hood of the car,

and I went on to the mine, got security as an escort home. And the next day,

Hammer--Dr. Hammer--they had contacted Dr. Hammer about this and they shut the

mine down for the next day. They--Occidental told them, “Get this under control

or we’re not coming back until you do.” And two days later, we were back in

operation, and the lady was gone, so.

CURRIS:When you refer to Hammer, are you talking about Armand Hammer?

HERN:Yes,

Dr. Armand Hammer. A matter of fact, I was--he came to the site to see us load

our first rail car and had a big to-do when all that was going on. But these

were remote control locomotives that pulled the rail cars through, and they--as

they were loading the cars, or getting ready to load them, they’d ask--the

podium was set up for Dr. Hammer to advance the first train--first cars out of

the load out and took him up to the podium, and he started pushing buttons and

nothing was happening. (laughs) One of the guys that was working for me went

around to the off side of the train and out of sight so the crowd couldn’t see.

He went up and got into the lead locomotive, laying in the floor, and started

manually advancing

the engine. And nobody knew he was in there. (laughs) So we got away with that one.

CURRIS:(laughs) Did you--

HERN:--Dr. Hammer’s sitting there, watching all this, so.

CURRIS:Was he aware of what was happening?

HERN:No, he didn’t know.

CURRIS:(laughs) So you really did pull that one off.

HERN:Yeah, pulled that one off.

CURRIS:Did you give that guy a raise? He deserved one.

HERN:Case of beer.

CURRIS:Right. Well, now, weren’t you in China also at the time of the uprising

in Beijing?

HERN:Yeah, Tiananmen Square, yes.

CURRIS:Tell us about that experience.

HERN:They--I got--put it on hold--

[Pause in Recording]

CURRIS:Again, we had a momentary pause, and Bruce, again, tell us about the

experience of being in China at the time of the uprising, to be in Beijing.

HERN:Well, the uprising had just started and the--we were

in--you get a three-day mini R&R into Beijing once you’ve been there for six

weeks and we decided to go into Beijing. Of course, that’s one of the wrong

decisions that we made--to this area, and we knew things were going on in

Beijing. We didn’t know how bad. And we stayed at the Holiday Inn there in

Beijing (pauses) and the people at--around--like I said, the Holiday Inn’s where

we were staying, and we pulled up to the Holiday Inn and there were two

truckloads of Chinese troops sitting outside the--parked, sitting outside the

Holiday Inn, waiting for the call to go to Tiananmen Square, which we didn’t

know at the time. But

we went onto our room and then local news reporting kept reporting from

Tiananmen Square even while all this is going on, so we knew what was taking

place. And then the--Gorbachev had come to China on a state visit and this had

caused the Chinese to lose face because they were having to control airports,

and there were people rioting in the streets, and the Chinese management lost

face, which is a big thing in China, you lose--it’s okay to lie or do other

things but you can’t lose face for your family, and they had lost face because

they had all these plans for Gorbachev and they had to cancel all the plans

because they were afraid for his security. And that’s when they decided to clear

the Square no matter what it took. And the

soldiers came in and went down in the Square, and we saw truck after truck after

truck of--military trucks with bodies in them. They were going--found out later,

going to the crematorium, and they--the numbers that are official are not even

close to what really happened, but, I mean, it was a slaughter. They--we didn’t

know if we were going to get out of there or not. We tried to get back the same

day but they wouldn’t fly us out of the airport because of the Square situation

going on. So the next Monday--we got there on a Friday, so the next Monday, we

finally got a plane back to the site. We all flew back to the site and things

deteriorated to the point that they flew all non-essential personnel out, had

families and kids, put them on a plane

and flew them back to wherever they were from. And then we--it’s been another

week, they finally had it all under control, back to normal--as normal as could be--but--

CURRIS:--how did you get back from Beijing? What was your mode of

transportation, since they couldn’t fly you?

HERN:No, by the time we were ready to fly out, we could.

CURRIS:Oh, by Monday, you were able to do that? Okay.

HERN:This was going--internal China. This wasn’t international, so they let us

leave the airport.

CURRIS:Well, now, this is--(laughs)--the experience of China, which you--in

reflection, what do you think the China job did in terms of providing new

opportunities for the future?

HERN:Well, it didn’t look back on a resume, if you’re going to--the thing about

international work and travel, you’ve got to get that first job under your belt.

(laughs) If you’ve never done it

before, it’s hard to get a position. But if you’re done it a time or got some

history behind you as far as doing international work, it’s a big difference.

CURRIS:Well, what was your next international position?

HERN:Colombia, I think.

CURRIS:Brazil, Colombia, Australia? So when you were in Colombia, was there

anything particular there that stands in your mind as being the most exciting

part of your position there or the job?

HERN:Colombia was a lot of fun and the people--I mean, it was hard work, but--

CURRIS:--did you have any experiences there like you had in China?

HERN:Yeah, I missed a kidnapping attempt.

CURRIS:Tell us about that.

HERN:The president of the company, Mike Tracy, he was in Birmingham. He flew

down a weekend--

CURRIS:--and this is which company now?

Drummond?

HERN:Drummond Coal, yeah. And we--he was going out to the port. We had a port

facility for loading barges, and he was going out to inspect the port, and I was

going myself also, so we decided to fly together out of the airport there in

Barranquilla. And we flew out--I was supposed to fly on a Cessna. It’s what we

usually flew in, a single-engine Cessna to the airport there in Santa Marta, and

we got to the airport to fly out and they were having mechanical troubles with

the Cessna, so we ended up flying on a two-engine King Air. And that’s what--we

didn’t realize at the time--that’s what saved our bacon, and we were fifteen

minutes early versus our schedule. And the other thing we didn’t know was

the local guerrilla had our schedule, what--where we were going, and they had

focused on the president, going to kidnap him. And so we get to Santa Marta, get

off on a little van driving toward the site, and we drove all the way to the

site. You go across this single-lane bridge, the road narrows, and then onto the

site, it’s about a twenty-minute drive. We got in and went to the--got there and

went to the office, I guess, fifteen minutes total, and the--all the sudden, one

of the security people came into my office and said, “Bruce, we’re under attack.

We’ve got to go to the safe room,” the safe room being a room with eighteen-inch

thick concrete walls and steel doors, and the only thing is if they come at you,

that’s the first place they’re going to go looking for people, is in a safe

room. But we were there, I guess, an hour, and the foliage is so dense, I mean,

you just can’t see. You can grab somebody and take off to the woods and you

never see them once they left the side just because it’s so thick underbrush.

But we stayed there and finally the military showed up and chased them off. But

that was--it was about an hour ordeal. But they were--

CURRIS:--and you had no idea all this was coming?

HERN:No, none.

CURRIS:This was walking into it blind?

HERN:Yeah, they were stopping traffic there at the concrete bridge and looking

for us, and we just happened to get there before, early.

CURRIS:And that is what saved you.

HERN:Yeah, that’s what saved our bacon.

CURRIS:And so we’re talking about some time at the

end of the 1990s, early 2000s?

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:For this--well, from Colombia, what was the next position,

internationally? The--I remember you being in Australia, and what was the salt

mine? Didn’t you work in a salt mine at one point? Forgotten which country. It

was one of the Eastern European countries, I thought.

HERN:Poland. That’s where that was. No, I didn’t work in the salt one. That was

a one-day adventure. There was a salt mine in Wieliczka, Poland, been in

operation for 300 years, and they--that was quite a trip. They had nine

different levels. In the salt mine proper, they had a restaurant, a dance hall,

and one of the popes had been there. George Bush had been there. In the--

CURRIS:

--In this salt mine?--

HERN:--in the salt mine.

CURRIS:In Poland?

HERN:And they had--

CURRIS:--fascinating--

HERN:--statues out of salt, the Virgin Mary and the Last Supper. They had it.

Three--two brothers and another guy committed their life to doing all these

carvings in the salt mine, and it was quite an ordeal.

CURRIS:That--isn’t it fascinating that you can take something like salt, mine

it, and turn it into a work of art?

HERN:Oh yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:Well, now, I--it’s my understanding that you also worked in Brazil as a

site construction manager. Who was that for?

HERN:A company called Vale. They--a major international company. But I was

working directly for R&S Company, Roberts & Schaefer, out of Chicago. But they

were building a state-of-the-art load out to load rail cars because they shipped

21,000 tons a day out of this place. And, I mean, it was a pretty rapid pace and

had to have a technologically advanced system to be able to do that, and that’s

what Roberts & Schaefer provided. And I was down there managing that. A lot of

my career, I learned that eighty percent of your problems are people-related and

twenty percent are mechanical or process-related, and that held true no matter

where I was. So I got into Brazil and was real fortunate. I got to go to Rio,

see the Christ statue, and a lot of wonderful things in this place. But we were

in a town called

Parauapebas, and that was probably about a six-hour drive from Rio. But anyway,

we were in São Paulo quite a bit too. But--

CURRIS:--was there anything in terms of that particular position that is

memorable in terms of experiences, dealing with the people, dealing with what

you were doing? It’s just like you’ve had these really wild experiences in

Colombia and China. Was this time finally something that--(laughs)--you didn’t

have to worry about?

HERN:No, Brazil had been a--they had their own culture, as far as criminals,

and we were in a--there’s a town in the mine site outside of Parauapebas, and

they had an open-air restaurant, and we

broke for lunch one day and went down there, me and three other Americans, and

we were in the restaurant for lunch. And the--all of the sudden, we hear what

sounds like firecrackers going off, but it was gunshots and we didn’t know it.

And they--two carloads of men showed up in police uniforms and they weren’t

police. They were--and they pulled up in front of the jewelry--two jewelry

stores and a bank and bashed the windows out of the jewelry stores and stole all

the jewelry. It’s like, we’re sitting there, eating lunch just across the

street, you know? And then they robbed the bank and there was one guy in there,

had some money in his hand, and one of the robbers went up to him and said, “Is

that your money or the bank’s? He said, “It’s mine.” He said, “Well, you keep it

because it’s your money. It’s not the bank’s.” But

they stole all the bank’s money and left. And they got in--they took the bank

manager and his secretary hostage, drove off, and had another car waiting on

them, flipped that car over, set it on fire in the middle of the road, and then

they drove off in the jungle and had a helicopter waiting on them and flew off.

And so we went over because we didn’t know what they were looking for. We were

over to a local building, just went inside, and closed the door and hunkered

down and locked the door and just sat there until it was all over with. And we

had a new guy. It was his first day there, working with us. (laughs) I looked at

him. We were down on the floor. The door’s locked, waiting to see if anybody’s

going by. And I said, “Welcome to Brazil,” and (both laugh) he--but we got

through it.

CURRIS:Well,

as you look back over all these multiple places and very interesting career,

would you have changed it? Would you have--still, if you had a second chance,

would you still follow that same career path?

HERN:Pretty much the same, except I made one major mistake. I didn’t apply for

citizenship in Australia. I mean, I could’ve done that, but I got busy doing

other stuff. That’s the only thing I regret I didn’t do.

CURRIS:What’d you do in Australia?

HERN:It was another huge coal facility with all the trimmings to go with it. It

had underground mining, it had raw coal storage, clean coal blending, flint load

outs. It was a 400 million dollar project and that was a lot of

fun. I enjoyed Australia. I enjoyed the people. But the--

CURRIS:--well, when it comes to having had all these exciting experiences, and

you look at the coal industry today. What do you forecast is happening to coal

both in the United States and across the world?

HERN:Well, in the United States specifically, the--coal’s a four-letter word.

The average American person doesn’t understand what it plays in the total

economy both, you know, utilities and the steel industry. And I don’t think most

people grasp that. But it’s--

the economics are there to survive and, you know, run a business, but with all

the rules and regulations and shutting down oil drilling permits and all that,

we’re dooming ourselves, I think.

CURRIS:Well, everyone talks about electricity. Is coal not required in most

instances for the production of electricity?

HERN:Through a powered steam--power generation, yes. But one thing I--is where

we’re headed long-term is nuclear fusion. It’s--it makes its own fuel and

there’s no major plumes from it. But it’s going to take a long time and a lot of

commitment but I don’t know if

American industry’s ready to tackle that or not. They have proven it works and

it exists. It’s--no radioactive fallout from it. It’s just got all the

positives. But it’ll replace coal.

CURRIS:In time.

HERN:I’m talking a long time down the road.

CURRIS:Um-hm. The--what would you say having a degree in chemical engineering

did for your career? If you had had a different kind of degree--let’s say a coal

mining degree, an engineering degree?

HERN:Having that Chem E notoriety--anytime you say “Chemical engineering,”

people kind of pay attention. “He must be smart,” which is my case proves that

wrong. But yeah.

CURRIS:One of the discussions you and I have had that I think is most

fascinating, that is would you tell us

the story and the implication of the lunch pail? The coal miners’--

HERN:--oh yeah--

CURRIS:--lunch pail?

HERN:(laughs) This is a standard in the coal industry, and underground mining

in particular.

CURRIS:Is this worldwide or U.S.?

HERN:U.S. But the coal miners back in the previous days had a lunchpail out of

aluminum they could take underground with them, and the top third of this was a

compartment to put sandwiches or edibles in, and then below that was sealed, and

that was for drinking water, and you carried that with you for the working

shift. But it came about as a signal when--during the union days that if a

person “poured their water out,”

quote-unquote, that means you were going on strike and leaving the operation.

And this guy was going into work, and they rode what they called a portabus,

which transported the miners to the working areas of the mine, and this guy

traveled to the working place and got out and then wanted a drink of water, so

he opened his container for a drink of water. There was an insect in the water,

so he poured the water out. Everybody else saw him pour his water out and they

walked out of the mine on strike. (laughs) So ----------(??). But he didn’t say

anything and they--back to work the next day, but sure enough, he poured his

water out, and everybody left.

CURRIS:Could any individual miner pour out the water and cause the strike?

HERN:Yeah, but, you know, he’d lose his wages too, so there was incentive not

to do that.

CURRIS:The--

when it comes to--

HERN:--that’s a true story, by the way, his.

CURRIS:The--where did it take place, do you know?

HERN:Southern West Virginia.

CURRIS:Where?

HERN:Southern West Virginia.

CURRIS:Southern West Virginia. Well, I think that the whole language of the

coal lunchpail is just a fascinating little story all on its own because you

think about the women having packed those lunches, not knowing if they were ever

going to see their miner again.

HERN:That’s on everybody’s--anybody that works in an underground coal mine,

that’s on their mind every day when they go in that portal. “Will we come back

out or not? Because you never know. And I had the same thought, when I went.

Sure was happy to be on a portabus laying on my back, looking at the rail line

or wherever, coming outside, and seeing that circle of the outside,

you know, where everything was. I couldn’t wait to get there. I think anyone

that’s worked in an underground coal mine has that same mindset.

CURRIS:Oh, no. Well, you know, you talked about your children and gave their

names and their mother was--what was Kay’s last--maiden name?

HERN:Barnes.

CURRIS:Barnes. But you also have a very pretty daughter, Ana (??). Tell us her

name and her mother’s name.

HERN:Her mother’s name is Martha Elena Hern. She’s Colombian. And Ana’s

name--Martha is fifteen years younger than I am, and Martha never had any

children, but said she’d like to have one between us, so I said, “Far be it from

me to say no.” And I said--we went to the doctor and they didn’t think Martha

would be able to conceive, and they

told us to think about adoption, and we looked at each other and Martha and I

agreed. We said, “No, we’re going to put this in God’s hands,” and we did. And

come along, it was Valentine’s Day one year and I’d come home from work, and

there’s Martha standing there with a big smile on her face. I said, “What? And

she handed me this little container and I said, “Valentine’s Day was yesterday.”

She said, “Yeah, but open it up.” I opened it up and it was a pregnancy test

showing positive.

CURRIS:(laughs) And so then we have Ana.

HERN:Ana Milagros. Milagros means miracle in Spanish and--

CURRIS:--okay--

HERN:--she’s our miracle.

CURRIS:Well, you know, I think about your daughters, and they’re all just

really wonderful. Shanna is educated and trained as a nurse.

HERN:Right.

CURRIS:Kind of tell us what every--because

my thought is we’re coming from Josie, Mother Parker, who--the grandmother, and

she had a little store. She was one of the few women that had any kind of

business other than businesses that you could do in your home. So then you come

to your mother who--Pauline, who absolutely, you know, just took the bull by the

horns and did a lot of things for a lot of people and worked outside of the home

in later years. And now we come down to our children. So tell me what your other

children are doing.

HERN:Oh, well, the next one--like I said, I use numbers instead of names--but

number two, Cindy, she--Kay’s grandmother was a full-blooded Cherokee Indian, so

Cindy was born

and she was red when she was born, and that--because of her heritage. We thought

something was wrong. He says, “No, it’s just her heritage showing out.” And

she’s been the tomboy of the bunch. But she worked in--she wanted to be a state--

CURRIS:--well--

HERN:--environmental officer, and she got that type of job, ended up being the

manager at Norris Dam State Park for a few years, and then she was a forensic

person for--when--anytime somebody died, she worked for the state and would go,

like, help accumulate the bodies and see what had happened.

CURRIS:See, they’re all smart. And the next one?

HERN:Roberta Ryan, she’s the scary one. She--as far as smarts, she saw me play

chess a couple times

and sat down and she was eight years old and said, “Dad, will you show me how to

play chess? I said, “Sure.” And I showed her the moves. She almost beat me on

the third game and I said, “I’m not playing you anymore.” I said--

CURRIS:--(laughs)--I believe that about her.

HERN:Yeah, she’s pretty sharp. She’s got a masters in epidemiology, and she

gets her kids up and grown, she’s considering a PhD, so we’ll see how that goes.

CURRIS:And then?

HERN:Then there’s Kara Lee. By the way, the—Kara Lee was coming along, and the

other three--Kay and I talked about it and we said, “Okay, we’re going to let

the three of you name this one. You get to name her.” And that’s the name they

came up with, Kara Lee, so--and I thought that was a good bonding thing for them.

CURRIS:That’s great.

HERN:Yeah.

CURRIS:I did not know that. Yes.

HERN:And, of course, Ana’s with Martha.

CURRIS:Yeah, and she’s at the university.

HERN:University of Tennessee--

CURRIS:

--studying, yes. All your girls went to the University of Tennessee, did they not?

HERN:No, Ana went to--that’s--it wasn’t WVU. It was a nursing school there.

CURRIS:Oh, okay. Oh, okay. But again, you know, you have this family tradition

of women who really strive to do many different things, and I think you’re to be complimented--

HERN:--well, thank you for that--

CURRIS:--on your girls because they all have just really--

HERN:--and Kara Lee is an executive with Keurig, the coffeemaker.

CURRIS:With whom again?

HERN:Keurig.

CURRIS:Oh, Keurig.

HERN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Yes, coffee. I didn’t know that.

HERN:Yeah, she is. She’s got quite a position there.

CURRIS:Well, you know, we’re talking about the history of the women in the

family. And we’ve talked about Benham, the Tri-Cities, Benham, Cumberland,

Lynch. Do you have any particular

comments that you would like to make--any final comments that you would like to

have recorded for history, whether it’s about Benham, mining, the culture?

HERN:I guess the major thing in my mind is--thinking back on my life is Benham

will always be home for me. They--just--I can remember it. There used to be

these water stands that were tied into the Benham community water system all

over town where you could go and just push a liter down and get fresh water any

time you wanted to, and today, it’s all bottled water and all this. But this is

an example of a different time.

CURRIS:Well, it’s--others have commented about the fact that the entire

community was raising a child, that--

HERN:--right--

CURRIS:--if you were doing

something that you shouldn’t be, your parents knew it before--(laughs)--you ever

got home. Did you find that same experience?

HERN:Oh yes, and one of the things was when the local town streetlights came

on, everybody went home. I mean, you didn’t have to wait for a phone call. That

was--and myself and two guys I graduated with decided to take a trip to Canada

together, Joe and Carl Delph, and we did for a couple of weeks. We--

CURRIS:--who was it that went?

HERN:Joe and Carl Delph And we came back and we hit--nobody knew we were coming

in--and we hit Lynch, and it wasn’t fifteen minutes later, one of the women had

seen us go down the road and called our parents and told them that we were back

in town. So--and that reflects on what you were talking about.

CURRIS:Well, Bruce, this has been a wonderful period of time. I really

appreciate your taking the time

and I want to say thank you for doing this because now, we have a far better

understanding of what was the subject matter of my starting these, and that is

Benham, the Credit Union, Bob, and Pauline Hern. Thank you, dear brother. (laughs)

HERN:Oh, it’s--thank you for the opportunity.

CURRIS:We forgot one thing. Your writing, your two books.

HERN:(laughs) Arguille MacGregor.

CURRIS:Yes. Yes. Tell me about those.

HERN:Well--

CURRIS:--what prompted you to do the--

HERN:--well, I’ll get back on Mrs. Rider and that creative writing class.

She--a lot of what she taught me prompted me to do this, but I--over six

different times, separate places--around the world, really--I just sit down just

like we’re talking now and start talking about the places where I’d been and

what I’d done,

and six different people told me, “You need to write a book.” And so this

opportunity came up to--thinking back on what I had done, and I set down, wrote

a book--wrote two books, as a matter of fact, about my adventures and where I’ve

been and what I’ve done.

CURRIS:And what are their titles?

HERN:The Global Adventures of Arguille MacGregor and Arguille MacGregor Domesticated.

CURRIS:Well, are you sure that happened? (laughs) Are you sure you’re

domesticated? (laughs)

HERN:Ask Martha.

CURRIS:Ask Martha. Well, Bruce, again, thank you, and I’ll look forward to

getting--having you actually listen to this or a portion of this in the Robert

Hern and Pauline Hern Financial Center in Benham, Kentucky.

HERN:Super.

CURRIS:Thank you.

HERN:Thank you again.

CURRIS:Bye-bye.

[End of interview.]

� PAGE �44�