CAGLE:All right.

CLEMENT:Hopefully the garbage trucks will stop soon.

CAGLE:Yes, the garbage trucks, trucks should stop soon. So, this is Lauren

Cagle. I'm here with Cathy Clement at Cathy's house on September 19, 2023, and

we're recording an interview for the Kentucky Climate Oral History Collection.

Thank you so much, Cathy. I'm excited about this. So, um, I'll start with either

the hardest or the easiest question. Tell me a little bit about yourself.

CLEMENT:Um, well, I grew up in California, so I'm not a native Kentuckian, um,

but I moved here in 1989 to take a job at Eastern Kentucky University in the

psychology department. Um, so I taught there for twenty-seven years, roughly,

and retired in 2016. My husband, uh, was at Kentucky State University, so he got

a job here first, and then I followed. Um, we have two sons, and one lives in Houston

. He's a high school teacher, and one lives in San Francisco and is a techie.

CAGLE:Hmm.

CLEMENT:Um, so--(laughs)--that's almost all I know about what he does--(both

laugh). So, um, the year I was retiring, um, a friend of mine, uh, Steve

Wilkins, was very involved in Kentuckians for the Commonwealth, uh, On the Table

event. I don't know if you were around then--

CAGLE:--that was right when I was moving to Kentucky, so I was not yet--

CLEMENT:--okay--

CAGLE:--aware of it.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:So this would have been 2016, no 2018?

CLEMENT:No, it was--the event, I don't know, was either sixteen or seventeen.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:So under Lisa Abbott's direction, KFTC's[1]New

Energy and Transition Team Committee, um, had this really fabulous event where

they hosted large gatherings all over

the state to get people's thoughts about the future of energy in Kentucky. And

it was partly, I believe, in response to Obama's climate clean power plan, and

the state of Kentucky refused to--the notion was that every state would come up

with their, uh, way they were going to implement it, and Kentucky refused. And

so Lisa and others on this committee said, “well, we'll do our own.” So, they

created this On the Table event. They had speakers from all over, but mainly

they were getting people's input on what should Kentucky do. And, so anyway, and

then they constructed this huge document that's out there--[dog barks]--uh,

still, uh, available on things that should be done to address a just [?? WORD

UNCLEAR] transition in Kentucky. And it was so impressive, and I thought these

people are amazing

. And--(laughs)--um, so I joined that New Energy and Transition Committee, and,

so been involved with that and some things that have trickled out of that for

the last four, five years, six years--(laughs).

CAGLE:I have a lot of follow-up questions--

CLEMENT:--yes, yeah, go--

CAGLE:--I want to ask from all those things.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah. Because I don’t know where to--

CAGLE:Okay, let's start with--so when you came to EKU,

[2]that would have been in eighty-eight?

CLEMENT:Eighty-nine.

CAGLE:Eighty-nine.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Did you think you were going to be here this long?

CLEMENT:Yeah. I, I was never wanted to think much about the future, but, uh--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--but, no, we did not come here with the plan of leaving, uh, you know,

getting better jobs or--no. Um, yeah, I mean, actually--that's interesting

that you ask that. I mean, the academic job market was so difficult that--and I

wasn't on a, you know, research one career path, at least by that point. So, no,

I think we figured we would stay--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--but I will say it took a while to be, you know, to

assimilate--(laughs)--into the state.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Uh, and partly, too, was the fact that we both were commuting. So that

meant I really wasn't enmeshed in Lexington or in Richmond. So, um, but yeah,

that's funny. I never, I never applied for any other jobs and neither did Ron, I

don't think. So, uh

--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah, as you said, it's the academic job market is so impossible,

and yet there is that sense that you should, you know, always be keeping your--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--finger to the wind for the next best thing.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:And I guess partly is that everything was two jobs, not just one. So,

yeah, I think we were glad to have jobs.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And, um, you know, we had friends and, and the places--I'm from

California and he's from, uh, northern Michigan. Uh, my sister lives in New York

City. All these other places we might want to live are financially impossible. So--

CAGLE:--yeah. I know how that goes.

CLEMENT:Yeah--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah. Uh, will you say more about that? You said it took a while to

assimilate, I think is the word you used.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Will you say more about that?

CLEMENT:Um

, well, I didn’t pay attention to state or city politics for quite a while. I

mean, I voted, and, but, um, nothing in much detail. Not that I would have done

that if I was in, you know, whatever--it had been--I left California in 1980. So

it was nine years since I'd been in my home state. And we had lived in New York

and Massachusetts and, uh, Minnesota. So I didn't really have an

allegiance--(laughs)--to any particular place. But, you know, certainly, um, uh,

it was a different culture, certainly a different culture at EKU. And, you know,

a lot of things were kind of upside down to me there--(laughs)--uh, on the campus

. So, um, and learning the students' culture of, you know, for me, and I think

the expectations when I was young is that you'll go to college and who knows

where you'll end up. There was no notion that you will come home. You will, you

know, live near your parents. And there was never any, no expectation of that.

None of my siblings did that exactly, and, and, but I think for a while I would

be surprised, you know, the students didn't want to apply to grad school even in

Lexington. I mean--(laughs)--so, you know, just getting to understand where they

were coming from--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm [affiirmative], and that attachment to place--

CLEMENT:--yeah. And family--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--and more than what I was used to

.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Um, so retiring was good too in that letting me get involved in

Lexington and, you know, embrace it more as my community. Even though most of my

friends lived in Lexington, oh, you know, I didn't have time to really do

anything but work and raise kids. So--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah. How were you meeting folks in Lexington then? Through like kid

stuff or--

CLEMENT:--yes.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah. Um, there was two humming birds. Uh--(laughs)--they just flew

off. Um, yeah, and, uh, I was very lucky that my--one of my best friends from

graduate school got a job in my department--(laughs)--and lived nearby. So--

CAGLE:--nice.

CLEMENT:Yeah, that was--

CAGLE:--the dream.

CLEMENT:It really was. Um, but yeah. So I met things through the kids and

neighbors. Um

, uh, yeah.

CAGLE:Have you all been in this neighborhood for that whole time--

CLEMENT:--yeah, so we, uh, almost. We lived downtown Madison Place for two

years and then moved here.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Yeah. So, oh you're like classic Kenwick--(laughs)--resident.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. The OG Kenwick resident. The original, so--

CLEMENT:--oh, well, not--

CAGLE:--I mean, not the original, I guess--

CLEMENT:--no. God, I mean, I meet so many people and they'll say, oh yeah, my

grandmother lived in Kenwick--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm, yep--

CLEMENT:--so--

CAGLE:--yeah, when I used to live over here as a renter, I would meet people

occasionally who would tell me about their family members who lived in my house.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:You know?

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah, yes, but original compared to--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--there's so many people moving--

CLEMENT:--yes, yes, yes--

CAGLE:--in as much as possible, I mean, now that there’s--

CLEMENT:--oh yeah, no. Yeah. I mean, I'm very lucky because we could not have

bought the house on the salary I was making

when I retired.

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:So--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--right. Yeah, yeah.

CLEMENT:Um, so--

CAGLE:--so California. Where in California are you from?

CLEMENT:Um, the Bay Area. So, what's now Silicon Valley--a town Los Altos,

which is very near Google and all that, you know, Silicon Valley is a completely

different place than what it was when I was there.

CAGLE:I can imagine.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Um--(clears throat)--but my mom lived there. She died in 2017. So we

went out there every year.

CAGLE:Okay.

CLEMENT:If not twice a year.

CAGLE:Yeah. So you got to see all the changes over time.

CLEMENT:Oh yeah. Yeah. I mean, when I left, I thought, oh, I'm glad to leave.

You know, I passionately love California. Um, but at the time, I thought, I'm

glad to leave. I can't watch this anymore. I can't watch--(laughs)--you, know, I

can't watch the environmental devastation

of every orchard turning into a house, which is what I lived. I lived in a

suburb that was in a cherry orchard. Um, so, but, you know, that was really

wrong in a lot of ways. California has done so much to protect things. Um, but

anyways, so, I forgot what you asked about.

CAGLE:Oh, just where you were from.

CLEMENT:Yeah. Yeah.

CAGLE:Well, and you anticipated me because I wanted to ask about whether this

concern for, you know, interest in, appreciation for all those feelings in

relation to the environment, if that's something that you've carried for a long

time or developed.

CLEMENT:Yeah. Um, my father was a big nature lover. Um, so I feel like he

helped me appreciate. I mean, I just--California was so beautiful, and

we went to the Sierras a lot. Once a year--(laughs)--he had one week of vacation

a year. Um, but we lived close enough to go to Santa Cruz Beach. And, you know,

I mean, there's so much glorious nature there. And, so, yeah, that's certainly.

And there was a point. So, when I was in high school was the first Earth Day.

And I remember that event. And, um, I remember a conference that some students

had put together, uh, where they--I remember the opening statement was, “we will

all be dead by 1980,”--(both laugh)--so--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--and I think Paul Ehrlich came gave a talk--

CAGLE:--wow--

CLEMENT:--at my high school, and--

CAGLE:--wow.

CLEMENT:Yeah

. I mean, because, you know, we were pretty close to Stanford. And, um, so there

was a lot of people on campus. You know, now that I hadn't even really thought

about this. Um, and then my--I remember I went to Oregon State my first two

years and then transferred to UC Berkeley. And I remember I was going to maybe

change my major from anthropology to environmental studies. But I, you know, I

wasn't a very aggressive person--(both laugh)--but I ran into somebody on

campus, an old high school friend, and I told her that. And she said, “really,

that requires a lot of math and chemistry and physics.” And--(both laugh)--I

thought, oh, right. I can't do that--

CAGLE:--uh-oh--(both laugh)--

CLEMENT:So--(both laugh)--so, but I, you know, had I overcome those fears, I

could have gone in that direction, um

, I didn’t, um--

CAGLE:--how'd you end up settling on psychology then?

CLEMENT:Uh, when I graduated, I think I was--I kind of just assumed I would go

to grad school. And, um, I was interested in education and, uh, and, you know,

the process of education, and I was frustrated at the time that I thought my

education at Berkeley had not been good. On retrospect, I think there was a lot

of good things about it. But at the time, I thought it was just all this massive

memorization and regurgitation. So, I thought, I think I want to do something in

education. I took one--(laughs)--I sat in on one education class. I don’t know,

I had already graduated. I can't remember the context, but

that told me immediately I did not--(laughs)--want to do education--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--so--(laughs)--so, then I thought I should do develop--I thought what

could be more important than developmental psychology? Um, you know,

children's--in particular, I was interested in Piaget and--who wrote about

cognitive development in children, and so, um, because I had read something by

him as an undergrad. Anyway, so I then I decided to do developmental psychology.

Um, and then I started a master's program at San Francisco State, but then went

on to my PhD program and switched to cognitive psychology, which is more just

adult cognition, how people think, attention, memory, and problem solving, and

that kind of thing was my field, my research field. Um, so it just kind of

evolved. And the very last few years, most of my research

at, my research interests at EKU, um, had to do with using analogies in

reasoning and how analogies can help people solve problems. I had done a postdoc

with this woman who was real big in analogy research. Um, but then I--my last

few years, I got interested in how people make decisions about environmental

problems and environmentally responsible behavior.

CAGLE:Yeah. I had to stop myself from going down a Google Scholar rabbit hole

and reading--

CLEMENT:--oh--

CAGLE:--all your papers--

CLEMENT:--well, oh I didn't--well there’s not much to read.

CAGLE:No, well, more the analogy.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:You have some of those from your earlier--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--publications, because as a rhetorician--

CLEMENT:--oh--

CAGLE:--and I have colleagues who work with cognitive scientists--

CLEMENT:--oh--

CAGLE:--on kind of rhetorical devices--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and their sort of overlap.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:I have a colleague at Carnegie Mellon, this is not important for the oral

history, but I think Cathy will be interested--

CLEMENT:--yeah

--

CAGLE:--who's working with cognitive scientists on working with Alzheimer's

patients to identify which rhetorical structures remain as kind of access to

language and memory falls away.

CLEMENT:Huh.

CAGLE:And that they're finding these really interesting patterns that, you

know, you go back to the ancient Greeks, some of the most foundational

rhetorical devices that they identified for persuasion--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--and entertainment are the things that remain when other language

facilities fall away.

CLEMENT:Well, that's interesting.

CAGLE:Isn't that interesting?

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Yeah. So anyway, I saw analogy and I was like, hold

on--(laughs)--I'm going to read about this, though.

CLEMENT:It's so interesting because I didn't one thing I didn't anticipate is

how I would completely just drop--(laughs)--that like a hot potato when I retired--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--I don't--uh, I just got so caught up in all this other stuff

.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And, um, I haven't thought about it at all. But as you're talking about

it, that's really interesting. I wish I was still reading some of it.

CAGLE:Had you planned to stay like at least a little research active or no?

CLEMENT:I don't know. I guess not really.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:I, I haven't thrown anything away, so--(both laugh).

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:I wanted to just. No, I wanted to do other things.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Were you running any environmental psych studies at the end,

then? You said you got interested--

CLEMENT:--no we, uh, we did this--two colleagues and I did this one project

and, uh, got one paper published. And yeah, no, that was kind of the end because

partly I retired, uh, gradually. That is my last year I was half time, and I

think by that point I was connected

with KFTC.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah, and there were some other little things, but, yeah, and I didn't,

you know, it's not a, uh, well, they do have a PhD in clinical psych, but

there's no--I never had PhD doctoral students carrying on research--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--or even master students.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:If I had a masters student, they weren’t in experimental psychology. So--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--so, when did you--you said, you know, initially you weren't paying

close attention to local politics or state politics. Did that change at any

point during your career then?

CLEMENT:Only when I retired, really--

CAGLE:--it was really then--

CLEMENT:--yeah. I mean, yeah, definitely local politics. I mean, when you know,

I would help out

when Obama ran. Who ran before Obama?

CAGLE:Kerry.

CLEMENT:Yeah, and I--so, I got involved in that, but no, not in any local stuff.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Yeah. Yeah. And yeah, to my regret, I, you know, I distinctly remember

a colleague, uh, when Bevin ran saying, I didn't even--she said I don’t even, I

didn’t even know there was an election--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah. Yeah--

CLEMENT:--and so, I wasn't that bad. But--(laughs)--but, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. It's easy, though. It's there's so many other things in life to

take attention.

CLEMENT:Oh, yeah, and I yeah, I'm pretty obsessive compulsive. So--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--teaching took a lot of my time.

CAGLE:Yeah. You did say so you've always voted like you always knew there was

election. Was that something that was--were you raised to

value voting or where did that come from?

CLEMENT:I don’t know--(both laugh)--uh, I don't think it was something my

parents talked about, but I guess it was implicit. I mean, they were very

conservative Republicans, but, um, but my mother had the, uh, her--our house was

a polling location sometimes.

CAGLE:Oh, wow.

CLEMENT:So, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:And so my brother and sister are older. My brother passed away, but

she's nine years older than me, and he was six years older than me. They were at

University of California, Berkeley. She was there during the free speech

movements and the, um, civil rights era. My brother was there during the Vietnam

War. So, you know, definitely, political issues were certainly front and center,

um, at home, not

--(laughs)--not talked about it with my parents, but, uh--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--certainly, you know, the next generation certainly was talking about things.

CAGLE:What did they go on to do?

CLEMENT:Uh, my sister's a clinical psychologist in New York. My brother was a

physical therapist.

CAGLE:Oh, that's interesting. All helping professions, right?

CLEMENT:Except me. I [?? WORDS UNCLEAR], no I'm not a clinical psychologist--

CAGLE:--but teaching, but teaching--

CLEMENT:--teaching, yes.

CAGLE:Yes. I think of teaching as a helping profession--

CLEMENT:Yeah, yes. We didn't go into finance or become lawyers.

CAGLE:Uh-huh--(laughs)--were have they also--were--I'm sorry for the loss of

your brother. Was he and is your sister also sort of concerned about

environmental and climate issues?

CLEMENT:No.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:No. Um, I mean, my brother was a certainly a nature lover, but he

actually got pretty conservative in his--as he

got older.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:But, uh, so no--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah. I mean, my dad is extremely conservative--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--and same. It's this weird thing--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--where loves, you know, nature. We always used to go do outdoors things

and fully supports policies--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that don’t--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--no dot connecting--

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Exactly.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:So, okay. So--I just--it's so interesting to me because I ever since I've

known you, I have known you as someone who's really active and politically

engaged and a leader in these spaces, um, in various ways. And so it's--I had no

idea that that was a sort of like conversion story there--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--or not conversion, I guess.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:But, you know, there's a real change narrative there--

CLEMENT:--I guess so, yeah--

CAGLE:--uh, which I think is just interesting. And it really was this like on

the table experience and getting really involved and seeing the work--

CLEMENT:--yes, yeah--

CAGLE:--that they did--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:So

then, so how did that translate into continued involvement?

CLEMENT:Um, uh, I think what--one thing that happened--I'm trying to remember

what what was going on the first couple of years. Um, it was just because of the

new energy and transition, the net committee, which Lisa ran and, um, Steve

Wilkens, my friend, was very active in. Um, and they just taught me so much--[thud]--

CAGLE:--oops, oh, you're fine--

CLEMENT:--oh god, there’s a water glass there though. You don’t want that on

your computer--

CAGLE:--oh, no--

CLEMENT:--um--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--I almost made a mess--

CLEMENT:I don’t know which technology would be the worse for the water to fall on--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--Oh, yeah. No, that's--thank you--

CLEMENT:--uh, uh, so I just learned a whole lot from Steve Wilkins and, um, and

they were just good role models. And there was a lot of immediate things to do.

So, they had this

, uh, Kentucky--Empower Kentucky plan is what they called it. But then Trump got

elected and that was certainly a--you know, if Trump had not got elected, yeah,

I don't know what would have happened, um, because that was so devastating.

Trying to figure out the sequence of events now. He was elected in--

CAGLE:--2016, November, whatever day it was, sixth, 2016.

CLEMENT:I don't remember not being retired, um, when he was elected. So, I must

have been working at doing online teaching and working part time that year. Yes.

Yeah. Um, I think that also was like, just so devastating. And, um, it did mean

that they could not pursue this Empower

Kentucky plan, um, in the way that they envisioned. And so, then we just, um--

CAGLE:--was that the plan that came out of the on the table work, then?

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:Yeah, okay.

CLEMENT:Yes, yes, yes. Um, so then it just became a lot of defensive work. And

so. that was the year--the first--one of the first year, if not the first year,

the legislature tried to end net metering. So, every year there was actions to

do to fight that. Um, and for, I don't know, some number of years, I can't count

them, you know, we held them off or it didn't happen, you know, and then it

finally did happen that they changed net metering. Um, and there was also rate

cases. So, um, pretty much everything I have done has been involved with

the--has, had related to the utilities

. Um, um, and, they--it's--one year--I don't remember what year. Um, they asked

me to prepare a little summary of this rate case for this in-person meeting they

were going to have. Well, they didn't realize that, that was an enormous task

for me. And, you know, so I invested a whole lot of time in trying to understand

all this kind of things that was going on and preparing these little, you know,

in my academic way--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--handouts and all this stuff--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--then I get to the meeting and it turns out they didn't have time for it--

CAGLE:--(gasps)--no--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--oh--

CLEMENT:--yeah, that was pretty annoying. But--

CAGLE:--that made my heart's sad--(both laugh)--

CLEMENT:--but, it kind of meant that now I knew something about these rate

cases. And so, ever since then

, I've been, you know, helping out with utility stuff. So--

CAGLE:--we--

CLEMENT:--for better or for worse--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--I mean, obviously, I understand rate cases, but for the record, will you--(laughs)--explain?

CLEMENT:--well, this was--

CAGLE:--I actually really don't--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--I mean, both net metering and rate cases, actually, it would be great

to kind of get your sense of what that has involved. And I mean, it's not a dead

issue, certainly--

CLEMENT:--no--

CAGLE:--I mean, so yeah.

CLEMENT:Um, uh, this is, this is the problem with this area is that it's so

complicated. So, it's hard to do any kind of action related to it, because it's

so difficult to explain to people what's going on. Um, so Lisa Abbott, you know,

there was a phone call where she told me, you know, what an investor-owned

utility was and all these things that, um, I had to learn and

that people need to know. Because I didn't--I never thought about my utility

bill--(laughs)--It wasn't horribly high for us, you know, whereas for other

people, it's impossible. And, um, so it becomes--the utilities’ behavior is an

environmental issue, because they, um, for two main things, they structure, they

want to structure rates to discourage energy efficiency and rooftop solar. So,

net metering is how much are they going to compensate for people, for energy

that gets fed back into the grid. So, I have solar panels, and right now we

don't have any AC going on. There's probably no electricity, hardly at all,

being drawn in my house right now. So, the stuff being generated by the solar

panels goes back to the grid. So, um

, what are the utilities going to compensate me for that energy that I'm

providing to the system? That's what net metering is all about, um, and whether

it's going to be a fair rate of compensation or not. Then the rate cases, part

of the problem is just raising rates beyond what people can afford. But there's

two components to utility--to your bill, there's many components--but the two

main components to your bill are the charges for how much--the, the per kilowatt

hour charge, so if I use, how much, how many cents am I going to pay for per

kilowatt hour of energy I use. Um, and that’s a, that charge is reasonable in

the sense that it's, the more you use, the more you pay. Um, but

the utilities want to take a lot of your bill and not put it in that per

kilowatt hour charge, but put it into a flat fee, their basic service charge.

And the more they raise that, the more, whatever you do energy wise has no

impact on your bill. So, um, it's a--what's the term they use--price signal. It

doesn't give any price signals to discourage excess energy use. It doesn't

mean--it means the more that goes up, the less benefit you'll get from having

solar panels or being, you know, installing insulation and all that kind of

thing, because you're going to pay that amount no matter what. And then for

low-income people who are living in a small dwelling and not using that much

energy, they're going to pay as much on that as somebody living in a McMansion.

So, it's, um

, very unjust and very poor in trying to help us reduce energy use. Um, so

that's what the rate cases have--the rate cases have often been about trying to

stop the increase of the basic service charge and about dealing with their net

metering policies. So--

CAGLE:--yeah, so, oh, go ahead--

CLEMENT:--that was then, but more recently, there have been other things--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--um, so right now there's a big case that has to do with, uh, they

want to retire coal plants, which yay, but they want to replace them with gas

plants, which not yay. And then, and that was going to be pretty

straightforward. They, until last year, if the utility wanted to retire a coal

plant, they could retire a coal plant. Then Senate Bill 4 passed, making it very

difficult to retire a coal plant. So now the case has

become the coal plant retirement case, when initially it was about the gas

plant. Anyway, so that thing has been a real.

CAGLE:Will you talk about Senate Bill 4 a little bit?

CLEMENT:So Senate Bill 4[3]is, um, due to the coal

lobby, um, which has all these--I cannot talk intelligently about it--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--but there's all these requirements the utilities have to meet in

order to retire a coal plant. And um, but explaining those requirements, I

really can't do. Um, one of the most egregious requirements of it is that when

they evaluate the economics of retiring a coal plant

or not retiring a coal plant, they cannot, they are not allowed to take into

account any federal money, such as the money from the Inflation Reduction Act,

which gives tax credits for building renewables. And I think things more

specifically, benefits specifically related to retiring coal. They cannot bring

that into the cost benefit calculation, which hurts customer--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--so, um--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--let's see what happens. We don't know what's going to happen. Um, but

the coal lobby--and for all along, since I got involved in this, the coal, there

was no, um, the coal interests and the utility interests were perfectly aligned.

And all of a sudden, the utilities are on one side and the coal companies, the

coal mines are on the other side. And so

this is a very interesting--(both laugh)--dynamic. Um, uh, yeah, so where we're

siding with utilities on some pieces of their case--

CAGLE:--uh-huh, because it's not cost effective for them. They're not making

money with--

CLEMENT:--no--

CAGLE:--these older coal plants--

CLEMENT:--no--

CAGLE:--right? Yeah.

CLEMENT:No.

CAGLE:Yeah. What is your sense of that coal lobby dynamic? Um, I mean, how have

you seen that play out? You've gone to however many--the PSC, which is the

Public Service Commission--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--meetings and you know, had all these conversations and coal is this, in

some ways, it feels like a cartoon villain at this point, right? But it's a very real--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--thing, the coal lobby--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--but I think, I think for these oral histories, it's really interesting

to try and get at like, okay, what does that

actually look like in practice? You know?

CLEMENT:Yeah. And I, I can't honestly can't tell you that.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:I don't, you know, Fitz, would be--(laughs)--he knows so much about that--

CAGLE:--yeah, he did talk some about that, yeah--

CLEMENT:--I mean, and it seemed to me Fitz and others were surprised, because

the utility lobby has been so strong. When we have gone to lobby about net

metering, the legislators would say, oh, the--you KU[4]

lobbyists are in my office every week, all the time. They're, they're just

permanent fixtures. And, um, so I think even Fitz and others were surprised at

how, you know, KU lobbied against what the, against SB4. And I think Fitz and

others were surprised that--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--um, they lost. And, um, so, um, but

I, I will say, when I started at EKU, so this, I was at some meeting and somehow

it was said in response to something probably about funding, well in Kentucky

coal is king. It's like, what does that have to do with funding for my

department, you know? And, but it's just so, you know, penetrating the culture.

I mean, all the, coal keeps the lights on, license plates.

CAGLE:Friends of coal.

CLEMENT:Friends of coal license plate, yeah. So I mean--

CAGLE:--I, I've joked since I moved here that, um, so there's a--some states, I

can't even remember which or where I read about this, but some states have a

requirement that if there's any sort of political license plate kind of, that,

that there always has to be an alternative, right? So--

CLEMENT:--huh--

CAGLE:--people have lobbied for like

, if there's a pro life, you should have a pro choice--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--option. And so I've joked that there should be an enemies of coal

license plate--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:There is a friends of sol. Isn't there something?

CAGLE:With the solar? Yeah. I think so. Yeah.

CLEMENT:I know the solar energy society wants to start having a license plate.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Uh, yeah. So I mean, it's, it's so bound up in culture wars and Trump

and, um, you know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--trying to explain all that is well beyond me--(laughs).

CAGLE:It's hard. I mean, even a joke like--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--enemies of coal is, you know, immediately I'm like, okay, I need to

clarify. I mean, literally like the burning of coal--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--that affects the atmosphere, not the people who are attached to it--

CLEMENT:--yes, yes--

CAGLE:--right, it's not--

CLEMENT:--yes. Yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah, and I really don't have a good sense of how much of coal's

lobbying power at this point, the coal industry is based on actual access to resources.

CLEMENT:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:I know that certain individuals have, you know, just immense fortunes

that they can throw--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm, mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--attempt to buy a governor's race or whatever--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--just hypothetically--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--um, but, but I don't know how much of the lobbying power is also just

based on that long time--

CLEMENT:--yeah, and--

CAGLE:--kind of ethos.

CLEMENT:Yes, and, and, yeah. Did as, you know, but I honestly don't know. I

don't know, you know, who got, uh, electoral support for supporting SB4, or were

they just worried about the optics with my community that elected me? Are they

want to--going to want to see--

CAGLE:--that culture backlash--

CLEMENT:--that I supported coal?

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:And, uh, and then the constant repetition that it--the reason the lights

did go out in December, they’re claiming was because of too rapid a transition

to renewables. We don't even have any--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--so, it didn’t--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--and so, uh, but that--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah--

CLEMENT:--the, the, the need for coal to maintain reliability is the mantra and

false or not false, that’s--

CAGLE:--yeah. I had not heard about this with Decemb--what is this where

they're saying like that, that's why the--

CLEMENT:--they're saying that we, that the transition to fossil--to renewables

is too rapid nationwide and that we need to maintain, um, fossil energy--

CAGLE:--oh--

CLEMENT:--on the grid to keep things going.

CAGLE:Okay.

CLEMENT:Even though the reason for the--and there's--I can't, you know, I don't

want to get into the details of that, but there's actually a, um, there

was an op-ed by coal interests just day before yesterday, I think, um, about why

we need to keep coal because the Sierra Club at this latest hearing, um, brought

to light a lot of information about how many coal plants failed at the time of

this outage.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. This was--

CLEMENT:You know, there’s two--there's lots of counter arguments.

CAGLE:I'm just--I don't remember which outage.

CLEMENT:Well, we didn't have it in Lexington--

CAGLE:--oh, okay--

CLEMENT:--um, but it was winter storm Elliot--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--which when I was out of town, so I was--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--in California enjoying--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--the nice weather. And, but that's when the temperatures dropped--

CAGLE:--yep, we had the, yeah--

CLEMENT:--really low. And, so there were rolling blackouts in, um, LG and E

[5]and KU territory. I guess we didn't have any in

Lexington. I’m, uh--

CAGLE:--yeah. The only blackouts I can think of is when we had the ice storm.

CLEMENT:

Yeah, and--

CAGLE:--which was in late February.

CLEMENT:Yeah. Well, and there, there was other ones due to wind storms, um--

CAGLE:--right. Yes--

CLEMENT:--but these were not power outages like due to falling power lines.

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:This was intentional. We're going to have to turn off the power for a

brief period of time--

CAGLE:--ah--

CLEMENT:--that's my understanding--

CAGLE:--ah, yeah--

CLEMENT:--um, and it was largely due to low pressure on the gas lines. Gas--the

gas being transported to Kentucky, um, from all--from Texas and elsewhere, I

think, or Tennessee. And, so that low pressure caused some gas power plant

failures, but there were also some coal power plant failures. So, I'm not an

expert in this--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--but anyway. So, but definitely the, um, American Coal Association, no,

the Kentucky Coal Association is an intervener in this case. So, you know,

they're playing a very large role in this case. Um--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--so anyway, how did we get on that?--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--I could not tell you. Coal is king--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--yeah. Coal is king. Yeah. And, but, you know, Kelly Craft, the wife of--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--the influential coal lobbyist, apparently, uh, Joe Craft, you know,

she did not do well in the election.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:So, I think in the primary, I think people were a little surprised that

SB4 did pass. Um--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--so, you know, it's anybody's guess what the decision of the Public

Service Commission will be.

CAGLE:Yeah. Are there any more hearings or is it--

CLEMENT:--no, the--

CAGLE:--we’re just waiting on a decision now--

CLEMENT:--the hearings

have ended right now. They’re, uh--

CAGLE:--yeah, the last one was two Tuesdays ago, I think--

CLEMENT:--yeah, something like that--

CAGLE:--something like that. Yeah--

CLEMENT:--and, the attorneys are, you know, now there's post-hearing briefs and

post-hearing data requests and--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--all this stuff. But I think a decision is due, like, right around the election.

CAGLE:Oh--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--great. Okay. Fabulous--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and this is the, the--having to do, as you said, with originally

replacing coal plants with natural gas plants--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--but it's become, can we even close the coal plants?

CLEMENT:Yes, yes.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:And then, they also have a whole--there's a whole other component to

it, which has to do, what are they going to offer, uh, for energy efficiency--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--and demand-side management?

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:What are their plans for that? So--

CAGLE:From all of the work that you have done, self-educating, advocating,

talking with others who care deeply about these things, do you have an idea of

what--of where we're

going? Like, what's the target? Where are we trying to get to?

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:It's, you know, so not coal plants, but then do we need a more, um, oh,

of course I'm forgetting the word, decentralized--

CLEMENT:--yeah, distributed energy. Absolutely, yeah--

CAGLE:--there we go, distributed. Thank you.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:So, can you talk about what that, what's the sort of vision for the

future for Kentucky?

CLEMENT:Yeah. To have as much distributed energy as possible. And I, um--so

that means rooftop solar. It means home batteries. Um, It means better net

metering. It means hugely better policy supporting, um, rooftop solar. Um, so

what I'm actually in a way most active with is that I'm--there's a coalition

called Kentuckians for Energy Democracy, and Cara Cooper is the, um

, coordinator of that. And it is a coalition of multiple groups, including KFTC

and Kentucky Solar Energy Society, um, sort of, and Lane-Boltman's group, um,

Metropolitan Housing. So it varies, you know, there's about ten groups involved.

Um, and that's in a way what I've been most active with. And their long-term or

short, medium-term goal--CAGLE: --(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--is to get people involved with the Public Service Commission, which

controls our energy system. And, um, so, um, they have played a role

in, um, turning out public comments for rate cases and for this case and for

prior net metering cases. We are trying to get the Public Service Commission to

create some working groups to educate people about how the PSC works and how

energy policies get developed. Um, um, but I think the long-term vision for

that, uh, network, um, is to have a much more transparent process and democratic

process for making decisions about, uh, energy policy and moving toward

renewable energy, moving toward affordable rates, getting affordability being a

factor in rate decisions. Um, because there's a way in which in Kentucky it's

actually not, technically, and

--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--I did not know that.

CLEMENT:Yeah. Um, so it's not in the statute, whereas it is in other states.

CAGLE:Okay.

CLEMENT:Um, so, and that coalition has kind of thought, well, currently there's

not a lot of hope in getting new legislation. So, working through the PSC is

probably a better bet in getting some changes, even though the PSC is very

constrained by what the legislature does. And the legislature is trying to take

away power from the PSC. So, um, uh, but yeah, I guess the long-term vision is,

uh, for people to have a voice in their energy system and, uh

, for the PSC to have to take into account climate and environmental issues, to

have to take into account affordability, to have to ensure that energy

efficiency programs are equitably distributed--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--um, and it's hard, it turns out that there is a nationwide effort,

that there's this notion of energy democracy. There's a--I can't remember the

exact name of the organization, but there's a national organization called

something like that. Um, and I know a lot of people would like to see municipal

control of utilities. Um--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--I think that's a good idea in theory. Um, you, you know, I

could just imagine some good old boys being in charge of

Kentucky's--(laughs)--utilities. Which, so at least what we have now is regulated--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--but whether, uh, you know, but you know, if it were done properly,

that would be the better way to do it.

CAGLE:Yeah. Are there other renewable energy sources that you think are

promising in addition to solar?

CLEMENT:Yeah, I'm not, I don't, not that I know of. It's just batteries.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:I mean, yeah, in terms of distributed energy, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--um, you know, in terms of large scale, wind of course.

CAGLE:Sure.

CLEMENT:I don't, I don’t know about Kentucky's wind capacity. I don't think

it's great, but I'm not sure.

CAGLE:Yeah, I don’t--I have no idea.

CLEMENT:Yeah. Uh, I've heard that the cabinet

right now is looking into, not renewable, but looking into nuclear--CAGLE: --(sighs)--

CLEMENT:--um--(laughs)--so that's disappointing.

CAGLE:How come?

CLEMENT:How come they're doing it?

CAGLE:Oh, how come it's disappointing?

CLEMENT:Well, I just--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--it's, you know, my understanding is that it's just not going to be

economical in any kind of timeframe.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And then of course, it's, uh, not a no regret solution.

CAGLE:What do you do with the waste?

CLEMENT:You know, we're talking about thousands of years.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:You know, but--

CAGLE:--millions of years in some cases--

CLEMENT:--yeah. I mean, yeah. And, you know, there are definitely people who

say that we're not going to, uh, deal adequately with the climate without

nuclear. I don't--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--I don’t think we need new nuclear

--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--but, you know, I'm not an expert.

CAGLE:I think of the, uh, I think it's Yucca Mountain in New Mexico--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--where, so they have the waste storage, the nuclear waste--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and they have the signage, do you know about the signage? So warning

future generations, they had to come up with, what do you say to convey and what

kind of symbols can you use if language changes to convey like, this is really

dangerous, you really, really, really need to not just like wander in here. And

so the placard on, again, I'm pretty sure it's Yucca Mountain. The first line

is, “this is not a place of honor.”

CLEMENT:Wow.

CAGLE:Yeah. Right?

CLEMENT:That’s heartbreaking.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Wow.

CAGLE:I think it's “this is not a place of honor. Nothing good can come from

here.” It's yeah, yeah, it's very intense--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--wow--

CAGLE:--so--

CLEMENT:--

yeah, I mean, we have to change the way we live before we do that.

CAGLE:Yeah. Yeah. What might that look like do you think? I've been thinking

about this question a lot?

CLEMENT:I honestly can't imagine. I mean, you know, one of the other things

I've been involved in is with the city level is working with the Blue Grass

Climate Action Team. And, um, you know, what's front and center, as it should be

for the city is affordable housing.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And, um, you know, I mean, one thing it would look like is not this is,

you know, the end of huge housing, you know, single family homes and, you know,

massive individual energy consumption

. Um, but, you know, easy for me to say, I've got my house, and, so, uh--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--not that it's huge, but--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. And so, you know, this whole question of

expanding the urban service boundary that our group, you know, certainly

opposed. Um, the council has gone forward with it. I think for many of them,

this is the most progressive council we've had ever. Since I've lived here, and,

at least that I know of--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--when I was paying attention that, uh--and yet they have bought the

argument that we have to do this to provide affordable housing. You know, I'll

eat my hat if it does. I just can't--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--I just can't see how it would work that way. And,

um, I mean, and what, you know, I mean, it's really hard to be honestly hopeful.

I have to be hopeful--(laughs)--uh, um, but it does seem like we can't be a

car-centric culture. We can't occupy such energy hog spaces. So, you know, to,

uh, we push the city for compact mixed-use development, you know, the things you

hear everywhere, um, a lot of densification, and I think there's a lot of people

trying to do that. Um, but then the realtors, win the day, so often.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Um, but I, you know, I think we need

, I'm trying to, affordable housing is not something I've been educated on, and

members of this team, we're trying to learn about new models, uh, the way cities

have succeeded in sustainable, affordable housing, and so we're starting to

learn about that. Apparently Vienna is a model--

CAGLE:--oh--

CLEMENT:--uh, Cambridge, Massachusetts has a model. This--Maryland apparently

has some good models. So, you know, but it's a huge struggle. I mean, the people

on the council, they don't have time to learn about all this stuff.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:I don't know how they do it.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:And, so--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--but it's all intertwined. And it’s all--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--um--

CAGLE:--do you ever feel like you know enough?

CLEMENT:No, god--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--I knew the answer before I asked--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--No. And--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--I mean, that's the thing, and it's, uh, you know

, it's the danger of being too scattered--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--and no--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--no--

CAGLE:--the--

CLEMENT:--not even close--

CAGLE:--okay, for an easier question, the Bluegrass Climate Action Team, is

that the group that came out of the Bluegrass Green Source Sustainability, their

original summit, or has that been--

CLEMENT:--no--

CAGLE:--that's separate?

CLEMENT:No, uh--

CAGLE:--okay--

CLEMENT:--yeah, this is, Judy Humble--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--is the head of it, and it's, uh, technically sponsored by the Sierra

Club, I think.

CAGLE:Okay.

CLEMENT:Uh, because she's been very active in the Sierra Club.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:So, this is her, uh, baby, and she and some others--and it kind of grew

out of work she and others had done to convince the city to hire a

sustainability person--

CAGLE:--yes--

CLEMENT:--which they did--

CAGLE:--which they finally did.

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Um, and so, um, yeah, that's where that, where that grew out of.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Um, so

what we've been doing in the past year is, um, different things. Uh, we met with

the planning division to have some input into their, uh, comprehensive plan, and

I'm hoping we can meet with them again. And, um, uh, then also try and provide a

lot of information to members of the city about various grant programs in the

Inflation Reduction Act.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Because there's so much money--

CAGLE:--it’s--

CLEMENT:--it's very time limited--

CAGLE:--so hard to--yeah--

CLEMENT:--and yeah, so the kind of prototypical experience, if you get to an

actual division of the city that could make use of the money, it's like, well,

you know, we've got too much on our plate. We don't have time to write a grant,

and if we had the grant, we wouldn't have time to implement it--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--so--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yep--

CLEMENT:--but it turns out that Jada is the sustainability person

--has applied for some grants, is applying for some grants, and some other

divisions are too. So, some things are happening.

CAGLE:Great--

CLEMENT:--um.

CAGLE:Yeah, I talked to her when the--(laughs)--when Kentucky decided to pass

on applying for the state climate planning funds.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And so she put in the letter of intent on behalf of the city.

CLEMENT:Yes, yes.

CAGLE:So I talked to her that week about that, um, because--

CLEMENT:--and it's probably time to apply for the second piece of that.

CAGLE:Possibly. I'm not sure. Yeah--

CLEMENT:--I hope that gets done--

CAGLE:--she seemed very on top of it, so I was--

CLEMENT:--oh good--

CAGLE:--happy to--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--leave it in her hands--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--um, it just--

CLEMENT:--but she needs help. She’s got too much--

CAGLE:--it’s--yeah, of course. It's not, it’s not--I mean, we're a big enough

city that it's--

CLEMENT:--we need a whole office--

CAGLE:--yep--

CLEMENT:--it needs to be staffed. It needs to be funded.

CAGLE:Yep, exactly. I should teach a grant writing class--(laughs)--Just write

some grants for the city. Oh, your face--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--absolutely, yeah, they totally need them--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--because that’s the other thing, we have, we have

tried to tell them, you need to hire somebody who can--you know, we have spent

all kinds of time reading the Inflation Reduction Act in all these different

grants. And, um, it's a huge investment of time. They have to have somebody

who's on top of this.

CAGLE:Yep--

CLEMENT:--um--

CAGLE:--it's so hard. I mean, my job, our jobs--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--involve applying for grants, potentially--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and it's hard enough to do when it's actually part of your job.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Let alone when you're--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--so, yeah. Yeah, it's incredible to me how often the work is about just

finding connections and not, not even like, you know, we need to figure out what

to do, but just we know what needs to happen. We just need to get--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--like, we need to get this person this money to connect with this model

to, yeah

--

CLEMENT:--and, and yeah, yeah, and Judy Humble is really good at, you know,

creating relationships--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--you know, trying to figure out who to get in touch with about this,

that, and the other thing.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Yeah, yeah, she and I were emailing last week, I guess, about,

um, so KYCC, which I direct, the Kentucky Climate Consortium, we have the

network of climate researchers and teachers--

CLEMENT:--okay--

CAGLE:--and so we're often asked to give comment for stories, news media

stories. And so she and I were talking about how to make sure she gets looped in

when that happens so that she knows what stories are getting published so she

can put them in front of council--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and say, look--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--here's another one. Here's another one--

CLEMENT:--that’s brilliant. Yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--that would--

CAGLE:--well she, I mean, like you said, this is a talent. She--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--emailed me and said, how can we sort of--

CLEMENT:--oh yeah--

CAGLE:--and, you know, there's challenges because often the loop doesn't get

closed in the sense that I get a contact from a journalist

who wants to comment and then I send it out to my network--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and then somebody responds. But I don't necessarily know--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--that they responded--

CLEMENT:--yes, yes--

CAGLE:--and the journalist is not coming back to us--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--to say--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--oh, the story aired or--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--this or that--

CLEMENT:--yeah.

CAGLE:So we're still figuring that out.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:But, you know, news media is definitely covering climate more in

Kentucky. And, so--

CLEMENT:--oh, yeah--

CAGLE:--it's, you know, we can point to it--

CLEMENT:--oh, yeah--

CAGLE:--and Judy's all about saying, you know, hey, if they're doing it,

we--let's get on that. Let's use that--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--to our advantage--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--so--

CLEMENT:--no, for a university town, I feel like--I mean, I ran into this in

Richmond, too. You know, it just feels like there should be more interplay--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--between UK and the city--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--and maybe--there's probably a whole lot more than I'm aware of, but

it feels like it should be more than sports--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm, sports and the Arboretum--

CLEMENT:--it should be harvesting--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--all that

expertise is--

CAGLE:--yes--

CLEMENT:--yeah, uh-

CAGLE:--yeah. I mean, the university doesn't always harvest its own expertise--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--yes, of course not--

CAGLE:--oh, yeah--

CLEMENT:--no, and I totally get, I mean, the pressures on faculty are--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm, yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah, um--

CAGLE:--but when it comes to climate, people care. People want to put their

time there.

CLEMENT:Yes, yes.

CAGLE:Yeah

CLEMENT:So, um, yeah, we did this, uh, workshop a few years ago at a KFTC

meeting about how to talk about climate change, and we had, uh, a speaker from a

climate advocacy lab. I don't know if you know them. Um, but one thing they

talked about is this myth that everybody walks around believing that nobody else

cares, and--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--this is my hobby horse.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:I will beat that drum.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:I will beat that drum.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Um, you know, and it is a myth yet--I mean, I was thinking about the relatives

I've seen this summer. Uh, you know, there is some--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--there's a lot of evidence that people don't care, but there's, you

know, what does it mean--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--to say you don't care or you do care?

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Um, people might certainly vote for something that they might, you

know, rather than reduce their energy use or something--(laughs)--so--

CAGLE:--right.

CLEMENT:Um, yeah, um, but as we talk about Judy, I just think of how I've been,

uh, motivated and surrounded by these incredible women. So Judy, and Lisa

Abbott, and, um, Cara Cooper, who coordinates the Kentuckians for Energy

Democracy. I mean, they're all such amazing people and, uh, and Mary Arthur and,

you know, Lisa Abbott

has retired.

CAGLE:I know.

CLEMENT:And I mean, I'm really struggling with that--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah--

CLEMENT:--so, uh, really struggling with that. And I don't know what she's

going to do--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--and I don’t--

CAGLE:--yeah. I mean, she's a powerhouse--

CLEMENT:--and just such an amazing person, and I hope she goes on to do

something else--(laughs)--you know, I can't imagine that she won't. I have

really no idea how old she is, but, uh, she has such a wonderful manner and

respect for people and so much knowledge. And, yeah, I don't know, that totally

took the wind out of my sails, uh--(laughs)--which is in a way, I mean, I kind

of wrote this. It's not fair because, you know, if somebody's like that, I think

they would like to know they've left something behind--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--that doesn't go away when they do.

CAGLE:Yeah

.

CLEMENT:Um, so--

CAGLE:--yeah. Yeah. I mean, the leadership--the goal of democratic leadership

is to be replaceable, right?

CLEMENT:Okay. Yeah.

CAGLE:That it isn't dependent on a singular person or personality.

CLEMENT:Yes, yes, you're right.

CAGLE:That we can always--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--we can always meet our needs, even as the sort of coalition of people

involved shifts.CLEMENT: Hmm.

CAGLE:But that doesn't make it smart any less when someone that you've relied

on or grown to enjoy working with leaves the work.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Do you have any theories, either as just someone involved or as a psychologist--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--about why there are so many, like, really, now that you say it, I'm

like, oh, yeah, there are a lot of women leaders.

CLEMENT:I know.

CAGLE:I mean, it's Kentucky, we're an overwhelmingly white state--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--population wise. And this is, I believe, all white women.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:So, I do want to specify that.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:But like, do you have any theories

about why so many women are leading the way on this?

CLEMENT:No. I don't know. But it's certainly true--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--um--(laughs)--yeah, I really don't know. And, it, you know, and it's

certainly not the case that there's not been involved--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--but, um, yeah. I'm sorry, I don’t have anything to--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--no, no, I mean, it's I literally had not thought about it until you said--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--and then I thought, oh, yeah--

CLEMENT:--and Lane Boldman, I, you know--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--who works, I mean, so hard. And--

CAGLE:--yep--

CLEMENT:--uh, I guess I don’t think I want--(laughs)--to put any of my theories

on record--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--so--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--no

more need be said--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:I think actually, well, that does make me think of a different question--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--that I had been wanting to ask anyway, even as I was preparing, um, for

our conversation, which is whether and how your training and expertise as a

psychologist feeds into the work--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that you do. I mean, even what you were just saying about, you know,

just because someone doesn't want to change their energy consumption, that

doesn't necessarily predict, like how they might want to vote--

CLEMENT:--yes, yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--and if you're if you're talking cognitive science, you know better than

anybody that we're not exactly rational creatures.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:So how does that sort of show up in?

CLEMENT:You know, I don't know how much I've explicitly made it show up, but,

um, so that's hard to say. But certainly I know, you know, I know literature

on--or used to know the literature on

--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--predictors of why people, uh, you know, do certain things, you know,

engage in energy conservation or--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--um, but I, you know, I don't know--social psych is not my area.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And I, you know, so, a lot of the stuff about political beliefs, I

don't know. Um, but certainly the fact that things are multiply determined and,

and we're not going to be consistent and there's only so much, uh, mental space

we have. So, I think when it comes to energy use, you know, people are going to

do what's easy and convenient and, and that they believe is doable and has

potential consequences--the potential for actually making

a difference. You have to believe that what you're going to do is going to have

an impact. Um, I mean, that's what the literature says--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--but as I say that, do I believe that anything is going to have an

impact? I don't know. Um, but there has to be some sense in which people think

it's worthwhile, um--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm, right--

CLEMENT:--so--

CAGLE:--even if it's just for a personal sense of well-being.

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:Yes, that’s a good--a good way to put it. Um--

CAGLE:--I've been thinking a lot about the question of like what counts as an

impact lately because of the climate conversations, actually.

CLEMENT:Yes--

CAGLE:--that I've been doing--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--with Mary and Claire--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--Kelly and Alex and Christine that like that is so often, uh, the

question that, that, people want to talk about or the feeling there's sort of

two big ones. There's fear or sort of other kind of big--

CLEMENT:--yes

--

CAGLE:--overwhelm. But then the other one is this sort of draw to nihilism.

Like, what does it matter what I do?

CLEMENT:Yes

CAGLE:I'm just one person.

CLEMENT:Yeah

CAGLE:What is my energy consumption?

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:What is?

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:And that is something that has always cropped up in my I mean, I've been

studying climate communication since 2010, 2011. Um, and so that's always

cropped up. Um, but it's really crystallized in these conversations. And so I've

just been having a lot of these like--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--conversations trying to work through with people--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--well, but is that the only way that this action can matter is the

actual like kilowatt hour count? You know what I mean?

CLEMENT:Yes, yeah.

CAGLE:Right? Like it also matters because of social signaling and it matters

because, you know, as you said, you only have so much space in your brain.

CLEMENT:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:And so, if you dedicate just a little bit of it to thinking about energy

efficiency, then that starts to like open that gap. And then now you're already

primed to think about, you know, oh, there's this public service

commission. Right. Like--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--does that make you more--yeah--

CLEMENT:--that's a really good way of thinking about it.

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:Being primed--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--and being open to new--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--yeah, absolutely.

CAGLE:Sort of setting the stage as it were.

CLEMENT:Yeah, and this is going to become, um, for this case, the gas plant,

the coal closer--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--you know, thing. Um, we have turned out, you know, hundreds of comments--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--and, um, I was thinking yesterday, really, that this is, you know,

this is the first time so many people have commented on such a thing. And we

need to exploit that--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--and get for the next thing and the next thing. But what are we going

to say when it doesn't come out very good?

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:Which, it’s probably not right.

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:So, this is really important. You know, we need to convince

people that, yes, um, uh, uh, we didn't get what we wanted. But the fact that

you took action is still going to matter--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--in all these other ways, and, uh--

CAGLE:--yeah. And it's still a win--

CLEMENT:--but articulating that--(laughs)--exactly, I was really--

CAGLE:--(sighs)--it's hard.

CLEMENT:But that, but that is I mean, that is totally what we have to do.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Um, but yeah. And so we can think of it as you know, as you said, I

like that notion of priming and it's priming the PSC--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--to not just assume nobody's going to give a darn what we do here and

what we do there.

CAGLE:Exactly.

CLEMENT:Um--

CAGLE:--exactly--

CLEMENT:--and the utilities as well.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Um--

CAGLE:--it changes the conditions of argumentation. We're not starting--next

fight we're not starting from the same place.

CLEMENT:I like that.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yes, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah.CAGLE: I've been

leaning a lot into social movement theory lately. And that's where this is

coming from, right? Is this idea that, you know, from studies of, um, justice

oriented social movements--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--and labor movements--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--and that precise question of what you said when, when you have an

action or a campaign--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--and you have a lot of people show up because they're enthusiastic, but

you don't win--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--what happens to all that energy?

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And there's a big--I’m trying to think where I was reading about this. It

was labor related, but I don't remember the exact source. But this, um,

distinction that you can make between messaging that's about turnout so we can win--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and messaging that's about turnout so we can build power.

CLEMENT:Yes, yeah--

CAGLE:--right, and that's where I see like KFTC does such a great job--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--talking about it's always about building power--

CLEMENT:--yes, and that’s what Cara says too--

CAGLE:--it's never just about--

CLEMENT:--yes, yeah--

CAGLE:--this campaign.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Because if you tie it to this campaign, then--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--you know, a loss is the

end.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:It's so interesting.

CLEMENT:And Cara knows that.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Uh--

CAGLE:--yeah. It's amazing. The, the knowledge. I mean, speaking of--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--never knowing enough, like there's a whole theory of--

CLEMENT:--yes, yeah--

CAGLE:--this kind of like organization building--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and power building.

CLEMENT:Yes, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah--(sighs).

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:It hardly seems fair. We have to know everything. And on the other side,

they just they get paid a lot of money to know like two things--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--yeah, oh, I mean, and yeah, I mean, that's--and I think that is part

of the message when we tell people this is about power building, when you

compare. So, you know, it's--KU and LG & E, you know, I'm sure they're spending

millions on this case just to pay the lawyers--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--and various experts. And so--are--KFTC and these other groups that

are intervening, you know, they've scraped together their--KFTC's

money and Mountain Association's money is being used to pay lawyers and experts.

And, um, but that amount of money is--(laughs)--so tiny.

CAGLE:Yep.

CLEMENT:Uh--

CAGLE:--yeah. Do you think that if it hadn't been solar and energy, and then

through that climate, that sort of got you really connected and hooked in post

retirement, do you think it would have been something else? Or is there

something about this topic in particular? I mean, topic sounds so anodyne. You

know what I mean. This, this issue, this challenge.

CLEMENT:Well, I think environmental things would certainly have been, what,

uh--but I don't know. The nice thing about KFTC is

, uh, it isn't just environmental things--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:-so, um, yeah, so, but whether, you know, if I would have gotten

involved in some other social justice issue, I don't know.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Um, other than, you know, election campaigns.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:I mean, it's also part of, you know, a lot, there's a lot of things

that are just happenstance too. You know, if Steve Wilkins hadn’t invited me to

this thing, and you know, things snowball, and maybe I'd be invited to something

else. I can't say--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--but, you know, I guess the climate crisis, uh, the urgency, the time

constraint on it is, uh--(laughs)--kind of forceful.

CAGLE:Yeah, it’s very persuasive.

CLEMENT:So, uh, yeah, yeah. And I think just, uh, the grief with, you know,

environmental loss is also, I mean, you know, and then the humanitarian crisis,

I mean, it's just, you know, renders you speechless that the utility companies

and the fossil fuel industry cannot--can ignore--(laughs)--I mean--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--you know, that they, those workers, those executives, they have their

daily lives, but good God.

CAGLE:Hmm

.

CLEMENT:Uh, yeah, I don't know how [?? WORDS UNCLEAR]--(laughs)--yeah what was

I--oh, that was a different topic. But yeah, so I don't--I have no idea what I,

uh, you know, I think part of what I fantasized about retirement was playing the

piano and--(laughs)--you know, getting involved in enjoyable things--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--and instead, here we are talking about grief and loss and anger--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--I'm so sorry--

CLEMENT:--and a lot of travel and then, but COVID hit too. So--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--you know.

CAGLE:Yeah, that wasn't too long after retirement--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--so--

CLEMENT:--um--

CAGLE:--yeah. I think it's interesting that you mentioned that, you know, KFTC

, which was the primary, like you're involved now with the Solar Energy Society

and climate--

CLEMENT:--yes, I've quit that by the way--

CAGLE:--oh, okay--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--had been.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And then, um, the Climate Action Team.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:But that the, the original entree and continued involvement is KFTC--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--which as you say is, is not just environment.

CLEMENT:No, yeah.

CAGLE:And they, you know, they never have been--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--from, from the get go, even when originally they were more focused,

issue focused--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--it was always about sort of a broader sense of justice.

CLEMENT:Yes. And that's what I, I feel I'm so lucky to have learned about them

and, you know, so that I could go into some of these issues without being blind--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm [afirmative]--

CLEMENT:--to social justice implications. And, um, you know, just, you know, be

woke. I mean--(both laugh)--for lack of a better word.

CAGLE:Yep.

CLEMENT:God, give us

a better word. But, uh, uh--

CAGLE:--yeah. It's ripe for reclaiming, right?--(both laugh)--

CLEMENT:--yeah. So, um, yeah, I just feel so lucky that, uh, you know, that my

learning experience came through them.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:--so--

CAGLE:--makes sense. Yeah. Because it's, it's real easy to get really like, you

know, the, the horse blinders on--

CLEMENT:--yes, yeah--

CAGLE:--about environmental issues, I think, and sort of--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--lose track. I mean, even what you were talking about, that like

affordable housing--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that is the thing--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--right? And it's not beating people over the head to use less energy.

Like that's not--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that doesn't get us anywhere--

CLEMENT:--no--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--which I appreciate also as someone who's equally kind of concerned with

the bigger picture, I think.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:One interesting thing, there's a researcher, Jerry Howell, who did her

master's degree in the community and leadership development program at UK.

CLEMENT:Uh-huh.

CAGLE:She's in the ag college and she actually did--it was

basically a psych thesis. Um, she did interviews with youth climate activists--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--um, related to significant life experiences. And the SLE[6]

[EDITOR’S NOTE: Significant Life Experiences] research on environmental activism

has shown that many people tend to, many people who become environmental

activists at some point or advocates in their life, attribute that to

significant life experiences involving nature as kids, right? They had, they

were part of 4-H or they were in an outdoor club or whatnot, but that for

climate, people who identify as climate activists or advocates, it is a

significant life experience or they attribute it to a significant life

experience in youth with a humanitarian justice issue, like--

CLEMENT:--interesting--

CAGLE:--being homeless--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--or, you know, um, becoming aware of, um, inequities in education, like

things like that

then lead to--

CLEMENT:--interesting--

CAGLE:--and it's this really interesting--yeah.

CLEMENT:Huh.

CAGLE:Yeah. And so her work was one of the first to look specifically at

climate activism--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--as opposed to broader environmental--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--so, you know, remains to be seen sort of how generalizable that--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--distinction is--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--but it really struck me--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that climate just, by definition, it just forces us to--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--to think bigger.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. To see bigger. CLEMENT: Yes, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Not, not again, that there haven't been environmental activists--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--for a long time who are really concerned about the--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--interconnections. I mean, that's been--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--like indigenous activism for--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--literally centuries at this point, but--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Um, I have one last thing we haven't talked about, which is

according to the internet, there's a Cathy Clement in Lexington who has a third

degree black belt in Shaolin Kung Fu--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--is that you?

CLEMENT:Yeah

--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--okay. I need to know everything, please.

CLEMENT:Well, no, it doesn't--(both laugh)--uh, my kids, uh, started karate.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And, uh, so, um, when they were little and then my husband started and

our, and my neighbors were doing it. And so everybody was doing it. And then,

um, uh, and it was this one, they call them Kata. So these forms you learn,

these routines--[sound of garbage can rolling on pavement]--um, that’s my

husband bringing in the trash.

CAGLE:Oh--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--that is what that sound is. That is trash cans.

CLEMENT:And, uh, so there's this thing with a bo staff, this long thing, and

they were twirling all around. I thought, God, I can never do that. And then I

think it was probably my older son showed me how to do it. And when I could do

that, I thought, oh, I could do

that--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--so, the magic kind of--so I just started it. It--I never was a

accomplished sparrer--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--um, but I totally love the people and learning the forms and

breathing and the kind of spiritual part of it.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Oh, it's just wonderful.

CAGLE:Do you still practice?

CLEMENT:Um, no. Yes and no. Uh, so with COVID, uh, the classes stopped--my

classes stopped at the High Street Y. And then those teachers never resumed, um,

at the High Street Y anyway. And, um, during COVID, some of us got together

twice a week to do, uh, there's forms called internal forms, sort of like Tai

Chi. Um

, uh, they're just slow, uh, focused on combining movements and breathing. Um,

so we got together twice a week out at the Arboretum to do those internal forms

and do some Tai Chi. And, um, a few of us are still doing it. And then, um,

Master Thé, Shang Thé, who's the leader of the Central Kentucky Shaolin Club, I

guess it is, he has some, uh, classes at his farm on Sundays that I go to

sometimes, uh, that are not--it's mostly Qi Gong and Tai Chi and internal forms.

So the action-packed stuff I don't do anymore--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--but, uh, but I miss it terribly. I mean, you know, for the community

and the exercise and the beauty of it, I just loved it

. Yeah, I miss that a whole lot. And I could--there are other, um, uh, classes

within that same club in town that, um, I could take up, and I think about

it--(laughs)--I haven't really gone back into the gym since COVID, so--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--whether I'm gonna have to do that--

CAGLE:--I've gone to the gym in a mask, it's not fun--

CLEMENT:--yeah, I mean, otherwise, yeah, because I don't want to do that. Um,

so I don't know what I'm gonna do with that. But, you know, and for my--my older

son was really excellent at it. And, uh, you know, he was a big inspiration at

it. He was a joy to watch doing it. Um, so--it's so many people in this town of

my generation or older. So I, you know, I go to the dentist, or was at the Henry

Clay Estate, and, um

, this friend and I were doing Tai Chi and the groundskeeper there came over and

said, Oh, is that Shaolin or is it this? But he, in the eighties, there was two

brothers, Shang Thé and Sin Thé, who had an enormous sports club on Richmond

Road somewhere. It had a wave pool in it, apparently. I mean, it just--

CAGLE:--what?--

CLEMENT:--and they had, they taught karate to all kinds of people. I mean, you

just--it's amazing the number of people I run into said, oh, yeah, I took

classes with Master Thé back in the eighties. I mean, it was a big

deal--(laughs)--in Lexington. And then it ended for reasons I'm not sure of.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And, um, Shang Thé, my teacher went back to Indonesia where he's from

for a while. But then he came back and started classes.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:So it's a very familiar thing to a lot of older people in Lexington--(laughs).

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Yeah

. Did anyone else in the family keep it up? Or you were the one?

CLEMENT:Well, no, my older son, uh, keeps it up. He's his turn--he lives in

Houston. And so he can't. If he was here, he'd probably still be doing it. But

he--now he does jiu jitsu, but he does a lot on his own. And he--CAGLE: --yeah--

CLEMENT:--he's internalized a lot. He reads about it all the time.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:Um--

CAGLE:--it's hard moving around if you've built a community--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--with a particular--

CLEMENT:--yes, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

CLEMENT:Uh, and I think, you know, that whole, I don't know, it's, there's

all--(clears throat)--this group of older people that, you know, started with

Master Thé in the eighties. And, you know, they have all kinds of stories to tell--

CAGLE:--oh my god--

CLEMENT:--I think it was very different then than it is--(laughs)--now.

CAGLE:Talk about oral history--

CLEMENT:--yes--CAGLE: --we need an oral history project about that community

and like that history--

CLEMENT:--oh, I think, I mean

, I don't know that they'd be willing to do it, but the--

CAGLE:--right--

CLEMENT:--conversations they have at this thing on Sunday--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--oh, yeah--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--and it interested me because they're often talking about, um, the

mental components of it. So, I'm trying to remember. They often are very

concerned with focus--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--both in sparring and, um, like they would do this exercise where they

would try to read each other's--anticipate each other's moves. And this was way

beyond my skill level. Um, and they would always talk about not having a busy

mind. And, so they get into these conversations and I was, you know, teaching

attention processes. And, so it's just from that perspective was so interesting

to listen to them talk about it--

CAGLE:--I bet--

CLEMENT:--um, and it gets into a lot of if you've ever done mindfulness

meditation or any of that and what's going on when you're meditating and what

does it mean to either clear your mind or focus on a candle or, um, you know,

and Master Thé was interested in research on what are the impacts of that for

your life. And there now there is all kinds of research on how does Tai Chi or

meditation affect your attention capacities or abilities elsewhere? So, yeah.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:I don't know if any of them would be interested--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--interested in sharing. I mean, Master Thé wrote a book--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--uh, about Tai Chi.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And one of the guys is a sportscaster. But I, I don't know if he still

works. His name is Dick Gabriel.

CAGLE:Hmm.

CLEMENT:I don't know

if you follow sports.

CAGLE:Mm-mm. I do not.

CLEMENT:He might be--(laughs)--I don't know.

CAGLE:There’s--we have at least one sports historian at UK. I'm like

somebody--that’s--I smell a small project. Not me.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:But I would totally be into hearing about it--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--if someone else did it.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. That's so, so cool. I just I love--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--these, you know, unexpected, I guess, although it's not fair to say

unexpected necessarily.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:People are mysteries. But these things that are maybe not at the

forefront of someone's--CLEMENT: --yeah--

CAGLE:--self-presentation or public identity.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah, well and then, I got it, you know, I was never a fighter.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:So, I was never skilled at that at all. Yeah. I mean, I was pathetic at

it--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--but you know what? That's just one part of the practice.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.CLEMENT: Yeah, so--

CAGLE:--it is not everything--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--yeah--

CAGLE:--and in my opinion, it is the least important part. Sometimes the people

who are the best sparrers are the worst--

CLEMENT:--have you done martial arts?

CAGLE:I

--before graduate school, I was a Taekwondo instructor.

CLEMENT:Oh, my God.

CAGLE:Yes, yeah--

CLEMENT:--oh, okay--

CAGLE:--yeah. So I don't know anything about Shaolin. I did, um, uh,

karate--what type of karate? When I was in Vegas for my master's degree, there

was not a Taekwondo--because I was trained in traditional, like really

traditional Taekwondo. And, so there weren't any traditional schools in Vegas at

the time. And so I did, uh--(sighs)--what kind of karate did I do? I don't

recall now. Because Shaolin is is Chinese originally? Or--

CLEMENT:--yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. I did, um, Shūdōkan--

CLEMENT:--okay--

CAGLE:--which is Japanese.

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:I was like, I know it's coming to me.

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:So I did that for the three years that I was in Vegas, um, which was

interesting to kind of go--and then I went back to Taekwondo when I was

in--doing my Ph.D, um, just training. But it just is so hard with the academic life--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--to make time--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--and the school I was at in Vegas

or in, uh, Tampa where I did my Ph.D., I loved, but they were very serious.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And the, the--so master Brunner is German and he's like really German--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--in like a very--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--in a very German way.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And, um, he did not like that. I prioritized my Ph.D. studies over

training. Um, and so, yeah. And I think I mean, he was willing to, you know,

when I push back on that and was like, yeah, this is my career, um, he, he I

think he was willing to be okay with that, but not stop giving me grief about it.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:And I just didn't like that.

CLEMENT:No, and, and, that’s--

CAGLE:Yeah, I--in the same way you talk about, though, it's like I'm always

like I should really--but it feels overwhelming to find a new school and also

I'll be real. I'm I know I'm going to be sad that I can't do what I used to be

able to do.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:You know, I started training

when I was nineteen, twenty--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--you know, and you can just like put your body through anything at that age--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--wow, but, you know, at this Wednesday class that I used to go to at

the, at the Y--well, both classes, I mean, we were all old farts.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Not all, but largely, and, so--

CAGLE:--I loved teaching adult classes when I was--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--when I was an instructor.

CLEMENT:Oh, there's opportunities, I mean, and, and then, you know. What did

you, I mean, I guess--well, I don’t want to get into that.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:But Master Thé was very much, you know, he would talk about having a

good character and--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--and this--when I knew him, I think that which might be different than

the old days, you know, he wasn't terribly a hard-ass--(both laugh)--and so, um--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--or, as I know him now--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--and, um, and

I think that spirit is true for any of these people teaching, um, you know, who

grew up learning with him. Um, so, yeah, they, so this young man, Ben Allen, I

don't know, he's probably late thirties, uh, teaches at both the Beaumont and

the Hamburg Y, um, Shaolin, and--

CAGLE:--oh--

CLEMENT:--yeah, you could start--

CAGLE:--I’ll have to try some Shaolin--

CLEMENT:--you could blend in anytime--

CAGLE:--yeah.

CLEMENT:And, um, and then Dave Kubine teaches at the, uh--and he's an older

who's been with Master Thé. But even Ben Allen, I think, uh, took classes when

he was a kid--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

CLEMENT:--with Master Thé. Uh, uh, oh--

CAGLE:--it feels I mean, even though this is like a sidebar, it still feels

somehow related to the conversation we were having about, just kind of

motivation, like, why are you interested in--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--or what what drew you into the climate work, it's that

, that willingness to be present with hard things--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--feels related. And the I mean, you even said--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--right, like during COVID, you started up this, this, um, habit of going outdoors.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And like, it's this, this--I mean, it's a sport, technically, I guess,

but it's the--

CLEMENT:--oh--

CAGLE:--you know, it's a way of being--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--it's something--it's movement that you can do anywhere.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Um, and it really lends itself to being done outside.

CLEMENT:Yeah. CAGLE: Which is really neat.

CLEMENT:Oh, yeah.

CAGLE:Or even thinking about like floors, like one of the things that I really

appreciated about doing traditional training was that it's wooden floors, right?

Not mats, not rubber wood. And you would feel you know, that feeling of the--

CLEMENT:--interesting--

CAGLE:--wood under your feet.

CLEMENT:So, what does that mean traditional as opposed to--what's the difference?

CAGLE:Oh, just, um, there's so many I mean, I think this is true for a lot of

martial arts, right? Where there's so many kind of American

versions--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--or like where they'll take bits and pieces from different traditions--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--and kind of mix them together.

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:And so then you end up learning like, you know, just--you go to a martial

arts school--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and it isn't necessarily like an actual traditional martial arts--

CLEMENT:--yes, yes, yes--

CAGLE:--and then with Taekwondo in particular, there's now Olympic Taekwondo,

which is really sparring--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--it’s not exclusively sparring, but really sparring focused--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--I'm pretty sure it's not exclusively sparring. Um, and, and that looks

different, right?

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Because the same thing, it's, it's all like katas and, you know, breathing--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--balance--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--rhythm--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--all those pieces. And then when I, when I earned my black belt, I had

to write an essay about like, my, you know, relationship with the black belt and

why I was--why I wanted it and what the practice was.

CLEMENT:Wow.

CAGLE:And then it involved all these like oral tests about the history of Korea.

CLEMENT:Wow.

CAGLE:And each kata

is named after a different, like historical figure or event.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And so you have to know like, or at least for my--

CLEMENT:--god, my son would have eaten that up if he had--

CAGLE:--my training. Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:So I know a bunch of weird--

CLEMENT:--because he did that on his own in a way--

CAGLE:--oh yeah--

CLEMENT:--oh, I’d love for him to talk to you about that--

CAGLE:I know a lot about the Korean flag. Like--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--huh--

CAGLE:yeah, yeah, which I really appreciated having that grounding--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--because it felt like, like, I really understood where a lot of it

wasn't just movement, movement. It wasn't just motion.

CLEMENT:Yes. And it wasn't just an exercise.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:And I think Ben, my son, yeah, I mean, he took it that seriously.

CAGLE:Hmm, mm-hmm.

CLEMENT:And it wasn't, you know, he wanted to know the history and he wanted to

know the reasons for this, that and the other thing. Um, what these moves are

all about, and, uh, much more, you know, for me, it was more the community

. Just the pleasure of doing it.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Um, but--

CAGLE:--yeah--

CLEMENT:--that's great.

CAGLE:That's--

CLEMENT:--god, oh--

CAGLE:--yeah, I feel like I would enjoy hearing from Ben about the Shaolin--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--experience. Because like, one of my favorite things that I learned

about Taekwondo is that his--the his--sort of historical narrative about it is

that during one of the Japan's occupations of Korea, um, there was a major

crackdown on any sort of weaponry. Right. And, so Taekwondo was not newly

developed, right? Certain forms of martial arts existed, but that it was

specifically designed to be doable either without any weaponry or with farm

implements. And so like those sort of--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--traditional weapons, like a bo staff, right?

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:It's a rake or a bow.

CLEMENT:Yes, yeah. Oh, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Which is so interesting.

CLEMENT:Yeah. And in fact, I think--what was somebody talking about? Oh

, there's, yeah, there's this very skilled member of Master Thé classes. And

yeah, I guess he did one of the things with a, a corn cutter--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--yeah--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--you know, some kind of scythe--

CAGLE:--right, right, right. Yeah. See, and that's just--yeah, it's so neat. Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:And you think about like, just things like I mean, tonfas, right, are

just clubs, basically--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--and then now I don't know about like stars or like, um, oh, I forgot

what they're what are the things called that are like the ball on the chain?

CLEMENT:Oh, I don't know.

CAGLE:Yeah. CLEMENT: Oh, God.

CAGLE:I know.

CLEMENT:Well, there's a chain whip.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:But yeah, I don’t know about a ball on a chain.

CAGLE:Right.

CLEMENT:I'm just remembering that one of the last things we were learning

before COVID was a chain whip.

CAGLE:Oh.

CLEMENT:That was not for me--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:--I did it with a rope, but--

CAGLE:--you're like bow staff. Stick with the bow staff--(laughs)--

CLEMENT:Yeah, no. I mean, god--CAGLE: --yeah--

CLEMENT:--I am not

knocking my teeth out for this, but--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--again, I don't know. I'm just I'm, I feel like I'm getting all this

like, self insight from talking with you like the bo staff. So I learned on a

wood bo staff--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--CAGLE: --which has a real weight to it--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--right? Like it's really heavy.

CLEMENT:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:And it means that you have to really put effort into doing you know, the

flashy spins and things.

CLEMENT:Uh-huh.

CAGLE:But the kids when I was teaching, um, the kids who were competing at

really high levels, they were using all these like polymers--

CLEMENT:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--and plastics--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--and these really, really light--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--bo staffs because they could do the flashy things, right?

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:They could get a lot more height on throws, and they could spin them

really fast. And if they got if they messed up and like hit themselves with it,

it wouldn't hurt so bad.

CLEMENT:Yes.

CAGLE:And I just never liked that.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:It just felt wrong somehow. And I, I kind of sat on that because I was

like, this is not I don't want to be you know, I was like, twenty-five

--

CLEMENT:--right--

CAGLE:--but I was like, I don't want to be the old curmudgeon--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that's like, well in my day.

CLEMENT:Yeah--(laughs)-- CAGLE: --but I really think it has to--

CLEMENT:--yes--

CAGLE:--do now that I'm reflecting on it, at least in part on the idea of the

material, right? Like this was not meant to be--the point of this exercise--

CLEMENT:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--the point of like, doing this work with this object is not who can

throw it the highest.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Like that's leading us away.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:And in order to do that, then we have to like, create all these synthetic materials.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:You know, like, I love the idea, bo staff--I love the idea that, and

maybe I was watching a lot of Jackie Chan movies at the time--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--but, you know, you're just like in a room and you can just grab something--

CLEMENT:--yes, yes--

CAGLE:--and defend yourself.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:And if you don't know how to work with an object that actually has heft

to it, then you can't do that.

CLEMENT:No. And, and part of it is about the attention. I mean, to not hurt yourself--

CAGLE:--yes--

CLEMENT:--means you don't lose concentration for a second.

CAGLE:Right--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--right.

CLEMENT:And so that's the skill.

CAGLE:That's such a good point. Oh my gosh

. Okay. Well, I'm so glad I asked. And I'm so glad you are in fact, the Cathy

Clement of Lexington, Kentucky--(both laugh)--

CLEMENT:--how is that even--

CAGLE:--you--

CLEMENT:--public information--

CAGLE:--there is on, on the website, on the website, on the school's website,

there's a list of all the, the black belts.

CLEMENT:Oh.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:The school--the Shaolin school--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah, yeah. Yes.

CLEMENT:There must be Taekwondo in Lexington.

CAGLE:Oh, there is, there is--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--I just haven't.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:You know, it's--

CLEMENT:--yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah. I got into Acro for a little while and then the pandemic hit Acro

yoga. So--

CLEMENT:--I don’t even know what that is--

CAGLE:--oh, like partner, like when people, you know, somebody is laying on the

ground and then they're like flipping people off their feet and stuff.

CLEMENT:Oh.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Acrobatic yoga.

CAGLE:Basically, yeah, acrobatic--

CLEMENT:--yes, oh, okay--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--yeah. Which that scratches that same itch of community that you're

talking about, right?

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:And that, that enjoyment that you get from like successfully doing

something in concert with other people.

CLEMENT:Oh, yeah.

CAGLE:It's like the same feeling actually of going to a concert, right?

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Where you're sharing an experience

.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Oh, when you do like a Kata in a full room of people and you're all doing

the moves at the exact same time--

CLEMENT:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--(gasps)--oh, it's magic.

CLEMENT:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Okay. I'm so glad I asked--

CLEMENT:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--is there anything else? Do you have any other exciting life adventures

or climate related things we haven't talked about? I'm sure there's many.

CLEMENT:No, no, no. Um, I can't think of anything at the moment. I know I'll

think of things--not exciting life adventures--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

CLEMENT:--but--

CAGLE:--well--

CLEMENT:--things I--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--wish you had said.

CLEMENT:Yeah.

CAGLE:Well, make a list and I'll just come back and we'll do this again--(both

laugh)--yes. Well, thank you so much for your time--

CLEMENT:--oh gosh, oh--

CAGLE:--Cathy, I'm going to stop recording.

[END OF INTERVIEW]