TRISTIN: (clears throat) All right, so, Jeremy, if you can introduce yourself

and just give me a little bit about who you are and, you know, career, life, all

those good things?

CAMRON:Sure, my name is Jeremy Sean Camron. I was born December 3, 1973, in

Owensboro, Kentucky, and in my fiftieth year, as we speak, coming up on it in

this December. Majority of my life has been spent in Owensboro. I spent fifteen

years away in the Navy, and then at Western Kentucky University, and then

teaching in other communities around South Central Kentucky. And then I

eventually became a college and--

well, an alternative teacher in my first job and in my second job when I moved

back home to Owensboro, running a unit that dealt with short-term and long-term

behavioral and drug violations that the district would place them. And I would,

kind of--I oversaw that at the high school level and then that moved onto

administration in Warren County. It didn't work out and ended up back here at

Owensboro as a college and career coach at Apollo High School, my alma mater

where I graduated in 1992. And created, basically from scratch, the position of

College and Career Coach through a federal grant called Race to the Top with the

Green River Regional Educational Cooperative. I was basically their employee,

but I worked in a high school.

There were about thirty of us across the state from Northern Kentucky all the

way down to basically Bowling Green and Hodgenville area, and we created the

job. Founded the College and Career

Coaches Association here in Kentucky and then this happened to work out about

six years into the job and, kind of, felt like everything leads back to

alternative education for me. And that led to being here for the last six years

and selected, you know, the 2022 Kentucky principal of the year last year, I

think, kind of, based off some legislative work I had done with DJ Johnson, a

local legislator here, to expand access to the graduate equivalency diploma to all

students in traditional and nontraditional alternative education. And relieved

them of the burden of compulsory attendance after they actually pass it, so they

can move on with their life and, you know, transition into, you know, whatever

it is they plan to do.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:Yeah, so that was really cool; that was a nice surprise last year. I

serve on the board of the Kentucky Association of School Administrators for the

last three years, which, kind of, led to that work around education policy. And

I'll be the David Karem Educational Policy Excellence Award winner this year

announced here soon, so--

TRISTIN:--wow--

CAMRON:--that's just between us. (both laugh) I think they don't want anybody

announcing it just yet.

TRISTIN:Congratulations.

CAMRON:Yeah,

it's all of a sudden. I also was inducted in the Kentucky Veterans Hall of Fame

this year, so that was--

TRISTIN:--wow--

CAMRON:--I know, like, well, getting inducted in September, so it's pretty

humbling the last couple of years. You never really sought out awards, just

doing the job, and all of a sudden, it seems to be coming in stream, so it's

pretty nice, pretty gratifying to, you know, be recognized for your work.

TRISTIN:Recognized for your hard work. (laughs)

CAMRON:Yes, of course.

TRISTIN:And I'm sure caring too goes a long way so--

CAMRON:--a lot, a lot, it's all of it--

TRISTIN:--well, thank you for that. As we talked about here earlier, you know,

we want to get Kentucky stories and looking at the Kentucky experience,

especially during the pandemic. And we're--you know, we're pretty much in the

post-pandemic era now, but I'm just, kind of, wanting you to think back into

that time, and just, kind of--just, you know, warm-up questions, if you will.

CAMRON:Sure.

TRISTIN:What would you say would be, like, a word that really encapsulates that

time and--well, for you anyway?

CAMRON:Are we talking personally or professionally?

TRISTIN:Either or, I like, I love--

CAMRON:--okay, all right, well, adaptability, I think, is what springs to mind--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--like, as a word. So, I was sitting at this screen the same way I'm

talking to you when the email came down that they were going to close schools

the next Monday. I believe it was March 19, 2020, something like that, and March

seventeenth, I believe, something like that. But long story

short, we went into, you know, panic mode because, you know, nobody knows. This

state's invested a lot of money unsuccessfully providing high-speed internet to

rural and multiple areas, and I hope we can get better at that. But not knowing

what the capabilities of the homes were, not knowing where our kids had access

to, not knowing if they had food every day, not knowing all of that kind of

stuff. And basically, I remember rushing, having the juvenile justice staff that

helps us run the school cover the classrooms and say, "Okay, here's the deal, I

don't know how long we're going to be out, it could be a couple of weeks--"

we're all hopeful back then, right?

TRISTIN:Right. (both laugh)

CAMRON:"But whatever you do,

every kid in this building leaves with something to do, and you're going to have

a call list." And we basically planned out the next three weeks, because it was

almost spring break, on the spot, how to successfully run distance education

from--with kids that are in high trauma, very high poverty homes within, I don't

know, an hour or two basically, just it was like, Go, go, go. So they, at least,

would walk out our doors with something in hand to provide the educational

services that are required by the state of Kentucky and not knowing what that

would look like or how we would do that or any of that.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:The adaptability came with every turn when all of a sudden, it was, Oh,

we're not coming back, okay.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah.

CAMRON:Maybe in May, no.

TRISTIN:Yeah. (laughs)

CAMRON:Maybe in July, no. So continually trying to find ways to make sure our

kids were safe and okay. Changing processes and trying to find the best way to

educate and keep kids connected with somebody that cares about them. You know,

because a lot of times in a school building, it's like their refuge from their

homes sometimes, and that's sad but true. It might be the only place they eat

that day, the only place they, you know, have

somebody that smiles at them that day, cares about them that day and--you know.

Some of the background noise you would hear in these homes with our kids, you're

like, Okay, I don't know how we're going to teach them because it was so chaotic

and so hectic.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:So it was just a continual process of adapting to what we were we were given.

TRISTIN:Got you.

CAMRON:And then the game being changed about every two weeks or every week by

somebody that--

TRISTIN:--oh, okay--

CAMRON:--they learned something else, Okay, well, now, we got to do this, or

now, we can't do this or--you know--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--figuring all that out on the fly all the time.

TRISTIN:It's like a--not of the--it, obviously, was a possible task, but it's

like an impossible task that you're constantly changing and redoing and--

yeah.

CAMRON:Yeah, I basically told my teachers, "You need to get any kind of OCD

tendencies you have out of your system, you're not going to be able to be

perfect during, this is all new, this is a nationwide distance learning

challenge." (laughs

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:"So forget what you know and let's deal with what we can deal with."

TRISTIN:For sure.

CAMRON:Yeah.

TRISTIN:Wow, can you talk--well, it kind of leads up to kind of two questions,

but since you--as you were talking there, can you give us or give, you know,

just like a little understanding of alternative education in general? Like

what--what's the population that you're working with, what does that, you know,

necessarily mean? And then, you know, kind of, going back into--going a little

bit more in depth in how the pandemic maybe affected those particular students a

little bit differently

than possibly other students?

CAMRON:Sure. Well, when you hear alternative education across Kentucky, you're

going to have a lot of range of what that actually means. The Kentucky

Educational Cooperative [sic] for State Agency Children oversees multiple

programs, anything from mental health hospitals, to DJJ [Department of Juvenile

Justice] group homes where kids may have been assigned to live for a certain

amount of time out of their environment. It could be a youth detention center.

It could be a long-term youth detention center where they're there for multiple

months, for multiple criminal acts that they may have committed. Mixed into

that, you also have non-DJJ kids that are more

DCBS [Department for Community Based Services] kids, child services, social

services-type kids that are mixed into that whole spectrum. Either in foster

care or in different homes because they don't really have one, they might be in

custody. We've got a--for instance, we have a student now that's a placement

here from the social services that lives in a place here in Owensboro called the

Hayden Home. That was created for basically kids that don't have a place to be,

and it's in their best interest to not be with their families anymore. So we

have kids like that as well

as kids that are--you know, our kids go out in a day treatment every afternoon

back into the potential environment that they were in when they chose some of

the--to do some of the things they did. There's also non-DJJ, so there's like

district-run alternative education places where maybe there are kids in there

that--anxiety issues with having like Daviess County High School here in

Owensboro has eighteen hundred, nineteen hundred students, Apollo has fourteen

hundred, Owensboro High has, shit, I don't know, eleven hundred, twelve hundred

kids. And it's just an environment where there's too much chaos and lack of

structure. So an alternative school can, a lot of times, provide either a higher structure

or just a smaller group number structure. A lot of times, the student-teacher

ratio is significantly less than a regular school. You know, when I taught arts

and humanities at Apollo, some classes had thirty-four kids. Probably the

maximum I would have at Heritage Park High School here in town is--one of our

district-run alternative programs is twelve to fifteen give or take.

TRISTIN:Wow.

CAMRON:A lot of times, you're dealing with kids that have truancy as a symptom

of what's going on in their life, a lot, a lot of mental health issues whether

that be, you know, anxiety-based bipolar, oppositional fights, behavioral

disorders, I mean all kinds of stuff, there's a whole realm.

That can also be kids that just need something different because they don't

necessarily fit in the big, large system, and an alternative school, when done

well, can be adaptive more to an individual student's needs.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:And provide them, you know, with what they need. A lot of times, kids

are credit deficient when they come to an alternative program, so they're

offtrack for graduation. A big goal is to get them back on track to be a high

school graduate. And with the recent passage of the law I was telling you about

earlier, now, we have the GED again as an option. It was off the table for

alternative schools run by districts for a long time, only state agency children

qualified, but now all. So about twenty-three thousand kids across the state are

in alternative programs roughly. That was the count as of about a year ago.

And now, those kids will, at least, have access, if they need another last ray

of hope, to actually attain something, some kind of credential, so they can go

to work. You know, a high school diploma is still, kind of, the standard that we

strive for, but it's not necessarily the reality when you have a

seventeen-year-old that has three credits and they need twenty-two, at least, to

graduate. And at a minimum, most places want a GED, especially our factories and

places around here and at a minimum. There are a minimum number of career and

basic academic skills that a kid has to exit with to actually be hirable

because, you know, a lot of these factories around town, you know, they're using

the ACT WorkKeys test where a kid needs to be able to read and do basic

career-based math and stuff like that, so.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:So your goal is to graduate them,

but also to graduate them in hopes of, you know, getting them, at least, to a

point where they can be self-sufficient.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:And that's always our goal as a regular ed, but especially an

alternative ed, because the likelihood of those students being on their own

sooner than others is a lot higher.

TRISTIN:Sure.

CAMRON:It's a lot higher, so they need to be ready to go, and a lot of times,

they're the most ill-prepared, unfortunately, because of the environments they

grew up in. And some of them, it's just, you know, "I got into drug use, and

here I am, and I love it, and now, how do I get off of it, right? And I'm

fourteen, fifteen years old, and I'm an addict, and how do--?" You know? So you

got--you're dealing with all that, too, and I mean, that's the other side of a

lot of alternative education is dealing

with a lot of substance issues and, you know, potentially lifelong charges

that--you know. I've had two kids, three kids in the last four years that have

left us that are dead now from gun violence or fentanyl, which is a big scourge

in this side of the state--well, I think it's nationwide--but it's the largest

growing. It's actually passed teen suicide as the largest killer of teens in

Kentucky in the last year.

TRISTIN:Wow.

CAMRON:But when you think about Kentucky per capita, we have the highest child

abuse rate in the country and--

TRISTIN:--I didn't know that--

CAMRON:--yeah. So the need for an alternative program, you know, every one of

those kids are going to have an attachment disorder of some kind, you know.

So getting them to actually trust an adult, I mean it takes time and it takes

smaller numbers because they got to be able to be--the--you got to be able to

see them, you know--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--on an individual basis, relationally, before you're ever going to make

any progress.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:Yeah.

TRISTIN:And so—(clears throat)--how did that--how did COVID--I guess, did you

see changes with your students? You know, I don't know, was there anything

salient that really just, kind of, messed up things for those students?

CAMRON:I think, I mean, we saw it across the board in all versions of

education. I mean, you had kids that they just went missing. You know, they

didn't show up to the Google Meets, they didn't--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--you know? And then initially, you had contact limitations. I mean, you

were just trying to do everything over the phone,

right?

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:But in a lot of homes where you have high truancy or at-risk kids, the

parents either don't answer the phone, the kids don't answer the phone, or the

phone number changes about every few weeks, and so you have inaccurate data. So

until we were able to get permission--I mean, when we first did this, the

Department of Juvenile Justice kicked everybody out of the building from--that

wasn't DJJ personnel. So all of us educators were trying to do this, and we were

doing a lot of our planning through Google Meets from our homes to try to figure

out how to serve our kids and use--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--you know, phones and Google Meets and Google phones. Google was a huge

help during the pandemic; Google platforms

in general because you had everything you could go virtual with. And, you know,

as we got further into the pandemic, at least, we were able to, you know--I

still have a couple of these sitting around--have these little hotspots that we

could give kids that worked off the cellular signal. And we had tons of that

involved. I think what we found is, pretty quickly, we needed to provide food,

figure out how to, kind of, do that, and how to make sure that their basic needs

are being met, which is not--I mean, it's not easy by any stretch. You know, you

become basically--because after we finally figured out

that, you know, as long--we got the vaccines in, you know, and this was a ways

down the road, right, so we were still doing a lot of distance stuff.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:The first step was dropping off, for us, laptops. Most every other

educational institution around here was able to send a kid home with a

Chromebook, right?

TRISTIN:Um-hm.

CAMRON But we're not a regular educational institution. I mean, you know, the

chances of getting your Chromebook back sometimes, hey, just may not happen, or

them even signing on or--you know? So the chances of them living in a home

environment that's going to follow guidelines--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--is not--is--I mean, it's not accurate, or even know what guidelines to

follow, right? Because--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--am I watching the news, am I researching, am I--you know,

like I am for my family? Not necessarily, you know, and especially if you're in

a home where the parent has also got a lot of drug and alcohol issues, in some

cases, you're using with them as a kid. You're dealing with that, right? So

you're dealing with, you know, a potential environment where, you know, you may

have something there for them to work on, but they also have access to drugs all

day long or they--you know. It just--the game changer for us, I think, was

starting regular home visits, you know, and having front-yard meetings with kids

especially. And we finally partnered up with our DJJ counterparts again and

would make the rounds and deliver food to certain houses.

And, you know, the amount of chaos around some of these houses was significant.

Just the number of kids, and, like, we'd go to this one house that had probably

twelve or thirteen kids in there all the time, and I'm talking cranked up at a

high level at all times. So you're talking about trying to get this kid to be

able to hide away somewhere and actually do their work. Meanwhile, you've got

all these other kids that are just running shot and not having, you know,

parents around even like--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--they hadn't been there for a few days, who knows where they are? Like,

I don't know. You know, so you turn into educator, social worker, food provider,

like, all that, all in a short period of time. And, you know, with our numbers,

we didn't add kids to our roster the whole time, so we--at least, we were pretty

stable that way,

and we knew what we're dealing with. We were lucky to have the numbers we had. I

mean, when you think about these kids, if they're plugged into a regular high

school, how do you meet the needs of five hundred of kids like that, like--? And

that's, kind of, the nature, it may not be that high, but it's pretty high--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--when you start talking about the same type of at-risk child, you know,

that maybe just hasn't committed a criminal act yet to be in my school.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:Yeah, so it's--I don't know if I answered the question because I, kind

of, lost track of it but--

TRISTIN:No, no, no, no, you did, you did for sure.

CAMRON:Okay.

TRISTIN:Wow, that's hard to--I mean, that responsibility alone that you, kind

of, take on is a lot for, I mean, any of the educators, you know. Just from

being in a classroom to becoming, you know, all those different hats that, you

know, it's just--that just sounds like a lot to deal

with.

CAMRON:It is, but you just--I mean, you just do it, they're your kids, you

know. Like at the end of the day, we get into this--I say we, I would say the

majority of educators get into this because we want to--you know, our legacy is

the lives our kids live after they leave us--

TRISTIN:--um-hm--

CAMRON:--right? So you want to see them have everything they need to have every

chance to be successful in life, right? And see them when they're twenty-five

and out of a Walmart or something and just they're healthy and they look good

and they're good citizens and they're involved in their community, you know,

that kind of stuff. In alternative education, you know, one win at a time is

your goal, honestly, you know.

In a regular school, you might have multiple kids. You know, I--I've been in

both, and multiple kids that are, you know, making it and, you know, have their

college degree, and they're gone on to be professionals and they're parents

and--you know. With our kids, it's, you know, one or two kids at a time that

you--out of--you know. It's a lot smaller percentage of success sadly because by

the time we get them, especially this, this facility is the seventh grade

basically until about eleventh-grade level of kid. And the obstacles they're

overcoming are immense, so it's--you know, it's one win at a time. I mean this

year, we had a kid graduate from a county. We have multiple counties that send

kids to us and--in our region. And, you know, just being

able to see some of those kids graduate from a regular high school, move on,

look healthy, not using any more, like, that's a huge win for us.

TRISTIN:For sure.

CAMRON:So it's important to share. I mean the building right behind us, there's

a former student of ours that's a physician in the office. So you have those as

well as the ones that, you know, unfortunately end up dead. It's that spectrum, right--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--of extremes?

TRISTIN:Yeah, well--

CAMRON:--yeah--

TRISTIN:--just, again, thinking back and you, kind of, briefly talked about

that, when was the first you heard about the pandemic and then how did that play

into, I guess,

how you, kind of, enact? Or did you lead the charge in regards to your school,

or was that something that, you know, you were following orders, if you will,

like, how did that go?

CAMRON:No, we lived in a different climate then, if you remember--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--under a different administration?

TRISTIN:Um-hm.

CAMRON:I think in Kentucky, we were extremely blessed to have the governor we

had, have, currently still because he took it really seriously. You can't say

that nationwide. You can't say that from the federal level at all because of

what we had in there and, kind of, the downplaying

of the virus in--I'm assuming in hopes of maintaining wealth, instead of

maintaining health of all of our citizens.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:And you saw regions where they did take it serious, have, you know, a

lower mortality rate. Eventually, we figured out that it's--there's no rhyme or

reason to the disease, right? Like, you know, I mean, I had it after being

vaccinated, you know, multiple times, and it was still horrible, you know.

Fortunately, I did have the vaccination and it--you know, I had some precursors

in there. But I think it was a combination of both for us. In my particular case,

I served two different, to three different masters. The Department of Juvenile

Justice that runs this facility and building, and Daviess County Public Schools

that provides the educational services for the building. So, you may have a

hypervigilant superintendent from your side that is trying to be proactive and

is thinking about thirteen thousand students and how we can provide service and

meet their needs from a food service standpoint like we provided. That was part

of it once we got up and running, and we, kind of, figured out, you know, the

home is a part. We took advantage of delivering lunches and breakfasts to homes

as a way to also stay in contact with our students with the DJJ counselors going

with us. We have in this facility a counselor

over one group, and we have three groups, so there's three counselors. And the

food delivery was a way to stay, at least, face-to-face from--even from a

distance in the front yard to, at least, check on them, make sure they're okay,

keep encouraging them. From a large-scale level, you know, it was more like,

hey, we're going to have food drops at these areas. You know, we were able to

take the juvenile justice van and make a route regularly. And that allowed us to

stay in contact with our kids, probably more--probably better than other schools

could. Because remember, we're not dealing the same amount of numbers, right? So

if I'm a regular high school with fifteen hundred students, how do you do that?

Like you can't home visit all of them, you can't, and the only hope you can is

that the ones that are aren't

making it are getting served by like a family resource or a guidance counselor

and all these auxiliary folks that are hopefully trying to make contact and--but

even a lot of them were out and about like we were. We were very lucky to be

able to do that. So, I think it's a combination of both. We have DJJ telling us

what we can and can't do. From their standpoint, the day treatments are always

an outlier in the DJJ umbrella because you will remember when all that started,

you had coronavirus run through a prison down the road in Muhlenberg County and

kill multiple people, right? So they--DJJ had that fear, so their long-term

facilities went on complete lockdown, right, and so it was different. Educators

couldn't get in, out, like people that--you know, it was different that way.

So that made it hard for a lot of my counterparts across the state to actually

do what we did, especially in secure facilities. The day treatments, I feel

like, had more flexibility thankfully once we got past that. And basically, me

and the superintendent that's in charge of this facility took the suggestions

from KDE, they had a Web site. Once we got to that point and a whole list of

things that we needed to think about before kids reentered our buildings. And

sadly, one of our frustrations, one of my frustrations were that a lot of the

school districts were more proactive in, at least, getting kids back in the

building, alternative days, things like that. And we weren't allowed to do that

from the state level

because we were treated like one of the secure facilities, right? Even though we

weren't a secure facility, we're a residential, they go out in the community

every day and come back. And we were actually the last building to get access to

our kids to bring them back in, in the region. And that's--that was not a great

move for our students, but it's what we dealt with. And, you know, it was

concerning that we couldn't really see them in there. You know, the larger

school system, they had like an alternate day plan where it was like a Monday,

Wednesday, and then they were all Google on Friday, and then it'd be like a

Tuesday, Thursday for another half. So that way, they're able to social

distance. When we finally social distanced--you know, that whole term, that's

the term now--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--within a classroom, so you would have to cut the numbers down to be

able to actually do that, right? So that was the initial plan at the

large-structure standpoint,

was after we got past a certain point, at least half the kids would be in the

school two days and then half the kids, two days, and then everybody virtual on

the last day. And I mean, it was what we could do, right? And that was kind of

the--there was always restrictions, you know, with, and then the restrictions

would update, and then we would have a spike in Corona, right? And then the

restrictions would change back to nobody's coming in, or if we're--you know? So

it was that wave we all rode--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--you know, even just to go to the grocery store sometimes.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:You know for--meanwhile, you're trying to, you know, be a father and

take care of your own children and make sure they're getting what they need.

But, at the time, my ex-wife and I were both educators, and so

she's trying to teach at home while overseeing-ish our kids while they're remote

learning, one, in their classroom, my daughter is very self-sufficient and did

really well; my son was young and needed more guidance, so. And then you're

teaching to a home that you have a parent trying to maintain their job from a

distance with maybe two to five, just depending on how many--how big their

family is, trying to find, just trying to find a device for each of their kids

to be on a separate Google Meet because they're in several classrooms, right?

TRISTIN:Um-hm.

CAMRON:So she's got all--you're deal--you're juggling all of that.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:And then, you know, somebody forgets that you're on a live meet, and

they walk across screen nude or. Yeah, that happened to my wife in the middle of

her Google Meet with,

you know, twenty-five third graders.

TRISTIN:Oh my gosh. (laughs)

CAMRON:I've heard--the stories on virtual learning is--it's crazy. Like, you

know, mom and dad's yelling at the top of their lungs cussing out this and that

and that and that. And, you know, you have to mute, all of a sudden, that

conversation, so all the kids in your room that aren't part of a home like that

aren't--you know? And then I've heard other stories of people, you know, making

out in front of the camera where their kids were sitting on a Google Meet,

getting quite amorous, and you're like, "Come on," what, what do we do? So

they're doing that while their kid's in the computer trying to learn? Like, come on.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:And so the plan was fluid, as always, and the plan got more fluid as we

entered the school year after the complete lockdown that we went into, right, so.

So, when I said adapt really, you had to be adaptable depending on the current

levels of your county, whether you're a red county, yellow, orange, or whatever.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:And you had to be adaptable to meet the needs of homes without Internet.

You had to be adaptable to meet the needs of kids with special needs. I mean,

it's going to take several generations to really tell what damage was done to

kids with IEPs [Individualized Education Programs] and learning disabilities. I

don't even know how you metric that, right. Like, how do we get to that point to

know, you know? When I left Apollo High School, my office/career center was

right outside the lunchroom,

and at any given time, there was five to seven hundred kids having lunch, you

know, just having fun, but it's loud, seven hundred kids. You get used to it,

walk around, walk around, you know, doing that, visiting kids, no big deal. I

remember going back the next year having been gone for six months for a meeting,

and hearing that noise was almost traumatizing because I wasn't used to that

sound anymore, right?

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:So, that's me, a grown, functional male educator that worked in that

building for a long time and led a lot of things in the building for a time

coming back out of an environment like this, that's about this noise level

majority of the time intentionally. So, imagine doing that with fourteen hundred

kids, right. And they've all had a year to two years of I'm in my bedroom

at a little desk, it's quiet, I can focus--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--you know, I'm working individually, I'm doing this. For some kids,

that's great, other kids are more interactive. But we've, kind of, figured out

how to allow for that kind of stuff within Google Meets by having breakout rooms

and doing stuff like, you know, being adaptable to do that. But how do you

actually meet the needs I mean? And you would have breakout rooms for kids with

IEPs that would meet with their special educator that was co-teaching with, you

know, the regular folk--

TRISTIN:--right, right--

CAMRON:--regular teachers, and that was part of planning, right? Like all that

was intentionally planned to, kind of, figure out. You know, it's all from a

distance still, but it's still, at least, one-on-one or one-on-four, kind of

like, if you had to pull out in a coteach classroom. But I don't think anybody

could plan for--how do you bring a first grader

in that's never been in a school structure, right? I did kindergarten and first

grade from a distance, like, how do you do that? Like, they've never walked in a

line in school, they've never had to follow, you know, rules for conduct,

they've never had to, you know, work hand in hand with somebody across the

table. I mean, you had to reteach, and we're still reteaching basic social

skills in a significant way.

TRISTIN:Wow, and you're--

CAMRON:--there's no way to plan for that, right? Like, how do--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--you plan for that? Like, you know, we're going to the kids that

already had anxiety problems, they loved it, right? Like, we're figuring out,

and I'm a big proponent of quality virtual education

for some kids. And people are always, "Well, that's not realistic, that's not

the real world." Well, I know a lot of people that work from home, and maybe

that kid might be one of them people because it allows them to be a functional adult--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--you know. So those kids, like my daughter is one of those kids that

have--had a high anxiety, semi-spectrum-ness somewhere makeup, and she's--she

thrived, she loved it. Going back into a regular school was more traumatic than

staying out of one, and that's with any kid that--even the kids that love

school. Like all of a sudden, you're back around, so there's an increase in

behavior, you know. So that's the back end planning that we're working now.

That's why you're seeing some laws come out

this last legislative session, specifically increasing opportunities for

discipline with severe behaviors. It's--and it's sad because it's, kind of,

like--it's like Kohlberg's Theory of Moral Reasoning, right? It's that whole is

this right for this kid, is it going to help them be a better adult? No, but

these other five hundred kids over here are going to thrive better if this kid's

not cussing out a teacher or getting in a fight or--yeah. And we've always had

that, but there's more of it now.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:So it's working that and figuring out how to find the answers. And

that's where alternative education really comes in, is trying to meet the needs

of that singular, small group over here while preserving

a place where kids that aren't engaged in that kind of thing can actually maybe

make it and, you know, overcome. It's interesting, I went to a high school

graduation yesterday, my niece's, and the honor graduate is a kid I've known

since he was two, and it was just--and it was pretty neat. But one of the things

they did talk about in their speech, and the introductory speaker that was,

like, the class president also talked about overcoming what they've overcome,

the worldwide drama, and I don't think they have, right? I mean--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--I don't think they have yet. I mean, think about the outlook of an

eighteen- to twenty-five-year-old right now of, you know, living through a

pandemic, you know. I know we aren't, you know, the generation that lived

through the Spanish flu, the Depression, World War II, and, you know that.

Can you imagine being in that generation, like the greatest generation that came

out? But these kids went through it with social media, mass lying on television, like--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--all these different outlets that--you know. If I lived in rural

Kentucky back then, you knew there was something going on, but you probably

didn't work past fourth grade anyway because you're in the coal mine or your own

farm or you're--you know? It's just a different reality--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--for our children now. Everything is instant access, and instant access

doesn't often lead to a singular truth, unfortunately, and can lead to

significant misinformation being put out, you know. So--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--really, we're trying to create a generation of kids that can reason

through social media's

misinformation about just life, right, like, and how to act and what's a good

role model and, you know, how to be a good citizen, and, you know, because there

are so many different things. So when you start talking about how do we, as a

structure, you know--it's still pretty individualized. There's--I feel like we,

as a state, did a really good job throughout the pandemic. On the post side,

it's--we're still figuring it out, yeah. Still, kind of, figuring out what the

damage is. This was the first year that--second year, I think that testing

occurred again as scores, but what's that really tell us? I mean--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--I don't know that, you know, it gives us a great number of, you know,

"Hey, I did really well in my social studies test, and now, I'm going to be

working at a factory." So how does that determine what kind of person that kid's

going to be, you know?

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:Yeah, so it's--I don't know, I think we're trying to rush back to the

norm too quickly sometimes.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah, my nephew, he didn't take well from being online, and I

think he's a bit behind, just in general, now because of it. So it's, kind of,

been something that I've been working with him a lot just because, you know, I

just don't think--I think it still has an influence or had had an influence and,

you know, put him behind, you know, so. But--so I completely empathize with you

on that end. Kind of just to use the word IP, can you tell me what that one means?

CAMRON:I'm sorry,

what?

TRISTIN:IP, I believe you said. We're talking about your students, and you have

these two words, but I forget what the other one. I thought it was IP, but maybe

I'm wrong now.

CAMRON:I'm not sure.

TRISTIN:Okay.

CAMRON:Sorry.

TRISTIN:Was it--? Well, you'll probably use it again, and I'll say hold on real quick--

CAMRON:--okay, there it is--(Tristin laughs)--sounds good. (both laugh)

TRISTIN:So, kind of, to--if you don't mind, kind of, switching from, kind of,

talking about work and more talking about your own personal life if you don't mind?

CAMRON:Yeah.

TRISTIN:And since you had talked about your home or--and your children, and

your ex-wife, how did that work? I don't know if you-all were divorced at that

time yet?

CAMRON:We were not.

TRISTIN:Okay.

How did you-all manage the house together during that time and, you know, how

did that play out?

CAMRON:I think it was hard and easy at the same time, in some ways, because I

was eventually required to report to work as an administrator.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:Even though all of the staff and students were still working from home,

they required us to be in building as soon as DJJ opened the doors to us, which

didn't happen until like July, maybe August from March. So, you know, I think

like a lot of places, you figured out a space in the house that you could do

what you had to do.

You know, it was a lot harder for my wife, at the time, because she's managing

thirty kids online, right, for so many hours a day. And it gave, fortunately, me

the flexibility to, you know, be on a Google Meet, and then get off, and check

on my kids, prepare some lunch, and that's how it started, and then it was okay.

We--you know, personally, we were we were already struggling, at that point, due

to some issues that had happened the December before the pandemic with her and

somebody else. And, in some ways, I think the pandemic was good for us--

TRISTIN:--really--

CAMRON:--because you're right there, you're dealing with each other. You're

dealing with a worldwide

scare, you're dealing with the unknown, but you're tight, right, like you're

tight as a unit, you're--I feel like a lot of folks--I don't know if they would

admit it now or if they even remember because we've tried to move on with our

lives--I think there was a great throwback to the pandemic. It reminded me of my

childhood because I think a lot of people were like, okay, technology has

stopped, we're going to start doing--we're all in this house together. We're

going to play games again, we're going to do activities, we're going to--you

know, we're going to figure out some art projects to do as a family, we're going

to, you know, go for walks, we're going to, you know, do stuff. And I feel like

for us, it was a bonding thing, you know, in a lot of ways. Like, who gets to

see their kids that much?

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:You know?

TRISTIN:Yeah, I do.

CAMRON:And it was nice, overwhelming at times, but nice. I think there was a

great adjustment period there for everybody, you know, my family included.

Because, you know, you go from doing your everyday thing, drop your kids off

school, go to work, maybe they're in after-school, then about five, you pick

them up, you do dinner. You know, in most educators' lives and a lot of

everybody else's lives, all of a sudden, it's, oh, there's no school lunch,

there's no this. We're providing breakfast, we're providing lunch, we're

providing this, so now we're home doing it together, you know?

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:So, in some ways, you know, it was fun because, you know, it was about

training them how to be adults by teaching my daughter how to cook certain

things. And, you know, allow them to be part

of that process, especially during the school day. And I eventually went back to

work, and like a lot of families, then it was the struggle of how do I have

somebody watch my kids because the kids aren't allowed back in school yet,

right? So we're trying to get the economy started and then. So my wife and I

talked at the time, and she volunteered to be part of the virtual academy that

was created out of the pandemic for families that had high-risk medical

students. That if they were to get, you know, coronavirus or the--or if the

family chose to opt in to virtual versus in-person, that they couldn't--you

know, initially, they couldn't opt out. Like if you signed up, you're in, you're

virtual for long-term, but you're still part of the cohort of a class, right?

Like, so it's still

a class, but it's all online, still led by, you know, my wife. At the time, was

a third-grade teacher, so she had a whole extended group of third graders, but

then she was juggling, especially with my son, because he was younger, how to

keep him engaged. Where my daughter's up in her room, had a little desk, got her

stuff out, and she was just going along, doing her thing--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--you know?

TRISTIN:Um-hm, yeah.

CAMRON:And then, you know, I would, at least, try to make sure that I was

around in the mornings to, kind of, get them started. And hopefully, you know,

do breakfast as a group, which was great, you know, having breakfast with your

kids every day, right I mean?

TRISTIN:Right. When it's usually--I mean, back to it, you're just, all right,

everybody out the--

CAMRON:--go, go, go--

TRISTIN:--yeah. (laughs)

CAMRON:Yeah, we did school, yeah, but yeah, we're missing something. You know,

my time in Europe taught me that

a long time ago when I was in the military. And the siesta of Italy and Spain

and different places and the different, you know, flow of life that they have. I

think we're so infinitely younger than a lot of our European brothers and

sisters that we haven't gotten past the rush stage, you know?

TRISTIN:Okay.

CAMRON:Hopefully we get there. I don't know, I don't know if we ever will as a

nation, I hope we do if we can learn from that, you know? Because when

everything shuts down midday, kids, parents go home, they're together for siesta

and lunch. And then they go back and do their thing and then they eat late, you

know, after and--but it's very much familial, you know. And I'm sure they have

their same issues like we do with, you know, kids that struggle, but

that was a nice thing because, I mean, you know, fast food restaurants close

then, right? So everybody's cooking home again, you're doing recipes, you're

doing--you know, but you're sitting down. I mean, think about the amount of

family dinners that happened during the pandemic versus having to run to soccer

and then go to Salsarita's after soccer because it's already eight o'clock at

night and then--you know. And juggling the sports life that we've created,

especially in Kentucky, you know, and--well, everywhere probably, but, you know,

especially in Kentucky. So you take away all the extracurriculars, that's all

gone, so you don't have that distraction of mind, and it's the four of you, you

know, and you're sitting. And, you know, I became a better cook during that time.

TRISTIN:Nice.

CAMRON:I feel like, you know, I got better at smoking meats and doing stuff

like that and--

TRISTIN:--did you--

CAMRON:--grilling and, yeah, I make a better steak now than I ever did.

You know, and just, yeah, that kind of stuff. And then just--but having the four

of you, I mean, you know, it reemphasized the importance of the family unit I

felt like because there was no way around it--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--right? Especially if you had two, you know. And we were fortunate at

the time to have, you know, both their parents in the same house, and we didn't

have to deal with that. I cannot imagine going through the pandemic, sharing my

kids 50 percent of the time.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:Like a lot of kids already were at that point, right, so and how that

worked but--

TRISTIN:--yeah, especially when--

CAMRON:--I couldn't imagine being a single parent trying to pull all that off.

TRISTIN:Right, well, I remember some people were talking about how they just

didn't go over to the other parent or stuff like that, and I was like, how do

you do that? (laughs) How do you just say, "Oh no, you can't have your kids

for--" you know?

CAMRON:I know, right? Like,

yeah, that's a great question. Fortunately, very fortunately during that time

period of life, I did not have to do that.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:Because I know how hard it is now. I mean, I'm basically a single parent

half the year at this point, and I hate it, you know, because I don't have my

kids every day, right?

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:I couldn't imagine being that person when you're so isolated, you know.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:At least now on the weeks I don't have my children, I can reconnect with

old friends and--because I mean, when I was, you know, married in the house all

the time, I didn't really feel like going out that much. Like, I don't know, I

wanted to be part of that, I've always wanted to be a dad. And so now, you know,

I'm able to reconnect

with friends and do a trivia night, right, like at a local pub or something and--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--but I think about--you know, put this context in the pandemic context,

and there's no outlet, and you're stuck in a house by yourself, right, every

night for a week at least, if not longer depending on how you break that up, right?

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:And it had to be extremely hard--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--because this, it's hard right now. I avoid going to my house by myself

a lot of times.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:Because, you know, it just brings back home that, hey, my kids aren't

here, you know--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--so--

TRISTIN:--right.

CAMRON:Yeah, so.

TRISTIN:If you don't mind, just can you give me what--? Because you talked a

little bit about the day to day or just if you could describe just a—you know,

just day that you-all would have. What did that look like for you and your family?

CAMRON:Okay, when it first started, it looked like

everybody's staying in their PJs. I think that was realistic, at least for the

first half of the day, especially my son. My son is a chronic PJ wearer now.

TRISTIN:Is he? (laughs)

CAMRON:Because if he's home, he's in his PJs, because he spent literally a year

and a half, almost two years in the PJs, right. (Tristin laughs) It's the--

TRISTIN:--you've got to be comfortable, I agree.

CAMRON:I know, right, yeah, I think everybody got used to that.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:You know, get up, get them some breakfast, start a Google Meet, then

make sure they're starting on a packet or a Google Meet. Working with them while

trying to balance, figuring out, you know, your next strategy. While my wife is

upstairs in the office we made for her because she was, like I said, teaching

the thirty kids.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:You know, so she would be upstairs teaching, and she's

very vocal because she's Canadian, so it's very--you know, it cracks me up--very

loud. And meanwhile, my daughter's next door with her earbuds in trying to do

her work, yes. And then my son would be downstairs at the table and would go in

spurts. He was younger, so you had to--yeah, you had to figure out that kind

of--how long I can actually stay engaged, right like--so, you know, staying

engaged with him and then providing him some, "All right, dude, it's Mario

time," you know, after he gets--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--done, so I can actually get work done. And then buying a pair of

clippers, so I could, at least, you know, cut his hair. I became, kind of, a

low-key backyard barber--(Tristin laughs)--some days.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:And I actually cut my superintendent's hair

on multiple occasions in my pool deck.

TRISTIN:Did you?

CAMRON:I did.

TRISTIN:You got all the skills.

CAMRON:Well--

TRISTIN:--smoking meat, barber--

CAMRON:--in the Navy when you go out on a Mediterranean crew, you're out on a

ship, living in a ship for six months. And especially I was with the 1st

Battalion, 8th Marines, so we were the embarked crew, so we weren't the regular

crew, right? So you know, they have barbershops and libraries and workout

centers and all this stuff, big old ship, three thousand people or so on it, so.

I mean, you had to learn how to cut hair, right? Like, you know, your buddies

and you would cut your own hair because you still had to be, you know, high and tight.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:So, I had a little experience and I--but I just learned how to take a

guard and try to blend it from the bottom to the top, and it wasn't easy, it

took forever. I got okay but it was--(laughs)--but I think

how many people were probably in that same situation, right, because they closed

the barbershops down for so long.

TRISTIN:Right, right.

CAMRON:A lot of people got COVID beard and hair and--you know?

TRISTIN:Um-hm.

CAMRON:I couldn't do that. (both laugh) So, you know, my wife got--at the time,

got pretty good at giving me a little taper--

TRISTIN:--nice--

CAMRON:--here and there, yeah--

TRISTIN:--nice.

CAMRON:Her dad got one of the worst haircuts you've ever seen from her mom that

was--(Tristin laughs) We saw a lot of that too, I think--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--because people were learning how to be their own barber at the time.

TRISTIN:Right.

CAMRON:Yeah. Shut down in the afternoon pretty early. So we were lucky,

especially in the August-September range, starting back in like mid-April, to have

a pool in our backyard, so we spent a lot of time in our pool--

TRISTIN:--awesome--

CAMRON:--the other, and that was--yeah, that was a good thing, it was. I mean,

once again, we were very lucky to have some of those things. You know, my wife

was a swim instructor for a long time, and that's one of the things she wanted.

And we found a house that we could afford that actually had an old in-ground

pool in it, and it just—it worked out perfectly. So we did a lot of that and,

you know, a lot of movies, a lot of different projects you'd see pop up. We

did--we turned our fence into a sidewalk chalk mural of sorts where the kids

could actually have an art project, and they would, you know, color the fence.

They really liked that; they want to do that again, in the summer they said.

TRISTIN:Awesome.

CAMRON:Yeah, but, you know, playing video games together, not just by

themselves or, you know, try to in bed, a good afternoon nap to take up some

time, right? Like, I mean we were all probably somehow depressed at that point, so--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--I think everybody was okay with, you know, taking an afternoon nap

and, you know. Because you were so stressed because you were trying to figure

all this out at the same time--

TRISTIN:--yeah--

CAMRON:--but you're also stressed together, so you had to figure out how to

make the best of it for you, for your children.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:But like I said, I think the nice thing was having, you know, breakfast,

lunch, and dinner together every day. I think that was--yeah, it was nice, it

was a good bonding time.

TRISTIN:How do you think mental health was in your house? Because you, kind of,

talked about, you know, kind of, getting to that depressive set

time for a little bit but--?

CAMRON:I mean ups and downs. I mean, I was already starting with a therapist

before the pandemic hit, just through stuff I had gone through with my ex. And

I--I'm glad I had that already there and in place before it hit. You know, I

think for my daughter, it may have increased anxiety in her tendency to stay in

her room and do art, you know, and have a lot of alone time. For my son, he

would have--he was--he's more of the social bug, so he would get sad and--yeah,

about not having his buddies. But crazily enough, Fortnite was a win.

TRISTIN:Really?

CAMRON:Well, it's social gaming, right?

TRISTIN:Right, right.

CAMRON:So all of his buddies could meet in Fortnite from their homes. And I

have like a little iPad over here with all their faces where they could have a

group chat while they're playing. So you still had that interaction, right?

TRISTIN:Right, right, right.

CAMRON:It was from a distance, but he would get sad that he couldn't see them

and be around them--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:--but--you know? So in that way, technology helped, you know, with

the--kind of that social part of it. And that was a nightly thing, you know,

with him to be able to have his friends. And that group of kids are fifth

graders now and getting ready to move to middle school. This is their last day

of school today, and it is a very, very tight-knit group of kids. It's pretty amazing

really.

TRISTIN:Yeah.

CAMRON:And I think you see that. I think we'll see long term, I hope. You know

how it goes when you leave after you graduate high school, and all of a sudden,

everybody goes their separate ways. I think we'll see a type of the kids maybe

throughout life from what they experienced together, and it was very bonding.

You know, those little buddies became like the social, kind of, buoy that saved

a lot of kids, right, like--?

TRISTIN:Right?

CAMRON:Yeah, especially those younger ones. In some ways, it was probably good

that they were young because they didn't have to worry about all the impacts,

but they knew what was going on. I mean, I don't know about you, but, you know,

I would, kind of, look at the worldwide coronavirus tracker, and it was very

daunting, you know, about

when you see the deaths starting to stack up.

TRISTIN:Oh, yeah.

CAMRON:Then you see the lack of an action nationally. You know, that was tough

for me, but, you know, that's the world we live in, and we're getting ready to

fight that battle again, I think. So, I think I've definitely become more active

politically out of this just because of being somebody that--you know. The

Veterans Hall of Fame thing, which was a total surprise this year, the thought

of having my name on a marble monument down by the river is pretty weird at

times, you know?

TRISTIN:Yeah. (both laugh)

CAMRON:A lot of these guys that go in are in their seventies, right, so I'm

pretty young for it. And

--but the whole thought behind it is--is Mr. Norris (??) not? [speaking off

camera] What time is it? Sorry.

TRISTIN:You're fine.

CAMRON:Huh?

MALE 1: -----------(??) almost 10:15.

CAMRON:What time is your thing?

MALE 1: Two-fifteen.

CAMRON:She's still here?

MALE 1: Yeah.

CAMRON:Can you ask Keith?

MALE 1: Sure.

CAMRON:Thank you. I think, you know, the political environment, especially

within our Commonwealth, that's come out of it has not necessarily been really

healthy. And it's, kind of, trended with the national divisiveness, right? And I

feel like a lot of polarization happened

out of this that we are having a hard time recovering from as a nation. So, you

know, the Veterans Hall of Fame is all about being a servant after the service.

It's not necessarily what you did in the service, it's about, you know, what you

did after as a veteran to continue serving your community. And I just wish more

people had that mindset, especially those that are in our leadership.

TRISTIN:Yeah, yeah, just a couple more questions, if you don't mind, and then

we'll wrap up. But the first one is, it could be either work, home life,

whatever related, but just if you can give me, again, good or bad, just one of

those salient, really one of those stories that, in the pandemic

happened, right? Something in there during COVID, just one of those really

profound memories that you have during that time? Again, it could be work or

personal, positive or, you know--(laughs)--not so positive.

CAMRON:Gosh, I've hit on the most of them I think.

TRISTIN:Did you?

CAMRON:Yeah--

TRISTIN:--and that's fine, I mean, if we already covered it, it's okay--

CAMRON:--I feel like we have.

TRISTIN:Okay.

CAMRON:I'm trying to think of, you know, the family togetherness part and the

desire to be outside, I think, was something that jumped out at me. We actually

lived about, oh, fifty minutes,

an hour from Mammoth Cave National Park.

TRISTIN:Oh, okay, yeah.

CAMRON:And-- yeah--that's fire drill, it's okay.

TRISTIN:Oh--(laughs)

CAMRON:God bless them. They have like, I don't know, eighty, ninety miles of

trails. So as a family, we started hiking, and now, my kids absolutely love

being on a trail and hiking.

TRISTIN:Cool.

CAMRON:It depends on the incline, of course. But, you know, for the most part,

my daughter is very much happiest when--you know, when she can be out in nature

especially if we're out on a mountain or on, you know, some trail in like a

national park or something like that. The amount of fishing we did increased.

We didn't eat them, we just catch and release, but it was something to be

outside, yeah, and you can still distance, you know. I'll never forget--so, kind

of, the whole outside theme--there is a group that I'm part of, and we like to

describe ourselves as the really cool dad group called the Wolf Pack. And

there's a group of about seven of us that met in a cul-de-sac of a neighborhood

here in town around--social distanced, around a fire pit in the wintertime

sipping bourbon. And I brought over a smoked pork loin that I had just

done--(laughs)--so we ate, we ate meat and drank bourbon and just

talked, right? You know, just that gathering of men and talking crap to each

other, and, you know, like we do and, you know, talking about anything and

everything. And that started during the pandemic, and to this day, we are still

a group. We just went to see the Dropkick Murphy's in Louisville this spring as

a group; it was a lot of fun. We played poker. I've never played poker in my

life, but we play Texas hold 'em now, you know, with like a twenty-dollar

buy-in, so real low end and--but it's just about the gathering of friends,

right, and the ability to do that. And it really--I don't know that I'd ever had

a group of adult friends like that. It, kind of, started from the Boy Scouts. I

was the den leader of--for their sons and then there are some other guys in

their neighborhood because they all lived in this singular neighborhood that we

started that gathering around the fire pit kind of deal, and it just led to

fishing. And after we finally could get back together to family gatherings for

Fourth of July and for, you know, big family swim parties and--you know. Because

all of us--there's about, like I said, seven of us, and all of us have at least

two to three kids. So, you know, all of our sons were already tight, and then

the daughters got tight, and, you know, all of a sudden, you have a gathering of

fifty people, you know, for it. And then we have Halloween parties together that

we all--adult Halloween parties.

TRISTIN:That's awesome.

CAMRON:It's--yeah, it's pretty neat

how that social club, tight, niched group has evolved out of that, you know, and

to see them, you know, because all of our kids pretty much go to the same

school. That's, kind of, where that wolf--the den came out of for the scouts out

of a certain area, it was out of the school. So that group of kids is buddies in

school, but they're also buddies outside of school. Because, like, sometimes if

we're playing poker or we're having a get together or something, they're playing

together while, you know, we're all being adults together, right? Like it's--

TRISTIN:--right--

CAMRON:So they've really--that whole group's bonded, and they're all going, I

think it was kind of, middle school together. So I'm hopeful that out of that

companionship outside of--you know, help them throughout middle school.

TRISTIN:Wow,

that's cool, that's so cool.

CAMRON:Yeah, we even have a challenge coin.

TRISTIN:What's that?

CAMRON:You know, it's a coin that, a lot of times, the military guys will

carry. And you put your challenge coin up, and if they don't have their coin,

you got to buy them a drink. (Tristin laughs) So when we all go to dinner, you

put your coin up, and whoever doesn't have a coin has to buy a round.

TRISTIN:(laughs) Nice.

CAMRON:It's just a coin with a wolf on it we found on Amazon.

TRISTIN:(laughs) That's awesome.

CAMRON:Wes have to carry it at all times. (both laugh)

TRISTIN:You could just--if you see somebody, then you can just--

CAMRON:--oh yeah--

TRISTIN:--challenge them? (laughs)

CAMRON:Another Wolf Pack member, yeah.

TRISTIN:Yeah, right, right, right. (laughs)

CAMRON:Yes, I bought three rounds so far. (both laugh)

TRISTIN:Well, I--my other question was, you know, because I always like to

leave our conversations in a positive note, but I think you've ended us off in a

positive note, so thank you,

thanks for that.

CAMRON:Yeah.

TRISTIN:Really thanks for sharing all of your stories and family and work and

all that stuff, so I appreciate your openness that you had with me, thank you.

CAMRON:Always, no other way to be.

TRISTIN:(laughs) I'm going to stop the recording now.

[End of interview.]

1