BOYD:My name is Doug Boyd, and we're interviewing Trudie Musson for the John

Sherman Cooper World History Project. Again, the project that's been dormant for

over twenty years, I think. And I'm so excited to, to interview you. And I'm

really I'm really truly I've been looking forward to this for some time.

MUSSON:Thank you.

BOYD:So, I like to start off every single interview that I do with somebody

that I'm interviewing for

the first time with the same question. And that question is an easy one. Tell me

a little bit about yourself.

MUSSON:I came here as a summer intern for Senator Cooper. And stayed in with

him in the Senate for seven years and was supposed to work for another member of

the Senate and decided I really didn't want to. So I--Mrs. Cooper was gonna

write a book on gardens.

So she asked me to come help her. And, she never did. But--and then he was

appointed ambassador to India--to East Germany, and he asked me to go with him.

BOYD:Um-hm. Yeah. So And you're originally from Louisville?

MUSSON:I am from Louisville, yeah.

BOYD:And your parents, your father was an episcopal--

MUSSON:Minister.

BOYD:--minister.

MUSSON:And my mother had an Irish shop at one point.

BOYD:I read that. It was called the, Shamrock House.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Tell me about that.

MUSSON:She started downtown, Bakery Square? [Editor’s note: Baker Square is a

Louisville neighborhood]

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:Is that Bakery Square? And then she moved to--well, near the--what's the

bar? The bar on the corner. It's a white building.

BOYD:Yes.

MUSSON:It might not be there anymore. You might be--

BOYD:I'm Lexington, so I don't know Louisville as well.

MUSSON:What is

it? Well, anyway, it's in that it's in a sort of complex on channel width lane,

I think.

BOYD:And where was your father's church?

MUSSON:He was, originally at the Church of the Advent on Baxter Avenue.

BOYD:Oh, on Baxter. Yeah.

MUSSON:Where his father was. And then he, left there and he, he was also

working at a little mission, Saint Thomas. And, he left

the Advent to make Saint Thomas a member of the diocese. It was just a mission

when he was going back and forth and preaching. And so

BOYD:Was his father an episcopal minister as well?

MUSSON:I'm sorry.

BOYD:Was his father?

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Your grandfather was episcopal as well?

MUSSON:And his grandfather was a bishop.

BOYD:Oh, wow.

MUSSON:I know it's a full--

BOYD:That's amazing. That's amazing. And so what high school did you go to?

MUSSON:Collegiate.

BOYD:Collegiate. Okay.

And what neighborhood did you all live in?

MUSSON:We lived out in the country. I mean, then it was country, but it's not

now. Brownborough Road.

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:And, my grandparents had I'll show you a photograph of them actually. My

grandparents had a, house and the cemetery was here.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And we built behind there.

BOYD:Oh, okay. Yeah. That was out in the country at that time.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Oh, that's

interesting. Okay. So, you graduate from high school. Did you have an interest

in politics at that point? Or an awareness of politics at that point?

MUSSON:I think so. I, I think, I think I always was interested. I think Kennedy

kind of started people my age having an interest.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And,

so, yeah, I think

BOYD:So, you--before I get into the internship, talk to me about high school.

What were what were some of the things that how would you describe yourself in

high school? And what are your memories from high school?

MUSSON:Well, I wasn't a student.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:But I loved Collegiate. Just loved Collegiate. And

you know, the there were fourteen of us. And only one has died, and we still

communicate with each other.

BOYD:That's incredible.

MUSSON:Yeah. It's wonderful.

BOYD:Wow. That's fantastic.

MUSSON:Yeah. Um, and, my aunt worked for Thruston Morton, and she came to talk

to an assembly at Collegiate. And I was so you know,

it sounded so wonderful to me that I--that was one push.

BOYD:I'm sure that was a, a, a big influence.

MUSSON:Yeah. And then, that push and then, of course, is as I say, Kennedy.

BOYD:We had--we also have, one of our first oral history projects in our

archive is also a Thruston Morton oral history project.

MUSSON:Oh, really.

BOYD:So that was one of the first that we, we did. We did a project

on Fred Vincent, the Supreme Court Justice.

MUSSON:Now he was Kentucky. Right?

BOYD:He was Kentucky.

MUSSON:Yeah. Yeah.

BOYD:And and Thruston Morton where there were two of the earliest projects that

we have in the archive. So, okay. So your aunt works worked for Senator Morton

Thruston Morton. And and that's an early influence. How

did you get on your radar this idea of an internship? No. No. You've been to

college first.

MUSSON:Yeah, well not for long.

BOYD:Not for long. Let's talk about that. So you went to U of L? [University of Louisville]

MUSSON:I went to well--I went to Bennett in Millbrook, New York, and did not

like it, so I, left much to my parents' horror. As you can imagine.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:And,

then I went to U of L.

BOYD:Okay. Okay.

MUSSON:And didn't I never graduated until I--here at forty--I graduated from

Mount Vernon

BOYD:Oh, you did. See, I wondered about the timeline because it's well

documented that you have said that, “I went and, I never--I went for the

internship and never came back.”

MUSSON:Um-hm.

BOYD:And so, so I wondered about finishing because I--yeah. Because that was

your sophomore year or your

junior year?

MUSSON:Must have been my junior.

BOYD:I think it was your junior.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I was twenty when I came here and worked for him. So that's--it was probably--

BOYD:Okay. So, so you're a political science major at the University of

Louisville. So again, interested in politics, um, how did you how did you make

the step to

I'm gonna apply for an internship and, and move to Washington, DC?

MUSSON:I, I'm just trying to think what, what, as I say, I think of my aunt and--

BOYD:What was her name?

MUSSON:Rose Blakely.

BOYD:Rose Blakely. Okay. That makes sense. So

MUSSON:So she

spoke and I came and, I came with a, another friend from Louisville. And she got

the internship with Morton. And this is really quite amusing. I didn't hear from

Cooper. I didn't hear from Cooper. And which is now I know it's not unusual, but

I didn't at that point And so finally, I got a letter and he said, I think I'll

have a space for you. And I think

probably my aunt kind of--because they--

BOYD:Yeah,

MUSSON:--you know, friendly.

BOYD:I'm sure.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:I'm sure there was some, some--

MUSSON:Yeah. Push.

BOYD:--little arm twisting there a bit. So, what was your friend's name, who

you went with?

MUSSON:Betsy Miguel (??). It's her--Betsy Johnson.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:She's married to Randolph Johnson.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:She lives in Louisville.

BOYD:Oh, okay, okay. So this was the person that you--she was your

roommate, is that correct? While you were out there as an intern?

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Okay. So this is what year?

MUSSON:Sixty-five.

BOYD:Sixty-five. Okay. So talk about your first impressions of Washington DC,

you know, coming coming out for the internship?

MUSSON:Well, I just loved it.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, you can't help, but if you're there, be enthusiastic, excited,

impressed.

BOYD:I agree.

MUSSON:You know, it's just--

BOYD:I mean, I remember--

MUSSON:--whole different world.

BOYD:I remember my first impressions

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:In nineteen ninety-one. It's a whole different world.

MUSSON:Mm-hm.

BOYD:That's right. Okay. So so how did you all go about, like, finding a place

to live and--

MUSSON:At my aunt--

BOYD:--oh, okay.

MUSSON:--got us a basement apartment in Georgetown.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I mean and then, when I decide to stay on, I, got

a--an apartment up at Wisconsin Avenue by the cathedral.

BOYD:Um-hm. Do you remember where your basement apartment was that summer?

MUSSON:On N and, just off of Wisconsin.

BOYD:So you were like--

MUSSON:This side.

BOYD:--this side. Right? Yeah. But but--

MUSSON:Because you were the other side.

BOYD:Yeah. You were like three blocks. Probably or three or four blocks away

from my internship basement

apartments--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--on N Street. That's amazing. So, so you have an apartment, talk about

that, you know, those first impressions of an internship, that first day. Do you

ever do you have memories of that first day?

MUSSON:Yes. I do because he was coming in the door. And he, he, (laughs) I

mean, I didn't know who he was. (Boyd laughs) You know, I really didn't. And

I remember he said, “are you here to visit or to work?” And I said, “I'm here to

work.” And then, I think he dropped his briefcase or something. And I don't, I

don't know, but I, I've been, of course, I realized who it was. And, he said,

“well, you come in.” And he introduced me to Bailey Guard (??) who was his AA.

[Administrative assistant] And they took me to Senator

Cooper said, well, she can just come with us to the hearing. I think it was

Agriculture Committee. And I thought, oh my lord, I don't know what I'm doing.

Am I supposed to be paying? You know, am I--is this gonna be like a test? You

know? And, so, that was the beginning of that.

BOYD:I mean, it it's it's interesting because I can't help but think about my

own experience. And this is not about me, but I will say

I remember going to my like, on my first day, I worked in the Senate Press

Gallery, and my job was to go to these hearings. And I realized I didn't really

understand what these were, the hearings. Like, what are they doing here?

MUSSON:Yeah. Well, I mean, you can't expect to. You know, that's the thing.

Anyway, what year was this?

BOYD:Nineteen ninety-one.

MUSSON:Ninety-one.

BOYD:

So you're at a committee hearing. And, and, and such on this first day to--walk

me back, walk me through some more of that first day.

MUSSON:What what?

BOYD:Walk me through some of the first, or, or some of the other things about

that first day that you remember.

MUSSON:I well, I'm pretty scared. You know, I just really don't remember, you

know, I've it's,

it, uh.

BOYD:Had you been to the Senate before or the--in Washington DC on tours as a

tourist at that point in your life?

MUSSON:I think I've sat--I think I've been in the gallery I, I don't remember,

but I'm, I imagine I--

BOYD:And you and Betsy, you know, presumably came together and then separated

to the different offices.

MUSSON:Yeah. And then she, left to go back and finish college.

BOYD:At the end of the summer?

MUSSON:

Yeah. And I didn't. That's when I stayed on.

BOYD:Well, let's, let's, let's talk about that summer a little bit more. What

were some of the things that you were asked to do as an intern?

MUSSON:Probably get coffee.

BOYD:Get coffee.

MUSSON:You know, file. I, I did file.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Which actually was sort of interesting in a way because you saw a lot of

things, you know, letters or speeches or things

like that. (clears throat) And I don't remember much.

BOYD:Did you have much interaction with the senator that summer as an intern?

MUSSON:Probably not.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Much.

BOYD:Yeah. So as an intern, probably also not with Lorraine, his wife, either.

MUSSON:No. I’ve forgotten--I know.

She, she entertained quite a lot. I'm sure you know that, and did beautiful

parties. And at one point, she asked me to send out invitations or, you know, I

don't know, a dinner or something. And I did, and then I sent her a list. This

is amazing. I sent her a list of who I had spoken to, and regrets and, you know,

she had never nobody had ever done that

for her. And she, so she said, “Can you come help me?” And, of course, he's he

was happy to have that happen. You know, he--and, so that's how I got started

with her.

BOYD:So that essentially was one of the things that sort of made them realize

this isn't just a regular old intern.

MUSSON:(laughs) Well, I don't know about that. But--so

and I don't know, how I, how he was convinced that I could stay on.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:Must have been Bailey Guard or somebody. Yeah, actually, he sent Bailey

Guard to talk to my parents, and see if it was alright. I think that's the most

amazing illustration of what he was like.

BOYD:Right.

MUSSON:Don't you think?

BOYD:To have somebody talk to the parents.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Wow, that's amazing.

What do you you do your parents ever did your parents ever talk about that conversation?

MUSSON:No.

BOYD:No?

MUSSON:I don't think so.

BOYD:Because, I mean, You weren't going back to college?

MUSSON:No. But I think they realized.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, and my father always said, “She's the only one of my children

that didn't go to college and she had the most exciting job.”

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:So they, they, you know, and of

course, they loved him.

BOYD:Sure.

MUSSON:You couldn't, not love him.

BOYD:That's what it sounds like.

MUSSON:Yeah. And, um, you know, he was a, he was somebody to really revere.

BOYD:So it's really a tremendous opportunity.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Now, you know, one of the things I remember as a Senate intern that

summer, was the social aspect, you know, that that there was that was that was

pretty remarkable, that summer. What do you remember

socially about being an intern that summer in Washington, DC?

MUSSON:We didn't have I mean, I think you probably had a real group. Of--and

that really, I wouldn't say that existed for us.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:And why? I don't know.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Um, I, I just can't think that we had really intern activities.

BOYD:Sure.

MUSSON:But you did.

BOYD:Yes.

We did.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:But you and Betsy, did you, did you go out? What would you, what would you

all do for fun?

MUSSON:I suppose we, well, I went out with one of the elevator operators.

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:Who worked on the elevators right around the corner from our office. And

his office was fabulous. You came in on C Street. He was right

at first office in the old Senate Office Building.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:And who was that?

MUSSON:Senator Cooper.

BOYD:Oh, Senator Cooper?

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Right. No, but I mean, who would you, who was the elevator operator?

MUSSON:Frank Greer. (??)

BOYD:Frank Greer. (??)

MUSSON:Yeah, who, I think he lives in Washington State now.

BOYD:So I've heard, you know, Betsy goes home after the

after her internship, but I, but I read somewhere about a dinner party that you

all had. Tell me about that.

MUSSON:I can't really remember who, what we were having, but we had decided to

have beef stroganoff. (laughs) And, of course, we made all this stuff. I can't,

you know, I don't know how many we invited. But being from Kentucky, you know, you're

gonna have a lot of food. And of course, we made all the stroganoff and

absolutely no place to put it. And I ended up putting it in the vegetable bin in

the icebox. (Boyd laughs) Can you imagine what it was like after?

BOYD:I think what I read was that there were forty.

MUSSON:Did we have forty people?

BOYD:That's what I read.

MUSSON:(laughs) Can't imagine, but--

BOYD:Yeah. Everyone said--there's a there's a lovely little article.

I think in the Courier Journal, I think about you and Betsy going out that

summer. Let's see if I can find it and send it to you.

MUSSON:Oh, okay. I don't, I don't know that I--of course, I could have seen it

and don't remember.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I mean, I have a drawer up there that's really Cooper stuff.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:Which you can look at.

BOYD:Oh, I'd love to see that.

MUSSON:I don't know. You know, I don't know how much I have left.

BOYD:

Um-hm.

MUSSON:Which is sad, but--

BOYD:I think, you know I, I mean, we do have John Sherman Cooper papers in the archive.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:And, you know, so I mean, if there's something that that you would like to

put in the archive, I think that's something that we would be open to.

MUSSON:Okay.

BOYD:Okay so, so that summer, you don't have a lot of recollection

of your social life. That summer being really active, like, theater and things

like that.

MUSSON:No, so tired.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:As you know.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I mean, it’s a whole different life.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. It really, it really is. And, and it's a shock, you know, a

bit at that point. So what do you remember about being asked to stay after the

at the end of the summer? Cause that's a pretty dramatic moment in--

MUSSON:He didn't ask

to stay. I asked to stay.

BOYD:So you--

MUSSON:I asked to stay.

BOYD:Tell me about this.

MUSSON:I guess I just asked him. I don't know. I--you know, I can't remember,

but I, I--that's probably what happened.

BOYD:Um-hm. Um-hm.

MUSSON:And I think because of, um--sort--well, I, I don't think I really had a relationship

with Miss Cooper at that point, but that would have been an impetus too. I mean,

she probably would have said, let her stay. But I don't think I was doing much

for her then. I'm just, I, you know, it's so long ago.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Trouble remembering.

BOYD:But you do remember the invitation list, and doing that invitation list,

and sending her the RSVPs and, and her being impressed by that.

MUSSON:Yeah. And that would have been

when I was staffed, not an intern.

BOYD:Okay.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Okay. Got it.

MUSSON:Because I'm not--I'm sure I didn't meet her when I was an intern.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I mean, I--maybe I did, but I doubt it.

BOYD:So how did your duties change? Between being an intern and then being full

time staff? Because I'm assuming, you know, once you become full time staff,

it's a little bit different. Right? They gotta set you up to be paid and, and

such. Do you do

you remember those?

MUSSON:Not really.

BOYD:Not really?

MUSSON:No. I did--I, as I said, I, you know, did filing. And then I moved to

the front desk Which was fun because you got to see everybody coming in from Kentucky.

BOYD:The constituents and, you know, people who would come into the office. That's--

MUSSON:

And then, you know, you'd see other members would come and talk to him, and that

was fun.

BOYD:Yeah. I mean, at that point, you would know who they were, and--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:So what was your job at that point? At the front desk?

MUSSON:Answering the phone. I, I never did anything very important.

BOYD:That's not true. So, so, the front desk--answering the phone, greeting people.

MUSSON:Taking people to the floor,

you know, to see him, which I know you know, and--just anything, you know,

basically anything. I mean, I wasn't doing anything, earth shattering. That's

for sure.

BOYD:So, so sixty--end of summer of sixty-five,

you join full time. There's a lot going on during this time in his career.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:That, you know, Vietnam. There's some civil rights.

MUSSON:Uh-huh. I--just on the end of civil rights.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

MUSSON:And then it was Vietnam, which, of course, he was--

BOYD:Right there in--at the forefront of.

MUSSON:I mean, I'm telling you that was just the most incredible

time period. Just, um--(pauses)--you know, the tension, the depression.

BOYD:What do you mean about the depression?

MUSSON:Just, you know, that people were so depressed.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, just the whole thing was just

so overwhelming. And actually, somebody just sent me a--not somebody, my cousin,

Rose's brother just sent me a book about Frank Church. [Editor’s Note: The book

mentioned about Frank Church is The Last Honest Man, James Risen.] Which I mean,

I don't know if you would have seen it, but it--because I think it's brand new.

And there is a section about Cooper-Church in there. And that's, that's some of

the things I didn't know.

BOYD:

Um-hm. I will I'll check that out.

MUSSON:Well, I'll, I can show it to you too. You know--so you--because at that

point, I'm twenty. I don't really know what I'm doing. You know? And, but you

look back, as I say civil rights, that was really basically over. Because that

was sixty-five. I think it was the--

BOYD:Sixty-

five. Right?

MUSSON:--yeah, Voting Rights Act. And, so, Vietnam was the next big hurdle.

BOYD:We're gonna circle back around to the politics, but in terms of, like, the

personal interaction with the senator, at some point, you did personally, more

personally interact with him on a one on one basis. Talk about that transition.

MUSSON:

Well, the--somebody in the office asked me to go pick him up. To bring him to

the office. He didn't drive.

BOYD:At all?

MUSSON:No, thank goodness. Neither did she.

BOYD:Oh?

MUSSON:Yeah. So, I, I went to get him, and I had a Volkswagen Bug. And, you

know, He's six feet plus, and he always wore a hat. So people were so

amused. Looking at us. I mean, anyway, and so I would pick him up and then he

just got so that he asked me to pick him up all time. It was fine because I just

love--lived, you know, by the cathedral. I thought it just go down. But, and

that's when I got to hear about all the things that were going on. And that's

when he and I, you know, got close.

BOYD:Yeah. So he would start so he would talk to you about the, the issues. Do

you have

any specific recollections of that?

MUSSON:I think maybe, I'm not sure I should say this, but I think maybe, he

commented that he didn't get along with Fulbright.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

MUSSON:I think, um--

BOYD:I mean, honestly, if you listen to the Fulbright interview, I, I

don't--that doesn't surprise me at all.

MUSSON:Yeah.

And I'm trying to think--it was Fulbright. Fulbright and Johnson, or it would

have been Nixon at that point. What--wouldn't it have been? Because Johnson

would have been sixty-five. The sixty-six was Nixon. [Editor’s note: In 1966,

Johnson was still in office. Nixon was not inaugurated until 1969, so this story

about Fulbright and Nixon must have been 1969 or after.]

BOYD:Yes.

MUSSON:So I think Fulbright wouldn't talk to Nixon something like this. It's, you

know, I have to sort of resurrect this stuff, but, um, and I remember him saying

you know, “That's an enormous mistake because you won't have any interaction with--”

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:--what's going, you know, basically what's going on. So you're cutting

yourself off. From being, you know, involved with what's going on. And he

actually went

to the White House more when Johnson was there than Nixon.

BOYD:Interesting. Okay. That's really interesting. I mean, he got a lot of

blowback from his own party. I think, because of his stance on civil rights,

and, and Vietnam. For sure. So that's that is interesting, but he was close with

the Kennedy's. Earlier in his career.

MUSSON:Because they,

you know, they dated together.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:So Charlie Bartlett was, I guess he introduced the, the group. And,

he's--I guess it's Ted Kennedy. Have you seen an interview he gave?

BOYD:Unh-uh. Unh-uh.

MUSSON:That might be in the--you have not seen Gentleman From Kentucky?

BOYD:No. I have not.

MUSSON:Well, that might be in there.

BOYD:Okay.

MUSSON:And that's--that will really interest you.

BOYD:Yes.

MUSSON:Because

that’s Kay Graham. That's Lilly Gester. (??) his, you know, his friends,

personal friends. And, um--yeah. Now I've lost my thought. What, what was I saying?

BOYD:We, we were talking about how he, he would actually open up and talk to

you on those on those car rides, and, and kind of give you an inside scoop on.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:That which is really interesting.

I bet you learned a lot.

MUSSON:Yeah. It, it, I wish I could remember, but, no, that was--as I say,

that's when we became close. Because, and then being associated with Missus

Cooper. I mean, they were like, parents to me.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, I'm twenty.

BOYD:Yeah. Well, let's, let's, let's zoom out a little bit and let's

describe--I wanna ask you to describe Senator Cooper, you know, in general to

me. How would you describe

him as a person?

MUSSON:(pauses) He's had a wonderful character about him. He was, so honest. He

was so caring. And took so much time for people. No,

no matter who they were. And I always found that so, so, so moving and touching

because he was always late. But he never you know, pushed somebody aside or

rushed or anything. If if you needed something, or he needed to discuss things

with you, he gave you the time.

So I thought that was always really, a notable part of him. And he had a

wonderful sense of humor. He--

BOYD:Talk more about that.

MUSSON:Well, the one--I wish, well, and one thing I do remember which I thought

you know, Moshe Diane. He was Israel. I think, you

know, who and he had a eye patch. [Editor’s note: Moshe Dayan was an Israeli

general, and later, a politician]

BOYD:Yes.

MUSSON:I walked in his office one day and he had an eye patch on. And I said,

“What are you doing?” And he said--I think somebody had sent it to him as a

joke. So when you put in me, there's this big, distinguished man, you know, he

was always immaculately dressed.

And, you know, it just funny. And he

he I'll show you this because I have I have a some letters and he--Anne Landers

came to talk to him one day. And I can't remember what about, but maybe gun

controllers. I don't I really don't remember what. But anyway, he came out to us

in the front. He said, “Now Ann Landers is coming.” And he said, “You all, all

act nice and don't ask her any questions.” Isn't that wonderful? (laughs)

BOYD:It is wonderful. Because I bet

everybody asks her questions. (Musson laughs)

MUSSON:That and, he’d just, he’d just, you know, he’d, he’d do things like

that, you know.

BOYD:Yeah. He's he sounds very kind. Like he was kind and, and--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--thoughtful, but, but he also must have been extremely tough.

MUSSON:

Oh, yeah. I mean, but in a not in a nasty way. You know, in a stern. You know.

Oh, because one time, Ward Sinclair, you, you probably never knew. I mean, I'm

sure he--he was dead before you were born. He was the Courier Journal Washington

correspondent. And he came and was reading on

somebody's desk in the in the front. Reading letters from Kentucky about, as I

say, I think it was gun control. And he was furious He's he said, called Ward

Sinclair in and, said, “You know, you, you can't look at those things without

you know, my permission.” And he

he let us know, you know, you don't share these things. These people are writing

to us in confidence, and, you know, you don't--

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:We just--and we, we got the picture. You know, we, we knew.

BOYD:So he was stern when he needed to be.

MUSSON:And, another time, he I guess he talk--you know, there was talk that he

would run

for governor when he retired. And I think I think he must have told Ward

Sinclair, that he was not going to, and Ward Sinclair reported it. And I

remember Ward Sinclair coming to the office, and we all said, “You're in big

trouble.” And, you know, he was. Cooper was not happy, so--

BOYD:Well, you know, sixty-

five, you know, the fall of sixty-five year full time. That's just about to

enter into election. Right? I think that year he ran against John Y. Brown?

MUSSON:He, yeah, I guess sixty, he ran then, and was--came in, in sixty-six.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. So, so, do you remember anything about--

MUSSON:No I wish I had been able to go. You know, but, you

know, he wasn't gonna take me out

BOYD:At that point, you were, yeah, pretty young and new. Who else do you

remember in that office? At that time. What were some of the people who were the

office staff?

MUSSON:-----(??) Bailey.

BOYD:Bailey?

MUSSON:A man named Will Haley was the LA, I think. Marone (??) Brockman. There

is--here are two people here that I wonder if you would wanna talk to. One is

Tuohy (??) Cameron.

Who is from Louisville where she, you know, she grew up in Louisville. You know Oxmoor?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:She grew up in Oxmoor.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:And she, she did campaign. Would go and campaign because she was a

roommate of Miss Cooper's niece. So the two of them went, and then

there's a woman named Dora Jean Malachi (??). Who lives here. She's from

Louisville, and she then she went on and worked for Marlow Cook. But, she was

one of the--she and a woman in Javits’s office were, I think, two, two of the

first African Americans to work in the Senate. (pauses)

BOYD:

Okay.

MUSSON:And I think everybody else is dead.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

MUSSON:Because I was trying to think. And, and--

BOYD:Were, were the staff close?

MUSSON:Some of us, but I was very close to Dora Jean. And

(pauses) became close later on, but wasn't really close to anybody right, right then.

BOYD:Um-hm. So that came later?

MUSSON:Yeah. And actually, a lot of--after he retired just because he'd have

people over and stuff.

BOYD:Um-hm. Um-hm.

Okay, so, so you told the story about Lorraine. Let's talk about that. So, so,

you, you, you handled the, the, the invitation list for her this one time. But,

at some point you started, you know, interacting

with her more closely. Talk about that.

MUSSON:Well, they, they were, a very interesting couple. And totally different

as far as, I, I, not emotion. Well, I don't know really how to characterize it,

but I think at one point. I mean, you know,

he was very sentimental. And, (pauses) you know, she, she, “Now John, don't

cry.” She, she was really, really quite amazing. And she--Drew Pearson. Do you

know who Drew Pearson was?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Drew Pearson wrote an article about her that--

How how are the people of Kentucky gonna take to Lorraine who carries a parasol

and wears white gloves? And of course, it totally backfired on Drew Pearson

because people loved her. Just adored her. And she was wonderful because she'd

have you know, a girl scout troop would come. She'd have them all for lemonade

and cookies. She, I mean, she participated

in the Kentucky aspect of his career and I mean, I think she loved the people of

Kentucky. Yeah.

BOYD:They were married in fifty-five--

MUSSON:--before he went to India.

BOYD:They were both married before, to other people.

MUSSON:She was married twice before.

BOYD:Okay.

MUSSON:And he was married once.

BOYD:Okay. So they were, you know--

MUSSON:--fifty-five.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah, and so, but she had grown up kind of a

socialite.

MUSSON:Well, she grew up, I'd say wealthy.

BOYD:Wealthy. Yeah.

MUSSON:And I think one story is which she didn't like at all, but, that, I

think it was Alvin Barclay, maybe I've forgotten, but he said, “John will

approve you, will confirm you to go to India as long as you marry Lorraine.”

(Boyd laughs) So,

BOYD:and so they got married right before?

MUSSON:Right before they, they went.

BOYD:Oh, that's interesting.

MUSSON:And, she had I mean, quite a good staff. You know, there was a cook, a

butler, upstairs maid.

BOYD:Where did they live? Where was--

MUSSON:Oh, I'll show you. It's right

around the corner.

BOYD:Oh, it is.

MUSSON:Yeah. And, of course, it doesn't look anything like--have you ever seen

pictures of the house?

BOYD:No. Unh-uh.

MUSSON:No?

BOYD:No.

MUSSON:Well, I've got those, I think too. It was beautiful. She had, Salvador

Dalis. and Dufy, Raoul Dufy, paintings.

MUSSON:Wow.

MUSSON:I know. It was beautiful, really, really

beautiful.

BOYD:Well, that's one thing she did everywhere she went, right? It's--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--she took decorating very seriously and--

MUSSON:Yeah. She there was a--the boyfriend or partner of the butler came to

Berlin with us. And he was very talented. He was like a designer or

something--he, fixed up the place in Berlin,

which was, which we called a Kleenex box. (Boyd laughs) I mean, they were just,

you know, and he made it just amazing--

BOYD:So I--

MUSSON:--with her.

BOYD:Do you remember his name?

MUSSON:Yeah. Tom Hanson.

BOYD:Tom Hanson.

MUSSON:But he's dead.

BOYD:He's dead. What was the butler's name?

MUSSON:Michael Mangan, and he's dead.

BOYD:Yeah. So that's interesting. That's a really I've never seen that because

I've, I've, I've always heard that she had this flair for decoration and whatnot.

MUSSON:Oh, she did. But,

I mean, he would, he'd make it happen.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:But, no. She, she um--

BOYD:That's great.

MUSSON:--yeah.

BOYD:So describe--yeah you say like she was--she sounds like kind, kind of a

little tougher than him in the sense of like he was very sensitive and, and

whatnot. Tell me more about how you would, sort of, describe her as, as a person

and her style.

And--

MUSSON:Well, of course, she had enormous style. I mean, she, she, she grew up

in Pasadena, California. And her, I guess, stepfather was Prince Orcini, an

Italian prince. And I have to check some of these things I'm telling

you because--but anyway, so she had serious jewelry, as you can imagine.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And, she, she went when she was young. She was in--she went to, school

in Italy at some point, and, when she was young, and she went to Dior.

And said, “Will you dress me?” And that's ever since, I mean she, she was

dressed by Dior.

BOYD:Really?

MUSSON:It's just to me--and they were wonderful, they would send books of

drawings of the dress and they'd attach material, to it. I mean, it's just a

whole different life, you know.

BOYD:Yeah. That's amazing.

MUSSON:Yeah. I

can just see the--

BOYD:I think her stepfather was a prince, but it seems like sounds very like a

princess, you know, like in the in terms of her, that's remarkable. So, I mean,

on the on a side note, like, you talked about how Kentucky, Kentuckians loved

her, and really embraced her. She wrote a--what was it? A monthly column?

MUSSON:Yes.

BOYD:That was in newspapers. I've never seen

one of the--

MUSSON:Oh, I--you've never seen one?

BOYD:No. I'd love to see one if you have that.

MUSSON:I don't know that I have any, but there's a whole book there's a whole

book of them at UK.

BOYD:Okay. I will look that up because, because I'm just so taken with the fact

that she did that and, and, you know, again, that that just sounds remarkable.

MUSSON:I'm sure they're at UK because I'm--I put them all together.

BOYD:Okay. I will take a look, and see. I'm sure that you're correct. So

did she, I mean, Did she actually write them?

MUSSON:Yeah, yes.

BOYD:Like if she--

MUSSON:Oh, I'd go and take dictation.

BOYD:Oh, you would.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Oh, that's fantastic.

MUSSON:Yeah. And they were wonderful because they, you know, if they went to

the White House for something, she'd describe that. It would, it would there--I

don't think I have any here. I'll look and see, but I don't I don't imagine I

did, but.

BOYD:It just seems like that would be something that

would really be fascinating to read about. So yeah, I'm--

MUSSON:History.

BOYD:--yeah.

MUSSON:I mean, I guess she, (pauses) I guess maybe she, I guess maybe she was

doing it during the Kennedy's. I can't remember.

BOYD:Right. Because he was the senator through the fifties, before India.

MUSSON:Um-hm.

BOYD:It's

always very confusing because he was sort of like a special election senator a

couple times, in the fifties.

MUSSON:Senator Cooper.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. And then goes to India.

MUSSON:He was, well, we say, you know, sixty-five he came in was in for the

rest of the time, but he was defeated three times. (pauses)

BOYD:So it's a little

confusing timeline because then he'd come in, like, when Happy Chandler left to

be the commissioner in baseball.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:He went in.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:And finished that term, and so but--

MUSSON:And then there was, you probably know the name. I can't remember. He did

that for somebody else for two years.

BOYD:There was a senator who beat him who was then killed in a car accident.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:I can't remember his name. [Editor’s note: Senator Virgil Chapman of

Kentucky won election over John Sherman Cooper, and later died in a car crash.

John Sherman Cooper then won a special election to serve out Chapman’s term.]

MUSSON:Wasn't Vincent or somehow?

BOYD:No.

I can't remember.

MUSSON:That and Happy Chandler and there must have been one other one.

BOYD:I think you're right. Yeah. I don't know. [Editor’s Note: The third was

Senator Alben Barkley of Kentucky, requiring another special election, won by

John Sherman Cooper.]

MUSSON:Okay.

BOYD:I'll have to look that up. Do you-- did her column have a name?

MUSSON:No. I don't think so.

BOYD:No? Okay.

MUSSON:Just, you know, newsletter or whatever.

BOYD:Newsletter. I mean, again, like you say history, the ability to sort of

track what

they were doing and when they were doing, but but have it not be super

political, because I'm sure she's writing about it from, you know, not

necessarily from a politician's perspective, which instantly makes it more interesting.

MUSSON:Yeah. I mean, and, and he would he would look at them.

BOYD:Oh, he would?

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:You mean before they would go out?

MUSSON:Yeah, which was, you know, well, I don't blame him.

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:You know? But they were, they were,

I'm sure they're really interesting now.

BOYD:So, so, you know, I'm, I'm here in your Georgetown home and, you know, one

of the things I remember, the Georgetown home that I lived in down the street.

And one of the legendary aspects, I think, of this neighborhood during that time

are these dinners that would be held. And they were part of that scene.

Talk about what you remember about those dinners.

MUSSON:Well, they had, they would have small, you know, eight, maybe eight

people dinners, intimate, things for different purposes. And, then they'd have

much bigger ones. For example, I remember

when they were working on the SALT treaties, there was a huge dinner planned.

And, you know, outside, no tent or anything, but just in the garden, And of

course, hurricane, what, Katrina or somebody, it wasn’t Katrina, I don't know

who it was--anyway happened. And so everybody was in the house sitting on the

steps. (Boyd laughs) It was just wonderful, you know. It was the most fun.

BOYD:So it took something

very formal then and made it very casual.

MUSSON:Yeah. (pauses) It's just also.

BOYD:I mean, the the name of the people who were involved in these things that

I read about, you know, that you you hear about. I mean, at some point, Sidney

Blumenthal wrote a book, I think, about the dinners. There was a play produced

about the dinners. The play was called.

MUSSON:Oh,

BOYD:This, The

City for [of] Conversation [written by playwright Anthony Giardina] or something

like that. Based on I think Sidney Blumenthal's book The Ruins of Georgetown, I

think. But they would talk about, like, Katherine Graham, Lorraine Cooper,

Evangeline Bruce. [Editor’s note: The Ruins of Georgetown was an essay published

in The New Yorker during 1996]

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Pamela Harriman.

MUSSON:Um-hm.

BOYD:Susan Mary Alsop.

MUSSON:Um-hm.

BOYD:Sally Quinn. Some of those people.

MUSSON:That's, I think that's the, Ladies Social Club of--

BOYD:Ladies Social.

MUSSON:--Georgetown.

No. I don't know. I have to--John Heymann, he wrote a book and, actually, what

he said about Miss Cooper wasn't true. [Editor’s note: Most likely this is a

reference to The Georgetown Ladies' Social Club by C. David Heymann.]

BOYD:Really?

MUSSON:Yeah. He was, uh, (pauses) uh, anyway.

BOYD:Did you ever get to go to the dinners?

MUSSON:What?

BOYD:Were you at--did you ever get to go to the dinner?

MUSSON:Yeah. Not Not often.

I mean, of course, and I was just absolutely terrified.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Can you imagine? Absolutely terrified. I mean, I'm sitting next to

Senator so and so. Now, they have no interest in talking to me, you know, and it

was just excruciating sometimes. You know? But, of course, fun. I mean,

memories. You know. And

she--they would have a--she'd have a big party but I don't think, I think this

was after Berlin or after he retired. I'm not sure that they happened in the,

when he was still in the Senate, but she'd have a party for first, the members

of the Republican Senate, and then she had it in honor of the entire Senate. So

that was quite fun. And, you know, you can imagine the hordes of people who

came, you know, all the press, the

members, you know, administration people because they're all there, you know, to

corral around.

BOYD:One thing that's hard for me to wrap my head around because of the age of

politics that I've grown up in is the two different parties interacting

socially. Do you remember that aspect of things?

MUSSON:Oh, yeah. There there wasn't the

you know, acrimony or that exists now. I mean, For one, it was a different time,

and people didn't behave the way they behave now. And you know, you respected

people. They're Democrats and you're a Republican, and you don't go after them.

I mean, you don't go after them viciously like they do now. You might go

after them, but, it was just civilized. You know, which is as, I think so sad

that we've lost that.

BOYD:Reading about the dinners, it really makes me, you know, feel nostalgic

for a time that I never experienced.

MUSSON:Oh, it was wonderful.

BOYD:You know, this idea of them having these political discussions,

you know, over the dinner table. I think this sounds so important.

MUSSON:You know, actually, I think they, they, it was more they really enjoyed

each other. They didn't get into business. You know, they, it was just a fun time.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, fun time to be together and to, (pauses) and, you know, all

of a sudden, just people would show up. I remember, oh God. What's the, there

was the singer or Diana, not Ross, obviously. Can't remember who who it was, but

and, she, you know, she’d invite the president. Of course, none of them came.

But she'd

invite them every year and the vice president. Agnew came once. That's the only,

you, you remember Spiro Agnew?

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:He came once and, and then the Reagan's went there for dinner right

after he was shot. And that was quite fun. SWAT team all over the roof. You

know, you can imagine the whole street cut off. (pauses)

BOYD:

I mean during this time, you know, the, the seventies or the sixties and the

seventies, I've read it. It wasn't just senators, but it was it was all kinds of

people who were--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--coming together.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--that including journalists, which surprised me, that because it seems

like that'd be dangerous, you know, to have journalists. But again, as you

described, they're, they're interacting as friends and

MUSSON:Yeah.

MUSSON:--but it just were it just, you know, it as I say, it was a different

error. You know, you'd I mean, we weren't scared of the press When they came in

the office. We adored them.

(pauses)

------(??)

BOYD:So would you be involved in organizing some of these dinners?

MUSSON:Yeah. Just, you know, doing the guest list and doing the place cards and

menu, you know, we have menu cards.

BOYD:Um-hm. What kind of food do you remember?

MUSSON:What​

BOYD:What kind of food do you remember being served?

MUSSON:Well, they had a wonderful cook. And,

a lot of times it was Kentucky ham. Depending on, obviously, what it was. [I’m]

trying to think what they'd have. Well, of course for the, when she had the

Senate, you know, everybody, it was something like, well, once they--this sounds

terrible, but it was very good. Spaghetti with scrambled eggs and little bits of

ham. Because it was obviously,

you know, the volumes. She didn't like meat.

BOYD:Interesting.

MUSSON:(pauses) So. (pauses)

BOYD:It's a little fact that you don't read about anywhere. You know, that's,

that's, that's fantastic. So you kinda describe them, you know, at

the time for you. It's becoming sort of parent figures, you know, talk about

some of, you know, you know, that moment where you--didn't you clearly became

someone who wasn't just another staff member to them.

MUSSON:I think because of my relationship with both of them.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, that was different from--a lot of people were scared of her.

You know, and

of course I was when I first--I mean, I was scared of him. You know, but she was

absolutely wonderful. And, was, I think, an enormous asset for him in Kentucky

and all over. You know, she had known so many people here and

you know, people just just left her. She was She wasn't, you know, as I say, he,

you know, she'd say, “Now John, don't cry.” You know, she wasn't about to do

something like that, but, she, she couldn't have been warmer and more wonderful,

really. You just had to get to know her.

BOYD:Yeah.

Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, and, I mean, he always stood out, as that. (pauses)

BOYD:He seemed like a very reserved person.

MUSSON:She?

BOYD:He did.

MUSSON:He did.

BOYD:But Is that is that true? Because he seemed, I guess in in listening to

his interviews and things. He just always seems like he's so humble.

MUSSON:Oh, he

was. I mean, that's genuine. I mean, he was, he was, I don't, I don't know how

to really say it. He was, I think he just knew who he was.

And behaved that way. And--

BOYD:But she also seems sort of, you know, when you talk about, like,

everybody, to talking about her from a social standpoint. Was she very

extroverted, it sounds like, you know?

MUSSON:Yeah. She I would say yes. I mean, not

not aggressive.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:But, she was interested in people. You know, she and, she enjoyed people.

BOYD:Yeah. (pauses) So imagine she was a good conversationalist that would, you know--

MUSSON:And you know, she spoke five languages.

BOYD:Is that right? Wow.

MUSSON:I know.

She, she went to a boarding school here, Saint Timothy's in Maryland, which

still exists, I'm pretty sure. (pauses) Have you talked--do you--have you talked

to Cornelia Cooper, Dick Cooper's wife?

BOYD:Unh-uh.

MUSSON:You know, Dick, Dick Cooper was the younger brother. There were three

boys and three girls.

And, she's still alive in Somerset.

BOYD:Oh, really?

MUSSON:Yeah. I think she's a hundred.

BOYD:Oh, wow.

MUSSON:But she's and then, somebody else I was thinking maybe you'd be

interested in talking to. Well, you might be interested in talking to Dora Jean,

the black--

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:--which I can easily.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:She could probably come here.

BOYD:Okay.

MUSSON:And Tuohy (??) Cameron is right around the corner, and she's the one that

went to the campaign. And she could come over here.

BOYD:So you, so you, you worked for him from sixty-six, sixty-five. And then his--

MUSSON:Seventy-two.

MUSSON:--his term came to a close in seventy-two. And, at that point, How are

you feeling about the fact that he's retiring?

MUSSON:Very sad.

BOYD:

Yeah. What are your memories of that?

MUSSON:Well, I think we all knew, but were still sort of surprised, that

somebody couldn't push him to stay, because a lot of people tried. But he made

up his mind and he did the right thing, I think. Because

you know, you don't wanna go down because you're older and frail.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, he had such a wonderful life.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:That, it would be too bad.

BOYD:Sure.

MUSSON:And I think she knew that too. I mean, I, I think they were both. Both

sad, but knew was John.

BOYD:I mean, he

he was retiring from politics. But he certainly wasn't retiring at that point.

MUSSON:No. He worked for he, he-- (phone ringing)

BOYD:do you need to answer that? (phone ringing) I can press pause

MUSSON:You want another coffee?

BOYD:Oh, no. I haven't even finished this one, so--

MUSSON:So where were we?

BOYD:So we were talking about the retirement.

MUSSON:Oh, yeah.

BOYD:And, and--

MUSSON:Until he then,

he was of (??) counsel at Covington and Burling--

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:--law, law firm here.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And--

BOYD:What, I mean, you know, I have, I have two nephews who are current

staffers, on The Hill and, and my brother and his wife were staffers on The Hill

and so I know the sense of, in fact, my, one nephew's boss

was a long time senator who's retiring. And so I kind of know that sort of like,

oh, what am I gonna do now? And sort of that that part of the game, what are you

thinking at this point?

MUSSON:Well, as I say, I, had a job with another member.

BOYD:Which was

MUSSON:Senator Stevens of Alaska.

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:And I just I really didn't wanna do it.

You know, I just didn't wanna work for anybody else up there which I, I think

was the, the best decision.

BOYD:Why do you think that is?

MUSSON:I just I think he was so important to me and she was so important to me.

And I just don't think I could have accepted the way somebody else was doing

things. That sounds terrible, doesn't it?

BOYD:I don't think so. I think it sounds wonderful.

MUSSON:I mean, as I say, I was twenty and I spent, what, seven years? With

them, in the Senate. And then, and then, of course, Berlin.

BOYD:But there's a time before Berlin starts. Right? They're they where you've

gotta figure I mean, you gotta have that paycheck

to stay.

MUSSON:Well, you know, she as I say, she was gonna write a book on gardens.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:And, and then I guess let's see. That was seventy-two. And then, you

know, I had my own, freelance secretarial work.

BOYD:Talk about that.

MUSSON:Which was quite fun. And I guess she Mrs. Bruce, Mrs. Bruce, Evangeline

Bruce, was married to David Bruce, who was ambassador

to, well, he was NATO. He was, you know, but he also was Peking.

BOYD:Oh, right.

MUSSON:I mean, you know, China. And Mrs. Cooper said, “Call Evangeline Bruce

right now. She needs help.” And I thought, I can't just call Evangeline Bruce.

(Boyd laughs) You know? And she kept asking me. So finally, I called Miss Bruce.

She said, “Can you come right now?” And so I went to her and, you know, got

her sort of packed up. This is when the Coopers were going to Berlin too. So I

was packing up Miss Bruce and packing up the Cooper's. And, it was just quite fun.

BOYD:You were sort of the organizer and the logistics person to kind of help them?

MUSSON:Yeah. Just--

BOYD:Coordinate.

MUSSON:Yeah. Miss Bruce, you didn't have to do much about because she had

obviously been in the diplomatic corps for--

BOYD:Right.

MUSSON:But, I mean, the Coopers, I mean, not that they

didn't know what to do, but I mean, it was, you know, getting used to different

people and stuff, which Miss. Bruce may have known some I really can't remember.

And then, I forgot I worked for Miss Bruce. She went to China, the Coopers went

to Germany.

BOYD:How would, like, so the, the, you know, you're doing this freelance work.

How is it arranged that you would be

paid to do this work?

MUSSON:By the hour.

BOYD:By the hour. And so--

MUSSON:I just, you know, that people would say, “What do you charge?” And I'd

say, “Well, I'm, you know, x.”

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I think I started out at ten dollars.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And then my name just got passed around. So I worked for the for

Ellsworth Bunker. You do know who he is?

BOYD:No.

MUSSON:Actually, he was I think he was our one of our last ambassadors to Vietnam.

BOYD:Oh.

MUSSON:He was--(pauses)--I'll just have to get you some of these, but he was,

and he was married to a woman named Carol Laise, who was, State Department. She

was, my mind, I can't think of anything. Carol Laise and, Ellsworth Bunker. He was

She was head of the foreign service. I mean, I, that's not the title, the title

would be--but she was--anyway, they're in--they're very interesting. That's a

interesting couple like the Bruces

BOYD:And you would work for them as well?

MUSSON:Um-hm. I worked for, him. And then, when he died, I worked for her. For

a while.

BOYD:

So and--

MUSSON:I was very lucky. I worked for some really incredibly wonderful people.

(pauses) I was very lucky.

BOYD:Talk about a typical day during those years where you were doing the

freelance work.

MUSSON:I would just, you know, somebody would call and say, “Can you come now?”

And I'd go and take dictation or do whatever they wanted, mostly dictation. You

know, they were retired,

like, ambassadors and things. And so they were still getting mail and right. So

I just do that and I--if people were having parties, I do the invitations maybe,

and I just did whatever they wanted, basically. And it was quite fun. And, and

if, you know, if it was dictation, then I'd come home and do it and take it back

the next day. You know, so.

BOYD:I mean, it sounds like something

different all the time.

MUSSON:Yeah. And different people, you know, so, and I think, and I, I don't

mean this to sound pompous. But I think, you know, so many people knew, because

of the Coopers and Bruces, knew I existed that, you know, they might wanna hire me.

BOYD:Well, they

knew you could be trusted.

MUSSON:Well, that could be, but. (pauses) So I, I had a had had a wonderful time.

BOYD:I mean, that I mean, you know, they probably wouldn't have called it this

then, but back you know, but today, you basically were running a small business.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Small business owner here.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:And, do you remember any challenges during that time?

MUSSON:It, houses?

BOYD:Challenges.

MUSSON:Challenges.

Well, I'm sure, you know, at some points there were things. But I--

BOYD:Were you, were you trained? You mentioned dictation. We, we--that's hard

to do. Were you trained to--did you ever get any kind of formal training?

MUSSON:No. No. I, when he retired, I got my

aunt to teach me short hand, you know.

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:And so I could just get by.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, but I didn't have a formal.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I didn't know how to type when I first came.

BOYD:Oh, really?

MUSSON:I went to typing school for, I think, about two minutes. (Boyd laughs)

And then but, You know, you could just say, it's you're going too fast or

something and I'd be scribbling away it

was funny.

BOYD:You know, and you were in some ways dictating and doing shorthand for

yourself, because you'd go home and type it up. So, so that, I mean, would you,

I'm just curious, It sounds like you are, you know, in addition to, I think,

being very organized as a person. I mean, you know, we talk about like labels

today, small business owner. It does also sound like you were like a project

manager. Like you could--you managed lots of things happening at once?

MUSSON:Yeah, I guess.

BOYD:Yeah. Because you'd have multiple clients at the same time.

MUSSON:Yeah. But, you know, if, if, this is amusing too that a lot of times

like, someone would call miss Cooper and say, “Is she, is she there? Can she

come here?” You know, I mean, So it was, you know, it was fun to have

people, you know, that you knew knew where you were and what you were doing and,

you know, when they needed help. Because these people, as I say, were retired.

Former ambassadors or, you know, whatever, and they were used to help.

BOYD:They were used to help. That's right.

MUSSON:And, they needed it. You know?

BOYD:Yeah. I mean, that's a real great, like,

that you recognize that niche, and, and--

MUSSON:Well, it really had nothing to do with me. It was just just that I got

passed around, you know, so.

BOYD:Were there other people who did that kind of work?

MUSSON:I don't think anybody worked for multiple. Yeah. There were obviously,

Miss Bruce had a, after he died, Miss Bruce had a permanent secretary. Kay

Graham always had

someone. And I mean, I think most of them.

BOYD:So where are you living at this time?

MUSSON:On Wisconsin, by the cathedral.

BOYD:Okay. Still, still there. Okay.

MUSSON:Yeah. I didn't live in Georgetown until, after Berlin.

BOYD:Well, let's talk about that transition to Berlin.

But, but before I talk about Berlin, I do wanna go back to Senator Cooper's

politics. And I think in that that time at the end, you know, like you said,

during your time, the civil rights aspect had, had passed, but it had really

established him as kind of a maverick in his own party, and whatnot. Let's talk

about that that Vietnam era in terms of

of, of, of, you know, he took some really tough stances and, and really stepped

out as a leader. I think against the war. What are your memory what are your

memories of that?

MUSSON:As I say, it was, you know, it was a very tense time. And a lot of

emotion and

a really exciting time because, um, people were coming from all over the

country. And I guess it was the Cooper-Church [Editor’s note: Amendments

co-sponsored by Senators John Sherman Cooper and Frank Church during the

1969-1970 time period. These resulted in the passage of the Cooper-Church

Amendment on June 30th, 1970 by the Senate, however the House of Representatives

did not pass this version of the amendment. A revised version passed both houses

of Congress and became law on January 5th, 1971 with reduced restrictions on

Presidential authority to pursue the war in Vietnam.] when we had just masses of

people coming in. And I didn't realize that, you know, there were a couple, I

mean, a couple of Cooper-Churches before

the final one. And that is in the Frank Church book, which, interesting. But of

course, it could have just been sort of behind the scenes.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, and plus, you know, my memory. But I, I do remember the

Cooper-Church, and that was just a, amazing time. I mean, people from all over

the country coming in

and talking to him and, I think it was a very difficult time for him. (pauses)

Because I think--and this is totally me, not anything based on him, but I think

they somehow, somewhat felt, that they had been deceived.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know,

does that make sense? Yeah, that--

BOYD:I mean, what was the what was the stance on the war with regard to constituents.

MUSSON:What was his stance, or?

BOYD:What was what was this? I mean, general--

MUSSON:How did it feel?

BOYD:How did the state--how did the constituents feel about the war? Was he in

line with?

MUSSON:

Well, the people who came to the office were obviously on his side. But, I'm

trying to think what the backlash would have been.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:Because there definitely was. I'm just trying to think of a member who

might have been

(pauses) I, I just have to think more about that.

BOYD:Did he ever articulate to the staff and in the office or to you

personally, why, he was against the war?

MUSSON:I think having gone through World War Two in Germany I think he just

knew the horrors of war. And

because I say, I think, you know, sort of the deception of it. Not being really

upfront about what was going on. I mean, I--it's my feeling that they had no

idea that he was gonna go into Cambodia. But that's totally me. You know, I, I

don't know that I could really base that up. Now, this is,

that's McGovern-Hatfield, which was one of the votes to end the war, and that's

the, I think Clara told you about that. [Editor’s note: McGovern-Hatfield was an

amendment to Appropriations that failed to pass the Senate in 1970. If it had

been passed by both houses of Congress it would have required a full withdrawal

from Vietnam by December 31st, 1970. It was another attempt by Congress to bring

U.S. involvement in Vietnam to an end.]

BOYD:No.

MUSSON:Oh, she didn't or maybe she told me to be sure and show it to you. This

is a--

BOYD:That's the roll call?

MUSSON:That's the, the vote. A vote. And it's McGovern-Hatfield, which was just

end the wars--

BOYD:I see.

MUSSON:Yeah. And you can see he's--what he's, he's counting them up. You'll have

to look at it.

BOYD:I will look at that.

MUSSON:Yeah. You see his writing on the side that--what people are doing.

BOYD:That's amazing. (pauses) That's not a copy. That's the real--

MUSSON:No, that's the real thing.

BOYD:That's amazing.

MUSSON:That's, actually, uh, I did a paper on Vietnam, and I think--yeah, I did

a paper and, and that, I found that.

BOYD:Wow.

MUSSON:I think I stole

it from him, actually. (both laugh)

BOYD:You, you said that, you think, you know, this period took a lot out of

him. You know, I mean, I--I feel yeah. Talk more about that, that it just sounds

like this would have stretched him thin.

MUSSON:I, hmm.

(pauses) I don't know how to explain the tension that was being felt, uh.

(pauses) As I say, I think they--I think quite a few members felt deceived, that

they weren't told that this was gonna happen. And that, they may have been told

that it wouldn't. And,

and I think as I say his experience--

BOYD:You mean you mean the escalation. They weren't told about okay.

MUSSON:Yeah., um. (pauses) I, I you know, I don't know really how to explain it.

BOYD:Yeah. Just some, yeah, it sounds tense and, and--I mean, you've

characterized him as a very sensitive person.

MUSSON:Um-hm.

BOYD:So,

so I feel like I'm imagining him, you know, taking some of this personally too.

I, I mean--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--personalizing some of it.

MUSSON:Um-hm. Well, as I say, because of World War Two and, um, I think the

deception. You know, that, this was happening without any congressional input,

which is not acceptable.

It just shouldn't be and it isn't.

BOYD:Yeah. (pauses) And Cooper-Church was really about that, right, this idea of--

MUSSON:That, that was, Cambodia.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:When he [Editor’s note: Nixon] went into Cambodia. He was, I forgotten

exactly what the specifics were, but it was basically no, you can't just put

troops somewhere without congressional approval.

BOYD:Yeah.

Yeah. That's--I mean, it changed history, you know, I think from that

perspective. (pauses) Okay, so, so he retires in seventy-two. He goes to work

for the law firm. You are, you know, running this great freelance operation, and

everybody's life is about to change, again. Let's talk about Berlin and

and the transition there.

MUSSON:Well, of course, he knew fairly soon after that that he would be going

to Berlin. And I think it was within two years.

BOYD:Yeah. In seventy-four, I think.

MUSSON:And I went in seventy-five.

BOYD:Did you know you were going?

MUSSON:Nope. Not

until well, I didn't know they were going. I don't think. No. I wouldn't have

known they were going until probably pretty soon before they went. I don't think

they did necessarily. I, I don't know. But I think, I always sort of think that,

they might have had an inkling that something was gonna happen and that they

didn't--they didn't sort of push me to do--to, work for Ted's team. Now that's

and these things are always my interpretation of things, which may not be correct.

BOYD:Sure. Yeah. So you may have been encouraged to freelance, I think, knowing

that they,

they pretty much if, if indeed they knew, they knew, they probably wanted you to come.

MUSSON:Well, thank you.

BOYD:So that's pretty neat. So did they go act--I know they were there in

seventy-four. Did they go before they ask you to come, or did they ask you to

come before they even left?

MUSSON:Uh, they asked me before they left.

BOYD:So you hadn't worked in that world, you know, before. I know, like, today

you have to go through all kinds of bureaucracy to get clearance. Did you have

to do any kind of--

MUSSON:Clearance, security clearance, yes, I had top secret.

BOYD:What was that process like?

MUSSON:I mean, I didn't even know, you know, I mean, you just get it.

BOYD:I mean, they're probably out doing investigation of--background checks and

things like that.

MUSSON:Yeah. I think that may be one reason I was delayed.

My grandfather died. That was one delay. And then I think maybe it took them a

I, I, I not sure I can remember correctly, but I think they would have gotten

there. And also, there was no residence because they refused to move in the one

the State Department had picked.

And it was, it was sort of out in the country, and it was a big place that I, I,

I think I never saw. So I don't know much about it, but they just refused. They

wanted to be in this sort of diplomatic compound area.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:I mean, there were more people around, and, and it was you know, as I

say, a Kleenex box.

BOYD:Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah.

MUSSON:It wasn't this big palatial.

BOYD:Right.

MUSSON:Which is typical of them, particularly when you're going someplace like that.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know?

BOYD:So had you traveled abroad at that point?

MUSSON:No.

BOYD:Wow. Yeah. Wow. So so talk about an adventure. You're going to East Berlin.

MUSSON:

(Pauses) It just was a (pauses) you know, shock, I guess.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I mean

BOYD:Do you remember that your first impressions?

MUSSON:I--

BOYD:I, I'm guessing you had to go through the checkpoint?

MUSSON:Yeah. But we had passes. So we just, you know, you showed your pass. And,

it was pretty grim. I mean, it was pretty dead. Uh, it's quiet. It's just, you

know, the silence was really--that's one thing I really remember. And you know,

the troops and

I don't know. (pauses) We had a good time.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I mean--

BOYD:This is the first, like, the US had not recognized East Germany at that point.

MUSSON:Right.

BOYD:So part of his job was to set up the whole diplomatic operation, including

getting established in the house. So, um, you know, I think you've described it

as silent.

Yet, you know, at the same time, it sounds like it was, you know, there was a,

an aspect of fun that you said?

MUSSON:Well, you know, we, we had each other. I mean, you didn't have anybody else.

BOYD:Right.

MUSSON:And this is sort of fun. There was a, you know, a base in in West

Berlin. The--a big military base. And the,

the commanding general there, and his wife became friends of the Coopers, and

they were extremely helpful, you know, getting supplies or whatever. And, they

were the McDonald's (??). They were so, so wonderful. And, I keep losing my

point. I get so involved in what was going on.

BOYD:

We were talking about the

MUSSON:West Berlin.

BOYD:You know, this idea of West Berlin and the military base and supplies.

MUSSON:Which was actually, you know, fabulous because they had the PX and the

commissary. So we could go someplace and get food and--

BOYD:Because you had a pass. So you could just come and go.

MUSSON:Back and forth.

BOYD:I mean, do you remember--I imagine going through Checkpoint Charlie being

fairly tense, was there fear involved or were you just

kinda, show the pass and not worried?

MUSSON:Yeah, I did one thing they said, the State Department, was don't ever,

ever give up your passport, no matter what. Oh, soon as I landed, they took my

password. And I thought, oh my god. And I was, you know, needless to say, rather

nervous. And fortunately, I looked

through the gate when I was coming in, and I saw Miss Cooper. And I thought,

well, I'm okay.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, And then we were told, you know, he was not supposed to ever

get out of the car. And, Mrs Cooper's niece came to visit, and they, you know,

they took her in and were you know, interrogating

her, basically, and it took forever. She was pretty, I can imagine, you know,

that the guards who were quite smitten by her, but anyway. He got quite upset

and got out of the car. And I said, “Sir, sir, you know, they shoot people here.

Please don't go out.” And he did, you know, he wasn't gonna--I mean, that's the

way he was. You know, it was a funny time.

BOYD:

So where did you live?

MUSSON:I lived in--we had--apartment I'll show you. I can show you.

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

MUSSON:Pictures and stuff of this. They had just put it up, basically. I mean,

literally. Somebody from--a woman who used to work for him came with her partner

or something and said, “Don't go out on that balcony.” Because they thought it

would, you know,

gonna collapse. (both laugh)

BOYD:Where where was the, the compound?

MUSSON:We were--well, the embassy was, I mean, it was I have to show you.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Look, because it's too hard to explain.

BOYD:How far was your apartment from there?

MUSSON:The embassy?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Not far.

BOYD:Not far.

MUSSON:I mean, I walked.

BOYD:You walked.

MUSSON:And it was it was tiny little office on the

fifth floor of an office building. you know, it was--(pauses)--and of course,

you know, we had to, be buzzed in and buzzed out of the office, but that's not

so bizarre.

BOYD:Did you have--I mean, what was your what was your actual job there in East Berlin?

MUSSON:Well, the ambassador's secretary. Just doing the same

thing, you know, that I've always done for him.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And for her.

BOYD:So what were some of the--I mean, what were some of the components of the

job in terms of, like, what were some of the--what was he, what was he dealing

with at that time in terms of--

MUSSON:What was?

BOYD:These new diplomatic relations that are happening?

MUSSON:Um, what's happening then? Well, I, I, you know, I really can't

think.

BOYD:I mean, there was problem was there any interaction with the Soviets? And--

MUSSON:Yes. Actually, because Mrs. Cooper spoke Russian, she and--he, the

Russian Ambassador was Abrasimov. And he was actually he was quite fun. I tell

you, it's it's amazing. He came to dinner at

the residence. And they had lamb chops. And he said to me, what it she put me

next to him. Why, I don't know, but anyway. And he said, “What is this?” And I

said, “Lamb chop.” “Lamb chop, lamb chop, lamb chop.” He just kept repeating. It

was very funny.

And he, and he, you know, he was, he was just fun.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, and I don't, you know, the people would say, “Don't,” you

know, “you can't go to the Russian embassy,” and say, you know, “the Coopers

just can do what they want.” You know, which is I mean, there was no reason not

to go. I mean, you know you were gonna be bugged. So, I

mean, we knew we were, our apartments were bugged.

BOYD:How did that make you feel?

MUSSON:You know, in the beginning, you're kind of, “Wooh.” And then you just

don't care. You don't really mean you forget.

BOYD:I mean, would you have to be, you know, when you would be at the office,

would you have to be careful about conversations?

MUSSON:You mean, amongst ourselves?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Probably not.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:

The the wives of some of the embassy personnel may have been a little reluctant

to talk. But, you know, it's so sad as I say that nobody from the Senate and

there's nobody from Berlin. I mean, there's one woman who was married to

someone who was there. But, you know, it's amazing that there there's nobody

left really that knew the Coopers.

BOYD:Who was from that office?

MUSSON:Who?

BOYD:Who worked in that office?

MUSSON:Who was in the Embassy office?

BOYD:Yeah, in Berlin.

MUSSON:A woman named Bobby Brooks, who was from Louisville, I think. And she

was the secretary for

the DCM, which--who was the Deputy Chief of Mission.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:Brandon Grove.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:Who actually, wrote a book Behind Embassy Walls.

BOYD:Yes.

MUSSON:Have you seen that?

BOYD:I have.

MUSSON:Yeah. That's--it's--that's a good book.

BOYD:And

MUSSON:I think that, as I say, I think the wives were a little more concerned

because of the

husbands.

BOYD:Um-hm. Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, they--I mean, I had a wonderful friend who, who is here now,

who we had, you know, you just had to laugh. You know? And one, (laughs) one,

kind of fun thing is that one night, they, you know, everything as I say,

everything, like six o'clock, it was dead.

You know, just silent and everything. And at some point, I heard all this

commotion, rumbling. And I looked out of my balcony and there were Soviet tanks

and troops, just lined. Oh, I mean, literally I could see their eyes

practically. And I thought, oh my god. They're invading Poland. I didn't even

know where Poland was when I that's just what

I figured out. Well, of course, they were practicing for May Day. Isn't that funny?

BOYD:That's interesting. Yeah that's great. So, did you have personal

interactions with East Germans and with--

MUSSON:I did. We had, I think, three secretaries

that were--I think that's right. And one was, my age. And--or close to my age.

And she asked me for dinner, one night. And, obviously, I got permission to go.

I mean, I wasn't just gonna say yes. I, and, I was allowed to go, and it was fine.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:But that's the only, and well, when we had drivers, I loved

the ambassador's driver. -----(??) heimer (??), He was wonderful. And of course,

you know, they adore him. Um-hm. I mean, they could just you could see in their

expressions. How they admired him.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Sorry.

BOYD:That's okay. (pauses) Sounds like you're continuing to organize parties and

MUSSON:

She's having it so cute that call me. How many do you think I should make?

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. As you said, better to be prepared.

MUSSON:Yeah. That's the Kentucky influence.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. So so back to East Berlin, what, you know, in terms of

Lorraine, you know, she's used to having these parties and having this social

thing that,

that she's doing here in the States, how was this experience for her?

MUSSON:It would, you know, there was a, you know, there was a group. I mean,

you know of ambassadors that they all got to know. They were, particularly

friendly with the Portuguese. And, the Pakistani. He was a wonderful man. John

Sheed Marker and

and she, you know, they would entertain. I mean, And they'd you know, as I say,

they were in these Kleenex boxes, which were kind of next to each other.

BOYD:You described the outside, what was the inside of the buildings like?

MUSSON:Well, the--because of this man, that was with us,

BOYD:The butler's partner?

MUSSON:Yeah. He did, he put, like, he put,

red damasks (??), sounds dreadful, on the walls. So it made it quite warm. And

then, I, I'm sure I have pictures of this. I think they're right in there. You

want me to go look?

BOYD:Afterwards. Yeah.

MUSSON:Yeah. But I think they're--some right in there. And there's one

apparently, one of the East Germans said to somebody or I, I don't know

something like, “I thought the Americans were so rich, but they used candles and

not electricity.”

BOYD:That wonderful. That's great.

MUSSON:Because, you know, obviously, She--Miss Cooper has some beautiful

things, you know, and they, they were, you know, tall candle holders with, you

know, with the things on the side.

BOYD:Where would she get the things to decorate

it with? Is that==

MUSSON:Where'd she get the thing?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:That she had?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:From her family.

BOYD:From her family.

MUSSON:Yep.

BOYD:Okay. So those are personal items that she--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD :--used.

MUSSON:And she, I guess, we got a lot of them were. I don't know if she

got--she, she was married to a man named McAdoo (??). Will you stop me if I'm

repeating stuff for you that's boring?

BOYD:Yeah. Not right now.

MUSSON:He's McAdoo (??) and he

was, his father I believe this is right. His father was Roosevelt’s. Could this

be right? Roosevelt's Secretary of the Treasury? Could that be right?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And then she was married to a man named, Tommy Shevlin, who was in Cuba

with, I think the navy or something.

BOYD:

So she knew what she was getting into when, when, you know, she's gonna be sent

to East Berlin and, I mean, she, she just sounded like she, she was a pretty confident--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--person.

MUSSON:Well, she’d been, around a while. And, when she divorced Tommy Shevlin,

or they were divorced, she moved here. And I think she was, pretty sad. Because

I don't think she knew a lot of people and things. And I mean, you know, she

was, she was well known and every, I mean, you know, people around would have

known her. So she, and she apparently, and this

this is all a lot of this is in the Gentleman From Kentucky, movie that, from

interviews from people. But apparently, she went to the Senate one day, and she

was in the gallery looking at the floor, and she said, “I'm gonna marry that

man.” Mr. Cooper.

BOYD:That's great. That's really great. I've not heard that before.

So they're interacting socially with the other ambassadors and they're, they're

I mean--

MUSSON:That's all they had to do.

BOYD:So there was no interaction with, sort of, the local population, much at

all. So you weren't eating in East Berlin restaurants and going to concerts and

things like that.

MUSSON:There weren't any.

BOYD:There weren't any.

MUSSON:I mean, there was, I think there was one restaurant. It was in the,

lower floor of where the Embassy was. And,

I know go, going back to Abrasimov, the Soviet, it was Pyotr.

BOYD:Is it Pyotr Abrasimov?

MUSSON:Yeah. Did you know him--about him?

BOYD:I've just read a little bit. That he was there at the time.

MUSSON:Um, as I say, he was quite amusing.

(pauses) I’ve lost my thought again. I tell you I'm pathetic.

BOYD:I mean, was there any sense of politics between, like, I mean, here's the

Soviet you know, you know, ambassador and they're kind of they're kind of in

charge there. Right? I mean--

MUSSON:Oh, absolutely. They, they--totally were in charge.

BOYD:You know, I mean, I think about history, we've got, you know, Bay of Pigs.

We've got Cuban Missile Crisis. You know, you know, then, you know, ten years,

ten, twelve years later, you know, things are pretty tense, you know, I mean,

this is I remember, you know, I would have been, when you're in East Berlin,

interacting with the Soviet Ambassador. I'm probably five or six years old, and

I remember having, you know, the, the nuclear bomb drills in in school and--

MUSSON:Oh, yeah.

BOYD:--and things like that. So, so things are tense on the world stage. But

you're saying that interactions with him were,

were not tense?

MUSSON:No. I don't think so. You know, they're, they all know what they’re,

what the positions are and what they’re facing. I mean, they, they--

BOYD:And what do you mean by that?

MUSSON:(pauses) Well, I mean, there there's no point in cutting yourself off

from somebody like the Soviet Ambassador.

There's just no point, and the Coopers knew that. And to, you know, toe the line

of the State Department is absurd. Um, and, and, I mean, that's how they were

effective. Same thing in the Senate. You know, you don't cut yourself off from

Lyndon Johnson or Richard Nixon. You're not gonna accomplish anything. You don't

get into a fight with William Fulbright. You know, you just, and

I think that came across extremely--(pauses)--in how the Coopers behaved. You

know, I think, and I think that's probably--I think the Senate was probably

responsible for a lot of that. Don't you? BOYD: Um-hm.

MUSSON:You know, that you, you, you have to be flexible.

And you have to be understanding.

BOYD:You work by building bridges and connecting--

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:--to people rather than dividing and--

MUSSON:Yeah, which is what we have now. I think to, to a, an extent.

BOYD:But it sounds like they were especially good at it too. And and I think he

was especially good at it.

MUSSON:And He?

BOYD:No, he--they. I mean, it sounds like they were especially good at making

connections and working

in that style, which means I which think in some ways, despite the the State

Department, you know, line that they were kind of countering, makes him kind of

the perfect person to be the first to go in.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:That's interesting.

MUSSON:I think, I think, I can't remember what the incident was exactly. I'll

think about it. But at one point, somebody said

“Sir, you can't do that.” Secretary, that doesn't want you to. He said, “you

tell the secretary to go to hell.” I know. He was--he wanted to go see Gerald

Ford, when Gerald Ford went to Helsinki.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:You remember, I, I can't what was that for?

BOYD:It's like the Helsinki Accord or it was a big, it was a big meeting.

MUSSON:Maybe, but what was it about?

BOYD:I don't know, but there was a big meeting in Helsinki during that time.

[Editor’s Note: Helsinki Accords of 1975 were a Cold War security agreement

signed by 35 nations in Helsinki]

MUSSON:And

I think he, he, and he was in Berlin and, and I think it would have been

Kissinger, right?

BOYD:I think that’s right.

MUSSON:Kissinger said he couldn't go. And he said, “You tell the secretary to

go to hell.” (laughs) He's gonna go.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:--he was a friend of Gerald Ford, and, he was gonna go home and campaign

for him.

BOYD:Yeah. So they, so they took trips

MUSSON:

When they were in Berlin?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Not a lot.

BOYD:Not a lot.

MUSSON:No. I mean, we weren't there that for that long, really. You know?

BOYD:So you went with them?

MUSSON:I went in, they went in, November. And I went in January.

BOYD:To Helsinki?

MUSSON:Oh, no. Excuse me. I thought you meant here. No. I didn't go anywhere

with him.

BOYD:You didn't. Okay.

MUSSON:You know, and I made a terrible mistake. Of course, I had a diplomatic

passport, and all I wanted to do was come home. I never went any--I know. I

know. I never went anywhere.

BOYD:Wow. Yeah.

MUSSON:Actually, I did go to Malta because my best friend in Berlin had left

and went to Malta. So--

BOYD:Malta's beautiful I hear.

MUSSON:Yeah.

So but that's the only place. I know.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. (pauses) So you're in Berlin from seventy-five to when. When

did you leave?

MUSSON:Leave Berlin?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Well, I was there for two bi--two well, I was there for the Bicentennial,

so that's seventy-six. And, (pauses) I must have been there for two,

Bicentennial ---------(??)--(pauses)--and for the first year, I'll have to

look--and see.

BOYD:Do you--I, I, mean, you, you mentioned Bicentennial and it makes me think,

did you all celebrate? Like, have, like--

MUSSON:for the Bicentennial?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Huge party. Yeah. It was wonderful. We had, the, as I say, you know, we

had the butler and his partner and, and the partner was just so clever at

things. And they had round tables with white cloths, and they had, big ribbons,

red and blue

ribbons on the top. And then the, General McDonald in the west, got them little

flags. And so the little American flags were all in the napkins. It was so

wonderful. And they and Mrs. Cooper had gotten a Shamiana, which is a tent. I

don't know, if you know, what a--I certainly didn't know before. But anyway, it

so that she

could put an--out in back. And if they had something, it would be a place to go.

And it was, It was from Pakistan, and I don't know how she got--anyway, it was,

striped on the outside, and then all this wonderful Pakistani material inside.

I've got pictures of that, I'm sure too.

BOYD:Oh, wow.

MUSSON:And so, you know, everything was (pauses) I mean, because of the two men,

that was really particularly helpful, but she, you know, she was gonna do her thing.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. I mean--

MUSSON:So, which was wonderful.

BOYD:Yeah. Did she speak German?

MUSSON:Speak German?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:She did.

MUSSON:Russian, German, probably Spanish, I’ve forgotten. Russian German. I’ve

forgotten, but--

BOYD:That's amazing. So, so, so you

had this big celebration. I mean, you know, I know being a Kentuckian and living

other, you know, elsewhere. From a party standpoint, a lot of times people from

Kentucky have Kentucky Derby parties now, you know, when they, you know, was

there any kind of Kentucky aspect that was brought to, to Berlin at that time

that you remember?

MUSSON:To Berlin?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Well,

I we had Kentucky ham.

BOYD:Yeah. Kentucky ham.

MUSSON:My grandmother sent us Kentucky ham for--

BOYD:Oh, really?

MUSSON:Yeah. Isn't that wonderful?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:For, I guess, the Bicentennial or one of them.

BOYD:Um-hm. Um-hm.

MUSSON:I'm pretty sure I was there for two big things. I mean, the Bicentennial definitely.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MUSSON:And I must in the summer before, I must have been there. Yeah. Because

that would be summer of seventy-five.

BOYD:Yeah. Yes.

MUSSON:

So that, and we had, I guess that's the most kind of Kentucky thing. I and we

got the, because they were so close to McDonough, the general, we got the Army

Band to come.

BOYD:Wow, really.

MUSSON:Isn't that wonderful?

BOYD:That's amazing.

MUSSON:I'll show you pictures of that too. Which was so fun, but I--

is a couple named George and Liz Stevens. George Stevens was head of the

American Film Iinstitute and they lived across the street from the Coopers. You

have been by the house or not?

BOYD:No.

MUSSON:You have, but you never been in.

BOYD:I have not been.

MUSSON:Well, of course, I can probably get you in, but it won't look like what

they were.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Anyway, (pauses) See, I just lose it. So

I get so involved with what was going on. And, I'm so sorry.

BOYD:You're talking about George and Liz Stevens.

MUSSON:Oh, and they came twice, two--or he came once, and I guess they both

came and I had to drive them back to the West [Berlin] every time before they

played the Star Spangled Banner. I was furious.

BOYD:Oh.

MUSSON:You're

BOYD:Oh.

MUSSON:Don't put that in there, though.

BOYD:No. That's funny.

MUSSON:Oh, deeper.

BOYD:

So do you--did you have other visitors?

MUSSON:Oh gosh. We had I think we had the entire Yale class of nineteen

twenty-three. BOYD: Interesting.

MUSSON:We had them. We had, when Miss Graham came, for Stevens. Lily Guest, who

was a great friend of both the Coopers. She's a wonderful woman. Her daughter

was Liz Stevens.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:

And she came. What else did we have? Of course, we had two CODELS which are

congressional delegations. [Editor’s Note: United States Congressional Delegations]

BOYD:Okay.

MUSSON:And, one was Tip O'Neill. Was headed by Tip O'Neill. And the other one,

now I can't remember who the other CODEL was. Well, that was great fun because,

you know, you could

catch up--

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSOSN:--the Coopers could catch up on, what was going on in the Senate.

BOYD:Um-hm. But these other people that would come over, were they kind of

being tourists in East Berlin and?

MUSSON:They, they came to see him.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And, because, you know

BOYD:How else are you gonna get to East Berlin? You know, I mean, I think--

MUSSON:How how often did I?

BOYD:No. How else would somebody from the United States

be able to get there?

MUSSON:Exactly. Exactly. So it was a, you know, it was a, and I can't remember

if a lot of people stayed at the residence, or they must have stayed in the West.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:I, I, I'll have to think about that. I can't remember.

BOYD:So, so your time in Berlin comes to an end, but I'm gonna, just, I want to

talk about after Berlin, but

I wanna fast forward to nineteen eighty-nine. I mean, how did you feel when the

wall came down? And we were--

MUSSON:I called him up. I said, “Sir, they're taking the wall down.” He said,

“What?” I said “They're taking the wall down.” I mean, it was, was just stunned.

You know? Never thought it would happen.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And he didn't--I don't think he thought it would happen.

It well, I tell you, it was grim. You know, you felt so sorry for--and and then,

of course, you come back here. And actually, the State Department, I give them

credit for this. They said, “You're not gonna have any trouble there. You're

gonna have trouble when you come home.” And, you know, you go to the Safeway and

people are complaining about the lines. You think I've just been a place where

people queue up for a piece of bread.

BOYD:

Oh, Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, oh, so.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Very, very interesting times.

BOYD:Yeah. So you came home from from Berlin. Did you know it was gonna be sort

of a short time that you would be there?

MUSSON:Probably not. I, I really don't know.

BOYD:Because it doesn't seem like they were there for very long.

MUSSON:No, they weren't.

They--I was, um, no--they weren't it's just under two years.

BOYD:Yeah. I mean, is that because of, a new president comes along and--

MUSSON:No.

BOYD:No. They just were done.

MUSSON:I think so.

BOYD:And I mean, again, he's, he was charged to start it up. Um, and maybe then

hand it off. So, so you pretty much knew you were coming back.

MUSSON:I think so.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:I, you know, Well, of course, I sent them back. I mean, you know, I had

to pack them up to have them come back, do his papers and stuff. (pauses) I

just, I think I must have known all along. It wasn't gonna be very long, and he

obviously did.

BOYD:Um-hm. How old was he at this time?

MUSSON:In his seventies, seventy. Well he was born in nineteen-o-one. So

BOYD:Yeah. Okay.

MUSSON:

Both of them were in their mid-seventies.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

MUSSON:Going toward late-seventies, which is a really amazing.

BOYD:It is. I mean

MUSSON:We really--

BOYD:I mean, East Berlin. It's not like an ambassadorship to Malta, you know.

MUSSON:No.

BOYD:I mean, I mean, it was I mean, that is not a cushy, you know, placement--

MUSSON:No.

BOYD:--for the time, so.

MUSSON:I mean, you know, fortunately, there was all of the help that

they had here, not all of them, but a lot of them. So that was helpful. And, of

course, the, as I say, the PX and the commissary were lifesavers. And that you

could go any time with your pass.

BOYD:So you weren't, you know, so you felt like you were, you were, you know,

still had some amenities, like, of living here.

MUSSON:I mean, we went to the I went to the PX and commissary every weekend.

BOYD:Okay. Yeah.

MUSSON:Because there there literally wasn't anything to buy

there.

BOYD:Yeah. In East Berlin.

MUSSON:Food.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Or at least food you want.

BOYD:Right. Right. So, you know, again, back to, to, you know, Washington DC

culture, this idea of, like, you know, job’s going to come to an end. And you

had been freelancing before Germany. What, what was your plan after Germany?

MUSSON:I don't think I had any.

BOYD:

Because you're about you're about thirty at that point. Right?

MUSSON:Um-hm. Yeah. I think I turned thirty there.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:And, luckily, when I came back, I picked up all the old people that I

had worked for. You know, so that was helpful. And then I went back and got my

BA. And then I got an MA.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

Did you do that here?

MUSSON:Yeah. Got to finish the BA at Mount Vernon. Which, you know, doesn't

exist now.

BOYD:Right.

MUSSON:And then, Masters in American--

BOYD:And where were they in? Where did you study?

MUSSON:What?

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Political science.

BOYD:Political science.

MUSSON:Yeah. American government, political science.

BOYD:So were you the person in the class who, who was the first to raise your hand?

MUSSON:No. (laughs) The last.

BOYD:Because you had all this did all this experience.

MUSSON:

I didn't wanna speak.

BOYD:Yeah. Oh, that's fantastic. I think you did that.

MUSSON:I loved it. Just loved it. I never liked school before. And I just loved it.

BOYD:I can see that.

MUSSON:Yeah. It was, it was--

BOYD:Okay, so you resumed the freelance work when you got back, um, how long

did that last?

(pauses) Did you just keep doing it? Did you just keep doing it?

MUSSON:Going to school?

BOYD:No. No. No. The the freelance work and--

MUSSON:Oh, no. Of course, well they've died.

BOYD:Oh, okay.

MUSSON:I guess, I must have done it for two or three years.

Maybe four. I, I, you know.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:But Bunker died. That was with Bunker, Miss Bruce died. Um, Senator

Cooper died in ninety-one.

BOYD:Um-hm. She died first. Right?

MUSSON:She, she did.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:Yeah. She had a, massive stroke.

BOYD:She was, like, in eight--nineteen eighty-five, maybe.

MUSSON:I think she

had it in eighty-four, and she died in eighty-five. It was a hard time.

BOYD:I be--I believe it.

MUSSON:He'd go every day. To see her.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:And then, you know, he eventually, he had to move out of the house,

which was hard too.

BOYD:Yeah. Do you mean to, like, a nursing home?

MUSSON:He--no. He went to,

an apartment.

BOYD:Apartment.

MUSSON:At, 2500 [Avenue] Q, which is ---(??).

BOYD:Yeah. Not far.

MUSSON:No. But you know, that was a--I don't know. I think that was a blow. You

know, I, I mean, his whole life was changing so quickly.

BOYD:Yeah.

MUSSON:You know, I think--

BOYD:Was that hard for you

to watch that period of time?

MUSSON:Yeah, I mean, I was so lucky to know them for so long When I was so

young. You know? The impressionable child getting to know these kind of people.

BOYD:

They changed your life.

MUSSON:Absolutely. And exposed me to enormous things that would not have

happened had I stayed in Louisville.

BOYD:Um-hm. Um-hm.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Oh, yes.

MUSSON:Yeah.

BOYD:I mean, you lived in East Berlin in nineteen seventy-five. That's remarkable.

MUSSON:

(laughs) It was a--I mean, well, as I say, it was pretty drab.

BOYD:Did you get back into, working on The Hill and and that type of thing after?

MUSSON:No. I just did the, you know, freelance secretarial work and, then as I

say, got a BA and a Masters, and I don't know what else I've done. Doesn't sound

like much.

BOYD:

Yeah. It's a lot. (pauses) How often do you get back to Kentucky?

MUSSON:Talk to you about Kentucky?

BOYD:How often do you get back to Kentucky?

MUSSON:Not much anymore. I used to go at, you know, Christmas, obviously. And

but I haven't been for a while.

BOYD:

Yeah.

MUSSON:I still I have a brother there. And cousin, you know, Rose. But it's

such a pain to travel.

BOYD:It is.

MUSSON:You know?

BOYD:It is.

MUSSON:And, I mean, I can always stay with my brother. I could always stay with

Rose, but,

BOYD:you

MUSSON:know, it's just in the same.

BOYD:And she has a place out here. Right?

MUSSON:She has my aunt's house. She,

my aunt left it to Rose and to me. And she bought my half. And it's on Reservoir.

BOYD:Okay.

MUSSON:Road. Nice house. Can I get you a sandwich?

BOYD:No. I'm good. I'm good. I think we can go ahead and wrap up. I just thank

you so much for, for sharing these memories with me.

MUSSON:Well--

BOYD:I mean, it's really it's pretty special.

MUSSON:

--thank you.

BOYD:And I'm honored to to have you tell me these stories. I mean, really.

MUSSON:Let me show you.

BOYD:Yes. Yes. Let me hit, let me hit stop here, and I will--