FERNHEIMER:--make sure it's actually recording. Testing, one, two, three.

Kopana, you'll clip this at the end. (laughs) Good morning.

GUR:Good morning.

FERNHEIMER:It is a joy and a delight to be back here at the beautiful home of

Janna Gur, in Ramat HaHayal, Tel Aviv. Today is July 17, 2023, my name is Jan

Fernheimer, I am Professor of Writing, Rhetoric, and Digital Studies, Zantker

Professor of Jewish Studies, and the James B. Beam Institute for Kentucky

Spirits Faculty Fellow at the University of Kentucky, and it is my great honor

and pleasure to continue a wonderful conversation about food and food-ways in

Israel-Palestine, with the amazing and esteemed author, and editor, Janna Gur.

Our last interview was wonderful, and we spent a lot of time talking about

trends in cuisine,

and, sort of, how Israeli food has evolved, along with the state itself, but

there were many things we didn't get a chance to chat about, so I'm hoping today

we'll have a chance to talk a little bit more about some of those things we

didn't get to last time. So, one of the things that you had mentioned, when we

were kind of wrapping--not wrapping up, but sort of midway through, was the

informality of Israeli food, food-ways, in cuisine, and I wonder if we might

start there, because I think--and I think you would agree, that that's a really

different part of how food works here. Do you want to talk a little bit about that?

GUR:Yeah, sure. First of all, I think--well, everywhere, food, and the way

people eat, reflects the--many ways, the reflection of the character of the

nation or culture, it's always connected, and it's always fascinating to

observe that. For example, think about Italians, and their adoration of

tradition and heritage, how it--it is reflected in the way they eat, it has to

be very local and typical, and at certain times, and, you know, try to find a

place to--to have lunch in--in Italy after 3 PM, for example, or--I mean, there

are times when you eat, and what you eat, and how you eat. Israelis are--well,

they're very different, as we know, and, plus--I mean, it's maybe just as it is

too early to talk about Israeli cuisine, it may be even too early to talk about

the Israeli nation, because it's something in the making, and changing a lot,

but the informality, the directness, the lack of manners, even, (laughs) is

something that I think is very typical of Israelis. I remember when I was

first came here, I was a new immigrant from very polite Latvia. I would curtsey,

you know, when I was introduced to somebody, to a grown up, at the time, I was,

I mean, taught to curtsey, you know, literally. And then I come to Israel, and

they say, "You know, they address the Prime Minister by his first name." That

changed, and he's walking without a tie on, you can just talk to him and say

"Yitzhak," or whatever. But, yes, there are the informalities at the very core

of the Israeli character, and if it--when it comes to food, well, first of all,

very flexible eating hours. If you think about Tel Aviv, this is probably the

best place to have great food in the morning, or late at night. Also during the

day, but, I mean, you can find really good food at 2 AM, which is quite unique.

And, you know, the minute--or the time--

as soon as the small plate, so tapas, trend hit the world, the culinary world,

Israelis embraced it with, with great joy, because--first of all, because it, it

kind of resonates with the Mezze culture, you know, the Mediterranean, Middle

Eastern, small plates meal, but also it's very typical of the way Israelis

entertain--I'm sure you been to Israeli homes for Shabbat lunch, or dinner, or

during the week. It's rarely first course, main course, last course, it would be

usually what we call in Hebrew liftoach shulchan, okay, literally open up a

table, or make a spread of it, it's lots of, you know, lots of food that

everybody's sharing, so the whole sharing thing, the whole mopping up

things--you know, I always make fun of my husband who, who thinks food

preserves, or anything that is

kind of creamy and, and, and mousse-like, has mousse-like textures, is--should

be mopped up with a piece of break--I mean, as if it's like tahini, or--

FERNHEIMER:-hummus--

GUR:--hummus, or labneh, or something like that. So, that's that, I mean, the

fact that sharing, breaking the tradition of, you know, of, of a proper meal,

like first course, main course, last course. Large quantities, Israelis are very

generous with their helpings, both when they entertain and when they eat

themselves, and--well, if you think about restaurants, then--I always say you

can never be underdressed in Israeli restaurants, only overdressed. (both laugh)

Which, again, I mean, things are changing, there are some very elegant places

now, but, even there, I mean--most Israeli men

probably own one tie, which they wore at their wedding, or bar, bar mitzvah.

Again, I'm exaggerating, but that's the spirit. So, you're informally

dressed--even the very elegant restaurants rarely have linen mats. They would

have, like, you know, placemats, and then something you could have, you know,

mishmash silverware and, and dishes from the flea markets, and the kind of

Bohemian chic that is very, is very popular, so--yes, so all of that coming

together is, is, I think, a mark of, of the local food culture.

FERNHEIMER:And that kind of informality, does it translate--and, and you've

kind of talked about it both in terms of, like, the dress, and the hours, and,

and how people eat, but also kind of what people eat, in terms of--and we spent

the last conversation talking about--

GUR:--yeah, yeah, yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--some of those foods. You know--

I think about French cuisine, and sort of, like, regimented kinds of techniques,

and, you know, the kind of path that you work--you learn to make a roux, and you

learn to make this, and you learn to make that.

GUR:Yeah, but I think here we're going more to the cooking techniques, and it's

tricky, because if you think about--of course, French cooking is very

regimented, it's very--there are certain ways to make certain things. But, if

you look at the rest of the world. I mean, not all the world adheres to these

principles, even though there are debates of most, of most professional cooking

schools, and that includes Israeli chefs as well, I mean, the better ones--even

if they didn't go to school in, I don't know, in France, or at, like, formal

culinary education, they definitely work

in Michelin starred restaurants. So, they have the basic--you need to have some

basic technique, and you know how to do things, but, what you do with

those--with this technique, how you apply it, or how you play with it, is, is a

different thing altogether, so, if you think about, like, their training, it's a

mix. If you're talking about the way the food is served, or presentation, or

flavor combinations--I think we talked about, the last time, the fact that

you're not only allowed, but encouraged, and expected, to be innovative, to be

creative, to be--to break the rules, and it's funny, because sometimes people

don't even know what the rules are, but--yeah, but it's very--but it has to have

some kind of, you know, underneath, some time of, you know, logic and system,

and I'm sure good

chefs have that, otherwise it would turn out--

FERNHEIMER:--very difficult to be successful--

GUR:--yeah, or just, or just serve really good food, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:But, you know, I guess, kind of talking about this training and

things like that. We are starting to see a little bit of that formalization

process here. If you think about some of the institutes and organizations, what

do you think that means, or how that will shape and continue to impact the way

that people think about Israeli food, food-ways, and cuisine. I'm thinking

about, you know, the institute they're starting up north, in the Galil, and the

kinds of work that Asif is doing here, in Tel Aviv--

GUR:--well, they are--I mean, there are several things happening--should I get closer--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, maybe.

GUR:Okay, so there are several things happening, and--they are not necessarily

connected, but they

probably all attest to the fact--I mean, the part of our culinary progress, or

culinary path. (coughs) Not in one particular order, but--let's say, in early

2000s, or late nineties, well, you know, the food revolution was started in

Israel. Most, or vast majority of, of aspiring chefs went abroad to study,

simply because there was no options in Israel at all. I mean, there was some,

usually, how-to-cook hotel cooking schools that were kosher, that were quite

dated, that were based, again, on the kosher version of classical cuisine,

classical French cuisine, which is not something really amazing, so that--in

those days, people went abroad because there was simply no options here. And

then, when food became food, and restaurants, and the whole dining culture

became more

prominent, really high quality cooking schools started to open up, and today

there are quite a few. I mean, today, if you want to get a really solid culinary

education, you can do it in Israel, with places like Danon, for example, or

Bishulim. You mentioned the Galilee Cooking School. I'm not very, you know, know

exact details, but I think what they want to do, in addition to enabling people

up in Galilee, in the north, to have culinary education, to connect with local

cuisine, okay, local ingredients, and, and influences. Which brings me to Asif,

which, again, is something different. Asif is an organization that wants--I'm

not sure how--whether they are a body, let's say,

that wants to, to promote research, want to amass knowledge and information, and

engage people with various aspects of local food culture, that can be, you know,

quite--how should I say it--not exactly mainstream. For example, the bread

culture in the seventeenth century Jerusalem. But, then, when you are at the

expedition, and you read the text, you realize how relevant it is to the modern

day--to understand the contemporary local food culture. So, that's more of a

research body, so I'm not sure if formalization is the right word, but, yes,

we're getting more--because food is so popular, and because food here is so

fascinating, and because there are all these different, you know, Israeli versus

Arabic, and, and immigrant food versus

local food, it's very interesting to, to explore. To, to study, to, to--and, you

know, I'm not sure I'm answering the question exactly, but I think this is

something that is definitely--I remember the first time--and I apologize if I've

already said that.

FERNHEIMER:It's okay, this is the beauty and the benefit of a, of a multi-prong interview.

GUR:Okay, sure, so you can edit it out if you need to. Well, what I was

saying--I remember when my first book came out in 2007, and then 2008 in the

U.S., and I think one year later, in 2009, I had a group of American food

writers brought to Israel for a food tour, which I led. And that was, for me--I

mean, between--between me and myself, I called it the bragging tour.

"Look at us! We can make great wine, we have proper restaurants, we make amazing

olive oil, see how delicious our bread is, how delicious, how cheap--we're as

good as anybody else." I mean, that was kind of, "Look, mommy, no hands." Like

you're a kid driving the bicycle. Today, it's not necessary anymore. You don't

have--I mean, people who come to Israel know that they're in for a really

amazing culinary experience, so, now the interesting question is what it is that

we are cooking, and eating, and growing here, and how it evolves, and how it's

shaped, and what is local, what is local wine, how does it taste? Wine is a

really good example, because, again, thirty years ago, the question is, "Can

Israeli wine makers make decent wine?" The answer, "Yes, of course they can."

Now, let's see if they can--I remember

one of the members of my group, in 2008--a friend actually--she asked, said,

"Yes, we had some really nice cabernet sauvignon, and merlot, but--you know, if

I had drank that wine in California I wouldn't know the difference. I was

disappointed," she said, "That there was no, I mean, local flavor. Like in

Tuscany, taste the wine and you think about pasta, and--" Well, I was kind of--I

was almost irritated, so I said, "Wait. Give us some time, it's too early for

that." But, today, I think she would have been much more fascinated by local

wines that we made, by using local--by exploring Asian varieties, by trying to

find the wine that reflects local terroir, things that we--that's like the

second stage

of the food revolution.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, the second stage kind of coming back to that sense of

locality, and--I mean, there's even that--the next may come from Kentucky, we

have that huge distillation industry, but now there's even distillation

happening here.

GUR:Oh yes.

FERNHEIMER:I think about how Jullius Craft--

GUR:--Jullius--exactly. Wow. Have you tried some of his creations--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, yeah, so, someone we know through our professional circles

is married to someone who was connected with the distillery, and I can't

remember exactly, I think the grandfather was maybe one of the fathers, but we

brought that etrog liqueur, last time we were here, and mainly used it for

cooking, and some cocktails, because it was very strong, but, to me, that kind

of epitomizes this, sort of, local--etrog is not something you're going to find

in the U.S.,

except for maybe in Jewish communities around Sukkot. And then they're so

pesticide ridden you can't turn them into liqueur without also bringing the

chemicals, but they have all kinds of flavors--

GUR:--oh yes, they're beautiful stuff. And there are quite a few of them, and

then, even if you look at the cocktail scene--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, that's new, right?

GUR:Well, what do you mean by new? I mean, it's been around for almost a

decade, and there are quite a few places that won accolades, I think Imperial

Bar was named the best cocktail bar in the Middle East a couple of years ago,

and in--I mean, the craft cocktail is not something that Israelis invented, it's

a trend that was imported, definitely, from maybe New York, or London--but what

they do--I mean, the ingredients they use, local herbs, and even wild, edible

plants, is very local, so, so that's another thing that we can see the, the

changes, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, maybe I just didn't pay attention on previous trips, but I

really was kind of struck in how the craft cocktail wave--

GUR:--same--

FERNHEIMER:--had, had, had arrived here, and this is something that was, kind

of like the mid-2010, 2013, like, in the U.S., this is when this started to

happen, and even impacted the bourbon industry, and helped make it much more

popular. And here, what--you know, it's really interesting to see what are they

doing with arak, and, you know, the local spirits--I'm trying to think what else

would you put--

GUR:--as a local? Well, ouzo is a Greek--arak. Arak is local, but--

FERNHEIMER:--arak, for my students, it's like a, kind of, licorice flavored--

GUR:--it's like pastis, if you know French pastis, or French Pernod. The

whole--we once created an article that we called

the Mediterranean Anise Circle, because you have, you have ouzo in Greek, you

have raki in Turkey, you have pastis and Pernod is Southern France, you have

sambuca in Italy, and, of course, you have arak, which is kind of

Levantine/Lebanese drink of choice. Because, remember, much of this area was

Muslim, so there was not much--

FERNHEIMER:--alcohol--

GUR:--alcohol here, yeah, but arak was definitely--but, again, I'm not sure if

you asked most Israelis what is their favorite spirit, if they have one, they

wouldn't mention arak. Maybe some who came from--you know, have Middle Eastern

origins, there is also North African spirit called boukha that is made, I think

it's similar to arak, but I think it's made from, from figs, but maybe I'm--

no, it's made from figs for sure. But, basically, spirits are not--I mean, they

are becoming part of local food culture, because craft cocktails are popular,

because there are some very interesting artisanal distilleries, but I think

Israel is more of a wine country than a spirit country, I think--and also beer.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

GUR:And it's--yeah. We have--we have tons of microbreweries, crafted beer, and

it's lovely. And have all these funny names like everybody else everywhere else.

FERNHEIMER:Malka and--

GUR:--yeah, yeah, there is one--something with Fat Cat--(Hebrew) Fat Cat--

FERNHEIMER:--Fat Cat?

GUR:Yeah. Yes, and Malka, and Negev, and Shapiro, and Alexander, and--yeah,

there are plenty of those, and people love their beer. Which I think makes

perfect sense, because it's hot here. What can be better than a chilled glass of beer

during our sweltering summer that we're experiencing right now? (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Indeed, indeed. And, when you talk about wine, I mean, when you

connect that to cultural things, how do you explain that--

GUR:--the wine thing? You mean why Israel is a wine country, that was the question--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah.

GUR:Well, it goes back to--to the bible. (Hebrew), the three--excuse me, it's

(Hebrew). Bread--

FERNHEIMER:--oil, bread--

GUR:--the oil, and wine. Three pillars of local food culture in the biblical

time, and in many ways they still are--we should talk about bread right now,

which is, I think, very important.

FERNHEIMER:Let's do it.

GUR:Okay, so--no, let's finish with wine, and switch it to bread.

FERNHEIMER:They go together anyway.

GUR:Yes they do. And so, wine was there

all the time--wine was basically invented somewhere in the area, okay. The first

drunk is in the bible, Noah. You know how it ended.

FERNHEIMER:Not well.

GUR:Not well--well, it depends, (laughs) I mean, they are the whole dynasty of,

of, you know, people born out of that. Whatever. Your, your students are of age,

we can--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, we can talk about--

GUR:--yes, okay. So, anyway--

FERNHEIMER:They're probably not as familiar with that version of Noah.

GUR:They should look it up, yeah, it's easy. So--so wine was--and wine is, of

course, part of the Jewish ritual--really just rituals, they're important, you

bless with wine, you drink wine with Shabbat, and--by the way, it's very

interesting the way Jews that today live in Muslim societies and Muslim

countries, like in North Africa, made their own wine, because they

couldn't--they didn't have--I mean, wine wasn't widely available, and they had

to be kosher, and they

made their own wines in the country where there was almost no wine. But, in

Israel, and I think we talked about it last time, wine, even though Baron

Rothschild, you know, this very famous Jewish philanthropist, who was very

instrumental in creating early settlements in Palestine in late nineteenth to

early twentieth century, and one of the things that his--people he worked with,

the experts, suggested that should happen here in terms of agriculture was

winemaking. The thing is, they, they, they--so, they brought experts from south

of France, which makes sense, because the climate is different, and they planted

local--South French varieties, such as Carignan, which also made sense, because

the climate is similar, the conditions are similar, but they basically planted

it in all the wrong places, mostly. Like, during

--on the coastal plain. And, as one of my wine aficionado friends says, "If they

grow bananas there, they cannot grow wine there. It doesn't go together."

So--and for many years, yes, there was Israeli wine, and it was substandard.

Until, as a part of this amazing food revolution, people restored the whole

thing, and started--it started with Golan Winery, and they explored the

conditions there, and it's actually very good ones, because they have great

soil, and they have sunny days, cool nights, enough cold during the winter--and

they started to make--produce great wine, and sold it--and sold it--I mean,

there wasn't--they charge a lot of money for that, and it was part of it. I

mean, you, you, you can--people were--in the beginning, they were kind of,

"Okay, I'm going to spend 100 shekels on a bottle of wine, it better be French or

Italian." When we still had our magazine, we decided to have an all Israeli wine

exhibition, I think it was about fifteen years ago, and people were laughing at

us. I mean, all these, you know, wine buffs, you know them, they are mostly

male, and very opinionated, and snobbish, they wouldn't come--you know, the

cigar smoking types, that had--

FERNHEIMER:--we have them in Bourbon too--

GUR:--I'm sure they do, I'm sure you do. They have all these wine cabinets, and

they discuss the chateau in Bordeaux they've been to, and the--yeah, exactly.

So, these guys would come to an exhibition to, to taste Israeli wine never, and

it was a huge success, and we had several more, and today, it's completely

obvious. So, that's basically what happened with wine.

FERNHEIMER:So, would you--you attribute this to, kind of--I mean, the Golan

Winery sort of did this move--or a lot of--

GUR:--well, they were the first, they were the first--

FERNHEIMER:--the kind of--

luxurification, I don't know how to turn that into a word. But, but treating it

as a kind of--not necessarily--luxury item means not everyone can afford it,

but, but you know it's quality because we're going to put a very high price on

it, and--

GUR:--well, you put--I mean, it was--

FERNHEIMER:--they're trying to create, like, this image around it as well.

GUR:It wasn't--I mean, wasn't outrageously expensive, but it wasn't--it wasn't

cheap, okay.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. But they also had the whole visitor experience, right?

GUR:Yeah, that came later. I mean, when they just started, the person who

founded it, Shimshon Welner, I think--he was from one of the kibbutzim in the

area, and his vision said, "Listen, if we have the best apples here, we can also

make the best wine. I mean, it's very similar requirements." And when--just as

he started, he said, "I'm going to sell my wine more expensive than the average

bottle on the market, because I want to signal that this is quality-driven wine."

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

GUR:But, after that, I mean, so much has happened since. I mean, today Golan

Winery, it's still

considered a good winery, but I'm not sure it's the best, even among the

commercial ones. And there are literally hundreds of boutique wineries. You

know, from very, very small ones, to kind of average and more, and--and the

selection is really mind blowing. And now, I've, I've been--I've been so, you

know, au courant with wine for the last two years, but when I go to restaurants,

and look at the menu, and the wine menu, there are so many wineries I've never

even heard about before, so it's really booming. But, on the other hand, what

happened--and I think it's good that we mentioned this whole snobbish, cigar

smoking male culture--that also changed. And this is true not just for the wine,

but for the food culture in general. The first generation--I remember the

beginning when we started to write about gastronomy, and fine dining in Israel,

we had a whole issue dedicated to tasting

menus, all these, you know, decadent meals with fifteen courses, and, you know,

these three star Michelin restaurants, et cetera, et cetera, and drinking, you

know, this amazing wine, and taking wine courses, and learning to discern, you

know, the--

FERNHEIMER:--tasting notes, and--

GUR:--yes, exactly. Wow, who has--I don't have patience for that. But then I

look at my kids, who, kind of, grew up. I mean, second generation foodies, they

were born in mid-eighties, the, you know, perfect millennials, in terms of time

frame, and they grew up in a family that was discovering the food culture at the

time, because we--my husband and I were running the magazine, and our life was

very much about food and wine, and they tasted wine since they were very young.

In Israel, you know, they're very relaxed about it, and they grew up having a

great palate. But they don't care, they have no patience

for, you know, wine notes, and tastings, and--but they just sip. Say, "It's a

nice wine. It reminds me of the wine I had last week." So they, they have this

working--and this also applies to food. I mean, they, they, they--even if

they're living on a budget, they would go and buy, you know, sourdough bread,

and good cheese, because their palates, their, their awareness is there, but

they don't have the--they don't have to make a big fuss about it.

FERNHEIMER:Right, because it's less about the performance, and more about just

part of how they actually experience, or engage, with the, sort of, sensory

aspects of food, of wine--

GUR:--exactly. I'm sorry, I just checked the--

FERNHEIMER:--no, no, it's fine--

GUR:--and bread.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, I was going to get us back to bread. I also--I'm just making a

verbal, mental note for us to talk about the, kind of, touring industry, and

food culture as a travel, kind of, industry,

which--you know, you talk about "the bragging tour", but, also, you know, you

spent a lot of time working on Al HaShulchan, and creating, you know, taste

making, and shaping, the way that people began to think about and consider food

through this pretty influential publication, and then, also, taking that to the

experiential level of travel as well. But let's talk about--

GUR:--let's talk about travel before you forget. So, first of all, again--

FERNHEIMER:--and this is, like, a new part of--you know, part of the

new--Israel is very well known for its tourist industry, but this is a kind of--

GUR:--yeah, and, you know, again, I'm taking you back--I'm sure I've already

quoted that, but it's relevant, the first sentence in my book, which I stole

from a very good friend, Bonnie Stern, the famous Canadian food writer, who was

bringing people on culinary tours here before it became trendy, and the first

sentence in my first book is "Nobody comes to Israel for the food."

And I just couldn't help it, it was such a perfect way to start my book that I

stole that sentence, and I was--I always think about it during my consequent

lectures, the talks I give to, to Bonnie Stern's group, tell her how I stole my

first sentence. So, anyway, nobody did come to Israel for the food in those

days, and today they absolutely do, there are even food travel agencies, I mean

people--travel agencies specializing in food tours, there are food tours for the

locals. You go to Levinsky Market, and you see, like, simultaneously four, five

tasting tours taking place at the same time, and I think the vendors there make

most of their money just, you know, catering to food tours rather than selling

their stuff to regular shoppers. So, it became a huge thing, and it--it's a part

of a larger phenomenon of

food tourism that happens around the world, and Israel is part of it, but also I

think it's part of the--listen, one of the most highly rated TV shows is

MasterChef, or a similar version of MasterChef. This--they are hugely popular, I

mean, people are--Israelis are obsessed with food, and they love to travel for

food. So, it's both incoming tourism that is more and more interested in food,

and some of them--some of the tourists come specifically for the food, for a

food and wine experience, but also--also the locals. Yeah, it's definitely

happening, and--but, again, I'm not sure it's an exception. You've been telling

me about the Bourbon Trail, or--

FERNHEIMER:

--yeah--

GUR:--I mean, people are--because food, and wine, and drinks, became very much

part of the lifestyle.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, and when do you date that shift? Like, you talk about your own

children, kind of perfect millennials, as a second generation, so, you

know--here, first you have a shift of people actually being willing to go to a

restaurant and spend money, right, which--

GUR:--willing or able--

FERNHEIMER:--or able, right, economically, and that's probably--what, in the

eighties, would you say? Eighties--

GUR:--again, it's a process, but, in the seventies--sixties, seventies--people

didn't go out to restaurants in general. I mean, on a regular basis. It was

something reserved for wealthy--

FERNHEIMER:--special occasion--

GUR:--or very, very special. And even if--not even for special occasions, there

were certain restaurants that were popular with certain groups,

but it was not part of the Israeli lifestyle as it is today. And it did start to

change, I think, in the--I think it started to change when people started to

travel abroad, when people felt when the economy improved, and people had more

money, and people felt it's fine to, you know, to have a good life, we call it

in Hebrew. And--yeah, and, again, I don't think in that we're different from

other places, I mean--maybe in Israel the change of the society. It was

very--(coughs)--Israeli in the fifties, sixties, even seventies, was a Spartan,

very socialist-oriented society. The simplicity in, kind of, you know, it's the

(Hebrew), I'm not sure how to translate it into English. Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Ah, (both laugh) that's a good one. We'll leave that to the translator.

GUR:I mean living simply, not--making due with, with the basics.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, and--

GUR:--not being decadent, not being, you know--

FERNHEIMER:--there was literal austerity, I mean, there was rations.

GUR:It was, it was early fifties, that was the time when so many immigrants

came here, so--yes, and it was rationing and--for a few years. But, even later,

when I came to Israel, it was mid-seventies. But I'm trying to think

about--well, we were new immigrants, who obviously didn't have a lot of money,

our--I think I remember the first time I went to a restaurant, it was, like,

two, three years after I arrived to Israel, it was a Chinese restaurant--I

probably wouldn't have been able to eat the food today, but then, it was a

revelation. You know, there were egg rolls in this red sauce, and all the

experience of being in the restaurant was very new, and very exciting, for me, so.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. (Gur laughs) I'm just thinking

back, I mean, and--just how much those kinds of cuisines have changed too,

right, the commercialization of, of different cuisines, as they move outside of

their place of origin.

GUR:Exactly, but, again, it's the same everywhere. Israel is not unique in that sense.

FERNHEIMER:I guess, while we're on the subject of, of--

GUR:--bread--

FERNHEIMER:--food tours, and traveling--we're going to get to bread--you know,

tell me, how did your--you know, you worked as an editor for a long time, and

then you published these wonderful books, and then you--you kind of went from

food lover to food expert. And you know--I know you do lectures, and guided

tours yourself sometimes. How was-what--tell me about that transition for you.

And, of course, the whole time you've mentioned your kids, you're raising these,

you know, young kids, and there's, there's some questions about work-life

balance, I wouldn't ask, but--

GUR:--wow, it's a lot, a lot of things--

FERNHEIMER:--I'm just laying it out, kind of where I want to go, or at least,

you know, kind of guide us along the way, but to talk about that transition,

from being someone who, kind of, gets into food, almost by accident, and then,

you know, you are one of the experts now people come to talk to about Israel,

among other kinds of food.

GUR:Yeah, it's still-it's still sometimes kind of weird. (both laugh) Well, as

I--as I think we had told the last time, it did happen by accident, and, in the

early years of our magazine, yes, we did have two small kids, with one year gap

between them, almost worse than twins. I think they call it Irish twins?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, I've heard that expression.

GUR:Yeah, fifteen months' gap. And producing--

FERNHEIMER:--and both you and your husband were working together--

GUR:--yes, we were working together, my husband is actually--he's the boss,

he's the punisher, he's in charge of all the serious stuff, money, and hiring

and firing. And, of course, he was my teacher. He's a journalist, he's a

visionary, he's--I mean, everything I know about journalism, and working in a

magazine, I learned from him. So yeah, in the beginning, it was work, work,

work. Nothing--not much ever anything else. We did travel a lot because of what

we did, we're often invited to different, exciting places, which was nice--

FERNHEIMER:--how did you manage that with small kids--

GUR:--we sometimes went--just one of us, and sometimes we would find--it was

when the kids were a bit older, so we could leave them with a sitter, or with my

parents. But I think I started--like, my international career, started when I

published my first--authored my first book.

FERNHEIMER:In early 2007.

GUR:And very soon afterwards, I was, kind of, sourced by the Foreign Ministry

of Israel, and--they arranged, like, a lecture tour for me, and then another one,

and then people started to--I was a little bit more familiar with these circles,

so people would come to me. So, I--I never expected it to happen, I just wrote a

book, and--I don't remember if I told you last time, I wasn't even sure I would

be the one writing it. But I ended up writing it, and I'm really happy that I

did, because--first of all, because it was completely different, and extremely

scary experience. I mean, doing scary things is good for your psyche. And advice

for the young, do things that scare you, because--well, you know, editors and

writers are two different species. And I'm very happy when I'm editing, or

translating. I'm completely terrified, paralyzed, with fear when I'm writing,

especially in English, which is not my first language. So--and I was writing

about something that was--I mean, Israeli

food was nothing. I mean, it was one book--again, I talked about it, ten years

prior to mine, so I was terrified. But I'm really happy I did that, and--

FERNHEIMER:--and it was for an international audience--

GUR:--it was, I mean--

FERNHEIMER:--so it was not just--translating in terms of, you know--English is

what you're--which language you speak, how many?

GUR:I speak three. Three and half, I have some French, but I'd probably speak three.

FERNHEIMER:Amazing, also. So--

GUR:--not for Israelis, by the way. Three languages is very, very--

FERNHEIMER:--no, but for--in the U.S., it's pretty uncommon--

GUR:--yeah, I know, I know--

FERNHEIMER:--for a lot of folks to speak more than one language, more than

English. So, yeah, you're writing for this international audience, in English,

about something that very few people--so you, your background in translation,

now it's not just--it's not just word for word--it's never word for word when

you're translating.

GUR:No, it's not.

FERNHEIMER:But it's a kind of cultural translation,

also, to explain--

GUR:--yes, of course, and that was part of the fascination I had with the

projects, because it was like trying to allow people to look at the culture that

I call my own through their own--through their eyes, to see how it looks. You

know, I remember giving one of the lectures, and, during one of my talks, I was

with this American guy, who was working for the Israeli consulate, and was--he

was my chauffeur, he took me to these talks in Jewish communities, and I was

talking about Tel Aviv, I had this lovely lecture about Tel Aviv, you know, the

capitol of everything Israeli, including Israeli food, even though Jerusalem is

the official capitol. And he said, "You know, you should mention the fact that

the beach is right in downtown Tel Aviv. Because, for most people, I mean, you

have to travel to the sea. In Israel, it's like, Dizengoff, Ben Yehuda, boom,

you're at the beach. Three streets from the

main drag, you are on the beach. And that is why I'm telling you that, because,

for me, that was a really good point of something that I take for granted, for

me, of course. And that's the way it is in Tel Aviv. But to be able to explain

to people who do not live here, who do not experience what Tel Aviv feels like,

you need to mention that. And then, just an example of things of looking at

things from a foreigner's point of few, how--how there is this--in literature,

there is this device--and I always have a problem

pronouncing--defamiliarization. That's exactly that. And it always fascinated

me. So, yes, I did make this transition, very happy I did, because it made my

life much more interesting, and took me to interesting places, and allowed me to

meet interesting people, and,

you know, when you do that, when you talk about Israeli food to international

audience, it forces you to look even deeper, to try to, you know, to, to kind

of, distill the insights, and deeper understanding of the subject, so,

intellectually, it was very rewarding. Yeah, and there were various--one, I

think, some of the most fascinating ones was a series of tours I did for the

Marks & Spencer, which is a very famous department store chain in Britain, that

are very, very good in food, they have, like, the whole--

FERNHEIMER:--they have great teas--

GUR:--amazing food department, and a lot of prepared food, and they approached

me about fifteen years ago, I think, for a tour for their R&D team, it was

something called Inspirational tours, and I was very flattered, not personally

even, but because they usually would go to places like, I don't know, Tokyo,

Paris, Tuscany, and Tel Aviv, Israel, at the time, it was quite--it was a

compliment that they even considered us, and it was very successful, so we had

about six to seven tours like that, with different teams each time, focusing on

something else--

FERNHEIMER:--how many people were on the tours--

GUR:--very small, like, four or five. It was very small, and they ate--I mean,

they were very, very serious about what they did, it was the first time I

actually saw people spitting food, like you would spit wine when you taste--

FERNHEIMER:--oh, wow--

GUR:--because other--yeah, otherwise you wouldn't have been able to--

FERNHEIMER:--to eat--

GUR:--to eat so much. Because, every time we went to a restaurant, they would

order the whole menu, because they wanted to taste as much as possible. They

weren't gluttons, they were professionals--and very slim, by the way, most of

them. So--yeah, it was fascinating because of the things that they paid

attention to.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, so, what did

you learn from them when you were talking about the defamiliarization, and

looking at it from someone else's eyes?

GUR:It's been a while ago, I need to remember lots of stuff I guess. For example--

FERNHEIMER:--I want to go on one of these tours, by the way--

GUR:--yeah, yeah, it's fascinating, and--you know, because they are so--I mean

they are so well-informed, they really know their stuff. The ingredients that

fascinated them--for example, they were all fascinated with zhoug.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

GUR:And they practiced the whole tour trying to say the word. "Zhoug, zhoug."

Zhoug, for your students, is a very famous local--

FERNHEIMER:--it's like a hot sauce, kind of--

GUR:--hot sauce, yes, that's the best definition, but it's--

FERNHEIMER:--condiment--

GUR:--condiment. Precisely. It comes from the Yemenite cuisine, and it's made

from a combination of chilies and cilantro. And it's the perfect combination, if

you ask me.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

GUR:By the way, this combination of chili and cilantro

is to be found when we're talking about the Mediterranean, and encircled there

is a international cilantro circle, that encompasses from Mexico to Georgia to

Thailand to Yemen, and all of these cuisines that have this very generous use of

Cilantro and chilies, because Cilantro is a cooling factor, and when you mix it

with chilies, it's amazing, and they just fell in love with that. What else, I

don't remember. I should, I should think about it harder.

FERNHEIMER:So, when you were designing these tours for them, what was important

for you rot think about, knowing what their goals were, and, you know, trying to

expose them--like, how did you think about which restaurants to choose, what

kinds of ingredients you wanted to show--

GUR:--well, then it was, it was pretty clear, because they were professionals,

and they told me what they were looking for. They said, "

Listen, on this tour, there are people from the spice department and the bread

department, so we want to--

FERNHEIMER:--oh, okay, understood--

GUR:--see as many bakeries as possible, and to see all the possible, you know,

spices and spice mixtures, but, when we're talking about general audience, which

I also did quite a few times, I would say variety. I would say focusing on both

Jewish and Arabic traditions, not just, you know, high-end restaurants, lots of

street food, and market, and, for me, also agriculture. And I'm not sure we

talked about that, but this is really one of the pillars of the local food

culture. The, the things that grow here, where they grow, how they grow, and I

always took them to, , of course,

food market, but also to the farmers market in Tel Aviv port, because, farmers

market is interesting, you know, farmers market, let's say, in the U.S., are

mainly to enable the customer to buy directly from the grower, to skip this very

long span of, you know--food travels for so long from place to place. In Israel

this is not necessarily a problem--that local farmers market, in many ways,

enables us to taste new things, or which kind--not necessarily new, it could be

heirloom variety of eggplants or tomatoes, but often niche producers would

start--would bring their produce first to the farmers market to test it out, and

lots of things that we've never seen before would sell for the first time at the

farmers market, so I think it's a fascinating place to learn about Israel as a

country, so I always did that as well.

FERNHEIMER:What

are some of the examples of the things--like, new things. I mean, I remember

reading about the tomatoes that they grow in the south, like, they're so--

GUR:--yeah, yeah, yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--they actually made a tomato that's too sweet--

GUR:--exactly--

FERNHEIMER:--that people said--

GUR:--no, there is no such thing as too sweet tomatoes. For me--I love those,

desert candy, desert candies I call them. For example, berries. You know, the

blueberries, and raspberries, and--the berries, is the thing, that, for me,

it's, it's the taste of childhood. I mean, I grew up in Riga, we would go up in

summer to pick them up in the forests, so--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, you think about them as the, kind of, forest, lush, kind of

cooler--you know, and so--

GUR:--yes--

FERNHEIMER:--thinking about them here in Israel is kind of dichotomous.

GUR:Exactly, yeah. But they do grow, mainly in--up in the north, so--I think I

saw them for the first time in the farmers market. What else--lots of

them already became part of, you know, local mainstream. For example, the famous

Baladi eggplants, you know what I mean?

FERNHEIMER:Those are the round--

GUR:--the round ones. I call them three-dimensional fans, they have, like,

skirts. So, they were--again, some we've been hearing about. Baladi is named

from, in Arabic, from the village, but I think it usually refers to heirloom, or

local variety, and they are virtually seedless, and quite sweet and wonderful,

and I think the first time I saw them was the farmers market, now they're available--

FERNHEIMER:--in the Shufersal--

GUR:--exactly, yeah. Generally speaking--

FERNHEIMER:--Shufersal is like Kroger--

GUR:--eggplants are very, very central in local cooking. This is about one of

the things you were asking before, what was kind of defamiliarization, for me,

eggplant is, like, next to tomato,

the most important vegetable for Americans, it's kind of--yeah, somebody once

told me she mainly uses it, she buys it, she peels it, and use as a sponge for

flower arrangement, because you can stick--

FERNHEIMER:--the eggplant--

GUR:--the eggplant, yes!

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

GUR:Because it's a sponge, it kind of makes sense. I mean, you can also cook

with that, but--yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, it's not something that you see, like, on a regular menu, for sure.

GUR:I know, I know. I think--one of the things about Israeli food--that we

have, like, trendy vegetables all the time. So, what is the trendiest vegetable

right now? I remember a while ago I was working on some projects where I asked

people at one of the Facebook groups, you know, huge foodie communities, "What

is the trendiest vegetable right now?" And there were a whole bunch of answers.

For example, kohlrabi.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Another vegetable you don't see very often.

GUR:Yeah, and, and I fell in love with kohlrabi.

And I have it all--I mean, not now, because it's kind of--it's not as juicy as

in winter, it's not it's best right now, but kohlrabi is kind of weird

vegetable, but so great because you can use it for salads, when it's fresh and

extremely crunchy, it's like a cross between an apple and a cucumber, in terms

of flavor. Or you can, you can roast it, it's beautiful roasted. One of the

iconic local recipes is whole kohlrabi cooked in a tabun, on coals, and it gets,

like, caramelized. It's absolutely spectacular. But also like beets, and, of

course, tomatoes. Eggplants are old news already. What else was there--like, the

trendiest ones. Edible--wild edible plants that we talked about last

time.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, my cousin brought hibiscus stuffed with cheese?

GUR:Yeah, that's, that's the thing they sell at Levinsky Market, yeah. Yeah, I

know, because--they started selling these small hibiscus flowers at the farmers

market, and then they stuffed it with cheese. I wouldn't call it, like, you

know, mainstream Israeli recipe, but it's--he probably brought it from Levinsky,

I'm pretty sure.

FERNHEIMER:It was something new I hadn't seen before--

GUR:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--and I wasn't sure if this was some part of trend that you were

talking about before.

GUR:I wouldn't talk about trend, but you've--I've seen it around, especially in

the Balkan Deli, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Yeah, you know, we've talked about agriculture, we've talked

about nationalist stuff, what do you think--you know, you talk about the

relationship with Jewishness, Jewish cooking to Israeli cooking, talk to me a

little bit about that. I mean, talk about the--you kind of talked about Arab

cooking, and Jewish cooking--

how do they come together, do they come together, where do they fit within this

broader envelope.

GUR:They are part of it. I mean, as we discussed last time, it's basically--if

you look at the--let's look at--obviously, top ten dishes from, you know, the

Israeli--Israeli iconic dishes. Go. You start.

FERNHEIMER:Oh gosh. You're turning the interview the tables on me, but let's

see. For me, when I think--

GUR:--don't think, just--

FERNHEIMER:--falafel. Hummus. Jachnun. Malawach--

GUR:--okay--okay, let's stop here.

FERNHEIMER:Couscous.

GUR:Okay, five, great. So, you have hummus and falafel, which are Middle

Eastern local Levantine, and then very naturally you switched to malawach,

jachnun, and couscous. Malawach and jachnun are from Yemen, couscous is from

North Africa. Here you go. I mean, there are certain dishes, from certain Jewish

cuisines, especially those close to us geographically, that

became part of the Israeli mainstream cooking.

FERNHEIMER:Sabich.

GUR:Sabich of course. And shakshuka, again, from North Africa. Bourekas from

the Balkans. Kubbeh from Iraq or Kurdistan.

FERNHEIMER:Marak kubbeh.

GUR:Marak kubbeh, or called fried kubbeh--yeah, kubbeh soup--

FERNHEIMER:--especially the beet one--

GUR:--right, yeah, and then the sour one, in Jerusalem, hamusta--

FERNHEIMER:--also very popular in the--also--Arab cooking has kubbeh as well.

GUR:Yeah, but a different one. Kubbeh--kubbeh is a collective name for

dumplings made from bulgar. Remind me to talk about bread and wheat, it's very important.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, we're kind of--we're getting--

GUR:--getting there, okay. So, kubbeh is a collective name for all of these

dumplings, and there are a whole variety of them. There is--the most famous one

is fried kubbeh, like the torpedo shape that you have at the--

that you find at the Arabic Middle Eastern restaurants. They're crunchy, a bit

look like falafel, but they are not falafels, they are usually stuffed with

meat, so that's--that's one kind, the other kind which I really love is called

kubbeh nayeh, which means raw kubbeh, which is like a middle eastern version of

steak tartare, it's raw meat, usually lamb or goat meat, very, very finely

minced, and mixed with bulgur and spices, and then shaped into a dumpling. It's

delicious. So--and then there is kubbeh--cooked kubbeh, which is popular,

especially, in Iraq and Kurdistan, and very, very popular in Jewish, Iraq, and

Kurdish cuisine, and this is the--the kubbeh looks like a love child of

kneidlach and kreplach, actually, it's funny, because it's--the shell is made of

a very fine variety of

bulgur wheat, and the stuffing is meat, so it's a little bit like kreplach, and

a little bit like kneidlach, but, of course, it tastes quite different, but

that's, I think, one of the reasons why it became so popular in Israel, because

it kind of tapped in, you know, the Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi palates, yeah.

So--so basically, that's what happening with Jewish cuisine, every now and then

another Jewish ethnic dish becomes all the rage, and it's being incorporated in

the mainstream Israeli cooking, but, as I also last time, I think, it is--we are

seeing many, many more local dishes, as in knafeh, and, yeah the--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, talk to me about the knafeh explosion, I feel like this is

also something in the last--like, you didn't used to see knafeh on Dizengoff

fifteen years ago.

GUR:No, no.

But, well it's cause of--first of all, for your students, knafeh is a Middle

Eastern Levantine dessert made of layers of shredded filo, which looks like tiny

vermicelli, made from filo dough, that are--and, in between the two layers of

dough, in between, there is a layer of local cheese, which is a little bit like

mozzarella, very mild, and slightly elastic, and it's usually made in

proper--knafeh would be made, you know, to order--

FERNHEIMER:--hot--

GUR:--in a little pan, hot, and then, before it's served, actually, it's--in

the dish itself, there is no sweetness at all, but then it's doused with sweet

syrup when it's still hot. And when it's made really well, it's delicious. And

you used to see knafeh a lot--I mean, Israelis are very familiar with that, but

you mainly saw it at the markets, usually at Middle Eastern markets.

It was part of, like, the baklava culture, and then it was, again, rediscovered

by local chefs, made into a trendy dish. There is--used to be--I don't think it

exists anymore, there was a place in Jaffa where they served knafeh that was,

like--it was an all knafeh place, but it wasn't necessarily sweet, most of the

dishes were savory, because you can take the same idea of layers of shredded

filo dough, which is crunchy and delicious, and stuff it with, I don't know,

spinach and cheese, or, you know, something that is paid for, like a main dish,

rather than dessert. And today we have all these lovely knafeh places--it's like

the next malabi, malabi was very popular, like thirty years ago, now it's

knafeh, probably knafeh is on the way out, and--you know what is the latest trend?

FERNHEIMER:No, tell me.

GUR:I think it's Liali Beirut, Liali Beirut, in Arabic,

means, "the night of Beirut". Very famous Lebanese dessert, made from--let me

refresh my memory, just to be sure I'm not--

FERNHEIMER:--(laughs)--misinforming--

GUR:--right. Let me show you. This is the original Liali Beirut, it should be

in the Christmas, I think--yes. Here we are.

Semolina and cream cake in saffron syrup. It looks like--it looks a little bit

like a cheesecake, but it's made from--actually from cream, and this recipe is a

combination of cream and mascarpone, but you can use different--there is a

semolina pudding, and then, on top of it, there is a layer of cream, and--and

then a layer of ground pistachios, and then everything is doused with saffron

syrup, and there is a secret ingredient that you must use to make a proper--it

should have Mastika, I think--yeah. To make a proper Liali Beirut, you need to

use Mastika, this is Mastika, which is made from resin, and it comes mostly from

Greece, and it has this very unique--

FERNHEIMER:--stretchy--

GUR:--no, you, you, you--

it, it can be used, you know, as a masticator--as chewing gum, but what they do,

they crush it with some sugar, and it adds a very delicate but distinctive aroma

in the dish. This is what it looks like, before we--okay, so. They cannot see

anything, so make sure to show them photos.

FERNHEIMER:No, I'll take a picture after, so it won't credit the photo.

GUR:Okay. So--and, I've seen it, and it's--I mean, I knew, I knew it through

Zuzu, through the person I worked with on this book, who is a Galilean chef, but

now I've started seeing it in, in restaurants around the country, and even

during one of the culinary TV shows, one of the competitors made her version of,

of the dish, so I think it's on the way becoming the next trendy dessert. We'll

have to see.

FERNHEIMER:I'll have to be on the lookout for it, I don't think I've seen it

this trip. That doesn't mean anything, this is a different kind of trip.

GUR:Oh, by the way, this is--what I was talking, this is the kubbeh nayeh, but

that's--in the Galilean-Greece recipe,

it's--

FERNHEIMER:--they show with the meat on top, I see--

GUR:--they--yes, they make it with quick ragu of lamb and onions, and they

serve the dumpling, the kubbeh nayeh, is kind of cold, and the ragu is hot, and

it's, like, beautiful interplay of textures and temperatures and flavors, it's

really spectacular.

FERNHEIMER:Wow. So, we were talking about the, kind of, reach of ethnic

cuisines, and how--which one becomes the next thing. So, if you had to put--you

started with malabi, and these are all kind of traditional Arab desserts, malabi.

GUR:Well, malabi is, is a little bit trickier, because there is something.

Malabi you have both in local food culture, but also in the Balkan food culture.

So, malabi, proper malabi, was brought to Israel by Balkan--by immigrants from

Bulgaria and Turkey, mostly. But it's sort of connected to local malabia, which

is very, very

similar.

FERNHEIMER:Okay, so that's why--

GUR:--yeah, but knafeh is definitely--

FERNHEIMER:--local.

GUR:It's Palestinian, it's one of the hallmarks of Palestinian cooking, and

Liali Beirut is Lebanese, so, you know--by the way, do you remember last time we

talked about shanklish, the yogurt?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, yeah.

GUR:Suddenly, they're talking about it on TV. I think that's also the next--

FERNHEIMER:--big thing--

GUR:--yes, and I've seen recipes to make shanklish at home, so--yeah, it's

going to be, I think, very trendy soon.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. Actually, my husband reminded me, he had tried it, we--I don't

remember where we got it, but we had had it, and I had forgotten.

GUR:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:I haven't seen it like that, I guess, usually--he's seen it in a

cone shape?

GUR:Yeah, yeah, it's in a cone shape, yeah. That's the first time I saw it--but

this was the best one--

FERNHEIMER:--it was very tasty--

GUR:--it was really good.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. So--so, yeah, one thing that we kind of briefly touched on

last time is something that kind of, in your mind, haven't quite caught on. I

mean, there's a huge Ethiopian Jewish

population, and yet you don't see a ton of Ethiopian restaurants, and--

GUR:--you're right--

FERNHEIMER:--I don't see, even in the markets, it's not like--like you can go

to the markets, and someone will sell you malawach with an egg and schug, and

you can buy it, and eat it on the street as you walk through, but no one's

selling you injera. Actually, for a short while, you could see injera in certain

parts, but I haven't seen them this trip. Talk to me about why you think that

hasn't been--

GUR:--I don't know--

FERNHEIMER:--so quick to uptick, because--

GUR:--maybe because--maybe--listen--again, it's just a theory, I'm, I'm, I'm

not sure I can defend it, but they pretty much--I mean, for a cuisine to become

popular with people who are not part of the Jewish community, you need to bring

it out there. How bourekas became what they are today, there was this famous

place in Jaffa called Sami Bourekas that every--all of Tel Aviv went to, and

then it became

a chain, and then it became, you know, part of the Israeli local staple. And how

did shakshuka become famous, almost an identical story. Somehow, even though

there were a couple of Ethiopian restaurants, they didn't catch on with the

audience. And Ethiopian community is still pretty isolated, so--maybe that's the

reason that it never became, you know, popular with Israelis, because, in terms

of the flavor, I think people would--I mean, I had injera a couple of times, and

I liked it, and it's quite similar to Yemenite--

FERNHEIMER:--what's that bread, I know exactly what you're talking about--

GUR:--lahoh.

FERNHEIMER:Lahoh.

GUR:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:It even looks like that--

GUR:--it even looks like lahoh, it's just made from a different kind of, of

grain. But, you know, think about the Russian community.

the largest ethnic community now in Israel are those people who came from the

forests, mostly Russia, but also from other places, Ukraine, of course, of the

former Soviet Union, the Russian speaking community, they do have a cuisine, and

they are some Russian restaurants, but they are mostly for Russians. I mean,

very few Israelis go there, even though every now and there is a, you know, very

favorable review about Russian owned restaurants, there is one called Viki on

Ben Yehuda Street, but still, if you go there, you only see Russian, you only

hear Russian, and you mostly see people who are immigrants. It didn't become

trendy with--with Israelis of other communities, so it's--maybe it will happen,

I don't think so, because it's--it's--again, it's quite foreign to the local

vibe. Which I cannot say about Ethiopian people.

Ethiopian cuisine is, again, very similar to Yemenite ones, why shouldn't we,

like, I don't know. Frankly, I don't know. But, you know, these things can

change. For example, if some very talented and enterprising local chef would

open an Ethiopian restaurant that would become trendy, and there would be a

certain dish that people would really be excited about, it could change. This is

how these things happen, so it might happen in the future, possibly, I don't know--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah. It's interesting to hear you talk about, you know, the

Russian speaking community, and--you know, you think about the kind of Balkan

connection, because I think about Georgian cuisine, and how popular that is

here. When you see a lot of--

GUR:--but, again, I mean, Georgian--most of the Georgian community arri--a

large part of Georgian--Georgian Jewish community arrived in Israel in the seventies--

FERNHEIMER:

--yeah--

GUR:--and it took decades for that cuisine to become popular, and it did become

popular after a few Georgian--like, high profile Georgian restaurants opened up,

and these amazing Georgian bakeries.

FERNHEIMER:Now we're going to get to the bread.

GUR:Yes, okay. So--(both laugh)--

FERNHEIMER:--I said, "Talk to me about the Georgian bakeries, and let's make

our segue to bread--

GUR:--so, Georgian bakeries. You know, Israelis are very fond of their carbs,

and whatever--if you look at this, you know, when you started to name dishes

that are the iconic Israeli dishes--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--we didn't--I didn't say pita, but, of course, you eat most of--

GUR:--yeah, there is a lot of bread based products here--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

GUR:--Israelis are very fond of, of bread, and bread products, and pastry,

cakes. But bread--grains in general, and bread--if you'll think about the seven

species, you know, the concept of big stuff that grows here, that is very

good--there are five fruits and two grains, no vegetables at all. Are you

okay with noise, is it, you know, bothering you?

FERNHEIMER:I mean, could be turned down a little.

GUR:(Hebrew) Sorry about that, we're cooking lunch--my husband is cooking

lunch. So, yes--where were we?

FERNHEIMER:Five fruits and two grains.

GUR:Yeah, and two grains.

FERNHEIMER:So it's--

GUR:--and no vegetables at all. So, this is, like, the basis of local food

culture. Why bread is so central. You know, when you think about the bible,

bread and food are synonymous. Okay, when Adam and Eve are expelled from the

garden of Eden, they are told by God that they--"In the sweat of thy brow, thou

shalt eat bread." Bread is food, and food is bread--why is that? Very simple

mathematics of local climate. We have the rainy season, and an arid season.

A long, long, long summer, and shorter winter that is rainy and cool, and this

is where we grow most of the stuff you eat. And the great thing about bread is

that--and grains are that you can plant them in autumn, they grow during the

rainy season, and they're ready to be harvested in early summer, and then you

can store them. You can store the grains almost indefinitely, and if your family

has a sack of grains, they won't go hungry. And this is very, very, very basic

and central part of local--of local--when I talk about local, I talk about the

whole Middle East, and I talk about traditional agriculture. Rice only arrived

in the area in the nineteenth century, okay. The, the basic carb, and the side dish,

is, is bulgur, bulgur wheat, which is, which is part boiled, cracked wheat

grains that are made in a myriad of ways. They are made--they are used as--you

can make a pilaf with them, you can make tabbouleh, which is a beautiful herb

salad with grains. You can make the aforementioned kubbeh. All of them are made

with bulgur, bulgur is, like, at the very core, and the basic eating style in

the bible was having flatbread--wasn't exactly pita, it was more like laffa

flatbread, and mopping it up in some maybe olive oil, or maybe some ancient

version of hummus, or some kind of other mash made with spices or legumes,

and--and wiping it with a piece of bread. So, bread is very, very central, still

is, and, if we go back to the mathematics of local climate, this is--this is one

of my favorite food stories.

There is something called freekeh in our food culture, freekeh is green-toasted

cracked green wheat. And it tells a fascinating story about local agriculture,

especially in the olden times, because, as I said, grains and wheat is paramount

importance, and it ripens during spring. And, in spring--we usually have lovely

weather in spring, but sometimes we'll have these hot spells, called--I'm sure

you know, khamsin, or sharav, when the temperatures leap from very pleasant

seventies, eighties Fahrenheit, to nineties and one hundreds, and now, of

course, with climate change, it's even worse, but even in the olden times, in

the biblical times, they would have that, and if that spell would be very

extreme, it happened, and during very sensitive time in the--the process of

ripening of the wheat, it could

virtually burn out the harvest. And, to ensure themselves against such a

calamity, the ancient farmers would go into the fields, reap some of the young,

tender green wheat, toast it on an open fire, crack it, and use it very much as

you would use couscous or bulgur. And, and, today, of course, it's not made,

because it's still produced, it's very expensive, at ten times more expensive

than regular wheat, because it's--you know, it's time consuming--

FERNHEIMER:--a delicacy--

GUR:--it's a delicacy, and it's quite labor intensive process, and, of course,

it's made, not because of--as an insurance against calamity, but because it

tastes great, which is, by the way, true of most of foods we enjoy today, from

sausage to food preserves to cured fish, et cetera, et cetera, they're all made

to--and, of course, -----------(??), because there was no refrigeration, that's

how you preserve

milk. If you want to have a look at how it was made in those days.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, this is an amazing book, and--

GUR:--yeah, this is the book I created--

FERNHEIMER:--was it sold in the U.S. as well?

GUR:It's currently--I, I think they're working on the Amazon page, currently

it's sold only in Israel, mostly in the places frequented by--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, I want to get--

GUR:--Christian pilgrims.

FERNHEIMER:This is, I want to--yeah, you had mentioned this in the last

interview, and I--whoever did your photography is amazing.

GUR:Yeah, it's amazing, I think it is one of the most beautiful books I've produced.

FERNHEIMER:This is--I'm just going to--the title is The Galilee Table, and it

was written with Yousef Zuzu Hanna, and you were telling me about the--he worked

with his--wife, or am I confusing two stories?

GUR:No, I don't think--

FERNHEIMER:--there was another restaurant, it was a couple of pharmacists--

GUR:--no, no, that's Ezba, that's a different one--

FERNHEIMER:--okay--

GUR:--yeah, I just want to show you the photo of the freekeh, it should be in the--

FERNHEIMER:

--yeah, I've had freekeh, it's very tasty, it has a kind of nutty quality, and--

GUR:--exactly, exactly. Okay, so--wait a second--what happened to it--here we

go. This is how it's reaped, with a sickle--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

GUR:--like in the old times. And this is how it's toasted, on open fire. You

need to toast it because it, it will spoil, it's very tender--

FERNHEIMER:--fresh--

GUR:--very fresh.

FERNHEIMER:So these are page 156,157,158, from The Galilee Table.

GUR:Yeah--this--and they're made in the--we call it (Hebrew), in Arabic it's

(Arabic), which is a valley in upper Galilee that is brought--broke down in

family plots, mostly owned by local villagers, and they still work the land with

traditional--according to traditional practices, so they still

make freekeh--this is one of the best places to see how freekeh is produced, it

usually happens in early May, if you're around, you'll be able to see it, and

they say that, even though freekeh is now made, it's made around the world, even

in Australia, but the best one is, of course, made manually like in the old

times. So, yes, bread is very, very central in our whole food culture, and I

think Israeli bread, by the way, one of the most delicious things to have in

Israel, I wonder if you think the same, is bread.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, the bakeries, I mean--talk to me a little bit about the

evolution of commercial bread and barkers in Israel--of course, I'm cheating,

because I had an interview with the most well-known bakers yesterday, and--

GUR:--yes, you know something--I'm not sure I can--

FERNHEIMER:--but I'm curious to hear you tell that story of Israel--and you

mentioned rice didn't get here until when, you said?

GUR:Until nineteenth century, I didn't know that either.

FERNHEIMER:Wow, that's really--

GUR:--yeah, and it

was considered luxury--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah.

GUR:So, when I was working with Zuzu on the recipes, and we tried to figure

out--we kind of said, "You know, rice based dishes are usually for special

occasions." It kind of--even though today rice is--

FERNHEIMER:--common--

GUR:--very common, and very inexpensive, it's still--in the traditional

Levantine cuisine, it's, it's used more for festive dishes, whereas bulgur wheat

is very, kind of, every day, every day food. It's different if you--and this is

one of the things when you look at the differences, let's say, between Levantine

and Middle Eastern cooking and Iraqi and Persian cooking. Persian is all about

the rice.

FERNHEIMER:It's all about rice, yeah.

GUR:It's all about rice. Rice is the basic carb. In original Levantine culture,

bulgur wheat is the basic carb, just as couscous in North Africa. So it's like,

bread is more evident

here. Rice is imported, bulgur is local. Zuzu told me that his grandmother used

to make bulgur--I mean, she would make it herself. She would have the wheat

cooked for hours in huge pots until it's soft, that's the par boiling, and then

she would dry it on the roof.

FERNHEIMER:Oh wow.

GUR:Because, you know, the roofs in Mediterranean houses, the flat roofs, turn

into--into kind of food producing plants in summer. You dry tomatoes, you dry

sumac for--and you dry bulgur wheat. They used to dry--they don't make it any

more, but she used to make her own bulgur, and then she would crack it, and

she'd add her homemade bulgur wheat. So, bread. Well, first of all, I believe

Uri told you that, even the basic bread, what we call

lechem achid, the standard bread in--

FERNHEIMER:--lechem achid--

GUR:--lechem achid.

FERNHEIMER:Like one, like ach?

GUR:Achid is, like, uniform. Lechem achid, it's the only bread that is still

subsidized. I mean, you cannot sell it above certain price--that's why you see very--

FERNHEIMER:--is this the brown one--

GUR:--no, it's kind of--it looks like a loaf, a round loaf, but you don't see

it, like--oval, or oblong. You don't see much in Tel Aviv supermarkets. Bakeries

don't really like selling it, because they have to sell it for really--

FERNHEIMER:--cheap--

GUR:--yeah, because it has to, it has, like, a controlled price. But that bread

was actually-when you taste it and it's fresh, it's actually quite good, and the

founding fathers of local baking and pastry industry were mostly German and

Austrian--German bakers

that came to Israel in the thirties, fleeing the Nazi regime, and they created

this, quite high standard of, of local breads. But still, I mean, if--again,

this is one of the elements of the food revolution. What changed mainly was the

variety, and the fact that sourdough bread was introduced in the eighties, and

then artisanal breads, and today, I mean, you have the whole range. You have

something quite similar to American Wonder Bread, sliced and taste like a cotton

ball, if you ask me, and two very, very good, high quality, artisanal breads,

that's, that's the only kind we eat, we don't eat much bread, but, if we do, we

buy it from our favorite deli, from delicatessen, actually,

that's our favorite bread. And then, of course, there is a whole family of

flatbreads that are actually--this is another thing, another carryover from the

biblical times, because, in the biblical times, there were leavened bread, but

they were quite--I mean, loaves in the way we are familiar with today, but most

of the breads that were consumed in those days were some variation on

flatbreads, and was usually, like, you know, lechem (Hebrew), you know, very

thin variety, made on hot metal, like what we call pita druzit, it's very, very

similar to the kind of bread the biblical homemaker would make for her family,

after she had to spend hours grinding the, the, the grains--

FERNHEIMER:--flour--

GUR:--because there was no--I mean, flour, in this time, had to do with Israeli

food, but, you know, Michael Pollan called flour the first fast food in the world,

because, once white flour was invented, the process of making white flour that

had almost indefinite shelf life, and you didn't have to have, like, windmill in

every village, and people would store flour, rather that grains. This changed

the whole culture of bread making.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, so there's all kinds of flatbreads related--like pita druzit,

but you want to name a few others that you're thinking about in this category?

GUR:Well, there are a whole bunch of flatbreads, and the thinner one is druzit,

almost paper thin, and then a thicker one called laffa, or (Hebrew) in

Jerusalem, lots of restaurants that serve Middle Eastern food would have their

tabun where they make--bake fresh laffa, fresh flatbreads, and they're

delicious. It's very important--lot of Israeli food, almost

most, most Israeli street foods, are served stuffed or wrapped in some kind of

flatbread. So, pita, and I think--I mean, I'm not very sure of it, so I don't

want to talk about it, but Pita has, like, a pocket bread. I heard it's

relatively new, it's not necessarily part--it wasn't around like, 200, 300 years

ago, but I--don't quote me on that--

FERNHEIMER:--I'm not--

GUR:--yeah, something I heard that I didn't investigate deeply. But--but today,

I mean, pita for Israelis is, is, is even more important than bread, because so

much food--I mean, having it from kindergartens, when they're having a party,

they would have, like, watered pita slashed with hummus and pickle. And pita

with chocolate spread as a sandwich, or it's like the Israeli equivalent of

grape jelly and--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, peanut butter and jelly--

GUR:--peanut butter and jelly,

sorry--(coughs)--and, of course, pita with hummus, and shawarma, and sabich. And

then, people like Eyal Shani, who is our--one of the most prominent and creative

Israeli chefs, who started the whole--

FERNHEIMER:--miznon--

GUR:--miznon, exactly. The trend of, of delicious, gourmet, creative foods,

stuffed in the best pita in the world, and the thing is--and I, I still don't

have the answer why they can't make pita like that in the U.S. It's so soft, and

fluffy, and pillowy. I heard once, and this may be true, that, actually, Israeli

pita is--is different from--if you go, for example, to a Middle Eastern

restaurant in, let's say Lebanon, or in Syria, not that I went there, but that's

what I'm told--they usually--their pita is thinner and drier. Local pita is very

fluffy, and it's similar to another Yemenite bread called saluf.

So it was actually inspired, in a way, by this Yemenite bread, and Yemenite food

culture is very interesting, because, on one hand, it's very, very simple,

it's--hardly has any meat, hardly has anything like, you know, like soup--that's

the best example. I mean, as humble as you can get, but they have this whole

range of very unique bread products. And I've heard from an expert on biblical

cuisine that, in the way these breads are reminiscent of the range of the breads

that existed in biblical Israel.

FERNHEIMER:Interesting.

GUR:Yeah, and there is a whole thing--some of them are more, more famous, some

less, but they have, like between six and seven--and the techniques are really different.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

We had students--we, we made jachnun in Kentucky, it was an experience.

GUR:And then there is kubaneh, which is delicious, and there is something

called--my memory is failing me--

FERNHEIMER:--malawach is also Yemenite, right--

GUR:--malawach is Yemenite, malawach, lachuch, jachnun, kubaneh, and there is

one more that I forgot of, it is really spectacular, but--

FERNHEIMER:--there's a honeycomb one, I'm blanking on the name, that's kind of

sweet--maybe I'm--but, yeah, they're worth exploring--

GUR:--yes, they are, and they are very unique and very, very popular in Israel.

FERNHEIMER:And, at least in terms of jachnun and kubaneh, it's inspired by the

Shabbat tradition of cooking overnight--

GUR:--yes, these are overnight bread, yeah, and this is interesting,

because--because, as you know, many of the most distinctive Jewish dishes were

actually made for Shabbat, to overcome this paradox of Shabbat cooking, where it cannot

actually cook on the day you're supposed to have your best meals. And most

Jewish culture would have a Shabbat casserole, like cholent, in Ashkenazi

cuisine, or Dafina in North African cuisine, or--

FERNHEIMER:--you mean stew, I think--

GUR:-it's not exactly, it's an overnight pot.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, I guess when I think casserole, I think, like American,

midwestern casseroles, with, like, Tuna, and noodles, and things--

GUR:--really, I was thinking more like -----------(??), that was my--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--interesting, talk about your own cultural reference point.

GUR:Yeah, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:But yeah, well, I mean, it's interesting, because, when you make

cholent, there are different ways--some people make it all in the pot, and some

people they--like, the Sephardi, I think, cholent, they wrap the thing so that

they keep their distinctive--

GUR:--it's a lot--there is some--

FERNHEIMER:--so many different ways.

GUR:Yeah, and some of them--some of them make it like that, just--I needed to -----------(??)

having my memories going--

FERNHEIMER:--(laughs)--it's okay--

GUR:--it's going, so--

FERNHEIMER:--the heat does not do good things for memory.

GUR:Yeah, and I was thinking about the Iraqi version of chamin, which is my

favorite, and it's called tabit.

FERNHEIMER:Tabit.

GUR:I think we talked a lot about Iraqi Jewish cuisine. Why it's my favorite,

because it's so much more suited for the local climate--it's made from chicken

and rice. Rather than kishka, and beans, and meat, and all this stuff with

Ashkenazi cholent that is so, so heavy. Tabit is a beautiful overnight

casserole, but what I was actually talking about was the fact that, in the

Yemenite food culture, the overnight Shabbat dish would be bread. I don't think

they have their own Shabbat stew, or Shabbat overnight, like, meat based dish,

they have kubaneh, or jachnun. It's basically all about

bread, and they have it with some grated tomatoes, and schug, of course, but

it's--again, bread is at the very core of their cuisine.

FERNHEIMER:So--yeah, we've talked a lot about these, kind of, shabbat

traditions, and their influence, so--and, you know, not just the food that's

cooked, but also the food culture around it, and the kind of intergenerational

meals, we talked a lot about last time, last interview. So, you know, let's talk

a little bit about the place of Jewish cuisine. How interchangeable--what is the

relationship between Jewish, and Israeli, when we're talking about food and food-ways?

GUR:Jewish--well, it's--Jewish food is a very important part of Israel in the

end. And, again, it's, it's, it's a very specific part of Jewish food, it's

usually Jewish food that comes from areas that is close geographically, it

underwent dramatic changes, and it changes from family to family, and it's--the

beauty of it is that--for example, in a traditional Moroccan Jewish family, they

would have, like, Moroccan Jewish food, or Moroccan Jewish Shabbat lunch, but,

if you look at an average--I'm thinking, for example, about my cousin, who lives

up north in Galilee, she's Ashkenazi, her husband is Ashkenazi, but what would

they--have for Shabbat would be chraime, which is North African fish stew, and a

kubbeh soup that is Iraqi traditional Jewish dish, and hummus that they bring

from, you know, from an Arabic village nearby, and grilled chicken, and then

chicken soup, because everybody loves it, chicken soup, and--it's so

natural now that they don't even stop and say, "Oh, wait a second, we have this

melting pot lunch, with the Iraqi, and Moroccan, and Ashkenazi dishes."

They--it's Israeli.

FERNHEIMER:So that's--so that combination.

GUR:Yeah, and, and, and the fact that Israelis--and this is really important.

The fact that Israelis are exposed not to one Jewish ethnic traditions, but to

so many of them. And sometimes they don't even, you know, stop, say, "Wait a

second. We're having this lunch, and we're having schnitzel with couscous and

Israeli salad." So I have the three pillars of Israeli cooking, I have the

schnitzel, which is the staple of central European cuisine, but it's made with

chicken rather than veal, because in Israel, when chicken schnitzel first

arrived with German and Austrian

immigrants, veal was something, you know, reserved for very special occasions,

and chicken is the go-to meat for Israelis. So we have that, and there is

nothing more Israeli than chicken schnitzel. And then you have couscous, which

is this North African staple, and--yeah, and you can buy it frozen, you can buy

it instant, you can make it your own, I mean, there are so many ways to eat

couscous, and to make couscous. And then Israeli salad. And, and there is

nothing exotic about this plate, this is--this is, like, average Israeli dish.

And maybe they have some bowl--little bowl of tahini that they will pour on

their salad. And then have malabi for dessert, or maybe some -----------(??), I

mean, again it's--

FERNHEIMER:--from the bakery--

GUR:--it's--yeah, and it's--the thing is that people do, I mean, intermarry all

the time,

I mean, most Israelis, my family--I mean, we're all Ashkenazi, but my daughter

is married to a guy who is half Yemenite, a quarter Egyptian, and a quarter

seventh generation Jerusalem, so--and, in his family, his mom makes jachnun for

Shabbat, it's quite a thing there, kids love it--but he's also crazy about

gefilte fish. And chopped liver. So--and challah, which is the go-to Shabbat

bread for all Israelis, the goddess of their providence. So, it's not a big deal

anymore. See what I'm trying to say? I mean, it used to, but now we just--this

is the basic cooking repertoire.

FERNHEIMER:You know, I think about how ubiquitous challah is in Israel, and

when you think about how the Arab bread ways have made their way

into Israeli cuisine, do you see the--it go the opposite way, like, do you see

folks in the villages picking up challah, like--

GUR:--oh, I'm sure they do. I'm sure they do, challah is sold everywhere--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah.

GUR:You know--

FERNHEIMER:--I'm just trying to imagine it on the table in the same way you

see, like, you know, the flatbreads, with zaatar, and sambousek, and those kinds

of things--

GUR:--listen, most--I mean, if you, if you speak with--I don't know if you had

a chance to speak to Arabic cooks and food lovers--

FERNHEIMER:--I’m coming--it's coming--

GUR:--good, good. Ask them that question, because--because from what I know,

the ideal is, of course, to have this proper Levantine Middle Eastern meal with--

FERNHEIMER:--tabun bread--

GUR:--flatbread, tabun bread, and mezze, and homemade stuffed vegetables,

yadda, yadda, yadda. It--who has the time? I mean, women--more and more women

are working, I mean, both, like, double career families, so they love that food,

they usually would have it

for, maybe, for the weekend, or for special occasions, or for weddings, and

holidays. And during the week, they will have schnitzel. They will have

something quick, and, as for challah--I'm sure you can buy challah in Arabic

villages as well, I don't know how popular it is, I'd guess it is popular,

regular white bread is popular. And--and they eat--I mean, their kind of day to

day diet is not that different from ours, from the Jewish Israeli one. Of

course, when--you know, the most interesting things in the kitchen usually

happens either on weekends, or holidays, or special occasions, then they--

FERNHEIMER:--more time--

GUR:--I guess they go back to their traditional cuisine, but--and it's a very

interesting thing. We've had a lot of discussion with Yousef Zuzu, the chef who

runs this beautiful restaurant on the Galilee shore called

Magdalena, it has these beautiful, inventive, inspired versions of Middle

Eastern cooking, but he also serves risotto, and seafood, and stuff that I keep

telling him, "Why do you even bother?" And his explanation is that he has a lot

of customer--a lot of his clients come from Arabic villages, and for them is a

special--it's an expensive restaurant, when they go out, they're looking

for--they're not interested in having Middle Eastern food, they want something--

FERNHEIMER:--different--

GUR:-different, yeah. They want something kind of prestigious, European, French

or Italian, rather than their mom's cooking. Plus, as it often happens in these

cases, when they do have, like, something traditional, Middle Eastern,

that they know from home, they would say, "Yes, but my mother's is better."

FERNHEIMER:(laughs)--yeah, of course.

GUR:Because that's how it works with food.

FERNHEIMER:You know, we've talked a lot about the kind of shared aspects

between Palestinian local cuisine, and Israeli cuisine, and we talked about,

sort of, you know, the impact of climate and agriculture, and sort of the

agricultural cycle, and I wonder if you could talk a little bit about the

way--the way food might be imagined as a way forward out of certain parts of the

conflict here. I mean, both peoples are tied by these agricultural needs,

they're bound by the agricultural circumstances of the region, the need for

clean water, the need for healthy food, the need for vegetables, and--you know,

we talked last time about how both people love each other's food. But, you know,

we think about the way the climate's changing,

and this, kind of, interdependency on both the land and, now, one another, to

ensure people are actually able to access food--

GUR:Can I-- to the ladies?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, yeah, that's fine. (laughs)

GUR:And then I'll think about it, it's a tricky one.

FERNHEIMER:Okay. We're going to take a little--a brief pause here, and then

we'll come back.

[Pause in recording.]

GUR:Would you like some more water?

FERNHEIMER:I'm good for right now, thank you. But it's a good reminder to drink some.

GUR:Yeah, you must.

It's a huge, huge question, and I'm not sure I'm best equipped to answer it

properly. But two things that came to mind, very diametrically opposed, and

they're both somehow connected with olives, and olive oil. One is, and you

cannot avoid thinking about it when you're thinking about agriculture and the

relations between, you know, Israelis and Palestinians, and, of course, this is

a very sad, and tragic, and shameful behavior of some of the Israeli settlers in

the territories that uproot olive trees, ancient olive trees, that were

Palestinian owned, or prevent

the farmers going to their fields, working the fields, and it's terrible. I

mean, it's despicable. But then, I thought about the other thing, the other

part, the other facet of that, I had the privilege of talking about Galilee, and

the food culture, to a group of olive growers from around the Mediterranean,

there is--I forgot the name of this organization that brings together olive

growers from Spain, and Italy, and Greece, and Israel, and Palestine. They're

all--they started it before Covid, they met over Zoom during the pandemic, and

now they were finally able to meet in person, it happened in Israel this winter.

It was a lovely group of people who came to Israel to learn, and to share, their

experiences about growing olives,

irrigation, yes and no varieties, et cetera, et cetera, and there was some very

amazing things about it. First of all, the very fact that people are coming to

Israel to learn about olive oil, and olive growing, that was something--again,

prog--the, the huge progress we made in this field was done in the last few

decades. On the other hand, it's something so ancient, and so rooted in local

culture, and, indeed, most of the people they spoke with and they met were

Arabic people, because the majority population in Galilee is still Arabic, and

they are the main bulk of olive growers there. And there were some people from

the West Bank that were part of that, of that group, and they were all coming

together, all discussing the same problems and the same challenges they have.

Because, as you said, the climate changed, the clean water, the soil, it's all

issues that are relevant to all of them. So,

so, as far as agriculture in Israel is concerned, we do share the same problems,

of course. And the same issues, and Israel, on one hand, is very progressive,

and technologically savvy, agricultural superpower, I would even say. On the

other hand, agriculture is going through a very, very complicated crisis,

because it's a small country, the prices of real estate are leaping, the cost of

production is much higher than it used to be. Many farmers either change their,

you know, their--what they grow, or just go out of business. I mean, when Israel

was first created,

farming was--maybe that's where I should have started, farming was at the very

core of the Zionist ethos. Reconnecting to this place through the land, working

the land, growing and eating what you grow. It was, like, the ideal. The ideal

Israeli was a farmer, and soldier, and poet, all these. Naive dreams. Today he

is high-tech, entrepreneur.

FERNHEIMER:And he's still a he?

GUR:It's still a he--and it's still a he--well, I hope that changes a little

bit, but, yes, I think we talked about it as well--even then it was a

chauvinistic culture. So, today, it's tricky, but--so, they--the ones who

succeed are those who are doing some niche products. Oh, another thing that

happened that changed, once Israel was a very, very important exporter of

agricultural produce--think--

FERNHEIMER:--oranges--

GUR:--oranges,

and then avocados. And today, when you become, you know, a rich and progressive

culture and country, it necessarily means you're less--you're making less money

farming. If you think about--I mean, the biggest competition of Israel today,

and the international market, is Morocco, or Spain, or Greece. Cost of labor is

high, there is not so much land. But still, there is agriculture, and still,

most of what we eat--and this is important. The things of most fresh produce we

have, vast majority is local.

FERNHEIMER:And so this is how--

GUR:--yeah. I think we need to wrap it up, because I have to go to my mom's--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, it's okay, we are exactly on schedule to wrap up, I was just

about to ask you, this has been a great conversation, I'm grateful for the time--

GUR:

--you are most welcome.

FERNHEIMER:If there's anything else that you want to add before we head out--

GUR:--I think we exhausted most of it, but if I think--we'll still have Zoom,

and--we'll always have Zoom--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah. Well, thank you so much, I really appreciate it.

GUR:You are most welcome, I enjoyed it as well.

FERNHEIMER:I'm going to stop the recording now.

[End of interview.]