CAGLE:Welcome to the recording of Christine Smith's interview for the Kentucky

Climate Consortium's Climate Research, Activism, and Policy in Kentucky Project.

We are recording at a friend's house in west–on the west side of Lexington,

west-ish. I'm Cagle. It is July 31st–oh my gosh, 2023. So, hi Christine.

SMITH:Hi.

CAGLE:So, I'm gonna start with either–this is either the easiest question or

the hardest question, which is tell me a little bit about yourself.

SMITH:Well, my name's Christine. I am living in Lexington. I'm not from here;

I'm from Miami, Florida. I'm currently 38. I live in Lexington largely because

it's one of the most affordable places I've ever lived,

and because Miami is sinking under the ocean slowly but surely. So, you know, in

terms of long-term decision planning, that's why I've chosen this spot. And, and

I garden for a living, or make gardening possible for others to do for a living.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Okay, there's a lot in there that I want to talk about. Let's

start with Florida.

SMITH:Okay.

CAGLE:Okay. So, you grew up in Florida, Miami specifically, like in the city, or?

SMITH:So, it's a neighborhood called Opa-locka, which is, like, could be a

whole other conversation, but it was–it's a city themed on One Thousand and One

Nights, or the Arabian Nights stories that Shahar Azad tells to save herself.

And so, there's lots of Arabian-style buildings. I grew up on Arabia Avenue. And

so, it's about twenty minutes from North Miami, or getting to the beach,

basically. And so, yeah, that's,

that's–

CAGLE:So, it was a planned community then, if it was themed?

SMITH:Yeah. So, Glenn Curtis, who was a famous aviator, who probably no one

remembers now–incredibly wealthy 1920s, and Florida was a site for a lot of

developers to like, sort of create these fantastical communities to attract

northerners to. So, Glenn Curtis, after reading a Thousand and One Nights, with

architects based in New York City, they dream up a planned city that would

encapsulate the storybooks. And, and yeah, so they build a theme city, where

there's lots of domes and minarets and streets that are named after elements of

the books. And there's old photos of lots of white people dressed up as–I don't

know, not like anyone from the Middle East, but more like what you would see

Jasmine as in

Aladdin. And, (laughs) and that is–that, that was the city.

CAGLE:Wow. And so, how did your family end up there?

SMITH:So, my family is from Jamaica, but they came to the United States in the

late seventies. And they were able to afford a home there. It was–I think it was

affordable in part because of white flight. Like, as more and more black

families were moving in, white folks departed tout suite, and I think it made it

affordable for them to get a home.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. That's pretty–classic story? I don't know, classic is not the

right word. Not uncommon.

SMITH:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. And maybe we'll connect back to conversations about Lexington here

in a minute. Yeah. Okay, so were you outdoorsy growing up? You did gardening?

SMITH:Uhm, so, I suppose–

outdoorsy. So, I, I should say that, you know, growing up in an urban

neighborhood, and also at a particular period in this country–or in our world

history, right before technology was so widespread, not outdoorsy in sort of–in,

you know, in the sense of like, we went hiking or camping or anything like that.

We never did anything like that. But I was always outside playing. And we had

lots of fruit trees, citrus trees. And so, with friends always either in like,

you know, our backyard eating things, or in neighbors’ backyard stealing fruits,

or just being outside, was just part of growing up and trying to avoid one's

parents. So, outdoorsy in the most literal sense, yes. Outdoorsy and kind of the

sense of, you know, family trips outdoors into the Everglades, no. School trips

to the Everglades, yes, but–(laughs)

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah. Well, and–so, I did my PhD in Florida,

USF in Tampa. And my friend in the program there, who was from Florida,

described it once to me as the state that nature is always gonna take back. And

I was like, “Yeah, that seems about right.” Like, the Everglades is this–it's a

park, but it's not like a park in the sense that we think of parks, where you

can just sort of stroll in, right? And yeah, yeah. So, actually, that was an, an

observation that another interviewer from South Florida–or interviewee from

South Florida told me not too long ago.

SMITH:Really?

CAGLE:Yeah. So, Chris Keefe.

SMITH:Oh, yeah.

CAGLE:You know them? Yeah. So, a seed keeper. So, they're from South Florida

and talked about that. So, you also had family in Jamaica, correct?

SMITH:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Yeah. And so, were you visiting a lot and experiencing, like–I actually

don't know much about how different the sort of ecosystems are between South

Florida and Jamaica.

SMITH:Yeah, so it's

in the tropics. And I think Florida would be listed as subtropical, although

that could be wrong. So, a lot of the same things grow in different places,

like–I mean, the same places, so mango trees, orange trees. And so, yeah, I was

visiting a lot as a kid. I would go in the summer times, and I would spend the

time with my grandparents, Frank and Edna, who are both no longer, no longer

here. But yeah, I would go and stay there in Kingston. And my grandmother–it's

funny, I don't know so much about my grandpa. He was always a–he was a man who

was literate, which is significant, because my grandmother wasn't. So, he was

always reading the newspaper and always listening to the BBC and always

commenting on politics. And he loved tennis. But that's all I really know. And

that he was a carpenter and a salesman. He built their house in Kingston. My

grandmother was the one who I spent the most time with, and she kept the garden.

And she's from the breadbasket

of Jamaica, which is St. Elizabeth. And so, they come from an agricultural

community. And so, in Kingston, although she was far away from what she knew,

she had this huge front yard garden. She had, like, a menagerie of animals, like

goldfish, turtles. She kept pigeons, she had, like, seven dogs, there were

chickens. And then–yeah, and her garden and what remains now of the house. There

was breadfruit tree, guinep–sometimes people call it Spanish lime. There was

pomegranate, there was Jamaica apple–or it's sometimes called Malay apple. I

think its original name is Malay apple. She had different veg growing and, and,

and yeah, and those are the things that remain. The house is no longer really

there. But the trees are massive and overgrowing and neighbors salivate over the

fruit, because there's just so

much fruit coming out of the yard.

CAGLE:Yeah. So, do you go back now regularly, or?

SMITH:I haven't been there since my grandpa's funeral when I was in high

school. And so, the dream has always been to somehow find a way to get back to

visit. But as more and more family members have died, it's, like, less and less

people to visit. So, like, you know, a lot of stories of Jamaicans, the diaspora

has–there are more Jamaicans living outside of Jamaica than in it. And many of

them, the nodal points where Jamaicans land up, end up is either England, Miami

or Orlando–more so Miami–New York City, or Canada, in the eastern part, like

around Ottawa. And so, yeah, those are sort of the traditional pathways and

where many Jamaicans today live. And it's sad, because the island economy is

so–sort of

revolves around tourism and foreign dollars coming in and that. And, and yeah,

there's just not a lot of opportunity for Jamaicans to stay in Jamaica. So,

there's a lot of people who leave and send money back, or treat it then as their

kind of vacation home or family meeting place. So, yeah. Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. I think–I mean, not that anything about us is reducible to one life

experience ever. But I see, at least in part, maybe where your interest in

geographies came from? (both laugh) Yeah, which we'll, we’ll get on to. Okay, so

you–actually, yeah. So, now maybe is a good time. So, you mentioned high school,

and going back. I'm sorry about your–the passing of your grandparents. That's

tough, especially at that age. I feel like for me, at least I–yeah, I lost

several grandparents sort of around high school age. And it felt like it was

just the time that I might have gotten to start knowing them as people,

you know. So, you went off to university. How did you decide where to go and

what to study?

SMITH:Well, I had a very good college counselor. I forget her name now, but she

was great at encouraging us to look not only at local colleges, but like,

abroad, not–abroad in the sense of outside of Florida, right? I have to say that

Florida growing up felt–I never felt like we were part of America. (laughs) And

so, when I got all the college brochures, (coughs) it was really exciting,

because they all showed seasons, which was not a thing. And they showed things

that look like TV, because my only–like, if we did not have television, you

could not tell me that, just because our lives in Opa-locka were so–like, all of

us were black,

immigrant, brown kids. That was our life going to school. You know, we would, of

course, go to the beach, and that's where we would see white people. But like,

just our world, or the world at that time, in some ways, felt very small. And

there were, like, black people from the south also there who migrated into Miami

too. And so, there was that. But also, that just didn't feel like “America”,

quote, unquote. And, and so–what am I trying to say? So, when those brochures

came in, it was–it looked like America, that (laughs) one saw on TV. So, anyway,

it was fascinating. But um, and so, I got–I think I applied to, like, as many

schools as I could afford, and that were free to me to apply to. So, I applied

to, like, Reed College, which was wild. Like, I, I saw, like, photos of them

having, like, a dog watering spot. Like, you could bring a pet to campus. And I

was just like, “What? What is this? (laughs) This is wild. I have to see it.”

Because never, ever, ever, like–dogs stayed outside and they had their own

little bowl and you didn't have them on college campuses, you know. Or I applied

to Florida schools too. But I ultimately went to Syracuse. And that was really

largely because of the Maxwell School, and this idea that I could be–at the time

I was really into international relations. And I really wanted to be, like, an

international lawyer or, you know, someone who was a bit of a, you know, sort of

straggled the world of diplomats and, you know, and dealing with heavy

international issues. And of course, it never came to pass. But that was the

point. It was like, “Okay, this place has seasons, there's snow, and there's the

Maxwell School.” And so, that is why I went to so far away. And I had no idea

what I was getting into. But the brochures just really look lovely. And, like, a

totally different

world.

CAGLE:How was the first winter?

SMITH:Dreadful. (laughs)

CAGLE:What did you–I mean, like, did you even own a jacket at that point?

Because when I moved here, I had to buy an actual winter coat. So–

SMITH:Yes. No, I did not. So, I rode with my mom. We took the Greyhound up to

Syracuse from Miami, and got there and I didn't have a winter coat. I remember

having to go to the Carousel Mall. And–but my first coat was so impractical, but

it was not very good. I must have gotten it from, like, Forever 21 or something

there. But it was, like, this puffy white coat that was totally–like, didn't

have any down. It had, like, something synthetic as its filler. But it was just

big and white and not very warm. And that was my first one. I think I've gone

through–like, I had to go through, like, several winter coats before I learned

what was (laughs) good enough. Because I just didn't know. Didn't know how to shop

for a winter coat. Yeah, there was lots of–there was lots of rounds of different

coats before. I had to get winter boots that felt like, you know, like having

sort of small children weighted on your back. (laughs) And, like, learning that

ice is worse than snow. Like, I slipped–so, the thing about Syracuse is that–so,

in the dormitories where I was, we were on Mount Olympus, and there was Flint,

where I was a student, and you had to go down these stairs, like about–I think

it was 144 stairs from Flint to get to the quad and camp–like, you know, the

primary center of campus. And there was one morning where I slipped because I

just–I wasn't aware that ice on the ground. I was just dumb when it came to

weather. And I must have slipped down twenty of those stairs. My coccyx was so

bruised. And, and so, I learned about ice and I learned about having good shoes

with traction and, like, watching my–because I was just strolling around, like,

ignorant. They don't cancel classes no matter what, because that's their–that's

what happens. And so, like, the mornings of having to walk through, like,

tunnels taller than me of dirty snow that had been plowed the night before, or.

Yeah, it was an experience. (laughs)

CAGLE:Was–did it take the shine off the notion of seasons? Or did you grow to

love it, or?

SMITH:No, I, I still grew to love it. Like, you know, summer became my favorite

season. Um, I really loved the fall. I became accustomed or introduced to Nick

Drake. And so, listening to Nick Drake in the fall, which just felt like such a

classic college experience. (laughs)

CAGLE:I literally–this–I had the exact same experience, experience in

college in Boston, and was introduced to Nick Drake by a friend who went to

Berkeley School of Music.

SMITH:Yes, right? And I just felt like this is what–it's like, “This is

America.” Like, that’s what it felt like. (laughs)

CAGLE:What was that show in the–around that–oh, Felicity.

SMITH:Yes. Yeah. (laughs)

CAGLE:Yes. Yeah. Where she–yeah. Because we–you and I are exactly–like,

graduated ‘02. College ‘06. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. So, we're at the same, like, touch

points, I guess. Yeah. So, at what point in there did you discover geography?

Because you ended up graduating with a double major, right?

SMITH:Yes. So, uh, I was an international relations major and I decided that I

absolutely hated it. Um–

CAGLE:Why?

SMITH:Largely because they saw the world as a game. So, there are several

theories within international relations, um, that are kind of classic. Like,

there's realist theory, there's liberalism, there's neoliberalism, which is, um,

you know, one that we're now most familiar with, or perhaps not. Yes and no.

Um, and realism or–and I should say in a lot of the classes, you know, human

behavior, complex events, um, that happened, treated people like a game. Like,

international relations felt very much like you had chess pieces on a board, and

how to move was based on people thinking within these sort of frameworks. Um,

whereas, you know, having a family history based in the colonies and–right? And,

and, you know, a, a, a group of people, um, and all of their stories sort of

compressed down into one of, you know, benefit and utility. Um, I just found

reprehensible and I felt like it wasn't, uh,

the full story of politics or social organization in these places. And it–in my

first geography class, it was with Clayton Rosati, um, who I had a terrible

crush on at the time. Um, so–(laughs) he won't ever listen to these though, I'm

hoping. But, um, I sat in on the class and it was, like, just huge because it

was talking about relationships, um, of people, of trade, of politics. Like, it

was just, like, this fully, more fully fleshed out view of how the world

operates and how our interconnectedness sort of pushes the trajectory of history

that I found so, um, so much more exciting than what just felt so stale about

international relations. Um, and so, I didn't leave the major because I think

somewhere in my brain

I was like, “I could still do, like–you know, I could still be a civil servant

of some sort.” Um, but yeah, geography was far more exciting to me. Um.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Uh, why keep the international relations major then?

SMITH:Oh yeah. Because that idea that I could still probably be, like, a, a

civil servant.

CAGLE:Oh, okay. Not that, like, geography could get you there as well, but that

the combination could. Okay. Okay.

SMITH:And it was like, I think–yeah, I, I–yeah, I was still sort of thinking

that they both could work together to my benefit.

CAGLE:Okay. Sorry, I misunderstood. I thought you were saying that geography

could replace it. Yeah. That makes a lot of sense though, especially–you, you

use the metaphor of compression, right? That the international relati–relations

was compressing. And I often think of geography as unfolding, um,

disciplinarily, right? It's taking a, like, a map, say a two-dimensional

space, and unfolding it to reveal all the nooks and crannies underneath. So

then, you went–um, you didn't go straight to grad school, correct? So, what,

what were you doing in between?

SMITH:Um, so, I didn't have a lot of money going to school. Like, you know,

lots of poor brown kids take out a bunch of student loans. Um, and I saw lots of

friends traveling abroad, and I was like, “You know, I would love to do that.”

And I mean, I couldn't afford to go anywhere fancy, but like I was saying

earlier, like, the Jamaican diaspora that spreads out, one of the directions

they go is to England. And so, I had family there. Um, and so I got a work visa

to go work at a grocery shop called Planet Organic. Well, it wasn't to go

specifically there, but that's where I landed because I could get no other job.

Um, and I spent, like, half a year just living

in North London, uh, working in center of London, just down from, um, the West

end and–and yeah, and trying to travel around Europe on the weekends. And so,

that is what I did. And then when my visa was up–which made me so sad. I was

trying to find ways of staying in Europe, but not England, because England it

turns out is just–(laughs) I was like, “Probably I could go to France,” because,

you know, I'd, I'd tried in vain to learn French from high school. It didn't

work out, but I was like, “You know, once I'm there, probably I could pick it

up.” Like, you know, trying to find a work around with the work visa situation,

but I couldn't. So, I go back home, still didn't have any money. Um, but it

wasn't until I got home and realized that, uh, with my undergraduate degree

alone, I would never become anything close to being a diplomat or a civil

servant. Um, it simply wasn't

working for me to–I, I wasn't able to find any work in that, and sort of–not

even an internship, really. Well, let me say there were internships, but I

needed to survive. So, um–and so, yeah, I started working again at home at a

museum that I worked at, uh, when I was in high school, the Museum of

Contemporary Art, and that's when I started applying to graduate schools. And

so, the following year I, I go to school at UK.

CAGLE:And, ah, we're so lucky, right? (laughs) It's so interesting to me, these

accidents–like, how did–I never saw myself ending up in Kentucky, but I'm

certainly not mad about it. I really love it here as it turns out. Um, how–so,

UK has a really great geography department, um, and I assume the reputation was

already strong at the time?

SMITH:Well, I knew nothing about it actually. I–when I was applying to grad

school, I'd called my mentor, Don Mitchell from, ah, Syracuse,

who's, like, this widely known Marxist geographer, um, whose work I adored and

who, like, I sort of fangirled, you know, throughout my time there. And I said,

you know, “I want to go to grad school. I want to, like, come back and, like,

now actually be a student firmly within the Maxwell School and in geography.”

And he's like, “Kid, our department has no money and it's a wreck. And, (laughs)

and have you thought about Kentucky?” And I'm like, “Where?” (laughs) And he's

like, “Kentucky has one of the best programs in the world. Look into it. Like,

it's actually–I think it would be good for you.” And so, I–like, I didn't know

anything about Kentucky. I remember telling the people at the museum that I was

applying to Kentucky and, um, where I worked. And, you know, they all see

themselves as cosmopolitan and so, like, you know, urbane. And when I told them,

they would start humming the dueling banjo song and making sort of all the

Kentucky stereotypes

of, you know, “You're just going to be around people with no teeth.” Uh, you

know, preparing me for all kinds of, like, stuff. And so, then I became

horrified because I didn't know–like, I didn't–I went from knowing nothing about

Kentucky to thinking that, like, you know, I was gonna meet the Klan on the way

to Kentucky, like, you know. And so, I was just like, “Oh my god, what have I

gotten into?” Um, but I'd gotten in, and they invited me to come and visit. And

so, I came and visited, and Sue Roberts–uh, just a wonderful economic

geographer, really brilliant–uh, was the one to pick me up from the airport. And

I remember being, like, so scared because I'd never done anything like this

before. No one told me how to prep for meeting, um, facul–faculty with, like,

you know, within a department where you're going to grad school. And so, I was

just like–I didn't know what I was supposed to do. So, I get in the car, and the

only thing recognizable to me were the farm workers who I would see as we were leaving

Keeneland and coming in–right, Keeneland and coming into town. And I think there

was some comment on it. And then, like, I remember Sue dragging me–not Sue

dragging me, but I felt like she was starting a conversation on sort of, like,

flows of migration and–because the workers were Mexican, right? Or they were

clearly Latino. And, um, and it felt like home because, as you know, I grew up

in this Latino and black neighborhood. And, and, and so, I remember a very

awkward conversation about, like, migratory flows of workers in these horse

fields and us having a back and forth and, like, me thinking, “Oh my god, oh my

god, please don't let me say anything dumb. Please don’t let me say anything

dumb.” (laughs) Anyway, it was lovely. And, and I, I get into town after a sort

of this, this, this, you know, knuckle, uh,

white knuckle experience. And I stay with another graduate student at the time,

and she helps to introduce me to the scene at that time in 2007, 8. Uh,

Lexington Folks was just some, like, divy bars. It was Pazos. It was, um,

Charlie Brown's, which is still around. Uh, Cosmic Charlie's. Like, I–we went to

all the, the dark bars and just spoke with graduate students. And I didn't even

do the speaking. I just, like, would listen to them talk about things that felt

really obtuse and out there. Like, um, you know–I don't know. At the time [??

WORDS UNCLEAR]–I don't even think [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] was mentioned. It was like,

uh, French–yeah, other French theorists. And I just remember being totally

bored, totally tired, totally stressed because my nerves were so afraid at,

like, you know, all of the faculty conversations I was having where I just felt

like an utter

idiot and, and not having anything to say or even knowing what to say. Um, and

so, I remember it being incredibly stressful, but at no time during that did I

find, you know, any of the stereotypes that anyone had ever–that, you know, in

the museum had said to me. Like, in fact, I found incredibly kind and

hospitable, uh, people and, uh, and a landscape that, I mean, was heavy on

horses, that no one said anything about. I was just like, “This is all bars and

horses. Like, what do people do here?” (laughs)

CAGLE:Bourbon and horses, yeah.

SMITH:Yeah. Um, and, and, and then–so yeah, when I came back, it was like,

“Well, there was nothing bad about it and all the faculty seems lovely.” And

because I had no questions to ask them, I got no greater insight in that they

were nice. And I was just like, “Well, why not go to a place where people seem

just nice and kind?” And so, that

was the deciding factor of UK. I think I had applied to–I can't remember who

else I applied to for grad school. I think it was UK, Columbia–I can't remember,

but I came to UK. And that's been it.

CAGLE:Did you visit any of the others? No?

SMITH:Mm-mm. Yeah. –[dog whines]

CAGLE:Trying to figure out if the dog needs to go outside.

SMITH:I also just want to say that I think I love the people of this house or

space even more because they have a picture of Harry and Meghan, and–(laughs) I

just think that's adorable.

CAGLE:I hadn't even, I hadn’t even noticed that. Yeah. That is such a, in some

ways specific, but otherwise common experience, I think, of–graduate school is

so different from undergrad.

And even students that are not first gen for undergrad may be first gen for

graduate school. And it's, I think, probably a less difficult transition for

many of them. But even so, as a, as a faculty member now, I have lots of

conversations with students who are interested in graduate school of just sort

of explaining like–well, what you were saying about, you're not applying to a

university. You're applying to a department and you're applying, you know, to

work with these specific faculty. And then you layer on top of that coming from

an immigrant family, as you're saying, like, you know, not having financial

resources that would come from having–potentially come from having parents with

higher ed degrees and so on. So, that sounds like a really tiring weekend.

SMITH:Oh my god, I was so exhausted. I was reading, gosh, Emily–

uh, Jane Eyre, like, for the third time, just to, like, calm my nerves because

it was (laughs) a novel that, like, helped me to chill for some reason. But

yeah, I remember, like, crying, I think. One of the nights I was just, like, so,

like, overwrought and sort of, like–yeah. Yeah.

CAGLE:I would, I would have been overwrought by that. And I feel like I came–I

was pretty well prepared when I started doing those visits because I, I did

visits like that, but only for PhD after doing the master's. And so, it's like,

that made it possible. And yeah, and even that thing of, like, worrying about

saying something dumb, but they already admitted you, you know, but you're still

feeling that pressure. So, then you, you do move to Kentucky (sighs) and you're

planning, I'm guessing at that point, just planning on being here for maybe two

years? Or you were already thinking the PhD?

SMITH:No, I was just thinking–

I don't know what I was thinking. I think I was just thinking about the two

years at that point. I had no–because I didn't really–I mean, for me, school was

just a way to get one of those nice civil servant jobs still. I didn't, I didn’t

see any further than that. And so, I think it was okay. Like, with a master's

degree, I will definitely be employable. And it wasn't until I think after the

first semester that I began to think differently about who I was and what I

wanted to do. But, but yeah, when I came in, it was simply, you know, that

first–it was just to get the master's done with. And that was my focus.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. What happened in that first year to prompt you to self reflect in

that way?

SMITH:I don't know, just the expansion of, like, the world in my head, I

suppose. And, like, realizing that I absolutely did not

want to be a civil servant. I think realizing that I absolutely loved learning.

And, and I loved, I loved being in the geography department that first semester.

It was incredibly hard. I remember, like–how many times did I cry that semester?

One. One or two times because of a perceived slight from one faculty member. It

wasn't total teddy bear, that faculty member. But I was just, like–I was so

stressed out. I was, like, reading more than I've ever read in my life. I was

living in a terrible apartment, because I just–I found an apartment on the

internet, thinking, “Oh, well, everyone's nice there. And there's horses

everywhere. You know, it should be cool.” And I landed in, like, a studio

apartment off of Transylvania Park that was owned by this company that owns lots

of student housing. And, like, the walls were

paper thin. So, I was hearing, like, everything from my next door neighbor,

like, when he was with his girlfriend, when he was sick, when everything. And it

just became–like, it was a dreadful year. But at the end of it all, despite all

of it, I absolutely loved it. And, and, and by becoming part of the department

culture, and really sort of learning from faculty members–because at that point,

they see you as colleagues–it just opened up other possibilities of who and what

I could be. And so, much of the program at the time was geared toward making

academics. Not civil servants, but academics. And so, what I thought I could do

and be changed so dramatically, I think, in that first semester, first year.

CAGLE:That makes sense. So, then you, at, at some point during the master's,

applied to stay on as PhD. And were you thinking at that point

about being an academic? Like, going on the academic job market?

SMITH:I think I was. Like, I mean, just so much is geared in, in the geography

department at the time toward becoming an academic. And I was, again, looking at

these faculty members who were mentors in that respect, as well as, you know,

teachers and thinking–I mean, thinking quite practically, like, I was this poor

immigrant kid. And here was–like, I was going to faculty houses for, like, you

know, for seminars. There were faculty parties, you know–or not faculty parties,

holiday parties at their houses. And I was just like, “Oh, so, I can enter quite

fully the upper middle class by, like, continuing through this.” So, I was

making real economic calculations. But I was also thinking, you know,

like–(clears throat) the jobs I've had up until now, whether it was, like,

secretary, cleaning

rooms in a hotel, being the front desk girl at a hotel, working at fast food,

how much trouble I had in getting a job after my bachelor's degree. And, like,

jobs that I–I, I didn't like any of them. They were just jobs. But to realize

that I could, like, make a living reading and writing in a field that I really

loved, that was just, like, explosive. It’s like, “I could do this every day,”

just, like, study and read books and talk to people about it and, like, go to

conferences and be my shiny self and afford really cute boots, because a lot of

the female faculty in geography had the most amazing shoes. (laughs)

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Still do, yeah.

SMITH:Still do. (laughs) It was like, I could look cute, have a cute house,

–[dog whines] do this, and, like,

take care of myself. Yeah, I wanted to be an academic.

CAGLE:It all makes sense. I'm gonna pause us for a second to take the dog out.

[Pause in recording]

CAGLE:And we're back from a quick break. So, your master's thesis was focused

on local issues. And then for the PhD, you went pretty far abroad from here. How

were you selecting topics? So, it was policing in Lexington, and then embedded

research in Cairo. I might have read parts of your thesis and dissertation in

preparation. Yeah.

SMITH:You never told me that. (laughs)

CAGLE:Oh, I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry. They're very good. So, how are you

selecting those topics? And I'm asking also in part because, you know, we're

doing this interview because you are so deeply embedded in environmental

education and climate issues at this point. And those–

I mean, they, they are woven in but those are not, like, the focus, I guess.

SMITH:Yeah. Let's see. So, I was here, I was a student. I–my advisor was the

brilliant and lovely life teacher that I call her, Anna Seacore. And her work

that I became immersed with and fell in love with was–one was psychoanalysis,

but sort of a huge part of it, and where psychoanalysis was sort of wedded in,

was into looking at the state and particularly in Turkey and relations with

Kurdish groups within Turkey and surrounding. And so, she had done a lot of work

looking at how Kurds were discriminated against. How Kurds incurred, basically,

or experienced

other military attacks from the Turkish government because they were seen as

terrorists. And, you know, that all goes back why they were seen as terrorists

to the founding of the Turkish state and, and so on. And so, you know, I was

also–you know, was a really strong part of the social theory department where we

read very deeply into largely continental European thinkers. And so, you know, I

was doing my master's work on policing because so much of my young world before

leaving for college was, you know, thinking about the police, seeing policing in

my neighborhood, and people dealing with addiction.

And I, I just thought, you know–well, before I even had any notion about Egypt,

I wanted to study policing because it just felt like a, a microcosm of some of

the things that I had been reading to that point, and it felt like it would have

value. Like, I think I was always–and this is silly. So, you know, dear

listener, don't think, beware. But I was like–you know, for me, I wanted my

research and my thinking to be applied to issues that I had seen growing up.

Although you don't need to go to graduate school to only do, like, applied

things. Like, graduate school is delightful to just learn whatever you want,

even if it's totally useless in the real world. It's still totally worth it.

That's what I want to say. Don't think about applied, only. Anyway, (laughs) and

so, I wanted to have some benefit and usefulness for

the world that I came from. And so, I, I studied policing, particularly because

so much of the policing in the East End of Lexington, I needed to do local

research because I had no–I wasn't gonna go back to Florida to do research and

do sort of a back and forth. I wanted a field site or a site that was easy

access that I could build relationships with, like long-term and ongoing

relationships with. So, it behooved me to stay focused in Lexington. And, and

the same issues that were back home were here. And so, I decided to do

drug-related research and to look at the policing of drug crime, because a lot

of the policing of the East End is linked with this idea of drugs; of drugs

moving, of drugs being sold, of people taking drugs, of arresting people

who are drugged out and they do something stupid, right? And so–so, yeah, and

so, I rode around with police officers and just talked to community members for

what felt like forever. (laughs) Many people were sick of me, many people felt

insulted by me sort of coming to them and to their groups and asking these kinds

of questions. Like, sort of a whole range of emotions that came out of that

project. But by the end of it, by the end of it, I thought that–because, because

I at that point had read so much of the literature around policing and

drug-related crime, I felt like in–I, I had it kind of exhausted what I could

find out there. And I was against–I, I was–I thought I exhausted what I could

find out about policing of drug-related crime.

But on the other hand, I thought there was more to learn about policing and how,

whether it is a local police force or, you know, state security, like, at the

national level, they operated in same–in similar ways, and that communities

under their control, I suspected had similar stories to share. If–you know, not

only from Miami to Lexington, but I could see from the U.S. to, you know, say

Turkey, which is what I was reading in Anna's work, or in Egypt, which is–you

know, and talking to Anna and working with her and her focus being so much in

the Middle East, I kind of got drawn to that. And it's so funny because I come

from this place called Opa-locka that was sort of meant to look like Baghdad in

1990 never.

(laughs) You know. And I, I was just like, “Yeah, no, I totally can–” I don't

know. It just sort of, like, “Yeah, I could go and do that.” And, and kind of

look at policing from this other angle. And so, yeah. So, one day I was in

Anna's office and I said, “Anna, now that I'm done with my master's, I want to,

like, do this research in the Middle East.” And literally, she said, “What about

Egypt?” And I said, “Sweet. Yeah, sure.” And that was, (laughs) that was

literally it. There was, like, no deeper sort of romanticism about Egypt. I had

no care about pyramids, hieroglyphics, pharaohs, or any of that. There, there

wasn't anything of that. It was more like–it was a site, a country that had been

under authoritarian rule since the 1950s, but arguably way longer. It had this rich

history and that I think could inform how I was thinking about, yeah, policing

and, and management of individuals and communities. So, that's–that sort of

describes the leap or “why to the policing” and then “why to the Egypt” out of

nowhere. But in many ways, they were quite similar. Only, of course, I didn't

get to ride along with–do extensive work with security forces in Egypt. But in

terms of conversations I was having in communities or at different

organizations, it was very much a lot of similarities.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. So, how did you start building that network and, like, making

contacts and meeting people in Cairo?

SMITH:So, let's see, how did I?

It's always kind of a marvel (wheezes) how I pulled it off. So, I started going

there doing–because you know, Anna was like, “You got to learn the language or

get as close to it as possible.” And I–like, at first I was like, “Yeah,

totally. Like, it's not hard, is it?” And I go, and it is incredibly hard. This

very, very ancient language that is beautiful. Like, words have multiple

meanings. It was one of the hardest things I have ever done. More so than

dissertation, more so than graduate school, I think, being a student of Arabic

was that much more challenging, but incredibly rewarding. But–and so, I, you

know, I started going to American University in Cairo and then Cairo University

and just making contacts and telling people what I was doing. And then when I

went to live there for the research, my roommate

worked for UNHR [[United Nations Human Rights]], and was born and raised in

Alexandria. And so, she didn't give me contacts, but she said, “Have you–” you

know, she would often say, like, “Did you go and look at this place or talk to

this place?” And so, I was getting leads from her. I was getting leads from some

people in the sort of academic communities that I'd become a part of, whether it

was Cairo University or AUC. And then the rest really was just in walking the

streets of Cairo. So, if I wasn't, in this case, riding along with police

officers, I was basically moving in the same ways that I would see, you know,

small vendors or valets moving through the streets. And, and so, I think sort of

wearing naivete and sort of my foreignness and–is how I started. And it was

really just–

because the, the work was on mobility, right? I made myself mobile and I made

myself chatty and, and people did not know what to do with me. (laughs) But

eventually they were just like, “You're harmless.” And, and then they would

start talking. And so, I amassed a group of friends who were, like, tissue

sellers, who were valets, who were, you know, people I would see on the tuk-tuks

every day to get from part of Cairo to another. I started working at a human

rights organization in Cairo as well. And so, helping with cases and helping

with some of the work in the office, getting to meet their clients and then from

their clients, getting to go to their homes and hear more about their stories.

So, yeah, I just kind of, I

guess, truly embedded myself and just was super chatty. And then I started to

build up just this network of people who would then share stories. And the

reason why I focused on people who were low income is because ding, ding, ding,

poor people often get the brunt of police violence, no matter where they are in

the world. And in Egypt, there's a huge kind of informal economy of people who

sell goods on the street sides, who do transport. And, and those people with an

informal economy are largely low income. And so–and they're also the most prone

to police violence because they have no–like, they have no paperwork for their

businesses, right? It's just kind of something that they're doing to barely

survive. They most often get the brunt of violence from, you know, street

traffic officers.

If, if other security forces that are higher up come through their neighborhood

and–you know, in one instance, a man was–who was a mechanic–was forced to work

on this officer's car. They have no recourse. They can't–there's no one they can

go to, to ask for help. And so, anyway–and, and so they were sort of the people

I gravitated toward and embedded myself within. And that was the community I

found and how I found them.

CAGLE:That sounds like a lot of [??]effective work. And I think that often goes

under valued in academic work, how much of yourself you have to put into it. And

especially for that kind of, like, embedded work–I don't know if embedded is

quite the right word–but where you're building personal

relationships with people who become part of the academic work. That's tough.

And then especially if it's, you know, so far away, then how do you sort of

maintain those relationships? And, yeah, those are all, I guess, open questions.

Do you–have you been able to maintain relationships?

SMITH:So, yeah, with, like, sort of my closest network. So, you know, I have

friends, Iman and Yasmin, who I met. They didn't end up being part of the

research in any way. They–you know, I–again, just so much of my work there was

making myself sort of publicly available to be, you know, chatty. And so, I met

them, they were two sisters. And we're still friends. My roommate, Rasha, is so

dear to me. And, and then Shaima, who–actually, I went to her

to be a tutor in Arabic. And then ultimately, you know, she's just become a

friend. And so, we still connect and chat from time to time. And so, that's sort

of the core network of people that I've kept relationships with. But for

research clients, no, after–(sighs) well, I mean, these folks, because a lot of

them were informal vendors on streets. Like, you know, their communication

changed often. Like, they would have one number one day, another number the next

day. And so, if I'm not there seeing them daily, then you sort of lose those

connections. And then I should also say that I worked with a, a company to do

focus groups. And so, they helped to recruit my focus group folks as well. So,

there were two sort of separate sects–or sets of interlocutors. There were the,

the people who I've recruited, who I just

got to know on the street, and who I basically, like, chatted up. And then

people who this firm brought in as focus group participants to do some of the

other elements of that research.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. I think we'll probably talk about this in a minute with climate

conversations, but just the, the need for a really expansive set of possible

relations is really important in the work that you're describing. Like, the

world is not divided into “friends” and “not friends”, or “close” and “not

close”, right? But it's many more shades of relations. And I'm, I’m guessing,

like, you know, doing ride-arounds with Lexington police, for example, that's a

very specific relationship that you had with them, right? Where I'm guessing

there weren't, like, a lot of friendships necessarily that grew organically out

of that experience, right? But that doesn't mean that's not a relationship of

some kind. Yeah. So, okay, you did the dissertation, did the research. Were you

teaching the whole time? You were–because you were a graduate teaching

assistant, right?

SMITH:Yeah, so not the whole time. So, I took on–I think after I got back from

Egypt, I, I took on some courses. I took on, like, the cities of the world

course, I want to say, or North American cities. I mean, it's all kind of vague

to me now. And I taught a Middle East course. And then after I finished in 2015,

I did a teaching postdoc at UK, where I taught courses on the Middle East, and I

think on urban geography, if I remember correctly. And then I got a, a gig, a

job at Bucknell University as a visiting professor for one year, visiting

assistant. I was replacing someone who had gone on sabbatical that year. And I

was teaching in the international relations department.

CAGLE:(laughs) Full circle.

SMITH:I know. (scoffs, laughs) And I was having to teach theory of

international relations, which was just hilarious. Poor students. Anyway, so,

that was the year where I, like, I fully did the thing. Like, I, I graduated and

now I'm an academic and I absolutely hated it. I hated– Well, I do–like, the

school was lovely, but Lewisburg, Pennsylvania is in the middle of nowhere,

about probably an hour away from state college. And, and it, it was, it’s all

sort of focused around Bucknell and its students. So, I felt very isolated.

And then all of my life force’s energy was being poured into students. And, and

when I think back to what I thought about when I was like, “Oh, academia, I

could read books and write and think and talk to people about ideas every day.”

And then when I realized that, “No, you're at a college that really focuses

strongly on undergraduate education and teaching, and I did not like teaching at

Kegel. I thought teaching was the pits. (laughs) I hated when people would come

during office hours to ask me things that I felt were clearly right there in the

text. I hated, I hated that we couldn't have just conversations. Like, I just

wanted people to think with, and they wanted people to come to class, have the

presentation, deliver the presentation, and then give the test. The

students, I mean. That's what I sensed. And I, I absolutely hated it. And I

think, and I think–I mean, to be quite honest, too, I think there was a class

dimension there as well. I think I felt resentment that I had worked so hard.

And I was on a campus with kids who were ostensibly within, like, the top

two-percent of our country in terms of wealth and access to just resources. And

the idea of me slaving for so many hours into the night to then serve these

students of the two-percent just made me angry. And I was like, “No, this is not

the life that I wanted for myself. And if I'm gonna slave for anyone, I wanted

to slave for communities like the one that I grew up with, or in some

way that–” Yeah, I just wanted to support the world that I knew and where I came

from, wherever that world might be, whether it was Egypt or Miami or Lexington.

And so, I think as soon as November of that teaching year rolled around–so, it

was very into the first semester, I, I called up the director, then director of

Seedleaf, where I'd volunteered before while I was in graduate school, and I

said, “You know, I think I need a new job. I can't think of anything else I want

to do, partially because I'm not really trained to do anything else but to be a

thinker at this point. (laughs) I don't know anything about computer science. I

don't know how to build things. I can read and write really well. But is there

any way I can come and work for Seedleaf?”

Because another thing that I can do really well is garden. And we're a really

great gardener. And then director Ryan Cook said, “If you can find a grant to do

it, sure.” And so, I found a grant and I used those two things I knew how to do

very well, which is reading and writing. And I wrote a grant that I got. And it

got me an income for the first two years and helped me to come back from

Bucknell–which I refer to as the wilderness–back into Lexington.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Was a little more than forty days, but (laughs) you still found

yourself. But, so, that was actually a question I wanted to ask about, which is

the gardening piece, particularly through graduate school. I mean, graduate

school is such a, an all-consuming endeavor. And then especially when you're

doing fieldwork elsewhere, I think building and maintaining a relationship to

land can be tough

if we think of it as a, as a matter of rooting. So, how were you building and

cultivating a relationship to, to land and, and particularly, you know, through gardening?

SMITH:Yeah. So, I mean, I’d always–I mean, it's just sort of confounding to me,

coming north, the identity of a gardener and the identity that you need to have

a garden to grow things in, like– So, in Miami, right, it is not uncommon to see

mango trees and fruit trees everywhere, just as sort of like part of the

landscape. In Jamaica, like, I described my grandmother's yard of–you know, my

grandfather went to these botanical shows that would happen every year called

Denby in Jamaica and bring home a tree. Like, if you could, you had an ackee

tree, which Jamaica–ackee is part of the national dish, ackee and saltfish. But

you had an ackee tree that you get food off of. Like, “Why not have food in your

landscape?” was just like, question mark, question mark, question mark.

(laughs) And so, coming north and realizing that people had food, but they were

gardeners and they did it as, like, part of this hobby of gardening and not just

as, like, this normal common sense thing was a bit baffling. But–so, I go from

Miami to this community and in undergraduate, I was–I lived in a housing

cooperative where gardening was a pretty big part of what we did. And so, I was

just used–and so, it was, like, from Miami where it was just part of what you

did to have food growing if you could. That was, like, low effort to Syracuse

where we had a big, huge summer garden and a front yard garden and a side yard

garden. And then, you know, when I was here in, at UK during my master's, like,

my summer work–I found work working in a garden for a wonderful woman named

Barbara Crocker, who had a huge–it had to have been an acre and some

change–backyard, where she just made it into this beautiful

garden that was, like, you know, maintained by student workers that she got

every summer. And so, I did that. And, you know, when I would be stressed out

about school, before Michler's became, like, this really expensive, crazy, busy

place that it is right now, it used to be really quiet, and I could go through

the greenhouses and look at plants that I couldn't plant anywhere because I

didn't have land. But I would just hang out there and sometimes chat with John

Michler or other staff there. And so–and then, yeah, I'd volunteered with

Seedleaf just to get my hands in dirt and to, –[dog whines] yeah, garden. And,

and so, I've just–no matter where I've been, I've always found some way to do

it. Even in Egypt, my roommate Rasha was so pissed at me because I would–like,

in walking around, there were lots of plant sellers. Like, Egyptians love plants

because they're in, like, these–

literally, like, sandstorms coat everything, like, this beige brown, and there's

no grass. And, like, you know, finding greenery is really hard within the city.

And so, there's lots of people who sell houseplants. So, every day when I would

go out and I had some spare change, I would bring home a houseplant to where our

balcony basically was a jungle. Like, and we had kitty cats who would go out

into the jungle and they would, like, smell the fresh air. It was, it was very

adorable. But I, I (wheezes) just always needed to have something growing

nearby. And so, it just felt it was truly the only other thing I knew how to do

besides read and write. And so, I, I don't know if I thought of it in terms of

me rooting somewhere as much as I needed to do that for my own mental health and

sanity. Yeah.

CAGLE:This idea of, like,

the identity of the gardener, right? This–that, that in some spaces, contexts,

it's not–it doesn't even necessarily make sense to have that as an identity or

as a, as a necessary identity prior to accessing, like, locally grown produce

or, like, producing your own, growing your own stuff. But now in a lot of

places–like, you describe yourself as a gardener. Did–is that an identity that

you–like, how do you think of yourself in the context of that identity then,

given this background?

SMITH:(sighs) Yeah, I think when I describe myself as a gardener now, I think

I–like, it's signaling to other people within this sort of, like, milieu that's,

I say, perhaps north of the Mason Dixon line. Like, who I am, and perhaps a

little bit of my values, right? And the weird thing about being in the nonprofit

world is that part of my brain is always oriented to the fact that I need to

fundraise and find people who are like-minded with money. And so, a lot of my

language then takes on, like, “Okay, if this is an identity that attracts

certain eyeballs to our organization, then that is, ‘Yes, I am a gardener,’

(laughs) right.” Which is not untrue. But yeah, it is, like, it is just

signaling to others with a value of growing food, of embedding themselves within

landscapes, of appreciating certain ecosystem services that come from a garden.

Self sufficiency; that's what I'm about. So, it signals now in a way that I just

never realized that it did.

CAGLE:And also, I mean, the

work that you have done as executive director of Seedleaf–which I'll ask how

that transition happened in a second. But that work–my understanding of that

work is that it's been very much about stretching that identity, right? And, and

finding ways to elasticize it, to challenge barriers to it, to invite people

into it, to– I, (sighs) I don't know what the right phrase is. I, I almost said

give people our permission to self identify, right. But this idea that,

like–well, even you said, like, you don't have to have land to garden, right.

And so, I wondered if that was part of it. It makes sense that it's, it’s very

practical also. But just, you know, like,

people who landowners shouldn't get to claim, shouldn't get to monopolize the

identity of gardener. Yeah. So, how did you end up executive directing? And

being in charge of all the fundraising and getting eyeballs and–

SMITH:And so, yeah, I came to Seedleaf at a time when the then director, Ryan

Cook, I think, was getting tired. I mean, being ED of a small nonprofit is an

incredibly stressful enterprise that stretches you in many ways. Stretches

until, like, you know, perhaps the rubber band snaps. (laughs) But by 2019, he

was just going through a lot of different changes and, and realized that he just

didn't want to do it anymore. And also, you know, our organization had a

particular juncture in 2019. So, in that winter, we just had no funds. Seedleaf

has always

been terrible at fundraising, something that I am not great at, but I, I do try

to be a little bit–I do try my best to learn ways to be better. We had no money

and it was like this fork in the road. Like, either we close as an organization

or we have to do something radical. He decided to step down ultimately. Like, I

was flirting stepping down and, and just, you know, leaving so that there would

be enough money to continue another day. But he decided to step down, and there

was no one else. So, Seedleaf had, largely before I came along, had mostly been

a one-person show with lots of volunteers, supporting characters who would come

in and out for a period of time and then duck back out. And, and that wasn't

sustainable. That was also part of, I think, you know, this person feeling

incredibly tired. And so, in 2019, with very little money in the

bank, I become, in that December, the ED, and, and then had to think about how

we, how we survive. So, yeah, I kind of become–became director not out of– Well,

it's choice, but it was out of desperate measures more so. Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Can you talk a little bit about what–like, what Seedleaf was envisioned

as as it–when it was founded, and, and sort of how it's evolved to what it is now?

SMITH:So, Seedleaf was founded in 2007 as a way, I think, of, of– So, it was

sort of the vision of a group called Communality. And it was a religious group.

It was students who had just graduated from Asbury University or had some link

to Asbury University alumni, as well as recent graduates who were thinking,

like, “How do we as Christians

at the time live in the world that is deeply, deeply broken? How do we take the

knowledge and the resources that we have to walk alongside people who are in

some of the darkest hours of their lives?” Right. And so, these Christians–all

white, from my understanding–they're in Lexington because Asbury, Asbury is in

Wilmore. But they're primarily living in Lexington, wanting to create a

community of worship together, but also wanting to have meaningful work that

serves the broader community in some way. And so, they focus in on the East End

where some of them were living at the time, I believe. And they're looking

around and they're seeing a historically African-American community that is now

sort of riddled with crime and also with

these diseases of lifestyle–whether it was hypertension, diabetes, obesity–and

that lifestyle being largely dictated by the fact that there wasn't fresh food

options, not enough fresh food options nearby. And so, thinking, “Okay, well,

the thing that we can do here is garden and creating these spaces where people

can grow their own food, hopefully supplementing their own diets, and sort of

being an intervention into this problem. And it allows us as a community to

build relationships and do this work of walking alongside, of living lives as

neighbors with each other.” And I think in a lot of ways, they got a huge

reality check about–one, you might want to live alongside someone, but they

don't necessarily want to deal with or talk to you or live alongside you. And

they certainly don't want to garden. So, our first garden in 2007 was London

Ferrell Community Garden. And my understanding was that it was designed

as private plot owners. Like, you can rent a plot and get it there and you can

go in and garden.

CAGLE:And this is the garden on Third Street next to the cemetery?

SMITH:Yes. And they only had, I think, about half or a little bit less than

half of those plots filled up, and the rest was just becoming weeds. And so,

they quickly had to reevaluate, like, “Okay, like, this product does add beauty

to the neighborhood.” And it does, you know. It's a point where people can come

in. They saw that people were–neighbors were enjoying the food and that it was

there, but they didn't want to garden. And so, the second idea was to turn half

the garden that was underused into a community “you pick” garden where people

can come in and just pick produce. So, like, getting fresh food out there, you

don't have to work for it. You don't have to grow it yourself. You don't have to

rent anything. You don't have to pay anything. You can just come and get what

you need according to your need. And

so, that is the current format that it is in today. This idea that, you know,

these are “you pick” gardens. They are maintained with the help of volunteers,

although that–staff members, and now we have a staff of five, help to maintain

them as well. So, they're only as good as the number of volunteers that we get

to maintain them. And it, it acknowledges that, you know, not all of our

neighbors want to garden, but that we do have a crisis of health in these

communities. And, and it also–I think today, the way that we're different from

the past is that no longer do I think, you know, “Everyone should garden,” or

that, “We should have gardens everywhere.” In fact, I am against gardens

everywhere. (laughs) Because someone has to maintain them. And I, I–

what I am in favor of now is just teaching people basic skills to even keep a

houseplant, right? And so, sort of backing away from this idea of, “Gardens are

these solutions for, you know, for neighborhoods, for violence, for obesity.”

Like, you know, gardens can't solve all these problems. So, totally backed out

on the idea that gardens are solutions for all these things, but still very much

of the mind that, if we can give people these basic skills, they can find some

entree way to growing that suits them and their lifestyles. But yeah, I suppose,

I suppose a large difference now is that we don't make assumptions about what

people need or want. We're just here if people would like or need to know

something about growing.

CAGLE:It seems to me,

despite what you said earlier about your training not having prepared you for a

lot of jobs, like, learning to listen to people in the way that you have to as a

researcher in geography is really key to that lesson of not making assumptions.

Yeah. And hearing people and shifting your viewpoint as a result. Also, I just

want to point out–so, you have become an educator. (laughs) Nonetheless. But,

but it seems–it strikes me as, as a pretty distinctive–like, non-formal

environmental education is, is very different from the kind of formal classroom

higher ed education. Yeah.

SMITH:And I think it's more satisfactory, because again, it's like, this world

that I know and that I feel kind of at home

in, that it–it's other folks who are immigrant or low income, who don't have

loads of resources. And that feels so much better to me than–yeah.

CAGLE:I saw in a couple of spots–I think, I think it's on the Seedleaf website,

but certainly in interviews and such that you've done–this idea of growing

growers instead of growing gardens. And that seems to encapsulate a lot of what

you're saying. Right. And it's not growing gardeners, right? It's growing

growers, that the emphasis is on the growing, which again, seems to point away

from this idea of “gardener” as a singular identity or attached to kind of land

ownership or minimum requirements for entry. Yeah. I think–I mean, I definitely

thought that for a long time,

that I couldn't be a gardener because I was a renter, you know, or because I was

moving around all the time, and didn't even have houseplants for a long time.

Yeah, and now I strive to be the neighbor that's, like, leaving produce on

people's doors in the middle of the night, because I, I have too much. (laughs)

SMITH:And you got to get rid of it. (laughs)

CAGLE:Tired of me foisting it on them. Yeah. I also saw–speaking of, of pithy

phrases–somewhere, something about ambassador of flowers? What is that?

SMITH:So, when I first came back to Lexington and started working for Seedleaf,

Ryan, who was a director, he had, like, this laser focus on, “Our spaces could

only grow food.” You know, like, “People need food, that's what we're growing.”

And I was just like, “That is so lame.” (laughs) I mean, yeah, we can grow food.

But, you know, it's so–everyone, every single person, I've not met a person who

does not like a flower, and who does not feel inspired by a flower. And,

you know, doing the, the master's thesis research in the neighborhood that I now

work in. And knowing the impact of just seeing scenes of beauty when you're kind

of at your lowest ebb, and what that can do for you. It was, like, no. Like, if

anything, like, we need bread and roses, right? Like, you know, we need, we need

food and flowers, dude. And so, I went about just, like, adding flowers

into–like, tucking it into the corners of raised beds or corners of gardens.

Because, like, why do this if it's not, in some other way as well,

inspirational? And so, that's how I got that nickname of–you know, Ryan stood

off hand one day. He's like, “Oh, you'll just be the ambassador of flowers

then.” And I'm like, “You know what, I will.” (laughs)

CAGLE:Indeed.

SMITH:Indeed.

This was actually, I think, before I worked for Seedleaf. This was when I was

still–I think I was still in grad school. I was just at that time still a volunteer.

CAGLE:That's very cool, to have that influence. And flowers, or plants grown

primarily for their flowers, can be such good companion plants for gardens,

right? Like, the either or dichotomy. Nature is not about either or. Yeah.

SMITH:Yeah. And those vegetables have flowers before they have fruit.

CAGLE:Exactly. Like, some people grow peas just for the flowers, right? Yeah.

So, that's really nice. So, where in your life–this is such a–I think this is a

really hard question, but I'm just gonna ask it and see if it goes anywhere.

Like, at what point in your life did you become aware of or start thinking about climate

and climate change? Right? Because we've talked a lot about nature and

environment and gardens and growing things. But climate is this sort of, like,

big, other abstract–

SMITH:–Yeah. Thing.

CAGLE:Yeah.

SMITH:So, when I was little, I remember hearing about the ozone layer and,

like, like, these gasses were going into the atmosphere and creating this, like,

hole in our ozone layer that could be really quite dangerous for us, right? So,

it wasn't at the time linked to climate. It was, like, what we were releasing

into the atmosphere that was creating this rip where, like, you know, these

ultra violet or whatever, these, like, you know, elements of, like, the sun's

light was coming down into earth and it had this harm, right? At the same time,

there was sort of this increasing awareness when we were, when–I'm saying we,

because we were both contemporaries–when we were small about climate, but it

wasn't as big as, like,

conversations about the ozone layer. I remember that. And so, I don't think

climate became a thing that I was even that tuned into until I went to

university, until I went to Syracuse, and I was part of the Student

Environmental Action Coalition, SEEC. And, and it was there that conversations

about fossil fuels started to be–sort of become something in my own

consciousness. I mean, a lot of our work at the time was focused on sweat labor,

on sweatshop labor on campus and the making of campus goods. But that was the

first–it had just sort of, like, this greater sort of image. Not so much of,

like, you know, chemicals going into the atmosphere and creating this ozone rip,

but of, like, us through use of fossil fuels and these investments that our

universities are making, and our name in fossil fuel companies that they are

leading to changes within our climate. And I, I mean, I didn't even totally

understand it then, but it–and again, sort of like, you know, our campaigns were

not necessarily geared toward climate action. But that's where perhaps I first,

in a very real way, started to become aware of it. And then, I don't know, just

following the news, and, and again, the student of international relations,

looking at, like, the Paris agreements, and, like–I remember Al Gore, right, and

wanting him to be president because of all of the work that he–and he does this

after his failed bid for the presidency. But he becomes, like, this real big

climate champion. And still following him and his work, just, like, hearing more

about it and thinking, “Oh, this is really scary.”

And then I think, kind of glibly, as I got older, sort of like, you know, mid to

late 20s, thinking like, “Dude, my life is so simple. Like, if anything, I don't

have any responsibility for this climate disaster. It was boomers and, like, you

all who drive and eat loads of fast food and eat meat.” Like, I was vegan, never

owned a car, didn't even know how to drive. Like, you know, renters didn't have

any–I felt like any of the conveniences that, you know, the other people in the

world had that was leading to this problem. So, I, I perhaps was a bit

hoity-toity thinking like, “This is a problem, but I'm doing all that I can.

And, like, everyone else is the problem, and the government just needs to make

policy and fix it.” Like, and so, I don't think it was until–actually, I think

it was being in Egypt, and then working for Seedleaf, that rose my awareness.

So, in Egypt, I mean, water fights that are happening along the Nile between

countries, just the intense heat that we would experience. I think, you know, in

traveling to, say, Palestine, and then hearing about places in other parts of

the Middle East that were, you know, not really habitable, unless you had AC and

salinization plants, and me starting to be like, “What the hell is going on?”

And then it became just, yeah, real for me when I was done, when I came to work

for Seedleaf, because now I'm out in it every day. Like, I–there's no buffer

anymore. And you just become

really aware, like, “Oh, crap. If this winter is, like, insane, will the trees

survive that we planted?” You know, like, “Oh, crap. If the summer is insane,

will I be able to make it to August without, like, totally falling out from heat

exhaustion and heat stroke?” And so, feeling very much like going from the

position of, like, “I'm already doing, like, everything and I'm so great,” to

feeling like, “Oh, shit. Like, I am at the, the–I'm gonna receive the brunt of,

you know, at least locally, of our climate changing in these radical different

ways.” Whether it means I can't get into the garden to, like, you know, to do

things because it's too extreme, to, “I don't even know if the food that we just

planted will survive unless I'm here to water it every day,” which just, like,

defies our capacity as an organization, you know. Unless we get more people

to, like, be seasonal workers, to– I mean, yeah, just in so, in so many ways.

And, and I mean–not this summer, this summer has been great, but last summer

felt absolutely unbearable. Like, it was just–it was so hot. And all that we

know about, like–you know, because we're working in neighborhoods where there

are people with few resources and people who do get desperate and, you know. And

that leads to, like, violent occurrences happening. Like, you know, one of our

board members who lived on Chestnut had her house shot up, you know, in the

summer. And we know that in summertime, crime rates go up and crazy stuff

happens because people can be outside and–but also people get stressed out from,

like, just heat, and not having AC, and not having spaces to quite literally

cool down. That is a factor. And so, I–that's when I sort of just

became really hyper aware of climate, in a way that it was sort of bonkers to me

that no one else was caring about in the same way. And also, you know, I'm from

Miami, Florida, and every time I go home to visit, something on the news about,

like, in South Beach, they're having to raise the street level again, right? I'm

constantly worried about hurricanes because my mother doesn't–like, there's

no–she doesn't have house insurance. It's just insane in Florida. And it's too

expensive. And she is disabled. She finally owns the house. But her income is

limited. And she just doesn't have loads of money to pay for crazy house

insurance. So, she's like, “I'm just going to put hurricane shutters up and, you

know, get sandbags and hope for the best.” And I'm like, “That is not okay.” As

the Atlantic heats up more. And then, you know, our people–we come from an

island nation, Jamaica, which is, you know, right there in the Atlantic. This

little tiny island

that is just, like, poised to get whipped by Atlantic that is heated and

creating more and more storms. And so, I'm just like, yeah, hyper afraid a lot,

either because of work, because of, like, you know, my family in Miami, and

particularly my mother. And, you know, this is her house. She feels very

strongly about her house that, that she was able as an immigrant who came here

illegally to be a citizen and own a home. Of losing that I think would be

profound for her. And, like, I mean, as an ED of a nonprofit, I'm not making

loads of money. And so, the idea of, “If she loses this home, how can I afford

to take care of her in a way that, like, you know, maintains her dignity and

maintains my sanity?” (laughs) Yeah, like, those are–and so, like, climate

change has, like, really real real life implications that are every day.

CAGLE:Yeah. I very much know that feeling of–I don't, I don't think it's

gaslighting, because I don't think people are doing it intentionally. But that

feeling of, like, “Am I crazy?” Like, how is everyone not just screaming about

this all the time? And it can be–I mean, it's tough to know where to put that

energy, that emotional energy, I think. And it, based on our work together, I

think a lot of it, you have been putting into–back into Seedleaf, and then also

into the work, sort of collaborative work, which is, like, how climate

conversations came about, right? So, is that right? Like, do you feel like

you're taking that emotional experience, energy, and, like, putting it back into the

work? Have you been able to do that? Or is it–(sighs)

SMITH:I, I mean, only so much of it can go into the work. Some of it–I mean,

that fear. I think no matter how awesome our, our conversations go, and, you

know, whether we have it with our neighbors, or, like, the handyman who comes to

visit the house, or with each other, there's still that leftover fear that still

comes home with me at night. And, and it's largely because– It's the thing that

I think we struggle with in climate conversations. Like, the work that we're

doing is so local, and so, like, about connecting and empathy, and building

these relationships with our community members here in Lexington. But the

solution to this big problem relies on

really all of us as a nation, right? Or nations doing this work. And it's not

happening. And, and it just sort of–it almost feels like we're all at the wake

for a funeral, right? (laughs) Like, yeah, we're seeking comfort and solace in

each other and trying to find ways that we can support each other as a

collective in this grief, and make it better. Fill the gap that this, this loss

has left. But there's still this loss that's–I don't know, I don't know if

that's the right analogy. But yeah, there's–the emotions that are generated by

climate change do–are somewhat ameliorated by work and by this wonderful group

of humans that I'm a part of. But a lot of it just

is still there with nowhere to go. And even, even my solace, which is going into

my own garden, has been all but abandoned. Like, it's just it was–it's too hot.

Like, I work in so many gardens during the day. And when I come home, I used to

be able to, like, of course, go and work in my garden, like, when I got home.

But now it's just, like, “It's hot, I'm exhausted, I don't want to sweat

anymore.” (laughs) And so, my backyard garden has become completely overgrown.

The front yard garden is overgrown. Yeah, it's just kind of a, a sadness

that–like, I'm sort of–basically, I'm reaching my own physical limits of what I

can feasibly do during a given day in the summer months of particularly July and

August. And it is directly because it is insane, the level of heat. And that is

our active season. That is

the active season for gardens everywhere. My spring garden was beautiful.

Summer, I–and that, that's heartbreaking. And, and gardening is the thing that

sort of helps me to feel like, “Okay, we can do–” you know, there's, like,

there's some energy that gets expended there. And it hasn't been going there lately.

CAGLE:Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you wrote about that in the Herald-Leader piece

during COVID, right? That that-the gardening as, like, a place of solace and a

place to put anxious energy. So–and that's only gonna get harder to do as the

seasons, like the summer season in particular, becomes hotter. I mean, not

again. Like, in Kentucky, we're getting off pretty easy relatively, when it–in

terms of temperature, at least. Well, okay, so, climate conversations. How– I've

talked to Claire, and I've talked to Callie and Alex, and then Tori talked to

Mary for this project. I don't know, I haven't listened to it. So, I don't know

if they talked about climate conversations. But I'm wondering from your

perspective, like, how that got started and what you're thinking about that,

that work? Because yeah, the–as you said, we're sort of butting up on this

question of solutions right now.

SMITH:Mm-hmm. Well, it was a hot summer leading into fall. And I've been going

to the Urban Forestry Initiative meetings and met Mary Arthur. And I have to

say, I don't even know really how Mary and I became friends, except that I went

to these UFI meetings. And she would look at me and her eyes would twinkle. And

I would look at her, and–(laughs)

CAGLE:They do twinkle. She has this face.

SMITH:She does.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:And, and so, and she, she was a supporter of Seedleaf. Like, loved our

former ED Ryan Cook, as does all of Lexington. And I think came up to me and

just asked me how things were

going. And I would tell her. And actually, I don't think our friendship was

cemented until I was walking with a friend, Craig Crowder, who you both know.

And he lives near Mary, and I didn't know that I was on her street, but we were

walking. And she was out on her porch, and she yelled, “Christine!” And I

yelled, “Mary!” And, and she just came off her porch, and we hugged, which I

don't think we had hugged before then. And, and, (laughs) and then it was like,

“Oh, it's so lovely to see you.” And it genuinely was lovely to see her. And,

and then she's like, “I live here.” I'm like, “Interesting. And you have such a

great porch.” And I think from then on, I just was showing up at her porch

randomly. I think it was just at that moment settled. We're friends now. And so,

(laughs) with UFI meetings and Tree Week, Mary had come to me to ask if I would

do a

Tree Week event–or Seedleaf would do a Tree Week event. And I said, “Yeah, sure,

come to the farm and we can talk about it.” And she came, and this was the year

when the Australia wildfires were really, really bad. And she was to see the

farm–I think I'd suggest that we do something at the farm for Tree Week, or

two-acre urban farm. And so, she came to see it and talk about what we could

possibly do. And so, I gave her some ideas. And then I was like, “But Mary,

like, this is so dumb. Like, how are we celebrating trees when, like, a bunch of

trees are burning, like, in the southern hemisphere, right?” (laughs) And she's

like, “No, Christine, you're absolutely right.” And I'm like, “Okay, so, like,

probably we should do something, like, for Tree Week.” And, and so, then Mary

and I started to think about, like, what could that be? And, you know, I didn't

know, but it–I felt like it needed to be,

it needed to be some kind of way of communicating with the public. And I got the

sense that first year that it–because I was like, “Can't UFI just take this on,

like, as part–like, build it into Tree Week?” And there seemed to be not the

appetite for that. Or, like, they–I think there was a keenness to keep it

focused on trees, which again, blows my mind. It's, like, but trees are burning

everywhere. Like, this is an issue for the trees. But anyway, but–and so, we

basically moved to create an event that was within Tree Week, but not, like, a

central core of, you know, what the week focused on. But to do that, we needed

help. And I feel like–what were the next steps? Perhaps–Claire was Mary's

student, and–

CAGLE:I think she might have been

interning with UFI at that point. Yeah.

SMITH:I think so. And so, she was brought in because she was also really

involved in–and I think just brainstorming with Mary climate, and or just

talking to Mary about climate. And so, Claire was there and Mary and myself. And

I asked Craig to come because Craig was a rhetorician. And I felt like our event

needed to speak to people in a way that didn't make them feel alienated. And

Craig always has opinions about how language works and how, you know, people

talk down to those who they think are beneath them. And I felt like a lot of

climate stuff fell into that trap of talking down to the public. I kind of

remember how I was really hoity-toity in my vegan, bike-only phase. And I was

like, “I'm doing everything correct, but you heathens are, like, (laughs)

destroying this planet.” And so, Craig was there, and Tracene Logsdon

from FCPS came to one or two meetings. You might have been there when she–

CAGLE:I don't think so.

SMITH:Okay.

CAGLE:I think you were the only new-to-me person, at those meetings. Yeah.

SMITH:And, and that's how we started, and it really became, like, what should

we do that's climate focused where we're engaging with people in a way that

isn't demeaning or off-putting, but that invites them into really sharing what

they're seeing and how they're feeling in this moment? Like, how do we get us

out of the, like, really charged language, and kind of the political dumbing

down that feels like it is happening all the time? And then I think Craig–or,

Mary brought you in. And then you and Craig knew each other. And that's how we began.

CAGLE:Yeah. It's so weird to think about.

Because it really–I, I, I should go back through my text messages with Mary,

because I think she texted me, maybe emailed, and I wasn't entirely clear on

what the in–I, I knew it was a planning invite for something to do with Tree

Week and climate. And that was about all I knew. And then I came and y'all were

talking about signs, and I had money from KYCC. So, I paid for some of the–

SMITH:–Yeah, those big tree signs–

CAGLE:–the big ones. And I just remember being just excited that other people

wanted to talk about it. And not in a way that–like, in my life, typically, I

think I, I experience climate talk either in a very academic way, right? People

who are doing research. Or in a, a very specific form of activist conversation,

like a move to action. But not that sort of exploratory, like, we care about

this as humans. And, you know, we're not trying to make a plan to advocate for a

specific policy or something. It was, like, doing something different. And it

felt– Sometimes I, I get involved with projects early and it feels unfocused in

a bad way. But some–that felt like, you know, we're circling something, we're

exploring something. Like–

SMITH:And I think exploring is the thing, kind of. Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Yeah. So, then we had the event as part of Tree Week at Castlewood

Park and brought the community in. And we–so, we haven't actually talked about

that specific event very much in the conversations I've had so far. What do you

remember about it?

SMITH:I remember sitting down with

Dan Stiver, and–

CAGLE:–Who's a tree guy–

SMITH:–who's a tree guy who was there. He lives near Castlewood Park. And, and

having a good conversation about him, about the ways in which he as the city had

tried–or, the conversations that he was having at the city level around, you

know, tree canopy and other things that he was doing as part of his role. And

then I remember–I didn't know a few people that was there–that were there. I

remember, also, that I brought pawpaw popsicles.

CAGLE:(gasps) You did. They were so good.

SMITH:(laughs) And yeah, I remember–

CAGLE:Did you make them?

SMITH:No. So, we gave the pawpaw’s food chain and food chain made them for the

event. So, that was our contribution. So, it was like, Seedleaf edition.

There'll be, like, these yummy treats.

CAGLE:Did–were the pawpaws grown at a Seedleaf garden?

SMITH:Yeah, they were–I think they were. No, not all of them. Some of them–I

think some of them came from another farm, I think. Or probably Leandra had some

leftover frozen from a previous year. So, there was amalgamation of pawpaws.

And, and then there was also, I feel, like–was there, like, a persimmon dessert?

Probably–I can't remember that one.

CAGLE:I just remember the pawpaw popsicles. The, the paw-popsicles.

SMITH:Yes. (laughs) Exactly, paw-popsicles. And I think the overwhelming

feeling that I got from that event was that most people felt like this needed to

continue. And then it was like, “Huh, okay, so we've printed these big signs.”

And we–

I think by then we had yards–we had some–

CAGLE:Yeah, I took–I got my first one at that event. Just the sort of yard

signs that you stake out in the yard, yeah.

SMITH:Yeah. And then it was like, now what? And we all liked each other. And

so, the now what was like, “Are we gonna stop seeing each other a little bit?” Like–(laughs)

CAGLE:Okay, again, the relationality thing, right? Like, these different kinds

of relationships when there's no–like, what's the model for that relationship

where it's, like, “Okay, are we, are we friends? Do we, like, go bowling? Like,

are we, are we co-workers? Are we co-conspirators? Like, what, what are we–” Yeah.

SMITH:And have it remain just natural and lovely. Because I think that's one of

the fears that, you know, I've heard Mary express, is like, “I don't want this

to ever feel like work. Like, another thing that I have to do.” And it hasn't

felt that way yet. So–

CAGLE:The only time it's felt like that for me is dealing with the budget

through UK, for the grant that Claire and Callie got. It's fine. Small price to pay.

SMITH:Yeah, yeah. So, yeah, I think out of that event was like, we need to

continue, but we don't know why we would be continuing just yet. Or for what

purpose, except that we have these yard signs that people really like. And I

can't remember–what was the next thing to come out of that? So, Craig kind of,

like, drifted and dropped out of the group. We had several meetings about, like,

“What are we?” I remember Judy Humble came to one of those “what are we”

meetings that we had at, oh, the park over by Park Ave. Woodland Park. And I

think, you know, Claire at that point was doing a lot of just, like, outward

facing work

for the group. But it was–like, I think we were so hung up on trying to figure

out what we were. And I think now we feel more confident about what we are,

which is that we're a group of people, a group of friends who come together,

share knowledge. Alex did a great job yesterday of informing us of, like, how

this utility thing is banana pants. And that we try to activate conversations.

Like, we just want to communicate and build relationships with other people.

(laughs) And that's okay. And we’re–I think we're okay with that at, at this

moment. And sort of like, you know, taking steps as they arise toward, you know,

whatever it is that we're meant to be. Even if that means that, you know, we no

longer meet regularly, that's okay. But I feel like we're no longer wedded to

having to be something specific to, like,

I don't know, ease people's apprehension about being a kind of a jellyfish,

right? Like–(laughs)

CAGLE:Right, right. Yeah. A very, very–a jellyfish with a lot of life stages.

SMITH:Yes. Yeah. (laughs)

CAGLE:So, next time people ask, “What's this climate conversation thing?” You

can say, “A jellyfish with a lot of life stages.” (laughs)

SMITH:Yes, exactly. (laughs)

CAGLE:Yeah. And then what's so cool, odd to me is that that's been my

experience too, is this sort of, like, very amorphous–you know, people who are

drawn together because of these shared concerns and values. But yet, we've

produced some really concrete things, you know, like the card–I mean, the yard

signs that you talked about, but then the card game.

SMITH:Mm-hmm. The big old tree signs. We still have that big tree sign in the

North Pole Garden.

CAGLE:Yeah. See? I mean, these–it's these very, like, permanent–and the card

game is so interesting to me because everyone we tell about it wants it. And I

imagine it's gonna outlive whatever. It’s gonna outlive the jellyfish, right?

Yeah. Yeah. I spend so much time thinking about, in terms of leadership, and I'm

guessing you do too, as, as the ED of a nonprofit, that I spend so much time

thinking about how to build things that last, that it's interesting to be part

of a structure where the structure itself is not the point. You know, where we

don't have to worry about making it last. And that's actually very–it's part of

what makes it not feel like work to me, I think. Yeah.

SMITH:Yeah. I will say that at Seedleaf, like, I've

gotten to–into the habit of telling many people that, “You know, our existence

is not the point.” Like, the whole point of Seedleaf is to, like, be of no use,

because, like, the idea of the seed leaves, right? Or, like, the first leaves,

the embryonic leaves that come out of the seed, that just helps the plant get

going, like photosynthesis. And then when it's true leaves come, it kind of just

drops off. And so, the idea is that people in many ways will have the knowledge,

ability to grow something wherever they are. If it's not in a community garden,

if it's at their backyard or on the window sill. The point is to be–make

ourselves redundant, to make it so that it's really common sense to have a

school garden, or to have a fruit tree in your yard, you know, as, like, a thing

that is just lovely, for no other reason. You don't have to be a gardener or any

other entity. You just–it's common sense.

CAGLE:Yeah.

Yeah. And the, the more–I will say the more I garden, the more it seems common

sense to me. I think, I think a lot about how, once I started gardening, I got a

lot less precious about it. You know, it, it seemed at first like, “Oh, I need

to map everything out. And I need to–” And now it's like, “Put a seed in the

soil. Let's see what happens.” Like–(laughs) Yeah. Chaos gardening. Yeah. Yeah.

So, do you–are you working to incorporate those climate conversations into the

Seedleaf, like, environmental education, gardening education, as well then?

SMITH:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. What does that look like?

SMITH:It looks like boldly saying climate change when I'm in front of children

and working that in into the, the different–so, we made this regenerate the earth

coloring book. And it doesn't–it's not about climate change, but it sort of, you

know, states it, that our climate is changing, right? It's, it looks like, you

know, when having conversations about people in the garden who are complaining

about how hot it is, it's like, “Yeah, it's only gonna get worse, folks.”

(laughs) Like, we are gonna see these crazy ups and downs, highs and lows going

forward. And we can't talk about a normal anymore. And so, it's taking what

we're all obviously feeling and, and just parlaying it back into, like, this

reality that's here. And not in a way that's, like, insulting to anyone, but

just sort of, like, matter of factly. And so, having those conversations in the

garden space has been important. And usually if you're a gardener or a farmer or

someone working outside, you know.

Like, we don't remember any–we're old enough to remember beforetime, when it was

not this crazy, when every day, it's like the weather channel has some, like,

new saying to, like, mark how, like, significant this weather event is. Like,

something crazy, like, you know, the polar vortex or, like, I don't know, the

heat diarrhea. I don't know. But there's always some crazy term because it's

just–it's getting crazier and crazier and it's hard to know what to, to expect

or do.

CAGLE:Yeah. Yeah. I worry sometimes about that, um, kind of rhetorical arms

race of, you know, people start tuning it out. And it's sort of self-defeating

because there's this effort to, like, well, we have to use more extreme

terminology to communicate how extreme it is. But at some point, people–if every

day is a new extreme, then the new–the increasing extremes are the new normal.

And people will tune it out. Yeah. So, I think that matter of factness is

probably a really useful companion, maybe, to emphasizing the extremes. Yeah.

SMITH:I will say that, I mean, I think people's push to, like, have climate

conversations and just say, like, climate change is having impact on those who

have been climate deniers. Like, I was reading something this morning that,

um–Mike Huckabee, like, has created educational material for children. Because

he comes from, like, this climate denialist background. Um, but he–even he has

had to reckon that the climate is changing. And so, a lot of it now is like, you

know, “The climate has always changed and here's what that has looked like,

kids.” And he's cherry picking scientific information, but, you know, at least

he too is, like, saying, “Okay, climate–” He's having to reckon with it, which I

think is, like, this progress that comes about

just in being able to name the thing and be taken seriously or be engaged with.

That now we can at least–we're at the point where we can say “This is climate

change.” Which, it feels stupid, but it's also pretty big with just how

politicized it's become in our country.

CAGLE:Yeah. Is there anything I should have asked about that I haven't?

SMITH:I don't think so. I think–I mean, my social security number? You know

everything at this point. (laughs)

CAGLE:(laughs) I know. I know. I always feel like after doing these interviews

that I should offer to let you ask me all the same questions so that we're even.

(laughs) Um, okay. Well then I'll just wrap up with one question, which is, um,

can you tell us about Giant?

SMITH:Oh, wow. (laughs)

CAGLE:This is–I asked because of your, your acknowledgements in your thesis and

your dissertation.

SMITH:Yeah. Um,

yeah. Uh–

CAGLE:You don't have to.

SMITH:No, it's fine. Um, so, Giant was my father. And, uh, he–so, grew up in

Jamaica, um, and learned the jewelry trade, and him and my mother and my uncles,

they immigrate to the United States and he becomes a jeweler here, um,

once–well, he was a jeweler really early on, but then he gets his papers and he

gets settled. Um, and–but he comes during the 1970s when cocaine is everywhere

in America and he becomes, um–because as a young boy, he's watched American

Westerns. Like, my dad loved old Westerns and old movies. And so, he comes

searching for the American dream and what he got was the parties and the

cocaine. Um, and so he becomes addicted to cocaine. Um, but you know, throughout

his life, a jeweler who made amazing jewelry pieces and an artist.

And in Jamaica, the nickname for him was “Giant” because he was very tall, but

also because he was, like, this–uh, he had this huge ambition, um, to, like, you

know, become something in the world. Um, and so, yeah. So, he struggled with

that. Um, but you know, I grew up with my father very much in, in my life. He

lived with us. Um, and you know, between the two of them, like, my father

definitely taught me to appreciate being able to work with my hands. Um, and my

mother was very much into, like, just having beautiful things and, and both of

them, like, sort of, I think exemplified, like, doing good work. Like, my mother

was the manager of housekeeping at a hotel, Howard Johnson.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Hojo!

SMITH:Hojo, yeah. (laughs) And my dad being a jeweler, like,

our home was just, like, strangely this amalgamation of just lovely things. And

our yard had lovely plants and fruit trees. And I think they very much make me

who I am. But, um, yeah, my dad was the reason in large part that I pursued that

master's work, um, because he had died before coming to grad school. Um, and I

remember, like, you know, at one point we had asked officers to intervene to,

like, you know, just stop him from going and, and looking for, um, drugs one

particular time. And they came to the house and they said they couldn't believe

that he was addicted to drugs because the house was so beautiful. Like, and it

was, like, a middle-class. Like, you know, we grew up in a neighborhood that

wasn't rich. It was low income, but, you know, there was pride in how the yard

looked and how the inside of the house looked and, like, money was saved to do

repairs. So, he's like, “This

doesn't look like, you know, the house where an addict lives.” And I just–that

always stood out to me, like–(laughs) Um, and, um, and yeah, knowing that my

father was someone who appreciated beauty and that, uh, in his roughest moments,

like, turned to that. It–so, yeah, it just made sense for my master's thesis

work and in my work in Egypt where a lot of the same themes of what it meant to

be poor and, uh, targeted by security forces, but to still create beauty

wherever they were. That's what I saw in Egypt. And, um, it's what I do in these

garden spaces and some parts of town that people think are worthless, um, is to

just have a space of beauty and to be able to work with my hands and creating.

That is awesome. So, that is Giant.

CAGLE:Thank you for sharing that.

SMITH:Yeah, no problem.

CAGLE:Yeah. And

ambassador of flowers makes even more sense.

SMITH:Yeah. His name was Wilfred Anthony Smith.

CAGLE:Okay. One last short question then. Tell us about Rue.

SMITH:Oh my gosh, Rue. (laughs) Rue is my kitty cat. He is five this first week

of August. I don't know when he was born. But I was, um, I was working with, uh,

CISO from [??]AM Art Foundation and Felice Salmon, uh, to do this thing called

art on the block. I don't know what it is about me that I just create more work

for myself, but I was like, “Wouldn't it be so cool if we had, like, an art

festival and, like, on Sixth Street?” Like–

CAGLE:Oh my god, we haven't even talked about first Sundays yet.

SMITH:I know. (laughs)

CAGLE:Carry on.

SMITH:And because–I mean, so, Sonia [[?? WORDS UNCLEAR]] is about everyone can

do art. You don't need to be, you know, Picasso. Um, that it's, you know,

revelatory, it's

fun, it's healthy self-expression. Um, and Felice is just a mom who lived in the

East End. She's moved to Castlewood, but she's becoming an art therapist. And

so, she was really into it. And I was like, “Let's do this in the neighborhood

and get all of our neighbors to, like, create art on this one day,” right?

Because, uh, I can't remember. I feel like Sonia had some money, but then we

applied for a grant for this thing and got more money. Um, but art on the block,

um, was happening and we had to flier for it. And, and so that the neighbors

knew, because we wanted all the neighbors to come. And so, I was on Maple

flyering and at one house, this pregnant lady comes out and–oh no, first Rue

comes out, but he wasn't Rue at the time. He was just, like, this scoundrel. He

was like this little tiny thing that was super dirty and–but super cute and

meows and wants to play. And I was like, “Oh, you're cute.” And then this

pregnant lady comes out and she's like, “Do you want him? He's the

last one of his, like, litter. And I need to get rid of him because I'm about to

have a baby.” And I'm like, “Uh, okay.” And this was when I had just gotten my

house, I just bought it. So, it was 2018. Um, and so, I didn't have to ask a

landlord anymore about pets. Because that was one of the saddest things about

renting. Like, I couldn't have an animal because it just–it's so much more

money. And so, I was like, “I guess I could bring him home.” And so, I put Rue

in my pocket of my overalls because he was still that tiny. And so, I continued

to flier with him just in there, not realizing that he had fleas, but

then–(laughs) But I bring him home and, and it was like, “Oh, you, like, you can

fit in my pocket, like a little Joey. And I'm not gonna call you Joey, but–” I

should have probably. “But how about Rue?” And, and, and that's how Rue got his

name. And so, now he's five this first week of August, and I need to go and get

him a new toy

and, like, a can of tuna. Um, but, but that is Rue and he is a little psychopath

because he didn't get a lot of time with his mother. So, he likes to nibble and

fight to show his love and to explore. And he stalks as a way of playing. So,

he'll stop behind couches and he'll wait for you to walk by with your bare

ankles to jump out and fight. (laughs) But he is a sweet boy and very, uh,

sometimes he'll let me hold him and cuddle him. I give him a thousand kisses

every day. And, uh, he is really crazy about food, uh, and, and just lovely.

CAGLE:That's wonderful.

SMITH:Yeah. (laughs)

CAGLE:Thank you so much for sharing so much of yourself.

SMITH:No problem.

CAGLE:All right.

[End of recording]