PRATHER:Today is Tuesday, November the 5th. Uh, my name is Liz Prather, and I'm interviewing Brenda Ball, a resident of Bath County, Kentucky, and an antiques dealer at Mount Sterling Court Day. This interview is taking place at her home in Sharpsburg, Kentucky, and is part of the Mount Sterling Court Day oral history project. Brenda, thanks for sitting down with me.

BALL:Oh, thank you for inviting me.

PRATHER:Yeah. So we're sitting in this incredible home here. Um, can you tell me--and it's full of antiques, and you're getting ready to have a show. Um, it's the last show of the season. Tell me, what about this house? What is this?

BALL:This house was built by Doctor John Berry. He built this house in 1809. He was a very--didn't marry, didn't have any children. Um, he was a very prominent person in our community. And I bought the house in 2005.

PRATHER:Okay. How much land comes with--came with it?

BALL:I have 120 acres.

PRATHER:Wow. What does an antiques dealer need with 120 acres?

BALL:The love of the land. [laughter] I actually do antique shows here. I do five shows here on the farm a year, so.

PRATHER:And you have--you have people come in to this home?

BALL:Yes.

PRATHER:And they purchase antiques?

BALL:Yes.

PRATHER:And you--I notice also coming in--you have a house up there. Is that where you all live?

BALL:Yes. That was the tenant house.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:So when we bought this farm, we lived there first in the tenant house. And it took me seven years to do this house.

PRATHER:Oh, wow.

BALL:So we--after we got it finished, we moved here. And then after--I'm empty nest--we moved back to the tenant house.

PRATHER:How much work did you have to do? Was it in disrepair?

BALL:It didn't have a roof. Yeah. It was deep disrepair. Very deep.

PRATHER:Well, this is a--this house is amazing. Pre-Civil War, I mean.

BALL:Oh, yeah.

PRATHER:Just incredible.

BALL:When I first came and saw it on a Friday night, my husband said, "Absolutely not."

PRATHER:He said he knew that there was going to be too much, right?

BALL:Yeah. And he--and I said, "It don't hurt to pray to God.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:So Monday, we bought it. [laughter]

PRATHER:[laughter] Have you ever regretted that decision?

BALL:Maybe. No. We put in a lot of sweat, tears, and years.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:And, um, we didn't take vacations. We put everything we had back into the house. That's the reason it took us so long to do it. But, yeah, now that the kids are gone, I probably wish I had done more time.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:More time.

PRATHER:Tell me--tell me about your background. Are you from Bath County?

BALL:I am from Mount Sterling. I was born and raised in Mount Sterling, Kentucky.

PRATHER:Where, where were you born?

BALL:I was raised at the Levee, and I was born in Mary Chiles Hospital.

PRATHER:Okay, great. And when did you move to Bath County?

BALL:In 2006. I bought this farm in 2005. I had a senior in high school, so we stayed--

PRATHER:Yeah--

BALL:Till he graduated.

PRATHER:Yeah. And this has been your dream?

BALL:It was. And, and actually, after we bought this house, someone offered us quite a bit of money to--after we started cleaning up the farm--because it was in deep despair--he offered us some good money if we would just walk off and leave it and I told him, "Money don't buy dreams."

PRATHER:That's right, that's right. Wow. That's wonderful. What did you do before?

BALL:I've done the same thing. When I was really young, I worked in a factory, and then I had babies and trying to get a babysitter for three kids--and I couldn't afford it, number one, and number two, I decided--I rented the building for two months, and seeing if I could make it, and I could, so I bought me a building.

PRATHER:What year was that?

BALL:In 19--I see 2000--2001.

PRATHER:Okay. Was that the beginning of your life as an antiques dealer?

BALL:Yep.

PRATHER:Okay. Had you always--

BALL:I've always loved it and, and always went to the auctions and stuff. But I had a really good friend who was my neighbor, and she would take me out and show me the stuff.

PRATHER:And she knew.

BALL:Yeah, she was from Texas. She was, uh, her and her husband had moved here from Texas, and she would take me out and show me stuff, take me to antique shops, show me the different things. And I just fell in love with them. She had every Country Living Magazine ever, and she would let me take five at a time, and I would look through--

PRATHER:Oh, wow--

BALL:--so it was amazing. Her name was Diane. She was a sweetheart.

PRATHER:Diane. What was her last name?

BALL:Williams.

PRATHER:So in 2001, you kind of started--

BALL:Yeah, I started doing it. Um, I had a building. I bought a building in Frenchburg, Kentucky, because I lived in Jeffersonville at the time, and I did that until the baby--I had two children there, actually, while I had that store open. And then I sold it when the baby started kindergarten.

PRATHER:What was the name of the store?

BALL:Raggedy Treasures.

PRATHER:And where was it?

BALL:Main Street, Highway 460, Frenchburg, Kentucky.

PRATHER:And where did you go from there? Did you come here?

BALL:I bought--we bought, we bought this. I did that in 2001. We bought this in 2005. So I started--we first--we moved everything here. And we had a shop when we lived here, we had the shop in the little tenant house.

PRATHER:Okay. And what's your husband do? What's Clifford do?

BALL:He just helps me on the farm. He's a farmer.

PRATHER:All right. Well, um, I'm interested in knowing a little bit about what your year is like as an antiques dealer. So I know you're--you're really in the thick of it--in the holiday season.

BALL:I start in March.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:I started at the Vintage Market Days in March. I actually do a March show here. It's called Spring Fling in March, and then I do Vintage Market Days at the Kentucky Horse Park next. And then in April, I do a garden show here, which I give out garden seeds and stuff for my show. It is--then I do Vintage Market days in Xenia, Ohio. So and then, in May, I do another show here. It's called Red, White, and Bloom where we give out flowers. And then I also do different shows throughout Kentucky starting in May. I don't do any shows in June or July. And then we start back in August.

PRATHER:How many do you do a year?

BALL:I'm going to say about twelve.

PRATHER:What's the biggest one that you do?

BALL:At Kentucky Horse Park or here. One of the two. It runs real close together.

PRATHER:Yeah. Do you, uh, do you judge a success of a show by the people that come by or the sales?

BALL:I judge my show by--me personally--is the people.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:Um, the sales are always good. Like the one year here, it was seventeen degrees for our Christmas show, and we had them lined up, waiting because it was in the barn then, because we had both houses full back and forth moving. So I had it in the barn, and I had--I mean, it was seventeen degrees, and we had people lined up waiting at the gate to get in.

PRATHER:Wow.

BALL:So it's --to me, the success is the customer.

PRATHER:And you have relationships and you--

BALL:Absolutely, I do. He, he, he just is amazed--Clifford is amazed by the, the output and--

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:And it's the same thing that I did Vintage Market Days in the spring. And they were lined up from here to your car.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:Uh, waiting--to me checking them out.

PRATHER:To check out. Wow. Wow.

BALL:Yeah. Our host is like, "Brenda, I can't believe it."  They took pictures of me. But I'm local, you know what I'm saying?

PRATHER:Right. People know you.

BALL:And I think--I know a friend of mine--His name is Woodrow Spencer. He was a big antiques dealer in Mount Sterling, Kentucky. He told me, "you got to buy cheap to sell cheap. Brenda."

PRATHER:Mm-hmm, hmm.

BALL:A happy customer is a return customer.

PRATHER:Mm-hmm. Tell me how do you prep for a show.

BALL:Okay. So like, I package everything. I buy--like I buy, I buy stuff that is most people would probably throw away, and then I, I reuse it. So like I do these old frames, um, I do a lot of vintage Christmas, I do a lot of primitives. Um, and I'm one of those girls that will, like, dig right underneath your feet if you're having a yard sale. It doesn't bother me. You know, a lot of people won't get down and dig and I'm one of them. I will.

PRATHER:You, you go for it. You have an eye for it, though, right?

BALL:Yes, my daddy says I can find a needle in a haystack.

PRATHER:What are you looking for when you--

BALL:It's just something that catches me because I think I got double-dipped when it come to imagination. I see so many things I can make out of something.

PRATHER:I imagine reading every Country Living was an education, right?

BALL:Yes it was. She was the sweetest lady. They have moved back to Texas now, so I miss her dearly. She's been gone for quite some time, but we're still in contact.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:But she--she inspired me, and she had a room in her house called--It was all Raggedy Ann stuff because she loved it as a child.

PRATHER:Oh, yeah.

BALL:So that's how my shop got its name--Raggedy Treasures.

PRATHER:Oh, yeah. What is your--what is your shop called now? It's Ball-Tiques.

PRATHER:Ball-Tiques

BALL:Because this is Ball-Tara Farm, and it got its name from--that was Scarlett's dream on "Gone With the Wind." And this was mine.

PRATHER:Uh, Ball-Tara I love it.

BALL:So it's Ball-Tara Farm.

PRATHER:So let's say you're going to the Kentucky Horse Park. How do you transfer all of those [antiques]?

BALL:Okay, so like--I do a theme. Everything has a theme. So like, for the spring show was always about gardening stuff. So I'll do flower pots, iron furniture, and just I do a lot of picture frames. You can't sell a picture, but they love the frames because they put them around the pictures. You know what I'm saying? They love the frames.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:So, um, I do a lot of those. I do all--everything has a theme. Like for every show I do it, we have a theme.

PRATHER:And so when you're, when you're packing up your, I guess, do you have a trailer or--

BALL:I do. I do have a trailer.

PRATHER:And you just you just pack them--

BALL:Yeah. And everything--I don't take anything but that theme. So it's--which probably shouldn't--I probably shouldn't do that, but it just worked best for me. I--I like to promote that--that season.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:So if I do that season's theme, then that's. And it works well for me. Yeah. It works really well for me.

PRATHER:That makes sense. And, uh, are you the only one that's working on those shows --

BALL:Absolutely.

PRATHER:Does Clifford help or--?

BALL:No.

PRATHER:No, it's you.

BALL:He says he just doesn't have that. He has a great personality. He just does not have that--he says, I can't see what you see. [laughter]

PRATHER:Yeah. [laugther] Yeah, right.

BALL:He'll help me load the trailer, but. And sometimes he'll help me unload. But I do all the setting up, tearing down, packaging and do all the paint and cleaning and fixing.  I'm a--I'm a carpenter's daughter, so I can make anything.

PRATHER:How long does it take you to set up?

BALL:Uh, probably about an hour and a half to two hours, depending on the big show. Like at Horse Park. I do a two-space show. But when I do Xenia, I just do a one-space show. So it just depends on how--what size I'm doing.

PRATHER:What is the size for your--for your --

BALL:For Kentucky Horse Park is a 10 x 20. And at Xenia, it'll be a 10x10. Now at Court Day, I have three spaces.

PRATHER:Okay. This is a good segue. Let's move into your Court Day doings. Uh, what's the first year you started selling at Court Day?

BALL:I'm going to say I've been setting up there now for--I'm going to say about six years.

PRATHER:Okay. And what do you --you have three spaces. Is that a--

BALL:That's three parking holes, three parking spaces.

PRATHER:Okay. And you rent from who?

BALL:I rent from the city.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:Of Mount Sterling.

PRATHER:And where exactly is the spot? Where are the spots?

BALL:I am right behind the--I'm in city parking, right behind the Athletic Club. I'm right on the corner. I have the corner spot.

PRATHER:On the Downtown Athletic.

BALL:It's called Wilson Alley.

PRATHER:Okay. Right there. Has that been good? You've been there the entire six years?

BALL:Yes, I love it there. He'd done that so that if we have a customer who buys a piece of furniture, they can back down Wilson Alley and load out. That's the only place that they can actually back down and load out, so that--he put us there for that reason.

PRATHER:Yeah, that makes sense.

BALL:Yes.

PRATHER:Um. And it's been good.

BALL:It has been very good, I love it. It's like a homecoming to me because I was born and raised there. And as you can tell, where I live now, there's no neighbors.

PRATHER:Right.

BALL:So I don't really have a lot of, um--I don't see a lot of people or hear from a lot of people. So.

BALL:Yeah.

BALL:So, getting to get Mr. Botts, our little mayor in Mount Sterling, he does a very successful job. Most people don't realize, like, I'm up there at 6:00 in the morning when we're doing a show, and they are out there sweeping those streets. They're putting trash cans out. I mean, it is amazing what they--what they do before anybody ever sees it.

PRATHER:Yeah, yeah.

BALL:They really go about--our--the city boys, I mean, they're sweeping. They are putting out trash cans. They're--our boys are cleaning out our outhouses. When I was a kid, those outhouses, you did not want to go in them.

PRATHER:Oh, wow.

BALL:But now they--they do them three times a day.

PRATHER:Wow. Let's--before we start talking about your experience as a vendor--let's go back. Because you were born in Montgomery County, you probably went to Court Day every year of your life, right?

BALL:Absolutely. Except for when I was real little, my Dad and Mom would go. And they met at church, so I thought that they was going courting when they was going to Court Day, but they was actually going to Court Day. Well, I'd have been mad if I'd known. [laughter] But I thought they was going to church a-courting because they went, you know, that's how they met at church, and that's how they started courting.

PRATHER:Yeah [laughter]

BALL:I thought that was when they said, Court Day, we all thought they were going to church to court. But it's funny, but it's funny. But yeah, I love it. I have been going there for years and years, many years.

PRATHER:What were some of your memories as a child?

BALL:Oh my gosh. The best things are the elephant ears. The church would make the best elephant ears, and the country ham sandwich, and the Cattleman's.

PRATHER:Mm-hmm. Do you remember the church that did the elephant ears?

BALL:No, it was down on the railroad street on the railroads.

PRATHER:Did you go with your family or did you just have a group of friends?

BALL:Oh we would--you know back when I was a kid--we would be down there--all of us friends would be down at 7 a.m., buddy, we was a little early bird travelers.

PRATHER:Wow.

BALL:And it would be packed. I mean, it'd be packed. And it's funny because when I, when I was younger and was working and got my first little job, they'd say, all the girls would come in, they got a new pocketbook, new hair bows or this or that, and I come home with, I come home with a new tractor seat. [laughter] I was a farmer. I come up with a new tractor, they'd say, "Brenda, you don't never quit thinking about that farm, do you?" And I said, nope, I love it.

PRATHER:Well, but the Court Day is the kind of place where you can buy hair bows and a tractor seat.

BALL:That's exactly right. We could. We used to have a place called Antique Alley, and it always had antique stuff. And when my kids was little, I collected jadeite and we'd pack one of them on our hips. Or my husband put them on his shoulder and they'd say, "My mommy loves jadeite. Y'all got any jadeite?" It was so sweet. But, I mean, it was so fun.

PRATHER:What is jadeite?

BALL:It's a green glass made by Fire King in the--I think it started in the 30s, and I think it ran up to the 70s.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:And it was highly collectible. And it's still highly collectible now, but my kids grew up with it, and they, they love antiques. Um, but every place we'd go, my mommy loves antiques. My mommy loves antiques. That's funny.

PRATHER:They were your scouts.

BALL:They were my little scouters.

PRATHER:So you were down there at 7 a.m. with a group of friends. Was there--this would have been in 70's? 80's?

BALL:80's 80's.

PRATHER:Tell me--describe what it was like, I mean.

BALL:Oh my gosh, it was amazing. The atmosphere, the kids, we just--it was just Court Day. Everybody was so excited when it got here. You know what I'm saying? We were--us kids was so excited, we couldn't wait. I mean, at 7 a.m., we'd be up through there walking. There was no--you didn't have to worry about things, you know what I'm saying?

BALL:Yeah.

BALL:We had state police post there right as we turned on Locust. There used to be a state police post there and sit there, a big van, um, when I was a kid, and we--I mean--it would be--you'd be shoulder to shoulder. The crowd was amazing.

PRATHER:Wow.

BALL:It was just amazing. And I actually would work there. I helped the guy sell pictures. They were five dollars a picture.  When I started helping him, when I was 14, and I guess, I worked for him every summer--I mean--every fall till I was about 18.

PRATHER:What kind of pictures?

BALL:They were just pictures, and they were $5 each. I mean, they were just like a 16 x 20, you know, like a poster picture mostly.

PRATHER:Oh okay.

BALL:So but he came from--I don't remember--maybe Indiana. And I would sell for him.

PRATHER:And was it like landscapes or animals?

BALL:No, they were like movie stars and Western pictures, Western people.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:But I'll never forget, he'd make me holler, "$5 picture!"  Can you believe that? You know.

PRATHER:Where was his booth?

BALL:He was right down from the viaduct--over--if you came down the viaduct, he would have been to your right.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:And so he was funny. He was--he was--he was a bigger man. I was kind of scared of him.

PRATHER:How did you get that job?

BALL:I was walking down through there one day, and I was buying my boyfriend a pair of boots, and he asked me, he said, "Would you be interested in working?" Because a booth man was sitting next to him, and I said, "I don't care to help you." And at first I was just going to help him for that afternoon. I wasn't even going to charge him because I just said, "I don't care to help you." And then so he liked my selling so good. He says, "You think you could help me tomorrow." So I did.

PRATHER:Wow. So when you started going, was it three days or two days or--

BALL:It has ever since I've been going. It's been Saturday, Sunday, and Monday.

PRATHER:Okay. So you you would start at 7 a.m.. How long would you stay there as a kid?

BALL:Oh, my gosh, we'd still be there at dark thirty.

PRATHER:Really?

BALL:Oh yeah. I mean, we see everybody. We'd run with this friend for a while, and then we'd see somebody else and we'd go with them. You know. And then there might be a slew of us together.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:Um, my--my class, um, was a very big class at graduation class, and we had--we was all just really close people. We still are. That's why I said about Mr. Al Botts. He was one of my classmates.

PRATHER:What year was that?

BALL:I graduated in 1987.

PRATHER:87. Okay. So you'd never run out of things to do? It was just.

BALL:Oh, no. It was just so fun. I mean, we were just so fun. It just--and just seeing people and--and talking to people, where they came from, you know, there was people from all over that came to that show to set up. Court Day was amazing. Absolutely amazing. I still love it. Um, just when you started down that viaduct, because we always parked on the hill and we'd start down that viaduct, you could just see that it was just love. Lots of love.

PRATHER:Parked on the hill. That's Apperson.

BALL:Yep.

PRATHER:Yeah. So let's transition a little bit to talk about, uh, your experiences as a dealer at Court Day. Um, how does it compare or contrast to other shows that you do?

BALL:Well, the first couple of years I did it, I did mostly just like the other shows, but the last couple years, I've done a clean-up show there, so I do everything that's left over from the year. So I do a clean-up show, and I just mark stuff cheap. Like last year, we had a lot of pumpkins left. We raised pumpkins here.

PRATHER:I remember that.

BALL:We had a lot of pumpkins left over. So I had a trailer backed in there, and I put free pumpkins, and I put that they were from the city of Mount Sterling.

PRATHER:Oh--

BALL:--just because they're so good to me, I just gave back.

PRATHER:So you were doing it as a goodwill gesture?

BALL:Yes.

PRATHER:And that's. Wow.

BALL:So I did it back. I did it for compliments of the city of Mount Sterling.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:To just give back to--for them. I know I see how much hard work they do. You know what I'm saying?

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:So I did that. And then every kid, every year that I've raised pumpkins, we didn't have nothing left this year. But every year that I've raised them, and I've raised them since I got a 25-year-old, and I think he was one.

PRATHER:Oh, wow.

BALL:So we've done them at--I told him--we always give the children a pumpkin. I always have something for the kids when they come through.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:But this year, it was a clean-up sale for me. And last year was a clean-up sale. So when I passed--I had several dollar tables. Yeah. And then there was a couple little ladies that sit down below me, and every time they'd make a dollar, they'd come spend it. So when I was done, I just gave it to them.

PRATHER:Yeah. Yeah.

BALL:You know, let you make some money, and they would just cry. And I said, "No, you know, take it. You can make you some money."

PRATHER:Yeah, so, um, tell me what you brought this year. Tell me some things--

BALL:Okay. I brought some cast iron. I had some cast iron. I had several lanterns. Um, that I had--I actually hadn't been out. I brought some old fireplace stuff that went in an old fireplace. 1700 or 1800 pieces. Um, I'm trying to think what else--I brought some old vintage books. I sold several vintage books, and then I sold just some dishes. I actually sold several little sets of dishes. Dishes is kind of a lost thing right now.

PRATHER:Any furniture?

BALL:I did, I only sold a couple pieces of furniture. And like I said, they did let them back right down there and load up. So it was amazing that--that's one of the reasons he put us there. So that whole row back there, that's where he put all of his antique dealers, right against the parking for the--for the Athletic Club, because that way, they can back there and we can pack right out.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:So it really makes it convenient.

PRATHER:Where was the old Antique Alley?

BALL:It was up by the--It's on the other side of the Athletic Club. There used to be a little road went up through there.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:And--and it was that whole--it was like a little alley. There used to be a big building there, and it would be that whole alley up beside it.

PRATHER:Okay. All right.

BALL:So when I was a really young kid, like where I set up now, it would have been the stuff I got now.

PRATHER:Okay.

BALL:It would have been that stuff, too. But in the 80's, we had what they call Antique Alley.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:And that would have been the really old stuff.

PRATHER:Yeah.

PRATHER:What about the, uh, clientele or the people that come to Court Day? How are they different from other shows that you do like at the [Kentucky] Horse Park?

BALL:Well, okay, so the clientele is totally different. The clientele at Mount Sterling Court Day is just--it's--it's everybody. It's every breed. It's, um, the dirt poor. And the filthy rich.

PRATHER:Really?

BALL:Yeah. It's both. It's just the- and the, and you--you--your heart gets touched by both.

PRATHER:Mhm.

BALL:So yeah, it's both. It's definitely [not] the same clientele. You don't see that at the Kentucky Horse Park.

PRATHER:Mhm. What other antique dealers set up near you? Do you know them?

BALL:Kent Evans is set beside me. He--me and him--he used to set up here with me on the farm. I used to do vendors here. Um, and I stopped that last year because I'm wanting to--I'm wanting to downsize, and I'm very undecided if I'm going to sell or not. So I told him last fall, I said,"no more vendors" because I didn't want them to buy, thinking they were going to do it and not do it. So but so, he set beside me. There's a couple more guys that have set there a couple times with me too. And then over beside me is a lady that does it across the road from me. She does it. But Mr. Evans is a very good--he has--he's--listen, when I met him, I was managing a little antique shop, and he says, "I'm just going to move in here 'til February, because in February I'm going to Florida. And I said, "Okay." That was nine years he stayed with me. [laughter] And I tell him all the time, I'm his adopted daughter.

PRATHER:Yeah, he's a good one. He's--he's there at uh--what is shoppers--

BALL:Vendors Market.

PRATHER:Vendors Market.

BALL:Yeah, I managed that for a while.

PRATHER:Oh, did you? Okay. And that's in Mount Sterling--just kind of right behind the--

BALL:Right down below Lee's Famous Recipe.

PRATHER:Lee's. Yeah, yeah. [pause] All right, well, um, tell me if you would, um--why--I've got two or three questions here at the end. Number one, how has Court Day changed over your lifetime? What are some of the--

BALL:Sadly, it's--I think we have way too many food courts. But I love to see the churches prosper. And I always buy from the churches. Always. Or the Cattlemen's. I mean I try to buy from our local people. I think local--it brings the money right back into our community. Um we--we don't have the old stuff there as much. Mr. Botts is trying his best to get the old stuff back. He has worked really hard for that. Um I just and he--he--we are getting there. I mean, it just takes time. You know, we have we have competition with Preston the same weekend.

PRATHER:Mhm. You've never set up at Preston?

BALL:I have. When the kids were real small, I set up there at Preston a couple times. Um, I personally have done better at Mount Sterling. I personally--of course, my kids were small. So but I personally, you know--when I first started doing it, I started buying and selling with babies. I didn't have a whole lot of money, so I had to buy the cheapest stuff, and I had to figure out how to paint it, fix it, repair it, clean it, wash it. So I had to learn how to do that on the worst of stuff.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:But so--as my--my businesses grew, I've got a lot better because now, like, I could buy, you know, I could buy quantity.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:But, you know, when you--my stuff is one of a kind. So you're not going to have that again. You know what I'm saying? Because most of my stuff's one of a kind.

PRATHER:Yeah. I meant to ask you this. How late do you stay down there?

BALL:00 or 6:30[ PM].

PRATHER:How do you make sure that nobody takes your stuff?

BALL:I just trust God.

PRATHER:You just--

BALL:I have been doing this for 35 years, almost, and I have never had a bad check or I have never had nothing stolen.

PRATHER:Wow. That's impressive.

BALL:Amazing.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:So I just trusted it to God. Some people pack their stuff up. I ain't doing that. God's got it.

PRATHER:And you just tarp it over.

BALL:Yeah, I tarp everything over, and I look at it like this. If they need it worse than me, just go ahead and take it. I'll be all right.

PRATHER:Yeah. Yeah. So why do you think Court Day has lasted as long? You know, every county had a court day, but no--no county--I mean, they have fall festivals, ham days in Lebanon and all that, but none--no--no other county in the state of Kentucky has like a Court Day proper like we do. Why? Why has this one endured?

BALL:I think it's just because of our people that have been over it. I mean, I know some of the previous mayors, I mean, they--they have all--they have promoted it. They have worked their hind ends off at it. I mean, it is amazing. The population is just amazing. I mean it's crazy how many people are there.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BALL:And it's you know a lot of our locals sadly goes on vacation because it's so crowded. I mean this year I met people from New Jersey, Maine, uh, all over Ohio, Tennessee, North Carolina. I mean, it's just amazing. It's just been amazing for the people that travel that far just for that Court Day.

PRATHER:Yeah. How do you know where they're from? You--I mean, you're a people person.

BALL:Absolutely. And I love to talk to them. And, you know, and if they buy it, usually if you buy an old piece, you'll say they want to know if it's got any history or if I know any history on it. And so that's how we get to talking. And of course, I am a people person. I love knowing where they're from or what they're looking for or just to promote our Court Day, I love it. I mean, it's just--it's--it's just amazing. And--and a lot of those people said, "I'm not never missed it. I'm just not never missed it."

PRATHER:Yeah. So they come every year even though they're coming quite a ways.

BALL:Yes.

PRATHER:That's, that's a good way to end. What do you hope for the future of Court Day?

BALL:Oh I hope it's--we're blessed with it forever because it has been amazing for the whole entire community. I mean, our little side stores, our restaurants, our motels, I mean, you know, the money that it brings in and the people just love it, you know, they absolutely love it. So I just hope it continues forever.