SNOW:It keeps--yeah.

UNKNOWN:Okay. [Microphone feedback] Cool. Okay.

SNOW:It's counting, it's working.

UNKNOWN:Alright Olga, well, thank you very much for coming in today and taking your time to do an interview with us about The Post Clinic. So to start, we just kind of want to ask about your background, could you just please tell us about yourself.

SKINNER:Thank you for having me for this interview. I really appreciate it. My name is Olga Skinner. I'm a family nurse practitioner. I have been a nurse practitioner for eleven years and serving primarily in primary care and, um, preventive services. I'm also, uh, bilingual in English and Spanish. And I'm a veteran. I served in the military, um, way back, but I served for a few years. And, um, I believe the service made me who I am today, serving people, serving the country, serving God.

UNKNOWN:Yeah, that's awesome. And, um--or did you want to take the next question?

SNOW:If you had a question, yeah. Or, how did you hear about The Post Clinic?

SKINNER:I needed a--um, about three, almost three years ago, I needed, I was looking for a part-time job, and The Post Clinic had an opportunity. And it was a good fit for me, and I was a good fit for the post clinic. So I have been with them since.

UNKNOWN:That's awesome. And so what is kind of your role at The Post Clinic?

SKINNER:I am a primary care provider. I see mostly adults, and I do primary care services. I work Monday through Friday, and I do follow-ups with the patients. And I do referrals to the community, to different hospitals, to specialties, to the ER. We send patients when they come in and they have very high blood pressure or any other issues that cannot wait for blood work or any other imaging or anything. And we send them to the ER. Well prima--my primary role is to be there for the patients as the patients are our priority.

UNKNOWN:Yeah. Awesome. And how do you feel that The Post Clinic has, like, impacted you personally?

SKINNER:It is a joy to serve in The Post Clinic. The fact that they have an awesome, uh, staff and the medical director is outstanding. Also, the services that we provide for free, um, bring me a lot of joy to be there every day serving the indigent and people that have low income, sometimes no insurance, or they can't afford to go to their doctor. So it is a big satisfaction. And I see my profession of service not only as giving prescriptions and referrals, but as a ministry to the community.

UNKNOWN:That's awesome. Do you have any--

SNOW:So when working at The Post Clinic, how has community, like, shaped your views? And, like, what does community mean to you in the lens of The Post Clinic?

SKINNER:The community is not just Mount Sterling, but the community also s-- I mean the community also serves Eastern Kentucky and other areas. Um, it has shaped me in a way that it has made me a very humble person and more compassionate and even more caring than what I used to be. I look at the patients, and a lot of times they come in for just an acute illness like bronchitis or sinusitis. And we find out that they have very high blood pressure, maybe critical blood pressure, but they don't want to go to the ER. Well, I treat the bronchitis or whatever is the illness, but also I treat the blood pressure. Um, sometimes I tell them they have to go to the ER, but uh they get their prescriptions and they leave and they don't come back. So I feel for those patients and I call them back. And I keep calling until I reach to them and, you know, reassure them that they need medical care to be able to feel well. And a lot of times I'm successful, and that's where my satisfaction is.

UNKNOWN:Uh, let me think what was the next question I was going to ask you. Do you have any particularly, like, memorable stories or interactions with patients since you've been working at The Post Clinic?

SKINNER:Yes, we have all kinds of people and, uh, different personalities, different ideas about health. So they do need a lot of education, especially about blood pressure and diabetes. And sometimes their pulse is very high. So they need a lot of education about what needs to be done, like blood work, we do EKG as well, we do pap tests for the females. And a lot of times they don't understand why they need all of that. So my role also is not just to provide medical services, but an educator to the patients to make them aware of what they need. They need medical care, a lot of times continuous medical care. They need follow-ups with us, and I explain why they need blood work, EKG. And, um, a lot of times... Like I said earlier, they just go home, they feel better, and they don't come back. They finish their 30 days of medication, if it's for blood pressure or diabetes. And then I have to reach back to them instead of them reaching to me. And I'm delighted to do that because once I get hold of them, they all always come back.

UNKNOWN:That's awesome.

SNOW:Do you feel like your views or just your framework around medicine and health care have changed with your experience at the post clinic versus any other places you worked?

SKINNER:Yes, because we're providing free medical services, we encourage the patients to follow up with us and to other specialties. My view has changed because of the economy, and also not everybody these days have insurance like in the past. Um, our goal is to reach out to the patients these days, especially they are discouraged to spend their money on medical services. They have to choose a lot of time where their money is going to be spent. So we do outreach as well in the community to let the community and the patients know that we are there for them.

SNOW:Thank you.

UNKNOWN:I don't think I have any more questions, do you?

SNOW:Is there anything else you would like to tell us or share with us?

SKINNER:It is a joy to work at The Post Clinic. I think I'm going to stay there for a long, long time. Um, we have a very genuine staff, and our services are genuine with good intention as well. We get wealthy in a way that is wealthy in the joy that we receive from serving the community, not necessarily monetary.

UNKNOWN:Mm-hmm. Think we're good, thank you.

SNOW:I think we're good, thank you so much for coming in today.

SKINNER:Sure, my pleasure.

SNOW:I'll stop the recording.