BOYD:Okay, here we are. Session number three. It is July 27th, 2023. And again,

we talked about the recap of last session where we talked about the remarkable

lives of your grandparents. We talked about your parents meeting and falling in

love and moving to North Carolina, you being born. We talked about the Carter

Family Fold.

What is that noise? [jackhammer sound] Let's pause for a second.

MCLAIN:A mouse.

BOYD:That's right. Right. Let's pause and see if they're--are they working? and

see if they're--

MCLAIN:Are going to continue jackhammering.

BOYD:Because that's got to be really loud if we're hearing it here. So okay.

You gave a fantastic tutorial on Carter family fold and the history of that,

as well as a history of the Hindman Settlement School. And we started talking

about Hindman Settlement School because your father moved there to be recreation

director in 1954, moving you. You're just six months old, I think, at that

point, and--

MCLAIN:Daddy said when we moved from North Carolina that someone had given me a

little rocking chair, a child's rocking chair. He said everything fit in the car

except the rocking chair,

so he tied it on the bumper and brought it up. He said I was perfect until we

got to Jackson. And when we got to Jackson, Kentucky, the four hours, I think he

said it was four hours. Couldn't have been. I don't I don't know. In ‘54, maybe.

The last four hours of the trip, he said I screamed the whole time.

BOYD:(laughs) Yeah. Yeah. That's how it goes.

So he's there. He's hired as the recreation director. So you all moved to

Hindman. He later becomes the executive director, and we're going to talk about

that. But I was going to start with what was your earliest, what's your earliest

memory of that time?

MCLAIN:I can tell you my earliest memories because I've said this a number of

times. It's something I talk with students about. What are your earliest

memories? What are your earliest musical memories? And all my earliest memories

have to do with music. I remember riding on my father's shoulders as he danced.

I remember sitting on his lap as he played the piano for dancing. I remember

going to sleep in my bed with everybody playing music. I remember

everything I remember from my earliest years have to do with music.

BOYD:Isn't that interesting? Yeah.

MCLAIN:I think so. And as I've talked with students about this, a lot of theirs

are similar. A lot of their earliest memories are also musical memories. I

remember one time Daddy had a guitar, [jackhammer] and he never told us not to

touch his instruments.

I don't remember him ever saying that. I can't imagine those words coming out of

his mouth. We knew to be careful of them, and we knew they were important, and

we knew they were delicate, but we also could touch them. And I remember very

plainly it being hot, sun coming in the window. I remember sundust in the air.

And I went over to--he had the guitar leaned

up against the side of a chimney, a fireplace, and I picked the B string, and

it's like this--bomm--it's like this wave went through the--I could see--you

know, it's like a special effect in a movie, it was like--vvvoooh--like that.

And I thought, wow, that can happen. And that was an early memory. I remember--I

don't know--I'll tell you what happened on my fourth birthday. On my fourth--I

don't know when I knew I wanted to be an entertainer, but I know I knew it on my

fourth birthday, because my parents gave me a camera, a flashlight, and it was

kind of a flashlight, and it had a button on it, and you could--and I thought it

was a camera. It was a flashlight. And

when I realized it was a light, I remember shining it on a stage, on an

imaginary stage, and introducing entertainers. And so I know I wanted to be an

entertainer then, but I don't know if it was before that or not.

BOYD:So you would have been about three when your sister was born.

MCLAIN:I was two when Alice was born and four when Ruth was born.

BOYD:Got it. I was

almost right.

MCLAIN:Well, maybe. I don't know, because I was born in December and Alice's

birthday is in September.

BOYD:I have Alice in ‘56, and Ruth in ‘58.

MCLAIN:So--Yeah.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Yeah. So they're about--More or less, yeah. They were about two years

between Alice and me.

BOYD:So what are your memories of your sisters being born?

MCLAIN:I don't know. My mother said, when Alice was born, I said, “oh, now

there are

two of us.” And I don't remember a lot of specifics about growing up with Alice

and Ruth, except that it just was the most natural thing in the world. And they

were very sweet, and I understand that I was very mischievous.

They were just--we just always did everything together. I mean, before cell

phones and computers and before, well, even television, I was about four when we

got television, or five, and--well, four, I think. And--well, you couldn't get a

lot on it. We could get the--our first station was

Channel--well, Daddy put the antenna way up on top of the ridge, and we lived by

the creek. So it was a long ways from the top of the ridge down to the creek.

And he just ran a line down the side of the hill to the house for an antenna.

And there was no way to know how to aim the antenna. So, our first station that

you could barely see through all the snow and the static was WJ--WJHL in Johnson

City, Channel 11, which I still have a relationship with the people at that

station today.

BOYD:Oh, that's great.

MCLAIN:That was our first station, and then when we could get the antenna aimed

towards something, the closest station was WSAZ in Huntington, West Virginia.

And so that was our best station. And it faded in and out,

but every Saturday night--Saturday nights were the Saturday night jamboree on

WSAZ. And it was wonderful. It was so well done. The musicians were so

wonderful. Connie Smith sang on that station when she was 17 years old on that

program. All the people on that, I mean, the dancers were good, the musicians

were good, the band was amazing,

and the singers were good. And we'd watch the Saturday night jamboree and eat

tomato soup and soda crackers. That was Saturday. I remember that very well. And

I think that probably influenced my life, too.

BOYD:So children-wise, close growing up?

MCLAIN:Yeah. I think, as I say, my sisters were sweet and smart and good, and I

was mischievous. And

probably not as smart and probably not as gracious and graceful as they were.

BOYD:In those early--you know--set the scene for me. Where's the house in terms

of where were you?

MCLAIN:The first house we lived in when we got there was at that time called

Recreation House. Now it's got things called Preece--and it's high up on the

hill. [Editor’s note: Recreation House was renovated and renamed for Hindman

Settlement School board member John Preece in 1982] We moved from that house

down to Creek House.

And Creek House was in a little bit of a bottom that sits across the creek from

a big bottom, and it flooded.

BOYD:Is that Troublesome Creek?

MCLAIN:Yeah, Troublesome Creek. And it flooded about twice a year.

BOYD:The house or the creek?

MCLAIN:Both. Both. Yeah, Creek House flooded. The floods have gotten higher.

Last year we had the highest flood.

Troublesome Creek flooded at the highest level it ever has. But I remember other

times in the early sixties once, and there were different times when there have

been the biggest flood in history before this one. So things that we thought

were out of the flood plain are now not. But Creek House, I'm sure when they

built it, probably there was no chance it would get in the house, but then

it did a couple times a year. When we moved out of that house, I'm not good with

dates, but when I was pretty young moved into a house called Hillside.

BOYD:Hillside. Describe Describe Hillside for me, the house.

MCLAIN:I can send you a picture of it.

BOYD:I'd love to see that.

MCLAIN:I just saw it. It's it. It's on the table in my basement. I was cleaning

out some boxes

yesterday at my wife's encouragement. She's very good at, I would be a hoarder

and I would live in a horrible mess if it were not for Diane. So I found a

picture of Hillside. I'll take a picture of it with my phone and send it to you.

BOYD:Did the kids share a room?

MCLAIN:No.

Well, in Creek House we did, because Creek House, there was just the living

room, a bedroom, another kind of a room, a bathroom, and a kitchen. There was

kind of a little dining area, but it was not a--Hillside was used for a lot of

different things. I mean, there were things on different floors. A lot of the

houses in Hindman, in particular, the settlement in particular,

built about that that time, about the 20s, were very similar, because they had

clear-cut the forest at that time, as they did with a lot of Eastern Kentucky.

They floated from Hindman, there was not a railroad there, they floated the logs

down the creek when it flooded. And so they would float all the logs down the

creek, but the oak

was too heavy to float. So that green oak, they built the houses, they milled

that in a sawmill--

BOYD:locally--

MCLAIN:--a local, rough kind of a sawmill, and built the houses out of that.

And the construction of it was a big board and then a small--if you had a lot of

big boards and then

smaller boards. And over time, as that green oak cured, it moved, and so there

were some places you could see through. It was a huge house. It kind of went up

the hill this way, so there was one floor that was at ground level, another

floor that was at ground level, and there was then some stairs to an upper

store, and there was even a basement that used to have an old coal-fired

furnace in it. And the heat was radiators. It had fireplaces that were much more

effective than the radiators. And the radiators were, I guess, a gravity system.

As the hot water would go up, then the cold water would fall, and it would

circulate that way. But it wasn't very effective, and it didn't--it

wasn't. The fireplaces were much more effective than the radiators.

BOYD:So what do you--you know--you talked about the Saturday nights and the

tomato soup. Talk to me about what--what were you--what do you remember about

the meals?

MCLAIN:Well, at that time, the Settlement School, there were 70-some students

that lived there,

because at that time, even though Knott County is not huge, the roads weren't

very good. And getting from one place to another, an example I just was talking

about recently, so it's on my mind, was Hindman and Decoy, which were not that

far apart, the way the crow flies, but to get from—I don't know, less than 20

miles, probably. But to get from Hindman to Decoy at that time, you had to drive

like 50 miles and go through like five different counties. Even

though they're both in Knott County, Decoy is close to Brethitt and maybe Perry

too. But you had to drive through Floyd, and I mean, the way you had to go was

quite a trip, and it took a long time. So students that lived in Decoy couldn't

come to the public high school in Hindman without staying in Hindman. So that's

the reason students had to stay

at the Settlement School, and they'd come stay through the week and then go home

on the weekends. And when I was very young, there were dairy cattle there, they

raised a lot of corn, potatoes.

BOYD:The school did?

MCLAIN:The school, yeah. And all the students that stayed there also worked

there. So everybody worked, either at

farming, or at cooking, or at cleaning. Everybody did something. When I was in

high school, I worked at the library for Harriet Johnson. She was the librarian

at that time.

BOYD:So when you were kids, though, going back to the young days, were you

eating meals with the other students?

MCLAIN:Yeah, most of the meals we'd eat together.

We had a small kitchen in our house, and Mother was a wonderful cook, and did

cook, cooked every bit, I think every bite of bread that I ate until I left

home, and left, I ate at somebody else's house or at the settlement. But in our

house, she baked all the bread, and wonderful bread, everything. She had some

kind of, she called it anadama bread, that was cornmeal, and there was molasses

in it a little bit, and it was really

good. She made every kind of bread, all kinds.

BOYD:But you were eating a lot of the meals with the school?

MCLAIN:That's right. That's right, That's right, at the Settlement School,

because there were some wonderful ladies that cooked for everybody.

BOYD:That's great.

MCLAIN:Did I tell you about Daddy building the

May Stone building?

BOYD:No, let's talk about that, because your father, before you start, I'm just

going to say, he was a force.

MCLAIN:Oh, yeah.

BOYD:At some point, you had said that he didn't finish his thesis, because the

time ran out that they give you, because he was so swept up with what he's doing.

MCLAIN:He was busy.

BOYD:Oh, my gosh, he was busy with what he accomplished there. So one of those

things was building

buildings. Let's talk about that.

MCLAIN:When Daddy became the director, there were, I think he said, 13

buildings on the campus, and they were all condemned. And he said they should

have been. And some of them had, in the boys' dormitory, there were, I think,

there was like a shower in the basement, a big room, but I don't remember that.

I think there was concrete on some of

it, but I don't think there was concrete on all of it. There were, all the

buildings, you know, had been built, I guess, when they first started the

Hindman Settlement School, the first thing they did was build a great big

building for everything. And it was everything from dormitories, to classrooms,

to residence for the ladies that lived there, to everything, kitchen, probably,

and it was everything, it was huge. And it burned.

And they said that they learned from that.

BOYD:When did it burn?

MCLAIN:Thirties or forties. Yeah. Thirties

BOYD:Yeah, thereabouts. Yeah.

MCLAIN:Yeah. It would have been in the thirties or forties. Thirties to give

time to build it, and no, it might have been even earlier than that, because

most of these buildings, I think, were from the twenties and thirties.

BOYD:Mm-mm, okay. So they lost everything. They lost everything.

MCLAIN:And they said, okay, from this point on,

we're going to build them apart from one another. And so, in about, okay, Daddy

had been director for about four or five years, so the early sixties. We still,

okay, I'm sorry, I'm trying to put it together, I'm remembering John Kennedy.

BOYD:I have

May Stone Building in ‘57.

MCLAIN:No, that's too early.

BOYD:That's too early?

MCLAIN:It wasn't then. It was more like 62 or 64. [Editor’s note: Construction

of the May Stone Building began in 1957, and was completed in 1961 Story of

Hindman Settlement School (Stoddard)]

BOYD:Okay. Which Which came first, the Elizabeth Watts Building or the May

Stone Building?

MCLAIN:May Stone Building. By quite a long time. [Editor’s note: The Elizabeth

Watts Building was completed in 1964 Story of Hindman Settlement School (Stoddard)]

BOYD:Got it. So it.

MCLAIN:So before the May Stone Building, there was Orchard House, and Orchard

House, the kitchen was in the very lowest level, closest

to the creek. Those two bridges, footbridges that went across Troublesome Creek,

there was not a bridge you you could drive across. You had to drive down the

side of the hill and through the creek and up the other side if you wanted to

drive on that side of the creek, which is where we lived and that kind of thing.

Otherwise, we had to park like way over and carry whatever we were carrying

over. And any time the water would get high. To this day, if I hear rain, I think

I need to get the car across the creek. That's sort of ingrained, and I think it

probably is in anybody that lived in that part of the country at that time,

because if it started raining, you needed to get the car across the creek if you

wanted to go anywhere. So Orchard House, the bottom was the kitchen. The next

floor up was the big dining hall, and everybody ate there.

And then above that was the girls' dormitory. There were two girls' dormitories.

This was for the upperclassmen. And Gladys Hall was the house mother. And it had

been built about the same time as all these other buildings. And it was really,

every building there needed attention. Well, one night it was storming, and

somebody came to the door and said

to Daddy, he said, “Mr. McLain, you need to come down and see this.” And he

said, “what is it?” And he said, “well, you need to come down and see what this

is like, because we can't explain it to you.” And so he came down, and they took

him up to the dorm mother's room. Miss Hall had a room there. And the rain was

pouring in everywhere. It was pouring in everywhere.

It wasn't like it was leaking in one place. It was pouring in all over the room.

And Daddy said he got a hammer and nails and some plastic. And he nailed the

plastic up around the places and made a trough for the water so it would flow

off into the corner of the room instead of on her bed. And he said, “Miss Hall,

why didn't you tell me

that the roof was leaking?” She said, “well, I know you're so busy, I didn't

want to bother you. I didn't want to concern you with this.” And the very, I

think it was the next day, it might have been that week, but it might have been

the next day, at breakfast, you know, a lot of these young men that stayed there

knew how to do things. They grew up in families knowing how to work, knowing how

to build things. They

came with a lot of skills, practical skills. So after breakfast, Daddy asked all

the boys to come out, said, “if all the boys would come out.” And he said, “I'd

like you to start digging me a footer here.” And he put his heel, and he drew a

line with his heel in the dirt there. And he said, “from there to there.” And he

said, “if you could start building me a footer, we're going to have to build a

building.” And

he went up to, at that time we lived at Hillside, which was up the hill, and he

started making a cardboard model out of pasteboard. And he built, made a model

of what was going to be the May Stone Building. And he did it on just paper, by

hand, drawing things, and laying

it out, and made this cardboard model. And he never studied architecture, he

didn't know that, but he did know that he needed a building, and it needed to be

a good one. And he went down to Ed Compton's Lumber Company, and he said, “Mr.

Compton,” he said, “I need to build a building. We don't have money right now,

but we will have when

the time is due. May we order things and pay for them as we use them?” He said,

“yeah, yes, that would be all right.” So he said, “you just tell me what you

need, Mr. McLain, and I'll see that you have it.” The Compton Lumber Company was

down in Frogtown, just above the Settlement School a little way. So the Settlement

School was there, then the high school, and then as you go up Troublesome Creek,

Frogtown, was sort of a little holler that goes back up in there. And that's

where Compton's Lumber Company was. And he came back to the house, and he said,

okay, I have to raise some money. And Mrs. Strong, Martha Strong was his

secretary, and he said, “I need you to collect

a list for me of everyone who's ever made any donation to the Settlement School,

if you would.” And so she started making the list. And he started composing

letters. And do you know what copying gel is?

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Yeah.

MCLAIN:Well, he made copying gel. A lot of people that have never had

experience with that, I mean, this was before mimeograph machines, right? And so

there not only were not Xerox machines or electric typewriters, there also

weren't mimeograph machines even. And so he made this gelatin-based copying gel,

like Jell-O, but for this purpose, and poured it in frames and would move it

around until it was free of bubbles and free of anything. And he would

make one letter on the typewriter with heavy-handed, and he would put that after

the copying gel set, then he would put that letter there, and the ink would kind

of soak into the gelatin. And then he'd pull that off, and he'd take a blank

sheet of paper, and he would smooth that on and take it off very quickly,

because it didn't take very long. By the time he got the last letter, it was

leaving it on there a long time and peeling it

off slowly to see how many copies he could make. And it wasn't like a Xerox

machine, it didn't spit them out.

BOYD:No, no.

MCLAIN:So he wrote the best letter he could and said, we need to raise money

for this purpose. He also, at that time, I'm going to tell another story that is

related, but I have to tell this one to tell the first one. He was,

every year he went and played music in Berea at the Christmas Country Dance

School. Berea College had the Christmas Country Dance School, and he went, and

Miss Ethel Capps was the Recreation Director at Berea College, and she had the

Christmas Country Dance School, and she had Daddy and some wonderful musicians.

Sometime I'd love to talk about that. And while he was there, he met two ladies

from New York, Lillian

Oppenheimer and Alice Gray. Alice Gray was an

etymologist—er--entomologist--which is insects? Entomologist isn’t

it—etymologist is words--

BOYD:Yes.

MCLAIN:She was the entomologist at the Natural History Museum in New York City,

and Lillian Oppenheimer was the president of the Origami Association of America.

And she

put out a newspaper called the Origamian, and she was very interested in this

Japanese art of paper folding. You make no cuts. You start with a piece of paper

and you fold only, and you make all kinds of things. They wanted to see the

settlement. They wanted to see Hindman, and to make a long story short, Daddy

brought them and Ruthie White in his small car from Berea to Hindman. And they

intended to stay a day and then leave and go back to New York, well it snowed.

Well not only could you not get across the creek, you couldn't go anywhere if

you could cross the creek, because you couldn't go anywhere. It snowed and there

wasn't a chance, nobody could go anywhere, and so there they were. Well, Miss

Oppenheimer was a compulsive teacher, and Daddy was

a compulsive student. And she was so interested in origami, and Daddy started

doing it to be polite to his guests, and he said once that he realized that it's

what he wanted to do all his life and never knew it. He started folding paper,

and he became very good. He not only folded everything he could

find to fold, and the ladies stayed with us for about two weeks before they

could leave, and then they went back to New York, which they needed to be back

in New York. And Daddy started doing this and became known for it, and she

published some of his original folds in the Origamian. Some of his folds are on

the covers of origami books, even today

I've got one in my house right now that has one of Daddy's original folds on the cover.

BOYD:That’s amazing. I did not know this.

MCLAIN:He found ways to make improvements to other people's folds and

collaborated with other folders. He went to the National Origami Convention once.

BOYD:Did he ever try and get you guys into it?

MCLAIN:Like everything else, Daddy wanted to make everything available to us

that we wanted to do, but he never said,

you need to do this, you have to do that. Same with music. He let us play music.

He encouraged it, and he played with us, and he liked it when we did, but he

never said you're going to play this or you're going to play that. He never

said, you need to practice. He never said that. He would say, “would you like to

practice?” And if we did, he'd practice with us, but he never insisted on these

things. And so,

one of the things that he folded, he invented a donkey, a mule, he invented I

think a cow, there are too many stories to narrow it down, but anyway, one of

the things he folded was an angel blowing a trumpet.

He had all these angels blowing a trumpet folded from paper. After he sent a

letter to everyone who'd ever made any donation to the Settlement School at all,

well, people started sending checks, and he would send a thank you letter, and

in the thank you letter, he just had all these paper folded angels. He would put

one in the thing and send it back, and people loved

it, and people would write again and say, “if I make another donation, may I

have another angel?” (Boyd laughs) And so, Daddy taught all the students, a lot

of them, to fold angels too, and my mother did it, and there'd be big folding

parties at the house after school every day, and there might be five, ten

students in there, folding with Daddy and Mother,

and so every time anyone made a donation for the May Stone building, if they

could, if they had enough of them, they would put an angel in the, and that's

how Daddy paid for that building. He didn't know when most of the things that he

accomplished in his life, I don't think he set out to do. I don't think he set

out to be the director of the Hindman Settlement School. He was a very good one, and

he brought all that resourcefulness and all that interest and direction and

intelligence to that responsibility, but it wasn't because he spent his life

preparing to be the director of the Hindman Settlement School. He didn't decide

to be a bandleader, he just played with us in the living room, and as our career

developed, he realized that he needed to be a really

good bandleader, he became became an amazing bandleader. He didn't know that he

was going to develop and teach the first college course in Appalachian music and

the first college course in bluegrass music. He didn't intend to do that, he

didn't prepare to do it, he did prepare to do it, but he didn't consciously

think, I'm prepared to do that thing. Most of the things that he did in life,

it's because

he responded to a need.

BOYD:I say this a lot, because he and I have a few things in common, and one of

those things is, we talked about Denison University, but we also talked about, I

got my PhD in folklore, and I can't tell you how many times a week I think to

myself, I'm doing something in my current job, and I think, they didn't teach me

this in folklore school. Here he is, two years at Hindman, now he's the

executive director, thereabouts, maybe

three, right? He came in ‘54?

MCLAIN:He came in ‘54, he became the director in ‘56.

BOYD:Yeah, so now he's running a capital campaign, you know, fundraising-wise.

Yeah, Yeah, he certainly didn't have a development office or anything like that.

So he seems like he's improvising and going with his instincts, but it's working.

MCLAIN:

It worked for him all his life.

BOYD:That's remarkable. I mean, it really is.

MCLAIN:I think it worked for him because he had that mindset. He spoke in

positive terms. When they talk about wind chill factor or heat index, he said

there also should be some way to describe

a pretty day. There needs to be a pretty day adjustment, just the same as

there's a heat index or a wind chill factor. He thought in those terms. There

needs to be a way to do a positive thing in this situation, or what's the

positive thing that we might accomplish?

BOYD:That's an important trait that's not very common.

MCLAIN:That was part of his nature. Spent very little time dwelling on hurt or

a slight.

He spent as little time as possible thinking about those things. He thought in

positive terms.

BOYD:How long did the building take to build?

MCLAIN:I don't know. I think probably a year or two, I would imagine. The

settlement students did

every bit of it. [Editor’s note: 1957-1961 (Stoddart)]

BOYD:Oh, I didn't know that.

MCLAIN:Yeah, they did every bit of it, except I think he might have hired the

electric work done. Maybe some of the plumbing. Oh, I think not. I think the

students did almost everything. They dug every footer, laid every block, put

every bit of, what is it you call the, I

can't think of words right now, laid the floors, they did everything. They did

everything. Framed the windows.

BOYD:What an accomplishment, I mean truly, to raise the money to do the kind of

level of project management necessary to build a building, while at the same

time still running the school. The school was happening all of this time. He

seemed also

to me like he was multitasking, to put it I think in the contemporary terms, he

was multitasking at a very high level.

MCLAIN:He was a natural leader. I don't know why it sticks in my mind at this

moment, but one time, you know, on pretty steep hills with everything was

standard transmission,

most cars in those days, and I remember one of the students driving the truck,

pickup truck up the hill, and a bunch of other students standing in the bed of

the truck going up the hill, and I remember Daddy looking at them, and them

looking at him, and him just doing, and they all sat down, and I thought that

there was a lot of communication in that, that some

people would think they had to go shout out, what do you think you're doing,

don't you notice it down, or some people might have thought, you know, you'd

have to do it a lot of different ways. He had a way of communication that was

beyond words, certainly, and it just was very basic.

BOYD:But they clearly respected him, you know, to understand that level of communication.

MCLAIN:Daddy earned respect.

He deserved it, and he earned it.

BOYD:Yeah, sounds like it. How, let's talk about, I have so many questions, and

I know you just said you have so many stories. How was it for your family at

that time in terms of integrating into Hindman? Because here you are.

MCLAIN:Well, I think it was fairly natural for Daddy, because he knew the

ladies, he

knew Miss Watts already. He knew a lot of the people that worked there. He was there.

BOYD:And there was a connection with your grandmother.

MCLAIN:Yes, and Grandmother--Grandmother. Yes, and Grandmother knew a lot of

those people. And I think my mother had already been there, too.

BOYD:Oh, yes, that's correct. That's right.

MCLAIN:I think she had. And he loved this music so much, and people

in eastern Kentucky are by nature welcoming. People in eastern Kentucky are by

nature good communicators, very practical. And Daddy was a hard worker, and I

think they respect that.

BOYD:He was in charge of the children.

MCLAIN:Yeah, he was very practical,

and at one point, I think he could see that the dairy farm was not a good idea,

that it was going to be much more cost effective just to buy milk and butter

than to maintain a herd of cattle over across the creek, and there were just, it

was just difficult. And he said, we don't need to do that. So they quickly left that

part of the operation.

BOYD:Yeah, I saw that he made some pretty serious decisions.

MCLAIN:He had to. The other thing that he did that I think was, because of his

vision, he could see opportunities. And he would take, for one thing, we had a

dance every Friday night.

And when he built the May Stone Building, that's now called the Mike Mullins

Building, for very good reason. I'll tell you about that later. But one of the

things he designed in that building was a great big room for dancing. And they

still use that to this day. I went to a dance last week, the night before the

board meeting, they had a dance in there. Sarah Kate Morgan, that's the

recreation, or not recreation director, but the folk arts

education coordinator, I don't know. Those words, put those words together in a

title, it'll make her a title. Had a dance. It was wonderful. And it was so nice

to see, you know, 40 people in there dancing again in that room that was built

for that. And we would sing together, there's a fireplace in there, and we'd

gather chairs in there and sit down and sing folk songs and things. And then

it was a time to talk, and a time to, people would tell stories, and people

would tell jokes and laugh, and it was a community. Because you had all these

students there, and he thought that was important too.

BOYD:And how did religion play into all of this? Because you've got this

community, and you all are technically outsiders to the community.

MCLAIN:Religion has been

different depending on who was at the Settlement School. There were some times

when people in the school's administration were very, felt very strongly that a

particular religion, if it was, depending

on the person, they would make opportunities available for people to worship or

sing or do things that were, when Mrs. Earp, for example, Helen Earp was there.

I need to talk about her and Paul Earp, her husband. But when they were there,

she was very involved with the Methodist Church, and she had CE

every Sunday and things like that. There were always things like a sunrise

service at Easter time that you could, these things weren't required, but they

were available if people wanted to.

BOYD:I mean, was there clergy around?

MCLAIN:No. It was not. The Settlement School itself has never been--

BOYD:So there was lay people who were--

MCLAIN:Yeah, whoever was there would do things. There's a

McLain Chapel there now that's a chapel in the woods that they named after Daddy

because that's where our house stood.

BOYD:So you were saying, I cut you off, I'm sorry, so you were saying there was

never anybody, it's always had more of a secular--

MCLAIN:Yeah, it's not--I think probably some religious groups have donated to

the Settlement School in the past, but I don't think that it's not affiliated

with any particular church or group. The Daughters of the American Revolution

were early supporters of the Settlement School because some of the DAR were

friends with some of the ladies that started the Settlement School and early

administration of the school, but different directors have had closer

relationships. Always a relationship,

but sometimes a very close relationship. The current director spends a lot of

time with the DAR and going to regional gatherings and that sort of thing, but

other directors, Daddy wouldn't have had time to do anything like that because

he was busy every day, day to day, taking care of very basic things that had to happen.

BOYD:What about,

back to religion, what about within your particular family? Was it particularly

a religious upbringing?

MCLAIN:Not particularly. Some families are very strict about that. He wanted us

to be able to be informed. He wanted us to be able to make choices.

He has always wanted us to be able to make choices about things. That's in his

nature and it was in his nature to make choices for himself, but also to let us

make choices for ourselves too, and that was important to him. The culture at

the Settlement School was

probably more self-conscious about being--in the past there had been a lot of

emphasis on setting tables correctly and on doing things properly. And on

crafts, I said everyone worked, a lot

of the young girls learned to weave on hand looms and would weave or the young

men would, some of them would carve things or work in the shop or make things

that way as well. There was the weaving program had the name Fireside Industries

and I don't know if Daddy coined that term or if it had been there before, but

they would make hand-woven things and they would, you still see some little tags

on some of them, Fireside Industries, from the Hindman Settlement School. Now

they use that term as part of their literacy program and the Hindman Settlement

School has a strong literacy program. They still use the word that I just said,

Fireside Industries, for

some of the projects that have to do with the literacy program. But I felt

very--your original question was how to fit in--I felt very comfortable fitting

in with, particularly with people that I went to school with, people that I

played music with.

There didn't seem to be a big difference like there would, might be today. Right

now we seem very divided in terms of the way we think about, oh, dividing people

up according to their political opinion or their religious belief or their

cultural heritage or their, you know, by all these different ways we tend to

separate people. And

well, it was pretty homogeneous around Hindman in terms of cultural heritage,

cultural background. It was pretty homogeneous in a lot of ways, but in terms of

music, for example, Daddy loved classical music. There was a radio station that

was run by a, it was a religious group at

Van Cleve, Kentucky, that you could barely get on AM radio, and he listened to

classical music on that station.

BOYD:I mean, those were his roots, right?

MCLAIN:Yeah. Oh, yeah. Hank Hank Snow owned the radio station in Whitesburg,

Kentucky, and played a lot of country music. The station in Hazard, there was

not one in Heitman, but the station in Hazard played a lot of wonderful music. I

remember, they

had, I don't know if it was a theme they used for a particular show or whatnot,

but they used, what I found out later was Chet Atkins' recording of East

Tennessee Blues. Doodle-do-do-doodle-deedle-doodle-deedle-- It was really good,

and it It was really good, and it made me love that. There was a man that had a

radio show called, he was called The Singing Miner,

and he was on the Hazard station. He was wonderful. He and his wife sang, and

they'd do, I remember them singing “Ashes of Love” and all those. I don't know

if the show was live or if it was on tape, recorded, you know, but it sounded

like it was live. They broadcast Old Regular Baptist church services, and some

of the Old Regular Baptist hymns singing. I mean, you couldn't drive in the car

without passing

people singing on a Sunday, for example. If you go to church with them, it was

wonderful, and the music in some of those songs would go on for ten minutes,

because there'd be, I don't know how many verses, and you'd sing every one of

them, and someone would line out the song, and then everybody would sing, and it

was good.

BOYD:The song “What Wondrous Love” comes to mind, it's sort of like that lined out,

you know, it just goes on and on, verse after verse.

MCLAIN:Yeah, that one, “The Day is Past and Gone,” is one that was Daddy's

favorite. Frankie Duff from Decoy, Kentucky sang a version of that that I just

loved. Jean Ritchie knew a different version, and she said that Frankie had the

tune wrong, but they were from, well, not that far apart, but you couldn't drive

from Viper, Kentucky

to Decoy very easily, especially in those days, and so they had different tunes.

BOYD:Okay, we're going to come back to music, but I like this thread, sort of

pre-music, and I do want to ask about a couple things. So I do want you to

reflect for a moment that, you know, we talked about blending into the community

and how you were pretty much accepted into the community. You weren't born

there, but you came as a six-month-old. The rest of the family were

born there. So in terms of blending in, I do just want to pause and reflect,

though, that your parents were northerners, right? Your dad was from Ohio. Your

mother was Wisconsin?

MCLAIN:Yeah, she was born in Chicago and raised in Madison, Wisconsin.

BOYD:So and then, you know, has this whirlwind romance and finds herself living

in Texas while he

finishes out his time in the Army, shoots over to the mountains of, or to, not

the mountains, he's over in Chapel Hill--

MCLAIN:Chapel Hill, North Carolina

BOYD:--and then suddenly in a very different world. Talk about, you know, do

you have any memories of your parents in terms of those? We talked a lot about

your dad, but I'm thinking like your mother in terms of what, she's got a lot on

her plate in terms of being a mother at

this time, but what is your mother doing and how is she connecting to the community?

MCLAIN:There was a picture of my mother on Facebook recently, and I just loved

the comments that people made that knew her from that time. It was a picture of

her when she was young, and there were comments, so many comments about what a

sweet, beautiful woman she was, and it just made me feel

so good to remember those relationships and that time. Some people might think

of living in two worlds, but I thought they were all part of the same world. It

didn't seem that different to me.

And I'm sure people did at some point make, you know, some comment or did think

something, but I wasn't aware of it.

BOYD:Did you have a sense for her friendships? Did she have sort of friends

with, you know, outside of the family, maybe outside of the school?

MCLAIN:Yeah, she and the Thackers were,

had the phone company, Thacker Grigsby Phone Company. Friends weren't everywhere

at first, and Thacker Grigsby Telephone Company were wonderful, and their family

was wonderful, and their daughter and Alice were kind of best friends. And Mrs.

Thacker and Mother started

Girl Scouts in eastern Kentucky. When Alice's friend and her friends were old

enough to be Brownies, Mrs. Thacker and Mother started that together. Dava Lynn

Thacker is her name, is Alice's friend, and her mother, I'm sorry, names are

flying out of my head like crazy, but Dava Lynn and Alice were

very close, and so when they were old enough, their mothers started, and then

Brownies, and then when they were old old enough to be Girl Scouts, they started

that. Mother did things in the community, too. She wasn't as involved with

music, because she was hard of hearing, for one thing. But I think Mother's

sweet nature probably

helped her fit in like my father's nature. He had to make decisions, like you

say, as the director of the school, and had to make some big decisions, and

whenever you make any decision, everybody doesn't like them. But I think he was

also very practical, and it was obvious what needed to happen sometimes. But I

was talking about his vision and some of the things he did. One thing

that I want to make sure I talk about is the fact that when students were

dancing and so forth, like the Berea Country Dancers, Daddy had a performing

group, too, and so he would work up programs with the students, and they would

go on trips to perform. Not as often as the Berea dancers did, but he tried

to do something every year or two, if he could, and he took them to perform at

the World's Fair in New York. He took them to dance at the National Folklore

Convention in Atlanta, Georgia. He took them to Denver, Colorado, to dance. He

took them a lot of places, and so sometimes there were some kids that had never

traveled very far, maybe not outside the county or outside the state, or maybe to

Ohio, where they had relatives in back, but not to New York or Atlanta or Denver

or places like that. Those just popped in my head as being examples, but there

were other places that we danced, too.

BOYD:Were you part of that?

MCLAIN:Well, when I got old enough to play the bass, that's how I started when

I was nine. I started, Miss Capps had left her bass at our house, and so Daddy

let me

start playing with him for country dancing.

BOYD:I mean, those trips must have profoundly changed those students in terms

of their lives.

MCLAIN:I was talking with one friend, Roy Harland Stacy, recently, and he was

telling me even at that time, he said that those trips profoundly changed his

life. He was from a generation that,

when he was very young, their house didn't have electricity or water. A lot of

houses didn't. As soon as it was possible to do it, his father put electricity,

wired the house, put water. Before that time, they had a hand pump, and just

outside the, no, they didn't have a hand pump. They had a well. You lowered

a bucket down, I remember. He was I remember. He was saying that one of the

things he's having a hard time explaining to his grandchildren is why, if you

got up in the morning and the water in the bucket in the kitchen had frozen, why

you couldn't get a drink of water. Because he said, they don't have a reference

for that.

The students at the Settlement School have always had opportunities because of

the Settlement. That's part of our mission. Our mission is to, I can't quote it

exactly, but it's something like to help educate and to give opportunities to

people from our

region and to keep mindful of our heritage. The first graduate from the Hindman

Settlement School, Josiah Combs, went to the Sorbonne in France and got his

doctorate, wrote his thesis on balladry from eastern Kentucky. People have

always gained opportunities at the Settlement School. In those early days, and I

even think of the 60's as early days, although it's in my lifetime, so I don't

think of it as early days, but the roads were very different then. The Mountain

Parkway was built in, what, ‘64. So before that, and before New 15, before they

built that, which is now just 15, I guess, between Hazard

and Jackson and on to Campton, it was very different traveling around. In those

days, what you did to serve that mission was different than what you do today to

serve the mission. When Daddy went to Berea and Lionel Duff became the director,

he had a real challenge. He was director for seven years, and it was really a

difficult time to be the director of the Settlement School because it was a real transition

from the time when students needed to come stay at the settlement. Now there are

all these roads, that's not the big need. And so all of a sudden, all the

infrastructure, everything you've been preparing to serve in this way is not

what you need to do. (laughs) So he had a very challenging time, and he did a

good job. And then Mike Mullins came. He was terrific. He was a wonderful

director. He was

a go-getter. He was driven. He had, I mean, it was his personal mission to

fulfill that mission. And his family is wonderful and supportive, and his wife

and his daughters, his whole family. But what was the situation when Mike got

there was very different than the situation that Daddy left just seven years

earlier. And so the dyslexia program, when Lois Weinberg came to Mike and said,

“I need someone to help my grandchild,” and they did, he was reacting to the

need at that point. He was doing exactly what Daddy did. He was addressing the need.

BOYD:And figuring it out.

MCLAIN:Figuring

it out.

BOYD:So, I love that. Before we go to music, I want to just sort of talk again

about the memories of your parents as parents. How would you characterize your

mother? Describe her.

MCLAIN:Loving, caring, nurturing, amazingly resourceful cook. Amazingly

resourceful, everything.

BOYD:What else do you remember about cooking besides the--

MCLAIN:Just goodness. My mother's--

BOYD:Like what were some--you talked about bread and tomato soup. What were

some of the good things?

MCLAIN:It doesn't matter. It was all good. Any kind of a casserole, any kind of

a--anything she made was good. And she made desserts, oh my God, desserts. She

had something she called chocolate

cake pudding that we would burn our mouths on every time because we couldn't

wait for it to cool. come out. You'd pour it in a pan and bake it and it would

separate and it would be like pudding underneath it and like a hard thing on the

top and chocolate and--

BOYD:Sounds amazing.

MCLAIN:(laughs) It was good. And lemon cake pudding she made and she could make anything.

She wasn't a mountain cook. She wasn't a southern cook. She had her style. She

wasn't really a northern cook either, but she just made food and it was just

good. She was very good about following recipes. Getting the way to do it was

important to her. If you alter a recipe, you can alter it, but then

you have to write it down that way and do it that way every time. She had, you

know, it's like there was one way to do this and one way to do that. And it was

good, but it was her way.

BOYD:Did she have any kind of hobbies or, you know, something that--

MCLAIN:(pauses) No, my mother's hobbies were more things like

pastimes, like puzzles and like working jigsaw. A lot of people in Hindman at

the Settlement School worked jigsaw. Alice Beeman, that was the nurse there, in

the wintertime would set up a table in the front hall of the hospital that's now

called Stucky. And a big table, and she would work on a piece of glass, a jigsaw

puzzle, very complicated, upside down. Because she thought it was cheating if

you look at the picture. So she would work the jigsaw puzzle upside down,

complicated ones, and then she'd put something on the other side and turn it

over and then get to see the picture.

BOYD:Oh my gosh.

MCLAIN:In the wintertime, we had a lot of time, which is why people played

music, why people did things like that.

BOYD:Well, let's talk

about music, because--

MCLAIN:(laughs) I'm sorry, I keep saying it.

BOYD:--well, it's just so interesting because, you know, we started off talking

about your earliest earliest memories, and your earliest memories, you know,

straight to music. And so at Hindman, you've got the dances, you know, that

you're going to as a child. You've got the Friday night you listen to the radio

program, so you have music there.

You also had, as far as I can tell, an unbelievably talented set of neighbors.

MCLAIN:You know, that's one of the things I loved about growing up in that

community, was the easy way people sang and played and whatever. If you went to

somebody's house, you could see a guitar sitting there or a banjo or something.

If someone's walking down the street, they might sing. You don't see that much

anymore. People did that. They would just sing.

BOYD:And people wanted them to sing, you know, in some ways, too.

MCLAIN:People liked it if people sang, yeah. If somebody's people sang, yeah.

If somebody's washing the dishes, they might sing, or if somebody's working in a

field, they might sing. It wasn't like singing was

a different thing in the book. I don't remember which book it was, uh-oh, I

think that Robert Fulgham wrote, he talked about what happens to us from the

time we're young to the time we get old. If you ask a child, do you want to

sing? Yeah. What do you want to sing? Anything. sing? Anything. When? Right now.

You want to dance? Yeah. Let's do it. We put conditions. Well, I sing, but I

only sing

with this group of people, or I only sing at this time, or I only sing this kind

of music, or I only sing this. We put all these conditions on it.

BOYD:Or even worse, the adult says, I don't know how to sing, even though they

can sing.

MCLAIN:Even though they can sing. And that was one thing growing up in

Heinemann, everybody did it. Nobody, it wasn't like an unusual thing for

somebody to sing.

BOYD:But you've got like Hiram Stamper, Art Stamper,

you've got the Sloan, Ray Sloan in the area. You've got the Ritchie family,

right? So that's in Viper. The Gibsons?

MCLAIN:I didn't know him as well at that time. Jesse Wells knows him very well.

BOYD:You've got Banjo Bill Cornet.

MCLAIN:Yeah, I never heard Banjo Bill Cornet

play, but he was there.

BOYD:I mean, I'm just going down the list of, you know, did you have--

MCLAIN:Where did you get that list?

BOYD:I just, we just--research.

MCLAIN:Oh. (both laugh)

BOYD:Morgan and Lee Sexton, obviously, in, you know, Whitesburg, right? They

were in Whitesburg?

MCLAIN:Letcher County.

BOYD:Letcher County.

MCLAIN:And, um, and, uh, Marion Sumner as well. Marion Sumner? well.

BOYD:Marion Sumner? Who was Fiddle?

MCLAIN:Yeah. Yeah. He sure

was. And, um, matter of fact, Marion Sumner and Lee Sexton were the first, well,

I don't want to say they were the first ones I heard, I heard a lot of them. And

entertainers like Ralph Stanley and Hylo Brown and people like that would come

through too.

BOYD:That's big. That's--

MCLAIN:I saw them when they were very--I would go to the, uh,

if it was in a courthouse or in a school gymnasium or if it was on top of the

drive-in movie theater in Hindman, uh, um, they'd come through.

BOYD:So you're nine years old and you discover the bass.

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:Tell me that story.

MCLAIN:It was sitting there and, uh, Daddy was playing the piano

and, um, I don't remember the conversation or how it happened, but I think I

asked him if I could play with him and, uh, he started playing, uh, “Chinese

Breakdown” on the piano. And he said that all the strings are open, all the

strings you play are all open strings. So,

um, it was in the key of D and it had D, G, and A were the--and he told me when

to change and told me what to do and, uh, showed me. And then, I can't remember

the next--”Chinese Breakdown” was my first song. And, um, then when I started

needing finger notes, um, I stood on a chair and I did

that for--Well, until I didn't have to stand on a chair anymore, (laughs) but,

um, after I started playing with him and I wanted to do it so much that, um,

that I did it a lot.

BOYD:Were you connecting what you're doing in those moments as a nine-year-old

with this tradition of, you know, neighbors who were very accomplished

musicians, um,

listening to the radio, listening to music in the dances?

MCLAIN:I don't guess I thought of it as a different thing. I thought it--I

thought music was all one thing.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. all Yeah. thing. Yeah. That's cool. Yeah. cool. Yeah.So--was

your dad--you said he was playing the piano, um, and we've talked about--a lot

about your dad. We're going to talk a lot more about your dad

as we move forward, but, but--I'm assuming, because of music in his life, that

for people who have that as sort of, clearly music was a bit of an obsession,

right, for him, that, um, almost not even obsession. It was just part of him.

MCLAIN:Part of life.

BOYD:So was he playing all the time and around the house and what kind of

things would he play?

MCLAIN:He played everything, you know, uh,

he played recorders. He was a wonderful recorder player.

BOYD:Well, he started out that, like, back in--

MCLAIN:When he was, uh, yeah, before he was in high school, I think.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Um, matter of fact, did I tell you that when he lived, that he used to

ride his bicycle from Lexington out to, uh, Boot Hill and teach John Jacob

Niles' children?

BOYD:No, I didn't know that.

MCLAIN:Give them recorder lessons.

BOYD:When he was here in Lexington?

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:I mean, he had left music at that point, right?

MCLAIN:He

loved music, yeah.

BOYD:He left professional music. So he was doing--

MCLAIN:No, this was when he was a child.

BOYD:Oh, when he was a child!

MCLAIN:Yeah. When he was too young to drive a car.

BOYD:Well, that would make sense. With John Jacob Niles, that would make sense.

MCLAIN:Okay. And, And, um, he, uh--What was the question?

BOYD:So the question was, what was he, you know, what do you remember your

father playing around the house?

MCLAIN:Oh, everything. He had a, uh, an old

pump organ that folded up into a, I think, and, and you'd, you'd pump it and

he'd play the, uh, a little pump organ. Uh, it was a portable thing. You could

put it in the back seat of a car.

BOYD:Really?

MCLAIN:Yeah. He had a harpsichord that, uh, he played. He had any number of,

well, not any number, he had a silver tone guitar. And finally he got

a little Martin guitar because he was going to teach Mother to play. And but

Mother being hard of hearing, it wasn't fun for her and it hurt her fingers and

it didn't--With hearing aids, it didn't have the same--She was very musical by

nature, but, uh, she didn't, um, she didn't continue, uh--

BOYD:But the Martin guitar stayed.

MCLAIN:Yeah. So it was a, it was a small body, uh, Martin it burned up in our fire.

BOYD:

Which we're going to talk about.

MCLAIN:Yeah. Um, any number of instruments, uh, the piano, the, the accordion.

And he had these accordion.

BOYD:And he had these all at the house?

MCLAIN:Mm-hmm.

BOYD:He had them all at the house?

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:Wow.

MCLAIN:Where else would he have them?

BOYD:He played accordion, right?

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:So I, I've heard tell of an accordion.

MCLAIN:Yes.

BOYD:That's amazing.

MCLAIN:That's the, he had, well, the banjos that were upstairs in

the closet. That's how I, I just asked if I could play one of them. Uh, he had,

uh, yeah, he had a dulcimer. He had, uh, there were any number of instruments of

all kinds.

BOYD:Yeah. That's really, so, so what kind of things would he just play for

fun? What do you remember growing up in those early childhood days?

MCLAIN:

It depended who was there. If, um, if he was playing with, you know, with a,

with a fiddler, he would play maybe guitar if he was, or, or accordion or

something. If he was playing, um, with recorder players, he'd play the recorder.

If he was playing, it depended who, it would, he loved all kinds of music.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Clearly.

Clearly. Um, did your mother enjoy the music?

MCLAIN:She enjoyed the music, uh, but as I say, it didn't necessarily sound

good to her through her hearing aids. Hearing aids have improved over time, and

I think modern hearing aids are better than the hearing aids were in the early

sixties. And she had an operation too early in the sixties. I was alive at that

time, but, um,

she had one good ear, which was not great, but then, and then one ear out of

which she could hear very little. And the good ear, the, uh, the doctors really

didn't understand why she could hear anything, and they never did all her life.

Why could this woman hear? Because those things, the stirrup and anvil and those

things that are in your ear that, the bones and so forth were gone. They had

dissolved away long before, and

the normal things that we have in our ears, uh, some of them she didn't have.

And doctors really didn't understand why she could hear, but they told her that

they thought they could do an operation that would restore her hearing. So early

on in the sixties, she had, she let them do the operation. And she heard

perfectly out of that ear for about

a week and then nothing.

BOYD:Oh, oh, it's heartbreaking.

MCLAIN:So, uh, they wanted to, and now the bad ear was her good ear.

BOYD:Oh, geez.

MCLAIN:If you see pictures of my mother, she frequently have her head turned

this way and she's smiling at you. It was a sort of a characteristic way of her,

that she looked, but it was so she could hear you. That's why she would turn her

head that way.

BOYD:Oh, that's interesting.

MCLAIN:So they wanted to operate then on the other ear. But after the

experience with the first ear, she wouldn't let them do it. So she wore hearing

aids, um, uh, from then on. She lost her hearing because she had rheumatic fever

when she was a child.

BOYD:Right. Right.

MCLAIN:But I'm sorry, I probably didn't answer your question.

BOYD:Oh, I mean, we're talking whether your mom enjoyed the music because she

was hard of hearing.

MCLAIN:She did. She did

enjoy the music. She enjoyed the dancing.

BOYD:I mean, she later became extremely supportive of the McLain family band and--

MCLAIN:Oh, she always was from the very beginning. She was always a good dancer

and loved, loved folk dancing all her life. She loved the interaction with

people, very social. She loved, uh, she did

all of our correspondence, kept our office, answered the phone. Daddy always

said that he thought one reason she was so good on the telephone was because she

was on an equal footing with everyone else. All the rest of her life, she had a

hard time hearing, but on the phone, she could hear very well. So, uh, he

thought that was one reason that she was so good on the phone, um, was because

for once she could hear. (laughs) She, uh, was

very supportive from the very beginning and she became really a manager for our

band. She didn't bec--and she was very good at it. She didn't become a good

manager because she wanted to be a manager. She wanted us to be well-managed.

And if she wanted her family to be well-managed, then she just had to do that.

BOYD:That makes a lot of sense.

MCLAIN:And she became very, very good.

BOYD:Clearly. I mean, we'll talk more, a lot about that when we get into that phase.

Um, so you've just, your father's playing music all over the house, a variety of

all these instruments, a variety of musical styles. You're exposed to a lot of

bluegrass and a lot of old-time music just being in the community that you're in.

MCLAIN:Because that's everywhere.

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:And so--so did you have favorites at that time?

MCLAIN:Yeah, I had a lot of favorites.

BOYD:What were some What were some of your favorite? And I guess we'll make the

tip and say what later, what would become

your influences?

MCLAIN:Um, early in the sixties, it was, my favorites were the people I could

see. On television, the artists on the Saturday Night Jamboree. And then as I

got older and we got more stations on the television, we could see Flatt &

Scruggs weekly show twice. We could actually

see it three times, because we could see it once on one station and then you

could change the channel and see last week's program.

BOYD:Oh, that's fantastic.

MCLAIN:And then you could, uh, and there was another time you could see this

week's program again. So they'd send, I guess they must have sent those, it was

on film probably, they'd probably send them from one station to the next. That's

probably why. But, um, we,

uh, the Stoneman family was, had a weekly television program and they were hot

as a firecracker, uh, everywhere in eastern Kentucky and became our good

friends, uh, to this day. Um, those that are still living. Of course, Ralph

Stanley was, uh, when he came through, he was very

nice to us and people in his band. I never met Carter. Daddy knew--Daddy had met

Carter, of course, but, uh, I didn't meet Ralph until after Carter had died. Um,

matter of fact, it was the next year and when I met Ralph Stanley, I don't know,

I was probably 14 or 15 years old and I played the mandolin and, uh, Ralph had

just come back from a trip out west and

he and Curly Ray Cline and Larry Sparks had gone out together because it was

just after, uh, Carter had died. And Ralph didn't know if he was going to

continue playing or not. He thought he might not continue because he was so

moved by Carter's passing. Fortunately, he decided to continue. Um, but that was

the band, it was Curly

Ray Cline and, and, uh, Larry Sparks. They were playing on the, uh, roof of the

drive-in movie theater in Hindman and we went. Melvin Goins was there and

Melvin, uh, when, hadn't gone out west with him, uh, Ralph had left him at home

to book dates and to, um, uh, you know, prepare for them to come back to put

their schedule together and that. And Jack Lynch,

who was on Jaylyn Records, uh, came and he was going to play bass with Ralph.

And, uh, for some reason, I don't know how it came up, but Ralph asked me if I

wanted to to play the mandolin with him that night, which I did. And then he

invited me to come play with him the next two nights in Prestonsburg and, uh,

maybe Paintsville, if they had a drive-in movie theater. We were always on the

top of the movie theaters,

um, at that time.

BOYD:And you're fourteen?

MCLAIN:Or fifteen.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:I wasn't old enough to drive yet, I don't think. Um, but, uh, he let me

play mandolin with him and that was such a generous thing for him to do.

BOYD:Well, I mean, you had played, you had played for a people before, but I

imagine that was pretty big.

MCLAIN:Local people. Oh, yeah. Well, yeah. It was like, it was like he was my

hero and he

stepped out of a record album jacket into the world and, and let me play with him.

BOYD:What did you play?

MCLAIN:I just played the mandolin.

BOYD:But, I mean, do you remember the song?

MCLAIN:His songs. Whatever he was, all of them, you know, “Going Up Home to

Live in Green Pastures” and, well, I didn't play that one because, but, uh, all

of his, everything he played.

BOYD:So would you, you know, thinking about, go ahead.

MCLAIN:Well, I was going to tell you about that night. It was an interesting

night because, uh,

Melvin Goins had not booked, uh, for Ralph. He put the band together with his

brother Ray and started the Goins Brothers and so he booked for them and they

had both played with Curly Ray Cline and, and his brothers in the Lonesome Pine

Fiddlers and he wanted, so he came and told Ralph that he'd not book dates for

him but he was going off on his own

and he wanted Curly Ray Cline to let them use the name the Lonesome Pine

Fiddlers because it was an established name and they'd been in the band and, uh,

that and, uh, Curly Ray told him that he would let him use the name for 15% of

everything they made off the top and Melvin said, well, he wasn't going to do

that and, uh, so they went with the name the Goins Brothers and, uh,

and that was a, that was kind of a big night.

BOYD:How did that go over with Ralph?

MCLAIN:Everybody was, everybody was, you know, one of the things about these

artists and I see it with young artists too, they've all got a sense of humor

and they all know how to laugh. Yeah, I don't think you survive if you don't,

it would wear you out and they all seem to be able to see the humor in a

situation, they all seem to be able to, um, remain friends with, uh, with one

another, um, even, you know, there are old stories about jealousies and that and

people that won't speak to somebody and people laugh about that. They do and

they, and they come back together again and I think, uh, I asked Ricky Skaggs

one time, I interviewed him for KET for a program called Bywords in his house

with his mother and daddy before he, before he had his record contract and

everything with, with, uh, CBS, um, or Columbia I guess it was at that time,

maybe even, but I asked him about that, why we all seem to be able to

get along so well and that, you know, in the past people wouldn't and there'd be

stories of fist fights or that and Ricky said he thought it was because times

were so hard back then. If somebody got a date, maybe it meant that you didn't

get one or if somebody made a dollar it meant that you didn't or a dime or

whatever and he said he thought it was because times were so hard and now it, it

still might make a difference in the way you eat your lunch,

but you can, but you're still going to be able to manage. And I think that's

true, I mean, if you think now even young artists who've only been in the

business a few years, if they have a recording contract and if they have certain

support, you know, they've got a bus and they've, they're doing it in this way

and they've got a road crew and they've got a lighting director and they've got

a sound man and they've got, uh, you know, and the people that started this

music did not

do that. They traveled in their car with, you know, sleeping on one anothers’

shoulders and putting the bass fiddle on top of the car and if it rained it has

to come in the car with you and Jim and Jesse had a story about Dave Southerland

traveling with them, the bass was on top of the car, they came to a red light

and he, David not, uh, uh, fastened the bass on the, on the top,

uh, very securely and they stopped at a summer and the bass came off and went

through a plate glass window of a store. It's a different world now than it was

just a few years back and I feel so fortunate to live, I don't mind turning 70

this year, that does not bother me at all because I had the opportunity to

meet some of my heroes, people that if I had not met them I would have have read

all about them that I could in a book.

BOYD:Not just meet, you've played with.

MCLAIN:I was so fortunate to have the opportunities to make friends, personal

friends with heroes. That's thanks to my dad and my family, that's thanks, if

Daddy had not

made decisions that he did I would never have met these people. I had the chance

to play on stage with Don Reno and Red Smiley and Bill Harrell for three years,

not every day but on and off for three years. I'm friends today with his sons, I

saw Ronnie and Don Wayne at some of these funerals that happened last week.

Still, I mean if I think about all the, everyone from Larry Stevenson to Vince

Gill to Carl Jackson to Mike Stevens to the pallbearers at these funerals were

their bands and their friends.

BOYD:I can't imagine.

MCLAIN:If you think about being Terry Eldredge, Terry Smith,

some of his family, I don't want to go into that right now, but if you think

about having the opportunity to have the honor to carry that person. If you

think about knowing their stories, having your heroes be really open with you

and tell you about their mistakes as well as their successes,

tell you about their stories, the things they hoped would work that maybe

didn't, but this happened instead. That's one of the big life lessons for me,

talking to these people about them working and working and working toward this

thing. That thing didn't work, and it was a disappointment. But because they did

all that work, this thing over here happened that would have never happened

had they not been working toward this, and this was better than it would have

been anyway. So many of these people, and they gave me good advice. Clyde Moody,

well, Sonny Osborne, Don Reno, a lot of people gave me this advice, and a lot of

people did, a lot of entertainers. Clyde Moody said it like this, he said,

“Raymond, if you're going to be an entertainer, there's times you're going to

have money,

and there's times you're not going to have any money.” He said, “sometimes you

have a lot of money. Don't spend it. He said, it's hard, but don't, because

you're going to need it when you don't have any money.” He said, “back in the

40s when I was the waltz king on the Grand Ole Opry, I had hit records and had

the Shenandoah Waltz,” he said, “I made a lot of money. I didn't spend it, I put

it in the bank, I invested it, he said, I didn't spend that money.” He said, “it

was hard, but I didn't spend it.”

He said, “Raymond, it's been decades since I've had a recording contract or hit

record, but he said, every year I go out and buy a new Cadillac,” and he did,

and he would drive in to those shows in a new Cadillac every year, and his wife

beside him, and straight and tall, and come and sing just as beautifully as he

did on records in the 40s. You listen to him in the seventies, and you think,

he didn't lose anything. He just got better, and that was his advice about

money. Sonny Osborne told me one time he kept a quarter out of every dollar he

ever made. Entertainers that have a long career have ups and downs, like anybody

does if they're self-employed, but with entertainers I think it's more of a variation,

and there are times when you need to have that to fall back on, and you also

need your good word. You also need your good word. You need people to know that

when you tell them something, it's right. My father had more good advice than I

could tell you.

BOYD:

What? Go back to age nine in the bass.

MCLAIN:I'm sorry, I keep jumping ahead. (laughs)

BOYD:No, you're good. You're good. I want you to connect the dots for me.

MCLAIN:Okay.

BOYD:Fourteen years old, you're on stage with Ralph Stanley playing the mandolin.

MCLAIN:Well, maybe I was 16, I don't know.

BOYD:Thereabouts. It doesn't matter.

MCLAIN:Early teens. Middle teens.

BOYD:It's still amazing.

MCLAIN:Middle teens.

BOYD:So, connect me--connect the years between nine years old and that. You've

gone from playing the bass to playing the mandolin.

MCLAIN:Well, I started

playing probably, I don't know. Daddy showed me chords on the guitar. Paul

Dobson was a friend. He's, let's see, he would be Larry Sparks' brother-in-law

now. At that time, not, but, because everybody was a lot younger then, but

he was a student at the Settlement School, and his sister married Larry Sparks

later on, Pam (pauses) Dobson, Paul Dobson, Billy Ray Dobson was their brother,

but Paul and I, Billy Ray, sometimes, would play guitars. I remember learning to

play “The Wildwood Flower” with him, and some, I mean, he's just a friend, and

we, in an afternoon, we'd play, and

Daddy showed me things. People were very generous. Ray Sloan was very generous,

would teach me tunes.

BOYD:At that time, when people were teaching you tunes, were they teaching you

on guitar, are they teaching you, are you learning on, what instrument are you

gravitating towards at this time?

MCLAIN:Guitar, banjo, mandolin.

BOYD:So you were playing them all pretty quickly.

MCLAIN:There were people who said, don't play these other instruments, stick

with the bass. If you play these other instruments, it's going to mess up your

bass playing. And I said, “Daddy, is that right?” And Daddy said, “I think that

it only helps,” and I believe that, too. Some people think you should only stick

with one instrument, and play that instrument, but I like trying to play

different things on different ones.

And I think it helps because you know, if you play the guitar, you know what the

guitar player needs from a bass player, it helps your bass playing. If you play

the banjo, you know what the banjo player needs. If you play the fiddle, you

know what the fiddler needs. I think it helps you play in a group, or if it's a

duo, or whatever. And it also helps you be self-sufficient on that instrument,

so if you

are the only musician and playing the banjo, you know how to feel the group on

that instrument.

BOYD:So you've got some incredible people showing you things. Was there kind of

a lead mentor?

MCLAIN:Daddy.

BOYD:Your dad.

MCLAIN:Yeah, it would be Daddy. I was just really fortunate to be around a lot

of really great players,

and a lot of people who just felt, like I still do, that music is just natural.

It's like air. It's like water. It's part of life. We need it.

BOYD:We do. We do need it. So was there, at this time, somebody who was, or an

instrument that was kind of, were you gravitating towards one, you could do them

all? MCLAIN: People knew me as a bass player, I think,

at first, because that's what I played all the time. And when Ruth started

playing the bass, I'd been playing the banjo for a little while, and it was

natural to, so I think people thought of me as a banjo player, although I still

played the guitar and the mandolin, and loved those instruments, too.

BOYD:So when you're--just out of curiosity today, you've accomplished in many

of these instruments, I've heard you play

many of them, and yeah, you're quite accomplished, what do you reach for now, first?

MCLAIN:Depends.

BOYD:Depends. So you're still?

MCLAIN:I still like--yeah, it makes it a little more awkward for me to tour,

because I try to take everything. (Boyd laughs) If I take it all, I take two

guitars, I take an archtop and a, that small body flattop you saw, I take the

fiddle, the banjo, the,

I don't take a bass, usually, because Ruth's got that, and, or Alice, my sister,

all three of my sisters play bass, Nancy-Ann plays bass too, but it's a lot to

wag around. (laughs)

BOYD:Yes, it is. Well speaking of which, let's talk about, not the family band,

but let's talk about the family playing together, because there was a period of time

where you all were playing together before this idea of let's start a band and

go out on tour. Talk about playing music together as a family.

MCLAIN:Well before that, Daddy and I played with other people. We played with

Ray, we played--Sloan, we played with, with Columbus Brewer and his family, and

Burl C. Ritchie and his wife Vita, and we played with

Columbus and his family, his son Doris (??), his Alice, his wife Alice, his

daughter Sue, we were called Burl and Chris and the Perry Mountain Boys.

BOYD:Burl and Chris.

MCLAIN:Yeah, for Columbus Brewer it was Christopher Columbus, and Burl C.

Ritchie was Burl, and so we were Burl and Chris, and I guess Daddy and I were

the Perry Mountain Boys. (Boyd laughs) We had a radio

show on the Hazard station, we were sponsored by the Perry Furniture Company, we

had a different sponsor, but the Hazard Furniture Company, and Burl was a good

emcee, and he would do the commercials, and we would record on tape, and we

would gather and rehearse and then do the show.

BOYD:

What kind of music would you play? I mean, specifically, do you remember songs

that stand out?

MCLAIN:Everything--we sang, when you said some of the songs we sang, it

reminded me of, when we were singing,

Columbus' wife and daughter were singing “Gonna Paint the Town”, you know, the

one that Carter Stanley wrote, and they had a book of the words, and so we were

playing the song, and we'd kicked it off, and we were singing, and they did the

choruses, and they couldn't remember the last verse, so while somebody was

taking a break, one of them said to the other, what is the

break in our music, it means a solo, so somebody was taking an instrumental

solo, and they ran back to get the words, because they'd forgotten the words,

and they flipped open, and it's going along with everybody's work, and the first

words were, now when you see me coming, and they said, now when you see, and

they're running, now when you see me coming, better raise your windows high,

when you see me leaving, la la, hang down your head

and cry, so they're running toward the microphone, full speed through, coming

through the band, now when you see me coming, and everybody started laughing so

hard, because they were singing, now when you see me coming, and that we had to

quit, and re-record the whole darn thing. (laughs) That was what, I mean, we

sang, they sang, Merle Haggard's song “Silver Wings” was popular at the time,

they sang that, we sang, they sang “Last Night the Bottle Let Me Down”, they

sang, you know, some of those Merle Haggard songs, Burl and Vida were really

good at that, they were good at a lot of things, and Burl, there were several

banjo players in that band, Burl was a banjo player, and Columbus, and they both

showed me things on the banjo, Burl was a good

three-finger player, and Columbus was a great old-time player, and they both

taught me that, to play things. Katie Combs was a wonderful lady that taught me

how to play some certain things in the old-time style on the banjo that I still

try to play today, and I try to play it like her, because it was so wonderful. She

told all kinds of stories, too, she was a good entertainer, I mean, I never saw

her like on a stage, but she was just, she was a good storyteller, and a good

player, and she said, one time I said, “how did you learn to play like that?”

And she said, “well, I learned to play like that because I was lazy.” And I

said, “you did?” She said, “yes,” she said, “because when I was little,” she said,

“I was one of the younger girls, and I had all this family, and my mother had a

lot of dishes, and she wanted me to wash the dishes, and to do all this work in

the kitchen, and I didn't like doing it.” So she said, “but, and if I wasn't

doing something, she would, or if I was doing something that she didn't like,

she would make me come and work. But she loved to hear me play the banjo,” so

she said, “I would get the banjo, and climb up,” she said, “the roof of the

house came back to

nearly the hillside,” and she said, “I could step over from the hillside onto

the roof of the house, and I'd stand up on the roof and play the banjo, and as

long as I would play, my mother wouldn't make me come work.” And so that's why

she told me she played the banjo, but.

BOYD:So she was showing you things as well.

MCLAIN:Oh yeah, yeah, she taught me, she taught me to play one of the songs I

still do today.

BOYD:What's that?

MCLAIN:Cotton Eye Joe.

Not the Texas version. It's a different, it's a different, it's a different song really.

BOYD:Yeah, I'd like to hear how different it is. I'd like to hear that. So

okay, so you're off, you and your father are off playing, you're pros at this

point, you're playing with these. Well, these.

MCLAIN:Well, I wouldn't say we're pros.

BOYD:No, you're on the radio.

MCLAIN:We played with the Charles Brothers from Beattyville, Kentucky also. We

were the Charles Brothers and the Kentucky River Boys, and I guess Daddy and I

were the Kentucky River Boys. (Boyd laughs) And we came, this was before Alice

and Ruth started, and Billy Paul Charles and I played twin banjos. We both

played the banjo. And we happened to have Gibson bowtie Mastertones that looked

alike. [Editor’s note: Gibson Mastertone banjo of a certain era have fingerboard

inlays that resemble a bowtie.] And so we played those together, and we would

play some things that were

in the nature of a banjo duet, and then I'd play the mandolin sometimes and he'd

play the banjo. We met them. It was Dallas was the guitar player, and Billy Paul

played the banjo, and their brother Phillip plays bass. And so the three of them

would play, and it--the first time we met them, Brewer Chevrolet in Campton,

Kentucky, now it's a different owner, but at that time it was Brewer Chevrolet.

Every year they

would have a grand opening to show the new model that would come out in the

fall. Wouldn't it be or something? And they would have a show and music and

invite everybody in to see the new Chevrolets, and they'd have a contest, had a

band contest. Well this year I think that Melvin Goins was the judge, one of

them, and there were several judges. But the Charles Brothers had

entered, and we'd entered, Daddy and I were playing at that time with Marion

Martin and Ray Sloan and, or no, maybe, no, okay, I'm sorry, we went, I believe,

Columbus and Burl C., and for some reason I think that Marion Martin was there

too. Anyway, we were playing, and the Charles Brothers were playing,

and we'd never met, and one of the Charles Brothers came over to Daddy and he

said, “who picks your five string?” And Daddy said, “my son does,” and pointed

to me and said, “how old is he?” And Daddy told him, and I was the same age as

Billy Paul, and he says, “how many fingers does he pick with?” And Daddy said,

“three,” and he said, “oh.” Because Billy Paul was playing with two fingers at

the time. Now he could play

a two-finger style that sounded amazing, but it was a thing back in those days

to play with three fingers, because Earl Scruggs and Don Reno and Ralph Stanley

and all these people played with three fingers, so that was a thing. And so

Billy Paul played with two fingers. And as it happened, I think we won the band

contest, but very soon, we made friends with the Charles Brothers too, and very

soon thereafter, by the time I saw Billy Paul

next, he was playing with three fingers. (laughs) But we started going to

Beattyville and playing with Billy Paul and Dallas mostly, and sometimes Phillip

too. And we came and played at the Bluegrass Fair in Lexington and entered the

band contest as the Charles Brothers and the Kentucky River Boys. And that

night, after we were done, J.D. Crowe was playing at the Red Slipper Lounge at

that time, and

it was just about a week or two after Red Allen had left the band, but Doyle

Lawson was there, and (pauses) Sloane, [Editor’s note: Bobby Sloane] my friend,

I'm sorry, names are just flying out of my head like crazy, anyway--anyway, we

went to hear them.

Well, I couldn't go in, I was sitting, there was a little chair outside, there

was some doors, it was the Red Slipper Lounge at the Holiday Inn North, you

know, and they played there six nights a week.

BOYD:That's incredible.

MCLAIN:I mean for hours, six nights a week, and if you don't think they were

good, it was such inspiring music, but of course, I was obviously too young to

go in, so I sat on the chair outside and Daddy and Billy Paul and Dallas

went in, the three of them, and a man came in after I'd been sitting there a

while, he'd been out, and he came and he said, started talking to me and said,

“who are you,” and I said, “well, I'm a banjo player, and I'm just listening to

the music,” and he said, “well, why don't you come in?” And I said, “I can't,

I'm too young, they won't let me in,” and he said, “I know him,” and it was

J.D.'s daddy, and he went and got a stool, a bar stool, and set it this close to J.D.,

and so every time J.D. would come in for a break, he was that close to me, and I

think that really influenced me, because that was pretty powerful music, and

Doyle Lawson, he's my friend to this day, and he's been a friend to all of us,

to all my family, and J.D. was just as nice, and I'll tell you something else,

that a lot of these entertainers that had long careers,

they're not all the same, but our favorite ones of them have got something in

common also, and that's respect. If you think about J.D. Crowe, Doyle, if you

think about, Bobby Sloane was the fiddler, if you think about Jim and Jesse, the

Osborne brothers, if you think about Bill Monroe, they all have this thing in

common, respect for one another,

whatever their differences might be, there's still a lot of respect. For not

only who they're playing with, but for the people that hire them, for the fans,

for the people they're playing for, for the people they're playing with, respect

is huge, and it carries through, and if you see the new generation, and the Sam

Bushes, and the Ricky Skaggs, and Jerry Douglas,

and the Whites, and I mean, I could go on, everybody, and Vince Gill. Vince is

just as nice, and just as respectful, and as, he wouldn't have to be, but those

people, that whole generation, have that in common, and respect is so important.

BOYD:Yeah, well, J.D. was in this very seat, I think he might have been--and

we might have been been his last interview, because I think he died just a few

months after we interviewed him.

MCLAIN:I'm glad that you did. J.D., the Osborne brothers, early entertainers,

Jim Carter, they didn't believe on turning their back ever toward the audience,

because for them, that would be a sign of disrespect, and if you ever saw J.D.

come on, you'd see him come on, and back off the stage, so he never turned

around. I don't do that, that's not, I don't think, for me, that's, I think, I

respect people, and sometimes, I heard Jim Carter say, pardon me turning my back

toward you, it's the only thing I've got on that side if I'm facing this way,

but people from that generation, a lot of them felt that way, like you never

turn your back toward the audience, and that was

out of respect as well.

BOYD:It was funny, I think about all the times I've seen J.D. Crow, and that's

true, he would back up and move forward and back up and move forward, and I'm

just envisioning you as a teenager sitting in that barstool at the lounge, and

you know, being that close, because he's somebody who, he projects so much when

he plays, but he also sort of leans in a little bit, so I can just see him just

kind of leaning towards.

MCLAIN:And my head is that far from his banjo. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah, that's amazing, that's

amazing, well, I'm going to wrap up here, not necessarily because this is the

best place to stop, but we are running short of time in the studio. Next time,

we're going to start with talking about, we're going to continue this

conversation, you're playing with your father here, and you are playing

professionally, you're playing with these other groups, and we're going to move

into 1968.

MCLAIN:I didn't address your question, though, I didn't answer your question,

the one about how it developed

with Alice and Ruth.

BOYD:Yes.

MCLAIN:We just realized that they were old enough to start going with us,

because we always sang together.

BOYD:So, at home, you weren't--

MCLAIN:At home, we were just singing together in the living room, just because

it was fun, we enjoyed it, and we enjoyed doing it with them.

BOYD:And they were learning the instruments as well.

MCLAIN:Yeah--yeah Ruth was playing the bass. Alice actually hadn't started

playing an instrument yet. They were both

singing with us. And so, when we started our television program in Hazard,

Kentucky, in 1968, Daddy played guitar, I played the banjo, and Ruth played the

bass, and Alice sang. And she said she felt awkward just standing there, and

that's why she started playing the mandolin.

BOYD:Well, next time we're together, we're going to start with the television

show, because that sounds fascinating.

All right, I'm going to hit stop.