PRATHER:This is Liz Prather. [audio interruption] This is Liz. This is not. My name is Liz Prather, and this is Thursday, November 21st, 2024. I'm here with Roger Barnes, who is a resident of Montgomery County, Kentucky. We are talking about Mount Sterling Court Day. This interview takes place in the Montgomery County, Mount Sterling Library. Roger is a property owner that rents to Court Day vendors and is also a member of the City Council. So welcome, Roger.

BARNES:Thank you.

PRATHER:So before we get started on the interview proper, let's -or the oral history proper- let's hear a little bit about who you are and where you're from and a little bit about your childhood.

BARNES:Well, my parents were in the restaurant business in Mount Sterling, but previous to that, they moved to Fort Worth, Texas, and was in the barbecue business in the early 50s--

PRATHER:Really?

BARNES:--where I was born.

PRATHER:You were born in Fort Worth?

BARNES:1954. Moved back to Mount Sterling in 1955. And they opened up the Midland Trail Hotel downtown on Main Street. And I've lived here basically the rest of my life. Went to Mount Sterling High School. Graduated in 1972. Married the first time in 1974 and did live in Bourbon County for a short period, about 14 years.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:Came back to Montgomery County and, well, in the process of living in Bourbon County, decided to start a business and started Barnes Blacktop Sealing in 1978. Then when I moved, divorced and moved back to Mount Sterling, bought a home here on Garden Springs, and, uh, remarried in 1991 to my wife, Rosemary. She was from Irvine, Kentucky, and I have two daughters, and she has three daughters. So five daughters between us, five son in laws, 15 grand babies and two great grandbabies.

PRATHER:Wow.

BARNES:So, I decided to run for city council in 1996 and have been on there ever since.

PRATHER:Wow, that's a long run.

BARNES:Long run.

PRATHER:Yeah. Um, Midland Trail Hotel. Tell me where that was.

BARNES:Okay.  Down, uh, if you go down Maysville Street, hit Main Street and take a left.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:It's down to the end of the block.  Just before you get to Wilson Alley, I think it's Wilson Alley. I'm not sure. Right there.

PRATHER:Yeah. Where the [Gateway Regional] Art Center is?

BARNES:Well, it's, well, the Art Center was actually in that building for a while. The old Midland Trail, when they first opened up the Art Center.

PRATHER:Oh, okay. So it's on the right there.

BARNES:Right next to it, there's an empty parking lot which used to be a laundromat.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:And then of course, the Downtown Athletics was the original Kroger in Mt. Sterling.

PRATHER:Okay

BARNES:So, they had that restaurant and hotel from 55 to about 1970. They sold.

PRATHER:Wow.

BARNES:And out where O'Reilly's Auto Parts is in Mt. Sterling, they opened the first fast food restaurant in Mount Sterling. Which was Big T Burger.

PRATHER:Big T Burger

BARNES:Uh-huh. And it was the first franchise fast food in Montgomery. Ran it for a year and they were just decided they were too old to do that. My dad worked at the bank at Montgomery National Bank at the time and retired from there. Mom kind of worked around as a nurse for the different surgeons and doctors that were in town.

PRATHER:Yeah, so you had a restaurant in the hotel? What was the name of that?

BARNES:It was just Midland Trail.

PRATHER:Midland Trail Restaurant.

BARNES:They did all the Lions clubs, the Rotary clubs. If you had a meeting, you had it at the Midland Trail Hotel.

PRATHER:Wow. Do you. Did you work there as a kid?

BARNES:I did, I did. I grew up mopping floors and started out when they'd have private parties, I would. It was when I was like 12. They wouldn't let me do much, but I could pour water and stuff. At the time, I was 13 or 14, it got to where I could serve. You know, because there would be 40 or 50 people. And they'd need, need servers. And they even got to split the tips with me and all that stuff. It was interesting.

PRATHER:What was Mount Sterling like at that time in the 60s and 70s? What was it like?

BARNES:It was just a little town you came through, I mean, really. They built, I can remember them building, the interstate out here in the early 60s. So everybody had to come through before the interstate was open. They had to come through Mount Sterling to go to get to Ashland. Or from Ashland, they had to come through Mount Sterling. We used to feed Western Kentucky basketball team when Ed Diddle was the coach there. He and my mom and dad were good friends, and I can remember as a kid, the bus pulling up in front of the hotel and all their players getting off. They'd be going to Morehead or Marshall or somewhere. They always stopped in Mount Sterling with Mom and Dad. They would feed the kids.

PRATHER:What a great memory.

BARNES:I mean, it's just neat. And with all the pipelines that came through Mount Sterling, there were really no hotels. There was like, Littles, maybe Littles, Littles Motel, and there wasn't anything out in, you know, toward the interstate. There was no hotels or anything. So everybody stayed in the hotel, and it was a hotel that you didn't have a restroom in your room. You went to the end of the hall, and the women's restroom was on the left with a bathtub, and the men's was on the right with a bath tub. And you had like you see on the old Western, you had the big bowl and pitcher in the room where you could go get water if you wanted to wash your face before you went to work, so I can.

PRATHER:Wow. That's amazing. And so, yeah, that's like on a movie, you know, that's kind of.

BARNES:Had radiator heat in the rooms. You know, the old radiators.

PRATHER:Wow.

BARNES:I can remember being on the-we walked out on the roof and I'm -- my dates may not be right on this, but when the warehouse burned down where one of the city lots is now, there was a tobacco warehouse, and when the stockyards burned down, we stood on the back porch, or we stood on the back roof, and watched the fire.  Hoping the wind wasn't going to blow toward the hotel and burn it down. We were that close. We were within 100 feet of the fire.

PRATHER:Sure. Yeah.

BARNES:And it was-

PRATHER:That's scary

BARNES:-seeing a lot of things. And I just seen a lot of things that have happened in Mount Sterling and know a lot of things, and a lot of people don't realize there's really a catacomb underneath the sidewalks on Main Street-

PRATHER:Really?

BARNES:-where all the plumbing, city plumbing and everything is. You could go out of our hotel, go through a little door, and you could walk up, and I have done it, where the old Western Auto was.

PRATHER:Underneath the sidewalk?

BARNES:Underneath the sidewalk, just like a cave. I don't know that they're still there, but they should still be there.

PRATHER:Were they there - I guess- from the original city planners, they just needed wanted some way to get.

BARNES:Kind of underground plumbing. Yeah, all the different things instead of having it in the dirt.

PRATHER:Yeah. Interesting. How many rooms do you remember? How many rooms you all had?

BARNES:Probably had maybe 20, 15 or 20.

PRATHER:And the restaurant just served.

BARNES:Well, when they bought it in 55, they were doing breakfast, lunch and dinner seven days a week. And they finally got to where it wasn't feasible to do breakfast. So they did lunch and dinner. And the same old people. Okay. I mean, Mr. Nesbitt that owned Clay, Green, and Nesbitt store, Jack Carrington and the Howells that had the Howell Hardware Store. Same people came every day and ate lunch. I just remember that as a kid, if I was there. And Miss Ruth Hunt that had Ruth Hunt Candy factory, sometimes she would be there. And I might be there at night, and she'd say, "Sarah Martha, y'all going to be a while?" And they'd say, "yeah, yeah." "Well, could I take Roger out to the candy factory with me out on Main Street?" "Oh, yeah. We'll pick him up."  And she'd take me and she'd say, now you just go downstairs and you eat whatever you want to eat.

PRATHER:I want to go back in time.

BARNES:I was a kid in a candy store. It was a neat time.

PRATHER:That's wonderful. Sarah Martha was your mom?

BARNES:Yes, ma'am.

PRATHER:Okay. Um, yeah, that just sounds like an idyllic childhood.

BARNES:It was. It was perfect.

PRATHER:So tell me a little bit about what Court Day was like when you were a kid. So you had a front row seat to the Court Day celebration being right there on US 60 Main Street.

BARNES:I remember it being just- it was the busiest days of the restaurant. I mean, absolutely time they open till they close. it was wall to wall people standing in line to come in and have a sit-down meal.  Three days straight. I would stay with my grandmother, which lived at the top of the hill at Trojan Avenue. I'd stay with her on Sunday night because school, the city schools went to school on Monday at that time.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:So I'd stay with Grandmother Barnes so I could walk. When she'd get me up on Monday morning, and I walk across the street to the school. And you know, later on got to where Mount Sterling was out. But I just remember as a kid walking down through around where the railroad was, and it was just real nostalgic. Everybody had their boxes of-we call it junk-but it was antiques and things, and Daddy always wanted to go down and buy a shovel handle. I was telling somebody this morning at breakfast, I said, I don't remember my dad ever owning that many shovels, but he always bought a shovel handle, and he had a certain man he bought it from. And the animals on the track and if the train came through, you had to get everybody had to get out of the way for the train to come through. Sold everything. They sold everything there. And it kind of got to be a health hazard and a little bit with the dogs and the horses and things, and they kind of moved that to Preston. And that's what kind of got Preston started with, uh, with their court days.

PRATHER:Yeah. What would you buy?

BARNES:As a kid, I don't remember. It was mostly food. You know, we always wanted an elephant ear or something, you know, like that.

PRATHER:And people were already at that time selling food.

BARNES:Yeah, it was mostly at that time, it was mostly the local churches and Rec Clubs and Girl Scouts or Boy Scouts or, you know, cheerleaders or kind of like some of what it is now, but not as much commercial as it is now. I mean, or not as much- there's a lot of traveling vendors, you know, with the food vendors now.

PRATHER:Yeah. Do you have a special memory from that time?

BARNES:Well, I remember 1974, my first wife and I just had our first child, and we've been stripping tobacco on Sunday morning. And we came down and it snowed. And the old stockyards were still there. They hadn't torn it down. They had rebuilt it after it burned in the 60s. But everybody rushed--they didn't have any animals in it--and everybody rushed to be inside the stockyards, and it snowed about an inch of wet snow. It was so cold. And it's the only day I got to go that Court Day. And my father-in-law told me, he said, "Y'all, we won't strip tobacco this afternoon. You all go enjoy Court Day." And we didn't get to enjoy it. We brought our baby to Mom's house here, and she kept the baby. And we were trying to walk, and it's snowing. Oh, that was not a good year.

PRATHER:That's a rare occurrence on Court Day.

BARNES:It's a very rare. A lot of floods down there seemed like when it would rain a bunch. You know, I think I've only missed one Court Day, and that would have been the Court Day of 1972. We're working in Sutton, West Virginia, putting up guardrail, and they told us that we can go home this weekend or we can stay and work through the weekend, and we won't have to come back next week. We missed it. We came across the viaduct that night on Monday night and everybody was leaving and I said, I'll never miss another one. And I haven't. I've not missed another one since 1972.

PRATHER:Wow. Wow. So the Court Day now is a lot different.

BARNES:A lot different.

PRATHER:So how would you characterize the change?

BARNES:Well, originally, it was farmers and people bringing handmade things in, stuff they had at the farm they didn't want.  Just trade. A lot of trading. And then it finally went to the foreign sweatshirts, the knockoff shirts and purses and tools.  Tools were a big thing one time, the cheap tools and the socks and things. It just got real knockoff ish.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:Instead of homemade handmade stuff, people didn't. And there's still some of that.

PRATHER:Sure. When do you think that changed?

BARNES:That was probably--you started really seeing that change probably--in the 80s, early 80s. I helped Mac McCormick with his Court Day. He took over down there in about 1990. The city started leasing their property to him. And we were really starting to see it come on real strong in the 90s. You know, just every other booth was selling a knockoff UK t-shirt or a Bengals jacket or hats or NASCAR. This NASCAR, you know. And it just kind of got to where a lot of people were complaining, golly, all it is, is just foreign stuff down there. But a lot of people liked that. They could buy a knockoff $50 sweatshirt for $20, you know, and the kids loved it. You know, they wore it. I mean, they even if they were the off-color, you know, it wasn't the right color. They didn't spell Bengals exactly right. The kids didn't care. And we just saw a lot of that.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:Of course, it's just kind of- in that process- it was a- and during that times, it was a Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. Court Day was a three-day event. Let people come in on Fridays and set up. Well, me helping Mac and kind of knowing what was going on and helping vendors set up, we had a lot of vendors started telling us, we need an extra day, we need more. You know, we can go up to Covered Bridge, Indiana, or I can go over here. I'm not not sure with all the names, but different places, and we can set up for a whole week for the same amount of money you all are charging us for three days. We just need an extra day of sales. So I'm not even sure if I was on the City Council at that time when we pushed for it, but we decided that we will start letting them sell on Friday. And that worked good for a while, but now -- Back at that time, these people that sold at Court Day, a lot of them, they traveled the circuit, you know. They start out in Maysville, they came through Flemingsburg, they came to Mount Sterling, and I don't know where they went from here. Maybe the Woolly Worm Festival in Beattyville. They were people that made a living doing it. I mean, they did it every year and go south into Florida or go south during the winter. And spend the winter in Florida and then and come. Well, they, people- I don't think the people [want to] travel that much. I mean, I think it's Tommy and Billy and over here we want to sell stuff, and we're going to do it this weekend, but we can take off Thursday, set up sell on Friday and Saturday. But we can't stay till Monday. You know, we can take off from our job. You know, a couple of days, but it's three days. So it is really just faded out over the last few years. I mean, this past year on Monday, there were just very few people there. Of course, all my vendors- I have six vendors that set up on the front of my lot, which is really not my lot anymore.

PRATHER:Where is that?

BARNES:It's on South Queen Street. It's the first as you come into the festival, coming down Queen Street, we are the first lot on the left that has vendors. And we have six vendors on the street. Same vendors every year, pretty much every year.

PRATHER:Was that where Two Chicks and a Pig was? Was that you?  So are you coming down South Queen?

BARNES:Yeah. South Queen.

PRATHER:And it's on the left?

BARNES:Just before you go across the Hinkston Bridge there, just before you get to McCormick Lumber Company.

PRATHER:Oh, okay. I'm coming at it from Maysville or from Main Street. You're coming at it from the bypass? Yes ma'am. Yes ma'am. Yes ma'am.

BARNES:Yes ma'am.

PRATHER:Yes ma'am. Yes ma'am. Yes ma'am. Okay

BARNES:And, uh, my vendors, every one of them were gone this year. They all packed up on Sunday evening and went home. They were all gun vendors. They sell guns, knives. But he said there's not enough traffic on Monday to stick around.

PRATHER:How long have those vendors rented from-- how long, first of all, have you had those?

BARNES:I bought the property in 1989 was my--no. I'm sorry, I'm sorry-I bought it in 1999 from Mac McCormick. He owned the property, and I put my office and shop to run my construction company there. And I thought, you know, I've got a gravel lot at the time. We need to be utilizing this. So we have put as many as 40, 40 campers on our lot too.  A lot of people just love to come for the camping experience, to walk Court Day for two or three hours and come back and lay down in their camper or whatever and bring their children. I've watched, I've watched kids when they were babies in a stroller to now they're 15, 16 years old, still coming with their mom and dads and their granddads. And it's just neat to see it.

PRATHER:Where are they coming from?

BARNES:Oh, I've got, uh, I've got three families that come out of Michigan.

PRATHER:Really?

BARNES:They rent five camping spots from me. And another boy that comes out of, uh, out of Ohio, I'm not real sure where it is in Ohio, but he rents, uh, he and his family, his son-in-law and his father. And another. They'll rent five spots from me for campers.

PRATHER:And these aren't vendors?

BARNES:No, no, these guys don't -- One of them actually is a gun dealer, but he just walks around and sells guns.

PRATHER:That's so interesting. So you have six vending spots but you have almost up to 40 camping spots. How do you market the camping spots?

BARNES:Well, the city helps me a lot because I'm on their web page. Okay. So people call and they say, you know, if they call in to Tracy Pearce or whomever they're talking to and they say, or Steven Tuttle with the city. They'll say, well, you know, what about camp campgrounds? Well, yeah, Roger Barnes has it, and they'll call me and they've even-- I've had-- that's something that's happened over the years. When I first had the lot, all my people were there, and they were not that old.

PRATHER:Right.

BARNES:But then we are talking 30 years now.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:They've gotten old.  Well, not 30, but 25 years.  I'm watching next year, "Well we're not - we didn't get to come this year. Dad had a stroke or Mom's had a stroke, or she's in a nursing home."  And I'm trying to recruit new people. And just the younger people just don't do that.  It's the older people that are- I say the older people-anywhere from 60 to 80 years old.  Very few 35 or 40-year-old people want to come down there and camp all weekend. We have a little place. We have a fire pit. I bring them firewood, and they sit around their fire pit and talk. It's very, very interesting.

PRATHER:I had no idea that that was going on. I had no idea. That's a part of Court Day I was completely clueless about. So how much does it cost to camp for the weekend?

BARNES:$125. Cheaper. Cheaper than you can stay in a campground anywhere.

PRATHER:And they get water.

BARNES:They get water and electric. They don't have sewerage. But they usually have. But now we do supply a porta-pot for them. Plus the city has the porta pots across the street.  And I have had some customers that were good enough that I'd let them come in and use the shower. I have some people. I have one man that's been there ever since I've been there. My first year was 99. He camped there in 99. He's never missed a year.  And a few other people that have been there almost that long.

PRATHER:So they know you. I mean, it's a relationship.

BARNES:It's a relationship. They just call and say, "Well, I'm not sure I'll be able to make it. I've sent my money, and I can't make it." Yeah, I'll hold your spot next year.

PRATHER:Yeah. So talk to me about that. How early do you start working that? How early do you start securing spots for your vendors and also for your campers?

BARNES:Well, I've always done it for fun, so it's really not a business, you know? The guys that are doing it as a business, Mac McCormick and Perry Colliver and the Lundergans and the whomever else has the property. I'm not sure,Randsall Back's heirs.

PRATHER:Mhm.

BARNES:You know, they make you have your money in at a certain time.  Well my vendors hardly any of them, I make them put a deposit up for next year. They're supposed to have their money in by September the 15th. But I never get a penny of it till they get here. And it's fine because I know they're coming. My RV's are supposed to be paid in full by September the 15th. And most of them are. You know, occasionally they'll get there and write me a check or give me cash. But I've just never it was never my livelihood, so I never worried about it. If it didn't come, it was just that was okay too.

PRATHER:How big are your vending spots?

BARNES:The average is 20 x 20. One person takes a 20 x 40 spot. Then I have one little spot that's like 20 x 10.. Mhm. Just 20 x 20 is like on Mac's lots. That's the standard size is 20 x 20.

PRATHER:Yeah. And what is that? You charge for four days? How much is that? If I wanted to rent something-

BARNES:My guys, I got him for $200.  $250. Then I got another guy that pays $175, and I got a guy who pays $600 because he takes the big gun spot.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:And another guy pays $175. A little bitty spot. Ten foot wide spots, $100.  Just location. It's three L's. Location, location, location is what you pay.  You know, food vendors-we don't- we had food vendors for years, but we just couldn't keep a food vendor. I don't know what it is about that end of the festival. People just don't want to buy food. We had a barbecue man that stayed there for four or five years and he got in trouble with the IRS. So he didn't come back.  And I said it's just time to rent that to somebody that's going to be there every year.

PRATHER:Describe to me what that area is like.

BARNES:It's mostly guns. It's mostly guns. When you start down-when you walk down the street, when you walk down Queen Street, if you park there at, oh the church that's next to us, I can't even think of the name of

BARNES:Keas?

BARNES:No.

PRATHER:Evergreen?

BARNES:Evergreen. Yeah. They do a lot of parking. They do car parking. We could park cars, but I've always had a pretty good relationship with them. And I said, I'm not going to steal their cars. We just do the RVs. People park there, and when they walk out and they walk the first place, they see selling guns or knives, and it's guns and knives and ammunition all the way till you get to where the old railroad tracks were. I mean, it's basically 95% of the people that are set up on Queen Street till you get to the railroad. It's guns, knives, ammo, some camouflage, something to do with ammunition or guns.

PRATHER:Have you been to a regular gun show?

BARNES:Oh yeah.

PRATHER:So what is the difference? Like compare. What is the difference between a gun show and guns at Mount Sterling Court Day?

BARNES:Well, at a gun show, you got to do a background check. At Mount Sterling, you don't.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:Because gun shows are mostly- a lot of the guys at gun shows are- gun dealers. If you're a gun dealer, you have to do a background check. If you're selling, as Roger Barnes with his fifteen guns out here, as long as I don't have a federal license to sell guns, I don't have to do a background check.

PRATHER:Yeah, so that makes it easier.

BARNES:It's good and it's bad. I mean, you know, anybody can buy.

PRATHER:Yeah, what's good?

BARNES:You don't know if the guy's a psycho when he buys a gun.

PRATHER:Yeah, yeah.

BARNES:Most of these gun dealers can kind of look at a guy and tell if he's because, I mean, we've had some gang come out of Lexington, and some of our gun dealers have said I just won't sell to you. Yeah, it's not for sale. Yeah, not for sale. And it does cause problems sometimes, but.

PRATHER:Yeah, I think that's the one thing that is most startling to people who have, don't have never been there. And they come to Mount Sterling based on my recommendation, for example, you know, and then they're like, what are all these people doing walking around in the streets with guns over their shoulders?

BARNES:I was going to tell you one thing I did when I was a kid, uh, with Mom and Dad having the hotel.  They decided I was going to make some money. And this wasn't based around Court Day at first. They bought me a popcorn machine, and I had a peanut roaster, and every Saturday morning, I came to the restaurant with them as they came down to open, and I pushed it out on the street. We had it on wheels and we could push it out in front of the hotel, and I sold popcorn and peanuts. Well, my biggest day of the year, biggest weekend of the year was October Court Day.

PRATHER:Oh, yeah.

BARNES:And I mean, by this time, we were out of school on Monday.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:And we would sell. I'd have to even Mac because Mac McCormick and I are cousins.

PRATHER:Oh, I didn't know that.

BARNES:We're just like brothers. Okay. So Mac helped me, and I had maybe two or three other little guys, and we'd fix up a little box and they'd walk around and sell popcorn and peanuts. And they'd come back and give me the money. And then Mom would feed them and and we'd pay them. But, I mean, that was a big deal for two or three years. And then, you know, I kind of outgrew that. I got to, you know, when you get to be a teenager, 15 years old. I don't want to do that.

PRATHER:How much was the popcorn?

BARNES:Popcorn was $0.10 and the peanuts was $0.10. But we were in stiff competition with the ten cent store up on the corner because they gave you a great big bag of popcorn for $0.10. And we just gave you a normal size one.

PRATHER:How are you and Mac cousins? Explain the genealogy there.

BARNES:Well, Mac's mom was Gayle McCormick.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:All right. Gayle McCormick's dad was Wills Clay Henry.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:There's Wills Clay Henry. Darvin Henry. Ali Henry. And my mom was Sarah Martha Henry.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:So his mom and I were first cousins. Well, it really gets tricky here. Mac's Dad

PRATHER:Jack

BARNES:Jack, his mom was Kelly McCormick, which was my dad's sister. There was Kelly McCormick, Charlie Barnes, Bobby Barnes, and Sue Gatewood.

PRATHER:Okay.

BARNES:They were siblings. So Mac and I are double second cousins. Jack was my first cousin and Gail was my first cousin. And people looked at me like. Does your tree branch any? My wife. But we've been married 33 years and she still has a hard time telling it. She'll try to explain it and she say, "just let him tell you."

PRATHER:But that's a great testament to the families in Montgomery County, you know. They're close.

BARNES:And we've stayed best friends. Traveled and done everything in our lives together.

PRATHER:So the vending side of your Court Day life is one thing, but your City Council role is a totally different thing.

BARNES:Yes ma'am.

PRATHER:And I want to, first of all, before we talk about the City Council and the Court Day, tell me how what do you do? What's your responsibility on the City Council? Like what are the kinds of decisions you all make? You've been there since 96.

BARNES:We work on the budget. We vote on things more than you know. People come up with the- we own - the city of Mount Sterling owns the water company, but we don't dictate what they do. They're an entity of us. They have their own board. If they're going to do something, if they're going to spend $10 million or get them a grant or whatever, need money or do anything, they still got to have our blessing. So they come to us. Alright, planning and zoning, same thing. You know, if they're going to let you build fourteen houses on a quarter-acre lot, they got to bring it to us. If we don't want it, it's not going to happen. So we dictate a lot of what happens, which the mayor, Mayor Al Botts. And when Gary Williamson was there and I was sitting on with Bert May for one term, they kind of dictate, kind of bring up what we're going to do, and then we get a vote on it. And it's a - when I went on, there were eight council members. Now there's only six. But we keep it to where you could, if you have a tie vote on something, the mayor is a tie breaker. And in my almost thirty years of being on there, I've only seen one time that the mayor ever voted. I could probably think hard enough and figure out what it was, but it was something-

PRATHER:Interesting.

BARNES:-that there were three or four of us that were always kind of one sided. There's three or four that sometimes would be the other side. And Gary [Williamson] made the decision one time.

PRATHER:But that's what you want in local government is you want both sides represented.

BARNES:Like if there's an ordinance where I mean, this big ordinance that really, really was a tough one was alcohol sales by the drink on Sunday.

PRATHER:When did that come up? Do you remember?

BARNES:Oh, it's been ten years ago, maybe. And the first time it came up, it was tough. And I'm looking out for me, but I'm looking out for the city. I'm sitting there and I'm thinking, well, I mean, they packed it. Every church member, everybody from every church came to the meeting that night, and they were very against it. I was for it for the city of Mount Sterling. And I'll give you kind of my background on that was a lot of friends that say, you know I go to church on Sunday. I pray. But I want to drink after church. So I'm having to go to Lexington and I'm taking my money over there and I'm spending, my wife and I are sitting there and having a few drinks and we're eating, and we're spending $100 in Lexington that can be spent at a steakhouse out here. And we were having a hard time recruiting restaurants. They want to sell seven days a week. You know, so my wife asked me that night when I left, she said, "How are you going to vote?" And I said, "Well, I'm going to vote for it, but I'm not going to second the motion." I'm not going to be the one that somebody else has already had them read it. Read the amendment or what I'm trying to say, whatever it is.

PRATHER:Proposal or ordinance or whatever ordinance.

BARNES:I said I'm not going to be the reason it gets to a vote, but I am going to vote for it. And I work for everybody, every one of those churches out there. And I was looking for out for-I wasn't just looking out for the city. I was looking out for Barnes Blacktop Sealing.  I'm going to crucify myself here maybe. But nobody seconded it that night.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:It was not a second. So it died for lack of a second. The motion did. Well, I think it was the next year or maybe two years later, it came back up and was on the thing. It's advertised, you know, it's on there. There was one person from one church.

PRATHER:Really.

BARNES:And that's something I've noticed in city government. Georgetown did the same thing. And I mean, they blast it and killed it. Two years later, they brought it back up. Nobody came. You know, whatever your view is on alcohol, it's a legal thing. And it's good for restaurants, I mean. And, you know, and we went in with said, you know, we're going to set parameters. You can't start selling at 8:00 in the morning.  You sell at 1:00. And if people go to church they want to go there and eat after lunch and don't want to see it, they can go in and get through eating by 1:00 and get out of there, and they don't have to be around it.  And you had to quit at 9:00 on Sunday. So it was just those kind of things are brought up and you know uh I really enjoyed it.

PRATHER:So that's interesting. You've been on for three mayors, three different mayors.

BARNES:Three different mayors.

PRATHER:Court day, of course, has always been- actually Court Day hasn't really been the city's. Like in the very beginning, it was just people coming together.

BARNES:It was just people coming together.

PRATHER:But what has been the City Council's role now over since 96? How has it changed in relation to Court Day?

BARNES:Well, we have to-we're paying overtime for our police officers. You know, you have to have police presence. You have to clean up. You know, that's a big expense of Court Day. If we got overtime for our police officers, for our city employees, the street department people, you know, they're in there putting up barricades. They're manning the barricades so they can open them or let people in and out. It just got to be expensive. And Rumpke, our trash collector, has been very good. And as you saw the other night, we voted to extend their contract. They've been a great community partner with us. You know, there's things that they've done for us that I'm not sure that some other trash collection company is going to do. You know, they'll drop a dumpster. Won't even charge you for it. And they run through the- at one time they only picked the trash up at night, you know when everybody went home. Oh there'd be so many piles of trash down through, especially down, uh, Locust Street where most of the food vendors are. It would just be piled and me helping Mac and some guys that helped. We were trying to empty some of it, but no place to put it. Well now Rumpke does a three, they go through the whole festival three times a day with a small trash truck and empty the trash. So it's a lot cleaner now than it was back then.

PRATHER:What is the next challenge for the City Council in relation to Court Day?

BARNES:Well, we talked about it the other night, and they're going to have a meeting. They wanted me to be on it. I spend the winter in Florida, so I said, I don't really want to be on the committee. I don't care to come to maybe some of the meetings if I'm here. Monday is the official Court Day, but this festival is probably going to have to become a Court Day weekend, and maybe Monday is still going to be the official Court Day, but it just won't be there. I mean, we'll have some kind of celebration on Monday, as was the talk the other night, and I'm not sure what they'll decide to do in their committee meetings, but we just- it's just four days of paying overtime and more trash. And a lot of some of the local businesses don't like it. It's tough on them. Some of them love it because they do more business. But you know, Court Day is a love-hate. You either love it or you hate it.

PRATHER:Talk about that a little bit.

BARNES:I love it. It can't get here quick enough for me, but it can't leave quick enough. You know, I'm like by about Sunday morning, I'm thinking, Lord God

PRATHER:And you go down all four days, right? You're down there, I'm there.

BARNES:I'm there, and you know, I don't own the property, but I just kind of manage it for them. I'm not there as much as I was, but because I had an employee that worked for me, that kind of took care of it. And I just kind of was a good guy, bad guy, you know, walked around, talked to everybody. Got all the money. He did all the work. Well, since he's not with them anymore, and I am, I just said, I'll take it and I'll do all that. Uh, it's just I forgot what your question was. Well I got rambling there.

PRATHER:Well, I just find it's fascinating that there are people who, in this town, who will leave during Court Day.

BARNES:Well yeah,  I'm going to Gatlinburg.

PRATHER:Yeah. They just do not like it.

BARNES:They just don't want to be around all that mess.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:You know, a lot of people have Court Day parties, you know, Friday night, you know. David Lee Roberts, they used to always have a blowout on, you know, and we'd all roll in. And one year we had a big party at the house, which was very tough on me. I said, Rosemary, we can't do this. I mean, we had it catered and it was just people. And I said, I got obligations. I need to be downtown with these people. And I've got 100 people at my house.

PRATHER:Yeah, yeah. So I guess the real sticking point in losing the Monday is the historical significance.

BARNES:We've thrown that around for 15 years. It just you don't know what to do. You know, it's just that's what it was. But the average person that comes, if there's 100,000 people come to town, 99,000 of them don't know what Court Day is.

PRATHER:That's right.

BARNES:They don't know that there used to be- It's just a- they'll ask me and I'll try to explain to them. And I probably tell them not maybe half truth because I don't know the whole thing. But I know it was the big. The third Monday of every month was actually Court Day.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:But the third Monday of October was the big. Yeah. I was always told it was the hanging Court Day.

PRATHER:Oh really. That's interesting.

BARNES:The judges came to hang people.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:I don't know that that's a good quote. But yeah that kind of spices the story up a little bit.  That's when they everybody came to hang you know.  They brought their horse. I mean you can look at the old pictures and see around the courthouse where they had their cattle and their horses tied up.  It just -and another thing about Court Day, too, I can remember back in the 80s, they, you know, court date kind of got to expanding to where it was supposed to be Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. Mhm. People start rolling into town on Monday of the previous week. Not so much downtown. I mean, not on the lots that were designated for Court Day, but in your yard, if you had a yard, somebody wants to set it up. Well, they're selling t-shirts. They're selling whatever.  And it got to where it was a week-long deal. And I don't remember exactly when this happened. I'm going to say probably in the mid to late 80s.

PRATHER:That was the heyday really, wasn't it?

BARNES:The city said, look, we got this is a three-day festival. And if we catch you selling, we're going to fine you or run you out of town so that really cut it back. I mean, because it was really deterring downtown business. You know, people just craziness going on for a whole week, and you couldn't find a place to park, and you couldn't get in and out of your businesses. So that was really a good thing. And this is really supposed to be in right now. Some of these people set up on Thursday. They're not supposed to sell. It's supposed to be a fine if you get caught, and you don't see much of it. But you see, like my guys that camp on me, they'll be there on Thursday, set up. They'll walk up through there, and they'll come back with a sack full. He gave me some stuff. Well, they're not supposed to do that. But I'm not the judge.

PRATHER:Yeah, yeah.

BARNES:You know, dogs were not supposed to have dogs at Court Day.  Everybody's got a whatever kind of dog.

PRATHER:A service dog

BARNES:A service dog. So all you gotta do is get a service dog. And that gets crazy. And the police officers, you know, and you're kind of. We try to advertise no dogs allowed. But the guy comes from Louisville, and he brings his little dog with him. You tell him you can't have a dog here. He leaves. He's never coming back.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:He's going to tell everybody he knows you can't go to that crazy place. They won't let you have your dog.  So mostly guys bring the pit bull in through there.  That's the guy that they're usually really watching. If you got your little border collie or something, it's not- And the police officers, they don't - They don't want to deal with that.  And the city employees. I mean, the street department boys, they're supposed to deter them, and they said, that's really not our job description.

PRATHER:That's right.

BARNES:So, yeah, don't want to get in a fight over a dog.  So but I see him walking down through there, and they got to use the bathroom somewhere or another. You know, it can be a mess.

PRATHER:Better than it used to be, though.

BARNES:Oh yeah, well you know, I can remember as a kid these people would bring dogs. And when they left, they hadn't sold those dogs. Half of them, they just turned loose. And the poor old dog warden, he was catching dogs forever. People were buying dogs. No telling how many dogs Mac's dad bought him for hunting dogs. They'd die in a week, you know. Buy a beagle hound. It wouldn't make it a week.

PRATHER:So the last two questions that I have are kind of looking back and looking forward. Why do you think that Court Day has survived all these years? I mean, 1796, you know, 230 years and then looking forward, how do you think- do you think it will survive? Do you think it will always continue to be celebrated?

BARNES:I think it will be. Well, let's see, what was the first question?

PRATHER:Why is it endured? Why has it been here so long?

BARNES:Just gets instilled in people. You know, it's a reunion to me.  To go up and stand in front of the old Monarch Mill on a Sunday afternoon. Well, that's where Mac's headquarters used to be when he owned the Monarch Mill. His headquarters was there. I could sit on that corner on a golf cart because we had golf carts where we were helping our vendors and do things. Everybody that came through came to Mount Sterling, went past the Monarch Mill.

PRATHER:Yeah

BARNES:I saw people I still to this day, I'll see people I see once a year.  I went to high school with or worked with or. It's just I think it's a reunion as much as anything. Some people just go to and everybody wants a deal. And there used to be something every year used to be one item at the Dourt day that everybody had to have.  One year it was a giant pillows, and I mean everybody packed a pillow out of there. I mean I even bought them for my kids, you know. They'd lay on them, big 3x3 pillows. Well, I mean, that year it was a craze. I mean, yeah. How many thousands they sold.

PRATHER:Wow.

BARNES:Okay, well, next year he's back, and he sold about half that many. Next year he sold about a half of a half, you know. And it just played out. Then one year it was the baskets. The guy came from Atlanta, Georgia, and he sold these baskets. And he was sitting up on Mac McCormick's lumber yard. And he literally had to leave on Saturday night, go back to Atlanta, and get another truckload. And by Sunday night, he had sold them all. And he said, I'm not going back to get another one. Well, the next year he came, and he didn't sell half a truckload. One year later, somebody had made these little teepees, like for children. I mean, everybody you saw going through there. You don't see that wow factor anymore. One year, a few years, they were kind of-- when the drones first came out, everybody was selling drones and it was pretty neat. But there's just-- I look for the wow factor every year, and  I just haven't seen one for years. There's just nothing that makes you think I got to go have that, I gotta have one.

PRATHER:That's interesting. It could be the internet. I mean, it could be.

BARNES:It is probably the internet, everybody buys from the internet.

PRATHER:But it's so special to have, like you said, to say that, "And I got this at Court Day."

BARNES:Yeah. Oh, the purses. My wife's had so many of those purses that were supposed to be a Gucci, but they didn't spell it right. Or it's. But hey, the average person said it looks good, doesn't care whether you paid $500 for it or $25 for it.

PRATHER:So do you think in the future, how will it exist? You know, will it always be here?

BARNES:I think it will exist. It's just getting a little more compressed every year. And you know, uh, I don't know that the young people are as crazy about it as, you know, I'm 70 years old, Mac's 70 years old. Uh, the Lundergan's, you know, they're getting age on them. We're getting old. One of these days we're going to quit. I don't know that there's anybody I mean Mac's son Jason, he helps him with it. But I don't know that he has the drive to deal with people like we do. Uh it may and but I mean life's going on whether you're here or not. It may just go on in a different way.  But I hope there are people to do it. But I mean, one day we may have a mayor that doesn't want to have it. You know, he'd say, "Look, we're throwing money away. We need to kind of do away with it." And something that's happening downtown now, too, with the Rails to Trails, the Adena Trail, you know, they're getting ready to build a bunch of stuff down there, amphitheaters and stuff, and that's going to start taking up areas. It's kind of compressing itself. We're building a new Senior Citizen Center down there on one of the lots. That's going to take up a lot of space. So it's kind of compressing itself every year anyway. And it might not be a bad thing, you know, it getting smaller. It'll just be a Court Day, just not be a hundred thousand people Court Day. I'll go until I guess I'll keep going until it's over. Now, my wife's not as crazy as I am about it because she grew up in Irvine.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:But, I mean, I just, I think, you know, say I missed the one year and I thought, yeah, so I'm never going to happen again.

PRATHER:Oh, I mourned, I mean, I was glad the City Council made the decision.

BARNES:Yeah, I missed two. Yeah, the one I was working.

PRATHER:And the one that didn't happen.

BARNES:We hated it. But what I was saying about that, uh, when we were making the decision to cancel that year, we didn't call it cancelling it. We postponed it.

PRATHER:Was it 2020 or 2021?

BARNES:I think it was 21 because we came home, no, it was 2020.

PRATHER:2020, okay.

BARNES:Because I came home from Florida and just barely got out of Florida that year.

PRATHER:Mhm.

BARNES:I mean, they were cutting people, not letting them come out. And we came home on April the 1st or it may have been March. I don't know when it was but it was, it was just when, it was just starting to go rampant, and we were still having our council meetings.  And it was brought up. We better- what are we going to do about the Court Day? And you know it was, of course Mac hated to see it. And you know me with property down there. But you know in that deal, they showed us, they gave us a list, and I'm going to get Jeanette [Jeanette C. Bertram- City Clerk] to copy me another list of how many festivals that go on in the state of Kentucky at any given weekend.  And what really brought it up was 95% of those festivals cancelled.  I mean, it was-Preston didn't.  You know Preston's not really governed by anybody. You know, it's not like a government. We were afraid if we had it, if we allowed it to happen.

PRATHER:Mhm.

BARNES:And there was a massive outbreak. The ramifications from lawsuits. You knew there was a pandemic.

PRATHER:Mhm. Right. And no vaccine at that point.

BARNES:And you didn't do anything about it. You let it happen. And whether they could sue you and do anything. It's one thing to be sued. It's another thing you got to be represented. And we just thought, you know, we don't want that bad thing. And it's kind of that kind of hurt. Missing a year. It gave Preston a little more of a foothold.  Of course, they're not governed by anything over there. It's just you're just kind of runs rampant. It's a neat little place to go. Um, I'll go occasionally, but there's no, no order. You know what? You may get run over. If you're walking in the street or fall and break a leg. But, you know, I've always said they're one person from getting run over from that thing being cancelled. Or changed a whole lot. They drive traffic through the whole time, the whole week.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:So that was kind of the deal having to cancel that year. But like I say, there's way over 300 festivals that go on in the state of Kentucky in a year's time. And that's another thing. Court Day weekend-the list told how many festivals there were in the state of Kentucky that weekend. So that's what we're dealing with. Yeah. We're dealing with Covered Bridge in Indiana. It's a big festival that goes on for a week or two. There's places in Virginia to have big festivals. You know, we're competing against them. It's just like a convention center. They're competing against other places to have their conventions there. Well, we're competing with getting our vendors to come. And they're saying, I can go over and set up for a week. And I can only set up three days there. We went to four days, and now they're saying you can go back to three if you want to.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:And we're saying we're going to anyway whether you want us to or not, we're going to have to.  And I say that I think next year is going to be same as usual.  It's you know, you don't want to change this late, and they may make a decision just yet because it's not too late to tell the vendors, you know, we're not doing Monday's. You weren't here last year on Monday anyway, so.. Now who knows what they're going to do. They'll say, "Well, if I'm not going to get four days, do I get a better price?" And that's up to the owners. You know the city only rents, I think Steven [Tuttle] says there's 200 some spaces and maybe not that many.  Mac may rent, I don't know, he may have told you how many. I don't know how many spaces he rents. 2 or 300. And the Lundergans so many. Of course you can't set their price you know.

PRATHER:Right, that's private property.

BARNES:I mean, that's one thing that really has hurt our festival too is a couple landowners have kind of gouged.

PRATHER:Mhm.

BARNES:I mean we've heard stories of a guy bringing a tractor and trailer and sitting up selling NASCAR stuff, and had to pay $5,000 for his 75-foot spot or something. Or maybe we might have set him up at Mac's for $1000 or $800. You know, it's just don't. That's one thing that a lot of people say it costs too much to go to Mount Sterling. Well I don't know that it cost too much. I don't know what they're charging other places, but, I mean, would you rather go sit at-I've always said-would you rather sit at Preston for a week?

PRATHER:In a field of mud?

BARNES:Sell the same amount of stuff that you'd sell in Mount Sterling for $300. Just because you saved $100? You know, you wanted it. I mean, if you want to do that, you just like doing it. You know, it's just it's something for you to do. You know, I've had people have come by and they say I stood in knee deep mud over there. The place they had me. It rained and-

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:Rain is good --rain in the early week before Court Day is good for Mount Sterling because people don't like the mud over there.

PRATHER:Yeah. Yeah.

BARNES:And they want to come to Mount Sterling because.

PRATHER:It's all asphalt

BARNES:Mostly asphalt and gravel

PRATHER:Yeah. Is there any final story you want to tell that you can think of about Court Day? You're a true believer. I can tell you're just like me. Love it. Love every bit of it.

BARNES:I can remember one year- I'm not sure if they were the Hells Angels or who they were- but there was a motorcycle gang came in, and they had some spaces down there that on the gravel. I don't even know what they were selling, but they had a German Shepherd- they had a Doberman Pinscher, and people tell it, now I didn't see it--that they actually cooked that dog, killed that dog, and cooked it. I don't know if they sold it or ate it theirself, but I mean, they were the roughest looking bunch. And that was back in the day when it got pretty tough down there.

PRATHER:Yeah, things were just kind of lawless.

BARNES:They were pretty much wild. Yeah, that was probably one of the wildest things I ever saw.

PRATHER:Yeah, that's awesome.

BARNES:Now, whether they actually that --I saw something on a spit that looked like a big Doberman pinscher-- it could have been a small dog. Could have been anything. But the dog wasn't around so anymore. So that would have been the -that would have probably been around 71-2-3-4 that back when everything was just running wild.

PRATHER:And nobody was. There was no city input, really. People were just.

BARNES:No, no, the city, like, I don't even know if the city had lots then.  We didn't even have lots. It was just the railroad had their areas and, gosh, I love to go back and see some pictures back then.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:Because I can remember walking up around the  railroad, you know, people sit up on both sides of the railroad tracks.  I don't remember who  even rented those spots.  The railroad owned all that?

PRATHER:Sure.

BARNES:So, yeah.

PRATHER:That's a great- that's a great memory to end on. Well thank you, Roger, I appreciate your time.

BARNES:Yes ma'am, I enjoyed telling it. I love to tell the story about Court Day.

PRATHER:Yeah.

BARNES:Of course, somebody might contradict what I've said on some of this stuff. Say, that isn't the way it happened, but that's the way I remember.

PRATHER:That's your story.

BARNES:That's my story. And I'm sticking to it.