CAGLE:This is Lauren Cagle. I'm here with Carol Devine on January 24th, 2024.

Uh, and we are at Carol's house in Lexington, Kentucky for an oral history for

the Kentucky Climate Oral History Collection. Thank you so much--

DEVINE:--thank you--

CAGLE:--for doing this. Um, I'm going to start with a question that is either

the hardest or the easiest--

DEVINE:--great--

CAGLE:--which is just tell me a little bit about yourself.

DEVINE:Yeah, well, I'll just focus on the, um, climate creation care

environmental part of my life. But, uh, so I--but I am a middle aged woman. Uh,

I'm an ordained minister in the Christian Church, Disciples of Christ, and, um,

and before that was in education. I have three adult children. I still call them

young adult, but they're getting, um, they're getting near their thirties. So,

uh, none of them are here in this

, in this--in Lexington area anymore. Um, I grew up, though, with,

um--particularly, I would say my grandparents, but my mom as well--I grew up

with, um, just what I would call a tree-hugger family, an environmental family,

but it wasn't even really talked about. It's just the whole waste not want not.

We always had a garden. My, uh, grandparents on my mother's side lived in the

mountains of eastern Kentucky. And, um, so I always identified with, with that

as just who you are, but it wasn't part of my faith. So I was a teacher. I did

Peace Corps and, um, loved teaching, loved education--had been accepted to the

doctoral program at UK in the College of Education, um, when I was called to

ministry. And, um, I kind of came

, I say, kicking and screaming to ministry because I really loved education. I

loved kids. I loved teaching. I taught adjunct. I loved teaching, um, those who

were going to be teachers. And, uh, just the whole education scene was, uh, my

jam. I was super happy there. But I came kicking and screaming to, to ministry

because it made no sense to me. And, um, and similar to all the biblical

stories, you know, I gave lots of reasons as to why not. But when I came to

seminary, I took a class pretty early on called the Body of God. And, um, in

that class on one particular day early in the class, uh, one of the first

classes, uh, for the first time, how I lived--you know, I at that time I was

vegetarian, now vegan, but, um, how I ate, how I lived

, my whole composting, gardening, recycling, tree hugging self, it came together

with my faith for the first time. So I'd always been involved in church, always

loved church, grew up in the church. Um, but I had never heard a sermon. I'd

never done any kind of Bible study or any kind of--(sighs)--anything having to

do with my faith and the environment. Uh, and so in that class and seminary was

the very first--(laughs)--time that it all came together. And I realized I was

actually living out my faith in this way, but I had never connected it. Um, and

no one had ever helped me connect it. And so in that moment, that happened for

me. And at the same time, I realized that that's why I was being called to

ministry was to help others connect their faith to creation care

, uh, creation, environment, all of the things to the earth. Um, and so, uh,

also in that same moment, uh, I was moved to talk to Disciples leaders in

Kentucky. Um, we had a regional minister at the time named Greg Alexander. And I

asked him, um, what are we doing, um, in Kentucky Disciples, uh, to support

people's faith in this way? And he said, this is something important to me as

well. Let's do something. And, uh, so I don't know if you know, but the

Christian Church Disciples of Christ was actually started in Kentucky at Cane

Ridge in Bourbon County. And so there are, um--at that time there were over

two-hundred Disciples congregations. I think there's a little less than

two-hundred now. And, um, so we're not talking

about just a few churches, but how do we how do we support all of these

disciples, congregations, and the people in them, um, in making these

connections with their faith? And so, uh, Greg called a--just a ‘y'all come’

meeting and had pizza and people came. Disciples came from eastern Kentucky to

western Kentucky and everywhere in between. And it was really exciting to

realize that this was a hunger that was, uh, had by lots of people and that this

was really important to lots of disciples. And so from that, um, what is now

known as Green Chalice was born. And so Green Chalice is the creation care

climate program ministry for the Christian Church Disciples of Christ. But for

its first four years, it was just a Kentucky thing. And it was a group of us

just volunteers, again, who had this passion. And so we, we led two green

retreats. We had, um, workshops

in church basements. And, you know, uh, at that time, I wasn't yet ordained.

This was--I was still in seminary and then was ordained, uh, as part of this

process, so eventually it also became preaching. But, um, at first it was just

like, let's help others. Uh, and it really took off. And Disciples congregations

were--in Kentucky were really excited about it. Uh, and then in 2011, um, some

leadership in the denomination reached out to Greg Alexander and to myself and

said, can we take this denomination wide? Can Green Chalice be not just a

Kentucky thing but, uh, for the whole denomination in North America and Canada

or in the U.S. and Canada? And so we did. I did. Um, so it was a very part

time--still is part time-- but very part time thing

. But, uh, it has grown to have, um, I don't know where we are on numbers now,

but around two-hundred and fifty congregations are connected to Green Chalice

across the U.S. and Canada. And, um, and that work has been very life giving for

me and for lots of others as well.

CAGLE:Literally in some way.

DEVINE:Yes. Right.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Yeah

CAGLE:Right. How, how did the calling feel before you understood where it was

coming from?

DEVINE:Oh, I thought I was crazy--(laughs)--um, it's a real common story,

actually, but I didn't tell anybody for a while, but I wasn't sleeping at night.

I had a plan. I had been accepted to the doctoral program. I had, you know, an

advisor and was moving forward with that. Um, and I'm a planner and really

liked, I really liked my plan. So I wasn't

sleeping at night. I kept, um, having these. Well, one was like a voice that I

heard that felt outside of me, not inside, um, and then others--just this, just

this like, I don't know, wrestling. And finally, I started telling people, uh,

including my, my pastor, my minister at the time, as well as some other friends.

And I thought each of them would tell me I was crazy, maybe needed to get

checked out--(both laugh)--and all of them were like that checks. Like, we think

that you would be a good minister. We think that you should explore this, et

cetera. Um, and so the first thing I did was I reached out to my advisor and to

UK and ask if I could just defer my, um, acceptance to give me time and space to

wrestle with this. And as soon as I did that, I started sleeping. And so

then I, then I just wrestled with God through the whole thing and gave God lots

of reasons why it didn't make sense that I wasn't--that this--I had never read

the Bible all the way through at that point in my life. While I always loved the

church, I had zero desire to preach or lead in the church. And, um, I also, uh,

couldn't afford to go to seminary. And so I was like giving all the reasons that

it didn't make sense. And so, but I reached out to the seminary--Lexington

Theological Seminary. And at that time when I talked to them--and honestly, I

don't remember even who it was--they let me know that I would qualify for a, um,

full scholarship. And so it was like I kept putting up reasons and they kept

falling. So I, you know, started the next semester. I started seminary in, you

know, in the January, February semester

--spring semester, but I think it started in February anyway. Um, and then it,

you know, was a, a great ride. I mean, it was ahard--very hard. It's one of the

hardest--well, it is the hardest academic thing I've ever done. I'd never read

the Bible. I was really active in church, but that didn't mean I was like taking

notes and paying attention. So I was super stressed and overwhelmed, um, by just

even imagining--(laughs)--trying to learn all of that. And it was it was a lot

to learn, but it was also really fun and exciting and felt very right. So, um, yeah.

CAGLE:How early in the process was that class that you were describing?

DEVINE:It was early, but I can't remember if it was my--it could have been my

first semester. Um, I would have been drawn to that topic for sure, but I can't

remember if it was my first semester or second semester. I don't remember. Um,

I'm sure it's in my paperwork somewhere--(both laugh)--I don't I really don't remember

, but it was early. Yeah.

CAGLE:I asked because I was wondering if that then shaped how you approached

reading and studying--

DEVINE:--oh definitely--

CAGLE:--and learning. How so?

DEVINE:Oh, definitely. Because, um, so I, um, the theolo--um, the theologian

and the theology that I really connected with right away was, um, an eco

feminist named Sallie McFague. She, she passed away just a couple of years ago,

but she, um, really helped me because she was a feminist but with that green

lens--helped me to see my own life and my connection to God, to the divine, and

be able to kind of put that. As soon as I connected with her and read her work

and read all of her books, I realized, um

, you can't take that lens off that. I don't know how else to describe it. Like

once you see, you can't unsee kind of thing. So reading the Bible, I was then

able to see all of the places that more than human world is there and the number

of references to trees and water and, and even just focusing on Jesus and all of

his references to the land and to the, the, the seasons of, of life. And it just

opened everything up for me. Um, and, and ecofeminism isn't the only--there's

ecowomanism. There's many other, uh, theologies, but that's the one that just

really spoke to my own heart. Um, and that has also enabled me to, um, to share

that lens with others who have never had that, you know, who like

me growing up just really didn't even read the Bible in that way if they read it

at all like me. But, um, that where it was always a separate--like I love to

hike, but don't see that as part of my faith or I love to garden or I'm really

connected to the land or to flowers or trees or, uh, any of that. So often

people have those--either connected to, drawn to, even would say that they feel

most close to God and still see it as separate from their, you know,

Christianity, Judaism, um, Islam, whatever. So it's, it's really nice to help

others to put that, those, those, those lenses on and go, Oh my gosh. Yeah, it's

all connected.

CAGLE:Yeah, thinking about my own ex--I was raised Episcopalian--

DEVINE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and thinking about my experience with just like Sunday school. All the

stories were about the people.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:People were always at the center

.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:So--

DEVINE:--yeah. And then, you know, and I'm not Catholic and I've never been

Catholic, but there are, um, so many things in the Catholic Church I've been

drawn to, um, once I went to seminary. And one of them is St. Francis I, you

know, I have really connected to, to St. Francis and to, um, I've been to a CC

[1]and did like a week long meditation retreat that was

studying him, and I read all the things about him and, uh, and having--I didn't

have figures like that, right? There wasn't in the Protestant world in

particular but now Protestants do, you know, it's--uh, we didn't have those

saints or figures that, uh, were shared with us really. I probably knew who he

was, but I didn't really know anything about him. Um, and it didn't, I don't

know, it didn't help me connect. So--

CAGLE:--is it

overstating to--the case to say that you--not in a prideful way but just

observationally--like you have been central to helping make those figures

available and make those kinds of readings available to a particularly Protestants.

DEVINE:Well, I hope so. I mean I think it is all of our hope that we're, you

know, a pebble in a pond. And you, um--my prayer is always that I get out of the

way and I let God, uh, speak through me. And so I hope--and when I'm successful

at that, it goes well. Um, that doesn't mean I'm always successful at that, but

that's my prayer is, um, that I'm an instrument of divine love, peace, work,

mercy. But, uh, so I hope so. But I definitely would say it's, you

know, I hope that I have been an instrument for the divine. And I hope that I

have helped others, um, restore their faith or deepen their faith or see their

faith in a new light. I think that when we do have those connections--I don't

think--I know that when we have those connections in our heart, when it comes

together like it did for me in that class, um, that it's--that it is life giving

and that there's an energy and a depth of faith that comes from that. And then

we can even connect with all people of faith, because we all stand on, live on,

walk on this, depend on this holy ground, right? And it is a place--uh, I do

multi-faith and interfaith work now--and it is a place that we all can come

together and hold hands. You know, we don't--even within the Christian faith, we

don't agree on baptism

. We don't agree on communion. We don't agree on women--(laughs)--being

ordained. We don't agree on, um, gay marriage or gay ordination. We

don't--there's so many things that we don't agree on. But we can agree that

we're called to care for all that God created, and that that is sacred, and that

we can, um, be in this place and do this work together and honestly set aside

all of those other things.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm [affirmtaive].

DEVINE:And then when you get into multifaith work then there's, um, it's, it's

different. It's actually sometimes easier than within the Christian faith. But,

uh, you know, we call God different things, we have different holy books, we

have like there's all of these things that are different, and yet, we all agree

that, that the earth is sacred, and that we are called to care for it. We might

disagree somewhat on what that looks like, but, but we can, can agree on that

thing, that one thing.

CAGLE:Yeah

. How did--when you graduated seminary and were ordained, and then, did you

become a minister? Because you have been the minister at Providence Christian

Church, right, until you move to ecoAmerica. Is that correct?

DEVINE:Um, kind of yes.

CAGLE:Kind of yes. Okay--

DEVINE:--so I, I, uh, first pastored--I was a bivocational pastor in Cynthiana,

and, uh, I just had a small congregation there for, oh, three years something.

And at that time I was trying to build Green Chalice and the denomination and

then I was called to full time ministry pastorate at Providence Christian

Church. And, um, so I when--(laughs)--when I was finishing seminary I did not

want to be a pastor, I did not want to preach and teach and do all of those

things I didn't. Um, and yet that's how I felt called--I really felt called to

do this, and the beautiful congregation

in, um, in Cynthiana--I was, uh, out in the county. It was just the most

gorgeous setting. And, uh, I had a lot of farmers and people--even the ones that

weren't farmers, they mostly lived out in the country in Harrison County, and

were very connected to the land and, and to the animals--those, you know, sheep

and cows and wild animals too. And so that was really nice because, uh, uh, they

got it. Uh, it really wasn't--for them it was more of a like yeah, you know,

they were just so more connected--are so more, so much more connected. And then

when I came to Providence, um, uh, I did have two farmers, uh, well and a

family--two families of farmers I should say and then others who were at

various, various levels of connection and some who were totally

more urban or suburban and, you know, didn't have any more connection than

anybody else. But I, I now look back--I loved being a pastor, I did, I loved

preaching I loved the teaching I loved the youth, I loved, um, the pastoral part

the being in, and showing up in the hospital rooms, funerals, all of it. I

really, I really loved it. And I think, uh, that also--(laugsh)--is a part of--I

mean, we humans are a part of creation. We are creation. And so it helped--being

a pastor helps you to see that whole season of life, um, and the ebbs and flows

and the joys and the heartbreak. Um, and also, all of us are still dependent on

the earth and through food we're connected and, um, like Episcopalians disciples

are very table centered. So we have communion every

, every Sunday. And also, it is our def, our def, definition of our theology. It

is--the table is for disciples how we understand God, our relationship to God,

our relationship to other people and, and, and then I hope that I have helped

them understand how it connects us to the earth, and the more-than-human world.

But we have an open table, and all are invited to come to that table, So it's,

um, a really powerful--really it's a very powerful creation or environment, uh,

holy act. But, that part, that connection has been missing for many. Um, and to,

to try and bring that back in--and actually a friend of mine has helped do that

in the, uh, Episcopal church, in helping, um, with the liturgy around the table

always include that connection to the more than human world, you know, through

the bread through the, through the, um, grapes but--

CAGLE:--yeah it's right there--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--it’s on the table already--

DEVINE:--it literally is on the table--(both laugh)--already--

CAGLE:--it’s literally--

DEVINE:--yeah, yeah. So--

CAGLE:--how, with the sort of day to day of pastoral care then, did you, did

you have to work to make sure to keep that environmental focus, the climate

focus, the more-than-human world focus? Because I--if it's anything like my job

it's very easy to get lost in the details of the day to day. Um, and, or was

that--it, it just naturally found its way--

DEVINE:--you know, it’s so--

CAGLE:--into all of your work.

DEVINE:It's so interesting and I now know that's really why I, um, had to put

in my time as a pastor, um, is that I can now say to other clergy who are

resistant to

adding any kind of environmental ministry or doing any kind of climate or

creation care work is that it isn't adding something. It is living out your

faith in all the ways that you're already doing that, and, and for a minister,

all the ways that you are caring and leading. Um, you--it's just woven in. It

isn't a separate different thing in the same way that we might say, you know,

faith is all about love, it's love is central, but you don't have this like love

ministry necessarily, right? It is how you hopefully come to all the things that

you do. And so, I know that at times--(laughs)--my beautiful folks at

Providence, who I love dearly, um, I know at times they got tired of--okay, so

we are, you know, we had once a month, we have potluck. They still have a

potluck once a month, um

, which is a beautiful thing. But how we serve that food and what food we serve,

we have to question as people of faith. Um, who is it impacting and cheap

doesn't mean fast, and it doesn't even mean really cheap because somebody is

paying this prices, or, or humans and, and more than human. And so it just

became this constant conversation I would say. Um, we, we did lots of things

while I was there that are, you know, greening, greening of the, of the building

and of our practices--our office practices, our worship practices, our food

practices, um, and, and that kind of thing. But it wasn't like I set out to be

like--it just became like, okay, we now have this task and how are we going to

do it in the most faithful way. And I wouldn't even say the most green way. I

would say it's just how we're--hopefully this is how we're called

to do all of our things. So, how we spend our money, um, what we buy, what we

support, um, what we do with our free time. When, you know, the youth when I was

there--at times I had a youth pastor and at times I didn't. And so, um, we had

spiritual retreats that were out in nature. We did kayaking, we did hikes, and

we--so that became, uh, an important part of youth ministry. Um, and that

wasn't--again it wasn't like now we're going to do a climate change lesson. It

was about helping them make those connections that this is a part of my faith.

Right, and doing these things outside, it's, it's a part of my faith. Um, I

don’t know, so I wouldn't say that it was--I didn't lose that focus. And that

doesn't mean--I mean obviously I had to do all the things--the reports and the

budgets and I had to do all of the--and every sermon wasn't about

, you know, climate. But I doubt there were many where create--more-than-human

creation, or the impacts we've had on this earth as humans--there were probably

very few that that wasn't present in some way.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Right.

CAGLE:This is that lens you were talking about.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Once you see it, it's just there.

DEVINE:It's just there.

CAGLE:Yeah,

DEVINE:Yeah. Um, yeah. And, and I'm super thankful for that, for that time now.

As I was approaching it I didn't want to be a pastor--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DEVINE:--I really didn't want to be a pastor. I really didn't want to preach,

and all that. And then I ended up loving all of it. I loved all of it. So--

CAGLE:--why not?--

DEVINE:--I’m thankful for that.

CAGLE:Why didn't you want to?

DEVINE:Again, it goes back to like my vision for my life, and my plan was this.

I, you know, I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this

, and so I had that vision. I had that plan. And this wasn't part of it.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Also, I, you know, in, in my education work I, um, I did, you know, I

was fine to do public speaking obviously. I taught at UK to adults. Um, most of

them adults anyway, and I, um, did workshops for continuing education and I--so

I was comfortable speaking in public, and yet the idea of preaching is totally

different and scared me. And I was sure I wouldn't be able to do it. So, I guess

that was probably part of it as well.

CAGLE:(Laughs)--Waldo has unplugged the recorder. Waldo, for the record Waldo

is a dog--(laughs)--I'm going to plug us back in. Uh, that makes very good sense

to me. It's a different kind of public speaking that involves a different kind

of authority

and a different kind of responsibility.

DEVINE:Yeah, felt heavy, it felt--yeah, responsibility is a good word.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:It felt like a lot.

CAGLE:Yeah. Um, so, throughout this time, you were still working on building

Green Chalice--

DEVINE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and it was going denomination wide--

DEVINE:--yes--

CAGLE:--or had gone I guess denomination wide--

DEVINE:--yes--

CAGLE:--what did that building process look like.

DEVINE:Um, so, Green Chalice and that work was always where my heart was and

what gave me energy. It was my passion. Um, but when you're doing full time

ministry, and like, and this only happened once, thank God, but one time in one

month I had, you know, four funerals. And so, and you're still preaching and

you're still doing all that. So, there were obviously times that I couldn't work

on it. Um, and then

other times that I really, you know, gave my all. Luckily, Providence, in

particular, um, they knew when they hired me that this was really important to

me, and they hired me knowing that. And so they were really supportive of my

work--my Green Chalice work, and, um, and very kind to me in that way. Um, so,

it, it ebbed and flowed. Like there were times that, you know, felt like we were

really doing great work and there were other times that I felt like I was just

trying to keep--(laughs)--things moving forward. But, you know, what did that

look like? It looked like trying to, uh, through all of the denomination,

communications, like making sure that folks were hearing about this ministry.

Because at first when you're building it, you just need people to know about it.

Like, they could be as excited as can be, but if they don't know about it, that

doesn't matter, right? So, uh, writing articles, I, you know, we had various

denomination magazines and

one for women, and so writing articles, being part of like writing devotions for

devotion books that were creation care centered, um, uh, attending gatherings,

assemblies, conferences, and whatnot, and doing workshops at those, having

booths, a literal booth at a, you know, at assembly or conference and the

exhibit hall, um, having green retreats. Uh, and so just trying to--and then,

and then as I--as it grew, um, then looking for opportunities to talk to those

in charge. Um, so the general board of our denomination, you know, I finally, it

didn't, it doesn't happen easily, um, but I finally got, you know, an hour with

them to just talk about why is this important to your various ministries? Why is

this important to the denomination? And then I also got a couple of hours with

all of our regional ministers

, which are like conference ministers or bishop level folks. Um, and, and I had

a great, you know, a great time with them and, and, and kind of coming back to

what I said before, when folks--when congregations are doing this work or are

living out their faith in this way, um, they have this energy vitality. They

have relevance in this time of, of a climate changed world, um, that helps

revitalize the church. Probably all of us who've been into, um, a Christian

church anytime in the last decade or longer have been into a church where we

just think, oh my gosh, like, we're just like, this is like a dirge. You

know--(both laugh)--this is just like this, like, wow, like slow and no energy.

And it just feels like we're going through the motion and it feels like we don't

even know really why we're here

gathering on Sunday morning or--but when they, when the congregations--and I'm

not saying that like droves of people suddenly come in, but if somebody comes

in, there is just this different level of energy. They know why they're there

and their faith is like deepened and, um, is, is just revitalized. And for some

of them, for older folks, I would say, um, it's such a nice thing for them to

go, I've always had this longing or this connection to my garden, my yard,

hiking, et cetera, and now it is part of how I live out my faith with my faith

community, with my church or house of worship. Um, so anyway, so helping these

leaders understand that this isn't just--it is something we're called to do,

which should be enough, but it isn't just that it brings, uh, life to congregations

. And when we have young people exiting, well, we just have people exiting the

church left, right, and center, right, in droves. Especially during the

pandemic, that was really, that really escalated, but, um, when we have people

leaving, and many of them say, I don't, I don't understand what it's for. Like

it doesn't bring anything to my life. And young people see it, uh, the church,

often as disconnected from like the world that they're living in and the fears

that they have and the anxieties. And, and of course, um, LGBTQ+ issues are

wrapped up in that, but they're also creation and also, um, you know, part of

the most vulnerable among us. So all of it's connected, but--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DEVINE:--in my understanding.

CAGLE:Yeah. It sounds like, I mean, a lot of that time was spent creating

, I hate the word content now, the internet has ruined the word content for me,

but materials, content, things for people to, to learn from and build with so

that you did not personally have to--you could, you know, teach the teachers in

a sense with workshops, you could have devotionals and, um, you know, materials

for people to self-educate, to share with others. How much of that--mmm, I don't

like the way I phrased that question. In, in the process of, of creating so much

and gifting it to people, were you developing new ideas? Were you drawing on

your own reading of the Bible to, to bring out new ideas? Were you doing a lot

of sharing of, for example, the ecofeminist theologians you had read, all of the above?

DEVINE:Yeah, so I, I've been having a lot of conversations in the past, I don't

know, year or two about theories of change. Um

, and when you're in, you know, climate work--climate and faith, I'm going to

say, I mean, I, I definitely, you know, rub elbows with folks who are not part

of the faith community who are doing climate work, but really most of my

interactions and meetings and all of that are, are climate and faith. Um, and

there's a lot of disagreement about how are we going to get there? We need a

wave, like we are so behind the eight ball in the faith community, but even

more, you know, just in the--(laughs)--in the world. We're so behind, we

have--we, we can't continue to move slowly. We have to go by leaps and bounds.

And so there's a lot of discussion about how do we do that? How do we get that

wave? How does the faith community come to lead on climate rather than being

like--and I, I feel like it takes all of the things. I think it takes--it does

take connecting with those in charge and the leaders who

then have an influence on maybe the ministers in their area or depending on the

ministries that they, that they deal with. It does take them, but it also takes

this understanding of, um, all the regular people who are at different places

and some congregations are, um, leading on climate--are, are like way, way

leading in their communities and, and, and politics and all the things, right?

And then there are those who were like me, haven't even yet made that

connection. Don't understand how climate change is works or don't even--aren't

even really plugged in. Like, I don't know how many articles I read a day. Every

day I start my day looking at climate news. So I am swimming in this stuff,

right? But not everybody is, right? Uh

, a lot of people are looking for other things in their newsfeed and aren't

really paying attention to climate change and really still are in the place of

like, huh? And so we need all of those people to be--have a place to come in and

to be supported. So I think I can't say I had a lot of theological conversations

except with maybe other pastors. And I did do, um, I've done a couple now. Now

probably more than a couple, but back at that time when I was just doing Green

Chalice work, I did a couple of retreats specifically for ministers that were on

this topic. And so then I would do theology, you know, work and, and

conversations, but for the average person, I just really think we just have to

help them connect their, their love that they already have for the out of doors

and their desire to, to leave, uh

, a hopeful future for their children, grandchildren, and those who are yet to

come. And so it's a little different. And then I would say that part of the

success of Green Chalice has been, um, we have a pro--a congregational program

where a congregation signs up to be a Green Chalice congregation. And they do

that by doing three step, we say. Uh, the first one is that they have some kind

of creation care, green team, whatever they call it. And in a small church that

might be two or three people, right? But it has to be more than one. So they

have some kind of creation care team. They take a covenant together. Um, we

provide--um, I--we provide, uh, covenants that they can use, but some churches

write their own. Great. Amazing. Like that they are committing to living this

out. And then they make three changes to walk more gently on the earth. Those

three things can

be, we no longer use styrofoam in this church. It could be we celebrate earth

day. We're having a whole worship service, you know, devoted to this, or we're

doing a book study. It can be anything--we have garden, whatever. It can be

anything. And, and by allowing those three things to be anything, it allows for

all congregations to get involved. And once they get their foot in, then they're

like, Oh, well, those three things weren't too hard. Like, what's the next thing

that we can do? And so then we continue to give them ideas and support their,

their work in this way. Um, I really think that that model has been really

critical to growing this movement because it isn't just something that's like

out in the sky. Like what is that ministry? There's a prac--there’s some steps

you can take in order to get connected. And then once they do

that, they just get a certificate in the mail and they get acknowledged on our

website and in our newsletter of like, you know, welcome to the Green Chalice

family, kind of thing. And then we have a, a more in depth level. That's a

certification that would be on par with Green Sanctuary of UUs

[2]or it's, it's a eighteen month to two year process.

And it's looking at your congregation, your church in all the ways, and worship,

and buildings, and grounds, and practices in the office, and food, and all of

things. So you have to look at all of your church life and make changes in all

those areas. And so that's a, that's a much bigger step. Um, but that move--that

automatically moves that congregation on the path to carbon neutrality because

of the ways that the things you have to do help you to move that way. Which, um,

I would say now that my goal for Green Chalice congregations

and congregations in general, is to be carbon neutral, and to be involved in,

uh, the healing the restoration of, of earth through native plantings, you know,

biodiversity work. And that can look, and that can look like a lot of things

depending on the geography, right?

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Desert looks very different than the--

CAGLE:--yes--

DEVINE:--Kentucky.

CAGLE:Yeah--(laughs)--as the rain--

DEVINE:--as the rain--

CAGLE:--comes pouring down--

DEVINE:--right--

CAGLE:--outside. Yeah. That's such an incredible structure, just as you were

saying to kind of lead people in a, um, you know, people like concrete steps--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--to take. So--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that makes perfect sense. And I realized where you might have heard,

um, about the consortium is, um, I co-delivered a talk last year for I believe

your home congregation Green Chalice group Pat Anderson--

DEVINE:--oh--

CAGLE:--had invited. Um, so, uh--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--she reached out through the consortium

to see if someone could come give a talk on the basic science of climate change

for them--

DEVINE:--yeah, that's fantastic--

CAGLE:--so I did that with one of our extension agents--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--from UK and so that was all part of, you know, having those the regular talks--

DEVINE:--yes--

CAGLE:--during that programming as part of their Green Chalice group--

DEVINE:--yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DEVINE:--yeah no, they're, they rock. They're awesome.

CAGLE:Yeah. Well, and what you were describing earlier of the energizing effect

of it. I mean, that was so apparent in this group.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:I've never given a talk on Zoom to such an engaged audience. It was

incredible. So--

DEVINE:--oh, that's really great news--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DEVINE:--and I, I, I have seen, I have seen with my own eyes and gone to

worship at various disciples congregations in particular, but others as well.

Um, from small rural churches to, you know, larger churches like, uh, the one I

attend, Central, but, uh, and, and I have received emails from pastors who said

once we started doing this work, we have seen such a change

. And so it is, it is so life giving. Life is so hard. You know, I--my kids,

particularly my daughter, are sometimes it's like when will it get easier and

I'm like, it doesn't ever get easier. But if we're in it together, and if we're

part of the, you know, I call it practicing hope. If we're if we're taking steps

toward a better future, um, even if we really just want to go to bed and put the

covers over our heads. If we take that step, and we do participate in, in a

hopeful future, then that provides hope that's that pebble again and the pond of

providing hope for others that like, okay, she has faith that there'll be a

better day. So maybe I should as well. And that is hopefully building on each

other's hope and sharing this hope and it's, it's a very

, you know, hope gets thrown around and a lot of people feel like there is no

hope or whatever. But we--hope as I understand it as a person of faith isn't

something you ever get and have. It's something you practice.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:And you get up and you take the steps that are hopeful--(laughs)--and

that look towards--and, and then that helps build on, on more and more.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:And on each other's.

CAGLE:Mariame Kaba who's an abolitionist writer, yes--

DEVINE:--yeah yeah--

CAGLE:--she has that great saying. Hope is a verb. Hope is a verb.

DEVINE:Yeah, it is a verb.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Actually, in, in, in our scriptures in the, in the Bible, all of those

kinds of words like hope and faith and love and all of those kinds of words are

actually not, you know, like nouns. They're all meant to live out to be active.

So you don't ever have love and then that's it, right? We're called to agape and

to this, you know, living into an action and the same with faith

. You don't like have faith and now I'm done. I have no more work--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

DEVINE:--to do on that--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DEVINE:--you know. It--all of those words, but unfortunately, uh, our language,

but probably more importantly, just how we talk about it, um, leads people to

feel like that's an empty thing. Well, I don't have that, you know, I don't

know. I actually, uh, have just a little posted on my, my very messy

desk--(laughs)--in there that just says practice hope. It's like, just like my

kind of mantra for the day. What are we going to do to practice hope today?

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Because there's so much war and pain and suffering. And there's so much,

especially for our young people that my heart breaks for--that their look at the

future doesn't have that light at the end of the tunnel yet. And so maybe we can

give them a pinhole of light by doing this work. And the young people in our communities

of faith or the ones that are outside of it when they see us leading on this

issue it, it gives them hope and it helps them to see that, um, maybe there is

something about this God or faith or higher power or whatever words, maybe

there's something there, um, and they need that. And if we don't do it for any

other reason, maybe that's enough, you know. Um, I don't know.

CAGLE:I'm teaching a senior seminar for environmental and sustainability

studies students. I direct the ENS[3]program at UK. And

so I've got a room of thirty, mostly seniors getting ready to graduate in ENS,

looking to the future. Some have very clear plans. Some don't. And for our first

day of class, rather than sort of a typical icebreaker activity, I have, um,

questions from--actually they're from a Climate Conversations card deck--

DEVINE:--uh-huh--

CAGLE:--that I co-developed

--

DEVINE:--yeah, yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--have you run into this?

DEVINE:I have.

CAGLE:Okay, in town--so you probably know some of the folks involved, like Mary

Arthur maybe or--

DEVINE:--I don't know her--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DEVINE:--but I know who she is--

CAGLE:--of that, yeah--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--so we developed this card deck and so some of the questions on there,

and so I just hand them out to students and so they get these random questions.

And one is what gives you hope--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and/or what brings you hope? And the student who got that one just

gestured at the room, said this, these people--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--like look at all these people who have chosen to dedicate four years of

their lives or more to becoming credentialed--

DEVINE:--yes--

CAGLE:--and caring about this, so yeah, yeah. And I was like, I'm gonna cry--(laughs)--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--they give each other hope, which is wonderful--

DEVINE:--oh, yeah--

CAGLE:--and bolster each other's hope.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Well, and so you, in moving to Eco-America, I think it sounds like

that--or I guess my assumption is that that maybe has let you be even more active?

DEVINE:Yes.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:So interestingly

, in 2019, um, I clearly heard God again. Actually, I was on a trip, uh, from

Asheville back here to Lexington. Um, and I clearly heard God tell me, okay, if

you're gonna do this climate work, it's time to put all your energy in that.

Because as I've said, I was doing full-time ministry. And then on top of it,

doing the Green Chalice work. I was actually on my way back from a climate

conference. And it was not--that was a real eye opener for me. It was not--there

was no faith, like, part of it. It was just a climate conference. And, um, it

was my first time at just a climate conference that had no faith component. And

so, uh, the thing that I left there with, that was, uh, that I was wrestling

with, was these were business people. And like, they were folks

who were trying to figure out what they needed to do, basically, to preserve

their industry in climate change. How do we need to adapt? How do we need to be

changed? How do we need to change? But it wasn't so that they could provide a

better future for future generations. And at least that was the conversation. I

shouldn't--I don't want to blank--I'm not saying they don't have great hearts,

or I don't know what they wrestle with at home. But in this conference, it was

more about how do we change and adapt to climate change so that our industry or

our business or our whatever--and so it was all about money. It was, uh, we had

little small groups and things, and you had to talk about like, uh, what are the

most important things that we do having to do with climate change? Anyway, all

of their answers--I didn't even say what mine were, because mine didn't involve

money at all, right? And so I thought, wow, I am like a fish out of water here.

So on the ride back

after having kind of that very weird experience, um, I really heard God say, if

you're going to do this, it's time. And, um, and so I then decided to leave my,

leave congregational ministry. And I was--so the rest of 2019, I was trying to

figure out what that meant. I got a grant for Green Chalice that, um, was going

to enable me to be, uh, three-quarters time with Green Chalice, which at that

point, I probably was like five hours a week, you know, like I--so, um, it was

going to enable me to be three-quarters time. And, um, my--I was taking a big

cut in pay and a minister's pay is really--(laughs)--really bad. So that is

really saying something. So I was going to take a big cut in pay, um, but I was

going to be able to figure it out. Um, and then 2020 was going to be a year

where I just really devoted

myself to building Green Chalice into a full time position. And we all know what

happened in 2020--(laughs)--so I had a really big year planned already of all

these churches I was going to preach in, of all of these conferences I was going

to. And so I did, um, I did two, I did one in February where I led a clergy

training. Um, and, uh, for--it was actually a clergy training for women, and I

got a grant to bring these women to this training. And, uh, so that was

wonderful. And then, um, a couple of congregations in New Mexico asked me to

come and lead a--it was a more than a workshop. It was kind of several churches

that came together for a day long, uh, conference, I guess. Um, and so I had

those two things and the first one was in February and the second one was in the

first week of March and then everything shut

down. And so--(laughs)--in the, in the midst of that, uh, because I was three

quarters time with Green Chalice, I still needed a little bit more money to just

be able to pay my bills. And, uh, Lexington Theological Seminary had a part time

job. And so they were kind enough to take me on. Once the pandemic happened, um,

and none of us knew what that was going to mean. And then when it was apparent

that it was not going to be a short term thing, um, the seminary had been

looking for a director of admissions and they didn't want to hire somebody who

didn't already know the institution and ask if I would do it. So I became the

director of admissions for LTS[4], uh, during the

pandemic. So, but to back up on the ecoAmerica transition, Green Chalice

disciples--the Christian Church Disciples of Christ, became one of the first

partners of ecoAmerica's

faith program, which is called Blessed Tomorrow. And that's the program I now

direct. That happened in 2014. So in 2014, they reached out to me, actually at

first, to just do an article on this Green preacher and they came to Providence

or sent a photographer to Providence and took pictures of me and then did a

story, uh, about like this is what it can look like kind of thing. And, um, and

then they came and asked if if my denomination would be one of the first to sign

on and partner with them in this work. And, um, and so we did. So I had worked

with ecoAmerica, uh, through the Blessed Tomorrow program since 2014. And, um,

my predecessor, um, her name is Annie, who, uh, uh, she went on maternity leave

twice. And for both of those she reached out to me and said, because you know

this program so well

, will you step in for me--just very part time--(laughs)--uh, will you step in

for me to try to just keep things running for the three months that I'm taking

off for maternity leave. And so I did that. And so then when she, um, decided

that she was really feeling called to human rights and she moved on to a human

rights organization, they reached out to me, because they already at this point

have known me since 2014 and then have worked with me as I filled in for Annie.

And so they asked me to, to consider coming. And so, um, it wasn't an immediate

yes, because I was super happy at LTS. Uh, it was, uh, you know, I, I was able

to still preach on weekends if I wanted to. And I loved the colleagues at LTS so

it was actually a little bit of a like--but again, um, the Holy Spirit, uh

--(laughs)--came to me at night and kind of was like, are you kidding?--(both

laugh)--this is what we've been calling you to do. And I was like, Oh yeah, right.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DEVINE:So going back to that call in 2019, uh, it took a while for it to become

to fruition. But then ecoAmerica, um, leading the Blessed Tomorrow program has

enabled me to do this full time. And, um, as a pastor, I was always involved in

ecumenical and interfaith circles, but I never like led or worked in this way,

and that has been really amazing. Really amazing. It is really amazing. Um, so

that's kind of how that--

CAGLE:--yeah. What's amazing about it?

DEVINE:(Sighs)--I say all the time, I think that people who are working in

climate and faith are the best humans. Um, they--nobody

does this work for the money. Nobody does this work because it's easy. Because

like I said every morning, and I'm sure you're the same way, I start my day by

looking at all of the climate news. Um, that is super depressing. And there are

times that you really feel like, Oh my gosh, is there--am I making any

difference? Is any progress--do we, you know? Yeah. So it's really hard, heavy

work. It's, uh, it's just really challenging in every way. So all of the people

who are in these circles together are doing this because they feel very called.

They're very devoted and they're working towards a better future that they won't

see. You know, that whole Chinese proverb about planting the tree whose fruit

you will never enjoy. Like that's what this work is, and sometimes it's really

hard work. And they're all amazing

people for the most part, super grounded, outdoorsy types anyway. You know,

they're the, the vegans and vegetarians at all of the food events. And they're

always the one who bring their, you know, water bottles and they're--it just,

they're just, they’re--it's just like my people--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

DEVINE:--and I'm just so honored and blessed to work with them. And the

multi-faith part has opened doors and, and relationships with people that I, you

know, some of them I knew of, but haven't--didn't know personally that now I

know. And I'm just in awe of, and they bring, um, depth to my own faith as we,

you know, look at Holy Scriptures from different traditions and, um, including

Baha'i, which I was not--I knew of, but wasn't exposed to very much before this

work. Um, so it's just been, just the people I would say has been amazing. And

to know again, going back to that, we have different holy books, we have

different ways to worship. We call God different things. We have different

understandings of the afterlife or whatever. And yet all of us can be in this

work together and a hundred percent aligned that we're called to this because of

our faith. And that's a beautiful thing. Uh, so, yeah.

CAGLE:How does being a Kentuckian inform all of this work for you, if it does?

DEVINE:Well, you know what, in Green Chalice world, Kentucky has more Green

Chalice congregations than any other state. That makes sense because this is

where I'm from and that's where Green Chalice started. But, but people in the

denomination don't necessarily know the history of Green Chalice and are

surprised, right? And so in my work, when people learn I'm from Kentucky--so I

have an office in D.C., and I go there

only like every other month or so, um, as little as possible. I love my

colleagues. So it's really fun to get together with, uh, the rest of the staff

at ecoAmerica. Um, but for obvious reasons, I don't go very often. So mostly I

just am working here from my home. And so people in D.C. and others that I

interact with are surprised that I'm from Kentucky and then are surprised but in

a positive way of the great things that happen around climate, uh, in Kentucky.

And, um, so it's interesting in that way. So I'm like all of us who are

Kentuckians, no matter what the topic. Sometimes we go to more urban places or

places where people feel--um, look down upon--(laughs)--us Kentuckians, I

guess--um, have these stereotypes. It's, it's definitely there. And I think

Kentucky--going back to my own roots

and family--the mountains of Kentucky, uh, have always spoken to me and

been--are in my heart. Um, I love telling people facts about Kentucky that are,

you know, we have--we're second for arches, natural arches, um, after Utah. And

we have more bodies of running water than any state other than Alaska. And like

people are like, what? Anyway, so it's such a beautiful and diverse place. And

in general--this isn't one-hundred percent true, but in general, Kentuckians are

really connected to the land. Um, and whether that, you know, people have the

idea of coal or tobacco, which are both very true. But even the tobacco farmers

or the coal miners were dependent upon literally and also super connected to the

earth through both where they lived and, and what they did. Um

, so it's an interesting thing. Uh, and in terms of our leaders in general--not

one-hundred percent true--but in general, uh, our national leaders and state

leaders, uh, do not lead on climate. They don't hardly ever, even maybe never

talk about it. And, and it was really hard for me when the, um, when--less with

the tornadoes in western Kentucky, but really with the flooding in eastern

Kentucky, um, where my my grandparents lived in Knott County, which was one of

the hardest hits, uh, in the, in the flooding. That--those first--that first

wave of articles, news, quotes, climate was never mentioned once. And it was

only when people started speaking up and saying hello that it started coming up.

But I, I don't know

--that was really disheartening for me of like it was so clearly connected to

climate change in, in community, in--and also connected to, uh, mountaintop

removal and deforestation and all of that, um, as well. Obviously connected, but

it was environmental in, uh, just such a real way. So that--we still have to

combat these state and national leaders who don't talk about climate, don't make

those connections. And I think it's to the detriment--I know that it's to the

detriment of, um, the most vulnerable in our state, including, uh, well

everywhere in the whole state, um, and does not benefit future Kentuckians. And

that's just really sad. Yeah

.

CAGLE:Yeah. I think. Yes to all of that--(laughs)--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that's and the point about whether or not media coverage or other sorts

of conversations even mention climate--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--as a relevant--you know, and we have a few interviews actually with

journalists in the, this collection and it's the journalists who have been sort

of, uh, at the forefront of ensuring that their coverage of environmental beat

addresses climate.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:And you know, and yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah.

DEVINE:Meteorologists now and weather or weather folks, you know, are starting

to talk about it more and more even, you know, locally. And that's, you know,

that's good. But we really need our leaders to step it up because it's--yeah.

CAGLE:Does any of your current work with ecoAmerica sort of touch on that or,

like is this, this, is

part of your work thinking about how faith leaders and faith communities can influence--

DEVINE:--so a little bit. So, um, there are a lot of incredible climate and

faith organizations. GreenFaith, Interfaith Power and Light, Creation Justice

Ministries, um, Green the Church, and many others. And Blessed Tomorrow is in

that mix as well. Some of those - GreenFaith and Interfaith Power and Light in

particular are really trying to lead on advocacy in the, um, in the government

sector. So we're really trying to help, um, climate and faith activists to move

us forward in that way. That is super important. I'm friends with them. I cheer

them on. And I think that it's really important. Um

, but it's also really important that all of us who are in this common climate

and faith arena--that we all don't try to get on that same, you know, lane. And

from the beginning, ecoAmerica's purpose and continue goal is, um, is about

bringing in those who are not activists. So both those who are very concerned

about climate, but don't know what to do or haven't connected it to their faith

for blessed tomorrow, and those that are still like, huh, you know? Um, we

want--so our lane is just different. That said, there are, uh, we do point to

that work and share it as is--makes sense for, um, those that we work with. We

want there to be a place for all congregations and all people of faith to plug

in, in a way that they're comfortable. But the majority are not comfortable, you

know, marching or being arrested or, you know, doing that more, uh, kind of, you

know, what we think of when we think of like a climate activist. The majority of

people aren't comfortable doing that. That's okay, because there's a lot of

other work--(laughs)--that needs to be done. Yeah--

CAGLE:--so much work. So are you still, um, directly involved with Green

Chalice outside of the partnership with Blessed Tomorrow? Or--

DEVINE:--so I am--I mean, I founded Green Chalice. It is my heart, um, and so I

will always be involved. But, um, my, uh, he calls himself co-minister, but, um,

he's really leading now taking the lead--is another pastor and friend, uh, Scott

Hardin-Nieri. And so he's doing the the leadership now. And then he and I meet,

you know, at least monthly and kind of

talk and, you know, strategize. We strategize definitely together. Um, he checks

in with me. I, you know, I think slowly, people are looking more and more to him

for leadership, which is great. But I, you know, have been the primary face for

Green Chalice for so long that there is still this, um, leaning towards me,

which is fine. I love it. Um, but my new, my newest endeavor, um, uh, is a part

of the work that I'm doing now is that along with a coalition of multifaith

partners, we've started, um, a campaign called One Home One Future. And, um,

this was intentionally something that, again, I felt called to do. So when

ecoAmerica hired me to lead the Blessed Tomorrow program, my first I don't know

, few weeks, months, I just was reaching out and having conversations with

others in the faith and climate movement to get to know them, to introduce

myself, and to imagine with them like, what is it that will help us be that

wave? How is it that we can move the faith community to be leading on this

issue? Because that's what makes the most sense, right? Um, as, as Gus Speth

says, the climate scientists, you know, been doing this climate science work for

decades and have finally realized that it's not a science problem. It's a

spiritual problem. And so spiritual leaders need to be getting, getting

involved. So, um, after talking with them and then, and then in conversation

with my bosses and the leadership at ecoAmerica, just came to realize that, um,

a couple of things are missing in the faith community. One

is visibility. I still enter--come in contact with people who are shocked that

there's, that there's even a faith movement in climate, right?

CAGLE:(Laughs)--I had one of those conversations last week.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:So there's a problem because there's a lot of congregations and a lot of

houses of worship and communities of faith who are leading and who are doing

incredible things on climate. But if you drive by their church or building,

unless they have solar panels, you don't know that. Um, so we aren't visible

enough and we need to increase our visibility so that both the faith community

and the non faith community see that this is connected to our faith. And this is

why we're we're doing this work. That's number one is visibility. Um, another

thing that has been missing and, uh, is support for pastors. And as someone who

pastored and knows how hard it is to do all

the things that you have to do. If you weren't educated in seminary, if you

haven't received the tools, those green glasses or just the support, the

theology, the how do you do this, um, they can't lead if they haven't been

taught. And so this, this clergy education and support--so not just a one and

done, but like I'm here to support you along the way like--that was really

missing. Excuse me, and then the, the third thing is, um, is on ramps for all

congregations, all houses of worship to be able to engage. However, they--not

like you have to do this, this and this. So that's kind of built on the Green

Chalice model, right? But opening that up to all communities of faith that, that

you don't have to have an energy audit, reduce your energy use by thirty

percent, get solar panels, like that there is a place for you in this

conversation and in this work wherever you are. You know, like come, but in a

multi faith kind of way. So there are lots of faith and climate organizations,

but there hasn't been a creation of something by multi faith leaders of standing

together, holding hands together. That’s really ableism, so I apologize for

that, but coming together and holding hands together, moving forward together on

this issue from our various faith perspectives and yet having this common place.

So, um, anyway, there were meetings of denomination leaders, heads of

denominations, uh, in the end of 2022. And then there was a broader climate and

faith leaders, both in denominations and within, you know, various organizations

who then we said, OK, here's what the denomination leaders say they need. The

heads of the denominations say they need. What do you think about this? Having

those same kinds of conversations and building on it. And from that, a coalition

was formed, um, to like--let's do this together. What's this look like? And so

we didn't have a name for it. We didn't have a logo for it. We didn't have--we

weren't even quite sure--we knew it needed to be visible. We knew it needed to

be a place that all people of faith could come and be welcome wherever they

were. We knew it needed to support clergy and lay leaders who were leading their

congregations. Um, but we didn't know more than that. And so we all we met every

two weeks. And in those meetings, the coalition would, you know, make some like

we need to do this, this and this. And then during those two week period, um,

myself and the staff at ecoAmerica, we would work on those things

. Okay, what do you think of this? So we came up with three logos, for instance,

and brought those back and everybody discussed those. And then we did message

testing on those, um, out in the world, um, through a company who does that. And

then we came back and said, this is the clear winner. And then people were--I'll

show you the logo. It's three faces. And so people were, you know, like, well,

that needs to change. So the little tweaks needed to happen. So we would go back

to the graphic--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DEVINE:--designer and we would work on that. So anyway, it was like every two

weeks. Okay, now we're going to build a website. What does it need to include?

How does this need to move forward? Like so we would have discussions, then

myself and ecoAmerica team would do that work and then come back to them. And,

and so anyway, and then it launched in October, the campaign with, uh, just a

beautiful, uh, Zoom launch of all these faith leaders, um, speaking on this

and saying this is what we need together. Um, and then, um, two days after the

war started. And the attacks--the Hamas attacks happened and then the, and then

the war started a little right after that. So, um, so, uh, but even within a

war, uh, beginning, you know, that has really hit the faith community, of

course, hard. Everybody hard, but particularly the faith community has really

been rocked by this. Um, and then moving into the holiday season, even with

those things happening, it is, it is really taking off. And we have well over

one-hundred congregations who have signed on. Plus, I don't even know how many

sixty-something, maybe more than that individuals who have signed on. And then

we have thirty-five partners, including the Episcopal Church and my own

denomination and all of the, uh, kind of mainline denominations, plus

others and organizations who are part of this. So now we meet every other month,

um, the partners. So some of the partners were not involved as the coalition

members, but any--all of them are invited in. And so we meet every other month

and say, okay, we're thinking about this. What do you think? We get their

feedback and then we stay in contact, uh, in other ways and meetings and

whatnot. And so the hope is just to really raise up visibility, uh, of this work

by all people of faith and that there isn't, um, you don't have to believe

certain things. You don't have to do certain things. You could come into this

work because you're really into community garden. You could come into this work

because you're just really wanting to save money on your building and lower your

electricity and maybe, you know, with some help from IRA

[5]get some money to do solar panels. Like you can be

anywhere. Justice. Maybe you're just

really, uh, uh, concerned about racism. And how is the environmental crisis

impacting and wanting to do something about that in our black and brown

communities. So, um, that's how this campaign--it's alive and changing

thing--but that's that's how this campaign has come about. And I'm just, I feel

like it's my--for right now is definitely what I'm called to do and what I'm

really excited about, maybe in the same way that that Green Chalice, but a

different iteration.

CAGLE:Yeah. And also the multifaith thing. It reminds me of something that I've

talked a lot about with, um, Shane Tedder, who's the officer--the sustainability

officer at UK and the work that I do with the Climate Consortium, the scholarly

network and the work that he does on campus. We've, uh, spitballed a few

metaphors and one of the ones we like is nerve tissue, right? Like you have all

these people--

DEVINE:--yes--

CAGLE:--in different spaces doing

things and they need to be connected and they need that, um, pulse of

electricity to travel back and forth. And so there is a role in the world for

people to be the nerve tissue between--

DEVINE:--yes. Absolutely.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Abs--I, yes. I, um, yeah, I won't--I've had a sermon about, you know,

it's--we often talk about neurons and, in, in our brains, but the power isn't in

the neurons. The power is in the connection--

CAGLE:--the pathways, yeah. Exactly--

DEVINE:--right? And so it's those those connections, those spaces. This is all

about relationship. All this work is is about relationship, relationships with

each other - super important. Relationships to God and relationships to the more

than human world. And as we work on our relationships, all of those, then that's

where the power is.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DEVINE:That's where the change comes.

CAGLE:Yeah. And that makes sense that it's not, it's not additive. Like you

were saying--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--it's not a different extra

thing. It is--

DEVINE:--right--

CAGLE:--it's a, just a, it's an orientation.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. It's a way--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--of doing the work that you are doing anyway, if you're in community

with other--DEVINE: --that's right--

CAGLE:--people of faith, right?

DEVINE:Yeah. I have a colleague who, um, is in this work, too, who--he's a

pastor in the Church of the Nazarenes. Um, and he says he doesn't like the term

creation care because it's just care.

CAGLE:Oh, uh-huh.

DEVINE:It's care of humans of, um, in Christian circles, we would say the least

of these among us. The most vulnerable is what that means. And care of, of the

trees and the earth around us, uh, and care for all that God created. Um, I

think we still have to say creation sometimes in order to help

lift--(laughs)--up the visibility of this. But I totally agree with that.

CAGLE:Yeah. And it does. I mean, creation is a term that just carries so much meaning--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--in particularly Christian tradition.

DEVINE:That's right.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:That's right.

CAGLE:I remember the first time I

heard the phrase creation care. I think I was in graduate school, maybe and

already studying climate communication. And it just clicked. I was like, oh--

DEVINE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--of course.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Stewardship. Like this is--

DEVINE:--that’s right--

CAGLE:--I--the same way that you were describing, although not from, you know,

sort of a place of active faith, but that--

DEVINE:--right--

CAGLE:--sense of like, oh, of course--

DEVINE:--of course, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah, right?

DEVINE:That’s right.

CAGLE:And then you start--and then you, you know, I think back on many of my

favorite Bible stories and they often involve--

DEVINE:--yeah, right?--

CAGLE:--yeah they involve--

DEVINE:--so clear--

CAGLE:--animals and plants and it's all there.

DEVINE:It's all there.

CAGLE:Yeah

DEVINE:It's all there. It's so clear.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:And it's so sad that we have--and so many people still. I think the last

study I saw was last year, um, and I think it was actually focused on Catholics.

I think it was a Catholic study. But it, um, like only thirty-something--less

than forty percent of Catholics have heard a sermon, um, on creation care climate

, whatever. And I think that definitely transfers to Protestants, and I'm going

to guess people of faith everywhere, that still the majority have never heard a

sermon, have never heard a talk within their faith community on, on this topic.

CAGLE:Do you think Pope Francis's encyclicals have made an impact?

DEVINE:Oh, so much.

CAGLE:Good.

DEVINE:I think, yes, Pope Francis has really helped the movement all the way

around, including lifting up St. Francis. And, and, you know, when he took

that--I remember the moment that he, that they announced his name, that he

announced his name as Pope. And, um, I just was like, all right, this is going

to be my guy--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--[?? WORDS UNCLEAR], yeah.

DEVINE:--be my pope.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:He has definitely helped and God bless him. Um, so I don't agree on all,

all things. Uh, obviously, I'm an ordained--

CAGLE:--obviously--

DEVINE:--woman--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DEVINE:--woman. But, uh, but

I am so thankful for that. And honestly, if we don't get this, if we don't get

this, then all other things will not matter. If we don't have a place that we

can literally live and eat, um, all the other things won't matter because we

won't have life. And so it's--and, and all the injustices that we can see are

connected directly and indirectly to climate, to creation care. All of it is

connected. And injustices are all a web of overlapping. And as we pull the

threads. So I would also say this. If you are somebody who's really working on

anti-racism work, then you can't do that work without also addressing climate,

because that is a big part

of the racism and the, uh, oppression and that that is happening both directly

because of, of where, uh, black and brown people primarily live, the

neighborhoods and those conditions, environmental racism type things having to

do with industrial toxic waste and all of the things having to do with that, but

also now with climate disasters. We know that in general, that white people

after a climate disaster are actually better off - have insurance, know how to

work the system, get the FEMA[6]support, et cetera, are

better off and, um, and black and brown people are worse off.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DEVINE:And so there is that.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:So in all of the ways, and that's just one example, I would say the same

about LGBTQ, you know, kind of queer advocacy and working on queer rights. Super important

. Cannot, cannot ignore climate.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:It’s all connected. So whatever the issue is, if you're into justice,

I'm with you one-hundred percent. Um, but it all connects. And, and, and there

has to be some acknowledgement or standing with or, um, teaching, preaching all

the things on creation, care, climate as well.

CAGLE:Yeah

DEVINE:Whatever you call it.

CAGLE:Yeah--(laughs)--care. Just care.

DEVINE:Yeah, right.

CAGLE:Whatever.

DEVINE:Right.

CAGLE:Is there anything I should have asked you about that I didn't?

DEVINE:I don't know--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--it's hard to keep track. It's a long conversation.

DEVINE:It's hard to keep track.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

DEVINE:I guess, you know, um, I spent part of my environmental work prior and

even after I came to understand it in a faith way with a whole lot of like, uh,

self, uh, judgment, shame. You know

, every baggie or any waste--my grandmother's favorite saying was waste not want

not--so, you know, that just resides in my head. Any kind of thing that driving

a car, you know, that, that uses gas and all of the things I have struggled so

much with carbon footprint and emissions and, uh, food and all of the things.

And one of the things that has been super freeing for me and enables me to

continue to do the best I can while also letting go is the realization that, um,

the term carbon and carbon footprint and that whole thing having to do with

carbon calculators came from the fossil fuel companies. My realization that,

that, uh, campaign that I grew up with of the, um, oh, um, now I'm not going to remember--America

, the beautiful thing--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DEVINE:--but the--that had the Native American that had the tear.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:You know, that was all about trash. Like that--all of that really worked

on me. And I had so much--thought I had so much responsibility. Um, and then

realizing that, you know, for that particular campaign, it was an anti, uh,

littering, you know, and trash campaign that while they had that campaign going

and making all of us feel guilty and shame, they were--it was plastics that was

supporting it and they were continuing to increase every year the amount of

plastics and trash that they created. So, um, I guess that would be one of the

final things is that in doing this work, we have to, I think, do our little

piece, you know? Make the next right decision that is within our ability and

also free ourselves from just

this burden of shame when we've been working with--in a system, and this isn't

even one industry--it's a whole system and culture that points fingers at us as

individuals while the corporations and, uh, leaders of various sorts get super

wealthy, um, and are the reason that we're in this mess.

CAGEL:Mm-hmm.

DEVINE:So I hope that all of us can, can continue to live our lives with this

green lens, for those of us who are people of faith to see all of those

connections. And we have, you know, hundreds of decisions we make each day,

little and large, that can make a difference in our own lives and in the world.

But let go of the heaviness and shame--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DEVINE:--um, and work towards talking about and, and

coming together joining hands together, supporting each other, cheering each

other on and, um, and doing this active practicing hope, right?

CAGLE:Yeah.

DEVINE:Yeah.

CAGLE:That's a lovely note to end on--(laughs)--thank you so much.

DEVINE:Thank you.

CAGLE:All right. I'm gonna stop there. And then we will stop.

[END OF INTERVIEW]