UNKNOWN:Great.

SHACKLETTE:Okay. [[?? WORDS UNCLEAR]] Perfect.

UNKNOWN:Are you rolling?

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. So, if you wanna start out just by telling us a little bit about yourself, where both y'all are from, what's your daily life like, those sorts of things?

WALTERS:Would you like to begin?

WHITE:(White clears throat)(Walters laughs) My name is Missy White, and, um, I work at a factory, and, um, it's, it's really awesome, and, uh, I can freely talk about god, and, um, I stay in god's word every day, and, um, I, I like helping people and being a, a positive light to everybody around me, and I love telling people about god and the things that he's done in my life and the things that he can do for other people. And that--you know, to let people know that anything that you're going through, god can help you with it. And he can lead you down the right path in your life.

WALTERS:And I'd have to say the same thing. Um, considering how my life used to be, um--I, I lived for myself. I lived for what I wanted, how I wanted it. Um, always going down the wrong path, following the footsteps of people making the same mistakes that they told me not to. Uh, pushing god out of my life, always in a constant, back-and-forth battle, uh, trying to serve two masters. Um, I've struggled with, you know, a little bit of everything, everything under the sun. Uh, and I was just on this repeated cycle, this, uh, endless loop. Um, every time I'd start to do good, I'd fall right back off. And now, as I see it, I know that that was god, that--you know, he never gave up on me and, uh, delivered me time and time again, even though I would time and time again push him away. Um, you know, I'm not going to get into the specifics right now, but, you know, everybody makes, you know, bad decisions. And, uh, about three or so years ago, I finally had went to jail. And, when I got out a month later, I met my wife. And we lived together within the first two or three weeks of knowing each other. And we've never looked back since. And we was both going through a lot of the same things. And our, you know, worldly ways, you know--we still had things we couldn't let go of, things that still brought us down. Addictions, uh, you know, trauma from things of our past, insecurities, you know, distrust, you know, looking for another way other than god. Truly--and we was a lot like other people. I mean, we would, you know, be back and forth until one day, um, you know, god really did open our eyes. And he really did save us and pull us out of everything. And he freed me from, uh, bondage and chains that I had went through, uh, ever since I was a little kid. Things he delivered me from--you know, fifteen plus years, any and all addictions. I was able to let go of everything that ever haunted me. I was able to be not only just a good man to her, even though I still struggled. And I let a lot of my old ways and even, even ways of my, my dad, um, shine in, in a negative light. And, and I, I didn't just become a husband, I, I became a father myself. I became a dad. You know, I don't have no kids of my own, but I took her daughter in, Jasmine, as my own, and I look at her just as a daughter, and just as my dad looked at her as a granddaughter. He took all--I was his only son, but he took all of his kids in--step kids, other people's grandkids, he called them all--or other people's kids, he called them his grandkids. He never turned nobody aside. He always went above and beyond to help people. And he was the one that actually had--(White clears throat)--introduced me, you know, to some teachers, you know, of god's word and ways, you know, outlets of people to study with and, you know, away from a lot of traditions and, you know, church doctrines, um, because--we can't cover up the truth, because it, it does happen, you know, there are a lot of churches that--I'm not saying that I don't love each and every one of them, you know, they're all my brothers and sisters in Christ, but, you know, there, there are false teachings out there, and, you know, god really delivered us from that because we was caught up in a lot of that. And the fact that it, it--how much of a blessing it is for god to, you know, start to reveal his truth, uh, you know, to his children, you know, and it's much more of a blessing to be able to share it in a way that they can easily understand it. And just the impact that we've been able to make, even this week as an example with the death, um--it's not that I didn't want to cry. It's not that I did not feel sad. But as I try to remind people, Jesus Christ set us free. Why would you go back to those chains? Why would you put yourself back into bondage? Why would you go back to Egypt? And to remind everybody what god's word says to help strengthen them. And when I got up to the podium, and I had some words, you know, from my heart--I didn't know what to say, I just got up there and I put my head down and I just, you know, I asked god, you know, I don't know, just, you know, just lead me. And I reminded everybody that, um, you know, despite--and this goes for anybody, you know, despite how anybody may live or, you know, what you think, you know, as f--in, in terms of, you know, where they are now, that we are not the judge, that god is the judge, and god knows our hearts and he knows our every thought and, you know, and if people--they, they do cry out to them, or out, out to him--even if it's just in their head, if they're just thinking it in their last moments, you know, and they, and they, and they cry out to Jesus that, uh, you know--they can be forgiven and they can, uh, you know, be redeemed from that. And, and today, they live forever, you know, to remind people of those things, you know, to not look at what you think somebody's life is--(White coughs)--in your eyes, but what god says. And what god says goes. And just the fact that, uh--when you know somebody, especially a loved one, how comforting it is to know that they did have a relationship with Jesus and they did know god and they did study, you know--how much more so, you know, you know, is god going to hear them, you know? But like I try to tell people, even if they didn't, we are not the judge, and god loves us so much, and he is forgiving if you're sincere, and he will help you. And every day we clock into work, we don't go there with, with, uh--doing our jobs, performing, you know, the way we need to do to provide for our family. We--our number one job when we go into work is, god, how can I--how can you use me today? You know, give me opportunities. I--who can I talk to today? Who, who can I help out? I mean, if it's just a smile, you know, sometimes that--that's a gift from god. Just, sometimes, somebody's smile can, can really change somebody's day. And we're always seeking, you know, who can I help out? You know--I mean, I've stopped work all together many times, and worked extra hard to try to get caught back up, just to pull up a verse, or try to take the time to talk to somebody, or try to pray with somebody, or something like that. And that's been my number one job this week, with the loss of my, my father, is I want people--not because I'm anything special, but because I want people to, to see the power of god, and when they ask, "How are you okay? How are--you don't have to be so strong. It's okay to cry. It's okay to be weak." And I say, "Well, you're right. There's nothing wrong with that. And I am weak, but it's god that gives me strength." And I want people to see that if you truly know what god's word says, that you can know that, you know, this is not the end. And there is a far better life and a better place after this life is over--this life is so short. It's temporary. It's not our home. And when someone passes away, I don't want them to come back. I wouldn't want another day with them, because where they're at is where I want to be. And we make it our duty every day--our number one job as parents is to raise our daughter up in god's word, and show her the examples and, to be honest with her. Not let the age gap, or the intellectual gap, uh, cause a division, you know, we try to open up our hearts to her as if we're talking to one another--just because she's a kid--she's thirteen. We try to level with her. We try to tell her, you know, "This is really how I feel. This is why I did this. This is why that happened." We always try to come down to her level, and let her know that, you know, none of us are really any different, that we're all in this world and we're all trying to do our best job. And even the people that don't care, or that do bad things, um--if we really love god, we love them enough to at least tell them the truth, and if they reject it--or they reject others because they rejected Christ--and as I told Olga in here the last time I had seen her--the medical practitioner--um, I was telling her some things about, um, some negative responses I've gotten at my job in the past. And she said, "That's okay. You know, they did it to Jesus, too." And then I sent her a--(Walters clears throat)--a verse in Matthew--I think it might have been chapter five, verse eleven, maybe--you know, it says, uh, you know, when people mock you, you know--cast your name out as evil, you know, for Christ's sake--it says, "Rejoice in that day, for your reward is great in heaven." So, you know, I, I would like to encourage people to, to never, uh--to never back down, but to be respectful, you know? It's not our job to force anything on anybody. We let god lead us. We say what we feel led to say. And not to beat yourself up if you didn't feel like you did a good enough job in doing that, you know. And the hardest part for me--before I truly started to serve god--was every time I would sin, or make a mistake, or do something stupid, or do something out of a selfish reason, I couldn't forgive myself, because I began to see how good god was to me. After the life that I was living, that he--that he freed me. And not only freed me, but gave me a family, and blessed me with an amazing job where people absolutely love both of us. They're there for us so much. They constantly hug us, tell us they love us, that we're here--that they're there for us. And the fact that, you know, we can freely talk about god at our jobs is, is such a blessing. And the fact that our--that our daughter--now she wants to study god's word. It's not just like, "Oh, well, I gotta do this." And we don't make her. You know, we tell her, you know, "If you really don't want to do this tonight, I'm not going to make you do it. That's, that's up to you." But she wants to, because she sees that it's very important, and she sees that the impact that it's made on her, her mom--(Walters clears throat)--and me--how our difficulties when we first met have went away because of god's word. And to have such a support system and family that--we don't have a lot of family, because a lot of family is--most families split up, or quit talking, or move away, get caught up in their own lives. But the fact that there are still some that remain, uh, that truly, you know, you could say is a--is a strong family, you know, that's there for each other to the end. And we don't have no problems with any family members. We don't have any problems at work. The problems that we do have at home are over as quick as they come. We go to prayer. We have everything we need. We never worry about money. I haven't looked--I went almost two months here, from the middle of January until just yesterday--I haven't even looked at my account, how much money I make. I have everything I need. God blesses us so much. He blesses our health. We--we're, we're never truly sad, when--I, I forgot what depression is. I forgot what, uh, being left wanting feels like, because Jesus Christ does not leave us wanting. And, everything that we go through, god gets us through it. We come together as a family and we remind ourselves what's important, and realize that, you know, when god truly forgives, he forgets and he doesn't want to hear about it anymore. He for--it doesn't exist. So, we need to move on as well--the only reason we remember is so that we know not to do that again, and we move forward. I don't care how guilty you feel, or how ashamed you feel, or how stupid you feel. You get up and you be a good soldier in Jesus Christ like in Second Timothy, I think, chapter two. For we are good soldiers in Jesus Christ. You march like a soldier, because we're in a spiritual warfare. The devil is real, and Jesus Christ--in Luke chapter ten, verse nineteen, he said, "I give you power over Satan and all of the enemy through my name." And it's up to us Christians to use that name, because without god, we're hopeless and defenseless. Like in Ephesians six, to keep that gospel armor on, ready and in place, ready to do battle. Christians are not second class citizens. They're champions. And there's a lot of people--not that they're better than anybody. There's a lot of people that play church and there's a lot of people that are fake. And there's a lot of people that don't believe in god, or don't care, and I don't hate them. I love them. Other religions, I don't mock them. I don't call anything out by name. I don't call any individual out by name. It's my job--it's our job to set the example, and to show people that there is a god, and he is real, and he can save you from anything, and he will bless you, and he will help you through anything you go through. And if our--and if our lives are not living proof of that, I don't know what is. And that's my number one--that I would say for us both, as one flesh, you know, husband and wife--I would say that it is our number one job to try our very best to set that example. To realize that life can be so, so good, even in the hard times--

SHACKLETTE:--yeah--

WALTERS:--because god is with us--

SHACKLETTE:--that's--

WALTERS:--if you want him to be.

SHACKLETTE:That's a beautiful story. I'm glad you're both able to be here with us today. And, uh--

WALTERS:--thank you.

SHACKLETTE:Just, um, in that story, um, where does the Post Clinic fit in? How'd you, uh, first hear about it, what's your experience with it been, those sort of things, if you'd like to start.

WHITE:(White clears throat) Um, well, it started out because my husband was having problems with his ears and, um, I had--my stepmom had actually told me about it. And, whenever he had first came here, um, it was just really awesome because, you know, you could freely talk about god here, and they--everybody talks about god to you. And it's just, um--and everybody, you know, like Olga, like--she takes her time to talk to you, um, the people at the front desk--

WALTERS:--to really understand, you know--

WHITE:--yeah--

WALTERS:--what is going on with you. "I'm, I'm, I'm genuinely concerned. I want to know your history. I want to know every little thing that's going on with you, so I can best treat you." And just the time, and the patience, and the, uh, urgency to really do that--especially when you have volunteers here, you know, people that come in on their own free will to, to do that. You know, I know this place is funded anonymously, and I--and I praise god for them people, you know? I know that if we were in the same position, we, we, we would love to provide--help provide a place such as this, because, you know, there's a lot of things, you know, with healthcare that really--in a way, that really can screw people over that really do need help, that are trying, um--puts people on a bind a lot of times, especially when it's hard enough for a lot of families just to make it, just to pay their bills and things. And, you know, you come here, and you're not just coming here for, uh, medicine or, uh, you know, "What's wrong with me?" You're, you're coming here with the reminder that, you know, it's not really the doctors. It's not really the medicine, you know, that really heals us--it's god that really heals us, you know, through these things. And the fact that they remind us of that and, and that they, uh--you know, I've never heard a--I've never heard a doctor say, "When I hand out medicine, I hand it--I hand it out with prayer," you know? You know, she said there was a young man in here a couple weeks ago that, um--she basically had told him, "If you don't like your job, you need to find a new job, because you can't keep coming here to try to get out of work. So, if you're not happy with what you're doing, you need to find something else that you would enjoy doing." And--she said that, I did not. There was much else said, but she said, "I did not treat him physically that day, I treat him--I treated him spiritually, told him what he needed to hear," and she said it really--seemed like it really meant a lot to him. And he walked out of here feeling good about himself, and, you know, realizing those things, you know. And that, that's--you know, I've never heard that in my life. I've never been anywhere--not just a, a hospital, or a clinic, or something, just--I've never been in any type of business or any place like that where I've ever heard anything like that. And the fact that it actually helped that guy, you know? That, that was amazing.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah, do you think this place feels almost like a family or community?

WALTERS:I would say, uh--I would say that, you know, um, you don't have to know everybody, you know, your whole life. You don't have to be close with them or know them personally, you know? You know, that--that's what Jesus does, I mean, he, he, he put--he tears those walls down. I mean, we all just come in, and it's like I've always known them, or they always knew us. And that would go for anybody, not just here--that would go for anybody in those circumstances. And the fact that you can come in here and, and, you know, you know, if you do--if you do serve god, or, or whatever, you know, you know, then they are family. And if you don't, they're going to treat you like family anyway, you know, and try to really help you out. Because, you know, in a perfect world, of course, we would want everybody just to get all the help they needed around the world, you know, in a perfect world. So, this is kind of, to me, it's kind of a, a peek into, you know, what, what that could be like. And it shows people that, you know, it's not just crookedness and, just, big corporations trying to devour you, you know, and, you know, bleed you of every penny you've got or something like that. You know how people are, you know, they, they just--they look at things in, in that way and they, you know, "They're not really out to help me. They just want to get me in and out the door." And you don't have that here.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. Anything you'd like to add?

WHITE:And, like, coming here, um, you don't have all the feelings that you have at other doctor's offices or--(Walters clears throat)--you know, where you go to get appointments done. It's like, you know, it's, it--you're at peace here, because you know that you are really cared about, and that they're going to get to the bottom of how they can help you, and that they're going to let god to lead them to do that. And, it really gives you a peace of mind knowing that, you know, you are going to get the things that you need to get better.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

WALTERS:Because they know that it's not them that provides, it's god that provides.

WHITE:Yeah.

WALTERS:So, when you have people with that kind of confidence and courage, you know--they know that whatever they're going to do, god's gonna back them up with it. And if you believe that, then, then you can guarantee that you're gonna be okay.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

WALTERS:And, uh, and, uh--not that other places--not saying anything bad about them, you know.

WHITE:No.

WALTERS:Nothing like that at all. You know, other doctors or hospitals--nothing like that at all. I'm not trying to say like, "Oh, they're bad people. These are good people." Nothing like that at all.

WHITE:It's just a different kind of experience when god is involved. That's, that's the big key thing.

WALTERS:You know, and like, they would be trying to, say, talk to you about god here. And the, the roles are reversed. You know, if--when we went to other places, it's like, we're trying to talk to god about them in a, a rightful manner. You know, not like a fanatic or, you know, just--that's all you talk about, and you won't shut up. I mean, obviously, you wouldn't do something like that anyway, I mean, just--

WHITE:--just telling them--

WALTERS:--it might just be a few words.

WHITE:Yeah.

WALTERS:It might just be your character, you know, just--it might just be, the whole time you're there, just--well, I just thank god today, you know, and that's it, you know.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. And, um, ever since coming to the clinic, how has--has your health improved? Has your well-being improved? Like, what's changed since--(Shacklette clears throat).

WALTERS:I have no problems--problems that I've been dealing with my ear for, uh--on and off for a long time. And I know a lot of that stubbornness, and, just, kind of every time it would get better, just let it go until it gets worse again. And then, and kept doing that until it start to get worse and worse and worse. Now that I've come here, and she got me what I needed, and I've not had any problems. I did what they told me to do, and my hearing, and my eardrums, and the wax--just all the stuff that I've done with my ears, everything looks perfect, they said, I mean, "Both your eardrums, they look great. There's nothing there." I don't have any problems whatsoever.

SHACKLETTE:That's amazing. How long was it that you all said that you had been coming here?

WALTERS:Uh, I would say, to this day, um--November of last year.

SHACKLETTE:And are you all originally from the Mount Sterling area, or somewhere else in Kentucky?

WALTERS:Uh, we've liv--we've, we've lived here for the majority of our lives. Um, I mean, you know, we were, we were--were you born in Mount Sterling?

WHITE:Yes, but--

WALTERS:--I was born in--(White clears throat)--Lexington.

WHITE:I grew up and went to school in Bath County, and, um--I had dealt with, uh, really bad inflammation, um, where I have arthritis and, uh, chronic body pain in my bones for years now. And, when I came here, and I was seeing Olga, like, she, she really got to the bottom of it, and, um, went into details and, you know, asked me questions that I didn't even think of. And it answered a lot of things of why I was in pain. And she had me to change my diet, and things like that, and to take some vitamins. And it's, it's really helped me to not have to be in the chronic pain that I was with my arthritis.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

WALTERS:And, uh, you know, I mean, we've, we've moved around, just, throughout our lives, but we've, we've lived the majority of our life here.

WHITE:Yeah.

WALTERS:And--

SHACKLETTE:--how does it, uh, feel knowing you have this clinic in your community?

WALTERS:I mean, it's, it's, it's amazing, really. And that's, that's, I mean--the papers--we took a stack this big from Louise. I mean, we've been trying to hand them out to everybody--I had a guy come over and help me work on the car last Wednesday (Walters laughs). I was just like, "Here, take this," you know--(White laughs). I was like, "You got to check this place out," you know, just--(White clears throat)--anybody and everybody, uh--been trying to tell them about it. And they're like, "I never knew about this." You know, like, "Oh, I've got insurance. Don't--that's okay." And I'm like, it don't--you know, you can still come here if you have insurance. And, you know, I mean, that's fine too. And, and he's (??) like, "Well, that's, that's okay." I was like, "Well, there's no copay." He's like, "What?" (Shacklette laughs) You know, like, like you can come in here and it'll, it'll be all right. So, you know, we've just been trying to do what we can. Because a lot of people, they, they don't get seen, because they don't have insurance, or they can't afford it. I know a lot of people that have let their health get really bad because, uh--or they're worried about the medicine, which, I mean--I'll, I'll admit, I mean, the medicine that I needed for my ear was at the highest price here in town. I had to call around. I had to--had to get to work. I had to check out every place--I was even checking up in Winchester, you know. It was around 145 dollars. I was like, "Oh, my goodness." But, I ended up having that GoodRX app, and, uh, the place that I went to--uh, CVS--they had discounts. I don't know where they came from, but they say, "Here, we got these coupons," and I got it for 51 dollars. I know that's a little bit steep, but--and, and some people might struggle with that, but you got to think about, you know--say, you're trying to get health insurance through your work. You know, for my work, it's, it's 62 dollars, I think, out of every paycheck. So, if you're going to come here and you're going to spend 51 dollars, and for the last several months you've spent--you know, you've had 60 dollars taken out of your--you know, 40, 60, 50 dollars taken out of your paycheck every week. You know, you're not--you're saving a lot of money. Uh, and--but that was just for--p--particularly for what I had. I'm not trying to, you know, discourage anyone like, "Oh, well, I can go in there to get free treatment, and then all the medicine is gonna be jacked up sky-high." That's, that's not true, just--the particular thing that I needed was originally 212 dollars, and--so the fact that I got it for 50 bucks--I mean, I, I was--I was tickled to death--(White clears throat)(Shacklette laughs). I really was--and I've still got plenty of it, so that way if anything happens again, I can just--(Walters snaps)--redo that treatment. And I don't have to worry about that. So, I mean, that was just for me. personally. But I'm not wanting people to think that, you know, that's the case, you know. Um--so, and then that's what--that's--I'm going to look into getting insurance, uh, with our open enrollment at our job. That this--hers is next--hers is in May. Mine's in July. We're gonna-we're gonna see what would be best for us to try to get the family plan. But, that--that's what took me away from having insurance, because I, I was rarely ever sick. I hardly ever needed to go to the doctor. I mean, I was doing the math. I mean, I was spending hundreds of dollars, you know, paying into my work for insurance that I was never using. So, I finally just got rid of it. And I know like, something major happens, it would help, or at least knock down the price. I do understand that. I'm not trying to tell people to, you know, just don't have insurance. You know what I mean? I'm not trying to say that, but just for me personally, I mean--I was--I was--I was saving hundreds of dollars. And this was even before I work--where I work now, you know, you know--years ago before I met her, uh, something did come up, and I ended up having to spend like 150 dollars or something like that. And I was fine with it because, you know, I, I had saved hundreds of dollars in the last few months leading up to that time. So, you know, that--that's what's kind of took me away from, you know, having health insurance--just for me personally. It's just because, um, you know--I just, you know, thank god, you know, that, you know, I'm, I'm never really needing any medical assistance.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

WALTERS:So, you know, the fact that, you know, you can come here and get treated now--you don't have to worry about all that anymore. And then, if you do have to pay anything, it's just a little bit for maybe some medicine here and there. So, I, I don't--I don't know how you could go wrong. I really don't. And, you know, I would love for more people to know about it. And, you know, that's, that's why we was so excited. And we thank god that we could be a part of this, too. Maybe it would encourage somebody to, you know, say, "Wow," you know, "That sounds great." And then, they tell people, you know, I'd love to see this place packed (Walters laughs). You know? (Walters clears throat)

UNKNOWN:You guys got any other questions?

SHACKLETTE:I think we're good.

UNKNOWN:Great.

SHACKLETTE:Thank you all, thank you.

UNKNOWN:Thank you so much--

WHITE:Oh, was that (??)--was--was that good, I--

SHACKLETTE:Oh, it was--it was great--(White laughs)--

WALTERS:--I felt like I kind of--I felt like I--(White clears throat)--kind of fell off at the end there.

SHACKLETTE:No, no, no, no (Shacklette laughs).

WHITE:Well, we pretty much answered all the questions that they were going to ask us ourselves.