CURRIS:Good day. This is Jo Hern Curris. I am a 1959 Benham, Kentucky graduate

of high school. My parents were Bob and Pauline Hern, or Robert Bruce, Senior

and Ruth Pauline Hern. He was manager of the Benham Credit Union, and Pauline

worked both in the home and in later years had a career outside the home. My

sister Alice had a very exciting life, and it is with great joy that I’m able to

interview her today to talk about her journey. And we have a brother, Bruce

Hern, who also attended Benham and later Lynch in the 1960s, who became a

chemical engineer at the University of Tennessee.

I want to tell you that we began these interviews as a part of the Benham Credit

Union Project, which was initiated to record Benham’s history and to reflect

specifically the financial lives of coal miners and their families, and to

recapture the sense of love, joy, and community, as well as the sadness of

living in a very exceptional coal camp. It is my goal to document the stories of

us all as we truly represent--represented--an American melting pot, although we

did not recognize this at that time. These interviews are also being supported

by the University of Kentucky, Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History, where this

interview will be stored. Therefore, I have asked Alice to sign a form agreeing that

this recording will be considered a gift to the center open for unrestricted

use, including being quoted from, published, or broadcasted from; including the

ability for she, herself, to use this for whatever purpose that she might wish.

It has become very apparent that if we do not tell our family’s stories, they

will be lost forever. As we are children of the 1940s through the 1960s and in

one generation, this country has forgotten that without the hardworking coal

miner willing to travel into the bowels of the earth to mine coal, beginning

with pick and shovel, there would’ve been no electricity, no electric

refrigerators, washing machines, stoves, no airplanes, tanks and boats, and no

American winning of World War Two. Therefore, let us attempt to restore

America’s memory.

Alice, thank you so much for being willing to be interviewed today. It has been

an exciting journey that you have led, and as a young girl of Appalachia, more

specifically Harlan County, and then a young woman who traveled the world, I

think it’s most fascinating that we include your story. I would like to begin

with your full name.

HERN:Alice Diane Hern.

CURRIS:And when and where were you born?

HERN:I was born in Benham, Kentucky, 1944. That’s it. (laughs)

CURRIS:Well, let’s start with your parents’ names.

HERN:Ruth Pauline Parker Hern, and Robert Bruce Hern, Senior.

CURRIS:And did you attend the Benham school?

HERN:I did for eleven years.

CURRIS:And what happened for the twelfth year?

HERN:People--the mining industry wasn’t apparently going to be going as strong

as it had, and so there wasn’t going to be the membership at this school. So the

school closed and the students had a choice of going to Lynch or going to Cumberland.

CURRIS:And why Lynch?

HERN:It was just offered if you wanted to pay the money. I don’t know if there

was money involved with going to Cumberland.

CURRIS:I don’t think there was.

HERN:Okay. And Lynch was thought by my father to be--have the better teachers

after he inquired quite avidly.

CURRIS:When it comes to your education, tell me what you remember of your grade

school at Benham--at the Benham school.

HERN:I’d have to say Miss Ison and Miss Reams.

CURRIS:Who were they?

HERN:Mrs. Ison was the first grade teacher, and of course she taught me to read

and to listen and participate with all my little friends there in the first

grade, which wasn’t very many people.

CURRIS:Do you have a memory of approximately how many? I know in my graduating

class, I believe we had fifty-four in Benham High in 1959.

HERN:Well see we had thirty at Lynch where I went. But in first grade, I think

maybe twelve at the most. A lot of attention could be given to us individually.

CURRIS:Well, that--

HERN:That was great.

CURRIS:That was really a wonderful opportunity. When you were in grade school

and junior high, what kind of activities did you

or the girls have at that time?

HERN:Pretty much being in a play was one of the things that we could do. The

Tom Thumb wedding in second grade.

CURRIS:Tell us what the Tom Thumb wedding was.

HERN:Well, they reenacted a wedding. We had the bride and groom. We had a

couple of people to sing. And what else? What am I thinking? It was just so

sweet. And they talked as if they were adults--(laughs)--being what, seven years

of age? Yes. And so everybody got to participate one way or the other.

CURRIS:What was your role in the Tom Thumb wedding? Do you remember?

HERN:Yes. I was one of the singers, and if I remember correctly,

my father said to me, “I will sit on the back row and I will wave to you if I

can hear you.” And so out I went and I located where my father was, and I belted

out this song because I wanted for sure for my dad to hear it. And he waved to

me. And I can remember it was, I can’t remember the name of the song, but it was

“Because of you there’s a song in my heart,” and I love telling that story

because so many of my friends, especially my adult friends, find it so

spectacular that I went out and made such a fool of myself.

CURRIS:Well, when we talk about the Tom Thumb wedding, of course that has gone

by the way, when we’ve had all these societal changes about what is acceptable

and what is not. Then the concept of two little seven year

olds doing a parody on a wedding. But in reality, at that time, in this very

small community, it was a major event.

HERN:Event, absolutely.

CURRIS:Where did--where was it held?

HERN:The gymnasium.

CURRIS:Of the school.

HERN:Yeah. Oh, and the last year that the school was in session, they had a

reenactment of anyone who was still there that had been in the Tom Thumb

wedding. They were going to have another one with the bride and groom, and they

invited back everybody who had sung in it, but me.

CURRIS:(both laugh)--Was that because of your singing?

HERN:Could have been, but I like to think they just forgot about me. (laughs)

CURRIS:That’s very good. Well,

when we talk about that, were there plays and so forth that the first graders or

that the primary school students participated in?

HERN:You know what, now that I look back, I’m thinking more that was high

school where we did the plays. Yeah.

CURRIS:Were there any girls’ sports at that time?

HERN:Oh, none. No, no. Nothing like that whatsoever. You could be a

cheerleader, a majorette, or you could be, of course, be in the band. But that

was--we were pretty much limited to that.

CURRIS:To help our audience understand the context of what we’re talking about.

At this point, we are talking about approximately what, 1950 when you started

first grade?

HERN:Um-hm.

CURRIS:And there were no televisions?

HERN:No, just radio.

CURRIS:There were only rotary phones.

HERN:Correct.

CURRIS:You lived in a town of approximately three to four thousand people, and

the area was Cumberland, Benham, and Lynch. Cumberland was the trade area.

Benham was the only captive coal mine owned by International Harvester.

HERN:Correct.

CURRIS:And captive coal mining, meaning that the coal was used only for the

production of International Harvester products. It was not coal that was sold on

the open market to someone else--

HERN:--yes--

CURRIS:--and then the town of Lynch, which was a US steel mining operation, and

they had four to five thousand people, Benham three to four thousand and

Cumberland was around four thousand. So that was the total population. Now,

having informed

the audience of that, tell me how much interaction there was or was not up

through your junior year with students in those other two towns, Lynch and Cumberland.

HERN:There really wasn’t any. Sports. Everybody was avid about their sports

teams winning. And you didn’t even think really in terms of dating, or

socializing in any respect. If I ended up doing so, it was through one of my

mother’s clubs that would involve daughters being brought in, you know, to do

the same. But you would be polite and you would interreact, but you wouldn’t

make plans to get together again.

CURRIS:That simply wasn’t part of the culture. It was very closed within

Benham. In terms of your social, your sports, and all those particular

types of things. I would like to ask you, when you think back about your

schooling, when you’re in high school, what’s your favorite singer?

HERN:Elvis.

CURRIS:No question.

HERN:No question.

CURRIS:When you were in high school, who were your favorite teachers?

HERN:There was Walter Dick.

CURRIS:What did he teach?

HERN:He taught algebra, trigonometry, geometry. There was Jenny Robinette. And--

CURRIS:--and what did she teach?

HERN:She taught typing, shorthand. And then we had two others to come there

that had previously lived and gone to school there. One was Kenny Cole, and we

were very excited about him because he was so young and he was just fun. And

Patsy Patton came back to teach physiology and anatomy

and I wasn’t quite sure what all of that was, but we felt like we had to take

that class because of her.

CURRIS:When it came to both of them, tell us about Kenny Cole and being in his

class. What type of classes was he teaching?

HERN:He taught chemistry, and we only had chemistry for one year, and luckily

we were lucky to get him, and he taught just basic chemistry for most of the

year. And then we went into a different type of chemistry where you had to give

the symbols for salt and things such as that. And I can remember one day in

particular, the class started and Mr. Cole walked into the room and he said, “Larry.”

CURRIS:Larry who?

HERN:Larry Flannery. He said,

“Larry, how do you make antifreeze?” And Larry said, in response, “Take all of

her clothes off!” To which the class erupted into guffaws, including Mr. Cole.

(laughs) He had to compose himself to bring the class back to order. And of

course, when we left class, everybody wanted to know what we were laughing about.

CURRIS:Well, what was Mr. Cole’s response to Larry other than laughing hysterically?

HERN:That was it. And then--

CURRIS:Did he then turn around and tell them what the answer was?

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:What did he say?

HERN:Well, I just remember that Larry, Larry was very, a very good student, and

he finally, when the class settled down, gave the--I keep saying symbol, but

that’s not the word--

CURRIS:--formula--

HERN:--formula for what he had asked for.

CURRIS:Was it like -----------(??)?

HERN:He probably would’ve been killed

if he hadn’t come up with the right formula. (laughs)

CURRIS:And what about Ms. Patton? Patsy Patton.

HERN:Ms. Patton.

CURRIS:Well, now, what grades were you when these two students--faculty members--arrived?

HERN:Probably sophomore/junior--I would say since my junior year, after the

junior year, the school closed. But Ms. Patton just really introduced us to

knowledge we had never had before in studying the human body. And I can remember

one time our assignment was to go home and with whatever materials we wanted to

use, we were to design the atom and show where the proton and the neutron was,

and then come back and the next day, and each of us had to stand up and show our

project and explain it. Well, there was one student in particular

who was very artistic named David Hickey, and he had heated up hangers, metal hangers.

CURRIS:Clothes hangers.

HERN:Yes. And he had just done a beautiful job, the best there. We also had a

guy named Charles Schubert who had made his out of--what do you clean--pipe

cleaners? Yes. And Charles’ looked like he had backed out of--backed over it

with his car. But anyway, Charles got up and showed his as well. So then Ms.

Patton decided to have a contest, and we were to vote on who had the best. Well,

now you had to remember there was this girl who was my best friend named Carolyn

Cornett, and Carolyn’s word was law. And Carolyn said

to me, “Pass the word to pick Schubert’s.” (laughs) So I said, “Okay.” So I

passed the word. Everybody picked Schubert’s. So Ms. Patton was not aware of

this. So when it came time to--Hickey, just a few people held up their hand.

When it came time for Charles Schubert’s to be done, the rest of us held up our

hands. So Schubert won, and Patsy Patton was livid. (laughs)

CURRIS:So David Hickey should have won.

HERN:David should have won, because I mean, he really, no matter what David did

artistically, he did it very well. Yes.

CURRIS:So what did that teach you about human nature, if nothing else?

HERN:Not to count on a thing. Yeah, pretty much. (laughs) And that people will

turn on you.

CURRIS:And that one person can absolutely--

HERN:--rule the roost. Yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:Why did Carolyn have such sway

over the class of approximately how many students at this point, still thirty?

HERN:Yes. Carolyn went to Catholic school for the first six years and then came

to Benham. And there was just something about Carolyn that was different. There

was a mischievous there--mischieviousness that we came to admire, and she would

think of things like that. I can remember Robert Wilson came up to her one day

and he had had to buy some groceries for his mother, and he had bought some

eggs, and he held one in his hand, and he said, “You want an egg?” And she

crushed the egg in his hand--(laughs)--and we all just thought that was just too

famous. And of course, Robert went after her and she took off running. But

Carolyn just did the different things like that. And actually too,

the federal boys came into town one day.

CURRIS:Who are the federal boys?

HERN:The FBI, looking for stills.

CURRIS:Looking for--oh, stills--stills for making moonshine.

HERN:That’s it.

CURRIS:Alright.

HERN:And her father sent her across this field, running across this field and

up this hill to warn a neighbor who had a still to shut it down and get out of

there because the feds knew about him. And I’ve asked Carolyn in these later

years, I said, “You’ve told your grandchildren that?” And she said, “Yeah, they

think I’m nuts.”

CURRIS:So, it was a colorful upbringing.

HERN:Oh, absolutely.

CURRIS:Did you realize it was colorful at the time?

HERN:Well, I realized she was unique.

CURRIS:Carolyn, but not necessarily that your lifestyles were all that.

HERN:Oh, no. I just assumed mine was just

like anybody else’s throughout the nation.

CURRIS:I want to ask you, when you take a look now, who was most in this from

grade school, we’ll say forward. Who was most impactful on your life?

HERN:Well, through grade school it was a girlfriend named Anna Vera Rogers. And

Anna Vera could do no wrong with me. And I sought out her advice and thoughts on

various and sundry topics to which at the dinner table, I would relay them and

my father would look at me and say, “And who told you that? Anna Vera?” (laughs)

Of course I would say, “Yes, she did.” But my parents that whatever Anna said

I’d listen to.

CURRIS:That was part of being in

primary school.

HERN:Yeah, and having your best friend.

CURRIS:And so then Carolyn Cornett was your best friend in--

HERN:Yeah. Carolyn came along.

CURRIS:--in junior high school.

HERN:And I remember the guy, she later married, he thought that to impress her,

he would go over and shove her.

CURRIS:Go over and what?

HERN:Shove her.

CURRIS:Oh, shove her, push her.

HERN:And she turned around and took her fist and knocked it into him. Well, I

think it was love from there on. They married and spent the rest of their lives

together. But I mean, nobody else would’ve hit someone like that. So there you go.

CURRIS:Well, when it comes to--we were talking about your faculty members and

the students and so forth. Let’s make a little switch and go to the adult side

of life. What was the impact of your parents on you?

HERN:Their word was final, but I always felt like that if I asked a question, I

got an educated answer. (pauses) Very much so.

CURRIS:Well, now your father was from--our father--was from New York state.

HERN:Correct.

CURRIS:And what is your memory of the story as to how he came to Benham?

HERN:Well, first of all, his father was killed when he was very young--at four

years old--somewhere around there. And so Mother Hern

had to take over taking care of the family from there. At any rate, one night,

one of his brothers, Charles Ray Hern, told his mother, “I’m going out. I’ll be

back at eleven.” And then two years later, she hears from him and he’s in the

coal mines of Kentucky area. And he got information that a job was becoming

available to manage a credit union. And he called dad because it was during the

Depression years and jobs just weren’t available. And he asked Dad if he wanted

to come down and consider doing that. So dad said, “Yes. Yeah, I will come.” And

I used to kid dad, because I said, “Dad, there was just one street here. When

you came through, you had to come through at night, otherwise you wouldn’t have

stopped.” (laughs)

CURRIS:What did he say about that?

HERN:I got a little lecture on my saying that, if I can remember. I think he

said that I had gotten above my raising, but I just said it to be mischievous

because I loved growing up in Benham.

CURRIS:Well, tell us about your mother--our mother.

HERN:Yeah. Well, as you have always said, mom was always there and there wasn’t

much Mom didn’t do. When she was at home and not working, she was canning and

gardening, cooking, keeping house--you know, just what I guess a lot of people

in that area did. Canning of the food in order to have fresh food. Plus, I think

there was a financial advantage to

storing up like that. And she loved to can, and so did dad. Then I decided I

wanted to make some money, so dad said, “Well, how would you like to raise a

hundred chickens?” And so I said, “Fine.” So he had all of the setup to store

the chickens in--

CURRIS:The brooder, the equipment.

HERN:--yeah, yeah. And when they came, they were cute little things that you

could hold in your hand. I just thought they were darling. But then as they

started growing up, I didn’t think they were very attractive to look at until

they really got full grown. But any rate, I raised a hundred chickens. I sold

fifty to a neighbor, Bruner Gillum, who wanted them, and then our family had to

kill the other fifty

and put them in the freezer. I couldn’t eat chicken for two years after that. It

just--I mean, I couldn’t stand the smell of feathers or anything. It was just

wet feathers at that. It was just--(laughs)--

CURRIS:How much money did you make on your chickens?

HERN:Oh, ten dollars that I spent on a chemistry set that was advertised in the

back, probably of Good Housekeeping or Better Homes, or one of those. And I

wasn’t quite sure what a chemistry set was, but I was sure I needed to find out.

And so off I sent my money, and eventually it came in and I hadn’t had

chemistry. Well, I was still what, in grade school, or at least junior high. So

I hadn’t entertained that as a subject, but I would mix things together and see

if anything would happen, and nothing ever did. So I just--(laughs)--

CURRIS:--disappointed--

HERN:--disappointed. To heck with that. Yeah. Moved on.

CURRIS:When it came to Mother, what was her role within the community? What

were her community relationships like?

HERN:Well, she was always busy and involved. She was with the Woman’s Club,

Beta Sigma Phi.

CURRIS:What’s -----------(??)?

CURRIS:Garden Club.

HERN:Garden Club, that’s right. And they would have events in parks in

Cumberland, and you know, she would always work a booth, take a cake, whatever

was needed. Excuse me. And she just always joined in. I can remember that.

CURRIS:Do your memories include her involvement, major involvement in starting

the Youth Center?

HERN:Oh, yes, yes.

CURRIS:Tell us about that.

HERN:That was fun. They decided--because what we did for entertainment was we’d

borrow--if we had a car or borrowed from our parents and we’d drive up to--there

were two drive-ins. Actually, there were three at--Louie and Helen’s was the

first one. And then you went on down to the Pine View, and I can’t remember the

name of the other. But any rate, you go down there and get hamburgers and French

fries and just hang out with the kids. So they decided they needed someplace for

the kids to go and have a jukebox to dance. And so the old theater there in

Benham was no longer being used.

CURRIS:Do you remember who owned those theaters?

HERN:Not the one in Benham.

CURRIS:The Isaac family.

HERN:Oh, they owned that one too?

CURRIS:Yes. The Isaac family owned theaters in Cumberland, Benham and

Whitesburg.

HERN:Oh.

CURRIS:So the Benham Theater was an Isaac theater originally.

HERN:Okay.

CURRIS:Go ahead.

HERN:So anyway, the men in the communities, everybody took a job and they

refurbished it and got us a jukebox. And we would go there every Friday and

Saturday night and just hang out. It was almost like a Fonzie thing, but it was

just great fun. [Editor’s note: Fonzie was a television character on the show

Happy Days during the 1970s.] You were just hanging out because you were just

talking to your friends and dancing. You had a lot of trouble getting the

boys--a lot of the mountain boys--to dance because they did not. But it was just

a fun time always.

CURRIS:Were there ever any discipline problems?

HERN:Very few. Very few. And of course, if you had a ball game like on a

Friday, or Saturday night, then the

Youth Center would open after that and you would go down there and celebrate or

lament the loss.

CURRIS:I don’t know if you’re aware of this, but do you happen to remember the

name of the woman who was the chaperone for so many years?

HERN:Granny Robinette.

CURRIS:Who was the mother of Jennie Robinette, the teacher you mentioned earlier.

HERN:And Danny and Bunny.

CURRIS:Were her other children.

HERN:Um-hm.

CURRIS:It seems that she had a switch at the Youth Center or some form of

communication to the police department, which was just, you know--

HERN:--two steps away--

CURRIS:--two steps away. And if she flipped that switch, they were there.

HERN:Yes. I never saw that happen.

CURRIS:Well, see, there was--I agree, there was very little problem, but at the

same time that had been set up. I don’t know whether you realize that they--

--the group that had designed the concept of the Youth Center put in that big

floor that covered up the Youth--the whole theater for the dance floor. Move

forward to current times of approximately 2022-2023, that has been removed now

and returned to an original theater. And the acoustics are so good there that

they bring in a lot of singing groups.

HERN:Fabulous. I had heard that that had occurred but I have yet to go there

and attend anything.

CURRIS:When we are talking about our mother being so involved. Let’s go back to

dad and the community. Now, what are your memories of him as manager of the

Credit Union?

HERN:Well, I would always go to see him after school before I went on to my

grandmother’s. And he would hold Credit Union meetings once a year, in which if

you were a member, you were invited to the meeting.

CURRIS:The annual meeting.

HERN:The annual meeting. And if you came, you got a silver dollar. And then

there were other gifts that they would draw names for. And, you know the whole

town came out to get a silver dollar. I mean, that, you know, that was just

uniquely different.

CURRIS:Well, did you have any involvement in the annual meetings?

HERN:Yes, oftentimes I was standing there with the box of silver dollars and

handing them out as they came by.

CURRIS:And where was this held?

HERN:In the Benham gymnasium. Benham High school gymnasium. Yeah.

CURRIS:When you’re talking about gifts for drawing,

it’s my memory that we are talking about hams and turkeys.

HERN:Well, I remember radios and irons later on and that kind of thing, but you

could not leave the meeting and your name be drawn and still receive the gift.

You had to stay through the meeting and at the end they give the gifts away. And

so you had to stay to get it.

CURRIS:But this was a huge social event.

HERN:Absolutely.

CURRIS:As well as being a business event, as this would be the time that the

coal miners who were members of the Credit Union would elect their board of

directors and other officers.

HERN:I don’t remember that, but that probably was.

CURRIS:And when we were talking about these, do you remember any of the stories

of any of the meetings in terms of people

asking questions?

HERN:I remember one in particular. This man got up and he went on for about ten

minutes with his question, or it seemed that way. And he used these humongous

words that nobody had ever heard before. And after he finished it, Walter Dick

stood up and said, “Could you repeat that?” And everybody burst into laughter.

And Pat Sturgill had been the one at that time.

CURRIS:And who was he? He was the director.

HERN:Well, he was one of the board members. That’s all I know.

CURRIS:Okay.

HERN:Anyway, he had been the one that the question had been directed to, and he

didn’t know the answer. And so he referred to my father and said, “Can you come

out and help us with this answer?” And my father came out and leaned

over into the microphone and said, “It’s illegal.” And then just turned around

and walked back to wherever he was. (laughs) And my dad was oftentimes of few

words, but they hit home.

CURRIS:That is so typical of the type of event that would evolve in that type

of social setting. One thing that I think our audience might like to know is

that the Walter Dick who asked him to repeat--

HERN:The question.

CURRIS:--was the math teacher at Benham. And he was so excellent and superior.

He could have worked anywhere in the United States, however he was from there,

and he wanted to come back and share his knowledge and was extremely valuable

member of the community and an exceptional teacher that I think

all of us remember

HERN:Well and everybody just adored him. And I remember one time Dr. Powell,

who was the principal at Benham, and everybody loved Dr. Powell as well.

Evidently money was being reduced on teachers’ needs to teach a class. And so

Dr. Powell requested of every teacher to make a list of what they were going to need.

CURRIS:So you’re talking about supplies.

HERN:Supplies. Mr. Dick sent in “chalk and a string”. (laughs) And Dr. Powell,

he went to him and said, “Are you telling me to teach algebra, trigonometry--,”

and what was the one before trig, “--geometry

that you only need chalk and a string?” And he said, “Yeah, that’s pretty much

it.” (laughs) And so I’m sure he got his supplies. (laughs)

CURRIS:Tell us about principal, Dr. Powell.

HERN:Dr. Powell I think was one of the first examples of a very educated man

and someone with class. Now, I may not have known about class at that age, but I

knew he was something special and had it. And just to give you the--I mean, and

the students adored him--and he gave us a lecture on being loud because at lunch

break, when you’d come back, we’d be in the hallways and it’s like the

restaurants today, you can’t hear the person across the table saying anything.

And he was just saying

that it wasn’t necessary to be that loud. Well, we evidently listened, but we

didn’t take it in. And one day right after that, we were all in the hallway and

it was so loud, it was just obnoxious. And we were on the second floor of the

high school, and Dr. Powell walked up the steps and he stood at the end. And as

the students became aware of him, everybody, it was just like everybody down the

hallway stopped talking until they got to the end, and then you could have heard

a pin drop. He didn’t say one word to us. He had accomplished what he needed,

and he turned and walked back downstairs to his office. He was just always

impressive, and he was very warm and caring.

CURRIS:We were exceedingly fortunate to have had Dr. Powell.

For the audience, when you were at Benham, you were frequently given a nickname

if you were liked. Now, if you weren’t liked, you didn’t get a nickname, or if

you did, it was not very nice. But there were two people in the school who

deserved the term “mitter” rather than mister. So it was Mitter Powell and

Mitter Dick. And that was very special to the students. Now, of course, when

they were talking to them directly, it was mister.

HERN:Certainly.

CURRIS:But when it was amongst themselves and talking, it was Mitter Powell and

Mitter Dick. And it is interesting how in those particular days, it was only

important that you be recognized as so special with a nickname. And I don’t

know whether that same type of community thought and spirit exists today, but

for us it was very special.

HERN:Oh, yes, yes.

CURRIS:Well, now you have frequently referred to your father as your hero. Tell

us how you--why you think that.

HERN:Well, this may be father-daughter relationships, but if I asked my father

a question, I always got an educated answer. And I don’t ever remember my father

being wrong about anything. And he was very well read. He was always reading

(clears throat) and just seeking out knowledge of just about any sort. And if I

wanted something and it was rational, he tried to see to it that I got it.

For instance, my friend Carolyn, she owned a cabin down the river, so to speak,

and I thought we should, I thought I should have a cabin as well to spend the

night in and that kind of thing. Well, and after considering that he had put in

a special wide oak floors in the house, he thought he might save those if he did

build me a cabin. So he did, and we used to have a great time.

CURRIS:How did he build that cabin?

HERN:What do you call those things, from the railroad ties? Yeah, from the

railroad ties he did. Yes. I don’t think he built it by himself, did he? No. He

probably had help with that. He would’ve had to. Yeah. And then we would have

cookouts and all sorts of things.

CURRIS:I remember a fireplace inside

and the L&N, who owned the railroad, to kind of supplement your story, were

replacing the old railroad ties with new ones. And so dad asked L&N, whomever,

could he have those old ties? And that’s how he had the railroad ties to build

the party cabin, which was really fairly large.

HERN:Um-hm. We had beds in it.

CURRIS:And his poker parties that were there. Let’s go to other important women

in your lives. I know you have frequently talked about your grandmother, Mother

Parker, mother’s mother, who did not want to be called grandma. She wanted

to be called Mother Parker, and then her sister, Leona.

HERN:Aunt Leona.

CURRIS:Tell us about your relationship to them and some of their history.

HERN:Well, Mother Parker, my grandmother, I would go to her house every day

after school because of--and wait there for dad to finish working to come and

get us and take us home. I just remember that she cooked on a wood stove or

coal, and she could bake in it. There wasn’t anything she couldn’t do. And she

would even have green beans hanging over it to dry the green beans.

CURRIS:Shucky beans.

HERN:Shucky beans, yes. And now when we go back for the reunions, there’s

always packages of shucky beans given as prizes, and peoples really seemingly

want to get those

because when you’re out in the rest of the nation, you don’t hear about shucky

beans. And I remember too, Mother Parker knew how to make soap. She washed most

of her clothes in a tub with a tub board.

CURRIS:Scrub board.

HERN:Scrub board and she would put her clothes, once they were washed, she

would dampen them and then put them in the refrigerator to chill because they

ironed better. Well, and she canned too. And she had a garden behind her house,

strawberries and things. And it was always a work of art because she would have

things like sawdust around them, each plant, and she just treated them like they

were her children. But my grandmother,

anytime she went to church or anything, she always looked beautiful. She really

did look beautiful. She took a lot of care. And I remember that--because you

didn’t have a lot of money back then--anything that was prized, like nylons you

wanted to take care of. And she would put on gloves to put on her nylons. And I

remember that, and I thought that was neat.

CURRIS:Quilting.

HERN:Yeah, she did quilting and she crocheted. Women came to her to find out

how she grew her African violets because all of theirs seemingly died and Mother

Parker just had a whole table full of them. And I would sit there and listen to

them talk about these African violets, and I would think, “How can you go on for

all this time about the African violet?” (laughs) But

seeing how so many people had difficulty in raising them, that was the reason.

CURRIS:Did you know that she had created an African violet that was named for her?

HERN:I did not know that. Well, good for her.

CURRIS:I have no idea whether one still exists. But her--but in those days, a

woman went by her husband’s name, so she was Mrs. Parker, Mrs. Charlie Parker.

And recently I was showing one of the Benham cookbooks to others. And one of the

feature that struck one of the men the most was that all the women were a

missus. Only seeing women listed their own name and wanted to know about that.

And I explained that that was very much the case--

HERN:Very prevalent.

CURRIS:Yes. In those days.

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:This was before women had major careers outside the home. What do you

remember in terms of women working outside the home?

HERN:Well, Mother Parker, she did have a dress shop. She decided to try that

for a while. I don’t remember how long she stayed in business, but I think she

enjoyed getting out away from the home and doing something different. You know,

you get tired of anything, especially housekeeping. And the fact to had that

opportunity, which she made for herself was something.

CURRIS:Because most of the other women in that era, in that time, and we’re

talking about the late fifties, very early sixties, what positions would they

hold in the community?

HERN:Well, there would be teaching,

nursing. There would be--they would work as clerks in retail, possibly at the

theater, a movie theater. Hairdressers.

CURRIS:Were you aware of, in today’s world, seeing a woman doctor, lawyer?

HERN:Never. Never even heard of it. Not in those early days.

CURRIS:So there was no expectation.

HERN:No expectation. And really, truly, I had the feeling it just wasn’t allowed.

CURRIS:There was a lot of truth to that. What about Aunt Leone?

HERN:Well, Aunt Leone was also married to a coal miner, Uncle Silas.

And when I was just a little thing, a little toddler, they would ask my parents

if I could come up and spend the night with them. And I always loved doing it

because they paid me so much attention. And we had at that time, the red truck

that would go down the alleys and in between people’s homes to bring actually a

small grocery store to their home. And they had everything on there from milk to

chocolate to ice cream.

CURRIS:Vegetables.

HERN:Vegetables, yeah. Probably cleaning products. And so Aunt Leona would

always give me some money and let me go out and buy something off the red truck.

And that was such a treat because where we lived, nobody came up there and we

lived on the side of one of those hills. And so it was sort of like a little

adventure for me.

CURRIS:When you talk about the red truck and it’s a little moving grocery store

for all practical purposes, I think the audience would find it interesting to

know that there was a Big Store in Benham and there was a meat market, but when

it came to buying vegetables and canned goods, then you had to go to Cumberland.

HERN:That’s right.

CURRIS:To the grocery store there, because it just simply wasn’t available.

HERN:That’s right. And the big store and the meat market were owned by the

company, International Harvester. Whereas when you went to Cumberland, you’d

have A&P and I can’t remember.

CURRIS:A greater variety.

HERN:Yeah, a greater variety to buy from.

CURRIS:Talking about Mother Parker and Aunt Leone, let’s talk a little bit

about some of the other people in Benham that you have great memories about,

fond memories.

HERN:Well, the first one that comes to mind for me is Goldie King. There was

something about Goldie King that just fascinated me as a young girl.

CURRIS:Now, who was Goldie? Did she work outside the home? Was she a housewife?

HERN:Not to my knowledge. She was married to Bob King who was a coal miner

also. And Mom had had dinner for several of the couples, I would say about five

couples had come on this particular night. And I was sitting there watching from

just the sidelines, and Goldie started talking about fishing. The good thing

about Goldie though, many good things about Goldie, but this, she could out fish

any man in Harlan County and probably the state. And she loved to talk about

fishing, and she was a good cook. She loved to fix it after she caught it.

But this particular night, she was talking about being down there at one of the

TVA lakes [Tennessee Valley Authority] and talking about catching the fish, and

you would see your hands show the size of the fish and everything. The men,

because they so admired her ability to fish just sort of circled around her and

just she held their attention. Oh, and I just could not get over a woman holding

every man’s attention in a room. And I looked at her husband and he was just

smiles ear to ear. He was so proud of her, and I think he was always proud of

Goldie. The other story that I find so sweet is the community was so small. If

somebody were ill, Goldie knew about it. And if they were dying, Goldie would go

sit with them and hold them while they died.

I mean, she just had a warmth and a caring about her. And if my mother couldn’t

have been there, I would’ve wanted Goldie to be there, it’s that kind of thing.

CURRIS:Well, talking about the community, when you were growing up, did you

understand that you were living in a coal mining community?

HERN:I did, but, you know, it was--that was what life was, and I didn’t really

see that my life would stand out as being different from kids in the rest of the

nation. It was just that was our industry.

CURRIS:When it came to the community, we’re talking about Benham being one of

coal mining, so that when it came to the social structure, since most of

the families that are there--in fact, in order to have a house there, they had

to be a miner at International Harvest or an employee of some kind. Did--what

was your view of the community as a whole? How did people get along together or

not? Were there any social differences that you could see in the school amongst

the classmates and so forth?

HERN:There may have been a little clique-ish, but nothing severe. I mean--

CURRIS:--was it clique-ish around just being friends or clique-ish around who

your parents were?

HERN:Clique-ish about--well, about--I don’t know. People would just--groups of

people would hang out together--but if somebody else came up, they weren’t

excluded. You know, if you were standing--if you were down at the Big Store that

Tennessee Ford used to sing about that having a Coke or an ice cream, you know,

you still--you just interreacted with everybody. I didn’t--and the thing about

it is nobody had more than the next guy to a certain degree, and so there wasn’t

anything to really be jealous about, so--but I liked that.

CURRIS:Well, one of the interesting parts about Benham was you had a diversity

of cultures in English, Irish, Hungarian and others, and Lynch particularly had

a very wide Eastern European population. You had churches, everything from snake

handlers to the Catholic church, Jewish folks were there.

Did you ever see any kind of interaction other than just a community working together?

HERN:Day-to-day. No, I didn’t. And mother and dad played bridge, and there were

two or three Jewish families there, and two of them they played bridge with. I

didn’t know they were Jewish. I really wasn’t sure what Jewish would’ve meant

anyway. And I knew about the difference that there were a lot of Eastern

European people there, because I’d always heard that when International

Harvester decided to do this, they sent representatives to Eastern Europe to

find out if any of those people wanted to come to American and mine coal. Well,

we were lucky enough that we had a street

called Hunky Street for the Hungarians, and we were lucky enough that they

brought a man to us named Dave Toth from Hungary, and specifically because he

was a shoe cobbler, and his main job was putting the steel plate in the toe of

the miner’s boot. And that’s why he was brought and set up there in shop. And

the shop was on the ground floor leading up--that led up to the Credit Union

where my father worked. And he was--he had bushy eyebrows and I always thought

he looked like Santa Claus, probably from the National Geographic ads on the

back. [Editor’s note: National Geographic magazine for many years featured

Coca-Cola advertisements on the back page that were an image of Santa Claus

drinking Coca-Cola.] And I would stop by as a grade schooler every day to say

hello to him and impart any wisdom that I think he needed to know from me. And

he was always so gracious and tolerated me, and it had

to be because he was friends with my father, because otherwise I’m not sure he

would have. (laughs)

CURRIS:Well, now the whole mining situation in the entire valley, US Steel,

International Harvester, there was also a large Black population that in those

days, that was the preferred call, preferred name was the Black. Today we often

say African-American, but it’s been very interesting in interviewing the various

components of people who lived in Benham. They are still very determined to be

referenced as Black. That one interview the young woman talked about, “I was

born Black and I’m Black today.” So it’s been very interesting to see how people

in Benham did not have any kind of conflict or animosity that anyone has ever

reported on any of the interviews, what did you see?

HERN:Well, we were segregated at the time, so we did not interreact except on

the street in front of all of what International Harvester owned.

CURRIS:The Big Store.

HERN:The Big Store--

CURRIS:And the hospital.

HERN:--and all that. And I remember Mr. Bob, who--he was a sweetheart. He was

so nice and friendly, always seemingly happy, and he was just a delight to talk to.

CURRIS:It was a unique community.

HERN:It was.

CURRIS:It was a unique time and a unique community. But now let’s leave Benham

for the broader world

in terms of you leaving Harlan County and headed toward a life of surprises and

who knew what. Where did you go from high school? Did you go ahead and did you

at that time seek additional education?

HERN:I started out at the University of Kentucky, and then I came back to their

Southeastern Center in Cumberland to stay a year there. I had a hard time

leaving home, and I loved being home because I just loved being around my mom

and dad. But then after I did that, I realized what Dad was trying to show

me--that I needed to get out in the world. And so I went then to Eastern

Kentucky University, and that’s where I graduated.

CURRIS:What was your degree?

HERN:Sociology and psychology.

CURRIS:And what was

the next step?

HERN:Well, the last year, a girlfriend of mine, Donna Fawbush called me from,

she was at the University of Kentucky, and she called me and she said, “Alice,

in the newspaper, Delta Airlines is hiring stewardesses. Let’s go.” I’m in my

senior year. And I said, “Donna, my parents, this is their dream. All their kids

get a college degree.” I said, “You go on and see if you like it. And then when

I graduate, I’ll see if I can get an interview then, and I’ll come.” And Donna

actually got me my interview. And so I went down.

CURRIS:And this is after you’ve graduated?

HERN:After I graduated, I went down, and then a week after my interview, I got

the letter of acceptance and off I went.

CURRIS:Where did you go?

HERN:To Atlanta, which was Delta’s home base and they trained you there right

on the property of Delta Airlines. And it was just a whole new experience. And I

had only flown twice, once to go see a boyfriend who was in the Army and then to

come down for my interview. And I would say the first six months there were

oftentimes I was sick in the bathroom from the flying, (laughs)--but I stuck

with it, I guess, as much as anything. I didn’t know what else I wanted to do.

CURRIS:Well, you talked about Delta was training you when you’re in Atlanta and

being trained, did you have an apartment?

HERN:They put us up

at a hotel, a block away from general offices.

CURRIS:So Delta is paying for your room?

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:Food?

HERN:I don’t remember.

CURRIS:But your education as well, your training?

HERN:Yes, yes.

CURRIS:Describe that. Tell us a little bit about that.

HERN:Well, we had a house mother, just like at the university. And after

graduating, I thought that I was rather above that, but I needed a job. (clears

throat) Excuse me. And I liked my house mother other, so it was just day in, day

out, going to class. And then on the weekends you would go out and fly on

different planes to see what it was about. And if they weren’t in a real rush to

finish a service or something, they would put you in the aisle with them and

have you work so you could get some idea of what you were getting ready to do.

CURRIS:Well, when it came to your training, what did they say about dress,

manners? What were some of the expectations that Delta had of you if you were

going to be a stewardess?

HERN:Well, first of all, you had to have short hair, and they sent you to the

same--they sent everybody to the same beautician--and she cut your hair the same

way. Nobody got a different haircut. And of course everybody was livid over

that, but you know, you do what the boss wants. And, um. (cleras throat)

CURRIS:When it came to dress?

HERN:Yeah, we had two uniforms. We had a green one for the summer,

and we had a medium blue one for the winter. And the thing that I picked up that

Delta really wanted to impress upon you is you were never rude. You always

listen to what the passenger or customer was saying, and if he was yelling at

you, you just maintained an even voice and that would eventually bring that

customer down to that of being not so loud in registering his complaint. They

had weight check and they encouraged you to wear girdles and you had to check in

once a month to make sure you hadn’t gained weight over a certain amount and you

wore high heels. But on the plane you had flats you could wear to work in,

and they gave everybody a little tote bag. And that was--no smoking. You weren’t

allowed to smoke.

CURRIS:Was that you were never allowed to smoke at all or just on the job?

HERN:You weren’t allowed to smoke on the job and you couldn’t walk around with

a cigarette. You could sit in a restaurant or some such and have a cigarette,

but they were very strict of that. You always had to wear your white gloves.

Once you came off the airplane, the hat had to be on and your gloves.

CURRIS:So it was a standard look. So anyone wearing what you wore, the hat, the

uniform, the white gloves, the high heels, knew that you were a Delta stewardess?

HERN:Correct.

CURRIS:Were there any stewards at this time?

HERN:No, they did not hire men for that department, but they didn’t hire women

to be pilots either.

So there you go.

CURRIS:Change of time.

HERN:Um-hm.

CURRIS:What--when did they first start having--I know today we would call the

person a flight attendant--when you were beginning your career, it was a

stewardess. Tell us about that transition.

HERN:It was funny at times because they would forget that we had a male flight

attendant with us and when we would be doing the procedure for showing you

emergency exits and everything in the aisle as we were taxiing, was on occasion,

they would say, if everyone would direct your attention to the stewardesses and

there stood a man, a young man, and everybody would laugh and so would he.

And some of them would say, “We’re getting used to this,” and go on.

CURRIS:Was that the reason for the change of terminology from stewardess to

flight attendant?

HERN:Yes. Yes.

CURRIS:So when you first were going to school, it was approximately what year

when you were headed to flight school.

HERN:Sixty--nineteen-sixty-seven.

CURRIS:Do you know approximately when they started hiring men as well?

HERN:I don’t. I don’t.

CURRIS:When it came to travel, when you first started, how were you able to

choose your flights? What kind of system did they have that enabled you to

choose a particular flight?

HERN:We had a bidding system. Everybody had a number.

CURRIS:Where did that number come from?

HERN:From training class.

On the last day, you drew a number out of a bowl, I suppose, and that was your

seniority for that class. And then you went over to a different number according

to the rest of the system. And that determined everything, vacations, days off,

what you could hold.

CURRIS:Now, where would you want to fly when you were first flying?

HERN:When I first started, well, I first started flying I was on reserve where

you got called out in the middle of the night. If someone called in sick or

something got rerouted and they needed you to go somewhere.

CURRIS:When it came to the flying and so forth, if you had had

your pick of where you wanted to go, where would you have flown?

HERN:Well, after I’d been there for a while, I realized. And so did everyone

else that you wanted to go to San Francisco, San Diego, LA or Vegas. Now there

probably were those who wanted to go to New York and things like that, but you

got in more hours by flying across the nation.

CURRIS:What difference did that make flying, having more hours?

HERN:Well, it just took less time to have what you needed for the month. You

were limited to eighty-five, but you didn’t always get eighty-five. But the

higher trip values, it meant you weren’t going up and down all day long. One

takeoff, one landing, and that was what we liked. But then it got to be just

where you had the best time once you got there. And girl--

flight attendants, male and female, it was, “Do you want to lay over or do you

want to turn around and be home at night?” And if your seniority, whatever that

could hold, that’s where you would end up.

CURRIS:Define what would happen. The difference between a time being called a

layover as opposed to being just a immediate turnabout, I mean--

HERN:It was just called a turnaround.

CURRIS:Okay.

HERN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay. Was there a particular timeframe that was required for it to be

called a layover?

HERN:You could have if you had eight hours anywhere in the middle of the night

or whatever--I think it was eight and it may have been less--they would get you

a hotel room so you could relax. And then when you started laying over in like

Las Vegas or the California trips, you would usually be there twenty-four

hours. And of course you had a hotel room and Delta always had hotels under

contract and so many rooms per night so that you didn’t have to go in search of

one. And I don’t think all airlines were that way. And then they had the

limo--not limousines--but buses, et cetera, from the hotels that would take you

back and forth.

CURRIS:So what you’re saying, or what I’m hearing is that Delta were taking

care of their employees--

HERN:Yes, very much so.

CURRIS:--when you came to any time--of time away from their base.

HERN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Was that fairly true with the other airlines or would you know?

HERN:I really wouldn’t have a knowledge of that.

CURRIS:Let us jump from the United States to flying internationally. Tell us about

your career flying internationally. When did it approximately start and where

did you go?

HERN:Well, Delta got--the first international route was England--and at that time--

CURRIS:Do you know which airport in England, was it London?

HERN:Gatwick. Not downtown London, Gatwick. And then we would have to be bused

to downtown. And that was miserable because it would take two hours or more, and

then something would happen, like a water main would break. And you wouldn’t

think you were ever going to get there, but you wanted to go downtown. You

didn’t want to stay out by the airport. Nothing was going on there by the

airport except take off and landings type thing. So we would go into London. And

my first time at seeing Harrods, I just could not imagine a store being that

huge. But one time when

I was laying over there, Elizabeth Taylor was playing in Little Foxes and I got

to see her.

CURRIS:Did you see the play?

HERN:Yeah, I went to see the play. We could get tickets at the last moment. It

was that kind of a thing, but it was less population and more--there wasn’t a

competition for things like that. And it was just very exciting to see her and

she was so beautiful.

CURRIS:Well, do you remember your very first flight internationally? Was it to London?

HERN:Yeah. Oh yeah. It would’ve been to London, yes. And at first it was such a

difference of experience as far as serving--the length of time in air and

everything. I really didn’t care for it. So I went back to domestic for a while,

and then one of my friends, Sandra Hope, decided that we had to fly

international, so we got back into

it and then I stayed. I never came away from it. I just adjusted to the time

changes that I was going to feel bad when I got there. I was going to feel even

worse when I got home from the jet lag.

CURRIS:Well, flying internationally versus flying domestically. Did Delta

expect a different set of circumstances, have other expectations of you if you

were flying with international people from other countries as opposed to just an

American domestic flight? Were there any changes there?

HERN:You had to know what to call people like say that were in the religious

field, whether you would call someone father, Your Eminence. And we even had it

down pat to I can remember Monaco, the Prince of Monaco flew with us and we had

a particular name for him, which at the moment, I don’t recall. But yeah, you

had a list of how to address them.

CURRIS:Well, you’re talking about the same prince that married Grace Kelly?

HERN:No, his son.

CURRIS:His son that came.

HERN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, did you have advanced knowledge when you were going to have a

special celebrity or guest on?

HERN:Usually, yeah. The agents usually knew it because a lot of times they

would want to sit in a room close to the gate they were leaving from and have

the privacy, and oftentimes an agent would walk on with them and get them seated

and that type of thing.

CURRIS:

Who were some of the celebrities or others that you--

HERN:One of the most delightful I remember was Ginger Rogers. She was just so

friendly. And there were some that you knew not to--that they wanted to be left

alone. You could pick up on that and so that’s what you did. You gave them their

space. Had Dr. Joyce Brothers on, she was delightful, and she asked me for a

pillow and I opened up this overhead rack where we stored our pillows, and all

of them came out on her, like about twelve. (laughs) But she laughed. She was

very nice about it and didn’t get upset. I had Burt Reynolds and Sally Fields

[Sally Field] on one day, but they

seemingly were unhappy that day. Frankie Lane, the singer, “Mule Train,” it was

one of his famous songs. Before television we used to listen to him sing to us

on the radio. I remember that. But any rate, this was years later and he was

sitting in first class and some of the younger flight attendants were up there

working. So I went up and I said, “You have a very famous singer sitting up

here, and his name is Frankie Lane, and he’s sitting in row seat such and such.”

Well, I went on to the back cabin where I was working, and all of a sudden I

felt this hand grab my arm, and I turned around and it was Mr. Lane. And he

said, “Nobody ever recognizes me anymore.” And I said, “Well, my whole family

loved your singing all of our lives.” And I said, “Of course, I would pick up on

you,” but I mean, he was very gracious.

CURRIS:“Ghost Riders in the Sky.”

HERN:“Ghost Riders in the Sky.” And then of course it was that delightful Telly

Savalas. And he came on with I don’t know how many women, and he came back to

me. I was standing at the back of the cabin of first class, and he picked my

hand up and he kissed it and he said, “I’m terribly afraid of flying.” (laughs)

And I said, “Yes, it shows.” (laughs) And then the guy that played in Hogan’s

Heroes, the lead man, he came on one day and this was 747 days. And he sat in

the very back and he was so cute that I would lean out of the galley and I would

look back at where he was sitting. And every time I did it, he would look up and

catch me looking at him and he would just grin.

But he was just--famously nice people. I’m trying to think. Oh, had Steve Allen

and Audrey Meadows on, and she was so delightful. She was just as warm and

friendly and loved talking to you. Had Larry King on, and he was just like as if

he was sitting there for an interview, he was just Larry King. Flip Wilson I had

on. Very shy, very nice, but very shy. But it was just, it was always a treat

nine times out of ten to have them on. And everybody in the airplane eventually

knew they were there. Oh, and I had Muhammad Ali a couple of times and he

couldn’t have been nicer. And one of the flights, he came up behind the

partition in first class and did

magic tricks for us and he was good at it. He was very good at it, or at least I

thought so I didn’t know any of them, but any rate. But I mean, he was just very

down to earth. Warm.

CURRIS:How does a little girl from Benham, Harlan County, Kentucky, from the

1950s evolve into a stewardess/flight attendant who feels so comfortable

communicating with all these individuals of perceived great stature?

HERN:Yes. Well, I would have to say that before leaving Benham High School, the

coach there, Big Man Davis, one day said, “All right,”

and he knew the school was closing. He said, “Before you leave here and go out

in the world,” he said, “I want to tell you one thing I want you to always

remember.” He said, “Everybody puts their pants on the same way, one leg at a

time, and don’t you ever forget it.” And when that would come home to me, the

most would be if I was working with someone that wasn’t particularly pleasant

and maybe had the put down remarks. And I would think, “You don’t know what I

know.” And then like Richard Boone, I remember he was very shy and he was going

to walk past me and he put his face down. And so I said to him, “I had dinner

with you and the Duke last night.”

CURRIS:Meaning John Wayne?

HERN:Yes. He said, “Which movie?” So I told him and I

said, “And I always enjoy your acting.” And he was very gracious, tolerated me.

But the thing about it is you think that because people are famous, that they

have an assuredness that may be not be there. So when they’re shy, it sort of

throws you. And that went back to that, “Every man puts his pants on the same

way.” We all have those shortcomings.

CURRIS:Well, what a fascinating career you’ve had, Alice. I mean, it’s a long

way from Benham.

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:It’s a long way from Benham. As we start to close out this really great

interview, thank you so much for giving us a touch back to our past, back to

Benham. But tell us some of the countries that you were just automatically

flying to as your career progressed. You started with England.

HERN:And then the next route Delta got was to Ireland.

Loved going to Ireland. Irish people were so friendly. And of course you had all

the Irish pubs, which eventually we would stop in before going to dinner or

whatever, and you could go in and just sit down next to one of them in a booth

and start up a conversation. They were just wonderful, wonderful people. And

then after that, probably Germany, Frankfurt in particular. And then we got

Munich and a couple of other places. And then we got Paris. Well, that was my

very favorite--up until we went to Nice around Monaco and that area. And that

was so delightful to fly there because it was seasonal. We got 48 hours there

and had just really had good times there going to every place and checking it out.

I remember one day I went to a little restaurant on the water. I was with a

friend of mine from England, and he had rented a car. And so we drove up the

coast and we’re sitting there and this waiter comes out and I said, “Avez vous

pommes frites?” And he said, “Lady, we invented pommes frites.”

CURRIS:So, French fries.

HERN:Of course, of course you did. Oh geez. But let’s see, after Paris, well,

Istanbul came in there somewhere and that was so unique. Oftentimes the

restaurants were on top of buildings, and then at a certain hour you would have

the call to prayer and all the temples, somebody would start singing

on a loudspeaker. And it was so just uniquely charming. Something I had never

experienced. And the shopping in Istanbul was wonderful. They had a marketplace.

CURRIS:The Bazaar.

HERN:The Bazaar and it was just like what you saw in the movies. People sitting

having tea in one area, you walk up steps and then you could buy shawls or

anything, like any of the things that they had to do with their life, you could

purchase that too to take home.

CURRIS:What about the jewelry?

HERN:Oh, their jewelry, the gold jewelry, the design. I had never seen designs

like that before, but it--there were so many shops and just one window full

after another. It was way too overwhelming. I never bought any gold jewelry

there. Because I just couldn’t decide on what to go into debt for. (both laugh)

And then we got a route to Greece. The water there was so beautiful. And we took

a boat to one of the other islands to have lunch one day, and it was just

different. And at night you would go down by the water and have dinner and it just--

CURRIS:What did you think of the Greek people?

HERN:Oh, I liked them. They were very friendly, very nice. You dealt mainly

with men. The men were the waiters.

CURRIS:The music?

HERN:Oh, and that music,

yes. I loved that music and people, they would start and people--they would

dance and show us how to do it then you’d get up and make a fool of yourself and

have a great time.

CURRIS:Did you go to the Parthenon?

HERN:Oh yes. And when I went you didn’t have to pay to get in. It was still all

open just there. They hadn’t even considered turning it into a park-like area

where it was sort of walled off with parking places and things like that. And I

can remember I was sitting there and I was talking to one of the Greek men who I

don’t know what had just come by, and I was asking him some questions and he

said, “The thing he worried about the most, he said, you look at Athens now and

how pretty it is.” And he said, “Look over there, one neon sign. And I’m afraid

that’s going to change.”

Well, brother did it. And I was so glad I got to see that when I did. The same

with Hawaii. When I went to Hawaii for the first time, there was the pink Hilton

hotel there and they had gates around it, and you had to have a reservation to

even get in. It was one of the most exquisite, exquisite places I’ve ever been

to. And then that changed. They built shopping centers in over it and there was

no longer the prestige of staying there, I wouldn’t think. But then there was

also Hong Kong. When I went to Hong Kong, it was like San Francisco, a city on

water. And you had the vernacular that would take you up the side of the

mountain. And I don’t even remember

seeing a skyscraper of any type. It was just--and I’ve been so lucky that my

timing of having the life I’ve had during these years to be able to say that I

got to see that at its best.

CURRIS:That is exciting.

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:A long gone era. And you were able to enjoy it at the most.

HERN:Yes.

CURRIS:Well, as we close out the interview, are there other countries that you

visited that you particularly enjoyed?

HERN:Well, we ended, we started getting the South American routes and Argentina

in particular. I loved going there because they had these supper clubs and every

supper club put on a show regarding the tango. And there was also--

they had a play on the first trip over--they were putting on a play about the

history of the tango, which started with the Irish people coming there and how

they did--but I think it was only with men initially. And then the women came in

and it’s sort of watching them dance. And the older the couple is, the better

the tango is because they’ve had all those years to practice. And then you could

go to a type of market on the weekends where people would have the music going

and they’d sell their CDs and they’d do the tango for you there on the street. I

mean, it was just fun. It was uniquely fun to experience that. And the tango is

such a beautiful dance. It’s so romantic and passionate.

And a lot of the people, like at the supper shows when they would finish doing

the tango, they would turn to the audience and look at them like, “No applause?”

And some would even hold out their hands like, “Are you all awake?” And of

course we loved that too. It was wonderful. Food was wonderful. Like in

Argentina, I had one of the best steaks ever had. And then I think there was

where I was introduced to a wine, Malbec, which is very popular now in the

United States to be brought here. It was just fabulous.

CURRIS:What a career. Quite an absolute career. Having listened to your

comments and having really not known much of what you have commented about, one

of the pieces that I seem

to be hearing is that it was the foundation of who you were that was formed in

Benham that let you proceed to such an interesting life with a real sense of

joy. Is that true or am I wrong about that observation?

HERN:No, because mom and dad took us traveling all our lives and everybody has

their wishes. And so when a lot of my girlfriends were getting married and

wanting to have babies, I just didn’t want--I wanted adventure and I wanted to

be entertained, and I lucked out. And I don’t know why. God’s grace is the only

thing I can think of.

CURRIS:Well, it certainly worked.

HERN:It worked.

CURRIS:It certainly worked.

Well, Alice, I want to thank you for taking this time to do the interview to

help us understand a little more about Benham from the perspective of a young

girl of the fifties and sixties and her life. And I just want you to know that

your thoughts and the love that you are expressing for so much of your history

is now reserved for posterity and will be stored at the University of Kentucky

and will be, in part, a portion of what is happening at the Robert B. Hern and

Pauline Hern Financial Center at the Benham City Council Room, which hopefully

will be open sometime in 2024. Thank you very much.

HERN:Thank you for letting me participate.

[End of interview.]