BOYD:And so, Nicholas Jamerson, I'm gonna let you tell me a little bit about yourself.

JAMERSON:Well, I was born in Louisville, Kentucky. Raised in Eastern Kentucky, Floyd County. My early years was like Floyd Park, Letcher County. I'm the oldest of four children. Nicholas, Emily, Clay, and Joseph. Recently, I've been going through a lot of old home movies, and it's just reminded me of a lot of, like just the music that I was immersed in from just day one, pretty much. Um, always, always like around music. Um, and, uh, sports, sports was like--my, my grandfather played at Kentucky. Um, my dad was a coach.

BOYD:What did he play?

JAMERSON:He played football.

BOYD:Oh, football.

JAMERSON:Yeah. He was on this team.

BOYD:Oh, wow. What was his name?

JAMERSON:Shorty Jamerson.

BOYD:Shorty Jamerson.

JAMERSON:Wilbur Shorty Jamerson played for Bear Bryant at Kentucky.

BOYD:Have you ever looked in the archive for anything?

JAMERSON:No.

BOYD:We'll have to do that.

JAMERSON:Yeah, I would love that. Yeah, he went here. That's where he met my grandmother here.

BOYD:Shorty was nicknamed for what?

JAMERSON:Wilbur.

BOYD:Wilbur, okay.

JAMERSON:Wilbur Shorty Jamerson, because he was five nine, 160 pounds. Yeah, so, him, my grandmother, my aunt, my aunt Mary Osborne, they all went here, and--to UK. And I was around them, you know, when I go through, like, my family archive, I'm just surrounded by people of that era. A lot of aunts and uncles and great aunts and uncles and my great grandmother and I just feel like part of me is like rooted in that time, you know, like just this like pre-World War era of people that kind of, you know, essentially crawled out of the mud, you know. That, that, that's such a strong foundation of, of who I feel like I am is, is those kinds of people that, you know, pre capital, you know, capitalistic America, like they're just trying to live their life and--so much was about gathering, you know, about being together. That's the thing that I think when I see these videos, it's like, "Wow, we were together a lot." And there's no cell phones. There's--it's all just like presence. And so, I feel like I've spent the latter half of my life trying to, find that in a new way, you know, because they're all gone, and--

BOYD:It's not happened naturally these days.

JAMERSON:No.

BOYD:Isn't it?

JAMERSON:I think there's just so much other distraction, so many other things going on. And yeah, I mean, it's been interesting because I feel like in, in the--as life has--you know, I think modern day, you--especially in small towns, and maybe it's always been this way of, you go to school, you get the job, you move out, you move away, and you're pursuing a job, usually money, you know? You know, I went to school and I moved here and I started playing music. And in the process, you know, the old home place in that time deteriorated and it wasn't there, it's not there anymore. And by the time I could--was like old enough to realize like, "Oh, shoot," you know, "Maybe I need to foster this or nurture this," it was, it was just too late. You know, like, the, the squatters had got it and the kudzu was, was, was, you know, eating the house and--(sighs)--you know, it's just like, things like that have to be preserved and it just gave me a--it's not just like life--it, it doesn't just happen. Like you have to show up and, like I said, nurture those things. And so, I kind of feel like I'm in this re--Like, I'm trying to have my version of that, you know. I'm trying to really--at this point in my life, after just finishing this tour and--I feel like I've been really mission-based in my life, like just really driven for what my goals were and what--I think it comes back to my sports background, just super driven and focused.

JAMERSON CONTD.:But I think what has happened in that process is that--and it's always, I think, the struggle or balance of pursuing anything is your relationships, you know. Your relationships suffer, I think, or they can. Trying to shift to like more relationship-focused. And, you know, as we enter the holiday season, it's like, yeah, it's really, it's about, you know, like this past weekend at the get-down, it's like I was trying to soak in the people, the, the hang before and after and like this is the only--this is like a time that we can all be together. And, um, you know, just growing up, music, that's what it always was, was like we gather and we play music. It was like these things that went hand-in-hand, and I think like now, you know, I think I heard someone say the other day like cell phones are like cig--like the modern-day cigarette, like you can like just take a break on your cell phone and--

BOYD:Yeah--

JAMERSON:But back then it was like, well, if you don't want to talk, you can just go over in the corner and play or, you know. We, I just remember watching my, my grandparents, they would pass out these like song books, so if you didn't know the song, you could, you could, you could follow along, you know.

BOYD:That's brilliant.

JAMERSON:Yeah. Yeah, my grandmother would just set up the camera in the corner. And I have like just, I have tapes of three hours of there just people sitting around, playing, like, passing songs around.

BOYD:So, those were documented?

JAMERSON:Yeah.

BOYD:Somebody documented those? That's fantastic.

JAMERSON:Yeah, my grandmother, she--she always had a camera and was always documenting. And I really felt like, it's so funny watching videos as a kid, because we're like, you know, she's just enamored by us grandkids. And, you know, then we're like, "Let's watch the tape. Let's watch the tape." And looking back to those tapes, it just made me feel like she, there was so much gravity, you know. Off air, you were talking about soaking it up and really grasping like children and raising kids. I felt that from her, that it was like, this is important, what we're experiencing right here. This moment is really important and I wanna like document this and remember this forever. And I feel like that really at my core is, sort of my philosophy, I guess, with songwriting, is it's a document--it's a documentation of a moment in time. And it's saying, hey, this moment, this feeling, this thought is worth writing down and sharing. And it all comes back, I feel like, to those home movies. Because, yeah. She'll have a camera up of us just, you know, all the grandkids just jumping in the pool. You know? And screaming and fighting at each other. And so--

BOYD:That's fantastic.

JAMERSON:Yeah, I'm really thankful for it.

BOYD:I didn't come from a family of document--documenters. And I remember, for the first time, my uncle sent us a bunch of film that he wanted me to digitize, because I'm the archivist and I know how to do it. And so, I get this film digitized from my uncle. And it was my grandfather that went through a phase where he was carrying one around. Um, never around when we were around that I could remember. And I'm--I digitize these things, and I'm going through it, and right there I saw myself for the first time. I had never seen myself until the era of cell phones on moving image. Like--

JAMERSON:Yeah.

BOYD:You know. So, none of my childhood was on that. And I'm watching this, and here I am like probably, you know, a year-and-a-half old.

JAMERSON:Wow.

BOYD:And I'm just--just start weeping. It was really wild to see that. But you have the opposite. And wow, what--not to get nerdy on you, but what format did your grandmother shoot on?

JAMERSON:It was just videotape.

BOYD:So, VHS?

JAMERSON:Like VHS.

BOYD:Is it the little ones or the--

JAMERSON:The big ones.

BOYD:The big ones? So, you get those all digitized?

JAMERSON:Uh, in the process of it. I did a lot of that last winter.

BOYD:Good.

JAMERSON:And then I thought that I'd gone through most of it. And then my dad has pulled out some new stuff. Yeah, a new layer of it. And you talk about seeing yourself, you know, it's--I think that, yeah, it's important, I think, to stay in touch with that side of yourself, your roots and your core and who you were before the world got a hold of you. And it's like this, I call it like achy nostalgia, where it's like, oh, man. It hurts because it's not that way anymore. A lot of those people aren't there anymore. But it's sweet because it's like, oh yeah, that's who I am, and that's where I came from. Musically, in particular, like the last week, you know, I think that I'm always trying to like stay in touch or reinvent my purpose of like, why do I do what I do? Because I--I've been very fortunate to have made a living doing what I do for fifteen years, like playing music strictly for fifteen years, and feeling pretty comfortable, you know. I don't need--I don't really have like a big living expense, you know, so I've--but I don't have to like really worry about work or anything like that. So, you know, money's not like my reason for doing a lot of the things that I do. You know, sometimes having a family, you're just like, "Yeah, it's a good payday. I'm going to go do it." But I feel like if you don't--and what I do as an entrepreneur, as someone that's outside of corporate USA, as someone who's also not trying to necessarily, like, pursue mainstream success. Like, I'm open to it, but I'm not like, I'm not, I'm not really like in the Nashville ecosystem. I've been a part of this thing in Kentucky the last twenty years of my life, trying to create something, be a part of something different. But with that, you know, there's no like direct return a lot of times, and it's just up and down. And so, it has, the process for me is like what drives me.

BOYD:Yeah.

JAMERSON:And--but even then, you can get lost and, you can just get lost in it. And with these videos, I've just been like, like I said before, I've been seeing myself as a two-year-old. and my aunt is like talking to my great uncle, and she's like, "Yeah, Nicholas is in the basement playing drums, and he always asks for Kentucky music. And if it's not fast enough, like, he's like, 'Faster.'" And I was like, man. Like I was just, you know, I'm not thinking about anything at that age, I'm just like talking, and like it's pure, just--and I was like, wow. Like I was already like sort of leaning towards this. And it kind of goes on in the video. And it's my grandmother's sixtieth birthday. And everybody's gathering, playing music. And I'm just like--(claps hands)--I'm two years old, like, just clapping along and dancing. And I grab my harmonica. And I'm playing. And I'm like, "Faster, faster!" And just watching that, it just, I was like, wow. Like, maybe this is what I'm supposed to be doing. Maybe it is, and I'm not just--because I feel like I have, you know--I just always have to reckon with that. Of like, why am I doing this? Is this feeding my ego? Am I pursuing like these superficial things? And--but music has just always moved me, and, and it's always been a thing of like, that was side-by-side with gathering and belonging, more importantly. Of like, I just remember being in my great-grandmother's living room, surrounded by all these people that are this warmth of togetherness, you know, and belonging. And that's it for me. That's what I feel like music, at the core of it, is what I want out of it, is just the togetherness. And it's hard when it's your job, too. (laughs) You know? When you're also trying to make a living and those lines get blurred. And so--

BOYD:Well, I saw you for the first time on Saturday night at The Burl. And, a couple observations; one of those was, I felt like, now that you said it out loud, I felt like you were up there being like, "Faster, faster--" (Jamerson laughs) You know, like the night. Like I felt that.

JAMERSON:At times for sure.

BOYD:That's really interesting. But I also felt you were really--and I want to talk about this tour, but like--you're really good at working the crowd.

JAMERSON:Thank you.

BOYD:In a--you know, you see different people have different styles of doing that. And you just seem to be one of the most authentic crowd workers. You just, you know, you just connect. And I think that's where--I felt that, and we talked off camera about like, you know, me being with the old people in the back and, you know, all the people talking and, you know, I'm sure they were talking up front too. But I think that, you know, when you bust into Heinemann and you suddenly hear that sort of elevation of everyone singing along, you know, and I'm sure you feel that, that like, where like, on one level, this is your job, and you gotta play the hits, and how many times in your life have you played this song? (Jamerson laughs) But when you feel that crowd singing along, like--

JAMERSON:That's it. That's the stuff. Yeah. It's everything, really. Like, that's the moment that we're, like, those are the moments that we're, like, constantly pursuing, you know? And it is this like balance of like, I want you to meet me where I am, of like something new and different. But I also want to serve you. So, it's a line. It's a--but, you know, that song is so special to me and my family and a reminder of a sweeter time and, and also like, it's always like a special moment in the set for people. That song in particular, I feel like it'll probably--I don't know. I don't know what the future holds, but it's a special song to my family and to listeners. And it's also, I think, with music--like I said, it's a way to preserve memories and preserve moments. So, like to get to, to share a family song that's so personal to me with so many people, it's crazy.

BOYD:All right, I have a confession for you.

JAMERSON:Okay.

BOYD:So, I don't know if it was because I had three kids during this time period, but I completely missed Sunday Best. (Jamerson laughs) Like, and I'm a musician and I try to pay attention. I missed it completely. So, so, when, when I met you in Heinemann at the songwriter retreat, like our workshop, maybe, what, six months ago, and you played that song, I was like, "Who is this?" (Jamerson laughs) It was like, you just played this, you know, for, you know, forty of us, you know, and, and, you know, there was a moment where I was just like, oh, geez, I got to get out of here. What am I doing at this? This is, I'm a terrible songwriter and whatnot. But, but, but now since then, I've really dived in, complete, you know, the whole catalog, and it's been fun to actually track your, your, your progress in the sense of your trajectory of songwriting. And, but I love that like my introduction to you wasn't, you know, this star writing, you know, writing hits.

JAMERSON:Yeah.

BOYD:It was songwriting. And so, when I listen to everything, that's what I key in on. And I usually do that, but it was great that it wasn't skewed, I think, by this stardom thing.

JAMERSON:Yeah.

BOYD:So, but when, but again, and I've, you know, I've seen YouTube, uh, clips and, and researching for, for this, but--from the bars, those moments and Instagram and things like that. But being in that room watching everybody who's been talking, you know, back in my section, but suddenly when that came along and suddenly everybody's lifting their drinks in the air and they're singing along, that's, uh, it was, it was remarkable. Uh, but that gets back to this idea of that you're talking about, I think, with connection. That, that, you know, you're connecting with them, they're connecting with you, but they're also connecting with each other.

JAMERSON:Exactly. That, and I think that, I just--not to simplify the solutions of the world, but I feel like more of that is what we just need to like calm ourselves and to just, no matter what, we are all together in--we are experiencing a lot of the stuff, you know, similarly. And it just feels like when you can get there, it's like, oh, man, I can breathe. The thinking sort of survival mind ceases for at least three-and-a-half minutes, you know.

BOYD:Yeah.

JAMERSON:I just feel like music has always been that for people. Before it was a industry, it was a way of just, yeah, it was that connection. It was to signify an end, a beginning, to be joyful, to have sorrow, to just work through all the stuff that I feel like as humans we, we're sort of just dealing with on a daily and seasonal basis. You know, it's less of a ritual now, and it's more of, you know, I mean, for some people it is. For some people they're like all in and they're just like hanging on every word and they're feeling it all deeply, you know. Some people are just there for the gram, as the young kids say. They're just there to get the picture and have about twelve drinks and like, you know. But, you know, I'm trying. I want to, like, through different ways of just help, help. It's a cultural mind shift thing of like the purpose of what we're doing. And I don't want it to be too serious. I don't want it to be too loose either, you know. I want it to just be everything. I want it to be the whole--I want to have room for the whole spectrum of feelings--

BOYD:Yeah--

JAMERSON:Because I'm complex. We're all, you know, we're all complex. It's like these nuanced sort of feelings that we're all sort of, you know, sorting through that I, you know, I don't always like to say that it used to be better, because I think every generation has had its own. But when I just think about like tribal living and ceremony and things like that of like, "This is the time," you know, like solstice celebrations, and just like in rhythm of nature and just time of--there's a time for suffering. That's biblical, you know. There's a time for suffering. There's a time for worship. There's a time for joy. There's a time for a couple beers, you know, like--that's a whole other subject, really, of temperance and virtue and what is all that stuff, but I'm not necessarily here to do that in those shows. But that's where I'm kind of rooted in, is I'm, you know, I'm here to entertain. I'm here to maybe touch on something that is, is like hard to explain. And maybe like just help move through some things, some of the weight of this world and with, like, just togetherness. I think that that will just pierce through so much. Like I said, the thinking mind can cease for a little bit. It's, you know, I feel like there's a grander intelligence that can help us just make more room and move through it, so--

BOYD:I feel like you're--it's interesting. How old are you?

JAMERSON:I just turned forty.

BOYD:You just turned forty? I mean, not to be cliche or anything, but I will say that I feel like--and again, not to get too heavy, too quick in this interview, but you're--you know, you can watch time pass, but it seems to me like right now you're feeling that time passing. Home movies, you know, this awareness of connection.

JAMERSON:Definitely. I mean, I think that's kind of the gift of being my own boss, is that I've worked in time of reflection and contemplation, and I think that that's, you know, all the philosophers of, of our, you know, of, of history are like how, how important contemplation is to our just evolution as people and to stop. And, um, you know, at thirty, I sort of had an existential crisis of that, of time is passing, and I'm thirty, and how did I get here? And this is not what I thought thirty would be like. And then I sort of started over. You know, that's when I--that's when I guess exclusively, I stopped being exclusive with Sunday Best, you know. And I was like, I can't just be this person that pursues. I had done so much by the time I was thirty, more than I'd ever dreamed. And it still wasn't enough, you know? There was just something more. I was like, if I don't change, like, nobody's telling me I need to do something different, you know. So, I feel like the last ten years of my life has just been trying to be more intentional because yep, time is passing. And at forty, I don't feel like it is existential. But it is a, you know, we do have so much time here, and it is a mile marker of forty times around the sun. And, you know, I've had grandparents die in their sixties, you know. So, I'm just, yeah, I'm trying to just live as mindfully and as intentionally as I can. And, you know, just not get caught up in the machine.

BOYD:Yeah.

JAMERSON:Because, you know, it's--we live in a crazy world where it feels like nothing's enough sometimes. And I just don't want to be caught up in the pursuit of something that doesn't really exist. So, I've done that. And then you get there and you do these things, you know, we played the Grand Ole Opry six times, you know. I never thought that was going to be a thing, and then you do that and you're like, "Well, now what? What do we do to--" It's like brain chemistry, of like, you've got these dopamine--you get this dopamine from this experience and then you just want to keep climbing and having this bigger thing, but I don't know. It's--I just think that's a trap in a lot of ways. So, I've--it's just like this constant, you know, line trying to find of balance, you know.

JAMERSON:In fairness, I want to put on the historical record that we're talking to you forty-eight hours after the last concert--(Jamerson laughs)--last show of a tour, um, and you're feeling reflective, um, and, um, which is good, which is good. But I thought--(clears throat)--why don't we shift gears a little bit, and we'll come back to the mind stuff and the emotion stuff. But let's talk about the tour, because you are--and then I want to go back to the old days. But let's talk about the tour, because that's so fresh. And it was a great show. I felt like you all were a good bar band, like in that great way, like you came out of the gate and like, and put on a heck of a show. But then you were able to sort of lure everybody in to, to enjoy what I would say would be the more nuanced songs. And that I thought was really fantastic, to watch you pull that off, because that's hard, to then suddenly play a sweet, you know, emotional, sentimental song and get everybody to feel that with you. Anyway, let's talk about, before the tour, let's talk about this album and where this album fits into your catalog, and then take me through the tour.

JAMERSON:So, the record was the final piece of this trilogy that I feel like I've been working on the last ten years. And it's so in line with everything we're talking about of. It was me really feeling like I had done all this work on myself and really just diving into some heavier things that I had probably avoided for fifteen years, twenty years. I feel like I had established this foundation within myself of like--and friendships, you know? I think that was the biggest thing, was like, I don't have to be happy all the time. I don't have to have it all together all the time. I can rely on the support of my family to help me through this. And it was a lot of just like family stuff. So, I was watching a lot of these home movies, and I call it The Narrow Way because I felt like, you know, you can, in contemplation and reflection, you can get lost in your mind and lost in heavy feelings. And, you know, I think that's why people will get depressed, because they just sort of contemplate on negative stuff too long. And it was just my way to work through sort of some of these nuanced feelings of, you know, life changing. And--

BOYD:Did you envision this as a trilogy?

JAMERSON:Not when I started. No, I just sort of started, you know. And I think that, you know, it was pretty much my--the journey of my thirties, of this deconstruction of--the paradigm that I'd been living in, you know, up to maybe just childhood, you know. Maybe it was just like the paradigm of childhood and the rose-colored glasses and the pursuit, you know, of, of something. Like I said, then I got to thirty and had this, like I said, existential crisis and left the band, left the girl, moved home. And I was like, I just started over. And, um, so, it's been--you know, it was spiritual deconstruction, it was professional deconstruction, and when I started out, it was, you know, it was The Wild Frontier. That was, in my mind, was, like I feel like I sort of had this reconnection with god and what that meant to me, or like this curiosity of, what is god? Who is god? And all these things that I, you know, growing up in the bible belt, you hear all these different things, virtues, what is sin? Um, what does that mean to me? So, that first record was a lot of me observing those things of like, what, what are virtues? What does it mean to be virtuous? Um, what does it mean to be gluttonous? You know, like what are those? And--what's that called? Like, a subliminal narrative. That was like my sort of process behind the curtain. And so, you know, I worked through that, and--which led me to Peace Mountain, which was kind of like resting, in like not worrying about the story so much, but sort of resting in the things I'd basically been studying, and trying to find just peace in a larger plan unfolding. And just sort of, yeah, just contemplative and--and then The Narrow Way was like, okay, I've built this foundation of who I am. I'm going to like take my foundation of faith and I'm gonna go through the shadows. I'm gonna go through myself because I feel like I'm equipped now to face these things. You know, and also for the first time in my life, or not first time in my life, but probably--almost twenty years sober from alcohol, you know--

BOYD:Twenty?

JAMERSON:Yeah. I like, felt like when I was twenty, when I got to college, I was drinking a lot, you know, which kind of hand-in-hand with music and the bar scene and just the culture. But as I was going through all this stuff, it was like, it was very much a mask of these hard things that I had been just carrying. And a lot of it was loss. It was a lot of just loss of family members and common ground. You know, of--when you have a patriarch or a matriarch, my great-grandmother who lived in a house for almost a hundred years, like you feel that, you feel like the multi-generational energy and like sweat equity, you know, that goes into a space. And when you lose that, you're just like, what--where is home? Where do I feel like myself, but also where do I feel connected to something greater than myself? And that's when I talk about nuanced stuff of like, that's such a complicated feeling, you know. And, but we're all, I feel like--not all of us, you know. I feel like I was really blessed to be born into that and I understand that not everybody had that, but I do feel like that in our core is like what we're all yearning for, is like I said, belonging and home and just this feeling of togetherness. And that was like what my heart was aching for. And so, it was just hard kind of putting myself back into those feelings. But those videos, man, it just kind of broke me open because it just, it allowed me to see it and see myself before--and see all of us, really--before life got messy. And it was a different time. It was the eighties. It was the eighties and nineties, and it was just so different. And I just feel like people's presence were so, it was so different, because we didn't have the cell phone to like, to occupy our minds. It's like, I see videos of, like, there's just time where people just don't say anything, and they're just sitting there, and it's just like, wow, everyone seems really content, you know--

BOYD:The phones would be out so fast today--

JAMERSON:Yeah, to, like, just pacify the moment. But it was like, yeah, we can just sit here and be okay, and--yeah, I just--

BOYD:You also had a generation that, you know, could go out in the woods for, you know, fifteen hours.

JAMERSON:Yep.

BOYD:And, you know, I think about those days growing up, and like, my mom didn't know where I was--

JAMERSON:Same--

BOYD:You know, for fifteen hours.

JAMERSON:Same. And I mean, I still live in the woods. That's--when I left Lexington, because I lived in a cul-de-sac near the mall and I was just super depressed. And, um, I found Veterans Park, which has a nice creek that runs through it, and that really--I wrote Riverbank from that space because it was just remind--that was when I sort of just kind of shift and sort of reconnect with nature when I found that spot. And just all the times that just sitting next to a piece of water, you know, how--I've spent my whole life doing that. And for some reason, like in the pursuit of grandeur, I guess, had lost touch with that. And then moving home, it's like, oh, wow. No wonder. No wonder I felt the way that I felt. Because I had just lost touch with nature and the silence and just the good stuff, you know?

BOYD:You're reminded that it's not just a want; it's a need.

JAMERSON:It is. It is. It's just a part of, I think, who we all are. It's like everywhere would be nature a thousand years ago, you know? Like, cities weren't--it just, it was, you know, so--

JAMERSON:By the way, I have to say, while you're reaching for the drink, Riverbank has my fav--one of my favorite rhymes that you pulled off, bank and thank. (Jamerson wheezes) I just--

JAMERSON:That's some Eastern Kentucky stuff right there. (laughs)

BOYD:Fantastic. I think I would have--you know, no AI rhyming dictionary would have taken me to that place--

JAMERSON:That's right--

BOYD:And you did that--(Jamerson laughs)--so, well done.

JAMERSON:That's so funny.

BOYD:So, talk about this album, and let's talk--let's lead this album into the tour, because you are--you keep referencing this is the end of the tour.

JAMERSON:Yeah--

BOYD:End of the tour. And talk about what that means with an album.

JAMERSON:You know, there will be more dates sort of under the umbrella next year, but--it's just, it's like this moment in time where I've given myself permission to feel these things. And some of it's heavy. And I think that sometimes with music, I've felt this responsibility to be uplifting. And I've just--or gone through heavy stuff, and then there'd been like this moral of the story where it's like this lighter. And there's still elements of that in the record, but it's a lot of just like, hey, this is how I feel. It's kind of sad. It is what it is. So, the tour was just this, it's just this moment in time to like, we're gonna try to go through the whole gambit of emotions and, and, and not shy away from it. And it's also been a time for me as I've, you know, reached forty of like, do I still want to do this? And at the same time, you know, there's this whole other process, like logistical process that's going on behind the scenes that I've honestly--you know, I've been working on for ten years of putting a team together to carry out this plan. It's booking, it's management, it's road managers, it's the band--it's bands, you know, it's band members. I've had multiple iterations of a touring band. And so, this was--it was the culmination of all that work. Which ultimately, I think, is--it's like, you know, that it is--it's just as much that. that I've learned is such--you know, when I talk about relationships, you know, it's, you've got to have a support system. Even--you know, we're fortunate. I think we probably operate, touring-wise, from a metric standpoint, at a higher level than probably ninety-nine percent of people that are doing it. But I still consider it kind of modest. You know? But, there's just a lot that goes into it. So, it's just been like this whole sort of like, do I want to do it? Why am I doing this? And it's me also facing my fear of, really my own emotions, I guess, at the end of the day, being too much for people. But it's been so, it's been so rewarding. One, putting a plan together, carrying it out, being part of a team, having a beginning, a middle, and an end. And like, I feel like it's been so much like a sport. That's how I've looked at it, like a season. We get to the end, and I'm like, this is how they feel in the Super Bowl. Like I am so tired. I feel beat up. But this is what we work for right here. This is all of it. So, trying to embrace the grind and, you know, cause my twenties, it was a never ending tour. Like I said, it was like, nothing was ever enough. Like you do one thing, onto the next. It was just like four years, you know, pretty much of just show after show, after show, after show. So--

BOYD:I mean, when you're at the center of the team and you're talking about the team and you're talking about, you know, using the sports analogy, but it is business and you are the CEO. How taking on this role and, you know, talking about working towards something and having strategy, talk about your relationship with leadership, because you're in that business now.

JAMERSON:Yeah. I think that it all comes down to having--you know, you've got to have the right people. And I like to--I don't like to micromanage. You know, I've learned in life--like, I think when I was younger, what I wanted people to do was just, like, take me, you know. "You lead me." I wanted people to confirm me and affirm my worth. But--and I just didn't know anything. You know, at that time, it was like I was being led. But I want--it's like I have a vision. I have to have my hands in it. I have to be present in the process. But I like for people--I let people do what they do, you know. I give people space to have an opinion and I hire people that I trust. So, when decisions are being made, it's like I just don't always have the bandwidth to make a decision. So, I want to lean on, I want to have people that I can lean on and trust and maybe, because like I said, I'm super contemplative. I'm sometimes very zoomed in. So, it's important for me to have people that I can trust to lean on. It's like giving people the room to be who they are, to have a voice, to not just choke the life out of it. But I also feel like I have to, yeah, I just always have to be present, because I'm the one that ultimately has to go out and carry out the work. I'm the one who has to go out and play the show. In some cases, just, I have the most experience in my, you know, in it, because, you know. I think one of the best things with the Sunday Best stuff and being pushed to burnout was that I have that experience and I know what it's like to operate on a higher level and get burnt out and it not be enough.

JAMERSON CONTD.:So, you know, I talk about virtue and temperance, and temperance is just like one thing that is important to me with this whole thing, is it needs to be built to last. It needs to be something. I want to be like Willie Nelson. Like, I want to play till I'm ninety. I have to make it 'til I'm ninety. And, you know, the hours of operation in this, it's not the healthiest, you know. It's, it's late hours, and food is sometimes not even there. You know, you're eating pistachios and drinking water, and that's, that's what you, it's what you're fueled on, you know. So, I was thinking about this, like the art of--it's like I've been working on like the art of business and the business of art. You know, it's this blurry thing because just, you know, like we said, capitalistic sort of--and I'm not against capitalism. I'm like, I sell songs for a living. But greed, that's what I--or, you know, and I don't know if it's even greed that drives people, but we're just, chemically in our minds, we just want more. So, I like to have very intentional times where we're gonna go work, like I said, seasonal, and it's important to have an end. And that's what this has been for me. It's like, it's been high volume. But there was a specific time we were going to do this. And it's--yeah, it is allowing time to reflect and feel proud and accomplished. And I just think that is so important in team stuff, is like, can't just--we can't just move on to the next thing. It's like, I think in making it sustainable, you need to have that time where you are feeling proud, where you are sort of resting on your laurels for a second, and then you can zoom out and look at it all from a bird's eye view. And then I think you learn from it, you adjust, and--until you die. (laughs) You know? Like, that's what it is for me. So--

BOYD:Do you have a--how, what is your relationship with songwriting on tour? So, here you are promoting this album, but when you are in that travel mode and you're in the pistachio, you know, and water mode--

JAMERSON:Yeah--

BOYD:How does that, how are you able to--do you write on the road?

JAMERSON:Yeah. You know, I'm a part of a songwriter group that, we write a song a week. And there are moments that I feel super inspired by the road and I'm living life. I'm immersed in so many different environments. And that's like, it's what I live for right there, is like the moments of connection with strangers who oftentimes have less of a preconceived notion for who I am and what the show is supposed to be like, compared to like a home crowd. You know, I think that's part of--I'm not going to tangent on that too much--but I think that's part of the talking of home. It's like, "That's just our boy up there." And it's, it is such a grind that you feel. I've been saying this week, I feel like a raw nerve. You know, like your capacity, like your mask can just be completely worn off. So, then all that's left is like raw emotion. So, that's great. When you're just so, you're so worn down that you have no other choice but to be completely transparent with how you feel. So, I've written some really good stuff, I feel like, but then there's also times where I'm just like dialing (??) it--sort of like in context to the songwriter group, I'm just sort of putting words together and turning it in. So, I don't know how long I'll do that. Because it is--you know, especially, like, this season--well, I'm not touring now, so there'll be more space for that, you know, but--

JAMERSON CONTD.:It's, uh, it's tricky because, like I said, it's easy to get lost in my mind, you know, when it's all about--when I'm in--when I'm touring, thinking about songs. I'm trying to be a dad. I'm trying to be a partner. So, it's this delicate thing that I feel like I have a good grip on. I feel like with this record and this trilogy, I've said so many things that I really wanted to say. that now I don't, I don't feel that way necessarily, that I have like these things that I'm trying to excavate, I'm trying to like take a break from that space and just live my life. Because I think that's important, too, to live and not just documenting your, your, your experience. It's like, I just need to live and not think about it. And so--but it's, it's good. It's like, what I love about music. And I can shift, I'm just--like I can just play other people's songs. I always have access to songs that I just love and, um, so--

BOYD:Talk about your, your style, um, in terms of, back on this note of--especially with having to write one each week now, like, putting that added pressure on, which I can absolutely envision being a love-hate thing. Are you a tinkerer? Like, do you tinker with songs? Like, and, you know, because you do a really good job of a couple things in your songwriting. You, you, have this great sense of, of, of place and home and family and characters. You do a really good job with that. Um, and there's stories infused, a lot of times not necessarily linear stories, but there's, there's always this sort of evocative story, um, and there's emotion. Is this something where like you'll tinker with a song for time--you know, for months and months and months, or are you just kind of a knock it out?

JAMERSON:I'm usually knock it out.

BOYD:Okay.

JAMERSON:But I will say that my process has sort of changed, uh, over the course of this last record, because it was more collaborative than it ever had been. My friend, Rachel Bayman, who produced this last record, we really dove into the edit. So, what it did was--and I think I sort of talked about this in the songwriter workshop we did--but there's a space for just pure expression, you know. And typically in the past, I would just ride with that. Like, the first time through, it's fine. But with this last process, it's like, okay, you go through--you have this free period, and then there's the edit, of like, yeah, I want to be really--I want to try to deliver the essence of what I'm trying to say. And sometimes it just takes an edit, you know. So, I--you know, songwriting is so philosophical, because some people are just like, "It's never done." If you look at it that way, it will never be done. So, it's like this loose grip that I feel like you have to have to it of--you know, there is a certain level, or certain level of like completion and feeling. Like, how do I feel performing it? And also, like how do I feel performing it is really the most important thing. But sometimes just the feeling of a new song can be sort of blinding. So, I archive everything, you know. So, when I'm, when I'm--you know, it all goes in the drop box every week and I'm, every couple weeks, like sort of going through my songs and listening because I'm just always thinking about the next record, you know, in a lot of ways. Even just, you know, sometimes more passively than others, but I just can't help it. You know, I leave room there for like, okay, I think the bones are there. I would, you know, I can see where I need to change some lyrics, but I get so hyper fixated, like when I find something that I like, that I usually feel pretty good about it. Like, catching, you know, catching the inspiration and riding that to the end. And then enough like unattachment to it that I can like kind of just let it be what it'll be. So, um--

BOYD:Talk about that, um, working with a collaborator like Rachel in this--like, it seems like this is different. How so?

JAMERSON:Well, it, you know--one, it's just asking for help and being open to a teacher, pretty much, of just someone that comes from a different background and has this whole other skill set and process. You know, it all started with me being like, I'm going to go through all these shadows. I need help. I need someone to help me sort through this. Friends, family, you know, and then her through this process, because I just never--I pretty much--you know, it's my--I'm the one spearheading it all, and it's still me, but I just, I don't know. I don't know if it's like this oldest child thing thing in me that's just like doing things on their own and hyper-independence. You know, I heard Kevin Durant say something years ago that just struck me--and maybe I'm paraphrasing--but it was that nothing really great ever happens like by an individual. Like it takes a collective group of people to like, "We'll win a title." And so, you know, arts, they don't have that. You know, we don't have championships. But each record is a big group project. And the championship is making it, you know, is finishing it and delivering it to people. And, yeah, it just feels more collaborative. And I wasn't--I was able to just perform and not worry about so much if it's good or not. I would leave that to her and engineer. And I'm just--it gave me more space to feel what I feel like I needed to feel. You know, all these heavy things that I'm ultimately, was the purpose of it was like, I'm just trying to work through this stuff to hopefully clear out space to be a happier, healthier human and just be more present in my life and not just carrying around these subconscious, you know, things that I'm, you know, making sad or whatever it is. So--

BOYD:But this is collaborative, this album, in other ways. There are other people who are appearing throughout this album. Talk about that.

JAMERSON:Yeah, I had this shift during Peace Mountain where I--and that's kind of where I was with relationship-driven, of this is a time to get to know people. We're making this thing together, and it's a way to forge relationships with other people that--I think one of the hardest things that I have with this lifestyle is how isolating it can be, because, especially where I live in eastern Kentucky, there's not this infrastructure of musicians that are working together. So, I oftentimes feel like an alien, you know, because they're like, "You still doing your little music thing?" As opposed to being with people that are, have been in the same grind for, you know, their whole lives. And I just think that's the point of all of it. That's the point of making the music, is getting to have that experience and conversation with--you know, I got to, to record a song with Ketch Secor of Old Crow Medicine Show, one of my heroes. I'm like, man, this is what it's about for me. I'm just sharing a song with someone that's inspired me to do it. And with my sister, you know, on a couple of the songs who had experienced a lot of that same family stuff that we sang about, it was good for us to work through that together and, you know, having Rachel, you know, sing on some angsty, you know, sort of stuff that unapologetically, it's just like, it's just easier when we stand together with things, you know? So, it's like, what have I been--I thought, I don't know. It's like I said, this hyper independence and like focus on individuality. I think it is good to know who we are, but it's like, what good is it if it's not in context to everyone else? You know, so, it's just a sort of philosophical shift of purpose, and it's just an open door to new people. And, uh--

BOYD:Tim O'Brien?

JAMERSON:Tim O'Brien, yeah. I mean, gosh, I can't even--I still can't even wrap my head around that.

BOYD:Yeah.

JAMERSON:And at the end of the day, these are all just people, you know. They're all just people. And that's one thing that I think that I've, in my younger years--you know, you respect people. There's always room for respect, but for idolizing people and this sort of hierarchy of "They're greater than me," it was just like letting all that go. Because, you know, I grew up--I was here when, I was here in Lexington when Sturgill Simpson was here starting up. Chris Stapleton was playing Cosmic Charlie's. Tyler, you know, playing owls and just, they're all really accessible. And just, I just remember fanboying over all of them. And I think sometimes when I did that, it sort of skewed who I was and skewed who they were. And it didn't leave room for friendship and really common ground because I was putting them above me.

BOYD:Which is so sad.

JAMERSON:It is. It is. It is sad. Because I don't really think anybody--I mean, some people maybe want that, to be on a pedestal. But I don't really think any of them wanted that.

BOYD:See, I want to get you and Chris Stapleton together in the room, and I want you guys just to talk about high school football in Kentucky.

JAMERSON:I would love that.

BOYD:That's what I want to see in the interview.

JAMERSON:I would love that.

BOYD:One of my favorite little videos is stumbling on this video of, I think it was Chris sacking Tim Couch.

JAMERSON:Uh-huh. Oh, yeah--

BOYD:Which is so fantastic to see that. Again, to humanize these people and realize they're just people.

JAMERSON:Yeah, I think that's--you know, not to zoom out too much, but I think just in society, that's one of the most important things we can do. And, as I think that we're trying to create our own infrastructure here and--like, sustainable, we have to let our young people know that these are just people, imperfect humans that aren't--that don't have it all figured out, never did, never will. And just because they've had this, just because they're really good at what they do, and they've had that success, it's like, it doesn't mean that that's who you have to be. It doesn't mean that you're just gonna be content because of your accomplishments. It's like really framing up what art is. And it's--if you want to play in stadiums and pursue those things, that's fine. But there's a middle ground, one. And it's, for me, it's like it's got--I was having a conversation with someone about--I was talking about basketball and this new generation of NIL and all this stuff, and it just brought me back to like LeBron and KD and Steph and just feeling like, the people that are the best are the ones that care the most about what they do. It's not the things that come with being good at it. It's that they want to be good at their craft. And for me, that's the only thing that's really sustainable in all of this, is the process. Because the shows are up and down. The metrics are up and down. And so, just, you know. Yeah, just more process. I know I'm kind of jumping around here.

BOYD:No, you're doing--this is great. And again, just, I do want to stress that you and I are envisioning this as a series of conversations. So, we're not necessarily going in linear sequential order.

JAMERSON:Good.

BOYD:And I like this as a kickoff, because this stuff is fresh in your mind. And so, I'm going to keep going on this line. You know, this idea--I love the idea of talking about, using like the LeBron example or, you know, caring about the craft as opposed to just caring about the success that comes from the craft. And I think that you do a really good job with that in terms of--back to the business, you've got to build an audience. You've got to build that--we had coffee a couple weeks ago, and we talked about, I had just seen Jeff Tweedy, and it was wow, because I'd seen Jeff Tweedy play for two-and-a-half hours, and he didn't play a single Wilco song or a single Tweedy solo. So, he just played songs from this triple album he just released with a bunch of kids on stage that was his band. And as it turns out, it's his sons and friends who grew up in the neighborhood. Brilliant. It was great. But it was wild. And I had this moment where I was looking around and I realized he can pull this off because he has this community of people who care about him and what he does. And that takes work to get to that point. And I see you building that up. Again, I saw you on--with the hometown crowd. Did you have a sense on this tour where It didn't work out the way that you thought?

JAMERSON:Some places. But mostly it was, I feel good about most of it. And the times that it didn't, it was just like, man, it's just life. And I just, I do come back to sports of the grind. Like, it is not always gonna go how you think it's gonna go. And that just helped me with it, you know. It's--man, even performing, you know, it's not all great feelings up there, you know. There's--I'm fighting my mind sometimes of just like doubt and self-consciousness, because if the environment isn't catered towards how I feel in the moment, which is mostly never. (Interviewer laughs) But we were in Houston. That's what stands out in my mind. There was a show in Houston, this place called Dan Electro's. And it was a duo run through Texas. And three of the four shows were, I would say, listening room. Which, I needed that, of just like silence, complete freedom to just say and play wherever I'm at dynamically. And then this one show in Houston, like it was really lit up and there was a baseball game going on in the back. The sound guy is like--(Interviewer laughs)--on his cell phone over in the corner working on his college class. The lights are like these lights that are on a timer and they're just like flashing the whole time. And we're playing like this singer songwriter set and it's just like, man, I'm tired.

JAMERSON CONTD.:And--(sighs)--it was just like, you know, it was just, it was a job that night. It was a job. And--but we survived, and people--we got great feedback of like how much people loved it. And it's just like, you know, it's just one of those things like, what do I know? You know. But at the same time in that same show, there was like a seventy-year-old man that came up to me and was talking about--he's like, you know, "I listened to this record." He said, "I'd never heard of you until this record came out. And it feels like you've lost some people." I was like, "Yeah, I have." And he's like, "I know that feeling." And we both just kind of sat in this sort of heavy feeling. And I put my arm on his shoulder, and I was like, wow, that's like why I do what I do, to be able to get on a real level with an elder, you know. And so, it was like, wow, like, I'm doing things that are resonating and important to someone that's not, that's not forty years old, or a twenty-some-year-old bro at the bar drinking. You know, it's like, this guy's coming for some real stuff and finding some. So, overarching, this whole tour was like, yeah, this is what I love about it. This is what I love about doing this, and I'll continue to do it. It needs to be intentional and as efficient as possible. But it wasn't perfect. It never is. And so--

BOYD:Well, as I said to you before, the band, I really like this band. They--I've got all kinds of--off camera, I'm going to ask you all kinds of questions. Like, I couldn't get close enough, but I want to see the guitarist's pedal board, because it was a good sound. He's got a good sound. And I, you know, I've got all those kinds of things. But I think--but again, back to this idea of, to make a living doing what you're doing. you gotta make those connections. People gotta--you gotta get people to show up to the shows. And you don't have necessarily now, as an individual performer, the same scale of the machine that was doing the Sunday best thing, right, in terms of that. So, you're working and hustling a little bit in a different way. One of the things that's really important in this day and age is the social media. When my--you know, I love that in all of this I've also discovered your sister's music. She's really, really good. And so, I picked Saturday night, because I was going to come either Friday or Saturday night at The Burl, I picked Saturday because I wanted to check her out live. And she was fantastic. But I think at some point, like social media-wise, I remember just sort of diving back--because again, I just discovered her. So, going back through the Instagram and posting, at some point, she just like is putting on makeup, you know? You know, like--

BOYD:Get ready with me.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. So, what is your relationship to that dimension of, you got to build this audience, has nothing to do with your songs?

JAMERSON:Yeah. You know, I think I'm fortunate enough to have been raised at this crossover period of technology. I would say I'm an analog boy living in a digital world, you know. I grew up without a cell phone. I grew up--you know, but also in the early days of instant messaging. So, I know life without it. And so, I think for me, I just try to--I've embraced it in some ways, of it's an extension of my art and an extension of myself. I definitely fall victim to like doom scrolling and like the trap of, you know, this got traction, this didn't. Trying to think about--it's like a puzzle for me, of like how do I--so, I've deconstructed the process of like content creation and lighting. That's why I was taking pictures in here of like your whole setup because that's interesting to me. That's a process sort of way of thinking about, how can I make this look good? I mean, sometimes that's not always the case, but being aware of, like, the lighting and just finding a process in it instead of just throwing up something because I feel like I have to feed it. Like I don't feel the obligation to do it. I look at it as an opportunity to just share what I'm doing, and it is what it is. It's like a documentation of my life, and I can go back and be like, "Okay, that's that show, and that was this moment, and--" It's a live archive, pretty much. It's not always been that way, but I don't know. I feel like, you know, I think that technology is a great thing. I think that here's been this adjustment of, how do we use it responsibly? And I think that there's been so many people that have come to my music through social media, through streaming, that would have never done it otherwise, that it's such a gift, you know. So, I just try to keep it light, you know?

BOYD:There is an archival component to it that is lovely and wonderful because, again, coming to your music late in the game, um, discovering your sister's music late in the game, um, and, and doing the sort of scrolling and you're able to sort of piece together a story, um, never would have known about Sleeping in the Woods otherwise. Just wouldn't have known about that. Um, but what an amazing thing. Like, talk about what that is. Cause I discovered that and was just, that's amazing.

JAMERSON:Yeah, thank you. Um, we just became a non-profit within the last three months. So, essentially, it's just a place--so, we do it out at Hidden Ridge in Monticello, Kentucky. John Smithwick, John and Ginger Smithwick own and operate the campground. They also run the Raven House series here in Lexington, which has been really good, I feel like, for our scene. It's just, for me, it's always been about cultivating that community around songwriting. I feel like we're in this sort of golden age, I think, of songwriting in Kentucky in terms of just the volume of people that are writing songs now on a whole spectrum of intention behind it, you know. I think a lot of people are trying to do it as a living. A lot of people are just doing it, you know, by themselves because they want to do it. So, through my experience and a lot of the things we've talked about, I want to give people a support system. We want to help create pathways for people that are trying to do it for a living. We're also trying to give a space that's for the artists, that it's kind of--so much of the rhythm of the road is you're in and you're out. And we're trying to just give people a space to come in and immerse themselves in nature, low volume, a space that's accessible. If you don't have a band, you know, you can come in and just sing your songs and be heard. And there's the space to share whatever spectrum of emotions that you want to share, and, and you just create common ground through that. It's--our max, our selling out would be 600 people, you know, so it's not a huge festival. We like small groups, the power of small groups. And--

BOYD:Yeah. It's a small group who cares.

JAMERSON:Yes. And singular focus. We don't have a bunch of things going on at the same time, so--

BOYD:I like that--

JAMERSON:It's just not, not--we don't want people to be overstimulated being there. It's, it's like a nervous system regulation sort of ceremony, is what I'll say. We want people to feel nourished and, um, you know, we're just trying to make it sustainable, too. We, we don't want it to be a thing where we're having to just make it unaffordable for people to be there.

BOYD:You keep saying "we." Who do you work with?

JAMERSON:John. John Smithwick. I have--we have a board. John Smithwick, Melissa Hirsch, and Jesse Dunn. That's been the primary people like getting this off the ground that meet every two weeks. And then we're currently in the process of funding and putting a board together. So, this is a total shift for me of--one, just learning about--I live in this infinite space of just making stuff up as I go along and throwing noodles at the wall, essentially, and seeing what sticks. I'm still learning about what the possibilities are through nonprofit work and where you can get money and programming. Because we want to be in schools. We want to--we want to give programming away for free just because I feel like it's important, you know, for people to be--to all the things we've said, like to be together, you know. The Heinemann settlement school stuff was really inspiring. And one thing that I hated about having to leave for vacation was that I missed the in-between stuff. That's where I feel like, that's where the, the real good stuff happens, where you can get into the throes with people. And, um, you know, eating over, just talking over dinner and things like that. And I think at the essence is just getting people together on common ground and sort of unplugged from the troubles and worries of their own lives and being face-to-face with other people and--in the name of song, you know. That's the common ground. But it's the deeper stuff that we're trying to like really tap into and give people this just human experience. So--

BOYD:Well, good luck.

JAMERSON:Thanks.

BOYD:Because that, that just, it sounds to me like the perfect experience--

JAMERSON:We love it--

BOYD:From both a participant and an audience member.

JAMERSON:We love it. It's--there's a lot of people, and we've just been fortunate that--that's the thing about Kentucky, too, is that, you know, I feel like the last ten years I've primarily played in Kentucky. You know, and that's something that I'd always heard growing up about Texas and Oklahoma, that these artists, the red dirt scene and this huge--you know, people are playing, they're driving around in tour buses and they're just playing in the state of Texas, you know. And just as we're, you know, we're in the post-coal era, and I feel like industry, it's like, it has to shift and evolve, and we have to diversify. And--but in that, we have to have people that buy in, literally, you know. And so, Kentucky, there's a community of song lovers, and that's the only reason that we're able to do it, I feel like, is because people have put value in it. So, we're just trying, we're--you know, I know that part of music is celebratory and sort of unhinged, you know. That's part of--but there's, it's a different kind of listener, different kind of listening when you can go into a space and be open to something completely new, you know. Like I just think that kind of listening, it's a state of being that I think just changes the world for the better when you can just listen with an open mind and an open heart and not judge what you think you're supposed to hear. You're just, like, open. So--

BOYD:That's what I love about the idea of the Raven House here in town. I haven't experienced it firsthand. It just seems like the schedules have not aligned. So, it's one of my little sort of obsessions of trying to get into that. But talk about venues for what you're talking about, because there seems to be a lot of people popping up. Are there--I feel like Raven House popped up because there was a lack of venue for that type of thing. What are your thoughts on that?

JAMERSON:Yeah, I mean, I definitely think that the Listening Room is lacking in Lexington. I have a friend that just reopened the Cork, which was the Twisted Cork. And I know that there's desire there to cultivate that kind of thing.

BOYD:That's my--the aspiration for working up to getting the guts up to do the open mic--

JAMERSON:Yeah--

BOYD:At The Cork.

JAMERSON:Well, that's, we want to have a Sleeping in the Woods--you know, we do open mics through that, and we want to do one there. You know, I think that the opera house lends towards that.

BOYD:Yeah.

JAMERSON:I would like to play there. I don't--it's not, it's a thousand person or so room. So, it's not necessarily accessible to everyone as an artist, you know. But that, that kind of room feels like that vibe. And I've seen the Burl in that way, you know, at times, where it's seated and particular artists--you know, different artists have different cultures around, you know, their, their following.

BOYD:Yeah.

JAMERSON:Um, and time and place. You know, I could go to California--we went to California last summer and I was blown away at what I perceived as just the value that they put in us being there, because it was culturally just so different. And they, I felt like they were like, "Well, this is something way different than what we experience out here." And they were, they were there for it, you know. Here, they were, they were there for it, but it's just, it, you know, there's just a thread of, of my, you know, coming up here in Kentucky. Like, I used to be in a bar band, and I used to be really wild, and I think that there's still that thread in my music. And I, we--Saturday night, I felt like we were pretty rowdy, you know. We were pretty rowdy as far as, you know, music goes, and there'll always be a rock and roll side of me, you know. So, it's tricky. It's a tricky--

BOYD:But The Burl, like, is, you know, that series of, that weekend of music, it was billed as that.

JAMERSON:Truly, yeah, yeah. And that's just what it is.

BOYD:But you could probably pull that off.

JAMERSON:Yeah, I think so, too. If we're like, this is a listening, yeah. We talked about that, about, like, on Sunday. Because we were like, "How many days do you think we could do this and people would still show up?" So, we were talking about a Sunday matinee that was just, like, all acoustic. Seated, like a comedown--

BOYD:I love that idea--

JAMERSON:You know. So, yeah, I think it's just your, you know, it's got to be your intention. First of--it starts with that and the messaging of it.

BOYD:All right, I'm going to have you zoom out.

JAMERSON:Okay.

BOYD:And I want you to reflect on a little bit, this idea of you in songwriting and how things have changed, but also get at this idea of--I've seen it written in descriptions, you know, sort of marketing descriptions and things, that there's this sort of Appalachian storytelling component. And obviously we've talked about the history and your interest in history and place and such. Talk about that component, that--this notion of place and history in your writing, but also how it's changed as you've gotten older and more experienced as a writer.

JAMERSON:I think when I was starting out, you know, you're so conscious of the crowd and trying to just get people's attention. That's like a big part of it, of, what will people like?

BOYD:Like, give me an example from your catalog.

JAMERSON:In the Sunday Best days, Drunk Rot, you know, it was a drinking song. We're playing in bars. We want to--I want to write a song that gets the party going, you know. So, I say "drunk" and "high" and "beer" and "redneck" and all these things that people--you know, and that was where I was at in my life. It's also, I think, really raw emotionally, and it's a lot of like bleeding heart and romantic love, specifically, like love songs. Which is great. Romantic love is awesome. I think for me, what ended up happening was like, you can only write so many songs about failed love. You know? It's great in the moment, so it made me really take a step back. I was like, do I even know what love is? (Interviewer laughs) Like, I'm writing these songs like glorifying these ultimately failed relationships. I'm like, maybe I should write about something else because I don't think I really know anything about this. Like I'm just like caught up in like my hormones probably. And then, you know, the opposite side of like heartbreak when it doesn't work out. And then it's like, "Yeah, no wonder, you were a raging alcoholic." I wasn't, I don't think I was a raging alcoholic, but like, when I look back at like failed relationships and the correlation with alcohol, you know, it's like--so, about, you know, back to thirty, that was sort of like when time split for me and my process sort of changed of--I read this book by this visual artist by the name of Alex Gray. And his whole thing is like, it's very spiritual in nature. And what it did was--

BOYD:What was the book called?

JAMERSON:The Mission of Art.

BOYD:Yes.

JAMERSON:Changed my life. Because it--one, you know, he talks about god a lot and like the divine. And that was such a big part of my identity as a child. And it opened me up to that space of, I can ask really complex questions in my art. Like I can ask that and sort through it through my art. And it gave me that permission to just look at that and not compartmentalize myself so much of like. Because I do feel like mainstream music is sort of limited topically, you know. It is a lot of party, love, you know, sex, drugs, rock and roll, that whole kind of thing. And I came up in a time where, you know, you just--most of the music that you had access to was the radio. It was mainstream stuff. So, it's like all really about the same kind of stuff. So, shifting into that sort of mindset was, it was really sort of anti--like, it wasn't the intuitive, it wasn't intuitive at first, and I felt like it's--I don't know if "alienated" is the right word, but there wasn't like this crossover, as big of a crossover from the Sunday Best stuff, which was a young, young writer, I'm partying. It's, you know, for like--it was more accessible to people, you know. It was more mainstream. And this was more contemplative and analytical and nuanced, probably. And so, yeah, I mean, I feel like The Wild Frontier in particular was like this leap into, to the absolute edge of my creative--like, I'm going to push this to the edge. I'm going to write songs about dragons as the personification of, like, these sort of carnal things that I'm sorting through. And it's kind of heady, you know? It's like--yeah, it just is, you know? And so, I think, you know, you go to the edge, it's like--and then you come back, and you're like, okay, I observe it. I think that in some ways I missed the mark of what I was trying to convey, or maybe it was just too heady, you know.

JAMERSON CONTD.:So, I think that I reserve the right to do whatever I want to do, but I also want to serve. I want to serve people. I want music to be--I want to connect, you know. Like I want to have common ground. So, it's just been this process of where's The Narrow Way? Where's the middle ground? The through line through all this of a way that I feel like I'm--I'm satisfied with what I'm saying. I feel like there's purpose in what I'm saying. Also room for no purpose, of just like, it's just a song. It's just goofy or it's wild and it's out there. It's just a pure expression. So, I think that I've just been, like, I've broadened my horizons on what a song can be. I feel like I'm back around basically where I started as a kid. And I think that romantic love should be celebrated. It should be under a microscope and, like, shouted if it's, like, healthy. You know, if it's, like ever--if it's like lasting love, you know. I think that's what I've been doing, too, is like learning what love really is and really how ugly it can be at times, especially as a parent and being a fiancé, a future husband, in context to the ugliness of life. Like that is the beauty of it, of like it's--you know, back to god and Christ, it's like, it really is the most selfless it can be, if you, like, allow it to be, if you know how to, like, dig deeper. So, that book was so much of, like, art is a reflection of your spiritual journey, of the inner journey that's going on, and you always hear that, and I--but it was like I'd heard it for the first time, of, of someone, you know, someone that was older than me, Alex Gray, that had, was giving me permission to like, "There are no rules here."

BOYD:Mm-hmm, yeah.

JAMERSON:All these things that you're going through as a growing human, like you can talk about this. And you don't owe anybody an explanation on what your parameters are in making these records, you know. And that was just really liberating for me. And to me, feeling like, that's the point. That is the point of art, I think, is exploring these questions that we have about everything, and then you express it, then you have to live with it. And then you, you know, for me, it was like, if I'm gonna say these, if I'm gonna sing these songs, night after night, if I'm going to promote these songs, then I really want it to have some like depth and value to it. Because, you know, what am I doing here, if I'm not--for me, perpetuating some sort of like, healthy response to what's happening in the world.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

JAMERSON:Coming from a family of teachers who feel like we're making an impact, I feel like I lacked purpose in the early days other than just like the good time.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

JAMERSON:And so, just in trying to play my part in society and in my community. There just needed to be more purpose. So--

BOYD:So, one of the things that I've noticed about your songwriting is, just from a technical standpoint, you do break a lot of rules. (Jamerson laughs) Like, you know, things that, like, you know, using specific names. You know, you, you're really good at zooming in on the micro, too. Like, you know, citing local roads. And, you know, so you're good at that. Do you know Michael Cleveland, the bluegrass fiddler?

JAMERSON:Yeah.

BOYD:So, I got--I had the privilege of interviewing him several years ago out in Louisville at the Louisville School for the Blind. We were having this thing where we were bringing in live performers who were blind. and doing sort of like a narrative stage where there was music and interview, and it was like a live interview in front of an audience, and it was great. And I had this moment where we were talking about his influences, and I was getting him to play the different styles of fiddle. And so, "Play like so-and-so," and he'd demonstrate what so-and-so's style was like, and I'd be like, "Play like so-and-so," and he demonstrated. We did this maybe four times, and it was really cool. And then I said, "Okay, now play like Michael Cleveland." And he sort of paused and was stuck. (Jamerson laughs) He was like, "Well, I guess, you know," and he sort of thought it through and then he knocked something out. But it really, you know, was a moment. And I listened back to that moment a couple months ago. It was really fantastic. How would you characterize Nick Jamerson's songs today? Like, if you were to describe, and you were to go to ChatGPT and ask ChatGPT to characterize a Nick Jamerson song, what are those elements today?

JAMERSON:I think the first thing that comes to my mind is modern folk singer. You talk about the specific sort of micro stuff. I feel like I make folk history out of folks, you know, out of how we're living. Um, you know, there's, there's spiritual observation. I heard someone say like spiritual grit. Um, historical, um, which I think that's probably in line with, with folk singer, modern folk singer. Um, multi-general. I--you know, you hear--Tyler Childers was quoted about Americana being no part of nothing, you know, a part of nothing. And I kind of had the opposite view of it. I feel like I am--like Americana, that term was sort of made for me, because stylistically it's American music, you know. I pull on so many different genres. And I love it because there's no rules. It's like, I don't feel like I have to stay in one lane musically. I think that that is--that's just another cage for me. And I think working with Rachel and living where I live, I've been leaning more into the history of, of like the banjo and like Appalachian, my Appalachian like old time sort of bluegrass roots.

BOYD:You're so excited about the banjo. Like, I mean, you pulled it out at the, at the workshop, and you were so excited about that.

JAMERSON:Yep. It's really brought me so much joy, um, I think for multiple reasons, just being kind of--I've always played it and been around it, but like it just clicked to me in the last year or so. And my approach with it has always been, "This is for me. I'm gonna like get acquainted with this instrument. I don't have to perform it if I don't want to, and--or till I'm ready." And, you know, going back to the early days of my grandparents, just being around them playing banjos and the historical relevance of the, and regional cultural relevance of it. I saw--is it Rhiannon Giddens? Who's just a--you know, she's just been such a champion for the banjo, and how she talks about, like, the banjo just blurs all these cultural lines, you know. It's an African instrument, and--but, you know, I've grown up with rural white people playing it, you know, and--but rhythmically you see that, that African sort of descent, and, um. You know, just personally, like I can't--I've not dove into the standards. I've just tried to make it my own. And so, with that, writing my own songs, and it just has put me in a different place. And from a song perspective, I feel like it's simplified my writing, of like getting back to just like, like how like standard songs were written. You know, it's not really contemplative. It's just like, it's just telling a story and with like a chorus that might be like four lines, you know. (sings) I'm a little bit late. (stops singing) You know, that's the chorus for--it's like our closing song now. So, it's like, I don't know, it's made me feel like a part of something grander and like zoomed out and not--like I said, I feel like sort of my contemplative, like really zoomed-in stuff is behind me in some ways. Like I said, I always reserve the right to be as specific as I want to, but the banjo just feels more communal. The songs feel more communal in that way. And I don't know. I'm just, I'm thankful for it, because it's like, when you're younger and you're learning instruments, for me, it just, it was really hard to learn, to how to play guitar and feel comfortable on it. And I feel like the banjo--one, being around Rachel, who is a master, I think, at the claw-hammer style banjo. It was like I was able to watch and absorb. And it's just been--I don't know, something clicked. So, I'm thankful for that, so late in life to come to something new musically and just feel like I'm stepping into a whole new world.

BOYD:I feel--I definitely got the sense that you think in terms of seasons, like the--and that you've gone through seasons. It sounds like there's a season that's coming to an end, but a new season overlapping. Banjo sounds to me--again, like you were like, giddy and--(Jamerson laughs)--excited when you pulled that out. It feels like it's opening up a new season.

JAMERSON:Yeah, definitely. Season of the banjo. Yeah, it's--because it automatically puts you in a place. It just puts you in a different place. And, you know, I go back to my great-grandmother's house. Like, that was the first time, you know, when you're a young child and you're just kind of--it's just raw experience and you're just like coming into awareness of yourself and your surroundings. And that was just like the, the earliest memories were, was a banjo was there. Banjo and fiddle and guitar and group singing. And, um, so, yeah, it--like I said, I feel like I'm almost back to where I started, but it's--I have all this experience and It just feels lighter. Like I said, I feel like I've sort of exorcised some demons with this last one that I--I felt the heavy stuff, and I've done it with other people, and now it just feels like time to sort of joy. You know, joy. And like, just togetherness. And, man, it's liberating. It's liberating to like--because, you know, my--that was always my thought and purpose going through the hard stuff. It's like, yeah, I don't want to feel this way forever. I want to feel it and address it so I can move on. So, that's just the medicine of art, that I feel like I just want to share with the world. Really, like, it's free therapy. It's really a way to like turn all these hard things that we as humans, it's just inevitable. Suffering is just part of it. So much of that inner tension comes from avoiding it. You know?

BOYD:Yeah.

JAMERSON:Which it's like we're programmed, I think, to avoid it.

BOYD:Sure.

JAMERSON:You know? Or like, we're trying--It's self-preservation. But, man, if we can hijack that and just feel it all, then I think--there's just, I think, I do--in my experience, there's just on the other side of that is, is joy. So--

BOYD:All right. That's a perfect note to end on. But I'm going to end by saying and declaring we're going to do this series. And I think next time around, let's go back to the beginning and let's talk about growing up and some of the biographical stuff. Talk about family. Talk about football. Because there's no doubt in my mind this has had an influence--

JAMERSON:Oh, yeah--

BOYD:On you. That, that's so--all right. I'm going to hit stop.

JAMERSON:All right.