BARTLETT:This is Jennifer Bartlett from the Louis B. Nunn Center for Oral History at the University of Kentucky, and I am interviewing Dr. Anne, Anne Prestamo, former dean of libraries at Florida International University, via Zoom on Friday, June 13th, 2025, for the Association of Southeastern Research Libraries, or ASERL, oral history projects. So, good morning, Anne.

PRESTAMO:Good morning.

BARTLETT:Thanks so much for talking with me today for, for the project. Um, so, um, for this interview, we want to talk, um, a lot about your experiences with ASERL. But to begin with, can you tell me a little bit about your educational background and your early career experiences?

PRESTAMO:Okay. Um, like I think many others that I have known in the profession, um, librarianship was not my first degree nor my first career. Um, I've had a lot of colleagues over the years who, who came to librarianship perhaps a bit later in life, and I'm certainly in that category. Um, my undergrad degree is, uh--was in music performance with, uh, dual majors in, in cello and piano performance. And I worked for many years as a professional musician. Um, and I did a lot of studio teaching as, as part of that. Um, so then the next question people usually have is, "So, how did you end up being a librarian?" And it really is kind of a--sounds like a made up story, I guess in some ways, but I, I swear it's, it's the honest to god's truth. My last job as a professional musician was as a staff pianist for the Milwaukee Ballet. And it was probably the worst sort of position I could have had, given the fact that going back many, many years, even, even to my college days, I had problems with recurring, and what became chronic, tendonitis. Ballet accompanying is very physically demanding. There's a lot of repetition. You're playing for classes and rehearsal often, you know, repeating the same things over and over. And the--because of the nature of the music, there's a lot of very repetitive motion, particularly for the left hand. So, ballet accompanying really kind of finished me off physically. Um, I had been seeing an orthopedist who specialized in performing arts cases. And after, you know, a whole variety of treatments, everything from, uh, a lot of steroids, injections, ultrasound--he sat me down one day and said, "I think you need to reconsider what you want to be when you grow up."

BARTLETT:Oh. (Bartlett laughs).

PRESTAMO:So, because of, uh, needing a--an ever--uh, a never ending source of music to play for ballet class, I was a frequent visitor at the Milwaukee Public Library because they had a fabulous sheet music collection. So, when I was getting bored with what I was playing, I'd, I'd go and look for new things, and I literally walked into the lobby--their downtown central lobby is a beautiful old building. Multi-story atrium, terrazzo, marble. It's, it's gorgeous. And I walked into that atrium and looked up into the dome, and it was like a bolt from the sky said, "Maybe you should be a librarian." So, um, fortunately, um, the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee had a, a great library and information science program. So, I was able to, you know, just--this was long, long before online programs had even been imagined. Um, so I was able to, you know, stay right at home, get the degree. I thought I was headed for special librarianship, or at that time there was still something sometimes referred to as information brokers.

BARTLETT:Mm-hmm. Yeah. I remember.

PRESTAMO:Um, and before the time when everybody could do their own searching, um, businesses, corporations would contract with an information broker to carry out the research that they needed. But I was fortunate to get a paid internship while I was working on my degree, working in the library at UW Milwaukee. So, that totally changed my, my thinking and my trajectory. And I went into academic libraries and never left.

BARTLETT:That's an amazing story. I, I think you're right. A, a lot of librarians start off as something else, and then they have some kind of formative experience, and they decide to go into librarianship.

PRESTAMO:And I actually know probably at least a dozen people who have undergrad degrees in music, got their library degree, and only a very small number of those ever worked as a music librarian. (Prestamo laughs).

BARTLETT:I was going to ask, um, was, was that something you thought about, given your background, trying to go into music librarianship?

PRESTAMO:Um, I think it was kind of in the back of my mind. But the opportunities that presented themselves early in my career, you know, really took me in, in completely other directions.

BARTLETT:Right, right. So, yeah, let's, let's talk about those other directions. So, you, you go through library school--um, can you talk about, you know, your first--your first positions and what direction you went into--(Prestamo clears throat)--in academic libraries?

PRESTAMO:Um, at the time that I was getting my degree, um, the University of Wisconsin system was under a hiring freeze. So, um, the UW Milwaukee library--there were a number of people who were on half-time, one year appointments. That was the most that was allowed under the freeze. Um, and so, at the time that I graduated, one of the other system campuses forty-five miles down the road, UW Parkside, had an opening for a--I'll. I'll call it a general purpose reference librarian. Um, it meant that I was liaison to, um, a number of, uh, departments in the humanities--social sciences areas. Um, this was also the time that the Web was just really kind of starting to, to take hold. So, in that year--that one year appointment that I had at Parkside, um, I created the first Web site for the library.

BARTLETT:Nice.

PRESTAMO:Um, they had a, a long and very strong history of information--(Prestamo clears throat)--excuse me, information literacy, and all of their freshmen were required to complete a course. And working with the other librarians who had been teaching those courses for many years, we, we put the first version of that, um, largely online. So, those were two, um, you know, opportunities that I had being in the right place when these things were just very much in their infancy. So, that kind of started me on a path to, um--as my brother has described it, I turned into the--I, I moved to the geeky side of librarianship fairly early on. (Both laugh).

BARTLETT:Well, I--you know, I think it's great that all, all the students of that institution were required to take some sort of information literacy class, um, because that's, you know, still not universal. Certainly, it's often, often optional. So, so that's, that's terrific. But, um, you, you, you did the information literacy, uh, work and, and the Web site, but I think you also taught, um, LIS [[EDITOR'S NOTE: library and information science]] classes at some point. Is that right?

PRESTAMO:I, I did some adjunct teaching for the, the UW Milwaukee Library School. Um, and a lot of that was focused on the emerging technologies of the time. (Prestamo clears throat). I, I did not teach in, in the degree program, but they had a very strong program--(Prestamo coughs)--that largely supported their, their previous graduates, but also was open to, to any librarian in the area. Um, and they could--if they took enough of these classes, get a certificate. They had a number of different categories of, of certificate. But, um, you know, one day I, I got called into the office and they said, "We need somebody to teach basic Web development and design." And I said, "Oh, that's nice." And--(both laugh)--they said, "We think it should be you." So, you know, for people who, who were in the profession in the--in the early to mid-nineties, um, I think would, would back me up in saying we were all just kind of making it up on the fly. Um, and I look back at, at some of those very early efforts, um, and I guess I would say, you know, we, we were working with the tools that we had at the time, and we were doing the best we can, but of course, they looked so primitive when we see where we've come in, in the last thirty years.

BARTLETT:Yeah, I agree. I think we all learned HTML skills and, and did Web sites, and I'm sure our work is still archived on the Wayback Machine--(Prestamo laughs)--somewhere. If we wanted to go back--(Bartlett laughs)--and take a look at that. So, yeah, no it was--it was a great, great time, I, I recall. Um, so, um, at some point in your career, you made a move to Oklahoma, right? Is that--

PRESTAMO:Yes--

BARTLETT:You went to the University of Oklahoma, and then Oklahoma State?

PRESTAMO:I did some adjunct teaching for the University of Oklahoma, but my principal employment for the entire time I was in Oklahoma was Oklahoma State.

BARTLETT:Mm-hmm. And that was in cataloging, uh, technical services?

PRESTAMO:Eventually, um, I moved into an associate dean position where I had, um, oversight responsibility for cataloging. I, I gotta say, I myself was never a cataloger. Um, but I'm incredibly grateful to catalogers that I worked with, particularly through some system migrations that I was a big part of. And I, I honestly have to say from those migrations, I learned far, far more about cataloging than I ever learned in library school.

BARTLETT:Hands-on experience, yeah, yeah. So, um, what, what drew you to a library leadership position at, at Oklahoma State? Because not everybody wants to do that., certainly. But what attracted you to, to that kind of position?

PRESTAMO:I, I--to be perfectly honest, I really have to say it was--it was an accidental progression. Um, it was not a, a conscious goal that I had set for myself. Um, but my--I guess my first--my first step along that path toward administration was being named a department head. And again, this was, was very much tied to the, the changing technologies that we were, um--that we were implemented. I might have had some other colleagues who said we were--we were confronted with, um, uh, not in the least being the transition to online journals and periodicals. So, one day, um, the, the wonderful dean of libraries at Oklahoma State at that time was a gentleman by the name of Ed Johnson. Um, and Ed called me into the office and he said, "I want to create a new department to manage all this online stuff." (Prestamo laughs).

BARTLETT:Is that what he said?

PRESTAMO:Yes.

BARTLETT:Online stuff? (Bartlett laughs).

PRESTAMO:All this online stuff. You know, how do we know what we have, and how do people find it? And so, he said, "We're gonna call the new department digital library services." I said, "Okay, that's--yeah." And he said, "And I want you to head it up." And I said, "And what precisely do you envision for the role of this new department, and, and what are your expectations?" He said, "I don't know, just do something. We need to be able to find this stuff, and we need to, you know, create programs to educate our users on how to find this stuff." So, the department started off as me and one twenty-hour-a-week graduate student. Um, and eventually, um, the, the scope of what this department was involved in went beyond just purely managing e-resources to including our digital collections, um, that we were developing locally. Um, and, and things grew from there. Um, and it was while I was head of that department then that, um, we were migrating from Notice to Voyager, and I was--because of the e-resource component there, I was made part of the implementation committee. And then, from there, the associate dean, who had had oversight responsibilities for library systems and technical services, retired. And I was initially put in the position as an interim, and then eventually was the successful candidate for the job. So, again, it was not something that I had said as a career goal or, or had in mind. Really, I thought having come into the profession at the age that I was, um, you know, I, I would have been happy to, to get a--to get promoted and get tenure. Um, and, and didn't have any real goals or, or expectations beyond that.

BARTLETT:So, from the, the AD position at, at Oklahoma State, then um, a, a dean opportunity came available at Florida International University, and, and you became dean there in 2013, I believe. So, you can tell--

PRESTAMO:Yes--

BARTLETT:Can you tell me a little bit about that decision making process and, and, um, what, what motivated you to make that pretty big change?

PRESTAMO:It was, um. There was so much about Florida International University that appealed to me. Um, as well as the physical location, um, being in Miami, um--it was interesting, when I was interviewing for the position, I was asked repeatedly--sometimes in rather subtle ways, other times very directly--um, something along the lines of, "You do understand that Miami is a really different place to live?" And finally, during my interview with the then provost, he posed that question to me, and I finally said, "Why does everyone seem so concerned about this?" And he said--well, he said, "I'll give you a very recent example." He said, "About three years ago, we recruited two faculty in, in the hard sciences, um, to come to FIU as a team." And he said, "They've done great work while I've been here. They have been extremely successful in, you know, grants and publishing and so on." He said, "I think it's been very good for them professionally, but they've submitted their resignations. They're both moving on because their families just can't deal with Miami."

BARTLETT:Oh, really?

PRESTAMO:Um, and so I, I said "Well, my husband's Cuban. We have spent a lot of time in South American countries. We embrace the, the multiculturalism of Miami and, and what it has to offer. And we would make this decision very much with our eyes open and, and understanding the city that we're coming to." And the other, I think, really key thing for me with FIU, um, was its commitment to transforming students' lives. And it, it wasn't just a slogan. Um, the, the numbers of students at FIU who were first time in college--first gen in their family to go to college, um, every year--commencements, of course, were one of my favorite activities throughout the year, and for many years they featured what they called Worlds Ahead grads that were profiled. And the stories were amazing of what some of these students had overcome in terms of maybe how they got to the country in the first place, um, what their, you know, economic and family situation had been. Um, so being part of an institution that cared about students in the way that FIU did, at least at that point in time, um, was very meaningful to me.

PRESTAMO CONT'D:Um, and also, people would ask, "Well, why is it called Florida International University?" Well, you know, first and foremost, Miami is a very international city. Um, in, in a given year, um, the, the student body was often comprised of students from--anywhere from 130 to 150 different countries. Um, just among the library staff, um--did analysis--one year we had people born in twenty-seven different countries on the staff of the libraries.

BARTLETT:Wow. Wow (??).

PRESTAMO CONT'D:Um, so it's an incredibly rich environment, I felt to, to work in. And it is one of the--it--and again--I'll, I'll couch this again by saying at the point in time that I came and, and really for, for the time I spent at FIU, it was one of the most rapidly adaptive institutions that I had ever worked at. Um, you know, we all know university bureaucracies are, are not designed for speed a lot of the time. Um, but things at FIU moved and changed at a much faster pace than other places I had been familiar with.

BARTLETT:Now, it sounds like a really amazing and unique environment there. And, you know, certainly the libraries, um, are, are really always the heart of any campus. And, and so, you know, you, you come in as dean, um, to, you know, the, the center of this, you know, uh, very rapidly changing international, you know, campus with a lot of students from different backgrounds and staff from different backgrounds. As an incoming dean, what did you see as some of your, you know, opportunities as, as a new dean? But, but perhaps some of the immediate challenges you, uh, needed to face leading, leading that institution.

PRESTAMO:I think the biggest challenge that I, I felt when I arrived was building trust and confidence among the librarians and staff. Um, there had been a very, uh, long-serving, uh--originally his title was library director, it eventually changed to dean. But, but he had been there virtually from, from the beginning of the library at FIU until the--2007, eight, somewhere in there. Um, so his retirement was a huge change. Um, there was a new dean who came in, did not stay for very long. They had an interim for a little over a year, while the search that I was eventually part of was carried out. So, there, there was a certain feeling of, of fragility, I think, that I sensed when I arrived, um. And, along with building trust, um, convincing people that it was okay to fail. Um, I had always--I had always felt in positions that I had had prior to coming to FIU, that I had a, a certain amount of leeway to take risks. And coming into FIU, I encountered what I perceived to be great, um, fear of risk-taking.

PRESTAMO CONT'D:Um, and, so, so I think I saw that very much as connected to the building trust, um, aspect of, of developing a, a very open communications among the administration and the librarians and staff. I think one of the other things that I brought into FIU that perhaps ruffled some feathers among some of the librarians was also because of my past experiences. I viewed the role of staff within the libraries as critically important. And there is nothing that makes me bristle more than people who want to draw a really strong distinction between, well, they're not a librarian. And particularly as, as we've--as libraries have branched out into some non-traditional areas, um, we need expertise that comes from beyond the, the walls of the library profession and the library schools. Um, and I'm sure with your work as an oral historian, you've en--you've encountered some of that. Um--

BARTLETT:Yeah. The, um, sort of tension between people who have the ML--MLIS [[EDITOR'S NOTE: master of library and information science]], um, and, and those who don't is, is real. And, and I would agree with you. It's pretty, pretty unfortunate, um, because, you know, as, as you say, there's any number of things that need to be done in a library, and some of them require an MLS, perhaps, but, but many do not. And our students don't know who's a librarian and, and who isn't. They just want help. And that's what--

PRESTAMO:That's--

BARTLETT:Yeah.

PRESTAMO:That's--yes. Precisely so.

BARTLETT:Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. So, um, I would imagine the life of a, a new dean--and especially in that environment when you were, you know, looking at that sort of fragility of, of the staff and, and dealing with, with issues. Um, a lot of your time is, is, you know, you're, you're pulled a lot of different ways, right? So, you're--the demands on a dean are many. Many and constant. Um, but one, one of the, the associations that you would have been, um, involved with fairly early on, I would assume, would be--would be ASERL, um, right? So, um--

PRESTAMO:Actually, I, I had my very first involvement with ASERL before I ever came to FIU.

BARTLETT:Oh, really? Tell me about that. (Prestamo laughs). Tell, tell me about your first, first encounter with ASERL.

PRESTAMO:Um. You may or may not recall, um, one of the--it was among the evolution with our, our library discovery systems. Um, it was a, a, a product called Summon, which actually was, was a, a interface that could ride on top of another ILS. Um, Oklahoma State, along with Dartmouth, had been the two silent development partners with what was then Serial Solutions to develop Summon. And we were the first--Oklahoma State was the first institution to go live with Summon. So, as a result of that, I had done a number of conference presentations, invited speaker engagements, um, to talk about not only what the system could do, but what our experience had been as a development partner and a very early implementer. So, I don't know, we'd probably been live with Summon for maybe something approaching a year. And I got a call from one of the people at--by then, ProQuest Serial Solutions. Um, and he said, "Hey, I'm wondering if you might be able to speak, so and so,"--another colleague from another institution, um, had been scheduled to speak to an ASERL deans and directors meeting, and was ill and was not going to be able to do it. And so--wanted to know if I might be willing to step in. And I said, "Well, when is this and where is this?" And they said, "Well, you can do it virtually. It'll be at one o'clock this afternoon." (Prestamo laughs). So--

BARTLETT:Sure. (Bartlett laughs).

PRESTAMO:And there was a little more involved at that time. We didn't have Zoom, you know. Doing, doing an online hookup involved some more, um, you know, perhaps technicalities. So, I remember running around trying to find something I could use as a suitable background, um, to do this from my office computer. Um, and so, with one presenter in the room at ASERL and me coming in virtually, we did the presentation, and--(Prestamo laughs)--that was that. So--(Bartlett laughs). And as well, um, Oklahoma State was a member of the Greater Western Library Alliance, which has done collaborative work with ASERL over many, many years. And I had some former colleagues from--both from Greater Western Library Alliance days, but also through, um, my involvement for many, many years as a member of what was originally called the OCLC [[EDITOR'S NOTE: online computer library center]] Members Council, and eventually became OCLC Global Council. So, coming into ASERL, I felt like I was coming to a room of colleagues, many of whom I already knew or had worked with through other organizations.

BARTLETT:And so, then you were coming into OCLC--or I'm sorry, ASERL with, you know, not, not with a blank slate but you knew a, a lot of--a lot of people already.

PRESTAMO:Yes, yes.

BARTLETT:Yes. Yeah. So, um, um, can you tell me a little bit about, you know, some, some projects that particularly stand out for you, um, with, um, your, you know, early days with, with ASERL, or even, you know, when you--when you became president of ASERL in 2019. What stands out to you, uh, for, you know, particularly, um, interesting collaborations or projects or some of the support that, that you feel that group provides its members?

PRESTAMO:I think that the support, um, aspect of it is probably one of the least quantifiable, but in many ways perhaps one of the most important. And that was--that was never more true than the COVID period that, that we went through. Um, I think knowing that you have a group of, of close colleagues, um, that anytime you might face a challenge or, um, uncertainty of any kind, there's likely somebody that you can pick up the phone and know that they'll take your call and share insights or experiences that they have. And if it's not something that they've encountered, that you'll have a sympathetic ear, um, to help you talk through and, and perhaps work through and clarify your own thinking. So, that, that aspect, I think is, is just critically important. And the more nuts and bolts sort of area, um--I think the two--the two areas where ASERL has a very strong history and track record are in resource sharing and in professional development offerings. Um, and I'm sure John would, would corroborate this, but the prof--ASERL has made the commitment that its professional development offerings are, are open to people in the profession beyond just the membership. And I think that is so important.

PRESTAMO CONT'D:But again, I'm gonna come back to--it's not just our librarians that benefit from that, but many, many of our staff participated in the online professional development offerings and, and benefited tremendously. And I know for--in particular, for some staff at FIU, knowledge and, and information that they gained through some of those professional development activities actually contributed to their decisions to eventually pursue an MLS. Um, so--but back to the resource sharing components. Scholars trust the, you know, shared print commitments, and archiving, I think, has been critically important to, to many, many libraries and has helped tremendously as, as we've tried to sell the concept of deaccessioning print journals on our own campuses. Um, and being able to point to these shared resources--to which we've contributed, but then can, can benefit for the future--um, has, has really been important. Um, that same sort of idea, you know, can be applied to the Collaborative Federal Depository Program. Um, and then, of course, getting back to the very--the very heart or the, the origins of, of resource sharing, the, the members commitments to share not only monograph collections, but more recently, um, kind of branching out into considering sharing special collection materials, which I know for a lot of institutions is a pretty big leap. Um, but again, very important. And even though we look back on the COVID period as kind of a hell on earth that we never hope to experience again, I think it really did help drive some of these--what I see as very progressive decisions for libraries, because suddenly we found our ability to travel was, was severely limited. So, we were more willing, perhaps in that period and, and what followed to consider what many thought were some kind of out of the box sorts of ideas.

BARTLETT:Yeah. It's, it's interesting, um, you know, that you, you say that, um, because, um, this oral history project that we're doing now, it started off being an in-person project that, you know, I would travel to talk to people. But with the pandemic, suddenly we're--everybody's doing a lot more Zoom interviews. So, I think that's a good example of what, you know, you're talking about, that you know, the way we do our, our business in, in the libraries and how we provide services to our patrons, to our students changed with, with the pandemic. Yeah. Um, but I remember here at Kentucky when, when that hit, we thought, um, that it was--it would all be over in, in a couple of weeks, and, and we would be back to business, right? But, but it was not. Um, so--and, and you were president of ASERL from 2019 to 2020, um, if I recall. And so, you would have been in, in the thick of, of that in a leadership position. So, do you recall the conversations that, um, ASERL leadership had, and the membership had, about how to handle these situations in our libraries that were just happening on a--on a daily basis? And, and what did those conversations look like, and, and what kind of mutual support, I, I suppose, was, was available there?

PRESTAMO:I think the mutual support, um, kind of manifested itself in a number of, of different ways. Some of it was sharing, you know, what was happening on our campus, what was being proposed. Um, 'cause I think, you know, we can all probably remember and think about some things that were considered on our campus or, um, we heard about from other campuses that seemed like pretty wild ideas at the time. Um, and so I think having the ability to, to get together, um, via Zoom with our colleagues--it, it was kind of a good reality check for us, you know. And to hear things that were being proposed, ideas that were being considered at other institutions, um, perhaps gleaning some information that we thought we could take back to, um--in some cases, try to help head off what we thought was a really off the wall idea and wasn't going to work well for us. Um, so, that was--that was critically important. And some of it--some of it, you know, very honestly, was just a place for us to commiserate and vent. And I think all of us felt a tremendous amount of pressure to put the best face on things as we were talking with our librarians and our staff and, and our administrators. But those online times that were strictly, you know, our colleagues' other places--for a lot of us, I think, was a real release valve.

BARTLETT:Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. You know, I, I think, you know, one of the themes of, you know the, the interviews in, in this project is the mutual support that ASERL has traditionally provided, um, to, to its membership and, and what it, you know, continues to provide and making contacts with, with other colleagues and identifying areas that, that can be, be supported. Um, when, when you think about your term as, as ASERL president--I know, probably the pandemic overshadows everything like, like it--like it does. But, um, what, what, what do you see as, as your, you know, major accomplishments or, or what are--what are you proudest of, of, you know, both your, your term as president but also your, your work there with, with your colleagues.

PRESTAMO:Um, some of it, at kind of a very crude and basic level, was we kept it together through that year. (Both laugh). Um, very frank--but I talked about what I have viewed as the importance of the professional development offerings, and I think continuing those through the pandemic, when nobody could go to a conference, and nobody could go to any kind of training and so on--having those professional development opportunities continue throughout that year was really, really important, um, for the, the staff at all of the member libraries. And, just like I said a, a moment ago about the conversations among deans and directors, um, that opportunity that professional development provided for our folks to have interaction with people from other institutions that was, was so missed throughout that time, um, was, was really, really important.

BARTLETT:And, you know, these professional development opportunities, I mean, they're free, of--

PRESTAMO:Yes, yes.

BARTLETT:Of course, for, for everyone, which is--(Prestamo laughs)--which is--which is great. But it, it seems to me that they've grown over the years. There's been a lot more variety of, you know, really interesting speakers and, and topics that are very, very pertinent. So, um--

PRESTAMO:And--

BARTLETT:How, how does that work, actually? I just wanted to ask, um, does the board, um, decide what, what gets on the schedule, or is that John and his staff or--

PRESTAMO:It's--it is really largely John and, and the staff, and I, I think board members or, or members at large may suggest particular topics or areas where their institution--they see a need at their institution. Um, so there, there certainly are avenues of input that way. Um, and, and sometimes, quite frankly, it's, it's somebody stepping up from an institution and say, "Hey, we've, we've been doing this really neat, this really successful project, and we'd like to tell people about it." Um, some of them have come up--you know, come from that perspective. And the other thing I, I do want to particularly say--I've talked about what I see as the real benefits for our librarians and staff, but also probably equally important are the opportunities that it presents for librarians from member libraries to do the presentations, um, uh--as, as deans and directors, I think we try to support and provide avenues for our librarians to be professionally active and to provide them with opportunities that will help them in their own career progression, whether that's just in a very local sense--the, the tenure and promotion process, um, and, and getting, getting the things done they need to do to move along in that process. Um, but I see that as, as an equal benefit of participation in the professional development programs as, as the information gleaned from attending.

BARTLETT:That's, that's, that's a great point. I'm glad you brought that up because, um, I've given one presentation to an ASERL meeting, and I will say it's a very supportive group. I went in feeling very intimidated. (Both laugh). But it was--it was--it was great. So, it always seemed to be a very, you know, supportive, open, open group to, to work with. Um, so as, as we--as we, you know, start closing, um, the interview, I just, you know, wanted, wanted to ask you about, you know, what, what you think about the overall value of consortial institutions like ASERL. We've talked about, you know, the shared collection development and, um, the, the professional development opportunities and, and leadership, um, cultivation and, and so on. Um, so what, what do you see--if, if you had to predict, like the future of, of ASERL or groups like ASERL--do you--do you think they will still be, uh, valuable, you know, vibrant institutions for, for our libraries? What what roles do you think they can--they can play?

PRESTAMO:I've been probably a very vocal and, and avid cheerleader for any kind of library cooperation, whether that's through a, a formal membership organization or consortium. Um, the seventeen years that I spent in Oklahoma, I think, really set me on that path. Um, it's no secret. Oklahoma is usually somewhere in the bottom part of the list in terms of funding for education, whether that's K-12 or, or higher ed. Um, but because of strong cooperation, not only among the academic libraries there, but all types of libraries, um, they've been able to do some really great things in terms of resource access, um, and public libraries, academic libraries, K-12 libraries were all participants in a lot of collective subscriptions, as--again, as we move more toward online resources, joint licensing agreements--so that everyone was able to benefit. Pooling money from all the different types of libraries that were state supported, um, allowed for much greater breadth of resources being made available to everyone. Um, and from there I became involved with Amigos, which for this part of the country, Amigos was the, the parallel organization to what was [?? WORD UNCLEAR] for many, many years. Um, and that then led to my involvement with OCLC.

PRESTAMO CONT'D:Um, so I guess--I guess it's, it's probably very accurate to say the vast majority of library service work that I did throughout my career has been very collaborative, cooperative, focused. Um, so I'm a--I'm a very strong believer. Um, I know these days, in, in times when all of us are facing budget challenges, that sometimes there's a case to--I, I gotta protect mine. (Prestamo laughs). Um, but I think--I think one of the real benefits is the, the--collaboration and cooperation is, is the float all boats sort of concept. Um, the challenge to that, of course, being a certain selflessness, um, that one needs to have to understand that, no, not everything that, that a cooperative or consortium is going to do is of the same level of importance or interest to every one of the members. But, you know, maybe program A isn't really important for me, but I'm gonna support program A because we really need program C. Um, and so trying to engender that sort of thinking, I think, is one of the biggest challenges. But when that all works is when we all benefit.

BARTLETT:Is there anything else that you'd like to add that we, we haven't talked about this morning?

PRESTAMO:I guess the other thing that I would like to say that has been very, very important to me throughout my career, has been supporting and encouraging growth and development among colleagues, and in the role of dean at FIU, for the staff. And as all of us face budget challenges and so on, I think we all benefit when we provide the best opportunities that we can for our staff and our librarians to grow in the positions that they have. I'll share--I'll share one quick story, um, as we part that, for me, is, is a great point of pride, but also, um, personal and professional satisfaction. When I was at Oklahoma State, we had a young man--undergraduate music major, actually--um, who, who worked in the library as a--as a student employee. He graduated, went on to graduate school in music, um, needed to support himself while he was doing that. Got a job as a staff member in a library nearby where he was going to school. Got his master's degree and, and faced the realization that even with a master's degree from a prestigious school of music, um, was not going to pay the bills. So, took a full time position in a library. Eventually decided to get his MLS. Moved through a number of positions, became a department head, and this past year became an associate dean at an ARL [[EDITOR'S NOTE: association of research libraries]] library. And we've stayed in touch, you know, over the years and at various points. And when he was considering, you know, the degree or a job opportunity, we've, we've talked through things many, many times. And so that, that to me is, is tremendously satisfying. In the time I was at FIU, we had seven or eight staff members who completed their MLS degrees. Some of them stayed at FIU. Some of them moved on to other opportunities. But, um, that's one of the things when I look back on my career that, that I'm most proud of.

BARTLETT:The next generation--

PRESTAMO:Yes.

BARTLETT:Of, of librarians.

PRESTAMO:Yes.

BARTLETT:That's amazing. That's a great story. Well, Anne, thank you so much for talking to me, uh, this morning about your career and your experiences and, and, and ASERL. It's, it's really been a pleasure.

PRESTAMO:Well, I enjoyed it. Thank you so much, Jennifer.

BARTLETT:Thanks.