BARTLETT:Right. Good morning. Uh, my name is Jennifer Bartlett. I'm here in Lexington, Kentucky, at the Louie B Nunn Center for Oral history. It's August 9th, 2022 at 11:00, and I am interviewing Lynn Sutton for the Oral History Project. Uh, good morning, Lynn.

SUTTON:Good morning. Glad to be here.

BARTLETT:Thanks for agreeing to talk to to me about about your time at time at Acireale. Um, so, um, to just to begin with, uh, could you please tell me just a little bit about yourself, your, your background, um, and your your education?

SUTTON:Okay. Um, I am from Michigan. I grew up in the metropolitan Detroit area, went to school at University of Michigan, both undergrad, and got my masters in library science there. Thought I would spend the rest of my life there, actually, until, uh, my husband showed me a posting for the Wake Forest University Library job and moved my whole family down to North Carolina, and we ended up here. So I'm currently living in Beaufort, North Carolina, which is heaven. I enjoy it very much. And, uh, I've been retired now for five years. Yeah.

BARTLETT:Yeah.

SUTTON:Um, I also, uh, when I worked at Wayne State, uh, I got a PhD in, uh, education. So, um, that also is significant.

BARTLETT:Mhm. So in your educational experiences, um, what, uh, what prompted you to go into library science? What was the appeal there?

SUTTON:Well, I was the first in my family to go to college. And, um, often in those cases, I understand parents apply heavy pressure to do something practical, get a good job. and my parents did not do that at all. They just said, do whatever you want, take whatever courses you like. So I did, so I, I took, um, I had to fulfill a language requirement. So I took Latin because I had taken Latin in high school and I loved it. And then I took Greek in my sophomore year, and I loved it even more. And I ended up majoring in classical Greek, which is not practical at all. But, you know, my parents said, do what you like. So archaeology, uh, classical Greek studies. Um, so anyway, when I was a junior, I was sitting in the undergraduate library at Michigan, and I thought, shoot, I'm going to have to, like, support myself in a couple of years, so maybe I should figure out something practical. And so I literally got out a career guidebook and was sitting there in the library paging through what I would possibly like, And I saw a librarian, which would require a master's in library science. And Michigan had a program and I could stay in Ann Arbor for two more years. And I thought, I think I'll do that. So that's not very noble, but that's, uh, that's how it happened. And then later I learned that one of the great things about librarianship is you can have any background at all. Right? And, and you come to value people who have those quirky majors, because in an academic library in particular, you always need, you know, that you need that vast breadth of knowledge. And so, um, people with weird majors come in handy sometimes. So anyway, that was that was how I, I got into library science.

BARTLETT:Okay. Well, well, I have to ask, um, does does your knowledge of or did your knowledge of Latin and classical Greek ever come in handy during your career as a librarian?

SUTTON:In fact, it did because my first job was in a hospital library. Worry and so many of the medical terms. I did not have a background in science at all, obviously. Um, but I had taken a two course sequence in library school on medical libraries just because it was seemed intrinsically interesting to me. And so, um, my first job happened to be in a hospital library in Chicago and not having a science background. The the Latin in particular helped me a lot with medical terms and terminology. And so I, I feel like I picked it up more quickly than I did elsewhere. So.

BARTLETT:So you mentioned your first job was at a hospital library in, in Chicago. So, um, what what drew you to that position.

SUTTON:Was, you know, it was the first job that would take me, really. I mean, I got out of library school, I went to, uh. By then, I was pretty interested in the medical field, and I went to the Medical Library Association conference right after graduation, and there were people interviewing, and I interviewed for a couple of jobs, and this was the one that gave me the first, um, opportunity. And it was close to my home. It was only five hours away. And when you live in Detroit, um, Chicago is like a real city, you know, it's like you're if you want, like big city experience, you go to Chicago. So, um, anyway, I love Chicago, but I only stayed there 14 months. And then, you know, I was like 22 years old, and, uh, because I went right from undergrad to grad school, which I came to find out is not very typical. Many people work in between or have careers in between. But I went, you know, from May until I started in July, only two months later anyway. So I was very young and I had no friends, and I, um, I just decided when a job came open in the Detroit area, I would come home and, uh, so I got a job in a larger hospital library in Detroit. And, um, it was two hospitals, actually. So I did that. And then my dream job came open, which was the head of the Harper Hospital Library in Detroit, in the Detroit Medical Center. And it was my dream job because one of the librarians there became president of the Medical Library Association as a hospital librarian, which was unheard of. You know, hospital libraries obviously are very tiny.

BARTLETT:Right.

SUTTON:And usually there are 1 or 2 person operations. But, uh, Harper had nine people and it was very prestigious. And in fact, I had just had my first child, and I heard that she was going to retire, and I planned the conception and birth of my second child so that I could be ready to apply for this job when it turned out well. Alexander is my second child, and he's, you know, a dream. But, um, it was a little Machiavellian, I guess. So I got that job, and however, this was in the 70s and, um, early 80s when healthcare was undergoing a very harsh transformation and, um, there was downsizing of hospitals all over. And we all thought Harper would be exempt because it was the largest hospital in Detroit. And and it was not. So one day I was we had consultants came in and I was told that, um, tomorrow my library would go from nine people to three people. And I was one of the three, fortunately. But we had to lay off all those people and they were like working mothers, and they lost their health insurance that night. It was horrible. Oh.

BARTLETT:That's terrible.

SUTTON:It was terrible. It was so heartless. So when that happened, I resolved to get out of the hospital library industry and started looking around. And a friend of mine was at Wayne State University in the library system. She was the head of medical library, and they had an opening for a science librarian. Well, again, I was a Greek major, but, um, they hadn't been able to fill the position for a while. And, um, because I had worked in the health care industry, that was close enough for the sciences. And so they hired me. And that was really a wonderful thing, because it's hard. I have come to learn, when you are a librarian, to change tracks from one type of library to another, and especially in small special libraries, which is what, you know, hospital libraries were to go work in an academic library was just a huge step. And fortunately, I. The combination of circumstances, I was able to move on to that. So that's how I got into the world of academic libraries. And um, several years later, I was chosen to be the new director of an undergraduate library. And I got to this was, I think later in your questions is one of your what is your most significant achievements? One of them, and until 2011, this remained as my most significant achievement, which is to design and build a new library from scratch and create the programs. The policies hire all the staff to accomplish a mission that you have set out. So we were just told by the administration, go build an undergraduate library because we don't think our undergraduates are being very well served. The, um, Wayne State is a is a graduate heavy, uh, urban university. And so there might be 1800 Hundred undergraduates but 30,000 graduate students. So those undergraduates were left behind. So we had a fabulous time in designing that library, and I loved every minute of it. And so I did that. And that opened in 1997. And then, um, our dean moved on, and I, uh, we had an interim dean who was a friend of mine, and I, I said, you know, if you need an associate dean, I would be happy to be your interim associate dean until this all gets sorted out. He said, okay, so that's how I got into administration. Well, I guess I was, because I was the head of a library, but still, um, so so I did that, uh, for a couple of years. They hired the new dean. The new dean wanted to keep me on as a permanent associate dean. So life was lovely. And, um, another turning point came when I applied for a job as the head of the director of the library at Oakland University in Rochester, Michigan, and it came down to me and one other person with a finalist. And I don't know if you've ever been in this position, but when you're a finalist and you know you're a finalist, then you don't hear anything for a couple of weeks. It's not a good sign, right.

BARTLETT:Mhm.

SUTTON:So I wrote to my contact on the search committee and said you know, where are you. I'm just kind of wondering. And they said they had offered it to the other person. And the reason was that person had a PhD.

BARTLETT:Ah.

SUTTON:And I said, well, no one's ever going to tell me that again, so I'm going to go get a PhD. And luckily at Wayne State, I could have my all my tuition paid and go to class right on campus. As I said, it's an urban university. So they're geared toward working students. So all my classes were in the evening and they were right there and they were free. So, you know, that was pretty easy. Although I had three children, three school age children by then. So that was hard. Yeah, but it's tough. Yeah. But anyway, I got my, um. I was working on my PhD, and then my husband, now second husband, um, worked for a bookseller, which was an online bookseller, and his territory included North Carolina. And he went on paid a visit to the triangle, um, Research Triangle libraries and also Wake Forest. And when he came home in 2004 three and said, if a job ever comes open at Wake Forest, you would really like it there. And I go, I've never heard of Wake Forest. I don't, you know, I want to live in the South. So why are you telling me this? But guess what? Their librarian died a couple of months later and they posted a job. And I would go online every once in a while just to look and see what was going on at Wake Forest in the library. And it was a good library, I could tell. Anyway, she died and they were a search committee. So long story short, I was offered the job in the spring of 2004, but that meant moving my entire family down to North Carolina, which was hard. And but I did so, and my ex-husband came with me and it was anyway, so that's how I got the job at Wake Forest. And that's how I was introduced to Israel.

BARTLETT:Wow. Wow. So what going going into, you know, administration. Um, you know, some librarians just, you know, don't want to do that because, you know, it will, you know, sort of take them away from their original specialty. Right. You know, in your case, perhaps, you know, health librarianship or medical librarianship. Um, you mentioned that you had a terrific experience setting up an undergraduate library. Is that what prompted you to want to continue your path into library administration?

SUTTON:I don't know, I guess, you know, even when you're a hospital librarian. I started out as a librarian of staff of one. It was just me. So you're already the boss. You know, I was boss and worker. And so you have to meet with the administrators. You know above you who are non librarians, which to me is kind of the definition of being an administrator when your boss is not a librarian. When you are the top library person and you have to report upward to people who don't understand why this is important and you have to justify that. That, I think, is what I consider to be administration. And I think I was good at it. And, um, I enjoyed it, I didn't the downsides I the higher you go up, the more downsides you see you know. But still and all I felt I was accomplishing a good thing. And definitely that experience with building the UGL, working with the architects, working with the administration, working with people, what I found very interesting, working people in the university about learning outcomes, you know, that was all new to me. Um, I had been more of a research oriented practitioner. And now to talk to people in undergraduate education about learning. And it was in the early days of learning centers. We had a learning center right in the library. So that was very, um, interesting because it was new and inspirational because it was I felt it was worthwhile.

BARTLETT:Well, let's let's talk a little bit about, you know, that transition to leadership at Wake Forest and your, your early involvement with, with Searle because, you know, certainly your experiences there as, as, as a new, a new Dean, um, would, would parallel, you know, some of your colleagues there, there in that group. So can you talk about, you know, some of your first experiences with, with Searle, your first meetings, your first contacts with some of your new colleagues and how that influenced your work? Uh, at Wake Forest?

SUTTON:Sure. Um, let me preface it by saying that when you're a hospital librarian, And you are very much dependent on your networks. So because you're a tiny library with a few hundred journal subscriptions, but you're your patrons need all the information in the world, the absolutely most important thing is resource sharing and developing a network of colleagues that can help you, um, you know, achieve your ends. So Aseral was a lot like that. You know, it was founded on this resource sharing. I thought, um, kind of ethos. And that was perfect for me because that's the background I came from. I was comfortable with that. Oh, good. Other librarians care about getting resources to their patrons. That all felt very comfortable to me. And I am, um, as many librarians are, I'm rather shy at meeting first, at people at first. And so I'm sure John Berger, you know, called me the first day when I was when I was hired or emailed me or something and let me know that there was this group. And, um, and I attended my first meetings. But what I typically do is kind of sit back and watch and observe the dynamics of what's taking place. And, um, I remember early on, I don't remember if it was 2004 when I came or shortly thereafter we had a regular ACS meeting, and in those days they were held essentially so that the men could play golf. Have you heard this before?

BARTLETT:I've heard this many times.

SUTTON:Yes, yes, you've heard.

BARTLETT:This many times.

SUTTON:So my memory, which could be faulty, is that Carol Diedricks is the one who really changed that, because she went to a meeting and she said, look, I'm a I'm a commuting dean and my husband lives in another town, and I don't get to see him them that often. And I don't want to spend my weekends watching you guys play golf and being away from my husband. So why don't we start having these meetings during the week like most other professionals? And you want to play golf. You can play golf some other time. And she said it pretty bluntly like that. And, you know, most of the non-golfers, um, said, actually, that makes a lot of sense. So I think that's how it happened that we changed from the good old boy kind of, you know, yuck, yuck. Drinking and partying and golfing to more of a professional basis. Maybe I made that up in my head, but that's how I remember it. So that all sounded good to me. And I think I volunteered for, you know, committees and so forth. But I didn't volunteer to be on the board until almost the end of my tenure. So I was a I was a dean of libraries, director or dean for ten years at Wake Forest. And I looked up my dates, so I. My presidency ended just as I went on to my next job, which was in the provost office as vice provost, so I. Every year they would put out a call. Okay, anybody interested in being on the nominating committee or if anybody is interested in being, you know, on the board, we have openings for president elect and secretary treasurer and all that and member at large. And so I never really volunteered for that. I volunteered for other things. And finally, after about eight years or so, I said, well, it's apparent you have to volunteer. They're not going to really just ask you. So so I told John Berger, I said, you know, if you I think it's time. I think everybody else has now been president or been on the board since I've been here. So I think I'm due. And he said, oh, I'm so glad you said that. And so, um, then I was president elect and president, and then, um, that's how that happened.

BARTLETT:Okay. Well, I want to say that, you know, your presidency of Acireale, uh, took place during a pretty significant time because I think that's when Azercell's office moved from Duke back to Atlanta, I believe so. Can you talk a little bit about about that move? Um, if you recall, and the impact that that had on the organization?

SUTTON:Yeah, I do recall that actually for a couple of reasons. One is that because Duke was close geographically to us. And so that meant, you know, well, when we heard that it was going to move to Duke and John was going to move to Durham, that was great because it would be closer. And John, I adore John. I think he's great personally, professionally. Um, I would get to see more of John And so it happened that he moved to Duke in Durham. And then it was not very long before it was apparent that that wasn't working for him personally. And my take on it was that it was a it was his personal, um, life that dictated or determined or at least suggested that he would need to move back to Atlanta to be fulfilled as a person. And I was I was as I was preparing very lightly for this talk, I looked back through some of the emails and he showed me a draft of his statement of why he wanted to move back to Atlanta, and he said something like, no, I don't want this in any way to make it sound like I did not have a good experience with Deborah and all the people at Duke. Um, Um, but I just feel like I need to move back to Atlanta, you know, to be a whole person or something. So I counseled him. I said, I think that's a little strong. I think you're kind of drawing attention to it by, you know, saying, this is not the case. This is not the case, when in fact it was part of the case. So anyway, I said, why don't you just, like, praise Deborah and her staff and the, you know, your whole situation there to the skies and then say, you know, but still for personal reasons, you need to move on. So I think that's what he did. But, um, so I think it was I think there were hurt feelings at Duke. I think there was, um, with Deborah herself. I think there were hurt feelings. And, um, I think it eventually subsided. And people are grown ups and they just move on. But it was it was a tough time for John, who just felt he needed to do it, but also didn't want to. You know, this is his life, his livelihood. If people said no, then he would have to make a choice between like quitting or, um, you know, hurting people that he cared about. So, um, I think it was mostly personal. I think also there were the atmosphere at Duke was was, um, not as hospitable as he thought. I think he was isolated. Um, I don't think he was, um, brought into the, uh, administration the way he had hoped. And I think he just kind of sat in an office at the far end of the stacks and, you know, go do your thing. So, um, but I remember talking to him a lot about it, and, um, it was during that time that I volunteered to go with him on his site visits. One of the things that he would do is to make 2 or 3 site visits to institutions, um, during the year and, uh, kind of on a regular rotational basis. And I think it would maybe it was because we were there in Durham at the time he was there in Durham. He said, like, would you want to go with me? And I said, I would love that. Actually, I would love to go on a site visit because, you know, it's like a busman's holiday. So we went up to UVA. I remember when things were a little touchy up at UVA, and we went other places and we were driving the car, and so I was in the car with him a lot. And so we had a lot of heart to hearts. So that's what I remember about that.

BARTLETT:I'd like to talk about John just just a little bit. And I think he would probably be horrified because he's he's a modest guy. I really love working with John. And and he's very, you know, self-effacing and, um, but but, you know, talking about the, the professional atmosphere of Assyria, you mentioned Carol Diedricks and, you know, the, you know, needing to move away from, from the golfing and and all that. But can you talk just a little bit, since you know John so well about the impact that he has had on Azrael's trajectory as, as a consortium and, and how how you think it's developed with him as executive director?

SUTTON:Well, I'm glad you asked that, because I was going to add that at the end. If you hadn't gotten to it because like one of your questions says, you know, what are some of the, um, led to the success of astral? And I, I honestly think it is mostly John. I remember meeting him one of the first times, and I made the mistake of saying, oh, where did you go to library school? And he said, oh, actually, I'm not a librarian. And I thought, then why would you want to hang around with all these librarians? But I think that turned out to be a strength because he looked on it as a consortium management, not for profit management, which I think brought in necessarily more professional, kind of nonpartisan kind of, um, approach. So I just found he wanted to be at the forefront of everything. And it turns out he followed the trends of librarianship as hard as or more than any of us. And often he would tell us what the leaders maybe because his contact with other consortium leaders, um, in RL or in spark or in, you know, any other organizations. But he would always know what was happening in the library world first. And not only did he know what was happening in the library world, first, he knew what was happening in consortium management first and in nonprofit management first, and he always wanted to bring in best practices and new things that could help. So it's I mean, he's still there, right? I mean, it's just I mean, I know that he he would look at other jobs from time to time. People would come after him or he would be interested, you know, and, um, I don't know how many jobs he actually applied for, but it's truly remarkable that he's been there so long and stays so fresh. Or at least he did during the time that I was there. Um, so I just think he's a remarkable leader. And you're right, very self-effacing and very low key. And one of the jobs of the president is to give the performance evaluation to the executive director. And it startled me to learn most presidents Residents kind of like emailed it to him and said, just sign it and give it back to me. You know, the next time I see you. And they didn't even have a conversation, which was just awful. So I had a conversation with him. He said, are you sure you want to do this? I said, well, yeah. So, um, and people, you know how people are, they they say 99% good things. And then they say one thing that could be, here's something you might want to work on. And then it's like, oh my God. It's like, yeah.

BARTLETT:That's what you fixate on. Yeah, exactly.

SUTTON:So I think it was I think it was Deborah Jacobs who had said to him, something about you might want to take a course in, um, public speaking. And so then he he just thought he was the worst public speaker of all time. And this was his real, you know, weakness and and how could he go on? And, you know, I mean, he does have a very dry delivery, you know, when he's talking, but And he has kind of a nervous tic of, you know, clearing his throat or something. But I mean, anyway, so for like years he would say, now what do you think I should do to improve my public speaking? Or do you think I should take this course or should I do this anyway? So, um, I remember that the, um, delivery of the performance evaluation was always fraught with feeling.

BARTLETT:Yeah, well, as it is for all of us, right?

SUTTON:Yes, of course it is. Yeah. Except my daughter in law, who loves it, you know, she loves to get. And, you know, young people will say, oh, please give me feedback. Give me feedback. Often they mean only positive feedback.

BARTLETT:That's exactly right. That's right.

SUTTON:But anyway, um, so I think the world of John and I think Astral's continued success is largely on his back. Yeah. Um, I also think and I think probably he had a hand in shaping this environment, but it truly is a collegial organization. Or it was when I was there, meaning people would help you. They would help you personally. They would help you professionally when they didn't have to. And it doesn't always happen. I was used to that. Like I said, in the medical or healthcare um, group, we all, you know, would would do anything to help another person. But I learned that, again, the higher you go up, the more jerks you encounter. And we were not in a library at Wake Forest, so I was not a part of RL. But what I heard them say, and you must have heard this, is that many of those directors or deans preferred Aseral because they could just be themselves and they could, you know, don't they didn't think someone was out to stab them in the back, and they weren't doing things for one upmanship. And it was just very refreshing to hear. I never saw that in the world of RL. But I can very well believe, you know, the, the preening and the the egos and so forth. Um, were were on display there and there was much less of that at a maybe 1 or 2 jerks. But then somebody would keep them in line or, you know, so on the whole, I felt it was a very supportive, collegial organization. And you need that when you're a dean of a library, you absolutely need that. And I think that fulfilled that role for many people.

BARTLETT:Yeah.

SUTTON:Including me.

BARTLETT:Well, and, you know, I'm glad you said that. Um, because, you know, I think morale in institutions can be a problem sometimes. And, you know, uh, being able to, you know, feel that you've you've got some information coming from, from your leadership and that, you know, what's going on in the library world at large is so important for for morale. And one of the things when I was doing research for our conversation today, one of the things that that that you did, um, that I find particularly helpful is that you, I think, had a blog at Wake Forest and you would you would write minutes and your thoughts about meetings and and you would, you would put that out there. And it's sort of, you know, reminds me of, you know, when you had a face to face conversation with John, you know, to open up those lines of, of communication. So do you think, um, you know, that was that was typical, um, of, you know, what your colleagues on Astro did, did did they take information back to their home institutions and do did did topics that or, you know, just speaking from your own experience to topics that you talked about in a certain issues that came up? Um, how did it affect your, your, your staff and, and what ideas could you bring back and sort of enhance that, that morale and sense of involvement?

SUTTON:That's very that's very interesting and astute. So when I got to Wake Forest, um, as I said, the previous director had died. But her view of professional development was to keep it for only 2 or 3 people in the organization. And back in back then, we didn't have a lot of money to send people places and the money that they did have, they kind of hoarded and only a few people traveled. So I determined to change that. And so I said essentially every every first year I started out with just the librarians, but all the librarians had this pot of money, and you can all spend $1,000 and go out and learn things, because at that point, I felt our staff needed to learn from others. Later I said, I think now you have things to contribute to the profession based on the things that we have done at, you know, at CSR. And so I said, but the only catch is if you travel to, you know, Los Angeles or whatever, you have to write it up in a blog. You have to, um, share that with people back home. And I think they still do it, actually. And, uh, that that changed everything because people saw the world out there. It's like, oh my gosh, I'm not the only interlibrary loan librarian, you know, in the world. And there are other people I can learn from. And we had so many people go on to become leaders in the field from just tiny little Wake Forest. It was so. It was so wonderful. So, uh, Wanda Brown became president of the American Library Association a couple years ago, and Steve Kelly was the president of Nasig. And, um, Lauren Presley was the president of, of CRL. It was just, you know, I think it just started from that little kernel and then by asking people to write about their experiences, so did others in the in the library will do that? I don't know, maybe not as, um. Overtly as we did, because I was using it for a purpose, for a staff development tool and to make our library better. Um, maybe others didn't need that impetus, but I felt that we did. And so I really stressed that, um.

BARTLETT:No, it's a great model. And, you know, in my experience and other people I've talked to, it's not necessarily common. So I think your point about that, you know, professional development opportunities for your staff is, is so important.

SUTTON:Let me just say that after, I don't know, three, 4 or 5 years, it became evident that there were non librarian staff who also would like to take advantage of these opportunities. And so then we opened it up to everybody and dang if they didn't become leaders. So it was it was it was really good.

BARTLETT:That's great. That's great. Well, you know, staying on the topic of professional development, um, one of the projects that you were involved in, um, with Azzurro, was a collaboration with, um, the historically Black College and Universities Alliance, where I believe you had two, two librarians come to to Wake Forest for professional development experience. Um, can you talk a little bit about, um, that that program and how it benefited your institution and these librarians as well?

SUTTON:Yeah. Um, the one I remember most clearly is Ayanna Sims from North Carolina, A and T, and she's the one we wrote a little article about and, um, about our experience. And that just worked out really well. Um, I won't speak to what she gained from it. I, I hope she gained a lot from it. I know that we as a staff gained from it. Um, for one thing, promoting, you know, Dei is now like very commonplace, right, in, um, in industry. But back then it was kind of fledgling. Right. About diversity and inclusion and and in our library, we had one African American librarian, and she's Wanda Brown. She's the one who came later president of Ala. But, um, people looked on Wanda as like an aberration. Oh, well, there's only one Wanda, so, you know, can't be any more out there like that. But we brought Ayanna in, and she was young and bubbly, and she attended our, uh, management meetings. And, um, we tried to get projects going between the libraries that would carry on. I'm not sure that was completely successful, but it I think it kind of broke open some. Stereotypes or broke open some barriers. Uh, to to enlarge our idea of what, um, good libraries can be. Um, Wanda later became Wanda, later became the librarian at Winston-Salem state, also an HBCU. But we, um, we tried to support HBCUs. And as you said, through ace URL, it was from a grant, wasn't it? Didn't we get a grant from. No, I don't know who it was from that that paid for some of it, but, um, it, uh, we stayed in touch with, with Ayana for years and years and years afterward and, um, um, I think it was a it was a it was a great program.

BARTLETT:Um. No, it sounds like a real highlight, um, that when you think about other programs in which you were involved, um, in, in a role as, as president and as you say, as, as as a member. Um. What? What do you feel really, really stands out? What do you what do you think are standout programs that Azzurro, uh, worked on during during your time there?

SUTTON:Yeah. Um, well, I think, uh, I think in general, the, um, the HBCU program was just one part of a greater effort for, um, uh, for diversity initiatives. And I think that was, again, kind of one of benefited from John being aware of, um, directions in which we needed to go. And, um, I think there was a continued effort from those early days with the HBCU program through the end of this kind of diversity. Um, leadership development, I think was was personally satisfying to me because it seemed so evident and so obvious that that's what we needed to do. So that was, um, leadership development in general, but leadership in development in particular for diversity, I think was a good thing. Um, you mentioned the Journal retention program, and I have less clear memories about that. But I, I do remember because it was, um, it it went back to my roots. I, um, again, if you're a hospital librarian, what you need is access to other people's journals because you can't afford to buy all the ones you need. So then you need a union listing tool. So I wrote an article on union listing and in Michigan and um, so that was kind of baked into my idea of what librarians do. So then in a, um, you know, research libraries like, oh my gosh, you have so much, but you still you never have enough. So, um, um, the journal retention thing was, was a it was kind of the inverse, right? It was like, who's keeping the last print copy? And in the old days it was like, who have access to that print copy? But anyway, um, so that I thought, and I don't know what happened to it, I don't know if it's still a thing or if.

BARTLETT:It's still a thing.

SUTTON:Is it still a thing? Okay, that's that's really good to hear. Um, so I, I thought that was, um, a very worthwhile thing. We did things in my year, like we updated the strategic plan, which I don't know, I guess. I think the strategic plan, the nucleus pretty much stayed the same. The issues in libraries kind of stay the same in the big picture, kind of in the how they're done changes. But, you know, like resource sharing is still still, you know, it's still a core. What that looks like is different. Um, but so our strategic plan, I think therefore is tweaked every year. We did that my year. Um, the move back to Atlanta. Moved away from Atlanta. Back to Atlanta. Um, I don't know.

BARTLETT:Yeah. Well, you know, it's it's interesting a a really long lived institution as, as you know, it was formed in 1956, which in Consortial years is, is is pretty, pretty impressive. But it is a geographically based, um, group. So it's based from southeastern libraries. So do you think with, um, resource sharing moving more towards, you know, online journals and open access, you know, materials, what do you think is the, you know, long term place of a geographically based organization, a consortium like Ace, or is there still value in in that sort of, um, configuration for, for library leaders.

SUTTON:I think there is. And it's hard to say why. Why it should be right. Because thinking back of all the organizations that I've been in, most of them were geographically based. And I guess in the early days it was because everybody could drive to a certain place, right? And now that's not really an issue. But for example, I was also a member of a group called the University Libraries Group, which was not geographically based. It was um, libraries of a certain size. It was like the ARL wannabes or gladware nuts, you know, they were large research libraries, but they had not they were not at ARL status, and they were all over the country. And you could just tell it was they met twice a year, same as ACL, but it was just not as tightly knit. And there's just something about I mean, you talk about libraries place, right? So you talk about consortium as place maybe I don't know because those. I can't even describe. Those factors that come with inhabiting a certain part of the. Of the Earth. It's just very strong. And, uh, I don't think that it would be. And maybe that's the problem with RL, right? It's it's not. It's the whole country. And so it's like, well, whatever those people in the Pacific Northwest, they don't have the same issues. Well, they do have the same issues, but it's just it's hard to say why it works so well now. Interestingly. So I was also involved in Solnit and those, um, iterations. Right. And those those all those OCLC based things also started geographically. Right. And then so then it grew and became whatever it became and tried to go national. And whenever you try and do that, you just kind of loosen the the ties. Why is that? Someone needs to do a dissertation on that.

BARTLETT:It's an interesting question, really. And I'm just starting to think is, is there something just innately valuable about meeting people face to face in your own geographic area?

SUTTON:I think there is. And, uh, I think they said at some point they, you know, they wanted to be always they didn't want to be bigger than driving distance of one day to get to a place. Um. So I there there is definitely something. I mean, now we're face to face, right? But it doesn't it doesn't feel the same.

BARTLETT:It's not quite the same. Right.

SUTTON:So this is interesting. So did astral have the zoom. Did they have zoom meetings I guess during the pandemic in.

BARTLETT:I would assume they did like everybody else. Right. Yeah. But yeah there there is sort of that distance and, you know, you're sort of getting back to the whole golf outing type, you know, origin of, of of Acireale. I mean, you know, perhaps some business went on, on, on the links. Right on, on the golf course, even if it was, you know, it's just your, uh, you know, meeting somebody at, at, uh, you know, a local restaurant or, or something not official, but.

SUTTON:Or the bar that played a very great, uh.

BARTLETT:Exactly.

SUTTON:After the golf went away, it was all about, you know, the cocktails and the cocktail reception. And, um, I was again preparing for this, for this interview. I came across an email and I needed two conversation starters. And so I chose two of my friends, and I said, okay, will you ask the first question this way? And you ask the second question this way, because they're guest speakers and, you know, they don't know us, and that'll get the ball rolling. And they said, yeah, well, what are you going to do for me? And I said, I'll buy you drinks after, okay. Then we'll do a quick tour.

BARTLETT:Yeah, it's not quite the same in an online environment.

SUTTON:It's not quite the same. But yeah. Yeah.

BARTLETT:Yeah. Well, you know, this is sort of a, you know, global 20 zero zero zero foot question. But you know, given your, your long experiences as a librarian and as a library leader, you know, we look back on, I think, what has been an incredibly, um, formative, uh, generation for, for libraries, um, over the past, you know, 40 or 50, 50 years, basically over the, you know, lifespan of, of, of aseral, um, and what, what do you think when historians look back at this time in library history and academic library history will have had the most lasting impact on what libraries look like 50 years from now. You know, collections or, you know, technology or, you know, all all these, these things. I sort of wonder, you know what? What remains at the core of, you know, academic libraries that still make them libraries.

SUTTON:Well, what I think remains at the core is the collection. And when I say collection, I mean the content. And I think librarians greatest strength from Alexandria to today is to focus on the content is the thing, no matter what format it takes. So in the public eye, libraries were about print books. And in faculty, like when I came to Wake Forest faculty. Science faculty told me, we don't need libraries anymore because we don't read journals in print. And I said, who do you think spends $4 million so you can read it online? They had no idea. So, um, I think, you know, you're in the archival profession, so whereas you used to deal in letters, now you deal in text messages or something, you know, or files. So but you recognize that it's that thought that is expressed in whatever medium that is the core of what we need to take care of and, and provide to people. And, um, I don't think the rest of the world or the rest of the society understands that, but luckily we do it anyway, and then we have it there for them when they need it in the format that they need it. So I would like to think that there's always, you know, a physical place where this exchange can happen, whether it needs to or not. That may not turn out to be the case in the future. I don't know, but Often, you know, as a movement goes this way to digital, a movement starts going that way as to but we still want the physical for all the reasons we just talked about geographically, face to face feels, you know, all that. Um, so I think that's that's been librarians most enduring contribution is to focus on what's really important and to have the flexibility to adapt when people didn't think it was possible to adapt. You know, I think librarians are so creative. I mean, and people, you know, the stereotype is not. Well, screw that we are and you need us.

BARTLETT:You know.

SUTTON:On the other hand, people, you know, are sort of in like, if you tell a person you're a librarian. I live down here in a rural community. It's a beach community. But, you know, you tell somebody you're a librarian and this is what they do. Whoa. Like.

BARTLETT:Really?

SUTTON:You are a person of respect. You are smart. You know things.

BARTLETT:What a great town it is.

SUTTON:But anyway, that's. That's all I have to say.

BARTLETT:Oh, well, um, is there anything else that you'd like to add about? About a swirl or, you know, your career or librarianship in general that we haven't talked about?

SUTTON:No, I think we haven't talked about is the fact that I left that librarianship career and became the vice provost at Wake Forest University, and certainly all the people, talents, um, that I had or amassed over the years were absolutely critical to moving into that administrative role. I did not enjoy it at all, and I only did it for my three year term, and I did not renew, and I retired after that. One reason I did it, frankly, was I wanted faculty in particular to see that librarians could become vice provost and maybe even provost, you know, because we are their intellectual equals. And, um, they should not. Oh, you're just a librarian. You know, we we achieve faculty status during the time that I was there at Wake Forest, which was easier than it probably should have been, because we had a super great administrator to, to to guide us through. But I wanted to keep that going. And, um, I felt I was successful in that. People could see that librarians were, you know, capable of holding these, um, roles in the upper administration. And so I felt I was glad I did it for that, for that reason. I did not enjoy the work because it was just, you know, He goes and.

BARTLETT:Oh, okay. Yeah.

SUTTON:You want to make an impact on the university, but it's just very hard to do. Mhm.

BARTLETT:But overall are you happy that that you did that.

SUTTON:Overall I am happy that I did that. Yeah. I am, I'm happy but I, I achieve what I wanted to achieve and I it was worthwhile and um yeah. So that was a and then I could retire and move into the sunset.

BARTLETT:Well let let me ask then, um, living in your, in your beachfront, uh, community that loves, loves libraries. Um, what what are you doing now? In in retirement?

SUTTON:Yeah. That's interesting. So I told myself I would give myself a year before I jumped into any roles I did not, I, you know, so now I'm, like, on four different boards. I'm on the Carteret County domestic violence program and I'm on, um, um, League of Women Voters. I'm the treasurer of the Democratic Women. Um, and all these things are worthwhile, but I think I overdid it a little bit. I also volunteered at a thrift shop benefiting, um, animals two days a week. I overcommitted, and I came to realize about myself, I. I enjoyed work, I was a workaholic. I loved to check off those boxes, you know, and get that that feeling of of accomplishment comes can come from tiny little things, like working at the thrift shop was just as satisfying to me as, you know, doing research at a library. So, um, I'm trying to let go of so many of those things and just, um, enjoy a little more and work a little less. But it's hard.

BARTLETT:Of course, of course, especially if you know you're used to being busy and you're used to contributing in that way. So completely understanding.

SUTTON:The roles that I seek now are not leadership roles. I try, I try as hard as I can just to be a worker bee back in like back in the early days, you know. But sometimes when you see incompetence above you, it's hard not to set them straight.

BARTLETT:It's a challenge for sure, a challenge. Well, Lynn, thank you so much for spending the time in this great conversation about your career and and Aswirl. It's really been a pleasure talking to you this morning.

SUTTON:It's been great fun. Let me just ask, are you is this a is this a grant or a project or did they hire you or is this what is this initiative?

BARTLETT:This is a continuing project. We originally started this a few years ago for, um, the institutions for Israel's 60th anniversary. And, um, uh, Kentucky has the Louis B Nunn Center for Oral history. And so ASL actually, uh, funded my traveling across the, the southeast for face to face interviews. But, you know, we I thought when I moved over to this, this role as oral historian from library administration, I had the opportunity to do oral history work. And I thought, oh, we have all these great voices in ASL that we haven't talked to, and we can build this collection. And so, of course, talk to John. And John was completely supportive of it. So and, you know, now we have more opportunities to do interviews because we, we have zoom.

SUTTON:But yeah.

BARTLETT:Right. Yeah I'm not averse to more and more trips to places. And you're.

SUTTON:In Beaufort.

BARTLETT:Your town sounds great. So maybe we need to do a follow up in person interview. So yes, we we will be doing, uh, more of these as the months go on.

SUTTON:Really great. I enjoyed this so much. Thank you.

BARTLETT:Thank you so much, Lynn. Take care.

SUTTON:Okay. Now you're going to stop recording and then do we?

BARTLETT:Yes.

SUTTON:Okay.