HADDIX:So, what are some of the things we'll be talking about?

SHACKLETTE:Um, just your relationship to the Post Clinic--

HADDIX:--okay--

SHACKLETTE:--and the Post Clinic's role in the community.

HADDIX:Okay.

SHACKLETTE:Just those.

HADDIX:Yeah.

SHACKLETTE:Simple questions, not anything too--

HADDIX:--right--

SHACKLETTE:--deep, or anything--(Haddix laughs)--so--(Shacklette laughs).

HADDIX:"I, I got into their finances. I don't know what--" (both laugh).

SHACKLETTE:Make sure we're good, there we go, and, we're rolling.

HADDIX:Alright.

SHACKLETTE:Perfect. Okay, um, to start off, can you tell me a little bit about yourself, um, your daily life, your role in the community, um, and we'll start from there.

HADDIX:Okay. Well, I'm Chris Haddix. I'm, uh, the county judge executive here in Montgomery County. Um, I have--my past, I have, um--I was born and raised here. I went to Mount Sterling Elementary, graduated from, uh, Montgomery County High School in 1993. During that time, I decided, you know, I want to, I want to start serving the public. And I--that was kind of, you know, I, I felt like that was my calling, was, was to serve this community. So, I ended up, um, after graduating in '93 from Montgomery County High School, went to Eastern Kentucky University, graduated, uh, there with a bachelor's degree in 1997, when, uh, and it was uh, I went into police administration. So, I was a police officer. Oh, matter of fact, while I was going through school, um, I ended up dispatching during the summers. And, once I graduated, they made me, uh--I was able to promote to police officer. Um, spent several years--I spent, you know, twenty-five years in various roles and, and serving this community as a police officer. So, then, once I was able to retire in, uh, 2019, I set out for about ninety days, and went to the schools. I went to the school as a school resource officer. I was able to, uh, you know, mentor a lot of kids there. Uh, I, I absolutely loved the kids, and, uh, but then it started to, uh, weigh on my heart that, you know, maybe, you know, I can help in a different role, you know, as--for running for county judge executive. And so, was able to do that successfully, um, won, won that race, and, um, I've been serving, serving our community ever since, you know.

SHACKLETTE:Nice, nice. When did you first hear about the Post Clinic?

HADDIX:I first heard about the Post Clinic, um--there was an announcement from the, uh, mayor, and Andy Barr came in, and they made a big announcement. At that time, it was Dr. Ralph Alvarado--he was our, uh, our state, uh, senator. And David Hale, our st--uh, state representative. I had a relationship with all of them. And, um, so, they were talking about it, a lot of talk about that. And, as a matter of fact, you know, talking about relationships, I've known Dr. Ed Roberts since I was a kid. So, uh, have, have a great, a great relationship with him. And, uh, I know that Dr. Roberts and, uh, and, and Louise Summers, Ms. Louise Summers, I've known her since I was a kid as, as well. And they both have a heart for people. So, um, that's what, um, made the Post Clinic, you know, come to, come to fruition there. And, uh, so, um, that was--

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. Were you a patient of Dr. Roberts when you were a kid, or--

HADDIX:Actually, we were family friends.

SHACKLETTE:Okay.

HADDIX:So, my dad and him and, uh, they, they were all just, uh, just family friends.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

HADDIX:Yeah.

SHACKLETTE:Nice. Um, you were talking about all of your experiences as, like, a police officer and now as a judge, and school resource officer.

HADDIX:Mm-hmm.

SHACKLETTE:Um, did you have any experiences with the Post Clinic through those roles?

HADDIX:I haven't had any--I didn't have any with, with those roles because, really, this was starting up about the time that I was, was, uh, retiring as, as a police officer.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

HADDIX:And that's when the st--uh, the start--the talk started. So, I wasn't able to really do that, being, you know, involved with, with it during those roles, uh, now, um, I will say with the Post Clinic, in, in my role, um, I get to see a lot of people and, um, there, there are people that are, that are hurting, that, that need help. And that's where this is really a special place because there's a place here where, whether it be medical needs, dental needs, they come here and they get the help that they need and deserve.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. And do you come across that in your current role as the judge now?

HADDIX:I do--

SHACKLETTE:--okay--

HADDIX:--I do. I get to, to see some people and talk to some people, and, and I know this, our community and this region is blessed because of the Post Clinic.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. Do you have any stories from any of those people that you've, that you've worked with, that particularly stuck out to you, or--

HADDIX:Well, um, in, in particular, there was, um, um, one man that came in, um, wasn't happy with his smile, and, uh, so, they were able to help him with, with some dental needs, and really changed his life.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. Dr. Roberts just shared a story about a similar, similar situation so I'm glad to hear that. Um, how--I'm trying to think. Do you have any questions? (Shacklette laughs).

UNKNOWN:You spoke about how--(Shacklette laughs)--um, Dr. Roberts was a family friend--

HADDIX:Yes.

UNKNOWN:Could you dive a little bit more into the growth of you guys' relationship?

HADDIX:Oh, yes. So, when I, when I talk about, we were family friends, um, I'm talking, I was probably five. So, uh, our relationship goes, goes way back. And, uh, like I said, it was more in particular with, with him and my dad, my mom and his wife. So, we did, we do--I, I really respect Dr. Roberts. I respect what he, what he does, what he stands for. And, um, and I--yeah.

SHACKLETTE:Great. Um--

HADDIX:(Shacklette laughs) Let's see.

UNKNOWN:Would you like to talk a little bit about the community? The Post Clinic's been here for almost three decades, um, have you seen it, sort of, shape anything around here?

HADDIX:Yeah, um, let's see. And, and you're right. It has been here--it, it's been here for a long time, and it's, it's served a lot of people, um, in di--in different ways. And, really, with the expansion of this, this building, when they were able to build this building, um, they was able--we were able to get a lot of people, um, to really recognize that it was here and, and spread the word. It was able--because of that, it was able to help a lot more people with this, so.

SHACKLETTE:Mm-hmm.

HADDIX:And that's what it's all about. It's all about helping people. Um, you know, helping those that are less fortunate than us, so, so, again, I, I think that, just because of this clinic, you can tell a lot about the people that work here.

SHACKLETTE:Mm-hmm.

HADDIX:And, uh, they really have a heart for people--a heart to help people.

SHACKLETTE:And, from your eyes, what, what do you see the Post Clinic's role, like in, in the [[??]] Mount Sterling community? Like, do you, do you see them working with outside organizations? Like, how--what, what is their--where do they stand, I guess, at, in the community--

HADDIX:--right, yeah--

SHACKLETTE:--in your eyes?

HADDIX:Right. The, the Post Clinic, it is, um--when you talk about community involvement, they are able to work with a lot of different groups. Um, one of the things that I'm really proud of as the, uh, as the county judge executive, our, our fiscal court--we were able to provide a little bit of funding for them. Again, it was, um--that's something that I'm, I'm proud that we're able to do. And, um, and the reason that I'm proud of it is because of the, um, the people that they serve. And, um, so that, that helps. That helps a lot of people and those in need--it helps those in need.

SHACKLETTE:Mm-hmm. Right. How, how often would you say that you work with the Post Clinic in your role?

HADDIX:In my role, I probably--I'm talking to, uh, uh, Ms. Louise Summers. I talk to her, probably at least once quarterly. I talk to Dr. Roberts, you know, we, we, we talk about the same amount of time. And, and I'm always--I'm, I'm the guy that says, you know, hey, whatever we can do to help, please let us--

SHACKLETTE:--yeah--

HADDIX:--and, uh, and so they, they do. They, they let us help, and um--but again, our role in, in this it is, um--we, we, we are a minor role is what we are so, uh--and I'm proud to be that role and, uh, so--but the things that they are doing is amazing things. They're helping people every single day.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

HADDIX:So, I'm proud of that.

SHACKLETTE:Has it changed your, your outlook on, like, healthcare and healthcare access?

HADDIX:It actually has--

SHACKLETTE:--as a judge, and how does that--

HADDIX:--right, right--

SHACKLETTE:--influence, you know, some of the decision making that you--

HADDIX:--right--

SHACKLETTE:--make, you know?

HADDIX:You know, with, uh, in my role as, as the county judge executive, we deal with everybody in the county, whether it's Judy on the northern end of the county, [phone buzzes] or Jeffersonville in the southern end of the county, we're dealing with everybody. And, [phone buzzes] uh, we get to see--because of that, we get to see the needs. Some needs that you wouldn't see in any other, other way and some that you, you just don't know about. But when you can look a person in the eye, and you know, I need help, they need help, um, that's when you can really start to shape your own opinions and, uh, have educated opinions on, on everything. And, uh, so, yeah, I mean, this, this place, it has, it really has changed my way of thinking about, about healthcare.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. Okay. Do you all have any more questions--

UNKNOWN:--do, do you see the clinic as a sort of, source of unity in the community?

HADDIX:Oh, yes. Yeah, so the Post Clinic, it is a source of unity in the community. When we start to talk about, you know, helping others, that's something that--it doesn't matter what side of the aisle you're on, it's not a political thing. It is, there's somebody in need, and we need to help, and, I do think that it, it brings everybody together.

SHACKLETTE:And that's what's so unique about the clinic. I think that it's so--(Unknown clears throat)--bipartisan. We were just talking about how they receive funding from Matt Bevin and Andy Beshear--

HADDIX:--yes--

SHACKLETTE:--and it's just, it's, it's really unified the community--

HADDIX:--right--

SHACKLETTE:--as something like, you know--

HADDIX:--right. Yeah, that's right.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah, yeah.

HADDIX:And that's one of those things, I mean, you, you really--everybody--I feel like deep down in, everybody really wants to help somebody.

SHACKLETTE:Mm-hmm.

HADDIX:And this is a way that we can all do that together.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah. Yeah.

UNKNOWN:I know you said you only--you feel like you only have a minor role but, I--it sounds like you have a much larger one--(Haddix laughs)--than you give yourself credit for. Um, what, what would you say, um, to other city officials or government officials, um, looking at the sort of advocacy that it takes to support something like this in, in your role? [phone buzzes]

HADDIX:So, you know, I think that, in a role, whether you're the county judge executive, a commissioner, a magistrate, the mayor of a city or their council, um, this is a project that helps people. It helps them, you know, with--I mean, give them--give themselves, you know, a sense of self-worth. And, uh, when you have a community full of people that have great self-esteem because of the mi--you know, I'm, I'm not gonna say minor things--because of the basic things in, uh, in life they, they can do that. They can provide healthcare, dental needs for their families. Think about what that would do to a, a mom or a dad. I can get my, my kids healthcare, I can get my kids dental--their dental needs. I can do all that stuff. That makes them be--want to be more productive in, in society. And all of us work together to make our community better. And really, when you talk about this Post Clinic, it is--this is not just a Montgomery County, Mount Sterling, Jeffersonville clinic. This affects the region. They affect--I mean, they help so many people around the, the entire region so, this is something to be proud of. Dr. Roberts, um, Dr. Tingle, um, Ms. Louise Summers--the things that they do here is something to be proud of, and I'm proud of them for it.

SHACKLETTE:Mm-hmm. Is there anything that you'd like to share, other than the things we've talked about so far?

HADDIX:Uh, [Shacklette sniffs] I think that's about it. Yeah.

SHACKLETTE:Mm-hmm.

HADDIX:I mean--

SHACKLETTE:--okay--

HADDIX:--can y'all think of anything else? (Haddix laughs)

UNKNOWN:I don't believe so.

SHACKLETTE:I think we about covered it, do you all have any more questions?

UNKNOWN:That is good [[??]].

SHACKLETTE:Okay. Yeah. Perfect.

HADDIX:Thank you all.

SHACKLETTE:Thank you so much.

HADDIX:Hey, I appreciate it. Do, do we need to do it again? Did I, did I mess anything up?

SHACKLETTE:We gotta do it all over again (Haddix laughs).

HADDIX:Well, I appreciate you guys. Thank you all for coming in here and doing this.