STEINERT:Hi, thanks so much for coming. This is awesome.

KABAKOFF:Thank you.

STEINERT:So, will you start out by just telling us your name and spelling it

for us so we have it right in all of our documents.

KABAKOFF:Sure. My name is Alan R. Kabakoff. Uh, A-l-a-n, uh, middle initial is

R, stands for Richard, and last name Kabakoff, K-a-b-a-k-o-f-f.

STEINERT:Awesome. Okay, so we invited you to come here today because your

family lived in the building that is now owned by the Over-the-Rhine Museum, and

we have plans to interpret an apartment that will be as if it were your

grandparents apartment, um, where you dad also grew up. So, I’m--we’re, you

know, curious about, um, things that you remember or, um, family history or

things that will help us do that interpretation. So, let’s just start by, um,

working backward in the genealogy, like, um, who was your dad, who was you mom,

how was your dad related to Rebecca and Solomon Kabakoff. Let’s just go back

from there and get that established.

KABAKOFF:Okay. Um, my dad was Abraham Albert

Kabakoff. And, um, my mom was Evelyn J. Kabakoff, her maiden name was Gellman.

And, um, my dad was one of five children, and, um, he was right in the middle.

And so he had an older brother named Herman, and another brother named Meyer,

um, a sister named Ida, then himself, and then a younger brother named Max. And

they all grew up on that, uh, I believe it’s 3 West McMicken. And, um, they, uh,

my grandfather owned the building with my grandmother, Rebecca. And my

grandfather was Solomon, and, um, I never got to meet my grandparents. They all

passed prior to me being born. Almost--in my family, we like skipped a

generation. My dad was born in 1914, and, um, I was born in 1961. So, huge,

huge, um, age gap.

STEINERT:Why did your dad wait so long, you think?

KABAKOFF:You know, I, I, I think World War II had a profound effect on him.

And, um, he was in combat in the Pacific, and he was in, um, battles in, uh, New

Guinea, and he also was, saw McArthur’s return on Leyte Island, the Philippines.

And, um, he just, uh, waited until later in life to get married. And there was a

sixteen year age difference between my mom and my dad.

STEINERT:So did he ever talk about the war? Did--when you say it had a profound

effect on him, do you feel like it, um, caused, like, traumatic issues?

KABAKOFF:He, um, would talk about the war. But it was always with my uncles.

And I, I guess you could say I grew up in a little bit of a sexist type of

family. Um, whenever we had family get togethers, all the men would congregate

in the living room and they’d have football on. And all the women would

congregate in the dining room or kitchen

And I just never dug the conversation that the women were having. (laughing) It

just didn’t interest me. But, um, with, um, my uncles and my father, they would

talk about when they were growing up, they were talking about, um, World War II

had a impact on all of them. And then, you know, every once in a while they

would start talking about, um, Nixon, and, uh, you know, and current events. And--

STEINERT:And you have siblings, right?

KABAKOFF:I do.

STEINERT:One or two?

KABAKOFF:No, I actually have two, and then my mom raised my cousin, um, Melody,

and she’s, like thirty-one days younger than I am.

STEINERT:Oh wow. So, would, can you run me through, I know you have a sister

named Sandy, who’s just recently passed away.

KABAKOFF:Yes. Sandy, um, passed away recently at the age of sixty-four. Yeah,

that was last year.

STEINERT:Such as shame.

KABAKOFF:And then, I have my oldest sister Diane. And she’s married to Fred,

and, his name’s Fred Smith. And they live down in Florida together, and they’ve

carved out a very nice life for themselves.

STEINERT:Great. And do you

think she would have other memories of, um, did she ever get, get to meet your

grandparents, you think, or--

KABAKOFF:No. She never got--now she was born, she’s almost nine years older

than I am. And so, when she was born, um, from what I understand, my, um,

grandmother on my mother’s side, was alive for a week, but she wouldn’t have any

memories of that. But she may have information that I don’t have.

STEINERT:Awesome. Okay, thank you.

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:Okay, so, do--you never got to meet your grandparents.

KABAKOFF:Un-huh.

STEINERT:Um, where did you grow up, in Avondale?

KABAKOFF:No, I actually grew up in Golf Manor.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:And, um, we had a nice little Cape Cod house, and it was a, a great

community to grow up in.

STEINERT:So, when I think of Golf Major, I think of it as largely a Jewish

community, where you in Golf Manor because it was a, um, a Jewish community?

KABAKOFF:Yeah. Yeah. My parents, um, migrated out there. They actually had, um,

lived in Avondale by the zoo at one point. And then, um,

I guess, the 1950s, everything started, uh, moving out to suburbia.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And so they, they moved to Golf Manor.

STEINERT:And did you grow up going to Temple there?

KABAKOFF:I did. I went to Golf Manor Synagogue there.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:And, um, it was a neat little neighborhood experience. It was sort of

like a, um, a Mayberry. And in many, many ways.

STEINERT:Yeah. So, when, when your family previously lived in Avondale, before

you were around, do you know where they worshipped in Avondale?

KABAKOFF:Whatever the Golf Manor Synagogue was before it was Golf Manor

Synagogue. I, I, I--

STEINERT:--I can look that up.

KABAKOFF:Yeah, I don’t remember.

STEINERT:Because I know that Solomon, who owned the building, um, moved to

Avondale, um, when he moved out, just directly when he moved out of the

building. Um, and I have always wondered, and kind of assumed, that that was

because he was going to, you know, and be, because of his religious community

was sort of centered there. Do you know if that’s true?

KABAKOFF:No, no. Uh,

what happened, from what I’ve been told, is that Solomon married a woman named

Bertha. Uh, none of Solomon’s children really liked Bertha. And, um, Bertha got

Solomon to change the will. So there was a lot of bitterness that the, the kids

felt slighted by, uh, Bertha, and that, that she was like, I guess what

encouraged him to move down there.

But ironically, my uncle Meyer still resided in that building. And when my uncle

Herman passed away, my dad hadn’t spoken to Meyer in years. And I ended up going

down there with my father to advise him that, that, you know, my uncle Herman

had passed away. And the building looked vacant. Um, there was no electricity,

it was in the middle of winter. And I remember it was bitterly cold. And, um, we

were like banging on the door. And, and finally, this face pops up, and the

window’s all dirty,

but it looked like it was casted in a mold of my father’s face. All my fathers

and his brothers and his sister, they all looked alike, like they were cast in

the same mold. And I remember, it, it took me back. And, um, my uncle Meyer was

living, um, very frugally. I mean, he was dirt poor, and, you know, was still in

that same building.

STEINERT:Yeah. He was living on the Findlay Street side, in the 12 Findlay

address. Yeah. So, did you get to go into his house at all, or--

KABAKOFF:I was just shocked at--it was so cold, and, um, I, uh--there was not a

lot of love between my father and Meyer. And, um, I remember my dad just gave

him the necessary information. And I, I felt bad, I don’t want to leave--Meyer

was very upset when he heard Herman had passed. And I remember he was weeping.

And, um, I wanted to stay there and, uh, make sure he was all right. My dad was

very abrupt, and he was like, “We’re going. Let’s go, now.” (laughs)

STEINERT:Ugh.

KABAKOFF:And he, uh, that’s the way my, my mother kind of described my, um, um,

grandfather Solomon. As, she said he was a, a little guy and smoked, like, hand

rolled cigarettes, and he--she used to compare him to, um, the old, um, Sargent

Carter from Gomer Pyle. That, that he was a no nonsense guy. And, um, according

to my dad, he, he had, he was a, a, really good tailor, and not only a tailor he

was a furrier. And that he could’ve gone to work for Pogue’s, which was a major

department store, but he, he didn’t, he had no interest, he wanted to be his own boss.

STEINERT:Interesting. So, uh, I have so many directions I want to go. We’ll

come back to all of them, but we found evidence, that in the 1930s, Solomon,

actually hosted, um, a séance medium, like a, a spiritualist--

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:--he allowed

her to hold her seances and meetings in his building, in his space. Do you know

anything about that?

KABAKOFF:No.

STEINERT:Or does that resonate with anything you’ve, you know about him or the family.

KABAKOFF:No. Not at all.

STEINERT:Yeah. Okay.

KABAKOFF:I mean, I, I, never knew that.

STEINERT:I mean, it could have been that he was just, literally, renting space

to her. And it was just for money. Um, I, but we, there were, she was

advertising in the newspaper, that it was in his shop.

KABAKOFF:Wow. Yeah, I’m not aware of any of that.

STEINERT:Gotcha. So, also in that building, there was a dry goods store on the

ground floor that Rebecca ran. Do you know anything about that store.

KABAKOFF:I know a couple of things. Um, apparently there was one there, but

then she had a dry goods store somewhere in Price Hill. And, you know, I don’t

the exact location. But I’ve had older folks ask me about her. And that, you

know, that she apparently, you know, was a, a, you know, a hard working woman

that had that store.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:All of them were hard working. Work was a, uh--

STEINERT:--so, I’m

curious about the Price Hill thing, because one of Solomon’s brothers, and I

can’t remember which one off the top of my head, definitely lived on the west

side. And so, I had wondered if they might have also had a store called the

Kabakoff store. And I didn’t know--

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:--if it was Rebecca running both, or if it were the two separate brothers.

KABAKOFF:I, I don’t know. Yeah.

STEINERT:You don’t know. We’ll do, we’ll do more research, we can check into

that. Yeah. Um, okay. So, do you, um, do you know of any--one of the things we

need to do when we interpret this apartment is, um, recreate what their life

would have been like. Like, what kind of furniture they would have had, um,

objects, and, and one--so, I’m curious if you can think of any things that you

know of that are in your family that would have come out of the house and what

that might have been.

KABAKOFF:There, there was a bookcase. And I’m so sorry my mom got rid of it,

but it was heavy. It was a heavy bookcase. And, um, and that’s about it.

Now, from what my, um, cousin Phil told me--Phil and Eileen are both still

alive--they would have more information. They actually met, you know, my

grandparents. And--

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:--so they, but, um, apparently, um, my grandmother would always have

like a pot of food on the stove. And, um, my, uh, grandfather loved cats.

STEINERT:Oh.

KABAKOFF:And, um, he would be--so apparently he smoked so much his fingers were

yellow. And he had, like, wire rim, like, John Lennon glasses. And, um,

everybody worked. I mean, work was a big, big—um, you, you took pride in your

work, work gave you meaning. And so, so, he was a hard, hard worker. And was

always selling, but, um, he didn’t want to teach my dad to be a tailor. He

didn’t want my dad to be a tailor. He did teach my uncle Herman how to, um,

alter uniforms, or alter, you know, make alterations. Which, my uncle used--

it was valuable when he was in the Navy.

STEINERT:So why do you think he didn’t want your dad to be a tailor?

KABAKOFF:I, the, um, I’m just speculating here. I think that he wanted him to

do something else. That he just, um, wanted something better for his kids.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And, uh.

STEINERT:And do you know anything about, um, how Solomon became a tailor? Like,

did he have, had he had training as a kid in the Ukraine. Or, did he--is that

something he learned here?

KABAKOFF:You know, I, I, don’t know. But traditionally, you know, um, it like,

it was usually a trade that was handed down. So, I, I don’t know anything about

my great grandparents. You know, um, I’m not sure exactly how he got it. In

fact, I, when I went to your, um, um--

STEINERT:--the talk--

KABAKOFF:--talk, um, I learned that he had came over on his own as a young man.

I’m like, wow, I, I was under the impression that, um, he came over with his

family and that--

STEINERT:I know his mom was here. And

I don’t know, with, I could, we could do some more research about who came first

and when.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:But I know that his mom, Fanny--

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:--you know, was here eventually, yeah. We--

KABAKOFF:And my dad had said something about they came to Newport, Kentucky

first. And, I don’t know why or how long they were there--

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:But--

STEINERT:Well, I’ve also wondered--that’s a period where the Jewish, um,

agencies in Cincinnati--so they came, I think, if I’m remembering correctly, it

was your grandpa in 1905 and then your grandma in 1906. But it could be the

other way around. Um, but in that period, the Jewish charities of Cincinnati had

kind of gotten together to provide resettlement services for Russian immigrants,

or Russian Jewish immigrants. They were--honestly, the German Jewish--Cincinnati

was a little embarrassed at how poor the Russians were. And so, they were trying

to help them get a leg up. Um, and, so, I’ve always wondered if maybe your

family got some resettlement services through the Jewish social services.

KABAKOFF:I, I, do not know. But I, I remember as a really little boy that there

was a, a, there was a little bit of a rivalry that still existed between the,

the German Jewish immigrants and the, um, Russian Jewish immigrants.

STEINERT:Yeah. How did that rivalry, like, come out, how did you see it or know

about it?

KABAKOFF:Um, when I started working for the Golf Manor police department, um,

as a dispatcher, um, we had a guy that owned a business whose last name was

Signor. And, um, I remember hearing him talk very derogatory about Russian Jews.

And I kind of felt like, wow, you know, I never had heard that before. And he

was an older gentleman.

STEINERT:Huh. Did he know what your last name was? Were you, like, hey, (laughs)

KABAKOFF:No, no, he didn’t. Did not know. But uh, he was actually talking to

the, um, Golf Manor police chief at that, that time, and I just happened to be

in earshot.

STEINERT:Uch. What a drag.

KABAKOFF:(laughing)

STEINERT:Sorry about that.

KABAKOFF:Oh, it’s all right.

STEINERT:So, um, let’s

talk a little bit about your, your grandma’s family, so, Rebecca’s family. Do

you know--I know you’re in touch with, or you maybe know your cousin David Sapadin--

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:Yep. But do you know anything else about your mom, or how she came

here, or what her family story is?

KABAKOFF:Unfortunately, I don’t. And it was like, uh--

STEINERT:I’m sorry, your grandma. I said your mom and I meant your grandma, I apologize.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. It’s, it’s like a, a secret--I’ve independently studied about

the pogroms, and I suspect that, um, on both sides of the family, the, the

Gellman side and on the Kabakoff side, that, that probably was, um, something

that influenced their decision to move. Um, I did go to a family reunion, 1979.

It was in Indian Hill, on Given Road. It was at Neil Bortz’s house.

STEINERT:Oh, sure.

KABAKOFF:And, um, he is, um, the owner of, um, Towne Properties. And the Bortzs

have done phenomenally well in Cincinnati. And I wish I would have, um, paid

more attention and got names

and dates. But, there were still several old-timers that were still alive. And

one of the interesting stories was that, um, the Kabakoff and the Bortzs would,

um, sew money in the lining of clothes, and then they would ship those clothes

back to the old country, and they would use that money to, um, allegedly, bribe

border guards to come over here.

STEINERT:Oh my gosh.

KABAKOFF:And apparently a lot of effort was used trying to bring everyone else

over, to get everyone else out of there.

STEINERT:Will you remind me--before we turned on the camera, we talked a little

about the story of someone in our family who went back. Will you tell that story.

KABAKOFF:Sure. The only thing I know is that one of my great-grandfathers, um,

came over here, and it wasn’t religious enough for him. And that my dad said

that, he was a little boy at the time, and that he went back, and, what--I mean,

I’ve always thought, wow, what an awful decision,

knowing the history of that, that, that place. It’s just awful. And so many

awful things, with the, the mass, um, famine imposed by Stalin, the holocaust,

the World War II, the, uh, Stalin again, um. It was just one tragedy after another.

STEINERT:Hold on one second. I’m sorry. -- Other way. Sorry.

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:Yeah, right, it was terrible. But, do, and do you know, so it, was it,

was that a grandfather, was that Rebecca Sapadin’s dad, or was it a grandfather

on your mom’s side?

KABAKOFF:Um, no, that, that was, I believe Rebecca’s father. But I’m not a

hundred percent sure. I’m trying to find out from Phil and Eileen, if they know

anything about that. But like I said, it’s--that’s many, many years ago my

father told me that.

STEINERT:Yeah, but if, if your dad was already a young kid when it happened--

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:The US government should have taken, should have, there should be

immigration records--

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:And we, with, if we’re looking for it, that’s something that we can

start to work at, research. Because we didn’t know that that was something to

research before. Um, speaking of not being religious enough, or being religious,

when we think about what to put in an apartment that could have been

interpr--inhabited by your grandparents, how religious do you think they were,

and so what sort of object or books or evidence of Jewish religion do you think

would be representative of their lives.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. The one thing I would say is probably, and it’s not so much

religious, maybe a menorah. But, um, a sewing machine. Like an old Singer sewing

machine with the foot pump.

STEINERT:Um-hm.

KABAKOFF:Um, and just older heavy wood furniture. I said the bookcase was

ornate, it was beautiful. I’m sorry my mom gave it away. I would have loved to

have it.

STEINERT:Do you know who she gave it to? If we could just even get a picture of

it that would be super helpful.

KABAKOFF:No.

Because we had it in our basement, and it was used to store stuff in it.

STEINERT:If you come across any family photos where that bookshelf happens to

be in the photograph--

KABAKOFF:Okay.

STEINERT:Let us know, because, we have, um, someone whose job it is to find

objects for the apartment, and if we’d show her, this--they had an bookshelf

like this. She could find one.

KABAKOFF:It, it, actually was, had two glass doors that opened up, and, um, we

were storing paint and old stuff like that in there.

STEINERT:Um-hm. So, it had glass, and two big doors.

KABAKOFF:Yep.

STEINERT:Yep. (snaps fingers). Dang.

KABAKOFF:Oh, I know.

STEINERT:So Phil remembers there being a big clock on the mantle that he

remembered when he helped, I guess, they packed, a little, he packed a little

bit, when they moved.

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:Um, so it seems like they have nice bookshelves, nice clock, it seemed

like they were fairly upper, middle-upper class? What do you think?

KABAKOFF:I, have a picture of them. And I, I’m going to have to find that for

you. But, apparently, Solomon made

everybody’s clothes. And they, they look pretty spiffy. Now, now, I’m sure for

their photograph, um, they got all dressed up. But, apparently he, he was a good craftsman.

STEINERT:Yeah. Awesome.

KABAKOFF:But, um, but I had hammered into me when I was growing up on both

sides of the family that you want to be a mensch. You want to be a man’s man,

you want to be a mensch. And that, uh, work is good for the soul. And, you know,

that was hammered into me. Uh, take pride in your work, and--

STEINERT:Yeah, well, I, I’ve--it seemed like his sort of hard approach to the

five kids, worked for some of them and maybe not so well--

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:--for others. So, will you run--let’s, eventually I want to kind of

run through all the brothers, but will you tell me the story that you told me a

long time ago about Ida?

KABAKOFF:Poor Ida. Um, Ida was a very attractive, um, woman. And, um, we

actually do have a photograph of her from her high school graduation.

And her and my father were very, very close. And, according to my dad, Ida was

basically, um, she wanted to go out and see the world, and that. My grandparents

were very, very protective of her, to the point of overly protective. And Ida

decided she’s going to run away. And she actually was trying to make her way to

New York City when the bus was intercepted. They brought her back, and then they

treated her with electroshock, because, um, I guess she was exhibiting signs of

depression. And this happened in her early twenties. And they over-shocked her.

And, and she literally, um, was--had to get care the rest of her life. And she

was institutionalized. And, and so my dad would always go and visit her. And,

out of all my, um, siblings, I was the only one

that my dad, um, would take.

STEINERT:Ah. What do you remember about her?

KABAKOFF:Uh, I remember that, um, she was always glad to see my dad. And that

he would always give her a Nutty Buddy ice-cream, and, um, like an ice-cream

sandwich. And, and she would just devour it. And my dad and her wouldn’t really

talk. It was, it was really sad to me. He would get really pensive, and just,

you know, maybe light chit chat, and she would--and, you know, then he would

give her--he wasn’t a very affectionate guy. But, um, he would give her like a

little hug. And then he would tell me, let’s go. And we’d go. And, um, I just,

you know. But I was the only one that, that met her.

STEINERT:Do you think he, your dad, somehow felt guilty or like he could have

done something differently, or--

KABAKOFF:--absolutely. Absolutely. My dad felt guilty because he’s the one that

informed his mom and dad that she’s leaving and she’s going to New York.

He never expected that they would administer electroshock and, and overdo it,

and then make her, you know, go from a, you know, productive member of society

to a--it just sound like they were so oppressive that she had a breakdown. And--

STEINERT:And so, your--she confided in your dad, because they were so close--

KABAKOFF:Yep.

STEINERT:--and then he, yeah. That’s unfortunate.

KABAKOFF:And he didn’t want to see anything bad happen to her, you know.

STEINERT:He thought he was protecting her.

KABAKOFF:Right, and he--how’s she going to support herself, what is she going

to do, you know. A single woman back in the, um--they graduated in 1932. And so,

that’s just a different time and era.

STEINERT:Yeah, in the middle of the depression. Yeah.

KABAKOFF:But, uh, apparently my dad was one of the few people that went and

visit her on a regular basis.

STEINERT:And when he went to visit her, where was she. Do you remember where

you went?

KABAKOFF:Um, Glen Manor, it was a nursing home in Pleasant Ridge.

STEINERT:Got it.

KABAKOFF:But, um, my mom had told me that, um, she had been in Longview

which was an old state mental hospital. And that one time she had two black eyes

and that--

STEINERT:--oh my god.

KABAKOFF:--yeah, they were worried about that lack of care that she was

receiving there. And, and so--but she did spend many years at, at Glen Manor.

STEINERT:So, your mom and your dad arranged to have her moved out of Longview

to Glen Manor, you think?

KABAKOFF:I, I don’t know. I know that somehow that she ended up being in that

retirement home. There were two, um, Jewish nursing homes back in those days.

Um, Glen Manor was for folks that weren’t religious, and then the orthodox, um,

nursing home was for the more religious.

STEINERT:Ah, got it. Interesting. So many things I don’t know. And, um, so, so

they’re sending her to a Jewish nursing home--if we kind of back up to, like,

obviously you just said put a menorah in their apartment. Do you think they

would’ve had mezuzahs on the door?

KABAKOFF:Yes. Yes.

STEINERT:Do you think they would’ve had had, you know, yarmulkes laying around,

are there other objects

that you can think of?

KABAKOFF:Um, yeah, they, they probably did. Now my, my dad, um, wasn’t fluent

in Hebrew either. And, um, nor am I. And so--

STEINERT:How was his Yiddish?

KABAKOFF:He understood Yiddish, and he knew words, but he couldn’t speak it.

And my mom was the same way. That, her mother didn’t speak English very well.

And so, they both could understand Yiddish but they weren’t very proficient at

speaking it.

STEINERT:Because the census at some point says that the family is a Yiddish

speaking--it’s when, it’s just Rebecca and Salomon and Herman is a little baby.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:And the census reports that they’re Yiddish speakers. So, they, I

assume that they are, from that, I think that they spoke Yiddish around the

house. At least at the beginning.

KABAKOFF:They--I’m, I’m sure they did, yeah. Yeah, I’m sure Salomon, and many

of the old timers that, that, I met at that one reunion, they, they were fluent

in Yiddish.

STEINERT:Oh, wow.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Hm. Interesting.

Okay, so if we go back to the siblings. Um, let’s start at the top. What do you,

do you know, what do you know about Herman? Or his growing up, or--

KABAKOFF:Herman, um, Herman was the opposite of my father. Where my father was

somewhat, um, introverted and very, um, my, my dad was an avid reader, but he

was more of a quiet, stoic guy. Herman was outgoing, very bombastic, he was a

cheerleader in high school. Apparently back in the, um, ’20s and ’30s, um, you

had male cheerleaders. And, um, he, um, would get my grandfather’s Dodge touring

car and drive it all over the place. He’d--apparently, um, Herman did so many

things, that when my dad came of age, none of the other kids were allowed to do

it. Herman, um, somehow, got with Johnny Weissmuller, Tarzan, and, uh, allegedly

they swam across

the Ohio River.

STEINERT:Wow.

KABAKOFF:Herman used to dress very loud, um, in plaids and checks and, uh, he

was a salesman for John Hancock, um, Insurance. And apparently he sold a lot of

life insurance policy on the west side, um, in Price Hill and Western Hills. And

I’ve actually, um, people come up to me and ask me about him. They used to--his

nickname was Kabby. And like I said. He was a very gregarious and--he was a

funny guy, but, um, my dad and him, um, out of all his siblings, Herman was

probably the one that he had the most contact with. But there, there was some

friction between the two.

STEINERT:Oh yeah? What was the basis of the friction?

KABAKOFF:I think part of it was--I remember one time, um, my uncle Herman

looked at me, and he called me Alkie, and he goes, Alkie, “World War II was the

greatest thing that ever happened to me.”

And my, my dad just lost it. And I remember he used a lot of verbiage, you know,

that, that normally he didn’t. And, um, he was like, I remember him saying,

“Herman, that was the stupidest thing. You’ve said many stupid things in your

life, but that’s the f’ingest stupidest thing I’ve ever heard.” And, and, well,

you know, my dad had actually been in combat, and um, where Herman, he finagled

a great deal. Um, he never deployed. He went to, um, Norfolk, Virginian and

because he knew how to sew and he knew how to type, he became a Navy Yeoman. And

so, he basically worked for a bunch of officers. And then on the side, he did

alterations. And so, the--these guys would want their, their uniforms tailored.

And so all these officers would go to him and he would tailor their uniform. And

then on Fridays he would type himself a pass. And

(laughs) he would leave Norfolk, and apparently during World War II, and this

is, my uncle told me, he could ride any train he wanted for free, if you were in

the service. And so, (laughs) he types himself a pass, had whatever officer

signed off on it, and then he would come home. And then he would leave Sunday

night from Cincinnati and go back to, uh, Norfolk. And he would be, he would

sleep on the train and then he would go back to on duty on Monday morning.

And, and, where my dad actually had malaria, he, you know, he, he was second

wave at Leyte Island, and I remember him telling me that everybody from the

first wave was dead--that, that when got there. And he, he actually told me he

was in a foxhole when General MacArthur did his famous “I shall return”, and his

buddy said, “Hey, look, look, there’s General MacArthur.” My dad thought he was

kidding. And he said that there were active snipers still,

you know, shooting at American soldiers.

STEINERT:Oh my gosh.

KABAKOFF:And apparently MacArthur came walking up the beach and then did an

about face and went back out to his ship.

STEINERT:Oh my gosh.

KABAKOFF:Yep. (laughs)

STEINERT:That’s incredible. That your dad was there. Wow. Um, other, okay, so

anything else about Herman that we should know?

KABAKOFF:Um, he did a great job. He, um, raised Phil and Ronny and Eileen, and

they all became productive members of--

STEINERT:--and they grew up in Avondale, right?

KABAKOFF:Un-huh, Roselawn, on Kanova.

STEINERT:Okay, awesome.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Cool. And then, um, the next one down is Meyer. We talked a little

about Meyer when we was older. Do you know anything about Meyer as a child.

KABAKOFF:Yes. Um, Meyer was afflicted with polio.

STEINERT:Oh!

KABAKOFF:And then Meyer actually had three years of college. He came here to UC

(University of Cincinnati). And, um, he fell in love with a woman, and she

didn’t, um, feel--reciprocate. She wasn’t interested in him. And, um, he decided

that he’s going to go out to Hollywood and become a big movie star. He went out

to Hollywood and apparently didn’t get very far. He had a limp and just, you

know, but he started working for the Post Office in California. And, um, he came

back to Cincinnati, and, um, I don’t know why he never went back to the Post

Office or whatever, but, I do know that he ended up working for various dry

cleaners. And then, um, he never did get married. And, um, he died, you know,

um, as a single guy and didn’t have many friends. He was, he was an eccentric

guy. And he was also hard of hearing.

STEINERT:Do you know why, um, so he must have never served in, he didn’t serve

in World War II?

KABAKOFF:No. He was the one, um, brother that was ineligible.

STEINERT:Oh, because of the polio.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Sure. Sure. And then do you know how he would up staying in the

building for so long.

KABAKOFF:No. No, I have--

I just know that, um, my uncle Meyer and my uncle Max, who was also a bachelor,

um, stayed, you know, down there. My uncle Max lived in the Dennison Hotel. And, um--

STEINERT:Yeah. So, we have--there’s a landlord, um, I think I’ve actually told

you this story, who owned the building in the ’80s and she’s actually the one

who moved Meyer out of that building into some assisted living facility where he

passed away later. Um, and she remembers the apartment being just like, like

hoarder, you know, like incredibly full of stuff. And, um, also that he had, he

didn’t pay his own rent. She remembers that some--a check would come from the

bank every month. And that he--she thought that he had some sort of trust fund

or something that paid his rent.

KABAKOFF:That very well could be. Because when my, um, grandfather Solomon

passed, Meyer did something, and, um, Solomon’s new wife got a good chunk of it

and Meyer got something. But I, I don’t know

the particulars.

STEINERT:Got it.

KABAKOFF:But I, I do know that we would, uh, my mom, this is after my father

had passed away, that my mom would pick up, uh, my uncle Meyer from, um, the

nursing home. And, um, we had a, a maple tree, it was a shade tree in our

backyard. We had a swing set and he was very quiet, and, you know, we’d give him

something to drink and he would just sit out there and listen to the birds

chirp, and, yeah.

STEINERT:So that would have been just, just, you know, last couple years of his life.

KABAKOFF:Correct.

STEINERT:Yeah, interesting.

KABAKOFF:And, I do remember when he passed away. Um, that my mom was

instrumental in setting up the funeral arrangements.

STEINERT:And so, uh, where are the people in your family buried? Are they all

together somewhere?

KABAKOFF:Um, most of them are on Sunset Avenue. And--

STEINERT:--the Jewish Cemetery in Price Hill. Um-hm.

KABAKOFF:Yep. Yep. You go up the hill.

STEINERT:Got it.

KABAKOFF:And um, but then, um, there’s another section of that cemetery, that

some of the other relatives, my aunt Sylvia and my uncle Herman,

um, my grandma Rebecca, are buried.

STEINERT:Okay. I have never been out to see them. That’s on my list of things

to do, is to go look at their graves, for sure. So, when Meyer was old and

sitting in your backyard in, in the shade tree, you, do you, what did he look

like then, or, what was he wearing, or--

KABAKOFF:He looked really old and, I remember that, um, his hearing loss was so

severe that you would have to really yell and pronounce your words. And, um, a

lot of times he would misunderstand what you said. And so, it wasn’t like we had

any great conversations.

STEINERT:Yeah, that’s too bad.

KABAKOFF:I remember, uh, one time, um, he had, uh, um, something about my

neighbor Rose, who was an elderly woman, of, of German heritage. And, um, he had

proposed marriage to Rose. And (laughs), um, Rose

was, in her thick German accent, was like, “There is no fool like and old fool.”

(laughs) And, um, declined his marriage proposal.

STEINERT:She wasn’t having it, huh. That’s hilarious. Poor guy. Uh. He’s, he’s

so perplexing to me, you know? I imagine him as, kind of like the neighborhood

recluse on that corner.

KABAKOFF:He actually, uh, at the time that we went down to, um, advise him that

Herman had passed, the neighborhood was predominantly Afro American.

STEINERT:Um-hm.

KABAKOFF:And I remember knocking on one of the doors and one of the guys, um,

told me his name was the Birdman, and that apparently he would feed pigeons, um,

down there which was apparently illegal, and, at the time in Cincinnati. And the

Cincinnati police just, pretty much just left him alone. They had other things

to investigate than, than him illegally feeding pigeons.

STEINERT:Um, did you know that he was hit by a

tornado?

KABAKOFF:Yes.

STEINERT:What do you know about that story?

KABAKOFF:I remember. I remember that, I want to say that it was, like, 1969--

STEINERT:--or ’70--

KABAKOFF:Seventy--

STEINERT:Right in there. I’m not sure. Yeah.

KABAKOFF:He was working at a dry cleaners, and apparently they got hit and he

received some injuries and, I remember that, you know, my dad going down to the

hospital visiting him. And, you know, but other than that, you know, once he

healed up, we kind of just lost contact.

STEINERT:The newspaper said he broke his pelvis. So that seems like a--

KABAKOFF:Oh, yeah.

STEINERT:--a pretty significant injury, yeah. I wonder if, if there was an

insurance settlement. Do you think he had any kind of insurance that would have

covered that? I don’t know.

KABAKOFF:I--don’t know if he--

STEINERT:He was so poor he was probably on assistance.

KABAKOFF:Yeah, I don’t know. And, um, my uncle Max is another kind of interesting--

STEINERT:Yeah, hear--let’s talk about Max.

KABAKOFF:Max actually was the youngest. And apparently he was kind of, I, I,

there’s some sibling rivalry between him and my dad. Apparently

when Max came of age, um, my grandmother had money to send him to, like, some

type of trade school. Where my dad, you know, didn’t get that. My dad started

selling newspapers. All the brothers sold newspapers at a very, very young age.

And so they all, and they would dutifully bring their money home and give it to

their mom. And so when my dad graduated 1932, um, there were no jobs. And--

STEINERT:That’s the middle of the depression.

KABAKOFF:Yeah, yeah. My dad, um, you know, he ended up working for a guy named

Rosen selling hats, um, up here on Twelfth Street, I think.

STEINERT:Hmm.

KABAKOFF:So he was, kind of, didn’t have a chance to, um, further his

education. Um, my dad was fluent in German, and, um, he was actually in the

signal corps, and ironically, they sent him to the Pacific. (laughs)

STEINERT:That’s dumb. (laughing) That’s a wasted resource right there.

KABAKOFF:Oh, yeah.

STEINERT:Yeah. So, I

but Max also served in the war didn’t he?

KABAKOFF:He did. Max served in the Coast Guard. And, um, one time, my dad, when

he was at the Philippines, he, he used to tell a funny story that, um, he went

to visit Max on his ship or LST (Landing Ship Tank) or wherever he was on, and,

uh, they had, like, a, some type of boat that would ferry people out. And the

guy told my dad to jump, and he jumped and he missed the deck of the ship and

landed in the, the ocean.

STEINERT:Oops.

KABAKOFF:And the they had to fish him out. (laughs) And, um, and then he was

telling me that, um, he was visiting his brother on the ship and his brother was

eating steak. Apparently they, they had a really good provisions and rations.

STEINERT:So, your dad’s in a foxhole somewhere and, and his brother is eating

steak on a boat.

KABAKOFF:My dad’s eating, uh, Spam. (laughing)

STEINERT:Uch. That’s terrible.

KABAKOFF:He said that, that he couldn’t eat Spam anymore, that he was so sick

of it by the end of the war.

STEINERT:I’m sure.

KABAKOFF:He came to visit me when I graduated

from, uh, basic training. And he was just amazed. I was living in a brick

building. And, um, apparently he, he didn’t live in a building for, like, four

or five years. He lived in, like, a--at one point he did say that he had a tar

paper shack. But other than that, it was canvas.

STEINERT:Wow.

KABAKOFF:And, um, he hated Florida.

STEINERT:It’s hot.

KABAKOFF:He ended up--um, he said he was at Camp Crowder Missouri, and it was

so frozen and so cold, that they were looking for volunteers to go to, um,

Florida. So him and his buddy volunteered and ended up in, um, Tampa, Florida,

like, I don’t know, ’42, somewhere around then. And, um, he used to, um, talk

about having to sweep snakes out of his tent every day, and, uh--

STEINERT:Oh my gosh.

KABAKOFF:But, he did get to go to Australia. And then, of course, to New Guinea

and the Philippines and places like that.

STEINERT:Although it’s not like it was for vacation.

KABAKOFF:No, no, no

STEINERT:It was in dangerous circumstances.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:So what else do you know about Max? Like what did he do for a living,

you just said he lived in the Dennison.

KABAKOFF:Max was a printer. And, and that’s how Phil got into printing. And

apparently Max had a little shop in, uh, downtown Cincinnati. And, uh, he, eked

out a living. And then Philip followed him into printing. And, um, but, I,

literally don’t know a whole--I know that he lived in the Dennison Hotel. And,

um, what an unusual experience that was. Um, we had to notify Meyer and Max

that, that Herman had passed. And we get to the Dennison, and, I mean, it looked

like something from, uh, a bad 1970s, um, cop show, like Barretta.

STEINERT:(laughs) And what year do you think this was? That your--that Herman died?

KABAKOFF:Oh, ’78, ’79, somewhere around there.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:We get there, and this, this guy looked like Louie Dembrosky from

Taxi. He’s behind this glass enclosure

and we had to pick up this heavy phone, it was a heavy corded phone And, um, I

remember my dad was--he used very minimum verbiage, um, he said, “I need to talk

to Max Kabakoff.” And the guy had an old fashioned switchboard. And so he

plugged him through to Max. And, um, he goes something like, “Max, Abe. Herman’s

dead. Funeral tomorrow.” And then, uh, you know, mentioned that it’s going to be

at, um, Weil’s, was the funeral home.

STEINERT:Um-hm, sure.

KABAKOFF:“Weil’s Funeral Home.” And click. We didn’t even visit him. And I, I

remember I’m looking at my dad, I’m a young kid, I’m sixteen, seventeen, and I’m

like, you know, “Dad, aren’t we going to go up and”--

STEINERT:His brother just died.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. And, um.

STEINERT:Do you think he was protecting you? Like he didn’t want you to see how

dirty and poor that the lodgings were?

KABAKOFF:I know that, um, I one time, um, almost, my finger--I had a glass

doorknob shatter in my hand, I open up,

my finger is dangling. And so, I lived in the basement, typical, ’70s kid. I

come upstairs, my mom and dad’s bedroom was, like, locked up, like Fort Knox.

And I’m like pounding on the door. And, uh, my dad comes out, and he’s wearing

his wife beater t-shirt and he’s got his, you know, underpants on, and, um,

boxer shorts. He doesn’t have his teeth in. And he looks at it and he said, “Put

a tourniquet on it and go to bed, you pain in the ass.” (laughs)

STEINERT:Oh my gosh.

KABAKOFF:And my mom said, “Abe. We have to take him to a hospital.” And so, my

mom drives me to Bethesda Hospital, they sew my finger back on. But, he, he was

a very gruff guy. And, um, he too had some hearing issues. But, I mean smart. Oh

my god. I, I, he was an avid reader. We would go to the Roselawn Library and,

and, he would get some very heavy duty reading. I mean he was a lot more, um,

I mean, he, he probably could have been an academic had he developed. And, um, I

remember he kept track of current events. I mean, he got the morning newspaper,

the Enquirer, and then he would get the Post and Times Star in the evening. And,

um, he knew what was going on. He maintained situational awareness. And I

remember he had forecast that the collapse of the Soviet Union, in, like 1972.

I’m like nine years old. Everyone else thought my dad was a little bit

eccentric. And, um, the nicest thing he ever said about the Russians, or, uh,

the Soviet Union, was that mums or bastards. He was like, they’re all mums or

bastards. And--

STEINERT:That’s the nicest thing.

KABAKOFF:Oh, that’s the, that is the nicest thing. But, I mean, I, I look back,

I think, my god, he was, he was right on the money. He was way ahead of his

time, you know. No one, you know, saw that eventually the Soviet Union would

fall apart just like he had predicted.

STEINERT:Amazing.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Yeah. Did he ever say anything about what Over-the-Rhine was like when

he was growing up there?

KABAKOFF:Yes.

STEINERT:What do you remember, what do you know about that?

KABAKOFF:There was a Channel 9 special on Over-the-Rhine, and this must have

been in the 1970s. And, um, we watched it, and he told me that when he was

growing up, people took pride in the neighborhood. And that, you know, people

would sweep their front stoop, and that, that, you know, it was, um, it was

apparently a nice place to grow up. Um, in fact, when he was little, they didn’t

have a bathroom. And that, um, they would go to the public bathhouse. And

whatever it cost. I mean it was very minimum. But, once a week, they would go to

the--have a--the public bathhouse, take a bath. And then the rest of the time

they had what he described--this is another thing that you could have as, um,

apparently it was, like, some type of porcelain, uh,

STEINERT:--basin?

KABAKOFF:--yeah, with a pitcher. And it would have a pitcher of water and

that’s the way they would clean themselves,

is they’d wash up with that.

STEINERT:Smelly parts or whatever, yeah?

KABAKOFF:Yeah, and, and, um, so that, that would be something to put in there.

But he said that, um, they were one of the first people to get, um, indoor

plumbing and that they converted a closet into a, you know, a bathroom. And they

had a, you know, the sink and a toilet and a bathtub. And, uh--

STEINERT:Interesting.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. So, I mean, that building wasn’t originally engineered for--

STEINERT:No, absolutely not.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Yeah. And do you know where he went to elementary school? I know he

went to Woodward High School. And that he and Ida were actually in the same

class, because they were close enough in age.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. 1932.

STEINERT:Yeah. Do you know where he went to elementary school?

KABAKOFF:No, I, I sure don’t.

STEINERT:So, there was an elementary school right across the street from the

building called Webster.

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:Which could have been where they went to school, if they went to

public school. Do you think they did?

KABAKOFF:They did.

STEINERT:So, they probably went to Webster.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Um, there’s also an, the next, I think, nearest school would have been going

up Vine Street hill, half-way up, is Vine Street Hill Elementary.

KABAKOFF:He did tell me that, um--he was naturally left-handed. But back in

those days, apparently, um, they discouraged people from being left-handed. So

he learned how to, um, write with both his right and his left hand.

STEINERT:Oh wow.

KABAKOFF:And he had beautiful, beautiful handwriting. And, uh, I remember him

telling me that they just didn’t, you, I mean, there’s something wrong with you

if you’re left-handed.

STEINERT:Yeah. So, do you know, like, did he have favorite stores or things to

do in Over-the-Rhine or any other--

KABAKOFF:They literally sold newspapers. He talked about, you know, he would

get off school and immediately him and his brothers would go out and they just

sold newspapers.

STEINERT:So, they’re standing on a street corner doing that? It’s not like they

have a route where they delivering.

KABAKOFF:No. No. It was “Extra, extra, read all about it.” And they would be

selling newspapers. And apparently, uh, a paper cost two cents at the time.

STEINERT:And they lived really close to Findlay Market,

so that was probably a good, a, hub for them. Did he ever talk about Findlay

Market, or do you know if they shopped there. They must have.

KABAKOFF:Yeah, yeah. I think they, they stopped there. Yeah, they, he talked

about Findlay Market, he talked about--when he grew up on Over-the-Rhine, um, it

was still, you know, like I said people took pride in the neighborhood, they,

um, they--I remember him making comments, um, on that special--

STEINERT:--show--

KABAKOFF:--yeah, that, you know, it was a well-kept neighborhood. And then it

had gone into decline.

STEINERT:Yeah, yeah.

KABAKOFF:And, uh--

STEINERT:Um, so, if they were living in Over-the-Rhine and were going to go to

temple, do you have any idea where they would have gone when they were down there?

KABAKOFF:Um, we were sort of, uh, like Jewish light.

STEINERT:So, not so much.

KABAKOFF:We would go on the high holidays.

STEINERT:High holidays.

KABAKOFF:And then, um, I’m not sure where they, they went. But my dad wasn’t

fluent in, in Hebrew. And, uh--

STEINERT:So, I guess, more

specifically, I’m wondering if they would have walked to a synagogue somewhere

in the West End, or if they would’ve taken the streetcar or gotten in the car

and come up to Avondale. What do you think?

KABAKOFF:I really don’t know. I think that later on they probably went to, uh,

it was a synagogue that named after a street.

STEINERT:The Rockdale Temple?

KABAKOFF:Maybe it was, yeah.

STEINERT:I mean, Rockdale Avenue. I was on Rockdale.

KABAKOFF:They talked about, um, a temple that was named after a street, where

they--and then it moved to Golf Manor.

STEINERT:Actually, I think it might be the Forest Avenue Temple.

KABAKOFF:I think it was Forest Avenue, yes.

STEINERT:So, Forest Avenue was more orthodox, and, and Rockdale was reformed.

So that makes more sense that it would have been Forest. Interesting. Um, okay.

So, then let’s talk about, like, what happens in your dad’s life. So, he grows

up in this building, he goes to, um, Withrow for High School--

KABAKOFF:--well, Woodward.

STEINERT:I mean, sorry, Woodward,

I’m sorry, I said the wrong thing. Woodward for High School. And then, um, can’t

get a job, so he goes and works selling hats for a guy named Rosen on Twelfth Street,

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:Do you know what’s his story, how--pick up his story there, then

what’s the rest of his life story, do you know?

KABAKOFF:Um, uh, World War II happens, he, um, tries to enlist. Initially, um,

they wouldn’t take him. And he tried to go in the Navy and they didn’t accept

him, so then he went to the Army, and actually there was an Army Reserve unit in

Fort Thomas. And that was a signal unit, they got mobilized, um, he hadn’t gone

to any type of, um, A (advanced individual training) school or anything, he

ended up getting separated from that unit. Ended up being in the signal corps,

and, at what eventually would turn into the Army Air Corp. And, uh, Ninth

Airforce, and, um, in the Philippines. And, so, you know, he, uh, was using this

new high tech thing called radar.

And, um, he was in an early air warning detachment, and so they would, like,

forward deploy, set up and, um, try to intercept or detect incoming Japanese

aircraft, and then radio back that, you know--

STEINERT:Here they come.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. (laughs).

STEINERT:Okay. And so then he gets--the war ends, he comes home, um, and he

still doesn’t meet your mom for a number of more years.

KABAKOFF:No, no.

STEINERT:What’s he doing?

KABAKOFF:There’s a, a new GI, or, where the GI Bill came out.

STEINERT:Yep.

KABAKOFF:He ends up going to Chicago. And we wanted to learn about this

new-fangled device called TV. And so he went to a school, a trade school up in

Chicago, for two years. And, um, they taught him a lot of theory, but it wasn’t

hands on. And so he tries to come back to Cincinnati, and open up his own, um,

store. And I, I, were just not entrepreneurs. Um, it just didn’t take off. And,

um, it was

Meyer that mentioned to him about the post office, so he took the post office

exam, and, um, he got into that nice civil service cocoon, where you’re never

going to be rich, but, you know, they’re going to provide you a nice cocoon

where you got a guaranteed pay check. And it was security and he, he did have a

young, he started a young family at that point. That would be up into the, um,

early ’50s, he married my mom. And so, um, he got with the post office and he

stayed with them until the, um, um, the early, early ’80s and then retired.

STEINERT:So, which post offices was he in in Cincinnati?

KABAKOFF:The annex. He was a mail handler.

STEINERT:I got it.

KABAKOFF:And back in those days, a mail handler threw around heavy canvas bags.

He had some arms on him. And, um, I mean he, uh, --

STEINERT:Amazing.

KABAKOFF:Yep, he could throw things around, I mean.

STEINERT:Wow. And then he retired, and

so, he, um, just lived in the house in Golf Manor?

KABAKOFF:Well, um, yeah. He was, um, like I said, I got to know my dad more so

than my sisters. And then part of it was just my position. I was the youngest. I

was also--

STEINERT:--a boy

KABAKOFF:--a boy. And, and, and, in their mindset, like, you didn’t cuss in

front of women. And, and, my uncles and my dad were amazing. If a female was

within earshot, their potty mouth would just evaporate, it would (laughs). And

so, my, um, sisters never got to see that side of him. My sisters never knew any

of the stories about, you know, what happened during the war, and they never

heard my uncles talk about--my uncle Leon lost an arm and eye in the war, had

shrapnel in his body. And so, you know, the, they war had a big impact on all

these guys. And, and so, um, you know, I was privy to that, that information.

And then, or course, you know, stories when they were growing up, and, um--

STEINERT:Yeah.

So this uncle you mentioned, was your mom’s brother, yeah?

KABAKOFF:Correct. My uncle Leon.

STEINERT:So let’s talk a little about your mom. Where’d she grow up, and, and

what’s her story, how’d they meet?

KABAKOFF:My, um, mom, um, grew up, and--very, very poor, and, um, my

grandfather, um, Isadore Gellman, uh, had a variety of jobs when she was growing

up. He passed away when she was ten. So, she was born in 1930, and, and,

literally, um, my, um, grandfather died when, when, like 1940, when she was ten,

and, um, the family all pooled their resourced together. So, all the brothers

dropped out of day school, but back in those days Cincinnati had night school.

So, they all went to night school, and they pooled their money together, so you

had, um, um, my uncle Morris, uh, my uncle Leon, my uncle Sam. And they, they

all pooled their little bit of money together and they would give it to

my grandmother, Minnie.

STEINERT:Hmm.

KABAKOFF:And, um, it, it was fascinating. I love the stories, because they--I

grew up, and my mom studied by candlelight, not because they were goofy, they

didn’t have money for electricity. Um, but apparently, that, um, they got

evicted from the house in Price Hill, um, on Dewey Avenue, that, that the

Sheriffs came out and put all their belongings out in the front yard. Um, and

that was during the height of the depression. Um, they ended up in government

subsidy, subsidized housing, um, and, um, oh, um, down here in downtown

Cincinnati, Laurel--

STEINERT:Laurel Homes.

KABAKOFF:Laurel Homes--

STEINERT:Um-hm.

KABAKOFF:--and, um, it was a fascinating thing happened. Um, my mom is at a

Silverton block watch meeting and they is a woman that she looked at, and that

woman looked at her. They hadn’t seen each other in seventy years. Both of them

went to Woodward High School. She happened to be an Afro-American, and they

would walk to school together. But she lived in

the predominantly Black section--

STEINERT:Lincoln Court--

KABAKOFF:--and my mom lived in the--

STEINERT:Laurel Homes.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Um-hm.

KABAKOFF:And, and, so, and my mom said, “We, we just never thought of

segregation. It was just the way things were back then.” But they were very glad

to see each other, they enjoyed talking to each other. And, um, but my mom, um,

had stories about her mother, where, like, her mother didn’t speak English very

well. And so, like, my mom would, um, go to school and have to write her own

notes. “Please excuse Evelyn for not coming to school”, because Minnie didn’t

know how to write English and that, um, like, sometimes, Minnie would get a

fish, and, um, the fish would be swimming around in the bathtub. And, um, my mom

would, like, play with it and then the mom, er, her mother would take the fish

out and chop off its head and make it for dinner.

All my uncles and my mom had nothing but love and support and fond memories of

my, my grandmother. Um, she was like

the rock of Gibraltar, that, um, my mom said that she probably went unfed, uh,

many times, but she always made sure--and then they all, they grew up eating,

like, bread and onion sandwiches, bread and sugar sandwiches. And what was

fascinating, is that they didn’t know they were poor. Because everybody in the

neighborhood was in the same boat. And so, you know, if you got a bread and

sugar sandwich, that’s what you ate, you didn’t complain about it.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And, uh. Yeah.

STEINERT:Fascinating.

KABAKOFF:Oh, yeah, yeah. My mom was very much against alcohol and very, very

much against gambling.

STEINERT:Did your dad drink?

KABAKOFF:No, no. But, there’s something in my grandfather. And I don’t know,

if, they--one of the things that happened was out of desperation he lost money

and that ultimately caused them, them to lose their house. But I know she was

very much opposed to, to the gambling and the drinking. She did, in her later

years, say that she

remembers, um, men carrying my grandfather, her father, home one night. But, I,

I don’t know if that was a, a regular thing or if he was an alcoholic or that

was just an exception.

STEINERT:Hm. It’s a shame.

KABAKOFF:But, um, she was ten years old, and, and she, she loved her dad and,

um, one of his many jobs, he was a porter on a train, on an old Pullman. And,

um, at one time, um, she broke away from her mother and chased after the train,

trying to get with her dad. And, and her brothers had to chase her down and say,

no, no, no.

STEINERT:Got to stay.

KABAKOFF:But he, um, he had a variety of jobs. He was a baker, he was a, um, a

porter on the train. Um, he had also been in the Ohio Army National Guard. And

um, we’ve got photos of when he was, he was in there. He was a cook, and then my

uncle, um, um, Morris,

became an Army cook.

STEINERT:Oh, wow.

KABAKOFF:And that was, that was her oldest brother.

STEINERT:So, it sounds like, she grew up in this really incredibly loving

family and your dad grew up in this--

KABAKOFF:--very dysfunctional, yeah.

STEINERT:--like, kind of, tough love, er, you know, almost, um, abusive’s too,

wrong, but, too, a harsh family. Right, yeah?

KABAKOFF:Yeah. And, but, my dad and mom loved animals. And they, they, um, and,

we had cats and dogs growing up. And my, my mom and dad would be very

affectionate to our animals. And my dad would be affectionate to animals. They

all loved him and feared him too. And, um--

STEINERT:--but he wasn’t affectionate toward his kids, huh?

KABAKOFF:No, (laughs) no.

STEINERT:Interesting.

KABAKOFF:He loved us, you know. I, I, but it, it wasn’t something that, you

know, not like today, you know, we never went around saying, “I love you”, or

anything like that.

STEINERT:Yeah. So, how did your mom and dad meet?

KABAKOFF:Um, my uncle Leon, um, basically got with my dad and said, hey, you

want to meet my sister? Um,

there was a singles Jewish weekend at a place called Camp Livingston, which was

out in Indian Hill at the time, off of Remington Road. And, and it was like a

singles Jewish weekend, and, um, my uncle Leon introduced them. And the next

thing you know, they started dating and, and they got married.

STEINERT:Do you feel like your dad might have felt pressured to get married

since he was already kind of older? Do you think he was--

KABAKOFF:My dad, yeah. My dad was in good shape. When you look at his pictures,

he, he looks like he’s a very young guy. And he just, um, had, I guess, good

genes. And, um, I know that he wrestled and he boxed. And then, he was also in

the German Club, but, um, he, he looked like he was in--and then working for the

post office, that kept him in great shape.

STEINERT:When you say he wrestled and he boxed, do you mean in high school, or

did he do it, like, outside, continue that?

KABAKOFF:Um, he did a little bit in Golden Gloves, because he did talk about

the Golden Gloves back then, that, that apparently

he got to do some of that, and that. In high school, I don’t think he did it all

four years, but he did do some wrestling.

STEINERT:Interesting.

KABAKOFF:And I remember him teaching me, um, how to defend myself. And it was

like, it was, looked like Joe Jordan, I mean, it was like, put your dukes up

like this. (laughing) And there’s no footwork, and, um, it was really antiquated.

STEINERT:That’s interesting. So, I know that, um, uh, Max Elkus, was really

involved in boxing in Cincinnati. And he’s Russian orthodox Jew originally. And

that makes me wonder, um, what, what else was that larger culture of Russian

Jewish life like. Like, you know, we talked about that there was a nursing home,

and there was Camp Livingston. And, like, what are other elements of that

culture and community in Cincinnati?

KABAKOFF:Um, growing up, um, my mom and dad belonged to this, um, the Simchas Club.

And they would have a dance, every once in a while. And I remember my mom,

would, um, my mom would pick out my dad’s clothes. And, um, he would wear this

powder blue leisure suit which, which I hated. (laughing) And then they had a

white patent leather belt with white shoes, and they, and she actually bought me

that too. And I wasn’t very much into fashion or anything. But I remember

pleading with them, please don’t make me wear that. And, (laughs) um, I remember

my dad telling me to, basically, like, “Shut your mouth and put it on. It’s not

a real suit, it’s a leisure suit.” And I’m like, “I don’t care what you call it,

I just didn’t dig it.” (laughs) But I remember him donning the leisure suit and

my mom and him going out to--and they, they had a, a circle of friends that they

would sit together with. And, and they enjoyed--my mom was a lot more social

than my dad. My mom would, um, she was active in Golf Manor’s Women’s Club, and,

she, always, um,

she helped with elections. In fact I, I work now the polls.

STEINERT:Nice. Awesome. Way to--that’s good.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Um, so, and, and you, when you went to temple for the high holidays,

where did you go--oh, you went to Golf Manor Synagogue, we’ve already talked

about that. Um, were there, like, youth things, or did you have a bar mitzvah,

or any of that stuff?

KABAKOFF:Oh yeah. Yeah. I had one. And, oh my goodness. I was, I was terrible.

I was a terrible Jewish kid. Um, I hated Hebrew School. I, I, it just, um, I

thought, oh my god, I go to day school, and then when you get out of day school,

it was, um, Sunday, Monday, and Wednesday, you, you had, or Sunday was, was

Sunday school, where you learned, um, and it was more history and I dug that,

and I loved it, and I learned a lot about, you know, all the, you know, Moses

and Abraham and so forth. But on Monday and Wednesdays I hated it. I, I just

could not--I don’t have an, um, the aptitude, to learn foreign language, and

I’ve tried.

STEINERT:Same.

KABAKOFF:And, um, so, I, I remember I just did terrible in Hebrew School. And,

and you know, I muddled my way through my bar mitzvah. And I was more attracted

to the Boy Scouts. And, and I actually belonged to a wonderful boy scout troop.

And I was able to get my Eagle Scout--award.

STEINERT:Oh, that’s exciting.

KABAKOFF:And so, um, I, I actually, um, love scouting. I mean, I loved the

camping, and the cooking, and the hiking, and the boating, and all the wonderful

stuff that you got to do. So, that was, that was my thing.

STEINERT:And was that also in Golf Manor?

KABAKOFF:Um, no. What--we had a friend that worked for the Milacron. And, um,

so, um, his son and I joined this, this Boy Scout troop together. And, and, I

just really got into it. I threw myself in and I loved it.

STEINERT:So, did your parents drive you somewhere to go, or was it--

KABAKOFF:Yes, it was, um, my parents were in a car pool.

STEINERT:Oh, nice.

KABAKOFF:And, um, my, um, I--great guy, he was, um,

one of our neighbors. He would pick us up, and DUI his way home.

STEINERT:Oh, no.

KABAKOFF:(laughs) And, um, he would, we’d get in the car, and we’d go to Oakley

and, uh, we had our own scout lodge. And he would pop a top on a Hudy, Hudepohl

beer, and, (laughs) he would always say the same thing, “How was your meeting

boys?” (slurping sound) And then we would--who knows how many beers he had, but,

no one, we didn’t think it was unusual, we just thought that was normal, it was

the early ’70s.

STEINERT:And there’s no seat belts in the car.

KABAKOFF:No, no. None of us wore seatbelts. We’d get in these great big cars

and, he would DUI his way home. And then a lot of times, um, I did a lot of

camping. And we camped all over the place. And, um.

STEINERT:Yeah. So then, let’s run through, like, your story. So, you, where did

you go to high school? I know you did, you went to, came to UC, um, and then,

yeah, tell us what your trajectory was.

KABAKOFF:I, um, I went to, I grew up in Golf Manor. Uh, went to Cincinnati

public schools--

STEINERT:Which school?

KABAKOFF:I, um started with Losantiville. And then I went through a special

reading program in Oakley for the fifth and sixth grade. And then I went to

Shroder Junior High. And it was interesting. I was a, um, like the only Jewish

kid at, um, Oakley. And, and, so, you know, I was, I was a little bit of a

minority, um, position. And then I went to Schroder which was a predominantly

Afro-American, um, um, junior high. Well they didn’t have middle schools back

then. And then I went to Woodward High School.

STEINERT:Got it.

KABAKOFF:And, uh, what was fascinating is, is that, uh, I was once again in a

minority position. And so, um, you know, I just, I didn’t realize that, um,

White folks were in the majority. I always thought that, you know, this is just

the way things are.

STEINERT:Yeah. Interesting.

KABAKOFF:And, um--

STEINERT:So, by the time you went to Woodward though it was out, um--

KABAKOFF:--it was in Swifton.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:It was out in Roselawn where--

STEINERT:--close to home, you could probably walk.

KABAKOFF:Oh, um, yeah. I did. Many

times I did walk.

STEINERT:Yeah. So then what did you do after high school?

KABAKOFF:Um--

STEINERT:--did you come straight to college?

KABAKOFF:Uh, no, no. Actually, um, while in, um, high school, I enlisted in

the, um, Ohio Army National Guard. And I became a medic. I was a field medic.

And, um, so I, I went off to active duty for basic training and, uh, AIT

(advanced individual training) and came back here. And, um, I started UC in, um,

’81. And, um, I struggled. Oh, my goodness. Um, I didn’t have the foundation in

english and math. And fortunately, UC at the time had a, what they called a

freshman English exit exam. And, and, they wouldn’t let you proceed on until

you, um--

STEINERT:--could do it.

KABAKOFF:And so, I had a wonderful--her name was Mary Finelli. And she would

give you a theme and you had to go into her class and write on it. And then

she’d take out her red pen and she would just butcher my paper. But she would

put the corrections, like, put a semi-colon here, put a, you know, a comma there.

And, um, and she is the one I credited with teaching me how to, how to write.

And so, um, I was on the extended plan at UC. I graduated, um, in ’86. So, I did

an extra year here.

STEINERT:That’s not too far extended. You did fine.

KABAKOFF:Yeah, uh, and then, um, and then, um, um, actually, when I graduated,

I tried to get a job. Well there’s a glut on the market for teachers. And I, I

just--I did a lot of substitute teaching.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And then, um, at that point--I’d also, I did two years in ROTC, so I

got a, um, Army commission, as a second lieutenant, and, um, I was in the 377th

MP Company. Military Police Company.

STEINERT:Police, yeah, um-hm.

KABAKOFF:That was my, um--so I, I went from being an enlisted medic, and, um,

everyone loves the ‘doc in a box’. And so, it was great as an enlisted guy. And

then when you become a military police officer, people don’t really dig MPs.

(laughter) It was completely the opposite.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And, and, so, um, I, I loved it though. I, I was, um, one of those

guys that would just show up, um, when I was the guard I would go to the armory

and did all sorts of extra training and volunteered to do stuff. And then, the

same thing when I became an MP. And I, just out of pure dumb luck, I lucked into

some things. Like, for example, um, they, they needed someone to go to Arizona.

And--I didn’t know what I was volunteering for--they’re like, “Hey, anybody want

to go to Arizona?” I said, “Sure”, I was, I didn’t have a full time job, I’m

substitute teaching--

STEINERT:--single, yeah.

KABAKOFF:And so I got to go to the intelligence and terrorism counteraction

school, Fort Huachuca, Arizona, home of Army intelligence. And, and so, I really

got to do some really cool things, that, had I volunteered to, if I tried to get

it, I would never get it. But, just pure dumb luck I was able to, uh, get all

sorts of extra training, and, um,

so, I, I loved it. Throughout the ’80s I was always going off somewhere. And,

um, I got to do a lot of cool stuff.

Um, I actually attempted to get my Green Beret.

STEINERT:Oh.

KABAKOFF:And so I joined the eleventh special forces group. It was out of

Jamestown, Ohio. And what was so cool about the unit is, um, many of the

soldiers had eastern European last names, like mine, like Kabakoff. And, and,

so, many people on, on the ODA, the, um, operational detachment, I mean, we had

a--one guy had a PhD. And, uh, it was just a neat unit. We would jump into--we

were an airborne unit. We’d jump into Fort Benning. We’d get in and have the

entire Mount Village, which is the military operations in urban terrain, just

for our, our special forces unit. We got to do a lot of cool things.

Unfortunately, I had three weeks to go to get my green beret, and it didn’t happen.

STEINERT:Aw.

KABAKOFF:It was on--I,

um, ended up getting eliminated on the stakes exercise. And, um--

STEINERT:--I’m sorry.

KABAKOFF:Well, it happens. I had a, a guy from, um, Zaire, which no longer

exists--his name was Lieutenant Magogo. He was on my escape and evasion team.

And, Magogo was having a rough time. And I wasn’t even practicing noise

discipline. I was trying to get him to go up this mountain. We’re in the

Uwharrie National Forest in, in north Carolina. And I’m like, “Come on, Magogo,

(hands clapping) you can make it, you can make it.” And, and he got up to the

top of the mountain and he announces, “I cannot go on any further.” Bam,

collapses. So, by the time I get him help, I miss my exfiltration time. So, I

appealed it, and they said, “Well, that really stinks lieutenant. You know, you

got this foreign national assigned to you, and, um, tell you what, come back,

we’re going to have another stakes exercise. Oop, you’re reservist. You’re going

to have to go off of active duty and come back.” I came back, and they were in

processing me back into Fort Bragg. And, um,

they, um, said, oop, your shot records just happened to expire. You need to get

five vaccinations.

STEINERT:Oh no.

KABAKOFF:Um, and I had a, um, a, an allergic reaction to one of those. So, the

second stakes exercise, I didn’t miss it by a little bit. I missed it by a lot.

I couldn’t even feel my feet. I felt like they were, like I was walking on stilts.

STEINERT:I’m so sorry. What a bummer.

KABAKOFF:I went back to big army after that. And I, I’d spent two years as a

non-tab, um, guy with a, a, the eleventh special forces group. So, I go back and

became a company commander. Um, my military career, I did relatively well in.

And, um, I was able to, um, have a variety of assignments. And, um, I retired as

a Lieutenant Colonel. And, um, and then, simultaneously while being a member of

the army reserves, and army national guard, um, I, um, I ended up, um, being a

police officer. And, I,

I initially worked for Golf Manor police. And it was at a really fascinating

time, when crack cocaine first came to greater Cincinnati.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And, and I’m kind of, um, it kind of upsets me the way that era seems

to be written. Because it--nobody was prepared for the crack epidemic.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:I mean social workers, um, we were removing children from the homes

because their mothers rather hit the crack pipe than take care of their kids.

And, um, just, um, it was an interesting time. At that point, Golf Manor went

from being this wonderful suburban community that I had such great memories, and

my, my relatives still live there, and my cousins and my mom and dad lived

there. And, and it became a dangerous place. We, we, were dealing with all sorts

of crime. Um, we should have been renamed the Stover Avenue police. Because

that’s all we do is go to Stover Avenue. And that’s where,

it was a two block area of Section 8 housing. And everything you can imagine.

And so, this sleepy little community went downhill in a hurry. And, um, for me,

it was a very difficult thing to see. Because, you know, you know, I, I wanted

to be the great defender, and, and protect my family and my relatives and my

friends. And, um, so, um, got a lot of experience and did a lot of work with

DART, drug abuse reduction task force. And, um, I, I knew all the nicknames of

all the players. And a lot of times I would sit in the surveillance van with

them. And they would buy dope off of people, and they would, they didn’t know,

all they knew was this guy's name was, um, Junebug or, Butch, or, you know,

whatever. And I would say, oh, that’s, that’s so and so. And, and so, um, they,

they ended up taking a liking to me, and I ended up going to Silverton after

that, and then immediately went to the

drug abuse reduction task force and lived out my Serpico fantasy. And, uh, I was

able to, um--back in those days, um, the gold standard was a hand to hand

transaction. So, we would use confidential informants to introduce us and then

we would get the informant out and then I would do the hand to hand transaction.

STEINERT:Oh my gosh.

KABAKOFF:So, you know, I, I loved it. So, you know, throughout the ’90s, I

would, um, go to DART--

STEINERT:Did you, like, dress up like, put, like how did you convince--right

now you look so well put together that I wouldn’t sell you crack.

KABAKOFF:Oh--no,

STEINERT:You know what I’m saying?

KABAKOFF:Actually, if you got the money, you can buy crack looking like this.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:But, um, I didn’t know that at the time. Yeah, I, uh, I remember I,

uh, I went to, um, Goodwill in Woodlawn, to try and get doper clothes.

(laughing) And, uh, what I ended up discovering was they had Brooks Brothers

suits, Florsheim shoes, you know, people from Glendale and Wyoming donate

clothes to that Goodwill. And so, if you want a really good deal on a Brooks

Brothers suit-- but, um. Anyway, no, no, I would, um, I was actually, I had my,

I had gone through my first divorce, and, um, I managed an apartment complex in

Kennedy Heights. And so, I would paint an apartment and get it ready to show,

and then I’d go, oh, got to go to work. So, I’d go to work, and people were

like, wow, man, you look like a painter. And then I’d go out and buy dope.

(laughing) And so, it, it was so wild that, you know, um, you just dress the

part. A lot of times I would be in a, looking like a laborer. And, um, it was, I

enjoyed it. I had a great time, and, you know, when you’re in that nefarious

world, you’re really plugged in.

STEINERT:Was it ever, like, really dangerous? Anything--

KABAKOFF:Oh, yeah, yeah. There were, there were a few times. And, um, but, um,

then I would go back to uniform patrol. And I, I remember, just it was always

kind of a letdown that you’d go to uniform patrol, and then

I’d go back to DART, and, so, I got to do that. And--

STEINERT:I feel like a lot of that decline that you just talked about in Golf

Manor, is exactly what happened in Over-the-Rhine. I mean, the crack epidemic

also, and, and, sort of divestment, and the, you know, the urban crisis, all

really drastically changed Over-the-Rhine.

KABAKOFF:We did communities that were outside of Cincinnati. But then we would

roll a case, and, as long as we would roll case we would work with Cincinnati

Streetcorner, we would with DEA, we worked with a lot of different folks. And,

the movie “Traffic” came out, with Michael Douglas. And, we were all blown away

because one of the deals that they did was off of Central Avenue, Central Parkway--

STEINERT:Um-hm.

KABAKOFF:And we were like, holy cow. Talk about art imitating life. You know,

it was, it was, they used the real locations. Um, Over-the-Rhine was a source

community, at that time. And so,

even though I was supposed to stay in the suburbs, we did occasionally come in

and work cases in the city. And then vice-versa, the city--

STEINERT:So, what was Over-the-Rhine like then?

KABAKOFF:It was dangerous. I was a really dangerous place. And, um,--

STEINERT:Just drug dealers? Or was it--

KABAKOFF:Well the problem that we had is, and, and I remember the task force

commander really being frustrated because nobody used what they used to refer to

as your government name. Everyone used their street name. And, and, so, a lot of

times, we had no idea who these people were. They didn’t have, like, automated

fingerprint identification, or facial recognition or any of that.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And so, it was very difficult. And so we, we preferred to keep cases

in DART communities, because that’s who was paying our salary. But if we could

get to a source community, then, then we could work the case.

STEINERT:So, what you’re saying, source community means that someone’s buying

drugs in Over-the-Rhine that

make it out to Golf Manor--

KABAKOFF:Yep.

STEINERT:--and then, I get it, I understand.

KABAKOFF:And, and, uh, so, yeah, we, we would, um--we actually rolled a few

cases. One of them led to Jakarta, Indonesia. And so, it was, it was wild. Where

you would start, like, um, we had this place, um, called Mailbox Etc. And an

employee kept calling, and so we ended up going up there. And, uh, Pat Carr, um,

was a Forest Park officer at that time, interviewed the guy, and he goes, “Yeah,

there’s something really suspicious. This woman gets suspicious packages.” Sure

enough, she was. And she had ties to Chicago street gangs. And they intercepted

the package, the dog hit on it in San Francisco, and the next thing you know,

they’re--we’re taking out this--we were buying heroin. Um, she was bringing

heroin in, and none of it was intended for Cincinnati. It was in, um, hollowed

out books. Kilos. And it was all headed for Chicago.

But because we were a lower priority city, they would, um, they set this woman

up in an apartment building in Forest Park. And they would send, um, packages to

Mailbox Etc., she would pick it up and then she would meet a mule, um, usually,

um, usually either at the Quality Inn, in, in Covington, Kentucky, or directly

across the river, and give it to the mule and he’ll, he would drive it back up

to Chicago.

STEINERT:Interesting.

KABAKOFF:Yeah, yeah. And, uh, we worked with the DEA on that. And, so, uh, it’s

pretty cool.

STEINERT:Wow.

KABAKOFF:And so, I did multiple tours with DART, and then I eventually became a

detective at Silverton. And, um, loved it. I loved it, but also hated it.

Because I was just overwhelmed. Um, as Silverton continued to lose, um, its tax

base, um, our calls for service exponentially grew. And I couldn’t get to

everything. And so as--that part was really frustrating.

And we focused more on part one crimes, which are crimes of violence. And part

two crimes, if we could get to it, we would. And many times, it’s solvability.

If it was, it wasn’t going to take up that much time, yeah, then, I did a lot of

receiving stolen property stuff because they were easy cases to work.

STEINERT:Yeah. But, if, like someone smashes your windshield and you have no

idea who does it, cops aren’t going to help, right?

KABAKOFF:Um, we actually did have, uh, smash and grabs. And typically it was at

daycares. And, no, I, I tried my damndest. And a lot of these purses were, like,

designer, purses. And, uh, typically the mom would, would leave the purse in the

front seat and she’d go in the daycare to get her kid. Come out, and the window

would be smashed and the purse would be gone. And so, we, we tried. I mean, like

I said, it would be based on, um, if your victim really wanted you to do

something, and if, um, the solvability--it was a good chance you’re going to

solve it--and a lot of times, like, um,

the bad guys change their mo’s, their means of operating. And so, um, they would

take credit cards. And you used to just be able to swipe a credit card. And,

and, so, um, you know, we would go get video and try and get license plates and

run them. So, if we had a lead that we could follow up, I would. But it, it was

crazy, I got to--

STEINERT:It sounds really frustrating.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:So then did you retire from Silverton?

KABAKOFF:I--Silverton imploded. Um, the 2008 recession was rough. And, by 2013

we had burned through our reserves. And, um, there was basically, a drug deal

that was set up between, um, Sheriff Simon Leis and Silverton city council and

the City Manager. And they decided that, um, they would contract with the

County, and, um, anyway, to make a long story short, I barely

had enough time, I was enabled (? by my military. And I retired from, um,

Silverton with just the amount of time in 2013. And then, um, tried to start my

own background investigation business and discovered I’m not an entrepreneur.

And went down to, um, Department of Criminal Justice Training in Richmond,

Kentucky, and I became a police academy instructor down there. And, I, I, was

shocked they gave me the job.

STEINERT:I’m sure you were great at it.

KABAKOFF:(laughs) I was, I just happened to be at the right place at the right

time. And I had also been a police academy instructor at Scarlett Oaks Police

Academy. So, so that helped me get my job down there. And then, um, we kept

having to come back to Cincinnati. We thought, my kids and my, um, grandkids

would come down and visit us. And, it, it didn’t happen. So we kept coming back.

And then my mom got ill. So, we moved back up here.

I’ve been an airport police officer, uh, since 2017.

STEINERT:I got you. And so, you mentioned your first wife, and then your second

wife and your kids and your grandkids. Can you, do, is there, can you sort of

tell us who your descendants are.

KABAKOFF:Oh sure, sure, okay. Um, I, I got married to, um, Sabina Kabakoff, and

I had a daughter, uh, named Jenny. And she’s now a mom and she has five, five kids.

STEINERT:Whoa.

KABAKOFF:So, I have five granddaughters from Jenny. Um, um, Paydon, Hayden,

Kennedy, um, Presley, and Lennox.

STEINERT:Good job grandpa. You remembered them all. Nice work.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. And then I adopted, um, a child from, um, Sabina. Her name is

Sara and she has two boys.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:And, um, Silas, and Kaden. And then my wife that I married

after, um, this is my third wife--

STEINERT:Oh, so there have been three. Okay.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:Sabina was the first wife.

KABAKOFF:Sabina was the first wife.

STEINERT:That didn’t work out.

KABAKOFF:Right. Diane.

STEINERT:Diane was the second one.

KABAKOFF:Diane was the second wife. That didn’t quite work out.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:And then I’ve been with Kristy ever since. So, we’ve been together

over ten years.

STEINERT:Got it. So, but all your kids are from your first marriage.

KABAKOFF:Um, well actually, Kristy has two kids. Justin and Jessica.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:And they had a, Justin had a little boy, Lucas, and, um, we’ve got

custody of Lucas.

STEINERT:Oh, wow. I see him in your Facebook posts sometime.

KABAKOFF:Oh, yeah.

STEINERT:So, I didn’t know who, where he came from. I got it. Who he was

connected to. Lovely, cool. Okay, so we’re kind of maybe winding down. Are there

other things that you think the museum should know about your family, or

Over-the-Rhine, or, um, the history, or anything that, that, or physical objects

or how to interpret this apartment, or anything that you can think we haven’t

talked about.

KABAKOFF:Um, just that, that, we, I, you know, I know that I was hammered

in, as a young kid, how lucky we are to be in America, how lucky we are to be

are to be in Cincinnati, Ohio. Uh, you know, though it might not be, you know, uh--

STEINERT:--Hollywood

KABAKOFF:--Hollywood, or, you know, Florida or someplace, but that, um, I, I’m

grateful every day that, that my, um, um, grandparents and great-grandparents

came here and that we avoided, you know, um, um, the pogroms, the holocaust, the

World War II, World War I, um. I mean, oh my god, just that, that area where we

originated from. It’s just seen nothing but war, and famine, and just awful things.

STEINERT:Yeah. Did they every talk about, did anyone ever talk about their

immigration experience or what the family brought with them, or, or what pushed

them or anything specific?

KABAKOFF:You know, I, I know that, um, the family was tight knit and that, um,

they sent money

back and they brought it back, as many relatives as they could. And that, um, my

dad talked about that, you know, they didn’t save money to send their kids to

school, they sent money back to the old country to bring other folks over, to

get them the heck out of there.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:But, as to specifics, you know, I’ve independently studied the history

of the pogroms and just know the region where, you know, they were from, um,

that they did suffer, you know, quite a bit. And I think that was the real

motivation that, that got them to come here.

STEINERT:Yeah. Great. Anything else that you think we need to know?

KABAKOFF:Oh, I’m sure I could bore you all day, but, uh--

STEINERT:This has been awesome. Well, then so yeah, let’s talk about what you

could--you’re not boring me, first of all, I could listen to this all day. But,

I know you have--if you have objects or photographs, or, um, you know, if anyone

in the family you think has photographs or things, we would love to scan those objects.

KABAKOFF:We’ll do--I’m going to look for, um, Ida’s picture,

and then the picture--we don’t know if it’s my dad or my uncle Meyer, but

there’s a little boy, and they, they all had the same face, it looked like they

cast it from the same mold. But, I mean they’re, they’re really dressed very

nice and, you know, like I said, my grandfather apparently was a very skilled

tailor, and, and could make those clothes.

STEINERT:Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And I’ll try to get those to you.

STEINERT:Okay. That would be awesome.

KABAKOFF:And, and I hope you like that, that photo I was able to bring to you.

STEINERT:Yeah, yeah. We use it for things for sure. Yeah, and then Phil also

shared a photo that he’s in with--so, it’s Rebecca, Herman, and Phil outside the shop.

KABAKOFF:Oh, wow, wow.

STEINERT:I’m sure, maybe you’ve seen that one.

KABAKOFF:No, no I haven’t.

STEINERT:Yeah. Do you have any idea if they redid they building when they moved

in? Rebecca, and Solomon and the kids? Nope.

KABAKOFF:No.

STEINERT:Because we know that before they lived in our building, the Kabakoff

store was run--well they owned a building at 1400, it might be 1402, but basically

the 1400 block of Race Street.

KABAKOFF:Um-hm.

STEINERT:And then, it seems like there are some things in our storefront that

are from--that would kind of make sense if they did sort of an upgrade on the storefront.

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:When they bought the building before they moved in. Do you have any

idea, do you anything about that.

KABAKOFF:No, no.

STEINERT:That’s fine.

KABAKOFF:Phil and Eileen might. But, yeah, I, like I said, when I was born,

they, they had already passed--

STEINERT:--away--

KABAKOFF:--several years, and--

STEINERT:Does anyone know anything about Bertha, or what became of her?

KABAKOFF:Yeah. She ended up, um, passing away in a nursing home, I believe it

was the orthodox nursing home. And um, no one was close to her.

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:And, and, so--

STEINERT:And, I mean, it sounds like the kids kind of thought she was a gold

digger, is that right?

KABAKOFF:Yeah. Yeah. Pretty much.

STEINERT:Yeah. (laughing) So, do we know where she came from, or how she met Solomon?

KABAKOFF:Yes. Um, my dad was kind of angry at my aunt Sylvia and her sister--

STEINERT:That’s Herman’s wife--

KABAKOFF:Right, right. That they said, “Solomon, you have to be married. You

can’t be, um, single.”

STEINERT:How are you going to take care of yourself.

KABAKOFF:Right, right.

STEINERT:Yep.

KABAKOFF:And so they introduced her.

STEINERT:Oh.

KABAKOFF:And, like I said, there, there were some bitter feelings that, you

know, they, uh, for whatever reasons, they didn’t like her.

STEINERT:Got it.

KABAKOFF:And, uh, I wasn’t nice blended family. (laughs)

STEINERT:No. So, well, okay, that so interesting. Like, did you grow up, like,

going to family events, did you have picnics with the family, like did you see--

KABAKOFF:--We were more, um, close to the Gellman side. And we would see, out

of all my cousins, I would see my uncle Herman and my cousin Phil, and Ronnie,

and Eileen, um, here and there. But it wasn’t like, um, the typical holidays

where we would go visit my uncle Sam, aunt Wilma, my uncle Leon, my cousins

Claire, Marsha, and, um, what have you. So, we were closer to the Gellman side.

And, um,

I used to joke that all the Kabakoff side, they were too successful. So, we

didn’t really associate with them. (laughing)

STEINERT:Because they live in, uh, single room occupancy hotels,

KABAKOFF:Yeah.

STEINERT:I got you. The house with no electricity. Okay. (laughs)

KABAKOFF:Well, uh, the Bortz’s. Um, my dad did talk about—apparently, um, a lot

of money was sent over and brought many other relatives over. Not only the

Bortzs but the, um, I guess the Sapadins and, um, they’re several, it starts

with P, and I can’t think of the name, um. Oh my goodness. Um, anyway, um, the

kids never went to college. Where when the Bortz’s came over, the, they, the

father started a candy store. He started selling candy out of a rumble seat.

STEINERT:Wow.

KABAKOFF:And then, then he had a--I actually visited the candy store, it was in

downtown Cincinnati.

STEINERT:Huh.

KABAKOFF:And, um, he was able to send his sons, um, to--

STEINERT:So his sons would be like Neil, Philip, Arn,

the ones that are still around today.

KABAKOFF:Yep, yep. And they did fabulous. I mean, they really, I mean, Arn

became the Mayor of Cincinnati, um, Neil, multimillionaire, Towne Property.

STEINERT:Philip owns a jewelry store.

KABAKOFF:Oh yeah, yeah. And so, you know, they, they were very, very

successful, and, um, there was a real class difference. Um, we went to a family

reunion, like, I, the late ’70s. And, um, it, it looked like a clown car. We

packed so many folks in this, like, you know, I don’t know what it was like, I

don’t know what it was, like a--

STEINERT:--minivan or something--

KABAKOFF:Seventy, um, Chevy Impala.

STEINERT:Oh, wow.

KABAKOFF:We go out to Given Road in Indiana, er, in Indian Hill, and we’re

looking at this wonderful home, it’s got a pool and a slide and, I was like,

wow, these are really our relatives? And I remember they had wine and brie

cheese. And I remember my dad saying, “Got any diet pop?”. (laughs) And, um, it

was, like I said, it was a real class difference. (laughing)

STEINERT:That’s amazing.

KABAKOFF:Yeah. We were like the Beverly Hillbillies coming out there. But, I

remember talking to a lot of the old timers. And like I said, I wish I would

have, um, got their names, and their, just--

STEINERT:Yeah. So, let’s just establish for the movie, for the recording, um,

the connection between your family and the Bortz’s family. Can you talk about

that a little bit?

KABAKOFF:Sure. Sure. They were, um, apparently from the same, I’m going to

mispronounce this schtickle--

STEINERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:Small village, um, outside of what’s modern day Kiev or Kiev. And it

was called Ekastartarenaslav --?? --.

STEINERT:Good job.

KABAKOFF:And, it no longer exists. And, um, they basically would, um, bring

over all the relatives that they could.

STEINERT:And so, Fanny, who was Solomon’s mom. Is a sister--

KABAKOFF:--Yup.

STEINERT:--of the Bortzs, right?

KABAKOFF:Yes.

STEINTERT:Okay.

KABAKOFF:And the Bortz’s have done phenomenal here. They, they’ve

really, um, just been able to achieve the American dream and materially done

great. And--

STEINERT:Yeah. It’s such an interesting connection, right?

KABAKOFF:Oh, yeah, yeah. But--

STEINERT:So, and you’re not in touch with them--

KABAKOFF:--no, no--I’ve met--

STEINERT:--but you do--no more family reunions?

KABAKOFF:I’ve met them. And, and I doubt they’d even necessarily remember me. I

mean, it was just, every, like, we just, naturally grow apart.

STEINERT:Of course. Yeah.

KABAKOFF:And so, once the old timers had all passed away, you know, we, we lost

the connections.

STEINERT:Yeah. Awesome. Well, anything else? Thank you so much.

KABAKOFF:No, no, I thank you. I appreciate that.

STEINERT:This has been totally fantastic. If you think of anything later, or

have a memory, or you mention this to someone and they help you remember

something, we can always do more or you can send us emails, or whatever.

KABAKOFF:Okay, will do. Will do. Well, thank you. I enjoyed it.

STEINERT:Yeah.

(end of interview)