CAGLE:So, uh, today is June 29, 2023. Uh, this is Lauren Cagle. I'm

interviewing Tom Fitzgerald, also known as Fitz. Uh, we're doing an interview on

Zoom. I'm in Lexington. Fitz, you're in Frankfort?

FITZGERALD:I'm in Louisville.

CAGLE:Louisville, in Louisville. Yeah, so we're capturing this over Zoom. Um,

let's start with a really straightforward question. Just tell us a little bit

about yourself.

FITZGERALD:Well, I'm the former director of the Kentucky Resources Council. I

was a director for about thirty-seven years. Before that, I was a staff attorney

for AppalReD, which is the legal aid, uh, provider for Eastern Kentucky. So I

was doing, um, had my own caseload, but also was doing kind of environmental

specialist and backup to the different, uh, staff attorney who were out in the,

uh, in the field. Um, and so, uh, that's, you know

, that's mostly it. I am, uh, I am, now technically, um, uh semi-retired, so I'm

still working about forty hours a week--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--rather than sixty. But I'm having, you know, I’m having a great

time because I no longer have to do a lot of the, uh, a lot of the

administrative stuff. And I don't, you know, I don’t know who it is who

suggested that attorneys are good administrators or good supervisors because

they're really not.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:But, um, but that's, you know--so I'm still working, um, with doing

whatever, uh, folks need me to do in terms of, uh, working on cases and working

on issues. Um, I'm still closing out my cases. So, but that's kind of

where I am. I'm a lowly adjunct over at the law school as well--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--started there in eighty, oh gosh, eighty-six teaching energy law

and environmental law. So, um, that's, you know, still working on that.

CAGLE:And that's at the Brandeis School at UofL, right?

FITZGERALD:Yeah, it sure is.

CAGLE:Yeah. But you're not originally from Kentucky, is that right?

FITZGERALD:No, originally a New York City kid. Moved down here when I was 17.

CAGLE:How did we get so lucky?

FITZGERALD:Oh, I don't know if it’s a matter of luck, but it's a matter of, uh,

I was heading to Ohio. I took a wrong turn. No, I, what, what my brother, Rick,

who's one of my two brothers, had been working during the late sixties for a

project that a Catholic priest was doing up in Jackson County, Kentucky. Um,

and, um, the

priest was a guy named Ralph Beiting, who, uh, started the Christian Appalachian

Project. And Beiting would troll the Northern Catholic universities, uh, for

volunteers. And my brother was at Manhattan College at the time and was kind of,

you know, on the outs with Manhattan because he was involved in anti-war

protests, which didn't go over very well. So he took the opportunity to leave

and to come work with Beiting. And then he would come home and bring me, um,

books to read. The two that I remember him bringing, one was a book by a guy

named John Stacks called Stripping, which was a Sierra Club monograph on strip

mining. Uh, and then the second was a book by Harry Caudill, uh, his seminal

book about the history of the colonial exploitation of Appalachia

Night Comes to the Cumberlands, which was, I guess, was published in sixty-four.

I got a copy of it, probably sixty-five. And I decided I wanted to come to

Kentucky to work on opposing strip mining. And that eventually is what got me here.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Were you already invested in environmental or social justice causes?

FITZGERALD:No, not, not individually. I mean, I've done a little bit of

anti-war work, you know, as a teenager in New York. Uh, we had some Queens

College kids would come over to the high schools and kind of recruit us to go to

protests and do things and stuff envelopes, and so, um, but no, I was steeped in

a tradition of, of a, of the idea that, that, uh, we did owe our brothers and

sisters, um, our a, our

, um, a sense of service. And my mom and dad, um, were part of a, um, when they

were in school, the Newman Club is what it was called at the time, but it was

kind of a social justice, religious, uh, organization that mom was involved in

at Hunter College. Dad was a city college kid and, um, uh, he was just enamored

with her, of course, and would follow her places. They did a little bit of

volunteering up for the Countess, um, uh, de Hueck, or Baroness, I guess is what

she was called, who was a white Russian who had left after the Bolshevik

Revolution and came to, to New York City and started, uh, an interracial

settlement house in Harlem, um, that was

called Friendship House. And so, um, my dad volunteered there, my Aunt Marion

volunteered there, and this kid from Douglaston whose parents actually lived in

France, but who was living with his grandparents named Tom Merton, came and hung

out at Friendship House and volunteered as well. And he had a big crush on my

Aunt Marion, apparently--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--before he decided to go off to the monastery and become, uh,

become a Trappist monk.

CAGLE:Wow.

FITZGERALD:But so that's my claim to fame is that Father Louis had a crush on

my Aunt Marion--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--so I grew up with that sense that we did have an obligation to try

to make the world a little bit better. And, uh, so that kind of fed into, uh,

leaving New York and wanting to come down and get involved in fighting

straight mine. And so I came down to Kentucky and worked at the Council of

Southern Mountains, um, which was a group that had been founded as the Council

of Southern Mountain Workers back in the early 1900s. It's kind of a charitable

organization at a Berea College. And it became a big conduit for OEO money

during the War on Poverty. And also--

CAGLE:--what is OEO?

FITZGERALD:--oh, the Office of Economic Opportunity.

CAGLE:Oh, right.

FITZGERALD:That was the office that funneled all the war on poverty money after

Kennedy was assassinated--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--and Johnson took office. Um, and so the, uh--and of course, when

it comes to the government, it's had a lot to do with focusing the nation's

attention. That and, um, Bobby Kennedy's tour of Appalachia, Johnson's tour in

sixty-four, uh, of Appalachia. And, um, uh,

so the Council of Southern Mountains became kind of the conduit for a lot of

that money. It was then taken over by a coalition of activists and students from

the region and, um, and became a much more, uh, progressive slash leftist

organization in the late sixties and early seventies, right around the time that

I got here. And so I worked from seventy-two to seventy-six at the Council's

bookstore in Berea, which at the time was the largest resource on Appalachia.

Um, and we built the libraries for, um, a number--you know, because it was still

federal money for libraries. We built the libraries at, um, Alice Lloyd and at,

uh, Appalachian State down in Boone, North Carolina. And, uh, it was--so I

worked there from seventy-two to seventy-six on and off while I was going to

school by mail, uh, mostly. You know, it's kind of a draw a sparky and win a,

uh, art degree kind of--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--back of the matchbook thing--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

FITZGERALD:--but it was an accredited degree. And so I actually had paper was

in school at Rhode Island while I was going--while I was working in Kentucky.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Do you have any idea--I mean, we are often so mysterious to our

own selves--why strip mining caught your attention or grabbed that emotional

investment? Why that in--

FIZTGERALD:--no, no, I don't know the strip mining as much as the sense that

people had been dispossessed of their land and, uh, had been essentially reduced

to a, to a colonial status by the, uh, by forces beyond their control. I think,

you know, a part of that, I think, came out of my own tradition, uh, because,

uh, you know, we used to fly on--my grandfather was Irish born on one side, uh,

great grandfather on the other side. And, uh, uh, but Irish--you know, three

quarters Irish, one quarter Western European Jew. So, uh, the idea of being

dispossessed of your land and being, uh, reduced to a, a colonial status is

something that runs deep in the blood, I think.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:And, uh, you know, I look back years later and realize that, that we

never flew the Irish flag on St. Patrick's Day. We actually flew a flag that I

didn't realize till many years after my dad had died was the flag of the San

Patricios, which is the Irish battalion that, that is a battalion of Irish immigrants

who were fresh off the boat, um, and enlisted into the U.S. Army during the

second Mexican War and who defected to the Mexican side and fought for the

Mexicans, um, against the United States, um, because they realized, you know,

they were keenly aware of what it was like to be a, uh, uh, Roman Catholic

nation that was being put upon by, by, uh, invaders--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--so, it was a--so yeah, so I don't know if that was if that was it.

You know, it may have been something as simple as the fact that injustice always

seems more interesting when it's not in your own backyard, because I could have stayed--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--I could have stayed and worked in Bed-Stuy for that matter--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--you know, I didn't have to travel seven-hundred miles to fight a

fight to get involved in.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. Yeah, it's interesting to hear that you talk about it, and I

think this

will keep coming up maybe or I'll have a more cogent question in a bit, but that

there's that interest or focus on the people and the people's experience. And,

um, one thing that I have learned, um, from doing secondary research as part of

this project is that, um, folks who study significant life experiences, SLEs in

psychology, sort of looking at, you know, are there patterns across people who

become environmental activists and so on, that there's a distinction between

people who self-describe as environmental activists and people who self-describe

as climate activists, that environmental activists often attribute their work to

an early passion for nature and climate activists often attribute their work to

an early passion for people, um--

FITZGERALD:--oh, now that's interesting [?? WORD UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--isn't it? And of course, it's not, you know, it's a pattern. It's not a

truth or a one hundred percent

generalizability, but that there's a--kind of that these different motivations

bring people to the work. So, um, so your brother, I assume, was older, if he

was in college and then bringing books back--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and then you said you had a second, you have a second brother?

FITZGERALD:Yeah, uh, Ed was my oldest brother. They both passed, uh, several

years ago. Ed was the, uh, was a contemporary of, uh, Allen Ginsberg and Corso

and Orlovsky and the rest of the Beats. And that was kind of the generation he

grew up in. And he spent time in the village growing up, hanging out with, with

some of the Beats. Um, but Ed, uh, Ed in the birth order, was the oldest. Uh,

and, um, he went up to Vermont to college, stayed there as what they now call

the international student advisor. They used to call them

foreign student advisors, but he stayed a student advisor, um, and then ended up

in Thailand, uh, where he taught at a couple of colleges there in Bangkok. Um,

he was very close to the student government that was overthrown with a CIA

backed coup in the seventies. And a number of his students were actually murdered--

CAGLE:--oh my god--

FITZGERALD:--as part of that, as part of that coup. And he had to leave the

country. And so we--I was living in Berea. My sister, Jane, was also in Berea.

And, uh, we found him a job as the foreign student advisor at Berea College. So

he was the student advisor there for about twenty years, and then retired

because of medical disability to Lexington and then passed away in Lexington.

But, um, he had been, um, very, you know, he had had

students when he was at, uh, um, up in Vermont. One of his close students, his

TAs, um, had a number of people, uh, in Prague during the, the Prague Spring,

this short period of time before when Dubček was, uh, trying to push for

independence from Russia, and then the rebellion was crushed. And, uh, uh, Ed

also had a good friend who became, uh, one of the close advisors, uh, in the

Sandinistas. So he had kind of leftist leanings of his own.

CAGLE:That's--I'm sorry for your loss, first of all--

FITZGERALD:--I appreciate that, appreciate that--

CAGLE:--yeah, and also, I,

I’m just amazed at the, you know, the sort of, um, variety of things that you

and your siblings have gotten up to--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--well, you know, and all--

CAGLE:--and the, the connection--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, and they are a fascinating bunch--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--um, you know, Jane, Jane, uh, is the closest in age to me, just a

couple of years my senior, and she was a principal of a Catholic grade school

out in the end of Long Island, um, and is now working with a, uh, kind of a

property management group out there. Um, and, uh, lives out in Sag Harbor, which

is on the northern side of the southern fork of Long Island. And so it used to

be a whaling town. Then my other sister's down in North Carolina, um, where she,

uh, she retired, was trained as a, uh

, in, uh, nursing. And she was one of the two people--one of the two first paid

employees for hospice in Louisville, which now is Hosparus in Louisville. Um,

but, uh, she had been involved, she's very involved in autism advocacy. Co-wrote

a book on parenting autistic kids. And so, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah, and she was living in Berea at one point also?

FITZGERALD:No, she was actually--she was in Louisville.

CAGLE:Okay.

FITZGERALD:Her late husband was a med student at, uh, U of L. And so she, she

had all five kids in Kentucky for a period of time. Yeah, yeah. It was kind of

interesting. My brother--

CAGLE:--I love that--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, brother Rick was a family court judge. He was one of the

pioneers of the concept of family court

, um, and did a lot of lecturing nationally on, um, on family court. But he was,

he was one of the pioneers in Kentucky, the idea that you would have a unified

court that would handle all of the different aspects of parental and child and

family issues.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. That's very good. I'm glad we have that--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, absolutely.

CAGLE:Yeah. I love this, um, you know, Kentucky has this sort of gravitational

pull on your family--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, sure does--

CAGLE:--it seems like. Yeah, yeah. It's like, I really like living here.

So--(laughs)--it is really, it has grabbed me as well.

FITZGERALD:It is a remarkable state in a lot of respects.

CAGLE:Isn't it though? Yeah. So you, okay, so speaking of, so you're here in

the seventies, you were working at the bookstore in Berea, doing correspondence

college, and then at some point decided to do the JD and went to UK for

that, correct?

FITZGERALD:I did. I tried to go to UofL because they were much more active in

community, right? Or at least at the time, they seemed to be. Um, we have some

issues about that because they just lost one of their professors who actually

went to UK because--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--she was, she was wanting to, um, she was wanting do more community

work on air quality issues, and they wouldn't, wouldn’t charge that against her,

uh--give her credit for that towards tenure. And so we ended up losing her over

to UK, which really--so I have my issues with UofL right now. But yeah, I wanted

to go to UofL, but I had always been on paper, a resident somewhere else, even

though I've lived in Kentucky for most of the, you know, past five years. So,

um, UK treated me as a resident, so I was able to get into UK. Um,

and then, yeah, I worked, did school for three years and worked as a law clerk

for AppalReD, um, and then became a reggie, which is kind of a rare thing that,

that, um, the Reginald Heber Smith community lawyer is mostly minority lawyers

going back into minority communities. Um, but I was given a reggie because I was

going to be working in Appalachia, and--

CAGLE:--okay--

FITZGERALD:--um, so the reggies were kind of the shock troops of legal

services. We were supposed to do at least a quarter of our time doing

non-traditional law. And so I did, um, I worked with, out of AppalReD, uh, with

the Reginald Heber Smith community lawyer fellowship for the first two years.

Um, it was actually my first year as a reggie was in, um, we were in Philadelphia

when Reagan, when Reagan proposed his first budget and David Stockman was his

budget chief. And he took the, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, which

actually had been passed by Carter's people and he zeroed out all of the social

programs and zeroed out all of the, uh, the legal aid programs. Basically said,

you know, I'm not going to go to a democratic Congress and fight over each one

of these. I'm going to set a budget cap and then y'all can figure out who gets

screwed. And it was, it was brilliantly done. And Stockman, of course, years

later, you know, talked about how terrible it was that all that happened, which

is kind of, you know, crocodile tears, the same way that McNamara lamented his

involvement as Secretary of Defense during the Vietnam War many years later.

But, um, but so yeah, so I was a reggie for a couple of years and then they

started to restrict

what we were able to do, um, as, as legal aid attorneys. Okay. They started to

say, you can't represent a group unless everybody in the group is income

eligible, which meant you could not get a cross section of a community. Um, you

couldn't represent folks on administrative advocacy and legislative advocacy.

And of course, right at that time was when the strip mining act was being--was

unfolding. Right. Um, and, uh, so I said, you know, I can't continue to do this

work and take a paycheck from a, an organization that is getting federal money

because I'm either going to be lying on these forms that I'm sending in the

mail, which is mail fraud, or I'm going to be lying to my boss about what I'm

doing, spending my time. So I decided to leave. And that's why I came to the

Kentucky resources council, which had been the Kentucky rivers coalition

. And if you go over to the UK archives, you can pull up information about the

red river gorge fight, which was the most famous of the, of Kentucky rivers

coalition fights. KRC was urban college kids and environmentalists and farmers

who were all working together to stop the army corps projects, because back in

the day of, of earmarks, the way that a congressperson brought money home to

their district, particularly poor rural districts was to get a dam--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

FITZGERALD:--so you had, you know, Howard Baker in Tennessee doing the teleco

dam and the, and the other TVA[1]dams. And you had Carl

Perkins in Eastern Kentucky wanting to dam the red river gorge. And you had the

Falmouth dam, which never got built to the Yatesville dam, which did get built,

and the Paintsville dam and the Howardstown dam. So KRC managed to fight,

managed to stop about half

of them, but it had ceased to really function as an organization after that

fight. And then after the oil shale fight during the late seventies and early

eighties, when there was an effort by the Addington brothers and some other

companies to lease up the knobs region in order to mine oil shale, to extract

the oil from it, because there's all this federal money coming from the heavens

for non-traditional fuel projects. And so they were just throwing money at

projects. And so we had the, uh, quote unquote clean coal projects and we, that

never went anywhere. And we had these oil shale projects that never went

anywhere. But the elder Beshear, who was AG[2]at the

time, was instrumental in getting those leases voided because they were

fraudulent leases. But a big section of the knobs region had been leased for

mining this

, this Devonian era shale, which has a lot of oil in it. It's a kerogen

substance, which is a petroleum compound that when you heat it up, you can drive

that stuff from the rock, kind of like tar sands. So, uh, I came to KRC and

rebuilt it as a legal aid firm and said, okay, we're going to do, based on a

legal aid model, we're not going to be a public interest law firm that says, you

know, that issue looks really good and I'm going to get involved in that issue.

I'm going to pick this issue, uh, this year because that's where the grant money

is. We said, we're going to do what comes in the door. Whatever people's

problems are is what we're going to deal with. So we started out, we had a fight

on the medical waste incinerator in Franklin, Tennessee, slash Kentucky, right

on the border. And then we had, um, the, the, um, Falmouth Dam, which was called

the Callensville Dam up in Northern Kentucky. And then we got involved with the

broad form deed fight, which was one of the great, you know, great, um, circle

of life kind of things. One of the things that attracted me to coming to

Kentucky was reading about the broad form deed and how people were being

dispossessed of their land based on a corrupt court decision in the 1950s that said--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--these turn of the century mineral deeds allow you to strip mine,

even though the parties could never have contemplated strip mine.

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:So--

CAGLE:--is that just to clarify, because I'm not fully up on the, well, on

anything law, um, that essentially it means, you know, somebody who had the

mineral rights could then basically like mess up the land above it--

FITZGERALD:--they could obliterate the surface--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--they could obliterate the surface. And what made it even worse,

what made it even worse--

CAGLE:--even though they didn't technically have legal rights to the surface.

FITZGERALD:Well, they, no, they, no,

see, the idea of severing the surface and the mineral under, under the common

law, you know, the case law that developed, okay, um, you could sever the

minerals. I could give you the oil and gas rights. I could give somebody else

the, the, uh, coal rights. I could lease those rights or I could sever them in

fee, which meant that you would get all of the minerals. Right.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:Then there's certain rules. If the deed didn't specifically say how

you could get those minerals, there was assumed to be an easement that would

allow you to go through the surface to get to the minerals, but it was, had to

be reasonable. Okay. Couldn't be unreasonable, couldn't be oppressive. Um, and

that was all on the assumption that you would dig a, a shaft, right? Like the

old traditional mining where you get into the car and you lower it down into the

elevator. The, um

, 1950s, um, we started to see this new form of mining and it was really, um,

TVA that provided the capital that led to Sturgill, who later became the chair

of the board of trustees of UK, uh, and a colleague named Kelly to invest in the

mining equipment to strip mine. So it was late forties, early fifties. They went

out and started bulldozing notches into the sides of hills and pushing the

material that you were disrupting over the side of the hill and digging your

coal that way, which is why you see those ribbons of areas around some of the

old knobs where, you know, there's a notch in the side of the hill and you see

the face of the hill, which is the high wall. And then the flat areas, the

bench. And the, um, they were sued by somebody who said, hey

, my deed was executed with an X back in the turn of the twentieth century. And

the parties back then, when they said mining, they meant underground mining. The

court said it doesn't matter. The court stood property law on its head because

property law says you construe the instrument, the deed, the lease, whatever,

with using the language that the parties would have intended, right? So you put

yourself in their shoes. The court upended property law in order to get to the

result that they wanted to because it was a corrupt court. I think, you know,

there's been a lot of speculation as to whether money changed hands, but they

came out and they said it doesn't matter what the specific intent of the parties

were. They intended to transfer the coal. It would defeat the deed not to allow

them to use any means necessary to get to it. And by the way, that waiver of

damages clause in there, we're going to construe that to mean that you can

completely obliterate the surface without paying any damages. So that single handedly

was responsible for the dampening of economic development. Well, that, of

course, and the fact that the coal industry didn't want any competition from

anybody else who paid decent wages. So, um, they, and they controlled the

banking community. So you had no economic diversification in Eastern Kentucky.

In the right minds going to build a factory when the--seventy-five percent of

the surface and minerals are in severed, you know, had been severed and are in

different hands, much of it absentee ownership and there was no protection. They

could completely obliterate your improvements that you made on the surface and

not pay you anything.

CAGLE:Oh.

FITZGERALD:It wasn't until so there was, you know, then repeated efforts to go

through the courts to get the courts to reconsider then legislative changes,

finally, a state constitutional amendment. And one of the neat things is I was

able to write the brief that was used to overturn, um, the broad form deed

line of cases. Um, and, um, and I argued the first of the two cases that

overturned it. We kind of got part of it overturned. And then John Rosenberg,

who's one of my heroes, who was the director of AppalReD at the time and

actually whose family left Germany right after Kristallnacht, right when Hitler

was coming to power. And John ended up working for the Justice Department

prosecuting civil rights actions out of New Orleans. So, uh, he's one he is

absolutely one of my heroes, but he's still living in Prestonsburg and working

on, uh, mine safety issues and elder issues now. So, so anyway, so the long and

the short is, um, the, uh--KRC has been, uh, for forty years now has been kind

of the, the legal aid firm on the environment

. And we've been involved in pretty much every major environmental controversy

over the past thirty-nine years and done a lot of lobbying, um, both to get some

of the major changes that have been made in the law, which are few and far

between. And then a lot of it has been trying to prevent the chipping away of

protections that were put in place during the seventies.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. How do, um, how has KRC historically balanced, like lobbying and

legal action? Because--

FITZGERALD:--well, the lobbying, yeah, the lobbying gets--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--lobbying occurs, you know, during the session. And right, so so it

used to be up until the change in the constitutional amendment, that the

legislature met once every two years for sixty days. Right, so under the the,

uh, the IRS lobbying rules, you can either limit your lobbying so that you

are not, quote unquote, a substantial portion of your work is lobbying. Right.

But substantial is fuzzy. Right. There's an option to elect a hard dollar

number. So, you take your total budget, and you multiply it by a certain

multiplier. And that's your cap for direct lobbying, which is lobbying directly

to a legislator or congress. And then there's grassroots, which is I ask you to

call somebody--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--and, so, uh, KRC stays well within those limits. Um, and, um, I've

been their lobbyist up until this coming year since eighty-four. Um, now

there'll be a new lobbyist starting in January, um, who's one of my former

students, who is now a staff attorney for KRC, and she will be absolutely excellent.

CAGLE:Yay, good.

FITZGERALD:Despite the fact that, despite the fact that she was one of my students--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--um, so it's actually

it's kind of funny because the two staff attorneys who got hired, uh, this past

year by KRC are both former students. And, and despite my efforts, they both

turned out really well--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--that's always the goal as a teacher is that your students

surpass you--

FITZGERALD:--exactly--

CAGLE:--and--

FITZGERALD:--[?? WORDS UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--the trick to make sure that happens--

FITZGERALD:--yeah [?? WORDS UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--is you just make sure it's like they're off--

FITZGERALD:--it’s the teacher's curse. Once anything good happens, you think

somebody else did it. Anything bad happens, it's your fault.

CAGLE:It's your fault. Yeah, exactly. Yes. One thousand percent. I feel that.

FITZGERALD:Yeah. Yeah.

CAGLE:So I have this question that I'm trying to figure out how to articulate.

Well, okay, maybe the most straightforward articulation is the one--why the law?

Like the choice to even do a JD and, and like, was there a point at which you

thought, you know what the court, the legal system, this is a way to make change.

This is the place to put my time and energy.

FITZGERALD:Yeah, yeah. And that had a lot to do with it.

CAGLE:YeahFITZGERALD: You know, it is, um, in, uh, it was always the wall that

we would run up against in terms of community organizing and in terms of, of

attempting to effect change is that, you know, the law reflected the, the, um,

the entrenched will of the powers that be. And any durable change obviously was

going to come from people's hearts, um, uh, but changes in the economic, uh,

situation, you know, it was going to come through the ballot box and it's going

to come through the courts and through the legislative process. And so I

decided, um, to, uh, to go get that skill set because we were very shy on folks

who had that training

.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:And so, uh, so I decided to go back and get, you know--my undergrad

was in, uh, in, uh, in American Studies, which is American Cultural Studies.

It's basically history through literature. And, uh, and then I decided, uh, that

a law degree is a useful set of tools.

CAGLE:Yeah.FITZGERALD: Um, and so, um, so, uh, that's what took me to, you

know--I was very single mindedly focused on why I was in school. I was in school

to try to get some tools to help make change.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Um, and it was, you know, when you look at the most successful

campaigns to try to, to, to make meaningful change in the quality of people's

lives or protection of the environment. And, um, it is a combination. And I tell

my students, as you know, the laws grow up in a cultural and historic

and, and economic and political milieu. And they change for those very same reasons.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:And I said, you know, I worked on the seventy-seven Strip Mining

Act. I also worked on the seventy-six and seventy-five Strip Mining Act. And I

also worked on the seventy-four Strip Mining Act. And and the you know, it took

the organization of it took people like Joe Begley, whose son JT ended up being

the lead attorney for, um, for the Office of Surface Mining out of Knoxville.

But it was also my mentor at AppalReD when I first started. You know, Joe and

Gaynelle, his wife, ran the, the, uh, the general store in Blackie, Kentucky,

which was the ground zero for the Appalachian group to save the land and people

who lay down in front of bulldozers and who, who fought, you know, who got

bombed out and burned out and fought to, uh, against the powers that be and

fought the strip mining abuse. And so it was the, you know, it was a caravan of

citizens going county to county to try to explain the horrors of the broad form

deed that got us the broad form deed amendment, which passed overwhelmingly in

Kentucky. But it then took attorneys to defend that constitutional amendment.

CAGLE:Of course.

FITZGERALD:So you know, I've been part of a much larger cultural and political

and economic fight.

CAGLE:Uh-huh.

FITZGERALD:Um, and that's, you know, we always have to remember that the legal

strategies are part of a much larger picture.

CAGLE:Yeah, that makes sense. So how do people find you?

FITZGERALD:Um, the same way you did--

CAGLE:--okay--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--people, people, I mean,

people, people will find KRC because they Google it, they'll find it because

they heard about us because of fights that we've been involved in. A lot of

times, uh, people would come to us because they would try to represent

themselves in, in hearings, uh, before the Energy and Environment Cabinet and

the hearing officers or the attorneys would say you need an attorney called

these people because they will provide free legal assistance for you. And they

know what they're doing. So a lot of times we would actually have the state send

people to us because they were--they would recognize that that folks needed representation.

CAGLE:How, I mean, I'm, I'm assuming I could be wrong, that you--there's more

need than you all have resources to, or time to fill--

FITZGERALD:--oh absolutely, absolutely--

CAGLE:--so how do you select? How do you decide, you know,

what to work on where to put your energy?

FITZGERALD:Well, historically, there is now, you know, as we transition, when a

couple of years ago, I said, you know, we need a new, younger generation of

leadership. And so I need to step down, we need a new leader. And I set about

doing that over, you know, very intentionally over a three year process. And,

um, the, uh, uh, one of the things we needed to start doing was to codify

different policies, right. And so we, we needed to, um, uh, to, uh, to put in

place priorities for, uh, for, um, what types of cases we would take, I would

never do prioritization, I would take them all. Okay--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--so, you know, just like--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

FITZGERALD:--some things would get done quicker than others, but we would never

say no. But basically, what we would do is we

would take, if it were a, um, a situation where they could afford an attorney,

then we would, um, we would find somebody for them, okay, and if they couldn't

afford an attorney, it was a case nobody else was going to take, we would find

some way to make that to work, you know, to do that. But, uh, we, you know, now,

so what we would do in some cases, is we would actually, um, take a, uh, you

know, work with, with private attorneys and would say, you know, what, um, why

don't you go to so and so, and we will provide backup assistance. And so we

would that you know, somebody else would actually do the representation and they

would give them, you know, kind of a really sweet deal

in terms of capping what the cost was going to be. And we would actually do all

the work. Um, a lot of the writing, the brief writing, the research and things.

And, um, in order--

CAGLE:--uh-oh--

FITZGERALD:--what's that?

CAGLE:Hold on. Oh, the sound cut out for a second. But it's because your video

came on. Oh--

FITZGERALD:--video. So yes, now you can see how old I am--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--perfect. Yeah, it froze briefly. That's quite all right.

Sorry to whoever's listening to this recording after the fact. All right, please

carry on. Sorry.

FITZGERALD:Okay, so and if the connection continues to be unstable, that may be

because I've got the video on so I can always turn it back off again. So, so or

it may just be that I'm unstable. So, um--

CAGLE:--either way, it makes for a good interview, so--

FITZGERALD:--okay, that's good. So anyhow. So, so, uh, what we would do is

it's, you know, part of part of the conundrum

for any nonprofit is the time that you spend trying to raise money is time away

from doing the substantive work. Right. So I would always we were always

notoriously undercapitalized. Because what I do is I've raised enough money to

make sure that my one stamp person got paid and then go back to work. And there

would be months where I would take myself off budget in order to make sure that

the staff person got paid. And then I would catch up, you know, months later. So

it was not easy on anybody around here to have the kind of, you know, always on

the edge. But, um, but that was one of our issues was always being notoriously

undercapitalized because we take no government money and no corporate money. So

that cuts out a couple of sources. And the reason for that, you know, we've had

as part of this transition process, we now have a board that is much more like

most nonprofit boards, which have like fifteen, sixteen people. It's kind of the

average, right. So we have a board which over a three-year period

, I forced into being more active--

CAGLE:--okay--

FITZGERALD:--I'd start like, because, you know, because organizations get

founders complex--

CAGLE:--yes--

FITZGERALD:--it's a big deal--

CAGLE:--yes--

FITZGERALD:--it's a big--

CAGLE:--yes--

FITZGERALD:--it's a big problem--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and I'm acutely aware of that. And so I was like, you know, I had

to come like, you know, being a control freak is an ACOA

[3]thing, you know, it's like, you know, you want to

control everything you think you can. And so giving all of that up was not easy,

but it was really important. And the board started to take on more and more

things. They did the search for my successor; I had nothing to do with it other

than writing the final essay exam that--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--the two final candidates had to do--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:What was really funny is, is, is Ashley, who's the director, had

come to me about twenty years ago, when she was fresh out of school. And you

know, she came and I immediately put her to work

, gave her a copy of the strip mining handbook that had been done by one of the

advocacy groups, and immediately put her to work looking at a mining permit.

But, uh, she said to me, she said, Fitz, you have my dream job. And so here it

is twenty years later, they hire her. And I reminded her that I said, now you've

got your dream job. So you need to go out and do what you're going to do with

it. This is now--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--your responsibility. And so she's done great. And, and so I'm

still walking that line of wanting to not kibitz when I'm not asked to, you know--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--and trying to be helpful without being overbearing. And so I think

it's working out pretty well. You'd have to ask her, she may say, Oh, God, he's

such a pain in the ass--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--you know what, I'll be sure to do that. I'll schedule an

interview and get that done--

FITZGERALD:--there you go--

CAGLE:--well, to that point, it struck me actually, a minute ago, when you were

talking about the new staff lawyers coming on

and like new lobbyists--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and you said, they hired not we hired. So, I heard that--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--moment of you kind of separating yourself from not necessarily KRC as a

whole, but certainly from that process.

FIZGERALD:Oh, I tell you what, one thing I've learned is the less I have to do

with any personnel decision, the better the outcome--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--uh-huh. Yeah--

FITZGERALD:--I am serious, there is a direct correlation. And I'm sure that

somebody could map it on the x y axis. But--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm [affirmaitive]--

FITZGERALD:--um, years, you know, several years ago, um, Becky, who had been my

office manager, and and just by my colleague and cohort in crime, she retired

after being with me for thirty-four of the thirty-seven years that I was

director. And, um, she--and so when she left, my staff attorney, who had been my

law clerk, and one of my students who then became a staff attorney, then left

and went into private practice working with a consulting

firm, and became a board member, and then came back to the organization, stopped

being a board member became an employee again--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--um, I said, Go find us a new person to manage the office and do

all the intake and everything. And she did the hiring. The first person she

hired didn't work out. But that person never showed up actually--

CAGLE:--ah--

FITZGERALD:--her second, her second choice was Amy Carpenter, who is now our

communications person. She could not have done better. When we decided that we

needed someone to do all the bookkeeping stuff. Because Becky had done that. And

then we outsourced it to somebody who's not doing a great job with it. And we

wanted to bring it back in house. Amy did the hiring. And I had nothing to do

with Amy's hiring. Because I said to Liz, you know what we're looking for, go

out and hire this person. And then when

it came to hiring the staff attorneys, uh, I think all but one of the staff

attorneys had me listed as a reference all of the candidates because they were

all former students--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--um, of different eras. Some of them were students who have been in

practice five or six years, some of them were just out of school. But they were

all excellent. And I was asked my advice. And I gave my advice when I was asked.

CAGLE:Right. But not before--

FITZGERALD:--but not before. And, and, and I did--I told them after they were

hired, we all had a meeting. I said you all as far as I'm concerned, are the

dream team. Because Audrey had worked for the LRC as a staffer for one of

the--for the Economic Development Committee--

CAGLE:--what’s the LRC?

FITZGERALD:--Legislative Research Commission--

CAGLE:--okay--

FITZGERALD:--that's the permanent body for the General Assembly--

CAGLE:--oh, okay, yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and that's all the staff, all the non-partisan

staff that do the research and they staff the committees--

CAGLE:--oh, okay--

FITZGERALD:--so you know, the LRC, you've got House and Senate leaders, right,

the president or the speaker and then the pro tem and then the majority whip and

the minority whip and all that. And then they have partisan staff that work for

them. And they have majority minority caucus. But there's also this permanent

staff that, that are non partisan. They do all of the bill drafting and that

sort of stuff. And, uh, so she had worked for the Economic Development

Committee. And so she knows the process. She knows the people. And she

knows--she's seen a lot of lobbyists over the years. She's been out, I guess,

five, six years. And she will step right into that job, as if with--seamlessly,

and I'll still be there to do, I'll still be here to do bill analysis and that

sort of stuff. But she'll be the person who'll be contacting the legislators

and doing the testimony and committee and doing that sort of stuff. And so I'm

going to work this next session with her to, to fill in what she's not

comfortable with, but she is going to be excellent.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:And on the flip, the flip side, Byron, who's another one of my

former students, worked with the Air Pollution Control District, which is the

local air pollution agency in Louisville. And he knows regulatory development.

So he's going to be really good at doing that. Um, and, uh, so I think she's got

a good team of folks.

CAGLE:That's amazing. What about the piece of it of--the relationship piece?

Um, I think when you spoke at the CCTS[4]event at UK,

um, last, this was last year? My goodness--

FITZGERALD:--has it been a year?--

CAGLE:--it's been a while. Yeah, it's been right about a year. Um, that was the

one with Robert Bullard--

FITZGERALD:--right

--

CAGLE:--and then in reading about your work, um, so you spoke about this there,

and then in reading about your work, I know you've said this in other spaces,

right, that a lot of the work is relationships, particularly the working with

the legislature, right? And knowing people and being able to, um, kind of

develop those connections over time, even when you're on the opposite sides of

issues. So how are you thinking about passing the torch on that aspect of things?

FITZGERALD:That's a really good question. We've been working on that for--

CAGLE:--thank you--

FITZGERALD:--for, yeah, for the past couple of years. And you're right, it is

all about, um, those human connections and all about finding those common ground

and the commonalities among folks who, who might, um, situationally or

positionally be opposite, right?--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--um, because there are a lot of common threads, um, you know, and, uh

, sometimes it's frustrating because you can't break through the din in order to

reach those connections. But those are cultivated over time. And, and so what

I've been doing is, you know, when I would go over the last session, when I go

to committee meetings, I, I’d mentioned to the committee that Ashley was here,

I'd introduce her to a number of the key people. Uh, and I do the same thing

when, for example, I'm dealing with the opposing attorney for Kentucky Power

Company. I'll copy Byron or I'll copy Audrey and I'll say, by the way, Katie,

I'm copying Byron. You know, Byron, Katie's good people, you guys will get

along. And so it's just, you're starting to develop those direct linkages where

I can unplug myself and they will continue the conversation. Because part of it

is, you know, you bring the good and the bad, right? You know, um

, and so part of it is not wanting to shade or taint the other's perceptions of

the people that they're going to be communicating with. Not that I've, not that

I’ve not gotten along with most people--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--over the course of time. But I, you know, I've had my frustrations

and so I try not to, to, uh--I think it was The Sound and the Fury, where you

had the same occurrences happening through three different people's lenses,

right? You had the one, uh, I forget, Quentin maybe or whatever his name was--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--who was so wrapped up in his--the gravitas of Southern, you know, uh--

CAGLE:--yeah, Quentin was the one who went to college.

FITZGERALD:Right--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and he was so into his own head that what he was seeing was

distorted by that.

Then you had another person who had his own distortions. And then you had Benji

who had no filter and everything just came at him. And he would freak because

they went around the fountain in a different direction because he had no filter.

And so I try to not impose my filter on--(both laugh)--because that's the bad

side of developing relationships.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:But, um, but it's been an interesting process, it really--and I

think it's been a very--I think it's, I think it’s worked really well.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:The organization is thriving and that's what I wanted to leave, was

that they would, would be thriving. You know, they've expanded the budget, I'm

helping doing some fundraising--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--and then just, you know, just helping out as needed.

CAGLE:It's

very impressive. I mean, building an organization up or rebuilding or reshaping

as it were with KRC originally, and then building something that is able to be

passed off forty years later is really impressive. Um, I have a question sort of

turning more specifically to climate and climate change within the context of

environmental work and, and the work that you've done in Kentucky. Is--at what

point do you recall becoming aware of climate and climate change as an

environmental issue? Like, where in that timeline did that happen?

FITZGERALD:You know, I think it started to become an issue around Kyoto, right

around the time that the protocols are being developed. Um, because much more of

the work that we were doing was focused on the more immediate impacts

. You know, at the time, coal was ninety percent of everyone's day. You know, a

secretary of the energy cabinet would get up in the morning and it would be

coal, coal, coal, coal, coal all the way through the day for ninety-nine percent

of the time. Um, and even now, coal has an outsized, um, footprint relative to

what any positive economic benefit it has for the commonwealth. Um, in terms of

employment, in terms of GDP, you know, it still has a very powerful hold on the

psychological and the economic and the cultural decision making that occurs in Frankfort--

CAGLE:--not that the footprint is big from that GDP or employment, but rather

that that hold is big despite those other things being low.

FITZGERALD:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah

.

FITZGERALD:Yeah. Part of that's cultural, part of that's historic, um, uh, part

of that's economic. Um, but, uh, you know, it always loomed large. And, uh--in

terms of the in terms of the politics. We saw that, for example, you know, when

Ben Chandler lost his election to Andy Barr, right? There's no coal mines in

Central Kentucky's sixth legislative district. Um, but because Chandler had

supported the climate change legislation that passed the House that time, that

was the last time there was any comprehensive climate change legislation, and

the Senate didn't take it up. And Chandler lost his job because of that. Because

he had supported it.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Um, but the litmus test for Barr and the litmus test for his successor

in the past races that have occurred is, are you, are a friend of coal?

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:Are you enough of a friend of coal? Even though, you know, anybody

who's who's--has any more than a passing familiarity knows that that it is

purely a matter of hype. Um, and that the so-called war on coal actually, was a

function of the depletion of the resource and the rise of hydro fracking in

natural gas. Because you had, you know, ninety-nine percent of Kentucky's coal

was going to steam coal for power plants. And you now have no utilities building

new coal fired plants in the United States.

CAGLE:Right, not because of them being regulated out necessarily, but it just

doesn't make economic sense.

FITZGERALD:You know, you've got a couple of trend lines. One of them is that,

that when, um, when most

of your coal is being burned by utilities that are subject to public utility or

public service commissions, and they are pushing you to come up with the least

cost alternative, and your costs are excluding all of the costs that are not

monetized, then all of the pollution burden is off budget. The climate impacts,

the fine particulates, the coarse particulates, the NOx

[5]emissions, the sulfur dioxide emissions, the coal

combustion waste disposal, all of those were off budget. And so coal was the

cheap fuel. One cheap for the people dying in the mines, and it wasn't cheap for

the folks who lived downhill from the waste dams that collapsed. It wasn't, you

know, cheap for my friend Nellie Woolham, who was crushed to death in her home,

when a coal waste structure collapsed and pinned her against the wall in her kitchen

and suffocated her. Um, but it was the cheap fuel because all those things were

off budget. So the trend line for coal as a fuel for electricity is it's going

up because you now have to put on scrubbers, and you now have to put on, you

know, NOx controls, and you now have to do this, and you have to do that. So as

you're internalizing the costs, the real costs, um, that cost is going up.

Meanwhile, the cost of renewables is coming down. And the cost of natural gas

went, you know, and the availability of gas went from way up here to like down

here, because you've discovered how to get gas out of these tight shell

formations by drilling into the formations, and, you know, injecting water and

sand, you know, keeping open the cracks and pulling the gas out. So all of these

factors are occurring. But even without any consideration of the environmental

controls, if you went back and looked at the Energy Environment or Energy

Information Administration, they were predicting a massive drop off of coal

production from Appalachia right around the time it started. So all of that is

the perfect storm for the coal industry's decline. Um, but you said, and so in

all of that, what is the first reaction from the General Assembly, right, is to

ban the Energy and Environment Cabinet, or whatever it was called then, Natural

Resources and Environment Protection Cabinet or whatever, um, banning them from

doing anything to implement Kyoto. That was the first climate related thing you saw.

CAGLE:Yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and, um--

CAGLE:--and that would have been in the late, like the ninety-eight session,

maybe, I guess, because Kyoto was ninety-seven.

FITZGERALD:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Yeah. And so, so you started to see that was the first

big pushback. And then, um, because so much of the climate stuff in those years

was driven from DC, it was driven internationally. There wasn't a whole lot

going on in Kentucky, other than the fact that you didn't have anybody

acknowledging that climate change was an issue. Uh, then you start to see

greenhouse gas issues appearing at the national level, right? You started to see

the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change starting to produce its reports.

You start to see some discussion among--in the teens, and then, you know, you

started to see symposia being put together. Um, there was one that was done

actually by the University of Louisville, after, I think it was at nineteen

agencies that

did the agriculture report.

CAGLE:I don’t know.

FITZGERALD:Um, it was all of the different agencies that were involved

in--there were two different governmental reports. One of them was on the

national security implications of climate change--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

FITZGERALD:--that was done some years back. But the other one was done by the

USDA and the Soil Conservation Service and all of these other agencies talking

about the impacts on agriculture. And then the Pew Trust did its own study on

climate change and agriculture. But I remember being on a panel over at the

University of Louisville, where they were talking about agriculture and climate

change, because we had stopped having a lot of, of, uh, of tobacco production by

small farmers because of the end of the tobacco co-op, right?--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--which had been, you know, set up by farmers in Kentucky was

actually where the burley co-op got its start, John Barry Wendell's brother.

And, uh, John Stad

was very actively involved in creating this price fixing and, you know, in a

positive way where they were trying to make sure there was a floor price for

burley and that they were not overproducing burley so they could command a

certain price from the tobacco, you know giants in North Carolina--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--and Brandon Williamson and the rest of them. And, uh, and so with

the end of the co-op, nobody is producing, you know, the allotment system goes

away and farmers are looking for new crops. And so we're doing all this ag

diversification and some of that money is coming out of the tobacco settlements

and you're getting, you know, farmers that are getting involved in grapes and

they're getting involved in other things. And I remember being on a panel with

this guy who I didn't realize was Australian when he started talking. And he had

the most delightful accent--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--but he starts and he goes, “yes, I'd like to talk about the gripe and

wine industry.” And I said, gripe and wine. I said, it's got to be the coal

industry because they gripe and wine all the time--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--and then I realized he was talking about grapes and wine. And I

was like, oh, never mind--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--I felt like Emily Littella. “Never mind.”

CAGLE:“Never mind.”

FITZGERALD:But, you know, so you started to see that. But really, the only

legislative response you would see are efforts to preclude consideration of

climate as an issue, right? And so, you know--and that is in keeping with a long

and proud tradition of doing the absolute minimum that we're required to do.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:Right? And we're not alone in that. I think there's like twenty, I

haven't counted in some time, but twenty-three states, maybe out of the fifty,

um, that say that whatever the federal standard is under the Clean Air, Clean Water

, you know, Safe Drinking Water Act, Endangered Species Act, whatever the

federal law is, that the states have decided that they want delegated status to

run those programs, mostly because they think they can get a better deal from a

local legislator or local regulator than they can from Washington or Atlanta,

right? So we want to run the programs. So we--and the federal laws say states,

if you run these programs or tribal nations, if you run these programs, you

could be no less stringent than this standard. Well, we've turned that into our ceiling--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--and said we would be no more stringent than--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--the minimum standard. Right. So so we have turned the federal

floor into our ceiling. And of course, I always, you know, I will criticize that

and say, you know, it's a hell of a legacy to leave your kids when somebody

asks, what did you do when you had the opportunity to protect the environment

for me? The answer is we did the absolute minimum that we were required to do,

uh, because part of the problem is being tied

to that bottom rung on the federal ladder, is that when you get a Trump or you

get a Reagan or a Bush one or a Bush two and the standards lower, we follow suit--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--and when the standards go back up, we go back up. So we're kind of

this accordion of environmental degradation or environmental quality--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--um, and um, so, the, um, there really’s not been any concerted

effort to account for, for climate.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:What's been what's been interesting is is two things is one is you

seeing some efforts on the part of local governments. You know, a lot of it's

more aspirational than perspirational. Right. You know, we'll adopt a resolution

saying we want one hundred percent this or one hundred percent that. But, but

then you look at where the actual investments are. Right. And, and our city's

doing everything that's within their power to try to push that. No. You know

, they could be doing a lot more. It's you know, it's one of those things, you

know, a mayor gets up in the morning or a city council gets up in the morning.

He says, “let's see, I got jail overcrowding. I got under trained police. I

guess I get racism issues here. I got affordable housing issues. I got a

homelessness issue. And I got, let’s see, seventeen other problems that only

then there's climate change.”

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:Right. You know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and so, so there's an old adage, um, that is generally used by

people who have a, have a largely a general disdain for the public. And they use

it specifically when somebody will resist the imposition of a locally

undesirable land use in their neighborhood. They call it, um, NIMBY, right? Not

my backyard.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Now, legitimately, there are some folks who drive me nuts because

they are so afraid of change and so angry that they are not part of the

decision-making process, that they have inflated risks way out of line with what

the real risks are. And they're just they're, they're being incredibly selfish.

There's no dearth of selfishness in that regard when it comes to any kind of

change. Land use being no exception. But there is the flip side of that, which

is NIMTO, which is not in my term of office--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--um, and if you if you're dealing with climate issues, a lot of

what people think is climate issues are going to cost money, right? Nobody comes

to you and says, “I want to talk about climate change.” And you see like dollar

signs popping up, right? You know, it's like I want to talk about climate

change. And suddenly you feel a tug on your wallet. Um, and, and to a certain

extent, that's true, okay. You know, we dug ourselves a pretty deep hole

, right? Um, or as, as, um, uh, as others have observed and I've stolen because

I've only had one original thought my entire life--

CAGLE:--which one was it?--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--the idea of OPM. Uh, O-p-m.

CAGLE:Okay.

FITZGERALD:The fact that that sometimes a lot of developers and and some

government officials like to do things with other people's money. OPM. And that

is a--

CAGLE:--I like that. Other people’s money--

FITZGERALD:--it is it is addictive, like opium--

CAGLE:--oh--

FITZGERALD:--and yeah. And so that was one of the two things that I actually

said that it was original--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

FITZGERALD:--the other was, um, I was talking about the Internet Interstate

Mining Compact Commission and the fact that they were so in the hip pocket of the,

uh, National Mining Association that with I said with friends like them, who

needs an enema?--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--or an enemy, maybe I don't know.

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--It's one or the other.

CAGLE:Either way.

FITZGERALD:Either way.

CAGLE:Yep, yeah, yeah.

FITZGERALD:So those are the only, but, the, the--

CAGLE:--but the phrase you've stolen from other people, though.

FITZGERALD:Yeah. Yeah, the phrasing, the phrasing I stole from other people.

The idea that that we've been cooking the books on climate change and now the

books are literally cooking us, right?

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Uh, we spent a lot of years in denial. I mean, we got to the point

where the chair of the House committee actually had to go to Britain to bring in

a climate denier, uh, to testify, uh, in front of the committee. It was a guy

whose name was Lord Monckton, M-O-N-C-K-T-O-N, who's like the third Viscount of

left nowhere in, you know, in Shetland on Thames in England somewhere, who also

believed that we

should isolate everybody who has the HIV virus. And--which sounds like a Sarah

Silverman, uh, you know, skit, but really wasn't. Um, uh, but yeah, Lord

Monckton came and talked about the fact that there really isn't any climate

change. But but what's been fascinating, at least from from my vantage point, is

the first place you start to see climate change showing up other than the--you

know, it starts with the Barclays of London and the Lloyds of London and all of

these insurers who were the first ones internationally, the reinsurers who are

starting to say something's happening here. We are paying catastrophic, you

know, so there's more catastrophic events occurring more frequently, and we are

paying out the nose for it. What the hell's going on? Right

. And so you start to see that. Then you start to see the who's who of

businesses, the Fortune 500, who are coming out and joining groups to say we

need a climate policy because they're recognizing the disruptions. Then you

start to see the defense, um, uh, uh, agencies coming out and doing studies.

Then you start to see the utilities using climate as a an excuse for getting

into renewables, right?

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:And, so when we go to them and say, you need to factor in climate

change, they say, no, that's an externality. And, and it's too, it's too, um,

uh, speculative. But when KU[6]wanted to build the

first ten megawatt solar array over

at the Brown station over by Harrington Lake there, their justification was that

while this may not be the least cost alternative, it is a prudent thing in light

of climate change--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--for us to start diversifying. And so I was you know--and you look

at, at Chase and all these other folks that are doing the investing. They are

starting to say we're not going to invest in coal fired capacity because we know

that within the lifespan of these facilities that they will have to be retrofitted--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--right? And even if you even if you design them with a slipstream

so that you could take off the carbon, what the hell are you going to do with it?

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:Right. You know, we're now--we now have a new federal rule that

says, oh, you can sequester it

. You know, I mean, easier said than done, right? Even if you can capture, you

have to compress, transport and find a place to put it. Or you're going to turn

it into some color of hydrogen. Which is, you know, it's, it’s, um, and I think

long before you get there. renewables are going to make more sense backed up

with battery storage.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:But you've got a whole lot of people who want to--you know, and a

whole lot of research institutions that would love the money to study these

issues. And who knows? I mean, I'm not going to say that there's not going to be

options out there. I just know what I'm hearing from talking to, you know, from

listening to--I guess it was a couple of years ago, the, um, the, the Navy--or

was the Air Force--put out an RFP[7]saying we want a

domestic fuel

that doesn't rely on foreign oil and doesn't rely on petroleum generally to make

jet fuel--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--and one of the things they were looking at is conversion of coal.

Well, of course, the only two countries who have ever converted coal to liquid

fuel successfully, neither of which were very price sensitive, right? One of

them was Nazi Germany and the other was apartheid South Africa. And, and that's

where the, the conversion processes came from, um--

CAGLE:--hmm, not a great track record--

FITZGERALD:--no. And, and not the sort of people we want to emulate--

CAGLE:--unh-uh--

FITZGERALD:--but also the reason that they were price indifferent is because

they had lots of coal and nothing else. You know, and, and nobody was going to,

to, uh, to give them any petroleum.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:So it's it's doable. But I think long before you get to the point

where it makes sense to, to split atoms, to boil water, to turn turbines, because

now there's this big, you know, new push for nuclear. I think long before we get

there, you are going to deploy renewables backed by battery storage.

CAGLE:What is your view of those efforts? I feel like in Kentucky right now,

solar is the renewable energy--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that we hear the most about, about--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--and I don’t know if that’s--

FITZGERALD:--you've got, you’ve got, you’ve got some hydro potential. And I

would, I would encourage you to talk to David Brown Kinloch if you haven’t yet.

CAGLE:We already did.

FITZGERALD:--did you?

CAGLE:We have an interview with him. Yes. Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Did--you did?

CAGLE:I didn't do it. Um, my colleague--

FITZGERALD:--he’s, he’s--

CAGLE:--Zada Komara, did it. But we do have an interview--

FITZGERALD:--he's so--

CAGLE:--in the collection already--

FITZGERALD:--he’s so much fun. Um--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--David and I--

CAGLE:--she said it was a really good set up.

FITZGERALD:Oh my god, I've been a fan of David since I first met him in

nineteen seventy--gosh, I think it may have been seventy-three--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--um [?? WORDS UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--oh

that was like pre grad school and everything.

FITZGERALD:This was--it may have been seventy-four. This was--he was still

looking at nuclear, looking at nuclear engineering as a career. But he got

involved in an anti-nuke group that was fighting Marble Hill. Um, it may have

been later, like seventy-five. They were fighting Marble Hill, which is--Duke

Energy was trying to build a nuclear plant across the river from Kentucky. And,

and, um, there was an anti-nuke rally in Lexington. I came up from Berea and

actually met Wendell Berry that day. Um, I was--I had never cooked with whole

wheat pasta before--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--and, oh my God. You know, you know, those huge, big industrial,

you know, a cast aluminum pots with the handles out. Okay, I made a pot of

noodles with one of those and I didn't drain it.

And, um, by the time Wendell got there, the pasta had congealed--

CAGLE:--oh, my God. It was just glue--

FITZGERALD:--I cut him a square of it and like a little cube--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--and then put sauce on top of it. And I didn't think he ate any of

it, but he may have had like a bite of it. But you could see like little pieces

of, of like pasta sticking out of the cube. But it was, yeah, it was really sad.

CAGLE:You should have called it like what's the thing now where it's like the

science of cooking, like gastro molecular--

FITZGERALD:--yes--

CAGLE:--whatever--

FITZGERALD:--yes, oh my god--

CAGLE:--that’s right. You were ahead of your time. You were ahead--

FITZGERALD:--I really, I really was--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--and it was like, you know, gluten-esque. Um, but, but nobody told

me you didn't--you needed to drain this stuff, you know. So, so, um, but, uh,

David always comes in and talks to my class

on hydro issues. And he's always--he's wonderful. And then I have Sarah Lynn

come in and talk about climate issues.

CAGLE:Yeah. Which she was involved in those nuclear protests, too, I think.

FITZGERALD:She sure was.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:She was she was chained to the fence. She and David and I have known

each other for thirty-five, forty years now.

CAGLE:Wow.

FITZGERALD:She was actively involved with that group. Um, and--

CAGLE:--I have to tell you that I did her interview. I interviewed her back in

the fall and she mentioned the protests. And I said, okay, we'll come back to

that. And then we didn't come back to that--

FITZGERALD:--oh--

CAGLE:--and I regret it so much. But it--there was there's so much to talk

about right over this long and storied career and the work that Sarah Lynn's

doing now. And it wasn't till later that I went--(gasps)--oh, no, I didn't get

the full nuclear protest stories.

FITZGERALD:She's still around, you know.

CAGLE:Yes. And we'll do another--we'll do a follow up interview.

FITZGERALD:And one of the great things is you can mine through what you're

doing now--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--and, and put together

--and there's been a little bit of work done on this, but not a lot of work.

Okay, there's a there's a woman. Gosh, I'm trying to remember her name here in

Louisville who was trying to do some oral histories on the environmental

movement. And I know down at Filson that there is a--they are trying to start I

think they probably did start a conservation collection that has lots of oral

histories and a lot of papers. Um, I sent Winnie Hepler's papers down there, uh--

CAGLE:--oh, nice--

FITZGERALD:--and, and I you know, the Red River Gorge stuff is over at UK at

the archives. Um, and I don't know what we're going to end up doing with all of

the, the, the thirty-eight years of stuff that I'm going through now. Um, but,

but it may go to UK if, if they want it or

it may go to Filson. It's not going to go to the State History Museum because I

had an inside word a couple of years ago that they were actually destroying some documents.

CAGLE:Okay.

FITZGERALD:Yeah, I don't think it's a current problem. This was like four or

five years ago, but it just--

CAGLE:--okay--

FITZGERALD:--kind of soured me on that. But--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--but you know, you could do a great job--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--if you want to take that on as a second project is to mine through

a lot of this and and do a snapshot of the history of the conservation movement

in Kentucky.

CAGLE:I actually that is, uh--I'm teaching a class in the Spring where I'm

going to have students work through these interviews and start to build out

some--yeah, build out some, um, short essays like publicly accessible essays

about pieces and overlaps because it's so interesting how the there's certainly

like stories that fit together in the sense that, you know, people were in the

same place, they're working on the same projects, but also

these resonances. I did an interview yesterday with a twenty-two year

old—twenty-one year old UK junior rising senior, but her--the way that she talks

about how she came to the work and, and the influences that other people have

had on her. It, it resonates, you know--

FITZGERALD:--that’s awesome--

CAGLE:--there's this sense of you read that one book, you have that one person,

you have that--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--right. And, and yeah, so I'm going to teach a class that--

FITZGERALD:--you know, one of the things that we're trying to do, I'm not sure

if you've talked to Ashley at all about the Good Trouble Project. But one of the

things that that KRC is going to be trying to do over the next three years is to

train citizens on how to become activists--

CAGLE:--oh--

FITZGERALD:--and that is going to be, you know, Leadership Kentucky, all these

Chamber of Commerce type groups have their projects where they identify, you

know, future potential movers and shakers and they, you know, they, they groom

them and they have them

, um, go to these conferences and things and, and but where's, where's the

training for progressives? Where's the training for high school seniors and

juniors, and college kids that teaches them, um, that brings in people who have

done work on climate and work on environmental justice and work on racial

justice and work on economic justice and train them. Um, we have, you know,

there's a there is a Center for Neighborhoods here in Jefferson County, that has

a leadership college that they do for would-be neighborhood activists. Um, we

need that on a much more broad scale. So one of the things that KRC started to

do is they're doing different podcasts. In fact, there's one tonight on the

roots of, of Appalachian, um, colonialism that Ron Eller, who used to be the,

the Appalachian Center head over at

UK is doing. Uh, that's a, that's a, uh, online interview that KRC is putting on

tonight at seven o'clock. But those are the sorts of things you know, we need we

need more training opportunities, we need more, more uh--I remember during the

the pipeline fight, Chris Schindler put together, uh, uh, a couple of weekend--

CAGLE:--which, which pipeline?--

FITZGERALD:--oh, well, that was the bluegrass pipeline. Okay, there were two

pipelines that we were fighting over a very short period of time. Bluegrass

pipeline was the one that took more time and effort, because that was the first.

But have you talked to Chris?

CAGLE:No, not yet.

FITZGERALD:Oh, do, do interview Chris.

CAGLE:Okay.

FITZGERALD:Um, she's wonderful. And she came out of UK, she and her sister, um,

uh, were there at the same time they started the student environmental coalition

at UK. CAGLE: That’s--she is on my list, the, the--

FITZGERALD:--good, good, good

--

CAGLE:--the, KSEC--[8]

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--she's so wonderful. You will—you, you two will hit it off so well.

CAGLE:Okay--(laughs).

FITZGERALD:Uh, but in--and there's a there's a movie, I think you can find it

on Vimeo, called End of the Line. And I would encourage you to go see it, okay?

Um, it was done, um, uh, a few years back, and it's about the bluegrass pipeline

fight. And it was just--it was wonderful. It's got the sisters right on there.

CAGLE:Oh, I love that.

FITZGERALD:They are the most kick ass group of women here we're gonna run into.

It's like, you know, what the hell is a pipeline company thinking trying to go

through their property. But they, it was this great evening, they were down in

Elizabethtown. And the company had actually rented the civic center. And they

brought in some off duty cops as kind of rent a cops. And so they've decided,

you know, you never want to do a public meeting, um, when you're trying to do a

project, where you actually have an auditorium and invite a bunch of people that can

hear each other--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--you want to set--you set up little kiosks, that way you can

control the number of people you talk to, and they can't share information and

you go around from place to place in the kiosk. And, uh, and so the nuns were a

little bit pissed off about the kiosk stuff, right? Because they realized what

they were up to. So they, they were having no pun intended, none of it--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--they stood in the middle, they stood in the middle of the room and

started doing kind of the, the occupy stuff, you know, someone in the middle

would say, the earth belongs to, uh, you know, the earth is sacred, and we are

all its stewards. And then the next group of people said the earth is sacred, we

are all its stewards. So they were doing that kind of--

CAGLE:--oh, the, the, the human--what do they call it? The human amplifier?

FITZGERALD:Yes, the amplifier.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Yeah. So they were doing that. And then they started singing Amazing

Grace. The one thing you got to say, it is not a prerequisite to be a Sister

Loretto that you have a good singing voice. So they're singing. And some of them

sound okay,

some of them sound a little rugged, but they're singing. And they're singing

loud. And this little minion comes over and she could see her talking to the

cop. The cop comes over to Sister Mary Swain, who stands like four foot nothing.

He says, “Sister.” She goes, “yes.” Yes, “Sister, the Williams Company has

rented the Civic Center for this evening's gathering. And they've asked me to

ask you to stop singing, because it's a little disruptive.” She looks up and she

goes, “did you go to, uh, St. Catherine's for grade school?” He goes, “yes,

Sister.” He goes, “did I have you in fourth grade?” He goes, “yes, Sister.” She

goes, “mm-hmm,” and just walks away--(both laugh)--could you imagine? Just, oh

my God. Just, so, yeah

--

CAGLE:--yeah. Are you kidding?--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--just, it was just, it was just precious. So--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--I need to copy this and send it to you. This came from the

Environmental Quality Commission. And I don't think it's available anymore. And

it only goes through 2015. But this goes from pre-1970--pre-1700, through 19--to 2015.

CAGLE:Wow.

FITZGERALD:And it's got, for example, 2011, House Bill 433 established the

Waste Tire Working Group. Kentucky produced X number of feet of gas. Coal mine

jobs fell to 18,000 from 1979. Cylindrical paper shell mussels recorded in

Elkhorn Creek. And so basically, it's got all of these different things going on

. Radioactive contamination in the Martha oil fields located in Johnson and

Lawrence counties. Nineteen miles of the Red River declared a National Wild and

Scenic River. So it's your timeline--

CAGLE:--what an incredible resource--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--oh, my goodness. Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Leslie Cole is another person. I think I gave her name to you.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:C-O-L-E. She's in Lexington. She used to be head of the

Environmental Quality Commission when it had a staff. She was responsible for

creating this, as well as creating citizens, teachers guides, and public guides

to environ—to the environment. She started to do an annual scorecard on the

environment. And that's one of the reasons that the EQC got defunded--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--uh-huh--

FITZGERALD:--because they didn't--for the same reason, I don't know if you

know, we used to have a long-term policy research center that, um, that did long-term

policy research. It was actually at UK. And they were funded by the legislature

to do long-term policy research. Until David Williams, who was the Senate

president, didn't like what they produced, and he defunded them. So--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--um, you know, we don't shoot the messenger, we just defund them.

But, but, uh, yeah, so Leslie Cole is in Lexington. And she was there working,

the citizens--the Environmental Quality Commission was a citizen advisory group

that advised the governor's office. Uh, and it was eliminated, uh, under Ernie

Fletcher, because he decided he didn't need any advice from citizens. Um, but

they produced a tremendous--you know, she would do forums on emerging issues.

And so, she did them on climate change and some issues like that. And so, she

would be a really good person to talk to.

CAGLE:Yeah, definitely. I mean, so even

though, as you were saying, the kind of legislative impulse over the past

decades has been, like since Kyoto really, has been to just--well, actually, I

wanted to ask a clarifying question. Was the impulse--it seems like maybe both

things were happening, that they were both taking action to prevent action, but

also taking action through inaction.

FITZGERALD:Three things.

CAGLE:Three things.

FITZGERALD:Taking, taking action through inaction, okay. Taking action to

prevent the adoption of things that were directly, you know, that were imposed

through international treaty or by the federal government. Okay, um, and then

the third was taking action economically and legally

whenever possible to advance the fortunes of coal.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

FITZGERALD:So, you combine those.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:You know, for example, um, historically, right, coal was the

dominant fuel because, um, because of the least cost requirement for utilities,

right? And when coal was the artificially cheapest fuel, everybody loved it,

right? But then you start to see efforts to diversify because the cost for coal

is going up and the cost for renewables is coming down, and the two are meeting.

So now what we do is we put in a new bill, which just became effective this

year, Senate Bill 4, which says that before you retire a fossil fuel power

plant, you need to request approval to retire it

and you need to, there's a presumption against retiring a coal-fired power plant.

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:So we start to change the rules and say, yeah, least cost is least

cost and we love least cost, but least cost, but we want you to think about this.

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:Least cost and we want you to think about that.

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:So we're starting to change the rules because the rules no longer

favor the outcome that we want.

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:I mean, even to the point where some members of the committee were

saying, well, if it costs the rate payers a little bit more, that's fine.

CAGLE:And they were actually saying that--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--explicitly.

FITZGERALD:And this is the same legislative committee that six months earlier

had ripped the utilities for raising rates.

CAGLE:Right.

FITZGERALD:And now they’re saying, hey, if it's going to favor the interest of

the coal, you know, and you know, you get that, you know, is it going to cause

more coal to be burned? No. It may give Joe Craft a better market for a couple

more years

. But, but, you know, he's not, his coal is not firing--

CAGLE:--right--

FITZGERALD:--most of these power plants.

CAGLE:Right, and this is--

FITZGERALD:--you know, and, and--

CAGLE:--also on the heels of like, you know, making a big flop about the net

metering. Right. Like it really [?? WORDS UNCLEAR]--

FITZGERALD:--freeloaders, oh my gosh. Yes, you know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--it's just I'll never understand why, other than the fact that it

was a national fight that was being picked in some other states where it makes a

difference, why the utilities decided to go to war with their customers. Because

you know, I told him, I said, y'all need to be real careful. I say, because

right now, even under the one to one kilowatt based net metering, you got

customers that are paying you a flat fee for being customers. They're still

paying you service charge and they are still purchasing some of your product.

Right. Because, you know, even if they, they try--strive to be

over the course of a year, net zero in terms of their consumption and their

production, you're still, they're still customers. They're still paying you a

flat thirty-five or forty dollars a month for the privilege of being customers--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--I said, you keep messing with these customers. They will, the

second that they can get a Tesla--the firewall, uh, battery--they will unplug

from your damn grid.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

FITZGERALD:And that's happening.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:And I said, you know, five years, I said, five years from now, you

know, you'll be able to go to Lowe's and get a plug and play system to stick

out, stick out in your backyard--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--with a solar panel and a battery--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and so you may not even need solar installers. And because you're

going to have folks that are out there that are able to power what they need

without being tied to the central grid, and you're going to miss the hell out of them.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:Because rather than, than creating opportunities to use that power,

to get them smart inverters

and smart meters, and to use that power to meet your peak needs, by enlisting them--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--as distributed energy resources, you decided to pick a fight with

folks whose mean nothing to your bottom line.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:And it's just stupid.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah. And you then tell all their friends about it, too--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--oh, absolutely--

CAGLE:--you know--

FITZGERALD:--absolutely--

CAGLE:--yeah. I think, you know, it's not quite the same, but it reminds me

also here in Lexington, I don't know if the same has been true in other areas,

but there's been that whole issue with KU cutting down trees.

FITZGERALD:Oh, cutting down trees that they gave people to plant ten years ago.

CAGLE:Exactly. Yeah. And just squandering--I mean, I don't know if I want to

say squandering goodwill, I don't--Goodwill might be a strong word, but

squandering, not being hated? Yes. It's an interesting choice, I guess. So--

FITZGERALD:--oh, no, they definitely were squandering. I mean, you know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--we, we, we had a, uh, fight, uh, over here

, it was a little bit different. But Bowman Field is a general aviation airport

that is basically used now for little jets and little planes, right? And and

occasionally somebody flies a, you know, a biplane and charges you a little bit

of money to take a tour in a biplane. Um, and, uh, they decided, uh, some years

ago that they needed to cut down a bunch of trees around Bowman Field. Um, and,

uh, we got it--we did a Freedom of Information Act request and got a memo that

said that the Courier Journal had been calling to ask about the massive tree

removal program loosely based on our regulations. So I was like, oh, there might

be a problem with this program--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--so we we opposed Bowman Field on it. You know, but I mean, you

know, and they squandered a bunch of goodwill with the surrounding neighborhood,

you know--

CAGLE:--oh sure--

FITZGERALD:--because the only reason that they even exist anymore is because

UPS doesn't want these little, little planes flying around in their airspace

. But but yeah, you can you can squander goodwill very quickly by being stupid.

CAGLE:Yeah. Well, so we've been talking for a while. I have a few kind of wrap

up questions or big picture--

FITZGERALD:--absolutely--

CAGLE:--questions, I guess, that I've really been looking forward to asking you

as someone who has kind of a long view. Um, and I'm guessing they're things

you've been asked before. Uh, but do you think we're in a different place now?

Like, do you think that there's there is evidence to believe that forty years

from now, you've been doing this for forty years in Kentucky, forty years from

now, all the work that we're doing will will make a difference also?

FITZGERALD:You know, I do. Um, the, the, uh--since 1981

, um, I have been fighting mostly a defensive battle. Unfortunately, on, on the

national scale, there has been after a decade that really was during the I'd say

starting in seventy, ending in ninety, but mostly through the seventies, um,

where we've made a tremendous amount of progress in terms of our national

environmental policy.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:When Reagan got in in eighty-one, it was the first time that

environmental protection really became used as a wedge issue--(coughs)--and,

and, um, and when he you know

, he put George Herbert Walker Bush in charge of his regulatory reform

initiative, they focused on the Strip Mining Act as being job one for gutting

federal regulation. And you haven't seen very much leadership, except during the

Biden administration, um, in terms of major investment in addressing climate,

infrastructure, a number of other issues. There's been a tremendous amount

accomplished over the past couple of years. But what gives me hope is, is seeing

your generation and younger who are focusing on systemic change, are focusing

on, um

, on local government, local policies. And, and, uh, so I think a combination

of, of a more engaged electorate, a more engaged community, and technological

innovation will get us past the hump. I look at these past forty years, and so

much of what I see is what I've called, and I may be wrong, it may just be that

I'm in the middle of it, you know, it's hard for a fish to understand what water

is, because they grew up swimming in it. And for that reason, it's been hard on

my generation to understand caste and understand institutional racism. But, but

I can't help but think that so much of what we've been seeing is the last

gasp of the boomer generation's sense of, of loss. You know, we, we grew up, we

were the last generation to grow up with the mythology that everything that,

that the myth of that, um, our economic myths, our political myths, we were a

generation that came to find out that we got lied to by government, and became

deeply cynical. And that cynicism remains, um, where we elect people that we

know are, are, are not worthy of holding the office, because we're tremendously

transactional about it.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:Um, we're resentful because our--we believed in this myth that if

you do right, and you hold a steady job, that you're going to retire and

everything is going to be wonderful. And somebody played with our savings, and

we got angry, because the, you know--we got taken for a ride during the economic

boom, you know, the economic downturn that declined during the 2008-2009 era.

And we didn't say anybody to go on a perp walk. And, and we're angry. We feel

like the certainty that was never there is slipping through our fingers. And

we're fearful of change. And

we're angry about change. And so we will take it out on whoever somebody tells

us is to blame. Whether it's Mexicans, Muslims, Mormons, or Minnesotans, right?--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--um, because somebody brought Trump, he doesn't like things to

begin with M. But, uh, but we're, you know, I, I, I can't help but think that as

we transition to a younger generation in leadership, we may get less of the

resistance to the changes that need to be made in order to, to, um, create a

more just, more healthy, uh, social order in society. Maybe that’s just--I just

have to believe that after spending all of this time and effort invested in it.

But I’m--but I see things that, you know

, that give me hope. You know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and I just--and so I think we cling to that hope, we work for that

change and try to avoid cynicism.

CAGLE:Yeah, which is hard.

FITZGERALD:Yeah.

CAGLE:Cynicism or nihilism or both--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--it's hard. Yeah--

FITZGERALD:--although when you're around long enough, you know, I've seen

enough change happen. Uh, when good--when people of goodwill work together.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:I've seen it happen enough times that I know it's a possibility--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--and that's what gives me hope. When I see when I look back on

fights like the Bluegrass Pipeline, and the broad form deed, and the solid waste

reform, you know, now I'm still working on a daily basis, um, with one community

or another that is in the process--in fact, I just yesterday, Pendleton County

109 board, which is a citizen based solid waste board--is

in the process of going to public comment on a request by Rumke to expand their

landfill. They've got to come to the county to get approval to expand their

landfill because the county has control of the solid waste planning process.

That happened because of a bill that we negotiated in 1991. That--and that bill

happened because we were getting dumped on by New York and New Jersey and

citizens all across the state created enough of a political furor that the

legislature called a special session in 1991. And we were allowed essentially to

write the rules that created a process because the only way that we could stop

being a dumping ground was by getting our standards up high enough--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--in terms of managing our own waste--

CAGLE:--yeah--

FITZGERALD:--that we were no longer attractive. And we had some legal things we

had to get around the interstate commerce clause and this and that. But, but

that was a citizen

based initiative that made a major legislative forum that all of these thirty

some odd years later, I'm now working to implement. But the counties are in charge.

CAGLE:Hmm.

FITZGERALD:Scott County, you know, Scott County decided that it won't take

Lexington's garbage anymore, because it was causing major problems in Scott

County. They were able to control their own future. Those are the sorts of

things that happen overnight. Doesn't happen every day, doesn't happen every

session. But it happens enough that I can't help but believe that people of good

faith working together can make the changes needed. Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. I mean, every time as I moved to Kentucky in 2016, and unplanned,

uh, not the move, but it was not planned that I just fell in love with this

place. And, um--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--it's, man, this Commonwealth

will do something to you. And when I didn't learn about the, uh, the gorge, like

the dam site, um, related to the gorge until--I'd been here for a while when I

first heard about it. And I think there were, you know, maybe like, you know,

people who are driving really old cars still have bumper stickers and things

maybe is what alerted me to it. And every time I go to the gorge, I just think

this could, you know, you don't, you don’t necessarily know to celebrate the things--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--that could have been different. Right?

FITZGERALD:Oh, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah, and that’s--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

FITZGERALD:Well, and that's one of the things I love is, in fact, I got a note

the other day from somebody I worked with back in the late seventies on mining

issues, who's down in Tennessee. Um, I was driving a couple of years ago up in

Bell County. And

Bell County, um, the city of Middlesbrough gets its water supply from Fern Lake

over in Tennessee, which if you stand in the Cumberland Gap, and you look

through the knots where the European settlers came, Fern Lake is in one of those

valleys. And the town of Pineville in Bell County gets its water supply from

Cannon Creek Lake, which is there in the county. We petitioned both of those

areas off limits for mining. So both of those watersheds are permanently

protected from mining using a tool that was in the seventy-seven mining law,

which became law because of folks like Joe Begley, and Hazel King, and folks who

lay down in front of the dozers in the sixties and seventies. So it really is,

um, there are some enduring things that occur. But I got to leave you with with

a story about the Red River Gorge.

CAGLE:Please

.

FITZGERALD:Used to be there was a toll on the Mountain Parkway. I don't know if

you knew--

CAGLE:--unh-uh--

FITZGERALD:--that Mountain Parkway was a toll road.

CAGLE:Unh-uh.

FITZGERALD:But there was a toll at the Slade exit to Mountain Parkway, which is

where you get off to go to the gorge. I think now it says maybe Nada and Slade.

But the Slade exit, it used to be a quarter to go through. And I think it was

either ten or fifteen cents to get off the highway there. And I worked with a

guy who became my, my managing attorney, who had--was going to the gorge with

some friends for the first time. And typical of Lexingtonians, he had not been

out of Lexington very much--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--and he was from Louisville, and, um, didn't know that it was a

toll road. And didn't know that it was a different cost to go through or to

get off the highway. And he and some friends of his had decided to ingest some

LSD and go to the gorge.

CAGLE:Oh no.

FITZGERALD:Which is a uniquely stupid idea because, you know, every year

somebody falls off the side of a cliff because they’re [?? WORD UNCLEAR]--

CAGLE:--I didn't want to say--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--but boy, those drop offs come fast--

FITZGERALD:--yeah--

CAGLE:--they come up too fast, yeah--

FITZGERALD:--yeah, it's usually somebody from Ohio who decides that they take

the wrong step and go off a cliff. And usually in altered states. So, um, so he

and his colleagues are driving out of Lexington and they get through Winchester

and they're starting to feel the effects of it. And they make the turn to go

down the mountain parkway and they're heading down through Stanton and heading

to Slade and really starting to feel it now. Suddenly somebody looks up and

goes, “Toll booth, oh my god, oh my god,” everybody in the car goes goes through

a panic. “Toll booth, oh my god, oh my god, who's got money? Who's got money?

How much?”

So they're going, they're going like, you know, spinning out of control and

everything. And so they finally somebody said, “okay, we're fine. We're good.

Right. We're good. Okay. Look at it. Look at it. Do I normal? Okay. Yeah, okay.

We're good. Here we go. Okay. Okay. Here we go. Okay. Okay. Got the money? Got

the money. Okay. Slowing down. Here we go. Slowing down.” Okay, and they're, and

the woman sticks her head out of the toll booth, and she looks at them and goes,

“are you getting off?”--(laughs)--and they’re getting off the highway. And

they're like, “oh my god, how did she know?”

CAGLE:How did she know?

FITZGERALD:So yeah, so it was one of those great moments--

CAGLE:--oh--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--that'll teach you to do acid--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah--

FITZGERALD:--so anyway, so yeah, so now that the toll booths are gone, it's not

nearly as much fun because you can't--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--pay for the people behind you the way I used to in toll booths.

CAGLE:Oh--

FITZGERALD:--which is always fun--

CAGLE:--you know, a little pass-it-on.

FITZGERALD:Yeah, well you find--and actually, it's really a cruel thing to do

. You find some businessman driving a very fancy car. You pull in front of him,

and you say, I'm paying for the guy behind me.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:And you drive off. And he pulls in and tries to pay. And the person

says, “no, it's paid for.” And that doesn't compute.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm, yeah--

FITZGERALD:So he tries to pay again. And they say, “no, sir, it's been paid for.”

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:That still doesn't compute. So he tries to pay a third time. And

then he finally looks up and he sees the light is green. And he thinks, I'm

getting away with something. So he drives away. Of course, by now, you're long gone.

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:He drives a hundred feet. He thinks to himself, they don't make

mistakes. Somebody paid for it--

CAGLE:--it’s not--

FITZGERALD:--who the hell did that?

CAGLE:Yeah.

FITZGERALD:Who are they doing that for? And it ruins his entire day for like a quarter--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--like, to hell with paying it forward. This is a great way of

ruining somebody's day for a quarter.

CAGLE:Yeah. Paying it back.

FITZGERALD:Exactly.

CAGLE:Yeah. Yeah.

FITZGERALD:So anyhow--

CAGLE:--anyhow--

FITZGERALD:--so you got what you need?

CAGLE:I did. The only thing we didn't talk about, but it's been recorded

elsewhere, is the shoes, so--

FITZGERALD:--oh, they are at the Frasier History

Museum.

CAGLE:They are the history. See, I knew that history was captured.

FITZGERALD:Yeah, they’re, they’re at the, they’re--

CAGLE:--do you want to just for the record say what the shoes are?

FITZGERALD:Well, um, the shoes--they are a pair of shoes that they actually

came to me by way of Ken Corey, who was the judge here in Jefferson County. He

was at my brother Rick's house. And he had just come from up in Magoffin County,

where he was closing out the house of an uncle who was kind of the Imelda Marcos

of Eastern Kentucky. He liked shoes--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--and he apparently had ordered a couple of pairs of wingtip shoes

and had never worn them. And so Ken, you know, I, I was stopping by my brother's

house and Ken said, now, what size are your feet? And I said, you know, if you

could straighten them out, they'd be probably ten and a half. And so he gave me

this pair of shoes and I'd wear them over to the legislature. And, uh, and I

would never shine

them. And, uh, back then I was, you know, showing up at the legislature wearing

painter's pants, right? And a t-shirt or, you know, a button down shirt, but not

a suit and things. And so, um, at one point, the chair of the committee, uh,

stopped me in the hall. And said, “Fitzgerald, when are you going to get those

shoes shined?” And I should have kept my mouth shut, but I didn't. I turned

around and said, “when are you going to pass a good bill?”--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--so it became this standing joke that the shoes would get shined

when a good environmental bill got passed. So they've been shined like six times

in the intervening thirty-seven years--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--um, which is either horribly sad or is actually a reflection of

the fact that it takes time to get big things done.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

FITZGERALD:But they've been shined six times, including one time they got

shined in, um, Governor Beshear--the older Beshear--was actually doing a bill

signing on the solid waste legislation

in 2001. And he didn't know the story. And so, uh, the Senate, uh, committee,

uh, person or the Senate negotiator, Dan Kelly, looked at me and says, all

right, let's see it. So I reached in the paper bag, I pulled the shoes and I

started shining them. The governor's looking over, what the hell--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--is that guy doing in my office? Do I need to call security?

CAGLE:You're in the governor's office.

FITZGERALD:Yeah, yeah, so--

CAGLE:--of course--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--and of course, back in ninety, when Wilkinson was the governor and

he looked over me as he signed the bill. They do the ceremonial pens and things.

He goes, “all right, Jay says you've got to shine those shoes now.”--

CAGLE:--yeah--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--and I’m like okay, okay governor, so. Yeah, so they're in, they're

in an exhibit at the Frasier Museum. I've not been down to visit them--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--but I can't imagine what the exhibit. She said it was in the cool

Kentucky. I said, those are anything but--

CAGLE:--oh--

FITZGERALD:--those are anything but

cool.

CAGLE:Cool Kentucky, it's your shoes and what, cocaine bear?

FITZGERALD:Exactly. Really, really--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--put one of them in cocaine bear's mouth.

CAGLE:Yeah, there you go. Yeah--(laughs)--

FITZGERALD:--it may be fool Kentucky, but, but, uh, but, uh, so--

CAGLE:--yeah. Well, fabulous. Thank you so much for your time, Fitz--

FITZGERALD:--oh, it's good to see you--

CAGLE:--I'm really excited, yeah--

FITZGERALD:--keep me posted on the project.

CAGLE:Yes.

FITZGERALD:I think it's a very exciting project. And, um--

CAGLE:--thank you--

FITZGERALD:--and let me know. Uh, I'm going, um, I’m going to see if I

can't--the scanner here does not work well--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

FITZGERALD:--but I'm going to get a copy of this and I'm going to send it to

you--CAGLE: --thank you so much--

FITZGERALD:--so that you can use it. Because this really is kind of a neat

little, neat little--

CAGLE:--yeah, the, the environmental quality--

FITZGERALD:--the timeline, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah, the report. All right. I'll stop recording here.

[END OF INTERVIEW]