Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History, University of Kentucky LibrariesEnvironment and Heritage Along the Cumberland River Oral History ProjectInterview with William Frazier, May 21, 20242024oh0216_ehcr0005_frazierLO:  It is 9:15 AM on Tuesday, May 21st, 2024. My name is Edward Lo. I'm a postdoctoral, um, Lyman T. Johnson postdoctoral fellow at the University of Kentucky Appalachian Center in Appalachian Studies Program. Uh, and we are, uh, here at, in Barbourville, in the Barbourville Tourism Building.

And we are here to discuss the Environment and Heritage Along the Cumberland River, uh, Oral History Project. I'm here today with, uh, Bill Frazier. So would you like to introduce yourself and tell me a little bit about yourself?FRAZIER:  Okay. I go by the name of Bill Frazier. The official name is William Lee Frazier. I've been in Daniel Boone since,

uh, ‘83, and, uh, I was president in ‘91 and ‘92. I am from Barbourville, Kentucky, and, uh, officially with Daniel Boone. And worked with the Indians for most of the years. And

I'm a second generation. My father was the fourth president the year I was born, which is coincidental. And he started, maybe somebody in front of him, I don't know who or how, but my father started the Indians and we had one person in between and me. So basically the Fraziers have taken care of the Indians.LO:  Wow. So multi, multi

generational, uh, involvement with the festival. Um, so you told me a little bit about how you got in, involved with the, with the festival.FRAZIER:  Well, I was, uh, in the Jaycees [EDITOR’S NOTE: Junior Chamber of Commerce] and they had an age limit, and a bunch of us were at it or getting or slightly over. And we got talking about we need to do something, have a dinner

about once a year, meet about every month and do some kind of a project. And I mentioned Daniel Boone and they said go check it out. So I went and checked it out, and they put me in at that year as vice president. And I came back and told the, uh, older Jaycees [EDITOR’S NOTE: members of the Junior Chamber of Commerce] what I found, and I brought over roughly twelve Jaycees and the

Daniel Boone membership at the time we came was only eight. And technically the Jaycees that I brought improved, changed, and got the Jaycees, uh, the Daniel Boone Festival back on its feet. The year I joined, they were talking about selling the rights to the name of Daniel Boone to two other counties and Daniel Boone, or Barbourville,

trading it out every year. And we had enough workers at that time to save it. And we hired a deer from (??) carnival and started getting a little money that-- when we joined, they were basically broke. And I'm not taking credit for doing it all because those others did their share of work.LO:  Yeah. Just, sorry, uh, for the

recording, what, what does the Jaycee stand for?FRAZIER:  Junior Chamber of Commerce.LO:  Okay.FRAZIER:  And we had to quit, I want to say about age of forty, thirty-five or forty. And we liked it. We had basically did the same thing as Daniel Boone, but Daniel Boone, we have a dinner in February and meeting. Uh, we do our big

event in October, first full week, and then we meet once a month except for January, uh, December and January. So, [?? WORDS UNCLEAR]. Let's say that group saved Daniel Boone, in my opinion, Festival.LO:  Yeah. The commitment of that group I'm hearing it's been really important and

integral to the, to the festival.LO:  Yeah.LO:  Um, my next question to you is, um, how's the festival shaped, um, who you are?FRAZIER:  Well, I'm in charge of the Indians since about, uh, about my third year there. Uh, Mr. Sellards, uh, forget it. Ed sellers was in charge of it and

he only brought six Indians and had a very small budget, and he couldn't do much. And, uh, he just said to me, I'm just tired of it and are you willing to take it over? Because I expressed it's (??) past experience with them, with my father and, uh,

I took it over. And I went to about four groups before I come up with, uh, Rick Bird. And Rick's been with us a good 25 years, if not more.LO:  Yeah, because the, the first time, um, he was involved, probably in 1964 or something like that? Um, a solid 25 years, probably, uh, consistently, right?FRAZIER:

He, he started coming about ‘96, ‘97. He took off a year or two years in there, and I went through other groups and didn't work out. And somehow I went over there and Rick said he'd like to come back. He came when he was, he said about eight year old, nine year old.LO:  Mhm.FRAZIER:  And

I was in that festival which was quite older. And uh, I think under the Welches (??) they came for about twenty, twenty-five years. But through my father and other people and say-- my father is, was started, was president in the fourth Daniel Boone and he used to had a bus and he drove, he

hired a person to drive locally and go up different directions. People, there was about four buses that went out of Barbourville, and he would take that bus and go get a group of Indians and take them back. And Daniel Boone at that time paid the motel room and everything. Now I just pay them per person for the time they're here. And I've had as much

as fifteen different Indian nations represented it. And then I have, one time I went to Texas and I stopped in Oklahoma, made arrangements for the Eastern Band [EDITOR’S NOTE: Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians], President of, of the nation [EDITOR’S NOTE: Cherokee Nation], and there's two in Oklahoma. And I got all three to sign one treaty of the Daniel Boone,

where we promised them cane, and they come here and do Indian representation. And, uh, it grew from there.LO:  You mentioned that was, uh, like a one time trip. Do you remember the whereabouts of where, when that might have been?FRAZIER:  Yeah, that, that was

right at 15 years ago, I did that.LO:  Okay.FRAZIER:  And, uh, they got a copy, each chief got a copy and we have one here I, I've got. But, uh, to my knowledge, that is the only official treaty that all three nations, uh, signed. And as

Rick Bird says, it's the only treaty that the white man has never broken throughout the years.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Does it bring you a lot of a lot of pride, uh, to, to be a part of that?FRAZIER:  Yeah. I say, I know at that time I got to, to know the two Eastern Band real good and, or fairly good. And,

uh, Chief Michell, uh, I know him real good. And matter of fact, a month ago, we went over to talk to him, and there is a possibility he'll come here. But most of the time, our event and their big event is the same weekend, but this year, it's not. So I'm hoping he'll be back. He's been here a couple of times

and we, and of course Rick represented some too.LO:  Yeah. So, so in different years you've had different numbers of people come in all the way from as far as Oklahoma.FRAZIER:  Well, yeah. Most of them are out in the south and north and some of them were western. But, uh, I don't know why, but I hired a group and it was multi-nation.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative].

Wow. Um, so while we're on the, the topic of the, of the Cherokee people, um, I was wondering if you could tell me about the, um, the, the role of the Cherokee people in this festival in particular, you know. Tell me more about the River Cane Treaty and how they-- what, what you know about, uh, they, how they harvest.FRAZIER:  I think he was a doctor, a PhD doctor from the college. Uh,

Burr, uh, Bleyl, Karl Bleyl was going through Cherokee, and he noticed how bad off they were. And Indians are famous for making baskets and everything, but they didn't have any river cane because at that time period it was the real demand for cane. Went to wicker furniture and it was very popular,

and they went out and cut all their cane. So therefore they couldn't make baskets. And around here, especially around the river banks, we've got cane that just tries to take over the field. And when Daniel Boone came through, even, it was hard for him to get through the cane. Uh, it was so thick and big, but, uh, he promised him that he would take them cane. Now they come over here

and to make baskets with, and that helped them financially quite a bit.LO:  Do you, uh, feel like the, the, the places where the, the cane is collected from has, has changed over, over time within Knox County? Has it, do you know if it's primarily been from the more or less the same spot

and how they--FRAZIER:  Yeah, it grows out mostly around the Cumberland River and some of the creeks that, that are tributaries of the river. But it is just a nuisance to farmers and things because it will spread by the roots, and I think it does bloom, but it basically is from the roots. And much

maturity on it; the way they tell me is about 12 years and then it dies, but other cane comes up. But I've taken them to three different locations and rotating them because if you thin it out, it gets the limbs on it growing. But if you let it stay tight, it loses its limbs. And that's what they want when they peel the outside of the cane,

uh, to make the basket look different (??). And then Rick Bird, also we give him a large bundle of cane and he makes blowguns out of it and, uh, bows and arrows. Yeah, but Indians are, plus other nations, developed blowguns. And that's what they really hunted with was

a blowgun.LO:  Yeah, yeah. So just a lot of different uses that were able to, um, provide for them through, through making the rivercane available in, in this treaty. Yeah. Um, could you tell me a little bit about how the river has, has shaped your life in terms of living in Knox County your, your whole life and what the Cumberland River

has meant to you?FRAZIER:  The only thing-- I, I don't fish, and a lot of people in the [?? WORD UNCLEAR] in the early days swam in it different places. And before we had our local flood wall, you're sitting where water came to and flooded. And around here, the creeks and stuff, because the rivers are up and not emptying very well, it backs up into the tributaries. And that's what's

called backwater. And that affects an awful lot of people, or nothing else, strands them and they can't leave for a few days. But, but most people are happy with it. And I know one area here close that when it flooded, it brought mud into people's houses, and as they cleaned, all the neighbors would clean one house with the mud out and they just walked down the street as the water went down and

cleaned, every, everybody cleaned everybody's house. And then, uh, we built a floodwall. And then Pineville, Kentucky, which is upriver from us. Their floodwall broke and flood downtown during ‘77. And that basically saved Barbourville from being destroyed. But that same time, our floodwall had ups and downs in it,

and it was sandbagged up to five sandbags high, and that people worked with it and saved Barbourville, technically. [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] back awaited (??) Barbourville because of the possibility of flooding, but Pineville people just lost a whole lot. That was unexpected. And also the Cumberland River here, just out

of knowledge, goes to Nashville Tennessee, south. And then it heads back north and empties into the Ohio River. A lot of people don't know that in western Kentucky. But the floods that Nashville has comes from here.LO:  You drove me around some of the backwater regions around, um, it was, was it Flat? Flat Lick?FRAZIER:  Well. Flat Licks.

The Cumberland River comes, starts at Harlan above Harlan, Kentucky, and I'm not sure exactly where comes through Harlan, through Pineville, through Barbourville, down to Williamsburg and beyond. I don't know technically about that, but it, it affects people quite often. And it would take-- when the big bad rains come,

especially in Harlan, which one year it rained twelve inches and twenty-four, thirty-six hours, and that was ‘77 and caused all the problem for everybody. And by, just common thing I'd bring up, when they originally built the floodwall, my father was hired to put what's called field rock over the backside of the floodwall. They didn't use what they do now,

the large clumps of limestone. But the, one guy placed all of the stones on the back side of the flood wall for the protection of the flood wall.LO:  Mhm, wow. All right, that's a lot of work. And it's a lot of the, the community coming together to, to--FRAZIER:  Yeah. Well the Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for construction and everything.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Uh, I remember when you were driving me around,

uh, the, the Flat Lick area there was the Boone Trace. I think that--FRAZIER:  Boone Trace and the Wilderness Road.LO:  Yeah.FRAZIER:  Intersection. And you're going to have Steve Valentine to come in. Him and the two, and another, Mike Mills and another guy that's not going to do an interview, actually put signs up along the Boone Trace. And there is a group called something of the

Boone Trace. I don't know what their first name is, and that's somebody I would recommend you talk to too. Or the, and see Valentine can give you that information.LO:  Mhm. Okay, um. Do you-- what does the festival mean to the community in, in your own words.FRAZIER:  Homecoming. Just simple as that. Everybody-- it's

our big event. We've had the May Festival years ago and it died. And past two years we’ve been trying to bring it back. But the May Festival technically joined with the Daniel Boone and the Junior Study Club does the Queen's and Princess things [EDITOR’S NOTE: GFWC Kentucky Barbourville Junior Woman’s Study Club]. But, uh it's, as I say, almost homecoming. There's probably three or four class reunions of the county school and the city

school during that time period.LO:  Um, so this is a, a moment where multi, multi generational families have, have come together and you probably have a lot of people who are coming in from, from outside of the county too. Right, I see the sign coming in on the highway as well, home of the Daniel Boone Festival.FRAZIER:  Basically, the people around here-- in the fifties, right, basically,

after the Second World War, they were making a whole lot of commercial, uh, things to sell, especially cars. And we had a large group of ex-veterans and that age group up until probably about ‘70, that went to, uh, Detroit and other large towns to build cars and such. And they come home

especially for the Daniel Boone and other holidays. But it's homecoming for the county.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Well, it seems like it was really reflecting, um, the times when the automobile was really surging at the time, post World War II and, and American identity forming at the time. Um, so what are some different, um, elements of the festival? I

know there's a different, uh, like, booths and crafts, and I was wondering what you think is the most important part of those different elements?FRAZIER:  The biggest thing that anybody really does is the Court Square is where you meet people you haven't seen for a year or ten years. And that's just where you walk around the square, sit down

or whatever, and you meet people that you haven't met for a long period of time. And I, as I push, it's the homecoming. And then the booths help. And all of our booths are nonprofit. We do not have anything on the square, now some are starting to come off the square, but only churches and schools and stuff like that.

The Shriners have a place, the Masons, but, uh, it's the gathering area. And people will not hardly leave that area until they're ready to go home. And, uh, the booths as the festival has helped these nonprofits. Because when we started the food booths, a lot of churches had outdoor

johns, and they raised enough money in a year or two to build one bathroom for that church.LO:  Mhm.FRAZIER:  And then when they got a little more money, they built another bathroom because of what they could earn in Daniel Boone and they can earn a lot of money. They built the second bathroom and usually called it the women's and men use the old one. But, uh, it has helped the

early churches financially because a booth. I know more information, about ten years ago they would-- a good working booth would make $10,000 in three days. They had to work and they had to have good food. And there's four or five booths that are famous for chicken and dumplings or soup beans and, uh, it's a good place to eat.

A lot of people want to eat it to boost, and they go out to the, uh, surrounding fast food places, and they do about double of what they would do the week before and the week after. But, uh, it's the first of the month, and the carnival, we don't have a county fair, and the kids get to ride the carnivals, and we kept the price on those very low. Uh, I know twenty years ago when State

Fair and my son, and it would, may take twelve, fifteen tickets per ride. And at that time we were charging one ticket per ride at a dollar and to county fair for basically the same ride. But, State Fair, they would charge $10 or more because they sold tickets at one price and each ride was different. And now we've had to raise the price because of nothing else time, inflation.

We've got some rides that take two tickets and three tickets, but we still hold a ticket price of $1. And we're on, every ride is on, all but a couple rides are on blacktop. So if it rains, it quits, you know, usually in about an hour or two, if you don't get muddy walking around to the rides or the festival itself.

And that's one thing that really helps our thing. And we do pre-sell with the tickets, and that guarantees the carnival enough money to come in, at least break even. And then that's where we get our income. We do not normally get donations from anybody or commercial, uh, money. We are 98%

self-sufficient, and we do have a large budget. Now, we've got, off the guessing top of my head, about thirty events, and our feast is one of the bigger ones. And we've, because we are making a little money, we still charge $6 for a meal that we paid $12 for, and we serve about 350 people at our feast, and we moved the location. It is,

has grown about twenty-five or fifty people per year above what we had the year before.LO:  Mhm. Now I remember that was a really good feast. And um, I was wondering if you could tell us a little bit more about the, the elements, elements of that feast out, how it comes together. And it sounds like it's moved, and now it's in the, uh, high school stadium auditorium.FRAZIER:  Well, middle school gym used to be the high school

gym, but they built a high school. My mother and a group of other women back in the fifties used to have it at City School, and they cooked on the stage. We had a retailer that would loan them stoves and ovens to fix the feast. The feast and the, uh, food booths-- I want to say there were three events

and I'm not sure what the third was. It was actually, we didn't have a carnival that paid for the cost of the festival. And as, when I say, when I joined, we only had eight events and only eight people in the, when I first joined and I say I brought others in. But, uh, our budget is a lot more than what they used to do, and they had so many at that feast

that people, let's say, uh, 200 people, would come in, sit at the tables, and then when they ate, a second group came in and the people at tables would go to the bleachers and they would sit at the tables and they'd have two servings as such, or two groups that they served. And one year when I was not a festival person but younger, they had

ten or twelve different meats that they served. And a group of men used to barbecue at a, built, start building a fire in the first week (??), wait till the coals set up and they would stay with that 24/7 or five days. And, but as I say, we had ever eaten turtle, buffalo, deer,

elk,  and they would give you a small portion of some of the other things other than pork and beef. But you got to taste. And I, I think I'm correct, but they even served possum. I know they served turtle. And, uh, but you just got a, basically a bite because they were so small and it grew, that got

it off. Uh, the women cooking, the men started cooking. Now we have it catered. And, uh, David's Steakhouse does it now. We've had other groups that do it, but David's Steakhouse has done it for at least five years.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Great and so, uh, in the early years before is, is catered some of this, these meats would probably come from, from Knox County or, or nearby. People would bring

it in.FRAZIER:  We had in the early days, there was about two hunters that would travel, even to Canada and stuff, bring back stuff they'd killed. And then we had a game warden. Sounds kind of weird, but if they, somebody hit a deer and they had to put it down, they would take that deer. The game warden would give it to the festival, and they'd have it butchered and then put in storage for the festival. And that's where we got a lot of our venison, but, uh, and

other critters too, but don't like to use the word roadkill. But that's basically what it was--(Lo laughs), but it was, it was fresh roadkill--(laughs). And so most of it was deer.LO:  Yeah. So um, what are some of the uh, stories about the Daniel Boone Festival that you want to share?FRAZIER:

Oh, I say basically I've worked at most of the time the parade. It is, was estimated, I heard the other day the pings on people's phones, there was about 30,000 people that dinged the tower during the Saturday of the festival, or the parade that watched the parade. The parade's about a mile and a half long and two,

two sides of that. And people are about average, I'd say three thick and, do the math, it comes up to about twenty-five or 30,000 people, and I like it real well.LO:  Mhm. Uh, interested in-- I think, thinking about, um, how the Daniel Boone Festival also fits into some of the local landmarks we talked about in terms

of like, I think there was a, a mountain nearby. There's the, the, uh, the Thomas Walker, um, House, I think with like first pioneer house?FRAZIER:  I assuming the US government, at that time it was 13 colonies maybe. And he came in through what is known as Cumberland Gap, which was one of three ways that you could go west. You could go up through,

I think, Pennsylvania or down in Georgia to head west to get around the Appalachian Mountains. But Doctor Thomas found Cumberland Gap, which is named after some king or something in England. I don't know that history. The other guys can tell you about that. And Daniel Boone was hired to cut a path for people to really follow, uh, making

the transition of going west. But, uh, a lot of--  they estimate about a half of the people that went west came to the Cumberland Gap, and they came from Cumberland Gap. And most of them went up to, uh, Fort Boonesborough. And then Lexington, Kentucky was founded. Uh, the charter, Daniel Boone

actually signed the Lexington, corporation or whatever, its charter to be a town.LO:  Mhm, yeah. Yeah. Uh, and what, what about the, uh, the role that the Cherokee and other nations um, play in the festival now? I'm just switching a little bit here.FRAZIER:  More or less educating. You know,

when I grew up in high school, we had a history, Kentucky history class that was mandatory, and they had their own little book that they went by. And you learned about the White guys mostly, but not the Indians. And then, I've had three different representatives of Cherokee do, uh, some education

like (??) personally; they do dances around their booths and stuff, and they educate the people of-- I was here and in that point about every three out of ten festivals are feast and all, which is the biggest program of the Indians and things, it's Columbus Day. And they keep saying, well,

we don't really like Columbus Day because we were here. You didn't discover America. We did. And most of the Indians around, uh, all the Indians came through the Alaskan…LO:  Bering Strait?FRAZIER:  Yeah. And then came south. And as the, uh, Indians come from the northwest to the south, they have different dialects.LO:  Mhm.FRAZIER:  And

the people from the South can understand the North, but the North can't understand the South because they've got different terms and words. But the southern people know those and theirs and can communicate a little bit with them. It's the difference of a person from New York City talking to somebody in Atlanta, Georgia. It, it's different words--(laughs)--and different, things mean different.

LO:Yeah. Uh, and how do you see the future of the Daniel Boone Festival and portraying Knox County and its, and its unique history moving forward? Now that you're--FRAZIER:  Well, as I say, we've had a cap on our membership, and our membership today is getting old. And in the last few years, one way or another, health, death or whatever, we've lost about ten members.

And, uh, they’re, we are bringing in what I'm going to say people under thirty, a lot of them are even younger than that. And, uh, matter of fact, our vice president right now, I'm going to say, is below thirty, maybe even twenty-five. So we're,  people like me that's been there forever, it seems like,

are starting to back out and let newer people take over, because that's what my group of, of the Jaycees and all came in and did, because they were, most of them were getting elderly and unable to actually do work. And we were at that time youth, youthful. But we're not anymore after thirty years.LO:  Yeah.FRAZIER:  Even if most of us came in at say, thirty-five or close to forty. And

you add thirty years on top of that, you're-- I'm seventy-two. So, we're getting old and got to bring in new. We don't bring in new, it will die. But I feel like it will continue for another thirty [EDITOR’S NOTE: thirty years] at least.LO:  Uh, you know, for listeners who have never been, can you describe the feast? Is there like, a,

um, a ceremonial part of it?FRAZIER:  Okay. The big, uh-- we do the, the actual eating, the president does a little bit of speech. Uh, Indians do a performance for about thirty, forty-five minutes, and it's almost personal between the audience and the Indians because you're there, gathered up, and they put up an extra large show on. And then, of course, the

signing of the treaty, which is a big thing. And, uh, the, so the population, because it's more convenient, more parking, it is growing in participation.LO:  Yeah. Yeah, I, um, I'm interested in the portion, uh, where the Cherokee are also coming in, in regalia.

And you also have different, um, local people here, like, um, if you look on the back of the, of the booklet every year, there's, uh, a picture of everyone in like, pioneer clothing. Could you tell us a little bit more about how that plays into--FRAZIER:  Okay. Basically, the dress is based in the time period of 1776 to 1780, in there. And I wear buckskins, but the buckskins are mountaineers and

common (??).  Daniel Boone, even in the TV series and the movie and stuff by Fess Parker, Daniel Boone never wore a coonskin cap. He always wore a hat. And, uh, they, uh, dressed-- the women, there's usually, they make them, a lot of people make their own, but there are, uh

seamstresses that cater to that. And then in the past, a lot of us had gone to Friendship, Indiana, to the National Muzzle Loaders Convention. And they have vendors that sell that time period of dress also. Shirts, and interesting thing about the shirts for the men. If they're done correctly, they do not do a normal armpit.

I forget the term, but it's a lot larger under the arm. It may come down halfway down your chest. The bottom part of the armpit is such. And, uh, we're-- more people are dressing. In the older days, they wore khaki shirts, khaki pants, and [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] French (??), but we pretty well moved from that. And we have people that dress

colonial, like in Williamsburg, Virginia, which is the fancy gentleman's dress or women's attire. And then you have the people that dress as the pioneers, which is a lot of difference of style.LO:  Do they make the choice of like wear what, what you would want, want? Do you choose like what, what you want to wear each, each year?FRAZIER:  That's, that’s personal, yeah.LO:  Personal choice.FRAZIER:

Uh, I'd say my, I'm dressed in buckskins, jacket, pants. And then, of course, the normal shirt. I don't know the name of the shirt, but, uh, and then a lot of people carry flintlocks, guns. Uh, a group-- I bought a bunch of rough wooden parts of a gun, and we, they're fake, but they look real. And we did a thing

when I owned the Radio Shack. We came down at night and we built our guns, and there's about ten of those guns floating around, plus people actually carrying official guns, but their guns weigh about fifteen pounds, and ours weigh about one pound. And, uh, but let's say they look good. And in the rifle shooting, the Kentucky Long Rifle officially

is called the Kentucky Rifle,  Long rifle. Pennsylvania wanted, does kind of say the Pennsylvania Long Rifle. And then there's, uh, Ohio kind of claims one. But we had the official shooters from seven different,  I'm going to say states, but lets say cities, represented here in Barbourville. And the winner

of the groups got to officially call the gun their long rifle. And the Kentucky Long Rifle Group won here at Lakefield the rights to call our guns Kentucky long rifles. And they shot against Pennsylvania, Ohio, I want to say Virginia, West Virginia, but there were seven

different groups. They shot to get that name.LO:  So they earned their, earned their name.FRAZIER:  Yeah. As the winner, they could officially call it. And nobody else of that group could call their guns Pennsylvania Long Rifle or whatever.LO:  So wondering (??) if, uh, you can tell us more about some of the, the way that, uh, place names, uh, got their, their names around Knox County. I remember

we were driving around and, and you were telling me about some of the different names.FRAZIER:  Okay, Flat Lake was a salt place. All, all the places that have the word lick in them was where the buffalo or the deer, most of them buffalo, uh, Kentucky used to be very covered with buffalo, but, uh, Flat Lick got the name of, because of the salt licks. Stinking Creek

got its name, there's a little discussion over it, but basically the trappers came in and trapped beavers and other critters out of the creek, and they would skin them and throw the carcass down or in the creek. And it stunk. Therefore, that area was called Stinking Creek. And, uh, apparently it did stink real

bad--(Lo laughs). And it was a large area. It's uh, Stinking Creek is about one fourth of the sink (??) creek area, is about one fourth of the County of Knox. And then Knox County came out of, if I'm not wrong, the other, other people you'll interview will correct me if I'm wrong.LO:  Yeah.FRAZIER:  I'll ask them. Came out of the county of, I want to say Bourbon, but I'm wrong. There was three counties

in Kentucky, and it came out of one of those three. And, uh, just out of the top of my head--[phone rings] the whiskey that Kentucky's famous for is bourbon. Yeah. And it has to be out of, uh, originally out of County of Bourbon, which now is about ten counties or thereabouts. And they can call their whiskey bourbon, but it's kind

of like the champagne comes out of the champagne area of France. Other places make the same product, but they legally can’t call it champagne or bourbon.LO:  Mhm. There's also a, uh, mountain name that you mentioned that's near here. Right, that you can, we can see from, from downtown, I think? They're called like, uh, um.FRAZIER:

Well, there's one road that's called, uh.LO:  Uh, Red Mountain?FRAZIER:  Downhill Booger Mountain. It's the same thing, but that's on the mountain here. And then, as I say, the Cumberland Gap is where a lot of people came through and a lot of people don't know it. The tunnel, there's two tunnels, actually, that go through the mountain of Cumberland Gap. And instead of going over the hill, you go through it. And those are the longest tunnels

east of the Mississippi River.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yeah, they are very long.FRAZIER:  There's areas along the Cumberland River that have various names, and some of them are from the people that originally got-- I'm trying to think of the name that was actually used. But

people out of the Revolutionary War were paid by land grants and they weren't called deeds. I want to say they were called patents, but I'm not sure what’s the (??) term. But they were issued that if you go back on your property, more than likely it comes out of one of those grants of Revolutionary and some of the grants were 2000 acres. And of course it wouldn't, they just wanted people

to come and settle it. And then that person could sell property off that area.LO:  Okay. Well, we're coming up on time. So I was wondering if you have anything else to add?FRAZIER:  No. Not really. I probably will know some stuff about ten minutes from now, but I-- Barbourville was

named after the guy that donated the property for the courthouse. The courthouse-- I want to say three votes, it was two or three, uh, being Barbourville or Flat Lick was going to be the county seat. And Kentucky is the 14th state hitting (??) and I want to say Maryland had

the right to call it, uh, Commonwealth. And the Commonwealth is a state that came out of one of the original thirteen colonies.LO:  Mhm, right. Well--FRAZIER:  And Knox County was named after a person also.LO:  Mhm. Yeah. Well, thank you so much, Bill.FRAZIER:  No problem.LO:  Yeah. We've been, it's been a pleasure.FRAZIER:  No, say no problem.

Now, thank you.[End of interview.]