DISKIN:Good morning. Is it still morning? Yes. This is Jonathan Diskin, I'm

here with Roberta Johnson, we're going to be recording an oral history interview

for the Voices of Over-the-Rhine Oral History Project of the Over-the-Rhine

Museum. And it's February 14th, Valentine's Day, 2023. Um, would you mind just

introducing yourself a little bit and giving us a little background about your,

uh, well, I'll just stop there. We’ll continue from there.

JOHNSON:Okay. Okay. All right. Okay. Um. Excuse me. Uh, my name again is

Roberta Johnson. Um, this is my, uh, I guess you'd say, my third name. I was

married twice. (laughs) My first husband was Jim Leon, uh, my second, he passed,

and then I married Dennis Johnson. So my name at the time I lived in

Over-the-Rhine, my last name was Fledderjohn.

DISKIN:Wow. Do you mind spelling that out?

JOHNSON:F as in Frank, L-E-

D-D-E-R-J-O-H-N.

DISKIN:Wow. That’s--(??)

JOHNSON:Right. Yes. And although I was considered by many as, uh, the little

Irish girl, my father had a Dutch name, so. (laughs) And I got stuck with it. (laughs)

DISKIN:That's great.

JOHNSON:Yes. Right. Yes.

DISKIN:Well, there were, I think most of us are familiar with the, uh, German

immigration and it's kind of stamp on Over-the-Rhine. They were the largest

group by far. But as I've done these interviews, we've got Irish, Romanian,

Italian and Dutch names.

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.

DISKIN:So it's nice to see that kind of--

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes. Well, my mother was through and through Irish. And I always

have said if your mother is Irish, you're Irish, no matter what. But, um, but

um, it, uh, but it, it--I really never cared for the name. In fact, some people

said that's why I married so young

to get rid of that name. (laughs)

DISKIN:(laughs) That's funny.

JOHNSON:So. But anyway.

DISKIN:Well, would you mind telling us a bit about, um, your, your parents or

even earlier generations, if they first immigrated to the region or anything you

know about, kind of, the big picture?

JOHNSON:Oh. Well, um, I don't know a lot about my father's side of the family.

My mother and he divorced when, in around 1944, he was in the service. And, um,

so I, I did his, his mother lived in Hyde Park and his brother lived in Hyde

Park. Um, and I got to know them, uh somewhat. But mainly, um, it was my

mother's family and they were--

DISKIN:Mind if I, just to cut in--

JOHNSON:Sure,

DISKIN:What, what was your father’s first name?

JOHNSON:Robert.

DISKIN:Robert. Okay. Thank you. Yeah. Please continue.

JOHNSON:Um, they, um, uh, my mother's family was from Over-the Rhine. She--

her mother--she lived in Cleveland. She and her two brothers. And her mother

died. And she was sent to Cincinnati to live with her grandmother, her paternal grandmother.

DISKIN:Okay. When she was a child, right?

JOHNSON:When she was a child. Yes. They lived at 1212 Broadway.

DISKIN:Yeah. When was that? And how old was she?

JOHNSON:(Throat clearing) Well, let's see. She was born in 1907. I think she

was about nine or ten when her mother died. So we'd say around 1917, ’16, around there.

DISKIN:Yeah. Okay.

JOHNSON:Uh huh. And they.

DISKIN:And what was her first name and last name?

JOHNSON:Her first name was Marie. And her maiden name was Hughes.

DISKIN:Yes. Thank you so much. Yeah.

JOHNSON:Um. So, um, so we were, um, for--

DISKIN:And she lived with her grandmother?

JOHNSON:She lived with her grandmother, yes. And so we were very familiar

with, uh,

that, whole area, um.

DISKIN:Yeah. Do you know how long her grandmother had been in Over-the-Rhine?

Just to kind of go back and see if we can find an origin of your family’s

history in Over-the-Rhine.

JOHNSON:Oh. I, I can give you her name. But I think for, I think for many

years, because, um, they went to Cleveland for work. We had done some genealogy

and found out and, uh, they came back with the exception of my mother's father,

who stayed in Cleveland and married there. And then his wife died in the flu, of

the flu in 1918. So--

DISKIN:The big flu.

JOHNSON:The big flu. Yeah.

DISKIN:The so-called Spanish flu. Yeah.

JOHNSON:And he came--brought the children back for his mother to raise here in

Cincinnati, in Over-the-Rhine.

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:Yeah. So she, um, as I said, my mother was very familiar. She married

my brother's father and lived on

Main Street, 1309 Main Street, which is now a, um, a thrift shop for women. I,

we went looking for that.

DISKIN:That’s great.

JOHSON:--And my, my brother was born there. Now, my--that was in 1929 that my

brother was born.

DISKIN:And, and his name is?

JOHNSON:Robert Jordan.

DISKIN:A lot of Roberts and Robertas.

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes, yes, yes.

DISKIN:(laughs) Robert Jordan. Good. Thank you.

JOHNSON:And his father died when he was two. So, um, my mother had a pretty

rough life. Uh-hm. She, um, she, uh of course, was left alone with a son and

then went to work at the Fenwick Club, which was in downtown Cincinnati. Uh, it

was, uh, like a home for, uh, uh, I think it was a, a home for men

who came into the city. Kind of like a hotel kind of place.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:But anyway, she went to work there and met my father and married him.

In, um, oh, when did she marry him? Let's see. Bobby was twenty-nine, so, must

have been the--I was born in ’38, so it must have been the middle ’30s, ’35,

’36, something like that.

DISKIN:Mm hmm. Yeah.

JOHNSON:So and then I was born, um, but the, the marriage didn't work so she

divorced him. And it was her, uh, my brother, and I. My brother was nine years

older than me.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:So--

DISKIN:And was this, uh, all at 1309 Main Street?

JOHNSON:At, um, no, we, um, I'm trying to think where she, she--no, I was born

on, on Wheeler

Street.

DISKIN:Oh yeah. I--when we talked on the phone I remember you mentioned that.

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes. In Clifton.

DISKIN:Right.

JOHNSON:(Clears throat) She had two or three different apartments in that

building. And when I was born, she lived on the first floor of Wheeler Street, so--

DISKIN:Okay, so she’d been in Over-the-Rhine--

JOHNSON:She had been in Over-the-Rhine--

DISKIN:Some point before you were born she moved to Wheeler Street.

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes, now she, as my brother, and my brother told me, they moved a lot.

DISKIN:Mm. Um-hm.

JOHNSON:She, they, in, in, within Over-the-Rhine. But then, um, somehow ended

up after she married my father ended up on Wheeler Street, so.

DISKIN:Sure. Yeah.

JOHNSON:Um, and then. Okay, so then she was, um, again, um, by herself with my

brother and I. And a friend of hers told her about work at the film company on

Central Parkway.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And

she went there, got a job as an inspectress. That means she cleaned and cut the

films. And. And in order--because I was still little, I was only about three or

so. She looked for an apartment in Over-the-Rhine and got one in the Parkway Apartments.

DISKIN:That's great.

JOHNSON:That's how we got there. And at that time there was the nursery on the

sixth floor.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:(throat clearing). And my brother would take me there every morning

and then pick me up after school.

DISKIN:Is the, are, it the Parkway Apartment building still there?

JOHNSON:Oh, yes.

DISKIN:Okay. I thought so, but they’re, they’re--

JOHNSON:They’re building.

DISKIN:--torn some things down right in that region.

JOHNSON:Yeah, they're, they’re, I know--

DISKIN:But I just wasn’t clear about the address.

JOHNSON:They're building on both sides of it.

DISKIN:Okay, okay. That’s on both sides of it

JOHNSON:I believe it's, I believe it's a senior, uh, center home now.

DISKIN:Okay. I’m going to drive by.

JOHNSON:Yeah. There were ninety-four apartments in that building.

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:Yeah, right. Uh.

DISKIN:Yeah, that's a big one.

JOHNSON:But I actually, I, I would say I--we didn't leave there till I was,

like, thirteen. But, um, the whole young part of my life, we lived in the

Parkway Apartments.

DISKIN:That’s great.

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:That’s great.

JOHNSON:Yeah. Um-hm.

DISKIN:And that's lovely. And you mentioned the, the daycare.

JOHNSON:The daycare. Yeah. I was in the daycare up until, um, let's see. I

guess, I must have been five because my, um--Saint Joseph of Nazareth School was

at Liberty and Logan. The building is still there, the school.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:And, uh, she went there and asked the nuns if they would take me in

kindergarten. I was a late birthday, but, and they did.

DISKIN:All right.

JOHNSON:They took me. So I was there, uh, until I graduated from the eighth grade.

DISKIN:Wow. Okay.

JOHNSON:And my brother went to seventh and eighth grade there, I believe.

DISKIN:Okay, That's great. Yeah. So that's a nice, stable period it sounds like.

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes.

DISKIN:Same apartment, same school.

JOHNSON:Yes. Same school. Right, yeah. Belong to the church. Saint Joseph of

Nazareth Church was at Liberty and Elm. They're building something there now, I

see, finally. They tore the church down. But I, I, saw that they’re--I don't

know what they're building, but they're building something, so. But anyway,

that, yeah, that, that was a pretty, pretty stable, um, time in my life. Yeah.

DISKIN:Yeah, that's great.

JOHNSON:Um-hm.

DISKIN:And did your mother continue to work at the, the--

JOHNSON:--at the film. Yeah.

DISKIN:Is it the Warner? What’s it called now?

JOHNSON:Hm. It, well

DISKIN:Universal. Universal.

JOHNSON:Well, yeah, she worked at Universal.

DISKIN:Universal. That’s right.

JOHNSON:Universal. In fact, I think she worked at like two, three different

ones, but, um, they were all in that same area.

DISKIN:Yeah. It's interesting that Cincinnati had a cluster of--

JOHNSON:Of

of films--

DISKIN:--film businesses.

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:I didn’t realize that

JOHNSON:Right. Yeah. Yeah. And our life kind of evolved around that. Me going

to school and her working at the, at the film company. And, um, most of our

friends were relatives, um, who lived in the area, uh, over on Thirteenth

Street. The Hughes’, you know, my, my uncle, my uncle Joe Hughes and his wife

and two children. I spent a lot of time with them.

DISKIN:So, these, this is your mom's brother?

JOHNSON:My mother's brother, Yes. Uh-huh.

DISKIN:Yeah, okay. That's great. Yeah. Talk a little bit about the

extended--so where there was Uncle Joe and you said there were other relatives?

JOHNSON:Well, um, uh it, uh, actually, they were his wife's relatives.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:I don't know if you, Arlene talked about them, but they all lived in

that Thirteenth Street, Spring Street area.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:There were, the mother and dad in the house.

And then, uh, the children, as they married, got apartments. So it was kind of

like a cluster. Uh, their name was Cannon. Their last name was Cannon.

DISKIN:That's great. And are you related to Arlene or were you just friends?

JOHNSON:She’s, Oh, yeah. She's my Uncle Joe's daughter.

DISKIN:Oh, you know, okay.

JOHNSON:Both she and her brother Bill. I grew--I literally grew up with them.

DISKIN:That's great.

JOHNSON:I spent a lot of time on Thirteenth Street because my mother worked,

and (throat clearing).

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:That, you know. So.

DISKIN:Oh, that's great.

JOHNSON:Yeah.

DISKIN:That's, that’s great. Thank you. I didn’t--

JOHNSON:Okay. Yeah. Yeah, right. Yeah.

DISKIN:I knew there was a connection but I didn't have it, didn’t have it

nailed down in my mind yet.

JOHNSON:So um.

DISKIN:Oh, so that's great. So you had. That's kind of a whole different

section of Over-the-Rhine--

JOHNSON:It is.

DISKIN:---from Central Parkway.

JOHNSON:It is. It is.

DISKIN:So you covered the neighborhood.

JOHNSON:It is. Yes. I did I, I, used to say I've walked that whole area.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:You know, as a child, um, my mother was a walker. So,

like in the evening we'd go out and take a walk. I went to, uh, there were two

theaters, The Imperial

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:Which is up there. Yeah

DISKIN:It’s still there.

JOHNSON:And, um, Up, the Uptown, which was right there on McMicken.

DISKIN:Yeah, that one I didn’t know about. The Uptown

JOHNSON:I spent--well it, the building is there still. I was surprised.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:They--it's, it's bricked up in the front. But

DISKIN:Oh, maybe I'm mixing up the names. Maybe it's the Imperial that's gone.

JOHNSON:No, the Imperial’s there too.

DISKIN:They're both still there.

JOHNSON:They're both still there.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:Yeah, yeah. I spent a lot of time there. And then the public library,

on McMicken, where I spent a lot of time. And as I got older, when--by that I

mean seven, eight, nine--I walked from Central Park way up to McMicken.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And went to the library and went to the movies and, um, walked to

school, um, church.

It was, it all evolved around that. Findlay Market. Findlay Market was a big

part of our lives.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:You know, that, uh--when you're a single mother, you, um, and don't

make a whole lot of money--I remember my mother used to get paid on Friday, and

we would go to Findlay Market on Saturday and get the groceries for the week, or

food for the week, and then, um, paid her rent, which at that time was $7.50 a week.

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:(laughs) I remember because--

DISKIN:A week though.

JOHNSON:A week.

DISKIN:Interesting, okay.

JOHNSON:She’d give it to me and we had to pay it weekly.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:She'd give it to me to take it to the lady who collected it in the building.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And, um, um, and then whatever was left, we went to the movies.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:So it was. It was uh. (laughs)

DISKIN:(laughs) Boy.

JOHNSON:Yeah, it was, it was a good life.

I, uh, you know, I always used to say I was poor, but I really didn't feel like

I was poor.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:You know, I didn't, because, I didn't miss a whole lot or--

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:Uh, you know, right, being right there in the neighborhood. The people

in the Parkway Apartments were wonderful.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:They--

DISKIN:Yeah, talk about them a little bit.

JOHNSON:They, um, all, well, diverse only to the point of age and, um, and,

and families or single people.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:But, um, they, the older people--there were, on our floor, there were

one, two, three, four, five apartments. We lived on the second floor.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:There were five apartments. Um, they were all older couples. We became

very good friends with the McSorley's. He worked at the Gaiety.

DISKIN:Oh, yeah.

JOHNSON:Which was

down on Vine Street.

DISKIN:I've heard about the Gaiety--a few people now.

JOHNSON:Yes. And her name--she was from England--her name was Maudie. And, um,

she just, she loved my mother. And she kind--you know, uh, the people looked out

for me.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:They knew I was--after my brother went off to high school and then on

to school, and then, I was by myself a lot, so they looked out for me. It was, uh--

DISKIN:That’s great.

JOHNSON:It, it was a wonderful atmosphere. It really was.

DISKIN:Where were people from in the building? I mean, you mentioned Maudie

was from England.

JOHNSON:Yeah. Uh, I--

DISKIN:Where there other people who were immigrants or was it people had been

settled in the U.S. for a while, or--

JOHNSON:I, I would, I think so, yes. There was a couple next to us and I don't

remember their name, but, um, they were from, they were from out of town. They

had lived in Cincinnati and they--

the apartments were small. They were--our apartment was only three rooms. So, a

kitchen, a living room, and a bedroom. The apartment next to us had two bedrooms.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:And that couple had the two bedroom apartment, and they fixed it up

very nice. Very nice. Um, and, um, but I, you know, as far as, uh, where the

people came from, there was a very elderly couple that lived on that floor. And,

um, they used to have people, people would come in to take care of them, like, I

don't know. But, and my mother would go over and do meals and things like that.

The other apartment was a family called Neeporty (??), and they, um, their

responsibility was collecting the rent for our section of the building.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:So, um, I

you know, I just, as I said, they just kind of looked out for me. Mainly it was

Maudie though. She was always there for me. Oh, if I needed, if anything went wrong--

DISKIN:Did you go in their apartment?

JOHNSON:I could go right to her door and she'd be right there. Yeah.

DISKIN:Oh, that's great. Do you know what other folks in the building did for work?

JOHNSON:Many of them. Well, okay. While we lived there, I guess when I was,

um, a little older, maybe ten or so, people were moving in from Appalachia.

DISKIN:Um-hm. So this would have been, I guess, the late ’40s.

JOHNSON:The late ’40s. And, they, most of them worked at Crosley’s or

Wright’s, I believe it was called. Right. But it was war work, you know.

DISKIN:Mm. Um-hm.

JOHNSON:And, and, uh, interestingly, the couple that lived above us on the

third floor

had two children, a boy and a girl. And I became friends with the girl.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:They went home to Kentucky every weekend. They lived there during the week

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:--for the work. But on, on Saturday morning, they were gone and were

not back until Sunday night.

DISKIN:Wow, that’s amazing.

JOHNSON:Isn't that interesting? Yeah.

DISKIN:Yeah. Yeah. I've had a few people mention their ties to their home

property and community, in Kentucky.

JOHNSON:Yeah, in, in Kentucky,

DISKIN:In particular.

JOHNSON:Yes, yes.

DISKIN:Where some people where here, some people where there, is, could be a,

a very strong and important, uh, kind of center--

JOHNSON:Yeah, yeah.

DISKIN:--of life.

JOHNSON:But I, I, I do remember them. Uh, other parts of the building that I

would go through, I had a couple, of their, were a couple of, uh, uh, kids who

went to my same school.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:So I, I was in their

apartments, you know, and um, um. As I said, overall, it was just, uh, it was

just a safe--

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:It, it--I never felt fearful living there. Um, towards the end, as I

got into my teen years, my mother got concerned because there were some people

moving in who she just didn't really approve of. You know, of their lifestyle.

And, um, the neighborhood had started to change. And so we moved. That's, you know--

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:That was when, as I said, when I was thirteen. But up until then, all

through grade school and, um, the film company, I could go to my mother's work

at any time if I needed something.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:You know, it was, um, it was just, um, it was a good place to grow up,

I think.

DISKIN:When I drive up Central Parkway, I think I mentioned Warner Brothers because--

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:--there’s, there's a building with that--

JOHNSON:It’s on the corner there. Yes.

DISKIN:Is that where she worked? Was it--

JOHNSON:No, she--

DISKIN:It was--

JOHNSON:She never worked for Warner’s.

DISKIN:Okay, that was always Warner’s.

JOHNSON:It was always. Next to it where I think they’ve built the Boys Club now.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:Okay, I. Her, her--Universal was in there.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:And then--

DISKIN:--and you could just go right into her place of work?

JOHNSON:Uh, well, and the entrance for--

DISKIN:If you had to.

JOHNSON:--her place was on Logan Street.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:So I'd come down Logan Street from school with anything that I needed.

I could stop in and see her. Um, I did notice--

DISKIN:That’s great.

JOHNSON:--um, some of the, some of the, um, film buildings are still there. And

they’re apartments now.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:I believe they’re are owned by Urban Sites. But, or taken care of.

DISKIN:Yeah. I might look that up.

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:There’s a cream-colored building there.

JOHNSON:Yeah, well, I was surprised because my, my grandson said to me,

Grandma, you think about moving back down here?

DISKIN:Uh-huh.

JOHNSON:You can go into one of those buildings. I said, I think I'm beyond

that, Bill. But anyway. (laughs)

DISKIN:Yeah. Yeah. Might be fun to take a walk through Findlay Market.

JOHNSON:Through Findlay Market. Yeah.

DISKIN:It’s still bustling after all these years.

JOHNSON:Well, I've been, yeah…

DISKIN:It’s a pleasant place.

JOHNSON:I've been back to Findlay Market many times.

DISKIN:Yeah. Oh, that makes sense.

JOHNSON:You know, it's uh. Yeah. Right. Um, what else--

DISKIN:Let’s talk, maybe, about the, uh, some of the, the settings you were in

and kind of flesh out a little bit what your daily life was like. Do you remem-,

do you have memories of being in the daycare before you went into kindergarten?

JOHNSON:I do have some memories, yes, of being there. Um, I know I, yeah, I

remember they had little sinks that you--where you wash your hands, and, um--

DISKIN:Sounds pretty modern really.

JOHNSON:And it real- it was, it was very ni- And I, I, I remember getting the

measles, and them putting me in a room all by myself. That was kind of

traumatic, but, um, but I do, uh I do, it, it was a very nice nursery.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And I don't know what they charged or what, how much it was. But, um, I

know it, it was easier for my mother when she could send me to St Joseph's.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:Because it, that was free. That, you didn't have to pay for that, you

know, so.

DISKIN:Right. It was part of the schooling.

JOHNSON:But. Right, right, but, um, and then--

DISKIN:Were there are a lot of kids there?

JOHNSON:Yes there were.

DISKIN:Were there boys and girls?

JOHNSON:Boys and girls.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes. Yes. I don't know who ran it. I can remember one lady that I

liked a whole lot that, you know, I'm, I must, it must have been hard for me

going there, as it is for any child when they start out. But she made it easy.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And um, we had to take naps in the afternoon, you know. (laughs)

DISKIN:Yeah. Yeah.

JOHNSON:And if you wet the bed, you had to sleep on the floor.

DISKIN:Ooh.

JOHNSON:So I was so happy. I did not--I got to stay on a cot or something.

DISKIN:Yeah. Yeah.

JOHNSON:Anyway. But I do remember, I remember that, you know, um--

DISKIN:And was it a pretty friendly place?

JOHNSON:Oh, absolutely.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:Absolutely.

DISKIN:Because, you know, it's kind of like schools. I mean, they can be nurturing.

JOHNSON:Or--

DISKIN:Occasionally sometimes they’re, they’re not.

JOHNSON:They're not.

No, no. I was fortunate in that regard because I went from the nursery then to

St Joseph's, which was wonderful. And um--

DISKIN:All right, so you finished with nursery school and you went from

kindergarten through eighth grade.

JOHNSON:Through eighth grade at St Joseph's, yeah. And those were--

DISKIN:Do you remember going there your first time, was it nerve racking at

all or?

JOHNSON:Um, I, I, I don't.

DISKIN:I don’t remember my first day of school either.

JOHNSON:I remember, I remember going I, I remember my mother taking me and

leaving me and me crying. And there was a nun. Her name was Sister Serafin.

DISKIN:Um-hm

JOHNSON:She was a Franciscan nun. And she took my hand and walked me in and I

was sold. I mean, she was. She was wonderful.

DISKIN:That's great.

JOHNSON:So I was there. In fact, I was, I think I was in kindergarten two

years, I had an October birthday.

DISKIN:Hmm.

JOHNSON:Which they, they push you back with that. But I don't know. But anyway,

that was, that was, that was a good experience.

DISKIN:Yeah. And were, were those classrooms have boys and girls both, too or?

JOHNSON:Both.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:Both boys and girls. Yeah. Yeah. And, and as I said, the building is

still there.

DISKIN:Yeah. I'll go by it.

JOHNSON:I ca-, I can tell you another story, but it's further down the line as

far as the building is concerned.

DISKIN:Sure.

JOHNSON:When my first husband got sick, I had to get a job and uh, a friend of

mine said, um, the archdiocese is looking for someone. Why don't you go down and

talk to them? Well, as it turned out, it was in that building.

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:--in the St Joseph School building, and I worked there up until Jim

died. So--

DISKIN:That’s amazing!

JOHNSON:Is that amazing?

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:I went back to the same building. Yes.

DISKIN:Wow, there's a kind of fate involved--

JOHNSON:--involved.

DISKIN:--or something.

JOHNSON:Absolutely.

DISKIN:That’s…

JOHNSON:Absolutely.

DISKIN:That’s quite a connection to that one place.

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:And I’m glad it's still standing.

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:I mean, a lot of Over-the-Rhine is but--

JOHNSON:Yes, but a lot of it isn’t too.

DISKIN:Sometimes beautiful buildings are knocked down.

JOHNSON:Right. Right.

DISKIN:So.

JOHNSON:Right. Yeah. So.

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:Yeah.

DISKIN:That’s, that's kind of poignant.

JOHNSON:Yeah.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And then as, as far as school, as I, as I got older and was able to go

out on my own, so to speak, um, spent, as I said, spent time with my cousins. I

also went to the Findlay Neighborhood House.

DISKIN:Mm-hm.

JOHNSON:Which is, was on Findlay Street.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:So after school I had things I had--my mother gave me things to do. I

had to come home and clean up before she came home. And, but, if I had time, I

could go over to Findlay Neighborhood House. So I’d go over there and then run

home and do my jobs.

DISKIN:So it sounds like you enjoyed going there.

JOHNSON:Yeah, uh, very much.

DISKIN:Yeah, what kind of stuff was happening?

JOHNSON:It was right across from, it was right across from the park too.

DISKIN:Okay, yeah.

JOHNSON:Findlay Park. So in the summer time, I spent a lot of time at Findlay Park.

DISKIN:Yeah. Were

there school friends that you saw there. Or was it a different group of people?

JOHNSON:Yes, uh, yes, um, there were some from school that went there that

lived in the neighborhood also, and, um, um, and others too. Their public school

was there. So, some of the public school kids would go there.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And they had um, I should get some water. They had some um, activities

planned all the time for kids.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:You know. Excuse me. I'll just be one second. (break in recording)

But anyway, um, as I said, a lot of time in the uh, uh, Findlay Neighborhood

House and, uh, the park there, Findlay Park, during the summertime. They had

swimming pools and, and as I said, I had friends from school, but, um, I didn't

have a lot of supervision. I was by myself pretty much, you know.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:And I always felt comfortable.

DISKIN:Yeah. It sounds like you had a few locations

JOHNSON:Locations that I could go.

DISKIN:Where Arlene’s family was…

JOHNSON:Yes, yes.

DISKIN:Your building…

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:And the Findlay place--

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:And then you mentioned the library and--

JOHNSON:Oh, I loved the library.

DISKIN:--and the theatre maybe a little bit.

JOHNSON:Oh my gosh. I loved the library.

DISKIN:A few years later on.

JOHNSON:Yeah, yeah.

DISKIN:Well, that's, that's really nice. So, like, when you were at this

Findlay place, were there activities you did, and?

JOHNSON:Activities, they had, uh, I learned how to play pool there.

DISKIN:All right!

JOHNSON:They had a pool table and a ping-

DISKIN:I don’t think young people play enough pool anymore. (laughs)

JOHNSON:Right. And a ping, and a ping pong table.

DISKIN:--When I grew up there were pool tables in a lot of people’s houses.

JOHNSON:Right. And there were, uh, you could sign up for different things. You

know, when I, um, when I graduated from the eighth grade, my mother had a party

there for me.

DISKIN:That’s great.

JOHNSON:--which was nice. They allowed her to, because I guess I had been go--,

going all those years. They allowed her to have some other kids in and we had a

little party. Yeah.

DISKIN:Wow, that's great.

JOHNSON:Um-hm.

DISKIN:So, in school, what was, you know, what was the,

what was it like in school, just overall?

JOHNSON:Going to school overall?

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:Well, it was according to who the teacher was. Most definitely.

DISKIN:Yeah, and did you have any particularly, you know, good memories or any--

JOHNSON:Oh, yeah.

DISKIN:troubling memories?

JOHNSON:Oh, yeah, I have, I have um, first grade leaving Sister Serafin and

going to Sister Ambrosia, I believe her name was, was a rough one.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:She was sterner. I was having trouble writing. I couldn't write well,

and um, I cried a lot. I wanted to go home, a lot, after I got into first grade.

I do remember that. I also had this thing about thunder and lightning.

DISKIN:Mm.

JOHNSON:And, um, uh, it was like I, whenever it would begin to thunder and

lightning, I wanted to go home. I wanted to leave. And she, of course, wouldn't

let me leave, you know. And I talked a lot,

so. (coughs) We were preparing for First Communion and I was talking and she put

rubber, I mean, brown sticky paper on my mouth.

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:I- I'll never forget that one.

DISKIN:Oh, boy.

JOHNSON:Now, if the boys got into trouble, they had to go in the cloakroom. And

they'd shut the door and put them in the cloakroom. But, uh, I mean, those were

the times.

DISKIN:Oh yeah.

JOHNSON:You know, so. But I was so happy to get out of her class. I, uh, when I

got to um, I guess--

DISKIN:--second grade.

JOHNSON:--second grade, third grade. I think, I think we were two, two grades,

first and second, third and fourth, fifth and si-. Yeah. Right. Yeah.

DISKIN:Were all the teachers in your grade school nuns?

JOHNSON:All nuns.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:All nuns. Franciscan nuns. Yes. Yeah. I owe a lot to the Franciscan

nuns. There were some who were very tough and, you know

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:But um, the principal of that

school, her name was Sister Mary Gemma. And she had a wooden arm.

DISKIN:Wow.

JOHNSON:And I remember I was petrified of the wooden arm. You know how

children say, “well, she’ll hit you with a wooden arm” or something like that.

But when I got to know her, she was, just, she was delightful. She was kind and

good and, you know, so. But um, uh the school experience was a little mixed in

that, um, uh, I was fearful of the nuns, you know. But some of them were just

wonderful. Some of them were really good and others were just like human beings,

you know. It--just the way it is. Yeah.

DISKIN:Yeah. And you went through eighth grade, did you say?

JOHNSON:Yeah, I graduated from there. Uh-huh.

DISKIN:Yeah. What were the—were the other children reasonably well behaved

most of the time or?

JOHNSON:Pretty much, yeah. They were small, very small, classes.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:I was, um, there were three, when I graduated--oh, I have a picture in

there. There are three girls and I think eleven boys. Um, what--one of the

things that happened, one really good experience that I had was, um, a family

from Germany, moved into the neighborhood. And, um, they--Nicholas Reeder(?),

that was his name. He, um, he told us a lot about--that was after the war, you know.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:He told us a lot about what was happening in Germany, which was really interesting.

DISKIN:This is someone your age at the time?

JOHNSON:My age. Yes.

DISKIN:Not their parents?

JOHNSON:Yes. Yeah.

DISKIN:Okay, yeah.

JOHNSON:Yeah. And, uh, I think they lived over on Pleasant Street. And I heard

years later that he passed. But he, um, I remember Nicholas very well. He

impressed me because it was interesting to hear him talk and he had a very heavy accent,

German accent, you know. So. But, um--

DISKIN:Yeah. You know, during the war, did you--was it something you were aware

of in daily life? Was the war much of a presence?

JOHNSON:Not, no--

DISKIN:--and you were pretty young but

JOHNSON:Yeah.

DISKIN:--when the war was still going.

JOHNSON:Yeah, yeah. Not, um--no, what I do remember is the atom bomb.

DISKIN:Uh-hm.

JOHNSON:And, them preparing us for that. In fact, if you go, go to the

building on Liberty Street. And walk past Warner Brothers to Central Parkway.

There, I guess it's still there, there are two huge metal doors in the street,

in the sidewalk.

DISKIN:Um-hm.

JOHNSON:That lead to the subway.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:You're familiar with the subway?

DISKIN:Yes.

JOHNSON:Okay.

DISKIN:The ill-fated subway, but--

JOHNSON:All right. Okay. That's where they would take us.

DISKIN:Down in the tunnels?

JOHNSON:In

the tunnels.

DISKIN:And did you have drills and stuff where you went down there?

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes, we did. We did. We did. Yes, we did.

DISKIN:Wow. That's interesting. What do you remember about that? Were people

nervous or was it just kind of--was routine?

JOHNSON:It was routine. It was rou- first we started, um, under, I think,

under our desks or putting our hands over our head. And then, all of a sudden,

one day, they walked us up to the, you know, opened--I don't know that we went

far down. I've been in those, that subway. I went down there with a group of

kids one time. But anyway, um, but we would go down the steps, you know, to show

us where we would be going and then come back up. And that was--

DISKIN:Yeah. So when you went down there another time with your friends, were

you just exploring and having fun?

JOHNSON:Yes. Yes. Eighth grade. That was eighth grade. That was, somebody knew

how to get into the subways. And, um, so we went up and on Central Parkway and

there was an opening

in the fence. And we went in the fence and we went down the steps and into the

park, into the underneath, you know. And of course, the boys were doing what

boys do, and there’re rats down here and all that sort of thing, you know? But

it obviously impressed me.

DISKIN:Could you see pretty well?

JOHNSON:Please?

DISKIN:Could you see pretty well? Was it light enough?

JOHNSON:Lit, we lit candles. Which was not safe, but we did. Some, some of them

had--I don't remember having one. But, and, and I remembered I woul- couldn't

wait to get out. I was in, and I just wanted to get out. I was just doing it to

please everybody else.

DISKIN:Yeah, was that the kind of thing that you would tell your mom? Or--

JOHNSON:Oh, no. Heavens, no. I never would tell my mom. No. (laughs) Well, I

guess I did years later.

DISKIN:But yeah. Not at that time.

JOHNSON:No, not at that age. She didn't know I did that. No, no, no.

DISKIN:I was wondering about that. I went to a Jesuit high school for a couple

of years, so I was a little older than eighth grade but--

JOHNSON:Oh, Yeah. Yeah.

DISKIN:Everybody was orderly while they were being watched.

JOHNSON:Yes.

DISKIN:But they were--we got up to some trouble when we thought we could get

away with it.

JOHNSON:Yes, Yes.

DISKIN:You know, people were smoking in the parking lot.

JOHNSON:Yeah, things like that.

DISKIN:So, I guess that’s not surprising.

JOHNSON:Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, um, in school, uh, some of my friends lived

in the Laurel Apartments in the West End.

DISKIN:Um-hm, yeah, the Laurel Homes.

JOHNSON:Laurel Homes. Yeah. But they--

DISKIN:And were they, were they white?

JOHNSON:Yes. Oh, yeah.

DISKIN:Because I think it started that way.

JOHNSON:I, I never, I never went to school with any, any African-Americans at

all. There, it was all white, but they were children of, um, the military.

DISKIN:Um-hm. Interesting. I didn’t know that.

JOHNSON:And I-- and they didn't stay long. I mean, I, I can remember, like

maybe first through fourth grade, having a very good friend. And, um, then she

moved away. Two very good friends, and they moved away. But I think maybe, um,

maybe the service

put them there temporarily, and then later they moved into the suburbs. I don't

know. I don't know.

DISKIN:Interesting. Yeah.

JOHNSON:Yeah.

DISKIN:Maybe transferred to other military installations, or who knows?

JOHNSON:Other military or whatever. Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But I do remember that.

DISKIN:Well that’s interesting. I didn’t know that, that history of Laurel

Homes. That's interesting.

JOHNSON:Yeah. Oh, uh, yeah, some of them lived there, well, because at the

time there were two St. Joseph Schools. Yeah, St. Joseph of Nazareth where I

went. That was all white students. And then there was St. Joseph on Ezzard

Charles, which is still there.

DISKIN:Still there. Right.

JOHNSON:And it was Black students. And that, you know that, um, I, I don't

know, nobody talked about it. It’s just the way it was. I, I have always said

though, my mother was a very unprejudiced person, I believe. But she never

talked about it a lot, but she never said anything bad, you know, never. Um, but

growing up,

living where I lived on Central Parkway, once you crossed Central Parkway, you

were in the West End. And as you went down, um, Findlay Street, it all became Black.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:And, um, the, the, the Black people came, of course, and went to

Findlay Market and were always in my neighborhood.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:Always, you know. And, I, I was never told to fear them or to, uh, uh,

you know, that they weren't as good as me or anything. I just, it was, they were

just there and it was fine. I never, and occasionally they would be at Findlay

Park playing, you know. Um, but, um, I never had a feeling of, of fear or, or,

you know, they're not as good as me or anything like that.

When I went to high school--I went to a high school in, uh, Mount Adams, and it,

it was easier for me to walk down through the West End, down, I think to John

Street, and get a bus to take it to Mount Adams. And so, um, I was--every

morning, every evening, afternoon, rather, walking through that area. And people

got to know me, Black people, and they'd say, “Hey”, and I'd say, “Hey”, and

what was, it, you know. And I, I'm so happy that that happened for me.

DISKIN:Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That’s, that’s great.

JOHNSON:I you know, that I just it--we were separated. They were not in the

Parkway Apartments.

DISKIN:Right.

JOHNSON:And I, yeah I don't know how that came to happen, but they were not.

DISKIN:So there's like, private spaces where people lived.

JOHNSON:Yes, yes, yes.

DISKIN:But like, the bus stop, the market, there were some public places that

were more integrated it sounds like--

JOHNSON:Yes. Where they were. Where they were. Yeah. And we, as I said--

DISKIN:--everyone accepted that.

JOHNSON:Right. We went, I walked down through there and it was--I never was

fearful. We used to walk down to Crosley Field, to the baseball games. I never

was, never, ever was fearful. Ever. And fortunately, I continued my life that

way, you know? So.

DISKIN:Yeah, good. Good for you. Yeah, there's kind of a fraught history of,

uh, boundaries that probably was a little bit later. I've heard in some

interviews, from African-Americans that from Central Parkway up to, up to Vine

Street is where a lot of African-Americans settled.

JOHNSON:Right.

DISKIN:And that it was more Appalachian and White on the other side of Vine

Street. Going, uh, I guess that's east.

JOHNSON:East. Yeah.

DISKIN:And for a while, Vine Street was a real dividing line. I think that was

probably a bit later than you lived there.

JOHNSON:Yeah, I think so too. Um, some, some of the kids I went to school with

lived in the West End

though. I can remember that. But it was um, it was, it was closer to Liberty

Street and, and down and south, I guess you'd call that. They lived in that area.

DISKIN:Okay, yeah.

JOHNSON:But um, and then, of course, there were the Laurel Homes. Which I don’t

know. Were they integrated at that time? I’m, I, I, I don’t…

DISKIN:Uh. You know, I was just reading about that. I'm going to have to go

back and look at it. It may have started as an all-White uh, settlement.

JOHNSON:Oh, I'm sure.

DISKIN:Because there was a lot of controversy when they were planning and then

developing during the Depression. These, these new projects and tearing down

some of the older tenement housing in the West End.

JOHNSON:Right. Right, well, and I'm sure because I remember the two girls from

school, both of their fathers were, had been in the military. (coughs) So, um.

DISKIN:Yeah, I think that’s interesting.

JOHNSON:And they were White, of course.

DISKIN:Yeah, because you were right on, on the dividing line kind of there on

Central Parkway.

JOHNSON:Really. Really. Yes, I wa- I was.

And, um, I'll tell you another interesting thing about Central Parkway, I'm sure

someone has already. But, um, if you, if you walk up Central Parkway, cross

Findlay Street, there was the wrestling. Have you heard about that at all?

DISKIN:No.

JOHNSON:Okay. There was a, um, what would you call that, a venue? I don't know

what it was, but it was a place. Ah, on Friday nights, uh, famous wrestlers came

to wrestle. And I believe it was--I was never allowed to go--but I believe it

was outside wrestling.

DISKIN:Wow. And so this is on Central Parkway, a little north of where the

Parkway Apartments was?

JOHNSON:Yes, Yes. You cross Findlay Street. There’s a building there on the

corner. Um, and then next to that, I don't know what is there now? I can't

think. But anyway,

um, it was--and Friday nights when I was, I don't know, nine, ten, eleven, uh,

everybody, the kids would all sit out on Central Parkway on the benches and wait

for the wrestlers.

DISKIN:Wow. That's interesting. What was, what was life like on the street?

Uh, I mean, one hears a lot about how many taverns and saloons and bars there

were in Over-the-Rhine.

JOHNSON:Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yeah.

DISKIN:Was it ever, uh, unruly out on the street when you were a kid?

JOHNSON:Not that I remember. Um, uh there was a there was a bar at the corner

of Findlay and Logan Street where my mother would go occasionally. And I guess

meet friends and there were times that I would get to go with her. Um, and then

of course Flamm’s, we talked about Flamm’s on Elm Street. Which had the best

roast beef

sandwiches in the city.

DISKIN:Oh that's nice to know.

JOHNSON:Yes, and um--

DISKIN:--We had a nice interview with Lou and Mary Ann Flamm.

JOHNSON:And they, um, they, what I remember about it, we would go through the

bar, which always was exciting for me--I was a kid, you know--through the bar

and to the, uh, to the room in the back, the dining room, I guess. And you'd

order your sandwich and it would come down on a dumbwaiter. In the building.

DISKIN:I would’ve liked that. (laughs)

JOHNSON:So that was. I mean, that. That's a nice I have a--that's what I think,

when I really think about it. I have so many nice memories, of it. You know, I'm

just thinking too, further down on Elm Street. Uh, which would be north of

Flamm’s. There was another theater, The Elm Street Theater. Right there on the

corner of Findlay and Elm. And, um--

DISKIN:Someone mentioned a theater that was torn down.

JOHNSON:Yeah, that probably was torn down.

DISKIN:Yeah, that’s what I was thinking, maybe one of the other one’s was, yeah.

JOHNSON:And that's I, I was allowed to go. My mother was a great moviegoer, so

she would let me go to the movies. But I, I wonder sometimes, I was talking to

Arlene and I said, “remember how I used to go to the movies?” And she said,

yeah, and what kind of movies were we watching?” (laughs)

DISKIN:Yeah. Well, what’s the answer to that? Do you remember what you saw?

JOHNSON:Well, I know I saw, I saw a movie with Ray Milland and he was an

alcoholic and hid his liquor in the lighting fixture or something. I remember

that, you know, um, war. I remember war movies. We saw a lot of those, you know.

But, um, I, I, you know. These films--

DISKIN:Were westerns--

JOHNSON:Westerns. Yes, yes, yes.

DISKIN:Probably a lot of westerns.

JOHNSON:Yeah, but I, I don't ever remember her saying to me, “Oh, no, you can't

see that movie.” You know, she, it was just like, can I go to the movies?

DISKIN:Whatever’s showing.

JOHNSON:That's right. And it was only ten cents.

Of course, for her at that time, could have been a lot, but it was ten cents,

you know, to get into the movies.

DISKIN:And did you go with Arlene and other friends too?

JOHNSON:Oh, yeah. I went, yeah. And then other friends from the neighborhood.

We went there. There was at the corner a--boy, I'm really remembering--at the

corner of Race and Findlay, there was a, um, I guess you'd call it a soda shop.

Made the best ice balls in town. (laughs)

DISKIN:Is that like, like a snow cone?

JOHNSON:Like a snow cone. But they called them--

DISKIN:I never heard of that term, an ice ball?

JOHNSON:But they called them ice balls. And um--

DIKSIN:Ice balls; I like that.

JOHNSON:If you were, you know, if you could get the money, if your mother would

give it to you, it was ice in a paper cone with syrup and then they would put

marshmallow on top of it.

DISKIN:Oh man. That’s pretty interesting. Yeah. Are there other things that,

like just spots you like to go, like either for food or just because you enjoyed them?

JOHNSON:Oh, goodness me.

DISKIN:Probably

didn’t eat out as much as people tend to today.

JOHNSON:No, not, no. Our our, our big eating out was maybe every once in a

while, she would take me to, um, I think it was call--downtown to Fourth Street,

to The Mill, I believe. I think it was called The Mill. And we'd eat out because

I remember the desserts, you know, it was, it was like smorgasbord. They had the

desserts all sitting out, um, um, but, um ,right there in the neighborhood

Flamm’s and of course, the market. They didn't have eating in the market like

they do now. They didn't have any of that. But, um, I'm trying to think there

were of there were bars in, along Findlay Market there. And, um, trying to think

what else.

DISKIN:Were there any, like, bakeries or ice cream shops?

JOHNSON:Well, I think it was called Heller’s, the ice, the cone place. They

had ice cream.

They had ice cream and sodas and all that sort of thing. Um, I'm just kind of

drawing a blank on anywhere else we would go along there. Up on Vine Street, at

Vine and Elder, I believe, there was another ice cream store. It closed, though,

when I was still pretty young. They, but, um, it was, it was fun to go to, you

know. Um, especially if you get to go to the Uptown and then go to the ice cream

store, so.

DISKIN:That sounds good.

JOHNSON:Those were good things. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

DISKIN:Well, tell me about the library. I mean, you mentioned you have a great

affection for it, sounds like.

JOHNSON:Well, I just. I love to read and, and um, it, you know, I knew my

mother worried about me, especially if my, my brother started to work, and

there was no--there was Maudie if I had to, but I was by myself a lot. So she'd

say, just go up to the library, you know. And I would go there and, um, just sit

and read books. You know, they had a children's section and I remember the

librarian was very helpful. What have you seen? What are you looking for? You

know, um, and that's, I can't uh- when I went down and looked around, I can't

imagine if the library was in the museum building there. I don't know.

DISKIN:I don't think so because--

JOHNSON:It was right along that street--

DISKIN:--there was a family that lived there during that time that had a business.

JOHNSON:Okay. Well. There, there was, yeah, there was, um, it was in that

stretch. It was not a big library, but my mother would go there too and get

books. You know, my brother went there and got books.

DISKIN:That's great. I'm going to try to locate that. Especially so close to

the museum building.

JOHNSON:And in, and in the theater.

It's in between those too, because looking at it straight on, I thought, wow.

Which, which building was that? Unle-, unless they tore that down, too, for the

fire department. You know, they have that fire station there now.

DISKIN:Yeah, I'm not even familiar where that is off the top of my head, the

fire- I’ll just have to go back and look at it more closely myself.

JOHNSON:Yeah. Yeah. I think there's a, there's a fire station. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah. But um, and then as I got older, I was able to walk downtown, which was.

That was big. Or to take the bus downtown. Uh, the streetcar, not the bus. Um,

that you know, there were more theaters to go to. And um, because Maudie’s

husband worked at the Gaiety, I could go to the Gaiety and meet him and come

home with him, so. I was by myself.

DISKIN:Did you ever go in the Gaiety?

JOHNSON:Oh yes. Oh yes. Yeah.

DISKIN:What was it like in there? A couple of people have mentioned it, but

haven't said much about it.

JOHNSON:About. Oh, just a regular theater.

Um, uh, live theater. I don't know that I ever sat and watched anything, but I

did see some of the women. I saw some of the comedians because of Ma- his name

was Mac. And, um, he um, he was the ticket taker. And he um, you know, he'd say,

okay, you sit there, wait for me, I'll be out, and then we'll walk home, you

know, so. Yeah, um, it a, it, it it's. I don't know, it, just a regular theater,

but live theater, you know. Onstage theater. Yeah.

DISKIN:So they have comedians, too. That makes sense. A couple of people have

just, you know, described it as a burlesque house.

JOHNSON:Oh, it was a burlesque house.

DISKIN:Which I think it was, yeah.

JOHNSON:Rose LaRose was there, and I. I remember hearing about Rose LaRose and

thinking. Thinking, um, I wonder if I'll ever get to meet Rose LaRose, who must

have been a famous burlesque star.

DISKIN:That's wonderful. Yeah.

So, you graduated in eighth grade and started high school in Mount Adams. Where

were you going up there, by the way?

JOHNSON:Immaculata.

DISKIN:Okay. And you were still living in Over-the-Rhine?

JOHNSON:Yes. Up until about, um, oh, right before the end of my freshman year,

I guess. So I was like, thirteen.

DISKIN:Okay, about a year of high school and then you and your mom—

JOHNSON:Yes. And I know, I, I remember uh my mother being concerned, uh,

about--my brother had married and left, and her, and, um, Maudie had left.

People were beginning to leave the building. And I think she got concerned about

me because of my age and walking around by myself all the time and everything,

and, um, or with other kids my age, you know. And she, um, someone told her

about an apartment in Saint Bernard and, um,

we moved to Saint Bernard, that, then. Oh, I was devastated. I just, I did not

want to leave that neighborhood. I did not. I remember crying and crying, not

wanting to go, you know, so.

DISKIN:Did you continue at the same high school at Immaculata?

JOHNSON:Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. I bussed everywhere. I, you know.

DISKIN:Well, earlier, you mentioned that your mother was starting to get a bit

concerned about changes in the neighborhood. Probably, I'm assuming in the year

or two before you moved.

JOHNSON:Mm-hmm. Mm-hm.

DISKIN:What was happening? I mean, I mean, sounds like turnover in your

building--stuff just happens sometimes.

JOHNSON:Well, I think it was. I think. I think, you know, I, I think it was

more Appalachian than it was Black. I don't, uh, I mean it's just um--

DISKIN:--It's kind of like the early 50’s?

JOHNSON:There was a delicatessen on the corner of, of, um, Findlay and Logan

across from the bar. And the bar began to change. Where it was before

neighborhood-like. You know, and, um, the delicatessen,

there used to be--I, it, there were kids standing around the lot outside. I

remember that. And um, and the same way with the park. I don't know. I, you

know, I never really asked her, but it was like, it's um, we’re, we’re, we,

we’re going to move. That's it. You know, so. And so off we went to Saint Bernard.

DISKIN:Yeah. So did you, did you notice a change? I mean, did it just feel

different? Were there, you say people standing on corners, were there, was there more--

JOHNSON:Well, I. I guess, um, but no, not. You know, not, no. I don't think I

really did notice a change that much. I really, I don't, I or, whether I just

wasn't open to it or nothing had happened to me. I did, there was an incident

of, of a man following me one night and that may have done it for my mother. Um,

I, I had a friend who lived—oh, oh, what is that street there at Findlay, Dunlap?

DISKIN:Mm-hmm. I mean, that there this a Dunlap.

JOHNSON:Dunlap Street? She lived on Dunlap…

DISKIN:There’s a new little café on Dunlap, yeah.

JOHNSON:And I, um, went to her house and came home after dark and could feel

somebody following me, and started to run. And I got to the delicatessen on the

corner, and um, I debated whether to tell my mother, you know. But I did. But I

think that, that may have been the end for her. I don't know that, that may have

been. You know.

DISKIN:Well, I mean, you were a young woman by that time it sounds like.

JOHNSON:That's right. That’s right.

DISKIN:And my, my parents grew up in New York and I’ve heard these stories. And

I mean, did you know anybody who, uh, you know, any, any young women

who had any bad experiences out in public, you know, with men approaching them or?

JOHNSON:Not. Not, no. Not down there. Uh, there was an incident, uh, over at

Findlay, Findlay, uh, Market. And there was an is- now that I'm thinking of it,

there was an incident with a girl I went to school with of a man exposing

himself as she was coming, walking to school. So, um, I, but I don't know, I

guess I was kind of naive. I just didn't at the time. But I, I would imagine,

and I don't know who these people were. They were not Black people. I will say

that. That man who followed me was not a Black man.

DISKIN:Right. Yeah. It can happen to anyone.

JOHNSON:You know, so. Yeah. And eventually--

DISKIN:And it doesn’t sound like it was a very frequent occurrence. You know,

growing up, that one would have to be on guard all of the time.

JOHNSON:Oh, no, not for me, anyway.

It was not, or, for anybody, um, you know, I think trying to, you know, things

coming back. I think in my building, um, I remember her saying to me, um, you

could enter the building off of Logan Street, and I lived in the front, so you

would go through, um, a hallway where there were some apartments and then into

an open court. I wonder if that's still there. I’m sure it is. A open court. And

then around there and to the right was the entrance to where you took your

trash. People would go down there, put their trash down there. And then I would

go around up the steps to our apartment. And I do remember her telling me, “Do

not go into

that basement part, don't go anywhere near it. Just come around the building.

Don't go through there.” So things were changing, you know, and I, um, and I

did, I mean, I did what I was told. I had a controlling, very high control

mother. And, (laughs) you didn't mess around with her. She never put her hand on

me, but, boy, I was still scared to death of her.

DISKIN:Did, did that, how did that sit with you growing up?

JOHNSON:The fact that she was like that, you mean? Um, uh, not, not well, all

the time. Especially when I got to be a teenager, you know. But um, but she, um,

she had had a hard, very hard life and she, she wasn't going to let anything

happen to me or my brother. You know, I mean, she was, she was uh, she was a

good mother. She really was. She just, uh, it was her way. Always.

(laughs)

DISKIN:So, uh, when you're fourteen or fifteen, somewhere in there, you moved

to Saint Bernard?

JOHNSON:I moved to Saint Bernard. Yes.

DISKIN:And, and I, you said you didn't want to go. I can appreciate that.

JOHNSON:No, no, no.

DISKIN:How did you, did you settle in there? Did you stay for some years there?

JOHNSON:No, we stayed, she that, she, she was, um, she couldn't afford to live

in the suburbs. I mean, um, we stayed there for a while until I, until I guess

the middle of my senior year, we moved to Northside. On Langland Street.

DISKIN:Okay.

JOHNSON:Uh-huh. And we moved into a two family there, the second floor of a two

family. And it was just she and I. And, um, um, I, um, it, it was okay. You

know, I finished high school there and then got a job, and then we moved to the

other side of Northside, which the

street is, has been destroyed now. It was called Runnymede, Colerain and

Runnymede. We lived in an apartment building there. But, um, uh, and then I got,

I got married when we lived there. So. So those, that was, that was, rough, that

was rough. She just, you know, in the Parkway Apartments every--she could afford

everything, everything was--

DISKIN:--Close?

JOHNSON:Close, you know, everything. We were safe. And, and then it all just

kind of fell apart for her, you know. But, but, um--

DISKIN:So those years in Northside, it doesn’t sound like those were happy

years for her.

JOHNSON:In Northside, yes. Yeah, not, I, I, you know, I don't know. You never

knew if she was happy or not, but, but, uh, uh, for me, the moving, you know, I.

Oh, my God, we're going to move again. You know, I didn't want to move again.

Langland Street was fine because the people who lived downstairs were really

nice people. And,

um, but um, it, it reached for, she couldn't afford the heat. She could afford

the rent, but she couldn't afford the heat. So winter would come, and, um, her

salary wasn't such that she could afford to feed us, and I think she was paying

for me to go to high school so that, you know, that, um, that was, that was

rough. So we moved over to Runnymede, which was less expensive. So.

DISKIN:And where did your brother move? You say he got married, also sounds

like he got married fairly young.

JOHNSON:He got. Oh, yeah, he got. Yeah, he got married. He married a girl from

Camp Washington, and they lived in Northside for a while on Georgia. And then,

um, Bob did well. He, he, um, worked for Pogue’s Department Store, and, um, they

started having children and eventually bought a house, in Covedale up here, you know,

so. So we all did--but he and I both did, you know, well, I mean, she saw to

that, you know. It was just it was those years were a little bit hard for her

that, as I said, my years in Over-the-Rhine were just fine. (laughs)

DISKIN:Yeah, I’ve, you know, as I've done a number of interviews now and

listened to the ones I haven't done to transcribe them, and it's part of my job

this year to just care for those and get them all ready to, uh, be part of our

archive and be accessible to people.

JOHNSON:Right, right, right. Yeah.

DISKIN:The years in which everything was close at hand seems to be a very

important feature in life where it was, it's like a whole world contained in a

small area.

JOHNSON:That's right. That's right, that's right. That. No, you're absolutely

right, and people at that time, we didn't have air conditioning. People in the

summertime came out. In the Parkway Apartments, there were uh, there were

benches along the front,

and people came out and sat there. So you got to know your neighbors. You got to

know, you know, who they were and, uh--

DISKIN:Yeah, life out in the street.

JOHNSON:And, and that, I think I, yeah. Access to things was, like my cousin

Arlene where they lived all of their, her mother's family, lived in the same

area, you know.

DISKIN:Yeah.

JOHNSON:We, we were, you know, my mother really didn't have much of a family

but other than my Uncle Joe, so um. But, but it was easy to get to them. You

know, it was so easy. And then I, as I became a teenager, I used to go over to

St Paul's, over to my cousins, to canteen dances, and it was a good time, you

know. It was, it was. So.

DISKIN:Oh, that's great.

JOHNSON:Yeah, yeah. So.

DISKIN:That's, that’s wonderful. Yeah. Is there anything else that, um, you recollect

or that you'd like to share right now? Any experiences, reflections on--

JOHNSON:I think I, I pre- pretty much um--

DISKIN:Do you remember a rolling rink? Like a skating rink? By any chance?

Couple of people have mentioned a skating rink that might have been behind St.

Seraph Church.

JOHNSON:St Francis Seraph Church? No.

DISKIN:Okay. Just, just popped to mind because--

JOHNSON:No, no, no. Just I was familiar with St. Francis Seraph Church. There

was, there were three Catholic parishes, St. Joseph. Well, four if you count the

one on Ezzard Charles. But there was St. Joseph of Nazareth, St. John the

Baptist on Green St.—

DISKIN:That was Green Street?

JOHNSON:Um-hm, and St. Francis Seraph, which is still there. And, um, I, while

I was going to St. Joseph's, I met a girl, um, in the neighborhood, I think

probably at Findlay Neighborhood House, who I became

friends with. And she went to St. John and I asked my mother, “Please, could I

go to St. John's?” But, um, of course she said no because St. Joseph's was right

there, you know, right close to us. But, um, I, what, you know, I guess what I

can say about that whole time was, um, it was gentler, gentler, people were

nice. We had a, um, uh, a young man who lived in the neighborhood who was, um,

very gay, very, very gay. His name was Betty Williams. And, you know.

DISKIN:Did you say Betty or Benny?

JOHNSON:Betty, they called him Betty. Betty Williams.

DISKIN:Ok, so everybody, this was just totally acceptable--

JOHNSON:And everybody—

DISKIN:--well, I don’t know if acceptable--

JOHNSON:--and it was like,

DISKIN:--known.

JOHNSON:- --it was like, in the Findlay Market area. You know, I don't know

where he lived,

but he was always around. He could hit a baseball a mile. I mean, you play

baseball everybody wanted him on their team because he could really hit the

ball. Um, uh, he was accepted. I don't, I, you know, that's what I, I think

touches me now about the whole area. I never experienced anyone not being

accepted. It was, you know, a, people, of course, I'm sure made fun of him. But

um, if you saw him on the street, if he talked to you, you talked back to him.

You know, it was, or if you're playing ball, will you be on my team? Because you

can play, you know, you're a better player. And he'd be very happy about that.

Um, um, there was a diversity that I grew up with that I've kept my whole life.

I’ve, I think I've just--

DISKIN:--And there weren't religious or ethnic differences, I mean, there were

differences, but they weren’t barriers.

JOHNSON:There were differences. Yeah, I didn’t, I did—

DISKIN:If someone was Protestant or--

JOHNSON:Oh, yeah, I didn't, like the kids who lived upstairs from Appalachia,

they were, I don't know what faith they were, but it was something, you know,

different. And because I remember them, me telling them stories about saints and

them laughing like crazy (laughs), I mean laughing, you know, like, hmm, this

isn't going well.

DISKIN:Really? (laughs)

JOHNSON:But anyway, um, the St. Joseph of Nazareth was a Hungarian church. I

don't know if you knew that.

DISKIN:No, I didn’t.

JOHNSON:Yes, it was a Hungarian church. Yeah. They celebrated every year what

they called the Kirvi (?) Fest. And I was a big part of that being when I was in

grade school there, in in that I went to the festival all day and they included

me in the dances and whole thing.

So it, it, um, it was just a, it was just a good place to be.

DISKIN:That’s interesting! Hungar- were there Hungarian people who had been

from Hungary who attended the church?

JOHNSON:I yeah, I believe so. I, you know, I mean, because well, they, they

have this, as I said this Kirvi Fest and the women would cook and dress

differently and all that, you know. And then this family, this German family

that moved in that were actually from Germany. You know, you'd wonder how they

were, how they'd be, you know. But as far as I know, his, I remember his name

was Nicholas and I, um, we got to be friends, you know, because I would listen

to him when he talked.

DISKIN:Oh, my God. You wonder what kind of an experience they and their

family--like, I mean, we hear a lot about the experience of people in internment

and concentration camps and other things but, uh, the—

JOHNSON:Yes, yes,

DISKIN:--German citizens too had a very rough time.

JOHNSON:And I think his father was like, I think his father was, uh, mended

shoes. I think that's what he did

out of his apartment, if I remember correctly. Yeah. So. Yeah.

DISKIN:Wow. Do you remember when the war ended?

JOHNSON:I do.

DISKIN:Was there a lot of celebrating?

JOHNSON:Well, I was--

DISKIN:You were probably pretty young.

JOHNSON:--like, seven. Yeah. And, yes, I do remember. I remember going downtown

and all that. You know, there was celebration and all that. I don--I don't

remember a whole lot about it, but I, I do remember it, you know? And then, as I

said, then, then I guess, um, the military was coming home and they started to

settle in, in, um, Laurel Homes. And, and I don't know if that that probably was

temporary, you know, housing.

DISKIN:Yeah, it might have been.

JOHNSON:Yeah, yeah, yeah.

DISKIN:I’m going to look into that.

JOHNSON:So.

DISKIN:Well, this has been wonderful. Yeah. All of those theaters!

JOHNSON:Oh, good. I'm glad. I hope I’d be of help. Yeah.

DISKIN:Oh, absolutely.

JOHNSON:Oh, yeah, I know all the theaters.

DISKIN:And there are these intersections. I mean, the Flamm’s Cafe people know

about. Uh, the park,

the daycare, have come up in other people's experiences too, so. Get a, start to

get a sense when you hear a number of people's reflections for some of the, kind

of a crossroads that were part of multiple people’s lives.

JOHNSON:Right, right, right, right. Yeah. Uh, uh people in general, I don't

remember a lot of bad people experiences. I mean, I have to go to the Findlay

Market. There was a grocery store at Findlay and Dunlap where I'd go. And, um,

everyone was always kind, uh, everyone was nice. It was, just it was a good

place to be at that time. I, you know. It's a shame when I watched it go down

and it was like, oh my God, I just, you know, this so sad, so sad. But now it's

coming back, so. (laughs) I can't believe I've lived through the whole thing.

DISKIN:Yeah, Yeah. Absolutely.

JOHNSON:Yeah.

DISKIN:And we’re going to try to get

good, firsthand experiences from people who were there at every stage.

JOHNSON:At every, yeah, of when it all started to change. Boy, you've got a

big job in front of you.

DISKIN:We do. We do. But, it’s, it’s exciting. And I’m delighted to be part of

the project.

JOHNSON:Yes. Yeah, I’m sure.

DISKIN:Well, thank you very, very much for sharing your story,

JOHNSON:Well, you're more than welcome to--

DISKIN:--your history.

JOHNSON:Yeah, I'm happy to do it. I hope I, uh--

DISKIN:That’s great. I’ll turn this off.

JOHNSON:Yeah, okay.