Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History, University of Kentucky LibrariesEnvironment and Heritage Along the Cumberland River Oral History ProjectInterview with Gwynneth Bird Wildcat, May 29, 20242024oh0219_ehcr0008_wildcatLO:  My name is Edward Lowe. I'm a Lyman T. Johnson postdoctoral fellow at the University of Kentucky Appalachian Center in Appalachian Studies Program. Today is Wednesday, May 29th. I'm at the Cherokee Indian Hospital in Cherokee, North Carolina, and the Qualla boundary, um, and we're talking about the oral history project Environment and Heritage Along the Cumberland River. And, so why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? You're, where you were born and raised,

your, your date of birth, and anything you'd like to share.WILDCAT:  So, um, my name is Gwynneth Bird Wildcat. Um, and I am from Cherokee, North Carolina. Um, I was, um, born in Hendersonville, North Carolina, and I've actually was raised between here and Balsam Grove, North Carolina. Um, my dad is here, and my mom's family is in Balsam Grove. Um, so my grandparents and aunts and, um, my other side of the family was over there.

Um, so I've kind of walked in two worlds. Um, for my entire life. Um, but both of them definitely here in the Appalachian Mountains. Um, my date of birth is 03/27/1981. Um, and I think that's pretty much it. Um--(laughs), I work here in Cherokee. I have, um, I got my bachelor's degree from Western Carolina University, and I'm currently a

rising 2L. So officially a 3L now at Mitchell Hamline School of Law. So I'm finishing my last year of law school this year.LO:  Congratulations. That's amazing.WILDCAT:  (laughs)--Thank you.LO:  Um, just wondering if you could describe what the Daniel Boone Festival, um, is. If you could summarize it for somebody who's never been to the festival before. What, what does the festival entail?WILDCAT:  So I've been to the festival, um, many times throughout the years with my dad.

Um, growing up from, you know, a young child through a teenager up into adulthood. Um, and the biggest thing was, um, what my dad always presented it to us as, is it was the only unbroken treaty. So there was a treaty between the Cherokee people and the residents of Barbourville for, um, river for, for a, um, collection of river cane. And um, so every year when we

went there that there was a ceremony where they gave river cane to our people. Um, for us to bring back home, um, river cane has been used, um, historically--(clears throat)--in arts and crafts and making useful things as well, basketry and that kind of thing. Um, for our people. And so that was the big significance that was presented to me, um. As a kid, it was just cool because I got to go ride rides, carnival rides, and eat junk food.

Um--(laughs), so, um, there's some there's some. Um, but as I got older, I realized, um, the significance of that and the ceremony, um, they always had, and they always took such good care of us when we were there, which was, um, really amazing, the hospitality. Um, we would go there and, um, they would feed us dinner and make sure that we had everything that we needed. Um, and then we would perform powwow dances, um, do street shows, um, participate in the parade,

um, all of those kind of things. And, um, there were just some really kind, amazing people who made some, um, good impacts. I have some really fond memories, memories of Bill Frazier, um, and just how he was as an individual and, um, how he always, um-- you know, he, he was always, like, checking on the kids, making sure the kids are okay, making sure the kids have something to do. Um, and just that kindness that he portrayed was, um, really incredible.

And I'm sure there's many more people. Um, but he's always someone who just sticks out in my mind when I think of, um, our time in Barboursville.LO:  So it sounds like you got involved with the, the festival with, uh, with your dad, Rick Byrd.WILDCAT:  Mhm [affirmative].LO:  Um, so you started at an early age. What did that look like for you over, over time? Did you get, uh, you have an increasing role and responsibility within different songs and dances, um, as time went on?WILDCAT:

Yeah. Well, I grew up, um, traveling to powwows with my dad and, um, dancing, um, and being a part of the drums, singing and that kind of stuff. Um, and so I've just always done that. That's always been a part of my life. Um, I don't really know, increasing responsibilities or anything like that. I mean, I'm sure that, you know, I was told to do more as I grew. Um, and, you know, of course, my own children,

um, would come with us. As you know, they were born and, um, my, um, oldest daughter, Cara, has probably has been going to Barboursville since she was, um, probably about six months old. Um, and so that's pretty neat, you know, that they've seen, um, generations of our family up there. Um. But powwows is like a, um. I don't know, it was a way. It was an economic resource for us.

Um, that's how my dad supported his family for a great number of years. Um, you know, my dad's always been, um, a performer--(laughs). Um, he's, um, really incredible, though. Um, he's always. He's one of those people that can quickly build relationships and make connections with individuals. Um, and just has this charismatic presence to him, um, where he just draws people to him. Um, but he's always done

powwows and emceed and, you know, built relationships across cultures and boundaries and, um, which is really neat if you think about it. Um, especially with the state of our country throughout his life and how he's been able to make connections across cultures is pretty cool.LO:  So would you say that the Daniel Boone Festival then for, for you is, uh, basically there isn't a like, a level of like a, a

different form of, like a, essentially like a powwow. And in terms of how it, how it shaped, um, who you are and as well as your, your upbringing.WILDCAT:  I would not compare it to a powwow. Um, I would compare it kind of to, like, a cross cultural merge, um, where there's all these different pieces coming together to just create this multicultural vision, um, is what-- from my perspective,

right? Um, because I've never been to a powwow where you could ride, um, carnival rides and then see Appalachian crafts and see people, um, you know. And, and really learn about that, that culture, like that true mountain culture of cultivating, you know, the land and, you know, just the Appalachian culture, like the things that they do, Cornhusk dolls and, you know, just all this real, you know, the Appalachian crafts and,

um, dances, you'd see cloggers and, you know, just all these different things all melded together into one area. And so definitely not like a powwow, um, you know, in that aspect.LO:  Yeah. Because I've, uh, been to a few powwows, and the, and the powwows and themselves are often-- that's, that's the, the center stage for, for the, for the entire festival. Right. And so has how is that-- has the Daniel Boone Festival changed in terms of how, how it's, um, positioned?

Um, uh, the Native Americans, um, in terms of, uh, the, um, different locations, maybe with placement within the festival that that you, that you remember?WILDCAT:  We have kind of moved to different areas where, you know, our area was placed. Um, but, you know, powwows are, uh, they're, they're multicultural because it's intertribal. Right. Um, across different-- um, but

you wouldn't go to a powwow and have, you know, dance, dances and then Appalachian crafts here. Right? You're going to have, you know, it's all going to be a similar theme of a intertribal. You're, you're going to have Navajo and, you know, all these different tribal crafts there. Um, so the Daniel Boone Festival is unique in that, um, as far as any other festival that I have

been to, um, where everything's really integrated seamlessly and, um. It's just really neat, um, how all these different cultures come together and there's I, the-- I don't view the Daniel Boone Festival as having anything really as its center point, right, where it's, it's focused on one thing. There's just so many different things

that come together to just form this truly unique event, right? Um, where nothing's really, you know-- they're not highlighting anything in particular, like, everything's pretty equal there, um.LO:  That's an interesting point you, you make. Then what, what do you, you know, given that the name of the festival, the Daniel Boone Festival then, and the different elements that, that are present, right? You have the different, um, I know they've mentioned other interviews, they’ve mentioned, like a primitive

village, primitive camp and, and a lot of dressing up. What do you feel is the most important aspect of the, of the festival? And you might have already alluded to this in your response, actually.WILDCAT:  Uh, yeah. And, and I, I mean, the treaty is important for us, right? Because you will hear that across culture is that there's so many broken treaties or, you know, and even, you know, like as a law student, I bring this different perspective

because I've spent a few years reading, um, Supreme Court cases from way back in how these treaties were, um, abricated and, you know, divided where we're we're going to honor this part, but not this part. Um, and, you know, you just see some truly racial, racial, despairing language and some, so many legal fictions. Um, like, there's a term that comes through the Supreme Court,

um, that Native Americans are domestic dependent nations. Um, what does that mean? Um, what do you mean by that? Domestic dependent nation? Um, but there's all these legal fictions and these terms that come into these court cases, um, that are just really,  that have had significant impacts. Um, so if a treaty is upheld and people uphold their word, um, it, it's something to highlight. So for me, that was the

historical significance. But then as an adult, when I think about it, um, just the fact that all of these different elements could coexist together in harmony and create this unique, um, event that happens up there is the really significant part, right? Because when we think about how divided we have become, um, how divided we were, how divided we still are, um, so much division across cultures where we don't just treat, just accept

people for who they are, um, and be open minded about other people's culture, even though we have our own. Um, the fact that all of this can coexist together in harmony is really a highlight for how we should be living, right? Um, just because you do things differently than me doesn't mean we can't coexist side by side together in this world, that there's enough for, there's enough space for everyone. Um, and I know that's getting really philosophical,

but, um, it's just something that comes together in my mind now, thinking of this as an adult. Um, who has seen this happen? Um, since a child. Um, and now, you know, kind of come full circle with what I see happening in the world.LO:  Well, that's a beautiful way to describe it. Do you so, so from, from your perspective as a, as a, as a law student, do you, what do you think about the the text of the, of the

treaty and how it's, um, how it's been passed, uh, since it's started in 1948 and how it's signed every year?WILDCAT:  Yeah, that's pretty neat, right? Um, and it's not changing. It's just. And, you know, it's plain language. And no one's ever said, no one's ever created a legal fiction that made them not have to, you know? And that's really what happens, right? These legal fictions are created to make someone be able to, um, get out of their word,

basically, um, to be able to go back on their word. Um, and Oh, no, I didn't say that because you're a domestic dependent nation or, you know, You gave up that right when we gave you this or whatever. Um, it's pretty neat that that's remained unchanged because there are not many of those. I mean, there are tribes up north that have had to fight for their ability to go catch fish. Um, you know, and when you think about, you know, me being,

you know, involved in health care, and I've, I’ve worked here at the hospital since 2008. I started out as a dental clerk. Um, so I kind of started out at the, you know, the very bottom of the totem, totem pole here at the hospital. And, um, Casey Cooper is one of the most incredible human beings that I've ever met. And, um, he actually started out dancing for my dad as a teenager. And so there's some, um, there's, there's a relationship there from, um, that commonality. Um--(clears throat), and he actually

is an incredible public speaker. And, um, he accredits my dad for, um, learning how to do, you know, to be charismatic and make that connection with his audiences. Um, and so, all of this stuff comes full circle when we think about that, right? Um.LO:  So I've heard that, um, treaties are-- I, I attended a workshop where they're, treaties are treated as a living document, right?

They change and then they can they can be subject to reinterpretation, as you just mentioned, all these legal, um, legal descriptions and word wrangling. Um, do you feel that the, the treaty itself, if, if it, uh, would, would stand up to like legal scrutiny, scrutiny if it were ever to be in a situation like that?WILDCAT:  Um, and I don't know, I mean, you know, you, I have seen them, like I just mentioned, the tribes up north having to fight for their rights to actually go fish. Um,

I, I can't really answer that because we see treaties, um, that are plain language that are interpreted very differently. Um, and so, Native American law, that focus is to interpret those treaties as the tribal members who entered into them would have understood it at the time. Um, and so, (clears throat)--and a lot of courts

are getting on board with that, you know, like we've went through these different eras of, um, Native American law. And a lot of, you know, the pendleton, the pendleton is going this way now, right? Like, but it swings back and forth where, you know, there's decisions made that are very against, um, Native American rights and self-determination. And then, you know, it goes back the other way. Um, but if you think about it on a whole, um, you know, there were lots of tribes who were removed from their homelands, like our,

um, our, the other part of us, the Kituwa and the Western band of Cherokee [Editor’s Note: The Cherokee Nation]. Um, they were removed from here where they knew what plants to eat. They knew what plants to harvest. They knew the, um, terrain. They knew how to fish. They knew how to hunt. They knew how to, um, survive, right? And they were moved into this very different environment in Oklahoma where they didn't know what plants were safe. They were removed from not only their food source, but also their medicine source, right? And then they're put on these reservations

and they're fed USDA foods, which have just been so detrimental to our health. Um, you know, frybread, that's so popular, is like one of the most unhealthy things that you could possibly put in your body. You know, it's, it's flour and fried and grease, right? Um, and so when you think about that and you kind of track that back to the health disparities that we face today and just, you know, how, um, in the termination era, um, they almost terminated

tribes. Um, but this treaty has just remained unchanged, unchallenged, like-- but it's very simple, right? They're just going to give river cane for people, you know, for the tribal members to make baskets to, to do these things. Um, and so most treaties you could look at, you could look at it and be like, this is really simple--(laughs). Um, and the living document, um, I think that this

one in particular is a living document because it gets signed every year, but I don't see it so much as living as it's changed, right? Because that's one of the the high points that dad's always stressed to me is that it doesn't change, right? It's unbroken, um, and has been sustained throughout the years. And a lot of the broken treaties, they're also not living documents because that language has not been changed. It's just been interpreted incorrectly. Um,

or they've said, well, we'll honor this part, but, you know, not this part or, you know, they've picked and chosen language to serve their own purpose, I think.LO:  Yeah. And that's really sad.WILDCAT:  Yeah. It is.LO:  Um, you touched upon the, the importance of, of a sense of place and, and knowledge of the, the local landscapes, the, the medicines, the, the food and the lifeways here, um. With the Cumberland River being in the ancestral homelands

of the, of the Cherokee, what does, um-- how, how has that river or, or other rivers shaped your life and the life of the community around you here?WILDCAT:  Yeah. I think, um, you know, dad has always taught me that water is life. Um, and you go to the water for healing. Um, you know, those rivers are what gives us and our landscape life, right? And so if we're not protecting our water sources, um, then we can

be in some real trouble. Um, and so if we're talking about preventing pollution and, you know, preventing all these things, um, you know-- the EPA's pretty, um, they're,  they're ahead of a lot of other government agencies, um, in the way that they treat tribes because they treat tribes as states, right? And so tribes are allowed to ask for

increased protection for their waterways and for their environment. Um, they're actually allowed to create standards that are above and beyond what individual states have. Um, and so that's really cool, right? Um, and so I think, um, you know, as that develops and moves out, um, and really gets across Indian Country, I think that, um, those determinations will have a really positive impact on, um, tribes

in this area and tribes around the Cumberland River, um, and being able to do more for our environment to ensure that the next seven generations, um, you know, are protected and that we're providing for them.LO:  Um, so we've been talking about the, the River Cane Treaty, and I've seen a lot of the importance of river cane in the, um, Qualla Arts and Crafts, um, Mutual. Um,

can you tell us a little bit more about the, the river cane? Did you participate in the river cane harvesting when you were in, um, Knox County, or, or what do you know about river cane in that, that part of the.WILDCAT:  I did not participate. Um, they would always bring the cane to us during that, um, welcome dinner. Um, but as a child growing up, I have helped my dad make thousands of blowguns out of river cane. Um, and that has been my experience with river cane and what it is used for.

Um, you know, those-- we've had blowgun competitions and, you know, just all kinds of different stuff. So that has been my experience with the most use in my family. Um, and what we've used that, uh, river cane--(laughs)--for, um, for our family in particular. Now, there are other families who have different, you know, they're basket makers and, you know, they, they do different, different things. Um, but for my experience, that's

what, um, my dad has had me in the backyard doing a great number of times--(laughs).LO:  Um, can you walk us, uh, through what that, what that process is like? I wanted to, to hear a little bit from your perspective. Like, like from just from some start to finish for a blow gun.WILDCAT:  (laughs)--Okay. Um, so blow guns, they’re various lengths and so you, there can be little short ones, um, or huge long ones. Um, and so various lengths, um, just depends on their use and the

application and what they're being intended for. Um, but you try to find a good straight piece because you want to be able to aim, right? And so you find a good straight piece. And then the, the centers have to be burnt out. So that's usually a fire in the backyard with a long piece of metal, um, where you're going in and cleaning out the inside of that, um, you know, and then cutting it to a length. And we started out with like hacksaws, right? So we're sitting in the backyard with the hacksaws. Um, eventually

when I got a little bit older, we got a bandsaw, and that was awesome. It was so much faster. Just zip right through there, you know? I don't know how safe it was for me as a child to be using a bandsaw, but, you know, I learned. Dad taught me to keep my fingers out of the way and we were good to go. Um, so it was a fire in the backyard, but that’s some of my most fond memories with my siblings and my dad, um, is all of us in the backyard doing that. Um, and then there's also the darts, which you have to carve out. And they're

very thin and sharp on one end. And then they have bull thistle, um, wrapped around the top of them, which is a fuzzy-like substance, so that when you pick up the blowgun and blow it, that's how it gets its momentum and goes forward. And so we would sit and tie blowgun darts, um, in the living room at night after it was dark, um, with thistle everywhere. I'm sure my mom loved cleaning all that up--(Lo laughs). Um, I'm sure it was a great time--(laughs). I'm sure there's probably bull thistle still embedded in the cracks

in my dad's house--(both laugh).LO:  Oh, were, were these blowguns that, that you and your family made some of the, part of the arts and crafts that were sold? I think Rick, uh, had described carrying some of the arts and crafts from the elders here, to, to three or four booths, um, uh, at the, at the Daniel Boone Festival.WILDCAT:  Yeah, yeah. So those were definitely a part of it. Um, you know, and there were lots of-- you know we would go up to Stan Tooni and he always made,

um, slingshots out of, like, I think it was mountain laurel, was the wood that he used because they kind of had that natural ‘Y’ in them. Um, and, you know, just all kinds of different things. We would actually get blowguns from him and blowgun darts as well. Um, you know, but there were various places where dad would go pick up crafts from, um, different people, um, to take and, you know, like the little short blow guns, we would sell a lot of those to the kids.

Um, and those would all have a, um, a stubbed dart, we would call them, where they are not sharp--(laughs). So, um, they're not going to injure themselves or others. Um, but, um, you know, there were a lot of various things that we did throughout the years. And dream catchers, we would go pick up dream catchers, um, different things to sell. So, yeah, for sure.LO:  What, what are some of the, uh, what are some stories about the Daniel Boone Festival that you'd like to share?WILDCAT:

Oh, goodness, there's so many. Um, just our, you know-- I, I particularly, particularly, uh, particularly remember one year when, um, and he's actually our current chief now, Michell Hicks and his family, um, they came up with us, and that was really neat, um, for him and his family to experience that with us. And they were there at the welcome dinner and rode in the parade with us and everything. And so that was that was really neat. And I don't remember,

I mean, it was, it was when he was-- he served eight years and then was out um, for um, like six years, I think. And then he's back in office again. Um, but, you know, Michell and my dad have always been really good friends. And so that was really neat to, um, just see the impact of that, that our chief took the time to go up there and, um, meet everyone there and kind of see the treaty being signed. I think he actually signed the treaty that year as well

too when he was there. Um, but that was a big,  that was a, you know, a big one for me. But otherwise it's kind of, you know, the excitement of going up there every year. Um, and the sameness of going up there every year. You know what I mean? Like--LO:  Consistency.WILDCAT:  It was consistent that, you know, it was always wonderful and welcoming and the community was always incredible. And, um, we always felt well taken care of.

And we, we always felt like honored guests there. Um, and so that was my experience--(laughs).LO:  What, uh, I know this, um, sometimes there were also school shows that were done in the weeks leading up to the event. Did you ever participate in in those school shows?WILDCAT:  Yes, we did. So we would go out to the schools and dance for different grades, sometimes the whole school at a time. Um, so yeah, we've always

done that because, um, the education piece is really important, right? Um, for a long time, what was taught in our history classes was not true Native American history, right? Um, and so the education, um, is really important. And still to this day, I think it's--(laughs)--really important, um, for people to be informed and educated and understand, um, some

of the struggles and the reality of what happened to Native Americans.LO:  What were some of the songs and dances like in, in the, um, school shows compared with the, the, the Daniel Boone Festival itself. Were they the same, uh, shows or?WILDCAT:  It is kind of the same. Um, it's more of like an exhibition style, right? So showing them different styles of powwow dancing, but also showing them,

um, some traditional Cherokee dances. So we would do, you know, like the bear dance and the beaver dance and, um, different traditional Cherokee dances. Um, but then we'd also do the friendship dance, which is, which is a dance that kind of brings everyone together and lets everyone participate. Um, and then the exhibition powwow styles like, and just depending on the dancer and what their style is. Right. So, um, there are some various different types of powwow dancing. Um, I started out as a child. I was a fancy shawl dancer

and then transitioned to a jingle dress dancer in my early teens. Um, you know, I have some brothers who have fancy danced. Like, my dad was always a fancy dancer and then kind of transitioned to grass when he got a little bit older. Um, and my brothers have all kind of followed a similar path, but some of them still fancy dance. Um, you know, my daughter, she's always done fancy shawl, but as she's got older, she's kind of trans, transitioning into jingle. Um, and so I think it just all kind of depends,

right? Um, so different styles across different dancers. Um, and then just, you know, it's a, that dancer, right? So.LO:  Oh, what was the conversation like with, um, with the, the schools, the school children?  Did they-- what kinds of questions, if any, did they have during the shows?WILDCAT:  (laughs)--So, you know, there's a presentation, right. And then, but you know, a lot of the questions that I got ask is, you know, that same questions that I got asked here as a child

dancing on the street and doing exhibition style dancing here; it’s like, “Where do the Indians live?” You know, and they're looking for teepees and they're looking for these, you know, specific things that they've, um, seen in their history books. Um, and so just the education of, you know, like Native Americans live in houses just like you do. Um, you know, and, and those types of things and just kind of changing that mental model and that perspective.LO:  Um, for

future renditions of the Daniel Boone Festival, is there anything that you would like to see, um, changed or, um, uh, improved upon?WILDCAT:  Uh, I don't know. That's a tough question. Um, I think the, the magic of the Daniel Boone Festival for me has always been the sameness, right? Um, I think that, I don't know, that would be hard to imagine. Like what it would look like if

it was different, if someone changed it, right? Um, that's kind of hard. Um, I think that the, you know, as technology changes and people advance, like, things naturally change. Um, but I think that that that collaboration of multicultural performers and stuff is what makes it really unique. And I don't think that you- that should be messed with personally, um.LO:  Do you, um, uh, what do you think about

Daniel Boone?WILDCAT:  Daniel Boone? You know, I'm probably not the person to answer that question, because I've never really dug into Daniel Boone and who he truly was as a person. Now, I have the overarching childhood view of what Daniel Boone was. Um, but as far as really digging in. And, in order to, I think, truly form an opinion about someone, um, I think it's important to know who they truly were

as a person, and that's just not something that I'm very familiar with. Now, I've always heard positive things. I haven't heard a lot of negative things. Um, you know, but I, I don't know who Daniel Boone was as a person, right? Um, how he lived his life, decisions that he made. Um, I know that there was a lot of philanthropy there, um, that has, you know, been told, um, and so I assume that, um, he

was a good man. Um, but I've never dug into true history other than just that overarching--(laughs), um, history. Um, and so, I think, like, like you could especially understand that with your studies and like, that's what you do with your studies, right? You're digging down into the roots of who he was as a person and I've never done that. So sorry, guys. I know that's probably not the answer you wanted--(laughs).LO:  This is, um, this is great. Um, I, like many people, he

is a complicated person, right? So.WILDCAT:  Yeah.LO:  So, I, I respect your, your response.WILDCAT:  (laughs)--Yeah.LO:  Um, I've, uh--(laughs)--I've, I’ve lost my train of thought now. Um, uh, I was, uh, wondering about the seven generations that you had mentioned earlier. Is that, is that a consistent part of the, of the culture? Why, why is it, uh, thought about in terms of the next seven generations,WILDCAT:  Um.LO:  Whether in terms of Daniel Boone Festival or

anything, any other policy, um?WILDCAT:  Um, no, that's just a, that, that is just, um, the way, right? Always thinking about the next seven generations and you're always thinking ahead. And so, um, one of our guiding principles here at the hospital is that we ensure the health of the next seven generations of the Cherokee people, right? That's, we've been, um, you know, given a responsibility for that. And so if you're always thinking

about the next seven generations, then you're always protecting the future and ensuring that your people survive. And so if everyone always thinks seven generations out, then, you know, for the protection of the seventh, that seventh generation out there, then you're making the correct decisions for the environment, for resources, for everything. Um, and so that's just-- seven is a very significant number

to, um, I think all tribes, um, maybe not all of them, but all of them that I'm familiar with. I mean, we have seven clans, and, you know, you're thinking about the seven generations, and so it's just a really significant number. So it comes up in a lot of different aspects.LO:  Mhm. Yeah, I find that I have a great deal of respect for that. I think that definitely, um, adds to, to a lot of uh, future sustainability of the community and just, you know, wise use of our natural resources.WILDCAT:  Exactly.LO:

Um, there's been different, uh, perspectives about how, how the Daniel Boone Festival itself has, has changed through time. For example, there's been, it seems like there's more um, there's been an increased emphasis on, on like the carnival, on the, the concert that draws in a lot of people. Do you feel like that's, uh, changed the dynamics and, and the emphasis on the, on the treaty and the Native American focus?WILDCAT:  Um, I'm not sure.

Um, as technology increases, we all, we all change, right? We just naturally change. Um, and there's always going to be people who have varying interests. You know, some people have a really historical focus, and other people just want to get dizzy, um, on the spinny rides. (laughs)--I, you know, I mean, but, you know, and, and my perspective kind of changed as I got older, right? Um, when I was a kid, it was, I get to ride all these carnival rides, this is going to be awesome! You know that, that was my focus of the Daniel

Boone Festival. Um, and then as I got older, like, the historical significance started to come in there. Um, and I was like, Oh, this is really cool, right? Like, you know, so I think that it's just natural, right, for things to change and evolve. Um, there was always been concerts as long as I can remember. Um, and I think, like we used to actually do a show, like, up on the stage with the concert, before the concert, like the

opening for the concert. So there's always been inclusion, and I don't think that that's ever-- I hope that that never changes, right? Um, because I think the inclusion and the merging of all of those different pieces is what makes it so special. Again, I've said that a few times, but, um, I think that the changes and the emphasis on the, you know, that there's more carnival rides and it's bigger and it's better is not a bad thing, as, you know,

as long as there's still inclusion of all the parts, which, um, I still very much get that vibe. So I don't see that changing unless, you know, that's a decision that a future committee makes.LO:  So, I think the committee of the Daniel Boone Festival to date hasn't had a, um, Native American person on the committee before. Do you think that would be a welcome development for, for, um, the, the Daniel Boone Festival? Is

that something that's important that’s crossed your mind?WILDCAT:  I'm not sure. I've never felt like because there wasn't a Native American person on that committee, that there was not, um, a reach out, because I know that my dad has, you know, he's, he’s always been an integral part of that planning. Um, and so I think maybe he's not officially on that committee or hasn't been, but I think that that committee has always reached out for that guidance

and that, um, advice and that input. Um, so even though there's not someone physically there in Barbourville elected to that committee, um--(clears throat), I don't think that that has that that has stopped that committee from making sure that they have that input and that they're being, um, respectful and, um, inclusive. Like, I think that they've done a really good job with that. I don't have

an, an oppose, um, to the way that things have been ran at all. Um, now, would having a Native American on that committee be cool? Yeah. Do it. That would be awesome. But, you know, I think that they've always asked for input and, um, contributions.LO:  Yeah. That's great. I, that's what I've heard during, during my other interviews here, is that they've always, uh, Bill Frazier and others have always had, like, paid attention and listened

to what, um, your dad, Rick Bird, has, has asked for so, so that’s really great.WILDCAT:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. For sure, yeah.LO:  Um, there has been discussions, um, by-- I'm veering here off on a tangent just a little bit--WILDCAT:  Oh no, you’re good.LO:  But, um, I was at a event that was held by West Virginia University last year that, um, and I think the president of the Delaware Nation and the Shawnee Nation had, uh, expressed interest in, in,

uh, like establishing an, an office or, uh, in their ancestral homelands, like in, in Kentucky. Um, is that, you know, from your perspective as a rising legal scholar, is that something that you'd be interested in, in seeing happen, for example, in in Knox County where, uh, you know, having a, like a field office for, um, the, the EBCI [Editor’s note: Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians] in that, that part of the country?WILDCAT:

I mean I think that that's a really neat idea. Um, whether, you know, like and, and I would just, you know, like, I think that we would need more information about what the value is. What are we, um, contributing? Um. It's kind of, I don't know-- that's just, it's hard to kind of wrap my head around that. Now, I've seen the, you know, the Cherokee Nation, they're doing a lot of outreach and holding

different events across the country, and they call that Cherokee Nation At-Large. Um, and so, you know, eventually, I think that that would, you know, like things like that would be, um, beneficial. Um, but kind of just having more information about what would it be about? What would be the purpose? What would be the point? Um, what would be the contribution from both sides? How would it be-- what would be the benefits that came out of it? Um, just a whole lot

of more, a whole lot more stuff, right?LO:  Yeah.WILDCAT:  Yeah.LO:  Um, what are, what are land rights? Um, like, you're, you’re in, in like in-- in a couple of sentences in, in the, on the Qualla Boundary, it’s um, held like in a, in trust?WILDCAT: Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yeah.LO:  Is that how that, um, basically functions?WILDCAT:  Yeah, um, it's held in trust by the United States government. But the Qualla Boundary is different than other-- it's called the Qualla Boundary because we're not a reservation, right? Like our land was

purchased. Um, our money was pulled together by our ancestors and our land was purchased. Um, and so, you know, we're, you know, we didn't leave when they wanted us to leave. We stayed here and fought for our homelands. So, um, that's what makes it makes it, uh, makes us a little bit unique. Um, but, yes, our land is still held in trust by the United States government. Um, and we're-- our tribe, actually, like, um,

purchases land and puts it into trust. So Kituwa Fields and, you know, different, um, the Cooper's Creek track and different, um, that's the intention is to, um, get that land put into trust. That way it's protected. Um, you know, some people view-- the trust land is viewed a few different ways. Um, because you don't really, truly own your land, right? It's held into trust. Like you, you kind of just have property rights

to it, but it also protects that land for future generations because it can never be sold off.LO:  Yeah, yeah. And I've actually, I’ve started hear people in different, in different areas start to donate land to, to different tribal nations as a, as a way to, to add to the, to the trust and.WILDCAT:  Yeah, yeah. Well, lots of, lots of, um, tribal land across the country is like checkered box because, um, there was an era that allowed people

to just hold the land, and, for 25 years, and then they could sell it and disperse of it and do what they wished with it. So there was, you know, over a million acres, um, you know, millions of acres lost, um, during that era.LO:  Mhm.WILDCAT:  So.LO:  Is there anything else you'd like to, to add or sing for us?WILDCAT:  I think that I have talked for a really long time--(both laugh).LO:

Well, Gwen, it's been a pleasure. Thank you so much for your time today.WILDCAT:  Thank you guys so much. I enjoyed it.[End of interview.]