PRATHER:My name is Liz Prather, and today is Friday, October 25th, 2024. And I am here with Lucille Harden at her home in Montgomery County, Kentucky. And we are going to be talking about Court Day. This is part of an interview, um, taken, uh, through the Kentucky Humanities Council and the Court Day Project: The Third Monday in October. Hello, Lucille.

HARDIN:Hello, Liz.

PRATHER:You and I know each other. We have a past.

HARDIN:We do. We do.

PRATHER:We, uh, taught together, I guess, in the early 90s. Is that [right]?

HARDIN:Well...

PRATHER:I came here in 93.

HARDIN:Well, I was-- I was there.

Pr:Yeah, you--

HARDIN:--I was there. I retired in 2002.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:From teaching.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:So you were there most of that time, I think.

PRATHER:I know I left to start the bookstore in 97. So I was there just four years, 93 to 97. And then I came back in in 2008.

HARDIN:All right, well, yes.

PRATHER:So-- and finished that. And you were you had already retired.

HARDIN:Right. Right.

PRATHER:So we know a little bit about each other, but I really don't know much about your background. I don't know much about your life story and your history. Tell me a little bit about who you are and where you came from.

HARDIN:Oh my goodness. Well, I am a Montgomery Countian through and through, as were--actually I am--I'm going to say a sixth-generation Montgomery Countian. And uh, my--one of my ancestors, uh, Enoch Smith, was actually at Boonesborough with Daniel Boone. He-- the way I understand it--he had the very first, uh, land grant in Kentucky.

PRATHER:Really.

HARDIN:And--and it was here in this county. There were 3 or 4 of them that came. He had the first stone home built in Montgomery County. And the cemetery is-- is not far from, uh, the, the county line.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:--or the city limits, I would say-- and in need of repair. And I've sort of been working on that, uh, trying to get a few together and perhaps a grant to--to get that done. We spent a little time physically working on it, but I spent--

PRATHER:He's buried in Machpelah?

HARDIN:No, he is buried in a-- in a private family cemetery.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:And I remember back in the 50s that my father and, uh, at least one cousin did some, uh, cemetery renovation. Not positive that that was one, but it appears from what little research that we've done, we have found his stone.

PRATHER:Wow.

HARDIN:That, uh, maybe there was some renovation done there as well. Not positive it was his, but my sister and I both would-- would like to see that restored. And there are a great, great number of Enoch Smith's descendants still-- still living, several in the area. But, uh, I just think for historical significance.

PRATHER:Absolutely.

HARDIN:In--in Montgomery County, it would be well worth something to leave behind me. My-- I grew up with--with a lot of interest in family history. My--my grandmother was a member of the Daughters of the American Revolution. And--and it was Enoch Smith's father, actually, that she and I both went into the organization on. So we didn't do a lot of family reunions. But I do remember that my father would stand on the farm wagon and recite the lineage, none of which ever have I found in print. And I had a--I had a distant cousin who was also a good friend. And I know Jim called me one day and asked if I would send him a copy of what my father would recite, and, you know, I had to tell him, unfortunately, there was not a copy that--that we had ever found.

PRATHER:What was your father's name?

HARDIN:John Newton Lee. He was John Newton Lee, the second. He was named after his great-grandfather. He never used --or his grandfather--he never used the second because his grandfather was not alive for the most of his for life.

PRATHER:But where do you think he did this? From memory? He didn't have anything written down?

HARDIN:No, no, he did it from memory.

PRATHER:That's fascinating.

HARDIN:He did it from memory. And--And one of his--of course-after we reached high school, we lived on the family farm, and Daddy had always farmed it. But when we were in high school, we had events and town school functions. And Daddy was always our--our taxi driver, and he would spend much of his time waiting on us driving through the cemetery. That was-- that was one of his little, little hobbies. And yes, he-- he was quite interested in family history. And I can remember probably one of my first recollections when-- when my sister, of course, Kentucky history used to be a staple in the curriculum in the seventh grade.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:And I can remember when-- when my sister had Kentucky History--Daddy standing at her bedroom door telling her more than what the book had to offer.

PRATHER:That's amazing. Right.

HARDIN:So it was-- it was always of interest to to him.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:And just sort of stuck with me, I guess.

PRATHER:Yeah. Where was the family farm?

HARDIN:Actually, within a rock's throw from where we are.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:Uh, as a crow flies, it's less than a mile. The--the actual entrance before Highway 11 was rerouted and--and, uh, the new section put in, it was accessed, uh, just about probably a little over half a mile on what is now called Old Highway 11.

PRATHER:Okay, that comes out from Mount Sterling running to Sharpsburg and beyond?

HARDIN:Yes. Yes.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:Between this residence here in North Ridge subdivision and the Somerset church.

PRATHER:Yes. Okay. The Disciples of Christ Somerset Christian Church there.

HARDIN:Yes.

PRATHER:So six generations. So you've been around a long time and you've been around-- your family's been around a long time--

HARDIN:That's right.

PRATHER:--and you've seen a lot of things. It's interesting. You've only-- you only say it's a stone's throw from where you grew up, but, um, the roots are deep here,

HARDIN:They are.

PRATHER:And, and, um, so you've seen a lot. And today we're talking about Court Day. Um, and I'm really interested in some of those early, early memories that you have of when you were a child and your family would go. Tell me a little bit about-- what was Court Day like? Describe it to us.

HARDIN:Well, strangely enough, you know, Court Day hasn't always been a festival, and I'm pretty much a history purist. And when--when we see Court Day advertised as being the oldest festival in--in Kentucky and running for so many years, I always sort of grin because it has not always been a festival, and I'm not real sure when, but I feel like it's certainly been in my lifetime that we recognized it as--as a festival. When--when I first remember Court Day--and now keep in mind our Court Day--was traders coming. Now, as I remember it, it was not a season of court necessarily.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:But traders would--would come from the mountains to Mount Sterling, which was their trade location, the first flat land, and where supplies were more readily available. And they would bring their sorghum, their honey, their axe handles, those things that they needed to trade. They had been working on all--all season, and they needed to trade for supplies to get them through the winter. And my understanding, the reason October happened to be the-- the month that-- that began to grow, was that it was the last month that they could be assured of good weather. And of course, Thanksgiving and Christmas would have interfered with that kind of activity anyway. So October it was. But keep in mind too-- and I started to say this a minute ago--that all of the gathering was on Locust Street. Even though Locust Street had been one of our original streets, it had certainly gone into a state of disrepair, and anything bad that happened in Mount Sterling happened on Locust Street.

PRATHER:Really?

HARDIN:And shoot--there were bars, just every other building, and maybe even-- I was under the impression-- a house or two of ill repute. And that certainly wasn't where a child or a woman, a lady would be found, and certainly not anywhere that a mother and a father would let a young girl go. My first memories, really of--of understanding what Court Day was-- there again, my--my father even before-- we actually-- when I speak of the family farm, I did not move to the family farm until I was, I guess, about 12. We moved when my-- may have been a tad later--my grandmother passed away, and my grandfather needed us to-- needed my parents to help care for him.

PRATHER:And that was your father's father?

HARDIN:That was. Yes. Yes. And we had lived in a little house on Holt Avenue, and he farmed. And, uh, we went about our everyday lives from the little house there. But as we, uh, even before we moved to the farm, uh, Daddy would drive us--and I'm going to say this was probably the early to mid 50s--he would drive us down on Locust Street, probably on Sunday evening. And of course, there was parking on, uh, on Locust Street. It was a-- it was a narrow little street. And if I remember correctly, probably parking just on--I definitely remember on the north side, there were still a few homes. Uh, most of them had been turned into businesses. Uh, we had a stockyards, right--right there on-- on Locust Street.

PRATHER:Where was that on Locust Street?

HARDIN:You know, I was thinking about that last night. We also had a--a--I don't know if it's a re-drier or an actual tobacco warehouse, but I think the stockyards was-- and I may have it confused--but I believe it was in the block where-- between the viaduct and what would be probably--I can't think of the name of the business, but it's to the left now of the Civic Center.

PRATHER:Monarch Mill? Is that the--

HARDIN:No, no, it would have--Monarch Mill was there.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:Uh, but yes, it would have been probably between Monarch Mill and Queen Street on the south side.

PRATHER:Okay. Okay.

HARDIN:Uh, I believe I'm right. You might find someone that's memory's a  little keener there, but as I say, I did very little more than, uh, drive-- Now as I got a little older, uh. I'll share some--

PRATHER:Well, tell me what those Sunday nights would be. So your-- your father would bring you down, and you all would park, and it would be, you know.

HARDIN:We would not park. We would-- we would see the people that had come from the mountains with their wares, parking their cars and sleeping in their cars overnight to get the best parking places for the trade day on Monday. Now, keep in mind, it hasn't always been several days

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:It was--

PRATHER:--one day

HARDIN:It was one day. It was the third Monday. And, at that point, it still was--so the growth had not really expanded like you would--would see today by-- by any stretch. But it did quickly after that.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:And also keep in mind that I did not go, uh, downtown in Court Day. Uh, my mother kept pretty tight rein.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:And that was not the place for a little girl or a lady--

PRATHER:--a woman. So it was mostly a man's atmosphere. It was environment of men.

HARDIN:It was particularly in the beginning. Uh, now you had some people that came from--from afar because they were coming for supplies. But uh, the best I remember from tales as--as we're told me uh, as well. But then during the growth time, of course, you know, things began to change as people saw it as a--a way locally for groups to make money through fundraisers. Uh, school groups, as a matter of fact, probably the very first time that I could recall going to Court Day, I was probably a sophomore in high school.

PRATHER:Really? Yeah. What year would that have been?

HARDIN:Oh my goodness. Probably around 61, 62. Simply my class had a booth. I cannot remember what we sold, but I had volunteered because we had a truck to take something that had to be taken in a truck. There again, uh, preparing my mind for today, I cannot think what that thing was, but my mother was in awe that I would volunteer to work, and that I would volunteer to take the truck. She was so awe that I was going to Locust Street, that she went with me [laughter]

PRATHER:[laughter] for protection?

HARDIN:She went with me and-- and I could remember at that time there was very little traffic control or very little crowd control, and I had not been driving long, and she was so, so on edge that I was going to hit something or somebody. I don't know if she was concerned about the things or the truck because it was-- it was relatively new. But anyway, we made it and-- and I can't remember the experience other than-- and of course I like crowds. It's a good thing I don't--don't, uh

PRATHER:Not skittish at all.

HARDIN:Not into the--the nightlife because neon lights really do a lot for me. But, uh, I can remember the adrenaline flowing and just how much fun I thought it was to be in that big crowd. But on the downside, I also remember that there was a scouting group, and I do not remember the woman's name, but there was a woman that was severely burned in a grease fire. I think they were doing hamburger. I'm not real sure, but nonetheless it was-and I don't know if it was that year or a year or so later, but I think that's probably when the city began to realize that they needed more crowd control.

PRATHER:What is a scouting group?

HARDIN:Uh, Boy Scouts.

PRATHER:Oh, Boy Scouts. Okay.

HARDIN:Uh, one of their sponsors that was there for a fundraiser, and--and, uh, they-- they had trouble getting emergency vehicle into her. And, uh, and also to get the fire out. So we began to see more regulations and more, uh, control with traffic and what was going on. And, of course, uh--

PRATHER:How big would the crowd have been?

HARDIN:Oh my goodness. Nothing like it is now.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, I'm going to say maybe like a a, uh, a Monday now.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:Uh, but then again--

PRATHER:Maybe 25,000-30,000 people.

HARDIN:I think that would be large there. Again, I'm not sure. Liz. Uh, I was a child and numbers and-- I was not-- I did not meander very far from where I was supposed to be.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:Now I do remember-- and I'm-- I'm going back in history a little bit. My high school years were at Montgomery County. So--but through the eighth grade, I went to Mount Sterling.

PRATHER:And that's the city school?

HARDIN:Yes, yes. And we were in session, but we would run down during lunch hour on that Monday.

PRATHER:Wow.

HARDIN:Uh, to--to see all the spectacular sights. One of the things that I remember most interesting is we would go to the stockyards to see the animals.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:And there were always a few of our boy classmates--and I can remember on one occasion, a girl--that would talk to the livestock owners into letting them sit on the animals that were in the pens and--and, you know, that was-- What kind of.

PRATHER:What kind of animals are we talking?

HARDIN:Oh, yeah. There were horses and cows and mules and donkeys and whatever they had to trade.

PRATHER:Yeah

HARDIN:But of course, the--most of us were there without our parent's knowledge. They may have suspected it the next year, but my mother would have been aghast, I know. That was just not what we were supposed to be doing.  It--there was a liquor dispensary along in there somewhere, and I cannot for the life of me-- I was going to call somebody and get the name of it, but, uh, politicians liked it. It had a-- it had a--I guess you'd call it a shed roof. It was flat and slightly, slightly slanted. And the politicians would stand up there.

PRATHER:Really.

HARDIN:And--and have a good stage. Uh, fella by the name of David [Seifer?] uh, owned it. And I don't know if he was politically in tune or just allowed people to-- to use it. But as a matter of fact--and there again, this was probably back in the 50s-- it made Time Magazine really. So there is a newspaper article out there somewhere. Uh, if it's not in the 50s, it would be the very early 60s.

PRATHER:And it features politicians in front of this liquor dispensary?

HARDIN:On top of it.

PRATHER:On top of it.

HARDIN:Yes.

PRATHER:Oh, they'd stand on top of it.

HARDIN:Yes, yes, yes.

PRATHER:Was it local politicians, were they--

HARDIN:Well, no-- they would--I don't remember anything greater than state but--Oh my goodness. Uh, yes. And there could have been, uh, others, but they had a captive audience of a large crowd.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:So nearly every year. And it's also the first place that I saw speeches from soapboxes, usually religious. Uh, very, uh uh, condemning kinds of messages with people that, uh, look like they--they didn't have a dime.

PRATHER:There were actual soapboxes. They would just put them out on the street or--

HARDIN:Well, yes. And most of this was right down around the railroad tracks.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:Now, keep in mind there were not a lot of organized vendors like we see today. The spots were not sold. People just came in and, uh, took a space.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:And did what they chose to do.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:Uh, also--and there again, uh, a need for crowd control--there was an awful lot of--and maybe it was just my perspective, but it appeared there was an awful lot of drunkenness. Mhm. Uh, you know, it was not a real good environment. Uh, fortunately, uh, that has seemingly pretty much changed.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:Even though we have guns and that kind of thing. It--it's--it's relatively a safe environment.

PRATHER:Yes.

HARDIN:You know, I would not be concerned about children going down together with a little bit of age on them, as long as they know how to not get lost.

PRATHER:That's so interesting. That is so interesting. So you have politicians preaching or you have politicians politicking, you have preachers preaching, you have animals--

HARDIN:There's lots and lots of of dogs, hounds, hunting dogs. Uh, now, not to say that there weren't pets, but for the most part, early, uh, What you saw were-- were hunting dogs that people had brought to trade. And I mean, they looked flea bitten. And what is funny now is-- is that they didn't get traded, they might have gotten left behind--

PRATHER:--and just were here.

HARDIN:So yes. And that was my understanding again. Uh, one of the reasons that they chose not to have the--the-- the animals here in Mount Sterling. Yeah, I know there have been an awful lot of-- over time, there's been some criticism that Montgomery County did away with that. But I feel like that's neither here nor there.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Those people in-- in power at the time were doing what they felt best to protect the citizens because you have animals that you do not know whether we're inoculated, right? Uh, you have children free to go up and touch and get bitten and and, uh, you can hardly keep a young child from a-- from an animal.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Many of them walk through the crowd.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, so. And I think, if I'm not mistaken again, they-- they have done some various regulations at times. There were, uh, no dogs even allowed on leashes.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:And I understand that-- that that there are now. You know, but yeah, we have laws in place that are supposed to have them, uh, taken care of, you know, medically, before they--

PRATHER:Uh, what would you-- what would you, uh, buy then? It doesn't sound like this was a buyer's market. It was a trader's market, right? For the most part. But at some point, there were things that people were selling.

HARDIN:Right, right. Uh. Even honey, sorghum. Those are the things that I remember my father bringing in before I went. I don't, uh--probably the first time I went to shop, I was an adult.

PRATHER:Okay.

HARDIN:It was probably the year that Bill and I married. You see, he introduced me to a lot of things, but his.

PRATHER:What year was that?

HARDIN:1965. His best man's wife, uh, Mary Bruce Wilson. And I want to think her mother-in-law and two children stopped and picked me up. And I went to Court Day with them. First time I'd actually gone as a-- as a participant-- short of working at a booth. Uh, I was in awe. Her son had taken an old, uh, iron, uh, a flat iron that you heated to iron to trade in. I don't know how old he was. Maybe ten.

PRATHER:Really?

HARDIN:Uh, and we separated, and he did trade for something, and I can't remember what it was. He had a younger brother. Who--who is-- is, uh, Doctor Ben Wilson, the veterinarian--and in, uh, Owingsville.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, they were together, and I don't know what, uh, Bruce Taylor traded for, but he came back without the iron. So that was-- that was my first experience, and I've enjoyed it, uh, over time, particularly when I was--after they began to bring in the antiques. I would pick out something that I would look for. I remember a couple of years that-- it was real funny, because I have always had a Christmas Club account, and if Court Day is late, my Christmas Club account check would come before Court Day, and I would literally do a lot of my Christmas shopping. That was fun.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, there used to be some, and there may still be--it's been a few years since I've gone down in the heavy of the crowd--there used to be some nice book vendors that had gift books and-- and calendars and that kind of thing that made really nice gifts. And they were generally bargain prices. So I enjoyed that from time to time, but I enjoy the people. My--my--of later years. And I don't want to get off track here, but my--

PRATHER:Please do.

HARDIN:--my daughter's in-laws, uh, all enjoy Court Day so much.

PRATHER:And where are they from?

HARDIN:Well, actually, her father-in-law is David Hall that used to be minister at the Church of God here in Mount Sterling. Uh, he is retired. Of course, he lost his-- his wife and he's remarried. And they live in Florida. Mhm. Uh, and they come most every year. They didn't come this year because of the, uh, hurricane concerns and her sister-in-law, her children and- and a brother-in-law and their overflow usually ends up here, so I enjoy the people and would rather spend my time, uh, preparing little food and--and getting ready for them to come back from their, their journeys. And of course, Nancy, our daughter, hasn't lived in Mount Sterling until this year for many years. So, uh, this was the gathering place.

PRATHER:So that's a tradition that seems to be just kind of all over this town. There is a tradition of townspeople welcoming other people from outside. What--what is that tradition about?

HARDIN:Well, you know, in all reality, Liz, I think if you talk to a wide variety of people, there's a love hate, uh, you know, you're talking in this project, you're talking to people that-- that have a great deal of respect for the history and enjoy the aura of Court Day, if it's not Court Day itself. But there are others that don't like their little town to be--to be, uh uh, crowded, uh, noisy. And with all the traffic. And particularly now that our school calendar, our public school calendar, has fall break during Court Day. Uh, you do have a lot of people that leave on a regular basis. And don't look back and don't come back until it's clean and the traffic's gone.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:So I think those of us that-- that like the tradition, uh, I don't know how-- how that could be described, other than maybe we're just the traditionalists, uh, those that-- that go with the flow and--and you know, there is a bit of, of, uh, reckoning who you are. Do you mind getting your feet dirty and dusty? Uh, do you mind rubbing shoulders with strangers?

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Do you mind the fact that you might be standing right next to somebody that's diseased? [laughter] Do you have to find a Porta-Potty?  You know, so, uh, it's reckoning who we are, you know, what our level of refinement is or what we think it is.

PRATHER:Yes, that's a great way to put it.

HARDIN:You know. Yeah. So, uh, but I'm not embarrassed to say that--that I like the-- the atmosphere.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, when Bill and I were married earlier, we lived on Vista Court, and--and I don't know if it was everywhere, but, of course, regulations come and regulations go, and they change--but people used to come in--of course, now everything is legally open in the public arena on-- on Fridays. It used to be you couldn't open until midnight Friday and-- but there would be a few that would cook for themselves and the few around them that were setting up. And you could walk out our front door and smell onions and green peppers.

PRATHER:Oh, wow.

HARDIN:I mean, and-- and there again, uh, that just got my adrenaline flowing.

PRATHER:Yeah, talk about that. What are the smells and the sounds of Court Day? What's that sensory--what's the air like?

HARDIN:Well. It's probably a much cleaner smell now that we don't have the animals.  But when you had a stockyards--

HARDIN:Oh, yeah.

HARDIN:--right in the middle of the mess. Uh, you know animals don't always smell good. And their biological habits don't smell good. And--and you mix that with some Hinkston Creek and and, uh, green peppers and onions, uh, it was not always a, uh, a glorious fall smell, but, uh, now I think that we've got just food odors. Uh, and you've got the sweets and the sours and--and you've got-- I wonder foods from how many different countries. One of my--one of my fond memories, of course Bill, my late husband, worked with the radio station, and they did--they did advertising, and they walked through the crowd. And one of the things, and I'm getting off again. But one of the--one of the things they did was stop to see what people had in their bags.

PRATHER:Oh, how interesting.

HARDIN:Yes, it was, it was. And I would--I would listen particularly for that. And--but they came across--and this has not been too many years ago because it has been after the advent of the internet. And I--I'm going to say I was probably retired from teaching. So it's probably been after 2002. And Bill called me, and he said there was a man that had a booth that was set up for deep-fried Twinkies, but he had forgotten to bring his recipe. Could I help? Well, I thought, that's a man for you. He thought I had the solution to everything. So anyway, I got on the internet and found a recipe for deep-fried Twinkies.

PRATHER:Oh, wow.

HARDIN:And--And I--it seems like I had to take it down there, so I don't know if--if maybe what service I had for my phone didn't allow me to text that to Bill or what, but maybe I wrote it down. But anyway, we got the man his--his deep-fried Twinkies and recipe, and he carried on with business. So of course, he'd already paid for his his booth.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, but, you know, there-- there have been various-- various volunteers working with Court Day. And of course, you've got private enterprise very definitely involved in a big way. Uh, I know we had an apartment building just, uh, very near the corner of South Queen and East Locust, and many of the buildings in that area had been bought by a single, uh, enterprise just for Court Day. Some of them were bought and torn down. I know, uh, uh, I'm sure you're familiar with the Lundergan name. Sure. And Tommy Lundergan had bought several buildings in there and used them to store his, uh, emergency management equipment that he had. And then, of course, as he tore them down, he had, uh, spots for his own people to--to cook and sell, which--which was a, a boon, you know, a definite boon. But we had, uh, you know, we've had times that people have nearly gotten a little too greedy over what they could get for a space. And in any business, there's a point of no return.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:And-- and if a business cannot make a return, then they'll go elsewhere. And we've lost a few. But I think now we're probably back to a more reasonable fee. And, uh, or times have caught up with it one.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:Uh, I haven't heard of that kind of complaining in a long time, but we had a sidewalk in front of that building, and I can't remember all of the logistics that went into it, but Bill was renting it, and he got a little for it. And of course, he had become acquainted with Tommy Lundergan. And so Tommy said, well, he'd just rent it. And I think one year maybe he needed it. And then after that-- and he rented it, and for what we don't know. But we got from Tommy as much out of it as we had been getting ourselves. So he was able to command more. But it was right there in that very critical intersection--

PRATHER:In the thick of it.

HARDIN:Right in the thick of it. And, uh, so and then, of course, the, uh, the Backs bought a good bit of property that, that they could use also.

HARDIN:And who were the Backs?

HARDIN:Well, let's see, uh, his first name was Ransdall, and I am having trouble with her first name, but she was an Everman, and she had, uh, uh, owned a bar there and, uh, just already had that property and added--added to it around there. And--and until they had a great amount.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Which was very, very lucrative at Court Day time. But yes, it's been it's been very interesting, uh, watching it--watching it grow. And I know the-- town and county leaders have been challenged--

PRATHER:Sure.

HARDIN:--to keep it where it is safe and, uh, not terribly costly. But when you think about the-- the planning that goes into it and the cleanup.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, it's bound to be a real challenge, and to have that many strangers.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:Uh, coming into town. But I really think they've done a fantastic job. And, uh, of course, that was the cause or reason, uh, for the numbering of the stoplights, the intersections. And, uh, that's a fantastic way to direct anybody any time of the year.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:You know, so I think the-- the powers that be have-- have done a wonderful job. Uh, it's just amazing to see that it has continued to continue. Wherever you go, uh, you'll run into someone that's been Mount Sterling Court Day.

PRATHER:That's right. Tell me that's a great segue into this last question or one of the last questions I want you to answer. Why has it endured so long?

HARDIN:My goodness.

PRATHER:That's a big question.

HARDIN:It is a big question. And-- and I'm going to say that it could well have fizzled if it had left to be without aid from some of our tourism interests. Uh, we have made it. We've made parking as convenient as possible. Uh, we've made stations for, uh, travel trailers. Uh, yes, we have regulations that some of the vendors don't like, but it is generally for the benefit of all. Uh, but I do think that--that, uh, Tracy Pearce and I'm not sure that we had a tourism director before her. If so, I don't remember. But, uh, she's done a fantastic, fantastic job of--and I'm sure there are others, uh, that have as well, but-- fantastic job of--of putting the ads where they need to be and, uh, getting it on the state level.

PRATHER:I think, you know, at the beginning, the draw was survival, right? I mean, like, what you're describing is people were coming here to get what they needed to make through the winter.

HARDIN:Well, and--

PRATHER:--that's really it-- at some point in our history, it changed.

HARDIN:And the court--

PRATHER:And the court

HARDIN:--it was--that's why they were here to trade is because if they needed to come to court, that was the-- the last good travel time--

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:--that they could depend on.

PRATHER:Right.

HARDIN:Because you keep in mind what our roads were like back then.  And still now, you know, even if we go [Highway] 460.  And, and you go up the Frenchburg Hill. You know it. I wouldn't want to go if it were ice-covered. Just simply because it's such a hill and it's-- it's a fantastic road.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:You know, but--and then you think about how those roads were back in the early 1900s.

PRATHER:Sure. Sure. What about the future of Court Day? What do you think will happen? Will it continue on as it has? Or how will it change?  Any prophecy you have?

HARDIN:Well, I don't have any future in mind for Court Day, but, uh, change is inevitable. Uh, we'll have change if it's nothing more than because of who is in charge. Uh. New blood. It's always good. Uh, change for the sake of change. I don't think it's anything we need to confront, but, uh, I am now old. And change isn't always easy. And I have to sit back and think that through. Probably now, about once a day.

PRATHER:Yeah.

HARDIN:Uh, you know, because younger people think differently. And, uh, I have learned, as hard as it is-- that, uh, I am not always right. [laughter]

PRATHER:Yeah. [laughter]

HARDIN:And there can be more than one way to skin a cat. And yes, they may have a much better idea than I do, but I see no reason for it not to continue. Uh, if the townsfolk want it to continue. Now, if someone or if you have a city council or a-- a tourism board that decides it's not what Mount Sterling needs. I think it would be terribly disappointing to a lot of people, but, uh, I don't see that truly happening. Not to say that it couldn't.

PRATHER:This has been a delight. Thank you so much for sitting down with me. Are there any other memories that you have or stories that you'd like to share that you think would be informative to anybody interested in Court Day?

HARDIN:Oh my goodness. Not really. I think one thing, and as I-- as I have said, I am very, very interested in our history simply because I've-- I've lived a good deal of it. Uh, but I do think Court Day is an important part of our history because of our geographical location, uh, because of what took place in--in the courts. Uh, but as a festival, I'm just delighted that, uh, Mount Sterling, Montgomery County, have been able to entertain so many people, uh, over the years.

PRATHER:Yeah. That's a good place to stop.