Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History, University of Kentucky LibrariesEnvironment and Heritage Along the Cumberland River Oral History ProjectInterview with Charles Mitchell, May 21, 20242024oh0203_ehcr0004_mitchellLO:  All right, um, my name is Edward Lo. I'm a Lyman T. Johnson postdoctoral fellow, um, at the University of Kentucky Appalachian Center and Appalachian Studies Program. Um, I'm here today in the, um, Barbourville Tourism Building. It is

AM on May 21st, 2024. And we're here to talk about the Environment and Heritage along the Cumberland River Oral

History Project, which is centered around the Daniel Boone Festival. Uh, welcome. It's a pleasure to have you. Could you tell me a little bit about yourself?MITCHELL:  My name is Charles Reed Mitchell, born July 5, 1942. Um, I am with the Knox Historical Museum, which is a local history museum in this town, uh, which--(clears throat)--was formed from the

previous Knox Historical Society, uh, which began primarily as a genealogy organization, uh, with some interest in history, but predominantly genealogy. Eventually, when most of the members, uh, got as far as they wanted to get with genealogy, the organization sort of petered out. And at a later date,

another person, uh, well, another committee, uh, decided to recreate, uh, the organization but make it a physical museum and to place the emphasis on history. Uh, I was among the founding members. I really wasn't all that active for the first founding year or so, but,

uh, by 1990, I was in charge of the oral history program and, uh, other media. Eventually, I became editor of the Knox, Knox Countian, which is, was initially a newsletter and later became more of a history journal. So that's that background.

(clears throat) Before that, uh, my family ran the theaters, the movie theaters in this town. And I was manager of, uh, of two of them, the Mitchell Theater, the Knox Drive-In Theater. I was projectionist at the age of nine at, uh, the Magic Theater,

which is now just, uh, the interior is the Board of Education Annex. Mitchell Theater burned in 1984, and the Knox Drive-In has been closed since, uh, um, 1980. (clears throat) I, uh, after that, taught

English, uh, literature, and film and media at Union College for a few years. Previously, I had taught there a couple of years full-time. So that's the background.LO:  Now, uh, you've generously put together this uh, 75th, um, anniversary full compilation of the, of the history of the

Daniel Boone Festival. Um, but for the recording, could you tell us a little bit more background about the, about the Daniel Boone Festival for our listeners?MITCHELL:  Okay. Uh, the book is, uh, begins with the founding of the festival and then goes, uh, decade by decade to, up to the 75th [EDITOR’S NOTE: 75th year of the festival].

But you're more interested in the founding. Union College, uh, is, is really most responsible for the creation of the festival, and one man is the person that came up with the concept. His name was Dr. Karl Bleyl, B-L-E-Y-L. Uh, he was a native of Texas,

hired at Union College as a professor of biology. Uh, but he had a strong interest in history, and, uh, particularly frontier history of his native Texas. And he saw, uh, connections with, uh, not only the movement of, uh, people from Kentucky to Texas,

but the, uh, idea of Kentucky being, in essence, the first frontier after the thirteen colonies. Uh, he also saw that, uh, Appalachia was pretty much denigrated nationally. It was the one legitimate subculture that America seemed to agree that they could look down on

and belittle. Uh, after World War II, uh, that was pretty much the situation. Blame for that generally falls on, uh, the state's reputation for feuding and, of course, the assassination of Governor Goebel in 1900, or the death of him. He was killed a few days before 1900

, but, uh, it took a (??) little while dying--(clears throat). So, uh, Bleyl had it in mind to do something to remind particularly the children of, the, Kentucky's historic heritage and to instill in them a degree of pride in their origins

and in their past, particularly since, uh, at least in this section of the country, uh, the average family pretty much goes back three, four, maybe even five generations of people living in the same area. Uh, that was ultimately the purpose of the festival. But the impetus

for the festival was Karl Bleyl's visit to Cherokee, North Carolina, where, uh, he saw the situation that the Indians on the reservation were having difficulties because of, uh, some organization had limited their use of natural resources,

specifically cane, which they made, um, chairs, baskets, and rugs, and other artifacts to sell. And that was one of their primary economic sources, but, uh, one of my sources said that some organization was charging them three cents a cane for their cane. I don’t,

I can't verify that, but that was in a published report that, uh, appeared in a local paper. So Bleyl meets with the, uh, head of the reservation, a man named Carl, uh, Chief Carl Standingdeer, and tells him, uh,

"I think we've got a solution to your problem. You come to Barbourville, and you can have all the cane you can carry back. It's a weed that grows on the Cumberland River. Uh, it's more of a nuisance than, than a benefit. So this would solve your problem, and at the same time, we can have a party, a celebration, a dinner,

uh, and, uh, this will be good for, for everyone. We can use this for education for our people." He agreed, and, uh, Union College-- after, after this, Karl Bleyl, uh, talked to the senior class of, uh, 1948. Oh no it wasn’t-- well, I’ll

have to check--(laughs). But he, he talked to a, a class, uh, to see if they would agree to sponsor this event and take part in it. So, um, at that time, Union College was predominantly southeastern Kentucky-based. Most of your students were, uh, Knox Countians

, Clay County, Whitley, Laurel, the, the surrounding counties, a few in Tennessee. Not very many from outer, outer states, as it became later. Uh, and, since most of them had family that, that had these traditions in the past anyway, uh, it was a, a good thing to be able to,

uh, draw on these sources. And one of the amazing things that they found once they started this was the incredible hoard of, of antique objects from, from the time of Daniel Boone that was, were still in Knox County, uh, houses. And so, of course, uh, they took advantage

of that, and we, we put them in, in windows in the various stores--(clears throat). Um, sure Bill has, Bill Frazier has told you about how in, in later years, uh, the arrangements changed, and, uh, the cane became more symbolic than, than actually

needed. But it must be emphasized that in those first few years, this was a serious contribution, and it was meaningful. And we know that because they wanted more, and they came back and got other loads for a couple of years, at least a few years. And the next year after the first, uh, Daniel Boone

Festival, uh, a picture was published in the newspaper of, of a Cherokee student holding a basket made from Knox County cane, and that student was on a scholarship at Union College. Okay, let's see what else.

Um--(clears throat)--I don't really have an outline of this other than what I said.LO:  Oh (??). Um, I was wondering if you could, um, tell us a little bit more about the role of, of the Cherokee people in this festival then and, and now. Like, uh, then it seemed like it was a really integral part to haul as much, uh, river cane, um,

to, to use for their, their, their crafts and for their, um, day-to-day needs, and, and now it's become more symbolic. So how has that role also evolved, and in the people as well?MITCHELL:  Well, uh. At first, uh, well, in general, Indians, the Cherokee Indians from the reservation, uh,

really enjoyed this. I, I have no records of their actually being paid. They probably were reimbursed for their traveling expenses in the first couple of years. I don't know, uh, if that's the case, but at any rate, now they are paid. And Bill, I'm sure, has address, addressed that. But it was

a very close relationship, and Dr. Karl Bleyl actually wrote the Cane Treaty himself, and it was, uh, immediately described as the first treaty with the Indians, which was solely in the Indians' interest. And that this was sort of a pledge of friend, friendship between the people of

Knox County in southeastern Kentucky and the Cherokee Nation [EDITOR’S NOTE: Mitchell misspoke here. He is actually referring to the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians. The Cherokee Nation is a separate tribe]. Um, the next year, the treaty was called the Watauga Treaty, which, uh, was said to be a Cane Treaty in Cherokee. I don't think that is accurate, but that--(laughs)--may be. Uh, the next year, 1949,

the, uh, Cherokee actually invited, uh, Barbourville citizens to come to Cherokee [EDITOR’S NOTE: Cherokee, North Carolina] for the first year's performances of "Unto These Hills," which is the, uh, outdoor play that they've been doing ever since they had one last year. They even called it Barbourville Day, uh,

and invited, uh, people to come in costume with the, with the outfits that we wore during that time, uh, on stage. They were a little bit disappointed in the turnout, but it was about twenty people, which I think is a fair representative. Uh, I should also point out in terms of the Daniel Boone Festival, uh,

that this is the time that television, particularly the Disney Channel, had come up with Davy Crockett. And, the success of that miniseries spurred a longer series called Daniel Boone, both starring Fess Parker. And, uh, the clichés of dress at that time with the coonskins and cap,

which Boone vehemently denied, but Davy Crockett did wear one. And, word has it that he wore it mostly to annoy congressmen when he, uh, was, uh, a representative of his state. But, uh, that-- so everybody started wearing coonskin caps and

the students were advised to let their beards grow and, uh, wear, the girls wear, uh, old-style bonnets and, and long dresses. Everybody was supposed to do something to represent the older times. And so, the first festivals,

uh, were held, um, primarily with nothing but, uh, pioneer items. Yes, we did have a, a band, uh, but the main, the main event, on, again it was on Union College campus, was a historic pageant, which culminated in the signing of the

Cane Treaty, the first one.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative].MITCHELL:  Uh, the first Daniel Boone Festival was in May of 1948. It was a terrible decision. Uh, you had all of the graduation ceremonies going on about the same time, high school, college, uh, a May festival, the Mount Laurel festival has, had just gone on.

So, uh, it was frankly amazing that they had as big a crowd as they did for the first one. But they decided, uh, This is silly. Let's move it to a fall harvest festival instead. And, so they chose October. Initially the end of October, but we moved closer to, uh, the beginning of October,

specifically the first full week that includes a Sunday. So that's the, uh, scheduling, um.LO:  Was, uh, the fall date also a better period of time for the harvesting of the river cane and the location where they, they were chosen to harvest the river cane?MITCHELL:  I doubt that was a consideration. I doubt that was a consideration.

Cane is, uh, generally harvested, uh, when it's full grown and dry. It would be better working material that way than, uh, than sprouts or something like that. So, uh, and, uh, again, I doubt that that was a strong consideration

. But they had, uh, the pageant for a number of years. Karl Bleyl wrote the first one. Marjorie O'Donnell wrote the second one. We do have a copy of that in the museum archives. If I didn't mention it before, uh, the Knox Historical Museum is the archives for the Daniel Boone Festival and

I'm the person that runs it.LO:  And that's how you came to be involved with writing this, this book in the beginning? To be involved with it?MITCHEL:  Pretty much, yes. I pretty much, um-- another reason that I got involved was, uh--(clears throat)--our family not only ran the, uh, movie houses, but at one time we produced a local newsreel

, uh, just called The Mitchell News. And, uh, these were 16 millimeter films, uh, shot by, uh, initially the first photographer was Raleigh Dixon, a projectionist at the Mitchell Theater. Uh, later, my father, Paul Thomas Mitchell, took over the camera. But,

uh, they, they shot films, uh, that were at least locally done from about 1937 to, uh, the early forties. The earliest films, of course, were before they actually started showing them publicly,

but they were edited in, uh, to later shows. So anything that was of, uh, public interest got photographed during that time. Almost all parades, lots and lots of ball games, unfortunately. And, uh, some of the most popular things were just people on the street, uh, usually in

front of the Mitchell Theater going to the post office where the Board of Education is now housed. But, uh, that was one thing, uh, my father still had those films, and they had them in my home. Occasionally he’d, he'd drag one out and I'd watch it with him. And so, uh, that was the one thing that I could offer that would be

unique, uh, for the museum and, and our programs. So that, uh, first year, we did schedule a Mitchell Local News program in the municipal building upstairs next door to where the museum was. This is-- we opened the museum in 1988 during that festival year, uh,

during the Daniel Festival, Boone Festival. So, this was one of the programs, along with a number of state-produced programs that we had. Daniel Clink, Clinkenbeard and, uh, let's see, who else did we have that year? Well, at any rate, that’s was one of the programs. It proved to be a big hit with the public.

We had to run it three times, and the next year we, we moved to Union College with that program and kept it up until the film began to show signs of wear. And I called it off, uh, I think the last year was around 2007 or so.LO:  And--MITCHELL:

But, that was one of the programs we did at, at the festival.LO:  And, how would you say that the festival shaped who you are and, uh, as a Knox Countian?MITCHELL:  Well, uh, personally, you know, the situation was different than the average person. For us,

uh, in the theater business, uh, Daniel Boone Festival was competition. Uh, we, we played along with it, and this is the case with a lot of the businessmen on the Court Square, particularly, uh, those who had, uh, um, businesses that, uh, that would be blocked by events

during the festival week. And, uh, for many years, this was a serious gripe with a lot of the businessmen. Uh, my father pretty much played along with it. He, uh-- The Magic Theater, which still, the marquee is, is very viewable on the square [EDITOR’S NOTE: in Barbourville’s town square], the marquee had, uh, letters that, of course, advertised the films.

So, uh, they would generally change that to "Welcome to Barbourville" or something along that line, certainly. They also did that during the Dr. Thomas Walker bicentennial of 1950. Uh, and generally, they'd try to play something like, uh, "Return of Daniel Boone" or one of the

half-dozen feature films that had been produced prior to that, uh, to the first festival. Uh, but, and I’m, I'm sure I saw the first festival. I would have been, yeah let's see, six years old. But, uh, don't really

recall much of it. Most of my early memories were sort of negative, because people would get on our buildings to see the parade. Well, part of my job was, as a teenager, keeping people off the roof--(Lo laughs). So I didn’t have to, I didn't really see the early parades. I was in the hallway trying to keep people from climbing on top of the roof and

tearing things up, trying to get a good view. Uh, eventually, it was just, for me, just like any other, uh, festival, once, uh, once that situation—I, I don't know why, but it, it sort of dried up, the people getting on the roof. But, uh,

my connection with the, the festival was through the museum and the fact that we had shot so many of the Daniel Boone Festivals on film, including the first one. Uh, so that was how I could contribute to the situation.LO: Mm-hmm [affirmative]. What--MITCHELL:  And, uh, after,

uh, we got organized and the museum's, uh, oral history program be, uh, became very active, um. Turner publishers came to town from Paducah, Kentucky, uh, promoting the idea of producing a local history book. Uh,

Sherman Oxendine was gung-ho for this, and so were the older members of the committee. I just sank, because I knew how much work this would be. And it more or less, uh, depleted our oral history program. We just couldn't do both at the same time. And, eventually, uh, the Oral History Commission, uh, asked for the recording equipment back that we had had on

the equipment grant. But uh, that’s uh, we did produce the book. I ended up being primary editor, and we decided to base the book on Sherman Oxendine's, uh, University of Kentucky

master's thesis, which was a history of Barbourville written in 1954. Uh, we could have chosen Sol Warren's, uh, History of Knox County, which the Daniel Boone Festival had published in 1976. But, uh, it did not cover, uh, the major events

of the county's history as well as Sherman's, uh, Barbourville-focused book. So I just chose, or rather asked, uh, the committee to decide what to do about that. We knew we didn't have time to write one from scratch. And so, uh, we ended up expanding his dissertation by

one-third at least, perhaps almost half again. Uh, Ron Rosenstiel wrote the first two chapters on Native American history and the, and the, and the frontier era. And, uh, I picked up from there. But Sherman Oxendine, was,

uh, his book was the primary source of that. And, uh, and it's been a fairly successful project, but, uh, very, very exhausting.LO:  (laughs) As, as all good things are, I think. Um, what does the festival mean to the community in your own words?MITCHELL:

It's the time for, at least as planned, the time for people to think about their heritage, their traditions. As I said earlier, it's, uh, primarily to, uh, evoke in the, in the young a sense of pride and, and knowledge of, uh, of their ancestry and

the sacrifices and difficulties and the encounters with the Native Americans, uh, both positive and negative. And, that has been the goal. It's not always successful. Uh, we had a meeting last, last week where-- we at the museum

have a, a place together and talk about, uh, getting a new place and any other problems that are going on and the subject matter of the next magazine. And, uh, President, uh, Steve Valentine suggested that we set up, uh, a group of visitors

from our committee dressed in sort of the Daniel Boone costumes as such to visit the schools. And, that uh, they could talk about not only the festival, but the history behind it and, uh, and, and Kentucky history in general.

And, one of the members was complaining and said, "The kids in Knox County don't even know who Daniel Boone was." And, if you want to talk about the community at large, uh, Daniel Boone Festival Week is a week out of school. Uh, you got the festivals. You got the rides, the food. It's an

opportunity for churches and other groups to make, uh, some, some money to fund their projects. The Junior Women's Study Club, uh, like all festivals, it seems, has, uh, invest in contests, beauty contests and, that you end up having, uh, the person who draws the most votes, and the votes are money.

Not too far away from today's elections, I guess.LO: Mhm.MITCHELL:  Uh, but, uh, that is one of the things they do to, to raise money. And, all, all, of that is used to fund projects within the county for, uh, for the benefit of the people. So, it’s, it's all good in that sense.LO:  Yeah, while, while we're on the topic of these different

beauty pageants and, and different elements, I, I've seen that there's been an evolution of changes in, in the different elements of the festival. And, I was wondering what you thought is the most important part of the festival, right? Is it the, given the, the feast and other things that have since been phased out, the, the, um, I think there was a bow and arrow competition in earlier years. Yeah, tell us a little bit more about those different elements, what's the most important part?MITCHELL:  Ok, uh.

Of course, the feast is the central element, uh, that used to be the pageant. And the feast, uh, is also the time when, uh, the Native Americans-- and I say that instead of Cherokee, because we, I'm sure Bill has explained that, uh, it's certainly expanded beyond

simply the Cherokee Nation. You've got Shawnee and, and other tribes represented. But at that time, they have, uh, a performance. They do the dances. Of course, this is also, uh, featured on the court square during, during the latter part of festival week. But this is the main performance. And, after that, they have what they call a

friendship dance, which invites the people of the community to join hands with the Native American dancers and dance in a circle. At that time, of course, the Cane Treaty is always signed and the exchange of cane, even though symbolic, it's still done. And, our, and, somebody is, is, on our committee is

always assigned to go out there and hack something off the Cumberland River for, for these, uh, events. That's the single most important event. In my opinion, the second most important event, uh, would be the long rifle shoot, which began in 1949, the second year. This, uh,

invited, uh, people who had, uh, either, uh, historic weapons, muskets, firearms of, of the frontier period to, um, demonstrate, be similar to the Native American bow and arrow programs. And, in the earliest years, those two events took place on the same soil.

Uh, not the first two years, but, uh, after that. And, uh, this evolved, uh, into a situation that became a statewide rivalry between, uh, Pennsylvania and Kentucky. The, the governors were having a little quarrel.

Each of them had, uh, organizations that, uh, involved musket firing and primitive weapons. And, of course, we called it the Kentucky rifle, and Pennsylvania say it’s Pennsylvania rifle. Of course, the earliest ones that were used in this area were made in Pennsylvania. So they decided they would have,

uh, representative teams for the whole state of Pennsylvania and the whole state of Kentucky. And, I don't, uh, know exactly how they arranged this, but in the, uh, 1970s, they arranged to have the events—no, it's '60s, I'm sorry, you can check the dates--(laughs)--in the book. Uh, they arranged to

have the contest. The first one would be, uh, near Boone's birthplace in Reading, Pennsylvania, and the second one would be in Barbourville on, for the Daniel Boone Festival. And this went on for several years and was a nationally, uh, known event and heavily promoted. Um--[chair scraping the floor]

Bert, Bert Combs came, um, to the first shoot and got a bullseye, so, uh, that was that. Do you want to pause for a moment?LO:  (laughs) I can pause for a moment here.[Pause in recording.]LO:  All right, we're back from our, uh, pause. I was wondering, uh, you know, what are some

stories about the Daniel Boone Festival that you'd like to share and that you'd like to be remembered?MITCHELL:  Yeah, well the, uh, I'll finish up with the long rifle shoot. This, uh, long rifle shoot between the teams of Pennsylvania and Kentucky, uh, did give the festival wide exposure and, uh, and, uh

publicity. However, it sort of, uh, put aside the local shooters, the local gun collectors, uh. And, eventually, the, uh, the Pennsylvania-Kentucky, uh, Rifle lasted two years, and then the

Pennsylvanias lost the, the matches and conceded that it would be called the Kentucky Rifle. After this, the, uh, Kentuckians got Tennessee involved. The Tennessee Frontier Rifle Clubs came to Barbourville for the Daniel Boone Festival. And then our group, or the

Kentucky group, would go to some place in Tennessee. Then this eventually expanded, Indiana wanted to get in the act, and finally Ohio. Uh, and by this time, it was becoming a little bit stale and just pro forma, so it began to slow down, uh.

With that, of course, the local people like Dr. Harold Bushey, who was a collector of guns, uh, got involved and, and kept it going for a while. Uh, but for, for a time, it looked like it, the event would simply die out. Uh, it's been under various,

uh, uh, project heads over the years, but, uh, and recent, most recently, it is, it is beginning to become more difficult to find people that, uh, have the skills and the interest in those rifles. And it's a fairly, uh, small group, and most of them from out of Knox County

right now. But we, we, I think it's important that we keep this going. The number one thing that we must continue having are the Native American visitors. The Indians are the main part of the public show. Uh, yes, we have, uh, long rifle men. Those, those people who participate in that often

walk in the parade and fire their musket blanks, uh, during the parade. Uh, but the Native American presence, I think, is the core of what was originally established. Uh, and, Steve Valentine and, uh, Merrell Bargo are trying to, through this education program I

mentioned, of going to the schools in historic costumes and addressing historic questions, trying to bring back that first primal reason, education of, of the children, back into the picture. But of course, we've got in, in the years afterwards, car shows, beauty pageants, carnival,

uh, all of the things that you associate with, uh, a civic festival, particularly a harvest/fall festival. And it's very important the, to keep the focus on the main thing, the initial purpose: education of, of the young, uh, celebration of the, of the community's heritage,

and, and the Native American connection. Those three things are primal. Everything else is dressing, including the parade, in my opinion. I, although that, if you ask nine out of ten people, the parade would be number one, or maybe number two after the carnival--(both laugh).LO: It's, it’s certainly the, the most, the—it, it captures

a lot. It takes up a lot of, uh— it's a huge spectacle, right? So certainly the parade--(laughs)--captures that.MITCHELL:  So we, we do our best, at least we old guys… and gals, uh, to try to keep this from becoming just like any other generic fall festival.LO:  What do you hope for the, uh, for the Native American involvement to be like in

the future? Do you hope that it continues to, to be in this, this format with the feast and then the, the, um, activity, uh, the performance in the, in the court, um, square? Or, or do you hope that it evolves, it kind of changes, with, um, with the times?MITCHELL:  I, um, don't really know how to improve on what we've got. Now, uh,

in years past, uh, we have had, and in recent years as well, um, the Cherokee, uh, actually go to the schools in, in some cases and, and talk about, uh, their history and also demonstrate certain skills and so on, uh, for, uh, the convocations and things of that sort. That, uh, was a good thing. But frankly, um, I have no idea of how to, to improve that, unless they wanted to revive the pageant. And that would require, uh, more

cooperation from Union College, I should say that after Karl Bleyl left, he retired due to ill health, he would continue to come back from time to time to various festivals. His last one was in 1972. But, uh, after he left, it depended upon, uh, the nature of the leadership of the college,

uh, whether, whether they participated a lot or not. In recent years, it's not been terribly good.LO:  I'd like to, uh, switch topics a little bit. And I was wondering if you could tell me about how the river itself has shaped your life, living along, you know, with the Cumberland River being such a prominent, uh, prominent part of the geography of the county. How has that affected you?MITCHELL:  Well,

I live right across the street from the big bend in the Cumberland River, which is, uh, sweeps around right where the museum

used to be and then on to the river bridge. So it's affected, uh, me quite a bit, um. I'm sure you're aware of the flooding problems that we have, and that's an annual deal. Used to be almost every year we would be flooded, uh, to some degree. Uh, where I live, it really didn't affect, well, me directly until the, the Great Flood of 1946, which was the highest flood to that date. And that flood actually got into my house at

237 South Main Street. And one of my earliest memories is of, I would have been two or three, three, it’s (??) my birthday in July, of that January flood, being, uh, banished upstairs, it's a two-story house, and coming downstairs and

patting my little feet in the water on the rug in, in the hallway and having my butt busted and sent back upstairs. But that's one of my earliest memories of the floods. Uh, we had one more flood that I can remember that got into the house. That would be the Flood of

1957, when the flood wall had just been completed, and, uh, almost completed, but they had a section there, uh, around School Street that had not been completed enough and the waters topped that and came into town. And I remember, uh, looking down into the basement, turning the

light on, and seeing a light bulb burn under the water--(Lo laughs). It's a weird feeling. Of course, immediately cut it off. But, uh, the flooding has been a problem. I, I also wrote a history of the flooding in, in Barbourville and a history of the building of the flood wall, which I'm going to republish. This was written

thirty years ago. I republish in the next issue of the magazine, uh, which will accompany another nice essay by a fellow named D.J. Swarmer (??) on the Flood of 1977, which is the largest flood we have ever had. Uh, it--[car drives by]

actually topped the wall. The, uh, the river gauge was, uh, river gauge for flooding in Barbourville is twenty-seven feet. The, uh, seventy, the 1946 flood was, I believe, uh, 40.4, maybe a little higher.

This one was— uh, they had, had figured that at 45.5, it goes over the wall. That’s the river gauge, those, those numbers. This one, the '77 flood, the reading was 45.91. What saved us was, uh,

we had sandbags in the armory, and one person, Bill Nell, remembered them, where they were, organized the National Guard, and, and local townspeople, uh, to sandbag the wall. The town was evacuated before this, obviously. Uh, six months before this

great flood, the mayor, um, Jack Ketchum, and his, um, board had come up with an evacuation plan for Barbourville and, and sent that out in July of '76. So we were very well prepared, and the evacuation went very well.

But it's fortunate that a number of us did stay and man the walls. Uh, since then, of course, we petitioned and they elevated the flood wall by ten feet. That means that the, the next flood that reaches 55.5 will go over that. And seeing what happened in

Knott County in 2022, it was?LO: Yes.MITCHELL:  Uh, where they had sixteen to eighteen inches of rain in a day and a half. There's no way that we could face a catastrophe like that. So yes, I lived near the river. I played in the

river as a child. I, river rat, I guess. I, I loved to roam the shores of the river, but it's also very dangerous.LO:  Yes, yes, this is certainly a long history of--(clears throat)--floods in the, in the region. And, has the location for the collection and the, and the

growth of River Cane along the Cumberland River changed in terms of in the, where different years and, uh, where the cane has been collected in different years?MITCHELL:  I have no idea. That's something that I think is entirely all in the province of the, of the Indian Community. You know Frazier can answer that (??) completely,

because I have never actually gone and, and chopped, chopped cane or. I did run into it when I was roaming the river banks, but, uh, it, on my side of the river, it wasn't all that heavy. It was, uh, further on down, downriver.LO:  Mm-hmm [affirmative].

Um, so you, you’ve already touched on this a little bit, but how do you see the future of the Daniel Boone Festival in portraying Knox County and its unique history, not, not only to Knox Countians, but also to, to people visiting from outside of Knox County?MITCHELL:  Well, um, as I, I said

in the history of the festival, it's been going on for seventy-five years, and we'd like to think for another seventy-five years we'll be active. Uh, uh, tt's difficult, we, uh, we want to try to keep our traditions going. Uh, it’s, and I do have to say

the Daniel Boone Festival is one of the few groups that I've been associated with that has been successful in recruiting young people. Now, by young people, I'm talking late thirties and forties. Uh, and of course, that's, that’s always a problem, because you're in your key income-making years. But, uh,

the committee we have has been very generous with their time. And, uh, we even have a vice president who's, uh, thirty, thirty-five or so. Uh, so I'm, I’m hopeful that since they are interested in this, uh, this project, that it won't be another one of these organizations that

dies when, when its founders die.LO:  Do you have anything else you'd like to add to the interview?MITCHELL:  No, um. There’s, there's lots more that I could say, but you'd have to ask me specific questions--(both laugh).LO:  Well, thank you so much for, for the, for your time today. It's been a pleasure.MITCHELL:  Okay.

[End of interview.]