DORENKEMPER:Ok, so I'm recording now. Um, I'm Lara Dorenkemper and I grew up in

this area. So I'm a volunteer, um, just to help out recording this information

and transcribing this. So, if you want to go ahead and introduce yourselves and

tell me a little bit about yourselves--thank you.

C. BUQUO:I'm Carol Buquo and my husband Jim Buquo, and we both have a history

here in Over-the-Rhine. And, um, my name before I was a Buquo was Callahan, but

the Callahan's don't have history in Over-the-Rhine. But the other side of my

family, the Nadler part of my family, has history here in the Over-the-Rhine.

And, Jim, go ahead.

J. BUQUO:Okay. I have, uh--

C. BUQUO:--and you are?

J. BUQUO:Jim Buquo, James Buquo and I have quite a bit of history here. The old

St. John’s Church, which is now the Transept Bar at Twelve and Elm,--my

great-great-grandparents, great-grandparents and grandparents were all married

in that church.

My great great-grandmother is Bertha Bertram who made the first uniforms for

Cincinnati's baseball team in 1869. She invented the modern baseball uniform and

the Cincinnati Red Stockings and she made the uniforms for ten years. She is in

the Reds Hall of Fame and, and mentioned in Phil Nuxhall's book. And she grew up

and they lived in this area. Her shop was just right--

C. BUQUO:--We're not exactly sure--

J. BUQUO:--we're not exactly sure

C. BUQUO:--we’re not exactly sure

J. BUQUO:--but its somewhere near Findlay Market

C. BUQUO:It's listed as being at, um, uh, Elm and Elder. Elm near Elder. So—

J. BUQUO:--right up here.

C. BUQUO:We suspect that is somewhere around in, in this area. And, uh, she

lived, when I looked at the city directories, she lived, um, in and around Elm

Street. Okay, near the Transept Church or the St. John’s Unitarian Church and,

uh, near Music Hall somewhere in that area between

there and, and, and Findlay Market. And, um, she immigrated here from, uh, what

was called Bohemia. Which is now the Czech Republic. And, um, so somewhere

around the Prague area, city of Prague area. And her name before she married

Charles Bertram was Bertha Wenzlick that was her name Wenzlick, W-e-n-z-l-i-c-k.

And they got married, like Jim said, at St. John’s Church and, um, they really

never left that church, but she moved and married a lot. Her husband died and

I’m not exactly the year, sure of the year he died, but she was a widow for a

long time and, um, she ended up you know having to support herself.

She came over in 1851, somewhere in that vicinity. And I don’t know when he came

over, Charles Bertram, but somehow or other they got together and got married.

But he died fairly early. She didn’t die until 1912.

J. BUQUO:But her daughter married a Sterneberg.

C. BUQUO:And he had come from Germany.

J. BUQUO:And he had come from Germany.

C. BUQUO:And I’m not sure where they lived.

J. BUQUO:Frank. Frank Sterneberg.

C. BUQUO:They lived up in the Clifton Heights area near Fairview, uh, School up

there, um, in Fairview. Um, so when she finally died, she died, she lived on

Jefferson Avenue up in the Corryville area near UC (University of Cincinnati).

Um, and that’s his history from this area that he can remember. Can you think of

anything else that goes with that?

J. BUQUO:No, other than the fact that, uh, there’s still Sternebergs around

and, and in the area. Uh--

DORENKEMPER:In Over-the-Rhine or just--

J. BUQUO:Just in the area, yeah. Uh, and of course, originally it was Von

Sterneberg but then they dropped the Von.

C. BUQUO:And we’re not sure where, you know, uh, they, where they met or

anything or whether that had anything to do with Over-the-Rhine, but we do know

Bertha was part of the Over-the-Rhine for quite some time.

J. BUQUO:Quite some time

C. BUQUO:Yeah, before she moved to Clifton Heights. And then my family, the

Nadler family, my, uh, great-great grandfather was Ferdinand Nadler and he

immigrated from a town in the Czech Republic or Bohemia as it was called at the

time, part of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire. Um, and, he immigrated around the

same time Bertha Bertram immigrated here. And he lived on Main Street near where

Japp’s is now. And the building that he lived in is gone. It was torn down

around 1927 and was made into a dime store or a five-and-ten store.

I think it was like a Woolworths or something. But it’s right near the Hanke

Exchange area, in there. He ran a Turner shop. And he was a turner a wood

turner. And so he lived there for quite some time, in fact I think he died there.

He was also part of the Squirrel Hunters which was a group of Germans, uh,

citizens who were commandeered by Lew Wallace, who was a general, uh, and

Cincinnati was being threatened by, um, by the Confederacy. Um, um, Morgan’s

Raiders, and there were rumors that they were coming and so Roebling Bridge

hadn’t been quite completed at the time; they stopped anymore construction on

it. They commandeered a whole bunch of African Americans to build a pontoon

bridge across the Ohio River and then they rounded up, I don’t know if they did it--

I guess they did it by patriotism or something--all these Germans that lived in

Over-the-Rhine. And they were called the Squirrel Hunters because they all had

their own guns, and they used them to go into the woods I guess to, to--I guess

there were woods around here--and they would shoot squirrels and that’s why the

called them the Squirrel Hunters. Anyway my great-great grandfather was like

forty something years old when he was made part of this army for one month and

after that month they were told to go home and go back to their businesses. So

eventually, um, he had children. His wife was Margaritha, um, I forget what her

last name was before she got married to him. But anyway Margaritha also,

Margaritha, um, died and she’s buried at Spring Grove. And then he remarried and

he remarried

his brother’s, um--

J. BUQUO:--widow

C. BUQUO:--widow.

J. BUQUO:Yeah.

C. BUQUO:Her name was Sophia. And so, so anyways, I found all this out. So

anyway they had a son his name was Ferdinand also, that was one of his sons, and

that was my great-grandfather. And they lived over up off of East McMicken.

J. BUQUO (?): Chris Weideman.

C. BUQUO:At Peete Street, um, and Peete Street, uh, is right behind Clifton

Avenue, East Clifton, in that area there, near the Hude--old Hudepohl Brewery

that was there. And he was a teamster. Now, I like to think that he was someone

who drove the, the beer wagons, you know, through Over-the-Rhine. Because he was

a teamster which means he did that. And then I guess when cars came into effect

he became a chauffeur. Those were the jobs that were listed on the, on the

city directories. So, um, they lived there for quite some time and then

eventually they moved up to Clifton Heights. They first moved to Wheeler Street,

and then they moved past Wheeler Street and they moved up to, uh, Euclid near

University and, and short Vine and all that. My grandfather had three brothers

who all lived and he, my grandfather, was the youngest. His brother Ferdinand,

Ferdinand seems to be a favorite name and George. And all three of them served

in World War I. And they all went to France. So, um, that’s--you go ahead and

ask questions of me. I’m telling you my history here in Over-the-Rhine.

J. BUQUO:So, as you can see she’s done a whole lot of research.

C. BUQUO:Yeah, I have.

J. BUQUO:A lot of time at the library.

C. BUQUO:That’s why I’m interested in this. And, like, when this gets up and

running. I will be so happy if I’m able to volunteer at the, at the museum

and help get it ready and everything else. So, yeah.

DORENKEMPER:Absolutely. You can do interviews too then. I’m just volunteering.

C. BUQUO:Okay, all right.

DORENKEMPER:Um, so I do want to clear up a couple of things that you were

talking about. Bertha, she’s your grandmother?

J. BUQUO:Great-great grandmother.

DORENKEMPER:Okay. Great-great. Okay. And then how long was she involved?

J. BUQUO:She made the uniforms for the Reds for ten years.

DORENKEMPER:Okay.

J. BUQUO:Single-handedly.

DORENKEMPER:Wow.

J. BUQUO:Well there were only ten members of the team too. So I know it, it

wasn’t that many, but she made them.

C. BUQUO:Well according to, um, the book The History of Baseball in Cincinnati,

um, the owner of the Reds came to her and asked her to design the uniform. And

so he wanted something different something flashy and so then she came up with

the red stockings and the, the signature C--

J. BUQUO:--right.

C. BUQUO:--that went on the front of it. And that’s what she did that was her

profession. So, I don’t know if she was a

she may have been a widow by then too. But I’m thinking because you know a lot

of women didn’t work outside the home if they had children and she did have a

number of children. It wasn’t just your grandmother.

J. BUQUO:Right.

C. BUQUO:Or great-grandmother--

J. BUQUO:great-grandmother.

C. BUQUO:It was something, she, she had other children too I think. But, um, I

don’t know if she, I’d have to, I didn’t bring my genealogy book with me and

maybe I should have. But, um, because I didn’t know if we would be able to have

time to do this. I wasn’t sure what was going on today. But anyway, um, but she

worked as a seam--that must have taken some time to sew all those uniforms. I

don’t care, you know, and she sewed for other teams there were a lot of amateur

teams in this area. So that’s maybe why the, uh, owner of the Reds came to her

because she had a history of making baseball uniforms. So we don’t know anything

else about that. And Charles Bertram I’m not exactly sure what his profession

was, her husband.

And I’m not sure if he was alive when she did this.

J. BUQUO:Right, right.

C. BUQUO:He could have, because she was a widow for a long time.

DORENKEMPER:And then are you, do you know any of the rest of their decedents?

Like any of the, their history after, after--

J. BUQUO:Well she had a, Bertha had a daughter who was my grandmother’s mother.

DORENKEMPER:Okay.

J. BUQUO:And, and uh--

C. BUQUO:Her name was Anna.

J. BUQUO:Anna, Anna Sterneberg.

DORENKEMPER:Okay, she was a Sterneberg.

C. BUQUO:She was a Sterneberg.

J. BUQUO:Right, well she was a Bertram and then she got married to a Sterneberg.

C. BUQUO:And she--

J. BUQUO:Frank Sterneberg.

C. BUQUO:Yeah, and her, her husband--

J. BUQUO:--at St. John’s.

C. BUQUO:Her husband immigrated from Germany in 1888. His name was Frank X.

Sterneberg. And he owned a stained glass, he did stained glass, he was a stained

glass maker. And he had that profession. But I don’t know how she met him or

anything else. But, um--

DORENKEMPER:They got married.

C. BUQUO:They got married at the same place where her mother got married, St. John’s.

And then--

J. BUQUO:My dad’s mom and dad got married there too.

C. BUQUO:And then his--

J. BUQUO:--Elsie

C. BUQUO:--grandmother--

J. BUQUO:--Elsie Sterneberg

C. BUQUO:--was Elsie Sterneberg.

J. BUQUO:Married George Buquo.

C. BUQUO:Married George Buquo.

J. BUQUO:Buquo is a very unusual name.

C. BUQUO:And his family, and Buquo family has nothing to do with Over-the-Rhine

at all.

J. BUQUO:No.

C. BUQUO:Other than the fact that they moved up here from Chattanooga,

Tennessee and they became film projection

J. BUQUO:Right.

C. BUQUO:They ran movie houses.

J. BUQUO:Yeah, my grandfather was--

C. BUQUO:--silent movies.

J. BUQUO:President of the Projectionist Union for years.

C. BUQUO:Silent movies that’s how his grandmother, that’s how his grandmother

and grandfather met.

J. BUQUO:She was the--

C. BUQUO:She played the piano.

J. BUQUO:--piano.

DORENKEMPER:Oh.

C. BUQUO:And you know they didn’t have any, they didn’t have any sound. So you

know when the hero would brr-uh-brr, you know that kind of music.

DORENKEMPER:Was that at the Emory?

C. BUQUO:No, it was I’m trying to think there was a lot of little movie houses

all around. She grew up in Fairview. Up in, near Clifton, um, Clifton Heights.

Uh, she grew up in that area. Near where the Nadlers, you know, moved to. And

that--in fact they even lived down near the same street. I can’t believe they

probably might of met or even known each other. But, um, there were movie houses

all over the place. So--

J. BUQUO:Right. Right. And, and like I said they were of course black and

white, silent, so there’s a person in there playing the piano.

C. BUQUO:Charlie Chaplin type stuff.

J. BUQUO:Charlie Chaplin and, my grandfather, then my grandfather wound up

spending thirty-five years at the Keith’s Theatre on Fountain Square.

C. BUQUO:Yeah.

J. BUQUO:And that that was the theatre that showed the Walt Disney movies. That

was and he was there for--until he retired. My dad was a projectionist, his

brother was a projectionist. My dad was at the old Woodlawn Drive-in. His

brother was at the Twin Drive-in. These are real Cincinnati names.

C. BUQUO:But that has nothing to do with Over-the-Rhine. (laughs)

J. BUQUO:That has nothing to do with Over-the-Rhine.

C. BUQUO:But that’s how the history evolved.

. And I don’t know who, uh, other children, what a, I had it listed somewhere. I

should have brought it, about the other children. But we don’t know who those people.

J. BUQUO:No.

C. BUQUO:We don’t know any of those descendants at this point. He has not kept

in touch with, uh, any of the Bertrams or the Sternebergs.

J. BUQUO:Or the Sternebergs. No. I graduated with a Sterneberg from Norwood

High School.

C. BUQUO:And he was related.

J. BUQUO:But we’re, but we’re, haven’t seen each other for a while.

C. BUQUO:We never kept in contact.

J. BUQUO:Even at the reunion.

C. BUQUO:And that’s the same way with me with the Nadlers. Um, they, um, moved

to other parts of the country. Uh, one of Ferdinand’s the Second, my

great-grandfather’s, one of his sons married a Prior (?) or his daughter married

a Prior and my grandfather’s sister, and then they had a son Ferdinand. And he

became, um,

he played in the symphony orchestra. He played the oboe. So that’s--

J. BUQUO:Now an interesting fact, okay, is St. John’s Church. Well, and then

the Church basically across Washington Park, St. Paul’s, broke away from St.

John’s. The high-German, low-German thing. And what’s ironic is both churches

had something to do with beer. St. John’s is a bar but St. Paul’s is Taft Ale House.

DORENKEMPER:Oh, (laughs)

J. BUQUO:Yes

C. BUQUO:Well and the interesting thing is where the Nadlers got married, they,

my great-grandfather married Anna Wideman (?). The Widemans, which is part of my

family, too, they lived right across the street from St. Peter’s, uh,

Evangelical German Church which is where the annex of Rothenberg School is right

now. The new Rothenberg School annex that was built when they redid Rothenberg

School. Right there at the corner as you look up Main Street you can see it.

That used to be

St. Peters Church and, again, it was a break off from St. John’s. Because of the

controversy of either using high-German as a language or low-German as a

language. And Germany was not united and, when did Germany become united?

J. BUQUO:Eighteen sixty four?

C. BUQUO:Well, then I don’t know if they had broken off by then.

J. BUQUO:Eighteen eighty something. But Germany was not a country until the

late 1800s.

C. BUQUO:But there was still lingering. There was still lingering animosity.

J. BUQUO:Right

C. BUQUO:Between certain--

J. BUQUO:--Well, and that’s why the churches--

C. BUQUO:Even though they were all the same religion, and we’re not even

getting into the Catholic part of it yet. So this, this was all the German

controversy and so this is why they broke off. Um, but then I also, you know,

most of my family, I think all the German families somehow or other had some

connection to Over-the-Rhine. But where, my, these are the specifics ones the

Widemans and the Nadlers that lived here down in Over-the-Rhine and Jim’s were

the Bertrams.

J. BUQUO:Now you know the history of churches here. You know how to tell the

difference between a Protestant church and a Catholic church? The steeple. The

Catholic churches have crosses at the top. The Protestant churches have animals

and Philippus Church, which is Christian Moerlein, right, and by the way, it is

this finger. Yes, yeah. I love to point that out but, but that was, that was

Christian Moerlein’s church. Where he went to church.

DORENKEMPER:Okay.

C. BUQUO:What about Salem United Church?

J. BUQUO:And Salem United Church

C. BUQUO:What do they have at the top of theirs?

J. BUQUO:Uh, wait a minute, a bird or a squirrel or something, something like that.

C. BUQUO:I thought, I thought Philippus had, um, the, um, German helmet or the

helmet, which one has the helmet?

J. BUQUO:Philippus has the finger.

C. BUQUO:Well which one has the finger?

J. BUQUO:That may be Salem.

C. BUQUO:That might be Salem.

J. BUQUO:I’ll have to, we’ll check that out sometime.

C. BUQUO:At the end of Sycamore, yeah.

J. BUQUO:Now see when I grew up--

C. BUQUO:--Those were a lot of German, there were, there were a lot of German

Protestant churches, uh, in this area.

J. BUQUO:Yeah.

C. BUQUO:There were a lot of Catholic German churches, too.

J. BUQUO:Right.

C. BUQUO:Very much, religion was a big part.

J. BUQUO:I think even the Catholics didn’t get along. But I grew up in Norwood

and went to Zion Church, Evangelical and reform which is now United Church of

Christ. It still exists. But we actually had books in the pews that were in German.

DORENKEMPER:You’re kidding?

J. BUQUO:I mean and it was, and--

C. BUQUO:And you live in in the Over-the-Rhine area?

DORENKEMPER:No, I live on the west side.

C. BUQUO:Oh, okay, but your family probably started out down here somewhere.

DORENKEMPER:Um, actually, some Lower Price Hill stuff.

C. BUQUO:Yeah.

J. BUQUO:Yep.

DORENKEMPER:Not a whole lot. I’m sure there were because it is German. We’re

still like doing some of that research.

C. BUQUO:Um-hm. So.

J. BUQUO:I’m kind of looking at all the architecture down through here. And you

can see--

C. BUQUO:--It’s all boarded up.

J. BUQUO:All boarded up, but, but brick buildings and usually where there where

there is a space there was a building there. I mean so many have been torn down

or fallen down.

DORENKEMPER:Yeah.

J. BUQUO:But, uh,

this, and what you’ve done here, this is, I’ve seen the initials PL all the time

every time we come up here. And why the name People’s liberty?

DORENKEMPER:You know what, I don’t know that question, but there’s a, there’s

someone that’s working here that will be able to.

J. BUQUO:Okay because--

C. BUQUO:Do we need to fill in any gaps?

DORENKEMPER:Um, no. If you guys have anything else you need to share?

C. BUQUO:I can’t think of a single thing at this point. But if anybody wants to

contact me I do have a lot of records at home.

J. BUQUO:She has done a lot of research at the downtown library.

C. BUQUO:Yes and I didn’t bring them up with me because you know I didn’t know

how much detail, I actually didn’t even know if I was going to get to this

interview today so, uh, we just came up a little earlier and we were able to do

that. But that’s our history from Over-the-Rhine. And it’s basically German, it

all happened. I think most everybody was out of Over-the-Rhine by the nineteen,

by nineteen--

J. BUQUO:They had moved, my family moved to Norwood and Bond Hill.

C. BUQUO:By 1910 his family, the Bertram’s were all up in

Clifton Heights.

J. BUQUO:Clifton Heights.

C. BUQUO:And that’s where the Nadlers were too. And so they had moved out, I

would say by 1910.

DORENKEMPER:Okay.

C. BUQUO:Yeah. This era. And you know what the strange thing is, and I’ll say

this very honestly, I never knew any of my family other than, my grandfather

told me that he swam in the canal. And he swam naked. And that when the human

waste would come floating down the canal, because people would throw their swamp

pots into the, into it, the ones that lived along the canal. They would yell

“duck here comes a floater.” And other than that I know my grandfather liked to

swim and, you know, I guess because it was so hot and they lived on Peete

Street. I know where the place where they lived. It is a tenement. It is not a

single family home and I know that they, when he finally was able to live in a

single family home he definitely did. And my, my mother was born,

uh, they lived in Oakley. Actually they lived in O’Bryonville and then Oakley.

But they lived in single family homes and that was I think important. And the

other thing was, never talked about living in Over-the-Rhine. Never. Never

brought it up. Never said, Clifton Heights, yes. But never the beginnings down

here. Whereas my grandmother, who grew up in the West End and on Queen City

Avenue in Fairmount across from St. Bonaventure’s Church, Church, she talked

about it. But I, but my mother, but my mother never brought up that my

grandfather lived in Over-the-Rhine. I think it was something-- because

Over-the-Rhine had deteriorated so badly, had such a reputation--

J. BUQUO:--Well by the ’50s and ’60s.

C. BUQUO:And that they, that they just didn’t really want to--

J. BUQUO:Findlay Market almost closed

C. BUQUO:--touch it with a ten foot pole. And you know we never went to Findlay

Market. Even though my grandmother told me that she’d go to Findlay Market. She

would talk about it.

But I didn’t, my grandfather died when I was seven years old. So, I really, I

would loved to have had him back to sit down and do exactly what I’m doing with

you. Uh, but at the time you know I was seven years old I could’ve cared less

where he lived. Other than the fact that he would tell me about swimming in the

canal. And then when I saw pictures and old photos of Cincinnati of what the

canal looked like after it had been drained.

J. BUQUO:Yep.

C. BUQUO:Ooow. So--

DORENKEMPER:It’s amazing they didn’t all get sick and--

C. BUQUO:--really.

J. BUQUO:Well they did. There was sickness.

C. BUQUO:Sure.

J. BUQUO:There was cholera and that, and, you know, and, and, but, but the

thing, what it was, that people moved.

C. BUQUO:They got out of here.

J. BUQUO:They got out of here, before--

C. BUQUO:--And that’s why,

J. BUQUO:--and when it started, the Cholera epidemic really affected, started migration.

C. BUQUO:--and that’s why they never they admitted, they never admitted living

here. They never admitted it.

J. BUQUO:No.

C. BUQUO:And it was just like it was, you know, not shameful but it was just

something that--

J. BUQUO:--you didn’t talk about.

C. BUQUO:Yeah, my mother would have told me where he lived and that he lived

down in this area.

But I don’t think she even knew that.

DOREMKEMPER:That’s interesting.

C. BUQUO:I think they just, she assumed that they always lived in, uh, Fairview

and, and that area up there, Clifton Heights, yeah, Corryville. So--

J. BUQUO:Alright Thank you so much.

C. BUQUO:Yeah, thank you.

J. BUQUO:We enjoyed it. And feel free to contact us, and, and--