COURTNEY:It is November 13th, 2025. I'm Anita Courtney, and I serve on the board of the directors of the Kentucky Theatre. I'm here today with Fred Mills, also known as Mr. Kentucky Theatre. This is our fourth episode. We closed with the fire that happened in the late eighties and the reopening, and we'll go from there. So Fred, what do you have to say about the transition after the fire?

MILLS:Well, you know, very fortunately, you know, after, the, uh, the theater had been closed for, well, about four and a half years. So we're talking about April 1992. The city had been negotiating with a number of folks, you know, confidentially, behind the scenes with folks that had indicated interest in, um, operating the theater. The city wanted someone to be the management company for the theater. The city, you know, would do certain things as for maintenance for the building, but the actual day-to-day operation of the--there was no way that the, the mayor and the council wanted to be involved in a day-to-day operation of the theater. Too many day-to-day issues and, that they would have to do, so they thought that the best direction to go in was to have a management company. So they had several people that had indicated interest. As I understand it, it all fell apart. And then thankfully, that two local individuals here in Lexington, Howard Stovall and Anna Lee Scorsone, stepped up and basically, I think at that time, one would say they saved the theater because there was no one really interested in opening the theater. I'm sure that the city did a nationwide search to see if there was a, a, a company or a chain of theaters that was willing to come in and operate the theaters. Um, the, you know there was a lot of things to, to deal with there in the beginning of the opening of the theater because that you have two individuals that had never been in the theater business before. Howard and Anna Lee had ran, I would say, some several successful businesses, uh, during their careers. Anna Lee, she has, was with Blue Grass--BCTC and KCTCS for a number of years in administration. Howard operated, like I say, a couple of other businesses. The real challenge was that being closed for, you know, so long and then trying to get open back up again, trying to get yourself reestablished again. The public certainly was out there, but during this period that the theater was closed--I think it was 1990s--there was two Cinemark theaters came into Lexington. And they opened, I think they were both eight-plexes, I believe. One was at Lexington Green, and the other one was called Man o' War Cinemas or something like that, but it was the same chain. They opened two chains, chains, one on the east end of Lexington, which was out on North Locust Hill Drive, and the other one was at Lexington Green. And the theater was, as I said before, was closed at that time. So I remember attending the, the person that was the manager of the Man o'--of, of the two cinemas in town.

MILLS CONT.:I had recommended him for a position years ago at another theater and he had left Lex--he had worked in Lexington for a while at the old Lexington Mall Cinemas, and then he went to New York City and worked for a concession company in New York City. And then I believe he had moved on to someplace in Alabama and managed a, a, a, uh, large discount theaters that Cinemark had. And so I was invited to the, the opening night out to the Man o' War Cinemas. These two complexes with eight screens each, well, like I say, they opened in--they came to Lexington in 1990. I think it was January of 1990. They were able to get a good foothold in Lexington. So that was gonna make it more difficult for the Kentucky to, again, bounce back, if you will. We continued to do what we were doing when the theater closed. We were gonna do the Kentucky as a, uh, a repertory house, and I think I mentioned before, you know, that in the late seventies we started that calendar house, repertory house, revival house, whatever you want to call it, doing a number of films each day and those were the films that were some foreign films, it was some old classics, it was some offbeat films. So we picked back up in a sense where we left off there for the Kentucky because that had really got the Kentucky reestablished again in the late seventies. So we opened back up doing the same thing in the Kentucky. And then to some degree or the other, we kind of, with the smaller house, with the, uh--the State Theatre was closed because the city, in the purchase of the land and the buildings and everything, they renovated the Kentucky, but they let the State kind of sit. So, I'll go ahead and mention that it, it was successful. I think that the city realized it was successful. And in 1996, they decided that they would renovate the State Theatre and get it back open. So we then had two theaters again downtown.

COURTNEY:So, did they already own the State Theatre, but it just wasn't renovated?

MILLS:Yes.

COURTNEY:Okay.

MILLS:They, they, when they made that purchase of buying the land and the buildings, the, uh, that the State Theatre was included in that whole area of, of buildings there that the city purchased at the time. But at--when they did the renovation and the selling of bonds to renovate to Kentucky, that was not included at that particular time to do that renovation in the State. So the State Theatre got opened back up in 1996, and we kind of--we were continuing to do, uh, I would say we leaned toward the more arty side of films then. So we were still doing the, the repertory programming in the Kentucky with the calendars that we printed every six weeks. It wasn't long, though, 'til we got a call from our film booker, and the repertory houses were having issues and problems, and I think it was because that you, you--by doing a six-week calendar, by the time you got the films selected and your calendar printed, you could already tell that there were certain films that weren't gonna do very well. Also, you know, we're talking about films, thirty-five-millimeter films. The shipment of these films from maybe the film company, maybe even a film coming from Madison, Wisconsin to Lexington. And the cost of that film, it was not cheap then, whether it was being shipped by Greyhound. Sometimes I felt like that I spent half my time going to Greyhound and picking up cans of film, bringing them to the theater. Other repertory houses around the country--there were a limited number of prints of certain titles, and so these prints circulated, you know, you, you would get it, they'd be shipped to the Kentucky and then they'd be shipped from the Kentucky to Louisville, to the Vogue Theatre in Louisville. So there was quite an, an expense there. Plus, there was only a limited number of these prints and as, and as time it was going forward, these prints were beginning to get shabby and destroyed, and the quality of prints were, was not what it should be. So our booker called one day and said, you know, he operated a theater, Larry Thomas in Cincinnati, our film booker, he operated a theater down on Race Street in Cincinnati called The Movies. And in fact, our film booker now, Steve Zahn, he works for Tri-State Theatre. And he had worked for Larry at The Movies in Cincinnati.

MILLS CONT.:And, um, so that theater had closed. So The, The Movies in Cincinnati closed. I believe there was a theater that, uh, down in Nashville, the Belcourt Cinemas, I believe they closed. The Vogue eventually closed, maybe a little bit later, or was on its way out. So Larry suggested that we change our programming and that we begin to go more first run but not as much just playing every, maybe, commercial film, but films that were, I would say, maybe more quality films. And we would be very selective in what we were showing and try to stay to the art side of the filmmaking. And then the smaller theater, the State Theatre, would maybe play other, maybe a little bit more commercial films. But it was a, a time of a lot of changing with cinemas. The, uh--I think about 1998, I guess it was, that the, the cinemas at Lexington Mall, the, the, the theaters there, and--well, in fact, the whole mall closed by about 1999. So we lost those theaters. Um, I think it was ninety--1996, around the middle of the, the 1900s--or 1990s, that Cinemark opened Fayette Mall Cinemas. And then eventually, that, the house that they had at Lexington Green, they turned into an art house cinema for a period of time that really didn't, didn't work. But, uh, it was, it was a lot of changes with, probably not just Lexington, but in Lexington with the different theaters closing and then other theaters opening. The, uh, I think the, uh, the theaters at Turfland Mall went out about that time, too. I think that they closed. So it was a, it was a little bit--things were changing exhibition-wise in Lexington. And it was great for the Kentucky to get back open again, and it had to sort of reinvent itself. And so we're continuing.

COURTNEY:You mentioned the bookers and the, um, film companies. Can you describe how the Kentucky works with them, how that works, how that whole process happens?

MILLS:Sure. The theaters need somebody to represent themselves, that you want somebody that knows the, the, the industry, that is trustworthy, that you feel confident in yourself, but that the movie studios feel confident in, people that they have worked with over a period of years. And this Tri-State Cinemas, Tri-State Theatre Booking Service in Cincinnati, are the people that have looked after the Kentucky Theatre for decades. There was a fellow by the name of Phil Borak that started that company, and he has since passed away. And there's two individuals now that purchased the, the, uh, service, the theater service from him and that we are still dealing with. And I mentioned that the film bookers for, if it's Paramount or Warner Brothers, they have built up, the tri-state people have built their reputation, too, that when they are representing the Kentucky Theatre and they say, we would like to play this particular film at the Kentucky Theatre, that the person from Warner's or Paramount or the smaller independent film companies, that they know that they can trust the people at Tri-State to do what that they tell them to do and by--I mean, tell them to do. Naturally, if you're gonna play a picture the film company is gonna tell you what the terms are for playing that picture. And they might say, well, okay, such and such film is gonna open on Christmas Day of 2025, and we want that picture to open on Christmas Day. And it looks like that you're going to play that picture for three weeks. And we don't want any shows dropped at all to do anything else. We want every showing that you're doing every single day to be only that picture. Now maybe at the end of the third week, that weekend of the third week, if it's doing X number of dollars that weekend, we might ask you to hold over that picture for a fourth week. So, they tell you these things up front.

COURTNEY:And so the local theater doesn't have any negotiating power, it's just the way it--

MILLS:Well, our--you, your booker is representing you but, with that film company. But no, the film company is gonna tell you that here's this film that's available, and it's okay if you want to play it, but these are the rules that you're going to go by to play it. They might also ask you, well, you know, we think this film's gonna do pretty well, and we'd like to have two thousand dollars up front. Before you ever open the film, we want two thousand dollars. Because they've got confidence that you'll make that money back, but they want that film in advance. So you know all this stuff before you, uh, agree to playing the film. And it's--

COURTNEY:How often do they ask for upfront money? Is that common, or?

MILLS:Not--well, even if you're playing a one-off picture, as I call it, like that, uh, as an example, we're playing--we're gonna do a program, a joint partnership with the Girl Scouts that I've been doing for years, for probably thirty years at least. And it's the theater provides the space, and the Girl Scouts pay for the film. And it's free admission to everyone that comes with a donation and--you know, warm clothing or in some cases maybe food or hygiene products, whatever--and it's donated to, uh, the local organization called The Nest for women and children. Well, in this parti--this coming December, December the 13th, for a Saturday morning show, we're gonna be playing "A Christmas Story." And the film company has asked for a 250-dollar advance for that film. So it's a flat fee. But on more repertory titles, you're looking at smaller amounts of money, like, you know two hundred, 250. Can be a lot of the Disney films are more pricey. Maybe they're up at three, 350. Some special films might even be five hundred dollars. So you've got to be careful what you're agreeing to. You may, if you don't like it, you don't have to play the film. But that's film, you know, it's, that, that film is--that price is set. But it is important to have someone that the film companies trust, being our booker in Cincinnati, that they're gonna follow through, and they're representing us to the film companies, and they're gonna tell us what we need to do 'cause they don't want to--Tri-State doesn't want to have egg on their face by representing someone that's not gonna do what that they've been requested to do by the film company.

COURTNEY:And so the bookers know the local market, right, and help guide you in selections? How does that work?

MILLS:I think so. They have, they kind of--I guess they've got the Hollywood buzz in a sense, too. They probably know how the films have done at certain film festivals and what maybe the audience response was. They also, uh, there's certain times of year that, you know, the summer and holidays are when the most people go to movies. You never know whether a film's gonna do, uh--they're always looking for a blockbuster, but blockbusters don't happen that often. But there are pictures that during the holidays, if you--the film, the film studios know that, that a certain film that they feel like, well, this is gonna do well. Well, you would wanna release that picture in the summer or you would wanna release it around the holidays because that's the time that most people have time off--plants close down, factories close down for a couple of weeks. People have a little bit more free time. And so the films that you've got more confidence in--the film companies--that's the time of year that you want to release those films.

COURTNEY:What else happened in the nineties at the Kentucky Theatre?

MILLS:Well, of course, we're back again to continuing to show "Rocky Horror Picture Show" as a staple. Of course, downtown, too, the last department store closed was 1990, the same year that the Kentucky reopened, Wolf Wiles closed. And, of course, that's the building that got preserved by Gray Construction that's still there. The 1990, I believe it was, early before the Kentucky--I, well, in fact, I know exactly that it--I have to, I'm, I'm now recalling that I'm waiting for the Kentucky Theatre to reopen 'cause I'm anxious to see if I might be able to go back and work there again. And, um, I mentioned earlier that there were people that the city was negotiation--negotiating with and hoping to be the management company, company for the theater. And, uh, it--I quit a job that I had at Waveland in Lexington, a historic site, and because it looked like that the theater, they had found someone that was interested, and they pulled out at the last minute and I gave up that job. And so I lost that job. And then, what I'm getting ready to mention is that I found another job. And Mayor Scotty Baesler--well, I think it was really maybe Pam Miller's project, was the Lexington Children's Museum opened in 1990. And so that was something new for downtown. And I went there to work and I worked the front desk for about a year, a year and a half at the Lexington Children's Museum before I came back to the Kentucky.

MILLS CONT.:What else happened downtown? Well, of course, things that were happening was, you know, there was multiples of, clubs downtown, bars, that the music scene was just--and I think we, it, it was going well in the eighties also, but it was continuing in the nineties. There was, uh, the JDI, Lynagh's. There was the Rockledge. There was a little club called the Hip Joint. There was a, a club called the Millennium. There was another club that was called The Dame. There was, you know, they opened and they closed. And there was one just almost, it seemed like, one right after the other. And, uh, but it was a, uh, a great time for music. And, uh, there was--I can't say that I was busy with the, the theater 'cause we were trying to make the theater, you know, return to its past and, and, and like I'd mentioned before, it, you know, it wasn't easy because the other theaters had reopened and had new theaters were in town. And I think in 1996 or '98, the Woodhill Cinemas opened. And it was the first theater in town that had stadium seating. And there was ten more theaters to Lexington to, to compete with. But the, uh, there was lots of folks that have now became big stars in the music world that came to Lexington that played at a number of these clubs constantly around town. So it was a fun time to, to, to live in Lexington and so much--so many different things going on. There were restaurants downtown that, you know, we've already mentioned that it happened back in the eighties, but, you know, we had the Festival Market and we had The Square, and I was just thinking that some restaurants that were there, there was a place over in the, uh, the, the bottom of Rupp Arena, and it was called the Magic Pan, if you remember--

COURTNEY:I worked there.

MILLS:Oh, you did, okay.

COURTNEY:Yes.

MILLS:Uh, Bravo Patino that was over in, in Victorian Square. I think in Festival Market there was a, uh, a sports bar called Scores. There was also a T.J. Cinnamon's, and that was very popular. And all the, the school--the kids that went to St. Paul and St. Peter that was close by Victorian Square there on West Short Street. they, all those kids there that went to the Catholic school, they would come over constantly and loved going to Festival Market. You know, Festival Market had a carousel, you know, up on the second or third floor. And, uh, but there was lots of things that, uh, that was in the bottom of--oh, I just remembered that the, uh there was a big toy store--

COURTNEY:Oh, yeah. Yes.

MILLS:If you remember that toy store that, uh, might've been--and then, of course, the Children's Museum had its own store, too. But, yeah, that it was lots of fun things going on that, uh, that kids--more things downtown then that I think maybe to do for kids that, that they would stop in after school. We don't have as many things that, now, in there that maybe kids--I think some of the kids from the Lexington Traditional, maybe they go down to Third Street Stuff, you know, but there's not as many things, I don't think, downtown right at the moment that, since that the, the bottom of Rupp Arena's gone, that where that the, the, the various stores, specialty stores--

COURTNEY:Yeah.

MILLS:That were downtown. I think there was a magic store downtown, down there, and so, yeah.

COURTNEY:Was the toy store FAO Schwarz?

MILLS:I think it was.

COURTNEY:Yeah, it was a great store, yeah, yeah.

MILLS:Yes, it was. Yes, yes.

COURTNEY:So, when did the Troubadour Concert Series--and if you could also describe what that is--start?

MILLS:Sure. Well, the, uh, the gentleman that started this was, his name is Michael Jonathan. And he started the Troubadour Concert Series at the Kentucky Theatre, maybe it was 1995. It's, uh, because he has just recently asked to come back to the Kentucky Theatre. He was there, I don't recall for how long, but it seemed like ten or fifteen--ten years, fifteen years or something, I'm sure, that was the period of time that he was there. And then he left the Kentucky Theatre and moved to the Opera House to do his larger concerts. And, uh, but recently, I think maybe they have a different booker or management at the Lexington Opera House, so he asked about a year or so ago, might he come back to the Kentucky Theatre, and I think that generally we were happy that, uh, that he asked to come back because, you know, that people loved that series before. And I remember when he first started, and this is his thirtieth anniversary. This is his thirtieth year, this, for the series. And I remember that his slogan was, in the very beginning, was ten lousy bucks--(Courtney laughs)--was the price of concerts. Of course, that's gone up considerably now, like everything else. But his, his first concert was Lucinda Williams, and he still continues to, to bring quality entertainment to the theater. Of course, concerts are expensive, and I think there's, doesn't seem to be, from what everyone tells me, there's sometimes, there's not a whole lot of money for a promoter to make because--from a concert--'cause those, those folks are very expensive, and when you see concerts that are even at Rupp Arena that you can--you hear, you hear figures how much that such and such act cost, well you can say, my gosh, no, no wonder that the, uh, that the prices are what they are.

COURTNEY:Yes, yeah.

MILLS:But another thing that Michael Jonathan was responsible for was that, and I do not recall the year, but he started something on Monday nights down at the Kentucky Theatre--or if you will, in the State Theatre, the smaller auditorium--and that was WoodSongs Old-Time Radio Hour. And just any number of folks have been through Lexington, up-and-coming people that have played there numerous times. So, it was the, the home of WoodSongs for a number of years on Monday evenings. And then there was an opportunity. The, uh, the Lyric Theatre opened, reopened. And so he chose to move the programming up to the Lyric. They have a little bit more seating than the State Theatre does. And so it, it remains there at the Lyric Theatre. And, uh, seems to be--and it helped get the Lyric Theatre reestablished. One thing, too, that I want to mention, too, is. is that Pam Miller was responsible. There was something that--

COURTNEY:She was the mayor.

MILLS:She was the mayor. And there was something that--gosh I don't know what year that it actually started--but Lexington was given some space. I think, uh, I think I have this correct, that the state government provided space for Lexington to build I think the, what they were saying at the time, they were calling it the World Trade Center or the World Coal Center or something was the title that they gave it. Well, there was a downturn in the economy at the time. And so Lexington did not follow through with what they had hoped to do with this new building. It was going to be an arts center and, like I say, I'm sorry I don't recall the exact title that they, that it was being described as. But anyway, they were not able to do it because of the downturn in the economy. And some years after that, when it wasn't done, the--in Frankfurt, the then governor wanted to sue the city of Lexington and to ask that the city pay back this money to them because the city had not been able to follow through on an agreement. Well, fortunately that Mayor Pam Miller was able to work out something with the state government that in exchange for not being sued, that the city of Lexington would provide a number of other things, cultural things, for--in return for quality of life for its citizens that they were not able to do because, due to this downturn in the, the economy. So they, the first thing that I believe that she was able to do was the reopening of the State Theatre. And then the next thing that happened was that the Lexington Children's Museum opened in 1990. And then the Lexington Children's Theatre on West Short Street, across from St. Paul's School there, was in the Victorian Square building or complex there. In 1998, we got the Lexington Children's Theatre again. Of course, it goes way back to the thirties, but it got a permanent home in 1998. And then I think there was a promise that--by her, by Mayor Miller--that when the time was right--there was a big controversy as to who owned and had the rights to the Lyric Theatre. The building had suffered immensely sitting there unused for a number of decades, and they had to find out who the, the actual owners of the property was. And that was one of her promises, also, was that when the time was right and they were able to, to get to the bottom of, of the, of who ownership was, that she would also restore the, the Lyric Theatre. So there was four or five projects that--and the Downtown Arts Center, that was also hers, too. So there was about five or six things that Mayor Miller was able to accomplish. And the city, you know, it saved the city from having to go through some lawsuit and all that sort of thing. So it was, uh, seemed like that it was the thing to have been able for governments to work together, and it was a win-win-win situation for I think everybody. And, uh, and all of these projects per se was pretty much downtown.

COURTNEY:Yes. And so for those listening who don't know Lexington, all the things that you just described are just right around the Kentucky Theatre. I mean, the Kentucky might be, even be in the center of those.

MILLS:Yes.

COURTNEY:So, do you think those kinds of art things help the Kentucky's business and, um, place in the, in the community?

MILLS:Oh, I certainly think it does that because the, and it--you know, anything that you can do downtown, if it's a new restaurant--and you know, I think it's the same thing--and we've been pretty fortunate over the years for things to, you know, there are things that close, but we seem to get replacements. In all cities, I think it happens all across the country, probably, that, you know, that you move forward a little bit, and kind of things stay the same, and then maybe something happens or you lose something and you feel like that you move back a little bit. But then suddenly there's something else that's happening--

COURTNEY:Yeah.

MILLS:And you move forward again and so, as--where we are now, that downtown Lexington on the corner of South Limestone and Vine Street, West--would be East Vine, I guess, there is a new, uh, there's some new condos that are opening. And it's, uh, and I--seems like I read an article or something that all of them have been sold. And of course, the, uh, Lexington is looking for a new home for its city offices because at the present time, as we've talked about before, that next door to the Kentucky Theatre is the, is City Hall at 200 East Main Street. And that was one of the attractive things about, at the time, when the Kentucky was theater building and Switow building was purchased by the Lexington-Fayette Urban County government was that in, in, in this purchase that the city was gonna get the, the two theaters reopened again, hopefully, that, and they--and that happened was the city got two entire floors of offices up over top of the theaters in the Kentucky Theatre building and the Switow building. And so, the present City Hall building was, I think, built in early twenties and the folks that built the theater lived there while they were building the Kentucky Theatre. And so that building has, the city has really outgrown itself, and it looks like that the city is gonna find a new home soon in the next couple of years down on West Vine Street. And this building will probably--the present city hall will probably become available. And hopefully, that the--and I imagine they will, will sell it, and it would be great if there was condos next door to the Kentucky Theatre again. So I guess that what I've been mentioning is that here we--hopefully that we're gonna have something else happen next door to the Kentucky Theatre maybe. There's--I understand maybe there's two or three interested parties. I don't know who they are, but there's maybe two or three interested, interested parties maybe in doing something to that building. So here we go again. We're moving forward again.

COURTNEY:Yeah.

MILLS:So--

COURTNEY:That could be an influx of new, steady customers.

MILLS:Yes.

COURTNEY:Not going out to the suburban theaters, but--

MILLS:Absolutely.

COURTNEY:Staying downtown.

MILLS:And maybe it would, you know--there will be maybe another restaurant someplace close by. You have to have people, that it really helps downtown if you have people that are living downtown. And I think that all cities have this problem that, you know, you know, what comes first? Is it, uh, the--I think, of course, downtown is attractive. I think it's a--I really honestly do think it's, it's a, it's a safe downtown.

COURTNEY:Yes. Well, in the decades that you've been working at the Kentucky Theatre, you've seen the trends of movies come and go and change. What were the movies like in the nineties?

MILLS:Well, of course, in the nineties, let's see. Well, the, uh, you know, some of the, the height of a lot of, of the careers of certain actors and actresses, that, you know, there was Julia Roberts and Sharon Stone, Demi Moore, Tom Hanks, Samuel L. Jackson, Bruce Willis, you know, they were popular in the nineties. And the big movies that, that I really remember is "Titanic" was just absolutely huge. "The Lion King," "Jurassic Park," which we just recently played as a summer classic. "Pulp Fiction." Oh, I think it was, uh, "Batman," you know, that came out. "Star Wars," where they, you know. So there was a number of those films that--eighties and nineties films are very popular for, uh, for families and for, for that, the summer classics that's so special at the Kentucky Theatre.

COURTNEY:Anything else you want to say about the Kentucky Theatre in the 1990s?

MILLS:Well, I think that we were able to--it was a rough time getting, you know, started there, but it didn't take long to, uh, 'cause we started with the repertory. And then we started showing more first-run films. And it just took a little while for people to return, but we got that core audience back, and the loyalty was there. It just took a while to get them back. And, you know, you get used to going someplace else, doing something else. And I think at that, the young people, what made it so difficult, the theater was closed for, like I say, four and a half years. There were a period--there was a period of time these, the young people got used to going to, to the multiplexes, and it took a while to get them to return downtown. And, and we're continuing more than ever to try to work with both universities, Transylvania and the University of Kentucky, to try to appeal to, to students again. Of course, maybe a number of films that, on the artier side, that maybe students just don't seem to be that interested in. But we continually just finished a--or  are finishing up with a programming that with a professor from Transylvania, Tim Kirkman, that has been doing a series of some movies. And he's played "Risky Business" and "Harold and Maude" and "King of the Hill." And he finishes next week with a film on Tuesday called "An Education," which I remember we played it first run back in the, whenever that it actually, you know, came out and was released. But no, I think that by the, the late nineties, the Kentucky was back on track. And, uh--

COURTNEY:Well, I think a lot of things draw people to the Kentucky. Of course, the beautiful environment, you--(Courtney laughs)--being there as the wonderful host, um, the sense of community, the lower ticket prices, and the concessions. Can you tell us about the concession stand and about the popcorn that everybody says is the best in town?

MILLS:Sure. Well, I am real, uh, real proud that we are able to--we have the best ticket prices in town. We also have the best concession prices in town.

COURTNEY:By far?

MILLS:By far. The, uh, the current operators of the Kentucky Theatre, they happened to go out to one of the other theaters a couple of weeks ago. And they made a purchase, and they came back and remarked about something about the prices on something. And, and they told me what the price was, and actually, our prices--I immediately thought, well, our prices are half that.

COURTNEY:Wow.

MILLS:And so, and it's, you know, the, the operation of the concessions is very, very--I doubt if theaters could stay open if you didn't have--if theaters weren't, didn't have good concession sales because the theater gets to keep all of the concession revenue. The, the film company's not getting a percentage of that. They're getting, oftentimes they get a percentage of your film that they take at the box office, you know.

COURTNEY:Yeah.

MILLS:So, it--

COURTNEY:What's the range of percentages that film companies get?

MILLS:Probably from 35 percent all the way up to probably 60, 65 percent on those movies that are gonna be coming probably at holiday time. But we, we have, uh, I think we have the best chocolates in town, and the Lindt chocolate, Chocolove. We, uh, in the last few years, dark chocolate has become very, very popular. Occasionally, I'll see someone get some dark chocolate and maybe a red wine. And we do have, uh, traditional theater candies, the Junior Mints and the, the Goobers and the Milk Duds and the Twizzlers that, that have been staples for decades and decades in theaters.

COURTNEY:And those still sell, sell?

MILLS:And they, they sell. Everybody's got their favorite, M&M Peanuts or whatever. But the, if you want to call them specialty, fancy chocolates, I say that sometimes. Other times they're specialty chocolates. We've got a very--and people remark all the time about, hey, you all got the best chocolates of anybody. So, and our price is there, the same as it is on other candies, and popcorn, and everything is the same. And we have, uh, we have Coca-Cola products, and we have a number of bottled drinks that someone, you know--caffeine, no-caffeine cokes, and some zero coke, and that sold--and the La Croix's that we sell that people like, that sparkling water. Also that back a number of years ago that with--due to the Troubadour concert series, I would say, we decided that we probably needed to get a beer license, and because drinking beer goes along with concerts. And so we did that. And then mostly ladies, they started to say, well, I wished you all had some wine. So anyway, we had to obtain another license because in Kentucky, the wine license goes along with your liquor license. So we had our beer license, so now we get a liquor license. And then, I don't know when exactly it was, but a number, a couple years maybe went by, and I'm thinking I'm hearing about all this bourbon. And I'm thinking, well, my gosh, we already had the liquor license, and they were selling wine. Why not do some bourbon? So we have about four selections of bourbon that one can get. We also have, you know, a vodka, a tequila, a gin, so that we can do some specialty cocktails. We have several of those that we make. It all helps the bottom line for that concession stand and extra revenue. I always laugh and say that usually on Fridays, if we open a new movie, I'll remark sometime, oh, this seems like that this movie is gonna be a wine drinking movie--(Courtney laughs)--and that you've sold more wine there because maybe the, the film is particularly appealing to more women. So I noticed the, the wine sales that on Friday nights. And I--

COURTNEY:Are your predictions, do they tend to be right?

MILLS:And, and they do, yes. And you'll say, well, this one here looks like that this is gonna be more of a beer-drinking movie, you know. That, uh, we have an array of, the beers from local, from, uh, West Sixth. And then we have a, I think we have one from Country Boy there, Cougar Bait from Country Boy. So we try to support local. And, uh, we also have, uh, those cookies that come from Louisville, the, the Kizito cookies that, uh, from the little store out on Bardstown Road in Louisville. And, uh, the, uh, the old owners of the theater, I think, had gone to St. James Art Festival. And this lady, Elizabeth, that had come from Africa, that she started the store there. So we--I don't know anybody else that sells her cookies in Lexington. They probably do. There's probably some place, but I don't, I don't know. I haven't seen them anywhere. But people seem to enjoy those cookies 'cause they go pretty fast. But, uh, and, of course, the popcorn, we have three sizes of popcorn. And, uh, well, I can't give away my secret, but anyway, that we use canola oil. We, you know, we don't use--at one time, you know, coconut oil, which isn't supposed to be as healthy, that we don't, no longer use coconut oil, we use canola oil, and we think it's the, the more healthier. But people, a lot of city employees, they come over, uh, at least once or twice a week and buy popcorn. And--

COURTNEY:Oh, just during the work day?

MILLS:During the work day. They don't buy it on, on the--

COURTNEY:Not going to a movie? Yeah.

MILLS:Not going to the movie. (Courtney laughs). They'll purchase it on their way home. And, you know, I'll look, and here's someone coming in the front door, and I'll look, and I'll say, oh, yeah, she's coming for her popcorn. (Courtney laughs). You know, so.

COURTNEY:How much popcorn do you go through in a--

MILLS:Oh, my gosh. Well, we get, you know, 50-pound bags, you know, of popcorn. And sometimes we'll go through one, two, a hundred pounds a week or something. It's a lot of popcorn.

COURTNEY:A lot of popcorn.

MILLS:Yeah, yes, yes. (Courtney and Mills laugh). I think I hold the record probably in Lexington, I bet that I've popped more popcorn personally than anybody else in Lexington.

COURTNEY:I think you--(Mills laughs)--hold that title. (Courtney laughs). So in, I think, the first interview, you said that the slogan for the Kentucky Theatre was every customer a, a valued guest?

MILLS:Every, every patron an honored guest.

COURTNEY:An honored guest. And it seems to me that you have sustained that. Can you tell me a little bit about how you relate to people and think about how to make this such a hospitable place?

MILLS:Well, I think that everybody--this is my personal feelings--that everybody needs to be treated the same. And you need to be respectful. Not everybody is good at working with the public. You know, I'm saying, you know, your employees. And so I try to, when I'm involved in that process, I--that's one of the first questions that usually, now, with the, the, the current operators of the theater, there's usually they participate with myself. And one of the questions I ask is, is, do you enjoy people? Do you, do you like working with people? Because if you don't, this really isn't the place for you. And I'm not trying to be disrespectful to you, I tell them, but, you know, there--we have a very loyal clientele. And we have a lot of repeat people that come in constantly all the time.

COURTNEY:Yeah.

MILLS:It's been that way for a number of years, and it started way back when we did the, uh, the calendar house or the repertory. Back in those days, there would be people down there maybe three times a week seeing films. And of course, we don't change films as, as many times, times a week. We were showing seven, eight films a week then. But still, I noticed that the same people that are coming, that loyal audience, they tell me that they always look to see if the Kentucky Theatre is playing a film before they--and if it is, they will come there before they go to any other theater in town. So I know that. So these people that are coming in are gonna get to see you constantly, and you're gonna get to see them constantly, and I've said over the years that I think that I've built up that reputation that I'll maybe know somebody's first name, I might know their last name, I might know where they work at, I might know what kind of car they drive. Something that kind of relates me and their family that have generations that have been coming. So try to pass this on to, to the employees that, you know, they're--I did have one employee once, and he, he didn't--he said, used to say that we spoil our customers--(Courtney laughs)--because if they want--well, I want some extra salt. Okay, I've got a little cup. I'll put some extra salt in for it that they can take with their popcorn in the auditorium. So we go to that extra, extra mile to make sure that we can do what we can for that, that patron to make them happy. And, you know, if your--if that's your job working concession stand, I automatically know that whenever this guy comes in, I know what kind of beer he's gonna buy. And this other person, when she comes in, she's gonna say, absolutely no butter on that popcorn--(Courtney laughs)--you know. And so I, I, you know, so I try to--who that I'm gonna hire is to say, hey, you know, you need to pay particular attention to the folks that you're waiting on at the concession stand, you know. And sometimes that people can--it does, certainly doesn't bother me. It might bother someone else. And, and I usually warn them about it. You know, some people can be kind of pushy, and they can kind of be disrespectful when you're waiting on them. But, hey, it never has bothered me 'cause right after I finish waiting on them, I'm gonna wait on somebody else that's very, very nice, you know.

MILLS CONT.:And I've learned that over the years. And, and, and I don't worry about it, you know. It's just all in sort of a day's work. And it--but on the most part, we've got the greatest, uh, customers and patrons. I know that Lisa and Hayward, our current operators of the theater, they were concerned about playing "Rocky Horror" and the, the folks that were, would be coming in to see "Rocky Horror." And I said, "Oh, you know, you don't have to worry about this." I said, "They're, they're gonna be--it's gonna be fine. There, there, you know, they might be rambunctious and loud and something like that, but they're--it's gonna be fine." And they remarked--and I've heard Hayward say this, that those people that come to see "Rocky Horror," that there's some--they're the most courteous people, and that--of, of maybe some of the patrons that we've run across that they are, all of them, they're thank you and they, you know, and they seem to appreciate what we're doing and, and they're--and to have a place to come, you know. And I can tell, too, that, uh, if it's a Kentucky Theatre crowd, you're playing, say, a more commercial movie, I can walk through the auditorium and at the end of the night I can tell whether it's a typical Kentucky Theatre crowd or if it's that you're getting people that's not your--might not be as many reg--well, you're getting the regulars, but you're getting many--you're exposing--the theater's being exposed to many, many other people that don't, maybe, typically come as much. And the reason I know that is, is they've left cups inside on the floor and they've thrown down things on the floor and got up, and they've left the theater and they've left them. Now, the Kentucky Theatre crowd at the end of the night, yeah, there's stuff to clean up. You know, when you have big crowds, you expect that. But they bring stuff out, and the trash cans are full with, they brought out the, the empty popcorn box or the half cup of, that they drank or didn't drink, whatever, and it's in the trash can. And these other folks are different. They have left the stuff in, on the floor and cup holders and everything. So I can tell if it's a, if it's a different crowd in the Kentucky, I can tell it, yeah.

COURTNEY:Anything else you want to say about the nineties before we close for today?

MILLS:I don't think so. I think we've talked about changes downtown and, and that the--a lot of changes that happened with new cinemas opening and closing at the malls, and, and it's a time of now more the, the theaters closed at, at Lexington Mall and Turfland Mall, and so we're now in, uh--theaters aren't in malls. They are in stand-alone buildings and multiplexes. So, but I think that that kind of finishes up that, that decade.

COURTNEY:Okay, great. Thank you so much. I look forward to talking to you about the 2000s in our next interview.

MILLS:Great.