UNKNOWN:Okay, cool. We can get started, and then we can get going. Oh, wait. Do you guys want to move the lights?

SUMMERS:You all will enhance [?? WORD UNCLEAR]. You do the--all the things that they do to the models that are on the covers of magazines?

UNKNOWN:I'm sorry?

SUMMERS:You will enhance the photo? (laughs)

SHACKLETTE:Oh, yes, of course. Make you look beautiful. (laughs)

SUMMERS:Yeah.

UNKNOWN:You already are beautiful.

SUMMERS:Oh, thank you.

SHACKLETTE:All right. Get started here, and.

SHACKLETTE:So, to get started, um, can you just tell us a little bit about yourself and your background? I know you talked earlier about how you were in education.

SUMMERS:Okay.

SHACKLETTE:So can you talk maybe a little bit about how you transitioned from that to?

SUMMERS:Well, I was born and raised in Lexington. Moved to Mount Sterling in '71 with my husband, and got involved with education and stayed in education for twenty-eight years doing many, many things, um, writing grants, working within the community, working within the schools, bringing schools and community together. So I retired in 2008. In 2009, I was hired as executive director of the Montgomery County Foundation, um, of the Education Foundation, I'm sorry. And then I did that, and then in 2011, um, they had, uh, a position open for the Director of Post Clinic, and I said, hey, would I qualify for that? And they said, well, apply. And I think there were forty people who applied. And they interviewed me, and I was hired. So I have been with Post Clinic since June of 2011. I'm going on (??)--It will be fourteen years in June. So it has been the most rewarding, uh, program, job--I hate to call it a job because it's just a part of who I am and giving to the community, and when the patients come in knowing that we're doing a good deed, it's just awesome. So, um, like I said, so I've been with it for fourteen years and almost, and just, I just find it--and it is, it is absolutely the most rewarding thing I've ever done in all my life. I'm, I'm not the one that takes care of the patients. I, I do the background work. So the ones who really make a difference in the life of the patients are the people who take care of them, the doctors, the nurses. But I go home every night when I've been at the clinic and we've seen patients knowing that I've made a tiny little difference in the life of someone. But it's our doctors and nurses and volunteers who make the big difference. I'm just in the background.

SHACKLETTE:Um, you talk about this being such a rewarding, um, experience. Is there anything, like, parti--in particular that makes it that way? Like--

SUMMERS:That makes it so rewarding like that?

SHACKLETTE:Yeah, yeah.

SUMMERS:Okay. I think I could name about--talk about two or three instances without mentioning names. Uh, we have actually had patients who have come to me, and they've cried when they're checking out and getting rescheduled for the next appointment, and they cried. Because they can't pay for the doctor taking care of them. And we had one patient in particular, and she said, I truly want to do something. I said, we took care of you, and I said, that's what we're here for. And she said, no, I want to do something just to show you how much I appreciate what you do. She was unemployed. She had no insurance. And she said, can I clean the clinic? And I said, only if you want to. So she came in the next week when we had no patients, and I'm walking down the hall, and she's in the bathroom on her hands and knees scrubbing the commode with her hands and no gloves. And I stopped right there and I said, no, no, no, you can't do that. You can't--I said, don't do that. And I said, you have to have gloves on. She said--but she said, I can't do it with gloves on. I can't get it right. The--those were her words. So I said, don't do that anyway. I said, don't do the bathrooms. I said, you can clean, but don't do the bathrooms. So that's just one type of person. And we had many, many patients like that. Uh, we had one patient I think I told you about. Um, she came, she was Medicare. She wanted to be seen at the doctor because she was sick. And we did not take Medicare patients at that time because Medicare will pay for them to go to the doctor, pay for the medications. Um, but she said, I only have Part A. Part A only pays for the hospital visits. So at that time, uh, we saw her. We took care of her. She was very, very sick. Her income was not that great on what she did have. She lived in public housing. So, uh, she was sick, like I said, when she came to see us. The board did make a change in policy where the--we do now accept people with Medicare. If they live within our income level, our income level is three-hundred percent of federal poverty level. We base it on three-hundred percent because that's what pharmaceutical companies accept. There's an application for patients that we complete. It's called PAP, and it's the Patient Application for Prescriptions. And, uh, we do that for a lot of patients because, um, they have to take expensive medication and they can't afford it. And, um, so we'll--we do that application for them, and it's to a pharmaceutical company. And what they'll do for--with that patient, we have to put in there. we have to--they have to complete an application. They have to show their income. And then they have to give proof of income. And, uh, so we fill that--we send it in. And then the pharmaceutical company will approve it for about 12 months, a year, then you have to reapply. But the pharmaceutical companies use three-hundred percent of the federal poverty level. And when I looked at it, I thought, well, wow, that's pretty good. But when you consider what gas costs you today, or if you go to the grocery cour--store and you're paying 5.99 dollars for a dozen eggs, which people quit buying, um, then you understand why three-hundred percent of the federal poverty level applies. And, and we do have patients that cannot even afford the cost of generic medicine. So, you know, there are, there are many outstanding stories that you could get from patients about why they come here. We even have some patients who get their insurance and they don't want to leave us. They'll go, well, I'll drop my insurance. No, no, no, don't drop your insurance. Just transition to another doctor. Uh, but if they get insurance and they--they're not within our income guidelines, then we will work with them transition the--to transition them into another doctor that will take care of them.

SHACKLETTE:How has The Post Clinic helped you develop a sense of community?

SUMMERS:Pardon me?

SHACKLETTE:How has The Post Clinic helped you develop a sense of community, personally, and maybe you could talk about how Post Clinic, like, the relation they have in the community with other organizations?

SUMMERS:Oh, the outreach is phenomenal. Um, you, you have so many people who can, being in education, you'll see some pe--sometimes you'll see people walk in the door and they'll say, Oh, you're Ms. Summers. Yes. And you, you don't want to ever invade their privacy or you don't want to tell personal things about them in public, but if they acknowledge you, then it, then it, it's okay to do that. But, um, The Post Clinic builds that sense of community because it's, it's a program that has a broad outreach, and the outreach is to people who are sick. And two of the things that we deal with the most would probably be hypertension, high blood pressure, and the other would probably be diabetes. And, you know, when you, when you take care of people who have those issues, they, they feel connected to you, and it's a connection not only to them but to their family also because sometimes family members will call them they don't have telephones so the family members will call, it builds up that community but I don't know you're--you know, when I talk about community I've always felt that community is important so even before I came be--before I came into the clinic, I always did a lot within the community. Visibility is very important, I think. Uh, with Post Clinic, sometimes you want to guard the pri--you, you do want to guard the privacy of the patients. You want to do that, too. But still, um, I have patients now that have been coming to us since 2012, 2015, and it's almost like they are family. You know, they reach out to you and they talk to you and they're happy to see you and when they come into the clinic now, and they leave the clinic, if I'm standing close to them or another volunteer is close to them, they always give a hug. And they always say thank you. And then they go into the community wherever they live and, you know, it's not just Montgomery County, we serve all of Kentucky--Eastern Kentucky. I've been here fourteen years almost and we've never turned a patient away. So you're constantly building community. That's what The Post Clinic is all about. Serving those in need, and you have people in need who live all over a community in the county, in the city or town, always. And it--there's just that sense of, of pride in what you do, and a sense of knowing that what you're doing is needed. It's beyond necessary. It's needed. And, uh, that's the reason I think I'm so happy to be at the clinic because, there are so many volunteers who give their knowledge and their time to serve others, and they too are building community. As a matter of fact, we have a big community that we've built. Just about all the volunteers, I only knew a couple of them, and now it's like they're my best (??) friends. They're my family, so.

SHACKLETTE:So you said that the clinic started in 1996, right? 1996?

SUMMERS:1996.

SHACKLETTE:1996. Uh, do you know how many counties The Post Clinic served then (??)?

SUMMERS:At that time, I think it was mainly, uh, Montgomery County and the four contiguous--and all of the contiguous counties. Primarily, it would have been Montgomery, Menifee, Bath, Powell, and, uh, Montgomery, Bath, Powell, Manatee, and what was it? I guess Clark. It would have been your fifth. It would have been the, no, and Nicholas County. It would have been all contiguous counties.

SHACKLETTE:And now you all serve close to forty counties?

SUMMERS:Well, last year, I mean, just in the past six months, we served twenty-seven counties in one state, Virginia. And so if they walk in that door, they take care of them. And, uh, when we say counties, we serve all of--we saw Montgomery County, all contiguous counties, eastern Kentucky. But we have a lot of patients that come to us from Scott County, from Mason County. Uh, we've had them as far as Jefferson County, Pike County, they come--you just--if there's a need. Uh, there's a, uh, great need for dental care. So we get a lot of them. And they're always sort of surprised when they come in for the dental program. They go, oh, you all do medical too? So we do it all. Do it all. So, and the program did start in 1996. And I don't know why I go into the community now and I'll talk about The Post Clinic. They go, Louise, what's The Post Clinic? I'm shocked that people in Montgomery County do not know about The Post Clinic. It's so well supported. But it's one of those hidden assets. And it truly is an asset. It's an asset to the patients who do not have medical care, who do not go to the doctor, and they're comfortable coming here. They're very comfortable, so.

SHACKLETTE:Um, how would you say The Post Clinic has grown since you started working here?

SUMMERS:Well, we've gone beyond contiguous counties. We've gone beyond five to serving all. Uh, well, look at the building we're in. You know, we started out, uh, when I started out at The Post Clinic in 2011, we were in the old post office downtown. And don't get me wrong, I was happy to have that space. It was absolutely awesome, but it was very cramped sometimes. And--but the, the waiting room was huge. Patients could come in there, and they had nice restroom facilities, and you had a, a big area for meeting space. But the area to see the patients, the doctor's rooms, the exam rooms, very small they, um, they weren't even as big as this area back in here, so you had that. So the growth, and then of course Dr. Byram Ratliff and his wife Jennifer gave us the building down here, so we were able to move from the old post office into this one in 2017, and we thought we'd gone to heaven when we got into that building, it was just so awesome to get in there and have all those exam rooms. And then Dr. Tingle came to us in, um, 2017. He said, I want to do a free dental program. I'm thinking, how do we do a free dental program? We don't have access to everything that they need. So we met with Dr. Roberts, and the dental program was born. Um, Dr. Razor, here in--he was a--he has passed away, but he was a dentist, a retired dentist here in Montgomery County, knew what we wanted to do. He said, you can have my facility to, to--not have it, but use it. Use my facility to do dental program. And he had a, a dental clinic downtown. And so we went in there with our dental program. And we operated out of that. And, uh, it was nice to have it. And some of the equipment was older. But they made it work. And we developed the dental program from that and then when we moved into this building down here, we were able to come to come--to accommodate both dental and medical, so you had, uh--we had three medical exam rooms, we had four dental exam rooms, we were able to do it all, and with dental x-rays too, we had that down there. So it was nice and then, um, Governor Bevin came to visit us in October, I'm trying to think, I want to say 2000--It was his last year in as governor, so what would that have been, '19? 2018, 2019? He came to visit us, and he liked what he saw a lot, and we received correspondence from him saying, I'm going to give you money to go toward the construction of a new facility. And from there, it just grew into this. And through community development block grants and HRSA funding from, uh, Congressman Barr, we were able to build this state-of-the-art facility. And people come in, and they see it. Patients come in. They're just, this is awesome, Louise. And it's awesome, so, it's, it's just grown, uh, exponentially. Um, you can see the growth here going from the old building downtown to this new one here now. And, you know, we, we don't talk about it, but we have a board of directors that's absolutely awesome. They're very giving. Uh, they're proactive within the program, proactive within the community at promoting what we do and who we are. So it's all of those components that make this Post Clinic very successful in what it does in taking care of people in need.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah, um, you talked about the past, but what do you hope to see in the future?

SUMMERS:Uh, in the future? Um, I'd hope to see us getting more and more patients. You know, because of volunteer doctors and everything, we've been very limited on the number of days that we could be open to serve the public. We're now open five days a week. We have dentists that come in every Monday and Tuesday. We have Olga Skinner, our nurse practitioner, who sees patients Monday through Friday. And the one thing that I'd like to see us do is have--I ha--have a limit of--not a limit, but I have at least, uh, twelve to fifteen patients on a daily basis in the medic--um in the medical area, and at least nine to ten in the dental on Mondays and Tuesdays. Growth would be there. I'd like to see us pick up more volunteer doctors, nursing staff. Uh, we could always use more volunteers. We use volunteers in all things. Uh, we even have a volunteer that cleans the, the facility for us on a monthly basis. We have one of our volunteers who is a retired teacher. She also does mentoring, and she has a group of kids that she works with. It's a leadership program, a teen leadership program. She brings those kids up here twice a month now. And they clean the facility. They don't clean in to--in the office area. They don't have access to where the patient charts are. But they clean the rest of the facility twice a month. She's always with them. They're never left alone. Um, so there's all of that that's going on. But I really would like to see more doctors, more nurses, more volunteers to accommodate what I hope will be the patients who will start coming in. And we are seeing more and more patients. You know, being open Monday through Friday, uh, when we first started opening on Thursdays and Fridays, we wouldn't have patients scheduled. Now I look at the books and we've got patients scheduled Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday. So it's happening. And I found that the patients are saying, I've been telling my friends about you and I've be--they've been telling their friends and we're getting them. Uh, so, I, I'd like to see just continued growth and expansion of services of what we do. I think that would be awesome. You know, but, um, I can't say enough about the staff that we have now. They're wonderful. You know, they give up their time. And, you know, it's easy to write a check and make a donation, but when you give up your time, that's invaluable. You can't put a price tag on giving an hour of service to somebody, and we have patients. I have one lady that's a nurse, and she's, she comes in every Wednesday. She's here, and she works until the last patient leaves, and sometimes that last patient leave--might leave at 3:30 or 4:00, and sometimes that last patient might leave at 6:30 or 7:00. So she stays the whole time and, uh, just gives up her time, and that's what they want. So what I would see--love to see happen is expanded growth. In both patients and volunteer service. You know, it, it's a wonderful program, and it is needed. It is needed, um.

SHACKLETTE:How many total staff members work here?

SUMMERS:Staff? We have, um, one, two, three. We have two dentists who volunteer. Uh, Dr. Tingle will probably not be volunteering after the end of this year. But we have Dr. Kendrick who volunteers and his wife, uh, works here. And then we have, um, two doctors who volunteer. Three, uh, we have one in Lexington that, that will substitute and come in in an emergency. We have about, at one time, we have five registered nurses. We have eleven board members who are very active. Then we have, on, on a regular basis, about twelve volunteers. Who make the clinic go. I mean, we have volunteers for each day of the week that come in each day. And, uh, they do everything. You know, they--they're just willing, they, they take on any responsibility. And not only do that, let me tell you, they bring in water and they put it in the refrigerator. They'll be up front. They'll say to the patients, would you like something to drink? Would you like coffee? Would you like water? And they give it to the patients. They're good.

SHACKLETTE:[?? WORDS UNCLEAR]]

SUMMERS:Yes, they do. And, and that's it. That's that sense of family, that sense of community, that's how they make them feel. You know, they don't come in feeling like they're a burden. The patients are really, you know, they smile. They hug us when they leave. It's that sense of family. They want to be here.

SHACKLETTE:The patient earlier we talked to talked about how they felt like they could talk about really anything when they came in here for their appointment, so--

SUMMERS:Yeah.

SHACKLETTE:--that checks out, yeah.

SUMMERS:Yeah, our dentists are absolutely awesome. I mean, I--when I sit down and talk to them, you just see how much they care. You know, and, of course, they wouldn't be volunteering if they didn't care. They do care.

SHACKLETTE:Yeah.

SUMMERS:Yeah. Yeah. And I have t--I would be remiss if I did not mention Dr. Roberts, who started this program in 1996. A very empathetic person who cares about the community, and he does a lot of, um, he does a lot of community service, and he makes--not only does he give of his time, he gives also financially, but he does it silently and in the darkness of night. He doesn't do it because he wants attention. He does it because er--it's a need, and, it--he is, he is the heartbeat of the post clinic. He is the reason that we exist today and hopefully that will continue to exist after we're gone. Yeah.

SHACKLETTE:[?? WORDS UNCLEAR] Any final thoughts?

SUMMERS:Nope. Just thank you for doing this for us, for promoting us. We, uh, really appreciate that.

SHACKLETTE:Of course. Thank you for agreeing to let us do it.

SUMMERS:Okay. Now remember, you have to enhance me.

SHACKLETTE:You got it. That's a promise.

SUMMERS:Okay. Hope it was okay.

SHACKLETTE:Oh, it was great.