HOWELL:Little dove singing for us.

KOMARA:I love it. Little morning dove. Do you go by Jeri Katherine, by the way?

I was gonna ask that.

HOWELL:I go by either.

KOMARA:Either? Okay, cool. This is an interview with Jeri Katherine Howell on

the 24th–it's the 24th, right? Yeah. Twenty-fourth of July, 2023 for the

Kentucky Climate, Kentucky Climate Change Oral History Project. This interview

takes place in Frankfort, Kentucky at Jeri's home. I, Zada Komara, the

interviewer, am a faculty member at the University of Kentucky. So, Jeri, just

to start, how are you today?

HOWELL:(laughs) How am I today? I am, like, really curious about the kinds of

questions you're gonna ask me. (laughs) And I'm feeling good. My Mondays–I

reserve Mondays for, like, creative work. So, this feels very much in line with

that. And

feeling excited. Had three cups of coffee, so a little jitter inside. (laughs)

KOMARA:Uh-huh, uh-huh.

HOWELL:Yeah, but good. How are you?

KOMARA:I'm doing well. I'm also excited about this interview. So, I usually

like to start with a little–some biography. So, tell me a little bit about yourself.

HOWELL:Okay. Oh, there's so much I can tell you. Well, I'm from Frankfort. I

was born here and grew up on, like, a hobby farm in the more rural side of

Frankfort. Franklin County, on the west side of Franklin County. And just grew

up exploring the farm and scream singing to the fields and, you know, dancing

and being very expressive as a child.

Making music with my sister, making art with my sister, going to my brother's

baseball games and–just grew up in a household that was very focused on family

and supporting each other's interests and talents, which was awesome. And my

parents really encouraged me to, to cultivate all my creative interests, like

visual art. I did a lot of visual art when I was younger. And then dance my

whole life. And then it really solidified with music and playing guitar and

writing songs and performing. And that kind of–that cemented in my life as, as

how I experienced the world and experience community, is through music. And also

I'm a mega nerd. I've always loved school and research and

learning new things, especially ecology and sociology and history. Really like

human-nature interaction and, and culture. I love Latin American culture. I love

Kentucky's culture, vast diversity of cultures. And I love speaking Spanish, and

did a lot of work with the Backside Learning Center in college and helped ran

a–run an after-school program in college for immigrant and migrant youth in

Boyle County, Mercer and Boyle County, and just took the arts and music with me

through all of that as a way of building community. I'm very rooted in this

place in Frankfort, in Franklin County, and the experiences

here. Not just the, like, geography and ecology of the creeks and the river, and

it's just so green and very inspiring to me as an artist and a human being, but

also being the capital. In high school I grew up–(clears throat) or in high

school, not I grew up, but in high school I would get out of class and get to go

lobby, you know, and go to every I Love Mountain Day that I could when I was in

school. And that was huge. That was pretty huge for my development as a teenager

and really identifying, identifying as an activist young in my life. And it was

really easy to plug into community initiatives growing up here, so–just feel

like I have a very strong sense of community here and that's why I came back

after some time away.

I'm married. (clears throat) It's my five-year anniversary this year. (laughs)

Just wild. Married to Nat Colton and we play music together a lot. (clears

throat) We have a dog, who's upstairs. And we both love plants and animals and

have a ton of native plants out in our yard. We live in this little carriage

house. (laughs) And, (clears throat) yeah, just love, love to live

interconnected with, with our neighbors and the environment and–yeah, live a

good life, I guess. Is there any, (laughs) any questions with that?

KOMARA:No.

HOWELL:That was a lot.

KOMARA:I love, I love your whole answer.

HOWELL:Okay. (laughs)

KOMARA:Can you talk just a little bit

about your educational background? You got kind of a cool educational journey.

HOWELL:Sure. Yeah, I–well, (sighs) I went to preschool in downtown Frankfort,

which was really cool. And went through first through eighth grade also in

downtown Frankfort at a Catholic school, which is–has really, you know, as a

child growing up with a Catholic education, it impacts your life in many ways.

Impact–it has impacted my life in many ways, some really awesome and some not

really awesome. And–but being physically downtown was really interesting because

I had a early sense of independence because after school and middle school, you

know, I could walk downtown to the coffee shop and hang out with friends and

stuff like that. Or you could walk to field trips within downtown.

And I would say I, I really kind of got into studying and sharing my own ideas

and also sharing music while I was in, in that time of my life, particularly

middle school. And then for high school, I went to Frankfort High, which is in

the independent school district–it's a public school still within the city

limits–and went through some–a little bit of culture shock coming from a private

Catholic school to a public school that was much more diverse and had–yeah, I

just got to experience people who had such different lives from me in a more

intimate way, every day in school together. And I loved it so much. That school

had such a rich culture and, again, very rooted in the community.

And developed a lot of my environmental activism at that time when I was in high

school, and took as many AP classes as I could or independent study classes as I

could, and–you know, went to the capitol as much as I could. Did, like, Kentucky

Youth Assembly and Kentucky United Nations Assembly or whatever all that's

called with the YMCA. And did the Governor's Scholars Program, which was very

important to meet people across the state who cared–who are my age, who really

cared so much about a lot of the social and environmental justice issues that I

cared about, and who I'm still friends with today and will be lifelong friends

with. I know. And then after high school, I went to Center College and I majored

in environmental studies and Spanish and minored in Latin American studies. And

while there, I studied abroad in Merida, Mexico and Antigua, Guatemala, but

also, like, in more rural areas of Guatemala. And every summer–I was, I was also

a, a Bonner Scholar through the Bonner Scholar Program at Center–and every

summer I did an internship with a nonprofit. The first summer was here in

Frankfort developing a community forest environmental education program. And

then the next summer was at the Backside Learning Center at Churchill Downs,

developing classes and just doing general social service support with

mostly migrant workers that work at, at Churchill Downs in the backside. And my

third, I guess, and final summer, I interned with the Nature Conservancy in

Louisville, helping run their youth program. Their youth, like, summer–what did

they call it? I guess like a professional development program to, to encourage

more young people to get involved in “green jobs” or quote unquote “green

careers” and their urban forestry program. So, yeah, and at, at Center I was

also very involved with the Folk Ensemble, which was very fun and probably one

of the main reasons I was able to get through school there. And

just awesome people. And through the Kentucky Music Ensemble, I was able to go

on tour. We did, like, a tour in the Northeast and–and then as an alum, alumna,

I was able to go to Japan with the Kentucky Music Ensemble later in life, you

know. But back to education, (laughs) my education. I took about five years off

after Center. I graduated a semester early from Center and yeah, took five years

off. And I had a lot of unlearning that I needed to do and very grateful that I

took that time. And in 2020, I guess it was, I started

the graduate program in Community and Leadership Development at UK. It's

something I had my eye on since I was in undergrad because Ivy Brashear had done

the program. Oh gosh, what was her first name? Something Pratt. She's now the

Jefferson County Extension agent. I can't remember her first name. Anyway, she

went to Center and did the program, and I talked with her about her experience

and I just kind of had my, my eye on it. Kara Cooper, who at the time was

running the Kentucky Student Environmental Coalition and I was really involved

in that in, in undergrad. So, yeah, after about five years, I decided it was

time to, to pursue some big questions that I had through a graduate program that

was funded. That was a big thing for

me. (laughs) So, so, I did that through quarantine, through the pandemic, and

graduated in May of 2022, I guess? Time is so strange now. I think it was

(laughs) 2022. I think I started in 2020 and then graduated in 2022, but I could

be off a year in between there. And it was a two-year program. So, I–do you want

me to tell you about that experience at all, or is that–?

KOMARA:Sure. Yeah, I definitely want to talk about your thesis at some point,

but go for it, yeah.

HOWELL:Yes, so most of my classes were online throughout the entirety of the

program. My research assistantship was

almost completely online. So, it was a very different experience of school and

learning than I had ever had before. But it worked really well because I also

had to sustain my job here. I have a–I'm the assistant director at Josephine

Sculpture Park. And so, it's–I maintained that position while in grad school,

just for–you know, financially I had to. And I wanted to as well. But it was, it

was a very weird time in everyone's life, in my life too. But I'm very–I'm

thankful I did it. Yeah, I learned a lot, met some incredible people, and I know

we'll talk more about it, so.

KOMARA:Yeah. Yeah, that’s, that's a really cool educational journey. You've

done some super impressive things. I, I can sense that you identify as a

musician, maybe first and foremost.

HOWELL:Like professionally, you mean?

KOMARA:Yeah, just as a person. Or am I wrong? (laughs)

HOWELL:I feel like it's much broader than that. I, I feel like I've used many

different umbrella terms, like “community builder”, “cultural organizer”.

(clears throat) Yeah, I guess those are the two terms I've used. That could, I

guess, in my mind, better encapsulate all these other things that I do,

including being a musician. Yeah, artist feels broader. I, I look at my

community work very much as a creative practice. So, sometimes it just feels

easier to say I'm a, I’m an artist in a way.

But when people ask me about my type of art, I usually say singer-songwriter.

So, yeah, (laughs) lots of things. I'm a hyphen person, like a hyphenated

(laughs) person. One thing I did not mention–and this is kind of my

education–but after, after school, I received a Fulbright English teaching

assistantship to Costa Rica and did that for 10 months. And particularly applied

to Costa Rica because I wanted to–I knew I wanted to come back to Kentucky. And

I really wanted to learn from what Costa Rica was doing as a country, but also

get to know more local communities as somebody in the school systems. And learn

about, you know, their environmental education,

their educational policies, their health care, what it's like to live in Costa

Rica. And Costa Rica is, like, half the size of Kentucky, space-wise. And

anyways, I just thought it would be a very eye-opening experience. And it, it

was, and I have applied a lot of what I've learned, more so in my personal life.

But also learned a lot of, of issues with my–with the United States and our

approach to public affairs, I guess, is what it was called? I didn't really

realize that the program was part of public diplomacy of, of the United States

before I, before I went. So, anyways, I learned a lot about the United States

being there, too, so. Yeah, there's, like, a whole other topic. (laughs)

KOMARA:Very cool, yeah. You, you just said that, you know, you consider, like,

your community work as creative practice, which I would love for you to unpack

that statement.

HOWELL:Okay. Well, (sighs) I might have to talk through it a little bit. So, I,

I have been recently, I guess in the past few years, really grateful for the

work of Adrienne Marie Brown, for putting to print thoughts and feelings that

I've had my whole life, and just feeling validated in the way of talking about

community as ecology and joy, and–

So, I think not only through her books and, and, you know, just even, like, her

blogs, but through that, and then also some of the research that I did in grad

school, just dedicated time exploring the concept of nature, or more than human

nature, and community and ecology and social communities, you know, and how that

is so related to what we know about ecology. All of that coming together, I feel

like I've been able to more concretely solidify my mind, at least for right now,

my concept of community. And, and keep coming back to this, this phrasing of the

quality and diversity of our connections

help determine our resilience, our, our ability to adapt to adversity or

challenge. And I think that the, the words quality and diversity is–it's not

like hundreds of weak connections. It's, like, several strong-rooted

relationships with people, place, other species, whatever, that allow us as

humans to be able to adapt. And that’s just–it's similar to, to what we

understand right now in ecology and ecological communities. The more diverse a

habitat is, the more able all of the species in it are able to adapt to

disturbance, to change. And I understand that these are ancient ideas that, you

know, we were not

taught due to white supremacy, colonization. You know, these are very simple,

basic things that I had to personally really work to be able to start

verbalizing because it, it just felt so, like, radical or that somebody would

think I was insane. But once more and more people started talking about it

publicly, I was like, “Oh god, fuck yes, okay, I'm not crazy.” (laughs) And, and

particularly thinking about the time that we're in now, as an artist and as

somebody engaged in, in community, I think a lot about, like, the arts and music

as medicine. And we are in such

a trying time with climate change, the impacts of climate change, you know,

politically–getting through a pandemic, experiencing the repercussions of

quarantine from the pandemic. And I think that, as somebody engaged in the

community, as a community builder, I think that it–and as somebody who considers

myself an artist or singer songwriter, I think that the arts and culture, at

least for me–like, my role in this is amplifying the arts and culture as a way

of coping, as a way of

connecting with people, as a way of–you know, if, if–to me it's really about

that connection, that quality and diversity of connections. And I think to get

through these times and to adapt, to be resilient, I truly believe that we need

to be more connected and interconnected. And just within my own personal skills

and experiences, music is such a powerful way to do that. And as somebody

engaged in the arts and culture as a nonprofit leader, I know that other mediums

also connect people. But also in the way of, of–I, I do a lot of gathering of

people and facilitation of people. And I think that for me, that is a creative

practice in

thinking through how to lift up certain voices, how to set up a space so that it

feels welcoming, how to market the thing, you know, which is like a creative

practice as well. I guess I just see things through that lens.

KOMARA:Yeah.

HOWELL:If that makes sense. (laughs)

KOMARA:Makes a lot of–good analysis, man. I'm kind of curious, I didn't–while I

read most of your thesis, I did not actually listen to any of your music. (laughs)

HOWELL:Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.

KOMARA:Which I'm sure most people do the opposite thing. I'm, I’m curious about

how your music specifically is entangled with, like, community building and

political ecology. And I mean, I know what genre you do, but I'm curious to know

how, how you explicitly engage with those things.

HOWELL:Sure.

Some of my songwriting is–like, for example, I have a song about immigration

and, like, trying to build empathy around immigration because most of my

audiences are white people, you know. I have a song about environmental justice,

specifically about, like, the urban heat island effect in Louisville, and–but I

break it down in a way that is, I think, catchy and you're able to engage with

the topic, or I hope audiences are able to engage with the topic in a more,

like, approachable way. But most of my music really, I think, focuses on my

individual connections with other humans, but also other species.

And this idea of nature connection, like this emotional connection with plants,

animals, ecology in general, shows up in a lot of my music. And just in terms

of, like, my own mental health, but also the research that I've read, nature

connectedness cannot–can be a predictor of sometimes health, but often, like,

someone's desire to want to have pro-environmental behavior or to, to care for

the environment, basically, to care for nature. I think too, just the–I grew up

playing first bluegrass music

and then met Carla Gover at a young age and John Herod at a young age. John

Herod lives here in Frankfort. And I met all these folks at Cowan Creek Mountain

Music School when I was 12 in Letcher County. And then I just really–I was

really embraced (clears throat) as a young musician in that community, and did

an apprenticeship with Carla through the Kentucky Arts Council in high school.

And she really helped me identify or helped me cultivate my voice really as a

songwriter and performer, but also helped me better understand what it meant for

me to be playing music that I learned from folks in Appalachia, and music and

styles of playing music

that developed, you know, in Appalachia and particularly in Eastern Kentucky,

some of the songs she was teaching me. And so, I think in, in that way too,

honoring that–the style, (clears throat) the style of music that inspires a lot

of my music comes from a specific ecology and geography and political ecology. A

particular connection to nature and a particular struggle sometimes too. And so

that's kind of always in the background of my music playing. Even though

sometimes I'm playing a song in a style that doesn't sound anything like

old-time music, it's still there, you know, as my base, kind of. Yeah, I don't

know if that answers your question. (laughs)

KOMARA:Yeah,

that’s, that's really very cool. I know Carla and a lot of those folks from

Letcher County. And this seems like a beautiful way to honor, as you said,

ecology and geography. And I'm curious about, like, how you've engaged with

climate change, specifically through the arts–

HOWELL:–Sure–

KOMARA:–music and otherwise, because you said you work for the sculpture park.

So, overall, the arts and climate change.

HOWELL:Yeah, I think that's something new that I'm, that I’m really wanting to

be more explicit about. I think that in my mind, I can have these, like,

broader–everything I've talked about previously, you know, like, all these

broader picture ways of how–I know nature connection, for example, is connected

to humans getting

through climate change. (laughs) But I'm really, really interested in being more

explicit about that as an artist. And I think that the particular–really, it was

my thesis that made me–well, let me back up. When I was thinking through ideas

for my thesis, when I was presenting thesis ideas, this was the one that scared

me and excited me the most. The one that was what I ended up doing, which is

interviewing young people in Kentucky about their climate activism. And it

scared me the most because I had gotten so burnt out on

specifically environmental justice activism in college, and had intentionally

taken time out of–like, and when I say environmental justice activism in

college, I'm talking more about, like, direct action and organizing people to

sign petitions or go to a rally or, like, pressure your campus president or

things like that–more like direct action, traditional activism. I got really

burnt out and just didn't feel like it was authentic to me and who I was at that

time, and really needed to figure out my place in it. And I kind of shifted more

into environmental education, like non-formal environmental education after

that, and found a lot of healing

and a lot more, like, flow and ease in that. And also felt like I got

connect–got to connect with much more–a, a greater diversity of people in my

community, a variety of ages, rather than organizing with people, you know, my

own age and feeling like I was hitting my head against a brick wall sometimes.

So, choosing to do my thesis with this question, it was, like, a time for me to

face the climate change topic head on and–which is something I had been avoiding

because of, like,

honestly, mental health reasons, and because I had gotten burnt out previously

and I was scared. And I just had this, like, developing curiosity in my mind and

in my body about, like, really what is my role in addressing climate change more

specifically. And I just–I felt like one way to do that–this is, like, a selfish

reason, is one way to do that is to, to explore what it means to be a young

person engaged in climate change right now in, in the state of Kentucky. And

what are the challenges? Are they the same as they used to be when I was

engaged, you know, when I was younger? Are people still struggling with the same

things? What are people thinking the solutions are right now? And, you know, do

I really have a

place in it? And I do. (laughs) You know, but there were a lot of, I had a lot

of insecurities about facing climate change more directly. And I think it's just

one of those things where it's like, you don't really want to talk about it

until you start talking about it and then it's like, “Holy shit, (laughs) why

isn't everyone talking about it?” So, the thesis kind of ripped the band-aid off

for me. And I’m, and I’m–I am trying to identify how to talk about it and bring

it into my art more directly. So, I can let you know later. (laughs) But, but,

you know, generally the nature connectedness piece has, has been a through line.

And, and I feel like that is part, a big part of my, of my work in climate

change and also community building, like helping people realize that they are

not alone, they are not isolated, that we live in community, and that we are

here for each other, which is currently and will be, for the foreseeable future,

really integral to adapting through climate change disasters, so.

KOMARA:Yeah, I mean this is obviously one reason that I wanted to interview you

because so far everybody that we've interviewed I think has been over the age of

40. And you know, you work, you got to work with youth, which, you know, I think

you defined as, like, 18 to 24 for your study population, based on some cool

ideas like using Sway, or the–er, Stay–like, Stay Together

Appalachian Youth, how they define youth. But like, how–you know, I'm curious,

you know, how do you, how do you see young people thinking about climate change?

Like, what are they doing? How do they–how are they thinking about it?

HOWELL:Sure. And again, as you said, it's only 18 to 24. I would have loved to

do, you know, much younger, but within two years it's (sighs) hard to get all

the permissions for minors. But at least I can speak to the folks I interviewed,

which there were seven of them. I can speak to what they shared with me about

how they're thinking about climate change. And it's, it’s interesting–well,

they're thinking about climate change in a way that is very intersectional. And

in the–in that climate change is something that impacts everyone,

everywhere, but not in the same way. And really approaching the topic of climate

change through an intersectional lens. And seems like several of the people I

interviewed got into climate change work through reproductive justice work,

primarily, or women's–and women and children's access to education, and then

that led them into climate justice work. Housing justice, and then they got into

climate change. You know, it’s, it’s–young people are recognizing that it is a,

it is an intersectional issue and challenge. They're also thinking about it in

a, like, in a way that it's not gonna get better, you know. It's, it’s how do we

adapt to it,

which is what the most recent climate change report shared, you know. Several of

the people that I interviewed are addressing–they, they express that they're

addressing climate change through mutual aid and skill sharing, like

self-reliance skill sharing. Things from yoga, like learning how to calm your

own body and mind, to herbalism, like how to care if you're sick and the, you

know, and the system crumbles, how are you gonna care for yourself? Or for some

of the folks I interviewed, you know, the system, the government they shared,

like, never has worked for them, so they're learning these things now. So, like,

yoga, herbalism, all the way to “How do we distribute

resources and money to people that need it in the face of floods?”, you know,

that young people were pointing to climate change as a cause of. So, mutual aid

is one of the responses. And a lot of people in Kentucky, a lot of the young

people in Kentucky were talking about climate change–well, let me back up. I

looked at, I looked at the, the data through this, like, lens of positionality,

and it was really interesting in that all of the participants had a significant life

experience, which is one of the main frameworks I was looking at, is a

significant life experience. A significant life experience of witnessing some

form of environmental destruction, and that's what got them into climate change

work in part. But when you put the lens of positionality on top of that, the

folks who shared growing up poor, who were people of color, the witnessing of

environmental destruction happened directly to them, whether that was through a

natural disaster, through being unhoused and experiencing weather, weather

shifts. And then those who were white predominantly experienced

the environmental destruction, like, secondhand, through a study abroad

experience, through a community service project, that were in, like, global

south communities or that were in marginalized communities. For example, in

Louisville, Kentucky, like on an environmental justice tour. One of the

interviewees who got into climate justice work, who, who witnessed environmental

destruction firsthand, talked about, you know, not being able to have a garden

in her yard because her yard had coal slurry in it, and, and her family didn't

want to grow a garden in her yard because of that, and she was connecting that

to climate change. You know, and she was connecting her family, having had black

lung experiences, she was connecting that to climate change. So, it's also,

like, the language

around it, around–with young people, it seems that climate justice is more than

climate change. It's, like, environmental justice. It's, you know, it’s, it’s,

it’s becoming a more umbrella term for all of these issues we're, we’re experiencing.

KOMARA:Yeah, and you mentioned at the beginning of your thesis–download number

139, if you were curious. (both laugh) It was–it's great, it's a fantastic

thesis, like, really, really good–

HOWELL:–Thank you so much–

KOMARA:–and relevant. But you mentioned at the beginning that, you know,

adults, quote unquote, real, “real adults”, “adult adults”, kind of look down on

youth climate activists and youth environmental activists because they feel like

they have a voice but no power. And I'm just–like, I'm interested to, to hear

your perspective

on, on, on power, basically, like, power and, and youth climate activism and

youth environmental activism in the Commonwealth.

HOWELL:Sure. I was really surprised. Like, the, the piece that you're

referencing, I think is in the lit review, which is what came up, you know, when

I was working through all the, the literature. I was really surprised that when

I asked directly about challenges–like, challenges or barriers that people were

facing–like, when I asked the interviewees, no one directly brought up, like,

adult–er, ageism, or adults not listening to them in Kentucky specific–well, I

mean, some people talked about, like, frustration with lawmakers.

And–but they never said like, “Oh, we are treated so–like, people don't take us

seriously because we're young.” That wasn't, like, a main challenge that they

talked about. Now, maybe it was just, like, an understood thing. And I didn't

want to ask about it directly because I didn't want to sway (laughs) what they,

what they shared as challenges. But yeah, it, it seemed like interviewees were

talking about it more so in terms of, like, politicians don't listen or, like,

the system being capitalism or our current, like, democracy, like, that's just

not working, and wanting something completely different. But me personally,

like, my thoughts on power, I think that–

(sighs) I, I found it really insightful how much the people I was interviewing

were focused on, like, their immediate communities and the people around them,

and how to organize their localized communities in a way that would better

address climate change now or in the future. Which seems more approachable,

seems more possible and may frankly be really key. There were some interviewees that–

there were maybe one or two that really liked to focus on big policy changes and

seemed to still have faith in, in, in electing the right person who can make

positive changes and, and, like, make Kentucky a, a more quote-unquote

“environmentally friendly state”. I think we need all of it. Yeah. (laughs) And

I will say that the people that I interviewed–you know, I think all of them

would agree with that statement. Most of them shared, like, there's room for

every single person in

this movement and this work, you know.

KOMARA:Yeah, yeah. So, a, a question. So, I used to be involved with Stay a

little bit. I went to grad school with Tammy Clemons. And one thing that we kind

of wrestled with is what does it mean to be–like, who are, who, who are the

youth, right? So, like, I was in my 30s and Tammy's in her early 40s and we're

like, “Are we too, are we too old for this?” And I don't know. I read on your

bio you made some comment about, like, former environmental activists. And I was

wondering, like, do, does it, like–obviously you're not a former activist.

You're still doing this work. Like, I don't know. Like, how do you, how do you

identify in terms of, like, age and with your study population?

HOWELL:Yeah, I–that was one of the challenges that people shared when I was

interviewing them that really resonated with my own experience, is this, like,

question of aging out–and I know that that came up

in the interviews I read that Tammy did–that there is some really–there's some

awkwardness in being, like, a young activist who's, like, exceptional. You know,

like, there's this idea that, like, “Oh my gosh, young people care and are doing

this awesome work and yes! Yeah, you go, go!” You know, and it's really

wonderful and it's great that there's, like, that cohort of peers that are

around your age. And then I would say once you graduate, like a traditional

undergraduate graduation age of, like, 23 to 26 ish, it gets a little awkward,

it seems. It got awkward for me and a few of my–of the people that I interviewed

were, were feeling that too. And

I'm 29 now–I'll turn 30 this year–and I do not consider myself, like, a youth

activist. I think depending on who I'm talking to I would consider myself young.

And, and the interviewees helped me understand really quickly that, currently

among young quote-unquote “organizers”, youth is, like, a term for more high

school age organizers. And I think that comes out of language that Sunrise uses,

that there are, like, youth organizers that are high school age, and then some

of the folks I interviewed were put in these mentor roles after they had aged

out of that high school space, but they

were like, “But we're still young, but we're not high schoolers, and now we feel

like moms and, like, this is awkward.” (laughs) And yeah, you know, I remember

being asked to be continued after I graduated, the Kentucky Student

Environmental Coalition would still reach out and, like, try to get me to

engage. And aside from my own personal reasons of needing to take a break from,

like, that direct action activism, I also just felt too old. I was like, “No,

I'm not a student anymore.” You know, I'm not–I need to figure out, like,

awkwardly what the hell I'm doing (laughs) as not a student. I'm becoming an

adult, like, like that kind of thing. And that was–you know, again, that was a

huge challenge that a lot of people

shared that I interviewed about, learning to live on their own as an adult. You

know, paying their rent, finding a place to live, getting roommates, paying

their bills, while trying to be engaged in community work and how do you do

that. Like, finding that balance was a huge challenge for a lot of people within

the population that I studied. I think it's–yeah, I think it's a very subjective

term and changes depending on the context. (laughs) I don't know your–er, I

don't remember your specific question, but I know it was generally about young.

KOMARA:That was it. And I'm also–I'm really interested in your, your

perspective of how youth and this awkward liminal period of youth but not youth

and, you know, grown-ass adults, as I guess

my students would say, you know, are–you know, I, I'm interested in your

perspective on how interconnected these groups are, or are they? How do they

interact? Like, what do they think of each other doing this climate work?

HOWELL:Yeah. (sighs) I just–again, based on the interviews, there were a couple

interviewees who felt there was–like, I, I would perceive it as some ageism a

little bit against high school students, like that they were immature, that they

didn't know what the hell they were doing, that they had to be handheld. And

folks who are a little older, who are asked to be in these, like, leadership

mentorship roles felt kind of disgruntled about it and resented really being

asked to take care of these high school students.

And the reason that they explained why they felt that way is because they wanted

to continue to be involved in the direct action. They didn't really want, like,

this administrative leadership development role. Like, they understood that that

was important, but they didn't feel like they could be as directly engaged

anymore. And, you know, so that was something I did not expect at all. That was

a big surprise for me to hear. So, there was, like, that tension. But if I focus

beyond the, the thesis and I just think about my own personal experience, the

reason I got engaged in activism in high school was

through, like, a very intergenerational experience, and it was often folks who

are a lot older than me doing awesome work in the community asking if me and my

friends would want to get involved, and then, like, we would self-organize with

them and, like, show up and volunteer or help them get more volunteers, things

like that. And, and then even through KFTC [[Kentuckians for the Commonwealth]]

when, when we would go to Island Mountains Day and I would sometimes go to the

annual meeting when I was younger. That felt very intergenerational to me, and

that was always really important to my experience of community as an artist, you

know, playing music with people of all ages, but then that's just like how I

experienced community organizing. And I hope,

I really hope that it continues to be. I think that–I don't really, I don’t

really know what–I don't have a really great sense of what it, it, what it looks

like now, like, in terms of–I'm not involved with KFTC, not really involved in

KSEC. [[Kentucky Student Environmental Coalition]] I'm just–I'm, like, involved

here, you know. (laughs) Not in a specific environmental organization per se,

but just as a engaged community member working with different organizations.

Yeah, I don't have a good sense of it. But those are just some things that

popped up.

KOMARA:Yeah, yeah, cool. And you know, what in your opinion are some big

lessons, some big takeaways that, you know, we all in the Commonwealth of

Kentucky and beyond should be getting from,

like, youth climate activisms in terms of, like, community organizing, community

building, activism, whatever?

HOWELL:Sure, I think the, like, lens of anti-oppression and collective

liberation is really, like, very strong among youth organizers, young

organizers. And I think that that's central. I think that a lot–at least from

the folks that I interviewed, having people of color lead the conversation and,

and lead the, the visioning, but that was a struggle. Like, that organizations

were learning how to do that without dumping labor on people of color. And you

know, I think we need–those are lessons to continue learning

and figure out what that looks like. (laughs) I also think among young people,

there's this reinvigorated commitment to joy and pleasure and celebration, and

that didn't necessarily feel like it was there when I was more engaged. And I

think that's really important and a big lesson to continue forward. Yeah, those

are big ones.

KOMARA:Yeah, awesome. And what about, I don't know, big takeaways for you, from

your work overall, from high school to present?

HOWELL:

I think that I had a bit of an identity crisis in high school and college

about–I, I, like, siloed my, my passions and skills and experiences. I had,

like, my music life, and I had my, my academic life, and I had my, you know,

nonprofit life, or whatever. And it's something I still struggle with today, but

I feel so much more confident about blending them all and really just embracing

who I am and these gifts that I have and what I have to share with the world

while I'm here, you know. And just how amazing

and important the arts are in, in, in any struggle. (laughs) You know, but with

my particular interests within these social environmental justice movements,

just for the joy and celebration, having music and dance and visual arts, for

communicating messages, having music and dance and visual arts, you know. It's

just so central to our connectedness and our being to, to have the arts bathing

us, you know. And I don't think I could have said that as confidently when I was

younger. Now I can. (laughs)

KOMARA:I

love that. And I think I'm gonna make my students listen to your interview by

the way–

HOWELL:–Aww–

KOMARA:–in at least one of my classes. So, I'll ask for them, like, you know,

what advice do you have for young people sort of navigating this fear and

uncertainty in an era of global climate change? And how do you think they can

get involved?

HOWELL:Sure. Yeah. I would say figure out–so I'll go back to Adrienne Marie

Brown, who I know was inspired by a lot of other people, but the, the idea of,

like, fractal and adaptive organizing in that, like, start with you and figure

out–in terms of, in terms of addressing the fear or the anxiety or whatever

around this topic–like, figure out what works for you. What are your,

what are your coping skills? What do you need? What boundaries do you need? You

know, it's okay to, to need to tend to going to work so you can pay your rent,

you know, or taking a break. Or it's also okay to be really, really involved.

And anyways, just figure out what works for you, whether it's–and, and what

fills you up so that you can take care of yourself through, through this

experience, through this organizing, and through frankly a topic that is just so

devastating, can be so devastating. And allow yourself to feel that and grieve

that. And that this is not like

an either or experience. This is an and, both, gray, big, mixy, mushy rainbow of

(laughs) everything. There's, like, no right way to do this or think about this.

It's so big. So, figure out what you need. And in the interviews, a lot of that

was, like, hanging out with friends, going on a hike, making art, doing yoga,

going to therapy, living in a communal living situation to where, you know, you,

like, share meals and process things together. But people need different things,

obviously. And then, you know, who are you? Who do you–what skills and, and

loves and passions do you have? And what brings you joy? Because that's your contribution.

Whether you're a musician like me and you can get involved, or whether you

really love research, you really love graphic design, you really love public

speaking, you know. It's such an interdisciplinary struggle movement that truly

everyone does have a role in it. So, find out your passions and joys and, and

that, and have that be what you bring to the work. And then how to get

involved–you asked me that, right? I, I really do think that the Kentucky

Student Environmental Coalition is doing some awesome work. And in terms of,

like, trainings and kind of ways of thinking around this work, they offer some,

some great resources

there. You know, I think KFTC can still be a place to learn and get involved. I

guess established organizations can be an easy way, if you're curious, to, like,

go and meet other people that are also interested in, in similar work and learn

how to plug in there. But also, like, you can start your own project and meet

other people that way. For example, if you're a visual artist, you can have,

like, your own exhibition about climate change, and then you're gonna meet all

these awesome people that come to your exhibition, (laughs) and then you can

learn about great things and get involved that way. But yeah, you know, at least

my personal experience is that I, I, I worked within organizations that were doing

work I was interested in, and then I met people and kind of snowballed from

there. So, it worked for me. It might not work for everybody, but that, that's

one way.

KOMARA:Yeah, great answer. What's next for you?

HOWELL:Lunch. (both laugh) What's next for me, just like, in general? Or–well,

I guess in the context of what we've been talking about. Very similar to what I

just shared. You know, figuring out what you need is a constant, lifelong

process. (laughs) It changes over time. So, I am continually learning and

healing and figuring out what I need while doing this community work. So, I

guess I'll share that if your students

listen, that this doesn't end. This is a lifelong journey. So, continuing that

for myself and, as I mentioned before, really wanting to identify how to bring

in discussing, bringing out the emotions of or breaking down complex ideas of

climate change within my music, within my teaching, within the work that I do at

Josephine Sculpture Park and within, like, our city parks here. Whether that's

in the signs that we put out, like the language and the signage that we put out,

or the art that's exhibited, or, you know, even as social media, our social

media language and posts. Just figuring out how

I can filter that more as a, as a community organizer, artist, cultural–or,

whatever. Whatever you want to call me. And, and continuing to, to cultivate

those quality, diverse connections within this community locally, but, you know,

even nationally and internationally too. And just continue to share resources. I

think that's such a huge, a huge thing, is sharing resources and ideas with

people. And not–for me, not being afraid to share my ideas has been, you know,

something I've had to really push in me. Like, sharing my ideas, my creative

ideas. And I've found that the more I'm willing to talk about

something like climate change, or even meeting with you–you know, there was that

scared feeling when you emailed me and it took me forever to get back with you,

but it's, like, it’s because I care about this and I'm still thinking about it

and it's still messy, and it's like I'm having to get over that perfectionism

bullshit. And–because it's just, like, not real, it is very unhealthy, you know,

rooted in a bunch of bad shit. (laughs) So, I would say continuing on that

journey as well, in talking and, and creating about this topic, about climate

change. I'd love to do more with the research that I did. And I don't know what

that means yet. But I would like to.

KOMARA:Cool.

It really is a fantastic thesis.

HOWELL:Thank you.

KOMARA:Theses aren't, like, good as a general rule. (both laugh) Yours is

really good.

HOWELL:Thank you.

KOMARA:Yeah.

HOWELL:Thanks.

KOMARA:And you know, I feel like you're, you’re a very expansive thinker when

it comes to climate change and environmental activism and community building.

And I feel like my questions have probably only scratched the surface. So, like,

what have I not asked you that you think we should know, everyone listening to

this project now in 20 years?

HOWELL:Oh, that is such a good question. Did you say in 20 years?

KOMARA:Well, hopefully we'll still here in 20 years, right? (laughs)

HOWELL:I know. Yeah, that's like where–I just think. It's

so hard to think about. For me, it can become overwhelming, if I let it, to

think about what the world could look like in 20 years. You know, and there is a

possibility that it is okay. (laughs) You know, I know that climate change

disasters will be exacerbated and continue. And it's even just this year in

2023, and, and last year or the past couple years, you know, I don't feel like I

had directly experienced climate change before. Until,

you know, I saw friends who lived in eastern Kentucky post about the flooding,

flood after flood after flood. And, like, my whole body is getting chills right

now. And, and then this summer, you know, in Kentucky, not feeling safe going

outside because of the Canadian wildfires. And that's just–I feel like I've been

so privileged and blessed. So far, you know, in, in my personal experiences or

lack of experiences of direct impact of, of climate change, in 20 years from now

or even next year, you know, I, I hope that we–to me, it's like I just really

hope that we continue to care for each other. And

take care of ourselves the best way we can, but really take care of each other.

And, and realize our interdependence with our human neighbors and non-human

neighbors. Yeah–yeah. Because I, I mean, even just thinking about this question,

I'm getting, like, emotional shutdown. And I just really hope that I want to

work through that. I want to be able to work through that. And I hope we

continue to. And I know we will because, you know, humans have gone through so

much. I think that's another thing is, there can be a lot of hope in looking at

history and

how communities have adapted and how resilient we are. So, I, I hope, like,

telling those stories. Like, I need to tell myself those stories and I hope we

can continue to share those stories in the future. We can do this and, you know,

don't give up. I, I think that I have, I have accepted that, like, I am thinking

more about adapting to climate change rather than preventing it. Like, when I

was in high school and college, some of college, that was the conversation, was,

“What can we do to save us from climate change?” You know, and that was

really–even though it was, like, terrifying, it was hopeful. I can't imagine

being a 16-year old now and the conversation being, “How are we going to adapt

to climate change? Here are the predictions. This is what's likely gonna happen.”

Like, what the fuck? (laughs) Oh, my gosh. How, you know, how, how difficult?

Yeah, continue to look at, at–I think there's, of course, so much wisdom in

staying connected with and learning from elders. And I think there's so much

wisdom in connecting with young people. So, I hope–I guess I hope that we have

an intergenerational movement, and to me, that's part of, like, being connected

in your community and taking care of each other, is across ages. Yeah. Again, I

don't even

remember your initial question, but– (laughs)

KOMARA:It was anything else you want us to know?

HOWELL:Oh, right, right, right. I got stuck on–

KOMARA:–the questions that I haven't asked. (both laugh)

HOWELL:Yeah. Oh, I just–I hope we can still swim in creeks and rivers and

stuff. Yeah, for me, at least right now in my life, I'm–it's been one of the

most difficult years of my life emotionally, just like in my personal life. And

I have found so much strength and, like, this new found sense of spirituality

and, and my place in this time in the world, through connecting with, like, plants.

And really just being very present with how my feet feel and creek water and,

you know, looking for caterpillars on host plants. And I think that sometimes

that's what my activism is gonna have to look like just to take care of myself,

you know, and then sometimes it's gonna be big and loud. And I'm okay with that.

And I'm okay with that with other people, too. (laughs) Yeah.

KOMARA:Yeah. What a fantastic answer. This has been really great.

HOWELL:Thanks. I had a good time, too.

KOMARA:Like I said, very expansive interview, expansive thinker.

HOWELL:Yeah.

KOMARA:This one will be listened to, hopefully in 20 years.

HOWELL:Yeah. It's wild to think about.

KOMARA:Right? (both laugh)

HOWELL:Yeah.

KOMARA:

Yeah. Well, thank you so much for taking the time and sitting with me and, you

know, sharing.

HOWELL:You're welcome. Thanks for listening, anybody, in whatever time.

[End of recording]