BOYD:Okay, we're recording. This is Doug Boyd. It is July 25th, 2024. Our--this is interview session number two with Ruth McClain Smith. Right?

SMITH:That's right.

BOYD:I missed that last time.

SMITH:It's okay. I go by both.

BOYD:I know, I know.

BOYD:So you've just finished recording an album?

SMITH:Oh we have.

BOYD:So I wanted I want to talk about this. So--

SMITH:--it's so exciting--

BOYD:--So, so let's go back to the beginning of this album from concept. Tell me about, like, making the turn. okay, we're performing, we're going to do a new album. Take me back to that moment.

SMITH:Well, we're always thinking of doing a new album. I mean, that's that's a continual thing. It's not a oh, today we'll start. It's, it's actually we're always thinking of that. And we used to do an album a year.

BOYD:Right.

SMITH:And then it--we had a time where we didn't record as much. And then we did our 50th anniversary CD called Celebrate Life. And so now it's--now this one is an exciting one. It's, it's kind of we don't have the name for it yet. And so we don't have it completely ready to, to promote and so forth because we haven't gotten quite that far. But we did get the recordings, our parts all done. So our files are all done, and it's so fun. And Rickey Wasson is taking care of it for us. And he's a super hero and so respectful of the music, and he understands the music so well. He cares about it.

BOYD:He really does.

SMITH:And so he, he comes to the project bringing a level of expertise that we're appreciative of.

BOYD:So, you know, you all are so experienced playing together. Um, who produces--like, who serves that role as producer in terms of, like, shaping things and whatnot? Is Rickey doing that or--?

SMITH:Actually, we self-produce and we've always done our own productions.

BOYD:But--but, pr--

SMITH:--on, on intentionally--

BOYD:--yeah.--

SMITH:--um, so that we have a little more input.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And, and lots of reasons behind that. And this time also we're self producing and it's kind of a team effort.

BOYD:Good.

SMITH:We do this--all of the things we do we do together, and, um, with with great respect for each other and we do kind of find roles that each of us do.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know, to make, the make the whole thing work. Raymond, is, is--if we had to pick one person, it would probably be Raymond. Although he is, is part of the team and he, you know, we really all work together. And Rickey also helps, you know, if there's something--

BOYD:--oh yeah--

SMITH:--if something he notices, you know, he might mention it.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And so it's really a--it was a joyful week.

BOYD:I bet, okay--

SMITH:--recording--it was just an absolute joy.

BOYD:So where is the studio?

SMITH:The studio is in Clay City.

BOYD:Yeah,

SMITH:And it's, it's part of part of Rick's Music and Electronics, um, building. Rickey Wasson also has the Meadowgreen Music Park that, that is so active and, um, current, um, honoring the music that has been in the past and is happening and in the future. Rickey also is watching the, the next generation.

SMITH:Yeah. And that's one thing that makes that particular place Meadowgreen Music Park so vibrant.

BOYD:Yeah. My, my friend Chuck, who I mentioned before the interview, who is doing the--has been doing the research on this project, um, who's a great musician himself, he's been trying.--

SMITH:--Chuck Cox--?

BOYD:--yeah, yeah, he's been trying to get me to Meadowgreen. I haven't been yet.

SMITH:Yeah, okay, well, that's where the album release is going to be--

BOYD:--oh fantastic--

SMITH:--so I'll let you know--

BOYD:--perfect--

SMITH:--when that is.  You can come join us.

BOYD:Okay. So, um, so you've got this album coming up, and you've--you guys have gone down there, um, to record. Did you stay down there or did you commute back and forth?

SMITH:No, it's close.

BOYD:It's close. Clay City is -----(??)

SMITH:Yeah, it's close for everybody. And we're coming from different places, and so we would meet there.

BOYD:And how much--what--walk me through the prep process of like--you had songs--how many songs did you--was--did songs not make the cut on the album?

SMITH:Um, we got together, the band all got together. It's, it's Raymond and Alice, and Al and Daxson and I, got together and decided on the songs. Put in songs that we thought would work well together with this project. And then we scheduled rehearsals because everybody's so busy.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And so it's, it's tough to find spare time. Extra time. (laughs) So we have to schedule rehearsals. And so we scheduled some rehearsals, um, to go through and make sure we had the material completely ready and that--for recording, because it's different when you get a song ready for stage, it's different than when you get it get it ready for recording, um, there are some different focuses. And so we wanted to get them completely ready so we wouldn't waste Rickey's time and so forth. And, and then--and we met one day and to do--to start that process and it happened that a whole bunch of us got Covid.

BOYD:Oh.

SMITH:And so we didn't get to do (laughs) the next, the next, um, rehearsals other than on our own.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

SMITH:And so then when we met at the studio, it was just fun and fresh and exciting and, and just fell into place. And I think it's partly because we've played together so much that even if it's a song, we haven't done a lot yet, it just fell into place.

BOYD:Yeah, and you feel pretty good about it, I can tell.

SMITH:I do. I'm so excited. I'm so thrilled to--I love the recording process. I love that whole experience is exhilarating, um, and it's so alive and, and it's just exciting to be recording--

BOYD:--there's a magic--

SMITH:--all the projects.

BOYD:There's a magic to the recording stuff. I love that, too.

SMITH:Yeah, and, and Rickey's studio has big windows. Even if we're in an iso-booth and he has a center, uh, studio part, but we can all see each other so we can be playing at the same time, seeing each other, hearing each other. But it has the separation so that Rickey can work with it.

BOYD:Oh, that's so great.

SMITH:And, and it was--it's just so exciting to be--all be there together, and it just--

BOYD:--yeah, yeah--

SMITH:--it happens.

BOYD:So what's your timeline? What are you thinking in terms of mixing?

SMITH:It's pretty fast.

SMITH:Yeah.

SMITH:It's pretty fast because we'd like to have it for this fall, you know. And, and everybody's on it. And so it's not it's not going in a drawer waiting. You know, it's, it's, it's in process right now. Rickey's mixing and Jody Miller is working on the design.

BOYD:Oh nice Jody's great.

SMITH:And, and it's going to work pretty quickly.

BOYD:Yeah, good, oh good, I can't wait. So I can't wait for the for the release.

SMITH:We're working on the publishing and yeah getting all the rights a lot of them are, are ones that, that we've written and so that helps.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Um, and then we have some friends, uh, Brink Brinkman brought us a song. And so we're doing one of his. And that's exciting.

BOYD:Oh yeah.

SMITH:It's called "Would I"

BOYD:"Would I". Okay.

SMITH:W-O-U-L-D "Would I".

BOYD:Oh that's fantastic. Well, I'm just so happy.

SMITH:Yeah. We're, we're excited.

BOYD:So, um, have you are these songs that you guys have performed live before?

SMITH:Uh, some of them are some of them, uh, there are fourteen, uh, fourteen songs. And so it's, it's kind of a nice and full and a good variety.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Uh, there's, there's--one that Raymond wrote is "Dance in Old Kentucky". And we've done that before. And it's, it's fun--it's a fun one, but we--The McLain Family Band, hasn't recorded it before. Uh, and we have one called the "Down Home Waltz", that Buck White wrote the tune and our father wrote the words.

BOYD:Oh, that's so sweet, fantastic.

SMITH:It's a sweet, sweet one. We have "Blow the Candle Out" that our Aunt Rosemary wrote.

SMITH:Oh, that's so great.

SMITH:Um, and we have Kentucky Moon, and that is a brand new one, um, Raymond and I wrote just recently, uh, and, and kind of for this project. And there's one called "A Mountain of Memories" that is a brand new one also that we wrote. Um,  there's uh "Down in Old Kentucky" that Asa Martin wrote.

SMITH:Oh.

SMITH:Um, Asa Martin was a friend, and he has a wonderful musical history back to the vaudeville days. And so we're excited about recording that one--having that one done. We have another one that Raymond wrote called "River City Blues". It's an instrumental and it's so fun, it's, it's exciting. There's "Homegrown Tomatoes" that Alice sings. That was kind of a special studio song because we brought our homegrown tomatoes for every session. (laughs)

BOYD:Oh, perfect, perfect.

SMITH:Alice starts them from seed. And then she and I both grow, you know, have nice gardens. And so we were both growing them and they were ripe.

BOYD:This has been a good year for those.

SMITH:It's been a great year for tomatoes. And so we had sun golds and heirlooms and so, so many wonderful--so we brought those and had them at the studio.

BOYD:Okay, so you have 14 songs.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:One of the most important decisions you make when you do an album is the order.

SMITH:It used to be more important than it is now because, because now people listen on their phones--

BOYD:--it's, it's streams and playlists--

SMITH:--different, you know, and so it's not in sequence anymore, but people don't usually--.

BOYD:--but do you still think about it or--

SMITH:But--oh, very much so.

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--yeah, very much so. And I remember my father working with it when we would do our albums and just planning, and sometimes a song would get left off because it didn't fit in, in the sequence any good place.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And, and so we'll see, we'll see. We haven't, we haven't done that yet. We've kind of been playing with ideas.

BOYD:So will you just being a--you know--I have a lot of your vinyl. Um, have you considered the possibility of doing vinyl?

BOYD:Yes.

BOYD:So are you going to do it?

SMITH:Do you think we should?

BOYD:I think you should. (Smith laughs) I think you should.

SMITH:Well, we do too. Um, and it's, it's interesting because we've started carrying vinyl on, you know, on the road with us.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Again, we didn't, of course, because of CDs, but now it's kind of maybe shifting back to albums.

BOYD:Yeah, I think it was like, I think they said something like last year or the year before, it was like the first year that vinyl outsold CDs.

SMITH:Yeah. Jesse Wells, who's touring with Tyler Childers, said that, that for Tyler, it's vinyl. Yeah. Way, way more than CDs.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And our students at Morehead--they were talking about how they listen to music, and almost all of them have turntables.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:So they want to buy vinyl. They want to see the pictures. They want to see all the information--

SMITH:--yes, yes--

SMITH:--um, that vinyl offers.

BOYD:Yeah, the only downside to vinyl is, right now, because there's such a demand, the turnaround time is really slow to get the vinyl out, because all of the facilities are so backlogged, because the demand is great, but there's so few of them left--

SMITH:--that are doing that--

BOYD:-- that are actually doing it--

SMITH:Well, maybe there will be more if there's, you know--since there's such a demand.

BOYD:Yeah, that's the hope. That is the hope. Well that's fantastic. I cannot wait, and if you're taking votes, I vote for vinyl.

SMITH:Okay. (laugghs)

BOYD:Uh, because, because--it's not my dominant way of listening to music, um--but It is treasured time for me when I can sort of go back to that ritual of, I'm going to pick something out, pull it off the shelf, place it work, do a little bit of work to, to, to get it going. And it's really nice to have that back in my life actually.

SMITH:Well, people like to have it even if they don't listen to it that way. They may, they may digitize it and have have it or they may stream it or, or listen to it a different way. But they like to have the album.

BOYD:Yeah. All right, so I'm going to go back to, to life story stuff, but I did want to say that we're behind today, um, and we do have a hard stop at one. So we're going to do a short interview today, um, and focused on certain things, but I could not--not have you talk about the recording, so--

SMITH:--well, you can keep me on track, because I don't have--

BOYD:--yes--

SMITH:--have anything to watch it--

BOYD:Yep, I got it, --

SMITH:--so you can just--

BOYD:--I got it. So we, um, really got to the point. In the last interview to around 1968, we talked about Hindman up to Hindman. We talked about a lot of things, but we talked about the television show, which I just love. I wish there was a recording of of that, but I understand.

SMITH:We do too. (laughs)

BOYD:Um, so let's talk about that pivotal thing that happened in Hindman towards the tail end, and that is the house fire. So take me back to that, that day.

SMITH:It was, it was New Year's Eve, 1968. And our father was Raymond, Raymond Kane McLain was in Berea as music director for the Berea College, uh, in the Berea Christmas Country Dance School. And it was just ending. It's the week--still going on--it's, it's between Chris--the day after Christmas and New Year's. It's that week always, and people from all over the country come to--for a dance, a dance instruction and other events all through the week.

BOYD:And he ran it, but your grandmother was--

SMITH:--our grandMother, Bicky McClain was one of the original--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--original ones that started that and taught there, too. And so, our father was in Berea, I mean, yeah, in Berea. And we, were living in Hindman in, in the, um, in Hillside with--each of the buildings on campus had a name. And so we lived on Hillside and, uh, it was in the evening and we were getting ready for bed. And Mother, I believe it was. smelled smoke and found that there was smoke coming from the laundry room. And Michael, our youngest brother, was was maybe, um, he was in a in a baby bed. And, um, Nancy Ann, two years older than Michael was, was young also. And so when Raymond and Mother and Alice and I realized that, that this was a bigger deal than we realized, you know, it wasn't you can just open a window and blow the smoke out. It--there was some--there was an issue. What ended up being, I believe, an electrical issue in the laundry room, um, because of wiring, perhaps. It was an old, old, old house. And so we got Nancy Ann and Michael, um, and went downstairs to the, um, to, to go out the front door. And there were some instruments because we had, we had, you know, had instruments from the last time we came in by the door, a few of them. Raymond got those out. That's the only thing we got out of the house. We were in pajamas. And so we got out. And as we came out of the front door, um, we could see, you know, smoke and flames coming out, even from the upstairs. So we, we got out (laughs) and, and walked to the--just down our little, um, little, little driveway hill where there was a, there still is a fire hydrant and a huge evergreen tree that was covered with Christmas lights because it was the week after Christmas and watched the house burn. Though, the--it happened that Hindman had a brand new volunteer fire department and this was their first fire.

BOYD:--oh-- (Boyd laughs)

SMITH:(laughs)--and--

BOYD:--oh--

SMITH:--and they had a new old truck. It was an old fire truck.

BOYD:That's not the honor that you want to have-- I think--probably. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:No. And, and so they got into action and, and because there, there was evidence of a fire and word got around quickly. And so they got the fire truck out and, and they came and brought it. Well, you had to go, at that point down the hill and through the creek to get up to our house--to get to the Settlement School campus. And so they, they got down into the creek, but they got stuck.

SMITH:Oh, oh.

BOYD:(Smith coughs) Oh.

SMITH:Sorry. And so--hang on, let me get some water.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Because this is an interesting-- it keeps, it keeps going. So the fire truck got stuck in the creek. They finally got it out while the house is burning.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:They got--and got it out and came on up the hill to the where the fire hydrant was. And the hoses had frozen to--it was cold in the middle of New Year's Eve. The fire truck--the hoses had frozen to the truck. And so they, you know, the house is--but by the time they, they got the water there, they could at least keep the fire from spreading up the hill or down to the dormitory below the hill, which was Westover, I believe, the dorm. And so we watched it, and it was okay. Somehow it was okay. And word got to Daddy, and Daddy started driving-- (laughs)

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--from Berea. And we ended up moving into his office on the at the Settlement School campus there, just down the hill. Um, and Daddy had a wing built on so that--because there were five of us kids and his office was, uh, like was a log house, was a wooden house building that's still there. And so he had the wing added on so that we each had a little space that was our own. And we had a place, you know, we had it had a little kitchen in it. It had a place that was like a, like a living room library where we could practice music.

BOYD:Oh, perfect.

SMITH:Um, and it had--it, it, it was nice. It was right there in walking distance of the other buildings on campus.

BOYD:Okay, I'm going to go backwards, though, because--

SMITH:--okay--

BOYD:--because you just said, that it was okay--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--you know, and, and for most of us, we have not experienced this catastrophe, right? This idea of of watching your home burn with all of the things that you have, except for the musical instruments, which is incredible.

SMITH:Yeah. A few of them.

BOYD:Um, right, it wasn't all of them, because there was probably a there was a piano because your father played piano. Um, there was other things.

SMITH:There were lots of other instruments that we didn't get--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--unfortunately, but we did have enough.

BOYD:Yeah--so, so walk me back to that moment as a child. How old are you at this point?

SMITH:Um, ten.

BOYD:Ten, so walk--

SMITH:And Alice would have been twelve, Raymond fourteen, and then I guess Nancy Ann--maybe they were two and four--?

SMITH:--yeah--

SMITH:--one and three?

BOYD:So probably--they probably don't have, you know, solid memories. But you, I'm sure have--so walk me back to that moment of, like, emotionally--what are you thinking about in terms of I mean, was it scary to--

SMITH:Well, I wasn't scared. I don't remember being scared. I remember seeing the lights on that--on the big Christmas tree, uh, because they were the lights were stunning. And I guess I wasn't out there much at night to see them, but they were the, the Christmas lights were--I remember being amazing, and it might have been that I didn't have my glasses. I'm not sure because I remember the lights being so, so big and amazing. Um, but I don't remember being scared.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

SMITH:We were all fine. You know, none of--nobody was hurt at all. And we were together.

BOYD:Yeah, I do want to take this moment to think, you know, a lot of times the mus--with your music, The McLain Family Band music has always been what I would kind of characterize as uplifting, optimistic music, but it's not fake, like like--

SMITH:(laughs) --no--

BOYD:--it is not fake. You all are absolutely, like--and that just goes to show that, that, that there is an optimism, I think, you know, an appreciation, I think, and an optimism and a gratitude that I think is just built in, probably from your parents.

SMITH:For sure. Absolutely, from our parents. And, and you're right. It's real. It's we, we look at things with the potential and the possibilities and, and you--some--you can--what you have control of--what do you have control of? We couldn't actually have control of that situation.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:The only thing you have control of is your response.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know, now thinking back about different things. Of course, there are hard times in everybody's lives. I've had hard times in my life.

BOYD:Yeah. Sure,

SMITH:You know, like everybody has. And our friends that we care about so much. And so, of course, there is hurt and there's frustration and there are hardships. Everybody, everybody has them. They're actually always there are issues and problems with--that you have, your friends have you know those, and so of course there's a lot of care. And you realize that, that you can't change this, but you can change this and this and what comes after it and the trajectory. And if you can help that be a positive experience, that's something that I care about now as an adult looking back at these things and kind of trying to analyze them myself--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--uh, because I grew up with it--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--but looking back at it and working with students that have problems in their lives.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know, how, how do we keep it from being overwhelming or letting that be the identity, but rather--okay, so from here, what can we do? Where can we? What can be our focus? What can lead to nifty things? You know, what can you care about? What are your new goals.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:What are your new plans? And so you're always working towards some positive things in your life and helping others. Um, that's another thing that I've found matters to me is, is--and takes focus off of negative stuff is what can we do to help others and find people that you can do something for and that somehow helps.

BOYD:Yeah, so, you know, again, we talked about how your parents fostered this sense, but what do you remember about your mother that evening? Because from a parent perspective--

SMITH:--I don't remember her--she wasn't frantic. She wasn't upset. She was just taking care of things. You know, she had five kids.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And we were just there together.

BOYD:Yeah, that's really great. And it must have been spectacular to see in the night to have this big--

SMITH:--well, I'm sure it was--

BOYD:--you know, Christmas lights over here, and--

SMITH:--and it's and it was an old house. An old building. It was, uh, it was an old building--multiple stories, and it went quickly.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:It was--it, it caught quickly.

BOYD:That wasn't the first fire at Hindman, right? There's been--I think there's been fires about Hindman before. Maybe?

SMITH:I don't know.

BOYD:Hmm.

SMITH:Possibly.

BOYD:So, uh, you know again not to dwell on the bad but--and the loss-- But there is a certain amount of family history there that physically, you know, whether in the form of photographs or things that's lost in the moment. Um, thinking back on that now as an adult, looking back, what do you feel like was in that house that you do not have now that?

SMITH:Well, what what I realized, looking back, is that the saying of what you have is what you gave away.

BOYD:--I love that--

SMITH:--is, is mighty true because people started giving us pictures back that, you know, if Mother had sent pictures in a Christmas card or, or things that we had given people, people started bringing to us, you know, and so we actually do have some pictures of--that would have burned in the fire.

BOYD:That's amazing

SMITH:And pictures from that time.

BOYD:Oh, that's amazing.

SMITH:And, um besides instruments, uh, what matters that much? Instruments and photographs.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You know

BOYD:Yeah

SMITH:--that kind of Kind of history and clothes. People started bringing us clothes. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:And, and, uh, there there was a clothes store and, and--in Hindman. And so we each got an outfit that we could wear to school the next day, (laughs) you know--

BOYD:--yeah, yeah--

SMITH:--and we had a TV show to do on Tuesday. And so because we had the television series )laughs) and so we did our television show.

BOYD:Oh my gosh. (Smith laughs) Oh my gosh. Wow. Wow. That's amazing. That's really really pretty remarkable. So you went to live in the office--

SMITH:--Um-hm--

BOYD:--after the fire--so in that area. Talk about, you know, that in a little more detail about--

SMITH:--well, I remember Mother baking in this little kitchen. It was a tiny kitchen.

BOYD:Like a kitchenette type of.

SMITH:Yeah, it was like a kitchenette, (laughs) but I remember her making amazing food and she we would we would line up. There was a large table in the, in the--that one room, that kitchen kind of living room, library, music room. It was just one, one area and that we had a nice big wooden table. And she would set things out there for us to help fix, like the cinnamon rolls. We might have talked about that last--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--time where she made--she would give us each dough and things that we could put on ours, and we'd roll them up and cut them up. (laughs) And I remember things like that--that being wonderful. And I don't know if in a bigger place, you know, where everybody's spread out, do people still do those things together? Kitchen brings people together. (laughs) Food brings people together--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--and music--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--brings people together--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--um, and projects like that. We did paper folding. Our mother and father were always interested in new things--they had--whether it was tree identification or paper folding. They went at it as, as if it were a job, you know, as with the respect of, of doing it well and paper folding--I don't know if you know how involved our father was in paper folding, in origami. (laughs) He was very involved and went to New York City. And Raymond may remember more of the details about this than I do, and the specifics, but he taught origami to the students, um, and--that were living on campus at that point. And they made paper folded stars that ended up being on the White House tree. Daddy was--he's a published paper folder.

BOYD:Wow.

SMITH:Um, his, his original horse. He made a paper folded origami horse that was on the cover of, of a Robert, um, Harbin? I believe, is his last name, his book called "More Origami", and it's, it's our father's original Kentucky horse fold on the cover.

BOYD:Wow.

SMITH:And then he's had others where that have gotten published, where he's created them. Uh, there's a baby buggy, and there, there are frogs that are jumping over each other that are made from a paper dollar. (laughs) Um, but he's had several published. He's done--there were there were articles and so forth on the international origami world about his paper folding.

BOYD:How did he get into this?

SMITH:Well, I don't know how he started.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:I don't know how he started. He had friends that did this. Lillian Oppenheimer, um, in New York City, um, and May, uh, something. May, I can't remember. But he would be involved with their national conventions and, and publications that came out, um, and at the house there are, um, at my house, which was my parents house. Um, there are in his handwriting instructions of how to make some of these things. And he drew out the piece of paper, you know, and what the fold would be with a dotted line for a fold and with an arrow for show which direction. And and he has it all written out. He has a star, a see through star that you can put up in a window. And parts of it have one layer and others have two, and others three, so that it looks nifty.

BOYD:That's amazing.

SMITH:He has--he made a whole creche scene, um, and, and, so he did--he did things really well.

BOYD:I mean, I know last time, like after the interview, I think I mentioned, I referred to him as like a creative genius because, I mean, he just seemed like that kind of-- (Smith laughs)

SMITH:--and the more you find out--

BOYD:--but, but like, you know--

SMITH:--the more validates that it's--he was.

BOYD:But, also, like this idea of like it wasn't just this creativity, but there was this also like curiosity that I think he must have just--had just a heightened sense of curiosity where he just, you know, wanted to explore new things, and--

SMITH:--and do them well--

BOYD:--and do them well, truly. Yeah. Wow. Wow. (Smith laughs)

SMITH:So he did that in Hindman, in that in that office, uh, office house and on that same nice wooden table.

BOYD:So you're ten years old, um, you've got the TV show, you're, um, you're playing lots of music at this point, um, there was a story about the--what was it, the White House Conference on Children? (Smith laughs)

SMITH:Well, yeah, I'd forgotten about--

BOYD:--Let's talk about that.

SMITH:--about that--

BOYD:--let's talk about that--

SMITH:--okay.

BOYD:Because that was, I think, 1970, so right--.

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--around this time.

SMITH:Yeah. And so the--and so I was 12 and the National White House Conference on Children was, was organized was they were--they had their plan of what they wanted in the show in Washington, DC. And they were--it was going to be filmed nationwide, and, and I mean, presented nationwide. And, and in the program they had it was supposed to open with a young child and everything was for people, children under 13, (laughs) um, with a young child playing the dulcimer and singing some ballads is how they wanted to open the show. And so they contacted Jean Ritchie, who was [an] amazing dulcimer player, ballad singer, in touch with the community and, and family and--

BOYD:--and was pretty famous at that point.

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--so--

SMITH:--and she would--so she would be a good one, but she couldn't think of a child that could do that. And she called our father. They were good friends. And because he was involved, you know, in music and so forth, and he said he didn't know of any that played the dulcimer and could sing ballads that were a child. And so she was checking with other people and, and she called him back finally, because they were, they--it was it was time. (laughs) It was almost time for the show and they didn't have anybody. And Daddy said, "Well, I think I know someone that can learn." And so he went to Homer Ledford, uh, luthier, our friend in Winchester, Kentucky, and--

BOYD:--who was a master.

SMITH:A master dulcimer maker--

SMITH:--yeah--

SMITH:--and our good friend. And so Homer stopped what he was doing and quickly made a dulcimer for me, (laughs) and Daddy brought it home. And so we figured out how to play it, we figure--and Mother made me a dress to wear, and I learned a couple songs, and we got on the plane (laughs) and went to Washington.

BOYD:What were the songs? Do you remember?

SMITH:Um, yes, there were three. One was "Old King Cole". (singing) Old King Cole was a jolly old soul. And this he could tell me something. (hums melody without singing words) So there was, there was old King Cole. There was, uh (singing) da da da, when the sun goes down. Every night when the sun goes down. Every night when the sun goes down. I hang my head and mournful cry. And I'm--(melody without words) bum, bum bum bum. (laughs) You know. And there was a third one that I can't remember what it is at the moment. Um, so I learned those three songs went up--Marge Champion was the master of ceremonies, and she got it all set up. The, you know, huge, huge crowd. And--

BOYD:--like, where--

SMITH:--all the cameras--

BOYD:--where are we?--

SMITH:--in Washington, DC? Um, it was the White House Conference on Children.

BOYD:But where in DC was it?

SMITH:And I don't remember where it was.

BOYD:Okay. Okay.

SMITH:I remember the day before--we got there, a day early. And so the day before, Daddy took me to the, um, some--to the Natural History Museum--Smithsonian.

BOYD:--yeah, oh--

SMITH:--um, and, so--we had an amazing time there.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:But, I got my dress that Mother made me with a matching headband, and, and did the three songs. (laughs)

BOYD:And it was on TV.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:Like, this is, you know--

SMITH:--yeah, it was in TV guide, you know, had the picture--had my picture in it. I came back home and then it was, um, my picture was on the cover of the, of the Music Educators Journal that, that month. (laughs) And it was funny as a dulcimer player with me there playing dulcimer.

BOYD:And then you just come home and go to school and, you know, I mean, did any, you know--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--I mean, that was a--that's a big deal.

SMITH:Well, it's--you don't think of it that way, though.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:You don't think of it that way.

SMITH:No, you--

SMITH:Just do. They're just things that we do.

BOYD:Right.

BOYD:We just.

SMITH:That's right.

SMITH:One of the things you do.

BOYD:That's right, oh that's so--

SMITH:--that was a funny time.

BOYD:That's really cool.

SMITH:I have, I have, I still have that dulcimer--

BOYD:--I was going to ask--

SMITH:--uh, that Homer made. We also had a mandolin and a banjo and a guitar that Homer made for us.

BOYD:Oh.

BOYD:Um--

BOYD:--he was so great--

SMITH:--absolutely a treasure.

BOYD:Yeah, some of my favorite memories were watching Homer play, um, when he would play the saw.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:I just loved that.

SMITH:Yeah. We had him come and do a, do a one man show on our festival when we moved back, jumping way ahead to Lexington--my family--um, my, my husband and kids. I played bass with Homer and his band on their radio show. They had a weekly radio show, and I would go over and play with them--

BOYD:--how great--

SMITH:--and we'd do some shows. The Cabin--it was, it was Homer Ledford and the Cabin, Cabin Creek band.

BOYD:Oh, yeah.

SMITH:I got to do some things with them. Record with them, and-- (laughs)

BOYD:--yeah, I got to see them at the tail end when we would work the Kentucky Folklife Festival in Frankfort, and he would, he would come in.

SMITH:Sweet, sweet man--

BOYD:--treasure--

SMITH:--and Colista--

BOYD:--oh--

SMITH:--just a treasure, both of them.

BOYD:But you still have the instruments, which are amazing, that's, yeah.

SMITH:Yeah. And I've gotten to teach dulcimer at at Morehead some. (laughs)

BOYD:Really? Okay.

SMITH:Mostly bluegrass and, and other things and music history kind of things. And ensembles and recital class and those kinds of things. But there have been students that wanted to take dulcimer. And so that's been that's been fun too. I got to use Homer's dulcimer.

BOYD:Oh, how, cool. Oh, that's really amazing, so um--

SMITH:--one thing I noticed from that experience, looking back at it, is that our father respected us and knew we could do anything.

BOYD:Clearly.

SMITH:And so he helped us feel like we could. It wasn't, oh, how am I going to do this? I don't do this. It was never that. It was. Oh, okay. You know, and, and so we just did it.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:Because he had confidence in us.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah, absolutely, um, and a just really fearless type of mentality, it sounds like as well. Like, okay, we're going to roll up our sleeves. We'll teach you the songs, teach you--

SMITH:--yeah, let's do this--

BOYD:--this new instrument and, you know, and--

SMITH:And I, I, it was really fast. I'm, I'm thinking maybe we had two weeks. I mean, it was, it was pretty fast--

BOYD:--new instrument, on national TV--

SMITH:--pretty fast turnaround--

BOYD:--so, um-so, okay, so you all are playing as a band right now. Um, and, and we should wrap up soon because again, there's an interview scheduled at one in this studio, but, um, but you all are playing on TV at this point.

SMITH:Yeah. Hazard channel Fifty Seven.

BOYD:But you aren't called The McLain Family Band at this point, wait, is that correct?

SMITH:That's right. We had a different name. It was called--we were called The Bluegrass State, The Bluegrass State.

BOYD:So we have uh, I think it's a, I think it's November of Seventy One where we see an article, a newspaper article that still refers to you all as The Bluegrass State, so, um--

SMITH:--there was--it took a little time to switch over. You know, once you have a band name, it's hard to--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--have a new band name. (laughs)

BOYD:--right, right--

SMITH:--new identity. But people still called us McLain Family even when we were The Bluegrass State.

BOYD:Yes, I bet. I can imagine.

SMITH:And so it--that was kind of a natural switch too.

BOYD:How did you come up with the--how did you all come up with [The] Bluegrass State?

SMITH:Um, my father had--he could talk about it, and I wish he were here to tell you about it, because I would be interested too. I don't really--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--I don't really remember--

BOYD:--yeah, yeah. I mean--

SMITH:--you know, we were always proud of the state. We were always proud of our region, always proud of the music. It wasn't--we weren't ashamed or embarrassed or anything, you know--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--if you do something and work at it, you kind of need to respect it.

BOYD:Yes.

SMITH:And feel good about it. And, and he helped us feel positive about what we were doing. Um, we--but at that point, also, we didn't just play bluegrass music. We played lots of other things, too. It was lots of things we played with bluegrass instruments--

BOYD:--yes--

SMITH:--for the most part, (laughs) plus an accordion sometimes. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

SMITH:And so forth, but for the most part, they were bluegrass instruments, and even if we were doing other original material or material from other genres, it was still The Bluegrass State.

BOYD:It's a brilliant name. Like the play on words, I think, you know, it's, you know, Bluegrass State as in, you know, the United States, but you also have--

SMITH:--a state of mind--

BOYD:--state of mind. And then you've got bluegrass, the region, bluegrass, the music.

SMITH:Yeah.

BOYD:Um, so it's, it's, it's a great band name. So, um, you are on the show operating as The Bluegrass State. Are you perf--you're performing outside of the show, though--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--at this point? Talk about some of the performances that you're doing at this stage of the game.

SMITH:Well, we would go to the Pike County Jamboree, um, and, uh, perform there. But even more important than performing there was connecting with the group of of that community of musicians and friends that were all ages. And so there were musicians, our ages that were there. And it was such a natural. It helped it feel like such a natural thing to do.

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--uh, to have music buddies, and, and at the festivals we were playing at festivals then too. And Eminence, Missouri was one of our first festivals. And there were other musicians, The Calton Family and Jimmie Giles and other musicians that were our ages. Um, and being in those situations just made it such a natural thing for us to do.

BOYD:Sure, yeah. And how would you at that point--what do you remember about traveling on that circuit and getting, you know, to these festivals, and--

SMITH:--well, we were in a small car--

BOYD:--and you have an upright bass--

SMITH:(laughs) Yep. So the bass can go, you know, in, even in a sedan, you know, the bass can go either in the middle. And we weren't very large people at--

BOYD:--right--

SMITH:--that point--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--and so one person, you know, could be on each side of the bass and then the, the neck could go up through the front, and the headstock could be at the very front between the, you know, neck between the driver and the passenger in the front. And so the four of us with the instruments and a tent--

SMITH:--right-- --because we might camp at the, at the festival--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--uh, that worked. And we learned to pack light even then, and, uh like at Bean Blossom. Bill Monroe's festival in Indiana. Uh, even that early, we would go there and we would be ready. And so if something happened where somebody didn't show up, Bill could--Monroe could call on us. And because we could be ready, like that--

BOYD:--oh, yeah yeah--

SMITH:--and, uh, sometimes he would have us play during the supper break, those first couple years that we went. And then he started having us, you know, be on the show and, and having us on all of his festivals and--

BOYD:--that's so great--

SMITH:--so forth--

BOYD:--this is so fantastic. So, um, so mom and the two youngest wouldn't come.

SMITH:Sometimes, but not usually. They were in--um, they were involved in things there at the house--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--and growing up. Sometimes they would come. Nancy Ann is seven years younger than I am, I believe, and Michael, nine. And so when you're ten, that's a big age difference.

SMITH:Sure.

SMITH:But at this point, it's not. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. So you know, again you've got your thing. You've, you've you've talked about you all stepping in if Bill needed you. You're playing bass.

BOYD:Yeah.

BOYD:And bass is one of those instruments that everybody always needs a bass sometime, you know, at some point were you able to fill in I think, and play with others?

SMITH:I did. I filled in a lot. I did somehow fill in with a lot of the musicians. Um, I filled in with Bill [Monroe] (laughs) and with Ralph Stanley and with Don Reno. And you know what-- Mac Wiseman, of course.

SMITH:Yeah.

SMITH:And and all the--Tex Logan and Pete Rowan and different people that needed bass players. That community is was, at least, and I imagine still is to an extent, but was a mighty close knit community. We all knew each other. All the bands knew each other. Those were our best friends.

BOYD:Yeah.

SMITH:The bands were our best friends.

BOYD:Sure. Wow.

SMITH:And we got to be together at festivals, and we understood each other and, and it was like we had two lives. We'd come home and do school, and--

BOYD:--yeah--

SMITH:--that's great, too. And had great friends there. And then we'd go to festivals and have great friends there.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. But you're children at this point--

SMITH:--yeah--

BOYD:--you know, and, you know, sitting in and playing with, with these, you know--

SMITH:--I'd never thought of myself as a-- as too little or too--I never thought of it that way.

BOYD:And they seem--sounds like they didn't treat you that way.

SMITH:They didn't treat me that way. Nobody did.

BOYD:Yeah,

SMITH:I don't remember feeling that way at all. They were just so respectful.

BOYD:Can you think of any other genre of music that would--(Smith laughs)--that would do that?

SMITH:No, I guess not.

BOYD:No, I can't.

SMITH:That's interesting.

BOYD:Oh., that's remarkable. Okay, well, we do have to wrap up at this point, but next interview, I promise we're going to transition to Berea.

SMITH:Okay.

BOYD:And, uh, we're going to transition to [The] McLain Family Band. And hopefully would like to then launch into the internationalization of The McLain Family Band.

SMITH:What a wonderful aspect of it.

BOYD:Because I, I--that's where I stopped with Raymond as well, so we have not yet gone there. So, um, so, so this will be our first foray into, into the international stage, which I'm really excited about, so--.

SMITH:--yeah, and that happened really quickly as soon as we moved to Berea.

SMITH:It's amazing.

SMITH:We'll get to talk about that.

BOYD:It's such a great--okay.