Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History, University of Kentucky Libraries

Food and Foodways in Israel/Palestine Oral History Project

Interview with Uri Scheft, July 16, 2023

2023oh0567_ipff0002_scheft_acc001

FERNHEIMER:Recording. Testing--one, two, three. Okay, awesome. So good morning.

Today is Sunday July 20--

SCHEFT:--sixteenth--

FERNHEIMER:--July 16, 2023. Hello, my name is Janice Fernheimer. I am Professor

of Writing, Rhetoric, and Digital Studies, the Zantker Professor of Jewish

Studies, and the James B. Beam Institute for Kentucky Spirits Faculty Fellow. I

know, it's a long title, but that's my favorite part. (Scheft laughs) Today is

the 16th of July, and it is my honor and pleasure to interview Uri Scheft of the

famous Lehamim Bakery in Tel Aviv and Breads Bakery in New York; author of

Breaking Breads and several other wonderful cookbooks--here in the Hashmonaim

location of Lehamim in Tel Aviv for the Food and Foodways in Israel/Palestine

Oral History Project which will be housed at the Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral

History in Lexington, Kentucky. So to officially get us started, please state

your first and last name for the official record.

SCHEFT:Uri Scheft.

FERNHEIMER:

Naim meod.

SCHEFT:Naim meod.

FERNHEIMER:I understand from reading Breaking Breads that you were born in

Israel, and you moved to Denmark as a child, and then came back to Israel later

in life. In your own words, tell me a little a bit about your family origins,

and where your parents were from, and how and when they got to Israel.

SCHEFT:Okay, so my parents were born in Copenhagen, Denmark before, before the

war, went through the Holocaust. As many know--maybe people know--being saved by

the Danish underground, and been moved with the fishermans to neutral Sweden.

Came back to Copenhagen--this is--actually, they were really young, both of

them. Didn't know each other, of course, at that time. And this is a history of

the Jewish Danes, and my parents were Zionists. They came first as a--in the

late in--like around when--there were eighteen to twenty came to Israel

to kibbutz. Fell--got to know each other, fell in love, and decided to immigrate

to Israel. This was in 1961--one year, actually, before I was born. I was born

in Israel, but my parents really kept a Danish culture house--including

furniture, food, all our traditions, and then--so it was like a Danish speaking

house for most of my childhood.

FERNHEIMER:So Danish was your first language or Danish--

SCHEFT:--yes--

FERNHEIMER:--and Hebrew?

SCHEFT:Yeah, Danish and Hebrew, but at home, we spoke--actually, insisted until

very late that we will speak Danish at home. And we were frequently going for

visits to Denmark almost every summer vacation we spent there with--

FERNHEIMER:--did you still have family there--

SCHEFT:--because we had a lot of cousins, grandparents, the

whole family stay there. And because the Danish Jew weren't in any kind of

danger, so people didn't--it was not a lot of immigration from Denmark to

Israel. And at one point in my childhood, we went back for a couple of years

mainly because my parents wanted us to connect with the Danish culture. Came

back to Israel, did the regular Israeli routine like school, high school, did my

Army service and became an officer in a special unit in the Army. And one maybe

important point to--actually went back to Denmark, was eleven years old, and I

was--I attended a Jewish school where actually--that's where I actually first

got in touch with the kitchen because I took like a special course in the--like

baking and cooking.

And like I wasn't--

FERNHEIMER:--was it like home economics? What was it called--

SCHEFT:--yeah, it was called--yeah, I don't know, what was it called? Let me

think about it. I still have a--I still have my notebook from that time--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--I still keep it. This was--having six, seven recipes. So I wasn't a

very enthusiastic baker, but a few times a year I will actually take the

initiative and bake some stuff so I learned at that time through all the years.

FERNHEIMER:Anything stand out that you remember from that--

SCHEFT:--it looked like a--it was a croissant-shape--it wasn't a croissant, a

traditional croissant, but it was croissant-shaped baguette, and--and filled

with like butter, and sugar, cinnamon, stuff like this--

FERNHEIMER:--sounds good.

SCHEFT:And another maybe important thing in my childhood was my mother was a

kindergarten teacher--

FERNHEIMER:--I read that--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--and she actually were--the kindergarten were placed in our home. So

coming home

from school, from--and throughout my childhood, Friday was connected to a smell

of baked challah in the house. And--

FERNHEIMER:--how--aside from the challah, what other kinds of connections to

Judaism did your parents have? Obviously, it was important to them when you went

back to Denmark for you to go to a Jewish school. When you were here in

Israel--you know, you're in Israel, and you're surrounded by all different kinds

of Jewish culture. What kinds of things did they do at home aside from challah?

Was--tell me about that.

SCHEFT:We were a very traditional Jewish family. We wasn't like what you call

today religious. Like my father could go to the synagogue at Saturday, but he

will come home and we can--we will drive and like--so we wasn't so--but Friday

night, family sitting together, challah on the table, and the whole ceremony

was--the Kiddush and the--

FERNHEIMER:--prayer over the wine--

SCHEFT:

--for the wine, for the challah, and the--after, of course, when we finish--we

were finished to eat, we all have to sit and say Birkat Hamazon, and the--

FERNHEIMER:--the blessing on the meal--

SCHEFT:--and living in Ra'anana most of my childhood, so all the time the other

kids were screaming from the street, "Come out! Come out!" They wanted over--to

go to play after dinner--that's what we used to do on Friday. No, my father was

very strict about we will have to sit all the way. So we also got a lot of

family visits. At that time--let's talk more about when I was a child in

seventies coming to Israel--flying--you don't come for a few days. When you

come, you come for two weeks, three weeks, one month. So we were constantly

having like especially grandparents, and uncles, and aunts in our house. So

Friday was also very special. The house was also very kosher especially for the

ground that my grandparents were really religious, could come and eat in our home

and feel very comfortable. So the house was always very Jewish kosher, but

not--never--we were never--beside the Friday evening, we were never forced to go

to the synagogue, it was voluntary--"If you want to come with me," and--so it

was a liberal, but very traditional house.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. And do you have--you have brothers and sisters?

SCHEFT:I have a bigger brother and a younger sister, yes.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. And what's the age gap between you all?

SCHEFT:My brother--my--my brother's almost five years older than me, and my

sister was born a year and a half after me, so yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Okay, nice. And your parents, do you know how they met? You said

that they met when they were roughly eighteen?

SCHEFT:Actually, they met--(coughs)--I think they met--it's a little

complicated to explain. They met as teenagers, they have a common--

FERNHEIMER:--friend--

SCHEFT:--cousin. No, they have a common--no, the brother of one grandparent,

and the--another grandparent's sister,

they married, so they actually had--they were--they're not cousins, but they

have a common cousin, yeah? So I think they met when they were teenagers, but

exactly where and how they meet I'm not sure. I just know--that's what I was

telling you before--that my mother at one point took to Israel to kibbutz, and,

actually, my father probably fell in love with her--he came--he came after her,

but at that time, I don't know--as I remember the story, she had a boyfriend

that she met here in Israel, but--

FERNHEIMER:--drama--

SCHEFT:--yeah, an Englishman--a Jewish Englishman. But my father won

my--(laughs)-- mother's heart, and she went--they came back to Denmark, finished

their studies at one time--or they got married, they decided they wanted to

immigrate to Israel, so they both--from their college or university--decided to

take like teacher education

so they can teach. And not always a good decision, but, you know, my father was

very worried what he will do, how he will teach because he was learning history

and the more--and literature--and said, "Oh, I cannot learn Danish history in

Israel," so he actually became a math and physics teacher in--

FERNHEIMER:--wow, that's a big change.

SCHEFT:It's important to note in my life because I saw a man that wasn't very

happy with what he's doing in life, so, for me, growing up, I didn't know what I

wanted to do when I grow up, but one thing I knew: that I will have an

occupation that I love. So this I felt was very in the front of my mind for a

very long time--since I was a child with--seeing a frustrated teacher. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:And you talk about the frustrations--(laughs)--you experienced a

little bit. You described moving to Denmark when you were ten as a disaster--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--in the introduction. And the contrast--the language

you use to describe the contrast between your beautiful home in Israel with the

orange groves and the pool, and this tiny apartment in Copenhagen with five

people and no shower. Looking back now, though, it seems like that was a pretty

impactful experience. How would you talk about the way that your time in Denmark

as a young child impacted you? Aside from--and I'm learning now--this amazing

class that you took when you were eleven and--

SCHEFT:--yeah, I think it all was--it all happened in the summer of '73. And in

September '73, there was the Yom Kippur War--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, I was just going to say--

SCHEFT:--and then my father, he took immediately a flight back to Israel

although he wasn't a fighter, but he went to teach in the school as most of the

teachers were out in the war. And so in general, I don't have very good

memories--(laughs)--of that--of that period. I was kind of jealous I'm not in

Israel when everything was

going on there in the war. I actually wanted to be here with my friend. But

just--it was so extreme--like also described in the book and what you

read--between growing up in Ra'anana in this weather, coming from school,

throwing the bag, and was very free to go out, it was like a close neighborhood.

And then coming to--to Copenhagen--even going to a Jewish school, you know,

you're not going to school with the people who was your neighbors--

FERNHEIMER:--right--

SCHEFT:--yes because you're going to a remote Jewish school. So as a child,

just moving--it was a--also for my younger sister, we, we don't--although maybe

we got something from the culture and the--we saw a lot in Denmark, but it

wasn't a happy period. And, unfortunately, also the war started, so it's a--we

really wanted to go. It was just finishing--waiting a year while finishing we

would go back to Israel to our normal--

FERNHEIMER:--so you were just there for one year--

SCHEFT:--a year and a half, yeah. After a year and a half, yeah. Something like that.

FERNHEIMER:Kind of like a sabbatical

of sorts.

SCHEFT:Yeah, Maybe they shortened the time after because--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, from the war. Did you--when you were--you know, did

you--what was--I'm trying to ask a good question. (laughs) What was your

experience as a young man, you know, being in an immersive environment in Israel

where most everyone--not everyone--but many people are Jewish, and kind of

taking that for granted, and then being in this place? You talk about how you'd

go to Jewish school, but your colleagues are not your neighbors. And so do you

have memories of what it was like? Obviously, the Jewish community in Denmark is

different than all kinds of other places.

SCHEFT:I will say the Jewish community and our close family really like really

helped us out, and really like--we were really surrounded with--the good thing

about it was really like going to my grandmother every Friday, we also had a

summer house near the beach, and we took a lot of trips to Sweden, to Norway,

and--but, again, you know, three kids, sitting in the back of the

car--(Fernheimer laughs)--fighting. No iPhones, no iPads--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--and going for long trips. It wasn't always like brother, but in

general, it was--we learned a lot, but we--I think we really--also because my

father went back to Israel, we were really--

FERNHEIMER:--missed him--

SCHEFT:--anxious to go back to finish this period, and then pushing our parents

to go back the summer--the following summer and go back to Israel.

FERNHEIMER:What are the foods that your grandmother made while you were there?

SCHEFT:It's a--it's a--food--food is a whole--maybe I will send you after--if

you remind me, I'll send you a list my sister did once because I'm talking more about--

FERNHEIMER:--what's her name--

SCHEFT:--Dina.

FERNHEIMER:Dina.

SCHEFT:And this was a whole excitement when our grandparents or uncles would

come to Israel because--so she actually described what they had in their

suitcase--

FERNHEIMER:--amazing--

SCHEFT:--so we're talking about the sixties, seventies, okay? And it's a lot

around food. So, of course, Danish cheese, Danish smoked fish--salmon, halibut,

mackerel, herring, of course--coffee, and licorice, and--

FERNHEIMER:--black licorice or--

SCHEFT:--black licorice, yeah, the really strong--and she had a whole list of

things. It was always--we knew exactly what's going to come out of the--and of

the stinky--my father used to love really, really stinky cheese. And so it was a

whole ceremony about--but I think also when we talk about food, what I--looking

back to it about--okay, today's Danish food is really like--really high and

really recognized all over the world, but I think for me, it's exactly what was

in the suitcase. It was--and this was also,

I think, it will take me until today, it's to--the connection to the

ingredients, to the high-end ingredients. And not the complicated cooking--no,

it's just--of course, they will bring, of course, the heavy rye breads with

them. So it's just a rye bread with butter--no cream cheese--and smoked salmon.

That's it--dill. And so it's all about the ingredients, and very clean, very

straightforward. And I also remember at that time being here in Israel and also

in Denmark, restaurant? Never heard about, we didn't go to it, never--I think

the first time I went to a restaurant I was a teenager when I went first time to

sit actually in a restaurant--

FERNHEIMER:--and this was--

SCHEFT:--and we went from Ra'anana to Tel Aviv with a special taxi to my

grandfather decided to take us to a restaurant. Never been. I think I was--I

don't remember, but probably thirteen, fourteen--was the first time ever sitting

in a restaurant. I'm not talking about eating a falafel in the street.

FERNHEIMER:No, like a

sit-down restaurant.

SCHEFT:A sit down restaurant, being served by a waiter, only in my teenager I experienced.

FERNHEIMER:So your bar mitzvah into the food world was to go to a

restaurant--(laughs)--at thirteen.

SCHEFT:Yeah, something like that. Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:And this was in like the late seventies?

SCHEFT:I would say, yeah. Eh, not late seventies, but--

FERNHEIMER:--mid seventies?

SCHEFT:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:And what was the restaurant? What was the cuisine? What did you--

SCHEFT:--I know exactly the restaurant. I threw up after eating there--(laughs)--

FERNHEIMER:--oh, yeah? Because you ate so much or because the food was bad?

SCHEFT:I think it was here in north Tel Aviv, Pancake House, mushroom blintzes,

something, blintzes (French) whatever, something like this. I ate something with

spinach, my mother said, "Don't take the spinach. I told you not to take the

spinach." (Fernheimer laughs) But yeah. So this was here, yeah. We had to go all

the way to Tel Aviv. I don't think in Ra'anana there were any--

FERNHEIMER:--wow--

SCHEFT:--kind of restaurants at that time.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. When would you--in your memory--say that the kind of scene

begins to open up

here in Israel in terms of eating? And part of that has to do with economics,

but also--

SCHEFT:--the scene wasn't here--I think also in my Army time like '81, '85--so

there is a few more like--I don't know how--milestones where actually I can

point out influenced my decision to become a pastry chef I will tell you, and,

actually, a baker in the end. But, actually, when I first--so after the Army, I

went actually quite a few times--I would spend a lot of time in the U.S.

fishing, fishing in Alaska.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, wow.

SCHEFT:Three, three seasons: '85--

FERNHEIMER:--my husband would be jealous--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--'86, '87. Each time I made some money, went to travel, came back to

Israel. I did my--

FERNHEIMER:--so--

SCHEFT:--I didn't--I didn't know I will become something to do with food, but I took

biology degree, and--

FERNHEIMER:--in Tel Aviv--

SCHEFT:--finished my degree in Tel Aviv, yes. Started in Be'er Sheva, but made

my degree from Tel Aviv.

FERNHEIMER:When did you graduate?

SCHEFT:Let's say--now we are '89.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SCHEFT:I finished in 1990.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SCHEFT:Yeah, something like that--'89, '90.

FERNHEIMER:So you're, you're after the Army and adventures in Alaska?

SCHEFT:After the Army, after being in Alaska a few times, being in Japan, being

in China, '85--did a lot of travel--a lot of extensive traveling, a lot of work

fishing. And--

FERNHEIMER:--did you know fishing from like--from being--a kid?

SCHEFT:No, I just heard after the army, "Oh, you can make some money fishing in

Alaska." Bought a car--went with my sister--

FERNHEIMER:--yalla--

SCHEFT:--and a friend to New York, bought a car, went with the car all the way

up to Alaska--

FERNHEIMER:--wow, this is the American dream--

SCHEFT:--for months and then--yeah, it was really, really fun. Slept in the

car. (laughter) Came with

--sort of--I came with $1,200--just what I had in my pocket--(laughs)--coming to

the U.S.

FERNHEIMER:Wow, and this was in 1985? Amazing.

SCHEFT:Nineteen eighty-five, yes.

FERNHEIMER:And a good time not to be in Israel, right? During the Intifada. (laughs)

SCHEFT:It was just before. Actually, the Intifada, I think I were--the Intifada

started a little bit later, '87. 'Eighty-seven, I was here in was in Israel and actually--

FERNHEIMER:--so you were back--

SCHEFT:--and very quickly, what we call recalled from the Army--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah.

SCHEFT:That's actually when I was a student, biology student, I'd been

recalled. I've always struggled because we did there forty-five, sixty day here.

And then--and where were we?

FERNHEIMER:We were--

SCHEFT:--what's the question--(laughs)--

FERNHEIMER:--sorry, we were talking--

SCHEFT:--ah, yeah, going back and forth and back and forth a little bit, yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--we were back and forth about restaurant scene in Israel--

SCHEFT:--in Israel--

FERNHEIMER:--but also your--kind of the milestones leading up to--

SCHEFT:--ah, you asked me about the scene. So, actually, when--after finishing

my degree, I--I got married, and we went--

FERNHEIMER:--I was wondering where Rinat

came into the picture.

SCHEFT:It was not Rinat--

FERNHEIMER:--oh, not Rinat. Oh, slicha--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--no, it's okay. And then--and I was in India at that time, and

when--first time came to my mind, "Maybe I'm going to study to be a pastry chef

in Denmark."

FERNHEIMER:--this--

SCHEFT:--but I felt like--what's the struggle is that--was it respectable

enough? The whole thing about chef maybe started with--started to come up with

restaurants at that time, but pastry chef, even cook, I will tell you a little

bit for me, like a cook--what I knew was a cook in the Army. And who does the

food in the Army at that time? People that cannot fit into the Army. So it

wasn't like it's--it wasn't a very respectable job in the Army. A cook normally

is the people with kind of complicated

backgrounds, so they used to do only week in the Army, one week at home. And I

-----------(??) how they cook: disaster. And I was always attracted to food

although I didn't know it, but I always--I was--now I remember, I was even

making toast for my friends. I remember how I would--for my Army friends which

I'm still in contact with or we're still friends--how I will make the cheese

toast. It was always--so I wasn't the food, but looking at the Army cooks, when

I started to think about it, I said, "You know, this was one of my--no, no, no.

Can't be. I won't do it." But I was still attracted, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:So you're attracted, but kind of--

SCHEFT:--yeah, how will people look at me? Oh, I'm going to be a pastry chef?

It's like-- wasn't that clear answer like today--ah, being a chef, dealing with

food, it's something--it's a job like everything. But at that time, it wasn't

this way at all--

FERNHEIMER:--was it--part of it has to do with

kind of the profession as you're talking about it, but also I mean--I'm not

going to ask a great question because I'm trying to ask open-ended--but how did

this also connect with the way that you understood kind of masculinity, right? With--

SCHEFT:--understood what--

FERNHEIMER:Like gavriut, masculinity, the idea of--like chef all of a sudden

became something prestigious and--

SCHEFT:--no, this never came up to my mind.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SCHEFT:But in general, from my childhood, I was very attracted to a lot of

things my mother did. This is for sure. Knitting, cooking--you know, like before

I even know it's something that I really like, I always look at her, in the

pot--what's going on there? Another story I like to tell is--okay, like living

in the house in Israel, but I kind of imitate like what my mother did to my

father, but in a way, I remember me playing with--playing the cook--before there

was restaurant-- the waiter

and the guest. So my mission was that I will make myself like lunch--this would

only happen when I knew nobody will come--nobody--I'm alone at home. So I will

cook, I will set up the table, and I will sit in it. And the mission was that

after everything was set up, I don't have to come--I didn't forget anything like

I didn't forget the salt, I didn't forget the napkin, I had everything. So it

was playing like a small restaurant where I was doing all the--all the roles.

FERNHEIMER:How old were you?

SCHEFT:I think this is also maybe after coming from Denmark, like fourteen,

fifteen, something like that. But it's more like getting also organized, and

then, also, a big part of this is like the open-faced Danish sandwiches, yes? So

this is what my mother used to prepare. We wouldn't call it this way. This was

very obvious. No, we'd take a very thin piece of rye bread, and place whatever

cheese, vegetable on the top, and it will never be--this will be an open-faced

sandwich. And normally you eat it with--

FERNHEIMER:--fork and--

SCHEFT:--contrary to Israelis you grab it with the hand and eat, you eat it with

a--yeah. And there was a fork and a knife. So I would prepare my eggs, my

open--my open-faced sandwiches which I didn't know it was something to do with

Denmark or something--it wasn't from anything special, this is the way--

FERNHEIMER:--it was just what it was--

SCHEFT:--food had been served in the house.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SCHEFT:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SCHEFT:I will say also something about food that come in mind, and also

something to do with what is special about Danish which is contrary to what I

saw outside of the Israeli neighbors is the--first of all, also with food or

preparing your food--first day in school, first grade, my mom will take me to

the kitchen, she would show me how you take two pieces of bread, you put butter,

you place the cheese, or chocolate spread, or banana, or cucumber--which also

never heard in Israel you eat--you eat slices of bananas and bread, but Danish

do--and you wrap it this way, and that's the way--

FERNHEIMER:--Americans, too--

SCHEFT:--you make yourselves

the lunch food for yourself. And now you will do it alone. And since first grade

first day, never been--nobody prepared for me food for school--to all of us in

the house. And also lunch, you would take yourself. My mother used to do only

one--like a hot meal in the evening, in the early evening, and all the

rest--"There's food in the refrigerator, you take care of yourself. I'm

preparing one dinner--I prepare the dinner every day and that's it." And, also,

the dinner was contrary to what I actually experienced later here in Israel when

I got more open to different cultures. It was very precise and accurate, meaning

when I had just--I'll tell you the story this way. When I just opened Lehamim,

one of the most famous celebrity chefs, Haim Cohen, interviewed me. And he

--here, and they took a photo here for the, the first--Pilpel

-------------(??)----------Pilpel Melach, which is now coming back. It's the

first food that--I'm not sure that--but one of the first food programs in

television. So--and this is twenty-one years ago when--

FERNHEIMER:--Garlic, Pepper, and--

SCHEFT:(Hebrew), yes. And he took here, and he asked me to prepare him a

Danish--like a brunch or meal. And I had somebody bring for me herring from

Denmark to this, and I set up the table, and he looked at this and said, "Okay.

No, in our family," because he's a Sephardic, you know? "And we have--tables

have to be like full and over." And here, he saw something else. And I tell

you--no, I tell you this story because I wanted to tell you--so my mother used

to bring like let's say steaks or (Hebrew)--

FERNHEIMER:--meatballs? No--

SCHEFT:--yeah, meatball. And

she would bring them to the table, she would say, "You can eat as much as you

want. There's one to each or two to each. That's it." (Fernheimer laughs) So

it's not like--it doesn't have--but the--like dinner is finished, she will be

not be, "You have to finish what's on your plate," and mostly there was no

leftovers--just maybe potatoes, of course. And it was very like salad, potato,

let's say a meatball--that's it. You know, three, four dishes. And that's

contrary--like what I said after you see like Sephardic with all the salatim,

and the--this I didn't know. Not in my house.

FERNHEIMER:So the kind of contrast between like--it's not like conspicuous

consumption, but it kind of is, right? And the Sephardic with all this like,

"More, more, more"--lots--and then very precise, kind of maybe minimalist, is it

fair to say?

SCHEFT:You know, I was jealous of a friend of mine. His mother would--like I

told you, after school we would throw the bag and we'd go. And his mother

--and we--"Take food to your (Hebrew)--" And then we have dinner, yeah? And his

mother would run after him with a pita with a scrambled egg with all the

parsley, and the coriander, and the--a lot of spices, and amba, and whatever.

And she would run, "Hey, you have to eat your lunch!" He said, "I don't want it,

though." "Take it, take it." "I want it,"--(laughter)--to my friend. And so--no,

Sephardic--for me, this is the way I saw it, "Ah, she's running with a pita with

this full hot omelet with herbs and everything," and I--and he was resisting,

and I said, "Take it, and I will eat it." Sometimes he would take it and then he

would give it to us. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:So from a pretty early age--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--you're exposed to the differences in the kinds of food traditions

between Ashkenazim and Sephardim, Mizrahim.

SCHEFT:Yeah, very little. Very little at that time. And--

FERNHEIMER:--and this is like in the seventies, eighties, so there's also, you

know, not that--still in the kind of bigger picture of Israeli culture, it's still

Avodah, and kind of work, and this kind of predominance of Ashkenazi culture as

the high culture--just when we're thinking about that timeline--

SCHEFT:--not--not--see, I don't think so.

FERNHEIMER:No?

SCHEFT:I wasn't that aware--although we were a very Ashkenazic neighborhood,

and kind of a close neighborhood, and we will go to a school where it was

more--the majority was Sephardic, was like a neighborhood where a lot of--also,

but not Sephardic, not only, but there was mostly Sephardic, but there was a

whole bunch from Russia, from Romania I remember in my class. So it was a really

like a melting pot, but mostly it will be like Sephardic. But at that time, I

think more the neighborhoods constructed who were my friend, and I lived in a

neighborhood in Ra'anana--most were Anglo-Saxon, I would say--a lot of South

Africans there--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, a lot of English--

SCHEFT:--which food wasn't

--nothing in their like culture. You know, like we would always look there, we

didn't want to go to eat. (Fernheimer laughs) We didn't--and--but mostly like

with Sephardic, with Ashkenazi, it wasn't something we were so much dealing with

or thinking about the differences. Not--not something we were really aware

like--I don't know. Not where I lived, anyway--

FERNHEIMER:--you weren't conscious--

SCHEFT:--although we really lived in a heavy--like I remember where I lived in

Ra'anana was a whole neighborhood--we thought it were--it was two streets where

a lot of Yemen like--

FERNHEIMER:--Yemeni--

SCHEFT:--that came there first, and then there were--but through the early

seventies, it was like waves of let's say come the Russian, and then came--but

there was also--they're from Iraq, from Morocco was a whole--but it wasn't

something like--like, "Oh, this is Sephardic."

They were, in general--I can remember some stuff about it or maybe who you were

dating was maybe it was--"Ah, you're dating some Sephar--ah." Although my father

would--"Get a Yemenite girl." I don't know why he said it, but he said many

times. (both laugh)

FERNHEIMER:So it wasn't, wasn't so important to--

SCHEFT:--but--

FERNHEIMER:--your parents then who you dated except for--

SCHEFT:--no, no. Not in my house. Not in my house, but it wasn't--later, when I

was a teenager, when I went to school, I remember--I can remember--recall some

maybe girls that didn't want their parents to know because they were dating

Sephardic or Ashkenazi, but it's--to me, it's always a little weird. It's not

something--not in my house. And the way I've been brought was very--not pointing

out--pointing out you were Danish, but not better--Danish is, you know, you keep

your nose down, you don't want to shine out. No, no.

Equal, stuff like this. Also, maybe to do why the Danish actually saved the

Jews, you know, at that time. It's something to do with this. Something my

parents also got in which--never discriminate--I don't think they were--I don't

remember any, in my house, any racist--never spoke bad about other Jewish

culture and--

FERNHEIMER:--so this is--so we're talking--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--like seventies, eighties, and, you know, you're kind of being

exposed, but not in a--just because of who's around to the different food

traditions of eat, eat, eat from the Sephardic tradition, versus what your mom's

got at home--and kind of very precise, and very ordered. What did holidays look

like in your house? Did your mom do--

SCHEFT:--everything--

FERNHEIMER:--relatives--

SCHEFT:--very Ashkenazi--like also Friday--chicken soup, chopped liver. And, of course,

Rosh Hashanah and the Pesach, gefilte fish. All the--

FERNHEIMER:--does she make it from scratch?

SCHEFT:From scratch, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Amazing.

SCHEFT:And, also, remind--remind you also--also because like I said before,

restaurant pastries--no pastries. No, you make the cake at home. My mother used

to not only bake challah, but also make desserts. All the pastries were made at

home. And what were--what was the question? (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:I was just--no--curious about the kinds of holiday foods--

SCHEFT:--oh, the holiday food--

FERNHEIMER:--that were important. What was made, and what you remember, and

what kind of what stands out to you. I know the challah was a big thing, and the

smell of the challah.

SCHEFT:The challah. The challah, always a big thing. But really like if I can

imagine today, I must not--don't try to innovate anything, no. We come to

her--so it's the chopped liver, and then--and the lettuce with the, with the

pickle or the

--and selek, and--

FERNHEIMER:--beets--

SCHEFT:--beets. A piece of beet was maybe a little bit Danish with it, then

chicken soup. And then come the chicken, and the potatoes--

FERNHEIMER:--the vegetables in the chicken soup or none?

SCHEFT:Yeah, on the side you can--yeah, it was lokshen with kneidlach, also in

the Pesach mostly. And then--

FERNHEIMER:--lokshen, a kind of dumpling--

SCHEFT:--lokshen, and what--and really, really, really traditional, what I

call. At one point, I was a little bit confused between what is Danish and what

is Jewish-Danish food. For a while, as a child, for me, a lot of Ashkenazi or

the--because, okay, my grandparents came to Denmark when they were a child. Like

all my--I think all my grandparents came from Russia, from Lita [Lithuania],

from Poland, from Germany--came when they were kids to Denmark. But, for me

--ah, this is not Danish. There is some Danish influence about the food, or you

can have a piece of fish, maybe smoked salmon, but it wasn't really Jewish. But

for a while I was confused was this Danish? And what is Jewish? For me.

FERNHEIMER:They were interchangeable.

SCHEFT:Yeah, yeah. Said, "Ah, this is not Danish food. This is Jewish with some

Danish influences on it, but this is really Polish/Russian/Jewish/Ashkenazi

food," what we ate on holidays.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. So I'm going to keep going--zig-zag back in time.

SCHEFT:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:So you were telling me about--after the army, you went to Alaska and

had these amazing fishing adventures. And then you got called back up into the

reserves--part of your reserve duty or--

SCHEFT:--no, no. I came back to Israel--I came back to Israel, I wanted to go

to university, I didn't know what I wanted to do with my life. I knew I--

FERNHEIMER:--like most people at that age--

SCHEFT:--then found what my--where--I then found my passion to--nothing

I did like--in my high school, I took biology as my major, so I said, "Okay, I'm

going to study"--and my father--yeah, they were not pushing, but, for them, the

book, literature, studying in a university was like a--although we were not the

house--wasn't too much money, let's say it this way, but--I used to work from

ten years old. I went out to--

FERNHEIMER:--to work--

SCHEFT:--to work like after school, of course. And--but my father always said,

"You go to university, I will pay you--I will pay the university if you go to

university." So they really encouraged us to do our degrees, and that's why I

didn't know what to do, so I said, "Let's study biology." But very, very soon

after I study--maybe a year, I knew I'm not going to be a biologist. But there

was also something else my father and mother gave me, "You start, you have to finish."

And I didn't know what to do, so I was just living Tel Aviv life which was

pretty exciting at that time, and studying--being a student here in Tel Aviv.

So--but I knew I was going to do my degree, and then--

FERNHEIMER:--do something else--

SCHEFT:--I will keep looking what I want to do in life.

FERNHEIMER:What was it that kind of clicked for you that--"Biology, not for

me,"? (laughs)

SCHEFT:Very hard to sit on my--(laughs)--ass and study. (Fernheimer laughs) To

get, to get good degrees took me--I wanted to have good enough degrees so I

could--so I will--I can choose if I continue. And it just took a lot of time.

FERNHEIMER:To study.

SCHEFT:My concentration go very short, so I found--(laughs)--I found a way to

study with a watch--was watch a--I knew my concentration is ten minutes, fifteen

minutes. So I would put the watch ten minutes, and I knew it will finish, and

then I will go do a coffee, then I do--water my plants, but

I like took it in pauses every ten minutes. This is how I studied.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SCHEFT:Ten minutes, get out of my chair; ten minutes, get out of my chair; five

minutes, so--

FERNHEIMER:--not bad advice for students--

SCHEFT:--huh?

FERNHEIMER:Not bad advice for students, by the way.

SCHEFT:Don't do anything--I had ten minutes, I know the watch going to ring,

and then I have my break. But I knew I could not sit for one hour or thirty

minutes--it didn't work. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. So at this point, you mentioned the first wife somewhere in

this trajectory--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--when--what's her name? When did you meet her? How did you meet her?

SCHEFT:Her name is Tami, and I met her doing my university studies. She was

studying also in Tel Aviv. And, yeah, we fell in love, and living together for a

while, and then got married in 1990, and we both finished our university degree,

and went for another adventure, and went to

the far east. We went to Thailand, different places, but we actually also aimed

to go--to get to Japan where I did some also work--did you know that? (laughter)

So for three months, we were--a lot of Israelis did it--we were selling,

actually, posters in the--

FERNHEIMER:--posters--

SCHEFT:--posters and paintings to Japanese--in Japan, like every quarter, every

city have an area which is only for--all the bars and all the clubs, and all the

men, mostly, go to be entertained--

FERNHEIMER:--and this was in the nineties--

SCHEFT:--it was really, really--like was--was all set up. You come to Japan,

you get to this agency, they set you up with a car, they set you up with the

posters, they set you up with everything you needed to handle, and you--in the

end, you find a place in the city or another city, and you will--especially

looking for the

Christmas/New Year's celebration, they all go up to the temple. And that's how

also a lot of young Israelis found to sponsor the traveling in the world, so we

did it, too. And after we went to--and I actually was saving money to

get--actually to travel in India. Then I went to India for a long time, for six

months--traveling in India. And I would say at that time, I kind of started to

see the end of my traveling. I was really, really busy in my mind--what I'm

going to do with my life, or how I'm going to do living, and stuff like this.

And mostly when I would think about it--black hole. (Fernheimer laughs) Nothing

came. It wasn't, "I will do this, I won't do this." Like every time I would just

think about it, it was just poof. And--

FERNHEIMER:--you're like--

SCHEFT:--for some--one day I woke up in the morning, this is--I said, "Ah,

maybe I'll go to learn pastry." And my partner at that time,

my ex-wife, said, "Ah, try." So we were thinking about--because my Danish

background, and I have the language, and I have Danish citizenship, and said, "I

will go and check it out." And--

FERNHEIMER:--in Denmark--

SCHEFT:--in Denmark. So, actually, my ex-wife, she went back to Israel, and I

said, "I'm going go to--I'm going"--and I bought a ticket to Copenhagen. I said,

"I will check it out, I will come back to Israel, and then we'll see if it's

something for me." And--

FERNHEIMER:--what year was this--

SCHEFT:--the story--this is--this is eighty, this is ninety--this is 1991, I

think. And the story which I tell many times, it's like this--I came from the

flight, and my grandmother lived kind of very close to the--not far away from

the airport, and was also very ritual. Always we come to the house, she knew we

were coming, she prepared like a brunch

or whenever you come--always coffee, and a cake, or something to eat. And I

was--I arrived to the house, I took the--we were sitting having the coffee,

after fifteen minutes I go to the yellow pages looking for where do you learn

to--how do I get to where you learn to become a pastry chef? And I ended up

calling the official technical school for bakers, for pastry chefs, for

chefs--and I called them, and they said, "Oh, school started"--I didn't even

know, but said, "School started today, you can come tomorrow." I said, "Wow,

okay. I'll come tomorrow." Then I came the next day. The school is not in

Copenhagen, it's a forty-five, one hour train ride from Copenhagen. And I got

there, and they looked at me and said to me, "Okay, you can come in, but you're

going to the baker class school, you're not going to the

pastry school." And I really--no. I was fighting them, and they didn't let me.

They said, "No, no. If you want, try just one day." After time, I knew it just

wasn't--because they didn't have enough students in the baker school--

FERNHEIMER:-oh--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--so they were pushing me there so they have enough of students. And I

went to the--to the class. By the end of the day -----------(??)----------was--I

was exploded. I came home, I called my wife at that time, I said to her, "I know

what I'm going to do in my life." And then I went to school, and I do--did--did

my baking, baking school. So in Europe, it takes more than three years--no, you

go to school one year, and then you go to internship, and then you come back

after--once in a while. I didn't do the whole process, so I--first, I was

already in my late twenties, like I was 29--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, I was going to say--

SCHEFT:--just also

--yeah, it was--maybe--yeah, not maybe, but, at that time, my wife, she was

already pregnant in Denmark--or a little bit later, anyway, and--

FERNHEIMER:--so she was back in Israel pregnant?

SCHEFT:She was back--no, no. She came back--

FERNHEIMER:--she came back, okay--

SCHEFT:--she's back, I took an apartment, get help--I had a lot of family

there, we lived with family in the beginning with grandmother until we find an

apartment, then we--we lived there for almost two a half years. But after a year

in school, for me it was very hard to find a place--I looking for the high-end

places. So I was really going from one another, knocking on the door. Remember,

there was no emails, no telephone--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--no--it was a different world. And I would say, "Okay, I want to get

this"--I didn't get a--like the place where I wanted, so I started with a--like

a regular bakery. But another issue

was that--okay, I learned to be a baker, but remember, I wanted to be a pastry

chef. And one thing I found out very quickly, bakers work at night. I didn't

want to work at night, was never my thing to work at night. And, also, at that

time, I already had a child, so I definitely didn't want to work at night. So I

went back, and I was looking for internship in the pastry. So as a--so people

that finished school in Denmark, they are twenty years old. They maybe start in

the--sometimes some of my--

FERNHEIMER:--peers--

SCHEFT:--students were sixteen, seventeen years old. I was twenty-eight,

twenty-nine, yeah? Some were twenty, but I was really the--so looking for

internship also for my age--I speak Danish, but I have the accent, yes? And

then--and I wanted to work in the pastry, but I actually learned to be a baker,

so it was really, really hard to find. (Fernheimer laughs) So I found one place

who took me in, and after three months, I found one of the places where I used

to go and

be begging them to take me in, they were doing really, really--it was a really,

really good bakery--finally they took me in. But, also, over there, I didn't

last too long. I had to stay the three years to do--yeah--no, two years, two

year and a half until you get the certificate. But at one point, I understood

that's not going to work this way for me, and I started to--to move from one

place to another, so I got a lot of techniques. Normally, it was also to look

for places or--normally, they will take me in when it was before like holidays

where--so, you know, they need chefs.

FERNHEIMER:They need help. (laughs)

SCHEFT:They need help, yeah. And then after I kind of saw that it was getting

more and more hard for me to get a job, I started to go back and forth to Paris.

Started with a place called École Lenôtre, a very famous pastry bakery school,

but more short

--short--short courses.

FERNHEIMER:Did you speak French, also?

SCHEFT:No, but--

FERNHEIMER:--wow--

SCHEFT:--very slowly--yeah, at that time, it was an issue because some of

the--most of the teachers didn't speak English--(laughs)--so I had to have some

of my fellow students to translate although it's a very small classes--five

people, ten people. And--

FERNHEIMER:--what was the name of the place that took you in first in Denmark?

This was in Copenhagen still? There was one place--

SCHEFT:--this was--no, this was not in Copenhagen. This is in a city very close

to Copenhagen, a suburb of Copenhagen -------------(??), but--well--

FERNHEIMER:--was it--

SCHEFT:--maybe it's in my book, but--

FERNHEIMER:--is it Conditori La Glace?

SCHEFT:But--La Glace--La Glace--it was funny because she were going to

school--she were--so the woman that own it today, at that--now we're talking

about almost thirty years back--she was a daughter of the owner. And she

actually, in a way--said, "Oh, I bought the business from my mother," or

something like this. But she--probably she was born

or grew up in the--in La Glace, and only like later she went to school. So

we--when she was actually finishing her three year program, and I was in my

first program, so we were riding together the same train back and forth. So I

got closer to her, saying, "Hi, I'm this"--and then, "I heard you--" I knew who

she was. And later, I came back--actually, I think three times she took me in

for a shorter time to do some -------------(??) internship in her--and she was

very generous with me. And so--

FERNHEIMER:--and this was not the first place that you took you in for three months--

SCHEFT:--not the first place, even not the second. The second place is a very

famous place. It's not--doesn't exist anymore--called Kransekake

-------------(??). Kransekake is a Danish specialty with marzipan. You know,

they have the tower, and they have like--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--I have something going on here. By the way, I think also have my

Danish school books here.

FERNHEIMER:

Yeah? Maybe we'll get some pictures. This is awesome.

SCHEFT:Not the picture, but just the work like--where you--all in here.

-----------(??)---------- [Flipping pages] this is my--actually, my book. You

can see how you braid --how I learned to braid from six. (laughs) I didn't know

it was here, but--

FERNHEIMER:--amazing--

SCHEFT:--this is the--the very famous Danish--this is--yeah. And Kransekake

is--I don't have--ah, it's here, but I have to look for it. It's a special

marzipan with a mix with sugar and egg whites, and they bake it, and then--

FERNHEIMER:--sounds good--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--and yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--anything marzipan sounds good--

SCHEFT:--and they--this is the part--they make it ring by ring, and they attach

it together, and then they do a lot of petit four from outside. But this is

probably a sign of one of the places. So my second job

was at this place called Kransekake -------------(??), and if you look up--up

the word Kransekake--I think it's also in my book. It's--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah. I was just--

SCHEFT:--it's a Danish--it's a Danish--very normal specialty. And in this

place, they were like the best place for this--

FERNHEIMER:--cake--

SCHEFT:--specialty, yeah. People all over the world like--at least Scandinavia

will order from this place, buses of Japanese will go to see this place. So it

was really, really special. So this was second place. After, I went to my third

place -------------(??) for the school--how do you call it? (Hebrew)--

FERNHEIMER:--the rules--

SCHEFT:--the rules. I would have to work--I already like--because I didn't

stick to one place--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--so you're kind of not allowed. But in my mind, back of my mind, I

said, "I have a bachelor's degree in biology, I don't need another paper." Now I

go to--so it was--like the stories

which are really I really experienced, too, like this--like you hear about chefs

how they've been--like three months just peel potatoes and stuff like this. This

is really me because I was knocking on the door. The truth is because I was

Danish--also, when you go to school to Denmark like a baker school, you're

sponsored totally by the state. Like you get the train tickets, you get actually

money to go to study.

FERNHEIMER:Amazing.

SCHEFT:And, of course, it doesn't cost you anything, and the--whatever you

need. You need eyeglasses--everything is really, really--very comfortable. And

so at one time when I saw I could not get a job for money, I actually went to

get money from the state--(Hebrew)--(both laugh)--like people don't have work,

they get like--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, like unemployment--

SCHEFT:--employment. And baking some cake on the side to cousins that have a

coffee place--(Fernheimer laughs)--and just get along like--but really like

going to the high-end places, knocking on the door every couple

of months saying, "I talked to you one month ago"--very polite--also like

Americans. They will never tell you no--"Try another time. I don't have now--I

don't have--try in the--in Christmas," and stuff like this. And normally--

FERNHEIMER:--this is tough. You have a baby at home--

SCHEFT:--normally they didn't want--because also--because they didn't

want--said, "No, I will come for free. I will come"--but even for free, they

don't let you always in.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SCHEFT:And, and then--

FERNHEIMER:--but this must have been hard at home. You have a wife, and a kid,

and--a baby at this point, maybe a toddler--

SCHEFT:--yeah, it is--it was. I think at one point, also, even though--I was

encouraged a bit--encouragement of my ex-wife. I was in Paris, and I was in the

school, and I was really nagging my French teacher to find me a place to work.

And in the end, they found me a place in Paris that would take me in. Again, no

money--(laughs)--no nothing.

FERNHEIMER:So your wife was working at this time?

SCHEFT:She was in Copenhagen with the child. I think they came one time. And

she said, "Stick as long as you--although they don't pay you--" because

I got also like peeling potatoes, I got the same job every day. They almost

didn't let me do anything. I was watching, but I had this--like the station

where I worked with, another five, six people work. One does the croissants, one

do baguettes, one do this, but I will see--

FERNHEIMER:--what were you doing? It wasn't potatoes--

SCHEFT:--what I would do it's called--in French it's called--like I did--I put

the dough in the ring like especially stuff--pie, and the tarts, and quiche.

So--and they have a special name in French, I forgot about it, but just to put

the dough in the ring or in the mold. Very nice, very this--this is I did for

almost two months.

FERNHEIMER:Wow. (laughs)

SCHEFT:So if I was very fast--so every day I'm going into the refrigerator or

freezer, and they will prepare to me all the--

FERNHEIMER:--dough--

SCHEFT:--it start from small quiches or small tarts to big plate. And they

would prepare me the whole dough, and I would have to set it in the ring or in

the forms. And I

would come in the morning, I would--so if I was very fast, maybe in the last

hour, I got to go--so at that time, I was really attracted to layer cakes. So in

another room, the guy I would see what he'd do. He did all the cream cakes and

all the fancy cakes. So if I worked very fast, in the last hour I could go and

join him. But they said, "First you finish, then you can go," because after a

few weeks, all of a sudden Israeli was a chutzpah. "I want to do this. I want to

do this. Let me do croissant." You don't imagine--today I can explain this to my

worker--just how excited just to roll a croissant. Not even to make it, not even

to put it in the laminator machine, not even to cut it--just to roll--if they

let me do it for half an hour, I was like, "Ah, this was a very good day." But

many days I didn't get to it because dough thing never finished. And the French,

they don't--(laughs)--they're very strict.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, very precise.

SCHEFT:Yeah, "You don't want? You can go," because there's no

--it was--just thinking about this day--you don't get lunch--ah, maybe they do

gift lunch, but you cannot eat nothing from the store. And you see all the

croissants coming up--"I want to taste one." "No, you cannot."

FERNHEIMER:So what did they feed you? Just like--

SCHEFT:--one guy--

FERNHEIMER:--bread?

SCHEFT:One guy will make some lunch, we all sit together, it's a very low cost

one-dish lunch kind of thing. And then back to work--with a watch. Sometimes it

was really--the watch ring, you have to leave. Didn't make it to eat that time?

Too bad. It's time now to go back to work.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SCHEFT:So this was in Paris, and then after a couple of months, I had enough,

and I went back to Denmark, did some more work, different places, and returned

to Israel. At that time, I was sure when I returned to Israel I will--after two,

three months, I will open a bakery of my own.

FERNHEIMER:This was what year?

SCHEFT:This was--so now we are at

probably '92, '93--'93.

FERNHEIMER:So Oslo is coming, things are looking different in Israel at that time.

SCHEFT:Different look at the--yeah, and then I said, "Okay, before I'm going to

open my own place, I want to know a little bit more about how business works in

Israel," because I come from a house, nothing to do with business--(Fernheimer

laughs)--nothing to do with money. Money was actually--you don't talk about

money in the house. Definitely not at the table when we're eating--no, no, no we

cannot talk about money. Definitely not on Friday, but in general. And so I

started to work with a guy--he's very famous, a very famous chef in Israel at

that time, very--number one catering in Israel called Ran Shmueli.

FERNHEIMER:Ran--

SCHEFT:Ran. R-A-N Shmueli.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, Ran.

SCHEFT:Ran Shmueli. Now he owns a huge -------------(??) in the catering

business, and have here a great restaurant--Claro.

FERNHEIMER:Claro?

SCHEFT:Claro. Yeah,

it's here in the very--I'm pointing out because it just--(Fernheimer

laughs)--around here. And he took me in which was really, really a great thing

for me because as a catering, when they deliver like a menu for people that get

married and this--chocolate cake? Now you do whatever chocolate cake you want.

So I came with a lot of recipes from France, from Denmark, from different

pastries and bakeries I worked for. So I got really to--they gave me a really

free hand to do whatever I want with the dessert. At that time, it was a very

special time in Israel because--also the food scene really started at that time.

And the--it was like economical--was really good time, Rabin

---------------(??). And a lot of people not only make money, they--sometimes

there was a lot of

showoff for some people at that time. A lot of--let's say--

FERNHEIMER:--conspicuous consumption--

SCHEFT:--nouveau riche, they have to show off. And it was really like--we did

crazy, crazy stuff, also, for private, but also for different--different things

at that time really connected somehow around the Rabin and the--it was a kind of

time where economy was really good in Israel, so the catering was really

succeeding. So I was there for three and a half years after saying I wanted to

open a place after a few months. But I really got to learn a lot, and one of

my--I didn't care so much about my salary, but I cared that I can--that he will

sponsor--that I can go to--at least one time a year I can go to France, or Italy,

or Denmark and take a course, so take some more studies. So he was supporting

that. And that really worked for us to--

FERNHEIMER:--professional development--

SCHEFT:--professional development. And he was ahead of his time. From catering,

he started--he wanted to open a deli. And I think, at that time, there was not

so many small manufacturing, so it was very hard to get the special stuff, and

the economics went a little bit down, so at one point in time we decided I'm

going to move on. Made my first attempt to open my own--at least in my mind,

nothing really--(Fernheimer laughs)--actual--then I got in touch with, at that

time, a very small coffee place called Arcaffe which is a huge chain today, but

they were really in their beginning. And--

FERNHEIMER:

--I just think of it as the big chain coffee house--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--so it started small?

SCHEFT:--but they really pioneers--although the coffee scene already started, I

won't say they were the first, but they were the first that wasn't like--didn't

try to adjust the coffee to what was going on in Israel. They brought Italian

coffee, and machinery, and the--how you call it where you roast the coffee?

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SCHEFT:Yeah--but yeah. Roasting--

FERNHEIMER:--roaster--

SCHEFT:--yeah, roaster. Yeah, so they roast their own coffee, and they really

like brought the Italian espresso, and they really--like Arcaffe was also a

major place for me because they were going with the authentic, the real stuff,

they didn't make any compromise, they wanted the best Italian coffee, and they

really did it.

And I joined them when they were just getting started where at that time, they

thought they were going to be only like a coffee/espresso bar, and they would

not serve food. But they understood that they need some food, and then I

partnered up with them, we opened the company that actually supplied the whole

becoming a chain later with the food. But my first experience with them, after

we actually shake hands, I think two days after I was on a plane to Italy. The

owner, he--after long research of himself, found the place where they make the

best focaccia in Italy, it was in Milano. I talked with him one week; two, three

meetings; one time I made some samples for him to taste what I know; then he

said to me, "You want to go next week to Italy?" "Yes." I was on a plane--(both

laugh)--and then I got--I got just three weeks, I learned only to--you know

like, "Italian is special in

focaccia, this is what you make: focaccia." So for three weeks, I made the same

focaccia morning and afternoon. Then came back to Israel, established the bakery

of Arcaffe, and started to buy the machinery, get the staff, and I was--

FERNHEIMER:--this was like '97 or later--

SCHEFT:--yeah. I can check it out. Maybe it's in my book, in my resume. I don't

remember the years exactly.

FERNHEIMER:It's okay.

SCHEFT:Yeah, but '97 is good--

FERNHEIMER:--a good estimate.

SCHEFT:Yeah. May be really accurate. (both laugh) And the owner, he was really

like--he saw--he wanted to go fast, and the same he did with Italy, he was

searching like really in France for not only the best bakery, but also a baker

that can--speaks English, for example, that

we can actually collaborate with him. Got attached with Eric

Kayser--known--maybe the biggest artisan commercial bakers all over the world.

Like I know in New York, he opened and closed--this is a franchise, yes, but he

still--also in Israel, I know he's also had some problems here--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--but he's an amazing guy, and we got--after our research, we got a

know-how agreement with him. And my mission was from the owner--Kobi Shemmer of

Arcaffe--is to bring the bread--to bring the baguette and the confit loaf--I

would put it in my word--not resemble off the real stuff in France, not look

alike, not almost, "I want the real stuff in Israel," and this was my mission.

So I went there and studied for

quite a long time, and then I got to a conclusion--"If you want the same bread,

we have to bring the same machinery, we have to bring the flour, and we actually

also have to bring maybe some baker or"--because me going back--also running the

bakery in Israel, and going and studying back and forth--it's better to have--

FERNHEIMER:--what about the yeast? Do they use natural yeast? Did you have to

bring that, too--

SCHEFT:--no. Actually, they learned us to--we also brought from there, but,

actually, also I learned how to build it here. So there's always some about the

sourdough, "It goes for generations", but I'm a biologist, and, technically--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--because you can say it go generations, it has a nice story, but if you

look at the bacteria and what's inside the dough, it's--they don't know there's

been generations there--(Fernheimer laughs)--but it's the same bacteria, yes.

But, yeah, we brought the sourdough, the workers, the flour--we brought the

flour from France. It's funny because we used to--just across the street, this

used to be the Green Market,

but now the Green Market, it actually supplies the restaurants. It was just here

across the street, now it's this older building. So they have a lot of (Hebrew),

cooling rooms. So we actually will store the flour right here from--when we--

FERNHEIMER:--oh, wow--

SCHEFT:--when we started in Arcaffe. So this relationship with Arcaffe went on

for four and a half years, and then I decided I'm going to open a bakery in the U.S.

SCHEFT:First? Interesting.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. (laughs) And then I matched up with a person, with American

Jewish that wanted to go back, and she said, "Oh, we have to open--" and we did

our whole--we did our business plan, we did our research, we actually also found

sponsors for partner with some money people to do it. And she was really

insistent, "We will go and check out two places: Phoenix, Arizona and Las

Vegas." She said, "This is the best place.

We open--there's nothing there in the bread scene, and we will do Arcaffe

there--like Arcaffe there." And the--and the whole story's--

FERNHEIMER:-------------(??)--

SCHEFT:--yes. And then I said, "Okay, we will go there, but I want first to see

the bakery scene in New York." And she didn't want--and I said, "No, no. We're

going to New York first." And I remember that we went to New York, and it's

funny because if I will walk--after now ten, fifteen years, the same

bakeries--Sullivan Street Bakery, Amy's, Balthazar, and--were--I think maybe a

few more, but this is--and Boulud, Boulud Bakery--were the standing out bakeries

in New York at that time. So we went, and I bought a lot of bread, and check

everybody out, and then we went to Phoenix. And we do one day in Phoenix, and I

have there a very close cousin--cousins there, and I stayed at her place. But

after the first day,

I was sitting there at dinner, and I felt my stomach going ow, ow, ow, ow, ow,

ow. And I pick up the phone--still no cell phone, but, "Can I call?" I called

where she was staying at the hotel, my partner, I said, "I'm out. I'm not going

to bring my wife and two children to Phoenix. I don't see--(laughs)--I'm not

going to live here. Let's go back to New York. (Fernheimer laughs) If you want

to do something--" "No, no. New York, we cannot afford it. It's too expensive in

New York. Blah, blah, blah. And give it another chance, another day." I said,

"No, we are wasting our time. I know I'm not going to do it here. My wife will

not come to Arizona, to Phoenix. It's not going to happen. And probably not to

Las Vegas." "Oh, let's go to Las Vegas." "It's not going to happen." (Fernheimer

laughs) She was pissed with me. She didn't--in the end, she talked--she came

here one day and kind of apologized. I said, "I don't want to waste our time. I

know." Said, "Oh, you're going back to New York because--don't. Give it a real

chance." I said, "I don't need. I'm not going to come

here to Phoenix."

FERNHEIMER:Who was the partner? (Hebrew) or--

SCHEFT:--I have to--I'm not good with names. I forgot even her name--

FERNHEIMER:--no problem.

SCHEFT:No, no. But she's not in this business--I don't think she's in this

business. I think she's back in the state. I saw her once or twice here

afterwards, and then--but it's--

FERNHEIMER:--so this was--same--it was still Tammy? And you have two kids now--

SCHEFT:--yes.

FERNHEIMER:So the family's growing, business is growing--

SCHEFT:--and then I go back to New York--back to New York, and then, again, I

said, "Okay, I'm going to go back to Israel and open my bakery, and then I got

one of the best advice because I thought I was going to go and do a bakery in

Ra'anana--maybe Herzliya, maybe Ramat HaSharon. And I had a friend that said to

me, "Don't do it. Do it only one place: Tel Aviv. Only Tel Aviv. Tel Aviv. You

cannot afford to do it anywhere else." (Fernheimer laughs) And I came back, and

started to build up my Lehamim Bakery that time. This was 2001--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah. Wow. Also, a challenging

time--

SCHEFT:--here--actually--

FERNHEIMER:--here, Hashmonaim--

SCHEFT:--it's not--it's the next--it's the location next to us, like the--

FERNHEIMER:--so this is like the second Intifada, it's a really rough time. I

lived here then.

SCHEFT:Ah, okay.

FERNHEIMER:Lower Tel Aviv in Jerusalem. So this is a tough time to start.

People were scared to go out and to go to public places from what I remember. (laughs)

SCHEFT:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:So tell me about that.

SCHEFT:So many, so many things with the Intifada, and the--so I don't

remember--for me--

FERNHEIMER:--I understand--

SCHEFT:--so first thing, you have to know me, I don't have news in my life. I

don't read newspaper, I don't have TV, and the--although it's not totally true

today, in the last year, I'm a little bit more in the news. Even today, when I

go in the car, when it comes to the news, I shut it off. Today I listened to the

news for the first time on the radio for a long, long time, but--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah? Lama? Why today--

SCHEFT:

--maybe what's going on interest me more than anything else, but--but, you know,

periods I'm not--

FERNHEIMER:--I signpost for my students so they understand kind of where this

sits in the context of the world and what's happening. So, anyway, we come back,

it's 2001, this friend who you need to really acknowledge because he gave

you--he? He or she?

SCHEFT:He.

FERNHEIMER:He gave you great advice, right? To open one place.

SCHEFT:To open in Tel Aviv. I went that time to study to work with a computer.

I start Word and Excel. This is how I made my first business plan--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--by--actually, when I was actually studying to work with the computer

during my--like during my studies, I actually did my Excel sheets--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--for Lehamim, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:And so--when you did--so you went back to school

to learn like word process--

SCHEFT:--no, I just took private classes to learn--

FERNHEIMER:--and did you need to get outside investors or how--

SCHEFT:--yeah, I started with--I started with a friend--with a--friend invested

money, and then got some money from--my brother helped me a little bit, my

parents helped me a little bit, and I did it with a really minimal--if I tell

you now the number, nobody will believe me that I opened a business with this

little money. But, also, for my reputation with some of my suppliers, I got a

lot of credit for machinery, some gave me machinery and tell me, "Pay me"--they

trusted me, they already knew me here from these two--so I worked only two after

studying--only in two major places. I didn't work--I did a little bit of work

for myself like between the work. And every time between also Ran

Shmoeli--between the first work and the second, and then the--I took a major

like time--I took one year off like--I was going back to what I aimed to do

something that I love. I was--sometimes you get confused, thought, "Ah, maybe--"

but it's not only about the food, I also am--to be honest, I also have this

business mind, said, "Okay, I want to make a good living, I want to make money."

Especially living in Israel like my childhood, so maybe I didn't mention it, but

I lived in a rich area, but my parents were not, so I saw how all the neighbors,

they get telephone, TV at that time, cars. And my parents were all--my family

was always last. So it's not jealousy, but you look around, and you say, "Okay,

when I grow up--" you know, I was teasing my father, "Oh, you will see. I will

make--I will be very rich. Blah, blah, blah." "We'll see."

So I had this--also my passion, but also the passion to have my own--my own

business was also a part of my passion.

FERNHEIMER:And so how was that at the beginning? I--

SCHEFT:--so the beginning, I was sitting outside here. So I will tell you there

was like the--sort of the Green Market, this, and then people, "Oh, what are you

doing here?" Nobody will buy it ever--bread here. This is what the main thing

was--"What are you doing here?" "Bakery." "Bakery here? In this area?" And--

FERNHEIMER:--tell me about the area at the time because now, of course--

SCHEFT:--so the area was really rough because as you see here, now

the--resident, they only came now. But it was--for me, also, I picked specific

this area because first there was no neighbors upstairs. There's no resident,

it's only offices. It's called like--it's also defined by the municipality like

a light industry. And the major thing

that I mentioned already, it was the Green Market, but I'm talking the--I don't

know how to call it--no, really the big trucks coming from all over Israel,

unloading here like piles of--whatever, all the greens. And all the people that

have--the supermarkets, even the--

FERNHEIMER:--like warehouse supply--

SCHEFT:--they're coming to--so it was--also, in the morning, really like

smelly. (Fernheimer laughs) You know, they would wash the whole--and it was a

really rough like area here. But I saw it like it could get a lot--a big--like

it was almost three thousand square feet, it was very low rent, and--but very

close to the center of Tel Aviv. At that time, it wasn't all these buildings

going on what you see now. So the rent, the--it was central, it was in Tel Aviv,

and then--

FERNHEIMER:--were you living in Tel Aviv at the time or--

SCHEFT:--no, no--

FERNHEIMER:--were you living elsewhere and commuting in?

SCHEFT:Yeah, I lived quite far--not too far, but it was

--today it will take much longer time because the traffic, but also that time it

was a forty-five, one-hour drive every--

FERNHEIMER:--was this in Ra'anana or no?

SCHEFT:No, no. Even further north. I lived in a place near Netanya. I lived in

a moshav.

FERNHEIMER:Wow, okay.

SCHEFT:I rented a house in a moshav. Contrary to a lot of my friends, I said,

"First I make a business, then I buy." In Israel, at least when I grew up, it

was very important--still today--"Oh, you get your own apartment, you have to

buy your house and take the loan." I said, "I'm not taking loan. I'm first going

to make money, then I'm going to buy a house." I didn't want to be obligated to

what you call here mashkanta.

FERNHEIMER:So wow--okay, so when you opened your bakery, like what was your

vision? What did you want to bring to the people of Israel? Did you have--

SCHEFT:So what I saw is--so I would say--so the pioneer of the baking industry

is Erez. Probably heard about him--Lehem Erez. He's now

the owner of the bakery carrying his name. But it was funny, when I started with

Arcaffe, even with Ran Shmoeli, we did already a bread store, and he also

started at that time. But he really captured--he was a pioneer, like a--but he

became very quickly kind of a little bit industry, okay? More like it was sure

he going to make like branches at that time. And for me, I just look at the very

simple way, what I saw in Denmark and in France. It's a one-man bakery, maybe

sometimes the man and the woman. You know, the men bake at night, the woman

sells in the day, they have two, ten people around them work, that's it. That's

what I had in mind. So where actually you manufacture, you prepare the bread,

you bake it, and you sell it in the same place like a

regular corner bakery what you see all over Europe and especially you see it in

France and Denmark, these places. So this was my model. Doing maybe also because

it's university, so doing--I can even send you this. It's in Hebrew, but this

would be easy to translate--so I was learning to do--to work on the computer,

and then need to do some kind of a business plan, so I had the business idea.

What is the--so I want to do a one-pager: what's it going to be? You read it

today, I lived up to what I planned twenty-years--

FERNHEIMER:--amazing--

SCHEFT:--I only see--I don't know how to--

FERNHEIMER:--the investment idea--

SCHEFT:--yeah. No, so I did. And then I did some very simple straight-forward

business plan which I saved. I also have it today somewhere. And then--what I'm

going to sell--so it was--again, it was bread, pastry--Danish pastry, some

desserts, but

in my background, I knew also to make the very fine like petit four chocolate

stuff--also, in Arcaffe, we did all the layer--very special French pastry

desserts. And then--but here I wanted more like--more like a bakery, and

viennoiserie which is more the tarts, pies, croissant. No, there's a bakery

pasty, and what's in the middle is viennoiserie, like Vienna--

FERNHEIMER:--why is--

SCHEFT:--croissant, all the layers, like puff pastry, pie doughs is

viennoiserie. You can--

FERNHEIMER:I'll Google it.

SCHEFT:--it's defined, yeah. And so it's more bakery viennoiserie. But I had

the confidence with me that I know to do ice cream, I know to do desserts, I

know to do petit fours, I know--so I saw the oven, I said,

"I'm going to start," and the success heated very quickly. I would say

even--yeah, three months I saw it was already going very well.

FERNHEIMER:So how many--how many people were working then when you first

started? And like now--

SCHEFT:--twenty, twenty people when it started. Today we are way over three

hundred--three hundred and fifty people, I think.

FERNHEIMER:Wow. And that's in how many branches? When was the next branch?

SCHFT:The next branch took a long time. At one point--at one point my first

investor shifted--was shifting, and then--and, actually, it's his cousin which

is my partner until today--Ohana Or--O-R--Ohana is Ohana, O-H-A-N-A.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SCHEFT:

It started as--it started after a couple--three years--when after the opening,

started at as a waiter, become the barista, became the service manager, and the

shop manager. After a couple--three, four years, I offered him to become a

partner. So the shift--then he came in, the other partner came out, and then

he's still my partner until today. And we opened--so I want to correct something

you said in the beginning for my title. So I'm--my name is Uri Scheft, I'm the

owner and the founder of Lehamim Bakery. I am the co-founder and used to be the

chef of Breads Bakery--I'm not involved in Breads Bakery New York anymore.

FERNHEIMER:Okay.

SCHEFT:We didn't get along that well. Not going to talk about it anymore. And

we split. It's still--the whole

concept is--

FERNHEIMER:--based--

SCHEFT:--not--everything is based there. I lived in New York for--just near the

Breads Bakery on 16th Street, I lived for three years. But I was involved like

seven, eight years, so a lot of traveling back and forth. And we split, and I opened--

FERNHEIMER:--when did you split? Just--

SCHEFT:--huh?

FERNHEIMER:When? When did you split? Just--

SCHEFT:--it's--since, I think--I don't remember exactly now--2016-17--

FERNHEIMER:--okay. So right around the time the book came out?

SCHEFT:Right. And then it--it's still--it carries the name, we good. Everything

is behind us. And--and we opened a year and a half--almost two years ago, we

opened Bakey in Boston.

FERNHEIMER:Batey?

SCHEFT:Bakey, B-E-K-E-Y--B-A-K-E-Y.

-----------------(??)--------------

FERNHEIMER:--during the pandemic? After the pandemic?

SCHEFT:During, yes. We started before, we got stuck a good year and a half, two

years. And, still, Boston is still not out of the pandemic, in a way. You know,

the first location downtown Boston is still--the offices are kind of empty.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. I was going--

SCHEFT:--it's not that many--

FERNHEIMER:--where in Boston is it--

SCHEFT:--not so many conventions like they're used to be--

FERNHEIMER:--right--

SCHEFT:--like it was a big city--

FERNHEIMER:--conferences, people--

SCHEFT:--conferences--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--yeah. Not like--but--and we opened a couple--two months ago, we opened

our second store in Brookline. Brookline, Massachusetts--not Brooklyn. Everybody

in Israel like--

FERNHEIMER:--no--

SCHEFT:--"ah, you're in Brooklyn,"--

FERNHEIMER:--but it's a very Jewish neighborhood--

SCHEFT:--"not Brooklyn, Brookline." And, yeah, very Jewish, very--area,

but--and I hope we can open a third one very soon.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah?

SCHEFT:So I mention this because of my partner who started here was a waiter,

became my partner.

He's a--he relocated about four years ago.

FERNHEIMER:Or?

SCHEFT:Huh?

FERNHEIMER:Or?

SCHEFT:Or, yeah. And he lives there, so I'm back and forth. So I live--exactly

a year ago, I came back after a whole year. So I did a whole year with--

FERNHEIMER:--and the pandemic in Boston.

SCHEFT:In the pandemic in Boston, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, kashe. (laughs) Hard.

SCHEFT:Yeah, I think it was easier than being here.

FERNHEIMER:Interesting.

SCHEFT:Because in Israel, they stopped every time there was something--they

stopped the school. So the school wasn't--over there, if you're not sick, you

can come to school. And the school was open the whole pandemic at least at this

time. Maybe not in the very beginning, but this year when we've been there--

FERNHEIMER:--this was what? '21-'22? This year now is '23.

SCHEFT:So I came back--I came back in August 2022. So it was--yeah, '21-'22. We

opened September '21, and I came back--so I was there--actually, I went there

for three months

to establish and to--for the whole--to help my partner with the opening. And

it's a little bit different concept from what we do here. It's more like focused

on coffee and fresh-baked goods. So we do--we bake constantly. The whole idea is

you buy coffee, you buy drink, and whenever you come in, you will find a fresh

bagel, a fresh babka, a fresh croissant, cheese sticks--almond croissant are our

like best seller. So we actually limit--which is now, if you're talking about

the world scene of bakeries--I just came back from Copenhagen, so--actually,

maybe I'm before the time because over there, the best bakeries today, it's

bakeries that do three-four type of loaf; ten items of baked goods like

croissant or the specialty both sweet and savory; maybe two--maybe even

sometimes only one, maybe

two to three options of sandwiches breakfast--many places even don't hold

espresso-based machine, so it's all drip, all like Danish-American coffee. I

found some of them very good. So very lean menu, very--not the full range like

we see in old days, or like Lehamim, or in many places also in Europe. So

now--and high-quality--like amazing, amazing quality. A little bit

boring--(Fernheimer laughs)--because it's now--because everybody like--and it's

based--it's more like--I feel it's more like chef restaurants, more like based

on one person who have the talent, and the good recipes, and the good work

methods. And the two, three, four, five type of breads--maybe some of the type

breads they make also some rolls or some buns,

but I've just been there one month ago, and it's like one after the other.

It's--and in today, maybe economy, it's not--that's not a bad idea.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SCHEFT:So we do a little bit different. Maybe a little bit more item on the

menu, but not that much. Definitely not like Lehamim.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SCHEFT:And more concentrated on baked goods and bread although we also do

the--we do the same. We do challah, we do Danish rye bread, we do a French sourdough.

FERNHEIMER:Wow.

SCHEFT:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:So thank you for sharing that with me.

SCHEFT:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:I didn't know about Bakey. Maybe I should have done more homework,

but I was just in Boston not too long ago before we came here, so I would have gone--ventured.

SCHEFT:Yeah, very--very successful. It's done really, really good.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SCHEFT:People like it, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Let's--

SCHEFT:--although the pandemic. It's been hard-- (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:--sure.

SCHEFT:It's been crazy.

FERNHEIMER:

I mean we could do an entire interview about that.

SCHEFT:No, we're still suffering because our economy--because we spent a lot of

time--a lot of money during the pandemic--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--and we--because we wasn't an established business, so we couldn't get

any help from the--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--most businesses was already established, like we just missed the--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, you've the government--

SCHEFT:--government support, so we kept zero. So it was--

FERNHEIMER:--really tough--

SCHEFT:--tough, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, and we were here during the pandemic, and went back.

SCHEFT:Okay.

FERNHEIMER:But let's talk--can we talk a little bit up here about--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--I know you're probably short on time, but about--

SCHEFT:--if I'm talking too much, you can cut me.

FERNHEIMER:No, no--(both laugh)--I like--you know, what you established here

with Lehamim and even Breads--even though it's not the same, but it still

carries the reputation, this idea of like really high quality baked goods, and

this kind of--the way that bread--I mean if you ask people now to talk about

what is Israeli food? Everyone comes back to the bread. And, you know, you

brought this--you know, that it's simple:

vegetables, this, that, but always really good bread. And so what does it mean

to like, you know, think about how baking and bread fits into it? I love this

quote somewhere in Breaking Breads. You talk about the importance of bourekas in

Israeli cuisine, like you compare it to the American bagel, right? It's

something that you can eat anytime, and hot or cold, pick up and you go. Talk to

me about what you think is kind of quintessentially Israeli food and where bread

fits into it, and then I've got some more questions about that.

SCHEFT:Okay. First, yeah, I can--no, always when people trying or asking, also,

being a lot of these day, "Define Israeli cuisine." And even in Israel, there's

a lot of argument--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--and what is--is there an Israeli cuisine? Which is a legitimate

discussion and talk, and I'm very connected to Asif, if you know, and to the whole--

FERNHEIMER:--I'm going there later this week--

SCHEFT:--you're going what?

FERNHEIMER:I'll be there later this week.

SCHEFT:You're going to visit. So I'm involved also with another--people there

also from New York because it's something to do also with the Jewish Food

Society. As you probably know--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--Naama Shefi--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--which is the founder together with--yeah, so I was just sitting and

thinking about--I was sitting with my publisher, Lia Ronnen, who was the

publisher of my book. She was here in Israel. I thought that one of the thing I

think when you--especially if I talk about the restaurant scene which what

different in Israel or in the U.S., yeah?

And I said a lot of it is to do something with freshness because a lot of

us--what I saw in the U.S., a lot of even the small restaurants, they come from

the big--like I think they--like all the mise en place, and all the

preparation--for Israelis, it's like very important we cut the salad just before

we eat it, or we mix it just before we eat it. It's not so many preparation. But

a lot also to do with food from yesterday--are we eating the food from yesterday

or a lot being thrown away? So a lot about it is not only about local

ingredients, it's about the way people live and about freshness. And the

specific about bread and bagels, I kind of found out from my first--like one of

my memories is--so I told you in Ra'anana there wasn't restaurant, but just

across the street from where my neighborhood was, was one small Yemenite

falafel. (Fernheimer laughs) And I told you I wasn't--I was very

interested in food, but I wasn't aware about it. And I was nagging to him, I

tell him--his name was Yefet (??)--I said, "Yefet, what is the secret about

falafel?" And he was teasing me, said, "I'm not going to tell you. I'm not going

to tell you." I remember one time I came back from the Army--and came back also

from Army before entering my mother and my parents' house for the smell of the

challah, anytime I would stop and eat the falafel. And one time I said,

"Yefet"--he got really like old. I said, "Yefet, are you not going to tell me

the secret of falafel?" And then he looked and said, "You don't understand.

There's no secret in the falafel. It's the pita. I bring it here fresh four,

five, ten times a day from the bakery--somebody bring me every time twenty

pitas." The pitas have to be very like--

FERNHEIMER:--squishy--

SCHEFT:--soggy, not like some they make in machines so they're very dry. No,

that's not the way. And it's very fresh all the time. So you see--so somehow I

have this memory--"Ah, it's not the falafel, it's the bread." Which also says

bread is not just the carrier

of the good cheese, the bread have to stand alone for its quality and taste. But

this freshness together with a lot of like the line outside--we're talking about

Israel, but I bring you back to -----------(??) , but for me, like the line

outside the Eric Kayser first shop--and when I knew him, he had only one shop in

Paris in Rue Monge, in the Latin quarter--and I saw the line for fresh baguette.

And I said, you know, sometime I buy--when I didn't have a bakery, and I didn't

make bread myself, and I would go to the supermarket and had to buy the bread

there--so in Israel they started like--they didn't manufacture, but they just

baked off like fresh bread. You know, they come frozen, and they just bake in

the supermarket. And I noticed the baguette was very low quality, but when it's

come out of the oven and it's hot, I will eat half before I get home already in

the car. So

I don't know if this answered your question, but I think it's a lot about--no,

maybe also, you know, if you look a little bit back where there's no much--today

refrigerator something, but because of hot weather here--so the freshness is a

big part, I think. And in Israeli cuisine, we talk about the use of vegetables

and Mediterranean, but also the way we prepare it is always--I know from a lot

of my friends, freshness is a big--is a big deal. And, yeah, I don't know if

this is answering your question.

FERNHEIMER:So for you, freshness is a big part of what you would--

SCHEFT:--Israeli cuisine, yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--what else do you think--if you had to define it, you know,

what--you talk about your own kind of trajectory and--

SCHEFT:--we hate now because we've been so much watch the news and

-----------(??), but it's--yeah, me also, I saw--I see also

--okay, my connection also with -----------(??) coming to Russian house which

really aware of quality of food. They know what good food is, yes. And they're

very picky about how they prepare the food. Even the bourekas, she will not make

bourekas, she will make piroshki. With what? With also puff pastry, and cabbage

or ground beef, yeah? But--and I talk about bourekas, but I, for me, I found

bourekas--you know, you can call it French--I don't know--puff pastry like baked

goods--how you call the apple? Turn--

FERNHEIMER:--turn--strudel--

SCHEFT:--no, no, the American--

FERNHEIMER:--apple pie?

SCHEFT:Not apple pie--turnover? Like--

FERNHEIMER:--triangles--

SCHEFT:

--yeah, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, apple turnover or a hand pie.

SCHEFT:Hand pie, stuff like this. It's all kind of--kind of bourekas. Also in

Israel, they took the bourekas--like let's say Turkish, or this area--which we

make with filas, and we actually did the same filling, but inside puff pastry.

France--like taking different things from different places and changing them.

Israeli--for me, Israeli food, wow. It's always a tough question. I would say

everything--you know, now especially when it's--come discussion this: yes, this:

no; but, you know, for me, I tell you--I tell this story. When I first opened in

New York, so before the pre-opening announcement in the TIME magazine, or in the

New York Times,

or--what's the name of the famous--I know she's not anymore--the food writer.

She's probably Jewish.

FERNHEIMER:There's so many.

SCHEFT:Yeah, I know, but there's one standing out--

FERNHEIMER:--Ruth Reichl--

SCHEFT:--like she had always--anyway, in one of the newspapers, she had the

announcement, they're going to open a bakery in New York--a Jewish bakery in New

York. And I was really upset. I said, "I bring Danish rye bread, I bring French

baguette, I--and baguette croissant. Yes, I make also challah, and rugelach,

and"--but she opened up like a Lehamim bakery website, and she saw a Jewish--for

her, it was a Jewish bakery. At that time, I didn't capture--I was upset, and

then I said--because I said that, I bring--like I did my studies in Italy and

France, been in Germany, been in Denmark, been in Israel, and captured a lot of

things from many places, and I considered myself a very international baker.

And then somebody said I'm a Jewish baker, but this is--so I know you're talking

about this one. This is exactly Jewish in Israel. I'm taking this from here,

taking this from there, and mixing it. And, you know, in a way, it's not so much

about Jewish food, but the same as the technology and startups which Israel is

very--maybe not very--how do you call it? (laughs) Going by the rules, but it's

allowed us a lot of creativity and--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, you actually bring up an interesting question because

that's--that's one of the questions I have is--for you and for everyone I'm

talking to--but, you know, the relationship--what is the relationship between

Israeliness and Jewishness, and your idea of how you think about it either in a

larger question about identity, but also about food? Because, you know, in

Breaking Breads, you have some other things that are--how shall I say it? A

little controversial, right? Like

hummus, mutabak, some other things--Jerusalem bagel, right? That come from--

SCHEFT:--I released myself from--also, this is one of the story from--so later,

I have a partner up in marriage with a--kind of marriage with a--with Rinat

which her background is Yemenite and Moroccan, and a lot of influences of her

cooking, baking, pastry, her mother--in the book, you see malawach, kubaneh. And

then in --in my mind, you see like even in malawach, and all the thing like

Yemenite do which is take a piece of dough--

FERNHEIMER:--stretch--

SCHEFT:--and stretch it, put some butter. What's the difference between this

and croissant? It's another technique of getting more like crunchy layer stuff--

FERNHEIMER:--flavor--

SCHEFT:--flavor into baked goods. And taking even this kind of malawach, and

then you can put in some other stuff

--maybe European stuff. So there's no rules so much. So you have to know

where--maybe where it stem from--where it come from, and--yesterday I just

have--again, I have the--it's more to do with the freshness, so

-------------(??), so it's a big--hummus is a big thing. Ah, it's Israeli. No.

It's not Israeli, it's Arabic, Palestinian. But I don't know. We live here, we

know the hummus is here, but--and then--but about quality, and about freshness,

you know, try to eat the hummus just made or even one that's been standing for

one hour--still very fresh. I'm not talking about the commercial one. You will

see a huge difference in the quality. And Israeli food, yeah, it's funny

even--you know, even about the babka which is--it's funny how--I will take the credit

for the new age babka, yes? Because coming to New York, and seeing these dense

with long shelf life babkas. I didn't invent anything. I learned from actually a

very senior pastry chef because when I learned in Denmark, I didn't know all

the--what we call yeasted cake like the babka, like even the cheese babka, we

call it. Or actually--

FERNHEIMER:--that's what we think of Danish pastry, right?

SCHEFT:Yes--

FERNHEIMER:--cheese danish--

SCHEFT:--but it looks very different from other places. And when I came and I

established Lehamim, I didn't actually have the knowledge how to make this

yeasted cake like babka which we call the chocolate crunch, or called--in

Israel, it's called just--if I had to make a translation, a direct translation,

it's called (Hebrew). It's chocolate--mean chocolate yeasted--like

yeasted--I mean the babka.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah.

SCHEFT:Babka is round, and--but it's more--anyway, so I had this guy come and

teach me, and we call it just a chocolate crunch. Just it was a change in the

name, it became very famous, and together with New York, Seinfeld, all kind of

this stuff. It's kind of--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, I'm trying to remember the Seinfeld episode, what year that

was. Long time ago--

SCHEFT:--yeah.

FERNHEIMER:When I introduced this to my students, they connected to

cinnamon--yeasted cinnamon rolls that they know from Appalachian food traditions.

SCHEFT:Another--this story, then I'll have to connect to Israeli food, but for

me, it's understanding even--although I make not only chocolate rugelach in this

form, and then also bourekas--so in Israel because the way also bakeries was

established in Israel which is a new country, yes? So we--I told you what I saw

in my vision--to have a small corner bakery shop

who produce, bake, and sell in the same spot--we didn't have those kinds of

bakeries. We started with--in Israel, they started with big bakeries--I'm

talking like for the bread. The small bakeries was more pita bakeries. But,

anyway, bourekas and rugelach was in people's mind very low food because big

factories make them with cheap ingredients, with frozen ingredients, with cheese

that is not actually cheese, with potatoes that are not actually potatoes, you

know? So it's had a really, really bad--these kinds of items had a really bad

reputation. When you wanted to say about a movie, low-cost movie--

FERNHEIMER:--right--

SCHEFT:--you called it bourekas movie. And low-cost--

FERNHEIMER:--like spaghetti westerns in the U.S.

SCHEFT:Like I told you, across the street was a Green Market. So I said, "Do

you have a bourekas?" "No, I don't have bourekas." "But everybody's asking for

bourekas, let's make bourekas." And then just to understand it doesn't have to

be low-cost,

it doesn't have to be something low. It can be--you create your own. So taking

the knowledge that I had from France about puff pastry and maybe fillings that I

got from here, and just combine them, represent my Israeli way of doing the things.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. So this kind of innovation, it comes back to freshness, and

sort of--we started the interview talking about the quality--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

FERNHEIMER:--of ingredients and freshness, and for you, that's how this really

becomes a way for you to elevate and innovate. So what do you think? Where does

Jewishness fit within Israeliness? You felt very pigeon-holed it sounds like

when someone described Breads Bakery as a Jewish bakery and not the

international one that you imagined.

SCHEFT:Another note about it--I don't know if I have a good answer for you,

but--(Fernheimer laughs)--when I was working in the states

--so I got interviewed quite a few times about Israeli bread. And many

times--not only interviewed, some people ask my advice, some people--some

Israeli, maybe Jewish, who wanted to open some kind of Mediterranean Israeli

restaurant also be asking me for my advice or--and--but many times, in our days,

when they were talking about Israeli food, Israeli baked goods, they went

immediately to let's call it Sephardic items--was more attracted to

them--Moroccan foods, look more exotic. At one time, although Danish community,

or Danish Jewish is so small, I said, "Hey, but we also are part of Israeli food

so--" because people know--like more--it wasn't in to talk about Ashkenazi food.

This was obvious, yes? For American Jewish or for American--this is what they

knew. So

they were more attracted to speak about Yemenite, or Moroccan, or Sephardic

food, and the--I have a -----------(??)--"Hey, this is all"--you know, so--but

like I grew up, you know, for me, there's limits between what is--who belong--I

look at it--you know, you can--food is such a playful thing. It's not to--also

to hold to tradition and the--like, you know, speaking also about France, you

know, all the small manufactures, some food are really to preserve--don't do any

changes. Israel is a new country, so you--you can be more--

FERNHEIMER:--fluid--

SCHEFT:--fluid, change things, be more playful with the food.

FERNHEIMER:So it sounds like part--you were in part motivated--I don't know if

motivated is the right word, but you wanted to earn some--elevate the place of

the Danish Jews and the conception--I mean you're right

that Ashkenazi--I think it's more familiar in the United States, but up until--I

don't know, maybe the last ten something years, people were really--the way

people looked down at bourekas, people looked down at Ashkenazi food--

SCHEFT:--yeah--

l FERNHEIMER: --like this--gefilte fish became this thing that's like in a jar

from Manischewitz, and like--

SCHEFT:--yes, yes--

FERNHEIMER:--not what you want to eat. But then like Gefilteria, and this whole

movement in New York to really elevate what Ashkenazi cuisine is, and was, and

is evolving kind of took off. And I think there's that movement--you talk about

it here with the Moroccan grandmothers, and the immigrant traditions, and like

what was once everyone wanted to put aside and just be like everyone else, and

now coming back to appreciate all of those food ways that were one, two

generations back.

SCHEFT:

Yeah. And another thing is the--I've been doing my book, I went to--it was a

good friend of mine, so I--because of my Danish past--but I went to Tunisia with

him to look at it. And, also, Tunisia geographically, you look how close it is

to Italy, you know? It's only small boat going between some island of Tunis to

the bottom of--and it was funny to see--I see like--just in talking about

marzipan, how much they take care of also some almond taste, all kind of

bitterness of this and that, also the--I don't have the book here, but the whole

specialty about working with marzipan in Tunisia. And then I see ah, I see the

resemblance between Tunisia and Denmark. And dill, how much they like dill--and

also in Denmark I see.

And, yeah, but going--I don't know, for me, it's a lot of--it's a lot of

breaking the--the opposite--when I came also from Denmark, and then working in

Arcaffe, and Ran Shmoeli, none of them was kosher. So when I established Lehamim

bakery, I actually--although my story start with my mom challah, I actually kind

of didn't know--I actually never made in a commercial bakery a kosher challah.

In Arcaffe, our challah was brioche, made with butter. You cannot do blessing on

a Friday. Maybe some do, but for traditional religious--and when I started here,

actually I wasn't kosher from the beginning, but I didn't want to work on

Saturday just because some money my father lend me--he didn't tell me don't

open--like I said -----------(??)--"If you can afford it, don't open

on Saturday." But I wasn't kosher, and I was working even after Shabbat on

Friday, but slowly, slowly I see I'm not working on Saturday, why not to be

become kosher? But, again, when I started Lehamim, I didn't know to--I knew to

braid the challah, but I never manufactured challah. I only started very

late--only twenty-one years ago when I opened Lehamim, I started to make a

regular challah. But what I want to say about bourekas and rugelach, names are

just names. Now you put--you fill it up with what you--we call it babka. It

doesn't look like anything like a babka that was in Poland or wherever

it's--people think it's came from--now it's straight, it's not round, it's

laminated in a different way, but it's a babka anyway. (laughs)

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. So, you know, you talk a lot about international--your own

international kind of background, and

the interconnections in your own family whether it's your parents or your

marriages. And I see that Rinat's made some recipes in here.

SCHEFT:A lot, yeah.

FERNHEIMER:I'm going to ask two questions. One is what is the relationship

between food, culture, and national identity for you? And then I'll have a

follow-up about the book--what made it in.

SCHEFT:Again, what--

FERNHEIMER:--how do you see the relationship between food, culture, and

identity--or national identity--

SCHEFT:--I don't know if I have a very good answer for that. But I see one

thing--also when I talk about the food in Denmark--although I'm more Israeli

than Danish by far--but I have very--I'm very proud--I know

what's good--I know--I'm saying I know--

FERNHEIMER:--air quotes he's making--

SCHEFT:--you know, you like smoked salmon? You know, but you've never

tasted--you know, so this all kind of--this specialty where we--it's some of the

identity, you know? Where I just--I haven't been a few years, and just coming

back to there, like you cannot run away from your childhood or from--you know,

it's like a--it's not a true story, but--I grew up on my mom's chicken soup--it

doesn't matter for what stand out in it--maybe if you go for kind of a

challenge, there will be somebody who says, "This is nothing about special about

this." But for me, this specific taste, I will always--this will be my DNA. This

will be always my--all my references of the chicken soup will be to this one

which is--I think is the best--this was bring me home.

So in general, I see like, "Oh, this is Danish food," and then in Israel, or

if--especially when I'm outside Israel--especially today, I think, with what's

going on also with the challah which is very creative for creative bakers

to--it's a very playful way because you have to braid it, and you can make a lot

of things with it contrary to a regular kind of loaf. And so--and it's bringing

more--I don't know--identity, pride, and the--but, yeah, I think in general,

culture, you are what you eat. You are--I don't what to say. You know, like I

said the falafel, you know, I don't go a week without eating a falafel.

(Fernheimer laughs) And I really, really love falafel, and I know exactly where

I'm going to eat it, and I know where--

FERNHEIMER:--where do you eat falafel--

SCHEFT:--I eat falafel next to my shop here on Ibn Gabirol. It's specific guys,

one-man show. He made

the whole thing from scratch to assembling your falafel. Again, it's about the

freshness. He actually fries the falafel--

FERNHEIMER:--for you--

SCHEFT:--not for me, for everyone. He doesn't put it in oil before

somebody--before the client actually makes an order. So I like to eat my falafel

hot from the oil. And I don't what to say, but I hope--hopefully it will--all

the world going to be--(both laugh)--we will not have this identity, we will

have a global identity, I would say. But I don't know if I'm answering you.

Maybe I have to think about it to -----------(??)--

FERNHEIMER:--it's not an easy question--

SCHEFT:--how was--I'm also a guy--I go a lot with what I like and what I see.

I'm not always--you know,

have to dig into the history of the food--of the food--like I told you, my basic

is good ingredients, and by that, I also found the standing when I grew--when my

business started to grow, I--so also knowing that I'm not going to create every

bread, every loaf by myself. And here we're sitting and talking, there's a lot

of production going on--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--even in the bakery. And I have to train a lot of people. So maybe they

will not do it exactly like me. But for me, the part of the business and the

business plan is to really take responsibility about the quality of the

ingredients that come in and about the freshness. And if I have those two--so

even if the worker will maybe--will do my loaf, maybe it will not be as

beautiful as mine or as the most professional guy, but

I know when it's very fresh and the ingredient is good, I'm already above

halfway to the quality.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. And it's okay to have your name attached to it, right? Lehamim.

SCHEFT:Yeah.

FERNHEIMER:What made it in the book? Why these recipes? How did you choose?

SCHEFT:So first the book is--it's not that I made the book and then I was

looking for a publish house, the publish house approached me with a book deal.

So we wanted to make like the--as we call it, A New World of Israeli Baking.

This is why also it was important to me--actually, before actually I started to

think about all the recipes to--this--like I told you before, to go to Morocco,

to go to Tunisia, to look for more

Jewish food even in Israel. I went to quite a few--together with a good friend

of mine, -----------(??), which is also a food writer--do to research in Israel

for bread from Bukhara, from Georgia, from all kinds of--also Yemenite food, but

also theirs is different--different is the Yemenite from Aden, from different

places there. And there's still some places and some women--and also to

go--mentioned in the book also to go to some Arabic baked good or food

manufacturer--one in east Jerusalem, one in Daliyat al-Karmel. And then--and so

for me, it was also research of my own, and together, of course, with Rinat and

her mother--which is funny because her mother is a Moroccan, but she actually

--she's an expert in Yemenite--the father is Yemenite, so--

FERNHEIMER:--Yemenite from where--

SCHEFT:--not from--it's a good question, I don't remember right now.

FERNHEIMER:It's okay. (both laugh) Only because you said the differences between--

SCHEFT:--yeah, but they're from Aden, because I don't remember all the cities

there. And she'd do all the Yemenite--the Moroccan mother do all the Yemenite--

FERNHEIMER:--so the Jachnun--

SCHEFT:--food, and she'd do it like one of the best maybe ever I've tasted. And

just to study it, and to master it also--not only to take the recipe, to master

it by myself, to know--I wasn't even--now does Rinat do it as good as her mother

if not better, but I wanted also--so her mother came to New York, and really we

were standing there and making all items again and again together--

FERNHEIMER:--amazing--

SCHEFT:--to see how it worked with American flour also, and to find the right

combination of flour to get it right.

FERNHEIMER:

It's a labor of love. (laughs)

SCHEFT:So we wanted to bring here--so another thing is about the kind of

simplicity--and this is also why I like so much the Yemenite because you have a

lot of baked goods. You have the tomato--tomato--

FERNHEIMER:--resek--

SCHEFT:--resek which is only tomato--they even don't put salt in it. No oil,

nothing, just--

FERNHEIMER:--just grated tomato--

SCHEFT:--the resek, and then the schug, the spices. And the--you eat it very

simple, like it's not--and eat a salad next to it, and you don't need much to

it. It's really--

FERNHEIMER:--hard-boiled egg--

SCHEFT:--fulfilling. And the simplicity--and it's so hard--also cooking, I see

all the chefs doing so much of ingredients, and, for me, also baking is about

getting more and more--more simplicity, yeah? Good ingredients like from

Denmark, and just--and here it's--for me, also research and to bring--but the

babkas, it's a big thing about it. Also, to take the challah, and--okay, it's a Jewish

--very defined as a Jewish thing, but we are also the Jewish--this is a story,

I'm not sure about the story, and I'm telling you I'm not sure, but why did we

adapt to challah even? I think it's something from somewhere. We didn't do it,

but let's go back couple hundred years ago where egg was expensive--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, sugar--

SCHEFT:--salt, pepper, wasn't exactly oil--so the daily bread was only with the

four basic ingredients maybe--you know, flour, water, some kind of yeast or

sourdough, and maybe salt if they had it. And this is how you make bread. So

think about it when it comes to Friday, or to a holiday, to a special day, it's

not obvious to add an egg, fat, and sugar inside the bread. So you want to make

it--you make special bread for Shabbat and for holidays, and not only you put

more money or more ingredients in, you also braid it because you actually can

make with the same dough, you just make a regular loaf.

But here you take three strings and you make it--just to make it more festive,

more happy--

FERNHEIMER:--more beautiful--

SCHEFT:--more beautiful the table for special--for special occasions, yes?

But--so this is how we adapted, and for me, this book is to spread the--spread

my love and my knowledge about everything I learned. So I call it the A New

World of Israeli, but it's this is from Yemen, this is from Denmark, this is

from Italy, this is from France--so many places that I been and learned, and

putting it to what I do here for my items.

FERNHEIMER:Wow. Well, this is--you've been so generous with your time, and--

SCHEFT:--thank you--

FERNHEIMER:--showing me around the bakery. I just want to ask two more questions--

SCHEFT:--sure--

FERNHEIMER:--so what's next? You talked to me about Bakey in Boston, is there

another book on the horizon? What are the trends that you're seeing in baking

right now? You talked about the sort of very--for lack of a better word

--minimalized approach to the new kind of coffee house with just a few items and

this and that. What's next here in Israel you think?

SCHEFT:You touched exactly where I'm at. Now after being in New York, being in

Boston, now I'm more concentrated on my Israeli operation here. So I think

post-corona or post-COVID--especially being among the small bakeries--and let's

say I'm big among the small bakeries--and the manufacturing in Tel Aviv bringing

stuff in Tel Aviv, keep the quality with the--sorry--with a lot of labor, hand work--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah, I saw--

SCHEFT:--to achieve the quality, and not put everything in automatic machines,

and still have a good profitable business is

--right now is an increase of, actually, labor wages. And all the--and the rise

in the--build out of new places, and economy is really, really changing--changed

for us, not for the good, and bringing challenges--how to be more efficient, see

what works, see what's not good. And in a way, it's a period where I achieve

something, but I feel like I have to renovate--to find myself again for the

next. So I'm not going to do now a new book although I have an idea of what I

want to do, it's also to do something with my mother, how she use actually the

bread because when she had the kindergarten, she used to make two batches: one

with the kids when she had time and one for the house. And, "-----------(??),

what do you with the kids with the bread?" So how she teach them

mathematics, how she--just to be--express creativity or even to take out anger--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--(laughs)--

SCHEFT:--and then how she used actually bread and dough to teach, and to use it as--

FERNHEIMER:--pedagogical tool--

SCHEFT:--pedagogic tool, right. So this is kind of one part of my interest, but

I think when you're making a book, and I see a lot of chefs that make books,

sometimes it's just to say, "Okay, I'm here," but actually what's--what is the

one recipe or two recipes--or what is agenda? What do you want to--

FERNHEIMER:--what do you want to accomplish?

SCHEFT:--what do you want to tell other people? This is to make a book. So I'm

still looking, but it's more about--not about making my business bigger, but

it's making it--making it better. And at this part in my rule, in my life, I

call it also to see the--my coworker where I work. And one of my biggest jobs is

I call it to

bring out the good of people--not only the bakery, but also in our guests. And

also--(laughs)--the survive Tel Aviv which brings a lot of things in this time.

And, yeah, just to see--and not just--it's a big challenge right now, really, to

make it all work. And see what's going on for the next twenty years after being

here twenty more years at Lehamim.

FERNHEIMER:Wow. Anything else that I haven't asked you about that you want to

share? Advice for, you know, young students who are just beginning to learn

about food, or Israel, or this part of the world?

SCHEFT:-----------(??) I would say something general, and I say because I have

a thirty-year old boy who was born in Denmark, and I have a daughter,

twenty-eight, and I have a seven-year old.

FERNHEIMER:Oh, wow. (laughs)

SCHEFT:So big differences. And it might be something to do with--but what I

talk in the beginning how I found my way into bakeries. So my oldest son,

also, is also still struggling with what he's going to do with his life. So I

said to him, "You know, let's say the so-called success is first

-----------(??)." I still wake up in the morning--still--I wake up in the

morning, I go to the bakery--maybe my job change, but the routine, the day to

day, I don't--even hard times, I keep going the way. And my advice for my son

who hasn't found his way, I said, "Yeah, you know, maybe you don't find your big

passion, but make sure you find a job that's something where you wake up in the

morning and you go happy and you enjoy what you're doing." But a lot of--I see

in today's world everybody want fame quickly, and money, and this, but it's a

lot about--I don't--

FERNHEIMER:--consistency--

SCHEFT:--consistency--

FERNHEIMER:--(Hebrew), day to day--

SCHEFT:--(Hebrew)--and the--I think I came out from the--let's say from biology

when you

--like you work in the research and this, you're studying research today, you

never know when you finish here. I started bread today, and tomorrow it's in the

oven or the next day--if it's sourdough, so it's the next day. But so the reward

of also of what you do, you see it--or the success or the failures--very fast.

And especially when you work with food, and you do--you do something good, you

get a lot of compliments and roses from people--people love food, love baked

goods, love--

FERNHEIMER:--love bread--

SCHEFT:--love bread, love babka, so I get roses. But every day, I wake up, and

I say, "How can I do it better than yesterday?" It's not always success, but

every day I have this in my mind always. I want to do it better than what I did

yesterday. And even if I did very good yesterday or not. So this is my

philosophy of life. So I look more to bring out the love, to do what I want, to

show--it doesn't matter how I wake up in the

morning, I have a responsibility. I go to this, I will greet--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--every coworker on my work although maybe I don't know their name or

they change it you see here in the middle of Tel Aviv. You go here, you see

people from all over the world. You see--from--yeah, different Israelis, not

Israelis, you see Arabs and Palestinians in my work, there's some handicaps, or

some that is--and you see people from Sudan, from Ethiopia, Yemen, wherever.

Everybody equal, everybody I want to put a smile on their face. And I only judge

you for the work you do, not where you come--not what your color, not what your

sex, nothing. Just--and the bread in the bakery is just part of it, but

it's--the agenda now is--

FERNHEIMER:--yeah--

SCHEFT:--larger than just the--to make the living or to make the business.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah, it has an impact on people's day. People start their

day with a coffee and a baked good or--so it has the power and the potential to

really impact someone's whole day.

SCHEFT:All day, yeah. It's a challenge especially in Israel it's like driving a

car in Israel, you know? (Fernheimer laughs) Or even I'm driving the electric

thing -----------(??)--

FERNHEIMER:--I rode a bicycle, it's terrifying.

SCHEFT:Just let--and I do it, and it just--it doesn't matter how other people

behave or react, I give--you know, I will be generous also in the street, let

people--how you call it? Give them the priority.

FERNHEIMER:Give them right of way.

SCHEFT:Give them right away, yes. It doesn't matter if it's a man, woman,

child--like it's more like what you do and the way you--the way you act. And I

can make a big change--you know, in those days, I have Michael Jackson song in

my head--"If you want to make a change,

look at the man in the mirror." And make a change first with yourself and the

way you are. And this is also with the bread. I'm trying to do it also with my

work because it's not a hundred percent successful because people thinking--but

I have consistency and keep trying. And I see the results.

FERNHEIMER:Yeah. You can taste them here, it's wonderful. Well, thank you so much.

SCHEFT:Thank you.

FERNHEIMER:It is really, really an honor--truly, I'm going to stop the recorder now.

SCHEFT:Yes.

[End of interview.]