CURRIS:Here we go. (both laugh) Good morning. This is September 2nd, 2023. I

have the good fortune to be at the Eastern Kentucky Social Club, meeting in

Louisville, Kentucky for the first time in four years because of COVID and so

forth. My name is Jo Hern Curris. I'm the interviewer. And this interview is

being conducted for the purposes of recording for posterity, and for the Hern

Benham Financial Center, which is going to be established in the City Hall in

Benham, the history of coal miners, of their families, of how lucky we were to

have lived in Benham and Lynch, Kentucky in the forties and fifties. And we are

recording for posterity stories from that time, before they're lost for us--for

us all forever.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:And this--

one of the thank-yous that I want to give is to the University of Kentucky Louie

B. Oral--Louie B. Nunn Oral History Center, which has loaned the recording

equipment, and where these interviews will be stored. I have asked Gean, and he

has signed a document, agreeing that this recording will be considered a gift to

the Center, open for their use, unrestricted, quoted from, published,

broadcasting, and that he may also make any use of the information as he wishes.

So, may I ask what your name is for--

AUSTIN:Gean Austin.

CURRIS:Gean Austin.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Gean, where are you from?

AUSTIN:Lynch, Kentucky.

CURRIS:And where is Lynch, located?

AUSTIN:Northeast, in Harlan County, Kentucky.

CURRIS:Good old Harlan County, Kentucky--

AUSTIN:Yeah, right.

CURRIS:--home of Benham and Lynch coal camps,

one International Harvester, and Lynch with U.S. Steel.

AUSTIN:Yeah, right.

CURRIS:Right. Now, Gean, where were you born?

AUSTIN:In Chambers County, Alabama, 1930.

CURRIS:Oh my goodness. So you are one of the miners that came from Alabama.

AUSTIN:Kids. I came here a kid.

CURRIS:You were a kid, weren't you?

AUSTIN:Twelve years old.

CURRIS:So when you came from Alabama, who was it that was coming to mine the

coal? Was it your father? Your grand--

AUSTIN:--my dad had come a year or two before and got a job here, and then he

sent for the rest of the family.

CURRIS:That was quite typical in those days, wasn't it?

AUSTIN:Right, right.

CURRIS:What town in Alabama did you come from?

AUSTIN:A farm.

CURRIS:A farm.

AUSTIN:Well, sharecropping.

CURRIS:Sharecropping in Alabama.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Did you know when--or

did your father know when he came other miners from Alabama?

AUSTIN:Well, the word was getting around, and they was recruiting people from

different parts of the South to come here to work, and looking--they were

looking for people.

CURRIS:And here we came.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Here we came. So you were about twelve years old when you arrived?

AUSTIN:Twelve.

CURRIS:When you arrived, where were--where did you go to school?

AUSTIN:At West Main--well, then it was called Lynch Colored Public School, in

Lynch, Kentucky, owned by U.S. Steel.

CURRIS:And was that grades one through twelve?

AUSTIN:Right, yes, yeah.

CURRIS:Okay.

AUSTIN:Why -----(??), how different things was.

CURRIS:Yes.

AUSTIN:

During the thirties, as well as--I guess it started in the twenties and thirties

and the forties, when--see, U.S. Steel would set these mines up, and they would

build--they started building Lynch in 1917. They built the town, the mine, and

everything. They set the whole thing up. And they went out and recruited people

to work there. And most of these mines by these big companies was--was run by

unions, too, and to have everything work good and get along, they had--they

built set of houses for the white, Black, all, but all the houses was the same.

CURRIS:Were the houses for Blacks and whites all the same?

AUSTIN:Yeah.

They built schools, a brick building for the white, a brick building for the

Black school. They went out and hired they own teachers, they everybody. The pay

scale in the mine was the same for everybody, and they--union preached harmony,

and the company preached harmony. To mine the coal, everybody had to get along,

to live in the town. So it was a good place to live and work, because there

wasn't any problem. (laughs)

CURRIS:Did you feel like you felt any racism at all? Because I've heard mixed

stories on that.

AUSTIN:Well, it all depends what you wanted to do. They white had their country

club, swimming pool, golf course,

which the Black didn't play golf, so it wasn't any problem. We had our own

school, gym. We could get bands in. Baseball park, played baseball. The things

we wanted to do, we had areas to do that, so it wasn't any problem there. (both laugh)

CURRIS:So basically, you had--you--actually, I guess, it's almost true, you

could say: Black was--and white were separate, but would you consider them equal in--

AUSTIN:--right, right. All but the bosses. The big bosses, you know, they was a

little--they was getting paid better than everybody else, absolutely (??). (laughter)

CURRIS:For sure, for sure.

AUSTIN:And, see, the other thing is half of the white that was brought there

was brought in from Europe, Hungarians, the Polacks and all, and they had to go

through the same thing that the Blacks, you know--'cause they wasn't

accepted, either. (laughs)

CURRIS:Was there any discrimination for these Eastern European countries, in

terms of going to movies at the Novo, or going to movies, or--

AUSTIN:--they sat with the white, went to school, the white--they all were

together, but the only real problem was in the neighborhood they didn't

associate with the white that much, you know, so they would associate with us

more than they did with them.

CURRIS:The, uh--(pauses)--When it came to--let's say that you were living in

one of the camps, one of the sections, and it's my understanding that in Lynch,

as well as Benham, that once you were in a particular area,

you might be able to move around if a house became available--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--but that you became a community within that particular segment of the camp.

AUSTIN:Yes, right.

CURRIS:At that point, did you have mixtures of Black, white, Eastern European,

or were those separated?

AUSTIN:Well, the kids part--I can tell you more about the kids.

CURRIS:Yes, that's fine.

AUSTIN:See, we lived in, call them, camps. There was a camp here, mixed, and

the camp there was mixed, and the camp different places. If you went out of your

camp to the theater or to the ballpark, you know, some other area, the way it

was set up, everybody in that camp, white or Black, they all were together,

because that was--they all would protect you from the other camp. (both laugh)

CURRIS:

So if you lived within a camp, it didn't matter what your race was, or your

color, or--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--what country you were coming from, you went together because you were

really more concerned against the other camp.

AUSTIN:Yes, right.

CURRIS:That is very interesting.

AUSTIN:Yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:Yes. So no matter what the situation was, whoever lived in your camp was

part of that community.

AUSTIN:Yeah, right. We had to protect each other.

CURRIS:Did you find that if there was any disciplining done that basically the

whole community was involved, in the sense that if one mother saw something and

called your--or didn't call, just sent the word to your parents--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--that everybody--the grownups ruled when it came to--

AUSTIN:--yeah. Well, yes, that was a--you know, I tell a lot of people that--I

tell it in a joking

way, about this Bill Crosby [Cosby] thing in Hollywood, you know, and all them

people. I said, when I first came to Lynch in 1943, and moved into the--one of

those camps, that's the first thing the people in the community would tell us,

“Whatever happened in that camp stayed in that camp,” white or Black, -----------(??).

CURRIS:(pauses) That's very interesting. So it wasn't--it wasn't based on your

origins; it was based on the fact that you lived in a particular camp,

and--well, now, when you moved from one camp to another, did your allegiance

change? What--

AUSTIN:--it--yeah right.

CURRIS:It did!

AUSTIN:(laughs) Right.

CURRIS:So then all of a sudden you were protecting against maybe your old friends.

AUSTIN:Right.

CURRIS:That's very interesting.

AUSTIN:And

by us being kids, the biggest problem was each camp playing sports, you know,

neighborhood sport, and going--you know, going to girls, going with girls was a problem.

CURRIS:You did not cross lines.

AUSTIN:Well, you did, but you did it in a protection way. (Curris laughs) If we

went to Benham to see the Benham girls, there would be ten or twelve of us boys

went together, and we would meet after we see the girls. You had to leave at

eight, nine o'clock to get out from there. (laughs) But we'd meet at a certain

area, and all of us come back together. And sometime you have to fight, and

sometime you have to run. It all depends. (laughs)

CURRIS:I remember that there was very little dating between Benham

and Lynch and Benham and Cumberland. There was a little more dating with Cumberland.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:But that just wasn't part of what--you didn't cross out of your

community very often.

AUSTIN:No, you didn't. But, see, I--I was a little different in my--when I was

a senior in high school, I took a girl from Benham to my senior prom.

CURRIS:That was a shocker, I'm sure. (laughs)

AUSTIN:And that was because--excuse me--me and my girlfriend in Lynch had fell

out, and I was going to show her. (both laugh) And then, later on, five years

later, I married a girl from Benham. My first wife was from Benham.

CURRIS:

Really? And was there very much race--marriage between the towns?

AUSTIN:Right, it--soon after that, it did--it got to be accepted, you know--

CURRIS:--okay.

AUSTIN:--among the white--more among the Blacks than it was the white.

CURRIS:Oh, now that's interesting.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:So those cross-community things happened more quickly.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:That--

AUSTIN:'Cause, see, a lot of us Blacks--like, if your family came from Alabama

up there, Tennessee, and there were two or three brothers, maybe both, all of

your brothers didn't get a job. Maybe one or two of them would get one with

International Harvester in Benham, but you still was a family, see. So,

undercover, you had to still get along.

CURRIS:Well, that make--I see what you're saying. I had never, until you said

this, even thought about that possibility.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:So let's say

you have a family from Alabama that's coming up with two or three brothers. Two

brothers work at Lynch.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:One brother works in Benham, which means their housing is going to be

two in Lynch, one in Benham. But because it's family, it gave you the ability to

go back and forth.

AUSTIN:Well, what we would do--see, Lynch wasn't as bad as Benham. See, the

Benham police didn't allow the Lynch people in Benham, to the stores and the

movies, that much anyway. But, see, there was a--Cumberland was right there, and

you could catch the bus and go to Cumberland, and the little malls and stores

and things. You could sit down there and socialize, so it was--it was neutral,

see, and nobody could say anything to you.

CURRIS:That's interesting. So when--so when you would have these circumstances,

you would go to Cumberland.

AUSTIN:Right.

CURRIS:Where would you go in Cumberland?

AUSTIN:We had clubs and boarding houses, they called them then, you know,

places that--and the churches--that you could meet.

CURRIS:Well, now, we were talking about earlier--Slim and I were talking about

the Corlee Theatre and the Novo Theatre.

AUSTIN:Well, the Novo Theatre didn't accept--early, it didn't accept Blacks,

you couldn't go there, but the Corlee, you could go there--that was in

Cumberland--but you had to sit upstairs. The theater in Lynch, you could go

there, but you--you know, the Blacks sit upstairs and the whites sit downstairs.

CURRIS:So in Lynch you were also sitting upstairs.

AUSTIN:Yeah, right.

CURRIS:Did any of that change before integration?

AUSTIN:Yes, yeah.

CURRIS:It did?

AUSTIN:Yeah, uh-huh.

CURRIS:

Well, that's a step forward.

AUSTIN:Well, you know, you could do different and nobody ever said anything to

you, like--just like the city buses running from Lynch to Cumberland.

Ordinarily, in the South, the Black had to sit in the back, and the whites sit

in the front. If you got on that bus, you paid ten cent to ride to Cumberland,

you got on the bus and sit on the first seat, nobody said anything to you.

CURRIS:So there was just no problem there.

AUSTIN:No.

CURRIS:Um-hm. See, I didn't remember any problem.

AUSTIN:Yeah, there wasn't no problem. See, everybody, they worked together, got

along together. They, you know, drink together, party together. And, most of

all, see, the union was one big union, and it was mixed. They was part white and

part Black, and the Black had officers in there that had to deal with the white,

and they all, you know

--so it was a lot of getting along.

CURRIS:When you compare the communities that we're talking about--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--with today, there may be more openness in some ways, but, as I've

listened to various people talk now--I've done I think probably, like, twelve,

thirteen interviews, all total, including your all's--it seems as if there was a

greater sense of community back in the days that we were here--

AUSTIN:--it was. And I'll tell you why. Nowadays, money--to everybody living, nowadays

money is the most important thing in our life. Back then, family was the most

important thing.

CURRIS:Wow. (pauses) Survival.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Survival.

AUSTIN:You wanted--see, I have--by two marriages, I had eight kids--well, seven

kids--by two wives. I worked in the mine thirty-five years. I sent seven kids to

college. Four of them graduated and three didn't, but I told them like this: I

said, "You were better than me, because I never had the opportunity to go. I

wanted to go, but you had a chance to go to college and make it good, and you

didn't make it. That wasn't my fault."

CURRIS:You gave them the opportunity.

AUSTIN:

Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, now, this is interesting. When you talk about four graduated from college--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--what were--what did they major in?

AUSTIN:One of my sons is a doctor, and his wife is a doctor, by my first

marriage. My other son was going to be a teacher. He graduated from Richmond,

you know, East Tennessee State.

CURRIS:Oh, yes.

AUSTIN:My oldest--my other boy's a doctor. He graduated from University of

Kentucky, and got a medical degree at Louisville, and he's up in the biggest

doctor's office in Fort Wayne, Indiana now, him and his wife both. They both

doctors. And two of his kids are going to Hampton right now to be doctors.

CURRIS:You're leaving a beautiful legacy, a wonderful legacy, Gean.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:

Do your children know about their parents, grandparents, and so forth?

AUSTIN:Right. I've got a history of my parents in the--I made it from when they

would start go--see, my first wife died when my oldest boy was, like, ten years

old, eleven years old, so for the next seven years, me and my mother raised my

kids and sent them to school.

CURRIS:Your mother was a saint.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:She was obviously a saint.

AUSTIN:And I was always the person that--you didn't miss a day of school.

Wouldn't want to miss a day of school: all your friends at school, all the fun

there--everybody's there. Now, why don't you want to go? There's no excuse

to miss a day of school. I never missed school in my day. And I was the first

one in my mother's family, you know, to graduate from high school. My mother had

a eighth grade education, and my dad had a third grade education--(laughs)--but

they were survivors. Like--

CURRIS:--they were.

AUSTIN:--like most Black people are. You know, they got they own ways. They are

survivors. They can get by on--(laughs)

CURRIS:Yes, yes.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:It's--when you look at coal miners--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--as a whole--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--that--there are two words that really just jump in my mind

immediately: bravery, and survivors.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:And when you stop and think of your friends

from Lynch that have grown up, and we went through that time when they started

laying off everybody through the mines-

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--what did your friends do? Where did they go?

AUSTIN:Well, see, places like coal mine, you got two set of people come there.

That first set is traveling, and they keep traveling. They only work in this

place four or five years, or till they kids are grown. Then, they'll send their

kids somewhere else to get a job, and then they go follow them. You know, you've

got that type of people. Then you got people like me come to a place like the

coal mine as a good place, quiet place,

you can raise your kids and send them to school and get them a good education,

and then send them out into the world.

CURRIS:I see what you're saying. The--when you take a look at your family, did

all of your family come to this area from Alabama, or did part of the family

stay in Alabama?

AUSTIN:Let's see--my mother's daddy, he had sixteen kids, nine girls and six

boys, or ten boys, or seven boys. There was about sixteen of them. But--and

during the time of the Depression, I was a little kid. I used to visit them a lot.

They worked from sunup to sundown, Black farmers, just trying to make it. And

his kids, they never had money like people working, you know, regular jobs, so

every time one of them got seventeen, eighteen years old--I guess most of them

were sixteen--they got away from that farm. (laughs) They left. They--and what

was happening in the South, the railroads--they were building railroads

throughout the country, highways throughout the country, and lakes throughout

the country, and they would go--like, the coal mine--through the South,

recruiting people, you know, to work, take them all over the country. And

whenever some Black

working for the company would come to, like--said to the coal mine, like, and

they were working on the railroad building--it's right up there--and they would

party, and see how people got along up there, and with their money, and then

have a good time, first thing they would talk to somebody they were working up

there, "I like here, try to get me a job here." And they still--they headed

north to factory and steel mill, and that was--

CURRIS:--and that's how--

AUSTIN:--how people would go there from--then you tell your--get in touch with

your brother or somebody, tell him how things is there, how much different it

is, and--

CURRIS:--off he'd go.

AUSTIN:--here come one more. (both laugh)

CURRIS:The--when you were working in the mines, did you think that you received

the same pay and the same benefits as anyone else working the same job?

AUSTIN:

Well, in lot of ways, yes, because--see, now, this is another thing about U.S.

Steel that a lot of people didn't realize: U.S. Steel was a good company for

people, and they loved sports. And I was a good athlete in high school. So when

I was in the eleventh grade, I forged me some paper and got me a summer job

there, just working in the summer to make me some money. So some more boys seen

me get that job, and they tried the same thing, and they got caught. Well, they

told on me, so the company, they liked me, they said, "Gean, don't worry about

it," said, "but we're going to have to fire you,

because we don't want to hire them other boys." Said, "But next year, come

back.” And say, “Your job will be right here waiting on you." So the next year,

I wanted--I was--intended to go to Kentucky State to college, to play

basketball, and all ---(??). I was a basketball player. But my dad didn't have

anything, so he wanted me to go back to Alabama, and go to Tuskegee, and work my

way through it. I said “No, I didn't want to do that.” I said, "I want to go to

college and play basketball,” because I was real good at it. Well, anyway, he

said, "Well, you've got to work." I said, "Well, I'll work a year or two and,

you know, save up some money." But during that year and a half, the mine only

worked two and three days a week--(laughs)--and things were slow after the

Second World War, so I wasn't making any money. And I was playing a little semi-pro

basketball on a traveling team, but I worked, you know, too, and I wasn't doing

no--too good on that. We wasn't making much money on that. So the Marine Corps

recruited me in there. Go in the Marine Corps, and they offer me--say, "You can

play basketball in the Marine Corps all you want." (laughs) So I went in the

Marine Corps just to play basketball. I went to South Carolina, and the Marine

Corps, that's when they started integrating the Marine Corps, in 1950 and '51.

So I went to South Carolina, playing basketball. I was the only--but we

played--only played on military bases that was integrated, but we was playing

them white colleges down there, and I was the only Black on the--on the

basketball team. So when the season was over, they were shipping me to North

Carolina, but I was so big that

I didn't have any uniform, so they had to have all my clothes special made for

me. So I had to go back down there and wait. So while we--I was there waiting,

orders came down from the Marine Corps headquarters that they needed thirty-five

MPs in North Carolina. So here they come. They would line all us up, went down

the line, and picked, "You, you, you, you, you, you. You're going to be a MP." I

didn't ask for it, and I tried to get out of it. "You going to MP." So they sent

me to North Carolina to be a policeman.

CURRIS:Well, how did that turn out? Because I would think that could be great training.

AUSTIN:Well, it would have been if the segregated people--you know, there was a

lot of people didn't want the Black in the service anyway, so I'm MP,

but they had us working. There was a shortage. We worked six hours of every day,

and sixteen, about sixteen, eighteen hours off. That's every day, thirty days a

month. And that went on for all of summer, and then winter--and then November,

December, I got a break. I took a ten-day leave and come home. Got back the 27th

of December, right after Christmas. First sergeant looking for me. "Officer,

where have you been?" I said, "Well, I've been on leave. You all give me leave."

"You supposed to be in Korea. (laughs) See, you--your--everybody gone to Korea,

so you get ready to go, go to Korea." They shipped me to Korea, said they--we

had to send a hundred MPs to Korea, up to Panmunjom, the peace talk.

So I got ready, went to California, went to all the training, and then got to

Korea about two months later. Peace talks had broke down. They didn't need the

MPs. I said, "Well, I get to go back to the States." They said, "No." Said, "We

got as shortage on line. We need people to fight on line, so you going up on

line to fight." I said, "Well, I didn't know anything about fighting!" (laughs)

So they sent me up on line. So while I'm up on line fighting, they trying

to--tried to promote me to be a sergeant, or a platoon sergeant. Head--orders

come down from Marine Corps headquarters. They couldn't promote me, because I

was classified as a policeman. They couldn't promote me. So I did that for six

months and went back on my regular job, policing over there. I stayed over there seven

more months. And actually, out of the four years I was in service, I never took

a test for a promotion. I tried to volunteer to get out of the MPs, because I

really wasn't making no money, and that's what I wanted to make, but they

find--told me, "Austin," says, "we trained you to be a policeman." Said, "You

can get out of Marine Corps, go in the Army, Air Force, anywhere you want to

go," said, "but you're going to always be a policeman." I told them then, I

said, "I will get out of service, go back." I said, "I'm not making any

money--I'm making $104 a month." (laughs)

CURRIS:So what did you do?

AUSTIN:I come back, got out of service, come back, and U.S. Steel come to my

house that day. Say, "Austin," say, "your job waiting on you in the mine." Say,

"You got your same job back. You don't have to take no

physical, nothing. You just got out of service. You can start to work." I

said--that was a Saturday--I said, "I'm not going to work on no Saturday." I

said, "I'll be to work Monday--(laughs)--but I ain't going no Saturday." So I

started back to work. But, I mean, see, I had been schooled, took some classes,

too. By having that little education then, the union want me. I start working in

the union, making extra money there on the side, and I was part of their

protective force, you know, protecting the president of the United Mine Workers,

and I got to travel, and on different committees and stuff. And I was moving up,

getting ready to run for a high office in the union, and somebody--they put

together some kind of group of guys to run against me,

and they beat me out on a few votes, so I got mad. Well, in the meantime, U.S.

Steel had been begging me to taking a bossing job with them in the mine, and all

I had to do was go two months of schooling with the education I already had. So

I told them I'd do that, and I started the school. Soon as I started the school,

they put me on the bossing job. (both laugh)

CURRIS:You didn't even have to finish. That is great.

AUSTIN:And so the State give me a certificate, mining certificate, certified

mine foreman, and I worked for them for another fifteen years. And I--

CURRIS:--and who was that for?

AUSTIN:U.S. Steel.

CURRIS:For U.S. Steel?

AUSTIN:Yeah. The State tried to hire me as a state mine inspector and all that,

and--but I wouldn't take it.

And--(pauses)--I found out there were the people's--you had to deal with the

union, and some of those was the sorriest men you ever had working with the

union, but the union would protect them and keep them on the job. Then the

company, they didn't try to help you that much, and whatever problem you got

into, they wasn't going to help get you out, and you were just about on your

own. And if you did anything wrong you could go to jail, you know, serious or--

CURRIS:So you were caught between the rock and the hard place.

AUSTIN:Yeah. So with my time in service, and time working in the mine, and I

had stock in U.S. Steel, and they were getting ready to sell to Arch,

I--so it was a chance for me to take a buyout. I was fifty-two years old then. I

took the buyout, and I retired and quit. (laughs) And the other--they tried

every way they could to get me to come back in there. I wasn’t--nope.

CURRIS:That's--I've never heard anyone who took a buyout. Was that typical? Did

very many people--

AUSTIN:--there was quite a few did it, yeah.

CURRIS:Really?

AUSTIN:Uh-huh.

CURRIS:Well, how did you have the stock? Was that part of--the U.S. Steel

stock--was that part of your pay, or was that something you bought?

AUSTIN:Well, see, you--they pay you a salary, so much a month, and then I put

twelve percent of my salary in--you could invest it, and then they would match

it, match that amount.

CURRIS:And--

AUSTIN:So the money was building up good. And then my kids were getting out of

college and high school and all that. Yeah.

CURRIS:So it was perfect timing, at age fifty-two.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, here's my really most important question: what in the world did

you do at age fifty-two?

AUSTIN:Well, I was a member of this social club. I was--

CURRIS:--the East Kentucky--

AUSTIN:--VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars].

CURRIS:VFW.

AUSTIN:I was the master of a Masonic Lodge, chairman of the trustee board in

the church--(both laugh)--and my mother was there with her people in New York,

Cleveland, Alabama, Washington. (laughs) I did a lot of traveling.

CURRIS:I think that your retirement plan, which may not have been totally

planned, but may be

one of the most successful plans I've ever heard about--(laughs)--

AUSTIN:--well, I--

CURRIS:--because age fifty-two is amazing.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:To do that.

AUSTIN:I was busy going and traveling and usually where the kids was in

college, go there, you know, and all that. I was busy all the time, you know.

CURRIS:Right. Right.

AUSTIN:And that--I didn't have to worry about anything, because my salary was

coming. (laughs)

CURRIS:That is absolutely fabulous, Gean.

AUSTIN:And--

CURRIS:--that is fabulous.

AUSTIN:The only thing that you had to do was try to stay within your means, and

not get over--and then I learned how to do that, because I used to take a lot of

cruises and go places and there, and I had some people tell me, you know, these

people that do all that cruising

and stuff, they showed me the way, said, "Well, you got to plan ahead, like two

years ahead. If you want to go to Hawaii or the Bahamas or--" The Bahamas was

not bad. It's, like, eight hundred dollars. That wasn't a real--Hawaii was,

like, twenty-five hundred dollars per person, five thousand dollars paying. What

you going do? So you put so much money out of your check every month on this,

start two years ahead, and then when the time come your tips, everything there

is already paid for.

CURRIS:Amazing. You are one smart man. (both laugh) I have got to say, Gean,

I've got to hand it to you, you really have done so very well for retirement,

which is not a time that a lot of people--

AUSTIN:--yeah.

CURRIS:--you know, are doing that. Well,

I am absolutely thrilled that you agreed to be interviewed, because you have

given a whole different perspective on life as a coal miner, and your

experiences have reflected a very different way of living things, and it's

extremely interesting and exciting to hear.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:I would ask you one last question. Is there anything you want to add at

the end of this interview that someone hearing your tape twenty-five years from

now, that you would want them to know?

AUSTIN:Well, like, I was at the meeting yesterday, and I was trying to talk to

our organization, and they were--

CURRIS:--wanted to talk on what, please?

AUSTIN:Our group of--

CURRIS:--oh, of the group?

AUSTIN:--of

different chapters. I said, "I've been in this social club since 1970. I'm one

of the organizers of the whole thing."

CURRIS:Oh, are you? Well, I must congratulate you.

AUSTIN:In fact, I guess I'm the only one still living. (laughter) Well, anyway,

I told them like this. I said, "We can have this reunion, like, here. There are

going to be two thousand people here come to the hotel, but there only going to

be two or three hundred people going to put some money in or pay for, you know,

to help sponsor or push these things." I said, "And we were right there at that

same spot in 1970. We haven't changed a bit." (laughs) I said, "We have got to

learn how to keep these things going, and it take people working,

raising money and doing things to do it, but we haven't gotten--we haven't

gotten that yet. And that's one of our biggest problems.”

CURRIS:Well, for an originator to now bringing that advice, they need to

listen. They need to listen to you. Well, Gene, again, thank you. It has been a

privilege for me, and, really, I'm just hoping that I don't have the problem

with the equipment I'm afraid I'm having. But if I did, will you promise to let

me come and interview you in Lynch?

AUSTIN:All right, yeah.

CURRIS:All right.

AUSTIN:All right.

CURRIS:All right. Take care, and thank you so much.

AUSTIN:Yeah. Now, there's a catch to that now.

CURRIS:Okay, what's the catch? (laughs)

AUSTIN:November, I'll be ninety-three.

CURRIS:Oh my--you certainly don't look it, and you certainly don't act it.

Well, congratulations. I am amazed, let me--

AUSTIN:--and

being around that long--(laughs)

CURRIS:Well, it is kind of wonderful, isn't it?

AUSTIN:And, you know, they--that's one thing they told me when I retired.

"Well, people retire in the mine, you know, after all that disability and black

lung," which I do, say, "they ain’t but going live but seven, eight years no

way." (both laugh)

CURRIS:You fooled them, didn't you? So you were during the black lung period.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay.

AUSTIN:Yeah.

CURRIS:Yes.

AUSTIN:I get a hundred percent disability.

CURRIS:Well, deservedly so. My granddad worked in the mines in Benham, and, you

know, I know a lot of things there, lot of things. Well, thank you again so

much, Gean.

AUSTIN:Well, let me--let me tell you this off the record. This is not for the record.

CURRIS:Okay, just one moment.

[End of interview.]