BOYD:All right, we're here with Raymond McClain. It's interview number four.

It's February 2nd, 2023.

MCLAIN:2024.

BOYD:2024,

MCLAIN:right.

BOYD:I can't believe it. I actually typed in 2023.

MCLAIN:I had to think when I wrote 24.

BOYD:Yeah, I wrote my first check last night for Girl Scout cookies for the

girls next door, and did the same thing, 2023, oops. So, last time that we

talked, it was some time ago,

but we covered a lot of things. We talked about your time as a young person in

Hindman. Um, we talked a lot about Hindman. Your early growth as a musician,

your musical neighbors, your influences, and how there were so many great

people. And we went through so many of the names. We talked about you then

moving into playing music with your father , um, and your family, but really

getting into

Raymond playing with other people. So was it the Charles brothers I think that we--

MCLAIN:--yes, Daddy and I played with the Charles brothers in Beattyville.

BOYD:--you told a fantastic--we finished off with you telling this fantastic

story about seeing J.D. Crowe at the, um, what was it, the Red--

MCLAIN:--Slipper Lounge.

BOYD:That was it.

MCLAIN:Holiday Inn North.

BOYD:Yeah, and how they kinda got you in to the club.

MCLAIN:J.D.'s father did.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

And you had a really good seat, apparently.

MCLAIN:Well, yes. (laughs)

BOYD:So we ended just with a real brief story circling back around to Alice and

Ruth just beginning to play that music with everybody at home. And so I wanted

to kick off and just ask you, what are some of those memories of you all playing

together in that sort of pre-band phase at home?

MCLAIN:

)pauses) Just playing together in the living room, we did. There was always

music in our house though. Daddy always had musicians in the house. And, uh, in

evenings there were frequently musicians. And Daddy loved all kinds of music and

he played all kinds of music.

And, uh, sometimes it would be recorder groups because there were people--Daddy

had, a whole set of recorders, a quartet of recorders. He had more than that,

actually, because he had the soprano, the alto, the tenor, and the bass

recorder, and he had a sopranino, which is a very high recorder.

And people in Hindman had, at the Settlement School, had recorders. Ruthie White

was one. I think Alice Beaman(??). And there were people there that had

recorders, and they'd play those sometimes. Not very often, but sometimes. And

there was beautiful music that was--and Daddy made arrangements when he was in

high school, even, that are still available through,

I used to know the publishing company, maybe Schirmer Music, but I'm not sure.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:I used to know.

BOYD:Still available?

MCLAIN:Yeah, still available.

BOYD:Wow.

MCLAIN:Recorder quartets.

BOYD:And that's kind of back to his roots right because I mean we were just

talking off-camera about how he would write these recorder arrangements very

early in high school.

MCLAIN:He did, even before he was in high school he would take he would ride

his bicycle

out John Jacob Niles asked him to come teach music lessons for his children. And

sometimes it would be recorders or sometimes other things. And Daddy would ride

his bicycle from Lexington out to Boot Hill.

BOYD:Yeah. I mean, you know you're kind of different if John Jacob Niles is

asking you to come teach his children music. (McLain laughs) And that's--okay,

so take me back to the living

room. So you had this sort of organic formation ,of, of musicians playing, you

know, pretty regularly. How would--take me back to one of those moments when

you're reflecting as a young man at that point, um--

MCLAIN:It was just natural, it was so natural. When all the time growing

up--uh, many nights as I was going to sleep listening to music in the other

room, it was just part of life. It wasn't different. It wasn't a different thing.

And frequently it would be country music or folk music or whatever Daddy was

playing with, you know, whoever he was playing with. And sometimes it would be,

dance music. or sometimes it would be just country songs. I mean it would be--it

wasn't surprising whatever it was

And it was always good. It always felt--Daddy loved music and he had a real

feeling for music. So whatever he played, it always had heart. For Daddy, it was

not about technically difficult or technically--I like this piece because it's

challenging or because it's that--it wasn't about that for him.

It’s, does it feel?

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Hmm. It just sounds like he had such a wide range too, that he

could, he was so versatile that he could--

MCLAIN:It wasn't about style, it was about feel.

BOYD:--that if there were jazz musicians who lived down the, the road coming by

the house, he could pull that off as well probably.

MCLAIN:Yeah, I don't think he, he just wasn't around a lot of jazz, I don't

think. So that was never part of our,

of our experience as much as other styles.

BOYD:But, but if there were, he could have pulled it off.

MCLAIN:Well, yeah--

BOYD:I'm sure

MCLAIN:--he would have known something to do.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:He didn't improvise like jazz players do. Jazz players improvise on

chord structure.

BOYD:That's right.

MCLAIN:Country musicians improvise on melody. And, uh, the difference is that

you have to really have that melody

in your mind, when you're, when you’re playing. It's not a matter of playing

scales over something. It doesn't work like that. It-you’re, you’re making--uh,

it's a lot more like composing, in my opinion. Composing or songwriting is about

taking whatever boundaries you set up, if it's a theme or a style, or a, I mean,

whatever in your mind it's going to be,

and then sort of creating within that. And when you improvise in country music

or folk music or, uh, in our musical styles, you're improvising on melody.

Melody is strong, melody is important. It's hard ,for me to think about trying

to do something that's gonna be better or stronger, than playing the tune, than

playing the melody.

That’s, that, (pauses) that unyielding sense of melody is part of our music. And

it's important. So even when you're playing something else, when you're

improvising, you're remembering. And the person listening should remember it.

BOYD:Yeah, right.

MCLAIN:It's not a matter of trying to get so far away from it that you're, that

you're going somewhere else.

BOYD:The point is to actually--

MCLAIN:

The point is to, to augment or to, or to, uh, yeah, to make the song strong. If

you're going to produce a country record, you want that to be, the sense of

melody is important. You want to do everything you do to enhance the, the song,

the whatever the vocalist is singing.

That's an important thing in country music, in my opinion.

BOYD:So you get all these people coming by the house, playing music. You, at

this point are fairly mature in your playing, and, and such. You've got younger

siblings who are starting to play. When, would you, would the kids sit in with

these organic sessions? Or were the kids sort of separated from that and then

you guys would have your own sessions?

MCLAIN:By the time we, by the time

you're bringing us up now to about ‘68. By that time, there were not as many

people coming over in the evenings. We were just singing and playing, uh, the

four of us, really.

BOYD:So tell me about those sessions.

MCLAIN:We would decide, we're going to try to sing this song or that song. Uh,

we had some that we just loved, um, we sang “The

Angels Singing in Heaven Tonight”. It's a Stanley Brothers song. We sang, uh,

“Roll Muddy River”, the Osborne Brothers song. We sang, uh, we sang Bill Monroe

songs. We sang a lot of bluegrass songs at that time. And early country songs, a

lot of Carter family songs. We sang, we just sang what was on our hearts.

BOYD:

And so, who would play what instrument during those years?

MCLAIN:Before that I played the bass. I started playing bass when I was nine

and I played that with my father all up till the time that Ruth started playing

the bass and that was about the time I was playing the banjo. So I started

playing the banjo, Daddy played guitar, Ruth the bass, and Alice hadn't started

playing the mandolin yet. Matter of fact we had already

had our television show for about a year before Alice started playing mandolin.

And she said she started because she felt awkward not playing an instrument. And

then, so she, said she wanted something to, and she did so well at it that

immediately you missed her if she wasn't there.

BOYD:Yeah, that's great. (pauses) So during these years, pre-television

show, when you're just kind of playing, she was in there harmonizing and...

MCLAIN:Yeah, she was singing. She had a very good sense of pitch, of harmony,

of... She's just a good singer.

BOYD:She still does have that.

MCLAIN:Yes, she does. She never lost that.

BOYD:So, what--your mother during this time?

MCLAIN:Uh, Mother, uh, did a lot of

baking, cooking. She, uh, was interested in things. She and Miss Thacker started

the first, I think the first in Eastern Kentucky, Girl Scout--she and Miss

Thacker started Girl Scouts in Eastern Kentucky. She started a Brownie troop

when the girls were old enough to be Brownies. (laughs) And then, then they started

Girl Scouts when they were that age. Mother did a lot of things. She loved

dancing, always. Right up until she couldn't dance anymore, she loved dancing.

And she, even after she couldn't dance, she stayed in the dance group and would

help and talk.

BOYD:But during these living room sessions with the family, what was she up to?

MCLAIN:Being hard of hearing,

She didn't sing with us or play with us. And I don't know that our music sounded

great to her through the hearing aids.

BOYD:Mm, hmm. That makes sense.

MCLAIN:She was very supportive. And she wanted us to do well. But I don't know

personally that the music, she loved music and she was very musical. But through

her hearing

aids.

BOYD:The frequencies probably were harsh.

MCLAIN:It didn’t, yeah, and hearing aids in the 60s were not what they are

today either.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. Okay, so you talked about some of the songs. You're playing

together, I presume. It's going pretty well. Who comes up with the idea that

we're gonna start performing out of this living room (McLain laughs) and we're

gonna call ourselves a band?

MCLAIN:We didn't

decide that. We didn't decide that. Ms. Osborne had the Maytag dealership in

Hindman, uh, Sloan Maytag Company, and she asked us if we'd come play. She

wanted to have an open house. And she asked, and so Sloan Maytag Company, that

was our first, uh, engagement.

And we just came and sang all afternoon. (laughs) That was the first. And then

we sang at the PTA meeting. Someone asked us if we'd do that. And we did a few

things like that in Hindman. And our first paid engagement was for Uncle

Charlie's Meatpacking Company in Hazard, Kentucky. And that was after we'd been

on the television for a while. A few weeks, probably. It was about Christmas

time, and they were having their Christmas party, and that was our first paid engagement.

And I don't remember why. It was some odd amount, like $97 and some cents. (Boyd

laughs) And I don't remember why. And Daddy said, “Well here, you need to have

this.” And he split that up amongst us kids. And I think Ruth, at that time, the

First National Bank of Jackson was our sponsor on the television show and Ruth

put that money in the First National Bank of Jackson and I don't think she ever

took it out.

BOYD:That's great, that is great.

MCLAIN:Ask her about that.

BOYD:Yeah I will,

I will for sure. Um, so you know when you were playing these things you weren't

really calling yourselves anything at that point.

MCLAIN:Well, when we started the television show, we, started calling ourselves

The Bluegrass State. And we did that because we were traveling at that time over

to Belfry, Kentucky and playing--Sam King

and his sons, Greg and Jerry, had, uh, a band. They had several bands, actually,

and they ran the Pike County Jamboree and they had all these bands and the Pike

County Jamboree is going to figure in the next few years so this would be about

‘67 probably, I imagine.

And we made good friends with the Kings and we went to see them and they came to

see us in Hindman and it was a lot more difficult traveling from Hindman to

Belfry, Kentucky at that time than it is now because there are a lot of new

roads since that time. But my gosh, it used to take hours on little roads and

there were about three or four ways we'd go and at that time they were working

on 23

and it was all torn up. And so we'd try to avoid, most of the construction. And

I mean, they were, it's hard to build a road and drive on it at the same time.

And that's what they were having to do because there just weren't other ways to

go that were very good. And so everybody was all going through this construction

phase and it was so, so it wasn't easy to drive but we we started going over on

Saturday nights

and W, I think it was IXI. That's close, and Pikeville played all afternoon on

Saturday afternoons, they'd alternate and play a song by the Carter family and a

song by the--was it the Delmore Brothers? I think, and it was... We'd listen to

that show all the way over driving

to Belfry and we'd go play with our friends and there were some wonderful people

there. We met Jimmy and Ada McCown there. This was before their children were,

uh, later their children played with them too, and they were wonderful. But they

got COVID during the pandemic and passed away.

But they were, oh my gosh, amazing musicians. Snake Chapman and Paul David Smith

and, and, and, um, um, uh, (pauses) (laughs) sorry names are flying out of my

head like crazy. Uh, there were some wonderful singers and players there. We

just loved playing with them.

We did that for quite a while.

BOYD:What were some of the songs that you would play?

MCLAIN:At that time, we played songs like, uh, = the Sons of the Pioneers song,

“Cimarron”, and “Cool Water”. Um, The Coasters, “Charlie Brown”, we sang that.

It wasn't just bluegrass songs and country songs that we sang, we didn't care.

We sang everything that we liked.

BOYD:

That's great. I bet those were wonderful.

MCLAIN:It was a wonderful experience. It was a wonderful experience. And nobody

ever said to us, well you shouldn't do that, it's not bluegrass, you shouldn't

do that, it's not bluegrass, you shouldn't do that, it's not this or it's not

that. At that time, people were a little more accepting than they were later.

People became more rigid about what was exactly this or exactly that.

I mean, by and large, I mean, I say that I'm speaking in generality. Some people

thought very definitely it should be this or that. And some--but a lot of people--

BOYD:Yeah,

MCLAIN:--the people we were around didn't care.

BOYD:Yeah. So let's talk about the TV show.

MCLAIN:Well, the way that started was in 1968, WKYH-TV, which is now WYMT, went

on the

air. Before that, there was no television broadcasting in eastern Kentucky. WHAS

in, um, Huntington, West Virginia, was our closest station, probably. And so, we

grew up, they had the Saturday Night Jamboree. Did I talk about that? No. Well,

on Saturday nights, from the time we got television, in about 1958,

seven or eight or nine, I was four, whatever year that was. And WHAS broadcast

the Saturday Night Jamboree. It was a wonderful program. There were excellent

musicians and singers. Connie Smith was on that station, on that program, when

she was 17 years old.

Um, it was a wonderful, wonderful program. And their dancers, their singers,

their--and Saturday nights for even before Alice was very old or before Ruth was

born, Saturday nights were listening to the Saturday Night Jamboree and watching

that program and eating tomato soup and crackers.

Soda crackers and tomato soup. That was Saturday night.

BOYD:That was Saturday night.

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:That's cool.

MCLAIN:

And it was wonderful and I think that, I may have spent my life trying to

recreate that some way, because that's such a fond memory. And I'd be so excited

by that music and it would just make me feel so good.

BOYD:Um-hm, that's fantastic.

MCLAIN:Uh, but coming up.

BOYD:So, so you were, you and your family were accustomed to musical

performance coming from the TV.

So this idea of you know, reaching out and starting this type of thing--

MCLAIN:It didn't seem unusual. It didn't seem like, I'm going to play on

television, it didn't seem like that. It was a natural thing. And the station

had only been on the air for two weeks.

BOYD:And what was the station?

MCLAIN:WKYH at that time. And, uh, we were driving through Hazard and Daddy

said, “Son,

Why don't you go in there and see if they'd like us to play on the television,

now that they're on the air?" And I said, “Who, should I talk to?” He said, “Go

ask for the program director and talk to them and see if they want us to do

that.” And so I went in and there was a young lady sitting at a desk in the

middle of a room, uh, just a building still there, it's right this side of

downtown in Hazard. And I went up the

Stone Building and went in the front door and she was there and I said, “Hi.”

She said, “Hi.” I said, “I'd like to talk to the program director.” And she

said, “Okay. I guess that would be me.” And I said, “Okay. um, my family sings

and plays music and we'd like to play on your station.”

“Would you like to?”

“We'd like to.”

She said, “Okay.” And I said, “Well, shouldn't we audition or

something first?” She said, “Well, that would probably be a good idea.” And she

got out some papers and she started marking and she said, “We have a spot

tomorrow on Hall Senior Citizens Corner. Can you be there?” And I said, “Yeah, I

think so.” And so she said, “Okay, they're broadcasting from the transmitter.”

Now this office was downtown, but the transmitter was up, do you know where La

Citadelle is?

BOYD:Yes.

MCLAIN:Okay, it's above that. It's at the very top of the hill.

If you were going up Gorman Ridge there and, turned off, and the only road up

there was what the dozer cut when it went up there to cut the foundation to, um,

build the transmitter. And so it wasn't a like a highway. (laughs) This was this

is a mud road and it was raining and we came in, we'd worn our stage clothes

and Daddy had a carry-all that we were in, and we got up as far as we could go,

and he said, “I think we're going to have to walk the rest of the way.” And it

was raining, and we got the instruments out and go walking up this mud path up

the road to the transmitter. And when we got there, uh, uh,

it was, they just had a room and the transmitter was here and we were here and

they had a camera that was, they didn't have a tripod for the camera yet. It was

sitting on--it was all black and white no recording equipment there. Everything

they broadcast had to be either live or on film. Either 16mm or 32mm film. And so,

Mr. Hall was there and he was gracious and he said, “Yes, we're going to go on

the air.” And there was no way to move the camera. You just had to stand where

the camera showed. And Mr. Hall was very gracious.

BOYD:Who was Mr. Hall?

MCLAIN:I don't know his first name. It was Hall's Senior Citizen’s Corner was

the name of the show. I don't know how we fit in with that. I think it was just

someone had an empty spot and they

said you can sing then. And so, uh, he introduced us and we started singing. And

we were just basically giving a program like we always did. There was a

microphone that was hanging from the top. And from the beginning, we were

accustomed to balancing ourselves like country musicians do.

BOYD:And by that you mean like sort of going up

to the mic and backing off of the mic.

MCLAIN:Yes, although there wasn't a mic on a stand, it was up above, but, um,

before people were as accustomed to working microphones, they balanced

themselves in a room, and that's kind of what we did. Um, so, we sang for about

fifteen or twenty minutes,

And right in the middle of everything, the door flew open, because it wasn't

built for a studio, it was just a door coming in from the outside. A man came in

and he stuck his hand out with a smile and he said, “My name's Bill Gorman. I

own this station, and I want to make you a 50-year contract.” Right there on the

air. He said, “Next 50 years.” He said, “ I don't care what. Anytime you want to

come here and you sing,

come and say--” He said, “I don't care. We'll preempt the news.” And he was so

gracious and so inviting.

BOYD:And this is being live broadcast where he kind of makes this offer.

MCLAIN:Everything was live. There was no recording equipment there for the

whole time we were there.

BOYD:I mean, I'm presuming that he is somewhere and he is watching your

performance and that he comes up and--

MCLAIN:See, his house was just down the hill from the transmitter.

That's Gorman Ridge and he had a home there. And so he just jumped in the car

and came on up (Boyd laughs) and everything was live. There was no way to do

anything that wasn't live unless it was on film. And so we started singing once

a week. There we did a half hour show every week and we practiced new material.

It was good for us for a lot of reasons. For

one thing, it made us learn a lot of new material. Because we had to have

something new every week. We couldn't go and sing the same songs every week. And

it was very instructive in a lot of ways. It taught us to, uh, make our timing

in between numbers tight. It taught us,

well, all the things that you learn when you try to do something like that. And

over the next two years, uh, we had, uh, a lot of guests on the program with us.

Sam King brought his group over from the Pike County Jamboree. His sons, Jerry

and Greg, had a, had a band with John L. And Jim May called the Tater Diggers.

And they came and were our guests. Bert Moyer was a tenor banjo player. He was

teaching at Lee's Junior College in Jackson. He came and did the hambone--Billy

Ray and Gene Triplett came from Hindman. They were both math teachers at Hindman

High School. They were both my teachers at one time or another. They played

amazing thumb-style guitar. Gene did and Billy Ray

with rhythm. They sang and they were amazingly good. And Gene Triplett had one

of the first steel guitars, lap steels, that I knew about in eastern Kentucky.

My grandmother heard him back before, I think before I was born, playing lap

steel. Um, well, I'm not thinking right now about a lot of the other guests we

had, but we did have guests.

BOYD:

That's great. So you're--I've got a couple of things to ask. I'll continue on

before I go back. The idea of you all being on a weekly television show at this

point, I mean, did that sort of make you all celebrities?

MCLAIN:Uh, it might have, although I don't think anybody thought a lot about

it. It probably made me self-conscious, but I don't think that anybody cared one

way or another if we did or if we didn't sing on the television. They were very

nice to me and they would--a friend said she bought a television set just so she

could see our program. She lived over on Lake Branch of Balls [Fork].

There were friends, that did watch us. I know they did. Daddy wrote a theme song

for us.

BOYD:He did.

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:How did it go?

MCLAIN:(sings) Every Thursday evening by seven we arrive

At channel 57 to do our program live

Three kids and their daddy, the Bluegrass State I say

The kind of music that you like is what we love to play

Up each and every hollow, each home on every street,

The Bluegrass State is ready, turn it--tune in and tap your feet.

And we probably said “holler.” Because that's what would have naturally said, I

try to be, (pauses) I try to be, as correct as I can.

BOYD:

So, so you’ve got this--are you being paid for this show?

MCLAIN:No, no. (laughs)

BOYD:No, no, no, so this is just--

MCLAIN:I don't think we were paid for anything until we played for Uncle

Charlie's Meatpacking Company (Boyd laughs)and that wasn't until Christmas, the

next Christmas--

BOYD:Okay, so you're doing this week after week, I don't want to go backwards--

MCLAIN:--well we we did it, uh, and see the station they were operating it on a

shoestring because they you know

He just started this station and I think it was, I think it was a huge

undertaking for him. He did it himself, Bill Gorman built that station himself.

I mean, he didn't have financial backers, I don't think. And so, and everyone at

the station was under 21, even the engineer, Raymond, his first name was Raymond

and his last name was,

I’ll think of it, Chuck Rucker was the cameraman. So they moved the studio out

of that down in town in the same building where I talked to the secretary in the

first place, made a nice studio and control room and so forth. And, um, so Chuck

Rucker was everything down there. He was the, they said cameraman, but he did

everything. But this time they had three cameras. They were the old cameras with tubes

in them and black and white, you know, that you had to dolly around and adjust

the focus as you went. And...

BOYD:Which took a lot of skill.

MCLAIN:They were heavy. He was very good. And so Chuck would communicate with

Raymond up in the transmitter on a headset. And so he would say, he would set

the audio level so he'd have us sing a little bit. And it was all one set.

There was a big map of the world behind us. And they used that set for

everything. So they used it for the news, and then they used it for the sports.

And then they'd clear those things out of the way, and we'd go stand there and

do our program, and everyone--The Goins Brothers came within about six months of

them going on the air. About the time that the station got an affiliation with

NBC, Bill Gorman worked that out. He had a friend that

worked at NBC and he came down and they made WKYH an NBC affiliate. Which was

good because then they could cop all the NBC programming out of the air and

rebroadcast it so they could do the NBC news and that sort of thing. And um, and

the morning shows and so forth. They still did the live programming from that

one set. But, uh, Chuck would have us--

--and when The Goins Brothers came and other times too, they would let me come

and do sound, or let me come and operate a camera or something. I wasn't old

enough to probably, well, I was as old as a lot of the other people there. And,

and I learned a lot doing that too, (pauses) because the first time the Goins

Brothers played there, they let me do the sound, and I remember, I think it kind

of worried Melvin a little bit but, uh,

he knew that I would know how it should sound. And um, he was really good about

it. And Ray was wonderful. There was a couch outside. And I very well remember

Ray Goins showing me things on sitting there. And I'd say, “How do people play

this lick that goes do do dooodley do ga-do doodle doodle?” He said, “Well I

play it like this, do do doodley do ga-do,” and he'd let me watch his fingers

and show me and I'd try and he'd

correct what I was doing. And Ray Goins was very, very nice to me and Melvin

too, to all of us. They would start talking about going to play at Bean Blossom

or going to play at this place and it sounded very exciting to us. And that was

one of the reasons I think that we started touring the way we did. Melvin would

talk about going to Bean Blossom, Indiana

and playing with Bill Monroe and, and uh, we had met Bill And so we went to Bean

Blossom, Indiana, just as attendees at the second Bean Blossom Festival. And

Bill invited us to play on the third one. And from then on until I think about

77, we played at every one of those. And Bill also invited us to go play at all

of his other Bluegrass festivals. And he had a lot in those days.

In the early 70s he had one in California, Colorado, Texas, Maryland, Glasgow,

Maryland, Glasgow, Delaware, but it was in Maryland and Glasgow, Delaware, right

there close. Um, Kentucky, of course, um, and he was very, very nice to us. Took

us to play at the Ryman Auditorium at the

Grand Ole Opry in in ‘74, and that, it was an exciting time for us. I'm getting

ahead of myself, aren't I? What was the question? You asked me about playing at

the television station.

BOYD:But that's interesting, and I think this is an important point to make. It

was really the Goins' guest spot on the, on the television show.

MCLAIN:Well, they started doing their own weekly program.

BOYD:They did their own weekly program.

MCLAIN:Yeah, they

did their own. I think we were on Tuesdays and they were on Thursdays or the

other way around.

BOYD:But your interaction with them really opened the door, I think, to it.

MCLAIN:It was one, yeah. It was one of the things that really did. Um, and

well, I think the Pike County Jamboree had a lot to do with it. We met Kentucky

Slim there. We started picking up Kentucky Slim, taking him over to the--because

he didn't drive. And we'd take him over to the, we'd stop at his house and pick

him up and take him

to the Pike County Jamboree to sing on the program and then bring him home on

our way back home.

BOYD:Oh, wow. That's really amazing. That's special.

MCLAIN:You know, we were very fortunate to meet people like him and Hylo Brown.

Ralph Stanley was very nice to us. He would come and play, you know, in the

grade school auditorium or in the,

he was playing on the projection booth of the Drive-In Theater in Hindman. It

was right after Carter had died and he had come back and he was playing, Curly

Ray Cline was with him and, uh, Larry Sparks and the three of them and Melvin

Goins had been playing with them and doing comedy and playing bass and or another

guitar, and it was easier to travel with a guitar than a bass. And then Ralph

had gone out to California and Washington State and Oregon to do a tour and

taken Larry Sparks and Curly Ray with him out to do that part of the tour. And

he came back and their date in Hindman was the first date back again. And he'd

left Melvin

there to book dates, show dates, so that when they got back they'd have an

appearance, you know, some appearances. And Melvin had done that, but Melvin was

going to start playing with his brother Ray. And so he was starting his own band

and wanted to have, you know, dates for them too. So he booked dates, you know,

mostly for them. Melvin and Ray Goins had played with the Lonesome

Pine Fiddlers, which was Charlie Cline and Ezra Cline and Curly Ray Cline, and

there and some other people, Bobby Osborne played with them early on, and Melvin

and Ray had played with them for a while. So, Melvin was hoping that he and Ray

could use the name the Lonesome Pine Fiddlers because it was known. And, Curly Ray,

He asked Curly Ray that night, I was there, asked him if he could use the name

Lonesome Pine Fiddlers. And Curly Ray hesitated and he said, “Yes, you can use

it if you give me 15% of everything you make off the top.” (Boyd laughs) And

Melvin didn't want to do that of course, because there probably wasn't going to

be that

much to start with especially. And so they went with the name The Goins

Brothers. And they didn't use the Lonesome Pine Fiddlers and no one has used

that name as far as I know ever since. [Editors note. Charlie Cline used the

Lonesome Pine Fiddlers name for his own band in the 1970s and 1980s]

BOYD:Yeah, 15% is a lot.

MCLAIN:Well, (laughs) I don't think that Curly Ray thought that they would ever

do that. (Boyd laughs) And so that night the band was

Ralph, Larry and Curly Ray, and Jack Lynch was there in playing bass, and that

had a record label that Ralph had recorded for, and, or maybe it was soon after

that that he did, he recorded for Jack Lynch's label. And so had Don Reno and,

uh, Bill Harrell

and other people too. But that night, Ralph let me play mandolin with him, which

was really nice because I was, I mean, I wasn't a great mandolin player, but he

was very kind. And I realized that some of these people let me do some of these

things so I would learn things.

BOYD:It's really amazing. Like, not all musical genres have that, where they'll let--

MCLAIN:Let somebody do something so they'll learn.

Yeah. And that was important to me. I saw my father do that--let people do

things so that they would learn to do it. If they were passionate about it and

if they were interested and had a good attitude and you know it would be a

constructive thing. I saw him do that for people.

BOYD:At this point, you know, the TV show's going. You know, you've got all

these musicals.

MCLAIN:That might have been before the TV show.

BOYD:That might have been before

the TV show. What point in relation to the TV show were you enrolled at Lee's

Junior College?

MCLAIN:About halfway through. There were several things that happened during

those two years that we did the show. We did it every week, regardless what. And

in turning over the new decade from 1969 to

1970, there was something that happened that night that was, that was, changed

our lives. And every year since I was born, my father had taken me to the

Christmas Country Dance School in Berea. They have the Christmas Country Dance

School that runs from the day after Christmas until New Year's Eve. And they

have all kinds of lessons,

classes in different kinds of folk dance. They have, um, music as an important

part of it, and Daddy was the music director for that for many years. Ruthie

White came from Hindman every year, and um, Daddy had always taken me until that

year. About a week before Christmas, he said, “Son, I'm going to leave you in

Hindman this year.” I said, “Okay,

why?” He said, “I don't know.” He said, “I just have a feeling, that I'm

supposed to leave you here.” I said, “Okay.” And so I stayed with Mother And

Alice and Ruth and Michael and Nancy Ann were born by that time. I think that

was about the year that Michael was born. He wasn't very old. He was still in a

crib at that time. And

On New Year's Eve, we lived in Hillside. It was a building that we didn't live

in the whole building, the bottom floor. We were using it, had been offices for

the Settlement School at that time, the boys dormitory was there, part of it,

because there were about 70 some students that were living at the Settlement

School at that time and going to the public high school. We'll talk

about the Hindman Settlement School sometime if you want to. And so we were

living in the in the, in the top two floors and there were more. And so it was a

tall building and it was had been built back in the 1920s out of oak and

chestnut. And it, uh, because when the forests were clear cut

back in those days, they would wait till a high tide and they'd float the logs

down the creek. But the oak, the green oak wouldn't float because it was so

heavy, wouldn't float very well. So they'd use that, they'd mill it and use for

buildings there. And it was very old and dry by that time, and it was a tender

box. And I was in the upstairs playing

a guitar, Daddy's guitar that Homer Ledford had built for him. It was a

beautiful guitar. And we'd come in right before Daddy left and we had carried

the instruments from across the creek. At that time you had to drive through the

creek to get across, so if the creek was high you have to park on the other side

of the creek. And it was quite a ways to carry the instruments, and we just set

them down inside the front door. So the bass, two banjos, and

the mandolin were there, by the door. I'd taken Daddy's guitar upstairs and I

was playing it. It was almost midnight on New Year's Eve, turning the New Year,

and Mother came up. We'd remodeled and they had used aluminum wiring, which was

code in those days. They stopped using it because it caused fires. And that's

exactly what happened. Uh, Mother came up and she said,

“Well, there was a fire in the bathroom downstairs beside the clothes dryer. I

blew it out and opened the window to let out the smoke, but I thought that you

ought to know.” And everybody else was asleep but Mother and me. And then she

went back downstairs and I thought well I better go see and I set Daddy's guitar

down and I walked down the stairs and we opened up the door to the bathroom and

it was completely ablaze. I mean the whole thing was, it

was a roaring fire. Yeah. And at that time and Daddy had a Model A Ford that was

parked right outside that window. And I think that that car had already caught.

I'm not positive about that, but I mean, it was just, it's like you open the

door and it was everything and we knew it wasn't going to be long till there was

no way to control it at that point and I ran to the phone and

called Luther Bentley that was, uh, he did a lot of maintenance and he's a

clever man. He lived just not far away. He was one of our closest neighbors.

Mother said, “Call Luther Bentley,” and I called him and woke him up. I said, “I

think our house is on fire, we're gonna need some help.” And it was the first

fire for the Hindman Volunteer Fire Department. They had just formed and they

had spent time practicing,

you know, with the fire engine. It was a 1947 model fire engine. They had

brought it down in the bottom there across from the Settlement School, and they

practiced with the hoses, and practiced doing the things, but they never had a

fire. So this was their first fire. They were there very fast.

It was very, very, very cold and the creek was high. And so the fire engine

wouldn't start being so cold. And it was fortunate that it was an old car being

in 1947 had a crank. And they cranked the engine off so they could get it

started that way. And they pulled it around and they had to come through the

creek to get to the house. Well, when they got in the creek, the water was high

and the fire engine got stuck.

So They had to get out and push the fire engine. They did get it unstuck and

they got up out of the creek, but of course, this time, the house, all they

could hope to do was keep the fire from spreading to other buildings, which was

lucky that they could, and keep it from setting the wood--hillside on fire,

which they did.

But when they got up to the area below the house, where they could--there was

actually a fire hydrant there. They had to go in, turn the water on to the fire

hydrant, because of course it was winter time, it was off. They had to turn the

water on, they got the water on, and the hoses going through the creek, the

creek water had splashed up on the hoses and froze them to the side of the

truck. And it was impossible to get them off so they had to send for new hoses,

they had other hoses but they had to go get them.

And they did that and they got it and they managed to keep it from spreading.

Keep it from, I mean, what they did was really amazing and, but the instruments

being by the door I was able to--after we got, I got Nancy, I carried Nancy Ann

out, Alice, Ruth I think carried Michael down, we got the girls up, we got

everybody downstairs. At

that time we still thought, you know, there was time or something, because it

was happening, looking back on it, in slow motion. I called Luther. Mother said,

“I think we're okay, but we probably ought to get everybody out.” We went and

woke everybody up, got everybody out. I went, walked back over and got the

instruments that were by the door, the bass, the fiddle.

I had a fiddle at that time. The two banjos, and brought them out. We didn't

have shoes or anything. And fire was coming out of the upstairs at the far side,

and I knew looking in, I knew I couldn't go back in. And everything burned. And

so it was dramatic. And they called Daddy and he came, of course, right home and

came around the corner,

drove from Berea, which at that time was quiet. I mean, a lot of the roads that

are there now weren't there then. So it took him a while and a few hours. And

when he got there, he could see, you know, what had happened. And he moved us

into his office, which had been on the other side, of the, of the

creek. It was the old Fireside Industries cabin that had been there. And he

moved that and Solomon Everidge's house, which was in the bottom, and moved them

across the creek to a better location because they flooded every year being in

the bottom. He moved them over here high enough on the hillside so that there

was no chance they would ever,

ever flood because water couldn't get that high and this year, last year in that

biggest flood in history, it was five feet in Solomon Everidge's cabin. That's

how much higher. He moved them where he thought it would be safe for all

eternity. And all eternity is relative.

BOYD:Yeah, that's right. So back to the fire. It's in

that moment, everybody gets out of the house. You make the phone call, and then

you get the instruments out of the house. Looking back on that moment, I mean,

it was amazing that he said, Raymond, you stay this year, you know, and that--

MCLAIN:He always had really good intuition. And he paid attention to it.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah, not everybody does that. That's remarkable. But,

looking back, what was lost? Like, what can you think of?

MCLAIN:The things that were lost, my parents had, had, always had a quality

that is the quality I admire most in people. The quality

in people that I admire most is that ability and the decision to take

circumstances that would understandably make a person closed and bitter and

selfish, and use those experiences to become open and loving and generous.

Because everybody has experiences in life that would understandably make them

closed and bitter and selfish.

Everybody has something. Everybody has something. And to make the decision to

take that, and that quality was manifested in that time after the fire. I've

thought about it a lot in my lifetime. A person could say, oh this is lost and

that is lost and that will never be again. Pictures and things that we've spent

our whole life, you know, you could

spend the rest of your life being bitter about that." And they said, “We have

all the things that are really important. Everything that's really important, we

still have. We've got one another.” And Daddy said, “I think the fact that we

have these instruments is a sign.” So we lived in his office, and it was not

huge. He put a modern roof on that old

building, and he designed it himself. And it was really nice. He built a wing

off of that, because there wasn't enough room really in there for us. With three

bedrooms and a, and a bathroom, we needed a better bathroom than the one that

was there. He really made it nice for us.

And he never made us feel sorry for ourselves about it. He never made us feel

angry about it. He never made us feel, he just, he just, and Mother, too, always

said, “We have everything that's important.” And they would smile. And I think

that that probably was one of the greatest gifts that he

could have given us, and Mother too. Daddy was always interested in

architecture. He never studied it formally, but he knew a lot about it because

he was so interested. With this new wing, he had those three. He needed another

place for me. I was going to--about ready to go to college at this time. And he made

some steps on the side of the wall where he made the peak of the new roof come

up to the peak of the old roof so the, the roof was there and He covered that

and made a ladder up there, and a kind of a wall with a mostly open there so

that light could come in. There were windows up there, little triangular-shaped windows.

And um, he made a flat place that was about that big that you could stand on and

then made a bed for me. And that was my bedroom and it was wonderful. And one of

those windows would open and I could climb out on the roof if I wanted to. It

was really neat in a lot of ways. And then that made a nice place for us to

practice down there too,

for the television show and whatnot. About that time, you should ask Ruth about

this. When you talk to her, Daddy got a phone call from, Ruth was I think 13 he

got a call from the producers of the White House Conference on Children, and it

was going to be broadcast on CBS television. Marge Champion was emceeing it. And

they said, “We have

a, a script here that--it's all scripted. What we need is a 13-year-old girl who

can play--someone younger--13 or younger who can play the mountain dulcimer and

sing these two particular songs that we have picked out.” And Daddy said, “Well,

I don't know any children that play the dulcimer right now.” Jean Ritchie had

told them to call Daddy. She said she didn't know anyone, but she thought Daddy might.

Daddy said, “I don't know children. I know a lot of people that play, but none

of them are children.” And so they said, “Okay, thank you.” And they didn't call

back for about a month and they said, “Listen, there it's three weeks before the

program and we can't find anybody. Do you know a 13 year old girl who could

learn?” And Daddy said, “Well, my daughter Ruth could probably do it.” And they

said, “Well, if she could learn in three weeks, we need someone 13 or younger to play

the mountain dulcimer and sing these two particular songs.” And so, Daddy said,

he called Homer Ledford in Winchester and said, “Homer, could you please make

Ruth a dulcimer pretty quickly,” And Homer said, “Yes, I can do that.” And he

made her a beautiful poplar dulcimer, and she still has it. And Daddy taught her

to play and sing. Ruth has always had a lot of gumption

and a good spirit and a can-do attitude. She's very diligent. And I would never

tell Ruth she couldn't do anything she set her mind to. And Mother made her a

beautiful dress with a pretty headband. And In three weeks, she and Daddy got on

a plane for Washington and she performed, made her debut on CBS nationwide

television singing and playing the mountain dulcimer and she'd agree she was

accustomed to singing on the television in Hazard. She was on the cover of the

Music Educators Journal. She was, it was--she was fearless.

BOYD:Did you all--I'm assuming you all watched it live? Like, you watched it--

MCLAIN:

I'm sure we did. I don't have a memory of that. I'm sure we did watch it. But I

don't remember. If I think about it, I might.

BOYD:How special. I mean, that's really incredible for a 13-year-old.

MCLAIN:Ruth has always been able to do anything she set her mind to.

She sang a song in Burmese after being in Burma for one day and hearing it.

BOYD:Wow. That's, yeah, that’s incredible.

MCLAIN:Ask her about that too.

BOYD:I will.

MCLAIN:She, in any case, that was the fire, and that was Ruth's experience.

BOYD:I mean, you know, you all are kids--

MCLAIN:But we never missed, we never missed, I think it was a day or two after

the fire, we went and did the television program.

BOYD:You still did

the television program?

MCLAIN:We did. There were things that just seemed natural for us to do and

playing music has always been natural.

BOYD:Well I mean, you know in today's language, you know, your parents are

extremely supportive, it sounds like, and in empowering you all to move forward.

But it had

to have been traumatic on some level, to see everything go up and--

MCLAIN:Changed our lives. Sure did. I remember where I was standing watching it

burn. I remember who was standing around me.

BOYD:Yeah. And the fire, you know, the firefighters, and you know, the chaos,

I'm guessing, that ensued. But music was there to kind of ground everybody?

MCLAIN:

Music was, yes, it did. It was something that goes on anyway, like eating or sleeping.

BOYD:That says a lot about your parents, I mean, I think, and their approach,

you know, which is wonderful. I even go back to this moment, and I'm thinking

again as a parent, it just sounds like time and time again, your parents were

sort of treating

you all kind of as adults, but like this idea of preparing you for life, which

is ultimately all of our jobs, right, as parents. But driving past that

television station, your father sent you in to make the deal, as opposed to your

father pulling over and saying, you know--

MCLAIN:I'm going to go in and do this.

BOYD:--I'm going to go in and do this. Or Raymond, you know, come in with me

and we're going to go in together. He sent you in.

MCLAIN:He always did that.

All--always. Whenever we were, like for decades, touring, he would always say,

“Okay son, go do your stuff. Go meet the people, talk to them, you know, find

out if there's anything we need to know, find out if there's anything they need

to know,” that sort of thing. He'd always send me.

BOYD:Yeah, I mean, that's, you know, I mean, he clearly, at the time,

especially, is the leader of the band,

right?

MCLAIN:Always.

BOYD:I mean, he is, and he's such a force, yet, when it comes time to those

moments it's really amazing how he does what I don't think most parents would do

in that situation. He really--I think that's an interesting little sideline to a

little observation about his personality.

MCLAIN:

He always led by example. He always had a good sense. And I always trusted that

his judgments were made for the right reasons. I never doubted that. And the

other thing is we always behaved. We knew that we needed to. And sometimes I

see young people now, there seems to be a difference. Some young people don't

think they need to behave.

BOYD:Mm-hm. (pauses) Yeah, sure.

MCLAIN:And at school, we thought we had to behave. If we didn't, I mean, we

might choose not to, but we knew what was gonna happen if we didn't. That's

quite a difference. And I would never want anyone

to be cruel to a child or hurt a child, but in those days we did get spanked if

we misbehaved.

BOYD:Mm-hm. Yeah, yeah. In my days too.

MCLAIN:We knew, we knew if we misbehaved there was going to be a consequence.

And I don't know that young people now know that there is a consequence if they misbehave.

BOYD:Yeah, that's right. Well, I have a question about the TV show

before we move away from that.

MCLAIN:I didn't mean to go off on a tangent.

BOYD:And I'm dying to ask you this, because I know you and I have talked before

about this, that because it was a live broadcast, there wasn't a recording of

the show.

MCLAIN:Right.

BOYD:So we don't have anything that we can, somebody's digitized and thrown up

on YouTube that we can go to, like some of the other footage of some of your

earlier performances. Is there any archival record of those television programs?

MCLAIN:Not as far as I know.

BOYD:

Like photographs?

MCLAIN:Well the, well, now the cover of our first little single record that we

made is from the television set. And there are photographs.

BOYD:There are?

MCLAIN:Yes, Ruth probably can, or Jody Miller might know where to find

photographs from that time.

BOYD:Okay.

MCLAIN:But there are photographs.

BOYD:Okay. I'm going to try and hunt

those down, because I'd like to see some of those.

MCLAIN:Well it was about that time we made our first recording. Daddy made it

on a Wollensak tape recorder which in those days was called a portable tape

recorder and now they're pretty darn big according to modern standards. They're

not like an iPhone or something.

BOYD:There's still a slipped disc, right? You know, when you think about

carrying it around.

MCLAIN:But yeah, he recorded it in a building that he

designed, in a room that he designed for music and dancing, the Great Hall

in--at the Hindman Settlement School in what he named the May Stone Building

that's now the Mike Mullins Building. We made it, there was some beautiful

natural reverb in there and that was the first record we made it was on one side

was “Cimarron” on the other side was “Charlie Brown” and that was the first

recording that we did and He took it to Cincinnati and Carl Burkhardt at Rite

Records pressed I don't know how many of them for us. Daddy designed and made

the cover. Lou Gutierrez (??), that was living at the settlement at the time,

made the photograph and did the artwork

design. It was kind of a homemade job.

BOYD:But how, I mean it must have just felt amazing to have a record.

MCLAIN:One of the beautiful things about growing up in a small town is you can

do things. Now, if you don't do things, nothing happens. But if you do things,

things happen. And people can do things. And if they do them, they happen.

If they don't do them, they don't happen. So there are opportunities in a small

town that there wouldn't be necessarily in a larger town. And so we did those

things. And our friends did things too. A lot of people from Hindman have done

things. A lot's happened in that little town.

BOYD:Absolutely. That's absolutely right. Just some amazing talent has come

through that

place, or come from that place. And just, yeah, there's so much to talk about

with regard to Hindman. I mean, speaking of Hindman, you know, we're talking

about all this stuff that's going on in terms of you all blossoming as a band

and what's going on with the fire, with the television program, and all of these

things are happening, he still has a job. I mean, he is

still functioning as--

MCLAIN:Oh, right. This was all things we did in the evenings or on the weekends

or in odd times. We didn't take any, in those days, trips that lasted through

the week. We did go one weekend to Eminence, MO. The first Bluegrass Festival

that we ever attended was in Eminence,

MO, on the banks of the Current River, which at that time was so clean that the

town took its drinking water right out of the creek without having to do

something else to it. Now they can't do that. There's a trail ride there and big

stables and things, and they can't do that anymore, but they did it in those days.

BOYD:So, back to Hindman, he's

got this big job. What's going on with the Settlement School at that time?

MCLAIN:Well he was doing a lot of things with the Settlement School. I mean,

operating the Settlement School was, just operating the, the, the, what was

going on there, talk about someone that's multitasking, right? There were, I

think I mentioned when we left in ‘71, 74

students that were still living at the settlement. In those days, and from the

Settlement Schools beginning in 1902, people frequently lived there. At that

time, the state was not able to provide like a high school or that in

communities like that that came along later so the Settlement School

was the school in the early days May Stone and Catherine Pettit started the

Settlement School. And that's a whole story for another time. And I think that

Cassie Mullins has a very good account of a lot of that here already. So I don't

need to go into a lot of that. But over time, as the state was able to build up

schools and so forth,

the Settlement School worked with the state and Settlement School students went

to the public school, stayed at the Settlement, and then would go home on

weekends when they could travel because roads just weren't, I mean, it took a

long time. It wasn't easy to travel in those days.

BOYD:I think it was interview number two where you gave me the Hindman

Settlement School 101, where you took me through the entire--

MCLAIN:Did I?

BOYD:--you know, yeah, it was great. And I think I mentioned that

I actually, one of my first jobs, my first oral history job in Kentucky in 1998,

one of my first projects was to train a young Cassie Mullins how to do

interviewing for the Hindman Settlement School oral history project that she did.

MCLAIN:Perfect.

BOYD:It was great. Yeah, so it's fun to watch that now. But I think in terms of

like, you know, what we're leading up to obviously is Berea is coming, this

transition to Berea.

MCLAIN:Well before that,

Daddy also was, I mean, not only operating the functioning of the Settlement

School, but he was doing a lot with the Settlement School students, dancing and

every, we'd have a dance every week there in the great hall. Before that was

built up in Recreation House, it's now called Stuck (??), no it's called Priest

(??) I think, but we would, Daddy had

performing groups that he would take of the Settlement School students. And

they'd take me and let me play bass and, and they would dance and sing and had a

very nice performance that and they'd go they went to the New York World's Fair

when it was there and performed. We went to Atlanta, to Denver, to a lot of

places. And I'm still in communication

with some of those students that were on those trips.

BOYD:It probably just changed their lives.

MCLAIN:It did. And they'll tell you it did. It changed mine too. And all of our

lives. I mean, to do things like that. So he was doing a lot.

BOYD:So he wasn't just this aloof director somewhere off doing his directing

things for the Settlement School. He was hands-on and interacting really at the

ground level.

MCLAIN:Right,

he was. And He was organizing and playing for and leading those dances every

Friday night. He was building buildings and designing them. He was doing a lot

of those things that put him in touch with not only the students

and the local people there at the Settlement School, but people in the community

as well. So he wasn't just working only at the Settlement School. He was working

with the 4-H director, Jack Niece, at that time, and he later then went to

Jackson, Kentucky later on with--well I can't think of everybody's name at this

point, but he was very involved with the local community.

BOYD:So here we are, you know,

at this time around the television program and the fire, so we're really in that

‘69, ‘70 period. Can you think about what was happening? You know, and again,

I'm foreshadowing this idea that he's gonna leave this position in ‘71.

MCLAIN:He didn't know it at that time.

BOYD:He didn't, okay.

MCLAIN:He didn't. None, none of us were thinking about that. He didn't consider

leaving until--and I think the fire

probably had something to do with it. Probably that was enough of a change that

something like that makes you think long term. You know?

BOYD:Oh yeah.

MCLAIN:But I think he, he hadn't necessarily thought, I'm going to leave. But

when the question was raised, he didn't back away from it.

BOYD:Sure. I mean, he recognized the opportunity.

MCLAIN:He considered it.

And that happened. Have I talked about this already?

BOYD:No, and we're going to, but I guess what I'm trying to get at is what's

happening with that Settlement School under his leadership in that ‘69? Is there

anything that he's doing that comes to mind in terms of like, you know, his

leadership during that final phase?

MCLAIN:In retrospect I realized that everything was about to change.

At the time I didn't think it was. At the time, I wouldn't have thought--I would

have thought, yeah, everything's going on exactly as it always will, always has

and always will. Maybe that's just what a seventeen-year-old thinks,

but--because at that time in your life, everything seems like it is, and it

doesn't seem like there's something else. I mean you don't have that kind of

perspective. I didn't and I've always been a little slow about that

sort of thing. But, Berea College had done, you know, Berea College's focus is

the Appalachian region. I think something like 79% of students come from the

Appalachian region by design. And I think its--the purpose is to serve

good students who couldn't afford to go to college otherwise and so they that's

one of the reasons for existing. And so every year when Berea has new faculty

they have a new faculty tour because they have--they hire faculty from

everywhere not just people who already know a lot about the mountains. So every

year they have a new faculty tour and they take a bus and they take the new

faculty and they go around to different places in the mountains and they say

this is, this is the area we serve and these are people we serve. And they came

to the, they brought that bus and came to the Settlement School in, I guess it

would have been 1970. Or late in ‘70, I don't know. In any case, about that

time. And Dean Jones was the dean of the college and President Willis

Weatherford happened to be on that tour that year. They came with the new faculty.

When they came to Hindman, they asked us to sing for them, which we did. So

Daddy and Allison Ruth and I sang. Daddy spoke to them about music and talked

about Appalachian music. And, I don't think they said anything at that time, but

they very soon thereafter talked to Daddy. And Willis Weatherford and Dean Jones

went to

ask Daddy. They said, “We think you are uniquely qualified.” They'd heard him

talk, and they'd asked questions and so forth. “We think you're uniquely

qualified to teach a course in Appalachian music and a course in bluegrass

music, and we think you could develop those courses, and we'd like to hire you

to come to Berea College and teach.” Specifically that. And evidently, there'd been

some conversation before that, that Berea College had this focus on the

mountains, focus on Appalachian culture. Loyal Jones was there, he started the

Appalachian Center. He'd started teaching courses in Appalachian studies,

courses in all these areas. And I guess there'd been conversation that there was

nothing about Appalachian music. There was a chapel choir that sang

Appalachian hymns, but they sang in a choral style that had been arranged as in

European part writing, which doesn't sound like mountain style singing or

mountain style--so, they said, one of the students I think complained that I've

been there four years and I never heard one piece of country music. And so,

I think they wanted to, to incorporate that in. That's the reason they came to

Daddy. And so he hadn't thought about leaving, but he said, “I'll think about

that.” And they talked and he decided to do it. You asked about my going to

college. I went to Lee's Junior College in

Jackson, which is at that time, new 15 had been built, so it was a good road

from Hazard to Jackson. And then you still at that time had to drive the old

road, which is now the Art Stamper Highway, which is really nice, named for one

of our wonderful fiddlers from the Stamper family. But I could do that in, I

don't know, probably an hour and a half at that

time. Maybe two hours, I don't think so.

BOYD:Would you go just for class and come back?

MCLAIN:No, I lived in the dormitory there, but I would try to come back at

least once during the week to practice. We'd decide right after the program, one

week, what we were going to do for the next week. And then I'd practice and I'd

come home on the weekend and we'd practice. And then I'd try to come home one

night and then

I'd come and we'd do the television program. So I had a couple of opportunities

to practice during the week. And um, (pauses) I've sort of lost my train of thought.

BOYD:Yeah, well, we're talking about this transition time where your father is

being tempted into this new job, which quite frankly sounds like his dream

job because of his, you know, the trajectory that he had gone. And again, he

always, to me, seemed like he was teaching in whatever position he was in, or

even in parenting. But I think it must--Hindman was very important to your

family, I think it must have been, you know, going back, you know. And so it

must have been

hard for him on some level to leave Hindman, I remember?

MCLAIN:Yeah, it was difficult. It was a difficult choice. But once we made the

decision, he was all in to create the new, the new courses to help get us

established in the new place. I transferred from Lees to Berea and I finished.

I graduated from Berea College. And my sisters did later.

BOYD:So, talk to me, talk me through the transition. What your memories are of

leaving Hindman and, and getting established in Berea.

MCLAIN:I don't know. The things that occurred to me are things like I didn't

like the water at first because the water in Hindman had a very high sulfur.

Doesn't now because there's, you know, there's,

but growing up there, it was, there was a lot of sulfur in it, which I guess is

probably good for you. And I liked it. It tasted like water to me. And I guess

when I got to Berea, they had really good water, which didn't taste right to me. (laughs)

BOYD:Isn't that interesting?

MCLAIN:Yeah, it was funny. Daddy said, “Well, son, you could always fill milk

bottles with it and bring it with you.” (laughs)

I didn't do that. But you asked about how things were changing. Right at that

time, things did change, because they were building a lot of new roads. It

wasn't going to be necessary for students to live at the Settlement School and

go to the public school anymore. The Settlement School did still provide, we had

a building for

industrial arts and home economics, and the Settlement School still supplied the

teachers for those things. We still had the library and employed the librarian.

There were things that we did to supplement that were left over from the time

when the Settlement School was to school. Some institutions that were

educational institutions, when the state was

able to provide a school, some institutions competed with the state and tried to

provide everything still. And the Settlement did the opposite. The Settlement

worked with the state and said, you know, if you, you know, we'll supply these

things if you can take this over that would be great. And so that was the way

that that

worked.

BOYD:So their business model is changing at that point because of that?

MCLAIN:They , they didn't, the, the, the, the mission statement for the

Settlement School has been the same since 1902. It hasn't changed to this day.

It is (pauses) I'm sorry I can't tell it to you verbatim. It'd be better if we

look that up.

BOYD:Okay.

MCLAIN:

But it hasn't changed. The way we implement it has changed over the years. I

still serve on the Hindman Board. They asked me maybe a decade ago if I would

serve on the Hindman Board, and I'm proud to do that. But, things were changing

in the seventies in Eastern Kentucky.

And so, the next director was Lionel Duff. And Lionel really had his hands full

because things were changing. It was the way we addressed that mission was

appropriate in the sixties and in the seventies, so many things changed that

people's needs were different.

It was not about not being able to travel across the county anymore. Of course

you could travel, it's an easy trip now. There were a lot of things that changed

during that time. And Lionel had a very difficult job, and he did a good job,

transitioning from what the Settlement needed to be in the sixties to what the

Settlement was going to need to be in the late seventies and early eighties. And

he was the director for about six or seven years

and then Mike Mullins.

BOYD:Oh, is that when Mike came?

MCLAIN:And Mike came immediately after Lionel. And Mike was a fireball. He was

just out of college, determined to come make a difference in eastern Kentucky,

and he did. It was Mike, because Lois Weinberg went to him and said, “I have a

child, we need to figure out who's dyslexic, we need to figure out something.”

Mike started the whole dyslexia

program at Hindman to--because he was asked by a parent to help a child. He

started the whole dyslexia program that became a model.

BOYD:It's really revolutionary.

MCLAIN:It became a model for the world in how to help dyslexic children. He

realized the changing times in eastern Kentucky and addressed them.

BOYD:

So, family packs up and moves to Berea.

MCLAIN:Yes.

BOYD:I'm sure there was some sadness, as all kids have typically, when leaving

friends and change.

MCLAIN:For me, I was already going to college and I was already, you know,

living in Jackson. We were very busy with our music. Daddy was busy with our

music, which also

became his classes. He was very--you mentioned, you know, his nature, which I

think of as always being a teacher and always being a student. He was always a

good student, he was always a good teacher. And I think the best teachers are

good students. He always wanted to figure out what's going on and how to make

things better.

And he did that in a lot of ways in his lifetime. My grandfather did that. He

had that same spirit.

BOYD:It's almost like an engineering spirit where it's like going in and

designing solutions and things. And ag--again, think about your grandmother and

the Suez Canal evacuation and you know her management of that situation In a

crisis. I mean it sounds they all had this so was the Berea

transition the end of the television show?

MCLAIN:Yes, it was too far to travel back and forth and they still didn't have

recording equipment. If we could have gone on a Saturday and recorded you know

one back-to-back you know for that they could run for a month or two, then that

would have been possible. But it was too far to travel. And we were busy trying

to move and do everything.

BOYD:

Well, you talk about the water. Talk about Berea and the transition. Where did

you move? Where was the house?

MCLAIN:Berea College has housing that new faculty can stay in for I think five

years. Then you pay rent to the college and you can stay there. So finding a

place to live wasn't a challenge right off. Daddy

picked a place that made sense. It was within walking distance for him so he

could you know get to where he needed. And as a matter of fact he had a lot of

the classes in our living room. So students just walked to our house and, and

they had, matter of fact, CBS Evening News broadcast from our living room about

those courses. And the New York Times did a front page of the arts section from

our living room.

And, you see, when we moved, we didn't have any furniture. Daddy had six chairs

that Lee Thompson had made, (laughs) with, you know, the hickory bark seats and

that. And we had six chairs, maybe it was eight. And that was it. We didn't have

any other furniture.

BOYD:Because everything came with the job at Hindman.

MCLAIN:That's right. Well, our house had burned. We had some furniture, but it burned.

And so in the new--we just So we brought Daddy's eight chairs. (laughs) And I

think Alice or Ruth still have them.

BOYD:Oh really?

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:I mean did you all go--then have to go out and pick out beds?

MCLAIN:Yeah, we had to pick out everything and we went to a used furniture

place outside Berea and Daddy got bought two church pews.

We went and bought one and he brought it home and it worked so well and I think

it was $15 and we went back and by that time the fella knew Daddy wanted the

other one, so he charged $25 for the other one. (laughs) And we put them in the,

I think Alice and Al still have at least one of them, maybe two of--both of

them, and put them in the, that was the most of the seating

in the living room facing one another with a little table in between them that

Grandmother gave us that was old anyway and that was perfect for the classes

because everyone was right there in that space and there was space to play

music. Daddy had good phonograph right there and a very good sound system so it

was good for playing music, recorded

music, good for playing live music, was a good place to talk with one another

and have discussions and it was perfect actually for that purpose. He kind of

set it up like that. And that's where we moved.

BOYD:What do you remember about your mother during that transition?

MCLAIN:I remember Mother being, I thought, kind of heroic in

making that transition. There was just no, problem. She was able to make things

seemed, seem easy. And she was already doing a lot of our organization, a lot

of, you know, if we were traveling somewhere, if we had phone calls for that,

she just took care of that. She talked on the phone very well.

Daddy always thought because she was hard of hearing and had a difficult time

talking with people in a room, on the phone she could hear as well as anybody.

So Daddy thought maybe that was one reason, and she was a very personable person

and very smart. He thought that was one reason that she was good on the phone,

very well organized, and could make--could communicate well.

So she just started naturally doing a lot of our management. What a manager

would do. And she didn't do that because she wanted to be a manager, she wanted

to do that because she wanted her family to be well managed. And so she just did

it. And she continued on for our whole career. She took care of our office, she

made all the phone calls, she did all the paperwork,

uh, she and Daddy did it. And then later on, we didn't need another manager for

that reason, but when we eventually did have another manager in the eighties, it

was wonderful. We had some of the best people we possibly could have ever had

represent us. But that's for another time.

BOYD:Yeah, so 1971, I know

I saw an article, the Richmond Register still is referring to you all as The

Bluegrass State.

MCLAIN:Oh really?

BOYD:Yeah. So at what point did you all realize we're going to call ourselves--

MCLAIN:At that point, when we moved from Hindman, we from that point called

ourselves The McLain Family Band. And we started calling ourselves The McLain

Family Band in Hindman. I remember that because I remember Daddy

saying, “Well there are families like the Carter Family, the Lewis Family, this

family, and there are bands, something band,” but he said, “I don't think there

are any family bands.” And so he said, “I think The McLain Family Band is

distinctive.” And he got my grandfather, who, I think we talked about the fact

he was an amateur printer and woodcarver, he designed

a logo for us that we still use to this day “The McLain Family Band”. Cut it in

wood and printed it on his press.

BOYD:He did that?

MCLAIN:He did that.

BOYD:Oh, that's great.

MCLAIN:And he did, he designed that and then when we started really recording,

we called our record label Country Life Records. And he designed then a logo for

Country Life Records.

He designed and cut in wood and printed all the record titles as long as he lived.

BOYD:That's really pretty special. That's really remarkable. So your father

really kind of spearheaded the transition from Bluegrass State to McLain Family Band.

MCLAIN:It was a decision.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:He said, “No one knows who the Bluegrass State

is. We might as well call ourselves by our name.”

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah. And you talked about the record label. That was really, you

know, just, you all just produced your own and stayed--

MCLAIN:We did. We did that for our whole career.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Record labels asked us about recording, but Daddy wanted to do it our way.

BOYD:

Which is very savvy from a business perspective. I think on--

MCLAIN:Well, it was not a time when people were doing that much.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah.

MCLAIN:It meant we did not have national distribution.

BOYD:Sure.

MCLAIN:It meant, it meant that we did it like people are doing it now, with the

internet and so forth. Boy, if the internet had existed in those days, Daddy

would have been all over it.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:He always stayed up with the latest technology,

whatever it was, right until the Parkinson's was at a place that he couldn't do

that. But right for his whole life, he was right up with the latest technology.

He would study, and study, and study things that weren't even things he

was--when he wasn't even going to buy a car, he would study all about all the

new cars so that he knew what the characteristics

and the strengths and weaknesses of all of them were. He would study everything.

That was in his nature.

BOYD:Let's zoom out for just a second away from music and talk about what's

happening in this period of time, 1971. You know, I think one of the things

that's very ever-present you know, in terms of what's happening in the world was

the Vietnam War.

MCLAIN:Yeah, it

was.

BOYD:What was everybody's awareness of that and also there is your coming up to

be draft age.

MCLAIN:Right. I was, draft age. And we were very aware of the war in Vietnam.

My uncle, my mother's brother,

was, uh, had a career in the military, career in the military, and he was

actually one of the people that decided who should go to Vietnam. His last--he'd

been in the Pentagon. He was a major, he was a major in the Pentagon. They

generally let people

decide where they wanted to go for their last assignment. He said he wanted to

go to Vietnam and they said usually people want, you know, something that's not

that and he said, “No.” He said, “I've had to make the decision to send people.

I want to serve there as well.” And he he went he went to Vietnam.

BOYD:Wow.

MCLAIN:Then, at the last, it wasn't a pleasant place to be, I know, but he made

that decision. We were very aware that I might be drafted

When, in those days, you know, you had draft numbers. When they were chosen, my

draft number was thirteen. Thirteen. And so, it was pretty likely that I would

be called up. And Nixon called off the draft. Probably weeks. I had to, I went

to do all the physical and all that, you know, and

I felt certain that I would be called up in the next--anytime. and Nixon called

off the draft.

BOYD:Wow. So in your case, thirteen is kind of lucky.

MCLAIN:Thirteen was lucky.

BOYD:Yeah. Wow, wow. I can't imagine the emotions, I think--

MCLAIN:Yeah. I knew it was the time. That was going to happen. And he called

off the draft.

BOYD:

How did your, you know, family process the entire--because there's a very vocal

anti-war movement happening. It was a very contentious thing. A lot of music

coming out at that time that was sort of more activist-oriented?

MCLAIN:I don't remember ever expressing, a lot of opinion.

I don't remember Daddy expressing opinion. I don't remember any of us expressing

opinion about that.

BOYD:Yeah. I mean, I know he wasn't big on protest music from a performance

standpoint, right? I think you and I have talked about that before, where,

where, um--

MCLAIN:He didn't feel that was his role. And that wasn't what music was for in

his life. And really it hasn't been in mine either to express opinion about something

through music. Some people do. Some peo--Jean Ritchie, for example, had songs,

she didn't intend to be an activist, she didn't intend to be a this or that, she

just wrote songs from her heart and you know, songs like “Clear Waters” or songs

like “The L&N Don't Stop Here Anymore”, songs like, they just came out. And in

our case, that wasn't

anything, it could have happened, but it didn't. I did make a campaign song for

Thelma Stovall when she was running for governor. She asked me to and I told her

I would.

BOYD:I'm going to get you to play that for me sometime. (McLain laughs) That's

really cool. That is really cool. OK, so we've transitioned to Berea and we've

talked a little bit about your father's new role. I do want to wrap things

up, but I know you've transitioned to become The McLain Family Band at this

point. And there is a sense that, I think, again, like you're talking about the

fire, you know, this idea that it probably did play a role and sort of like it's

time for a change. But was there a sense at this point that we've got this

really good thing going, we're

going to be playing, you know, we're going to go play these festivals and we're

going to start to tour and, you know, you are--

MCLAIN:To be honest, there was not a moment at which we said that. We responded

to invitations. We didn't seek out invitations until much later. Bill Monroe was

nice to us, asked us to sing at his bluegrass festivals. We were invited to

play, uh, Stanley

Dezarn in Hamilton, Ohio, had an organization called the O’Tucks. It was all

Ohioans who came from Kentucky. And he had us and people like Richard Jett's

dancers and Pee-Wee King and Red Stewart, Benny Martin, um, gosh, any number.

Old Joe Clark, yeah, any number. And Terry's son, any number of acts. And he

asked us quite a lot to come to that part.

By that time I'd been playing with Don Reno, and Don had been very nice to me,

and Red Smiley, what a kind man and generous. And they took us places to play,

Melvin and Ray, the Goins brothers took us places. We played at Ralph Stanley's

festival, not the first ones, one or two, but after that he asked us. And there

were, at first, you know, there were bluegrass festivals,

There were places we were asked to come to play for different groups, for shows

we weren't trying to have a career.

BOYD:Yeah, so.

MCLAIN:But it was turning into one.

BOYD:That's interesting. So there wasn't like at this point at Berea in 1971 or

‘72, that there wasn't that master plan that was, you know, kind of being

implemented in terms of what would eventually become a reality.

MCLAIN:

That wasn't what we planned to do. We did--after we moved to Berea, we did miss

the television program and the regularity of having to work up numbers for that.

And we'd made friends with Glenn Pennington in Berea that was one of the new

owners of Renfro Valley at that time. And he said, “Well, do you want to come to

Renfro Valley to sing on the Barn Dance?” And we said, “Well, absolutely we do.”

And so he invited us to come sing on the Renfro Valley Barn Dance. He was very

nice to us and we met a lot of the folks down there at Renfro Valley at that

time. I'm trying to think of the lady's name that was doing all the organization

of that I went to her house and I found out where she lived in in Mount Vernon

and and

I went up and knocked on her door. And I mean, this was before the days of cell

phones and all that and all. And I felt comfortable doing that in those days.

Now, I probably wouldn't just walk up to somebody's door and just knock on it

and say, “I'm Raymond McLain,” but I did. And I said, “We've really been

enjoying going down and singing on the Barn Dance.” She was making the assist

for WRVK, which was the radio station that is part of the Renfro--and she said, “Well,

would you like to do a weekly series on the station?” And I said, “Well, we

certainly would.” Well, we could record that. And we recorded, sometimes we did

it live in the studios there at WRVK, and sometimes we would record it and take

it in if we were going to be touring or something on the weekend and couldn't

go. So we could record that at the house and take it.

BOYD:That was

probably, I mean, that's definitely an upgrade. I mean, from the television

station that you, you know, you were playing at before, which was more of a

local station, to now you're at Renfro Valley, that's gotta be--

MCLAIN:Well, being radio instead of television in those days, I didn't think of

it in exactly the same way.

BOYD:Interesting, okay, yeah.

MCLAIN:And you can go back and edit a tape, which we

couldn't when we were doing the live things. We had, Daddy and I had done radio

before in Hazard with, I think I told you, with Columbus Brewer and Burl C.

Ritchie on tape, but of course those tapes burned in our fire. And so we didn't

have those. So we did record these. Some of them probably should exist, but I

don't know. Probably the radio station might have them, I don't know.

BOYD:

Yeah, yeah, well I'm going to wrap up, and I always send myself a message at the

end of these, you know, recordings that next time we're going to hit the ground

running with you all hitting the performance circuit and, you know starting to

play these festivals and, and, and then move into the, the international stage.

MCLAIN:Well this time by this time we already had played at quite a few

festivals. Ottawa,

OH was one, Don Reno took us there, everybody, in those days, everybody was at

every festival.

BOYD:Yeah

MCLAIN:Because there weren't that many of them. So you'd go and there'd be

Clyde Moody, and there'd be Bill Monroe, and there'd be Lester Flatt, Ralph

Stanley, and there'd be Don Reno, Bill ----(??)--Red Smiley and Bill Harrell,

and there'd be Carl Story, and there'd be, um, Larry Sparks by that time, and

there'd be, I mean, everybody was at every festival.

BOYD:

Yeah.

MCLAIN:And then later on, you know, as there were more festivals, there were

fewer artists at each one.

BOYD:Mm-hm, mm-hm, yeah. Yeah, that's great. Well, we're gonna hit the ground

running on that and really focus in on the music and the performances and then

we're going to travel outside of the United States and travel around the world

with The McLain Family Band. Alright, so.

BOYD:Thank you, Doug.

MCLAIN:Thank you.