CAGLE:All right, I am here with Callie Dickman. My name is Lauren Cagle. We are

conducting an interview for the Kentucky Climate Oral History Project, focused

on climate research, activism, and policymaking in Kentucky. It is the

twenty-eighth of June, 2023, and we are in my office in the Patterson Office

Tower at UK. Hi, Callie.

DICKMAN:Hello.

CAGLE:Thank you so much for doing this.

DICKMAN:Thank you. I'm happy to be here.

CAGLE:All right, well, let's start with an easy question. Tell me a little bit

about yourself.

DICKMAN:For sure. Um, so I am currently a student here at the University of

Kentucky. I'm a rising senior, so I'm going to be a senior in the fall. Um, I'm

from northern Kentucky, um, like the Union Florence area. Um, at UK, I'm

studying a dual degree with environmental and sustainability studies and natural

resources and environmental science. Um, so I'm just really passionate about the

environment. I love being outside. I love nature, all of those things.

CAGLE:Has that always been true

for you?

DICKMAN:Um, I've always loved being outside, but when I was younger and all

throughout all of my schooling until college, I never really thought about

sustainability or environmental science. Um, it was more just like, "Oh, I

appreciate nature and I love nature, but I don't know anything really about it."

Um, and I always kind of felt--I don't know--I always kind of viewed nature as

an escape.

CAGLE:Mmm.

DICKMAN:I never really connected it to my life, other than just like, I like

being there.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Were you--so you're from Union--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--right? So is that, like, did you live in a place that you could sort of

quickly get to outside spaces? Or--

DICKMAN:--um, what I really liked about where I grew up, I just grew up in a

suburb, pretty basic, boring little area--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--um, but I appreciated it because we could run free in our backyard

and there was a fake forest. So it was like a little line between the houses

that when I was a kid I thought was huge and there was a creek. So it was fun to

roam there, but then it was also very nice because we lived

, like, thirty minutes away from Cincinnati where we could go, like, downtown,

feel like more city urban areas. While also then we would go down to Grant

County Dry Ridge and visit my relatives who lived on a farm and it was more

nature, more natural areas. So I felt like--I really appreciated that like, I

don't know, the different realms and I was just able to experience it all. So I

kind of got it all, and I think that really like, I don't know, got my mindset

where it is. I'm like urban and green spaces and the connection of it all. I

think it's cool.

CAGLE:The--so did you have a lot of family with sort of that, like more rural

background, then?

DICKMAN:Um, yeah, so my mom's side was more like from the rural areas in Dry

Ridge. And then my dad's side was more like the suburbs and the city areas. So

bit of both.

CAGLE:Mmm.

DICKMAN:But yeah, I remember I would go visit my mom's side and I would feel

like a fake little like farm girl--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and I would just be like, I get to go live my dreams of like having a

garden and horses

and cows. And it was fun.

CAGLE:But then also leave at the end.

DICKMAN:Yes, exactly, and then go back to just like not having to take care of

those things.

CAGLE:Do you have siblings?

DICKMAN:I have an older brother. Um, his name is Willis. He's two years older

than me, and he is also studying environmental science. So something in the way

we were raised, I guess.

CAGLE:Yeah--

DICKMAN:--yeah--

CAGLE:--so I mean, do your parents, would they consider themselves

environmentally minded?

DICKMAN:Um, I think my mom is more like environmental like policy and more

about those issues. And my dad just really enjoys being outside. He's really

into like fly fishing and kayaking and those types of things. So they both kind

of have their own ways of like respecting and enjoying it.

CAGLE:Interesting.

DICKMAN:Yes.

CAGLE:So when you came to UK, did you know that you were going to have these

dual majors?

DICKMAN:Um, I started with just environmental and sustainability studies, which

is just ENS because I like never really heard about environmental science or

sustainability in high school. But then when I was looking into careers and what

I wanted to do, I was like, what am I passionate about, passionate about and

like what would be fulfilling for me while

, also, I could like give back to the world. Um, and I thought that was perfect.

And I was like, this sounds interesting. So I chose ENS. Um, and then I did that

for a year and it's a Bachelor of Arts. And in high school, I really enjoyed

science and math. And I kind of missed that side. And I also kind of missed, um,

the field work, I guess I was interested in trying out. So I added natural

resources, environmental science, NRES, which is housed in the College of

Agriculture versus the College of Arts and Science. Um, so then I would get the

more like plant specific, like, ID skills and like field skills and then the

more technical side, I guess. And I really liked the overlap so far between the two.

CAGLE:Yeah, so, what were you into in high school then? Like, were you in

clubs? Were you doing a lot of other stuff?

DICKMAN:Um, in high school, I really liked music. I was in band. That was my

main thing, and then I played tennis, um, but I just really liked hiking and I

like being outside. Um, but it never really reflected like in my school

. There wasn't like any sort of like garden club or recycling club or anything

like that, um, which I always thought was like, interesting. I never really

thought about it until now. I like look back and I was like, that really could

have changed like a lot of things. Um, but so I never really got involved, but I

remember I would go to like 4-H club or I would go to like our local like parks

or arboretum and I was like, these are so beautiful. And so I really enjoyed those.

CAGLE:Were you in 4-H then?

DICKMAN:I, um, did. I went to 4-H camp once. And then we would--every once in a

while, they would have like a little like event or just like a one-off like

class or something that we would go to, but not super involved--(laughs).

CAGLE:It's interesting considering because you graduated 2020--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--right?

DICKMAN:Yes.

CAGLE:So, you would have been in high school 2016 to 2020--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm [affirmative}--

CAGLE:--and that's the period where we were seeing like, you know, really

massive school walkouts, like stuff being led by, um, like, Greta Thunberg. And

I think there's this

idea that, you know, a certain generation or like generations graduating at that

point have this like, just, I don't know, like natural environmental--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--but no, it's a matter of your kind of--

DICKMAN:--yeah--

CAGLE:--where you are.

DICKMAN:And I definitely like, I had like Greta's book when it came out, like

No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference. And I remember I was really excited

about that. And then I like, um, I remember like hearing about climate change

and just like learning about it. And then, especially during COVID, when we were

just stuck at home and just reading more about like how that was changing the

world and how it was also affecting like and connected to the environment and

social justice issues. And then I was kind of just like sitting in my room

connecting it all, and I was like, oh, this is interesting. And then it was cool.

CAGLE:Uh, so you graduated high school into COVID?

DICKMAN:Yes, yes, so I did not walk senior year. I got sent home on a random

day, and I, um, yeah, it was a mess.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:I remember my last day--

CAGLE:--how did that go? Yeah

, tell, tell me about that last day. I'm so curious.

DICKMAN:Um, well, I actually had a doctor's appointment--(both laugh)--So it

was like a doctor's appointment that I could not cancel. And it was in the

morning. And I was planning on just like not going to school the rest of the

day. And then like a few days before they announced, they were like, this is

going to be your last day. And I was like, oh, so I did not go to school in the

morning of my last day of high school ever--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--um, and then I showed up with like two hours left in the school day.

And I walked in and I was like, “hey, do you mind if I run around and talk to

all my teachers and like get all my stuff from everywhere? Because I wasn't here

this morning.” And they were like, “why weren't you here?” And I had also gotten

an ear piercing that day. So I was like, my ear was like bloody and I had been

to the doctor's appointment and then I was like running around. But it was

really surreal just because the last hour they kind of just like let everyone

sit there. And we were all just kind of like sitting there reflecting,

especially the seniors. I remember I was in the library and I was just like,

well, see you. Like, I don't know. I went to the band room because that's where

I spent like a lot

of my time being in band. Um, and I was like, this is crazy. And I said bye to

like all my teachers and then we just left. And then I don't know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--we were just stuck at home. Um, and then a lot of my like senior

classes kind of just like gave up. They were like, we don't really want to like

keep going. Um, so they did like weekly check-ins or we like had a Zoom, but,

and we would like read for class and stuff. But it was, it was definitely

surreal, um, and it was very insane.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:I don't know. It all happened very fast.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:And then, um, we did like the virtual graduation and then we were able

to do like a graduation ceremony. We actually went to the Kentucky Speedway.

CAGLE:Oh.

DICKMAN:We were able to, like, do a lap and like get our diploma--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--but we couldn't like, they wouldn't let us like talk to our friends

or like--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

DICKMAN:--you know, um, so it was all very safe--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--but it was kind of cool. I don't know--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--I mean, who else got to graduate at the Kentucky Speedway?

DICKMAN:This is true. Yes, yeah.

CAGLE:So that is, well, and then you start

college.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm, and it was still--

CAGLE:--that must have felt, I don't know. I don't want to put words in your

mouth, but I imagine if I were in your shoes, it would have felt very anticlimactic.

DICKMAN:It was, um, I know my first year I really struggled because I was--I

lived in the dorms, which was nice. But I lived with my like childhood best

friend, which was also really nice. I kind of glad like, cause we knew each

other and we really liked each other. And I'm really appreciative of her always,

um, but it was hard to meet new people. So I met like my first year--my only

person I met in my major, um, their name is Carly and I live with her now--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and we're very good friends. So she's the one that like stuck, but,

um, she's like the only one that I actually met with and connected in my major

for that whole first year. Um, all my classes were online. And then it was also

very hard learning about like the environment and like learning about climate

change and like how to protect like nature and outdoors and

also how to protect people when you can't like interact with them.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, and then I also feel like a lot of, like, when you first like jump

into learning about climate change, it's a lot of doom and gloom. Um, so that

was like all thrown on me while I was like sitting in my dorm room alone, like

looking at a computer screen--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and I was like, this is not good--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--no--

DICKMAN:--um, but I got through and then the next few years like have been

amazing. And I've been able to actually like go to classes and meet people and

like engage in like positive ways. But it was definitely hard and it was

definitely a challenge.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, so--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--I'm very grateful for where I am now and the people that I've

connected with because I, um, like, just in the past few years with like

internships and jobs and like meeting with professors, I've been able to like

grow so much and learn so many new things and have so many opportunities and get

like engaged on campus and in the Lexington community.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, and I feel like--like a part of me is sad because I'm like, I feel

like I could have done that my freshman year if it wasn't during

COVID. And I feel like I could have even grown even more. But also I'm so

grateful for where I am now, and I think, you know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--we all got through it together.

CAGLE:Yeah. What is it? What is it that the Governor Beshear always says? Like,

we'll get through this--

DICKMAN:--yes, yeah--

CAGLE:--we’ll get through this together--

DICKMAN:--Just over and over--

CAGLE:--when he was doing the daily--yeah, yeah. I mean, I think that's the

hard thing about regrets, right? Is like, who knows what it--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--life would look like otherwise?--

DICKMAN:--yes, yeah--

CAGLE:--if you're happy with where you are right now. So one last question

before we talk about where you are right now. What did you play in band?

DICKMAN:In band, um, so I started in sixth grade. I played piano before that,

and then when I joined band, I played flute. I really wanted to play saxophone

and I could not for some reason. But I'm really glad I played flute. I feel like

it was fitting for me. Um, and then so I did that all through high school. And

then in marching band, I played flute for two years and then I was drum major

for two years.

CAGLE:Woah.

DICKMAN:So that was exciting, but yes.

CAGLE:Do you still play?

DICKMAN:Every once in a while I pick it up and goof around. But

, um, and I always told myself because I was like, oh, I'll go to college and

join a little group. Like I didn't want to do band in college because I didn't

want it to be like my thing again. Um, but then it was COVID, so nobody was like

getting together and playing--

CAGLE:--right, yeah--

DICKMAN:--so then I was like, never mind.

CAGLE:Especially the woodwinds--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm, yes, we weren't, yeah--

CAGLE:--and the wind instruments. It’s, like, you don’t want to be blowing--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm, yes. Very close to each other--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--um, but--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--I really enjoyed it, and I think it's a good skill to have--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--I love music.

CAGLE:Why? What do you love about it?

DICKMAN:Um, I think it's just the way it portrays emotion, and then it can also

connect people like live music, I think is super powerful. And I feel like you

go to concerts and you're like, everyone is so beautiful enjoying--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--like the music in their own little world--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--um, so I just really like that--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--and then being able to like play it and like play for other people is

always fun--

CAGLE:--yeah. It’s very cool--

DICKMAN:--and play together. It's like--

CAGLE:--playing together, that’s its own--

DICKMAN:--I know it's powerful. Yes, yeah, mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--when you find yourself in step with someone else.

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah, mm-hmm. And then, um, when I was drum major, being able to

like, like lead

that people who are all playing together and like be a part of that, that was

amazing. And they're just like looking at all of them on the field, and I was

like, this is amazing--(laughs).

CAGLE:Did you--were you ever nervous?

DICKMAN:Always.

CAGLE:Always--(both laugh)--I feel like I would be so nervous to like make a

mistake and suddenly we're all like, you know, marching on the ones and threes

or whatever--(laughs).

DICKMAN:Yeah, no. My first--so I was like backfield drum major my junior year

and then senior year I was like the head one. And the first ever, like, away

tournament we went to, I like messed up like not terribly like I fixed it right

away. But there was like a measure where I was like, this isn't right--

CAGLE:--oh--

DICKMAN:--and then I like immediately corrected. But I feel like messing up

that first time really helped because then I was like, nevermind guys, we're all

good. Um, yeah, and I feel like it was just nice to like--everyone was super

supportive and nice. And like we had a great leadership team to support me. So--

CAGLE:--nice--

DICKMAN:--it was good. But it was it definitely helped me like grow and get on

my comfort shell and do something new and grow as a person and a leader. So I

think that was good

--(laughs).

CAGLE:That's really cool. Well, because you were, I mean, from my internet

sleuthing about you--

DICKMAN:--yes--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--you were also very successful academically--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--in school.

DICKMAN:Yes.

CAGLE:So governor’s scholars and lots of honor roll and things. So that must

have kept you really busy--

DICKMAN:--yes--

CAGLE:--doing both.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm. Yeah. I, um, I, yeah, I was pretty good at high school,

hopefully--(both laugh)--I'm still pretty good at college, hopefully.

CAGLE:Yeah. Do you feel like that translated? Like the skills that let you be

good at high school, do they apply in college or is it different?

DICKMAN:I think there's definitely a learning curve, but I think there's,

there's a similar-- similar ways. I was always pretty, like I'm good at like

doing homework. Like, I know that's weird to say, but like when someone gives

you like an assignment or a task, I'm good at like figuring it out. Like even if

I don't like fully understand the concept, I can like complete the task--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--I don't know if that makes sense--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--But so I feel like that's been very helpful, um, and then I also just

like learning new

things, which is helpful. And then, um, I don't know, I feel like I'm hopefully

good with people and just like connecting with people. And I feel like that's

always helpful in school and classes and stuff.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm. So let's talk about UK. So you've been here for three years and

have gotten involved in a lot of different things during that time. Will you

just kind of talk through--like we heard a bit about your first year--how you

ended up adding--like at what point you added NRES, how you've gotten involved

with some of the like projects and groups, and you've done a bunch of different

like internships at this point. So just kind of like talk us through that timeline.

DICKMAN:Yeah, for sure. Um, I'll have to like think myself.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:It's been a lot. I definitely think that overlapped from high school

cause I was super involved in high school and then I got to college and like

COVID I kind of crashed and I was like, I need to get back to where I was cause

I like being involved and I like, like, different groups and like having things

to do. Because I feel like during COVID we were all like, there's nothing to do.

And I personally

was going insane. Um, so freshman year I started off with ENS, um, and I really,

really liked it. I don't think I got involved until my spring semester. The

first club I kind of like got involved with and joined was, um, LEYO, which is

Lexington Environmental Youth Outreach. Um, so I really am interested in like

environmental education, um, especially for younger students. Because that's

something I never had. And then like reflecting on why I wanted to do ENS, I was

kind of like, well, if I had learned about this when I was like in elementary or

middle school, I feel like my whole life would have been changed. So I think if

those are tools that were like accessible and like readily available for all

students, that would be amazing. Um, so I got involved with that club, which was

pretty small post COVID. And then they were just like kind of starting up. Um,

so we just like had brainstorming ideas about how to get involved. And there

were two seniors who were both ENS majors who were running the club and their

name were both Maddies. Um, and I--one of them specifically

was like really, really nice to me and was like a mentor. Um, and she just kind

of, like, helped me, like, understand like why I was passionate about ENS and

get more involved in this club. And like, she would meet with me and like talk

to me about like how to get involved. So she was super helpful, um, in me like

kind of finding my way. Um, so then with LEYO, the first thing we did was

actually with a boy scout troop, um, which had kids of all ages, boys and girls.

It might've been a boy and girl scout. I don't know if they were mixed or if it

was just girls were included, um, so all peoples. Um, but I was able to put

together a presentation and an activity about food sustainability.

CAGLE:Oh

DICKMAN:Um, and then we went and presented that and I thought that was really,

really cool. Um, and so then that was kind of like the first thing I did out in

the community. And I was like, well, that was really fun. I liked talking to

people. I liked, um, like I like educating people and I like standing, like, I

don't know. I was like, that's really interesting. And then also having them do

the activity and like draw, like how they saw, like incorporating sustainability

into their food practices

. That was what I had them do with like crayons and stuff. Um, it was fun. So

that was the first thing I did with them. Um, and then in the sophomore year, I

think I added NRES in between the fall and spring semester. I honestly do not

remember--(laughs)--um, somewhere during my sophomore year, I was like, I really

want to get more involved in like the actual scientific side of

NR--environmental science. Um, because I really, really liked the social side

and I like interacting with people. Um, but I wanted to learn the other skillset

as well, and I also kind of wanted to figure out how I could overlap them in

like my own life in my own work. Um, because I think the social side of

sustain--like sustainability and social work is like super important and I'm

super passionate about it, but I also want to be able to like go out and be

like, Oh, that's what this tree is. And like, in order to like teach like

children or like any people about the environment, I also want to be able to

like tell them all these like cool little facts

and, um, field work I think is just super interesting and rewarding. Um, so I

added that at some point, and then I got involved with student government here

at UK. So this SGA[1], um, and I was a sustainability

coordinator. So I was part of the executive team in the student government. Um,

so there was a director of sustainability. It was Olivia Tussie who was also

another mentor and she's amazing. Um, so I was a coordinator for Olivia and I

was able to just like kind of watch what she was doing, um, at UK with

sustainability. And then also I got involved with the sustainability, like,

office at UK. So I met all of those people--

CAGLE:--and Olivia was an intern with the office of sustainability too, right?

DICKMAN:Yes. Um, I think Olivia was a recycling intern.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Yes

CAGLE:Yeah? Yeah.

DICKMAN:I believe, um--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--so--

CAGLE:--yes--

DICKMAN:--yes--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yes, we went to a recycling facility together one time--

DICKMAN:--(gasps)--very cool, very cool

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah

.

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah. Um, so she was amazing to kind of like work under.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so I was able to just like become involved there. I remember one of

the big things we did there was plant pollinator gardens, um, by the library on

campus. So that was like the big project I helped with there. Um, and then we

also just did a ton of other stuff.

CAGLE:Was that--who was leading that project?

DICKMAN:That was--Oh, um, I can picture their face--Quincy.

CAGLE:Yeah--

DICKMAN:--I don't remember--

CAGLE:--I wondered if it was Quincy--

DICKMAN:--yeah, it was Quincy--

CAGLE:--because she was doing that through her--I think--was, she was a, uh,

either a horticultural or landscape architecture student.

DICKMAN:Yes, I think maybe both--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--but I think LA--[2]

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--um, yes. So that was Quincy's project and we kind of just like helped

with that. And then, um, with my coordinator position for student government, I

also served on the SSC, which is Student Sustainability Council. So I was the

student government representative on the SSC. So I was the SGA rep

on the SSC--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and there's so many acronyms--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and then, yeah, it's a mess.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so that's when I heard about like a ton of sustainability projects

on campus. Um, the SSC is kind of--it’s a group on campus that gets funding. Um,

every student, I think it's a four-dollar fee that every student pays that goes

towards sustainability on campus, and then this group of students, um, listens

to proposals and here's projects about how to give the funds out. So I was able

to serve on that council, and that was also just really, really interesting. Um,

just to hear about what was going on. I'm not super interested in like the

economics or like money side of environmental work. So that was kind of hard for

me to, like, get super passionate about, but just sitting there listening to

people like, and all these people came and like presented and they were super

passionate about their projects. It just makes you passionate. So I just wanted

to say yes to everything--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--but other people were like not--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--so on board--(both laugh)--but I was like, yeah, sustainability

project, do it--

CAGLE:--yeah--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--um, why not? Um, but so it was super cool to serve on that. So I did

that for my whole

--or I guess for half of my sophomore year, almost three fourths, cause I got

involved with SGA in like the October of my sophomore year. So almost all of it.

CAGLE:How did you get connected with SGA?--

DICKMAN:--um--

CAGLE:--because it wasn't--the director of sustainability is not an elected

position, right?

DICKMAN:Um, no. So the director of sustainability, that's what Olivia was. And

it's just part of the executive team for student government.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so you apply as a student like the year before, um, and then you

get interviewed by the student body president and then also just like the SGA

advisors and some members of Senate, um, and they interview. And so it's those

people who pick the executive board and then, um, you apply--they open

coordinator positions. And then in the fall after they've picked their directors

and the directors apply or like interview the coordinators. So, um, I applied

just on like BBInvolved when it was open. But the way I heard about it was

because that September of my sophomore year, um, Olivia was holding a

sustainability business fair. Um, so it was just like a student event that SGA

was hosting with Olivia. Um, and I went and there was an SGA booth and I just

like walked up and I was like, like, how did you do this? Like, how do you get

involved? And Olivia was like, you should apply to be a coordinator. So then she

gave me her little business card that had like the email and then I like did it

and then I got in, and it was super exciting. And, um, I was super, I don't

know, I'm super happy that I went to the event and that I ran into her and I

asked and it was amazing because it's--that was kind of like the first big thing--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--that got me to where I am today. And I met a ton of people there. Um,

and I didn't really even know that it was like student government at the time. I

just knew it was a sustainability position. Um, so I had no idea that there was

a whole other, like, government side of things like the Senate and the, all the

different students there and

all the different directors who are doing different projects. Um, because I was

kind of like in my bubble of like ENS students who are all like, I don't know,

love nature and granola people--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and like all these things--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and I kind of like felt like I was in that bubble and then I went out

and I was like, Oh, there's whole other majors here on this campus--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--who knew? Um, so then I did that the rest of my sophomore year. Um--

CAGLE:--is that a paid, or are those paid positions?

DICKMAN:The coordinator position is not, but it's just like two to three hours

a week. Um, the director position is paid. Um, so yeah. Um, I'm trying to think

what else I did my sophomore year. There's definitely something else--(laughs).

CAGLE:Was that when you were doing the ambassador?

DICKMAN:Yes.

CAGLE:Yeah, okay.

DICKMAN:Thank you for looking me up--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:Um--(both laugh)--I was also a arts and sciences, um, ambassador, um,

just for the college and that was--it wasn't super like--there wasn't

sustainability focused or anything, but it was more the people side of things.

Um, I was interested

in, like, just, like, recruitment and, like, getting people passionate and

excited about coming to college. Um, and then, so through that I just like met a

bunch of like incoming students and then, like, brought people on tours of

campus. And I also always like threw in the ENS major--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and talked about the sustainability stuff that was happening on

campus as much as I could. Um, so that was super fun. Um, I don't know. It was

just a way to get involved and meet more people. And then--I also--another thing

I did for SGA my sophomore year was develop a presentation and like information

about sustainability on campus tours. Because I was like walking these with my

ambassador position. I was like walking people around campus and I was like

saying these little facts. I was like, there's, like, fourteen-thousand trees on

campus and like the student center, like part of it like collects water and the

rainwater is like underground and all this stuff. Um, and like the stairs in the

student center are made from like reclaimed wood. And I was like, do they say

these on like normal campus tours--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--or is, are they just getting like

the super environmentally focused side of things?

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so then I reached out to Shane Tedder and then somebody from

recruitment, um, and I put together a little presentation and I was like, here's

how you can incorporate sustainability facts into campus tours. And we made a

little map of like different stops. So that was exciting. That was cool to do.

CAGLE:That's really cool.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Yes, um, I do need to check in on that to see if they're actually doing that--

CAGLE:--Mmm, mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--next year. I will be doing that--(both laugh)--Um, so I thought that

was fun.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Yes, and then at the end of my sophomore year, I was both an ENS and

NRES major and content and I'd started doing NRES classes and I really liked it.

Um, and I had met some more people from the ENS major, but, um, one of the

distinct things I remember that like kind of changed my college, um, experience

from COVID was an NRES class trip that we took to Mammoth Cave. So it was in

--I can't remember if it was the fall or spring of sophomore year--I think it

was the fall. Um, but it was right after like COVID was like wrapping up and we

were starting to do more things in-person and they were like, okay, we're going

to do like this class trip that was all like newer students to NRES and we're

going to go to Mammoth Cave for like a weekend or like, I guess it was school

days. Um--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--so then we went, and I met a ton of people that I'm like still

friends with today and that they were all amazing people, um, that were all like

in the NRES major. And then, um, we also, it was my first experience doing field

work. So we like got a tour of Mammoth Cave, which was super cool, but then the

next day we went out and we did muscle sampling in Green River. So we were just

like in the river all day, like pulling out these muscles and like IDing them

and these, like, experts in the field were walking around like telling us facts.

And I was like, this is so fun. And I felt like that really connected me to the

major and to UK and all these people and also back to, like, the environment.

And I was like, this is what I've wanted from my college experience. And I was

like, now I've gotten it and that's so exciting. Um, so

that was kind of like the first thing that brought me back to, I was like, this

will be good. I can do in person things and I can connect with people and I'm excited.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so then as my sophomore year was wrapping up, I started applying

for all these internships and all these like things for next year because I was

like, things are starting again. I want to get more involved. Um, so the spring

semester of my sophomore year, I did the tree cats program which is hosted with

the Urban Forest Initiative. Um, and it's just a like five-week program where

like--it's on Saturdays, and it was on Zoom still, but it was still a new group

of people that were really passionate about trees. And it was just like a

seminar series where each day they talked about a different tree topic and they

met like experts. And then there was also like a final project where you could

do your own urban forestry thing. Um, and for me it kind of was just like

checking all the boxes because, um, it was like urban forestry. So it connected

like urban living and communities

and people to like trees and field work. And I was like, this is amazing. These

are amazing people that are doing amazing, like amazing work. Um, and I was

like, this is so cool. So I applied for UFI’s--which is Urban Forest

Initiative--summer internship and for their SIP. Um, and SIP is the student

internship program here at UK, which is like what Olivia Tussey did and Quincy

did. Um, and it's like with the office of sustainability and the student

sustainability council funds it. So it was like connecting everything really.

Um, so I was just kind of like, I want to get involved with UFI. And I was like,

how can I do that? So I applied for all these things and I ended up getting

their summer internship and the SIP position.

CAGLE:Mmm, mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so I was like, this is super exciting. Um, and then I also applied

to be the director of sustainability for SGA because Olivia was graduating and I

had been a coordinator and I was like, that would be so fun as well. And I ended

up getting that

position as well--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--so I was like, my junior year is booked. I'm going to be so involved.

I'm so excited. Um, so that whole summer after my sophomore year, I moved off

campus. I lived in Lexington, um, for the first time. And it was just so

exciting to be living up by myself. I had a roommate, but she, um, was at 4-H

camp. So I had the apartment to myself. So I was living by myself in Lexington,

which is like--I'd only ever lived on campus in the dorms. So I feel like I

really got involved with the community there. Like I--every once in a while I

volunteered at like Seedleaf and then I went to the farmer's markets and I would

just like walk around and explore while also that whole summer I was working

with the Urban Forest Initiative. So I met their whole team. Um, and we did a

park tree inventory of, um, twelve Lexington parks. So we wanted to do a park in

each council district. So I was going out and doing field work and, like,

measuring trees and learning tree ID while also creating these reports that were

going to go out to these communities and also learning about

, like, the council districts and, like, the, um, community and, like, local

government that's, like, going on with trees and all of these things. And I was

like, this is amazing, and I'm so happy to be here.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so that was that summer and it was amazing. And we also just like

learned how to map trees on like ArcGIS and then all these different skills. And

then also towards the end of that, I was doing social media for UFI and learning

those skills. Um, and then also working on the Tree Week planning team. So Tree

Week is a week-long celebration that UFI and like other Lexington

and--throughout Kentucky, like community stakeholders--um, work to like create

and put together and it's in October and it's amazing. Um--

CAGLE:--it is really fun--

DICKMAN:--it is really fun.

CAGLE:I--my boyfriend and I always do the passport.

DICKMAN:Oh yes, that's amazing--(laughs).

CAGLE:Yeah, so we have like a collection of--

DICKMAN:--events--

CAGLE:--passport prizes--

DICKMAN:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah. One year was a magnet. Last year was a pin--

DICKMAN:--(gasps)--nice--

CAGLE:--with a Bur oak on it.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm, that's awesome

. That is cool. That's funny.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, yeah. So, because I had done Tree Week, like I had gone like my

freshman, sophomore years, I like heard about Tree Week--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and then I got to be a part of the planning team and I was like

running the social media, and I created, like, a postcard for it, and I got to

like see like the background of it all happening, and that was really cool. So

when junior year started, um, a lot of the fall semester was Tree Week planning

for UFI, which was so cool. And I was, it was like, this is amazing. And, um,

just seeing all the community members like come together to put on this like

environmentally focused event and learning about all these different like

stakeholders and like people in the community who are just passionate and like

willing to give their free time to like put on these events, um, was really,

really cool. And that's where I met Mary Arthur, um, who we are both working

with, um, on Climate Conversations project today. And I remember the first time

I met Mary, she was like so well-spoken and like articulate. I was like, I

--it would be a dream to work with her. I was like, and now I am. And every day

I'm like, I like sit next to her and I'm like, this is crazy--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--yeah. She's, yeah. It's hard to talk about how awesome she is.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm. Yes, and then, um, Claire Hilbrecht, who is also on our Climate

Conversations team was part of the tree inventory, like she was the one putting

it together. And I was like, Claire is also so well-spoken and articulate and so

are you. And I was always like--that was one of my goals--was, like, in college,

I was like, I want to be able to like articulate why the environment is important--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and also like my feelings and just, like be, like well-spoken and

like about the things that I am passionate about. And then people always told

me, well, just like be around people who are like that--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and then I was like, okay, I will do my best--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--and I have--

CAGLE:--doing it--

DICKMAN:--and I'm so grateful--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--um, but yeah, so I--Tree Week all fall, and then I was also doing the

role of the director of sustainability for student government. So in the fall

I did my own, um, business fair that Olivia had done the year before. So I

brought a bunch of sustainability, environmental focused businesses to campus to

talk to students. I hosted my own Tree Week event, um, with help from everyone

else in student government, and obviously all my coordinators who were amazing.

Um, and then we did a showing of the Lorax on campus--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and it was amazing. Um, and it was for the Lexington community and

for, like the UK community. So it was really cool, and it was for trees.

CAGLE:Yeah--

DICKMAN:--um--

CAGLE:--was it like earlier in the day so the kids could come or was it like an

evening thing? Like the--how they do the movies?

DICKMAN:I think it was at like five PM. So an evening thing--

CAGLE:--nice, a bit of both--

DICKMAN:--but there were a few kids there--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--which I was kind of surprised to see that family showed up to campus.

And I was like, “hi guys,”--

CAGLE:--yay--

DICKMAN:--I was like, “this is so exciting.”

CAGLE:Well, there are so many people that work here or even students who have kids.

DICKMAN:Exactly, yeah. So it was amazing. Um, so focusing on all of those

things, it was a very tree focused semester, but it was amazing. Um

, and then last spring, the spring of my junior year, um, for UFI, I was able to

develop my own individual project cause that's part of the, um, SIP, like,

program is you do your own individual thing. Um, so I worked with the UFI leads

who were, um, Lynn Phillips and Lynne Rieske-Kinney at the time. So the Lynn's--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--um, to develop a project. Um, and I decided I wanted to do an

environmental education one again. Um, so I created a, um, 4-H like program to

be used throughout the state. Um, that was called adopt a tree to, like,

build--adopt a tree to build your own forest. And it was a workbook, um, which

was made up of--I can't remember now--six activities. I spent hours on it and I

can't remember--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--I gave it away--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

DICKMAN:--I was like [?? WORDS UNCLEAR], um, six or maybe eight. I don't know.

But, um, it uses UFI's adopt a tree program, which is a program where anyone in Kentucky

can adopt any tree. Um, it's just a web form you fill out and it tells you

different like environmental benefits of your tree. And it kind of just like has

you form a connection with the tree, and I think it's really rewarding. So it

walks students through, um, adopting trees and each tree has an activity to go

along with it. So the first one is like adopt a deciduous or coniferous. Um, so

you learn the difference and then you adopt one of each and then it's adopt a

big versus little--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--so once you fill out the web form, it's like adopt the big tree and

the tree has like these stormwater benefits and carbon dioxide and all these

things. So they can compare the big versus little. Um, and then it was also just

like sketch the leaf and sketch the tree and like write how that you make--the

tree makes you feel. Um, so just those activities like aim for kids. And then I

wrote a lesson plan for the educators to have and then made a workbook for the

kids. And then I gave it to extension specialist and 4-H to be published and to

be put out into the state--

CAGLE:--wow--

DICKMAN:--um, so that was really, really cool and it was amazing, and I just

met a ton of cool people in extension

and in 4-H. Um, and then I also just got to, like, create something--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--that would give back to the youth which is something that I always

wanted to have as a kid--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--so that was amazing.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, so it was very cool. Um, and then for SGA in the spring, we did

lots of things--(both laugh)--um, lots of meetings. Um, um, one of the main

things I did was I was able to speak at the Blue Grass Green Source

Sustainability Showcase. Um--

CAGLE:--I think that’s how we met--

DICKMAN:--sustainability summit--

CAGLE:--initially--

DICKMAN:--yes, yes--

CAGLE:--was there--

DICKMAN:--yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--um, yes, that was amazing--

CAGLE:--fellow speakers--

DICKMAN:--um, I know it was crazy--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--It was a good time.

CAGLE:Uh-huh.

DICKMAN:So I went and I got to speak in front, and I was on the student panel.

So I was actually the oldest on the panel--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--which I thought was kind of funny--

CAGLE:--yeah--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--because they, um, Shane had reached out and was like, would you be

willing to speak at the sustainability thing? And I was like, sure--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

DICKMAN:--I got nothing else to do.

CAGLE:--yeah--(both laugh)--

DICKMAN:Um, and so he was like, okay, you'll be on the student panel. So I was

expecting all college students.

CAGLE:Right.

DICKMAN:And then I get there and it's me

, two high schoolers, and then like a fourth grader--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and I was like, this is good. This is very good.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um--

CAGLE:--you’re the wisened old soul--

DICKMAN:--I know I was like, Oh, I'm, I'm going to have so much advice for

that. No.

CAGLE:Yeah--(laughs).

DICKMAN:Um, so I just went and I was able to talk about what I was doing in

college and--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--pretty much jsut this and why people should be passionate about--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--why all generations should care about the environment.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:So that was really amazing. Um, and then I have no idea. Did lots of

things ran all over the place. Um, yes, but it was amazing. I also just got more

involved with like, um, other, like, tree and, like, environmental related

things. So I went to a tree planting in Eastern Kentucky--

CAGLE:--oh--

DICKMAN:--that was on top of like a reclaimed mine. Um, and that was like a day

that really stuck out to me because we planted like fifty trees. Well, like I

personally planted like fifty trees on top of this, like mine and everybody else

planted and they were just--it was insane. And then, um, a lot of like

invasives removals and, like, the Lexington parks, and just getting involved

there, um, with the community that I like met through all these other positions.

So that was amazing.

CAGLE:I wanted to ask you about that, of like doing all this work on campus and

then, you know, it hasn't really come up--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--but like you're also taking a full class this whole time--

DICKMAN:--yes, yes mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--right, and maintaining good standing as a student--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and so--as a double major--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--so I was wondering about how you found time to still cultivate and like

nourish that desire to be outside and, like, be in the environment, and--

DICKMAN:--it was definitely hard. Um, it helps that like my classes take me outside--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--and that like they give me the opportunity to kind of reflect on

that, but every once in a while I would be like sitting in a class and I'd be

like, I don't want to be here right now. Like, I want to be, like, going and planting--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--trees and like working outside--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

DICKMAN:--but I'm like, but that's why I'm doing this.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:So then I can later do those things

--

CAGLE:--right--

DICKMAN:--forever. Um, and it was definitely hard to like stay on top of things--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and too many classes, but I--for most of the classes I've enjoyed

them--(both laugh)--um, and I enjoy what I'm learning and I enjoy learning new

things. Um, and I don't know--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--I have--sometimes I like, I need to remind myself that I was like, I

am taking classes--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--right--

DICKMAN:--not just working these things.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, but all of like the student jobs and like on campus jobs are super

understanding and they're always like school comes first and prioritize classes--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--so all of like my advisors and professors I've worked for have always

helped me in that, um, and just have given me advice. And I feel like the skills

I've learned in like these jobs and internships have helped me--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--you know, like with the SGA position, um, the sustainability

director, you kind of are just like in charge of like what you want to do and

then you get your little team and you connect with people. Um, but you are

forced to like stay on top of things yourself.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:So I'm like doing that also helped me to stay on top of classes and

like you were like doing

office hours for that, but you can also work on other stuff and it's just--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--it's super helpful. Yeah.

CAGLE:It's interesting like thinking about the way that you've talked about how

you chose your majors--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and the kinds of things that you have gotten involved with. There's

like multiple pieces and you've even said this about doing the, um, the

internship through the office of sustainability that it like brings everything together--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--you know, checks all the boxes. That it's like, it's about connecting

with people--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--but it's also about like physically experiencing the environment--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--right, and it's also about, um, educating and it's also about, um, like

building something, like building infrastructure, creating things that, so it

isn't just, like you personally have to be out there doing--but like you're

leaving behind things that other people can use. Like a lot--like it's--I mean,

it's complicated, but it feels like

you're describing, um, like a whole being part of a bigger system.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Like it isn't--you're not the person it sounds like, who's like, I want

to study like this kind of tree and I just want to be out--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--looking at this tree and I don't want to do anything else.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Right. Like you need all of that complexity to feel like fulfilled in the

work that you're doing.

DICKMAN:Yeah, I definitely agree. And I think being connected to all those

things, like for me, it's really rewarding, but it's always been like kind of

hard, especially in academics, because people are like, you need to have like a

specialty in like--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--especially like looking at grad school and stuff. I'm always like, I

don't know if I want to go to grad school because I don't want to be like--like

I want to be an expert in like many things--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and I just want to be like super well-rounded, um, and just like know

a bunch of little things and be able to like understand the world around me at

like a certain level. Um, so it's definitely hard when people are like, what do

you want to be like a certain expert in? And I know when people are like talking

like, oh, what do you want to do? I'm like, I don't have

like a specific career goal. I just want to be like a part of a community and be

able to have a career where I can give back to the environment and interact with

people. And I feel like there are so many things where I could like be fulfilled

and do that, which I think is a good thing. But other people are like, no--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--you need a specific goal. And I was like, but why?

CAGLE:Wait, who is telling you this?

DICKMAN:I don't know--(both laugh)--I feel like it's mostly other students who like--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

DICKMAN:--I feel like I stress them out because they're like, yeah, but what

are you going to do? Like what job are you going to apply for? And I was like,

whichever one there is--(both laugh)--and they're like, no, but where? And I was

like, somewhere--(both laugh).

CAGLE:I mean, it's not like you have been hurting for opportunities--

DICKMAN:--exactly--

CAGLE:--to have jobs as a student--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--so why would it be any different--

DICKMAN:--yeah--

CAGLE:--after college?

DICKMAN:I'm hoping that it rolls over.

CAGLE:Yeah--(laughs)--yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, yes, I feel like my parents are also hoping that it rolls

over--(both laugh)--um, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--I think it'll be okay. And I'm confident that like, whatever like

community I end up in, I'll be able to like, find a place and

give back--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and like, feel connected. Um, I feel like it'll be possible, and I'm

not super picky. So I feel like it's a good thing--(laughs).

CAGLE:Do you want to head back to Northern Kentucky? Or--

DICKMAN:--no--(both laugh)--um, I really like the Lexington community. I feel

like, um, I really have enjoyed it here and the people that I've connected with

and the people I've met. So I'd be happy staying here, um, and like working for

some organization or group or whatever comes up. Um, or if there's a grad

student position that opens up at UK, I think that could be super interesting.

Um, but I also might--like I always wanted to do like seasonal like fieldwork

and just like go out and travel and like experience the world and like the

environment that I'm fighting so hard for. I feel like it would be really cool

to see that. Um, and if I could do that in a way that was like a job in like a

seasonal position in like a park or something, I think that would be really fun.

Might as well do it while I'm young and

can.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:But then I'm also like, oh, but I can go to school and go to grad

school when I'm young and all these things, but I'll figure it out--(laughs).

CAGLE:There's--you’re not hurting for options. That’s for sure

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Well, let's talk about the Climate Conversations work.

DICKMAN:Okay.

CAGLE:So, um, and then I want to kind of expand outwards from that to talk more

about how climate has like threaded through some of this stuff.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Because mostly we have been talking in more--in broader terms about like--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--environment and sustainability and whatnot, which is something that's

interesting about these interviews, actually, is where are those lines?

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:And like, you know, what does it mean for someone to be doing climate

work? Like, there are lots of people doing work that is very impactful on the

climate that don't necessarily call themselves--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--like, you know, so, um, yeah, so Climate Conversations, will you walk

me through from your perspective, how we ended up at the point that we're at now--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--with the assumption that whoever's listening to this has no idea what

we're talking about?

DICKMAN:Yes--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--yeah, I'll do my best. Yeah.

CAGLE:Okay.

DICKMAN:Um, so

end of junior year, I was like, finishing up my work with the Urban Forestry

Initiative. And I was like, Oh, what am I going to do this summer? And what am I

going to do at, like, senior year and all of these things. Um, and I had met all

these people and like connected with all these people from my work that whole

past year. Um, and then I spoke at the Bluegrass Greensource Sustainability

Show--uh, summit. What was it called?

CAGLE:Not showcase, yeah summit

DICKMAN:Yeah summit, um--

CAGLE:--the Sustainability Showcase is like the UK student--

DICKMAN:--yes I also--that’s a whole other thing--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah, yeah--

DICKMAN:--um, Sustainability Summit, and then Mary Arthur was there. And I, um,

walked up to her because I like recognized her and I just wanted to say hey, and

like check in, um, because I was just like, no way. Um, and she waved at me when

I was up on stage. And I was like--(gasps)--this is exciting--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--so then, um, I went up to say hey, and she was like, what are you

doing this summer? And I was like, Oh, well, nothing right now, but

blah, blah, blah, I've applied for all these things. And she was like, well,

you, um, should become involved with the Climate Conversations Project. And I

had heard about that from Tree Week and from working with Claire Hilbrecht. Um,

so Climate Conversations was a project, um, I heard about it from Tree Week. And

it was just a group of Lexington community members who were getting together,

um, and who had created a few little slogans and yard signs and these things who

wanted to reach out to more people and engage more people with climate work and

have people just like talk and think about climate in their everyday lives, um,

especially when they normally wouldn't. Um, and when Mary approached me, they

kind of wanted to form a more like cohesive goal. And they wanted, I guess, help

doing that. And they were like, you should get involved

. And I was like, “I would love to be involved”--(both laugh)--um, so that's

where I met you. And I started meeting Christine and then also working with

Claire and Mary, um--

CAGLE:--and then Alex joined in a little bit later.

DICKMAN:--yes, and then I met Alex as well from Bluegrass Greensource, right?

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Yes, awesome. Um, I wonder if Alex was at the Sustainability Summit.

CAGLE:Probably.

DICKMAN:Woah

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:I did not think about that--(laughs).

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:We were probably all there and did not know.

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, that's funny. But so I started meeting with Claire and Mary at

first, we were just meeting on campus, um, like during the spring semester. And

Claire and I decided to write a grant for the Student Sustainability Council,

um, to fund our time and to also help fund Climate Conversation moving forward,

just with like materials and stuff. Um, so we were brainstorming what we wanted

to do specifically to like present to the SSC. And I was like, well, in the

summer, we can like do the First Sundays Project

, which is something that's going on in the Lexington community right now at,

um, Julietta Market, where it's just bringing in environmental and music

organizations to, um, talk to the community. And we've been tabling that and

having Climate Conversations with people. And we've been testing a lot of

different methods.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so I was like, well, we can focus on that this summer while also

creating these different methods and finding how to have effective conversations

with people while also creating a social media presence. And then in the fall, I

can focus on bringing it to campus and having these conversations with students

who aren't in like the ENS and NRES programs. So I thought--so we wrote that

grant and presented it and they, um, accepted it. And I've been working with you

guys ever since.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:And it's been very rewarding.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, and I've enjoyed it a lot.

CAGLE:Me too--

DICKMAN:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--I really have. Yeah, so right now we're--yeah, because it's it really

has been a process of like figuring out how we're having

these conversations. And like, this was clear last night when we were at the

Trees Lexington meeting together to talk about this work--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--um, and Christine and Mary were there too. And like, I realized while

we were talking to those folks that you really can't underscore enough. No,

we're just having conversations.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Like that's, that is it. That's the point. Like we are going right now to

Julietta Marget on first Sundays--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and be like, hey, come talk to us about climate change--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and like, that's, that's not for anything, right? Like that--but it

really is, I think a novel concept for a lot of people.

DICKMAN:I feel like it shocks a lot of people. And like, even when I'm like

explaining it to people, sometimes I struggle--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--and I feel like I'm getting better at it, like putting it into words.

CAGLE:Me too.

DICKMAN:Um, but people like, I feel like it takes them like a while--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and for some people it doesn't click. And I'm just like-we're

just--we just want to talk to people and we just want to get people thinking and

then have a

effective, like thought provoking conversation. And I think some people, like if

they've never had these conversations or have never really thought about having

these conversations, they don't realize how impactful they can be. But like

after having them and like sitting down, like you can see people's like

being--like, how their mind changes and like how they can like, realize

something new about themselves or just like, understand something new or just be

like, Oh, that's how I feel in just like a five minute conversation. And it's

very rewarding. And I think I didn't realize it until we started doing this. Um,

and like, we have these like prompt, prompting questions and I think they're

really well written. And just the power that like being like, posed a

well-written question about like climate change or about anything impactful--

CAGLE:--mmm--

DICKMAN:That’s really--is insane.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, but I think it's hard to like put it into words--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--but once people like have one of the conversations or understand

or just like, I think it's powerful--

CAGLE:--I almost feel like you can even watch a conversation and get it.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:You know?

DICKMAN:Yes.

CAGLE:Yeah. So how are you feeling about the cards? So we're using cards for

these conversation prompts now that--did Claire do the designs on them? Did you

do the designs?

DICKMAN:Um, I--

CAGLE:--the designs are from--

DICKMAN:--from the yard signs--

CAGLE:--borrowed from the yard signs

DICKMAN:--so we--yeah, um--

CAGLE:--but they look like actual kind of--or we're working towards them looking--

DICKMAN:--yes--

CAGLE:--like actual playing cards--

DICKMAN:---mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--like a deck of cards.

DICKMAN:Yeah, so I made like the deck of card template and just like--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--mess around with like the font and like, the like, little designs there.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, but then the questions were written by Mary and Claire--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and then we all kind of like put them together and edited them.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, and then a lot of the like prompts and the wording has been edited

and looked at a million times--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--but they're from the yard signs.

CAGLE:Yeah. We just did revisions last week--

DICKMAN:--yes, yeah--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--like again--(laughs)--yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

DICKMAN:But

, um, and then there's four levels of questions.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Um, so the cards have four different levels. The first one being an ice

breaker. You said it really well yesterday--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--uh-huh--

DICKMAN:--and you said you sold--

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:I don't remember what it was.

CAGLE:I think so. The first level is an icebreaker.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:The second level is, okay, climate. Let's go there.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:So it's kind of rearward looking like how have you been feeling? What

have your experiences been? And then the third level is forward looking and

trying to prompt positive, imaginative responses. What would you like the future

to look like? And then the fourth level is reflecting on the conversation we

just had. So it's like a meta moment. Yeah.

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah. Um, but I think that like setup has been really powerful.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:And I think, um, one of like, the goals of--like our goals and the goal

of the Climate Conversations is to bring, like meet people where they are and

not to like scare them away. Because some people are just like so scared

of talking about climate change or they're like, it's obviously like very

anxiety inducing and like, it's a scary thing. Um, and just like, today we're

dealing with really bad air quality in Lexington and even just like walking

outside today and like seeing, like you won't be able to see as far as like you

normally can. And then it's like the air feels different and you're like, this

is scary. And like, you can like, kind of like go down a rabbit hole where like,

Oh, what if like double on you connect all the dots? And it's, it's very scary,

but I think the questions have been really helpful in like managing that. And

then also bringing people to a point of like hope and optimism. Um, because

like, I don't know, for me, the hope and optimism is super important, especially

like learning all these things. And like my first year as an environmental like

student, I was like, this is so sad and I'm so sad and everything's scary. But,

um, learning about what people are doing, and like, for me, the getting involved

in like working with people and like learning about

all the different like community organizations and the grassroots organizations,

that's been like the point where I'm like, Oh, this is okay. And we'll be okay.

And it's been very helpful to see that. Um, so I feel like having people talk

about that and reflect with these levels, like brings them to their own, like

understanding. So like, Oh, nevermind. We'll be okay.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:Yes, um, but--

CAGLE:--but not in like a head in the sand kind of way.

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah. In a way we're like, we're aware and we're accepting, we're

doing what we can.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:And yes.

CAGLE:Yeah. So how are you imagining doing that on campus? Like--

DICKMAN:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--put the table like outside the white hall and be like--

DICKMAN:--we--

CAGLE:--come talk--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--about climate?

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah. Um, I've got a few ideas. I need to still like brainstorm

and talk with the team and come up with different methods. Um, but we want to do

just like tabling on campus when people are walking around and busy, um,

students, like when you like have

things to give them, um, they're less likely to sit down when you don't have

like food or drinks or something. So hopefully like planning events. Um, I know

we can do like a Tree Week event. We can do like, I've thought about doing like,

we bring chalk and like people like write how they feel like around campus--

CAGLE:--oh--

DICKMAN:--or like drawing how they feel about climate change or like just

writing a word about it. And then hopefully like drawing people in with that.

Because they see colorful chalk and like, Oh, you can draw on campus. And then

they want to sit down and talk, um, or like having like lemonade and cookies and

like having them talk there. And then also going to different classes or

colleges or groups or like working with the RAs, um, and then having like a

certain group where you'll go and like at a scheduled time and talk to them. Um,

I had thought about doing things like that. So, um, reaching out to colleges

that wouldn't normally talk about climate change, um, and those types of things.

CAGLE:Yeah

DICKMAN:Yes. Um, one of my, when I first got involved with student government, um

, one of the first things I wanted to do was create or like incorporate

sustainability in the environment and those types of topics into the UK core

classes. Um, so all students on campus have to take like UK 101 or honors 101.

And at first I was like, well, we can just get it--like there can be one like

module one week, one lesson plan about that. Um, but they were like, we don't

know about that. But this past year with SGA, um, I've been able to be a part of

redoing the sustainability strategic plan. Um, so I served on the Student

Experience Committee and we talked a lot about that. And, um, hopefully one of

the goals that UK has in the future, um, that's in the strategic plan is to

create a UK core class that there's like a group of like, I don't know, ten to

twelve classes that all students have to like, they're like topics that you have

to take a specific class in. Um--

CAGLE:--yeah, it’s like, global citizenship--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--humanities--

DICKMAN:--there's an arts one

.

CAGLE:Yeah

DICKMAN:There's a bunch of different mathematics--

CAGLE:--but then lots of different classes that--

DICKMAN:--that students can choose from--

CAGLE:--that meet the--yeah--

DICKMAN:Yes. Um, and they're hoping to add a core like topic that is

environment and climate sustainability.

CAGLE:Oh my god, that’s awesome.

DICKMAN:Yes. Um, so that, I think that would be amazing. And I think if all

students, um, who like went through UK had to like, think about that in one

class, I think that's really powerful because it connects to all fields. Um,

cause like--in every way--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--and then just even, I don't know, it's, it's a thing--(laughs)--

CAGLE:Yeah, it really does. You know, it's--yes, you can major and they get

your whole focus. But I think a lot of people have found that--a lot of students

have found that like ENS is also a really good companion major, right?

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Like it, yeah. Because it's connected to everything.

DICKMAN:Yes. It's very interdisciplinary--CAGLE: --yeah--

DICKMAN:--and it's, um--I don't know, whenever I talk to people who like,

aren't in my major, they're always like, I don't really see like how

it connects. And then we have a conversation--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

DICKMAN:--and then they're always like, Oh, nevermind. Like I get it--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--um--

CAGLE:--like you can stop talking now.

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah.

CAGLE:You’ve convinced me.

DICKMAN:Um, so, and then, yeah, I always meet people who are like in the ENS

major, but they're also in like international studies or psychology or

healthcare or any of those things, engineering. And I'm just like, it's amazing

how it all overlaps.

CAGLE:Yeah. We have a lot of double majors with WRD[3]also.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm. That's awesome.

CAGLE:It's like people want to be environmental writers, and yeah. What do you

think, like, what's your hope or what's the kind of, you know, future, the thing

you're imagining that might happen on campus or like what the kind of student

experience, student conversations, all of that, like, how does that look

different because of like bringing Climate Conversations, because of integrating

our core class? Like, how do you see that kind of having these

long-term effects?

DICKMAN:Yeah. Um, I think like a goal of like my work and I think something

that would just be amazing and I think would change campus is just like, if

every student who like walked on campus, learned about the sustainability

efforts that were going on here. Um, so like, they don't have to like

necessarily go and like apply it to their own life. Um, but if they're like, oh,

this is how UK, like these things are related to sustainability. Like we have

like free buses that run around campus all the time and we have bike racks

everywhere and the campus is like bike accessible and like the dining options,

we like compost the food waste and there's different like healthy and vegetarian

and vegan dining options. And then there's just like all these different things

that--UK and the recycling programs are absolutely insane. Um, so there's all

these things that students come to campus and I--they benefit from. And I think

if they connect in their heads that these things are related to climate

and the environment, then they can see how it's making their lifestyle better

and how it's making the community better. And I feel like that would inspire

them and hopefully like, inspire some passion in them to take those ideals back

to like their communities and their work and their world. Um, cause I think if

they're like, oh yeah, it's important to like ride the bus and be like--use cars

less and this is a walkable community. And then if they maybe go back home, like

I know when I went back home to Northern Kentucky and I had to drive everywhere,

I was like, this is no fun.

CAGLE:Yeah--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--this is no good. So I feel like if students just become aware of that

and then make those connections in their head through like talking to people and

having conversations, then hopefully they'll want to like make their communities

in the world better in those ways.

CAGLE:Oh, I love that.

DICKMAN:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. There's a, um, I can't remember. It was like a joke online or tweet

or something that was like, you know, the reason people are so nostalgic

for--the reason Americans are so

nostalgic for colleges is cause it's the last time they lived in a walkable--

DICKMAN:--a walkable community--

CAGLE:--mixed-use community--(laughs).

DICKMAN:Yes. I always hear that. And I'm like--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--it's amazing. You can like go, you can walk to your friend's

apartment and pick them up and then you can walk to the library together and sit

down and like run into like eight other people, you know, on the way.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:And then you can go get like food together. It's like, yeah, it's just

those types of ideas.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:And I'm like, if they can understand why those things are connected to

the climate and to sustainability while they're living here. And cause I feel

like people appreciate them so much. And then if they take those ideals back to

wherever they end up or whatever work they end up being in and just even in like

green spaces, like there's so many trees on campus and there's so many different

like green spaces and being outside and just walking places. And then, um, the,

like the way the buildings are like accessible and energy efficient. And so they

can apply it to everything. And just like, if they're able to like be here and

understand that in their time

, I just feel like all it takes is one person to like point it out to them. And

then everywhere they look, they'll be like, Oh yeah.

CAGLE:There it is.

DICKMAN:And then any time you leave campus, you're like, it's

lacking--(laughs)--where did it go?

CAGLE:Yeah. Yeah, because there's, there's maybe like a missing piece where

people don't think that it's that way on purpose, right?

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm, exactly, yeah.

CAGLE:We have a lot of trees on purpose.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:We have a lot of walking paths and biking paths on purpose. These were choices--

DICKMAN:--and there's benefits to them and their environmental benefits and

just benefits to us.

CAGLE:Exactly. And so if you hear--if you're somebody who doesn't care about

the environment and you hear like, Oh, you know, these environmentalists in my

city, you want to build some more bike paths. Like, I don't care if that has

anything to do with me. And it's like, no, but that's going to take cars off the

road and then creates, and then you can like make that connection to like, Oh,

maybe my city could look more like UK's campus--

DICKMAN:--yeah--

CAGLE:--which is a really nice place to be relatively speaking.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, yes.

CAGLE:How do you feel like

, so the Climate Conversations, obviously we've been talking literally--

DICKMAN:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--with people a lot about climate. How do you feel like climates as a

specific focus area or topic has, has shown up for you? I mean, as somebody who,

as you said, you had this like kind of emerging environmental consciousness that

went from being younger and like having a real appreciation for nature and the

environment, but not necessarily a consciousness of it as a space of like action

and then coming to college and like really starting to get into that. And then,

yeah. So where did climate show up in that for you?

DICKMAN:Um, I think, I don't know. It's a hard one. I just all connected one day.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:No, um--

CAGLE:--I mean, you did mention like that first year where it was in that

specific COVID

place of being online and also encountering really depressing--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and I think this was like thirty minutes ago--

DICKMAN:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--but, I’m pretty sure you specifically said like learning about climate change.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:So that might've been, I guess it probably showed up in coursework that

first year.

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah. It's--I feel like the first year in coursework, we talked

about climate as like a far away issue.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

DICKMAN:I don't think they did it on purpose, but I think just like when you

read the textbooks and you, when you read the articles, it's like these, you

would kind of learn about it as a global issue. And you just learned about the

general ideas. And I was like, this is obviously changing our world and it's

changing my life and we have to like do something about this--(both laugh)--um,

but I'm just like, I feel like it was a lot of fear-mongering and then I guess

it didn't really connect until, um, I met people, um, like Mary and I started

working with like the Tree Week board and then they were able to be like, oh,

but this is happening because of this, because of this, because of this and

connecting it all

. Um, so I think like the, after I had learned about trees and then the year

after, when I started to notice like the seasons change and like the first

spring after I learned about like phenology, when I saw everything like budding

and then when like a freeze happened and then all the like Magnolia flowers fell

off, I was like, oh, I get it now. I was like, they fell off because it's

colder, even though it shouldn't be colder because of climate. And then I was

like firsthand seeing those changes when I would never have like noticed, like

they didn't take time to like look at the buds of the trees before the

coursework and before like meeting these people who talked about it. Um, so I

think it just over time, you're like the way I perceived the world kind of

changed. And then the way you look at things changes. And sometimes that can be

frustrating. Because like you'll look at something that's like bad for the

environment and it takes away, like you can't enjoy it anymore--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--Or like, you're like--you get stuck kind of in that negative mindset

and you're like, no, I'm gonna have to get away from that. But then there's all

these other like beautiful things that you start to notice, like pollinators and

like when there's a bunch of flowers in one areas and then there's a bunch of

bees and you're like, yay.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm--(laughs).

DICKMAN:Um, and things like that. When you see like the buses like packed and

then there's like no cars and then those types of things.

CAGLE:Yeah. It's almost like you're saying in order to fully grasp that global

picture that's being presented, you have to look more and more and more closely

at smaller and smaller things.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--yes. I think for me at least, and then also just like being around

people who talk about the small things and who are like appreciative of them and

who like talk about nature in like an optimistic way and as something to like

protect. Um, when Robin Wall Kimmerer came to campus, um, last semester, um,

listening to her was also just like really impactful and really powerful

. And then, um, just learning about how indigenous peoples and like people who

have like been protecting nature and who have cared about nature for like years

before and just learning about them is super powerful. And if you can like, if

other people learn about that and just like those types of things.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:That makes sense. Do you feel like climate is something that, and this is

not a, like you have to pick an expertise--

DICKMAN:--mm-hmm--(laughs)--thank you--

CAGLE:--but like, do you feel like climate is something that you will find

yourself continuing to focus on or is it like a thread among other threads, I guess?

DICKMAN:Um, I think it definitely depends. I think no matter what job or like

wherever I end up, I'll definitely be doing things in response of climate change

and like

acting in a way that's like making the community more climate resilient, um, in

whatever ways I can. Like right now I'm interning at the Arboretum where we're

doing a lot of management and, um, a lot of what we're doing is like watering

and like removing invasives and just, um, those types of things. And I'm like,

oh, well we have to remove the invasives to protect the natives, but the

invasives have come in because of like humans who have done all these things.

Um, so I think I might not like be focused like specifically on like how the

climate is changing and like doing that specific type of research, but I'll

definitely be doing things to, um, create--make the world more resilient and

like develop like strategies or working with people to make their minds more

like resilient as well.

CAGLE:How does, um, that goal fit into

--like, the way you answered that question, you ended with end people's lives,

right? So it's not just about protecting nature, right? So how do, how do you

see your desire to serve people kind of fitting into this big picture of like

kind of your worldview and your, your broad goals?

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm, um, I think, I don't know exactly how to word it. I'm

thinking--(both laugh)--um, I've always like really cared about like protecting

people, especially like making things more accessible and making like food and

water and just like making sure everyone has the right to like healthy food. And

like when I first learned a lot of like what I was interested in my freshman

year was like food sustainability. Um, so we learned about like food deserts and

just like the social justice side of sustainability work. So I think a lot of

what I'm interested in is also rooted in that, um

, so I think making sure the environment and like green spaces are accessible

and equitable. Um, and I feel like I want to make the world a better place, but

I also feel like that's done by making it safer for people. And I think a lot of

like climate work is--should be focused on people. I mean, it is. Um, and I

think Climate Conversations, like we're obviously helping the environment, but

we're first like talking to people to inspire them to care about the

environment. Um, so I'm hoping that in my like work with the environment and

with nature, I'm also going to inspire people to care about the environment and

therefore it will be healthier and a safer place for them, um, while also just

increasing accessibility for like younger students and for people just from all

backgrounds and like, yeah, just making, you know

, yeah.

CAGLE:Did you--you said you had Greta's book--

DICKMAN:--No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference--

CAGLE:-- No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference--that would have come out, I

guess when you were in high school.

DICKMAN:I believe so.

CAGLE:Yeah. So had you read it, like, like you were aware of climate change as

something that was happening?

DICKMAN:Yes, yeah. Um, my mom liked to play NPR. We always had NPR on the car.

CAGLE:Oh--(laughs)--uh-huh--

DICKMAN:--um, so I was an NPR kid.

CAGLE:Yeah, same, same.

DICKMAN:Uh, so yeah, explains a lot--(both laugh)--

CAGLE:--right, yeah--

DICKMAN:--um, so I would always like hear about it, um, like on the news or on

the radio or just like stuff like that. Um, and it was, I just thought it was

scary when I was younger. Um, and I wanted to learn more about people who are

working with it. Um, so that's why I like--especially younger people And I think

Greta was just like an inspiration, um, for so many young people.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:Um, and to get into college or to, I don't know, one of my application essays

was like, if you had to pick, redo Mount Rushmore and put four new people on it,

who would it be? And one of them I chose Greta. I was like--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--I would put Greta.

CAGLE:I love putting, I mean, considering it's already like imposing white

men's faces--

DICKMAN:--yes, yeah--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--on like, an Indigenous, you know, sacred place. Like, you know what?

Yeah, let's just not even do Americans.

DICKMAN:Yeah--(both laugh)--no, I was like, you know, I, you know, I was like,

it was funny. I think I put Greta and then like Lin-Manuel Miranda--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

DICKMAN:--and then I don't know, maybe Serena Williams.

CAGLE:I feel like this is a tour through the, like, you know, who are the good

role models--

DICKMAN:--I know--

CAGLE:--of the late 2010s--

DICKMAN:--I was like, who was I inspired by?

CAGLE:Yeah, yeah, exactly.

DICKMAN:It was, it was definitely funny--(laughs).

CAGLE:I had to--I had an assignment in eighth grade. I think we had to make

baseball cards for our role models.

DICKMAN:Yeah.

CAGLE:So like the--draw a picture on the front--

DICKMAN:--oh yeah--

CAGLE:--and write stats about them on the back. So I'm not even going to say

who I did. It was too embarrasing--

DICKMAN:--(laughs)--yeah, no.

CAGLE:Um, that's all my questions.

DICKMAN:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Is there anything else

that we should have talked about?

DICKMAN:Um--

CAGLE:--climate stuff, things that inspire you, hopes, dreams?

DICKMAN:Well, I don't know. I feel like this was very rewarding.

CAGLE:Yeah.

DICKMAN:I think reflecting on like your own work is always interesting and I

think it can be powerful--

CAGLE:--yeah--

DICKMAN:--and empowering for everyone. Um, I don't know. I think it's important

to stay optimistic. Um, I guess I am passionate. For me, passion is a strong

influence of what I want to do. So I just want to make more people passionate

about climate and the environment. Um, so thanks for letting me talk about it--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--I love that. What a perfect way to end. All right. Thank you, Callie.

DICKMAN:Thank you--(laughs).

[END OF INTERVIEW]