DOTSON:We're very relaxed with it. We want to make sure you're comfortable and--

ROBERTS:All right.

UNKNOWN:And?

DOTSON:Is the microphone set where you want it to?

UNKNOWN:Yeah. Perfect. All right, we're ready.

DOTSON:Are we rolling?

UNKNOWN:Yep, we're rolling.

DOTSON:Okay, um, so we'll just, we'll start with the basics, um, would you mind telling us a little bit about who you are and your name and your relationship with the clinic?

ROBERTS:Um, I'm Edward Roberts. I'm a physician. I've, uh, practiced, um, medicine in Mount Sterling, um, since 1979. Uh, and I helped found the clinic, uh, in the nineties. Ninety-six, I think, was when we, uh, set it, set it off exactly. And, um, since then I've been on the board of directors, the president chairman of the board of directors, and then the medical director. And I've been volunteering, uh, ever since in the clinic until, until late 2024, and I sort of stepped aside and I'm still the medical director and chairman of the board but I, I don't, I don't have a clinic. I don't volunteer as, as a physician here. We have a, another full-time person now. (coughs) --so that's my, my story

DOTSON:So you have a, a very nice career in medicine. Do you want to tell us a little bit about how you got into it and--and your story of becoming a doctor and a physician?

ROBERTS:Well, my, my uh father, uh, was a physician who, who practiced medicine, a family practice here in, uh, Mount Sterling. He had, um, um practiced in Eastern Kentucky before, uh, as um a physician working for Inland Steel. They had a, a little coal mining town that they owned called Wheelwright. And he practiced there, but then moved to, more towards Central Kentucky here in Mount Sterling in the fifties. And so, um, I watched him practice and was, um, he, he was definitely a role model. When I went to undergraduate school, I, um, had no intention of being a physician, but it was a, a time of, um, of great, uh, turbulence with the Vietnam War, and, um--(coughs)--a lot of protests, which I participated in. And I decided that I couldn't, um, go into law and be a politician, which is what I had intended, and that I had to do something in, in large quotation marks called useful, and, um, would become a, a physician. So I sort of shifted my career. I'd been president of my freshman class and participated on the undergraduate council and, um, I shifted into organic and inorganic chemistry and then came back home from college to be at the University of Kentucky School of Medicine and, um, graduated from there in '76 and decided I wanted to go into internal medicine and thought I would go to Danville, Kentucky to sort of be away from family but I was persuaded by the physicians there that they didn't need any extra doctors, so I, I ended up in, in Mount Sterling where my, my family was and is, is today.

DOTSON:What's it been like being able to be a physician here in your hometown and, and with a community that you were familiar with and connected to?

ROBERTS:Well, it's wonderful and, uh, frustrating, you know, at the same time. It's wonderful that, um, I know so many people and we're casual acquaintances with so many people. But it's also frustrating that I need to talk about the little white pill, uh, you know, at Kroger's, uh when I'm shopping because usually I can't remember what the little white pill is that, uh, is so important. So, uh--but I would say that most of the things are, are great and wonderful. It's very, um, it's very easy when you're in a small town to see that you are having an impact on the quality of the lives of the people that you live with. And, um, uh, to me, that's important. Maybe, uh, maybe not so much to other people, but, um, to me, that's what makes it, um, worthwhile, is to, uh, see that you, you've been able to make a, a difference, sometimes small, usually small, but a little difference.

DOTSON:So The Post Clinic started in the nineties. Uh, what was practicing like here before then? Did you work in a private practice or at a hospital?

ROBERTS:Yeah, I had my own private practice, which is very unusual today. I, I, I don't know what the percentage is, but there, there are very, very few physicians then, that come out of medical school and start a private practice. Uh, most physicians now are employed, um--(coughs)--I, I had an arrangement with, uh, other private physicians in town to, uh, take call so that I wasn't on call twenty-four seven, um, and I had a little office--(coughs)-- and, um, saw people and recognized pretty quickly in the eighties that, um, many people couldn't, um, couldn't afford what I, I thought I needed to, uh, provide for them. Um, I remember getting educated by a patient when, um, she came in with thyroid disease and I wanted to get a, a test called an LA, a LATS test, an antibody test for their thyroid back in the early eighties. It was a new test that I had, you know come across at UK (University of Kentucky) and felt like it was useful, and she brings the lab slip back to me and says, well, you know, it's twelve hundred dollars. I'm not getting that test. You're going to have to take care of me without that test. And so you run into those things, um, from--I ran into those things from the get-go. Uh, health care is, um, just not affordable for a lot of people. And, um, I sort of cast about trying to figure out how to, um, address the issue. Part of the problem is is that if you take on a lot of patients that can't pay and you don't charge them--(coughs)--you're taking them on not just for yourself and your personal private practice, but for all those people that are also covering for you. And that became, you know, cumbersome. There were complaints that, you know there was a lot of, um, free care sometimes. And that was not what, uh, some of my associates were--they just couldn't afford that. They couldn't, uh, do that, uh and so I thought that maybe as a group of physicians, the um--that we could, um, say that we had a need for free access to at least primary care. And the, um--we--I formed a, a group, the Montgomery County Medical Society, we--there had been a medical society many, many, many years ago back in the, um, uh, mid twentieth century, uh, but nothing, uh, after that, um, and, um, we had mostly social meetings, but we discussed some, the need for, uh, access to healthcare and decided that we could try to start a free clinic. And I was a member of the Presbyterian Church, and, um, they had this empty, vacant building next to the church building on Main Street that they, uh, owned and had bought. Um, and it was fallow, not doing a thing. And I went to the church and asked if, uh, maybe we could start a free clinic there, and, of course, they said, great, we would love that and we will support you any way we can and they did. They, they paid for the janitorial service, they paid for the utilities, they paid for insurance on the building. Um, the church was wonderful and a lot of the, um, volunteer, um, people that, um, would check patients in the front door and tell them where to go and how to get ready for the doctor visit were--they were church members. So the Presbyterian Church sort of partnered up with the, um, um, volunteer physicians from the, uh, local medical society to have a clinic, usually one day a week. Uh, we would open our doors and um, um, we advertised by word of mouth. People, um, would come and it, um, got, um, kind of overwhelming pretty quickly. And, um, so we had to have a clinic director, and, uh, we needed volunteer nurses because we wanted to do EKG's (electrocardiograms) and we wanted to do finger stick blood tests to check people's blood sugar and their diabetic, um, parameters like a hemoglobin A1C and maybe their cholesterol level, all of which we could do with finger sticks. So at that time, we needed, um, a nurse or a nurse's aide that was trained and we began casting about for more volunteers. But one thing that was nice about the beginning of the clinic was that, um, so many of the local physicians participated. Um, you know, not everybody, but most people actually would, uh, volunteer. Sometimes it was a couple of times a year. Sometimes it was, um, I remember Dr. Perry was every week. He was there. So, you know, it, it, um, uh, gave, uh, physicians a clear way of, you know, giving back to the community, uh, the skill set that they had acquired and, um,  something that the community needed. So that's, that's sort of how it got off the ground and it's a proverbial, uh, snowball rolling downhill, uh, back in um--I don't--I think Dr. Tingle, who's our dental director, can give you the exact dates, but the--Dr. Tingle approached us about, um, setting up a dental clinic in the context of The Post Clinic. And we, um, we looked at that, uh, very carefully, but it was going to be extremely difficult in the old post office building downtown next to the church to put in a dental clinic. Almost, I won't say impossible, but it was going to cost a lot of money and, um, not going to be very, um, um, efficient or the, the rooms weren't going to be ideal. So we talked to, uh, Dr. Razor here in town, who's since passed away, and he had a dental building. And, uh, one of the offices in the dental building were, uh, was open, it was vacant, and he said, well sure, you can, you can use it. So we got a group of twenty volunteers in the town who cleaned out the building, pulled up the old carpet, did some painting, and moved in some used dental equipment, nice equipment, but used equipment that Dr. Tingle had come across, and we set up a dental clinic. So we had a, a medical clinic in one building, the old post office downtown, and, um, a dental clinic in another building, but both of them, you know, under the umbrella of the, um, Post Clinic. We had had, um, Bob Klink, who is a fellow retired social worker who had worked in the VA hospital system, who was our, uh, director of the clinic for many years. And he, um, he, uh, was our clinic director until fifteen to twenty years ago when Louise Summers took over. So, um--(coughs)--we, um, were okay, but, um, then the, what I call Dr. Razor's Dental Building, they kind of wanted us to leave because they had, uh, somebody who wanted to rent it, and we were nervous about losing our dental clinic. And a local physician retired, or, or didn't retire, he moved to another building. He was in the building adjacent to this building, right next door. Uh, he owned that building, but he was going to a new facility and he agreed to, um, just gift us the building in exchange for you know, a tax break on his income tax. So he gifted us that building, and again, we had twenty to thirty people who came in and pulled up carpet and painted and moved furniture, moved equipment, cleaned it up, and we moved in. Both the dental and the medical clinic were in one building. And even though the building was built in the 1950s, it was set up as a medical building, so it was, um, you know, much more suitable, much more appropriate to what we wanted to do. And, um, from day one though we, at that, uh, building, which is next door, we had trouble with handicapped accessibility. We had a patient in a wheelchair that couldn't use the toilet. And we had a patient on a walker that fell coming into the building, uh, early on. So we began casting about, um, asking for monies to, uh, uh, make the building handicapped accessible. And much to my surprise, you, you, you can't build a handicapped toilet in a building using federal money unless the whole building is handicapped accessible. So, the doors were pocket doors in the old building. Nothing was really built for handicapped accessibility in the 1950s. So the architect came and looked at the building and said, um, we would be better off building a new building. And I said, well, that's great, but where are we going to get money to do that? So, um, we um, first, um, uh, thought that maybe the, uh, Appalachian Resource Commission would be a place to get money, but they turned us down. But, um, both, um, local and state government officials, um, liked the post clinic, liked the work that we did, so they helped us, um, get, um, two federal grants that allowed us to build this new structure, which is fully handicapped accessible, and um, we're very, we're very proud of it. The, the, um, clinic itself is--we operate without any federal money. We do get a small stipend from, um, both the city and the county. Um, uh, that--that's a new thing in the last couple of years. Um, before that, it, it's always been, um, you know, individuals in the community writing checks and just giving money to, uh, sustain us. We, um, we have, um, a part-time, uh, employee in Louise Summers. I say part-time. She's, she's here most days, but, um, she's paid a, a stipend, a nominal stipend. We have, um, a paid uh, dentist. Uh, the dentist, um, gets, um, you know, a daily stipend to work here two days a week. And we have a nurse practitioner that is paid an hourly wage to work here five days a week. We also have a paid, um, a receptionist, um, who does scheduling on the dental, the dental side. All the other people that are here are volunteers who work without any pay at all and the people that are paid are, um, I don't want to say underpaid but they're not paid, um, what they could get maybe working somewhere else, so, um, it's a, it's a group that has been around now for about 30 years and has treated, uh, thousands of patients and we're, we're growing, you know, and in the current environment, we expect cutbacks in Medicaid and I, I think that means that we'll, we'll see more people. Um, we don't turn anyone away, uh, even if you have insurance, if you don't have a doctor and you need something, we will see you. We just don't bill the insurance. We just see everybody free of charge. So, um, and there's, um, a, uh, a scale that we apply. One person, your income has to be, um, so much, two, three, four people in the home, it's, it's a little higher. So we, we ask people to--if they make less than that, we don't require documentation. If people say they don't make much money and tell us that they need our care well we just say fine (laughs) we believe you and so we will, we take care of them.

DOTSON:You shared a little bit about, um, the original building that was next to the church that the clinic started in. That building helped the clinic get its name. Do you want to talk about that a little bit?

ROBERTS:Well, it was, um, it's a beautiful building. I would say it's the most beautiful building in Mount Sterling, uh, it's the old post office. Uh, it was built, um, in the twenties, 1920s, I believe. So it's around a hundred years old, it has this beautiful granite foundation with, uh, a stained glass skylight inside, and it's um--and the church, when the post office was moving out of the building, um, the--it's next door to the Presbyterian Church, and so they, they, uh, I guess wanted to use it for parking more than anything. But they also loved the building. So when we moved in there, we, we called our clinic The Post Clinic because it was in the old post office, so that, that name has, uh, stuck. We're, we're The Post Clinic now.

DOTSON:How long after the clinic started did you continue with private practice?

ROBERTS:Well, the clinic started in ninety-six, and I retired from my private practice in 2017, so.

DOTSON:So you continued working for a number of years with both?

ROBERTS:Right, more than twenty years, yeah. Mm-hmm.

DOTSON:What's it like to serve in both capacities as director and physician at the clinic, but also continuing that practice?

ROBERTS:Well, it, it's, um, it, it's good. I mean, I, um, I felt like I, um, kind of had the best both ways. I could see people--I mean, you know, uh, for instance, in private practice, uh, a, a number of physicians won't take Medicaid, which is the insurance offered to low-income people or people who are low-income or disabled, um, and, uh, the, the reimbursement is very, very poor, uh, in that regard, um, and people would come and you, you just, you can't a lot of times, um, keep the lights on in your office and pay your employees and, and make it work with Medicaid reimbursement. Um, but if we had a patient that, um, got Medicaid we always took care of them, but people would come, uh, to, um, the front desk and say I have Medicaid can I see Dr. Roberts or, uh, you know at that point I had a partner Dr. King, um, and the staff would say, no, we, we don't accept Medicaid--or they would come to the front, uh, desk and they would say, I don't have any insurance and, uh, I don't make a lot of money, um, can, can you help us? And so it gave us a way of telling people, we're not abandoning you, but you can get help at the post clinic. So we would, um, have people use the post clinic. And, um, I would see, um, people, um, at the post clinic. Sometimes, um, what we could do at the post clinic, uh, was not enough. Uh, and I would have them come to my private office. So the referrals kind of went both ways. Maybe I could step in in the office. We could do a stress test, uh, a heart stress test in the office, which we did in the office. But we, we didn't have the equipment to do that at the post clinic. So I could just have people come and, and, um, I had an interest in GI medicine, so, um, I did upper endoscopies and colonoscopies, uh, in town. I was for a while the only person in town that did those. And I could, um, have, I could have my Post Clinic patients, I could do those for free for those patients. So a lot of--there was a lot of crossover back and forth. We would refer people who were having financial trouble to the post clinic a lot, and then sometimes at the post clinic we would refer those people, in, back into my private practice to do things that--for free--that, um, would be hard to access, um, as, you know as a non--somebody who couldn't pay and had no insurance. Now when we see people, if they have, um, Medicaid, we encourage them to get a local provider, but especially with dental care, there are very few dentists that take Medicaid. So, um, we see those people, uh and the same is true if you're--you want a physician, medical care, and you have Medicaid and you can't find anyone to see you, we will take care of you until you can establish yourself with somebody else. We're, we're not here to compete with the, um, local, uh, established medical practitioners. We are seeing people that have trouble accessing care. And most of them, I don't know how many, ninety, over ninety percent of them are, under, are, they're uninsured, and the others are underinsured. They have, um, Medicaid, perhaps, but they can't, they can't find anybody to take care of them. And the other group that we see are insured, but they have a five-thousand dollar deductible, which, you know, uh, they may as well not have insurance. They, uh, they work as uh, on farms, they work in fast food, uh, restaurants, they may work at one of the local retail shops, just don't make enough money to pay that, um, fifty to a hundred and fifty dollars for a doctor visit.

DOTSON:The Post Clinic has such a rich history for three decades, really, here in Mount Sterling. How has the community changed and how has it stayed the same over that time?

ROBERTS:Well, um, I have observations about the medical community, that, um, the medical community has, has changed. There, there's been, um, a centralization of healthcare, in my opinion, in, in more urban areas, uh, like Lexington. You, you go there for a lot of specialty care. And really, um, when I started practice in the late seventies, um, we did provide some of that specialty care, uh, more, uh, locally. If a woman, um, has a mammogram and needs a diagnostic mammogram and a breast biopsy, we used to do that here all the time. That was just standard here. Now it's pretty much done in Lexington, so um, there, there, there is that. There, there's that shift in healthcare away from rural areas to more urban areas, which I think is a lot of times, it, it's good because the skill set that people have is, they get a--when you're doing a thousand breast biopsies, you're a lot better at it than if you do ten. So there, there is that, but also it means that it's harder for people to access the care. They, a lot of people don't want to go to Lexington. They can't drive--they don't have a, they don't have a way of getting there, an easy way of getting there. The other thing that's happened is that doctors used to all live in town. And now most doctors live in Lexington. And they come to town here and practice and then go back to Lexington. And I think that's, um, sad in a, a number of ways. They, they may not, um, you know, ever visit the local grocery store or know anything at all about the local public schools. Um, and they're not woven into the fabric of the community like they used to be. So that, that is um, disappointing to me. Um, the same is true of the hospital. The hospital used to be a local board of directors, and, um, was an independent hospital. Now it's, um, part of the, um, St. Joseph chain. I, its--they provide great care, I'm not complaining, but the administrators, um, if I, if I told them, well, um, you know, uh, meet me in the international food section of Kroger's, they would not know where to meet. You know, they've never been there. So, uh, it, it's sad that people are not, um, they're in a small town, but it's some way, in some ways very superficial. Um, also, over the last thirty years, um, medicine has gotten more uh, uh, technical and, um, there's a lot of focus on testing and used to be that, um, physical exam was, um, so important there was hands-on touching of patients and understanding their problems better because you had taken care of their mother or their father. You knew the whole family. And, um, that's not as much now. I, I think during, um, COVID, there was an expansion of Medicaid, which was wonderful. So many, um, so many more people were able to get some kind of access to health care. But, um, there's still a large, large number of people that are uninsured. And I'm afraid that the Medicaid expansion during COVID is now contracting and we'll see more uninsured people. So, um, the other thing is is that I (laughs) I think that doctors are less inclined to volunteer. Um, I don't know exactly where--what that's about. I think it's a lot of things. But it used to be that, um, like I said in the beginning, most doctors would volunteer their time. Now, not so much. It's very difficult to get a doctor that will volunteer. Now, I will say that I can call a doctor in his or her office on the phone and say, I need help. And I have done that many times. I've got a, um, I remember specifically a patient that had kidney failure. He was, um, he, he worked construction in Clark County and he had, uh, he came in because he was profoundly weak. His wife was with him. He--she was talking about how he came home and went to bed and he had become nauseated and it turned out he had renal failure. His kidneys had totally quit. He needed dialysis. He needed it emergently because his electrolytes were all abnormal. He was in danger of dying. And I called a local doctor. I said, I need help. This guy needs dialysis. He's got no insurance of any kind, he, he doesn't make a lot of money. And he said, send him over, you know, we'll, we'll see that he gets taken care of. So doctors step into the breach and help, but they seem less likely to, to volunteer, um, whether that's because they're not as much in the community or, I'm not, I'm not entirely sure, but, um, I've also noticed that.

DOTSON:You spoke a little bit about volunteering as being an, an obstacle, finding volunteers. Are there other obstacles that the post clinic has had to overcome to stay in operation?

ROBERTS:Well, um, we have the basic expenses that anybody would have running a business. Um, our building insurance, our medical and dental malpractice insurance are all very high. Uh, we have to find funding, um, through donations for that. Um, we, um, our utility bill here is quite high. We're an all, all-electric building. Our electrical costs are high. And, um, access to internet and phones and all that we have to pay for. So, the, the, that's a big obstacle is, uh, fundraising, uh, you know, the basics to, to keep, keep us open. One of the things that's been very, um, uh, helpful and has, um, made a big difference to our patients is we have a local lab, um, that will do any lab work for our patients free of charge so that's a big deal, I mean, lab, a lab can cost hundreds, well, sometimes thousands of dollars and we, we get that for our patients free we have an agreement there. So we try to, uh, partner up, uh, where we can with, um, people. We have, um, there's a Kentucky cancer, um, uh, uh, service that will do cancer screening, both pap smears, mammograms, and, uh, colonoscopies free of charge. So we send our patients to those kinds of services. We partner, we don't try to duplicate. If, um, our patients can get free vaccination, which is increasingly difficult to find, um, we, we will help them access that through the health department. But we, um, you know we also, um, get flu vaccine, we buy flu vaccine every year, um, because we know that if we don't vaccinate people when they're in the clinic and want to be vaccinated, they're very unlikely to take time off of work to go to the health department and sit in the waiting room. We've already got them here, so we need to take care of them. So I, I will say this. That brings up another thing. Most of our patients, most of our, the, they--most people that we see here work. I mean, this is not like these are, you have this stuff sometimes that these people are freeloaders or something. These are hardworking people who, who can't, who can't make ends meet on what they, uh, get for their hourly, uh, wage. So, uh, that's the other thing. I, everybody needs to be treated with, um, with dignity. Everybody, I mean, um, just because, um, people have financial issues or issues with housing, uh, it, it doesn't make these people bad people. I mean, these are all good people. Most of them are hardworking. We have people that are trapped, trapped by drug abuse, um, and, you know, um, we, we know that these people can be, can be helped, and we try to help them get on a path to, um, some sort of recovery. Although we don't do, uh, drug rehab directly here, uh, we have people that we can refer to. We have a local dermatologist that'll see somebody for free if we refer them. So we've tried to open up access by doing some things here. We now do plain film x-ray here. We do dental x-rays here. We have dental care. We have medical care. We do, um, free, uh, blood work, uh, we've accessed that for them, and then we try to partner with other providers that can do things like, um, cancer screening and laboratory evaluation or some subspecial--some subspecialties will also, um, allow us to send people, um, you know, without any sort of charge.

DOTSON:You, uh, uh, The Post Clinic has received funding grants from two different administrations here in Kentucky, at least that I know of. Can you talk a little bit more about that?

ROBERTS:Well, I think that it's, um, um, it says something about The Post Clinic, I think, that both the, uh, Bevin and the Beshear, uh, administrations, uh, supported, uh, the grants to build a new Post Clinic, so, um, and I'm sure there are a lot of other examples that are similar, but I think that it means we have a nonpartisan agenda here. We don't care, we don't, we're not a, there's no politics involved in who you are or anything like that. We just are trying to provide health care and dental care to people that need it.

DOTSON:And this building was built in what year, this new clinic?

ROBERTS:Well, we began operating out of this building in the spring of twenty-four, so it's pretty new.

DOTSON:And were you in the post, the old post office up until that point?

ROBERTS:No, um in 2017 or, yeah, I think it was 2017, we moved to, um, the building next door here that was given to us by a, local, uh, doctor when he vacated the building. So from '17, until last spring, a year ago, uh that seven year period we were in, uh, the building adjacent to us. So this is I guess our third address, but most of that time we were down at the old post office.

DOTSON:It's hard not to notice as you walk in all the wonderful art and the very interesting displays in the waiting room. Tell us a little bit about, about what went into those things.

ROBERTS:Well, I think, um, I think that, um, the, um, exhibits in the building are for our patients and, and our staff. The um, Sigmund Abeles etches are mostly for people who work and volunteer here. Sigmund Abeles in the hallway over here, uh, did a series of etchings about people that were in a nursing home with his father. And, um, some people would look at those etchings and say that they are maybe unattractive or ugly, but, um, not, not really. Uh, all of those people are, uh, you know, uh, sets of personalities that are, uh, important, uh that have their own story. And that's what we're interested in--(coughs)--In the waiting room, there is a case with, um, uh, medical antiques in it. Most of the medical antiques are from here in town. Uh, my father was an antique dealer after he retired from practicing medicine, and he enjoyed collecting, uh, medical antiques. So there are things in there like, uh, eighteenth century bleeders, and, um, uh, nineteenth century bleeders. It's a spring-loaded knife that you would put on, a, um, a patient's arm and push a button and a blade would come down and slice open the skin and you would hold your arm over a pan and, um, blood would run down your arm into the pan. It was called bleeding. Um, barbers used to do that. That's where the barber pole came from, you know, blood circling down the arm. So, um, there are all these medical antiques. They all, most of them have a Mount Sterling connection and people enjoy that and they look in their case and they see, uh, uh, the name of a doctor on something. Oh, my grandmother saw that doctor. And we don't have television out there. I think most offices will have a, you know, television or something. We don't have that. We have our little history case. And then in the back hallway was people, uh, go down to an exam room, we have, um, a, a case filled with, um, nineteenth century apothecary jars just because I had them and I enjoy looking at them and I think the patients enjoy looking at them. We are going to, um, try to get, um, some local art, uh, eventually installed because, um, I think that, um, humanities and the arts are a cornerstone of being a good healthcare provider. If, if, if you don't understand where your patients are coming from and what they're about, I don't, I don't see how it's possible for you to be a good doctor. I, I think, I, I don't, I've never understood this pre-med major much (laugh). What's a pre-med major? It's a, it's something totally artificial and made up. I think if people want to be physicians, they should be, they should have a history degree or a, or at least a psychology degree, or maybe they should study art. They should learn how to look at people and understand people by looking at art. And I know most of the big medical schools now at Harvard, you know, you have a whole semester where you go to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and you study paintings because you need to understand how to look at things in a way that you can make sense of what's going on. So I think that humanities, um, are very important, so we're going to get some local art installed here, and, um, and I think, um, um, you know, it's another way of, um, connecting to the community, and it's another way of telling people when they come in to talk about things with us that aren't maybe serious like their heart problem. They can look at a piece of art and discuss it with the provider or the, the people at the front desk, the volunteers at the front desk, or ask about what's in the display case and somebody can explain it. You know, it's just a way of relaxing people, um, just like the colors, uh, in the clinic were chosen because they're colors that are supposed to be calming. There's not a lot of red, you know, red is not a calming color in general (??). So, um, you know, there are things that are done with intention, um, and, um, the artwork is one of those things.

DOTSON:It has such a connection to the community, as, as you mentioned, but patients are coming from all over, aren't they, to access the clinic?

ROBERTS:Yes. I've, you know, it changes from year to year. Some years we, as many as twenty-eight different counties, um, people come. And, uh, we've, we've had of course, uh, foreign exchange students from Africa and, um, people from Texas, um, Puerto Rico. So, you know, there are people that are passing through that need help. We are here for them, too. So, um, if people, uh, need help, we don't have any particular geographic boundary where we cut you off, you know (laugh). That's not our, that's not our, the way we do it.

DOTSON:Can you tell us a little bit about, um, what you're most proud of with the clinic, what it's meant for you to be involved with it?

ROBERTS:Well, what am I most proud of? I'm, I'm proud of of um, of um, giving people, uh, sometimes life-saving, um, access to care, but more often it's just sort of, uh, routine care. You know, people have diabetes and we help them control their diabetes and they don't end up in the emergency room and their life becomes more, uh, it becomes better, more what I--you might call normal because they're not ignoring their health issue. Um, I'm proud of our dental program. I'm, we've had a patient that, um, very intelligent woman who had nasty looking, um, front tooth, and she was unemployed. Could not find a job. We fixed her tooth and she kind of got a job almost immediately. So I'm, I'm proud of, of people, um, being able to, uh, you know, lead more full, more normal lives. I'm proud of the occasional patient where I feel like, oh, we saved their life. And of course, um, it's wonderful when you take care of somebody that can actually, um, I think, find employment because of something we did directly. So that's, that's wonderful. I'm proud of those kinds of things.

DOTSON:It's had a major impact here. You said that the clinic is expanding. What's, what's that expansion looking like? Whether you're seeing growth or would you like to see growth now?

ROBERTS:Well, you know, that's a two-edged sword. I, I wish there wasn't any need for the clinic. If everybody had health insurance, uh, good health insurance, um, maybe the clinic could do something else. Maybe it would become, um, a vaccination center or, I don't know, some other, uh, entity. But, um, I think as the number of people who I anticipate will increase, the number of people who are without health insurance and access we will have to maybe increase our hours of, uh, operation. Right now, uh, we seem to be able to take care of our dental patients with two days, uh, a week. But we could easily expand that if we needed to and could find funding to do it. Dental care is expensive to provide. It's a lot of ways much more expensive than medical care, um, so, um, I'm anticipating that those demands will increase and that medical demands will increase and maybe, you know, it's possible in the future we'll need to not only expand the number of hours of operation from thirty-five hours a week to forty, but maybe we'll have to have two medical providers operating at once, or maybe we'll need to have dental care delivery, um, more days a week. And the nice thing about this building is that, um, we have the capacity to do that. The building allows us to grow into that. So, um, I'm very, very proud, very pleased with that.

DOTSON:Is there anything else you'd like to share about the history of the clinic or your involvement with it?

ROBERTS:Well, I think some of my, uh, patient relationships have been very rewarding in this, uh, clinic. Um, the patients have been extraordinarily appreciative of the care that they've gotten here, and I think that, um, it's been wonderful to see volunteers, um, here who are, uh, very devoted and committed to providing, uh, volunteer services to patients and, um, you know, wanting to give, and I think it's only if you give that you can get. So, in, in a lot of ways, (laughs) we provide opportunities to volunteer. And that's sometimes almost as important as the actual services rendered.

DOTSON:Well, thank you so much for sitting down with us today. We, we really appreciate this.

ROBERTS:Well, I hope it's what you, um, you wanted.

UNKNOWN:Yeah. No, that was great--

DOTSON:It was wonderful. Thank you so much.

UNKNOWN:--It was great, yeah.

ROBERTS:And I'll, um, let's see, it's almost ten o'clock, I hope [?? WORDS UNCLEAR].