CURRIS:

Good afternoon. This is May 3rd, 2023. My name is Jo Hern Curris. I'm the

interview. The interviewee is Jerry Walters, originally from Benham, Kentucky

and this interview is being conducted for the purpose of being an addition to

the oral history of Benham, Kentucky and the lives of coal miners and their

spouses and families. And this will be assisted by the University of Kentucky

Nunn Center Oral History Center, who have provided the equipment and the time

for training and assistance for this particular project, for which we are very

grateful. Today,

I must say that so much of this started for the project of the Robert B. and

Pauline Hern Financial Center to be housed in the city hall in Benham, Kentucky

because we realized we were losing the history because, in truth, everyone has

gotten older and so these recordings will deal particularly with beginning with

the '40s and '50s because those are approximately the ages of those of us who

are remaining. And I'm so fortunate today that Jerry Walters has agreed to be

interviewed because there is no doubt that he, more than anyone that I know, has

the greatest memory of what happened in terms of the Benham Credit Union, which

is a vital part of

Benham as a town. Benham was a captive coal mine by International Harvester. So,

it was a company coal town. And Jerry, thank you so very much for being here

today and if it's all right with you, I'm going to just start asking some basic

questions that go back to you and me going to school and being residents of

Benham, Kentucky. Harlan County.

WALTERS:Jo, you're so welcome and it's good to be here.

CURRIS:Thank you. The first question for the record: would you give me your

name and where you were born?

WALTERS:Jerry Walters, born in Benham Hospital. My--

CURRIS:Scoot back a little.

WALTERS:--born in Benham Hospital. My parents--was Henry and Verna Walters. I have

three brothers and three sisters. The first two were--was not born in Benham.

The other five was all born in Benham Hospital.

CURRIS:And what year were you born?

WALTERS:Nineteen forty-six.

CURRIS:That makes you younger than me, Jerry. (laughs)

WALTERS:We're not counting--

CURRIS:We're in a sad state of affairs.

WALTERS:--we're not counting.

CURRIS:(laughs) And what's the, in terms of your history, the names of your

wife and children?

WALTERS:My wife is Betty Walters, from Cumberland, and we have one daughter,

April Walters, who is at South Bend, Indiana. And three grandsons.

CURRIS:I bet you're proud.

WALTERS:Very much.

CURRIS:(laughs) Bet you're proud. Where did you attend school?

WALTERS:Grade school in Benham. And my freshman year was in, my freshman year

was in Cumberland.

I mean, my freshman year was in Benham. My sophomore year was in Cumberland and

my junior year was at Lynch and I graduated Cumberland.

CURRIS:Well, you moved around. Why was that?

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Why did that happen?

WALTERS:Well, my two brothers my older--my two older brothers, you know, they

were--you know, my older brother, Johnny, played football for four years for

Benham. Two of my three sisters were cheerleaders and we lost our school at the

end of my freshman year. And I went to Cumberland to, uh, my sophomore year and

I had an opportunity to go to Lynch to play basketball. And that didn't work out

due to other injuries and so forth. But I ended up going back to Cumberland and

that's where I met my wife and our senior year we were high school sweethearts,

I guess, if you want to call it that, yeah.

CURRIS:Where did you marry?

WALTERS:We married in 1966. No, I'm sorry, we graduated in '64 and we got

married in May the 7th of 1965.

CURRIS:Don't you think it's amazing that you and I can remember these dates? (laughs)

WALTERS:It's amazing to me. But my wife is responsible for that particular date.

CURRIS:(laughs) That's very good.

WALTERS:Memory-wise. (laughs)

CURRIS:What were your most enjoyable memories when you attended school in

Benham? So, that would have been primarily your grade school.

WALTERS:Yes, and my first year of high school, which was really the--you know,

it stands out more because, as you know how the Benham school was laid out and,

as, as you know, the Fourth of July was a big deal. You know, the company

sponsored that and it--

CURRIS:Tell us about that.

WALTERS:Well they provided--now this is to the best of my recollection. They

provided a truck, they had some sorts of entertainment and sometimes I thought--

--as I recall, it was at the football field and they had a huge ice cream truck.

Of course, that was a big deal, you know? And then, one of the other big events,

and I guess this is what stays with me and still does is the involvement with

the Credit Union. The annual meeting of the Credit Union was a tremendous social

function. And, you know, they always managed to have--now, I didn't go to all of

those but back in those days, family members--was not accepted early on.

CURRIS:Oh, into the meeting? Into the annual meeting or into the Credit Union?

WALTERS:They were not allowed to be members.

CURRIS:Oh, all right.

WALTERS:But they were allowed to attend the meetings and I remember they would

always hand out a little--I call 'em handouts. Plus, I remember one year they

gave us, everybody, silver dollars and I--and the reason I remember that so

well, I got

one that was 1900. And my dad had, like, 1912 or something and we switched those

out because that was the year he was born. But, yeah, it was also a big event. I

think they had, to the best of my knowledge--of course, this wouldn't have been

my interest at that time but I think they had some kind of finger foods or

something like that, too. But once again, it was a huge--or in my eyes and

several others, it was a huge event.

CURRIS:When you're talking about these big events, was the July 4th event

sponsored by International Harvester?

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:And so, they would then have a big to-do down at the football field.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Was the whole town invited?

WALTERS:Pretty much, yes, yeah. I, I, I--as I recall, it was just open. You

just came in as, once again, as I can recall that.

CURRIS:Yeah,

yes.

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:What sports did you play in grade school, high school?

WALTERS:In grade school, I played basketball and football, which was the

primary sports. Of course, I played little league baseball, but, and freshman

football. But I made the team at Cumberland but once again, you know, we were

the freshman there. We were the new guys as far as football goes and, yeah, my

sophomore year, and it was kind of hard for me to make that adjustment. Some

guys did it well. It was just a little more difficult for me because I was

playing against what was the opposition, you know?

CURRIS:Well, and not only that is I remember it. We had huge rivalries between

Lynch and Cumberland. Benham, Lynch, Benham, Cumberland. So, for you to

suddenly, your freshman year, be going off to Cumberland and then to Lynch, that

was huge.

WALTERS:Sophomore year. Yes, it was.

CURRIS:Sophomore year.

WALTERS:Yeah, but, I, I, you know, I did have, not to my satisfaction, but I

did have at least one year of high school at Benham and my younger brother, of

course, he didn't have that opportunity. I felt like you missed out on something

if you didn't go to school at Benham, you know? I felt like you were--

CURRIS:You lost.

WALTERS:--you're missing out, (laughter) yeah.

CURRIS:Who was your favorite teacher?

WALTERS:Oh, my favorite teacher in high school would have been, well, it'd be a

tossup between Ronnie--Walter Dick and Janie Robinette.

CURRIS:Both from Benham.

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Both.

WALTERS:That would be and, and, and that may still be my favorites all through.

CURRIS:What was your favorite song in high school?

WALTERS:Well, this was my senior year and it was "A Summer Place." It was both instrumental

and verbal. And that was also the theme of our prom. And we just went to our--I

think it was our fiftieth a couple, three years ago and as I recall, and my

memory is very poor, very bad, but as I recall, that was our theme for our prom,

our senior prom.

CURRIS:Oh, those were the days. (laughs) What--did your father work in the coal mines?

WALTERS:Yes. My dad started work in the late '20s, I'm not sure when, and

during the Depression, he left there and went back to Tennessee.

CURRIS:Was this at Benham that he was working?

WALTERS:Yes, that's the only mines that he ever worked at was International

Harvester. And he worked, as I said, prior to the, the, uh Depression. And then,

during the Depression, he went back to Tennessee and went back to farming and

then immediately was one

of them that was called back when they started back.

CURRIS:When they started hiring well again?

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:What about your grandfather? Was he in the coal mines?

WALTERS:No.

CURRIS:Starts with your father.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:What job did he have in the coal mines?

WALTERS:The only job I know title-wise or job position was a shuttle car

operator. And he lost his hand in the very early '60s and he retired in '62. But

Dr. Schosser and some of those doctors there, they--he kept his hand but he

couldn't function with it fully. Just could use--but, yeah.

CURRIS:Do you remember when you first went into the mines?

WALTERS:I went--I did not go in the mine. I went to Scotia in

'95. I went and worked with the engineers outside the Scotia coal company and I

only worked there for six months because it was a seasonal thing and we were

getting coal samples out of abandoned mines. Wasn't a very pleasurable job. And

when it was up in December, the, the--one of the fellows I was working with, he

chose to stay with them and I chose to go to International Harvester. [Editor’s

note: The Scotia mine was opened in 1962 as a subsidiary of the Blue Diamond

Coal Company. Walters’ date reference to ‘95 is most likely actually 1965 based

on the sequence of events related below.]

CURRIS:Right.

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:What did you do? You have graduated from high school. What's the next

thing that you do?

WALTERS:I go to Indianapolis and I work for the summer as I had done three

summers prior to that. I would go there to earn money. As you know, the mines

was, you know, you was--you were top of the line today and at the very bottom

tomorrow. That went with coal mining.

But I went the summers prior to my graduating and worked summer jobs. And I

enjoyed that quite a bit, in Indianapolis. Older brother, Johnny, worked for the

company and had prior going into the service. So, when I graduated, I went to

McCall Corporation. After I did the summer thing up there and came back and

worked at Scotia, I went to McCall Corporation. It was a women's magazine and

they had Redbook, U.S. News, and the Reader's Digest.

CURRIS:What did you do there?

WALTERS:Well, I worked in the bindery and I was real little. I graduated, I

weighed 118 pounds, and I worked in the bindery. No. I’m sorry--in the bindery

but it was with the pattern shop

and they, McCall's, had patterns. And this is all--I’m just going from--all I

did was pull together (??)--

CURRIS:I remember everything that you just talked about, the McCall's patterns--

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:--the Redbook, the Reader's Digest. Well, what prompted you to leave

that and go onto something else?

WALTERS:Well, the printing industry, you know, the, the--McCall's was really an

experience but it was only eighteen months. But the longest eighteen months of

my life. I was in Dayton, Ohio. And, well, some guys would've thought this was

fantastic. But I worked in the basement. I was the only guy down there and I was

doing the stitching. Those ladies were putting it together and you were judge,

jury, and, well, you know, any time there was any kind of discrepancies and that

happened every day. But I was looking forward to--my brother, Johnny, he called

and said that he could help me out getting on it at Indy and I, I--

and he also said if there was somebody I want to bring with me. So, I called Rod

Cannon and run into a fella named Bud Spangler from Cumberland. He was filling

the Coke machines up the day before I was going to Indy. So, Rod got a ride to

Dayton, Ohio and he and myself and Bud Spangler went up and that started my

career at Indy.

CURRIS:Well, then, when did you join International Harvester?

WALTERS:September the 14th of '66.

CURRIS:What were you doing then?

WALTERS:I was a machine operator in the machine department and I got a medical

condition where I had to go into receiving and that's basically where I was at.

Of course, you know, when you have layoffs and things, you'd be right back

and--eventually, you know, most of my term--but I was a union rep.

After the third year I was at Harvester, I was some form of a union rep and

sometimes, too, during the--from the--my third year seniority until I retired

twenty-seven years later.

CURRIS:What union?

WALTERS:UAW, United Auto Workers.

CURRIS:Well, what was the difference between United Mine Workers and also Progressive?

WALTERS:Well, now this is the best I can recall. You know, United Mine Workers

obviously was the biggest. But Progressive was--a lot of people referred to it

as a company union. And as I remember, just as in the UAW versus--the company

would, generally, U.S. Steel would sell their contracts and International would

follow by just, you know, either matching--maybe a couple things a little different

to the best of my recollection. And, you know, that creates a difference in

the--a little animosity between the two.

CURRIS:I've heard that. When you first started with International Harvester, do

you remember what you were paid?

WALTERS:Me, personally? I remember exactly what I was paid: $1.99 an hour.

CURRIS:How did that rank among wages at the time?

WALTERS:I was in high cotton. Yeah, it was, yeah, that was '66, of course. But,

wait a minute, I said--I'm sorry, it was two-ninety-nine. I remember I was a

penny away from--

CURRIS:Three dollars.

WALTERS:--yeah, and also, that was as a labor--and I think that changed within

the first month because as, you know, you took different jobs, they had

piecework and I went to that.

CURRIS:What--how were you paid?

WALTERS:Oh, I was paid

by check.

CURRIS:You were paid by check.

WALTERS:Yeah, always, yeah. Payroll deduction that--was soon as it became available.

CURRIS:Where did you receive the check? By mail or where did you get the--?

WALTERS:Our supervisors would hand their checks out, yeah.

CURRIS:Do you have any idea whether or not at International Harvester in Benham

they ever used scrip or was it always some form of cash or what?

WALTERS:They started out with scrip and then some, then cash and then,

obviously, to the checks, you know?

CURRIS:So, it was that kind of progression, yeah?

WALTERS:And I remember the scrip. But at one of my sessions, they had brought

some of that scrip. I had him as a speaker and Ed Cannon--and people couldn't

believe that's how the company did years ago, you know? Scrip,

then cash. And I know it was a big deal when they started paying in cash,

especially. It was a big deal because of the protection they had.

CURRIS:When--what would you say amongst your classmates of--let's say the ones

that you graduated with in Cumberland. How many would you say worked in the mines?

WALTERS:Well, the Benham guys, I recall two of the Benham guys, two or three

from Cumberland. Their names won't stay with me. And then, Lynch, you had four.

So, four, two, three, probably seven or eight guys that I recall out of my

senior class.

CURRIS:How many were in your senior class, approximately?

WALTERS:Oh, I don't remember that but it was somewhere, like, 200, some--I

don't really remember, yeah.

CURRIS:Because they had combined--

WALTERS:Yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:I would like to, for the moment, jump to the formation of the Benham

Credit Union. And I'm going to be asking you historical questions, for the best

of your knowledge, and we'll just go from there. Would you describe the actual

formation of the Benham Credit Union as best you know it?

WALTERS:Well, Benham, as any credit union, they're a group of people normally

joined by a common bond. Benham's credit union was the company that

International Harvester--and it got the name of--the Benham Credit Union was

sponsored by International Harvester. That was their one sponsorship. And it

basically is a group of

people who are seeking--financial institution among their selves where they can

get loans and also savings. And at that time, that's all that any credit union

offered. And Benham was one of the earlier credit unions. And I think you, well,

I think we said around '36 or so.

CURRIS:Nineteen thirty-six.

WALTERS:But it's formed by, it's made up of--your credit union is not owned by

the company. It's owned by the members and that's still in play today and it's

still the same system today. However, you got many more functions and many

more--you know, you now can get your homes, your things that you couldn't do

then. Benham did. That was a big exception. A big exception

to the fact (??)--

CURRIS:When do you think, Jerry, that Benham actually started the option of

mortgages?WALTERS: With the sale of the houses.

CURRIS:So, that would have been in the '60s.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Probably 1962, '63, somewhere in there?

WALTERS:Yeah, or before, yes.

CURRIS:Or before.

WALTERS:Yeah. I don't think they did mortgages then, prior to the sale of the

house, to the sale of the houses. I'm pretty sure they did not do mortgages.

CURRIS:When it came time to--who would have made the International Harvester

decision to create the Benham Credit Union?

WALTERS:Well, that would not have been a decision from the company. Now, the

company had to agree to that. But I would assume whoever was the superintendent

would have been the--that would have been

the final word. That would have been the okay. And I'm sure they also got that

permission from Chicago as, to my knowledge, all of them had to do that when

they were at Benham.

CURRIS:Now, Chicago was the home office?

WALTERS:World headquarters, yes

CURRIS:The world headquarters for International Harvester?

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:So, we're looking at home office and then down to the superintendent.

But the superintendent would have been the driving force or just would have been

complying with what Chicago wanted to do?

WALTERS:Well, I'm sure that Chicago left that up to them, that particular

situation, because the other international plants, you know, it would've been a

different playing field because, you know, each is different, you know? The coal

mines is not, in my case, the engine manufacturer. So, they catered that to

company, which, by the way, was the best, the

best of all the ones that I'm aware of simply because it had its own position in

the town. It was, you know, of course you had a barber shop and I don't remember

the other little things but most of it was owned by the company with the

exception of the credit union.

CURRIS:Do you know what the different sites, locations in Benham, were for the

office for the Credit Union?

WALTERS:Not really. I remember when it was under, when it was by the barber

shop, under the meat market. I remember when it was in the--I'm thinking it was

in the--or it was out when it closed, of course, but I think there was another

location but I really can't remember.

CURRIS:Okay.

WALTERS:I was in the process of--

CURRIS:Right. The last one was at City Hall.

WALTERS:Yeah, right.

CURRIS:In Benham.

WALTERS:And that’s, and I was actually in that one. I was in all of 'em at one

point or--

CURRIS:Would Pat Sturgill have been the superintendent at the time?

WALTERS:Very good chance of that. In fact, that's who I thought it was but I

wouldn't go on record and swear that. But I think that--and he was also an

officer, I'm pretty sure of--once again, I can't swear to that but I'm

reasonably sure that he was. And I remember conversations that my dad would be

having with different people and Pat would be there.

CURRIS:Now, you have forwarded to me and we will have in the exhibits at the

Benham Hern Financial Center the actual original charters for Benham. And will

we be able to find the dates of the original charter on those documents?

WALTERS:You can find 'em if you can read 'em. They're old and I

say--I got interested in that Benham charter a few years ago when I met Wendell

Lyons in Indianapolis. He's the president of the Kentucky League. And what

really stood out and got me going to ----(??)--in fact, I went to their annual

meeting as his guest, was the comments he made about the Benham board, you know?

And when they would go--and they stood out. And I'm not sure of how to identify

that. He said they were very impressive, you know? You had coal miners that were

grouped together as a board of directors. And as in any credit union that's

well-formed, you'll have all aspects as far as your board directions. And I know

that he helped me with some research on that and his successor, I still stay in

touch, just--.

CURRIS:But more than likely based on photographs that you and I have both seen,

we're looking at the early, probably mid-1930s--

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:--would more than likely be--

WALTERS:Thirty-six, yeah.

CURRIS:--probably '36. How is a credit union and, more particularly, Benham,

how was it first chartered? You had mentioned earlier both by federal and by state.

WALTERS:Well, yeah, well, mentioning that, Benham has always been, to the best

of my knowledge--and it was chartered as a state charter. And it remained a

state charter. However, some credit unions today, as well as then, you still had

some federal insurance. And when you're a state charter, I'll go by today's as

today, you'll be examined and they usually do it mutually with the state, every

five years with the federal.

The state used to be every year. In fact, that had to be. That was a law that

every credit union was examined annually. Now it's every eighteen months. So,

that--exams has changed. So, even though they weren't a federal charter, once

again, I have to go to some of my facts. We are a state charter but we started

out a federal charger and Benham started out as a state charter and stayed that

way. However, NCUA, which is the National Credit Union Administration, they did

audit Benham as well as other credit unions.

CURRIS:Do you have any idea what the results of any of those audits were over

the years?

WALTERS:I can only go by conversations with past directors and Benham was

unique, they

really were, in the credit union industry. And I think that's why when they

would go to state conventions in Louisville, I think that's what stood out about

them is, you know, they would go that extra step. And also, they would never do

anything that was illegal but they might do something that was out of protocol

because--to help somebody. For example, may I give an example?

CURRIS:Certainly.

WALTERS:Is a coal miner was coming in and it was a known fact that the company

was bringing him in but he had to, I think, spend a year in the mines. And I

can't use any names even though I'd love to because he turned out a fabulous

family. But long story short, he didn't come under the qualifications for a loan

for whatever reason. His tenure at the company, I would assume. But the board

of directors cosigned that loan and that was a no-no then and it's a no-no now

because you're getting personally involved. But also, with my credit union

experience, I think the examiner can say, "You shouldn't have done that" and be

doing that, indicating you guys did a good job. You guys did something really

good. And it wasn't that--you've heard stories. Rainbo with a TV [George

“Rainbo” Johnson, see interview 2023oh0083_bcu0005_johnson_acc001], there was

just a multitude of stories and that would take up this entire time, just

telling you all those things.

CURRIS:Give us two. Give us two stories that you really like.

WALTERS:Well, that is my favorite because here's a guy that the company had the

confidence in who had four children. And here he's coming, he's just moving into

Benham or Cumberland. And

he's got four young kids and he needed to get started there. He already had a

reputation in Virginia as the coal miner and from what he did in the mines and

he ended up obviously being on management. And they knew that. That's about--a

single sponsor, you have a rapport and that rapport is pretty strong between the

credit union and the company. They're your sponsor. That's number one. And in

most cases, I think Benham, they paid the bills, but those were minimal as

compared to today. But now, you know, it's hard to survive a single sponsorship.

But back then, it was a very, very close relationship. It was a very close bond.

And I don't know of how to go into too many stories because they were all

basically the same. A guy had a big family, needed this or whatever

and a good credit union, and Benham certainly was, a good credit union, they go

out of their way to make a loan versus to reject a loan. They take whatever

avenues they can to do that. And, as you know, the coal mining industry was up

and down and on the downside, you knew the good side was coming and you made

those adjustments. And I can remember not forgiving those loans but times of

layoffs or whatever, just pay the interest on those loans, not the payment on

them, but they would just pay the interest on them. And that's fortunate that

credit unions can do that and they can do that and that's totally aboveboard. I

mean, that's what's unique about the credit union versus your banks. And there's

other things that they're able to do.

CURRIS:So, what we're really looking at is

a small town, at that time I would imagine we're looking at around 3,500 people,

more or less. And I know when we were in school, the sign used to say 3,500

coming into Benham but I imagine there were times it was greater than that. And

we certainly know it was less than that--and so that during those times, you had

a company that had sponsored a credit union. Much of the management as well as

the miners and various parts of the mine were represented on the board of

directors and so, therefore, they attempted to be very humane in their dealings

with making loans. Would you say that's an accurate statement?

WALTERS:Yes, but I would say it was entirely made up of active employees.

CURRIS:Oh, was it?

WALTERS:Yeah, I mean other than Bob, of course. I mean, you know, your

committees and your board of directors, your

credit committee, your supervisory committee, yeah, that I'm very comfortable

saying they were all active employees.

CURRIS:Of International Harvester?

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Okay. Do you know who served on any of the boards--

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:--over years?

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Okay.

WALTERS:(pauses) Most of these were on these committees at the time of--

CURRIS:How many committees did the board have?

WALTERS:Well, the board had, originally, the board, the board, and I'm not sure

of the numbers but our board is seven and I think that was Benham's number, I

think. And then, three and sometimes five. It depends on what the volumes of the--

CURRIS:What were the names of the committees?

WALTERS:There was the board of directors is

your governing committee. Your management, your--

CURRIS:Would there have been a--

WALTERS:--wait a minute--

CURRIS:--loan committee?

WALTERS:--oh, yeah, but before that, more importantly, is the supervisory

committee who is the police, police dog. They are the watchmen on all accounts:

the business, the board, the credit committees. They're the watchdogs. And the

state charters are elected. In a federal charter, they're appointed. So, you had

your credit committee, your supervisory committee, and your board of directors.

Now, I notice that there's a loan review committee. That committee came after

they did away with the credit committee. Benham never did. They still had a

credit committee when they dissolved. And I have some of those names and some of

of them, I know what committees they were on. Others, I know they were involved

at the closing of the committ--of the Credit Union, you know, when it was, like,

when they did--

CURRIS:Yeah, I'm sorry for interrupting there. It suddenly dawned on me that I

didn't know whether we had listed what those various committees were. So, yes,

please go ahead and tell us about--

WALTERS:Well, I'll give you some of the names, if that's okay, first and their

functions. These are some of the directors that was on the board, also some of

the original directors and I think I can keep those separate. Bob King was on

the board. Steve Knoll was on the board. Ed Cannon was on the board. [Dean] Dink

Fields was on the board. Bud France, I think, was credit committee. And Fuzz

Estep, Charles, and I had to call his brother

and find out because I never knew Fuzz by anything but Fuzz. And Fuzz was

originally on the credit committee--who moved up to supervisory committee. And

Fuzz was replaced by a guy for a very short period of time because--right before

they closed. And that was Johnny Carroll. So, that's some I know as of now. Bob

King, his dad was Diddy King. And I'm going to let you handle that name because

he was one of the original board that I knew--knew of.

CURRIS:So, Bob King's father was on the board of directors?

WALTERS:The original board of directors.

CURRIS:The original board.

WALTERS:Yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:And so, he was called Doddie. [Diddy]

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:But his name had actually been Napoleon, had it not?

WALTERS:Napoleon Bonaparte (laughter) King.

CURRIS:How great.

WALTERS:Yeah. Yeah, well, (laughs) so--

CURRIS:So, he was on the board

of directors.

WALTERS:--he was, Diddy was.

CURRIS:Diddy was, yes.

WALTERS:He was one of the original--and the only one I knew was Howard “Red”

Patton. I knew him, of course, growing up. And, of course, later, my dad, he was

on the board, as well.

CURRIS:And your father's name again?

WALTERS:Henry. And he was on the board when the Credit Union, when it

dissolved. And they, that legacy is still going, that group of men. And, of

course, as I think I told you earlier, Bob, when you're the CO or manager,

whatever you chose back then, they were accommodating.

CURRIS:And we're talking about Robert Hern.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Yes.

WALTERS:Oh, yeah, absolutely. Sorry, you know, I just knew him as Bob.

CURRIS:Well, didn't everyone call him Bob, pretty much?

WALTERS:To my knowledge they did.

And you would call him that, not out of--by no means disrespect because we were

taught growing up that you were--I'm sure, it's mister or missus, but there are

some people that--you know, Bob Hern, you know, this is automatically you

know--and because of his position, which really was kind of unique in a little

town like that, a little coal mining town like that.

CURRIS:How would you describe that?

WALTERS:Bob? You mean with his--well, Bob was, at that time, I'm sure--because

you have, you have, you know, everybody's happy except the guy that don't get

his loan. And any criticism that you would ever get from the Credit Union,

irregardlesss of what that criticism come from, it come from some person, probably,

who felt like he had something coming that he didn't, because I can almost

guarantee this, that if there was a way to get a guy his money, they would do

it. So, usually, any criticisms of mostly any credit union is from a member who

didn't get what he wanted exactly the way he wanted it at the time he wanted it.

You don't have much of that, but you can just bank on it, you know?

CURRIS:Was the--give us kind of an outline, and I'm kind of changing mode here,

but give us an outline. If you wanted to be a member, how did a miner open an account?

WALTERS:Well, first of all, you would have to be an active employee. You

couldn't be a member if you weren't.

CURRIS:An active employee of?

WALTERS:International Harvester. Now, of course, any credit union employees

could be a member. But that was the, that was a requirement and, and, at my

credit union--and it was that way at Benham--I don't know that it was that way

at Benham but it stands to reason that it would have been--when you retired,

you--your membership was--credit union, in mine, and I think it was that way in

Benham, you would, yeah, they would close your account and you'd have that

payroll deduction. And when you retired, sadly--but that wasn't necessarily a

credit union bylaw or a regulation. It was a, you know, the credit union was

well guarded through the state and your, you know, they use certain

guards and that, I think, was one of them. And also, when that, when that was

relaxed and you could have family members--and it was a liability for most of

the company's plans. So, therefore, that was a no-no. Benham was, once again,

different. They were out in town. You can walk from your house, go into your

credit union. There was no liability there. So, once that was relaxed, that

liability, and you didn't have to be a member, you could stay involved with the

credit union as a retiree, which was huge. Very beneficial.

CURRIS:So, they did that at Benham but not necessarily in other credit unions.

WALTERS:Exactly. But when they could, once again, taking a page out of Benham's

credit union, I followed that plan, as well.

CURRIS:When we talk about

you had to be an employee of International Harvester, so we're talking about

Benham. What about the miners in Lynch in these early years?

WALTERS:No.

CURRIS:They could not be members?

WALTERS:No, not at first, no. That came along with the deregulation. And

whereas the liability was taken off the company--in my, in mine, as well, as I'm

sure that had a lot to do with Benham. And I don't know what the U.S. Steel (??)

International situation was during some of those times. But I know Lynch did not

have the credit union and I do know that, at the closing, there were several

Lynch people that were members of the Credit Union.

CURRIS:The uh, some of your comments would suggest that in some ways, Benham

was almost a trendsetter.

WALTERS:Certainly was for me.

CURRIS:Talk to me a little more

about that. We have talked about the fact that if you're in difficult

circumstances, if there were any way at all to give a loan, then that loan would

be given.

WALTERS:Yes, it would.

CURRIS:And we're talking about, then, that you could remain a member in Benham

at a later time even as a retiree.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Are there other instances where Benham would create these operational

mechanisms that they would be technically legal but they weren't necessarily

followed in other credit unions?

WALTERS:Well, you know, we say sometimes miner but you also had nurses,

doctors, schoolteachers. And so, and I, like you, I have a tendency to say coal

miners because that was the backbone, that was the basics. But it was also your

schoolteachers and, you know, even early on, some of the employees, you know, I

don't remember the bowling alley or all those things. But, you know, if you were

involved with International Harvester, you know, the doctors and, just as an

example, postal employees, if you were affiliated--basic Benham, you was a

member, yeah.

CURRIS:How did you become a member? I understand that there were shares. How

did, if I--if we're in the early years and I am an employee and I come to the

Credit Union to open an account, what happens?

WALTERS:You would give them a card, that you would sign this card and you would

give them five dollars and a quarter. That five dollars was your shares. That

quarter was your membership. You didn't get the quarter back. (laughs)

And that's that way, at least in my credit union, today.

CURRIS:Is it still basically $5.25?

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Even now?

WALTERS:Even today.

CURRIS:In 2023?

WALTERS:Even today, 2023. As of this past Saturday, it was still that.

CURRIS:And so, I have come in and I have paid down my $5.25. And do I get an

account book? Do I get a document? Is it just--what happens?

WALTERS:Well, if you did it in the '30s and '40s, you probably got an account

book, as well as if you got a loan, you probably got a loan book, as well. And

your account book, basically, you would enter your, you know, the old banking,

the old deposits, and any withdrawals and you kept track of it yourself like

that. And you would get your statement. Then they were monthly. And

even today, we have people that, they still like the hard copy in hand of that

transaction, even though that's been replaced by, you know, banking, electronic--

CURRIS:Technology.

WALTERS:--yeah, yes. And it's a good thing in a way but we still have some guys

that still do, they still do that. But I remember those payment books and I

remember those where you would add your savings and then subtract from your loan

and, of course, I don't know that that exists anywhere, but, you know?

CURRIS:What about, what services--okay, I'm now a member. I've paid my $5.25.

WALTERS:So, when did you become a member? In 1938 or in 1965?

CURRIS:Let--tell us the difference.

WALTERS:Well, in 1965--I'm sorry, let's go back. In 1936, which I'm reasonably

sure was when it

became a credit union, you had savings and loans, that's it. That's it. That's all.

CURRIS:So, I could deposit for savings.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:And I could ask for a loan.

WALTERS:Exactly. But your deposit, you did that, when you initiated with that

$5.25, you're also opening a space how much you wanted deducted weekly, you

know, for savings, and, okay? And then, next month, you get a loan. Then you

would be given this is what your loan payments--depending on what Bob and

yourself worked out on the payments. Were you going three years, two years,

depending on the loan. A lot of things. Depends on what the loan is, how much,

and what it's for. But that, that payment, that would be that and you would have

that, as well, to do back then to do in your,

your membership packet or card or payment book or whatever. You had a payment

book as well as you had a--you kept your own account.

CURRIS:Interesting.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:So, I am an employee of International Harvester. So, are there going to

be deductions from International--from your paycheck directly to the Credit Union?

WALTERS:Yes, as early on as when it was it was scrip, to my knowledge, and as

well as when the company started paying with cash, you know? International, to

me, was a little bit unique even though pretty well on line with Ford and the

other councils that I'm familiar with. But International Harvester was, as I

said, that bond was a pretty strong bond. And even though you were paid in cash,

that Credit Union deduction, that came out

before you got your envelope with that cash. The Credit Union had their payment

and that was arranged even--similar things have happened in most recent years,

such as 2000. I'll put it that way.

CURRIS:Well, what about your payments at the company store, the Big Store and

the meat market? Did that go through the Credit Union or were those direct

deposits that went to those entities?

WALTERS:I think those went to the entities. But I'm not sure about that. But

I'm sure there were things, what we refer to then and still now in some cases:

big ticket items. A washer, a gun. As you know, the store had those and I'm

pretty sure, probably some of those went through the Credit Union. In fact, I

know it did in some cases where a guy be getting a gun, or purchasing something,

once again, big ticket.

CURRIS:So, it was more like a loan from the Credit Union.

WALTERS:Yeah, in those cases.

CURRIS:In those cases.

WALTERS:Yeah, but you also had a store bill that, you know, that we was talking

a minute--and I can't remember who was the store manager at that time but he had

an assistant manager, their offices were upstairs and I'm trying to think of

their names, but you paid that store bill when you got your check. I think it

was weekly, also. I don't know when they closed it but, you know, like, if they

closed that account from Wednesday to Wednesday or whatever. But, you know, I'm

not sure.

CURRIS:Well, if I jump forward to, let's say 1966, and I'm coming in and I want

to be a member?

WALTERS:Okay, same procedure. I don't know if the little cards are still in

play. They were, in my credit union, 1966. But also, the difference today,

let's move on. Let's fast forward to 2000.

CURRIS:Sure.

WALTERS:Okay, fast forward to 2000. Now, you go in and you've got these things

known as cell phones and you've got your internet banking. You’re uh, and now,

today, you don't have a savings and loan only. You've got a savings and you've

got a savings account, you've got CDs, you've got IRAs, you've got all these

different entities. You have, actually, mortgages, second mortgages, and the

advancement is we're a full ser--at that time is full-service banking. You have

no reason to go anywhere but your credit union because anything that a bank can

do for you a credit union can do for you now. And that has not always been that

way. Especially, for many, many years,

it was basically for the working guy that wanted a savings and loan, a place to

save and a place to borrow money. And he felt comfortable because he owned it.

And that is what was unique then and, in my view, it's unique, as well, today.

CURRIS:Just fascinating. I want to jump forward to the employee spouses because

if you have a spouse, and this goes back to your comments about liability, if

you have a spouse with a separate account who is not an employee, then you have

nothing to attach. So, when were spouses able to be members of a credit union,

as well? Was that ever an issue? Ever a problem?

WALTERS:Yes, it was. You know, and I have to refer back to my credit union.

Even recently, until we

got off company property, they couldn't be a member because of liability. Now, I

assume that when International--our Benham Credit Union, when Benham Credit

Union got where they could keep--or it wasn't one of their policies that when a

retiree retired, I assume that at the same time, it's what it did with me, I

would assume at that same time, you took advantage of that and you, you welcomed

family members, which is astronomical. That's huge. When you get away from just

being an employee only, it, it, it's huge in your growth. Huge. I don't like

reverting back to my credit union but I have to make the point. In six months

after we get off company property,

we doubled in six months' time. Our new building, we had to put a divider down

the boardroom, have our board meetings in the lobby because of our growth and

the sizes. And that was the same way with Benham. Maybe not as far as employees,

as credit union employees, but I can assure you, because I know a lot of members

today that's never been inside of a coal mine, when that credit union

liquidated, I know a lot of guys, a lot of people that has never been inside a

credit union, and pretty much all the spouses, you know?

CURRIS:So, at some point, Benham did permit spouses.

WALTERS:Yes, at some point.

CURRIS:But we don't know when.

WALTERS:No, I don't.

CURRIS:But it would have been in the later stages, probably.

WALTERS:Yeah, it would have been just probably prior to the I, uh--this is a

guess but I have reasons to think this, it would've been probably shortly before

the company sold to the company they sold to.

CURRIS:Okay. We have jumped forward. Now, I want to have a loan for a car. So,

I'm coming into the Credit Union and I'm coming in in the 1950s and 1960s. And

I'm an employee, so what do I do to obtain the loan?

WALTERS:Well, first you come in and you obviously have your--I would assume you

would have your loan through the dealer or, I'm sorry, your paperwork through

the dealer and it would have your car, what it was, and so on. Now, this is back

in '50s. Basically, then, it was a title. That's it. And, and the Credit Union

would tie you down or the Credit Union would put that lien on your title and the

Credit Union would physically hold that title. And we still do that

now. They would physically hold that title. The difference in--and then and

now--and your loan would be made according to what you could pay and, once

again, as always, as from the beginning, your ability to repay. That--all loans

are approved on your ability to repay that loan. And, again, credit unions had

advantage, in my view that, okay, this car might be four years that the--and

they would assume it is a four-year loan and they would try to keep that

liquidity or that loan value so that if they had to recover that car, the credit

union wouldn't lose money. And they did a good job with that because they were

conservative but they also--a person that maybe wanted that car paid for in three

years but it might, it might, you know, stretch his living expenses, they would

probably go an extra year and because people kept those longer. And today it’s,

you know, your loan's based upon your, um--I've just lost my train of thought

but it's based on your earnings and how much of those earnings it takes you to

live. In other words, your average electric bill, your average this, and all

that's TDR, total, total debt ratio. And then, the CDR is the current debt

ratio. So, back then, as well as now, it was still figured that way at the end

of the day. Of course, we use different, we use computers and things now that

those guys, they had to do that.

CURRIS:Now, we talked about the fact that, initially, the

Credit Union in Benham only had loans and savings.

WALTERS:Yes, as all credit unions.

CURRIS:As all credit unions did. And it was presumed--it wasn't until

International Harvester chose to sell the homes that they had constructed to the

actual employees, and we think of that predominantly as miners, although, as you

said, you know, we're talking about doctors, nurses, teachers, and so forth. So,

we think that it's at the time that they were going to sell the homes that they

started the concept of mortgages.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Is that correct?

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Now, let's say a miner wants to buy his home. Could he have financed

that home by a bank as opposed to the Credit Union?

WALTERS:Oh, I'm sure.

CURRIS:So, it was not a locked-in situation--

WALTERS:No.

CURRIS:--as far as

the Credit Union was concerned.

WALTERS:No, see, and also, that would not have been legally, you know, that--

CURRIS:I had not thought of that.

WALTERS:--yeah.

CURRIS:(laughs) I'm glad you said that. So, okay, I have a home and so I come

to the Credit Union. Explain to me those days of the big sale of the homes. I

remember that as being a very, very big deal, that suddenly this home that you

had had for all these years, you had the ability to own.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:From your perspective as a child of Benham, what was it like living in a

company home?

WALTERS:You know, there's an old saying: be careful what you pray for 'cause

you just might get

it. And it, it can apply to that in some sense because those houses, you know,

they were company built and I'm just using my home, if it's okay, which was my--

CURRIS:Yes.

WALTERS:--really right almost next door to your grandparents. Uh, and using

that, I remember our house, I think it was, like, $750, if I remember right.

Now, I'm really testing my memory. I think it was $750 and I remember Dad, who

was on the board at that time, but he was going up and he was going to get--you

know, that was astronomical, you know? 'Cause the house next door to ours was

400, 400 and change, seventy, whatever. And I recall he went up to get that

lowered. Now, whether he did get it lowered or not, I don't know but he probably

did to some degree. Probably no more than $100,

if that. But a lot of things had to do with the housing. Our house, we preceded

Mr. Kaylor (??), Noel Kaylor. Not Doc, as we know, but his dad. And his dad came

to Benham as the carpenter, as the head--carpenter shop. And he was over all the

building of the houses and this was his house, his former house. So, he had

added a room here and there and a little bit on that side that you could

actually stay in. That was our clubhouse as children. But those all come into

play. But I know, and I, I don't know specifics, but I do know that if you were

involved with the Credit Union in any way, shape, or form, you were getting a

lot of calls, you know? You know, people were trying to get paid. "Look, hey,

look, how do we do this? Can we do this?" I mean, all of a sudden, it was

sprung. The rumor had been going around this was going to happen. Bam, it

happens and then there's all these questions. "How do we get this financed?

What do we do?” And as we've talked earlier, your mother came into play--I'm

positive, I couldn't swear but she came in there as a Credit Union employee

because she was making the loans, helping to make those loans, but she was

working in a company office, no doubt. I think they probably recruited more help

because it was just a massive deal. It was massive, you know?

CURRIS:Who set the value for the houses?

WALTERS:The company did. And, uh, and this was not a negotiable deal. This is

what these houses are and this is what they're worth. And the company was pretty

glad to do that because once that happened, you know, a lot of things changed. I

don't know what Benham was paying--the homeowners were paying before they

actually owned the homes. I don't know what they were paying but I do know

that a lot of things changed after it become theirs, you know? Benham would hire

high school students, you know, International Harvester would, in the paint

crews, as you remember, and they would paint houses. And they made it a point

every house was painted every so many years. And in that environment, they

needed it. But all that, that went by way of the buffalo.

CURRIS:What about water and electricity and so forth?

WALTERS:Yeah, that--

CURRIS:--before the sale, who paid for that?

WALTERS:Well, I think, I know Benham paid for the water. The water plant was up

near one of the--the bathhouses moved with the interest to coal mines, you know?

And I remember one of the water plants was attached real close to the bathhouse

up by the colored school. And that's what it was referred to, colored school.

I'm not saying that.

CURRIS:Right, that was the language of our time, yes.

WALTERS:Yeah, right, exactly, yes.

CURRIS:Yes.

WALTERS:But, uh, and I remember installing

different meters and I don't know if that was due to the electrical company or

International Harvester.

CURRIS:About how old were you at this time?

WALTERS:Gosh, I don't remember the year they sold it. Do you happen to remember?

CURRIS:I think it's around 1963, give or take.

WALTERS:Yeah, well, '63 was my first year at Cumberland and I thought we owned

our house in '62 when I was at Benham.

CURRIS:You could have.

WALTERS:But I can't swear to that. But I think we did. I think so.

CURRIS:So, you can go to any lending institution but you've decided to go to

the Credit Union.

WALTERS:Almost everyone. Almost everyone. I don't know of a person--I, I,

personally, I can't even imagine anyone going anywhere but the Credit Union to

get a loan because it was only offered to active employees at

that time. And I recall that, that, uh, there's this Joe, it's just a fact he

went to the Credit Union. If there was one, I can't even vision who that person

might have been.

CURRIS:Well, actually, when you think about the history of Benham and those of

us who lived there and the time, there probably hadn't been much thought to

going anyplace else--

WALTERS:Exactly.

CURRIS:--during that time. It was quite close-knit.

WALTERS:One hundred percent, exactly, yes. And I, I'm sure that a lot of U.S.

Steel homes, a huge majority of them, I would think, was financed to a degree,

you know?

CURRIS:Would this have been, for the Lynch homes, would this have been after

the Lynch office was opened for the Credit Union?

Because I remember that Dad, Bob Hern, went to Lynch then and opened an office

in Lynch.

WALTERS:But wasn’t that temporarily, just for, like, till they could close

those houses?

CURRIS:I do not know.

WALTERS:I think so.

CURRIS:But it could have been.

WALTERS:I think it was. I, once again, I can't nail that but I'm pretty sure

that was just a temporary thing.

CURRIS:Okay.

WALTERS:That was for convenience. Also, room, space for them, as well. It was,

it was, was the best of both parties to have a separate entity there, just for

that purpose. But I don't think they ever had a branch, per se, there, no.

CURRIS:Okay. Well, going back to Benham and we have these homes. And we have

brought in Pauline Hern to help with the paperwork.

WALTERS:Yep.

CURRIS:And was Shirley Hensley still there at that time?

WALTERS:I think so, yes.

CURRIS:So, Shirley, who had been the longtime

secretary, she is there and then Bob Hern is the manager at that time. So, you

have those three people. So, I come in from--for a loan and I'm probably going

to any of the three and then for just providing the information and then the,

the determination is made as to whether or not I can have the mortgage. Describe

that process.

WALTERS:(coughs) Excuse me. Okay, let's say you're going in to buy your home,

is that what you're doing? Okay, I, I would think you would go in and Miss Hern,

if she was doing that, I, I’m, I'm sure she was qualified as pretty much a loan

officer as your--what we call tellers, which they're not. They're member service

reps, even then. But because

they had that window, they were a teller. But they were member service reps.

Once again, that divided us from, separated us from the bank. But I'm sure that

Miss Hern, when you would go in and you would fill out that paper, I'm confident

she knew exactly what was acceptable and how to manage that. I don't know of

anyone that was turned down for a home. I don't know of anyone. To my knowledge,

once again, Jo, it's going back a day or two, but I don't recall anyone being

turned down for a home because you had the equity in it. I mean, you had, in my

case, you had a four-bedroom house and a huge living room and dining room. Huge.

And kitchen. And that's $750. So, you know, credit unions should not have lost

anything on any of those, loans going bad or

not. It, it, but by that same token, you know, they had those deeds until those

houses were paid off. Those deeds were just as a car loan would be, where you

would have the title for the car, then you would have your home mortgage. The

Credit Union would hold those, as well.

CURRIS:So, the Credit Union is dealing with the paperwork and the actual

transaction but the payments are ultimately then to International Harvester.

WALTERS:No.

CURRIS:No, tell me about this.

WALTERS:Oh, oh, wait a minute. Let's get this straightened out. The Credit

Union paid for every one of those homes that was financed. I mean they, you

know, it was like buying a car. I mean, you went and you made that deal on that

car, that loan was approved, the Credit Union got that title and they held that

title. And if you wanted that title back, you had to pay that car off or if you traded

that car and there's still something due on it, then when you made that trade,

the Credit Union got paid off and you got the remainder. So, it was the same way

with the titles or the deeds to the homes. The Credit Union had those deeds.

And, and to this day, I still allow my credit union to keep my cars, all of

them, in that folder there, uh, because it's safekeeping. Also, as you know,

they're not the old paper back now but you still got those there at the Credit

Union. Much safer with them than me. And, and then when I get ready to trade a

car, I will tell one of our MSRs, "Hey, send me that title. I need to--I want to

trade cars." And, uh, even when I don't finance one, I'll take the title there.

That's old school.

CURRIS:So, (laughs) yes, so that you have your mortgage, you make

your payments. The Credit Union holds the title, the mortgage, uh, deed, until

all your payments are made.

WALTERS:Yes.

CURRIS:Now, all payments have been made, let's assume.

WALTERS:Okay.

CURRIS:What does the Credit Union do at that point?

WALTERS:Well, you mean your home's paid for?

CURRIS:Um-hm.

WALTERS:Well, you will get a, they, uh, a lot of credit unions will send it to

you unless you're like myself and tell them to hold it for you for safekeeping.

You, your title to your car or your home, your mortgage for your home, you would

have a clear mortgage and that would be sent to you, as well. But a lot of

people, and I'm sure they did it in Benham for, I don't know, several families

that I know well, most of them are family members, but they did then just as I

do now, they would keep some of those in your file there.

In other words, you own that home. You had a clear mortgage. You had

documentation of that but the actual paper itself was in the Credit Union

because you knew, knew where to go get it.

CURRIS:When you look back at this point, Jerry, what are your favorite thoughts

and memories of Benham?

WALTERS:Well, you know, to grow up in Benham, I thought, my opinion, it was

unique. Everybody knew everybody. You didn't get out of line because your

neighbor would correct you, you know? And you did that, things we don't have the

liberty to do today. You just don't have that. And, and, it was, you know, you

knew what people were doing, even though you weren't close-knit, you knew

so-and-so, they were going to this college or it was just a--the most

unique thing about Benham is it was like one tremendous family, one huge family.

If somebody got injured or something, you felt for 'em, you know? I can tell

you, to my memory, I knew, using yourself, you and Rocky Fawbush were two people

that had horses. That's going back a year or two, but I can also tell you that

there were just so many things. You knew how well someone's parents were doing.

If you don't mind, I'd like to use your mom, for example. She was always a

person that, uh, when I contributed those things to the museum, she was there

for two of those. Um, I, I don't know if she worked there as a volunteer or just

whatever but she was there and she was the first one to greet me. And she did it

the same way she did when she was coming up to

see Mr. Parker or Miss Parker, you know? Same way as, as when I was eight years

old or whatever. Same smile, same way, and pretty much the same conversation.

"You behaving?" You know, and, and, and those things. It's just hard for me to

put into words because it just is a closeness. And it's still there. As I said,

as of this past Saturday, I was with Benham people in my own credit union in

Indianapolis and, and, uh, we were referring to a lot of Benham things that were

going on then. And that's, as far as my own personal life, still today I reflect

on Benham a lot, uh, and when I say my personal life, that's my credit union

life or my life itself, yeah.

CURRIS:We talked Pauline, my mother.

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:What about Bob? In the community. What were their activities?

WALTERS:Well, in my, in my situation, you know, I was a kid. You knew your

mother because she was always in the--well, well, whatever was going on, she was

with 'em, all of 'em, the women, you know, the ladies, I mean. And Bob, we just

looked at him, as young boys growing up, and young adults, see, our parents ,

they were the ones that were the closest to Bob. You look at him, you know, and

you knew he had had, well I think it was pol--what, what was his accident?

CURRIS:Actually it was ice skating.

WALTERS:Ice skating.

CURRIS:Accident.

WALTERS:Yeah, and, and you know, and he would always speak to you. But as

children and young adults, you had to go toward Pauline, your mother. And I

don't call her Pauline. (laughter) But, you know,

and also, she was an actual neighbor of ours, as well. And her brother, C.R., so

I guess that had a lot to do with that attraction to why I was not close but

felt closer to her and more comfortable talking to her because, uh, you know, if

I were to go, which I didn't, because, sadly, I, I was away from home when I

bought my first car. But, you know, you would go with Bob and it would be

business. But, yet, a kind word. And you would go to your mother, it's whatever

she's going to ask you next or whatever she's going to tell you next. And it was

always friendly. Always. I got an amen for this the other night in my

conversation with some guys. And he always had that smile. Always. It'd just

come, even, even if you were back home for a tragedy

or something. When she would greet you, she always had that smile, she, uh, to

me. Now, this is personal and I'm just speaking for myself only.

CURRIS:Yes, yes.

WALTERS:But I'm positive that other people shared that same thought.

CURRIS:Thank you, Jerry, for that. When did you become a member of the Credit Union?

WALTERS:Uh, in, let's see, like, '61.

CURRIS:How old were you?

WALTERS:When I became a member, I didn't become a member of the Benham Credit

Union because then, I couldn't. But I became a member at a McCall's corporation

credit union and six months later, I bought my first new car. I mean, brand new

car. And, um, uh, see, here's something unique about International Harvester.

Because of that bond that they had with their

credit unions, the company would use your credit union as a benefit. I mean, a

lot of times, if you're looking at this mines or this mine or you're looking

around, they would say--it would not be in writing, of course--but they would

say, "We also have a credit union." That's huge. For some people. Me, as far as,

for example. And my wife worked in personnel and the company would not permit

you to, to, to encourage this but my wife was in personnel and when she filled

out all your papers, she handed you a card to join that credit union. She didn't

tell you you had to but she said, "You might want to join this. This is a good

thing." Now, with Benham, no difference there. Back to--let's go back to the

'40s, '50s, or '60s, I can assure you there was always somebody in that office

that would have said, "Hey, we have a credit union. You want to be there." Now,

you, you--a person can look at that any way they want to. Of course, I look at

it as just another benefit and it gives you a right to some things that you

might not have been reminded of.

CURRIS:So, that's interesting. So, it was used by IH for a, uh, employment benefit.

WALTERS:In my opinion, yeah, because, you know, a lot of your blue collar, in

those days, as well as today, a lot of your blue, blue collar, they may be

starting out young. Eighteen years, they have no established credit. And your

credit union, in my view, is going to give 'em that extra.

CURRIS:Right, I see what you're saying.

WALTERS:That's right, if they can, because, once again, that mine's there, the

company, and,

and, uh.

CURRIS:One of the things I would like for you to tell us, uh, about, and I'm

going to -----------------(??) tell us about your credit union. Give me your

history of having been a part of the credit union for so many years. Because, at

this point, what is your position in the credit union?

WALTERS:Chairman of the board.

CURRIS:Of what credit union?

WALTERS:International, uh--Harvester Financial Credit Union. At its original,

it was Harvester Federal. We went from a federal charter to a state charter so

we could expand. We had to drop the name Harvester Federal and we substituted

that with Financial. We had no expense changing our logos and all of these,

these things. And that happened in

late '80s. But cre--just like Benham, my interest in the credit union was

brought to me by the president of our union. He had heard of my involvement

wi--with my parents and friends that were involved with the Benham Credit Union

and they felt like they would like to get an hourly person out of the machine

shop--start in on the board. And I was elected to the board and, uh, six years

later, I become the chairman of the board. And at that time, the credit union

was on company property. And the first meeting that I chaired, as chairman, we

had moved off company property, built our own building, and we bought that

corner lot from the company, which was unheard of. Company had sold no property

at that time

and we got that and, and we, six months that we were in that new building, and

we had to divide the boardroom into two rooms, uh, to make offices and we had

doubled in growth. And that's why I can refer back to Benham as they were the

guiding factor for that. The plant is now closed. If we had not have done what

we did, as with what Benham did, then we wouldn’t, we wouldn't be in existence

today. We just merged this week, another credit union up there of $22 million

and 47 or 27,000 members. So, everything that I have done with this credit union

today, it all--the cornerstone, it was built in Benham. Those

guys operated in a, in a way and I experienced some of that growing up, I--the

results of some of that I experienced. I wasn't involved with the things but,

you know, I had eventually heard and I had overheard, you know? Benham, there

were committees. If they had to meet, they might meet up at the Big Store, get

off the site or something. Something had to be done. And emergencies always do

happen. I, I've experienced that. I've done that. But I would not have done

that--first of all, I would not have been interested in, in jumping onboard of a

credit union that size, which is astronomical now. But I would not have even,

even given that any consideration had it not been for Benham Credit Union and

the Benham personnel at that credit union. By that, I mean the board and

committees. That developed an interest for me early in life

and when the, uh, president of our local union came and said, "Hey, we need some

representation on that board and you're the guy," I didn't know, I have no idea

how he found it out. Got a good idea for some of that. Could have been from my

older brother, I don't know, but wherever it came from--and also, I remember one

of my early--my dad wasn't big on advice but when he did give it, it was usually

pretty good: if you're ever in a position of authority to surround yourself, if

you have that authority to do it or the ability to do it, surround yourself with

people you know, people that are smart, and people you trust. And that's what

I've done. We had John Gunn, who you probably knew better than I. He was on the

nominating committee when this all transpired. And then I, I immediately started

surrounding myself of people that I knew

and I knew they were smart or intelligent. And that happened early on and it's

still there today.

CURRIS:That's great, Jerry. I have three final questions. We have not talked

about, for example, and this is my omission. If, let's say someone defaulted on

their payments for their house, on their mortgage, what happened? Did they

repossess the house?

WALTERS:I don't recall of any of those, I, I, at Benham. But now, you know, I

was, as I said, I was working away in the summertime and then when I graduated,

immediately. But I don't recall of anyone defaulting on those mortgages. I don't.

CURRIS:What about a loan? Let's say you bought a new refrigerator?

WALTERS:Well, they would repo it. But a refrigerator, even

then, that, that, would have been, that would, would, there was a fix for that,

I'm sure. Cars, I would say they would repo those back then. Once again, I don't

recall of any of those. Now, I do recall some of 'em being late and I recall, of

them--Benham was such a tight-knit, you know, first of all, you didn't want to

default. Now, I know of, I know of cases where younger miners were laid off and

Benham had to assume some of those loans, you know? And so, I'm sure they wrote

off a lot. They had to. And, of course, with the liquidation of the company,

that was tremendous. That was a, that was a hurdle that was just too far to overcome.

CURRIS:Actually, that's one of my two remaining final questions.

Describe, to the best of your knowledge, the closing of the Credit Union and

what triggered the closing in Benham.

WALTERS:This is to the best of my knowledge. I want to be sure I just say it to

the best of my knowledge, how much is, is -----------(??) but when International

Harvester sold out, they was still another company. They retained employees, a

lot of them, and then they probably brought some employees with them. They

automatically came into that with the sale of the company. They automatically

came into that, and, and--

CURRIS:Yeah, it's my understanding that International Harvester sold their

assets at Benham to Arch--

WALTERS:Arch Mineral.

CURRIS:--Minerals.

WALTERS:Yes. That, to my knowledge, is what--but it went on down a couple more

times, as well.

So, I'm sure Arch, they wanted the Credit Union, no doubt. And, uh, uh, those

loans probably stayed in place for that. And it was sold again to a Japanese

company. I don't recall the name. Of course, they were tied with Scotia, as

well, and Lynch was selling, too, and all of that. But what the demise happened

is when you had no--when the company closed and you didn't have other companies

that were sponsors. After the longest strike in UMW history, we had been told by

the examiners, "You've got all your eggs in one basket, International Harvester.

Now you're off company property. You got family members. Now pull in all these

companies around you." And we got sixty or seventy-some companies now. But

Benham didn't have that luxury. There was no industry there. When the mines

closed at U.S. Steel, Benham, and those mines closed, you had Scotia. Who had,

they stayed intact quite a bit longer, to the best of my knowledge. And you had

some of those guys. But you had lost a lot of, of your members. I'm sure those

that had pensions, I'm positive they stayed up with the credit unions, and

stayed good with it because they were afforded that opportunity. But you had

people that were leaving the mining industry going into auto industry or, or

whatever industry. And the demise of the Credit Union, when the company totally

demised--I mean by that the companies that had bought 'em, when they went under

with, with nothing in there and no other industry

, they were destined, they were just destined. People were on fixed incomes.

Those people already owned their homes and had for years, already had their

cars, and, and so it was pretty much, in my viewpoint, and, and others that I

have talked to, in my viewpoint, uh, it, it was nothing to do with the Credit

Union itself or the operation or management or anything to do with the Credit

Union itself. It was, uh, it was something that they couldn't fix by policies,

procedures, or anything. This was suddenly we have an industry that is our sole

spon--sole sponsor, one sponsor, which was international and they had no other sponsors.

CURRIS:Yeah.

WALTERS:And geographically, where they were located, they had no hope of other

sponsors. So, the demise of the Credit Union was not the Credit Union's fault.

It was the times.

CURRIS:Who was the last manager? Do you know who?

WALTERS:Ed Cannon would have--was, was treasurer/manager to my knowledge.

CURRIS:At that time.

WALTERS:He was the last.

CURRIS:Who was the secretary at that time?

WALTERS:Gosh, I'm trying--

CURRIS:Do you know?

WALTERS:--let's see, Shirley--and when you say secretary, you mean of the board?

CURRIS:Oh, no, no, no. At the Cred--

WALTERS:--oh, no.

CURRIS:--I always thought of Shirley as a secretary but that may not have been

her title.

WALTERS:No, Shirley was, I think, she was, like, the, uh--I don't know if you

would refer to her as an office manager or what because of there, there being no

other offices other than that. But,

you know, I, I, I would step in occasionally if I was over there, you know, just

for no other reason to say hi, just check it out, simply because of my mom, my

dad, and Pop King and Ed Cannon. Ed was like a father to me.

CURRIS:What, um--(pauses)--I know that you--

WALTERS:And Ed, allow me to say this.

CURRIS:Sure.

WALTERS:Ed was also responsible for me being--I don’t want to use the term

close but be more familiar with Bob in the latter days, much more so than I was

in the earlier days, just through Ed and Bob's friendship and relationship. Some

of that carried onto me through, you know, this and just conversations that were

very private and I won't share. But, but both of those guys, even though Bob

wasn't hands on with me,

, and I don't mean that disrespectfully, but even though Bob wasn't hands on

with me as Ed was, a lot of that was a, a benefit for me and a tremendous help

when, when I started in the credit union industry. And, and it--without that,

well, it goes without saying, and I'm also being repetitive, without that I

wouldn't be in this today. And if I weren't in this today, neither were those

guys because we would have lost that contact. And I felt like, up until the day

it dissolved, I felt like I still had that contact with them. And they had no

reprieve. They had no way, no source of, of possibly holding onto that.

CURRIS:I know that you have, had been able to retain some of the items that

are representative of the Credit Union and the entirety that you have either

donated or loaned to the Benham Coal Museum. And I know there are those who

think that we might very well be able to work out some type of, uh, whether it's

exchange, whatever, so I have been checking on that. And so, what were those items?

WALTERS:Well, what came out of our credit union office that we donated to the

museum was an IH clock. There's a lot of collectors there, International

Harvester collectors. That's a big deal. They, they have conventions and

gatherings. And we, we were getting bids and people wanting to buy this clock

and wanting to buy these other things like that. We had an IH clock that was

donated to the museum and then we had a refrigerator

with the old IH logo on it that we donated to the museum. Oh, there was a IH

refrigerator, they were made in Evansville, Indiana, I think. And then, the most

important thing, and there was a little bit of a battle to get this thing where

it belonged, but there was, uh, this plaque that the company had and it was for

the credit unions. It, it was, there was a council of International Harvester

credit unions. Huge. They were huge. And they met in the spring and in the fall

and each credit union would host. And they would keep track of that. And at the

demise of the company, International Harvester, whose name was gone, the name

went to Case, which is now called Case IH. And, of course, the Ag implement went

to Dressler. [Editor’s note: Part of International Harvester was purchased by

Dresser Industries in 1981] So, we kept the

council. We changed--instead of International Harvester, we called it the

International. We had dropped the Harvester. And with that, I was the chairman

of the council at that time, which was all those credit unions. And they had

that plaque that we would take and when somebody else would pick up the torch,

we would pass that plaque on and that plaque had a, a coal miner digging the

coal and then they had a truck engine and then they had a steelworker, showing

him pouring steel, and that probably, even though most people, wouldn't mean

that much to 'em, but the credit union people, it would've meant a lot because,

at the time of that, when it dissolved, I got that, in, in our possession. And

as we were no longer International--had converted to the Navistar,

we kept the International, dropped the Harvester, so therefore, with all those

companies, all those departments, divisions being sold, I gave that along with

Rod Cannon, who was on the board, who helped me get that done.

CURRIS:What is it made of?

WALTERS:I'm not really sure, Jo. I could tell you at the time. But I remember,

it's on a tripod, and I just remember, at the house, before I was getting ready

to head down here, to get--and that was the one item that your mother, I don't

think, was involved. And that would have been the most important, for me, as far

as her. But the other two items, she was there, uh, um, the clock and the refrigerator.

CURRIS:When she was a volunteer?

WALTERS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Yes, at the museum.

WALTERS:Yeah, yeah, and it would have really, really been a little icing on the

cake had she been there for that.

Once again, I'm sure you know this, but had I known this was going to develop,

with Bob and your mom, is if you were, anyone was going to do this, I would have

held that, that to make sure it got home where it needs to be.

CURRIS:But is this an item, Jerry, that you could point out to us?

WALTERS:Absolutely.

CURRIS:Right.

WALTERS:Yeah, and it's on the third floor. It was the last time I saw it, was

on the third floor. Yeah, I don't believe it was being displayed where it needs

to be.

CURRIS:Well, I, I think we have very good relationships, that I think all of

that can, can be worked on and then set up so that everybody gets to have the

ability to see these items.

WALTERS:Yeah, that would be huge because that's, once again, in the credit

union industry, you know,

Kentucky, you know, they had in Louisville, that, uh, which was one of their

credit unions, International plant at the airport, which--they sold that

property to the airport, Harvester. And I'm trying to think of some of the other

locations. And, of course, there were several dealers in Kentucky and I--when I

had that conversation with Mr. Lyons, Wendell Lyons, he mentioned that. He

remembered those council meetings 'cause they would always have-- invite someone

from the league, or, or whatever. And Wendell started out young in the industry.

Played ball for one year under [Adolph] Rupp at Kentucky, and, uh, uh, I don't

know. He come--I was getting an award and I think Betty said it was 2011. And he

come up to that meeting and that's how he and I connected

and I was his guest at the third, next annual meeting in Louisville. And we

kinda bonded on that and we talked about some of the old things. And the--even

though he wasn't a witness to a lot of these things, he had, the--those things

had been passed on down to him.

CURRIS:Right. Well, Jerry, it has been fascinating. When, uh, my family and I

decided to make the donation so--to match with the [Robert E.] Frazier grant in

order to basically save City Hall by providing a new roof and some new windows

and so forth, Bobby Gothard had said, "Jo, you realize that City Hall was the

site of your father's last credit union?" And so, all of this kind of wrapped

together and we decided then

to establish, as I said, the Robert B. and Pauline Hern Financial Center. And

what I want to say specifically to you is, Jerry, you are the very first person

that I came to, to ask about information on the history of the Credit Union. And

the fact that you have been so willing to spend so many hours talking before

today and just trying to educate me in terms of what happened and for you to be

here today is so very special. And what I am particularly pleased about is that

we're doing this preservation of Benham, the Credit Union, my parents, together.

And I want to thank you so very much and ask if you have any closing remarks

you'd like to make?

WALTERS:I, I, I appreciate those. I appreciate you passing those to me

and that means a lot to me. It really does. And the preservation means a lot to

me. And everything that, as far as my business life goes, and a lot of personal

life, it relates back to them. If there's a thank you to be given, it would be

me to them. That's where a thank you's at because of the impression they left me

with. It stuck and it'll always be there. And, and I, for one, am grateful that

you and your family have elected to do this because that leaves a lot of my

memories as I'm phasing out my, my involvement within the next couple of years.

It, it, it, it, puts a memory in place and it puts a place for others to see and

a lot of this that weren't credit union family

or credit union involved, it won't mean as much to them as those who

participated in those years and how the survival of a lot of those families, a

lot of that survival was, was due to the Credit Union. And, of course, as you

know, Bob led the charge on that. And, uh, and if there's thank you to be given,

it's me to them. And thank you so much for having me.

CURRIS:Thank you, darlin'.

[End of interview.]