KOMARA:

This is an interview for the Kentucky Climate Change Oral History Project with

Jim Embry on July 11, 2023 at his home in Richmond, Kentucky. Um, I’m Zada

Komara the interviewer, I'm a faculty member at the University of Kentucky. So

Jim, the man of many hats. Um--

EMBRY:--yes.

KOMARA:I like to start with a little biography, uh, so tell me a little bit

about yourself.

EMBRY:Okay, well you know when I was in Chicago and I was one of these James

Beard Leadership Award recipients, I began my short talk to the group by saying,

it really isn't about me, it's about we. It's about we. And, um, I try whenever

I'm speaking--because question--I think--I mean like by saying, I think

how we ask questions is part of the problem. Uh, I’m talking about climate

change and, uh, our country was founded upon--resided in individualism. Ain't no

such animal as an individual, okay? And our--even our human bodies are this

collection of all kinds of elements. There's more bacteria, more fungi, uh, you

know, within--on our skin, in our systems than we would even care to think

about, let alone, you know, care about. Um, but, um, and then part of this

assault on the earth, this assault on the earth. Especially the last five

hundred years of what I call the Newtonian, Cartesian view of the world, is

because of this sense of I as a human. That humans are intelligent and nothing

else is intelligent.

And that, you know, the human species is the most important species and, and

we're high--we’re on the hierarchy, we're way up here. And over there somewhere

is the environment. You know, not here--

KOMARA:--Mm-hmm--

EMBRY:--over there is the environment and we've got to protect what's over

there. Uh, that sense of I, uh, in the English language, we only capitalize one

pronoun. That's I. If I were making a decision of which pronoun to cap--it would

be we. We is a much larger--there’s much larger truth of reality than the I. You

know, and you're a scientist and scientists are still discovering things and

what they're discovering is nothing, nothing, there's nothing really called an I

anywhere. But we keep using it, we promote it, and then we make it part of, um,

you know, the research. We say hey you come to college and you get to be a

professor and get to write a book with your name on it, okay, about what you're

interested in. You guys--you know nothing else. You talk about problem--solving

problems and part of the problem Einstein said, he said we can't solve today's

problems based upon the way of thinking that created them. But, universities,

you know, are, are, are the citadel of still teaching Newtonian, Cartesian view

of the world--thinking separate, okay? And then we talk about, we, we, we read

websites saying oh we're about problem solving.

KOMARA:Mm-hmm.

EMBRY:Well, but, but if your, if your structures at universities, how you

write, are still based upon these old paradigms, then oftentimes you're creating

more problems rather than

problem solutions. So, that to say, um, I regard myself as, um, an agrarian

intellectual activist because that's who came before me. Those who came before

me were similar. Agrarian, farming, coastal land, you know, planting seeds and

having things grow and looking after animals. Agrarian intellectual, though

meaning that even in the thralls of enslavement, even though we were said by

folk to be illiterate--

KOMARA:--Mm-hmm--

EMBRY:--couldn't read or write in English, we were just lazy, shiftless, you

know, didn't want to do any work. When work slowed down it was a resistance

movement, another folk story. Um, but we were very--I say we were intellectual,

and we were brought--our family came, according to my DNA, you know, testing and

all of that, came largely out of Nigeria. Um, but we were very skilled people,

very intellectuals, had universities, had great stories of oral history and, and

worked in--I was just reading on the New York Times, uh, recently where a lot of

the European--U.S. and European countries have agreed to send back a bunch of

these been--these, these bronze masks and all kinds of art forms, um, back to

Nigeria, um, that were stolen or people were killed and thousands of, of these

wonderful, beautiful, uh, like, you know, art forms or--were now--are now in the

museums and throughout, uh, Europe, France, Germany, England, United States, and

there's been an effort

to get those masks to go back to, back to Nigeria, and there's some whole issues

about that. But, the point is that well--(clears throat)--to make those masks

and to do the things that you're known for in West Africa requires some kind of,

uh, intellectual ability--so I claim that kind of a lineage. And plus you know,

um, uh, our great-grandfather, who was for emancipation, his father died--fought

in the Civil War, died in the Civil War, his mom was a single mom with seven

kids, moved back here. But his mother inspired him to go to Berea College in

1879. And we have his transcript, he went there to become a school teacher and

he taught school again at the school right down the street here. So we come out

of this family, recognize the importance of education, going to college,

teaching and things like that. And then activist, um,

meaning that ,um, we come out of a family lineage of activists. Um, we had uh,

we three great-grandfathers who fought in the Civil War. Uh, when Lincoln

finally--when the North was losing the war--(clears throat)--President Lincoln

decided to open up, uh, the fighting force to include, um, enslaved Africans.

And then our folks ran to fight. Uh, and, um, then after the Civil War ended my

great-grandparents were known as people who, used to be a, used to be a bus

service, we used to have very good regional bus service and train service. And

so down the road here about a mile is where my grandparents lived, down this

way. Uh, anyway, but, uh, my great-grandfather was known, he would catch the bus

with my mother to ride into the city. And sometimes, not every time, sometimes

the bus would fill up with people and they would say, well, you know, um, uh,

Brother DB, you've got to give me a seat up, the white woman here. Okay, you

know, come on now, you know how we do this, okay. Um--(clears throat)--and he

would refuse, then he would be put off the bus with my mother and they walked

right into town. Uh, so that kind of activism. Uh, my mother was the president

of CORE in 1959. CORE stands for the Congress of Racial Equality, one of those

direct action civil rights organizations. And I was ten years old on picket

lines and wait-ins and got, you know, cussed out, spit on, whatever as a ten

year old. But my activism was there because my mother was CORE president, her

grandfather and her were put off the bus. Three great-grandfathers fought in the

Civil War. Two of them

were part of the 114th Regiment that must have entered Camp Nelson. That's where

John Fee was, and that's how that John Fee was the founder of Berea College,

that's how that connection came for our granddad, D.B., to go to Berea College

in 1879. But two of those great-grandfathers in the 114th Regiment were part of

the regiment, I like to say, when I'm in, you know, they were in the regiment

that kicked Lee's ass in Virginia first of all--(Komara laughs). But they

surrounded Lee and Lee was trying to escape and maneuver himself in his larger

fighting force to get back to I think Richmond, Virginia, and they outflanked

him and, and got him surrounded and forced his surrender. Well again, two of our

great-grandfathers were there during that battle and during that time and they

were there when the surrender was, uh, was

offered by Grant to Lee at the courthouse, they were there. And then they were

shipped to Texas in April to defeat the remaining Confederate forces, uh, in May

before General Granger[1]got there in June. So, part of

the idea of how you write history, you know, you read about Juneteenth as well,

this white general came out on a horse and read his, you know, or number three,

he proclaimed, y'all are free, you black folk who are here, y'all are free. That

doesn't say that a month before, you know, eight to ten thousand black troops

arrived at Galveston and defeated the Confederate forces that were there and

marched into town a month before Granger got there. Now if you've got ten

thousand black troops--(laughs)--riding into the city, it tells you that when

white folk ain't in control no

more. And, and I--(laughs)--when I spoke at Stanford I said, well I said, uh,

when, when, when, when the people who were in the city, so all these black

troops, the white folks said what the hell is going on? I said black folks said

almost the opposite. They said hallelujah, we're free. Lord have mercy. Thank

you Jesus. Okay, uh, but anyway, so that's who I am as a body of, of those

families. But even more physical who I am when I try to speak and have, how much

time I have, I've got a lot of time here. But I enjoy saying also I'm someone

who come, come out of this bioregion that's at the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains.

It's this land that is fed by the Kentucky River watershed and land that is

nourished by the soil heavily mineralized in limestone rock. That's who I am at

the physical level because the soil is what makes us. We get some air of course,

we've got to have a little air, a little water, okay. But at that greater

physical level what we become is what is in the soil here. You know, when we eat

plants we're eating dirt, hummus, compost second hand. And, if we eat animals

then we're eating soil third hand. But we're eating--we just eating, you know,

soil, dirt, hummus, compost--that's what becomes us. I recall speaking over at,

um, at UK

some of the students who were in their master’s and PhD programs

in[2]soil science--a friend of mine is a professor over

there, he was talking. And I asked students two questions at first. I asked them

who felt close to the environment--okay, a real simple question, who felt close

to the environment. Only a few hands went up, somebody said, “well you know, I’m

a, uh, I enjoy going camping and I go to the Gorge often to go camping.” I said

“wow man, incredible. Oh I'm a canoer, you know. I, I like to go canoeing and do

that and hiking.” Okay, because we view--you know, over there as the

environment. And I asked people--it’s all PhDs--I said, “well how many people

breathed a few sec--a few minutes ago?” Everybody breathed. I said okay. I said,

“how many of you all drank water in the last three or four days?” I said well

yeah, water comes from the Kentucky River. Then I asked them who felt close to

rocks. I would usually carry with

me all kinds of stuff, Tibetan singing bowl, you know, bones, pieces of wood.

And I would carry rocks with me and I might even pass them around and I asked

people who feels close to rocks. And again, this is a class of thirty students,

okay at UK, all PhDs--all really smart people, okay. The future leaders, future

researchers, future problem solvers. I asked them two simple questions, who felt

close to rocks? I have thirty people, then three hands went up. One person said

“well you know my mother is a geologist. I've just grown up around rocks all my

life. I have a beautiful rock collection.” I said, “Wow man, what an amazing

answer.” Another person said “well you know, I love rock climbing. And you know,

down in the gorges, they're, they’re known internationally.” I said “I know,

I've been there a lot of times. I do rock climbing too, okay.” He said

“oh yeah, so I just love rock climbing.” Then I asked them two other simple--I

ask them two questions. I said “well, why is blood red?” And the first thing I

asked people who were using it, they said oxygen. I said no, “the function of

blood. It's to pick up oxygen, carry it to all the cells, kick in the Krebs

cycle, produce ATP , ATPP.” I said, “What makes blood red?” People said oh

iron[4]. I said oh iron, oh iron, oh iron makes blood

red, okay. Then I aske[3]d them, um, “why are bones so

hard?” People say, “typically calcium.” I said “yeah, but don't trust me. What

do I know? I'm just an old dumb country boy. I don't know much. I said go to

Google. I go to, you know, and Google the bone constituents. It's about

twenty-three--twenty-four--twenty-three minerals make up bone. But I just asked

you all who felt close to rocks.” We got students at UK

who were studying soil science, talking about dirt, pulverized rocks. They

didn't feel any connection with rocks. I said “if it weren't for the iron and

the carbon hydrogen chain,” I said, “as a matter of fact, hemoglobin and

chlorophyll are almost the exact same chemical formula when you draw it out.

There's one thing that's different. In hemoglobin you have iron. In chlorophyll

you've got magnesium.” I said “so we should be thankful. We should be shouting.

We should be shouting. Yes, we're divinely close to rocks. Yes, yes, we are.

And, and as a matter of fact, if it weren't for iron, we'd be a plant, okay?”

Okay, but we don't teach that kind of stuff. What we are

reading, when I read the websites, we're talking about problem solving. We're

talking about problem solving. I mean we're using the same way of thinking that

Einstein talked about to create the problems. So, so, I'm saying that, that,

that if you can't be a student, like in this case soil science, ask the same

question wherever I go, the same responses, okay, the same responses. Wherever I

go, ask the question, that's how we're taught. Okay, we become experts at this

Newtonian, Cartesian view of the world, which means not only assaulting Mother

Earth, but also means assaulting women and they're connected. Okay, the

devastation, you know, I'm looking at you all's page, okay, about climate change

and the new consortium and, and whatever, okay. I read nothing in there that

even mentioned Mother Earth. Talk about

climate, like it’s some non-living something--non-being--this non-entity called

climate. I read nothing in there, when you speak to someone who's indigenous,

they might begin the first page with tears. Because we are, we're just

assaulting the mother. You know, we're devastating, we're blowing up mountain

tops, you know, we're, you know, we've got, you know, all these, you know,

changes in weather and, and, and, you know, the mother is crying and the

species, we've already caused numerous symptoms already. There's no--I didn't

read anything in there that even mentioned Mother Earth, first of

all--(laughs)--as the mother, Edwardian science says, the earth is a machine and

she is a resource to be mined, devastated, polluted, and she's this resource, we

treat her how we want to treat her.

Not the source of life, but a resource. And the devastation of Mother Earth is

very closely, in my view, connected with how we treat women. There, there,

there--and we can't solve one without the other. I read nothing in you all's

webpage, and I talked to Stanford, I gave them, I--maybe you have it already,

the video is up now. I gave them like eight pathways for Higher Ed to follow

towards a sustainable future. And I said, well, I'm going to be presenting, you

know, as you might know, they were just awarded, I understand, for one billion

dollars, one billion dollars for this new Center for Sustainability, a billion

dollars, to hire more faculty and to do more research because in their view, the

answers to climate change

is in technology. Yeah, I mean, that's part of the equation, certainly. Anyway,

I said, well, I'm going to mention these pathways and what I'm going to lay out

is nowhere on you all's website about sustainability, okay. But you're going to

say, well, we heard Jim, he's a crazy ass guy from Kentucky, he's always saying

it makes no sense. Nobody else is saying these things. You know, he's crazy.

Those aren't--but they listened, okay. And now we're working on how to bring you

back out there for other kinds of things. I talked about, uh, sustainability is

based upon Earth-centric and woman-centric, they're combined, okay. Then I said

the next pathway was indigenous wisdom. On you all's website, I saw nothing in

there--not one damn thing in there about indigenous wisdom. And I say, I keep, I

keep saying, if when Europeans came over

here, say five hundred years ago, if they had listened to indigenous people, we

wouldn't be in the mess we're in now. Okay, okay, they just listened to all

these people who had been here ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty, forty, thousands of

years. They're called Turtle Island. They might know something, they've been

here a while, okay. But typically, same way at Stanford. Even though Stanford

does what they call, as everybody does now, this land acknowledgement, I said,

but that's like, that's like taking a watermelon in there, its indigenous

wisdom, and you pull one seed out. Oh yeah, we're honoring indigenous

people--(laughs)--okay? We do a land acknowledgement. Look at, look at what

we're doing. Now the rest of their

cosmology and, and wisdom and, and whatever, to hell with that, that is ancient

stuff. So, I use indigenous wisdom as the second point of pathway. And then I

think my third one was, um, uh, George Washington Carver, and what I call the

African American ethos, what that means. And then I mentioned, uh, the arts and

hip hop, okay, arts and hip hop. I said, because so many times we’re--we

encourage people to do STEM. Oh wait, what's important is technology, you know,

and science, you know, technology, engineering, mathematics, what's important?

Not the arts. They're not important, okay. And so, I said, well the arts are

critical. Critical. And then a good friend of mine who's a poet, uh, her name

is, uh, Toni Cade Bambara, I have a shirt that has her, one of her quotes about arts

is that the role of artists is to make revolution irresistible. So, I

paraphrased that at Stanford. I said, “What have you all said? The role of an

artist is to make sustainable future irresistible, to make work around climate

change irresistible. The way to get people to change behavior, irresistible, is

through the arts. What if that was what was part of your webpage and a part of

your practice? But it's not.” And then I gave them examples. I said, “well, you

know, when it comes to hip hop, you know, I mean, it can be, you know, we have a

whole slew of people that we can rely on. Maybe its Queen B. she's on her world

tour now, Beyoncé. If you can't deal with her, go to Lizzo, you know, go to

Snoop, you know, I mean, you know, go to somebody, go to somebody. We should all

be singing songs about climate change, writing poetry. You know, uh, a good

friend of mine

named Terri-Lyne Carrington is a jazz drummer--(coughs)—and, uh, so we should be

inviting all forms of art to be, you know, take that billion dollars that the

school got. Don't give it to more professors, give it to the arts community. We

want new visual art, we want more break dancing that talks about climate change

and what we have to do, how we're challenged, new lyrics for rap artists, you

know, all the different art forms ought to be engaged. They should be--I read

about who you all, who you all have--I have some notes here--who you all have as

part of the consortium. I'm not talking about no artists, no indigenous people.

I'm saying, well, how are you going to talk about having solutions to anything

if it's all scholars? Okay? The

solutions are not over there on UK's campus. I mean that's a part of, of what

has to be done. The solutions lie in community. You mentioned, oh well I'm from

Pennsylvania, you know, Appalachia. Okay well the solution lies not just in

Appalachia, which we've talked about that a little bit, and we're in the

country, we're in the world literally. How are the common people invested? Okay,

how are the masses of people, if we're following the words of Marx and Lenin

and, and, and folks about the masses of people. Uh, you know, how--what are we

doing, uh, not only to get folks to quote buy in, because buy in to be

successful you have to have inclusion, inclusion of folks in the community to

create more buy in. If you just

come along and say, well look here, this is what you should be doing. No go back

to your community and just, I'm telling y’all, I'm the professor, I'm, I’m smart

as hell, and you all do these things. I say get your ass up out of here. We

thought, we thought home girl had some sense, we thought you had some common

sense to you. You know, all that university over there, all your common sense,

you don't come here and talk to us like that. Oftentimes we do, however, when

we're doing, I'm involved by the way in projects with about five different

universities, uh, doing a project of oral history, like you know, oral history

with Princeton and, um, Spelman College, and we're working in Southeast

Appalachian. We're interviewing largely African American indigenous farmers

around seeds. It's a focus on a project, University of Vermont, Harvard, now

Stanford. I'm, I’m, I’m aware of, um, while offering critiques, I'm aware of the

important role. I spoke, uh, at Stanford, I said universities, universities are

most--are the most powerful entities on the planet. I put that down in there as

a quote. The universities are the most powerful entity on the planet. More

powerful than big corporations, more powerful than governments, more powerful

than the EU, NATO, BRICS,[5]and whatever else. And

here's why. Because universities educate, train, prepare all the leaders.

Educate, prepare, give degrees, give authorization to all the leadership of all

these entities, corporations, governments,

um, local government, state government. Most everybody has a college degree,

okay. Which means, there's a book by two friends of mine in Canada, professors,

it's called Planet U. Planet U. Okay. And U stands for universities. And it's

kind of subtitled something like, “Reinventing Universities as if the Planet

Mattered.” Okay, “Reinventing universities as if the planet mattered.” Because

the way universities operate globally, the planet don't matter. Now I'm saying

that in general terms. You know, at UK, I can give you some examples from my

history, in a minute. But

that's my sentiment. That universities could change this thing pretty quickly,

okay. Same way with opioid, maybe you're familiar with, in Kentucky, opioid

problems. Right now we're suing, as you know, what's called Big Pharma. Because

of how they've been overprescribing prescription drugs and opioids and all that.

But who educates the pharmacists? Who educates the doctors to go out? Rather

than stressing prevention, you know, we don't really have

a--(coughs)--healthcare system. You know, we have a disease care system. Okay,

that's what we have, and we stress drugs and surgery, not prevention. When I was

in Cuba, I saw a country that stressed prevention on the front end. And they

have, according to the UN, some of the best health

indices of this hemisphere. Our nation has some of the highest rates of infant

mortality, mother mortality at childbirth. Some of the highest rates of, of

death still, okay, Cuba has one of the lowest. Anyway--(clears throat)--so,

we're talking about--(clears throat)--this idea of transformation, about climate

change and what do we do. This book--(clears throat)--[?? WORD UNCLEAR] points a

picture at what, what role--what's been the purpose of higher education. And

back five hundred, eight hundred years ago, the role of universities--and still

is, was to literally educate the ruling class people, kids, to get a liberal

education to help rule the world, okay. Those were the initial functions--that's

who could afford to go,

okay, the families of the ruling classes. And then when it came to, say,

post-World War I and before, folks realized, well, we've got to have captains

and lieutenants and other people to help us control the world order. And we've

got to have people come in, you know, who can be educated to become the

directors of the big corporations, to become university people who are at

universities and still are. It's been written about, one of their primary

purposes is to support the large big corporations. A lot of the research is

being done by universities to support the big businesses, okay. When I was at UK

as a student, I worked in the physiology department and, and, and we were

working on neurotransmission. And down the hall, there were three professors who

were researching smoking

and back then they got money from R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris. You say, wait a

minute now, those are cigarette manufacturers. And they're giving you all this

money to research tobacco, smoking. What might be the results? Oh, well, it's

how to make tobacco maybe less harmful. It wasn't saying the universities should

not be supporting things like this. Alright, because we’re about healthcare. And

you wonder why we have one of the highest smoking percentages, highest cancer

rates. You know, and then they named the, the, the, the, the men's basketball

after Joe Craft, a big coal baron. And, and, and, and, you know, so, so I'm

saying that, you know, if we can get universities to, to become places where the

Earth matters, okay,

then we can talk about some solutions. But until then, we're just, we’re just

out there spending a lot of money up and we’re just--we're spinning

yarns--we're, we’re telling lies to people. Oh yeah, we're about solutions. But

not if you're using the same paradigm, the same way of thinking. You know,

you've got to talk about how you’d restructure the whole campus. If you go to

the, um, uh, UK Agricultural College, you go there and you've got Ag Science

North that talks about production of food. You go across the street, you've got

a building called Soil Science. Next to it, you've got a building called Plant

Science. And down the street, you've got the College of Health and Nutrition.

Okay, then you got across the street, you got the hospital where people study

the, the impacts of food. Then you go to the law school and you got a whole

agricultural law and they're all separate, nobody knows each other, they don't

work together. So until we figure out a way

to create not only different interdisciplinary efforts like you're describing,

you've got to think about how we redesign the whole campus to where it emulates

what's called quantum science, which says, quantum science says we're all from

the same source, we're all interdependent, and we're all interconnected. That's

what Einstein meant when he said, you can't solve today's problems based upon

the way of thinking that caused them. And what caused them was this

Newtonian-Cartesian view of the world, Earth is a machine, the Earth is a

resource to be mined and devastated, the Earth has no intelligence--

KOMARA:--Mm-hmm--

EMBRY:--she's not, she’s not a big organism. Some people say she--I, I, I think

that way, she's a big organism. And within her, there are millions and billions

of other organisms. And her organism is only one speck of

organism--(laughs)--but within the larger

universe organism, okay, is a greater truth based upon what's called quantum

science and business wisdom. But we're not teaching that at the universities.

And we wonder how and why things get worse. So anyway, that's some of that, so

when you ask, you know, um, a little bit about myself, um, I come from this

wonderful, you know, long legacy of, of, of what I call agrarian intellectual

activist. And, um, and the work that I do--I say I don't know any better, that's

how I was brought up. And in this house here, this house was built by my great

uncle and aunt about ninety years ago, and I grew up in the city, would come out

here every Sunday because the church we attended right across the street, okay,

and my grandparents lived, you know, just down the way and cousins were all

around here and I kind of grew

up--I never really lost what you call the sense of land connection. Never lost

it. Some people have, which is, which is--been trying to recover that. Uh, and,

and yeah, the area here has been, you know, in the family for a long time. And I

honor that, I respect that. So I always try to give that sense of who I am. Um,

and, um, the things, things that I do, uh, you know, are, are based upon this

lineage of how I was taught to, to, uh, be focused on social change. You know,

the condition we live in now, you know, aren't conditions that express our best

humanity. So, Jimmy, your role is to get out there and, and, and, and, and

speak. When I came to UK, uh, you know, I was born in Richmond and we moved up

to Covington--Cincinnati in ‘59, uh, and then I came to UK in ‘67, went to school.

I was a pre-med major, headed to medical school. My mom was a nurse and, um, I

was getting all kinds of encouragement along the way as I was growing up to

think about, you know, uh, a career in medicine or healthcare or whatever. And,

um, then, uh, then I began working in the hospital because my mom was a nurse

and I would hear her tell stories. And I began working as a student, part-time.

And I began seeing things, I thought wow, hmm, now I'm here, I'm about

healthcare, I'm about community, I'm about the health of the people and the

health of what's around us, the ecosystem. And what I kept seeing were things

that were contradictory. You know, uh, you know, uh, my wife at that time got,

got married and we had our first child and, and we were, um--I keep saying we,

it was her, uh--wanted to do, uh, breastfeeding. And when we got to the

hospital, even before we got there and we were going to see the doctors, we had

already mentioned that was our intent. And oh, it was like, we thought we had

said a curse word, or you thought we were from some other country. And people

said, oh, well nowadays, you know, women are choosing, uh, uh, you know,

formulas and they kept pushing all this Enfamil and Similac and all these, you

know, all these formula mixes on, on us and weren't supportive. If anything,

they were--kept telling us the horrors. Like, well, you know, you might have

this complication, that complication, you know, and you got to have this and you

got to have that. Trying talking us out of it, that's what we meant now, hmm.

We're here having this baby. And for us, our commitment to do what our mothers

did, okay, and our grandmothers,

again, one of our, out of, out of post-enslavement, uh, one of our great

grandmothers who was enslaved, uh, was a, was a, was a midwife, an herbal

healer. So, I'm being taught by my family, those kind of traditions. Now I come

to university, you try to tell me, well all those things that your, your old

folks talked about, you know, ain't modern no more. So that was--I thought, hmm,

now I don't want to become a pediatrician. But talk's like that--not supportive.

And then we mentioned, you know, this for myself, and that we were following as

a family largely a plant-based diet. Oh my goodness, he thought I was like, you

know, worst person in the world. You know, they were bombarding me with all kind

of facts about how if you do that, you know,

you won't be healthy, your children, you know, will be thin and they'll, you

know, they’ll develop, you know, all these issues and problems and, and the

current science, the current science, that universities were peddling based upon

the influence of the meat and dairy industry was back then it was you had to

have 120 grams of protein per day. That was the thinking back in the 70s. 120

grams of protein per day. I think now it's around sixty or fifty. But they're

also saying that protein comes from, just from animals. Okay, you got to have,

you know, you got to have meat, got to have dairy, got to have eggs. Okay.

That's where protein comes from. But then, you know, during high school I was,

you know, took a lot of science classes, you know, took some biology, took some

physiology, came to UK, was taking several courses, I went wait a minute now,

there's protein in everything. Everything has protein.

That's why horses can eat grass, whales can eat plant, but UK was peddling, no,

you don't want to do--so anyway, my point is about, a little bit about myself.

I've been blessed to have had this family legacy, people who could be critical

thinkers, who in many ways were, were ahead of other people. They were

visionary, they were, uh, able to create organizations, create movements,

develop things that people weren't necessarily ready for at that time around,

around them. So it was one of those early situations that I had experienced at,

at UK and that whole medical center complex began to--leaving me to question

about whether I really wanted to go to medical school. And I read a--an article,

might have been from what's called the, uh,

AMA,[6]might have, might have been the, uh, British,

uh, Lancet, uh, Lancet, I think it was called--medical journal--(coughs)--and

talked about students come into medical school, they're altruistic, they have

all these great ideas about serving their community and being, you know, a

wonderful doctor--wonderful servant of her or his community and help people heal

and live more wholesome, longer lives. You come in there and the article said,

but what happens when you go through medical school, because of all kinds of

pressures and stresses and strains and debt and how you're fed this notion that

your purpose is to--is first, is to prescribe drugs. When someone comes in,

don't talk about food as medicine, you come in and you prescribe drugs. Don't

say, by heaven forbid, maybe you ought to quit smoking. I don't, I don’t say,

well maybe you ought to exercise more. I don't say, eat better quality food, no,

take these

drugs. And then when the drugs don't work and the problems you have complicate,

oh, come back and we're going to do some surgery. Okay, we're going to do bypass

surgery, we're going to do all these surgical procedures. Okay, uh, that's our

priority, we know, I don't want to do that, okay. Anyway, so I, uh--(clears

throat)--graduated. And then I, actually I was a part of school for a year and

like campus activists. A lot of things that, that folks enjoy now, uh, the

university, uh, part of those--our activist groups, Black Student Union, brought

a lot of things that we now take for granted, okay. We were, uh, protesting, uh,

the basketball team was all White, and, uh, back then a guy named Rupp was like

God, and you can't question, you know, God.

Uh, and then we were, we were protesting the singing of, um, Dixie, uh, was

being sung at all the sporting events and waving the Confederate flag and we

were protesting within, uh, our state, uh, anthem were the words are “when the

darkies are gay,” within the Old Kentucky home, we were protesting things like

that. People thought, again, it was crazy as hell, you know, they're crazy. You

know, those words, those words aren't racist. Oh, those flags and rebel, uh,

Dixie and flags, they're not racist. This is part of the White culture, White

Southern culture, you know, kind of thing. And then, you know, we were, um,

involved in, uh, universities, universities trying to get them to change the

complexion of, uh, of, uh, the professors, okay. We said, well, where do Black

folk get, you know, and where the women at? Okay, uh, and so, things like

that were things that we were, uh, working on. And I was--so I was reading--so

we formed--so I was a UK student and about fifteen of us formed what's called

Good Foods Co-op in 1972, okay. And, we, as you know we're still around. And

back in those times we formed based upon three primary pillars, and that was

local food, healthy food, and organic food--and always the same. Those, those

were our three pillars, local food, healthy food, and organic food. And we were

young folks who were, uh, aware of some of the other ways of thinking. We had

read Richard Carson's Silent Spring, came out in the 60s. Um, uh, some of us

were familiar with the work of, uh, E.F. Schumacher in Small is Beautiful. And,

and, um, then later on,

a couple of years went by and we were, you know, and I was a student and Wendell

Berry was still teaching at UK then and became friends over the years. And we

were aware of his pivotal book that came out in 1974, you know, Unsettling of

America--(clears throat). And all those things again were pointing the finger at

what we called the environment or climate change. Uh, in, in ‘79, I, I was

working at UK at the community college. I was the director of community

education, and, um, I recall I offered a conference that was called “Energy and

the Way We Live”, it was in 1979. And we were addressing, uh, the whole question

of energy. And of course in Kentucky, the reliance on coal, the reliance on

fossil fuels. And we were projecting in that conference that we should

be thinking about what we back then would call alternative energy, which is

solar. And of course, the solar, the solar and the sun is the essence of life

anyway. Okay, nothing new--we're talking about solar energy, um, and wind and

geothermal and things of that nature. And we were also addressing, you know, as

well, just, uh, uh our farming methodology. We were trying to move from

industrial farming. This is what Wendell Berry criticized so well in his book,

this notion of industrial farming and what it means, uh, you know, what it has

meant in terms of not only devastation of what we call the environment, the

water, the land, but also how it impacts even communities--(coughs). It was in

‘79, okay, uh, and, uh, back then, uh, some people used the label of--towards me

as being

black and green. Like you know, you, you, uh, Black folk ain't supposed to be

concerned about the environment, uh, that's White folks purview. I said, well,

hell, I was protesting--they were trying to--in the 60s, they were trying to dam

Red River Gorge. That was the plan was to build a big dam and make a big

recreation area and you know, lakes and whatever. And a lot of us who had been

going there--I’d been going there since I was a kid, actually. I used to live in

Richmond and can recall going to, um, to, um, uh, to the, um, the state park

there when I was a kid. But anyway, so it was part of that whole movement to,

um, stop the damming of Red River Gorge. Uh, and, um, so I've been involved in

all kinds of things, again, over the years. Um, and you know, I have--over the

years I've recognized

that food and agriculture represent not only, according to most scientists who

study what's called, uh, greenhouse gas emissions and our carbon footprint, that

different sectors contribute different amounts. And that according to scientists

breaking it all down, that the Food and Ag sector represents about one third or

more of what's called emissions and impact on the carbon footprint. So it's a

very important sector--so part of my work in the last say twenty years has been

recognizing that large sectoral footprint. But also--(clears throat)--talking

about questions of injustice that you go back to the country's founding, uh, you

know, we were founded upon two contradictions and that was stolen

land from indigenous people and then stolen labor from African people was the

country's founding. You say, “Well, hmm, well Jim, stolen land and stolen labor

to do what?” To do agriculture, okay. That was the main reason, to do

agriculture. That was the contradiction--that was the foundational, foundational

contradiction of our country, of injustice. And all the other injustices have

evolved from that initial contradiction, okay, uh. But--and it's also the

source--speaking of injustice in food and Ag sector, uh, because it was largely

done for free by enslaved Africans for two hundred and some odd years. It's also

the sector where it wasn't written into the, to the federal labor laws. It's a

sector where you can work

fifty hours a week, there's no limit to how many hours you have--can work. This

area where, uh, what's called prevailing wage or, or minimum wage doesn't apply.

KOMARA:Mm-hmm.

EMBRY:The sector where women are most harassed, most sexually abused, sexually,

you know, violated, you know, uh, most underpaid, whatever, isn't holding the

food--the Food and Ag sector. It's where we have these very in-your-face forms

of injustice. You say, well why? Because that was the area of work that was seen

as, as the work of enslaved people. That's what people who are enslaved do.

Okay, okay--

KOMARA:--yeah.

EMBRY:And we're still carrying that kind of imagery even today, whether it's

with the farm workers, okay, they're the ones who have to be there and spray all

the poisons that we're using and sometimes no bathroom available, no retirement,

no, no living wage, you know, no, no health care--(laughs)--you know, there’s, like

, like--y'all go do the fundamental essential work, okay. But we're not going to

appreciate and, and we're not going to pay you--what you should be paid. During

COVID, at one time, there weren’t--they weren't regarded as essential workforce.

They said, “well, hmm--(laughs)--you know, maybe we should, maybe we should, uh,

include them. They're out there picking the food, getting the storage for

us”--(clears throat)--but it's also my view, because of those contradictions

then, that working in the Food and Ag sector represents this fulcrum of social

transformation. If we can get into this Food and Ag sector, create new imagery,

create new principles, new values, new ways of looking at these sacred

relationships with soil and land and water, uh, engage ourselves in this

indigenous wisdom, you know, they would regard,

uh, corn, beans, and squash as three sisters, their family. Those folk who were,

who were growing and breeding corn are those who were harvesting wild rice. They

called wild rice and corn the grandmother, they're part of the family. So how

can we begin to--(clears throat)--learn from this indigenous wisdom to create

this terminology where all these things--(clears throat)--are part of our

family? The fungi, I don't know how many species live within us. You know, if it

wasn't for them in our guts, we would be frivolous skeletons. But we have all

this, you know, bacteria and flora and fauna and fungi and--that make this whole

thing work. They're family, okay, they're family, uh. So, um, so, um, so, so any

way part of my, trying to answer the question we had before, part of my focus

a lot around food--food systems, is that it represents this fulcrum point of

radical revolutionary transformation, because it's the essence of our humanity,

okay. For two, three million years, as we evolved as a species, all we did, all

day, was hunt and gather. That's all we did. For two million years, at least.

You know, however, we categorize us as a species, that's all, that’s all we did.

You know, and that was a--survival. Every adult, every mom, every father, every

child was out hunting and gathering, okay--(clears throat). And it was only at

the intersect some 15,000 years ago that women gifted us with agriculture, okay.

That's what was one of, one of the women's gifts

to this human, we’ll call it civilization. I think we're not civilized yet,

we're approaching being civilized, we're not civilized yet. In my view, if you,

I use the word civilized with, you know, meaning. If we're civilized as a

species, then we wouldn't pollute the air, wouldn't pollute the water, wouldn't

pollute the land. We wouldn't cause a species to be extinct if we were

civilized. And also, if we were civilized, we'd do no harm to women. Okay? If we

were civilized, because we all come through women. So why would you harm this,

this divine--(laughs)--entity that gives birth to all of us--(laughs)? Why would

you do that? No--(laughs)--animal would do that--(laughs). Sometimes within

animal kingdom, you know, you know, the males get into a tizzy, but man, the

males, no, no, I ain't touching mama--(laughs).

No, no--(laughs)--that's sacred. Stop there--(laughs)--okay, you know. But we do

that. So, I'm saying that we're not civilized, you know, we’re maturing as a

species, I’d say that. But, we’re, we're about the adolescent stage, you know,

we're probably the youngest species on the earth--humans. We've been around two,

three million years. You know, everybody else has been around, you know, much,

much longer. So, we're, you know, a new kid on the block. You know, we’re,

we’re--so we're maturing. We're trying to figure out still what it means to be

human--that's where we are now. And right now, we're in a pickle, I say. We're

in a pickle where we've already caused, you know, other species to be extinct.

And according to some authors and some philosophers, you know, they're saying

that we're headed towards what's called the sixth extinction, okay. You know,

we’re, we're, we’re, we’re, we’re causing our own extinction. Uh, I'm a person

that believes that we have

the--that, that we were, we were birthed by the mother to do some special

things. I mean, everything--everybody does special things, okay. I'm reading a

book now, Fungi. Uh, and, um, man, the fungi were so critical to the whole life

on Earth. If it wasn't for fungi, it--this stuff wouldn't, wouldn’t be here. So,

they had a special role--(laughs)--okay. Uh, so, I'm a believer that, that every

species--and there are all kinds of people, there's human people, there's air

people, there's water people, there's plant, animal people, there's rock people.

And they’re all--we're all related, okay, we're all family, um, and we all have,

you know, different functions and roles to play, you know. Uh, and, uh, if you

ask indigenous people, and I've been blessed to have been around a lot of people

over the years that have taught me lots of things, and they have a whole

con--they have a whole

cosmology about rocks, about rock people. I won't get into it in today's

interview, but, um, one of the reasons that I now--I always take rocks with me,

because I led a retreat back about ten years ago, I was doing an acknowledgment,

and I didn't know much about rocks. And this brother was crying, he said, “oh

man, you didn't say much about rock people at all.” And he gives me this

cosmology that has to do with evolution, not just human evolution, the evolution

of Turtle Island and the role that rocks play in all kinds of things. You know,

it was the lichen that came out of the waters that helped break down rock and,

and, and helped create now called soil dirt, it was just rocks. What, what, you

know, dirt is, oh, um, about, what, maybe, uh eight hundred million years old,

okay. It's a newbie, okay, Earth's 4.5 million years.

But, but, but, but, you know, you know, bacteria, uh, you know, fungi, those

elements help break down rocks. Well, rock--rocks agreed to have their bodies

pulverized. You know, can you imagine--(laughs)--a species being willing to be

gouged out and to be crumbled and--for the sake of other species yet on the way?

You know, they go through a whole thing about rock people and about humans

evolving and, and having caves to, uh, to live in. You know, did men have

different caves, we don't know. Not only are we one of the youngest species,

we're one of the weakest species. Uh, and maybe that's the wrong word, weak, uh,

maybe there’s a better word. You know, we have different capacities that

sometimes, uh, aren't similar to what other species

have. You know, uh, on our farm, uh, here, uh, every summer, uh, we have

different--new butterflies, you know, we try to be a very diverse place here.

And ma--along the way will come some monarchs and, and they'll make their way to

Canada. I just got a bunch of milkweeds, you know, from, from some people out

west--I haven’t plant, yet. But anyway, they'll come through here and, and then

they'll go to Canada. Until--you know, you may need your student of this--it

takes four generations, okay. But the full, I call them mamas, I call most

things mamas because we've got enough things, we all call men, we've got enough

stuff named for men, we've got enough stuff--(Komara laughs). You know, we need

to exclude some men from personification or whatever. So, the mamas fly from

Canada back to Mexico, okay. You have kids? You got, um, uh, younger siblings? Okay

what’s, what’s--how old is the youngest one--sibling?

KOMARA:He's only three years younger--

EMBRY:--three years old--

KOMARA:--than--(laughs)--I am--

EMBRY:--okay, okay, well this is the fourth generation, okay. Take a

three-year-old or take a, you know, an eighteen year old and take them to

Canada. And they'll find their way to Mexico. I've never been before. I mean,

no, neither have the monarch. It's up there now, but the monarch has within her

this greater intelligence, or whatever word you want to use, this greater wisdom

of being, of being able to have this--I call it this, not just physical DNA,

psychosocial DNA where she can understand the vibrations of the planets, the

stars, the magnetic pole, the Earth axis, and find her way back to the

forest--(laughs)--in Mexico. Okay? Now, I'm

saying things like that, uh, provide for some species, this incredible

capacities to do things. And for, for humans, maybe we had a--maybe we--because

over the years we developed different--we developed from walking on all fours to

walking on two feet. We developed language and we developed all kinds of things.

We develop--developed to, to evolve--and evolve that opposing thumb allows us to

hold things and transform nature. Uh, but, um--(clears throat)--so, so anyway,

so I'm saying that the idea of, of intelligence and where we are, uh, is

something we need to, to, to be taught and to appreciate that other

intelligences. If we're going to find some solutions to stuff, you know, uh, I

was out this year I, I, uh, in

California I went to one of the big parks, they have the big redwoods. The trees

there are 2,000, 3,000 years old. I said, okay, hmm, these trees might know

something about resilience. Might know something about how you weather fires,

okay, and how you as a species for thousands of years’ experience--those are

natural kind of things, fires, and how do you build your framework, your

capacity, how you reproduce, um, to with--to your resilience to still be a

species even though you have fires. You know, what can we learn from those

trees? I saw nothing in, in what you all were projecting about how do we tap

into this wisdom, okay, of the other species. See, we're, we’re too, uh, uh, I

mentioned this at Stanford, we're too

homocentric. We need to be very Earth centric, if we're sincere about talking

about solutions. Now if we're just playing a game, you know, and we're just up,

up there, you know, trying to get a name on a book and trying to get our name in

a consortium, you know, uh, formation and, and we get to go speak and we get to

be honored. If we're just doing that, then fine, okay, just--let's say that. Say

hey, we're just gaming, y'all. You know, we're not really sincere about this

stuff. You know, we're just, you know, this is all a game. And because if it's

not a game, then we know that we can't just rely on human intelligence to figure

out solutions. When, um, that's why I referred to George Washington Carver. Uh,

you know, he was regarded--he was friends with all kinds of people, all the

presidents, all the, uh, Secretary of Agriculture. He was also friends with

Einstein, uh, you know, Edison, Henry Ford. And Einstein and

Edison regarded Carver, they said he was the greatest scientist of their era,

okay. Now those two guys weren't too bad, but their era was very specific, okay.

Einstein, quantum mechanics, quantum physics, Edison, electricity, Ford, car

manufacturing. But Carver--so those guys had maybe about a ninety percent view,

which is fine, ninety percent view. But Carver was 360. And, um, and he would go

out in the mornings before daybreak, talk to the plants, talk to the trees, talk

to the stars. And then he'd ask God, he'd say, well God, I, I just came out of

Iowa State, I got a master's degree and I was going to get my Ph.D. but then

Booker T. called me to Tuskegee. I'm a bad boy. He said, look at me, you know,

look at me God. I'm way up there on the totem pole. He asked God, uh, he said,

God, well tell me the secrets to life. And she said--God said, hmm, that's big

girl stuff. That's what big mamas do, like me, okay. He said, now you little

boys, y'all handle the piddling stuff. He said, what I'm going to do though, I'm

going to talk to my sister girl here, the peanut plant. I'm going to ask her to

sit down with you and have her reveal her secrets to you. That's all what he

said. He didn't use those exact terms, I'm embellishing. So, he said, okay. So,

he began studying the peanut plant. And he would go out to her, as he would say,

and would ask her, please, God said, you would reveal your secrets. And she said,

boy, how much time you got--(Komara laughs). He said, well, I don't plan to go

anywhere. I just arrived at Tuskegee and I hope to be here, you know, my whole

life. She said, okay, well fine. It might take that long. She said, you got your

pen and pencil? Sit down, number one. And as you may know some of the history,

you know, she went on to reveal three hundred plus products to make the peanut

plant, okay. But he says, he didn't discover, he says the plant communicated

with him. That's what he says. Now he was regarded as a quack. Some people, when

they heard the story, no scientist talks to plants. You know, he's a quack, he's

a crazy man. So, he was ridiculed quite a bit, but he kept finding these things.

His, his, his first love or his first training in Iowa was

in fungi. He was one of the premier mycologists of his time. He had four named

after him. He said, enough is enough, don't name no more for me, let me just

keep finding them and sending them. He sent a couple thousand to the different

fungi herbariums where they store, you know specimens--several thousand. He

understood the basis of all this stuff. Talking about agriculture, the basis of

that is fungi. And what goes on underground needs to be understood, um, he was

on top here. He understood all that, and um, and so he is, in my view, one of

the best examples, if you want to talk about the role of scientists, problem

solving, and whatever else, and the connection with science and religion and

spirituality. He's one of the few people that, in my view, comes closest

to indigenous cosmology and indigenous wisdom, the way he approached things. Um,

I've been studying him for about twelve years intensely and working on, I've

written different articles and working on possible one or two book projects

about him. But, um, but if you want to study, read about him, study his life,

okay, and, um, and how in many ways he saved the South. The South was causing

the work on, or focus on, growing cotton, the land was like a dust bowl, it was

infertile, they were having a horrible time, then the boll weevil came in and

the Southern agriculture was the basis of the whole country's profitability.

Okay, it was on Southern agriculture. It was the basis of Northern industry. Of

course, cotton was one of the bigger forms of initial industry, making cotton

rather than relying on, on

elsewhere, whatever. Um, but again, in many ways, because of his farming

agricultural practices and what he was teaching, he saved the South. So, he

saved the Union. And then thirty years earlier, the introduction of 200,000

black troops saved the Union again. It was black men and women, both, who fought

in the Civil War that, um, that enabled the Union side to win the war, which

reunified the country. But, when we read about Juneteenth, that's not talked

about, but--so, my point is that those are situations in our country where we

faced, we were in a pickle. We face--faced a crisis. And we can learn a lot, we

can learn a lot from those historical examples. We can learn a lot from Carver

if you're faced with this almost devastation of,

of, of the once fertile soils in the South. How do you regain fertility? How do

you create this sensibility around diversity, okay, rather than a monocrop? How

do you, how do you engage with the people who were just emancipated? And how do

you engage with them and their survival skills? On, there were some two or three

million black farmers in the South post up until maybe World War I. But how do

you get people to work together, engage, have viable small farms, build

communities, build schools, create community? How do you do that? Well, the role

of Tuskegee, Booker T., and Carver were critical to that. Okay, say, okay well

now we're facing some similar, we're in a pickle now, in a much larger kind of a

way. Well, what can we learn? All it is--all the principles of sustainability,

climate change, Carver was doing for forty years at Tuskegee. There's a book out

called “The Green Vision of Ford and Carver” okay. Recycling? Oh, Carver was a

master at it and taught it all his years at Tuskegee. They, they emphasized

basing industry on agricultural products grown by farmers in America, especially

black farmers. Okay, there's videos of showing--so, so, so Carver was a

consultant, a scientist helping at the Ford Motor Company, and they, they were

making, their idea was to make the car as much as they can out of plant-based

material grown by farmers. They're making car bodies from soybean.

Okay, let’s name one example, street work from plants, rubber for tires from

plants. That required just having the rubber plant to make rubber. Okay, but

what happened, then Ford died in ‘37, his son Edsel came in and decided to go

with the big oil companies, the Chevrons, the Shell, the Mobil, Exxon. He

decided to base industry based upon oil and not--what if, you know, if we had

based upon Ag products grown here, where they also emphasized zero waste, they

believed in--now you go to Toyota, they have what's called, I think it's called

zero waste. Well, this is what they were, they were preaching and teaching at

Tuskegee through Carver

and at the Ford Motor Company, zero waste. Everything gets returned back into

some largely compostable cycle or a technical cycle, okay. It's only when Edsel

sold out his father in essence, that we have this notion with something called

waste. Hmm, so that’s it to we have words that are lies. It doesn't call waste

and garbage because it all remains on the earth--(laughs). It all remains on the

earth. If you call it waste, then you set in motion these, these practices of,

of creating all these, I, I can't call them unimaginable, but we have them, all

these poisonous elements

that are poisoned for thousands of years because you think something called

waste. You can create all these industrial waste products, oh, and just, oh,

well, dump it in the river. Okay, yeah, dump it in the river. Or dump it, you

know, in a cave or mountain somewhere. Or--(clears throat)--now I'm here at

ground zero, okay. My friend Craig, uh, has been working on this whole idea of

this Army Depot out of World War II, now with chemical weapons, you know, and,

and we argue about Saddam Hussein using weapons--well, we gave him the weapons,

okay, first of all. But anyway, so there's a big dump over there, okay, of all

these chemical weapons--(clears throat). They wanted to ship them out west,

people argued and fought, you know, and said, no, you can't, it was going to

take, you know, years because there's so much over

there. They finally agreed ten years ago to build these three

walls--three-walled incinerators to burn them up. I think Craig

said--(coughs)--I'm supposed to get the last of them burned up by the end of the

month. But that's an example of the mentality of what's called waste and the

mentality that says we as humans, we can just create all kinds of stuff that

wreak havoc on ourselves, on what we tend to call the environment, on the air,

on the water, on the land, because we're like top dogs and we can figure it out.

You know, we can, we, we, we can create problems and then we'll, we’ll figure

them out eventually. So, that kind of mentality, okay, that, that, that gets

reinforced at universities, unfortunately, that's the way it gets reinforced,

you know. So, you wind up having some kind of a climate change organization that excludes

everybody other than, I mean, excludes a whole community, this includes

scholars, and you say, well yeah, you know, we're, we’re, we’re, of, of this

intelligent species, we're more intelligent than everybody else, okay, we know

more, and, and we're the talented ten that can solve the world's problems, okay,

we're the ones, so we're going to create all these formations and then we're

like the Wizard of Oz, we, we can dictate, you know, uh, how the world should

look. And that's a lie, that's a false, a false reality. We're saying, well, how

can we, you know, how can we engage, you know, with the entire community, not

just the people, the trees, the solid, the rivers, you know, how do we build

into, you know, our curriculum, you know, going to do, uh, at the Kentucky

River, you know, water rituals, having women, because in business culture, uh,

women oftentimes are those who, who

hold--are the holders of certain rituals, uh, and, and in my experience, that's

women are the ones that help God do the water ritual. Well, how can we, you

know, uh, begin doing things like that as a part of a university functionality,

okay, because we know we need to have people have a sense of reverence for the

water, and maybe that will help us stop, you know, uh, uh all of our practices

of having all the waters and industrial fertilizers and fertilizers and lime

chemicals washed out of Lexington and into the Kentucky River, then the Ohio

River, then the Gulf, and the big algae, algae bloom off of Gulf is because of

what? Oh, you have all you Kentucky farmers and landowners who spring all your

herbicides and pesticides, all your fertilizers, get washed off, wind up in the

Gulf. That's just, that’s just one example. That's one example. But maybe if we begin

doing, you know, water rituals and things like that, then we can, we can begin

to think differently about what's called the environment. Uh, but as long as

we're, you know, we've, we’ve, we’ve been bamboozled into a certain kind of a

certain ethic or a certain practice of life and a view of life, but again it

views the environment over there, and, um, and we have to, um, from conception,

we have to not just wait until kids are three years old or whatever in

preschool, we've got to begin at conception, you know, talking to the children

about hey, when you come out of there--we're in a pickle and we need you to be a

visionary, a thinker, a someone, you know, you're in here now in your mama's

environment, and, and, and, and that environment there is precious, and we ain't

going to teach you to mess up the water in there, okay? We

ain't going to teach you to wreak havoc on your environment, because while

you're there for those, you know, eight, nine months, man, that's what's going

to have you develop and mature and have you come out, okay? So don't mess up

what's in there. But you're teaching that kind of innate wisdom when you come

out, you say wow, now I came out of my mama's womb, and we come out of Mother

Earth's womb, that's the same kind of principle. So, how can I begin to act, you

know, in my life in ways that honors those, those wombs that, that help--that

make life possible? So, it's those kind of things that I think ought to be

embodied. That's what I was saying at Stanford. You know, you all, you know, you

got a prestigious school here, you got a

billion dollars, but I said I'm reading, what I did, I read their web pages. I

said y'alls language reinforces the problem. Because you kept--keep referring in

your web page to the environment, like it's over there. Nowhere in, in their

page--(laughs)--they have several pages, was there's this notion that there's

this one organism, and surely you can't even say she's just one, because she's

part of a whole, you know, solar system and galactic system, but anyway, this

one organism, okay, and she's sacred and all of the relationships we have with

her are sacred, the air we breathe, the water, you know, whatever. And out of

that kind of cosmology, out of that kind of, of, of, you know, beginning

prayerful understanding, now we can move into--(laughs)--how we can

begin to honor that in ways at the university where we can begin to either

reverse or, or remedy, the things that we've created. But we don't begin with

that, we begin with how great we are as a university, and who-- I read--you

know, all these great women came along and they did this, and that's all. I

understand universities need to give props, but when I was over at UK some time

ago, well not UK, not just UK, I said first of all, I would begin when we name

all the buildings. Most of the buildings are named for white men who gave money,

okay? And I'm not saying rename them for women or people of color. I'm saying

give the names, all names that connote earth, earth family, whatever. If talk,

if you say about sustainability, because you all got, you know, a bunch of

money, universities now get all kinds of money from all kinds of people, which

is all fine at one level, uh, but again,

, um at Stanford, the new center, the guy and his wife, uh, uh, they gave him a

billion dollars. They named the whole center after the Doerr family. Same way at

UK, people give money, you know, to the Commerce Building or the Law Library or

the, you know, Basketball Players Dorm or whatever, you name it after that

individual. I said okay, now it probably won't work because that's probably--if

you--but I know you're going to be here, you’re, you’re--you'll correct me, but

suppose we take a donor and say okay, what we're going to do, we’re gonna--you

gave to UK ten million dollars, you gave to Stanford a billion dollars, what

we're going to do, we're going to go to the big banks and we're going to bring

ten million dollars in dollar bills right here, which you gave, right here, and

we're going to say now take those ten million dollars and make me a tree, make

me some

sand for glass, make me some oil, make me some water, make me some granite or

limestone. Okay, now go ahead, take, take, take the money, and the money

actually was made from wood, you can't even really take that, you need, you

need--you didn't even make that, okay, for real, you didn't make that. I'll give

it to you anyway but make me some trees to build these buildings. Can't do it.

The earth has spent billions of years, 800 billion years I think, creating oil

deposits, creating you know, mountains, creating you know, and some of the

oldest mountains as you know are right here in Appalachia, some of the oldest

mountains in the world in terms of formations, okay, but how we name buildings

is an indication of what we value,

okay. We know about that, oh yeah, we really value, okay, this person that gave

money to build--so we value that person. So, wait a minute now, but how do you

calculate the economic value of the earth spending 500 million years making

certain oil deposits? I know--I forget how old the mountains are, the

Appalachian mountains and the coal reserve, how many millions it takes to do

that? How do you quantify that? Is it worth only a dollar a year? Is it worth, I

don't know, maybe a million dollars a year? Oh, and it took them, took her 500

million years? So, then you begin to see--I'm saying we need some radical

changes, not

a change of number on an address. Deep changes, and this is just my view, we

need some deep, deep changes that goes into--when indigenous people, uh, uh,

were here before colonial rule, they would name their people, maybe they were

called the people of--maybe they didn't call them back then the Rockies or

Appalachian Mountains, they named themselves where they lived at, or we're the

mountain people. Maybe up north, oh, we're the people of the lakes. Oh, we're

the people of, of the desert and the cacti. That's who we are as a people,

that's who makes us. Or they would say in their names, who was the guy, Chief

Red Cloud? Yeah, I'm on the clouds. Or Bear Mama, or they, they would have

names that create this close sense of family, what we call the natural world,

because they understood it was my family. And that they understood that if

you're gonna give some point of who you regard, oh man, this river and the lakes

that feed us, provide wild rice and fish and whatever, without her we would be

nobody. So, we name--so we regard her--these lakes. So, I'm saying that it's how

we name things is how we regard and how we don't regard. So, if you keep naming

buildings after men that gave money, even though the men who gave money can't,

can’t make no tree, can't make no rocks, okay--(laughs)--okay. The earth has

provided all of

that--(clears throat)--and we say, which you ain't important. Well, if you do

things like that, then you have what we now call climate change, okay. Yeah,

yeah, that's why, you know, it's, it’s not simply, you know, carbon emissions.

Of course, that's a factor. It's not simply that. It's a way of looking at the

world that at least goes back to this Newtonian-Cartesian view of the world. It

goes back to that at least, uh, that's a bigger part of the problem. So how can

we, how can we mature, so to speak, how can we mature and begin to combine the

best of what we call quantum science? And we're not teaching yet current

science, but we're teaching Newtonian science at UK. Anywhere else, not just UK,

everywhere. Teaching old science, how? By the way we structure the campus. I

gave you an example, the Ag College.

That's a Newtonian science approach to agriculture. They're all separate

buildings. Nobody knows each other. They don't work together. And you wonder why

the hospitals are full of people with all kinds of diseases that are food

related. But y'all over here in the Agricultural Production, Ag Science

building, talking about food production. But, what you, what you have been doing

for many years is emphasizing all the trash food, all the refined food. You were

stressing corn, soybeans, refined food, refined flours, you know, tobacco is a

main industry. You all were promoting as a college, okay, food consumption that

causes disease--(laughs). That's why the hospitals are full. Wow, what if we as an

Ag College and College of Nutrition emphasized healthy food, organic food,

permaculture, biodynamic food, however you want to call it. What if we stress

that as a university? Wow, man--(laughs)--talk about radical changes. Okay, you

know, where I live at now, because again, we're thriving--(clears throat)--small

communities. I have, uh--(clears throat)--in the, uh, I was at this weekend a

family reunion. I helped write a book in the family it's called “Family of

Centenarians.” It's those who are a hundred years or more. Okay and this house

right here, my great uncle lived to be a hundred. When he died in ‘92, we

thought we'd write a book about him, he was a centenarian. It would be in

thinking, but you know, we've got other folks who were centenarians. We had

seven, one was

107. Most of them were either, either first generation, post emancipation, or

second generation, okay. But you lived in the rural areas, a lot of hard work. A

lot of food was eaten, was grown right here. My mom would say, you know, you

helped form Good Foods Co-op, and y'all stress organic food, but you know, when

we were growing up--because she grew up a mile down the road, you know, her

uncle lived here, my great uncle--that's how we farmed. It wasn't called back

then organic. All the inputs were from the animals on the farm, okay. That's

what she's describing. I said, yeah, mama, you're right. That's how folks ate.

You know, uh, we call conventional agriculture, agriculture based upon chemical

inputs. We, we, we even worded conventional meaning normal, which it should be

the best, this is the modern way, this is the best way to farm conventional.

Those old ways are archaic, you know,

that y'all have been doing--organic farming was done for 15,000 years. Wasn't

anything new, okay. But the point is, is that--(clears throat)--these elements

of, of, of issues of climate change, and it's a worldview that we have to also

change. We can't just change who's on a consortium and who's writing new books

and, and whatever. Um, most of the time when people are writing, uh, are

speaking about sustainability, they use three circles. One's equity, one's

environment, one's economy. That's a false, that's, that’s one of the biggest

lies I've ever been told. Now I do, in my, in my talks, I, I use those slides.

Then I say, well, I would add spirituality. I said, but that's a lie. With the,

with the--what that chart says is that those are all equal. That the economy,

social equity, and environment, all the same, they're all equal. Then I give

them my slide that shows the whole

Earth, and then there are sub-circles that are our human stuff. But they're not

equal. The economy of humans aren't equal to the earth, ecosystems. Not equal.

That's how we portray it in our work around sustainability. So, we’ve got--so we

said--(laughs)--so we have to undo, again, some of the things that I call them,

just outright false statements. But, but they're based upon this sense of being

homocentric in how we view things. Um, I think also in your notepad there was a

mention that, um, that, uh, you sent me something about, well, us Kentuckians,

because of, I think, our strong relationships with the environment, and because

of our reliance on, I think, energy of coal, uh, and

agriculture, then we have this unique perspective, I think was the word you

used, or we have, um, anyway, a unique perspective. And I would say that, oh, it

was about, oh, oh, because we're inland, then we haven't been impacted by some

of the first signs of climate change, meaning sea level rise. I would say that's

another example, I won't call it a lie, I would call that this homocentric view

of, of how, how the Earth--what symptoms arise as the earth is trying to deal

with our human impact. So yes, because of our limited understanding of the

Earth, then we say, oh, her, her first--(laughs)--first symptom was sea level rise.

Man, you don't even know, we don't even know what things preceded that. That's

what we can measure, let's don't call it the first sign, okay, when we talk

about, you know, the rise of industry, uh, you know, 1700s, 1600s, uh, these

impacted cities where people are concentrated in cities, and because of that,

good health measures, all kinds of plagues, and all kinds of smokes and industry

being emitted into the atmosphere, and the waters being polluted, those things

might go back hundreds of years. So let's don't think that only when we can

measure something that the earth isn't responding and trying to correct some

things that, she got her stuff figured out, okay, we come along, you know, the

last, what was it, the last 500 years, we say, oh, we know better, you know,

we're intelligent, you're just a machine Earth, you're not a living organism,

and we know better, and we can just treat you how we want to treat you. Don't

think that she's just responding when we can find some way to measure it,

because if we understand that, then we can say, oh, we can look even maybe

further back, further back, and we can also begin different ways of

understanding. Back when the--(laughs)--tsunamis hit in the Far East--I have it

somewhere in my laptop, it's an interesting story, as you know, a lot of people

died because of the tsunamis in those

regions, you know, this is how the earth is, sometimes she's--that's how the

earth is. Anyway, a lot of people died, but, um, one certain island there, I

forget its name now, in the big Indian Ocean, nobody died, because the people

there were people who were indigenous and were still following, quote, the old

ways and the old teachings. And the old teachings, they went back thousands of

years, they were taught, they said, “always be watchful of the other species, be

watchful of the birds, insects, animals, be watchful, the fish, be watchful,

always observe it, as, as people generally are.” And they said, “If you see near

the water, the birds are flying away, the animals are moving up in the

hillsides.” That's the first warning,

okay? And in this island, animals were doing that, birds were leaving the

shores, animals were marching off to the highlands, so the elders said, “be

watchful of that,” then they said, then they said, “if you're still there, and

by now you actually want to be gone, okay? But if you're still there, and you

see the water recede out, it might be too late, you see the water recede out,

don't go gawking at the water, run like hell.” And there are images of people

who weren't following the old ways, and when the water went out, they went

walking out, because you know, you got 100 yards, 200 yards of just low water,

and you're walking out saying, oh wow, look at that, then what happened? Then

you had

thirty and forty foot waves coming in. People were taking pictures of it, people

were running, okay? And a lot of people died. So that's an example, that's an

example of how, see those things were occurring days before the tsunami hit,

okay? Days before the tsunami hit. The insects and birds were, because when the,

when the quantum science says the smallest factor of life is a string vibration,

smaller than an electron, smaller than a proton, okay, a string vibration, which

means everything is vibrating, okay? Everything is vibrating. The rocks, this

desk, you, you know, the birds outside, everything is

vibrating. And part of our role as humans is trying to get ourselves back in

resonance with the vibrations, okay? For all kinds of reasons, we've lost those,

called resonance, we've lost the abilities, the capacities, the, the purpose of,

of trying to be in resonance with the earth vibrations and systems. But other

species are not, okay? They're still in resonance. That's why days before--so,

so the earth--so the tsunamis that hit, even earthquakes, there were signs of

it--that's what I'm saying, that's what I'm saying. Because of our--we think

we're intelligent, because we're not--don't--we don’t know how to read the

earth, we've lost some resonance, then we think the tsunami just arose that day

and here it is. No,

no, no. Sometimes days are, who knows back? So, things vibrating within the

oceans and the animals are saying, man, something get ready to jump off. Okay.

I'm getting ready to jump off here--(laughs). Let's, let's move to higher

ground. They could feel the vibrations, but our dumb asses, you know. we were

out there in the water, okay. Something to talk to me about, to my point of

saying that is to say that when we're writing statements like the first signs of

the earth showing her response to climate change, a sea level rise, I think

there are better ways to phrase that experience. We can say the first time we

use our instruments, we're able to measure sea level rise all--and we connected

that with, okay, well fine, I can, I can somewhat say that, but don't say this

is her first signs. Okay, when we say it that way, then we honor her and we can

then be better able to figure out this pickle we're in--(laughs)--okay. We can

figure out better ways to, to think about that. I mean, hell, when, again, when,

when not just Rachel Carlson, I mean, people who are in business with talking

about stuff, you know, we came in talking about the gorge, you know, and it's so

nearby. If you go over there, there are pictures of it with no trees, you know,

clear cut, okay. We're talking about, I got some, you know, I did a talk at

Sierra Club

back last December and I showed some images of John Mural. Uh, he, well, he'd

done about a thousand-mile walk. He left the North and walked all the way, I

think to Florida. Talked about that, come to Kentucky, and showed images when he

came through here, what the trees might look like. They were cut down, I had one

image of a big old tree and it's a person's standing next to it. Looked like an

ant--(laughs)--like an ant next to the tree, okay. But people who are indigenous

would say, you know, like y'all say we're heathens. Oh, y'all live in the

forest. Y'all live out in the jungle. You know, y'all, you know, no, these are

our family. We've lived this way for thousands of years. These are, they feed

us, you know, they, they clothe us, they give us canoes. I mean, we're, we're,

we're, we're just so thankful that we get to be in the forest or in the lakes or

wherever we are. We're just real

thankful. But don't cut them all down. Why would you do that? You talk about

climate change, okay, and the impacts. Well, again, it's not just CO2. I have

some images where I show the USA forest cover--pre-colonial forest cover, and

about every year, every hundred year increments, I show Turtle Island, USA

forest cover. And right now, I think we're about, hmm, I think it's at about

twelve percent of what it used to be, okay. Well, if you're cutting down all the

damn trees, you know, uh, those are factors that also create havoc, not even

withstanding carbon emissions--(laughs)--you know what I’m saying?

I mean, yes, we understand carbon emissions and what's been going on, but we

have had a worldview that's just about devastation of the environment in many

different kinds of ways. And they all contribute--see, when you, when you factor

them all together, it's just, wow, man, we've got a bunch of overlapping

pandemics. I wrote an editorial for the paper back when COVID hit. I said, yeah,

I understand about COVID being a pandemic, but we've got multi--we got

overlapping pandemics, not just COVID that we have to continue with. So, the

role becomes, you know, as scholars is how do we understand the bigger picture?

And how does that impact my research and who I work with, the language I use,

uh, you know, so, so, so I can be not so much

a, a, a, someone who creates more problems, but how can I be someone who's,

who’s providing--I wouldn't even call it solutions, that’s, you know, a bigger

word. It might take 500 years to unravel what we've been doing. Uh, we added 500

years, uh, anyway, but how do I have--how does my presence on the earth become

one that is trying to remedy things? Okay, uh, it's a woman and I saw the names

on that. I didn't know women, I said, how can y'all have this webpage and got

nothing about women other than the name, nothing about mother Earth being, you

know, certified as a woman, you know, and, and, and women's--and I said at

Sanford, I said, this idea of earth centric and woman centric ought to be the

mantra for the century.

And I got looks at me, wait a minute now, no, all technology is the mantra for

the century, computers. How did Earth and women become the mantra? I showed some

images, I said, because we need much greater voices of women, okay, much greater

voices of women. Women have a different, not different, they have a particular

relationship with the earth than men have because women give birth like the

earth. It's just, you know, it's just a very essential, uh, whatever the right

word is, uh, you know, unique or particular function that women have. And part

of that function isn't just to give birth, it's also to be the gender that

because you give birth to project about the future better. When, when our

founding fathers, we call them, uh, you know, George Washington, Benjamin

Franklin, Thomas Jefferson,

Adams gave us the three branches of government, as you may know, that came from

the Iroquois Federation. Europe didn't have nothing about democracy. Okay, but

there were students of the Iroquois Federation, first five, then six tribes. And

they, they had these three branches of government that we borrowed from them.

But in the Iroquois Federation, that entity that became our Supreme Court, they

had within the Federation an entity that was about all the major decisions, all

the big decisions about the Federation and decisions about the future, about how

you want to go to the future, was given to one entity, and they were all women.

Because they understood--(laughs)--okay, they understood as a people

that, yeah, you know, women, you know, are, are that species or gender that has

this particular function. I mean to give birth, when you give birth, I tell

people all the time, I says now, you know, I said, when your mother was inside

of your grandmother as a fetus, okay, your mother at four months gestation has

all the eggs she'll ever have. They're already there. I said, so I was there as

an egg inside my mother as you were. You were inside of your mother as an egg

inside your grandmother. So, the emotions, the vibrations of your grandmother

were impacting you as an egg, and chances are your grandmother was around her

parents, maybe even her grandparents, and maybe even her great-grandparents.

So, part of the cosmology of indigenous people says, be careful what you say and

do, how you speak, because what you speak and what you do impacts seven

generations. Well, that's right there as an egg. That's why it's so important

that we wrap the mothers around this peaceful, this joyful, this protective,

loving environment, because she's carrying two generations--(laughs)--okay. Um,

so and that was--that's what I'm saying about your role, your function, anyone's

role or function. How can I be someone who can learn all I can and, and change

how we speak and how we do scholarship and how we write up, you know, our websites?

And how do we--how, how, how--what do I write--how do I write? I have a book in

the back--I helped write a book called Sustainable--I'm sorry--"Sustainable

World Sourcebook.” I co-wrote it for that back in 2010, um, but we wrote it

differently. Most books, based upon the academic model, if you write a book and

its different writers, oh, well, what you do, you know, we give you a, give you

a chapter to write, put your name on it, you know, I get one, you know,

everybody gets their name in credits. Okay, that's how you write books,

right--(Komara laughs). We said, no, we don't want to write like that. So, we,

we each wrote articles on certain themes that we were interested in writing

upon, okay. It was like 20-some writers. And then the guy who pulled it together

was just Heldman Editor. He took all the articles, and he integrated them

seamlessly. He integrated them because sometimes if you--if you’re--if you’ve

got a book that's got different contributors who've been invited, sometimes

things get repeated. You might write about something that's part of your theme

of work, and I will, and maybe we share certain things that overlap. So, you're

reading a book and there could be some overlapping.

Why do you need that? So, it's, it’s, it’s all woven together. I can see in some

spots where what I wrote, I thought, okay, yeah, yeah, yeah, okay. Oh, he put it

over there. Oh, okay, that's pretty cool. You know, he put it over there and,

and that category theme that, hmm, I don't know if it fits there, great, he did

that. And then, so immediate--I got a library full of books, I had books on

sustainability. There's no color, saw these graphs, ain't inspiring worth a

damn. So, we wanted a book that was inspiring--(laughs)--you know, that would

inspire people, you know, to want to read it, okay. Uh, you know, and I have in

here as well, four or five photographs. Uh, and we have in the back a lot of

resources, people,

you know, because this was a people--this was a book to inspire people, to make

some, you know, lifestyle changes and better understanding, you know, and, and

things of that nature. Um, but again, so those were like conscious decisions on

how we would write something.

KOMARA:Mm-hmm.

EMBRY:And I haven't seen much improvement of what we've done. We thought it

would be a model for other authors--

KOMARA:--yeah--

EMBRY:--to write, project, um, you know, uh, and whatever. But again, I’ve,

I’ve--I buy lots of books, you know, always trying to read and better

understand. But many of the books, not all of them, don't get me wrong, many of

the books that are out there about sustainability, I mean, I have a lot of books

that have no picture, don't get me wrong, but if you want to inspire something for

people, you've got to do different things--

KOMARA:--yeah--

EMBRY:--you know what I'm saying?

KOMARA:It's a cool book. I've looked through it before--

EMBRY:--okay, yeah. Okay, yeah, yeah, yeah--

KOMARA:--can I, can I ask you specifically about--so you had made the comment

about how, um, you need to think about what you can do, like to be part of the remedy.

EMBRY:Yes.

KOMARA:Can I ask you specifically about the Sustainable Communities Net that--

EMBRY:--yeah, sure, yeah, sure, yeah, sure, yeah, sure, yeah--

KOMARA:--you founded and how you see this as part of the remedy for climate change--

EMBRY:--yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Absolutely. So--(clears throat)--when I

was in Detroit, again, I had met a couple named Jimmy and Grace Boggs in the

seventies, uh, as part of, uh, my work around social change. And they

represented, you know, some ideas and imageries and philosophy that really

broadened my perspective, okay, on social change, not just being based upon

injustices around race or gender or whatever else, but a much larger idea of

social transformation and changing the entire country, which meant then that

we're reading about

everything because we're trying to transform the entire country, uh, not just

quote different injustices, but how do we change architecture, how do we change

design, transportation, agriculture, the whole, the whole you know, nuts and

bolts. And then, uh--(clears throat)--in ‘92, uh, Jimmy Boggs died. And then

some of us formed, uh, like the Boggs Center for Community Leadership, and we

bought the building they lived in, and then we made sure that Grace had

somewhere to stay, and then we formed this nonprofit, uh, for short called the

Boggs Center. The full name is, um, the Jimmy and Grace Lee Boggs Center to

Nurture Community Leadership. So, so, it’s about community-based leadership, uh,

and especially with young people, especially using arts and urban Ag. And then I

became the, the, the board chair of the Boggs Center, uh, from here in Kentucky

for many years. And

then I had been asked by other board members to consider moving to Detroit to

become the director of the Boggs Center, and then around the year 2000, I

agreed. Things in life were, you know, at a, at a point where leaving out of

Lexington, I'd been for forty some odd years, um, provided that possibility. I

said okay I'll move to Detroit in the year 2000, and I was there for about five

years. While I was in Detroit, um, as a director, again I worked on a, a whole

variety of things. Uh, I, I worked on organizing, uh, these “Say the Possible

Retreats”, uh, sponsored by what was called YES! Magazine coming out of, um,

Bainbridge, Washington. A couple of friends of mine, um, David and Fran Korton,

had formed, um, um YES! Magazine,

uh, it's like a quarterly magazine, uh, subtitled, um, um, uh, Positive Futures

Network--it's a subtitle for YES! Magazine. And these retreats, um, centered

around this, this sense of leadership of the future, and also around this, this,

this question of where we are with, with much of what we call climate change,

environment, nature, uh, whatever else. It's where we are on the state of the

world, these larger kinds of questions--(coughs)--that we said that some of the

questions are philosophical. It's how you look at the earth, how you look at

each other. Is there--are there four races or is there one race of people? Okay,

these are philosophical questions that if you can, if you can create a

philosophical projection, those

things can emanate into how you, uh, how you, um, organize your organization,

what your areas of focus are, how you organize a university. Based upon what is

your worldview, what is your philosophy of how humans fit in the world--the

philosophical, spiritual kinds of questions? So, Jim and Gretchen were great

about things like that, and we had these retreats where we bring in all kinds of

people to address oftentimes the larger philosophical questions, but also

address then, how do we leave out of here, and we go out, and we do our practice

in our communities? Along those kinds of, uh, uh, ways of experiences, I met up

with a guy named Bill McDonough, uh, who back then had a book called Cradle to

Cradle. He's one of the big gurus on sustainability, okay. He and a guy named

Braungart, uh, they'd written a couple of books and the latest one was

Cradle to Cradle, meaning there's no waste. Everything that we produce ought to

go back into some kind of cycle, uh, and it gets refurbished or reused. And, uh,

uh, Bill McDonough had been invited by Ford Motor Company, I think it was Henry

Clay Ford, was then--to, to rethink what was called the Ford Roof plant. And,

and McDonough convinced him to put on the Ford Roof plant, uh, this what’s now

called Green Roof System, that impacted the Ford Roof plant all kinds of ways.

It brought back all kinds of nature and birds and butterflies, places to sit,

uh, but it also reduced their heating and cooling bill, and it also reduced

storm water runoff. And, now, uh, green roof systems are, are, are a much more

common application now, uh, in construction, uh, as, as part of the, um, you

know, the, uh, the, the me (??) certification of, of construction, whether it's

restoration or new

construction. But, we were helping do those--we were working with Bill McDonough

way back--this was back in 2001, two, three, four--things like that. Um, and

then we had--and then we were working a lot in urban agriculture in Detroit, we

called it the re-realization of Detroit. We were, um, uh, I had a chance to, uh,

come here to meet with some Hopi elders who came to Detroit to see what we were

doing and learn a lot from them about Turtle Island and the whole area there in

Detroit. Uh, this is a picture--one of my pictures from Detroit, this is in an

urban, uh, uh garden that once was a field full of glass and tires and, and, you

know, whatever, and we began to refurbish it and bring in compost and this is a

young woman who was from Yemen, uh, who had an experience, and I call this,

this, this picture “Gold Dust”, meaning that the black earth on her fingers is

more valuable than gold.

But, uh, she was from Yemen, came over with her family, had a hard time

adjusting, new place, new language, and wouldn't say much, but, uh, three months

after being in the garden and then we were, we were raising some radishes and

she pulled one up and she raised it up and she spoke to her teacher for the

first time in a full sentence, “Miss Halsey, look, it's a radish.” And it was

Selena, and she said, “wow, she can speak”--(both laugh). This idea of how a

garden can also be a healing place--

KOMARA:--yeah--

EMBRY:--uh, so I, so I mean I had--I went to Brazil for the World Social Forum,

uh, went to Cuba, uh, I--we entertained, I worked a lot with a school in Detroit

called the Catherine Ferguson Academy, a school for teen moms, um, and their

kids, and they had a farm that they operated,

they raised horses and cows and, and, and goats and bees and they had a hundred

fruit trees and, and there was all kinds of vegetables and they would take the

food home and they had five businesses, one was selling apples and cider, one

was selling meat, uh, one was selling honey. They'd also go on Saturdays to the

farmer's market, so they're learning about entrepreneurship around urban Ag and

men--and young girls who are pregnant teens--uh, mothering teens, and their

kids. And we saw how this, um, school with this farm transformed young women,

okay, to be confident, self-esteem, how their children grew up, their kids came

there at about a month old to about four years old, the kids grew up not

learning to fear bees and animals and whatever. The school had a ninety-nine

percent rated graduation, ninety percent were on the post-secondary, eighty

percent no second pregnancy. We gave tours to that farm of folks like, you know,

Ossie Davis,

Danny Glover, people all from the U.N. states, people from the British

Parliament, people from South Africa. So, last year up there we gave a tour to

people from the, uh, Nobel Peace Committee. Uh, a film was done about the school

from Prince of Ireland and Holland and they began showing it and then some of

the people who saw it were with the Nobel Peace Committee. They came over and

said, “Well, we heard there's a school in Detroit, a school--high school for

teen moms and their kids, it has a farm, you're doing incredible stuff here, we

wanted to see it.” They came over and they gave the school some money to put on

the, um, to put around the barn a windmill and solar collector, where

that--whereby that, then the barn could run off of flowing wind. And those are

all things that we know are elements of what we call sustainability. And then we

formed in Detroit, what is called Sustainable Detroit, which was meant to be

again this network of

anybody and everybody that wanted to come together to think about what we could

do in terms of practices in Detroit, real life things that we were doing, a lot

of urban gardening stuff, art, um, and then this idea of, of, of, of visiting

people. Uh, again we were visited by people from all around the country who came

to see what we were doing. They couldn't believe, wait a minute now, you all are

doing urban agriculture in Detroit? You all like Motor City. You all are like,

you know--(laughs)--the big three, you know, car manufacturers, you're all known

as Industrial City, you're doing urban farming. Yep, because Detroit at one time

had two million people and we have, for all kinds of reasons, a million plus

have moved out. They've torn down hundreds of thousands of buildings, which

leads, we call it the reruralization. Rural areas are coming back to Detroit,

and we've got, you know, quail and pheasants, you know, rabbits, and--but also

opportunity to do large scale farming, uh, which we know, and we say that the

foundation of a sustainable community is a local, just, fair, sustainable food

system. That's the foundation of sustainability. Uh, and anyway, so, I was doing

a lot of things like that and for various reasons I came back to Lexington,

okay. Uh, and, um, lived about two blocks from the co-op, uh, because in Detroit

there weren't any really decent grocery stores in Detroit. Back when I was

there, I had to drive over to, uh, Dearborn, uh, to get, you know, ample supply

of food that I wanted to eat and I was aware of that. I said, man, I move back

to Lexington. I want to move right next to the co-op, okay. I can walk there, I

can bike there, I can go there if I want to multiple times a day. I don't want

to be stressing

about food, okay. It's too essential. Uh, but anyway--(coughs)--so I had--I also

met a whole bunch of people, uh, Joyner Macy, uh, who gave us this terminology

of--called the great turning, uh, meaning that, uh, that on the earth and human

species we're entering this, this, this paradigm shift called maturation of the

species. If you're using the meta--the butterfly metaphor, I met a woman named

Elisabet Sahtouris who's known for the butterfly metaphor saying that humans are

like caterpillars, okay. We're, we’re at that stage of, of--the caterpillar

stage of our existence, eating up stuff, pooping everywhere, uh, just eating

and, and being devastating to that home, to that home plant. See in the monarch,

it's just milkweed, there's an entire life on one plant basically. But we're

entering into a period where we're coming into a maturation of species

called a paradigm shift, we call that the great turning. Uh, it's not like one

year, it could be centuries of this turning, okay--(clears throat)--it was a

concept that resonated with me because it brings, it brings our work to a much

larger view, not just about 2023 and the oppressions that we might be facing

today based upon our particular walk of life, okay, it's a much bigger picture

than that, okay. That we’re trying to mature as a species and sustainability has

to have that larger--has to have this view of what's gone before us, past,

present, and future, okay. And oftentimes many people don't have a, a, a, a, a

good grounding in what's in the past, not grounding in how we've been maturing

as a species in all kinds of ways. But anyway, so when I came back

to Lexington, I had this much larger view, okay, like than I went out there

with, in all kinds of ways. I had been--I traveled a lot, India, Cuba, Brazil,

parts of Mexico, uh, visiting with friends and learning about urban Ag or

organic Ag, and say in Cuba, that's when Fidel was living. I saw--experienced

where I said, wow, we had two weeks. We were around Fidel three times and all

while I was here, I never saw a gun. I thought, I know Cubans got guns, I know

they have an army, I know, I know they got guns, but I didn't see any. I said,

wow, how can, how can you have a culture that can thrive and survive and with no

guns visible? Can you imagine how it felt as a black man having to go somewhere

with no guns? It was a relief. Okay, uh--(clears throat)--so I experienced

things in Cuba and of course they're in no way,

you know, quote perfect. They got--they're working on things every day--(clears

throat)--but it gave me a glimpse of, of how you can still not have to rely on

new cars every year, okay, as we do. See, we get--so part of the issue of, of,

of ,of the, and nobody talking about--is, is addressing in, in your center and

at Stanford, no one is saying we have to, we have to stop telling people that to

be happy, you got to keep buying stuff. And every year you got to buy a new

phone, a new car, a new this, a new that. When you do that, then you're going to

have right down the road as you came up, there's a new storage, uh, warehouse

and everywhere they're building these new storage, uh, warehouses. People have

too much shit--

KOMARA:--yeah--

EMBRY:--okay. But, but, but, but, but we can't talk about solutions if we're

not saying we've got to stop feeding people this notion that we have to keep

buying stuff. Okay and Cuba showed us as well. I had to pick a seven, seven

lane--(laughs)--okay. I had to pick a seven, seven lane right--(laughs)-- here

in Cuba, okay. So, and I saw, you know, the signs about prevention everywhere.

You know, there weren't these Big Macs, there weren't all these fast food joints

being advertised. It was about eating great food, you know, and we got, we've

got farms everywhere. We've got gardens everywhere in Havana, everywhere, okay.

Uh, but I saw how, you know, democracy can work. Uh, even what we call a

communist country, how democracy can work where people are engaged at the hotels

you work at, the schools you work at, you know, around the University of

Kentucky. If we were following the Cuban model the people who are cleaning up

the dorms and, and, and cleaning up the commodes and mopping the floors and

cooking the food and, and, and in physical plant would be on the board of

trustees along with, uh, the president and professors and everybody else.

Okay, yeah, because what y'all do is essential, but you have no voice in our

university and what we should be doing. But y'all's work is essential, when I

came, I saw that. So I'm just saying that, so I--so anyway, I came back to

Detroit, I'm from Lexington that I had a much larger view about what I should be

doing. And it wasn't just to the lens of quote one organization. It was--(clears

throat)--taking the people I'd met with, individuals, organizations, university

affiliations, uh, international contacts, contacts and wove that into what's

called sustainable communities network. Okay, and we say simply that our purpose

is to contribute to the theory and practice of sustainable living. It's real

simple. You know, we contribute to the theory and practice sustainable living.

And the network

is, is this--it's almost like you think about the underground network, uh, that

sometimes aren't visible to us. There's this tremendous underground network.

You've got tree roots, you've got bacteria, you've got fungi, you've got all

kinds of worms and insects and moles, and you have all this stuff underground

that all work together. Okay, they all work together. Um, so, so, so then that

imagery was part of my emulation of how I wanted to, to begin to form. So,

sustainable communities’ network was an extension--(clears throat)--of what I

had in Detroit was called Sustainable Detroit. It was also an extension of like

the work with the Boggs Center, uh, the work with, um, with--so we were working,

for example--(clears throat)--through the Boggs Center--(clears throat)--and

Sustainable Detroit,

they were like separate entities, with all the universities in the Detroit area.

We worked with Wayne State University, University of Detroit Mercy, uh,

University of Michigan, Michigan State, all five of them. And all five of them

had--they were doing something in Detroit in terms of a project, okay. Like you,

like you all do, you know, you work in different places and research here. So

all five of them were working in Detroit, but the attitude back then was them

crazy black folk in Detroit, that's mostly who's left, is all them crazy black

people, they done messed up the country--I mean, messed up the city, okay. They

done effed it up, that's what's wrong. Detroit, them crazy black people,

okay--(coughs). But anyway, so universities all had projects working in Detroit.

Now some universities might have five, six, seven, ten projects in, in Detroit,

but the weakness was oftentimes those

five different projects, they didn't know each other. They all come to the

University of Michigan, okay. Many of them were intersecting the Boggs Center,

okay. We'd have a professor so-and-so from sociology, we'd have a professor over

here who's in African studies, a professor over here might be in, um, the

College of Design, a professor over here might be in some other department. And

they all want to come in, work in Detroit, research in Detroit, and many of them

want to intersect what we were doing. We said wait a minute, wouldn't it be a

novel idea if before you all came to Detroit that the president of the

university would say, [?? WORDS UNCLEAR] would say, let's get together and know

each other and share what we're trying to do in Detroit and maybe we can create

some kind of synergy that can be more impactful, okay. So we decided to call a

meeting and we did through the Kellogg

Foundation of all five universities, presidents and some of their staff. We had

a big meeting--(clear throat)--and part of the meeting, there's, there’s,

there’s a really valuable book, it's been around almost twenty years, by the

Kellogg Foundation, it's called Leadership Reconsidered. You can get it online,

it's a PDF, Leadership Reconsidered. And, um, I encourage you to get that,

download it, copy it if you want to. And look at that as an additional guidepost

for your work. Okay. And some of the way that book looks at universities,

because leadership again comes from universities. And Kellogg is saying we have,

we have to have a new kind of leadership, okay, coming out of universities. And

if you're familiar with what's called McKinsey Report, McKinsey Company is a

company that does consultation and writing for what's called

the, um, World Economic Forum, okay. Every two years they meet in Davos,

Switzerland, and they pretty much decide about how the world should be. It's all

the large corporations, uh, the World Economic Forum, uh, and McKinsey Company

is like their consultant and then they do a variety of things. And they have on

their site, uh, uh, a page about the lack of good leadership, even within you

folks who are ruling the world. But y'all have laid out outcomes and things,

they have a whole vision for food and Ag, twenty-five year vision. But as

corporations, and we've measured, and we have all the inside information, about

one third of what you all project as your points of agenda, outcomes, goals, uh,

objectives, get met. One third. I say what you want to do, get

done. Which means you're failing, two thirds of the time, okay. So anyway, so,

so it's not just me being crazy. Um, so the Kellogg book describes this question

of leadership and how if you want leadership that's transformative and

visionary, I would encourage you to think about yourself, do you want to be a

visionary? I call it an Imagineer. Do you want to be someone who's thinking

about things that can be transformative, then how you mature into that, okay. So

the Kellogg said, to develop leadership that's visionary, transformative, here's

how it should look, here's what the president would do, here's what faculty

would do, here's what staff would do, here's what students would do. What they

said was, half the time they would spend at the academy in the campus classroom

and half the time in the

community. That's how they would fashion higher education, half the time out

trying to solve some problems. People said, well, we've got to keep

researching--(coughs)--if you keep eating this crap--(Komara laughs)--we formed

the Good Foods Co-op fifty years ago and said, if you keep eating this crap,

you're going to be sick. You got to keep researching that. We knew back then as

young kids, I'm talking young, we were in our 20s. I was called black hippie, I

was called all kinds of names, we knew then. We knew, I'm not saying we weren't

foretelling the future, but if we keep eating this crap and fifty years when

COVID hits, it's going to impact what they call people with compromised health

conditions. Hmm, what does that mean? Compromised health condition? Oh, well,

eighty percent or more of what we call

diseases are food related. Oh, well, well, well, why aren't we committed to

getting people good food? Simple as that. Get all the trash--you just drove by,

by a dollar store. Out here in the area where I live now, back years ago, in

small communities, with great grocery stores serving largely food grown by

farmers from here, okay. Healthy stuff, local stuff, okay, which was sold in

every rural area, like here, church, school, stores, businesses, grocery

store--more like a farm supply store--you got farm supplies, food, whatever, it

was largely healthy stuff. What's here now? All these M-double stores, all

refined food. You talk about poverty in Appalachia, talk about lack of health,

but you're, but, but, but you’re, but, but you’re, you’re promoting all these

kinds of things?

Okay. You ain't got to do more--why aren't we researching that anymore? We

already know what the problems are. But again--(laughs)--I’m just saying, again

universities say, hey, we're a research institution and we thrive on that, even

though we know, we already know the answer to some of the problems, we already

know that. When we came up in the mountains and we did mountain top removal and

we tore off all these mountain tops, we said, oh, we're going to go back in

there and we're going to reclaim, okay, the mountain top removal sites, all this

rocks--rubble there now, nothing but rubble, and we're going to plant trees. But

it takes centuries, if that short of time. It takes a long time to restore these

mountains to where they're healthy

again. But if you don't do that, then last fall, when it rained real hard, okay,

when it rained real hard and you had no forest cover, no ground cover, no, uh,

no, uh, feet high of soil to percolate, the water runs off, then you kill--not

that you [?? WORD UNCLEAR] thirty-five people died, okay, because of that. So,

I'm saying that--(laughs)--that, that--so anyway, so the book, I'm just

suggesting the book by the Kellogg people. So, I came back to Lexington with

this much larger sense of the work that was beyond just an organization. You

know, we get taught, we come out of universities and you get these degrees and

this is your theme of your work and this is what you got your PhD and your

thesis in and your master's degree and you become an

expert at that and we think what we do, most important work of all. So we're

taught. And we come out, we become the heads of NGOs and agencies and whatever

else, and we have the same way, that what I'm doing here, most important work of

all. And thus, we don't partner with other people. I remember in the morning

thinking about, hmm, today I really want to be extra synergistic, synthesis, I

want to collaborate even more than I've been doing--I don't wake up thinking

about that. I wake up thinking, well, what must I do for my own organizational

survival, our work, uh, you know, what we provide in our community? Its good

work, I'm not wrong, it's good work. Not about collaboration, not about synergy.

So, I wanted a network that was about this ever-expanding network of people that

we and I, you know, that we associate with and we do things with. Yes, we can

do, we can do different events, uh, but it's more important to just create this

idea that we have to work almost at every level. So, that's kind of what, um,

that development was, was in Lexington to say, okay, we're, we’re trying to live

more sustainably and everybody's got to do it. So, thus, we will reach out to

all the sectors, the government, local government, neighborhood folks, you know,

parks, schools, faith community, women's organizations, the court system, the

jails, you know, all the systems that, that we're operating in, within, is how

we, we need to reach out around this whole intersect of sustainability, okay,

which encompasses more than people oftentimes want to regard it

. If we're locking up people, I spoke yesterday, I was over in Frankfort, I met

with the Secretary of Agriculture, Ryan Quarles, who's--this is his last term,

he'll be leaving in January. Some of the conversation. I was saying that

Kentucky has one of the highest rates of incarceration per capita, okay, per

capita. Well it ain't very sustainable--(laughs)--if we keep locking people up,

okay? And we're locking up more women, okay, increasingly more women, more young

people. Our nation, if you take globally, all the people who are incarcerated,

and there's a number that's one hundred percent, we own twenty-five percent of

the world's incarcerated. Well, so, that means that sustainability

isn't just about whether you're using green design to build the building, or

whether you are, um, doing no-till farming, or, or whether you're, uh, trying to

get universities to move away from coal burning to other kinds of, um, energy

production, okay, or whether you've--I, I saw--I was up at the soccer game

Sunday, uh, and watched USA play, uh, Canada, and I ran into, um, oh, what was

his name, he kind of heads up, uh, the main campus sustainability work, um, uh,

Sean, uh, uh, what was his name?

KOMARA:Shane?

EMBRY:Who?

KOMARA:Shane?

EMBRY:Shane, yeah, yeah, Shane, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, um, Shane. I was,

I was, I was trying to confuse his wife's name, whose name is Jared, and I was

getting the two names combine--I said, Shane or is it Jared, yeah Shane. Um, so

I saw him at, at, at a soccer game, he and his son, and we'd been friends for a

long time,

and, uh, and I was just kind of teasing him about, uh, where UK was on the

spectrum of sustainability, and again, we'd been friends for a long time, and I

mentioned him, I said, “well, at Stanford, you know, and they got this billion

dollars”--he said “yeah, I know, man, I read about that, and they're doing good

work out there, you know, they’re”--I said, “yeah, they’re--they want to

be--they're developing now, they said, some models that are meant to be a

national model of what they're doing.” But anyway, so, um, so, so part of the

idea of the network meant to work with all different kind of levels, um, because

the solutions lie not so much working in silos, okay, and we're taught at the

university to work in silos, think in silos, act in silos, and silos are great

for storing grain, but they ain't worth a shit when it comes to solving human

problems and the problems we have

as a species, they ain't worth a shit, okay, that's what we teach though, and we

become experts at thinking and acting in silos. I'm just saying that my

experience was in Detroit, even before Detroit, because even before Detroit,

again, Jim and Grace were having us--well, we were trying to transform the

country, not just the neighborhood, transform the country, and--which means you

have to read about everything, and you're reading about how things fit together,

how things, you know, there's no such thing as an I, okay, there's a we.

There’s--that's how the earth is--it’s just--that's just how it is. Uh, so,

things like that were very helpful, uh, at broadening my understanding, and

then, then--able then to, um reach out to everybody. I wouldn't say, well, hell,

you're this, you're that, so I ain't gonna

talk to you. I--I'm not saying we're gonna necessarily agree--(laughs)--okay,

but everybody has to change. So, I talked yesterday to the Secretary of

Agriculture, I said “yeah, I, I reached out to the people in the, um, state and

federal penitentiaries, county jails, saying can we use agriculture, this is how

Ag comes in, can we use agriculture, farming, uh, and things like that as a way

to teach people skills that can be locked up, and oftentimes you're locked up

because, uh, you lack certain proficient literacy skills. It's still a problem

in Kentucky.” “My goal in the country is”--I say, “yeah, well, you know, we

still have a higher rate of literacy.” “Man, this is the 21st century.” I said,

“yeah, I know, yeah, I know, yeah, I know, I'm in the 21st century, I know.” He

said, “well, you're supposed to be the richest, most powerful country in the

world, and you all aren't doing the basic

stuff, making sure every citizen is, is like highly, like highly educated, at

least to a high school level.” I said, “no, we're not doing that very well.” I

said, “as a matter of fact, the highest dropout rate is pregnant teens, okay.”

That's why in Detroit, when I worked with the school for teen moms, it was so

important to me because if you're not talking about helping women heal, then we

can't talk about sustainability. I can, you know, some of the time I can tell a

story about my mother's healing and how she came back to the farm from losing

her daughter and, and how she healed from being here. Uh, I worked in Lexington

with what I call women at risk, women who were involved in experiencing domestic

violence, women who were healing from drug and alcohol addiction, women in a

homeless condition, uh, teen mothers. Because a teen mom, if you're pregnant at

twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old,

uh, uh, it's a situation that in many cases requires some healing of your

self-confidence, self-esteem. In Detroit, I saw how this farm helped women build

self-confidence, self-esteem, okay. Because if you're a young woman in high

school, twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old, having a baby, chances are you

might have two or three more. If you want a pathway to poverty, have a young

woman who's got two or three kids and she's not a high school graduate, eighteen

years old, that's almost a guarantee, okay. So I saw this school and how--also

if you're a, if you’re a, if you’re a, if you’re, if you’re a, a young teen mom

and maybe you're--I don't know--and in Detroit we have people who are young as

twelve years old. Oftentimes, many of them were pregnant by someone in the

household, not the whole point of healing. But, anyway, so

, um, we began saying, so what happened, they were trying to mainstream the

young women. Oh, you got a baby, okay, fine, uh, get him in the nursery and then

get back and finish high school. But if you go back in the mainstream schooling

and then, uh, uh, uh, Mark sees you, hits you on your butt, oh, you gave Jim

some and y'all had a baby, well I want some too. Everybody's hitting your butt

wanting some. Then you got two or three kids. So, a friend who was a principal

at school said that ain't working, okay. Give me my own school, it's just all

young women who were mothering teens and they had these outstanding results. It

should have been the example for the whole nation, but you can't, some people

can't fathom largely Black and Brown women who are pregnant--who are mothering

teens, supposed to be the example for education. Yeah, yeah, yeah, they sure,

they sure are. Look at what they're doing, okay. So I came back, okay, again

from, from

Detroit with that idea in mind as well, many ideas within the network, many

ideas like that. And I began meeting with all kinds of folks saying, hey, I have

seen the future, okay. I have seen the future, okay, in different ways and I

want to bring that back to Lexington in a whole variety of ways. And, and part

of that was, again, working with women at risk or I'd seen the teen moms, what

that meant. So I came back, I began working with the family court, a good friend

of mine, Lucinda Masterton, uh, was the, uh, family court judge, was also a

farmer. She saw--she'd seen things in the paper about my work with kids in the

garden. She says, “wow, like, you know, I've got some young kids who are in drug

court, they got to do community service.” She comes and “look here, I've got

these kids and they got to do community service 10 hours for whatever, can I

send them to you?” I said, “sure, send them to me and we'll do,” I was doing

gardening all over the city. I probably began about forty-something gardens in

Lexington. That's not counting all the gardens now in public schools, even in

private schools

. Just, just in the public arena, about forty, some of my gardens all over the

city with all kinds of different, whether it's neighborhoods or churches or

faith groups. Um, so I brought back, again, those kinds of dimensions and then

my friend who was a court judge said, “hey, I want you to”--I said, “yeah, bring

your kids out, we're out in Winburn and we're doing gardening there. I call them

art gardens, uh, and then we'll, um, work with them.” First Saturday was four

hours, four guys were there, had a good time, kicked it real good. Next

Saturday, I showed up in my van, it was seven guys there. I said, wait a minute

now, I said, now, the judge didn't call me and say, “well, Jim, you know, we've

assigned three more, okay, to your group. Hope you don't mind.” I said, “well,

no problem.” But she didn't call. I says, hmm, wonder who they are. And I rolled

up, you know, gave them a dap, you know, that kind of stuff, whatever. I said,

well, look here, I said, “I know the brothers are here, but who are y'all?” They

said, “hey, bro, like you know,

uh, our friend Harold said, y'all was here last week, you know, and they was

here with you, man, and y'all was kicking it, you had a great time. The OG was

spitting out some wisdom, you know--(Komara laughs)--and they had a great time

and came back telling us what a great time they had, so we wanted to be here.”

Okay. I said, “cool, we'll get some work done.” So out of that, the judge said,

“that was incredible. These young men were--I mean--doesn't mean, anyway, see,

now what I want you to do, says about thirty different organizations intersect

family court, and most of them are women's organizations, okay. Not all, but

some of them, many of them. I want you to come to a meeting that we're having

about--it's called Model Court. Everybody's going to be there, I want to

introduce you--they should all work with you. Okay, cool. I was there in the

back room. The judge said, hey, you know, Jim said, I said, I said, you know,

hey, this brother here is doing some really great stuff. He's worked with me,

with the kids in drug court, and everybody here ought to work with

him, because what he's talking about, I think it's really important to what you

all are doing. Now, could you imagine the look on people's faces? Most of them

are White, White folks, most of them are women, a lot of them are men, a lot

of--mostly all white people. We got to do what, judge? This old dude, like, you

know, looks like Bob Marley, okay, and got a little bit of hair and no hair, and

then we got to work with him? About what--(Komara laughs)--about what? Okay. I

said, well. So, we began working with a whole variety of groups, and the one

that took it to another level, of course, it was called back then--it was called

the Bluegrass Domestic Violence Program. They're out on Briarwood Road (??), uh,

it was a secret location, and they work with women and the kids who are going

through, who experience domestic violence. And they go there, it's basically get

away, to be safe, for weeks or months at a time. And I was out there introducing

the whole notion--now it's called therapeutic horticulture, it wasn't back then,

the idea of doing gardening. Um,

I do workshops on women gardening and healing, and I introduced the idea of, you

know, raised beds and planting things in the soil, and, uh, the first day, the

folks who were the directors said, well judge say we've got to work with you,

and I don't know what, what you're doing has to do with domestic violence. You

know, we've got our own staff, we've got counselors, we've got great staff, and

we're doing great work, and I don't know why judge said we've got to work with

you--(Komara laughs)--but anyway, but yeah, but here, here, here's a space for

doing gardening. That's how I approached it, I said, cool, no problem, you know.

So, I began doing--(clears throat)--that first day, uh, some soil preparation

and carrying on, and out came a woman, uh, who, hmm, well, in my view, she

looked African, and she was. That's why she dressed, you know, and skin tone.

She came out with, like, two of her kids and said, “Well, you know, the folks

said, you're out here doing gardening.” I said, “Yes,

ma'am, we sure are.” She said, “Well, I want to be a part of this.” I said,

“well, hey, come on out.” What she did first, she took her sandals off, okay,

and went over where the ground was loose that I'd been digging it up, and put

her feet in there and did it like that, and she began to cry. I thought, is

there--(laughs)--glass in the ground? She cut her foot? What's going on? You

know, and she began to cry. And then she explained what’s going on, and she now

says, um, back home--I think she was from Burundi, back home in Burundi, you

know, in my village, I was a farmer and the women are farmers. And before us,

our mamas were farmers. Before our mamas, our grand mamas were farmers. Before

them, our great-great-great-great-great-great grandmas were farmers. How we

identify as a woman--part of the identity as a

woman is farming. Other things as well, but farming is how we, you know, and

many parts of the world, the women are the farmers. Um, she says, you know, what

happened, the wars broke out, and, uh, you know, we tried to escape. Some people

didn't escape, some people got killed. But I was able, I was one of the few who

were able to escape through the countries and we got to Tanzania, and then we

were in these refugee camps for six or eight years. And those camps were just

given this food and they were doing farming. And I forget the story, she made

her way over here and she got in this shelter. And she says, I haven't been able

to really put my feet or dig in the soil for eight or ten years, I'm just

thankful that I'm here. A true story. And then, um, we did that experience with

her and her kids and then, um, that, that day ended.

I described--I was leaving, I described to the ladies, you know, who were the

directors, I said, now this is what, I said, one woman did come out, and here's

her story. I mean, if you've heard it before, they hadn't heard it before. They

said, did you make that up? I said, I said, yeah, I made it up, yeah, don't

worry about it, I made it up. They went and talked to her and they heard her

experience. That's when they began to say, hmm, might be something to this. Then

they kind of, they evolved into a support rather than this thought that it has

no relationship to what we're doing. I had some experience with, with the

Christmas house where women and kids there were going through drug and alcohol

addiction. Some of them were locked up. And, and the Christmas house, sometimes

it's a court order. You get locked up, then you get out, you got to go over here

for two years to help yourself heal,

okay. I work with women and kids there with all kinds of, again, I can share all

kinds of stories. So, so the work was at the ground level--

KOMARA:--yeah--

EMBRY:--in terms of practice, theoretical level, writing things, speaking. Uh,

and again, uh, it, it was my fault that everybody has to change and that part of

the work of the network is to meet up and talk with everybody. I work with faith

groups. Uh, you know, part of the problem that we're having about climate change

is a spiritual disconnect, okay. If we had our spiritual house in order, okay,

of how we view the sense of sacredness and the divine and whatever else, I think

we would have a different practice, okay. Uh, so I worked a lot with all the

different faiths, uh, uh, in Lexington, around Kentucky, uh, Christian, you

know, Baptist, Presbyterians, Catholic, Baha'i, Unitarian, Islamic,

Jewish, uh, and worked with all of them. Even while I never professed though a

religion, don't now, try to be halfway spiritual, you know, probably more than

half. But, um, but I've been invited to speak at all the different

denominations. Probably the only person in Lexington, probably, that's been

invited to speak at all--and these are all friends of mine, okay. You know the

rabbi who left, Mark Kline, was the rabbi at the Temple Adath Israel. He was a

good friend, you know, these are all friends, okay, uh, with mutual respect. So,

so, I began working on this whole intersect of sustainability and especially the

idea of, of gardening and how you, what you do around your building of worship.

And to a large degree, all these buildings of worship where, they weren't quote

green inside. They were using all kinds of poisonous chemicals, a lot of

Styrofoam. They were, you know, they were antithetical

to images of what it means to live sustainably. So, we did all kinds of, of, of

work inside trying to create what we call a green sanctuary, okay. Then outside,

by and large outside, we had parking lots, a lot of green grass--I call it green

concrete. Okay, that's what you have there, no trees, no flowers, nothing

edible. I said, wait a minute, how you talking about--I said the Garden of Eden

is the earth for the first of all, okay. And you all can replicate the Garden of

Eden all around your sanctuary. You're going to have bird houses, bat houses,

beehives, uh, you know, trees, perennials. You know this, this green concrete,

all this green grass, ought to be lots of perennials, okay. I said, man, you're

crazy, you know, that's going to look unkempt. You know, I said, yeah, in your

view of what it looks like. So, I worked with all the different faith groups and

then they have changed in how they, how they

look. Uh, I have some, was doing these, uh, every year we would do this

bluegrass, um, local food summit and we would invite different themes of people

to, to, to meet with us. Uh, and one of the themes was, was, was the faith

community. And I would say, okay, and we would do, we would do things that

weren't quite like a typical academy conference. Conferences aren't meant to,

meant to solve problems, they're meant to give people a chance to be peacocks,

talk about their book, about their article and they go home, and they go home.

There's no projects that come out of that. We approach it very differently where

you would come and you would create projects. So I had people gathering themes

like the faith community, put three arm blocks, get to know each other. Over

years, it takes years to do this kind of work, and then out of that summit of

2008 arose this project. It was called, um, Faith Feeds and it was sponsored, it

was organized a lot by the Presbyterian

folk but it widened to include other denominations--(clears throat). And what

they began doing is establishing gardens in all the Presbyterian churches and in

various, you might have some, some surplus. People then collect the surplus from

the various churches that were involved, then take that surplus we call fresh

fruits and vegetables to like the food banks or the senior centers. And they

were just thanked immensely, they said, “Wow, oh, well, thank you. Because

oftentimes you don't get what we call fresh fruits and vegetables at a food

bank. Wow. Then we give it to people who are--who come in for food.” I said,

“Wow, man, because we don't have money to buy. We make, often we make the

healthy food expensive.” I don't understand that. I don't understand that. Are

we paying on the other end four times over? We're paying for people's loss of

life, early retirement, lack of productivity, all kinds of diseases and,

you know, health care. We're paying four times more than we would pay if we made

the healthy food the least expensive because it's going to save millions of

dollars--(laughs)--but anyway, strange system. Um, so we began doing that, and

then over years, they involved more faith people out of what's called Faith

Feeds. And it began going on for years. Now it's called Glean Kentucky, okay.

Now it's called Glean Kentucky, and now they, uh, they get food now, and, and

so, we were getting food from farmers, say if you were growing potatoes for the

market, maybe you were growing, you know, five acres and you, you had a contract

for selling 8,000, uh, pounds of potatoes, which really produced 10,000. So you

had 2000 surplus. And we'd go out and get access to those 2000 from that farmer,

from many farmers. And then we'd bring that together and get it out to the

various, uh, you know, food banks and whatever

else. And with a lot of success and a lot of need, they outgrew it being in

Lexington, Faith Feeds, now it's called Glean Kentucky and that's a statewide

operation. That all started from something we were working on. Well, we

recognized that first of all, everybody should be growing something, everybody

eats, the earth, one of the earth's principles is reciprocity, okay. And humans

aren't very reciprocal, and one way to be reciprocal, everybody should grow

something and everybody should compost. So, we were bringing to these, these

faith organizations, uh, this theory of sustainable living and what

spiritual--and, and what it is that religion has to think about or do within the

context of sustainable living, as well as practices that you could be doing on

site and within your membership. So, I would go out--I would do like a sermon

on, you know, gardening--I'm supposed to do one this--or I’m supposed to do one

here in Richmond on the 30th at the local Unitarian church. Uh, and I would

preach, oh, about the sacredness of Earth and food and it's a sacred sacrament

and, and how the Bible talks about all that stuff. It's in the Bible, it’s, it’s

in--all the sacred books have elements of living sustainably already in there,

okay, it's already in there. Uh, and--but we're just not practicing what those,

uh, those texts say. Uh, the whole question of, uh, when I gave my talk, I

mentioned to the UK students in soil science, I also use this quote from the

Bible, which I use often to talk, to talk about what we made from us. I say

well, I wrote down, you know, somewhere in the Bible, I think it's in the “New

Testament”, “Mark" and “John”. I said, no, no, “Old Testament”, “Exodus”. I

said, no, might be

“Genesis”, oh, might be the second chapter, maybe, where it says when God

created humans, God picked up soul, hummus, dirt, clay, and then breathe the

breath of life. I said, it says right there where we made from, don't believe

me. You know, what do I know? I'm just a crazy old dude from, you know, from the

foothills of, of the mountains here. I don't know nothing. But anyway, so, so,

again, so the idea of the network is to take this message that we all have to

change and different people have different levels of responsibility for

impacting change, okay. We all have to change, okay. Uh, and, and whether you're

a, a member of, if you're a faith leader, then you should be spiritual. When

you're having your church service or your faith service, you should be talking

about sustainability, okay. You should be giving out books and

articles. You should be giving out seeds, okay, here's, here's seeds, okay.

Here's free seeds. Oh, here, here's, you know, you should be, you should be

emphasizing composting. I said, composting is a spiritual practice. They look at

me like I'm crazy, “well Jim, we heard you was crazy, you know, I mean, praying,

singing songs and, and, and, you know, um, uh, we kind of know and praising, you

know, our deities. Um, we know those things are spiritual practice, but you're

saying composting, taking food scraps and, and leaves and, and, and it's

spiritual.” I said, “Yeah.” I said, “It wasn't my idea about composting. This

was like a divine order. How do you want to call her? This was like divine

pronouncement.” I said, “If it wasn't for how the earth began to evolve and the

essential nature of composting, could you imagine if what we

have out here, leaves and grass and whatever didn't compost. I thought we would

be walking around on the earth and miles high of muck. We'd be, we'd be way up

near the moon walking in muck, but, but, but we don't. That's spiritual

practice, okay, and we should be emulating that. And of course we know that one

of the thousands of things we can be doing about sustainable living, then we

were able to teach people that, well, you know, some of the issues about

greenhouse gas emissions, there's CO2 and there's methane, which lasts longer,

blah, blah, whatever. And the methane is a natural production on the earth, but

the human imprint has increased the levels of CO2, methane, and these, uh, these

concentrated animal feed lots, CAFOs[7]and things like

that produce an enormous amount because it's an unnatural kind of place to be in

terms of human existence to have all these animals in one big lot. And they're

pooping these big lakes of poop that not just small farmers aren't a problem

raising animals. It's these big--anyway, so we are able then to weave within the

sermons--and they're called homilies at Unitarian church. We can weave in things

like that, that people can say, “Oh wow, okay. Well the minister has been

preaching once every--if it's a Christian church, every Sunday, once a month,

she's been preaching about composting. Well, maybe I should do something like

that. Maybe I should do that.” Uh, so, so again, so we worked with the city

government about doing the co-op with having behind the co-op we had behind

there at one time--(clears throat)--an organic waste place

to put stuff. The city was committed--they were committed to zero waste, now

they're not. Uh, but anyway, so, you know, when you work with, so, so my, so, so

part of our role was to work with everybody bringing the same message, but

sometimes different themes of how you would apply the same message of

sustainable living and involves a lot of things. I hope that makes sense.

KOMARA:It does, this is really cool work--(Embry laughs)--Jim. And I, like, I

really appreciate you taking the time to lay out all these interconnections and

I--(Embry laughs)--I don't have enough--I don't have a lot more time to spend,

but I wondered if I could see your farm. Could we--

EMBRY:--sure, sure--

KOMARA:--could we turn off the recorder

EMBRY:--sure, sure, sure, sure, sure, sure, sure, sure--

KOMARA:--and go outside? (laughs)--you're calling me to the sacred and I want

to go out there and do it.

EMBRY:Absolutely, I’m trying--

KOMARA:--yeah. Thank you so much for this recorded portion--

EMBRY:--most certainly. Thank you for coming over. And I should have warned you

before you came over, you know, um, I get interviewed often and folks at Yale

says, um.

[End of interview.]