So first I’m going to put a tag on this--it’s just like an audio identifier at

the beginning--and then we’ll get into it. Very formal, weird thing. This is an

interview for the Kentucky Climate Change Oral History Project with Reverend Dr.

Wilson Dickinson on the 5th of July, 2023. This interview is taking place in

Donovan Hall at the University of Kentucky. I, the interviewer, Zada Komara, am

a faculty member at the University of Kentucky. So, Wilson, how are you today?

DICKINSON:I’m doing well, how are you?

KOMARA:Oh, I’m doing okay, yeah. You weathered the big weird storms?

DICKINSON:Yeah, yeah.

KOMARA:Yeah, did you get shelled for the 4th of July in Georgetown like we do

in Lexington?

DICKINSON:Yes. You know, actually I was able to sleep last night, usually--I

mean, most fourth of July is--you know, 4th of July already is kind of--I find

to be an alienating holiday. And then when, like, there’s just like all these

kind of explosions going on all night and keeping me awake it’s--

KOMARA:--yeah. The loud nationalism--

DICKINSON:--yeah--

KOMARA:--(both laugh)--keeps you awake.

KOMARA:

Well, I’m glad you slept, um, let’s get into it. Tell me a little bit about

yourself--I like to establish biography first, so just tell me a little bit

about yourself.

DICKINSON:Well, I’m from Kentucky. So, I grew up in Georgetown and I live in

Georgetown, um, and my only time outside of Georgetown, I went to school

elsewhere. So, I went to school at Transylvania, across town here, for my

undergraduate work and majored in philosophy. Um, I went to divinity school in

Nashville, um, and then I went and did Vanderbilt, and then I went and did

doctoral work in philosophical theology at Syracuse University. Um, and toward

the end of my doctoral work, my dad was sick so I moved back to Georgetown

thinking I would be kind of part of the itinerant intelligentsia and would never

get to live here again. Um, and so we moved back while I was finishing my, um,

doctoral work--so my dissertation. And I ended up, uh, getting

some gigs at, uh, Transy. I, I taught in the philosophy department a couple

years, and then I was the associate dean for religious life. Um, and then at a

certain point, uh, there was a lack of congruence with vision and mission at

Transy and also I had become involved--a lot of my--so as associate dean for

religious life I was like some kind of blend of professor and pastor, and so I

had kind of developed this--and, and it was a little bit before that that I

started to getting into issues of climate and food justice. And so the model I

developed there was really kind of about connecting academic, the kind of the

wider community and the kind of--and the co-curricular around issues of food

justice and faith. Um, and in the course of that process, I became more and more

kind of embedded in that work and committed to it, and I wanted to kind of--in a

lot of ways, give my life over to it. So I, I left there, um, my wife and I

at the time were, were living in Georgetown already--we had, you know, moved

back to Kentucky--we lived there the whole time. But we actually sold our house

in Georgetown and one of our cars, and we moved in with my sister and my nephew

and my mom. So, we have a multi-family household, we simplified our bills, um,

and so I went about trying to figure out how I could organize around issues of

kind of climate and food justice and have been kind of trial and

error--(laughs)--doing that ever since.

KOMARA:(laughs)--that’s awesome. Uh, how long did you teach at Transy?

DICKINSON:Um, I was back at Transy I think for six years. So, I was in the

philosophy department for two and then associate dean of religious life for four

or five.

KOMARA:Cool, and when did you get to Georgetown, how long have you taught

there? Or--

DICKINSON:--oh--

KOMARA:--you lived there, sorry. Lex--

DICKINSON:--so yeah--

KOMARA:--Lex Seminary. My gosh--

DICKINSON:--no, no, that’s--

KOMARA:--right? Yes. When did you get to Lexington Seminary and how long have

you taught there? (laughs).

DICKINSON:Um, I guess I’ve been teaching there probably

six or seven years. It’s hard to remember because I was kind of brought in as an

adjunct. Um, and then about four or five years ago, I was brought in to direct

the Doctor of Ministry Continuing Education programs. Which is still a part-time

staff position, so part of the adjunctorate.

KOMARA:(laughs)--yeah. Okay--(both laugh)--com--the academy is so complicated.

DICKINSON:(both laugh)--yeah, that’s right.

KOMARA:Yeah. And, like, what are you into other than, you know, all of your

scholarly and activist work?

DICKINSON:Um, so I’ve, I’ve--I am the director of the Green Good News, which is

really nothing more than an umbrella organization for a lot of disparate efforts

that I’m a part of. So, part of that is rooted in food justice efforts in

Central Kentucky. So--which is--um, I am--or, I am one of the

organizers for Community Garden in Georgetown. It’s a partnership between two

churches, the, the college there owns the land. Um, and also--and, and a dinner

church that I also am one of the conveners of. So, it’s a dinner church that

meets in our house, uh, it’s called Green Christians--I guess is relevant for

this. It’s a small group of people committed to living our faith in ways that,

um, are moving toward the ways of justice and joy and resiliency. Um, so there’s

the garden, there’s the dinner church, um, initially I worked a lot with kind of

different congregations doing classes and educational stuff around food and

climate. Um, and--well--and I guess--to take one step back, initially I thought

I would do something like a lot of the social entrepreneurial things that people

do in food justice.

KOMARA:Mm-hmm.

DICKINSON:Because I had gotten kind of plugged into some of those when I was at

Transy with some of those organizations on the north side.

Um, and actually, early on in that process I was having lunch with some friends

and thinking about how to do this, and um, one of them--Steve Pavy--I don’t know

if you know him from kind of in the orbit--I think he, he got his PhD in

sociology here. But he told me to go read a book called, uh, The Revolution Will

Not Be Funded by INCITE!, this kind of collective of Black feminists. Um, and he

was like, “Yeah, I don’t think we need another nonprofit”--(laughs). So, so kind

of early on, I shifted from that kind of social entrepreneurial--like, you know,

like--let me make my own organization and, uh, lose all my hair trying to figure

out how I’m going to pay my bills, um, by doing that. And instead, a lot of what

I’ve been doing is kind of lending my energy to building some nascent networks,

um, around issues of kind of Christian food movement and the Christian life.

Um, and that’s taken shape in a lot of different ways. Um, most recently--well,

I guess my current kind of work is, uh, of this kind of collective organizing.

There’s an organization called Creation Justice Ministries, which is kind of a

hub. Um, did, did Leah talk to you about that at all?

KOMARA:Yeah, a little bit.

DICKINSON:Okay, yeah. So they’re kind of a hub from--it’s a leftover from what

was once the ecumenical movement, which was very important for me but, you know,

it doesn’t really exist anymore. They’re kind of a leftover organization from

that, so they’re a hub of--or a bunch of different kind of progressive to

liberal to mainline Christian denominations. Um, it’s one of their kind of

connector organizations. So, anyway, they--one of the things they’re setting up

is a series of retreats for pastors around issues of climate, um, and I guess

they’re doing it kind of in different

regions or even bioregions. And I--and my understanding of that work is both to

create a retreat, but then also to get together the kind of local people in the

area, to connect them. Um, you--kind of that, um--kind of like the Poor People’s

Campaign, like, reversal of, like, where you do the mobilizing to start the

community organizing, to start kind of bringing people together. So, I think

they’re trying to--so, so anyway, I’m part of a group that’s planning a retreat,

it’s going to be taking place in Columbus, um, this coming October. And that’s

bringing together people in Kentucky and Ohio to, to begin to kind of, I guess,

thicken those relationships, hopefully, and build that network. Um, another

thing that I’m a part of right now is, um, there’s this thing called the Westar

Institute, which is, uh, an organization that brings scholars of religion

together to do kind of cutting edge research. I’m kind of--I’m chairing a, a new seminar

through that organization called the Christ Seminar, and it’s on Christologies

of the people. Um, and so this is--it’s, it’s--and so it’s a group of

international scholars, mostly people of color, um, and, and we’re looking at

these kind of people’s traditions of Christology. We’re kind of in some ways,

um, both--I guess, centering and more deeply exploring traditions that have long

existed, but also trying to do the public work. Because one of the Westar’s kind

of touchstones is doing research in the public for the public, and so doing kind

of public work to reclaim, uh, progressive to left voice when talking about who

Jesus is and what it means to follow him.

KOMARA:Oh, that’s all awesome. So, yeah, you do a lot of cool stuff. What, um,

just to backtrack a little, like, what sparked your passion for this? For food

justice, climate justice,

sustainability? It seems like you do a lot of sustainability, like, what sparked

that passion?

DICKINSON:Um, yeah. I think--so--I mean some of it was just kind of waking up

to the climate crisis, um, and wanting to do something about it, and kind of, I

guess, using or following the kind of, uh, communities I was already a part of,

the--what I was able to do. Um, another part of it was--there’s, there’s

something, you know, tangible and beautiful and joyful about food, right? So I

was doing--I mean--so I became interested in it and then also--and also

became--started finding my footing in it on largely intellectual grounds. It

was--I, I thought it, it was really interesting. There was a guy I--so

there was a guy who used to teach at Georgetown named Norman Wirzba, who was

kind of a--who is a scholar of this kind of intersection of, um, environment and

theology. He teaches at Duke now. But we--we both came from this, like, the same

arcane tiny corner of academia, and so I--kind of conversations with him and his

work, um, were kind of helping this grow some. Also, I have some other kind of

intellectual mentors, um, that were leading me in that direction. But really, I

guess one of the things that really brought it together was teaching

undergraduates. And so teaching undergraduates--and my background was kind of

this intersection of European philosophy and theology. Um, post, post kind of,

you know, the financial crisis of 2008 it seems like students less and less were

interested in these kind of, you know, let’s, let’s have the great conversation.

And more of it was like, you know, like,

I see my debt, you know, kind of building right now--(laughs). Why are we doing

this? What are you doing in this classroom? And so there, there was also--like,

there was a climate crisis, there was also kind of, like, a crisis of, like,

pedagogy, and so part of it was just a desire to connect with students. Another

part of it was that I--I mean, my--a lot of my teaching--and, and I understand

my vocation and my ministry to be centered on issues of justice, but I felt like

I was kind of doing this thing that Jane Addams talks about as the snare of

preparation, right? It’s where you get young people, you raise their awareness

about all this kind of brokenness in the world, but then you create no avenues,

um, to connect, to change, or another way of doing it. And so I kind of thought

I was maybe--basically that if students were tuning into what I was trying to do

in the classroom--it was really just a recipe for cynicism

and apathy, right? Because it was just like, here’s all these problems, and then

you’re just kind of stuck with them. Um, and so food and the kind of food

justice movement was just--and for especially the Christian food movement, it’s

like this really incarnational, tangible, joyful way of, of engaging, right? And

so it’s all--like all this stuff, like the kind of food movement stuff, a lot of

it is, um, very small scale to the point that, does it matter? And I think it

matters in the way that, like, maybe this is how you start to build a movement.

As you begin to taste alternatives and it changes and it kind of opens your

imagination. And it also gives you--it’s, you know, also kind of living in the

ruins of liberalism and the kind of hegemony of neoliberalism, community and

social connection is so tenuous that kind of what the food movement was doing

was, like, giving you this kind of space to build those bonds and to build them

around the ground that’s like more,

I guess, substantive and life giving.

KOMARA:Yeah, wow. You’re saying all the words that I’m really into, this is

phenomenal. Um, could I get you to unpack, you know, in your mind the Christian

food movement?

DICKINSON:Yes. Um, so, it’s basically a website. No, but there’s, um--so I

think around the same time, and I think it was kind of, uh, springing up around

some of this foodie type stuff, people started wanting to connect their faith to

that. And so that often happened in kind of community gardens. And, and, so

people--and so churches started doing community gardens, and then people started

thinking, well, what if we got outside the four walls of the church and the

garden was the church? And that was the kind of the nexus around which

the community was organized. Um, and so then those people kind of started

connecting and start--started connecting with other people who were saying,

well, what if we just--we had a farm and the farm was a church, and the farm

was, like, this school where people were invited to also live there? And, and so

all--so, so all these kind of different models, different ways of being church,

or different ways of connecting religious communities with their surrounding

community, kind of started rising up and--well, or started emerging. And then

they started to be networked and there were a few, like, specific places that

started networking those people. One of them that I got pulled into was Wake

Forest Divinity School. It started, um--they were networking those people for a

while, um, and for a while it was kind of--I mean, like some of the pieces of

the food movement, it was very white, right? And so this kind of really,

like, professional class, very specific, um, you know, almost, you know,

lifestyle type thing. And I think that the last, I don’t know, five, seven, ten

years that, that kind of swath of the Christian food movement has been in deeper

relationship with Black traditions and with, um, and just--and, and in with also

kind of more diverse contexts. Um, and, you know--and so one of the really

important organizations for that is this thing called the Black Church Food

Security Network. And its, um, initial organizer, Heber Brown, has been kind of

instrumental in also bringing some people together, also being kind of a voice.

Um, but another one of the--so another one of the, the efforts I’ve been a part

of was

a working group that put together a short documentary about the Christian food

movement. And it was--initially we were going to make a long documentary, and

then we made--then the--well, basically the pandemic happened. And so then we

ended up thinking we would make episodes, and we only ended up making the first

episode before, you know, the kind of precarity of everyone’s situation. But

actually the person who was one of the--part of the creative team is now part of

that other organization I mentioned, Creation Justice Ministries, and so I think

they’re going to kind of pick up that mantle a little bit. There’s also a

podcast that’s kind of one of the hubs for that, it’s called Food and Faith

Podcast. So, that--they’re one of the kind of places where some of these things

are beginning to connect. But there’s also other seminary efforts and other

organizations that kind of play that role. Sorry, I’m probably telling you more

than, you know--well.

KOMARA:No, it’s--you’re doing the right thing. This is what you want; somebody

who gives you details and analysis. Like, this is what I think and this is how I

feel about it--perfect. You mentioned that, you know, you’re intentionally

trying to, like, uh, reclaim ancestral knowledge, like network with people of

color specifically. I’m curious, like faith wise, who is in the Christian food

movement? You mentioned that it’s mostly the Christian left. Is this, like,

interfaith, non-denominational, multi-denominational?

DICKINSON:Oh, yeah, it’s everything--

KOMARA:--I don’t know how it’s classified.

DICKINSON:I mean, the--I mean, it’s--I spend my time in left circles. I spend a

lot of my time with, like, professional class liberal people and trying to,

like, pull things left. So I mean, a lot of that’s my bias. There, there’s--I

mean, another one of the kind of--so, another guy who’s been kind of a connector

in this, is, um, I guess, one of the kind of godfathers of the food movement in

the southwest, Gary Paul Nabhan. And he has a book called, um, something like

The Radical Center or something. And so--and in that book he talks about all

these different organizations, some of them Christian. Um, because--well, well,

he lives in Arizona and I think he lives in--what’s the one in the south that’s

like--so he lives--I think he lives--I think it’s Tucson. Whatever one is that

southern town where there’s, like, all these lefty environmentalists, and then

there’s, like, all these, like, far right ranchers. And, and he’s interested in

the ways that food has actually created a bridge between those two groups.

I--(laughs)--the way that things have been weaponized--

KOMARA:--okay--

DICKINSON:--I don’t agree with all of that--(laughs). But--no, but there’s

all--there’s evangelical organizations that are doing this kind of food stuff.

It is kind of across the board, it’s just that’s not my world.

KOMARA:Cool, interesting. This is, like, really cool to learn about. Um, let me

just start by asking you generally, like what do you think is the connection

between environmentalism and environmental social justice and faith?

DICKINSON:Yeah, um.

Well, I mean, on the one hand, my understanding of the Christian traditions that

I’m a part of are, are very much rooted right in creation, right? And so there

isn’t like the--it’s not like a kind of two worlds understanding of

Christianity. I don’t think that the Bible has much to actually say about

another world. Um, so, so anyway, I think, I guess, at the heart of what--the

faith tradition that I come from, at the heart of it is about the ways of

justice and joy, um, that are woven through the very fabric of the world that we

live in, right? So that--and that’s--and so then part of what faith traditions

are, are trying to find ways to,

um, align with those kind of creational rhythms, but also find ways to kind of

restore and heal the, the ways that those have been lost and, and damaged. So I

guess on--and so from the faith perspective, I see the connection as it’s

just--it’s woven in, right? So the whole thing is about how we take care of

community and how we take care of creatures and how we are taken care of by

those, right? So it’s about this kind of integral relationship. Um, I also see

faith traditions as powerful, kind of repertoires of social practice and of kind

of social imaginary. And kind of my own faith journey has been one from kind of

liberalism to liberation, and so, you know, this--in some ways this is coming

from the tradition that I was raised in, in other ways this has been something

that has been, I guess, deepened and transformed for me by my relationships with

other communities. Especially global communities, communities of color, but, but

also communities on the left. Um, and so I see these social practices, these

forms of being community and these social imaginaries as some powerful forms of

social transformation. Now it’s obvious--I think--now obviously, I think it’s

part of a pluralistic movement, and there’s all kinds of other, you know,

poetries that other people have that are going to need to be a part of the

trans-local movement. And, you know, there’s also all these ways in which these

social imaginaries that I find to be powerful are--seem to be connecting with

fewer--(laughs)--and fewer people.

Uh, but I do still think there’s a power there and it’s--you know, it’s what I’m

connected kind of into. And it’s also--it’s what I have training in, but it’s

also kind of what I have resonance with since I was a kid, I guess.

KOMARA:Yeah, that’s really cool. Um, you mentioned--you said like the whole

thing is really about stewardship, and I took that to mean, like, both the Bible

as a text and Christianity as a practice.

DICKINSON:Yeah. Well, I mean, I think the whole thing is about community and

covenant. I actually--this, this is a silly scholarly thing, but I actually am

not crazy about the word stewardship.

KOMARA:Hmm?

DICKINSON:And if you look in the--it is a term that comes up in the scriptures,

mostly out of Jesus’s parables. And I read--I’m part of--I read Jesus’ parables

as these acts of liberative pedagogy. To where--so what the parable typically

is, is it’s a--it’s an unveiling of the way that

the violence of empire kind of is embedded in everyday life. And so anyway,

typically the stewards are assholes, right? So, the stewards are

typically--(Komara laughs)--these bad examples, right? Because the steward is a

manager, right? It’s someone who is managing, uh, it’s managing wealth or

managing a kind of labor relationship on behalf of a master. And I do think that

one of the shortcomings of a lot of the kind of Christian environmental movement

has been, because it’s largely a professional class movement and it’s

professional class people who are, like, “Stewards? That’s us, we’re the

managers.” Right?

KOMARA:Yeah.

DICKINSON:“And the managers are the good guys.” And I think that that kind of

frames things in a way that is--that loses a lot of the grassroots kind of

orientation and power of the Christian tradition. Because I see it as a people’s

tradition, right? So, it very much--and, and one of the things I used to study was

a lot of kind of ancient and late (??) ancient philosophy. And it is interesting

to read, like, you know, the aristocrats of kind of the Greek and Roman world,

and then this strange literature that’s preserved in the Bible, which is a

people’s literature. And, and I just--it took me a very long time to see that

because I was raised in the Bible belt and I was told that, you know, the

scriptures are about something else.

KOMARA:Very cool. I feel like I bring up Robin Wall Kimmerer in, like,

literally in every interview, but she has this whole bit about the title manager

should be, like, removed from the forest service--(Dickinson laughs). Maybe they

should, you know, think about a more community-based title. I--like, I love

hearing your thoughts about, you know, how like--how to read texts, you know?

And, like, I’m interested because Leah--Leah gave me just a whole incredible

exposition of how, like, to read the book of Genesis, for example, you know, as,

like, a green text. And I’m interested

in, you know, how do you read the Bible? You know--

DICKINSON:--yeah--

KOMARA:--what’s there? What’s relevant to this?

DICKINSON:Um, yeah. Well, so I’m a theologian by training--well, so in the kind

of theological academy, right, there’s, there’s been a separation of--you know,

like in any academy, right? Everybody has their own discipline and in a lot of

ways there’s, there’s this whole field of biblical studies that has kind of

taken the Bible for them--(laughs). And I guess I don’t need to--for this

context, I don’t need to go into all that. Um, so I read the Bible in a kind of

constructive and spiritual way. I’m very interested in the ways that--well, no,

let me restart. So, one of the things that opened the, the text for me was to

actually, like, see the bible in, in a place and against a kind of social and

political horizon. So

for me, when I read the Bible, I see the social and political horizon of empire

as one of the defining features of it. And so it’s--because, you know, the kind

of--the, the liberalism of my youth only saw individuals and, like, kind of

ethical principles. And then I was also in this evangelical context of the Bible

belt that saw kind of individuals who were going to heaven or were doing

something that was kind of impure related to sex, right? And so the--so, seeing

this kind of--seeing these stories with the social and political backdrop of

empire, but also seeing it grounded in creation, because most of the stories of

the scriptures are being told by and to agrarian peoples. And so it’s not just

that those agrarian peoples have like a--that their metaphors then are more

plant-based or something, it’s that there--there

is, um, like, the deep wisdom and ancestral wisdom that they’re passing on is

about how to live with each other and how to live with the way--the land in ways

that are balanced and that’s just all the way through. I think that’s the kind

of deep core of the scriptures. Right, so, so I, so I read the scriptures then

as embedded in this context of empire, but the empire is kind of what’s wrong

with the world. And--but then what the scriptures are holding up is this other

way, in a way of both living with creation, but then also healing community and

creation in large part through community and creation. And so, I--in, in a lot

of kind of ecotheology--eco theological literature, a lot of it focuses on

those, like, first creation stories and genesis, and then kind of feels like it

loses the plot. And in some ways, because

what I think is most--the ecological issues that are most present in the

scripture is political ecology, it’s not deep ecology. Um, yeah, I could say

more about that. But also, I guess--so I read scripture as embedded in those,

like with that social political background, rooted in creation, but also I read

it as, um, not a historical document, but as liberative wisdom. And so, I guess

to read that well, sometimes I read it on my knees, I often read it in

community, um, and also I see it as, like, the--so the, the power of the

scripture is not that it’s reporting on something from the past. It’s also not

like it’s, like, these kind of, like, the magical, like, kind of propositions

drop from heaven, it’s this ancestral wisdom that you read in community to

become reoriented and to have your kind of imagination and heart shaped differently

.

KOMARA:That’s, uh, I think, an absolutely beautiful way to deconstruct that. I

know you’re into Derrida--(both laugh)--I, uh, I was, I was really interested to

read about, um, some of your books, and now that I hear that you have a

philosophy background it all makes sense. I was like, oh, this dude’s like, like

really into, like, deconstruction. And I was reading, um, blurbs about your

books and I was like, I think, like, what he’s going for is like, you know, a

de, like, a decolonial reading of the Bible. Like the Bible is an anti-imperial

text, so.

DICKINSON:Right.

KOMARA:You can unpack this, by the way, for as long as you want. I’m fascinated

to hear your thoughts about political ecology, so if you’ve got anything else--

DICKINSON:--well, I mean--

KOMARA:--feel free to go--(laughs).

DICKINSON:I, I, I’ve actually--I’ve wanted to connect with the UK

[1]political ecology people for a long time. I--when I

moved back, um,

I guess it was like kind of KFTC[2]circles and then,

like, kind of northern--like North Lexington. These food justice people, every

once in a while, will be like, oh yeah, political ecology and, like, the--and,

you know, the dope conference. And I’ve actually never been, but I would--I’ve

always, like, kind of kept track of--

KOMARA:It really is dope--(Dickinson laughs)--but actually, it’s great.

DICKINSON:Well, it’s helped set my reading list, I guess, for the past eight years.

KOMARA:Yeah, you should definitely go and you should present--most, most

definitely, what you’re doing would be extremely welcome. Um, could I--could I

ask you to unpack, um, what you mean by discipleship? I had read a little bit of

your work and you were talking about the intersection of environmental justice

and discipleship, and I’m curious what you think--like what is discipleship to you?

DICKINSON:Hmm.

Yeah, um. Well, I mean, I guess literally it just--it kind of means--well, so I

guess like I’d said, a lot of my background is in philosophy, and what

interested me in philosophy was about these ways of wisdom that were about an

alternative way of living--so it’s about a whole way of life. And in the ancient

world, uh, sometimes philosophers were the teachers of gentlemen, um, but often

the, but often philosophers were people at the center of a community that was

trying to live a more beautiful, or just, or good life, or all of those. Um, and so

I don’t just see Jesus Christ as a philosopher, but in some ways, I mean, I do

think what’s at stake is that I think the Christian faith, in my understanding

of it, is that it is about a way of following a teacher and being organized in

community to try and live a more just and joyful life. And so--so it’s not just,

you know, discovering this life for yourself, but it’s necessarily outwardly directed.

KOMARA:Yeah, cool. Um, I also read in one of the--a review of your book,

someone talked about--I haven’t read your books, but I really want to, actually,

after reading about them this week and reading a little bit of one of them--it

talked about, like, how you framed Jesus as an activist and an organizer, and I

would love

to hear about that.

DICKINSON:Yeah, well, I mean, I think there’s, there’s a long tradition of

that, um, not least of which comes from a lot of nineteenth and early twentieth

century labor movements. Um, but I think there’s also a way in which it’s not

just those more contemporary labor movements, but there’s been--there have been

people’s movements that have--you know, it’s not unlike the kind of the slaves

in the American south who got their master’s Bible and they were like, have

you--well, I guess they’re not reading it, but every once in a while they would

accidentally tell a story about, like, Exodus and the slaves getting free. And

they’d be like, “Wait a second.” Or they would tell, like, any story about Jesus

and they’d be like, “What now? That’s your guy? I think he might be our guy.”

Um, so there’s all these people’s traditions where people have started hearing

the story of Jesus and, and resonated with it

. Um, so--I mean, so I think that it’s kind of at the heart of the story is that

Jesus is an organizer. He’s this guy that goes around and organizes this

community and speaks out against injustice, um, even, like, forms

demonstrations. But I think most of his work as an organizer and as an

activist--I don’t know. This is part of my bias because this is the piece of the

work that I find that I can do. Like, just because of who I am, but also, like,

being in red Kentucky. Um, but I think a lot of the activism and organizing he

does is actually on the level of, like, rooting the grassroots and of

cultivating community. And doing stuff on the level of, like, social

reproduction, um, to try and, like, build sustainable power. So I think--so, so

there are, like, actual stories of Jesus, right, going into the temple and

turning over the money changers tables and shutting down the temple

economy for the whole day. Um, so, so there are stories like that. There’s also

stories of, like--I think the story of the feeding of the five thousand is just

the story of organizing. He takes farmers and fishers, he puts them together in

small groups, and he is like, “No, you all have the power.” Um, so there’s

stories of that kind of organizing that looks more recognizable to, I guess,

advocates. But I think most of the kind of organizing he does is kind of rooting

the grassroots.

KOMARA:Yeah. Yeah, that’s really cool. Um, you--I know that you also--where do

I want to go next? Okay. I’ll circle back to something that you said about,

like, the importance of community building, which is something that Leah also

talked about. She talked about how, in her own work, she wants to, you

know--like invite people to consider something beyond individual salvation

theology and community. And, um, I guess maybe my question

for you is like, how do you invite people to do this work for you? Like, what

does that look like in terms of conversation, in terms of, like, actual

organizing, in terms of the product, in terms of, I don’t know, cultivating joy?

I should be more vague about this. Like, how do you invite people to cultivate

this joy together?

DICKINSON:(both laugh)--so, I mean, I guess in my work with the seminary and

through teaching, a lot of that is about working with people to dream about how

current congregations could organize differently, right? Um, right--so that some

of that has to do with, you know, maybe they could do their worship differently.

Some of that has to do with--because a lot of--so the churches that I work with are

part of what is the mainline Protestant Christianity, which was kind of the

establishment denominations that reached their height in terms of public

influence and membership in, like, the 1950s. And there’s kind of old school

liberal denominations. That are--that have been there since, you know--they went

through a period of decline and now they’re basically just zombie institutions,

right? To where the--not that the people--the people in them are very much

alive, but the institutions themselves are undead and they just kind of march on

and just take people’s time and resources. And so one of the things I try to do

is to work with people in those communities, especially leaders through my

teaching, and trying to imagine how to kind of get some distance from, like--so

that we’re not just, like, inhabiting the ruins of liberalism and making it into

a museum where it’s like, I remember when this used to be like this. Instead

it’s, well, how can we be together in ways that are meaningful? So how can we

shift from, you know,

a board structure or kind of committee structure that isn’t getting anything

done--or not getting anything done. That is activating and organizing

people--professional class people to be--to just do more managing and to manage

something that is broken. Um, instead, to get them into communal spaces, um,

where they are, uh, bearing one another’s burdens, learning from scriptures--so,

so maybe getting them out to a garden. Maybe finding different ways of using the

spiritual traditions or practices of Christian traditions to bring us together

rather than the kind of spirituality of, like, kind of neoliberal managerial

committee structure--I don’t know, that all seems very vague. But I, I--so I

guess I could be more specific. But I try to work with pastors on that stuff.

Um, in my writing, I try to--like, so my--the book that I just had that came out

was--is trying to help

professional class parents see the practices of parenting as a school for

change. So as learning from the ways of parenting and learning from the kind of

genius of children, um, how to see the world differently, but then also how to

kind of, in these social spaces, dwell on them differently. And it draws on the

spiritual traditions of the “Psalms” to help people kind of enter into, uh, kind

of effective spaces that they’re likely not equipped to from the wider,

especially neoliberal, forms of our culture. So the “Psalms” give them a way to

lament, right? So they give--especially with like this—because it seems people

with kids and climate usually don’t, you know, people with kids especially don’t

want to think about climate because it’s just too terrifying. And it’s not that

they don’t care, it’s actually that they have this little, like, kind of perfect example

of, like, the future, and this thing that they feel deep love and responsibility

for--it’s too much. So anyway, so, so then that book is trying to help them

think about parenting in that way. Um, other work has helped try to think about,

I guess, food and, and community in that way. Um, there’s a dinner church that I

help organize that kind of does that work. I don’t--I don’t know if I’m being

specific or too specific enough.

KOMARA:You’re doing great.

DICKINSON:Okay.

KOMARA:I don’t have to ask you any follow-ups. You always tell me about

something and then you tell me the name of the organization--it’s perfect. Yeah,

your new book sounds really cool and props to you for banging one out during the

pandemic. That just got published, right? 2023?

DICKINSON:Yeah, I about broke myself doing that. I think that was part of why I

started getting migraines, is I wasn’t resting--(Komara laughs).

KOMARA:Yeah, that makes sense.

DICKINSON:It’s one of those ironies, you know? Sometimes you write about

things, not that like you, like, live deeply into, but that, like--

KOMARA:--yeah--

DICKINSON:--

you understand them because you struggle with them--(laughs).

KOMARA:Yeah, yeah. That’s funny, um, this sounds really--very cool, um,

especially, um, I’m interested in your comments about, like, thinking like

rethinking structure in churches and moving away from neoliberalism--woo-hoo.

Um, sounds downright socialist, Wilson, if I may say so.

DICKINSON:Which it is–(both laugh)--but in Kentucky, you know. I mean, I’m a

socialist, um. Well, well, I, I’ve said that for a long time and wondered, can

someone be a socialist by themselves? I am finding more and more, uh, community

around that. But I’m--you know, I’m not a Marxist and I’m not super red in my

socialism. I’m kind of more green and really my politics more and more is like

libraries. Like I--I, I don’t really know what the abolition of private property

even means. Like, I have--I have

ideas, right? And I think there’s all kinds of traditions. But I think I’m

really interested in just the kind of--and this is one of the reasons why

Betsy’s work was so important for me, um, was naming those traditions. One of

the things--so, one of the things that was so important about her work for me

was the way that--I mean, I was aware of the Commons, but the way that she lays

out and connects--so the Commons as this space that connects both social

reproduction, but then also the kind of reproductive aspects of the biosphere,

and then positioning that, especially vis-a-vis neoliberalism, was really

helpful for me. So anyway, my, my kind of socialism is, it’s about the Commons.

It’s about these kind of embedded communal experiences that help us think about

what collective and kind of creational ecological power looks like.

KOMARA:Yeah and what do you think that looks like specifically for Kentucky? I

know you write about the Commons. You use the term commonwealth in your work a

lot, with the lowercase ‘c’,

but I think we could also use it with an uppercase C. Um, like what’s specific

about--I don’t know. Your thoughts specifically about Kentucky, this work in

Kentucky, what needs to happen here?

DICKINSON:Yeah, well--so another important influence for me was, was Wendell

Berry. But I’ve spent a lot of time, you know, realizing that I’m not Wendell

Berry--(laughs)--in a lot of different ways. But also—you know, so I live in the

place where I grew up too, but I--one of the things, you know, and he has this

whole line about, like, you just need to commit to a place and stay in that

place. And I wonder, like, what does it mean to be committed to a place that’s

forsaken the idea of place? Because Georgetown is a southern manufacturing town,

and Toyota moved in when I was a kid. And so for my whole life the, the space

has been turned into the geography of nowhere, right?

There’s like a local--there must be like a local ordinance against green spaces.

Like they have to be covered with either a strip mall or a new subdivision.

And--and so, so I don’t know. I--so I guess I love Kentucky. I know that there

are all kinds of--you know, there’s a lot more than Wendell Berry to Kentucky,

right? There’s--I mean, just to go with the individuals, there’s Bell Hooks,

right? And then Thomas Merton, like, from the faith perspective he was--you

know, he wrote all that stuff basically in Kentucky, right? And there’s Delores

Williams, this other really important womanist theologian, I believe grew up in

Louisville. I mean, there’s--but there’s also all of these radical traditions of

the radical south and also Appalachia, right? That, that have been, I think,

lost, right? I think that this--the--a lot of things--a lot of forces, I think,

make those memories difficult to keep. But I think it feels like the Cold War

swallowed up, basically, every kind of left-leaning organization,

especially labor organization. Um, so I guess there’s all these memories in

Kentucky, and there’s all these traditions and there is still, like, KFTC. There

are still all kinds of people that I’ve met and collaborated with on the faith

and kind of ecology side, on the food justice side. Um, so there’s reasons to be

hopeful, but I--you know, my work more and more is not like, I--I, I think less

and less about what I can do in my context, because I’m kind of not sure of

what’s possible in the short term, because of the ways that so many things have

been kind of weaponized.

KOMARA:Yeah, I think that is very relevant. Um, obviously we have some pretty

significant barriers to environmental literacy--(Dickinson laughs)--and

activism in Kentucky. I think on all scales, from the personal to the

Commonwealth scale. Um, I would love to hear what you think. Like what do you

think are the barriers to this kind of, um, environmentalism generally--maybe

climate change specifically. For both, like, faithful and non-faithful people.

DICKINSON:Could I ask you?

KOMARA:Sure.

DICKINSON:I mean, because you--because I would think UK is kind of a really

interesting hub, right? You’re in Lexington but also being at UK--

KOMARA:Yeah.

DICKINSON:--like, you see. You--I mean I, I know kids come from all over the

place, or students, but so you see people from all over Kentucky.

KOMARA:Mhm.

DICKINSON:And then also doing the work that you do in Appalachia, you see

another--or you have, I guess, another deep set of relationships. What’s

possible in Kentucky? (laughs)

KOMARA:Oh, man--

DICKINSON:--what do you think--

KOMARA:--what’s possible in Kentucky? Not to take up too much space in your

interview, but I think collective action is possible

in Kentucky because we have such a strong tradition of it. Um, obviously

indigenous societies where, you know, deeply valued community and communal

action. And also I agree with you, like the labor movement, like Appalachia, I

think, specifically sets a very strong precedent. I don’t kind of know how to

get people over political polar--the recent political polarization and the

weaponization of topics like environmentalism, but I do also think it’s one

arena where people do want to come together for whatever reason. “I hunt on my

family’s land and I care about that being polluted” to "You know, I’m really

interested in the effects, like the local effects of globalization because I

have sixteen doctorates and I, like, am that liberal elite that you’re talking

about.” Like whatever I think gets you into that conversation and gets you to

care beyond the individual, I think is meaningful. Um,

but I don’t know. I don’t know, Wilson--(Dickinson laughs) because, you know,

like politically, like, we’re being taught individual salvation theology and

we’re being taught the secular version of that.

DICKINSON:Right.

KOMARA:Which is you vote with your dollar, don’t eat it if you don’t like it,

move if you don’t like what somebody’s doing in your community. Like, as long as

you are safe and you feel okay about however you can rationalize, right? So, I

don’t know. I mean, I think we have a lot of barriers here and, like, what do

you think are the big ones? Like what are all--what are all these barriers and

how do we navigate them?

DICKINSON:I mean, I think, I think one of the barriers is coal, I guess. Just

because of the legacy that’s had, the way that that has,

I don’t know, hollowed out the eastern part of the state and kind of broken the

back of labor there, but then also had such, like, kind of a disproportionate

voice. But I mean, but it’s not just coal. I mean, I guess I think another

barrier is the kind of the fallout from the southern strategy and just the ways

in which white and white working class people have been kind of galvanized and

organized in the way that that’s kind of, you know, worked like a resonance

machine with the evangelical church. Um, also, I guess--I mean--so I’m from

Georgetown. I’ve been around kind of evangelical churches my whole life. It’s,

um, and, and you know, in a working class context my whole life. But

my, my world really is professional class and, and kind of these liberal

churches, but I think one of the big barriers for even like kind of organizing

an alternative in Kentucky is, like, the kind of attenuated imagination, or the

narrowed imagination, that comes from it being blue in a red state. You just

think that so much less is possible. And then there’s also the ways in which

people, you know, center left and over, I think there’s also all kinds of ways

in which, you know that the narratives about, you know, rednecks and racists and

all that stuff that make it difficult for even people who maybe care about the

environment to create a bigger tent that keeps its eye on the systemic problems

and that really seeks kind of a deep form of solidarity. I don’t know, I--

the kind of Charles Booker type stuff, I find a lot of hope in. And that kind of

a different political rhetoric in Kentucky and really trying to lift up a

different kind of base. And, and there’s another southern organization, the Poor

People’s Campaign. I think the kind of work that they want to do to build up

those kind of coalitions is important. I think Highlander, so, is, is another

important one. And so the denomination I come from, actually, one of

co-executive directors of Highlander, um, the not famous one–(laughs)--not

Ashley, um, but the other one, he’s a disciples pastor and so he also kind of

comes from these Christian left traditions, anyway.

KOMARA:Yeah, cool. Um, I’m interested in what, I don’t know--maybe barriers is

the wrong word. Opportunities for improvement--(laughs)

I guess, is what they tell us to say as a teacher. Um, Leah, Leah in her

interview talked about--(laughs)--she said the--probably the funniest thing

anybody’s ever said in an interview. She said—she made the comment that, for a

lot of Christians, that, uh, simply having faith in Jesus and having faith in

God is enough for them in terms of, like, environmental policy, I guess. And

that, you know, she feels--she thinks a lot of people feel like, um, if I--you

know, if I have faith, my personal salvation and, like, the future of creation

is ensured. Because as she said quote, “Big daddy in the sky is going to fix

it.” And my God, I laughed during that interview--(Dickinson laughs)--like, like

it prompts a really good question for me. Like, what do you think, like, people

struggle with? Barriers to, like, regarding faith, like Christianity

specifically, and environmental action and consciousness, I would say?

DICKINSON:Yeah, um.

So, I think while there is a resonance machine between kind of cowboy capitalism

and evangelicals, right? And that’s kind of William Connolly’s line. I think

there’s also a resonance machine between a kind of liberalism--a liberal reading

of Christianity and a certain professional class that’s always kind of turning

in and looking on itself. So--right--so, so there’s--so part of, like, the

technologies of the self--of prayer, oftentimes, are very self-focused, right?

And you’re thinking about your action, you know, and your hopes and all this

stuff. I mean, there’s all kinds of things in a prayer that should be taken out,

but. So I think there are--so, I mean, basically I think that one of the biggest

obstacles the environmental movement

faces is internal to mainstream environmentalism that’s so focused on individual

action, right? So, so that, like, the carbon footprint, you know, there’s a

reason why the--why BP came up with that as an advertising campaign. Because it

takes professional class people and it’s like, “Here’s a test. Can you pass it

individually?” And we’re like, “Yes, we’re going to pass the test.” And, and it

gets us to focus in our own--in our own action. And not just our own action, but

our own consumer habits, right? And so--and because we do that, it basically

turns environmentalists into the irritating people in all their social circles.

And in which they--the solution that they’re offering is like, “Here, swim

upstream and do this small thing” that--you know--and so I think it’s--I

think--so that resonance between focusing on yourself and doing all these kind

of, like, you know, self-centered assessments for the professional class people,

like, I think that has--those things have kind of, like,

collapsed in on themselves in environmentalism to just look at consumer habits.

And so instead of looking at collective power, instead of really looking at, uh,

the structural sources, um, it’s--and instead of organizing communities, it

really has made people who like--it’s like, “Here, you care about the

environment? Now go do all this impossible stuff and make everybody, you know,

really irritated.” And so it’s like you’re not building a

movement--(laughs)--you’re doing that.

KOMARA:Yeah--(laughs)--you’re--yeah, that’s funny. Um, I, I like, um, I really

like all your attention to discourse analysis and rhetoric,

obviously--(laughs)--you have a philosophy degree, that’s what you people do.

And I know that you are really into Derrida. Um, I guess I’m interested to know,

like, how do you think, as a professional educator--and as an activist I would

say--like, how do we, how do we communicate to audiences, many of whom

are at least seemingly disparate? Like, how do you like to communicate? How

do--what do you think is effective about these issues? Like, how do we do this work?

DICKINSON:Yeah.

KOMARA:Language wise.

DICKINSON:Um, ideally I think it’s invitational. So, I think the pedagogy of

the movement should probably be liberative and so--you know, so it’s not, let’s

get the expert to give a presentation and change minds. It’s, how do we

facilitate a communal space that we can invite people into where people are able

to kind of speak truths, a lot of which are difficult, even traumatic? But then

also to find the language, and this is something else that I find

so promising in faith traditions--to find the language of also hope and joy.

Because, you know, a lot of--you know, so again, so I guess as faith traditions

and as ancestral and liberative wisdom, um, it just helps you think on a longer

timescale, right? Than just like, kind of--it’s not about choices, it’s about

kind of communal power. And so, you know what--and so how do you build that up

over time? Right, so, I know, yeah--so I think how we speak about this is less

like--and I’m part of a number of--I mean, I’m connected within a number of

networks where they’re always, like, trying to like, uh, focus group language

to, like--so, so we know what to say when we’re the experts on stage. And I

think really it’s about a process. About kind of--and creating a space that

people can

be invited into, and where they will find, like, healing and connection and

hope. But, but also, like, healing, like, but also like where there is honesty

about brokenness.

KOMARA:Yeah, and I’m curious to know specifically, like what do you think are

some of the prime issues of climate change that we are experiencing right now,

will experience in the future, and what should we be doing about this communally?

DICKINSON:Yeah. I mean, I think, who was it? Was it Du Bois that said the

twentieth century was going to be about the color-line? I think the twenty-first

century is going to be about climate. Everything. But it’s only because

climate’s going to intensify the broken structures that we already have.

Um, but, like, just, just like Du Bois’s line, like, the 20th century was about

that, but it was also about, like, pretending it wasn’t about that, right? And I

think that this century’s probably going to be very similar. Um, so I mean, so

the obvious--like, so the challenges there, like, the kind of obvious, slap you

in the face--you know, like it’s hazy outside because Canada is literally

burning. Um, but I think, you know, all of the other kind of--I just think all

the problems--yeah, climate’s just going to intensify problems. What can we do

about that? I mean, I guess it is also, the opportunity of climate is an

opportunity where the kind of the challenge is global and communal in a way

that’s completely unavoidable. It’s also a way to--so there’s also, I guess, the

hope there that we can address these larger systemic--that there is the impetus

and the pressure to address larger systemic issues of racial

capitalism in ways where there is a transition to something more just and joyful.

KOMARA:What do you hope that that will look like?

DICKINSON:I mean, I guess--all these different trans-local movements where

people live lives with less stuff but more community and connection. So, I mean,

I guess--I mean, one of the things that comes to mind is, I went and saw a

musical the other day and, and I guess it was in Versailles, right? So they have

a little regional theater there--it was actually--it was a lot better than I

thought. But, you know, I want the future to involve, like, community theater,

right? Like--or, you know, these--you know, the kind of, like, the, the Marxist

hope, right? Where, like, we work less and there’s more space for,

like, creativity, there’s more space for connection. Um, my son is really into

music and I just think about how tragic it is--so many people I think, play

music, you know, until they realize they can’t make a career out of it, and then

it’s gone. And so I guess the future that I would want would be one where there

is, um, like, deep community, um, deep connection, less exploitation and

extraction. Um, I really do think--and not that I’m steeped in it, but that the

kind of--I think the politics of something like the Green New Deal makes sense

to me where, like, when we talk about, what do we want from the future? Is

positively what we want. In addition to, like, what we also need to kind of get

rid of. But I think most of the stuff that we need to get rid of, it’s we, we

would be liberated from. But it’s also, there’s centuries of trauma, so, you

know, it’s not like

just to get rid of it, then everybody’s happy.

KOMARA:Yeah--(laughs)--all interconnected traumas, I think, you know?

DICKINSON:Yeah.

KOMARA:From many scales--(Dickinson laughs)--I think climate change is the

big—it’s the big trauma, but like you said, it exacerbates a lot of existing

structural inequity and other traumas--(laughs). Um, you do some really cool

work--like really cool work. And I think you have a beautiful and very expansive

way of thinking about it, if I may say so. What are, I don’t know, some of,

like, the biggest lessons that you have learned through your journey as a

scholar, a theologian, an activist? Big lessons.

DICKINSON:Hmm, um, well, I guess as a former philosopher,

one big lesson is, uh, all ideas are embodied and communal. That change doesn’t

come from minds--(laughs)--it comes from, I guess, practices and disciplines and

spaces. Um, which is obvious for anyone but philosophers, but also, um, I think

something that is often lost in a lot of the kind of politics of liberalism, or

even education of liberalism. Um, and because--and I think it’s also like--so if

you make that reorientation, then also there’s a reorientation toward activity

and community. And so I think being reoriented to that, you realize that there

has to be kind of a constructive positive aspect to what’s going on.

So if you’re working against injustice and climate, you know, you need to have

this, again, this space to invite people into. Um, a lot of the work I’ve been

doing has been, you know, kind of the--deconstructing the white guy inside of

me--(laughs). Where it’s like, i’m not a savior, uh, at best I’m, you know, a

member of something, um, but it’s, it’s hard to--it’s hard to make that shift

because there--again, because of neoliberalism and the, the kind of it’s

spiritualities which turn you towards yourself, but then also it’s kind of

literal and material geographies which have fractured a lot of the connections,

or a lot of the ways to connect.

KOMARA:Yeah. I mean, you have a very hopeful perspective. As you said, climate

change is truly terrifying. And I guess maybe, I don’t know, I’m interested in, like,

what’s a big lesson from your new book? You know, like reading Psalms to your

kids in an era of, like, global terror--(laughs).

DICKINSON:Right, so I mean, having kids, I feel like giving up isn’t an

issue--isn’t, like, an option. But then also that I think that there is

something inherent about, like, creativity and cooperation, and I think that

there’s, there’s a hope in that, right? Like that there is kind of woven into

the world and into us as creatures, even in the midst of all of the kind of the

trauma, that there is this kind of, I don’t know, energy, right? This kind of

interpersonal energy of cooperation and creativity that

abides and is resilient.

KOMARA:Yeah, I like that. I feel like I could ask you questions for days, but

I’m interested to know, what am I not asking you that we need to know? (laughs).

DICKINSON:I don’t know. It’s weird--(laugh)--to talk, in one way, this long.

KOMARA:I know, right?

DICKINSON:(laughs)--I mean, I think--I feel like you’ve asked great questions.

KOMARA:Okay, what else do we need to know? I’ll ask it that way. Is that a more

helpful prompt? (laughs).

DICKINSON:Well, I mean, one thing that I haven’t talked a ton about is that I

do think that the kind of--I find a lot of hope in the vision of the commons.

And like, so I don’t think that’s a master word,

right? So, I think the commons is not the common sense that should be applied

across the board. Because you brought up commonwealth earlier and this--or this

initiative I’m a part of, one of the kind of senior theologians, um, and

scholars in the group, you know, was kind of floating this term commonwealth,

right? And for these, for, like, early twentieth century social Gospelers, these

kind of lefty Christians, they would talk about the cooperative commonwealth was

one of the ways they translated Kingdom of God. And so I was like, yeah, I like

it. Because I really like this cooperative commonwealth that, like, puts a lot

of things together for me. And this, uh, kind of one of our godmothers of this

group was, you know, raised in Hong Kong and she was like, “Nope. Commonwealth,

that is the empire, that is Britain. Nope.” And so anyways, I think that

I find a lot of hope in the Commons, but also I acknowledge that that is in a

lot of ways the naming of a set of European traditions. And a lot of the work I

want to do is finding these alternative European traditions to help white people

not be white, right? Or to disentangle from this kind of disembedded and

disassociated form of identity. To find these other people’s traditions, to kind

of remember like all these--right, I’m also interested in all these, like,

radical south traditions--radical American south--to, to help people kind of

realize how much of I guess--how deeply the roots of an alternative go, right?

Because I think the way of looking at history from a conservative, evangelical

perspective is like, from time immemorial there have been men and women in

nuclear families who love

capitalism. And then from the progressive, like, history, it’s like, all this

stuff was bad, but we’ve moved past it. And so I feel like a lot of the work is,

I guess--to use some of your language, is like helping white people find

ancestors, helping people real--helping kind of communities that care about

environmentalism realize how long the struggle has gone on, but also how, you

know, it isn’t just all of a sudden in the sixties people woke up and, you know,

since then we’ve been, like, kind of growing. It’s--instead there’s like all

this stuff that’s been going on and all these systems are connected, but also

there’s been all these people’s movements. I don’t know, i’m probably repeating myself.

KOMARA:This is good. Yeah, this is good, um, you’re obviously involved in a lot

of projects but, like, what’s next for you?

What is on the horizon or something that you want to be on the horizon?

DICKINSON:Well, so, um, next is I’m writing a bunch of books about Christ,

because it’s part of, like, um, and initially I’d hoped--so I started this kind

of Christ seminar thing that I had mentioned earlier because I thought, people’s

Christologies, I probably need to do that work in community, do that in

collaboration and probably, you know, maybe help facilitate that with scholars

of color. And that is going on but that’s just moving very slowly, and so I’m

also going to be work--working on kind of those books. The first book is on

Christ in the commons, and commons understood in different ways. And so, like,

lifting out all these different kind of people’s Christologies--some of which

are from the radical south. So, like, you know, Fannie Lou Hamer and her Freedom

Farm Co-op is going to be, like, the beginning of the chapter on land. And then

there’s also like all these

Catholic liberation traditions in El Salvador. But they’re kind of all over the

place, in Europe and especially the Americas is what I’m focusing on for that.

And then, you know, I’ve--I don’t have as many irons in the fire as I normally

do. The next thing coming up is, um, is this retreat for pastors that hopefully

is going to help build a network in Kentucky and Ohio, that Betsy’s going to

speak at. But hopefully that will help build up that, that network, yeah.

KOMARA:So you, I think--(laughs)--would be called extremely radical by a lot of

Christians in the United States, individually or--

DICKINSON:--No, no, there’s dozens of us--

KOMARA:--institutionally. Um, have you--I mean, how--what have you struggled

with? Like any resistance that you have encountered or opportunities that you

have made out of

this work? Um, I feel like there, there must have been some resistance sometime

from someone, and I’m interested to hear about it.

DICKINSON:Oh, I mean, it’s all the time, but it’s actually--so again, I don’t

spend a lot of time in red spaces, I guess. Um, I guess when I was, when I was

like the--when I did religious life at Transylvania, I did, I did work with a

lot of, I guess, conservative students then. But they didn’t seem to really have

a problem with me. I don’t know, anyway, a lot of the resistance that i’ve, that

i’ve felt is--it’s… subtle stuff. Um, so it’s--so I haven’t--you know, I haven’t

been, like, actively trolled by the right

or anything. Um, or even the people usually--kind of like the liberal or kind of

centrist people that I spend time with usually don’t take issue with the way

that I talk about Jesus, right? Or they don’t take a theological issue, it’s

more like this kind of, like, procedural stuff. So, it’s, um, kind of the norms

of politeness and then the kind of policing that comes when you break those

norms. So like--so, you know, in those spaces, the way that you kind of

discipline people, I guess, is that you--when somebody brings up like a social

issue, you attach it to them and you make them feel like, you know, they’ve done

this thing to disrupt what was a peaceful order. Um, so I guess the pushback

I’ve felt has mostly been politeness, and then also the kind of procedural stuff

that comes from organizations, um, or institutions, where you

are kind of, you know, marginalized or silenced in ways that are not direct but

indirect. With how the meeting is conducted or with what’s followed up on or

with who gets what job, if that makes sense. (laughs)--

KOMARA:--Mm-hmm.

DICKINSON:So, so a lot of the pushback--I haven’t felt a lot of direct pushback

of, like, you know, Jesus actually says this. I mean, really anywhere.

Even--like, so even when I was at Transy and I would work with a number of

conservative students, some of whom, like, I felt like we, we connected because

we both, like, kind of--again, like we read the scripture on our knees. I

thought maybe there was, like--but some of them have become like these

conservative operatives, it’s deeply troubling. Like, like kind of in, um, and,

yeah, even they weren’t like arguing with me about it. It’s kind of strange--(laughs).

KOMARA:You just maybe shouldn’t say the word racism too many times at a

meeting. Is that what you’re saying? About, like, politeness

being policed? (laughs).

DICKINSON:Right,

KOMARA:Yeah, okay.

DICKINSON:Right.

KOMARA:(laughs)--yeah, okay. Cool, cool. Um, I don’t know, what do I want to

end on? I don’t know, uh, maybe do you have any, I don’t know, religious

messages of hope in a time of global climate change and rampant systemic

inequity? This is honestly just for me personally, I need this today--(laughs).

DICKINSON:Well, I mean, you know, it’s a cliché, but hope isn’t the same thing

as optimism. And hope is something that is practiced and it’s practiced in

community and in relationship. I mean, even like the--like in the kind of

history of theology, hope is often thought of--is often spoken of as a virtue,

as one of the central virtues. So as something that is cultivated. And one of

the things that strikes me--well, that comes up almost every time our dinner

church gathers, is just like, shit, these people had it worse than we do. And

look at the hope,

right? And I think that sometimes hope actually does come from, um, dark places,

but that--and the kind of hope that’s--you know, like, it’s something simple as

that, that ancestral intergenerational view, right? To where--so there’s, like,

the songs that come out, like, when--I’m just imagining, you know, and these are

just stories in scripture. But, so there’s like these songs that these old

people sing when they see the baby Jesus a couple times in Luke, and they’re

like, he’s come. And so on the one side it’s like, how did they know that? Like,

so my old liberal self is like, oh, it’s all skepticism. Instead it’s like,

imagine being someone who’s like, you know, it’s not going to happen in my

lifetime, right? Like it’s, you know, the hope is in something that will only

come of age after I’m dead. But I think that’s a lot of the hope that people’s

traditions and communities

feel, and, and I guess you feel that more the more you are kind of connected in

with a social body. That you feel like it’s going to live on beyond you. So

anyway, I think that there’s--the hope is, I think, the way in which community

lives on and the way in which community can save us. Um, and the way in which,

like, kind of a lot of these things that have never been good for us are

breaking down, and so hopefully there’s going to be kind of rediscovery and

reconnection that goes all the way down, I think.

KOMARA:Yeah.

DICKINSON:Right, because sometimes I wonder like, you know, the conservatives

basically have capitalism on their side, right? So they have institutional

structures that are planetary in scale. But I think that people working for

social and climate justice have creation on our side

and the kind of the very logics and connections of love and community and

cooperation, we just have to rediscover how to live into those.

KOMARA:Well, this has been so awesome. Thank you so much for taking the time,

Wilson, to sit down and really unpack some heavy shit.

DICKINSON:It’s, it’s weird to have a one-sided conversation. I want to know

kind of--

KOMARA:--isn’t it weird--

DICKINSON:--where you are? (laughs).

KOMARA:Isn’t it weird? We can now turn off the recorder and actually chat

because you and I have a lot to talk about--(laughs)--but thank you so much for

doing this, I really appreciate this.

DICKINSON:Yeah, well, thank you for the invitation.

KOMARA:Yeah, I will turn this off now. Okay, don’t do the wrong thing. If you

did hit the wrong button, it won’t write this to disk. Don’t do that.

[End of interview].