PRATHER:All right. Today is Tuesday, October the 8th. My name is Liz Prather, and I'm going to be interviewing Mount Sterling native Chip Manley at the Mount Sterling Montgomery County Library in Mount Sterling, Kentucky. And today, we're going to be talking about Mount Sterling's Court Day Festival.

MANLEY:All right.

PRATHER:Welcome, Chip.

MANLEY:Hello. How are you?

PRATHER:Doing fine. Tell me, before we get started, tell me a little bit about yourself.

MANLEY:Okay. My name is John Manley, but nobody knows me by that. Everybody calls me Chip because that's the nickname I've had since I was a kid. I was born and raised here in Mount Sterling. My family has been in the county here for generations.  So we've got a long local history here, um, I am a third generation or was a third generation public school teacher. I just recently retired in 2023 after about 28 years teaching social studies at the high school. My mother was an elementary teacher. My grandmother, her mother was a middle school teacher, and both of them taught for over 40 years.

PRATHER:Wow.

MANLEY:So we've got a long history here. . .

PRATHER:that's amazing

MANLEY:. . .in the county, I think when I retired last year, we figured out that there had been somebody in my family teaching in Montgomery County since 1934.

PRATHER:Wow.

MANLEY:So it was right at ninety years that one of us was employed in the school system.  I don't know that I was as much of a troublemaker as my grandmother was, but I tried to live up to her reputation sometimes.

PRATHER:Troublemaker. In what way?

MANLEY:She got moved around a lot because, especially with

MANLEY:Spoke truth to power?

MANLEY:Exactly. And so she got, she knew people all over the county because the superintendent tried to move her back then in the 30s and to try to make her quit. And she wouldn't do it. But yeah, so that was kind of the spirit that I had. My mother was always one of, you know, keep your head down. Don't make any trouble.

PRATHER:Right.

MANLEY:I kind of wavered between the two.

PRATHER:Yeah, you were a good, uh--

MANLEY:As the situation determined. So.

PRATHER:Yeah. And your grandmother, did she teach a particular subject in school?

MANLEY:She taught middle school. And I think it was science for quite a bit, towards the end. But she started off teaching in one and two room schoolhouses.

PRATHER:Wow.

MANLEY:And before she ever graduated from college. She didn't graduate from college until the 1960s. But back then, Kentucky let you teach without a college degree, as long as she had her certification.

PRATHER:Fascinating.

MANLEY:So my mother actually graduated college before my grandmother did. When the state passed new laws in the early 60s, she had to actually go back and get her college degree.

PRATHER:That's amazing. And they both taught a full thirty years?

MANLEY:Grandma for forty-two and mom for forty-one.

PRATHER:Wow.

MANLEY:And I considered myself lucky to get to my twenty-seven.

PRATHER:Tell me, you said that you have a long local history in Montgomery County. How long have the Manley's, or your mother? What's your mother's maiden name?

MANLEY:My mother was a Caudill.

PRATHER:Okay.

MANLEY:And my dad's family- my dad was actually the first Manley born in Montgomery County.  His family was mostly from Bath County, Sharpsburg area, just a few miles away. Mom's family had come from a couple of different areas. My grandmother was from Nicholas County. My Grandfather Caudill was born here. But his family, the Caudill's, went back into eastern Kentucky, down towards Breathitt County and Letcher County. And they had moved here to Mount Sterling quite a bit earlier. But in researching our genealogy, I'm a direct descendant of ones who were attacked at Morgan Station in 1794.

PRATHER:Really?

MANLEY:In fact, my, I believe, sixth or seventh great-grandmother was actually murdered by the Shawnee.

PRATHER:At Morgan Station?

MANLEY:At Morgan Station.

PRATHER:Wow.

MANLEY:And her son, my ancestor, George Becraft, was kidnapped and taken and sold in Michigan, up in Detroit to a Scottish merchant, who basically taught him how to read and write. And when he was released after, the treaty of, uh, it was the Battle of Fallen Timbers, 1794, when they actually had to release all the captives. He was released and-

PRATHER:And he made his way back--

MANLEY:Made his way back to his father, who was still here, Abraham Becraft.

PRATHER:Oh, my gosh.

MANLEY:So I've got, you know, not every line of the family, but we do have roots that go back literally to the beginnings of Montgomery County.

PRATHER:Right. That's amazing.

MANLEY:Yeah,  it was a big surprise because growing up hearing about the Morgan Station attack and everything that happened, and then doing family research just a few years ago, and we found that direct connection back. So it was quite the, quite the eye opener.

PRATHER:And that's something, I mean, as a history teacher and as a lover of history,  it's really special knowing that, you know, you've got that connection to the land, to the history, to the early families.

MANLEY:So, yeah, my Manley ancestors came to Kentucky in the early 1800s and settled up around Mason County originally before they gradually moved south into Fleming and Bath County and then here to Montgomery.

PRATHER:Are you the genealogist of the family?

MANLEY:Well actually, I inherited that interest from my Aunt Doris Nolan. And she had been kind of the family genealogist for decades, going back to the 50s, before the internet, before computers, when you actually had to write to the libraries and get them to send you the, you know, copies of the census on microfilm. So she had been, that had been a hobby of hers for many years. Me being a lover of history and later a teacher of history, that always had interested me too. So, I was always asking questions and trying to find out things. And then with the pandemic and everybody being stuck at home, I threw myself kind of into-

PRATHER:Oh that's cool. Yeah.

MANLEY:-the research,  three, four, or five years ago and started trying to develop it using online tools, more so than what I'd ever been involved before.

PRATHER:Right. Yeah. That's fascinating. You have a book to write? You have a book?

MANLEY:And, you know, ancestry DNA actually helped us fill in a couple of spots when, you know, we were kind of stuck, and, you know, we weren't quite sure who a certain individual's father might have been.

PRATHER:Really? Yeah.

MANLEY:And we were able to make connections through DNA with a family of who we thought we were related to. And sure enough, that traces it right back.

PRATHER:That's amazing.

MANLEY:That was, you know, something we'd always kind of [knew]. My great-grandmother was born out of wedlock up in Carter County, and we always kind of knew who her dad was said to be.

PRATHER:Right. From an oral tradition. Exactly. From an oral tradition Exactly. From an oral tradition

MANLEY:Exactly. From an oral tradition

MANLEY:Exactly. From an oral tradition Exactly. From an oral tradition Just stories

MANLEY:Yeah passed down, but we didn't have a firm connection. We didn't have anything other than his name. And managed to connect up with descendants of actual descendants of him as well as his family through Ancestry DNA. And were able to, I've reached out to him. I haven't heard anything back yet, so I'm not sure they want to admit that certain things happen

PRATHER:Right, right. So that's fascinating. Yeah. Once, if you're like me, once you start down that road, it's all-consuming. You have, you know.

MANLEY:And then, you know, you find out why, you know, that her father was apparently married four times.

PRATHER:Wow.

MANLEY:Yeah, maybe. And had at least two children out of wedlock.

PRATHER:Right, right, right. That's amazing.

MANLEY:Fits the character. Let's just say.

PRATHER:Well. So you have, you've been here, your family's been here, you've been here a long time. And the topic for today is Court Day, and it is a long-standing festival, 1794, in Mount Sterling. I'm really interested because people who grew up here have such a different take on the Court Day. So I kind of want to start with you describing the Court Days of your youth. Okay. Kind of what you remember about what that was like.

MANLEY:For us, it was kind of I know well, I should say, you know, for me and my friends, it was kind of a, you know, a highlight of the year that we always looked forward to because not only did we get out of school for a couple of days, we were able to kind of go and see, and it was just something special about all these people showing up and, you know, in our little town for for something. As a kid, probably nine or ten years old, in some ways it was a little bit of a taste of freedom as well, because, you know, our parents would often take us downtown and they'd go one way and we'd go another. And they'd say, meet up here at this corner at this time. And we were kind of left to, you know, $20 or $10 in our pocket to wander around and, you know, look at things and pal around with our friends and not have to worry about, you know, really anything because we were in a place that we knew. Even though there were a lot of people around we didn't know, but, you know, we'd go hunting for baseball cards and comic books at people's stands, you know, things like that that interested us.  I can remember one year that we all got, me and my friends, all bought these switchblade combs that looked like a switchblade, looked like a switchblade knife. But when you extended it, instead of a knife blade, a comb came out, and you know, so, needless to say, the school wasn't very happy when we all showed up with those at school the next year.

PRATHER:And what year would that have been?

MANLEY:That would have been close to probably 82. Because I remember we had a, we did a school trip to Washington, DC, and everybody.

PRATHER:Had their comb

MANLEY:One of my friends brought his comb and we tried to go through. We had to go through security to tour the White House, and he pulled out what looked like a switchblade knife, and the guards at the White House, um, reacted very negatively towards that, let's say. And he lost it that day. They did not give it back to him, but the rest of us, I think, had left ours at home or had already had them taken by our parents.

PRATHER:Right, right.

MANLEY:By that time. But you know, so it was Court Day was always a little bit of freedom and allowing us to kind of, you know, be ourselves for a while with our friends. And sometimes as we got into being teenagers, that may not have always been a good thing. So to explore around. But, I mean, we would spend ten, twelve hours a day, wandering around downtown, going up maybe to a friend's house who lived close by to rest and eat and use the bathroom, and then head back downtown again until, you know, our parents picked us up, you know, when it got dark or at a certain time.

PRATHER:So your parents weren't worried? I mean, you know, in the 80s, we had crowds of over 100,000 people here. Were your parents never afraid?

MANLEY:I just think it was a different time, you know, that there wasn't, there wasn't a fear of outsiders and a fear of things like, you know, we've kind of grown into now. I mean, we still trick or treated in neighborhoods instead of going to one location. You know, it was nothing for them to just hand us some money and, you know, tell us to stay out of trouble. And let us kind of just wander around as we saw fit, you know, we didn't have cell phones or-

PRATHER:Right.

MANLEY:-anything to get in touch if we, you know, we knew there were, uh, we were going to see people we knew pretty much everywhere we went.  So I just don't think that element of, of danger or really element of concern was there, you know. As a kid, I mean we'd get cut loose in a department store. You know, but we knew, you know, where we were going to be on the toy aisle or in the music aisle or something like that. And you know, we could almost always count on, you know, being found in no time. But Court Day was, you know, that on a much bigger scale.

PRATHER:Right. Right.

MANLEY:Letting us kind of run around a little bit more.

PRATHER:Describe for me - and to someone who's never been, let's say someone's never been to Court Day. What did Court Day actually look like in those days? Describe exactly, maybe even from a bird's eye view, what would it have looked like?

MANLEY:The main city parking lot, which is between Main Street and Locust, that whole area would have been filled with vendors. Then, of course, the gravel down by the railroad tracks area where now they've got the Farmer's Market building and all of that, all the way over to McCormick Lumber, which was on Queen Street, all that area would have been filled with vendors and then a little bit down to closer to the viaduct there from South Bank over. So it always seems to me that there was more,  much more kind of handmade items. It was stuff that you might find at yard sales. Um, definitely people who would do this for a living, but a lot of it, it just seemed like people who would kind of come out and and set up stuff.

PRATHER:Local people?

MANLEY:Local people to some degree, of course, you always had your food vendors around, and that was one thing I have to say that we were always told was, you know, um, if you're going to get food, get it from somebody that's local. So go to one of the, you know, places that like, um, the Kiwanis or, um, not Kiwanis, but like the Masonic Lodge and Eastern Star would have had their booths or one of the churches might have had a booth. You know, it was always kind of, you know, trust the locals when it comes to food type thing. And of course, there were guns and guns of all sorts and shapes and sizes And, um, again, not the concern that we have today. And I can remember, you know, classmates, when we were middle school, um, buying pistols and, you know, of course, we all had, you know, rifles and things, but, you know, buying a pistol at Court Day when you were, you know, under 15 years old was I mean, it'd be unheard of today.

PRATHER:And that was a normal occurrence? Yeah. Yeah. And they traded knives and.

MANLEY:Traded knives, um, walking around one thing I always recall from that time was guys walking around with ax handles. And I never knew there were that big of a call for ax handles, but seems to be there was. I always think of guys with an ax handle over their shoulder that they had just had just bought. Like I said, you know, we were always, uh, scrounging around, looking for comic books and baseball cards and things like that. And, um, you know, there were antiques and there were, you know, and probably when I was 13 or 14, um, I actually was the only time I was actually a vendor at Court Day. Um, my aunt got a small area. She had a consignment antique store here in town, and she brought down some of her jewelry to sell there and some antiques. And I to make a little extra money, I had bought and painted some pumpkins, so I was like, maybe 12 or 13.  And had painted pumpkins with, like, fall scenes or Halloween scenes or something and sold them for a few dollars a piece, just to put a little extra money in my pocket.

PRATHER:That's great.

MANLEY:Um, but that was the only time

MANLEY:That's a great memory. Was that with Doris?

MANLEY:That was with Doris. Yeah. Yeah. She had her Lockridge House Antique Store and consignment business up on North Maysville. And she had just got a little stand down there.  Um, so I had painted up probably no more than about 10 or 12 pumpkins, right?

PRATHER:Yeah.

MANLEY:Managed to sell them all. Sell' em 3 or $4 a piece, you know, for the weekend.

PRATHER:Was there something that you and your friends. I mean, you mentioned that going to find baseball cards and comic books, but is there a vendor that you remember that you always went to every time Court Day came around or something that you always kind of hit?

MANLEY:Yeah,  there were usually guys set up in the same areas with that sort of thing. Uh, like we said, with the cards and the comics there for a few years, we would always try to go back and and check those areas. We didn't see a lot of the big commercial type things. Of course, you had the guys there selling the fake stereos and, um, things like that, bootleg tapes.

PRATHER:Oh, yeah. And music tapes.

MANLEY:Music tapes. VHS and cassette tapes and things. So you always had those kind of guys. We always knew what kind of quality we were getting when we bought those. But we, you know, we kind of did it anyway just because, you know, they were $4 a piece or something where half the price they were in the store. Um, but, you know, there were always some of those few spots that we would try to go to. Um, and, you know, we rarely would venture down, um, but always take at least one walk through, down into what we call Shotgun Alley. And just look at some of the stuff, um, and the, you know, the surplus army stuff. You know, always look for either a jacket or something like that that we could, um, that we could grab camouflage clothing was kind of, you know, it was always something that everybody can't seem to come back from Court Day with a knockoff sweatshirt or two and a piece of camouflage clothing when we came back to school. But, um. Yeah, it was, uh. You know, I don't think, you know, I think today, um, you know, there's very few of those that we try to go to every time, usually now it's more food.

PRATHER:Talk a little bit about the food. What is food like? I mean, what is the food draw?

MANLEY:Yeah, as a kid, it was all about elephant ears and funnel cakes and corn dogs and all other types of fried concoctions that we didn't get to see, you know, um, any place else. Elephant ears were always a big, you know, flat fried dough with powdered sugar or cinnamon on it. That was always a big draw for us. Um, and fueled by Ale-8 soft drinks all weekend.

PRATHER:Yeah, wow.

MANLEY:So,  yeah, that was always kind of the thing for us. And, you know, no regular meal to speak of. It was, uh, completely fueled by junk food for those three days that, uh, you know, would give us that sugar rush to keep going.

PRATHER:This sounds like a kid's paradise. You're given. You're given 20 bucks. Three days. All the sugar you can eat.

MANLEY:Yeah, yeah. Some money in our pocket. And, you know, the freedom to run around and eat the things that, you know, today would.

PRATHER:Yeah.

MANLEY:Cause all kinds of digestion issues for our age, but back then, it was, uh, it was something entirely, it was that little moment of freedom Court Day was. And we just, you know, prayed for good weather. It wouldn't rain. It wouldn't be too cold. You know, we'd still go, but-

PRATHER:Yeah, yeah

MANLEY:We just didn't want to go bundled up and getting rained on and that sort of thing.

PRATHER:What is perfect Court Day weather?

MANLEY:Oh, nice. 60s and 70s. Good little breeze. You know what we think about you think of, uh, you know, just that perfect fall day of, uh, sun shining but a breeze in the air. Yeah, the smell of Court Day is something that.

PRATHER:Yeah. Describe that. Yeah. Describe that for me.

MANLEY:Fried foods.  Um, and sometimes not necessarily great smells with, you know, the effects of thousands of people showing up in town, but, um, the smell of food cooking. Yeah. Um, mixed in kind of with the, uh, just your, you know, the fall air of leaves and such like that. And, uh, I said I can always, um, you know, come out and and say, you know, it feels like feels like Court Day. When it gets to be in the 70s in October, you know, leaves start to change. It's about time for, about time for Court Day weather.

PRATHER:So did you have any Court Day, I would say. adjacent activities? Court day activities that your families. You said that you sometimes go to other people's houses.

MANLEY:Yeah. Um, yeah. Family would come in, both sides of the family, from mom and dad would oftentimes come in for Court Days. So usually we would, either we'd be making time to, to see them, uh, one evening or, um, you know, when they were in, or on Sunday mornings before we'd go downtown, you know. We'd go over to my my dad's mom's and dad's and have a meal there, meet up with folks there before we would all end up downtown. So that was another thing that, you know, if we weren't, um, running around with our friends, you know, then there was always the family coming in. And for a lot of folks here in Montgomery County, that became kind of a homecoming weekend. It didn't matter what the homecoming was for the local high school or football team. It was always Court Day was the homecoming, because you knew you were going to see a lot of people that had moved out, moved on, but still maintained those connections and those family ties back here, that they would come back for that weekend because it was kind of understood that, you know, this was a gathering time.

PRATHER:Yes.

MANLEY:Yeah. Um, so, you know, even just in the last few years, my cousin who relocated to Florida back in the 80s, they would always come up on Court Day weekend. He would get his vacation time off to come in and be here for Court Day in a few days afterwards. And that was his time to catch up with folks, um, that he had gone to school with and see people, see family members, um, that he hadn't seen. So that was always kind of a gathering time. And sometimes it would just be, you know, we would stake ourselves out on the corner of South Maysville and Locust at kind of the heart and just, you know, stop and talk to everybody as they came through.

PRATHER:This wasn't done in any kind of- there was no real protocol for any of this. It was just-

MANLEY:That was kind of a crossroads downtown. So a lot of people would be passing by. And, you know, sometimes it's just a quick wave and a smile, or sometimes it's, you know, a hug and a 30-minute discussion of, you know, what have you been doing since I saw you. Maybe it was just last year, but, you know, maybe it's been a few years. That was always kind of the corner that my family would stake out when they went downtown and, you know, we'd get down there in the mornings. Okay, we'll see you back here at 2:00, right? Not to leave, but just to check in. Yeah. And, you know, we'd wander back, say, hey, maybe chat with people that were there, um, and move on.

PRATHER:And that's South Maysville and Locust is the area where City Tire is.

MANLEY:Yes.

PRATHER:That corner.

MANLEY:There's Katy's Tire

PRATHER:And the Monarch Mill

MANLEY:The Monarch Mill used to be there, and they always had the chunka chunka chunka of the mill machine there.  That's another sound that I always equate with Court Day.

PRATHER:What was that? What was it?

MANLEY:It was like, um, the I don't know if it was where they were. They were doing something. It was like.

PRATHER:Were they grinding meal?

MANLEY:They were-- I don't know if it was grinding, but there was something that was always set up down there. And as a kid, I can always remember that, you know, that constant that chunka, chunka, chunka, chunka. Yeah. That, uh, that sound that was always, you know, kind of going on there when they were, uh, when the mill. There was something there set up at the mill.

PRATHER:And that was, uh, Big Reds would be on the other corner.

MANLEY:Yeah. Big Red's Liquors there on the other corner. And, um, so it wasn't, uh, wasn't too far into it, but it was where you always kind of count on seeing everybody.  And so that's still when we go down, that's still one of the corners, we always will stop at.  And, um, you know, people see people coming and going and getting a chance to say hello.

PRATHER:Yeah. So did you have any, um, people that you remember, uh, celebrities that came or bands that you heard or politicians that you remember?

MANLEY:Yeah. Um, I guess probably when I was about 10 or 11, uh, uh, governor later, while he was running for governor that year, John Y. Brown, uh, was here, and I got to, uh, he made a speech down there. They had a flatbed wagon, like a tobacco wagon. They would pull down there and use it for a stage, uh, for musicians or for the politicians to get up and speak from. And, um, I remember, you know, being down there to hear John Y. speak and, uh, shaking his hand after he got off the stage.

PRATHER:How old would you have been?

MANLEY:Uh, 10 or 11. Mhm. Yeah. Um, and one, uh, where my family are, you know, lifelong Democrats. The Democratic Party would often have a breakfast, uh, Court Day, Saturday, and actually ate breakfast there one time with um, Paul Patton and his wife when he was running for lieutenant governor. I just ended up, um, being seated at their table, and, uh, and a few years later, he was governor.  Um, Al Gore Senior came one time when this would have been, I guess, 92, when Bill Clinton and Al Gore were running. And we had it up at the high school, and Al Gore Senior came to the high school and, you know, probably in his 80s. And at that time. And, um, so I got to meet him after that. And, uh, but it was, there was always on that, that same stage, they always seemed to have, uh, bluegrass music going. And I remember Dad knew some of the musicians, So we always would stop and listen for a little while. And every so often you'd have cloggers that would come and dance on the street there as they were playing sometimes. But that was, you know, kind of that, that old-fashioned bluegrass music, um, was what I always equate with kind of the good music of Court Day.

PRATHER:Right?

MANLEY:Yeah.

PRATHER:Did you ever meet Gatewood Galbraith, long-time gubernatorial hopeful.

MANLEY:I've met Gatewood, but not at Court Day.

PRATHER:He was often seen in the streets of Court Day.

MANLEY:Yeah. I never met him here. Um, I did meet him over at Lynaugh's Irish pub in Lexington one night when he was running for governor in the early 90s. Yeah, and some friends and I had driven from Morehead, where we were in school at Morehead State down to Lexington, and we went to Lynaugh's, and Gatewood was coming out as we were getting ready to go in. And of course, you know, we recognized him and, um, made sure to talk to him. And he invited us back to his car and he said, I got something in my car for you. And we thought, oh, boy, we're going to we're going to roll one with Will or, you know, like rolling one with Willy? We roll one with Gatewood. And we got back to his car, and he opened his trunk and had campaign materials to give us.

PRATHER:So disappointing.

MANLEY:So we took them, and we were very disappointed that we didn't have that moment. But we took the posters up and hung them up on our dorm room doors at Morehead State. And, uh, a few days later, got called in to the, um, vice president for student affairs office, Mike Mincey.

PRATHER:You're kidding.

MANLEY:Because the, um, the Green Democrat had a marijuana leaf, right, poster on it. And we came back from class one day to find our posters.

PRATHER:Confiscated.

MANLEY:Confiscated, and a note telling us we had an appointment to meet with Mike Mincey at the administration building the following day.

PRATHER:That's crazy. Wow. That is a that's a great historical moment.

MANLEY:Yeah.

PRATHER:Oh my goodness.

MANLEY:Yeah, that was one of two times we met with Mike Mincey during my career there at Morehead State.

PRATHER:Is the other one, uh, safe for prime time?

MANLEY:Yeah, they were getting ready to move. Um, they were closing one of the dorms, uh, midway through a spring semester. And so everybody that was in that dorm were getting ready to get just scattered across the campus to different rooms and we couldn't understand why. You know, here, this close to the end of the semester, they were going to a completely, you know, evacuate everybody out of Butler Hall.  And it just so happened that a couple of friends of mine were the dorm president and such. So we got a big bed sheet and painted a sign of "Leave Butler Alone."

PRATHER:A little protest.

MANLEY:Little protest. And hung it up from our two rooms outside of Fields Hall right where everybody could see it, going to campus or going to classes, and yeah, they took that down. And once again, we had to meet the same guy strangely enough. So yeah, luckily, I think it was the following year after the Gatewood Galbraith thing. So we didn't have two strikes against us.

PRATHER:Right in one year.

MANLEY:Yeah. One in each year.

PRATHER:Yeah. That's great. Yeah.

MANLEY:So they ended up closing down Butler and evacuating everybody or moving them to other dorms with like you know, six weeks to go in the semester.

PRATHER:Oh man.

MANLEY:And we're like just leave them alone until the end of the semester. And then do the work, you know they couldn't do it.

PRATHER:That's great.

PRATHER:So you've stayed in the county and you have taught here for 28 years. You got married. You have now a senior in high school. Tell me, describe how Court Day has changed over. And think of it kind of from the through the lens of teaching, but also through the lens of being a husband and a father. How has Court Day changed in your lifetime?

MANLEY:Well, it's kind of weird. My wife isn't from here. She's from Morgan County originally, and so the Court Day to her is basically a time to stay away from downtown. Um, she wasn't, you know, she's not very keen on big crowds. And, uh, so, you know, when Court Day, when we were first married and Court Day came up, we were like, oh, we got to go to Court Day. And she's like, why? I was like, well, it's kind of like, you know, the salmon swimming back up stream, you know, it's just something you have to do, right? And everybody was going to be there. And when we were first married, we were always trying to find friends who weren't from here to kind of bring with us and introduce them to, uh, to Court Day. And I kind of let them see it and see it fresh  through their eyes. As just somebody who was, you know, newly married, it was kind of a way to kind of, you know, break the wife into being, you know, part of Montgomery County.  And then in 2006, we had our first child, our only child, a daughter. And she, of course, grew up hearing about it and loving it, and I think probably her, uh, before she was a year old, we had her down there in a stroller going to Court Day all bundled up because it was cold that year. So Court Day of 2007 would have been her first. And so she's always fascinated by it, always begging to go down. Um, she's not quite the independent spirit that I had to just kind of go off and wander by myself for three days or with my friends. So, you know, she always wants to go down to Court Day. And for her, it's a lot of as a child it was more about, um, the face painting. Wanting to get her face painted. Wanted to, of course.try the fried stuff that, uh, um, you know, she could smell cooking down there. It was looking for jewelry, like costume jewelry, kids jewelry, stuff like that for her. And just kind of a little bit of, uh, a little bit of crafts and things like that. So, um, my wife would come down. And now that Dana's gotten a little bit older, uh, our daughter, she still wants to go down. In fact, we're talking just the other day, and she's with the Art Club now at the high school. So they have a booth for Court Day this year. And she was basically telling us how, um, we were going to have to, like, come help man the booth.

PRATHER:Right.

MANLEY:This year. And, uh, because she's going to be working there for days. And, you know, she kind of wants one of us to be there. So I got a feeling I'll be sitting at the art club booth for a while.

PRATHER:Describe for someone that might not know this. Describe what those these three days mean for a lot of Montgomery County high school clubs. Yeah. So I don't know if you did that as a when you all were Mock Trial when you were with Mock Trial.

MANLEY:When I coached Mock Trial here-- I was assistant coach with Mock Trial for about 12 years--we never did any kind of Court Day, um, booths. But for a lot of the clubs, for a lot of the classes, um, like the Class of 2025 that my daughter is in, you know, every class will have a booth set up, usually selling drinks or something like that. Sometimes you'll have different clubs or organizations doing parking or, um, you know, selling stuff at a booth to try to, it's a fundraiser. It's a big fundraiser for them and as a teacher, we always tried to make sure we spotted out where all the different classes were so we could go by and give them, you know, buy something from them, buy an Ale-8. Let them keep the change from a five or, you know, something like that to kind of help with their fundraising right over the year. Um, so, you know, that was that's always a big opportunity for them to make some money to help pay for, like the Art Club is trying to raise money to help pay for a school trip to Chicago.

PRATHER:Oh, wow.

MANLEY:To the art museums there.

PRATHER:What are they going to be doing?

MANLEY:So they're going to be doing face painting. And I don't know if they're going to be selling any like, of their own, like, paintings or stuff. Um, I know my daughter had mentioned the face painting because, uh, she's not too sure that she can do a good job of it, but, you know, she's never done it before, but she's willing to try. So, you know, maybe somebody will get to be her guinea pig.

PRATHER:Right. After she's done 20 of them, she won't care

MANLEY:Yeah, yeah. So, um, so this will be the first time that, you know, we've kind of done it like that as parents and student there.  But, yeah, it's a great opportunity for them to make some money and hopefully raise some funds for their activities.

PRATHER:As a teacher. Did you notice the energy in the classroom different around Court Day?

MANLEY:Oh, yeah. Yeah. The week, maybe even two weeks leading up to it. Once the calendar turns to October and the kids start noticing, you know, it's getting closer, it's getting closer. And the, you know, the energy that would start to build up for that anticipation. And I think sometimes it was not even something they would realize what it was. But I remember even as a student when I was a student, you know, we'd, um, you know, you'd be walking down the hallways of the high school and you'd hear somebody let out a "Yee Haw!" and somebody else would answer back, "Court Day!"  And

PRATHER:Fabulous.

MANLEY:Yeah. So it was like a call and response. Kids don't do that anymore. They probably texted each other.

PRATHER:Right. Right. That's great.

MANLEY:But you could always, in those couple of days, right before you'd hear, you'd hear that echoing down the halls of the high school. I think as an educator, though, probably the thing that we dreaded the most was the week coming back from Court Day when everybody came back with the stink bombs.

PRATHER:Okay. What were those? What were those? Describe those.

MANLEY:Yeah. The little, um, sulfur like pellets that they would, you know, throw on the floor and just, you know, just this awful sulfuric smell that you could always count on somebody having a couple of stink bombs to to bring back to, you know, throw into a bathroom or, uh, let loose in a classroom. Um, you know, coming back with your,  bootleg sweatshirts. You know, the cheap sweatshirts that people would buy and everybody would be wearing those the first, first few days back, um, and, you know, sadly enough, you know, it was always kind of a, uh, be on the lookout for, for weapons as well, because, you know, maybe not firearms, but, uh, blades and knives, um, and a lot of times the kids would bring them to want to show off to their friends. And, you know, you had to kind of keep an eye out for, for that stuff.

PRATHER:With no ill intent. They were just proud. Proud of their trade.

MANLEY:Exactly. Not anything, you know, sinister about it. Just, you know. Hey, look at this cool knife I got down at Court Day, and, um, you know, maybe they hadn't seen their friends, and this was a chance to show it off.  And but, you know, always kind of had to keep watch for something like that as well.

PRATHER:Sure, sure, so what do you owe or attribute the longevity of Court Day?  It's the oldest festival in the Commonwealth. And, uh, it has no real organization. It has no real, you know, governing body. It just a bunch of people throw some stuff out and it happens. So how does that work? What are your thoughts on that?

MANLEY:It's, um, you know, the city has control of some of the, you know, like the city parking lot that they can, um, kind of manage. But for the most of it, it's done in people's yards or in their, uh, place of business that will rent out a parking lot or something like that. it's kind of almost like this just organic thing that kind of takes over the community. The longevity, I think, is just attributing to the place that it's always held. You know, I grew up hearing stories of my great-grandfather, who was Louis Jacobs living over in Bath County that they would drive turkeys from Sharpsburg area. He and his brothers would drive turkeys they had raised uh, to Mount Sterling for Court Day in, like, the 1880s, 1890s to sell.

PRATHER:Wow.

MANLEY:They take sticks and just kind of keep them in line and literally walk them all the way from Sharpsburg to Mount Sterling, which is, you know, ten, 12 miles, uh, to bring them here to sell. You know, it was a draw, right? So it's always kind of been that way for folks here.  I can remember, you know, as a kid, you know, you would see, you know, people who had raised animals that would bring them down to sell. I mean, you know, you could always find a coon dog that somebody would have had bred and brought puppies or young coon dogs to sell. You know, it was a thing that kind of meshed in with a lot of the community for the farmers and such going back. And while October was always the big one,  it was kind of that last meeting of the year when their harvests were in, and this was a chance for them to buy and sell and, and get things they needed to prepare for the winter and, um, make their last little bit of money before, uh, you know, the farms went dormant until the spring. So, um, you know, I think it just kind of ingrained itself into the way of life around here that it became this gathering place and gathering time. Maybe, probably, I should say, uh, for folks to come together, maybe see and do the things that they're not going to be able to do for a few months until the better weather came. So. And that tradition just gets passed on down the family lines.

PRATHER:The value of it.  That's interesting. So what does the future hold for Court Day? That's my last question. What do you hope for the future of Court Day, and what do you think may happen to it?

MANLEY:I think there's been a little bit of an effort the last few years to try to bring a little bit of,  you know, I don't want to say respectability back, but for a while there, you know, it seemed like it was a lot of, you know, the antiques and the personal made stuff and the handmade stuff that a lot of that had just disappeared. And it was a lot of, you know, just kind of generic junk that, you know, second hand, you know.  I always think of the tube socks or the like  24 pairs of tube socks. They're all factory irregulars. And, uh, you know, it's just kind of almost, you know, junky. Yeah. And I think it had driven a lot of folks away. And I know Preston Court Day over in neighboring Bath County had grown quite a bit because a lot of folks weren't really happy with what they were seeing here and were instead going over there. So, you know, I think in the last few years with, um, trying to get a little bit better, uh, handle on the folks that are setting up in, like, the city parking lot, bringing in music again, which is something that had kind of gone by the wayside for a while, um, bringing in bands to perform. I think that's been a step back in the right direction to kind of restore it as more of a kind of a gathering thing. You know, I, I think probably in the last, probably 2 or 3 years, I've not spent more than about 4 or 5 hours a day. You know, it's, um, go down and maybe one day instead of the 2 or 3 and, you know, I can, you know, in the late 80s and early 90s, when, you know, my grandmother was unable to walk, you know, she still wanted to go in her wheelchair. So, yeah, you know, we struggled down there with her in her wheelchair to get her places and go see because, you know, that was something that she, you know, she might not buy anything, but she just wanted to be there to see the crowd. . And,  you know, I've noticed that kind of that, uh, I think that has kind of waned in the last few years. So I'm hoping maybe with the kind of return to trying to get more of the arts and crafts back in, a little bit more of the music, um, and kind of turn it into more of a community type thing, we can maybe recapture a little bit of that of what it was back then.

PRATHER:Yeah, It's great. Well, at the end, is there any memory? Anything that you haven't said about Court Day because we're wrapping up right now, but is there any, uh, memory or story or anything that you would like to you think would be a good story to tell.

MANLEY:Uh, let me try to think of what statute of limitations has run out on. Uh, um, I will tell a little bit of a story, I believe, of a fellow that you know, Steve Flarity.

PRATHER:Yes. Yes.

MANLEY:Steve used to set up down there with baseball cards. And his was always a place we would stop by and look at. Um, he, uh, I remember one year going to buy something from him and, uh, looking at it and one of the corners of the card was a little, you know, I was 14, 13, 14 years old. And one of the corners of the card was a little messed up. And and I said, no, no, I don't want it, don't want it unless it's, you know, it's good and mint and, uh, you know, the next year I was back and was back at Steve's booth and was looking at stuff and, um, looked at something again. It was not quite the perfect card I was looking for. I put it back and he goes, "I remember you. You're the kid who only buys stuff in mint condition." I was like, I was like, well, yeah, you know, I get what I want, you know?

PRATHER:But you knew what you wanted even at that age.

MANLEY:Yeah. That was I remember you. Um, yeah. Probably the best. Uh, and I, you know, I've always been a kind of a baseball card collector, but, um, one year, we were, this would have been. Oh, geez. I was probably still in college. Maybe. Maybe not. Maybe still in high school.  We had gone down, and I was with my mom and my grandmother, and we saw a booth and that little sign hanging up and said, "Baseball Cards- Ask." So I was used to, you know, back then, kind of with Beanie Babies and everything else. If something gets hot and somebody's got stuff that, you know, they'll throw out just a little something to try to make a few dollars. And, um, so we had asked this, this lady, "What kind of baseball cards you got?" She goes, "Well, I've got some stuff here from my neighbor back in West Virginia. And, said it's stuff that belonged to her son and she's trying to sell. And so I go back and look. And it's cards from 1955 to 1963.

PRATHER:Oh my gosh.

MANLEY:With big name superstars and everything. And of course, you know, I felt like lightning had struck me.

PRATHER:Yes. Oh yeah

MANLEY:To find this

PRATHER:So did she know what she had?

MANLEY:Yeah. To some degree. Yeah. And, um, so she asked, um, if it was, I don't know, three hundred and fifty or four hundred dollars for the whole thing, which back then was a whole lot more money than I had. But it was such a good deal for what it was, I had to borrow the money from my mom and grandmother both and bought it all. And proceeded to go through and and pull cards from my own personal collection and then was able to resell the ones that I didn't want. And probably made two or three times my money back.

PRATHER:Wow. Wow.

MANLEY:On them. Um, that was probably my best ever Court Day.

PRATHER:That is a fantastic Court Day.

MANLEY:That was a fantastic find for a baseball card fan and I always dream of one day, you know, lightning might strike again, but it hasn't yet.

PRATHER:Yeah. Yeah. But that's really the spirit of Court Day is that there's something down there that I need.

MANLEY:Exactly.

PRATHER:Something that I can find. Yeah.

MANLEY:It's something besides the ribeye sandwich from Cattleman's that I can't live without.

PRATHER:Although that's pretty good.

MANLEY:Although that is pretty good. I've been known to jump out of the car and run down and buy a handful of them.

PRATHER:Just to--

MANLEY:To have for dinner one night when we weren't going to be downtown.

PRATHER:Yeah. That's great.

MANLEY:That's what keeps us coming back.

PRATHER:Thank you so much for your time. This has been great.

MANLEY:I appreciate it.