CURRIS:Good morning. It is May 4th. I'm in the Tri-Cities of Harlan County

Kentucky. I am here to speak with Miss Ruthie Wilson. And before we get started,

I just would like to say that--Ruthie, thank you for agreeing to be interviewed.

WILSON:You're welcome.

CURRIS:We grew up in a time in Harlan County--you were from Lynch. I was from

Benham. But we grew up at time--in a very different type of community. And I had

asked you to agree to be interviewed because I am trying to record the history

of coal miners and their families, and I am particularly interested in recording

the lives of

women because we were the backbone for so many things that happened in our

communities. And as you and I have talked, if we don't tell our stories now,

they will be forgotten. I want to begin with--I'll begin with questions about

you and your family. And again, for the concept of this interview, we'll just

make a flowing conversation as if we were in your living room, just sitting

there talking. One thing I want to be certain and do is to notice

that--(laughs)--this interview is being assisted significantly by the University

of Kentucky Louie B. Nunn Center for Oral History. They have generously loaned

the recording equipment today, and it will be where your interview will be

stored. And I will have

asked you to sign a document that this will be a gift to the University of

Kentucky Nunn Center for Oral History for their unrestricted use. You might be

quoted, published, broadcasted through all media, and you may include any

information that you want to have. So, that being said, Ruthie, what is your

full name?

WILSON:Ruthie May Wilson.

CURRIS:And you were born?

WILSON:I was born in Lynch, Kentucky. The hospital was known at that time--the

Notre Dame Hospital. Now it's called Meridzo Center or--either Solomon's Porch.

CURRIS:What year were you born?

WILSON:In Lyn--I was born in 1949.

CURRIS:The, do you--who

were your parents?

WILSON:My parents was Katie Quarles. My father--we were raised by--my mom was

with us, but we were raised by our grandparents more or less. My mom stayed with

us. Robert Lee Quarles, Gertrude Quarles, Gertrude Quarles. [Editor’s note:

Robert Lee and Gertrude Quarles were Ruth Wilson’s grandparents]

CURRIS:Did--was your father a coal miner?

WILSON:My father, as we called him "Daddy," he was a retired coal miner. And we

lived--we resided in a camp called Number Three.

CURRIS:And this was in Lynch?

WILSON:Lynch, Kentucky.

CURRIS:For the purposes of this interview, what we have is a situation where we

are interviewing a woman from Lynch. There were three towns: Cumberland, Benham,

and Lynch.

WILSON:Tri-Cities.

CURRIS:Cumberland was the trade area.

WILSON:Yes.

CURRIS:Benham was the

International Harvester Mine, and Lynch was the U.S. Steel Mine.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:Both U.S. Steel and--and International Harvester were, in fact, having

coal--what we called in those days coal camps. And there were, I would think,

great similarities between the two towns because they literally ran into each

other. Was that your impression at the time?

WILSON:That was my impression.

CURRIS:Okay. Now, Ruthie, do you prefer to be African American or Black? What's

your preference for this interview?

WILSON:Black.

CURRIS:So that--one of the differences in terms of Lynch and Benham was that we

each had our own school systems. Is that your memory?

WILSON:That's my memory.

CURRIS:What was it like in Lynch? What did you have in Lynch?

WILSON:With our school system?

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:Okay, I went to--it was called West Main. But back, I guess, in my mom's

and them’s days it was called Lynch Colored School. But as I went there it was

West Main. And it was--consisted of from the first to the twelfth grade. And I'm

thinking it might have been '64, '65, whenever they integrated. And I attended

West Main from the first to the ninth. But as we had to move--because when you

retire from the mines, you know--they were company houses, and we had to

relocate to Cumberland. So, my mom let my sis--sister Cheryl (??) stay at Lynch.

She used the residence of my aunt, and she was even the first Black queen. And

my brother played football. So, they stayed with my Aunt Ruth and Uncle Snow

so that they could still finish their schooling at Lynch. But the other three of

us had to go to Cumberland.

CURRIS:Well, this is a fascinating story. So, when a--when you have this

division between the two schools--and we're talking about the fact that your

sister and your brother are staying in Lynch at a time of integration--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--so, what did they call the Lynch school at that time?

WILSON:The--you're talking about the Black school or the--

CURRIS:--both--

WILSON:--they still considered us as--it was still West Main. But then,

Lynch--it was Lynch Independent.

CURRIS:Lynch Independent. So, your sister was the queen, football queen.

WILSON:She was first Black queen.

CURRIS:In the integrated school--

WILSON:--in an integrated school--

CURRIS:--in Lynch--

WILSON:--in Lynch--

CURRIS:--in the early years of integration.

WILSON:Yes.

CURRIS:Do you find that amazing?

WILSON:I find it amazing.

CURRIS:What

were your thoughts at the time?

WILSON:Oh, at the time, we were so overjoyed and so happy and, you know--but at

one particular time, I think they did not even want to have a parade. But

different ones in the community, ones and--you know, the guys, different ones

said, "If they don't have the parade, we're not going to play." So, they did

have the parade and, you know--and that same particular year, I think it was

like UMWA [United Mine Workers of America] chose her as a candidate or queen

for, you know--for the UMWA, you know. Other than that, I--I don't--I don't

recall too much prejudice or, you know, if it was, we wasn't aware because, like

I say, we went to different schools.

CURRIS:Well, that's a fascinating story. What did your brother go ahead and do

after sch--high school?

WILSON:He enlisted in--it was--it

wasn't the Navy. It was--he was--went to the Army. He went to the Army.

CURRIS:Well--

WILSON:--then after that and everything, we went into the coal mines--

CURRIS:--where?

WILSON:He went into the coal mines at Lynch and--as well as my husband. They

went to Lynch in--I think--they were called thirty--let's see thirty-one is the

portal--thirty-five at--in Gap Branch, at Gap Branch.

CURRIS:Because they named different areas of the mine different numbers. Is

that correct?

WILSON:Different numbers, right.

CURRIS:And so, they were at Portal Thirty-five.

WILSON:They was at thirt--yeah, they just called it thirty-five mines.

CURRIS:So, it's thirty-five.

WILSON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:You know, when we're talking about growing up in a coal camp and talking

about not--if, if there was problems, you

didn't recognize it.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:Tell us about your childhood growing up. What was it like? Where did you

live? Who did you play with?

WILSON:Okay. I lived in--like I say, it was called Camp Number Three, number

three. I still remember our address 457 Kearn Street, K-E-A-R-N is Kearn Street.

And everybody was like--it was so close, you know. As a matter of fact, we never

left from over our camp unless it was to go to school, go to church, or maybe

one a month some--they would take us to Cumberland, get shoes or something to

that effect. But as living over there, we was just--it was like freedom, but we

wasn't out at night. You know, everybody knew the sound of the parents' voice.

And when it was time to come in, all they had to do was just whisper--whistle or

say your name and you all--you know, but we played together in that community

even with the whites--white children.

We were all just like close-knit, you know.

CURRIS:You know, my memory is that during the day, in your neighborhood,

whether it was a street or two or three streets, whatever it was, everybody

played together, and you ate at whoever's house you happened to have been at at

the time.

WILSON:Right, right.

CURRIS:But when you came nighttime--

WILSON:--you was home--

CURRIS:--you were home. Is that your memory?

WILSON:That's my memory. That's my memory.

CURRIS:What were Sundays like?

WILSON:Our Sundays was like you know--well, first of all, we'll get back to

like--we didn't have the--like the bathrooms. We had what you called the

outhouses. And they were kept clean. I know my grandmother--she was--she--she

really was, I, I'll say, a fanatic on cleanliness. And some of the traits--I

guess me, and my sisters took up that trait

--I think it's called the linoleum rugs--she was so--she would do the lye soap

to disinfect the bathrooms. And the leftover linoleum--she would even put it on

the floors in our out toilets. Okay, as we got older, my grandfather--because

the toilets--the outdoor toilets connected. The neighbors' side was there, and

ours was like there. And my grandfather said--he had the leftover plywood,

different things. He made us a little stall where we would have to use it

because he didn't want us outside. He said that's how boys and girls like, you

know. So, we would have to take the waste and then take it during the day. But

he did that and made the stall. We had the--a sink. You know, no commodes,

nothing like that. But we had what you called the number two tubs.

CURRIS:What were the number two tubs?

WILSON:That was what you bathed in. It was--they were sort of like--we washed

up, took care of the hygienes

every day. But Saturday, we had to get the, you know--and the, they had another

little bucket called the foot tub, and that's how we were rinsed off, you know.

CURRIS:I remember the big--not cast iron--metal--

WILSON:--it was silver. They were like the big silver tubs. Yeah, that's right--

CURRIS:--yes, yes.

WILSON:You're right.

CURRIS:And that--that's what you bathed in.

WILSON:By the warm morning heater.

CURRIS:The--what were your Sundays like?

WILSON:Our Sundays--like I said, we had to attend, you know, Sunday School,

church. And even in the evenings, we would stay busy because they would have

like BTU.

CURRIS:What's--

WILSON:--that's Baptist Training Unions, you know. And even as we got older, if

we did not go to church, Sunday school, you know, we couldn't go--we had a

little place called the pool room. And that's where kids would gather

and, you know, dance and, you know, eat and socialize. But if we did not attend,

we could not go. You know, we couldn't even fake sickness and then think we

could go, you know--

CURRIS:--in Benham, they had the youth center that I think is the equivalent of

your pool room.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And that's where the kids went. And the parents were the ones who served

as the chaperones. Was that the same way?

WILSON:Same way.

CURRIS:The parents were not going to permit any kind of foolishness--

WILSON:--no--

CURRIS:--is my memory for sure.

WILSON:My memories--and even if they didn't chaperone, the people that ran it

during my time--it was called--Miss Gussie and her husband. And Miss Gussie was

your parent away from home. Miss Gussie will tell on you if you go out that door

or you didn't come back because I've been told on many times. (both laugh)

CURRIS:Well, Ruthie, what were you doing? (laughs)

WILSON:I was like--my husband that's deceased now--you know, my brother drove

us to the pool room, and it closed at twelve.

CURRIS:Where was it located?

WILSON:It was located in Lynch right--not too far behind the, you know--the

West Main School. But it's toward down--as a matter of fact, it was a barbershop

at the bottom. And the guys and stuff played pool and did pool or whatever.

That's why they called it the pool, uh, the pool room. But we was not allowed

down in the basement part where the men gathered, you know.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:And Miss Gussie--she had--you know, she sold hot dogs, the little

orangeades, and the chips and, you know, we couldn't get it every day. Some

could, but we couldn't on our income my mom, as a parent’s, income. But we could

go maybe on the first of the month, and it was a treat because we could get it,

you know.

CURRIS:You know, talking about Miss Gussie

would tell on you--at the Benham youth center, we had Miss Robinette. And if we

called over to the police station, which of course was just across the street in

downtown Benham. Let me tell you, they were there, and nobody was getting out of

line for very long. And if you did, you were not permitted to come back.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:A very different world--

WILSON:--it is--

CURRIS:--from what we see today. I would imagine you never thought about

talking back to your parents.

WILSON:No way.

CURRIS:What would they have done?

WILSON:Oh honey--

CURRIS:--all but killed you--

WILSON:--all but killed you. And guess what? We still alive. But now, if you

touch a child, it's child abuse. But I--I guess I'm from--I'm from the old

school. And even when they stopped the discipline in school--when

they stopped the discipline in school--

CURRIS:--yes--

WILSON:--I didn't let that stop me. I would go to the school--I always taught

my children, "If you have the problem with the teacher, whatever, any adult,

bring it to me, and I'll take care of it." And a lot of parents it's like--want

to jump the teachers, do this. But me as a parent--everybody know their child

and what they might do and what they might not. But I disciplined mine. I have

gone in the school, got my grandson--I raised five of my grandchildren. And he

didn't have a belt on this particular time. I think he was either in

kindergarten or first grade. And he got in trouble, him and another little boy,

on the bus. But he said that little boy threw a spitball or hit him with a

spitball, and he threw it back. And I said, "First all, it's nasty." So, I took him

in the bathroom. I asked one of the teachers, "Please." They said, "You can't do

that." I said, "That's mine," and I took him in. Had the belt, wore him out.

CURRIS:He didn't do that again?

WILSON:Huh? No, no, no. I've had him again in his school. But I would go, and

I'd hit him in the principal's office, slap him or chastise him right there. As

one time Mr. Dick--do you remember Mr. Dick?

CURRIS:Oh, absolutely.

WILSON:And there he said, "All I can do--you don't chill out or sit down I'm

going to call 848-5585 or 848-5555." Those were my telephone numbers. So, I go

over. And he--you know, he said, "Mama, you embarrassed me." That's my

grandchild, but he called me "Mama." And I said, "What do you mean?" He said,

"You come over there right in front of all the kids and you"--I said, "Don't you

think I was embarrassed for them to call me?" I said, "So, check it up."

CURRIS:You are a

wonderful, wonderful woman and mother.

WILSON:I--you know, I didn't say they didn't go astray. Some of them did. But

they say, "Train a child in the way they should go. When they get old, they

won't depart." That don't mean they don't make mistakes. But with your training

and then with God's word, they know the way back.

CURRIS:You know, this brings up the whole issue of where you went to school

then for your--when you moved to Cumberland. So, you then moved to Cumberland

for high school. Is that correct?

WILSON:I went from the tenth grade to the twelfth at Cumberland High School.

CURRIS:What did you do after high school?

WILSON:After high school, I got married probably--maybe a week--a few weeks

after. I got married June 17, 1967.

CURRIS:And your husband?

WILSON:My husband [Nathaniel Ray Wilson, Sr.]--he had moved away to Marion,

Indiana. And that's where we got married, at Marion, Indiana. As a matter of

fact, the way we ended back home--we came to visit. So, he decided he'll put in an

application at U.S. Steel.

CURRIS:In Lynch.

WILSON:In Lynch. So, no sooner than we got home--maybe hadn't been back

long--and they called for him for an interview. We had just bought some new

furniture, of course on credit. And we moved in this little house. I had my

daughter, and then I had my baby son, I think. I called him Little Ray. And we

came back to do the interview and whatever, and they hired him. So, we go back

to Marion, Indiana. Didn't pack everything, not even a whole lot of clothes.

Called the company that we bought the furniture called Carrico Furniture and

told them to come back and get their furniture. And we came to Cumberland,

stayed with my mom until this house became available, the house that I'm telling

you about. It was through

the credit union at one point, and then, it was Pauline and Bob Hern. His name

was Robert, but we called him Bob.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:And Pauline Hern. They were the purchasers--the home, and we bought it

from them.

CURRIS:So, this is that same home when you first came back. And describe what a

coal camp house looked like in those days. This would have been in 1969?

WILSON:Maybe '69 or '70.

CURRIS:So, describe a coal camp house.

WILSON:Okay, when I moved in--

CURRIS:--and this was in Benham or Lynch--

WILSON:--in Benham.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILSON:And my lot--the property's still mine--is on the end. But we only had

like the--two bedroom and the kitchen and living room, you know, probably wasn't

no size, but you know. But when I purchased it, it was not--how's

the word for it? It was not raggedy or worn down or you know. We had to do some

improvement. And we lived comfortable because it's what we had.

CURRIS:When--I want to make a distinction here between the time of living in

your own home that had been a company home but that you bought and when you're

growing up. You may not--you may have been too young to know this. But when you

were living in Lynch in the company owned house that U.S. Steel had built, just

like International Harvester had built the homes in Benham, do you know

what--whether there was any kind of rent that had to be paid, water,

electricity? Do you know whether any of that--

WILSON:--not that I know. I think it was all through the company--

CURRIS:--so then, when you have your own home--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--then

what did you have to pay for?

WILSON:I had to pay for the utilities and the water.

CURRIS:So, that--that was a big difference, I think, in both Benham and Lynch.

WILSON:Yes, and Lynch.

CURRIS:When they sold--

WILSON:--yes, it was a different--

CURRIS:--the--I want to skip back for a moment to--we were talking earlier

about the clothes that we wore growing up--

WILSON:--right, right.

CURRIS:Tell me about the clothes that you would wear.

WILSON:The clothes that we would wear--like I said, we would go to the Lynch

store, the country store. And it's--they were the quality, you know. As I said

back then, we wore the best, and we learned how to take care what we had. It

wasn't like we going every week, every other week, every month, you know. But

what we got was quality clothes, and they last, and they last, you know.

CURRIS:I can remember

the--sitting in the Big Store. In Benham, we called the company store the Big Store.

WILSON:The Big Store--we called the Lynch--the one that I--it was called the

Big Store.

CURRIS:And I can remember all the little dresses coming in, and they were so

pretty, so nice.

WILSON:Pretty.

CURRIS:And the--I can remember talking to people who lived in Lynch about the

quality of food that was brought in, to the meat market in Lynch. And as it

turned out, it was the same in Benham--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--that they stocked with really fine food.

WILSON:Fine food.

CURRIS:And the same was true with the clothing and the apparel.

WILSON:No preservatives.

CURRIS:That--I had not thought about that.

WILSON:No preservatives.

CURRIS:It was all there. Now, when

--when your parents were buying--was there a member of your household then that

was actually hired by U.S. Steel?

WILSON:A member of mine?

CURRIS:At the time you were growing up.

WILSON:My--oh, yes. My grandfather, like I said, he was--

CURRIS:--okay, so he was an employee--

WILSON:--he was an employee of U.S. Steel.

CURRIS:So then, when you bought your items from the Lynch store, the company

store, how were they paid?

WILSON:From what we could--uh, we didn't ever know, as children, how it was

paid until we grew up and got older. But it was called scrip. And then, a

lot--they didn't get--I never seen them bring home checks, check stubs,

whatever. I think it was taken out--their checks from--you know, taken out of

their checks--what they call--from the scrip. They let--what's what song? I

forget--my soul to the company store. You know?

CURRIS:So--so, that those items would all be deducted.

WILSON:Deducted.

CURRIS:And then, your grandfather would get the remaining amount.

WILSON:Remaining.

CURRIS:And that would be the, the pay.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:See, it was very--it was the same type of system at--

WILSON:--Benham--

CURRIS:--International Harvester in Benham.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:But I know I had little feed sack dresses too. But there was such a

difference between having a feed sack dress and having a storebought.

WILSON:And having a storebought.

CURRIS:And that's what we called it was storebought.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And then, my grandmother was a very fine seamstress. She really was very

good. So, in high school, she would make clothes for me. And that was where I

learned that if you have two suits that match, you can cross everything and

have--end up with four different outfits.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:I learned at the knee of my grandmother.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And it goes back to

what we were able to do at those times in the mountains for sure.

WILSON:Sure.

CURRIS:Well, once you came back--and your husband then is working at Benham.

WILSON:No, my husband worked at Lynch.

CURRIS:Oh I'm sorry. At Lynch. Now, when did you start working?

WILSON:I think it was like February--it was close to like maybe Valentine's of

1976. As a matter of fact--And I don't know if you remember. It was a store

called S-Mart (??)--

CURRIS:--where was that--

WILSON:--in Cumberland.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILSON:In Cumberland right there where--I think they called Cash Express or

where--it was down the hill. It was called Maloney's at one time. Okay. Then it

became S-Mart. And I was working at S-Mart.

CURRIS:What was your job?

WILSON:My job is--first I start out like just being a cashier. Then I became a

supervisor of housewares and domestic.

CURRIS:And so, you would have been about how old at this time?

WILSON:Oh, let's see.

It was in the early twenties, early twenties.

CURRIS:Early twenties?

WILSON:Yes.

CURRIS:Now, had your mother worked outside the home?

WILSON:No, except my mother is--like I said, go to what we called the "hunky

stand" and maybe do some jobs. I don't know if it's cleaning or whatever.

CURRIS:And what was the hunky stand?

WILSON:It was like a boarding house or, you know--

CURRIS:--in Lynch--

WILSON:--in Lynch.

CURRIS:But did she have any options really to work outside the home in her day?

WILSON:No, no.

CURRIS:Would the white women have had any options to work out the home that she

didn't have?

WILSON:I'm not sure if I can answer that because I, I don't know if she--she

could have probably had an option because I do know some of the Black parents

and things that worked, you know, even at the--like the hospitals or whatever,

you know. She was more or less like a stay home mom.

CURRIS:My memory is in those--in the forties, and fifties that the

women--unless you were a nurse, a teacher, uh, occasionally a secretary or a

cashier, and cleaning--those were your only options.

WILSON:Options.

CURRIS:Is that your memory?

WILSON:That's my memory.

CURRIS:When did you think that started to change? Because you are now working

in the twen--in your twenties in Cumberland.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:So, you had a position and a job that your mother probably could not

have had.

WILSON:Could not have had.

CURRIS:And that would have been as much a matter of timing for women working--

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:--as for any cultural reason. Would you think?

WILSON:I think so.

CURRIS:Because one of the critical

reasons that I wanted to interview you personally is because you, at a young

age, marked a transition for women and I think also for Black women--

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:--in terms of what it is that you proceeded to do with your life. And

again, these are the stories that we don't know about.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:So, you started out as a cashier and became a supervisor. What happened

next in terms of your employment and work life?

WILSON:Okay. Even before that, I was called to go into the mines at Lynch. But

my husband had this thing, "No, you're not going underground. You're not

working." And they called them back then "muckles" or--but that was the work

clothes. And he said, "Only muckles going to be in this house going be mine."

CURRIS:How do you spell that?

WILSON:I can't remember now. But it was--it was the work clothes.

CURRIS:Clothes.

WILSON:You know, but it's called muckles or whatever, you know.

CURRIS:I think it was M-U-L-K-A. [Editor’s note: Curris noted that after the

interview Wilson corrected the spelling to “muckles”.]

WILSON:I think so.

But so, the lady--I was at S-Mart working, and I had a phone call. And the

manager, Dingus or--either Mack Elder, said I had a phone call. And it was from

Pauline Hern.

CURRIS:My mother.

WILSON:And she--yes, your mother. She called me. She told me, "We need you to

come up for an interview." And she said, "We have interviewed quite a few, but

we need you to come up." And I said--at this, I said, "Miss Pauline," I said,

"My husband's not going to let me go underground." She said, "Just come on up.

It's something different," you know. So, I go up. And she said, "Hold on just a

minute," you know, asking questions, blah, blah, blah, this and that. And she

said, "How would you feel like going to the warehouse to work?" I said, "Explain

the warehouse." It was called the warehouse, but it was the supply house.

It's where the--all the supplies was kept for what they needed to operate the

mine and the machinery and equipment. So, I said, "I don't know. I have to see

what Fuzz"--Fuzz Estep, Charles Estep was the manager of the warehouse at the

time. When I go in, I say, "Oh my God. This is all Greek like to me," you know.

So, he said, "Just--you'll learn it. You'll learn it," you know.

CURRIS:Now, Fuzz--Charles Estep--we're talking about working at Benham for

International Harvester at this time.

WILSON:At the--Int--Harvest--before--and then it changed over to Benham Coal.

CURRIS:Okay. So, what did you think after you were--talking to Fuzz?

WILSON:In--after Fuzz and me talked--and they were real pleasant, real nice to

me. And then, I think it was like Don -----------(??) the boss, they said

they've never had a woman in the warehouse, and it was all men that worked

in the warehouse, past, present, whatever. So, I said, "I'm going to try it. I'm

going to try it." But I went in there with the determination to learn, to do it.

I didn't want them to do the work for me. I wanted to. But they were so kind and

so generous because I'm a workaholic. I can't be still. And, I would--my shift

was second shift, and that's the shift that I wanted because my husband worked

third. That way, I didn't have to worry about the children or--

CURRIS:--what time is second shift--

WILSON:--at that particular time, it was three o'clock.

CURRIS:In the morning?

WILSON:Three o'clock in the evening.

CURRIS:Okay. And so, you would work until when?

WILSON:Until eleven. As--and the one that came in to relieve me--I'm sure you

might know him--Woodrow France. But we called him "Bud," Bud France.

CURRIS:Yes, Bud France.

WILSON:And I was determined. You know, I learned. And as a matter of fact,

I would go in sometimes early, and I would hear them saying, "We got a wheel

unit down. We got a scoop down. We got a miner down." So, in the meantime, you

know, while they--before they was changing shifts, I would go ahead and take my

time and look for the proper parts or whatever. And when they would come--we had

a supply, supplu driver, and we called him R.J. Scott. That was his name. He's

deceased now. And I would have the stuff on the counter. You know, that's what

you called--they kept a little down time. The quicker you get the supplies, the

quicker they can get the equipment going. And, you know, now after I would do

this and I would even sit and, you know, I would even stock and, you know.

CURRIS:Well now, while you're in this position in the warehouse, the supply

house, who were you--who worked with you?

WILSON:The mornings--like I said, before

Charles went down--I think when Pauline retired or whatever or whatever

happened, Fuzz went to human resources. It was a guy named--was his name Ed

Cornette or--he was a Cornette. But Fuzz took on that position.

CURRIS:Curtis?

WILSON:Curtis Cornette. That's it. Curtis Cornette. But like I said, I was on

salary. I was on salary.

CURRIS:Well now, were your coworkers Black and white?

WILSON:Uh, the only--I was the only Black in the warehouse, the only Black.

CURRIS:Did you have any uncomfortable feelings at any time?

WILSON:No, no, not--except for one time, and that's after Fuzz left. But Tim

Bowman became my boss. And I think they had what they called staff meeting. And

that's when the boss and supervisors would go into staff meetings with

Junior--I'm sure you might know him, Junior Williams, Jerry Williams's brother

or Roberta Pratt, but she was Roberta Williams--their father. And they would

have staff meeting or whatever.

And they was saying that, you know, "We have so much down--down time on day

shift," whatever. They said, "Maybe we need to put Ruth on days or whatever."

And I, you know--I--I--"Oh, I don't want no days," you know. And so, Tim--that

was my boss at the time--it seemed like he was trying to treat me different. But

I don't know if he was thinking they was was going to put me, you know, in

charge or whatever. So, I--I said, "I can't understand what's going on with

Tim," because he always relied on me, you know, to do this. So, he knew he could

count on me. But I think that was when the bosses was telling me, "They're

thinking about putting you on days." So, I think Tim's mind, he thought that

they was going to give his position or whatever to me. So, I sit down--and I

said, "Tim," I said, "I heard about--they had a staff meeting and all this."

I said, "Honey, I do not want that position." He said, "You wouldn't take that

position if they offered?" I said, "No, I've got children. I got children that

I'm raising." I said, "I like my shift what I'm on because I get in at eleven.

My husband would have to leave and go to work. And, you know, this is my shift,

you know." And after I said that Tim and I became best buds, you know.

CURRIS:You know, you and I, in conversation, talked about what became your nickname--

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:--"Brown Sugar."

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:Tell us about the story about how that happened.

WILSON:Okay. How that happened--they had what you called a mine phone. And, and

at first, they would plug it up because--and I could hear them say, "Ruth got

the mine phone plugged in." You know, they didn't want me to hear any foul

languages and all that. So, they said, "Hey guys"--

CURRIS:--they were protective--

WILSON:--yep. "Hey guys, Ruth got the mine line plugged in." See now,

I could hear them talking or whatever. Got the mine line--the only reason I

started--because they could call me on the phone. But they had an accident at

one time. And his name was Ben Sweet. And they had the accident. And I

said--thought, "Oh my God. If I had that phone, I could have maybe speeded up

the time for the rescue or whatever." So, they start plugging the phones. And

they would just say, "Hey, how about your warehouse? How about you, Ruth?" and

tell me what they might need or whatever and you know. Then this one particular

time, the guy--his name was Stanley Jackson. He worked at--we call 4D mine. That

was right behind the warehouse and going up on a hill.

CURRIS:And this was at Benham?

WILSON:Benham Coal. And I'm thinking, "Now why is he--he's never, you

know"--always, "How about you, Ruth?" or, you know, "How about you, warehouse?"

So, I'm getting real offended, you know. So, I was talking to Don Disney, Ruben

Davidson--we called him "Squeeze"--and

Dale Ice (??) and them. They said, "What's wrong, Ruth?" And I was just telling

them, "Well, it's Stanley Jackson." So, they were Stanley's boss because this is

all like maintenance crew.

CURRIS:And what had he called you?

WILSON:He said, "How about you, Brown Sugar?" And I'm thinking why--where is

this coming from? And so, I think when they talked to me, whatever--and then,

Stanley called the warehouse, and he said, "Ruth, I am so sorry you got

offended." He said, "But I didn't mean anything." He said, "It's a Black guy

that was kept--bringing Decatur plates, roof bolts, pins, whatever. And he

wanted to know who was the pretty Black Brown Sugar. Who was the pretty Brown

Sugar in the warehouse?" You know? So, then I--oh my goodness. Then I got all

into myself, you know? (both laugh) I got all into myself, you know.

CURRIS:So, this was a Black guy from--

WILSON:--Alabama--was bringing in some supplies--

CURRIS:--so, he was delivering supplies.

WILSON:And they would have to bring

the ticket to me to sign that they were delivered. And he just--he wanted--when

he come by and I told him where to take them and I said, "When you get through,

bring the ticket back, you know. Stanley and them will let me know everything

was dropped off," and I signed off on the ticket, you know. But then, that's

when they called back and said, "How about you, Brown Sugar," and the guy wanted

to know, "Who's the pretty Brown Sugar in the warehouse," you know. So, when he

came back, he said, "Hi, ma'am." And I just told him like--I said, "I'm married,

you know. I'm married."

CURRIS:So, what did you do with the name after that?

WILSON:After that--after it became--you know, I just went to Carl Hatfield. He

had a shop where he made plates and whatever. I had a Pinto. I bought the plate,

purchased it to have him put on there "Brown Sugar." (Curris laughs) So, that

name was carried a long time, long--still some of them still now--like Don

Tippett, different ones that's still alive--they call me Brown Sugar, you know.

CURRIS:So, what could have been a

very terrible circumstance--

WILSON:--it was not meant that way. So, sometimes we take things the wrong way.

It was a compliment. But I took it as being something negative--

CURRIS:Well, and, not only that. If you were talking about a white man versus a

Black man in those days--

WILSON:--right, right--

CURRIS:--that would have been the expectation.

WILSON:Right, right.

CURRIS:So, I'm so glad that that turned out--

WILSON:--it did--

CURRIS:--so really--so really--(laughs)--well. So then, what happened--what did

you do from the supply house, from the warehouse? What happened next?

WILSON:You mean other jobs after they shut down? We moved to a place called,

uh, D7. It's right--it's in Cumberland, but it still was ran by--after Arch's

purchase--called D7.

CURRIS:So, we're talking about after International Harvester has sold to Arch Minerals?

WILSON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:And at that time is when you're moving to D7 in terms of--

WILSON:--yeah, but it was still owned by Arch. But they set up a mine because

they had opened the mines down there, D7. So, I went there to--it was a

trailer--like--to run the warehouse there. And even after that Arch--we were so

happy Arch had bought us. We thought we was going to be on top of everything.

But no sooner--not too long after they bought it, they closed it. So--

CURRIS:--so, this is very interesting. You start work in 1976 as a cashier, and

they promoted you to supervisor.

WILSON:At--yes, at S-Mart.

CURRIS:At S-Mart. Then you are called to come for an interview at International Harvester.

WILSON:Then later become Benham Coal, yes.

CURRIS:And became Benham Coal. And you started in the warehouse. But then you

end up in charge of a warehouse.

WILSON:Yes.

CURRIS:How did that happen?

WILSON:Okay. After

the--I had this warehouse. Like they said, they had to set up a warehouse there

so the guys wouldn't have to come all the way to Benham from Cumberland to get

the supplies. So, they kept enough supplies there. You know, and even if I

needed something, all they had to do--I'd call up to the warehouse in Benham,

and they would have a driver bring the parts down, you know. And after that

job--it wasn't long--they just shut it down. And so, I was just saying to them,

Tim and them--I said, "You know what?" I said, "I'm going to go on home. I'll

just go ahead and"--he said, "No, no. They want you to stay on, you know, a few

more months because they know we've got to get this stuff from Cumberland, get

it back to the warehouse in Benham." And they said, "We know that you're going

to be--you know, do it well and get it done back, you know, to right place." So--

CURRIS:--tell me something. Here you are in charge. What was your title? What

did they call you? Director, or--

WILSON:--no, they--they would just call me,

you know, main clerk or--

CURRIS:--main clerk--

WILSON:--um-hm.

CURRIS:Now, how many other women, be it white or Black, were in that same type

of position of--

WILSON:--being warehouse clerk or--

CURRIS:--um-hm.

WILSON:None I know--oh, none that I know of at Benham except I was called after

they shut it down. I was called to work at Arch Minerals in Cumberland, and the

mine was 37 Mine. As a matter of fact, my boss had went on to 37. He--and I

don't remember if you remember Judy Henry--Judy Kaiser Henry--Judy Henry. She

was married to David Henry, you know. Okay. She worked there in the warehouse.

She was a woman that worked there. I was a woman, and I think it was another

woman, Serino--Jeanette Serino (??). They worked in the warehouse. So, I, you

know, had to learn their routines, learn this.

So, they were setting up another mine. You had to go past Clover Lick, you know,

past the 37 Mine. And they were setting up a mine called Highsplint, Highsplint

Number Two. So, they had a trailer, and everything brought in, and they had

hired me to do the Highsplint.

CURRIS:This is fascinating because at this time, of your girlfriends, how many

were working outside the home? And what kind of jobs did they have? Because you,

you have a job of importance in what you're doing and you're in--basically managing.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:So, I--what I'm trying to determine is how many women in the

seventies--and we're talking about mid to late seventies and early eighties.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:How many women, be they Black or white, had jobs outside the home?

WILSON:I know my sister [Cheryl]--she went underground. She went underground to

coal mine. One of my best friends--she went underground--excuse me--for Lynch.

And it was so many more. One of--another best friend, Drena Thomas, she went

underground. It was a few Black women and white women that I knew. We had white

women that went underground at Benham.

CURRIS:Who were they? Do you remember?

WILSON:Beverly Webbs [Webb]. She was married to the--she's a Webbs [Webb] now.

What was her--Beverly, Beverly Cox. Her husband's name was Gene Cox. She was

married to Gene. She went underground. And Mavis Hernandez--these are names now.

But some of the others I can't call them by--names by now. But we did have

a--one Black girl that start working over there when I was working.

Her name was Linda Fielder. But Fielder was her maiden name. And she started

working in the--we called the lab. And the lab was when there--when Doug

Trammel, when all them--they were teachers, but they came to work in the lab.

And the lab was the part when they would sample the coals or whatever. And then,

they sent it to the prep plant, you know. But it was quite a few that started

later on, you know, working.

CURRIS:What--what were the thoughts of the women working underground, and did

they differ if they worked at Lynch as opposed to working at Benham?

WILSON:Did they differ? What you mean by that?

CURRIS:I mean, their working conditions, their pay. But what--first of all, let

me just ask, what did the women who became miners underground--what kind of

stories did they tell you? What--what were their experiences?

WILSON:You know, a lot of them didn't really talk

because, like I said, when they would go in and stuff--but I do know they would

have to--I don't think the pay was--I think the pay was the same. And that was

because, you know, it was based on--and I--I'm pretty sure of the--how a lot of

them--even knowing this--when they was--tried to get them go

UNWM--whatever--Progressive Mine Worker.

CURRIS:In Benham.

WILSON:That's what it was called in Benham. And they would--tried to get

Progressive Mine Workers to go with UMWA. They wouldn't, you know. But they

would continue that pay like the UMWA was getting to keep their men, you know.

CURRIS:Well, were--were the women miners--were they paid at the same rate as

the males?

WILSON:As far as I know. As far as I know. I never heard them complain. As a

matter of fact, even one of my positions--when it came time to pay, they would

send the checks to the warehouse. And we would

pay them. I would pay like the--like the second shift crew or whatever, you

know. But far as I know--like I say, I was never--I was always salary. But I

do--I never heard them complain.

CURRIS:So, the presumption is that women and men were paid the same.

WILSON:Paid the same far as--yes.

CURRIS:And Black and white were paid the same.

WILSON:As far as I know. I never heard them, you know--and I knew a lot of the

guys that had been there for--like Archie Williams. He's deceased. These were

Black guys. And we called him Baby Ray, William Cooke. But they never said they

had any, you know--the first Black foreman there was Wolford Griffey. [Editor’s

note: In 1945 Wolford Griffey became the first Black foreman in the coal camps.

Wolford and Jackie: A tale of two African-American Pioneers by S. Ramsey,

Kentucky Coal Council; and W. Tompkins]

CURRIS:And this was Benham or Lynch?

WILSON:Benham. Benham, you know. But I never heard them say that they were

treated different.

CURRIS:So, we're talking about, again, the late seventies, probably up through

the mid-eighties.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:Is that--be--

WILSON:--that's it. That's--yes. But no--as far as the other one that they

worked there way before I got there--I

don't know. You know, I can't speak on that--

CURRIS:--in the interviews that I've had, the presumption has been all along

that everyone was paid equally.

WILSON:That's--as far as I know.

CURRIS:And opportunities were equal.

WILSON:They were equal.

CURRIS:Which makes Benham and Lynch very unique in the time of history--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--of what was happening, I think, with the rest of the world, rest of

America for certain. When--when you were working then for Arch, when they

closed, what was the next thing that you did?

WILSON:Oh, after they closed, I took on this--let's see. Like I say, I didn't

have to. I just couldn't be still because the kids were getting up, and then,

they were--you know, if I would have to stay late or something and then, I

didn't want to leave them unsupervised--they were teenagers.

(Curris laughs) So, I decided, "Well, I'll go home." But after they got up or

whatever--wait a minute. I'm going too-ahead of myself. Even before Benham

closed and everything, they had another little layoff. And Fuzz asked me

again--he said--Mountain Supply it was called. They had a Mountain Construction.

And he said, "They got a job, Ruth. You want it?" I said, "What's it do?" He

said, "Flagging." You know, they was pulling off the cliff, you know, as you go

around--we called it by Clutts. And they had the--

CURRIS:--oh yeah--

WILSON:--yes, they had to work there. And so, I said, "Yeah, I'll try it." You

know, I said, "Money, money, money," you know. (laughs) And so, I did that for a

while. And this girl--her name was Barbara Thomas. She was already a nurse. She

decided, "I'm going to--you know, I'm going to take that job on"--she flagged on

one end. I flagged on another one. And as that became--and it started getting

real cold. It was close to like November, almost Thanksgiving. And I called the boss.

I--I--I said, "I can't take this." I said, "I'm getting cold." I said, "I'll

give you all time to put up a light so they can detour to Clutts" And I said,

"I'm going to stay on until, you know, they get this all situated." I said, "I'm

going home," you know. But, I--

CURRIS:--you know, as I listen to you, Ruthie, there is a theme that runs

through what you're saying. And that is that you're dependable--

WILSON:--oh, yes--

CURRIS:--that you're smart, and that you are working far and above what is

demanded of you--

WILSON:--I'm glad you say that because I've been told that. My last job--I was

hired--I happened to be in the store just joking around, Food City. And -----------(??)

CURRIS:This was in Cumberland.

WILSON:This is in Cumberland, right here, and it's still in Cumberland. And

they asked me--said--no, I was just

kidding around with them. And I said, "You all--would y'all hire me?" They said,

"You want a job?" I said, "Yeah, if you'll hire me." I was just kidding. So,

they said, "I'll tell you what, go up in the office and put in an application,"

you know. I put in the application. So, I go back to the store the next day, and

they said, "Do you have time to come up and do a drug test?" And I said, “Drug

test?” You know, I said, "I don't do drugs." They said, "We just--you know, the

company rules. You do a drug test." So, I had to go up there and do this drug

test. I'm just still not, you know--and they said, "Well, we'll let you know

something shortly," you know. I think it must have been the next day or so. They

must have rushed it. And--and they hired me. And they hired me, and I told

them--I said, "Listen, I don't--I want

day shift." I said, "Now, if that's going to be a problem"--they said, "No."

They said, "We'll hire you as the morning opener." And I did the morning open

for quite a few years. And--

CURRIS:--well, that's a lot of responsibility--

WILSON:--yeah the--the opener--but see, I was always on time. I believe in--I

don't wait until time to clock in. I go earlier, you know. I go earlier. And

then, I couldn't just stand there. I can't be still, you know. I like--and I

would just start--dusting, cleaning around, you know. And even some of the other

cashiers--"Why are you doing that?" You know, I said, "Because I want to." I

said, "I take pride in where I work." And if I see dust--they didn't ask me to

do this, you know. I would do it on my own, just start doing--if I see--if it

wasn't busy, I would go in the produce. I go different places as--even, you

know, just wipe off the things or certain things, you know.

CURRIS:Goes

back, doesn't it, to how you were expected to live growing up--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--when it came to the linoleum.

WILSON:That's it.

CURRIS:The--the pail for the feet. It was how you were raised.

WILSON:How we were raised. How we were raised.

CURRIS:I wish so many people could hear--(laughs)--your story, and many will.

WILSON:How we were raised.

CURRIS:One of the comments that you had made was that you had served on Benham

City Council. Tell me about this. Approximately what years are we talking about?

WILSON:Oh, let's see. I just give it up. Let's see. My husband died in '20. So,

maybe about--maybe 2017 on up to '20. But I had to resign because he got real

sick in dementia and all this. So--so, I had to go home to, you know--

CURRIS:--well, did you run for city council--

WILSON:--yeah, I ran.

CURRIS:Tell

--tell me about the process. And were you the first Black woman on the council?

WILSON:No, Lacey Griffey. She--

CURRIS:--Lacey Griffey in--when--

WILSON:--Lacey was way back. She was with the--you know Wanda Humphrey? Her

mom, Mary Creech--well, Mary Creech, but she was Mary--what was Mary's maiden

name? But they were all on there. Billie Disney--all them were on the council.

They called them the "petticoat mafia."

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:The petticoat mafia. And so, I decided, I guess, you know--maybe in a

way--and I shouldn't say it like this because I became on there. But one reason

I said it--and I did--and I know it was wrong. I said, "I'm going to run for

city council so I can be on there with them," because they fought me for my home

that I'm living in now. They fought me. Then I had to move it back.

It's a modular home they had brought in, you know. But that was wrong to do that

just to get on. But when I got on there, it all changed because mine was to be

there for the betterment of the city. And that's what I did. If they were right,

what they were saying, I didn't stop the vote, if it was in right. So, after

that, we all became real close, you know.

CURRIS:Well, let's go back then to your home. Alright. Now, at this point, when

you originally bought your home--and that was at--what year did you say that

that was approximately?

WILSON:Probably around--maybe '70, '71.

CURRIS:So, the Benham--International Harvester had decided to sell the homes,

we think, somewhere around 1962, sixty three.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:So, they were to be sold to the miner that had--or employee that was in

the home at the time.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And so, for the first wave through, that's who they were sold to.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And most were financed through the credit union--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--which International Harvester had--excuse me--had sponsored.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:So, at the time that you bought the house, you're saying it was owned by

Robert and Pauline Hern.

WILSON:That was after the credit union. I guess what it--came from--because

people that lived in the--Miss--Uncle Buck, we called him, and Miss Pinky, they

died or whatever. And my deed says--it used to be Benham Credit Union. Then it

became--it was Benham--I mean, not Benham--Robert and Pauline Hern, you know. I

think a lot of things that they did to keep things from

depreciating or going backs or whatever, you know.

CURRIS:Well, that would tie in with the stories that have been told to us. And

that is that Bob Hern, as the manager, and that the company had evidently wanted

Pauline because she knew everybody, and she knew how to work--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--to come in and help--

WILSON:--right--

CURRIS:--with those sales.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And so, Shirley Hensley--was she there?

WILSON:Shirley Hensley was there. Like I say, Pauline had started working at

International Harvester, you know, in human resources and, you know, she and

Pearl Cope (??) and all them, you know.

CURRIS:So, it could very well be that when these transactions were taking place

that Robert and Pauline are

signing these deeds because of their position--

WILSON:--because of their position--

CURRIS:--at the credit union.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:So then--so, did you have to mortgage your home, or did you--how did you

buy your home?

WILSON:Okay. Like I said, when I bought mine, I--at this particular time, I

was--let me make sure I was doing it. I got a loan from the Benham Credit Union.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILSON:I got a loan from the Benham Credit Union, and I made my payments, you

know, to the Benham Credit Union.

CURRIS:Well now, at that point--

WILSON:--Shirley Hensley was working there--

CURRIS:--now, at that point, you're an employee of International Harvester when

you bought your home?

WILSON:No, I got it be--I purchased the home before then.

CURRIS:Okay, before then. So, you were able to purchase a home even though you

weren't an employee at Benham. So, they must have--you

must have had very good credit for them to use to sell to someone on a loan.

WILSON:Yeah, I think that's where it was now. But--I even got my deeds at home.

I should have looked it up. But they wasn't taking it out my check. Me and my

husband both was--it could have been--I could have been an employee. No

because--no, I bought the home--Little Ray then was little. Little Ray was born

in '69. I bought that home in like the early seventies. And I wasn't working at

Benham Coal then.

CURRIS:Was--and your husband was at Lynch.

WILSON:He was at Lynch. But then, at one point, didn't Benham Credit

Union--they used to--people from Lynch and all could go get loans.

CURRIS:Right. At a later time--

WILSON:--yes--

CURRIS:--there was the credit union in Lynch.

WILSON:In Lynch.

CURRIS:Now, the property that you bought was Benham property.

WILSON:It was Benham.

CURRIS:Now, describe where this is.

When you're at the hospital and you're crossing--

WILSON:--you keep on going to where the bridge. As a matter of fact, there's a

place there now that's called the Sadie Long (??) Park. Okay, it's down the

street from there. You're going to pass--as a matter of fact--I don't know if

you remember--they used to call it like the East Scene Mine (??), and it's a

road you go on there. It's still there. The lot is still there. It's my lot. You

know, the house is not there--

CURRIS:--okay.

WILSON:But it's still there. You know, maintain the lot or whatever. But you,

you remember where Rising Star Church sits on the hill?

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:Okay. You don't turn that way. But you just keep straight, and that lot

is still there. That's--

CURRIS:--and that's your lot--

WILSON:--yes.

CURRIS:Okay. Now, where you are today is--where?

WILSON:Maybe--okay, where that lot is empty--you've got a place there called

Sadie Long--

Sadie Long Park.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILSON:And, you know, it's fixed up now. It wasn't at first until I had to kind

of, you know, tell them that they need to do something on this end and, you

know. And they said they thought that this was--they was going to move--the

shelter--move this down to the Lower End. I said, "No, you can't do that." I

said, "Because that was left"--her name was Sadie Long, awesome Christian woman,

Sunday School teacher, whatever. And John Dodd--do you remember John Dodd?

CURRIS:I do.

WILSON:And John Dodd was the mayor, and he's the one that came up with the

suggestion of putting this in honor of Sadie Long, you know. So, that park is

right there--Sadie Long. And where I live now is right--my, my house where--the

property that I got from the Herns is right on the opposite side of there.

CURRIS:Okay. So, were you putting--did you build a home, or did you put a

trailer? What did you do?

WILSON:It's a modular home. It's called--it's a double wide, but it's a big

modular home.

CURRIS:Okay.

So, that modular home--the city council was objecting to you using a modular

home as opposed to building a structure. Is that correct?

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And so, how--how did that turn out? Because obviously it was your

disagreement with the city council over that that triggered you into running for

city council.

WILSON:Right. I'll be honest it did.

CURRIS:Okay. So, what happened there?

WILSON:Oh, after--happened--I had to get an attorney, you know. I'm sitting

there crying, you know, because the place is here. We had to move it back, do

this. They claimed the alley that has always been there. So, when they start

searching the records and everything, they said they wanted to claim that we had

to move it back. And they claim this alley right there where our tree was. But

Mr. Motley, Robert Motley, Mr. Hubert Kyle, Mr. Gaffney, and all them

lived in this vicinity. They called it East Benham. And they put up--did all

these trees and whatever. But since they claimed it, you know--and that's when

the attorney told them--said, "I'll tell you what, you know, it's never been

opened, never been used." So, they decided okay--they claimed it. But they

told--they said, "If you keep on with her, she can own the whole Benham." And I

said to them, "I don't want to own Benham. I just want to have a home for my

family," you know.

CURRIS:And so, it is this disagreement with the city. You run for city council,

and you win.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And then, you served until your husband was so ill you had to quit.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And at that time, you obviously became a very important member of the

city council.

WILSON:Right. And even the mayor--Wanda Humphrey

and them--you know, they became good friends with me. And Mary Creech--they

called her "Murph" or whatever--Mary Creech. But like I said, we became friends.

And as a matter of fact, Mary came to my house one day, and she came in and she

said, "Oh, Ruthie." She said, "I love your home." She said, "As a matter of

fact, my daughter just bought one. And it's not big as yours, but she bought

one," you know.

CURRIS:(laughs) That's kind of amusing, isn't it? You know, you're talking

about the deed--that you still have your deed. As this interview is part of a

project that my family and I started--Bobbie Gothard had called--

WILSON:--I know Bobbie and Earl--

CURRIS:--yes. And she and I had--well, they--she lived on the same street with

my grandmother.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And so, we had known each other many years, and she knew that we wanted

to do something for Benham. And she asked if we would make a matching donation

with Frasier Grant to do the roof at city hall.

And she said, "The thing is, Jo, that was the location of your dad's last office

for the credit union." So, we said, yes we would do that, but we wanted to set

up the Robert B. and Pauline Hern financial center to display pictures about

Benham. I'm doing a whole section on women. And of course, you are obviously

going to be a big part of that. And just our lives.

WILSON:Right.

CURRIS:And your deed--would you consider letting me Xerox that or something to

use it as a display?

WILSON:I sure will.

CURRIS:Because that will be a wonderful transition.

WILSON:I sure will. Well, the names will be on there. Yeah.

CURRIS:That would be fantastic. And part--if you have any other--or any of your

friends have any documents from their credit union days--

WILSON:--I'll check for you--

CURRIS:--that would be wonderful because

what we're trying to do are find documents that simply showed how the--the

operations of the credit union were conducted. And that would be really

fantastic if you would help.

WILSON:If--if--I know some people that would probably be able to find that,

especially like the--Wayne Lester. He can find everything. Or either--I'll check

with some of the families that--really from Benham and know a lot, you know, up at--

CURRIS:--and the thing is they can either give them on loan, give them to the

display, or we can Xerox them--

WILSON:--right, Xerox them--

CURRIS:--any of those things that--

WILSON:--well, since you mentioned that--and I've gone to them many times. But

now, we've got a mayor now that's on top of it. They never had--they have left

us--and I'm going to be honest--neglected on East Benham. They have left us very

neglected; you know. Everything was put

--was like, you know--on the--what's it called? Ours is--on the East--because

we're the West, right? Down there, you know, everything they renovated looks

nice, you know, they did--but they always neglect us. But now things are--and

so, how come nobody never submit for a grant to help do things up there, you

know, on the East end? We--

CURRIS:--I would say you're in a good position now--

WILSON:--we live there too. And, you know, I know you have to go through

procedures like to tear the old lead--houses and stuff. It's horrible, you know.

But they have started like doing some of them. They have, you know.

CURRIS:There has been a group that--that started with Stephanie and Chad Moore (??).

WILSON:I know Stephanie and Chad.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:Friends of Benham.

CURRIS:Friends of Benham. They have really worked hard to start the movement,

you know. For example, the brick wall

and trying to maintain that and I think the theater there in Benham. So, they

have started with what were considered--

WILSON:--with that, uh, the theater in Benham--that was done through--it was

already renovated and done--

CURRIS:--oh, was it?

WILSON:Yes.

CURRIS:That was not part of theirs.

WILSON:That was not part of theirs.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILSON:They started having like maybe little movies or things. But that was not

done by them. But--

CURRIS:--but you know, Stephanie and Chad would be great people to talk to

about how to start--

WILSON:--okay. I have. I have talked to them.

CURRIS:Well, that's good.

WILSON:As a matter of fact, it's called the Noah Ark that's up there in the

Sadie Long Park.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:It was not taken care of at all. So, when I got ahold of Stephanie

and--it's called Friends of Benham. And I talked to--I'm bad on names--Rainbo's

daughter. She works here at the college.

CURRIS:Kristen (??).

WILSON:Crystal.

CURRIS:Kristen.

WILSON:Kristen. And I told them--I said, "How come they won't, you know, paint

or do something up here?" She said, "You know, I never even"--she said, "I thought

that we were going--I was telling Stephanie, we need to just move that shelter

and move it down on lower." I said, "You can't do that." You know, they didn't

even know that it was called the Sadie Long Park, you know. So--

CURRIS:--well, you have been a voice on city council, and you--you would be

listened to--

WILSON:--but I went ahead, and I got--I got with Stephanie. And I told her--I

said, "Stephanie"--she said, "We didn't even know, you know, this."

CURRIS:Yes, because they're not from here.

WILSON:She said, "We didn't know this was important." I said, "No, because they

had to go through Frankfort or somewhere to get this." You know, and so, I said,

"It was rusty, the paint. It was just terrible." So, they got together, and

they--they had, they had, uh--I called some friends and told them they were out

of the grant money so they couldn't do anything. They sent--start sending me

money. And I had them to make the checks out to Friends of Benham or send them

to the city hall. And they said, "Well, we'll go ahead and send it to you." I

said, "No, I want this on record."

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:I said, "I'm the type of person--I

don't want it sent to Ruthie Wilson." (Curris laughs)

WILSON:You know, I want to make sure that it's--

CURRIS:--right--

WILSON:--sent to proper people. And they did come in with a group after

Stephanie and them, they got some ground to start painting and doing things on

it. So, I would check them and tell them funds are coming in, even some of my

lawyer friends. They would send them some money to help purchase the paint, you

know, because the grant money was already--they had these different projects,

you know. But the mayor now told me--he said, "Ruthie, I promise"--because they

told me about doing the roofing. But this was already, you know. And I--I told

him--I said, "Okay, just promise. I know you--I know Rome wasn't built in a day."

CURRIS:Well, and--(laughs)--when Bobbie called me about it, she said, "If we

don't get a new roof, they're going to lose that building."

WILSON:I understand that. I understand that.

CURRIS:Yeah, going to lose that building. And of course, I don't live here

anymore. So, the--

WILSON:--but it's still home--

CURRIS:--I don't know those things. But in my heart, it's home absolutely.

WILSON:Yes, that's right.

CURRIS:Yeah. Ruthie, as we kind of wrap things up,

I would like for you to think a minute about women of your age and--or younger,

my age and your mother's time. And what do you think are the greatest

differences of opportunity for women for your mother's time and for our time and

were there?

WILSON:Our times and stuff--we had more opportunities. You know--and I guess

from my mom's time--I think she died when she was eighty-six. She's been dead a

few years. They was not--you know, but then we--don't get me wrong. We

had--because our teachers were all Black. Our teachers were all Black, you know.

And just like you had said, they either had to be like nurses. Miss Mayham (??)

and them--you know, they were nurses. But this was something that they--some

kids was fortunate enough to go on, or, you know. A lot of the teachers that we

had here, they came from,

different places, you know.

CURRIS:Bringing a whole new different life.

WILSON:Yes, yes. But now, just like--my sister--she's been here, what, maybe

thirty something years here at the college, Andrea Massey. Okay, Carolyn

Sunday--I'm sure you've heard of Carolyn Sunday. She was awesome in what she

did. She did her job sort of like me. I didn't take this job on just to be--I

took the job on to help, to do. You know, Carolyn was a go-getter. Carolyn's--I

think she was one of the ones that probably--that started like the upward bounds

then, you know.

CURRIS:What about in terms of education? Because my--what I have been told is

that the Black school for Lynch, the Black school for Benham--that they had

excellent teachers.

WILSON:Excellent, excellent. We were discussing this not too long ago, and I

was telling them--they

had sports. They had good ball players. But, you know, they did not--if you

didn't get it in books, you didn't, you know, play. If you--if you're in the

first grade and if you didn't get it, they don't pass you on. You had to stay

there or repeat or whatever.

CURRIS:Very strict.

WILSON:I knew a lot of my friends had to be; you know--had to stay back because

they couldn't get it.

CURRIS:For your particular age group compared to today did many of your

classmates go on to college or--or technical school or--or did very many of your

classmates do that?

WILSON:Yes, uh, most of them.

CURRIS:Most of them did? Did you attribute that to the teachers or the principals?

WILSON:I contribute to that--even after we left and went to Cumberland or

whatever, it was instilled in you. Like Miss [Constance] Ellison (??)--she was

Home Ec. teacher. Mr. Carruba--you remember Miss Aileen Johnson too? Okay. Listen--

CURRIS:--at--yes, at Lynch--

WILSON:--I guess at some things--you have to want to do. Now, my sister, she

loves to sew. Just like you said, she could sew. She could, you know--it, it

didn't interest me. But I loved the second part of it. I had Miss Eunice

Carruba--you know, it's cooking part. Miss Ellison--I couldn't get it, couldn't

even hardly cut a pattern out. I wasn't interested. But my sister could just,

you know--I almost flunked at Miss Ellison's class with the sewing. But Miss

Aileen Johnson--I had--all my grades were good except homemaking. (Curris

laughs) So, Miss Aileen Johnson

got skirts and different things and had me to like alter them, do this, you

know. She was my teacher. But I was good. I did my work. Sewing I just didn't,

you know--

CURRIS:--speaking of sewing, let's go back to your mother for just a moment.

Let's talk about her contribution to the family--

WILSON:--okay--

CURRIS:--because--did--did your mother--did you raise gardens in Lynch?

WILSON:Yes, ma'am.

CURRIS:Tell me about that and who did those.

WILSON:My, uh, my grandfather more or less. My--my grandmother--because he was

working. My grandmother had the gardens and all that. And my grandmama--

CURRIS:--what did she raise--

WILSON:--oh, beans, greens, you know--

CURRIS:--tomatoes--

WILSON:--tomatoes, all of that. You know, as a matter of fact, we had--and it

was like a celebration. We had hogs. And they would call it going to the hog pen.

And that was a thrill and a joy for us to go to the hog pen, you know.

CURRIS:Yes, I got to sit on the back of the hog and scrape. (laughs)

WILSON:Yes, and then, when they kill them or whatever, you know, we would go to

the hog pen. Like I said, my grandmother would barbecue and make extra change

and sell. She was the best barbecue and all--everybody loves our sauce. And we

got it from her. It's homemade, you know, scratch, from scratch. But like I say,

they--most of the people--like I say, I was in Lynch. And they love their--like

Miss Irene Ross--she's deceased now and stuff. The yards. Miss Irene loved her

yard and Miss [Annie] Austin and all them, you know. They loved their yards.

They took pride in it.

CURRIS:Flowers.

WILSON:Flowers.

CURRIS:What about canning?

WILSON:My grandmother--she canned. Not as much as some people, but she canned,

you know.

CURRIS:Did she make clothes for you?

WILSON:No.

CURRIS:When it--and

the cooking. Describe--describe her kitchen.

WILSON:Oh, clean, you know, very, very clean. And one thing about it--I guess

we learned on our own or whatever because everybody contributes. I like to cook.

I cook. I told you I made straight A’s in Home Ec. But a lot of things that we

did in Home Ec.--things I just took on my own, and I was not ashamed to ask

people, "How do you do this? How do you do that?" And, you know, I'm a--I would

cook and feed the whole community. Like I tell people now, it's--I got to learn

now how to not cook so much. I can't cook small, you know. But my grandmother

was so--in that kitchen--she wouldn't hardly let us in that kitchen.

CURRIS:What kind of stove did she have?

WILSON:We had the coal stove with the one, two, three, four eyes with--and

the--you know.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:The coal stove.

CURRIS:Did--what kind of food did she--what did she cook? What were your--what

were her favorite things?

WILSON:Like I said, vegetables,

greens. It was a treat like maybe on Sundays and stuff pinto beans and all that,

maybe fatbacks and all that. It was a treat like maybe Sunday or

something--you'll get the pork chops or gravys or, you know--with kids now it's

like lean--clean, lean, you know.

CURRIS:(laughs)

WILSON:But we had to--you know, and then we did--had the--she would make what

you call tea cakes.

CURRIS:Tell me about those.

WILSON:Those--it was a certain--like a cookie, but it was a tea cake, but it

was sweetened. And we could take the cheese that used to have a place--at the

commodity stores.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:And that was the best cheese and, you know--this way--they'll make you

like a dessert, or you know. It was a thrill. Some of the children I went to

school with--they would have raisin cakes or, you know--we couldn't, with all of

us--we couldn't afford all that, you know.

CURRIS:How many children were in the home?

WILSON:Okay. Let's see. It was five of us, the children, plus my uncle,

when he came back from Cleveland--he was deaf. He couldn't hear, you know, deaf

and stuff. So, he moved in. And my grandmother, my grandfather, and my grandmother.

CURRIS:Was this in one house?

WILSON:This in one house. And this is what happened. My mom had the big bed

over here. She and my sis--Edna and Andrea--they slept in that bed. My

grandmother--we had another little bed over here. My sis--me and Cheryl slept in

the bed with her. My brother slept in the bedroom with my grandfather and my

uncle then. But I'm sure they didn't sleep there all the time. But we were

children. We didn't know.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:But, you know--but this is how it was, you know.

CURRIS:Well now, you mentioned your sister Cheryl. Now, did she work under mines?

WILSON:She worked underground in Lynch.

CURRIS:Underground? Yes because I--I want to interview her about her experiences.

WILSON:She worked--

CURRIS:--underground--

WILSON:--she's the one called me to--

CURRIS:--yes--

WILSON:--and her daughter--her a, ability--wants to--she wanted to cook and

wanted to--so she opened up a--she got filed against when she first started her

business, had to move it and all this. She got a lot of static from, you

know--but now, she owns her own little stand up here, you know.

CURRIS:Where?

WILSON:It's called Emma's. Emma's.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILSON:She sells, you know, the barbecue, the fish, the best--oh honey,

barbecue, fish, chicken.

CURRIS:Is this--which town?

WILSON:Cumberland.

CURRIS:She's in Cumberland at Emma's?

WILSON:Emma's Southern Cooking.

CURRIS:Well, we'll have to go there.

WILSON:She's awesome with it. Because one day I asked her--I said, "Emma." I

said, "Oh, honey. I'm sounding like you young people." I said, "This chili is

off the chain," her hot dog chili. She said, "Auntie, you're the one who taught

me how to make that chili." (Both laugh) But her mom taught her how to make all

the barbecue sauce and, you know.

CURRIS:So, she really has the family history

of foods at her fingertips.

WILSON:And she's good. She works at the cafeteria up here, Cumberland

Elementary. But she and her husband, you know--she's awesome. And then

she--she's--her food is good.

CURRIS:And so, if I wanted to go there, what's that address? How would you find it?

WILSON:Let's see. What's the name of that address? You can't miss it. You know

where we used to call it like going around the river, going spring. Okay. Do you

know where Quantum Health Center--you know where the carwash?

CURRIS:I don't now, but I can find it.

WILSON:Carwash, right. You remember where the Ball Brothers, them store is on

the end and all that?

CURRIS:Yes.

WILSON:It's a little road there where--I don't know if you remember David

Kennedy (??) and all them. But you can't miss it. You can't miss it.

CURRIS:Okay. And it's called Emma's Southern Kitchen. Very good.

WILSON:Or Emma's. Oh, honey. The food is--

CURRIS:--I am so glad to know that. Well, I guess

we better wrap up--

WILSON:--oh, yeah.

CURRIS:But this has been so interesting. (laughs)

WILSON:It is and my mouth--I talk--oh, I'm so low here. I'm a talker.

CURRIS:Well, I have just loved it. But you have been so representative of a

time of change for women and Blacks. And your story is important. But what

everyone is going to remember is what I said before. Your dedication, your hard

work, you're smart, and you just get it done.

WILSON:Oh, yes.

CURRIS:Do you have any last minute comments about memories of growing up or

living here now that you would like for people to know? Because this will be our

history for the future.

WILSON:Oh, like growing up, my grandmother, my grandfather, different ones, and

even some of our church friends, you know, they said, if you're sweeping the

street--if you become a sweep--you know, sweeper, said sweep it the best you can

and do the best you can. I always tell my children do it right. Do the best. Do

the best. And even go beyond, you know, that's what required of you. If you see

something that need to be done, do it.

CURRIS:You know, I just remembered something I've forgotten to ask you about.

And that is the churches were so important--

WILSON:--very--

CURRIS:--in Benham and Lynch. Tell me about your church.

WILSON:The church that I grew up and got baptized in, it was a close--and the

women, even the men--

CURRIS:--what was the name of the church--

WILSON:--it was called then Mount Sinai Baptist Church. But we had a pastor

that came--his name was Reverend [M.L.] Gabriel. And he named it Greater Mount

Sinai Baptist Church. But they always thought that--I guess maybe being the

Black church, we always had the biggest memberships.

And the women in the church, they took it at heart. They would train us. You

know, they were teachers even at church, like being in the home. They were

strict. They were strict. They were really strict. And I mean, at--I'm sure at

your church and things when you was growing up, you had to dress a certain way

and dress properly, you know.

CURRIS:Absolutely.

WILSON:And it didn’t--everything didn't happen like--you know, nowadays, it

don't matter. You can't turn a person away. But a lot of things--if you wasn't

living it right or you was doing things and they--they know, you couldn't hold a

position, you know. That's the way it was.

CURRIS:Did they have Sunday School?

WILSON:Oh, yeah. Always, always.

CURRIS:One of the--two things that I can remember from the Benham Church, the

Methodist church was that I loved having the sunrise service at Easter.

WILSON:The sunrise and watch service, New Year's and--you know, the watch

service. That was--we have--we would have watch service.

And what that is--before the new year, you know, you go to church. And they

would bring--ring--you stay there until twelve o'clock. And before twelve,

you're on your knees praying before, you know. You have song, service, worship,

you know, scriptures about maybe five minutes until or whatever. But when you

hear them and they're saying the new year's in, you was at the altar praying.

CURRIS:That is a beautiful way--

WILSON:--yes--

CURRIS:--to end this interview.

WILSON:Thank you.

CURRIS:On your knees praying at the beginning of the new year. Ruth Wilson,

Ruthie Wilson, thank you so very much.

WILSON:Thank you.

CURRIS:And I have been so very pleased that I accidentally was able to track

you down--

WILSON:--thank you--

CURRIS:--because this was going to be a significant part of the history--is

going to come from Benham--

WILSON:--thank you, thank you.

CURRIS:Thank you very much.

WILSON:Anytime I can be of assistance, let me know.

[End of interview.]