KEEVE:Thank you. This is so fancy.

CAGLE:This is so fancy.

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Um, this is Cagle. I’m here with Chris Keeve to do, uh, an interview for

the Kentucky Climate Consortium Oral History Project on climate, activism,

policy making and research in Kentucky, and for the interview, I should have

asked. Chris or Christian or----

KEEVE:--either one--

CAGLE:--okay.

KEEVE:I say Chris in my head--

CAGLE:--okay--

KEEVE:--when speaking casually, I say Christian when it’s--when I need to get serious--(laughs).

CAGLE:The more formal--yeah. I mean, I’m always sensitive to names since I go

by Cagle, which is weird. Yeah. Um, so we are here recording in the Nunn Center

studio, July 12th, 2023. I can’t remember if I already said that, and I’m

excited to get started with either the easiest or the hardest question, which

is: tell us a little bit about yourself.

KEEVE:(Sighs)--I feel like by now I should be able to do this--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--um, I, I guess I will often say I am a chaotic gardener and seed

keeper, and

also a PhD candidate in geography--(laughs)--at the University of Kentucky. Um,

and I am originally from Florida. Um, I’ve bounced around a little bit in my

adulthood, which has been interesting. Um, but I’ve been here in Kentucky for

almost three years now. I got here in August, 2020. I moved down from Wisconsin.

Um, yeah. I do, I do a lot of your typical grad student things. Um, at this

point, it’s a lot of kind of like juggling multiple side gigs and trying to

figure out, like, maybe there’s a main gig--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

KEEVE:--in the future. Um, but also, I do a lot of food and seed and farm work,

uh, both here in Kentucky as well as, uh, kind of organizing with food and seed

folks, um, in the region.

CAGLE:I have so many things I want to ask about just in that answer alone. But

let’s go back to the beginning. So you’re Floridian--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--where in Florida are you from and what was it like growing up there?

KEEVE:Uh, Broward County. So right in--I grew up in Plantation, right outside

Fort Lauderdale. Um, so, like, forty--five minutes north of Miami, depending on

where in Miami you would be from, but--

CAGLE:--right, yeah--

KEEVE:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--but, southeast Florida--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--very subject to climate change--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:I actually did--my dissertation is on the Southeast Florida regional

climate change compact and their policy work--

KEEVE:--that’s amazing--

CAGLE:--yeah. Because I did my PhD in Tampa at USF. Yeah--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--Oh, cool--

CAGLE:--so I was excited to talk Florida. So were you always--I guess, like,

when did you start being a chaotic gardener and having this relationship to the

environment? Because the Florida environment, I think of as, like, a very

particular kind of environment.

KEEVE:Yeah, yeah. The thing--so I guess a few things. It’s like, one--I

think--the thing about Florida especially is that, like, you, you’re very

uh--what’s the word? If you grew up in Florida you’re sort of like, um--you

interface with,

uh like, kind of, like, the not, the, the, the, the not cute aspects of this

thing we call the environment or nature, right?--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--yeah--

KEEVE:--as a normal part of your life. Like there are dinosaurs walking around

and like, uh, hurricanes, and as--something I’ve been thinking about in the past

several years, uh, having now lived outside of Florida for my adult life, is

just the weird--just the fact that like, uh, there’s like a, a, a major kind of

like early established national park that takes up a lot of the state, but you

can’t, like, walk into it--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

KEEVE:--which is because--I say that because, like, the first time I had gone

to, like, some of the national parks out west 00:03:43, like Yellowstone or

whatever, and I was like, “Oh, people are, like, driving through here,” and,

like, it’s like kind of a theme park. And, it’s like you can walk

around--not--you can’t walk around. But, you can, like, stop and, like, look at

stuff. You know, but then if you grew up in Florida you’re sort of like--your

image of nature is often like the Everglades, which is very much a space in

which you need

a certain level of know-how to even enter, uh, right? But--so, and I think

that--and as I say that, I think that’s where maybe a lot of the chaos comes

from. But I also think about maybe a few forms of maybe irony in my upbringing,

in that my parents were, and still are, very--they’re on, like, the more careful

landscaping side of, like, people’s environmental relations. Like, they are like

very, very sort of particular about their, like, suburban yard, um, which was

like a year-round project because of South Florida’s sun 00:04:43, right? Um,

so, like, um, mowing the lawn and, like, mulching and, like, um, kind of like

making sure everything is very controlled. Um, whereas my memories of, like, my

grandmother’s backyard was much more chaotic, in which they were growing vegetables--

CAGLE:--(clears throat)--

KEEVE:--

um, they had a bunch of, like, fruit trees in the backyard that I sort of grew

up harvesting from, right? But also kind of, like, it was kind of a thing

where--later on you kind of, like, would think of it as like some sort of, like,

food forest, but it was just like my grandma’s backyard. That was very much just

a smattering of different plants that, like, were edible and usable in different

ways. Um, and then, like, as a kid I kind of--I had like a square in the yard,

um, at my parents’ house in which they kind of let me do whatever they want.

And, I would like--I would try to grow an orange tree and then I would forget it

was there--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--and, I would just--I would throw seeds in the ground, and like, kind of

keep up with it for a little bit, and then get distracted. But then, like, maybe

in later seasons they would, like, pop back up. Um, which was, like, always

fascinating to me. Um, but

yeah, so it was kind of like--I think, I, I think I came up in a space in which

there’s a lot of maybe anxiety over, like, carefully controlled, like, garden

type nature--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--um, and, I think that is like maybe one of the central, like, tensions

in the work that I do now. Um, but especially because I’m kind of a very wannabe

part-time farmer, um, and I don’t have, like, a ton of resources, but I do have,

like, multiple sites across two counties--(laughs)--and all of them are deeply messy--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--but, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. One of my friends in grad school who was from Florida always

described it as, “the state that nature’s always trying to take back.” Like--

KEEVE:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--you know, we’re visitors here and that’s very clear, right? Yeah. So,

that’s so interesting to hear you talk about that. So then, um, you left Florida

for college, correct?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:So, how was that transition, both from a kind of educational, personal standpoint,

but also, yeah, that experience of, like, no, alligators?--(laughs).

KEEVE:Right. Yeah. Um, so I went to--I went to just right outside Chicago. Um,

and it was--so I guess like, one, like there’s, like, a really radical shift in,

like, your experience of climate and of the weather, and it was, like--there’s

kind of, like, the element of, like, you finally get to experience sort of,

like, temperate seasons. Um, quote, unquote seasons. Um, whereas [?? WORDS

UNCLEAR] it’s like South Florida, it’s like wet season and dry season and, you

know, um, it’s pretty warm year--round reliably, um--

CAGLE:--October’s really nice.

KEEVE:Yeah--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--um, but then, like, being out there, it was like, “Oh, like, there’s

like an actual--” Like, it was sort of like you kind of, like--if you ever like

grow up on TV seeing a sort of, like, temperate image of, like, what is

‘normal’, um, and then you’re like, “Oh, okay. This is what--this is, like, what

the situation is.” But also like it’s just deeply

cold--(laughs)--in the winter. Um, and it was like--also something that kind of

I have thought about a lot in the context of climate change is, like, the kind

of how people, how people establish what they think is ‘normal’. Um, because

there’s kind of a thinking through--and this is going to be a little bit of a

tangent, but just thinking through--I guess, I guess I--In my work now, I get

very inspired by work that, like, kind of takes up sort of concepts like

socio--ecological knowledges, and like, memory work when it comes to

environmental work. Um, and kind of thinking through, like, what it’s like to

speak with, like, elders who have been, like, working and living on certain

landscapes for decades who can then articulate, like, the changes that have

happened, um, both ecologically and socially. Um, but then I think--so thinking

about that shift to college, right? And also kind of, like, the wider

shifts around the country, um, it’s sort of--I think a lot about the fact that,

like, I--my impression of what was normal was already not normal--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--

KEEVE:--um, and Florida is very much a space of, like, environmental weirdness

that is becoming even weirder with climate change. Um, but it’s becoming even

more precarious. Like there was--even though it was already deeply precarious,

um, so yeah. So, I forgot where I was going with this--(both laugh)--but, I was

just thinking about, like, how--kind of, like, the lack of an idea of normalcy,

um, and then maybe--and how in certain ways maybe throughout my adulthood of,

like, kind of I struggled going back and forth with trying to, like, settle on,

like, an idea of what is climatically normal, um, in order to better understand

what has been happening--

CAGLE:--right--

KEEVE:--in the places where I’m at, right?

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:So like, um, so like I being--having

been in Kentucky for the past few years, like I really rely on people who have,

like, spent their lives here, just to clarify when things are not normal, right?

Um, when, like, a bad tornado hits outside of the season in which you would

expect bad tornadoes to hit. Um, or when, like, a bad flood hits on a more

regular basis than you would expect to have major floods.

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:Yeah, but also just, like--also just like doing land work now, and having

been lucky enough to have had, like, kind of older farm folks in the area just,

like, let me use small plots of their land, and kind of just to hear them

talking about the history of it, but also how it’s changed. Um, and also, like a

lot of, like, older farm folks will, like, make these very profound generational

statements when they’re just, like, talking about, like the drought this summer.

--(laughs)--um, and just--as a way of just kind of like thinking about, um, or

as a way of, like--I’m thinking of, like, how people will give you really,

really important, sort of, like, contextual stories and environmental histories,

um, through these very, like, almost like asides about, like, the weird rains

last month or the drought in the summer, all, you know, stuff like that. Um, but

I forgot the question.

CAGLE:About the transition--

KEEVE:--yes--

CAGLE:--just to--yeah. No, I mean, the tangent is wonderful, and it’s got me

thinking about the whole notion of shifting baselines, right?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:That each generation gets further away from a prior baseline, and the way

that embodied knowledge is so often excluded from our understanding of climate

as a scientific or natural environmental phenomenon. And, yeah, I’m thinking all

kinds of

different things now.

KEEVE:Yeah, yeah. So, that transition--that first transition, right? Going

from, like, South Florida to, what, Evanston was, like, um, so you have this

moment of--I had this moment of which I was like, Okay, like I’m seeing what

quote unquote seasons are, but also it’s sort of like a lot of, like, weird

emotional reactions to the winter. Like every, every year of college there would

be a point in which--both just through the stress of being in college, but also

just, like, because I had never had to deal--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--with an actual winter before, in which I would genuinely emotionally

break down. Um, and I thought, like, I was the problem. But thinking back, I’m

like, “Oh, no, actually, like, that was a perfectly reasonable reaction to

someone who is, like, thrown into that environment,” right? Or even someone who

grew up in that environment, right? Because, like, none of us should be working

in the winter in the first place--(laughs).

CAGLE:Right. Yes--

KEEVE:--um--

CAGLE:--it’s the time for sleep and eating.

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:So

there’s that kind of, like, really strange adjustment of kind of having to

figure out how to, like, dress yourself right every day, or had--getting used to

keeping track of the weather, um, in very, like, granular ways. But also just a

lot of, like, um, just, like, weird social and cultural things, right? Of just,

like, going to, like, uh, sort of a private elite PWI[1]

and having come out of, like, a public school in South Florida which is, like,

still a very deeply kind of like segregated set of school systems in terms of

race and class. Um, it was kind of like having these realizations that, like,

everyone else was, like, much better prepared to be in that space than I

was--(laughs)--and having to find ways to still adjust and to kind of, like,

keep your head above water. Um, which was a lot of people’s experience, right?

Um, when you get into that space when you weren’t supposed to be in that space.

Um, but those I think were, like, maybe the two major things

that stick with me. Or, like, that sort of--that particular sort of climate

weirdness and that particular sort of like social and cultural weirdness of,

like, kind of--that intersect in which you’re like, what is going on?--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm, yeah--

KEEVE:--like, what am I doing here?--(laughs).

CAGLE:Yes. Yeah. Like the environment metaphorically and literally are both

like, wait, what?--(both laugh)--So what ways did you find to navigate and,

like, create--and I mean, maybe part of the answer is, like, that it wasn’t

possible or whatnot, but to, like, make space and create comfort and find, I

hope, community? I don’t know.

KEEVE:Um, I think I was, I think I was a weird kind of, like, turtle creature

when I was in college. I think. I mean, I had community here and there. I was

kind of a loner. I kind of bounced around. I had a lot of loose strings and a

few really tight strings that I still keep today, which I’m grateful for. Um, but

it was--actually, now that you bring up comfort, I was like--I remember being

very, very intentional, in the winters especially, and just like kind of giving

up on the need to be, like, legible to other people and just kind of, like,

being like a weird, like, solo creature--(both laugh)--who’s like, um, I’m going

to, like, build a space that just works for me. That, like, allows me to, like,

survive and make it through and find some sort of, like, joy and experience. Um,

I think--like I do remember there was a point in college, maybe in my third

year, in which that switch kind of happened. Um, and I was like, okay, I can

just build my own little world, um, and, like, figure out what makes sense for

me. Um, which oftentimes did involve being, like, literally just, like, just cozy--

CAGLE:--yeah--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--in my room--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--I’m picturing like blankets and tea.

KEEVE:Yeah--(laughs).

CAGLE:Yeah. So through this time, so you were an environmental science major, correct?

KEEVE:Yeah. Environmental Science and African--American studies.

Yeah.

CAGLE:So it’s here at UK it’s AAAS--so it would’ve been AAS

KEEVE:Mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--yeah, so--

KEEVE:--yeah. I guess actually at Northwestern now it’s Black Studies.

CAGLE:Oh, cool.

KEEVE:I think they renamed it.

CAGLE:Oh, cool.

KEEVE:I think.

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Um, so that double major, did you have--did you go in with those majors?

Did that come to you along the way through this, like, process?

KEEVE:Um, I think I went in--I think I wanted to be a botanist--

CAGLE:--oh--

KEEVE:--I think I wanted to major in, like, plant biology, um, which was not

really an option in the way that I wanted to do it, if that makes sense. Like,

it was kind of like a--it was kind of a thing where it’s like you would major in

biology and, like, kind of do a concentration in, like, plant stuff, um, but,

like, kind of the biology track was, like, very, very pre--med focused. It’s

like there’s a lot of money in, like, biomedicine stuff and I was like, that

whole situation was, like, entirely not for me--(laughs)--um, in the first year

or two of college. It was kind of a mess. Um, but--so a few things were

happening in that

way. So I was like, well you know, I was also considering environmental science

because I had been--in high school, I had been part of, like, this environmental

science magnet program that I really enjoyed, um, and I had gotten the chance to

do a project in my senior year about, like--oh, I think it was about, like, drip

irrigation and, like, compost or something in the garden. Um, and I really

enjoyed that, which was, like, not something I got the chance to do in

college--(laughs)--which is fine. Um, but I was kind of--that was kind of in my

head. Um, and it was just like a thing I enjoyed and I was really just, like, I

kind of just want--I think it was--so, I think the story kind of begins when I

was like--I kind of just--like, I just wanted to work with, like, plants and

plant related things and, like, dirt, um, in whatever way that made sense. Then

I ended up--um, I think I got involved in, like, a student group that would go

out to, like, the, the small prairie remnants around Chicago and, like, do

restoration work. Like volunteer restoration work--

CAGLE:--that’s so cool--

KEEVE:--which was a lot of fun. Um, so there’s

that, and then also--um, I’m trying to figure out how to tell. Actually--okay.

I’m going to continue with that story and then circle back to AF--AM studies. So

there’s that, um, and I was like--I think--I was bouncing around a few--I’m

thinking back like a decade now. I was bouncing around a few things in my head

around kind of like what I wanted to do. And I was, um, in a position to,

like--so I was kind of like had fallen into environmental sciences--uh, or not

fallen in, but I had, like, kind of like entered into environmental sciences

because it was a much more interdisciplinary, uh, program, um, I think. At least

back then that major was housed by earth sciences and the earth science folks

were really cool--(both laugh)--um, and it just--I just found it much more

enjoyable. Um, and so

I was kind of like doing environmental science and I think at one point they had

this program, because I had been in, like, a freshman seminar with this

professor who is, like--um, I don’t think he’s there anymore, but he’s like a

Lichenologist, um--

CAGLE:--they’re very cool people--(both laugh)--

KEEVE:--um, and he had kind of turned me on to the Plant Bio and Conservation

program, which is--it’s a grad program. But they had, like, a combined BSMS or

BAMS, in which you would do, like, an extra year and get, like, a master’s in

plant conservation. Um, and I was, like, in a position to, like, maybe finish

that undergrad major early and I was like, oh, what if I just, like, scooped up

that advanced degree in the last year? Which did not happen mainly because I was

kind of--my third year in college I was lucky enough to, like, be in these,

like, upper level, like, plant and soil ecology courses that were also

cross--listed as, like

the lower--level graduate courses for their master’s and PhD programs. Like

their intro courses. Um, which is great because I got to, like, meet these

people who were doing this work at a very advanced level. Um, and I also came to

the realization that I didn’t really want to do that work in a research

capacity, um, which was really, really useful to realize. Um, and--or least not

in that way, right?

CAGLE:Mm--hmm.

KEEVE:Um, and so at the same time--uh, not at the same time, so, like, running

parallel to this was the fact that, like, I had, like, taken--I took like a

freshman seminar on, like, the social meaning of race with John Marquez, um, and

it was a, a, a wild time--(laughs)--in that class--(both laugh)--you know, it’s

like a bunch of, you know, like eighteen-year-olds who, like, just got to this

very, like,

fancy private institution who were in--we have this professor who was, like,

very much no bullshit, who was just like throwing a lot at you about how the

world actually works. Um, and I just, like, fell into it. Um, and, like,

the--and I think also I just, like, was lucky enough to just, like, have, um,

people who are in AF--AM studies and in related departments who are just like

really vibrant scholars who would--right, folks like, um, like Michelle Wright

who’s no longer there, but also like Alex Weheliye who, like, not only were,

like--who were not only like, um, this could be as an interest of yours, like,

as a major, but also, like, they built spaces for me to ask more questions and,

like, pursue those. And I came to these realizations

that, like, I really, really enjoyed those processes of doing research and,

like, cultural studies, um and, like, asking these really creative and critical

questions and pursuing them in really creative and critical ways. And I found

that deeply, deeply fulfilling. So around the time--(laughs)--in which I’m

realizing they really don’t want that--to pursue that, you know, advanced degree

in ecology, I’m also, like, having experiences in Black studies and in cultural

studies which I’m like, “Oh, I’m really, really enjoying the kind of research

side of this.” Um, and I was very much that undergrad who, um, was like--who

was, you know, the kind of student where they kind of like are asking certain

questions and they’re like, you should pursue that--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yes, yes--

KEEVE:--keep going with that. I was that student. Um, and I was considering

grad school and--in some capacity. Um, yeah. So that’s kind of how--and I think

really it was just like, those

were just, like, kind of the two majors that ended up at the end of the day, right?

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:That I had the credits for. But also I think at the time I was really

excited to be doing both of those sort of, like, tracks. Because, because like,

I think--this is the reality at a lot of institutions, that, like, kind of

academics were so siloed, and, like, kind of working in both spaces was, like,

really surreal sometimes. But also, like, there were commonalities that I was seeing.

CAGLE:Were you already seeing, too, the connections, like, sort of topically and--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm, yeah--

CAGLE:--theoretically across--

KEEVE:--like, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah, in the kinds of questions that you were asking? Because I know

you’ve talked--I’ve, like, listened to some interviews that you’ve done and

stuff in preparation for this, so I know you’ve talked about, like these things

are connected, right?--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--like you can’t separate out the conversation about seed keeping in the

US from the history of slavery in the US for example, right?--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--which is--yeah. So you were seeing that already at that point?

KEEVE:Yeah. Like they were both--I think back then I was like--they were both

about crisis. That was it. That was the word in my head. I was like, they’re

both fundamentally about, like, interlocking crises--(laughs)--um, in which,

like, they were both, like, disciplines in which people were not, like, kind of

fooling themselves. I mean, some people were fooling themselves into kind of,

like, being removed and kind of, like, being, “Oh, we’re just like studying the

world and, like, we’re, like, learning more things.” Which it is, but also

people in those disciplines are like, shit is falling apart. What do we do? And

how does my work impact the things that need to be done? Um, like how does my

work have actual political impacts and how--and who is it supporting and what is

it supporting? And like, what are the--um, and especially in, like, kind of,

like, ethnic studies and cultural studies, you know, like what are the knowledge

formations that I’m working with and, like, how does my sort of position as an

academic and, like, a colonial institution, you know, help or hurt, um, the

knowledge work that I’m doing?

So those were kind of, like, the major sort of crossovers that I was seeing. Was

that people were, like--it was more like--and also I think, like, both those

disciplines, like the history of the disciplines themselves very much come out

of crisis and come out of, like, progressive movements, right? That were making

these interventions into the academy and saying that, we need more work on X, Y,

and Z because, like, we need to address these very real issues in the world. Um, yeah--(laughs).

CAGLE:Yeah. No, that makes sense. I think--I did--my undergraduate degree is in

English and I think the prevailing sense among--also at a PWI but a

slack--Rhodes College in Memphis. And I think the prevailing sense was like,

this is a fun thing to do in--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--like, a--like this is an interesting intellectual exercise, right? Like

that sense of urgency that absolutely exists in the literary field but is not,

like, the mainstream of the literary field, or at least certainly wasn’t at the

time. Yeah. That’s a really different experience from most everyone’s here

because this matters--

KEEVE:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--in, like--(laughs)--a really deep--not just in a personal way, but in,

like, a political global way. So then, but there were a couple years before you

did decide to go to grad school, right?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:So talk us through that period.

KEEVE:Let me think. I was unemployed and at my parents’ house for most of 2015,

and that was a rough time. And I was like--I think I applied to, like, I don’t

know, a hundred and fifty jobs. I was just like shooting off stuff--(snaps

fingers)--and I had no idea what I was doing and I had no idea how to figure out

what I wanted to be doing--(laughs)--um, which, like, is fine at this point. Not

fine, but--(laughs).

CAGLE:At the time I bet it didn’t feel great though.

KEEVE:Yeah. At the time it was not great, but now it’s like, it worked out. But

I guess because of that I ended up

maybe doing something that I hadn’t really expected to be doing, and I ended

up--I did an AmeriCorps VISTA year in Montana in 2016 and it was like about--it

was working with the park’s Department of Billings and it was about this, like,

community gardening and urban ag project. Um, that was--and it was VISTA so,

like, the kind of like the sort of, like, text of it was about, like, you’re

making this project sustainable with and for the community. Um, and--but the

actual work of it was, like, just me directly managing--(laughs)--community

gardening in a park. Which was, like, this really fascinating scenario of, like,

um, managing both, like, the things that were growing in that space and making

sure everything was, like, doing well, and, like, doing that kind of

like--that--just, like, that kind of like that

baseline food and ag work in that space as well as like managing a couple dozen

people who had very different politics--(laughs)--and very different

perspectives. And their own weird histories with each other and just kind of,

like, figuring out how to, like, manage both of those and balance both of those

in a way that worked. But also--and also trying to figure out how to, like, pass

this off into the community’s hands in a real and tangible way, um--

CAGLE:--It’s tough--

KEEVE:--and that was, yeah, a lot. This was a very heavy experience. Like in

retrospect, I put, like, way too much into it that I ever should have, but that

was a lot. And then I ended up--but because of that, I think I got tuned into,

um, other kind of, like, food and ag stuff happening out there. Especially seed

stuff. So this is kind of like when I started getting really into seeds, because

I was--I started following--I don’t know if you’ve heard of

Owen Taylor of Truelove Seeds?

CAGLE:Mm.

KEEVE:I started following this guy Owen Taylor on social media, he’s a seed

keeper in Philadelphia. He does a lot of seed work. Um, and he would go on to

found the small seed company, Truelove Seeds, who we do a lot of work with, um,

both as an academic as well as like as a seed person.

CAGLE:I’ve heard of Truelove. I didn’t know his name--

KEEVE:--oh, yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--yeah, yeah. Um, so I was following Owen on social media and I got

really into, like, this work with seeds because he was like--because it’s all

about, like, how to do seed work, but also, like, what it means culturally and

politically, um, and personally, and I was just fascinated by this. And I

happened to move to Philadelphia for a different AmeriCorps gig about STEM

education, that I then left to go be a high school teacher for a

year--(laughs)--I taught horticulture for a year. Um, and in this time I was

like, I

was just--I think I had, like, slid into Owen’s DMs in, like, April of 2017--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--and I was like, “Hey. Like I appreciate your work. I just moved to the

area. Um, if you ever need a volunteer, let me know.” And he was like, “I always

need volunteers.”--(laughs)--and yeah, and I just I guess, like, fell into it.

And then--yeah, and then because I was a hort teacher and I was--like, I did

some, like, work as a, like, garden educator in the suburbs for summer camp, and

then I ended up in grad school. So I’d applied to grad school as a high school

teacher and kind of ended up in Wisconsin geography on accident--(laughs)--and then--

CAGLE:Yeah. I was wondering how geography entered the picture because it’s,

like, rhetoric, which is my field. It’s often a field that people haven’t really

heard of unless you happen to be at an institution that had a strong presence

for undergrad.

KEEVE:Yeah. I was not--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--and I had

no idea what it was and I just--like, because my life in fall of 2017 was kind

of a mess and I had a lot of, like, just, like, personal stuff going on, and I

kind of just, like, fudged the--my entire grad school application process. Like,

I think I was considering, like, I don’t know, ten different programs and, like,

English and ecology and cultural studies and STS. Just across the board stuff.

Um, and I didn’t apply to any of them--(laughs)--and then, like, I had a few

that I was also considering, and I kind of just--at the last minute I just I was

like, you know what? Let’s just do this. And one of them was geography at

Wisconsin, um, and I did--I had no intention--I did not think I was--I would get

in. I was just kind of, like, saying--I was just, like, talk--I was talking

about, like,

what I thought geography was--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--in my, like, whatever personal statement or whatever. Um, and I was

like, “Oh yeah, like nature and society and, like, interdisciplinary, yada,

yada, X, Y, and Z.” Um, and then, like, a few weeks later the person who would

become my master’s advisor, Keith Woodward, emails me and he is like, “Hey. Do

you want to talk about this program?”--(both laugh)--and I remember we had a

phone call and at one point he was like, “So, you are not a geographer.”--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--and I was like, “Yeah, I have no idea what it is.”--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:And he was like, “Oh, it’s this, that, and the third.” And I was like,

“Okay. This still makes no sense to me but, like, it sounds fun.”--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--um, and, yeah, I just--yeah, I was like, let’s see what happens--(laughs).

CAGLE:I mean, clearly it worked out--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--so, yeah. Backtracking one question. So, in the lead up to the work in

Billings with the community garden and then teaching hort in Philadelphia, had

you--so the--just the practical hands--on skills. So, like, okay. A little

context for the question I’m trying to ask. I got into home gardening not

terribly long ago, like five years ago, maybe. I had never even really had house

plants as an adult, but my dad had a garden--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--when I was a kid. And we would, like, kind of help out, but it wasn’t a

situation where we were, like, really involved, me and my sister. And so, you

know, there’s a long learning process. I have learned--(laughs)--a humbling

learning process as a home gardener, right? Of just knowing the basics of, like,

you know, germination times and ag zones and all those sorts of things. And one

of the things I like about gardening is that you--unless you want to go, like,

full high tech, you don’t set the timeline, right?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Like, you are--you have to collaborate with the weather and the

temperature and the soil and the whatever, right? Like, it’s not up to you. So,

how had you

collected, like up until that point, the hands--on and the embodied knowledge

that you then were able to put to use in, like, the community garden in Billings?

KEEVE:I think I got it as it was happening. Um, like, I was learning a lot--I

mean, there were certain things--I think the program, like, they, like, paid for

me to do, um, like, master gardener training--

CAGLE:--oh, cool. Okay. Yeah, yeah--

KEEVE:--yeah. Stuff like that. But also I--like, mainly I got it just, like,

because the gardeners in that space were like, “You need to do this, that and

the third,” and this happened. Which also because, you know, I had just gotten

to Montana--

CAGLE:Right, you don’t--yeah.

KEEVE:--and these people had, yeah, been there their entire lives and they were

like, “This is how the climate works here. This is when you plant so and so.

This is what you do here.” Um, but also, like, they’re kind of all doing it in

their own little ways, so yeah.

CAGLE:Oh, yeah. People--this is one thing that I’ve learned as a gardener. Is

that, like, I think I thought early on that there was

a right way--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and so then you, like, look up how to do whatever--like how to grow

sunflowers or whatever. And then you see, like, conflicting advice and it’s

like, “But which ones right?” “Well, that’s not really,” yeah--(both

laugh)--yeah. Okay. That’s interesting, um, and that’s really interesting about

them paying for the master gardener certification or training.

KEEVE:Yeah, yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Okay. So then jumping forward, so you’re like, “Okay. Like, let’s

go to Wisconsin.”

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:That’s wild--

KEEVE:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--back to the winter. I mean, not that--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah. Philadelphia’s not as bad, I guess.

KEEVE:Not like with--not Wisconsin.

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:Um, so, yeah. And I was going to--I got there and I was like--I think I

was really excited. I think, like, when I first got there I was so excited being

in geography because I think that Wisconsin Geography department is like what?

Quote unquote comprehensive. Um, so it kind of covers a lot of the bases

between, like, human geography

and physical geography, like people, environment, like CartGIS stuff. Um, which

is very convenient now because I’m actually--I’m teaching an intro class on

physical geography right now--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--nice--

KEEVE:--for geography here at UK. Um, and--yeah, and that’s all coming in

handy. Um, all that environmental science in undergrad. But, um--so I was really

excited and sort of, like--and I guess, like, what you might now call, like--or

not what you might now call, like what I learned was called stuff like--what?

Like hybrid methods or whatever, or, like--

CAGLE:--mixed methods--

KEEVE:--mixed methods. Um, and really, actually, I kind of, like, was really

excited about, like, what I would come to learn is political ecology, um, which

is a term that I was, like, introduced to, um, when I got there. But, yeah. And

I was like, so I think basically

because like my--because my advisor at Wisconsin is--he’s like a human

geographer, like, social theorist, really, like, kind of like radical geographer

type scholar. And I was like, yeah, you know, I’m just kind of like thinking

about plants. And I was kind of like also, um--because I think I had--when I

applied there, I had really been leaning on, like, my materials from, like, my

undergrad thesis, which is about like Afrofuturism and posthumanism and, like,

Black feminist thought and, like, pop culture. And that was still in my head

but, like, what was actually in my head was just like seeds. And because that’s

kind of like what I had left behind in Philadelphia and that’s kind of like

something I had been building out there that I then kind of, like, dropped to

move to Wisconsin. Um, but really it was like, so I had--so when I was working

in that garden,

that educational garden at the summer camp outside of Philly, it was I was

working with someone who’s now a really good friend of mine, um, who was--I

guess they technically were in charge of the garden. They worked there at that

place full--time, and I was, like, their assistant. Um, but we were growing

just, like, dozens of varieties of, like, heirloom open--pollinated things that

all had these interesting kind of, like, histories and politics behind them. And

we were like, “How do we kind of, like, teach these kids about, like, how to do

the work of gardening and farming and, like, plant care, but also recognize

that, like, these varieties have really significant stories?” Um, and one

of--and also, like, they had been trained in seed and farm work by the

partner--(laughs)--of Owen Taylor, who had been training me

in seed and farm work. But there’s one--there’s just one variety that was--that

we both--that I just adored. The Paul Robeson tomato. Um, and to give the spiel.

So Paul Robeson, right, was an actor and singer and Leftist, um, activist

in--what? Early, mid--20th century America, um, who’s also sort of a deeply

internationalist activist, organizer. And who was kind of, like, I would say

somewhat maybe expunged from US pop--culture for being a Black Leftist and being

open about it. Um, but, uh, these--and I’m not telling the story well, but these

Soviet plant breeders had been

breeding a line of black tomatoes that were kind of, like, being bred to do

well--to do better in, like, cooler climates, right? Because, like, the majority

of tomatoes are growing in, like, Florida, right?

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--um, and they named one after Paul Robeson as an homage. And those seeds

ended up in the US, I think, in the early Nineties, um, and they’re kind of a

cult classic tomato variety. But also it’s something that a lot of--it’s a

tomato variety that a lot of, like, radical seed folks really are attached to.

Um, because it’s a great tomato, but also because of Paul Robeson. Um, but also

because Paul had spent his final years in Philadelphia. There’s still the

Robeson House in West Philly. Um, and I think his legacy still resonates through

that urban space, um, and I think his seeds still resonate through that urban

space. Um, but we had been growing that tomato and so when I got to Wisconsin, I

just had that tomato

in my head. And I was like, and I was like it’s so strange that, like, there’s

still so much that, like, isn’t quite known about like how this tomato variety

came into being and how it became attached to Paul Robeson, um, but it has,

like, such a strong kind of, like, cultural force, um, among these seed

networks. Um, and my advisor was like, “Yeah, just see where that leads.” And I

ended up--

CAGLE:--that’s amazing--

KEEVE:--yeah. And I ended up not investigating the Paul Robeson

tomato--(laughs)--but I did end up just like snowballing into seed stuff and

kind of like a very sort of--like, I guess in, like, an academic way. Um, and

it’s still snowballing. Um, but, yeah. Or I guess I got really captivated by

just like the way people relate to seeds, um, and the way that seeds are both,

like, set into motion, um,

like geographically and ecologically and politically, but also how they, like,

set people into motion politically and geographically and how people will go

travel with the risks. People and seeds and stories that are attached to those

seeds are sort of, like, always in motion. Sometimes together, sometimes

separately. And how do you--and, you know, how do you even, like, ask questions

to investigate how that happens? Um, so, yeah. So that’s still going--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--that’s so cool. It’s like--(clears throat)--I don’t know why it never

occurred to me before, but yeah, if we have food waves, we have seed waves.

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Like, yeah. Um, what is the tomato like? So it’s black you said? But--

KEEVE:--yeah. It’s like--

CAGLE:--what size? What’s the flavor? What’s the texture?

KEEVE:It’s--the Robeson, so it’s not like black--black. So it’s like--

CAGLE:--right, I’m imagining like the chocolate cherry that’s sort of, like,

really dark.

KEEVE:Yeah. So it’s still mainly red--

CAGLE:--okay--

KEEVE:--it’s like a dark red and it’s a mix of, like, some dark greens and browns.

Um, and it’s very mild, uh, and, like, you’ll end up with--or mine, what you’ll

end up with, like, some--usually it’ll have green shoulders, um, when it’s ripe,

and it kind of has like a kind of a greenish, brownish, reddish transition

happening--(laughs)--on the top of it. Um, yeah. And yeah, it’s just--

CAGLE:--how big are they?

KEEVE:Um, yay big.

CAGLE:Uh-huh, for audio reference, that’s like a baseball?

KEEVE:Yeah. Maybe a little bigger than a baseball.

CAGLE:Yeah, that’s big.

KEEVE:Yeah. But some are--like, because it kind of depends. Because I know,

like, um, seed folks have a lot of politics and debates around, like, the

consistency of tomato shapes and sizes--(laughs)--um--

CAGLE:--mm-hmm--(laughs)--I believe it--

KEEVE:--because some

people will grow Robeson’s that are--like, that double or that are kind of like

lumpier. Um, whereas, like, because I grew with them for Truelove last year and

I think I am technically growing them for Truelove this year. But I grew with

them for Truelove last year, um, and they were--they did not want the doubles,

they wanted, like, kind of the--just the more consistent round ones--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--that are also consistent in, like, size. Um, but, yeah. But usually--or

mine, the ones that I grow will usually be, like, a handful size. Yeah, you

could palm one.

CAGLE:A good solid--yeah.

KEEVE:Yeah. It’s a slicer. Yeah.

CAGLE:That’s--now I want to track some down. I will hit up Truelove, I guess--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--after this--(laughs)--So, yeah. So what had you been doing with Owen in

Philadelphia in that period before you--

KEEVE:--um, Owen, will do this thing in which

he just immediately puts you to work just like weeding and, like, you know,

laying down drip irrigation and, like, pounding in stakes. Um, and the entire

time he’s asking you about, like, your family food histories. Um, and Owen--like

Owen also has a podcast called Seeds and their Keepers. Um, and he is actually

just, like, a fantastic, like, oral historian--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--that’s very cool--

KEEVE:--um, because the entire time you’re like out there working and he is

just like talking to you about, like, your sort of cultural and family history

with food and what seeds have traveled with you and what you grew up eating and,

like, what that means for you. Um, and just like what--your dreams are,

right?--(both laugh)--but yeah, so that was--yeah. And then also because I--so

during my master’s I--the

bulk of the field work I did was with Truelove Seeds in summer of 2019. So I was

like--so I had been building this, like, tomato idea in my head, or this seed

idea in my head, and, you know, I think it was, like, winter of 2019 at

Wisconsin and I needed to put a master’s project together. And I texted Owen and

I was like, “Can I just come back to Philly for a summer and work on the farm?”

And he was like, “Yeah.” And then I built it around that--(laughs)--so yeah, so

I was just like out at the farm and more of like a--you know, like maybe three

or four times a week situation, that summer. Just like working out there all

day. Yeah. And it’s--and also because it’s like, it’s--they’re like--so

Truelove, they always have, like, apprentices. Um, so it’s like a handful of us

who are out there who are all, like, weird seed people

who are just like chatting back and forth and hanging out and weeding uh and,

you know, stealing blueberries--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--amazing. Oh, blueberry season is just wrapping up. It’s--

KEEVE:--mm-hm--

CAGLE:--(sighs)--uh, you said something like seed people or, like, seed

weirdos, like that kind of thing--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--so, like, so people will self--identify as seed people? Like you have

like a--you’re like, oh, you too?--(laughs).

KEEVE:I think, I think people would usually self--identify as, like, seed

keepers or seed savers. I have been--I think in recent years I’ve been, like,

maybe leaning more towards a more, like, nebulous, like, seed people or seed

folk. Or often--actually oftentimes seed workers. Uh, because there is, like,

some growing energy around seed communities around, like,

really articulating your work as a worker, um, as a land worker and as a seed

worker and what that means. Um, and how do--like, how seed workers who--and this

is me just, like, thinking about conversations I’ve had with colleagues who do a

lot of seed work and are very passionate about seed work, but don’t, like, own

land and don’t run companies, right? Who, but who do that work, right? Or who

contract with seed companies, even the small radical ones, right? Um, but who

still need to build these networks of, like, other land workers doing really

culturally important seed work but in turn to like build these networks of like

mutual support, um, and thinking of how to organize. So I’ve been using the word

seed workers a little more lately, but also just like seed people, seed folk.

People who are like--also

because, like, some people are just like really into seeds--

CAGLE:--yeah--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--and also sometimes like, you know, it might take a little more to

self--identify as, like, a seed keeper because that means, you know, you’re kind

of like you are stewarding these. So even for me it’s difficult to call myself a

seed keeper. Um, mainly because, you know, my seeds are, like, in the back

corner of, like, my hot apartment--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--um, and I--(laughs)--

CAGLE:Yeah. Seed keeper makes me think of like a vault, you know? Like, I don’t

know, there’s--yeah, there’s a sense of--and this, again, is a complete

outsider. But like that sense of a seed library or, you know, something maybe

more formal than it sounds like you’re talking about describing within these

mutual aid networks. Where no one person is necessarily, like, in physical

possession of a formal library or

something. Is that--

KEEVE:--yeah. And this also I think gets to--because I think, I think people

who might call themselves seed keepers are more attuned to, like, the cultural

significance of these varieties and what that then asks upon you as someone who

is in relation with these varieties. Um, as more of like a long term, like, you

know, you’re responsible for keeping these stories, um, and sharing them. But I

think--but there is, like, a really interesting set of like kind of diversion

politics, right? When it comes to seed libraries versus seed vaults versus seed

banks versus, like--I think at the beginning of my PhD I was really, really

excited about just, like, decentralized seed networks in which there was no

physical space. It was just

like people who had seeds and could set them into motion to whoever needed them.

And it could be coordinated through, like, online spaces, right? Like a

spread--me and a friend actually at one point made a spreadsheet that was

like--what? That was just kind of like what if--what would a local digital seed

bank look like? Which did not take off, but it’s still a good idea--(laughs).

CAGLE:It’s hard to do. Actually, I was part of a gardening group on Facebook

and we did that with a Google Sheet.

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Where it was just somebody was like, “Hey, do people want to share some

seeds?” And it was just, you know, sign up for what you have and then maybe what

you want and then--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--but it took like--it took a fair amount of wrangling and that was,

like, eight people, you know?--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--so, yeah. And ultimately, I was like, I’m not on Facebook anymore so I

don’t have, you know? So the online is tough.

KEEVE:Actually, I was here and there and I’ve gotten really excited with a

friend about the concept of, like, Octavia Butler--esque seed caches.

CAGLE:Yes.

KEEVE:So like, what if they were like--essentially like geocaches of seeds

around the city in which like--

CAGLE:Like the earth seed, like Lauren’s--

KEEVE:--yes--

CAGLE:--yeah, yeah, yeah--

KEEVE:--yeah. And which, like, no one person knows where all of them are, but

everyone knows where some of them are--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yes, exactly. Oh, oh, that’s exciting. I want to ask about the politics

piece. I mean both around the terminology that you were saying of, like, library

versus, you know, vault, um, versus, um, bank. And--but I think that folds into

a bigger question I have about politics. I’m not sure whether right now is the

time to ask. Well, okay. I’ll throw it out there and then--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--I guess whenever it makes sense to talk about it. Which is: there are,

especially now,

resurgent eco--fascist movements, right?--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and there’s a whole--so I study, among other things, climate denial and

extreme--like, climate conspiracy theories, but also, like, eco--fascism and

sort of far--right, mostly. There’s--yeah, mostly far--right environmental

movements. And increasingly there’s efforts to recruit people using like

homesteading on TikTok--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and, you know, that kind of thing. And so I’m curious about how those

movements have made themselves apparent in the context of your work, and, like,

if that’s something that comes up or, you know, how you will navigate. Like,

what do you do with the people who are motivated to do this because they want to

make sure that we can close the borders and have a national food supply and,

like, you know, make America great

again or whatever?--(laughs)--Like, yeah. So I’m assuming that there are--that

the politics are messy enough that there’s, like, porosity or something. Um, so,

yeah. I don’t know that now is the time to ask about that, but sure.

KEEVE:No. Yeah, yeah--

CAGLE:--okay--

KEEVE:--so, there are definitely, definitely, definitely divergent politics in

the seed world, um, around just this very thing. Um, and I don’t want to say

too, too much because there’s a lot that I don’t know about it still. This is

like something that someone needs to, like, look more closely into. Um, but

there are, like--and by seed world, I’m still kind of, like, thinking of, like,

the--you know, the four percent or whatever of total US seed work or seed

economy, seed sales that are, like, small, organic or inorganic--

CAGLE:--not the [?? WORD UNCLEAR], not the--yeah--

KEEVE:--yeah. In which, like, there are

folks who are kind of the preppers and the homesteaders and who have, like, very

implicit and explicit, like, kind of like white nationalist habits that are,

like--in which they take the kind of, like, the rhetoric of cultural survival or

whatever with their seed to mean just that. You know, in the event that, like,

we need to shut it all down. We need to make sure that like--

CAGLE:--ensuring white supremacy basically. Yeah--

KEEVE:--yeah. That me and mine are secure. Um, but the people that I am more in

community with--(laughs)--are--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--actually--they take those--they have this acute sense, right? That,

like, the food and seed systems and land systems are deeply, deeply precarious.

And they articulate that directly through lenses of, like,

uh, legacies of racial capitalism, right? Which is like not a term that like

folks often use, but it’s a term that I use to kind of make sense of how a lot

of seed people in my networks are kind of, like, articulating the stakes of the

work they’re doing. And that, like, it’s about, like, building these resilient

food and seed systems, um, in the face of these histories and legacies, right?

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

KEEVE:That have exploited and extracted, like, the labor and land of, like,

Black Indigenous folks especially. Um, and I say that to say that, like, the way

the politics that then form out of this are oftentimes that people--are

oftentimes actually deeply, like, internationalist. And people are thinking

through, like, these very diasporic

lenses, right? Historically around like how seeds have literally--not just like

thinking about how seeds have traveled for the sake of their own travel, but

thinking critically about how, like, both seeds and people have traveled with

very, very different forms of, um, freedom, right? Like I have--like, this is a

tangent, but I have like a side project that I want to do someday that kind of,

like, thinks through the long history that kind of connects the sort of like the

role that seed and plants were forced to play in colonialism and western

imperialism, and the sort of, like, bioprospecting activities, right? That were

tied up with, like, the forest movements of people and materials around the

world, all the way up to the current moments of, like--in which, like, the sort

of like the borders are,

like, not permeable, right? In which like, um, for certain people, right? Um,

there is not the privilege of movement or mobility. Um, but also how, like, it

is very, very difficult to get seeds across borders--(laughs)--unless you have

certain forms of, like, economic and political clout, um, for the work you’re

doing, or unless you, like, know how to rework the USDA.

CAGLE:Like commercially.

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:Um, or unless you have, like, um, certain forms of, like, institutional

academic clout--

CAGLE:--right--

KEEVE:--in which you can--like, you can get seeds across borders. You can,

like, do certain--I don’t want to say bioprospecting--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

KEEVE:--but you can, like, go to certain places in the world and figure out how

to, like, get things back.

CAGLE:Right--

KEEVE:--um--

CAGLE:--If it’s under the sort of auspices of research or--

KEEVE:--yeah. Not, not saying that, like, that is easy, which it is not. But, like--

CAGLE:--it’s doable--

KEEVE:--if you have those connections--yeah, you

can make it happen. Whereas with people who are--like, with people who are in,

like, immigrant or diaspora communities in the US who are trying to, like, get

their seeds from their homeland, right? Like, that’s a whole other thing. Um,

and that’s extremely difficult. Um, and it’s something that, like, needs

to--it’s something that, like, um, you can’t really do above board. And so a lot

of--like a lot of seed folks who I’m in community with will do the work of,

like, figuring out how to get seeds to where they need to be and to when they

need to be in different parts of the world, right?--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--for pretty significant political reasons and for significant

geopolitical reasons. But, so I had--so one day I’ll do a side project of

looking through, like, the role that, like, seeds and plants have played in,

like the kind of like crystallization of borders--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--

Um, but to say all that to say that like--so there are those, like, political

divides, and when it comes to the kinds of, like, futures that seed work maybe

allows us to articulate, um, and who gets to be a part of those futures. Um, but

yeah, I’ll stop there.

CAGLE:I mean, it sounds like it’s--in some ways, like in broad strokes, these

two different kind of politics that then lead to two different kinds of praxis

both start from a place of recognizing precarity, right?--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--but in one case, if you recognize precarity without the political

understanding of how we got to this place of precarity, then double down for me

and mine--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--which might mean

my family, it might mean my racial identity, it might--right? That that is the

response. If you don’t have that accurate, unflinching--(laughs)--political

analysis of where we--how we got to this precarity in the first place.

KEEVE:Mhm.

CAGLE:Yeah. That’s interesting. Okay. So what did your thesis end up being--(laughs)?

KEEVE:Oh, the master’s?

CAGLE:Yeah--(laughs).

KEEVE:Oh, man, let me think. So--or I’ll--I’m going to describe it as just,

like--as, like, the two chapters, because I forgot what the overarching thing

was--(both laugh)--I remember the introduction was like, “Here’s what’s going on

with seeds.” It was a lot of like maybe--maybe me trying to do certain forms of

work, um, to establish a baseline for, like, something that I would now--that

I’m now coming around to calling

more seriously like critical seed geographies or critical geographies of agro

biodiversity. So that was kind of the baseline that I was trying to build. Um,

and then the two chapters were--and I’m trying to think back because the initial

idea for these, my advisor had me reverse them so it made more sense, but I

forgot the actual order that the chapters were in. I think the first one, the

first one was actually a--was inspired by some, like--by just interest of mine,

both back then and also still, around, like, the legacies of Black seed weights

in the US South. And it was a case study of the Homowo collection which was--so

in Winston-Salem North Carolina a little over a decade ago, I think, around

2012, the folks at Old Salem Museums and Gardens did this

project in which they started interviewing, uh, Black elders in the community

about, like, the seed and food that they remembered growing up with. Um, and

they used those interviews to build a seed collection of African and

African--American varieties in that region. Um, which I want to be careful to

say that it’s not, like, a general thing. It’s like, you know, for that region--

CAGLE:--for--yeah--

KEEVE:--um, so, and for the--it’s also because--like, so that chapter was

about--or that chapter was, like, it landed on that case study. It landed on the

story of how that happened, um, and what it revealed about, kind of the Black

food geographies of the city. Um, and also, like, all these other histories that

kind of came up around, like, people, uh,

kind of having these memories of, like, these community gardens, right? That had

existed decades ago. Um, but I kind of came to it and trying to intersect--oh,

trying to intersect, like, the space of the botanic garden with the historic

site. Um, because like that--so Old Salem Museums and Gardens, their

horticulture department specializes in like--I forgot the exact appropriate

term, but it’s actually like historical horticulture. So they have these gardens

around--that are, like, period gardens. In which, like the goal was, what were

people growing at this spot in the year 1750? Um, like what varieties would they

have been and, like, are there varieties that we can find now that could best

approximate what those plants would’ve been? Um, and also

people wearing like period clothes and using period tools to do that work. And

so the Homowo collection kind of came about because they had all this

documentation from people in power of the food and seed stories and the garden

stories, um, but not from, like, the urban enslaved communities and their

descendants in the city. So they had to use a different sort of historical

approach to try to get those seed stories, um, and then to think critically

about how best to, like, represent them. So it was kind of thinking through the

politics and the stakes at that intersection of, like, historic site and botanic

garden and what it’s mobilizing in terms of, like, your relations to land and

history and, like, what it means to put that type of, like, weight on, like,

seeds and plants to--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--represent history which is, like, wild to me--

CAGLE:--uh-huh--

KEEVE:--

Because to a certain extent, it’s like, you know, the squash just wants to be a squash--

CAGLE:--right, yeah--

KEEVE:--the squash is like, I understand that, like, there are all of these

stories and politics, um, but, like, it’s just living its life--

CAGLE:--yeah--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--so then what does it mean when we try to, like--when we are putting a

lot of, like, representational sort of, like, weight on these plants, um, and

what does that then ask of us? Um, so that was--yeah. So that was that chapter

and it was--oh, and also kind of, like, ended with, like, some thoughts around,

like, I was trying to, like, conceptualize seed collections as living archives,

which also got back to, like, that discussion between seed vaults and seed banks

and more dynamic seed work with the land. Um, because I was really interested in

this question of like, you know, Is this, is, is, is the seed room with the jars

and jars of living things, is

that a living archive? Is, um, the seed farm in which you’re actively stewarding

these stories and these histories and reproducing them literally through plants,

is that a living archive? And, you know, and one person was like, that’s a cool

idea. And one person was like, not at all--(laughs)--It’s not what we’re doing.

Which is good because like, you know, it was kind of, like, because people had

very divergent ideas around, like, what even the word archive means and what it

means. Because some folks were like, the work we’re doing is, you know, we’re

saving stories and we’re preserving its histories. We’re not archiving seeds.

The seeds need to live--

CAGLE:--right--

KEEVE:--um, the seeds need to move. Um, which is a really, really generative

sort of, like, set of divergences--

CAGLE:--right. Well, because you can’t just keep a seed forever, right?

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Like, it stops being--

KEEVE:--viable--

CAGLE:--a seed.

KEEVE:Yeah. So that was that chapter--(laughs)--and then the other chapter

was, um, was more focused on my work with Truelove seeds. So that was thinking

through, like, some of the more than human seed and plant relations on a seed

farm day to day, um, which involved things like--just like farmer--what plant

breeders or what plant breeder folks might call, like, farmer decision making in

which, um,--you know, because if you’re a farmer doing, like, vegetable

production, you are actively taking things out of play that do not meet the cut

at various points, from germination, to planting, to harvest, to processing. Um,

like I used to work for a farm in Georgetown and there’s a lot that do not make

it to the finish line. But with seed work it’s also, like,

really, really relevant. So, um, for example, if you have--so, like, with the

Paul Robeson tomato, that I had described that Truelove they don’t like the

doubles, right? They want kind of the consistent single round ones. So if you

have doubles, you would not save those seeds--

CAGLE:--right--

KEEVE:--um, some people might tell you to get rid of the entire plant, which is

hard. So, which is called roguing. But, like, if you have--so if you have, like,

a tomato that looks significantly different from how the variety is supposed to

look or how it’s supposed to taste or how it’s supposed to feel, it’s an

off--type. Um, and a lot of folks--a lot of seed folks might be like--I, as,

like, sort of chaotic person--(Cagle laughs)--love that and I would keep it

anyways. A lot of seed folks get rid of it, or they don’t keep the seeds. Um,

and that--from there, from those experiences I had, and also just from, like,

little debates

that I would get into with other apprentices on the farm, um, from there I was

like, “Well, then who and what is determining what a certain variety is supposed

to look like?” Especially considering that like a lot of seed work today is

actually in response to, like, modern ag, like modern industrial ag. Um, that,

like, kind of is still responsible for a lot of the ways that we talk and

conceptualize what, like, grocery store produce is supposed to look like, right?

The fact that you walk into Kroger and there’s, like, dozens of the exact same

carrot, right? Which is not at all how it happens in the field. Um, so I was

thinking about, like, how did we end up to that point where, like, we’re still

concerned about things being the right way. But also in a deeply ironic sense,

right? Doing culturally relevant historic seed work,

um, you’re--the people who stewarded those seeds back in the day usually were

not actually concerned about them looking like the right type of variety.

Because a lot of people didn’t even name the varieties.

CAGLE:Right.

KEEVE:Like, a lot of people didn’t even--weren’t even concerned about what

constituted the variety. Like a lot of things were just landraces. Um, and a lot

of people, I should say today still, are not really concerned about, like, the

naming and claiming of varieties. Um, which is very much a like--which happens a

lot which is a little bit--also a little bit tangent, which happens a lot when

you have certain seed and plant varieties that end up here from other places in

the world that are then--that then have to like--that have to be made legible

through the format of, like, an American seed catalog.

CAGLE:Yeah.

I’m picturing one right now.

KEEVE:Yes. But in order so that people or communities here can have access to

that seed--

CAGLE:--It has to be named--

KEEVE:--Yeah--

CAGLE:--It has to have a skew. It has to--yeah--

KEEVE:--you have to be like, “This is--this variety, it came from here. This is

the story.” Right? So I was really, really trying to think through, like, the

politics of, like, even what constitutes a variety and who gets to decide. Um,

but also, like, those moments with plant relations on the farm in which you’re

making these decisions around, like, this plant does not get to

reproduce--(laughs)--these genes stop here. Or, this plant entirely is going to

be pulled out the ground. Um, and I was kind of, like, trying to think through

it through, like, reproductive features, but also through a lot of, like, kind

of, like queer ecology critiques around, like, how on a seed farm

reproduction is, like, a multi-species process. Um, even--In a very basic sense,

just through the fact that a lot of plants are pollinated by the wind or by bees

and insects and, like, beetles, right? And it’s really not a single species that

is, like, reproducing itself all the time. But also how, like, humans are also

just, like, part of that story, um, and how, like, you’re in, like, a deeply

reproductive space, um, in which, like, a lot of things are being reproduced.

So, like, you know, both, like, in terms of, like, the next generation of

plants, but also, like, certain community formations in politics in forms of,

like, solidarity are being reproduced among the humans, but also between humans

and plants. So it was a lot of that. And it was also me trying to, like, I think

at one point--and I should, like, write about this at some point, but I was

also--I should, like, publish an article--(laughs)--so it was also kind of,

like, me thinking through

like--or I was playing around with some work by political ecologists that are

thinking through, like, biopolitics and conservation around, like, the human

decisions, around, like, which plants do or do not get to stay in order so that

certain landscapes can, like, be as quote unquote as the should. Um, and I think

that’s the gist--(laughs).

CAGLE:That’s, I mean, such rich questions though. And I mean, no wonder you

decided to come back for a PhD. Like, there’s no having--that’s just, you just

opened like a thousand doors, right?--(laughs)--and then you can walk through

any number of them. Well, so how did you end up deciding to come to Kentucky then?

KEEVE:Um--

CAGLE:--we have an amazing geography department--

KEEVE:--we do--

CAGLE:--but, yeah, I don’t know if you knew about us or?

KEEVE:Also a very weird story. So as I mentioned, during my master’s at

Wisconsin I ended up there and, like, I didn’t know what geography was. Um, and

I was learning about, you know, other programs and departments and the process

of, like, me getting situated in geography there. Um, so of course I’d heard

about Kentucky also because, like, there’s a lot of folks, right? Who ended up

going there from here and vice versa. Um, and I, I had a--okay. So I--a friend

of mine at Madison, Kallista Bley, was, um--I think was a PhD student at Madison

at AWS in geography. Who’s a good friend of mine there. Her partner Nick Lally

is a professor here in geography. Nick and I had like--actually he’s not on my

committee, but, like, Nick finished his PhD at Wisconsin three weeks before I

arrived in Madison

for my master’s, and then he came back here. So anyways, and, like, June of 2019

I was heading to Philadelphia to do field work with Truelove Seeds and Kallista

was moving down here from Madison to, um, be based here with Nick. And I was

like, “Oh, I’ll help you move.” Um, because I was like, “Oh, it’s a few hours

extra drive, but I haven’t been down there and it’ll be cool.” Um, and, um--or

actually, tangent, the first time I had--maybe the first time I’d heard about

Kentucky was actually when Kallista was telling me about DOPE

[2]and I--so this was, like, my first semester at

Madison and I had some idea for some, like, paper, or I think I was trying to

develop. And Kallista was like, “Oh, that would be such a good thing for a DOPE

session.” And I was like, “What is DOPE?”--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--and she was like, “Oh, it’s this conference at Kentucky called

Dimensions of Political Ecology.” And I was like, “What is political ecology?”

--(both laugh)--so that’s when I first heard about it. But, so this was, like,

June, 2019 and I helped Kallista move down here and I crashed with them for a

few nights. Or I was going to, like, just to kind of bounce through and then

they were like, “Just stay for a couple nights and hang out in Lexington.” Um,

and at one point we were at KR Native and Nick was like, “So where are you

thinking about for your PhD?” And I was like, “It’ll be at Wisconsin.” Because

like I was--it’s, you know, they are two different degrees, um, but it was sort

of, like, kind of a formality there to go up for master’s and the PhD because it

was kind of, like, assumed that I would stay. Um, so I was like, ‘Oh yeah, I

will be at Wisconsin.” And he was like, “What about Kentucky, Geography?” And I

was like, “Is that allowed?” And he was like, “Yeah.” Um, so then it was just in

my head--(laughs)--it was just in my head and I think that fall--the following

fall I was back in Wisconsin and I had this moment in which I was like, “I ended

up in geography on accident and I do want to hang around for a PhD, but I kind

of want to--I kind of want it to be my choice,” if that makes sense.

CAGLE:Not a default?

KEEVE:Yeah--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--so I applied to a few programs. Um, yeah. And I thought this would be

fun. Um, yeah.

CAGLE:So you came here in 2020?

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Oh. Tough.

KEEVE:Yeah--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--how did you--so, as an environmental scholar myself, I’m always so

interested in the way that academia especially, but also I grew up as a military

brat. Like, the way that certain careers and lives bounce us around can make it

hard to establish a relationship with a local environment--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and then thinking about trying to do that in the context of COVID

sounds really hard. Because you might be able to establish--you might be able to

start developing your own relationship with the local non--human environment.

But for me, part of that process is getting to know the other people who know.

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:So how did you do that?

KEEVE:Yeah. I think--I mean, the first year is just like a blur. Um, I was just

like in my tiny studio apartment just on Zoom. Um, like the first year in my

memory is very dark. It’s all very dark--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--like literally dark?

KEEVE:Yeah. But--so there’s that. And then--yeah, I’m trying to think. I think

I was volunteering with Black Soil just like in their fulfillment center--

CAGLE:That makes sense.

KEEVE:--just like because I needed to, like, have a thing where I got to leave

my home, um, and at least do some food related work. Uh, and then I think--so I

guess a few things.

There’s Black Soil. I’m not sure at what point I started volunteering with

Seedleaf, um, but I did on and off over the years. Um, and then I--(sighs)--it

actually may have been maybe when I worked for Elmwood. So I might--I mentioned

the farmer I used to work for in Georgetown, it was Elmwood Stock Farm. And I

think from, like, May of 2021 to January, 2022, I worked for them doing some,

like, on-farm pack shed work, a little bit of intensive weeding work and a lot

of, like, CSA deliveries and, like, farmer’s market stuff. Um, and that was

actually maybe when I was just, like, out and about and, like, just kind of,

like, seeing what’s going on. Um, so it was a little bit of land work, but it

was mainly just, like, um, kind of like experiencing geographies

of this region that I would not have otherwise experienced. Um, and also having

some opportunities like at the markets just, like, talk to people about, like,

food and land. Um, so that was the big thing. And then, um, I think when I kind

of--I think in, like--yeah, so this is last year, 2022, I kind of fell into

doing independent seed work in a very ad hoc way. Um, which is also a whole--so

it was, like, because I was--this is, like, winter of 2022. Um, I had been,

like, bouncing around this idea of--also I think I’d been volunteering with

Seedleaf sometimes, and then also at that point I’d been volunteering with

FoodChain in their aquaponics farm. Because I was like, I need to get out of the

house--(laughs)--and have a thing to do--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--um, so because--oh, so basically, I had been, like, developing

this idea for my DiSC project around, like, the seed networks and cooperative

politics and, um, seed relations. Uh, and I was just kind of like bouncing the

idea off of various seed colleagues of mine, um, and these networks in these

communities and I was like, would you--because initially it was like, I think,

um, I think Jackie was kind of--had given me the idea of doing a social network

analysis, and I was like, “Would it be interesting?” I was, like, texting with

Owen and I was like, “Might it be useful if you had, like, a social network

analysis of the Truelove Seeds growers’ network?” Because it’s like, it’s

Truelove, which is a hub in Philadelphia, and then a network of growers. Um, I

think at this point with seventy growers who are all growing seed for Truelove

on their farms, that are then made available through the catalog and there’s,

like, a profit-sharing agreement with them.

Um, so I was like, “It would be useful to do, like, a social network analysis of

the growers network.” And he was like, “I don’t know what that is.” And I was

like, “Neither do I,”--

CAGLE:--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--“um, but it sounds cool.” So I was like bouncing these ideas off

various people, of, like, Truelove with Nate Kleinman at Experimental Farm

Network. And then I met the folks at the Ujamaa like April, 2022 and fell in

with them. Um, but this thing kept happening in which like, I’d be kind of,

like, talking about these ideas I had around, like, you know, collaborative

methods, around these grower networks and, like, you know, co--production or

whatever, and they were like, “That’s cool but, like, what are you growing for

us?” And I was like, “Oh shit. I don’t know.”--(laughs).

CAGLE:This is--

KEEVE:--um, which was--

CAGLE:--anytime you do community work it’s like--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--“are you in community?”--

KEEVE:--yeah. Um, and it was just like, I’m working on, like, a Methods article

right now about this is the right

moment. Um, in which people were like--which, one, on one hand I was--it was me

coming to the realization that people actually saw me as someone who could do

this work. Um, it’s not just like an academic who just shows up and, like,

weeds. But people were like, “You are in these seed networks and, like, you know

how stuff works and you could reliably get a seed crop of some, like, okra and

tomatoes and sorghum.” So they would ask the question of, “What are you growing

for us?” Which, in retrospect--um, and this is me kind of thinking about this

as, like, a methods piece, which is, like, in my head right now. But in

retrospect it’s not so much like an access thing or, like, a transactional thing

of like, “What are you doing for us to get access to these networks?” It was an

invitation to be in the community. It was like--or it was also somewhat of a

recognition that, like, I was already part of these networks. Um, and even--and

Owen even said that, like, sort of like me doing independent seed work here was

a continuation of my apprenticeship at Truelove, which also is a good thing. So

there have been multiple apprentices who’ve apprenticed there and are now doing

farm work elsewhere and growing things for Truelove, which is, like, also part

of the model--

CAGLE:--right--

KEEVE:--um, so there was this question of like, what are you growing for us?

And I was like, “Shit. Okay.”--(laughs)--so then I just was lucky enough that,

like, a couple of, like, older farmers, like Jim Embry, like Jane Harrod were like--

CAGLE:--we just--Zada Komara, who’s an honors college lecturer, interviewed Jim

earlier this week.

KEEVE:Amazing. Okay. So I was lucky enough that some folks were just like, “If

you need a plot on my land out here, you can, you know, put some seeds in the

ground and get a seed crop.”

CAGLE:Who else besides Jim?

I’m sorry, I interrupted because I got so excited to say that--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--(laughs)--Oh, Jane Harrod.

CAGLE:Oh, nice.

KEEVE:Yeah. Um, yeah, and then I was just like, I think I--because I had, like,

some, like, summer research funding from the department that I just used to buy,

like, farm tools--(laughs)--um, and--yeah, and I was just like a seed farmer.

CAGLE:That’s awesome.

KEEVE:And I still am. I have a lot less time to do it and it’s kind of a mess

this year. Um, but so that--I think that is kind of--like, was maybe the

culmination of, like, me finally being able to, like, find some sort of

community, community with the land here. Um, which, like, in thinking about that

work now and the sort of the entire story of, like, how I got here is like just,

like, very surreal. Um, but, yeah. So yeah, it was that sort of like--it was the

invitation to grow,

but then also, like, the then impetus that I had to, like, figure out a lot of shit--

CAGLE:--yeah--

KEEVE:--very quickly.

CAGLE:Yeah. And then, you know, it looks like, oh yeah, you grow seeds in

Kentucky, but it’s--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--the whole process of getting there is, yeah. So I have, like, a very

big question, which is: given everything, so growing up in Florida, you know,

experiencing all these different environments and climates and, like, you know,

thinking about the more than human in relation to itself, but also in relation

to human histories, like all these things, and then just the actual experience

of, like, putting your hands in soil and--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--growing things. Has climate and climate change

specifically--(sighs)--has that been a sort of, like, active or activating

concept throughout? Is it something that is, like, woven in?

Is it something that appeared at some point? Like how does that sort of fit into

the overall--your overall experience of these life events?

KEEVE:Um, I think it’s one of the strongest forces that drives people to do

this work. Um, by which I mean, like, conserving and boosting agro biodiversity

is, like, essential just for having a resilient food system that can, like,

withstand increasingly precarious conditions. Um, and, like, increasing, you

know, waves of pathogens and, uh, increasingly, like, unpredictable cycles of

drought and flood, um, right? Like you need like genuinely agro biodiverse

systems and you also need seeds to be moving to where they need to be and when

they need to, like sometimes on very short notice. Um, and that

is like very, very much a major sort of, like, political impetus, um, for people

in this world and the work that they do. Um, yeah. But also--oh. But also it’s

because the thing about, I guess, like, annual plants is that, like, they--you

sort of--you have the ability to adapt faster. Um, faster than say, like, an old

growth forest or something. So you have--you usually have the ability to, like,

start selecting right now for not just, like, the climates that are coming, but

also for increasingly unstable climatic conditions. Um, so, like--which is why

people--folks in Ujamaa are really, really into sorghum right now because it’s a

quote unquote climate friendly crop that’s also deeply culturally significant to

a lot of Black and Brown folks.

Um, and so there’s that. So there are certain crops that are, like, very much

like getting increased attention because of climate change, um, but also, like,

the doing of seed work and the preserving of those, like, knowledges and

practices is increasingly important. Because, like, it’s, um--because you need

to be able to adjust or you need to be able to both, like, adjust to shifting

conditions, but also you need to be able to, like, build out like--what’s the

word? Um, like, vibrant genetic communities, let’s say, that can, like, better

withstand these, uh, disturbances, right? That are increasingly common. Um, so,

yeah. So I’d say it’s like one of the major political drivers. And there’s also

a lot to be said around, like, people

, um, people like mobilizing seeds in certain directions, um, so that, like,

certain varieties from down South can be moved up here. Um, because, like, these

conditions are becoming more amenable to those varieties. Um, stuff like that.

Um, but also I think there’s a lot to be said about the renewed attention to,

like, seed stories and seed histories as a way of understanding the

environmental work that people were doing and the ecological relations that

people had, um, but also for, like, better understanding, like, the stakes of

like your relations to land and of your family’s relations to land. Um, like I’m

thinking of some work by some colleagues on Sapelo Island, um, off the coast of

Georgia, in which

they’re growing heirloom crops, um, in order to, like, have that sort of like

ecological, historical, familial, um, connection with the land that, like,

reifies like, Gullah Geechee people’s sort of claim over those landscapes, in

the face of, like, you know, developers and capital in the state trying to,

like, destroy those claims. Um, and how, like, seed work is a part of, like,

people, like, holding onto landscapes and holding onto land that is, like, at

risk both by climate change as well as by, like, capitalist political forces,

and also recognizing that those two things were themselves connected--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--right, yeah--

KEEVE:--yeah--

CAGLE:--well, that

actually is a good connection to kind of a follow--up question, I guess, which

is, I encountered the word ‘Plantationocene’--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--through looking into your work. And that got me thinking about the

connection to Anthropocene and the way that we--the way that these cenes have

become a form of characterization, right?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:It’s, um--and like the--actually I was just--I haven’t read the story

yet, but there was a headline, I think yesterday. There’s been some progress on

the Anthropocene naming in the international geologic community, whatever. So,

um, so I presume based on what I read, that, you know, Plantationocene is

intentionally connecting to this idea of, like, large scale human impact that

has an environmental effect, right?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm. Okay. So--

CAGLE:--yes--

KEEVE:--I should say--um, or yeah, I should say, because I ended up at

Wisconsin for the master’s right as this, like, Sawyer seminar series on the Plantationocene--

CAGLE:--right, yeah--

KEEVE:--was coming into being. And they hired me for a year, which is also why

I was, like, prevalent--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--yeah. That was right in there. Well, I was reading the Edge Effects

piece. Yeah.

KEEVE:Yeah. The Plantationocene series.

CAGLE:Yeah.

KEEVE:Um, but I think the--and I say that to say that, like, um, I am less

concerned about the cene discourse these days, but I do--though I do see the

utility. And I do also really see the utility and a lot of the work that kind

of, like, was reclaiming the concept of the Plantationocene. Um, because

there’s--I think in my--so my kind of issue is that with it was like--there were

some, like, kind of like more STS oriented folks who were kind of, like, really

into the concept

because it kind of allowed you to maybe laminate, like, social and political

structural forces onto, like, non--human beings, um, which is great. But, like,

I think a lot of the work that I was more attuned to was people who were like,

actually this points us to the ways that in which like, um, I’m trying to think

of how to phrase this. Who were like, actually this points us to the ways in

which, like, the sort of like colonial racial capitalist project, um, was

constructing the idea of the human through forces of violence, um, against Black

Indigenous folks, against women, against people who we might now resonate with

as queer and trans, right? Um, and how, like, those structures of violence then

also produce, right? These relations of extraction

, um, and exploitation with the land, with non--human beings as well as with,

like, certain categories and certain groups of human beings. Um, which I think

is the utility of, like, that sort of, like, analytic through Plantationocene,

right? In which, like, that--in which that model was then developed through

spaces of, like, intense dehumanization and then exported around the world and

made to be ubiquitous in certain ways. And that then influences the logic that

we approach with, like, you know, non--human relations of production and

exploitation and extraction. Or recognizing that, like, those human

relations--(laughs)--of, like, production and exploitation and extraction are

still very much prevalent in the world and are still very much connected, right?

Um, but yeah, I haven’t heard about cenes in a while--(laughs)--

CAGLE:--no.

I just was thinking about it as--you know, I think, um, one thing that’s come up

in the process of collecting these interviews for this project is that, um, you

know, sometimes when people hear about this--the collection, um, there’s an easy

slippage to just kind of general environmental work or general environment--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--and, like, but how much--what are these? You know, I’m not a big

borders person myself--(laughs)--I don’t really like--people are like, “How is

what you do rhetoric?” And I’m like, “I don’t care.”--(both laugh)--“I don’t

know. You tell me what you want it to be.” Um, but I do think that there is

value in at least asking the question of if there’s a difference--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:Right? Or if there is, um, uh, a space of transition between saying like,

“Oh, this is environmental work,” or, “Oh, this is sustainability work--”

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--or, “Oh, this is climate work,” and so on. I’m just trying to be

attuned in these conversations to, like,

where is climate as a concept, as a motivation--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--as a whatever, kind of entering the picture. And what you said about it

being motivating for people, like politically motivating, that seems like a

clear connection. Again, like if you don’t have an analysis of how the

Anthropocene happened, right?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:Like, we didn’t sort of accidentally start burning fossil fuels on a

scale that could literally change the climate of an entire planet, right?

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:And, like, the systems that allowed that to happen are not possible

without exploitation. Or at least I don’t know how they would be possible

without exploitation of human and non--human alike.

KEEVE:Mm-hmm.

CAGLE:And so, like, it seems like the analysis of the Anthropocene in some ways

requires an analysis like at least Plantationocene.

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:So that’s what I was kind of thinking about.

KEEVE:Yeah. And, like, a lot of the--I think for me, a lot of the discourse

around the cenes

allows you, like you just said, to actually, like, have a sharper analysis of

like what--who is to blame. But also around, like, where the focus needs to be.

CAGLE:Yeah. Theories are only useful in so far as they actually help us make

sense of the things that we care about, right?

KEEVE:Yeah--(laughs).

CAGLE:Yeah. So last question. In the physical work, so in the being out,

especially the last year or so, you talked earlier about being new to Kentucky

and having to rely on elders--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--to tell you about like, “Oh, this is weird,” or whatnot. What have you

been hearing? Like, what has been going on? What are you hearing about climate

in Kentucky?

KEEVE:I’ve been hearing about the--a lot about the drought, flood patterns,

especially with the last year’s floods in East Kentucky,

I’ve been hearing about the firefly collapse and I’ve also been noticing this

summer that there are more fireflies than I’ve ever seen here, which is

exciting. But I’ve been hearing about--like, the firefly collapse and more

generally the insect collapse. Um, um, I’ve been hearing about some weirdness

actually around some of the--oftentimes in, like, late spring. How, like, the

late spring moment is less reliable now in, like, very different ways year to

year, which is interesting. So people might have, like, very sudden crop

failures that they didn’t expect. Um, what else? I’m not sure. I’m thinking

about the hailstorm that hit Richmond last weekend.

CAGLE:Mm-hmm.

KEEVE:Um, yeah--

CAGLE:--and even into sort of the eastern end of

the Lexington burbs--

KEEVE:--mm-hmm--

CAGLE:--yeah. Are those conversations that you had been having with people in

other places that you’d worked, like Philadelphia or Montana or Wisconsin?

KEEVE:A little bit. I think more so here, and mainly because this is--I’ve

been, I think, more grounded here. Like literally just like more just, like, in

tune--(laughs)--with the land here.

CAGLE:On the ground. Yeah.

KEEVE:Than I have been in a lot of places where I’ve lived in my adult life.

Um, but yeah, you do get, yeah, a little bit of it. But also I think I’ve been

here longer than all the other places. So, like, I’ve been here for, like,

most--this is my third summer here, um, which has been unusual for me, um, over

the past, like, decade. Is this--yeah, 2021.

CAGLE:Yeah. Three.

KEEVE:Yeah. So yeah, so it’s been a lot of

like--so I think I’m at a point now in which I’m, like, starting to see some

patterns. And then being able to, like, talk about those patterns with other

people, um, and kind of, like, get a, get a longer story of how they came to be.

CAGLE:That makes sense.

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Like bringing your own--you know what questions to ask if nothing else.

Yeah. Is there anything I should have asked about that we did not talk about?

KEEVE:Um--(sighs)--

CAGLE:--your work, your thinking, your motivations, how climate relates to any

of it?

KEEVE:Oh, I got to think. I’m not sure actually. Ironically enough, I was too

excited. I mentioned I’m teaching the summer course on, like, physical geography

and ecosystems. And I was just, this morning, like, putting together the little,

like, module on climate change--(both laugh)--um--

CAGLE:--I have a lecture on climate in Kentucky. You can have the slides if

you’d like.

KEEVE:Oh. Next time.

CAGLE:Yeah.

--(laughs)--

KEEVE:--I guess I’m really trying to think through because I feel like I often

end up stuck between this point of, like, I think people are really, really good

at articulating shifts that have happened, that they’ve seen happen, and, like,

weirdness that comes up, but are not as good at articulating, like, what needs

to be done. And that’s, like, something that I still struggle with. Of like how

do you--what does it like actually look like to build political power? And,

like, I have no idea--(laughs)--um, but also, like, I’m trying to maybe keep a

little more openness with the sort of, like, nuances of people’s political

thought process when it comes to climate change with the environment generally.

And it’s also because, like, I’ve, like,

been able to tap in here and there with some, like, organizing with KSEC

[3]]. So I know right now they’re doing like an

anti-pipeline campaign, um, and it’s like people do have, like, a surprising

amount of, like, nuanced opinions, right? And knowledges around climate. And

even if they’re not fully on board with sort of the more progressive ideas, like

they still recognize the importance of, like, their connections to land and the

necessity of having, like, you know, a consistent crop for everyone’s survival.

So it’s something I’ve been trying to think through, I guess. It’s just like how

to lean into that nuance and how to, like, build political power in which you

don’t, you know,

have to have everybody fully in agreement--(laughs).

CAGLE:I hope not because I don’t think we can--(laughs).

KEEVE:Yeah.

CAGLE:Yeah. Well, thank you so much Chris. This has been a delight.

KEEVE:Thank you.

CAGLE:I’m going to hit stop now.

[End of recording]