CURRIS:Allegedly we're recording.

PEEPLES:Okay. All right. Let's go.

CURRIS:Okay. Well good afternoon. This is May 2, 2024, and I am sitting in

Lexington, Kentucky with Dr. PG Peeples.

PEEPLES:Not a doctor.

CURRIS:PG Peeples.

PEEPLES:There you go. There you go.

CURRIS:Who is a highly recognized educator, (Peeples laughs) administrator, activist--

PEEPLES:Right.

CURRIS:--community leader, philanthropist, a son of Lynch, Kentucky.

PEEPLES:Yes.

CURRIS:And currently residing in Lexington, Kentucky.

PEEPLES:A proud son of Lynch.

CURRIS:A proud son of Lynch. As we've discussed, PG, the purpose of this

interview is being conducted for recording our posterity, and for the Benham

Hern Financial

Center, which we are establishing in City Hall for the purpose of displaying the

financial lives of coal miners and their families. And I have asked dear PG

today to sit with me for his historical reflections--

PEEPLES:Right.

CURRIS:-- of our great area of Benham, Lynch, Cumberland, the Tri-City area.

I--for the record, I have asked PG if he would sign, and he has done, a document

agreeing that this recording will be considered a gift to the center, the Louie

B. Nunn Center for Oral History, open for unrestricted use and including being

quoted from, published, broadcast through all media, and including any use that

he, PG, would like to make (both laugh) of this. Well, oh my gosh,

PG, here we are, sitting twenty-five, thirty years later. Children of the mountains.

PEEPLES:Ah, yeah.

CURRIS:You from Lynch. Me from Benham. And although they were both coal camps,

there were many similarities, but also many differences. And I want us to be

able to leave for our ancestors the stories that only we know. And if we don't

tell them, they are going to be gone forever.

PEEPLES:They'll be gone.

CURRIS:So I would like to start with first of all your full name.

PEEPLES:Okay. Porter, P-o-r-t-e-r, Porter, middle initial G, which is Geneal.

Porter Geneal Peeples, P-e-e-p-l-e-s, Senior.

CURRIS:

What is the--spell the Geneal for me.

PEEPLES:G-e-n-e-a-l.

CURRIS:N-e-a--is that a family name?

PEEPLES:Yes. My--my father was Roy. His--his father was O'Neal. My father was

Roy O'Neal, and my oldest brother was Roy O'Neal, Jr.

CURRIS:So are you saying O'Neal, or Geneal?

PEEPLES:No. They were O'Neal.

CURRIS:Okay. Spell that one for me.

PEEPLES:All right. O with the little dash, N-e-a-l.

CURRIS:Right. Okay. Okay, so they were the O'Neals. Well, let's just jump into

the family situation.

PEEPLES:Sure.

CURRIS:Now, tell me where your people came from--

PEEPLES:Okay.

CURRIS:--to Lynch.

PEEPLES:My father came from Bessemer, Alabama, to work in the coal mines in

Lynch. I'm trying--I don't remember the exact year, but I've got the information

on that he went to work and he and I stayed still in Lynch. Family?

CURRIS:Please.

PEEPLES:Family of nine kids. My mother came from Chattanooga, Tennessee. My

mother's name was Carrie Lou Peeples. L-o-u.

CURRIS:I--Carrie?

PEEPLES:Yes.

CURRIS:Spell.

PEEPLES:C-a-r-r-i-e. Carrie. Carrie Lou Peeples.

CURRIS:What was her maiden name?

PEEPLES:Conner. C-o-n-n-e-r. Conner.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:They both had been married before. My mother's husband was killed in

the coal mines in Lynch. And my father was

divorced before he left Alabama. And then, you know, nine kids later, yeah.

CURRIS:That is amazing.

PEEPLES:Five boys, four girls.

CURRIS:And that was the--that's between Carrie Lou and your father?

PEEPLES:And my father.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:And each one of them have had one.

CURRIS:All right.

PEEPLES:Now my mother's daughter was with us.

CURRIS:Right.

PEEPLES:And my father's daughter was still with her mother in Alabama. And she

ended up moving to Cleveland.

CURRIS:Well I am fascinated by the fact that we have a whole contingent from Alabama.

PEEPLES:Yeah, Alabama.

CURRIS:Now how did your father know to come to Lynch?

PEEPLES:Well, I've heard stories about this man called Limehouse. What I

understood is Limehouse used to bring

African American men from the area in Alabama to Lynch because of the

opportunities to work in the mine. And that's the story that I've heard. Now

whether Daddy came with Limehouse or not, but--and then his brother, Harden

Peeples, came after him to Lynch. That was probably the pattern, one brother

come, then others come. Some were married after they got there. Some were

married before. They would come, go back and get the families. But--

CURRIS:Tell me, if you know, what would life have been like in Alabama to make

coming to Lynch, Kentucky a major step up?

PEEPLES:United States

Steel had this--and still has--a reputation of taking such good care of their

workers because of the union. So those were attractive features that United

States Steel had about it that, as I said, attracted people to come there.

CURRIS:Well I have heard that story, and it's interesting because when you

think about Lynch being US Steel, and Benham being International Harvester--

PEEPLES:International Harvester.

CURRIS:There are, again, similarities, but major differences.

PEEPLES:Differences.

CURRIS:But PG, tell me first, when were you born, and where? What year?

PEEPLES:I was born in Lynch at the Notre Dame Hospital October 29, 1945.

CURRIS:

One of the things that I have found most fascinating, when I interviewed my

sister Alice to talk about specifically the women of the mountains, there are

three years' difference between the two of us. And there are about four years'

difference between the--years between you and I. Just that short period of time

has had a significant impact on what our memories were. What one of us remembers

and the other doesn't. How one interpreted it and another doesn't. So I'm going

to be very interested in--as we go along--

PEEPLES:Sure.

CURRIS:--in seeing all of that. Now when you talk about Lynch, Kentucky, did

you--describe your hometown and area as you came to know it.

PEEPLES:Okay. The town was built by United States Steel. All of the houses were

built by United States Steel.

Built for the coal miners, and the miners would rent the houses from the

company. For that time in history, there--I would say they were modern. United

States Steel invested well in those houses that they built for the coal miners

there. Like I said, we had the hospital as it did. We had three stores. Had a

store in Number Five, a store in Number One, and then we had the Big Store in

the middle. And the Big Store was just that, compared to the others, but it--for

our town--

CURRIS:The company store?

PEEPLES:Yeah. For our town, that was huge.

I always remember the Big Store at Christmas time, when you went upstairs where

they had the toys set up. And, you know, you would go through there every day.

And the Big Store also had a very nice drugstore, and--where you could go in and

sit down and drink and eat. Very, very nice. The grocery store and the clothing

store were on the first floor. Very modern clothing for that time, and there

were--a lot of the men hunted and fished. My dad did. I started going fishing

with my dad before I was in the first grade. And did it until he passed. But one

of the things that--one of my precious memories

is that I was able to purchase a boat for my father. And he died about nine

months later. But the memories of that short period just all--

CURRIS:Priceless.

PEEPLES:Sure were. Just priceless. Yes.

CURRIS:Where did you take the boat?

PEEPLES:Well, the coal miners in eastern Kentucky all fished in Tennessee, at

the Tennessee Valley Lakes. So the boat we kept at home, but we would go to

North Lake, Douglas Lake, Cherokee Lake. Friday evenings when I got out of

school, I was looking forward to Dad coming home by five o'clock and we're in

the car and we're gone for the weekend, fishing Friday night, Saturday night,

and then coming back home on Sunday.

CURRIS:

Would you camp out? Or would you stay at hotels? How would you--

PEEPLES:No. No hotels that they had, not for Black people at that time.

(Laughs) But what we did was during the daytime--if we were fishing at night,

during the daytime we camped. And the nighttime we fished. And just the opposite

in the spring. We did that. But--

CURRIS:Were there public camping grounds? Or did you just--or did it matter in

those days--

PEEPLES:It didn't matter.

CURRIS:--since it was federal grounds?

PEEPLES:It didn't matter. When we were fishing, we just had certain places on

the islands that we would camp--that we were used to. Like if it was--if the

weather was cold or cool, Dad and them would find a stump, pour gasoline on it,

(Curris laughs) light that stump, and it would heat up everything. In the

daytime, there were certain islands

that had certain trees, and that's where you'd sit under the shade trees. For

eating, Dad and them had the little gas cookstove, and, you know, we ate a lot

of sausage, eggs, bacon, and morning, noon, and night. And then the food that we

would bring from home. But yeah, they'd cook. They'd cook coffee and make coffee

and do all of that.

CURRIS:Don't you wish that your great-grandchildren had those opportunities?

PEEPLES:Oh yeah. I do. I do.

CURRIS:It was a marvelous way to have entertainment and be so close to your

family and friends.

PEEPLES:There's an endearment I still have at my age from those memories.

Bill Turner, a dear friend of mine--

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:--his father took him fishing along--we all would fish together

sometimes. Bill and I still go down the memory lane.

CURRIS:Do you really?

PEEPLES:Oh yeah, we still do. Now I still go to Tennessee, and I've got--see,

the Griffith family from Benham. Wolfram (??) Griffith and his son Stevie,

Stevie and Major. Well they're fisherman. And so those are my fishing buddies

now. It's interesting that we all have followed in our fathers' footsteps. In

fact, this morning I was communicating with Major because he was on his way

fishing. So Major and Stevie and I, and Paul Smith from Lynch, we all fish together.

CURRIS:Do you know, it's been very interesting. This whole fishing,

whether you're Black, you're white, it didn't matter. Everybody went fishing.

PEEPLES:Everybody went fishing.

CURRIS:Everybody went fishing. And it just--it was another one of those types

of activities that bound people.

PEEPLES:It bonded people.

CURRIS:Absolutely.

PEEPLES:It bonded--the fishermen would, you know you were always safe because

somebody come all the way--if you had some issues with your boat, you were going

to be given assistance by the cone (??)--by the other guys, all the time. If you--

CURRIS:Now, all of the fishing and so forth that we're talking about, PG, let's

relate that back to the communities. What did the women do for entertainment?

What did your mother do?

PEEPLES:(Laughs)

For entertainment, you know, that's an interesting question that I don't think I

ever thought about that much. But I know my mother--and I don't know this--my

mother liked to sew. She had that little Singer sewing machine, and--that she

would make things. The women--and this is still not recreation, but this is

what--they--what's called canning, putting the peaches in the jar and the

blackberries in the jar that we would live off of. They would--church. They were

all involved in the church.

CURRIS:Were there flower clubs for the women?

PEEPLES:I know there were in Cumberland. I'm not so sure about Lynch. I'm not

so sure.

CURRIS:Okay. I know my mother was always exchange--Pauline Hern--

was always exchanging flowers with everybody. You know--

PEEPLES:They may have done more of that.

CURRIS:And they may have done that.

PEEPLES:I guess I wasn't--I was a father's son (both laugh).

CURRIS:That was so typical, wasn't it?

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:That was so typical.

PEEPLES:I was a father's son, and, you know, I walked in his footsteps.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:Not, obviously, no--not that I cared more about him than my mother, but

we had more in common in terms of what we did.

CURRIS:That was the way of the age.

PEEPLES:Right.

CURRIS:That is the way that it worked.

PEEPLES:It--rabbit hunting with my dad, fishing with my dad, and that was just

the way it was.

CURRIS:Let me ask you--

PEEPLES:Wouldn't trade it for anything in the world.

CURRIS:No. What are the names of your wife and children?

PEEPLES:Okay, my first wife was Billye Morrow. Her mother was a

nurse.

CURRIS:Okay. Spell her name for me.

PEEPLES:M-o-r-r-o-w, Morrow. B-i-l-l-y-e. Her mother was Dorothy Morrow, the

Black nurse in Lynch.

CURRIS:Yes. Everybody knew Dorothy.

PEEPLES:Yeah, everybody knew Dorothy.

CURRIS:Oh my gosh, yes.

PEEPLES:Yeah. That was my first wife.

CURRIS:So wait, was Billye Morrow is your first wife.

PEEPLES:First wife. We had one son.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:And--

CURRIS:And his name?

PEEPLES:He was Porter.

CURRIS:Porter. Okay. And your second wife?

PEEPLES:Wilma.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:She was from Hazard.

CURRIS:Oh my gosh. You left the county (both laugh). You went all across the

mountain to Perry County.

PEEPLES:Met up after we both graduated from college. Both of us went to

south--went to college. I went to Southeast, and she went to--they called it in

an ad--community college.

CURRIS:

The community college there.

PEEPLES:Yep.

CURRIS:Part of the UK system at that time.

PEEPLES:And we both transferred--yeah. Both of them. If the UK system had not

developed and opened the college when I was in the ninth grade, I wouldn't have

gone to college. My parents were not prepared to send me away. But when they

opened the community college--and I would go away to my brothers and sisters in

the summer, I saved my money. I remember--I think I'm right--tuition was like

one hundred and ten dollars a semester. I could save that off my first couple

paydays in New York. And that was what I did. And so when I came back, the money

was already in the bank.

CURRIS:Well I want to come back to Southeast in a little bit because there is a

whole story there, for sure. What was Wilma's maiden name, or her last name?

PEEPLES:

Give me time. I'm thinking, in a minute.

CURRIS:No problem. No problem. But when we're talking about family and

children, did you and Wilma have children?

PEEPLES:No. She had a daughter.

CURRIS:Okay. Okay. Now, let's jump to your educational background. Let's talk

about first of all, grade school. Tell me where you went to grade school, and

what were the activities, and what were some of the things you loved, and some

of the things you hated (laughs)?

PEEPLES:Oh, I hated the spankings that the teacher gave you with the strap.

That I hated. So I tried to be a good guy --------(??) I'd avoid that. First

grade, you know, elementary school. One of the things I remember about every

year for school was getting the new clothes

to go to school. And because of my age, the way it fell, when school started in

September, and my birthday in October, they--my parents thought I was going to

get to go that year, but because of the October cutoff, I didn't. So I got an

extra year staying home, and I'd like tell--I'd tell this, that I got new

clothes that year and didn't have to go to school (laughs).

CURRIS:You got a special treat.

PEEPLES:Yeah, I got a special treat.

CURRIS:Now where did those clothes come from?

PEEPLES:From the Lynch Big Store.

CURRIS:Big Store. Now, was there any difference in where you could shop in the

Big Store and the white miners could shop?

PEEPLES:No.

CURRIS:It was all together, wasn't it.

PEEPLES:No. The only thing that was openly different was the bathhouse. White

guys had one side of the bathhouse, and Black theirs.

But that was no big deal.

CURRIS:Yeah. Exactly. Well you know talking about clothes for school--

PEEPLES:Collins, my wife. Wilma Collins.

CURRIS:Collins. There we go.

PEEPLES:C-o-l-l-i-n-s.

CURRIS:There we go. Thank you. So (laughs) what do you remember as being the

most fun in grade school? Did you have a particular favorite teacher? Or--

PEEPLES:I don't know if I had a favorite teacher until the--after about the

sixth grade. But we had one teacher, Miss Jackson. She was a hard line. She was

Sergeant Bilko. [Editor’s note: Sergeant Bilko was a television character played

by Phil Silvers in the 1950s.] I mean, she was tough. She was military type of

tough. And just about every--all the kids who went to that school would tell you

the same thing, that

we did not like Miss Jackson.

CURRIS:The--now which school are you going to at this point?

PEEPLES:Lynch West Main.

CURRIS:Now was that both high--grade school and high school?

PEEPLES:Through the eleventh grade. We integrated my senior year. So I was part

of the first class that went to East Main.

CURRIS:The--

PEEPLES:Which was interesting.

CURRIS:Yes. I definitely want to get to that, because my sister Alice had one

or two years of when Benham closed the school because of--

PEEPLES:--so she went to Lynch?--

CURRIS:--lack of students. And she went to Lynch. And I wondered if you had any

memory of her. Your times would not have exactly crossed.

PEEPLES:No, but a lot of my classmates from Benham were the Hodges, Julius Hodge.

CURRIS:Oh, sure.

PEEPLES:

Gary Lewis.

CURRIS:Yes. Bruce Hern was my brother. I don't--

PEEPLES:Yes. Ron Johnson.

CURRIS:Ron Johnson.

PEEPLES:Yeah. Those were my classmates.

CURRIS:All right. Now I think my brother was a little younger than that, yeah. So--

PEEPLES:What was his name?

CURRIS:Bruce. Bruce Hern.

PEEPLES:Okay.

CURRIS:But I think he came maybe a year or two later. The year that they won

the championship in football.

PEEPLES:That was my senior year.

CURRIS:Okay. That was his freshman year, I think, at Lynch.

PEEPLES:Yeah. But that was '63. '64.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:But they won it three years later, and my brother was on that team,

too. Maceo Peeples. And little Joe Washington. That team. That team. So I don't

know--was your brother in between that? Or was he on--

CURRIS:He was on that first one.

PEEPLES:So he was on the one with

me.

CURRIS:His must have been the '63 one.

PEEPLES:'63.

CURRIS:Yeah. Because it was almost immediately after integration. It was the

first championship after--that would be it.

PEEPLES:Well we did that my--our senior--the first year? The first year. The

year that John Kennedy died.

CURRIS:Yes. Nineteen six--

PEEPLES:--I remember so well. It was a Friday afternoon. We were going to play

Paris, Kentucky that night. So they were commuting, coming up to Lynch. We

went--we were in a pep rally in the auditorium. And this principal came in and

made the announcement that John Kennedy had just been shot. And we still--

CURRIS:What was the reaction?

PEEPLES:Oh just--even us, in high school, it was pretty much just devastating.

Devastating. And we went and we played the game because they had already

traveled, but I remember that so well. I remember that just like yesterday.

CURRIS:(Coughs) That's a day that none of us forget.

PEEPLES:Live in infamy.

CURRIS:Forever.

PEEPLES:Forever.

CURRIS:But so then you're in grade school. Then you stay at West Main up until

the eleventh grade.

PEEPLES:Okay. There was one break in there. My mother's brother lived in

Harlan, and his wife--they were both teachers.

CURRIS:Lived where?

PEEPLES:Harlan. Harlan Rosenwald School. They were teachers, but they didn't

have any kids. They wanted to adopt me. So I did go and stay with them

for a year and a half in Harlan. But I still--I went back to Lynch the next year.

CURRIS:What grades were you in Harlan?

PEEPLES:Fifth, sixth--fifth and sixth grade.

CURRIS:Fifth and sixth.

PEEPLES:Mid-year of sixth grade I went back.

CURRIS:Now when you come back, from there through high school, the eleventh

grade, what were some of your activities? What did you--what did the students do

for fun?

PEEPLES:Well, for the guys there was athletics.

CURRIS:Tell me about it.

PEEPLES:You start playing different classes. We had something called a class

tournament. Seventh grade versus eighth, ninth. So that was a big deal in the

spring, basketball. And usually if you were in the ninth grade, you'd start

playing--you start joining the varsity teams.

So--and that was--this is probably the shocker--there was serious competition

academically. Making that honor roll was a big deal, and that you took a lot of

pride in. There was, you know, participating in the physical education classes,

PE, where you learned to tumble. You learned to do different things. Then you

were getting to a point where you were--you went to--well in Lynch we called it

the pool room, which was there, our recreation center.

CURRIS:Where was that located?

PEEPLES:In Number One.

CURRIS:Now where was Number One? When you're coming--

PEEPLES:From the Benham line--

CURRIS:From the Benham line, um-hm.

PEEPLES:--up to

probably near--Number One was the neighborhood there. Then you went Number Two, Three--

CURRIS:Oh, all right.

PEEPLES:--going up that way. I lived at Number Five, on Church Street up there.

Then Number Two and Three were the houses on the right side going up, on the

right side by the river, going up. And then Number Four was where the Big Store

was. And then Number Five was where we--up past the hospital and on up in that

area. And then get down to--go down Church Street, and then you would get run

into Number Six, which went up past First Baptist Church. And then they

always--I remember they called that Lonesome Seven, which was further up towards the--not

the clubhouse, but the country club.

CURRIS:I know what you're talking about. Um-hm. So the pool room was in Number One.

PEEPLES:Number One.

CURRIS:Now what were some of the activities and so forth that were at the pool--

PEEPLES:Well that was the pool room in the bar room, the guys' room that we

shot pool. Upstairs there was a Rockola, [Editor’s note: Rockola is a brand of

juke box made, starting in 1927 and still in business at the time of this

interview.] and we danced, and there--hot dogs, drink, cakes, cookies. And we

did that Friday night, Saturday night. We ate our lunches--

CURRIS:Well now the girls were involved with that.

PEEPLES:Hmm?

CURRIS:So the girls could come to the dances and all of that.

PEEPLES:Yeah, upstairs. They didn't go down to the bottom of the pool room. But

upstairs. And guys, we'd go upstairs too, so dancing and--the pool room was

also, you know, we didn't have a cafeteria. So that's where we got lunch. They

made hot dogs that you could buy,

and then you could buy RC and a moon pie.

CURRIS:Did US Steel support that?

PEEPLES:Hmm?

CURRIS:Did US Steel support the food?

PEEPLES:No. That--the pool room was privately owned.

CURRIS:That's interesting. So it was local people.

PEEPLES:Um-hm.

CURRIS:That had the pool room.

PEEPLES:Right.

CURRIS:But it's fascinating that that's where you would have lunch from school.

PEEPLES:Yeah. Well, those of us who lived in Number Five, we both carried our

lunches. I carried my lunch to school. And as I got older, then we would--the

guys would, we'd go to the pool room and eat lunch upstairs.

CURRIS:See, we would take our lunch. That's what we called it. We would take

our lunch.

PEEPLES:Yeah, that's--we'd take a lunch. In a little brown bag.

CURRIS:Exactly. Exactly. And--

PEEPLES:But there was another thing about elementary school was getting that

new lunch bucket, lunchbox. My dad and them

had lunch buckets, but we had those little pretty blue and red, yellow lunchboxes.

CURRIS:Yes. And it was so much fun to open up and see what was there. What had

your mother put in? What would you--what would be in your lunchbox?

PEEPLES:Bologna sandwich. Party meat sandwich. Moon pie. Yeah. Moon pies and an

orange or an apple.

CURRIS:There you go. There you go. Well now to kind of wrap up the high school

part of things, did you have--whether it's a principal, teachers, whomever, that

you felt as if recognized your abilities and mentored you during those times, or not?

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:Who?

PEEPLES:All of them.

CURRIS:Tell me about this.

PEEPLES:

Honestly, our African American teachers pushed us harder because they knew what

the world was like out there. They were insistent that you're never late for

anything anywhere. You don't want the stigma of being tardy. Plus there were--it

was kind of a thing where Black people were supposed to be not disciplined. And

our teachers made sure they were going to fix us, for me to make sure we didn't

live that out. So they were tough on us on that. Being on time. Doing your

homework. Getting it in on time.

Sunday school.

CURRIS:What was the church?

PEEPLES:I went to First Baptist, and that's where First Baptist, which was up

almost in Number Six, Seven--

CURRIS:Oh, and the music that would come from that church was so beautiful.

PEEPLES:And then we had the Methodist church in Number Five. And then we had

Mt. Sinai Baptist in Number One.

CURRIS:It has been a recurring theme from those I have interviewed from Lynch

about how the Lynch Black school teachers intended for you to be prepared when

you left there.

PEEPLES:Absolutely.

CURRIS:And that they just were on top of it.

PEEPLES:And this from the first grade.

When you walked into Miss Wick's (??) class, you were going to boot camp. And

there was no nonsense. Absolutely no nonsense from the first through the

twelfth. No nonsense.

CURRIS:Was there any discipline problems in the community?

PEEPLES:No.

CURRIS:Tell us about this.

PEEPLES:Well, any and every adult in the community could chastise you. Any of

them could, and they would. And if they did, you were saying, "Lord, please

don't tell my Mama and Daddy that you had to do that." No as I call filth and

foul words. None of that. It was just--it was strict discipline.

CURRIS:That is our background.

Very, very much the same growing up in Benham. I mean, the same kind of thing.

Your parents knew about it before you even touched the door.

PEEPLES:Yeah. You didn't want to touch the door.

CURRIS:Unh-uh. And I know in Benham, if--and it would always be one of the

guys. It was never one of the girls (laughs), but if one of the guys had caused

a problem at school, boy, the father was there the next day, and if he was a

miner, he had to miss work to be there. And do you think that was going to

happen more than once?

PEEPLES:No. No more than once.

CURRIS:Do you know, you were talking about the language. I think probably one

of the most upsetting changes in our lifetime has been how we went from--I mean

you would be whipped if you took the Lord's name in vain.

PEEPLES:Um-hm. Um-hm.

CURRIS:To what you listen to now

on anything. It's just unbelievable that we're in the same country.

PEEPLES:Unbelievable.

CURRIS:At times over that.

PEEPLES:It's un--that was a song that I'd heard about--the way the song goes is

the father got sick, and while he was in his sickbed, he called the oldest son

to the bed, and told him that it's going to be on you to take care of the

family. And after he passed, he told his mom, "I'm going to drop out of school

to help take care of you." And the thing was, that one of Dad's strictest

rules. I remember that song. Dropping out of school was almost unheard of. I'll

tell you something else, though, that was unheard of. And I don't--I didn't pay

much attention to it. Divorces.

CURRIS:Did not happen.

PEEPLES:Didn't. It just didn't.

CURRIS:You know, there's a flip side to that one. As an attorney, the whole

domestic law area was of major interest to me, and I was in law school when the

no fault divorces came through. And I was able to see both sides to that story

because of the number of women that were abused.

PEEPLES:Oh yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:You know, abandoned? They had no choice. They could not really get a divorce.

PEEPLES:They were in it.

CURRIS:You were in it.

PEEPLES:

You're in it. And there were some abusive men. Really abusive men, then. Really abusive.

CURRIS:Well you know, I have heard stories. And this was about a Lynch miner, a

white miner, who would literally start with his wife and just strap the legs

right on down the family. And that eventually either the company stepped in, or

some of his co-miners, C-O miners stepped on, and said, "This has got to stop."

Did you ever hear of any stories?

PEEPLES:I've heard stories like that. Yeah. Yeah. I've heard stories like that.

The good guys would not tolerate that. They wouldn't. They would not tolerate

that. The other thing is,

there's a connection between some of the abuse and the alcohol situation. These

guys would be drunk weekends, and some of them just went nuts. Not only just on

their wives. They just went nuts on each other. But you know what was

interesting? Monday morning, five o'clock, they were out that door.

CURRIS:In that mine.

PEEPLES:Going on to that mine. And some of them wouldn't say a word from Monday

to Friday. And Saturday, when they'd get a couple drinks, Lordy mercy Jesus (laughs).

CURRIS:You know, it was--you know, I do not believe that today's world

understands the bravery of coal miners. Without--and at first, of course, until

the seventies, we're talking about men. But to go down

in that dark earth, totally surrounded, the amount of bravery it took to just

work on a daily basis.

PEEPLES:You ever been in the museum?

CURRIS:Yes, oh yes.

PEEPLES:One time I went. I always knew I loved my father beyond the shadow of a

doubt. After I made that trip through that and came out, and then I thought,

"Thirty-eight years, Daddy did that." Thirty-eight years.

CURRIS:You have to see it to even have a glimmer. To even have a glimmer of

what it--

PEEPLES:Yeah. I was somewhat claustrophobic anyway. But that--it wasn't the

claustrophobia. It was just knowing what they did. And we went through in that

little ride. Thinking about your fathers who were in there with coal this high,

crawling around.

CURRIS:Thirty-two inches

is what I've heard from Rainbo--Jimmy Dale Hensley. Thirty-two inches. He

started out in a seam of thirty-two inches. I mean, that's less than a yard.

It's amazing.

PEEPLES:And you had to do everything in there. That's where you had to eat your

food, everything.

CURRIS:Did you ever work in the mines?

PEEPLES:No. I graduated from--went straight to Southeast.

CURRIS:Let's go to Southeast Community College, and just give me your thoughts.

You referenced the fact you were in ninth grade when the system started. Start

there and just tell us about the importance.

PEEPLES:Oh, we were all--it was already being drilled into us by the Black

teachers to be the best that you could be. So that was the discipline that was

drilled into us. Some of the--some of them

had a chance to go to Kentucky State. That was the college for Blacks.

CURRIS:Absolutely.

PEEPLES:But what a blessing it was when Southeast opened because when Southeast

opened, there were--that was the opportunity. So it was a no brainer.

CURRIS:Because it's right there in Cumberland.

PEEPLES:No excuse.

CURRIS:No excuse.

PEEPLES:Go to Southeast.

CURRIS:What did you study when you were there?

PEEPLES:I graduated from Southeast with education. I graduated from college

with two teaching certificates. One was in special ed, and the other was in

regular elementary. I taught (laughs) I've been in this Urban League job

fifty-five years this fall. I taught for a grand total of one semester. Here's

the way that happened.

When I graduated, my last semester I was living at the YMCA downtown on Second Street.

CURRIS:In Cumberland.

PEEPLES:No. Here.

CURRIS:Oh, here. Here.

PEEPLES:Here in Lexington.

CURRIS:So you go from Southeast to UK.

PEEPLES:UK. And I'm getting ready to graduate. My senior year I'm doing student

teaching. So I lived at the YMCA. At that point, that's the only place I could

afford. Ten dollars a week. They opened the Urban League that year, and their

first office was in the YMCA. So I introduced myself to Mr. Brown.

CURRIS:What year would this be?

PEEPLES:'69. Mr. Brown came and opened the Urban League, so I introduced myself

to him. And he must have seen something in me.

CURRIS:And what was his name?

PEEPLES:Walter Brown. I'll show you his picture after. And

that summer, he offered me to come to work for the Urban League. The rest is history.

CURRIS:How do--you must believe in fate.

PEEPLES:Absolutely. God had a hand in that.

CURRIS:So how many years have you been with the Urban League?

PEEPLES:Since '69.

CURRIS:And what is your current title?

PEEPLES:President and CEO.

CURRIS:Now tell me about the journey.

PEEPLES:How long you got to listen? When I started, at that time I was the

youngest CEO in the country. And you know, we've got about ninety plus Urban

Leagues. Now, with the exception of one guy, I am the second longest serving.

The journey?

I think it was predestination. My mental attitude and my patience, and I think

one of the things that contribute to that patience was my training in college

for working with the special ed kids. You learn to appreciate small gains. And

that's what Urban League work is. Dealing with race relations. Dealing with

problems. You learn to move along at a pace that, because you know it's more

important to get it done right than get it done fast.

CURRIS:Do you know what's fascinating to me about all of this is your reference to

the expectations of the Black teachers at home, which obviously were supported

by your families.

PEEPLES:Of course.

CURRIS:They would have had to have been. Then coming to Southeast, and

particularly with special ed, and what a foundation that gave you for all the

future great work that you were going to be doing.

PEEPLES:Foundation.

CURRIS:Yes. You know, talking about foundation, let's go back to Lynch. Lynch

had the housing that you were talking about. Benham, you know, these were coal

camps. And we had housing. Did you have to pay rent?

PEEPLES:Yeah. They rented.

CURRIS:Okay. Tell me about that. What about the utilities and so forth?

PEEPLES:I think they were in there. I think they were included in the rent. I'm

not sure. I don't really know.

CURRIS:Do you have any idea what kind of rent

you were talking about?

PEEPLES:No.

CURRIS:Too long ago? (Laughs) You may never have known, though. Children don't

care about those things. So you may not have even known at the time.

PEEPLES:I just remember the scrip.

CURRIS:Tell me about the scrip, and then we'll get back to the houses.

PEEPLES:The scrip was what you used to go to the grocery store. A little yellow

thing about this long, and you would go there. And Mama said, "Get ten-dollar

scrip." So they would write that out. And then when you go around to the store,

they turned it over, and you started ten at the top. If you spent two dollars,

minus two, until that was exhausted. And you'd give another scrip.

CURRIS:You wouldn't have any of that scrip anywhere, would you? Or know anyone

that does?

PEEPLES:No I wouldn't (??).

CURRIS:I would love to find some for the exhibit. So if you hear of any, let me know.

That would be terrific.

PEEPLES:Put it--get the word out there. There's got to be some somewhere.

CURRIS:Got to be.

PEEPLES:Got to be some somewhere. So it was the scrip that we used. I also

liked going to the store for some of the elders, or some of the women who didn't

have kids.

CURRIS:Tell me about that.

PEEPLES:Oh, you'd go to the store for Miss Jones. She would give you a nickel

or a dime. That was millionaire money. (laughs)

CURRIS:So again, it comes back to that--

PEEPLES:Or carry coal in for them.

CURRIS:Now was this an expectation by your parents that this was just part of life?

PEEPLES:It was part of life. Newspaper route.

CURRIS:Tell me about this.

PEEPLES:I had a newspaper route. I delivered the court--the Knoxville Journal.

You know, Knoxville Journal each morning.

CURRIS:Oh, absolutely.

PEEPLES:Knoxville Sentinel

was in the evening. So I carried the Knoxville Journal. And I had to be out of

that house and gone by 6:30 in the morning to get them delivered and then back

home to go to school.

CURRIS:So now is your route there in Lynch? All up and down in Lynch?

PEEPLES:My route was all over Lynch. And sometimes depending on what shift my

dad was on, he would carry me to some of them. But most times, bicycle or

walking. You had to go. But--and then on weekends, you could go around the same

route and collect from the people who you had delivered. And I created myself

another route, an information dissemination route. Back in that time, we had

Black magazines called Ebony and Tan and Jet. So I was able

to be in touch with the Johnson company in Chicago and set up a route for me in

Lynch. And they would send me the books, and I would take--I would deliver them

to my people and sell them, too. And then my percentage I'd keep, and the other

I'd send in the mail to Chicago.

CURRIS:What other employment opportunities did the young guys have?

PEEPLES:Washing cars.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:Carrying the coal in. Cutting grass. Picking berries and apples for the

elderly people.

CURRIS:What about the girls? Did they have any kind of jobs?

PEEPLES:Ironing. Washing. Helping clean. Helping the people clean the houses.

Those kind of things.

CURRIS:Interesting.

PEEPLES:But the guys had more opportunities.

CURRIS:

Yeah. Now did your mother or any of your friends' mothers have any kind of

employment outside, in a business or nursing?

PEEPLES:Some did. Some still did the house cleaning. A few of them may have

worked at the store. Not much. But by and large there wasn't much time to work

when you're raising nine. That was the average size in Lynch, the average family

size. Nine to twelve was not unusual.

CURRIS:No. I remember those days very well.

PEEPLES:Nine kids in -----(??).

CURRIS:Which takes me back to the houses. How were the houses selected for you?

I mean, was there some system by which you would have a particular house in a

particular camp?

PEEPLES:I don't know specifically. But I do know--let's take my family--that

I lived in a house on one side of the street. My grandfather lived on the other

side. So when he passed, I know we moved across. His house had three floors.

Ours had two. People some kind of way of letting somebody know they were moving

or something like that, but I don't know exactly.

CURRIS:It probably--

PEEPLES:There's probably some research to be done on that, but I don't know.

CURRIS:I would imagine US Steel had to give their approval. The company

probably had to give their approval for you to--

PEEPLES:For you to move. Of course. Of course. And I'm sure there was a change

in the amount of rent if you moved to a larger house.

CURRIS:What about the--for example, my grandmother--so we're going back early

to let's say thirties.

In her house, at first, there was always a pump for water. But there were no

indoor bathroom facilities at all until I want to say the midfifties. It was

outhouses. But every house had a little plot they could use for a garden if they want.

PEEPLES:Garden, yep.

CURRIS:Describe your all's houses in Lynch. Were they the same?

PEEPLES:No, the houses in Lynch, all of them had--not indoor plumbing, but they

had indoor water, sinks, and the water running. Not hot, but cold. And you

had--though every time I was thinking of a basketball courts, tubby (??)

with--you had the Saturday night tub.

CURRIS:That's right.

PEEPLES:That sat close to the stove. And that's where you took that bath. Get

the hot water off.

Pour it in that tub. After I finished, there's the water already heating for the

next one, for the next one.

CURRIS:And this is on a coal stove or a wood stove?

PEEPLES:Coal stove.

CURRIS:And that's where your mother did all of her cooking.

PEEPLES:Cooking, oh yes. Yes. She had the coal stove. And it's amazing how they

could cook in that oven.

CURRIS:The cakes and pies.

PEEPLES:Amazing.

CURRIS:Amazing.

PEEPLES:Amazing. I don't know how they did that.

CURRIS:Today we'd starve.

PEEPLES:So yeah, that coal stove. And then it was a tremendous jump up when we

got the Warm Morning stoves. [Editor’s note: Warm Morning brand stoves were made

by the Locke Stove Company. There were several different models made for

heating. Some burned coal, some burned wood, and some could burn both coal or wood.]

CURRIS:Tell me about this.

PEEPLES:Those were the stove that were in the living room. That's what they

were called. Warm Morning. And that's when you got

rid of the fireplace that was there. And you have the Warm Morning stove, and

that's exactly what--it would keep the--it would keep most of the downstairs

warm. And then you still kept the fireplaces upstairs. And the fireplaces,

you--we'd have to chop the wood to start the fires, and bring the coal in to

keep the fires going. And then I remember we did something Daddy called banking

the fire, where, at night, you would put ashes over it so it wouldn't go out.

Then the next morning, you'd turn it over, the coal, and it gets back to doing

its business.

CURRIS:Yes. I remember. I did not remember the name, though, being the Warm

Morning, but I know exactly

what you are talking about.

PEEPLES:The Warm Morning stove.

CURRIS:The Warm Morning stoves.

PEEPLES:Yeah, so when they started selling those in Cumberland, yeah.

CURRIS:Well jumping from the company houses, let's go to the life of a coal

miner. Just using your family as an example, how did your day begin, and what

happened throughout the day?

PEEPLES:For the coal miner, or for me?

CURRIS:Let's start with the coal miner, with your dad.

PEEPLES:I just--it's funny. I just heard somebody say this the other day. Life

for the coal miner was can't to can't.

CURRIS:Was from--

PEEPLES:Can't to can't. You leave home in the morning and you can't see. You

come home and night, you can't see.

CURRIS:True.

PEEPLES:So Dad was gone when we got up.

He came home in the evening, depends on--summertime, the days are longer. A

special part of the days when Dad came home was, "What's in the bucket for me?"

You know, Dad would bring a cake back.

CURRIS:Really?

PEEPLES:Yeah. So it was a rush about who was going to get it today, who would

get it tomorrow. He would bring an orange or something back.

CURRIS:So what's in the bucket for me?

PEEPLES:And I think he intentionally knew that that was special to us, and he

would bring it. So that was a song. "What's in the bucket for me?"

CURRIS:Isn't it interesting how something perceived today as so small was so

grand at those times?

PEEPLES:Like whenever I could get a chance

to go to the bathhouse, when Dad's in there showering, and I could meet him when

he came out the bath. Now when they came out the mine, I couldn't tell him from

anybody else. But after he showered and came out, and I'd get to walk along

beside him and carry the bucket.

CURRIS:Oh, and that was big.

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:That was such a big deal. Oh my goodness.

PEEPLES:Walking home beside him and carrying the bucket.

CURRIS:The--now let's switch to you. What was your typical day--let's say when

you're in high school.

PEEPLES:Okay. High school. So you played sports from the time you got into

ninth grade. So your typical day was morning. High school, I think up to ninth

grade I--after ninth grade, I don't think I carried the paper. But that typical

morning was, you know, you go to school. And then at the end of the day,

you know, football practice, basketball practice, and then from Number One to

Number Five, you walked. Now, in the going to school in the morning, you know we

never had--I have never been on a yellow school bus in my life. Never. We didn't

have buses, school buses. Different people carried them. There were some people

that didn't work, or worked second shift. My uncle, my Uncle Bill, would

carry--his brother Roy carried us. He'd drive us to school in the morning. And

then in the evening, Daddy had arranged for somebody else to bring us home. Now,

when I was in high school, I had to get home best way I could when you were

doing sports. But, you know, two or three guys, you're walking home together.

You didn't even think

about it.

CURRIS:That was just part of life.

PEEPLES:Part of it.

CURRIS:Part of life.

PEEPLES:Yeah, part of it. Now, when also there was--it was fun in the warm

weather to walk your girlfriend home from school, especially if she lived in

Number Five. Yeah.

CURRIS:That would be a little distance.

PEEPLES:Now what was also interesting was the kids who lived at--white kids who

lived in Number One came from East Main. There used to be pushing and shoving on

the small sidewalk. But after a while, that--you know, I'm walking this way. I

ain't going to move. You don't--you know, that kind of thing.

CURRIS:Was there very much either discrimination or integration, or just

everybody goes out and plays? What was the deal?

PEEPLES:Well we all grew up playing together. If we had a basketball, we had

basketball goals on the outhouse.

And you just--we all played together. Played football together up at the church

on the top of the hill. They had a pretty good yard in the back, so we all

played there. We'd come play against each other, but hey, that was it. Our

fathers and the Black men and the white men grew up together.

CURRIS:Did you happen to know whether or not there was equal pay for an equal

job regardless of race? See, I did not realize until I--because it was normal.

You know, at home, we had--my golly, how many Eastern European countries were

represented? A lot, you know? So we had Eastern Europeans. We had Black. We had

white. We had different religious faiths. And I personally don't remember

any problems. But then my parents were very strict. I wasn't permitted out and

about, (laughs) you know, after school and things like that unless they knew

exactly what I was doing and where I was. But I don't remember there being.

PEEPLES:There was not open racial tension. It was not there. If there was an

inner squabble, it was just teenagers or kids being kids.

CURRIS:That's my memory.

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:Yeah, that's my memory.

PEEPLES:And those fights could be just as harsh Black on Black or white on

white kids. But it was. It was, it wasn't. And the athletics bonded us too. A

lot of pride in being a Lynch boy. Oh, God, Benham, we--Benham--the Black school

was Rams.

What was the white school?

CURRIS:Tigers.

PEEPLES:Tigers, yeah.

CURRIS:Tigers.

PEEPLES:Yeah, I've seen them photos in the inn up there. But yeah. Lot of

pride. A lot of pride.

CURRIS:And we took those games seriously (laughs).

PEEPLES:So seriously. Friday--my brother and I still talk about Friday nights.

In fact he says, "I can still smell the grass." (both laugh) “I can still smell

the grass.”

CURRIS:Well was it a shock to you, because it was for me--it was many years

later before I realized that within America, there were tensions. Because you

and I grew up, and we've both, you know, we both have recognized that we did not

face the strife on daily living

that other parts of the country were facing. Was it a surprise to you to

discover that?

PEEPLES:Now, we knew that in the deep South it was more segregated, but not

viciously segregated. But then certain things started to happen, like Clinton,

Tennessee, when they were trying to integrate. Little Rock, Arkansas, or the

murder of the young man. Those kind of things made us understand some of the

warts of our country.

CURRIS:But we didn't grow up living them, did we.

PEEPLES:No.

CURRIS:Isn't that amazing? We were so insulated.

PEEPLES:We were.

CURRIS:When was your first television in Lynch that you know of?

PEEPLES:I may have been in junior high school. But what was also interesting

about my street

is that when Mr. Earnest Thompson and Miss Louise, they didn't have any kids. So

they were the first people on our street to own a TV.

CURRIS:They could afford one (laughs).

PEEPLES:Yeah. So when "Howdy Doody" came on five o'clock in the evening, all of

us would go to their house, sit right on the floor, and watch the TV. It was

expected. And they allowed it.

CURRIS:And we didn't have that filter from the out--we didn't have that from

the outside world on a regular, daily basis until television, to know that life

was that much different.

PEEPLES:It was different. It was different. Well, I say a lot of times, I

didn't know I was poor until I learned it on TV and in the news. What I had,

everybody else had,

and what everybody else had, I had. Now, I do as I got older realize when they

had strikes, the coal miner strikes. And that when we had to eat the commodity

food. But that cheese was the best in the world.

CURRIS:(laughs) That was good cheese.

PEEPLES:Good cheese.

CURRIS:But, you know, talking about the strikes, in your memory up through high

school, or even at Southeast, what are your memories about some of the strikes?

PEEPLES:Well actually we did not have a whole lot of strikes. What they had was

maybe some layoffs. It was like--not Brookside and them that had the strikes.

But because the unions kept that from happening. Every year,

or every so often, they'd have their negotiation, and settle with the unions. I

remember there was a union boss that Daddy used to talk about, John L. Lewis.

CURRIS:John L. Lewis.

PEEPLES:John L. Lewis. But--

CURRIS:He started it all.

PEEPLES:Yep. So that's what I recall. But it was the layoffs more than the strikes.

CURRIS:The--you know you were talking about scrip. When did they start paying

by either check or cash?

PEEPLES:You know, I was trying to think about that when--and I really don't know.

CURRIS:Do you remember it ever happening while you were there?

PEEPLES:I remember--well I do remember, and I guess this was cash--that when

S.C.R. Christmas--what was his name? Ran the bank?

CURRIS:S.C.R. Chris--

PEEPLES:

Cristen (??)--

CURRIS:I know who you're talking about. I'll get the name.

PEEPLES:Ran the bank.

CURRIS:Um-hm. Exactly.

PEEPLES:Well, I remember the men on payday lining up outside the bank.

CURRIS:Is this the bank in Lynch?

PEEPLES:No.

CURRIS:The one in Cumberland?

PEEPLES:Cumberland. Now, they may have done it in Lynch too, later, because they--

CURRIS:Chrisman. Chrisman.

PEEPLES:Chrisman. There was another branch up there, so I think they did that.

But they were--whatever they had been given at the mine, whether it was a check,

but they'd line up and cash it. And then they'd go home with cash.

CURRIS:Would they then use--in fact, I have the name of the Cumberland National Bank.

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:Mr. Chrisman. So Lynch miners used that bank. So there was no direct

relationship with US Steel

so that there were no deductions from the paycheck or anything to pay for anything.

PEEPLES:Not that I'm aware of.

CURRIS:Okay. Now if your parents wanted to buy something and they needed--let's

say we're talking about a piece of furniture or a car or something. Where would

they get their loans?

PEEPLES:Unfortunately, Time Finance because they--their interest on their loans

was just criminal.

CURRIS:And where was this?

PEEPLES:Time Finance was down on Main Street there, going through Cumberland.

CURRIS:Where was it in Cumberland?

PEEPLES:Right across from what was the A&P store.

CURRIS:I under--yes. I know where you're talking of.

PEEPLES:Time Finance Companies. And that was not just Lynch. That was

everywhere. Low-income people were always taken to the cleaners by finance companies.

CURRIS:And so that's where you would go.

Okay, now--

PEEPLES:Low-income people didn't know anything about banks. They saw that as

for rich people. And then--

CURRIS:So they wouldn't even go to Cumberland National Bank for a loan.

PEEPLES:No. They check cashing.

CURRIS:They--just for cashing.

PEEPLES:Cash the check. And the finance companies would make the loan

without--they'd make it easy to make the loan because they knew they were going

to--the interest they were going to get would just kill them. You'd go down

there and borrow fifty dollars. It would take you fifty years to pay it back.

CURRIS:Um-hm. So this is very interesting because in Benham they had the credit union.

PEEPLES:Right.

CURRIS:That International Harvester had sponsored it, and my dad was on his way

to Florida and stopped and visited his brother, and that's how he ended up

managing the credit union for the next forty-two years. But that gave them

an outlet for a loan.

PEEPLES:That Lynch didn't--Lynch didn't have.

CURRIS:That Lynch did not have. But I thought that there was a bank in Lynch,

but you don't remember one.

PEEPLES:Well, up across from the post office, they had a branch. It was a

little small--

CURRIS:Branch of the bank?

PEEPLES:I think it was a branch of Cumberland Bank.

CURRIS:Okay. That would make sense.

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay. Now at the time that they sold the houses to the miners, my dad

was asked to come up and open a branch for Lynch, and I don't know this, but

I've always assumed it was for the Lynch mining families to be able to get loans

to buy the houses. Do you know anything at all--

PEEPLES:I don't know anything specifically about that, but that's very--that

makes a lot of sense. I mean,

then from the Benham Credit Union, that was a strategic business move. When

you--look at the opportunities here. If I'm running this credit union and I see

everybody's going to start buying--that's a strategic move.

CURRIS:It did make getting loans for the IH miners a lot easier. And what they

did was they would deduct from the Benham paychecks what they owed at the Big

Store, what they owed at the meat market, and some predetermined amount for any

credit union loan. And then what was left, they would go to the pay windows and

get at first, you know scr--well in fact, I don't think the credit union was

there when they were doing scrip. But it was later when they had

either checks or cash. But they would go to the pay windows outside what is now

the City Hall. Where would the miners in Lynch go get their checks, or get their scrip?

PEEPLES:Oh, inside the store.

CURRIS:Okay. So the Big Store.

PEEPLES:Yeah. No, and the little one. Both of them.

CURRIS:Oh, all of them.

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:If you walk in the store, right over here there's a window. The lady we

all--her name was Doris. You go to Doris, and you'd say, "I want ten dollars. My

mom told us to get ten dollars' worth." And she'd write it out.

CURRIS:And then they would collect that from your dad's paycheck?

PEEPLES:Yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:And so the company would take it that way.

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay. That makes sense. So it was a slightly different system that you had.

PEEPLES:Well what it did was it handicapped them in terms of

having any--financial literacy.

CURRIS:There you go. There you go. Did any of your family members buy their

Lynch house?

PEEPLES:My dad.

CURRIS:Did he?

PEEPLES:Yeah.

CURRIS:Okay. Now do you have any memory as to how he financed the purchase of

the house?

PEEPLES:No. It maybe could have been the Benham Credit Union. I don't really know.

CURRIS:Right. What was your dad's reaction when he knew he could own his own home?

PEEPLES:Nothing. I don't think he had that. (pauses) He was glad to be able to

own it, but I don't think he saw it as wealth building. He saw it

as, "This is what you're supposed to--I'm supposed to do."

CURRIS:Interesting. Now I have heard that in all the fishing that there would

be miners from both Lynch and Benham who would go down into Tennessee and try to

find a little plot of land.

PEEPLES:No.

CURRIS:Did that happen as well?

PEEPLES:I don't think it happened as much with the Black, but in the white

community, oh yeah. They always bought some land all along the lake, yeah. And

that's where they were much more progressive and into--and financially a lot

more literate.

CURRIS:That was a difference. Do you know--

PEEPLES:And that was also the--not just call for -------(??) of this

conversation, but they just called themselves bootleggers--guys who loaned

money, a quarter on the dollar,

and on payday you would see these guys going to Mr. Swift's house to pay him

what they borrowed in between paydays. In between paydays, they'd go and borrow

fifty dollars.

CURRIS:So it was more individuals that were serving as the bank.

PEEPLES:No, they were entrepreneurs.

CURRIS:Um-hm. And were they Black or white?

PEEPLES:Black.

CURRIS:So there were individuals who really knew what was happening. Isn't that

interesting? Isn't that interesting? It's true of every generation, isn't it.

There are some that just have this innate ability. But look at you. I mean, look

at what you have done with the opportunities that you made for yourself.

You know, you're talking about the newspaper route, all those different kinds of

things, and school. How did you make the transition from Southeast to UK, the

University of Kentucky?

PEEPLES:It was easy for me because I had been in New York every summer for the

last five or six years.

CURRIS:Why had you been in New York?

PEEPLES:In summers, I'd go up there with my brother. That's where I worked.

Every summer I worked, and I lived in Brooklyn but worked in New York City.

That's when I said that I was there when Columbia University.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:So--

CURRIS:What were you doing there? What jobs?

PEEPLES:Alright--I worked as a--I worked at a printing company who printed

materials for advertisements for certain companies like Avon and those places.

You've seen Sunday-- I mean, on mornings, when they have what they called 30

Rock, 30 Rockefeller.

I used to go in and out of that every day. 30 Rock. Because one of our clients

was in there.

CURRIS:You were right in the middle--

PEEPLES:--yeah.

CURRIS:--of New York City.

PEEPLES:Fifteen, sixteen, but I wasn't intimidated because, yeah, I didn't know

you were supposed to be intimidated. Didn't know you were supposed to. So

that's--so now what that did when I came to UK and I'm in a setting where there

were only about fifty Black students, that did not intimidate me. Not one bit.

You know, my take was, I came here because my parents wanted--not because they

wanted. Because this was something they made possible for me, and so I'm not

here to argue and fight and get in trouble.

I'm going to show--I'm going to take them a degree home.

CURRIS:So you were doing the printing. What else?

PEEPLES:Oh, I worked--you remember I mentioned St. Louis Hospital? Well that

was when I was in the program that the Electrician's Local provided for Black

men in college. So those were two different jobs I had in the summer. The

printing company--and I was just a messenger for the printing company. I would

take the samples, bring back their orders. So all day I was at--

CURRIS:You were always working.

PEEPLES:Yeah, all around New York.

CURRIS:Well that will give you confidence for certain.

PEEPLES:Well, some of the places that we see on TV. I’ve been to just--all of them.

CURRIS:So that was the money that you talked about you would save, then, for college.

PEEPLES:Saved for college,

and buy my school clothes that the parents didn't have to worry about.

CURRIS:So then you come to the University of Kentucky, and what do you do there

for what, two years?

PEEPLES:Yeah, two and a half. When I--because I was getting a second

certificate I went an extra semester.

CURRIS:So you are staying at the YMCA.

PEEPLES:That one semester. But the others I stayed on campus in the dorms.

CURRIS:Okay. But that one semester was pivotal with the Urban League.

PEEPLES:Right place, right time.

CURRIS:Tell me what sprung from that. What does this little kid from Lynch

whose parents have had the--given the opportunity to go to New York to work,

continues to build--teachers that have said, "You are going to do it right."

And now you're at the University of Kentucky, and then you, by chance, met the

Urban League CEO. Give us your story from then forward to today.

PEEPLES:Well, I was living at the Y, but I was also working for the Y in a

program with the kids from the neighborhood. So they--I worked with them in the

recreation programs.

CURRIS:Now when you say the Y, was this mixed? Or was it separate, segregated?

PEEPLES:They--no. They were pretty much segregated. You had the Y up here on

High Street, and the Y down there that I'm talking about, down in the Black neighborhood.

CURRIS:And where was that, approximately?

PEEPLES:Down on Second Street.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:And--but the new Y was up on High Street.

Now one of the--my part duties, and another guy drove the bus is on Wednesday

night and on Saturday night, we would go around through the Black neighborhoods

with the bus, pick up the Black kids, and take them up there so they could go

swimming, because there was no swimming pool. A lot of those kids are all adults

now, who I know.

CURRIS:What an opportunity. Because we're talking about approximately what year?

PEEPLES:'70.

CURRIS:Okay. So when we're talking about 1970--

PEEPLES:'69, '70. Well actually maybe it's more like '68, '69. Now that was in

UK time. That's why because--so I graduated from high school in '64.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:Two years of Southeast, '66. Came to UK and did two and a half.

Graduated midyear.

CURRIS:So tell me about your journey with the Urban League. You start off

working. You're helping with the kids.

PEEPLES:No, that was with the Y.

CURRIS:Oh, that was with the Y.

PEEPLES:Yeah. When I came and worked with the Urban League, I was--my title was

Education Director. And as a director of a division, you have to develop

programs. So the first programs that I put together was to train mothers, mostly

from what you'd call the projects, mothers from there. We taught them to type.

And at that time, there was

clerical positions, IBM and other places. Now I put that together because I

got--Fayette County schools would give me the equipment--I mean the furniture.

We had space at the Salvation Army, and IBM gave us the typewriters. Fayette

County schools paid for the adult education teachers, and what I had to do is,

you know, the advertising, the recruitment.

CURRIS:Was this all starting while you're there?

PEEPLES:I started it.

CURRIS:See, that's what I thought I was hearing, that you initiated this whole

pulling together all these different publics to pull together to give training

and opportunity in the Black community.

What was the next step?

PEEPLES:Let's see. That grew. Let's just fast forward to 1985. That's when we

put together a program to build housing for low-income people, and at the same

time train what we call ex-inmates in housing construction. And since that time,

we've done over a hundred houses. We've done--converted one school building to

rental housing for senior citizens. We built another housing company--another complex

for seniors, just any number. And I'll give you some literature on those. But

that's, that’s one of the big things I've done. I've done a lot of things with

education, with school. It's always--I like to say that what some people see as

a challenge, I see as an opportunity.

CURRIS:I have a very important question. Why did people trust you to do these

things? Why you? Why not someone else?

PEEPLES:Well, it start out with the reputation of the Urban League. Now, the

money to start all of that initially came through gifts and donations from the

community. Now, when you are entrusted

with those kind of public dollars, that's where that discipline that I had came

in of doing the--I like to say doing the right thing for the right reason and

the right will prevail. So that's been my mantra. And then as I've grown older,

what has been important to me is pay it forward, give other people

opportunities. Nothing bothers me more than the person who gets aboard the boat

and then pulls up the gangplank. If you get aboard, you--

CURRIS:We know a lot of people like that.

PEEPLES:Oh yeah.

This world is full of them.

CURRIS:Well now, what--when it came to all the work that you have done, have

there been associations with the University of Kentucky?

PEEPLES:A lot. A lot.

CURRIS:Tell me about some of these.

PEEPLES:Well actually, you know I've been--I'm part of the University of

Kentucky Hall of Fame. The University of Kentucky Education Hall of Fame. So I

always went back and did work with the college of education when I first

started. But most of what I've done with the university has been through the

basketball program.

CURRIS:I was unaware of this. Tell me.

PEEPLES:All right. At home, in my safe, I've got three national championship rings.

I got one from Coach Calipari, Coach Tubby, and not Coach Hall, but it--and

those were based on relationships that I had with those guys. It started with

Rick Pitino when he first came. I don't know if you remember when there was

friction in this community because of--and I attribute this to his senility and

getting old--when Happy Chandler was on the board of trustees and used the N word.

CURRIS:I remember that.

PEEPLES:Well, they finally got all of that settled down, but the next year,

Rick Pitino came. And I knew enough about recruiting processes, and I know how

coaches use certain things

against coaches to get the best players. So I went to Rick and introduced

myself, and I said, "I want to tell you this story that you don't know it, but I

don't want to see you blindsided by it." And we became just like that after

that. And when he got his first championship ring, he gave me it. Same

relationship with Tubby. Same with Calipari. So there were a couple of stories

in there. One was the race relations. The others was concern about the

recruiting, because I wanted to see more Black players get a chance to go to UK.

And so those are the kind of the reasons. And be a role model

for some of these players, so they'd know it can be done.

CURRIS:You have certainly provided the Lord's work. There is no doubt about

that. Well as we get ready to wrap this up, and I can't tell you how thrilled--

PEEPLES:Well let me tell you about it--what the Lord did for me.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:He's always been good to me. And I might get emotional, okay. Father's

Day in 2021. I went to bed, and I woke up in the middle of the night.

CURRIS:A little louder.

PEEPLES:I woke up in the middle of the night with a bad headache.

CURRIS:And this was when? Father's Day?

PEEPLES:Father's Day 2021. It was an awful bad headache. And I was taken to the hospital,

and I went through four hours of brain surgery. A brain tumor. I've been going

to the Cleveland Clinic for three years. I still go now. In fact, next

Wednesday, I'll be going back up. In 2004, now this is going to shock you. I had

breast cancer.

CURRIS:One of the few men.

PEEPLES:I had breast cancer. And, you know, time took care of that. But when I

had that brain tumor, the breast cancer metastasized and came back. So since

last three years, I've gone through that. God is good. This cancer's gone. That

cancer's gone.

But you know what I can say is here today, you know, gone. That's why I said God Bless.

CURRIS:Well you have been. You--but you have made the contributions. You know,

God has blessed you in oh so many ways, but you are a man who can stand tall,

that you have contributed, and you have helped.

PEEPLES:But you know why I can stand tall? Because I stand on other people's

shoulders, people who made sacrifices before me. And under different

circumstances, I stand on their shoulders.

CURRIS:Well PG, as we wrap up this wonderful (laughs) and thank you for

agreeing to do this, because we just ran into each other and you said yes, you

would like to do this, and I was so excited. But going back to our roots.

Is there anything that you want to say about whether it's your family, whether

it's Lynch, whether it's Southeast, being in Lexington. Is there anything that

you would like to really say as we close out this interview?

PEEPLES:First of all, I want to say this to you. Thank you for doing this,

preserving our history. Because our history has always been misrepresented,

misrepresented and made fun of. Sometimes demonized. But that so many of us have

come out of those mountains and succeeded. Doug Loebb (??) says that we came

from the mountains, and we took over Lexington without firing a shot.

CURRIS:

I had not heard that. (laughs) Yeah, well we were in school at the same time. I

had not heard that.

PEEPLES:Yeah, Dougie (??).

CURRIS:Came out of the mountains and took over Lexington without firing a shot.

I love that. Somebody needs to put that in needlepoint (laughs).

PEEPLES:Took over without firing a shot.

CURRIS:That is a great story.

PEEPLES:When I was in UK, and a few years afterwards, there were more Black

kids from the mountains from--through Southeast than there were from Louisville.

I don't have the exact numbers--

CURRIS:Really?

PEEPLES:--but yeah.

CURRIS:Well that--I had never thought about that.

PEEPLES:It's accurate. I don't have the exact numbers, but it's accurate.

CURRIS:That--now that is worthy of us trying to track down sometime, because

that really is--but

that strength, that determination--

PEEPLES:That's the Lord.

CURRIS:Always moving one step forward.

PEEPLES:One, yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:At a time.

PEEPLES:One foot in, one foot in. My dad--and I've heard--I mean, I've heard

this, but this is not just about my dad. It's about all of those coal miners.

Those guys worked in--well goodness, they worked in hell. And I don't mean that

in a bad way.

CURRIS:No. No, it's a description that is so accurate.

PEEPLES:But never heard a single one of them complain about not wanting to go

to work the next day.

Never. When the bell tolled the next morning, they were right there.

CURRIS:That says it all, doesn't it.

PEEPLES:Right there.

CURRIS:It says it all.

PEEPLES:It does. Yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:When the bell tolled, they were right there.

PEEPLES:They were right there.

CURRIS:Well PG, what a delight. (Peeples laughs) How wonderful that we stumbled

across--because we've known each--about each other for, golly, what twenty years

or so?

PEEPLES:Oh yeah. Yeah.

CURRIS:And so for us to have this opportunity to talk about a time in history

which is fading, and it should not fade. We at least have made our efforts,

haven't we.

PEEPLES:Yes we have.

CURRIS:Thank you so much, PG (laughs).

PEEPLES:Is--you know, one of my teachers at Southeast was Miss Schosser.

CURRIS:Really?

PEEPLES:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Well, Dr. Schosser

or else the son's wife?

PEEPLES:The wife of the doctor.

CURRIS:The wife of the doctor. I never knew that she did that.

PEEPLES:Yeah. Linda.

CURRIS:Linda.

PEEPLES:Who married John--

CURRIS:I know who you're talking about. Um-hm.

PEEPLES:Well, Linda was a year behind me.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:And Johnson was in my class.

CURRIS:Okay.

PEEPLES:Yeah. He and Raymond Zalum (??) and those guys.

CURRIS:Um-hm. Wow. My goodness. I never--what did she teach?

PEEPLES:As part of my special education--I mean, my elementary education curriculum.

CURRIS:Okay. See, I never knew that about her.

PEEPLES:Yeah. She taught. Miss Johnson taught.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:Yes, she taught over there.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:I remember her brother, Dr. Payton.

CURRIS:How do you spell that?

PEEPLES:

P-a-y-t-o-n. The football field up there is named that.

CURRIS:Oh, I didn't--had not made that connection.

PEEPLES:Yeah. Dr. Payton. Delivered a lot of babies. Poked a lot of folks with needles.

CURRIS:Yes they did. We didn't question about being poked either, did we?

PEEPLES:No, poked a lot of folks with needles. Dr. Skaggs. Boy, he spent a lot

of time in this mouth.

CURRIS:Yes.

PEEPLES:Beak Hope (??).

CURRIS:Oh my goodness, Beak Hope.

PEEPLES:Yeah, Beak Hope and Miss Dorothy worked together.

CURRIS:Yes. Yes.

PEEPLES:Somebody named Agnes. I don't know what her last name was.

CURRIS:I don't remember Agnes.

PEEPLES:Mary Joe Hollingsworth's mother.

CURRIS:Okay. Okay.

PEEPLES:Worked there.

CURRIS:I remember those names, but I can't--

PEEPLES:Remember the hotel that used to be up on the hill?

CURRIS:Um-hm.

PEEPLES:Well I delivered newspapers there.

CURRIS:You're talking about in Lynch.

PEEPLES:Yeah. In Lynch. At a hotel.

I went by there in the morning and dropped off the paper. And there was a guy

there who was the manager named Medley, Mr. Medley (??). And every morning I

would go in there, and Mr. Medley would give me a container of milk.

CURRIS:As you're making your route around.

PEEPLES:As I'm making my rounds.

CURRIS:Oh my good--you know, talking about the hotel. Where did the single

ladies live in Lynch?

PEEPLES:I don't know.

CURRIS:In Benham, it was at the hotel.

PEEPLES:Really?

CURRIS:Um-hm. Do you know the single schoolteachers and so forth? The few that

were single, they lived at the old hotel, which is gone now. And I just wondered

if Lynch did the same.

PEEPLES:I don't know.

CURRIS:Don't know.

PEEPLES:I don't know. No. Your father, he --------(??) phenomenal. He was

just--to me, it was

phenomenal to just be in the mountains, and him having the financial acumen to

manage those. I mean, we were supposed to be stupid.

CURRIS:Well, you know, the difference was he came out of New York state, and at

that time, they had an educational system--there was a name for it. But it was

mandatory for you to do so much in terms of education. So he ended up with two

years, because you could go free if you were an agriculture major. So he had two

years at Cornell University. Now, back in 1935, '36, in the mountains, that was

light years away.

PEEPLES:It was '35 when he came?

CURRIS:It was about 1935,

'36. Somewhere right in there. And so he--he's on his way down to Florida for a

job, and he stopped to see his brother. And they were just then doing the credit

union. So they asked him if he would stay. That's how that whole thing happened.

But I think, and speaking of my father, the story that I have heard that I am

the most proud of was if anybody in Benham--didn't matter who--wanted to buy

their house, if there was any way he could make sure that they had the

opportunity to buy the house, he gave it to them. And to me, that says it all,

doesn't it?

PEEPLES:And he didn't just help the person who was buying that house.

He helped generations.

CURRIS:That was the result.

PEEPLES:He helped generations.

CURRIS:Just like you have. Just like you have, PG. Thank you, my young man.

PEEPLES:You're very welcome.

CURRIS:Oh, this is going to be so great.

PEEPLES:You are so welcome.

CURRIS:Oh, let's see. This will take me a minute.

PEEPLES:Take your time. Take your time.

CURRIS:Let me see. Okay now.

[End of interview.]