PRATHER:Today is Monday, October 14th. My name is Liz Prather, and I'm interviewing Barry Frazier, resident of Montgomery County, Kentucky and Vice President of Commercial Lending at People's Exchange Bank. This interview is taking place at the Mount Sterling City Hall and is part of "The Third Monday in October Court Day Oral History" project. Barry, thanks for coming in and talking to us.

FRAZIER:My pleasure.

PRATHER:Yeah. Before we get started talking about Court Day, just tell me a little, a little bit about yourself.

FRAZIER:Um, so I grew up here. I've been a lifelong resident of Kentucky. Um, grew up here in Mount Sterling. Uh, went off to college at U.K. Um, I've been in the financial sector my whole career, basically, basically doing lending. And, um, uh, most people who know me will tell you I'm fairly eccentric. [laughter] I'm an incurable collector of all kinds of stuff--antiques, oddities. Uh, my mind is full of random, useless trivia, and, uh, so that's probably me in a nutshell.

PRATHER:That's awesome. That's great. What do you collect in particular? What's your favorite thing to collect?

FRAZIER:Um, if I have two or three of one thing, that's a start of a collection. So I have--there's no telling how many different things I collect. I don't even know if I have a favorite. I mean, I--

PRATHER:Like guns or books or?

FRAZIER:I've got a bajillion books, I've got guns. I like history, um, sports memorabilia, um, random stuff. I have a random collection of turn-of-the-century autographed postcards of circus giants who are eight feet and older.

PRATHER:Are you kidding me? That is so random. That is so--

FRAZIER:Yeah--

PRATHER:Weird.

FRAZIER:Yeah. No, there's--

PRATHER:And wonderful.

FRAZIER:Yes

PRATHER:That's great.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:Have you always been a collector, or is this just something you're--

FRAZIER:I think I have. I don't know when I got the bug, but I've always enjoyed going to antique malls, and flea markets, and yard sales, and all of that.

PRATHER:Yeah. And then once you get one or a couple of something, you are looking for that thing.

FRAZIER:I'm thinking that's the start of a good collection. I think I'll keep going. Yeah.

PRATHER:That's great.

FRAZIER:Much to my wife's chagrin.

PRATHER:It's hard to have a collection without storage issues, right?

FRAZIER:That's true. And, and I--I've created lots of storage issues for myself over the years.

PRATHER:So you're here today in your capacity as a historian and a lover of Court Day. So, first of all, tell everybody kind of your role on the first Friday of Court Day. You, you dress up as someone. Tell me a little bit about that. How did that come about? Whose idea was that?

FRAZIER:You know, I think it was Pam Murphy who sits on the city council here. I think it might have been her idea that they wanted to create, um, sort of a mascot for Court Day. And, um, someone who could maybe portray an original judge from the earliest Court Day, which would have been 1794. And I do reenactments, Civil War reenactments. I'm right now,in the process of joining the Sons of the American Revolution and--and have just had an extensive collection of costumery for years. [laughter] And a lot of local people knew that. So they called me and [said,] "Do you have anything that would look like a judge from the colonial times?" So I said, "I think I do." So, um, I think we shot a few commercials in 2022 and just took some pictures. But then I think we decided to actually kick off Court Day last year in 2023. That Friday morning, Channel 36, uh, came down. And so it was me, and my friend Herb Triplett, who's a realtor here with Keller Williams and also is a sales rep for WMST and a radio personality for the football games. He dressed up as a town crier and had the bell, and I dressed him up in a tricorn hat and a frock coat and, and he pulled out a big scroll and did the "Hear ye, Hear ye!" And, and, and then I kind of gaveled in and declared Court Day officially in session for 2023.

PRATHER:That is fantastic. That's wonderful. So you'll reprise your role this year?

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:Yes. And we'll be doing it at--on the courthouse steps.

FRAZIER:Uh, we've, uh, last year we did it at the Main Soundstage down by the Farmers' Market Pavilion, where they had a lot of stuff set up. So we'll be doing that again this year.

PRATHER:Okay. At the Market Pavilion.

FRAZIER:Yeah, at the, the Main Soundstage, actually, where they have the bands and stuff.

PRATHER:Okay.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:Um, in your role as a historian, how--has your family been in Montgomery County for years and years or--

FRAZIER:No. Um, my, my family has been in Kentucky for many years, but primarily in eastern Kentucky, Carter County and that vicinity. But we moved here when, when I was just a three or four years old. My, my dad took a job here. And but it's like the best place I could ever imagine growing up.

PRATHER:What year was that?

FRAZIER:It was either 1974, 1975. I'm a little fuzzy, but I think I was right around my fourth birthday.

PRATHER:Okay. All right, so in your capacity as a historian, kind of, uh, describe to people who are not familiar with the history of the concept of Court Day in Kentucky. And then from there, let's move on also to what it meant specifically to Mount Sterling. But just start generally talking about what the court day concept was in Kentucky.

FRAZIER:Yeah. So obviously Kentucky became a state--the Commonwealth of Kentucky became a state--in 1792. That was also the year Mount Sterling became incorporated. We wouldn't become a county for at least three or four more years, I think in 1796, if I'm not mistaken. But as soon as we became a state and Mount Sterling was incorporated, they decided to establish some court systems in--in certain hub areas. And so I think it was around 1793, 1794, they designated Mount Sterling as, I guess what we now probably know as a Circuit Court, and they would hold court the third Monday of every month. And so we became one of the, the main little hubs that I--I've tried to do some research to find out who exactly the names of some of the judges were. I think there were potentially as many as three different judges, but so many of the records got destroyed during the Civil War and during those periods. So even--I even tried to contact the Kentucky court system and see if they could find anything. But they--they were having trouble finding anything really specific. I'm sure it's find-out-able, but it probably takes some digging.

PRATHER:So when you act like the judge, when you dress up like the judge up here, you're not acting like a particular judge. It's just the generic circuit judge.

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:So you don't actually bear the name of a historical figure?

FRAZIER:Right.

PRATHER:Okay. So there were three judges during that period. So what would the judge do the third Monday of every month? What kinds of cases would they be settling? What kind of things would they be?

FRAZIER:Well, there at the courthouse--or whatever version of the courthouse they had at the time. It was probably more of a log home type, log structure, because I think there have been six courthouses since, since our inception. Um, there were obviously our, our town was just starting to grow--there was lots of land settlers, so there would be a lot of land surveys, a lot of deeds, a lot of things like that that would come up. I mean, the population wasn't that large, you know, in the early 1790s. So it was primarily, I think, land acquisitions and things like that, and I'm sure some legal disputes.

PRATHER:Six courthouses. That's so interesting. I mean, I know this is kind of going down a rabbit hole, but where were they? Are they all--were they all right here where we have our present--

FRAZIER:I think most historians think they were right about where they are right now. Pretty close to it. So our town was situated the, the--what they called Little Mountain Town--there was the big Indian mound right close to where the Civic Center is right now. And, um, the first courthouse was probably a log courthouse. Then they built a brick structure. If my memory serves me correctly, it was burned in 1851. And then the third courthouse would have been burned in December 2nd, 1863, during the Civil War. It was burned by Confederate troops. Um, another one was built. And then I think they built another one in 1890, which we have some more modern photos of today. And then, um, the courthouse as it stands today, I believe, was built in between 1960 and 1961.

PRATHER:That's fascinating. So then, as a result of having court every third Monday of every month, and that--that time was not--that was just for Mount Sterling? So would other--would other counties have it like on the second Monday or the first Monday? Was it or was it always across the state?

FRAZIER:Well, keep in mind, in 1792 there weren't that many counties.

PRATHER:True. That's true.

FRAZIER:So, as a matter of fact, when we were first created as a county in 1796, if I'm not mistaken, Montgomery County stretched almost to what is now the West Virginia line.

PRATHER:Wow.

FRAZIER:Yeah. It was. It was an enormous piece of land. So, um, I can't remember how many was there. I want to say there were maybe five or six counties initially when Kentucky became a state, and then those kept becoming further subdivided. So there just weren't that many counties. So because it was such a large area, you had people coming in from eastern Kentucky and southeastern Kentucky.

PRATHER:Yeah. So truly. Yeah. It wasn't just like the, the occupants of the county parameters that we know today would have been coming. It would have been like hundreds and thousands of people from all over. I mean, from Pikeville. And what we know now today is Pikeville.

FRAZIER:Yeah, probably as far as Ashland. I think that might have been among the far reaches of where we were coming from--in parts of southeastern--I don't know if we went--if Montgomery County quite went far to Pike County, but it was pretty far down there. So I mean, it was, you know. It was 100, probably 100-mile radius at least, maybe 150.

PRATHER:So what would people do when they would come? They would come to have their land disputes settled or any legal thing. But what else would they do when they got here?

FRAZIER:Well, obviously, um, they--a lot of people would barter. You know, that was just a time in our, uh, our state's history where obviously there was currency. But, um, bartering was such an important part of life, and particularly as it relates to Court Day--why October kind of became the official month. That's the time of the year where you've already completed all of your harvest. You know exactly what surpluses you have. You know exactly what you need to get through the winter. So you come and you show up and people would come with horses, mules, chickens, potatoes--you know what vegetables they had--corn, hay. Um, you know, they would--they would load up the wagons and--and come to sell what extra they have that they don't need and hopefully bring home what they don't have that they do need to get through the winter.

PRATHER:Okay.

FRAZIER:Textiles, you name it. Wool.

PRATHER:Where would they stay? I mean, like where--

FRAZIER:Well, that is probably one of the reasons Montgomery County, because we were one of the central hubs of the court systems. We had developed a network of boarding houses and taverns and, and things like that. So, you know, of course, these were early settler days. So a lot of people would probably pitch a tent or had a covered wagon. I'm not exactly sure what it was like back then, but, but eventually our town kind of grew around that. And, you know, we did become known for having taverns and, and entertaining. You know, eventually we had two theaters here. Um, you know, there were places to stay. There was--were lots of stores we had. It was a very industrious town, very resourceful town. We were--during the Civil War, as a matter of fact--we were kind of a known place that, that had so many resources, both agriculturally, um, so many different things that we were kind of a target. And so we became sort of a supply depot at that time. And, you know, we, we probably changed hands--we know, at least a dozen times during the Civil War because it was a hotly contested area just for our richness and supplies.

PRATHER:So if every county or even the, you know, the five or six counties that existed at that time, if they all had the court, why did Montgomery County's or specifically Mount Sterling's Court Day last, if every county were having some kind of, you know, session monthly, what is it about Mount Sterling that has endured?

FRAZIER:That-that is a good question. And, you know, if you, if you dig into it, there are still other places, I think maybe in Kentucky and maybe other states that, that still, um, have what they call a "court day." And it's kind of just a big trading day. Um, it seems like ours has just remained a really big one. And, and seems like we've only grown in stature over the years. But, um. yeah, I'm not exactly sure what ours was better than the others, but I'm glad it is.

PRATHER:It is unique because I feel like, um. Well, I mean, I grew up in Bourbon County. We talked about it before we started our interview, and, you know, it feels like that there were a lot--it's a lot of influx from eastern Kentucky. You know, a lot of the counties, you know, Powell and Menifee and, you know, coming, coming west toward Mount Sterling. Um, so, and--

FRAZIER:That may be part of it, too. We're the, um, we're both the gateway to the bluegrass and the gateway to the Appalachians. So once you get into the more hilly, mountainous area, you do have areas where people don't have large flat spaces to grow, large row crops to grow big tobacco crops. So over here you have more space for crops; over there, they may have other things horses, livestock, that sort of thing. So it--there is probably a bigger need for certain supplies in eastern Kentucky than they would have in central Kentucky, where things tend to be a little more flatter and there's more tillable land, I guess.

PRATHER:Yeah. That's interesting.

FRAZIER:And pasture land.

PRATHER:And so people would come here and trade and they would go, go home and would they come back and do the same thing, like in the spring, or was it mostly just a fall thing?

FRAZIER:I--from my understanding, you know, it was every third Monday, but the fall was obviously the biggest--

PRATHER:The biggest.

FRAZIER:But usually if people were, you know, keep in mind, uh, you know, if you're just traveling 45 miles, but you're doing it on foot or on horseback--everything--you know, you're going ahead and planning a day or two around that. So if you're going to waste a day or two, you might as well make the most of it. You know, it's kind of like us--if you're going to Pigeon Forge or Gatlinburg, you're going to plan to spend some money while you're there and get the things you can't get back home and eat the places you don't normally eat, and, you know, make a trip of it. So I think October became probably one of the biggest ones again, just because the harvest season was over. It was that time where you could assess what extra do I have that I don't need? What do I still need? And, and kind of--

PRATHER:--do it that way. Yeah. All right. So that's kind of the historical overview. Let's talk to you--I want to talk about a little bit of your personal history. What do you remember--what were childhood or your memories--your childhood memories of Court Days past?  Kind of put us in a time machine. And--

FRAZIER:And I still feel like a child when I go to a Court Day. That same feeling comes over me when I--when you fill that first crispness in the air and um. But no, it was, it was exciting for me because, um, you'd save up a little money. This is back in the 70s when you had those little Velcro wallets, and so you'd stuff that with a little money and, and, um, my church was on Winn Street, and we would, we would park cars for money on Winn Street. I mean

PRATHER:Wow.

FRAZIER:That was--that's a little bit of a trek, but that tells you just how many people would come in. And so we would park there. I would, you know, walk across Winn Street over to, to North Maysville and start heading downtown. And there would be yard sales all up and down the way there. So I'd stop at every one looking for baseball cards or whatever. And I still have I don't know how many baseball cards from my childhood that, you know, I paid three dollars for them that are worth 1,500 dollars now.

PRATHER:Wow.

FRAZIER:Um, and so you would go downtown, and the closer you got to town, you would, you would just kind of hear the buzz. You would always hear that down at Monarch Mill, there was a--this cornmeal machine, and it was like a little single cylinder engine would go, ching ching ching. And you'd hear that going. You knew you was getting closer to the, to the, the, the center of the whole thing. And you just smell all the smells. You'd smell Polish sausage. You'd smell corn dogs. You'd smell--elephant ears were always the, the, the big, sweet, uh, uh, delicacy. When I was growing up, it was just a big old giant thing before we had funnel cakes, before they really kind of caught on. Um, and then you would literally just go around from table to table. There would always be all kinds of stuff for kids, you know, thingamajigs. And, you know, back when I was a young kid, you'd want knives, you'd want ninja throwing stars. Um, you know, eventually, by the time you got into high school, you're looking for fake Rolex watches. And, I mean, it's even back then, there was fake everything. Um, but you know, every year I would save up enough money, and I would try to go every single day. I mean, literally, my parents would just drop me and my brother off, or some neighborhood friends drop us off right down on Main Street. And then they'd say, "Okay, be back here at, you know, 5:30 or whatever, and we'll pick you up in front of Belk's." And so we'd, we'd head back home, but we try to ration our money through that whole period. And you'd see all your friends from school. You'd stop and have your little show and tell of what all you got and what all they got. And--and so, I mean, every year it was like that. And usually for our family, there were so many people from out of town that they loved Court Day.

PRATHER:Okay.

FRAZIER:So our, our house kind of became a gathering house for out-of-town friends. Mom would make a big pot of chili or vegetable soup and have some sandwiches or country ham biscuits, and family would converge, and there'd just be a steady flow coming in and out of the house and they'd be buying everything from antiques to who knows what. And so every year it was--it was some version of that for me. And there was always some hot item each year that you were after. And, and--

PRATHER:What were some of those hot items that you can remember?

FRAZIER:Well, um, I remember one year it was like this flamingo marionette that was like a pink flamingo that was made of, like these little styrofoam balls with, with, uh, feathers in it. Um, the clackers were a big thing. They were like two big marbles on a, on a little string rope, and they would you'd clack them together and it would, you'd bust your knuckles at least three or four times. Um, for boys, ninja throwing stars, you know. As soon as glow-in-the-dark things came out, everybody had to have glow-in-the-dark things. Um, there was always some little thing every single year, um--

PRATHER:That everybody had to have.

FRAZIER:Oh, yeah. Yeah. And, and at some point, you know, as you become like a middle schooler, they had I don't know if you remember the, the painter's caps that.

PRATHER:Oh yeah.

FRAZIER:That had like Skoal and Copenhagen and Red--Red Man  on them. Even though if you didn't chew tobacco, you still had to have one of those, because that was cool. Um, back then, they had tents set up--the--all the main, uh, tobacco people:  Red Man, Levi Garrett, they would all just give out free samples. You just walk right in. There was nobody checking ages.

PRATHER:They would give samples of what?

FRAZIER:Chewing tobacco.

PRATHER:Really?

FRAZIER:I mean, it didn't matter if you were ten-years-old or eleven-years-old. They'd just say, "Give this to your dad, young man." Okay. You'd stick it in your back pocket or a little can of Skoal, and I mean, you, you thought you were just walking around with contraband.

PRATHER:That is, that is priceless. I want to go back to. You said that you parked cars on Winn Street at your church. How far is Winn Street from Mount--from the Court Day proper? And is it a mile? Would it be a mile?

FRAZIER:Probably--

PRATHER:Right at a mile.

FRAZIER:Probably right at a mile, at least.

PRATHER:And so--and how many cars would you all park in that parking lot?

FRAZIER:Oh, probably sixty or seventy.

PRATHER:And how, how much would people--you would be charging them?

FRAZIER:You know, I don't even know. Maybe two or three dollars. Back then, back in the 70's, I mean, it started out two or three dollars, and I don't know what it is now, ten dollars or fifteen dollars.

PRATHER:Yeah. That's interesting. So, um, how does--how did that feel? I mean, like when I've interviewed all these people, everyone says that their parents literally just dropped them off, and there's 50,000 people down there, or how, how big would it have been? I mean, 30,000, 50,000 people. Were you never scared about or your parents never scared? What did that look like?

FRAZIER:That's the interesting thing. So, um, if the weather was really good on a Saturday or a Sunday, the--it's hard for us to have ever estimated it, but, at times, I've heard they've estimated upwards of 100,000 people being downtown at one time.

PRATHER:Right.

FRAZIER:I mean, imagine Rupp Arena times four, all in our downtown, and one third of those people have a gun over their shoulder. You know, half of the people have a pocket full of pocket knives. (laughter)

PRATHER:Right.

FRAZIER:And surprisingly, I've--this is probably my--this will be probably my fiftieth year going down to Court Days. I've only ever known of one instance of a gun going off. And it was a guy who was selling guns who didn't realize there was a bullet in the chamber, and he was an actual dealer. He accidentally shot himself in the foot. He was okay.

PRATHER:Really. Oh, wow.

FRAZIER:But I've never heard of an incident. I mean, everybody's very respectful. Um, I remember one time, uh, we brought some friends in from Lexington that I went to church with--our pastor and his wife, and they were--he was from upstate New York. She was from Seattle, Washington. So I thought this will be a cultural experience for them. So we drove over to my parents' house and so that they would get the full effect, um, instead of just driving downtown, I had my sister get my dad's pickup, and we all jumped in the back of the pickup and rode, you know, all the way from Winchester Road in downtown, the back of a pickup. And she just dropped us off in front of Belk's like I would have done when I was a kid. And as soon as we, you know, they're just kind of--they're not used to riding in the back of a pickup truck, A.  But we get out and there's a guy standing there with bib overalls on, no shirt, and three guns over his shoulders. And, um, my pastor immediately said, "Oh, that's--a--that's a fantastic costume you got there, young man." And, and I grabbed him, and I said, "No, these are not costumes. These are people who are here from different parts of the state that are here to trade guns and trade whatever." And, and I said, "They're all be respectful. You don't have to worry about it." But I've never for one moment ever felt in danger in any way since I've been down there.

PRATHER:Yeah, you've referenced Belks twice. Belks is no longer in our downtown. Where would that have been?

FRAZIER:Belks is on the corner of Main Street and Bank Street. It is right now where the, um, the, the fiscal court is--the County Annex building there.

PRATHER:Okay. And that was kind of a place that--just a landmark that people just--always would use that. Okay.

FRAZIER:Because once you got much further past there, you really now all of a sudden you're into traffic. You really can't turn left on--I mean--there would be a line of people from the interstate backed up all the way to downtown. And if you're not turning right there on Bank Street to get back out of town, you're not going to be able to go downtown much further and have a place to turn around. It was just that packed.

PRATHER:That was the--that was the place.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:How--when did it start changing do you think or what--when--from what you're talking about--hundreds of thousands of people. Um, when do you think was kind of that hinge point, uh when Court Day kind of started changing?

FRAZIER:Well, and there's probably a lot of conjecture about when it changed. I mean, we still have the capacity to have big crowds like that, um, on a Saturday. I mean, probably approaching 75 to 100,000. The, the, the nature of Court Day has changed because when I was a kid, um, downtown, you still had the stockyard downtown. So there were animals being traded downtown. What we now know is we kind of refer to it as Gun Alley. If you go straight down Queen Street, right there past its intersection with Locust, you had the stockyards. Uh, people had horses, dogs, uh--

PRATHER:This was when you were a kid?

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:So this is in your lifetime, they were still trading these animals.

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:Okay.

FRAZIER:Yes, uh-huh. And, and you had a lot of people would, would come in from eastern Kentucky, and, and they would do that. Um, eventually they, they decided to curtail the animal trading part of things, mainly because people would show up, you know, they would trade horses, they would trade pigs, they would trade chickens, whatever. But oftentimes it became a problem. They would bring dogs in, and they would just chain them up there and leave them there. And then all of a sudden, we had a dog problem.

PRATHER:Right.

FRAZIER:And so at some point--and this was probably, I--I'm sure this is probably about during the--the term of--of our former mayor, Bert May could probably and Mayor Al Botts might be able to even pinpoint about when that was. I'm guessing it was probably in the late 70's to mid 80's. Um, and I think they finally got rid of some of the animal trading and then, um, conversely, uh, Preston Court Days has--has taken on a life of its own, but they're really an offshoot of us. So I think their's--their Court Day really didn't take off until they said, "We'll take your animals and we'll trade animals." People are already coming from that direction. They're already on I-64 coming that way or coming up from the mountains. And so that's about the time, I think is probably part of their biggest genesis of when they kind of took off.

PRATHER:That's really interesting. So it's that kind of that overflow-

FRAZIER:Right--

PRATHER:Of an unmet need that we're no longer meeting for people.

FRAZIER:Yes. And, and so they still have animal trading over there today. You don't see as many horses and big animals just because not many people use, you know, the big animals like they do now. But um, gradually some of the, the yard sale items, the antiques, the things like that kind of have gravitated over that way a little bit too.

PRATHER:Um. Several articles written in the 60's and 70's in The Advocate referenced something called Jockey Row, which is on East Locust Street. Do you know what that references?

FRAZIER:Yeah. So Jockey Row, as we talked about the animals. Um, right there on, uh, Locust Queen Street, that's where the stockyards were. So that whole row down there became known as Jockey Row because people would come in on their horses, people would come in driving their mules, they'd have pigs, they'd have dogs, they would tie them up all right there. And that became the kind of the, um, the hitching post for, for all the animals. Um, and for just the longest time, it was called Jockey Road because I assume because people were like, jockeys coming in on their horses with all their animals, and they would just hitch them up there and--and come and trade.

PRATHER:And now that area--we kind of refer to as Gun Alley.

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:If you're talking to someone coming to Mount Sterling now.

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:Yeah. Um, do you know what year? Of course--we talked about, you know, most of this trading would have occurred around the courthouse. Do you know what year--like in the early 17 or 1800s? Do you know what year the trading may be moved down toward the railroad tracks, or was it a gradual thing?

FRAZIER:I, I think it probably was a gradual thing because really, the town was built right on the corner of Locust and Queen Street. I mean, so the original Indian mound was just right across the street from where--if you look at where the Civic Center is now, on the opposite side of Queen Street was the original big Indian mound there. Um, so I think it was originally 640, 680, 690 acres that were, um, sold off by Hugh Forbes, Enoch Smith, and I think, John Judy, maybe if I'm, if I'm not mistaken, and they just sold off little lots and people built little cabins around that. And so Locust Street, Queen Street, that was kind of the hub--everything kind of moved out from there. But, you know, just up the way, you had the courthouse there. So probably the courthouse was there where people were going to take care of their business, but there was still quite a bit of trading. I don't know exactly when the railroad came in. I mean, I assume it was sometime after the Civil War, and you had a lot of things--I don't know if the stockyard was there before the railroad was there--but the stockyard was literally right next to the railroad. There were so many things that were strategically near the railroad, but all of the taverns, all the bars, the theaters, and stuff were right along the, the main street, uh, North Maysville, South Maysville corridor right there.

PRATHER:This is fascinating. So basically what you're saying is our present-day Court Day is at the actual nexus of where a primitive culture or I don't know if it's primitive, if you would refer to it as primitive, but like, uh, um, prior to European settlers.

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:So they were there on the corner of Locust and Queen, and then these three men decide to plot out the town around that same spot. And now we are celebrating--here we are in 2024. And that Locust and Queen Street, that's like the center of the universe. Exactly.

FRAZIER:Exactly. Yes. Yeah. So you go from the Adena Indian tribe to, to all the rest of us.

PRATHER:That, that is that's really fascinating.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:That's when you look at almost like a sediment of--of history there.

FRAZIER:Ironically, at one point, you're asking about some of my memories of, of Court Days growing up. So, um, right at Monarch Mill, which is, uh, at the corner of Locust and South Maysville, that was a big place where they--I guess you'd get stuff milled--but that was where the, the little cornmeal machine was that I was telling you you could hear chinking. There used to be a--I don't know if he was a true Native American Indian or just dressed up like one, but, for years, he was there selling cornmeal, and there were even years where he would climb up on top of the, the Monarch Mills, I'm told, and do like an Indian dance. I can just barely remember it. But there was a few different machines they had, but--and then just right in that same area about where the, um, about where the parking lot is for the, the tire place right now, right across the street, there was always for years growing up, there was a--an organ grinder guy that had a little monkey and, um, at--

PRATHER:At City Tire? Where City Tire is?

FRAZIER:City Tire, yes. And that was always a crowd favorite. And--

PRATHER:What's an--explain what an organ grinder is? What do you mean?

FRAZIER:A the, the probably the, the technical term is called a roller--rolling roller organ or a busking organ. And it's this little organ that's usually on a little monopod. And it's got a crank, and it has these little--I've got one of them at home. It's got little things that are about the shape of a corncob that have little spikes in them. And it's, it's basically like a music box. You would crank it, it would play music, and it would--it had little organ bellows, so you could hear it for a while, and he'd have a little monkey tethered to him and usually like a little bellhop outfit, and he would walk around and collect money from the crowd. If you gave him a quarter, he would kind of bite it and--

PRATHER:The monkey?

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:The monkey would?

FRAZIER:Yes, he would tip his hat to you. He'd, you know, hand it off to the--to the busker. Um, if you gave him like, a dime or a penny, he would throw it back at you. (laughter) But he had quite the little personality. But, I mean, that was a crowd favorite. Every year you'd see the little organ grinder, the monkey, you'd see the Indian across the way there.

PRATHER:What years were those been? In the 80's?

FRAZIER:That's probably the, the mid 70's to early to mid 80's and probably even back further than that,  that--that organ grinder was there probably maybe a couple decades, I don't know. And same with the Indian.

PRATHER:That's fabulous. So if you--if you had to think of history of Court Day in different--I was interviewing, um, Steve Tuttle and he talked about that. He's the city coordinator, and he talked about that Court Day kind of has two big buckets we put in, like, you know, pre-internet and post-internet, you know.

FRAZIER:Okay.

PRATHER:But if you have to think of the history of Court Day in different eras, um, how would you characterize those eras historically?

FRAZIER:Gosh, that's a good question. And Steve and I were neighbors growing up. Later, he, I think, lived in downtown up until he was probably in his early teens and, um, were the same age, basically. Uh, to me, the era would be somewhere between the age of seven and eighteen for every person. To me, that was the golden era. I mean--

PRATHER:Yeah.

FRAZIER:Just because you're, you're, you're a wide-eyed kid full of wonder, and you're just--you've got a treasure hunt out in front of you and you got twelve dollars in your pocket and, and no telling what kind of good food you're going to get. As far as eras, uh, eras overall, that's, that's kind of hard to say because, um, yeah, there were so many eras there. You know, depending on what your demographic was and what you're going down there for. Now, my dad would--when he would go down, he'd be looking for an ax handle or a hammer handle that he broke. And the thing about Court Day is, you know, you can--if you can't find something anywhere else, you can find it at Court Day.

PRATHER:Right. (laughs)

FRAZIER:For instance, was it last year or the year before? I do, I do Civil War reenacting and, and some Revolutionary War reenacting. And when we do stuff, we--we try to be, uh, historically accurate and have authentic stuff that would be period correct. So even simple things like what you're going to clean your musket with or your flintlock rifle, you don't want a modern metal cleaning rod. You want a wooden cleaning rod like they would have had. Well, where are you going to find that? Nowhere. I mean, if you want to buy one online, you're going to pay 200 dollars for a reproduction. Last year--it was either last year or the year before--I decided--I want to see if I can find one of those. I walked downtown. I'd been at Court Day for exactly fifteen minutes, and I walked up to this place, and I looked, and there were some primitive wooden cleaning rods that screwed together, just like I wanted them, like in three pieces, that was long enough for a big Kentucky Long Rifle, and I think I paid five dollars for it.

PRATHER:Oh my goodness, oh my goodness.

FRAZIER:And it was just--I've had so many jackpot moments like that.

PRATHER:Yeah,

FRAZIER:I could tell you some funny stories, but I'll not get off on a tangent.

PRATHER:Well, tell us some funny stories. We'd love to hear them. I love the story you or the--you alluded to a three-dollar baseball card that is now worth, you know.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:You know 1,000 dollars. So, um, those were those--did they happen quite a bit? I mean, things that--

FRAZIER:Well, you know, back when I was a kid, you could--you could buy baseball cards--I mean, you'd rarely pay more than four or five dollars for them. There just weren't--back then, the most expensive card ever known was like a 10,000 dollar card. You're not going to find that there. And then the next card might be a 1,200 dollar card. Then everything else was, you know, 20 dollars or less. So, um, one year, I think I paid 5 dollars for a rare 1969 Mickey Mantle misprint, where the letters were a different color on it. And there were, you know, only so many of them printed. And now it's worth, I don't know, 1200 - 1,500 dollars.

PRATHER:Yeah.

FRAZIER:I've bought Ted Williams, Stan Musial, you know, any, any number of cards back then. Now--nowadays--today's world--everything is graded completely different. So if a card might be mint condition, but the photo is off center, it could blow everything. But you're still--I mean, there's so many cards I bought back then for fifty cents, two dollars.

PRATHER:Yeah.

FRAZIER:You know, I'd buy a whole shoebox full of someone's yard sale at Court Day, and no telling--you know what some of them--I kept thinking that's my retirement plan one day, but who knows?

PRATHER:The beauty of--of Court Day is that it's not like you had professional vendors that you were all--you weren't just going to professional vendors, you were going to people who were cleaning out their attics.

FRAZIER:Yes. Yeah.

PRATHER:They would save up, right?

FRAZIER:Right.

PRATHER:And just say, I'm going to throw this out in the yard and see if anybody's interested in it.

FRAZIER:Yeah. And you did have some professional vendors. There was a group called Wildcat Lair. They still may be coming down every year. I don't know, but they were a little baseball card shop, and they would set up shop. And you, that was always--you'd go straight to the Wildcat Lair first. You'd go check out their stuff, and you always had your little honey holes of all the different places. To this day, there are a few people that have been setting up in the same spots for years, and I will always migrate over that way. And you know, one by one, they just eventually age out, and you go, oh, they're not there anymore. Well, too bad.

PRATHER:Yeah.

FRAZIER:I miss them. You know, but, um, but every year, you kind of knew exactly where your little spots were.

PRATHER:You mentioned your dad went down to get an axe handle. What? What is an axe handle? You mean like--

FRAZIER:Oh, just a wooden axe handle. Like he might have a handle that it'd be some tool that he had that he broke and he just needed a part for it. He didn't need the actual axe head. He just needed the wooden handle. And there'd be people down there every year that would sell nothing but axe handles or nothing but hammer handles or, you know, or anything like that. Or tube socks. Um, one year, me and my neighbor, um, his dad was friends with a former NFL player who said, "Hey, you want a job?" And we're thinking, "Yeah, we'll make some money so we can spend it all at Court Day." And we were selling army surplus and tube socks and, and--an interesting tandem. But so, for several hours a day, I would sell army surplus and tube socks, and then I'd, you know, make two or three bucks an hour, and then I'd go spend it all.

PRATHER:Yeah. Did you, did you meet anybody famous at Court Day? Celebrities, musicians, politicians? Anyone you remember?

FRAZIER:Um, you know, there were probably famous people down there. There was, you know, it was pretty regular that you would see politicians down there, especially if it was a gubernatorial race or a senate race. Honestly, I was fairly apolitical at the time. I was just there to get my goods. And, and so I might notice someone, you know, giving a stump speech, but I paid very little attention to it and just kept on going.

PRATHER:Did you have--you said there was your honey holes? So did you have traditions that--or activities that you did--you had to do every single Court Day? Were there things that, you know, booths that you attended every single time?

FRAZIER:You know, I think everybody has those. Um, so back then, the Kiwanis Club had their country ham and biscuit. Everybody would stop and get a country ham and biscuit. You'd get an Ale8 somewhere.  Back then, you'd have these fifty-five gallon drums that were just overflowing with returnable Ale8 bottles. And I kept thinking everybody just threw them away. If I was halfway smart back then, those were a dime apiece. I could have just cleaned those out of the trash can and made several hundred dollars. Um, I always got an elephant ear, um, from somewhere. There's always this one church that's still, um, the Apostolic Church still sells peanut brittle every single year,

PRATHER:Yes, yes,

FRAZIER:So you always stop and get some of that. Um, nowadays, it's the--you always got to get a Cattleman's rib eye, ribeye sandwich. Um, uh, you know, there's I think when they first started selling gyros and no one knew how to pronounce it, it was a gyro or a gyro or a gyro or a gyro. We always had to try that. You know, there's always something new. And then, then they came out--you know, I don't know when this started, maybe ten, fifteen years ago, where they just decided we're going to deep fry everything. We're going to deep fry an Oreo, we're going to deep fry a Twinkie. One year I remember they had some, like, like flash-froze sticks of butter--

FRAZIER:Oh no.

FRAZIER:And they would roll up a stick of butter in flour, stick it on a stick like a corn dog, and deep fry it and hand you a deep-fried stick of butter. And they usually had a defibrillator.

PRATHER:That sounds like a crime.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:Oh, my. Did you eat it? What did that taste like?

FRAZIER:You know, I didn't try that, but, uh, you know, I probably would have given enough--yeah.

PRATHER:So, um, is there any other memories that you have of Court Day? Anything that you would like to share?

FRAZIER:You would always nowadays, I mean, once you get out of high school, um, that's kind of your--semi high school reunion for everyone. Everybody comes back in for Court Days, so you're always going to run into someone you haven't seen since high school. To this day, I still do. And, and, and then you'll run into people from out of town that you know, and, and so it really is kind of a reunion of sorts. You're, you're going to bump into, you know, twenty-five different people, you know, every single year you'll stop, visit, catch up a little bit. And nowadays you've got also the different music venues that you can do. Um, one year we had, um, they had square dancing going on. They had a little, little three or four-piece bluegrass band and a caller, and we had some friends from out of town, and they were square dancing. They were giving you lessons right there on the spot. And you're like, well, you got to try it.

PRATHER:Right.

FRAZIER:So I mean, we just jumped right in and started square dancing and got all sweaty for about thirty minutes and thought, life doesn't get any better than this--

PRATHER:Square dancing--

FRAZIER:Square danced at Court Day. (laughter)

PRATHER:That's a seminal moment really.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:Yeah.

FRAZIER:I'll tell you one funny story. Um, uh, this actually involves the Preston Court Day, but it could have happened at this Court Day. But, um, there was a guy in my--my men's Bible study at the church I was going to at the time, and he was getting married, and he was getting married, um, the week after Court Day. And so he, he wanted to have a bachelor party the weekend of Court Day. Well, anybody that knows me knows I'm not missing Court Day for anything. I mean, I--my life gets put on hold that weekend, and if there's anything else going on, I don't care what it is. I've never missed a Court Day in my life. And I'm not going to miss a Court Day. And here I'm supposed to be the one putting on this bachelor party. And I was--it was a conundrum. And I'm thinking, I'm not missing Court Day just because somebody is getting married that I--you know. (laughs0 And so I came up with the brilliant idea for a bachelor party. Um, I dressed this guy up in a three-piece denim suit from 1978, put a cowboy hat on him with a big grouse feather. And I went in my garage and just got a bag full of the weirdest assortment of junk. I had a World Championship Wrestling lunchbox, an old rusty shotgun that probably wasn't fit to be shot, just odds and ends, and I threw them in a bag. We took his wallet away from him and said, "Okay, here's this, uh, list of things you've got to find. Your money's no good. You have to barter for them, so you can't--and it was a list--like eight really weird items that you normally wouldn't find anywhere. And by the end of the day, he had bartered for every single one of those items and somehow came away with 70 dollars in his pocket. (laughter) He was like, I love Court Day. I'm coming back every year.

PRATHER:What a great, what a great story. Oh my goodness. That's great. So why do you think Court Day has continued as long as it has?

FRAZIER:Well, it's just unique. I mean, some people have referred to it as the world's largest flea market. I mean, it really is. You can find anything here. Whatever you're wanting, whether it's entertainment or a cultural experience or you're a foodie and you like food, you're going to find any kind of food you can imagine here. If you like antiques, you'll find some of those. If you want to, uh, a new purse, you're going to find a new purse. Um, all that. Um, I'll tell you one other quick story. Just because I'm very tangential that way.

PRATHER:Please do.

FRAZIER:I had a buddy, um, from Lexington, and he'd never been. And so we--we show up, and he-we--it was a nice day out that day. He--I was living in Lexington at the time--we rode in in his little convertible BMW. And so we get out, and he was like, so, Barry, what are you in the market for this year? And I'm never in the market for anything. I mean, I'm, I'm just wide open, whatever I find, it's just a treasure hunt. I just wait for that special thing to present itself. But I thought, well, I have to tell him something. And I was just shooting from the hip, and said, "I don't know, you know, maybe a pair of good fringe leather rodeo chaps." We parked the car, get out of the car, there's a little booth set up there, and this person is selling military items. Just a hodgepodge of stuff. And I remember--he had a Silver Star there. And this lady walks up and she says, "Young man, that's stolen valor." And he goes, "No, ma'am. I bought this from an estate. I'm preserving history. I bought this fair and square and I'm, I'm reselling it." She goes, "That's stolen valor." And my friend's already thinking, what have I walked into? You know, there's about to be a fight going down over a military medal. While that's going on, he has a truck behind his thing of all the stuff to restock his table with, and I'm just kind of poking my head around, and I see a pair of leather chaps there, fringed leather rodeo chaps. I hadn't been there fifteen minutes, and I thought, well, I've got to get him. I mean, I really wasn't planning on buying them, so I kind of casually tried to keep my poker face and said, "How much you got on a pair of chaps in the back of the truck?" And he goes, "I'm going to need fifty dollars for those." I said, "I'll give you thirty dollars cash," as if you trade anything but cash. It wasn't like he was taking credit cards, and he goes, "Sold." So I literally grabbed them, threw them over my shoulder, handed him thirty dollars, and walked back around to the table. And my friend was like, "What're you doing back there?" I said, "I was buying something."  "What did you get?"   "I got some leather fringe rodeo chaps, just like I said I would." His eyes got so big. Like that happened in fifteen minutes. Did you set this up? I'm like, nope, but that's, that's typical.

PRATHER:That's the magic of Court Day.

FRAZIER:Oh, yeah.

PRATHER:You have no idea what you're going to find.

FRAZIER:Yeah. One year I found a taxidermied wood duck and I thought, well, I've got to have this. I mean, where else are you going to find a taxidermied wood duck? And, you know, three or four booths over, I found a little 1950s cellulite cowboy, a little bow-legged cowboy that was meant to fit on top of a horse, but he fit just on the back neck of that wood duck just perfectly. So it, it it sits on my, on my desk back home to this day. I mean, I've had that thing for probably twenty-five years and I wouldn't take a hundred dollars for it.

PRATHER:I was going to say, this sounds like a museum piece. You know

FRAZIER:Yes

PRATHER:It sounds like maybe some of your Court Day finds could find their way into your museum.

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:So, um, what do you hope for the future of Court Day? We're, we're coming up here, you know, to 2024. Do you see it enduring, uh, as it is now into the next--for the next generation? How will it change? What are your hopes for that?

FRAZIER:I think it's going to continue to endure. And we have, um, uh, Tracy Pearce, our tourism director, Mayor Al Botts, are the people that make up the Court Day committee. Stephen Tuttle is part of that. You got a handful of people that, um, that love to see progress with it, but they also love to protect the tradition of it. So there are a lot of elements of it, um, that I think we would love to see, um, you know, to get some of the antique dealers back, to get some of the unique items that you can't find anywhere else. And we'll do that. We've just got to kind of create the space for it, and, and visualize that. There have been lots of progressive things we've done. I mean, now you can look up and, and see the little banners hanging up on the poles and stuff like that, where you can identify certain things. You can--you know, back in the day, if you were from out of town and, you know, there's limited cell phone service here because everybody's on their cell phones. I mean, we would love to see some better, um, cellular, uh, coverage areas, that sort of thing. It's just so expensive.

PRATHER:Mm-hmm.

FRAZIER:And we'll continue to grow that. But we've brought back the entertainment side of it. Tracy Pearce has done a fantastic job on the tourism side of things, of lining up bands and lining up musical acts. Um, uh, Mayor Al Botts personally goes out and visits other festivals, and if he sees a vendor, he's like, oh man, that's a--and he'll give me his card. Would you please come and be a part of Mount Sterling Court Day? Um, in the third Monday of October. And--and a lot of people go, oh, I'd love to, you know, and so we're--we're watching on the horizon for things out there that, that makes it unique. We always have some mainstays. There's some vendors there, there's a guy who sells pork chops right on the corner of--of, uh, Queen Street and Locust. I think his family's been there for, I think, over forty years, maybe fifty years. Um, you have people like that that just come every year. And so we love to see that. And we love to see new things. And, and the thing is, we're always open to ideas. I think our mayor, our tourism director, all of them are--you know, if you've got an idea, we would, you know, at--they're always brainstorming at the beginning of a Court Day season. Afterwards they'll go, what went right? What went wrong? What can we do different? What can we do in the future? You know, just even little things like coming up with a mascot.

PRATHER:Right.

FRAZIER:You know, we really haven't heavily promoted it as much as we have in recent years. So, you know, having a partnership with Channel 36 coming down and of course, other TV stations come down as well, just because it's a--it's a big event. And so I think it'll continue to endure. And--and it's because it's that focal point on the calendar when all your friends from out of town--"Hey, are you coming in for Court Days?" Yeah, we'll see you then. You know, you catch up with your friends, and still--l still will budget a little money. Go, "okay, here's my fun money." And I'm going to go down at Court Day and spend some money and hopefully come back with something fun.

PRATHER:Yeah. Something memorable.

FRAZIER:Yeah.

PRATHER:You brought some stuff with--with you today. Do you want to talk about that?

FRAZIER:Oh, um. Well, you--you were asking some questions about stuff, so I was just trying to I--that's an old picture I have from 1988, which just shows kind of an overlay of it. And you were kind of thinking where, where is, um, Jockey Row and I see, I think that's probably about where the stockyards were right there. It's kind of hard to know where the stockyards were. And McCormick Lumber, it was all right down there. And of course, the--the railroad tracks were right there as well. But I mean, you can see this is 1988. So, I mean, this is where most of the stuff's happening, but I mean, you can look all the way up here.

PRATHER:Sure.

FRAZIER:There's people parked, there's--there's lots of stuff happening and--and I don't even know what day of the week that was, but it was--it was always a pretty big thing. And magically, the--the high school students, they had a partnership with the high school--they would come down and clean up after Court Day.

PRATHER:Oh, really?

FRAZIER:Tuesday. And it was like it never happened.

PRATHER:Yeah.

FRAZIER:It was amazing how it all played out.

PRATHER:And now I think the city does that. Is that right?

FRAZIER:Yes.

PRATHER:They no longer have.

FRAZIER:I think so, yeah.

PRATHER:That's a great picture. And that was taken just from a helicopter or--

FRAZIER:I assume, yeah, I assume it was probably a helicopter or an airplane. Um, back in 1988. And of course, there's--there's the courthouse right there. So you see, there's not much happening.

PRATHER:Up there, but yeah--

FRAZIER:Most of it is all gravitated toward down there.

PRATHER:Yeah.

FRAZIER:And, uh, this was probably--I can't remember what year they pulled up the railroad tracks, but I think it was sometime in the mid to late 80s.

PRATHER:All right. This has been a great interview. Uh, is there any final Court Day memory or anything you haven't said that you would like to say about Court Day?

FRAZIER:Well, I don't know. I could probably go on and on about Court Day. It's just a matter of--of drumming up, resurrecting the memories. Because every year there's some new memory and, uh, uh, there's not a bigger fan out there of Court Day than--than me. Just because there's--there's always all the possibilities. Every year you show up and you never know what you're going to find. You never know who you're going to run into. And, um, it's just, uh, uh, all smiles all the way around.

PRATHER:That's good. Thank you.

FRAZIER:Um-huh.