CURRIS:Yeah. Okay, testing, one, two, three, testing. All right, Ronnie, I

think we're going.

HAMPTON:Okay.

CURRIS:As I say, we are having a little problem with the recorder, so don't be

surprised if you get a call on my next trip home and we do this a second time.

(both laugh) But--

HAMPTON:--that'd be fine.

CURRIS:But my name, for the purposes of this interview, is Jo Hern Curris. I am

conducting these interviews for the purpose of recording the posterity those

stories of Benham, of Lynch, of coal mining, of community, and it's being done

in conjunc--with the support of the UK Louie B. Nunn Oral History Center, and

they ask that you sign a document agreeing that this interview will be

considered a gift to the Oral History Center, which we have done,

and for the purpose of unrestricted use, being quoted from, published,

broadcast, and for you to use it in any way that you prefer. That being said,

what is your name?

HAMPTON:Ronnie Hampton.

CURRIS:Ronnie, I know that your history has been a colorful, full life, so I

think that it's probably going to be easier for me to just start at the

beginning, but the first thing that I really want to do is ask you what it means

to be here at the East Kentucky Social Club in 2023.

HAMPTON:It's an honor to be here, first of all, because I never thought, you

know, it would get this far, and it

has. And COVID had stopped it for a few years, and we didn't know if it was ever

going to start again, and, with that being said, we're grateful to Andrea and

her crew for being brave enough to step out and do this. So many people have

missed it, and they are just grateful to see one another.

CURRIS:Without question. We have to give kudos of all kinds to Andrea Massey--

HAMPTON:--yes, indeed.

CURRIS:--and her group, because they have--they--and she was pivotal agreeing

to permit me to come to talk with fellow Benham/Harlan County/Lynch folks. (laughs)

HAMPTON:She's very good at that.

CURRIS:She is. The--what is the East Kentucky Social Club? Describe that for us.

HAMPTON:There was--back in Lynch, when coal mining was at its peak,

Portal 31 was working--working out, and they took a lot of the younger men out

of Portal 31 to Portal--to 32 mine, to top of the mountain, and a lot of the

older men were still in Portal 31. Well, when they closed Portal 31, there were

the older men with nowhere to go. There was a huge layoff, and in that layoff

U.S. Steel decided to start tearing the houses down, and they did. There were

seven camps. Number two and three were totally abandoned, torn away, and people

had to move away. They moved away to various cities, with relatives or wherever,

to get new starts, or to finish their lives, however, and on a trip to

Cleveland, six men from Lynch--I think Otha Snow,

Harry Snow, Sylvester Baskin, Gean Austin, and--I can't think of the other one

right now--Teenie Hutton, I believe--they met some people that they had not seen

in a long time, and they thought--you know, back then we didn't have the

internet and everything. They were not in communication with each other, and

they thought a lot of those people had died away, and found out they had not.

And they said, "Let's not lose touch with each other," and that's created the

Eastern Kentucky Social Club. And the first reunion was given in Cleveland.

CURRIS:About what year?

HAMPTON:I don't remember. I was in high school, I think.

CURRIS:That being said, when we're talking about closing Portal 31, which, for

the purposes of this interview, has now been reopened as a tourist

designate--site and designation, what--do you remember the approximate year that

that was closed, or the approximate time?

HAMPTON:It was in the sixties, early.

CURRIS:Okay--

HAMPTON:--I think I moved from number three to number one in 1961, somewhere

along in there.

CURRIS:Okay. I know in Benham, where I grew up and went to school, I can

remember vividly the December or the fall of 1958, which was the first massive

layoffs, approximately two to three weeks before Christmas, and it was

devastating. And then the same thing happened again in 1959, so this follows

right in that same time period--

HAMPTON:--exactly, yeah.

CURRIS:--of the closing of the mines--

HAMPTON:--yeah.

CURRIS:--and then the outmigration--

HAMPTON:--

yeah.

CURRIS:--from Benham and Lynch entirely.

HAMPTON:There was nowhere to go. They had to leave.

CURRIS:Um-hm. Now, I want to touch on many different areas of your life, but

first, to kind of give an outline, Ronnie, let's start with what was your first

job after high school, or what--for the first five years after high school, what

did you do?

HAMPTON:I graduated from high school in 1969. I went to New York and worked for

a summer in the Garment District. That was my first time ever leaving home for

any length of time. And I came back, was going to Eastern to play football, and

that didn't work out, so I came back to Southeast, and there I played basketball

for two years. And--

CURRIS:--when was this?

HAMPTON:This was ‘70--'69 and '70.

And then in '72 I went to Clinch Valley College, which was--is now known as

University of Virginia's College at Wise, and played basketball a year there. I

worked through the summers for U.S. Steel, and through the winters at that time,

and at the end of that season I came out of college my junior year and just

decided to go in the coal mine, and stay, and I did.

CURRIS:Now, as that was the first into the coal mine, let's just jump to that

time of your life.

HAMPTON:Okay.

CURRIS:How were you first hired in coal mining?

HAMPTON:I was first hired as a summer worker. They were--U.S. Steel had a

program that would help college kids stay in college by giving them a job to

make money to be able to afford the college, so through the summers I would work

for U.S. Steel on the surface.

I learned to run equipment, learned to handle explosives, all of those things,

and got pretty good at it, which, later on in my career, came to be a great

help. But at the end of my third year of college, all my friends were in the

mine, making good money, and, just to be frank with you, I got tired of eating

Beanee Weenees--(both laugh)--trying to make ends meet.

CURRIS:The kids would say ramen noodles today--

HAMPTON:--yeah.

CURRIS:--but we said Beanee Weenees, for sure.

HAMPTON:Yeah, so I decided there's a better life for me, and I thought coal

mining would do that, at that time. I had no idea staying in the coal mine; it

was just like a transition--I'll do this for a while--but then I got married,

and the rest was history.

CURRIS:Yes. Was your father a coal miner?

HAMPTON:Yes, he was.

CURRIS:Grandfather?

HAMPTON:Yes.

CURRIS:Give me their names, and what did they do, and where were they working?

HAMPTON:Okay. My father's name

was Otis, and he worked at Portal 31, and he was transferred to Portal 32, to

top of Lynch Mountain, so he was still working. My grandfather's name is Harry

Snow. This is a very wonderful story, so to speak. He was a brakeman for the

motor crew at 31 Portal, and the coal cars got bumped on him and broke his foot.

He had one foot already half cut off. The other foot got broke, so they brought

him out of the mine, and at that time there was no unemployment, there was no

disability, there was nothing, so he and my grandmother suffred, and I think in

1960 Southeast Community College opened up. They offered him a job over there as

a janitor, and he stayed there until he retired. His dad, Otha Snow, Sr., was also

a coal miner, so I'm a fourth-generation coal miner.

CURRIS:So your great-grandfather.

HAMPTON:My great-grandfather.

CURRIS:Was also--

HAMPTON:--Otha Snow. We called him Pop Snow. (laughs)

CURRIS:And where did he work?

HAMPTON:He worked at Portal 31.

CURRIS:So you have a family history that goes back to approximately when?

HAMPTON:Back in the forties, have to be, or thirties, yeah.

CURRIS:It would--yes.

HAMPTON:Yeah.

CURRIS:It would have to have been.

HAMPTON:Yeah.

CURRIS:So your grandfather, without question, was there with pick and shovel.

HAMPTON:Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, my great-grandfather was. My grandfather was

there. He talked about when they had mules.

CURRIS:I remember those days.

HAMPTON:Yeah. They had a mule born--

CURRIS:--I remember--

HAMPTON:--there at Portal 31 -------(??)--

CURRIS:--I did not know that.

HAMPTON:Yeah, where they kept the mules.

CURRIS:So at your grandfather's time, they still had the mules.

HAMPTON:At the beginning of his time, but, you know, then they came in

with track and rail, and the motors. So, you know, my great--my grandfather got

a chance to come into the modern age, with the motors pulling it.

CURRIS:Let's bring that forward now to yourself. So you start working with the

summers. You learn a lot of different skills.

HAMPTON:A lot.

CURRIS:A lot. So then you come back, in approximately 1971 or 2, to work

full-time, is that correct?

HAMPTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Okay. Let's start there. What did you do? Give me a summary of your--how

many years in the coal mines?

HAMPTON:Forty. I was a roof bolter when I went underground. My first years was

on the surface. I learned all the machinery, the lifts, the cranes. We changed

oil in them. I learned how to handle explosives.

We loaded holes. We shot explosives for--to create high walls for the mining. So

just various jobs. When I went underground, I went in as a roof bolter, and

there I stayed until 1979. And I transferred from U.S. Steel to Department of

Mines and Minerals, State of Kentucky, which is now known as the Office of Mine

Safety and Licensing, and when I got there, I realized a lot of what U.S. Steel

had taught me was absolutely greater than the state law at that time. So I

had--I was ahead of the game. I came in as a safety analyst, and from safety

analyst I went to inspector, to accident investigator, to inspector two, to

principal one, inspector principal

one, and then to supervisor.

CURRIS:Question: how did you make the leap for U.S. Steel to the Department of

Mines and Minerals?

HAMPTON:This was a rare thing. U.S. Steel at that time was thought to be--it's

going to be there. It's--you know, you--

CURRIS:--forever.

HAMPTON:Yeah, you've got it made, you hooked into it. And I took a test to see

if I qualified for state mine inspector, and I did, I passed it. And when I

passed the test, they offered me a job. And when they offered the job, I didn't

know whether to take it or not, so I talked to my grandmother, who was very

conservative. All I needed was a voice to say, "You don't need to go," and I

wouldn't have gone. My grandmother--I said, "Mama, they offered me a job," and I

was thinking she was going to say, "U.S. Steel's going to always be here; don't

leave a

good thing." But she told me, she said, "Ronnie, opportunity is like a

bald-headed man: when it's gone, it's gone." And I took the job off of that, and

there I stayed for thirty years.

CURRIS:That is amazing.

HAMPTON:It was the best move.

CURRIS:How wise was your grandmother?

HAMPTON:Best move. Very wise, and being conservative, I never thought she would

say that, you know.

CURRIS:You were counting on her keeping you there.

HAMPTON:I was counting on her to make me stay at U.S. Steel. All I needed was

one voice.

CURRIS:Well, did you leave? Did you leave Lynch at that time?

HAMPTON:No, I didn't.

CURRIS:You stayed in Lynch.

HAMPTON:Didn't have to.

CURRIS:You were able to there.

HAMPTON:I stayed right there, um-hm.

CURRIS:Okay. Well, speaking of your grandmother, I do not think that the women

of the coal camps are given nearly the credit they deserve.

HAMPTON:Not nearly.

CURRIS:So let's talk about your ancestors--

HAMPTON:--okay.

CURRIS:--great-grandmother--tell--just tell me their stories, what they did, and--

HAMPTON:My grandmother was born in Mississippi,

Meridian, Mississippi, and she moved to Kentucky when my mother was five years

old, and when she moved to Kentucky it started a new life, she and two of her

brothers, because I think farming was all they had down there, and then all of a

sudden these coal mines had opened in Lynch, and I think flyers went out or

whatever, saying--and they looked at Lynch coal mines as the promised land. They

were going to move and do so much better, which they did do better. They did do

better, and they all moved in, and I don't even have to tell you that all the

houses in Lynch, a lot of them were half houses, and families stayed on each side.

CURRIS:We called them double houses. (laughs)

HAMPTON:Double houses. And--

CURRIS:--you call called them half houses.

HAMPTON:Yeah.

CURRIS:That's interesting.

HAMPTON:And then there were three or four families sometimes that would stay in

each half.

That's how many families were in Lynch at that time. It was very overcrowded.

Very overcrowded.

CURRIS:And this would've been approximately when?

HAMPTON:See, this would have been in the--in the forties. I was born in '51.

That would've been in the forties, maybe the late thirties, early forties.

CURRIS:Well, now, when--

HAMPTON:--yeah.

CURRIS:--so when they came in the thirties, forties, she's coming with her two

brothers. Is she--does she have a husband at this point? Is she married yet?

HAMPTON:No. No, she marries my granddaddy when she gets here.

CURRIS:Okay.

HAMPTON:Yeah, he came from--

CURRIS:--so he's already here.

HAMPTON:He came from Alabama.

CURRIS:Right. (both laugh) Right. We think of that Alabama contingent--

HAMPTON:--yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:--whether it's, you know, U.S. Steel, or whether it's, you know--

HAMPTON:Yeah, he's from Alabama, and they met, and they married. He--two--he

had two kids, and she had

one, and they blended together. And then I was born, and there we go.

CURRIS:Here you are. Well, now, when it comes to the women, we can start with

wherever you feel like you have--(laughs)--the information: grandmother, mother.

What--did they work outside the home, or did they--?

HAMPTON:My grandmother for a time did. She worked at the boarding house in

number three to try to make ends meet, especially when my grandfather got hurt

and came out of the mine. And I'm going to tell you this--I mean, I'm not trying

to hide it--she worked at the boarding house. He bootlegged for a while to make

ends meet.

CURRIS:That was the life.

HAMPTON:He bootlegged to make ends meet.

CURRIS:That was the life. Can I tell you a story? When my dad, who was from New

York state, came down on his way to a job in Florida, and his brother,

Ray Hern, was, I think, an engineer for Benham, so he stayed. They offered him

this job, and he stayed. And at that point, that--got sidetracked. At that

point, when he is here, and he goes to buy a house--and I won't give the names

of the people, but when he bought that pot--plot of land, the guy that he bought

it from, the old home place, he reached over in the tree stump--(Hampton

laughs)--pulled out a jug, and that's how they sealed the deal. (laughs) So that

explains how I totally understand what you were saying about your grandfather.

Okay, so--

HAMPTON:--listen, in the camp we lived,

there were no less than seven or eight bootleggers, and they all made money.

(both laugh)

CURRIS:And some things don't change. (laughs)

HAMPTON:No, they don't. They don't.

CURRIS:Some--

HAMPTON:--I can remember when Mama was working at the boarding house, and he'd

be gone somewhere--I guess he was trying to do better, work, whatever--and

somebody would come knock on the door, and I'd go in the refrigerator and get

whatever they want, and they'd come home, and I'd tell Granddaddy. I'd say,

"So-and-so came and got such-and-such," and he'd mark it down. (laughs)

CURRIS:Well, now, when it came to your mother, did she work outside the home?

HAMPTON:No, she didn't.

CURRIS:What all did she do? Because most of those women were working so hard.

HAMPTON:My mother, she wanted me to excel, so she more or less homeschooled me

before I got in school. We started school when we were six years old. When I

started the first grade, that's when they taught you to write your ABCs. I

already knew how to write my name, you know, for that matter. But then

my mother began to get sick, and I think in about the sixth--fifth or sixth

grade she really got sick, and when I got to be a sophomore I think cancer

finally took her out. She was in and out of the hospital all the time, and as a

sophomore she finally succumbed and passed to it. She wasn't able to work. I

watched her just lose weight, lose weight, and, you know, cancer back then, they

didn't have what they have now. But, yeah.

CURRIS:I'm going to temporarily pause, because we have people coming in the

door. Just one moment. [break in audio] Okay, we have now unpaused, assuming

that we are recording--

HAMPTON:--okay.

CURRIS:--(laughs)--but anyway, talking about your mother, and that you lost her

when she was--when you were about a sophomore.

HAMPTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:But in the home, what--did she can? Did she raise gardens? What did she

do in the home?

HAMPTON:My dad raised a garden right next to the house. Wasn't a big one. My

granddaddy raised a garden up on the hill behind the house, and when I was young

my grandmother's brother lived with them the whole time. When I was young,

they'd go to the garden. Everybody went, even the little ones. (laughs) So there

we were on the hillside, you know, and you learned to get along with nature. I

mean, we--they raised hogs. There were snakes up on the hill. You know, you had

to learn to get along.

CURRIS:Copperheads and rattlers. (laughs)

HAMPTON:There you are. There they are. And we did. And I'll tell you what else

happened: in number three, there was a long belt coming down from Five South.

All the coal came to the coal plant right there to load out. At one time--you

know this, that that was the largest load-out in the world, until China built

one. Well, all the coal from the various mines came to that one dumping point,

and came down

the hill to the loading place for the cars. Well, the steepness of the hill, the

coal would roll off the belt, and they would get written up by inspectors

because they didn't have it clean, and they didn't want to pay somebody to clean

it, so they told the people in camp three, "If you police that belt, you could

have the coal." And the men would get around on Saturday mornings and run the

young guys, with five-gallon buckets. We'd take and fill the pickup truck up,

and they would go around to the widows and put coal in their coal box. And then

every Thanksgiving they would kill hogs, and the ladies, the widows that didn't

have meat, they got meat.

CURRIS:That brings me to a critical point of coal camps, Lynch and Benham. Tell

me about

being a community.

HAMPTON:It was one of those things that if one person was sick, the whole

community was alerted. If somebody was not able to go to work, or not able to

work, the men made sure that his yard was taken care of and things of that

nature. They didn't have a lot, but the women would take food, especially if

they had kids, and help feed the family until the man could get back on his

feet, or whatever is going to happen. But they didn't let anyone suffer. No one

suffered. Everybody had the same. They shared with one another. And the camps

had boundaries. Number two took care of number two. Number three took

care--(laughs)--of number three. And they were: they were absolute communities.

And he'll be able to tell you: when we were out playing on one end of the

camp, if we got in trouble, there were no telephones. When we got home, Mama

already knew it. She said, "Come on in here." (Curris laughs) And I got tore up

off of another adult's testimony, no explanation. "Did you do it?" No. I got a

whooping just because Ms. So-and-so said I was out there doing whatever.

CURRIS:And the same was true of your teachers.

HAMPTON:Absolutely. If I got a whooping in school, I got one at home. (laughs)

CURRIS:Wouldn't it be wonderful if we had the kind of life today that we had in

those coal camps? And we had no idea how lucky we were.

HAMPTON:But you see how we are now. This generation, these last two generations

don't have the discipline that we were taught.

CURRIS:And there wouldn't been a question about whether or not you watch--or

you were on social media, because if your parents said no,

that was it.

HAMPTON:No meant no. (Curris laughs)

CURRIS:It was a very--

HAMPTON:--it wasn't maybe, or--

CURRIS:--a very different time. Let me ask you: I mean, you know, the facts

are, Ronnie, that here we are with the Social Club, and we're talking about an

African American-slash-Black, whatever--Ruthie Wilson, when I interviewed her,

and I said, "Ruthie, what--how do you want me to refer to you?", she said, "I

was born Black and I'm Black today." (Curris laughs) But I said, "Well, not

everybody's going to agree with you, Ruthie."

HAMPTON:No. We lived next door to them.

CURRIS:Do you? Did you know that she was--

HAMPTON:--we did.

CURRIS:Oh.

HAMPTON:Yeah, we did.

CURRIS:Yeah.

HAMPTON:In number three, we lived next door to them.

CURRIS:Okay.

HAMPTON:And when we had to move, they moved to Cumberland--

CURRIS:--okay.

HAMPTON:--and she went to Cumberland School, and then we stayed in

the--actually, my dad's house was the last house in number three to be torn

down. They were given other houses, and they gave the keys to

my dad and another guy at the same time, and the other guy beat us to the house,

and we had to wait till one came available. And I was in number three, and our

house was the only one standing. (laughs)

CURRIS:Oh my goodness. But, you know, going back to exactly these kind of

things that we're talking about, when we make that leap from those times, when

the community took care of itself and of each other, and we move forward, but in

those days, inside the mines, did you have--see, basically, racials--issues

arise underground, or else--

HAMPTON:--it was there.

CURRIS:Was it there?

HAMPTON:It was there.

CURRIS:Were you paid equally?

HAMPTON:Yes, the union made so. That was--the union made sure it was--but the

bidding, the selection of

bosses, the demeanor of the bosses, yeah, racism was there.

CURRIS:When it came to the community, was there very much integration in the

community before it was--

HAMPTON:--the--

CURRIS:--required?

HAMPTON:All the communities were integrated, the Blacks and whites lived in the

community, but we went to separate schools, so that made us have a different mindset.

CURRIS:Well, what about the Big Store? I mean, the Big Store in Benham was the

center of everything.

HAMPTON:That was the center of Lynch.

CURRIS:What--? Tell me about the Big Store, as you remember it.

HAMPTON:I didn't get to go to Cumberland, per se, hardly any when the Big Store

was at its heyday. That's where we went. But kids were taught to be what we were

supposed to be. I remember

many times that we sat in the car while Mama went in the store, or my daddy went

in the store, because she said, "I don't want you going in there, because if you

mess up on me in there, that's where I'm going to mess upon you at." (laughs) So

if I did something wrong in the store, that's where she whooped me at. So she

didn't take me in there a lot.

CURRIS:That's very interesting.

HAMPTON:Yeah, we sat in the car, and--

CURRIS:--was that true generally of children in Lynch, or your family, or--?

HAMPTON:Kind of be--but I think with us it was because we were young Black

kids, and Mama didn't want anybody accusing us of anything of that nature, so,

"Y'all stay in the car till I come back," because racism was there.

CURRIS:What is it like today?

HAMPTON:It's--racism is still alive, but people are more vocal about it. They

don't just

take it and say, "All right, they treated me bad." You treat me bad, I'm going

to say something to you. It happens, and it gets confronted, most of the time.

CURRIS:Well, I know we have a short period of time left, so I'm going to leap

forward, and we may do some of this again, but tell me about the other aspects

of your life, because it's my understanding when it came--comes to community

involvement, contributions, running for various offices, and so forth, you've

been right there in the middle of it.

HAMPTON:Well, I've been pastor of my home church for the last twenty-five

years, and, to me, that's the ultimate, to be able to pastor the church that I

grew up in. And most preachers say that's something they don't want, you know,

pastor the church they come up, but I'm--I've privileged to have pastored this

church, and the job--

CURRIS:--what's the name of it?

HAMPTON:Greater Mount Sinai

Baptist Church. And the job that I had put me in contact with politicians,

because our office was located in Harlan, and I had to deal with mine operators.

We had to deal with politicians, especially when we were trying to get laws

passed or changed, and we did; we got a lot of laws changed in the coal mine,

which saved a lot of lives. Most of the laws had blood on them: somebody got

hurt a certain way, and the only way we can get a law changed was to go through

politicians. And in that manner, I had a lot of dealing with them, so I had a

lot of dealing with the community, and I actually became the first Black mayor

of Lynch--(laughs)--

CURRIS:--what--

HAMPTON:--for a short period of time.

CURRIS:What year?

HAMPTON:Oh--

CURRIS:Approximately.

HAMPTON:Two thousand ten, 2009, 2010. Yeah, 2010.

CURRIS:So what was the most

difficult part of being mayor?

HAMPTON:Trying--financially. The mayor before me, his cabinet had misused some

money, a lot of money. The City was without money, and needed to be ran, and I

had to come up with money quick. And through my experience with the coal mining,

and the operators that I dealt with as a supervisor, I got donations from a lot

of people, but--

CURRIS:--not everybody could've done that.

HAMPTON:But with that said, when I took it, it's always worse than it appears.

They said, "This is what we've got to do," and when I got in there I found out

it was a lot deeper, a lot more debt than we knew. And pretty much got back on

even keel. My wife had cancer at the time, and that was taking my time away,

and that's the reason I retired from the State, because she had cancer. I'd come

home, take care of her. She was doing better, so I took the mayor, and she

started to get worse again, so I had to give it up. But I gave it up,

essentially, because while I was gone with her, things wasn't taken care of. I

wouldn't leave her side. So federal taxes were not paid, and, me being the

mayor, they fined the City and me.

CURRIS:Oh my goodness.

HAMPTON:Yeah, I had to pay some huge taxes, so I quit.

CURRIS:Personally.

HAMPTON:Personally. I borrowed money to pay those taxes, and then I resigned,

and said, "I'm not going to take this."

CURRIS:You know, Ronnie, I think--I think, listening to your story, God had a

path for you.

HAMPTON:He did.

CURRIS:And serving how many years now?

HAMPTON:Twenty-five.

CURRIS:Twenty-five years.

HAMPTON:

Before that I was a deacon. Before that I was Sunday school teacher. (laughs) So

I've served in my church a lot. Haven't been the best person--(laughs)--in my

life. God had to touch me. (both laugh)

CURRIS:Well, for the purposes of this interview, if you had one, two, three

things to say that you wanted posterity to know about, that when someone is

listening to your tape twenty-five years from now, whether it's about the

community, whether it's about your family, what would you like them to be

certain to know?

HAMPTON:Do what you do best. And I think that's what our community did. We

searched out and found the people who were the best at what they were doing, and

put them in the right places. That's always successful right there.

You know, people like to have positions and whatever. Find the best people,

suited for the best jobs, turn them loose, and let them do what they do best.

CURRIS:That is excellent advice. Excellent. Well, may I say, reverend, I

appreciate so much your taking the time to do this. I am--I'm more than

delighted: I'm so thrilled that we're going to have this tape of what it is that

you had to say on file, and one of these days there will be a surprise. Someone

will have listened to you and taken you to heart.

HAMPTON:Thank you.

CURRIS:Sometime in the future.

HAMPTON:And thank you for what you do.

CURRIS:Oh, we must do this again, Ronnie. (laughs) Thank you so much.

HAMPTON:All right.

[End of interview.]