UNKNOWN:Cool, we're rolling.

MYERS:Um, if you just want to start out by telling us a little bit about yourself, uh, who you are, your occupation, what your daily life is like.

TINGLE:I am Charlie Tingle, um, I am a retired general dentist, uh, practicing out of Morehead, Kentucky in a private practice for over forty plus years. Um, I'm married, have three children--(laughs)--all of which are, um, uh, happily employed. My daughter is a, a dentist at the University of Kentucky, uh, she is a, uh, an instructor there right now. She was my partner in Morehead for about twenty years and then left to leave that practice. Um, I am retired, uh, just doing whatever I want to do. Part of what I do is trying to, to, be involved in--with free care. Uh, probably fifteen, twenty years ago, I got involved in, uh, providing free care through my dental practice, uh, through some mission work. Uh, a group called, uh, Remote Area Medical, uh, which I hosted several clinics there and providing free care and dental care. Moved to Mount Sterling in 2016, uh, after living in Morehead, and got involved with The Post Clinic. Uh, The Post Clinic was strictly a medical clinic at that time providing free care, um, and I felt like I might be able to fit in this particular, uh, clinic with the services that I was interested in providing. So we got things moving, um, 2017, I guess, um, we were able to, um, find a space in another dental office, and with some volunteers, we began seeing patients on a, a no fee for service, um, uh, meeting certain qualifications in, in their, in their, um, uh, income levels, uh, providing care one to two days a month at that time. We were, we were slammed. We, we saw lots of patients. Um, we then moved to another clinic right down, uh, below us here, and I was able to get equipment, uh, through donations, uh, from diff--different, um, uh, methods. And we equipped a, a dental clinic there, uh, and was able to get some volunteer dentists, but over the period of time, we've not been able to attract volunteer dentists on a regular basis. Um, we were able to get a federal grant to build this building. I'm probably duplicating stuff, right?--(both laugh)--Uh, and, uh, we were able to have another dental clinic that's much more up to date with newer equipment. And, uh, in the last, uh, year and a half, uh, to two--year and a half, I believe, we've had a dentist on site most of the time at least one day a week, maybe two days a week. We are involved in having to pay for that particular service right now, um, so, um, but we do have some volunteers in other capacities to help. Um, I am no longer providing care, I, I, I've on an active basis, uh, I do provide, um, we're, we're trying to make, uh, people without teeth, need, need a set of teeth. So we're trying to make dentures for some people that, uh, don't have that ability to, to, to buy that service. So right--that's kind of where I'm involved right now. And also I'm the director of the dental clinic, um, and we also have a dental clinic manager who's on site, uh, two days a week that's experienced, uh, well over 20 years of dental assisting. So she's managing the clinic, basically.

MYERS:Mm-hmm.

TINGLE:Uh, I live in Lexington now, so it's a commute for me, uh, I did live in Mount Sterling for about six years, um, uh, that's more than you probably want to know.

MYERS:No, that's perfect, that's perfect, yeah (Tingle laughs)--a great, uh, timeline for us, um, if you don't mind, we're gonna back up--

TINGLE:Sure.

MYERS:--towards the start of it. Could you tell us a bit about, like, what drew you to dentistry and, and why you wanted to pursue it?

TINGLE:In college, I guess, um, I was a pre-med major--(laughs)--and we just took a fork in the road there--(laughs)--for various different reasons. Some of the contacts I had, uh, that were in med school, uh, I could just see that that was gonna be more involved in a longer education, um, and I got interested in dentistry from that standpoint. Did some, uh, mentoring and shadowing and, um, and I was fairly good with, uh, um, with perceptual or depth perception, stuff like that, and, and so I applied to dental school and was able to get in, um, and um, from that point on, uh, it just kind of took care of itself. I was able to provide, uh, uh, the education I got at University of Kentucky College of Dentistry was excellent, um, I took advantage of it, I was able to probably do more than what I, my requirements were, and, um, I went in the military for a couple years, which got more experience, so uh, um, that's kind of how I ended up-- Yeah. Yeah.

TINGLE:Yeah. Yeah--becoming a dentist.

MYERS:Yeah.

MYERS:Yeah, and, um, you mentioned you got involved with free care through your practice. Do you want--can you dive a bit more into how that happened?

TINGLE:Early on, uh, I guess it was in the 90s, I got involved in um, a, mission trip to Nicaragua. And it was a very, uh, eye-opening situation where you could see the incredible need. People were walking miles and miles in, in line for care all--every, every morning. And I got home, and, you know, working out of Eastern Kentucky, or, uh, we were also providing care for people that, um, couldn't afford care, uh, were, were not being able to take care of their mouths. And it, to me, it, it made more sense to try to provide free care in a local situation rather than travel away for it. So we had our own mission in actually, uh, providing care, uh, in, in Eastern Kentucky. It wasn't organized, I just started providing a little bit myself, um, through my own general practice, um, but then I got connected with a, uh, a group developed by Stan Brock, uh, this goes way back for you guys, but United Kingdom, uh, anyhow, he, he developed this service, and right now it's ongoing, um, there are clinics right now as we speak, uh, three-day clinics, uh, throughout the country. Uh, it's ramusa.org, I think, and I got involved in that on a weekend basis like three times. And then in Morehead, um, there was a free clinic, a medical clinic, that I was able to start actually a free dental clinic there. It just gives you a, a, a good feeling when people appreciate what you're doing and they're getting services that they need and it's something they can't afford. And I probably have more feedback from patients, uh, f--when I deliver care or our staff does, um, than some of the private pay patients. You know, so it's, it's a, it's a win-win, you know, patient wins, uh, we get a, a good feeling from that giving. And it's sharing your talents. I mean, that's kind of the bottom line.

MYERS:Yeah, and how's that sense of sort of reward? Um, have you felt that during your time at The Post Clinic? And, like, what, what has been the most rewarding part of working with The Post Clinic?

TINGLE:I think seeing it grow, uh, seeing it go from nothing--(laughs)--to where it is right now, um, to me personally, that's been, um, a great, you know, uh, the biggest reward that I see then, and I guess the sad part is that I'm gonna have to walk away from it--(laughs)--You know, at this particular time in my life, uh, it's just a choice I made to, to do that. So, um, yeah.

MYERS:Yeah, um, I'm kind of losing my voice. Do you mind taking over for a second?

UNKNOWN:Yeah. Um, so Dr. Roberts earlier, he shared a story about a patient that had come in having issues with their front teeth and was having issues, um, finding employment. And after, uh, she got help, she was able to find a job almost immediately. Um, so I was wondering if maybe you could share any stories similar to that or stories that have, like, stuck out to you in your time working there.

TINGLE:You know, there's, he's able to grasp one story--(laughs)--you know, that stands out to him.

MYERS:Yeah.

TINGLE:You multiply that by twenty, you know, and that's kind of what I get, you know it's, it's for different reasons, uh, people are, are grateful to have a smile, be able to function and eat. You know, not only does, we provide, um, replacement of teeth, but the restoration of teeth, uh, that brings back a smile. You know, their natural teeth that, that come in with decay, um, when you repair that and do some cosmetic work for them, then they're able to smile, and, you know, I think generally, it brings about better self-esteem for anybody, you know, and most patients that are coming in, uh, don't want to smile, don't want to talk. We change their, their personality a little bit, you know not totally but--(laughs)--uh, and, uh, so that, I think that's, uh, I don't have one specific story I can share, uh, but I think it's, um, it's a cumulative type of thing where we, it just all kind of comes together to me that we've been able to make a difference

MYERS:Yeah. Um, do you have any questions?

UNKNOWN:I, I think that what we've been hearing that volunteer providers are a, a big need for the clinic, uh, what would you say to any dentists who might be considering volunteering their time here?

TINGLE:You know, I think if you were to come here and, and provide care, I think you would be rewarded, um, in a way that you're not being rewarded now in your practice--(laughs)--uh, you know, it, it's a matter of just, again, sharing your talents to help others, and, I think that that would be a, a benefit to that provider or that volunteer, whether it's a, a dentist, a hygienist, a dental assistant. Um, you know, you get rewarded in that way, um, and most volunteers that we've--the difficulty in trying to get a volunteer is that their time seems to be limited. Um, whatever time they have off, they want to spend doing it in another way. And I think you can't, you can't develop that--(laughs)--uh, feeling. You can't just say, you need to be a volunteer, you know, you've got to, you've got to feel like that that's something you want to do, and I think that's--it comes within, from within, and, and when that particular volunteer says, hey, I want to help, then they have to make it work. We can't s--you know, talk them into it, you know, in, in a way that's, you know, gonna make them feel better.

MYERS:Um, a lot of the patients that we've interviewed previously have stated that they have developed these, like, deep--deeply personal relationships with a lot of the staff that work here.

TINGLE:Uh-huh.

MYERS:Can you speak to why you think that is? Because I--a lot of them say they've been to other, you know, medical facilities, healthcare facilities, and, um, they haven't, they haven't gotten the sense of caring, I guess, that they receive here.

TINGLE:I think that's, what you just said, you know, they get the feeling that they really are cared about. They're not just here to, um, provide a service and, and, um, you know, charge a fee for it, you know, um, they--each person is treated as an individual, and develops a plan to, to help provide the care that they need. And I think it's done in a setting that's not stressful. It's not a hurry, move them in, move them out, uh, it's done in a, a slower type, um, uh, treatment method, I think. And, you know, there's touchy-feely things sometimes, you know, it's just a matter of, you know, you, I shake her hand or give them a hug, you know, they, they appreciate that kind of uh, uh, contact, personal contact sometimes, uh, beside the fact that you're just providing dental care. You know, I think, that's, that's kind of what I'm seeing I think.

MYERS:Yeah.

TINGLE:Yeah.

MYERS:Um, looking towards the future, how do you, how do you see The Post Clinic growing? What would you like to see in the future?

TINGLE:Well--(laughs)--right now we are providing care two days a week, and, and, I think one day last week they saw sixteen patients. You know, that's a lot for a dentist to see. I think, uh, I think we had a second dentist there was half a day perhaps. We have a pairing right now. It's a, a husband and wife team that are dentists that came from, uh, Charlotte, North Carolina, and they're both, uh, have moved here, and, and that's who we have now on staff, um, in the future, uh, I'd certainly like to see them stay. Um, we are paying Dr. Kendrick, Dr. Tanya Kendrick, uh, by the day, and we'd like to see, uh, more funding so that we could provide, so we pay a provider to come in, you know. It looks like that's what's going to happen. Um, and, the, I th--we have the facility where we could be open and seeing patients five days a week. That would be the ultimate goal. Uh, the other, uh, aspect of providing care, it's always been free care, and I've always been really good with that. Our area, um, from a state Medicaid dental standpoint, the providers in--are, are, are fewer than they've ever been, that accept Medicaid, dental Medicaid. Um, so I know that from a fact, from a standpoint of coming from Morehead, um, and, uh, it's not demeaning to the doctor that doesn't accept that Medicaid. It's just that they choose not to. Um, so therefore, there's a group of patients out there that can't find a provider. Well, they do, you know, well, they wait until they, you know, they can get in line to the patient--the doctor that might be seeing one or two a month or something, you know, um, so I presented a situation to the board, you know, The Post Clinic board, and asked if we could be able to see some Medicaid patients, and through my credentialing and getting the clinic credentialed, and, we've been able to establish a, a network here where we can actually see a patient if they have a medical card, a dental Medicaid card, not, not Medicare, but Medicaid, um, and we can provide a service like a denture if we get approval. And we, we will be paid for that. It's not a lot, but it's enough to kind of support our budget a little bit--(laughs)--and I guess I can see that either escalating or just dying--(laughs)--I'm not sure which way it's going to go. But, uh, I think, uh, it's, uh, it, it's just one more outreach that we're, that I felt like we should try to do. So, I, you know, we've got the clinic here, I think medical is, is, is established on a pretty strong basis right now, on a, on a day-to-day basis. And uh, uh the need is still out there, I believe, from a dental standpoint, that the patients that aren't getting the care that they, they, they need.

MYERS:Um, do you have any final thoughts or things you would like to add or say?

TINGLE:I think I've talked too much--(both laugh)--it's hard to get me, uh, I really don't have any more, uh, specifics, um, It's just been a, uh, I think, a rewarding experience for me as a retired dentist, um, to be at a slower pace, to watch this evolve, to be a part of it, uh, evolving, and to see, uh, some of the efforts that we've all put out come to fruition, I guess. You know, it, it's, uh, it's been a, it's been a team effort to, to get this where we are right now, I think.

MYERS:Alright, well, thank you so much for your time.

TINGLE:It's been fun--(both laugh)--Do I ever get to see this or not?

MYERS:Yeah, you uh--

TINGLE:--really?