CURRIS:Good morning.

MELTON:Morning.

CURRIS:This is a time for the East Kentucky--Eastern Kentucky Social Club

reunion after four years, and they are meeting in Louisville, Kentucky, and I

have the pleasure, Jo Hern Curris, of interviewing fellow Benham/Lynch good

people from the mountains of Harlan County and the coal camps of those two

cities. And this morning, before I begin the interview, Rutland, I just wanted

to tell you that I have asked you to sign a document, which will present this

tape as a gift to the University of Kentucky Louie B. Nunn Oral History Center,

so that they may have open and unrestricted use, for all purposes--publishing, broadcasting--

and also for you to use in any way that you might wish. So let us begin by

asking: what is your name?

MELTON:Rutland Vine (??) Melton.

CURRIS:What would you like to be called?

MELTON:Well, the majority of people call me Slim.

CURRIS:Slim! (both laugh) All right, Slim. This is great. Now, where did you

get that nickname?

MELTON:Look at me.

CURRIS:(both laugh) That kinda tells a story, doesn't it? Oh, that is great.

Well, the--well, Slim, who gave you that?

MELTON:I got--really, another name, now, you would never believe is they call

me Get Gone.

CURRIS:Say that again?

MELTON:Get Gone.

CURRIS:Get Gone?

MELTON:I got Get Gone—is my father started calling me Get Gone, because when I

was a baby my mother used to--I crawled on one knee, and every time my father

would come around and say something, I took off, you know, on my one knee,

running from him, so he started calling me Get Gone. That's the only thing he

ever called me my whole life.

CURRIS:(both laugh) That is a great story. That is a great story. Get Gone. I

tell you what, Slim and Get Gone, you obviously were going to have a fun life--

MELTON:--yeah.

CURRIS:--without question. Well, I began this project, Slim, when my father,

Robert Hern, was manager of the Benham Credit Union--

MELTON:--I remember--I remember that.

CURRIS:Do you?

MELTON:Yes, I do. (laughs)

CURRIS:Oh. And--

MELTON:--right there in Benham.

CURRIS:And then later, when they started the credit union in Lynch, you know,

they asked him to come up and start that.

MELTON:Yeah.

CURRIS:And at that time, were you living there when they were selling the

houses to the miners?

MELTON:Yes.

CURRIS:Did you buy a house, or any member of your family?

MELTON:My family--my mother and father, they bought a house.

Me and my pastor we had number three, because we had a camp called Number

Three--Camp Three. That was--they had a camp called Camp Three. Me and the

pastor both lived in Camp Three, in fact, we lived next door to each other. When

they started, everybody had to move out the houses. You had to wait till a house

got empty before you can get a house. Well, we were going one by one. The last

three families from--leaving from Number Three. That's where the pastor live, in

Number Three, and I live in Number Three, and we got a house in Number Five. The

camps went by numbers. And we were about the last left from Number Three to

Number Five. And the--all the houses belonged to the coal camp, belonged to

the--built by, you know, The Company.

CURRIS:That's right. U.S. Steel built them, and they owned them.

MELTON:They owned them. They had the Company Store. I heard you mention about

the store to the pastor. You got your food--

you went by scrip.

CURRIS:Tell me about the scrip. Tell me about the Big Store. So, now, you were

born when?

MELTON:Nineteen forty-eight.

CURRIS:Nineteen forty-eight. Okay. In 1948, was Lynch still using scrip?

MELTON:Yes.

CURRIS:How long did they use?

MELTON:I say I think they used it up until about--well, when I got into high

school, they started using money, but it's one thing--you had Benham,

International Harvester. You had Lynch, U.S. Steel. That scrip you can spend

nowhere but in Lynch. You couldn't go to Benham company with that scrip. You had

the Company Store. Everything in the--your toys, your clothes, everything was in

that one Big Store, and that's called--everything

by Tennessee Ernie Ford in--(laughs)-- [Editor’s note: Melton is referencing the

lyrics to “Sixteen Tons” as sung by Tennessee Ernie Ford, which talk about the

singer owing everything to the company store.]

CURRIS:Yes.

MELTON:--the Company Store.

CURRIS:The com--owned by the Company Store.

MELTON:Store, that's--

CURRIS:That is for sure.

MELTON:Well, it was true in Lynch.

CURRIS:That--I didn't realize that scrip was being used that late.

MELTON:Oh, yeah.

CURRIS:That's very--

MELTON:--oh, when I got in high school, now, they weren't using scrip then.

CURRIS:Okay, by the time you were in high school, then you were talking about cash.

MELTON:Cash.

CURRIS:Okay. Now, when you're referring to your pastor, you're talking about

Ronnie Hampton--

MELTON:--right.

CURRIS:--correct?

MELTON:Right.

CURRIS:And tell me about your relationship with his church, and the name of the church.

MELTON:The name of our church is the Greater Mount Sinai Baptist Church, and

the pastor and I, we grew up together. I'm three years older than he is, but we

was right next door to each other. We played together. We fought together,

fought each other.

CURRIS:Fought each other. (both laugh)

MELTON:You know, but

I would listen to him when he was interviewing him about the switches when you

get a whippin'. A grown person seen you do something wrong, before you got home

your mother and father knew it. When you got home, and you--it's basically my

mama. (laughs) She asked, "What do you do?" And she tell me what the lady

said--or what the grownup told, said to her. I said, "No, I didn't do it." "Oh,"

she said, "oh, she lyin', huh?" (laughs) That got me a whipping.

CURRIS:That is so great. (laughs)

MELTON:Yeah, my mother sent me out there to get switches, to get that whipping,

to get three switches, and she wanted us to plait them, and you better plait

them right. But, you know--

[Editor’s note: The term plait is used in the context of switches the same as

the braiding of hair using three strands, or in this cas switches. If the child

returned with a switch too tiny, the parent would braid multiple switches together.]

CURRIS:--so you had to go get three switches.

MELTON:um-hm.

CURRIS:And then what?

MELTON:And she would plait them.

CURRIS:Oh, she plait them together! (Melton laughs) Oh my gosh! Oh, that's strong.

MELTON:Oh, yeah. See, you weren't allowed to lie.

(laughs) As I say, the kids--

CURRIS:--no lying permitted.

MELTON:--the kids nowadays, they should--they just should go back to when we

was raised, when we were raised, they were more disciplined. We learned. Now,

it's against the law to whoop a child. I don't they ever should have made that

law, because it's getting worse and worse and worse. I was reading the paper the

other day, we had a eleven-year-old who had a gun. What kind of--? We didn't

have that back in the day. I consider our days the good ol' days.

CURRIS:Do you know, Slim, that that has been a consistent theme amongst all of

the interviews that I have done, is that the way we grew up in these mountains--

MELTON:--exactly.

CURRIS:--in these coal camps, we didn't know it, but we were so much better off.

MELTON:Exactly. That's what I'm talking about. Exactly. Now, you say something

about somebody's child, the parents want to come and jump on you. (laughs)

CURRIS:Different world.

MELTON:

We--a different group. We didn't have that when we was coming up. And the

parents told my parents I did it, I--when I say I didn't do it. (laughs)

CURRIS:Tell me something, Slim: now, where did you go to school?

MELTON:Well, we start off at Lynch. I went to school at, like I said, me and

the pastor--the same school he went to, I went to. I think we integrated in--it

was in 1965 or '64. That's when we integrated. Like, the first two years was

kinda hard. There was a lot of fights and stuff. But eventually, when we just

mingled and got together, sit together, sit down to--right when we integrated,

we had the best football team, the best basketball team, that win championships.

Everybody got together. And--

CURRIS:--

do you think sports played a big role in that?

MELTON:A big role. A big role.

CURRIS:Because if you were playing together on the same field--

MELTON:--on the same field, and the same team, you were going to win a

championship. And it made us--it made us strong. And you know what was the main

thing about it? Sports made us come together as one.

CURRIS:One of the things that Ronnie mentioned was that he had played sports

with my brother, Bruce Hern.

MELTON:Okay, I know--me and Bruce was in the same class.

CURRIS:Oh, good! (both laugh) Here's this chance for me to find out about his

life, because there were eight years' difference, so I did not--

MELTON:--he was good people.

CURRIS:Is he?

MELTON:We were classmates. And Bruce smart. He was real smart. He really was.

But, yeah, Bruce was--he was all that. He really was. But we were--we graduated

together. (laughs)

CURRIS:

That is great. Well, now, did you all play on any teams together?

MELTON:I didn't play sports.

CURRIS:Okay.

MELTON:I played--see, the thing about it, when we was--oh, we was in school, if

you didn't--if you didn't play football, you couldn't play basketball. Like--

CURRIS:--really?

MELTON:--I'm Slim. (laughs)

CURRIS:Yes, yes.

MELTON:I won't get broke up. No, I wasn't gonna do that.

CURRIS:But that's interesting. I've never heard this before, that if you did

not play football--

MELTON:--football, you couldn't play--

CURRIS:--you could not play--

MELTON:--basketball. Ed Miracle would not let you do that. That was the--that

was the coach. (laughs)

CURRIS:I remember Ed Miracle, yes.

MELTON:He would not let you play basketball if you didn't play football. And I

could play basketball, but--

CURRIS:Did they have baseball in those days?

MELTON:They had baseball, too. They had baseball, and--baseball, basketball,

and football.

Those were the main sports.

CURRIS:The--I know that the rivalries between Benham, Lynch, and Cumberland,

and Harlan--oh my goodness--

MELTON:--oh, yeah.

CURRIS:--you know, and Evarts--

MELTON:--Evarts.

CURRIS:Oh my--

MELTON:--Evarts was the main one.

CURRIS:That was the main one, for sure.

MELTON:Evarts was the main one.

CURRIS:Yes.

MELTON:Any time Evarts and Lynch played--

CURRIS:--fights.

MELTON:--there was a fight. (both laugh)

CURRIS:My parents wouldn't let me go to Evarts, because they'd stone the buses.

MELTON:I don't--I don't blame 'em. I do not blame 'em. And--

CURRIS:--well, tell me about your--tell me about your life. When you graduated

from high school, what was next?

MELTON:When I graduated from high school, I got a scholarship from high school,

and I went to Southeast Community College. And I stayed in college--I went to

college for one year, but I was young. I wanted to see the world. I was tired of

Lynch. (laughs) And so I quit college

and I went to New York.

CURRIS:What were you doing in New York?

MELTON:I worked at Chevrollet--Fisher Body Chevrolet.

CURRIS:Say that again?

MELTON:Fisher Body Chevrolet.

CURRIS:Really? Fisher Body Chevrolet? I didn't know they were in New York.

MELTON:Yeah, it's a place called Ossining, New York. That's where they--but

that's where I lived, in Ossining. But Tarrytown, New York is where they had

Fisher Body Chevrolet, and Ossining, I stayed on a street called--48 State

Street, and right down the street from Ossining was the--was the jail, was the

penitentiary. I stayed right up the street from the penitentiary. I was scared

to walk by it. (both laugh) Sure did.

CURRIS:That must have been an interesting time. Well, how long were you in New York?

MELTON:I was in New York until I got drafted.

CURRIS:Okay.

MELTON:I went--I was there for six months. How they found out where you--where

you at--(laughs)--so quick? They know where, you know--and they know how I

wasn't going to college no more, and they--and my mother got a letter

in the mail, and she called me in New York and said, "Rutland, you gotta come

back home 'cause you've got to go in the service." The Vietnam War was going on

then. And I did not want to go to Vietnam, so when I came back I went down to

the recruiting station. They told me, said, "If you sign up for another year,

you won't have to go to Vietnam." I signed up for another year to keep from

going to Vietnam, and that was the first place they sent me after basic

training." (laughter)

CURRIS:Was this in the Army?

MELTON:It's in the Army.

CURRIS:So they told you that you wouldn't have to go if you signed up for that

extra year--

MELTON:--for the extra year.

CURRIS:--and that was the first place they sent you.

MELTON:The first place they sent me.

CURRIS:How long were you in Vietnam?

MELTON:I was over there a year. That was the longest year of my life. (laughs)

And, you know, only thing I hate about that war--it got to me, but, you know, I

got out of it--when you see children, when you in a ground attack, we had to

pull a--what you called a sweep the next day,

to go out and see. But when you see kids out there, they went out there because

they wanted to be. They'd rather get killed by us than get killed by their own

people. That was something that really got to me.

CURRIS:Why would they be killed by their own people?

MELTON:Because they want them out there to fight us.

CURRIS:They wanted the children to fight.

MELTON:Yes, right. Anyone that was old enough to hold a gun, they would put

them out there. Like I said, that was the longest year of my life, though.

CURRIS:I'm certain it was. What was it like when you came back? Was it hard to adjust?

MELTON:It was, it really was.

CURRIS:Tell me about that.

MELTON:Well, for--when you first come back, especially, like, Vietnam War,

they'll send you to talk to people, you know, like a psychiatrist, something

like that, that bring you, you know--but I'd say it took about a year to really

get back adjusted to the, you know, civilization. But still, you think about it. But

I just don't think, you know--that was a war, and we still didn't win it.

CURRIS:Correct.

MELTON:We did not win that war. That was a war that shouldn't have even happened.

CURRIS:There have been a couple of our wars like that--

MELTON:--oh, yeah.

CURRIS:--for certain. The--well, after you came back, what did you do next?

MELTON:When I came back, I was still in the service.

CURRIS:Ah.

MELTON:I went in in '69 and got out in '71, '72 ----------(??), and after that

I went in the coal mine, and that was my job. (laughs) And, really, that was the

only job that paid good money in Lynch, Kentucky.

CURRIS:You know, people don't comprehend today that the wages for coal mining

were--with the benefits--

were really pretty good.

MELTON:They were, they really were. They really were.

CURRIS:And we're talking about the seventies.

MELTON:Um-hm, yeah.

CURRIS:So at that point, what were you doing in the mines?

MELTON:I was a shuttle car operator. And--

CURRIS:--shuttle car operator.

MELTON:Um-hm. And, like I said, the wages were good, and you had a union,

because without the union they could treat you any kind of way they want to

treat you.

CURRIS:Without the union.

MELTON:Without the union, you know. The union was the best thing ever happened,

because if it wasn't for the union, you had some bosses that just didn't care.

They'd talk to you any kind of way. They'd put you out--put you on jobs that you

know was dangerous jobs. But with that union--as long as you got that union

backing you up, they couldn't do nothing to you.

CURRIS:What would you say

to people today about the value of unions? I mean, there's such rancor in the

United States now by certain kind--certain people that you would think it was

the worst thing in the world. What would you say?

MELTON:Without the union?

CURRIS:Um-hm.

MELTON:I would tell them to look at it this way. I would tell them to look at

it this way. Take, for instance, you got the policeman. You got a badge. That

badge is for protection. That's what the union's for. Protection. Without the

union, you don't have no protection. They can tell you do anything, you got to

do it. You don't do it, you fired. With the union, like that badge protects you,

they can't do nothing to you. It's almost like, you know, you either go to jail

or you don't go to jail, but with

that badge, it's--like policeman got, it's for protection. The union is your

main protection. That's a badge. (laughs)

CURRIS:I've never heard it described that way before, Slim. That's very interesting.

MELTON:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, now, I can remember the stories from Benham of you--if you were

not working, you could be removed from your house.

MELTON:Exactly.

CURRIS:And that there were individuals who were hired specifically for that

purpose, and were frequently referred to as thugs.

MELTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Did Lynch have a similar--?

MELTON:I'm gonna tell you something. My uncle, he worked in the mines. That was

before they had the union. And he would tell us stories when we were little

kids. He said if you said you was sick, they had what you call in security.

Like, they went in with--like you said, thugs. They were thugs. They would

come to your house to see if you were sick. If you don't--they don't think

you're sick enough, they made you go to work. Now, this actually happened.

(laughs) This--they would come to your house to see--are you sick. That's

something. That's really, really bad. That was before they had the union. That's

why I'm talking about the union is a badge.

CURRIS:Um-hm, um-hm. So if, for example, if a miner had been badly injured and

could not work, would he and his family have been removed from the house?

MELTON:He would be removed from the house, because they couldn't pay for the

house. They didn't have no income coming in. Without--when they didn't have a

un--without a union, they didn't have a--they really were slaves. I look at it,

put it that way. And without the union, they paid you what they want. Like I

said, everything was scrip.

You couldn't go to no other store. Okay, you were, like--like being in prison.

You had only one place to go, and that's the Big Store, the Company Store.

(laughs) That's really bad.

CURRIS:Did thy change from scrip because the federal government, or because of

the union, or both?

MELTON:Both. Both.

CURRIS:That is very interesting.

MELTON:Yeah, I mean--I really feel sorry for our forefathers, because they had

to go through something. I mean, I was blessed. I look at it being blessed, I

didn't have to go through that, because I end up in the coal mine myself, but we

had a union. Anytime they try to--the boss would try to misuse you, go to--we

went, and we had--(laughs)--you know, like, like court. Go to--like you go to

court. That boss was wrong, that boss would try to fire you, that boss he end up

getting fired,

'cause we had a union. They went in there, didn't have a union, you didn't have

no voice. Whatever that boss said, that went. And that was bad. (laughs)

CURRIS:When I think about the stories that you see about the mine wars in

different states and different coal mining counties, it seems as if it was

always the same battle, but it was at varying degrees--

MELTON:--um-hm.

CURRIS:--that I have heard stories that the Progressives in Benham-- [Editor’s

note: Progressive Mine Workers.]

MELTON:--yeah.

CURRIS:--and the United Mine Workers in Lynch--

MELTON:--Lynch, um-hm.

CURRIS:--that they did not always get along.

MELTON:They didn't.

CURRIS:Oh, good. Tell me the stories.

MELTON:Okay, Benham was International Harvester. In Lynch, United Mine Workers,

where it was just like, okay, for us, it's a civil war.

(both laugh) You had the Union and you had the Confederates. That's the way you

look at it. You look at it exactly that way. You had the Confederates and you

had the Union. We were the Union, they were the Confederates. (laughs)

CURRIS:The--what do you think was the--explain to me what the difference--you

would think union and union, you'd be supportive of each other, but that was not

the case.

MELTON:That was not the case.

CURRIS:Tell me why.

MELTON:International Harvester really didn’t have a union. That's why I say

they're the Confederates. We had a union. International Harvester, they didn't

have a union.

CURRIS:You didn't consider the Progressives a union?

MELTON:No. (both laugh) No, no, no. I mean, you know, the Progressives, I mean,

they were still--like, it's non-union. They, you know, they would fire them in a

minute in Benham. They--the guys

in Benham, they working--they couldn't hardly do nothing, you know. But we had

it made.

CURRIS:That's very interesting.

MELTON:We had it made. But the guys in Benham--the guys in Benham was trying to

come to Lynch.

CURRIS:So they wanted to work in Lynch.

MELTON:They wanted to be in the union. I mean, that's for the Benham union. I

don't know what it was. I don't know what the Progressive was. I really don't

know, because they were not--they were not like a union. They would get rid of

guys in a minute. I mean, that's what they would do. The guys worked in

International Harvester, they had the---they, they had--whatever they say, you

do, no matter how--what it was.

CURRIS:That's very interesting.

MELTON:No matter what it was, they had to do it if they want that job. We

didn't have to do that. If a job was unsafe with us, we don't do it.

International Harvester, whether it was safe or unsafe, they had to do it to

keep the job. That was the difference.

CURRIS:That is a big difference.

MELTON:That is.

CURRIS:That is a big difference. What were--you know, we were talking about

living in the

community, and the houses, and the half houses, and what we call the double

houses. When it came--what did--what did you have to pay for in your house? Did

you have to pay for water, elec--excuse me--electricity, for example, or--?

MELTON:Well, yes, you had to pay--and I'll tell you something else. When the

mines came to Lynch, then went to Alabama and Georgia, the Black people that

lived in Lynch was from Alabama, and I can't think of his name that would go to

Alabama, get them, have them in the trunk of the cars and bring them to Lynch to

go in the mine. They would have four or five families living in one house at the

beginning, when they first started bringing the Blacks from out of town to

Lynch. You have four or five families in one house.

CURRIS:

That includes children.

MELTON:Includes children. And I think about that a lot of times. I just

couldn't picture it, but they had big houses. But can you imagine four or five

different families in one house? And--

CURRIS:--we can't imagine that today.

MELTON:(laughs) Nuh-uh. And you had your shifts--you know, first shift, second

shift, third shift--but that's still two or three families in one house.

That's--I just can't imagine. You know, that's--and, you know, you didn't have

no bathrooms. You had a toilet. (laughs) Can you imagine two or three had to go

at one time? You know, that's--

CURRIS:Tough living.

MELTON:That's really tough.

CURRIS:Tough living.

MELTON:You know.

CURRIS:Talk to me about what you did in the mines. For how many years, did you say?

MELTON:I was in there for twenty-three years.

CURRIS:Twenty-three years.

MELTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:What were the last jobs that you had there?

MELTON:

The last job I had there--when I first went in the mine, I was shoveling the

belt line. Okay, that's the lowest you can really just about go.

CURRIS:Shoveling on the belt line.

MELTON:Um-hm, but you got to--you got to work there ninety days. It's--you have

a trial, you know, ninety days, they'd give you--have you, like, on a trial

basis. After ninety days, you become part of, you know--you can bid for a job.

You can't bid for a job for ninety days, but after the ninety days come up, they

got you. You can be on the job. I love to see--

CURRIS:--so after ninety days you could bid on a job, but not before that.

MELTON:Job, um-hm, not before that. Before that, you can ------(??) off the

belt line. They might tell you just go out there and pick up coal off the

ground, but, you know, you had to do it. But after ninety days, you could bid.

And the job I seen that I wanted was a shuttle car. After my--when my ninety

days was up, I bid on a shuttle car.

CURRIS:Well, tell me,

Slim, what was a shuttle car?

MELTON:It was a big car that you ran, and they had a thing--they had a machine

called the miner. The miner load the coal, but it load--and it dump the coal in

the back of the shuttle car.

CURRIS:All right, so you've got this continuous miner--

MELTON:--uh-huh, uh-huh, you're riding--

CURRIS:--digging out that coal--

MELTON:--coal, and that shuttle car runs right up under the--

CURRIS:--and the shuttle car is there, and--

MELTON:--load the coal into the car.

CURRIS:--loading the coal, um-hm.

MELTON:You go to the--and dump the coal, you come back for another one. That's

what you did all day, for your eight hours. And you know what I did? I stayed on

that shuttle car for twenty-three years. (laughs) I loved that shuttle car.

CURRIS:I was gonna say, you loved that job, didn't you?

MELTON:Yeah. I did. I did.

CURRIS:Well, you have been fortunate in the sense that not everybody likes what

they do. Were you ever fearful in the mines? Were you underground?

MELTON:Yes, I was underground. Yes, I'll tell you what

scared me one time, one night. This is one night. I was--I went to get a load

from the miner. Well, the shuttle cars have a path that you take, and this one

path -------(??) I had to take, I went and got a load from the miner. When I

came back to go and dump my car into the dump, that path that--the topper fell

in. Well, I had just come from under.

CURRIS:You mean the roof?

MELTON:The roof.

CURRIS:Oh my gosh.

MELTON:I had just come from under that, and when I went back the topper fell

in. I said, well, you know--I tell you about don't even go in there. Mining,

it's a good paying job, but it wasn't no good job.

CURRIS:I have been struck by the bravery that it has taken for all coal miners

to do their job.

MELTON:

Well, I'll ask you a question: Did you ever hear about Scotia?

CURRIS:Yes.

MELTON:Where the--

CURRIS:--Scotia Mine, yes.

MELTON:Scotia Mine. The night when they had this--when they had that explosion

in Scotia--

CURRIS:--um-hm, very bad explosion.

MELTON:--very bad--I was at work. The bosses on each section came and asked

each person that worked in the mine, in the--on their section, did they

have--this is the only thing they walked up to you and say, "Do you have anybody

kin to you that work at Scotia?" I said “No.” But they asked everybody. "You

have anybody"--

CURRIS:--this is interesting. So you're at Lynch--

MELTON:--um-hm, and I was at work.

CURRIS:--with U.S. Steel, and you're working, and they come and ask everybody

if they had anyone working at Scotia.

MELTON:That was kin, that they'd be related to.

CURRIS:That was kin.

MELTON:Um-hm. Asked everybody that. I didn't have nobody that was kin to me

that worked at Scotia, but I had a friend that worked in Scotia that died in

that explosion, you know.

And next thing I--didn't find out about the--really about the explosion until

the next morning when I come out, and, you know--and this guy, we all called him

Peavy, he's the only Black guy that worked on that section, and he got killed.

CURRIS:Well, where was he from?

MELTON:He was from Cumberland.

CURRIS:He was--so his name was Peavy?

MELTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:P-E-E-V-Y?

MELTON:P-E-A-V-Y.

CURRIS:P-E-A-V-Y.

MELTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:Peavy. From Cumberland.

MELTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:And he was the only Black guy--

MELTON:--got killed in the mine.

CURRIS:In Scotia.

MELTON:In Scotia. And Scotia was right up the street from where, you know--they

was in Cumberland, and--but bad thing about it, they had an explosion that one

night, and then they went back again the next--and they had another explosion.

You know, that's--and that was non-union. That's what I'm talking about. (laughs)

You know, you got to--you got to go. And, I mean, that hurt. That really--

CURRIS:Now, I understand that Benham sent their mine rescue team to help at

Scotia. Do you know anything about that, or whether Lynch did that?

MELTON:I don't know about Benham. (laughs) You know, I mean, they may have. I

really don't know. I know they sent teams in there, but I don't know who all

they—who it was--I think the only thing--they sent them back the next night to

work after the explosion, you know. I mean, if you're gonna be safe, be safe. Go

in and check and see what's in there about to get--you know, it had to be

gas-fed. You know it didn't go away in one night, you know. For--that stuck to

the community a long time, you know.

CURRIS:Yes.

MELTON:

That was a--that was the big talk of the town for a long time. I mean, back to

back. They didn't care--they didn't care about the people.

CURRIS:You know, you're saying that. It seems to me that there were certain

mine rescues that refused to send their teams back in--

MELTON:--back in, exactly.

CURRIS:--because of that.

MELTON:Why would you send--? You don't want to send a team in there to just

check it out, is it safe or not. Why send a crew back in there to mine coal? And

that's crazy. I never could understand that. (laughs)

CURRIS:Well, it's--well, you know, to have spent twenty-eight years, did you

feel like you were appreciated as an employee?

MELTON:No. Only thing that they cared about, although U.S. Steel was a union,

but the main thing they cared about was getting that coal. And that's the bottom line.

Because you can be replaced. That coal, they want that coal. And, I mean, that's

the way I looked at it, and that's the way I feel, especially after Scotia.

That's the way I feel, because I couldn't see sending guys back in the next

night after--without sending inspectors in there first to see was it safe. They

didn't care about you. (laughs) They cared about the coal.

CURRIS:Well, you know, I asked Pastor Ronnie about any kind--what he thought

about whether there was racial--whether there were any kind of racism in the mines--

MELTON:--yes.

CURRIS:--and I think you heard his answer.

MELTON:Um-hm.

CURRIS:What would you say?

MELTON:It's like ------(??) when--shuttle car's a good job. It was a good job,

but, like I said, you had to work ninety days before you could

bid on a job. But you had bosses. They had some nephews in there working, and

they some cousins in there, you know, family in there. That family got the best

job, you know. You didn't get it, whether you had more time or not, but their

family, they're gonna take care of their family. They would give them the

easiest job, and the best job. You had different--all jobs had, you know,

different pay. Like, the miner man got top pay. Shuttle car was next to that.

But they're gonna put their family in the best paying jobs before they get to

you. And then, if anybody else there to take it, you know, a couple of their

cousins or whatever, nephews or whatever, then they--and they need somebody,

it's open, they'll give it to you. You see, you had to bid on these jobs,

but then they say, "This is how much time you got in the mine," Whether you can

get the job or not. They always had an excuse for how they got that job. What

can you say? (laughs)

CURRIS:Not much.

MELTON:Can't say nothin'. (laughs)

CURRIS:Well, tell me when--what was it like growing up in Lynch? And more to

the point, you know, what was it like growing up in the coal camp? When it came

to social activities, were they related primarily through the school, through

the churches? What was the social life, for example, when you were in high school?

MELTON:In high school, we would have, you know, like, a--we had the dances at

school, like, on Friday night or something like that. Yeah, we called it the

social. That's--everybody called it the social; that's the name of the dance.

And you go to the movies. We had one movie,

small movie where you go to, only, you know--especially on date nights. You take

your girlfriend on Sundays, you know, to the movie--(laughs)--because that's the

only place you had to go. And--

CURRIS:--where were--? Lynch had a Novo Theatre, didn't it?

MELTON:No, that was Cumberland.

CURRIS:Cumberland had the Novo.

MELTON:Novo, but we had a theater in Lynch.

CURRIS:Okay.

MELTON:But Novo was in Cumberland.

CURRIS:That's right.

MELTON:And where, for the longest, the Black couldn't go to Novo. And, see, Cumberland--

CURRIS:--could you go to Lynch?

MELTON:We can go to Lynch, but then Cumberland had two movies: they had the

Novo and they had the Corlee.

CURRIS:Yes, the Corlee. I'd forgotten that one.

MELTON:(laughs) We could go to the Corlee; we couldn't go to the Novo.

CURRIS:Really?

MELTON:We couldn't go to the Novo.

SPEAKER 3: Your wife wants you now.

MELTON:Huh?

SPEAKER 3: Your wife wants you.

MELTON:Tell her I'm doing something.

SPEAKER 3: No, she's -----------(??)-------------. I gotta--I gotta--

CURRIS:--okay, Slim, we're having to wrap this up--

MELTON:--

okay.

CURRIS:Much faster than we intended--but thank you--(laughter)--so very much,

and I will look forward to hearing all of this again and letting you know, and

thank you for taking time to do this.

MELTON:You're welcome. Where's Bruce at now?

CURRIS:He's in Knoxville. We'll close--

MELTON:--he met a girl named Kay.

[End of interview.]