MCLAIN:Famous last words.

BOYD:That's right. A true performer, though, right? That--

MCLAIN:--hope so--

BOYD:--always ----(??). Um, okay. So today's date is October 11th. Um--just trying to think how many we've done. I think this might be number five.

MCLAIN:Oh, really? Yeah, okay.

BOYD:This might be number five with you. Um, we've got two under, um, we've got two that have been done with Ruth, and I'm about to reach out to Alice to start that. And so the goal is, is you're going to be slightly ahead, but the goal is to get everybody up to Berea, um, and then pass Berea at that point.

MCLAIN:Yeah, I think--I think we're there.

BOYD:You and I are there.

MCLAIN:Yeah.

BOYD:We finished, uh, just getting to Berea in our last interview, so that's where we're going to start. And I'm excited to to start from the beginning with, with Alice now. But, I do want to talk about the transition to Berea. So go backwards--one of the quotes that you said at the end of the last interview that I thought was really interesting, and this is going to be the bridge, I think, to the next phase, what we're going to talk about, um, the performance aspect--festivals. And eventually, today we're going to talk about the international stuff. But you said quote, "We responded to invitations. We didn't seek out invitations until much later. We weren't trying to have a career, but it was turning into one at that stage." Talk about that moment that was happening with regard to to performance and, and--

MCLAIN:Well, we had, uh, friends that had invited us to do, you know, different things, um--

BOYD:--in the last interview, you talked about being invited to Bill Monroe's festivals. You mentioned, and this is all brief mention, so I wanted to get you to expand on it. But you talked about this thing in Ohio, um, the O'tucky?

MCLAIN:Oh, the O'tucks, yeah--

BOYD:--the O'tuck, the O'tuck festival..

MCLAIN:--that was, uh, Stanley Dezarn--

BOYD:--yeah.--

MCLAIN:--in Hamilton, Ohio. Or maybe Middletown--Hamilton, Hamilton.

BOYD:So that was one that stood out. And then we talked about--you just briefly mentioned Renfro Valley. So I wanted to kind of--

MCLAIN:--yes--

BOYD:--take, take this idea of--

MCLAIN:--Glenn Pennington, who was at different times has owned Renfro Valley Barn Dance or been part owner or I think at one point, maybe the complete owner. Um, he had a car lot in Berea, and we bought cars from him, and we made his acquaintance and we were friends, and he invited us to come play on play on the [Renfro Valley] Barn Dance, which we did and enjoyed it very much and started going regularly whenever we weren't on the road somewhere else on a Saturday night, we'd go to the Renfro Valley Barn Dance, and that was very exciting because there was still a lot of the old timers still around. Not all of them, but, but some. And, um, and we always enjoyed that.

BOYD:Did these invitations kind of coincide? I think the Renfro Valley thing coincided with Berea, and the transition to Berea.

MCLAIN:Well, yes. And we were close. So it was just, you know, fifteen miles to to drive there at that point. There were a lot of things that we did when we got to Berea that were easier than when we had been in Hindman, because it was easier to travel. But if we stayed in Hindman, it would have become easier, too, because they built roads that weren't there when we lived there and improved roads. Uh, we were there when they built new 15 from, uh, Hazard to Campton. And that cut, you know, a lot of time off of a trip to Hazard even before the Mountain Parkway was opened.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Um, and, uh, now, I mean, now you can go from Hindman to Hazard in a, in a very short time, a matter of twenty minutes or something. And it took much longer when we were younger, so--

BOYD:--so these friends were inviting you?

MCLAIN:Well, for example, when we started our television program, we talked about that at WKYH.

BOYD:Yep.

MCLAIN:Now, WYMT I think. In Hazard, um, very soon after that, the Goins brothers also started playing there, and, uh, Bill Gorman and the people at the television station said, anytime I wanted to come in and run a camera or camera or something, I could, and they needed people and I didn't cost them anything.

BOYD:Yeah. (laughs)

MCLAIN:And, um, I was very willing, and--

BOYD:--how old are you at that point?

MCLAIN:Uh, (pauses)  I must have been about sixteen or so because I was born in fifty three, and this would have been in sixty-eight--

BOYD:--okay--

MCLAIN:--and sixty-nine when they went on the air. And, um, uh--so I went in and I was running the camera and running sound and things for the Goins Brothers. And Melvin would say, "Now, don't mess me up, Raymond." And, uh, I really tried hard, and they were very nice to me and helped me. And I don't think I did mess him up. (laughs) Uh, and we made friends, and he was friends with my father and my family. And he was talking about going to Bean Blossom, Indiana and to play with Bill Monroe and to go to all these exciting places. And he said, you ought to come to Bean Blossom, and you ought to come to these places. And he introduced us to Bill Monroe, and who invited us in to play not only at Bean Blossom, which we did for a couple of years, but then later all of his festivals. And he had festivals at that time in, in Delaware, in Colorado and California, Mississippi, Alabama, uh, two in Tennessee. Well, later, two in Tennessee at that time, one in Tennessee, uh, one in Kentucky, and then--in Rosine--and then he started another one in Jackson, Kentucky, he and Melvin did together--and Cager Farler. Um, those were good days.

BOYD:These--this is a little bit of a digression, but, but one thing that strikes me, we talked a little bit about this in the first interview, but we're kind of experiencing today a rebirth of the festival, you know? And now there are these mega festivals that are just these enormous things that have, you know, like in Louisville, what is it? Bourbon and Beyond and these types of things that are happening that are having just, you know, but bluegrass really kind of--

MCLAIN:--but there really were in the 70s too. In the 80s, there was, uh, at the Riverfront Belvedere, there was the festival that celebrated Harlan Sanders birthdays, for example, and, uh, people came from--I mean, they had acts from California, from New York, from everywhere, uh, a lot from the Opry, and, uh, it was very nice. Harlan Sanders always asked for us every year, which was really an honor, you know.

BOYD:I mean, we think in the 60s about like, Woodstock and some of those other sort of famous festivals.

MCLAIN:Now, they weren't mega things like Woodstock, of course, because that was--

BOYD:--but--

MCLAIN:--so big, but Bean Blossom at that time was huge--

BOYD:--yeah--

MCLAIN:--and, uh, there were people from all walks of life that came together. And that was one of the things about those early bluegrass festivals. There was everybody. From every age, every cultural background, every political opinion, every everything, aAnd they were all there together celebrating music and enjoying music. And that's something that needs to happen again. And I think it can, even with the larger festivals now, there's maybe more of a range of ages and cultural backgrounds and so forth than there were maybe ten years ago, because everyone--the audience kind of segregated themselves--

BOYD:--sure--

MCLAIN:--and so you'd have a festival where most of the crowd was, you know, of an older age, or you'd have a, a festival where people were of a younger age or, you know, this was a very conservative group and this wasn't and that, but, uh, I think they're kind of coming together again, maybe around some of these larger festivals like Railbird here in--

BOYD:--yeah, Railbird, yeah--

MCLAIN:--or, uh, some of them, you know, there's some of these festivals again, that attract everybody. And I think we need to get to that, and that will help our that will help our society, that will help everything.

BOYD:It'll help musicians for sure.

MCLAIN:Oh, it'll help musicians, it'll help the audience, I mean, everybody needs music.

BOYD:I mean, when you talk about Bill Monroe having all of these festivals at this time, and you talk about all this--

MCLAIN:--well at, at the early bluegrass--at the early Bean Blossom Festival, there was a group of people there--Daddy always talked to everybody, and which was wonderful because it meant I got to talk to everybody, too. And there was a group of people there. We didn't know they were journalists, and they said, "We're going to start a new magazine. It's going to be called People Magazine." And one of the first things that they sent them to do was to cover one of those Bean Blossom festivals.

BOYD:You're kidding.

MCLAIN:Well, yeah, that was, gee--that was fairly early on, probably early 70s, I guess, or so. But, it really was kind of, uh, a game changer in those days. The festivals were because before that with, you know, when rock n roll came in, a lot of the older country musicians and bluegrass music musicians especially, had a harder time, uh, making a living. I mean, even the Stanley Brothers or even, uh, Bill Monroe couldn't always afford to keep his band all the time. They worked on his farm when he wasn't working on the road, and that there were a few hungry years for everyone except maybe Flatt and Scruggs, who had the, the folk music revival and The Beverly Hillbillies and the, you know, then the Bonnie and Clyde and all that, um, and the groups that were sponsored by Martha White, which were Flatt and Scruggs, Jim and Jesse, Hylo Brown, um, they had at least some momentum from all the television appearances.

BOYD:Hm, yeah.

MCLAIN:Um, and, um, you know, uh, Jim and Jesse and the Osborne Brothers going to The Grand Ole Opry in sixty four, um, Jimmy Martin was doing a lot in those days, um, but the, the rock and roll era was hard on country musicians. And now, of course, country music--a lot of what was rock and roll would be called country these days.

BOYD:--yeah, that's right--

MCLAIN:--but, um--

BOYD:So this, like, proliferation of, of festivals all over the coun--bluegrass festivals specifically. in some ways was kind of a survival mechanism in terms of, like, creating venues to go play?

MCLAIN:I don't know if it was planned as a, as a survival mechanism, but it sure helped bluegrass musicians.

BOYD:I mean, when I think about the, the kind of festival that we're describing, I just think about bluegrass. I don't think about, you know, of course you've got things like the big Jazz Fest and you've got some of the other genres that have the mega, you know, things, but.

MCLAIN:And folk festivals that were very popular in those days and very important in the development of folk music and the folk music revival.

BOYD:Did you get folk musicians playing at bluegrass festivals, or was there a divide? Was there really like, this is bluegrass?

MCLAIN:There were a lot of, uh, the folk audience that came to bluegrass festivals and the bluegrass audience that went to folk festivals because, for example, Newport Folk Festival, uh, hired Earl Scruggs. Interestingly enough, they didn't have Lester Flatt. They got Hylo Brown to sing with, uh--

BOYD:--interesting--

MCLAIN:--I don't know why that happened, um, it would be interesting--Maybe in the Bill Clifton interview, there may be some mention of that, that he did with Joe Wilson, you know.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

MCLAIN:Um, because, of course, Bill Clifton was instrumental in helping start the Newport Folk Festival and some of the other folk festivals as well. But there were bluegrass musicians involved in the folk music revival because bluegrass music had all the criteria to be accepted there. Not everyone did. There was one reviewer that said, uh, Earl Scruggs' banjo style sounded like pouring thumbtacks on a tin roof. But, uh, the--and, you know, there were people that resented the popularity of bluegrass music--the, the newfound popularity of bluegrass music. Suddenly, it was staggeringly popular again. Uh, bluegrass music has had some real ups and downs in history, sometimes driven by movies and by television. Because when "Foggy Mountain Breakdown" became the chase music for, for the, the movie "Bonnie and Clyde", all of a sudden everybody was all about the five string banjo, and then it kind of waned a little bit. And then, "O Brother, Where Art Thou?" comes out and all of a sudden everybody's all about bluegrass music again.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Uh, or different ways that people hear it that all of a sudden it becomes hip. For me, it's always been hip.

BOYD:--yeah, of course--

MCLAIN:--it was. I mean, it was a radical new music style when Bill Monroe invented it, but, uh, it has had, you know, ebbs and flows with--

BOYD:--sure--

MCLAIN:--with popularity over time.

BOYD:So, okay, so you guys are, are this family band, um, and you're, you're still really kids at this point. I mean, you're, you're in your late teens early--

MCLAIN:--but, you know, bluegrass musicians were very kind to young people, all across the board. Don Reno was so nice to me. And Red Smiley and Benny Martin and Bill Monroe and Ralph Stanley and Clyde Moody and all these people. And Bill Monroe's sidemen--Joe Stewart and Kenny Baker and, uh, those people really took us under their wings.

BOYD:So what does that mean when you say that they're nice and they take you under their wing?

MCLAIN:They treated us like musicians. They didn't treat us treat us like kids, and they did the same for Carl Jackson and for Jack Hicks and for, um, all these people that were about my age that were coming up with me, that were interested. I'm going to see my friend Blake Williams this weekend. He, uh, played banjo with Bill Monroe for many years, and I, and I was just thinking about Blake this week. You know, he didn't have to learn--when he went to work for Bill Monroe, and then he played bass with Lester Flatt, I think for a while, and different--when he went to work for those people, he didn't have to learn their material. He knew it from the time he was a kid.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Uh, Carl Jackson didn't have to learn Jim and Jesse's material. He already knew it. Uh, Jack Hicks didn't have to learn Bill Monroe and Carl and Jim and Jesse's material. He knew that already. He, he--it was part of them. Uh, because they were part of that tradition. And in a way, we were, too. When Don Reno asked me to play mandolin with him, I didn't have to learn, uh, "Talk of the Town" or or, uh, "Remington Ride" or, uh, "I Know You're Married, But I Love You Still", or "I'm Using my Bible For a Roadmap. I knew those songs already.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:I didn't have to learn his material because--and I didn't--I mean, I already knew what key it was in.

BOYD:Right, (laughs) right.

MCLAIN:We all knew those things.

BOYD:Yeah. That's incredible, that's--

MCLAIN:--because it's part of your growing up. You know, Marty Stuart didn't have to learn Lester Flatt's material. He already knew it, and he was fourteen years old.

BOYD:Whew. And, you know, you do also think about musical genres. And I think we talked about this already. But like the kids that were embraced and came up within it, you know, the people you can't think of many rock and rock and roll stars who started, you know, in their early teens or even younger. Um, you know, same with, you know, but when you think about bluegrass and you think of the people who, how many fourteen year olds you know, were playing and being exposed and being embraced by the genre, that bluegrass is fairly unique in that.

MCLAIN:Well, I think it's still the same today. I think that Billy Strings and, uh, Molly Tuttle and--

BOYD:--Sierra--

MCLAIN:Sierra Hull and I think of, uh, Tyler Childers and--I think he grew up in this music and knew all those things from a very early age. And probably had he been around, had he been a little older, you know, and been around those people, I think he would have been in the same situation that I was.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

MCLAIN:I think that Molly Tuttle would. She played with her family, you know--

BOYD:--yeah, yeah. Right--

MCLAIN:--and I think, uh, um, uh, I think that Alison Krauss.

BOYD:Oh, for sure.

MCLAIN:And, and, uh, I think it's still the same. It's not changed.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:And I think that people of my age that were helped by older musicians want to do the same for younger musicians. I think that's one reason I was drawn to teach. I never thought I was going to be a teacher. Uh, I thought I was just going to be an entertainer all my life, and that's one reason I wanted to do that.

BOYD:Um-hm. Okay. So so we talked about Bill Monroe's festival. We're talking about festival popularity. Take me back to a Bill Monroe festival. Let's do a sort of visualization exercise. Walk me through what I'm, I'm, I'm tagging along behind you. Um, I'm carrying your banjo case, all right? We're we're at a bluegrass Bill Monroe Bluegrass Festival during this time. What am I--what are we seeing? And take me back to that time.

MCLAIN:The things I think about are are, uh, getting up in the morning and walking toward the old barn there at Bean Blossom and seeing all the tents. The Country Gentlemen's bus was there. Uh, Bill Monroe's bus, uh, all the entertainers--a lot of them traveled in buses in those days. The Country Gentlemen were very nice to us, Charlie Waller, if I see him, um, I'm remembering--Jerry McCoury was so nice to me. Uh, Buck Ryan and, uh, Red Smiley and Bill Harrell and just walking toward that old barn, uh, seeing Tex Logan and, uh, all the entertainers, all speaking. And it wasn't a situation like you had to run up to--I mean, you didn't want to try to talk to him just as they're getting ready to go on stage and they're thinking about something else. I mean, you didn't want to bother them when they're--there's a lot of respect to you didn't want to bug these people. And we respected them and appreciated the, uh, you didn't--you didn't probably speak first unless. Well, you might if you felt really comfortable with them, but, um, so I think they're--that element might have been part of it too. I've heard, um, people, especially a well known, well known, uh, young person in this music say, well, Bill Monroe was just an ill tempered man. I tried to talk to him one time as he was getting ready to go on stage, and he didn't have time to talk to me, and I'm thinking, no, he was getting ready to go on stage. He probably didn't have time to talk to you at that moment. But he would have another time. Or if you'd--you know, been around--they respected people that worked hard. They respected people that, um, that were mannerly. That had, um, you know, you, you didn't want to waste their time. (pauses)

BOYD:Okay. So we're back there at Bean Blossom and there's the barn, and they're all, they're all interacting--

MCLAIN:--and backstage, and, and I remember at one of the first, uh, bluegrass festivals, I was just talking with Cheryl and Sharon White, you know, from the Grand Ole Opry. And they were talking about--because Buck White and The Down Home Folks were there, uh, with us, and Ruth was there, my sister and, uh, quite a few people. And Bill, for some reason had a, a--in addition to the banjo contest and the fiddle contest and those things, he had a Little Miss Bluegrass contest, a little beauty pageant. And, and so I remember Sharon saying, "Well, we didn't want to be involved in it," but Daddy said, uh, "You need to support Bill. He needs, uh, young ladies to be in this beauty pageant." And I think they talked Ruth into entering, too, and Cheryl and Sharon White and, uh, I think the, the Calton girls, uh, Randie and, uh, um, uh, uh, Randie and, uh, Calton, uh, I, I know her name way too well to not to say it, but, uh, I think they all, all the family groups, you know, that had, that had young girls that were entered this, and I have no idea who won it or remember anything about it except all their dad's said,  "You need to support Bill." And I think they all were in this little Miss Bluegrass pageant. And it was, (Boyd laughs) it was, it was kind of a sweet time because it was something that everybody did together.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. Yeah, it probably wouldn't go over well today, you know, in today's day and age. But, but it's something that probably is completely--

MCLAIN:--it would be thought of in a different way now. It wasn't.

BOYD:Yeah. But it--

MCLAIN:--it was just a, just a sweet thing in those days. It wasn't a, it wasn't anything but, you know, uh, but people all, all doing it was had the kind of the, you know, Tex Logan had a bean supper every--I can't remember if it was Thursday or Friday, he'd, he'd make a big pot of beans and everybody at the festival would come in a huge, enormous. I don't know what he used, but it was enormous. And everybody in the whole place came and had--.

BOYD:So was it the musicians--everybody?

MCLAIN:No, everybody. The crowd. Everybody did it at our festival. Daddy always had a watermelon party every Thursday night. A lot of people came down early and helped us set up and helped us just gather to get ready for the festival and help prepare the grounds and turn the power on and try to get rid of bees, nests or hornets or things that--or snakes or--

BOYD:--snakes. Right. There's that--

MCLAIN:--you know, things that might, that might interfere. But Daddy always had a watermelon party that night, and it was one of the great things. He'd get a pickup truck and fill up the whole back of the truck with watermelons and come cut them up on the stage, and everybody would eat watermelon, and--

BOYD:--that's fantastic--

MCLAIN:--And then jam and play music, and tell stories, and greet friends from last year and meet new friends and--

BOYD:--it was real community--

MCLAIN:--it was, it was a real community and that's what those things were like. Our festival had a lot of that atmosphere left over from, from those old days too. Daddy was visionary. If you think about him deciding to start a bluegrass festival and saying, okay, we need to define this in some way, it's going to be a festival of family bands. The first one we did in, in cooperation with Renfro Valley, and we held it at Renfro Valley and we were partners.

BOYD:What year is this?

MCLAIN:Uh, that was seventy-eight.

BOYD:Okay.

MCLAIN:And then seventy-nine, we actually bought a farm to have the festival on--

BOYD:--yeah--

MCLAIN:--uh, and it was perfect in so many ways. Friends came together. KET was going to, um, produce it for television and distribute it nationally. And they built a beautiful stage, designed and built a beautiful stage and a beautiful, um, uh, covering for the stage that was three enormous, uh, pieces of some sort of canvas and, and great big aluminum poles that were enormous and made the--transformed this farm into a, into a performance space.

BOYD:And it was--and you all bought the farm?

MCLAIN:We bought the farm. Daddy went up and cut the grass--ut the hay with a lawn mower like every, every few weeks so that it would be lawn like, um, and KET designed these beautiful little flies(??), uh, oh, I guess they were probably about fourteen by fourteen or fifteen by fifteen foot, uh, things with, uh, that, and I'm going to tell you the man's name in a minute that designed them because he, uh, those guys at KET in those days were amazing. And Russ Farmer was one of them.

BOYD:I was going to ask if it was Russ.

MCLAIN:Uh, Ward, uh, I'm sorry, names are flying out of my head like crazy.

BOYD:That's all right.

MCLAIN:But I, I feel like they were all my friends.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:And they did so many things in those days that were groundbreaking. And, uh. Have you ever talked with with Russ Farmer?

BOYD:You know, he's been floating on our list of somebody that we need to get into the studio and talk to.

MCLAIN:That, that would be a really great thing to do that soon, because he remembers all these great things, uh--the interactions with Leonard Press and, and, uh, really, he started producing bluegrass music for, for television and probably has done more hours of television production of live bluegrass and old time country music than anybody living, um--

BOYD:I will do that. I will-- I'll put Russ on the list.

MCLAIN:He, he would be great.

BOYD:Okay, so, so, so you guys do this festival seventy-eight. We're going to come back around to your festival, but back again, you guys are younger back in seventy-one. Um, thereabouts. And you're going to these festivals--

MCLAIN:We'd already been going to, to Bean Blossom for a couple of years since we were at his second festival. And I don't know what year his first festival was, but we were at the second one.

BOYD:Okay.

MCLAIN:And, um, uh, by by seventy-one, seventy-two, he was booking us on, on all the festivals. And it was interesting the, the first time, uh, he booked us, he --it was at one of the Bean Blossom festivals, and I talked to him about money and he said, "Yes, I'll pay you $400." And that--it wasn't about the money because we were just so honored to be able to do it. And so at the end of the festival, Bill would have all the receipts and he'd be in the back of his bus, and he'd had have the cash spread out all over the bed in the back of the bus, and all of the entertainers would be waiting outside. And, you know, Don Reno would be there, and Lester Flatt would be there. And Ralph Stanley and all of the people who'd played on the festival were there. And he'd call us in one by one, and we'd go in and he'd count out what he owed you. And so in those days, those bluegrass festivals were very popular, and there were a lot of gate receipts. And, um, so when finally it was my turn to go in, I mean, everybody had been there. I thought, there won't be anything left by now.

BOYD:So you were the family rep to go in?

MCLAIN:Yeah. Daddy sent me to go settle up with Bill. And so he called me back, and I went back and, and he was there and he said, "Now what did I say I was going to pay you?" And I said, "Well, we I think you said $400." And Bill said, "$400. Did I say $400?" And I said, "Yeah, that's I think that's what we talked about." And I said, "But if you know, if that's if that's too much, it's okay. Just if whatever you want to give us is fine." And visit. "Well, I don't know, $400. I don't think that's the right number. Would it be okay if I gave you $800? Would that be okay with you?" And, uh, and he paid us twice what he'd said he would. He said, "We had we had a pretty good year at Bean Blossom this year." And he was he was very generous with us, and I think he was generous with a lot of people. Uh, people tell the stories about Bill that, uh, are outrageous. Sometimes people that didn't have all that much interaction with him tell stories that have become folk tales as if they were there. And it's really not a good representation of Bill. Um, Bill could have moments when he, uh, was a stern taskmaster. He did have a very definite idea about how he wanted his music and his band to sound, and he wanted his band to play his music. And, uh, he was very definite about that. Um, he did--there were times when he was preoccupied or thinking about something else, or he was very concerned about his legacy. He wanted to make sure that he was remembered as the father of bluegrass music, which he was.

BOYD:Um-hm. Yeah.

MCLAIN:And Bill did put his career and his music ahead of personal relationships or ahead of some other priorities in his life. He, you know, you could say he made this decision or that decision and--or people will sometimes make fun of the way he expressed himself or the way he talked, which was an older way of expressing himself and a way of talking that was very natural for the part of Kentucky he came from. He accomplished a lot, and I hope that people will remember the things about him that were truly great.

BOYD:Um-hm. Yeah. Well yeah, so--

MCLAIN:--because his legacy is important--

BOYD:--it's remarkable--

MCLAIN:--it's remarkable, and it is important.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:If he had not done what he did, Billy Strings would not be doing what he's doing right now.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Doc Watson wouldn't have had the same career.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Uh, Flatt and Scruggs would have not had the same career. The Stanley Brothers wouldn't have had the same career, uh--so many people that have been important in our music--I wouldn't have had the same career. Alison Krauss wouldn't, uh, Dailey and Vincent wouldn't. Rhonda Vincent wouldn't, uh, the people that are on the Grand--Del McCoury wouldn't. If you think of all the people that he influenced directly.

BOYD:Um-hm.

MCLAIN:Sam Bush wouldn't have the same career.

BOYD:Yeah. Right.

MCLAIN:Uh, it would be different.

BOYD:Um-hm. Yeah, yeah. Okay, so a couple more questions about--back to this visualization exercise back here--

MCLAIN:--I'm sorry I keep, I keep--

BOYD:--no, it's okay. No no no, I love this. And this is the way we do it. I'm fine with this. Um, when you all would go to a festival in those days, was it kind of--would you perform once or would you have?--

MCLAIN:I'll tell you how we started. Uh, now, the, the major acts would be booked, you know, Bill would generally close the shows. Uh, and generally if someone was booked, for example, at Bean Blossom, you'd have two sets generally in a day. Um, if you were working for Henry Vanhoff [Verhoff] at Ottawa, Ohio, you'd play three forty five minute shows every day you were there, on two stages, because he wanted a lot. If you were working for Ben Humphreys in western North Carolina--I can't think of the name of the place--his sets were shorter because he had a lot of talent, and he had, you know, you may have two half hour sets at the end of the day, or one might be twenty minutes and one might be forty minutes or I don't know, but, um, different people did it different ways, and the person that ran the festival generally just made a decision, and that's what everybody did. That's certainly what we did at our festival. Daddy said, um, uh, Bill needs a forty five minute set here, and--or the Osborne Brothers, Jim and Jesse--or Grandpa Jones or whoever, um, and Daddy said would say, you know, um, we only have twenty minutes here without running into something. Uh, so-and-so is going to do a to do a twenty minute set, or McLain family was going to do a 20 minute set. I heard him say one time, "If you can't do it in 20 minutes, you can't do it." And Don Reno said something similar one time. He said, "You need to change the mood of the audience completely at least five times every half hour."

BOYD:That is great advice. Wow. I like that.

MCLAIN:And Don, of course, came from an older generation when, when you----n entertainer would come in to do to entertain and you had to entertain everybody, not just the people who resonated with that's a hot mandolin break or that's a hot banjo break. You had to entertain everybody. And so you always needed to do something that would excite the crowd, something that would make them cry. Something that would make them laugh. You had to, to, you had to do all these things. Bill Clifton said that he felt people responded differently to different keys. And so when I played with Bill, every--Bill Clifton--every for the first seven numbers of every set, every song would be in a different key because, he said, some people relate more easily to the key of B flat. Some people relate more easily to the key of G. Some people to the key of F. He thought that people related to the tonality of a key as much as--and the, and the ways that, that, that those notes fall in the harmonic scale.

BOYD:I mean, not to get all new-agey, but, you know, at some point music is--and tone and pitch is vibration, you know, and frequency of vibration and, you know, we're all vibrating, like, right, right--we, we are energy, you know, in terms of what the cellular level.

MCLAIN:He, he's certainly not new age-- (laughs)

BOYD:--that's fantastic--

MCLAIN:--except that he is but he--

BOYD:--yeah, right--

MCLAIN:--I mean, I'm sure he wouldn't say that he was, but uh--

BOYD:--okay, so--

MCLAIN:--a lot of the older people, you know, had those ideas and understood things that we forgot for a while.

BOYD:Okay. So, so I love this idea of you got thirty minutes and you're going to change the emotion. So during this period of time, early 70s. Let's put together a set list. So what is--what's going to be a typical McLain Family Band set list that you're going to perform during this particular time? So let's say you got a thirty minute slot.

MCLAIN:Hm, we had a variety of material, and that was one of the things that, uh, we learned from, from Don Reno and from a lot of these entertainers. We had things that were, um, you know, you'd want something that opens, that gets people's attention. When we played at Carnegie Hall, the first song that we played was "How Mountain Girls Can Love". And we opened shows with that quite a bit. Uh, when we played at, uh, schools, we'd frequently--grade schools and so forth, we'd frequently start with--and especially overseas, because if people if English is not their first language, if they know anything in England--in English, they know how to count. And so we'd sing, uh, "Riding On That New River Train". Darling, you can't love one, darling, you can't love one. You can't love one, and have any fun, darling, you can't love one. Darling, you can't love two and your little heart be true. Darling, you can't love three and still love me. Darling you can't love four and love me love me anymore, and so--and it had a bass break in it, which was interesting because Ruth was quite a good bass player. And so right off the bat, first thing she does is take a bass break that, that got young people's attention. Um, we tried to--one thing Daddy was very good at was reading the crowd. He was very, very good at knowing what the audience needs. And any entertainer, if they're going to be a good entertainer, the first thing they need to know is what does this audience need? And one audience doesn't need the same thing that another one does. And so if you can have a good read on what the audience needs, then you can address that.

BOYD:And so would you all--I mean would you go in with a prescribed set list but then--

MCLAIN:Daddy might get--made out of a set list because we were doing a lot of television in those days, and so we'd try to keep a lot of fresh material coming along, and Daddy would make, uh, little set lists that we'd tape to the side of our instruments. So we knew what was coming up, and we could write any notes that we needed on there. Uh, Jesse McReynolds had a little paper clip on the, on the--one of the D strings on his mandolin.

BOYD:Oh, really?

MCLAIN:And, uh, that paper clip was so he could put a three by five index card or half of it on there with any of the notes he needed, uh, to remember. So if there were words or anything. So with his mandolin, he could glance down and still have good eye contact with the crowd or with a camera if it was television or whatever, and know what he needed to know. Daddy put it on the side of our instruments, and we could look down, and we would know what was coming next. If we needed to know the keys, or if we needed to remember any words we were unsure of. We could remember those. So we did have a set list in those days. When I played with Don Reno, Don never had a set list. We'd get ready to go on and I'd say, "What are we going to open with?" And it could be, um, anything from "Love [Please] Come Home" to, uh, I mean, he had certain things that were good opening numbers, and he had certain things that were good closing numbers and, uh, you know, different things in the middle that were he could do "The Oak Grove Church" that he wrote about his mother's church and where--and about his mother, and he frequently--it was such a touching song that he himself would tear up during that song, such a beautiful song. And the crowd would absolutely get in that mood--when I say he changed the mood completely. And then if he'd do "Barefoot Nellie" or one of the funny songs, or if he'd do, uh, "Tally Ho" or uh, or and some of his banjo instrumentals were remarkable. He would play not only things that people would expect a banjo player to play, like "Cripple Creek" or "Dear Old Dixie", or some of those. But, but things from like "Limehouse Blues" or "The World Is Waiting for the Sunrise", or things from the pop field or things that he wrote, like "Charlotte Breakdown" or, um, you know. His techniques were so, uh, suited to him and suited to the material. He didn't just play hot licks because it was a hot lick. He played something that went with that piece of music, and he had a big catalog of, of licks and was so fluent on both the guitar and the banjo that I saw him sometimes start playing and run out of frets at the top and start playing up over the head of the banjo. (laughs) Uh, he uh, or tender things that he that he played uh, like emotions or my favorite, uh, Don Reno kickoff is on a record that it wasn't really distributed very widely. He and Bill Harrell did a record, and there's a song on there, "The Gift of Love" or "A Gift of Love". I think it's called. And that's my favorite Don Reno kickoff. And it is so beautiful and so simple and so straightforward and so heartfelt. He was very good about being spontaneous and about playing in the moment and entertaining in the moment. He'd look over at me and sometimes he'd say, "Dance," and he--and I would start dancing right at that moment. (Boyd laughs) And I didn't have any idea that I--that dancing was in the was in the picture, you know.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Or he would look over and he'd say, "Do this now." And uh, and it was always Is entertaining for the band, entertaining for the crowd, and he just had the spirit of the moment locked in. And that--when I say Daddy would read the crowd, Don would read--every entertainer reads the crowd if they're good. And I don't know if I answered your question or not.

BOYD:Yeah, well let's--we're going through the set list. And, you know, we talked about sort--

MCLAIN:--our McLain Family Band set list.

BOYD:Yes.

MCLAIN:He'd--Daddy would try to have a lot of variety and he'd have some old things, some new things, some things that we wrote or my Aunt Rosemary wrote in those days. Um, so there there might be "The Girl I Left Behind Me", which would be quite traditional. There might be, um, something that my Aunt Rosemary wrote. There might be a funny song. My sister sang, "Bubble Gum Baby", which was a humorous song about a, about--that my aunt wrote about a girl sitting in the movie theater, and she thinks the boy beside her is really cute, but she doesn't know doesn't know how to meet him. And she notices that he's popping great big bubbles. Blowing bubbles with bubble gum. And she decides that if she could manage to get stuck on the other side of one of the bubbles when he blew the bubble, that then he'd she'd have an opportunity to introduce herself and she'd meet the guy.

BOYD:That's fantastic.

MCLAIN:It's, it's really funny--it's a funny song. It was one of our most requested, uh, when my sisters got older, they didn't want to sing it anymore because they thought of it--they related it to being young. But I think it's still a funny song and I would love it if they, if they'd continue to do that song because it's funny. Ruth would sing a beautiful love song called "Brown Eyed Baby" that, uh, that, uh--now you'd probably think that it has a little bit of swing in the, in the rhythm or the feeling of it, uh, but (hums melody without words) It's got a kind of a rhythm like that. And like, uh--but there are a lot of songs that, uh, I mean, everybody doesn't--we did California Blues back in those days.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Uh, the Jimmie Rodgers song. And we did, um, and I tried to play a break on the banjo that--I tried to play as much like Grady Martin's, uh, break on that, on Merle Haggard's "Tribute to Jimmie Rodgers" that--Daddy and I worked that out on the banjo. And so I could, I could kind of simulate that Grady Martin break. Um, there were things--and then I had instrumentals that I'd written for the banjo, like "Raymond's Breakdown" or "Silver Creek", or later on "The Road". Uh, we'd do one of those. We'd do some gospel songs. Um, uh, my aunt wrote some pretty gospel songs, like "Gathered Together" was on our first record. I remember I just saw that we were we're making a compilation of, of those right now. And I just saw the, the titles, which is why that stuck in my head straight away. Um, and then we did traditional ones too, like "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" and "Amazing Grace" and some--

BOYD:--all right, so we're coming to the end of the set.

MCLAIN:Then we'd try to do something that was upbeat, um--

BOYD:--did you have kind of a classic closer?

MCLAIN:We, we had several that we used to close. One was got--"Music's Got the Power For Turning Things Around", and, um, it's one that different ones of us sang. It's kind of upbeat. Um, I'd drum on the banjo head and Daddy and Alice would clap, and hopefully the crowd would clap. (laughs) That always seemed to happen, thank goodness. I don't know what would have happened if they didn't. And it had, um, I'd say, "My banjo was made for picking. My voice is made to sing, my hands to clap, my feet to tap. So let the music ring. Because music's got the power for turning things around. Yes it's true, I'm telling you I love to hear the sound." And then I'd play a banjo break and, uh, then, uh, Ruth would sing, "My bass was made for slap, and my voice was made to sing, my hands to clap, feet to tap. So let the music ring." Daddy wrote that song. And then Alice and Daddy would sing, "My body's made for dancing. My voice was made to sing. My hands clap." And then they'd dance. And Ruth and I would play. And she'd slap the bass. And I'd play the banjo, and Alice and Daddy would dance.

BOYD:That's so great.

MCLAIN:And it was, it was one that we closed with, uh, quite a bit. And hopefully the crowd would be enthusiastic by the end of it, which they seemed to be, which was really nice. Uh, but you wouldn't start with that, and you wouldn't probably do that in the middle. You could do could do it for an ending number. And there were others that we ended with from time to time. Uh, that was a good one to do overseas as well, because if somebody didn't speak, uh, very much English, if they spoke a little bit of English, they understood enough about that because the words were repeated and, and it was kind of visual as well as, uh--.

BOYD:--yeah--

MCLAIN:And it was inclusive. They could clap except in some places where it was not in the culture to clap. In Burma, for example, it was not in the culture to clap. In, um--

BOYD:--did you know that going in?

MCLAIN:No. We didn't. They knew that we would be expecting them to clap. The audience knew this. They were better educated than we were. And so they didn't make a loud put their hands together. But they but they did this which was more gentle and it was in their culture. Uh, but they didn't do a thing that made a loud sound.

BOYD:Interesting. Oh, that's really wild. That's cool. Okay, so, so we've talked about festivals at this time, but I do want to come back to Berea as a topic because you've transitioned and you all have moved to Berea. You were a student and transferred right from Lees, from--

MCLAIN:--Lees Junior College to Berea. Yes.

BOYD:What year? Um--

MCLAIN:Seventy one.

BOYD:So how far? How far along were you when you transferred to Berea? What year in college would you have been?

MCLAIN:I must have been, probably--I think I would have been, like, a second semester sophomore.

BOYD:Okay.

MCLAIN:Probably.

BOYD:So, um, let's talk about how Berea was different, looking back for you all or you personally, than. Hindman.

MCLAIN:Well, it was a lot bigger, uh., it was--I felt comfortable there because I'd been to Berea a lot. My father played for country dancing there and took me with him a lot--Christmas Country Dance Schools--we played for every year--brought Ruthie White from Hindman with us, and, uh, other musicians, of course, came also from Hindman and from all over. Miss Ethel Capps was the recreation director at Berea College at the time. Have we talked about her?

BOYD:I don't know.

MCLAIN:Well, I need to talk about Ethel Capps because she was very important to me, to my family, a good friend of my father's. Ethel Capps from East Tennessee, close to Knoxville, went to high school with Roy Acuff. Went to the Pine--went to Brasstown, The John C. Campbell Folk School, during the Second World War and before and after, along with my father and my Aunt Rosemary and my grandmother, um, while Granddaddy was in the Pacific, um, along with Homer Ledford and Jean Ritchie and Philip Merrill. People who all maintained lifelong friendships from that time being together there. Daddy took his driver's test in Ethel Capps' car.

BOYD:Wow.

MCLAIN:They all had stories about Marguerite Bidstrup and Georg Bidstrup, who were the directors, who was the director of the of the John C Campbell Folk School. Uh, they all had stories about things that happened there. Um, you know, especially during the Second World War, but before and after there, there wasn't a lot of money, and they had to do things like milk--they worked in the fields and raised--uh, they all did it. Um, and they I mean, Brasstown is known for, you know, wood carving and for folk singing and for dulcimer making, and a;;--that's where Homer Ledford learned to make dulcimers.

BOYD:I didn't know that.

MCLAIN:That's, uh, that's where he and Jean Ritchie formed a lifelong friendship. That's probably about the time he made his first dulcimer for her, maybe. I don't know. Edna Ritchie was there, um, but, uh, they made lifelong friendships. Then later, um, Ethel was--became recreation director after after Frank Smith at Berea College. And she's the one that developed--when Frank was there, he and grandmother and Mae Gadd, who was the director of the American Folk Song and Dance Society, and Pat Napier and a few other people started the Christmas Country Dance School. And Grandmother and Granddaddy were living in Lexington at the time. Granddaddy was at Transylvania, I think. And Grandmother said they never had a car that had a headboard that was intact from carrying the bass fiddle in the car. Uh, it always roughed up the car. Uh, they, uh, went back and forth to Berea, and they all met there for the Christmas Country Dance School and for the Spring Festival in the spring, they'd always have. The Spring Festival was a gathering of, of people who did folk dancing and folk song from all over, but particularly from all the high schools all over the mountains. And it was a very important time, too, because they all were together. And whether--there was always a group from Woodford County, there was always a group from Perry County, from the--Hindman, from, from Knott County, from Laurel County. And they'd all come and they'd have the Spring Festival. And, um, Ethel was very active in traveling around all these places. And, uh, then when, when she, uh, had the [Berea] Country Dancers, she wanted to make a performance group out of the Country Dancers instead of just a recreational dancing group. And she studied the Alvin Ailey Dancers. She studied the Ballet Folklorico from Mexico. She studied all these groups that involved folk dancing in performance. And she studied what made them effective. And I went with her when I was just a young boy to see the--I can't remember, I think it was the Russian ballet that had a folk dance troupe that came through, and I think they probably were here in Lexington, maybe at Memorial Hall or somewhere. I don't remember where it was, but I remember the stage and it was a big stage and, and it was remarkable seeing them do folk dancing as a performance thing. And Ethel said, "We need to have the, the Country Dancers." And she started really rehearsing every night of the week. And she said, "If anyone wants to be in the country dancers, they can be in the country dancers, but they can't also be on the basketball team, and they can't also be a cheerleader, and they can't also be in the chapel choir," and they can't also be in this and that. "They have to just be country dancers because we need their focus every day." And so one night would be Morris dancing, one night would be, uh, maybe contra dancing, one night would be, uh, you know, working on this aspect of dancing. One night would be working on this, and they rehearsed every night, five nights of the week. And they were still doing that when I was in college, too. She was still the director of the Berea Country Dancers at that time, and they rehearsed that carefully. And then she would take the groups to the National Folk Festival, and she would take them places to perform, and they would be invited to dance on the television in New York. They would be invited to the World's Fair to to do a performance of, of dances. And she really, uh, worked at--and she was a very good correspondent. She worked very hard--and at the same time traveling to all these high schools in eastern Kentucky and working with younger people, working with the college students. If you can imagine keeping up that kind of a schedule. And this was her life. She never married. She--this was her life. The Country Dancers were her life. And she, and she did develop a top notch performance group.

BOYD:Sounds like it.

MCLAIN:Then she, in the early 60s, was invited to, um, by the our Department of State, United States Department of State to tour Latin America, and they were invited to dance at the White House when John Kennedy was president. And she asked my father to be the music director for this, for this tour. And our--Otto and Marguerite Wood were, uh, were in the band, uh, Lynn Gault. Um, no, no, no, Margie, uh, his wife, uh, Lynn Gault's wife, whose name was Lucille Galt. Lucille Galt. Um, and Daddy, of course. And he taught Ethel to play the bass so she could play the bass with the group. Uh, and she left her bass at our house. That's the bass I started playing bass on when I was nine. Um, she was very important to my family. And then it was after that tour that Daddy came back. He was very excited about, uh, and they--The Country Dancers continued. Matter of fact, the first two years we played that The McLain Family Band played with the with the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, Ethel also had a group of country dancers dancing with the, with the Cincinnati Sym--

BOYD:--oh wow--

MCLAIN:--phony Orchestra. And um, Phillip Rhodes made arrangements for country dance tunes. And we played, and Margaret Wright played, and Dorothy Grossman played with The McLain Family Band for the dancing, as well as things that we did with the orchestra. Um, I'm digressing, I apologize.

BOYD:So how did you spell Ethel's last name?

MCLAIN:C-a-p-p-s.

BOYD:Okay, that's what I thought. Boy, it'd be interesting if there was an interview with her.

MCLAIN:I'll bet there is in the Berea College Special Collections.

BOYD:I'm going to look around for that. So, so back to the Berea. This idea of, of, you know, you felt comfortable there because you had been going to Berea, but how would you say, culturally, you know, Berea was different than Hindman at the time?

MCLAIN:Well, there was a lot of emphasis on the arts at Berea in those days, and a lot of emphasis on Kentucky crafts. Their, I mean, their wood carving is still known and furniture making from those days, I don't know if there are still wood carvers at Berea, but there certainly were then, and it was one of the things that students did for their student labor. And then these wood carvings were sold in the Berea gift shop and in--all around the world. And people know Berea still, even today for weaving, uh, students weaved. Is that is that a word, that's a?

BOYD:Yeah, I think so. As opposed to they wove.

MCLAIN:They wove, I guess they wove that's, students--students wove. Sorry, that was silly. Uh, students wove, um, in those days and on hand looms. And, uh, the Berea broom makers were well known. Students did broom making, um--

BOYD:--so did you all get kind of into some of those different--

MCLAIN:--I didn't--

BOYD:--dimensions?

MCLAIN:No, we didn't we weren't participating in that. But the Berea bakery was still--and they decorated sugar cubes with little decorating tubes, and they were sold and, uh, and they made, uh, beautiful things that were. And the Boone Tavern Hotel was a training ground for people that were going into hotel management. Uh, Richard Hougen was the chef, was the head chef. His cookbooks are still published today. And all of his things that were remarkable and students were absolutely trained. It's one thing that people don't do nowadays. People that were in service industries were trained in those days. And if you were going to be a waiter, you were trained to be a waiter, and there were things that you knew--you didn't pick up a glass like this, you picked it up like that. There were things that you knew about serving that people don't even consider today. There were people about--food preparation for people who are who are going to eat in a restaurant, in a nice restaurant that, that I don't think is even addressed nowadays. Maybe some places, but not here--not in our country so much. Maybe in some places. I hope it is. I'd like to know those places because I'd like to go there. But in those days, people who were going to be in that profession knew all of that profession. So if they were going to be a hotel manager, they knew all the roles that people played in, in hotels. If people were going to be in restaurants, they knew all the roles that people played in that restaurant. They did everything. They understood hospitality and they understood service. They understood, uh, and because they were, they were studying that, that's what they were. That's what they were learning, and it was valued. Crafts were valued. Art was valued. The humanities were valued. Humanities at schools of higher education were much different in those days. It was a huge program and it was a huge part of what people studied. And now we're we're shrinking those things and we're saying, well, it's expensive to study humanities. What does it train you to do? It's not a, it's not a vocation. It's not a, and--but being educated is important.

BOYD:I mean, we're seeing the effects of--

MCLAIN:--we're seeing the effects of not studying those things now. We're seeing the effects of eliminating civics, of eliminating a lot of the things that teach you to think critically. We're seeing the effects of that in our culture. And it's not really--it doesn't bode well for the future of anything.

BOYD:That's right.

MCLAIN:Um, we're going to have to have a renaissance again.

BOYD:We are. Well, you know, we, we're--we talked to Becca Taylor coming into the, the, the building this morning. Who you guys connected through the Berea connection because she had grown up in Berea. Um, when we think about Berea today, I think about these two things: education and creativity. You know, and it seems like that, you know, going back to this time where you're transitioning into this, this location, that's what you were surrounded by.

MCLAIN:I was surrounded by all of that. And there was a wonderful, uh, lady by the name of Betty Bok (??) that was, uh, at that time she came in, I think, the same year Daddy did. And she was a journalism teacher. She was my journalism teacher, actually, in college. She was wonderful, and she did a lot of PR for the college, and she, um, was a wonderful influence and did a lot of things that helped spread what Berea was doing, us included. And the Berea crafts, the Berea when Phyllis George was our first lady and John Y. Brown was governor, Phyllis did so much to help publicize Kentucky crafts, Kentucky art, Kentucky music. Phyllis was amazing for our Commonwealth, for our culture, for us personally, just in terms of, of helping, uh, Lois Matthews (??) was her, uh, personal assistant and did so much. She's a wonderful writer. She's a wonderful communicator. She did so many things to help advance our Commonwealth, our culture, our region, our culture. Um. Kentucky became known as the craft capital, uh, of the country in those days, uh, and is--I think that is part of the reason that there are a lot of artisans there now, today, so--many of whom studied, uh, pottery with, uh, people like Rude Osolnik or with people that, that did that. The Art Department at Berea was wonderful. The Music Department was wonderful. The--I mean, who would think of, of including Appalachian music and bluegrass music in your curriculum? At that time, nobody. And today, even today, it's rare, but, um, who would think of doing some of these things? Berea was very forward thinking in those days. The Appalachian Museum was was an important part of of Berea in those days. The Appalachian Center was an important part of Berea College in those days. Later, I think they even closed The Appalachian Museum and took the pieces and just spread them around dormitories and things like that. Um, and I think that was very sad because when it when it had a central focus there, The Appalachian Museum, everyone could come. School groups could come. Everyone could come and, and see things that were that were part of our culture that maybe people don't use anymore. We're forgetting things that have sustained our culture for generations. We're learning a lot about telephones and about computers, and we're learning a lot of new things, but we're forgetting things that sustained us for many, many, many thousands of years. We're forgetting how to work with animals. Think how many people knew how to work with animals. And if you needed to find somebody to, to, to--that would be able to train a team of horses or pull a plow with horses. Or you could find some Amish who could do that. You could find some people, maybe, but most of us don't know people on a first name basis that we could just call up, well or not even call--go see and say, uh, you know, people used to know how to do those things.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:And they're--it's not just about animals. It's not just about knowing how to grow food and know where our food comes from. It's not just about knowing things that will sustain our children and our grandchildren and our great grandchildren. It's about a lot more than that.

BOYD:We're also losing the--

MCLAIN:--the culture, the cultural things that were--that went along with it.

BOYD:--yeah--

MCLAIN:--the tales and the songs and those things are important. They're part of who we are. When my great grandfather came from, from County Donegal in Ireland, he brought a lot of songs with him and stories and things that he told my grandmother that my grandmother told me. I don't know that my grandchildren know those things.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. More than likely, not, really, so.

MCLAIN:I probably need to sing them for them.

BOYD:You do, you do. Remind me what your father's position was. Because he came to--you all moved to Berea because of his change in jobs.

MCLAIN:Right.

BOYD:What was the position at Berea?

MCLAIN:I believe that when he came--I believe when he came, it was something like associate professor. Uh, but because he did not have a doctorate, he was A.B.D., right? He didn't prepare academically to be a teacher. He was prepared. He was a good teacher, but he didn't have the piece of paper. I think that it was difficult for the college's accreditation for someone with out a doctorate or an MFA or a PhD to hold that position. And so I think for that reason they changed the classification. And I could be wrong about this, but I think they changed it to lecturer or something like that.

BOYD:I was, I was going to just say if he were to come in today, that would be the lecturer rank.

MCLAIN:I tink that's what they did. And it coincided with the fact that we were doing more touring and not able to--so it meant if you're associate professor, I think there are certain things you're supposed to do in terms of service to the university, service to the discipline, service to the community research. And, uh, because those were things I had to address, too, when I was--because I don't have a PhD either. And I was director of, of two academic--the two centers that had academic programs, um, fortunately, I had a letter from the provost saying that my professional experience was equivalent to a terminal degree in my field from ETSU, and the provost at Morehead State said she respected that--the, uh, the recommendation from the ETSU provost. So that really that piece of paper helped me. My father did not have a piece of paper like that. Had he known to ask for that when he was invited to come, I feel sure they would have given it to him. And I feel sure that this would not have been a problem for him because his professional experience far exceeded mine. Um, but, uh, it didn't really matter to him personally, I don't think, because at that time we were traveling more so the fact that he was a lecturer instead of an associate professor meant he did not have to address those particular concerns that were part of a job. If he had the different classification, as--

BOYD:If he was on a tenure track, he would have--

MCLAIN:--If he was on a tenure track, he would have those things that he had to address. Being a lecturer, he didn't have to address those things, and that was good for him and good for us, because it meant we were free to tour. It meant we were free to do all the things that, uh, that we ended up doing. And then as we were--as our touring schedule became busier, he started teaching only one semester full time and taking off the other semester. And then later, when we were even busier, he started teaching only part time as adjunct faculty, I think, or maybe part time lecturer. Whatever they--whatever they call those things, I don't know, I think part time lecturer, uh, and so he was teaching part time, one semester a year, and then and we're gone all the rest of the time. And then finally there just wasn't even time to do that. People like Atossa Kramer and Bill Talmadge and, and other people started teaching, um, his classes.

BOYD:So--but Berea recruited him.

MCLAIN:Yes.

BOYD:So what were they trying to do when they brought him in? Like, what was his--?

MCLAIN:--well, at that time, Loyal Jones was was relatively new at Berea College, and he had started The Appalachian Center, which was a wonderful, wonderful thing. And it, uh, it in the center, they also housed some academic programs, too, which I think was unusual, um, in Appalachian Studies. And they wanted to expand on that and have classes in Appalachian music. and in bluegrass music specifically. And there was no one that I know of that was more qualified than Daddy to do that. And I think that President Weatherford, Willis Weatherford, and Dean Jones, uh, realized that when they heard Daddy speak in Hindman when we played and Daddy talked to the group and he was, he was, uh, so well rounded as a musician. And he loved all kinds of music. And he could explain, um, things to, uh, to people with a different background about our music that, um, that wouldn't have been easy for somebody that wasn't as well rounded as Daddy was.

BOYD:What I would give to sit in on a class, you know, like to go back in time and sit down--

MCLAIN:--it was wonderful, and he, he brought people to Berea College like Bill Monroe. He had the whole Bluegrass Boys come the come in with the bus and, and speak and, and do, uh, interviews and that and then do a performance for convocation in the afternoon--one in the evening. He had the Country Gentlemen come, and the Country Gentlemen were coming, too. Charlie Waller was a personal friend. We stayed with him when we were in Washington, and that, and, and we played it their first Country Gentlemen Bluegrass Festival early on back in the 60s. And so they came and they, they did the same back in about seventy-three or four. They came and, and did lectures and did Q and A's and, uh, did a concert in the afternoon and one in the evening convocations. He had all kinds of people come.

BOYD:I'm guessing that at that time, because, again, there's no bluegrass programs around. I'm guessing that people like Bill Monroe may have been being asked to come perform at colleges, but at the time, those people probably weren't being asked to give lectures and classes.

MCLAIN:I feel sure they probably weren't.

BOYD:And so that was probably really novel and innovative.

MCLAIN:Well, it, it wasn't--it wasn't out of their comfort zone because they did workshops all the time. And they, and they talked about what they did. They gave interviews. They did all these things. It was entirely in keeping with who they were. And being as Daddy was a personal friend anyway, it was easy for Daddy to talk with them about these things. He knew, he knew exactly what to ask them and how to approach this in such a way that it wasn't awkward for anybody? It was completely, totally natural. Jack Tottle did the same thing at East Tennessee State University when he started that program in eighty seven. No. eighty three. I'm sorry, I don't remember the year. It was in the 80s. When Jack Tottle started that he, he did not--he invited my family and we came and did a radio show, and we did a lecture, and we did a concert there, and he had Janette Carter come and from the--from The Carter Camily, you know, she, she sang with her father and mother and recorded with them and so forth. And so when Jack knew exactly what to ask her and he knew exactly how--and it wasn't awkward for anybody.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:The, the places where bluegrass programs have been have been, uh, directed by people who do that have, have done well because the--it's natural. It's not an unnatural thing. What's unnatural for me, ha, the things that were unnatural for me were the, the paperwork and the accreditation hoops you have to jump through and this and that. Those things were awkward for me. Not so much for people who do that--that grew up in academia, that those kind of things are things they understand. For me, they weren't. And I had a big learning curve there. And I think probably Jack and I'm sure Daddy did too. Um, but as far as teaching students, that was easy as pie, and--

BOYD:--he just seems like a natural mentor and always, you know--

MCLAIN:--he has always been a natural mentor and so is Bill Monroe. And so was Charlie Waller, and so were all of the Country Gentlemen. And so were were all of the people that he had come. Loyal Jones brought Pappy Sherrill and Snuffy Jenkins to, uh--I got to interview when I was a student, I got to interview Snuffy Jenkins about the early days of playing three finger banjo when--because Loyal set it up that way--when, uh, I got to interview Asa Martin because, uh, I was working in The Appalachian Center--that was my student labor. And Daddy had already made friends with Asa, and so we were going to his house anyway. And so when I went as, uh, to interview him for the, for the, uh, archives at Berea, uh, Asa let me bring a great big lard can that contained all of his 78 [rpm] records to home with me to record, uh, for The [Appalachian] Center to--and I recorded them all, took them back to Asa and thanked him, and--

BOYD:--so you were putting all this on reel to reel?

MCLAIN:I put them all on reel to reel and took all of the interviews that had to do with those particular songs, and I spliced them in. So if he was doing "Red River Valley Rose", there's the interview with Asa talking about "Red River Valley Rose". When I play "Hot Corn, Cold Corn", or "I'm Going Back to Alabam"--songs that he wrote, uh, there's interview with him about those songs. They're spliced into the to the, uh, to the materials. It's all there in the archive.

BOYD:I'm guessing they--I'm guessing Harry has digitized those. Harry Rice down there.

MCLAIN:I don't--I really don't know.

BOYD:Because that sounds like a treasure. So, um. Okay, so, so he was brought down to to specifically teach this bluegrass music and create--he was creating the curriculum, right? He wasn't just going--

MCLAIN:--Daddy was creating the curriculum. Yes.

BOYD:So, um, just, like, a small detail, but important. Where were you all you all living in Berea?

MCLAIN:Uh, for the first, uh, four years, we lived in, in, uh, Berea College housing, they have, uh, when somebody comes in their houses, you can rent. And we just stayed there on Prospect Street. Then we bought a house that was, uh--when, when our managers in New York, uh, learned of the address, they really liked it that we were on the corner of High and Fee streets. Um, High Street and Fee Street, named for John G. Fee that, that helped start Berea College, but they liked it because it said high fee.

BOYD:High fee. Yeah.

MCLAIN:And, uh, we bought a house there on the corner and, uh, Daddy, uh, and two, two, uh, friends that we hired to that were very good at carpentry and very good at, uh, um, construction, remodeled it. Made a house that had one bedroom into a house that had five bedrooms, and, uh--

BOYD:--wow--

MCLAIN:--Daddy was a--he was very skillful as an architect. He--it's another thing he never studied, but he had a lot of practical experience doing it. He did it at Hindman, at the Settlement School, and he did it right there. He made a house--he enclosed the front porch for a room. He made a back kind of a lean to into a room. He went up and built some stairs in the living room, up into an attic space and, and had made two bedrooms up there. And he, he just changed, changed the whole house, really.

BOYD:That's amazing.

MCLAIN:And, uh, made it actually a lot better. And, uh, that was the house my Mother lived in until she died in the house, actually. And my sister Ruth and her husband bought the house after mother died and they live there still.

BOYD:Yeah, I'd love to see it.

MCLAIN:That's nice, yeah. Nice house.

BOYD:Hearing that--hearing now that it was your father who customized it and basically turned it into a large family home, as opposed to something that was going to be for a small family. That's fascinating. So, um, again--

MCLAIN:--Daddy was nothing if not resourceful and if not inventive and if not creative and if not, uh, brilliant. (laughs)

BOYD:I mean, back to--you're right, he's brilliant is something we've come around to over and over again. But also, you know, I don't know if we've said this before, but back to your grandparents and your father that there is a fearlessness. There's, there's a sort of positivity, can do, fearlessness that just says--not that like, oh, no, what are we going to do? It's how do we--

MCLAIN:--how are we going to do this? That's--you put your finger right on the thing. He didn't say, "Oh, no, I'm afraid we're going to have to do this." Howev--how he started with, "Okay, this is what we have to do. How do we do it?"

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:He didn't start with, "Oh, no, can I get out of it?"

BOYD:He didn't dwell on the problem. He focused on the solution.

MCLAIN:He focused on--he was very positive that way. His speech was that way. His speech--he thought about his speech, uh, I tend to say, "Wow, that's the best biscuit I ever ate in my life." Daddy would say, "I enjoyed that biscuit as much as any biscuit I ever ate."

BOYD:And there's a difference.

MCLAIN:There's a difference? Uh, he said--he would say, he'd say everything in the positive way if he could.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah, that's really amazing.

MCLAIN:And he thought that way. He thought that way. He didn't say, um, like you, like you just said, actually, he didn't say, "How can I get out of this?" Or, "Oh, no"--he didn't--it was all about, how are we going to--it was that way when he developed the college courses. It was that way when he started the blue--the festival. It was that way when we played with orchestras. It was that way when he started to learn origami back in the 60s. It was that way when he made any decision, he embraced new technology. If he'd--if he were alive today, he'd be all over phones and computers. He'd he'd be nine times more, uh, knowledgeable about those things and capable than I am. Whenever he--

BOYD:--can you imagine how many songs that he would be able to capture with--

MCLAIN:--oh my gosh--

BOYD:--the voice recording app--

MCLAIN:--can you imagine--?

BOYD:--on the phone?

MCLAIN:Can you imagine--if YouTube had been around, oh my gosh, if those things had existed, um, yeah, he--figured out how to do a lot of things.

BOYD:Yeah. Yeah, I love that. I just, he--I just have such a fondness looking back on, on on hearing from you all about this, this person and I have just--

MCLAIN:--and my mother was so supportive. You know, nowadays, uh, people want to draw a distinction between a supportive person or someone who is independent. But my mother was both.

BOYD:Talk about that.

MCLAIN:She was, she was supportive. Uh, I think I said before, she was not a great manager because she wanted to be a band manager. She was a great manager because she wanted her family to be well managed. She was not a great cook because she wanted to be a great cook. She was a great cook because she wanted us to be well fed. She was--she did the things she did--she started Girl Scouts, she and uh, and uh, Thacker (??), uh, I'm going to say her name in just a minute. She was a Thacker. She and Miss Thacker started Girl Scouts together when my sisters and Miss Thacker's daughters were aged to be to be Girl Scouts. She started the Girl Scouts in eastern Kentucky. She did things that, uh, women didn't always drive because people thought, well, their husbands drive. Her mother didn't drive until, uh, the 60s. I helped teach her to drive, um, and she started doing that because there was all of a sudden, you know, there was a need to. But she didn't do that before because she just didn't need to do that. But she was very independent, and she was, um, you can't make that distinction when, uh, women's lib became a thing that a lot of people talked about, it just didn't apply to my mother because she was already so far beyond that. She was already liberated in every way. But there also were things that you could say--she was not liberated, but she was she was supportive and she was, uh--but she wasn't blindly agreeing to everything. She she was, um, an independent thinker, but she wasn't subversive to anything that everybody else wanted to do. She was, she was really a team player and startlingly intelligent. Um, that didn't mean that she had moved in some circles, but she was very comfortable doing that. She'd gone to Oberlin College, um, when a lot of women didn't do that, uh, it was a time when some people thought women should go to college to find a husband, and that was not her, um--

BOYD:--talk about her transition into Berea. What are your memories of that?

MCLAIN:Uh, our house had burned, you know, about a year before we moved. And I think that was particularly hard on my mother. I think she had a hard time coming to grips with that, uh, it felt like a loss to her. Uh, Alice and Ruth and Daddy and I had music. My younger brother and sister were pretty young, Michael and Nancy Ann both had to be carried out. Um, but I think it was the hardest on Mother because she had to try to figure out how to manage now in a--I mean, we moved into Daddy's office, which was a building that used to be the old Fireside Industries Cabin. Fireside Industries was the weaving program at Hindman. And that log building was down in--where it flooded every year. And Daddy had moved that across the creek and up the hill out of the way of the flood, um, and also Uncle Solomon's cabin. He'd moved over both to places where they would never, ever, in all eternity flood. And they did in that biggest flood in, uh, in history just, uh, two years ago. But at that time, we thought that they would never, ever flood. And so that was--he'd put a modern roof on that cabin, uh, with, with skylights and things, so that there was good light in there and there were windows and that and, and um, he used that as his office. So all of a sudden, instead of being the Hindman Settlement School office, it suddenly became our house too, and they moved the office into the cabin. And, um, at that time there were still students there, so the dormitories were needed. The, the kitchen and all the facilities--everything was needed to be used for other purposes, so we had to move into the--to the office. And there was a little, actually a little small sink and a small fridge and a small burner in there. So there was a place to cook. It wasn't very big, but there--and there were things that we could--but it was different for my mother. And all of a sudden the cabin had to house all of us. And there were five kids, right? (laughs) And the two of them--and people used to live in, in log cabins. So it wasn't like an impossible thing to do. We and we did it. And a lot of people did for were raised that way and it was just what, you know, it's your lifestyle and you understand it. And so it wasn't out of the ordinary for us to do it. It just was different for my mother. And she had probably more to adjust to. And Daddy very soon built four more bedrooms on that house. He put a little wing on it. And, uh, so we had a space to be, which was good, but it was never the same for my mother because it was harder for her, I think, and just psychologically, it was harder for her, for the house to burn and everything in it and pictures and, uh, memorabilia. But it--but people were generous and they gave us every picture that we had is something that we had given to somebody.

BOYD:It's amazing. I, I mean you--yeah. I loved that story that, that people were sending you--

MCLAIN:--the things that we'd sent them.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:And, uh, so, uh, when we moved to Berea, all of a sudden, Mother had her house again with a kitchen and with a washer and dryer in it and with a, you know, all of those things. When we moved to Berea Daddy bought a Maytag washer and dryer. And, um, so, twenty-- sixty--seventy--twenty years later, when I moved to Nashville, Mother said, well, she needed a new washer and dryer, so she gave me the old Maytag ones. She bought a new washer and dryer. I took them to Nashville and used them there for ten years.

BOYD:--they do not make those like that anymore-- (laughs)

MCLAIN:--Mother's, Mother's, Mother's did not last that long when I moved to Johnson City in the year 2000. By now they're thirty some years old. I gave them to Dan Bonar, who was getting married, and he was the--he was my successor as the director there in 2010. I think he was still using them then. That's forty-some years. Um, Mother's didn't last ten, I don't think. What we bought to replace those didn't last ten.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:Yeah. Anyway, I didn't mean to, to, um--

BOYD:--but, but it's a point that's important to make that, that you--your father had his focus on probably all consuming focus on starting this program at Berea.

MCLAIN:Oh, yeah.

BOYD:You all had your music as kids and school and things.

MCLAIN:And we were in college and, yeah--

BOYD:--and so she's, um--

MCLAIN:--she's got her house again. And we were touring more because--

BOYD:--yeah.

MCLAIN:--now when we'd done, when--I think I told you about going to Spoleto, Italy.

BOYD:Well we're gonna--I, I had just starred National Endowment for the Arts meets in Berea. Um, and I want to get to that point as maybe the, uh, the, the, the capstone of this interview. We can, we can talk about, because we haven't talked about--you've mentioned it to me, but we haven't talked in the interview about going to Italy and kicking that off.

MCLAIN:That, that starts you see, Mother started doing a lot more of our business and correspondence. She did it before that, but we weren't traveling that, that way or that much. So when we started, uh, when we were at Berea, then the National Endowment for the Arts, as you said, met--the music panel met at Berea that included Risë Lisa Stevens, The New York Times music critic. Gian Carlo Menotti, the composer. Um, it was a it was a high powered, uh, group.

BOYD:And this would have been, what, year?

MCLAIN:Seventy one. We played for them in the Oak Room at Berea College to entertain them after dinner one night, we were invited to do that. Uh, they'd never met outside of New York City or big cities before, and they were criticized for not getting out in the sticks. And so they wanted to get out in the sticks--they came to Berea. (laughs) And they thought that would be, uh, getting out of New York, which it was. And because people thought that would affect what they did and the decisions they made. And so they came to Berea, we entertained, and after we were finished, uh, Gian Carlo Menotti came and asked us. He said, uh, have I told you this? He said, first of all, I said, "I am Menotti." Like, we wouldn't know who he was. Uh, at that time, probably he was more well known than he would be today, because at that time, his opera "Amahl and the Night Visitors" was played on television every Christmas, and, um, his, uh, his other operas, "The Consul" and "The Telephone" were, uh, and he had just started not too long before, I think the, the, The Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy. He had not yet started the one in, in South Carolina, the Spoleto in, in this country. Um, he was quite an artist and he was visionary. He was brilliant. He wanted to start this festival. He had his vision. He also had the backing of Alice Tully, who was very important. Um, and she, of course, is responsible for Alice Tully Hall at the Lincoln Center. And she was, uh, I think she owned Corning Glass, and she was quite a patron of the arts and of Gian Carlo Menotti. And so he said, and this is we didn't know any of this at that time. We knew who he was, of course, but he said, "I'm Menotti. I want to invite you to perform at my Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy." He said, "I can't afford to pay you much, but if you come, it will change your lives." And we did come. We did go. The next year, seventy-two we went. And he was right. He couldn't pay us much. I think we played there two weeks and I think he paid us something like $400. It wasn't--it wasn't a lot and it wasn't enough to cover our plane tickets. It wasn't enough to, uh, but I sold a banjo, an RB 250 that my father had bought me a few years before. I sold an electric guitar that he'd bought me. It was a hollow body blonde Gibson that was beautiful. And I sold the meat (??) for $250, and, uh, we, we sold some things, and we did it as best we could, and we did. We, we went and we, we have a poster still--that is is a poster from that the, the Vienna Boys Choir is on it, and all the people that, that played on the festival that year are on it. It's, uh, and it's a, it's a calendar. And our I think he called us The McLain Family Singers because he thought in Italy, The McLain Family Band would not translate in the same way, and that people would have a different expectation. And so he called us The McLain Family Singers. Um, and I think that's the way it is on the on the poster. Uh, Ethel Capps came to see us there and brought a friend, a young friend, uh, Martha Chrisman, with her, who was, uh, interested in music and dance and all kinds of things. Uh, she came to one of the performances. My grandmother, Bicky, went with us. Uh, my mother and younger brother and sister, uu, uh Michael and Nancy and went with us even though they were young and weren't yet performing. The band was the four of us Alice, Ruth, Daddy and me. And, um, we, we flew to Rome, took the train to Spoleto and were there for the two weeks. Then, as a result of being there, uh, someone who worked in our, uh, as a USIS officer, it's a US Information Service officer in our Department of State in Germany. Saw the advertisement and said there's a group coming from Kentucky playing bluegrass music, maybe they'd come to play in--at the Amerika House, which was a, a, a, a place that was a venue that was run by the USIS at that time, and, uh--

BOYD:Where was that?

MCLAIN:This was in Germany.

BOYD:But where in Germany?

MCLAIN:Well, to be honest, I don't remember. It could have been Stuttgart, but I don't remember for sure.

MCLAIN:Yeah.

MCLAIN:And Daddy said, "You know, we could come, but it would be, you know, expensive to come from Italy just to that one town. Could you possibly arrange some performances in other places in Germany that we could do at the same time, you know, to spread the expense?" And he said, "Yes, I can do that." And so we went to five cities in Germany on that tour Stuttgart, Hanover, Hamburg, Essen, (pauses) I'm sorry, I don't remember the fifth city off the top of my head, but there was a fifth one.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:And, um, Hamburg was the first. And, um, we were on German national television there. They came and produced something that they did in the, in the park. Uh, the mayor of Hamburg welcomed us, and, uh, there was a ceremony in the, in the gard--in the, and the park there was beautiful. And, um, our concerts there were broadcast, I think, on national German national radio from one of the cities. I don't remember if it was--which one it was, but it was, uh, it was very nicely arranged. And then a dear, dear friend, Joseph Nuyens from uh, Westlawn in um, Belgium, we met him and his brother the year before. He came to a festival where we were playing in Ottawa, Ohio. He wanted--he loved--he was a--he was many things. He was an international stockbroker. He was a race car driver. He was a jazz trumpet player. And he had fallen in love with the mandolin. And he wanted to come to, uh, to America to come to a bluegrass festival. And so he and his brother flew to Columbus, Ohio and drove to--maybe they flew to Dayton, I can't remember which. And they drove to Ottawa, Ohio, and they arrived in the morning, early in the morning at this festival in, in Ottawa, Ohio. And everybody in bluegrass music was there. Don Reno had helped Henry Verhoff book, the bands. He had everybody there from, from Bill Monroe to the Country Gentleman to, uh, Jim and Jesse to--I mean, every--Ralph Stanley, everybody that was in bluegrass music was at this festival. And, um, so--and we were playing-we were since we were new and nobody knew us, we were like the first group on the schedule, right? You generally went from the groups that nobody knew to the ones that everybody knew. And so it was a foggy morning. I remember it, it was a little chilly, even though it was in, I think, August, um, it was foggy and we were getting ready to play in this prefabricated, enormous medi--metal place where they had polka dances and things in on Saturday nights and, and in this, uh, small town in Ohio. And there was an outdoor stage as well. We were going to play inside. I remember Daddy talking with these two people from Belgium, and, um, they came and we were the first group that they heard, and we made friends and we talked with them and he said he's a mandolin player. And his brother came with him and Winnie was his name, I think. And so Joe became a lifelong friend. He just passed away a few years ago.

BOYD:What was his last name?

MCLAIN:Nuyen's n-u-y-e-n-s.

MCLAIN:Okay. The Nuyens family played at our festival several times through the years. Um, and I've. I've stayed close friends, even though I don't see them very often, with, with everyone in that family. I love them dearly. But, uh, so Joseph said, if you're ever going to be in Europe, let me know. And so we Daddy did let him know. And he said, "Oh, good. Since you're going to be in Germany, that's--you're going to be in Essen and that's close. I'm going to set up some concerts in, in, in Belgium if that's all right." And so we after we played in Italy, we took the train to Germany. We went all around Germany. Um, and then we went to, uh, Belgium and he set up a program for us on on Belgian national radio. A concert in the town square in Ghent, as part of a festival that was hundreds of years old that they were having there. And that was very interesting. And another performance--he set up several things for us there, and that was our first overseas tour. And that was when we started playing as The McLain Family Band with, uh, doing things for our Department of State. That's when we started the Italy. That's when we started that, and that's when Mother's role really increased, because all of a sudden now, before computers, before the--personal computers had not been invented yet. Um, certainly not phones that did anything other than you've got a--I mean, wireless phones. I think you could have a cordless phone, but, um, not certainly anything like these smartphones. Um, so Mother's role, everything had to be hand written at that time for our--we didn't have, I guess we did have a typewriter, a portable typewriter, but, uh, most things were handwritten.

BOYD:I mean, it's a completely new dimension of logistics that you all probably had to experience, I think, in order to--

MCLAIN:--before fax machines, before copiers, before Xerox machines.

BOYD:Yeah.

MCLAIN:I think there were copiers that were being developed, but we certainly didn't have access to them.

BOYD:Yeah, well, I have, you know, you know, our, um, you know, we had my, my friend Chuck Cox do a lot of the research, preliminary research for this project. And from the Berea Archive, um, he dug up this letter that is from September 16th, 1972. And it is from a gentleman named Peter Kandler from Stuttgart.

MCLAIN:Oh, yes?

BOYD:And it says, "Dear Mr. McClain, your travel this summer through Germany and to The Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy. Make your group a stop here in Stuttgart on July 18th in the American House of Stuttgart. This evening with the wonderful bluegrass sound of your group was an evening I can never forget, because it was the best bluegrass I have ever heard from a group. This was the greatest true bluegrass feeling of a group, and it makes me so happy to hear the beautiful voices of the girls in her perfect harmony singing, and the masterful five string action of your son, Raymond Junior."

MCLAIN:Awww.

BOYD:It's, it's remarkable, this two page letter--

MCLAIN:--what a nice thing for him to do--

BOYD:--from Stuttgart. And, you know, I think that just this internationalization thing, I think we're definitely going to start the next interview with, um, because it is truly one of the things--I've used this term a few times today, but it's truly one of the things that I think make The McLain Family Band remarkable during this particular time was the international component.

MCLAIN:Well, I think Daddy's willingness to take us to Italy to do that, when it costs so much, was remarkable.

BOYD:I mean, when you were saying you sold the instruments, you were selling the instruments to help fund this project--or to help fund this trip.

MCLAIN:Yeah, that's what we did.

BOYD:Wow.

MCLAIN:It was one of the things--we did everything we could, everything we could think of at that time. And, uh, we took everybody. That was the only time. I think that Mother went with us on an overseas trip, and Nancy, Ann and Michael didn't start going again until they played in the band. And grandmother did go with us several times because she was already, uh, kind of known in international folk music circles. She was part of the International Folk Music Council and before we ever started touring or doing things like that, she already she and her friend Maud Karpeles, who was Cecil Sharp's, secretary, and uh, other friends, uh, had attended the folk music councils in--all over the world when they, when they met in places like even Romania and places she had already attended those meetings and was part of that group.

BOYD:Well, I'm going to wrap up, but I think it's safe to say that, uh, he was right. Uh, he wasn't going to be able to pay you much, but The Festival of Two Worlds changed your lives.

MCLAIN:It did change our lives. And from that time on, we'd--we, were doing an overseas tour every year for at least the next--well, for practically all the rest of the time, we toured extensively.

BOYD:It became an expectation that you would go abroad.

MCLAIN:Well it--I don't know that it was necessarily an expectation, but it was, uh, see, the next one we did was because we went to England, uh, at the invitation of The English Folk Dance and Song Society, and we were part of a of a traveling, uh, group of, of, uh, musicians and dancers that they, that they sent out from places like Turkey and Sweden and Brittany and Germany and, uh, and England, of course. And then we represented the United States and of uh, different called the Folkmoot. And they went all over, uh, not only playing, like, at Cecil Sharp House in London, but, uh, Central Hall in Birmingham and Newcastle on Tyne and up in that area in the north of England, and uh, coal mining regions and uh, Sheffield and in Yorkshire and uh, all--not only big places, but small places too. And we played in sometimes grade schools and it wasn't all, you know, uh, it wasn't all Central Hall, in that, (Boyd laughs) it was everything.

BOYD:Yeah. All right, well, next session we're going to dive in and, and hit the international stage.

BOYD:Okay.

BOYD:All right. Thank you.

MCLAIN:Thank you so much.