CURRIS:

Hello everyone. This is Jo Hern Curris. I am in Harlan County, Benham,

Cumberland, Lynch, Kentucky for the opportunity to introduce to you and to seek

his information, Jeremy Williams, with the Harlan County Extension AP, as in

Harlan County Extension Agent of the University of Kentucky Cooperative

Extension Service, specializing in agricultural and natural resources, and I

have to say that Jeremy has managed to retain more information about our history

of Harlan County than anyone to date--(laughs)--that I have talked to on such a

wide variety of issues. Now, the--this interview is being conducted for the

purposes of recording for posterity and for the Benham Hern Financial

Center, the memories of living in Tri-City Area and the reflections of the

history, people, and culture as Jeremy knows about it. At the time of this

interview, Jeremy, I need to say to you that the University of Kentucky, Louie

B. Nunn Center for Oral History is supporting this project, and they have

provided for us this equipment which we are using today. But you will be asked

to sign a document in which you agree to unrestricted use--which maybe quoted

from, published, or broadcast through all media--including any use which you

personally might also want to make of the information recorded. Will that be all

right with you?

WILLIAMS:That sounds good to me. I think it's a great project.

CURRIS:Thank

you. Well, Jeremy, I just--as I've mentioned, I've been so greatly impressed

with the breadth of your knowledge about Harlan County and its history. And so I

want to begin with tapping your knowledge about Benham, the Wisconsin Steel

International Harvester. However, let's start with information about you

personally. When and where were you born?

WILLIAMS:Nineteen seventy-six, here in, in Harlan County. Actually, in Harlan,

Harlan Hospital.

CURRIS:Appalachian Regional Hospital.

WILLIAMS:That's it. (Curris laughs) Yes ma'am.

CURRIS:And so where did you live when you were growing up?

WILLIAMS:Growing up, I lived in Cumberland--still live here in Cumberland, so

this is home. Cumberland's home.

CURRIS:So this is a native that we're speaking with. What was your educational background?

WILLIAMS:My education, I have an associates from Southeast Comm--Southeast Kentucky

Community and Technical College, but I also have a degree. My bachelors is in

agriculture, animal science, from UK.

CURRIS:The University of Kentucky is predominant, isn't it? (laughs)

WILLIAMS:It is, it is.

CURRIS:And it should be.

WILLIAMS:It is, yes ma'am.

CURRIS:(laughs) Now, if you were from Cumberland, which school did you attend?

WILLIAMS:I actually--I attended a private school, Victory Road Christian

Academy. That's where I--

CURRIS:--tell me about--say the name again?

WILLIAMS:Victory Road Christian Academy, and I, I'll--it was a small, small

private school here in Cumberland--actually, in the community of Blair, just

outside the city limits.

CURRIS:All right.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, did you go grades one through twelve?

WILLIAMS:Actually, there, I went grades seven through twelve, so--

CURRIS:--okay, very interesting. Now, that as a private school, I would not

anticipate that

International Harvester or US Steel had any support of that as a private school.

Do you know whether or not--

WILLIAMS:--no ma'am, no--

CURRIS:--they might have?

WILLIAMS:No ma'am.

CURRIS:The reason I ask, I know that International Harvester and US Steel paid

stipends to the teachers at Benham and Lynch, but I doubted that they would have

done that with it being really outside of Lynch--(laughs)--and Benham--

WILLIAMS:--exactly, yes--

CURRIS:--for them to have done that. Well, what were your student activities?

WILLIAMS:I don't know. That's been a while. (both laugh) That's been a while

back, Jo. It probably--the student activity was probably getting out of school,

you know. I was raised, I was raised on a farm, so that took up a lot of time,

and then at one point in time during a mining layoff, my dad--my mom and dad,

they actually had a small country store, kind of a produce store. So I spent

some time in that as well, so, uh--

CURRIS:

--so you were working along with the family.

WILLIAMS:Yeah, that, and then, you know, neighborhood kids out playing ball or,

whatev--you know, fishing, that sort of thing. So that's kind of the activities

at that time in my life.

CURRIS:Well, speaking of your parents, who were your father and mother?

WILLIAMS:Okay, my mom and dad is Linda and Jerry Williams. My dad Jerry, he

graduated from Cumberland High School. My mom Linda graduated from Lynch High

School. So I tend to tell people I'm half Lynch. (Curris laughs) So--and

especially if I'm in Lynch and people are talking about growing up in Lynch and

stuff like that, I'll say, "Well, I'm kind of half Lynch," you know. And so,

yeah, because of my mom being raised in Lynch--and my dad was actually--he spent

the majority of his growing-up years in Blair, so, uh--

CURRIS:--and what was his work?

WILLIAMS:My dad, he was actually a coal miner at International Harvester, and then--

CURRIS:--in Benham--

WILLIAMS:--in Benham. And then later on,

he, uh--after, after things at Benham shuttered, he ended up getting a job at

Great Western Resources, New Horizon Coal in, uh, in the Mary Helen community of

Harlan County.

CURRIS:What did he do with the mines? There were so many--

WILLIAMS:--my dad started out as a general laborer, and then he worked his way

up into management as a boss, and then when International Harvester of

Benham--we'll stay specifically there with International Harvester in

Benham--when it, uh, when it shuttered, he was actually safety director.

CURRIS:That's amazing.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:That is amazing. Well, for the term shuttered, for those who are not

from the coal area, explain what you mean by when Benham shuttered.

WILLIAMS:Basically when it closed, when the final layoff took place, and that

it, that it closed operations and became no more.

CURRIS:

Right.

WILLIAMS:After it was sold out and it, it just became no more, as what we know

of as International Harvester, Wisconsin Steel, and Benham Coal Incorporated.

CURRIS:Well, yes, and we'll come back to that, but that--it's interesting we

have a language of our own--

WILLIAMS:--yeah--

CURRIS:--in the coal companies. As we would say, the coal camps. (laughs)

WILLIAMS:Exactly.

CURRIS:So the--when you were in high school, what was your favorite song?

WILLIAMS:I don't know that I had one. When I looked at that, I tried to come up

with something, and I, I really don't--I don't know that I had a favorite song

or anything like that or favorite singer. And--

CURRIS:--see, mine was Elvis.

WILLIAMS:Okay.

CURRIS:I just got Elvis and Johnny Mathis.

WILLIAMS:Got you, okay.

CURRIS:I was in that particular period of time.

WILLIAMS:Two good singers.

CURRIS:I lucked out. Exactly.

WILLIAMS:Two good singers, yes.

CURRIS:(laughs) Now, do you have other family members you want to discuss?

WILLIAMS:I've got a brother, and he's three years younger than me, and so,

you know, we both, both grew up sons of coal miners, that sort of thing. And

my--you know, you mentioned my knowledge earlier. My knowledge, I have to thank

two people. I have to thank my dad and then I also have to thank my dad's

brother, my uncle, Raymond Williams, because of just their knowledge of

International Harvester, Wisconsin Steel, and the inner workings of Benham, and

what it meant not only to the town of Benham, but as to the region and to the

world. I know we'll talk about that later, so--but I have--those are two people

I have to thank because that's where I got my knowledge from, the stories that

they gave me.

CURRIS:That is excellent. What prompted your interest in serving at the UK

Cooperative Extension Service?

WILLIAMS:Yeah. You know, I don't know. You know, I was actually working here at

Southeast at the time. I was--

CURRIS:--doing what?

WILLIAMS:--I was their

agricultural services manager is what was considered my title was when I left

here. But I worked in their community, community development office here, and so

did several things besides that. But one of the primary things was built an

aquaculture learning center that was located at Lynch in a former US Steel

warehouse, and what we, what we did there--actually, a shop building, a former

US Steel shop building. What we did is we used--we raised trout using water

coming from Mine Number Thirty, and so that was, that was my--that's what I did

here. And then the position came open at the Extension Office. Matter of fact,

the AG Agent who proceeded me came and told me about it and thought I might be

interested in it, and I said, "Sure, I'd be interested. I'll apply." And I

applied and, and got that job. That was in

February of 2001. I've been here a little over twenty-two years.

CURRIS:Well, that is amazing because you did not have to ask to stay in Harlan

County. The position was here and you were encouraged to apply for it. I

think--(laughs)--that's wonderful.

WILLIAMS:Yeah, I, I was--I'm blessed to be able to stay home.

CURRIS:Well, my memories of the Extension Service, both as a citizen and having

been an employee at UK in the past, was truly it's--it was great service that

were provided by the personnel. And I know the memories from 1960s era was that

the emphasis was on farming, food maintenance, home care. Now, let's leap

forward to 2001 when you assumed your position, and then we will move forward to

2023. Tell me about the

evolution within the Extension Service of what the--what is offered by the

Extension Service and how technology has impacted what you're able to provide.

WILLIAMS:We--we're still doing those things. We're still providing information

on canning. I just left the office and came up here and there was a group of

quilters and they're making aprons at our office right now and finishing up a

project that they started this morning, so we're still working with a lot of

family consumer science homemakers, that sort of thing, of all different things.

CURRIS:That's, that’s excellent. What are some of the other things they're doing?

WILLIAMS:We have a group of scrapbookers. We have a group of this vinyl design.

You may see it on cups and, like, shirts, that sort of thing. That's big, so

we've got a group that they’re, they're experimenting with several different

things, of new ideas, whether it be signage or coffee mugs or cups and stuff

like that, maybe clothing, or even maybe welcome rugs, stuff like that. So

basically a lot of homemaker things that we're still doing to this day. We still

have 4-H. So the 4-H--

CURRIS:--tell those in the audience what 4-H is because the new generation is

not going to necessarily know that outside of the mountains.

WILLIAMS:You know, 4-H and youth development is really big. You know, we're

fortunate here in Kentucky. We have 120 counties that have an extension office

in each county, so each county has a 4-H program. So with the 4-H, they, they go

into the schools primarily. They go--that's one of the places they go in. They

go into the schools and they will--they'll teach anything from leadership to,

here in Harlan County, we--hatching eggs to chicks and students are learning

about that.

Grow your own tomato plant. Our 4-H group, they will--in the spring, they will

grow probably thirty-five hundred plus tomato plants throughout the county--of

each county, elementary, middle school, that sort of thing. And so teaching them

how to grow, grow plants, that sort of thing. But--

CURRIS:--that's excellent.

WILLIAMS:It is, and, you know, like I said, they're learning leadership,

parliamentary procedure. They're learning how clubs work because there's clubs

in each school. There's also some clubs that they have outside of the school. So

4-H is really big in the county.

CURRIS:What are the four H's? I can't remember. I used to know.

WILLIAMS:(Curris laughs) You've put me on the spot here. Hands, heart, health--

CURRIS:--hands, heart, health. There was one other. (laughs)

WILLIAMS:Yes.

CURRIS:But to--

WILLIAMS:--I'm drawing a blank, sorry.

CURRIS:Yeah, well, no, I'm drawing a blank too.

WILLIAMS:I should know that.

CURRIS:But the fact that today in 2023, we are still making an effort through

the Extension Centers

to teach young people about growth of food, maintenance of self, you're really

talking about the fact that the extension center--when you include all the

activities we were talking about for the homemakers, you're dealing with social

and cultural--

WILLIAMS:--yes--

CURRIS:--issues as well.

WILLIAMS:Yes.

CURRIS:Well, what about on the farming side? Has that changed at all?

WILLIAMS:So on the ag and natural resources side, you know, it's fluid. It's

very fluid, and you know, somebody calls my office and they've got bugs in their

beans, so to speak, an insect. You know, you've got to help them solve that

problem. If they have something going on with the lawn or an apple tree, things

like that. I do a lot of backyard gardening, a lot of, you know, pest problems,

that sort of thing. We are sitting here in timber, so we have--you know, there's

the timber questions every now and then. One of the biggest things

that I've worked with the last several years is maple syrup production.

CURRIS:Tell me about that.

WILLIAMS:The demand is high, and--but the supply's not there. So encouraging

people to become maple syrup producers is really big.

CURRIS:Well, where? When I think about Harlan County and the altitude, where

are the trees able to sustain themselves, the maple trees?

WILLIAMS:We have a large number of red and sugar maples in the mountains of

Harlan, and so they could be in somebody's backyard to a wood lot that they may

have. So we've got--the potential's there. We're seeing--

CURRIS:--that's fascinating. How--what was--what would be the minimum number of

maple trees you would need to actually have enough product to sell?

WILLIAMS:Have enough product to sell? I would say somewhere in the neighborhood

of twenty-five to forty.

To have enough product to sell--

CURRIS:--so what kind of acreage do you need for that?

WILLIAMS:It just depends on how many maples you have per acre. You know, you

may have--that twenty-five to forty may end up being a ten-acre spot, maybe in a

five-acre plot. But it may be you cross over the next ridge over, and then you

may have to look at forty acres to come up with fifty trees or something like

that. It just depends on what you have in there. But--

CURRIS:--that's--what about technology? Are you involved in any kind of

technology training for the farmers, whether it's record keeping, communication, what--whatever?

WILLIAMS:We do that. You know, like you mentioned, record keeping. I think the

biggest thing recently, especially since the COVID pandemic, has been Zoom.

We've all gone to Zoom, so myself, the Ag, Ag and Natural Resources agents in

Letcher County, Kentucky,

Wise County, Virginia, we actually jumped on board when things started to close,

and our offices had to close as well. So we created a program called Mountain

Zoom and we put timely informational pieces together. We were able to bring in

specialists. We taught it ourselves. We had volunteers to teach classes, and it

could be anything from gardening to forestry to something that may have to do

with drones, you know, wildlife, food plots, it--you name it. And I think when

we--the last ones we did, we started in, what, March of 2020, and the last one

we did was February of 2023. So we kind of continued those. But I think

we--we've done, like, 150 of those

things. So it was--you know, so you had to teach people along the way to use

this technology of Zoom, and the University of Kentucky Extension Service really

done a great job of preparing us as agents with Zoom and--because we were

periodically having some meetings and sessions for that. So that really helped.

That really helped.

CURRIS:Well, what's the flip side of the coin? The receivers, what about your

audience? When you talk about--let's just use Harlan County as an example.

Having the computers in the home is a very standard, uh, product--

WILLIAMS:--it is--

CURRIS:--that--and do you find that the adults as well as the children can

operate for the Zoom?

WILLIAMS:We had people of all ages. We had families. I can remember in the

beginning that families--whole families would sit down, and it didn't matter

what the Zoom topic was. It would be whole families

that that entire family of maybe four or five--mom, dad, three kids, whatever,

they would sit down and join in with us. So--

CURRIS:--you helped the mental health--

WILLIAMS:--yes, yes--

CURRIS:--of your audience--

WILLIAMS:--yeah--

CURRIS:--during this time.

WILLIAMS:Yeah, and we--that's--that was one of the aspects that, you know, we

wanted to do, do that, is our minds were on a lot of things at that point in

time. And so anything you could do to get your mind off of that--and they

were--people were very receptive to that programming. It was unfortunate that

they couldn't come to the office and we couldn't meet with them face to face,

but we were going to try to give them the next-best thing, and the technology

was there to help, thankfully.

CURRIS:That's just excellent. That is absolutely outstanding. Is there anything

else that you can--would particularly like for us to know about what you do in

the Extension Service?

WILLIAMS:Another really neat thing that I was able to work on

is I worked with our county emergency management director and we put together a

nineteen-week program at Harlan County High School. It's an afternoon--it's an

after-school program once a week. It's called Harlan County Youth Preparedness,

and it's basically preparing the youth that are in those classes for any type of

disaster, whether it be a weather disaster or--primarily weather. You know,

that's what we typically look at. But we narrow it down to something that might

happen in Harlan County. We may even throw in there, you know, financial. We may

throw in there, "What if a--the electrical grid crashes?" Things like that.

"What if the power goes out? What do you do?" Those students that graduated from

the program, they received CPR training.

They received SKYWARN training from the NOAA Weather--our local NOAA Weather

office. [Editor’s note: NOAA is the National Oceanic & Atmospheric

Administration, a part of the United States Department of Commerce] They--some

of them jumped on board and did some training on their own through some FEMA

trainings--did a couple of FEMA trainings. But they receive a lot of information

on even if they're in a--you know, in a building and it collapses, you know,

what do you do? And--

CURRIS:--do they receive a certificate or--

WILLIAMS:--they do. They receive at the end of the program, a certificate.

Another cool thing, Jo, is there's a lot of leadership involved with that.

There's a lot of giving back involved. One of the things we required them to do

is to go home and work with their family to provi--to provide them--help them

implement a seventy-two hour kit, a three-day kit

that if something happens, you have seventy-two hours' worth of food, medicine,

water, food, whatever. But on top of that, to graduate from the program, you had

to go find five more families to actually go and do the same thing with, teach

it to them, and provide them with the information on how to put it together. And

we require them to take a picture with them standing with the kit and the family

and bring it back to us. It's not on an honors system. So basically the group of

students that graduated from the program this past year, there were eight of

them. So if you take six families and multiply that times eight, you know,

you've got forty-eight families who are more prepared now than what they were

before the session started.

CURRIS:This is an absolutely superb idea. Now, do you foresee that some of

these students are probably

going to actually go forward and become involved professionally in these types

of activities and work?

WILLIAMS:We have seen that. We had one young lady this past session that she

needed CPR training for her job, so she was able to get that. We had one young

man that--the previous session--he became a paramedic. Another became a fireman.

So we also give them career options. We have somebody to come in from local

ambulance service. We bring in somebody from the police department, fire, fire

service. You know, we're all the time needing volunteers, like in the fire

service. And so if a local volunteer fire, fire service needs volunteers, what

better way to--you know, to speak to this group, when we bring in a--

CURRIS:--what are the age of these--

WILLIAMS:--you know, a fire chief--

CURRIS:--students? I mean, if they're--if you're talking about after-school--

WILLIAMS:--they're high school age. They're freshmen to--you know,

freshmen to seniors. So they're of high school age.

CURRIS:That is just an excellent, excellent--

WILLIAMS:--and it's after school and they want to be there.

CURRIS:I bet they do.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:I bet they do.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Let's jump over to the history of Benham.

WILLIAMS:Okay.

CURRIS:This--first of all, do you have any idea how the name Benham was selected?

WILLIAMS:You know, there's some--(laughs)--really great stories out there. You

know, you never know if the story's true. Sometimes the story just--a story's

good. Just go with it. But seems like the most solid story was a man by the name

of John Benham. He was a long hunter and he actually hunted on the Benham Spur.

So the theory is the town of Benham took on that name from the Benham Spur or

from John

Benham. [Editor’s note: Long hunter is a term used for hunters who were active

in Kentucky during the 1700’s, the most well known being the Boones.]

CURRIS:One of the things that I had heard growing up was that it was named for

an apple.

WILLIAMS:I've heard it named from the Benham apple. There were several Benham

apples there. As a matter of fact, near the superintendent and the assistant

superintendent's house, up until probably ten, fifteen years ago, there were

still some Benham apple trees growing there on that track.

CURRIS:Are they extinct now?

WILLIAMS:No, they're still in the region. I still talk to people from time to

time that are--that have Benham apples or are looking for a Benham apple tree.

So we still have Benham apples in the community.

CURRIS:So if we wanted to initiate a Benham apple grove, would that be possible?

WILLIAMS:I think we could do that. If we could find that tree or those trees to

take cuttings from for grafting, I think we could possibly do that.

CURRIS:Well, we are going to have to

look into that--

WILLIAMS:--sounds good--

CURRIS:--because it's--when you think about Benham and you say, "Well, where

did the name come?" Are there any other stories about the name? Or are those--

WILLIAMS:--I'd heard a story. There was a story out there about a man by the

name of Ben Ham. So, you know, originally it was called Yowell. Seems like

Yowell. And so supposedly Yowell--it was called Yowell or Yowell Post Office

when it was first--

CURRIS:--how would you spell that? Just like--

WILLIAMS:Y-O-W-E-L-L I think's what it was, and supposedly it came from the

sound of wild critters in the mountains--(laughs)--so to speak.

CURRIS:Well, actually, since I lived out of town, that makes sense--

WILLIAMS:--it's--

CURRIS:--that you would hear these sounds--

WILLIAMS:--these wilds--

CURRIS:--and that would be--

WILLIAMS:--yeah. And so supposedly, whether it be wolves, coyotes, or something

like that, and it became--

CURRIS:--bobcats.

WILLIAMS:You know, and that's a story as well, so--

CURRIS:--that's great. I love that.

WILLIAMS:And I think it's a

great story. It's really great stories.

CURRIS:Now, do you have any information about what it was like in Harlan County

before timbering and coal mining began? The geography, the people, the lives

that--the housing. What was it like before we started having timber cutting and

coal mining?

WILLIAMS:The big thing in--I guess you could say in Appalachia--and let's

say--let's just go ahead and narrow it down to Harlan County--was subsistence

farming, you know, through the region. Cumberland or Poor Fork at the time was

basically a trade location.

CURRIS:Was a what--

WILLIAMS:--a trade--

CURRIS:--oh, a trade location--

WILLIAMS:--location. So, you know, it had--it's had some stores, that sort of

thing, the late 1800s, that it was a trade location so settlers could come in,

to that--to those stores and trade

goods, and that's, you know--I guess that's an Appalachian term, "going to trade."

CURRIS:Going to trade.

WILLIAMS:Going to trade.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILLIAMS:Basically you're trading your goods for somebody else's goods. So, you

know, the Cumberland, which was Poor Fork at the time, they had--they were that

trade location. You know, in 1900--I looked up some census information yesterday

on that. In 1900, Harlan County had about ninety-nine hundred people throughout

the county. In district three, which would be in the Tri-City Area, they had a

little over a thousand people in district three, so very small. Very, very small

at that time. We'll get into it a little bit, but I'll go ahead and jump into

the 1930--

CURRIS:--yes, please--

WILLIAMS:--into 1930, the census there. The Harlan County population was

64,500. So in thirty years, we took

quite a bit of a jump. We took basically a fifty-five hundred people jump--or,

yeah, fifty-five, fifty-five thousand people jump. District three at that point

in time had went from a little over a thousand people to 12,500. Now, at that

point in time, we had International Harvester and US Steel that had a lot of

people hired in the Benham and Lynch area. So these hollers and hills were full

of people at that time. But prior to coal, we were seeing a lot of subsistence

farming along the--

CURRIS:--so we were looking at a culture that was sparse, in terms of

population. Subsistence living, primarily their own gardens, raising their own livestock--

WILLIAMS:--yes ma'am--

CURRIS:--and would we have been dealing with housing

probably from frame housing or log cabins?

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am, log cabins, that sort of thing, and frame housing, however

it may be. There may have even been some rock shelters along the way, especially

probably the mid-1800s, things like that. So--and they--you know, the stories

that you read and the tales that you hear, they were not just in the valleys.

They were scattered even on tops of Pine Mountain and Black Mountain. So people

were scattered about, and I would say to do a census in 1900 was pretty tough on

the census worker--(both laugh)--to find all these workers. So--

CURRIS:--I see your point--

WILLIAMS:--you know, to find everybody that was there, to find all these

people, I would say that it was pretty hard on them.

CURRIS:Well, how did--which came--did we actually have much timber cutting here

as an

industry before coal mining? Or did the timber cutting come from the time of the

coal mines?

WILLIAMS:The--there were probably not a lot of timber in this region. When you

drop south into--let's say downstream, down the Cumberland River, downstream of

Harlan, or even Harlan, further downstream Pineville. There were, there was

timbering going on there more than here. So very little timbering. At that point

in time, the way to get it out was via--via the river, and so they would put

it--they cut the timber, put it on the riverbank, wait for the spring floods,

and we just did not have what you would refer to as big water up in here. And so

you typically saw that closer to Pineville where they had a little bit bigger

water, the river got wider, and waiting on the spring tides to come to float,

float that timber out.

CURRIS:Well, how did the companies, International Harvester specifically and

also US Steel, how did they become aware of the fact that there were coal

reserves in this area?

WILLIAMS:There was--in 1888, the Louisville-Nashville Railroad had actually

instituted a couple of mineralogists to come up with a report in the region.

When I say the region, it was just beyond Harlan County. It was--it would be

downstream of Harlan into Bell. It was even over into Lee, Virginia--Lee County,

Virginia. And these two--one was a gentleman by the name of Edward D'Invilliers

and the other was Andrew Creath--C-R-E-A-T-H, and D'Invilliers would be D-apostrophe-

-I-N-V-I-L-L-I-E-R-S. So those two gentlemen created a report of the coal beds

that they saw here, whether they were exposed coal beds naturally or they

were--some of these subsistence farmers in the region had found these coal

seams, coal beds along the way, and they were using it for a form of heat. So

they knew it was in the region before then. So then the word got out from there.

There's a large gap there of how did it get out? We're not sure. But that's how

companies like International Harvester found out about it, was through this

report in 1888.

CURRIS:What company actually came to Benham

and bought the land and the mineral rights? Was that Wisconsin Steel as opposed

to--how did that work? Do you--

WILLIAMS:--it would've been a conglomerative--I shouldn't say a conglomerate.

It would be International Harvester with Wisconsin Steel. But if you'll look at

some of the old deeds, it mentions Deering Land Company. Deering was one of

the--Deering Harvester Company, and I think it was James Deering was the owner

of the company. They were one of the three--one of the two larger companies plus

three smaller companies that merged together to become International Harvester.

The other was McCormick Harvesting Company that we know of, the Cyrus

McCormick--the McCormick family who ended up being predominantly

the group that--the family that oversaw International Harvester in the long run.

So we see a lot of--we see some--I shouldn't say a lot--we see some tracts of

land when we do some research in the Benham area that is owned by the Deering

Land Company originally. So--

CURRIS:--do we have any idea of what was the amount of pay per acre? How were

the--how was this purchased? At what value was given to it, to the land?

WILLIAMS:That's a good question, and I don't know that, unfortunately.

CURRIS:It may not be on the deeds.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:There used to be deed stamps--

WILLIAMS:--right--

CURRIS:--that would tell you what the price was, if you knew how to read the

deed stamps.

WILLIAMS:Right, and it's--I'm sure it's probably there. That's something that I

never really researched. Going back, when the sale took place, the company in

'86 from

Navistar, which was the company that was spun off from International Harvester.

When it became--from Navistar was--Navistar was sold to Arch Minerals. It was

kind of a lump deed and it's so lump that it looks like they sold the entire

Tri-City area. (laughs) So it--there's really not a lot, unless--you know, and

I've looked back through some deeds there, and it's just--it's--and I've went

all the way back into the late 1800s on some tracts of land, and there's--I've

just never really been able to find out anything. But I know it was by fee. How

much, I'm not sure.

CURRIS:Well, I'm sure it may be that we'll never know. (laughs)

WILLIAMS:And we may never know, yes ma'am.

CURRIS:When it came to the lump deed to Arch, was there a price associated with that?

WILLIAMS:There was, and I wish I could remember that. That is on the deed.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:That is on the deed.

CURRIS:And sometime, if you see that again, would you send

that to me?

WILLIAMS:I will.

CURRIS:And we'll add it.

WILLIAMS:I will. That'll be great. I wish I'd looked that up before now. But I

don't remember what it was. I want to take a guess, but I'm afraid to guess--

CURRIS:--all right--

WILLIAMS:--on that. But I will say it was--by today's standards, it was fairly low.

CURRIS:And I'm sure--by today's standards, it was very low, what the original

homeowners received as well.

WILLIAMS:Yes. Exactly, yes.

CURRIS:What--when we're talking about the lump deed, did IH retain any land

that they still own today here?

WILLIAMS:They--the company--they did not. When they sold, they sold. They sold

everything to--the land, basically, and everything went to Arch Minerals or Arch

Land Company, which would be a subsidiary of what was known as Arch

Minerals then, which now's known--Arch Coal Holdings, I guess it is now, seems

like. But they--when they sold, they sold everything, everything that they had.

And the land now that is--that was owned by International Harvester, Wisconsin

Steel, the Deering Land Company, whoever it may be, is now referred to--is now

owned by Natural Resource Partners. They're based out of Huntington, but their

parent company's based out of Texas, so--

CURRIS:--fascinating--

WILLIAMS:--to kind of skip ahead a hundred years. (laughs)

CURRIS:Fascinating how that all pieces together. When we are talking about the

mining--so when we talk about the fact that there was no real timbering in the

usual sense of the word here, did International Harvester at the time that they

owned the land,

do we have any idea of the amount of acreage that was?

WILLIAMS:The number of acres that I could come up with was about sixty-five

hundred acres, was what they--is what they held, the information that I can nail

down. They held about sixty-five hundred acres.

CURRIS:When we talk about--I'm going to skip over to a moment as to why the

interest in coal? Why the interest by International Harvester? And I am

presuming that it was for the specific purpose of production of coal, is that correct?

WILLIAMS:That's what I--

CURRIS:--oh, steel.

WILLIAMS:Exactly. It was for the production of steel. This--when they came to

Benham, when International Harvester, Wisconsin Steel came to Benham, that was

about midway through the second Industrial Revolution. So it was one of those things--

CURRIS:--so we're talking about early 1900s?

WILLIAMS:Early 1900s. We're talking--they first

started--there's a couple of dates there. One is 1906. The other's 1909. I'm

going to stick with 1909 on that for the time being. So they started mining coal

in 1909. So basically they come here in that area, in that 1906 to 1909 span,

and it was primarily for the coal. They realized that the coal that was in the

area, which was a bituminous coal, that it was great for making coke, which was

used to make steel, and they were--you know, they, they held the Wisconsin Steel

company, and therefore they needed the steel at Wisconsin Steel to make all

their needs in International Harvester.

CURRIS:Okay. So we have then the arrival, approximately 1906 to 1909, the

actual mining beginning in

1909, and at this point, that coal is being shipped, train, how--in some method

to where--

WILLIAMS:--okay--

CURRIS:--for International Harvester to produce steel?

WILLIAMS:The original shipment is really interesting, and this is one of those

stories that came from my uncle that I mentioned earlier. And evidently, it was

in a file in the office that somehow, unfortunately, got pitched, unless it was

saved somewhere and it's somewhere floating around, and I'm hoping that file is

still there. But originally, you know, International Harvester was a young

company at this point in time. The merger of these five--of these two large

companies and the three small companies formed International Harvester, took

place in 1902, so it was a fairly young company at this point in time, and younger

than most. You know, I think by--at this point in time, by--seems like I've got

some information written down here somewhere. We may come to it in a

minute--that International Harvester was one of the largest companies in the

nation at this time. Hopefully we'll come to it in a minute and I'll point it

back out because I jotted that down. They were one of the largest companies in

the nation. So they had that need for the steel. But on the shipment of the

coal, the railroad wasn't here in 1909, so according to the paperwork that was

in this file, that was in the--that at one point in time, evidently it lived in

the safe for years at the office at--in Benham. But it stated that the company

mined the coal

and took the coal, loaded it up on wagons, and hired somebody with a team of

horses, pulled it out of Benham into present-day Cumberland--Poor Fork then--and

up the Poor Fork of the Cumberland River to the community of Eolia. So at Eolia,

they transferred the team and the driver, and the new driver with the new team

would take the wagon of coal and transport it across Black Mountain, across

Stonega Gap, to Stonega, Virginia. The railroad came to Stonega in 1895, I

believe it was thereabouts, give or take a year. So that was the local rail

location to get that coal, whether it was test coal or actual--

It's probably more of a test coal than it was anything at that point in time

because also during that point in time, the Louisville-Nashville Railroad in the

late 1800s, they saw the possibilities of iron ore in the Middlesboro area, and

Middlesboro area, Harrogate area. And so the Louisville-Nashville railroad built

the railroad into Middlesboro, through the Cumberland Mountain at Cumberland

Gap, and actually went towards Norton up to Powell Valley, and that's how the

original railroad got to Stonega, Virginia. So the iron ore did not pan out the

way that they were thinking it would be. The deposits were just not there. But

there was this coal deposit and they

realized along the way--the Louisville-Nashville Railroad, they realized they

made the mistake of how they diverted the railroad. So at the time, going back

to the timbering operation, you had a gentleman by the name of T.J. Asher who

was in the timber business, and he was building a railroad up the Poor Fork out

of Pineville in the direction of Harlan. So the small company, building rail

with whatever money he had, with whatever material that he had, with whatever

workers that he had. So he continued to build that, and he actually incorporated

the Black Mountain and Wasioto Railroad. [Editor’s note: The Wasioto & Black

Mountain Railroad operated from 1907 to 1915] To the Louisville-Nashville

Railroad saw what was going on, and they contracted him to continue building the

railroad, which they ended up buying the railroad. Deleman (??) Railroad

actually bought the Black Mountain and Wasioto Railroad from T.J.

Asher at one point. Some of the early deeds in 1910 show that the railroad at

that point in time, that would be--soon be built into Benham was actually listed

as the Black Mountain and Wasioto Railroad. So they contracted with him. They

later bought the railroad from him. So it wasn't until--on August the

twenty-fifth of 1911 is when the first shipment of coal left by rail from

Harlan. It left by Terry--left from Terry's Fork near Wallins. And then in

September is when the first car of coal left Benham.

CURRIS:When was that?

WILLIAMS:September 1911, first car of coal left Benham.

CURRIS:That's fascinating.

WILLIAMS:It is. It is.

CURRIS:That is absolutely fascinating. And when we talk about the railroad,

the--and the L & N,

what we're literally watching are individual entrepreneurs who have had the

foresight to develop, whether it be the Deering Company being combined with the

other three, four--so when we talk about this whole entrepreneurial area or

time, what I would really like to think about at this point is what was

it--well, first of all, you talked about it being bituminous coal that was

discovered. Describe what bituminous coal means.

WILLIAMS:It's a coal that would be used for making steel. Now it is used

also--it's a coal that has--that burns hot. It's a hot-burning coal, and

therefore it could be used for burning--to make--for making coke for making steel.

CURRIS:The--

when they, when the two gentlemen did the survey for the coal, how large were

the seams? Were they able to determine how large the seams were at that time?

WILLIAMS:See, in the report, it says, but typically the seams in Benham would

range anywhere between three and seven feet thick. The thickness of the seams

would be three to seven foot, and it could vary within the mine itself. As they

mined the coal and went deeper into the mountain, they, they may go from seven

foot down to a four foot, and it was just the way that the seam laid. And then

they may go up to--back up to five or seven foot. So it just depends, so--but

the typical seam height in--or thickness in Benham at International Harvester

would be three to--about three to seven foot.

CURRIS:The--Benham is often

referred to as International Harvester's only captive coal mine. Would you tell

us what being a captive coal mine means?

WILLIAMS:The company owned it and all the coal that left there, that left

Benham, went directly to International Harvester when it was created. It was one

of those things where they own the coal, and so everything went to Chicago early

on in the first ten, fifteen years, something like that. I can't remember the

exact time. But it went up as coke. They had coke ovens. They had four hundred

coke ovens, beehive coke ovens--

CURRIS:--in Chicago?

WILLIAMS:No, in Benham.

CURRIS:In Benham?

WILLIAMS:In Benham. And so they actually coked the coal there on location, and

they would actually load coke into hoppers and take the coke already to Chicago

instead of coking it in Chicago. They coked it in Benham--

CURRIS:--describe what--

WILLIAMS:--to take to Chicago--

CURRIS:--coking means.

WILLIAMS:So basically coking is you heat the coal to a certain temperature

and--I don't remember the certain temperature right off the top of my head--to a

certain time, and you're burning off the impurities. You're burning it down to a

pure source, a pure earth source. And so that purer source would burn as a

hotter fuel, and so that coke would be a hotter, lighter fuel. It's a lighter

fuel source. Coke is lighter than coal. So it would be maybe of a lighter fuel

source as well. So lighter as in weight is what I mean.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILLIAMS:But--

CURRIS:--well, for example, if you had a ton of the bituminous coal from Benham

and you coke it, what kind of weight are you going to have from this ton in

terms of just coke to be transported?

WILLIAMS:That, I don't know. (both laugh) That would be a mineralogist

question, so I--unfortunately, I can't answer that one.

CURRIS:I believe I will defer to the mineralogist, for sure. But it really made

a huge difference in how--the volume and weight of what had to be transported to Chicago.

WILLIAMS:Exactly, exactly.

CURRIS:And in Chicago, this coke was at that point combined to make steel.

WILLIAMS:It was used to make steel with the iron ore. You know, they were

getting iron ore pellets, and I don't know--I'm not sure how that process works,

but, you know--

CURRIS:--did they have other--

WILLIAMS:--they were getting iron ore pellets--

CURRIS:--production areas for steel? As time went by, did International

Harvester expand their locations?

WILLIAMS:Basically everything there was Wisconsin Steel there in Chicago.

That's where the steel was bought, until latter years when they started

outsourcing things, when--latter years into the '60s, late '60s, '70s, when they

started buying steel from overseas or even making tractors and farm

implements overseas.

CURRIS:Sad days.

WILLIAMS:Yes. Yes ma'am.

CURRIS:There are certain terms that I would like for you to define for us as,

under--for example, comparing underground mining, surface mining, strip mining.

What is the--not only what are--what do each of those terms mean, but also

what's the evolution of mining of the various types?

WILLIAMS:Okay.

CURRIS:And I'd like to start with underground mining.

WILLIAMS:Typically that's what we saw early on. They--when you look at--here in

Harlan County, we have, like, drift mines, and imagine being on a boat. You

know, if you're familiar with being on a boat, you're just kind of drifting

along--sailboat. You're just kind of drifting along. Sail's not up. You're just

kind of drifting along. And so that's what you were doing. As they started into the

coal seam, into the mountain, if that coal seam turned up--say it turned up

grade, turned up a hill, they would drift uphill with it. As it turned down,

they would drift downhill with it. So it was a drift mine. You may run into

slope mines that you're digging down at an angle into a coal bed that's

underneath you. As a matter of fact, they had a mine--at least one mine in

Benham that was like that. They actually dug through rock or up through rock to

reach that coal seam. So they may actually--so you're sloping up to it or

sloping down to it. Now, you get into West Kentucky, or maybe down into Alabama

or Indiana, and they may have--or even in West Virginia. They may have a shaft

mine where they drill a shaft down into a coal bed and ride an elevator down to

the seam of coal. You know, they may drive--they may ride an elevator

four or five hundred foot straight down into a seam of coal and get off and work

the day, and then come back out to the elevator and ride it back up. But

typically what we saw here originally were underground coal mines that were

drift mines.

CURRIS:Big difference.

WILLIAMS:Yes.

CURRIS:Big difference. Are the miners at this point using primarily pick and shovel?

WILLIAMS:They are. In those--that early 1909, 1911, they're primarily using

pick and shovel. Along the way, they used a method--developed a method of

shooting on solid, so to speak. [Editor’s note: The term “shooting on solid”,

“shooting from solid” or “shooting off solid” is still in use at the time of

this interview.]

CURRIS:What's that mean?

WILLIAMS:They would use a--great question. They would use an auger, large drill

bits. They would drill into the seam of coal, coal face, kind of like you're

facing the wall. That is a coal face. And they would drill into that. They would

fill that full of a powder, dynamite, so to speak, and then they would set it off,

and it would blow that face of coal out. Then they would in turn take their

shovels and load--you know, load a one-ton car, whether it be on rail--at this

point in time, they were probably--they probably started putting rail in a mine,

light rail, and depending on a size of a mine, that car, that half-ton, one-ton

rail car may be pulled by a pony. It may even be pulled by, you know, something

mechanical later on, whether it be electric or--the majority of them were

electric. The majority, probably electric at that point in time, so--but

basically, they were getting that out of the mine, even pushing it. They may

even have to push that car out of the mine to get that out, but--so pick and

shovel, and then also in the beginning, shooting on solid.

CURRIS:The, uh--then when we start talking about the evolution of mining,

talk about surface mining and strip mining.

WILLIAMS:So what happened when we got in--basically, surface mining and strip

mining are kind of one and the same, I guess you could say. The strip mining

would be you're taking, you know, a strip bench, a strip--you follow a bench and

take a strip--

CURRIS:--what does a bench mean?

WILLIAMS:A bench would be a flat area that runs the same elevation, that it

would have a coal seam that lays on that elevation. And so they would take the

overburden or the rock off it and then they would take the actual coal off, and

it would create a bench. So kind of a strip, kind of like we think of a strip

mall, something like that. It would just be a strip area. And so that would be

a--it's a form of surface mining there. And one of the things is it was--they

may do this. They were doing this and still yet today to access

coal seams that were thin. They developed technology along the way to access

those, but--to access coal seams that were maybe thin, or they could get that

coal a little cheaper than they could if they could, you know, go in there

underground. You know, we've got coal mines right here in East Kentucky today.

The Blue Gem seam down in Knox and Willette County, you're looking at something

that's twenty-four to twenty-eight inches thick, but it's a high-dollar coal.

[Editor’s note: Blue Gem coal is a very low sulfur coal used at the time of this

interview in the production of silicon metals for computers, medical

instruments, and solar panels. The Blue Gem coal seam is found in both Knox

County, KY and Whitley County, KY] And--but--so that strip would be to basically

go along the contour of the mountain and take off an overburden of rock and

soil, take out the coal, and then reclaim it.

CURRIS:When it comes to International Harvester and Benham specifically, was

there any strip mining here? Or was it all underground mining?

WILLIAMS:There was

some strip mining later on in the '70s.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:There was some strip mining, very little. Very little. Same with US

Steel, our next-door neighbor. So--Benham's next-door neighbor. But--so

basically it was primarily underground. That was, that was the method of coal extraction.

CURRIS:So is it safe to say, then, that because we have very little strip

mining in Benham and Lynch that our water sources--Looney Creek, for

example--were not polluted with the run-off from strip mining that we hear about

other areas?

WILLIAMS:Could be. I'm not sure on that. Could be. I do know that Looney Creek

is primarily made of--made up of water that comes out of mines, former mines,

from Benham right on up into Lynch.

Portal Thirty-One, which is probably our most famous, well-known mine in Harlan

County there in Lynch, a US Steel mine, there's water probably coming out of

that right now at--I don't know, fifteen hundred gallons of water a minute.

Portal Thirty across the road is used for Lynch's drinking water. Benham gets

their drinking water from that same seam of coal. We have trout thriving in

Looney Creek from those--from that water that are coming out of these mines from

Benham and Lynch, that because these mines--these underground mines create a

natural aquifer. So as the stratus cracked above them and the water comes down

through the strata, it comes out to the lowest source and runs out those former mines.

CURRIS:So what we have is the natural aquifers that have evolved so that we

have this collection

of water that is running naturally, then, through the seams or whatever into

Looney Creek. So you're not having any kind of mine production that is polluting

the water.

WILLIAMS:Right.

CURRIS:And therefore, it can be used by the cities of Lynch and Benham.

WILLIAMS:And they're both using it, use it every day, and have used it for years.

CURRIS:That is just--that's one of those really good stories--

WILLIAMS:--it is--

CURRIS:--isn't it?--(laughs)--

WILLIAMS:--it's really neat, really neat.

CURRIS:I wish you would explain to us a bit about the corporate structure of

Wisconsin Steel coal mines and International Harvester and Benham coal mines. In

other words, the parent companies, subsidiaries, that type of structure. How

would that have worked?

WILLIAMS:International Harvester was your parent company, but when you look at

things, the Benham Coal Works,

as International Harvester put it, it was owned by the Wisconsin Steel Company,

which was a subsidiary of International Harvester. But it wasn't like most

subsidiaries that we look at in today's world. It was almost like it was one and

the same, that if you mined coal in Benham, Kentucky or if you sold a

tractor--sold tractors in London, Kentucky, you worked for International

Harvester. Most people maybe even that were employed at International Harvester

may have never heard of Wisconsin Steel because it was looked at as one and the

same. Now, when it come down to paperwork and stuff like that, it was listed as

Wisconsin Steel, Wisconsin Steel coal mines, or Benham--the Benham Coal Works.

So there was a lot of really--

it wasn't separated, so to speak. There was a lot of commonality there, and

that's the way they looked at it, which was interesting because we don't look at

it in today's world, that it's a little different when--

CURRIS:--it was almost one family.

WILLIAMS:Yeah, it was. It was.

CURRIS:Yeah, that's--because as a native, I don't think I ever heard the term

Wisconsin Steel.

WILLIAMS:Right.

CURRIS:It was always--(laughs)--

WILLIAMS:--it was Harvester. It was Harvester, and that's what people referred

to it as when you talk to folks. Growing up, you know, you talked to folks that,

you know, were--that were raised in Benham in the '30s, grew up in the Benham in

the '30s and '40s, you know, and they'd say, you know, "I can remember how good

it was," and they referred to it as Harvester. You know, that's what it refers

to is Harvester, or International Harvester. But a lot of times, it--you know,

it may or may not be referred to as International, but it was referred to as

kind of Harvester or International Harvester. Wisconsin Steel Coal Works or

Wisconsin Steel Coal Mines was not necessarily listed there, although it was on

paper for that, so--but there was no--there was not a lot of insignia out there

that was plastered on the football field or on corporate offices that mentioned

too much about Wisconsin Steel. It was mostly International Harvester, although

there were some Wisconsin Steel lettering out there in different places, yeah.

CURRIS:That's very interesting. Well, when we--and I thank you for that

explanation because I think that there will be many who even lived in Benham

that will not have known exactly what that corporate structure was.

WILLIAMS:Right.

CURRIS:But when you think about International Harvester--and we're talking

about the first mining, coal going out in 1909--do--are you aware of what the long-term

planning either was or whether it evolved happenstance? For example, in terms of

what was offered for the miners to keep them in place, we know that their

houses, and we--but what else did they plan to do? For example, water, heat, hospitals.

WILLIAMS:Right.

CURRIS:Was there a master plan? Or do you think that just--different things

evolved as the need arose?

WILLIAMS:I think there was a plan somewhere along the way, but I think it

evolved as well. I think there was--it was both ways. When the coal was

discovered, when International Harvester and whatever name that they used to

come in and purchase the land, when it--when they came in and did that, then

they had the need for miners. So the miners had to have a place. You know,

you've got to put them somewhere. So then they had to build some houses

along the way. Then it--as things got bigger, you know, say, like, by 1916 into

the early 1920s, things got bigger. They started talking about entertainment,

and I recently read some information, that we have to give--basically said, "We

have to give these people entertainment. We have to give them an entertainment

source." And I saw where they were willing to put up--I think it was 750 dollars

per year for music, for all sorts of music. And this was, like, in 1922, which

is--you know, that's big money in 1922, but it's amazing that all it was going

to cost was 750 dollars. But they were willing to put that up. So they were

looking at that. They went in--you know, you needed healthcare. You needed

healthcare, whether the miners got hurt on the job--which they did. They had

families, and so the families had needs

as well. So they go in, they build a hospital, they hire some of the best

doctors and best nurses that money can buy. Same way with education. They hired

the best teachers that money could buy as we well know. I mean, you look at the

brain trust that came out of Benham and the--and how well the education system

was. And so they actually brought in the best of the best, and they saw those

needs. So I think along the way, things had to evolve, '20s, into the '30s.

CURRIS:Do you think--you're talking about the entertainment. Do you think

that's how the baseball teams--

WILLIAMS:--yes ma'am--

CURRIS:--evolved?

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am, and it's even mentioned in some of this that I have

recently read of even baseball teams, that they were willing to pay 150 dollars

for uniforms and equipment for these baseball teams to

perform. And basically, the baseball players were also coal miners. It got to

where in your coal camps, that baseball was a big thing. You know, it's not

America's pastime for anything. And so they developed professional baseball. You

know, they--basically professional baseball players. And so if they saw a

baseball player somewhere that was really good, who knows? He may play in

Detroit or he may play in Cincinnati. You know, that's just the name of--you

know, just to throw out a couple of professional teams. They would go and they

would hire that person to pitch. But during the week or during the day, they may

pick rock off the belt, or they may--you know, they didn't--you know, they may

not put them underground, you know, into a dangerous job. They were the

entertainment that was brought in. And so what they would do is if you couldn't

pitch, they fired you. It didn't matter how many tons of coal you could

load. If you couldn't pitch, you were gone, because you were--

CURRIS:--so if you were injured--

WILLIAMS:--that entertainment source--

CURRIS:--so--

WILLIAMS:--yeah--

CURRIS:--you were gone.

WILLIAMS:Yes, yes, which is intriguing.

CURRIS:It is intriguing. Do we have any idea--because I do not--do we have any

idea of what they might have initiated for the women, for the families? Now, I

know we did a large number of things through the school. You were forever up at

the school gym not only for sports, but for plays and activities by each of the

classes so that the parents could all clap for their--(laughs)--individual

child. But I don't remember anything--I do know that my mother, who was born in

1922, and so about--add ten years to that. She was in the very first first grade class--

WILLIAMS:--okay--

CURRIS:

--of the Benham School, and I know that her era, that they played--the girls

played basketball.

WILLIAMS:Yes ma'am.

CURRIS:My era of coming along in the '50s and '60s, they didn't have--

WILLIAMS:--right--

CURRIS:--basketball for the girls. So I have never known of whether anything

was organized outside of the schools and the churches for women.

WILLIAMS:I'm not sure on that. That's a really good question, and I'm not sure.

I've not heard anything specific. You mentioned basketball. My dad's mom, my

mamaw, she played basketball at Benham until she was--let's see, I remember she

played there as a freshman, and I'm trying to think of what year that was, and

it's not coming to me quick enough. But she grew up at Blair, which would be

just across the mountain from Benham. And so they actually walked down the Poor

Fork, crossed the end of Looney Ridge, and walked up to school every day.

CURRIS:How long was that?

WILLIAMS:(sighs) I'm going to guess somewhere in the

neighborhood of probably four miles.

CURRIS:Each way?

WILLIAMS:That's just a guess. Yes.

CURRIS:So they're getting up and going--

WILLIAMS:--yeah, they're getting up--

CURRIS:--on this hike--

WILLIAMS:--and going to school, and so she played basketball. She talked about

playing basketball at Benham, and going to school at Benham. And so she was in

school until her freshman year and had to drop out after her freshman year to

come home and help with the family, which was typical.

CURRIS:That was typical in those days.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Absolutely, it was.

WILLIAMS:But as for the offerings, I'm not sure. You know, I know the theater

was there. You had the YMCA that was there.

CURRIS:Yeah, I don't remember. It may have been a YMCA, but I don't remember

anything for the women.

WILLIAMS:I don't think so. I think--all I've ever heard listed was the YMCA.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:There were family days that took place as well.

CURRIS:I'd forgotten those.

WILLIAMS:Had a lot of family days. Basically those were held at, like, the

football field, and--from what I gather, and basically

hamburgers, hot dogs, and all the ice cream you could eat. (Curris laughs) I

remember my uncle telling a story. That was the first place he ever saw ice

cream in those little cups. You know, the little, I don't know--

CURRIS:--yes--

WILLIAMS:--few ounce cups, whatever they are, with the little wooden spoon--

CURRIS:--with the wooden spoon, yes.

WILLIAMS:And he said--I cannot remember the number he ate, but I'm thinking

it's somewhere around twenty-four because it's the first time he saw it. You

know, it wasn't typical. And so during that family day--so there were events

that went on, but specifically for women? I'm not sure.

CURRIS:Now, I'm not either. What--before we leave this particular topic, would

you describe some of the craft or trade areas or shops that supported the actual

mining operation?

WILLIAMS:I'm glad you asked that because those--those were needed. You know,

when you look at--okay, you've brought in a workforce, and you have built or are

building them houses,

you know, you're going to have to have a trade. They actually had a trade school

there in Benham and--that they taught the boys at the trade school, that--they

could become carpenters. They--you know, they had welders that--you know,

Wisconsin Steel, International Harvester owned their own coal hoppers. They

owned their own fleet of coal hoppers that transported--

CURRIS:--now, what's a coal hopper?

WILLIAMS:A coal hopper's called--coal car. They held fifty tons of coal. And so

that's what was used to transport that coal to Chicago. So they developed

problems. You know, holes in them or pieces break down or whatever. So they

actually had a car shop and the people in this car shop, they actually did work.

You know, you had mechanics that--you have a piece of equipment go down. Once

the housing was established, if you walked out of the house one day and the

doorknob come off in your hand,

you just called the main office and say, "Hey, I'm up here on Oak Street, such

and such name. I need you to come and put the doorknob back on." Well, they had

a crew that that's all they did was repairs to houses, repairs to buildings.

They were the carpenter crew. They had to go and, you know, take care of that.

So they--

CURRIS:--well--

WILLIAMS:--would dispatch them--

CURRIS:--were they also--

WILLIAMS:--there to fix it--

CURRIS:--maintaining the coal mining equipment? For example, the coal cars and--

WILLIAMS:--yes--

CURRIS:--whatever?

WILLIAMS:Yeah, anything. They--you're going to have a maintenance crew probably

on third shift, which typically you had maybe two production shifts, but then

you also--

CURRIS:--what time is third shift?

WILLIAMS:Third shift would be after midnight. So that redeye shift, you know,

it'd be after midnight--

CURRIS:--I never knew this--

WILLIAMS:--to typically--

CURRIS:--when's the first and second shifts? What are those?

WILLIAMS:First shift would be your

day shifts, basically, you know, 6:00 until maybe 2:00 or so. And then from 2:00

to, say, 10:00, you would have your second shift, 2:00 to 11:00, 3:00 to 11:00,

something like that.

CURRIS:And so then third shift, redeye--

WILLIAMS:--third shift, yeah, that was your third shift. They were basically

your--still yet they're repair crews. You'll have large mines today that they

run two production shifts, but then they--you can't run three production shifts

because you'll end up tearing everything up, and no--

CURRIS:--yeah--

WILLIAMS:--then you've got all this downtime. And so that third shift crew was

your group of mechanics, and they kept the items running, whatever it may be.

CURRIS:The--that is--that's all very fascinating, but I want to jump to mine safety.

WILLIAMS:Okay.

CURRIS:I can remember as a young person, there was this whistle that

would blow. It would be a long sound and then short sounds. That's my memory. It

may not be correct. But I would hear this whistle, but it was the indication of

a mine accident or some significant problem at the mines, and everyone would

just immediately freeze because they knew what that awful sound was. And I can

also remember safety teams that would train down at the football stadium--at

least, that was my--and then you would see them down at the Big Store as a team.

And I know from prior conversations that your family has been intimately

involved in mine safety in Benham, and I would really appreciate if you would

start this portion by telling us about your family in terms of all the mine

safety activities that have been involved--

WILLIAMS:--okay--

CURRIS:--between them.

WILLIAMS:I would--I'm delighted to do that.

My uncle, Raymond Williams, he became--he was an engineer--mining engineer by

trade, and so when he graduated school at UK in engineering, his dad--my

papaw--worked there at Benham International Harvester, and--

CURRIS:--who was your papaw?

WILLIAMS:My papaw was Willy Williams.

CURRIS:Okay

WILLIAMS:And he was--he worked his way up from general laborer and--which the

story of how he became a coal miner is hilarious and fascinating all at the same

time, but that's for another day. But so a lot of times, when you had a family

member that worked at a coal company and--like, with my, my, my dad and his

brother, they were almost assured that they could get a job there when they

became of age to be able to work. So my

uncle, he went off to school when he graduated high school, went to UK, became a

mining--mine engineer, and he came back into engineering. He worked his way up

out of the engineering office into--or worked his way up in the engineering

office to chief engineering--chief engineer, and then later became general

superintendent. He was the last general superintendent at Benham. But in the

'60s, he got involved in mine rescue. If you wanted to be part of mine rescue or

be part of management, you wanted to be on mine rescue team. (clears throat)

Excuse me.

CURRIS:Now, that's interesting. So it was a focus in management.

WILLIAMS:It was in management. So you were a manager. You were a manager to be

on a mine rescue team, and so it's kind of one and the same. You're a boss, I

should say. I should say you're a boss, and it may be you were an engineer. You

were maybe a boss in the mines. It just dep--you know, you were a salaried

position to be on a mine

rescue team. So he became involved in mine rescue in the '60s, and in 1967,

International Harvester, listed under Wisconsin Steel Coal Mine, won their

second national mine rescue competition. So he was on a national team in '67,

and in '68--I think there were two teams from Canada in 1967 at nationals, and

basically from the stories that I heard, these two teams said, "Hey, you will

never--you'll never be good enough to come up on our turf in Canada and beat

us," which was--you know, that's kind of--yeah, I--

CURRIS:--a challenge--

WILLIAMS:--you like that.

CURRIS:A little challenge--

WILLIAMS:--you kind of--

CURRIS:--there--

WILLIAMS:--like a challenge. You like that. I really like that. I really like

that because in mine rescue, it doesn't matter what team you're on or what

company you work for. There is

a common bond there. There's a very common bond that you're there for one

reason. You're there for saving lives. Everybody's trained in a similar way. So

the group from Canada said, "Hey, why don't you come up?" So the company

actually paid for the team in 1968 to go to British Columbia, of all

places--(laughs)--you know, not Quebec, not, you know, somewhere--Nova Scotia.

All the way across the west side of Canada, you know? And so they went to

British Columbia, and on the wall in the coal museum, or actually in the trophy

case, is an award from 1968 of that competition in Canada. So that was one of

the things my uncle Raymond was very proud of. He waxed poetically about his

time being on

the mine rescue team, about how nationals were, but he was really proud to be

the map man. Map man was--you know, the map man laid the course out, everything

that was--

CURRIS:--are you saying--

WILLIAMS:--spotted--

CURRIS:--mat--

WILLIAMS:--map--

CURRIS:--map--

WILLIAMS:--map as in--

CURRIS:--M-A-P--

WILLIAMS:--pat. Map, M-A-P. Map. So as an engineer, he was the map man. Who

better to be the map man than the engineer? And so on a team, you would have

five people underground. You would have a captain, you had a gas detector

specialist, and that person is to read the gas. You would then have the third

person back, and that would be the person who's carrying the map, and that

map--that person who's carrying the map is recording everything that they see as

they transverse through a mine after an incident or even on a mine rescue field

during a competition. Third--the fourth person back would be another

gas detector, and then the fifth person back, the number-five man, would be the

rear captain because as the team at times would--advance means you're going away

from the outside toward the face. Retreat means you're going away from the face

toward the outside. They may turn the team completely around. The map man's in

the middle. He stays in the middle. You've got gas detectors on each end, that

they're testing gas as the captain tells them to. And so you have a rear captain

who is now proceeding with the team as they retreat from the face, so--and then

they are talking to a briefing officer that's on the surface or in a fresh air

base, which is in an area of last fresh air before they may have to don an

apparatus because of that air quality. So my uncle been on the '67 national

team, that international team in--(laughs)--'68, you know, or the team

that went internationally into Canada into '68. So my dad hired on at Benham

and--and I love it, how we say, "Hired on at Benham." It's like we--they--you

know Benham is International Harvester. And so you, you know, growing up in Benham.

CURRIS:Absolutely.

WILLIAMS:You know, when--hired on at Benham is like--no, they didn't hire on

the city. They hired--(both laugh)--on with the coal company. But--so my dad

hired on '70, and shortly thereafter, he worked his way into management as a

boss--fire boss and became part of a mine rescue team. And at that point in

time, his brother, Raymond, had worked his way up into chief engineer, so

therefore he had went off the mine rescue team. Back then, you actually

had--mine rescue personnel, by law, they had to age out, and I think the age was

forty-five on that.

CURRIS:That's young.

WILLIAMS:Yes. And so they had to age out. That was a law. So--but my

uncle, he would've been pulled from the team due to shortly thereafter becoming

a chief--working his way into chief engineer, and then general superintendent.

In 1976, I was three days old. I won't go into the story, but I was three days

old. My dad was on the mine rescue team at Benham. Dur--at the time, the Scotia

explosion took place, and so--

CURRIS:--and Scotia was where?

WILLIAMS:Scotia was at Oven Fork, Kentucky in Letcher County, about fifteen

miles from Benham to the north, northeast. But--so the Scotia--the mine there,

there was 115 people underground at the time. Explosion took place on March the

9th, 1976. So as my dad and mom are carrying me at three days old inside the

house, the phone's ringing off the hook, and

it's the dispatcher at Benham, and he tells my dad, "Jerry, you need to get to

Benham. Scotia's blown up. We're going to--mine rescue team's going to go up

there." So my dad left a crying wife and a crying baby and he went to Scotia. He

went back again on March the 11th, after the second explosion. Those two

explosions, they killed a total of twenty-six miners. Sad day for the

communities, definitely. So at the age of three and five days old that I was, my

dad answered the call. Somebody asked him one time, "Why did you go to Scotia?"

And his answer was, "It's what I was trained to do." And that's what he did. And

so the last--so my dad was--worked his way up through the mine rescue team,

ended up being a captain,

became the trainer of the mine rescue team. The last team was in '83 and they

went to nationals that year in 1983 and won fifth place.

CURRIS:Little Benham, Kentucky.

WILLIAMS:Little Benham, Kentucky. They had a fifth place award when my dad was

on the team. In '73, they finished runner up. And so, you know, they--mine

rescue was big in Benham in 1913. I've got a couple articles. I'm just going to

send those to you via email.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:But I got a couple of articles here. Mr. Tucker, W.C. Tucker was the

first superintendent at Benham, first general superintendent. And so he actually

had contacted the bureau of mines--the United States Bureau of Mines to--I think

it was under the Department of Interior at the time. But he brought--the bureau

of mines brought

in a--kind of a passenger car and did a training for a first aid team in 1913.

That team--that training took place I think in May of 1913, and I think it was

in September of 1913--either July or September, one, 1913--they went to

Lexington and won a first place award, a silver cup that's featured in the photo

that I'll send you, that featured cup--that silver cup is in the coal museum.

CURRIS:That's fantastic.

WILLIAMS:It was--

CURRIS:--the fact that it's been retained when so much has been--

WILLIAMS:--yes--

CURRIS:--not retained, shall we say? That's--that is really wonderful.

WILLIAMS:So safety was big in--(pauses)--in that company, in International Harvester.

CURRIS:Really, if you're talking about 1913,

you're talking about four years from the time that they first sent out their

first load of coal.

WILLIAMS:Yes. And Mr. Tucker saw that there was a need for that, that they--you

know, as you look at it as a safe mine is a productive mine.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILLIAMS:So he looked at that in that fashion, that--the company paid for that

passenger car that did the training, the people to do the training from the US

Bureau of Mines. They paid for them to come in and set up shop, and I think it

was, like, a week or two that they set up shop and trained individuals--and I'm

sure it was probably volunteers or handpicked individuals that they could tell

that, "Hey, that these folks are--they're working safely anyway. They understand

mining." And so they created a first aid team that later became

mine rescue.

CURRIS:So in two months, they go to Lexington--(laughs)--and win an award.

WILLIAMS:Yeah, they won an--win an award. And so that's basically--

CURRIS:--that is amazing--

WILLIAMS:--where our--the solid background in mine safety and in mine rescue

came from, because we know without a shadow of a doubt, we know that they won

two nationals. We know of at least one runner up and possibly more runner ups

and nationals. We do know that there were multiple state championships, you

know, that were won, and locals.

CURRIS:Bring us forward to yourself.

WILLIAMS:Okay.

CURRIS:Because tell us now about what it is that you do and how you have been

involved, and there is a particular term that you use, Be Careful Buddy.

WILLIAMS:Let me--

CURRIS:--give us your story--

WILLIAMS:--let me mention the Be Careful Buddy right quick because that's an

early thing. Be Careful Buddy

was on hard hat stickers or decals that were given to the miners, and, you know,

one of the things is at times, I think be careful is an Appalachian term that we

tell people that means the same thing as when they look at you--you may look at

somebody and say, "Be careful," and it means, "Take care, I love you," whatever.

It's "I have a concern for you as you leave me and drive on your way. Be

careful, Jo--"

CURRIS:--absolutely--

WILLIAMS:"--as you head home." You know, there's a concern. Be careful. Same

thing as you leave as, you know, you tell a family member, "Call me when you get

home." You know, that--be careful, buddy. And Be Careful Buddy was a safety

slogan of--to let them know that at all times, to be careful. On the onyx wall

up there at Benham, if you go up there and look at the names

of the known people that were killed underground at Benham, there were

thirty-nine names. And so that comes back to the Be Careful Buddy. That comes

back to, you know, when you look at that company that started in 1909 and ran

coal at multiple locations until 1986, that's pretty impressive that there's

only thirty-nine names on that wall. That goes back to the Be Careful Buddy. So

I want to jump back to 1930. So in 1930, the first mine rescue contest was held

in Harlan County that we know of. We know there was a Harlan Safety Days that

was held. Now, there could've been another contest that were held, but we know

that the Harlan Safety Days--

Harlan Safety Day, that's singular, one day, was held here in Harlan County.

Over the years, it started in 1930, and from all the information that I can

gather, the last year that the Harlan Safety Day was held was in 1995. So when

you look at sixty-six contests that were held in this county, places like here

on the campus of Southeast Kentucky Community and Technical College, Cumberland

Campus, the Benham football field, the Lynch football field, and I think even a

few were held in Harlan. So we started to see at least--

CURRIS:--and what was the first year?

WILLIAMS:Nineteen thirty.

CURRIS:Thank you.

WILLIAMS:So at least in 1930, we started to see these mine rescue contests

happen. And we also know that even as late as the '70s,

that end of the--mid-'70s, that the state contest was held in Benham and

Lynch--Benham or Lynch. So we know that mine safety and mine rescue teams were

really big, and not just in Benham, but at the neighbor in Lynch because in

Lynch, they also won multiple states. They also finished runner up at nationals.

They also won two national championships. So there was a dedication to safety at

both of those large companies. So in 1930, we saw the first--that we know of,

the first contest at--so the competitions and the contests, that kept your mine

rescue team sharp. They're given a problem. Every team's given a problem, and

the problem is to work your way safely through that problem.

They're given a scenario, and it's to hone their skills. I shouldn't say that

problem--I should call it a scenario. They're given a scenario. Everybody

gets--every team gets the same scenario to work their way through the scenario

safely. Your number one goal as a mine rescue team member, as a team, is to keep

yourself safe. You may have a number of people that are unaccounted for in a

competition or an actual that you've got to get to in a matter of time, but your

number one objective is to keep your team safe. Your team also has a back-up

team. In other words, they just don't go in there by themselves until a back-up

team shows up on an actual situation. So with the competitions, they

hone skills. Now, today's law states that coal companies must have a mine rescue

team or they have the access to a mine rescue team. That mine rescue team has to

do--they have to compete in competitions to hone their skills. There are problem

builders or scenario builders at the federal mine level and the state mine level

that design these scenarios, and then they are judged--there's judges out here

at these competition fields, and it's a field--a small field. It's laid out

similar as--like a mine. And you've got the rooms and the pillars like you would

have in a mine, and they are judged by folks from the state and federal mining level

and basically inspectors and safety personnel, they're judged as they go

through. So in 1930, the Harlan Mine Institute, they initiated this Harlan

Safety Day and they ran it for years. I'm not sure when the last year that they

held sponsorship. But the last two years, '93, '94, '95 maybe, the Tri-City

Women's Club sponsored it. It was held right here, as it had been since the

'70s, right here on the Cumberland Campus at Southeast, and it was a big thing.

There were companies that came from all over. And in 1995, mining was changing.

Mine rescue teams were changing. Sadly enough, mine rescue teams became a

luxury, and so when you get luxuries,

when you have a luxury--as you well know--and you have to cut back on something

because of finances, you typically cut back on the luxury. So the laws at the

time were a little lax and therefore you became--you went from, you know, couple

hundred miner rescue teams across the nation to a whole lot less than that. So

1995, for whatever reason, they stopped having the Harlan Safety Day.

Twenty-ten, Cumberland Tourism and the folks there at the tourism office, they

knew of my family's involvement in mine rescue. They'd heard bits and pieces of

stories. I'd worked with them on some events, some really big events, and so

they knew that

I--you know, we had a really good working relationship, and they just--I was in

the office one day and they said, "We're thinking about putting a mine rescue

contest together. Would you be interested?" And I said, "By all means." I said,

"When you get it--when you get ready to meet, you contact me." That was in 2010.

November 2010, we met to possibly hold the Harlan County Safety Days, plural,

Contest in 2011. We--there was a committee formed and I helped take on a

co-coordinator role. And so it was something--it was almost my life came back

full circle from my uncle's involvement in the '60s through the end of the '70s,

with my dad's involvement in the '70s into the '80s, and then my dad had

a small chunk of time in the mid-'90s when he was at New Horizon Coal, that he

was--when he was a manager of safety there, they had a first aid team. And so

all the sudden, this comes full circle. I relied on people that I knew,

that--people that I knew that were putting on contests together to help us with

this contest. I harassed my dad, you know. He shows up. Unfortunately, my uncle

Raymond had passed away in April, prior to the first contest in July. I had told

him about it, you know. So it's one of those things. It's an honor to be able to

give--continue to give back. We--these scenarios are educating these miners. Two

weeks ago, we held the

11th. We had--due to COVID, we had to take a break for two years in '20 and '21.

So we had eleven teams to show up.

CURRIS:That would be a pretty good number, I would think, for today.

WILLIAMS:And you're looking at somewhere in the--I think we had eight last year

and we had eleven this years. We've had as many of twenty-two in one of the

first couple of years. We're educating these coal miners through these

scenarios, keeping them sharp. These are highly-skilled individuals on these

teams, highly skilled. They get the education that they need, but what happens

is this community--is really neat--is the money that is injected in the

community has an impact. There's a huge impact there. So the first ten years

that we know of--and we're getting ready to send out an economic survey for this

year, but the first ten years that we know of in the contest, over three hundred

thousand dollars was injected into the economy through teams coming and staying

in hotels, restaurants, buying food. Also there's contest needs, right down to

water and ice and however it may be. So we're seeing two-fold deal with this competition.

CURRIS:This is fascinating. I would like to go back because you have the family

history almost from the beginning. I would like to know if you were to describe

as a general rule what these men

were like, describe the characteristics of these men because you're not talking

about volunteers initially. We're talking about someone who was a boss on a

salary position. Describe the character, the skills.

WILLIAMS:Okay.

CURRIS:What were these people like?

WILLIAMS:Well, let's go back into the--you know, let's go back into those teams

that I'm very familiar with. I often talk about my favorite mine rescue team was

the 1983 team at Benham. I would've been seven. That's the team that I knew. I

knew every team member. My dad was the trainer and I knew everybody from the

captain right on, you know, through the alternate. And so they were a great

group of individuals. They were

solid people in their communities, whether they lived in Benham or didn't live

in Benham in 1983 or even in the '70s. So they were upstanding individuals. They

were sought out in their position in the mines. Now, in the mines, they were in

salary position, and if they were on third-shift--say they were a third-shift

boss, and they were picked to be--because of who they were, they were asked to

be on a mine rescue team, and basically they were asked, "Can you do this job if

the worst takes place and you have to 'answer the call'?" That's a

quote-unquote, "answer the call," because that's what--you know, it's a call.

The call comes in and you have to answer it. Can you do it?

That's what they're asked. If you can do it, you know, they were placed on that

team. But they may be handpicked. They may be sought after. You know, they're in

a management--they're in a salary position, but they may also be moved to day

shift so they could practice, to go from a third shift boss to maybe a day shift

boss, to move them around. And I'm talking in the '70s and the '80s. And as a

member of a mine rescue team, they were not paid. International Harvester did

not pay their mine rescue team members. You got the most out of a volunteer.

Volunteers want to be there.

CURRIS:Fascinating.

WILLIAMS:Yeah, they want to be there. And I've heard my dad mention that many

times because they want to be there, they're not wanting it for the pay.

CURRIS:

The--have there ever been any women? I mean, we've moved forward to the fact

that there were not women in the coal mines until--I'm not even certain what

years. But have there ever been any women on the teams once there were women miners?

WILLIAMS:Yes. Not necessarily at International Harvester. I don't know of a

women team member at International Harvester. TECO Coal in Perry County in the

'90s, they had a first aid team--an award-winning first aid team and they had a

lady on their team and she knew her job well. At the University of Kentucky

in--over in the College of Engineering in mining, you know, in the mining

department, they have a group called the Rescue Cats. They are a full-fledged

mine rescue team

and they are trained like any other mine rescue team. They have females on that team.

CURRIS:That's fascinating.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:What about the gear that is worn? Talking about your uncle to your

father and now to you, using those as examples, what would the gear be that was

worn? And what would standardly be--equipment would be available?

WILLIAMS:Okay. I'll get--I'll talk specifically about the late '60s, when

Raymond was on a team at International Harvester. They wore an apparatus built

by the MCCAA, called a MCCAA. That was the name of it, a brand name, MCCAA. It

was built by the Mine Safety Appliance Company.

CURRIS:Like M-C-K-A-Y?

WILLIAMS:It was M-C-C-A-A.

CURRIS:C-A-A?

WILLIAMS:Yeah, yeah. M-C-C-A-A. That was the name of the apparatus and it was manufactured

by Mine Safety Appliances. It would have a large bellows or a diaphragm in it

and a container that held an oxidizer and then a oxygen bottle that was made of

steel, basically. And so many liters per minute would come out of that oxygen

bottle, and they would inhale that, but also--they would inhale the oxygen and

then they would exhale. It would go through the--back through the re-breather.

It would go through the oxidizer, clean it somewhat, and then they would--it

would come back through and they would breathe their own carbon dioxide--clean

carbon dioxide and the oxygen, and that was a two-hour apparatus, and it

weighed about forty to forty-two pounds. Leather straps, dial gauge that showed

the oxygen output on it, how much oxygen was left in the tank, very crudely put

together. There were other apparatuses before that as well that used a chemical.

You lick a candle and it put off a chemical, a breathing chemical of a carbon

dioxide type chemical, and it was used as a--in a liquid oxygen type deal, and

it was used as a re-breather. So from the MCCAA at Benham, they bought a product

made by the--made by Draeger Safety, a German company. They developed a little

bit better self-contained

breathing apparatus, a re-breather. It's a little bit better. It's a little bit

lighter, had a little lighter frame on it. The material, the shoulder straps

went from leather to a nylon material, and so it went from forty to forty-two

pounds down to about thirty-five pounds. And so--

CURRIS:--big difference--

WILLIAMS:--that's what they wore. So thirty-five pounds, you're wearing that

whether on a competition field or in an actual underground situation. There were

other companies out there as well. It was a company that's still around by the

name of BioMarine. That was one. So there were other companies out there that

were making these apparatuses, these machines as they called them, the machine

that you trusted your life with. So the--

CURRIS:--what kind of equipment?

WILLIAMS:So the equipment that they would carry in with them,

they would carry in gas detection equipment, those two gas detectors--that

number two person, the number four person--and it read methane, carbon monoxide,

and oxygen is what--at that point in time--now, they read all three. At that

point in time, they were probably carrying two or three different instruments

with them. The captain who's the lead person through, he carries a captain

stick. It's a wood stick that has a brass knob on the end of it, stick--it's

probably in the neighborhood of a foot long, and he is using that to check the

top for any loose material, any loose slate. He's what's called sounding the

roof because he is trained to know the sound, if there's a crack up there, and

if they need to shore that roof up. And so it's brass

because brass doesn't spark. So that's something that that captain is carrying

as well. The stretcher, everything is put on a stretcher, fire extinguisher,

maybe, medical supplies. If you're going in there to do a rescue, you want the

medical supplies that you need to go in there and rescue that person as well. So

that's some of the things they would carry. They're also attached to what's

called a lifeline. Everybody's tethered together. You're--and smoke, if it's

after an explosion or a fire, you're in smoke, and so to keep everybody

together, you're attached to a lifeline. That personnel is also attached to that

briefing officer that I mentioned earlier, who is in a fresh air location. He's

not under oxygen. The team's under oxygen.

They're attached to him by means of communication. In the '70s and the '80s,

they would be attached to a cable reel, and basically it's kind of a string and

a tin can type deal, that they've got a head--headset and a microphone, and they

talk to the person via strung through wire, and they're talking to somebody in

that fresh air base that's--

CURRIS:--that's amazing.

WILLIAMS:Yeah. And so that's kind of the equipment that they're carrying. So

basically they would have--into the '70s and the '80s, up in the--until probably

early 2000s, they've got that thirty-five pound apparatus. Whoever that

apparatus was made by, they're carrying that on their back, hard hat, any tools

that they may need.

They've got stretchers--

CURRIS:--lights--

WILLIAMS:--lights as well on hard hat, yes. Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, the--when we're talking about the equipment and so forth that

they're taking in, do you mind talking about the Scotia accident, as much as you

know, as to what those teams would've been doing?

WILLIAMS:Accident took place in Number Two Southeast Main, and so after the

first explosion, the teams that were there--the teams that responded--I'm going

off memory here, Jo--but the teams that responded to--to that accident, whether

it be the first explosion or the second explosion, were International Harvester,

US Steel in Lynch, Bethlehem-Elkhorn at Jenkins,

National Mine at Wayland, and then also Westmoreland at Andover, Virginia. They

would've come there. And so they would have arrived at the scene there at Scotia

more than likely through team bus. They would've come in on a team bus as--all

of them did. I know the Benham team arrived on a--naturally on an International

Harvester bus, and they were--they came to the office bathhouse facility. They

were briefed on the situation, where it was. They--the Benham team, I think, was

the first team underground. They were backed up by

Beth-Elkhorn out of Jenkins because I mentioned earlier, you had to have that

backup team. In case something happened, you've got to have somebody to go and

try to rescue the first team, in case something happens with them. So they had

went down to, I think, One East. This is a section in the mine, One East. They

rode a mantrip down. At that point in time, they left the mantrip and to

proceed, after they were briefed on the number of men that were unaccounted for.

And so the mine rescue teams would've rotated. They would've went through

rotation. Rotation may last an hour, usually. You work an hour, you're called

out, the backup team goes in, the first team goes to the surface, they drop

those apparatuses. There is

somebody there to what's called bench those apparatuses. Basically, they put

them on a table, they work them over, they put new oxygen bottles in them, get

them all ready to go for the next team. And so they continued to rotate through.

So I do know that that first explosion, you had International Harvester, you had

US Steel at Lynch, you had Bethlehem-Elkhorn. You also had National Mines at

Wayland. And so they rotated through. The Benham team at Scotia I think when

underground two times or three times after the first explosion and were getting

ready to go either underground a third or a fourth rotation when the last five

miners were found. And so at that time, everybody comes out. Everybody is

debriefed. That's where the map man

comes in handy because that person on that team is taking the notes of

everything. They're looking at a map that's set up on a grid and they write down

everything they see. There's a scoop here at the righthand rib on this break.

There is a lunchbox here. There is a battery cover found here. That sort of

thing. And so that helps with the investigation process as well. That also helps

the team behind them to know where things are. They're also taking ventilation

with them. So they have taken--when I say ventilation, they're taking good air

with them. They're constructing brattices that direct the air. Bad air out, good

air in. And so they're constructing this as they go along for the next team, and

so the next team, they can advance--continue to advance in the mines. In other

words, not everybody's starting at Point A. Point A

now becomes Point B, and then after the third team gets through, it's now Point

C. And so they're working their way safely. They're looking through every

cavern. If there's four entries, take your, you know, your four fingers and put

them out in front of you, and at the end of, end of your fingers, there is

something that ties back, that connects those four entries. You've got to check

every--all four of those entries. Then you've got to check that tieback and you

keep advancing and you've got to check everything. You don't leave any stone

unturned. So that's what they would've done until the last person was recovered

and come out, and then they would've been debriefed and allowed to go home.

Those teams were there. They got there probably late afternoon, early evening,

the first ones did.

They didn't leave until sometime the following morning on the 10th. So that

would be a typical scenario of a mine disaster.

CURRIS:Now, with the second explosion, did these same teams go back?

WILLIAMS:The second explosion, it was a little bit different. Somebody said it

may have been my dad. I'm not sure. “Lightning don't strike twice in the same

spot.” And so it's a little unbelievable. My dad said it was a little different,

you know, going the second time. Things were--you know, the thought process was

a little bit different. That's a story for another day. But so the teams that

went, I do know that the team from Benham, the team from Lynch--I know the team

from Westmoreland showed up as well. I can't remember--seems like maybe the team

from Beth-Elkhorn came as well. I don't think the team from Wayland came.

Interesting enough,

I have met team members from every team--at least one team member from every

team except Westmoreland over the years that knew my dad from, you know--

CURRIS:--yeah--

WILLIAMS:--and they'll say, "Well, I met--I remember I met your dad at Scotia."

So that would've been--so those teams would've responded back.

CURRIS:What year was that?

WILLIAMS:Seventy-six.

CURRIS:Seventy-six, '76. The--when I think about all that you've told me and

then just having the knowledge of listening to those whistle, that didn't happen

often at Benham.

WILLIAMS:Thankfully it didn't, yes.

CURRIS:Yes. I would say that mine safety team members have never been thanked

enough or honored enough--

WILLIAMS:--they haven't--

CURRIS:--for what they have contributed--

WILLIAMS:--yeah--

CURRIS:--not only to the miners,

but to the population in general.

WILLIAMS:You're exactly--

CURRIS:--and I would like to say that to you now on behalf of

those--(laughs)--who haven't said it in the past.

WILLIAMS:I will pass that along to my people because I thank them all the time.

CURRIS:Yes.

WILLIAMS:You know, that's--that’s the joy of spending forty-some hours here on

this campus over four days at a mine rescue contest, that I get to interact with

these folks and I get to thank them continuously. I feel that's part of my job

while I'm here is to thank them, make them feel comfortable, because a lot of

times these folks are ridiculed at the mine because, "Oh, you're getting an

all-expenses-paid vacation. You get to go to wherever. You get to eat steak

every night. You get to do this." They're also the same persons that would show

up to dig that person out--

CURRIS:--exactly--

WILLIAMS:--of a deep, dark hole.

CURRIS:Exactly. (laughs)

WILLIAMS:So--

CURRIS:--I'm

amazed that they would ever be ridiculed--

WILLIAMS:--yeah--

CURRIS:--but, you know, people are people.

WILLIAMS:And I've heard the stories. I've heard these miner rescue personnel

tell me the stories, so.

CURRIS:Yeah.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, I'd like to switch back to the Benham houses.

WILLIAMS:Wonderful.

CURRIS:And we were talking about the fact that with IH, there was obviously a

plan of what the various amenities were going to be. Can you tell us basically

where--what--when it came to the houses and the designs, is there any

information--do you have any information about who designed them? Who built

them? Where the timber came from, the--

WILLIAMS:--there was. Let me flip through my notes here right quick. Trying to

figure out what page that's on--

CURRIS:--it's the fifth page--

WILLIAMS:--because I wrote some notes there--(Curris laughs)--on that. Okay.

Yeah, there we go. So I wrote some notes on that. (pauses)

The houses, the information that I have read is the houses--there was a designer

for the houses for layout and everything. As for building of the houses, from

what I can tell, early on--very early when they started building the houses, the

company hired people, from what I could gather, or maybe had people on--you

know, employees that were building them. Then--

CURRIS:--I wondered if the miners were involved at all in lumbering--

WILLIAMS:--no--

CURRIS:--or milling--

WILLIAMS:--no, the miners were basically--mine coal. And so you had a totally

different group. But somewhere about 1918--you know, you started

seeing a ramp up of building houses probably around 1915, 1916. There's some

really cool photos that Mr. Tucker, the first superintendent, his--I think it

was his great-granddaughter donated to the coal museum. Those photos were from

1916 that Mr. Tucker took of the building of the hotel, building of houses.

There were not a lot of them, but it seemed like there was a ramp up of building

houses and of needing more by about 1918 as the populace grew. More coal was

needed, more houses were needed, more buildings were needed. And so the

information that I have read is they contracted with a company by the name of

Gordon-Van Tine Company. Now, that company has an interesting history. But they

were a--they were from out of Iowa.

This company was based out of Iowa, but when you've got a company that's based

out of Chicago in the Wisconsin area, Iowa's pretty close. [Editor’s note:

Gordon-Van Tine was based in Davenport, IA and also had a major lumberyard in

St. Louis, MO which could receive or ship lumber, building equipment, or

Gordon-Van Tine personnel by water or rairoad routes. The St. Louis facility was

one of the company’s major sites for producing kit homes.] So this company built

towns, from what I could gather, and so they contracted with them in 1918,

thereabouts, to build buildings, houses. So when you start to see building of

houses, you could think some of the first buildings in Benham that were

built--maybe like the hospital may have been built by them. Possibly the office

building that's now City Hall was probably built by them. But they have an

interesting history there. Gordon-Van Tine Company.

CURRIS:How do you spell Van Tine?

WILLIAMS:V-A-N and it's separate word, and then T-I-N-E.

CURRIS:Okay.

WILLIAMS:Based out of Iowa. So that's--

that was in about 1918 that they--there was designs. Now, when they started

construction in '18, shortly thereafter, of more housing, but as for you

mentioned timber--so the timber would've been close. Timber would've been close.

In my great-grandfather's deed, the deed to his property, he owned a large piece

of property at Blair, near where the old Blair School was, Blair Chapel Church,

in that holler. And there I go with an Appalachian term again, holler. So in

that holler, he owned a chunk of land and the timber was owned by International

Harvester. And so he cut timber to send to International Harvester. He had two

mills there on location.

He also had a mill in Cumberland at the rail yard. So all indication that timber

came from there to build houses in Benham.

CURRIS:That's fascinating.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:That is fascinating.

WILLIAMS:Yeah.

CURRIS:Well, when it comes to the building, you've answered the question about

the--you know, who actually built them. But define the term and use of Silk

Stocking Row.

WILLIAMS:Silk Stocking Row. Dad mentioned that earlier in the week, or late

last week, I guess it was. He--you know, that's where your bosses lived. If you

were not the superintendent or the assistant superintendent, which lived on the

hill above the school, if you were a boss or if you were a--maybe the chief

engineer, somebody who worked in the office as a higher-up, Silk

Stocking Row, you lived on Oak Street. And so the houses on Oak Street were

valued a little higher than maybe the other houses, other than the doctor's, the

houses--the three, four houses that were on the hill behind the hospital,

so--but Silk Stocking Row is where the big wigs lived, where the bosses lived.

CURRIS:Were most of the other houses--I know we had what we called double

houses. We had houses of different sizes for different-sized families. But was

the construction fairly consistent so that no matter, whether you were an entry

miner or a boss, the construction quality was the same? Or was it different?

WILLIAMS:It was. No, the construction quality would have been the same. It just

may have been--the house may have been a little bit different. The Silk Stocking

Row, if you look at those houses that were built there,

if you drove three streets over, the construction would look similar, but it was

just who lived there.

CURRIS:Yeah.

WILLIAMS:Who lived there.

CURRIS:Well, Jeremy, this has been an absolutely

fascinating--(laughs)--interview, and we, of course, obviously have so many more

topics to discuss and will do so at a future time. But may I say thank you for

all the time and effort that you have given us for this interview. And this is

going to be information that is now recorded for posterity and it is going to be

greatly appreciated, and may I thank you very much for your time and your effort

and your expertise. Thank you. (laughs)

WILLIAMS:Thank you very much. Thank you very much for asking me to be able to

do this, to be part of this, to keep this story

living for generations to come. This is not my story. This is the story

that--these are stories that were handed to me because I just so happened to be

at the right place at the right time and was willing to listen to these stories,

and people were willing to tell me. And that's the neat thing about this.

CURRIS:And now you're telling for the future. (laughs)

WILLIAMS:I'm telling for the future, and that's what it's all about.

CURRIS:Thank you so much. (laughs) And I'm--we'll talk to you later.

[End of interview.]