BOYD:All right, we're recording. My name is Doug Boyd. I'm interviewing Jo Hern Curris, and it's a little atypical because I'm interviewing you, for your oral history project, which is the Benham Credit Union--

CURRIS:--absolutely--

BOYD:--Oral History Project, and it's been a wonderful project. It's been a wonderful collaboration for the Nunn Center to work with you on this project, but I love the idea of capping off a project by interviewing (Curris laughs) the person who did the project.

CURRIS:And I--when this started, I was not expecting this at all.

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:But, uh, Doug, before we really get started, I would like to make a couple of comments. First of all, I want to thank you.

BOYD:Oh.

CURRIS:Without you, this project would not be where it is today. You and your staff at the Nunn Oral History Center. You have loaned me equipment. You know how technologically disadvantaged I am. You have worked with me. And the fact that you knew the mountains, I think that was also very critical to our being able to communicate where we were headed. So, thank you. Thank you, Doug.

BOYD:Ah, you're so welcome, and it's been our honor. And--

CURRIS:--well, and I also have to thank my husband Constantine W. 'Deno' Curris. There are not many men who would, or spouses is probably a better word, who would financially support as well as supporting in terms of every conceivable way a project from an area of which he knew nothing where he did not grow up. And he has absolutely been there every step of the way. And it's just important that Deno know how much I appreciate this.

BOYD:I will even echo that because in our first meeting, remember I reserved the parking space?

CURRIS:Yes.

BOYD:And a student had parked illegally (Curris laughs) in that parking space. And so he went off, while you and I met--

CURRIS:--oh that's right--

BOYD:--he went off driving around somewhere.

CURRIS:I had forgotten that.

BOYD:And so he--yeah, no, this is a great project--

CURRIS:--yes, yes--

BOYD:--and we're excited to work with you on this. But I do want to start this interview off with the way I start off every interview when I interview somebody for the first time, and I'm going to let you start by answering the question, tell me a little bit about yourself.

CURRIS:Well, I love to talk about myself. (both laugh) The truth is I am at heart a girl of the mountains. And now it's only years later that I have come to realize how significant growing up in a very remote, isolated area, for the time, what an impact that had on my life. And so, we were always busy. We were always doing things. And I came out of those mountains, and you look back and understand these things. At the time, you're just growing up. You're just, you know, existing and having fun and little dramas. Looking back, I realize that many of the things that I did successfully, relate back to Benham. For example, my ability to work with people in all strata definitely comes from Benham because there in this little remote town, a coal camp, International Harvester's, only captive coal mine. Captive meaning that all the product went strictly to International Harvester, not to any other companies. But we all were together all the time. There were no real class distinctions. I mean, everybody knew whose father was the superintendent or the doctor, this type of thing, but it really did not play a part. As a result, I came out understanding that people of all walks of life have importance, and should be treated accordingly. At--I also think that maybe because in my life I have ended up doing tremendous amount of travel on a very high level, and, uh, I think my ability to work with people at all levels also is a result of not being afraid to do that after having come from the mountains.

BOYD:How would you describe Benham to me? Like, walk me through the streets visually during that time when you're growing up.

CURRIS:I think it's important for the audience to understand that the time period we're talking about is primarily focused on the 1940s, 1950s, and the 60s. We are starting--we'll use me as an example. I'm starting life with a home that's more remote than the town because I live outside the town. Now, in a little town, little area called Clutts. Now, I'm growing up--

BOYD:--how do you spell that?--

CURRIS:--C-L-U-T-T-S.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:There's a real debate on whether it's S or Z, but either one. But I'm growing up in the middle of what were the Gilliam clan. Now, Brunner Gilliam was a mountain man of the true tradition. We're talking about he--the man who walked with the gun, who did the hiking, who took us, he and--he would take, there were about four of his children, including his grandson that we called Little Joe. Joe McCauley. And he would take us all over those mountains. You know, show us all the rattlesnake holes, all these kind of things. So I'm growing up there--but we didn't consider ourselves isolated. It's only on reflection that I can say it's remote. But growing up out--when we're--I'm learning to churn butter with Gran sitting there. I'm uh, uh--we're doing hog killings. We're doing all these what you think of today as pioneer times in a certain sense. But we always had a telephone. But we did not get television until I was a junior in high school.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:So the whole concept of any kind of technology having a major impact on our lives, it did not. It also meant that we were not as aware of what was going on in the world as you would be today. But the greatest gift we had, and again, this is on reflection, At the time, it was just part of my life. We were always outside. We were roaming those mountains either by myself or later with some of the playmates. We were swinging on grapevines over ravines. How we lived through it, I don't know. You know, riding a horse up and down, learning to shoot guns doing all these things. It's a whole different era. And I--In every interview I had, without exception, they all talked about how they wish their children or their grandchildren could have lived the life that they lived because now all they do is sit inside and they live with fear. We never lived with fear.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:You know--the only fear we might have is somebody got in a scuffle, and they might be bigger than you were.

BOYD:Right.

CURRIS:But that was, that was it.

BOYD:I was born in the 70s, and I do feel like I was that last free-range generation. We'd go out--

CURRIS:--yes--

BOYD:--and, you know, I was in the suburbs, but we still had hundreds of acres of forest around where we were, and we'd be gone twelve hours--

CURRIS:--yes--

BOYD:--straight, no cell phones, no tracking, no nothing.

CURRIS:You know, another thing that fits right into what you're talking about, in Benham, everyone knew everyone. There was, at the time, the population was about 3,500. Now, for the audience, we're living in an area that's in Harlan County, and it is--it's called the Tri-City Area. It's Cumberland, which is the trade area, Benham, which is the International Harvester coal camp area, and then Lynch, which is the U.S. Steel coal camp. And IH had sold the land to U.S. Steel, from which came Lynch. So all of this had happened, but interestingly enough, you did not date outside your community. Oh, no. That did not happen because you had all these rivalries in sports and all this. And it--they were slightly different cultures. The base was the same, but it was slightly different. But in your communities, and this was true in Lynch and it was true in Benham, I can't speak as much to Cumberland being the trade area.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:The whole town raised you. If you were somewhere and you were doing something that was not the right thing to do, whoever was standing there, they disciplined you and by the time you got home, your parents knew about it, without telephones now. Because there weren't telephones just throughout the town until I would say the fifties.

BOYD:Mm. Wow.

CURRIS:Okay. So, we--that, that context of being raised by a village, we were.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:Absolutely. And, uh, there was never any question that you obeyed what every adult was around. And that, I think, was a beautiful way to grow up because it kept you on the straight and narrow as to what was the correct behavior and what was not.

BOYD:Well, forgive me for asking this question--

CURRIS:--uh-oh (laughs)--

BOYD:--but I have to ask this question because this is for history. When were you born?

CURRIS:Oh, do I have--I've told people I've been forty-nine several times now. (laughs) I was born.

BOYD:Where exactly were you born?

CURRIS:I was born in the Benham Hospital.

BOYD:Okay.

CURRIS:But now there's a story around that.

BOYD:All right.

CURRIS:You've heard the term Bloody Harlan.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:Bloody Harlan comes because there were major labor union wars. Wars between United Mine Workers and in Benham, for example, the Progressive Mine Workers, so that you have different labor unions that are competing. On the day that I was born, it was right in the middle of these labor union wars. My dad came to the hospital and helped deliver me. I even have a letter that he wrote to his mother on that day. And when she talks about, I have--I think this is correct, that six men have been shot. The whole town is armed. You know, this was--and during that time, people were killed.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:But it was--Bloody Harlan comes because of the union wars. And I don't think most people realize that's how that term evolved. But I was literally born in the middle of those. And Dad has blamed my personality on that fact ever since. (laughs)

BOYD:Oh, I love that.

CURRIS:But he literally, in the Credit Union, had been converted from a former apartment. There were three different sites, but at this particular site, it had a cast iron tub in it. And that's where he slept.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:Because on the mountains, they were shooting from the ridges down into the town.

BOYD:Wow. Wow. (Curris laughs) Well, speaking of your dad, let's talk about your parents. Who were your parents?

CURRIS:My father is Robert B. Hern, now senior. And my mother, Pauline--Ruth Pauline Parker, was her maiden name. There were twelve years difference in their age. And we never realized that growing up.

BOYD:Hmm.

CURRIS:Never entered our minds. The other thing, my dad came from New York State. He came down. He had a brother who was already in the mountains. And he came down, and they were just creating the Credit Union. Well, he's coming from New York State, and he has two years of education at Cornell University in Ithaca. Well, that's a lot of education in 1937 or thereabouts in the mountains of eastern Kentucky. So he became manager of the Credit Union. Was hired, and served for forty-one years.

BOYD:Mm. So he really, I--see, I thought he had been there for some time before the Credit Union began--

CURRIS:--no--

BOYD:--but he really came down--oh, wow.

CURRIS:In fact, in the documents that we have discovered, it would appear, that they filed in 1935 for the--to institute. It--this is something that might be of interest. A credit union could only exist if a company sponsored a credit union. So Benham--International Harvester chose to sponsor a credit union for it's employees. Now stop and think of when we're talking about. We're talking about the mid-1930s. We're in the middle of the big depression. And so the whole intent is that their employees have a banking type of situation in which they can save, borrow, do normal banking activities because the one local bank at the time had collapsed.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:Now, interestingly enough, Lynch, did not--U.S. Steel did not sponsor a credit union for Lynch until we get to, I think it was the 1960s.

BOYD:Really?

CURRIS:Because my dad went up to do the first credit union. Now, how long that lasted, honestly, I don't remember. But here's the key to this. Whereas International Harvester wanted a financial institution available. 1960, '61, '62 is a time when both U.S. Steel and International Harvester decided they wanted to sell the company-owned town, the houses, to those employees--miners who were there. That's when Lynch then asked that--I don't know whether it was a little branch from Benham, I don't know whether it was independent, I'm not certain, but that was when Lynch instituted theirs.

BOYD:Interesting.

CURRIS:Mm-hmm.

BOYD:We're going to talk about that. I'm going to go backwards to the family stuff first. And, um, your father was from New York. Where was your mother from?

CURRIS:My mother was a little girl from the mountains. Her--she had actually been born on that fine line between Harlan County and Bell County. Her dad, my grandfather, Charles Ross Parker Sr., he had come from a family--his father had married twice and had twelve children. The father died, so my grandfather at age twelve goes into the mines to support--

BOYD:--wow--

CURRIS:--the rest of the family. And for years, you know, almost everyone's gone now, but they would talk about how Charlie made all the difference, in those years for them. Now stop and think about a twelve-year-old going into the mines and worked there for the rest of his life. But he moved to Benham fairly, uh, soon after I think Mother was born. There were three children there, Mother the eldest, Pauline Parker Hern, and then her sister, Onlee, O N L E E, and then the son, the junior, (laughs) that we called C.R. And C.R. is only seven years older than I am. So, you know, it's really a whole family evolution, in a way--

BOYD:--yeah--

CURRIS:--in terms of the mountains. But to go back to what, what we were talking about, mining is the core. You have my mother, now, who is very active in everything. In those days, the women, the idea of working outside the home--it just wasn't possible unless you were a nurse, possibly working in an office, but very rarely, or a teacher, you did not work outside the home. And let me give you an example that no one today can possibly relate to. I have cookbooks from the Benham Community Church, and it has all the signatures of who it is, and it's always Mrs. Charles Parker, Mr. Robert Hern, Mrs. Robert Hern. They were referred to officially by the name of their spouse--their husbands. My grandmother, and I would guess now we're talking about mid-fifties, she decided to have her own little dress shop called Joanna's down in Cumberland. And I can remember it was a very--it, it was very small. But that was a step out of the norm.

BOYD:Big step.

CURRIS:Big step out of the norm. Now, the very next generation is when you see, uh, the evolution of women starting, but for the mountains--again this is reflection, I hadn't understood how important this was--

BOYD:--mm-hmm, mm-hmm--

CURRIS:--growing up. It's just that Mother Parker was doing this and how much fun to go down and play with all the clothes and all that. But I'm sorry I've kind of rambled and gotten lost here--

BOYD:--no, that's okay--

CURRIS:--but, uh, it was a very different time and I don't think you can comprehend how critically important a mining community was to that time, if you don't understand what we did not have, that you automatically have today.

BOYD:I agree with that. So he's come down from New York.

CURRIS:Right.

BOYD:She is from that area.

CURRIS:Okay, yes. I mentioned there were twelve years difference. When dad came down and was named manager of the Credit Union, that was in a time when they had the student, uh, what's the term? In other words, students would come and work in offices.

BOYD:Like intern, or?

CURRIS:Thank you, intern. Mother was Dad's intern. Aha! (Boyd laughs) So don't you know, as we became adults, that we gave them fits (Boyd laughs) about this whole scenario. But, uh, they were--it was very--they were an interesting mix. Dad was very well educated. Mother has a high school education. But, again, I only realized this from a distance of time. They were both very smart. Had tremendous common sense. Thought things through. But they worked as a team. We absolutely could not say, "Dad, can I do this?" "No." Go in to Mother and say, "Mom, is it possible for you?" No, no, no. There was no playing off of each other. They absolutely held still. If one had said something, the other would back them up.

BOYD:That's great.

CURRIS:(laughs) It was great.

BOYD:It's hard to do.

CURRIS:It--hard to do.

BOYD:Those kids are good at--

CURRIS:--but, uh, but yeah.

BOYD:What, um--so the--go backwards a little bit.

CURRIS:Um-hm.

BOYD:Your dad's brother is Ray?

CURRIS:Ray. Charles Ray--

BOYD:--so, so Ray was already down here--down there working in the mine?

CURRIS:He was, um--what became the Progressive Mine Workers, he--there was an International Harvester committee that he, I guess you would say, was the chair of.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:And so he was already in administration. We can't determine whether or not he actually was a miner. We had heard that he was an engineer, so we're uncertain a little bit about what all he's done. But he was already there in the mountains. And so, the story growing up was that dad came down to visit him and that he was on his way to Florida for a job in Florida and this whole thing evolved and they asked dad to stay and be the credit union manager in Benham. Another story that has evolved since we've been doing the research is that Uncle Ray knew this position was coming up and so contacted dad and said, "You ought to come down and see if they're interested."

BOYD:Interesting.

CURRIS:So who knows the truth?

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:We don't know the truth. But whichever it is.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:There--that's how he ended up from New York State.

BOYD:So he didn't necessarily come down having experience in the financial industry and--or the banking industry or the credit union--

CURRIS:--dad came when he was about, let me get this straight, I want to say about twenty-seven.

BOYD:Okay.

CURRIS:He had had his two years at Cornell, but one of the things that we don't know anymore, New York State in those days had a system in high school that was very rigid, and he went to a school called Cook Academy. And so he began with a far better education, before he even goes to college than any of us could possibly have comprehended at the time. And so he came--I don't think he came so much with experiences that I'm aware of as much as he came with a lot of study. and a lot of knowledge.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:Now my dad's came from--my dad's family, he came from, there were eight children. His father was shot on the street of Montour Falls, New York, when my father was four years old.

BOYD:Oh.

CURRIS:The two eldest brothers, Ray, that we're speaking of, and Ralph--they went to Charleston, South Carolina, lived in Somerville, and worked in the shipyards in Charleston to help maintain the family. So there has been this history of family comes first.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:All through that culture.

BOYD:Even though he was New York and, you know, sort of an Appalachian transplant, he came in with that same ethos.

CURRIS:Very much so.

BOYD:Wow. Wow.

CURRIS:Who knew? You know, (laughs) but everyone has their stories. Everybody I interviewed, oh my gosh, I really encourage those that are watching or hearing mine, please listen to the other interviews. They are fascinating about a different time, and, uh, the basic goodness of people.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. So you're born in forty-one. Your dad came down when?

CURRIS:He came down, we think, right around 1934, thirty-five.

BOYD:Okay, right, because thirty-five was the establishment of that.

CURRIS:And we think he was hired about--somewhere between thirty-five, thirty-seven.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Okay, okay. And you're born shortly thereafter, forty-one.

CURRIS:Yes.

BOYD:And, um--oh, and she was his intern. That's so great. I love that.

CURRIS:Isn't that great? I love that. I love that.

BOYD:Um, so what are some of your first memories from a family standpoint?

CURRIS:Right. Running around the mountains.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:Shooting guns. I learned how to shoot. I particularly liked, and we still have this one single shot--

BOYD:--oh, you still--[1]

CURRIS:--single shot twenty-two rifle. That--I just loved it. And I was pretty good, I was pretty good. Uh, the, um--but running around, up--living out, my closest playmate lived up the mountain a little bit, Peggy Gilliam. And we had these great things we, in--when the turnips were raised, we would cut out the turnips, dig them out, and they became our drinking cups. And we just thought that was the greatest fun. (laughs)

BOYD:Yep, yep. That sounds right.

CURRIS:Right. But, uh, but--in those early memories, I always felt safe. Again, this is retrospection. For example, International Harvester, now--to help the audience understand, International Harvester owns the entire town.

BOYD:And they came in 1910, I think. Is that right?

CURRIS:Right.

BOYD:So, so at this point, it's been three decades.

CURRIS:The first coal shipped out was 1911.

BOYD:Okay.

CURRIS:In the early 20s. They started building the houses and they had some ram--I wouldn't say ramshackle, they never did anything ramshackle. They, um, started seriously building for the miners. And so you had houses. They, uh--this all becomes sequential. Schools, both for--in those days, the language that we used in the exhibit is the language of the time. People today might consider it insulting. It wasn't. At the time it was just a matter of this was how everybody spoke. And so there were schools for both the Whites and the Blacks. They each had terrific teachers. I remember that being very important, and a little later on. But then International Harvester built a downtown, which is now in the historic register. And it had the meat market, the Big Store, the commissary, the offices, the Credit Union, a firehouse, a hospital, post office. But I can remember when I said I always felt safe, I can remember Mother taking me by my little hand to the hospital for the shots, for the doctor's appointments. And then after whatever it was, very traumatic to a young kid, she would always take me to the Big Store for an ice cream. And everything I have talked about, with the exception of the theater in those days, it was equally enjoyed by all of us. It didn't matter what your race was.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:And so the hospital, the Big Store, the meat market. So there was this kind of common gathering area right there in the center of town.

BOYD:Even though the schools were separate.

CURRIS:Right, even though--but stop and think when we're talking about Brown vs Board of Education, 1954. They did not integrate the schools until 1961. So we grew up in a separate but equal culture. But every interview that you read, you may hear that there was, within the mine structure, an underlying racial discrimination. Perhaps--now this is something that's important, both U.S. Steel and International Harvester paid the same regardless of origin, for the same job. So, if there was a question, it was whether or not you were assigned to the job. It wasn't what you would be paid. Everyone was paid the same for the same job. But in the interviews, no one talks--they all talk about how we all got along.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Yeah.

CURRIS:Now, let's face it. For example, the young men in Lynch, they talk about how they didn't stop in Benham. You could go to Cumberland, but you didn't stop in Benham. U.S. Steel and International both had very strong security, uh, forces. But we didn't even worry about that at the time because--I asked one of my interviewees about crime at the time and he just looked at me and he says, "Jo," he said, "there wasn't any crime." If you did something and, for example, Harrison Cornett, who was one of the security people at our time, he'd go to your parents. And that was it.

BOYD:Right.

CURRIS:Because if that parent had to leave time for the mines, that meant they weren't earning money. Because they're taking care of something. So there was strong discipline in the positive sense. There were some negatives. But in the positive sense, both at the home place with the parents, as well as--so we grew. You did not sass back, as we would say, "Don't you sass your parents." Gosh, it meant death. You know, we just didn't do that. And this permeated the whole Tri-City area. So to my knowledge, there was never--and, and it comes through in the interviews, there was just everybody kind of got along.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:And one of the other things that's very important to consider here, in Lynch particularly, there were a lot of Eastern Europeans. You had all kinds of cultures there. And, uh, so it wasn't just a race issue. It was also a cultural issue.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Talk--

CURRIS:--but everybody had their churches, their, you know. Now, that doesn't mean you don't have individual feuds and fights. Of course, that happens, period. But as a culture, no.

BOYD:Yeah. Well, real--you mentioned the mixture of cultures. Um, what do you remember, including at home, what do you remember about food at that time? I know that's kind of a random question. (Curris laughs)

CURRIS:Well, we all, I think, pretty much ate the same things because we ate from our gardens. We ate the chickens that we raised and the pork and the cattle and so forth. Now, you had the Big Store and you had the meat market. And one of the things that also comes through in all the interviews is there were absolutely--IH brought in the best. They brought in the best.

BOYD:Talk about that. What do you mean by that?

CURRIS:Well, in other words, when it came to the meat market, the foods that they brought in were top foods. When Lynch, I can still remember years ago talking to a fellow from Lynch, and he talked about how the commissary would bring in Blue Point oysters. You know, I mean, it just--

BOYD:--wow--

CURRIS:--they brought in--for one thing you have to remember, they had their own level of administration there, and they were providing for them, which meant we all had the opportunity. Now, by and large, Benham people would buy at the meat market in the Big Store. And as cars became available, talking about then, let's say, mid-'50s, then we started going to Cumberland because some things, a different store, A&P came in as an example. And occasionally we would go to the Lynch Commissary. My dad did.

BOYD:I was going to wonder, was there a crossover in terms of that?

CURRIS:There was some, but not a lot. There was some, but there was not a lot. Yes.

BOYD:What are some of the meals that you remember your mother making?

CURRIS:Oh, well, her fried chicken was unsurpassed, even to this day. But it's not so much the standard meals. Mother would take whatever she had, and she was an excellent cook, but so was my grandmother. And my grandmother, of course, she's cooking on a coal stove. She's making pies and cakes after she's gotten up at 4 o'clock in the morning to light the kindling in the coal fire, heat up the oven, fixing the lunch pail for Daddy Parker. fixing breakfast, and then her day is taken. With Mother, she was always experimenting. She had, um, chop suey. (laughs)

BOYD:Really?

CURRIS:She came up with the chop suey. Anytime we traveled, which we did a great deal, she would bring back recipes and try it at home.

BOYD:Oh, cool.

CURRIS:Yeah, she was so--but the thing I think about when you ask me about food, the first thing that popped in my mind was popcorn balls. Christmas was a huge, huge deal for the whole community and every family. But in our own home, We would pop the corn over the fireplace, over a fireplace that we had, or else go down to our coal stove in the basement and do the popping there. And then mix it with all the butter and the molasses and make popcorn balls. That was a very big deal. And my dad brought from New York a divinity fudge recipe, which I think only my sister can do now. But we always had plenty of food. it was what we raised--lots of canning, a lot of canning. So we go to the garden. This was not my favorite activity, by the way, (laughs) I was, I knew I was not born to always do a garden. Somehow that just wasn't supposed to be in my life. (Boyd laughs) And so, but I can still remember putting in the fertilizer, counting out the number of kernels of corn with the corn patch and so forth. And, um--so we had corn, we had beans, tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, the whole realm. And so did everyone else. My grandmother often referenced the fact that during the Depression, there was just no problem. No one had any money, but International Harvester, to its credit, had planned every single home to have a large enough site to put in a garden so that they could be self-sustaining. And there were master gardeners.

BOYD:Oh, I bet.

CURRIS:And the flowers, oh my gosh, the flowers that the women would raise. My grandmother raised, in addition to the usual roses and pansies, She raised violets, and we understood at the time that there was one that was even named for her. But that has drifted out, sadly, from the family. But it just was--you know, I referenced the Big Store. Let me give you a really important story that had long-term impact on my life. Sitting--I was probably in third or fourth grade and my mother and I are sitting there having a little something and they're bringing in these racks of pretty little dresses and I can remember even to this day turning to mother and saying, "Why can't I have the pretty dresses that the other girls have?" And She said, "You can. Here's the question. We always take a big trip every year. Which do you want to do? Do you want the dresses or do you want to take the trip?" You talk about something that has stuck with me. You have to make choices. There's only so much money. You have to make choices. But dad was a huge believer that travel was a form of education.

BOYD:Let's talk about that because that wasn't necessarily the dominant--

CURRIS:--oh no--

BOYD:--mindset at the time, so--

CURRIS:--no. Well, he came from a different place. There's the key right there. And he did, he believed--so not only were we taking trips back to New York on a regular basis, but, but by the time I had graduated from high school, I had been to forty different countries. I'm sorry, sorry, forty different states.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:Uh, you know, I knew--we knew the South, (laughs) all the Southeastern states, and I had been to Canada by that time as well. Every year, he would throw us into the back of the car, and off we would go.

BOYD:How many siblings did you have?

CURRIS:Three. Oh wait, I--there were three of us total.

BOYD:Three total, okay.

CURRIS:Um-hm. Now, time affected when we were all going, but I can still remember, I would have been maybe, maybe ten years old. And Dad was flying out to California to pick up a car for the Credit Union that someone had taken out and left, and I'm sure that he used this as a good excuse to go to California. (laughs) But he took me and Mother. Off we go. And here I am in my little white gloves, all dressed up on this prop airplane, having no idea, being very anxious about, But really, in retrospect, I have no idea how really dangerous it might have been. (laughs)

BOYD:Yes, I'm sure. That's right.

CURRIS:Wow. And, uh--

BOYD:--very different from airplanes today.

CURRIS:Yes, so we drove back. And I can remember sitting in the front seat. That's when you had the big front seats. And we would sing, you know, and I can remember we'd go through parts of the country and someone would have just cut the fields. And that aroma, you know, from that cut grass or whatever it was, um--

BOYD:--what was the car? Do you know?

CURRIS:Don't have a clue. Don't have a clue. It's been too many years. But no, I think the fact that Dad came from a far different state.

BOYD:Did he travel as a young man growing up with his family?

CURRIS:He would travel--they would travel back and forth to South Carolina. And again, remember, she's widowed with these children.

BOYD:Right.

CURRIS:So the tra--In fact, she at one point goes down and stays in later years with the two older sons in Somerville for a little bit of time. And so I think the travel probably started there.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:Going down to South Carolina. And the--stop and think--in those times, because Dad was born in 1910, so we're probably looking at, what, twenty-five, twenty, twenty, 1920s. We're looking at the 1920s. What did you have then? You barely had roads then. You know, going down in that kind of travel to a southern culture with the really very deep accents that I can still remember growing up. These beautiful, beautiful Charlestonian accents. I just was blown away that someone could talk like that.

BOYD:Oh, yes.

CURRIS:And so I think his love of travel probably started there. I think his sense of curiosity was innate.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. What are some of the trips that stand out in your mind?

CURRIS:Oh, the trips out west.

BOYD:West.

CURRIS:You know, going to, uh, Yellowstone the first time. You know, the uh, just the difference. I always loved to go south, and I can remember in those days, and now again, we're talking about the late 40s, early 50s. You have a whole different culture then. So when you're going south and you're staying in these, uh--you're not staying in Holiday Inns. You're staying in people's homes, the little tiny places that have just growing and started being built. And you would have sandwiches and tea on the front porch. of someone who was in great--dire straits, and this is how they earned their money.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:But that was just fascinating to me. And we were always going to Civil War sites. Very much historical. First time I went to Biltmore Estate, I think I was twelve years old when I first--and I thought, oh, I want this. (laughs)

BOYD:Yeah, yeah.

CURRIS:That was terrific.

BOYD:Every time I go there.

CURRIS:Yes, exactly. (laughs) And, so Biltmore, and of course, every place in the Northeast that was historic. You know, the Paul Revere ride, all the different Revolutionary War sites.

BOYD:Yeah. So there's a history. Did anybody take pictures? Was there any cameras?

CURRIS:Do you know, we cannot find these. Dad took pictures of everything. And he set up individual things for both of--all three of us, and none of us can find them. And believe me, it's been amazing how much I needed them for this project. But even at that, it's still been incredible to me that we were able to find so much of the things that Mom and Dad had kept, which will be part of the exhibit.

BOYD:Oh, that's great. That's great. What a special treat that you got to travel like that growing up.

CURRIS:It was. And you asked me a reference to the fact that that was not common. At the time, I didn't realize how uncommon it was. You know, I'm just a kid. I'm off on these great trips, and I come back, and I tell my friends. No big deal.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:So I don't realize it's a big deal. My graduation gift from high school was a two-month tour of Europe.

BOYD:Oh.

CURRIS:And this was 1959.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:Only very wealthy people.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:We did not fit that category.

BOYD:Well, you didn't fit the category like some of the grand scheme of things. Were you, as a family, considered wealthy in this community?

CURRIS:Uh, yes. I used to say that I wish Dad had anywhere close to the amount of money that people thought he did. (laughs) I can remember this would have been probably fifty-six, fifty-seven. There was this big railroad incident. I don't remember now what it was, but I just remember that people would ask me if it was true that my dad owned the railroads. (laughs) And I would say, "No, of course not." But again, it goes back to my future. It didn't matter. It really didn't matter, you know, you know. So Bob Hern may have this, well, so-and-so may have something else. So it, it was defining to a certain point, but not critically defining in terms of our relationship within the community.

BOYD:I think what reinforces that is your story about your mother and the dresses.

CURRIS:Yes.

BOYD:Because that's really interesting. Because, you know, that she had that awareness of, of--you can have this or that, but you can't have both. You probably could have had both. You probably could have had the dresses and traveled. But she was making a point. That was--I think it was very important.

CURRIS:Speaking of making a point. In those days, the girls, you know, would do a lot of these sleep, what would be called sleepovers today. But we would just call it camping out or whatever. And I can remember, I would have been like a sophomore or junior. And it was usually like, three, four, five girls, we'd all go to someone's house and, you know, have popcorn, do whatever. We weren't doing television in those days because we didn't have them. But we'd sit and giggle and tell stories and who was in love with whom and all this kind of thing. But I was invited to go to a particular girl's house who did not have a very good reputation. And so, of course, you always ask permission. It didn't matter what it was, you always asked permission. And Dad said, "I'm going to let you choose. But just remember, People put you in the same mode as what it is of the people that you run with." And he said, "Just think, birds of a feather flock together." And that's why I remember that phrase to this day. Well, I went. Had a great time. But that always stuck in my mind.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Planting seeds.

CURRIS:And I've always had a variety of friends on all kinds of levels, all kinds of reputations. But I think I learned to be safe in that growing up in Benham.

BOYD:Yeah. So talk about your school experience. So growing up in, in what--in the schools?

CURRIS:In high school?

BOYD:Yeah, yeah. What stands out to you?

CURRIS:Um--

BOYD:--you've already mentioned you had great teachers.

CURRIS:We had great teachers. I want to mention Walter Dick and Millie Davis. Walter Dick was amazing. Absolutely a mathematical genius. He could have gone anywhere in the country, but he chose to come back home. And he made a huge difference for so many people over the years. Millie Davis. Millie Davis, I'm not even certain what she taught. It was probably English, but we had at that time in Kentucky, there was a Kentucky speech program. I mean, it was just terrific. Every high school would have poetry, prose, monologues, debate, I mean, it was a great state program, and I don't know if it exists today. And so, seventh grade, I decided I was going to compete. I wanted something that I either rose or fell on my own. Had nothing to do with family connections. So I did poetry. And went to state. So from the 7th grade to the 12th grade, I went to state every year except one, um--

BOYD:--wow--

CURRIS:--the, uh, Kentucky, oh, my Kentucky, Jesse Stewart, "Kentucky is My Land", Jesse Stewart. That was my first poem. And then I went to state on it. And today I have a framed plaque signed by Jesse Stewart.

BOYD:Oh, my gosh.

CURRIS:Because he became very good friends with Deno when he was at Murray.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:And he left his collection to Murray State.

BOYD:Yeah, I knew that.

CURRIS:And that's why. That's the whole connection there. But anyway.

BOYD:Oh, wow.

CURRIS:Yeah. But my point is that the whole speech thing was just terrific. There was lots of music. You had choir, you had band, you had trios, you name it. They kept us so busy. It isn't until I worked on this project that I realized how busy they kept us all. And we all did it together. And the whole town came out for everything that was big. I mean, everything. We were all there. And so, you know, all, all the different--I'm trying to think of some of the clubs that were--Beta Club, National Honor Society, all those kind of things, those were just a part of the life that was there. And so that was great fun. That was great fun. Now, my parents expected us to do the homework. You can ask the other two children. We did not--when television finally came, the whole concept of watching television on a school night was just un--none thought of. You watched television primarily on the weekends. And then you'd sit down with popcorn and buttermilk and watch all the great things. But the education was expected. Dad used to say to us very seriously, "If you get married, before you finish college, your end of the table is cut off. Except for emergencies." And we took that seriously. In his later years, he said, "I wouldn't have done it." We say, "Yeah, right." (laughs)  "Good luck to us." But he-- education. It all came back to education. Opportunity for the future came from education. And you know if we fell by the way on something that was that was okay unless for example when I was in college my junior year, uh, I hadn't done too well in a couple courses the prior semester and I get this note that says I think I still have it somewhere I think if you paid as much attention to your studies as you do your friends, you'll see these grades improve. (laughs) So anyway, it was a different kind of life because there was no technology. You know, the warm morning heaters, the electric stoves, all those came in during my youth. They weren't there before that.

BOYD:Wow. So you're growing up, you're very, very young, so you will have no memories of World War II. But how did World War II impact your family during that?

CURRIS:I don't think we thought about that. And the reason I can surmise that at this point is, it goes back to the isolation. But it did affect the community significantly because coal miners were considered more important than the military because they had to have the coal to produce the steel.

BOYD:So they would have been, like, essential workers that--

CURRIS:--they were essential workers, what we would call essential workers.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:Not, now, you could choose to volunteer and leave, but the miners were pretty much protected, but let me tell you about the Benham miners. And again, this comes up with conversations and interviews. They were working six and a half and sometimes seven days a week just to produce the coal to go to International Harvester. Stop and think about this. All the war material, the trucks, a lot of the equipment. And in the exhibit, you will see much of what we're talking about now being noticed are part--in the exhibit. Because without the coal miner, you would be speaking German today. Which might be an interesting concept when you consider today. But, bobby pins, refrigerators, airplanes, the Garand, I'm not certain I'm pronouncing this correctly, but there was a particular rifle that General Patton was alleged to have said was the greatest war equipment, so to speak. And it was called the Garand rifle, G-A-R-A-N-D, Garand one rifle. International Harvester helped produce that gun.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:And it is a huge collector's item now. And I would give anything to find one. But, uh, yes, um, part of why I started this project--my first was I wanted to honor my parents. And, um, But I also, Doug, I became furious about the fact that coal miners were being cast in such an undignified manner today. And I would say to any of your audience, let's see you go three miles or more underground, having probably anywhere from three to six football fields of dirt and soil over you. And you work there--in those days, they're using carbide lights. You know, they're graduating into the battery lights. I still have my grandfather's carbide light. And they are doing that every day, every day, every day. They're doing eight-hour shifts, but the labor, the manual labor, let's see you do it, and then you tell me that we should not be saying "thank you" to every coal miner that crosses our path, and every family that supported their coal miner to be there. Every time a whistle goes off, and if your coal miner, as the mother, as the wife, if your coal miner is killed, severely injured, has black lung. The company owns the town. They need a new space for a new miner, so you're just out. It's not until 1961 that the women knew for certain they could not be moved out of their homes. Because that's when the company sold the homes to them. Now, it depends on how far back you want to go as to what the memories say. Some talk about the fact that it was very harsh, particularly when there was less housing. And others say, no, they made every effort to try to let you maintain the house in some way. But that fear was always there.

BOYD:Do you remember any mining accidents, and--

CURRIS:--I remember the whistles. I remember one of Dad's very closest friends. There had been a rock fall. And in that much time, he was gone. I think there were three in that one. Which brings up another point. The rescue teams. That is another group that--it was made up of miners, primarily those who were in the upper-level administration. But, for example, many people will have heard about the Scotia mine accident. Benham Rescue was there for the first day of all of that. Having those mine rescue teams, those were invaluable. Those were invaluable.

BOYD:What was the, um, with regard to International Harvester, what was the sense of mine safety? What was the?--

CURRIS:--I think they considered it very good at the time. They were very good. And I think the mine rescue teams had a lot to do with that. We would see them out practicing.

BOYD:Oh, wow.

CURRIS:Yeah, see, they'd go down to the football field, or--everything, lay out the equipment. The other thing is International Harvester was very good about doing festivals and so forth. Uh, July 4th, uh, they would--down at the football field, there would be games and everything, and they'd bring in these trucks, and two or three interviewees talked about this. They would have this ice cream in paper cups, and the ice cream was never as good before or since as that.

BOYD:I bet.

CURRIS:And, you know we--the Halloween Carnival. where everyone came and there was a prince and princess and a king and queen. We had king and queens and prince and princesses for everything and--but it was a fundraiser--bake sales, all these terrific things, but all these games. And they were all--they started--the coal mining companies would hire individuals because of their athletic prowess. Particularly in the early days, they each had their own baseball team.

BOYD:Oh.

CURRIS:And I had a picture, and I can't find it. I'm going crazy. It showed the baseball team with a WSC, Wisconsin Steel Company, on it. And so they built beautiful, uh, uh, facilities, stadiums and so forth. So they always concentrated on things of entertainment for the people.

BOYD:Mm.

CURRIS:Which was part of why I think you were able to be isolated--and again, but you didn't know what other people were doing--but could be content because you were always busy doing something as a community and IH would support that. One of the things that was always huge we always had a Christmas cantata--

BOYD:--ah.

CURRIS:In the community church. And Santa Claus would come, and we could all hardly wait because at the end, we each were able to go over to the Christmas tree and pick up a paper bag. Now imagine this being a huge thrill. A paper bag. We called them pokes. And inside, there were oranges. Uh, my sister remembers Cracker Jacks at a later time. But it was loaded with fruits because fruits, you couldn't get in fruits as easily. Today, we'd just go down to the grocery store. No, no, no, no. Fruits were being brought in. But IH did that--

BOYD:--oh--

CURRIS:--at the beginning. And evidently later it was taken over by the Union. But just the thrill of getting your own little bag.

BOYD:Wow. Yeah.

CURRIS:How simple, how naive, isn't it?

BOYD:Was there an aspect of life in--growing up that IH wasn't sort of in control of?

CURRIS:Oh, I think--in control of?

BOYD:I mean, it was--sounds like they had sort of like the police, right?

CURRIS:Oh, they had--no, they were in control of everything.

BOYD:Health care?

CURRIS:Everything.

BOYD:Education?

CURRIS:Well, healthcare. They had a hospital at Benham, and we think until about the mid-'70s, there was no charge for service. There was no charge for prescriptions, for care. Uh, there were even house calls in the early years. And one of the things that came through was that the women loved it because the nurses, after delivery, the nurses would come for a period of ten days with their little satchels and clean the baby, clean the mother, make sure she was comfortable. So she didn't have to get up for ten days.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:Isn't that amazing?

BOYD:That is amazing.

CURRIS:That is--then in the 70s, when they have already sold the town to--I, I think it's 1962, Benham becomes incorporated as a sixth class city. And it's independent at that point. But the mines are still functioning. And, uh, so in the 70s, Lynch and Benham combined to a clinic in Lynch. And at that point, both still supported the facility, but each miner had to pay $4 a month for basically those same services.

BOYD:Wow. Wow. Well, speaking of which, let's go back to the Credit Union. Because so much of this is built around that. What, describe the Credit Union to me in this community.

CURRIS:Here is the Credit Union. First of all, one of the major social events of the year was the annual Credit Union, uh, what did we call it, the big Credit Union annual meeting. That was it, the annual meeting. Now, everyone came. For one thing, they would elect the officers and so forth. And, uh the officers were always a combination of miners, employees--now, let me kind of phrase this--employee would also include the teachers, the doctors. All of those are IH employees.

BOYD:Everybody was an IH employee at that point.

CURRIS:Everybody. Right. But anyway, Dad had arranged, God only knows how this happened, but in those days you had silver dollars. Everyone who came got a silver dollar. And so sometimes one of us children would be helping pass out the silver dollars. And all people would come, and that was so exciting. Then they would raffle off--you didn't have to pay for it, you'd just automatically get a little check--and turkeys, hams. Later on, there would be little radios, um, so it was a huge social event.

BOYD:Well, go backwards first. What's the role of the Credit Union?

CURRIS:The role of the Credit Union is basically similar to a bank, for those times. It started with just savings. This I've gotten from Jerry Walters, who is the only person left alive who really knows the history of all this. In fact, he had a lot to do with my being able to start this project. And so you had savings and loans. And you would go in, this would all be done. And then the International Harvester payroll--before the miner received the money, at the window where you would come and get your money, at first it was scrip, in the very beginning. Then it was cash, and then later checks. But they would, I've kind of lost my trend here, just a minute, um, but when it came to that, International Harvester would deduct what was owed to the meat market, what was owed to the Big Store, or the commissary, what was owed to the pretty--

BOYD:--so those were all credit. Like, so essentially you'd go to buy meat, and it would just go on your account?

CURRIS:If you wanted to, you could pay for it by cash.

BOYD:Oh, okay, okay.

CURRIS:You could pay for it.

BOYD:But if you owed something--

CURRIS:--but if you owed something--

BOYD:--it'd come out of your check?

CURRIS:It was the very early form of deductions.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:Very early form of deductions. But speaking of this, so the--so that the Credit Union served that role. Then in 1961, when they were beginning to sell houses to the people, they also established mortgages.

BOYD:Oh, that's--okay.

CURRIS:And, uh--

BOYD:--and that's because the--IH was getting out of the business.

CURRIS:Right, of the houses. So you could go borrow the money from the Credit Union, where your--now the houses were somewhere between $700 and $1,200, which sounds like a pittance to us today. It was not a pittance to them. Jerry was telling me how dad would just, he said, "I don't think your dad denied anyone a loan on their house. He wanted them to have a house." And it really warmed my heart to hear Jerry tell that story. Because I was a sophomore or so in college, so I'm not at home when this is going on. But one of the things they did, if you remember, I mentioned that my mother was just basically smart. They asked her to come and help with the sale of the houses. And I think the fact that she knew how to keep her mouth shut, she knew certainly how to do office and all that type of work. And they trusted her. So she was very much involved in that wholesale. So they would borrow from the Credit Union. Now they could go elsewhere or else they could pay cash, but the Credit Union was there. It was not at all unusual in a gathering of some kind to say, "Well, I've got to run down to the Credit Union" or "I've got to go see Bob about something," because that was your financial institution. One of the miners talked about--there was some organization in Cumberland that you could borrow money from, but they were charging like 50% interest. So if you are a Benham employee of any kind, to be able to go to the Credit Union was a godsend.

BOYD:Yeah, sounds like it.

CURRIS:And see, well, to pull this whole thing together too, you go right next door to the Big Store where they sell appliances, you name it, they sell it. And they're good quality. And they're even in the exhibits now, uh, International Harvester coal stoves and refrigerators.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:Isn't that interesting?

BOYD> Yeah.

CURRIS:How they had a--I mean, so they had a lock on the town.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:But when you're a child, you don't see a lot.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:And it isn't until you are into a project like this and talking to all these people that you pick up and understand that every single person that I've talked to think it was the best way of life they could have had. Of course, I think there is some memory lapses, too--

BOYD:--so what--

CURRIS:--about some of the harshness.

BOYD:So what do you think about that? What were probably some of the downsides of this arrangement and some of the harshness?

CURRIS:Well, one of the interviews, they talk about the fact that if a family, if a member of the family caused any kind of problems, and it wasn't taken care of immediately. They just came up, security came up and moved you out of the house, period. That was it. You did not play around doing anything that you should not be doing. So I would say the strict control is the flip side of that. But, it's just very hard to say because all the memories have been for the most part, very positive, except, uh, maybe the selection of which job you had. Maybe a brother or an uncle or so forth needed that job, so maybe you didn't get that job.

BOYD:Yeah, mm.

CURRIS:And women[3]came in, in the 70s, about seventy-five, seventy-six for the first time, and um, but I think the true tragedy is, from my perspective is, International Harvester did not set up funds, that I'm aware of, to educate the children of the miners past high school. Now they were very, very supportive in terms of grades one all the way through high school, no doubt. But there was not an encouragement of any kind to leave the mountains. because that is an inbuilt labor force. In retrospect, the fall of International Harvester happened fairly quickly in the scheme of things. There is this book, which I now have a copy of, called Corporate Tragedy, which I'm looking forward to reading. But they were left on their own. Once they pulled out, and Arch Mineral came in. That was it. Period. That was it. There was no more mining in Benham, Kentucky.

BOYD:What happened to all the institutions that were run by IH at that point?

CURRIS:Okay, the Benham School, where I attended grades one through twelve. My mother was in the first grade of the building that still exists. And her first grade teacher was my first grade teacher--

BOYD:--wow, wow--

CURRIS:--later on. But, um, it's now--and it's the Schoolhouse Inn.

BOYD:Yeah, I love the Schoolhouse Inn.

CURRIS:Well, it has now been taken over by the county. And, uh, all the other buildings, that's one thing--and it was particularly at the insistence of the women. They always tried to maintain at least the physical facade of Benham, going out of the way to try to do bake sales, you name it, to raise money. Pennies at a time, just to pay bills and keep the buil--keep Benham going. So Main Street, the center of town, as I say, is now on the historic register and is, you know, being maintained.

BOYD:It's beautiful.

CURRIS:Yeah, it is.

BOYD:So, um--

CURRIS:--but, but that all, you--oh, I'm sorry, go ahead.

BOYD:No, you know, keep going.

CURRIS:You know, we were talking about Benham, and what is it that you evolve into if you've come out of Harlan County? Okay, there were classmates that went to California and became very successful in the police force. Peggy Gilliam that I mentioned that lived up--up the holler from me. She ended up managing a major little cancer lab. So you have those stories of people who left who really succeeded in what they were doing. And, uh, you know, on varying levels, on varying levels. But I took great pride in being able to say, that, to my knowledge, in my class, there was no one that ever went on welfare.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Interesting.

CURRIS:Because they worked. They grew up with this work ethic.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:And when they left--and it was not easy to leave those mines with only a high school education because by this time, time has progressed. And expectations have progressed, and so, uh, I take great pride in what, what our people did.

BOYD:Well, yourself included. You went to, (Curris laughs) you went to college.

CURRIS:Listen, I did not dare not go to college. Are you kidding? But I wanted to. I loved to read, and I wanted to go out and see what was going on. And I, uh, started out in medical technology because my dad thought that was the thing to do. And I failed five hours of chemistry my first semester. I think I'm dead, but fortunately all my other classes were fine. But in high school, the one area was science. And I learned more about New York bask--baseball because in those days we would listen to the World Series in my science class. That's why we--I had seen one major science experiment. One. Where they do the bell over the something and watch it explode. That kind of thing, so science was not good, but everything else was. So needless to say, I changed immediately to theater and drama, of which my father was absolutely appalled. And so then--

BOYD:--and you're at UK--

CURRIS:--I'm at U--I'm--yes, at the University of Kentucky, which, by the way, is where I was going for my state speech festivals and for all the choral groups.

BOYD:Okay.

CURRIS:Although, so I had a familiarity with campus beforehand. And so I just went, you know, arms open, eager to jump right in the--into everything. And of course, you know, that's always a mixed bag. But I ended up in political science and economics. And then, Dr. Amry VandenBosch was very much involved with--what was right before the United Nations? The--I've hit a mental block. In other words, after World War I, there was an attempt to, uh, have an inter--he was very involved in that.

BOYD:Oh, okay,

CURRIS:And he was the first head of the Patterson School of Diplomacy at the University of Kentucky. And he awarded me--

BOYD:--League of Nations--

CURRIS:--League of Nations. Thank you. Thank you. He awarded me a fellowship to the Patterson School of Diplomacy. And so I have twenty-three hours toward my degree. And I wanted to party more than I wanted to write. In those days, we had to write a final big thesis, and I (laughs) didn't want to do it. So that was the reason why, later on, I had to go to law school. It was just necessary to reclaim myself from having not finished the Patterson School. So then I went to law school at the University of Kentucky and loved that, loved that. They really prepared us, because from there at--I'm in Murray at that time. I finish up when I'm still in Murray. My husband is president at Murray State, and so I'm finishing my last year in law school by commuting, basically. We go to Iowa, and I realize--one of the most well-educated states in the country at that time, and I realized that my professors had done more for women than was being done in other states. For example, the professors let it be known to the men, the male students, you will hire your classmates. You will hire these women. So the UK law faculty really put the pressure on, and you can imagine the influence they had with the law firms throughout.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:So there were more female private practice attorneys in Kentucky at the time I moved, than to--than to the area in Iowa that I moved to. It was a shock.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:It was absolutely a shock. But I loved law school. I absolutely--I think I could have been a perennial student. And after that, I went to Emory University for an LLM in tax, which is a post-law school degree. So I have really enjoyed, and it goes back, I can still remember Dad's first lesson to me in memorization. And it dealt with the poem of the young Lochinvar coming in from the West. He rode his steed, of all, the best. You know, he started the whole concept. If you learn, but when you need to memorize to help you learn, you do it. Then when you think about all the speech things that I did. But about our fifth grade, fourth grade--it would never happen today. In the Benham School, there were these competitions of memorizing Bible verses. Great experience. Again, not only did you learn a lot in terms of the Bible, but you had a skill set that came from all that memorization.

BOYD:Yes. You--absolutely.

CURRIS:Yeah. And so, uh, you know, it--these little pieces, I see the difference.

BOYD:Did you have, growing up, um, a sense of finances and, you know, did you have your own checking account? And you know, and, did, did--

CURRIS:That's funny. (laughs) I'm sure that I probably did have credit union accounts, but when I went to college, (laughs) the Cumberland Deposit Bank, and I wish I could remember the president's name, he would periodically call and say, "Bob, you need to put some money in Jo's account." (both laughs) So--

BOYD:--oh, that's great--

CURRIS:--so, let's say that I did not learn that lesson as well as I should have early in my life.

BOYD:There's lots of other lessons.

CURRIS:And lots of other lessons, but that was not one of them, yes. (Boyd laughs) I had forgotten about that, but yes.

BOYD:So--

CURRIS:--but--

BOYD:--go ahead, go ahead.

CURRIS:Well, I've been very, uh, blessed. I've had some very serious ups and downs, like everyone. But in the total scheme of life, stop and think about my age. I'm still here. I'm still talking. I'm still mobile.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:I have had a life of, great travel. I have, uh--my husband has been absolutely wonderful to live with, except for the times I wanted to kill him, as is true of all wives. But, the, uh, you know, he was president of Murray State, of Northern Iowa in Iowa, of Clemson University in South Carolina, and then was head of the American Association of State Colleges and Universities. And at the time, that was one of the top three educational groups in the country. And it represented over four hundred of the public universities, some of which were international. And, uh, so in that position, again, you know, I am establishing the programs for the spouses all across the country. He is on the executive committee of the International Association of University Presidents. And as a result of that, we are traveling to all these various countries for different programs. So it has been a very interesting life. And it's been fascinating that it has been a continuation of the travel that my parents started all those years ago. I have been very fortunate to see so much of the beauty of the world. At the same time, it opens your eyes to what is happening today, which is sad. The, uh--we were in China, for example, in the mid-1980s. the mid-1990s and the 2000s. So we saw this evolution--

BOYD:--ah-huh, yeah--

CURRIS:--from just little, tiny places. And people would invite them--invite us into their homes and do dinners and so forth. I mean, it was just a fabulous experience. The same was true with Russia. We would, again, in the mid-'80s, the '90s, and again in the 2000s. In fact, one of the universities in Russia had made Deno an honorary doctorate in one of their schools. But the people, the people in all these countries were absolutely fabulous and treated us just beautifully. We were the last mission, official mission, educational mission from the United States to Cuba, when we were at AASCU[4]. And at that time, the Secretary of Education[5]was kind of our host. And he had been with Castro in the mountains.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:During the revolution.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:And the stories he would tell.

BOYD:Wow.

CURRIS:And just, uh--I mean, it was just, so it's been interesting to, it makes you very aware of history. It makes you very aware of what does dictatorship mean.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Yeah.

CURRIS:It means control of all of your parts of government. It means that you have undermined the judiciary. It means that sufficient numbers of people are following in line. The question is for how long. But that's one of the things that all the travel has shown me is that you can go to these countries and have a beautiful time with the people, but be smart enough to step back and say, what is the structure around what they're living. But I would like to add one thing here. Doug, this is very important to me. Remember I referenced the fact that the ladies were always referred to by their husband's name in the official capacity. Okay. Let's move forward. I graduate in 1959 from high school. In 1962-63, two major things really impacted the world of women, although, there was absolutely no recognition of the fact at the moment. The Pill was introduced.

BOYD:Right.

CURRIS:And Barbara Walters was the first woman that we saw on television in a leading role. Those two things in combination are why, and I speak now to the young women out there today, are why you have the opportunities that you have currently. Because for the first time that a woman could control the choice of whether she had children, impacted whether or not she could have a career, whether or not she had money on her own, so that if she were in some sort of negative situation, she could leave. And it all goes back--now, I don't think any of us would say that whatever you choose, in terms of your religious faith, that you should abide by. But don't impose that on others. Because there are others. You be that woman out there who's working three jobs to maintain those children because if you're divorced, you're either receiving no financial support, or, at the most, a third. I wrote a whole thing on this in law school, (laughs) which is why I can remember all of this. And that hasn't changed, by the way.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:That hasn't changed. But then we had Roe v. Wade, which gave women the right to choose. Not just using a pill, but having the right to choose. We now have the Dobbs decision, which has negated that. I want you, young women, and parents there who have young women, take a serious look at what you want for your young daughter. What kind of world do you want for your sisters? All of that is impacted. And the fewer options that women have in terms--will impact who is in the workforce. And more importantly, at what level. So I would say to you, just be aware, be concerned, and ask yourself in your heart of hearts, what choices do you want your daughters to have? That has been the issue that has crossed the culture of time from my high school till today. And every woman out there that is in a position other than the standard positions that we started with all go back to those two events in about sixty-two, sixty-three.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:So it's been an interesting journey. I'm sorry I'm not going to be around to see how things are going to be in another fifteen years, but, but it's been a great time. And I would wish--I would wish for the descendants of the coal miners--have great pride. Have great pride in what your coal miner and your family did to support, because without them, there would not have been a United States of America.

BOYD:Absolutely. Talk about--so you've done this great thing whether you realize it or not you've done this oral history project and documented these stories and you've gotten to really experience what it's like to be on this side of the microphone which is is an incredible experience. How over the course of all of these interviews--you were part of that community but you're interviewing people, other people, how did this oral history project change your perspective?

CURRIS:Well, I'm much more knowledgeable about the facts. (laughs)

BOYD:It's amazing what we don't know.

CURRIS:It is amazing what we don't know. uh, and interestingly enough, I would say at this moment in time, my husband, is probably the leading expert.

BOYD:Right, he's done all this archival research.

CURRIS:He has done huge, huge--I mean, these have been full-time jobs.

BOYD:Were there--was there something that you--I'm sorry to cut you off.

CURRIS:Yeah, go ahead.

BOYD:Was there something that you saw very differently? Like you thought one way, and in these interviews you actually--because you mentioned facts, did something change a memory?

CURRIS:I think,  it wasn't from the interview so much as it was from the research, particularly Deno's research. I had not comprehended as a child growing up, and even as an adult, the total control of International Harvester.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:I mean, their word was it. But because you have--I'm saying this in retrospect again, benevolent paternalism in the sense that they chose to make Benham a model coal town. And making that decision to make it a model coal camp, there were others that did not do that. There were others who did not have the hospitals and the schools and all the amenities, the--and so forth available to their miners. And so that was very interesting to me. But what was equally as interesting is how the labor union, without the labor unions, the miners would never have had the level of safety, the level of pay. I can remember one of the interviews, they talk about the fact that they came out of all of this, and this may have been at U.S. Steel, and they would--came out with a bar of soap and some--and a little money. But if you had not had the unions in there, going back to--no matter what people want to say, and they will say that it was the Union's fault for this, it was the Union's fault for that. If you are curious and are smart, then pay attention to what really happened.

BOYD:Mm-hmm.

CURRIS:Look at the history. Because without the unions, I would not be here telling the story that I'm telling today. But at the same time, International Harvester would have always been a better story simply because of their caring at a particular level.

BOYD:Interesting. So talk a little bit about your family. We've talked about you growing up and your family growing up, but talk about your family now.

CURRIS:Well, I have had these two experiences. Amazing, wonderful children that sometimes I want to run away to my mother and hide, as we all do for our children. My son, the elder, is Robert Page Curris. We've added Alexander because he--of Deno--he wanted to have the Greek connection, so he is now Robert Alexander. And he has just retired after thirty-two years in the military as a colonel and was, uh, Battalion Commander and Commandant of Psychological Operations.

BOYD:Oh, wow.

CURRIS:And, uh, may I say thank you to all the veterans out there because you are so desperately needed. And then a beautiful daughter, Elena Diane Curris, who was--she was a real mixture of being extremely shy. On the other hand, she would stand up for her friends in ways that you just wanted to say, oh, my gosh, what's going to happen? But I was very fortunate, very fortunate, you know, to have two wonderful children. And it has been a joy. It's been a joy.

BOYD:Sounds like it.

CURRIS:Yes.

BOYD:Okay, so as I mentioned before at the beginning, before we start recording, I do have to wrap up at a certain time. But I don't want to stop before we--before I ask you to describe what, you know, you've talked, you've made reference to the research and the oral history project. What's the goal? Tell me, I mean I--

CURRIS:--oh, I know the goal.

BOYD:I want to get you on record.

CURRIS:I know the goal. And it's kind of changed. My original objective was to absolutely honor my parents. Uh, they, they worked so hard, as did everybody, but they really made great efforts to try to improve whatever they could. Now, everybody did it, but I have the ability right now to honor my parents, and I want to do that. And alongside that, is I wanted the story of Benham, because I wanted the world to say "thank you" to the coal miners, and to all of those miners who labor in areas that they never would have considered. So there is that aspect of it. Um, I guess as much as anything, I am so pleased that we've done this. I did not mean for it to go this far. (laughs) It was going to be just a simple room in honor of my parents.

CURRIS:--and then I met you and started the interviews, and that expanded, and I don't know whether to thank you or not, because (Boyd laughs) those interviews, they have given for posterity the opportunity for the last of my generation to record. We are the last ones that have any idea what really happened.

BOYD:Mm-hmm. Yeah.

CURRIS:And we, without these interviews, specifically for Benham, I don't think it would have happened. I don't think it would have--it hadn't happened yet. So unless someone builds on this, and yet, you know, we're losing us--we're losing this age group.

BOYD:Yeah.

CURRIS:So I'm delighted that I'm able to tell their story. But finally, out of this, we are now going to have this exhibit inside the city hall building in the city council room, that will tell the story of Benham starting from the beginning up to where we are now. And my brother has written this piece called "The Day in the Life of a Miner" and my sister has written for my mother's, uh, eulogy "Will There Be a Benham in Heaven" and it has brought tears to people's eyes but portions of those will be included in the exhibit. We're also going to be having glass cases that Steve Gardner, who is very involved in the Portal 31 at Lynch, and he donated these, and we're going to be having all kinds of, uh--just items, you know, the lunch pail, documents, pieces that the women actually stitched or made. There are going to be all kinds of things in those exhibits. So, I want--other than for my parents--this was for the people of Benham and their descendants. That's who this was really for. And the fact that it can be open to others, then I would say, please come. You're welcome. And I hope that you enjoy.

BOYD:Well, I cannot wait. You've done a wonderful thing. So thank you for what you've done. Uh, it's--people are going to listen to these interviews for generations to come.

CURRIS:That's amazing to me.

BOYD:You know, as the Nunn Center--

CURRIS:--I never started out thinking about that.

BOYD:You know, as the director of the Nunn Center, who--and I will say it was Terry Birdwhistell who brought us together.

CURRIS:Yes.

BOYD:As the director, we celebrated our fiftieth anniversary. We now know people are listening to interviews that were conducted fifty years ago and learning from them and passing on that knowledge. And that's really, this--so what you've done has really been a tremendous gift, so--

CURRIS:--well, thank you, and thank you for making it happen. (laughs)

BOYD:Thank you, and I'm going to hit stop now.

CURRIS:Okay.