Neibr
tic 4,"
1. January 27, 1430
Jack Rillin, white, (fiotitious nano)
Bill, griffin itl 1,:.110)
Maple Street :heurf aet numbereC
4.gebring, Flerida
5. Oitrus grove lcbercr
e. Barberr. Derry Darer,
7.
LIPJ/ITORY
dig
JACK MAIN
A flizht of steep stairs led to the large Mon which
formed the upper story of the old laundry building *here Jack
Dillin and his children made their hen*.
Jaokls daughter glide opened the deer at my knock and
in a sweet votes and pleasant manner invited me to none in and
be seaiel. She was neatly dressed and her curly broun hair was
attractively brushed back from her fert,head. Papa", the said,
'has juat get in iron grove work up at Highlands' and is in the
bath Teen tuiewashin up seas, but you be seated and Wilt for his,"
Jack then cane in and theugh his bluu denim overalls and
jacket woro mailed and work —stained, his fac, and hands were
clean and his curly black hair was neatly *embed though it had
evaded an evidefit attalait to plaster it dexn ith a wet brush. Me
extended hls Land with the greetings Rowdy I'm proud to
yeu and iron you dealt mind a..talkin to LIU Airty as I n
why 1111 be nighty glad to tell you what I c1 r.bzut the Citrus
work. My own hut 17 toe I all new any e. person that knows the
26005

--- Page Break ---

Life History of Jack Dallas papa
kiader life I've h‘d hap told meI *lighter send to ens et then
.magazines ant git a blank to fill out about my life and "'ebbe /I -do
sake a lot el merle'', said Jack serieusly.
Elsie then excused herself, put on her coat added a little
reuge and powder tio her face and said she was going demi town to
get samething for supper. As she went lightly down the narrew stairs
Jack said: that sure air a fine gal ot mines cad she air mighty
4
kreAti. new :tint she." Then with a twinkle in his snapping dark
brown eyes which belied his serious countenance he said: betas,
folks says she looks just like me. B That was something that would
require imagination for Elsie was really very pretty with a healthy
flush, really needing us rouges upon her tanned cheeks, while Jack's
facto pallid and wrinkled and etched with pain and worry could hardly
be called good looking theugh it did express character and determi-
nation.
Then Jask proved quite voluble and launched readily in to
the story of his life and his work in the Citrus.
I been a-werkin in the Citrus for **rola eighteen year
now. Nos I aint just 'sackly a Ploridy cracker but I sure um a
Southerner an mighty proud el hit tive. Both me an' my wife wus
borned (bern) up in Alabamys in Pendleton* County, right near
Lusia*. We lived on joinia'farms an' I know that WOUAU from the
time she were a baby a-aussin
IMO*
ant then fur her to turn in
am' do ae like she did. But, that's another part of my stArytant
I'll tell you 'bout that later. Ni, wait a minits aebbe 2 bettor
tell you that rust off whilst Elsie is away. Elsie be right queer
that -a -way, she know how her ma done us all, ant she don't crave
to go an live with her but she shore won't let nobody say nothial
agin her ma, neither. An' iron you want ay story that's part ot hit

--- Page Break ---

Life History of Jack Dillin, page 3
so you jus' lissen to this, said Jack.
He rocked excitedly for a few seconds and then after
politely asking if I objected to tiobacco he lighted a cigarette egg
inhaled dceply, then: 8 Hitt, ills' like said, both no an' her
wus horned near Lucia anl akiiewin each ether all our lives we up an
married right early. /In most fift;;r :atm, ams hit must el bin twenty-
eight yearn agent,. Ida, I guess was nigh on to twenty. She come from
mighty fine people too anI she were L;ood lookin and always pleasant
in her ways with folks. She were a Kell* an' tether side el her
fambly wus Riley** they wus ail aigh up in polities too. I never
khowed so much about m4, folks excusin my father's people, I heard
hiA tell that his grand -daddy C040 over here from England but that'll
all knew.
8Hoon after we married her daddy up an' died, but he loft
her forty acres el fine tarsals land. Her ma, an' her brother both
got forty acres each too, that's all the fanbly she had. I never
had but one brother and one mister neither. We wus a.farmin on
some' rented land then so one day Ida said te met 'hy don't we
fix up my place so we can live there and step pa:Tin this here rent.'
Well I had a little money I had saved, the fust an' the last I
ever did save too, an I thought that a good ides so I fixed the
place all up nice like. I ptt a strong three strand wire fence all
round them forty acres, I built a nice little h•use with a wood
floor, no wase dirt floors for us, an' a fire place ant glass winders
too. By the time 1 got hit all fixed up I spent nigh on to nine
hundred dollars on hit. I give the County twenty-five dollars to
help in fixinsup the road, ans they due hit too, they put a good
hard road right by our place, cause when I gived them twenty.five
dollars a lot ol tknxiatax tether folks did the same.

--- Page Break ---

Life Htstory of Jack Dillin* page 4.
Well* we farmed for a spell an' made riht osod money
a
too but we didn't save nonee o' hit for we wus both young an,
liked a geed time along with a little likker now an then. Then
we got to hearin'what good ant easy money they wus a—makin down
in Fierily in the musk suesemmx rows the Lake* then we had a
chanct to rent our place as we up ant °ipso dewn hero. That was
uigh on to t wenty year ago.
While Jaek paused for breath and to light another cigarette
I netioed that the room was very neat and clean.* the floor scrubbed
till it literally gleamed as did the window panes. No shades were
at the wiudews but half curtains of unbleached muslin embroidered
in gay figures were placed at the four larger windows* the smaller
ones were curtained with white scrim. Dishe: werc neatlod eiled
in the old fashisned"kitchen safe. On some elv.lves there were a
few canned aosds* and others held food in small diehes. The safe
was screened to keep the flies out* Whioh was very wise as the front
deers of beth floors were open and screenless. Two double beds* each
neatly made were in opposite ends of the mom and partly screened
by muslin curtains* along side one bed stoce. a cot also neatly made
and with a gay quilt folded across the feat*
Jack seen resumed his stery however and damanded my attentions
mihe fust tilini; we did was to go right down to tir) Lake near Sugary*
au start a bean famine I could& got help aad worked on the shares
but me man* I wanted to be in ter myself alone. I still had a little
money se I put in a big bean Gimp for everybody said that was what
to plant. Well just as the beans was most a —ready to gather there
come a cold spell an' a high wind -nd plumb minty.= all* an me tee
fur that matter. Reckon I Dieted nigh on to s thousand dollars*
along with my house and what little fixins we had for they all get

--- Page Break ---

Life History if Jack Dillin, page 5
blessed away er broke up by the wind. I just didlol knew That en
the green earth te do when here come a feller an saids I been
u—watehia ye:: work a* I like the we:, y.,11 go rcbout hit, se you
COAo OA up to Sebring with me an' give :Tart 7erk in my
iumpun
orange ;rev* an' see that you its samita to eat till you zits
on yore feet aginel That nan was Mr. 0. Sebrinc, hisself, an' sip
tack my wife, our two chillens, km* quilts, a blanket, an' e dollar
an' fifty cents, all we had, an' went up here to Sebring an went
to work for Mr. Sebring.
N I wen4 right to work for him and did ',11ything he told me
an' he paid 11 fair wages toe an' was a good man to work for. I
guess iron I coulda left likker alone I might be a—workin for him
right now theuzh he aint get the biz groves he had then. After
awhile we did get a start but I aint never had nothin for I never
sould zit sh3t of the eravin fir likker an/ that shore is a expense.
1 been a—tryia lately te give hit up an' I tlint teehed a drop el
Christaus. Come Christnue Day I
no kind *I likl:er since
wus plain cold sober for the fust Ohristmus Day in thutty year, ma'am.
Whit I even pant to Church on that Day this last tine.
Jack sighed deeply and a contemplative look came int. his
As I was a—tellin you, w, stayed right en here
in Sebring an we routed a right nice house an' get some furniture
fir hit. ge had our 1;irl and cur youngest boy A,:re too, an' Ida
aus a—livin. She
expressive eyes:
way Ifere
she were *here pluab tickeled with the way
werked hard tee an' kepl a nice heuse and im3htd and irnCed all our
clothes regular and ceeked geed meals. She shore were a fine cooks
and when she worked outside like she done sometimes she a:poked us
a good dinner every day 'fire she went te work.

--- Page Break ---

Lite Aistery of JAI* Silliao page 4
S +Raked Jaek about Idate work ad he stated :that she worked
ia the peeking house. 1,44motimee she :gado as =eh ei fifteen dollars
week, but sore oftener hit were tea or tvolvc, en' the work hit
varalt ateedylike nAthar. Thom soapaaies tries to Atl-vido the work
eat Isongst the workers to they all stick. I done sass paskia'
house work toe but I don't like hit like the grave work. At the
paakie house I worked eight hours a day an get Ise tventy-five seats
a hour ea' tar cession labor like leadial the boxes, °toasts! up saa'
Ole
obeli. Tao paskial hit's piess work as' fur grapcfruit they paid three
oonte a. Um, *ranee sevoni an' tangarines ten manta. That Wait math
fur skilled labor like that paskinl,job takes -but when yeti de know
hew you can aake a right melt e' money with hit.
I Me an' Ida, get on alright, aal we didn't never quarl;Tuirrel)
or suss. She never cussed no as'I never oussee hur oven when I vus
deep in the likker. She secaod to love us all =a' she'd Sot up late
4,1 nights, when she'wus in the paekin' houses e.nondin ft -mats
clothes fur us. Then 'bout two year aftgene she up an/ run off with
a roller an' she left us all an' stayed rii;ht ,.7ith hiss in tether
"Am near here: Then she writ no to git a Atyiveroe 4B1 I told
her te go on an it hit I wouldn't do selthin' to step ho,Nov
SO
she is aosarried to that man as' amliVin up near .Lusia an our
place. She never tried to git the ehillens sr nothinl el horn (her0,
what she left here. Reckon she 'mowed I wouldn't ler her have then
ahillen. I'd. awflt to the last ditch for lea, as yeu niht 'ay.
After she left us one is ay boys, next to the eldest
Jess what's soy most twenty, get in trouble but hit 'ere all a
frame up *gin his an' se, but anyway they sent ht a to jail. I
sighta ot his pardes2d to me for I been riLht friendly with the
Jodie ant he knees hew hard I vas awtryis to get sm, but kit all

--- Page Break ---

Life History of Jack Dalin, page 7
got no so riled up an' I paid hit se auch mind that I got raisin
0,10
drunk an tridd to drive my car an' got 'rested fur hit. I got
put in jail toe an' letsa folks holt (held) that agin ne an so the
'Jodie he jsl ceuldn't give the bey ever to me. Most folks said he
wus a -heap better off in the jail house than he were with no. Then
whilst that there ruckus were a-gein en a neighber what was jealous
up an' went to Jedge an' said Elsie were a.runnin on the streets
day an' night, an' asked 'lodge to give Elsie to her. They had
a ***glom trial too an letsaprennentest folks here up an' swore
thing u whut wus not true 'bout mos an' se Jedze he bald, 'Jack, I
don't like to do this but I'm a-goin to give Elsie to this here
lady fur a year an' see how you all gets en for the edidence hits
mighty streug that you aint a-takin the praper ecre o' her.", Well,
to
ma an, &here enough, he did give Elsie to that woman, I just kaint
sell her ne lady though for she nigh 'bout ruint little Elsie.
She had a little money an' she let Elsie spend a, lot an' do
what ever she pleased aul she made her vaine-like an' taught her to
paint her face an' her fingernails an' I shore don't like none el
that for folks in .fe-r fixes, hit don't leek right. She put let ol
fool notions in Elsiels head, yet do you knew that when the year were
up Elsie. she 'looted to cone bakk to me an' believe me I shore were
proud. I up an' told that woman an' the iedge too if anybody ever
mess with me agin an' mess up my fanbly like they done I shore
a-goin to ;it ay shotgun au just pure graveyard kill 'en too, an
I shore mean hit.! Jack sighed deeply and sceev-d quite saddened
WIt
by his na:rative.
Re had well judged the tine that Elsie would take for
shopping too for her step was then hoard en the stairs and in she
cans with several pekages which she laid upon the table. Then

--- Page Break ---

Life Ristory of Jack Dalin) page S
she sane and sat near me and as Jack had ceased talking while
he smoked she said shylys "Weuld you like to sec the quilts that
my ma and At pieced? Epson my assurance that I Iseult indeed be
very glad to see then as I was interested in handmade guilts Mho
went ts, a trunk and brough cut six nealty folded gay colered
quilts.
Se made up all these designs too, donAt pou think they
are pretty. Seasetimes I think will name then each -with a
fancy pretty name but I never have dine it yet." She ran mall
saireth heads with tinted fingernails lovingly ever the quilts
as she talked. Folks say we eughter put these quilts in the
State an' County fairs but we aint done it. I would be scared
they night get lost or stele!). an' I want to keep then with me
all the tine." After I had sincerely admired each quilt in turn
I helped her fold the* and then she Paced them bcck in the
trunk and rop1LLQed the gay quilt which covered it.
Pa", she said then. want to run down to the corner
to see Mrs. Anders, she said she had a little present for net but
0
mit stay long." Jack said she could go and so she excused her
self politely and again went eat.
Jack seemed to be listening to her footsteps down the
stairway and out en the sidewalk and then he resumed his talks
That there weaan what kept her fur a year did Give her sone
niee slothss and taught her sere good manners, an" I reekon she
would a! -seen lernt te paint mp anyway. My bey Jimmy new he aint
never give ne t mite o* trouble Ever since he been a little
feller large enough to ride a bicycle he been a V.V. Messengers
excusin the tine he were in the 00 Ow, an' in *sheet: Ws
new tmen‘-ene years eld an' he graduates frost High ',shoot sins

--- Page Break ---

Life History et' Jack %ilia, page 9.
June. He would* Let through a -heap seiner but he get disgusted
when he Gene *tater the OCOsup an' decided net ts se a* mere. Then
the W. U. Manager told him to get a High eheel education an he
could pit to be a operator, but if he.didn't,graduate he couldn't
never be one.
'I didn't want lieu to send him to CO Camp an' ifen they'd
OOP
a sent Jess he might net be id all that heap el trouble new. But
nethie would de the 'Waif but they suet send Jimmy, I think
hit were the "'ERA that sent him but aint sure, hit nights been
the WPA. Jimmy works new en.the NIL. some Youth work he sails hit
an he makes fifteen dollars a month but with all his *spouses in
eeheel he don't serve any, gemAtinea.te helps me some though. NeW
he hoped (helped) IRA buy my new tag far tile (Int,o I get to have
hit la my work tn.'s* we get the bag while we he.4 the money.
0 Poppa, Jimuy's get his class ring an :feu oughter see
it.' screeched a shrill ;Noting VS103 en the stairway, and in
burst a frail leoking bey with becks slung ever his shoulder.
k Sen, speak to the lady en' take yore sap offs* in the
house, hew aany tiaes r get te tell you that. That's my youngest
fifteen
son, Silly. *elan. He aint but 000 years eld. but hole in the
tenth grade ix the Sigh Mehee1 an' there aint no tether child what
makes any better marks an' he does. Well new sin, you say Jimmy git
his class ring today. knew he shore is proud el it, he had ti
04.
send off eleven dellars fur hit ma'am an' seemed just like hit
never woulda come. All the beys an' girls if the class get them
these rings, thatsu to show they graduated frea High Beheel I
04111.
reeken.'
°)oppa, this ring is pure geld. Jimmy said os, mad it's
get raised letters on it. When 1 get ready to graduate esu 2 Have

--- Page Break ---

Life History of Jack Millis, page 10
a pure gold ring with raised letters, lOppail Silly was almost
whining by this tine but upon heating a whistle from bellow he
flung his books asido,-grabbed his sap from the chair whore- he had
threw: it and an back down without more words.
I declare natan,./ hope you will be seusin that child,
SOORS like hole the hardest to lain anything. Ito just don't pay
se nind to what yeu say, but he 'her, de study his lessens. Now
lists she is tve years elderlan what Billy is but she only in the
ninth grade o' school.
sever
6 I xamwas had much larain, 'bout the third grade I
reckon. My folks never though Ruch *Ivan to **heel an I
was needed for the tarn work a let, then tee I was awful puny
an' always had a *Leery in my stemik, so I didn't got mush
sehoolin'. I want my skill**s tio learn theugh for I realise
new what _a iodueation moans. This hero **Melia' now -a -days is a
heap bettor than hit aster be, Why the °halting what gets all
through the Nigh !Wheel new knew. a lot mere than just readin'
an' writins, seems like they all are mere able to take °sire o'
*IP
theirselves tee.
II shire an proud o! my fambly They tint never give as
no triouble *woman Jess, rose little fellew an' hit vomit his
90
fault. le get 'eused el stealinl some money but hit shore were
tether bey what Jess was a-tryin to pretest. Right au Oa
powerful glad there &int no acre °billions fur to be left with
*billion even as old as mine is a awfulsorious thing, aa'amol
Nat, hit could be a -heap werser ifion they was little. Us pore
folk, slat get ne business with lots o' skilless no ways. I got
two good friends ,hats got a even demi apiece an' how they ever
a-goia to raise sen all pesters as. $eems like hit's the real pore

--- Page Break ---

Life Iistery of Jack Dalin, page 11.
folks what has the most ohillen theigh am' then what's able to
eare for lea don't have news. Item I seuld just git me a job as
t caretaker fey a grove an have a little hone out in the grove
411•111,
an' a nice garden I'd. 'here be happy an' hit would be fine for
the shills*.
I wouldn't want to live in a sit/, hit's tee seicY
there an the shills* would learn lets el mischief. Then I
WIP
Ilk* the life here in a small town where everybody knows all
the folks even if they de try to rust my affairs for no. I like
to walk dew* tow* anl talk to my friends an' make new eaes teow
mint a mite bashful 'bent a-opeakia to folks, an' if I see pens
body what leeks pleasant I go up an' shake hands an' soon we gite
atalkin. I hears a let &bent the world that -a -way that I wouldn't
never knew totherwise for I aiat mush hand to read nine.
Yes na'an, I'm a-gittin te the Citrus mirk but I shore
did tell yeu a let'fere that didn't I. Reckon hit night be right
interesting too, aint hit. Wes, I been a-werkin in the Citrus for
-*any a year now anI I Teske* I knows about all they is to know
an an a export in all the lines of grove work. I done lots&
Mein', MOWS/ spreutinl diskini an' the like, but somehow
I like the pruninl best. Rit's about the
work of hit all toe. Oust I fell down in
thorn way in my hip, had te have hit out
long time but I kept right on a werkiAl.
time for the
11
did work a long
takers here an get along alright item I wilda just kepi eff the
likker. New werks mostly independent like an' by *extract for
the smaller Vivo *vizors. I can lick at a grove an' estimate the
hardest end nest dangerous
a tree an stuck a big
out ant I wits lane fur a
different grove care
tine an
soot el prtnia an' I got as high as fifteen cents t tree*

--- Page Break ---

Life Ristery of 'Task pillin. page 12
Sonotines I charge only five cents but that's fur them little
trees what aint a groains like they should. If the dead weed aint
out out regular the trees don't grow well an' after awhile they
have all dead wood in then an then there aint no mere Citrus
trees. When I worked for the Nonpanies sonetines hit well by the
day an' then I get twenty-five omits a hour for nine hours cause
ay work was skilled. When work independent I keep at hit as long
as necessary. The ‘ionpanies was right goad to their help an' ifen
we mprked ever tine they paid us but not extra just the regular
wage, lessin we werked at night, then we get usually five gents a
hear Arno
We all tried to fern a Ulan east. An/ we did get hit
started an' called hit The *kited Citrus Workers, but we eouldlOt
agree on letss things an' hit didn't last lens. I think *ebbe the
04)npanios broke hit up in sue way for sours. they was all &gin
hit for then they would a -hafts paid better prices. 2 feel sorry
for the grove owners ant the workers, none ol'en *max is a -saki*
any stoney, hit's then Caretaker Companies what sits hit all. They
charge such a powerful lot fur their services an pay the weekets
Si pore. But, they do soon to try to keep their mon, an' give each
one sone work most all the tine.
When I worked fur a Oaapamy I get up every Kornis' as
vomit to their *Moe or where they told no to nest, but they didn't
alvars take se 'less I wad a-doin0 prumia', that's so tAwerfUl
work they ean't change the non every day Sr se. I hat a hour ter
dinner an' for a long tine got paid from the tine 2 left heal
but they done quit all that now an' a nan is just paid fres the
tine he starts to work in the, grove till the tine he steps. They
dealt oven count the time they is a-oarryla us to .at back frost the
jib.

--- Page Break ---

Lift I1story of Jack Dillia, page 13.
Lessin l'a powerful hard up I like tho indepondont work
a-hoap bettor, hit givos as lure tin* an r can kiador select ay
work. 01st I was out a.huntia work an' I sone to a old lady's
houso in a arm, what sure did need a primal'. I talked to her ant
wanted ti oeatraet tho work but she wouldn't let ne an' said: I
will pay you by the day sal expect you to get that goeve pruned up
in a day too aaa.' Well, I needed the work se I told hem alright
ant she said she would give no two dollars an' ny dinner. I said
I had ay dinner but that didn't make no difforease to her. Mow
what you think *eau, when I started to work that old lady she
brought hos chair sut an' she sit right by every tree Whore I
was a-workia an' told as just what breaches to cut off. Cioao
0.0
soon I was nest dead, not bola' uster to ne aueh supervision as
IMO
that.
Tell then she said I scald knock off a hour for dinner
an while she was a-.gittin hit toady I scald now the lawn. There
warat nethin/ else to de but sit at hit. Then she brought as out
sone ice *roan an about -a inch ol sake fur ay glamor but I WKS
tee tired to eat *von that, Boon she sailed an *aids low, ny man
just, sone an' out tho gras in tit* bask yard your am hour &tat up
yet*, but I told her I were tee "mar dead to do that an I flopped
uador a tree and restful a few *taut's.
You eau believe no or not, but hit's shore the truth
that when I got that grow* done She seat a* down the strict to his
stator's. She almost works& no to death to.* an' till kit were
toe dark to see. ?him she, the sistor said,' Wow ifs* you know
a aaa what *an work real fast an' novo all this trash au' hee all
this' tropes tenorrow you send him to no, I don't think you sax work
as tart as I want mesa to do.* I sure told hor that I didn't want

--- Page Break ---

Life Xistery of flask Dillins page 14
the job, an shore didn't knew a* ass what sould suit her.
Jack again paused to catch his breath and to chuckle
ever thoughts of hew the old lady worked him. I been a picker
too" he said, 'an' uster make right geed money at hit. Per
grapefruit I got five eents a box, but they tint 100,01 a-payin
but three cents these days. Then for *ranges I get ton cents, an'
taagarines brung twenty *onto, but that's been several years &gene.
Itiow I think the ttngarines bring about twelve cents. They is about
a hundred an/ twenty grapefruit to the box, twonty-five tangariass,
field
anl.fifty oranges, that's fur the 'mit boxes which we pick in.
1 guess I make lbeut as much as meet any ether grove
worker, exeusin these what werks regular for the Oempaniesi ant
that aint many. manage to food ant elotheny chilies 4 We don't
have no !alley feed but we de have plenty 40 sweet petatees, cern
bread, fried flour bread tat his moat with greens. When ever I
can I git milk for the skillet* ant we bake as mush things as we
can 'stead 01 fryin them, I learnt that when I had se mush
stumik trouble au/ misery. wisht I Gould keep a geed balanced diet
for us all but I can't de hit these days. Everything ousts se mush
an/ prices seems a little eerier all the time. Blsio, she's a right
geed little seek tat she tried to fix the things eughter have When
ever she can.
I I had stenik misery powerful bad about three or feu,
years ague but the Boo, he just abeut cured me but he had to kepp
a deeteria1 on me for nigh en to two years. Re gived ae tire kinds of
powders to take a hour apart am' I uster take a alarm *leek to the
grove with me tut try te take that nediein soda*, but I seuldnIt
always do hit, swastimes I would be way of in tether part o/ the
grove when the clock rung ant just wouldn't feel able to walk to the

--- Page Break ---

Life Nistery cf Jaek Dillin, page 15
place where I left the nedieine. Oeuldn't very well take hit
alum with me about the grove *either.
N Then had hern!a an' I been operated feur times fur hit,
se hit dealt biother as mush no mere. I kept rd.:At a—workin fur
a Lyng tine with that a—betherin ne till I ;et the money te have
a eperatien, fur hit. Last year I had a bad sere come en ay lirer
lip an' two docters said hit, were a eanser an' they doctored ea
as seal but hit didn't de no geed. Then, a old quack deoter, ens
traipses
st then what *sunk roun ant totes his medicine alen; with hin
Gen* along ma' said ifen I used his medieine hit would shire cure me,
se I bought three bottles el hit like he said: Mit were a elear
liquid but hit burned sunpun turble tutu when hit dried littler,
a white stuff like salt on Ay lip. I kop$ a.usin hit just like he
told me an' sure 'fluff after while that sore healed up. New I got a
big smellin in ny neck. See that lump just under my chin en the left
think hit's a cancer tee,I hoord they always cone back seas tether
place item yell step lea ens place. Hit hurts sunpum turble tee clear
up te Ay ear senetimes. I been to three decters with hit ant they
won't nen* say whut hit is, but tin, 'em says hit must be out out.
Tether one said he esulda cure hit with medicine mn been ai.decterin
ea hit but deni.t Is hit no geed. I 'mint get ne money for a eperation
se reeken I wilihafta wait sine.
We talked of polities and the trouble in 4uropc but task
did net knew such of these things for he sfoldeu road a paper he said.
Regarding State and Satienal politics Jack said: I don't
take se much steak in allthat like sine folks do. I don't newer
understand hit se whetts the use to pay hit much aind an'
it
all werked up ever hit. Why I knows sine fellers that will fight
ever their I:Hattie.. I always been a Democrat an/ I reckonI always
will be. Hit shore is the Party for us pore folks. Reckon we sit Wo

--- Page Break ---

Lite listery et Jaek Bill*. page 141
best Bresideat we ever had an I Tight he seuld stay right ea in
the sifts*. le rare has tried to kelp the Beuntry an' hit alat his
fault that thiags slat gene se well.
1
I wirer was en the Gement work, exeusin 'bout a Reath en
the FEU. Just as soon as I scald get mirk I quit hit, I don't like
fur **body to bolo as. I Kept amhuatia jells even when I had that
dreadful aisory in ay stealk so bad. 'Nisei new when I got cuter
work I set the IPA J. put as en but by the tine they got ay card
ready I dome feuad other work so I dealt mess up with than as afore.
11Ut hitys a nighty good thing fur then what kalat find as wirk an'
there shore is a pile 0 folks like that.
All our faably belongs to the Baptist °burgh, we I get
a Goias in Trees* rloridy what's a Baptist preacher,* stated
Jack with much pride. I isn't goo te Okursh much ne more for 1
tint get the slathers to wear an" hit 'shore makes you want to dress
up te go to Chun* else yen tool powerful aisurble. I sees to hit
that the shill.* gees nal that they all has °lathes too an look
as aloe as the rest 0 the folks. Several times the °Marsh mfolke has
etfored to help se with food but I donwt over let 'en de hit.
Issas like telks think to mash s' sow they leeks fur
Church these days. New 'emirs. people eughler be neat and *lean
but why dress up in sash finery for °harsh ape 'sake thea what fast
get hit feel lad an' not wanter go ne mere.
Roll, asiaa, I shore have enjoyed eur talk anl item I
had a Umpired yea was ameiala today I would& shore brung rim la
seas .ranges. I try to keep es always en hand tar the shales
but simotiaes I forgit hits an right new we is all out 0 thou.
Zion I eau tell you airy &gin 'bout any Citrus work yin just tell
me tar share be powerful proud to de hi,*

--- Page Break ---

Life notary of Jai& Sillia. page 17
is s
Sisal end fistitious names used in histerys
P1Stitioue lase Real Maus
Jack S111/n Bill Griffin
Stale Glara
;ass *arum
Jiaiq
*aryls
Silly flask
401 auto AVM Park
Feud), *tea Smutty Oeviugtou ()aunty
imusia. Alain** Audalusia. Alabama
Ida Sortka
ual hamelos
11444,7 °mislay
Sugary. Florida °turista*
Trees. nortis Live Saki,