J2ebraary 0, 1930
.71llard and Cornelia :,:itcholl (vtito)
Oommeroe Street
Jobring, Florida
Oitras grove laborer, oh,..efly a
.11stor end pruner. 7orseu Citrus
canner.
Parbare Derry Duraey„ v7ritor
Tiorenim 740 Ttuss. revieer.
FItAit .17)
"0 MO in, tidy do you stavl there ;moo/drill" am31jjjy1 .1.erAcont ve icro
as I blocked on the first of three doors of the wall apartment. Men, as
hesitated, the door %MS rime open and a flustorod yourg?. wornn arolorAsed.
rroodness$ rionso do mauve no, I thouttt jou %lore mig little boy
Jamie, and I do rod 174-7 he :7 rtQcno akin on the door. Do own in. :?1,113
is tw kitchen. but Taotll go richt throudi to the other mon."
This mill. stoat, !Asset-int l'need normin 71rovod to be re, norrprale.
‘,210 1,1t10 noat vnd °1øn, thaarp her olothoe 7oro 2:11thor 7forn ind i'ldod• a
110 :maaael throatt the kitchen there she had, boon it iellinc e, noticed
that tho 7-11.f..00 m inosiding elem. TM chairs sto-d nor 3 larm 77Indcw
there mitatior of floriering plants f;rox• On one °heir i urge pan of
fresh 710,1611 pea se a brisket bese the other chair held the crirty hulls.
Mrs. Hormel° war so ,'!rmoornod ever the rtinnme of her ftrot rreetim
that she boom* irlito effusive.
teke this chair rieit here by the vIndea, it's cool and ocerfortable
hors. I declare Ins sorry if JOU thce.ght mc rado• I reckon ;pm -lore sur-
prised the -.Iv I yelled at you to cam in."
I hastened to asire her that it vras all riftt and that sho hadn't
hurt sw fooling's. :ith this she bemuse mere taloe.
3 I Irvl obviously interrirfted the shelling of the pocs I eumrted
2605i

--- Page Break ---

that I holp her. 3ho nos:sorted YrIJ offor and hurried, into the 'kitchen to ob-
tain then, Whoa oho retarnod she riaood them on a wall Usblo noel. at hand.
Tor frionilinoss had inoreasod with iv offer. As ,'7.70 \7orked aho earplainod
that this 'ias beim; dorso for a nekeAbor, and that it rust be comletcd by
oortain time, thoreforo sha was glad at r4,7 hel
$4,
"lorank isn't wartime today for heti on tho grove dustin arm: torsiftt.
',Mon ho mats at nlitt ho mats most of the day. Ito just wont dogntarn a
fey ninutos OM, but 11011 bo b:6ok soon for he likos his sappor a1y. Ho
will -tont to rest a little more before ho et irts his ',ark. re doosnit mind
the nigist work as it pays five °onto an hour mom than day labor. 70 ore
miejlty glad to got it. '-10 ore a.tryin to got our farm land fiod ur no we
can MVO down there and be real farmers like our daddies are."
WA arose and wont to a map taokod to the for walls it was the 1-;ind
distributed by the oil companies. .7' ore she minted with rride to a location
in tho loaor end of the county near Lako Zeta/croon.
,qiejlt hero is our farm and it sure is good land."
!bon she had moaned her seat oho launohod into the relation of hor
life story.
"I am a rail Florida Orrokor and all Try peoplo are Floridians*" she
said. "I vi o born in Lakeland 24 yoars ago, but I was just a little Oat
Whon ny father moorod to ."3Pon ?a* .-dhore I was re toed on a farms
"Iv daddy vras born over in Polk County, and rky mother, 17ho was a
wan born in Lako °minty flair Usaatills. IV daddy is 13en :111kins. II our
family has lived n Florida for a long time. itj groat-(-ro,t-sTrandfathor
'.-.111d.no is said to havo same to Virrinia from _Zeland, but ho soon come to
Florida after that, and hero we have boon aver sir100. Ltr mother's folks

--- Page Break ---

is all of Itglish stook, too, and 7io love hoard that they woe from a pleao
call Tiirminghem."
Ale niched deeply and sifted the bright green pees throarti her fingers.
°I mire Ideal we had a record of the families; it would be so interesting.
I've always wondered se mash about us all, bat kinrItt none of uo lam? any—
thing definite. ).11 we Ic3ou is what others tolls is. If i:Yo had the raane7
aal the ability, I mold have n tinily history made up for us, tut hoar
they costa lot ef ranney and taken lot of time.
'TitInk's people are all Georgians. He won born tri) near Oakland• tut
he hoc boon r Aced hero in Florida. His ftusily nen lives no)r tenewood.
Crefrgiao tore his daddy is superintendent of a Tendh orchard. Tie also has
half interest in a lame fan. Fronk says that he's thinking of taking us
up there for a while, so he clan help his daddy with the welt, bat I don't
want to go. .7e hove plenty to to hemp and vie have our own farm to woitii
"Frank's mother wna a De11,y, they afm to be real rich and prominent
Mks up there in Geomia. :moral of her uncles had one Of tho lei -coot
stock fame in the state years ago."
the peas wore shelled by this time, she =used herself for a taw
minutes and went into the llotchce with thou rw oyes followed her I
vies in impressed with the aretless order of her house. The kitchen and
dining roam wore combined. u alcove in this Jong narrow mon hold the sinks
Dome oholvese a cy)binat, and a three—Ix:truer oil store.
large equare table covered with a white cloth stool near the back
door. The bare floors wore nieely painted r.',.nd had recently boon olishod.
More ioro flat a txwirf: in the lart:e 1-nd Iry g ars1 a b Oa Ot 1.ao od on the

--- Page Break ---

table lent a Cheery aspect to the romm.
Mrs. Menyval° returned and oontisied her conversation.
"I often get little odd jobs like shelling peas, and though they don't
pay. mash Iymialwepe nighty glad to get them*. It sure helps a lot. Not
long age I node a lot at artifielal flowers for the Girl Scout Minstrel, At
Uhristmas I helped a florist rake a lot of ti* pine wraiths. That's the
first work of that kind that I have overdone. lint I have slows been niebae
with my fingers, so it wasn't a bit hard to learn. The florist said I did
well right from the start and that's something, because most folks found it
mighty diefloult at first."
Rising MOO more she event to the bedrom. This room was law and
narres like the kitchen and sontained two beds, a large bed and a single
bets the latter was placted cross -wise at the feat of the large bed. The
Marlow palmted and there were a nuaber of bright rug rags soettorod about.
A mmli tall table at the end at the nenhad sevenal bcmhis and =gamines on
it, while a esti of shelves on one wall held a large collection of rednal
and State agricalturel balloting. Drawing a bum from beneath the double bed.
she 40101411100,4
"IAA see this hare little quilt I MIAOW for a Debris She *Irefully
unfolded and Sheaf out the smell bundle tor me to see. "A neighbor rot the
top together, then ask ma to finish it for her. I been aworkin on it for two
weeks now* I have to de it off and an, for I don't have arch time to spend,
with these spare jobs."
The quilt proved to be a dainty -toes ofwerkwith a top of figured
lawn in panel shades and lined in blue. It was quilted with blue and ptik
threads. Taking note of ey interest, she ranched farther under the bed and

--- Page Break ---

.6.
"Nano sags is the peas reedy? She has to mot them to narkst and can't
wait. Here's the XV the promised you" I hope you got them all ready, cause
she's In a hurray," This rash Orimmft;.:i 7!osso all in one breath.
Hay. blerryvalo acoopted the MOO the boy held out to her and in return
handed him two largo paper snots orotaining the rots. She admonishod Ha to
be oareful and rot spill then and clotted the door ho left.
7he returned lauehing end of:Mint/NU
"Like I said before I got a rev odd jobs ti s wan and I don't novor ro-
tas') nothing Pa able to doll oven it It only as a dime.
"I use to :or17tn the orange sod grapefruit manning factory5 hut lately
there hasn't been, math work like that. Boobies I'aculd have to go so for
agog from hem and Prank don't like that, he also don't vant ma to take it
up twill AVOW
"I Ian sdhool In the sixth grade to tote nr the conning rlontwork.
av dodges health Nilod and he lost whet =maybe had, so tray oldest brother
and me Started to wort.
"tho oanning plant it Isnot so bad once you 7ot tire to it, bat at
first It took ell the Akin off xv flews. l'ca knot, the mid is soled..
Then I rmt to mAring finger atolls of robber; aomehoa I never could get nee
to rabbor (agree like seta of "howerkers use. For some reason I couldn't
never suplain I jest felt had to holism pains bare so that's the reason
I Just WI the atolls.
"I node around a dollar a day when first started' but Iv:mired hard
and did qv boot to learn just right, so it wean long before I nes moldng
$2 a by. It takes a rieht Oast madcer to make more than that, muse
Aitken 1240 is the 11Mb, bat I vas mAking that nudh before I was done.

--- Page Break ---

'The lateen and peelers get paid by theism'', mostly its about 25$
per hear, but I sectionised and Oaths piece works"
Once mere the kitehen deer opened, but maietly this time and a ttmil
little filler tutored and harried toward his mother. Filled with the is-
pertanco of his news he forst his *peas till he adveneed4
"Just leek here, Mather," he buret, "tat I didialt rot to finish it yeti"
le pissed a red and vhite paper valentine in his Mat,tar'n
"Masi I pot all but the legs dene. Leek at the arms, they is mode of
little Marta tee, lust like his to. It'* for you, only teacher wide"
mast finish it at hone and bring them back for her to see."
He leaked eagerly *roust ths we.
"You get any albite paper Mother?" His tagairy was sepia's. "Teadhar
givod no the rod paper to make the hearts for his leas•"
On being assarad at the it paper ens available he lensediately re-
tired to the kitdhen, obtained a cold bisenit *advent out on the beck steps
to eat it.
"That's my Janie," said Mrs. Mervyvalewft pride. "Re's ,lust six, but
he's going to seheel. I try to help htm all I am for I tent his to get a
good 'emotions I slant to keer htm interested tee, so that he'll be sager
for learniag. I realise so oftem at I missed by not being able to finish
*cheat.' Ohs sighed wiettellis
"well I started to tell you about my uvdk in the canning pleat, didzilt
IT I will try and explain alma* the eeetienizing, its gonna be haul, but
try at mike it an you can understand. In sectionloieg you have to out
out the rap of the frail without gettin so Okla, nmebrane, or seeds in it.
It sounds hard to debut it really is easy ehen you get the knack of it.
"When doing plow lark we get paid aeoaritag to trays. There are fear

--- Page Break ---

414341.
different osn tsøs, One elle is the .onsher 0 eon, these is the tiny cons,
and ease P4 on o tray. 'Phis else only holds a whole section, and two half
ones on either side. ra•miz 1 nem ra7 1? CM ty end brims W per t -say•
fhen there 'are the canbor 2 cans with 12 on a truy, osd WhiCh brings 1111
par troy. !tie mullein eons MO to foar MI t-7 endthTbrim. ne VV.
She panted to readniese, then revirod the &stifled sc!oennt of hir life
in the oannisr, faotory.
had to bo rel. coretil esti 1.adk, the ones mecorilam to n eohortile
or Talmo nail we newnr.low, altea the farsweasn meal& eon) firound sad test
oar paeltinfr• if !A irtlet done just debt, it was rrort.:ed aninst us, aril we
hod to to it all ovirr.
,fin all but the onsber 0 oass, !rid to use only •qhnle sections. In
e•sponf can Itir hod to be mighty °areal est not let any *Nods slip by. "re
were allowed one mm for broken sections re over/ towr of liorreet 7)-erika•
Those can* -yore 7411.140,11.Nith i brcv“.1 7311,01c itriree AS 4. pot mentioned we
allerrel one "%moll etripe an to e tray, hat of course the tracer bloc&
stripes we had, the Ty:tter mar etanding.
Th reply to ny (Naestione oonserning the Tadkinr; nf the lootions, Oho
The seotione at tot& pm berms, at be whole and ix:wrests Mese
are pineal in the can with the ?main of the plug toword the em side, eU
ant be evenly necked. There le always a little wrup already in the oan
when the eases to is. 'Ye don't rat no juioe in, only the piles*
Vast let rao rot Iry sooticrelslor knife ant dhow yea -ohrit /mane he
hurried out to her Ititehen azil returned as (stony with an odd looking' knife.
It had a brold sh)rt handle are a Uzi& blade of maditna length with sharp
edges.

--- Page Break ---

'rime vie t the conning 1-lant WO are ehar-md 750 for these
knives.. !Then We) leave if we w:)nt to keep then it's all tit,tut if we
turn then in wo gete our wow irck. rented to keep nine so I paid the 71311.!,
Armen she v,vased and sie,hed pensively* then she reacted ant absently
art rinohed n withered leer fres one of her tinier, *Unto.
4,They hod nighty strict ceders in the winnow tee* re one was allowed
to $mdke or use smart, or ew, ttelloso at all. Teems node to rfesr Oleos
sVrohed uniforms story dey• The erntfoie TIEIP blue with vette heeds band and
seat us 1. ea*. ''-ro stealdnot return then when we fintlitted wealk• Usually
they we wore anymety5 trots solA spatterinc on thou
't3omptirsoni the rlrla oat the sleeves oat for ooalness5. and jest as Mali
as the forewomen emit* then, they he to stop ant buy a newt uniform mid nit
it one or be disehaxed• Ner the fronts of oar natter= we usually wore
ral)ber amens with a smaller cloth one or it. This was done because the
juiete is en Wt.
”1--;f9 also were low heel Sto, sad sodas or otos:kings. I used %bite
socks, ami I had n (Ilona .7t:vair over Mr I also had antrum which I kept neat
aril clean, athevadi I could tonally wcnr one two days."
the leaned forward ant there was a tolled° in her big blue eyes.
',I nester did work in the ball r4stie she half Abispored•
ask hor it this 1736 and she astilet.
`'71111 yew mot the sootioaising rens is usually divided into throe rut$,
31x large tables are placed dcryn the rem, and at the aril of °soh two, large
anirrayor belts ran. nig rrX;15 an onelowaro where soma of the %mien Irmo
to stlai in order to work at the tables. They liork on both sides of the
U)bloss bat the Irirt inside with the belts is *Mod the bull pen. In ovider
to got in there, theg, lave to walk up six steps and or the belts, then

--- Page Break ---

lo
Van ix rtos la to the floor. 01 CIOUX30 thon, ain't moli difference
working in there than analliorus (=opt it gcyte VIZIOSX)ri t1.4ro end in ouee
of an aoolAunt or fire, it would "ak-.. X.01' to :j;et- out. I trot tavayb sled
&luso I cot to work on the outaldo of the bolter.'
In reg-rd to woxng, conditions, lbs. Klirysv7-.10 oontfi IVA
west to qtatic t auvun t1 tiarid woetwid. that is
if c..; boa a fall inn of fruit.
•7Zho forekdeen zArn strict, "Jot thccir wore Id*, so o lardly ovor hod.
fly e• t1r• ys Lad briar off for luncia, 2:4 a 30mtertable sawn&
roam to r
'other," yellsxi Juno, o I Le drryo to the 3oroor ,•and ,7ntoh for
d.addy. 1 laa sway e,.m. I?"
be real"olreful cnti wit get In tho etrout if I let Ion ger
Ills mother .81-,(3d hositAntlj.
—Yea. :0111 riett rzt 121,z clican1%, PlaTre erzn I i3ers
-1213trt, bat don't you stay long if laddy docanot acme. Ale., :mu
et'? Iwo Nihe.,-,e0 :1101";1 con call you."
alrfulod rrith buns; of the doer.
Ills nothor lOokod. otter ilia Isritt raductorme.
at Mild and thia gstabs apartment mice (pito a problem. Ho doecnIt
lite to stv n hare all th) tine, and I' met ak7a;73 o cot' down with
him. don't %Tont to mks a alsey ont cd' him by riering him stow !mr me all
tho time, se I let go oat, but I elosis lorry thdle 7103 don/oil-
:1th Jamie aono him !author -Invnstud to the dienuanion of living eon.
ditione.
The "ont here in thin little rlaeo Iconky 413 a month, and thatch ate

--- Page Break ---

atee;:, atLi1' L L-ett, hot 4s,ussere tae tho bort. or it.
,uoro trjing to smre 4 1-1 tat-i ma for (u...• 12. k iv a:oo bic bnth.
room hum t23.oughs ate. o -net L;v.t t‘L.It with eiou-j) rua-t.
nho tcJilztaa shn 34restlass1;,/ uitounslthi roots* ouatincern oo-
ausiunal ilnnoe tita..oueh th i.utiif'44L) °Mad uee Jamie«
'104 throe 1111,1,..)t disco ho cAaeu, talk, &dl âi1 t birth. Jedae-
tiller; VIM drui4, I',01.111/t havo nmore* nos be Li little over zi
your since the ).t,o7t tma oento• 'Alai I i 'oi ;mak; itrtano toiler
-;,,4 .1 la tiu. 7iveJ.ne xofl:441. slire hived it .viouid
oast trio. Alt er d it ,aontt• I ;low othildron so 47A1 Jilin is wall
u assfort to IV*
'Of °curse ure *..-valionsibiliV mil sonatinas iota of ticable.
;Jut 1-fe is nude of aeepozutibilitio3 and treriblaig" she edited 2,2,ilosortill-
1Y•
but f.0 toj
stu Imo baton:44lm. wit
ono in with Janie olimine to Ills
Jet. Netl,,A' t Little fcirlcr sel../ntal dioefall;f• itund him."
Short and 'mai_ 'Auk) ityos flair and Nam IC in se hi
wife vt.T48 stout• Pis manner vs1:, Itotisent but Cifficiant• •-ftor actondins his
creating bv aluildrk; lamas. he rAt ciwn &ail. I) r a table :Ana listenoC
to our eontreristion. Jonie olistix-41 1,41_ into Kir 11.+.1:' :Ana Ulu nesnass of :is
Erin' little etn..,,:tylir tilti blue shirt ntAle u shirr; 000trdet ucainst the vein
one. ivtallqd onet.; ratheres•
1-44 our eunverrati(,r. omit/met he grer raore clert; nil joisni in te teU
ur of llir ygsSr.•
"I 3st off toe.nj L. or rerk toniatt in thc dou-e.ustin.

--- Page Break ---

jt a amnion grOVe :OW:axe t* 1a-youidlo at it ra mat five
oi.ro ;Ey.
1 it over 7)orcr that au. litc am4" ciol.A.uod 211a
‘iith Lo. '10 Lilo. .ds scud for him nban t coma to tluato It (.0ea
tu:s.e winoazi. iht, fora= oaws opocialiat
)10( La, i. wokild,tist 15% tbuto 'but it iu t...:,.'.;:irarcat weiiik from
zx ..1.0 or
i1c .i.Lottor t.)o it's UQC..O iz tharovoo nicht anti acca..
7 thwoii: &lora Z2 us socKini&At iLs pot:J.211y* soma like*
thk-Ire is lini o.. to ha added softiyo
tjLt wox.k. Iezio 2.r4 .41: hoar and tho colj IA that**
14r.otl:or roLlg...2 1. 3c for Ulla ixtris five cents suac =alto
v.) ZattA:l. it too boin ett Cow ;r:31.1.1i& tc narc toe
11,41q; flz. lie 614 ;jou abaat thot, tab:lochs she's usurillw so 'wood ihria
tric tc VaLt".. ilo Cortd, tti.rd jg Talfoo
...c 1.14ro 441 uoric. z.t Lnod. f.oxlain laul dam onth of licru in talc ocuntgo
24.a .4V k3 c-arioi411 tCji1 uildin oar Immo ltd like to havo a big
atooh f la one j Alla103 ADO to huvu up in tk3i1a cow tine, but I
oanet ot--44.-te alt: to ltilso voL-;,..ta"oloa fuld ciJ -c
cnt tb.vor; 74occ 3v/ille .0 Ear0 a olriirt to Enke saw Nene,
vita 0: tib000 dav011 he e:LOL11.12t.,CiA
ILO •A.;:".zooll to roll tto and aftor 1.1htixt; it r..-10-araxio
x.r;: boon v;tt tJ,a4.!krozAiar 000VonV tita joir:ing .telisouge
from thC tiaie Zg. 1:;.trUSiit. oaton Wad tire the 'Joet ecovanii the•re
is to walk fore liton thmytevolian us as av L4bor, t.hoi give An 20c1 an
hoar for a tor/ lcur ,!t1;94r w1 vorta us; n'ina Itorars• it mono am cot

--- Page Break ---

one tour efla' uovalv t.aassi ,:loalt of Cat) oocroutos don't tant 0
neither, add the saws alostt like lt so -.4124
•tie MO$ it Le tZ.1.31:3 la TV)
the WOI1111 4114 WO get &hors our walk 1)oelas LOVOL att. xxis st
WI ain't leki £a t to se 4.05 a itha xti L th ic'Alt it -.70
tiallit ass grove totl thew wool o to Ile re that; the tiro it
tare to trosoart use
"ran sight WOOL is Oitteraat t L.C1.11'3 C. Se. re
When Weer* proolag Itie the &ale -a4;ist trc intot: L41 in it titlt wc
watt Woo a t4411 itottx dizetare
staypeti aivt tor :taste h4ti Callon :Ze a.iftorl the child.
&fatly xislage stoost,L isito tbe atijolnitil :vox .11.4. 47.0,7•ctet,:d.tic
the oretillax L4tola ,„thaal be rat -taws.. he wirtfliliehoLi.
ut that Goriagami ratka; It to -;Itl'oxtv.7 ."-,174
looks lika 'au aloft iztt jai:01,3;4
t44.41i MO i43,1:11 44/4 401ntbox 1.1‘...r. to .corc:' t7i,,t *Id
Ilmader Ilyet tilta LLJatttibt and tho Lioist.tr.) CIVIL 1srr. -11.
owed OaxsadXwu oho xrisasiittl tb.o and Z 111LO1
tiiii001214110*
eare oloAgs 41...ot. or hox floaeruir IL!vide I Iitalc
asiiffit prettiya taut attt taivt-ix aouldBirOlal thou 2 ikc ak.o daeo•
gettln baak /4/ tiozirai :.:114va it rt...ie L ctavt:/ly lut,rt scar
tar us a.o their big treski at/vexed ,J.Lth torixnainso lAtt or aourao VI01310 cat
Visa aa oar tissi• stops.
',da hot a stii,t.ty goo& tal-ss4.1 too. lie id e 021iO to And loossit Calva
us all the Asa saw aou at). 14t iavz tholo riernay Lu

--- Page Break ---

-14—
morkin for the other guy, I found that out a lonr time ace, so that's the
reason I'm so anxious to get out an mg we :lace.
t.Ion I first 4nut to work I nne just a boy; I ain't but 24 nom. I
useter make one dollar 3 day hoeing grass, and I usually worked throo days
3 Mae GOO, 7MS I IMIS I newer as on the relief but once and that nne
for ono (14.,. I mado ',711.50. Later did go to WC cam7„ but they sent no
way out to metorn Loaisiana and. I got homesidk„ so I .pit and core buck
after six mks. I've been married so long no that the homeelokness denst
bother no no mere. 1,7? folks are u-2 in leorgin nom. Illy on, he's a super—
visor of a lesch orchard.
2ho homesick statement broadht a note of derision from :11a.
'You'd think he mac a real old married non, from the noy be talks, noa
mouldn't you?'
ho lauelod heartily, mhile Frank 3nm-wed.
770 boon married seven years no, and ain't that a long time,
°veal:ally lhen I !Jos only 17 to start mith. 3ut really," he added earnestly,
/I'm rdyfity glad I marriod so young because I'd alreadu st2,rtod to ho a
mighty bad fella'. iron mhos I 77aset,msh Mecca" than my little fellow, I
starto-(1 to smakin and chin, and it 71asn't long before I mac drinkin too.
I 77.0 also br at fiebtin and oarmsin.
'.iometimos I tease ala about beta a little older than no, tut I sore
aa faLld I 0.ot her, for It -Joann lo417 after 7o mrried that I =7.1.it all ny
bad habits. %/o didn't never fuss at no, but no just good andkInd to no,
and dhon I soon it meat agin her I uit.
-I ain't 3 church member, but she's 3 3artist and a goodmarktr too.
I bellve is to live the boot I :no hum. ',nym:7 I Tant:! be real Tare
I knou ho v to behave before I 0.1.n a church. I Boo so many folks in dmrch

--- Page Break ---

who don't Doom to bo livin right in most w)ys, aryl I just ain't cot no
hankorin to bo like them I =pee I'll join in tine cono through, and
of coarse I'll gr with ,.:1114.
Getting up, he tiptood tomorl the bedroom.
got somothin I uuntn shay jou."
No returned in n fel minutes his nrms filled lAth arrioultural bulletins.
'Just year nt all thoso Govor'mcmt bulletins Wit 11arote. Mei toll
her how to raise flowore and how to cook rijht and whnt to cook. She's
alJlis Bonding for them end dhe rends evory ono what canoe too. 3he ain't
had mach education in school, and I haven't neither, but she's always ira-rovin
herself by roadizt. I don't take to rcadin thetudh, wen liko I oan't never
got Tv nind to it.
lla has mien fixed out a budget. It's a thirr that lots wan live on
no mach, s C. jou can save the rest. Of course we don't stick to it much, but
it cooms no can't, muse there ain't novor onocral money to co around. Then
thine is cottin so costly all the time. 3ut it helps samo and has sure
tried h t to tXth) it work, for dle's like mo, shoes atmin to cot that farm
as soon as the can."
FrIrik beamed vith pride at his wife; she seemed rlonsed but a trifle
cerborriesed.
In my wmic I avor-(m around 1.5 a week. jomotirws thancli whon tho
citrus is slack I haul wood and sell it. That don't brirr mach neither,
eaaeo I hnvo to hire a tenor, what has a truek, to halr me. I hnvo n small
oAr I use in rs, work sometimes, °specially Whoa I'm pont oat an a job alone
and the otterlany ain't cot time to take me, but it ain't no good to me in
haul in woods
-I don't know just how much it would take for us to have a cool livin.

--- Page Break ---

-16.
Of °aurae our food don't cost us madh, then our daddies sends stuff fran
thair farms arm naa and then.
this 110 vent in to the kitehon en a returned vith a on of amooth
yams Which her iathlr It sent her. Then she brought out a palatable look-
ing pootion of .:7111to baoon toAdhay no; this owe from one of Prnkes unolce
in Georgia.
hlvo figured out expanses s lot," _:;11a said, "and if ye corsidor th
improvemonts 170 mint to nuke on the farm so that via ovuld live there, it
mould take around 0150 a nonth for otime. ,fter that vie ndght be inae-
llondeut.
sure hope wo can get out an that fans before long, oven if7le can't
balld nothin but a little shack. Perm life Dooms so much batter than here
:in tam. Believe no I'd sure never vAint to live in no city on tilo littlo
that •Vrink nukes, and um not Irwin no more oducation than wo cot.
-TPA led saro love to be In the oltviihen tho: have those big 7:olitical
moetings. Goo it must be a lot or cositement and flint" wes sparkled
with the id.
Toy there you mr gattin yourself in politics again," hor husband laughed.
'1 don't tike much stook in those thIws5 rank continued. 'Tut I
muldn't mind coin to a big mootin myself. Jo have ono at Croro nor
Venus on the 4th of Jay, and it's always the start of the Damooratio camp.
.ala, the reJlly :rants to attond a honost-to-goodness bi metin.
I toll her she ourhta try and got herself elootd to the state end national
eammitteos„ if she vont' to see that sort of thing in a biT way.
'7o rat) bath Domeerats 'oat I dontt usually vote. Mla always doss,
she sejs it's a groat Drivilege, but it Booms a rodponsibility to no.

--- Page Break ---

Away, horde we knee that the psoplelve help elect will de the riut thing
us? Then if tboy gor:mg. alive can de is blame ourselroo and it just
don't emit me.'
"Noa Pratt' ale scolded. "yes knew it ain't right to lo at it 1‘
thnt vsk• le all have to vote in order to be good mnerionn aitisens. sup-
pose we lived in one of lien there oountriee whore they have dictators, ani
you were nude to vote a curtain wsirip Wouldn't that be wall n070 in onz
good. free *Gantry things are so itinerante and we gettn do all -le can to
keep it that 1137.
"Of °aurae we all nuke mistakes in that, just like wetukAithemin othor
things. but I still think: me sbauld tAro it ain't **ways that the fansive
vote for* does uswImeng. Suppose vrerybok )ad felt lite that in the last
national election. There would we be new? Veil, there ain't no tollini
think fake did a nighty wise thing whin they elected Presideat Roosevelt to
office again. ',Jel I here I have the privilwo of vetin for hist to gat a
third terms Yes, I sir° dell" Hee eyes gleasad with the vothessenee ether
artonent.
Frank leugNmilwartily and arose.
"loll, it ain't meetly polite to ftjht before company, so I reakon I
better got cut. I've got to find 3111 anyway and 40 it be wants to help
a. geformod tummy&
!Alter bidding me good dim) he turned to Illa and kissed hero then he
tiptoed in to the little one end ran his fingers through the tousled curly
heed.
When the sound of his footsteps died !Auk; as he sent doentho stairs
Ella resumed hsx,dIseession of polities and the country in genera..

--- Page Break ---

"Noe, what other oountry hos ever shoved so much help for its poor
folks? And Ws only boon slum Roosevelt rent in to office. I often
wonder What will happen if hi doesn't go on with the wealk, bat surely somo-
one oleo will take it up end go on. Itivould be all right to stop it it
the poor folks could help thomsolvott bat they can't, and they ain't poor
through no fault of &arts.
"Ma you take this here emanation tint Janie and me took the other
day for taberealoois, we never could hove done it if it hadn't been for the
3tote Roast of Real* ana the Oweement, I reckon. tie went to the school-
house oat had the tests nudes Jamie shoved negative, and that earprieod
me for a doctor once told me that he had mighty weak lungs. Ihave always
worried, about his, and I woc mum glad to got the chance to find out Dor
sure.
"My test dhowed positive, but theses said that didn't mean an active
ease. I might have had it years age anti get over it, lout the test would
ahem the seer wouldn't it? loosen oarprised then they told no I had it,
for mg grandpa, trj father's daddy, lived with us whom I was a little girl
and for ten years before he disd ha was sidk:uith slur oonsumrtion. So I
rookon I got it free' him.
"I'm fat I know, in foot Pato lot overmigtt for whole*, it the
narso said that didn't moan anything, bemuse you oan have taberoulosis
just the sem."
As she talkot, Oho kept glancing in a mirror trytmg to reaemure herself.
Vhey atm book this wed. and telt rommaye of me, but said it would be
two Months beforo I Vora free them* If I have eonsumption, they'll cAve
as free treatmant, that is if I ain't able to pay for it myself."