FEDERAL WRITERS' PROJECT
Miami, Florida
LIFE HISTORY
THE BURNS FAMILY
FOLKLORE, FLORIDA
W.%Woods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1938
Gladys Suck
The first one—half mile of Coconut Palm Drive, west of Prince—
ton, Florida is typical of rural life in the Redland District in
that all types of families live there., the poorest, the middle
class, the realthieet, and the foreigners.
There, the children gather to play on the road after school
and on holidays. They skate, play ball, tag, chase each other,
and fight. When a car passe e by, they scatter like so many chick—
ens on both sides of the road. The coral rock formation of the
soil makes it impossible for them to play in the yards and fields
as the jagged rooks not only tear feet and shoes to pieces but
great damage is done if one happens to fall.
In the center of these childish activities and back from the
road is the Burns headquarters. Large and unpainted, framed by
the dark green of mango, citrus and guava trees, the old house is
occupied only by 1111a Burns and her daughter Leona, with her
three children. Ho -lever, the Burns have a large family connection
widely scattered, ivq,o meet at this hone on the slightest pretext.
This house is typical of the older houses in the new section
"c_Y536

--- Page Break ---

.2. FOLKLORE, kLORIDA
Hrs. A. W. Woods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1938
Gladys Buck
which wab a wilderness not more than forty years ago. It is high
off the ground and has high walls and a steep shingle roof. A
long rambling porch covers two sides and is decorated by an orna.
mental balustrade.
"Come on back here," called Mrs. Burns, when I knocked, "I'm
busy." I went -through the dining room which has the large shiny
oak table pushed back to the wall. The straight back oak chairs
have oretonile pillows, there is an electric ice box and the floor
is e tirely covered with a brownish linoleum.
This room is used for a parlor also, the original parlor hav—
ing been utilized for an extra bed room, since part of the house
has been rented as an apartment. The "parlor bedroom" is curtain—
ed off with thick dark green material which hangs on a sagging
string.
Hext I passed through a bright cheerful bedroom. The walls
and woodwork were painted cream and gay cretonne is hung at the
windows. The dresser is draped with the same pattern of cretonne
and two double beds are neatly made with lovely tufted spreads.
In the neat and orderly kitchen, Ella is grating meddie,"
the root of a plant which looks like the elephant ear.
She is a
tall, grey haired old woman wearing a longer than average print

--- Page Break ---

-3.,
dress —1th long sleeves.
FOLKLORE, FLO"IDA
Mrs. W.W.Woods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1938
Gladys Buck
All of this family are tall and dark, with high cheek bones,
shoring their Indian descent.
English and Scotch mixed."
Ella says that they are Nindian,
Ella's face is happy and healthy looking and radiates the
good spirit found in this home. Her voice is high and peculiar
to the families from the British West Indies who have settled in
this section. The F.'s are all long and drawn out. V's are pro—
rounce0
011a calls every one "Honey" pronounced with an exceedingly
long ad says "Ayeeee" ;:hen slit, does not understand ;flat is
being said.
"Plaintains, borse banana, is a good dish. Te boil them with
meat -then they are still green or silos them and fr7 them like
potato chips in grease. You don't know what you miss by not bay.
hg them," Fala explains as she grates away on the eddie.
The eddie roots are shredded and mixed as "a potato pone,"
with cocoanut, spices, eggs, sugar and butter. When baked, it
is a most unappetizinr:;, dish to look at but one mouthful will make
one forget the appearance for it is most delicious despite its

--- Page Break ---

-4
greyish, gluey look.
FOLKLORE, FLORIDA
Mrs. W.W.Woods
Princeton, Fla,
Dec. 30, 1938
Gladys auok
1.r. Burns come over here from Grand Cayman a year before I
did," she continues, as her hands fly up and down with the grat—
ing. "1 -le cleared a grass piece and built a house for us before
we come over." Here I interrupted to find out what a "grass
piece" is and was told that in the country they left there was not
much rass and when one found a piece of land with grass growing
on it, taat was taken for a home and farming.
The grass piece and home are still on the old Naranja road.
Helen, one of the daug:Iters, and her four children oocupy it. The
house is tall, bib:h off he grouad, unPainted and back from the
road.
Mat for you want to know about us?" asks E11a, "'7e' re just
plain folks." I explained to 'ler that plain folks was That I
wanted to know about. She seemed to be satisfied with this 7,nd
started telling; me about her children.
ntAhel, Lilly and Haien was born over there and Leona and
Villiam (dilliam) was born here. Zthel married an advertising man
from New York and lives up there. She has three children. Lilly
married a lumberman in Kiaml and lives there, she has five child—
ren. delen married a fruit packer and left him after she had

--- Page Break ---

.5. FOLKLORE, FLORIDA
Mrs. W.W.Woods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1938
Gladys Buck
four ohildren. She lives in the old house. Villiam married a
girl from Now York and lives in Miami. They have twin children.
Leona larried a boy from the North. Sho left him because he would
not support her and the three children. She had to live at home
most of. the time 30 she decided to stay here.
w7apa -orked at adything he could find to do -hen he first
come ,)ver here, he grubbed palmetto roots, worked at the saw min,
helpc?1 ,71th the grove plantillg and any thing that come to hand. WO
nevLr 1:12 more than re needed but, at the same time, we always
had plenty. ny, I can remember when I wac a kid that all the
other kids thought re were rich. But back in those days it didn't
take much to be classed as well-to-do. In fact, it's getting back
to tht stage now," says Leona, who operates a little dress spore
in Princeton. ,FIT rent into this store with the ilea of beiT)g in.
depondert and akin it :;osFible to ::et a1onE 7ithout the pension
77hieh 1?,1,71a receiv,1-7. Co it has cost no every week since I
have been o7en, but
rrn't afford to give up until the season is
over, at least. I rent the store and work on a percentage basis
and some weeks my rent cannot be paid with my part of the profit."
Every one of us five children finished the eighth grade ex-
cept ,Alliam L.TIJ he only went to the sixth. We all married young
and didn't realize how much a good education would mean to us until

--- Page Break ---

-8
it was too late. I at my kids to get
an
FOLKLORE, FLORIDA
Mts. W.W.lbods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1938
Gladys Buck
education if nothing
else,H Leona states as she washes dishes and helps her mother with
the kitchen.
,11a is much bbloved by all of her children and grandchildren
as aell as the many other relatives and in—laws. At Ohristmas and
all °the.. holidays, in fact for no reason at all, they meet and
bring baskets of food to enjoy the day together: The many young—
sters play in harmony while the adults gat together in large and
small groups, some serious and some gay.
At these family reunions the adults always have wine or beer
to drink though none of them have ever been known to get drunk.
They dance, and lila dances as much as the younger ones, nor does
she ever lack for a partner ?or s'le is a good dancer and always
ke a lz.11 c,,;,3ing in a L;r0-17),
i'hen any of he children bring a bottle of -sine or whiskey
home, 1la hides it and takes a nip when she wishes for "cramps.'
She just laughs when asked why she hides the bottle.
All of these people have their share of worlz to do and not
one o: them would•thinit of leavtng theirs for another to do. EMI
to 4;-.:,e 1:nallest child has his part which is done on time nnd
with—
out any argument.

--- Page Break ---

POLKLORM, FLOTIIDA
Mrs. W.W.Woods
Prinoeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1938
.11alys Iluok
Lecna does the f,rnily w7ash.4 Thin has been her work for
years and now that she has the store she does it after she closes
store, rlolnetilnes =rking until far into the night. In the small
kite7leA, the washing machine is dragged from behind the door and
the 'rater is pumped from the old hand pump and heated on an oil
stove. The whole family Gathers around the table and, above the
:lois:: of the achine, shout and laugh at one another. The laundry
is :nada ready to hang and is left for the children to hang before
seilool tile next morning.
I asked 'Lila hether she thought a car or home more important.
she replie, "so7letimes you have to have a oar ,o get ob.
ough 7roney to buy a home ana then again if you have a car you will
spend all of your money chasing around in it and will never have
enough money to buy a home.
"I don't knom -77'.hat it ,ould be like not to have a home,* she
cont4nue. "I have rl-rays hn.d one. I think a home is much more
importa;t.“ Leona added, 08o do I." Then, Milo rent on to tell
of her husband homesteading the old place in Naranjo. He bought
this house, 7here they no' live, during the boom, "Fail ten then.
sL7ad dollar for it, too. 7ere eora inter/lintel to tell me
that he pc.L1 cash for it.
"I believe in folks paying for what they get. Believe met I

--- Page Break ---

.8.
don't -,a7,t to
hr.
FOLKLORE, FLORIDA
Mrs. W.W.Woods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec, 30, 1.038
GILMys aqck
snA.41ed to n bunch of debt' ell life. 77 -en I
get in extra ri_oller, I like to be able to spend it for a stow or
some other amusement and not feel like I am stealing it,
"I think one of the most dishonest things a person can do is
to spend money for foolishness when they owe it to some one who has
trusted them.
don't have any thing charged but our groceries and, -Then
t Ty check, I pay that bill and if there is any thing left
over I spend it for other necessities but I pay that bill first,"
Leona tells me, while her mother -vent to the door to talk .71th the
woman who has an apartment in the back of the house. "le get five
do/lrm a. month out of that apartment and that takes care of the
light bill, 2thel lends mama a check every moath, and 7ith what
get from the county, we have about sixty dollars a month. :lama,
the three kt, 114 I live on that and we live about as well as
most folks. le dres1 as well as the average and eat just shout
rhat we want.
"That dat you say about eating?" asked Ella as she returned
to the kitchen.' "I was saying that we have all we want to eat and
do have well balanoei meals altho we do not spend a lot of time
studying charts,* replied Leona.

--- Page Break ---

-9—
tqes
FOLKLORE, FLORID:.
Mrs. W.W.Woodm
Princeton, Fla,
Deo. 30, 17;33
Glady a 3ack
all of as :,LiVG well balanoed aeals exeet mama and she
will cook ything she caa get her halids on." Leona and her mother
both laughed heartily at this and said that taey had forgotten
that every thing they said might be held against them. "dell, its
the truth, any way, so let it go," Zinished Leona.
hen I gets
hungry aor anythkag, a eat ia," said IZia, "I slon't care whether
the book says to eat it or not. I gat along pretty good. ay
health is etter than mast peoplele of w,v age. fee, I eat ahat I
want and ask no questions about it." Every one laughed as they
always do 'alien Ella startfatalkilg. She gets a great kick out of
lie.
*We ta7te things as they come and don't complain. To, we
aren't camaletely satisfied aith 7hat we have but I guess we don't
have strong feelings about thiaga like aome folks. The alain ob.
jeotion to our life is that we dealt have enough money to do with
as we please. If ge had a hundred dollars a month we could get
along fine --a hundred and fifty would be a lot better.
"4e haven't alwaya been poor like re are now. 3ut, even now,
we have more than many p ople who have plenty of money. We have
our health, we love one anothea, and get along good together.
That's aometing that money oan't buy. There's no disgrace in
our family and we all serve the Lord altho we are not narrow minded

--- Page Break ---

-10
FOLKLORE, FLORIDA
Mrs, T.W.Woods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1q3C
Gladys ialck
aanl have a gooal tifae." Lac. finishe ].ab -:5 jdet
for a iaomeat, then ;.;11a epoke.
"Leona is talking about keeping the store open on Sunday but
I toll her I was going to leave if she started that. -;;e have to
have 1-er at home sonetime and net only that, the Lore filn't inpa
tenff for us to work on Sunday. If we can't make a living in six
days, one more day a!on't help much."
"Don't worry mama, that was Henry's idea to begin alth and I
am not keen about it any way." Leona told her.
Henry is Leona's sweetheart. They have been "going together"
afor five years and are planning to get married as soon as he aas
a ob that rill support them. "Something permanent," says Leona.
44e are gettinb along alright now on the thirty I get Peon'
the L!oulaL. ilat's not aueh but it aill ctcp if
get maried and
I am aot Ealing to ta:e any c'aanceo. I aoule like to be varried
and have a home of my aim and I do love Henry but I am not going
to take any chances. If It were only Henry and I, I woula aot
hesitate uut I have thece ohildroa a they have to be fel, clothed,
and eJucated. I am not zoing to jlanp•out of the frying i)an into
the fir,
%wary has a job now selling insurance, and I believe he is

--- Page Break ---

FOLKLORE, FLORIDA
Mts. W.N.qoods
Princeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1P36
Glad yr Duck
6:oing to e.ake Loed
44.
-40
are both hoping to be able to get
earried poons" Leona stopec:1 speaking for a emmenei.- end then look
c3. 111J eould -not be happy, anyway, if we always had
to be nruee,;line fox reet and food and clothieg. We wtuld soon be
unhappy. '7.e, ee enn't ,et rlarrted emtil enry is able
to eueeert propexly."
ee etarted telin about politics and discovered that the
whole 11r,e family ts Democratic. *7e may plit our vote sometimes
but, on the whole, e:e stick to our party," Leona said, and Lila
announce that ehc only voted if he felt like it.
N7y. one little vote don't make no diffirence nohoe. Lilly,
rn Thtc ho livec tn iai, 'omit think its the 7omants ,olsoe
to vote. he -1 T le -ex -1117 leave votirz alone, but ne are strong
Denocrete just the eeele," seLl 7111a.
Jut like we are Deeleorats, we are ethodints," Leona de—
clared. "'!ie are religious and have our principals but we are not
narro-.. ee may not aleays live up to our etandards but, at least,
we have them. Religion does not influence my morale at all but
believe that it does etamals. 7c)Ir about it, mama?"
te the ehene all fiehing on qunday, if thetts
ht yeu ete?n,1 Ella replied. "I can remember when all my kids

--- Page Break ---

-12—
woulf
ve th ught it ,-,,rong
4-
k kr,
FOLICLORAil FLOICIDA
Mrs. %%Woods
irinoeton, Fla.
Dec. 30, 1958
Glaays i3uck
go to shows on Sunday, but they
arc ta:Ang on all of the new fa,:...gled ideas that most folks seem
to 1v lese days and I reckon its all right for them, but not
for mc. I just 7.7ouldn't feel right about it. I don't mind the
kids O. ving. a ood time at any'in g they -4alit to do as long as
1.%'s leoan,t.4
I ao:ted .74111a how ,ilueh money they spent foi'doctor and hospi—
tal bills, and she seeod to think it a good joke.
,e don't spend no money like dat, honey. We doctor's our
own self unless there's something bad 7Tong 4th us and that fon't
1-7,:v2er ver; often. Leona had a goiter, and she spent Quite a bit
for tlasatorts for that a couple of years ago. I had to take
soy., 12 tions not lonL 42o for coLstipation, but I takes min—
eral oil so:- siv7 I T ootered -'it h it any more. Vill
ir tie JJctor in our family. %e is alTsayE runnink; to
the :',oci-or bout 7:oet7lini::: and then he comes home and preaches to
e c.11s him Doc 1/Hods. (7oods) Oat 'As fat healthy thing
it J;7, aLrs tiLere's so'r.ething wrong ,lith him."
":c haven't had any hospital bills at all. Did you know that
I was a practicel =Se and that I helped with all of the babies
and moz,t all tie sickness when I first come down here? Old Doctor

--- Page Break ---

serve a t -fold
tc E,L.' then
batile firt-;7t.
We 4,2.-; 1-:ve nf
4-oo 4
tie av all
suded,
FOLICLORE‘ FLORIDA
Mrs. W.W.Woods
Priuceton, Ila.
Deo. 30, 1938
Glalys 2uck
Tower ve Z3J bct to do ::itut zAie back in fao early
When asked about work, she said that work had never hurt any
one ir her family an Leona spoke, "'lama is the only one in the
family who ever has done very much work. She is always busy, from
morning to night. That makes the rest of us sound laity but we are
not. _e all work E-aldo our work well but none o! us work as much
as mama
...throo:n facilities ar,' also a joke to the 3ixrns. They say
they live ",.:vutside plu that tliey 7anke t1eir77,71 trAts
"They ,Ire for 7ashin L clothe snd ,tnk-
-e L.,.ve to ,rsL7, ten in every night, -:;11.= 'later
out. The Tirls zet sni
--irte..4, the b07z, tare their turn.
1-luch,or t ur bath timc. t3y the
J'-te::itchen floor is read7 to -lop and
":,e follow about the sile routine all yoar long," I Tas told
when -e question 'NUS acted. "I guess life wculd be mighty mono-
tonous Zor us if we couldn't enjoy one another."
You Helen didn't seem to be enjoying one another last

--- Page Break ---

FOLKLORE, FLO71I',,A
Mn. /.1.11018
2roeton,
T:erl. 30, 1938
[-1-t sa4l. "Oh, voll, fUi1g is
if
st a-oner of breain,..; .:loAotony,"
.,,ost of the ti:11e."
T...3^1,10010
1.1vv..1,1
al17*Xer,
Illa s&id -proudly, "I have never :lad to ask the churrLh or any
one else to help me but I TM think that the church should help the
needy it's possible for their to lo so. I go to church every
Sunday if I am 1,ot 7:10!: or ,Inless there ts sone-other zood reason
for ::c)t
711,
a ,7tIrlen in her 16.,:ok yard planted in "pumpkins and
cassava. "La.;t year, 7-e a couple _of Tater melons thst
turn out 7E.,11 but t7-,ey -'ere lure fine lookirj," Tlla toll me.
Pelt
lollt ore:?tt fr those Taternelons," 1:::u.ghed Leona,
.Entc' they -olildn't like it.
here do re i;o to court?" said Leona surprisedly. "Why ye
court -.;ut -i-Jiller2s All 07ex the house ad all over the country.
At our )1.rter's houses, uncles houses, at the picture shows, skat-
t.";L XiAgs golf links, dances or just anywhere we happen to be
when it suits our huizo;.- to court."
Reference-:
Intervievs anC personal observation.