TICURAL WRITIRes FROM?
Miami, Mari da
4,2* words
TM* MAXIM FAMILY
Month 1 11039
Pool Anlihmtlfekine
403 Lie aim street
Iliani_. _Florida
Our Mpairos. "'AAA?.
awls& I. inrnoll.
Vitro
The modest, stole° bumslmrseeupiod by the Masking family
has a well kept hedge of unrolls and profusion of varifteolosed
tropleal shrubbery growing in the small front yard Whom the
house and the street. These aro no sidewalks but a short, paved
walk leads straight to the house, mhioh in built on the front of
lam lot; there is a small cottage in the rear.
The house is one story, of Spanish type arohliooturo and
pointed cream solos with swoon trimmings* Throe stone stops load
up to the stoop; there is no front porch. On each eldo of the
stoop are stone urns in which largo ferns grow in abundanees
wrought iron lanterns hang on either side of the front door. A
short roof painted grant is just over the door.
The Haskins family consists of Paul, the husband; nosh,
the wife; and tmo children, Mordook and &molls.
As I knock on the screen door, I hoar a radio playing loudly
ia the living room. A clean out bluogyesed youth is sitting in a
rocker near the radio. He comps to the dour.
26029

--- Page Break ---

4.31.
*Is Mrs. Haskins at home?" I ask.
"Not she lenut, but I'm **eons her bask within a short
time. won't you sous in and wait?* he replies pleasantly, of fir.
ing a chair. *I knew you're one of my sister's neighbors for I've
seen you before, even the we haven't been introdused. I'. her
sister Mickey from Key West."
I tried to hid* if surprise for snot adult I thought Mickey
a bey as she is 'Nally clothed in bore khaki colored pants, white
shirt, and boy's shoes. Her dark hall is out in mannish style,
combed straight book off the forehead, and she is very husky and
healthy looking.
'Are you visiting Hrs. Haskins?' I ask.
*Yes, I *vest to stay for the sunmere* she replies, turning
down the radio. ITIknow„ every minute I'm in the house, I keep
that radio goini when I get up in the moaning, first this' I do
is turn it on. If I come in late at night, I turn it an until the
10041 stations sign offs then get an out of town station. I have
to ploy it low the, upsoose Paul oust get his sleep, bat I like
the gol.ioto thug played full blast when I'm alone in the house.*
The living soon in which we are sitting extends actress the
front of the house. To the left side of the roost is an open Mew
place shish shoo signs of recent use. Nob, the fize.plsos is a
lags overstuffed sing chair and welshing ottouan upholstered in

--- Page Break ---

dark brown sloth, Beside the *hair is a small table containing
aagaslmos„ among 'bitch are copies of Good Sousokooping and Unlearn,
a photographie publieation. A floor lamp with a whit* shado
stands next to the chair. The radio is on a small table in the
Gomm. A throo-pleoe white and brown painted gifter living roem
sot is also in this end of the room and wafter a long eentor
table which stands lengthwise. On it are a vase filled with out
flavors and photographs of the (Andrea. At the other end of the
room is another taxes -plow Askew living room set painted green;
A
the cushions are eovorod with orotonne. An ompty bird coo stalk
in the far corner. A worn rug is on the floor in the stator of
the room. The floor around the rug is *tabula with light varnish.
Litho not luxuriously furnished, the room is orderly and Glean.
Cream oolorod ruffled curtains and fringed shaft, hang at tho
windows. Tho stippled walls are decorated in harmonious colors.
On the loll in a gold frame is a ploturo of an old churgh
has been worked out in hand embroidery.
*MO was made many years ago by Paul's mother,' soya Miekwf.
!Me troasuros it above all else. Como on in and I'll Chow you the
Seven Dwarfs. There's no tollin when sis'll get back, she said she
wouldn't stay long but she is goin to stop in and sec, apreousim.
when those two Key west Oonohe get together, they don't knew when
to stop talkin.,
I follow Mickey thru a betroomshiah loads off the right side

--- Page Break ---

of the living roosh The furnishings eonsist of a double iron bed
painted green, a dresses and chair painted the same gooier. The
bed is neatly made and 'covered with a green tufted spread. A eon.
was= rug whish looks quite neirio is on the floor. To the left
of the bedroom a door leads into the bathroom, lhieb4 like all the
other rooms, is spotlessly clean. The walls are painted white
with blue trimmings; the old fashioned tub is of whits parotidn!
in front of the lavatory there is a throw rug; blue and white
linoleum °avers the floor. A built.in medielne chest with mirror
A
is above the lavatory. The bathroom is not oonneeted with any
rooms but the one bedroom".
Adjoining the bedroom is a sleeping poreh, shaded with wooden
awnings, This porsh extends slew across the bask of the bones.
One end is furnished with a double iron bed painted as. oolor„
and an iron sot. The neatly made, beds are moored with crisp whits
spreads, A *angels= rug is on the floor at this end of the posdh.
Wear the bed is a small table on Whit& stands a boudoir lamp, a
chest of drawers painted *ream color and chair to mateh stand aw.
WWI a wall. A mirror hangs over the sheet. At the ether end of
the porch are a Maytag washing machine, smother empty bird sage,
and a small table cluttered with two electric to and various ode,
and ends. A clothespin bag hangs on the wall and a large, round
basket filled with freshly washed clothes is on the floor. A fold.
lug ironlag.board stands against the wall. The varnished floor is
bare at this and of the poseh4

--- Page Break ---

•R301,0 bores the inerease we'vs had in the family,' says
Mickey pointing to a large box on the floor in vhioh lay a beau".
tiful long haired white .dog with brain spots. Seven little pop.
piss are seraMbling around her, all trying to nurso at the same
time, All of them are white with spots except one, and it is
bleak.
sMurdook ehristenod than the *even Dwarfs this is *Lady!'
Mickey pots the mother dog who is wearing a wattled expression be.
0821110 Ylokey plots up one of ber puppies and hands it to us.
'You can have one if you like, but it would have to be a girl
dog 'clause she only had two males and they're alreadymmdsedol
says nobly as she puts the puppy balk in the bon.
isle is very fend of birds, but she has no lack with them.
no had the prettiest pair of grey love birds before she moved
hero. Ous of thou got silk and dial; it wasnot long before the
other one died, too, from grid, I reckon.'
From this end of the porch, a door leads into a smell kitchen.
The furnishings consist of a 5wburner oil stove with a stationary
oven at the right side, a kerosene motor heater, a good sloped wood«
on tea -box painted *bites a white wooden Utah** cabinet, built-in
dish closet, white porcelain kitchen tablo and tie chairs. The
floor is covered with brown and white cheeked linoliun. Orisp whits
curtains hang at too small windows over the sink. A large aluminum

--- Page Break ---

pot containing blank beans is on the stove.
ssesse eookin Paul's favorite dish today, trrijolise noire
son Avells Ude that's yellow rise and black beans, se seek
perk °hops in the moo,* says Slaw as she stirs the beans.
Adjoining the kitchen is a small dining roash A round oak
table with six chairs to matob4 an old fashioned sidemboard with
mirror, and a small set of shelves aontaining hviasambras comprise
the furnishings. The sidewboard t s filled with shining glassware
A
and a vase of out novae is in the °antes of the lase covered
table. Thor* are tic winless with curtains that match those. in
the living room.
As ws rosoentor the living room a tan Ohsvrolet Wan stops
in front of the house.
'There's sis now,' says Miaow as Mrs. Haskins comas up the
walk.
miapdh Haskisa doss not look her 3S yews, Small is stators,
she has a very nest appsaraneil her !relay laundered print dress
is booming and harmonises with her tan silk holm and brava leelher
pumps. Her blask hair has &boyish bob and the seers *its pearl
earrings. Wha has sharp, brow eyes. Unlike her sister, she is'
very thin.
WhO koops gain all day long Ii011 bet shots in and out of
that ear 2$ times a day," says Nisk07.

--- Page Break ---

40741111,
erhsaght 10d never got away from Alias,' says Mispah as she
waters the living room. *Neve you been waitin longs Mrs. *men?
be with you in just a few minutars.0 She busies herself about
the kitchen, telling Miaow what to do to the preparation of lunsh.
*Paul comes home to lunch; be likes good hearty meals and be
needs thorn too, for he works very hardoo says Moab as she somas
bask into the living soon and sits in the rocker. ins has been a
ear repairer for the Florida Mast Closet for the past 14 years. His
hours are from seven to tour every day with an hour for lunoh. Of
course, he might be *ailed on the job at any hour of the night if
nooessary and he has to be ready to go at a moment's notleo in ease
of accident. If he 'ants a visitation, he has to take it without per
and that's not so good. He has taken only ens in all the years hots
worked for the railroad. I think he mods a post and I'm goin to
make him take two seeks off this summer. The nen who are paid
monthly get two wefts off with pay, but those who are paid soot'.
monthly get none unless they take it without pay. '3ut he has
steady work all year 'round and that's something to be thankful
for. He could get passos on the railroad but he seldom takes ado.
vantage of this, for most all our folks live in toy most and if we
take a trip we go there in our oar.
"Paul gets paid pretty wen for his work and we make our ineeme
porn our moods. He lets as handle the money. I try to spend it
wisely. and put by what I °an for a rainy day. I reckon we spend toe

--- Page Break ---

mush on food. fir groeasy bills run high, for I 000k throe good
meals a day and all of sir Zanily have good healthy eMstitilia
'when we were first worried, Paul worked for a wholesale
house into west and we could hardly manage on the salary he
made there He was dissatisfied so he studied at night, thru a
correspondence course, and learned this trades.•train meohanie.
Then he oompleted the course, he had so trouble in gettin a job
with the railroad. He worked in Key west until about three years
ego, when be was transferred to the shops at tort Lauderdale, and
later to Miami. At first, I didn't like it here at all, but now
I'm gettin used to it. I didn't oars much for Lauderdale either,
altho we have made a lot of friends there. We rented this house
beeause it's near the shops and too, the children don't have very
far to go to school.
'Paul is an exceptionally good man,' a,real home body. He
spends very little time or money on the outside and beis extremely
fond of ohildrea. If held have his way, I'd have a baby evert'
year. Now I like Waldron, too, but I believe that people with a
limited inoome shouldn't have large families. Oonsiderin our ism
Nome, I think two children are suffieient•
*Paul and I agree that school training is very important and
we hope to be able to give the children a bettor eduoation them
either of us have. 4e want murdoek to study electrical engineer.
bag and go to college if possible. Oelia is so young, we haven't

--- Page Break ---

sox.
made plans for her as yet. 1 believe in lettin a ehild choose
his own trade 07 profession. Of course, the parents should *Mir
suggestions toward their ohoosin but I belie,' it is a mistake for
then to insist on a oertain course of study for which their child
has no proterenee. Now, it Celia shove an inclination to be step.
dious, /Ill do all within 1ny power to send her to college When the
tine comes.
"I went thru the 10th grads, in school and could have gone
higher but I didn't like school. Paul wont thin the 12th grades
re were both born and raised in Key West. Some people think the
city would really grow and amount to something it they could bury
about 10 people down there, who control wreathing. I find livIn
in Miami higher than Key rftet. For instance, is paid only IMO a
month rent there, whereas we PAY $30 rent him ws rented this
house for one year, furnished, altho some of the furniture is mine.
"1hile we livid in Key Vest we got along nicely without a oar
but when Paul was transferred to Lauderdale we bought this Ohevroi.
let. It would be hard to get along without a oar hire. Unitizes,
he takes it In the morning, or if I want the oar, I keep it and
call for him at four o'clock. I like to visit around a little in
the afternoons or, go to tom. He said he'd walk hone to lunsh to.
day, the weather is so pleasant.
'le hope, some day, to own a home of our ows4 possibly in Koy
West that is if they ever build the railroad back and Paul can

--- Page Break ---

4.110.
ever got transfewred down there again. I just love to 'piddle'
around with a flower garden. U I'd have my way I'd alive keell,
a bouquet of freshly out flowers in every roost. To me, it gives a
cheerful, homey atmosphere. There is very little room for a garu
den here ft,' we have no book yard to speak of. The space between
the two houses is used for clothes lines. In Key Nest, Hurdook
and I kept a lovely noisy garden and did all the work ourselves,
"I an thankful to say we have good health so we spend very
little money for doctors and medicines. Oelialid have 'homing
cough last fall 'and the oough lasted so long I teak her to Dr.-
Nusus. Hs said one of her lungs ves Wetted, and advised me to
put her to bed for a month. He preseribed eoitmliwer oil osmium
and she got along just fine. She wee six years old last November
and began school this sid.ters semester.
"Hers's "Jurdook coming home for lunch, is everything ready,
Bicker" she calls to the kitchen.
"Bring 'es on sip, everything's 0. K. I set a plate for Prs.
Burnell, too,' replies nicker.
lurdook is a fine healthy looking boy, taller and more robust
than the average boy of thirteen. Blonds haired and blue.eyed, he
is neatly dressed in light blue shirt and dark trousers. 341 is
well mannered and after a few words, he walks into the kitchen.
"Paul gets off at 12130, so Nurdosk eats and goes on bask is

--- Page Break ---

-1140
pohool. I keep goin all day long. I get up at quarter of six and
cook a hearty breakfaat for Paul. After he leaves, its time to
get the children up for school. Mickey likes to sleep late in the
morning. I take Celia to school then I tidy up the rooms and plan
my marketing, whidh I do later in the morning. 9inoe I bought the
washing machine, I do all the lailndry at home. I used to send the
clothes out to the wet wash, but I like this ever Co much better.
The clothes smell no sweet and fresh when I take them off the line
...different than when they come beak from the laundry.
*Here's Paul eosin up the street nowt* she exclaim*.
Paul Haskins looks older than his 35 years. He is tall and
well built and his thin black hair is gray at the temples. He has
a rather prominent nose, large brown eyes and is fairly good looks.
ing. Xs is wearing khaki colored shirt and trousers that are nest
and clean, As he enters the room, he smiles pleasantly. Genial
and ettraotiva, he makes one feel welcome the minute he speaks.
mot company I see, that's fine,' he says to his wife as he
kisses her. *Howie the world treatin yuh, boners
*Paul, gra• Surnell is goin to write about us if we ars will.'
in its for a book or somethint4 says Mine&
A/ell, well, that's fine but there's nothln specially intim.
estin about me, :ust a plain everyday workman but you're welcome
to write us up if you care to; now when it oomss io this little wlie

--- Page Break ---

-law
of mine, then you've really got somethin to write about,' ea he
gives her a hug.
"Paul's an awful jollier, don't mind him,* says his ,it. in
oonfusion.
mown let's eat, I'm so hungry I could eat the side of a
house," says Paul. nom@ try my wire' 000kin, Urs. Burnell, she's
the beet little cook in the 4orld."
milll stay right here in the living room until you follts fju
Wit* 1 reply.
ol you won't either, there's nolhin makes us as happy as
havin company and especially at meal time. If I had my way I would
keep the house filled with company all the time," hs says, leading
me into the dining room as Mickey puts sn immense platter of yell*,
ries awl bleak beans on the table. Paul prowled* to serve this in
large helpings.
011know, it's the funniest thing, these new tangled ideas peo-
ple have about ooskin and diet. When we lived in Lauderdale, or
wife went to a cookin school and she tried some of the recipes she
learned there but none of us liked 'em,* says Paul.
'Ye all like the Cuban style sookin bests* says 427)104 n
have to pack lunch fox Celia beoaute she won't eat the things 11100
serve in the sohool oafetexiat. realise that we need vegetables

--- Page Break ---

.13.
in our diet, but there's no use for me to cook 'em for no one
here will eat 'em.
"41514 1 say cook things your own style and don't bothers,.
bout thee* new ideas," says Paul. *Were strong and hsalthi, are.
net wet loll, that's sufficient proof that your cookin is alright."
"Do you have a hobby of any kind, and whet amusements do you
enjoy most?" I ask Paul.
frAy hobby is takin snapshots," he answers promptly. "There's
nothin gives me a greater kick than to go out in the country and
take pictures of the family, or scenery that's specially pretty.
bought a net Iastman lately and it's a honey. You must see some of
the pictures before you leave.
"I enjoy ball games of all kinds, too, espeeially a good foot.
ball game. My wife and kiddies enjoy the movies, but I don't care
about picture shows at all. If 1 could afford it, I'd follow up
the races, too. Occasionally, we go to the dog raw's, but I don't
do muoh bettin for r don't have money to lose. I think Bingo is
fascinating, too.
"Politics?" says Paul. "Now, that's a subplot I'd hate to
get started on. Ws. both Democrats all the way baok„ and I hope
to see that party =Aiwa to govern the country. Oertainly can't
say much for the iloover Administration. Our local politics have
no disgusted, I must admit 4, trouble is so many people take no

--- Page Break ---

.14.6
interest but I believe they are wakin up to feats now. We never
fail to vqto and I do a good deal of readin in order to keep up
rith politics in general.
'Reckon my tine's up, honey, you needn't bother to take se
bask. The weather is so nice I'll walk those telptaeeks. You OMR
*all for ne at four Waled* says Paul as he kisses his wife
good.bye.
Jiapah's eyes sparkle as she watches him walk down the Ot240016
It is easily seen that this horns is one of %opiness and oontenim
sent, the husband regarding the love of his wife and family es one
of the most precious things in life.
'If I still had my dad, I'd feel like riff happiness was about
complete,' =Sem Mispahe 11, mother and three sisters live in Noy
West and a married brother lives in Tampa. 40' sister After is
goin to stay with us for awhile. She helps as a whole lot around
the house and Paul is happy to have her sty/ 4 4 he thinks I work
too hard. Rook= you think it strange that Mickey drosses like
she loos, tut she just hates Girls' clothes. Of °course, when she
wont to school she had to wear then but the minute she'd got hone,
she'd change again. Oboes always wanted to he a boy, even when
she was last kid. I've told her she'll have to *tart wearin
clothes naw she runt* go on that way bush longer. She never
liked school either and loft just before she came to Aiami.
The tsagis way my lad's -life waded is sossthing I've nova

--- Page Break ---

.15..
Lotten over, lie, woo sheriff of Monroe County and was servin his
'tenth year when he was killed acoidently, at the ago of' 56. He
ollned a yacht named 13arbara *WO He took some friends on a trip
to 3ird Key, leavin them on the key to bunt bird eggs. Later in
the lay he made the trip back to get them. Of course, the yacht
was a:whored in deep water and he wanted to go ashore himself and
get his friends. A high wind oame up, and the boat oapsised. Dad
was an expert swimmer but he didn't stand a ethanee in the rough
water, lie was dashed against a large rook and the high wares hurl..
A
ed the boat against his body, crudhin his chest. it ens just sinful
t never will get over it, I loved him so much, He had a won,.
derful personality And everyone liked him.
'It was the strangest thing how a boy about 12 years old, eame
to our house and asked for shelter. He said his name was Jack
Owens and that he had no home nor parents and would work for a U.
in if we'd take him in. My dad just couldn't refuse, and he semi.
sented to give his a trial. The boy proved himself to be very ea,.
isfactory but we never knew anything about his former life. A man
came to dal and wanted to give him 130 towards Jack's expenses, but
he refused to take it. He said, however, that he would deposit it
in the bank in the boy's name, which he did. My folks always thought
that the juvenile judge know somethin about Jack's background.
the very next lay after my dad was killed, Jack disappeared and
we've never heard a word from him since. lolve always felt that he
disappeared so abruptly beoause he thought he would not be allowed

--- Page Break ---

.16.
to remain on account of somethin in his pant life, lie left a note
for mother thankin her for all she had dons for him and stating
that she is to have the money deposited in the bank for him. !IOUs
thought a lot of him and to this lay, has never touched the money,
always hopin that some day she will hoax from Jack. /t worries as
a lot, too. I'd like to know What's become of him.
num long as we oan all stay well and Paul has steady work. I
feel that we have much to be thankful for. Woes I'm what you'd
call an optimist for I never let little things lorry me. It dee,.
Alt do any good toward solving a problem*
"I'm afraid we are not very religious.' Paul is Catholic, but
he down,* attend ebureb. He says that if a person lives the right
kind of life they donut mood to be =nein to obureh all the time
—.that most of these ardent ahuroh.goors who pretend to be so row
ligious„ just go to chusoh to shoe off their clothes* I an Meths.
hit and go to ohuroh only occasionally. We were married Protee.
%ant but our marriage was blessed by the Catholic Priest. That
was in 1924. Mardook was born in Xey Aosta and christened Hetho.
diet, but Celia wax ohristenid Catholic,. gime we've lived in
Annie we haven't gone to ohurth very often, I'm ashamed to oar.
Oelta goes to %ado Sobeel at the Holy Orose lipiseopel Churoh with
her little girl friend, and I like for her to go. Rove Pennington
has such a nice way with the children, he just sins then over. I
realise that all of us should go to church regular, but atter Paul

--- Page Break ---

works hard all look, it ems like he enjoys rolamin on avatar norn..
inv. After dinner we usually take a long aids in the country/ or
go to tho Wash.
"Thra tho week we have our dinner at 5130 and somotimae we go
for a rid* after that. Is always come holm by SOO Mesas* the
children have to stair. Somotinas we visit friends or have than
visit us, If we stay at hone, Paul likos to sit in his easy chair
by the firiplaso. 04111a loves to put his slippers on for his shilo
he smokes his pipe and roads. Re usad to sit up and road books
until two and the o'clock in the morning. His eyes are tad now
and I wish he would get some glasses! By tho time ha reads ths
evening paper and listens to Oolia's shatter, hi usually falls aw
sloop in his chair while I put her to bad. I au on the go all day,
and by the time 10 o'clock cones, Ion ready to go to bed wisolf.
'It must be two o'clock, hors's Oelia oonin home frost school,'
says Mlspah.
Odin is a shabby littlo girl with brosn oyes and straight,
bleak hair like her nothoes. Awl full of pep, and forever chat
toping, she jumps into her mother"s lap and hugs her.
"Didn't see tho oar at sample so I came hoop all by wfsolf,"
she says. "I want sonsthin to eat, she scrambles down again and
rums into the kitchen.
*Ion afraid Cilia's rather spoiled,' says Mispab4 shaking bar

--- Page Break ---

-18m
head, *Paul says sho's a 'live vivo' and that Just deserites hos
postopotly. Were atrial with Murdock, hat that littlo ono gots ap.
way with aardor, Shale has daddy's pit'
As I PrePaso to take loan, I thaak mispah for liverything.
'Don't mention it, and (Joao bask soon, haarto she says as I
depart.