January 1, 1939
Evelio And= (On)
1412 Tenth Avenue
Mar City
Tampa, Florida
(Cigar box skater)
stets= Kennedy, triter.
PlaWS0 AND Z3TFtELLA.
In another hour it will be 1939. After an all.day drive from
Zacksaavill., Witte and I have arrived an the outskirts of Tampa's
Latin settlement, Irks City. A fat red.fased man in overalls in
standing in front eta bar, and I ask him to direct no to tho address
of uifees relatives. lie boa imbibed too &ear to even understand
my ailestions, no I thank Ms and drive on.
We an a dog...oe track, which has drawn a largo crowd. Tao young
Nigro non are standing on the curbing, and I ask them for directions.
Although well -intoxicated, they sem amnions to please and the directions
they offer are soberant.
Ndith is inpatient: Ohs wants to reach her slater's house in time
to celebrate the New Tear with her. We soon locate the how., a dilap-
idated, unpainted two.story from building, divided into raw apartments.
A barrage of Spaaish greets Edith WI Mho goon up to the parch, and
there is much budging. I an introduced amid vigorous handshaking. Childret
gather in from* of the house, and in 3panishs INees an Amorioan. Re sure
looks it, too. Ton can tell by looking at him." Estrella and her hus-
band Pedro °reside...nod and have four °Midwest, two girls and two
boy's.
We are alherod into the front roam, whioh is tarnished with a
modern dresser, and an old iron bed neatly covered and topped with a
2606

--- Page Break ---

befeathered oaruival doll. There is a calendar meads well, and a
framed oard proclaims
npttokhorver ver the upp 4oth now
SUM heart ic casdi, to have it Os
3, Wei IWO% qFb t"4.
so vow it WANK 1140 loar 1.0Pw
There are no chairs, so we sit on the bed. Ve,are not invited
to maid up after our trip.
"Tau 'sill have to forgive our poor house," MP VAtreila. *10
use to have a nice place and nine fersiture but it all got basted up.
That ono dresser is the only
It just node we sick. Pedro
was visiting 4th a friend.
thing we saved out of the Wile house.
was at work, the kids in sdhool, and
then I oeme hose it um all termed. All
oar clothes and everything sas goes and that's My we haven't got hard-
ly anything now. Zeman eh° owned the house built it back again because
he had immune*, but we didn't have none booms* it cost too moh."
"I know pou use to have the nicest things," says &litho wdemati.
fa sloe Meets and tablecloths, everything handmade end .just beautifUl.
then I saw this house and furniture I couldn't believe it me Mere yen
lived.*
"I know. Vie UAO to have nice things I had been making and saving
for a longtime After the fire Pedro went to his boss at the oiger
box fostoryand told his how it was with us and asked him if he could
barrow som money. MA boss asked hies how mph and Pedro asked for
twenty dollars and his boss game it to him. That was nice of Mita'
right."

--- Page Break ---

4.3.•
*I worked for hiss long time,* says Pedro, *he know I pay his
back all right. .:You lent some wins? You like a sweet wine? I go
get some wine, we celebrate the New Year.*
HA leaps *shin bicycle and disappears down the street. Estrella
hesitantly puts on Edith's new fur coat. ahe stands before the dresser
and turns at various angles, ruining her fingers slowly through the
fur. "/t sure is softs* she says, "I don't guess I'm ever going to have
no no coat like this one. It seems his ehat you haven't gat is ghat
you always went,*
*You don't need a heavy cast in Tama,* replies Edith, "It's too
mum to wear a coat like that her.."
"I sure sould like to go to Key at to see mama,* says Fatrella
haven't seen moms in nine years. You know, uhen I'm working I can't
leave, and when I'm not workine; I haven't got any money to go, so you see
I don't get to see her. How is MW now? I guess she is getting fatter
than ever. I sent her a right pretty little lamp, like you set an the
table, for Christmas. I wish I could have sent her something more better.*
"I think that was a aloe present,* Edith says. *We wanted to send
her a Beautyrest ttrees for Christmas, but we just couldn't afford it,
Beautyrests eost thirty -sine dollars and ninety-five cents; we can get
than for wholesale price, about twenty-five dollars, but we still can't
afford it this year. tb sent her three sheets instead. I know she
needs sheets bad. I sure wish we could have sent her the mattrose,
cause you know a oma is getting old and it would be nice if she could have
a good mattress to sleep on. /he Beautyrest oompany advertises *Spend
one.third of your life like a millionaire.* It's too late for mes& to

--- Page Break ---

411414111
do that, but wiah dhe could at least sleep good for ono, in her lifs
before she dies. I know it mould poke her feel a lot better.
ninon needs teeth and glossae but it doesn't look like Wagon ever save
up enough to get either one. lhe trios all her beet to save enough to
COt then, but nomething alynys °mos up and day boo to spond the moomp...
&nobody gets °lake or Anoheles work stops, or something always happens.
to has to oat soup end everything aoft. Ulama allays liked to eat good
foot!, too. And abs liked to rend all the tine, but now she can't reed
oo abo liatens to the noye from Cuba over the radio. They bay. good
nova frau Who; they say everything by saying double neanine and e. -j
body understands but the government met atop the broadoasta booms*
they say overythingdemble waning."
"My kids would all like to live in nor Nest, bemuse of the headwall*
says :AtrolLa. "In nor City there in no place for them to play and have
a good time."
ofbu said that right," sego one of the boys. "ellen Tom in 70y lest
rya to the bee& ovary day. nut I like the schools here bettor; I have
all good Umbers except one.sboye ihe sore is touch4 She tolla us: 'If
you don't set down rill knock you out of your seat** Cho's tough all
right. I have to yalk tyslve bilooks to school everyday, but Pause
to it by now.'
Dodro returns, laving aloft en unoleheled quart bottle half filled
Ilth mine. "Come book to the kitchen," he seys,
lb peas through the oecond roon, thich in furnishod with tmo iron
bode, a straight chair without a back, and sore onlondare. Clothes Sr.

--- Page Break ---

hung an a cord behind the door. The kitchen is equipped with a
three -burner oil stove, two unpainted wooden tables, and four chairs.
Pedro pours the sine into glasses and drinks what is left flan
the bottle. "You like some coffee" he asks. Ws nod. The strong
black Cuban coffee is soon mad*, and served in glasses with evaporated
milk. A long loaf of ctiban bread is broken into pieces mad buttered.
"You see I keep the bread basket up over the stove,' Pedro elatlains.
"I throve leetle bits bread over in there and then some weeks when
coney is snares we take out those stale breads and wane then lathe oven.
--This is good fresh bread; I got it this afternoons*
ons will have to hurry," says nstrella. *Ina fewsinutes it will
be twelve o'clock and we hafta go out in the street to see the New Tear in."
we finish hmrwiedly and go out to the porch. The greatest noise
lamed* by the Children who fill the street; some of them shout in Wog.
lish, Spanish, Italian, or in all three languages. Several firecrackers
"Zest a few more minutes,* says Pedro.
Two blocks down the street the upper balconies of the Italian
Club are visible and the ordhestrn can be heard playing °Chan and Ameri-
san dame MAO* Suddenly we hear five shots, and ass a pelisse= sil-
houetted an the balcony of the Italian Club. He reloads his revolver
and fires five more times into the sky.
"It's l9598" shouts a neighbor. 3veryone yells and laughs; only
the children do not sound famed and artificial. They rase about the
street, shooting a few firecrackers. There is a barrage of Abot-gue fire

--- Page Break ---

from several aectorre„ ate soon the shots spatter beak upon the roofs.
The amll boys in front of the house are trying to &use the lead out
of WOO Shotuun shells, so they can tire the caps. mall
soreflv. Mw fingers split by tin explodinc fireernekere run6 down
the street wailina•
ten cent TIMM candle is ale:harped from tle house TbLi xt dome;
tho heiaht of the .lisplay, it is admired b;,, everyone. It as mt long
bofore the) limited cupply of firecrackers t exhausted. .:strella Dane
to her :311114re:1, nually she civets up °ailing, (rid ohtzes then in the
street. She catches each one, holds then aqui:mi.% while she kisses
then on Vie cheek,
elktdenly it is oppressivel:t quiet. Pedro moms. w:lells I iNnee
thatto al. It's 1939 and it don't feel me different to me."
trey:* yells a noidthor in 13pratish„ Sce.lione (the ftmeral
hono next du) to acme pick up the dead cool*
441114 dead ono** caeca Pedro•
01933,"
fra: Rai* laughs 2odzo„ "You got to tixtt time all rijtt. I bit
ritt on to that ono,"
"Itiuld you lila to rio somewhere tonight?* sake :Ltrtre.
slrrt oaf° of a om sort—Newtthare let on dance and buy drinks.
*You don't rasa a jook joint, do you?" asins. "Socking is
for uniArried pone"
*Matta at you think.," roplies .7edro, "-plenty married swum Poly.
"I knrst they do, but that's gt)i

--- Page Break ---

°Toe don't know "ghat looking means. looking areas baying a
good ties anywhere, drinking and dewing. We go somewhere nice. We
leave the kids with sr brother. He don't mind to stay with theta;
we give Mae a lietle aline and he be alright."
"Tms put on your tie," Estre.U.a tells Pedro. H e doesn't seem to
like the idea, but goes into the lamer bedroom and emerges with a tie
under the oilier of his polo shirt.
*Pedro, etantt you wear a shirt tonight? That tie don't look good
without a real shirti• Pedro grambles as be puts on a heavily starehed
white shirt.
One of the children appears with Pedro's brother, who is rubbing
his eyes sleepily,
*noes is my brother, Thomas,* says Pedro.
"I'm very pleased to meet you*" says Moses, "We ins meeting
you to cams yesterday or earlier today.'
"Madre de Diosto suddenly *ries r.strella. "Pre torn my *taskings
on this rough old furniture.the only pair I've cot decent that I can
war out* I just bought them for Christmas. Oh, this makes me slaki
My only pair: I just paid sixty -mine seats for them and nom they are
torn and lame uhen I can buy me another pair. Well, no use
to cry over it. But it makes ne feel. terrible; I minted to take such
good oare of them so they would last me a lonz time but now just look
at them, ruined,"
oval, you all better get started," says lgions• *I wish I could
go et th you, bat I guess soembody bas to stay with these kids. Maybe
I can go with you before you leave. Don't forget to send one of the

--- Page Break ---

kids nfter some wins.*
7tle send one at the ehildren for the wine; he Gan get the empty
bottle half filled again for fifteen mints. Our driving off attracts
the attention of everyone in sight.
"*.re to?* alk.
'we san drive up and down seven th Avenue." says Natrona. *That
is the only lighted -up street in Thor City Shire there is amythinE, to SINN
I guess you will want to drive over to l'Ellapa.*
I assure her that we would prefer to stay in nor city, in we
drive along Seventh Avenue. Marrow, and with a street oar track down
the minter, it is well lighted with neon signs. Met of the ihope have
Italian and 3panigh names, The Woo, barrooms, and restaurants are
thronged vith people, many of them dressed in tunedos and maniac gm's.
The restaurants are being .heavily patromised by Amerleans frau Tampa.
ISdet's drive by the Cuban Club and the 4penigh Club,* suggests
Estrella. *They haven't seen t There are big dames at all the axes
tonight; Me Years is the time or the best dames.*
Both the Wham and Spanish Clubs, impressive structures of some
erehiteetural beauty, are surrounded by :mem parked automobiles.
*I have male a model of the Cuban Oldb," says Pedro. "I siGoe it
to you when we go home. Tou blow. I lee make it for pretty; no have
nothine else to do so r make a loodel of the elub. After I paint it, if
it look good I teke it and put it in the club.*
*The °Oen OlUb kes a social medicine Society that has its ova
Climb, nurses, doctors, everything," says Setrella. *It sure is a
big help to poor people like us, They have individual and twill

--- Page Break ---

policies; we have a family palsy for sixty cents a week. Not lOnc age
I had to have an operation and went to the aisle aed had it, and it
didn't met me a canto whenever mnybody in the really gets Disk and needs
medicine or a doctor, the insurance pays for it."
we drive back to seventh Avenue, park the ear, and walk along the
sidewalk looking at the Whops.
"Nverything is moh obeaper here than it is in Zaoksonville,"
remarks Rdith. "Dresses, Shoes, hats, everything..everything costs
ivies this much in Jacksonville.*
*Grub is plenty Cheap in Thor City, too," sera Pedro.
"I feed my family of six, on five or six dollars a week, 0.14"
Almost every shop has a poster in itmeindoe, labeled: AID THA
saVT151 710TIlis or MAOIST ADORUSsION. Ilbe posters show a small ehild
crying amid ruins, and bombing planes flying overhead.
"Tbor City has seat plenty money and clothes and stuff to spain,"
?giro mays. "The Cubans, Spaniards, and Italians here are all feel
sorry for the Spanish people. Sven the Italians boo Mossolini eh=
he comes on the.sereen. The Italians here sure hates Anesolini all
right."
se pass a gagman* stand, which includes in its display a number of
measines printed in Spanish. aerie is OM 'eosins, Mug" laid: has
on its cover a groop of Spanish women and children with their arms up.
stretched in horror, *bile overhead are pictured bombers with the
Italian faalat inaigAiaand the Rani swastika. The cover is labeled,
in Spanimb, "Glory to Sod in the Highest' and Pease on italtn 110 UMW MR
of Coed 1111." I open the *over and see that bient is published by

--- Page Break ---

40.
the University of Lehorillialeo Oltn lineente Lambardo Toledamty
editor.
We speed several hours Ina small oafs. eating an sandwiehes
and adming,MAtswith Romrloo mad Gooapeola. There is a jook-
organ (alekelodien). Which offers a seleetion of eight swords of
Cubm music, acd teo mord' of Anerleen amide. There are maples
present who dames the Ameba gala and again. Isabella and Pedro
donee the *melba also. Apparently they, are both enjoying themmelvee.
'Ws dead to go out and have a good time with your husband,*
says Estrella. like to go to Ganoes and all that but Pedro don't
take ne mmoh. I don't oare so much about Showroom, kids is mire
snug about then, and they go two or three times every week. The
kids can as. two shows for ten Gents.'
It is five -thirty lathe morning when,* finally decide to go
home.
'This is the latest I ever stayed out in llfel" Estrella
emelalms.
with and are offered the front 'oma; the four children are
all sleeping in embed lathe bask rams, and Zstralla and Pedro will
sleep in the other bed.
*You vont some coffee before you go to sleep," asks ?ear°.
"If I drink eoffee now I won't be able to sleep." I reply.
"Mane a littly swallow coffee before you ep to bed make you
sleep pod. Ouhen eoffee don't keep you awake like Amerlean coffee."
I insist that I do not want soffee. I try to pull down the
paper shades over the windows, but they will not roil. There is
nothing to do but turn out the lifOts and mdress in the dark.

--- Page Break ---

"Are you vans enough?" calls astrella from the other room.
07.5,0 Mdith replies, mwe are sleeping in aar robes."
14y Pedro don't like for me to sear too much clothes to bed,"
laughs ::strolia. rua don't like Mr= to wear pajamas; he likes
gowns. Suva CuI have no sea appeal in pajamas. You should see
me lathe ones I'vu got ounce."
D. nest morning we are awakened when a nen and two young
girls, about eighteen and twenty, walk in the front door without
knocking. They all any "Pardon us,' and walk harriedly through
the room. The _girls blush and look towards the wall.
After dressing, we go into the kitchen. We sash our tapes
and brush our teeth at the sink on the beak port, ditch serves
both downstairs apartments.
"You bettor look out for the ceiling over the sink," warns
Sstrolla. "The sink upstairs isn't eonneeted to no pipe, and the
water drains through that hole and falls doun into the sink dove here.
Sometimes if you aren't °areal it (tomes down on top of ye:Lublin
you are not espeeting it and ruins your clothes."
"They shoulda tor. this house down long asp," Pedro says, as
be prepares the coffee for breakfast. "That floor leaks 'verities
they scrub upstairs, too. The Jana (toilet) for these apartments
is on the bask port% but it doesn't have any water oonneeted to it
eo we have to pour tinter in it to flu& it. The non who owns this
hones is a deputy sheriff. TI. lives upstairs and raises hell all
the time about living in such a slum house and says he is SWAG
to tear it down and build a garage apartment but he never does. Re

--- Page Break ---

La sassy end ndbody likes him. Tait bemuse he's a dainty
sheriff he thinks Mos a big shot, I guess."
"Pedro was tsim to paint the wills," says .71strella. ean
bey °beep paint and paint it himself. He painted the other house we
lived in all by himself. nets a good painter. Dot the landlxid
keeps saying he is liming to tear the house dove, so Pedro doesn't
paint it. He's been saying he mut gonna tear it dote for three
years and he hasn't done it yet.
*Thor City is the slum section where only very poor people live.
Mb live in Thor City beams* we Gantt afford to live nowhere Wis..
like everybody who lives in 'Thor City. They don't like it but it is
all they oen do without more money. There are lots of aloe, quiet
apartments in Hyde Park over in Tampa, tut they are expeosive."
*se pay a dollar and a quarter a week rent on this pla0e. We
don't have no bath or toilet or nothing like that. I don't mind
bathing in a tin tub cause I been use to it all my life. You should
seen no &hen I went to visit Alicia in kLiesi. She has a beautiful
bathrooms, tile all around and everything; a perfect Johnny and
mirror and everything just perfeet. I got in the shower and stayed
all day most. I sung and song in the shower and turned on the radio
and had the best tine."
**hat time is it?" I ask, after we finish a breakfast of
grapefruit, ()arrow, and bread.
"That (cook is fast," ;Citron& &wars. *Idy husband, he
always sets it fast so I will got up -in tine to get the children
off to school. I mks up and the clock says seven —thirty so I go

--- Page Break ---

book to sleep and then wake up end the °lock says eight, so 1 gay
*let no get up frOm here so the Children won't be late' and it is
really only seven -thirty."
"IrmnIr slamming ehen get up I fix one lestle imailas of coffee
and drink it, then go to the pamaderie for hot Caen breads and mime
back and have IWO coffee with bread, then go to my work," Pedro says.
01 went to Show you the model of the onban Olub I make," he con-
tinues, and loos into a closet on the beak porch. He returns with a
wetly made model, several feet high and long. °I just make this frma
lay mind; I no have nothing to go by. See inside* the ballroom upstairs,
and the place for the orchestra. make it with paper and shellac I get
from the factory. I'm golw3 to paint it white--/ wiehI had better
oelloPhane for the windows.
"•,-1,at you writing dew" Estrella asks no as I begin to take notes
openly.
explain something of the life history program of the Moral Writers'
PrOjfilete
"I don't know why you vent to write stories abcmt us, but don't put
our real nese in it. Call me 'Estrella; like that name better than any.
I almoye did want people to call me restrella. Its a pretty name.
can say forswear is that I've done my duty by Mole Saw -P-
I had four kids before was twenty years old. That was !network. But
them days is none forever. It's nice to have kids if you can afford to
take care of this end give this some of the things they need. You know
I want to try ard give wry kids an edueation. If I can dolhat I die
happy to tom that they got eduoated„ becamee without no education you

--- Page Break ---

oan't make a living these days. It's hard to maks a living even if
you have gat an education, nush loss witiout one.
°MY kids all hate to go to school, except Carmenp.dhe has a very
good head and makes good grades in everything. Tha other kids has gccd
beads too, but they sure hate school. They rather play with marbles,
I guess, Dut if I can just gat them all educated through the twelfth
grade I will got satisfied."
"You out to read scma good books yourself," says jiith4
husband is mmking ma read educational books.*
"I J now I ou4ht to," admits :strella, "bat I liks to road something
with a little life azd lame to it. I read love, romance, silk stocking,
and detective madazines. It scams like I Nat can't get my mind on
education books, and I can't understand than anyway. In Ely West when
I went to school they didn't teach us enough Aaglist words to read those
kind of books. I know it's good to read good books."
"nhat'a the story of your life?" I ask iledro.
'It ain't much of a story,' he replies, latmother is fiftymeour
and I'm thirty-six, and the baby of twelve kids. ny nothor died when I
as four years old. You know it's bad for kids not to have no mother;
that's the most worst thin. That's why I didn't got no education; but
I wan reed a 'esti() and write my pane.
"An old Negro messy raisod my fuoil.Y. She sure as good to us. She
is vary old and sick now and me and my brother have to pay for her to go
to the hospital all the time.
"I tall you eamethIng what happen in xey West before I moved to
Tampa. didn't have nothing to do so I got a Job in a restaurant

--- Page Break ---

-15-
hitg dish for sit dollar a week. Then one day the cook leave town
without telling &IOW end the restaurant open up one scram without
no cook. I to/1 the munaapr I cook pretty good so he tell me go ahead
try. I maTce the pancake for breakfast; make two for him to try first.
I put a leetle melted butter on each ono and a square of =elle butter
on too of the top pancake and he like mood.
'I cook plenty black bean with rice and lotea good things that
day and alla customers ttey like good and the manager he say I can be
cook elle time. ask him how much be pay me to cook and be say ten
dollar a week. 'Tell, that day X had workod froi six -thirty in to
morning to ton that night so I tell him I no cook for tan dollar but
if he mart to eive me fifteen dollar a 'peek thatte all rie,hL. 7o tell
moat() finish warking that week till he could get another cook, so the
next day lust didn't come back.
*Tms work in a cigar box factom We make forty thousand boxes
a day. The A-rle dress thom booms up mighty pretty. 2he itctory sure
is u r1txi, too. I kinda hats to start work because I know I'll have
to keep on workini; steady until this time next year. 3s work stet:4
all the this. The box factory don't close COM like tLfe cigar factories
cause we always got orders coming in from all over the country.
"Lots of cigar factories closes down after Christmas over year
because them is not very good boatmen right after Christi. At This
box factory they give everVoody *to worked there ten dollar fibr
ahrietwes present. That was nice. I wantod to buy mw kids ewe clothes
with it but I thought maybe I.better save it so incase there is sickness
or sonethinr, like that haNet r have a leetle scriathinr.

--- Page Break ---

-16
'There is about tante hundred people workiug in the boa festory
se I guess that makes about three thousand dollar they give avow to us
for Ohristwas. But they oan afford it; that cOmoany Ls waking
fur tha owners. 04mmulnent men iv an investigation loet year to see
howinuch than owners are makin4L. dad they published has much it wos in
the le sae one of Uhem papers over L.ers, end we read Where the
plant director is tua;:inz eighteen thousand dollar a year. LAS, me was
plenty da,41n sore."
"Some fellers day quo artakiw; all that sway evarY sear and welarking
like ,aves for twelve dollar a weekie You know than government fellers
investii:uting oan learn anything.
been working fifteen years lathe box mill. Fifteen years is a
lone time. 'le make the leetle thin paperwood out of cedar to wrap the
good edgers In; that keeps them fres drying, and keeps out tho Lugo too.
Oe leernee bow to leaks that And of wood -paper. 11,4 ang: my helper is
the only OPUS the meager trusts eith loading those oars to Lo into
the /tome. le vas thee/Lee &loved him tho way to do it. Ike vanted
to put that paper.thin mod right in the steam but wo told him it ought
to havu a heavy wood two or three Lnehee thick: on top to :tiou,p it from
warpin nid burning. 30 he told us to do an try it Inel when be
seen how good it oame out, to pretty, he told us to go ahead and alleys
do it that way.
.jurin6 the Ohristmes rush they triad to put another Seiler to
loading those ears for the steon, mud the nu didn't blow how to do it
end the ear burnt up, all bleak. Mine thee cars oast plenty noesy too.
The Chop nen had the oar Gleaned up and didn't say swathing about it or

--- Page Break ---

the men who did it would lose his job.
*There loons NOgromenimrk there, seventy.five years old. He
been working in that basin'ss for sore than fifty.five years. He is the
only colored ma working taws and he has another colored man to help help.
A lot of croakers fraa out in the 11600d0 10 working there. 01, 0006 pt
no union started cause them crackers will cork for anything. Themwild
cracker people have their ova aarden; they work for *lough to buy a
little bacon ands sack of flour and they is satisfied.*
W6 all go out maths front porch; there are no chairs, some perch
on the railing.
Two young COban menaerose the street are busily repairing flat
tires man old modal Wok, the top at vhish has been cut off so the
rear can be used as a truck. Pedro says that eadh moraine, it has at
least two flat tires, which most be fined before they drive to the city
dump heap where they salvage wrap iron* The iron is then takaato Port
Tampa and sold for a mall sma per pound.
"1 think they ship all that iron to Zupan,* says Pedro* *People
been digging iron out of that junk heap for years, and it looks like it
never Oives out.*
An aged and *rippled Negro nen stops in front of a house on the
corner, where a group, of children, inoludine Negroes, smlattoes, Spaniards,
Cabana, and 11.1 ions, are 'Wind nimblea in the black dirt of the front
yard. 4-‘ light-a/dinned ahild runs into the house, and returns with a
very bleak Regrow:am, tho gives the crippled man several colas. No
removeslais hat, bokie his heed, t%anka her, and shuffles on down the
street.

--- Page Break ---

.c7You. may not believe it," says hatralla, *but that 'aogra amat is
that white -looking kies mothers Thaw are al/ oalored peopla in that
house —they aro very nage people, too. Zoos kids all bAriQ egosa
tine iiIering together during the hau.sys. %Ls crolamd klas, OWL
the uhite-looking mos, have to ga to separate schools.
'I try to help anybody all I can. Xi I can treat aurbody nice
I try all ny best to trout tam all right. You know, I oonaldar myself
tna 194u0 as everrbody• .aioryboay in this world in •af GVUTS0
sons :aeopie has more mow taan others but that don't maio no di:annum)
*1004 that riot people think they are better than poor .i.eopita,-
A young Cuban nan, about tuwaty.two years old, stops by I.o see
fvdros 1e sits on tLe porab railing, and glucose t1routp. a pala-papsr
penpala entitleu:
Li
rAe2s
Aad Lawn be Oply Ons wief oc :301244
%0 'W04011 it tome with a laugh,
donn believe thora Is any tact* it it," he says. '4aoate craw
nan gave it to ue faul t11417i kgiketi i: 1 w4u1u saattributo° a dime. I
Vold hitt °Loll no.' "Aaal people go all x.ound alvitg away thaa booim
and aolleatik; fivu <mats bore atd taut:mita 1driO and it all WWILMI up.
I don't bellow i that kind o oode bat I 4o bulieve that aaara is soar
thing graator that us that aobady knows arwthint): about.
in aaanitlial the panOlat, I sae Inlaid* Una wear tao folloaing:
or auah imam -tame are taata fasts that Judas RutbartorCla speeah at
loyal Labe:Al:Au. London, naland, vas try-am:Mod by raio boa:awe
direot lino aim, to othar auditorium in oorJ that 50 altiaa it Zia

--- Page Break ---

-19.
Unitad Litatos, Oamadas Great Britain, mustralia, Now Zwealand, and
';lasaania, we, ull todothar, nor° than 150,000 ameahled in ools,..
volution. Jiaultaueoulay it was Oroadsast by u transoontinsztal obaia
o IIC Unite4 :-,tatas mdio stations. It is now putiLiodad twit millions
Mat, AL,Y
'fwd, rizh4lj tzoa tiro raots, aad bo Lastin61y bonofitad,"
10,000,000 copies
IA= MIER
Sihio and Traat Sooieti
International Bible Stadent Asemiation
Brooklyn, 214.
Itianah aftioas:
Lotdon, Buenos _Arun, Zaronto, Strathriald, CA.* rota,
Berne. Shanghai, and other cities.
*I just got in off or a boat from Ontia," emtimes the young nen.
*40 hadn't no sooner got off the boat *hen the international Somme
Union officers tried to get us** are stimbers to sign an agreement that
if there was any fighting with the National Maritime Union us woad
pitch in and help the MU. It seems that not low ago the NMU sent a
bendh of gays to an lBU meeting to bring up some controversial issues.
theimeeting ended in a fremoforwall„ end the bell weal wreaked.
*Then when the mu coiled emitting, the ISU went to their meting
and wreaked their hail: they broke all the windows and chairs and every-
thing. Than the organiser explained all that to us lima we got off the
boot, we eailed a meeting to talk it oier. se decided to tall him,
'ball no, we muldn't fight,* Ifty should we get Mad up in mah
foallihness? Lots of than boys in the IMU is good friends to us, so
My Shdeld we fijils wittithan just because a few union leaders wont
us to fight'

--- Page Break ---

7hen, T fellows I!h iU1 tht.t nit -down st-le7-7 or. the 1.1. MBA
'last ;ear rTte weinc; J.9 -Air feet funtor then their heeds, 1tri.thyT, aint
no ebilrlts 171:,,e.rpra, ttrft. Lhey rhotatta lawyer to at the shies
Gout -rots bears) they Iltertotl Pitrthin:-•,,, Ton see, the 7110, a rail
oontraet with the United !7t,r.ttes novernestnt, r,rte the contrri-ot Pro14, we..
thin:7 j:1147114t the mil not holm'. brad MI Vr-fro tn two week:a• ilrit'a 'kr
all .tf-rl lytirts mtelt -.k.7.trutt t %LIAM, beCEDX(10 the 8t"11:0 1'110A cr the
mil. 'IT tly:fy haft jttet coiled off the otrils r tirri.p1,e 1vriN before
thono two !moll; worn u7, ervl then stortod tho strike all 117M" P.'L rine the
union won't?! havn 11311 ont. ltit non all 421(rt boys hlve lost their jobs
1.7.11 cftritt r7ot bee:. henr4, that the eite7)mly offered to tnmet of
V'eri thorr would renter firms the union, b,.it only 0. few or fri did."
11171,7 omplexionod 1.r1 posses the house; atm has an attractive
film) !ma TIonrs; Imes.
nronetteg° eels 7474 d r 0
LI not r womm," tv:131a Ina 70t-ail.c. is net !Tarried;
she 7noe with ear: odzr. Ihe r!o itn,n;r7oAy far fifty certe--losa than
ttvit--4'or r !.!trel l!frten't rhe ;r13't erre dt2nnio"
Af dmet kraw,* mowers ?ftto,
*T.0 elic, a
rTO, her nothor 1t nban; T don't „lacer her offil MO -the_ ?mown leo
her father L3. ftto loolceliker 7ue /*an I 1:13e61 there vrql Anse
VI 3 fnnoo."
"k* cla-mgo placcJ vita her," :Atrell% sayo with con
'lotion. :to with four
la -het I an toore bettor off then she
13, 7.3,1ro was nast7 to ne .ror twMlo.lat new !if43, realize:3 th-A what he

--- Page Break ---

41.
has at boom is more bettor than what he eon IVA on the streets."
"I:strella is plenty jealous," Pedro loughs. "I like warn with
?lardy jealous end temper so I can tame eLdots,"
I have enjoyed vir visit to Thor City so latoh that I begin to
oonsiderr the possibility of remaining lower than I had planned.. I sok
Neb.° if it would inconvenianoe him greatly for us to delay our depar-
ture for several days.
"You have a good tiams?“ he atiks, 'O.K. yuu stay as long ea yoa
want, lbu know we don't. 71evo meh but we do the best we sun for you
to be happy as long as you oan stay,'
So 7edro and I drive to the telegraph officio to wire my State
director of wy &ones of plans. Pedro watches, we earefully as I draft
the telegram, Ss is amazed Alan I send it oolleot, and wall: out without
Paiiatc. "imam scatter” he ask*. not& no have to Ay for telegram!
Wm, how you do that?"
then we return to the house, With has seen her other sister, Aassia,
oho he invited us to aperd the next tow days with her. We paak our Wattle
assisted by Pedro, 7artre13.a, and the children.
"Tou come by to Gee us every day atiLlo you are here," says zetoolla,
widh you would stay with us, but We Ulm; .4fanda hes more mate
As we leave, Pedro says,. 0/ hope you find lots of stuff to write
good stories. I tell& you sooethings if you tell wrerYbodi you is a
Pederal "triter that sake them thin% you is a salsa or something and
they no talk to you; if you just may you area '11:P, millet writer tbarr
will talk to you such more better,*