-80 Sanford Sta
St•Augustins0P1. A
February 21, 193u
Alberta Johnson
THE MAWS (A SHRIMPER'S FAMILY)
Walking down Sanford Street named for the Sanford who many years
ago was ,a land.oundr'In this sootiest)! town) I ease to a corner
lot outlined by a hedge of bright Turk's Osps the approadk to the
house, a ooncrete walk, was bordered by small &ribs; painted boxes
containing both foliage and flowering giants brightened the long
front perah and lest a friendly atmosphere to the ham.
In response te!wy ring, Mrs.Olsen appeared, and, with a smile of
recognition, held bpen the screen door and asked me to some in.
Upon explaining the reason for my call, she said 'my husband is
home now and I an washing diehes„ so ogee right out to the kitchen.'
As entered the room she introdueed me to MosOlsen, who instantly
arose and extended his hand in greeting.
Explaining my call to him. he expressed his willingness to talk
of his long jeers as a fisheenan and shrimper, but was prevented
by lack of time as he was in a hurry to return to the boatyard
where he is repairing or robidaftughis shrimp beat, reeeatly
damaged and almost wrecked by the stormy minds and tides along
the coast. The hull was salvaged, but extensive and expensive
repairs were necessary to put the boat back into quick serviee,
and ovary minute of daylight is being utilised In the repair
mirk, as the unexpected expense, the loss of time, and the present
scarcity of shrimp la local waters is causing Mr.Olson to hasten
the work and seek other waters. He plans to leave at the end of
the week for Mew Orleans, and later, perhaps go to Galveston.
26055

--- Page Break ---

Replying to my inquiry about the migration of the shrimp fleet,
Mrs.01sen said "You know our best season here is in the winter
and teats from other sections also make their winter headquarters
here, but now the season is just about over and the shrimp are
getting scarce, so it won't be long until the boats (or some of
them) will seek other fishing grounds: *etching the migration
of the shrimp, the boats move along the coast, both Atlantic and
Gull', depending on the seasons and the "catch".
Brunswick, Georgia, and Beautort,SocVW1 Carolina are the two
points on the south Atlantic closet most generally used as head-
quarters for the flailing foot during the summer monthsvand on
Biloxi,Miss.,
the Gulf coast, Morgan City,Letdsianap and Galveston, Texas.
"This time Mr.Olsen is starting out for the Gulf mast, but in
other years when hoof's soon as the season ends here, fishes off
the Atlantis mast, we just pack up the things absolutely nece-
ssary, said Mrs.01sen„ put them in the car, and when we readh
Bauneetek or Beaufort, we rent rooms or a small house and live
as simply as possible. Of *ours*, we who have children of
sdhool age always return home in the early fall in time for the
opening of school, so that the Children's education will not be
interrupted.'
Curious about the beginning of the shrimp industry here, as we
know it, find that it originated about 1913 in Fernandina,
Florida. St.Augustine,having a harbour well protected and
amply deep for small boats, soon attracted fisherman who grads.
ually built up a lucrative business. Swedes, Italians, Spanish,
and Portugese, and Greeks in the fleet, and also a number of

--- Page Break ---

-3-
negro° helpers ure employed. The narrow San .iebastian River
offers safe andhorage to the many small craft that have their head..
quarters here during the season.
Packing houses were erected, and also a canning factory,where the
shrimp are prepared for the canning process. The completed products
of thiz-J factory are shipped to various sections of the %JUNI States,
and also to foreign markets.
Formerly the fresh shrimp were packed in barrels of ice and shipped
by freight or express, but now most of the shipsensVaxe made in the
refrigerated trucks owned and operated by oeveral local dealerseand
in this manner quick delivery is made directly to the northern markets,
New York City being the main distributing point.
The price on froth shrimp, Wholesale, averages about ten cents per
pound rut in Now Yorks this is with the heads removed before shipping.
One hundred pounds of shrimp,as caught, equal fifty-six pounds with
heads off. The average boat catch for a local six -months season
would average about 260,000 pounds. This is an average for a good
season. Seasons vary from year to year. The equipment is costly,
upkeep of the boats, wages of the crew and general overhead expenses
must be considered.
The local eating places serve shrimp prepared is some form, boned,
in salads, and fried. The /Shrimp fried in ve t.Augustine style"
have won quite a reputation among the visitors, and to meet the
demand of "Please tell us just how this is done and why do they
en
taste so differtly from other places we have visited,"printed recipes
are distributed at the local Chamber of Commerce office.
By this time, Mrs.01sen had about completed her dish-waehing,rinsing
and,polishing of glasses and putting her kitchen in order after the
mid -day meal.
Mrs.Olson, age about forty-two,of medium build, dark complexion,

--- Page Break ---

and with gray eyes; short, dark hair just slightly tinged with
gray; Rad for alert manner gave one the impression of being
interested in her home and surroundings.
Mrs.01sen, I asked, have you alwayd lived in St.Augustine7 She
laughed and said, "I was born right out here an the Staohns River
and have vent practically all my time in2t.Augustine. 4 father
was Gorman (chill), 'kw passed away a long time ago: 'Of course
you could soe; said Mrs.01senonthat Gus is a Suede: he was born in
6wedon but has been, hare since 1920."
Lr.Olsen is tall, Slender, sandy haired, friendly blue eyes, the
blue more pronouncea by ifts his browned and weather roughened face,
showing the results of many yours of exposure to sun and winds.
Mrs.Olssn is the ther of ..two Children by a fortaarnarriagei
The daughter resembles her mother in features and coloring. Hazel
Ruth graduates from high school this term. Since her seventh
year she has had piano instruction (dancing also). Per the past
three years she has been pianist at the Lutheran Church. Sings
(alto) in the high school glee club; She expects to continue with
her music but has no desire to ever teach: her real ambition is to
become a secretary, preferably in the legal profession. Hazel Ruth
has completed her one year course in bookkeeping and is now in her
second year of typing and shorthand.
(DuPont)
The boy, called by his initials nC.A.nxgraduated from high school
last yearoand is now learning the trade of an electrician. lie is
very proud of Ling permitted to assist hn the wiring of the re-
built shri:47 boat. During his high school days, C.A. was a popum.

--- Page Break ---

lar athlete, starring in both football and basketball, and wells.
liked by dais fellow students. C.k.also resembles his mother,
that lelba naa about the same features and complexion.
The Olsen family are all members of the Lutheran Churdhsattending
services regularly, and the younger r-mbers of the family are
interested in the Sunday Zehool, and activities connected with
the church.
Asking about their interest in politics, Mrs,Olswn replied that
they were Lemocrats and voted at election time: interested in
local, civic government, as well as the National Government,
especially al it affects working conditions. Deeply concerned
in the local movement for !arbour improvement, as the shifting
sand bars and channels, and the insufficient depth over the bar
for larger boats, have, for several years made passage 11.n and out
of the barbour dangerous, especially in rate* weather.
As we oat In the kitchen talking, I noticed the shining appear.
ance of the white enameled as range used for cooking the plain,
but plentiful and wholesome meals for her family.
Clean curtains hewg at the kitchen windows, and the painted table
in the center of the room was covered by new, amen patterned oil-
cloth, and over this a clean white cloth was spread. The service
table, which hold the dish pan and drying rack, was also covered
by new oilcloth of thc same pattern, and on the floor was a bright,
tile -patterned linoleum rug. A large white enameled sink was
installed in the pantry, but not in a very uonvenient location for
use in cold weather.

--- Page Break ---

The Olsenes wen their own hem, a plain, comfortable house of
eight rooms. This house was built quite some yours ago, and
electric lights and bathroom facilities have been installed.
After paying rent for a nuMber ot years, and as the fiahing industry
increused, felt that thievincam uould permit the purchase, Jo not
only for economic reasons, Jut for the feeling of seetrity in having
a place of their own, at least they would feel safe from having
rent "jumpecP on them, or having to move at some most inconvenient
time.
Leaving the kitchen, on my way auto I passed the modestly furnished
dining room, apparently not in every day use during the winter
months; A Cluny lace square covered the round dining table; A
buffet mnd matching chairs complete 'the furniRhings of this room.
Tho bedrooms are neatly and confortetly Purn127.10d. The living
roam, with eastern and sesthern exposures, well lighted by the
four windows; music on the opened piano, impressed one as being a
room in frequent use. The furniahings consisted of e few
pictures on the walls, a conservative patterned ruf, on the floor,
comfortable divan and chairs;d° Although these were not of an exe
pensive type, they were of good quality and tastefully arranged.
Most noticeable abaft the kemse wee the impression of order,
cleanliness and comfort.
Friends, music and occasional movies fern thcr recreation, and
"following the fleet" a break in the routine in the life of this
Shrimper's family.

--- Page Break ---

Asking Yrs.Olson if she -item willing to have her nano used in tnis
interview, she replied, "hr, of course it is alright; Xou know
some people seem to think that the ones who shrimp or fish for a
living live in shacks, haven't ang aducation.or oomfortn, aric while
we have to economize and have many thin es to contend with, such as
bad seasons, stormy _weather sometimes, when the boats can't oa
and costly aocidentsouch as happened recently,
"outside", but taken as a whole, we try to live eomfbrtably and give
to the children the sehooline and training that will anabla thao
to take care of themselves later on; well, at least, .we hope they
will desirable citizens.
MreOlsen is very proud of her son and daughter, and spoke so kindly
of II -Olsen: "Gus, she said, is much a good husband, and he loves
the two children as mudh as though they were his own, and they have
all the affection and respect for him due to a father."
4,skin g about her earlier life, Urs.01sen said, "Now let's just
omit that, after all that is a personal matter."