July 7, 1989.
David ititohell,
819 Law mxohange
ear. W. N. Narwiok,
Lawyer,
jaoksenville„ Ploritai
Koss bhopherd, writer.
VILLA ATAXANDRIA and JAOKSONVILLS
IN 1870 1880.
Mr. David Mitchell, the grandson of Alexander Mitehell,
Plerida's first multi -millionaire, and we. Mitchell, who
established Villa Alexandria, (now the Swisher estate) in
South Jacksonville, was interviewed in the offioe of his
life-long friend, mr. William M. Narwiok, lawyer, 319 Law
Ocohange Muilding, Forsyth and Market -its.
Mr. Mitchell is a slight, thin man, of prehably6sixtyo.
four years of age, having been about eight when his grand-
mother first brought him to Jacksonville from milwaukee,
Wisconsin, the city where Alexander Kitchell founded his
vast fortune through the mediums of banking, railroad pro-
motion, stooks, bends and sieuSitios. Acoording to re-
cords on file in the museum of the Uhioage, Milwaukee and
bt. Paul Kailread, in uhioage„ which read he founded and of
which he was krosident, sr. mitchell was one of America's
foremost finanelers.
oavid Mitchell's inheritanee has dwindled until new, he
states, he is supplied with small funds for his slight personal
needs from a trust fund administered by mien it. Barnett, of
the barnett Mational bank. He makes his home at the murbridge
Motel AMIOX, takes his meals at the mational Lunch, and spends
his Lays in the offices of his more prosperous friends of the
26058

--- Page Break ---

David nitehell 2.
1800's, and his evenings at the Jacksonville ionblic 4.1brary.
He is fend of reading and is espeoially interested in history.
Mr. Mitchell was neatly dressed in a white linen suit,
and talked with vim and eagerness, his blue eyes twinkling
as he interspersed his interview with homely philosophy and
m few choice slang expressions, torrent fifty years age.
"I landed here firstin 1883, when I was about eight years
of age, but I do not remember nueh about the prominent people
of Jacksonville of that period. I was sent abroad, went to
school in different pluses, traveled ever the world, and re-
turned permanently to Jaoksonville in 1893. Those days are
not known as tht *goy nineties' and theneuve bonds,' said
David Mitchell.
"The reople A. knew, and with when I most frequont4 as-
sociated then were not the 'nice peeplelbut racetrack follow-
ers, gamblers, ate., and i a* give you chronological data
on cook -fighting, which wasene of my chief interests.
did knew 'don it. Barnett. Oolonel gookrell. and other
oitisene prominent in those days, who have become the 'first
line of defense' for our fair city, as tine has tested their
quality and understanding. But I seem to be living now in a
world of my own, as most of those with when I associated are
new Lead at least Teat many of them.
"Where was I educated? Bay, 1 went to more schools in
more different places than anybody who ever lived in Duval
Vounty. You see, there were lots of thing* A. would rather
do than attend school, so three months was about as long as
I ever lasted at any educational institution. I would either

--- Page Break ---

navid mitehell
be ex-ollod, or would get is utak' that the old lady
(UM ,aexandor mitehell, his grandmother, by *heat° was
roared) would have me brought home. I went to barium
Univ)rsity, to the University of ualifornia at berkeloy, and
to various schools ;.n Washington, v. C."
POLO Popms:
*Through various associations with young men in the north
4114 *est i leaker.ftd to play polo and it was my faverito pas-
time.
"I get other young men interested and Imo USIA to halm
same grout games in a field at AKASOMtOMA a negro settle-
ment adjoining the plot owned by the Uloavoland Fibre faotory
whors the big firs of any 3, 1901, started. It was not thou
in the city limits, and in in *hut is now the west beaver
4strost seetioa.0* Jaoksonville. It was onto' level pleas
of flat sects land, en4 M443 a splendid polo field.
"The young men who used to play were A. D. Doll,
Dell, montgonory uerse, an Anglishman by the name of uur-
taia, and two ether 3nglisho,a E. marry white and a Mr. budlow.
Marry vhite was the first agent for the ulydo bteamehip uino,
an4 visaed in the °Mee on the river.
"Our polo ponies wore net bloodod stook, neither re
they trained. .:ny likely looking pen.;) served our purposst
601114 were small race horses from 'scrub' traoks. Ono of the
best ones I over had I found ono day hitohed to a huokoterso
oart on bridge bireetc We looked like he would be quiok in
turning au4 fast on the f old ideal for polo. I said. to

--- Page Break ---

David Mitehell 4.
his Sywien, owner: '1 wish to buy that Pear; Mow muokt'
'You poy ma fifteens della, and you take' said Dellani00•
I Climbed on the cart and ,ent home with him and the deal
was clesed. I had to most half kill him before 1 broke him
is. "The pony was tough, quick, and ran like lightning.
I ohristened him 'bug' because he darted here and there
with sueh fury. Ho was a delight to ride on the pole
field. But ens day A had a bad spill no, not from mug
whit 410604 117 pole activities, and the horse was sold.
The last time 1 saw old hug was one day out on the
Yornandina road. He wus hitched to a little road -wagon
and was engaged in the business of running away an by
himself, tearing down the road and running like the Devil.
SVidently his polo training had re -assorted itself and Le
was going wpm/hors in a hurry. He was a great gift to pole
in our days, 4.rut was the gamest little horse I over saw. He
just would net quit, no matter how stiff the pampa"
ctoUNTIRT
"The first Jaoksenville 0ountry ',Sub was established
by w. A. Dell, Bien Marnett, Montgomery °arse, and others
of the old pole players in Pairfield whore the A. C. L. R. R.
yards are looated, just this sid of tha municipal Docks, in
1893. It got off to a good start, and everything west yea
well from the beginning. We had a small olubhouss first,
about 40 z 60 feet in extent. We Played golf, and once a
week had field days, when we served tea to the ladies.
Ike firereton as another of those interested. and James
sprstt, whom L have known since I was knee high to a duck.

--- Page Break ---

David Mitebell S.
"Dion Marnett was the star polo player, and also
golfer. We that is, this same orow4 established a
speoial Oelf ulub in eouth Jauksonville in 1896.
"We had an option on the farms in the section neur the
Muni,ipal peeks where the first ueuntl-iulub was established,
which re sold when the A. Q. L. R. H. desired to locate in
that caution, and established the florid& uountry ulub in the
miversido eeotion. The Elerida uountry Ulul was more or less
plebeian always, and later on Mr. MuCklow, the anglish uonsul
hero, mr. Montgomery uerse, and itr. Angus, or the
Timuquana yountry ulub, iritsy, from the beginning.
"One of my boyhood friends hero was Allan Oreelogoesme
of old man Oreeley, superintendent of the old mewnan ;Ares%
Presbyterian waded eohool, who had been sitting on his
stunps waiting for something to happen in Jaaksonville for
many years. Allen was a little older than I was. He used
to ride iitrourd town in a little white may, and i would
look un to him like ho was a little tin god."
cluana ritall6)
"One of the biggest ohioken fights, or Gook fights,
we ever had was in 1904 right out in the middle of what is
now the Avondale residlnos seetion. It was high hammock
groul4d, mud re went out there because it wus ralievia
from tba oity. There was an old eraukor by the nano of
isrowoltio who hud his Nome and a country store out there,
three mils from the ,oaron% house. We fought 4 game of

--- Page Break ---

Dovid nitlhell
6.
seeks fir a fat purse of t thousand dellore to the winner.
On our side was old ran osilson, major O. D. loylesten, an
offloorsof thi 24 uarolina infantry from QkarlostoL, c.,
during the sur between the °totes, ularesukoDety and 1. We
were quite 1.oung. Jerry maith from across the river was aloe
In our crowd. it took Tiluee on the 20th of July.
"In those days there was hardly a vekk wont by that we
did not have a ovik-fight or u horse race, with pretty stiff
stakes and lots of tatting.
3114iNUL 0, CLUB:
"About that time the t$eminele ulub ha4 moved down an
iorsyth ..troet. it was first on the corner of began, op.
oeit the *indoor motel. The members of tLis club were
the ones I use4 to knew the best, 'hoc:ammo every day at noon
you oculd find the sumo bunch there, they wore eld major
Durkoe,(pr. Durkee's father), !sap= 0offin, who was in charge
of some northern land syndicate, with an office in Jaoksonville,
who always had rlenty -f money, Dr. gernandes, yr. Stank D.
iller,'orank Leslie, tha first agent of the Ulyde bin.,
R. It. Tiliggett, who married Lura ,,mbler, daughter of the banker,
*he used to own this building -tthe Law fixehangs building).
.ihese young men wore tEn main rapport of the bar in the aemi-
nolo ulub, and the bar ran the Ulub."
1011V.MX .3TAILAS:
"Some people 1 used to know and like very mush wore

--- Page Break ---

David nitohell 7.
mr. MeGinnie who owned a fine 'ivory stable boated where
tho Park Motel now is, with fine horses and carrii..ges for
hire. Thei °aim Tom NoUurray, uni engaged in tho as
bualuess.
"Monurray was tho first Unitod zitatee marshal here after
the war betwecn the otatee. lie wont out unit aingle-bauded
aaptured tho last Xuklux in elorida, about s. hundrot miles
from 4-alatka. Jo brougt him into yalatka and down to
Jaokeonvillo by boat in t11113 latter 1860's. Thor° were as
roilrO0.4sin those days, awl all tra:tia was by boats up
the :st. Johns nivors servId by sevoral different lines
I forgot their names now. but there wore several enormous
packets tied up at the Jaukoonville wharves."
LDWAK MILW:
"There wore big lumbar mills, too, John elarke,
floury Clark, Cashes's, nuckeyse, Fairchild's, und after
them oumo the Uummers in the early 1890's, or the latter
1880's, patting in at that time tho biggest mill in tbs
Jait3d htatee at milldule. The taimmsre established a record
for themeelves in financing. Thaw ‘,to the old people who
ever Game to rlerida with a bank roil and got out 'alive,
se to speak. nut they invested ut the right time, sold at
the nook of the lumber industry, and retired uith their
heads high, the bit in their mouth, aid their tails over
the dashboard."
113M03132:
"In Jacksonville's history, there are four things whisk

--- Page Break ---

Dail* niteholl 8.
will always stand out in my memory:
"Pirate was in my early boyhood the trip by boat up the
bt. Johns niver and landing in Fairfield at tho old stste
rairgrounds and they had good fairs in those days, with
lets of entertainment and horse racing.
"fl000nd, the great fire on nay 3, 1901. i had been over
in *am in the morning, and as I left to oatoh the beat gores.
the river where a drapoolailted me to make the trio to Alexandria
Villa, 1 passed the fire station Where tho central fire station
now is on Adams and (mean ttreets. The alarm sounded and
rod
ahief xaaey streamed out in the big/AO-devil of u fire truck,
drawn by the two handsome bay hormos of the fire department.
It was Just 12 Oulook. It was a hot day, and I remember
thinking to myself, flielle‘ Oda mussy has picked out a hot
day, with heat rising in layers from the streets, for a fire,
and I hops it does not last long.'
"I went en home four miles from the Jacksonville
Perry, and as dinner was being served, I said to the butler,
Pearson, what makes it se dark? Is there an eclipse of
the sun." lie wont to the north windily and looked towards
Jaoksonville, and rushed beak with tense face '70re Gel,
Master eavid, it suah looked like the end of the worlileemee
look!' there was a amp of imported Wawa at least forty
flirt high mowing on the lawn Just about twelve feet from
the north window, and above that was a sheet of flames from
the burning Jacksonville, lurid and rearing, fanned, by a
high wind, and above that a pall of black amoko that obsoured
the pun und mak4 it dark as night at our place. shall never
forget that picture the sheet of flames above the bamboe

--- Page Break ---

David mitehell 9.
and the bleak smoke rolling heavenward.
"By 2 Odle& L tus again at the ferry slip und took
the last boat across to the Jaakeonville side. my third
memory is the nieture of that wharf filled with prooious
belongings oftlacksonvillo oitisons, vho bepot in vain to
gain transportation to the.south eide of tha river. There
n,re family portraits, clothing, bric-a-brao, baskets of
silvor, trunks filled with heirloom and preaious documents
and papers, and the people with their panic-attic:Ikea faces as
the fire leaped by bounds to the water's edge, destroying
the wharf itself! No, shall never forgot that pleture.
"I had a munday school teacher by the name of Mrs. loot,
who kept a boarding house at monroo und :.Aamo tArJets. I
fought my way to the most house and from there maw sr fourth
picture two big hotels the windsor and the 6t. James
flames shooting from ev,)ry window, flames hi:41 in the air
from the roofs, a million dollars going uY, in flumes, but
what a magnificent sight the two big buildings made us they
yielded their greutnePs to the fire!
"I some way manaTed to makn my ray to the west side,
or LaVilla, geotion and got home luta th.A night."
INTsms3TING k_t_i9P1.3)
"The most interesting reople I have known in Jacksonville
were Tom Momurray, major beyleston, a mouth earolinian, mar
tuned above, r*. b. burnett, who established the barnett
National bank in 1877, pr. J. 101ingle, and Arthur massett,
who had charge of the Aster estate holding, in Jacksonville.

--- Page Break ---

David Mitehell 10.
"The first bank of the narnott's was known as the
national /sank of jaeksonville, and was looated where tho
nest nuildiag 11110W stands on bay :street, oixrnor of Laura.
AnUMSTOLy:
"When the first 4orden of whom there is any record at
all, ono of tho oompanions of *Mien the uonquover, clams
over from gormand,- with him to ealgland, there *us with him
a Hugo de miohell from a little town in normandy. when
was in oeetland in 1889 i saw the document giving the names
of gallium, the Aminorer's eompany the gentlemen who
wozo entitled to oeronets and romomber the mention of
do miehell, the firet kitchell. The sheepskin record locket
liki piooe oi wrapping nailer, uni it was difficult to do-
oiehor, but thers rho have since seen this document blur
the sumo toetimony. sheri silliam 4 b)en in Algland six
or oight months„ he limsolf indioatod tho ones who were to
be On knights of stland. He arpointed King David, who
was the first Xing of .lootlumd. puvid 'as looking filts a
wife, 4nd make cillian mado a deal by which his sister,
.northa, was te be rarriod to Xing David, Mud with her he
sends a great train of followers the Gardens who mere
given land in ueetlando (Aberdeen), mod Rage de Michell
who ale* went to Aberdoon to settle on the land he was
Nowa, given the title or 'Berl.'
allotted./ The Dolliohells or Mitohells, as they later
beoamo known, have been lead -owners in Bootlund ever gimps.
They did not emigrate from snglani, but oame from Prase,
the provisos of Normandy.

--- Page Break ---

David Mitoholl 11.
"One a the last to live on the Earl's land was my
graadfathoree brother, George Mitchell, who had fourteen
sons. They scatter id ovar tho world ,,frioa„
India, -igypt, and goodness knows where. grandson of
Uncle qoargolo* Kitchell Maokie, uswriu4 m4 half-sisters
and they went over to live right v4hora the George kitehells
lived in Aberdeen, Jootind.
.3,LaAND:i4 141T ,X4
"At the time my grandfather, Alexander mitohell, cams to
the United tutea in 1838, Pert Dearborn, later known as
Chicago, was a mere hamlet. His friend, George Smith, mover
lived in Ohleage. No ran a bank in Peterhead, whioh oarriet
the business of four states Wismensia, Iowa, Illinois, and
Miahigan. AR said, he had this small bank, when my grand-
father graduated from ilkle*deen University in 1837, and Smith
sent my grandfather to the United States, to that now elation
of the *country, to take charge of this bank whioh had just
b)on chartered, and was doing a business of probably fifteen
to twenty-five dollars a day. Wthhhim came ether Sootohmsa
Reiland, MoGeren, and w th my Swam grandfutherboowne the
first settlers of the eity will& later beeame Milwaukee. Hero
it was that 4,1exander Mitchell started hie groat financial
enterprises.
"John D. Rockefeller ruined the grout Chicago, milwaukee
and saint Paul Railroad, but it cost him a pretty penny in
the and, for he had to pay as high as 0,000 a share for
some of the stook.

--- Page Break ---

David Mitchell 12.
"Joseph Randall was another 3,34DV:ohms* who earli looated
in Milwankeo, and whew Harrison Reed, who was my grandmethor
Niteholl's brother was appointed the first Territorial Governor
of ilorida after the War between tho tates, he muds Joseph
Randall the 'Ihief JustiOe. I was ever in Tallahassee the
other day talking with ohief Justie* Whitfiold, and he said
that Judge Randall had the greatest knewladse of law of any
Chief Justice who evor lived in tiorida.
"When ho retired from the office of Chief Justice of
Plerida, ija 1893 he came to Jaoksonville and formed a
law nirtunrehip with a Mr. Walker and totephen 3. Poster, who
had beer a law clerk and former office bog, but was so bright
he was taken into the firm, whioh was known as Randall, Walker
and Poster. I romember Randall very well as a ohilie because
his long white beard reminded m* of a billy -spat.
"?rem the bostnning, iaexander Mitehell exerted a great
influence ovor the tate of Wieeonsia. He Lad aiways been a
Demeorat, but when the War between the States ease an, at his
awn axpense go raised a oomDany of militia, of which my father,
Aletander Hitt:shell, Jr., was Lieutenant, and a nephew from
Scotland, mebert Chaves, was Captain. ,It was Imes% as the
224 Wiseonsin negiment. Bob Chevee was killed in the battle
of Missionary Ridge.
"W grandfather, Alexander Mitehell, had a big pull in
withILsooln
Washin3teni and when pew° was declared and it cane time to
deal out the 'pap' he wed his Winonae with those influential
in Govornment affairs at the national Capital to him, his
brothar-ia-lwe, Harrison Reed, appointed Territorial Weverner
of Plorida.

--- Page Break ---

David Mitehell la.
"Harrison Reed was editor and founder of the Milwaukee_
4entinel, one of the owrly influential newspapers of the
north, and had written the manifesto of Pond du Lac,(Yrensh,
end of the lake),thioh booame the platform and was the 1)4)-
0k/sling of odtablished principles of the Republioan Party.
"The Republican Party in 1866 ran /Fremont for repose-
sentative for Uengresieip and when Linoola west to the Bowe
as a Represeetutive and had his famous debate with Stephen
Douglass, his fame swept the oeuntry like wildfire, ea&
Unele Marries* simply worked his head off for Linoeln, whioh
made him well Yuma nationally.
"Grandmother Mitchell oatso to ilerida to visit Uncle
Harrison in 1867 she was so taken with the state that she de
aided to establish a winter home here, and bought the lend
on the South side from D. Z. Ambler, who was the funniest
old thing and very disagreeable, but also vary smart.
"Lp to the time my !randmother built her tell known
Alexandria Villa, there was net a sewer.seath of Charleston,
6outh Carolina. But she had sewers put in over considerable
lima advices and objeotions in favor of the long used coos
pools e4en before the house' was built. The house, a rambling
name structure, faced the bt. Johns, Aver. She could not
obtain the big dimention lumber she required in Jaoksenville,
as tha lumbar La ordered from oaltimore and brought dowse*
**hawsers. Sho also brought down expert builders and no-
ohanius, we that ovary item was properly taken cure of.

--- Page Break ---

David nitohall 14.
"The artesian wells for water supply were awe her idol+.
The first mon that Juno down hors drilling wells found, her
eogor tO ox-riment, and th%i mint down M. 2 -inch drill twelve
humdrod foot, but they did not even got a heavy 'dew,' but _
grammothar told them, 'jou .,re not to atop. Fore is some
money; try ogain,' bat they had no 9800088. 4,boat 1886
thoro W48 another outfit who askod for sumo laud, and she
gav) them two auras, cm which they built 4 haunt) aud startod
drilling anothor woll. That is the one on tho road mirth of
tho houie, rhioh tu:d only two or throo pounds proosare, mot
onough to mak.) it of much value im piping.
"In 1889 a Ar. :ado (Jame and drilled 4 6 -inch well, which
provod satisfactory, farniuhio4' plenty of watar -;or the houss.
tho srouneo and ti o otablos.
aftor that tho wells for jajcsonville's water
supply Varj drillod.
"Bat then, Tory rovi pooplo aoolt 'rotor for anything ex-
alpt bathing; it vA48 net irO*1 lora, bald is tho 81410 now!
11BRY M.
"The time Hoary M. Stanloy was hoa, d of, be was
a reporter for the old Jacksonville liewe-Earald in the 18706s*
Thou he %,ont to New york kind worked as a roportot on the
How York monad, and whom that paper aAdortook the search for
the explorer, Dr. Livingston, in :4frioa, Houry H. t,tanloy
W48 sent as their roprosontativo. But ho mkIdo his start right
horo in Jaokempillo.
.X;IM R I?CHLL, my grandfather, lied in yew York City in

--- Page Break ---

David ilteholl
16
April. 1667.
"I do not romembor offhind than hie friend and sponsor.
George timith. of Aordlorl. ,Liotland, riled. but it rue when
Winston Uhurohill vas ohanooller of nagland. rosomber la
oomaisatimg on his dlath. ha 4.4ferred to the fiat that (mores
3mith's death tax was auffleient to pay for a Mole now
battleship. Ho passed ..1,444, a.cter my Kraadfather, I remember
that, but J. do uot knot no what year it was."