Molton, Ruth D
6-23-39
Rev. Harden V. Stuekey, was born in Sishopville,
g. g. 43 years ago, one of o f,-,taly of thirteen. Althoush
this family was lens, it had no effect upon the financial
status, as his parents were prosperous farmers. However,
Rev. Stuekey, would not like to have a large family,
because he feels that it requires more to rear children
now. He is rather proud of his ancestry, as his mother
was of Indian damson*, and a look at him, makes this
statement obvious.
At the age of four years he was struck in the eye
with a sling -shot stick, the right eye affected the
left, and in a m)nth or two he was totally blind. This
did not prove a hindranse to his odueation, however.
For ton years he went to sehool, stopping only when a
nervous breakdown made it imperative. Rev. Stuekey stated
that had it not been for his little causation be would
be among the beggars and recipients of charity. His
greatest ambition is to be sailed to a church of suffielent
else to pay him a living wage.
His first work was that of an instructor for the
blind in Lusklow, 8. C. He received $45 anion*. Of
eouzse, 05 a month then and in South Carolina was as
mush as 1190 now and in Jleksonville. Like the average
$57.40 worker, in the middle glass, he has had to redmei
L. 6 0 8 1/46

--- Page Break ---

Stuskey #2
his seals of living. Rs *onside's. $100 a month an adequate
insome. Mc added that being blind makes it rather, expensive,
as he must pay for so many things that ordinarily he obuld
do for himself, were he able to see. For example, when
he has to go to a part of the city that he is not familiar
with, he must rids or pay a guide.
He takes pride in his work, feeling that he is helping
his fellowmen. Re teaches them to make a livelihood, and
at the same time, having something to de, prevents them
frail beeoming blue quit. so often. He said, *No mattes
how long you have been blind, you never become quite
accustomed to it and you are inclined to be spasmodieally
blue.*
Rev. Stuekey votes and votes a ticket as he chooses.
Rev. Stuekey quite naturally feels that religion
influenaes the morals greatly in the right direction, as
he is a minister, this is to be expected.
When it eon's to amusements, his attitude is rather
broad. Although he is unable to do the things we do like
daneiug and the like, he feels that a person is entitled
to what he likes and the matter is to be settled between
him and his God.
No attends ehursh regularly and does not ask aid from
the ibursh ever. His health is very good, so good that
luckily, diet plays no pant, as being unable to de for
himself, he sale what is put before him, balanced diet or not.

--- Page Break ---

Stuekey #3
The one roost that Rev. Stuckey rents was veri elean.
Is had 'leaned it hinsolf, he said.
Tine on his hands is a luxury, when he finishes his
work, if he does not go to ehuseh to a program or just
regular services, he has quite a few friends that he
visits. They are not all blind, either. Some of the
outstanding ministers are quits fond of him.