February IO, 19Se
"io J. and Mattis Marshall (Negro)
Alabama an& Maryland Streets
Plant OW, florae
Overseer of Tenants
Paul Dime, writer (Wm)
Toronto* Kassa sad
Ivelyn Omer, revisers.
u. J. ATU) M -MALL, 07:1/EY2:11z: iP1721.1
Jo and Skittle Marshall lkve in a two-story house at the corner of
Alabama and Maryland Streets in Oork, a suburb of Plant City, Florida. A
granddaughter, Adis !Weals. Swift11 lives with than. Their sire -room
home is oonstruoted of untainted weatherboani and has a shingle roof, nosey
;ilth ago. Outside, nett to a dilapidated or Shed where farm barlereents are
stored, is a ilia& ehisti Muses B. Jga stnia,Book.
At one end of the front pariah is a pile of it wood covered with a
granary seek, a bushel basket, a seek of oorn, and a cloth bag that hairs
on the wall by the door. A the other end is an old table with a water bucket
and a tem pots and pans on it. BrioSots of flolore are ranged against the
wall. On a side pout are fear wadi tubs which serve the alternate yurpose
of 7rish tub and bath tub.
The lawn needs Waning, ant the yard is fall of overgrown shrubbery.
Ttirnd the rear of the lot, I see two large trans bushes whioh are taller
than the houses thew) glumly the itarshallts and their noichbors with fidatic
poles.
Unttle and E. J. are both on the porehtlhen I come up. U. J. is ahem.
lag his books. ns is an overseer who leases land for the amift Company, to
tenant garners and dtom some fanning for hlmsoM Ho wears a tan straw bat
with holes in it to keep his load cool. His diirt is dark grey and his
trousers blue, bright yellow stigmatism hold up the latter. Dangling fres
a trouser peaks* to his watah pocket is a pondormi gold chain. Ris shoes

--- Page Break ---

are homy Ullman,.
He politely invites am to (mom up an the porch, where he introduces
as to his wife ttie. Her eamplexion is mach lighter than his and she
has strnight bleak hair. She greets as pleasantly and keeps looking at me
over the tope of her glosses which the wears far down on her nose. he
has a Glean ehite apron over her red and white dotted gingham% and bodroom
slippers on her feats "They's far oomfort," she says apologetically.
I no sooner soot myself when too white men drive up in a nau lard.
J. greets them heortily and exanses himself saying, "That oldest men has
Charge of the Owift Oonvenyte bigness. He's come for all the money that
Ilse oolleetoa on the leases. "I controls 150 acres here. These is leased
to 21 tenants. The 'mount et Ian let out to eaoh tenant, ranges tome 1 to
20 agree, all aeoordin to the number of acres hp kin farm. Now and agin
one of them tries his bestns to bent us mattes some money by runnin away
at the end of the lessen. We Charges then aroun 35 a year for nne acre."
Thus 3. goo a down to talk with the non, Vntrie shows me her home
aid I aft her Where she come from, "Iwls horned in Tamper, Florida most
62 year ago. My fOiks wee Josh Brit stirebeth Belton. had siz sisters
and six bredAere, eight or them is still alivin. They's all in South
Oareliney, oeptin one aim what lives in Tamer.
'I Wne de fifth chile in the feebly. A for school, well, I went plum
throogh de ninth grade. I has one chile, Joaie Lee Johnson. Her mon ape.
rates a bigness on Lure Street."
-Idle we °hot we go through the house. The clean kitchen, with its
linoleum (severed floor comes first. There is a large cook stove, two small
tables with eiloleth covers, and an old clothes closet here the dishes are

--- Page Break ---

43.
kept. Next to the kitehem wee a pantry room where odds and ends are stored.
In the good.siced icl4dle room, which is sometimes used as a dining
roan, there is a large table near the eters lecileg to the seeond floor, a
dhien closet and a silent el**. An e34—fathioned clothes tree Is laden
with hats, oats and other artieles of weerieg apparel. The walls of the
room are covered with letures, and a framed print of the Ten Oceneadments.
The front room is olosn and well thrashed.
Ay this time J. is almost through, so MAUL) and I sit Iown to wait.
ahe has already told as that the fivoinore tract across the rend frymi the.
is mined by a Nook WuLsmorth„ a Negro who also hue a business on Laura
Otroot.
I wet& the Negroes pinking Amor:berries in the 7adieworth field across
the read. The3 4.1..o talking and laughing. One is heard oomplainings "reCin--
aint dein nothint" Another adds: "so sires, ain't dein a Golfs thing."
A foronan lalks up and down the rows, his try tabard, picking up the
baskets of berries se aminkly as they are filled. At the 03? side of the
field there is a large building oonstraated ofgalvanized shooting,IYhere
tho berries are being graded and packed.
J. retarns to the porch, settle* himself in a cane bottom dhair
and when I tell hist what I want, eannents, 4This will shore carry noway
bank dozier."
'I w! borned in Ageflold, South Oaroliney„ Namable? 16, 1869. Ny
ne and pa wne Asserd and Fransee Mornhalls there daid now. Magma slaves.
Their meter, his name wee gOrafts,'' and his vine considered aristocrat folks.
They' woe well knowed In South Onrolinoy.
1Sy pa brozght GS0,000 from NeWberry to Aiken, Snuth Oareliney for
then one tins. it wan to paj for a large plantation what the Orafts baaphten.

--- Page Break ---

Mew, you see, theists voter I cite qv tradin abilities, it's frumpy pe.
"I me married to my first wife, Nellie I. Jibes, e long tins 86v4
She has been dela meet 40 year nomp She's the, mews to mv bon ohildrans.
*mad, my son, he has been in the postal service in lOw York City fer 14
year. Then my. gal BeSSie Lydia Breen lives with her husband,. Res an undor.
taker domn to Live 044 Florida. They has two fine dhildrens.
',Dane of my yoanguns has ever give me troull/e. The boy looks jest like
me too/ it's nice When you get Childress Whet grave uptc do well.
"I married Mattis, my swank wife in Temper, and brung her here nigh
onto 30 year ago."
t this Untie blurts it streestieellys "And that is shore one long
time to live in one pipes, believe-Vomomer
Ignoring her, J. oontinuess °I oome to -Aeolus, Florida, from 3oath
Oarollney, ani worked for the Western Union ?elope* Osereny. they barn
me the trmie as electrician. twos young then. I also had the distinction
of bein promoted in lees time than any man on the job. In three month I
acme from apprentice to line repairman. At that there Wastrel was sta-
tioned t Jal4e, Florida. Later I cow to Tamper, to to electric merk. I
lived in iiilleberough Oeurty around 43 yesA right between Tamper and Plant
City. I will be alivin here 38 year this oomin January.
"I rut the first electric light system hero in Plant City. I barn to
Wawa*, tee. Oncet I got up a ocmwereationwith mg boes-man, Mr. George
i. Harris, over to Jacksonville, over the telegrsPh.
"This wos Shore same Dlace when I first care here. On Laura .:;treet
at times we Gould ends in water what ula knee high to waist deep for about
two blocks. This was shore low ommitry then. You could co afishin netrow

--- Page Break ---

boats in maw a spot arms here. Yes girt You shore could* al out growl
here was jest denims/Gods. Ohl Ant a wonnert22 rev-e-inr.tion. UV Cool-
ness alivek Ammar/hi tmprevement. Why this here pine° unrn't no more
than a wilderness.
°Imes the first man what had a deet to a home in Lincoln Pork, for
that yes ttos name Aeon I first woe here* The track of lan you soo ridht
in front of golv eyes noi is name for no. It's ooll Vardhall Heights**
-Asa I first came to Plane City there no very for colored folks here*
New the Negroes is jeet about halt. There is hewn more livin (retold° the
citg limits* I moved into this here house in 1910.
he straoberry businoos ain't no Baal business. The cost of a nersnry
is from $20 to 025 an acre. I cot eight aares undor oiltivation now. lee
thet nice truster over yonder in the field* lhet's mina* The oolorod mans
rannin it is a tine Ohristian hearted feller, and he's roliablo too*
'ritese of the tenants mdtes monoy horo, and SOW delft. go lots thom
livec their own lives. They mime other things boeiden straaborrios, too*
practioally foods thoirsolves ofen the lane The $15 ,ahot they has to
poy for the use of the lam if too much, but that's tho boss price, no uhat
kin I do nbout it?
Vest one thing that worries me about tale gamin, and that's the
differenoes in prim* fox our coods. They give* us colored frmers one
price for our fee:, uhen the minket is callin far another. I4u taiddn of
nomin with a big grower from up Norfolk, flADInOV.17ay. That's the !Ares
where t ey bialdo 'hips, ain't it? 71e in raise stuff hero and sell it it
a grouter profit. If you don't sell thronch the 000peretivo, and attempt
to ship inieposient, I:hoz-Aso birds hero wire Uhe.d of yew shipmont, then

--- Page Break ---

whi.rx the ail:vont rcr Its dentin:410.a, tivw clams ;orris Met lag we
slow.) it nt; itloo fe 44. 2hOtte what us poor s atjin•
can olaim to have no ettuoltion, 11.1• map uood ccmtt4ets by k
waold.n mod mon xyl ;num no fete I enlj hod four goer of sehoolin.
:liztot rut& is It? :114:illt now I takes fin? na7silapere anl ease ogri•-
riltu.,:a rn.i1. boon tain the 2ampor 2tinist for nozrAy 40 year.'
ttieat,,n, Aiscanbor WiAta tho Innuer ctartcd no,rly
e.40 yo,..• ago Ln ::airkoz• 4CF:114.1 ;XS tile first prihter ond ho startcd.
In WIo1 ouse on ...1,1k1.1ztieOt. Jo also re-els the itttsburg emriterie
roGivi3r hem on the truatea bonito tut the colored ambers
wzinglo set the .1'011/4i MAU tlasa out• Mc the haird ocautults
ro• hej t4zen trif word 1,1,-..anovoi' mottels owes up. Lcalot.,mea they calls
on the ii.en4s. and M14-4 le all there is to it. lone :•,eorponsible for that
11417 ache'bi1din tihat third got over yondor• One dog I tholOt that then
islcolorod holm 4a1 .,•faa naiwilin M alai play groan. nal vcio I SU= VAIC12 I
f".41i3 Mit they done vont and fix it ;434, Ilenesto Duo* 1 Jont oatldnet go
on J.:lad do tl:angs wanton I imowed I %Tao livin riGht•"
Jim atedtuukihtor riZen up in [Atom (Lercr.viet airs says;
-21uot•is ray or, und L fast stepper too. I hardly ever drives it,
thoott. I joot leovea it for the children* to enjoy as:solves* Jest give
me ay old friend aeolc, vo en Mae mod tins ap nal down the rows. Metes
rt unoadi r4c• You gets sainnth out of thot• 201x, that thing it
'1..arre it t4.1kos most avorig ot rako 4.uti sor,ve to keep it ap• Vas
=els la morin too raat :cr Liba Look at Tv houboll it noodo ropairin right
nu/ ztZia a InAintin• rho maw X waste on thet oar would do it toe. Ale
tine feika vrtit, us.;Ir: now judgment. Alt otrorbok wants to Lowy vith the

--- Page Break ---

stile. Nod yoa aim% la style those dap eases you boa 1 brooms* aaakAt
WW2 Ica dio. That's goal sonassoso
1:** dean loop up with no poUtisso I ain't Total atnll in tho last
toy "qrs. Iit todlis,vith it 1 gst disgastat. I always voted napab-
1103A111032 I dano my /atlas. Dali it I do it Agin Itse gannalrato Dat000rat.
That 1.134 whit* mass disgaatel ma with tho Itrpabliaaos. Ilse alsomal
sam. ftir =is do in dais the pseplas the kostt )oat. That 770 :mat
is a Isia Ws* %MI do hat be sly% and tor the goad of allip at not jest the
Sart?*
"3inao PA* bass ataxia's Its* lest glob, but it's doe* us goal anti
balldad sollp la health. AV folks health hos boon pat, good as testae*
teals boats outdoors**. Base tolls is to amrsis* llhs lb* toys *at
playa bum/banana othaa game, bat that's plus fools advise. L takes mina
in tho aardanwith ale 3sako muse yea kin ait sarethin coil of that.
"I think in nno-4Anr OarI miaM6 am to raisin livostook. I thi*
klo mak' a so At it. rah. and tharoas madonna /4 Its too, in :not I ens
°moot a auttlemoso Thot's a lit* ter a tattly.. era* eggs and bottom. 10011
usstar have a bore* to *LAI Woos I wall roan np tham oattlao Mates
Cos. 1 Sher* mat like sattlo he I keep talMln twat those
',met I had now sad was Mad ptrty goad in this two. Sim* the
deprossias eamodthisgs has west Impair*. I ale Up real business about
406 wanx nitft
tried to be a Ueder all qv lit*1 bst it's tiadb dittisult llke to
Amer ow. Joao's. 1 luster WA lets of prow% I sold that. Like tames
has lontstaris the last weraral opas, I hadda git rid at It. it I realise
a party fair livin frowsy Imamate. gm ;meg my shim* after I settle* with

--- Page Break ---

iseas
t:he bees -0m: tleavtin 'farthing ihoadhs I reckons Innlals amen 0.500 a
rem. Thet *Snot oil trovey neither:
"To vitae sow or de welting eases it pare to 4t yersolf Ort the
teldes 'IAN I tries to keep on his silo. Pee a sesher fir the Allen
Chapel XI! Mutat. ltu, !Astor is idle Rev: Cooper. I below% to the thumb
frets emir bat* yerderli n7cint rea lifetime ofsdn rirht up in it. Viso
tributal to atilrehos illTr life: Ito s I don't gone' to ;lhoz:h nu d'trel as
*mit Ives. 7hen :tee et: older yea ae..a so meth ycu slams deem a little.
Me11 git that way nom tioy• I Ida Sao afar fun of pep no' seat frau the
NNW °tire, rei done oak me. ikrt I eeree a littlo dtiTerent•
"IleAideos the eriAt oxiatin with the Etinietore tends to lad to the
Messer hisneee• the mike end file: ain't regpxdais asleep yott rw as you
go• Tan is a ITood, kftrel :,Pea hag Nam, bet dorm co to church without
it, feelese ree done -motto be nude be. /kin go er, lay ticon a dollar and
Med cells ny name ro loud ,..ru in hoer it 131um aro= the bledc• 3rat that
)1011.6,4ma you bfrely blots he dropred In airy thitc: lie hnidly site a
thrink yon• .Thette vhnt I means :Can I toll= shoat that Oaener bisneseis
"You bet I neer oft things to watt ?a her "het we watts art= hero.
I car moot of Yet Loot Outten the oils list abatis hotter? I loves geed
old ftern broads an 'believe se I shore cot °memo wit- kenr her to Go& its
ten. Um thetts belt yor lite*"
Rattle poor, over her glacial and wine broadly:
"I oleo likos eorng 2,enas means, '5eofetects heflete*s tater., ries,
elliakang sto's, 'To 111: :4 fine flock of 77Mte Pock &Jame and. Isoo
tryin to git a nort strain of thee frac thewrilles Tennessee. theesome
hone neff "het weighs from fix* to sevon poen.. I also farniehea the toads*.

--- Page Break ---

4011011111.
of The Rene iloonagies eines at oar sebbal with ohionanue icuotine the
nous ease ever hero ard anima a tank of theta* Meal:mos eat and gives
then Amens taikin taw lies boon able to bekag cut =any fine pints
that idto teed's.? ain't lamed* Tau see you getter Tut practical applies.
time with lasers. You buss. thotts 1i .tho rabbit viti4t wits throwed.in
the in'titr ritteht. Ito looked up and. jest grinned Per Viotti vber ho be-
Isogt.A boti,
her ita.zdro harebell Ciniattec his narreticato 1die lierixwAsso egad
17, dreeseci Liover.Ills0 ownsz in fres piceise streebortiee in the ,Aulmworth
field :mess the fsatl• She accede ?mutt tui Into time kitahen mai kettles
the knitlee co the kitchen stove am sha ISSZ14011 th0 eackIng food* Tido
new her 0.*.taitenther lant,•
'Thon oho onaup it tleine Co gives :xi L friendki Lreeting and tells
Yu 'Mt 0i SieM t berrr natact le on= ohs la going to rotarn to her
stutioe achool• 'he sells tickets at the lewd adored theater in tile
Cittll
Rog- next gest-um It an irrritatien to visit tho Wadsworth ose/dag lunge
aerate tto field free! trhare she worStas I accept the invitation. (aiding
tPnt Itre mover *aeon in a staufborgi rAsslciac hams he seeking heiso
preves to 714 the fray.uttsed bail/ling I had coon aoross ;Ale field furs the
lorshell perolk.
"Nan wo 6-r*e:...0 the *.stm-likt.. atruottra netioe the naive' r of wesna
eriplevmd. tho;,t nre bun,* crAlreOnd oclAng the briou they an *aught
fro, tho
Ti tlto nflitille of the room t lcsc tuble rilth vire atrotched war it.
eltem t"reitrg woks two oprend a& the wire, idtew the berries are washed

--- Page Break ---

0,10.
in a tub of water they are dipped up in meliorated tin vessels and enured
on the granary seeks. ',bees* water is absorbed by the seeks and drips
th21:0511 to the sand trivered floor.
The average strawberry ben oentsins abate 75 berries all a:wording
to variations in the else at the berry itself. Ilium a orate is paella it
holds 56 pints.
The pickers use quart borne uhen plaiting berries. They eon three
fronts Orr every bee. Sons told we tat "Ley am pig* truct 25 to 80 bates
Pelt dor* A Pidgsr evereltell tuna 07.00 to 09.00 swede. As elf oh bar is
finished the field tonnes gives than a stub of parer with a nterber on it.
Those rarer* are wanted When the Didier is init. carrier transports
the boos fres the field to the pithisa Wiese in a long caste tint holds 12
quirts.
Like WI* most of the young girls wear overalls !tails welting in the
fiats. Ms oyes eVe gits eight ants or more at the motet ter oar
berries5 sad a orate brings arena three dollar now. They WAN settin oat
the berry plants in Septembers and the pidtin starts long about Dew:ober.
'Plot weather and birds is the biggest trembles we Ins." Cuteide I
=tier a imeall boy and an old nen maths diligently around the field on
opposite sides. The non cowries s high powered rifle and the bey an air
rifle. LAAtie isplains that it is their job to keep the birds soy tram the
Meld. As we walk dews the steps I natio* taar deed robins lying there,
and harem...In say that the intends taking thee home to est.
As DfAle eel I walk bad% to Se Ps sires, the open field, I recall
soms internation in try possession eareernirmit the settlement at
At One tine Ante El**, bordered the eettlement• The town bore the
Indian none of lohnepnekenassa, or sthetneassa for acct. In the %minas

--- Page Break ---

-11.
language this wait "ladies Pipe*" About fifty years ago the post off tee
watherities had dittioulty *wallag these names ant reeommended that the
°Moo be moved to Oweatss =lipoid* This was etwompliehed and the town
renamed dark* They later moved the settlement to Plant City when the rail-
road emote that 00410M4 TodAy it is a suburb of Plant OW, a figarteh-
lag aerial:Mural *enter0 noted for its strawberries* Beeords dhow *Arm
meets of 20,000.000 pints esdh season*
With a popalation of 8000 persons, half are tigress* The latter play
a oonspiomeas part in tilling and wearing the vast treats at land under
mitigation* This inolndes trmak ihrming and citrus graving*
Derimg the berry season, ditch lasts trout Deoember through April the
tarn is a busy place* The eihools are closed so that the children ray
help in the fields* Milers range in eget:vole to 05 and scmetimes older*
freaks landed with horn same are oontinialiy gang to and frai the fields,
ether, trunks are swaged in transporting the berries to motet*
The nark*, °magneto' by IPA, is another interesting site* k large
plows built in devote= Oa*, it is where refrigerated trued:await in line
to take their comeigmmembe north*
'rheum arrive at Hop Ps*. he is sitting an the porch biting on the
I tem Obis pipe*
Veil, what doyen think of it?
I tell bin that I like it and that it is all very interesting.
"Mew, you sae he says, "this is all I Wishes I ain't ialcin in my
own garden spot* I kin see for miles airmen yore V, Jest sittin right hers
on wg fruit Tomah* I kin see my men amOkin, an keem tab. on evirthing they's
Lain. ikon I walks an and Cheeks the maps, theils the days *hen I vo*I.
Then I iest Itit Loin this or Itee remain all then papers you see on the

--- Page Break ---

table yonder. They keeps me oemeany. /tittle, she reads a lot too."
S. 3. stops then and looks at his visteht "Lowey meal It's three
fifteen. I gotta be gittin in ma garden, I got ease oorn to plant. !tow
bout yoa amain along ter a time if yen alai% got no more to do." FA
pieked up the bag of earn on the poroh and welled down the stm at I follow.
ad him. He went to the oor *tad whore he got a hoe, than we both walkod
tomard the gprden in the 707 of the house.
'This yore is a -pieoe of lea I gardens when I door feel like goin to
the fields," he told me. "I sakes lots of stuff on this piece of len itte
rich. I get* get mono more earn to teed rag mole !Ma. too.
"Sometimes I keteh ale loolw and ohms them fool beers groan yore how
to plow. I was trained to zr:low sten I was a boy about 16. Ny pn had aroan
60 +soros on hie last place. And you thlyik we didn't la= haw to pima I
ean show any of thee has it's done. I am one of God's men, and Then yor
a mon who Gee has laid his hands on. beware*
"It's plus hard for a man to make airy profit °fen a farm now. This
yere war what's oust* might make things a little bettor. You know, It
that war oases we must be ready for them ftarriners, arouse wo ivaan't pre-
pared for then last time it cane. 3.4 they jest keep on lettin than neerle
fool then with their premises. They talks pesos and at the same time gni;
theireekves may to rout. But wenms is seoh geed hearted folks* we jest
tdkeo it all in.
"Of course I believes in iseitine but the wog to do it, is to bare gor
lamokles and hit them square like they done in olden time. B2ok in then
&Aye it VMS over man for himself an route or else..."
A.s a;ii 3. Valko he walks up and down his garden diming and dropping a

--- Page Break ---

?-13w
grain of corn over two feet. He hes tied a smell white beg of earn to his
belt stamps, .and is using this for seed.
"This yore is Yeller Cuban /Tint Corn," he says "essettmes they mils it
Hosistenee Om. The reason for this is, it dean attract them
weevils like the other emu dos This yore kind grows some sevan foot tall."
E. 3. falls silo* after this last bit of infOrnetion, and, :he %elks
along the rows, making a hole with his hoe, them dropping a grain at earn,
making a hole and
Hie nest remark is one of meanIngs.-
4You know* You fine lots attest workers Ore= you if lbw happens
to live nest to a manwhaes thrifty. If it laurel for a thrifty feller
among thees shot lash the/Mall be lazy too, but as it is, thqv gits
thrifty se the result. Now you take thet there mule of nine, yes sir&
She gits me up at dawn ever time, as shore as you is bornads Haw the des
it is, the jest broy and broy until I gits out to tend has* that's all.
So then rose thrifty cause then I up early, and thet makee other folks
thriftyaroun nes
"Onoet I had a colt what brayed in the oiddle or the nights Shed
bray until I tolled out to her, then died ghat her mouth. You know, she
brayed jest likes person wantin no to pall to her, then when I did the
Merod my vote*, so the thumbed. It's sonsthin the way t gits to roe.
°gage ywr voles, but they do, Jost like Saks what talks over the telo-
a lot. I usator talk over the telophone-Amn I was livin in Tapper,
It was When Iwas line &sins PI sell in, and the operator would sw,
'Is that you Merthallf' and I'd tell her yes, but the alwoys knorei qv
vetoes viell that's the muss way animals is.

--- Page Break ---

.140.
vtAnelher thingI always kopt in qv oraw, was this. 71hen I seed a fel-
ler torryin himself plum to death, I Jost think, I boteher itenhe woad git
bisselta lot *thirst work to do, be wouldn't bait no time to be 'soh u tool.
Vont Zen Livia in a great °Uteri*, it's jest like this gamo down
yore what we lolls the bait., always* gmehis. Folks gasses a lot about
team Amin it, bat it ain't an bad. I world rather play that, thon be
welkin along the street and se* someone drop a ten dollar bill, than I ovums
along ant pisk it up and not give it book to him. The balite is like bread
oast upon the water, it do mums badk sometime or other*
"All in all thou*, this Jere little teen that I live La is purity god,
intact its a uareption. The niggers is all trotted better than in the
avenge town of the Boat". Boy. Isia how to tell you that too. Anyway. a
geed nigger is a better class nigger, and I always teals he should be liat
in a °lass to himself. A croaker run most tale me he didniPt believe all
nigger, tau alas anyway*. Bat give a nigger a &anima, lot him fix his.
self up to oppsar betters than the ones aro= hie, omi the better °lass ot
*hitt, talks anowelates us.
itOns White man tale so one time, right before a barmh of nigger's I
wee yo mg then mai It Short made as tool good. 'Yen never see Marshall
without 40 neektio on. Bop I omit do that, pause I spiles too many.' 701
oven that shooed thet I was sosothin anyway*
"I has lets of oontidomse larded a lot at thite men's tell maw Yon
take this here Owift mon that you seen as dein bigness with athile ago.
Nes one of then there rawboms oradker mem, and thee' tine. Tonere really
got momethin wham yet got one ()tithes on yor sile, for it there's any toatin
to be did, you damn hatter to ds it, lbw doss it for you.
Vo is talkin about premotin ma nor. But you Imola some time a promotion

--- Page Break ---

-16-
oauso aspiration, and gives yea a feelin that a littlo less job given mere
oat:sfaation without no ruoh responsibility."
..rhan I leave Pin to return to Plant Oittir, ho mils aftiar no, -hen yua
come dorm trill, 1..)-e sboro and come aroun to see no. `i.nd :Yon is always ma-
mma to uhatever t got, °martin my noney, and a poor man ainst got no =toy
twin whioh he oan depart."
,s I drive throutt the othor yfirt of the nolored ovation, I not too
strartborries planted on ovary available vet. few collsoxl i:Toenc nd other
voretriblee PITT":• here nnel, there. ,vorytihere the streets are Inre, ever,rene
Iva rano to the fieZds.
'Laid° frost -no th.f.bkly settlod tract the onarsanity is scattered. Pants
_aro osnod by the Nor:roes, or luased fres ovorsoors• Pomo labor is prods:sal-
note.
I 9 OC a Vs./ of tho old and dilapidated tenant Tionsos J. has in his.
&erre. 7hore is no oleatrieity in any of than and water is handrompod.
One tenant says* ,Ile is able to nate a livin on onr five acre tract,
and ,n,elPs trootod rarty tr.' I 800 one wasan in a bond 71.(sr, opening
roma far goads
hare is 'little 'profit in this typa of famine, altbrntft thoi nanam
to live nnicl mace up tho oioai by obtaining odd lobs duri.nr the of° soorrns.