February 14, 1939
Madge lethurbne (white
Route 1
AVM Park, aoridu
i,tiltry Farmer
Surbars i4rry wetly, writer
Veronica usr, reviser
ItrAGITiL--
4. velvet lase sapping to the waters of tho colour livau loie, Bor.
rounded the clean white cottage of iirginia ufo3.k. eds of Lrii,nt
flowers fused their colors with the grun or the lawn, and oaks added
their ahade to this transplanted An liah country scene. ..hite..waohed
poultry houees were spread out behind
ho house.
.uoks and geese, flost•
lug lusity 34 the lake, looked up euiseicaliy as 1 approadhed.
my anack oh the vestibule doer was :Answered by the etutely, eilverd.
haired t;re. ,uffoli.
iAaome in," she invited graeiously.
stepped inside and followed her through the hall to tha living
rowi.
go1ayou cume,'' She Qoutioued, "1 um juut rett4 to eit dem
to a spot of tea, one being u sociaiJle soul I prefur having soaUsons to
share it with as. All your
Jille oho retired to the 't,itchun to print, the tee thina, seAed
myelf ih a lorge oomfortable chair neer the front windows. ie Jr.L.om was
de:Adeely ,ngigah even to the leaded windows, ulthuugh it'aue eoaortable
and homelike in appearance. '.,here were several overatuKiee chairs homds
tined oith 4 wicker -auto and an atratotive elek tuoked into un alcove.
',14turesi aunk; tiibut the waAs, ane books unu magasines were in evidence
eVeryWhefe,
26090

--- Page Break ---

ra..u.folls returned with :Air toe end ekes, and 7 made tnonn the
perpooe of my visit. he aceptee my explanation in the sama rreoloue
manner uhe had invited me into her h:ime, aCing that she would be tied
to furnieh any information I needed.
y husband, John, had male pork to do in tom today," eho proffered
upolocetically, "so ho vual't he Ivo° until oiEbtfaY1. 4v wnv coin to do
this lerh after be meAs his eu deliveries,. He wouldn't b• much help an;
nUys tIOC,1:38 he vestn't like to talk, hut I do*"
The latter broke the preciseness of her speech, and she smiledt
"t often teal !ohn that he le rortunate having such a poolable wifo,
oleo we weld ie hermits .1nd live off in the eode svnewhere, inetead of
on this lovely lake here in =eon ark. AA he i* crov old nem and
seems to core loc., for the world an0 :Jther voonle all the time. gowever,
he's just as kind and pod hearted as aryone on be and never objects to
mo havinc, all the friende I tut. ti leo lets me brinc people here for
help and err/stance."
AriXing ohimos arreste4 ply aLteution. Lookint up beheld a five
old ,uth toms olock b4,01141 the :Woks 4ea* scowling the quarter hour.
".lon Is proud of that caeca," rwarked -uaelk, "it is very
old arid ,oamotitialdceeea iair;. %he cnieeu ere alvoye *topping saddene
t.ian aithout aaraint; they at.rt ap &Vain* if they fail to chime- in
the nicht t:74:4411, we both wake up lame:qutely, othorelbe we sloop soundly.
I.:eutfulnee* filled her or au oho seemed to ilanee through the
windowa towar.A the ohising lakes hoping uy ellanue to turn hack th years
end find thn pout reMoted in the <maim waters.
f,itoted su4ntely an a etraitfit-bock chair, daw iirjinle utfelk as

--- Page Break ---

pt.krt of btir Jeglish livingroan. Her silvered heir rising above the
plGinnese of her neat hwee dream, the haulthy clov of her oloIr
her 4urk rJuonened nand foldeo in adr lap, sWg4 the plain brown oxfords that
encased her feet.
4Thet old ,4th Thomas nue been a fine friend.° she obese without
turning, it use to sooth john so eftu.:i:e wee hurt in a ear wreak. Yee,
Joan wee seriously injured man a young girl in a highaTowerad cr o4ho
raining .)ut from a aide etrest an crashed into our old
lumina eround oho to. apher teagrup and roomed or story.
"As i jest mentioned, John is so iiind hei.rted, and snen he tob able
to leave the hospital after thnt aeui(Wnt there was anothor man there who
didn't lave h4yone to lelp nice. la flak. boen struok by a nit t.nl ran
driver aq the eulprits wno was the tun of mealth4 petunia, refused to de
talf.,;.• 0:106 WAR" brotOrt itr• iUs t00, WON AGM,
of room in ti,is Inf,s;o h,the, as ylu e,n see, and alweye feljoy nursing
pee:tie (114-40.y. .0 kept it, %1,a aero :or about fiVJ illontns. 1 hud to
t Ott11,11 t &l1 tL,. over tvzc
.ar,elav were terribly limited et taut time, but friends een, in.
nn0 Aalped, ond onen ivzo in h 1)01,ilt 14 :calmer juet to7,k caoros ad we
a4dfTer too badly.
-1114114 tuouL4, tat, man whaa .111s hi.6 boon workiny ter before
he Lot hurts irtotl, givint; foe uoven (:)11arh u audit lor his upkeep. does
over, 1 didn't fool that the money boionged tu
it Wall or hit.;• .nytay &la ifiugets sMQ Oppfid :Wan liegOt hurt an he
didn't 11/11/45 bh4thing, .Sro
tie, so 2ut every bit of
i.hen that, 11%) wuren't sure he'd ever Let well
onu L. muko nit; way. u at it away for safe kooping., 74111r0 Mae a

--- Page Break ---

is 4
rillht tidy tAount awoiting 4in when hu did got sill.
ut What do yt.o °up ewe ha did" the oa;olaimod ao uhe 4dved hr tescup
about. "its took that money und boutfit u cur. There 4u woo, co olc: said
pr that ho couldn't ever nuke a thing, and he tea the money I'd caved
Jn,und bought a our."
,ftur ihai:t'ing that I hove coma mor' tw, she atrtad hor ;.ife otory.
born iv ::,r'adford in the north of ‘mtland coma .5t; ye re LLD.
14.den moo *aka Loroalk,I had fivo brothers und throe cloture. 14
father ars the only con of wealthy parunto, ond he WWI a ctor. never
knew to preotice ncOicino, if 'no avor d. 3o liked to experiment and
engage in usdicul roserch. e oftnn at‘ted that ho ctudiad mujicine for
ita science alone.'
I 4._uffulk tulke0 she tied with the cup in hor nuods &And
nticed thd fragile richnose of the china. Lodking down at the littored
tea try I also 04 rved the fine old i1vor ond the t16,t earthonwuro totpot.
'?to a childhood," she hurried ;44, "I too loved the &otIou. and inetru•
nonts in otouy,
svect I spent ..ire tine broweinL onung hie wadi*
col ds‘oka ti I did with m: own
iduona.I never th-ught of twin a
Joctur howavuro :41pitiy thoee idous for women were prectioall unheard of
tun, uot did c,rou up filled with t strong deuiro to Lo of help to my
people.
"oftor complato6 my litorury uutn, inally p;:rcoudod my
fathlr to lot me Lc in traininc fur u Lures.
Low LA14 ye re i spent At
1.4 nr1: loorng I do twt Alow, for thu echoo:ao were very 6ifforent in
those ticee, und thon r.y c,Amution ut.a itoctly by privet° instruction ',indoor

--- Page Break ---

a governees.
"In starting my training to be a nerve, I entered the Olaokburn Ave
firmary in Lanehashire. I suppose my father little dreamed that I would
persevere and finish the rigorous (course, but I did and graduated us I
was nearing :4L. Ath this eempleted I nursed in Iltgland for several years,
and made a speoielty of children'. oases."
Ur.. :.tuffolk left her Chair and valied over to the antique mahogany
highboy in one earner of the room; removing several portraits from its top,
she brought them to as.
"People allays tome interested in pictures of kigland; thece are my
parents and my girlhood twos."
laking a wick gismos at her mother and futhor I obeerved a alight
reeemblonee to both.
"Though I had plenty of work in mglend," she went on, "I vas filled
with a strong desire to Q4110 to the United 3tates. I had always felt a
greot interest in this land of 3vAire; and would read and study all that
could about it. I always enjoyed meeting Americans and questioned them
unduly noout their homeland.
(This eountry alloys seemed such a land of opportunity for yutiv. in
4tglund we wer3 cLewhat limited, 00.81611y the middle classes, whereas
the United -Utile seemed to offer an unlimited chance for self expression
and advaneement.
e my training progreestd, oil did my determination to come to this
country. I bided my time and *Irked for several years in London.
During
that tine, my father who 11168 violently opAsed to my coming here, passed
away. 4y Lothar had never made ouch objections, and, as she had other
children witn her, 1 wee free to leave about 19C4 or 'o5; I do not know

--- Page Break ---

ea f
shish yteor it ws.s se it nos no lonl; co."
no tr,te croouud roan to roplz f -o the pi.eturos rwt the ihboys she
erotioneci to0 tr,ble on my richt.
did not stuy long in Now York," she said, “booeuen of thot rbild
whose rio', urn you suo there. 1 ha:.d just finished oursinr, her V.:rough a
long 11:ther:o *nem 7 nede my trip to e.,•
Tlut
1et after orrIving,
probably e.4 ponth or eix retei)ivsd a ottblegrea ratinr roe to return
t1:10 WW1 crieving for no to ouoh ontent that it ha;!, couseti a rasps*.
!,:roey V/93 oleo sent for my passage,. Aoturninr t London irese0iatelys I
nuroed `rathoripto balk to hre2th, ond when oho became well I cone book to
:t.:1 -as thin tine to ottl. The isr7e.- Jr:tyre you sae further
ti -to toble is the ozzle girl when she was nearly rrown. T.- kept in
t loon win hm. for non:: yet,re aft' coninr, here, but T ktrimr gdiere
oho la enymero.
flash of elnlk broln bodies and a criat deal of harkinL snnoeneed
the orriv,1 of tete !are shepherd do:Al. %re. 707011.. exr!ueed ners4lf und
vp,:le to fe.m1
fl0171 ',turned veltt. the (!oeft oArlIne about her in
nn Ile of Ivy, twaing fandly to tPu,i, itu bEtdfl t bac" iar(gntle whoa
I roe !bed out to pat their touoled Nioude.
o•nind thoir r -Aber," oho hurried lo explain," and I misad thetas
two fron ti -bey ore fr Ara"
and theft is about
t yeret V:ferertmo &r thoir Eir !‘ritttr, or stirinyr,'-le, an :ire of soy
friends e.:.11 him, is rAinger than "lettrel,the -their
et or ha.71' et black. fa,:e vr.11:1 ten enorktrps." .1te pointer; nr.oudly.
"!totbi r,r1 firte w-teh dc.1 ci.rd we have newer ".,len bothered with prowlers in
the 7'3ultry yordef. h.y v..r4 lap art 1,3 and goo.!..etst ured."

--- Page Break ---

7
he gothored up the toe things and took them to the kitchen; the too dogs
lolled &twat the floor awaiting her return.
emang Cook tOr.oigh a sueoesslou or rooms from the kitcOen sho called,
"1 know ya.J want me to got an with the history of ir poultry fora, but
just let me tell you ao4u4 Loot:tor onglith custom that I brought alont, 14osidos
the tea drinking.
"loot custom is /trove Iooectoy, or Pi4inuan 'Jueeday as we always coiled it.
ky: *ow wo Ohiloron use to look forward to toot day, and liveo in ontioipation
autil it arrived. our dinnar on th,,t oarticular elussday we away:. had pen•
ookos and Moot punookeo they worst" eho sA4laimod.
Taft sere made of milk ono oe miAod with obits flour, pooroO very thin
coAtua to the 000uistenoy of a wafer. f course, mon' okillsta /tiro used
for trying tam, 4o0uuso 4ur &oily mos L.rge. ut rug4ralsaG of pan sins, only
ono cake 11164 coAed ut e time. This reault48 in many ponsakoc of various else.,
but thoy wero utooked up in toll pilee, ono when all wore done so tool, our plaoos
at tho tuUto aid the pas ini; toolk,n. no mac tzlmin at a time, Lprucd with melted
butter, winkled with augur and lemon juice ono rolled up tiently like a stick,
to by aatou with :4AI. fin -zero.
"i taugOt my friends that ouotom tenon I irst name hero, but witain the
Iota fø o oto.rs i have lout my Atua at moi.iug this type of panosko, so I have
&ivon the ouutom uo -Ahtirely."
he j&need about the room, then rouchod down to fond).* the head of Michael
who loy at hr feet.
"In speaking of :41gland, one aouully think, of us ell as tam' 6rinkers, but
in the south of Olgiand Coffee is used as tritely as it is here in this country.
number of people here have uskoO ma hoe to nske tea. oil, there's dif-
ferent ways end oifferent tusks. :440 Of MW poop1a 1Lis it boiled until it is
literally black, others &OA lonves to those already steeped and pour boiling-

--- Page Break ---

water over its tniss when placed on the hob to brew, mikes a blaok
thick tea. You know in my homelazd many of the homes have hobs, these are
hoevy ir,n etands built in the fireplace and are used for hanginr, the
teapot on,
"out the proper say to make a brow, is to pour boiling water cm
f roan locvess let it st.nd for a minute then pour it off and you have a
fine delicut• tea. in rtgland we &logs serve tea about five in the
afternoon accompanied by sandwiches, o, ken and frequently, toast and jam.
me kept servants they were served wIth *at we called a pick-
up -e' oven morning at U. If this were not provided they were highe,
pickeurates consisted of whatever leftovers were on hand.
I pont inued the practice of this custom after coming to tho United
Aatest and enenever L sad fortunate en Ugh to have a servant.
01;61,041 cakes are another favorite foots of the .41glish peoples they
are ma, -:e from ameited potatoes mixed with a little flours thinned with
enter and cooked like pancakes.
"411.1.10 are an the subject of foods" she remarked with a shake of
tier :leads "I mitOrr as well *ay that it didn't take Twee to tell me to
lase e,rupeiruit juices in my coking, because I've been using it in breads
and calms ever since came to the .tidge 4.ctions and that's been a long
time 9O. ut some people think jest because Texas got that idea outs
its new."
no ',bused spin and air)ted deeply.
41 specialised in diets and foods along with my traininE as a nurse;
and biter coming to the United :,;tattes 1 upset some time at the Tiattle
44netoritai extending my studies arta research work.
"It certainly is a warder that the kIglish people remain so hail

--- Page Break ---

g
end hearty the way they est, for besides their regular meals aad tea.
It is nothing to enjoy a midnight smash. ast the eating heeits at some
at the people right here in 4voi Fork orte amestiege amyl :fhey sere
nothing for anything hot fried or boiled salt perk, fried Dread and eel*
lard greens. Of course the groin* are all right, but the others. by, q,
hOW 0614 they endure it!
"enameller I son I try to help them assume the proper methods of living,
espeeially mere foods are oenoerned, out it is a difficult and thanklose
tagik•''
,iroppine this dietreselon, she reverted bask to her perAonal history
and continued:
"Shortly after I mans to this oftetry a frothier 684 deter of nine
oano to Cased* to live. I visited them there sererailiroo but did not
find thw eountry partioularly appealing, se desided to take out eitisew*
ship papers her in Almeria*. Lly family booms, very angry at this and sew*
oral argesente ensued. Coe at my siatere wrote as tren Lehdon to remember
the blue blood in my value. !Jell, for the tine being I let the matter drop
and same way or other Zn..r found time to take it up
34 I did write ay sinter end tell het that I'd rather be a oltisep
of the United 3tatee than have all the hitt' blood in Nubia -and," laughingly
added 4rs. 3offelk. ",Ind furthered oy statement to her by explaining that
zy bload looked as rod as any 11.'3, °Wean. this loturiotati her, out I
held my ground.
"Aft4r a period of two pion In how York tad at the aattle ,reek Sams
tortum. I developed a bronehial trouble and the physielan under when I was
working advised that I eome to 71orida for the winter. 1 sane to

--- Page Break ---

10
Jasksanvilla, and os arriving liked it so vall I stayed several years."
Jost this our attention vies Utah by a woman 'saki% along the read
carrying s baby Is hos' arms, nevaral childrua trilatt bo4ind her. Ars.
3effalk explained that aka Iliad in tho neighborhood and was one of the
persons she had triad to edgiest* am the subjest-of diets.
"I did some nursing in Acksonville," oho continued, "than I took
over a rooming hone* end operatod it for a friend 4f mine 'nil.* she team.
north. It is there that I met Joha and 40 veto married. titstr that, 2
thoucht,for a long tin. that my marrlago to an Amarloan eitlaen,.autios,
matioally rinds so 3no, but I found 'out later that t las wrong.
"John sourdad co ImXigh to me, and though I loved ,,vnarioi, and aorida
vary dourly, it vas gond to haar his. I moz fosnd out thaigh, that he
vao of Ingliah dasoent and therefore had many 4tgliah toot.
'Ills poop'. Gan* wise in the Mayflower." sim laegked. I kuev that
many nionlo claim that distinction, but it is roally true in his mai. No
was born in. :4hbory„ Dasuozhovatta„ a UN( auttlamsnt oamovItero soar 4a4sa.
I think. Jo Jo aoarolly /,04 now, but hats spent the bettor part of Us lift
in Florida. Hs livod near hors for iftris and othur praporty at a
plum called :!ulphur '4rings, rioriCe.•
1te was married 44200 Wore. Aind thoup his firat site has long *Inas
passed asey, he has tvo flue dauOitotof both vorklag. Taw live soar
TAdocta, Goorgia. Ono owns r low) dairy farm 'Lich she add Ler boatuat
run, and the other is vorking in an offise. Thay cote dovn to sea us
ovary nov and than sad va tolk and Alsk tisk.
"Joha vas *PPrenttatd to a ootinot motor Is his r.Alth an4 learned
that trAel later ho boom* a building coatraster. Us ronstaled this
ham mod it is. the umtalent old shall you war is.. Iwill Wm) yam
through before you leas* is yos emit soo just shot We dolma. 1 think It's

--- Page Break ---

11
.remarkable that he eau do as mush ekilltul weft at his as., but he's still
vets capable.. I think that if anything napalmed to flur poultry ftral bed
be able to maks a living at earpeetry.
"%tot atter vs were morriod, nlieh vas *bout throe years after 1
ause to Jacksonville• se moved dove hero to tke Ridge Atetion. 4, spend
*overall additional years sowing about trykag to discover suitable Imam*
tiom and finally settled in z'4Uring share re intended to nibs a permanent
have hum peoltry f‘rmers *Inset fres the time of oar marriage
sad aratanoleteke erepped up in it. No storied with no *aperients, at all.
"la 34briag during the boon days we made money, bet our expenses
were heavy, too. At one time we had 3,000 laying hats, and we got OGO
a doses for eggs etielesals. didn't have may retail watts because Of
the wholesale dammed, but *sold a few doses sew and them at cive dollar
each.
oJreesed frying site chickens brought 500 and, leg a pound. Hens
weren't much *keeper. reed colts were high then and sometimes we paid as
mesh as 4.00 for a 100 pounds of laying mambo but believe me there woo a
great deal of satisfeetion in making a let tof money even ehen prodeeties
Goats wore as nigh.
A loud Moak at the beck doer arreeted Mrs. evffolk. lie encused
herself to answer it. Isetwr,.ftney•Maint followed her, but !lehael rose
and Game to lay his heed in my lap.
*tie she ass pail I leaked about the room only to discover that tars
house seemed divided Weave or throe apartments. %cross the hall I mould
see another livingreen, *Lie the room I was in opened into a large bode,
roam otiose bay window Weeded a aerie view 01 the lake.

--- Page Break ---

Returning frma the knishes through deers almost in alimment Mrs. -,;taffolk
shrugged her shoulderst
"Just a neighbor hunting Johns" she explained.
Amiting herself she resumed*
H.:April' after making so such money with the e(ge, I was eerie sly injured
.in an tutomoile wreak. It hap wed while I vas out driving with same friends.
A *heel oDme off and the ear overturned. This took nearly all the money we had.
"A lived in •2,ebring a number of years, but some way or other we didn't
feel that we wanted to make it our permanent hams. finally come over here to
look around and the minute I saw this Aleut I vented it. i loved the lake and
the big urove," she pointed throudi the window indieating the laro, crove that
followed the lake and bordered the road.
H4e had to sell a lot of chickens in order to have enough money to do the
the place over, but we didn't mind. John said we had toe many anyway, and if
it bac; continued he would havehaO to hire some one to help him. That is rarely
successful in poultry farming. As soon as we knew we could get this piece, we
rutted that old green house across the read to live in while we fixed this one
up.
"This place was certainly delapidated just a big old Well with a fallen
down roof end rotted porch. It seemed almost impossible to make anything of it,
but to ivtempt the th2ossible is often the way to suttees.," she added phi4-
losopuioally.
"(4 course John fixed temporary qusrters for the few chickens we had left,
and I took ore of them wale be worked on the house. We'd get up every morning
at 4.30, mid wale I got breakfast, he cleaned the hen houses and fed the hems.
Then when breakfast was over he went to work on the house and I saw the hens

--- Page Break ---

through the day, false collected, cleaned and grease the e a so that he
cooid deliver then in the afternoon.
e walked toward the runt TAM:UM and pointed to u Litsoline weter
wn tie lake front.
is necftestry becAuse the ohlekens need so much wnter. it wus a
?realms when 14 first Gene here 1Jecuuoe we weren't Connected with the city
wuthr lines, but after John inatalled that rump our problem was solved.
tAia all sounds funny, but layng hens can never be left without water. it
cioeen't hurt them to g0 without food for a while, but water never.
'It me while we were living in the green house that 1 teok a peer
sick i7Arl in. he was dying of pellegra when I get h r, and had been given
up ta die. It was crowded in ny place but there wasn't anything else to
do, booboo. she didn't have a soul to help hr. I pet her on special diet
and goy* her all the eare I could, und I min got results!" exclaimed
Mrs. Ad folk.
"After we moved over to this house I to2k in another sick woman
'howl foully east her off. he was a problem though, and turned out to
be a mental eases she frequently become violent.
*nest of my friends wor, actually afraid to erne and sec me while she
was hers, and they all becred me to get the °county to de something. 411,
when I first heard of her she was in need of quick help, and help from the
county or anything else would have tekoh a lot of tine and red tape. 3e
she stayed with me about six weeks and improved so much that her family
took her back again. Ate lived to die with emeetiing else.
s I have mentioned before John isn't a good mixer, but he never obi"
Poets to my having friends, nor to ma bringing people here to help. He

--- Page Break ---

La the eoul of '.indneos and aftur all, if we can't be kind ad helpful
to otioule we 3oet auk; the wuy of Ale, ghat duos the effort of 1%ving
amount to?" ohs uuked softly.
"as never "moulded our poultry work ftor owning lwre. m now halm
auout 300 ladle& hens and that is sufficient for a medeut living as our
Ltedu ors few. John obto.Olo a 11310 work in tow ever so oflon and I
eoll e 104 iloiore so wo got slang.
4roo !MOS are now at the heicht of the layint; stetson tote lin get about
an 30„: prction. rrieee fluetuate of o3urne, but within tho past few
soaks, Jr :wobably two aouthu, wo hove boon gottine fr-Jm 362'. to 15;-, a
(Waco 4'7%' tiwm wholceule. opoulnlice in day old-et-,te for :Irivate car
ta.,ore. 'omutimes John trades a :ow ot ihe olor :or Lrocorlos.
"Teeo 10 not la h1eh now id it moo see, und thiA ;:olps i:ome. Mir
avorace prica mew is U.00 a 1X lbu. 1 Aosta an c-verao vf 7. year
to feud la.dlnc hon.
rincing them up to tho lacinc point LL the twat oaponsive part.
)ftetimeu we buy baby chicks, Just a day old, but it's boat to buy six
cook old pullote. hoy ooet nom, but must of the dancer perirw is Mr,
411(1 that is un (mood. mood.
".41or. we are broodini; baby enicks we have to exercise the atmost
care. o never leave the promisoas ..e.)0 we wall() rectaLr two-br trips te
the brooder 11Jueos, day- ond ni3it. :hicks are just like babies, and if
you leave them for any len4th of tire, they nanace to zet in trouble."
She au6ceuted that we take a luoL ut tha ThIckens, and cL“Jti:ined no
about Eettinc. too cl000 as I WU34 frijiten them.

--- Page Break ---

3.5
a
2.9 we pleased through the yard I had a (thanes to °antra hor many
flowers including the rose garden, a grape arbor, and trelli**like fosse
cov-,red eith flame vine.
theide the poultry yards 1 saw the large white chicken WANK. and the
wire net fences eurrounding catch. 'is we walked about ire. 'u1 folk cona
tinsed her conversation.
"The ooultry work, is very intereeting„ and it is amazing tho amount
of intelligenee that chickens have. They all know john and myself, and if
s etrarer comes too close they fly in all directions. The check causee
then to moult and thus raducee egr !xoduetion.
tho taili•ond of a hurrionne we got a few years ago, it blew
the roof orf one of the hen hawse and drenched the hens, otherwise they
weren't hurt. Alt the shock made them quit 'eying and stLrt to moulting,
it ems three nthe before I could bring them back to their former status.
hocks ar- bad, as they are extrnely nervous.
suonessful poultryuan hue be cenetntly on the ros the houses mat
be cleaned and disinfected regularly to keels deem diseasee and insocts.
Chickens have their diseases just like humans de, ouch as oolde, pneumonia,
fever, ate. unee a chicken bec:Imes ill John wrings its nook and burns it,
bosause even though it is cured, it le weak and le the first to coca doss
with something else. :inyway when they're siok or subject to sioknesu their
six oroductien drops off and they aren't any good."
,leakinr. with the ensurenoe qf NMO who has had experienee, ohs went
on.
"Jhickens mast have U.-Jod and water all the time, for the mare they
eat and drink the higher the egg 'produetien. A one time we experimented

--- Page Break ---

with lidding the poultry houses early in the mornings before the sun rose
and getting the hens ofi the roosts, but it las too expensive so we quit.
In visitor we cook op a earn masb to raise egg prodestion. This is all
hard work, and ones 'tutted auet be strictly adhered too."
as stopped near a thisk oabbege patch va)loh had been planted to pro-
vide green stuff for the obiakens.
"lt is not praotical,to raise any green foods except eabbage," she
explainod, "and molly John does not even attempt that, as the earth in
this section is not suited to it. The hens should have the tenderest of
grow things, like lettuoe, but it won't grow at all, so we just plant
few cabbages. 4e usually obtains scrap vegetables from the stores and as
a general rule there's enough to go around, so we don't have to plant.
'Chickens Mitift be kept on a rugular routine for they notio, any devi-
ation in foototuffe, and retaliate by refusing to lay, Of (worse they can-
not control ti* for it's their nature.
"Oollecting the eggs and preparing them far market is no easy tLsk
either. They must be graded, lashed, and packed oaretully, but in spite of
the work, I love it, "she added earnestly.
3etraoing our stops toward the huse, we were stopped by a young girl
renning through tho yard.
7naffy, ma see kin you land her three eige till she kin pay you
temerree"
"Ahy yes Judy exclaimed biro. u1 folk, "I will be glad to let her
have them, but tell me, did your mother use those Garrote I sent yesterdell"
Judy hung her tousled head and dug a grimey toe in the sand.
"no man, ohs shore didn't, she maid them carrots was only fittin for oew
food."

--- Page Break ---

Mrs. duffelk sighed in disgust.
"dill Judy, at is your nAher having for supper tonight! and sky
does she want the eggs!"
"I reckon we'll have side meat," rflplied the child, "with tried breed,
like we most always has."
Lrs. Affolk entered her kitchen shile I stood an the book porch and
listened te her conversation with Judy.
"Now Judy, I am siding over a half doses eggs, and you tell your
mother to *amble than like I snowed her the other day," instructed Mrs.
3uffelk. "mat uid you de with the light bread I sent over with the ear!
rots! ;44 you throe it away too?"
lee man," replied Judy unabashed, "we still got hit."
*Alright, toil your mher to make toast of it, dry toast, and tell
her not to seek that 'hit* pork, and don't sat that fried bread either.
Now. If she'll scramble the eggs and make toast, and let you sat it that
way, I won't charge her for the eggs. •3sn you tell her that!"
Judy nodded in the affismative and grabbing the beg raced off caress
the yard like a badly scared rabbit.
by postale sighed again and gaged after her with a wondering look.
"I don't know shy I let Bush p ople worry me," she added, "but I'm
always concerned over their welfare. They seen so helpless and indit•
forest. flomebody must do sonetding for then! The pay they eat literal-
ly terrifies me, nothing but fat pork and fried bread, day in and day oat.
,a0ssionally they manage a few collard greens, but they're always se
smothered in grease that it isn't fit to eat. Poor things, I do wish I
-eould maks them understand, but it's impossible.

--- Page Break ---

don..
'These people des% an seed their,shildren to sehool half of the
time. I helped them with clothes and insisted that they go. bet it didn't
de any good. The United Mates offers the greatem, evertenities in every
way. and the schools are wonderful. They tee* the shildren so mesh mere
than the oeuel, and it's the unusual fron *Leh the greatest benefits are
derived. Ihildren here seem so much more independent and self reliant
than in my, day, and they knew a greet deal about gametal seonamic condition*.
"ften, I long to attend school, ond if it wouldn't create seek' a
vonontion T would. !Volts yahoo's in this oemstry tomb good (Mixability
end neighberly qualities which op many of us need."
ihi etwmfeted ohowing ne the interior of two, homes addle that she
wanted me to see whet wonderful work John bad aecompliihed.
le entered the veatibule in the from* of the house and turned to the,
left off the halls here I observed that my geese had been carrelt about
the house being errefted in seeh a way that it would be sonverted loth
several epartments. Inc Imre front room I had thought to be another liv*
tag room, preyed to be Are. kit folk's sewing room. lt contained a medeem
sewing machine, a large hand woven basket end a +mite it wisher foraiterea
The large bedroom on this side of the hoeso vas furnished with We,
hopes. Tee smaller rooms, opposite the dining room and kitchen hay py
linoleum an the floor and the general color *Chem inn to rotme green,
and grey.
"I planned this home of curse* Mrs. 2uffelk said, lend John has faith*
fully serried out every detail. There are ton rooms mad a bath. 4. may
add a cereal perch some day, bet it will not be soon.
"I love oempeny and I wanted plenty of rooms so I planned accordimge
ly. I also plasma* tar the apartment arressaleat, fir an. never know dm

--- Page Break ---

kt)
they night need it. You see, I had the bathroom pissed right in the
center of the hoese so that it °wad be roadbed from any of the bedrooms.
it took quite a bit of thinking, but we MROMOdou
AS WO talked we moved through the rooms and out onto a large book
larch.
may tastes this in someday," ohe added, land sake a sun porch out
of it, but it neoessary it too oan be converted into a bedroom. At profilist,
it makes a good storage place."
Her kitchen sod dining room were neat and clean. A built-in shins
closet in the dining room showed off gleaming, china and silverware, and
a vase of flowers in the center of the table added cooler to the room.
side door leading from the kitchen took us back to the yard and
toward the lake.
"4e subscribe to a daily pumper," she remarked, lend I enjoy reading
the news, espeolally the politisal nays. I omit vote and John doeen't
care for it now that he's so old. I think he's a Republican, but he sel•
don mentions these affairs.
"Row if I were voting I'd certainly be a immoorat, for I think that
they are the right partys they do ao much for the people. (Jf course I
cannot see much need for several parties like same folks do, but as long
as we have them, I isuers all we ean do is make our °holes and etlek by it.
"For myself, I heartily approve of all the aid the Government gives
the people, and I uppreciate their efforts in undertaking such a try..
meadow, task. In just the past few years in traveling over the Atte
have son many improvements, fame that have been habilitated, freshly
painted hones, end flourishing gardens, where a few years ago there was
desolation.

--- Page Break ---

di
A...1though I cannot vote, 1 urce ny friende to do rflo I wish 1 could
votu, 1..00t;;Jaa love this land with all its freedom and unlialited power.
-14.1.?,) it jil1. nnatn fr., and without war. :ar ir ouch u territle
uncod2:! thrth. j brother lho liven iL loads wus b 'starer; he finial'
L! I f
;Its w; ASTI le
ameo A ni ptoonod to plue: n °pray of mauve chrysanthemum. the
dAl .41 ho lake quacked a frilnOly iTeatIftr.
"It o vor oertme4 to mo thot govo ur thin _beautiful world to fight
it 17R :1 ftnd there iu hint/ of room for everyone, ',ut people
;741dy.
kE
n t n eh ur ah nembar rtht n:yw, but I continue my church duties
nr4 !-tt )1.1,: re! olarly. tly ,y)uth was an ':piseepellen, but when I
ocIno t von -'62.1: left that ,huroh end joined the Neserene. There beamed
-,orkorr there, am e thoir creed eesmed no honest and grimier..
realito nrr, thIlt fhly aro unnececotorily etrict, but at that time it seemed
ru ri;•ht.
',C3*.411 never out or heir, and no :se ever thuptst of attaad.•
dvin faro.
`',ro:)- os 'roue huwevar, trithin tho shureh, and they seem to 1:row.
That me a lot, so after r while withdrew for I want my Murat to
,,utet heuceful. 'lnee then I have atteesded the hantiet and the
Itet John 1- Tv,t o nomb Ar either, but he is always willing
fJriv., me in on =days and wit for rue* re *aye he sets along just as
101-1 the.) .horob, 'To hA P3 no boa habits, he don't @von drink tee
do, Ail1e VtttMod..
turnoil oi.:ein to tv.q• flowors an toll so that she sold a few new
and then, eueecially the ,ahryountha--,umo Which --rev oxec.roirrly viol: along
the lake front.

--- Page Break ---

"uf aouree ur abiftlit) tire li:itoci ?Ana every little bit helps, hut aft or
I work with the floweru they aeon au iltalt11 tht, t on hurdly stand the
thoudtt of aellinc theta. :hen hoopla C:010 for than ueuelly give than
away, unleae uur nu -Ai iv preening,.
,oraetine mint to travel all over the :411teci Utast, but no :natter
wherq I 1,o I went to a:,,ne beak to "'arida, it ie a part of me.