TORSOS AND OBSERVATIONS RELATIVE TO LIFE HISTORY
NO. paces
Ne.werds 2200, approx.
I. F.MILT:
A. February „i0, A.
2, Mary Taylor, white, (fictitious name;
Urs. Willa Blanding, (real name)
122 North Comnerco Awe.,
4. Sebring, Florida.
5. Home Kitishen Manufacturer of jams,
jellies, etc.
Barbara
Berry parsley, writer
7.
Marz Taylor
-.Size of family three; woman, husband, and daughter in
immediate family. Three daughters and one
sea married and living away from home.
Effeat of family size upon financial status immediate
family greatly limits financial atatus
as husband is ill and, unable to work and
daughter is in college.
'J.Attitude toward large family woman aoes net believe in
large families and showed a sli:,htly
resentful attitude teard her family.
4•Attituie toward limitation at family Believes in limitatiOn
of familyl.feels that life under present
day cirounstances is se precarious thatall
families should be limited.
3.0ecupational background of family agricultural for both
man and woman. Families of both were Parsers
and man has been a farmer and stook prolucer
and trader; Inman had many years experiense
on farm and was else County Pemonstratien
Agent. Now engaged in manufasture of jams
etc.
6. Pride of family, including ancestry rather vane as to
ancestry, ether than immediate family.
Proud of work and background of farming.
Proud of children inspito ef slight resent
neat of fact that they do net hop' her.

--- Page Break ---

Topical Outline for Life History if Nary Taylor
page a.
II. EDUCATION:
L. Number if years attendance in s‘heel twelve for weaan;
perhaps ten er twelve fir nan but rather
difficult to determine as he did net
attend a graded scheal all the tine,
neither did he attend regularly. Appears
well educated however. Ohildren all well
educated, nostly Ath college work.
20 Causes of limited education education of couple could
hardly be ealled limited theugh they are
net oellege Lraduates. Eeeessity to work
perhaps prevented **liege work, along with
limited means, and early narriage.
Attitudes Toward Education:
a. Educ2tiesal advantages desired for children---.. very
wabitious and nada: many saorifiees in eider
that children might be well educated. Ater
high seheel educations, ,ash took sine
special works sae daughter attended business
**liege; another took nurses training;
peunges4 daughter new at Flerida Etats
gellego fir linen though Ors. Taylor folio
the great strain if this and is denying
herself greatly in order to keep this ciild
in **liege.
b. Whither worker believes salmis/ trainin; ie if ecenamie
advantage —.Woman believes greatly in education, and
realizes its ...Reale value. Sas edueated
bibildren, each with sem special work or
profession in view se that they nay take
a special place in ecenenic and social life.
co Evaluation of seheel system fe.:13 that school sysims
IS filled with lejle of frills and fancies
but that fundamentally it is sound and
if great advantage; prometes self assurance,
:sakes children mere albi to think and plan
their lives, fits the to be geei citizens.
d. Ambitieas, ideals, idea if a z;sod life woman often
mourns the lees if their fin, farm and
wishes for a ;eed cubttautial hese and
ineone. At present is renting a small hens
but elms a large he in asiether part of
the St ate which she rents. Has a mall ear
which is necessary in her work as she
delivers criers for her jellies and Jane to
other towns and sitleo. Wilma* would wont
te work in spite if :drew:stances, eve* if
financial status was adequate, and would like
a eesition in at to or national work eta
welfare nature.

--- Page Break ---

Tepical Outline fir Life Distery ef Mary Taylor
page 3
III. IWOOMEs
1. Genparisen ef present incestg with first weekly er annual
irises* rather difficult to determine. When
woman was married at eighteen years of
age she entered a hem* of wealth. Her
husband owned a large plantation and
stook far* which he later lest.
The* wenan usistesk undertook to make
living as husband's health failed with
financial difficulties. While eupleyed
a Home Deneastration Agent she had a
regular salary which however was not
adequate. During been days in Plerids.
she mad* plenty of money WhichXwas
expended en famlby needs.
At present insane is inadequate and very
arowadte as males have been few during
season for her products.
While at beginning at her married life
she lived in weath mad plenty she new
has barely 'tough for feeds clothes, and
ether necessities, and even that at times
is threatened.
Astual needs to be severed by income.. feeds clothing, rents
medical bills for husbands upkeep er
daughter in eellege co that she may s eon
be capable of self supperti sem* repairs
en property in Gainesville; gas and oar
upkeep/ supplies for manufacture of her
products.
3.To what extent income covers ascds probably barely
adequate with allompenses pared as closely
as possible.
4. Sets of relative values in expendituro of income-- woman
had a highly trained and developed sense
of values and makes no foolish expenditures.
5. What persen consulted considers an adequate imam.. rather
difficult to determine as wanes did net
express herself definitely upon this. Has
lived with cut an entirely adequate Le—
mma for se many years. 1-4, live in the
style t• which she we at ese time
accustemed would require perhaps 'Wm=
a thousand dollars monthly; for incense
at present te cover all needs without
worry s prebably five huadred dollars
monthly. This wipuld provide better living
conditiens, medical cares better carefer
child in **liege.

--- Page Break ---

Topical Outline for Life History ef Mary Tayler
page 4
IV. ATTITUDE TOWARD °COMMON AND KIND OF LOPE:
1. Pride or shane in work seems very proud of hor work
and of the fast that she has originated
several sum recipes for Jellies, *to,
yet she omens resentful that she nust
do this work and that it pays her se little;
is &Ivo very suspicious, feeling that acne
one is trying to oneroaoh upon her work,
original recipes, etc.
Influones of eutside attitudes very susceptible to attitudes
*f friends, that is she cares a groat deal
ter their approval and Boons deeply
wounded by lack of frikidithip *f sou* pang*
and lack of appreciation ef her efforts by
sine of her close friindej
J. Basis of objeotions te As satisfactien with 1Nee woman
seemed disgruntled with present conditions;
cannot *eke sufficient to live as she
mould like and yet works se hard. Work
requires energy, time, and ;Rental ability
yet returnee from it are net adequate.
Fools also that responsibilities of entire
family are upen het since husband has
booms, ill and eh* is slightly resentful
of that. Attitude ef woaan is that every
one is antagonistic to her interestil she
admits this -an-_ says it is prebebly caused
by her age and having worked for 2* long
for se very little.'
4. Attitude toward owners ;prebably in this oases owners of hems
whisk she rent,. might also show attitude toward purchases*
of products feels that she is forced to pay entirely
to Amish rent; yearly average is 14,40
per ninth. Also feels that she is deing
a groat favor to ksts purchasers of her
predustd in letting thAs have tim goods
at price she asks, yet does net raise
price.
I. Advantages far disadvantages of resent liCe in conparisea
with ether types.
a. Present mall to -4i life as compared with that of farming'
woman stated that when they *sued their
large farm they ceuld preduse almost
everything to supply their needs and al-
ways were sure of a living and plenty to
oat. Such a life was more er loss iselated
hswever and she lie m frisnds and enter-
tainment. Would be glad to return to tarn
life if it could be with the wealth they
had at one time.
Present life would be more agreeable if

--- Page Break ---

ToPivtl Outline for Life History *f Mary
Taylor page 5
IV. ATTITUDE TOWARD OCCUPATION AND KIND OF LIFE. centinueds
3—a, continued, not se harassed with financial natters,
for friends call and she attends card
parties, etc. Is also able to sell
preduets in larv, hetels, to tourists
and ethers.
b. Present life compared with that in a city WOMAA stated
that she was essentially a small town
or country woman in her preference of
a place to life.. While city environment
would prebably in **me respeets be better
for her work in a marketing way, and
would net offer obstacles in production
of her produets, yet she shun* it and
deem net even go te largo cities to
sell her jams and jellies. Does net
*are for city life at all, and feels that
to attempt her work under sueh a life
vieuld be s great handicap.
c. Present life compared to that at a larger town. wenan stated
that she would prefer a larger town in
which to live and pursue her work if it
were net for the natter of naking adjust
meats, such as finding.. suitable leeation
for her business, staking now friends, now
markets. etc. She feels a timidity at
present in staking any change, though fools
that if she could lecate in lone ef the
larger tourist towns of' the Ridge Sootiest
it mi.;ht be to her advantage, fer mush
of her trade is ::,lort4; tourists.
V. POLITICS
1. Extent of voting wenangs husband is an ardent Demoorat
and votes at all election/0 woman is else
a Democrat but mere or less indifferent
and does net censider voting a privilege.
INISSOIL takes little interest in polities
except to eritioice present way of matters.
Dogres of independence in casting ballot both would
vete the regular Democratie ticket as have
always been Democrat, and feel that that
Party is best for the Country.
.Preference in choice of candidates Vete straight
Demooratic ticket feltn4 that the Pmataiy
Party choice is best. il snail beeal
elections would vete Zep friJnis *r in
lieu if fr5fmads as candidates, for there
VI,J7 considered suited for the office.

--- Page Break ---

Topical Outline for Life History of Mary Taylor
Page 6.
V. POLIT/OS, centirsueds
4. Party oonscieusnoss Both proud of being Democrats yet
wellies is critical of present eenlitioasand
rather apathetic regarding all polities.
5. Consciousness of changing trends in thetkait woman
well aware of changing trends in thought
but harps upen the way things were done in
her youth, deem net accept quite gracefully
present oseaemic and social trends.
VI. RZLIG/011 AND IORkL3s
1. Influence st religion on mere's-. family quite *oral but
doubtful if reittien has influenced them
mush in this respect. He bad habits, as
aedern trends in religion) family are all
Presbyterians but de not attend regularly.
2. Attituic toward varieus ferns of amusement woman very
bread ainded in regard to amusoaents of
various kinds and eadeavers to see that
hertaughter in such with other children
of her age and social position. 14111AA
**joys sieving pictures, bridgeolvarieus
parties, magemx and ether amusements
current in town. Is a member of Tourist
Club and regularly attends its wartime
entertainasnin.
3.
Relation to Church;
a. Contribution really contribute regularly to Church
b. Attitude toward aid free Church.- have never asked nor
been the recipient *if Church aid;
approves of it for the needy and wenan has
helped Church **(Pieties in giving this aid
to ethers.
c. Attendance family make no fetish of regular attendance
at Church but go when they want to and feel
like £t -.perhaps are fairly regular sad
especially when dau,:hter ia at hone.
VII. MEDICAL NEEDS,
1.Meney expended fertlespital and medical bills-. husband
has been under deater's care for several
meaths with cost ef abeut eight dollars a
week until recently when th3 bill has been
slightly reduced as he is new able to be
up and abeut Daughter in cellege has had
dome dental work, and another daughter uhe

--- Page Break ---

Topieal Outline Per Life History of Mary Sayler
page V.
M2DIOAL 111211,8, continuedt
1. continueds is unmarried and working needed
financial aid te have twist's and
appmadix removed. 9011AR needs
glasses changed as eyes trouble her
but feelOunable t. de so at present.
S. T. what extent health has been pretested by adequate
Iloilo:al ()era health has always been proileceod
preperly by adequate *are for entire
family, except perhaps for WenAll
is at present tired, everworked, and
very norveusA
3. What effect has work upon health apparently ne effect,
unless in ease of woman The is ever
worked and aervous s part of this
craditien se attribute's to age and
financial werries.
VIII. DI3T1
1. Snowledae if a beaanoed diet *man has a thersugh
knowledge if a balanced diet through
her studies and Inert as Oeunty Demos
stration Agent, and summer oeursee
at **liege in this work.:
Ti what extent ia kaewledge applied knewledge of a
balanced diet is applied at ell tines
when WOMAJA Ismpananz prepares neale
at hone, she does net like to cook and
is usually te., busy for it, se family
take most if meals in restaurants.
J. Ti what extort is it possible to have a belanoei diet en
wage earned pessible to have a well balanced diet
at each noel as family is small and
aro not heavy eaters.
IX. MISOSIALANEOUS OBSERVATIONSs
1. Cleanliness and crier of heuse and number of reams
house of seven rooms, all clean and
neat with a very comfortable homelike
appearanse.
2A Cleanliness of person --woman vas very neat and, clean, with
an attractive house dross and apron
if geed material; silver hair attractively
arranged, face and hands clean.
3 Furnishings in house a set of lawn furniture graced a
*corner af the yard and was pretested
from the sun by a huge gay umbrella;

--- Page Break ---

Tspieal Outline for Life History ot Mazy laylar
Mg.
IX. MISOELLANROU3 OBSERVATIONS, twAillnedi
6. Pri41.,
wicker ohairs in tan and groan were upon
the large front veranda; living rein
was oeafertable furnished with a natchiag
wisIVr set, chairs, settee, and desk.
A small wood burin; 7Aste added its
cheerful warmth, hands's* lamps kelectric)
and a sett rug in brown and grey added
to the pleasing street Portieres in
neutral shades that blsnded will with
both ree=s draped the arch between living
4111 dinini;; room.
A :ay linoleum ca7ercA the diiing roan
neer, ohina and glass gleaned in a
built...in china closet. A breakfast net
in pale green eentered the room and
bleemigg plants stes1 in the windows.
Kitchen had tws throo burner ail stoves,
ghltigw sink, sui)bsarcas and table.
leth bed roans were well furnished, *no
in nabegany finilh with draperies of
blues twin bodes, dresser, and clethes
cabinet; the ether in ivory with
hainginge in erermi ::41d rills) twin beds
vanity dresser ant; a built in clothes
clesets,
both bed rsems conns,oted with lie modems
bath.
A:tether small reea hold a table, shelves
ter beeke and a sink.
in pessessiens 1,112401 had many mall items,sush
a very old lamp, en aged woven basket
for selling if which rho was proud. 8114,
the had a handsome large diamond ring
with ear -rings to match, which she
said were the Italy jewelry left fres
mere prespereus tines. She was also
proud of table cloths, draperies and
the like which she had made and used
as denenstrations in her work as Kolas
Agent.
X. USE OF TIMES
1. lleutine etc, wonan 1..16 no established routinc for
work, .hat is does net work regularly
every day; works as demand ter predusts
occurs thus insuring fresh articles.
Whether working or net she arises early
and has no reapect for those who sleep
late ne natter what the eau...

--- Page Break ---

TopieLl Outlinc for Life Mistery ef Mary Taylor
page 9
X. US T4 OZ TILI,continu3ds
lieutin, etc. pentinued..--- TJten at work with her jellies
wemansarimes tio begin this
work at Ivrea se:eck, then unless
there are many ardor, mad a press:
of work she steps at threte eolook
rests and ueually has Irene recreation.
Or asmetimer erende that tine after
threo is delivering erdere to ether
town or in ta%luz new orders.
Attends all bridge parties of Tourist
Olub and eeeesienally gives a pa* ty
or dinner for mime friend.
When daughter ie at hone lets her
give frevent ?ties.
During the guava season wenan cane
quantities of cunVa juice which she
later uses fer jellr as srders dammut•

--- Page Break ---

LIP'S IISTORY
1, February 21, 23, 24, 19i)
Ma' 27".:05
He. .1111-7.0 Ila 11.1
r. x.
2. Mary Tayler,white (fictitious name)
Mrs. Willa Blanting,(real nano)
3. 422 Mirth Oommoros Avenue
4. Sebring, Florida
5. Hine Kitchen Manufacturer of jams,
jellies, etc.
6. Barbara Berry Darsey, writer
7.
MARY TAYLOR
The screen doer was suddenly unlecked and abruptly opened
and a crisp 'raise said* Gold morning, vault you some in! g
This was rather startling as I had knocked several times
semi minutes before but received mo answer. Thorofare, thinking
that no one was at hem', it was preparing to leave but had paused
upon the veranda, at the tip step, to admire the lovely view.
A bread green lawn was bordered with beautiful flowers, and a
most artistic effect was obtained by the placing of rustic table
and chair, and a huge gay umbrella under an 'raise tree white with
loaded
blossoms and Utast with golden fruit.
I immediately turned back to the deer to meet Mrs. Tayler.
Her blue flowered house dress was of fine material and very be
aiming warn with a dainty frilly white apron. Bar silvery hair
was waved and in perJect *Tier despite the fact that she had been
working in her kitchen making jam and jelly.
I thought I heard a knook but was net sure, 8 said she,
"fora had something seeking en both if my stoves and se the :wise

--- Page Break ---

hits Sistery, Mary Taylor' page) 2
in the kitchen was rather laud. 2
As she stood at the doer and mentioned her work I offered
ti return at a mere oionvonient time for her, but she insisted that
I came in as she needed a rest and would be glad to talk to mo.
Ur assistant, Mattis, could tarry en the work alone for a little
while it seemed.
The living ma was most attractive, furninhod like the
veranda, in wicker in 'eft tans, browns, and greens. A Deft tined
rug and draperies added to the roam and a small woad IMmx burning
stove gave cut a weleene warmth.
Mrs.Taylor after we were seated, called t• her helpers
glottis, keep the large *hits pan boiling, and be sure
tio toll no the very minute the paraffin is pelted.
Then she turned her attention to mo. She was not loquasioua.
We discussed a number of subjects with many pauses. At times she
seemed absent—minded and would frequently repeat what she had just
said, or ask if she had told me ft something which we had already
discussed. Sonetimes she seemed to leave a sentenee suspended in
aid air, so to speakbas same other idea oeoured to her. Rowell's
we talked alias and she told me the stery of her life.
Yes indeed, I am a native Floridian, though I de net
all myself a Cracker. Most people, net Floridians, seen to have
very guitar ideas about the Crackers and you drop in their estimation
if yell announce yourpelf as ens. Did you ever mottos, she asked,
that most people seem to think of all Florida Crackers as uneouth
illiterate beings and de not seem to realize that there are
Crackers and Crackers.

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Taylor, page 3
was born and raised in Johnstown* Florida sue sixty
years agos mere or loss. I will net tell my age exactly" she
smiled. you see I use lonanis preregative in regard te ny age. a
Oft
Though her hair was silvered, her manner neat dignified,
and her face showed sone lines, she dii not leek to be near sixty.
One mid rather have said that she was probably forty-eight, or
at the nest fifty.'
My *aides nano was Marge*, and my father was a wealthy
fame, near Jehnetven bikt I never knew him for he died just ens
swath prier te ay birth." She paused and sighed deeply and seemed
ts, recede late a gentle reverie for a few seconds.
'The cheek if his death and my birth were tee :such fez
my nether and seen her health failed esapletely and she passed
away when I was a baby. I was then raised by relatives in Johns-
-45V.TheY were ;eel to me and looked upon me as their wen daughter.
'their name VIA IP/soh* A daughter Ellen* though a number of years
older took a great fancy to me and we were always like sisters as
we grew up.
Again' she paused in retrospect and vsuld almost see the
years if her aniseed passing in review. After a few assents she
deemed again aware of my presents° and askeds
"Did you knew Miss Ruby Boynton' You did! exclaimed Mrs.
Tayler who at 'nee booms+, mere oerdial."Well, she was my music teacher
and though she could not play at all she Gould certainly teach
ethers to do vs. Later she became, as you know, quite an important
figure in State EillOttiOne If she were living today, I would have
no trouble in getting a good petiAssa,I know.

--- Page Break ---

life Misteryfary Taylor page 4.
Mrs. Tayler then beeam.: quite animated in her speech and
we festal that we had a number of mutual acquaintances in the
northern part eft the !Kato.
Then there was Dr. Gaines, the moot oeurtly gentleman
believe I have ever knew*. Oh,you knew hi_ tee, well new think
if thati he was ay teacher in high sehosil.I was taking a
business ()sures and wen the medal in bock —keeping which he had
offered for the best pupil, said she with pride.
Ho lived in Johnetewn for a number el' yeare,but later
went to bake Oity,where he became President of the University of
Florida.
My fester parents gave me a good education but I did
net put it to any special use during my youth for I married
almost as seen as I gra.:uated. I then went with my husbamd
to his home in Rillway*, lieuth Oarolina,and spent a gspeemany
years there.4
Mattis called from the kitchens 8 Mies Mary, did yeu
say to turn cut the fire under this large pan when it boiled
up good?
it Me, Matti*, keep it iling furieusly tier ton minutes
but dealt let it scorch, and watch that paraffin elestlys.8
ordered Mrs. Taylor.
Msessingiy reassured as to the watchfulness' of Mattis§
she resumed her stery,but the animation had left her and she
*peke dreamilys
My husband, Mr. Taylor*, wa.3 very weelthy.He and his
nether *mod and eperated a large plantation sad stook far* near
Hillway. That farm was indeed a wonder to me in my young days,
before the novelty wore off and the hard work (lune, for it seemed

--- Page Break ---

Life Sistery, Mary Txylir, page 5
that we raised almost everything we needed and with se little
effort. Ofcourse I did net realize the greEt am.eunt if work en—
tailed fir we had plenty if servants then.
We had a huge old brick house, eldfashiened• but so
confertable and handseae. It was built befere the °LTD. War.
Nei tines have changed with the years --here I an flew tailing
day anal night for a meagre existence and living in an *Millar/
little rented cottage willhout even the furniture belonging t• mot I
Sibs. Taller said bitterly.
My children were all born and raised there or is
aillway. I have es* son who is an •fficer new in the United
tates dray stated she with mush pride, and hs is
**Tried and has two children. Then I have feu, daughters. Tie
are married, one is an *Moe executive, and the baby ie a
Freshman at the State Oeliege for Vises
Mrs. Tayler sighed deeply and *sullied to be lest in
thoughts if her children, then she surprisingly remarked&
2 Sy children hair(' all bien.more er less of a ppeintsest
to me. I was is careful to give each one a geed odueaties with
gene special work ex' profession in view. I thought that thus they
would be fitted to be self sustaining and ales to help No. One
daughter trained at Johns nopkins as a nurse and she had hardly
finished her first cats befere she get starriest. It is a questien
tee •f whether her husband will take care if her they have already
&walled OA me several times for alio fairly snapped Mrs. Taylor.
I lie hops that my daughter in oelloge and the ens new
werkinz in as office will have Gens• onsugh not to starry. ma
is such a ganble even under the best of oireumetanees. One never
knows hew it will turn out. Just leek at me now, tter so nosy

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Taylor, page 6
years of isairiage, ant with ouch bright prospests at the start,
having to work as hard to rapport ay family and Yl.eop my child
in school."
Matti., a rather steut pleasant faced young woman, came to
the diaing-room deer an announced that the paraffin was melted
awl is Hrs. Tayler exeused ti ge tip the kitehen. she returned at
*nee with a large saucepan and a long handled spies.She plased
the pan upen a small biox on the dining table an4 seated herself
beside it.
The living roma opened inte the dining room with a largo
archway and I had neticod some three dozen tiny jars if green
jolly standing upon the snowy linen °loth of the tableau sash
jar wall a waxy orange blesstmoopenegoand apparently as fresh as
the day it was picked.
I just must put in the paraffin while it is hot and
melted but we can continue our talk as I work, if yin do net
mini,' said Hrs. Taylor.
I arose and took a chair nelr her and watched as she
carefully dipped up the melted wax and passix poured it upon
the green jelly where it rapidly sengealed to a erowny hardness.
N I de believe that my dauahtors will all at least have
sense onsugh net to boar large families. I have tried to teach
them that and hew unjust it is,fer nip .me no matter hew wealthy
can adequately care for mere than teller three children thee* hard
times. If they just must have ehildren, I have tried te impriosa
upen them that two *Would be the limit. They will all probably be
much bettor off without any. Si far my daughters have ne ehildrem
but ay sin's wife has borne two.

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Taylor, page
$he continued* °Midi's* are such a responsibility all
the tins it seems and appreciate so little all that is done for them,
suppose I was the same way hsowever, for I toe was educated.to be
self sustaining and theu married right awaya believe that my
fester parents had a differeat attitude hevever and they were glad
when I aarried and began a family sf my ewe. Perhaps beeause
they were quite well—te—de, and did net have to struggle for a
living is the re.ison that they had a different view if life, 8
sighed Mrs, Taylor deeply.
As she dipped the paraffin into the tiny jars, I notified
that the dining roost had a brighter appearanoe than the living
roma. Gay linoleum severed its floor and the breakfast set was
painted a delicate green *I In a built—in china closets ooler_ul
glass and chinas along with rich silver gleamed softly. Flowering
plants steed in the windows and softly shaded electric lamps were
placed at strategie points about the rim.
I could catch a glimpse of the kitchen and noted that
the bright linoleum was repeated there) a sink and table in white
enema contrasted pleasantly with the pale green of the tee ell
stoves and the slabliSIMA
Mrs.Taylor was silent as she filled the last if the jewel
like jars eZ green jelly. Then she put away the saucepan and spews
and we returned to the living room.
"Gemetimes the thoughts of my while married life with all
the troubles and responsibilities, swoop upn me and neon more than I
bear, like a terrible dreaniand yet I suppose I had as easy a time
as Llmest anyone l'e,r a number of years, I said show
I aduirel the lovely green jelly holding the orange blossom
se delicately and Mrs. Taylor explained that it was one if her

--- Page Break ---

Life Siaterys Mary T aylers page 8
sposialties. It was made el' pale guava jellystinted green and
flavored with mint.She said that she sonieti..A13 put the *ramie
blossom in orange er guava jelly in the natural coler,whon orders
cane that way. She did not like to le this ver for it gave the
blesses' a bilious leek. In the green it looked 7EAy and nest
natural.
I originated the idea and the preeees it placing the
orange bless** in the jelly so that it mill hold its freshnese and
perfootioa,* she proudly stated. Tots stay often see the orange
blossoms in jelly 4of various kinds but if you leek closely it will
appear cloudy abeut the flowerser the blossom will be wrinkled and
withered. Mine never des they always look as fresh as the day they
were picked from the treesand that is due to my secret process.
Almost any jelly maker can place the blesses in the
jelly and make it stay about half way dern in thc jars but I knew
of no ene else who can make it ksepits fresh appearance for any
length of tie. The newer* in my jelly will remain fresh just
as long as the jelly lasts. When the jelly is being used the
orange flit4ers nay be oaten too and they ii.pert T. delightful
fragrance aud taste to the jelly. nemetimeasin lqrger jars I use
a spray of the bleesems Aiich is most attractive.
I ask Y1 if she advertised this specialty and she replied
that she id net believe in advertising, that it was not worth
the trouble and expense.
I did exhibit ay products at the Sentuwy ef Progress
Exposition and ay orange flower jelly took first prize. I ales
took 2irst prize in my display path. Many prizes 'ere offered but
I never received a one of them. A trip ts the Sxpesitiens a fine
aluminun canning and preserving outfit were among the finest
offered. Ofeeuree when the Explosition authorities notified me if

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Taylor, page 9
being the winner I theught theylydould make arrangements fir my trip,
and send me tits ether prizes but they never did, I did net receive
ems thing as the result of all my troul)le to exhibit. But that4rs
usually the way everything happent to ae it imams."
Th. Bestnan sane up the steps and rattled the mailbox
as he put in the letters and papers, and again Hrs. Taylor excused
her self.Wirst she went to the box but fount it locket so then
she returned to hunt her pecketbeek which hell the key.
While she was huntin4;, I netieed that two rather largo
bed rooms "paned off the Rining rioom in 'soh side. One looked te
be a large square room with twin beds and dresser in mahogany
.finish and with draperies of a deep blue.The other room held twin
beds in ivory finish with draperies of orean ansf rose, its /1J/or
was bare and painted a 114;ht sand color. The fl4or of the larger
bedroom was covered in limoboun figured in m tiny flower. Both
rooms epened into a medern bath ma There &Gain the blue hangings
contrastei plociantly with the ':leaming white if tixtures.
The while house had a wholoseme atmosphere and was in
spetless order. At the side of the living room and aloe opening
en the trent veranda was a smaller room that might have been used
ofr an *Mee. Mere stood a mall desks& table, chair, and set. A
sink was alai in this rout.
Hrs. Taylor had at last fiund her key, opened the mail
box and now returned to resume her cinversation. She stated rather
apolegetisallyi We have no near neighbors and there are no
children in t:ais block se Mr.Teyhr says I am foolish to keep the
box locked, but I always feel that people night pry.
Man have tried too steal my recipes for the jelly and
marmalade, a very special tangerine marmalade which I make.

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Taylor, page 10
must oenZeso that the older I grow tho less faith in human
nature have.
e I thought once to have the prov:;eco of plmliug the orange
blossom in thc, jellysand the special marmalade recipe, patented
er copy.:4444, or what ever is necessary to in proteetien, but
the Patent Offioe would net do a thing about it unless I subnitted
my prows and recipe. Well, I did not de it, I :new quite well that
someone in that office wanted to steal them from re.
She paused a moment as a Oardinal flashed from the orange
tree to fight his refleetion in one of tho largo -Tindlows. Seen hew
ever he returned to the tree and began his sweet seng•Whe spell of
silence was thus broken and Mrs. Taylor spoke again,
I have been engaged in this kind of -sort for wane years
now here in Sebring. It was very easy for me en account ef my
farm experience in canning andfOemerving an my 'oft in Moue
Demonstration in South Carolina. At first I expested to make fame
and fortune, but I have realized neither. Right new the materials
are 117.- expensive that I hardly nake a living, end yet most people
who buy eonplain of the prices end try to beat no down en then.
0 After spending the best years of my life, I might soy,
en the Carolina fftrn mar finances began to dwindle. My aother—in—law
died and we then found that it was chiefly through her direction
and management that we had prospered. That wee indeed a surprise.
Moon after her passing everything seemed -to go wreng.I had always
kneen that ay husband was no lousiness nan but I had net realized
just how helpless he watand. I was too for that natter.
W He
de several deals 4rhich were adverse, and ho even
went security on several large notes for a friend which he later
had to pay and which completely ruined. us. Seen afterward we best

--- Page Break ---

leife History, Mary Tayler, pace 11.
our fin* hone and novel to town where we took a very mall cottage.
I get busy and with influenee an thc record if ay ram
life I scoured thetapesition of Ilene Demenstration Agent for a near
by Oisunty.It paid fairly well fez these days, I believe it was ono
hundred twentyfivo dellars monthly, bu, I am not sure. However it
did net seen like mach to se for I had•the burden if my family
toe upon me. Ws did net starve, neither we have everything we
wanted. And efaeurae in that day I felt rather queer about working
eutside y *en home, se. women in °aniline did that then. I had tso
spend part if my amassers in collo e tit in preparation for the work,
and finally me.ttero Leek, ee bad that ay thiughts turned to ay hose
state.
I made arrangeelents for m7 family to remain in Hiliway
ani I ease down to Johnstown to seo what I °slid ao. had relatives
there. Did I mention Cousin Ellen, well she was there and *wiled and
operated a large beardin; heuee an I stayed her for Peddle.
Then I clerked in a stir., but the salary wat so littae it did not
Is much good. Finally I ease hero to Sebring an Bemire& work in
a large gift shop. That was sine years before the been but business
in the winter we. geeda nade arrangenchts to work OCRO at making
oitrus bp.preEucte euth as jelly, maraalade, amdy, ete.to sell in
the ship."
Again she paused for sine moments sni a far -away leek OW
Luz,e her large breen eyes.
During the beem there was such ationaud folpr sy products
that I severed Ay eonmeetiens with the gift shop rented a rather
large AOUSO, esployed several women te help se Lnd started in fir
myself. I made money tee, but it tick lets to keep ay faeterr
going and prices were almost es hi:h hero than as they are TWIN

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Tayler, page 12.
"owever t banked -mite a bit tee an was bac/I-LA.4z to eondidrr
myself en the read te vuesess at last.
I Then one bank failure after anethz'.r es7: my money,
and what I made after that loomed al7ais in by ay family.
SO new her. I an crewing old and strugL;li14; :yr 5 tivimg.
Matti() called .from the kitchen and Mrt. Tay1r ovAat to
set what he wanted* While waiting her return Inoticad a number
of geed books and magazines upon ths table. 8,7.rr.1 copies of the
Iational Geographic 14,411:ed to be well read. Th 72sy eye was caught
by a very large old family Bible, uhieh lobkdd lt!:o an antique.
I was about te apex open it when Mrs. Teyier rellurned.
Things again seemed te co from had to rcrse with me, but
I struggjed along. When VERA same in I saw as Tx7ry who had work that
did not need it, and ethers who did as finallyI put my pride
aside and applied for work.
She sished deeplys 'That
yeut, A rather nice woman came to
a lot of questions, some of which were Ilene 9f her business at all.
Ofeourse I know it was routine work se answered as best I ()emit.
was a terrible ordeal I can tell
talk to me but she surely asked
After some time T assigned as Rireotor of the sewins roes at twelve
ateliers a week, I
though I was than taking care at my husband an. chili they
Darelina and as I seuld net .et &ny help for them here.
nAfter awhile the sewing room elosad and, then I was 4lwem
believe it wss, anyway it was very little. Itym
were is
the kione—nakers rrsjeoto but it seen closed.
Directer came and she made a rule that tht frasily of every client
e to toll as about
children and telt her
must --4,4
contacted.When the aids came to
it I refused to lot her write my 'ousts and
just to close my ease.
Mew IBAD that I did wrong for myself. If I had just hung
Then a new Relief

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Taylor, page 13
en, whether or net I wer!ted they would have had te pay me end maybe
now I would have work too.
I thought I mizht get a position -4th the Farm Rehabilitation
division but another irsman got that away from me just as I was
about to be appointed. Ay work as Demonstration Agent wepist have
helped me so ::,ush in that. Well that rorh dielnit last long anyway
-11. perhaps I did Let laiss aueh.
She stz,pped as the Cardinal cegin burst in to an ecstasy
of song and as she listtined to the sweet 'tear eripbing' notes
80)10 of the bitterness sesmed to leave her face End her votes
when she spoke k;ain.
Footsteps were heard on the walk and then upon the veranda
and aro.Taylor re.nt to the deer to meet a well dressed man and
woman, both ef ellen seek, pleasantly to her and he answered in
kind. he:; refusei to enter, saying they were in a hurry but
sp;:ei for s box ef the sisal/ jollies anil'especially ones at least,
with en oranse -*lesson in
Evidently Ars. Taylor kept thes:) alreally packed and wrapped
for sale for 3:al wt to SOAO ehelvas fr. eh Utak a package
ettreotive in white paper, green string, and orange blossom stickers.
She lindea this to the gentlf:man and asopted ic11oT, then as they
left he turn e4 to me again.
That box that they just bought.-- here will show yoa
3110 epened ut ettraotive round tin box printcd in attrective tlosign
with a largo eranc;e tine LISfiliOUR in its cenre.Tiny zjasses of vari-
colored jolly si/rAied like jewels aaid aoft 1F.oy white paper, and
in the- centre thfa btx stead the greon Ant jelly heltin; the
erane blessem. A. oh jur was labAled vit4 nalse of its eentents
Printel en mn *range s3al, ?ad ho -Jhaia ensemble was indeed
attractive.

--- Page Break ---

Life Histery, Xary Taylor, page Id
The jellies included Lantserane, ,:;uava, resells and papaya.
then there were marmalaeos
tanGarines .aan„As erLnos
lime as thn ueuel pack IAat oceaaienlli the ru5J—Iilto ;2.esLa of
surinam *harry sr sone rarer fruit r1::;1*%oe snoc the more seamen
in very opeciel orders, etted Mr;.
m As I Dtarted te tell 'Jett, ti t L; bo;c te fins.
ant the purchaser oto loss rsr his I.aneyi yet it is the most in
tenant. It really cost:.. almest seventy—five eents to make up
this pack fir the tins are expenAve and the ti;: jars cost abeut
as muoh an the lar5or ones and they arc 11•'1,or :ill and Atka
attractive.
gold separately msst or
far
oents, thou:hi/Can's like the surinam cheriv 7nt2 the
tiwee ene
bring ten
ask fifteen Jar a twelve *lance jar if ordinexT jolly such as
guava, an it is :aest popular 4tki the touri!lts,I ;St twnty—five
cents, for a pint jar whitish holds twenty -4w; cullees en account of
all the purl 3ar that I use, I get farty cents. Prices en other
prsducts of V.v.) Aso vary accol-din4 tt .17ht taey are.
I put up
sine larvor Biases but enly t7 special order
now. There was s tifas whea I kept a 1
rye tee% verieus kints
&at sizes, but business is se uncertain
hizh that I have tiecontinued that.
She wt in to tha dining; roe2
dish, of orystallized citrus fruit peel,
insisted that I t%ste it.
citrus fruit candy, theu:h net the variety that
varitus kinds and
I This in
and prics ff materials so
aid returzlei with a small
daintily tinted, ant
I uses te make. I orjstallize tha peel of ..he
tint them rls yau sefi, an th4 are often in domane_ fer bridoo
parties and thy li1e. In speAal orders I use
crysiallizet while auch as the kunquot ant the OriAltal Liao.
the smaller fruits

--- Page Break ---

years
,IThe
Life Mistory, 14ry Taylor, page 15
6omand for this sandy is rapidly ilialnishing. A few
ago I ()staid not make euffioient te sup?1;; ft.J dementia put
it up in sellobane bags fru ten cents to tent:—flye,c.nd aloe in
attractive box.* at fifty, seventy—five,eni -1,allr,r. Often I cut
the peel in newer ehspes and if Per ehildren in 7nt-aal ghapes
which always delillted them. Now I seldom 7Aake ^.zn, unlesc upon a
special erder for it is diffioult and tedieue e,s --ell as Tory
expensive,"
She nibbl:;d a crumb of ,the candy and !r7.7) WO be in deep
thought. After a few minutes *he sppke cgins
Mr. Tayler .ay a that if I considered n7 time in the
priee of my preducts they would indeed be priceless but I have
never given a velue to my time in this work. ure the best of
materials and efceurce count in the ell it taker to seek, but net
my tiiie tsr ac he sLii the price would then be unreasonable.
0Unisto rushed I de all my vlt work, and it is net often
lately that I ma rusheA with orders. Usually at tIlis time of the
seams I have my shelves filled with all varieties but not under
present conditions. Those round bexes of th9 smallest pack were
loft ever frost a canceled order some weeks ago. Oh yes, pesple
frequently emneel their order witheut any apparent reason never
thinking of the cost to net
mentioned the lovely orange blossoms upon the trees in
her yard and she snileds
0 They are my IMUTOO of supply this year Ter blessems for
my jelly. There have been time, when they were hard to get and than
ofceuree there were many orders. Now the blossoms trio plentiful and
the orders scares, While they are hero and handy I an thinking of
ptting up quite a lot of the mint jelly in spite ef my resolution
to preduse only as I have orders, said she.

--- Page Break ---

Life Rietary, 'wry
Tayior„ page 16
N These littl ai-s th,et I just capped eith paraf-in ere
glans north on an *rear tomerriow. I aloe supely•eoveral hetela and
gift shops in ether large town f the Ridge, thia yeer these
sees to be Lis eale.
guava
During the guava season I always put up Inantities of
juice to have ready for jelly when the orders eene in.
That requires Una, sugar,end fuel, and 24 I de net knew yot if
I wile be able to de it thio year."
She eeuse1 eze,: as pensively at R werar of lane
photogrephs ine u)en the wells. She peinte it her ohildren
sad then as if ane had xentienel Oeusin 111 en :h.e.e picture she
intioatei upon a Baal/ table.
Just after 'Win elesed she lest her mind ard as Iwas
her nearest relative I brought la*ri tom here to liye with me. Of
course she pair) aa little but ahe needed lete P care. When she
died ahe left her property to no and I enenew renting it. If matters
Johnstown
de not soon kepi/eve here I think I shall ga te Unarm, end take
charge Ayself, I believe 1 oeuld aanege a boarirg—heuse nsro
successfully than I can rent it for the people often not
pay the rent.
The piceuee ef "Oeuein oliewc,:'. an elflerly gentle—
woman with A ewet plaeirl face. The pictures ef
Ars.Tayleris
children were all attraetive. They were typieal ef modern youth
without extremes and their fee were alert intelligent and
hold hone of the grimness el' their Uetherls.
N Shertly h 2ere °lariat:ea& I theueht thet ay troubles wore
mostly ever i7er Isoot:reel a eead pesitisns *r le I thouuht, uith
a large preeervi3g oompapy in a larger Rilk;e, tn. Then toot as I
was about ready to leave I reuse. that whet they really want was
ny recipe fir the oran,io bless.* jelly and the ***naiades and se

--- Page Break ---

Life History, Mary Taylor,paze 17
frfceurse I refusee. the psiitien.
Then, alon with all ny finncial trLeo gr. Taylor
Oveloped Ter: 11.5.-zh bleed presenre Chae stroke and
the ?Looter ssi!1 he :lust up all werk He has
always lived in Millway with oeusins since I ha7c lived here.
We visited each ether uenally t,lice a year. 711e -a he become ill
I drive to Millway and broht hi :A back here. He lid net mush
want to lesov. fr Hillway hat al7iyo been hishC and he in
nearing seventy now, hut it se:nee the lyest 711,1, ,-.1,.oapest thing
to de.
w He paid f4pr his roan and board there, efeourse, and
that matey oeuli help us birth fr,are here. Well, efore we left
there, a, len; e,,J he wax unable 1,0 werk I felt th7=,t he was
entitled to the Old Age Pension, and 30 insaite of his pretests
I put Ay and 71ent to the Pension Office te make applie.
etion for 414. It did no goodi They fairly langbei in ay facet
NOnS 'if the workers, I have known them all their lives,
weuli bell ve that he was in noed and tee when they feund that I
wee -.;rin1;ing him to Floride to stay a. few months with me they would
net °wider iii eei all. They said nue% apply in Fleridal
Her cyes fikirly snapped and her voice was indeed bitters
"wh-lt chance weule. he stand hero, net even a resident
when his own hone town where he was bern raised, and livA. all
of hie lift -7.nd pAhd taxes would net help hint Well, I teli then
all wh_t 1 thalA•lt of their feelish revelations Itnywayt
With 41.;.h she resumed'
New he nekAls special foots and theugh I an a dietetian
I renlly do :ist have luch tine to prepare netts and special
We take nest if our meals in restaurants. When I as busy with my
preserving thre is little time for other work.

--- Page Break ---

Lifo Rietery, Mary Taylor, page 18
N Usuay I utart my *hark at seven soholk r_nd work
'steadily umtil three, unless I am In a r sh oracr. In that ease
I icp right on till I finish. At three unualy I stip,.relax
aid rest. Seattizes I attend a brie pert- fr other
affair. I suet do suoh thil401 in orCer to rcltr r110 keeT n7 self
in uondition for work.
This preserving onnnin and all the various kinds ot
the work take 12 mentat. and physioal strn7th ani seas
ability ani inl.ss i have rest and recrtion I mull soon be
unable to cantinas It. 3smeti;ies I wee.:: lett f%t 4ijit When there
ore any order, to fill.
N Aug ytt Imak se iitlke, I often yrondc)r why I stick
to it, said Ira. Taylor sadly.
nilem seide from my sannini; e.nd proservin;; and Ay Mouses.
hold duties, r eauc,hter iu collet. ;loots hits or clothes. Some
of these I 131A fer her win I have time, thou.;h ugually I buy
ready made thin;s• even the oeleetioa *f rea4y clethes ta.:40o
time and thou,ht tIrwever.
4 I h7A. "le hoped thit with the present Aftinistratiou people
would get on batter livin; schedule, be -A,11 ts live mere dosamt*y
nd !lave st,-Ady rtork fie!' all b,lt it dees net seol to be in that
wvy now. Va.. T1er is 5,11 ardent Democrat in spits of everything, and
he does net lik for AS ta fl nd tan ts I do but how oan I WO
re:re.in. Ieagt vita enymers, it rosily is not rth ti ac and
effart. It th9t 411 pml, in Ame take en politics in big
way, elic it i atirely up to oaeh iiteividual to put tho
ziitps4)1c, in 'Mao and. thereby eg.ve the Country.Then what
hens we fincl that we have uade terrill17;jsttke an the
Oonntry ks 2.esrbabl;, as bad s over. If I fer orv3 tcke no part in

--- Page Break ---

Life Mistorys Mary Tayler, page 14
return polities, than I cannot blame myself far what happens.,
Ire. Taylor exclaimed with fervor.
After a fov Emmental upon the 7orld cenrtitions in general
krona:At te distract her attentien from VA.:5
te grew in bitterness and was reduced airiest
remarked upen the family Bible and asked its
respended and her suet changed owneWhat.
IA* stated that the Bible was indeed
to Ms. Taylors' grandmother. ger people and thaw) of her husband
were anglidh thamaismAitx and came dirootl-: to Mouth earclina fru
Smsland. Later both branches of her family came to !Merida, aside
from that information she was vaLuo as to her aacestry.,
As she lovingly turned the pages of the Bible she
softly,. This eli Bible and my diamond ring and ear«.riegs are
or sole link with the wend of my youth. Friends tell no that
I wild sell ny diaiinis and be benefittod. I may have to
laterilif natters keep en as they are ;.in, news but
begi* te realize their value in a sale. What little
weuld see* be spent and then I would have, mSktiogx
as I intend to keep then just as ling as I can.
I I senetimes wear ay ring, but never the ear-iringe any
sere ter fear of whet people would think. all my friends knew la
my rolueet circunstaneis and financial difficulties, and if I
were dianend ear..rings *hat would they think+
don't attend Ohurch regulariy any mere, neither is
read the Bible as often as I should, but there is a certain select
end emnpanSesship in this eld Bible which I ',Nei,
vubjeetsas
to r.
cze.
aged
she
freasy. I
•Oened
She at ease
and had belonged
speke
sell the*
Gould wit
mould get
nething and
said Braii
layler earnestly.
Shoo then stated that she was a Presbyterian and sontributed

--- Page Break ---

Life Histery, "Lary Taylor, page £0
regularly, but did net attend Church “tonsnor any ef the ;:xetings
ef the various Qhurch atm:oily*.
It it neri a metier tf clethco, so with ge zany potpie
rho have given up Church atteadLnoes fez! I have thus f.,,x n4naged
t* have a few nip() drstales. I seam indiffero:It the need to ge to
Church end tee az very nervous and the service SOOMS to tire
neswexplained Ur*. Taylor
a There we tine or I felt over-./ respensibility
Church Ter): en i site considered it a great privilege* ify conscience
wtul a1Zy werr;,, to,' if I dill not attend knd work regularly. 'but
nee it *owns to mat:o no difference. Ofccuroc I help support the
Church and, try it live accerdinc:te ito rules bai I ea not attend
4., °hen 1 have ioisuro I:J*1moms that I need more ontortgin-
._:..w 4
sent and recreatiens perhaps seise excitenents and certainly -sena
relaxatiing end I never -could relax en4 rest in -Church acetinga•
Yonally I :find ill:erste* t xtelatrlay needs in briege _parties .khE
ether entortgin.honiii the local Teurist Club. 7hay have vary
veutcrful ontortavrzcni of verieue kinds end. everyone itfrionay
enil Beata. I alryr anticipate thcs neetirzs rith pleasure.' It
it intuicutir,L t ietpeaple frem al cvf17. the ecuLtry cmd heer
their Iteste, tuch E ve,riet.y in“restr L.* prc- wand14 wad Lap& lau:-
Norcet ssrn prebleasa Ursolayler sad cuietly
ehe cane to the deer as I left ane steed. geeing at the
larange *roe where the Oardinal *ens
6•I am so g' lad you cialed, sere her thic talk has seekied te
tit me a let cf,Leed," gently aid the.

--- Page Break ---

&it* liesterro "ay tiller. peg. SA
MRS USED IN LIFE ILISTORTs
IlLataittons Naas lassi Sante
aslinetsvairt a. eathearille. Fla
largo Darien
Plask Dots
Mos Pima Maggio neig
Pala isyttior. Slam Xaaptea
Dr. Canoe Dr. trims
SilAiraiwater
mr, Taller J. D. Blanding