February 16, 1939
Ta,Marshall (Whit
28 Rohde Ave,
St,Augustine,Florida
Insurance Collector
Alberta Johnson (Writer)
F.Hilton Grove (Reviser)
F, It:HALL
.:zarshall, forty-one years an ineurance collector,greeted
me
cordially at the door of his modest home and invited me in. kt
sixty years of age, 3r.Marshall iu tall, slender and erect-,
with Lilt little indication of advancing age. Thirty years of
tramping the streets of the Ancient City may have slowed him
down,noaewhat7,ut t,lie fact is eot aeparent.
esI ntered the attractively furnished living room, 1 noted
'the gereral good teste rila-leeed in the arrangement of the
fureture ane the good quality of the furnishings. ;,!raMarshall
owns eis nan heme, hich is more than adeqeate for the needs of
hie family nor that the children have grown up end moved to
other eities. anly one daughter remains at homer Helen has
graduated from high school and has attended Young Harris
College, a 07unior College, at Young Harris,Georeea. The
older dreafhtter4s hashand is alro with the eninsular Ineurance
Company, but lives in another section of he state. -Tis position
necessItates changes in places of reside,oe. Ails older
daughter• la the mother of three children, the youngest,just
a month old. The older son, aarried and father of three
boys, etakne his hoae in Thiladelehia, and occasional viaits
-re each -egad. Knke°, the single son, is employed in
and vi its his parents at least twice eueing the year.
26060

--- Page Break ---

•24.
Mre,Nershall is of medium statue, blue eyed, light brown
hair Just turning gray, and is of the nice, mheney*,friendly
typo.
Noting the piano and music tand nearby, I acted Irs.Alarshall
if she played; she smiled, and replied, used to play some,
not much, when I was younger, but not hoe. Mildred played
for her father until she married end 'left homi, and now
Nolen plays for him as accompanist, you know hie-vioXin is
his real pleasure and relaxation.'
"Do you know that we have lived right here in this sane house
over since we cane to St.!Augustine thirty years ago," Mrs.
continped: 4we rented for several years and then when we
felt that this city wotld probably be out permanent hone,we
dedided to buy it. It is so much more satisfastory in every
way, not only from Ln economic standpoint, but for the feel-
ing of recurity, and also too, knowing that any improvements
made are for our own benefit and comfort.
Mr.xarshall's early boyhood was.in a small place called
*Candler", a few miles frofl. Ocala. During the Opanish-
American 7-4,r he enlisted for service and was in training at
Fort daherson, Alt an he was under age,his mother procured
his iiischerge.. is first insurance experience was with
the :etropolitan Insurance Co.,being in their employ for
five years Lit Pugusta,Georgi:-0 where be wet and married
.ire, Marshall. Augusta was Urs.tlarshall's hone town.

--- Page Break ---

the Marshall family is affiliated with the Aethodist Church,
,h
interested in the oUrch work serried on by the members and
different organisations coteeated with the church. .1e;kr.Mershali's
talent as a violinist is greatly appreciated:by the choir and
congregation.
It is easy.te see, however, that Mt Marshall's chief interest
is his insurance business.
"Can I tell you something about insuruncel"said hervibibly
expanding, *I Should know soniething about it. Zee this button?
It stands for thirty-six years -with the Peninsular insurance Co,
and a rating of senior agent. I was quite u young ,man when I
first entered the insurance Lusinesi, but you know, thirty-six
years is a long nn tins *4th one firs.
You come down to xy office, tomoii.ow,' and I'll take you on
a collection tour through a section of the colored settlement,
and show you the work of a small payment insurance collector,'
Arriving at lr.Marshall's office before the appointed time,
found him busily checking receipts of the previous day, but in
a few minutes we were off.
*You have to runithis thing like clockwore„said he, In *sib
section a regular collecting day has been established and the
calls at sash house are made just about the ease tine sash
Week so most of then know just about when to impost us. If you

--- Page Break ---

don't run things this way and be prompt in collections,
the people won't be prompt in their payments. 2%s it is 1
havellad very little trouble in oolleeting.
"You won't find much romance in this businoss—juet hard
work. it memo Just routine to me, but I guess that is
because T have done it for so long.*
While we were driving to the field, Mraarshall explained
some of the rudiments of the small collection policy. We
are now going en *bat we call "debit calls". A debit list
is the reeord of the amount of insurance policy, amount
and date of premium due, and date of payment for every elicit,.
1!ly carrying this list, with the complete records, I can tell
at a glance the status of each insured individual. MY
Company bee a large debit list considering the population
of the town. All the publicity given about the value of
insurance and sick benefits is having its effect.
*The average premium aaiong the Negro clients of the firm
runs snout twenty cents weekly or straight life, or 'payment
at death' policisa, and policies ringing from one to Ogre and
six hundred dollars, with their sorresponding ranges in
premiunm.*
At this point T ion4uired if very many Negroes carried "sick

--- Page Break ---

-b-
benefit"policies. "Yes, said qr.Aarshall. "A good many
of my debits narry a little policy with a small premium
weekly. This will insure an income in case of oickness
or an accident, that ranges from two and three dollars
weekly to seven dollars, this being the hig,hest sick benefit
Paid UY comPany on this sort of arrangement, the premium
on this amount is thirty-five cents weekly. These policies
have been a blessing to many a family whose breadwinner has
been laid up by accident. Tou knee that, due to the
hanardous employment of mahy of the Negroes, sioknees or
accidents *tour quite often."
Tile auto was now turning down a sandy street *kith marked
the eastern boundary of that day's territory for collections.
T. ventured one more remark before' -r.darehell set about the
routine of collection. 1..Aarchall, said I, don't some
of the 14gro burial contracts seem a little peculiar?"
The agent smiled, a* he cut off the ignition switth and
took his debit book in hand.
know what you are think...
tag about "The Over the-iver jurying 3ociety" and other
hu oroue references to colored tur4ial-sOcieties. It is
true that some contracts used to call for, say; two .7.uloks,
two C'adillacs, two Dodgei, and 00 forth,for the funeral
procesion. I have even seen sole provision made for
IToaners and rental of blaok ooatn for pall bearers but
you read wore about that itficUoi than sou see in actual.
life.

--- Page Break ---

*About three years ago, the Florida legislature passed a law
that practleally outlawed or abolished the system of burial
contracts. Bow the amount of the claim is paid directly to
the named beneficiary and the reaponsibility of the insurance
agency ends when the claim is presented and paid. Those who
had carried the weird burial ineuraiee policies before the
Stats law went into effect, kt:rve in most cases re -insured with
the local agents, without .any- specific clause or condition
pertaining to the actual burial or funeral.
By this time we had walked to the first house on the route.
umber leS Central Avenue. The small yard and porch eons
tained easy well -cared for plants, and the blase of the red
geraniums made an attractive picture against the background
of green cans. Although the
rather shabby, the sage above
a belligerent pride et home.
with took in hand and with an
mArnin 7r.11arshall, here tie,
rot clothes on to boil.*
exterior of the house vas
the door, *SUITS US*,signified
The woman same to the door
expansive smile, saying 'Good
You has to souse me,I've
Al she disappeared into the house, got a glimpse of a
neatly and comfortably furnished front teem, a piano.with
opened hymm book on rack) reed furniture, and rose colored
.damask draperies.
Throughout the trip, it was noticed that dnaperies of
varying shades of rose or rose -red repreiented the choice
of this section.

--- Page Break ---

The next step wai at a email cottage severed with faded
green shingles, and poroh rails that at some time had been
painted yellow. A crumbly Gement walk led from the gate,
through sandy yard, to wooden steps badly in need of repairs.
short, fat woman came to the door, wearing a vary full
White sotton dress, and on her head was a violet colored
silk ruffled cap of the boudoir vintage.
:Holding her coins in her hand, she eyed_ Ile -f7ith stupicloh.
"Whut you dein with :a..arshall* who queried, *le you gain
to fake his job?"
Hastily I assured the old woman that a was merely "visiting*
with 7z..liwohall and immediately her attitude changed. She
smiled and withoitt further parley, handed out her twenty.
five cents.
"That's the mother of a "debit" ofine'. said eir.larehalle
"The old girl didn't seem to like the idea or anyone getting
my Job. These Negroes can be very loyal to ones they trust."
And now we ttrned down a short 'side street and I heard a
juvenile voice crying: *In-suranes
man: Insurance man:"
No medieval herald could have been more vociferous or more
effective, for as we reached the next house, a smiling Negroes
was at.Chii-door showing an expanse of white teeth.
*Now much worth does 1 owe you this week?" she said.
Was
Just as the agent handed the money, the sun buret through the

--- Page Break ---

clouds and a strong breeze blow in from the river. Mary
hastily turned and sealed basks "-Zug leave the book on the
pordh, :tee got to hurry and get ow clothes out in this
good sun."
Under the welcome sunshine, her flower beds of hibissui,
1.1eximman daisies,, and calmwdulas lifted.
Down the sand road again, und thence to 133 eouth ctreat,
where a small shabby clapboard house struggled unsucessfulky
to depress the brill4ant array of flowers planted in sans,
polls, wooden boxeer.und eten in broken dishes.
Sone sixth sense must have warned the woman of this house bf
the coming oft the "In-suranee"Nans for she had laid down
her iron and paddled to the door, money in hand, her old
carpet slippers making her footsteps almost noiseleas as
uhe crossed the bare floor.
n were now on Riberia .Areet, almost on the oast bank of the
an 7,obastlan River, and there on the ripe was a small three;
room house. A young woman, da ghter of the insured,
invited us into the room no that we could some her mother
who was ill.
The invalid was a talon of about sixty and had been at one
time very vigorous and energetic. Nor long illnees had wasted
her but the kept up -a pretense of being cheerful. It was
obvious that her daughter had given her all the care within
her power. The sick woman was propped up in bed by
snowy -eased pillows, and covered ,by an innaoulate fringed
bedspread. Voided Morose the foot of. the bed was a *ilk

--- Page Break ---

.patchwork quilt which I admired.
"Yassum", she eaid, The ladyfolks I worked for fifteen
years ago give it to me on my birthday, and there it still
i8, just as good an When I got it,"
0
In -a lower voice of resentment he,00ntinued: 4.1 AM sick
of being sick. I wants -to hurry up and it. well and get
out in the simshine. I den't like thin laying ih-bed:
After a few encouraging words'.4r.tiarshall and I continued'
on our round.
"That is.one of the oldest policy holders I have,"stated
1r,Vershall; 'he draws a weekly sick benefit of seven
dollars; more than sufficient to supply the net -deanery food,
And medicine, yet sly, is very unhappy and 'refuses to accept
the fact thal her rvorking daye are over. We are now
going to the hem of the principal of the negro high school.
You will find, him very intelligent.'
The principal's house is a two-story place, greutl,y in need
of paint, yet well kept within the limitations of him moons.
At our !MIA, the principal's wife (alio a teacher) came out
with book and money in hand. he greeted us pleasantly,
and asked us to cone in. Time was pressing, however, and
we declined. Air we were leaving the 'mean smiled at me,
sayings °Insurance is a wonderful thing. it is something
that we pay for, cheerfully and willingly.*

--- Page Break ---

After climbing a winaing outride -stairway at the rear of a
.0o-et,3ry hatnio on Coatral ventul, we found latilda, 4
younI neatly dressed Jriasaker 'Ito was iiitting at her sow
1n machine, and -Jha prodacol ri,qAediately the fiftt.len cents
for her premium.
A few doors away, gri4 ,uired ;lie was eitti in 1.1,7r
forch awing aaitine Llta :11.11e the agent was
mi.kine; chi,nis*; tror kh( ttn i..011r bill pre:tented, her shining
geid teeth and cheerful ancer ittr&cte4 .ittention nd
Lon we -,er€ ii a deel, Cl ior f flower rAitztng, the
guralent, :311. the vtatte of Ini,lirneG.
or hours We tramped throghTth,2 streets. ¶inv our snall
collect-1,re; futierl that A•tftrrocr hud °fluted 50-4
imck-tracking or repeat calle !Azt at last--- twenty-one
wale hod been made .ond ve were ready to head for tho ear.
011/ertly yLudied 1::r.arehall in hopes of finding a fellow
arireen, but hi n zteps zeomed its jaunty us when we started
aut. Lut ht u day'; work wau not yet ended: a few of his
clients leave their llony with ne,ifghbors, while some others
y send to the office.
TV z(vilP oases, prtioularly among
tho domeetto morkere 1,ho do riot return home from their work
until evening, it is neoeseary for collections to be 4ade
after rk. usi41 1.01411 if tee late_ calls bad
vvtr 1i1 t* trouhle, ot hk, said 41,o: of course
awY 4: ow the.t am c;arryieg !Alney rith me, but have never

--- Page Break ---

yet been molested nor any attempt of robbery been made. Al-
though it is true that. In many of the big cities,' open season
has been declared on collectors of all kinds and frequent
robberies occur., but so far, we have fiat had any of that in
3t.Auguatine."
"These I:louses and people that you -have teen todai", said Jr,
Uarshal4l, *Are typical of the general rue of small ten to thirty
Gents a wes≤k policy holders. You see that their homes are
generally neat and well kept, ,*nd how thrifty thty minge their
affairs. lf ours c we have aeon the Lest type rcgro todeY,
for Jail birds lon't bother to oarry insurance. Itau ,lso see
that in most instances the wo-,en 6,..re the ?alloy holders, amidst.
ing in, or entirely 44apportin,; the family, and generally Ianaging
to hold things together..'
This Negro section visited lies within the corporate Units at
the city, eo 411 of the houses have sewerage facilities, and
many of them have bathrooms, also electiic lights,,and radios.
The Negro's love of mile is well known and ;poet of the heuses
were provided with some type of swede, some with pianos, but
radios predominated.
Driving homeward, 7 remarked, "T think you have a most inter.
*sting Job but Aw.TAkreball answered It is nothing but
routine, we do the same thing day in and day out, and year in
and year out.

--- Page Break ---

Reaching homes, with a sigh of relief, glad of a chance to rest
my tired feet, maiveled at the contrast between the Tegro and
some of the whites in their attitude toward insurance, as only
recently T had heard some acquaintances grumblingly com-Jlain
about having to pay their insurance, "Well, you know how thee.
insurance collectors are, they just camp on your trail if you
don't pay when you should."
9
4.