Bolton, Ruth D
6-27-39
Maggio MAO Lyttle (Mrs. Pulton) born Prieeville, South
Oarolina. Fther went to work at 16 At a saw -mill. He was
a sawyer and later became foreman. Worked for the same man
all his life. He was a deasAl and Sunday Sehool Superintendent.
(Missionary Baptist.)
Two children In family, a sister. We had plenty if
good, isomaion food but no whole lot of enjoyment. They eould
not give ms tht. There were wine Negro families around who
had everytLing and the used to feel embarrassed. She thinks
God provides size of family (likes large families) and feels
that no matter Low large the family, God will provide.
Nobody should try to out off the family. Take *hat Gat
sends. Her uncle had large family and she enjoyed being
with cousins.
My mother took in washing and ironing. All of them
worked in the fields at times. She loved to shop and pick
cotton on her unele's farm. He paid her and her sister
for work and he nad 21 Caildren of his own, all by one
mother. Ma4gle liked to be with them.
She same from a good family. Mother's p:rents were
Margaret and Aieh:ird Humphrey (ex -slaves) He VAS foreman
on a lrge plantation, but never owned theta am home. Hsi
no need for one. They hpld 10 ehildren, 6 girls, 4 boys.
Her father's parents were James and Caroline Lyttle, farmers
too. They had a big family, 6 girls, 7 boys. Her grand,
2604j

--- Page Break ---

#2
parents on both sides were slaves. Mother's folks from
Virginia. Father's from North Carolina.
Her family life was happy and she was satisfied. Feels
thft she has a family to be proud of.
•rx.
mother taught her and sister at home until they got in
second reader beeAuss they had to go so far to school that
her mother was afraid to send them. Nagle learned her
alphabets very early bectuse she was -)romissd 1 big doll by
her ft,ther so ship learned them so early she muld hardly talk.
Went through twelfth grade in Columbia, S. C. (Senediet
C:ollsge) Kother sent them off to sehiol becAuse she was
afraid for them to get around. Finished her dressmaking
course, but not her college because they didn't live on esmous
and had to miss school a lot bee use no arrangement was made
sometimes t et them to sehool, so she got discouraged and
quit after twelfth grade. Was converted at 8 years old. lot
baptised until 14 years old bee use parents thought she was
too young. She has never danced, nos ever 4ayed cArds.
Never been on the dance floor. Parents did hot like it and
she was converted early and did not have no wind to.
She believes in education for everybody and wishes
even now (though she le blind) that there was $4.0 way to set
her 'allege degree. She thinks it helps a person to make
a living and then it is a good thing to raise Winds= by.

--- Page Break ---

#3
She does not think the sehool system ef today is so good.
She thinks the ',shoots farther beek were more partieulaz
about their sehools and she their school teachers were to
see if they knew their tateiness =Awes,* of good moral stand-
ing but look like now the parents do not seen to ears.
I would like to be a teaeher for the blind, always had
the missionary spirit ind wanted to do aomething to uplift
humanity.
Idea of a good life is to be a light -bolder for a few
Wirt.
She would bey a little home with a little comfort in
it for be: and her ehildren. Macost thought mush of a ear.
lover owned a Oa: but bait a trust for hauling wood for a
little while, but wouldn't keep up the payments an it. She
has 4 shildsea living, 3 dead, oldest 15.
Cannot make money now like she used to. Om hardly live.
Gets $15 a south aid to the blind pension mad th-it is not
enough to till be: needs, being blind with four shildren and
a widow. Seen a wide, around 12 years.
Nor ineoms sowers shoot one-third of needs only. If
she paY0 one bill, abs just has to leave aaother off.
?trot seeds of family is a boos to stay in so they eaa hold
up their heads. Feels keenly the need, of a home for the
sake of her 15 year old daughter. Next seed le plenty to
eat. Next, some books for the shildren. She believes abs
eould get 'long right well on $30 a month.

--- Page Break ---

0
People she make money honest are net in the wrong for
having it. Its a fine thing to work and she has always
dons so. Owning property and money arelike talents some
folks can manage better than others. People ought to be
able to dispose of their property as they desire.
She has voted. Last time she voted for Harding. She
could not remember whether he was a Democrat or Republican.
Ow would vote for the man who meant the people the most
good. She does not think mush about the new ideas about
relief and property and eapitalisa because she feels that
the really deserving don't get much help. Some others who
*milt deserve get mush more.
have been in the hospital onset that was during the
time E wont blind, I paid out about 000; other than. that,
I have not spent very musk, hnly a little now and then on
the children.
I know about the value of a balanced diet, but it is
Impossible to think of trying to balance it; it is all that
2 can do to get the tommonest kind of food, meal after meal.
live in one room that I furnished myself and it is
kept about as clean as you can expeitt with four or five
people living in it.