fORO M. 2940.
willies 116.101w/W.
Arlington, /Lerida.
(Jasksonville gistory)
Poteoual interview
(00malniet)
Rose Shepherd, Writer.
WILLIAM 11. RAWL=
WAIF? CITPIA(MtiV PANZia AuP9Pverazi, TO ihte0-4.
"There were several quaint sharacters familiar to
Jacksonville °Miens in the 1880s," said sr. Money. "One et
those was Sawa 4a3t, a middle-iaged sawed woman who traipsed
over the streets an3 up alleys, gathering whatever there was
visible of food, oast -off clothing, bottle', or anything she
could make use of. tihel aarried a large wiakar backet on her
right arm whiah was soon filled with odds and ends. Then
*gap& Sal 'Med her worn skirts, wadded the hem at her
waist in the buck, thus 4..aking a aoplui catuh-all of the from%
portion. She was a funny sight as -she waddled homeward, with
her filked basket and her back bent with the 'sight of stuff
she had. gathered up in ha: skirt. inaitentl,y, she originated
what was probably the first short skirt an our °it; stmts.
"Another was Uncle 004c1 who waked up and. dam* 1814-0,..
biasing blasts on a long tin trumpet, after whioh he would prom,
clan: 'Steals' man whAn't lie lyin' wan won't stea1.
Trumpet says so.' oubriel was an ex -slave of the bart4s,
little off in the upper story, but he had entree to tha
kitchens of local oitisene, via tha.back door, and neva: went
hungry. se was harmless, but peculiar. People were kind to
him, and even the children were not afraid to talk to him, as

--- Page Break ---

Was a familiar sight. than he thought it was uear masa tins,
he Just want through semsbodyie yard to the beak door, opened
it and halved hiamolf to any fiodftia sight.
Mara ware many of the kingelay slaves in Duval Coast/.
always Aletingaishad by their fine manners mai good behavior.
SOminiahAiingely was a slavv4isalor, built his ows vassals,
am& booms risk in the traffic; of nogrimos. On ens of his
trips to 4f:rt.& be dealt with an Afriaan Mug' or *art of heed
man of the tribe, who hat a vary beautiful daughter. kingelay
married her, and she was of great assistanao to bin, as he
would unload thee* gibbering Afrisans at his tort George plants.
tin, as& 'Maim Anna', as she was Galled, would take them in
band, train them to work, and to talk Mmglisk. M a had two very
haadAllai dshAthters, with dark olive skins, and Ulaek wavy hair,
bat showing traose of their negro bleat in their hands and dark
eyes with large whites. Mo had his iktightemsaiaoated at the
hest collages in the oast, and when they biome of marriagetle
ago, he ineortml an advertisamont in thm'mew yomM Vim offer-
ing a dowry of #10,000 sash to **Vast and satisfeotory young
men who wore willing to marry them, with knowledge of their
aneestry. John aammis fres an lark malaria& martha, mai the
other married a non by the nano of Maxtor. ?he Mammies* livid
en the south side, but the Other Gouge boosted in the mirth
samewheras although they stayed for a while maw Jaakeenvilla,
the Heti= from namwall to Oemnodhorots (total; on the at. Johns
miver was for many years known as mazterse naffs, the swotted
where their home was.

--- Page Break ---

S.
*Mr. Swale was engaged in the sawmill businoss, anti My
Autism in ,handling shipments often took no to his home. Mrs.
Sammie was highly odnoated, well mannored, said friendly, but
*Nils she look after the oomfort of any visitors in oerilei
fashion, she never sat at the table with mi. salmis and, his
business associates* As eleurei,a lot of land on the ewe* site
owning a largo numbor of *limos. No protested against Soso*,
at, and one dAy male a Kopublioan speesh on the sorner of
may and zine-ste. flulte a oresd gathered, around, some booms
threatening, so he out short his spesoh, made a run for the
river where boat awaited kin with one of his slaws. with
ears in hand, jumped in, and was rowed to rate), whore he
ought a schooner and left for the north, Just one lap ahead
of a highly lammed oosmittoo who wore bent an venguaneo•
"In preparation for his Journey north, he hatisdesied his
property to a woman mood Nosily. in the oarly 1111,0's during
the meoemetruotion period, be same beak* got his laud bask in
his own um's, and resumed business at the alt stand.
Anageley tilt before I Game to asokeenville• I usoi to'
like to talk to Mrs. Beanie, she was so intolligent, and an
sorry now did not make notes of ti intorviims. Us the his-
tory would be worth while, there are two rows of stately
palmettoes farming a wide avenue free the water to the :Mt
of the old plantation Nemo of her Other en et. Seen, plead
whioh she told me of holping to sot out. the Seamless hut two
some who wore eituaatod at Meldelberg univereity in Uormsny•

--- Page Break ---

4.
'The boys left Jammonville and made their hems in
Washington, D. u" where one of them for Shirty years or mere
bad a splendid job in the 0. 4, Department of Agriculture.
"I have b4on telt that mrs* Sammie attended the usationnial
;imposition in rhiludelphia in 17741 and registered at a different
hotel every night on &coolant of her eolor. bhe was a fins -looking
woman, stately, emd with oharnaing ;twiner*.
*One of the kingsloy negro.e used to work about the
J. h. W. R. A. station and one day *hewed as his manumission
papers, (*manta ation docamoute).
"another funny oharacter was uy Furman, who was a snake
oharmer. if anyone heard of a big rattlesnake in the neigh-
borhood, they would send for uy. me would °rapture it and go
up and down the streets giving exhibitions in snake handling.
Finally, a (Areas hired him, and hs was sent to Atlantic Uity,
Mew Jerev, where he opened a kind of side show Cs a *snake
charmer'. The city authorities gathered him up with his
box of suakellund sent him off to jail for operating without
a permit. Troubl4 started among' the other city guests who
were afraid of snakes and not particularly interested in a
colored *bake charmer, so the polio* remitted his fine alla
he picked up hie pets *ad walked out. The vmakes would soms..
times bite him, but he always earned little bottle of alai*
mixture, a seurot formula he olaimed to have received from the
indienes and 'Quid put a how drops on his tongue, seemingly
suffering noi harm from tho reptiles' bites. no would never
divulge to anysms whet this mixture was composed of.

--- Page Break ---

bi•
'There were a good many florists in asuksonvills, one of
whom named AOMMIOU 404. made a epeoialty of cultivating
violets. When 'President rover Cleveland brought his beide
here on their wedding tour im the late 18801s, they stayed at
the ot. Jameo hotel, und Mr. mibinson who was a ova* admieror
of the lovely ire. Cleveland, three a large baguet of perteet
purple violts in her lap, as their carriage passed along in
front of his place of business. she smiled in gracious so-
knewledgement and later wrote him u :ote of thanks, which he
prized very highly. t -r• nobinson, quite elderly, ie etill
living somwwhere in Jaekwonville.
*:,nother fumiliur oharaoter was u little white WOM&U
known as 'hailing i never know her name nor heart
her referred to in aLy other manmer. oho smiled in a frienily
way at ev)ryone as he ptiesol along, whether *he tud uquairitei
with ther, or not. ml first contuet with hr was one hot Lay
"Messing or tho veo-boarl walk along et. 'James kilrk to minroo•
at. 0:.n we sttting flat down on the beard, and as I cam*
along, she took off her shoe, awl, looked up as ehe pullet
out a two -a-half-inch sliver thtlt had run through the
thin solo of her slipoor, ani holding it up, she said, with a
gracious er.ile: ',Now, I ask you, isn't that um awful Waist
for a laity to have i4 her shoey, oho was small, always
dressed very neatly, Jill the smile was never -failing.

--- Page Break ---

6.
"I believe i forgot tO say that during the yellow fever.
epidemic of 1888, when the town !as quarantined, the Ulyde
Line steamboats stopped running. They resumed operations, how-
ever, on December 16th, and that night there was a celcoming
reception, the Nilsen battery came out and shot off several
salvos, there was a Tana°, and a good time generally.
"There was usually a good band of some sort available.
One of the best, known us the Welcome cornet band,— the leader
was a blind man who was .led always by a'littla colored boy.
Than there was Lucy's band, and there were two or three very
well trained loCaIedompuniedief colored minstrels. They gave
entertainments at the Park Opera Rouse, on the corner where
the Western Union building now stands at the corner of Laura
and .Juval-sts. In 1901, after the Yark Theatre burned, there
was a temporary structure erected, and later on the Duval Opera
House at monroo and Main-sts., very well equipped for that period,
and everything was hell there in the way of receptions, enter-
tainments, recitals, etc.
"Sailboats and excursions on the river were popular, and
there wore often boat races which occasioned great excitement.
When I came here, the levee was lined with steamboats, bosh
passengers and freighters, and' if you came along towards the
wharf with a suitcase, indicating you were going to board a
steamer, the little nogroas would almost knock you over in the
scramble for one to carry your bug aboard. for a quarter.
"John ulark and his family ware northern people, and when
the War between the states occurred, they put their grocery Ittock
on a steamer and want away, but returned after neacegwas declared,
opened the store, and did business as usual.

--- Page Break ---

am very proud of iseasouville. It has weathere4 fires,
fevers, "Morse ant other disasters, and progressed right slag.
"In 1891 there was i big fire 'hick started in the dam
store of Mum*, stooktem and knight at the foot of main and
•nag-sts. This was a new, fivei.stery etraoture, unA th3 fire
started in a colleotion of shavings and packing material at
the elevator shaft. The flames were leaping from bbo roof top
before the alarm spread. The fire 'cut on the east side of M
Maim to torsyth, jumped the street, took the proodaan's Sank
A
SsildiAig, and thou went out Aain, swespiug both sides glean _
of buildings to uhuroh-st., before it woe checked.
*Where the bindle hotel is looated„ nosed far Wiudle Smith,
his father, mr. 0. B. Smith ad a gr000ry store. Bent was a
vaoant lot with a deep Gave where a limited amount of dymemite
was always stored. This afternoon, hewev4r, some h,hd re-
turned, so that a larger quantity thaw usual was in the ease.
The main Atook was stored outside the oity limits in regul,r
-powder magazines. The u. k$. Douglass printing pleas adjoined
the vaount lot, end as mr. Douglass and I were struggling te
get his desk through u window, the dynamite tent off, the
Smith euilding lziashed to the ground, and we run for our lives.
Beyond the l'IMUL.1 lot was the old Savoy Theatre, which was also
destroyed in the fire.
"The grocery stores were in long buildings filled with
all sorts of supplies in use at thut tae in addition to gro
amiss; the fronts were *pen, and at night aloud by fastening
the shatters. Shelves holt the small paokages, with barrels
behind the lens saunters for sugars meal, flats, etc.

--- Page Break ---

"In 1881. MObori Jones opened a first °lass gr000ry
storey very attraet vs in its whit,* paint, vith uloset
shelves, show oases, and a high grads *took:. Nossold for
oath, which was also a novelty, as the old stores) did a big
credit business. The store was on west say -et., just off Of,
Laura. Ho did a fine business until the yellow favor epi-
demic next iour, when he was compelled to aloe, his store,
which was :ever
"Ons thing 4 will emit in favor of pillow fever. I sub.
fermi atteeka of typhoid fever we twouty-'five istAra, whisk
wore long -drawn out and very debilitating. but A would ratbat
have yellow fever whieh lasts only a few days, than one siege
of typhoid. By the way, after I had the yellow fever, ar
health improved, arid 4 soc:4ed immune to all diseueee. Xet SO
bud. eh?"