Menace County, Georgia
By .1(rs. ma 16 Hawke*
TT Wean SO BAST
wse out riding one day, eat an a lung stretch or a beautital higtower- I
sensed a enn and moan, not poorly dressed but dusty se if they had ham ea the road
a good vhile. The emu threw un his hand and asked if we meld give thee a lift.
We stopped ash let them get in the back seat, altheugh we told thee that we could
not go very Thr.
T turned around and looked at the people for a minute, and they both said, al-
most together, *Why I remember you end I au sure you ought to know us.* And then I
did remember than, because is had given them a lift once before on another highway.
belan to oak them questions.
M. ft,mut maid, *Well, ve have been in a few ups and dome einee we ewe you
last. ',1e went to Atlanta Vitt dny and we was lucky. We both got work and saved up
everything we could, so we took all the money trOM the bank aid landed WNW Taft.
*We had to have something to do so we kept a hotel. We enioyed that so mob
because we could be togethee Yll the tine. '!al, me made plenty tnd had the hotel
furnished real nice. We've taken /els of people thnt we didn't want, sad we bays
tahen acre of a lot of men and wagon net we didn't think was married. But when
they curie and registered as man nud wife what else eould we say if they ware quiet
and not noleyr too, we tvis had to cell the law mad have the. put eet. But we
mere ,Ifte the money, and we tried to not know anything ueleee we just had to.
*One of the bifygest troubles we had was omen a girl evie running up the stairs
and said to save she and her hueband a roma, that they meld be beck attar the picture
Shou closed. She wee bareheaded and had on just a little silk print drama.

--- Page Break ---

It Wasn't so Easy
We asked her where her husband was and did she have any baggage to bring up? Sho
said, "lie is downstairs talking to a man and won't bring up any baggage tonight“.
va said, "All right then". Of course, we rented several other rooms in the mean
Sims and played several games of Chinos* checkers. Around eleven -thirty o'clock
they came in. I abased them to their rooms and gave them a pitcher of cold water.
After evorything got quiet, someone knocked an my door. It was two or three of
my regular roomers and same man that was kinder settled wanted to know 'what kind
of a plaoo he had mytten in'. 'I guess we had dropped off to sleep', I said. 'Or'
'well, just listen', they said. 'We don't know which roam, but that woman is
screaming her head off. think the man is killing her, and if you don't do any-
thing about it, we arse. So I asked them to go back to their roams and I would
see what I could do. They did ao.
"So I went to the *caplets roam and knocked. I found the bad completely torn
up 1 mean the cower all over the floor, pillow camps torn up, and ths girl lying
on the float. I looked around, and a pint bottlo of whiskey and a empty ginger ale
bottle was an the table. I said, 'What doss this moan? I want this place put in
order and for you two drunks to be quiet or get out. You are disturbingly roomers'.
asked the girl if she was hurt. shs said, 'No, we wore just playing'. But I
know that wasn't so. She was afraid to sky anything also. I didn't hear anything
else out of them though and they loft early the next morning. They were just pitch
ins a party.
"I have often had people to beat me out of roan rent. Some his gotten by with
it, too, but not many. 01140 a good looking young men left owing me saventsem dol-
lars. I told him I would hold his baggage until he paid me and that I have had so
muoh of it to do that I would hold than just to a certain time. Well, whoa that
tine was up he didn't came, so I sold his things. Ample have left end didn't have
anything to leave for seoupity and same have left things that no use would have.
"I had a little Isw girl and her Vusband *toying a while. I never could find

--- Page Break ---

It Wasn't So masy 5
out what kind of work he was doing, but the bill got arouad thirty dollars. I
told than ono day that I would have to have some mossy before the bill got too
high. Well, that bight they get the porter to go outside the window three stories
below. They took sir *mots and made striae' strong enough to hold their baggage
and dropped it below to the porter. They had plenty of it, too. I hoard a noise.
Of course, it didn't sound like any ordinary noise, and I went *vaned and eaught
thee right in the act. I got say gen and made that porter oarry every plows of it
bask and I fired him. The couple left, and I don't know what became of them."
L. Bryant said, "He quiet, Mr. Bryant, and let n O talk awhile". So she
started, "This was one time I was sure seared. One night a souple wine in and
asked if I had a porter to bring up their beam.. I said 'Yes'. He came up
with two of the heaviest suitesees ever saw. Ihy, that boy just could get up
with theta. Hs tipped the boy, and be asked the man if be wanted those other bade
brought in. He said no, that there wasn't anything in them, that they were just
some he had bought. had to give than one of my best roosts and I had sloe ex-
pensive spreads, pillow slips, blankets, and four new towels.
"The next morning they ebeekdd out. The porter said, 'Mists, dose bags Ant
near so heavy die mornint as doy ma last night, but doy 10 heavy enough'. /tell,
lust was with ma again. This time it just happened that tbo maid was ready to go
in this room when they oheobed out. She came running to me saying, tLawdy, Miss,
din folks done put aim:half-gallons of water in dot closet end dcno took all de
bed linen, towels, blankets, even took de scarfs off the tables and just ever,
thing'. Of sours. the porter was putting the last bag in the ear. I. Bryant re*
out mad jumped on the nannies board just as the men was driving off, but Mr. Bryant
bmag cm. Up the street they went. He finally told bin to turn arouad and put those
'Wadi bask where he got than or go to jail.
"Well, I was scared to death. I just knew Mt. Bryant would kill the man or

--- Page Break ---

it Wasn't So Bea
get killed, but be didn't. Da brought tbela ou back uud the porter 00 rriald %hoe
upatairs. All the time be had their olotbas locked la the oar in the other bags
and the fruit jars with water in the 0406 be brought up.
"Oh, so may things bappeued abile we were there. A, betel i. iuteraatiag
work. It is never the assas. Uwething diffareat-is always bappmmiug.
"Ur. Bryant's mother died in Alabama, *owe had to go. And we decided to not
oome buok to law York. Bowe paoked tow:74114g we Gould in our oar end left for
Alabama. Attar all WO *mild do for bra. Bryant and everything was settled. we was
restless again solve paokad and atartad book to Wow York. is'. Bryeat was offarsd
a job as msobaaio in a will.
"avarything was fins owl it seemed that our car bud never run aay batter.
:ust before we got to Atlanta the our ouagbt on tire uad burned up evarythiag we
had. lawn we let Alabama we took all the Amoy we Lad and put it in the car door,
tlitaking "arts it anytblag happeaud that the money "would be safe. Ur. Bryant had
just a little ohmage in hi. pocket. Al). we saved was the olotbas oa our bucks.
had to bitcb-bike then. It was not long till *man Game alma end carried
um to Ile, Georgia. It. asked averyhody we saw for acme work becauaa we didn't want
to be be4Bers. Vats man had beard about our bad lusk1 soh* oarriad us to &Ir. Wilsou.
Le gave us a job picking cotton. Wo were ao glad to apt saythiug, but my feet were
so sore I just had to rest a dgy or two, but the got batter. We picked cotton and
ma4s enoudb to porta, our board and to gat bus fere to Auguata„ Oaordiu. ur.
prOut pp% a job poling Us& ek5 a weak in a store. We bouabt acme olotbes and shoes a
and sons UAW traveling bags and want to Virginia,
eTbare we both got jobs. I worked in the Neme store with Lir. Bryant. Tio made
good, too. We got a nios place to live, a haukat and good furaiturw. as pretty a
living roam suite us anybody wants, aupla und walnut bedroma suites, a two -hundred
dollar radio, a general aleotrio refrigerator, end a beautiful dinette uuite.

--- Page Break ---

It Waaaft :,;o Lamy
"Well, ve have gotteu buaiou oUV feet 48 40M0 people would guy, but be gat
tired at Virginia and it looked like WWI MIRO 11114Lad b• any ane but ma and :eke
here. We newer did Uwe uay children end 041401114108 I get ao luneugas for one, too.
60 us PaskadaP adain and uuwo beak to Medium County. Ue have a wall cabin to
live in end.a aloe oar to drive. AAd Z *wpm are anxious to know whet lop are
doing out beam bitebo-biklag again. Well, imo,pot viatod to got the thrill at it
au* mare. But I think we era tWrox40. bildbphikiad now, sous, I ain't 0,4 Mag
I$ I Gass was wad Mr. Brian% ain't aithssVso I think we will be bappy'naw Just a4
we are.*
'I wish rat Wad dO how)* with is, obo $44. ot we Nat had to tura around
and acme bank bone.