Regional  Oral  History  Office  University  of  California 

The  Bancroft  Library  Berkeley,  California 

Donated  Oral  Histories  Collection 


An  Interview  with  Richard  O'Hanlon 


An  Interview  Conducted  by 

Suzanne  B.  Riess 

in  1973 


Copyright   1988  by  the  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


ANN   OHANLON 
616   THROCKMORTON   AVE..    MILL  VALLEY.   CA.    94941 


Dear  Suzanne  Riess, 

I  learned  quite  a  bit  from  this  interview! 
My  maiden  name  was  RICE  -  unfortunately  the  original 
RHYS  was  dropped  somevihere  along  the  line  of  time. 
I  do  identify  with  the  original  spelling. 

Another  correction:   Diego  Rivera  had  already  departed 
S.P.  when  I  arrived  in  1932.   I  suspect  that  Dick  had 
become  so  accustomed  to  our  doing  everything  together 
that  by  the  time  you  interviewed  him  he  had  forgotten. 

Thank  you  for  letting  me  share  the  interview.  Also  I 
have  heard  from  the  J.P.K.U.  lady  whom  you  mentioned. 

Sincerely, 


Anne  Rhys  O'Hanlon 

616  Throckmorton  Avenue 

Kill  Valley  CA  94941 


Dear  Mrs.  G'Haulon: 

Here  is  the  brief  interview  with  Richard  O'Haulon.   I  did  take  another 
look  at  it,  just  enough  of  a  look  to  realize  that  it  is  ver>  muca  worta 
saving,  AKD  that  I'd  like  to  have  asked  a  whole  lot  more  questions.   Uiau 
was  a  long,  long  time  ago,  and  my  orientation  was  too  much  to  the 
interview  I  was  working  on. 

I  think  depending  on  how  much  time  and  interest  you  have  in  this  you 
may  find  many  places  where  your  own  marginal  comment  will  be  very  worth 
having.   Please  feel  free  to  write  notes  on  a  few  additional  pages  ana  it 
can  all  be  put  into  the  library  together.   I  expect  that  with  a  .      bit 
of  indexing  and  the  proper  cataloging  at  this  end .that  the  informat ion  and 
impressions  of  that  period  of  art  history  that  1'r.  O'Hanlon  ana  I  talk  about 
will  be  useful  to  art  history  researchers  who  come  Into  tue  Bancroft  Library. 
I  may  also  send  a  xerox  to  the  Oakland  Museum.   Can't  get  much  more  aambitious 
because  there  is  no  money  to  be  doing  any  of  this  in  the  first  Plac< 

The  second  part  of  our  conversation,  "What  to  do  with  tens  of  thousands 
of  slides  etc.,'  I  have  referred  to  Georgia  Radford.   She  knows  both  the 
Museum  Studies  Program  at  JFK  University  and  the  Oakland  Museum's  art  department, 
and  she  has  recently  completed  a  book  on  California  sculpture.   Fresa  from 
all  that,  I  think  she  would  be  alle  to  give  you  an  idea  how  to  handle  tne 
collection  you  have  been  left  with.   I  suggested  she  call  you  and  plan  to 
look  at  what  you  have.   I  am  expecting  this  to  be  a  marvelous  match-making. 
And  short  of  that,  helpful  to  you  and  interesting  to  Georgia. 

Please  send  the  manuscript  back  as  soon  as  possible.   Now  that  it  has 
risen  from  limbo  I  want  to  move  it  right  along  to  the  Donated  Oral  Histories 
Collection.   I  enclose  a  form  to  that  effect  for  you  to  sign. 

Sincerely, 


Suzanne  liiess,    Senior  Editor 

enc:    inss 

Donated  Tapes  form 
cc:  Georgia  Radford,  Sll  San  Diego  F.oad,  Berkeley  CA  94707 


Copy  tof  Pwtontf  UM  Only.  Tto  Ubr*ry.  UnMrwy  at  C**omla  * 


INTERVIEW  WITH  RICHARD  O'HANLON 
Date   of  Interview:     June   11,    1973 
Interviewer:     Suzanne  Riess 
Transcriber:     Judy  Johnson 
One  tape,    one  side 
[Beginning,   side   I] 


O'Hanlen:  Shall  we   preface  this?     I'm  Dick  O'Hanlon;   I've  been  some  twenty- 

five  years  at  Berkeley,   some  thirty-five  years   in  Mill  Valiey. 
I'm  an  old  school  mate  and   friend   of  John  Humphrey,  who  taught, 
incidentally;   a  great  deal  of  what  Grace  Morley  knows   about 
putting  up  shows,   she   learned   from  John  Humphrey.     He  was  an 
artist,    painter—excellent  painter--draf tsman. 

Riess:  What  had  he  been  doing  before  the  opening  of  the  Veterans'    Building? 

I   first  met  him  when 
OnHanlon:  /He  showed  me   the  Galka  Scheyer  show  in  Oakland,    in  1927   or   1928,  when 

he  was  working   for   the  Oakland  Museum  as   elevator  boy  and   general 
cleanup  man—and  student  at  Arts   and  Crafts,  where  we  both  were 

studying.      He   took  me   in  the  back  room  and   showed  me   the   Blue  Four, 
which  I  had  never  heard   of,    obviously;   I  wa3   having  a   rough  time 
learning  who  Cezanne  was   at   that   point. 

Riess:  This  whole  thing  of  Galka  Scheyer  bringing  the  Blue  Four  to  the 

to 
United  States—who  was   she,   and  why /Oakland? 

O'Hanlon:  She  was  desperate  to  get  some  money. 

Riess :  She  was   a  German? 


, 
f 

'. 

. 

. 

. 

' 

• 

: 


O'Hanlon:  Yes.      She  was   from  Germany,   at   least,   and   had  Jawlensky,   Kandinsky, 

dt-A-    r?>loJu_js_^f<'-e-«-£l/i  ~\~Lu>-    r^J-m-    QouLn 

Klee,  da  Blau,  and  Rightgr,  and  who  was  the  other?  There  were  four. 

At  any  rate,  that  was  my  introduction  to  that  kind  of  art,  by 
John  Humphrey  in  1927  or  1928.  Then  we  both  quit  our  other  kinds 
of  JobsT-I  was  doing  architectural  interior  work  designing.  We  went 
back  to  art  dhcooi,  in  our  mid -twenties,  at  the  Fine  Aria  in  San 
Francisco  (now  called  the  Art  Institute). 

Riess  :        You  talked  about  being  born  on  the  day  Cesanne  died. 

O'Hanlon:      No,  the  same  year--1906. 

Riess:        Where  were  you  born? 

O'Hanlon:      Long  Beach.  But  that's  not  really  fair,  because  I  should  have  been 
born  in  San  Francisco.   My  mother  and  father,  as  kids,  came  out  of 
Seattle,  missed  a  boat,  the  trunk  was  late,  got  the  next  boat.  The 
boat  they  should  have  picked  up  went  down  with  all  hands  aboard  off 
the  Point  Arguello.   They  came  to  San  Francisco  on  the  next  boat, 
and  they  weren't  allowed  to  land  because  there  was  no  city.   Father 
had  a  friend  there,  I  was  to  be  born  there--!  was  getting  ready  to 
be  born.   So  Bother  says  I  could  hear  the  earthquake  thing,  but  I 
couldn't  see  it. 

i 

Riess:  You  mean  reilly? 

O'Hanlon:  Yes.      The  city  was   in  ruins  when  they  arrived.      The  shio  came   in  and 

was   sent   over  to  Oakland   because   there  was   no  San  Francisco.      So  I 
ended   pp   in  Long  Beach,   where   there  was   another  friend. 

Long  Beach,    then,  was   the  size   of  Ssusalito,   majfbe.     We   left 
shortly  afterwards,   so  I  don't  know  anything  about  that  area. 


. 
I 


• 


• 
• 

JiKJi 


it     3 


Riess:  Why  were  your  parents  just  arriving? 

O'Hanlon:  They  had  come  from  the  East,   around,   to  work  in  California. 

Riess:  XaxotaMkati  To  do  what? 

O'Hanlon:  My  father  was   in  woodwork — cabinetmaking.     He  did   things   for  Gumps. 

Riess:  California  was   just  a  godd   place   to  go  to? 

O'Hanlon:  Yes,   just  to  get  away  from  the  families   of  all  kinds.     fg^TougSt^i 

,_  -ttatl 

in^farm»--:ttather  was   from  Europe.     Mother  wanted   to  get  out  of  the 

Middle  West.     So  they  stayed  out  here  the  rest  of  their   lives.     He 
did   things   for  Gumps    later--beautif ul  furniture  and- ship  models. 

Riess:  Were  you  the  first  child? 

B'Hanlon:  Yes,    the  first  child  of  three. 

Riess:  When  did  your  artistic   bent  start  showing? 

O'Hanlon:  Mother  says   it  started  before  I  could   talk,  because  I  used   to  scratch 

in  the  sand  and  make  drawings.      She  said  friends  would  comment  on 
this --that   I  was   alwjjjs  drawing  in  the  sand.      I  wouldn't  know  about 
this.      It  has  nothing  to  do  with  vanity  or  ego,    because  I  was   not 
aware  of  this.     But  it  started  very  early. 

In  grammar  school  I  was  drawing,  and  by  high  school  I  knew 
exactly  what  I  wanted  to  do--be  an  artist.  So  I  did  the  things 
that  kids  do  in  high  school. 

Riess:  Your  parents   obviously  didn't  discourage   it? 

O'Hanlon:  Not  really. 

Riess:  They  didn't  throw  up  the  usual  arguments  about   it  not  being  practical? 

Bianlon:  They  had  other  difficulties.     I  wasn't  the  difficulty;   they  had   it 

with  each  other.     My  dad  went  back  to  Europe  [laughs].     I  met  him 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess: 
O'Hanlon: 


Riess: 
O'Hanlon: 


Riess : 
O'Hanlon: 

Riess : 
O'Hanlon: 


Riess : 


some  years  later  and  found  he  was  a  fascinating  man.   He  was  painting 

and  drawing  and  writing  poetry,  as  a  more  or  less  illiterate  man, 

but  they  were  beautiful,  orimitive  things.  So  I  never  really  knew 

him  when  I  was  in  high  school. 

So  they  weren't  focused  on  you? 

They  were  so  busy  getting  mad  at  each  other  that  we  could  do  what 

we  wanted  to.  But  that  broke  uo,  fortunately  for  both  of  them. 

They  each  lived  hvn^iijr  happy  lives  thereafter. 

Did  yojp  find  some  good  training  down  there?  Or  where  did  you  go? 

I  came  uo  here  for  late  grammar  school.   At  that  time  I  lived  with 

my  father,  in  a  hotel,  of  all  olaces,  at  fifth  and  Market.   I 

lived  out  in  Golden  Gate  Park  during  the  day  when  he  was  working, 

haunting  the  museums  and  things  in  the  park.  Then  we  moved  to 

Berkeley.  Grammar  school  started,  high  school,  scholarships  to 

art  school,  Arts  and  Crafts. 

You  were  really  good,  to  get  a  scholarship. 

That  was  from  high  school.   I'd  won  a  few  prizes  there.  My  first 

one-man  show  was  while  I  was  in  high  school,  at  the  Oakland  Museum. 

Who  was  the  curator  there? 

Claop.  The  show  had  something  to  do  with  schools,  and  traveled  all 

around  the  country.   It  never  came  back;  I  never  saw  the  things 

again. 

What  are  your  memories  of  the  Oakland  Museum  and   that  whole  Society 

of 


- 

- 

• 
• 

•'Vl.f 

• 

•• 

• 


O'Hanlon:  Let  me  finish  off  the  school  thing,    because  at  that  point  I  was   in 

high  school,  and  then  Arts  and  Crafts  for  a  short  while;  then  working 
for  five  years  trying  to  earn  money  to  go  to  school  straight  through, 
which  was  idiotic,  I  guess;  then  to  art  school. 

Riess:  What  kind   of  work  did  you  find? 

1  worked   for  the 
O'Hanlon:  Designing,  the*  Emporium  Capwell  Corporation,   designing  interiors  and 

architectural  things.      I  found   I  couldn't  save  that  much  money,   and 
went  to  art  school  in  San  Francisco  and   paid  down  a  full  year's 
tuition.      I  was   interviewed   two  weeks    later   by  Lee   Randolph,    the 
director,   and  was   asked  why  I  was   there  and  what   I  wanted   to  do. 
I  was   frightened:     why  would  he  ask  me  in  the  office—the  big  boss? 
I  was  going  to  night  school  and  day  school;   so  we  went  from  eight 
to  twelve  o'clock  at  night  about  every  day.     There  was  a  bunch  of 

us   doing   that.      This  was    the  Depression  time--l930. 

a 
After  a  short  talk,   he  asked  how  I'd   like  to  be  his  monitor  in 

the  painting  class  for  one  of  the  teachers,  and  he  gave  me  back  my 
check  for  the  year's  tuition.  So  it  didn't  cost  me  anything  to  go 
to  school  from  then  on. 

We  also  worked   in  the  cafeteria,  where  I  met  my  wife.     She  was 
on  desserts,    and   I  was   on  saldds.      She  was   in  painting  and   I  was    in 
sculpture. 
Ries*-: —  — That's  why  you're  auch  a   pro  here. 


Riess : 


been  doing  things   ever  since. 


That's   a  fantastic  story  for  many  reasons.     Durigg  the  Depression  I 
guess   there  weren't  a  whole   lot  of  choices   of  things   to  do,   but  to 


. 
- 

• 


-  •  ..  .  - 

.. 
. 


Riess:  be  going  to  school  day  and  night  to  be  an  artist  seems    like  one  of 

the  more   optimistic   things   done. 

O'Hanlon:  I've  always  known  that  this   is  what   I  wanted  to  do.      If  there  had 

been  no  depression,   I  just  would  have  been  a   little  bit  ahead  of 
time.      But  in  working  I   learned  a   lot  of  things   that  kids  coming 
out  of  high  school  at  that  age  didn't  know.     So  I  eventually  found 
out  I  wasn't  that   far  behind.      I  still  worked  at  night  all  the  time. 

Riess  i  ""i    T.r'i    P"nrf-1-h   J-iil    |r1Hu   n  wnittrrfnl   mnn? 

Q'Hanlon! —       — He  was   a   vety  adequate  Hit  aihoul  manager.      Stackpole,   whom  I  came 
very  close  to,  was   there;   Diego  Rivera  was   there  doing  his   fresco, 
living  in  Stackoole's  studio.      Shortly  after  being  Stackpole's 
assistant  I  was  allocated   to  Diego  Rivera   for  a  year,   to  take  care 
of  his   studio  and   teach  Frieda  J    nmnugqnll if          ]    Rivera  how  to 
shoo   in  North  Beach,    and   to  grind   color  for  Diego  and   keep  track 
of  his   phone  calls. 

Riess:  A  real  apprentice. 

O'Hanlon:  Yes,  a  real  apprentice  kind   of  thing,  with  both  Stackoole  and   the 

Stock  Exchange  at   that   time,   and   huge  granite  jobs,    and  Diego  Rivera. 
It  was   very  much  fun. 

Henri  Matisse  was   here  at   that   time,    twice, on  the  way  to  Tahiti 
and   back  again.      A  number   of  us   older  fellows  were   incorporated   into 

the  art  world.     We  wakhed  windows   or  waited   on  tables   to  be  at  parties 

or  Europe 
where  there  we*e  artists   from  the  East /involved.      It  was   one  way  of 


. 
I 


• 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess : 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess : 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess: 


getting  us   to  be  kind   of   part  of  the   "team,"  although  we  were 

students.      It  was   a  very  healthy,  warm,  wonderful   thing. 

"A  f  " 

When- -artists  from  the  East  eame,  woo   there  the   idon   that  They  were 

junt   more   advanecd-than   anything   that JMAS-*uiiHL   uu   uiumul   hum,    and 


Ji 


I  didn't  understand -the  firot  part  of  that  question.   Artists  would 
come  through  from  the  East  Coast.   Arnold  Blanche  taught  at  the 
school  in  the  City  for  awhile  at  that  tine.  Matisse  was  only  a 
guest,  and  was  in  and  out  for  a  counle  of  weeks. 

Did  West  Coast  artists  always  feel  there  was  something  to  learn  from 
East  Coast  artists? 

West  Coast  artists,  in  this  sense,  were  all  Paris  oriented.  All  of 
them  commuted.  All  of  them  had  worked  in  Paris,  many  of  them  for 
many,  many  years.  They  didn't  think  of  themselves  as  West  Coast 
artists  at  all.  This  was  merely  their  home  and  a  place  to  work. 
Some  would  work  awhile  and  go  back  to  Paris  or  Italy,  very  much 
like  Worth  Ryder  did  from  txa  here. 

So  they  were  very  much  a  part  of  the  art  world,  which  at  that 
point  was  Paris  oriented --some  Berlin,  some  London;  no  Tokyo;  and 
practically  none  in  San  Francisco,  which  turned  out  many  people  in 
the  creative  fields,  all  of  whom  had  to  make  money  elsewhere.  Most 
of  my  work  still  is  east  of  the  Hudson  River,  because  I  happen  to 
have  had  a  gallery  there  for  twenty  years. 

In  about  1935,  when  the  museum  was  gotten  under  way  by  Grace  Morley, 
was  when  the  West  Coast  style  became  the  thing,  wasn't  it? 


I 

• 
- 

•. 

. 

. 

' 
. 

I 

• 
. 

. 


- 


• 


O'Hanlon; 


Riess 


O'Hanlon: 


Yes.      Before  that,   students   from  here  would  all  go  on  to  New  York. 
You  sort  of  work  in  an  art  shhool  in  the  United  States  someplace; 
then  you  go  to  the  Art  Students  '   League  or  to  New  York  and  get  your 
journeyman's  card,   as   it  were.     Then  you  would  go  to  Paris   or  go  to 
Europe  and  get  your  master's  card,   as   it  were.     You'd  come  back,   and 
you  were  an  artist! 

Of  course,    that  changed   in  1945,   violentlyr-very  good,    too. 
Mrs.    Salk  talked   about  how  she  studied    in  San  Francisco  with,    I 
believe,    somebody  named   Olga  Mandelbaum  Ackernan  and   a   person  named 
Julie  •Heincman?    /-*  «2-v  n  .=•  ^  ^  ,-,  . 

These  were  all  names    that  were    long  before  my  time.      It  was   during 
that   period   of  working  at   the  art  school   in  the  early  thirties--193t, 
1931,    1932--where  I  met  Helen  Salz  because  I  worked   for  Ralph  Stack- 
pole,   and   they  were  old  friends.     She  and  her  husband  would  come 
down  to  Ralph's  studio,   where  Diego  was  working.      I   knew  her  as   an 
older  artist  —  one   of   the  older  crowd.      Albert  Bender  and   all   those 
people  would  come   to  Ralph's   studio.      Ralph's   studio  at   that   time 
was   a   focal   point.      It  was   a  sort   of  Cite  Bar  of   the  West  Coast. 
After  work  people  would   come   in  for  a  glass   of  wine   and  would  sit 
and   talk.      Piazzoni  f-tf  would   even  come  down  and   say  hello  to  Ralph- 

old,    old   friends.      Piazeoni  sponsored  Ralph  in  Europe  as   a  kid. 

a  farm  in  there  were 

Ralph  was   from/Oregon,        They  met  in  Stackpole  s  yard;   rany  MHH»±H 


parties   there,    and 
xgBtxnHxriad  many  people  got  married   there.     He  was  crushed 

when  Ann  and  I  werenbt  ma  rriedd  there;  we  should  have  been. 


• 

...  • 

•L  • 

. 

fa»-v 

- 

. 

. 

. 


Riess:  It  was   aTStce^,    tight  community? 

O'Hanlon:  The   implications   of  the  word   "tight"...    it  wasn't   that,    but  it  was 

a  very  close  community,    because   it  was   so  tiny.      There  was   no 

Lora  n 

Berkeley  at  that  time.     Earl  4ka'icn  was  here;  John  Ha  £  ley  was  here. 

But   the  art  ambience  really  was   in  the  City  at  that  time.     Nkaax 
xMHiiKHHxwaKxwtsHBtxan^xEiiRB^xttxMax     Anything   that  happened, 
happened  at   the  art  school.     When  Matisse  was  honored   and  wined 
and  dined,   such  was  done  at  the  art  school.     I  was  so  busy  setting 

a  big  table  for  him.     I  was  given  forty  dollars   to  buy  all  the 
fruits   of  California   in   1932    (or  whenever  he  was  here;  whatever 
year  that  was).      I  spent  so  much  time  on  a  forty  foot   long  center 
piece,  with  all  the  fall  fruits  of  California,    that  I  forgot  to 
set  the   table.     In  came  Stackpole,  Matisse,   and  all  these  people, 
and   they  went  over,    including  Matisse,   and  got   piles   of  dishes   and 
went  out  helping  me  set  the  table,  which  I  thought  was  very  nice 
[  laughs]  . 

Riess:  With  Helen  Salz  and  /Ibert   Bender,   could   the  audience  and   the   patrons 

and   everybody  mingle  comfortably? 

O'Hanlon:  Very  much  so.      Albert  was  down   in  Stackpole  's   studio  quite  often, 

and  he  would  come  out  to  the  art  school.     The  Albert  Bender  Memorial 
came  after  we   left  school,    but   the  Ann  Brenner  Award  was   the  one   that 


my  wife, 
/Ann  'fatcej,  fc»«±f»*xHBii  won-      I  got   the   other   one.     We  were   to 


travel   in  Europe  for  two  years,    but  due  to  the  stock  crash  that 
wasn't  possible.     We  Just  had  a  year  in  this  country. 


: 


, 


10 


O'Hanlon:  But  Helen  Salz  and  her  friends... 

Riess:  It  was  Albert  Bender  who  found  you? 

O'Hanlon:  No.     No,   he  merely  donated   to  the   fund   to  the  art  school.      The 

staff   of  the  art  school  would   nick  the  winners.      After  that  he 
would   meet   the  winners   and  wish  them  well   and   so  forth,   and   send 
us   on  our  way.      Then  he  would  keer>   track  of  you,    after  this   trip. 
Today  they're  called  hippies,   but  we   lived    in  an  automobile 
and   traveled   all.   over  America  and  went   to  museums,    studying;    and 
we   lived   in  auto  camps   and   things,   and    lived   on  nothing.      We  came 
back,   and   Bender  wanted   to  buy  one   of  ray   pieces   and   one  of  Ann's 
for  his   collection.     That's   the  way  he  would  do  things.      After  m  you 
sort   of   proved   ur>,   you  became   a   part. 

Riess:  I'm  interested   in  how  Oakland  does   fit   in  with  this,   because   It^s 

Museum. . . 
O'Hanlon:  It  didn't  amount  to  very  much  because  of  budget;   among  other  things?- 

complete  aoathy  on   the   part   of  most  Oakland   peoole,   at   that   time,    in 

those  early  years . 

Riess:  Does     Siegrtftst  fit   into  this  crowd,    or  is  he  another  time  in  history? 

O'Hanlon:  He  was   abroad,   I   think,   and   he  certainly  wasn't  closely  allied  with 

the  San  Francisco  group  as   I  knew  it.     Now,   he  mightyhave  been  away. 

I  met  him  some  years    later.     He  was  closer  to  the  commercial  artists. 

There  was  a  gropp  of  well  paid  commercial  artists  who  painted  also — 

Maurice  Logan  was   involved,   and  still  is,  with  the  art  school  in 

Oakland.     Siegriest  did  things;  Maynard  Dixon  did   posters. for  Foster 
and  Kleiser  and   the  Southern  Pacific. 


. 
~'i< 


11 


O'Hanlon:  There  was  aberiod,   something  like  when  some  of  the  artists   in 

New  York  illustrated  magazines   and  did   paintings   on   the  side.      Wins  low 

Homer  did   this,    as   you  know,    and   so  did  Toulouse  Lautrec   in  Paris. 

• 
It  was   oart  of  that  tradition,   and   somehow  there  was   a  slight 

feeling  that  these  fellows  were  in  another  area,   I  suppose. 
Riess :  It  wasn't   Just   that   it  was  Depression  times? 

O'Hanlon:  No.      Of  course,   The  Six  goes   back  into  the   twenties,    I   guess,    before 

the  Denression,    too.      But   that's   all  very  well  known  by  Louis   Siegriest, 

who   lives   just   down   the  way  here. 


Mr  When  I  moved   from  Oakland   to  San  Francisco,   I  suddenly  found   this 
enormous  world   of   art--people  conning  and   going.      Fujita,    the 
Bananese  artist .washhere,   for  instance.     Twenty  years    later  I  had 
the   pleasure  of  being  with  him  in  Paris.     He  was   kind  of  an  illus 
trator  in  some  ways,   but  he  was   an  interesting  person  and  had  a 
wonderful  collection.     He  had  been  down  to  Mexico,   and  I  guess  he 
c«me   by   to  see  Diego  Rivera.      That's  how  I  met  him—working  in 
Diego's  studio.     I  had  to  sort  of  keep  track  of  the  guest  list,   so 
he  would  have   time  to  work. 

Diego  Rivera  at   that   time  was    illustrating  Carlton  Scales' 
Mexican  Maze  book.     He  was   doing   the  sets   and   the  costumes   for 
Chavez'  Mexican  Symphony;   Stofctawki  was   playing  in  Philadelphia. 
He  was  doing  theStStern  frescoes --the  art  school   fresco  and   the 
frescoes   for  the  Stock  Exchange.     He  was  doing  all  these  things 


• 


: 

• 


w»wd 


•   n***'< 

'  ' 

* '.  9  i : 


12 


O'Hanlon:      at  the  same  time. 

Riess:        When  he  was  here,  was  he  the  center? 

0'Hanlont      Oh,  no.  He  was  here  visiting,  and  very  few  neople  got  to  see  him, 

because  he  was  just  working  night  and  day. 
Riess:        How  about  some  impressions  of  him? 
O'Hanlon:      Warm;  a  huge  man.  He  weighed  the  same  as  Stackoole's  entire  family-- 

Stackpole,  h*s  wife,  and  two  children  weighed  the  same  as  Diego 

Rivera.  He  was  an  absolutely  enormous  man — around  three  hundred 

pounds,  or  something. 
Riess:        So  he  didn't  climb  the  scaffold? 

O'Hanlon:      Yes,  he  climbed  the  scaffold  every  day,  and  would  stay  up  there  for 

or  eighteen 
twelve  or  fifteen/hours  at  a  time.   Many  times  Ann  and  I  would  be 

doing  art  frescoes  under  Ray  Boynton  (an  old  teacher  here,  and  also 
at  the  art  school).  We'd  start  at  seven  in  the  morning,  wetting 
down  our  walls,  finishing  the  fresco  piece--as  you  know,  you  work 
in  sttl 1  nieces  each  day.  We'd  finish  around  eleven  o'clock  or 
midnight,  and  go  in  and  watch  Diego  still  oainting.  We'd  come  badk 
the  next  merging,  and  he  would  still  be  on  the  scaffold.  He  had  the 
plaster  to  do  two  pieces  a  few  hours  aoart.  That  happened  more  than 
once. 

Riess:        Why  the  frenzy  of  activity  from  him? 

O'Hanlon:      He  had  all  these  things  to  do,  and  wanted  to  do  them.   He  was  like 
any  artist  who  is  given  these  great  commissions  —  it's  a  great 
challenge.   The  Mexican  government  gave  him  large  things  to  do,  of 


• 

• 
I 


?79 .'  r 

'!'.£}  •        i.~tV 

I 

•^t:>riii 
icmrofl 

Vh 

1 
no3> 

. 

ODD  J 

'     «5H 
]•-• 


' 


•" 


13 


O'Hanlon:  course.  Incidentally,  he  never  spoke  about  politics.  In  Mexico  he 
was  very,  very  politically  minded;  he  was  very  left  wing,  you  know. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Communist  oarty,  I  guess,  at  that  time.  But 

nothing  like  that  was  ever  mentioned. 

art  school 

Two  or  three  of  us  would   have**8inner  with  him  in  this /cafeteria; 
then  he  would  go  back  Huostairs   and   paint   on  that  fresco  two  ttories 

high  J 2 - — ?  .     He  would  ask  what 

we  were  doing—and  all  this  was   in  Spanish  or  French;   he  refused   to 
speak  English,  which  he  could,    but  he  wouldn't.     He  thoughtwwe 
should    learn  to  sneak  French.      I  had   been  raised  with  Spanish  a   bit. 

We  would  show  him  fresco  designs,    and   he  would  give  excellent 

o"e 
criticisms.      I  showed   him  a  drawing  one  time,    and   all  he  said  was, 

^r^-bc/.-n       /     t.fr^ 

"Youffe  trying  to  do  exactly  the  same  thing  that  the  "foi&va- pas  jure" 

The 
weaver  who  did   the  piece  that's   out  at  thax&B  Young  Museum  (it  it 

was  at  that  time)--the  rabbit  hunting  seene.     YHii  problems  veee 
the  same  as  yours;   you  go  out  and  study  that." 

So  I  went   out  and  made  drawings   and   details   and    laid   out   the 
general   composition,   and  came  back  to  him.     He  said,    "Yes,   now  see? 
What  you're  trying  to  do  is  the  same  as  he  was."     And  then  I  under 
stood  what  he  meant. 


Tliii   ijijn  hUrgiLuL   Jiultl 


get  us   to 

.he  was   excellent  as   a  critic,   and  very  gentle.     He  would/probe 
f 

what  we  were  doing  in  terms   of  our  infter  feelings — the  art  part  of 
it.      He  would   talk  about  Giotto,   and   about   Piero  della  Francesca, 
and,   oh,   the  whole  gamut  of  art.     And   like  Picasso,   or  any  artist, 


" 

» 

• 

• 


14 


O'Hanlon: 


he  was  very  involved  with  art  history. 


Riess  : 
0"Hanlon: 

Riess : 
0  "Hani  on: 


Riess: 


I He'd  talk  about  things   in  the  Ajanta  caves,  which 

he  had  never  seen  but  wanted   to.     He  was  a  very  warm,    outgoing, 
fantastically  hardworking  man.     His  wife,   Fri^a,  with  her  huge 
Aztec  necklaces  and  Jade  and   all,  had   the  fun.      She  spoke  no  English; 
so  I  had  to  speak  Soanish  to  her, and   learned  a   lot  during  that  year 
that  they  were  Jiere. 

What  did   she  do? 

Frieda 
She  was  a  painter  in  her  own  right.     She  is   in  museums --rfcahlo  is 

her  name  in  the  books . 

When  were  the  Coit  Tower  paintings?  Were  you  in  on  any  of  that? 
No.  We  were  in  Kentucky,  and  my  wife,  being  from  the  University 
of  Kentucky,  was  given  a  wall  to  paint  there.  It's  the  largest 

fresco  in  America  painted   by  a  woman.      It's  still  a  very  beautiful 

<7,True 
piece  of  work.      It's   fifty  feet   long,   eight  feet  high.    -3&*o-  fresco^ 

we    learned   to  do  under  Ray  Boynton  here,   and   Diegols   So  I  helped   on 
that.      I  would   go  out  around  midnight  and   out   the  wall  upp-plaster — 
and   float   [ ?]        it   off,    oolish  it.      Ann  would  come   in  around  dawn 
and  work  until  nighttime.     So  we  went  twenty-four  hours  a  day,   right 
around   the  clock  for  some  six  months.      At   that  same  time  the  Coit 
Tower  was  going,   so  we  were  not  here. 

You  can't  see  the  Coit  Tower  things   at  this   point.     They're  recon 
ditioning  them.     They've  been  working  on  it  for  years,   and   it's  just 
plain  roped  off   in  a  semi -permanent  way,    because  there's  no  money. 


15 


O'Hanlon:  Well,   you  could  get   permission,   certainly,    to  go  in.      Dorothy 

Wagner   Pucc*nelli  Cravath,  who's  doing  the   repatting,    is   part   of 

this  whole—fcsfwatJible}  .    <^-u£rtVfc(_  . 
Riess :  Is   she  somebody  who's   still   living? 

O'Hanlon:  She   lives   right  down  the  strett  here.     She's  Dorothy  Cravath  now, 

and  she  grew  up  in  the   late  twenties,   or  early  thirties.     She  had 

a   studio  next   to  Stackpole's. 

Riess:  Htrw  ab-nit  mmrn  in  m-fr  fn   lnrr>  *"*     How  extraordinary  was  what 

*• 

Mrs.  Salz  was  doing? 

O'Hanlon:      I  frankly  never  saw  any  of  her  things,  except  a  few  pastels  that 
she  showed  aiHtumtx  to  Ralph.   Primarily,  I  think,  she  was  doing 
pastels,  and  still  is,  I  believe.   But  she  had  a  very  active  social 
life  and  all.   She  had  a  studio,  and  still  has  one,  actually.  Her 
housekeeper,  a  Japanese  woman  is,  by  the  way,  an  excellent  artist, 
and  wins  prizes  and  Helen  doesn't.  It  makes  Helen  furious  [laughs]. 


out 


oman,    practically 


She's   in  my  wife's  grouo  now,   and  exhibits   in  my  wife's  gallery-- 
the  Sight  and   Insight  Gallery,   at   the  Cannery  in  San  Francisco. 


Riess: 


Lee  Randolph  and  Spencer  Macky:  we  know  about  Lee  Randolph; 
you  know  Spencer  Macky? 


. 


'/_;  i 
•  aiari   .in 

til*. 

.9V' 


•  • 


" 


16 


O'Hanlon: 

Rless: 
O'Hanlon: 


Riess : 


Yes ,   he  was  one  of  our  teachers .     He  was   to  the  art  school  what 

Neuhaus  was   to  Berkeley. 

You  mean  d^old  school? 

Yes.      The  same  flavor   in  many  ways.      He  was   an  Australian  who  came 

to  Paris  and  then  to  this  country.     He  was  very  involved  with  the 

social  end   of   the  art  world.      He  had  good   things   to  say.      Lee 

Lee  R,.nd41oh  was   one  of  my  drawing   teachers.      He  told   us   of 
the  value  of  Ralph  Stackoole's  drawings,  which,   as  my  U^T^-a-     ? 

^^-^T""or,   as   it  were,  my  teacher,   I  didn't  really  realize. 
He  would   show  us   drawings   of  Stackpole's,   and   compare   them  with 

renaissance  drawings — drawings   by  good  draftsmen  down  through  the 

began  to 
ages.     We  gradually/became  aware  of   the  difference   between  just 

ff* >c<?  >  u  *- 

drawing  for  documentary,    let  us  say,   or  making  a  sketch-^getting 

really  into  the  world  of  art  more.      It  was   about  that  time,    in  my 
mid-twenties,    that  I  began  to  be  aware.      I  was  a   little  more  mature 

(VIM 

than  the  first  art  school   round,   and  drawing  wasn't  a  gimick  or  a 
trikk  or  a   trade,   or  a  way  to  make  a   living.      It  was   an  expression; 
it  came   to  be   part  of  an  expression.      I   became  more   involved  with 
the  real  world   of  art.      That  was   the  advantage   of  people   like  Diego 
being  there,    and  Matisse  —  they  would   talk  very  mature  art   talk. 
There  was   no  talking  teacher  to  his   student  kind   of  thing.      They 
would   talk  about  art,    period.      If  you  didn't  understand,    that  was 
just   too  bad. 

Are  you  contrasting  this  with  the  artists  who  were  still  putting  a 
lot  of  time  in  commercial  art? 


. 

• 

. 

. 

. 


- 


. 

. 

. 

. 


17 


O'Hanlon:  No,   quite  some   time  before   that   I  had  dropped   out   of   that  world 

co  completely.      I   actually  had   had  an  office  on  Market  Street  and  did 

ads--commercial  art  ads--because  I  could    letter  fairly  well;   I  was 

skillful  as   a  high  school  student;   I  could   "draw"  well."   that  kind 
of  drawing.      I  could   illustrate;   I   illustrated   magazines   in  high 
school.      Vie  won  prizes  years    in  a   row  f»x  our  high  school,  where 

three   or  four  of  us  would   put   out   that  magazine.      It  was    because   of 
that   that   I  got   into  Arts   and  Craftsmen  a   scholarship,    because 
they   thought   this  was   tremendous;  whereas   the   art  school   in  the 
City  didn't   think  much  of   it  at  all.      They  thought   it  was  very 
clever,    but   that  was   about   it.      It   took  me  a  year  or  so  to  find 
out  why,    of  all   those  years   I  had   been  drawing,    that  didn't  count 
really--because  I  was    learning  a   skill,   which  had   nothing   to  do 

with  art. 


The   art  school   in  Oakland,    for  instance,    taught  a   great  deal 

Albrecht 
about/Durer;   we  copied   the   rabbit,    the   praying  hands;   we  knew  about 

Leonardo  ZJa  Vinci.      But  we  never  once  heard   the  words  Cezanne   or 
Picasso  or  firaKht  Braque,    or  any  of  that   school.      There   it  was,    in 
Paris,   working  away;   and   here  we  were,    in  the   mid-late  twenties   in 

Oakland,   and   didn't  f^cnow   there  was   a   Paris. 

,  t- 
I  went   back  to  work  for  a  while   to  earn  money;   didn't  work; 

went   to   the  art  school   in  the  City;   and   suddenly  discovered   there 

was   another  world   full  of   names    like  Cezanne,    Braque,    and   right   on 

i 
back—like   Barbazon--the  whole   thing. 


• 


18 


O'Hanlon:  Then  I  began  to  realize   that   the  commercial  art  crowd    (and 

this  answers  more  specifically  your  question)  were  not  interested 
in  the  Paris  school;  they  were  interested  in  and  their  books  were 
from  Munich,  not  from  Paris.  Their  real  excitements  were  the  illus 

trative   kinds    of  things.      The   top  names   they   talked   about   locally 
were  Maneice   Logan,  who  did  ads,    or  Maynard  Oixon,   doing  ads   for 

the  Southern  Pacific.      Whereas    the  artists    in  San  Francisco  I   began 
meeting  never  mentioned   any  of  those   things;    they  just   never  came 
up.      But   they  talked   about   the  change   in  France   in  the   late   1800s 
and   up  to  the   twenties.      They  talked   about  cubism,  which  I  had 
never  heard   of;    they  talked   about  art,    in  other  words.      I   think 
there's  where   the   big  difference  would   be. 
Riess  :  You  must  have  come   out   of   it  £ust  at   the  right   time   in  your   life. 

O'Hanlon:  Because   it  was   just  developing  here.      It  had   already  hit  New  York. 

a^ch 
John  Sloane,   William  Zorfcclt,   and  Stackpole  as   kids    back  in  Paris- 

young   fellows--slept   upon  a   roof   in   the  summer   in  New  York  because 

hg>  fi  r  i 

they  had   no  money.      Robert  Haflrock  was   one  of   their   friends.      They 
were   always    involved   in  the  world   of  art,    not   in  any  snooty,   super 
lative  sense;   but  they  were  just  more  excited   by  what  artists  were 
doing,   not   by  what  commercial  artists  were  doing. 

Riess:  Was   there  any  difficulty   penetrating  all   of   this? 

O'Hanlon:  Not   once  you  could   see   the  difference.      During   this   time  of  art 

school  I  had   for  a  very  ^short   timef  atf^5|^iee]  --four  months,   I   think- 


lan  office^  in  the  Monadnock  Building    (wherever  that   is   now)   on 


• 


. 


19 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess  : 

O'Hanlon: 

Riess: 

O'Ha&iin: 

Riess : 
O'Hanlon: 


Riess : 


Market  Street.      I   began  meeting  the   older  commercial   artists,    and 
found   them  to  be  after  hours   a   rather  tipsy,    jolly  bunch,  who  never 
talked   about  art.      About   the  same   time  I  also,  bofearT'EniBrar ,    through 
younger  friends  who  had   gone   to  the  art  school   in  the  City,    began  to 
be   intrited   to  their  parties   and   found   a  completely  different   kind 
of  conversation  going  on.      I   realized   there  was   an  eaormous   differ 


ence  . 


and 


So  I  closed  my  office/  gave  up  commercial  artT-I  thought  hhat 
was  a  way  to  make  money;  but  I  discovered  these  other  artistswhwho 
looked  as  healthy  as  any  of  the  artists  I  had  kmma  met,  and  they 
led  much  more  interesting  lives  and  traveled  consistently,  which  is 
part  of  my  great  desire.   They  were  far  more  fascinating  and  far 
more  "real"  as  peoole. 
Were  you  married  at  this  point? 
No. 

How  old  were  you? 

Twenty-five  when  I  started  school  in  the  City;  so  from  twenty  to 
twenty-five  I  waa  partly  at  the  school  in  Oakland, and  partly  working. 
Do  you  think  that  if  you  had  run  into  it  when  you  were  thirty,  for 
instance,  that  you  would  have  been  too  closed  off  by  then? 
That's  such  a  hypothetical  question.   By  thirty,  certainly  I  was 
deep  into  the  world  of  art.  No  matter  where  I  had  been,  I  would 
have  probably  ftound  it  or  moved.   I  had  done  a  lot  of  traveling  in 
this  country  already,  trying  to  find...   I  had  been  to  many  art 
schools . 

So  you  found  what  you  were  looking  for;  essentially  you  were  looking 
for  this  thing 


20 


O'Hanlon:  I  don't   think  I  could  say  yes    to  that,    because   already  I  had   been 

to  the   o^xtest  «rt   institute — for  forty  minutes.      It   took   less   than 

an  hour   to   find   out   that   that  was   no  place  for  me.      I  went   to 

C.koij.i nctrd  .in  Los  Angeles 

.Schucn  Arge  /for  one  week.      I  went   to  schbol   in  Santa   Barbara 

for  one   term,  where   the  entire  staff  were  from  England;   at   least 
they'd   talk  about  art.      But   I  came   up  here. 

I  started   to  go  to  Paris    to  work  with  Antoine   Bordell,    and   he 
upped   and  died.      Like   an  idiot,   I  came   back;   I  should  have  stayed 
on?   because   that's  when  Hemingway  hit   Paris,    and   all   that   crowd. 
So  I'd  missed   the   bus   there,    but   I  was   too  young  to  know  that. 

As   I   look  back,    one  of  my  ways   of  adjudicating  these   things 
is   to  look  at  older  people.      If  they -made  sense;    if  they'd   been  at 
something  for  a    long  time   that   began   to  make   sense,   I'd   think  that 
whatever  they  did  made  more  sense   than  what  somebody  BX±  else  did. 
Because   I'd   been  to  a  couple   of  artists'    parties  where   they  were 
all  commercial  artists,    and   I   found   that   the  chitchat  was   fairly 
shallow.      And   they  all  hated   commercial  art.      NTW,    this,   you  see, 

was    in  my  early  twenties. 

have 
More   recently  I  had   been  with   old   schoolmates    in  New  York  to 

a  i"o 

parties—with  fellows  who  NBZB  making  absolutely  enormous   salaries 


on  Madison  Avenue,   who  MKXK  wajy.way  up  at   the   top:      art  director 
for  BBDV^and   all   of   that.      Their  parties   are  made   up  of  making  fun 
of  their  art   profession  as   they  know   it.      So  for  twenty-four  hours 
a  day--they  can't   even  relax  and   have  something  else.      They  say  what 
a   terrible   thing   it   is,   and  how  they're   prostitutes;   so  when   they 


21 


O'Hanlon:  taw  play  charades   or  get  drunk,    they're  still  talking  abouthethe 

thing  they  hate,  which  is   the  way  they  earn  their  money.      It  seems 
so   nathetic,   somehow. 

So  at   twenty  I  was   through  that.      It  sounds  very  vain  and   ego 
tistical,    but   it  was   a   happy  accident,    I  suppose. 
BeatrixeJudd  Ryan  wrote  an  article... 
She  -waa-wAs   one  of   the   first  galleries    in  San  Francisco—was    it   the 


L, 


Riess : 
O'Hanlon: 

Riess : 
O'Hanlon: 


Riess: 


O'Hanlon: 


East  West  Galleryt 
Gallery  Beaux  Arts. 


There  were   two,    and   only   two.      There  was  Corbusier's,   who  made  a 


of 


-- 

stab  at  it  and  folded  up.  Jfhere  were  makeshift  galleries,  but/the 

/\ 

was 
real  galleries    in  terms   of   Paris   or  London  or  New  York  was   one/Bun 

by  BeatrifcCJudd  Ryan.      In  that   part   of  history,  with  her  already 
well  developed   background,  with  the  kind   of  San  Francisco  audience 
that  doesn't   buy  wry'  much,   she  ended   up   in  the  City  of  Paris 

eventually,  with  them  sponsoring  the  gallery.      She  was   a  devoted 

she  a    lot, 
person,  who  was   quite  knowledgable,    really;   and/did/  certainly,    for 

that   time,    and   for  this   city,  with  its   ambience   of  no  art,    practically, 

The  artists  would  help  her.      Most   artist  still  sold   mostly 
through  New  York;  very  little  was   ever  sold  out  here. 
She   talks   about   two  groups   in   1925  —  the  academicians   retired   to  the 
shelter  of   the   Bohemian  Club.  .  . 
They  were   already   in  the   Bohemian  Club,    and   the  non-Bohemian   types 

left  and   formed   the   San  Francisco  Art  Association  and   the  Art  school. 

and   Randolph 
Ralph  Stackpole/quit   the   Bohemian  Club  because   they  had   a   big  fight 


22 


O'Hanlon:  with  the  sculptor  who  was    the   president—because  he  hated  modern 

art  or  contemporary  art,  which  to  him  was   Degas  —  that  was   too  far 
out   for  him.     So  they  split  off,   and   the  Bahemian  Club  just  kept 
right   on  going  as   it  always   had.      But   it  was    this    offshoot   that 
became  the  art  school   in  San  Francisco. 

Riess:  I  hadn't   realized   that   the  Bohemian  Club  represented   a  shelter,    in 

a  sense,    of   the   old  conservatives. 

Some  of  the   other  names    that  she  mentions   that  you  might  have 
comments   on  are  Renaldo  Caneo... 

O'Hanlon:  Renaldo  Cuneo  was   an  etcher.      He  had   a  studio  next  door   to  Maynard 

Dixon.      I  cleaned  his   etching   presses   and  his   and  Maynard 's   skylights. 

jat^- 
Then  I  was   sent   over  to  clean  Ptezzoni  s.      I  got   up  on  the   roof,    and 

^JtffftU.  <*-<, 

they  s«'£d,    "We'll   r>ay  for  it;   don't   tell  Bul.ui.iLi  that  we've  sent 

you  over.      We'll  just   pay  for  it,   since  he  doesn't  have  much  money," 

O.H 
although  it  wasn't   true.      But  fortunately,    thank  God,    Pieteoni  was 

in  his  studio  and  saw  me  up  on  the  skylight.     He  screamed  out 
[laughs]    to  get   away  from  there.      I  went  down  to  ask  what  was   going 
on,    and   I   explained   that  I  was   sorry  and   didn't  know  he  was   there-- 
that   I  had   been  going  to  clean  his   skylight.      He  said,    "You  do,    and 
I'll  cut  your   throat.      I  spent   thirty  years   getting  that   nice  dust 
on  there."     [Laughs]    They  all  knew   this,   you  see.      He  didn't  want 
his   skylight  cleaned.      He  had   this   beautiful  dusty  skylight   that   for 
him  was   just   right. 

He  was  my  sponsor   in  the  Art  Association—Stackpole  and   Piezzoni 
were   my  sponsor*. 


23 


Riess:         He  was  a  very  different  kind  of  character  from  the  rest,  wasn't  he? 
O'Hanlon:      Yes.  He  was  not  exactly  a  recluse.  There  was  a  big  joke  among  the 
art  students  about  how  he  and  Stackpole  would  go  out  to  each  other's 

houses.   But  they  were  both  busy;  both  working.  They  were  very  dear 

to  France 
friends.   Piezzoni  was  Stackpole 's  sponsor /when  Stackpole  was  ayoung 

man. 

Alwpys   behind   the  scenes   in  those  days   there  was   money.      Stack- 
pole  would   tell   us   that  any  time  he  needed  money  he  would   do  a 
portrait  of  a  bulldog  or  a  horse's  head   or  something,    to  get  enough 
money  to  go  to  Europe. 

Riess:  This   imoHed  a  certain  scorn  for  some  art  collectors? 

O'Hanlon:  Art  cillecting  was   quite  different   then.      The  Spreckels   family... 

I  don't  know  the   names   of   those   people,    really,    but   there  was 
enought  money  around. 

Riess:         The     Sterns,   Fleishha^kers ,   Haases--all  of  those   people. 

O'Hanlon:  Elise  Haas  came  along—she  was,    of  course,    a  girl  then.      She  bought 

things   out   of  Anne's   and  My  studios.      She  does   portraits,   and   they're 

9 

not   too  bad.      She's   always   been  interested   in  art.      Stackpole  said 
that  in  the  early  days   they  could  always  get  by  either  here  or  in 
Europe;    two  or  three  families  would  see  to  it.      Of  course  there 
weren't  any  more   than  half  a  dozen  young  artists  who  amounted   to 
anything.      So   it  was   quite  simple. 

Riess:  At   that   noint  were   the  Salzes   one   of   the   families? 

O'Hanlon:  I   just  don't   know.      I've  never  known.      I  would    like   to  know. 

Riess:  Helen's  family  were  the  Arnsteins. 


24 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess: 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess: 
O'Hanlon: 

Riess: 
O'Hanlon: 


I  suppose   that   both  Helen  and  her  husband  had   funds.      This   never 
came  out  in  my  lifetime,  while  I  was  around,   but  I'm  sure  that  they 
might  have  helped--peoole   like   the  Haases.      But   the  Barnes   I   didnjt 
know.     I  was  completely  unaware  of  the  fact  that  there  were  sponsors. 
I  didn't  know  what  a  sponsor  was.     That's  why  I  spent  five  years 
trying  to  earn  money  to  go  to  art  school,   vlf  I  had   been  more   in 
that  world,   I  would  have  know  that  all  you  have  to  do  is  go  to 
art  school  and  you  get  a  scholarship.      I  didn't  know   there  were 

scholarships.      They  were   funded   by  a   very  small  group   of   peojble 

are 
who  KRXe  still   the  same   families   sponsoring  symphonies   and   museums 

and   all   that.      They  are  almost   entirely  Jewish,   almost   entirely 
beautiful   people;    and   almost   entirely   the  same  group   in  New  York 
or  London  or  Paris.      It's   fascinating. 

OL^^A    C^xXt^.tj.    • 

Was  there  ev*r  a  mingling  of  the  sponsors?  When  did  they  come 
together?   The  Salzes  I  can  imagine,  but... 

During  this  period  I  was  a  "student"  —  so  much  so  that  I  just  lived 
at  the  art  school,  quite  literally.  The  only  oeople  I  saw  there 

who  were  involved  with  scholarships,  who  helped  me  and  some  others, 

O 


would   be   the  coffee   people  —  MJB   (-Bernstein?)  .     MJB  is   two  families 

that  [  ] 

Miller? 

Anyway,    they  did  quite   a   bit   for   the   art  world,    toor-one  half  did, 

not   the  coffee  half,    but   the   other  half. 

social 
I  suppose   that  after  while  it  became  a  competitive/activity. 

You'd  have  to  ask  Helen  or  these  people.      I  wouldn't  know.     That  was 


25 


O'Hanlon:      so  far  beyond  my  world  that  I  was  completely  unaware  of  it.   I'm 
still  very  naive,  I'm  afraid,  there. 

Riess:        What  impressions  did  you  have  of  Maynerd  Dixon?-his  style  and  behavior? 

O'Hanlon:      I  suppose  I  was  kind  of  intrigued.  2  also  was  involved  in  some  ways 
with  the  background  of  the  Indian  in  America,  and  have  had  some 
contact — quite  close  contact  with  Navajos  and  Indians  when  I  was 
growing  up  in  the  Southwest.  Maynard  was  involved  with  this.   But, 

again,  Maynard  was  deeply  involved  with  the  Southern  Pacific  and  Foster 

I 

and  Kleiser.  /Thougtt  he  was  interesting,  and  I  helped  clean  his  studio 

once  in  awhile,  just  to  see  the  interesting  art  effects  he  had,  and 
I  talked  to  him,  because  he  was  a  perfectly  fascinating  man. 

He  carried  a  Kiixsx  big  cane  with  a  silver  top,  and  wore  cowboy 
outfits.   That  lifestyle  was  an  accident,  and  he  told  me  all  about 
it  one  day.   ixaxkarfxkim  He  could  ride  a  horse,  but  when  he  was 
younger  he  couldn't.  He  JOHH  was  in  San  Francisco,  a  western  youth 
(where  he  was  born  I  don't  really  know).  He  went  to  New  York  in 
his  twenties.   He  already  was  clever  at  drawing.   He  had  done  some 
advertising,  and  went  to  the  commercial  art  parties  in  New  York. 
Most  of  them  w«e  that  way  in  the  group  he  was  with.   It  was  a  costume 
party,  and  he  rented  or  borrowed  a  cowboy  outfit.   He'd  never  had 
one  on  in  his  life.   He  went  to  the  party  and  was  a  smashing  success. 
They  all  thought  he  was  a  real,  honest  to  God  westerner.  He  put  on 
a  slight  drawl  and  became  a  cowboy,  with  a  few  drinks  under  his  belt, 

£u^~t*~~->^-L'  C-/C—  v 

and   never   left   it.      He  decided   that  was   a  great  giifi£ic. 

He  was   honest,    and   he  said,    "I'll   paint  whore  houses   or  sigh 


• 


O'Hanlon: 


Riess: 
O'Hanlon: 


boards;  I  don't  care  what  I  paint.   I'll  paint  outhouses  or  Foster 
and  Kleiser  boards.  When  you  need  money  vouVe  hungry."  He  was 
very  honest  about  it.   If  he  needed  the  money,  he'd  do  anything  to 
get  money  to  rani  paint.   He  would  paint  lousy  portraits,  or  whatever. 

I  saw  things  that  were  not  very  well  done,  and  he  said,  "Oh,  I 
was  hungry." 

But  he  was  also  very  sincerely  interested  in  the  West,  in  a 
kind  of  illustrative,  commercial  art  kind  of  way.   This  was  very 
obvious.  He  was  a  nice  person  to  talk  to,  but  I  could  see  that  he 
was  not  remotely  interested  in  Paris,  which  to  us  youngbloods  (by 
then  I  had  become  part  of  that  jjoungblood  group)  was  where  art  was, 
or  a  lot  of  it  was;  there  was  such  a  thing  as  European  art,  there 
was  a  Renaissance.   These  people  drew  Reaaissance  kinds  of  drawings, 


but  they  never  talked  about  theijfgod  that  I  began  to  revere-  -Pierre- 

t~\  ,'  a  rt~u 

de   la  Francesca,   Jaeque  D'Or,   Michaelangelo.      These   names   naver 
came   up.      They  talked   about    later  things,    always. 
When  you  talk  about   Paris,  what  artists   are  you  talking  about? 
Not  artists   in  particular,   but   the  entire  movement.      Paris  was   a 
place  where   art  was   free  and  sponsored   and  alive,   and  «ery  ener 
getic,    just  as   New  York  became   later.      I'm  talking  about   the   late 
twenties   already,   and   the  early  thirties   at   this   point.      Cubism 
was   only  ten  years   before,   so  it  was   all   brand   new  at   that   time. 
And  theHff       P&m/f^  ^  weren't  that  much  before  then. 

Whereas    in  New  York   (and   I  had   been   there   by  then)   I  could   see   that 

»&t 

the  Art  Students  League  was  pretty  old  had.   I  went  to  *rt  school 


• 


27 


Riess : 
0 'Han Ion: 


O'Hanlon:  to   learn  to  draw  for  a    little  while,    and   began  to  find   that   the 

students  were  heading  for  commercial  art--the  whole   thing  all 
over  again.      They  wanted   to   illustrate  and  do  all  kinds   of  things 
that  I   didn't   think  were  very  much  fun;   I'd   already  gone    through 
that. 

When  Galka  Sch&ifr  brought   the  Blue  Four  here,  was   that   an  eye-opener? 
It  was   very  startling,    because  I  had   never  heard   of  such  jf  things. 
This  was  when  I  was   still  at  Arts   and  Crafts.      John  Humphrey   tried 
to  exDlain  to  me  what  was   going  on;   he  was   already  clued   into  that 
world,    and  was   already  reading  about   it.      And   I  hadn't   even  heard 
it   existed;   I   never  heard   of  any   of   those   names   at   that   time.      So 
this  was   my   introduction  to  the   fact   that   there  was   a  world   of  art. 
It  very  well  could   be   that   that  was   the  crucial  moment,   when  it 
dawned   on  me   that  commercial   art   is   not   the  way—that   there  are 
other  things   goirg  on  that  I   better   find   out  about. 
Riess:  It   sounds    like   the   excitement   of   the   talk  about   it   is   a   lot   of   the 

pleasiree 
O'Hanlon:  It  was   exciting  to  think  that   in  Europe  things  were  going  on  that 

were   not  going  on  here.     We  all  wanted   to  go  there,    but   just  couldn't 

afford   it   or  we  would  have   been  there. 

Riess:  And   art   is   a  wyy  of  getting   into  things... 

O'Hanlon:  It's   a  way   of   life,    not  a    living.      Of  course,   when  the  Depression 

came   everything  fell  aoart,    but  we  all   knew   [already]    that   this  was 
no  way  to  make  money;    but   it  was   just  what,  we  wanted    to  do,    and 
making  money  wasn't  what  we  were  after.      Because   many   people,    like 


O'Hanlon:  myself,   had   been  around  money.      I  had    lived  with  extremely  wealthy 

people  as   a  child — and   found   them  bankrupt    later,   or  having   problems. 

Riess:  I  had   assumed   that  you  were   a   very   poor  boy. 

O'Hanlon:  I  was   from  a  very  poor  family—always  was.      But  at   one   point,  when  my 

father  broke  away  the   first   time,   I  was   seven,   and  my  mother  went   to 
work  HH   "living   in."     She  did   cooking  and   cleaned   up  around    the 
house   of  a  very  wealthy  house--Pacif ic  Mutual  Life  Insurance   it  was, 
frankly,  who  wbould  have   been  in  San  Quentin   later,    but  he  died 
before   they  put  him  in.      He  made  hundreds   of  millions   of  dollars 
cheating,    like   the  Newman   [new  one?]    [down   there?]. 

But   it  was   aa   insurance...      The  Teapot  Dome  man   lived   next 
doer--Albert  Fall.      This  was    in  Los    Angeles.      He  had   a   house   next 
door,    and  we  used   to  swim  in  his   swiroraing   pool.      I  was   Boy  Scout 
age,   so  I  wouldn't  know  about   those   things.      Their  children  could 
not  go  on  their  bicycles   to  the  Los   Angeles   River,    as   I  could  go, 
IhayxHRTHH bxHiiaxRdxtH  after  wild   chicken  eggs   and   things.      They 
weren't   allowed   to  go.      Their  chauffeurs   picked   them  up  from  school 
and   took  them  to  school.      They  had   a   shotgun  and   a  rifle   and  Cadillacs, 
The   butler's   pantry  had   rifles;    all   of   the  men  carried   big  Lug«r 
oistols--the   butlers   and  so  forth.      There  was   no  Lindberg   law   then. 

I   used   to  bicyile   on  weekends   out  to  a    little   round   back  road-- 
a    little   one  way  road,    through  wheat   fields   and  wild   oats   and   grass, 
about   twenty  minutes   from  where  we   lived,    to  a   holt   in  the  ground 
where   I  helped  dig  up  saber   toothed   tigers   and    things.      That's   now 
called   the  La   Brea   Oil   Pits.      That    little   one  way,    round   road   I 


0'Hanlon:  went  on  is   now  called  Wiltshire  Boulevard.      That  was  way  out   in  the 

country  then. 

Riess:  So  you  really  think  you  made   the  choice,    then,    between  kinds   of   life? 

O'Hanlon:  I  was   sitting   in  the  garden,   drawing  a   rose. (I  never  will  forget 

thatp  I  can  remember  the  drawing  of   the   rose,   even;    and   behind   me 
Lee  A.    Phillips,  who  was   a  very  wealthy  man,    obviously — he  owned 
the  biggest  yacht   on  the   Pacific  Coast, (that  Errol  Flynn  bought 
later).      He  had   been  watching  me,    obviously,   and   I  didn't  know  he 
was   there.      He   said, "I  would  give  anything   in  the  world   to  be  able 

to  do   that."     As   a   fourteen  year  old,    it  dawned   on  me   that  here  he 

dt 
has..;!    The  day  before  he   brought  home   a   rose   point   lace   table  cloth 

(my  mother   told  me  about   this)    to  show  his  wife.      He   laid    it   out   on 
the  table,    and   she  said,    "You  know  I  already  have   one  of   those," 
and   she   threw   it   on  the  floor.      My  mother  was  horrified. 

There  was   a   painting  over  their  fireplace   that  cost  more   than 
our  home.      I   thought,    "All   these   things   are   so  strange;     Their  kids 
can't   play  where  I  can   play."     I  quickly  saw   that   being  a   millionaire 
was   a   great  handicap.      It  was   kind   of  a  wonderful   philosophical 
insight  for  a  child,    to  be  around   this   very  unhappy  family  with 
the   biggest  yacht   on  the   Pacific  Coast,  with  a   fleet   of  Cadillacs, 
with  country   places. 

They  took  me  with  the  kids   to  the  St.  Catherine's  Hotel^W  £c£ 
[End   of   interview] 


. 


. 


