AFRICAN-AMERICAN  ARTISTS  OF  LOS  ANGELES: 


Ruth  G.  Waddy 


Interviewed  by  Karen  Anne  Mason 


Completed  under  the  auspices 

of  the 

Oral  History  Program 

University  of  California 

Los  Angeles 


Copyright   ©   1993 
The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


\- 


COPYRIGHT  LAW 


The  copyright  law  of  the  United  States  (Title  17, 
United  States  Code)  governs  the  making  of  photocopies 
or  other  reproductions  of  copyrighted  material.  Under 
certain  conditions  specified  in  the  law,  libraries  and 
archives  are  authorized  to  furnish  a  photocopy  or  other 
reproduction.  One  of  these  specified  conditions  is 
that  the  photocopy  or  reproduction  is  not  to  be  used 
for  any  purpose  other  than  private  study,  scholarship, 
or  research.  If  a  user  makes  a  request  for,  or  later- 
uses,  a  photocopy  or  reproduction  for  purposes  in 
excess  of  "fair  use,"  that  user  may  be  liable  for 
copyright  infringement.  This  institution  reserves  the 
right  to  refuse  to  accept  a  copying  order  if,  in  its 
judgement,  fulfillment  of  the  order  would  involve 
violation  of  copyright  law. 


RESTRICTIONS  ON  THIS  INTERVIEW 
None. 

LITERARY  RIGHTS  AND  QUOTATION 

This  manuscript  is  hereby  made  available  for  research 
purposes  only.   All  literary  rights  in  the  manuscript, 
including  the  right  to  publication,  are  reserved  to 
the  University  Library  of  the  University  of  California, 
Los  Angeles.   No  part  of  the  manuscript  may  be  quoted 
for  publication  without  the  written  permission  of  the 
University  Librarian  of  the  University  of  California, 
Los  Angeles. 


CONTENTS 

Biographical  Sununary vi 

Interview  History viii 

TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  Side  One  (July  26,  1991) 1 

Childhood  in  Lincoln,  Nebraska--Family 
background- -Parents  move  to  Minneapolis-- 
Enters  University  of  Minnesota--Working  her  way 
through  school  as  a  live-in  maid--Quits  school 
and  moves  to  Chicago. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  Side  Two  (July  26,  1991) 21 

Meets  Richard  Wright  in  the  Federal  Writers 
Project--Cultural  life  of  Chicago  in  the  1930s-- 
Move  to  Los  Angeles- -Working  as  a  riveter  at 
Douglas  Aircraft  Corporation  during  World  War  II. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   II,  Side  One  (July  27,  1991) 35 

More  on  working  as  a  riveter--Studies  ceramics-- 
Admissions  clerk  for  Los  Angeles  County  Hospital-- 
Diagnosed  as  having  epilepsy--Idea  of  organizing 
the  first  juried  show  of  African- American  artists 
in  Los  Angeles--Social  value  of  art. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   II,  Side  Two  (July  27,  1991) 54 

Rebuffed  by  the  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art-- 
Creation  of  Art  West  Associated--Idea  of 
collecting  prints  by  African-American  artists-- 
Traveling  throughout  the  country  searching  for 
prints--Criterion  for  selecting  the  prints-- 
Building  a  personal  collection- -Meeting  artists-- 
Marriage  and  divorce. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   III,  Side  One  (July  27,  1991) 75 

More  on  cross-country,  print-collecting  trip-- 
Waddy's  prints--Taking  classes  at  Otis  Art 
Institute--Learns  to  talk  about  art--Visit  to  the 
Soviet  Union  in  1965--Sightseeing  in  Russia. 


IV 


TAPE  NUMBER:   III,  Side  Two  (July  27,  1991) 96 

Reflections  on  the  sameness  of  people--Traveling 
in  Europe- -Commentary  on  Waddy's  art  works-- 
Creating  a  market  for  African-American  art — 
Experimental  methods — Africa  and  African- 
Americans — More  discussion  of  Waddy's  prints. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  Side  One  (July  28,  1991) 116 

Waddy's  artistic  style — African-American-owned 
art  galleries  in  Los  Angeles--Coediting  Black 
Artists  on  Art  with  Samella  Lewis--Activism  and 
militancy--More  on  the  artists  involved  in  Art 
West  Associated- -Rising  market  value  of  artwork 
by  blacks--Noah  Purifoy. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  Side  Two  (July  28,  1991) 137 

Issue  of  whether  there  is  a  "black  aesthetics" — 
Recipient  of  honors--Philosophy  of  giving-- 
Difference  between  training  and  thinking-- 
Starting  the  Waddy  Shower  Cap  Company. 


Index. 


155 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SUMMARY 

PERSONAL  HISTORY: 

Bom:   January  7,  1909,  Lincoln,  Nebraska. 

Education:  University  of  Minnesota,  1927-28;  Famous 
Artists  Home  Study  Course,  1962;  Otis  Art  Institute, 
1965. 

Spouse:   William  H.  Waddy,  one  child. 

CAREER  HISTORY: 

Domestic  service,  1930s  and  occasionally  thereafter. 
Riveter,  Douglas  Aircraft  Corporation,  1942-45. 
Admissions  clerk,  Los  Angeles  County  Hospital,  ca.  1946--. 
Clerk,  Los  Angeles  County,  ca.  1959. 
Founder,  Art  West  Associated,  1962. 
Printmaker,  1962--. 

SELECTED  EXHIBITIONS: 

"Negro  History  Calendar  Art  Competition, "  Safety  Savings 
and  Loan,  Los  Angeles,  1964. 

"The  Negro  in  American  Art,"  Dickson  Art  Galleries,  UCLA, 
Los  Angeles,  1966. 

"New  Perspectives  in  Black  Art, "  Oakland  Museum,  Oakland, 
California,  1967. 

"Negro  History  Week  Art  Exhibit, "  Independence  Square,  Los 
Angeles,  1968. 

"Prints  by  Ruth  Waddy, "  Scott  United  Methodist  Chruch, 
Pasadena,  California,  1976. 

"A  Vibrant  Force, "  Our  Children  Museum  of  African  American 
Art,  Los  Angeles,  1979. 


vi 


"Ruth  Waddy,  A  Retrospective,"  Gallery  Plus,  Los  Angeles, 
1986. 

She  has  also  exhibited  at  the  University  of  California, 
Davis  (1966),  the  Fine  Art  Gallery,  San  Diego  (1967),  and 
the  Impressions/Expressions  Studio  Museum,  Harlem,  New 
York  (1983). 


AWARDS : 

National  Association  of  College  Women,  Los  Angeles,  1963. 

Angeles  Mesa  Young  Womens  Christian  Association,  Los 
Angeles,  1964. 

United  Nations  cultural  exchange  to  the  Soviet  Union, 
1966. 

National  Conference  of  Artists,  Virginia  State  University, 
Petersburg,  Virginia,  1968. 

Our  Authors  Study  Club,  Los  Angeles,  1972. 

National  Conference  of  Artists,  Pacific  Region,  Berkeley, 
California,  1976. 

League  of  Allied  Artists,  Los  Angeles,  1981. 

California  Afro-American  Museum,  1983. 

Vesta  Award,  Women's  Building,  Los  Angeles,  1986. 

Life  Works  Plaque  Award,  National  Artists  Conference,  Los 
Angeles,  1987. 

Honorary  Doctor  of  Arts,  Otis  Art  Institute,  Parsons 
School  of  Design,  New  School  of  Social  Research,  New  York, 
New  York,  1987. 

PUBLICATIONS: 

Research  for  Theodore  V.  Roelof-Lanner  ed..  Prints  by 
American  Negro  Artists.   Los  Angeles:  Cultural  Exchange 
Center,  1965. 

Ruth  G.  Waddy  and  Samella  Lewis  eds..  Black  Artists  on 
Art.   Los  Angeles:  Contemporary  Crafts,  1969. 


vii 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY 


INTERVIEWER: 

Karen  Anne  Mason,  B.A.,  English,  Slnunons  College;  M.A., 
Art  History,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles. 

TIME  AND  SETTING  OF  INTERVIEW: 

Place:   Waddy's  home,  San  Francisco,  California. 

Dates,  length  of  sessions:   July  26,  1991  (61  minutes); 
July  27,  1991  (173);  July  28,  1991  (78). 

Total  number  of  recorded  hours:   5.20 

Persons  present  dviring  interview:   Waddy,  Mason,  and 
Waddy's  daughter,  Maryom  Ana  Al-Wadi,  intermittently. 

CONDUCT  OF  INTERVIEW: 

This  interview  is  one  of  a  series  on  African-American  art 
and  artists  in  Los  Angeles.   This  oral  history  project 
gathers  and  preserves  interviews  with  African-American 
artists  who  have  created  significant  works  and  others  in 
the  Los  Angeles  metropolitan  area  who  have  worked  to 
expand  exhibition  opportunities  and  public  support  for 
African-American  visual  culture. 

The  interview  is  organized  chronologically,  beginning  with 
Waddy's  childhood  in  Lincoln,  Nebraska,  and  Minneapolis, 
Minnesota,  and  continuing  on  through  her  preserving  and 
publicizing  the  work  of  African-American  printmakers. 
Major  topics  covered  include  the  publication  of  Prints  by 
American  Negro  Artists  and  Black  Artists  on  Art,  the 
creation  of  Art  West  Associated,  her  own  work  as  a  painter 
and  linoleum  block  designer,  and  the  black  art  scene  in 
Southern  California. 

EDITING: 

Steven  J.  Novak,  editor,  edited  the  interview.   He  checked 
the  verbatim  transcript  of  the  interview  against  the 
original  tape  recordings,  edited  for  punctuation, 
paragraphing,  and  spelling,  and  verified  proper  names. 
Words  and  phrases  inserted  by  the  editor  have  been 
bracketed. 


Vlll 


Waddy  reviewed  the  transcript.   She  verified  proper  names 
and  made  minor  corrections  and  additions. 

Novak  also  prepared  the  table  of  contents,  biographical 
summary,  interview  history,  and  index. 

SUPPORTING  DOCUMENTS: 

The  original  tape  recordings  of  the  interview  are  in  the 
university  archives  and  are  available  under  the 
regulations  governing  the  use  of  permanent  noncurrent 
records  of  the  university.   Records  relating  to  the 
interview  are  located  in  the  office  of  the  UCLA  Oral 
History  Program. 


IX 


TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  SIDE  ONE 
JULY  26,  1991 

MASON:   Today  is  July  26,  and  I'm  talking  with  Ruth  Waddy, 
in  San  Francisco.   Ms.  Waddy,  could  you  tell  us  when  and 
where  you  were  born  and  also  give  us  your  full  name? 
WADDY:   I  was  born  in  Lincoln,  Nebraska,  January  7,  1909, 
and  my  full  name  is  really  Willanna  Ruth  Gilliam.   Willanna 
was  my  first  name  because  my  mother--  I  was  the  oldest,  the 
first  child.   My  mother's  first  name  is  Willie  [Goran 
Gilliam],  and  her  second  name  was  Anna.   But  when  I  went  to 
school,  the  children  called  me  "Banana!"   So  I  asked  her  if 
I  could  go  by  my  second  name,  Ruth.   She  said  yes.   From 
then  on  I  was  Ruth  Gilliam.   Now,  when  I  got  married  I 
didn't  want  to  drop  the  maiden  name,  so  I  go  by  Ruth  G. 
Waddy. 

MASON:   I  see.   And  what's  your  father's  name? 
WADDY:   John  Moses  Gilliam. 

MASON:   Do  you  know  when  they  came  to  Nebraska, 
approximately?   Had  they  been--? 

WADDY:   They  had  been  married  four  or  five  years  prior  to 
my  mother  becoming  pregnant  with  me,  and  they  were  in 
Butte,  Montana,  at  the  time,  near  the  time  of  my--  And  she 
became  pregnant  with  me.   But  my  father  was  very  suspicious 
of  staying  there  because  there  were  no  African-Americans  in 
Butte,  Montana,  at  that  time.   So  he  decided  to  move  to 


Lincoln.   And  another  thing,  my  father  always  liked  to  buy 
wherever  he  lived.   He  liked  to  buy  his  house  and  some  land 
around  it  because  he  was  a  strong  believer  in  gardening 
for,  you  know,  tomatoes  and  peppers  and  things  like  that. 
He  liked  to  have  vegetables. 
MASON:   Is  that  what  he  did  for  a  living? 
WADDY:   No.   He  was  a  waiter.   That's  how  he  happened  to 
know  the  Northwest  of  the  country  so  well,  because  he  did 
what  many  African-American  men  did  in  those  times--run  on 
the  road.   But  he  was  not  a  porter,  he  was  a  waiter. 
^4AS0N:   This  was  on  a  train? 
WADDY:   Yes.   On  trains. 
MASON:   Did  your  mother  work  also? 

WADDY:   No.   My  mother  never  worked.   In  fact,  when  I  was  a 
baby  until--  Well,  when  I  was  born,  I  had  two  younger 
sisters,  Margaret  [Gilliam  Harrison]  and  Gladys  [Gilliam 
Little] .   Margaret  is  about  a  year  and  three  months  younger 
than  I,  and  Gladys  is  almost  three  years  younger  than  I 
am.   Gladys  was  born  in  1912.   Margaret  was  born  in  1910. 
She  was  a  middle  sister;  Margaret  was  the  middle  sister. 
And  Mama  hired —  It  was  during  the  period  of  a  lot  of 
immigrants  coming  to  the  United  States- -when  the  immigrants 
came  to  the  States,  I  mean,  a  lot  of  them  from  Europe.   My 
mother  knew  how  to  speak  German,  so  she  hired--  They  had  a 
German  help,  you  know,  to  help  my  mother  do  the-- 


MASON:   How  did  she  happen  to  know  how  to  speak  German?   Do 

you  know? 

WADDY:   Well,  my  mother  seemed  to  be  very  well  educated, 

although  she  was  an  only  child.   Her  mother  died  in 

childbirth.   She  was  raised  by  her  grandparents. 

MASON:   Was  she  educated  abroad,  do  you  know? 

WADDY:   No.   She  was  born  in  Fort  Scott,  Kansas. 

MASON:   Same  place  as  Gordon  Parks. 

WADDY:   But  she  was  raised  and  she  talks  about  Leavenworth, 

[Kansas].   I  guess  that's  where  she  met  my  father.   I  don't 

know.   Maybe  so,  because  I  know  the  Gilliams  had  property 

in  Leavenworth.   I  never  asked  her,  and  when  I  thought 

about  asking  her  she  was  gone.   But  she  must  have  come  from 

a  sort  of  upper-class  family  because  she  put--  In  those 

days,  young  women  had  hope  chests.   A  hope  chest  meant  that 

you  put  away  things  in  preparation  for  your  wedding,  your 

future  home . 

MASON:   Like  linens  and  china  and  things  like  that. 

WADDY:   Yes,  yes.   She  put  quite  a  store  by  sterling  silver 

and  linen  tablecloths  and  very  fine  things.   We  always  had 

a  dining  room  and  a  linen  tablecloth,  and  each  of  us  had 

our  own  napkin  and  napkin  ring  with  our  names  on  it. 

MASON:   Oh.   Did  she  play  the  piano? 

WADDY:   Yes,  she  did,  and  she  sang.   She  had  a  beautiful 

singing  voice,  but  none  of  us  inherited  that.   But  we  did 


inherit  a  love  for  grand  opera.   She  sang  grand  opera. 
h4AS0N:   Where  did  she  sing?   Just  locally? 
WADDY:   I  know  that  she  sang  in  Leavenworth,  Kansas, 
because  my  uncle--  My  father,  on  the  other  hand,  there  were 
eight  in  his  family,  girls  and  boys.   Uncle  Elijah 
[Gilliam]  often  remarked  that  it  was  strange  that  none  of 
us  had  the  voice  my  mother  had.   So  it  must  have  been  in 
Leavenworth,  Kansas.   And  where  else,  I  don't  know.   She 
never  did  say.   When  I  thought  about  asking  her  about  those 
things,  she  wasn't  here--she  had  died. 
MASON:   What  year  did  your  mother  die? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember.   I  don't  remember  dates  of--  I 
remember  when  my  father  died,  because  I  was  graduating  from 
the  eighth  grade.   I  was  thirteen  years  old.   I  remember 
that .   But  I  don ' t  remember  my  age . 
MASON:   So  he  died  before  your  mother? 
WADDY:   Yes,  many  years  before. 

MASON:   Did  you  know  much  about  your  father's  family 
background? 

WADDY:   Yes.   Uncle  Elijah  wrote  a  sort  of  mini- 
autobiography  for  his  daughter  [Anne  Gilliam  Hare] ,  and  I 
have  a  copy  of  it  someplace.   Uncle  Elijah  was  the  youngest 
of  the  eight  children.   My  father  was  next  to  the  oldest- - 
of  the  boys,  anyway.   I  remember  Aunt  Jane  [Gilliam] ,  my 
mother  saying  that  she  was  sort  of  a  disciplinarian.   She 


4 


never  had  any  children,  though.   Uncle  Henry  [Gilliam] 
did.   Uncle  Henry  was  the  oldest  boy,  and  he  had  some 
children,  but  I  don't  remember  how  many.   My  father,  since 
he  ran  on  the  road  and  he  liked  the  Northwest,  when  my 
mother  and  he  were  married,  that's  where  they  lived.   In 
those  days,  there  weren't  very  many  African-Americans  in 
that  part  of  the  country.   That's  why  it  was  a  German 
immigrant  who  hadn't  learned  how  to  speak  English  yet. 
That's  why  my  mother  hired  her,  I  think. 

MASON:   I  see.   So  what  kind  of  education  did  your  parents 
try  to  give  their  children?   Did  they  try  to  give  you  music 
lessons? 

WADDY:   Yes,  yes,  my  mother  did,  because,  of  course,  being 
in  music,  she  thought  it  was  important.   I  remember  we  had 
a  cardboard--  We  didn't  have  a  piano  at  first.   The  keys 
were  cardboard,  and  we  had  to  practice  on  these  cardboard 
keys.   And  it  was  numbered,  you  know.   The  keys  were 
numbered  E,  F,  G,  A,  B,  C.   Let  me  see.   I  think  there  were 
six  of  them.   The  C  starts,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  A,  B,  C.   A,  B, 
C  are  the  higher  one's  up.   And  then  after  a  while  we  got  a 
piano.   I  liked  the  piano.   Some  woman  heard  me  play  once, 
and  she  offered  my  mother--  This  was  after  my  father  had 
died.   She  said  that  she  would  see  that  I  became  a  concert 
pianist  if  my  mother  would  let  her  take  me.   But  Mama  said 
no,  because  she  had  heard  stories  about  white  people  taking 


children,  and  they  were  actually  enslaving  them  to  work  for 

them,  you  know,  for  years  and  years  and  years.   So  she  said 

no.   But  I  played  for  the  church,  and  I  played  the  pipe 

organ  for  the  church.   I  liked  the  pipe  organ  because  the 

pipes  are  for  the  keys  where  you  do  your  footwork. 

MASON:   How  long  did  you  continue  to  play  the  piano?   All 

your  life  or  did  you  stop  at  some  point? 

WADDY:   Oh,  I  can't  play  the  piano  now. 

MASON:   So  it  was  mostly  classical  music  then,  or  was  it-- 

WADDY:   Yes. 

MASON:   No  jazz,  right? 

WADDY:   But  my  youngest  sister  played  jazz. 

MASON:   What  did  your  mother  think  of  that? 

WADDY:   She  didn't  think  anything.   It  was  quite  acceptable 

then.   Not  as  acceptable  as  it  is  now,  but  it  wasn't,  you 

know,  forbidden. 

MASON:   Did  you  have  any  other  incidents  in  your  childhood 

that  you  can  think  of  that  were  important  or  people  you  met 

who  seemed  to  have  influenced  you? 

WADDY:   Nobody  influenced  us  except  certain  precepts  that 

our  parents  gave  us.   Nothing  else.   Nobody,  unless  they 

had  the  same  ones,  the  same  precepts.   Our  life  was--  As 

children  we  had--  It  was  very  regimented.   We  got  up  early 

and  everybody  got  dressed  and  had  breakfast  at  the  same 

time.   And  you  either  played  or  went  to  school.   My  mother 


sewed.   She  made  a  lot  of  our  clothes.   And  when  we  were 
able,  we  were  taught  how  to  sew. 

I  remember  one  thing:   Of  course,  we  always,  Margaret, 
my  middle  sister,  and  I,  would  lose  the  needles,  but  not 
the  long  ones.   Sewing  needles,  you  know.   But  the  little 
short  ones,  they  were  about  two  inches  long,  an  inch  and 
three  quarters  or  two  inches  long.   We  would  put  them  down 
or  forget  where  they  were,  just  drop  them.   So  we  were 
always  asking  Mama  for  a  new  needle.   She  would  give  us 
longer  ones  and  longer  ones.   Well,  longer  needles  were 
fine  as  long  as  we  didn't  lose  them.   But,  on  the  other 
hand,  you  can't  do  very  fine  sewing  with  a  coarse  needle, 
taking  big  stitches.   You  have  to  take  small  stitches  to  do 
fine  sewing,  small  holes  in  the  material.   So  one  day, 
before  we  asked  Mama  for  them,  because  Margaret  and  I  asked 
her,  we  said--  We  just  had  a  darning  needle.   One  was 
taught  how  to  darn,  too,  which  is  quite-- 
MASON:   Useful. 

WADDY:   Yes,  it  is.   Very  useful.   And  it  looks  good,  too, 
if  it's  done  properly.   We  said,  "We'll  give  Gladys  the 
darning  needle."   But  Gladys  was  very  sharp,  my  youngest 
sister.   We  told  her  she  could  take  more  cloth  on  the 
darning  needle,  take  more  stitches  on  the  needle,  because 
it's  longer.   She  said  to  us,  "Well,  if  it's  so  good,  how 
is  it  that  you're  giving  it  to  me?"   She  was  very  good  at 


that. 

MASON:   What  church  did  your  family  belong  to? 

WADDY :   Methodist . 

MASON:   Did  you  remain  a  Methodist? 

WADDY:   I  don't  go  to  any  church  at  all.   I  don't--  If  I-- 

When  I  went  to  church,  I  went  to  Methodist  churches. 

MASON:   One  usually  thinks  of  the  church  being  kind  of  a 

central  part  of  black  life,  and  if  you're  not  in  church, 

then  you're  sort  of  disconnected  from  a  lot  of  activities, 

social,  political  things.   But  you  didn't  find  that  that 

was-- 

WADDY:   Well,  I  stopped  going  to  church  after  I  was 

grown.   I  was  grown  up  and  not  living  in  Minneapolis  then. 

I  remember  particular  things  about  Minneapolis.   First 
of  all,  when  I  was  growing  up,  there  weren't  very  many 
African-Americans  there.   There  are  now  and  have  been  for 
some  years.   But  we  had  white  neighbors,  and  intermarriages 
were  common.   And  the  church  was  an  important  community- - 
when  I  was  growing  up--for  African-Americans.   They  didn't 
call  them  African-Americans  at  that  time.   They  were  called 
"colored  people." 
MASON:   That  was  before  "Negro." 

WADDY:   Yes,  then  Negro,  and  then  "Afro,"  which  doesn't  mean 
anything,  because,  as  Gladys  says,  there's  no  such  thing  as 
an  Afro.   What's  that?   That's  just  as  bad  as  saying  a 


colored  person.   But  African-American  comes  a  little  closer 
to  what  Africans  are  here  in  the  United  States. 

But  the  thing  that  I  remember  is  that  it  gets  dark 
early  in  the  summer  and  in  the  winter.   We  had  to  be  in  bed 
by  eight  o'clock.   Now,  I  mean  in  the  winter  it  gets  dark 
by  eight  o'clock.   In  the  summer,  it's  around  nine  o'clock 
or  so.   But  we  had  to  go  to  bed  at  eight  o'clock  while  it 
was  still  light.   And  we  would  play.   We  lived  in  houses 
that  had  an  upstairs  and  a  downstairs.   The  bedrooms  were 
upstairs.   And  the  downstairs  was  the--  See,  they  didn't 
call  it  a  living  room.   It  was  called  a  front  room.   And 
then  a  dining  room.   And  then  a  kitchen.   Maybe  there  might 
have  been  an  extra  room,  but  if  it  was  I  don't  remember  the 
name  of  it. 

MASON:   Parlor  or  sitting  room. 

WADDY:   A  parlor  maybe,  but  not  a  sitting  room.   And  then 
we  always  had  a  basement.   The  houses  where  it  snows  always 
had  cellars  or  basements--a  foundation- -because  it's 
required  because  of  the  weather,  of  the  freezing.   The 
freezing  of  the  ground. 

So  when  we  would  go  to  bed  in  the  summer,  I  would  tell 
stories.   I  had  a  very  active  imagination.   I  would  tell 
stories,  fairy  tales,  mostly,  to  my  younger  sisters.   If  I 
couldn't  think  of  an  ending,  you  know,  a  proper  ending,  I'd 
just  say  it's  "continued  until  tomorrow  night."   My  mother 


would  be  downstairs,  and  she  could  hear  me  talking  or  all 
of  us  talking  or  laughing.   She'd  say,  "Children!"   She'd 
call  upstairs,  "Be  quiet!   Go  to  sleep,"  almost  every 
night. 

When  my  father  came  home  from  being  on  the  road--  He 
ran  to  Washington  when  we  lived  in  Minneapolis. 
Washington,  the  state  of  Washington  and  the  state  of-- 
What ' s  that  other  state  that ' s  below  the  state  of 
Washington? 
MASON:   Oregon. 

WADDY:   Oregon.   It  would  be  eight  days,  from  time  to 
time.   He'd  be  out  eight  days  and  be  in  three  days,  you 
know,  in  Minneapolis,  three  days. 

One  time  my  mother  said  to  him- -we  could  hear  them-- 
"See  Jack,  that's  the  way  they  do  every  time  I  send  them  to 
bed."   My  father  never  whipped  us,  not  one  time,  because  he 
said  he  was  too  strong  and  he  would  hit  his  girls  too 
hard.   But  Mama  wanted  him  to  do  that.   So  one  night  he 
called  us  downstairs,  and  he  said  to  me,  "I'm  going  to  give 
you  three  licks  because  you're  the  oldest."   So  he  gave  me, 
and  he  counted  them  out,  "one,  two,  three, "  out  loud  like 
that.   And  Margaret  he  gave  two,  "one,  two."   Of  course,  we 
didn't  cry  because  he  just  barely  touched  us.   So  we  went 
upstairs,  and  we  heard  Mama  say,  "I  don't  hear  the  children 
crying."   And  Papa  said,  "You  don't  hear  them  talking 


10 


either,  do  you?" 

My  father  was--  My  sister  Gladys  was  like  him.   She 
always  had  an  answer  that  you  couldn't  answer  back.   My 
daughter  [Maryom  Ana  Al-Wadi]  does  that,  too.   She  can 
always  give  you  an  answer  that  you  can't  answer  back.   You 
have  to  be  quiet  because  she's  hit  the  nail  on  the  head. 
MASON:   Yeah,  well,  it  sounds  like  you  had  a  really  happy 
childhood. 

WADDY:   It  was,  very,  very  much  so.   So  much  so  that  when  I 
was  working  in  Los  Angeles,  or  it  was  in  Chicago?   No,  it 
was  in  Los  Angeles,  at  the  [Los  Angeles]  County  Hospital. 
One  worker  said  to  me,  "Oh,  Ruth,  everybody  knows  you  had  a 
happy  childhood.   We  can  tell  by  the  way  you  act." 
[laughter]   It  really  was,  it  was  a  very  happy  childhood. 
All  of  us.   And  then  my  father  died,  and  my  mother  went  to 
work.   That's  the  first  time  that  she  had  ever  gone  to  work 
outside  of  the  home.   Of  course,  she  worked  like  a  dog,  I 
realized  after  I  grew  up.   After  I  got  grown,  I  realized 
how  hard  my  mother  worked  at  home,  because  she  did  her  own 
canning.   In  those  days  they  canned.   She  did  her  own 
laundry,  and  she  took  care  of  her  children.   If  anything 
happened  in  school,  she  was  always  up  to  the  school  to  talk 
to  the  teachers.   She  was  an  ardent  church  worker.   She 
worked  hard.   I  didn't  realize  that.   And  she  loved  to 
entertain.   Of  course,  she  was  a  very  good  cook,  too,  and 


11 


cooking  also  is  hard  work. 

MASON:   Back  then  especially,  with  no  dishwashers. 

WADDY:   Washing,  and  taking  care  of  children,  three  girls, 

and  maintaining  a  certain  kind  of  standard,  that's  hard 

work. 

MASON:   Did  your  family  belong  to  any  organizations  like 

the  NAACP  [National  Association  for  the  Advancement  of 

Colored  People]? 

WADDY:   They  never  mentioned  it.   My  father  didn't  think 

much  of  any  kind  of  organization  of  any  color  or  any  size 

or  nothing.   He  just  thought  a  lot  about  doing  things 

yourself.   My  father  was  a  better  businessman, 

businesswise,  than  my  mother,  but,  of  course,  he  was 

outside  the  home  all  the  time. 

MASON:   So  how  did  you  decide  to  go  to  college,  go  to  the 

University  of  Minnesota?   What  led  you--? 

WADDY:   Well,  first  of  all  it  was  cheaper.   I  thought  I 

wanted  to  teach  school .   They  had  normal  schools  at  that 

time.   They  were  schools  that  taught  people  how  to  become 

teachers.   They  were  called  normal  schools.   But  it  cost 

$30  a  year.   First  they  had  semesters,  and  then  they 

changed  to  quarters  at  the  university.   It  was  $30  a 

quarter  then. 

MASON:   This  was  1927-28.   I'm  just  trying  to  get  an  idea 

of  how  much  $30  was.   Was  that  a  lot? 


12 


WADDY:   Well,  I  worked  while  I  was  going  to  school. 
Because  my  mother,  when  she  worked,  she  made  $25  a  week. 
MASON:   I  see.   That  gives  me  an  idea. 

WADDY:   So  I  guess  $30  was  quite  a  bit  of  money  then.   Not 
as  much  as  $1,500  and  $5,500  now. 
MASON:   Yeah,  it's  ridiculous  now. 

WADDY:   I  know.   It's  much  higher  now  to  go  than  it  was 
then.   Let's  see.   [searching]   I  thought  I  had  that  out. 
I  had  an  old  University  of  Minnesota  bill  to  show  you. 
MASON:   Oh,  okay.   Well,  you  might  find  that  later.   So  in 
the  normal  school  to  become  a  teacher  you  would  probably 
take  a  lot  of  different  subjects.   Instead  of  focusing  on 
one  area,  would  you  take  courses  in--? 

WADDY:   You  have  to  decide  what  you're  going  to  take  before 
you--  If  you  want  to  teach  English,  well,  I  guess  that's 
what  you'd  concentrate  on.   Or  they  had  one  called 
arithmetic  and  then  mathematics.   Mathematics  was  not  all- 
inclusive.   Mathematics  started  with  algebra  at  that 
time.   I  think  it  starts  with  trigonometry  now. 
MASON:   Is  that  what  you  studied? 

WADDY:   No,  I  went  through  solid  geometry,  but  not  trig.   I 
didn't  go  that  far. 

MASON:   No,  but  I  mean,  did  you  want  to  become  an  English 
teacher  or  what  subject  did  you  specialize  in? 
WADDY:   Yes,  English. 


13 


MASON:   I.  can  see  by  all  your  books  that  you  love  to  read. 
WADDY:   Yeah,  I  love  to  read.   Oh,  yes.   I  read  like  mad. 
MASON:   What  kinds  of  things  did  you  read?   Do  you 
remember? 

WADDY:  Philosophy.  I  liked  nonfiction.  I  didn't  like 
romance  and  love  stories  much.  It  didn't  make  sense  to 
me.   I  mean,  it  seemed  kind  of  silly. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  some  of  the  philosophers  that  you 
liked  in  particular?   Maybe  American  or  German  or-- 
WADDY:   No,  I  don't  remember  that.   The  only  thing  I 
remember  is  that  they  never  resolved  anything.   That  kind 
of  put  me  off,  too.   I  like  things  coming  to  a  resolution, 
coming  to  some  kind  of  conclusion,  coming  to  some  kind  of 
end.   I  like  the  hands-on  approach.   I  was  always  that  kind 
of  a  person.   My  mother  called  me  a  bull  in  a  china  shop. 
I  was,  first  of  all,  large  for  my  age.   And  I  was  strong 
physically,  very  strong,  which  may  account  for  my  present 
condition,  because  I  was  that  way  all  of  my  life,  all  of  my 
life.   I  may  have  just  done  too  much,  just  done  too  much. 
MASON:   So  you  were  interested  in  athletics  and  things  like 
that? 

WADDY:   No,  I  liked  to  swim.   I  liked  the  water,  let's  say, 
but  I  never  learned  how  to  swim  well.   And  I  liked  playing 
tennis,  and  I  prefer  to  play  with  men.   Women  didn't  play 
very  much.   They  didn't  play  hard  enough. 


14 


MASON:   They  were  too  busy  being  dainty. 

WADDY:   Yes.   There  was  a  great  difference  made  between  men 

and  women  when  I  was  growing  up,  more  so  than  now,  a 

different  kind.   It  wasn't  as  interchangeable  as  sometimes 

it  is  now.   I  think  it's  more  true  now  than  it  was  then. 

MASON:   You  mean  that  back  then  women  were  trained  to  stay 

in  the  home? 

WADDY:   Yes,  exactly.   Women  who  liked  sports  or  were  too 

athletic  were  called  tomboys.   That  wouldn't  wash  today.   I 

think  that  today  it's  more  true.   It  comes  closer  to  the 

truth  than  before. 

MASON:   You  mean  in  terms  of-- 

WADDY:   Differentiating  between  the  sexes. 

MASON:   Oh,  you  think  things  are  more  separate  now? 

WADDY:   No,  they  were  more  separate  then.   And  that  wasn't 

true.   They  are  really  more  alike  than  they  are  different. 

MASON:   So  were  you  called  a  tomboy  back  then? 

WADDY:   No.   Because  I  was  not  athletic. 

MASON:   You  were  just  strong. 

WADDY:   I  was  just  strong.   I  was  just  physically  strong. 

MASON:   Was  that  something  that  you  were  thinking  about  a 

lot  back  then,  the  differences  between  the  sexes? 

WADDY :   No . 

MASON:   Okay,  and  then  while  you  were  in  school  the 

Depression  broke  out.   The  crash  happened  in  1929,  and  it 


15 


seems  like  you  left  school  after  that  happened,  because  on 

your  resume  it  says  you  were  in  school  from  '27  to  '28, 

then  '30  to  '31.   So  did  that  affect  your  finances 

immediately? 

WADDY:   No,  because  I  worked  while  I  was  going  to  school. 

I  worked  as  a  domestic  and  stayed  on  the  place. 

MASON:   You  didn't  lose  your  job? 

WADDY:   What  they  called  a  live- in,  which  means  that  you 

took  care  of  the  children.   You  stayed--  You  know,  instead 

of  having  a  babysitter,  the  maid  took  care  of  the  children 

so  that  the  master  and  the  mistress  could  go  out  to  a  show 

or  to  somebody ' s  house  or  whatever .   But  they  had  a 

caretaker  for  the  children  in  the  house.   That  was  part  of 

your  duties,  as  well  as  cleaning  and  cooking  and  whatever 

else.   But  I  did  it  after  I  went  to  school.   Like  I  would 

get  up  maybe  and  fix  breakfast  and  go  to  school.   Fix 

breakfast  for  the  household  and  then  go  to  school.   Then, 

when  I  came  back,  I  would  go  to  the  store  or  start  fixing 

dinner  or  do  some  cleaning- -whatever  day  it  was,  whichever 

was  the  more  important. 

MASON:   When  did  you  find  time  to  study? 

WADDY:   After  dinner,  after  the  dinner  dishes  were  done. 

MASON:   You  must  hdve  been  tired  at  the  end  of  the  day. 

WADDY:   No,  not  particularly,  because  I  had  study  periods 

during  the  time.   Like,  for  instance,  an  English  class 


16 


would  be  between  eight  thirty  and  ten  o'clock  or  eight 
thirty  and  nine  thirty.   From  nine  thirty  until  eleven 
o'clock  was  free  time.   That  was  time  for  me  to  study 
before  an  eleven  o'clock  class.   There  was  time  during  the 
day.   And,  of  course,  at  night  too. 
MASON:   So  when  did  you — ? 

WADDY:   Well,  my  mother  was  cook  at  like  a  restaurant.   It 
was  really  a  candy  store  that  served  meals.   Ragland's 
Candy  Store  was  the  name  of  it. 

MASON:   Like  a  Woolworth's,  something  like  that. 
WADDY:   Yeah.   Ragland's  Candy  Store  was  like  a  See's  Candy 
Store  with  very  fine  candy.   And  she  decided  to  open  up-- 
Mrs.  Ragland  was  married,  but  she  was  the  one  who  made 
nearly  all  the  decisions.   Mr.  Ragland  just  went  along. 
MASON:   I'm  sorry?   Oh,  he  went  along.   He  raked  in  the 
money . 

WADDY:   Yeah.   So  my  mother  started  it,  and  it  was 
successful.   But  they  needed  a  dishwasher  at  one  time,  and 
I  said  that  I  would  do  it  so  I  could  get  out  of  staying  in 
the  house  as  a  live-in  domestic.   But  when  I  saw  how  hard 
my  mother  worked  doing  the  cooking,  I  decided  that  she 
worked  that  way  because  I  was  in  school  and,  you  know,  I 
had  two  younger  sisters.   She  was  only  making  $25  a  week. 
I  decided  that  I  didn't  need  to  stay  in  school,  I  needed  to 
get  a  job  and  help  her.   So  I  told  her  that,  and  she 


17 


thought  it  would  be  more  important  for  me  to  get  a 
degree.   But,  you  know,  I  was  in  my  twenties,  or  close  to, 
and  felt  just  as  grown  as  anybody  else.   So  I  quit  school 
and  went  to  Chicago,  because  I  knew  that  they  had  jobs  for 
live-in  maids  in  Chicago.   So  if  worst  came  to  worst,  I 
could  always  do  that,  because  I  knew  how  to  do  it. 
^4AS0N:   What  did  you  want  to  do  in  Chicago?   What  did  you 
think — ? 

WADDY:   I  thought  that  I  would  work  and  save  a  little  bit 
of  money  so  that  I  could  go  back  to  school,  because  my 
mother  was  very  unhappy  about  that.   She  was  unhappy  and 
proud,  too,  you  know,  both  of  them.   I  told  her  she  didn't 
have  to  work  that  hard  for  me,  because  I  was  strong  and 
able.   She  was  proud  about  that,  but  she  wasn't  happy  about 
my  quitting  school. 

When  I  went  to  Chicago,  I  saw  so  many  black  people, 
more  than  I  had  ever  seen  in  my  life.   I  fell  in  love  with 
it  just  as  soon  as  I  got  off  the  train.   I  mean,  I  saw 
people  just  walking  up  and  down.   I  said,  "This  must  be 
heaven!"   I  said,  "I'll  never,  ever  leave  Chicago,  as  long 
as  I  live."   I  just  fell  in  love  with  it.   They  had  more 
black  people  in  Chicago  in  one  block  then  there  were  in  the 
whole  city  of  Minneapolis.   They  had  five  thousand--  Of 
course,  they  were  living  in  kitchenettes,  two,  three  living 
on  top  of  each  other  along  with  the  cockroaches . 


18 


MASON:   And  the  rats.   Outrageous  rents,  as  well. 
WADDY:   Well,  the  kitchenettes  weren't  so  bad,  except  there 
were  too  many.   Five  thousand  in  one  block.   There  were 
hardly  five  thousand  in  the  whole  state  of  Minnesota,  and 
that  was  just  one  block  of  Chicago.   I  loved  it!   I 
absolutely  loved  it. 

But  when  the  war  came--  And  I  stayed  there,  too.   I 
got  pregnant.   I  got  married.   I  got  a  divorce.   When  World 
War  II  came,  I  decided  that  I  was  going  to  keep  my  daughter 
and  work  in  the  daytime  when  she  was  going  to  school.   I 
applied  for  a  job  as  a  blueprint  reader  and  solderer  for 
radios  at  Lockheed  [Aircraft  Corporation] . 
MASON:   That  doesn't  sound  like  a  job  that  many  women 
would-- 

WADDY:   I  took  it.   I  went  to  DuSable  High  School  at  night 
so  that  I  could  learn  it.   What  I  didn't  realize  until 
later,  there  was  a  young  man  who  was  teaching  the  class 
that  was  probably  an  engineer  and  couldn't  get  a  job 
either,  which  was  why  he  was  teaching  there. 

Well,  anyway,  I  made  an  application,  and  I  never  will 
forget  it.   A  young  man  interviewed  me,  and  I  told  him  that 
I  knew  how  to  solder  and  read  radio  blueprints.   He  said, 
"Let  me  see  you  solder."   So  he  handed  me  a  soldering 
iron.   I  showed  him  spot  soldering.   That's  a  different 
kind.   So  I  showed  him.   Well,  he  had  some  bosses,  so  he 


19 


went  to  his  bosses  and  said  that  I  knew  how.   But  they  told 
him  no,  that  he  couldn't  hire  me  because  I  was  an  African- 
American,  I  was  black.   He  said--  I  heard  him,  because  he 
was  so  provoked  or,  you  know,  excited  about  telling  me  yes, 
thinking  that  he  was  hiring  somebody.   And  his  boss  was 
telling  him  no,  he  couldn't  hire  me.   The  young  man  said, 
"But  she  already  knows  how!   And  we're  hiring  them  by  the 
hundreds  who  can't  tell  a  soldering  iron  from  a  pressing 
iron!"   But  they  insisted.   They  said  no,  and  that's  how  I 
came  to  Los  Angeles. 


20 


TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  SIDE  TWO 
JULY  26,  1991 

MASON:   That  was  during  the  height  of  the  Depression  that 
you  were  in  Chicago.   How  did  that  affect  the  way  you  were 
living?   Did  you  always  seem  to  manage  to  find  a  job? 
WADDY:   Oh,  yes,  because  I  was  always  a  good  cook.   I  am  an 
excellent  cook.   Yet  I  haven't  cooked  anything  for  quite  a 
long  time. 

MASON:   What  kind  of  things  did  you  like  to  cook? 
WADDY:   Everything.   I  cooked  anything  well.   I  like  to 
eat,  for  one  thing. 
MASON:   Oh,  good.   [laughter] 

WADDY:   And  so  I  know  good  food.   I  mean,  I  know  many  kinds 
of  food.   I  know  how  to  read  recipes.   For  instance,  a  lady 
went  to  a  dinner  party  and  the  hostess  served  a  cranberry 
ring  that  had  oranges  and  orange  rind  and  walnuts  in  it. 
She  got  the  recipe  from  the  hostess,  a  raw  cranberry 
ring.   She  was  entertaining.   It  was  Irving  Stone.   They 
were  the  Irving  Stones,  that  family.   She  [Jean  Stone]  was 
entertaining  another  author  and  wanted  to  impress  him,  so 
she  asked  me  what  did  I  think  would  be  an  impressive 
dinner.   I  said  goose,  for  one  thing.   Goose  is  a  fowl,  you 
know,  for  the  meat.   And  she  said,  "And  we'll  use  a 
cranberry  ring."   The  cranberry  ring  didn't  have  any--  She 
just  gave  me  that  with  no  gelatin  in  it.   She  watched  me 

21 


make  it  up,  and  she  watched  me  put  the  gelatin  in  it. 

She  said,  "That's  not  in  the  recipe." 

I  said,  "You  said  it  was  a  ring,  did  you  not?" 

She  said,  "Yes." 

I  said,  "Well,  what's  holding  the  things  together? 
Something  has  to  hold  it  together." 

So  it  turned  out  right,  of  course.   She  got  a  lot  of 
praise  for  that  ring.   It's  served  with  sourcream-- 
mayonnaise  mixed  with  sourcream  sauce. 

MASON:   Oh,  so  it's  more  like  a  salad  and  not  really  -- 
WADDY:   Yeah,  and  it's  very,  very  good  if  it's  made 
properly. 

^4AS0N:   Sounds  wonderful. 

WADDY:   It's  grated  orange  peel,  a  certain  amount  of  fresh 
orange  juice,  you  know,  peel,  grated  in  with  the 
cranberries  and  chopped  walnuts.   It's  very  good.   It's 
kind  of  expensive  too.   Well,  she  said  to  me  afterwards, 
"That's  exactly--  It  turned  out  just  exactly  right."   She 
said,  "How  did  you  know  that?"   I  mean,  that's  because  I'm 
a  cook.   She  said,  "I  wonder  why  she  didn't  put  that  in  the 
recipe?"   I  said,  "She  probably  forgot." 
MASON:   It  was  so  obvious. 

WADDY:   "She  was  being  the  hostess,  you  know."   She  looked 
at  me  like  she  didn't  forget  it,  she  just  left  it  out  on 
purpose.   I  said,  "She  probably  forgot.   You  were  pressing 


22 


her  hard."   But  anyway,  that's  what  I  mean  when  I  say  I  was 

a  good  cook.   I  can  read  a  recipe  and  tell  you  how  it's 

going  to  look  and  how  it's  going  to  taste  before  I  cook  it. 

MASON:   What  memories  do  you  have  of  Chicago?   Because  it 

was  an  exciting  city,  as  you  were  saying,  in  the  1930s. 

WADDY:   It  wasn't  exciting.   It  wasn't  exciting  to  me. 

Minneapolis  was  more  exciting.   We  didn't  do  anything.   The 

thing  that  impressed  me  was  that  there  were  so  many  blacks 

there  and  they  got  together  on  political  things. 

MASON:   Yeah,  that's  what  I  was  going  to  ask  you  about, 

because  Richard  Wright  was  there  in  the  thirties  and 

Charles  White. 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  saw  him. 

MASON:   Oh,  did  you?   Where  did  you  meet  him? 

WADDY:   Charles  White? 

MASON:   No,  Richard  Wright.   You  met  him? 

WADDY:   Yeah,  Richard  Wright. 

MASON:   You  met  him? 

WADDY :   Yes . 

MASON:   How  did  you? 

WADDY:   On  a  WPA  [Works  Progress  Administration]  project. 

MASON:   Oh,  the  [Federal]  Writers  Project. 

WADDY:   Yes.   He  was  telling  me  about  the  first  book  that 

he  did--what  the  plot  was.   It  didn't  have  a  plot.   He  was 

talking  about  the  young  man  and  what  he  thought.   I  was 


23 


trying  to  learn  how  to  write,  but  I  thought  you  had  to  have 
a  plot.   And  we  argued  about  that.   But  he  was  quite 
correct;  you  don't  have  to  have  a  plot.   He  was  just 
telling  me  about--  I've  forgotten  the  name  of  the  book. 
MASON:   Well,  that  was  Native  Son. 

WADDY:   Native  Son,  that's  it.   That's  it.   He  was  saying 
what  that  young  man  thought  and  how  he  thought  and  yet  was 
unable  to  do  it.   He  was  living  in  a  country,  in  a 
situation,  where  he  was  unable  to  do  and  be  what  he  really 
was.   That's  what  he  was  trying  to  explain  to  me.   But  I 
never--  Having  come  from  Minneapolis,  why,  you  could  do 
anything  you  want  to  in  Minneapolis,  because  there  weren't 
very  many  blacks  there.   You  know,  they  didn't  have  any-- 
Racial  prejudice  wasn't  practiced  there  at  that  time.   But 
now  it's  quite  different,  because  I  remember  reading  once 
after  I  got  to  Los  Angeles  that  there  was  a  race  riot  in 
Minneapolis.   That  meant  that  there  were  a  lot  of  blacks  up 
there . 

MASON:   Yeah,  they  had  come  north  to  find  jobs. 
WADDY:   But  when  I  was  there,  there  weren't  many  blacks 
there,  so  you  could  go  and  do  anything  that  you  wanted  to 
do. 

MASON:   Yeah,  I  guess  it  was  too  far  away.   Everybody  went 
to  New  York  or  Chicago  or  Philadelphia.   So  was  this--  Now, 
I  know  Richard  Wright  formed  a  writers  group,  Southside 


24 


Writers  Group.   So  you  just  met  him  sort  of  on  a  personal, 

sort  of  on  a  social -- 

WADDY:   No,  it  was  because  we  were  working  for  the  same  WPA 

project. 

MASON:   Oh,  what  did  you  do  on  the  WPA  project? 

WADDY:   We  were  supposed  to  write  something,  but  I  don't 

remember  my  doing  anything  in  particular  except  talking, 

meeting  people.   I  don't  remember  doing  anything. 

MASON:   I  know  a  lot  of  things  that  he  wrote  for  the  Writers 

Project  were  things  about  living  in  Chicago,  in  the  city. 

WADDY:   Yes. 

MASON:   Let's  see,  did  you  meet  Margaret  [Taylor  Goss] 

Burroughs  then?   Did  you  know  anybody  in  the  Southside 

Community  Arts  Center? 

WADDY:   Oh,  yes,  yes. 

MASON:   Oh,  did  you? 

WADDY:   Yeah.   I  thought  I  had  some  stuff  in  here  about 

Margaret  Burroughs. 

MASON:   Well,  she's  mentioned  when  you  go  to  the  Soviet 

Union,  but  not  before  that,  no. 

WADDY:   Not  before  that.   Yes,  I  did. 

MASON:   Well,  that's  what  I  mean  about  exciting.   You're 

telling  me  all  these  things  and  you're  saying  it  wasn't 

exciting,  but  it  sounds  it. 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  met  Margaret  Burroughs,  and  it  is  exciting 


25 


in -that  sense,  because  Minneapolis  didn't  have  that. 

MASON:   Did  you--?  I'm  sorry,  go  ahead. 

WADDY:   Now  I  forgot  what  I  was  going  to  say.   What  were 

you  going  to  ask  me? 

MASON:   I'm  sorry.   Well,  I  was  just  going  to  ask  if  you 

met  Charles  White? 

WADDY:   No,  Charles  White  was  in  Los  Angeles. 

MASON:   Well,  he  came  out  in  the  fifties,  but  he  was  there 

in  the  thirties.   He  was  in  Chicago. 

WADDY:   Oh,  I  don't  remember  meeting  him  there.   I  knew  him 

when  I  was  in-- 

MASON:   Los  Angeles.   So  were  you  involved  in  the  political 

activities  in  Chicago?   Were  you  interested  in  them? 

WADDY:   Yes.   You  know,  I  would  listen,  but  I  wasn't  a 

worker,  as  many  of  the  blacks  were.   They  worked.   That's 

why  they  could  accomplish  something--because  they  worked  at 

it.   You  know,  they  would  have  meetings.   I  did  that.   I'd 

go  to  the  meetings.   I  met  Carter  G.  Woodson,  because  I 

went  to  a  meeting  and  talked  to  him.   You  know,  I  went 

early  and  talked  to  him. 

MASON:   This  was  the  John  Reed  Club? 

WADDY:   I  had  just  gone  to  a  meeting  for  Carter  G. 

Woodson.   He  was  the  main  speaker. 

MASON:   Oh,  I  see. 

WADDY:   No  club  or  anything.   I  don't  remember  who 


26 


sponsored  the  event . 

MASON:   How  did  you  get  chosen  to  be  on  the  Writers 

Project?   Did  you  have  to  submit--? 

WADDY:   Oh,  yes,  we  had  to —  Maybe  that's  how  I  did  It.   I 

don ' t  remember . 

MASON:   So  you  must  have  been  writing  things. 

WADDY:   Maybe  Margaret  Burroughs  told  me  about  It.   She  may 

have  been  the  one  who  told  me  about  It.   Somebody--  It  must 

have  been  through  one  of  those  meetings  or  that  group  she 

had  there,  the  Southslde  club,  that  Southslde  art  club  that 

she  had.   And  the  museum  that  she  had  was  In  her  house. 

MASON:   Right,  In  the  beginning. 

WADDY:   Yes.   That's  right.   It  was  In  her  house. 

MASON:   She  had  a  collection  that  Included  African  art. 

WADDY:   But  I  didn't  know  about  art.   I  didn't  become 

particularly  Interested  In  art  right  then.   The  thing  that 

Interested  me  was  the  different  things  that  blacks  did, 

they  actually  did,  and  the  fact  that  they  were  black  and 

doing.   In  Minneapolis,  you  could  join  the  same  groups.   I 

could  join  art  groups  there,  but  they  mostly  were  white 

nearly  always,  very  few  blacks.   Most  of  the  time  I'd  be 

the  only  one.   But  this  time  I  wasn't. 

MASON:   Did  that  make  you  feel  uncomfortable  then  when  you 

were  the  only  one? 

WADDY:   No,  because  I  didn't  know  anything  else.   I  had 


27 


never  known  anything  else.   See,  when  I  was  born  in--  I 
didn't  go  to  school  in  Lincoln,  Nebraska.   I  started  school 
in  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.   I  was  the  only  black  in  the 
class.   It  was  ordinary  to  me.   I  didn't  know  anything 
else.   That's  why  I  liked  Chicago.   I  didn't  know  that 
there  were  so  many  people  like  me  doing  the  same  thing. 
There  was  a  different  feeling,  but  it  was  a  plus  feeling 
that  I  would  have  missed  had  I  stayed  in  Minneapolis.   I 
probably  was  missing  something,  but  I  didn't  know  what  it 
was  in  Minneapolis.   One  was  accepted  in  Minneapolis 
because  I  wasn ' t  any  threat .   I  was  not  any  threat  to 
anything  or  anybody. 

I  remember  once  that  Mama  went  up  to  school  to  talk  to 
my  teacher  because  she  said  I  read  so  well  that  I  was  going 
around  to  read  to  classes.   My  mother  objected  to  that.   I 
was  a  very  good  reader  because,  as  I  said,  I  had  an  active 
imagination,  and  I  would  take  the  part  of  the  characters, 
you  know,  that  were  in  the  story  and  read  it  that  way. 
Mama  said  that--  I  remember  her  saying  that  she  didn't  send 
me  to  school  to  go  and  read  to  classes,  she  sent  me  to 
school  to  learn  how  to  learn  myself,  for  me  to  learn.   So  I 
didn't  do  that  anymore.   I  read  to  my  sisters  and  would 
tell  them  stories. 

MASON:   So  in  Chicago,  in  other  words,  there  were  a  lot  of 
creative  groups  that  you  could  get  involved  in. 


28 


WADDY :   Yes . 

MASON:   And  you  were  mostly  interested  in  writing  and  not 

really  in  art. 

WADDY:   Yes.   Not  in  art.   I  don't  remember  trying 

anything. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  ever  getting  anything--?  Did  you 

ever  get  anything  published  that  you  wrote? 

WADDY:   Not  that  I  know  of. 

MASON:   Were  there  other  writers  that  you  met?   There  was 

Arna  [W.]  Bontemps  there,  and,  let's  see-- 

WADDY:   They  were  probably  there,  but  I  don't  remember 

meeting  them.   I  don't  remember  any  contact  with  them. 

MASON:   And  what  about  music?   Because  I  understand  there 

were  a  lot  of  jazz  musicians  that  came  up  from  New 

Orleans.   Was  that  a  big  part  of  your  life  there? 

WADDY :   No . 

MASON:   Okay.   So  you  were  working? 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  was  working.   On  my  days  off,  that's  when  I 

would  go  over  to  Margaret  Burroughs ' s  house. 

MASON:   You  say  you  did  know  Elizabeth  Catlett,  because 

they  were  sort  of  friends. 

WADDY:   I  met  Elizabeth  through  Samella  Lewis. 

MASON:   So  you  were  saying  that  you  decided  to  come  to  Los 

Angeles. 

WADDY:   Yes,  because  I  couldn't  get  a  job  in  Chicago,  a 


29 


daytime  job.   I  could  get  a  domestic  job,  but  I  didn't  want 
[to  be]  a  domestic.   I  wanted  a  job  where  I  would  be  away 
from  home  while  Marianna  [Maryom  Ana  Al-Wadi]  was  in  school 
and  [then  be]  home  with  her.   My  sister  Margaret  is  a 
registered  nurse,  and  she  was  working  here  in  Los 
Angeles.   Her  husband  [James  Haynes]--  She  got  married  in 
Minneapolis  and  moved  to  Los  Angeles.   He  lived  in  Saint 
Paul.   There  were  more  blacks  in  Saint  Paul  than  in 
Minneapolis.   Minneapolis  and  Saint  Paul  are  called  the 
Twin  Cities.   It's  just  across  the  Mississippi  [River]. 
You  took  a  street  car  across  the  Mississippi,  I  mean  across 
the  bridge.   It's  just,  you  know,  right  together.   And  she 
met--  I  can  see  him,  but  I  can't  remember  his  name.   He  was 
her  first  husband.   My  sister  got  married  twice. 
MASON:   Well,  we  can  add  it. 

WADDY:   [Sinclair]  Harrison?   No,  not  Harrison,  that's  the 
second  husband.   Well,  anyway,  she  got  married  to  him.   She 
married  him.   She  married  in  Minneapolis,  or  did  she  get 
married  in  Saint  Paul?   She  didn't  have  any  children.   But, 
anyway,  he  was  working  for  Douglas  [Aircraft 
Corporation] .   He  was  working  in  aircraft,  I  think.   I 
don't  remember.   Here's  my  daughter. 

MASON:   Let's  pause  for  a  second.   [tape  recorder  off] 
Okay,  I  turned  it  back  on.   His  name  is  Jim-- James. 
WADDY:   She  wrote  to  me  that  I  could  get  a  job  if  I  came 


30 


here.   So  I  packed  up  and  took  my  baby- -of  course,  she 

wasn't  a  baby  then--and  came  to  Los  Angeles  and  got  a  job 

the  next  day.   At  Douglas. 

MASON:   Doing  what? 

WADDY:   Riveter.   "Rosie  the  Riveter." 

MASON:   Yeah,  classic.   Classic.   Where  did  you  live  when 

you  first  came  here? 

WADDY:   I  lived  with  my  sister  when  I  first  came  here. 

Then  I  lived  in  the  project  over  on  Rose  Hill.   That's  not 

the  name  of  the  street,  but  that  was  the  name  of  the 

project. 

MASON:   I  don't  know  where  that  is.   What  area  is  that?   Is 

that  around  Watts  or--? 

WADDY 'S  DAUGHTER:   It's  El  Sereno.   Near  El  Sereno.   We 

lived  on  Florizel  Street. 

WADDY:   Florizel  Street,  that's  it. 

WADDY 'S  DAUGHTER:   In  the  Rose  Hill  prewar  housing  project, 

1942. 

MASON:   So  what  did  you  think  of  Los  Angeles?   Did  it  live 

up  to  your  expectations?   What  were  your  first  impressions? 

WADDY:   I  was  at  the--  I  came  around  Christmastime,  and  my 

daughter  wanted  some  roller  skates  for  Christmas,  so  she 

got  them.   I  mean,  that  was  one  of  her  Christmas  presents-- 

That  was  one  of  her  Christmas  presents.   And  she 

roller skated  on  Christmas  day.   I  couldn't  get  over  it. 


31 


because  it  snows- - 

MASON:   [laughter]   Yeah,  in  the  Windy  City  it  would  have 

been  unbearable. 

WADDY:   Yes.   Whoever  heard  of,  you  know,  sunshiny  and  a 

sidewalk?   I  said,  "No  wonder  the  houses  in  Los  Angeles 

don't  have  any  foundations.   They  don't  need  any!" 

MASON:   Yeah,  but  then  you  found  out  about  the  earthquakes 

probably  soon  after  that. 

WADDY:   Earthquakes  didn't  bother  me.   But  I  just  couldn't-- 

I  liked  Los  Angeles.   My  sister  was  surprised  when  we  got  a 

place  to  live  right  away,  because,  as  I  say,  I  like,  you 

know--  That  was  one  of  my  objections  to  philosophers.   They 

didn't  resolve  anything.   They  didn't  go  ahead  and  finish 

it.   They  just  talked  and  talked  and  talked.   I  mean,  wrote 

and  wrote  and  wrote.   They  didn't  have  any  evidence.   You 

know,  I  like  evidence  and  proof. 

But  anyway,  we  weren't  here  very  long  until  we  moved 
into  a  place  on  Rose  Hill,  on  Florizel  Street. 

When  I  was  riveting,  I  liked  to  work  with  men  better 
than  women.   It's  because  men  have  a  sense  of  tools,  and 
their  timing  is  different.   You  can  tell  by  a  certain  sound 
whether  or  not  a  thing  is  going  down  right.   But  women 
didn't  have  that  sense  at  that  time.   It  may  have  changed 
now  since  they  drive  so  much. 
MASON:   Yeah,  because  the  men  were  out  working  on  the 


32 


cars.   And  the  women- - 

WADDY:   Yes,  yes.   I  was  a  great  do-it-yourselfer,  you 
know.   Because  I  never  had  very  much  money.   I  had  what  my 
mother  called  "champagne  taste  with  a  beer  income."   So  I 
learned  to  do  many,  many  things  myself,  and  I  would  make 
things  myself. 

^4AS0N:   You  mean  sew  things  and-- 

WADDY:   No,  I  mean  like  put  that  table  together  and-- 
MASON:   I  see. 

WADDY 'S  DAUGHTER:   The  one  you're  sitting  in  front  of.   She 
made  that  table. 
MASON:   Oh,  this  one. 

WADDY:   Yeah,  and  this  one  too.   I  sent  for  it  and  then 
finished  that  one. 
MASON:   You  assembled  it. 

WADDY:   And  well,  anything  like  that.   If  I  wanted  some 
leather  handbag,  tooled  handbag,  of  course  I  couldn't  buy 
it,  so  I  learned  how  to  work  with  leather.   I  made  a  pair 
of  sandals  for  my  daughter  that  she  liked  so  much.   I 
couldn't  make  another,  second  pair  because  she  didn't  need 
them,  you  know,  as  badly  as  she  did  that  first  pair.   At 
least,  I  thought  so.   I  used  to  make  all  of  her  clothes.   I 
sewed,  too.   In  fact,  one  of  her  teachers  at  a  parent- 
teachers  meeting  told  me  that  I  made  her  clothes.   That  was 
the  very  thing  I  was  trying  not  to  show- -that  they  were 


33 


homemade.   I  said,  "Yes,  I  did.   How  do  you  know?"   She 
said,  "You  couldn't  afford  to  buy  them.   Not  clothes  like 
that,  you  couldn't  afford  it."   Anyway,  my  question  was 
answered,  which  is,  "Did  they  look  store-bought?"   And  the 
answer  was  yes.   That's  all  I  wanted  to  know.   I  didn't 
really  think  about,  "How  do  you  know  I  couldn't  afford 
it?"   I  didn't  think  about  that.   [laughter] 
MASON:   A  backhanded  compliment. 

WADDY:   But  the  thing  I  wanted  to  see  about —  James  Haynes, 
that  was  his  name.   What  he  said  about  Los  Angeles,  which  I 
think  is  true —  And  the  same  thing  is  true  of  California. 
It's  not  just  Los  Angeles.   He  said —  You  see,  during  the  war 
a  lot  of  blacks  came  to  Los  Angeles.   Someone  said  something 
about  California  being  south.   And  whoever  he  was  talking  to 
said,  "Well,  California's  not  south."   He  said,  "No?   I  never 
saw  any  palm  trees  in  Saint  Paul!"   [laughter]   I  like  that, 
answers  like  that.   My  father  used  to  give  answers  like  that, 
too.   I  used  to  like  Hershey  almond  [chocolate]  bars  when  I 
was  a  child.   He  would  buy  them  and  put  them  up  on  the 
shelf.   I  asked  for  one,  and  he  thought  that  I'd  had 
enough.   Then  I  would  say  to  him,  "But  they'll  get  stale  up 
there."   He  said,  "What's  the  difference  between  it  getting 
stale  up  there  or  in  the  store?" 
MASON:   But  you  weren't  getting  any. 
WADDY:   There  wasn't  any  difference. 


34 


TAPE  NUMBER:   II,  SIDE  ONE 
JULY  27,  1991 

MASON:   Yesterday  we  left  off  with  you  finding  employment 

with  the  Douglas  [Aircraft]  Corporation  on  their  assembly 

line  doing  riveting.   You  were  just  telling  a  story  about 

how  you  were  actually  training  people  and  were  one  of  the 

few  to  be  chosen  to  go  to  Pasadena. 

WADDY:   No,  Burbank. 

MASON:   I'm  sorry,  Burbank. 

WADDY:   Pasadena  didn't  have  any  big  industries  during  the 

war.   Pasadena  was  considered  then  sort  of  a  fine 

residential  area  only  for  people.   They  didn't  rent  their 

homes,  they  owned  them.   They  were  homeowners.   Anyway,  I 

told  him  no.   But  a  friend  of  mine  who  worked  there  went 

there.   The  pay  was  more,  and  she  liked  it. 

MASON:   So  it  would  have  been  doing  the  same  thing- - 

riveting? 

HADDY:   Yes,  riveting.   In  riveting,  the  rivets  had  to  be 

absolutely  flat  to  match  against  the  skin  of  the  wing  or 

part  of  the  wing  because  of  the  wind.   Men  were  easier  to 

work  with  than  women  because,  I  think,  they  had  handled 

tools  and  they  listened.   There  were  certain  sounds  that 

certain  tools  make,  and  they  were  aware  of  them.   A 

riveting  gun  and  a  bucking  [bar]--  I've  forgotten  what  the 

square  was  we  used.   It  was  a  long  wire  that  you  put 

35 


against  the  long  piece  of  steel,  and  it  had  a  flexible 
steel  oblong  between  two  and  three  inches  long  and  one  inch 
wide.   And  it  had  to  be  pushed  against  the  rivet  a  certain 
way  so  that  the  rivet  would  be  flat,  you  know,  flatten 
out.   The  men  could  tell  from  the  sound  whether  or  not  they 
had  it  in  the  right  position.   The  women  didn't  pay  any 
attention,  and  so,  of  course,  we  had  to  dig  the  rivet  out, 
which  made  a  big  hole  and  it  made  it  worse.   That's  why  I 
preferred  to  work  with  men. 

But  I  never  will  forget  two  incidents.   Once  a  white 
guy,  very,  very  tall  and  slender  from  Georgia,  which  made 
me  think  at  that  time  of — I  don't  remember  if  it  was  a 
saying  or  a  song--"as  tall  as  a  Georgia  pine."   Well,  when 
he  found  that  I  was  his  partner,  he  looked  at  me  and  kind 
of  curled  his  lip  a  little  bit.   I  did  the  same  thing.   The 
manager  or  instructor,  the  head  boss,  explained  to  him  what 
was  the  operation,  so  he  said  okay,  you  know,  because  he 
wanted  a  job.   So  he  went  along  bucking  properly.   Both  of 
us,  when  we  started,  looked  at  each  other  with — 
MASON:   Suspicion  or  disdain? 

WADDY:   Distaste.   Distaste  is  how  we  looked  at  each 
other.   But  at  the  end  we  smiled,  because  he  knew  how  to 
buck  the  rivet,  and,  of  course,  I  knew  how  to  use  the 
gun.   I  knew  how  to  use  a  bucking  bar.   We  just  changed 
sides.   We'd  work  one  side —  I  would  be  using  the  gun,  and 


36 


to  do  the  other  side  I'd  be  using  the  bucking  bar  and  he 
the  gun.   We  smiled  at  each  other. 

Another  time,  I  think  this  man  was  an  islander,  but  I 
don't  know  what  island.   But  he  was  half  my  size.   He 
wasn't  as  tall  as  I,  and  he  was  very  much  smaller.   And 
again,  both  of  us  looked  at  each  other  with  distaste,  great 
distaste.   At  the  end,  we  both  smiled,  because  he  knew  how 
to  use  the  tool,  and  I  did,  too.   We  had  a  good 
part[nership] .   You  know,  we  didn't  have  to  correct  it,  dig 
the  rivet  out  or  anything  like  that.   It  was  perfect. 
MASON:   Work  is  work. 

WADDY:   Yes,  work  is  work.   It  makes  no  difference.   If  you 
know  what,  period.   I've  never  forgotten  that.   And  I 
haven't  forgotten  what  that  young  man  said  about  the 
soldering  iron,  "She  already  knows  how,  when  we're  hiring 
them  by  the  hundreds  who  don't  know  the  difference  between 
a  soldering  iron  and  a  pressing  iron."   He  was  a  white  guy, 
too.   He  wasn't-- 

MASON:   So  when  the  end  of  the  war  came  and  all  the 
soldiers  came  back,  then  a  lot  of  people,  a  lot  of  women 
usually,  lost  their  jobs  in  the  factories. 

WADDY:   Women  and  men.   Because  he  just  picked  out  the  best 
ones.   When  he  said  to  me  that  I  could  work  in  Burbank,  he 
said,  "You're  late  all  the  time,"  he  said,  "but  you  do 
very,  very  good  work."   I  was  late  because  I  overslept.   It 


37 


was  a  graveyard—  I  worked  on  graveyard  shift,  which  was 
from  twelve  at  night  until  seven  in  the  morning.   And  as  we 
were  speaking  about  the  red  cars  earlier,  when  I'd  come 
home  to  Florizel  Street,  I'd  go  to  sleep  on  the  red  car  and 
the  conductor  would  come  and  say  "This  is  Florizel 
Street."   He'd  wake  me  up  if  I  went  to  sleep  on  the  car 
because  I  had  another  job.   I  was,  you  know--  It  wasn't 
enough  money  for  what  I  wanted  to  do  with  my  daughter  in 
school.   I  was  trying  to  save  a  little  money  and  give  her 
as  many  advantages -- 

I  was  trying  to  save  money  to  buy  a  car,  a  secondhand 
car.   I  have  never  owned  a  new  car  in  my  life.   I  have 
driven  for  many  years,  but  they  were  all  used  cars.   I 
remember  that  I  drove  to  San  Francisco  in  a  Model  T  coupe, 

a  Ford  Model  T.   I  hadn't  been  driving  very  long  then,  but 
I  figured  if  I  could  drive  to  San  Francisco  in  that  car 

then  I  would  really  know  how  to  drive.   And  I  did. 

MASON:   It  wasn't  one  of  those  where  you  have  to  crank  it 

up  or  anything  like  that,  was  it? 

WADDY:   No.   It  wasn't--  I  didn't  have  to  crank  it,  but  it 

wasn't  an  automatic  shift.   What's  that  other  shift  called? 

MASON:   Standard. 

WADDY:   Yeah,  standard  shift.   It  was  a  standard  shift.   It 

was  many  years  before  I  graduated  to  automatic  shift.   I 

meant  to  buy  a  car,  so  I  had  another  job.   That's  why  I  was 


38 


so  tired.   But  I  was  able  to  do  both  of  them. 

^4AS0N:   What  was  your  other  job? 

WADDY:   I  was  a  domestic,  as  a  day  worker.   Not  one  family 

but  several  families. 

MASON:   So  instead  of  taking  the  job  in  Burbank,  what  did 

you  do  instead?   I  understand  at  some  point  you  opened  up 

your  own  business. 

WADDY:   Yes.   Actually,  I  tried  to  become  self-employed 

several  times,  but  I  never  had  the  right  attitude.   For 

instance,  when  I  first  learned  ceramics  I  was  smoking.   As 

I  say,  I  started  smoking  when  I  first  started  working  at 

Douglas.   And  doing  cleaning,  you  know,  that  kind  of  work 

didn't  bother  me.   I  wasn't--  It  didn't  bother  me  to  do 

that  kind  of  work.   One  day,  I  don't  really  remember  how,  I 

heard  of  a  ceramics  class,  and  I  went  to  it.   Tony  Hill  was 

the  instructor.   I  never  will  forget  that  as  I  was  learning 

I  didn't  pick  up  a  cigarette.   I  remarked  to  the  other 

students,  the  other  ladies  around  me- -they  were  mostly 

ladies--I  said,  "I  haven't  smoked  one  cigarette  all  this 

time!"   "Well,  that's  wonderful!" 

MASON:   Because  ceramics  was  so  relaxing. 

WADDY:   And  I  was  so  interested  in  it,  and  I  liked  it  so 

much.   Tony  Hill  had  a  brother  [Evans  Hill] ,  and  he  cleaned 

offices  at  night.   I  met  him  and  somehow  or  other  we  hooked 

up.   We  worked  together,  and  I  thought  of  how  one  cart 


39 


could  carry  all  of  our  cleaning  things.   I  told  him  about 

it.   Tony's  brother  was  a  carpenter,  a  very  good  one.   So 

he  made  the  cart  for  me  from  the  idea.   I  worked  with  him, 

too.   I  was  working  with  him.   Some  company  in  Los  Angeles 

had  several  offices,  you  know.   I  don't  remember  the  name 

of  the  company,  but  it  may  have  been  Atlas  at  that  time. 

They  had  several  offices.   Well,  anyway,  I  talked  to  the 

president  about  this  cart,  and  he  said  that  if  I  brought 

him  a  model,  he  would  see  about  using  it.   I  told  Tony's 

brother--  I  can't  remember  his  name.   Well,  anyway,  he 

wouldn't  make  me  a  cart  because  I  wouldn't  marry  him. 

MASON:   Oh!   So  you  had  known  him  before  you  met  Tony  Hill. 

WADDY:   No.   I  met  him  after  I  knew  Tony. 

^4AS0N:   Is  that  why  you  took  the  ceramics  course? 

WADDY:   No,  I  read  about  it  in  one  of  the  African- American 

papers  or  heard  about  it  someway  like  that,  that  they  were 

offering  classes,  that  Tony  was  offering  classes.   Where 

was  this  place? 

MASON:   Was  it  an  art  school  or  just  a  high  school  or  some 

community  art  center? 

WADDY:   It  seemed  like  it  was  his  own  place,  Tony  Hill's 

own  place,  because  he  had  his  own  kiln. 

MASON:   And  what  kind?   Was  it  hand-building  or  wheel? 

WADDY:   It  was  both.   We  started  hand-building,  and  then  we 

went  to  the  wheel.   But  I  didn't--  I  don't  remember  that  I 


40 


was  very  good  at  the  wheel.   I  don't  remember  my  being 
that.   I  remember  doing  pretty  good  things  by  hand,  but  not 
the  wheel . 

MASON:   Do  you  have  any  of  those  things  now? 
WADDY:   It  was  a  long  time  ago.   It  was  during  the  war, 
around  that  time.   It  was  during  the  war,  because  I  had 
started  smoking. 

MASON:   So  that  was  really  the  first  time  you  had  practiced 
art. 

WADDY:   Yeah,  it  was  the  first  time  I  knew  about  it.   It 
was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  done  it  and  the  first  time 
that  I  knew  how  to  go  to  classes  where  they  were  offered. 
I  knew  I  had  to  do  something  after  the  war  was  over.   But  I 
had  decided  that  I  was  going  to  try  and  get  something  that 
I  liked  to  do.   It  was  part  of  my  search.   I  don't  remember 
all  the  particulars. 
MASON:   Did  you  meet  other  artists  through  Tony  Hill? 

WADDY:   No,  but  I  learned  an  appreciation  for  ceramics, 

though.   It  enlightened — 

MASON:   What  did  he  teach  you  about  ceramics? 

WADDY:   He  taught  about  glazes,  and  I  learned  about  that 

southerner  who  was  the  inventor  that  made  glazes  out  of 

some  kind  of  seed,  I  think.   Who  was  it?   [George 

Washington  Carver] 

MASON:   I  don't  know. 


41 


WADDY:   It  was  too  long  ago  for  me  to  remember  now. 
^4AS0N:   Yeah,  so  this  was  an  experimental --a  new  glaze? 
WADDY:   No,  he's  famous  for  glazes.   He's  an  African- 
American,  a  southerner.   And  he's  from--  He  did  other 
things,  but  he's  certainly  known  for  making  glazes.   And 
colored  pencils,  known  for  it.   If  I  call  his  name,  you'd 
recognize  it.   He's  well-known  as  one  of  America's  black 
inventors.   [tape  recorder  off] 

MASON:   Well,  when  did  you  meet  Danny  [Daniel  LaRue] 
Johnson?   And  when  did  you  start  to  meet — ? 
WADDY:   I  met  him  through  my  sister,  Gladys  [Gilliam 
Little],  my  youngest  sister.   She  met  him  someplace  after 
he  had  just  won  a  Guggenheim  [Foundation]  award.   So  when  I 
talked  to  her  about  getting  the  blacks  in  L.A.  together--  I 
said,  you  know,  "If  we  could  get  them  to  a  social  affair 
someplace  that  they  would  attend,  then  I  could  maybe  form  a 
small  group."   That  was  after  I  had  been  fired  from  the 
county  job.   Because  after  I  left  Douglas,  I  think  the  next 
job  I  had  was  working  for  Los  Angeles  County  Hospital  as  an 
admissions  worker.   An  admissions  worker  was  really-- 
MASON:   They  would  probably  screen  people  as  they  come  in. 
WADDY:   Yes,  to  see  whether  or  not  they  are  eligible  for 
county  care.   Yes,  that's  what  they  did.   There  was  an 
amusing  incident  when  I  got  that  job.   I  didn't  know 
anything  about  medicine.   In  fact,  I  didn't  think  very  much 


42 


of  it.   And  I  didn't  know  anything  about  doctors.   So  I 
said,  "Well,  since  I  have  this  kind  of  a  job,  I'd  better 
find  out  something."   The  best  way  to  find  out  things, 
sometimes,  is  when  people  are  sitting  down  to  a  meal.   You 
introduce  the  subject,  and  everybody  joins  in  and  says  what 
he  has  to  say  about  it.   We  had  a  cafeteria  in  the  dining 
room,  and  I  pulled  two  or  three  tables  together.   Each 
table  seated  four  people,  one  on  each  side.   So  I  pulled 
them  together,  and  when  the  workers  came  in  we'd  sit 
together.   And  sometimes  the  interns  would  sit  down.   Once 
in  a  while  a  resident  would  sit  down,  a  nurse  would  sit 
down.   Then  I  would  introduce  the  subject,  something  about 
medicine,  and  they'd  tell  us,  add  what  they-- 

Well,  one  time  when  I  had  the  tables  together,  an 
intern  was  arguing  with  a  resident  that  it  only  took  six 
years  to  go  through  school  in  medicine.   He  said,  "Really, 
that's  all  it  takes.   Not  eight."   At  that  time  it  took 
eight,  as  I  remember  it.   And  finally  the  resident  admitted 
that  it  took  six  years,  you  know,  the  lesser  time.   The 
other  time  was  spent  in  learning  a  certain  routine  or 
procedure  to  be  sure  that  they  acted  a  certain  way.   They 
had  to  be  trained  that  way.   I  was  always  doing  something 
on  every  job  that  I  had  that  was  not  protocol. 
MASON:   What  else  did  you  do  there  that — ? 
WADDY:   Well,  the  supervisor,  the  manager  of  the  cafeteria. 


43 


complained  about  the  tables  being  together,  the  people 
sitting  down.   But  of  course  the  thing  was  that  the 
conversation  was  always  very  interesting  and  spirited.   And 
I  learned  quite  a  bit. 

MASON:   But  they  objected  because  that's  not  the  way-- 
WADDY:   Yes,  it  wasn't  proper.   My  supervisor  called  a 
meeting  to  have  it  stopped.   She  called  all  the  social 
workers  together  when  she  just  needed  me--just  to  tell  me-- 
because  I  was  the  one  who  was  doing  it,  nobody  else  but 
me.   The  other  people  sat  down,  because  they  liked  the 
conversation.   So  I  thought  that  was  very  silly.   You  know, 
why  not  go  directly  to  the  person  who's  responsible?   Well, 
anyway- - 

MASON:   Did  you  stop  doing  it?   Or  did  you  tell  her  she 
didn't  know  what  she  was  talking  about? 
WADDY:   No,  I  just  told  her  that  all  the  rest  of  the 
workers  there  that  she  was  talking  to--  Why  call  all  the 
rest  of  the  workers  together  when  they  hadn't  done 
anything?   But  they  didn't  think  anything  of  it  because 
they  were  already  trained.   They  were  already 
indoctrinated,  so  they  didn't  think  anything  of  it.   Just 
wait  for  the  next  thing  I  was  going  to  do.   [laughter] 
MASON:   Did  you  make  a  lot  of  friends  there  at  the 
hospital? 
WADDY:   Oh,  yeah,  many. 


44 


MASON:   How  long  did  you  work  there? 

WADDY:   That's  when  I  got  my  first  used  car.   I  don't 
remember  how  long  it  was.   I  think  I  quit.   I  wasn't  fired, 
though.   Then  I  started  trying  to  do  things,  becoming  self- 
employed.   I  tried  making  a  chili  dog  [stand],  but  it 
didn't  make  enough  money  for  me  to  live  on. 
MASON:   So  you  had  a  little  stand? 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  had  a  hot  dog  stand.   I  used  a  chili  sauce, 
and  they  were  called  chili  dogs. 

MASON:   I  was  reading  that  it  was  while  you  were  working  in 
the  hospital  that  you  were  diagnosed  with  epilepsy. 
WADDY:   No.   My  self -employment  didn't  give  me  a  steady 
income,  so  I  decided  to  get  another  job.   By  this  time,  you 
know,  I'm  getting  older  and  older  and  older.   So  I  applied 
to  work  for  Los  Angeles  County  as  a  temporary  clerk,  and  I 
took  a  test  for  that.   With  temporary  clerks,  it  was  a  very 
easy  test  for  me.   I  scored  one  hundred.   They  didn't  have 
one  to  ten.   The  highest  score  was  one  hundred,  the  next 
ninety,  next  down  eighty,  next  seventy,  down.   That's  the 
way  they  scored.   A  hundred  was  the  highest  score.   So  I 
got  a  hundred  on  the  test.   But  I  forgot  that  the  county 
has  three  screens.   You  have  to  pass  three  screenings.   You 
had  to  pass  three  things  in  order  to  get  in.   You  had  to 
pass  a  written  test,  a  verbal  test  when  you're  interviewed, 
and  then  a  physical  test. 


45 


Well,  when  I  got  a  hundred  on  the--  They  changed--  A 
hundred  on  the  written  test.   The  county  decided  they 
wanted  permanent  clerks,  and  they  took  them  out  of  their 
temporary  clerk  pool.   That  meant  the  highest  ones,  you 
know,  had  to  have  a  verbal  test.   So  I  decided  that  I  would 
fail  on  the  verbal  test  because  I  didn't  want  a  permanent 
job,  I  just  wanted  a  temporary  job.   I  wanted  just  enough 
time  for  me  to  try  and  find  a  job  that  was  self-employed. 

So  the  first  supervisor,  I  gave  her  some  wrong 
answers— the  first  interviewer.   [With]  the  second 
interviewer,  I  tried  the  same  thing,  but  she  said,  "I'm 
going  to  take  you  anyway."   And  I  was  hired.   Because  the 
answer  I  gave  her  didn't  add  up  with  the  written  test. 

And  then  I  had  a  physical.   When  she  said  she'd  hire 
me  anyway,  then  I  started  to  work,  and  then  I  had  a 
physical.   Well,  there  wasn't  anything  I  could  do  about  the 
physical,   when  the  results  from  the  physical  came,  the 
doctor  said,  "Let  her  go  because  she's  the  kind  that  drops 
down  anyplace,  anytime."   He  didn't  say  it  was  epilepsy, 
because  I  don't  think  it  can  be  diagnosed. 
MASON:   He  didn't  recommend  any  treatment  or  anything? 
WADDY:   No,  he  just  said,  "Let  her  go."   He  said,  "She 
can't  work  at  all."   So  I  said  to  the  supervisor,  "Well, 
how  am  I  going  to  live  if  I  can't  work?"   She  said,  "Well, 
I  guess  you'll  have  to  receive  state  aid."   Because  I  was 


46 


in  my  fifties,  fifty,  fifty-one,  or  fifty-two,  or  something 
like  that.   But  I  wasn't  old  enough  to  get  Social  Security 
yet.   She  said,  "I  guess  you'll  have  to  have  state  aid," 
So  since  I  was  fired,  I  got  state  aid.   I  didn't  have  to 
make  any  application  because  it  was  from  county  to  county, 
you  know,  from  one  government  agent  to  another  government 
agent.   So  it  was  no  problem  at  all.   They  just  sent  me  the 
check.   But  I  was  very,  very  angry. 
MASON:   Why? 

WADDY:   Because  I  wanted  to  work.   I  was  in  the  habit  of 
working . 

MASON:   You  had  never  experienced  any  kind  of  physical 
symptoms  before? 

WADDY:   No--  Oh,  yes,  I  had  some  symptoms,  but  I  didn't 
have  any  accidents,  as  I  did  later  on.   As  I  grew  older,  I 
actually  had  attacks.   Very  much  so.   I  remember  I  had  one 
here  in  San  Francisco,  twice.   I  used  to  come  up  to  San 
Francisco  more  often  than  I  did  later  on.   I  was  in  the 
hospital.   I  dropped  down  just  as  the  doctor  said.   I  think 
I  was  on  the  street  or  something,  and  I  had  to  go  to  the 
hospital.   But  I  didn't  stay  very  long.   They  gave  me 
Dilantin.   That  was  the  first  time  that  I  had  ever  taken 
Dilantin.   And  whenever  I  didn't  take  it,  then  I  would  have 
an  attack  eventually,  you  know,  after  a  while.   So  that's 
when  my  daughter  [Maryom  Ana  Al-Wadi],  I  remember  my 


47 


daughter  said  to  me,  "Well,  Mother,  you  should  have  been 

dead  long  ago.   You  just  won't  lay  down."   [laughter]   She 

said,  "You  Just  won't  lay  down." 

MASON:   So  you  had  more  time  to  spend  with  your  daughter, 

if  you  weren't  working. 

WADDY:   Oh,  she  was  grown.   She  was  grown  up.   She  was 

living  here  in  San  Francisco. 

MASON:   No,  I  mean  when  you  started  to  receive  the  checks 

from  the-- 

WADDY:   No,  I  didn't--  I  was  angry  because  I  didn't-- 

That ' s  when  I  started  thinking  about  getting  the  blacks 

together,  the  blacks  in  L.A.  together,  because  I  didn't 

have  anything  to  do,  you  know,  except  the  regular  housework 

and  going  to  the  store  and  fixing  the  meals.   But  I  was 

very  strong  then,  and  I  had  a  lot  of  energy. 

MASON:   And  the  civil  rights  movement. 

WADDY:   And  that's  why  Gladys  introduced  me  to  Danny 

Johnson.   Because  unless  I  was  actually  in  the  bed  from 

something,  I  wasn't  sick  other  than  that.   One  day  I  said 

to  myself,  "You've  always  said  that  if  you  had  plenty  of 

money--"  No,  not  plenty  of  money,  "if  you  had  a  place  to 

stay  and  enough  to  eat,  why  you  would  do  this,  that,  and 

the  other, "  you  know,  different  plans  that  I  had  for 

starting  social  groups.   I'm  more  interested  in  the 

condition  of  man  than  I  am  in  anything  else- -to  improve  his 


48 


condition.   But  I  think  that  he  has  to  do  it  himself.   It 
has  to  come  from  him.   Somebody  else  can  introduce  the 
idea,  and  they  can  even,  having  made  the  introduction,  the 
person  to  whom  it  was  introduced  might  improve  on  it,  but 
it  has  to  start  with  the  person.   It  has  to  start  with  the 
man  himself.   All  I  wanted  to  do  was  get  it  started.   That 
would  take  time  and  energy,  and  I  had  promised  myself--  I 
had  said  to  myself  once,  "If  I  had  the  time,  a  place  to 
stay,  and  something  to  eat,  why,  that's  what  I  would  do." 
MASON:   What  did  you  think  needed  improving  most?   Was  it 
economic  or  social  or  political? 

WADDY:   I  thought  that  first  we  ought  to  get  together  and 
talk  about  common  problems,  something  that  was  common  to 
everybody  and  how  to  resolve  it  and  work  on  it.   But  the 
main  thing  was  to  get  them  together  first.   That  was  the 
hardest  thing,  the  first  thing  to  be  done.   They  had  to  be 
brought  together.   I  was  thinking  about  African- Americans. 
MASON:   Yeah.   By  this  time,  the  civil  rights  movement  was 
gaining  momentum.   Wasn't  that  bringing  people  together  in 
Los  Angeles  somewhat? 
WADDY :   No . 
MASON:   Not  really? 

WADDY:  Not  like  in  Chicago.  They  talk  about  it  loosely, 
but  the  people  who  needed  to  work  with  it  were  not  really 
involved  in  civil  rights.   The  people  who  were  involved  in 


49 


civil  rights  weren't  what  one  would  call  a  solid  citizen. 
A  solid  citizen  was  a  person  at  that  time  who  has  a 
permanent  home  and  a  job  or  a  business  and  a  family.   The 
people  who  were  interested  in  civil  rights  then  didn't 
qualify,  didn't  meet  those  qualifications. 
MASON:   They  were  younger  people? 

WADDY:   Some  of  them  were  young.   Most  of  them  were  younger 
people.   Some  of  the  them  were  older,  but  the  majority  of 
them  I  think  were  younger.   I  thought  all  people  should  be 
involved,  but  I  wasn't  thinking  about  civil  rights  in 
particular.   I  was  thinking  that  they  had  to  be  involved  in 
working  among  themselves  and  fostering  certain  ideas  among 
themselves,  certain  trends  among  themselves,  so  that  they 
could  forward  whatever  cause  that  was  outside  of  themselves 
to  their  advantage. 

MASON:   Did  you  find  inspiration  in,  say,  Martin  Luther 

King  [Jr.]? 

WADDY:   No,  I  was--  No. 

MASON:   It  was  just  something  that  you  had  been  thinking 

about  on  your  own  from  what  you  had  observed? 

WADDY:   Yeah,  for  many  years.   Many,  many  years.   Ever 

since  I  was,  you  know,  like  in  my  twenties. 

MASON:   Well,  you  were  saying  that  Chicago — 

WADDY:   Yeah. 

MASON:   So  that's  the  kind  of  thing  you  were  talking  about 


50 


when  you  were  with  Margaret  [Taylor  Goss]  Burroughs. 

WADDY:   No,  I  was  listening  mostly  to  what  different  people 

said,  because  I  didn't  feel  that  I  had  all  the  answers.   I 

felt  that  the  answers  would  come  from  everybody.   Everybody 

would  put  what  he  had  to  say  in  it  and  then  an  answer  could 

be  made  or  had.   But  every  person  had  [to  make]  a 

contribution  for  it  to  be  a  common  thing. 

MASON:   So  Daniel -- 

WADDY:   My  sister  met  Danny,  Daniel  LaRue  Johnson. 

MASON:   Did  he  have  a  lot  of  information? 

WADDY:   Not  at  all.   She  was  impressed  by  his  having  won 

this-- 

MASON:   Oh,  Guggenheim. 

WADDY:   Guggenheim.   And  she  said  he  was  interesting  in 

himself,  you  know,  the  man  himself  was  interesting,  and  for 

me  to  meet  him.   But  when  I  decided  to  try  and  make  a  group 

of  African-Americans  in  Los  Angeles,  I  said  I'd  do  it 

through  art,  because  I  felt  that  if  they  knew  that  my 

intent  was  social  or  civic  that  they  wouldn't  come.   But  if 

they  were  attending  an  art  affair,  that  they  were  so 

socially  important,  that  they  would  do  it.   So  I  asked 

Danny  if  he  knew--  I  told  him  that  I'd  like  to  have  names 

of  some  artists.   I'd  like  to  have  a  juried  art  show  at  the 

Los  Angeles  County  Museum  [of  Art]  of  black  artists.   There 

had  never  been  any.   He  said  that  there  weren't  that  many 


51 


black  artists  at  museum  quality. 

I  said,  "Well,  who  do  you  think  is  the — ?"  I  asked  him 
if  he  thought  he  was. 

He  said,  "Well,  of  course." 

I  said,  "Well,  who  do  you  think  is  as  good  as  you 
are?" 

He  said,  well,  Mel  Edwards  was  as  good  as  he  was. 

So  I  said,  "Okay,  what's  his  telephone  number?" 

He  gave  it  to  me.   I  called  Mel  and  told  him  the  same 
thing,  that  I  wanted  a  juried  art  show  at  the  L.A.  County 
Museum.   Who  did  he  think  was  as  good  as  he  was?   He  gave 
me  the  name  of  George  Clack.   Clack,  his  name  is.   So  it 
went  until  I  had  quite  a  few  names,  you  know,  like  thirty 
or  so. 

At  that  time,  there  was  a  black  bank  called  Safety 
Savings  and  Loan  Company  in  L.A.   They  had  a  community  room 
in  the  back  of  the  bank  which  they  rented  out  to  various 
organizations.   Marjorie  Green  was  in  charge  of  it.   I  told 
her  I'd  like  to  use  it  for  a  meeting  of  these  artists.   She 
said  okay.   So  we  didn't  have  to  pay  any  fee,  and  we  met 
there.   I  told  them  about  it,  and  they  liked  the  idea  so 
much  that  they  decided--  They  liked  the  idea,  but  then  I 
didn't  know  anything  about  art.   I  knew  I  liked  it  all 
right,  and  I  knew  that  it  had  an  important  social  value, 
but  I  wasn't  an  artist.   I  just  liked  the  work. 


52 


^4AS0N:   How  would  you  define  the  social  value  of  art?   I 
mean,  what  do  you  mean? 

WADDY:   Well,  art  to  me  has  a  social  value  the  same  as, 
say,  religion  has  a  social  value,  in  the  same  sense,  as  a 
spiritual  thing.   And  it  does  the  same  thing — some  of  the 
things,  anyway  (I'm  not  very  religious ) --that  religion  is 
supposed  to  do.   It  inspires  one.   It  lends  you  courage. 
It  makes  a  pleasant  atmosphere,  so  that  you  have  pleasant 
thoughts.   And  it  makes  you  think.   A  lot  of  people  don't 
think.   They  react  all  right,  and  they  have  a  thinking 
apparatus,  but  they  don't  use  it  very  much.   That's  what  I 
meant  by  a  social  value. 

The  first  one  is  obvious- -that  it  makes  a  pleasant 
surroundings.   Everybody  enjoys  that.   When  one  enjoys 
anything,  that  means  that  one  is  happy  and  is  apt  to  bring 
out  the  best  in  themselves  when  they're  happy.   That's 
good.   That  makes  a  good  world.   That's  what  I  mean  by  art 
being  spiritual  or  being  of  social  value.   It's  also  gives 
you--  It's  another  way  of  expressing  yourself,  because  many 
people  are  artists  and  not  aware  of  it.   I'm  one  of  them, 
[laughter]   The  artists  thought  I  was  an  artist,  because 
they  couldn't  conceive  of  a  person,  just  a  lay  person, 
being  that  interested.   Of  course,  I  didn't  tell  them  that 
my  ultimate  aim  was  civic  and  social.   I  didn't  mention 
that  to  them. 


53 


TAPE  hfUMBER:   II,  SIDE  TWO 
JULY  27,  1991 

MASON:   So  you  would  say  that  to  you  successful  art  or 
important  art  is  art  that  has  those  three  or  four  virtues, 
that  it  inspires  people  and  as  well  as  being  pleasant  to 
look  at. 

WADDY:   It  doesn't  necessarily  have  to  inspire  anything, 
but  if  a  person--  I  don't  think  that  it  necessarily,  you 
know,  has  to--  It  depends  on  the  viewer  whether  or  not  that 
art  gives  them  inspiration.   Different  people  bring 
different  things  to  art.   Art,  to  me,  it  makes  you  feel 
good.   That's  what  it  does.   It  might  make  you  feel  good 
because  it  makes  you  think.   It  might  make  you  feel  good 
because  it  inspires  you.   It  might  make  you  feel  good 
because  it  brings  another  viewpoint  to  something  that 
you've  already  thought  about  or  know.   It  does  something  to 
you.   As  I  say,  it  can  be  as  little  as  just  being  pleasant. 
MASON:   Is  there  any  art  that  you  don't  like--that  doesn't 
appeal  to  you  or  that  doesn't  make  you  feel  good?   Or  do 
you  enjoy  most  of  it  because  whatever  it  does  it  still 
makes  you  think  maybe  about  why--?  Or  are  there  some  kinds 
of  art--?  I  don't  know,  pop  art  is  one  that  usually  people 
dislike  a  lot. 

WADDY:   That's  because  they  don't  understand  what  the 
artist  is  trying  to  say,  I  think.   If  the  artist--  Or  they 

54 


don't  know,  whatever  the  subject  is,  enough  about  each 
subject  that's  being  portrayed.   But  I  think  that  pop  art 
is--  People  don't  understand  what  the  artist  is  trying  to 
say  or  saying.   Because  some  of  them  go  past  trying  to  say, 
they  say  it.   Or  they  may  not  agree  with  what  the  artist  is 
saying.   I  like  all  kinds  of  art,  if  I  understand  it.   The 
understanding  adds  to  your  enjoyment.   If  you  don't 
understand  it,  then  you  just  have  to  depend  on  how  it 
looks.   And  when  you  know  how  it  looks  and  understand  it 
too,  then  it's  of  great  value  to  you. 

h4AS0N:   And  so  when  you  had  this  show  at  the  Safety  Savings 
and  Loan-- 

WADDY:   No,  we  didn't  have  the  show.   Because  they  were 
good  artists  and  it  was  going  to  be  a  juried  show,  it  would 
have  to  be  at  the  L . A .  County .   So  I ' d  have  to  ask  the 
curator  of  the  county.   He  was  [Richard]  Brown.   I  think  it 
was  Brown  at  the  time.   I  can't  remember  his  first  name. 
^4AS0N:   Well,  Rick  Brown  was  the  director  around  19--  I 
think  he  started  there  in  1965.   So  you  went  to  the 
director  or — ? 

WADDY:   Yeah,  director,  whoever  it  is  who  sets  up  shows. 
I'm  not —  Well,  anyway,  I  decided  that  I'd  ask  Mr.  Houston, 
Norman  [0.]  Houston  at  the  Golden  State  [Mutual  Life 
Insurance  Company] .   I  told  him.   And  I  would  invite 
Charles  White,  because  he  was  an  artist  and  I  wasn't  an 


55 


artist.   So  the  three  of  us  went  there.   I'll  use  the  name 
Brown,  although  I'm  not  certain.   He  said  we  could  have  a 
show  if  we  could  find  him  a  [Henry  0.]  Tanner.   And  years 
later —  Oh,  dear,  who's  that  man  that  we  were  talking  about 
earlier  today  who  has  a  collection? 
MASON:   Cecil  Fergerson. 

WADDY:   Cecil  Fergerson.   He  was  working  there  at  the 
county,  and  years  later  Cecil  told  me  that  there  was  a 
Tanner  already  there  down  in  the  basement  in  the  storage. 
But  he  didn't  know  it,  I  guess. 

MASON:   Or  maybe  he  wanted  one  for  his  own  personal — 
WADDY:   No,  I  think  he  wanted  one  for  the  museum.   But  he 
didn't  know  it  was  there.   The  museum  did  have  a  Tanner. 
Because  having  a  Tanner  would  be  quite  a  feather  in  his 
cap,  you  know,  because  Tanner  is  a  good  artist  and  what  we 
call  in  books  "a  collector's  item,"  you  know.   It's  why 
they're  having  this  Tanner  show  going  around  the  country 
now. 

MASON:   I  wonder  why  he  said  that.   I  mean,  he  knew  it  was 
impossible  to  get,  so  he  wouldn't  have  to  have  the  show? 
WADDY:   If  I  had  known  as  much  about  art  as  I  know  now,  I 
could  have  gotten  a  Tanner.   You  know,  I  could  have 
borrowed  it  for  a  while  to  get  the  show  done.   Because  in 
the  art  world  they  have  the  same  kind  of  shenanigans  going 
on  as  they  do  in  business.   You  know,  it's  a  business,  and 


56 


you  do  the  same  kind  of  tricks.   [laughter]   But  I  didn't 
know  that  then.   So  we  never  had  the  show. 

I  came  back  and  told  the  artists  the  condition  of 
having  the  show,  and  none  of  them  knew  where  to  get  a 
Tanner.   So  we  didn't  have  the  show.   That  was  the  end  of 
it.   But  the  artists  were  so  happy  to  be  sitting  so  close 
together.   There  were  about  fifteen  or  twenty,  we'll  say. 
Maybe  there  were  more.   There  weren't  any  less  than  that, 
but  maybe  there  were  more  than  that.   They  were  so  happy  to 
be  together,  they  said,  "No,  we'll  form  a  group."   Not 
"We'll  form  a  group,"  but  "We  want  to  stay  together."   So 
it  was  all  right  with  me.   Then  we  decided  on  a  name  and 
made  up  the  rules  of  membership.   That's  how  Art  West 
Associated  was  born,  just  because  they  wanted  to  stay 
together.   They  wanted  to  be  in  touch  with  each  other,  and 
we  took  in  new  members . 
MASON:   You  were  the  president? 

WADDY:   They  made  me  the  president  because  I  had  gotten  the 
artists  together,  not  because  of  my  knowledge  or  any  other 
reason,  just  simply  because  I  had  initiated  it.   That's 
all. 

MASON:   Did  they  allow  you  any  say  in  what  was  going  on 
after  that? 

WADDY:   Yeah,  but  not  much.   Yes,  they  did.   They  allowed 
me —  We  elected  a  secretary  and  a  treasurer  and  decided 


57 


what  the  dues  were  going  to  be  and  Just  had  a  regular 
club.   That's  how  it  started.   We  had  regular  meetings  at 
each  artist's  home.   That's  where  they  were.   And  when  the 
United  States  started  that  humanities  and  history 
department,  humanities,  arts.  National — 
MASON:   Endowment  for  the  Arts. 

WADDY:   Yes,  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts.   Then  I 
thought  that  we  should  try  and  get  a  permanent  place  for 
ourselves.   One  of  the  artists  there,  Helen  Green,  I  think 
her  name  was  Helen  Green,  her  father  owned  his  home  in 
Watts.   He  had  a  lot  near  there,  next-door  or  near  his 
house.   When  he  heard  that  we  were  trying  to  work  on  a 
permanent  place,  he  said  that  he  would  give  us  the  lot, 
give  Art  West  the  lot,  if  we  would  put  in  a  foundation. 
But  the  men  in  the  club  didn't  like  the  location. 
MASON:   What  was  wrong  with  it? 

WADDY:   Well,  it  was  in  Watts.   That's  what  was  wrong  with 
it.   And  they  didn't--  Now,  had  I  had  my  wits  about  me,  I 
would  have  gone  out  there  with  some  stakes  and  strong  cord 
and,  you  know,  squared  off  enough  feet  to  lay  the  twenty  by 
twenty  or  sixteen  by  sixteen  and  started  shoveling,  digging 
a  ditch,  because  I  was  certainly  strong  enough  to  do  it. 
But  I  just  wasn't  thinking.   And  then  the  men  would  have 
helped  me.   They  would  have  helped  me  dig  the  ditch.   I 
always  regretted  that  I  didn't  do  that. 


58 


MASON:   So  there  wasn't  enough  status  in  Watts,  or  what  was 

wrong  with  the  Watts  conununity?   I  mean,  this  was  a  few 

years  before  the  riots.   The  riots  were  in  '65,  and  you 

started  Art  West  in  '62.   So  did  he  offer  to  give  you  the 

plot  before  the  riots? 

WADDY :   Be  fore ,  uh- huh . 

MASON:   Things  were  deteriorating,  but  it  still  wasn't--  It 

hadn't  been  burned  pretty  much  to  the  ground. 

WADDY:   No,  it  hadn't  been  burned,  but  they  were 

deteriorating.   You  know,  in  the  black  community.  Watts 

didn't  have  that  good  of  a  name.   That's  why  they  didn't 

want  it  there.   I've  always  regretted  not  having  done  that, 

because  that's  all  I  had  to  do,  because  the  men  would  have 

come  to  my  aid.   Well,  that's  one  of  the  regrets  of  Art 

West. 

MASON:   What  kinds  of — ? 

WADDY:   But  it  got  to  be  known  throughout  the  country. 

When  artists  from  out  of  the  country  came,  they  came  to  our 

meetings  and  became  members. 

MASON:   Who  were  some  of  the  people  that  you  remember  who 

aren't  from  the  area  who  came  and  joined? 

WADDY:   I'd  have  to  look  it  up.   I  don't  remember  just 

offhand. 

MASON:   So  did  it  change--?  When  I  was  asking  whether  the 

artists  let  you  have  your  say,  I  was  asking  whether  the 


59 


meetings  fulfilled  the  social  purposes  that  you'd 

envisioned. 

WADDY:   No.   I  didn't  introduce  that. 

MASON:   So  it  just  becaune  a  group  so  that  the  artists  could 

meet  and  talk  and  probably  plan  exhibits. 

WADDY:   We  would  plan,  yes.   We  planned  exhibits.   When  we 

had  it  in  city  hall,  the  first  one  at  L.A.  city  hall,  that 

was  a  juried  show.   We  had  several  of  them.   I'm  sorry  I 

don't  have  the  minutes.   Several  juried  shows.   The  reason 

I  thought  about  the  National  Endowment  is  because  I  wrote  a 

proposal  and  we  got  funded  $5,000  for  that.   I  wanted  the 

artists  to  stay  busy,  either  having  a  show--  And  they 

complained  about  not  being  able  to  sell  their  work. 

So,  let's  see,  where  is  that  paper? 
MASON:   Maybe  I'll  pause  here.   [tape  recorder  off]   I'm 
looking  at  an  advertisement.   You  say  it's  from  Essence 
magazine,  an  ad  for  Art  West  Associated  to  buy  an  original 
print.   The  subscriber ship--  Oh,  and  you  put  out 
brochures.   You  published  brochures  for  the--  That's 
interesting.   So  that  was  well-- 
WADDY:   That  was  one  thing  that  we  did. 

MASON:   That  was  funded  by  the  National  Endowment.   So  this 
was  after--  When  did  you  go  around  the  country  to  collect 
prints  by  black  artists?   Was  that  before? 
WADDY:   I  don't  remember  [whether]  before  or  after.   I 


60 


don't  remember  hardly  anything  about  it  at  all,  to  tell  you 

the  truth.   You  see,  I  have  to  look  it  up. 

MASON:   Because,  let's  see,  the  book  called  Prints  by 

American  Negro  Artists,  that's-- 

WADDY:   Oh,  yes.   That's  another  thing.   That  was  another 

one.   I  wanted  to  show  you  something  about  that  book. 

[tape  recorder  off]   Up  north  here,  called  Art-West 

Associated  North,  that's  New  Perspectives  in  Black  Art. 

MASON:   So  she  [Evengeline  J.  "Vangie"  Montgomery]  came  to 

Los  Angeles-- 

WADDY:   She  lived,  yeah,  I  knew  her  in  Chicago.   I'd  known 

her  a  long  time. 

MASON:   Oh.   Was  she  a  native  of  Chicago? 

WADDY:   No,  she  was  a  native  of  Boston.   Negro  History 

Week.   That's  why  we  were  in  city  hall.   And  Prints  by 

American  Negro  Artists,  see,  I  started  that  because,  well, 

Martin  Luther  King  [Jr.]'s  coming  here.   At  USC  [University 

of  Southern  California]--  Let  me  get  the-- 

MASON:   Well,  there's  a  guy  [Theodore  V.]  Roelof-Lanner  who 

edited  the  book.   [tape  recorder  off]   He  heard  him.   He 

and  his  wife  went  to  hear  Martin  Luther  King.   He  had  done 

prints  for  USC.   He'd  been  doing — 

WADDY:   A  master  artist  with  the  master  printers,  something 

like  that.   He  decided  after  hearing  Martin  Luther  King 

that  he  would  put  some  black  artists  in  there.   He  went  to 


61 


the  printmaker's  society,  and  Betye  Saar  was  the  only 

member  there.   She  said  he  asked  her  if  there  were  any 

other  black  printmakers.   And  she  said,  "Oh,  yes.   You  go 

over  to  Ruth  Waddy's  house.   She  knows  a  whole  lot  of 

them."   I  hardly  knew  about  printing  at  all,  period,  at 

that  time.   But  Margaret  Burroughs  had  sent  me  a  little 

booklet  of  printmakers  from  the  Southside  art  group. 

MASON:   Yes,  Southside  Community  Arts  Center.   She  was  also 

making  prints  herself. 

WADDY:   Yes.   She  sent  me  that.   I  knew  that  Van  Slater  was 

a  printmaker  and  Bill  [William  E.]  Smith.   Let's  see,  who 

else?   Betye  Saar  was  making  prints,  too,  at  that  time. 

Because  I  have  one  of  Betye  Saar's  prints. 

MASON:   Yeah,  the  one  reproduced  in  the  book  is  called 

Samsara. 

WADDY:   Yes,  that's  it. 

MASON:   That's  the  one  you  have? 

WADDY:   No,  I  don't  have  that  one.   I  have  another  one.   If 

you  look  in  there  in  that  book--  [tape  recorder  off] 

MASON:   I  was  looking  at  one  of  your  copies  of  Prints  by 

American  Negro  Artists.   You  have  a  postcard  in  the  front 

sent  to  you  by  James  Parker  who  says  that  he  found  [a  copy 

of]  this  book  in  a  bookstore  in  Chicago  and  it  was  [for 

sale  for]  $400. 

WADDY:   No,  in  New  York,  because  he  was  in  New  York  when  he 


62 


wrote  that. 

MASON:   Oh,  you  mentioned  it  to  him  while  you  were  in-- 

WADDY:   At  the  National  Conference  of  Artists  in  Atlanta 

that  Margaret  Burroughs  founded  some  years  ago,  many,  many 

years  ago. 

MASON:   There  were  two  editions  published.   The  second 

edition  has  an  essay  in  it  by  James  Porter. 


WADDY 


MASON 
WADDY 


That's  right. 


Who  got  Porter  to  write  the--? 

I  guess  Roelof-Lanner.   I  guess,  because,  you  see, 
I  don't  think  he  was  very  much  impressed  by  [the 
introduction  that  I  wrote  for]  the  book  at  first.   I  wrote 
something  for  Roelof-Lanner.   I  wrote  an  introduction. 
It's  in  there  in  the  second  edition  someplace.   But  it 
wasn't  what  he  wanted.   What  he  wanted  was  what  James 
Porter  wrote.   But  I  didn't  know  anything.   I  didn't  know 
that  much  about  art,  you  see.   I  just  liked  it.   When  I  got 
involved  with  the  artists,  then  I  learned  something  about 
it.   But  I  had  never  gone  to  art  school  or  done  anything  in 
art. 
MASON:   Well,  James  Porter  probably  at  that  time-- 

Yeah,  he  was  teaching  art  at  Howard  University. 

Yes,  Howard  University.   So  nobody  knew  as  much 
about  African-American  art  probably  as  he  did.   On  the 
other  hand,  I  bet  he  didn't  know  much  about  California 


63 


WADDY 
MASON 


artists.   I  wonder. 

WADDY:   No,  I  guess  not.   I  don't  know. 

MASON:  Because,  you  know.  New  York  was  everything  then. 
And  all  the  prints--  How  did  you  gather  together  all  the 
prints  that  are  going  to  be  printed? 

WADDY:   Well,  Roelof-Lanner  said  that  he  wanted  to  put  in 
some  black  printmakers.   I  said  yes,  and  he  looked  it 
over.   There  were  enough  so  that  after  a  while  he  said,  "I 
don't  want  you  to  do  that  book  at  all  for  USC.   I  want  to 
do  a  book  about  just  black  artists,  black  printmakers," 
because  he  was  a  printer.   He  said,  "Would  you  help  me?"   I 
said,  "Well,  of  course."   So  I  wrote--  I  don't  know  whether 
it  was  a  postcard  or  a  letter — it  was  probably  a  letter, 
although  a  short  letter--to  all  of  the  schools  or  to  the 
print  artists  in  different  towns,  asking  them  to  send  some 
prints  to  me  for  the  book.   Of  course,  none  of  them  sent 
any.   Not  a  one. 

Roelof-Lanner  said,  "Well,  what  are  we  going  to  do?" 

I  said,  "I  guess  we'll  have  to  do  the  same  thing  we 
did  with  the  ones  in  L.A. — go  and  get  them."   That's  how  I 
got  them  in  L.A.   [laughter]   They  didn't  come  to  me,  I 
went  and  got  them. 

He  said,  "Well,  I  don't  have  that  kind  of  money.   I 
don ' t  have  any  money  for  the  fare . " 

I  said,  "Do  you  have  $100?" 


64 


He  said  yes. 

Well,  at  that  time  Greyhound  bus  had  an  advertising 
promotion  program  going  on.   You  could  ride  for  $100  round- 
trip  anyplace  that  the  bus  stopped.   Or  anyplace  that  it 
stopped,  that  would  take  care  of  all  of  it.   But  by  the 
time  I  got  the  money,  the  promotion  was  over.   So  I  went  on 
another  bus.   I  don't  remember  the  name  of  it.   Anyway, 
there  are  two  bus  companies  in  L.A.,  and  I  went  on  the 
other  one.   I  didn't  get  the  Greyhound.   That  was  $100,  and 
they  went  to  nearly  all  of  the  places. 

So  I  mapped  out  the  places  that  the  bus  went.   I  asked 
the  artists  for  the  names  and  addresses  of  a  relative  who 
lived  in  that  town  or  a  friend  who  would  put  me  up 
overnight  and  give  me  one  meal.   And  I  told  them  why  I 
wanted  to  do  that,  you  know,  that  we  were  trying  to  publish 
a  book.   I  waited  until  I  got  an  answer,  whether  they  would 
say  yes  or  no,  because  I  didn't  have  any  money  either.   I'm 
a  state  aid  recipient.   [laughter] 

So  after  I  got  my  answers  back,  I  took  my  round- trip 
ticket.   A  friend  of  mine  in  Glendale,  she's  a  little, 
short,  fat,  white  woman.   She  was  a  librarian.   I  think  she 
was  a  librarian.   Well,  anyway,  she  had  bought  a  cashmere 
coat  that  was  too  small  for  her.   It  was  on  sale  and  it  was 
too  small.   She  gave  me  that  coat  because  it  was  in  the 
winter. 


65 


MASON:   Yeah.   Well,  that  was  nice. 

WADDY:   I  had  heard  how  warm  cashmere  was  and 

lightweight.   And  it  is  exactly,  because  it  did  just--  It 

did  a  perfect  job  for  me. 

MASON:   It  helped  you  in  the  Chicago  wind? 

WADDY:   Yes,  yes.   It's  very  warm.   So  I  waited  until  I  got 

an  answer.   Nearly  all  of  them  said  yes.   Of  course,  all  of 

them  said  yes.   And  I  went  on  my  way. 

MASON:   Where  did  you  stop  first? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember  that. 

MASON:   Did  you  go  all  the  way  out  to  the  Midwest  and 

stop?   Did  you  stop  maybe  first  in  Chicago  or  did  you  go 

all  the  way  to  New  York  and  then  stop  back? 

WADDY:   No,  I  stopped  along  the  way.   I  probably--  I  don't 

know .   I  don ' t  remember . 

MASON:   But  you  made  it  all  the  way-- 

WADDY:   I  went  north.   I  went  to  the  Midwest  first,  because 

I  think  I  remember  Detroit,  and  Detroit's  not  that  far  away 

from  Chicago.   Yeah,  I  went  up  and  then  down  the  coast  and 

around  and  back.   I  probably  went  that  way.   I  remember 

incidents  of  the  trip. 

MASON:   Judging  from  the  artists  represented  in  the  book, 

it  seems  like  you  hit  all  the  forty-eight  states.   You 

didn't  go  to  Alaska  and  Hawaii,  but-- 

WADDY:   No,  I  didn't. 


66 


MASON:   But  you  made  it  all  the  way  to-- 

WADDY:   I  made  quite  a  few.   I  didn't  get  to  all  the 

states.   I  didn't  get  to  Washington  or  Oregon. 

MASON:   Yeah.   No,  I  was  just  kidding.   But  it  is  a  wide 

range  of  artists.   So  what  kinds  of--?   Did  you  have  an 

idea  of  what  kinds  of  prints  you  wanted  or  would  you  just 

get  the  artist  to  bring  out  some  things? 

WADDY:   I  didn't  go  by  anything  except  what  I  liked.   I 

remember  writing  Vangie  Montgomery  like  that.   She  said, 

"Well,  Ruth--"  When  I  got  to  Boston--  Now,  Vangie  knows 

about  art.   She's  an  artist,  but  she  works  in  jewelry.   But 

she  knows  about  it.   She's  had  training,  and  she  knew  that 

I  hadn ' t  had  any . 

She  said,  "How  do  you  select  the  prints?"   She  said 
that  to  me. 

I  said,  "Well,  I  look  at  everything  they  have.   And 
what  I  like  best,  well,  that's  what  I  take." 

She  said,  "What?   What!   Ruth,  that's  no  way  to  pick 
out  prints. " 

I  said,  "Well,  I  didn't  know." 

She  gave  me  a  booklet.   I'll  have  to  find  it.   She 
gave  me  something  to  tell  me  how  to  pick  out  prints. 
MASON:   Yeah,  it's  really  a  complicated  process. 
WADDY:   So  when  I  got  through  reading  the  booklet,  I  said, 
"Well,  it  says  the  same  thing  I  said.   You  pick  out  what 


67 


you  want."   It  did.   I'll  find  it.   It's  around  here 

someplace.   God  knows  where,  but  I  still  have  it. 

MASON:   Because  there  are  so  many  printing  processes  and 

papers . 

WADDY:   Yeah,  but  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  what  you 

like.   The  process  has  nothing  to  do  with  what  you  like. 

The  different  kinds  of  process,  that's  what  I  wrote  for  the 

book.   And  they  printed  it.   It's  in  there,  along  with 

Wood's,  I  mean  James -- 

MASON:   Porter's. 

WADDY:   Porter's.   But  this  is  what  I  said  to  her.   I  said, 

"I  read  it.   It  says  the  same  thing  I  do.   It  says  that 

after  you  get  through,  what  you  like,  you  pick  that." 

MASON:   And  the  artists,  did  they  persuade  you  either  way 

or--? 

WADDY:   They  were  so  pleased  to  see  me.   They  were  pleased 

to--  Oh,  I've  had  a  tremendous  amount  of  artwork  that  I've 

had  to  sell  when  I  came  up  here  because  I  couldn't  afford 

to  bring  it  up  here  and  there  was  no  place  to  keep  it 

because  I've  got  stuff  behind--  I  don't  have  a  bed  board. 

That's  not  a  bed  board,  that's  paintings  that  I  can't 

hang.   And  behind  the  desk  and  under  the  bed  it's  a  whole 

lot  of  work  there.   They'd  give  me-- just  say-- "Would  you 

like  that?   Would  you  like  that?"   Well,  of  course  I'd  like 

it.   You  know,  they  were  beautiful  things.   Beautiful 


68 


things,  but  I  just  couldn't  afford  it.   I  didn't  have 
anyplace  to  put  it.   I  put  up  as  much  as  I  could  at 
first.   In  that  apartment,  I  had  more  freedom  than  I  have 
here  to  hang.   And  it  was  bigger,  too.   The  neighborhood 
was  kind  of--  Union  Street,  Union  Avenue  in  L.A.,  is  not  as 
bad  as  Watts--the  reputation  that  Watts  had.   It's  not  one 
of  the  choicest  parts  of  Los  Angeles,  but  the  building 
itself  was  superior  to  this  building.   It's  much,  much 
larger  and  storage  space  was  much  bigger.   Of  course,  it 
was  on  a  bigger  piece  of  land,  too. 

Well,  anyway,  she  didn't  say  anything  when  I  said  the 
book  says  the  same  thing  that  I  do,  that  you  pick  out  what 
you  like.   So  that's  how  I  got  around.   But  when  I  got  to 
Detroit,  I  took  the  telephone  numbers  of  everybody  that  I 
was  going  to  stay  with.   [Donald]  Stinson.   I  can't  think 
of  Stinson 's  first  name. 
MASON:   Donald? 

WADDY:   He  enamels  copper.   Have  you  seen  that  copper 
ashtray  that  I  have  on  the  desk  in  the  bedroom? 
MASON :   No ,  I  haven ' t  seen  that . 

WADDY:   Well,  he's  as  good  as  that  man.   He's  an  L.A.  man 
that  did  that. 
MASON:   Well,  Curtis  Tann — 

WADDY:   Yes,  Curtis  Tann.   Yes.   Yes,  he  can--  That's  his 
piece  that  I  was  going  to  show  you.   One  of  his  pieces. 


69 


Well,  Stinson  is  another  one  who  can  enamel  as  well  as 
Tann.   He  had  given  me  his  sister's  name — she  was  married — 
and  telephone  number.   I  had  written  to  her.   But  when  I 
got  there,  she  hadn't  received  the  letter.   I  had  written 
in  time,  but  she  just  hadn't  gotten  it.   It  was  a  funny 
thing . 

So  when  I  called  her  up,  I  said,  "This  is  Ruth 
Waddy . " 

And  she  said,  "Yes?"  like,  "Well,  what  about  it?   Who 
are  you?   Yes,  so  your  name's  Ruth  Waddy." 

I  said,  "Well,  I  wrote  you  and  asked  if  I  could — " 

She  said,  "Well,  I  never  received  any--"  It  was  around 
eleven  thirty  at  night.   Anyway,  she  said,  "No,  I  never 
received  any  letter." 

I  said,  "Well,  I  couldn't  have  had  your  telephone 
number  [unless]  your  brother  Donald — "  Donald  Stinson  his 
name  is.   She  didn't  answer  that. 

So  she  turned  to  her  husband,  and  she  said,  "Well, 
I'll  send  my  husband  down  to  the  bus  station.   We'll 
see."   You  know,  like  I'll  send  my  husband  down  and  he'll 
look  you  over  and  see  if  you  look  safe  enough. 

Well,  I  told  her  about  the  letter  I  had  written  and 
the  date  that  I  had  put  on,  you  know,  when  it  was  dated. 
Do  you  know,  the  next  morning  that  letter  came.   It  was 
held  up  in  the  post  office  some  way,  and  had  the  same  date. 


70 


MASON:   Well,  you  must  have  met  his  approval  in  your 

cashmere  coat,  anyway. 

WADDY:   Yeah.   So  I  stayed  there  in  Detroit.   I  never  will 

forget.   And  that's  how  Romare  Bearden--  I  met  him  too  that 

way.   Not  that  way,  but  I  met  on  the  tour  when  I  went  to 

New  York.   One  of  the  things  he  said  was,  "Would  you  like 

me  to  take  you  to  lunch?"   Well,  I'm  not  much  on  eating  out 

because- - 

MASON:   Well,  if  you  were  low  on  cash-- 

WADDY:   Yeah,  first  of  all,  I  couldn't  afford  the  places 

that  I  would  like  to  eat  if  I  were  going  to  eat  out.   And 

at  that  time--see,  this  is  a  long  time  ago--I  was  very 

particular  about  my  food.   I  mean,  I  was  particular  about 

what  I  ate.   Of  course,  I'm  particular  now,  but  I'm  not 

quite  as  rude  as  I  used  to  be.   [laughter] 

Because  he  said,  "You  want  to  go  to  lunch?" 

I  said,  "No,  thank  you." 

He  said,  "Well,  I  can  afford  it." 

I  said,  you  know,  "I  don't  doubt  it."   I  didn't  think 
about  his  finances.   But  I  have  a  book  on  him  now. 
MASON:   Yeah,  [Myron]  Schwartzman' s  [Romare  Bearden:  His 
Life  and  Art] . 

WADDY:   Thinking  back  to  when  I  did  talk  to  him,  I  know  he 
could  afford  it,  but  I  just  don't  eat  out.   Very  rarely. 
It's  been  a  long  time  since  I--  Well,  anyway.   She  said 


71 


they  were  so  glad  the  letter  came.   A  few  years  later  she 
came  to  L.A.  for  Donald's  birthday  or  they  had  a  little 
girl  or  something.   I  can't  remember.   Anyway,  she  was  in 
L.A.,  and  Donald  was  introducing  her  and  her  husband 
around.   When  he  got  to  me,  she  said,  "Oh,  no,  you're  the 
kind  who  calls  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  you  want 
to  stay  over!"   And  I  said,  "Detroit!"   She  laughed,  and 
her  husband  laughed  too,  because  that's  exactly  how  it 
happened.   I  can't  think  of  Detroit  without  thinking  of 
that  incident.   I  was  making  myself,  you  know,  preparing 
myself  mentally  to  stay  there  in  the  bus  station  till  the 
morning.   I  said,  "It's  a  good  thing  I  have  this  coat, 
because  it  would  make  a  nice,  warm  cover."   Stay  here  in 
the  bus  station,  you  know,  on  the  bench.   Because  the  way 
she  said  over  the  phone,  "I  didn't  get  any  letter  from 
you.   I  didn't  get  any  letter  from  you."   That's  how  I  did 
it. 

The  artists--  They  would  show  me  their  work,  all  of 
it,  not  just  the  prints  but  whatever  else  they  had  done. 
When  I'd  say  about  a  piece,  "It's  very  good"  or  this  is 
thus  and  so,  they  thought  so  too.   They  agreed.   Then 
they'd  ask  me  something  that  an  artist  could  answer,  you 
know,  a  practicing  artist  or  just  even  a  lay  person.   I 
mean,  a  lay  person  who  looked  at  art  a  lot  but  was  not  an 
artist. 


72 


They  said,  "Well,  how  Is  it  that  you--?"  I  told  them 
that  I  wouldn't  know.   But  they'd  say,  "Ruth,  do  you  think 
I  should  have  more  blue  in  this?"  or  "Do  you  think  that--?" 
You  know,  something  like  that. 

I'd  say,  "Well,  I  don't  know." 

They  said,  "Well,  how  did  you  get  into  art  if  you 
don't  know  anything  about  it?"   Oh,  what  they'd  do  is  look 
at  me  like  "You're  an  artist." 

I  said,  "The  thing  is  that  I  have  worked  all  my  life, 
and  I  know  that  anybody  who  is  good,  they  worked.   I  don't 
care  even  if  you  have  talent.   You  still  have  to  work.   Art 
is  work. " 

Well,  they  couldn't  answer  that.   And  besides,  they 
were  so  young,  you  know. 

I  said,  "My  daughter's  your  age.   I  have  a  daughter 
older"--  Sometimes  they  were  older,  sometimes  she  was 
older.   I'd  say,  "I  have  a  daughter  older  than  you.   Now,  I 
know  a  lot.   I've  been  working,  you  know.   I've  been  taking 
care  of  my  daughter  for  a  long  time."   My  husband  [William 
H.  Waddy]  and  I  got  divorced  when  Marianna  [Maryom  Ana  Al- 
Wadi]  was  three.   He  was  so  jealous.   I  can't  stand 
jealousy.   I  mean,  especially  the  kind  that  makes  up 
things. 

MASON:   Your  husband  was  jealous? 
WADDY:   Yes.   I  mean,  he  didn't  want  me  to  go  on  the  street 


73 


outside  unless  he  was  with  me.   And  he  couldn't  be  with  me 
all  the  time  because  he  had  a  Job. 

MASON:   Because  he  didn't  think  nice  women  were  out  alone 
on  the  street? 

WADDY:   But  I  had  to  walk  the  baby.   He  would  just  make 

things  up. 

MASON:   About  your  friends? 

WADDY:   What? 

MASON:   Was  he  jealous  of  your  friends,  that  kind  of  thing? 

WADDY:   If  they  were  male,  yes.   He  said,  "You  don't  look 

at  me  that  way."   That  didn't  bother  me  so  much  as  making 

things  up,  just  out-and-out  lying.   I  had  never  run  across 

anybody  that  was  jealous.   It  wasn't  in  my  family,  you 

know,  in  any  way.   My  father  never  acted  that  way. 

MASON:   Most  women  would  be  flattered  that  a  man-- 

WADDY:   Well,  I  didn't  have  anything  for  him —  You  know,  I 

wasn't  especially--  I  wouldn't  scare  you  to  death,  but  I 

wasn't  any  beauty.   There  wasn't  anything  remarkable  about 

my  appearance.   It  was  very  mediocre. 

MASON:   To  him  you  were-- 

WADDY:   Oh,  I  guess  he  thought  I  was  worth  it,  I  guess.   I 

loved  him  though,  just  the  same.   But  that  particular 

thing-- 


74 


TAPE  NUMBER:   III,  SIDE  ONE 
JULY  27,  1991 

MASON:   When  we  left  off,  we  were  talking  about  your  trip 
around  the  country  to  collect  prints  for  the  book  Prints  By 
American  Negro  Artists.   I'd  like  to  hear  more  about  the 
trip,  but  we  have  so  much  to  cover.   I  was  just  hoping  that 
I  could  ask  you  just  one  or  two  more  questions  and  then  we 
can  go  on.   Did  you  see  Bob  [Robert]  Blackburn? 
WADDY:   Yes,  indeed.   He's  another  very,  very  good 
printmaker.   I  went  to  his  studio. 

MASON:   As  I  understand  it,  his  Printmaking  Workshop  is  the 
oldest  in  the  country.   Could  you  talk  about  that  a  little 
bit? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember  anything  about  any  of  the  artists, 
unless  there  was  something  special.   I  know  that  he  is  an 
excellent  artist  and  printmaker,  but  I  didn't  know  how  good 
he  was  at  the  time.   His  name  was  given  to  me  or  I  picked 
his  name  from  some  book  or  magazine.   I  collected  the  names 
of  artists  and  asked  artists  for  other  names.   I  knew  that 
he  taught  school,  but  I  don't  remember  any  particular  thing 
about  him  except  that  he  let  me  look  at  some  prints.   I 
think  I  selected  one. 

MASON:   I  see  you  said  you  met  Romare  Bearden. 
WADDY:   Some  of  the  artists  were  more  outgoing  than 
others.   He  wasn't  particularly  so. 

75 


MASON 
WADDY 
MASON 
WADDY 


Romare  Bearden  wasn't? 

No,  Blackburn. 

Blackburn  wasn't.   I  see. 

Romare  Bearden,  I  think,  recognized  the  fact  that  I 
wasn't  an  artist  myself  and  I  didn't  know  too  much  about 
it.   But  what  I  was  doing  was  all  right  with  him,  and  he 
wanted  to  be  in  the  book.   But  Romare  Bearden  wasn't,  you 
know,  overimpressed,  as  some  of  the  artists  were.   Some  of 
the  artists,  for  instance,  said —  Well,  they  were  very  much 
elated  to  have  someone  collect  their  prints  to  be 
published. 

MASON:   By  that  time,  he  had  pretty  much  made  his  career. 
WADDY;   Yes,  and  he  was  a  little  bit  older,  too.   He  was 
older  than  the  rest  of  the  artists.   The  other  artists  were 
mostly  in  their  twenties  and  early  thirties — not  older  than 
thirty-two,  at  most.   Most  of  them  were  in  their  twenties, 
between  twenty  and  twenty- five,  twenty-six.   But  the  older 
the  artist  was,  the  less  impressed  he  was,  because  they 
knew  more.   That's  natural. 

MASON:   Were  you  able  to  come  to  any  conclusions  about, 
say,  trends  in  African-American  print  artists  during  that 
time? 

WADDY:   No.   There  weren't  any  particular  ones. 
MASON:   Yeah,  so  it  was  just  according  to  the  people's 
interest. 


76 


WADDY:   According  to  each  artist's.   They  did  their  own 
thing.   Romare  Bearden  was  more  abstract  than  most  other 
artists.   Some  of  the  artists  were  very  much  aware  of  the 
civil  rights  movement,  and  that  was  depicted  in  their  work 
and  their  conversation  sometimes.   The  older  artists  were, 
as  I  said,  matter-of-fact,  just  took  things  very  matter-of- 
factly.   They  weren't  unduly  excited  about  it,  while  the 
younger  artists  were.   They  didn't  talk  about  any  trends, 
and  they  didn't  exhibit  any  particular  trend.   They  did 
what  they  liked. 

MASON:   In  this  same  book,  they  included  one  of  your  own 
prints.   It's  called  A  Matter  of  Opinion.   By  that  time  you 
had  taken  the  [Famous  Artists]  Home  Study  Course,  and  had 
you  been  to  Otis  [Art  Institute]  by--  Well,  you  were  in 
Otis  in  '65,  so  did  you--? 

WADDY:   The  book  came  out  in  '67.   I  think  maybe  I  had  been 
to  Otis. 

MASON:   Could  you  talk  about  that,  your  own--? 
WADDY:   A  Matter  of  Opinion  is  an  abstract.   There  are 
columns  of  different  sizes  and  heights.   I  had  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  people  very  often  had  opinions  based  on 
misinformation  or  no  information  or  prejudice.   It  wasn't 
fact  at  all.   They  expressed  very  strong  opinions  about 
things  based  on  those  three  things.   So  an  opinion  didn't 
mean  anything.   It  meant  that  if  you  wanted  to  know  the 


77 


facts,  you  had  to  go  and  get  them  yourself.   You  couldn't 

take  anybody's  word  for  it,  because  they  couldn't  give  you 

a  factual  source. 

MASON:   So  did  the  different  size  poles — ? 

WADDY:   Yes,  represented  individual  opinions.   It's  just  a 

matter  of  opinion. 

MASON:   Was  that  the  kind  of  work  you  were  doing  at  that 

time- -more  abstract? 

WADDY:   I  don't  think  it  was —  I  didn't  have  any 

particular--  I  didn't  know  of  any  other  way  to  express  that 

thought .   That ' s  why  I  used  abstract . 

MASON:   When  you  took  the  home-study  course,  what  was  that? 

WADDY:   It  was  the  Famous  Artists  Home  Study  Course.   Years 

and  years  ago  there  were  famous  artists,  you  know.   Some 

company  had  induced  different  artists  to  make  up  a  book, 

contribute  to  a  course,  a  study  course,  a  home- study 

course.   Some  of  the  artists  talked  about  color  a  lot. 

Some  of  them  talked  about  graphics.   Some  of  them  talked 

about  placing  things  on  the  page.   That's  all  I  learned, 

those  kinds  of  things. 

MASON:   Then  when  you  went  to  Otis,  what  did  you  study? 

Did  you  study  with  Charles  White  there? 

WADDY:   No,  his  classes  were  advanced  classes.   Charles 

White  was  good  in  graphics  and  drawing,  very  good,  and  I 

was  not.   I  never  have  been.   Since  he  was  very  good  at 


78 


that,  he  taught  that,  but  that  was  an  advanced  class.   I 

only  went  one  quarter  to  Otis.   I  think  it  was  just  one 

quarter.   The  school  year  was  divided  into  quarters  at  that 

time,  not  only  in  the  art  school  but  at  all  the  higher 

educational  institutions.   I  think  they  were  divided  into 

quarters  instead  of  semesters.   When  I  started  school,  it 

was  semesters . 

MASON:   Yeah,  maybe  it's  just  the  West  Coast.   They  seem  to 

prefer  quarters. 

WADDY:   No,  I  don't  think  so.   I  think  that  it  was  national 

when  the  change  was  made  to  quarters.   I  don't  remember  the 

reason  that  was  given,  I  mean  for  changing  from  semesters 

to  quarters.   I  don't  remember. 

MASON:   Why  did  you  only  go  one  quarter?   You  hadn't 

formally  enrolled?   You  just  wanted  to  take  a  course?   Is 

that  what  happened?   Or  you  wanted  to  continue  but  you — 

WADDY:   I  didn't  have  any  intention  of  graduating  or 

anything  like  that.   I  just  wanted  to  take  a  course. 

MASON:   Which  course  did  you  take? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember.   Probably  I  just  started  in  a 

beginners  course.   You  know,  learning  value  and  color  and 

how  to  place  what  you  were  drawing--what  colors,  you  know, 

placement .   I  don ' t  remember . 

MASON:   So  when  did  you  start  to — ?  Is  that  when  you 

started  to  produce  more  and  more  work?   How  much--? 


79 


WADDY:   Yes,  I  did  more  work  after  that  because  I  knew  a 
little  bit  more  about  what  I  was  doing.   But  the  thing  is, 
the  artists  helped  me  more  than  anybody  else,  more  than 
anything.   Artists  would  show  me  how  to  print  and  they 
showed  me  what  value  meant  in  colors  and  they  showed  me 
about  graphics.   For  instance,  the  ear  is  placed  between 
the  eye  and  the  nose,  not  wherever  I  had  it.   [laughter] 
And  they  showed  me,  you  know —  They  taught  me  how  to  be  an 
artist.   The  artists  themselves  did  it. 

The  artists  when  I  first —  In  my  first  close  contact — 
For  instance,  when  I  was  collecting  the  prints,  some  of  the 
artists  would  ask  me,  well,  did  I  think  they  should  change 
a  blue  to  another  kind  of  blue  that  was  lighter  or  would 
add  more  value  to  the  top  of  the  painting  or  whatever  they 
were  doing?   I  told  them  I  didn't  know,  and  they'd  look  at 
me  as  though,  "You  know,  all  right,  you  just  aren't  going 
to  say."   I  got  tired  of  that.   That's  really  why  I  went 
back  to  school,  so  that  I  could  answer  questions  like 
that.   Because  I  did  not  know.   Like  the  majority  of  people 
say,  "I  know  what  I  like."   I  liked  it  or  I  didn't  like 
it.   I  couldn't  say  specifically  why  I  didn't  like  it,  and 
I  couldn't  say  specifically  why  I  did.   I  went  to  school 
really  to  learn  why,  so  that  I  could  answer  them.   Because, 
as  I  say,  they  were  young  people  but  they  were  respectful 
because  I  was  so  much  their  senior.   I  was  as  old  as  their 


80 


mother.   I  could  be  their  mother  to  many  of  them.   So  they 
wouldn't  Just  come  out  and  call  me  a  liar,  as  they  would 
their  peer  probably.   But  they  gave  me  that  look.   They  let 
me  know  that  they  didn't  believe  me.   Why  would  a  layman  go 
around  collecting  artists'  work  if  that  person  wasn't  an 
artist? 

MASON:   Yeah.   So  did  you  get  what  you  wanted  out  of 

school?   Were  you  able  after  that  to  articulate  what  you 

liked  and  didn't  like? 

WADDY:   I  didn't  initiate  any  art  conversations,  but  I  did 

know  enough  if  somebody  asked  me  a  question  to  give  a 

sensible  answer.   I  didn't  elaborate  or  anything  like 

that.   I  never  did  learn  enough  to  do  that,  because,  as  I 

said,  I  only  went  one  quarter.   I  started  with  oil 

painting.   But  it  was  to  me  the  fact  that  I  wasn't  a  good 

graphic  artist  (and  still  am  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact) — it 

interfered  with  what  I  wanted  to  say  with  oil. 

MASON:   Well,  you  were  talking  about  this  painting  that  you 

have  here  called  The  Shroud. 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  used  very  big  canvases  because  I  made  myself 

an  easel--a  beautiful  easel,  too,  strong  and  sturdy,  and  it 

could  roll  around.   But  they  cost  too  much  to  frame. 

Prints  were  less  expensive.   The  ones  that  I  was  doing  were 

very  small  ones. 

MASON:   When  did  you  start  exhibiting  or  did  you  exhibit 


81 


with  the  other  artists  from  Art  West  [Associated]? 

WADDY:   Yes,  if  my  work  was  chosen.   We  juried —  Someone 

would  jury  all  the  shows.   I  remember  once  Art  West  had  a 

show  at  the  Oakland  Museum  or  something. 

MASON:   Well,  there  was  Art-West  Associated  North  who  had 

the  show.   I  think  it  was  "New  Perspectives  in  Black  Art." 

WADDY:   Art  West  too  was  in  that  show.   Samella  Lewis  and 

William  Pajaud  were  the  jurors  for  us,  because  Art  West--  I 

was  so  proud  of  it,  that  Art  West  paid  them  their  fare 

round-trip  from  Los  Angeles  to  San  Francisco.   We  had  the 

work  sent  to  the  Marcus  Bookstore,  and  they  came  and  juried 

it  upstairs.   All  the  work  was  juried,  because  I  didn't 

feel  that  there  was  anybody  in  Art  West  who  knew  enough  to 

jury  shows,  so  we  had  an  outside  juror.   There  also 

wouldn't  be  any  politics,  you  know,  or  favorites,  that  sort 

of  thing.   Although  the  artists  in  Art  West  became  very 

well  known. 

MASON:   When  did  the  organization  break  up,  approximately? 

Was  it  in  the  seventies? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember  dates  at  all. 

MASON:   Okay.   In  '65  some  of  your  work  went  to  Leipzig, 

East  Germany,  or  was  it--  There  was  a  print  show  in  East 

Germany. 

WADDY:   You  know,  whatever  I  have  written  down  there, 

that's  what  happened.   I  don't  remember  things  like  that. 


82 


MASON:   Let  me  pause  here  for  a  second.   [tape  recorder 
off]   So  in  1965  you  got  the  opportunity  to  go  to  the 
Soviet  Union.   Could  you  talk  about  your  experiences  there 
and  about  how  the  show  came  about? 

WADDY:   Well,  actually,  Margaret  [Taylor  Goss]  Burroughs 
got  the  invitation.   She  wrote  me  a  postal  card  and  asked 
me  if  I  wanted  to  go  to  the  Soviet  [Union] .   I  told  her, 
yes,  when  were  they  leaving?   The  next  time  she  wrote  me  a 
letter,  she  told  me  when  it  was  and  sent  me  a  copy  of  the 
formal  invitation  from  the  Soviet  art  establishment. 
Charles  White  had  been  there  before,  and  he  was  the  one  who 
suggested  my  name.   That's  how  I  got  there.   Charles  White 
did  it.   He  said  he'd  already  been  there.   I  think  the 
Soviet  [Union]  was  inviting  artists  of  different  nations  to 
come.   Or  maybe  Charles  Burroughs,  Margaret's  husband,  had 
been  raised  in  the  Soviet  [Union],  you  know. 
MASON:   Oh,  no,  I  didn't  know  that. 

WADDY:   That's  where  he  was  born.   He  spoke  Russian  very 
fluently,  of  course,  because  that's  where  he  grew  up.   The 
invitation  for  Margaret  and  Charles  Burroughs  had  been  as  a 
couple.   Margaret,  being  an  artist  herself,  probably  made 
some  kind  of  contact  with  the  artists  in  the  Soviet  [Union] 
the  first  time,  you  know,  a  few  years  prior  to  this  trip 
that  I  was  on.   Because  I  think  this  was  about  the  third  or 
fourth  time  that  Margaret  had  been  over  there.   So  when  she 


83 


was  invited--  So  when  the  Soviet  Friendship  Houses  invited 
Margaret  to  bring  another  artist,  I  think  she  took  Charles 
White.   He  didn't  want  to  go  again,  and  he  suggested  my 
going,  taking  his  place.   He  said,  "I've  already  been 
there . " 

MASON:   He'd  already  had  the  experience. 
WADDY:   Yes,  he  thought  he'd  had  the  experience,  and  he 
didn't  want  to  go  again.   He  suggested  that  I  go,  and 
that's  how  I  got  the  invitation  from  Margaret.   That's  why 
she  wrote  it  on  a  card,  because  on  a  postal  card —  She  said 
when  she  got  back  to  the  States  she  had  asked  other  artists 
in  Chicago  to  go,  but  they  were  afraid  to  go  because  of 
politics. 

MASON:   Well,  it  was  a  little  while  after  the  McCarthy  era, 
but  still  during  the  Cold  War.   But  that  didn't  bother  you. 
WADDY:   Not  at  all.   I  didn't  think  anything  about  the--  I 
didn't  agree  with  the  McCarthy  era.   As  far  as  the  United 
States  being  critical  of  the  Soviet  Union,  you  know,  let 
whoever  is  without  sin  cast  the  first  stone.   The  United 
States  was  not  without  sin  herself,  in  my  opinion.   So  it 
wouldn't  have  bothered  me,  I  don't  think,  because,  as  I 
say,  you  have  to  be  clean  yourself  before  you  cast  the 
stone.   And  the  blacks  were  having  a  bad  time  in  the  States 
at  that  time.   You  know,  it  was  worse  than  it  is  now, 
anyway,  and  it's  bad  enough  now.   For  instance,  when  they 


84 


talk  about  drugs,  the  first  thing  they  talk  about  are  gangs 

of  blacks  in  the  streets  in  urban  areas.   But  it's  the 

whites,  though,  who  use  the  drugs.   They're  the  ones  who 

bring  it  in,  use  it,  and  have  enough  money  to  get  cleaned 

out,  and  enough  money  to  buy  it  in  the  first  place.   It 

doesn't  make  any  difference  who  they  are.   I  mean,  from 

medical  doctors  to  someone  receiving  state  aid  or  county 

aid,  some  kind  of  public  assistance  rather.   All  of  them 

are  white  that  use  it.   To  me,  you  know,  you  have  to  clean 

yourself,  clean  out  your  own  house  first,  before  you  can 

talk  about  the  other  guy's  house. 

MASON:   Yeah,  I  just  wondered  if  that  was  the  reason  why, 

since  the  show  was  jointly  sponsored  by  the  Soviet 

government  and  the  American  government- - 

WADDY:   It  wasn't  sponsored  by  the  American  government. 

The  American  government  didn't  have  anything  to  do  with  it. 

MASON:   Oh,  I  see.   I  thought  I  read  someplace  that  it 

was.   Maybe  it  was  in  the  article. 

WADDY:   No,  the  American  government  had  nothing  to  do  with 

it,  not  in  any  way. 

MASON:   Well,  that  makes  more  sense,  in  a  lot  of  ways.   So 

what  expectations  did  you  have?   Did  you  have  any 

expectations  of  the  trip  at  all? 

WADDY:   No.   Because,  as  I  said,  I  had  already  done  A^ 

Matter  of  Opinion.   Very  few  people  had  the  facts,  so  I  had 


85 


to  go  and  see  for  myself.   I  didn't  have  any  opinion  of  it 
or  any  expectations.   The  only  thing,  it  was  exciting  to 
get  a  passport,  because  I  had  never  gotten  a  passport  in  my 
life.   That's  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  ever  got  a 
passport,  because  I  hadn't  gone  overseas. 

MASON:   So  did  you  make  some  work  especially  for  the  trip? 
WADDY:   No.   As  I  say,  I  collect  work.   I  was  more 
interested  in  getting  as  many  artists  to  give  me  work  to 
take  with  me  over  there  for  the  exhibitions  in  the 
Friendship  Houses.   The  Friendship  Houses  in  the  Soviet 
Union  are  like  the  community  houses  here  in  the  States. 
It's  like  a  community  house — like  galleries.   They  would 
set  up  a  gallery,  you  know,  some  rooms  for  an  art 
exhibit.   But  a  friendship  house  itself,  the  building 
itself,  is  like  a  community  house.   They're  all  over  the 
Soviet  [Union].   That's  where  they  entertain  many  kinds  of 
arts  and  professions,  people  from  other  countries. 
MASON:   So  what  happened  when  you  got  to  the  Soviet  Union? 
WADDY:   We  were  assigned  to  interpreters,  because  Charles 
[Burroughs]  said  that  he  was  not  going  to  use  anything  but 
English.   He  said  to  our  group  that  he  wasn't  going  to  use 
anything  but  English,  although  he  spoke  and  understood 
Russian  fluently.   He  was  fluent  in  it. 

MASON:   Why  did  he  say  that?   Because  he  was  forgetting 
things? 


86 


WADDY:  No,  because  he  didn't  want  It  to  appear  that  he  was 
interpreting —  Because  it  was  safer.  Not  safer,  but  in  the 
sense  that  it  was  more  polite. 

MASON:   Did  they  have  receptions  set  up  for  you  to  meet 
people? 

WADDY:   They  took  us  to  travel  around.   I  have  a  written-- 
MASON:   Yeah,  I  saw  that.   Did  you  write  this  when  you — ? 
WADDY:   When  I  came  back. 

MASON:   Do  you  want  to  look  at  this  to  refresh  your--? 
WADDY:   Oh,  I  could  tell  you  this.   The  thing  about  the 
Soviet  [Union]  that  impressed  me  personally  was  the  fact 
that  everyplace  they  took  us  they  acted  just  the  same  as 
the  United  States  does  when  they're  trying  to  impress 
foreigners.   They  take  them  to  their  best  places,  the 
prettiest,  and  give  them  the  best  food.   They  acted  just  as 
we  do.   I  mean,  they  were  just  the  same.   [laughter]   You 
know,  when  you  want  to  impress  somebody,  you  put  your  best 
foot  forward,  as  they  say.   Well,  that's  what  they  did. 
MASON:   Did  you  have  a  chance  to  break  away  from  the  sort 
of  guided  program? 

WADDY:   No,  no,  because  they  had  evidently--  Our  time  was 
filled  up  with  entertainment,  you  know,  doing  what  they 
asked  us  to  do.   We  first  went  to  Moscow,  and  the  Red 
Square  was  very  popular  then.   It  was  very  impressive, 
too.   The  buildings  were  very  impressive.   They  were  well 


87 


built,  big  and  well  kept.   It  was  just  like  if  a  foreigner 
comes  to  the  United  States.   They  take  him  to  the  best 
places  in  Washington,  D.C.,  I  guess.   And  they  take  him 
then  to  New  York  at  night  and  take  them  to  the  best 
musicals.   Well,  they  did  the  same  thing.   So,  of  course, 
it  was  very  entertaining  and  very  pleasant,  only  it  was 
Russian  instead  of  American.   That  was  the  only 
difference.   I  noticed  that  their  airplanes,  at  least  the 
airplanes  that  we  were  on,  weren't  as  smooth  and  they 
didn't  operate  as  smoothly.   They  were  kind  of  noisy.   But 
instead  of  having  paper  napkins,  they  had  linen--not 
cotton,  but  linen,  a  very  fine  linen.   And  the  food  was 
delicious.   The  hotel  where  we  stayed,  the  rooms  were 
huge.   The  bathroom  was  as  big  as  this  room. 
MASON:   Wow,  that's  unusual  because,  you  know,  you  hear 
stories  about  a  family  of  five  living  in  one  room. 
WADDY:   Yes,  well,  that  was  true,  too.   I  saw  it.   It 
wasn't  shown  to  me.   It's  just  because  if  you  keep  your 
eyes  open  you  can  see  it.   But  it  wasn't  shown  to  you. 
What  was  shown  to  us,  the  same  thing,  as  I  say,  I  repeat, 
was  just  the  best,  just  as  we  do  when  foreigners  come  over 
here.   We  show  them  the  best.   We  don't  take  them  to  the 
ghetto  and  show  the  worst  parts  of  the  United  States. 
Well,  that's  exactly  what  they  did  to  us  when  we  went  to 
the  Soviet  [Union] .   They  showed  us  the  best  always,  which 


88 


was  very  pleasant.   Just  like  the  best  here  in  the  States 
is  very  pleasant. 

MASON:   Did  they  try  to  introduce  other  artists  to  you? 
WADDY:   No. 

MASON:   I  mean  Soviet  artists. 
WADDY:   No. 
MASON:   No?   Okay. 

WADDY:   But  once,  you  know,  in  one  of  those  cities--  I'd 
have  to  see  my  notes  to  remember  my  name  of  it.   It's  like 
Hollywood.   That's  where  they  make  their  movies. 
MASON:   Well,  you  said  you  went  to  Moscow,  Leningrad,  Alma- 
Ata,  and  Baku? 

WADDY:   Yeah,  Alma-Ata.   That's  the  place  that's  like 
Hollywood  here.   That's  where  they  make  their  movies.   It's 
on  a  river.   Anyway,  it's  in  the  notes.   We  had  to  take  a 
boat  to  get--  It's  an  island.   Is  it  an  island?   There's  an 
island  in  a  river.   It's  someplace  where  they  mine  coal, 
too. 

Well,  anyway,  on  this  boat  was  a  mess  boy,  I  guess  you 
would  call  him,  a  waiter,  a  young  fellow.   He  started 
talking  to  me.   One  of  the  things  I  noticed,  too,  when  I 
was  in  the  Soviet  [Union]  was  that  the  children  spoke  more 
than  one  language.   They  could  speak  English  as  well  as 
Russian.   They  probably  could  speak  another  foreign 
language,  too,  which  made  me  think  of  their  education  being 


89 


superior  to  that  of  the  United  States,  because  the  United 

States  doesn't  teach  its  children  more  than  one  language. 

That's  an  elective  here  in  the  States. 

MASON:   Yeah.   Well,  because  the  whole  world  has  to  learn 

English.   So,  I  mean,  that's  how,  you  know,  in  the  States, 

why  should  they  go  out  of  their  way  to  try  to  communicate 

with  any  other  peoples? 

WADDY:   But  it's  easier  when  you  can  speak  the  language  of 

a  country.   It's  easier  and  more  pleasant  for  you.   And 

just  because  they  speak  a  different  language  doesn't  mean 

that  they're  any  different  people.   They're  just  like 

you.   Hot  is  hot  and  cold  is  cold.   And  they  bleed  red 

blood  just  as  you  bleed  red  blood.   I  mean,  the  blood  is 

red,  period. 

MASON:   Did  you  meet  any  black  emigres,  any  blacks  that  had 

emigrated  to  the  Soviet  Union? 

WADDY:   No.   But  this  boat  that  we  were  on,  we  were  going 

to  some  oil,  that's  what  it  is.   They  had  coal  there. 

Anyway,  this  young  fellow  said  that  he  wanted  to  draw 
me.   I  asked  him  if  he  was  in  art  school,  and  he  said  no, 
because  his  mother  was  a  widow,  and  he  had  younger  brothers 
and  sisters,  and  he  had  to  work  in  order  to  help  support 
them.   Well,  at  one  of  these  dinners--  That's  exactly 
contrary  to  what  we  had  been  told,  you  know,  at  one 
dinner:   they  always  take  care  of  their  people,  especially 


90 


the  children.   So  he  drew  a  likeness  of  me,  and  it  was  very 
good.   He  had  one  or  two  of  them,  I  don't  remember  which. 
Anyway,  I  asked  him  for  one,  and  I  asked  him  to  sign  it  and 
put  down  his  name  and  his  address.   He  did. 

The  next  time  we  had  a  meeting  with  the  officials  who 
had  planned  this  whole  thing--the  main  officials--!  told 
them  about  it.   Now,  they  knew  that  I  only  spoke  English. 
But  when  I  gave  them  the  name  and  address  of  this  young 
fellow  and  showed  them  his  work,  they  were  a  little 
surprised.   I  was  so  glad.   I  knew  that  they  would  be 
surprised,  because,  as  I  said,  all  the  artists  were  younger 
than  I.   So  they  would  put  me  in  that  same  class.   They 
didn't  recognize  the  fact  that  I  was  older  and  I  would  know 
a  little  more,  you  know,  about  people.   And  I  didn't  think 
that  they  were  any  different  from  Americans.   Because  all 
people  are  more  or  less  the  same  when  you  put  them  in  the 
same  situation.   They  usually  react  about  the  same.   The 
difference  is  negligible.   I  knew  that  they  would  think, 
"Well,  she  could  talk  about  how  good  he  was  and  what  a 
wonderful  artist  he  was  and  how  he  should  have  been  kept  in 
school  and  thus  and  so,  but  she  doesn't  know  who  he  is." 
And  I  wouldn't.   I  couldn't  pronounce  his  name.   That's  why 
I  asked  him  to  write  it  down.   But  that  comes  from  being 
older.   Because  a  young  person  would  think  of  that,  too,  if 
they'd  had  that  experience.   But  that  kind  of  experience 


91 


comes  from  being  older.   You  have  to  live  it  in  order  to 
have  it.   And  they  were  surprised.   Margaret  Burroughs  said 
that  they  put  him  back  in  school,  and  he  has  become  an 
artist. 

MASON:   Really?   That's  terrific. 

WADDY:   A  very  good  one.   So  I  said,  "Well,  that  time  I 
tricked  them."   [laughter]   They  didn't  think  that  I  could, 
because  I  don't  think  they  had  that  high  opinion  of--  You 
know,  "She's  a  nice  person  and  all  like  that,  but  she's  not 
very  bright."   I  mean,  they  didn't  think  I  was  stupid,  but 
I  didn't  know  their  ways  and  I  couldn't--  Everybody's  way 
is  the  same.   That  just  comes  from  being  here.   You  know, 
certain  things  one  learns  just  because  you're  here  long 
enough.   That's  all. 

Well,  I  never  will  forget  that  incident.   Also,  as  I 
say,  the  hotel.   The  fixtures  in  the  bathroom  were 
marble.   The  towels  in  the  bathroom  were  linen.   Now,  you 
know  linen  is  very  absorbent,  and  it  is  as  absorbent  as 
terry  cloth  if  it's  linen  not  mixed  with  cotton.   Of 
course,  some  cotton  is  absorbent,  too,  but  not  as  a 
towel .   Linen  and  terry  are  the  most  absorbent  that  I  know 
of.   But  when  it  comes  to  running  hot  water  and  machines 
running,  the  United  States  was  superior  on  machines--the 
way  that  they  run  smoothly.   They're  just  better  on 
machines.   But  the  quality  of  the  life--  It's  nicer  to  use 


92 


linen  napkins  than  it  is  to  use  paper  napkins.   The  quality 

of  what  we  were  shown  was  better  in  the  Soviet  [Union] . 

However,  the  story  about  a  large  number  of  them  living  very 

poorly  is  true,  because  one  of  the  places  we  went  was  to 

some  very--  He  must  have  been  a  very  wealthy  man.   In  the 

back  there  were  some  little  kind  of  hovels,  and  people 

lived  there.   They  may  have  been  his  servants.   But  it  was 

still,  even  for  them--  The  way  their  servants  are  treated, 

[compared  to  how]  domestic  servants  are  treated  here  in  the 

States,  was  very,  very  poor.   You  know,  more  like  slaves 

than--  But  the  food  that  they  had  was  fabulous. 

MASON:   Probably  caviar  and  salmon. 

WADDY:   Yes.   Lots  of  caviar,  lots  of  caviar,  and  it  was 

delicious.   Because  the  caviar  was  like  anything  else 

there- -quality.   And  they  drank  a  lot! 

MASON:   Yeah,  they  have  that  reputation. 

WADDY:   Gosh! 

MASON:   Well,  it  keeps  you  warm,  I  guess.   [laughter] 

WADDY:   Well,  they  had  furs  there.   What's  that  other 

fur?   It's  a  short  hair,  like  mink?   I  can't  think  of  it 

now.   [sable] 

MASON:   Beaver? 

WADDY:   No,  it's  like  mink. 

MASON:   Seal? 

WADDY:   If  I  call  the  name  you  would--  People  who  don't 


93 


know  the  difference  between  mink  and  this  particular  fur 

call  it  mink.   But  it's  another  fur  from  a  small  animal 

like  a  mink.   Gee,  I  can't  think  of  the  name  of  it. 

MASON:   Well,  that's  okay. 

WADDY:   No,  but  we  were  treated  very  well.   We  went  to  see 

the  movies,  and  we  went  to  Leningrad.   And  the  old  stories 

about  Russia  with  the  horses  going  up  into  the  palaces-- 

The  way  the  steps  are  made  you  can  easily  imagine  horses 

going  into  palaces.   You  know,  the  stage  being  driven  into 

the  palace.   Leningrad  is  a  beautiful  city,  and  they  had 

beautiful  art  museums.   Oh,  the  museums  are  just  fabulous 

in  Leningrad.   Of  course,  the  Soviet  [Union]  is  very  much 

larger  than  the  United  States,  about  four  times  the  size  of 

the  States. 

MASON:   Was  there  any  art  you  were  particularly  impressed 

with?   Was  it  the  icons  that--? 

WADDY:   What  I  was  impressed  with  was  the  galleries  in 

Leningrad.   That  museum  has  a  name,  but  I  can't  remember 

that  name  either. 

MASON:   It's  probably  here  in  your  notes. 

WADDY:   Maybe.   I  don't  remember  a  lot  of  things  about  the 

trip  except  a  few  incidents  that  stood  out.   I  know  once 

when  we  went  to  see  a  movie,  one  of  the  guards,  one  of  the 

interpreters,  he  wept  so.   He  made  an  apology  for  it,  but 

so  many  people  had  died  there  in  the  Second  World  War. 


94 


That  was  the  first  time  I  knew  the  reason  why  the  Germans-- 
The  United  States  were  saved  by  the  Russians  coming  in  and 
fighting  the  Germans.   That's  what  saved  the  United  States 
from  being  wiped  out--the  Russians  did.   But  they  lost 
forty  million  young  people. 


95 


TAPE  NUMBER:   III,  SIDE  TWO 
JULY  27,  1991 

MASON:   Are  there  any  other  incidents  that  stand  out? 

WADDY:   There  was  an  African  in  the  hotel,  a  young  man  from 

some  country  in  Africa. 

MASON:   Was  he  a  student  or  just — ? 

WADDY:   He  was  a  student,  and  he  was  raving  about  the 

racial  prejudice  that  was  being  displayed  in  his  particular 

case. 

MASON:   In  the  Soviet  Union? 

WADDY:   Yes,  in  the  hotel  that  night.   He  was,  again,  way 

ahead  of  the  Americans.   You  see,  they  didn't  treat  our 

delegation  that  way  at  all.   Whatever  they  were  doing  to 

him,  they  didn't  treat  us  that  way  at  all. 

MASON:   What  was  his  complaint? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember,  but  he  was  making  a  whole  lot  of 

noise  about  it.   He  wasn't  talking  to  us.   He  was  talking 

to  the  offenders.   That  again  gives  you  another  slant, 

viewing  the  Western  civilization.  Western  countries, 

including  Europe,  especially  [the]  English. 

MASON:   I'm  not  sure  what  you  mean. 

WADDY:   By  the  Western  civilization? 

MASON:   No,  just  in  terms  of — 

WADDY:   Racial  prejudice? 

MASON:   Yeah.   The  point  you  were  making  about  the 

96 


differences  in  treatment. 

WADDY:   The  other  countries  are  European  countries- - 

Western  culture,  that's  what  I  should  have  said.   Because 

that  Western  culture  includes  Europe.   And  the  Soviet 

[Union]  is  in  the  continent  of  Europe,  the  European 

continent.   The  continent.   It's  not  a  European  country  as 

we--  Just  like  the  United  States  is  in  the  continent  of 

North  America.   It's  not  just  North  America,  because  Canada 

is  here  too. 

MASON:   Mexico,  don't  forget  that. 

WADDY:   Yes.   So  that  gave  me  another  view  of  the  sameness 

of  attitudes  of  different  peoples,  how  they  treat  each 

other. 

It  was  very  enlightening.   That  trip  was  enlightening 
in  that  sense.   The  actual--  Oh,  we  went  to  a  musical  that 
I  enjoyed  very  much.   It  was  a  takeoff  on  an  American 
musical.   Singing  in  the  Rain  I  think  was  the  name  of 
that.   The  reason  why  I  remember  that  is  because  the  rain 
was  plastic  strings.   And  the  light,  the  stage  lights, 
played  on  the  strings  a  certain  way  to  make  it  look  as 
though  it  were  raining.   But  it  was  nothing  but  strings. 
That's  what  it  was.   But  aside  from  that,  you  know,  I 
learned  about  people  and  attitudes  from  the  trip.   And  some 
of  my  opinions  were  confirmed. 
MASON:   Like  what? 


97 


WADDY:   Like  the  sameness  of  people.   They  had  rich  and 

poor  just  like  they  have  in  the  States,  rich  and  poor. 

Even  though  it  was  the  Soviet  [Union] ,  it  still  had  rich 

and  poor.   Well,  aside  from  that,  you  know-- 

MASON:   There  were  no  political  discussions  and  arguments? 

WADDY:   Oh,  no. 

MASON:   That's  probably  hard  to  do  through  a  translator. 

WADDY:   Especially  if  the  politics  were  different  than  that 

of  the  guest.   Underneath  the  bottom  layer  of  both,  the 

politics  were  the  same.   You  know,  it  had  different  names, 

but  it  was  still  the  same  old  thing.   Because,  again  and 

again,  it  is  let  he  who  is  without  sin  cast  the  first 

stone.   On  both  sides.   It's  the  same  old  thing. 

MASON:   You  were  telling  me  off  tape  that  you  never  saw  the 

show  hung  in  the  Soviet  Union. 

WADDY :   No . 

MASON:   So  you  didn't  get  a  chance  to  see  what  the  reaction 

of  the  Soviets  was  to  the  work. 

WADDY:   No,  I  don't  know.   I  think  that  it  probably  was 

more  a  political  gesture  than  anything  else.   It  may  have 

been.   I  don't  know  that,  but  I  just  suspect  that.   I  was 

glad  to  have  gone  to  the  Soviet  [Union] .   But  when  the  time 

came  to  go  home,  everybody  in  the  party  that  I  was  in,  the 

delegation  that  I  was  in,  was  employed,  and  so  they  had  to 

go.   The  Soviets  paid  our  round-trip  ticket  to  the  States 


98 


and  back.   We  flew  from  where  we  lived.   I  was  living  in 

L.A.,  so  my  plane  went  over  the  North  Pole  into  the  Soviet 

[Union] --went  up  north  first  and  then  over  into  the  Soviet 

[Union].   But  I  wasn't  employed,  so  I  didn't  have  to  go 

home.   So  I  went  to  Europe,  I  mean  the  other  part,  the 

western  part  of  Europe.   But  I  didn't  go  to  England.   I 

didn't  go  anyplace  except  Paris.   The  reason  why  I  went 

there  was  because  a  Parisian  couple  had  come  here.   I  had  a 

friend  who  knew  somebody  there,  and  they  had  an 

apartment.   They  came  to  the  States  and  let  me  live  in 

their  apartment.   That's  why  I  went  to  Paris. 

MASON:   How  long  did  you--? 

WADDY:   I  also  went  to--  Where  is  the  place  in  Italy  that 

has  the  grand  opera? 

MASON:   Milan? 

WADDY:   Florence.   A  friend  of  mine  was  studying  singing- - 

opera--in  Florence.   I  went  there  too,  and  I  stayed  with 

her  and  then  went  to  Paris.   And  then  from  Paris  I  came 

home. 

MASON:   About  how  long  was  the  trip  altogether,  including 

the  Soviet  Union?   Was  it  longer  than  a  month? 

WADDY:   It  was  about  a  month.   I  remember  about  a  month. 

The  whole  trip,  you  know,  including  the  Soviet  Union. 

MASON:   Did  you  try  to  look  at  the  arts  in  Italy  and 

Paris?   I  mean,  Florence  and  Paris?   Or  was  it  more--? 


99 


WADDY:   Milan.   I  didn't  go  to  any  other  place.   She  had  a 

friend  who  lived  in  Venice,  because  he  tried  to  persuade  tne 

to  come  to  Venice.   That's  where  the  canals  are.   I  told 

him  that  I  couldn't  go  because  I  didn't  have  any  money.   I 

had  my  fare  back  home,  but  I  didn't  have  any  spending  money 

to  travel  around  like  that.   He  said,  "Well,  you  don't  have 

to  have  any  money.   You're  going  to  stay  in  my  house  with 

my  grandfather."   You  know,  with  his  family.   But  going 

back--  Mama  [Willie  Coran  Gilliam]  always  said,  you  don't 

go  anyplace  unless  you  have  your  fare  back  home.   So  that's 

why  I  didn't  go  to  Venice,  because  I  didn't  have  any  fare 

back  to  Milan. 

MASON:   What  were  your  impressions  of  Milan? 

WADDY:   Oh,  it's  just  an  ordinary  city.   It  was  just  mostly 

to  see  my  friend  Helen  Bowman.   It  was  just  ordinary. 

MASON:   In  your  later  prints,  did  you  ever  incorporate  any 

of  the  things  that  you  saw  or  experienced? 

WADDY:   In  Milan? 

MASON:   Either  in  Milan  or  Paris  or  in  the  Soviet  Union,  in 

any  of  your  work? 

WADDY:   No.   It  seems  to  me  I  did  something  about  Red 

Square.   No,  I  didn't  either.   I  don't  remember  doing 

anything  in  particular. 

MASON:   So  your  work  didn't  really  change,  then,  that  much 

when  you  came  back. 


100 


WADDY :   No . 

MASON:   Let  me  pause  a  minute  here.   [tape  recorder  off] 

Okay,  we  wanted  to  talk  about  some  of  your  prints  that  you 

have  produced,  and  you  brought  out  a  number  of  slides  that 

you  have.   You  have  a  number  of  notebooks  of  slides,  but 

you  just-- 

WADDY:   You  don't  have  to  move  the  [projector]  wheel.   It 

will  move  by  itself. 

That's  a  portrait  of  my  mother  that  I  copied  from 
another  portrait,  another  picture  I  had  of  her.   But,  no, 
it's  this  one. 

MASON:   Yes,  this  photograph  here. 

WADDY:   I  was  trying  to  get  the  detail  of  the  dress,  but  I 
didn't  do  it  very  well.   The  dress  shows  a  lot  of  detail. 
MASON:   This  is  what  kind  of  print? 

WADDY:   It's  lino.   Yeah,  it's  lino.   All  of  my  prints  are 
linoleum  prints. 

I  think  that's  May  Day.   You  know,  up  north  May  Day  is 
very  important  because  it's  after  snow.   Winters  up  north, 
the  northern  part  of  the  hemisphere,  they  may  not  be  as 
severe  as  they  used  to  be.   But  spring  was  quite  a  day,  and 
May  Day  was  quite  a  holiday.   Now  it  was  summer. 
MASON:   So  here  you  used-- 

WADDY:   The  Norwegians  and  Swedish  people  and  people  from 
those  countries  celebrated  May  Day.   It  was  quite  a 


101 


celebration.   And  Minnesota  is  populated--it  was  when  I  was 

growing  up — with  Swedes  and  Norwegians.   Scandinavians,  you 

call  them.   They're  from  the  peninsula  of  Scandinavia. 

MASON:   In  some  places.  May  Day  is  almost  like  a  pagan 

holiday. 

WADDY:   Yes. 

MASON:   It's  a  celebration  of  fertility. 

WADDY :   Yes . 

MASON:   Here  you've  used  color.   Did  you  hand-color  that  or 

is  that  printed  color? 

WADDY:   It's  printed  color.   They  have  inks  in  color,  too, 

that  you  can  use  for  color.   It  was  printed  color. 

MASON:   Did  you  prefer  color? 

WADDY:   I  didn't  have  a  preference.   It  depends  on  what  I 

want  to  do. 

This  [slide]  was  in  the  islands,  in  Tobago.   Again, 
it's  Lyming  and  Listening. 

MASON:   You  explained  to  me  off  tape  what  lyming  means. 
WADDY:   Lyming  means  rapping,  gossiping.   The  children  are 
listening  because  there  weren't  very  many  telephones  in 
this  particular  town  in  Tobago  in  the  West  Indies.   So  news 
was  done  firsthand.   You  tell  it  to  somebody,  and  then 
somebody  else  would  tell  it  to  another  person.   That's  how 
news  got  around.   And  children  would  report,  too,  what  they 
heard.   That's  why  the  children  are  standing  around--the 


102 


teenagers.   They  aren't  grown,  because  the  grown  people 
wouldn't —  If  they  didn't  want  anything  to  be  known,  they 
wouldn't  let  the  children  in. 
MASON:   Yeah.   You  used  children  a  lot. 
WADDY:   I  like  children  very,  very  much.   I  like 
children.   I  think  children  are  very--  I  think  they're  the 
hope  of  mankind.   Because  man  might  not  always  be  on  this 
planet.   The  planet  probably  existed  without  man,  and  it 
could  do  so  again.   But  if  we  have  children  and  take  care 
of  them,  then  he'll  be  here  for  a  long,  long  time.   And 
then  another  thing  about  children,  they're  fresh.   They 
don't  have  preconceived  ideas  and  ideals.   They  see  things 
clearly  and  plainly  and  state  so.   They  talk  that  way,  too, 
if  they're  permitted  to  do  so. 

That  [slide]  is  an  abstract.   I  don't  have  any  name 
for  it  at  all. 

MASON:   This  appeared  in  [Samella  Lewis  and  Ruth  Waddy] 
Black  Artists  on  Art  as  untitled.   This  was  done  about 
1969,  it  says  in  the  book.   So  you  were  just  saying  you 
went  back  and  forth  from  abstract  to  representational  work. 
WADDY:   Yes. 

MASON:   It  just  depended  on  what  you  wanted  to  express. 
Then,  when  you  were  working,  did  you  have  in  mind  a 
particular  market  that  you  were  trying  to  reach?   Who  did 
you  feel  your  audience  was,  when  you  were  producing  your 


103 


prints? 

WADDY:   I  didn't  think  of  an  audience,  because  all  of  the 
artists  that  I  knew  didn't  sell  very  much.   That's  one  of 
the  reasons  why  they  were  enthusiastic  about  being 
published,  that  it  might  induce  sales.   That's  the  reason 
why  I  put  that  ad  in  the  paper--in  the  magazine,  rather--to 
induce  sales,  to  encourage  the  artists.   That's  why  I  like 
to  have  exhibits.   We  had  quite  a  few  exhibits  of  different 
kinds.   You  know,  Negro  History  Week,  or  somebody's 
birthday.   We'd  do  it  at  city  hall  or  at  a  community 
room.   And  in  colleges  we  had  quite  a  few  shows.   It  was  to 
encourage  sales.   But  ordinarily  the  sales  were  unusual  at 
that  time.   They  weren't  as  common  as  they  are  now.   Now 
artists  have  sales. 

MASON:   When  did  you  sell  your  first  print?   Do  you 

remember? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  some  of  the  earlier  sales  maybe 

from--?  Because  I  noticed  there  were  some  exhibitions  like 

at  the  [Westside]  Jewish  Community  Center,   Do  they  buy 

work  from  the  show?   Do  you  remember? 

WADDY:   No.   They  didn't  buy  any  work.   The  fact  that  black 

artists  were  exhibiting  was  news  all  by  itself. 

MASON:   I  don't  want  your  slide  to  burn  up. 

WADDY:   The  Fisherman. 


104 


MASON:   This  looks  like  another  one  from  the  islands. 
WADDY:   Yes.   Because  fish  was  very  important  to  people  who 
live  on  islands  or  near  water — not  urban  people.   Fish  is 
very  important  to  them  because  it's  one  of  their  staples 
for  food.   You  know,  the  fish  is  very  good,  too,  the  way 
they  prepare  it.   They  prepare  it  in  many  ways.   They 
usually  go  out  early  in  the  morning. 

These  are  The  Exhorters.   This  is  during  the  civil 
rights  days.   Everybody  was  telling  everybody  else  they 
should  do  this  and  they  should  do  that.   Blacks  should  do 
this  and  blacks  should  do  that.   They  should  be  thus  and 
so.   And  everyone--  Each  one  had  a  different  concept  of 
what  should  be  done.   That's  why  I  call  them  The  Exhorters. 
MASON:   Would  you  say  this  is  critical?   Were  you  being 
critical  of  any  of  these  exhorters?   Or  were  you  just 
stating  the  way  it  was? 

WADDY:   No,  I  was  just  stating  the  way  each  one  has  their 
own  concept  of  what  should  be  done  in  the  civil  rights 
period. 

This  [slide]  is  a  self-portrait.   I  used  to  wear  my 
hair  very  short,  and  I  would  now,  too,  except  that  I  don't 
want  to  pay  the  barber  $8  to  cut  my  hair  off. 
MASON:   What  were  you  trying  to  express  about  yourself  here 
in  the  self-portrait? 
WADDY:   Not  any  particular  thing.   I  put  the  squares  on  the 


105 


blouse  to  give  it,  you  know,  a  foundation. 

MASON:   Yeah,  it  makes  a  nice  balance  and  it  really  draws 

the  eye  into  the  image.   Is  this  the  only  self-portrait 

that  you've  done,  or  have  you  done  a  separate--? 

WADDY:   Only  one. 

^4AS0N:   That's  the  only  one.   When  did  you  do  this  one, 

approximately?   The  early  sixties?   I  mean,  the  late 

sixties? 

WADDY:   When  I  was  doing  prints,  so  it  must  have  been  in 

the  sixties,  I  guess.   I  don't  know.   It's  been  a  long 

time.   Whenever  I  worked  in  prints. 

It's  a  [slide  of  a]  little  boy,  but  I  don't  remember 
the  title.   I'd  have  to  see  the-- 

MASON:   Yeah,  it  looks  like  it's  written  on  the-- 
WADDY:   The  children  again,  playing  in  the  water  with  the 
black  and  white. 

MASON:   So  as  your  work  went  on,  did  you  experiment  with 
different  ways  of  cutting  the  linoleum  block? 
WADDY:   Yes.   I  tried  that,  because  you  have  different 
kinds  of  knives,  you  know,  that  fit  in  the  handle.   And  the 
knives  could  determine  the  outcome  of  the  picture.   If  you 
wanted  a  wavy  outline,  then  you  might  use  a  knife  that  has 
a  blade  that  fits  into  a--  I'll  show  you  what  the--  Do  you 
know  what  working  tools  look  like? 
MASON:   Yeah,  I've  seen  a  few  kinds. 


106 


WADDY:   Well,  you  know  how  it  fits,  it  screws  into  the 
handle.   I  might  want  to  use  a  wavy  knife.   But  I  didn't 
experiment  too  much,  because  linoleum  when  I  started  was 
too  hard  to  get.   They  were  beginning  to  use  synthetics 
instead  of  rubber.   Linoleum  was  originally  made  of 
rubber.   Then  they  started  with  the  synthetics  coming  in, 
you  know,  make  it  up  with  a  different  kind  of  composition, 
which  didn't  cut  as  well,  as  easily.   It  printed  all  right, 
but  it  didn't  work  as  well.   Linoleum,  rubber  linoleum,  the 
printing  linoleum,  was  hard  to  get.   I  think  it's  hard  to 
get  now.   I  have  a  few  pieces  uncut  that  I'm  saving  for  the 
time  that  I'll  start  doing  it  again  maybe  someday.   I  keep 
on  telling  myself  that  lie. 

MASON:   Are  you  making  sketches  now,  or  are  you  just--? 
WADDY:   Oh,  I  have  a  lot  of  things  that  I  want  to  do.   The 
sketches,  that's  the  easiest  part.   [laughter]   No  problem 
at  all  on  that.   But  getting  down  and  cutting  that 
linoleum,  that's  the  thing. 

^4AS0N:   Let  me  pause  here.   [tape  recorder  off]   Is  that 
how  you  usually  proceed  when  you  make  your  prints?   You 
make  a  sketch,  and  then  you  cut  out  the  linoleum? 
WADDY:   Yes,  I  make  a  sketch  and  use  carbon  paper  to  put  it 
on  the  linoleum  and  cut  it,  trace  the  sketch  onto  the 
linoleum  and  cut  it.   Because,  you  see,  the  linoleum  prints 
opposite,  so  the  sketch  has  to  be  opposite,  too. 


107 


^4AS0N:   Yeah,  the  reverse. 
WADDY:   "Reverse,"  that's  the  word. 

MASON:   I  can't  focus  that  [slide]  any  better.   Can  you  see 
It? 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  can.   It  seems  to  me  it  was  made  in  the 
islands.   I'd  have  to  see  the  title  to  remember  the —  It's 
about  children,  at  least.   The  reason  I  say  it  was  in  the 
islands  is  because  of  the  color,  because  the  islands  are 
very,  very  colorful. 

MASON:   This  [slide]  is  a  black  girl  in  a  pink  dress.   Does 
she  have  on  a  red  hat?   Is  that — ?  She  looks  like  she's — 
WADDY:   Looks  like  she's  walking  down  the  road,  but  I'm  not 
sure.   Let's  see  the  title. 
There's  The  Key  again. 
MASON:   This  was  also  reproduced  in  Black  Artists  on  Art. 
You  were  telling  me  off  tape  what  The  Key  was  about.   It 
contains-- 

WADDY:   The  key  to  freedom  of  the  countries  in  Africa  is 
fighting.   That's  the  key. 

MASON:   So  it's  specifically  about  Africa  and  not  about 
African-Americans . 

WADDY:   Yes,  it's  about  Africa  and  each  of  the  countries 
becoming  free.   It's  about  a  little  girl  who  had  some  kind 
of  message  to  phone,  but  they  don't  have  a  private  phone  in 
the  house.   And  she's  very  little,  because  she  has  to  turn 


108 


a  garbage  can  upside  down  in  order  to  reach  the  public 
phone.   It's  to  illustrate  the  children.   They  know  how  to 
manipulate  mechanical  things  like  a  touch-tone  telephone  or 
to  even  know  to  telephone,  to  make  a  call.   They're 
inventive,  creative,  ingenious.   She's  too  short  to  reach 
the  phone,  so  she  arranges,  you  know,  turns  the  garbage  can 
upside  down  or  something  that  makes  her  tall  enough  to  be 
able  to  reach  the  phone.   Because  she  feels  that  what  she 
has  to  say  is  an  emergency.   So  she's  capable  of  taking 
care  of  it.   Black  children  are  often  able  to  do  that. 
They're  very  creative  if  they  have  come  across  a  situation 
that  requires  some  ingenuity  or  creativity.   We  aren't  that 
way. 

That  [slide]  is  a  bouquet. 
MASON:   It  has  a  lot  of  different  colors  in  it.   Was  that  a 
difficult  print  to  make  because  of  all  the  different 
colors? 

WADDY:   And  because  it's  flowers.   I  was  just  treating  a 

bouquet  of  flowers  in  an  abstract  way,  sort  of.   I  like 

flowers  very  much.   I  was  just  thinking  of  treating  it  as 

an  abstract. 

MASON:   Do  you  feel  it  was  a  successful  print?   I  mean,  to 

me,  I  think  it's  very  pretty  the  way  the  flowers  kind  of 

explode  out  of,  I  guess,  the  paper  at  the  bottom. 

WADDY:   Yes,  it  is.   The  green  paper.   The  bottom  part  is 


109 


one  of  my  fingers,  holding  it.   Someone  gave  me  some 
flowers,  and  that's  what's  at  the  bottom — my  fingers 
holding  the  paper  of  the  bouquet. 
MASON:   Okay.   [That  slide  is]  sideways. 
WADDY:   That's  all  right.   Fetish  is  the  name  of  that 
one.   I  know  what  it  is  because  there  was  a  period  when- -I 
don't  know  whether  it  was  after  civil  rights  or  not--they 
were  saying  anything  that  was  African  to  the  African- 
Americans  was  quite  all  right.   They  were  taking  fetishes 
and  all  kinds  of  small  objects,  which  I  thought  was  very 
silly.   So  that's  another  abstract.   It's  just  a  fetish.   I 
made  it  red  because  red  is  in  the  old  saying,  you  know, 
about  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago-- "Red  is  the  color  that 
brought  you  over  here."   Red  is  the  color  that  brought 
Africans  over  on  the  slave  ships,  they  said.   It  was  an  old 
saying. 

MASON:   I  don't  understand  what  that  means. 
WADDY:   It  doesn't  mean  anything.   They  didn't  know  what-- 
They  didn't  know  how  they--  The  people  who  said  it 
evidently  didn't  know  how  Africans  were  taken  as  slaves. 
But  it  was  a  saying  while  I  was  a  child.   I  haven't  heard 
this  now  for  twenty- five  years,  I  think  fifty,  seventy 
years  ago.   They'd  say,  "Red  is  the  color  that  brought  you 
over  here."   When  the  colored  people--  They  called  them 
colored  then.   When  colored  people  liked  the  red  dress. 


110 


they'd  said,  "You  don't  want  red,  because  red  is  what 
brought  you  over  here."   Put  you  on  the  boat--  They  gave 
you  some  red  cloth.   We  don't  want  red.   But  red  is  a  good 
color,  and  it's  very  good  on  blacks.   It's  very  becoming  to 
them. 

^4AS0N:   Yeah,  and  what  were  you  saying  about  African- 
Americans  using  African  objects? 
WADDY :   Yeah . 

h4AS0N:   Were  you  talking  about  artists  or  just  the  whole 
trend  in  the  sixties? 

WADDY:   The  general  public.   Just  a  trend  of  the  sixties. 
^4AS0N:   So  you  felt  that  they  didn't  really  understand  what 
African  culture  was  about.   I'm  not  sure  I  understand. 
WADDY:   Oh,  they  were  making  a  lot  of  noise  about 
practically  nothing.   Except  if  they  were  so  African  or 
pro-African,  well,  why  didn't  they  put  their  money  where 
their  mouth  was,  such  as  join  some  societies  that  would 
free  some  African  countries  or  take  in  some  African 
students  or  something  like  that?   Something  for  real. 
That ' s  what  I  meant  when  I  said  that . 

MASON:   It  was  just,  you  know,  for  a  lot  of  people  it  was 
just — 

WADDY:   Just  like  a  fad. 

MASON:   Yeah.   But  for  some  people  it  was  a  really  serious 
thing,  you  know,  since  African  history  isn't  really  taught 


111 


in  schools.   So  it  was  a  period  of  self -discovery  and  kind 
of  a  discovery  of  one's  origins. 
WADDY :   Yes . 

MASON:   So  do  you  think  that  was  a  positive  thing? 
WADDY:   It's  okay  as  long  as  you  keep  it  in  the  has  been, 
used-to-be' s.   As  long  as  you  keep  it  there,  in  the  period 
where  it  belongs.   Don't  make  used-to-be's  be's,  because 
used-to-be 's  can't  be  made  into  be's.   Used-to-be's  don't 
release  one  from  the  responsibility  of  taking  care  of  the 
be's.   Used-to-be's  can't  fly;  only  bees  can  fly. 
h4AS0N:   Is  this  [slide]  also  children?   I  can't  tell. 
WADDY:   I  can't  tell.   It  looks  like  it.   I'd  have  to  see 
it.   Almost  is  the  name  of  that  one.   I  know  that  was  an 
island  in  Tobago,  because  that  little  boy  was  trying  to 
catch  a  butterfly.   They  have  the  imperial  butterflies  on 
the  island.   They're  called  the  imperials.   They're  very 
big  and  very  colorful  and  very  beautiful  butterflies.   They 
don't  grow  everyplace.   There  are  places  that  have 
butterflies  but  never  imperials.   They  only  grow  certain 
places  in  the  world.   He  almost  caught  it,  but  he  didn't 
get  it  quite.   He  was  a  little  boy.   And  that  diaper  was 
coming  off  too.   Sometimes  they  don't  wear  any  pants  at 
all. 

MASON:   Yeah,  you  show  that  in  Lyming,  where  the  boys  don't 
have  any  pants. 


112 


WADDY:   That's  Mother  and  Child.   That's  a  black  [Ink]  and 

white  [paper]  mother  and  child. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  what  led  you  to  do  this  particular 

[slide]? 

WADDY:   It's  The  Littlest  Clown,  I  think.   And  that  [slide] 

is  my  grandson  when  my  daughter  [Maryom  Ana  Al-Wadi] 

brought  him  one  time  down  to  L.A.   He  had  on  a  bib.   I 

didn't  like  it  at  all.   It  fit  him  all  right  and  all  like 

that,  but  I  just  didn't  like  the  bib.   So  I  just  did  a 

print  of  him  and  said  The  Littlest  Clown. 

MASON:   I  see.   The  perspective,  it  looks--  Did  you  do  this 

from  a  photograph? 

WADDY:   No,  he  was--  I  had  a  photograph  of  him. 

MASON:   Just  the  whole  perspective  from  which  this  is  done 

looks  like  a  photograph  to  me. 

That  [slide]  is  completely  upside  down. 
WADDY:   That's  The  White  Hat.   It  was  around  Easter,  and 
again  that  was  on  Tobago.   She  was  going  home  and  had  this 
white  hat  on.   She  was  very,  very  proud  of  it.   It  was  way 
too  big  for  her,  but  she  was  very  careful  of  it.   She  was  a 
little  girl. 

That's  Intermission.   That's  upside  down  too.   But  the 
round  figures  coming  out  are  people.   Intermission  is  like 
when  one  goes  to  a  theater.   I  was  likening  life  on  earth 
to  a  theater.   It  seemed  as  though  at  the  time  that  I  did 


113 


the  print  that  people  were  in  the  middle.   They  were 
confused  and  didn't  know  which  way  to  go.   Society  in 
general,  I'm  saying,  the  country  even.   They  didn't  know 
which  way  to  go,  so  they  were  in  the  middle.   And  the 
middle  was  like  a  tomb,  like  a  sort  of  death,  and  it  was  at 
intermission,  between  acts.   Like  between  using  a  lot  of 
synthetics  and  using  natural  things.   They  were  between  the 
two. 

It  [next  slide]  is  a  day  worker  sitting  in  the  hot 
day. 

I  think  this  one  is  called  The  Red  Umbrella. 
The  Red  Umbrella. 


MASON 
WADDY 
MASON 
WADDY 
MASON 
WADDY 


You  can  see  a  big  red  umbrella. 

And  that's  just  off  the  boat.  The  Giraffes. 

The  Giraffes.   What  does  that  mean? 

It  meant  that  we  were  going  to  talk  about 
immigration  again,  and  the  immigrants  were  trying  to,  you 
know,  settle.   There's  another  animal  in  there  besides 
giraffes.   There  are  two  giraffes,  and  what's  that  third 
animal?   I  don't  even  remember  what  it  is.   And  it  implied, 
I  was  hoping  that  it  implied,  that  there  were  Americans  who 
were  just  off  the  boat,  too--native  Americans,  black 
Americans,  yellow  Americans,  Chicanes.   They  were  just  like 
the  others,  just  off  the  boat. 

That  [slide] 's  an  abstract.   It's  upside  down,  too.   I 


114 


tracked  different  countries  of  Africa,  and  the  countries 
are  different.   One  should  call  an  African  a  Nigerian  or  a 
Ghana -- 


Ghanian. 

Ghanian? 

I  say  "Ghanian." 

Yeah,  Ghanian  is  right.   The  way  you're  saying  it 


WADDY 
MASON 
WADDY 


MASON; 

WADDY ; 

MASON; 

WADDY ; 

is  correct. 

MASON:   Can  we  pause  here  for  one  second? 
Sure.   [tape  recorder  off] 
You  were  telling  me  about  Africa. 
Yes.   I  think  Africans  should  be  called  by  the 
country,  as  you  do  the  rest  of  the  continents.   That's  why 

I  made  the  different  designs  for  each  country,  to  designate 

that  they  aren't  just  Africans.   The  same  thing  is  being 

done  with  Africans  as  is  being  done  with  African-Americans 

here  in  the  States.   All  of  them  lumped  together. 

MASON:   But  you  see  a  lot  of  regional  differences  between 

southerners  and  northerners. 

WADDY:   Yes.   They  aren't  just  Africans.   The  only  thing 

that  makes  them  just  Africans  is  the  colonialism,  and  it's 

still  being  practiced  even  in  the  so-called  "free" 

countries . 


115 


TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  SIDE  ONE 
JULY  28,  1991 

MASON:   Yesterday  we  were  looking  at  slides  of  your  work. 

I  was  wondering  if  you  could  talk  about  your  approach  to 

printmaking.   I  mean,  your  style  is  very  direct,  and  it 

also  contains  a  lot  of--  Well,  we  talked  about  children 

being  a  favorite  subject.   Why  would  you  say  that  you 

deliberately  pick  a  very  direct,  sort  of  highly  readable 

style? 

WADDY:   I  don't  know  how  to  do  any  other.   [laughter]   As  I 

had  said  earlier,  the  artists  thought  I  was  one  [of  them], 

and  I  had  to  learn  very  quickly  how  to  do  something  in 

art.   I  hadn't  had  any  formal  art  training,  to  speak  of. 

And  I  think  that  I'm  inclined  to  be  direct  in  other  fields, 

I  mean  in  speech  and  so  forth.   So  I  approached  art  that 

way  because  that's  the  way  I  am. 

MASON:   So  you  never  really  significantly  changed  your 

style. 

WADDY :   No . 

MASON:   Even  the  things  that  you're  doing--  You  mentioned 

that  you're  making  sketches.   They're  pretty  much  in  the 

same  style. 

WADDY:   Yes,  the  same  style.   I  see--  Many  of  my  sketches 

are  not  original.   Something  that  I  see  in  a  magazine  or  a 

newspaper  makes  me  think  of  something.   But  I  wouldn't  say 

116 


that  the  idea  was  original.  It's  prompted  by  something 
that  I've  seen.  The  idea  is  prompted  by  something  that 
I ' ve  seen . 

MASON:   What  about  subject  matter?   How  would  you  say  that--? 
WADDY:   I  like  social  issues  mostly,  rather  than  just 
beautiful  things  such  as  beautiful  landscapes  or  a 
beautiful  scene.   I  like  to  look  at  them,  but  I've  never 
felt  the  urge  to  paint  or  make  a  print  of  any.   Although  I 
have  seen  many  things  that  I  liked,  a  lot  of  scenery, 
natural  beauty  that  I  liked,  and  many  beautiful  flowers. 
But  I  wouldn't  attempt  to  make  a  print  of  beautiful 
flowers,  because  I  don't  feel  that  I  am  that--  I'm  not 
skillful  enough  to  do  it. 

MASON:   Well,  the  print  you  showed  me  yesterday  of  the 
bouquet  of  flowers,  that  was  very  beautiful.   With  your 
hand  holding  it  and-- 

WADDY:   Yes,  but,  again,  it  was--  You  know,  I  went  to  an 
abstract  style  because  I  couldn't  paint--draw--the  bouquet 
as  it  actually  looked.   Because  I'm  not  skillful  enough  to 
do  that. 

MASON:   Today,  how  often  do  you  take  out  your  sketchbook? 
WADDY:   Very  seldom.   I  haven't  done  it  for  years.   I  keep 
the  sketches  because  I  keep  promising  myself  that  I'm  going 
to,  but  I  never  actually  do  it.   That  is,  I  keep  the —  When 
I  say  sketches,  I  mean  the  pictures  or  what  gives  me  an 


117 


idea  to  do  the  sketch.   That's  what  I  keep. 

MASON:   Like  you  make  a  scrapbook  of  Images.   I  see. 

WADDY:   Yes.   I  have  a  scrapbook  of  pictures  that  I've 

taken  out  of  magazines  or  newspapers  that  give  me  ideas, 

but  I  haven ' t  gone  any  farther  than  that .   I  haven ' t  worked 

on  it- -done  any  printing- -for  many  years  now. 

MASON:   Is  that  how  you  always  worked?   I  know  the  print  of 

your  mother  [Willie  Coran  Gilliam]  you  were  saying  is  done 

from  this  photograph. 

WADDY:   Yes. 

MASON:   But,  for  example,  the  things  that  you  did  in 

Trinidad,  the  island  pictures,  they  were  from  life,  more  or 

less. 

WADDY:   Yes,  they  were.   Yes,  they  were  from  life.   The 

children  playing  in  the  water  was  from  life,  too.   I  don't 

make  many  sketches  from  life,  but  there  are  a  few  I  can't 

escape.   But  there  are  very  few.   I  saw  that  little  boy 

trying  to  catch  the  butterfly.   That  was  from  life.   But 

the  fisherman  was  something  that  I  didn't  see  then,  but  I 

knew  that  that's  what  they  were  going  to  do.   They  would 

say  to  me,  "We're  going  fishing,"  and  they  were  dressed  to 

go  fishing.   That's  what  inspired  that  print. 

MASON:   So  what  would  you  say  was  the  period  in  your  life 

when  you  were  doing  the  most  art?  Was  that,  say,  after  Art 

West  [Associated]  broke  up?   I  know  it's  sometimes  hard  for 


118 


people  to-- 

WADDY:   No,  it  was  during  the  period  that  I  was  with  Art 
West. 

MASON:  I  see.  Let's  pause.  [tape  recorder  off]  You  were 
saying  the  period  while  you  were  with  Art  West  was  the  most 
productive . 

WADDY:   Yes,  when  I  was  associating  with  artists.   That's 
when  I  did  the  most  work,  because  they  were  on  hand  for  me 
to  ask  questions  when  I  didn't  know  how  to  do  something. 
For  instance.  Van  Slater  tried  to  show  me  how  to  register 
color.   You  know,  after  you  print  it,  then  there  are 
certain  marks  that  you  make  on  the  plate.   Not  the  plate, 
but  on  the  linoleum.   You  know,  on  the  block,  so  that  you 
know  where  to  put  the  colors  and  where  to  place  them  on  the 
paper.   I  never  did  learn  how  to  do  it  as  well  as  he  does, 
or  did,  rather.   He  was  killed  in  an  automobile  accident 
when  he  was  a  young  man. 

MASON:   And  you  were  telling  me  off  tape  why  Art  West  broke 
up,  finally.   There  were  disagreements  within  the  group. 
WADDY:   Yes,  they  didn't  like  the  address  and  where  the-- 
They  found  a  place  that  they  liked  on  Buckingham  Road.   At 
that  time,  the  rents  were  very  high,  and  they  couldn't  get 
a  lease,  as  I  had  had  for  the  one  on  Jefferson  [Boulevard], 
and  so  eventually  they  ran  out  of  money.   That  was  while  I 
was  out  of  the  country. 


119 


MASON:   When  you  came  back,  did  you  become  involved  in  any 

of  the  other  art  groups  that  had  started  up,  like  the  Black 

Art  Council? 

WADDY:   No,  none. 

MASON:   Well,  not  necessarily  join,  but  did  you--? 

WADDY:   I  didn't  associate  with  any  particular  group.   Not 

any. 

MASON:   Were  you  involved  in  any  of  the  protests  at  the  Los 

Angeles  County  Museum  [of  Art]? 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  was  once  or  twice. 

MASON:   What  were  the  circumstances  around  that?   Because 

one  protest  was--  I'm  sorry,  go  ahead. 

WADDY:   The  only  one  was  to  exhibit  black  artists,  and 

there  was  just  a  march.   Other  than  that  I  wasn't  involved 

in  any  other  group. 

MASON:   Did  you  go  to  the--?  There  was  a  show  in  the  late 

sixties  of  African  art  that  I  understand  a  lot  of  people  in 

the  black  community  were  involved  in.   It  was  the  Tishman 

Collection.   They  had  a  lecture  series  also  around  that, 

with  people  like  Samella  Lewis  and  Charles  White.   Suzanne 

Jackson,  I  think,  also  spoke  at  the  museum.   Did  you  go  to 

that? 

WADDY:   No.   No,  I  didn't  go  to  any  event.   Although  I  know 

those  people- -Suzanne  Jackson.   Remember,  I  had  a  sale  of 

artwork,  and  some  of  my  work  was  included  at  Suzanne 


120 


Jackson's  house.   She  was  living  in  L.A.,  but  it's  been  so 

long.   It's  been  so  long.   It's  a  long  time  ago. 

MASON:   That  was  the  first  time  you  had  to--  You  wanted  to 

sell  off  some  of  the  work  that  you'd  collected  over  the 

years. 

WADDY:   Yes. 

MASON:   That  wasn't  in  her  gallery,  right?   Because  she  had 

a  gallery  for  a  while.  Gallery  32. 

WADDY:   No,  it  wasn't. 

MASON:   It  was  in  her  house.   I  see. 

WADDY:   It  was  at  her  house. 

MASON:   Did  you  ever  go  to  her  gallery  or,  say,  Alonzo 

Davis's  gallery,  the  Brockman  Gallery? 

WADDY:   Alonzo  Davis's,  that's  the  Brockman  Gallery.   Yes, 

I  liked  the  way  that  he  ran  his  gallery  very  much.   It  was 

very  professional.   The  way  he  conducted  his  art  business 

was  that  way.   His  brother  Dale  [Davis]  worked  with  him, 

too,  but  Alonzo  was  the  leader.   I  admired  the  way  that 

Alonzo,  as  I  said,  conducted  the  gallery.   He  had  special 

shows.   I  remember  he  had  a  series  of  motion  pictures 

once.   I've  forgotten  now  what  it  was,  but  I  went  to  each 

one  of  them. 

MASON:   They  were  films  by  black  artists  that  he  had.   When 

did  you  meet  Samella  Lewis? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember  when,  but  I  remember-- 


121 


MASON:   Or  how  or  whatever. 

WADDY:   I  was  thinking  about  that  this  morning,  because  it 
was  in  Los  Angeles  or  San  Francisco.   It  must  have  been  in 
San  Francisco  because  Evengeline  [J.  "Vangie"]  Montgomery 
introduced  us . 

MASON:   Oh,  wait  a  minute.   It  looks  like  there's  a--  [tape 
recorder  off] 

WADDY:   Because  when  I  met  Samella,  the  first  thing  she 
said  to  me  was,  "I  should  have  been  in  that  book."   She  was 
talking  about  [Theodore  V.  Roelof-Lanner]  Prints  by 
American  Negro  Artists. 

I  said  to  her,  "Well,  I  sent  you  a  card." 
She  said,  well,  she  didn't  know  anybody  by  the  name  of 
Roelof-Lanner.   Actually,  she  said,  "I  don't  know  any 
nigger  by  the  name  of  Roelof-Lanner."   [laughter]   I  told 
her  that  he  was  the  one  who  was  paying  for  the  cards. 
That's  the  reason  why  I  signed  his  name. 

So  we  started  arguing,  and  Evengeline  said,  "Ruth,  you 
know  all  the  artists,  and  Samella  has  all  the  scholarship," 
because  Evengeline  knew  me  before  I  was  an  artist.   She 
knew  that  I  hadn't  had  any  art  training.   But  I  knew  that 
the  artists —  She  said,  "Now  I  think  that  you  and  Samella 
should  do  a  book  together."   So  both  of  us  cooled  down  and 
said  okay,  and  that's  how  it  came  about. 
MASON:   This  is  [Samella  Lewis  and  Ruth  Waddy]  Black 


122 


Artists  on  Art. 

WADDY:   Yes.   The  first  volume  was  so  successful,  we  did  a 

second.   It  sold  so  well. 

MASON:   So  there  was  a  kind  of  a  sort  of  a  market  for  black 

art  then. 

WADDY:   Yes,  there  was.   Samella  was  teaching  at  Scripps 

College  in  Claremont.   After  the  book,  then  she  decided  to 

do  the  journal  of  black  international  art  [ International 

Review  of  African- American  Art] .   A  magazine. 

MASON:   Yeah,  it  changed  names.   I  think  it  was  called 

Black  Art  Quarterly  for  a  few  issues. 

WADDY:   Yes,  she  did.   Quarterly. 

MASON:   How  did  you  pick  the  artists  for  Black  Artists  on 

Art?   Did  you  just  send  postcards  to  everybody? 

WADDY:   No,  I  knew  them  by  that  time. 

MASON:   But,  I  mean,  did  you  just  pick  everybody  you  knew, 

or  did  you  make  a  specific  selection  of  people?   Because  it 

includes  quite  a  number  of  artists. 

WADDY:   I  picked  the  ones  who  I  thought  were  good  and  asked 

them  for  other  artists.   Although,  at  that  time,  I  knew 

many,  many  artists.   But  as  I've  said  many  times,  I  wasn't 

an  artist  and  I  wasn't  really  qualified  and  I  knew  it.   So 

I  always  asked  people  who  I  thought  were  qualified.   Alonzo 

Davis  was  qualified.   He  was  teaching  school,  as  well  as 

running  the  Brockman  Gallery.   Then  teaching  used  so  much 


123 


time,  he  stopped.   I  remember  him  telling  me  one  time  his 

mother  and  his  aunt  said  they  were  tired  of  supporting  him 

after  he  quit  school  to  work  at  the  Brockman  Gallery. 

[laughter]   It  wasn't  called  Brockman  in  the  very 

beginning.   It  was  called  something  else,  but  I  can't 

remember.   Brockman  is  his  mother's  or  aunt's  maiden  name. 

MASON:   Yeah,  because  the  Brockman  Gallery  had  a  sort  of 

core  group  of  artists  that  Alonzo  represented.   The  Black 

Artists  Association  or  something  like  that. 

WADDY:   Yes,  they  did,  and  all  of  them  were  professional 

artists. 

MASON:   And  some  of  those  members  overlapped  with  Art  West 

as  well. 

WADDY:   Art  West  had  professional  members  in  it,  nearly  all 

of  them  were.   I  was  the  only  one  who  wasn't. 

MASON:   Oh.   And  how  did  you  and  Samella  Lewis  work 

together? 

WADDY:   Fine. 

MASON:   Putting  together  the  book.   I  mean,  did  you  pool 

all  your  artists  together  and  then  go  through  them 

together,  or  did  she  put  in  some  and  then  you  put  in  some? 

WADDY:   No.   I  put--  Because  she  was  working,  you  know, 

teaching  school  at  Scripps  College.   She  was  teaching  art 

there  at  Scripps  College.   So  she  left  the  artists  up  to 

me.   She,  being  a  professional  artist,  would  view  my 


124 


selections  and  say  yes  and  no  that  they  were  good  enough. 

But  I  don't  remember  her  selecting  any  artists  to  go  in. 

MASON:   Oh,  I  see.   So  she  would  only  select  some  specific 

pieces  to  go  in. 

WADDY:   That's  what  she  would  do.   But  not  too  much  of 

that,  either,  because  she  wouldn't  even  have  the  time.   She 

had  just  this--  As  Vangie  said,  she  had  the  scholarship, 

she  knew  how  to  put  it  together. 

MASON:   When  you  read  the  introduction  not  only  to  Black 

Artists  on  Art  but  also  her  survey  of  black  art.  Art: 

African-American-- 

WADDY:   She  did  another  book  by  herself.   She's  done  two 

now. 

MASON:   Yeah.   It's  gone  to  a  second  edition  now.   That's 

used  as  a  textbook  in  a  lot  of,  well,  in  the  few  places 

that  teach  African-American  art,  anyway.   I  was  going  to 

say  that  she  seemed  to  have  really  strong  opinions  about 

art  that  she  felt  was  important.   That  really  comes 

through,  it  seems,  in  the  selection  of  some  of  the 

pieces.   They  seem  to  be  more,  well,  a  lot  of  social 

commentary.   I  don't  know  if  I  should  say  the  word 

"militant"  or  whatever. 

WADDY:   Yes,  I  was  that  way,  very  much  so,  but  so  was  she 

when  I  first  met  her.   Because  Scripps  College  is  not  a 

place  where  a  militant  would  be. 


125 


MASON:   I  can't  imagine. 

WADDY:   But  I  was,  because  I  wasn't  working,  so,  of  course, 
I  could  afford  to  be.   I  mean,  if  i  were  a  professional,  as 
many  of  the  people  whom  I  knew  were,  well,  maybe  I  would 
have  been  that  way,  too.   But  since  I  was  on  the  other  end, 
you  know,  one  of  the  have-nots,  I  was  in  the  have-not  group 
of  people.   Art  Seidenbaum  said  I  was  in  that  group,  but  I 
didn't  associate —  I  associated  with  people  who  had  more 
than  I  did  and  had  better  jobs  and  a  better  education, 
better  everything.   I  just  seemed  to  gravitate  towards 
those  people  and  that  kind  of  people.   But  I  didn't  lose  my 
anger  and  militancy,  though,  because  I  did.   I  tried  to 
make  them  that  way  too  or  tell  them  why  I  was  that  way, 
point  things  out,  you  know,  situations  out  to  them  to 
illustrate  it.   I've  been  that  way  all  my  life,  I  guess. 
MASON:   In  what  other  ways  do  you  express  that  kind  of 
militancy?   You  talked  about  being  involved  in  the  march 
against  the  Los  Angeles  County  Museum.   Were  there  any 
other  marches  or  protests  that  you  were  involved  in? 
WADDY:   Of  marches  and  protests,  I  have  been  involved  in 
very  few,  maybe  two  at  most.   That  kind  of  militancy 
doesn't  appeal  to  me  because  it  doesn't  resolve  anything. 
It  just  says,  "I  don't  like  it,"  but  it  doesn't  resolve 
it.   Now,  if  it  were  the  kind  of  militancy  that  we  aren't 
going  to  trade  there  or  they  aren't  going  to  get  our 


126 


business,  now  that  kind  I'm  interested  in.   But  just  to 

march  around,  that  leaves  me  cold.   I  want  some  results. 

That's  why  I  liked  Chicago,  because  in  Chicago  the  blacks 

would  get  together  and  they  got  results.   They  did 

something  that  resolved  it.   And  that's  what  I  was  hoping. 

MASON:   Did  that  ever  happen  in  Los  Angeles? 

WADDY:   Not  to  my  knowledge. 

MASON:   Well,  we  finally  got  the  California  Afro-American 

Museum  established. 

WADDY:   Yes,  and  it's  state-funded.   It  receives  some  of 

its  funds  from  the  state,  that's  true.   That's  one.   That's 

a  result.   I  agree  with  you  on  that.   That's  the  kind  of 

result  that  I'm  talking  about.   There  were  others,  too,  in 

Los  Angeles.   Art  West  had  a  show  in  city  hall,  downtown  in 

L.A.,  and  it  was  written  up  in  the  Los  Angeles  Times.   The 

Los  Angeles  Tribune.   The  Times  or  the  Tribune,  which  is 

their  leading  paper? 

MASON:   Well,  the  Times  now,  but  maybe  then  it  was  the 

Tribune. 

WADDY:   It  was  the  same  paper.   I  think  the  Times.   Because 

it  was  the  first  time  that  there  had  been  an  exhibit.   It 

was  either  Martin  Luther  King  [Jr.]'s  birthday  or  during 

Negro  History  Week,  because  there  was  one  painting  that  was 

causing  controversy  because  of  its  militant  stance. 

MASON:   What  painting? 


127 


WADDY:   And  Johnny  Otis  used  to  be  a-- 

MASON:   Oh,  really? 

WADDY :   Yes . 

MASON:   He  used  to  be — 

WADDY:   A  member  of  Art  West. 

MASON:   Oh,  really?   [laughter]   That's  right,  I  think  I 

heard  him  say  on  the  radio  once  that--  He'd  sort  of 

denigrate--  I've  never  seen  any  of  his  work,  but  he  said, 

"Yeah,  I  try  to  paint  or  draw  sometimes." 

WADDY :   Yes . 

MASON:   Oh,  I  see.   Whose  painting  was  it  that  caused--? 

WADDY:   I  don't  remember.   But  that's  why  it  got  in  the 

Times .   That ' s  how  it  got  in  the  Times . 

MASON:   So  this  must  have  been  in  the  early- - 

WADDY:   I  wish  I  had  the  minutes  of  Art  West,  because  it 

would  have  had  something  in  there  about  the  date  and  the 

artists  who  participated. 

MASON:   Does  anybody  have  the  minutes  or  have  they  just 

disappeared? 

WADDY:   I  don't  know  who  has  them. 

MASON:   But  you  think  somebody  might  have  them?   There's 

always  somebody  who  collects  those  things. 

WADDY:   I  was  trying  to  think  of  the  members,  which  one 

would  be  the  secretary. 

MASON:   Let's  see,  was  Raymond  Lark? 


128 


WADDY:   Yes,  Raymond  Lark  was.   Lark's  a  good  artist.   And 

he  heard  about--  Art  West  was  known  not  only  in  San 

Francisco  but  other  cities,  too.   Because  some  artists  from 

other  cities  said  that  they'd  heard  of  Art  West.   Or  I 

think  that  the  advertisement--  I  don't  know  how  they  heard 

of  it,  though. 

MASON:   And  you  were  also  saying  yesterday  that--  I  wanted 

to  ask  you  about  artists  like  P'lla  Mills  and  Alice  Gafford 

and  Beulah  Woodard,  who  were  actually  active  in  Los  Angeles 

in  the  1950s.   You  were  saying  that  Alice  Gafford  was  a 

part  of-- 

WADDY:   Art  West.   She  was  a  member  also. 

MASON:   So  it  seems  like  there  was  a  large  range  of-- 

WADDY:   In  ages  and  talent,  especially  talent,  because  I 

was  in  there!   [laughter] 

MASON:   And  you  said  that  Miriam  Matthews  was  also  a 

supporter  of  Art  West. 

WADDY:   Oh,  yes,  she  was  a  supporter  of  art. 

MASON:   Did  their — ? 

WADDY:   Art  West  was  definitely  an  influence  on  public 

recognition  of  black  artists.   Two  or  three  people  became 

collectors  during  that  period  when  we  had  shows.   And,  of 

course,  we  always  invited  this  particular--  I  can't 

remember  who  they  are.   But  I  know  that  two  of  them  were 

doctors.   Miriam  Matthews  was  a  supporter.   She  bought  art, 


129 


too. 

MASON:   Yeah,  well,  Leon  Banks  is  usually  a  name-- 

WADDY:   Banks,  that's  the  man.   Yeah.   That's  one  of 

them.   Isn't  he  a  doctor? 

MASON:   Yeah. 

WADDY:   Yes.   I  think  that  black  art- -artwork  by  black 

artists- -has  become  stronger  as  the  years  have  gone  by. 

MASON:   How  do  you  mean  "stronger"? 

WADDY:   That  people  buy  it. 

MASON:   I  see.   That  the  market  has  opened  up. 

WADDY:   Yes,  yes.   Because  the  resale  of  their  work  is 

very,  very  high. 

MASON:   But  not  compared  with  white  artists,  though. 

WADDY:   Not,  no,  but  almost.   For  instance,  it's  not  quite 

as  high  but  almost.   It  is  not  in  the  millions  yet,  but 

it's  in  the  hundreds  of  thousands.   Some  artists  get  that 

much.   For  instance,  Romare  Bearden  did. 

MASON:   Yeah,  but,  I  mean,  his  work  isn't  as  costly  as, 

say,  Jasper  Johns's. 

WADDY:   It's  almost  so. 

MASON:   Do  you  think  that  that's  a  good  thing- -to  have  a 

larger  market  for  black  art?   Or  do  you  think  that  because 

there  may  be  a  large  market  for  a  certain  kind  of  art,  then 

that  would  maybe  adversely  influence  the  kind  of  art  being 

produced,  because  people  might  be  more  inclined  to  work 


130 


with  the  mind  that,  "Well,  I  have  to  take  the  edge  off  my 

art  because  I  want  it  to  sell,  I  have  to  make  it  less 

militant"? 

WADDY:   No,  not  any  more  than  the  artists  did  before  there 

was  a  market.   Some  people  are  just  very  sensitive  to  the 

market,  and  some  people  are  not.   The  market  comes  to  them, 

rather  than  them  going  to  the  market. 

MASON:   Yeah.   David  Hammons  is  probably  an  example  of-- 

WADDY:   Now,  hold  on.   I  don't  call  $250,000  a  poor 

example. 

h4AS0N:   No,  no,  I  was  just  saying  he  seems  to  be  somebody 

who  has  always  followed  his  own  instincts. 

WADDY:   And  he  will,  because  there  were  some  members  in  Art 

West  who  were  teachers,  for  instance,  like  Alonzo  Davis. 

He  was  one  of  the  early  members.   When  he  started  the 

Brockman  Gallery,  then  he  resigned  from  Art  West  and 

started  his  own  group.   But  people  like  that  who  are 

teaching  school  or  who  had  some  kind  of  employment  and  did 

artwork,  too,  David  Hammons  at  one  time  didn't  think  very 

much  of  them.   He  liked  Roland  Welton,  for  instance,  very 

much  better,  because  Roland  Welton  was  an  artist  and  that's 

all  he  did. 

MASON:   I  see.   So  if  you  can't  make  a  living  from  your 

art--  I  see,  he  has  very  high  standards. 

WADDY:   Yes.   I  remember  him  expressing  that  years  and 


131 


years  and  years  ago,  and  I  don't  think  he's  changed  that 

much.   His  art  is  salable,  but  it's  because  the  public  has 

become  enlightened.   He  hasn't  bowed  to  the  public.   And  I 

don't  think  now  it's  likely  to  change  at  all,  because 

you've  got  to  plead  your  own--  Very,  very  few  people  learn 

that. 

MASON:   Did  you  see  a  show  at  the  museum,  I  think  it  was  in 

the  seventies,  with  Charles  White  and  Timothy  Washington? 

You  didn't? 

WADDY:   Timothy  Washington  is  another  good  artist. 

f4AS0N:   How  did  you  or  when  did  you  or  what  were  the 

circumstances  around  your  friendship  with  Noah  Purifoy? 

WADDY:   He  was  a  coworker  first.   That's  how  I  got  to  know 

him. 

MASON:   You  were  both--  That  was  the  job  that  you  had 

screening  patients. 

WADDY:   Yeah,  we  were  working  in  the  same--  All  of  the 

admissions  workers  were  in  one  huge  room.   Each  one  had  a 

desk,  and  the  client  would  come  to  the  desk.   That's  how  I 

became  acquainted  with  him. 

MASON:   Both  of  you  being  interested  in  philosophy,  you 

must  have  had  a  lot  to  talk  about. 

WADDY:   He  was  a  do-it-yourselfer.   He  fixed  his  house  on 

La  Brea  [Avenue]  when  he  lived  on  La  Brea.   I  think  it  was 

a  garage  or  it  was  some  little  house  in  the  back  that  he 


132 


got  for  very  cheap  rent.   He  fixed  it  up  and  made  it  very 
attractive.   And  there  was  another  young  man  by  the  name  of 
John  Wilson  who  lived  with  him.   John  Wilson  is  an 
architect  or  he's  in  the  art —  He  was  in  the  art  field  but 
not  the  same,  not  fine  art.   He  and  Noah  worked  together, 
and  they  introduced  music  when  they  had  an  exhibit  at  the 
Home  Show  in  Los  Angeles.   It  was  the  first  time  that  music 
had  been  used,  the  very  first  time.   It  was  written  up  in 
the  Times,  too. 

^4AS0N:   You  mean  it  was  used  as  part  of  the  exhibition? 
How  was  music--? 

WADDY:   It  was  used--  You  know  how  when  they  are--  It 
wasn't  an  art  exhibition,  it  was  an  exhibition  of  what  they 
had  to  offer.   You  know,  like  it  was  business.   It  was  a 
business.   The  Home  Show  is  a  business  show.   Once  a  year 
or  twice  a  year  L.A.  used  to  have  the  Home  Show  downtown  in 
that  civic  building.   Have  you  heard  of  the  Home  Show? 
MASON :   No . 

WADDY:   They  used  to  have  one  where  you  could  buy  home 
appliances  and  there  were  decorative  gardens.   It  was  like 
a  convention,  but  it  was  called  the  Home  Show.   It  went  on 
for  a  few  days  in  the  civic  center.   The  reason  why  it  was 
written  up  in  the  Times  is  because  the  music  attracted 
crowds  to  their  booth. 
^4AS0N:   Was  it  jazz?   What  kind  of  music? 


133 


WADDY:   I  don't  remember.   I  don't  know.   I  had  the 
newspaper  article  for  a  long  time.   I  saved  it,  but  I  don't 
have  it  now.   I  don't  know  what  I  did  with  it.   That  was 
the  first  time  that  it  had  been  used  at  booths  at 
conventions,  and  after  that  it  was  used  a  lot.   But  they 
were  the  first  ones:   John  Wilson  and  Noah  Purifoy.   John 
Wilson  lived  on  Windsor  Boulevard  in  L.A.   It  was  between 
Wilshire  [Boulevard],  close  to  Wilshire,  between  Wilshire 
and  Olympic  [Boulevard].   He  died.   I  can't  understand  all 
these  young  people  dying. 

^4AS0N:   Do  you  own  any  of  Noah  Purifoy 's  work?   Because  we 
were  talking  yesterday  about  the  piece  by-- 

WADDY:   I  have  a  poster  of  Sir  Watts.   I  think  I  still  have 
it.   I  think  it's  under  the  bed  with  all  this  stuff.   Sir 
Watts  was  a  wonderful  piece.   It's  a  beautiful  piece.   It 
was  from  the  riots,  after  the  riots.   He  had  found  a  mesh 
lady's  bag,  evening  bag,  and  that  was  one  thing  that  was  on 
the--  It  was  the  statue  of  a  man  from  the  waist  up.   It  was 
quite  a  masterpiece  made  of  junk  material,  and  he  made  some 
posters  of  it.   I  got  two  of  them.   I  framed  one.   This 
[indicates]  is  something  else.   This  other,  this  large  one 
with  the  most  wood,  it's  the  farthest  to  the  right. 
^4AS0N:   Those  are  two  pieces  of  melted  neon  from  "66  Signs 
of  Neon." 
WADDY:   Well,  the  one  with  the  biggest,  most  wood?   That's 


134 


Noah's.   And  this  one  is  Judson  Powell's. 

MASON:   How  long  have  you  had  those  two?   I  mean,  did  you 

get  them  right  after  they  had  toured? 

WADDY:   After  I  started  going  to  Noah's  house  often.   I 

went  to  Noah's  house  lots  of  times,  and  he'd  come  to 

mine.   Noah  did  this  table.   I  got  the  wood,  but  Noah  made 

the  frame.   I  wanted  it  made  out  of  two-by-four,  and  he  did 

that  when  I  was  in  L.A.   He  did  that  for  me. 

I  said,  "How  much  will  it  be?" 

He  said,  "I'll  let  you  know  later  on,"  or  something 
like  that. 

I  said,  "I'd  rather  pay  now." 
MASON:   Yeah,  before  inflation.   [laughter] 
WADDY:   Yes.   But  it  was  some  kind  of  favor  of  his.   He 
didn't  charge  me  for  it.   This  was  my  printing  table. 
That's  when  I  was  printing  then. 
MASON:   Yeah,  it's  nice  and  big  and  sturdy. 

WADDY:   Yeah,  it's  heavy.   That's  that  weight--  I  used  that 
piece  for  a  weight  for  printing.   You  know,  the  one  that 
holds  the  door  open? 
MASON:   Yeah. 

WADDY:   That's  what  that  iron  is,  too,  that  I  have  down 
here.   Because  it  has  to  keep--  If  you  register  or  lift  it 
from  the  print,  the  print  has  to  stay  on  the  block  in  the 
same  spot  or  else  it  will  ruin  the  prints.   So  it  has  to  be 


135 


heavy. 

MASON:   Did  you  ever  try  assemblage  yourself?   Did  you  ever 
experiment  with  assemblage?   It  seems  that  just  because, 
you  know,  you're  around  it  with  Noah  Purifoy,  I  was  just 
wondering  if  it  ever  attracted  you. 
WADDY:   Assemblage? 

^4AS0N:   Yeah,  like  Sir  Watts,  using  junk,  junk  sculpture. 
WADDY:   No,  no,  no.   I  was  a  do-it-yourselfer,  but  it  had 
to  be  something  that  I  wanted  to  use  and  I  couldn't  afford 
to  buy.   That's  the  kind  of  do-it-yourselfer  I  was.   But 
Noah  was  an  artistic —  He  was  an  artist.   He  fixed  the 
yard,  and  he  made  a  table  out  of  little  pieces  of  hard 
wood.   When  I  say  little  pieces--  A  table  top. 


136 


TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  SIDE  TWO 
JULY  28,  1991 

WADDY:   When  I  say  little  pieces,  I  mean  about  two  inches, 
two  or  three  inches  long,  and  about  one  inch  wide.   He 
fitted  them  together  to  make  a  table  top.   He  did  things 
like  that.   Well,  see,  I  never  did  anything  like  that. 
MASON:   When  did  you  begin  to--?  Did  you  buy  many  works 
that  weren't  prints  or  start  to  collect  art  outside  of 
prints  at  any  time? 

WADDY:   Oh,  yes.   But  I  actually  didn't  buy  hardly  any  art 
at  all.   When  I  got  the  prints  for  American  Negro  Artists, 
the  artists  gave  me  pieces.   I  would  just  keep  them  until  I 
could  frame  them  and  hang  them.   But  I  don't  have  them  now 
because  I  couldn't  hang  them,  you  know,  where  I  live  [in 
senior  citizen  housing] .   Except  on  Western  Avenue,  I  think 
I  could  hang  anything  I  wanted  to  there.   And  also,  I 
didn't  want  to  put  them  in  storage,  because  I  was  afraid  I 
might  lose  them.   Because  many  years  ago,  when  I  was  about 
in  my,  oh,  I'd  say  between  fifty  and  sixty  years  ago, 
probably  longer  than  that--oh,  I  guess  it's  about  that 
long--I  lost  some  things  in  storage,  because  I  didn't  pay 
the  storage  bill.   I  mean,  when  I  lost  it,  it  was  because 
the  storage  bill  wasn't  paid.   I  didn't  have  enough 
money . 
MASON:   Do  you  think  that  the  art  groups  that  we've  been 

137 


talking  about  helped  to  or  tried  to  formulate  what  might  be 
called  a  black  aesthetics,  which  is  kind  of  a  nebulous 
term,  but  some  people  might  define  it  as  a  particular 
approach  to  art  that  might  be  recognizable  as  African- 
American?   Do  you  think  that  anything  like  that  could  exist 
or  did  exist  or  should  exist? 

WADDY:   No,  I  don't  think  it  did,  because  African-Americans 
are  just  like  other  Americans,  generally  speaking.   Or, 
specifically  speaking,  each  person  has  a  different  approach 
to  everything.   You  know,  each  person  is  distinctive,  we'll 
say--  I'll  say.   And,  no,  I  don't  think  there  should  be, 
because  I  don't  think  there  is  a  specific  need  for  it.   I 
think  that  gradually  black  American  artists  will  be 
accepted  as  black  Americans  are  accepted  in  other  fields. 
MASON:   And  that's  just  because  people  will  know  more  about 
the  artists  the  more  exposure  they  get? 
WADDY:   Yes,  and  their  art  is  shown  in  black  American 
homes.   Black  American  homes  don't  show--  I  mean,  white 
American  artists. 

h4AS0N:   You  say  black  homes  don't  show  white  artists? 
WADDY:   No.   But  black  artists  appeal  to  those  people. 
Otherwise  Alitash  Kabede  couldn't  sell.   She's  an  art 
dealer  in  Los  Angeles.   You  couldn't  sell  if  they  didn't 
want  to  buy  black  American  artists'  work.   And  she  makes  a 
living  at  it,  which  means  they  buy  quite  a  bit.   They  pay 


138 


whatever  the  going  price  is--the  market  price. 

MASON:   Yeah.   Well,  some  whites  will  buy  so-called  "blue 

chip"  artists  like  Romare  Bearden  or  Charles  White.   So, 

you  know,  the  market  might  be  more  mixed. 

WADDY:   Oh,  yes,  the  market  is  very  much  mixed,  because  she 

sells  more  than  Bearden  and  White. 

MASON:   When  scholars  talk  about  a  black  aesthetics, 

sometimes  they  use--  It  seems  that  they  are  trying  to 

refine  it  lately  to  talk  about  a  kind  of  blues  aesthetics 

and  trying  to  make  a  parallel  really  between  blues  music, 

which  is  a  distinctive  kind  of  music,  and  sort  of  saying, 

well,  if  we  look  at  black  visual  arts,  then  there  must  be 

some  kind  of  parallel  that  might  have  some  roots  in 

southern  folk  culture  and  things  like  that.   But  you  don't 

see  anything  like  that? 

WADDY:   No.   Now,  artists'  work  to  me  is  just  as  varied  as 

any  other  aspect  of  American  art.   What  scholars  are  saying 

that?   Are  they  artists? 

MASON:   The  blues  aesthetics?   Or  the  black  aesthetics? 

WADDY:   Either  one.   Are  any  artists  saying  that? 

MASON:   Well,  David  [C]  Driskell  talks  about  a  black 

aesthetics,  and  he's  a  scholar,  or  I  should  say  he's  a 

scholar/artist.   But  usually  it's  really  intuitive. 

WADDY:   David  Driskell  is  an  artist? 

MASON:   Yeah. 


139 


WADDY:   I  have  never  seen  any  of  his  work.   I  know  he's 

considered  a  scholar. 

MASON:   Well,  yeah.   He  does  oil  painting,  but  usually  it's 

really  harder  to  define  in  the  visual  arts.   There's  a 

professor  now.  Rick  [Richard  J.]  Powell.   He's  a  young 

professor,  graduated  from  Yale  [University] .   He  talks 

about  a  blues  aesthetics  in  art,  and  he's  also  a 

printmaker. 

WADDY:   He  came  from  the  wrong  school. 

MASON:   Oh,  what's  wrong  with  Yale?   [laughter] 

WADDY:   It's  Caucasian.   That's  what's  wrong  with  it.   So 

he's  been  trained  rather  than  thinks.   Those  are  training 

schools,  Yale  and  Harvard  [University],  but  they  aren't 

thinking  schools.   Some  schools  specialize  in  training 

people.   Of  course,  they  don't  call  it  training,  but  that's 

actually  what  it  does.   It  trains  you  and  programs  your 

mind  a  certain  way.   It  doesn't  let  you  think. 

MASON:   Well,  there's  another,  a  literary  scholar  who  came 

also  out  of  Yale,  whose  work  has  been  really  influential, 

named  Houston  [A.]  Baker.   He  talks  about  a  blues  aesthetics 

in  literature.   He  seems  to  find  a  certain  commonality 

between  certain  works,  different  themes,  like  repetition, 

and,  I  can't  think  of  some  of  the  other  things,  but,  you 

know,  things  that  are  found  in  blues  music.   His  work  has 

been  really  influential,  and  it  seems  to  be  convincing. 


140 


WADDY:   It's  influential  among  what  group? 

MASON:   Well,  among  black  scholars  as  well  as  white 

scholars. 

WADDY:   Black  scholars. 

MASON:   But,  well,  artists.   You  know,  they  probably  just 

do  what  they  want  to  do  without,  you  know,  trying  to-- 

WADDY:   Well —  [laughter] 

MASON:   Why  are  you  laughing? 

WADDY:   It  makes  me  think  of  what  I  told  my  daughter 

[Maryom  Ana  Al-Wadi]  when  she  finished  her  bachelor's 

[degree].   I  wanted  her  to  go  on.   No,  I  don't  know--  She 

didn't  have  it.   She  was  going  to  [Los  Angeles]  City 

[College]  to  get  a  degree.   I  don't  know  whether  it  was-- 

She  hadn't  gotten  a  bachelor's  yet. 

She  said,  "It's  nothing  but  a  piece  of  paper." 

I  said,  "I  agree,  that's  all  it  is.   But  that  piece  of 
paper  opens  the  door . " 

And  she  said,  "Yes." 

That's  what  I  was  laughing  about.   Some  of  the  people, 
some  of  the  graduates,  don't  let  the  degree  go  any  further 
than  just  being  a  piece  of  paper.   Of  course,  one  has  to  be 
trained,  but  too  often  I  think  that  schools  train  you  not 
to  think.   Because  people  who  think  are  usually  upsetting 
the  status  quo  or  ask  questions  that  might  upset  the  status 
quo,  even  their  own.   And  thinking  is  not  particularly 


141 


easy,  either. 

MASON:   It  takes  a  lot  of  time  and  effort. 

WADDY:   Yes,  it  does.   And  honesty.   And  honesty  is  not 

particularly  trained  in  any  school.   I  mean,  that's  not  one 

of  the  things  that  they  train  one  in.   But  everybody  to  his 

own  notion.   As  I  said,  it's  "a  matter  of  opinion." 

MASON:   So  through  your  involvement  in  the  arts  and  your 

own  work  you  have  been  receiving  honors  and  awards  since 

1963,  approximately.   Let's  see,  in  1963  you  got  an  award 

from  the  National  Association  of  College  Women.   What  was 

that  for?   Do  you  remember? 

WADDY:   I  think  it  was  just  because  Art  West  was  going  and 

had  been  started  or  something  like  that.   Although  it 

wasn't  the  first  time  artists  had  gotten  together,  maybe  it 

was  the  first  time  it  was  more  inclusive,  for  some 

reason.   I  don't  know.   Because  it  certainly  wasn't  the 

first  time  there  was  a  black  artists'  group  in  Los  Angeles, 

I  know  that. 

MASON:   Do  you  know  how  they  found  out  about  your  work  or 

why  they  were  interested  in  art?   It  seems  like  kind  of  a 

general- - 

WADDY:   Yes,  it  was  more  to  arouse  African- Americans ' 

interest  in  the  work  of  black  artists.   That  was  really  the 

purpose  of  Art  West.   To  tell  the  public  that  they  had 

among  them  artists  whose  work  was  worthy  of  being  bought. 


142 


that  would  give  pleasure  to  them — pleasure  to  the  buyers,  I 

mean,  enhance  their  life. 

MASON:   And  then  in  '86 —  [tape  recorder  off] 

WADDY:   Maybe  the  fact  that  we  got  so  much  publicity  was 

because  I  wasn't  so  much  of  an  artist  but  I  could  get 

artists  together.   Maybe  so,  because  everybody,  every  one 

of  them,  was  better  than  I  was. 

MASON:   You  got  an  award  in  '64  from  the  Los  Angeles  YWCA 

[Young  Womens  Christian  Association] .   You  got  one  from  the 

National  Conference  of  Artists. 

WADDY:   Oh,  the  National  Conference  of  Artists,  that  was 

interesting.   I  think  that  was  because  it  was  the  first  art 

group  in  L.A.   I  don't  know  why.   Art  West  may  have  gotten 

a  lot  of  publicity  from  the  members.   As  I  said,  in  the 

beginning  it  may  be  because  there  was  somebody  who  could 

get  artists  together  who  wasn't  really,  truly  an  artist. 

At  least,  they  were  very  much  better  than  I. 

MASON:   Did  you  attend  a  lot  of  the  National  Conference  of 

Artists'  meetings? 

WADDY:   Yes,  because  I  wanted  to  be  associated  with 

artists.   I  liked  them.   I  like  artists.   And  Margaret 

[Taylor  Goss]  Burroughs  was  the  head  then,  and  I  knew 

Margaret  Burroughs  from  Chicago. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  any  particular  meeting  that  was 

exciting  to  you?   Because  they  met  in  different  parts  of 


143 


the  country. 

WADDY:   Yes,  they  did. 

MASON:   Sometimes  in  Florida,  I  think,  and  Chicago,  I  know. 

WADDY:   And  then  Georgia,  Atlanta.   West  Virginia  is  one 

place  I  remember.   I  remember  that  because —  [tape  recorder 

off] 

MASON:   So  you  were  saying  that — 

WADDY:   Bill  [William  H.]  Waddy  came  from  West  Virginia, 

but  I  don't  remember  the  town  in  West  Virginia.   I  don't 

remember  the  name  of  it. 

MASON:   I  see  you  got  an  award  from  Compton  College  in 

1972. 

WADDY:   We  probably  had  a  show  there. 

MASON:   And  one  from  Art  West  in  1972. 

WADDY:   Yeah,  I'm  sure  we  had  a  show  in  Compton.   The  one 

from  Art  West  they  couldn't  decide  what  to  do,  so  I  got  a 

plaque  with  a  bronze--  Here  it  is.   They  said  in  Art  West-- 

I  remember  one  of  the  members,  and  I  can't  remember  who  it 

was,  he  said,  "We  couldn't  decide  what  to  do  about  you, 

Ruth.   We  would  have  planned  that  each  member  would  say 

what  you  had  done  for  each  member  individually."   But  I 

don't  remember  all  that  stuff,  because,  firstly,  that's  not 

the  way  I  do  things.   I  mean,  I  do  it  just  because  I  can  do 

it.   It  was  needed,  and  I  can  do  it.   That's  all. 

MASON:   But  still,  it  takes  a  lot  of  energy  and  dedication 


144 


and  interest. 

WADDY:   I  mean,  the  person  needs  it.   You  see,  if 
everybody's  doing  well,  then  that  means  I'm  doing  well.   So 
I'm  very  much  interested  in  everybody  doing  well.   Because 
that  helps  me.   That's  what  makes  it  good  for  me.   That's 
why  I  think  it's  so  silly  for  people--  Why  can't  they  see 
that?   It's  how  you  elevate  yourself — you  keep  everybody 
else  up.   Since  you're  just  like  them,  that  helps  you.   I 
mean,  that's  to  your  benefit.   That  doesn't  mean — 

I  remember  one  artist,  I  forgot  her  name.   She  had 
some  children.   She  said  to  me,  "Don't  you  remember  when 
you  did  that?"   Well,  I  didn't  do  that  for  them.   She  had 
some  children,  and  they  needed  something,  a  thermos 
bottle.   I  had  two  thermos  bottles,  thermos  jars  or  one  of 
those  things. 

MASON:   Yeah,  like  for  lunch  boxes. 

WADDY:   Yes,  lunch,  that's  right.   She  had  some  children, 
and  she  wanted  them  to  take  something  warm.   And  she  asked 
me,  "Don't  you  remember  when  you  gave  me  the  thermos?"   I 
had  two  of  them,  and  I  can't  use  but  one.   So  that  helps 
me. 

MASON:   Many  more  people  have  the  opposite  attitude--the 
more  they  step  on  other  people,  the  higher  they  go. 
WADDY:   That's  just  a  contrary.   They're  working  against 
themselves.   The  old  saying  is  charity  begins  at  home.   You 


145 


take  care  of  yourself  first  and  then  you  spread  it 
abroad.   Well,  that's  how  you  take  care  of  yourself. 
That's  exactly  how  you  take  care  of  yourself.   Treating 
other  people  as  you  would  like  to  be  treated  doesn't  have 
anything  to  do  with  ethics--that ' s  good  business.   That's 
just  plain,  good  conunon  sense.   It  hasn't  anything  to  do 
with  being  right  or  ethical  or  any  of  that.   It's  just 
plain  good  business.   See  that  everybody  else  is  up  and 
you're  up,  because  you're  just  like  everybody  else. 

Well,  anyway,  I  don't  know  what  they--  I  got  up  there 
and  said,  "Thank  you, "  you  know. 

MASON:   Oh,  I  see.   We'll  pause  here.   [tape  recorder 
off]   So  here's  your  plaque  from  Art  West. 
WADDY:   Yeah,  that's  it. 

MASON:   It  says,  "This  conunemorative  plaque  is  presented  to 
Ruth  Waddy,  1972,  for  outstanding  national  and  local 
conununity  service  to  art,  artists,  and  mankind.   Art  West 
Associated,  Incorporated.   Los  Angeles,  California." 
That's  very  nice.   Well,  if  you  hung  up  all  your  plaques, 
you  wouldn't  have  any  room  for  your  art,  so  it  seems  like 
you've  made  the  choice  to  hang  your  art  in  your  apartment. 
WADDY:   Yeah,  because  at  least  I  know  why  I  did  it.   At 
least  I  can  say  that  there's  some  reason  for  all  of  the 
honors.   I  think  they  kind  of  ran  out  of  people. 
MASON:   Oh,  come  on.   Well,  what  was  your  award  from  the 


146 


Los  Angeles  City  Council,  1979?   Do  you  remember?   And 
there  was  the  League  of  Allied  Artists  in  1981.   And 
also  an  award  from  the  California  Afro-American  Museum 
in  1983.   In  1986,  you  got  the  Vesta  Award  from  the 
Women's  Building.   Had  you  been  involved  in  the  Women's 
Building? 

WADDY:   Oh,  yes,  yes.   I  can  remember  that  because  it  was 

so  kind  of  far  out. 

MASON:   How  so? 

WADDY:   I  mean,  in  my  mind  it  was.   Mary  Jane  Hewitt  had 

received  one,  and  she  told  me  something  about  Vesta  and 

what  it  stood  for.   At  least  I  didn't  feel  too  strange 

accepting  it,  because  I  knew  that  one  black  American  had 

received  one.   Mary  Jane  Hewitt  is  an  African- American. 

MASON:   But  you  hadn't  been  involved  in  the  Women's 

Building  before,  though? 

WADDY:   I  think  that  they  just  tried  to  get  someone  from 

each  ethnic  group  in  Los  Angeles.   I  think  that  might  have 

been  it. 

MASON:   So  it  was  more  of  a  public  relations  ploy  than 

anything  else. 

WADDY:   Yes,  yes.   And,  of  course,  the  Women's  Building 

would  have  liked  it  if  more  black  women  would  be  involved 

in  it. 

MASON:   Well,  wasn't  Samella  Lewis  involved? 


147 


WADDY:   In  it? 

MASON:   To  some  degree. 

WADDY:   Maybe  so. 

MASON:   Because  I  know  she  was  involved--  Well,  I  read  that 

she  was  involved  in  that  group  of  artists  that  organized  to 

protest  that  art  and  technology  show  at  the  Los  Angeles 

County  Museum  [of  Art] ,  called  something  like  the  Los 

Angeles  Women's  Art  Council  or  something  like  that.   And  I 

think  Betye  Saar  had  a  show  there.   But  yeah,  I  guess  maybe 

between  black  women  and  white  women  there  were  too  many 

conflicts  to  resolve. 

WADDY:   Yes,  there  are. 

MASON:   Their  outlook  was  too  different. 

WADDY:   Yeah,  Betye  Saar  had  a  show.   I  can  remember  that. 

MASON:   And  then  you  got  in  '87  an  honorary  doctorate  of 

fine  arts  from  Otis  Art  Institute  of  Parsons  School  of 

Design  of  the  New  School  for  Social  Research  in  New  York 

City.   Can  I  read  the  inscription? 

WADDY:   Sure.   [tape  recorder  off] 

MASON:   This  is  the  citation  from  the  Otis  Art  Institute. 

It  says,  "Ruth  Waddy,  painter,  printmaker,  advocate  of 

artistic  opportunity--" 

WADDY:   That's  the  main  thing  that  I  wanted.   That's  the 

main  thing. 

MASON:   Okay,  well,  that's  first.   "Your  strong  graphic 


148 


images  strike  us  with  aesthetic,  emotional,  and  social 
power,  and  your  dedication  to  seeking  out  the  distinctive 
experience  of  black  artists  in  America  has  widened  that 
power.   You  have  been  a  prophet  exclaiming  the  news  of 
black  artists  and  calling  upon  the  world  to  embrace  them. 
If  not  for  your  efforts,  artists  now  prominent  would  have 
remained  obscure,  thus  denying  us  the  vision  and  insight  of 
their  work.   As  art  reveals  the  freedom  of  the  human 
spirit,  you  have  expanded  freedom's  boundaries  for  artists 
themselves  and  for  us  all.   Otis  Parsons  of  the  New  School 
for  Social  Research  is  honored  to  confer  upon  its  former 
student  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Fine  Arts,  honoris  causa. 
May  14,  1987." 

WADDY:   It's  amazing.   I  want  to--  People  are,  you  know, 
they're  wonderful  animals.   They're  wonderful. 
Wonderful.   But  they  don't  let  themselves  be  that  way. 
^4AS0N:   How  so? 

WADDY:   They  let  other  people  train  them,  which  is  all 
right,  after  they  think,  after  they  think.   The  training  is 
essential,  you  know,  for  the  performance  of  a  job  or  a 
profession  or  whatever.   It's  essential.   I  recognize  that, 
or  at  least  I  think  I  recognize  that.   I  know  it's 
important.   If  people  would  just  be  people,  you  know,  just 
be  themselves,  they'd  be  really  wonderful.   They're  good, 
too.   You  know,  like  war —  You  don't  like  that.   They 


149 


really  don't  like  it.   But  they  let  themselves  be  led  by 

the  nose  this  way  and  that  way.   It's  stupid.   They're 

dumb!   [laughter]   That's  why  they're  trained,  so  they 

won't  be  themselves.   Because  they'd  upset  a  whole  lot  of 

customs  and  governments  and  taboos.   If  man  stays  on  earth, 

he  will  eventually  be  that  way,  because  that's  the  only  way 

left,  you  know,  the  only  way  left. 

^4AS0N:   You  mean,  to  be  unconventional  and  to  go  against 

the-- 

WADDY:   Yes,  to  be  themselves — good.   To  be  their  natural 

selves. 

MASON:   Well,  some  people  would  say  in  the  sixties  there 

was  some  of  that. 

WADDY :   Yes . 

MASON:   Do  you  think  that  will  reemerge  eventually? 

WADDY:   Oh,  it  wasn't  resolved  in  the  sixties.   We  just  had 

hints  of  it.   It  wasn't  resolved.   Nothing  was  resolved, 

because  the  majority  of  the  people  were  trained.   I  think 

man  is  essentially  a  good  animal. 

MASON:   So  what — ?  You  said  you  had  a  problem  with  this 

question,  but  I'll  ask  it  anyway.   Looking  back  on  your 

life  and  your  career  and  your  involvement  with  the  arts, 

what  makes  you  the  most  proud  today? 

WADDY:   I  have  as  much  embarrassment  as  pride.   In  having 

started  Art  West  and  knowing  so  many  artists,  I  am  both 


150 


proud  and  embarrassed,  because  I  feel  so  lacking  in  a  lot 
of  ways.   I'm  the  same  kind  of  animal  as  I  say  about  man-- 
you  know,  dumb  too.   [laughter]   I'm  dumb  too.   I  could 
have  done  better.   if  i  had  just  had  my  eyes  open  and 
thought.   Well,  hindsight  being  better  than  foresight,  I'm 
not  particularly—  i  can't  think  of  a  particular  thing. 
That's  all. 

MASON:   Okay.   I  just  have  one  final  question.   What  kinds 
of  things  have  you  done  to  preserve  the  record  of  your 
activities  over  the  years?   We  were  looking  through  some  of 
your  notebooks  here  in  your  apartment  of  the  slides,  and 
some  of  your  papers  you've  given  to  the  Amistad  Research 
Center  in  Louisiana.   Have  you  gathered  together  scrapbooks 
and  things  like  that?   Not  really,  no. 

WADDY:   But  I  think  that  this  talking  to  you  makes  me  think 
that  I  should  do  it. 

^4AS0N:   Yeah.   [laughter]   Art  historians  would  really 
appreciate  that. 

WADDY:   Maybe  I  will.   If  I  get  two  or  three  days  in  a 
succession  that  I  feel  good,  maybe  on  the  fourth  day  I 
might  start  it.   Usually  if  I  start  something,  I'll  finish 
it,  usually.   Although  I  can  think  of  my  failings  better 
than  I  can  of  my  successes.   For  instance,  when  I  started 
Waddy  Shower  Cap  [Company] ,  I  was  trying  to  prove  that  you 
can  become  wealthy  without  charging  a  whole  lot  of  money. 


151 


But  I  didn't  charge  enough.   I  charged  a  little  bit  over 
the  wholesale  cost  to  me,  a  very  little.   But  when  I  took 
it  to  the  retailers,  they  raised  it  a  whole  lot. 
f4AS0N:   Yeah,  they  usually  double  it  on  principle. 
WADDY:   Oh,  four  or  five  times,  at  the  best  stores,  like 
Saks  Fifth  Avenue  and  Robinson's  and  I.  Magnin.   They 
bought  the  cap  maybe  at  $12  a  dozen  and  sold  it  at  $60. 
They  charged  a  whole  lot  for  each  cap. 
MASON:   How  did  you  come  up  with  the  idea  for  that? 
WADDY:   Oh,  because  my  sister  Gladys  [Gilliam  Little]  and  I 
had  accepted  a  whole  lot  of  social  invitations,  you  know, 
to  very  nice  places,  and  we  hadn't  returned  them.   We 
had  been  trained.   Mama,  as  I  told  you,  loved  to  entertain 
but  thought  that  when  you're  entertained  or  when  someone 
entertains  you,  you  return  that  invitation  by  inviting 
them.   Gladys  and  I  hadn't  done  that.   So  I  said  to  Gladys, 
"We'll  have  a  big  party  and  have  a  caterer  and  door-to- 
door--"  What  is  it  when  you  go  up  to  the  door  and  somebody 
takes  your  car  and  brings  it  back  for  you? 
MASON:   Oh,  valet  parking. 

WADDY:   Valet  parking.   And  she  said,  "Well,  where  are  we 
going  to  get  the  money?" 

I  said,  "Well,  I'll  make  something,  and  we'll  sell  it, 
and  we'll  get  the  money  that  way." 

She  said,  "Okay." 


152 


And  so  I  made  the  shower  cap. 

Gladys  is  a  very  good  judge  of  things  that  she  sees. 
Finally,  I  got  one  that  she  said,  "Oh,  that's  a  good 
cap."   So  she  said,  "I'll  do  the  selling,"  because  she  is 
better  at  selling  than  I.   But  she  doesn't  like  hot 
weather;  she  can't  stand  heat  very  much. 

So  the  first  store  she  went  to  was  Robinson's,  and  the 
buyer  ordered  a  gross.   The  buyer  said,  "I'll  try  it  out, 
and  I'll  take  a  gross."   Well,  I  didn't  even  know  what  a 
gross  was.   [laughter]   I  found  out  it's  twelve  dozen. 

And  I  said  to  Gladys--  I  was  making  it  at  home,  you 
know.   I  have  an  example  of  a  cap.   I'll  show  it  to  you 
after  a  while.   So  I  got  the  gross  out. 

The  next  week  the  buyer  asked  for  two  gross--the  very 
next  week!   I  said,  "What  on  earth!   I  can't  afford 
that."   I  realized  I  finally  had  to  get  a  place  where  we 
didn't  make  anything  else  but  caps.   I  did  that  by  going  to 
city  hall  and  getting  a  zoning  variance  so  that  I  could 
work  across  the  street.   It  was  a  vacant  place  on  Venice 
Boulevard.   I  rented  some  machines  and  got  enough 
supplies.   Then  I  found  that  I  really  had  to  charge  more 
than  I  was  for  the  wholesale  price,  because  at  that  time 
buyers  went  in  retail  stores  and  then  got  the  name  of  the 
wholesaler  and  contacted  the  wholesaler.   So  it  got  to  go 
around  the  country  and  I  couldn't  fill  the  orders.   So  I 


153 


had  to  hire  some  seamstresses.   That  meant  that  I  had  to 
have  more  money.   [laughter]   But  they  were  making  such 
good  profit,  they  wouldn't  accept  the  higher  price.   I 
wrote  a  letter  trying  to  explain  it,  but  that  went  out  the 
window. 

Those  are  the  kinds  of  mistakes  I'm  talking  about. 
Like  that  one  about  that  Mr.  Green  giving  Art  West  the 
land.   Now,  if  I  had--  That's  all  I  had  to  do.  Just  stake 
it  out  and  make  everything  exactly  at  a  right  angle,  every 
corner  a  true  right  angle.   I  already  knew  that,  but  I 
wasn't  thinking.   Those  are  the  things  that  I'm  talking 
about  when  I  say  I  can  think  of  my  mistakes  better  than  I 
can  anything  else.   Those  are  the  first  things  that  come  to 
mind  when  you  mention  something  to  me,  not  pride,  but  that 
you  didn't  do  this  or  you  did  that.   That's  what  comes  to 
mind.   You  don't  have  anything  to  be  proud  of.   You 
remember  you  should  have  done  that.   Maybe  you  should  have 
done  the  other.   Those  are  the  kind  of  things  that  come  to 
my  mind. 

MASON:   We  have  a  few  more  minutes  left  on  the  tape.   Is 
there  anything  you  would  like  to  add? 

WADDY:   Well,  I  think  it's  a  great  honor  to  have  an  oral 
history. 
MASON:   It's  a  great  honor  for  us  to  have  you  participate. 


154 


INDEX 


Al-Wadi,  Maryom  Ana 

(daughter),  11,  30,  31, 
33-34,  47-48,  73-74,  113, 
141 

Amistad  Research  Center 
(New  Orleans),  151 

Art  West  Associated,  57-60, 
82,  118-19,  124,  128, 
129,  142-43,  144,  146, 
150,  154 

Art-West  Associated  North 
61,  82 

Baker,  Houston  A.,  140 
Bearden,  Romare,  71,  75-77 
130,  139 

Black  aesthetics,  138-41 
Black  Art  Council,  120 
Black  Artists  on  Art,  103, 

108,  122-23,  125 
Blackburn,  Robert,  75-76 
Bontemps,  Arna  W. ,  29 
Bowman,  Helen,  100 
Brockman  Gallery,  121,  123- 

24 
Brown,  Richard,  55-57 
Burroughs,  Charles,  83,  86- 

87 
Burroughs,  Margaret  Taylor 

Goss,  25,  27,  29,  51,  63, 

83-84,  92,  143 

California  Afro-American 

Museum,  127,  147 
Carver,  George  Washington, 

41-42 
Catlett,  Elizabeth,  29 
Clack,  George,  52 
Compton  College,  144 

Davis,  Alonzo,  121,  123-24, 
131 

Davis,  Dale,  121 

Douglas  Aircraft  Corpora- 
tion, 30-31,  35-38,  42 

Driskell,  David  C. ,  139-40 

Edwards,  Mel,  52 


Famous  Artists  Home  Study 

Course,  77-78 

Federal  Writers  Project, 

23,  25,  27 
Fergerson,  Cecil,  56 

Gafford,  Alice,  129 
Gilliam,  Elijah  (uncle),  4 
Gilliam,  Henry  (uncle),  5 
Gilliam,  Jane  (aunt),  4-5 
Gilliam  John  Moses 

(father),  1-2,  4,  5,  10- 

11,  12,  34,  74 
Gilliam,  Willie  Coran 

(mother),  1-8,  9-12,  13, 

14,  17-18,  28,  100,  118 
Green,  Helen,  58 

Hammons,  David,  131 

Hare,  Anne  Gilliam 
(cousin),  4 

Harrison,  Margaret  Gilliam 
(sister),  2,  7,  9,  10, 
30-31,  32 

Harrison,  Sinclair 
(brother-in-law),  30 

Haynes,  James  (brother-in- 
law),  30,  34 

Hewitt,  Mary  Jane,  147 

Hill,  Evans,  39-40 

Hill,  Tony,  39-42 

Houston,  Norman  0.,  55-56 

Jackson,  Suzanne,  120-21 
Johnson,  Daniel  LaRue,  42, 
48,  51-52 

Kabede,  Alitash,  138 
King,  Martin  Luther,  Jr., 
50,  61 

Lark,  Raymond,  128-29 
League  of  Allied  Artists, 

147 
Lewis,  Samella,  29,  82, 

103,  120-25,  147-48 


155 


Little,  Gladys  Gilliam 
(sister),  2,  6,  7-8,  9, 
11,  42,  48,  51,  152-53 

Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corporation,  19-20 

Los  Angeles  County 
Hospital,  11,  42-45 

Los  Angeles  County  Museum 
of  Art,  51-52,  55,  120, 
126,  148 

Matthews,  Miriam,  129-30 
Montgomery,  Evengeline  J., 
61,  67,  68,  122,  125 

National  Association  for 

the  Advancement  of 

Colored  People,  12 
National  Association  of 

College  Women,  142 
National  Conference  of 

Artists,  63,  143-44 
National  Endowment  for  the 

Arts,  58,  60 

Oakland  Museum,  82 
Otis,  Johnny,  128 
Otis  Art  Institute,  77-79, 
81,  148-49 

Pajaud,  William,  82 
Parker,  James,  62-63 
Parks,  Gordon,  3 
Porter,  James,  63,  68 
Powell,  Richard  J.,  140 
Printmaking  Workshop  ( New 

York  City),  75 
Prints  by  American  Negro 

Artists,  61,  75,  122,  137 
Purifoy,  Noah,  132-37 

Roelof-Lanner,  Theodore  V., 
61-65,  122 

Saar,  Betye,  62,  148 
Safety  Savings  and  Loan 

Company,  52 
Seidenbaum,  Art,  126 
Slater,  Van,  62,  119 
Smith,  William  E.,  62 


Southside  Community  Arts 

Center,  25,  27,  62 
Southside  Writers  Group, 

24-25 
Stinson,  Donald,  69-70,  72 
Stone,  Irving,  21 
Stone,  Jean,  21-23 

Tann,  Curtis,  69-70 

University  of  Minnesota, 

12-13 
University  of  Southern 

California,  61,  64 

Waddy,  Ruth  G.  , 

--works  by,  77,  81,  85, 

102,  104-5,  108-10,  112, 

113,  114 
Waddy,  William  H. 

(husband),  19,  73-74,  144 
Waddy  Shower  Cap  Company, 

151-54 
Washington,  Timothy,  132 
Welton,  Roland,  131-32 
Westside  Jewish  Community 

Center,  104 
White,  Charles,  23,  26,  55- 

56,  78,  83,  84,  120,  132, 

139 
Wilson,  John,  133-34 
Women's  Building,  147-48 
Woodson,  Carter  G.  ,  26 
Works  Progress 

Administration,  23 
Wright,  Richard,  23-25 

Young  Womens  Christian 
Association,  143 


156 


{./fV/ 


