X 


University  of  California  -  Berkeley 


^ 


\ 

*    \ 

/fi.  ur*H/~+ ,  V> 


/ 

V 


V 


<*' 


Ruth  Asawa 

ART,  COMPETENCE,  AND  CITYWIDE  COOPERATION 
FOR  SAN  FRANCISCO 


Albert  Lanier 
ARCHITECTURE,  GARDENS,  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 


Regional  Oral  History  Office  University  of  California 

The  Bancroft  Library  Berkeley,  California 

The  Arts  and  the  Community  Oral  History  Project 


Ruth  Asawa 

ART,  COMPETENCE,  AND  C1TYWIDE  COOPERATION 
FOR  SAN  FRANCISCO 


An  Interview  Conducted  by 
Harriet  Nathan 
in  1974  and  197/<U 


Copy  no. 
Copyright  Q  1980  by  the  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  —  Ruth  Asawa 


PREFACE  i 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  ill 

BIOGRAPHY  v 


I  PARENTS  AND  FAMILY,  FARM  AND  SCHOOL  1 

From  Japan  to  the  U.S.  1 

Family  Memories  of  Japan  3 

Buddhists  and  a  Quaker  Church  in  Whittier  6 

Truck  Farming  in  California  7 
School  and  Speaking  English 

Performers,  Art  and  Music  Teachers  9 

On  the  Playground  11 

Vacation  and  Onion-Planting  11 

Learning  Language  and  Culture  13 

Work  or  School  14 

The  Work  Routine  and  Farm  Life  15 
The  Hagiwara  Plaque  (1974) 

Planned  Visit  to  Japan,  1939  23 

II  WORLD  WAR  II  AND  COLLEGE  YEARS  24 

A  Junior  in  High  School  24 

Father's  Internment  and  the  Bonfire  24 

Family  Internment:  Santa  Anita  to  Arkansas 
From  Swamp  to  Garden 
To  Milwaukee  State  Teachers  College 
Hearing  of  Black  Mountain  and  Visiting  Mexico 
Back  to  Milwaukee:  Work,  Artists,  Teachers 
Black  Mountain  and  a  Scholarship 

III  WIRE  SCULPTURE,  HOME  AND  DISCIPLINE  34 

Working  at  Home 
Crocheting  and  Monotony 
Trying  Out  Design 
Deciding  to  Remain  at  Home 
Commissions  as  a  Sacrifice 

IV  DECISIONMAKING  IN  THE  SAN  FRANCISCO  SCHOOLS                       40 

Chain  of  Command  *0 

Structure  and  Productivity  ^2 
People  with  Skills 

Mural  at  the  Fort  Mason  Pier  *5 


A  Matter  of  Direction  46 

Synergetics  48 

Procedures  for  Hiring  Consultants  50 

Self-Reliance  and  Learning  What  is  Important  51 

V  ART  AND  ARTISTS  IN  THE  SCHOOLS  55 
Artists  Working  as  Artists 

Beginning  to  Work  in  the  Schools  55 

Developments  at  Alvarado  56 
Combining  Parents  and  Artists,  Teachers  and  Administrators 

Books  and  Murals  61 

To  Lick  and  Mission  65 

Moving  Parents  from  Home  Classes  to  Schools  65 

Neighborhood  Focus  and  Moving  On  68 

Sharing  69 

Techniques:  The  Real  Thing  and  Counseling  70 

The  MADDS  Festival  and  Involving  Departments  73 

MADDS  Reviewed  74 

Movable  Plays  and  Repeat  Performances  76 

VI  PLAY-DOUGH  78 

Workshop  in  Hawaii  78 

The  Do ugh- In  79 

4  Cups  of  Flour,  1  Cup  of  Salt,  1  1/2  Cups  of  Water  81 

"Let's  Work  on  a  Story"  83 

At  the  County  Fair,  1969  84 

Letters  to  the  Artist:  The  Mermaid  Fountain  84 

Properties  of  Clay  and  Dough  86 

VII  SERVING  ON  ART  COMMISSIONS  88 

The  Nebraska  Art  Council  Idea  88 

S.F.  Art  Commission  and  BART  Council  89 

Advisory  Panel,  California  Arts  Commission  90 

New  California  Arts  Council  (1976)  92 

Public  Support  for  Artists  97 

The  Private  Sector  and  the  Arts  100 

Two  Percent  for  Art  and  the  S.F.  Art  Commission  103 

Protest  and  Civic  Center  Design  103 

Landscaping  or  Art  106 

Art  Commission  and  Its  Role  107 

Studios,  Foundries  and  Hiring  108 

Art  and  Independence  109 

VIII  PANELS  AND  CONFERENCES  112 

Schools  and  Arts  112 

Riles  Commission  112 

Minneapolis  Conference  on  Textbooks  113 

Grassroots  Materials  114 

Bi-Centennial  Selection  Committee  117 


IX  TIME  AND  THE  ARTIST:  WORKS,  EXHIBITS,  AWARDS  120 

Beneficial  Use  of  People  12Q 
Finding  Satisfactions 

Artist  as  Conmissioner  124 

Activity  and  Family  124 

Experience  and  Memory  125 

Winning  a  Poster  Contest  126 

College  Exhibit  127 

The  First  Wire  Sculptures  127 

Fine  Arts  Award,  ALA  128 

Museum  Show  and  Peridot  Gallery  129 

Reflections  on  Design  Offers  129 

Albers,  Color  and  Relationships  130 

Evolution  of  Tied-Wire  Sculpture  131 

Curiosity  About  Materials  132 

S.F.  Museum  Retrospective  134 

Filming  a  Program  135 

Additional  Awards  (1976)  135 

Fountain  at  the  Japanese  Center  (1976)  136 

The  Hyatt  Fountain  138 

X  PERSONAL  PHILOSOPHY  140 

The  Need  to  be  Productive  140 

The  Dinosaur  Problem  141 

Personal  Responsibility  144 

"Stacking"  and  Multiple  Benefits  147 

The  Best  Place  150 

Skilled  People  Bringing  Change  150 

Educating  Teachers  152 

Hopeful  Signs  154 

Albers1  Use  of  Synergetics  155 

The  Future  and  Making  a  Living  156 

XI  DEVELOPING  THE  STACKING  IDEA  (1976)  162 

CETA  Program  in  the  Schools  162 

Citywide  Educational  Beautif ication  Program  164 

The  Alvarado  Idea  166 

Development  of  Gardening  167 

Monitoring  and  Volunteering  169 

Talespinners  171 

Artists  and  Community  Life  172 

In-Service  Training  and  Working  Together  173 

The  Scramble  for  Funds  176 

Liberation  and  Learning  177 
"How  Do  You  Live?" 

Student  RISE  Forum:  Segregation  of  Adults  and  Children  179 

Federal  Guidelines:  Multi-Cultural  Activities  181 

Counseling  and  Activities  183 

Owning  or  Serving  184 


XII  ALASKA:  RESIDENCY  IN  A  SCHOOL  186 

State  Arts  and  Corridor  Arts  186 
Bakers'  Clay  Panels  and  Mosaic 
Seeing  Alaska 

XIII  A  LOOK  AT  THE  LANIER  FAMILY  190 

PARTIAL  INDEX  192 


NOTE:  See  also,  Albert  Lanier,  "Architecture,  Gardens,  and  the  Individual" 
at  the  end  of  this  volume. 


PREFACE 


The  Arts  and  Che  Community  Series  was  undertaken  by  the  Regional  Oral 
History  Office  to  document  the  state  of  the  arts  in  the  San  Francisco  Bay  Area — 
especially  in  San  Francisco — and  to  note  the  public  and  private  patronage  the 
arts  have  received  in  the  past.   In  addition,  the  purpose  is  to  trace  new 
developments  in  federal,  state  and  local  governmental  support  stimulated  by 
the  establishment  of  the  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts  and  the  emergence  of 
state  and  local  art  councils  and  commissions.   Early  discussions  with  Harold 
L.  Zellerbach  and  Philip  Ehrlich,  Sr.  during  1970  presaged  the  on-going  interest 
in  and  support  of  the  project  by  the  Zellerbach  Family  Fund  of  San  Francisco. 
The  Fund  for  many  years  has  contributed  to  both  traditional  and  community  arts 
activities.   Mr.  Zellerbach  provided  the  first  memoir,  "Art,  Business,  and 
Public  Life  in  San  Francisco"  and  served  as  chief  consultant  and  advisor  for 
the  series  from  its  inception  until  his  death  in  January  1978. 

The  oral  history  process  at  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  con 
sists  of  tape-recorded  interviews  with  persons  who  have  played  significant  roles 
in  some  aspect  of  the  development  of  the  West,  in  order  to  capture  and  preserve 
for  future  research  their  perceptions,  recollections  and  observations.   Research 
and  the  development  of  a  list  of  proposed  topics  precede  the  interviews.  The 
taped  material  is  transcribed,  lightly  edited  and  then  approved  by  the  memoir 
ist  before  final  processing:   final  typing,  photo-offset  reproduction,  binding 
and  deposit  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and  other  selected  depositories.  The  product 
is  not  a  publication  in  the  usual  sense  but  primary  research  material  made 
available  under  specified  conditions  to  qualified  researchers. 

The  series  on  the  arts  and  the  community,  with  its  focus  on  San  Francisco, 
will  supplement  memoir  collections  produced  by  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office 
in  such  fields  as  Books  and  Fine  Printing;  Arts,  Architecture  and  Photography; 
memoirs  of  individual  artists;  and  the  Social  History  of  Northern  California. 
The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  is  under  the  administrative  supervision  of 
Professor  James  D.  Hart,  the  director  of  The  Bancroft  Library. 

Willa  K.  Baum,  Department  Head 
Regional  Oral  History  Office 

Harriet  Nathan,  Project  Director 
The  Arts  and  the  Community  Series 


30  March  1978 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 

486  The  Bancroft  Library 

University  of  California  at  Berkeley 


ii 


•THE  ARTS  AND  THE  COMMUNITY  INTERVIEW  SERIES 


Zellerbach,  Harold  L. ,  Art,  Business  and  Public  Life  in  San 
Francisco.   1978. 

Boone,  Philip  S.,  The  San  Francisco  Symphony.  1940-1972.   1978. 

Asawa,  Ruth,  Art,  Competence,  and  Cityvide  Cooperation  for  San 
Francisco.  1980. 


San  Francisco  Neighborhood  Arts  Project.  1979. 

Snipper,  Martin,  The  Art  Com^ssion  and  the  Neighborhood 
Arts  Project 

Cid,  Maruja,  NAP  Community  Organization  in  the  Mission 
District 

Goldstlne,  Steve,  The  City,  The  Artists,  The  Project  and 
Harold  Zellerbach 

Kreidler,  John,  Developing  Employment  for  Artists;  CETA 
in  San  Francisco  and  Alameda  County 


ill 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY 


Ruth  Asawa  was   interviewed  for  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  as   part 
of  a  series  on  "The  Arts  and  the  Community."     The  interviews  were  conducted 
by  Harriet  Nathan,   interviewer  and  editor  for  the  Regional  Oral  History  Offic«. 

» 

Time  and  Setting 

of  the  Interviews:   Interview  1  -  February  15,  1974 

Interview  2  -  March  15,  1974 

Interview  3  -  June  28,  1974 

Interview  4  -  October  25,  1974 

Interview  5  -  January  16,  1976 

The  five  interviews  were  held  in  the  family  home  of  Ruth 
Asawa  Lanier  and  Albert  Lanler,  on  Castro  Street  in  San 
Francisco. 

Conduct  of  the 

Interviews:        Interview  sessions  typically  began  about  9  a.m.  and  lasted 

for  two  hours  or  more.  After  the  interviews  were  trans 
cribed,  they  were  lightly  edited,  and  submitted  to  Ruth 
Asawa  for  review  and  approval.  She  supplied  a  few  editorial 
corrections. 

In  the  family  living  room  where  her  crocheted  wire 
sculptures  hung  from  the  ceiling  and  projects  in  process 
could  be  seen  in  adjoining  rooms,  Ruth  Asawa  talked  quietly 
over  the  tea  and  the  homemade  cookies  baked  in  the  same 
oven  as  her  noted  (non-edible)  dough  figures  and  plaques. 
Thoughtful,  modest  and  direct,  she  emerged  as  a  complex  and 
even  paradoxical  figure  as  her  story  unfolded. 

As  a  talented  and  liberated  young  artist  married  to 
architect  Albert  Lanier,  she  rejected  professional  offers 
(that  included  a  housekeeper)  in  favor  of  keeping  her  own 
house,  sharing  in  the  rearing  of  their  children,  and  weaving 
her  art  into  the  life  at  home.  Home- loving  as  she  is  still, 
she  now  accepts  invitations  to  travel  to  the  east  coast,  to 
Alaska  or  Hawaii  to  demonstrate  her  techniques  for  creating 
art  and  building  the  community  of  participants  that  is  in 
trinsic  to  her  view  of  life  and  art. 


iv 


A  dignified  and  private  person,  she  has  done  much  of 
her  work  not  in  a  private  studio,  but  in  the  community  with 
hundreds  of  children  and  adults,  teachers  and  parents,  pub 
lic  officials  and  businessmen,  foundation  executives  and 
artists.   She  has  led  many  of  these  groups  in  working  to 
gether  on  mosaic  and  painted  murals,  planting  and  tending 
gardens,  creating  a  publicly  treasured  series  of  San  Fran 
cisco  scenes  for  the  Hyatt  Fountain,  or  pulling  together 
an  inclusive  art  festival. 

She  was  serious  during  the  interviews ,  but  would 
sparkle  with  sudden  and  endearing  flashes  of  mirth.  She 
gently  disparaged  the  overemphasis  on  words  and  "all  those 
school  books  and  reading  tests,"  but  her  low  and  pleasing 
voice  would  state  her  decidely  unconventional  judgements  and 
opinions  in  language  eloquent  with  clarity  and  power. 
Spontaneous  and  undramatic,  Ruth  Asawa  is  a  natural  and 
charismatic  leader,  but  one  who  can  still  question  some 
of  her  own  decisions  and  wonder  at  some  of  her  own  choices. 

As  an  artist,  she  has  felt  impelled  to  practice  her 
art,  to  create,  and  to  recognize  that  time  not  spent  on 
art  can  become  the  artist's  enemy  and  the  thief  of  talent. 
Yet  she  has  spent  months  and  years  on  public  boards  and 
commissions  seeking  to  help  artists  organize,  make  their 
voices  heard,  and  find  ways  to  integrate  them  into  the 
functions  of  government  and  public  life. 

Many  people  have  written  to  Ruth  Asawa.   They  have 
praised  her  work,  and  sought  information  and  advice  on 
many  points:   the  formula  for  her  sculptural  dough,  ways  to 
deal  with  bureaucracies,  problems  in  producing  art.   She 
understands  that  some  were  also  asking  how  to  live  a  pur 
poseful  life,  how  to  make  a  lasting  contribution,  how  to 
survive  as  an  artist  and  a  person.  To  those  inquiring,  she 
has  responded  in  letters  that  are  courteous  and  helpful, 
but  the  clearest  answers  may  still  lie  in  the  life  she  leads 
and  the  work  she  does,  day  by  day. 


Harriet  Nathan 
Interviewer-Editor 


16  June  1978 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 

486  The  Bancroft  Library 

University  of  California  at  Berkeley 


BIOGRAPHY 


Ruth  Asawa  Lanier 


Born:         Norwalk,  California  -  January  27,  1926 

Education:     Milwaukee  State  Teachers  College  1943-1946 

Black  Mountain  College,  North  Carolina  1946-1949 


Group  Exhibitions: 
1948 

1950 

1953 

1953 

1954 

1955 

1956, 

1956 

1958 

1959 

1960 

1962 

1965, 

1966 

1967 

1967 

1967 

1968 

1968 

1968 

1968 

1969 

1970 

1973 

1978 

One-man  Exhibitions: 
1953 
1954, 
1960 
1962 
1963 
1965 
1969 
1969 
1973 
1973 


Addison  Gallery,  Andover,  Massachusetts  (painting) 

college  students  exhibit 

San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art  (sculpture) 

Fort  Worth  Museum,  Texas  (painting) 

Tin  Angel,  San  Francisco 

4  man  show,  San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art  (sculpture) 

S3o  Paulo,  Brazil  Biennial  (sculpture) 
1958  Whitney  Museum  of  American  Art  (sculpture) 

University  of  Illinois,  Urbana  (sculpture) 

Oakland  Museum  of  Art  (sculpture) 

Santa  Barbara  Museum  of  Art  (sculpture) 

Denver  Museum  of  Art,  Colorado  (sculpture) 

Stanford  University,  Palo  Alto  (carved  door) 
1968  Contemporary  Museum  of  American  Craft,  New  York 

Religious  Art  Exhibition,  Birmingham,  Michigan  (sculpture) 

San  Francisco  Institute  (watercolors) 

International  Gallery,  Memphis,  Tennessee  (sculpture) 

Pennsylvania  Art  Academy,  Philadelphia  (sculpture) 

Mills  College,  Oakland  (sculpture) 

Museum  West,  Ghirardelli  Square,  San  Francisco  (dough) 

University  of  New  Mexico  (sculpture) 

Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  New  York  (sculpture) 

Museum  of  Modern  Art  (lithograph) 

Dominican  College,  San  Rafael 

Van  Doren  Gallery,  San  Francisco 

2  man  show,  Fresno  Art  Center 


Design  Research,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts  (sculpture) 
1956,  1958  Peridot  Gallery,  New  York  (sculpture) 
DeYoung  Museum,  San  Francisco  (sculpture  &  drawing*) 
2  man  show,  Ankrum  Gallery,  Los  Angeles 
Shop  I,  Rochester,  New  York 
Pasadena  Museum  of  Art  (drawing  &  sculpture) 
Capper  Gallery,  San  Francisco  (drawings) 
Los  Angeles  County  Fair  (sculpture) 
San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art  -  Retrospective  View 
Van  Doren  Gallery  (lithographs) 


One-man  Exhibitions  continued: 

1973   Baxter  Gallery  -  California  Institute  of  Technology 

(sculpture  and  drawings) 
1976   San  Francisco  Art  Commission  Gallery  -  Capricorn  Asunder, 

"Honor  Award  Show" 
1979   Cabrillo  Community  College;  Cedar  Gallery,  Santa  Cruz 

County  Building  , 

Public  Collections: 

1958   Whitney  Museum  of  American  Art,  Gift  of  Mr.  &  Mrs. 
Howard  Lipraan 

1958  Chase  Manhattan  Bank,  New  York,  David  Rockefeller 

1959  Oakland  Museum  of  Art  -  Purchase  Award 

1965  Williams  College,  Massachusetts 

1966  City  of  San  Francisco,  San  Francisco  Art  Festival  - 
Purchase  Award 

1966   Addison  Gallery,  Andover,  Massachusetts 

Private  Collections:  (partial  list) 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  William  M.  Roth 

Mr.  Herbert  Fischbach 

Governor  and  Mrs.  Nelson  Rockefeller 

Rear  Admiral  and  Mrs.  Richard  Ballinger  (retired) 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  Louis  Honig 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  Josef  Albers 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  J.  Hume 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  Walter  S.  Newman 

Mr.  Robert  Howard 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  Hunter  Land 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  John  Bo lies 

City  of  San  Francisco 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  Gilbert  Smith 

Mrs.  Creighton  Peet 

Mills  College 

Commissions: 

1963,  1965  Joseph  Magnin  Company  -  sculpture 

1965  J.  L.  Hudson  -  Detroit  sculpture 

1965  Fox  Plaza  -  fountain 

1966  Ghirardelli  Square  -  fountain 

1970-1973  Hyatt  on  Union  Square  -  cast  bronze  fountain 
1971   City  of  Phoenix,  Arizona  -  Civic  Plaza  -  sculpture 

for  pool 
1978-1979   De  Bartolo  Corporation  -  Mission  Viejo  bronze 

sculpture 

1979   Crown  Zellerbach  Corporation  -  bronze  bas-relief 
1979   Swanson  Gallery  -  fountain 
1979   UC  Medical  Center  -  memorial  plaque  for  Edison  Uno 


vii 


Purchases: 

1959  Women's  Board  -  Oakland  Museum  of  Art 

1966  City  of  San  Francisco,  Art  Festival 

1976  Women's  Board  -  Oakland  Museum  of  Art 

Fellowship  Awards: 

1965  Tamarind  Lithography  Workshop,  September-October 
$1,000.00 

1966  First  recipient  of  Dymaxion  Award  for  Artist/Scientist 
$500.00 

1973,  1974,  1975  San  Francisco  Foundation  Artist  in  Residence 
for  San  Francisco  Public  Schools 

Appointments: 

1968  San  Francisco  Art  Commission 

1969  Reappointed 
1974-76  Reappointed 

1972  Council  for  Museum  Education  in  the  Visual  Arts 

1973  BART  Art  Council 

1973  California  Arts  Commission,  Visual  Arts  Panel 

1974  California  Department  of  Education 

RISE  Commission  -  Reform  Intermediate  &  Secondary 

Education 
1974   National  Endowment  for  the  Arts  -  Education  "Artists  in 

Schools" 
1976-78  California  Arts  Council 

1977  Task  Force  on  the  Role  of  the  Arts  in  Mental  Health 
(President's  Commission  on  Mental  Health) 

1977   National  Council  for  the  Arts  -  National  Endowment  for  the 
Arts  Task  Force  on  the  Education,  Training,  &  Development 
of  Professional  Artists  and  Arts  Educators.   Report, 
draft  February  6,  1978,  "Training  and  Career  Develop 
ment  of  Professional  Artists."  Final  report  to  be  distri 
buted  in  1979. 

V 

Awards : 

1970  Osaka  Expo 

1973  San  Francisco  Cable  Car  Award  -  San  Francisco  Convention 
and  Visitors  Bureau 

1974  Renaissance  Woman  Award,  Renaissance  Faire  and  Sir 
Francis  Drake  Hotel 

1974  American  Institute  of  Architecture,  Fine  Arts  Gold  Medal 

1974  Japanese  American  Citizens  League,  Silver  Biennium  Award 

1974  California  College  of  Arts  and  Crafts,  Honorary  Doctorate 

Degree 

1974  Business  and  Professional  Women,  Distinguished  Woman  Award 

1974  Robert  Kirkwood  Award  -  San  Francisco  Foundation 

1974  Phelps  Dodge  New  York  -  "Salute  to  San  Francisco" 


viii 


Awards  continued: 

1975 

1975 
1976 


Film: 


1978 


International  Women's  Year  -  San  Francisco  Women's 
Round  Table/United  Nations'  Association  of  San  Francisco 
Council  for  Civic  Unity 
Japanese  American  Citizens  League,  Contra  Costa  Chapter 


Ruth  Asawa:   On  Farms  and  Growth,  by  Robert  Snyder. 
Documentary  film  shown  at  the  San  Francisco  International 
Film  Festival,  1978.   Masters  and  Master  Works  Production, 
Inc.,  4143  Via  Marina,  #114-118,  Marina  Del  Rey,  California 
90291 


NOTE:   A  partial  bibliography  of  materials  associated  with  Ruth  Asawa  is  on 
deposit  in  The  Bancroft  Library.   A  Retrospective  View  lists  biblio 
graphic  items  to  1973.   An  additional  list  including  more  recent  items 
is  also  on  deposit. 


I  PARENTS  AND  FAMILY,  FARM  AND  SCHOOL 


From  Japan  to  the  U.S. 


Nathan:  Your  husband  was  saying  that  you  might  like  to  talk  about  your  family 
and  your  own  early  beginnings,  as  a  way  of  starting.  First,  when 
and  where  were  you  born? 

Asawa:   I  was  born  in  Norwalk,  California,  January  24,  1926,  but  for  some 
reason  it  was  recorded  as  the  27th. 

My  father  came  to  this  country  in  1902  and  his  brother  also 
came.  When  he  was  in  Japan,  he  was  seventeen  and  that  was  the  time 
of  the  war  between  Japan  and  Russia.  He  was  not  interested  in 
conscription  at  that  time  and  he  didn't  want  to  go.   So,  he  left 
Japan  and  came  to  Hawaii  and  lived  in  the  sugar  cane  fields  there. 
From  there,  he  came  to  this  part  of  the  country  and  went  to  Salt 
Lake  City-first  to  Norwalk,  California,  and  then  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  his  brother  and  he  went  to  raise  sugar  beets.  They  bought 
property  and  they  made,  at  that  time,  what  was  a  fortune.   They 
made  about  $60,000  by  just  sheer  hard  labor. 

I'm  skipping  around  a  little  bit,  but  in  1932,  I  guess,  his 
brother  became  very  ill--or  1929.   In  the  twenties,  his  brother 
became  very  ill  and  this  fortune  was  used  up  to  pay  for  his  medical 
care,  and  then  that  was  the  end  of  that  fortune.   I  remember  the 
stories  that  they  used  to  tell  about  how  they  used  to  dig  a  hole  in 
the  snow  for  their  icebox  in  the  winter  time  in  Utah.  We  were 
receiving,  even  in  the  late  thirties,  bills  to  pay  the  property  tax 
on  the  Utah  land.   That  was  in  the  thirties  and  we  never  did  do 
anything  about  that. 

Then,  in  California  at  that  time,  you  couldn't  own  property. 
There  was  a  law  that  said  that  no  alien  could  own  property.   I  mean, 
from  the  East,  you  know. 


Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asava: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Na  than : 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 


But,  anyway,  the  two  brothers  worked  together  and  their  wives 
were  sisters  from  Japan.   In  1919,  my  mother  came  to  this  country. 

Were  your  parents  married  at  that  time? 

No,  they  were  not  married.  He  was  sent  pictures.  You  know,  this 
was  a  time  when  they  had  the  picture  bride.  My  mother's  sister 
was  chosen  to  come  and  so  her  picture  was  sent  to  my  father  and  he 
approved  and  sent  for  her.  At  the  last  minute,  her  sister  backed 
out,  so  my  mother  said  that  she  would  come  then,  and  that's  how  she 
came. 

My  uncle,  who  was  married  to  my  mother's  oldest  sister,  came 
first  and  because  his  wife  was  so  lonely,  they  arranged  for  another 
sister  to  come  for  my  father. 

Were  they  all  from  the  same  area  in  Japan? 

Yes,  the  same,  what  they  call,  "prefecture."  It's  like  a  county  or 
state.   That  was  1919  and  that  was  in  Southern  California.   They  lived 
and  farmed  in  Norwalk,  La  Habra,  and  I  guess  those  were  the  two 
places  that  they  farmed.  They  had  a  truck  farm. 

Did  they  lease  the  land? 

They  leased  the  land,  yes.   I  would  say  they  weren't  very  large 
farms;  I  mean,  they  were  large  to  us.   They  had  anywhere  from  fifty 
to  eighty  acres  that  they  farmed. 

Did  they  have  employees? 

They  had  a  lot  of  Mexican  workers  and  Filipino  workers  and  those  were 
the  primary  workers.  We  had  a  few  white  workers,  but  they  never 
lasted.   It  was  just  such  hard  work. 


Was  it  very  hot? 

Hot  and  hard  and  long,  you  know, 
the  workers  worked. 


Seven  in  the  morning  till  five, 


Our  first  contact  with  the  Mexican  workers  was  when  we  used  to 
always  sit  under  the  water  tank  with  them  and  we  would  eat  with 
them,  get  a  tortilla.  They'd  build  a  fire  and  then  they'd  heat 
their  flour  tortilla  and  then  they  would  sit  there  and  eat.  We'd 
always  go  there  at  lunch  time  to  eat  with  them. 

At  that  time,  we  had  Chinese  neighbors,  a  farmer  who  was 
Chinese,  and  next  to  us  we  had  a  dairy  ranch.  We  were  right  adjacent 
to  a  river,  the  San  Gabriel  River,  which  was  a  man-made  river  that 
took  off  some  of  the  flood  water  from  the  mountains. 


Asawa:       Going  back  to  my  uncle's  Illness  chat  cime,  I  chink  he  died 
in  1929  and  left  five  children  of  his.  At  that  time,  there  were 
already  five  of  us.  Then  my  sister  was  born  the  following  year, 
and  then  another  sister  born  in  193S.  That  was  really  at  the 
depth  of  the  Depression.  My  father  was  responsible  for  both 
families  and  at  some  point  contracted  pleurisy,  or  got  pleurisy, 
and  was  very  sick  there  a  while. 

Then,  at  that  point,  or  very  shortly  after  that,  from  about 
1935  or  '39,  my  aunt  was  very  ill  and  she  really  remained  ill  until 
she  died  about  five  years  ago.  But  her  family  grew  up.  There  were 
two  sons  and  when  one  was  about  seventeen,  they  went  sailing.  None 
of  them  could  swim,  but  he  somehow  decided  he  was  going  to  learn  to 
swim  by  holding  onto  the  boat,  and  he  drowned.  So,  that  was  one  of 
the  first  real  tragedies  for  my  cousins. 

But  there  is  the  son  who  survived  and  he  is  now  a  physicist, 
and  then  three  daughters.  My  aunt  had  three  daughters.  They  are 
all  living  in  Southern  California  now. 

My  own  family—I  have  a  sister  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  two 
sisters  and  two  brothers  in  Southern  California,  and  another  sister 
in  Idaho. 

Nathan:   I  see.  What  was  your  life  like  on  the  farm? 

Asawa:   To  sort  of  describe  the  routine  that  we  had --my  mother  got  up  about 
3:30  in  the  morning. 

Nathan:  What  was  her  name? 

Asawa:  Haru. 

Nathan:  And  your  father's  name? 

Asawa:  Umakichi.  Her  maiden  name  was  Yasuda. 


Family  Memories  of  Japan 


Asawa:   Going  back  to  their  Japanese  background,  you  see,  our  name  is  not 
a  common  Japanese  name.  There's  no  one  else  but  our  family  that 
we  know  of  who  has  the  name  "Asawa."  There's  "Ozawa"  and  "Asano" 
and  there  are  many  other  names,  forms  that  sound  similar,  but  our 
name  seems  not  to  be  very  common.  Once  when  they  were  looking  for 
me  in  1955,  they  said,  "There  is  no  such  name,  Asawa."  So,  they 
thought,  "Well,  maybe  another  name,"  so  they  called  a  person  whose 
name  was  Asano  and  somehow  found  me  then. 


Asawa:        The  story  that  we  have,  which  is  a  tale--I  mean,  it's  handed 
down  to  us--was  that  our  name  was  originally  Asano,  that  we  came 
from  Hiroshima,  which  is,  you  know,  the  place  of  the  47  Samurai 
family,  or  "Chushingura"  (movie) --you  know  that.  The  story  is 
that  our  family  was  sent  away  and  so  they  fled  to  Fukushima,  which 
is  the  prefecture  that  they  settled  in,  and  became  farmers  there. 

My  father  had  two  or  three  brothers.  One  stayed  in  Japan  and 
another  went  to  Europe  and  we  never  heard  from  him  again.  He  went 
probably  to  France. 


is? 


So,  as  a  child,  my  father  used  to  sell — do  you  know  what  tofu 


Nathan:  Yes. 

Asawa:       Tofu  is  bean  cake  and  he  used   to  also  sell   something   that   is  called 
nato,  which  is  a   fermented   soy  bean.     He  used   to  walk  early  in  the 
morning,   before   sunrise.     He'd  walk  through   the   streets  and  he'd 
call   out,    "Nato-nato!"     He'd   go   from  house   to  house   and  he'd   sell 
this   fresh   fermented   bean  and  his   family  made   that. 

Then,   my  mother's   side   is   sort  of  an   interesting   family.      They're 
an  ordinary  family;    they're  not   unique.      But   there  were   ten  brothers 
and   sisters  and   she  was   the  youngest   daughter.      She  had   a  younger 
brother  below  her.     One  was  a  tailor,   another  had  a   silk  worm  farm, 
and    several   of  them  were   farmers.      I  can't   remember  what   the   others 
did.      But   they  used    to  raise   silk  worms  and   they  used    to  weave    the 
silk. 

Recently,  we  went   to  visit  a  friend  here  in  Cupertino  who 
has   silk  worms.      She  was   trying   to   find   out  how  something  was  done. 
I  went  with  my  mother.     The  woman  was  boiling  the  cocoon.     My 
mother  remembers  doing  this  as  a  child,   because   she   showed  her  how 
to   take   a  boiled   cocoon  and   stretch   the   strings   like   this   [gestures] 
in  all   directions.      This  was   then  used.      These   squares  were   used    to 
hold,   you  know,  what  you  put   into  quilts,    the  filling,    the  batting. 
You'd  put   this  over   the   batting   so   that   it  wouldn't   bunch   up.      But 
there's   something   in  the  silk  threads  that  acts  like  a  glue  or 
something   so   that   it  doesn't  move.      I  had   never  known  that    she  made 
the   stretched   cocoons,    but   she   remembered   very  much   about    it   just 
by  seeing  the  spinning  wheel   that   she  remembers  as  a  child. 

My  mother's   oldest  sister,    during   the  Occupation,    became   known 
for  her  dried   persimmons.      She  could   show  how   to  make   the  persimmon 
and  how  to  dry  it,   and  how  she   peeled    the   green  persimmons,    and    left 
the   stem  so  that  she  could   tie  and  hang  them  outside.     Then,   at 
night,    they'd  bring  it  «11  in  and  lay  it  on  a  bed   of  straw.      Every 
day,    they'd  have  to  massage  it  and  gradually  the    sugar  would  come 


Asawa:  out  of  the  fruit,  and  then  it  would  end  up  looking  like  there  was 
a  layer  of  povdered  sugar.  This  was  the  natural  sugar  coming  out 
of  the  persimmon. 

Nathan:  And  did  it  stay  green,  or  did  it  turn  brown? 

Asawa:   Oh,  no.  It  turned  brown.   It  was  picked  green.   It  was  kind  of  an 

orange,  but  it  wasn't  soft.   You  know  how  hard  those  persimmons  are? 

Nathan:   Yes. 

Asawa:       Then  they  also  used   to  use  that   green  persimmon  as  waterproofing. 
They   used    to  waterproof   tubs.      They'd   slice   a  persimmon  and    then 
they'd   rub   it   in.      They  would   use  the  juice  to  seal  the   inside  of 
a  wooden  tub,   you  know,   just  as  we   use  paraffin  or  wax.      They  also 
used   that   to  make—you  know,    like   stencils.      Stencil  paper   is  always 
waterproofed.      They  do  now,   still,    rub  this  green  persimmon  juice 
on  the  paper,  which  makes   it  waterproof,    and   then   it   turns  the 
paper  the  color  of   that   brown,   like  mocha,   and   then  they  cut   their 
stencil. 

Nathan:     Have  you  ever  used   this   system? 

Asawa:        No,    I've  never  used    it,    but   I've   seen  a  lot  of  stencils.     You  know 
those   intricate,    fine,    floral   stencils? 

Nathan:     Yes. 

Asawa:    I  saw  a  whole  stack  of  them  that  a  friend  brought  from  Japan.   But 
that  was  the  way  it  was  used.  Anyway,  persimmons  are  a  very,  very 
important  part  of  the  Japanese  life.   They  use  the  word  "shibui," 
which  probably  comes  from  persimmon,  which  means,  you  know-it 
means  like  that  (bringing  fingers  together).   It's  just  right  on 
the  spot,  or  something  that  you  can't  really  explain.   It's  just 
the  right  thing,  enough  of  it,  you  know.  But  I  guess  it's  the 
sensation  of  the  puckering  of  the  persimmon,  if  you  eat  a  green  one. 

That  was  a  sidetrack.   Where  were  we? 

Nathan:   Let's  see.   You  were  telling  a  little  of  your  family.   I  wanted  to 
ask  whether  others  were  artists  also  in  your  own  family. 

Asawa:    In  my  own  family?  No. 

Nathan:   There  were,  let's  say,  craftsmen  and  they  did  things  very  well, 
apparently. 

Asawa:   Well,  you  mean  my  mother's  family? 
Nathan:   Yes. 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


They  were  all  skilled  in  tailoring,  in  weaving.   I  have  some  kimonos 
that  were  made  by  my  family  and  they  spun  and  wove  and  made  the 
cloth.   I  think  they  did,  because  the  kimonos  came  from  my  mother's 
family.   But  none  of  them  ever  painted  or  were  in  pottery  or  anything 
beyond--!  mean,  I  think  the  closest  was  the  weaving,  which  was 
weaving  the  fabric. 

Right.  Would  pottery  be  the  closest  approach  to  sculpture  as  part 
of  the  Japanese  tradition?  Or  is  sculpture  a  part  of  that  tradition, 
the  artist's  tradition,  too? 

Well,  the  sculpture  is  very  strong,  I  think,  especially  if  you'd 
go  back  into  the  prehistoric  pieces  too,  where  there  were  villages. 
In  the  early  times,  I  think  it's  history  that  they  used  to  bury  the 
servants  with  the  ruler  or  the  head  of  the  house.   But  they  felt 
that  that  was  too  cruel,  so  they  made  these  Haniwa,  these  te"rra 
cotta  figures,  and  when  a  man  died,  then  the  whole  village  went  to 
work.   They  made  these  things  and  fired  them  and  buried  them.   All 
the  mounds  were  built  in  a  certain  direction,  I  guess.   I  don't 
remember  whether  it  was  east  and  west,  or  south  and  north.   But, 
so,  sculpture  is  very  much  a  part  of  the  tradition. 

The  difference,  very  often,  between  the  sculpture  or  art  in 
Japan  and  China  is  that  one  is  very  intricate,  which  is  the  Chinese, 
and  generally  the  Japanese  are  much  simpler  in  their  design.   But 
I  think  it  varies  with  the  period,  you  know.   There  are  very 
decorative  periods  and  very  severe  periods  too.   But  I'm  not  an  art 
historian,  much. 

Nathan:  Only  in  what  you  have  picked  out  that  you  need  and  can  use? 


Buddhists  and  a  Quaker  Church  in  Whittier 


Asawa:   Yes.  My  parents  were  both  Zen  Buddhists.   As  I  can  remember  it  as 
a  child;  it  was  not  going  to  church  every  week.   In  fact,  the  only 
time  we  ever  went  to  the  Buddhist  temple  was  a  memorial  service  or 
«  funeral.  We  did,  as  children,  go  to  a  Quaker  church  and  that  was 
the  only  Christian  church  that  accepted  Japanese  in  this  town,  in 
our  conmunity.  We  could  not  enter  a  Presbyterian,  or  a  Catholic, 
or  *  Methodist  church  at  that  time.   The  Quakers'  headquarters  at 
that  time  was  in  Whittier,  which  is  only  five  miles  away  from 
Norvalk,  and  they  set  up  a  church  where  they  had  a  Japanese  pastor. 

The  only  reason  I  didn't  go  to  it  very  much  is  when  I  was 
about  five  or  fix,  I  went  and  there  was  •  fish  pond  there  and  there 
wtr«  little  boats  there.   I  reached  way  into  the  pond,  fell,  and 


Asawa:   chey  fished  me  out.  The  only  clothes  they  had  were  the  minister's 
son's  clothes.   So,  I  had  to  be  wrapped  in  something  and  I  refused 
to  go  back  to  church  for  a  long  time.   It  was  not  until  I  was  about 
fifteen  that  I  went  back. 


Truck  Fanning  in  California 


Asawa:   Going  back  to  the  farm,  my  mother  woke  up  at  about  three  o'clock  and 
she  got  rice  and  vegetables  cooked.  My  father  got  up  about  four 
o'clock  and  he  would  set  the  gopher  traps  all  over  our  field  the 
night  before  and  he  would  go  around  and  gather  them  all  up.   It  was 
a  boxtrap  and  he'd  have  a  stick  so  he'd  know  where  to  find  them.  They 
were  always  such  pests  that  we  had  to  really  keep  them  under  control. 
Anyway,  that  was  his  daily  routine  and  then  he'd  come  home  and  have 
breakfast  about  six.  Then  he'd  be  out  in  the  field  when  the  workers 
came  at  seven. 

Nathan:  Did  the  children  all  have  breakfast  with  him  also,  at  the  same  time? 

Asawa:  We  all  had  breakfast.  We  all  ate  and  my  mother  was  already  out  in 

the  field  by  seven  too.  '  We  all  had  to  get  up  to  get  ready  to  go  to 
school,  so  we  all  ate  and  then  we  went  on  to  school.  We  had  to  walk — 
it  seems  like  about  three  miles,  but  actually  it  was  probably  about 
a  half  a  mile — to  catch  the  school  bus.  We  went  on  the  bus  every  day. 

The  school  was  a  grammar  school,  from  first  to  eighth  grades. 
We  did  not  go  to  kindergarten. 


School  and  Speaking  English 


Nathan:  Was  this  in  the  town? 

Asawa:   In  Norwalk.  We  didn't  speak  English  until  we  went  to  school.  We 
only  spoke  Japanese  at  home  until  our  older  brother  and  sister 
brought  English  into  the  house.   But  we  never  spoke  it  at  home. 
I  mean,  I  learned  to  speak  English  after  I  started  school. 

Then  I  went  to  school  and  I  was  registered  under  my  Japanese 
name,  Aiko.   By  the  third  year,  the  pressure  was  so  strong  to 
become  Americanized  that  the  name  was  changed  to  Ruth. 

Nathan:  Who  changed  it? 


8 


Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 
Nathan: 
Aaawa: 
Nathan : 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


The  school  recommended  that  we  change  it.   But,  actually,  I  was 
registered--!  mean,  my  birth  certificate  said  Ruth  Aiko  Asawa.   But 
I  used  Aiko  until,  I  think  it  was,  the  beginning  of  the  third  grade 
and  then  we  changed  it  to  Ruth. 

There  were  quite  a  few  Japanese  children  in  the  school  and 
the  Japanese  children  played  together.   It  was  pretty  segregated. 
I  can  only  remember  one  Black  student  in  all  the  eight  years  there 
and  that  was  in  my  sister's  class. 

Were  there  many  Mexican-Americans? 

Many  Mexicans,  yes. 

And  was  it  your  recollection  that  they  came  speaking  Spanish? 

Yes. 

But  everybody  had  to  speak  English? 

Everybody  had  to  speak  English  in  school.   There  was  no  language -- 
ESL  [English  as  a  second  language]  program--there.   But,  as  I 
remember,  except  for  two  or  three,  the  Spanish -speaking  students 
did  quite  well.   The  Japanese  students  excelled,  particularly  in 
math  and  even  in  grammar.   I  mean,  in  anything  that  had  to  do  with 
memory  work,  they  were  extremely  good,  but  once  they  had  to  start 
thinking,  then  they  fell  apart.   That  is  typical.   They  could  follow 
directions  fine. 

I  remember  only  one  very  specific  girl,  one  or  two  specific 
girl  students  who  talked  back.  There  was  one  girl  and  I  knew  even 
her  name,  Ramona  Gonzales.   She  was  a  Mexican  girl  and  she  was  very 
well  developed,  an  almost  mature  girl,  and  she  was  the  only  person 
I  remember  ever  talking  back  to  the  teacher  in  those  eight  years. 

I  was  amazed  at  her  and  I  sort  of  admired  her  for  being  that 
way,  because  in  some  instances  she  was  right  in  whatever  it  was  that 
came  up.  We  all  sort  of  followed,  you  know,  and  she  would  come  up 
and  stand  like  this,  like  a  Spanish  dancer  [hands  on  hips],  [laughter] 

With  real  fire? 

Yes.'  She  was  really  something. 

Anyway,  one  of  the  things  that  I  remember  so  well  (I  mean,  I 
remember  it  now  more  than  ever  because  I  compare  it  with  what  we 
have  now  in  school)  was  that  we  had,  I  guess,  a  relatively  new 
building.  The  1933  earthquake  collapsed  our  auditorium,  parts  of 
the  school.  Anyway,  they  were  rebuilt.  But  we  used  to  have  visiting 
performers. 


Performers.   Art   and  Music  Teachers 


Nathan:     Artists? 

Asawa:  Artists,  dancers,  magicians,  tap  dancers,  Mexican  puppeteers.  This 
was  called  an  assembly  and  we  had  it  once  a  month.  We  had  at  least 
eight  or  nine  visits  from  professional  people. 

Nathan:      Did   the   school   sponsor   this? 

Asawa:       Yes.     This  was  done  by  the  State  of  California.     We  also  had   a  full- 
time  music    teacher  and   a  full-time  art   teacher,   and  both  of   them  I 
remember  very  well.      Catherine  Gregory  was  our  music    teacher  and 
she,    I  think,   must  have  been  a  frustrated   singer  because  every  chance 
she  had,    she'd   sing  us   an  aria.     You  know  how  when  somebody  sings 
hard   or  strains,   a  big  blood  vessel  pops   up   in  their   forehead,    sort 
of  right  here  at   the    temple   [gestures].      She   used   to  go  up  and  hit 
those  high  notes  and   then  this  would  pop  out.      She'd   go  through  all 
the  drama  of  waving  her  arms.      I  was  always   impressed  and   the  kids 
always   thought   it  was  so  funny  they'd   snicker   too.      But   then  we 
would    try  to  imitate  her  and  try  to  get   that.  The  thing  that   impressed 
us  was   that  blood  vessel   there   that  would  pop  out  and  we  couldn't  do 
it  because  we  weren't   old   enough   to  have   that.     Anyway,    she  was  very 
good.      She'd   play  the  piano  and   sing  to  us   and  we'd   sing. 

In  those  early  days  we  didn't  have  an  education  department  and 
people  weren't    trained    to  become    teachers,   but  were  hired   because 
they  had   a  specific   skill.     Then  we  were  much  better  off,    because   the 
art   teacher  wasn't   taking  an  art  course  in  art   education.      She  was 
actually  a  practicing  artist.      So,   I  think  that   that  affected  me.      It 
didn't  affect  everybody  else   in  the   family.      It  didn't  make   them 
artists,   but  I  certainly  think  that  did  help. 

Nathan:  You  caught   a   spark  from  her? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  That  was  because   she  was  an  artist? 

Asawa:  Yes.      She  was  an  artist,   yes. 

Nathan:  Is   this  Gwendolyn  Cowan? 

Asawa:       Yes.      She  used   to  have  a   temper  that  was   so  terrible  and  she'd   go 
around  chasing  some  of  those  boys  with  a  ruler  and  all.      She'd  get 
so  mad,    she'd  hit  them  and   the  ruler  would  break  and   they'd   laugh. 
Then  she'd   get   so  mad   she'd  cry.      But   she  painted   and   she  really 
knew  how  to   paint.      She  was    impressive   to   us.      I  don't   know  what 
ever  happened    to  her.      That  was  a  long   time  ago. 


10 


Nathan:     Did  she  have  materials   so  that  you  could  paint? 

Asawa:        I   remember  doing   a   lot   of   large  pictures    for  Thanksgiving,    great 
big  things—you  know,    the  Pilgrims.      We  did   a  lot   of   things.      We 
worked    in  clay  and   I   remember   that   sort   of   specifically.      Not   that 
we   did   a   lot   of   ceramics,    but   I   remember   a   project  we  had   of  making 
a  bird. 

I  worked   and  worked   on   the   bird.      I  couldn't  make   it    look  like 
a  bird   and   I  couldn't   figure   out  why   it  was  wrong   until   another 
student  had  made   one.      Then   I  realized  why  my  bird  wasn't    looking 
right.      I  had   put   a  chin  on   it  and   a   bird  doesn't  have   a  chin.      If 
you  notice,    a  bird  has   a   beak. 

We   used   to  cure   and    stretch   rabbit   skins,    and  we  did   a   lot   of 
things,   actually,  when  I  think  back  on   it .     We  built  castles. 

Nathan:     Out  of   this  sort  of  non-edible,   play  dough? 

Asawa:        No.      The   castles  were  made   out   of   cardboard.      Then  we  had  a   real 
garden,   a   school   garden. 

Nathan:     That   seems  really  very  progressive  for  a  small   school. 

Asawa:       Well,    the  State  of  California  was  very   far  ahead   at    that   time. 

They  were  much  more   ahead   then   than   they  are   now.      I   think  there 
are   too  many  greedy   interests   in   the   schools  now. 

Nathan:      Sort  of   self-serving? 

Asawa:        Self-serving,   yes,   built    in   so   that   it  has   nothing   really   to  do  with 
education. 

We   learned   the  Palmer  method    (of  writing).     We   always   used   to 
get   in  rows  like   this   [ gestures] --first  row,   second   row,   and   third 
row.      If  you  started   using  your  wrist   instead   of  your  arm,    like 
this  [ gestures] -- 

Nathan:     Oh,   to  draw  those  circles? 

Aaawa:        The   "O's"  like   this,   we'd  have   to  do.      Then,    if  we  were   caught   doing 
this  [gestures   flexing  wrist]    to  try   to  make   it  accurate,    then  we 
were   thrown  out  of   that  first  row  and   sent  back.     That   is  one  of 
the   things   that   I   remember. 

Nathan:     How  is  your  handwriting   today? 

Asawa:       Terrible.1      (Laughter]     Yes,   I  have  very  poor  handwriting,   but   I 

think   it's   readable.      I  mean,  when   I  have   to  draw,    I   draw  okay,    but-- 
[laughter] . 


11 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


Did  you  feel  chat  she  gave  recognition  to  students  who  were 
interested  in  art?  Did  she  encourage  them? 

Oh,  yes.   She  encouraged  them  very  much.   I  remember,  very  much, 


On  the  Playground 


Asawa:   I  think  the  other  thing  that  we  shouldn't  overlook  was  the  amount  of 
playground  equipment  that  they  had  in  the  school.  They  had  a  large 
number  of  swings.   They  had  slides.   They  had  monkey  bars,  which 
were  the  kind  that  they  climbed  over.  We  had  handball  courts.  We 
had  the  "maypole."  I  don't  know  whether  you  remember  that.   It's 
built  on  a  pole.   You  can  take  one  of  these  —  like  this  [gestures 
hanging  on],  and  you  run  and  you  go  up. 

Nathan:   Oh,  and  it  swings  out? 

Asawa:   And  then  you  swing  out  and  out  until  you're  off  the  ground.  There 
were  many  things  like  that  in  our  school,  in  the  schools  at  that 
time,  that  I  think  don't  exist  any  more.   In  some  ways,  when  I  think 
of  it,  everything  that  we  have  now  has  been  so  watered  down  or  cut 
back  that  even  the  physical  exercise  is  not  there  for  children  now, 
because  everybody's  worried  about  safety,  liability,  you  know, 
lawsuits.   I  mean,  if  you  skinned  your  knee,  you  skinned  your  knee. 
That's  tough,  you  know?  And  I  did  that  many,  many  times.   I  could 
still  feel  the  burn  from  it  or  the  burn  on  my  arm.   There  are  many 
things  we  learned  to  do,  besides  working  out  on  the  farm  and  at 
school.   I'm  not  saying  that  I  enjoyed  it.   I'm  just  saying  that 
all  these  things  happened  to  be  there,  and  had  to  be  done  or  were 
available. 


Vacation  and  Onion-Planting 


Nathan:   So,  you  really  had  physical  experience  in  addition  to  schooling? 

Asawa:   Yes.  Christmas  vacation  meant  that  we  were  going  to  have  to  plant 
about  five  to  eight  acres  of  green  onions. 

Nathan:   You  planted  them?  There  wasn't  a  machine  to  plant  them? 

Asawa:   Oh,  no.  We  did  it  by  hand.  You  know  how  you  buy  your  green  onions? 

Nathan:  Yes. 


12 


Asawa:   The  tops  are  cut  and  the  roots  are  trimmed.   In  the  field,  rows  are 
harrowed,  you  know. 

Nathan:  About  a  foot  apart  or  so? 

Asawa:   Yes.  They  come  up  like  mounds,  like  this  [gestures].  What  you  do 
on  this  mound,  you  put  two  rows  of  onions. 

Nathan:   On  the  top  of  the  mound? 

Asawa:   On  the  top  of  the  mound.   And  you  put  the  onion  plants  about  four 
or  five  inches  apart.  What  you  do  is  you  have  your  onions  like 
this  [gestures]  and  you  take  and  you  get  your  onion  with  your  right 
hand. 

Nathan:  From  your  left  hand? 

Asawa:   Your  left  hand.  This  is  an  onion  in  your  right  hand,  and  then  you 
push  it  in  and  then  you  take  this  finger  and  close  the  hole. 

Nathan:   Sort  of  pinching  it? 

Asawa:  Yes.  You  put  it  in  and  you  pinch  it,  and  put  it  in  and  pinch  it. 
I  mean,  this  is  an  endless,  endless  kind  of  row  that  you  have  to 
plant. 

Nathan:  Right.  Well,  it  must  have  given  you  strong  fingers!   [Laughter] 

Just  seeing  those  long  rows  ahead  of  you  must  have  been  discouraging. 

(Thank  you.  These  cookies  look  so  good,  I  will  have  one.   I 
somehow  expect  it  to  have  a  face  on  it,  [laughter]  or  a  cablecar. 
These  are  delicious.  ) 

Asawa:   After  months  of  making  play  dough  figures  about  Christmas  time, 
Albert  would  ask,  "Do  we  have  any  edible  cookies?"  [Laughter]   I 
had  been  going  twenty-four  hours  a  day. 

Nathan:  You  baked  the  figures  right  at  home? 
Asawa:   Yes. 

Nathan:  How  long  did  it  take  you?  We'll  get  to  that  later,  but  I'm  curious 
about  how  long  it  took. 

Asawa:   About  an  hour,  an  hour  and  a  half. 

Nathan:  For  each  batch? 

Asawa:   Yea.  We  burned  out  a  thermostat  one  Christmas. 


13 


Learning  Language   and   Culture 


Nathan:     What   a  job.1      I  wonder,    just  briefly,  whether  your  experience   in 
the  school  without  knowing  English   somehow  connected  with  your 
interest   in  bilingualism--you  were   saying  you're  going  to  be  a 
bi-lingual  education  meeting  today. 

Asawa:       The  bi-lingual   group  has  asked  me   to  help  them.     What  I'm  trying 
to  say  is   that   the   language    is  only  one  part  of  the  program,    that 
if  you  are   going  to  go  into   the   bi-lingual  work,   you  have   to  go 
into  the  bi-cultural  aspect  of   it,   and   that   is   the  thing  that  will 
link  you  with    the  outside  community.     That's   the   thing  that  you 
can  show  the   rest  of   the   school.      You  can  teach   them  paper   folding. 
You  can  teach   them  doll  making.     You  can  teach  them  all  of   these 
things   that   are  valuable  to  every  child,   whereas   the   language   is 
only  limited   to   those  who   are  going   to  be   interested    in   it.      By   the 
time  you  end   up,   you're  going  to  have  only  a  handful  of  people 
interested   in  the   language  actually,    unless  you  develop  the   interest 
in   the  other  parts  of  ethnic- 
Nathan:     Experience? 
Asawa:        Yes. 
Nathan:      That  makes   sense. 

Asawa:       Yes.      I   think  that   if   they're  going   into  the  Japanese   language,    they 
should   by  all  means,    absolutely,    include   brush   painting   right   along 
with   it   so  the  calligraphy   is   being   the  visual   part   of   learning   the 
language.      They're   learning  also   the   painting   technique,    so   that    it 
all   comes   together.      That's  what  we  did  as  children.     We  went   to 
the   language   school   and   we  also   learned   calligraphy.      Every  week  on 
Saturday  morning  we  went   to  Japanese   language   school. 

I  resisted   learning  the   language,   probably  psychologically, 
because  you  felt   that  you  should   really  learn  English.     That  was 
going   to  be  the   language  that  you'd   use   in   this  country,   so  you 
should  do   this.      So,    there  was  a   resistance  to  learning,   or  a  block 
in  learning  the  Japanese   language.     Now,    if   it  was  only  that 
language  and  no  calligraphy  for  me,  then    I  probably  would  have  really 
blocked   out   the  Japanese  language.   But  having  had   the  calligraphy 
with   it--I   think  that  was  as  much  my   interest   in  painting  as  making 
water   color  on  paper,    because  when  you  do   these   strokes  you're 
learning   to  write   and  you're  also  painting. 

It's  sort  of   the  beginning  of  what  we  were   talking  about,   about 
having  dual   interests,   not   being  just   concerned  with  painting  or 
sculpture,   but  the   total   thing,    the  total  act  or  the  action.     When 


14 


Asawa:   you're  working  in  calligraphy,  you're  not  watching  what  your  brush 
is  doing,  but  you're  watching  the  spaces  around  it. 

You're  watching  what  it  isn't  doing,  so  that  you're  taking 

care  of  both  the  negative  space  and  the  positive  space.   In  a  way, 

it's  like  if  you  begin  to  apply  that  in  a  practical  way,  if  you 

talk  about  one  person,  if  you  concentrate  on  oneself,  you  don't 

really  see  yourself.   But  if  you  don't  concern  yourself  with 

yourself  and  you  begin  to  become  aware  of  the  people  around  you, 
then  that  defines  you. 


Work  or  School 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 

Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Aaawa: 


Getting  back  to   the    farm,    I   think   the   thing   that  made   school   so 
appealing  was    that    the  work  on   the    farm  was   so  hard    that   school  was 
playtime.      So,    if  you  don't  have   anything  you  can   relate    to   like 
that,    then  I  think  that's,    in  a  way,    sort  of  the   tragedy  of  today's 
kids.      They  don't  have   anything,    except   for   those  who  have    to  work, 
who  work  selling  newspapers,   who  work  four  hours   a  day   or  work  at 
a   part-time   job.      Most   people  don't  have   something   that's  worse 
than   school.      [Laughter]      So,    I   think  that  we   loved    to   go    to   school. 
We  didn't  want   to  be   sick  at  home.   We  knew  that  we  would   end   up 
having   to  cook   lunch   or  dinner,    or   even  have   to  go   to  work.      This 
is  what  my  mother   always   used    to  say,    "Well,    if  you  don't   go   to 
school,   you've   got   to  work."     So,  we'd   always   go   to  school.      But 
we   all   really   loved    school,    the  whole   adventure   of  getting   on   the 
bus  and   going,    and   coming  back,   and   the  whole   business. 

One   of   the   things  which  always   embarrassed    us  was    that    for 
Christmas,   we'd  have   to   pack   two   sacks  of  vegetables   to  give    to  our 
bus   drivers  and   that  was   their  Christmas   present.      But   anyway,    they 
seemed   to  like   it.      [Laughter]      But    it  was   embarrassing   to   us. 


Did  you  bring  presents   to   the   teacher? 

Yes.     We  never  celebrated  Christmas  very  much, 
our  celebration.      We  had   a   feast   then. 

Did  your  parents  ever  come   to   the  school? 


New  Year's  was   really 


No,   I  don't   think  they  ever  did  come   to   the  school   that   I  can 
remember. 

You  had   report  cards? 
We  had    report  cards. 


15 


Nathan:     Were   they  interested    in  seeing  your  cards? 

Asawa:        Yes.      But  they  never  knew  what  was  going  on,   never.     My  mother 
never   learned   to  speak  English.    She   still  doesn't  speak  English 
now.     My  father  spoke   enough   to  get  him  through  business  and  he 
could  carry  on  a  conversation.     But  neither  one  ever  knew  what  we 
were  going   to  college  for  or  what  we  were  going  to  school   for. 
We  were  all   supposed    to  study,   but   that's   the  extent  of   it. 

Nathan:      They  had   some   feeling   for   scholarship? 
Asawa:        That  was    important,   yes. 


The  Work  Routine  and  Farm  Life 


Nathan:     Were  you,    as   children,    aware   that   there  was   a  Depression   in   the 
land? 

Asawa:       Oh,   yes.     Very  much. 
Nathan:      It  was  discussed? 

Asawa:       Yes.     We  felt   it  very  much.     You'd  get  a  nickel    for  a  box  of 

beautiful  tomatoes   like   this  [gestures]    and  you'd  get  50  cents   for 
six  dozen  radishes,   you'd  get  35  cents   for  a  crate  of  cabbage  and 
we'd   get   ten  cents   for  beautiful  melons   like   this   [gestures] — for 
two   dozen  melons    like    that. 

Then,   on   top  of   that,  we  used    to  get  exploited  by  shippers 
who'd  come   in  and  contract  with   us   to  get  all   of  our  celery,   all 
of  our   tomatoes—whatever   it  was.     We'd   pick  and   they'd   pack  and 
then  they'd  go  bankrupt.     Year  after  year   this  happened.     This  has 
happened   because   of  an   inability  to  do  business,    anything  beyond 
the  one-to-one   arrangements. 

Nathan:     You  really  weren't   in  a  position   to  get  acquainted  with  a  number  of 
people  and  pick  the  best   person? 

Asawa:        Right.     We  were  just   sort  of  powerless,   and   ignorant;    it  was  really 
just  ignorance. 

So  we  worked  and  we  worked  and  we  worked  and  never  got  anything. 
When  we  got  home  after   school — we  got  home  about   three-thirty--we 'd 
work  until  about   eight.      Then  we'd   eat,    and   they  would  work  on  after 
dinner   till   about   eleven. 

Nathan:   It  was  endless,  really. 


16 


Asawa:   Yes.   Really  a  hard  life,  but  I  think  it  was  good. 
Nathan:  What  kinds  of  things  did  you  eat? 

Asawa:   We  always  had  rice.  We  had  a  big  pot  that  was  cooked  outside. 
My  mother  had  a  pot.   She  made  a  wood  fire.   We  had  rice  and 
pickles.  We  ate  a  lot  of  vegetables—cooked  vegetables.   Very 
little  meat.   Every  week  my  mother  would  kill  a  chicken  for  us; 
we  had  chicken  every  week.  My  father  refused  to  do  that;  my 
mother  had  to  do  all  that. 

Nathan:  He  was  too  tender-hearted  to  kill  it? 

Asawa:   Yes.  We  once  thought  that  we  were  going  to  raise  some  hogs. 

We  had  about  four  or  five  pigs.   I'll  never  forget  that.  The  time 
came  to  butcher  them.   I  can  still  hear  them  squealing  in  the 
background.  We  had  never  eaten  fresh  pork;  we'd  always  had  bacon 
but  never  fresh  pork.   It's  the  last  time  we  ever  had  pigs.  My 
father  couldn't  stand  butchering.   The  only  thing  we  ever  had  was 
the  chickens.  My  mother  would  have  to  chop  the  head  off. 

Nathan:  And  you  had  eggs? 

Asawa:   We  always  had  eggs.   We  had  a  little  hen  house,  and  we  had  horses 
and  we  had  a  dog. 

Nathan:   Cows  for  milk? 

Asawa:   No.  We  had  a  dairy  next  to  us.  We  bought  a  quart  of  milk  a  day. 
That  was  for  all  of  us,  so  we  drank  very  little  milk.   The  only 
time  we  had  milk,  drank  milk,  was  when  we  put  it  over  cereal. 

We  ate  the  vegetables  in  season. 
Nathan:  Did  you  have  fruit  also? 

Asawa:   We  always  had  fruit.  My  father  always  had  a  box  of  apples  and 

always  a  box  of  oranges.   Once  a  week  he'd  buy  a  box  of  apples  and 
a  box  of  oranges. 

Nathan:  Did  you  have  the  feeling  that  there  was  enough  to  eat  as  a  child? 

Asawa:   Yes.  Not  anything  luxurious,  but  we  had  plenty  of  lettuce  (we 

would  eat  it  out  in  the  field),  and  we'd  eat  all  the  melons  that 
got  broken  or  were  over-ripe.   So  we  had  really  plenty  of  fresh 
food,  fruit. 

Nathan:  What  about  clothes?  How  did  you  manage  for  clothes? 


17 


Asawa:       We  had  very  little  clothes,   actually.     We'd  work  a  whole  summer 
and  we'd  each  get  about   $10.     Maybe  we'd   buy  a  pair  of  shoes  for 
$1.95,  we'd  buy  underwear  and  a  couple  of  dresses. 

Nathan:     Did   the  girls  wear  pants   to   school? 

Asawa:       No.     We   always  wore  a  dress. 

Nathan:     Did  you  hand-me-down   from  one   to  another? 

Asawa:        Not   really.     They  never  really  lasted   that   long.     We  bought  J.C. 
Penney  clothes.     We  would  wear  a  dress   two  days,   and  three  days. 

Nathan:      Take   it   off  when  you  got  home? 

Asawa:       Take   it  off,   wear   it   the  next  day.      So  we  had   two  or  three  dresses 
for  a  year. 

Nathan:     Did  other   families  visit  you— other  people   in   the  general  area? 

Asawa:       What  was  very   interesting  was  we  never  had,    except   for  our  relatives, 
anybody   in   the  house;   nobody  ever   came    into   the  house. 

Nathan:      Is   that  more  or   less   traditional? 

Asawa:       Tradition,   yes.     We'd   always  go  out  and   sit  outside.     They'd  sit 
in   the  car  and  we'd  come   to  talk  to   them  in  the  car. 

We   used   to  have   a   bath  house   outside  and   I  used    to   be   in 
charge  of   the  fire. 

Nathan:     Was   that  a   special  sort  of  tub— the  traditional  kind   of   tub? 

Asawa:        We  had   a  wooden   one   at   one   time  with  a  galvanized   bottom,    and    then 
we   also  had   a  galvanized    tub.      There  would   be  a  wooden  platform 
inside  so  you  can  sit   so  you  wouldn't  be  directly  on  the  metal. 

Nathan:     Yes.     Was   there  a  pump   to  fill   it  with? 

Asawa:       Well,  we  had   a  faucet;   a  faucet  came   in,    and   then  we  also  had  a 
plug  that  we  plugged    in,   and  pulled  out  to  drain.     Then  whenever 
my  mother  was   germinating   seeds,    like  cucumber   seeds,    to  get   them 
started,  we'd   leave   the  water   in  the  tub  and  we'd   soak  our  bag 
of  seeds   into  that. 

Nathan:      Because    it  was  warm? 

Asawa:       Yes.      It  was  actually  conserving  water  and   using  that,   and  also 
probably  even  whatever  came   off   of  our   body  might   be  nourishing 
for  the   seeds   too.      I   don't   know.      But   I   remember  her  doing   that. 
She   put   radish   seeds    in  a   sack  so  that   they  would    sprout   faster. 


18 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan : 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 
Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 
Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Did  you  have  books  at  home? 

No.  The  only  books  we  had  was  one  set  of  the  American  Educator, 
which  was  an  encyclopedia  that  some  salesman  came  and  sold  to  us. 

Did  you  actually  use  it  or  read  it? 

I  remember  a  couple  of  things  in  there,  yes.  My  favorite  was  the 
page  that  had  drawings  to  say  "What's  wrong  with  the  picture?" 
You  know,  the  flag  was  going  this  way  and  the  wind  was  going  that  — 
I  remember  that  very  vividly.   I'd  love  to  find  that  set,  because 
that  was  my  favorite.  That  really  was  the  extent  of  our  books. 
We  had  a  couple  of  books,  but  not  really  many. 

Did  you  play  games  with  the  other  children  in  the  family? 

Yes.   We  used  to  play  games --Japanese  games  —  sort  of  like  a 
monopoly  kind  of  game  that  was  actually  a  war  game. 

Is  that  "Go"? 

No.      It  was   just  kind   of  one   of   these  number  games.      You  step   three 
and   go   back  four—like   that. 

Oh  yes.  Did  you  play  team  games? 

I'm  trying  to  remember  what  we  did.  We  fought  a  lot. 

That  happens  [laughter]. 

We  never  hit  anybody.  We  never  really  got  punished,  except  once 
or  twice  when  we  really  misbehaved.  We  never  got  spanked.  We 
never  learned  to  fist  fight  with  other  kids.  Never  could  do  that. 

Did  you  fight  verbally? 

Yes.  Or  silently—not  argue. 

You  would  not  argue? 

Not  much.  Except  I  argued  with  my  sister  all  the  time;  I  had  one 
sister  who  argued  with  me.  For  example,  we  never  talked  at  the 
dinner  table.  We  never  had  discussions.  My  mother  and  father 
always  talked,  but  we  never  discussed  anything.   Also,  we  never 
asked  questions;  we  never  asked  personal  questions. 

That's  why  when  I  talk  to  my  family,  Albert  always  asks,  "Did 
you  ask  about  this?"  And  I  say,  "No."  We  never  talked  about 
personal  things,  hardly.  We  do  now  but  we  didn't  then.  The  word 


19 


Asawa:        "love"   is  never  used,   or  we  didn't   use   it,   and   I  think  this   is  sort 
of  a  Japanese   trait.      I  don't  think  it  was  just  us;    I   think  it  was 
sort   of  a—what   is   it  called,    a  more? 

Nathan:  I  guess   so,   yes. 

Asawa:  You  weren't  nosy;    that's  very  bad  manners  to  be  nosy. 

Nathan:  Did  you  hug  each  other? 

Asawa:  No. 

Nathan:  That  again  is  part  of  this   sort  of  private  quality? 

Asawa:        Right.     But  my  mother  nursed   us  a  long  time.      She  nursed   every  child 
until   the  next  one  came.      Some  of  us  were   two  years  apart,   one  was 
five  years  apart,    and   she  kept  nursing  till   the  next  one  came.      So 
we  had   that   kind   of  — 

Nathan:      That   contact? 

Asawa:       Yes.     We  were  also  carried   on  her  back;    she  carried  all  of  us  on 
her  back. 

Nathan:     Did  one  child  carry  another  child? 
Asawa:       Yes.     We  all   took  care  of  each  other. 

I  remember  the  1933  earthquake.      I   think  it  happened  on  a 
Sunday.     We  didn't  go  to  school  because  our  school  auditorium  had 
crumbled  or  the  gym  had  crumbled. 

Nathan:     Could  you  feel   it  in  your  house  or  in  the  field? 

Asawa:       Oh  yes,  we  felt   it.      I   remember  holding  onto  kind   of  a  wooden  beam 
when   it  happened.     My  mother  would   tell   stories  about  how  people 
were  swallowed   up.     We  would   envision  ourselves  getting  swallowed 
up. 

Nathan:      [Laughter]      Funny—that  has  reappeared   so  many  times. 

Asawa:        But  actually  people  have  been—when  the  earth  was  cracked  open, 
people   fell   in. 

Nathan:      Really?     I  wasn't  sure  that   ever  occurred. 

Asawa:        It  actually   is  a  reality.      But  anyway,   we'd  get   scared.     My  older 
sister  and   I  had    to    take   care  of   the  younger  ones. 


20 


Nathan:  Did  you  have  sort  of  a  special  one? 

Asawa:   Yes,  my  older  sister--my  sister  next  to  me.   I'm  not  too  close 
to  her  now.  We're  close  but  we  don't  think  alike  anymore. 

Nathan:  No.  People  change.  When  your  father  and  mother  and  all  of  you 
were  working  on  the  land,  was  the  land  leased  or  rented? 

Asawa:   Leased.   I  think  it  was  leased  from  the  Suttons.  The  Sutton  family 
owned  it.  One  of  the  first  farms  that  we  lived  on  was  I  guess  owned 
by  Hargitt.  We  remained  friends  throughout  the  war.  They  were  very 
good  people.  We  also  rented  from  a  family  named  Strong.   We  were 
in  Norwalk  and  La  Habra;  those  were  the  two  places  that  we  had  a 
real  farm. 

Nathan:  Did  you  move? 

Asawa:   We  moved  to  at  least  two  different  places,  but  I  never  lived  in 
La  Habra;  I  lived  in  Norwalk. 

Nathan:  What  kind  of  housing  did  you  have? 

Asawa:   Very  primitive;  just  a  board  and  batten  house  that  was  built  with 
paper  walls,  paper  ceiling  and  tin  roof.   It  was  built  by  my 
father. 

Nathan:   I  see.   The  house  wasn't  provided  for  you  by  the  people  from  whom 
you  leased? 

Asawa:   No,  not  really.  We  built  the  house  and  built  the  barn,  the  garage. 
Nathan:  You  really  had  to  be  able  to  turn  your  hand  to  many  things. 

Asawa:   Yes.  My  father  used  to  save  every  nail,  I  remember,  and  straighten 
it  out.   I  had  to  repair  boxes  for  tomatoes  —  that  was  one  of  my 
jobs. 

Nathan:  Those  were  the  days  of  the  thin,  wooden  boxes? 

Asawa:   Yes,  right.  Those  boxes  were  always  broken,  so  we'd  have  to  repair 
a  section. 

Nathan:  How  did  you  get  those  little  thin  pieces  of  wood?  Did  you  buy 
them? 

Asawa:   No,  no.   Actually  there  was  a  box  company  that  used  to  build  the 
boxes.  Then  as  we  used  them,  they  would  get  broken  and  we'd  have 
to  repair  on«  side  or  a  bottom  or  something.  So  we  were  always 
having  to  repair  those  boxes  and  crates. 


21 


Nathan:      So  you  had   to   learn  how  to  use-- 

Asawa:       How  to  hammer  and    take  a  hatchet  and  chop  it   so   that  you'd  have 
a  piece  of  wood    that  went   like   this   [gestures],   and  you'd  have 
to  chop  it  so  that  you'd  get  this  one  little  piece  so   that   it 
would   fit.     Or   if   it  was   too  wide,   you'd  have  to  chop  it   in  half 
and    sort  of  break  it   so  that  you  could  get   that  piece  fit,    so 
the   radishes  wouldn't   fall   through. 

Nathan:     Did  you  usually  have  a  good  crop?     Were  you  children  aware  of 
whether  it  was  a  good  crop  or  not? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  Did.  the  weather  affect  this? 

Asawa:  Yes.  We  had  an  irrigation  system  that  we  put  in. 

Nathan:  Did  you?  You  put  that  in  yourselves? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  When  you  would  move  from  one  place  to  the  other,  would  you  pick 
up  the  irrigation  system? 

Asawa:  No.  These  were  all  pipes.  We  had  an  engine,  a  pump  house. 

Nathan:  But  you  would  leave  that  when  you  moved? 

Asawa:  Yes,  but  we  didn't  move  very  often.  We  moved  only  once  or  twice. 

Nathan:  And  your  father  laid  the  pipe  system. 

Asawa:  Yes.   I  don't  remember  it  very  much,  but  I  know  that  he  did  that. 

Nathan:  Was  there  a  problem  of  water  supply? 

Asawa:  No.  We  always  had  plenty  of  water. 

Nathan:  When  you  were  a  child  there,  did  you  have  any  idea  of  what  you 
wanted  to  be  when  you  grew  up? 

Asawa:   Oh,  I  wanted  to  be  an  artist.   I  had  a  cousin  who  was  an  artist  and 
he  was  ten  years  older  than  I  was. 

Nathan:  And  so  you  got  your  wish. 


22 


The  Haeiwara  Plaque   (1974) 


Aaava:       [Pause  for  phone   interruption.]      That  was  about  the  plaque. 
Nathan:     You  made  a  plaque   for  the  Tea  Garden   in  Golden  Gate  Park? 

Asava:       Yes.     That's  to  honor  the   family  that  developed   it,    the  Hagiwara 
family.      See,    they  lived   in   the  Tea  Garden.      They  lived    in  Golden 
Gate  Park. 

Nathan:      I  didn't  realize  that. 

Asava:       They  lived   in  a  house   in  the  Tea  Garden  in  exchange  for  designing 
and  maintaining  the  garden.     They  had  a  little  tea  house  where 
they  sold    tea  and   cookies   and   some  pottery  and   some   tea   cups   for 
their   source  of   income.     Mr.   Hagiwara   used    to  go  out   to  work 
as  a  gardener,    to  support  the  family.      They  were  in  there  until 
1942. 

Nathan:     And  then  they  were  sent  away  to  a  relocation  camp? 

Asawa:        Their  home  was  demolished,   and  when   they  came  back,    they  couldn't 
get   the   concession  back. 

Nathan:     After  they  had  developed   it? 

Aaava:       Right.     This   injustice  was  felt  by  many  people.      I  mean,    they  had 

no  contract.     That's  a  bitter  pill,    I  think,    for  the  city  to  swallow 
and,    so,    Isabel  Bachels  and   the  McLaren  Society  raised  money  and   I 
agreed  to  do  the  plaque.      So,    two  years  later,    it's   in  now. 
Yesterday  we  put  it   in. 

Nathan:     Where?     I'll  have  to  go  see  it. 

Asava:       When  you  walk  into  the  Tea  Garden,  when  you  go  to   the  main  entrance, 
to  the   left   there's  a  big  rock  and   the  plaque   is  mounted   on   the   rock. 

Nathan:     What  happened   to  the  family.     Are   they  still  alive? 

George  Hagiwara,  who  is   the  grandson  of  the  original  Hagiwara,    still 
liv«s  here.     There's  a  sister  also  in  the  City.     They  finally  are 
doing  something  about  it  now  and   the  McLaren  Society  would   like   to 
get  that  strip,    that  piece  of  street   there,  named   for  the  family. 

That   is  Dianne  Feinstein  who's   interested   in  this? 

Yes.     She's  very  supportive  of  it.      It's   the  Park  and  Recreation 
Department.     So,  we'll   see  what  happens  now. 


Nathan: 
Asava: 


23 


Asawa:       Where  were  we? 

Nathan:  We  were  in  school.   I  did  want  to  get  you  into  high  school  somewhere. 

Asawa:  Oh,  yes.   [Laughter]  Well,  I  graduated  in  1939. 

Nathan:  That  was  high  school? 

Planned  Visit   to  Japan.    1939 


Asawa:        No,   elementary  school.     When  I  was   ten,    I  was  going  to  go   to  Japan 
Co  live  with  my  mother's   family  for  a  year  or  two  to  learn  Japanese. 
I  was   ready  to  go  then,   and  my  father's   second   cousin  was  going  to 
take  me.      For  some  reason,  he  got   sick  or  decided  he  didn't  want 
to  bother  with   it,   so  I  never  went. 

Nathan:     Was   it   usual   to  send   the  children  back? 

Asawa:        Send   somebody  back.      So,    in  1939,    I  was  13  and   I  was  already  beyond 
the  age  of  wanting  to  go   to  Japan,   so,    I  didn't  go.     My  younger 
sister  went.     At   that   time,    she  was  nine  years  old.      So,   everything 
that  my  aunt  had   saved—you  know,   clothes  and   everything;    she  made 
ready  for  me  with  a  trunk- -my   sister   inherited.     Well,   unfortunately, 
she   stayed   until   the  war  had   started   and   she  was  held   in  Japan  as 
an  enemy  to  the  country,  with  a  police  guard. 

Nathan:      She  was   interned    in  Japan? 

Asawa:        She  wasn't   interned,    but   she  was  watched   in  this  community.     The 

stories  about  how  naive  the  village  was,    they  were  pretty   incredible 
too.      They  would   practice  defense  with  bamboo   sticks,    and    they 
were  going   to  defend   themselves   from  the  American    invasion  with 
these  bamboo   sticks  and    these  exercises.      Actually,    finally,  when 
the   raid   came   and   the   town  was   bombed-- 

Nathan:     Was   she   in  Hiroshima? 

Asawa:       No,    she  was   in  Koriyama,   which   is   in  Fukushima.     They  would   submerge 
themselves   in  the   river,    stick  their  heads  out  of  the  water.      But 
when  she  thinks  of   it  and   the  stories   that   she  tells  me  are  just 
sort  of  incredible.     However,   one   teacher  was  talking  about  Hitler 
because  they  were  allies  at  that   time:      "Hitler,  when  he  was  a 
little  boy,   didn't   sharpen  his  pencil  like   this  [small  gestures, 
sharpening].     He  sharpened   it   like  this,    so  that  he  shaved   only 
the  wood  off  his  pencil.     And  that  was  part  of  his  greatness."     That 
was  to   impress   the  children  about  how  they  should  be   thrifty. 


24 


II     WORLD  WAR   II  AND   COLLEGE  YEARS 


A  Junior   in  High   School 


Asawa:  So,  anyway,  in  1939  she  went  to  Japan.  I  graduated  and  went  to 
high  school  and  majored  in  art  at  that  time.  I  guess  I  thought 
it  was  pretty  good  for  where  I  was  at  that  time. 

In  that   first  year,  we  had  the  first  modern  dance  teacher, 
I  mean  the  first  one  in  the  State  of  California  then.      She  came 
and   she   taught.     Her  name  was  Frederika  Moore.      I  enjoyed    it  very 
much.     That  was  my  P.E.      I  studied   art   and   I  was   very  good   in 
English.      In  social   studies,    I  didn't  do  so  well.      In  speech,    I 
didn't  do  so  well  either.   But   I  had  a  good  time. 


We  had  music.      I'm  trying  to   think  of  when   it  was. 
it  was   in  high  school   that   I  was   in  a  choral  class. 


I   think 


I  was   in  my  junior  year,    I  guess,   when   the  war  started.      That 
was   in  December.      I   remember  when  we  had   an  assembly   that  Monday 
and   the  principal  was  really  extremely  good   about   trying   to   calm 
everybody  down  and  make   us  not   feel   too  badly  ourselves. 


Father's   Internment   and   the  Bonfire 


Aaava:        It  was  a  Sunday,    I  guess,    in  February,    that  we  were  working   in  the 
fi€ld  and   two  FBI  men  came.      They  went  and    found  my   father   in   the 
field  and  marched  him  back  into  the  house.     He  had   lunch  and  then 
they  took  him  away.      Then  we   later  heard    from  him  from  New  Mexico. 

Nathan:     Did   the  FBI  men  say  anything  to   the   family  about  what  was  happening? 

Asava:       They  were   interning  him.      I  don't  remember  very  much.      I  mean,    I 
didn't  really  talk  to  them. 


Asawa: 


25 


My  oldest  sister  went  with  my  younger  sister  to  Japan  and  she 
came  back  on  the  last  boat  from  Japan. 


Nathan:  The  older  sister? 

Asawa:   The  older  sister.   (My  younger  sister,  Nancy,  was  left  there.) 

So,  my  sister  came  back  in  October  and  the  war  began  in  December. 
With  her,  she  brought  beautiful  books  on  art.   I  don't  know  how 
beautiful  they  would  be  now,  but  they  were  books  on  art. 

I  had  taken  fencing  when  I  was  ten  here  and  my  sister  also. 
My  sister,  Lois,  and  I  took  Kendo,  which  was  Japanese  fencing,  and 
we  had  all  of  the  helmets  and  the  guards  and  the  gloves  and  the 
bamboo  swords.  That  was  one  of  the  reasons  my  father  was  taken 
away.   It  was  because  we  had  studied  Kendo.  There  was  the  Society 
of  the  Black  Dragon  and,  apparently,  they  were  accused  of  being  the 
underground,  sort  of  spies  in  this  country,  which  we  knew  nothing 
about  at  the  time.  We  were  completely  innocent.   Somehow,  as  we 
put  it  back  together  later,  we  realized  that  some  of  the  people 
went  back  to  Japan,  I  mean,  like  even  our  language  teacher.  We 
weren't  even  sure  that  there  was  ever  an  underground  network  here 
and  it  was  only,  I  guess,  conjecture  or  whatever,  trying  to  put  it 
together.  But  now,  I  mean,  all  of  that  has  been  cleared. 

So,  that  was  why  my  father,  partly,  probably  why  he  was  taken 
away.   So,  all  this  equipment  my  father  had  gathered --the  books, 
everything  that  had  to  do  with  Japan  —  they  just  made  a  big  bonfire 
and  burned  all  of  that.  Everybody  had  panicked  at  that  time.  My 
sister  cried  and  she  said,  "Oh,  please  don't,  don't  burn  the  books.'" 


Family  Internment;   Santa  Anita  to  Arkansas 


Nathan:  But  the  hooks  had  to  go  along  with  everything? 

Asawa:   Oh,  yes.  Everything  Japanese  was  all  suspect.   1  mean,  in  my 
parents'  simple  mind,  you  know.   So,  anyway,  then,  in  April  we 
were  interned.   We  had  to  get  rid  of  everything  and  we  went  in  with 
two  suitcases  each.  We  did  manage  to  take  our  sewing  machine.  We 
drove  in  with  our  cars  and  then  they  were  all  put  in  a  lot  and  they 
were  sold  at  the  Blue  Book  price. 

Then  we  went  to  Santa  Anita  for  six  months  and  that's  where  I 
met  the  artists  from  Disney  Studios  and  they  carried  on  school. 

Nathan:  They  did  this  just  of  their  own  volition? 


26 


Asawa:   Yes.   I  don't  know  if  they  even  got  paid  anything,  but  they  might 

have  been  paid  $8  a  month  as  a  teacher.   Then,  while  we  were  having 
our  classes  on  the  bleachers,  they  had  these  camouflage  nets  that 
another  group  was  making  for  the  war,  to  be  shipped. 

Then,  from  there,  everyone  went  to  different  parts  of  the 
country  and  we  went  to  Arkansas.  We  went  with  a  group  from  Stockton 
and  Lodi  and  other  places  in  California  to  Arkansas.  Really,  it 
was  a  very  interesting  experience.   I  think  in  each  block  there  was 
a  spy,  a  Japanese  that  was  assigned  to  spy  and  to  listen,  or  someone 
brought  in,  undercover  agents  to  make  sure  that  there  would  not  be 
a  riot.  There  was  a  riot.  A  man  who  was  Korean  was  nearly  killed 
by  a  mob.  They  really  went  after  him. 

Nathan:   In  Arkansas? 

Asawa:   In  Santa  Anita.   I  remember  because  I  remember  seeing  this  ambulance. 
So,  everyone  began  to  become  suspicious  of  everyone  in  that  time. 

Anyway,  we  had  baseball  every  day,  which  was  nice,  and  we'd 
go  to  a  movie  and  we  had  talent  night.  We  had  lots  of  talent  in 
the  shows  there.  We  really  had  a  good  time,  actually.  I  enjoyed  it. 

Nathan:  Had  you  known  the  other  Japanese  families  from  the  Valley,  from 
Stockton  and  Lodi?  Had  you  been  acquainted  before? 

Asawa:   There  was  a  group  from  Los  Angeles  and  a  group  from  Stockton  and 
Lodi.  Then,  recently,  I  went  to  Delta  College  in  Stockton  and 
five  or  six  people  came  up  to  me.   They  remembered  being  in  the  camp 
where  I  was.  One  woman  was  in  the  same  class  with  me,  so  it  was 
-*-„  «•«  <-ee  her. 

They  ran  a  very  good  newspaper  there.  Barry  Saiki  was  the 
editor  of  it.  It  was  called  the  Outpost.   I  think  the  cartoonist 
waa  George  Akimoto  and  I  don't  know  where  he  is  now.  But  that  had 
all  the  camp  news. 

Then,  we  had  teachers  from  all  over  the  country.  They  were 
all  white.  Some  were  retired.   Some  were  aort  of  couples  that 
decided  to  come  there  to  teach  there. 

Nathan:  Was  this  at  Santa  Anita  or  at  Arkansas? 

Asawa:   Arkansas.   In  Santa  Anita,  it  was  just  students  who  were  in  college 
who  came  and  taught  geometry,  or  taught  English.  My  sister  taught 
English  and  then  we  had  a  teacher  who  taught  geometry.   So,  we  sort 
of  carried  on  and  then  we  were  given  credit  for  that  semester  we 
lose. 


27 


Asava: 

Nathan: 
Asava: 


Then  we  got  to  Arkansas  in  September,  so  school  began, 
we  really  didn't  lose  very  much  time. 

What  was  Arkansas  like,  or  the  area  where  you  were? 


So, 


Well,  we  went  on   the   trains   there  and,  during   the  day,   everything 
had   to  be  closed  —  the  curtains  had   to  be  pulled.      So,   only  at  night 
we  could  open  it  and  I   remember  that  very  much  because  I   remember 
the  Arizona  desert,   going  across   the  desert.      I  don't  know  whether 
it  was  Arizona,    but   through   the  desert,   and  then  we'd  have   to  keep 
the  blackout. 

I  can't   remember,   but  I  have  a  feeling  we  went   through  Chicago 
or  through  Missouri  or   somewhere   there.     We  made  very  good  friends 
with   the  Public  Health  doctor  on  the   train  with   us.     He's  now  in 
Santa  Barbara.      But   that   really  was  quite  an  experience,   as  I 
remember--people   just   in   the  aisles,    everywhere. 

But  we  got   there  and  barracks  were  built,  we  had  a  public 
bathroom  and  a  public   laundry  room.      In  each   block,    there  were,    I 
think,    eight   barracks   and   there  were  eight  rooms,   eight   units,    this 
way  [gestures   in   rows].      In  here,    there  was  a  kitchen  and  here  was 
the   laundry  room,    the  laundry  room/bathroom.      So,   everyone  went 
and  washed  clothes   there  and   then  took  their  bath   too  behind   their 
unit. 


From  Swamp   to  Garden 


Asawa:        This  [gestures]    was  a  cotton  field  that  was   used   up,    right  next   to 
swampland,    right  next   to  sort  of   like  a  forest  swamp,   you  know, 
cypress   trees  and   just   really,    really  dismal   looking.      It  was 
spooky,   you  know.      But  out  of  that  came  very   interesting  things. 
I  mean,    they  had   just   chopped    the  wood    from   that   area  and   built   the 
barracks  and  were   tar-papering   it. 

But  my  father,    finally  came  back  in  1945--he  was  gone  three 
years.     We  didn't   see  him  for   three  years. 

Nathan:     Could  you  correspond  at  all? 

Asawa:       Yes.     Anyway,    they  discovered  plants   that   they  had   seen  in  Hawaii 
and   planted   the   seeds   from   them. 

Nathan:      That  was   the   people   in   the   camp? 


28 


Yei.      In  fact,  my  father  went  into  the   svamp  when  he  came  back  and 
he   found   this  plant  that  he  remembered  as  a  boy  in  Hawaii.     The 
only  thing  I  remember,    the  name  of   it  was  poka,    and   I  don't  know 
what   that   is.      It's  a  green,    smooth -skinned   fruit   like   that   [gestures], 
with  black  seeds   inside.      It  was  green  inside  with  black  seeds.     That's 
all   I  can  remember  about   it. 

And  there  were  tales  that  they  had  discovered  a  prehistoric 
monster--!  mean,   a  prehistoric  amphibious  thing. 

Nathan:     A  living  creature? 

Asava:       Yes.      It  was  something  alive  and   they  brought   it   in.      I  don't  know 
what   it  was,   really. 

Nathan:     Were  they  able   to  grow  the   fruit  you  spoke  of? 

Asawa:       They  grew  it.     What   the  Japanese  did  was  quite  amazing.      This  land 
that  was  good   for  nothing  they  turned   into  a  garden,   which  was   just 
the  most  exciting  thing  to  have   seen.      I  mean,    they  were  growing 
these  gourds  and   they  were  growing  Japanese  eggplants,    just  growing 
everything  that  they  had  remembered  growing. 

Plus,    they  had  a  lot  of  craft  classes   in  the   evening- -wood 
carving,   sewing,    tailoring,    and  hairdressing.  That  was  one  of   the 
nice  things   for  my  mother.      It  was   the   first   time   she   ever  had  a 
social  life  with   some  women,    in  which  she   spent   a   little   time 
talking  and   gossiping  and  chatting.      They'd   sit   around   and   do  each 
other's  hair  and  my  mother  had  never  thought   of  doing  that   ever  on 
the   farm,   but   they  had   the  time   to  give  her  a  perm  and   do  all   the 
things  that   she  had   never  done.    So,    it  was   really  a  nice   time   for 
her  and  for  a  lot  of  the   Isseis,    the  first  generation,    the  first 
vacation  that  they  had  really  ever  taken. 


To  Milwaukee  State  Teachers  College 


Asawa:   My  two  sisters  and  brother  went  off  to  William  Penn  College,  which 
is  a  Quaker  college  in  Iowa,  and  then  I  went  off  to  Milwaukee  State 
Teachers  College.  The  reason  I  chose  that  was  because  it  only  cost 
me  $25  to  go.  It  was  the  cheapest  thing  in  the  catalog.   I  looked 
through  the  whole  thing.  Although  I  wanted  to  go  to  the  Chicago  Art 
Institute,  it  was  out  of  the  question,  so,  I  went  to  Milwaukee. 

They  found  a  family  that  wanted  a  school  girl  to  come  and  live 
with  them  and  do  their  housework  and  babysit.   So,  that  turned  out 
fine.   It  was  fine  with  me  because  I  had  no  money  to  go  to  school  on, 


29 


Asawa:        So,    the  woman  wrote  me  and   said   that   she  would  be   in  a  blue  suit  and 
she'd  have  a   little  girl  with  her.    So,    I  wrote  back  and  I   said   I 
would  be  wearing--!  can't   remember  what   I  was  wearing--but   I'd   be 
wearing  this  color  dress.      So,  when  I  got   to  the  train  station  in 
Milwaukee,    I  recognized  her.      It  was  an  attorney's   family  and  they 
had  two  children  and   I  was   there   for  a  year. 

Then   I  was  given  a  scholarship  by  a  Mrs.   Thomas  Potter  or  a 
Mrs.  Thomas  Potts  of  Philadelphia,  who  paid  my  tuition  and   some 
expenses. 

Nathan:     How  did   this   come   about? 

Asawa:       This  was  a  Quaker  group- -American  Friends  Service  Committee.      All 

through   this,    they  helped.     They  really  helped   students.     My  brother 
and   sisters  went   to  a  Quaker  college  and   they  were  given  room  and 
board   and   their   tuition. 


Fortunately,  Milwaukee  is  a  very  good   school   and   I  met   some 
very  nice  people   there.   There  was   the  Conrad  Schmitt   family.     They 
were   in  the   stained-glass  business   there.     The  grandfather  was   from 
Germany  and  came  as  a  stained -glass  artist  and  set  up  a  stained  - 
glass   studio  in  Milwaukee.     Then  Rupert  Schmitt,  his   son,    carried 
it  on  with  his  brother,   and   I  guess  two  brothers  carried   it  on  from 
there.     The   two  daughters  have  gone.     They're   in  New  York.     But   the 


son,    I  guess,  might  have  carried   it  on. 
still   in  existence. 


I  don't  know  whether  it's 


Hearing  of  Black  Mountain  and  Visiting  Mexico 


Nathan:     You  met  these  people  when  you  were  at  school? 

Asawa:       Yes.      They  were   in   the  same  class.      I  was   in  Elaine   Schmitt 's  class 
and  her  sister  Betty  Schmitt  was  one  of   the  students  that  want  with 
this  teacher  that  went  off  to  Black  Mountain  for  a  summer.     He  was 
on  his  way  to  Athens,   Georgia,   to  the  University  of  Georgia,   to 
teach,   and   so  he  took  about   six  students   to  Black  Mountain  with  him. 
They  said  he  was  a  great   teacher,    but  greater   than  he   is  a  teacher 
named   Albers.      So,    they  all   came  back.      They  went   just   for  a  summer. 
They  came  back  and   they  just  wanted   to  go  back  again.      I  think  some 
of   them  came  back  to  get  a  degree  and   then  to  go  back,   because 
Black  Mountain  didn't  give  a  degree. 

Anyway,    so  then  Elaine  went   for  a  summer.     Elaine  went  with 
another  young   friend   named   Raymond  Johnson  that  Elaine  had   met  at 
Saugatuck,   at   the  Oxbow,  which  was  a  summer  school   for  the  Chicago 


30 


Asawa:   Art  Institute.   Ray  came  and  visited  Milwaukee  and  then  he  also  went 
to  Black  Mountain  College.   So,  then,  just  the  following  year  Elaine 
went  to  Black  Mountain.   I  was  all  hot  to  go  to  Mexico,  so  I  went 
to  Mexico  that  summer  instead  of  going  to  Black  Mountain.   I  studied 
with  Clarita  Porset   at  the  University  of  Mexico,  who,  just  by 
strange  coincidence,  was  a  friend  of  the  Albers.   She  was  interested 
in  the  Bauhaus,  designing  chairs  and  furniture.   She  was  Cuban  and 
her  brother  fought  in  the  revolution  and  they  were  exiled.   That  was 
in  1934;  Albers  had  come  to  this  country  in  "33.   She  came  and 
visited  them  at  Black  Mountain  and  then  they  visited  her  in  Cuba. 
So,  I  met  her. 

Nathan:  What  drew  you  to  Mexico? 

Asava:   Well,  my  sister's  going.   She  was  interested  in  Spanish,  the  language, 
She  was  also  in  Milwaukee  at  the  time.   She  had  left  William  Penn 
College  and  she  came  up  to  the  University  of  Wisconsin  and  she  was 
in  Milwaukee.   She  was  going  off  to  Mexico,  so  I  decided  I  would  go 
with  her  because  I  was  just  curious.   I  had  no  idea  why  I  was  going, 
but  I  knew  that  she  was  going,  so  I'd  go  with  her.  They  tried  to 
persuade  me  to  come  to  Black  Mountain  that  summer,  but  I  went  off 
[to  Mexico]  and  I  had  a  good  time  there. 

Nathan:  Did  the  art  of  Mexico  get  to  you? 

Asawa:   Yes.   I  went  to  an  art  school  there  called  Escuela  Esmeralda  de 

Pintura  y  Escultura.  It  was  a  sculpture  and  painting  class  and  I 
studied  with  a  teacher  whose  first  name,  I  think,  was  Luis,  and  his 
name  was  Orozco-Rivera.  It  is  not  Orozco,  nor  is  it  Rivera,  but  it 
was  both.  Rivera  was  painting  a  mural  then  and  also  Orozco  was 
painting  a  mural  in  another  building.  Then  there  was  a  teacher  named 
Sanchez  who  was  doing  the  priming,  or  doing  the — I  don't  know  what 
it's  called — putting  on  the  surface  for  fresco  for  George  Biddle. 
George  Biddle  was  also  painting  there. 

So,  this  teacher  said  that  I  could  go  and  be  with  him.  He 
was  going  to  show  me  how  he  prepared  the  wall  for  fresco.  He'd 
only  prepare  so  much  and  then,  if  Biddle  didn't  do  it,  then  he'd 
cut  around  it  so  that  there  would  not  be  any  plaster  that  was 
unpainted,  because  they  painted  on  a  wet  surface,  a  green  surface 
rather  than  a  dry  surface.   So,  anyway,  I  went  there  several  times 
and  I  learned  how.  He  even  let  me  use  a  trowel. 

Orozco  never  turned  his  head  when  he  was  painting.  Nobody  ever 
disturbed  him.  He  was  on  a  great  big  scaffold  and  there  was  a  big 
streak  of  red  going  across  like  this  [gestures]  and  he  was  working 
on  some  big  social  mural. 


31 


Asawa:  I  guess  this  was  another   time   that   I  went,   but  we   saw  Diego 

Rivera  painting  and  we  talked   to  him.     He  talked    to  us.     Years 
later,    in   this   conversation  that   I  had  with  my  sister  about    that 
experience,    she  said,    "You  know  what  he  said   to  me?"--and  I  don't 
know  whether  he  was   saying   it   to  me,    because  I  didn't  hear  it. 
Well,    it's   just  nonsense,   but   I  guess  he  told  her  that   I  had  a  very 
interesting  face.      [Laughter] 

Nathan:     That's  a  charming  compliment.'     He   should   know] 

Asawa:       We  visited,    I  guess,   Freda.      I  don't  know  how  I  met  all   these  people. 
You  know,    it's  sort   of  like  a  grapevine.      You  always  go  here  and 
there. 

Anyway,  we  went   to  Rivera's  house,    I   think,    as   I  remember   it. 
Freda  [Kahlo],   his  wife,    I  guess  was   there.      We  met   a  musician 
who  writes  music   for  player  pianos.      I  mean,  he  wasn't  writing   it, 
but  he  was  creating  music   on  this  machine,    just  by  punching  certain- 
Nathan:      Punching  the  holes   in   the   rolls? 

Asawa:        Yes.      I  remember   that   it  was   like  a  ping  pong  table,   you  know,    long 
and   thin  like   this  [gestures]   with  all   these   things,   and  that  was 
very  interesting.    But    that  was  just  sort  of  an  aside. 

Nathan:     Did  you  see  any  of  Freda's  pictures   in  the  house? 

Asawa:        I  can't   remember.      I   just   remember   being   sort   of  amazed   by  everything, 
the  pottery  and  the  costumes,   but   I  have  no  memory  of  how  I  got 
there  or  who   took  me    there. 

But  getting  back  to  how  we  got   to  Mexico,   at  this  college,   at 
William  Penn,    there  was  a  girl  whose  family  invited  my  sister  to 
come.      We    stayed  with   this   family   in  Mexico  and  had  a   little   room. 
It  was  where  the  grandmother  did   the  cooking  and   in  order  to  have 
hot  water,   they  had   to  go   through  a  lot  of   trouble,   you  know.      You 
remember   those  water  heaters   that  were   like   this   [gestures]    and  you 
had  to  light   it  and  you  had   to  wait   for  the  water  to  come   through? 

Nathan:     Oh,  yes. 

Asawa:   Anyway,  we  actually  lived  with  the  family  there  for  three  months  and 
that's  how  we  got  to  Mexico.  I  went  to  the  University  of  Mexico 
and  my  sister  also  went. 

Nathan:  That  was  in  Mexico  City? 

Asawa:   Mexico  City.  That  was  a  long  time  before  the  University  was  moved 
out  where  it  is  now. 


32 


Back  to  Milwaukee;     Work.   Artists.   Teachers 


Asawa:       Then  I  came  back  to  Milwaukee.     The  first  year,    I  lived  with  the 

O'Brien  family.     The   second  year,    I  lived  with  a  friend.     Her  name 
was  Elizabeth  Cristel  and   she  now  lives   in  this  area.      She  was  an 
older  woman.      She  was   about   37  when  she  was   in  school.      She  was 
going  back  to  college,   or  she  hadn't  had  college,    so   she  came  back 
and   she  went   into  early  childhood  development  or  childcare  nursery 
schools  training.      I  lived  with  her  for  a  year  and   then,   during 
that  year,    I  worked   in  a  tannery—you  know,   counting  hides  and 
working  at   the   adding  machine   in   the   finishing  department,    for  which 
I  got  66  cents  an  hour,  which  was  pretty  good   in  those  days. 

Nathan:     Did   it  smell   the  way  I  think  it  did? 

Asawa:       Oh,   it  was  just   incredible,    unbelievable!      I'd  go  through   the  place 
where  they'd   cure   the  things   and   I'd   remember   that   one   rabbit   skin 
that  we  did  when  I  was   in  the  fifth  grade.      [Laughter]      But   that  was 
the  only  thing  I  could   find.      They  would  not  hire  me  anywhere 
because  I  was  Japanese,   but  they  did  at  that  place  and   they  were 
really  very  nice. 

But   I  was  working  for  room  and  board  and  a  dollar  a  week  the 
year  before,    so  [laughter]    I  was  getting  up  in  the  world. 

The  third  year,    in  the  meantime,    I  had  met   through  the  Quakers 
a  very  fine   family,    the  Helmut   Sieverts  from  Frankfurt.      His  wife 
was  a  violinist  and  because  she  was  part  Jewish,    they  had   to  come. 
They  fled   in  1937   and  came   to  Milwaukee.     His   family  came   from  a 
very  prominent  mathematics   family.      They  were  all  mathematicians. 
He  was  a  black  sheep  because  he  wasn't  aspiring  to  that.      She  played 
the  violin  and  this  was  the   first  experience  I  had  with  chamber 
music.     They  had  a  chamber  music  group   in   their  living   room  and 
they  would  get  together.     There  were   two  doctors  and  her.     Well, 
you  know,    this  was  really  very  new  to  me.     We've  remained   friends 
and  they  now  live   in  Ithaca. 

But   (very  coincidentally)    their  son  and  John  Woodbridge's  sister 
m«t  at   Swarthmore  years  later  and  were  married.     They  live  in 
Washington,  D.C. 

So,   anyway,   the  third  year,    I  went  back.      I  had  very  good 
teachers   in  Milwaukee  too.      Robert  Von  Neumann   is   a  painter   from 
Germany  and  he  fought   in  the  First  World  War  and  he  had   a  wooden 
lag,  i*lch  he   used   to  always  have  great   fun  with.     He  used   to  show 

:  to  hi«  students.      I  think  he's  still  living.     Also,  Elsa  Albricht 
and  Winifred  Phillips.      And   there  were  some   artists   that   I  remember-- 


33 


Asawa:   Joe  Fretbert  and  Robert  Schellin.  And  Che  head  of  the  art  department- 
I  can't  remember  whether  it  was  Maurice  Logan  or--.  Anyvay,  It  was 
a  very  good  department,  actually. 

On  the  whole,  what's  sort  of  interesting  is  that  that  class 
that  we  were  in  was  a  ball  of  fire,  1  must  say.  Everyone  was 
adventurous.  One  went  off  to  New  York  for  a  summer.  Another  went 
off  to  Black  Mountain.  Another  went  off  to  Mexico.  The  next  year, 
it  didn't  seem  like  they  were  anything,  but  that  group  was  quite 
interesting.   I  studied  painting  them. 


Black  Mountain  and  a  Scholarship 


Asawa:   So,  finally,  I  went  to  Black  Mountain  then  and  studied  for  a  summer 
there.   I  went  Just  for  a  summer  and  I  got  a  scholarship  from  a 
church  in  Hawaii,  The  Church  of  the  Crossroads. 

Then,  after  that,  I  guess  I  was  such  a  good  worker--!  made 
butter,  you  know,  and  helped  on  the  farm—they  offered  me  a 
scholarship.   So,  I  was  on  scholarship  all  the  time  and  that  lasted 
until  '49.   I  went  in  '46  and  it  lasted  until  '49. 

Nathan:  Maybe  you  had  other  qualities  besides  butter  making.1  [Laughter] 

Asawa:   [Laughter]  Well,  actually,  they  had  very  good  students  there.   I 
mean,  all  of  them  were  very  kind  of  full  of  ideas. 

Nathan:   It  was  stimulating? 

Asawa:   Yes.   It  was  marvelous. 

Nathan:   I'm  sure  we'll  hear  more  of  Albers  and  Black  Mountain  later. 


34 


III     WIRE   SCULPTURE,  HOME  AND  DISCIPLINE 


Working  at  Home 

Asawa:       When  I'm  in  the   schools,   nobody  really  believes   that   I'm  at  work. 
Our  children  wonder  why   I'm  not  home,    in  the   kitchen,   cooking, 
because  that   is  what  they're  used   to.     They're  not   used  to  a  person 
going  out   to  work,   so  that  they  feel   that  my  work  is  here  at  home. 
If   I'm  out  there,    I'm  playing.      I'm  playing.      [Laughter]      Isn't 
that   interesting? 

Nathan:      Yes,    it   is'. 

Asawa:       It's  very  old-fashioned. 

Nathan:      Isn't   it?     How  conservative   children  are.      [Laughter] 

Asawa:       Well,   I  didn't  leave  the  house  until  they  were  already  in  school. 
I  did   spend  20  years   in  the  house  working. 

Nathan:     Were  you  also  doing  some  of  your  art  then? 

Asawa:        I  was  working  all   the   time.      I  was  working  while   they  were   growing 
up. 

Nathan:     For  instance,    some  of  crocheted  wire  forms.      [Looks  at   forms.] 
Do  you  actually  take  two  strands  and   then  work  them? 

Asawa:        I  take  one   strand   and   pull   and   I  actually  make   every-- 
Nathan:     Ev«ry  loop?     You  don't  buy  a  roll   like  chicken  wire? 


35 


Crocheting   and  Monotony 


Asawa:        I  make   the   loop  and   then   I  crochet   the  whole   thing.      So,    I  don't 

buy  a  row  of   that   and   squeeze   it  and    shape   it.      It's  actually  made 
like  a  drawing,   a  line  drawing. 

Nathan:     This  must   take  very  great   strength  and  delicacy  in  your  fingers. 

Asawa:       Well,   I  would   say  that   it's  probably  one  of  the  most  monotonous 

activities.      It's  nice  when   it's  all  done,   but   it's  very  monotonous. 
It's  like  knitting.      It's  like  crocheting.      I'm  going  back  to  what 
we  were   saying  about   learning  one  discipline,   learning   like 
planting  five  acres  of  onions  during  Christmas  vacation,   or  harvesting 
in  July,   all  of   these  things.      It's  very  easy   in  a  way  for  me  to  do 
it   because   it's  out  of  my  own  past,  having  worked  on  a   farm  and 
doing  many  things   that  were   repetitive,   like  stringing  the  bean 
pole  for  beans  to  climb  up  on  and   picking  the  beans   and   sorting 
the  tomatoes,   picking  tomatoes,    sowing  and  planting  onions   and 
gathering  them.      All  of  these  things  make   it  very  logical   that   I 
would   select  a  way  of  work  that  would  be  very  similar  to  that, 
only  done  in  wire   instead   of  plants. 

Nathan:     When  you're  doing  a  monotonous  kind  of  task,   do  you  find   that  your 
mind    is   thinking  of   something   else,    or  do  you  have   to  concentrate 
on  it? 

Asawa:  No,  I  think  of  many  things. 
Nathan:  It  sort  of  frees  your  mind? 
Asawa:  Yes.  I  usually  work  at  two  things  at  once. 

Very  often  women  don't  delegate   responsibility  and   at   the   end 
of   the   day   they're   tired.      They've   done  all   the   ironing,    they've 
done  all   this,   and   they've  done  all   that.     Well,    I  think  that's  a 
silly  way  to  do  things  because   I  think  that  as  soon  as  a  child   ia 
able  to  learn  something,    they  should  be  taught  and   they  should  be 
made  responsible  for  all    these   things. 

So,   a  woman  who   says,    "I  have   children.      I   can't  do  this. 
I  can't  do   that,"  I   think  they  should   really  teach   them  many 
things  —  teach   them  to   cook,    teach   them  to  make  yogurt,    teach   them 
to  make  jam,    teach   them  to  iron,    teach   them  to  use  the  washing 
machine,    teach   them  as  much   as  possible.      They  won't   like   it.      I'm 
not   saying  that    they're   all   going  to  be  happy,   but   it   doesn't 
bother  me   if   they   complain.      The   expression,    "I'd   rather  do   it 
myself,"   is   typical  of  parents  because   it's   easier   in   the   end.      It's 
hard   at   the  beginning,   but   if  you  can  overcome   that,    then   I   think 


36 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


it's  like  the  classroom  teacher  who  delegates  responsibilities 
to  other  students,  or  it's  like  us  delegating  the  responsibility 
of  painting  a  mural  to  the  children,  instead  of  our  sitting  there 
and  grinding  it  out.  We  put  them  to  work  at  a  very  young  age. 

All  these  things  I  apply  out  of  my  own  experience.   So,  I'm 
not  concerned  with  creativity  and  self-expression  and  all  that. 
I  think  that  that's  just  a  lot  of  cornball  theories  on  art.   I 
think  you  have  to  teach  kids  to  work  and  you  can  only  teach  them 
to  work  if  you  work.   I  found  that  out,  that  I  can't  delegate  jobs 
if  I'm  not  doing  it.   I  mean,  I  can't  say,  "Go  and  weed  the  garden." 


You  can  say,    "Come  and  weed   the   garden." 

"Come  and  weed  the  garden,"  yes.     But  you  can't   say, 
garden,"  if  you're  not  doing  it  yourself. 


'Go  weed  the 


Trying  Out  Design 


Nathan : 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asi 


Thinking  back  to  those  first  20  years  when  you  were  running  a 
household  and  bringing  up  the  children  and  doing  your  art  work, 
experimenting,  how  did  it  happen  that  you  decided  to  remain  at 
home  during  that  period?  I  gather  it  was  a  decision  that  you  made, 
that  this  was  what  you  wanted  to  do. 

Oh,  yes.  Well,  I  had  several  offers.  Say,  for  example,  that  was 
the  time  when  the  decorators  no  longer  wanted  to  be  called 
decorators;  they  wanted  to  be  designers.  When  Jackson  Square  opened 
up  and  the  whole  thing  of  designed  furniture,  designed  wallpaper, 
designed  fabric--that  was  all  a  big  thing  in  the  '50s,  right  after 
the  war.   It  was  close  to  the  war. 

That  was  a  very  curious,  interesting  period,  really  a  new  idea. 
We  made  fabric  designs  and  we  went  sort  of  through  that.  My  husband 
worked  for  a  decorator.  They  needed  some  wallpaper  designs,  or 
we  did  some  things  on  fabric.  We  worked  weeks  and  weeks  and  weeks 
and  weeks  and  then,  finally,  in  the  end,  we  each  got  $50  for  our 
design. 

Oh,  no!  So,  where  did  you  find  this  group  of  designs? 

W«  designed  th«m.  Well,  after  all,  we'd  just  come  out  of  Black 
Mountain  College.  We  were  full  of  Bauhaus  and  the  Institute  of 
Design  and  graphic  design.   I  think  that  that  whole  movement  produced 
th«  kind  of  graphics  that  you  have  to  do  in  commercial  design.   So, 
it  was  logical  that  we  would  maybe  kind  of  go  and  seek  an  occupation 
that  vas  not  defined  yet,  so  it  was  really  an  exciting  time  to  see 
if  there  was  something  in  it. 


37 


Nathan:   Both  you  and  your  husband? 

Asawa:   Yes.  He  was  working  for  an  architect.   But,  you  know,  we  were 
always  doing  these  things  together  at  the  beginning. 

And  then  paper  folding.  We  were  going  to  go  into  that  and  I 
had  gone  and  gotten  a  patent. 

Nachan:  Oh,  did  you? 

Asawa:   We  got  a  patent  for  a  copyright  on  a  wall  surface  that --do  you 
remember  the  folded  paper  in  the  Museum  of  Art? 

Nathan:  Yes,  on  the  right-hand  wall? 

Asawa:   Yes.  Well,  that  whole  thing  came  out  of  Black  Mountain  College 

with  Albers  and  the  Bauhaus,  paperfolding,  and  so  on.   I  thought, 
"Well,  let's  see  if  you  can  do  something  with  it  commercially," 
and  it  was  an  adventure  because  we  had  never  done  it  before. 


Deciding  to  Remain  at  Home 


Asawa:   Well,  you  get  into  all  of  that  and  you  quickly  see  that  it's  a 

rat  race.  It  is  almost  sinister  for  a  creative  person  to  try  to 
go  into  the  business  world.  I  didn't  go  into  it  very  far,  but  I 
saw  the  kinds  of  people  that  were  in  it  and  I  didn't  like  them. 

So,  if  I  had  to  be  involved  with  that  group  of  people,  then 
I'd  say  that  I  would  rather  do  housework,  I'd  rather  garden,  I 
mean,  clean  yards,  and  I  would  rather  take  care  of  children  than 
get  into  that. 

. 

I  was  offered  a  housekeeper  if  I  would  come  and  work  on  designs. 
These  would  then  be  shipped  to  Taiwan  or  to  India  to  be  produced 
and  brought  back  here.  You  know,  that  sounds  very  glamorous  and 
appealing  and  a  lot  of  people  went  that  way.   I  chose  not  to  do  that. 

Then  a  decorator  in  New  York  offered  to  take  me  as  their 
artist  and  put  me  into  Houston  and  Dallas.  This  was  in  the  '50s. 
I  was  going  to  produce  sculpture  for  them  and  they  were  going  to 
put  me  into  every  showroom  in  the  country.   That  was  appealing  too. 
That  would  guarantee  me  a  living.  They  drop  you  after  they've 
used  you  up. 


38 


Asawa:        So,.  I  did  have  opportunities  to  move  in  that  direction.   You 
know,  I'd  be  in  every  catalog  that  they'd  send  out  all  over  the 
country --3, 000  [laughter]  outlets,  or  whatever.   And  eventually, 
I  guess,  all  these  people  go  defunct  or  merge  or  do  something 
else.   But  in  every  little  bit  of  talk  or  information  that  I  got 
from  these  people,  I  found  that  the  artist  was  always  exploited. 
Designs  were  taken,  changed  a  little,  and  then  produced  and  the 
royalties  went  to  the  company.  That  wallpaper  design  went  on 
bedspreads;  90,000  yards  was  printed  of  that.  We  got  $50  for  it. 

If  the  person  was  intelligent  about  it,  he  would  offer  the 
royalties,  because  his  fee  for  that  must  have  been  just  enough  to 
run  that  very  fancy  office.   So  that  these  people  who  are  sort  of 
middlemen  or  agents  to  artists,  if  they  knew  how  to  really  treat 
artists  fairly,  they  would  get  a  lot  more  for  themselves,  for  the 
artist.  There  would  be  kind  of  a  mutual  friendship  that  would  be 
very  useful. 

But  we  saw  so  much  in  the  early  days.   I  mean,  I  was  never 
tempted  by  any  of  that.   I  could  envision  myself  traveling  to  New 
York  and  to  Chicago  and  to  all  of  the  markets.  We  knew  people 
who  produced  wallpaper  and  fabric.   We'd  see  them  every  time  they'd 
be  in  San  Francisco,  at  the  marketing.  But  that  wasn't  what  I 
really  wanted  to  do. 


Commissions  as  a  Sacrifice 


Asawa:   So,  the  investment  was  a  lot  slower  for  me  in  terms  of  time.   I 
really  never  began  to  make  a  living—or,  not  a  living  actually — 
until  only  recently,  in  terms  of  my  own  work.  Commissions  are  a 
great  sacrifice.  To  have  a  commission  is  not  a  profitable  thing. 

Nathan:  It  isn't? 

Asawa:   Most  often  not,  for  an  artist,  because  it's  not  like  making  a 

building.  Very  often  a  contractor  has  overhead.  He  has  sort  of  a 
25  percent  thing  in  case  something  happens. 

Nathan:  For  contingency? 

Asawa:   Contingency  and  increase  of  cost  of  living.  Artists  don't  have 
those  clauses  in  their  contracts.  When  something  takes  two  or 
thrte  years  to  do,  from  the  time  the  cost  of  the  material  increases, 
then  you  still  have  to  absorb  all  of  that  and  the  cost  of  labor, 
whatever  it  if,  unless  you  were  able  to  deal  with  the  whole  thing. 


39 


Nathan:  Or  unless  you  could  get  such  a  clause  written  into  your  contract. 

Asawa:   Yes. 

Nathan:     Do  you  have  an  agent? 

Asawa:        No.      I  have  to  cope  all  by  myself.      And   that's  another  question,   of 
having  an  agent.      That's  possible  too,   but   I'm  not  really 
interested    in   that   either.      So,   this,    for  me,    is  a  purely  personal 
decision,    but   I  like   to  sort  of  know  where  things  go.      It's  a  lot 
slower,   but   I  feel   that  you  have  to  be  local,   not    in   full  control, 
but  just    in  terms  of  direct   relationship  with  as  much  as  you  can. 
But   that's   foolish    too,   because  that's  a  problem  that   I  have  to 
face  now  personally   in  my  own  work. 

Nathan:     How  to  look  at   the  way  you  come  out   financially,   or  how  to  organize 
it? 

Asawa:       Well,   how  to  deal  with   it,   because  I  do  have  many  offers  now  for 
my  own  work  and    I'm  committed    to   the   school  now. 


40 


IV     DECISIONMAKING  IN  THE   SAN  FRANCISCO   SCHOOLS 


Chain  of  Command 


Nathan:     We  might  talk  about  art  and  other  elements   in  the  schools.     You 

were  saying  that  maybe  a  union  of  students  would  permit  some  kind 
of  pressure   to  be  brought  by  them. 

Asawa:       Yes.     Well,   I  think  the  thing  that  we  keep  hoping  is  that   the   board 
will  change  or  that  the  administrator  will  change  or  the  teachers' 
strikes  will  make   improvements,  but  actually   they  don't. 

Having  been  deeply  involved  with   the   schools  for   the  last   six 
years,   I've   realized  that   the  trouble  with  the   school    system  is 
that  the  people  in  it  are  not  people  who  are  capable  of  making 
decisions.     They  are  only  capable  of  following  and  those  who  won't 
follow  won't  stand   it  and  drop  out.     The   structure   is  that  the 
teacher  doesn't  make  a  decision  and   the  teacher  should   be  the  first 
one   to  be  heard   and   that   person  most  directly   involved  with   the 
students   should  have   the  highest   say  about  what  happens  to   the 
classrooms. 

But   the   teacher  cannot  make   the  decisions  because   the  principal 
is  above  him  and   the  principal  thinks   that  he  has  the  power   to 
make  decisions.    But  when  you  ask  him  for   something,    then  he  has   to 
then  in  turn  go   to  the  department  head  before  a  decision,  or  he  has 
to  go  to  the  buildings  and  grounds   if   it's  physical    improvement. 
So,   the  principal  has  no  power  to  make  decisions. 

Then,  when  you  go  to  the  heads  of   the  departments,    they  say, 
well,   they're  assigned  only  this  area  and   they  can't   say  anything, 
but   then  they  say  that  the  one  to  decide   is  the  administrative 
superintendent.  When  you  go  to   the   superintendent,    the   superintendent 
says,   "No,   the  board  makes  that  decision." 


41 


Asawa:  The   board   is  so  far  removed   chat   chey  have  no   idea  of  what   Che 

problem  is  on  the  site  level,    so   that  you've  gone  through   these 
layers  of   people  who  get  more  and  more  powerful  and,  yet,  you 
realize   that  no  one  has  any  real  power. 

Nathan:     You  sound   as   though  you  have  followed   this  all   the  way  up. 

Asawa:        I've  gone  to  all   these  people   in  order  to  get    something  done.      I 

can  understand   the  unions'   demands,   but    the  area   they're  concerned 
with   is  their  own  welfare. 

Nobody  ever   comes   up  and    says,    "We  need  more   supplies,"  or 
"We  want  to  have   the  right  to  select  our  own  books.     Give   us   that 
budget.     Let   us   choose   the  books  that  children  in   this  class  need." 

All  of   this   comes  out   in  this  newspaper  article   in  saying   that 
our  reading  score   is  low.      But  nobody  thinks  about   the   set   of  social 
studies  books   in   the   fifth  grade  that    they  waste  because   the  children 
in  the  fifth  grade  class  can't  read   them.     Each  classroom  is 
required   to  have   the  English   textbook,    the  math    textbook,    the  social 
studies   textbook;    these  books  never  get  used  and   in  two  or   three 
years   they're  obsolete. 

So,   books  that  have  never  been  touched  are   taken  and   removed 
to   the  warehouse  and  a  new  set  of  books,   a  new  theory,   comes   in. 
I  guess  Harcourt  Brace  Jovanovich  and   all  of  those  companies,   are 
just   saying,    'Veil,  we'll    try   this  and  we'll   try  that,"  and   they 
sell  a  whole   set  of  math  books,  English  books,   creative  arts,   and 
Intra-this  and   that,    and  none  of  it  gets  used.      I   shouldn't  say 
none,   but  a  lot  of   the  books  never  get   touched. 

These  are  the   issues.  The   real   issues  are  never,  never,   never 
discussed  or  challenged   because,    if  they  were,    then   it  would  destroy 
the  whole  system.     There   is  a  Student  Bill  of  Rights;   and   the  parents 
aren't  powerful   enough;    the  teachers  aren't  strong.     There's  nobody 
that's   really  strong.     Then  the  board.      I  mean,   they  really  can't 
act  because  they're   so   far  away  from  it.      I  was  told  by  principals 
that  they're     not  to   talk  to  a  board  member. 

They  have   to  go   through  all  of   this  business,    so   that   they're 
treated   like  babies  from  the  top  man  all   the  way  down.      So,  how 
can  they  teach  anything  to  the  kids  about  responsibility,    self- 
initiative?     They  don't  have   it.  The  system  doesn't  permit  it  to 
happen. 

Nathan:     You're  describing  a  system  where   the  greatest  decisionmaking  power 
is   the   farthest  away  from  the  classroom? 


42 


Structure  and  Productivity 


Asawa:       Yes.      I  think  the  decision  should   be  local;    the    teachers   should  be 
held  responsible  for  their  kids  and   if  they  don't   teach   something, 
they  should  be  thrown  out.     But  we  can't  do   that,   because   if  we 
did  that  then  we  would  not  need  an  administrative  structure.     You 
see,    I  would   say  it's  a  welfare  of  a  different   sort,   an  acceptable 
welfare,     because  none  of  that  has  anything  to  do  with  the  children. 
Children  don't  need   it.      It  never  touches   them.     Well,  wouldn't  you 
agree? 

Nathan:     That  makes  a  great  deal  of   sense   to  me. 

Asawa:       I  feel   sorry  for  children,   but  they're  still  young  and   they   still 
have  their  life  ahead  of   them.     But   I  feel  very  sorry  for   those 
people  who  are  good  people--!  mean,    they're  not  bad   people;    they're 
really  upright  and  respectable  citizens--whose   lives  are  being 
wasted.     I  just  feel  very  sorry,  but   they  allow  this   to  happen  to 
themselves,   you  know,   and   that's   the  sad   thing  to  me  because   they're 
not   productive  and   they  could   be   so   productive.      They   could  make 
the  whole  system  where   they  could  be  happy  and  they  could   feel    that 
they're  really  doing  something,    instead  of  being  caught   in  a  Rube 
Goldberg  machine   that  doesn't  work. 

Nathan:     You  feel    that   it   is   basically   the    structure   that   frustrates   people 
who  really  could  do  good  work? 

Asawa:       Well,  now,   I'm  saying  that   the  structure  will  always  exist.      I'm 
sorry  for  the  people  who  allow  themselves  to  be  put   into   this 
structure.     This   is   something  that  I  hoped    that  I  would  never  do, 
having  been  an  independent  person.      I  make  my  living  by  my  work, 
so  I  am  about  as  direct  as  anybody  can  be   in  knowing  where  I'm 
going  and  what   I'm  doing. 

So,   I  think  that  if  more  people  would  do   this  and  if  more 
people  could   show  children  how  to  do  this,    then  I  think  that  we 
will  have  less  and  less  people  having  to  be   forced   into  a   system 
that   doesn't  work.      If   the   system  doesn't  work,    then  you  get  more 
courts,   more  patrols,  more  control,  more  of  this,   and   less  and   less 
independence. 

Then  we  keep  thinking   that  we're  going  to  do   this,    that  we 
can  solve   it-- 

Nathan:     But  we're  heading  the  wrong  way? 


43 


People  with   Skills 


Asawa:       We're  going   the  wrong  direction.     We   started  on  the  wrong  premise 
and  we   keep  going   that  way  and  we  keep   thinking,  hoping.      It's 
like   the   fork  in  the   road;   when  you  take  the  wrong  turn,    then 
you'll  never  make  it  back.      I'm  not   saying  that   I  feel  hopeless. 
I   think  it's  possible   to  correct   things  very  easily  and   that's 
why  I   think  that  our  solution  in  our  program  is   so  easy;    to  get 
the  people  who  have   skills  and  put  them  in  front  of  the  children. 
There's  no  better  way  to  do  it   and   I  think  that   it   does  help   them. 
It  does  help  not  only  the   children,   but   it  helps   the    teachers  and 
parents  and  makes   their  whole  organization  healthier  in  a  very 
simple  way  and  a  local  way. 

Nathan:     Like  what  you're  doing   in  the  art  program,   bring   skilled  people 
directly  in   touch  with  children?     Do  you  see  this  as  possible  in 
other  educational  areas? 

Asawa:        It   can  happen  in  any  area  and  I   think  that's  the    thing;   when  you 

begin  to  do   that,   you  begin  to  threaten  the  whole   university  system, 
the  whole  college  education.     They're  producing  these   teachers   that 
go   into   the   schools  and    they're  producing  them  out  of   theories   that 
have  nothing   to  do  with   the  children.     The   reality  of   it   is  today 
that  you  don't  need   to  have  a  college  education  to  help  the  children. 
The  things  that   the   children  need  are  understanding  of  their 
immediate   surroundings,      their  home.   It's   terrible   to  say  that   it's 
the   schools'    fault. 

I  don't  blame  the   schools  at  all.      I  say  that   the    schools 
reflect   the  quality  of   the  community.      I  think  I've  said   that 
before.     But  the  proportion  of  creative   thinking  that's   in  the 
community  is   reflected   in  the   schools.      If   it's  not  happening   in 
the  community,    then   it's  happening  even  less   in  the  schools,   but   I 
think  it's  proportionate.      So,   the  problem  really  is   that   there  are 
so  few  creative  people. 

I'd  like   to  elaborate  to  complete  that   thought  about  people 
who  don't  make  decisions.      So,  okay,   then  this  group,  which   is   the 
school   system,    gets   federal  money.     Then  they  will  not  deviate  from 
the  guidelines.      Now,    if  I  were  to  get  some  money,    I  would  not  take 
any  money  that   I  had   to  fit    into  guidelines.      They're  always    talking 
about  guidelines.     They  say,    "Oh,  you  can't  do  this,   you  can't  do 
that.     You  have   to  do  this.     You  have   to  schedule.     You  have   to 
have   so  many  hours  of   this,   community   input." 

You  see,    they  themselves  are  being  told  how   to  spend   this  money. 
So,   finally  it's  controlled   by  the  federal  government --what 's   the 
point  of  government  anyway?     Suddenly  you  say,    "Well,    that's  my  money." 


44 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 


Finally  you  complete   the   circle   and   say,    "I'm  a   taxpayer.      That's 

my  money.     Why  can't  I  say  how  this   should  be  spent?"     After  you 

go   through  all   these   steps,   which  we  add,   you  come   back  and   you 
say,    "Are  we  all  crazy?" 

Then  you  begin  to  say,    "Well,    the  only  thing  you  can  do  anything 
about  is  yourself,"  and  finally  I've  come   to  the  conclusion  that   that 
is  really  what,    in  the   first  place,   I  intended    to  pass  on,    that 
one  has   to  make   one's   own  decisions   on  one's   own   future.      But,    if 
you  do  that,   that's  a  pretty  risky  thing. 


Because  you're   putting  yourself  outside   the  hierarchy; 
the   structure? 


and  outside 


Asawa: 
Nathan: 

Asawa  : 


Nathan: 

Asawa : 
Nathan: 
Asawa : 
Nathan: 

Asawa : 


Yes. 

The  structure  which  protects  you  in  a  way,  even  if  it  destroys  you 
a  little? 

That's  right.  Yes,  exactly.  But  all  we're  trying  to  do  is  we're 
trying  to  make  that  work.   I  think  it's  ideal  to  work  within  the 
framework  of  the  school  because  it  does  have  the  set-up.   You  have 
the  staff,  you  have  the  children,  and  everything  is  taken  care  of, 
so  that  you  don't  have  to  worry  about  these  things  that  will  destroy 
anything  that  you  might  have,  a  good  idea. 

All  you  need  to  do  is  to  move  right  into  this  with  a  program 
and  the  program  happens  to  be  people,  people  with  skills  and  people 
with  information  that  is  useful,  because  I  think  that  it's  not 
going  to  really  matter  very  much  exactly  what  you  do.   I  think  it's 
going  to  matter  very  much  that  we  know  how  to  survive.  Maybe  it 
won't  matter  that  you  have  a  garden,  but  I  think  all  of  these  things 
matter  very  much,  if  they  have  really  practical  information. 

To  put  you  in  touch  with  the  real  life  that  you're  living?  What 
kinds  of  skills  do  the  people  have  that  you  are  bringing  into  your 
program?  Are  they  what?  Painters? 

Painters,  yes. 
People  in  ceramics? 


Do  you  feel  that  the  children  get  the  idea  or  recognize  the  value 
of  what  is  being  presented? 

Oh,  I  think  very  much  so.   I  think  that  it's  probably  the  first  real 
experience  that  they  have.  What  is  important  is  that  it's  giving 
them  an  opportunity  to  make  decisions. 


45 


Mural  at  the  Fort  Mason  Pier 


Nathan:  What  kind  of  decisions  do  the  children  make? 

Asawa:   Very  simple  decisions.  For  example,  we're  painting  a  wall,  a  mural. 
For  example,  we  did  use  the  Fort  Mason  fishing  pier,  which  is  now 
being  used  by  the  Police  Department  for  a  fishing  program. 

Nathan:  A  fishing  program? 

Asawa:   Yes,  a  weekend  program.   If  you  are  a  child,  you  can  go  out  and 

fish  at  Muni  Pier,  except  it's  polluted  now.  They  asked  if  I  could 
find  some  painters  to  work  on  this  boathouse.  So,  that  came  about. 
So,  I  said,  "Why,  sure.  Why  couldn't  we  do  it  for  the  children, 
because  it's  a  children's  fishing  program?"  So,  we  got  children 
from  Hunters  Point.  They  asked  for  children  from  a  school  from 
Hunters  Point  and  then  we  selected  one  from  the  Marina  because  that 
would  be  the  two  ends  of  the  city.  Golden  Gate  National  Recreation 
Area  (a  national  Park)  provided  the  paints.  We  provided  the  children 
and  the  artists.  The  Maritime  Museum  gave  us  information  for  a 
field  trip  there.  So,  the  children  fished  out  there  and  they  had  a 
field  trip  out  of  it.  Then  the  Police  Department  primed  the  building 
and  then  at  the  dedication  we  did  some  fish  prints.  We  printed  the 
first  fish  that  was  caught. 

Nathan:  You  printed  the  first  fish? 

Asawa:  Yes.  We  made  a  fish  print  of  the  first  fish  that  was  caught. 

Nathan:  [Laughter]  A  fish  print J  You  dipped  it  in  ink? 

Asawa:  No,  no.  We  sponged  ink  on  it. 

Nathan:  You  sponged  ink  on  the  fish? 

Asawa:   On  the  fish,  yes.  Then  we  pressed  rice  paper  on  top  of  it  to  get 

all  the  scales.  Then  the  boy  who  caught  it  got  a  print,  the  Police 
Department  got  a  print,  and  the  Park  Service  got  a  print.   So,  it 
was  a  way  of  getting  people  together,  each  one  giving  a  little  bit 
so  that  each  one  can  take  the  whole  back.  And  they  will  all  get 
books. 

Nathan:  When  we  put  all  of  this  together,  I  would  love  to  be  able  to  have 
one  of  these  prints  [gestures]  and  one  of  these  books  [gestures] 
deposited  in  The  Bancroft  Library  too  because  these  are  such  very 
fine  examples  of  what  you  are  talking  about. 

Can  you  tell  me  a  little  more  about  how  you  prepared  for  this 
project? 


46 


Asawa:       Our  artist  at  Winfield  Scott,  Nancy  Thompson,   and  a  classroom  teacher 
and  I  went   to  the  Maritime  Museum  to  do  some  research  and   get 
familiar  with  the  whole   thing.     They,    in  the   classroom,   did   sketches 
of  marine  life,   you  know,  whales  and—actually,  we  were   thinking  of 
the  Bay,   but    they  did   a  very  serious   study  of   the  hammerhead   shark. 
Is  tt  hammerhead  whale  or  shark? 

Nathan:  I  think  it's  shark? 

Asawa:        Shark,  yes.     And  whales  and  crabs  and   octopus  and  hydra  and  all 
these,   so  that  it  was  real  research  with  something   that  you  have 
to  be  very  accurate  with.     Then,  when  they  went   to   the  site,    they 
had  their  sketch,   they  chose   their  colors,   and   they  chose   the   size, 
how  big  it  was  going  to  be  and  where  it  was  going   to  be.     All  of 
these  don't  seem  terribly  important,   but  I  think  that   that  whole 
experience  of  making   simple   decisons   is  just   like  planting  a  bulb; 
although  one   doesn't   think  very  much  about   it.      All   of   those   things 
put  them  in  contact  with  a  very  real  experience  where   they  actually 
physically,    emotionally,   visually,   mentally  participate   or   take   part 
in  doing   something.      Not   only  do   they  do   something   for   themselves, 
but   they  have  had,    in  a  way,   a  chance   to  do   something   for   the 
community. 


A  Matter  of  Direction 


Asawa:        It's   a  very  simple   experience   to  have  done   all  of   those   things  and, 

on  top  of   that,  when   they  are   through,    they  are  proud.      The   evaluation's 
there  and   they  can  see  what   that   thing  did;    they  see  what   they  did. 
They  don't  need    somebody  to  come   in  and   test   the   child   to   see   if   the 
reading  level   is  here.     You  see,   that's  another   thing  that   I   think 
in  terms  of   their   testing.      I  question.      That's    the  wrong  direction. 
That's   stupid.      But   this  whole   system  is  based   on  a   reading-level 
test  which  doesn't  mean  anything  at  all,   so  that   scoring   is  a  great 
disservice  to  parents.      It  scares   them  away  from  creative   thinking 
because   they  say,    "This  is  going  to  really  hurt  our  program."     They 
say,   "Cut  out  all  of   that.     Those  kids  need   to  read.     Those  kids  are 
going  to  need  to   learn  to  count."     Well,   you  know,    the  reality  is 
nobody  has  to  count  any  more;   you  just  put   it  in  a  computer.     You 
don't  need  to  count.     You  don't  really  need   to   read   because   if  we 
need  anything,  we  have   it  all  on  television.     Who  reads?     The  reality 
of  it   is,  who  reads   these  days?     The  only  things   that  we  read  are 
reports,   studies,  but  we  don't   really  read  any  more. 

I  mean,   I'm  not   talking  about  you,   but   I'm  talking  in  general. 
So,    the  schools  are  spending  millions  on  a  computer  to  locate 


absenteeism  in  the  school  system  and   that's  not  going  to  matter. 
It's  not  going  to  matter  whether  they're  attending  or  not.     The 


real 


47 


Asawa:        question  is  maybe  we  are  going  in  the  direction  that  only  those  who 
want  to  learn  will  come  to  school,   because  that's  really  what's 
happening  now.     The   kids  are  out   fishing  or  doing  something  else. 

So,   going  back  to  the  students,   if  they  were  really  serious 
about  it--I  don't  know  how  they  can  care.     They  don't  care.      I 
don't  know  how  they  can  possibly  care  about   school.      I  can  understand 
that  the  problem  is  that  a  lot  of  teachers   that  strike  are  very  good 
teachers  and  want  change.     That's  why  I  can't   say  striking  is  bad, 
but   the   strike  will  not  change  what  needs   to  be  changed   in  the 
system  because  nobody   is  willing  to  do   that  part. 

Nathan:     Do  you  think  that   there  is  a  way  that   change  can  come  about  in  the 
system? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  How? 

Asawa:  I  think   there  has   to  be  a  better  balance  of  community  people. 

Nathan:  Working--? 

Asawa:        In  the  schools,  yes.     And  I  don't  mean  only  community  people.      I'm 
talking  about  highly  skilled  professional  people,   like  writers, 
poets,   attorneys,      people   that  are   in   the  business  world,   who  are 
interested   in  people,   coming   into  this  and   becoming   involved. 

Nathan:     As  volunteers?     There   is   a   school   resource  volunteer  program  in 
Berkeley.     That  sort  of  thing? 

Asawa:        No,   no.      I  would   say   that   the  school   system  has  to  hire  people   into 
the  school.     I  think  the  volunteer  is   important.     I  think  that's 
essential.     But  I  think  that   that's  sort  of  given;   that's  always  a 
handout  and  they'll   take  that.     I  think  that  they  have  to  want  it; 
they  have  to  realize   that   that's   important. 

Nathan:     Would  you  start   off  with   board  members   in  order  to  make   this  change 
come  about?     Is  that  the  first  level  at  which  decisions  are  actually 
made? 

Asawa:        Yes,   that's   the  only   level  at  which  decisions  are  made,    unless  you 
have  an  energetic  principal,   unless  you  have  an  energetic   teacher     • 
at   the    site   level.      I  mean,    there   is  no  real  leeway  for  decision- 
making.     A  principal  can't  choose  his  own  teachers.     He  can't  even 
select  his  own  aides.     He   can't   select  para-professionals,   although 
they're  beginning  to.      If  a  principal   is    tough   about   it,    then  he 
could   try.      But   if   there's  an  opening,    say,    for  art  or  science  or 
math,  he  can't  select.     Very  often  they  will  take  whatever  is  sent 
them. 


48 


Asawa:  So,   I  think  that  all  of   these   things  have   to  be  done  on  the 

site   level.     A  principal   should  be   given  all  of   the  possibilities 
of  selecting  his   staff.     Those   things   should  be  done  at   the   local 
level  and   the  board   should  make  a  mandate,   or  whatever   it   is   that 
they  make,   saying  that  the  responsibility  is  on   the  principal's 
head  and,   if  he  doesn't  perform,   if  his   school  doesn't  perform, 
it's  his   baby  and  he's   got   to  make   it  work. 

Nathan:      In  a  sense,   a  delegation  of  responsibility. 


Synergetics 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 


That's   right,   yes.     You  see,    it's  Buckminster  Fuller's   idea.      This 
friend  who   is   teaching  at  Santa  Barbara  City  College,    is  Mervin 
Lane,  who  went   to   school  with   us  at  Black  Mountain.     Mervin  Lane 
credits  Bucky's   ideas  for   this  approach   that  he  has,   which  he   calls 
the   "Synergetic  Approach   to  Learning."     He  has  his   classroom  approach, 
which  I  think  is   so  simple   and   so  needed.      I   shouldn't  even   talk 
about   it   because   I'm  not  sure   that   I  would  be   saying  the  right 
things  about   it.     But   the   idea  would  be  that,    for  example,    if  you 
go  into  a  classroom,    instead   of  the   student-teacher   relationship 
of   1  to  40,  he  divides   it  up   into  groups   of  five   or   six.      So,  he 
has   the  40  divided   into  eight  groups   in  a  classroom,   or   six  groups. 
If  there   is  a  problem,  he  gives   the  problem  to  the  groups  and   then 
each  group,   each  person,    seeks  a  solution.     Then  each  one  corrects 
each  other's.     This   system  can  happen  with  a  million  people;    this 
can  happen  without  changing  the  system  at  all. 

Is  this  sort  of  a  cooperative  problem-solving? 

Yes,  yes.     And,   so,   the   teacher   flows  through,    throughout  the  room, 
like   this. 

Oh,  one   teacher  can  handle  it? 

One  teacher  makes  a  teacher  out  of  others—there's  a  teacher  in 
each  group. 

That   teacher  is  a  student? 

That's  a  student.     They  put  their  ideas   together,    ideas   that   they 
bring  to  conclusion.     Then  that   idea  is  moved   to  another   table  and 
then  switched   for  theirs.     So,   that  all  the   ideas  can  be  applied. 
It's  what  we  apply  to  our  program.     We  feel  that   instead  of  a 
teacher  dittoing  a  bear  and   saying,   "Now,   you  color  this  bear," 
then,   in  a  classroom—say  you  have  40  kids—you  say,   "We're  going 


49 


Asawa:        to  do  a  study  on  bears."     Every  student   is   responsible   for  finding 
a  solution  for  making  a  bear.      So,    then,   when  we  come   together,    you 
have  40  answers   to  a  bear,    and  then  each   student   is  given  39  other 
ideas  besides  his  own. 

Nathan:     And  he  has   to  put   them  together? 

Asawa:        No.     Then  what  he  does   is  he   sees;  he   learns  about  39  other   ideas. 
That's  an  example  of  a  bear.     You  can  apply  that  to  math  or  you 
can  apply  that   to  anything.     That's  why  story-writing  or  anything 
can  be  used.      So,   the   teacher  is  not  dittoing  all   these  bears  out 
and   the  Christmas   tree  out  and  all  of   the  valentines  out,   you  know, 
and    then  sweating  it  out. 

She  gives   blank  paper  and  every  child   is   forced   to  begin  to 
make  decisions  —  the   research,    the   use  of   the   library,    the   use   of 
his  mind,   or  a  magazine.   When  he  sees   it  in  a  magazine,  he  may  cut 
it  out   of  an  ad,   or  he  might   see   it  on—what  is   it?— Olympia  beer 
or   something  like   that,   or  Regal  Pale  has  a  bear  on  TV.      So,  his 
consciousness   is   awakened.     You  can't  measure  any  of   this,    but  all 
these   things  happen. 

In  terms  of  making  a  mural,   we  have  400  kids,  and   they  all  have 
to  make  a  commitment   that's  permanent.     They  do  it  once  and   it's 
there  every  day  and  people  pass  by  and   they   see   it;    they  see   it  at 
recess  and    they  see  it  at  lunch.      It  reinforces   a  kind  of   thing 
which  doesn't  take  an  extra   teacher,   or  a  para-professional.     All 
of   these   things  come  out  of  seeing   their  things  hanging,   you  know. 
I  just  have   these   things  always  there.     You  can  have  all   these 
things   that   they  do  once  and   every  time   they  walk  in,    that's  where 
the  person's  eyes   look.      I  know   that   just  by  having  my  own  work 
hanging.     Even  if  it  was  done   in  1950,    it  can  still  reassure  you 
that  you're  capable  of  doing   something.     So,   an  insecure  college 
graduate,  not  knowing  quite  what   she's  going  to  go  into,   is  not 
going   to  have   that   to  give   to  the  students. 

Nathan:     Do  you  have  any  cases  where  students  are  not  willing  to  fulfill 
the  commitment,   or  want   to  stop  halfway   through?       How  do  you 
handle   that  kind  of   thing,   or  does   it   ever  happen? 

Asawa:       Well,   it  doesn't  happen  very  often.      I  would  be   interested   in  seeing 
what  happens   finally  when   this  whole   idea   becomes   established.      It 
may  not  have  the  same   effect  as   it  has  now,    simply  because   it's 
still  the  carrot   in  front  of  a   turtle,  or  whatever  it   is.      [Laughter] 
We're  still  in  that   stage  now. 

It's  clear   in  my  mind  and  maybe  not   everybody  sees   it— that  we 
are  not   trying  to  produce  artists.     We  are  only  trying  to  exercise 
the  part  of  each  person  that   is  problem  solving,    so  that  if   they  have 


50 


Asawa:        this  sort  of  experience,    they  apply  this.      It's  a  method.      It's  a 
method   of  attacking  a  problem  and   it   doesn't  have   to  be   in  art. 
It  can  be  in  how  to  reroute  the  traffic,   or  how  to  get  across   to 
the  other  side  of   the  Bay.      It  has  to  do  with  how  you  cope  with 
problems.     That's  what  I   think  I'm  trying   to  do.      I  don't  know. 
Others  probably  are  hoping   that  they  can  go  and   sell    things  on  the 
street  or  plaza,   or   somebody  hopes   that    they  can   learn  a   technique 
so   they  can  tile   the  bathroom.      Everyone  has    their   level   of  concern 
or  interest,    but  I  see   it  as  making  it  possible   for  young  people 
to  quickly  switch   if  they  need  to  and   scrap  everything   that   they've 
done  and   start  over  again.     That's  what  I  have   to  do  with  every 
project  that  I  do,    for  a  commission  or  whatever. 

I'm  not  so  terribly   interested   in  repeating,   although,    just 
in  the  nature   of  study,    I   repeat  many  things.      But   it   doesn't   scare 
me   too  much   to  go   into  a  project   that   I  know  nothing  about,    such   as 
the   school   system,   which   is  what   it  has   been,   plunging   right   into  a 
system,  not  with  the   idea  of  overthrowing  the   system.      I   think  that 
the  system  is  perfectly  set  up;    the  mechanics  of  it    is  perfectly 
set  up.     The  only  thing  that   stops    it  are  people  who   try  to  retard 
and   to   stop   things   from  happening. 

Nathan:     Do  you  think   they're  perhaps   afraid   of   change   or   afraid   of   innovation? 

Asawa:  No.  I'm  not  sure  what  it  is.  I  think  it's  because  they  haven't 
exercised  this,  that  they  don't  know  how  to  do  it.  I  think  it's 
purely  mechanical,  because  once  they  get  it,  they  love  it. 

Nathan:     Yes,    I  was   thinking  how  warmly  you  have   been  received. 

Asawa:       Yes,    they  really  love  it.     Like  now  nobody  thinks   twice  about  painting 
a  mural  on  the  wall,   but   they  don't  remember  how  impossible   it  was 
to  do. 

Nathan:     Right. 


Procedures   for  Hiring  Consultants 


Asawa  : 


Nathan: 


So,   I  think  that   there  are  many  areas.     Just   the  other  day,    I  wrote 
a  letter  to   the  president  of  the   school  board,  Dr.  Hopp,  and  I 
said,    "Why  can't   the  procedure  of  hiring  consultants  be  changed   so 
that  they're  not  burdened  with  all  of  the  people   that   they  already 
know.     Why  don't   they  delegate   that   responsibility  to  their  staff?" 
Apparently,    they  don't   trust   them. 

You're   thinking   then  that   the  principal  would  be  the  one  who  would 
determine    to  hire? 


51 


Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Yes,    it  could  be   the  principal  who  would  hire.      I'm  saying  that   the 
process,    the  procedure  of  hiring   somebody  may  take    two  months, 
which  means    two  months  are    lost  because  we  have   to  wait   for  this 
process   to  be  cleared.     But  why  isn't   it  possible    for  a  principal  to 
decide?     We're  making  decisions;    the  parent  coordinator  or   the 
artist  coordinator  and    the  principal  decide  how  it's  going   to  be 
spent  and    they  go  ahead   and  do   it  and   then  hire,  which  means   that   if 
we  decide   today   that  we  want  somebody,    in  two  days,    three  days,   or 
in  a  week,  we  can  get  that  person  and  they're   in  and  out  and  paid, 
so   that  we  don't  have   to  wait   for   staff  approval,    board  approval, 
on  something  that  has  already  been  tried. 

I  would   say   for   things   that  are  new,    I  can  understand    it.      But 
why  do   they—when  they  have   such  really,    really,   desperately 
pressing   issues—why  would   they  not   trust  somebody?     I   think  that   if 
you  don't  trust  anybody,    then  they  don't  perform  for  you.     You  know? 

That's   right. 

Well,    I'm  just  as  guilty  of   that  myself.      I  sometimes  am.      So,   let's 
take   like  in  the   classroom,  when  a   teacher  doesn't  trust  a  child  who 
puts  two   suns   in  the  sky.     All   of  these  things  are  a  reflection  of 
how  they  are    treated  by  higher-ups,    so  that   they  don't  allow  children 
to  make  decisions.     Therefore,   children  don't   learn  to  make  decisions. 
Therefore,    they  grow  up  and   they  won't  know  how   to  do   something  that 
is  basic  and  essential   to  their  own  personal  welfare,   emotional, 
mental,   and  physical  welfare. 


But   it's  all  very  simple-minded, 
that   I  don't  know  why  we  don't  do  it. 


You  know,   it's  all   so  simple 


The  way  you  describe   it,    it  does  make   sense. 
Yes,    it's  very  plain. 


Self -Reliance   and  Learning  What    is   Important 


Asawa:        I  think  one  of   the   tragedies  of   this  whole   thing   is   that   it  does 

reflect  back  into   the  basic   unit,  which   is   the   family.     The  family 
no   longer  knows  how  to  make  decisions,    so   they  delegate   it  to  — 

Nathan:     To   the  schools? 

Asawa:       To   the   schools.     They  delegate   it  to  the  psychiatrist  to  solve   their 
problems.     They  delegate  all   the   responsibility.     They  delegate   it 
to   the  AAA   to  protect   them,    to   life   insurance.      I'm  talking  about  us. 


52 


Asawa:        I'm  talking  about   all  of  us.      I'm  not  talking  about  art  decisions, 
or   this  occupation.      But  we  delegate   everything,    so   that  we  no 
longer  know  how  to  make  decisions  any  more    for   ourselves   and  we 
don't  hold   ourselves   responsible   any  more. 

So   then  we  have   to  go  out  and   seek  employment   so   that  we   can 
pay  for  all   these  things  that  are  protecting  us,   but   finally  we 
lose   our  own  sort   of  humanity,    or  personal  decision-making. 

Nathan:     So,  you  feel  that   self-reliance   is  really  the  key  to  being  able   to 
cope  with  your   life? 

Asawa:        Yes,    I   think  that   that    is    fundamental  and   that's   the  most  valuable 
thing  to  me  personally.      That's  more   important   than  anything  else. 
Maybe   that's   just  my  view.      But   I  think  that   in   trying   to  work 
everything  out,   I  think  that   that   is   sort   of   the  purest   state   of 
mind   that   I  can   think  of.     Maybe   I'm   talking  about   a   state   of  mind 
too,  which   I  think  requires   the  highest  degree   of  discipline. 

Nathan:     Now,   does   this   whole   process   that  you  were  describing—learning  how 
to  accept   responsibility  and  make  decisions    that  you're    teaching 
children  to  do  through   the  art  program--do  you  feel,    then,   that 
this  promotes   self-reliance?      I'm  wondering  whether   this  has    some 
relation  to  discipline  also,   self-discipline. 

Asawa:       Well,  you  have   to  learn  discipline.     You  know,   you  have   things  that 
will    teach  you  that.      If  you  live   on  a   farm,    the   discipline   is 
already  predesigned   in  that,   so  you  have  no  choice. 

Nathan:     How  is   that?     Certain  chores? 

Asawa:       Well,  now,   I'm  saying   that   if  you  don't  plant  in  a  certain  time  of 
year,   then  you  don't  have  a  crop  at  the  end,   or   if  you  don't  weed, 
or  if  you  don't  thin  out  your  plants,  you  don't  get  a  head  of 
lettuce;  you  get   leafy  lettuce.      If  you're   trying   to  grow  iceberg 
lettuce,    then  you  have  to  give   each  plant  space,    so  you  have   to  thin 
out.     Or  when  you  plant  onions,  you  have  to  have   three  or   four   inches 
between.     Otherwise,   you  won't  get   the   size.     These  are  all  sort  of 
natural   rules   of  growing   things. 

If  you  take  yourself  as  nature,    as  an  onion,   or  you  take 
yourself  as  a  body  trying  to  develop  into  a  dancer,   you  have   to  do 
the  same  thing.     There  are  certain  requirements  that  will  produce 
a  dancer  or  a  musician  or  a  potter,   but  these  are  rules  that  you  don't 
make.      You  don't   just  decide,    but    there's  a  physical    fact   of   life, 
•o  that   if  you  had  the  discipline   in  dance,    that  you  can  actually 
apply  that  to  anything  later  on.      But   there  are  certain  basic   rules 
that  are  not  your  own.     I  think  that   if  you  learn  that   there  are 
these  rules,  you  can  choose  not  to  do  it  or   to  do  it,  but   I'm  just 
saying   that  I   think  that  people  don't  have   those  opportunities. 


53 


Asawa:  I  chink  chat   there   should  be  a  dancer  from   the   San  Francisco 

Bailee  going   into  che   schools.     They  should  be  hired  by  Che  school 
system  Co   teach   any  number  of   classes.      I   Chink   ic's   Coo   bad    that 
ic's  only   limiced   to  a  very  few  people,    because   if  ic  were  possible 
for  any  child    Co  have   this  experience- 
Nathan:     A  dance   experience,    for  example? 

Asawa:        Yes.      Noc   jusc   Chose  on   scholarship  and   not   on  all   Chis  business  of 
poverty  and  minority    this   and   that,    buC   actually,    if  we   really   felc 
che    importance   of   ic  we  would   exCend    iC--buC    there's   nobody   that 
feels   Che    importance   of   it.      But    if  we   did   that,    we  might    find   two 
or  three  or   four  or   five  a  year  of  real  dance  pocenCial.      But,   at 
Che   same   time,   we  would   be   teaching   che   general   public,   a  general 
group  of   children,    a  certain   amount   of  good  habits    that   could   be 
applied   at  different   levels. 

That's  why  I  chink  when  you  give  quality,   you  raise   che  level 
of  consciousness  of  a   loc  more  people   Chan  by  what  we  offer  in  che 
schools,  or  what  we  offer  our  own  children.     People  don't   really  give 
cheir  children  very  much.      I  can  say   that  even  about  my  children. 
I   Chink  that  we   give    them  as  much   as  we   can,    but   they   say,    "Oh, 
Chere's  nothing  Co  do,"  and  Chere   is  a  lot   Co  do. 

But,   on   Che   ocher  hand,   what   I'm  calking  about,    that   conscious 
ness  may  come  much    later,   way  after,   way  after  we're  gone.     One  of 
the   examples   I  will   cite   just  with   one  of  our  children  is   Chat  we've 
always  had   books  on  Albers  and    letters   from  him  and   they're  always 
saying,    "Oh,  Mom."     BuC   Chen,  when  he   lefc   Co  go   co  college-- 

Nachan:     One  of  your  sons? 

Asawa:       One  of  my  sons,   yes.     He  didn't  wane   Co  go  Co  museums,    Co  galleries, 
any  of   these  things.     He   said,    "Ughi"     He  couldn't  stand   it.      So, 
Che   firsc   thing  that  he  wanted  was  a  prinC  or  a  drawing   Co   cake  back 
wich  him,   a  sculpture   to  hang   in  his   room.      So  all  of  che    things 
chac  are  around  you,    Chey  affect  you.      So   it's   interesting. 

Then,  one  of  his  teachers   started   talking  about  Albers  and 
when  he  came  home  he    looked    into   che  books   that  we  had   on  the 
Bauhaus.      So,    it's  not   important    that  you  convince    them. 

Nathan:      Just   expose   them? 

Asawa:       You  just   live  with  the  Chings  chac  are   imporcanc   Co  you.      In  the 
end,    ic's  what   is    important   to  oneself   that   really  matters   and   I 
think  chac's  what  a  person  can  convey  to  another  person,    if  something 
is   important  to  them.     They  won't  necessarily  find  chis  chat's 
important,   but   to  find    cheir  own  things  that  are   important   to  chem. 


54 


Nathan:  With  the  kind  of  conviction  that  gets  passed  along? 
Asawa:   Yes,  yes.   I  think  that's  quite  true. 

Nathan:  I  was  thinking  just  briefly  of  the  grant  you  received  recently. 
Is  it  from  the  California  Arts  Commission? 

Asawa:   Yes. 

Nathan:  Is  this  something  that  you  will  use  in  the  schools,  or  will  this  be 
another  project? 

Asawa:   No,  this  is  for  the  schools.   It's  an  expansion  of  twelve  more 
schools. 

Nathan:  How  many  does  that  make  altogether? 

Asawa:   Twenty-seven.   So,  now,  at  this  point,  the  question  is:  Are  we  going 
to  repeat  the  ineffectiveness  of  the  system  that  we're  challenging? 
That's  really  the  thing  that  we  have  to  begin  to  evaluate  and  really 
face  and  decide:  whether  we  should  get  bigger,  or  should  go  into 
depth  with  fewer  schools. 

Some  of  those  who  have  been  in  our  program  feel  that  if  we  can 
strengthen  the  schools  that  we  are  already  in,  maybe  that  is  more 
important  than  going  beyond.   But  our  proposal  was  to  expand  and  to 
experiment,  so  we  will  try  to  do  both. 

Nathan:  And  that  will  suggest  that  you  will  need  to  trust  certain  people  to 
make  decisions. 

Asawa:   That's  right.  We  have  to.  Because  we  believe  that  each  site  has 
to  decide  its  own  needs  and  program,  we  will  have  to  trust  them. 
We  hope  that  everybody  remains  honest  in  our  program.  There's  not 
enough  to  be  dishonest. 


55 


V  ART  AND  ARTISTS  IN  THE  SCHOOLS 


Artists  Working  as  Artists 


Nathan:  Are  you  more  or  less  full-time,  now,  with  the  school? 

Asawa:   The  Artists  in  Residence  grant  from  the  San  Francisco  Foundation 
is  for  me  to  try  to  do  what  I  think  has  to  happen  in  the  schools. 
So,  although  there  is  nothing  really  tangible,  concrete,  if  I 
continue  to  work  in  that  grant,  I  would  like  finally  to  have 
several  concrete  things  that  are  permanently  fixed  into  school  as 
part  of  the  program  that  I  would  like  to  do:   to  bring  artists  into 
the  schools  not  just  to  do  children's  work,  which  is,  I  think, 
what  we  have  been  working  with  to  involve  the  children,  but  there's 
also  the  level  that  we  have  to  have  artists  come  in  as  artists, 
doing  their  work  and  then  leaving  pieces  there. 

If  businesses  wanted  to  do  something  for  the  community,  rather 
than  putting  money  into  a  program  to  bring  students  to  Dow  Chemical, 
or  bringing  students  to  Bank  of  America,  or  bringing  students  to 
CMC,  or  something  like  that,  and  spending  money  on  buses  and  tours, 
they  should  do  something  that  is  really  concrete  in  a  school. 

Nathan:  How  would  this  work  in  the  school? 

Asawa:   It  would  work  in  the  school  to  make  something  that  is  given  by  Bank 
of  America,  so  that  instead  of  dressing  up  their  own  building,  they 
begin  to  move  into  the  community.  That's  one  of  the  ways  in  which 
businesses,  private  businesses,  can  do  something  for  our  schools. 


Beginning  to  Work  in  the  Schools 


Nathan:  Thinking  back  to  when  you  first  began  to  work  in  the  schools,  was 
this  when  Harold  Zellerbach  became  interested?  Or  you  interested 
him?  How  did  you  get  that  started? 


56 


Asawa:   I  had  worked  in  the  schools  independently,  going  on  lectures,  bringing 
out  a  little  thing  on  "This  is  How  I  Became  an  Artist,"  two  hours 
of  this  to  inspire  the  children.  Well,  I  did  that  several  times 
around  the  school  and  I  said,  '*That's  nonsense."  They'd  pay  me  $25, 
which  was  nice,  to  just  go  in  for  two  hours  and  do  this  little  thing. 
Every  once  in  a  while,  the  PTA  would  have  $25  and  they  would  pay  an 
artist  to  come  in  to  show  how  an  artist  is  an  artist.  But  that  was 
the  extent  of  the  involvement. 

That  was  before  I  came  on  the  San  Francisco  Art  Commission. 
This  was  while  the  children  were  growing  up  and  I  was  trying  to  do 
something.   I  belonged  to  the  PTA,  the  Parents'  Club,  community 


advisory,  all  these  things  on  how  to  improve  the  schools. 
busywork. 


It's  all 


So,  finally,  when  I  was  appointed  to  the  Art  Commission  in 
1968,  I  said,  "The  area  which  I  am  concerned  with  is  our  schools 
and  I  would  like  to  concentrate  on  our  schools."  Well,  the  Art 
Commission  said,  "That  is  a  problem  of  the  Board  of  Education.   They 
have  the  money.   It's  their  responsibility.  That's  their  job.   Our 


job   is  art." 
'ftkay,   okay. 


Some  of   the   commissioners  did,   you  know.      So,    I   said, 
I  won't  do   it   as   something  with   the  Art  Commission." 


So,   we   started   in  our  own  neighborhood   school. 


Developments  at  Alvarado 


Nathan:     Which  school?     Was  that  Alvarado? 

Asawa:  Alvarado,  yes.  Sally  Woodbridge  and  I  and  Nancy  Thompson—these 
were  the  three  artists  that  were  artist-parents,  all  had  children 
in  that  school.  We  started  with  them  and  then  a  core  of  about  14 
parents. 

We   started  with  throwaway  objects  and  do-it-yourself,  milk 
cartons,   egg  cartons,   a  little  here  and   there,    this  and  that.     The 
art  department  gave  us  $25   for  flour  and   salt  for  that   summer  and 
the  rest  of  it  we  put   in  ourselves.     That  was   successful,   so  we 
continued   in  the   fall. 

We  had  our  planning  with  the  art  department  and    the  principal 
and   Sally  and  I  got   together  in  the    spring   for   the    summer.     We 
happened   to  be  in  summer  session,   so  we  used  our  school   to  begin. 
No  one  felt  that   it  was  a  long  commitment.     We  were  just  doing   it 
for  the  summer. 


57 


Asawa:  Then,   one  of    the   regular  teachers  was   teaching   there  and  Robert 

Pult  said,    "This    is  what  we  need    for   the  whole  year."     So,  we 
continued   in   the    fall   and   then,    in  the   spring,  we  absolutely  had  no 
money.     We  had  been   full-time.   So,   I  asked  Mr.   Zellerbach,   and  he 
and  William  Roth  and  his  mother  —  those  were    the   first   three  and   I'm 
not  even  sure  whether  this  was  a  private   thing  from  Mr.  Zellerbach. 
Anyway,    all   three  of  them  privately  gave  money  to  the  program. 

I  went   to  the  Museum  and   the  people  who  were  on  the  board-- 
Nathan:     That's   the  Museum  of  Modern  Art? 

Asawa:       The  San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art-- to   try   to  make   them  interested   in 
it.     At   that   time,    they  were   in   the  building  program,    so  that    they 
thought,    "You  know,   all  of   this   is  children's  art.     This   isn't  art. 
This   is--."     I  don't  know  what  they  thought   it  was. 

But,   anyway,    I   think  the  real  support  we  had  was   from  Mr. 
Zellerbach. 

Nathan:      So,  he   stayed  with  you? 

Asawa:        He  stayed  with  us   for   the  whole   time.     Then   the   Rosenberg  Foundation 
came   in  in  our   third  year,    third  and   fourth  year   they  helped   us. 

Nathan:     Are  they  especially  interested   in  children's  art? 
Asawa:       Yes.     And  we  did  get  $2,000   from  the  board. 
Nathan:     The   school  board? 

Asawa:       The   school  board,   during   that   time.     But   it   took  us  a  year  and   a 
half  to  be  paid   that. 

Nathan:      Is   that  right?     Now,    this  was   the  one  with   the   tile  mural? 

Asawa:       Yes.     This  was  a  whole  program;    the  mural  was  only  one  part  of  it. 
We  had   gardening,  workshops,   and  we  had   a   lot   going  on.      And   like 
everything  else,    things  fall  apart,   you  know.     When  the  people  who 
are   interested  are  not  there,    the  plants  die,   the   grass  grows.      So, 
we  realized    that  unless   the  program  becomes  part  of  the  curriculum-- 
I  mean,   even  now  it's  really  shaky.      If   the  program  goes  away,    then 
I  don't  know   if  anybody  will  continue.     But  I  think  that  my  idea   is 
that  the  Art  Commission  is,    should  [be],   the  artistic   leadership  in 
this  city,    so   they  should  be   involved   in  it  and  every  city  department 
should   be   involved   in  every  other  part. 

Nathan:      I  see.     You  were,    then,    reappointed   to   the  Art  Commission? 


58 


Asawa:   Yes. 

Nathan:  For  roughly  a  four -year  term? 

Asawa:   Yes. 

Nathan:   So,  you  were  reappointed  in  '72,  or  in  '71.   In  any  case,  your 
appointments  are  continuous. 

Asawa:   No.   I  completed  the  term  of  Sally  Hellyer  when  Mayor  Alioto  -was 

elected.   I  was  appointed  to  fill  out  her  unexpired  term,  which  was 
a  year.  In  1969,  I  was  reappointed  until  1973,  and  I  was  now 
reappointed  again  for  another  four  years. 

Nathan:  That's  interesting  because  it  does  take  a  while,  doesn't  it,  to  get 
things  rolling? 

Asawa:   Yes,  it  takes  a  long  time. 

Nathan:  Right.  And  the  Alvarado  program  did  receive  some  support,  didn't 
it,  from  the  state? 

Asawa:   From  the  California  Arts  Commission,  yes. 


Combining  Parents  and  Artists,  Teachers  and  Administrators 


Nathan:  And  do  you  have  someone  at  Alvarado  who  will  keep  that  going,  or 
will  this  still  be  something  that  you  take  primary  responsibility 
for? 

Asawa:   Well,  we're  planning  to  have  two  parents,  one  to  do  the  bookkeeping, 
which  would  be  just  the  paperwork,  and  then  one  who  will  actually 
take  the  responsibility  for  the  program.  Right  now  Joan  Abrahamson 
is  doing  it.  She's  putting  it  all  together.  And  we  have  a  parent 
already  that  we  think  will  be  the  one  because  we  feel  very  strongly 
that  parents  should  be  involved  in  it  and,  at  the  same  time,  we 
think  that  a  parent  program  cannot  do  it  alone,  that  it  has  to  be 
a  combination  of  artists  and  parents.  Artists  alone  cannot  do  it 
either  because  they  don't  have  that  bridge  or  that  investment  in 
the  school.  So,  if  we  have  a  combination  of  parents  and  artists, 
with  the  teachers  and  the  administration,  then  it's  a  little  slower 
and  it's  more  natural.  It's  a  little  more  home-grown,  but  I  think 
in  the  end  it  will  have  a  greater  effect,  the  Artists  in  the  Schools 
coning  in  and  bringing  in  professionalism.  That's  what  I'm  talking 
about,  the  combination  of  existing  staff  with  people  who  are 
knowledgeable  of  the  outside  world,  not  in  business,  but  in  the 
artistic  world,  to  come  in  so  that  the  students  see  and  are  in  contact 
with  practicing  artists. 


59 


Nathan:     This   is  a   slightly  different  way  of  doing  it,   by  bringing  the 
artists  and    the  parents   together? 

Asawa:       Yes.      See,    the  Artists   in   the   Schools  Program  doesn't  have   the 
parents   in  it  at  all.     They  have  a  professional  dance  company 
coming   in  and   doing  a  little  workshop  with   the   parents  and  with 
the  children,   but    they  don't  really  have   the  ongoing   thing   that 
we  have.   They  don't  have   it  year  round.     They  have   it   for  a   three- 
week  period.      But   the  combination  is  very   important.      I  think  that 
we  need   that,   you  see,   because  we  could  also   train  parents   to  do 
very  simple  skills   to  pass  on.     There's   that.     There's   that  group 
that  we're   training   that's   important. 

But  we  need   somebody  with   ideas   so   that   the   ideas  don't  keep 
being  Just  play-dough  or  macrame".     We  need  somebody  who  keeps 
opening  up  more  and  more   things  and   that's  why  an  artist   is 
important.     One  way   that  we    feel   that   it  can  happen  within  the 
framework  is  to  utilize    the   teachers   that  are   in  tune  with  what 
we're  doing  and   free  them  from  the   fixed   scheduling   that  they  have. 
If   they  begin  to  study  their  own  resources  within  the   school,   a 
school  has  everything.      It  has   the  shops,    it  has  homemaking.      It 
has   the  art  department.      It  has    the  science   lab.      I  don't   think 
that   they  have  enough  equipment,   but   I'm  saying  that   they  have  all 
the   things   that   they  need.     All   they  need   is   somebody  with  an  idea 
for  the  program. 

So,  what  we're   talking  about   is   to  bring   in  people  who  can 
make   the   teachers   change. 

Nathan:     And  it  wouldn't  necessarily  be  the   same  people  year  after  year? 

Asawa:        Oh,   no.      It   should   be   rotating  because  nobody  should   become 

stagnant  in  it.     Artists  are  not   interested    in  getting  caught   up 
into  the  whole    teaching  rat  race.      I  think  that  with  the    loss  of 
job  potential   it's  even  more  critical   that  we  get  rid  of  tenure, 
because   education   is   learning  and   once  you've   taught   something 
then  somebody  else   should   take  your  place   so   that  you  are  not 
repeating  yourself,    unless  you  yourself  are  growing. 

I  think  the  whole   idea  of  tenure   is  against  education.      I  mean, 
you  should  do   that   in  a  job   situation.     You  may  be  able  to  do  it. 
But   in  education  you  shouldn't  be   stuck  with  it.      I  think  there 
are  advantages  and  disadvantages  and   I  think  that  people  should 
have   some  kind   of   security  provided,   but   I  don't   think  that  one 
should   settle  in,   especially  in  a   school   situation. 

Nathan:      So,   really,   you  could  have  people  coming  in   to   teach  for  a  while 
and    then  doing  other   things.     Artists  could  come   in  and  be   there 
for  a  while  and    then  go  on   to  something  else,    so   that   it  wouldn't 
be   just  a  permanent   staff? 


60 


Nathan : 
Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 
Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Asawa:   Yes.   It  should  be  a  continuous  thing,  but  it  shouldn't  necessarily 
have  to  be  the  same  people.  But  also,  at  the  same  time,  they  should 
understand  how  long  it  takes  to  do  a  project.  They  should  see  the 
entire  process.  I  mean,  for  example,  how  long  does  it  take  to  do  a 
fountain,  or  how  long  does  it  take  to  do  a  huge  tapestry? 

How  long  did  it  take  to  do  the  fountain?  Let's  say  the  Hyatt 
Fountain? 

From  the  time  we  signed  the  contract,  it  was  two  and  a  half  years. 
Then,  three  months  before  that,  I  worked  on  it  before  that  too.  I 
presented  a  sample  which  took  me  about  three  months  on  top  of  that. 

So,  it  took  three  years  really. 
Yes. 

Right.  And  a  tapestry  would  be  a  very  long  process  too. 

Yes.   So,  number  one,  the  children  have  uncommitted  time  for  12 
years  without  responsibility.   In  that  time  they  should  be  given 
the  opportunity  to  take  the  kind  of  time  that  it  needs  to  do 
something.   I  mean,  take,  for  example,  gardening.   If  you  had  to 
go  out  and  do  it  for  a  living,  you  couldn't  do  it,  but  if  you  could 
provide  that  information  in  a  school  it  doesn't  matter  if  you  make 
money  or  not  but  you  teach  them  a  real  lesson. 

Nathan:  Responsibility  and  care? 

Asawa:   Care  every  day,  feeding  it,  watering  it,  weeding  it,  all  these 

things.  That  can  happen  in  the  responsibility  of  cleaning  up  the 
cafeteria.  It's  just  a  responsibility  of  sweeping  it  or  of  scrubbing 
the  walls  in  the  school.   All  of  those  things  should  be  a  part  of 
the  whole  learning  process  so  that  the  classrooms  have  some  learning. 
If  it's  not  related  to  picking  up  after  yourself--!  think  that 
that's  far  more  important  and  that's  part  of  what  I'm  talking  about. 
It's  taking  care  of  oneself  and  being  responsible.   You  know  how 
hard  it  is  to  teach  your  own  children  that.  Every  day,  "Pick  up 
your  shoes."  Even  I  have  a  problem,  you  know. 

Nathan:  It's  hard  for  me  to  make  myself  do  it. 
Asawa:   Yes.  [Laughter] 


61 


Books   and  Murals 


Nathan:     We  were  just   looking  at  some  small   books. 

Asawa:       Ernst    (the   tie  company)   gave  us   these  fabric  pieces.     All   the 

students   in  one  class  made   these  hats  and    so  we  wrote  what   they 
did. 

Nathan:     Oh,    I  see.     And   then  they   typed   it.      It  looks  like--what?--a   little 
print? 

Asawa:        I'm  not   sure  how  they  did   it.      I  think  these  may  be  potato  prints. 
Nathan:      And    the   students  did   this? 

Asawa:       They  did  the  drawing.      They  did   the  originals  and    then  there's 

Valerie  Ferrer,    an  artist-printmaker ,  who's   in  our  program  now  who 
has  a  print   shop.      So,   she  did   this  with   the   idea   to  show   teachers 
how   they  could  do   this  just  on  the  Gestetner  or  on  the  ditto  machine. 
They  should   do  more  of   this  with  their  classes. 

This   is  a  mural   that  we've  done  with   the  Pier  Four  at  Ft.  Mason. 
[Shows  mural]      As  I  said  before,    this  was  with   the  Golden  Gate 
National  Recreation  Area  and   the  San  Francisco  Foundation  and   the 
Police  Fishing  Program.     These  were  all    things  we  did  with   the 
Maritime  Museum.     We  had   a   field    trip   to   the  Maritime  Museum  down 
at  Aquatic  Park  and   the   students  did   some   sketches  and   then  they 
went  over   there   from  the  Marina  and    from  Hunters  Point,    two  classes. 
We  got   two  classes   to  paint  this  mural. 

Nathan:     [Looking  at  mural]      Oh,   some  of   them  are  brilliant. 

Asawa:       They  were  very  brilliant.     The  idea  would  be  that   they  could  use 

these   for  books  and  give  each  child  one   to  take  home  that   participated 
in  this. 

Do  you  want  a  little  more  coffee? 

Nathan:     Mo,   thank  you.     After  our  conversation  about  cleaning  up  after 

ourselves,    I  felt  I  couldn't  possibly  leave  a  cup  there  [laughter]. 

Asawa:   [Laughter]   It's  not  a  special  program  that  I'm  talking  about.   I'm 
not  talking  about  a  special  person  or  a  special  technique.   I'm 
just  talking  about  how  much  we  can  do  for  ourselves. 

Nathan:   I  was  thinking  too  how  crucial  it  is  to  make  that  transition  from 
your  leadership  at  Alvarado  to  whoever  is  going  to  do  it  next. 

Asawa:   Yes. 


62 


Nathan:     I  gather  that's  what  you  have  been  working  on  at   the  ALvarado 
School. 

Asawa:       Yes.      It  may  or  may  not   transfer,   but,   on  the  other  hand,    if   it 

makes   it  possible    for  murals   to  be  painted,    and    for   schools   to  ask 
the  community  to  help  select  the  color  of  the  building,    I   think 
those  are  very  major  changes.      That   doesn't  have    to  depend   on 
anyone  any  more  because  if  that   becomes  policy  that  opens  up   the 
opportunity  that  we  want  —  to  have  a  community  garden,    or   if  we 
could   put   up  a  new  piece  of  playground   equipment  which  was   never 
permitted  before.      I  think  that   those  are  sort  of  the  changes   that 
I'm  talking  about   and   it  hasn't   cost  anybody  anything.      It   doesn't 
cost   the   school  district   anything.      It's   just   simply   changing  their 
thinking  a   little   bit. 

Nathan:     Do  you  suppose   there's   some   sort   of   fear  of   controversy—that    if 
these  decisions   are  made  open  to   the   community   there  will   be 
different  opinions   that  have  to  be   reconciled? 

Asawa:       Well,   I  think  that's  what  we  should    try  to  do,    to  open  it   up   so 

that  each  school   is  not  the   same  and   that  more  people  are   involved 
in   the  decision-making.      Even   if   they   fight   amongst   themselves,    it's 
better  that  they  are  active  and   thinking  about   it   than  if   they're 
not  doing   it   at  all,   or   that  they're  not   allowed    to   do   it.      I   think 
that  we're  now  going   into   the   real  problem  of  mural   painting.      See, 
we  went   to   the  Board  of  Education  and  we   painted   a  mural    there. 

Nathan:     You  did?      In  the  building? 
Asawa:       Oh,  yes. 
Nathan:     Who  did   this? 

Asawa:       Well,  we   got  students   from  Commodore   Stockton  and   Edison  School. 
We  got   the   first  and   second   grade  classes   from  Commodore   Stockton 
and   a  mixed   group  of   fourth,    fifth   and   sixth,    a  special   ed   class, 
from  Edison.     We  painted   a  wall.     We  offered   to  do   it  and  we   got 
the  okay  to  do  it. 

Nathan:     Was  it   the  Board   that  made   the  decision? 

Asawa:       No.     We  went   through   the  Buildings  and  Grounds,  Milt  Reiterman. 

Then  we  got  it  on  the  wall  and   the  next  day   the  Art  Department  was 
getting  calls  about   something   in  writing  and   about  meetings   about 
it.     They  were  getting  a   little  pressure,    I  guess.     Now  they're 
asking  that  we  have  a  meeting  with  the  union  and   the  Buildings  and 
Grounds,    the  Art  Department,   and   somebody  to  represent  —  to  talk 
about  which  walls.     With  every  mural   that  we  put  up   it   sounds    like  — 
[  don't  know,  we  may  have   to  have  a  meeting  and   approval   by  everyone. 


63 


Asawa:  So,   I  chink  it's  not  really  necessary  to  do  that  because  these 

murals  are  not  permanent.      I  mean,    they  can  always  be  painted  over. 

Nathan:     Are   they  mounted   on  canvas? 

Asawa:       On  the  wall.     No,   no.     Right  on  the  wall. 

Nathan:     Can  you  describe  what   that  mural   looks   like? 

Asawa:       Well,    it's  just  very  free.     There's  an  area  with  a   lot  of   fish  and 
boats  and  one  area  that  represents   the  Mission     District  with  palm 
trees  because    the   school's  on  Dolores   Street.     There  are  some   trees 
and    things  in   the    sky  and  we  have  a  couple  of  school  buses   in  there 
and   Dr.   Hopp  put  a   little   spot  on  and   somebody   from  the  music 
department  put  a  note  on   there.      It  was  fun.     We  really  had  a 


time.   But  we're  going   to  have  to  get  help  from  the  union, 
met  yet.      I  don't  know  whether  we'll  meet  or  not. 


good 
We  haven't 


So,  my  question  will  be   to  ask  the  school  district  which 
schools  are  going   to  be  painted  and   if   it's  not  going  to   be  done 
in  the  next   two  years,    then  we'll  go  ahead  and  paint  a  mural.     We're 
not   trying   to  take   jobs  away   from  the   union,   but   if   that  wall  isn't 
going  to   be  painted    for   two  years,    there's  no  reason  why  a  mural 
couldn't   be  on  that  wall.     When  they're  ready   to  paint   they  can 
whitewash   it   so  that  we  could  paint  another  one   in   two  years.     So, 
they  should  not   feel    that  jobs  are   being  taken  away,   but  that   this 
is  a   learning  experience   for  the  children   that's  an  extension  of 
education  outside  of  the  classroom,    that   they  will  be  able   to  do 
something  out   in   the   community. 

That's   the  same  way  with  the  boathouse;    the  children  contributed 
something   to  the  entire  community  and  experienced    this.      It's   right 
over  there  by  Aquatic  Park.     You  can  see  across  and  you  can  see  this 
little  boathouse  where  Al  Capone   stood—you  know,    it's  Alcatraz  pier. 
They  sent   their  prisoners    from  that  pier.      It's  right   there  by  the 
pump  house. 

So,    the  children  really  get   a  real   experience.     They  learn 
something.     They  also  contribute   something   in  a  very  painless, 
easy  way  without   feeling   that   they're  doing  something  great.     They're 
having  a  good    time.     They  went   fishing  afterwards. 

I  think  that   they  should  look  at  the    school  not   as  an   institution 
to  provide  jobs   for  teachers,   and   teachers  as  workers  to  be   represented 
by  unions  but   as   the  primary  tool  for  providing  all  children  with  a 
basic  education.     Now  only  part  of   these  children  can  do  it  because 
they  don't  have   enough  brushes.     The  equipment   isn't  working.      I  would 
like   to  give  Buildings  and  Grounds  a   list  of  the  kilns   that  are  not 
in  working  condition,   or   shop   tools   that  are  not   in  operation.     You 


64 


Asawa:        can  just   forget  your  project  if  you  need  a  kiln  that's  not  connected. 
And,  on  top  of  that,   they  have  a  kiln  that   is  one  cubic   foot   for 
a  school  of  400  to  700  people.     They  have  a  kiln  that  big.      [Gestures] 
[Laughter]      You  know,   that   is   outrageous    that   they  don't   even   under 
stand   the   educational  process. 

They  shouldn't   be   concentrating  on  whether   the   children  are 
painting  a  mural  on  the  wall  and   spending  all  their   time  worrying 
about    the   union.      They  should  be  concerned  with  operation,    I  mean 
with   the  operation  of  equipment,    so  that  we  can  work. 

For  one   example,  when   I   loaned   a   sculpture   to  McAteer  High,   we 
clocked   it  to   see  how  many  manhours   it  takes.      If  you  take   the 
phone  and  call   somebody  and  say,    "Is   it  okay  to  do   it?",    if  you  get 
somebody  to  do   it,    it  wouldn't   take  you  more    than   two  hours   to  go 
from  here   to   there  and   get   it   installed.      Well,    they  had   to   get   two 
men  who  had   to  come   to   look  at  it.     Then  they  got  a   truck  with   four 
men  on  it  to  pick  it  up  and   then  they  dropped   it   there.      If   it 
weren't  'for  a  parent  who  kept  pushing  to  get   it  done,    it  would   still 
be  in  the  storeroom  at  the   school. 

Nathan:     They  didn't  even  put  it   in  the  right  place? 

Asawa:        They  didn't  even  put   it  up.     They  just  stored   it.      Then  another  crew 
had   to  come  and   set   it   up.      [Laughter]      You  know,    that's  very  costly. 
We're  paying  for  all   that  labor,  whereas  we   feel   that   that  kind   of 
time  should  be  put  into   things   that  would  benefit  the  children.     Of 
course,  having  it   there  benefits  them,   but  they're  not  worried  about 
that.     That  doesn't  bother  them.      But   it  bothers   them  that  we're 
putting  a  mural  up. 

Nathan:     When  you  do  a  mural,    is  there  some   sort  of  overall   scheme  or  plan 
that   is  agreed   upon? 

Asawa:        Generally  a  theme   is  discussed,    talked   about,    sketches  are  made   by 
the  children,    beginning  sketches,   and   then  we  sort  of  designate 
outlines.     We  draw  the   skyline  and   the  hills  and   the  water  and   the 
city  and   the  roads   sort  of  generally.     Then,  within  that   framework, 
they  put  it  in.   And   they  may  do   something  historical,    like   the  Levi 
Strauss  panels   that  were  done  downtown   in   that   building   [at  Embarcadero 
Center] :     one  area  was   the  gold  country,   another  area  was   the   ships 
of  San  Francisco,   and   the  other  side  was   sort  of  night   life  and 
entertainment.     So,  one  was  mining,   one  was   the   ships,   and   the  other 
wag  the  night   life  or   the   local  scene   in  San  Francisco.      In  general, 
it's  very  loose. 

Nathan:     Does  each  child  have  a  specific  area   to  paint   in? 


65 


Asawa:       He  selects   it.     The  first  ones  have   the  whole   thing  and   the  second 
group  has   to  adjust   to  what    is   already  there.     The  parents  and   the 
artists  come   and  put   the  background   in   to   tie  it  all   together  because 
generally  children  paint  a   lot  of   spots  that  may  have  meant   something 
to  one  child.     They  will  not  mean  anything,    so  they  will  paint   them 
out  when  they're  doing   the  background.      So,    the   little  children, 
unless   they  paint   their  own  background  with   it,   paint   their  thing 
and   then  their  background,    then  we  just  blend   it   in   from  there. 


To  Lick  and  Mission 


Nathan:     You  were   talking  about   the  early  beginnings  in   the  San  Francisco 
school  system,    in  Alvarado  School.     Then  did  you  move  along,   as 
your  children  got  out  of  grammar  school? 

Asawa:       We   followed    that   first  year   through.     The   second  year  we  went   to 
James  Lick  Junior  High. 

Nathan:     You  had  a  child   in  James  Lick  at   this   time? 

Asawa:       Yes.     All  of  our   children  have  gone   to  James  Lick,   but   this  was  our 
fifth  child.     That  was  when  we  began  the  program.      She  was  a  sixth  - 
grader  at  Alvarado  and,    so,  we  went  on.      I  think  we  actually  started 
before  that  group  went  with  an  art    teacher   there.     We've  always 
been   involved  with  the  art   teachers   there  at  Lick  and   one  of  our 
very  good    friends   is  Alan     Brooks,  who  is  a  painter.     He's  now  at 
City  College,   but  he   taught  our  children  and  was  probably  the  best 
teacher  during  that   time,    but  there  are  other  teachers  that  we 
don't   know  about. 

Anyway,   we  decided    that  we  would  sort  of   follow   them.     We  don't 
have  a  list  of   the  names  and  we  haven't   recorded    them--we  probably 
should  have,    but  we  haven't.     But  anyway,    in  our  fifth  year  —  that 
was   last  year—we  went  to  Mission  High  School.     That's  when  we  got 
the  high   school.      So,   you  know,   I  can  walk  down   there  and  all   these 
children  say  hello  to  me  because   they  remember  the  program.     They're 
not  all   in  it.     They're  not  all   interested,   but  we  have  a   few  that 
are   still  active   in  any  project  that  they  see  going  on  because   it's 
an  independent  program.      It's  not  scheduled  or   locked    into. 


Moving  Parents   from  Home   Classes   to  Schools 


Nathan:      Before  you  went   into   the  schools,   did  you  have  any  kinds  of  classes 
in  your  home   for  your  children? 


66 


Asawa:        No,   I  didn't  have   children's   classes.      I  always  had   children  coming 
in  and   out  and   doing   things.      But   I  did  have  a  group  of  mothers  who 
came  to  draw.      I  think  it  was   in  1953  or    '54  when  a  mother  who  had 
gone  on  to  study  art  came,   brought  her  child,   drew,   and   then  we  would 
go  to   the  park,    let  the  tricycles  out  of   the  car  and   they  would   ride 
around   the  band  concourse  or  Dolores  Park,  wherever  there  was   a 
children's  playground.     And  then  we  would  draw.     We'd  draw  the 
children  and  we'd  draw  the  animals,   or  we'd  go  to   the  zoo,   and 
wherever  we  went,  we   took  our  sketchbooks  with  us.     Then  they  had 
classes  here  too.     About   five  or  six  came. 

That  was  a   time,    I  would   say,    in  the    '50s  when   that    seemed    to 
be  a  very  good   thing   to  do.      Then,    gradually,    I  guess,    in   the    '60s, 
I  began  to  realize   that   if  parents  were   to  become   involved  with 
something,    they  really   should  become   involved    in   the   schools,    so 
that   instead   of  coming   to  study  with  me,   when   they'd  want   to   study 
art,    then  I  would   say,    "I  think  really  what  you  would   like   to  do    is 
to  start  to  get   involved   in  the   schools." 

The  reality  of   it   is  that  I  know  that  when  a  person  begins    to 
be   involved   in  art  at  a  late  age,    like  after  their  children  are 
in  school  and   they  want  to  do   something  and  be   busy  and  be   into 
something  they've  always  wanted  to  do,    I  mean,   I  think  that   in  a  way 
will   always  remain   recreation,    simply  because   the   other  commitment 
is   too  great.     They  have   to  maintain  a  house.      They  have  a   life    that 
they  have   to  keep  running  and   they  can't   ever  be   committed    in  a  way 
that   a   student   can  be   committed    to  art,    studying  art,  when  they're 
younger. 

Also,  having   started  at   that  age,   they  can't  give   five   or  six 
hours  to   learning  to  draw.     They  come  and   they  draw  and  then  they 
go  on  to   the  hairdresser,   or   they  go  on  to   church,    or   they  go  on   to 
a  PTA  meeting,    so   that  they  can  never  really  concentrate   the  way 
you  need   to  if  you  want  to  become  an  artist.      So,    it's   sort  of  a 
recreation  thing  for  them. 

So,   I'm  hoping   that   our  program--!  don't   think   that  we  can 
actually  say  it's  that  concrete—but  what  we're  trying   to  do   is   to 
bring  artists  into  the    schools   so   that  they  teach  the  children  and 
the  parents  can  learn  by  helping,    so   that  that's  a  much  more  efficient 
place   to  be   learning   these   skills.     That's  why  it's   important  to 
have  artists   in  the  school. 

Nathan:     Because  the  parents   learn  as  well? 

Asawa:       The  parents  can  learn  something  there  and,    so,    if  we  can  make   that 
work  stand,  we  can  then  make   the  school  a  learning  center,   a 
community  learning  center,  not  just   for  children,   but  for   the 
community  people.     You  can  satisfy  a   lot  of  needs   in  one  action, 


67 


Asawa:        you  know.     You  need    the  parents   Co  help   in   the   school*.     You  wane 

Che   involvement   also;   you  wane    them   co   be  aware   of  what's  happening 
in   che  schools.     Then  you  wane  Co  teach    the  children  and  you  wane, 
hopefully,    that   che  children  can  Chen   cake  ic  back  in   che  home   Co 
teach    their  parents.      So,    if  you  have  a  parent    in  Chere  and  her 
child's    Chere   Coo,    Chen   it's   almost   guaranteed    that    they  will   Cake 
ic  back  Co   Che  home.      But  where   Chere  are  no  parents   and  we're 
coming  in  with   that  experiment,    it's  very  hard  Co  geC   ic  back  into 
the  homes.     That's   essentially  what  we're  Crying  Co  do,    co  bring 
what  we   teach   into  a  natural  part  of   che  home   accivity. 

I   feel   that   at   Chis   point,    if  we  don't  have  parent   involvement 
or  community   involvement  and  we're  Ceaching  the  children,    then   che 
children  are   going  Co  have  Co  become  our  teachers,    because   Chey're 
going   co  know  more   Chan   their  parents  and   then,    if  Chac  can  happen, 
ic'd   be  a  wonderful   thing. 

BuC  that  may  just  be  theoretical.  Ic  may  just  be  sore  of  an 
idea  that  sounds  good  on  paper.  BuC  if  that  happens,  Chen  we  can 
really  begin  to  really  operate  effecCively. 

Nathan:  In  any  of  these  classes,  did  Che  fathers  ever  participate,  or  did 
they  go  Co  Che  schools? 

Asawa:        Some  did. 

Nathan:      Have   Chey   shown  any   interest    in  Che  activities   in   Che   school  more 
recencly?     I  was   chinking  of   some   of  Che   chings  chac  you've  been 
doing  in  che  schools   in  Che   last   few  years.     Have   Chere  been  very 
many  fachers  who've   showed  any   interest? 

Asawa:       Yes.     When  we  were  building  planters,  we  had  a  father  build    che 
planters   for  us.     They've  also  done   cree  planting  wich  us.     Lew 
Licsky  has  been   involved   in  sore  of   che  organizacion  of  our  program, 
I  mean,    the   accounting  and  working   in  an  area   in  which  he   can  help 
che  program,   so  that  we've  had   that  kind  of  help  Coo. 

Nathan:  When  you're  working  in  the  schools  wich  che  children,  do  boys  and 
girls  parcicipace  equally? 

Asawa:       They  all  want   ic.  They  all  wane   it  I 
Nathan:      You  don't  have   to   persuade   the   children. 

Asawa:  It's  only  a  rare  case  when  a  child  refuses  to  get  dirty.  I  mean, 
they'll  say  that  they'd  get  punished  at  home  if  Chey  gee  painC  on 
Cheir  cloches,  so  I  don'c  know  how  many  beatings  we  have--[ laughter] , 


68 


Neighborhood  Focus  and  Moving  On 


Nathan:  When  you  started  in  the  Alvarado  School,  did  you  have  any  special 
feeling  that  you  should  work  in  your  own  neighborhood  first? 

Asawa:   Yes,  absolutely.  The  thing  that  is  interesting  about  this  neighbor 
hood  is  that  we  have  a  working  nursery  school.  We're  all  split  up 
now,  but  when  we  began,  it  was  before  busing  was  here.   The  thing 
was  to  have  a  working  nursery  school  and  then  have  a  school  that 
these  children  could  go  to.  This  is  theory.  Theoretically,  the 
ideal  thing  is  if  you  can  make  it  actually  work,  then  you'd  have 
something  really  nice  going  on. 

We  had  an  active  Neighborhood  Tree  Planting,  the  improvement 
with  trees,  so  that  our  neighborhood,  Noe  Valley,  has  had  the 
largest  community-planned  tree  planting  in  the  city.  We  must  have 
had  at  least  300  or  400  people,  owners,  participating  in  this  program. 

Did  that  program  start  here,  or  was  it  a  city  program? 

Well,  the  city  began  a  tree  planting  program  about  five  or  six 

years  ago,  maybe  earlier,  where  if  a  neighborhood  gets  ten  signatures, 

then  the  city  comes  out  and  cuts  the  holes. 

Along  a  parking  strip? 

No,  along  the  sidewalk,  all  along  the  sidewalk.   So,  we  had  one  man, 
Earl  Moss,  who  has  taken  that  as  his  interest,  and  he  goes  around 
to  every  neighbor,  to  the  grocery  store.   Everywhere  he  hands  out 
this  application  for  tree  planting.  When  he  gets  ten  in  a  block, 
then  he  calls  Department  of  Public  Works,  Tree  Planting  Department, 
Brian  Fewer,  and  they  come  out  and  they  cut  a  hole.   Sometimes  some 
blocks  have  a  tree  planting  party.  In  Berkeley,  you're  full  of 
trees,  so  it's  old  hat  to  you.  But  here  in  the  city- 
Nathan:  Oh,  it's  very  important. 

Asawa:   And  that  has  sort  of  brought  us  together.  Then,  the  people  who  live 
here  have  decided  that  they  would  like  to  run  a  little  shop  on  24th 
Street,  so  that  they  would  rather  live  and  work  in  their  neighborhood. 
So,  we  have  a  book  store  called  Books  Plus,  which  is  run  by  two  who 
live  in  this  neighborhood,  two  young  men  who  run  it,  and  they're 
active  with  the  nursery  school  and  the  wives  are  active  in  the  school. 
So,  it's  a  really  very  happy  thing. 

Then,  the  group  fought  for  down-zoning,  so  that  they  wouldn't 
have  apartments  here.  They're  really  very  concerned  in  a  local  way 
with  how  their  neighborhood  is  operating.   I  think  that's  really  a 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 


69 


Asawa:   healthy  thing  that's  happening  in  the  city  and  I  feel  that  our 

school  program  contributes  to  that  kind  of  solidarity.  The  first 
two  or  three  years,  people  were  trying  to  move  to  this  neighborhood 
so  that  they  would  be  near  the  school,  which  was  an  interesting 
thing.  We  got  quite  a  few  people  moving  into  this  neighborhood 
because  of  the  school. 

Then,  of  course,  with  busing,  that  was  sort  of  very  upsetting. 
But  we  said  that  it  was  our  responsibility  to  go. 


Sharing 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan : 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


To  accept   the  new  children? 

No,   to  go  and  move  and   start  new  programs.   That's  how  we  started   in 
Chinatown  and,   you  know,    the  Zellerbach  Family  Fund   supported    that 
whole  mural  project   there,  which  was   filmed  by  BBC. 

No,   I  didn't   realize  that. 

They  opened   the  storeroom  with   the   supplies;    they  shared   things.      In 
that    school  now,  with  ESEA  and  ESAA,    they're  combining  back-to-back 
programs,    so  that  we're  not   in  isolation.     They  need   an  ethnic 
program,    so   that   they  have   it  scheduled   for  Chinese  New  Year's, 
Black  Week,   and   then   they  bring  our  program  into  kite-making,   you 
know,   and  then  with   the  Blacks   they  make  masks.      So,    they're  bringing 
to  share  what   they  each  have  and  bring  them  into  a  common  kind   of 
curriculum,  which   is  done   by  our  parents,    so   that   they  get   the  most 
for  their  money. 

I  think  that,  hopefully,    that  begins   to  happen  with  our  program 
and   federal  programs  and   reading  programs  and  math  programs,    so  that 
if   they  need    the   reading   and  math   complemented,    then  we   can  complement 
it  with  enrichment  and  bring  it   together.      If  that  can  happen,    then 
it  will   be   the  most  efficient  use  of  both  groups'  money  and,  hopefully, 
that  will  happen.     That   can  only  happen  if  people  are  generous   enough 
to  share  what   they  have.     We  have  always  offered  our  program  to  the 
gifted  program,    the  ESEA  program.     We  say  that  we  should  combine 
our  resources,   and   then  they  start   talking  about  guidelines;    they 
can't  do   this  and   this,  you  know.     They're  just   sort  of  depriving 
themselves;    they  have  programs   like   a  one-to-one-- 

This   is   in  the  Chinatown  school? 

In  general.     They  have   these  programs  where   they  have   tutorials 
where   they   reach   one   child,    not   the   rest.     Our  program  reaches 
every  child,   you  know,   and  we   try   to  reach  every  child.     We  don't 


70 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 


Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Nathan : 

Asawa: 

Nathan: 

Asawa: 


reach  the  whole   school,   but  we  don't  pull   the  gifted  and   the  special 
children  out.     We    take    the  whole  group  and  we  don't   discriminate 
and   say,    "You're  dumb,"  or,    "You're  Okay." 

It's   interesting   that  when  some  of  your  parents,  who  have  a  very 

happy  neighborhood   situation  here,  were  spread  out  by  the   schools, 

they  didn't   just  get   lost,   but   they  did  seem  able    to   carry   the 
message  with   them. 

Well,   our  program  survived   and  we  went  to  Hunters  Point,   Potrero 
Hill,  and  Chinatown.     The  teachers  at  Hunters  Point   said,    "This    is 
the   first  program  for  children  in  the  area  of  the  arts." 

Is  that  right? 

They  were  heavily  funded   for  reading  and  math.      So,    if  you  were 
creative,   you  would  have   quickly  seen  how  you  could  have   reading, 
math,   art  all   lumped    into  one    thing,    like  you  could  have  had  your 
books  published  with  the  writing  in  it,    illustrations,    so  that   they 
would  have   the  art  and   they  would  have   the  whole  experience  of  a 
whole  project.     This   is  what  we're  trying  to  offer   them  now,    that 
they  can   take    the  math   component,    they  can  take    the  multi-ethnic 
component,    they  can  take  English   or   reading,    and   put   it  all    together 
into  something   that   is  very  concrete. 

Do  you  attempt   to  put   together  a   text  of  any  kind? 
Well,    I  don't   really  know  whether   that's   the   solution. 


No,   I  don't  know  whether  it   is  either, 
idea  of  what   they  need? 


I  gather   this   is  not  your 


I  think  that  there  may  be  great  profit  in  it.      I  can  see  that  every 
body  will  grab   for   such  a  thing,    but   I  don't  think  that  that   is    the 
solution  any  more   than  I  believe  that  the  tape  cassettes—you  know, 
the  video-taping  thing — is  going  to  answer  the  problem,   or   that  TV's 
going  to  answer  it,   or  film  strips. 

Nathan:     You  think  those  are  just  all  techniques? 


Techniques;     The  Real  Thing  and   Counseling 


Asawa:       They  are  all   techniques  and  they  are  all   used  by  the  teacher  as  a 
substitute   for   the  real  thing. 

Nathan:     And  the  real  thing  is—? 


71 


Asawa:        The   real  thing   is  being   in  contact  with   the   r«al,  warm  body  of 
somebody  who's  doing   it.     People  say,    'Veil,  we  can't  afford   to 
have   that  many  people."     In  the  meantime,    they  spend   on  evaluation, 
they  spend  on  counseling,    they  spend  on  all   that  is  absolutely 
useless.      It   really   is  useless  because   the  counseling  is  wrong. 
I  mean,    the  kind  of  counseling  that  they  give   is  wrong.      [Brief 
interruption] 

Nathan:     So,  you  think,    just  briefly,  about   the  counseling  that  it  is  not 
sufficiently  related  again  to  the  real  world? 

Asawa:       Well,   I  just   say  from  our  own  experience  with  our  own  children. 
For  example,  when  our  daughter  was  graduating   from  Junior  high 
school,    she  had  a  chance   to  go  to  either  Mission  or   to  Lowell. 
So,    the  counselor  said    to  her,    "If  I  were  you,   I  would  go  to  Mission 
because  Lowell   is   too   tough  and  Mission  is   lower,   academically  less, 
so  your  grades  will   be   so  spectacular   that  you  could  probably  get 
into  Cal   easier   than  if  you  went   to  Lowell,    because  at  Lowell  you 
might  be  a  "C"  student."     Can  you  imagine    that  kind  of  counseling.' 

Nathan:  That   is  cynical,    isn't  it? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  Where  did   she  go   finally? 

Asawa:  Lowell.     Now  she   says   she  wishes   she'd  gone   to  Mission. 

Nathan:  [Laughter]      Of   course.1 

Asawa:        But   it's   interesting,    the   kind  of  counseling   that    is  given  to 

children.      If   instead  of  eight  counselors,   you  would  have  eight 
practicing  artists,   you'd   just  change   the  whole  environment  of  a 
school.      I   think  people  are  shoved   into  jobs   in  the  school  system 
that  are  counter-productive  and   a   lot  of  counselors  know   that   they're 
not  doing  any  good  and  they're   frustrated,   but   they're  assigned 
that,   so  they  take   that.      It's  really  too  bad,   as  much   for   them  as 
for   the  students. 

Or,   a  minor   in  art   is  put  into  a  teaching  job   for  art,  or  a 
P.E.  major  has  to   teach  art  because  she  has  an  art  minor  and   the 
school  needs  an  art   teacher.     All   these  things.  They  could  make   it 
work  within  what   they  have   if  they  would  utilize   the   skills  that 
are  within  that   framework  of  the   faculty.     There  are  plenty  of 
teachers  that  are   really  very  talented,   but  they're  not  used   in  the 
right  way. 

Nathan:      I  supposed   there  would  be   the  problem  of  what  you  do  with  all   the 

counselors   then,    because  you  can't   just  make  someone   into  an  artist. 


72 


Asawa:        No,   I'm  saying   that   all   of   them  originally   began  as   teachers. 
Nathan:     As   teachers,    I  see.     And  that's  what   they  ought   to  be? 

Asawa:       And  I  think  that  everyone  should   be   in  the   teaching  field.      I   think 
everyone  should  be   in  the  classroom. 

Nathan:     Everyone  should   teach? 

Asawa:  Everyone  should  teach,  yes.  You  can  have  a  smaller  classroom  size 
by  the  number  of  adults  you  have  in  the  school. 

Nathan:  You  were  saying  a  little  earlier  something  about  programs  in  which 
older  children  —  let's  say,  high  school  children  —  teach  the  younger 
ones.  Does  this  operate  in  the  art  field  also? 

Asawa:       Well,   I  don't  think  this  happens  yet.      I  think  poeple  think  of 

tutorials,    tutors   in  math,    tutors  in  English,    tutors   in  writing  or 
reading,    in  those  areas.       But   I  don't   see  anything  yet    in  the  area 
of  the   arts,   except   that   it   actually   is  happening   at  Mission  High 
School,  where   they  have   the  Mission  Mime  Troupe.      These  are   students 
that  are  being  taught.      It  was  taught  by  a  State  College   student 
teacher   last  year  and  he's  now  part  of   the  Lone  Mountain  program. 

These   students  develop  a  whole   company.      Last  year,    they  came 
to  Alvarado  and  performed   every  Tuesday   in  the   spring.      Right   now 
they  are  coming  once  a  week  until   the   end  of  the  year.     They  come 
as  part  of  their  school  curriculum  to  do   this. 

Our  son  is   in  junior  high   school  and  he  has  a  Groucho  Marx 
routine  with   about   three  or   four  of  his   friends.      This    is    independent. 
Now,    if   this   little   group  could   go  on  a   little  mini-tour  around   the 
neighborhood  elementary  schools  and   put  this  on,  or  if   the  junior 
high  drama  department,   or   the  English   teacher  who's   putting  a 
production  together,   could   then  take   this  witfh   the   idea  that   she  would 
gear  this  whole   semester's  work  around  a   tour  around  the  city-- just 
even  if  they  did  three  or  four  performances,    like  Diamond  Heights, 
Alvarado,  Edison,  Kate  Kennedy,   all  of  these  neighboring  schools- 
then  the  children  who  are  going  to  these  schools,  which  are   feeder 
schools   to   the  junior  high,  could  begin  to  see  what  junior  high 
school  is  all  about,   that   it   is  not  a  great  mystery,   that   they  can 
look  forward  to  this   thing.      It  could  happen  in  puppetry.      That  way, 
it  could  make  the  activities   that  are  done  at   the  high  school  and 
junior  high   level  have  some  meaning. 


73 


The  MADDS  Festival  and    Involving  Departments 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan : 

Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Yes,    instead   of  just  having  a  performance   in  your  own  auditorium? 

And   then  your  parents  come   and  maybe  you  have  an  audience  of  26 
or  27  people,  of  interested  parents,   and  you've  worked    the  whole 
semester  for  it.      I've  seen  this  happen  year  after  year.     Why  they 
don't   really  do  something  with   it. 

Hopefully,    the   festival   that  we'll  have   in  the  spring,    the 
MADDS  Festival-- 

MADDS?     That's  an  acronym,    I   take   it. 

That's  Music,  Art,  Dance,  Drama,  Science.  They've  changed  it  now 
to  add  home-making,  so  that  they've  renamed  it.  But  I  think  that 
that  probably  will  stick  because  it's  the  original  name. 

This   festival   takes   in   the  various   schools? 

It's  open  to  all  public  and  private  and  parochial   schools   in  the 
city,  with   the  Exploratorium,   the  San  Francisco  Museum,    the  De  Young 
Museum.      Parks  and  Recreation  [Department]    cooperating  with   the  San 
Francisco  Art  Commission  and   the  Art  Department  of  the  San  Francisco 
Unified   School  District.     We're  going   to   try  to  get   the  Arboretum 
and  the  Academy  of  Sciences   to  participate   in  it.     You  know,    the 
Academy  of  Sciences  has  a  science   fair  and   the  Art  Department  has  an 
art   fair.     But,   hopefully,    this  will  make  it   so   that   they  bring   it 
together,    so   it's  not  art  here  and    science   there  and   the  home-making 
separately. 

Will    it   go,    say,    for  a  weekend? 

It  will  be  May  9,    10,    11,   and  12.     That  will  be  Thursday,  Friday, 
Saturday  and   Sunday;    two   school  days   and    two  weekend   days.      That 
will  coincide  with   the  PTA  Conference  right   there  at  Civic  Auditorium, 
so   it  will  be  a  perfect  kind  of  stage  for  all   the  PTA  members   in 
California.      I   think  it's  a  conference   for  California.      It  may  be 
national;    I'm  not   sure. 

But  this   is   the   idea  of  bringing  all  departments  of   the  city 
together.     The  Art  Commission  Neighborhood   Arts   Program  will   be 
active   in  it.     Levi  Strauss   is  going   to  put  up  the  panels   that  were 
painted   around   the   construction   there  at  Embarcadero  Center.    And 
then   the   Bank  of  America  has   offered--!  mean,    they're  negotiating 
now  on  having  a  show  of  the  winners   from  this   festival. 


Nathan : 


You've  been,  I  gather,  very  instrumental  in  getting  this 
set  up. 


festival 


As aw a : 


Nathan: 

Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


74 


That  was  one  of  the  other  things  that  I  thought  the  Art  Commission 
should  have.   In  1969,  we  talked  about  doing  this  through  the 
Neighborhood  Arts  Program,  as  sponsors  of  the  thing,  and  at  that 
time  we  couldn't  do  it.  But  this  has  always  been  the  idea,  that  we'd 
get  the  city  agencies  together  and  we'd  get  the  school  district 
together  and  do  something  together.  Hopefully,  we'd  get  the  police 
department  to  patrol  it  and  the  Muni  to  offer  buses  to  the  schools 
to  bring  the  orchestra,  the  band,  or  the  gym  equipment.   So,  this 
would  be  an  efficient  way  to  see  what  is  happening  in  a  positive  way 
in  our  schools,  instead  of  reports  and  studies  and  this  and  that, 
to  have  four  days  of  people  coming  from  all  over  the  city  to  see. 
Kids  can  see  what  other  schools  are  doing.   Parents  can  see  what's 
happening  here  and  say,  "We  want  that.  We  should  have  that.   Sure. 
Why  not  us?  Why  can't  we  have  that?  Why  does  that  school  have  that?" 

We'd  lay  it  out  there  and  those  who  are  doing  something  could 
show  what's  happening.  What  we'd  like  to  do  with  the  Alvarado  group 
would  be  to  have  all  the  artists  who  are  working  in  our  program  do 
workshops  there,  so  that  parents  and  teachers  and  children  can 
participate  in  some  of  the  activities. 

About  how  many  artists  are  there  now  in  the  Alvarado  program  would 
you  say? 

Oh,  gee,  a  lot.  Maybe  25. 
That  many? 

These  are  all  part-time,  all  just  here  and  there,  workshops  here 
and  there.  One  of  the  things  that's  interesting  about,  for  example, 
Mission,  which  I've  been  sort  of  indirectly  involved  in,  is  that 
the  San  Francisco  Museum  now  is  involved.   They  gave  money  to  set  up 
a  gallery,  so  we  have  a  student  gallery  in  the  school. 

Now,  Mission  is  not  going  to  be  demolished? 

No.  Mission  is  at  Poly  now.  So,  they  have  a  gallery  which  will 
exhibit  students'  work  there. 


Nathan:  A  student  gallery.  That's  really  very  exciting. 


MADDS  Reviewed* 


Nathan:      ['d   like   to  go  back  a  little.      If  you  don't   feel  like   talking  about 

it,   we  can  do   it   another   time  or  perhaps   not.     We're   talking  now   some 
time  after   this   festival    in  May,    the  Music,   Art,  Dance,   Drama,    Science 
Festival.     Were  you  involved    in   that   planning? 


This   portion  was   inserted   from  a  subsequent   interview. 


75 


Asawa:       Yes.     Well,   Joan  Abrahamson  was   In  charge  of  bringing   it  all   together. 
She  directed   the  whole  thing  and   the   School  Department  had  Junius 
Camp   representing  the   school  and  Herb  Simon,    the  art  director.     P.E. 
took  care  of  gymnastics  and  tumbling,   and  Dan  Ryan,   and  Mr.   Bezeman 
organized  music --you  know,    the  bands  and   the  choir,   and   someone 
took  care  of   the  programming.     We  asked  Levi  Strauss   in   the 
Embarcadero  Center   to  loan  us   the  panels  that  we  had  painted  two 
years  ago.     They  were  now  down  because  of  the  building  being 
completed,    so   they   loaned   us  the  panels  and  Levi  Strauss  paid   for 
the   installation.     We  had  asked   if  they  would   give  us  some  of  the 
panels  and    they  may  give   us   these  panels  for   future   use.      So,  we're 
going   to  use   them  at  Ft.  Mason  for   the  Fourth  of  July  festival. 
That's  coming  up  July  4th,   5th,   6th,    7th,   8th,   and   9th  at  Ft.  Mason. 

Nathan:     This  Ft.  Mason  Fourth  of  July  festival  —  that  would  be  temporary? 

Asawa:       Yes.     We're  not  going   to  do  anything,  but   they're  using  the  panels. 
They're  storing  the   panels.     They're  using  them  there. 

Nathan:     Oh,    I   see.      So,    that's  another  use  of  the  panels.     Did  you  say  this 
MADDS  Festival  was  not   the    first   one? 

Asawa:       This  was   the   second  one.     Last  year   it  was   financed   by  the  Neighborhood 
Arts  Program  and   they  had  Kathy  Oliva,  who  did  what  Joan  did   this 
year,   with  Junius  Camp  and   several  of   the  departments.  This  year  we 
tried   to  expand   it   to  all   the  departments.     We   invited  all   the 
departments. 

Nathan:     How  do  you  feel   it  went?     What   is  your  assessment  of   it? 

Asawa:       Oh,    it  went  very  well.      Saturday  and  Sunday  we  didn't  have  much  of  a 
crowd.      Thursday  and   Friday   it  was  mobbed.      Saturday  we  had   a 
demonstration  by  the  Nazi  Party  on  one   side.     The  Jewish--!  don't 
know  what   they're  called  —  the  Liberation,  or   the  Jewish  Military— 
but   they  were  protesting   the  Nazis.     That  was  going  on  and  we  were 
parading  around  with  a  dragon  and   the  music  was  at  the  other   end  on 
Larkin  Street.      It  was  a  surreal  scene. 

Nathan:      [Laughter]      It  must  have  been.' 

Asawa:       But   I  think  it  was  very  good  and  next  year  we'll  probably  do   it 

during  the  school  year  in  a  school  week  so  more  children  could  come 
to  it. 

Nathan:     Now,   that  was  at   the  — 
Asawa:       The  Civic  Center. 

Nathan:     And  it  may  be  that   that   isn't  a  place  people  necessarily  go  on 
weekends   usually,    is   it? 


76 


Asawa : 


No.  So,  what  we  want  to  do  is  really  to  have  it  right  there  down 

in* the  center  of  town  near  the  Board  of  Education,  near  the  city 

hall,  so  that  it  reminds  them  that  that's  what  they're  in  business 
for. 

It's  turned  a  lot  of  teachers  on  and  a  lot  of  parents. 


Movable  Plays  and  Repeat  Performances 


Asawa:   There's  one  teacher  who  said  that  she'd  found  five  ideas  that  she'd 
like  to  take  back  for  next  year.   So,  it  sounds  like  an  in-service. 

The  important  thing,  I  think,  is  for  other  children  to  see  very 
skilled  children  in  acrobatics  and  dance  and  music  so  that  they  have 
an  opportunity  to  see  one  another.   It's  not  a  good  place  for 
theater  because  it's  just  too  open,  but  if  there  were  some  way  in 
which  they  could  also  have  theater  performances  somewhere  similar  to 
that,  so  that  there  would  be  a  film  and  theater  festival  somewhere, 
then  there  would  be  a  better  exchange  of  effort. 

Nathan:  Right.  Now,  you're  talking^in  terms  of  a  festival,  I  gather,  in  one 
place.   But  I  suppose  really  it  would  be  possible  to  simply  visit 
other  schools  and  put  on  these  performances  to  a  broader  audience. 

Asawa:   Yes.  Or  the  other  thing  to  do  would  be  to  do  plays  that  are  movable, 
so  that  a  school  can  travel  from  Lincoln  to  Washington  High,  or  to 
Mission,  so  that  there  would  be  some  way  in  which  they  could  even 
travel  around.   But  I  think  it  has  to  be  much  more  organized  so  that 
the  awareness  becomes  really  a  conscious  thing  for  the  schools  and 
the  students. 

Nathan:  Right.  You  mentioned  sort  of  in  passing  that  the  first  MADDS  Festival 
had  been  financed  by  Neighborhood  Arts.  How  was  this  one  financed, 
the  second  one? 

Asawa:   This  was  partly  by  our  program,  partly  by  the  California  Arts 

Commission,  our  funds  from  that.  By  providing  the  opportunity  to 
these  schools  to  have  some  of  it,  they  also  had  something  to  bring 
to  the  festival,  and  in  that  way  you  make  your  money  double.  You 
serve  two  purposes.  You  provide  a  program  in  a  school  and  they  in 
turn  bring  it  there  and  then  you're  doing  two  things  with  the  same 
money. 

The  school  gave  us  buses.  They  provided  buses;  they  did  not 
provide  money.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  our  program  being  funded 
by  the  Board  of  Education,  in  a  sense,  is  putting  money  through  our 
program.  But  the  operational  costs,  we  took  care  of  that  in  the 
Alvarado  program. 


77 


Nathan:      And  as   far  as  you  can  judge,    this  may  be    the   same   system  that  will 
work  for  che  next   festival? 

Asawa:       Well,   no.     We're  hoping  that   there  will   be  more  commitment   from  the 
Board  next  year,    just   in  the  mechanics  of  guards,   of  whatever  needs 
to  be  done  —  you  see,    the   sign  system  was  provided   by  the  Neighborhood 
Arts  Program.     The   set-up  was  provided  by  the  Neighborhood  Arts. 
All    the  panels  belong   to  the  Art  Commission.    So,    this  in  a  way  was 
a  cooperative  effort.     Then  the  Park  Commission  gave   us  use  of   the 
park.     We  didn't  get   the  police   to  cooperate  by  giving  us   some  patrol, 
night   service.      But  then  Levi  Strauss  provided   us  with   the  panels 
and   the   labor  to  put   them  up.     We  primed    them  and  we  got   them  cleaned 
up  ourselves;   we  had  a  crew  to  clean  up.     Then  the   Bank  of  America 
gave   space   in  their  concourse  gallery  for  pieces   from  that   show.     Of 
course,   Joan  Abrahamson  took  care  of  all  of  that.      So,    in  a  way,   we 
reached  out   into  the   community,    into   the  business  community,   and   I 
think  more  and  more  of   this  has   to  happen. 

Nathan:     Can  you  see  other  people,   other  parents  or  other  artists,  who  are 
going   to  be  able  to  do   this  kind  of  pulling   together,    this   sort  of 
cooperative  effort?     Are  you  trying  to  cultivate  other  people  to  do 
this  also? 

Asawa:        Well,    I  would    love   to.      I   think   somebody  has   to  do   it.      Somebody 

should  be  there.     Of  course,   Joan   is  just  a  genius  at  making   these 
contacts  and  having   that  kind  of  background   that   she  has,   coupled 
with  her  energy   to  do  such  a  thing,    she's  pulled  a   lot  of   things 
together—a  Bi-Centennial   thing. 

Nathan:     Oh,   really?     I   should  ask  about    that  next   time,    the  Bi-Centennial 
plan. 

Asawa:       Yes. 


78 


VI     PLAY -DOUGH 


Workshop  in  Hawaii 


Nathan:     You  were   saying   that   you  had   been   giving   a  play-dough  workshop    in 
Hawaii? 

Asawa:       Yes.     There's  a  young  couple,   an  Episcopal  minister  and  his  wife. 

They  wanted   to  do   something  and   they  did   this  whole  project  on  their 
own.     They  sent   us   a  plane   ticket   to  go.      I  was  going  with   a   friend 
of  mine,  Mae  Lee,   who   is  a  mutual   friend  of   the  Pummel 's,   Joseph 
and  Phoebe  Pummel,   and   a  wedding  came   up,    so  my  daughter  Aiko  went 
in  her  place.  So,  her  husband    and   she  and    I  went   and   did   six  workshops 
on  three   sites.     One  was  at  a  school,  Hawaii  Girls  School.     The 
second  one  was  at  St.   Andrew's  Cathedral  and   the  other  was  at  St. 
Christopher's   in  Kailua.     That's  on  the  other  side  of  the   island 
of  Oahu  from  Honolulu. 

They  had  no  idea  really  of  what  to  expect  or  of  what  kind  of 
response   they  would  get.   So,    the  first  day  we  had  about   75  people 
in  the  morning  and  about  45   in  the  afternoon.     Then  the   second  day 
we  had   160  and   so  on,   until  when  we  were   through  we  had  600  in  the 
three  days. 

Nathan:     Who  were  these  people? 

Asawa:       They  were  just  mothers,   children,    teachers,   a  lot  of   teachers  wanting 
to  do  something.     We  had  a  school  for  the  handicapped    that  came. 
That  class  came  and    there  were  some  children  from  lolani  School, 
which  is  a  private  school   there,   and  these  were  preschoolers.     Their 
teachers  and  parents  came.      So,   either  you  paid   a   fee  or  you  brought 
a  five-pound  sack  of  flour  and  a  pound  of  salt.      So,    they  had  a   lot. 

They  were  expecting,  well,  maybe   if  they  got   50  pounds  of  flour, 
and   they  already  had  20  pounds  at  home,    that    they  could  pick  up 
another   ten  pounds   if   somebody  would   bring   some.      But    they  didn't 
realize  that  that  much   flour  would  be  used.     So,    it  was  really  a 
•ucc««s. 


79 


Nathan:  How  did  they  announce  Che  face  Chat  you  were  going  Co  be  there? 

Asawa:   Well,  they  senc  ouc  notices.  They  sent  ouC  a  mimeographed  sheeC. 
Then  Cwo  newspapers  covered  ic  and  Cwo  celevision  scacions  covered 
ic.   1C  was  because  of  Che  media  that  Che  second  and  third  day  were 
so  packed.  They  had  read  abouC  ic  and  so  they  drove  and  brought 
their  children.  The  place  was  mobbed. 

Nathan:   That  must  have  been  fun. 


The  Dough-In 


Asawa:       Oh,    it  was  wonderful,  yes.   And  then,    Just  a  sidelight,    I  think  it's 
the  Hawaiian  National   Bank  or   something—a  man  came  and   asked   if  we 
would  do  a  sculpture   in  pennies    to   cry  co  encourage  people   Co  scop 
hoarding  pennies  and  bring  them  back   into  circulation. 

Nathan:     A  sculpture   in  pennies? 

Asawa:       Yes.      So,   I  asked    them  to  come   the  next  day  in   the  afternoon  and   in 
the  meantime   somebody  suggested--!  think  the  minister's  wife 
suggested-- that  we  make  a  penny   in  play-dough.      So,  we  made  a  penny 
about   ten  inches   in  diameter  and   I  made    the  Lincoln  side  and  Aiko 
made   the   tail   side   of   Che  penny.      We    thought    that    Chac  would   be   a 
nice   gimmick  Co  stimulate   them  and  he  wanted    to  connect   it  with   the 
"Dough-In"  project.     They  labeled   it   the   "Dough-In." 

So,    it  is  very  interesting  because  I  think  we  had  a   lot  of 
people.     We  had   craftsmen  come,    some   from  the    university. 

There's  one    thing  not  connected   to   this,    that  Hawaii  is   Crying 
ouc  chis  year.     They  have  a   state  mandacory  law  that   requires  one 
percent  of  Che  cost  of   every  building  to  be  put   into  art  commissions. 

Nachan:      Is  Chis  for  a  public  building? 

Asawa:       Yes.      State  buildings.     What   Chey  are   crying  Co  do  chis  year,   a*  I 
understand   it,    is    that   they  are  going  co  have  an     Artist   in  the 
Schools  program  from  the  Endowment  chis  year. 

Nachan:      The  Nacional   Endowmenc? 

Asawa:        The  Nacional  Endowmenc.      And  what    Che   state   is   going   Co  do   is   it's 
going   to  back-to-back  its  one  percenC  commission  program  with   che 
Endowmenc,   so   chac    Chey  will   Cry  Chis  on  che   island  of  Hawaii,   I 
think,    and    che   artists   are  being  called   back.      Most   of   them  are 
natives  who  have    left   the    islands  and   who   live   on   Che  mainland   and 


80 


Asava:        they  are  calling   them  back  to  work  as  artists   in  the  schools  with 
a  commission  so   that   they  can   be  working   on      their   commission  at 
the   same   time   that   they're  working  with  an  Artist   in   the   Schools 
program.      It  sounds  very  interesting. 

Nathan:     So,    the  actual  projects   that   the  artists   in  the  schools  will  work 
on  will  be-- 

Asawa:       Their  own  work. 

Nathan:     Their  own  work  for   these  public  buildings? 

Asawa:        Yes.     And   then   they  also   spend   some   time  with   the   students.      I   think 
primarily  they're  not   to  be   teachers,    but  to  be  working  as  artists. 

Nathan:     And  will   the   students  participate  as  one  does   sort  of  in  an  atelier? 
Will   they  have   something  to  do  with  the  work,  do  you  think? 

Asawa:        That   really  is  going   to   be   up   to   the  artist,    but    the   requirement   is 
that   they  do  it  on   the   school  site,   I  think,   or  a  place   that   is 
adjacent   so   that    there  will   be   some   relationship  with   the   school. 

Nathan:     How  does   this   compare  with  what   I  understand   is   supposed   to  happen 

in  San  Francisco,    that   a  one  or  two  percent   sum  of   the   cost  of  every 
public  building  is   supposed   to  be   set  aside   for  art? 

Asawa:       Well,  we  have   two  percent   in  San  Francisco. 
Nathan:     And  this   is  a  San  Francisco   ruling,    is  it? 

Asawa:        It's  not  mandatory,   but  they  can  use   it.     That's  why  it's  up  really 
to  my  committee   to  go  after   it.      Each   time   a  building  appears   on   the 
agenda,    then  we  have   to  go  and   ask  the  city  to  consider   it.   So   far 
they  have  never  turned  us  down. 

Nathan:      I  don't  want  to  lose   that  point,  but   I'd  like  to  ask  you  one  more 

thing  about   the   "Dough-In,"  if  I  may.     How  do  you  demonstrate  or  how 
do  you  set  up  this  kind  of  a  teaching  arrangement? 

Asawa:       Well,    the  way  we  did   it  there  was   that   the  tables  were  arranged  with 
about  ten  to  a  table  and  I  think  that  we  had  enough   tables   set  up 
for  about   150  to  work.     The  first  time  we  had   10  or   11   tables,   which 
meant   that  we  could  accommodate   100  at   tables  and   if  there  was  an 
overflow  they  could  sit  around  on  the   floor.     Then  we  had   large 
mixing  bowls  and   large  measuring  cups.     We  had  a  four-cup  measuring 
cup  and   then  we  had  eight-cup  pitchers—you  know,    those  plastic 
pitchers   for   fruit  juice — and    then  we  had   one-cup  measuring   cups   for 
the  salt.     Then  we   tried   to  keep   the  cups   separate   for   the  flour.     We 
don't  use   it   for  water   too;  we  keep  a  dry  cup  and  a  wet  cup.     And  we 
had  buckets   there.     We  asked  some  of  the  parents   to  bring  bowls  with 
them,    those  who  wanted   to  learn. 


81 


Asawa:        So,  we  began  by  mixing  and  we  started, 
dough  without  the  color  first. 


We  would  mix  the  plain 


4  Cups  of  Flour.  1  Cup  of  Salt.  1  1/2  Cups  of  Water 


Nathan:  And  what  is  the  formula?  How  much  flour? 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Four  cups  of   flour,   one  cup  of  salt,    one  and  a  half  cups  of  water. 
And   if  you  want  to  add  a  color  in   it,   you  use  dry   tempera,  which 
you  mix  in  with   the  dry  mix   first,   about    two   tablespoons  of  color. 
You  can  buy  that   in  a  one-pound   container,    like  a  one-pound   salt 
container,   at  any  art  supply.     But   if  you  are  working  with   children, 
or  with  anybody,   you  should   be  very  careful   that  you  don't  use 
anything  that   is   toxic  pigment.     These  are  always  nontoxic. 

Then  the  flour  and  salt  and    the  powder  pigment  are  mixed 
thoroughly  and   then  the  water   is  added   to  it.     One  and  a  half  cups 
of  water  are  added   to  that  all  at  once  and   then  you  mix   the  whole 
thing.      It   is  really  gooey  at  first  and   then  you  keep  pulling  in 
the  dry  flour  mix  down  at  the  bottom  of   the  bowl. 


Do 


you  do   this  with  your  hands? 


You  do  it  with  your  hands  and   then  gradually  it  will  all   sort  of 
begin  to  stick  together  and   the  consistency  is   like  bread  dough. 
Then  it    is  turned  over  and   is  put  on  a  table   to  knead  and  you  knead 
it  for  three  to   five  minutes  until  it's   smooth. 

The  parents  were  watching  and   then  we'd   say,    "Okay,   you  try 
it."     So,    they'd   come    in.      Some  would   add    too  much  water,    some  would 
make   it   too   dry,    and    then  what  we  would   do   is  we'd   show  them  how   it 
should   feel.     We  had  a   finished  batch  there  so  that   they  could   feel 
it,    so  that  they  could  compare   their  dough  with   the  good  one. 

Then  we   finally  got   it  organized  on  the  third  day  so  that  the 
dough  was  always  kept  on  one   table.     All    the  mixed  colors  were  on 
one   table  and   then  each  table  was  given  a  lump  maybe   the  size  of  a 
small  baseball  or  a  tennis  ball,   about  that  much  on  each  table. 
All   the  colors  were  put  out   in   the  center  of  the  tables   so   that  each 
person  didn't  get  a  little  bit,    because  when  you  do  it   that  way  it 
dries  out.      So,    it's  better  to  leave  it   in  as   large  a  chunk  as 
possible   so   that   the  air  doesn't  dry  it  out  and   then  you  take  whatever 
color.     As  soon  as  you  run  out  of  a  color,    then  you  go  and   get   some 
more.      By  doing  that   there  was   less  waste  and   the  dough  was  workable 
for  a  longer   time. 


82 


Asawa:  And   then  we  had   seeds.     We  had   popcorn,   black-eyed   peas,    peas, 

mung  beans,   kidney  beans,    sunflower  seeds.  And  we  had  macaroni,    you 
know,    the  shell  macaroni,   the   little  macaroni  salad,    those   little 
circles,    that  were  used  and   that  we  brought   in.     Then  we  cut  up 
Olympia  beer  cans   in  one-inch   strips  and   then  cut   those   into  little 
pieces,    so  that  we  had   little  pieces   like  half-inch  by  one-inch. 
Those  were  used   to  make  patterns  with,  where  you  would  make  a  curved 
pattern  or  a  V  pattern.     You  would  just  use   those   for   texture  or 
for  cutting,    for  cutting  the  dough   so  that  we  wouldn't  have   a   lot 
of  knives  on  the   table.      It  was  primarily  to  show   them  what   they 
could  do  with   their  throw-away  materials. 

We  also   then   took  the  pull   tops  off   of   the  beer   cans   and   the 
soft  drinks  and  had   them  save   those   so   that  they  could   use   those 
to  insert  into  the  dough  after   they  were  finished  with  their   figures 
that  would  be  baked   in  an  oven.     There   it   takes    longer   to  bake   because 
of  the  moisture   in  the  air,   but   those  were  baked   into  them  so  that 
if  they  wanted  to  hang  it  on  a  wall   it  would  hang  on  a  wall.     They 
could  hang  it   so   there  would   be  no  problem  with  that. 

We  did   it  at   low   temperature  because  what  you're   trying  to  do 
really  there  is  to  dry  out  the  dough,    to  take  all  of  the  water  out 
of  the   dough   instead   of  baking   it;   because  you've   used   food   coloring 
and  when  you  bake  it  at  high  temperature  you  lose  all  your  color. 
So,   the   idea  there   is  not  to  bake   it  at  a  high  temperature,    but   to 
bake   it  as    low  as  you  can--like   from  250   to  300  degrees—and    then 
you  bake  it  for  a   long   time.     Sometimes  you  bake  it  all  night  or   two 
or   three  hours  after  that. 

But   if  you're  baking  dough  that   is  not  colored  and  you  want 
that  nice  brown  color,    then  you  bake  it  from  300   to  350  degrees, 
depending  on  how  dark  you  want  it   to  get  that  brown   look.     That 
would   take  anywhere   from  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half  and   if  you 
want   it  darker  you  just  keep   it  in  there   until  you  get   the  brown 
color  that  you  want.     See,   like  one    there  [points   to  baked  clay 
plaque].     That's  a  natural  one. 

Nathan:     I  see.     There's  not  a  glaze  on  it.     That's   its  own  color. 

Asawa:       That's   its  own  color,    but  after   it's  done,    in  order  to  protect   it 

from  the  moisture   in  the  air,  you  have   to  put  a  coat  of  verathane   or 
a  polyester  resin  on  the  thing  and   spraying   it   is  not  enough.      It 
should  actually  be  brushed  on  or  dipped   in  the   solution  of  clear 
varnish  or  clear  plastic.     That  way  it  will   seal   the  moisture  out  of 
it--I  mean,  keep  the  moisture   from  being  absorbed. 

Nathan:     We're  looking  at  a  plaque  of  Adam  and  Eve   in  the  Garden  of  Eden? 
Asawa:       Yes. 


83 


Nachan:     Was    this   something  you  did  some   time  ago? 

Asawa:       Well,    Chat  was  one  of   the  very  earliest  ones.      In   the  early    '60s, 
I  think,   I  did    that. 

Nathan:  He's  even  got   the  apple   in  his  hand.     He's   taking  a  bite. 

Asawa:  About   to  eat,   yes. 

Nathan:  [Laughter]      That's  a  very  crucial  moment. 

Asawa:  Yes.     We're  all   suffering   from  it.      [Laughter] 

Nathan:  They  look  like   such  nice  people   too.     [Laughter] 

Asawa:  Well,  we're  all  nice  people,    still   struggling  with   the   same  problem. 

• 

"Let's  Work  on  a   Story" 


Asawa:        So,  what  we  did  was   then  we  went  and  got   some   fruit  crates   from  the 
grocery  store  and  wherever  there  was  a  group  of  children  from  a 
school  we  gave   them  a  box  and  we   said,    "Let's  work  on  a  story,"  so 
that   the  things  that   they  did  were  not   isolated,  but  we  created  a 
story.     While  we  were  there  we   talked  about,    "Now,  we're  going  to 
do  this,"  and   then  we'd   say,    "Oh,  hm,    I   think  we--,"  you  know. 
Somebody  would  have  made   a   little    fish   and  we'd   say,    "Oh,    let's 
make  a  little  lake."     So,  we'd  make  a   little   lake  and   then  we'd  put 
all   the   fish   in  there  and   everyone  who  did  a   fish  would  put   it   in 
that   lake.  This  was  a  class  of   severely  handicapped  children  who 
came  and   they  weren't  quite   sure  what   to  do  with  this.      So,   the 
minute  we  got  a  piece  of  cardboard,    that   scrap  cardboard   that  we 
were  cutting  up—there   is  a  circle,   you  know,    sometimes   in  a  fruit 
basket,    in  one  of   these  bushel   baskets.     There   is  a  circle  at  the 
bottom  or  at   the   top.     We   took  that  and  used   that  as  a   frame  and 
then  we  began  to  glue   things  on  it  and  by  the  end  of  two  hours,    they 
had  built  a  beautiful  little  picture   that  every  one  of  those   students 
worked  on.      So,    they  took  that  back  and   they  will  hang  it  at   their 
school.      So,   it  just   sort  of  gave   them  an   idea  of  how  they  could 
actually  go  beyond   just  making   those   things,    so   that   they  could 
extend    it   into   the   classroom  and   do  any  number  of   stories   through 
dough  while   they  were   learning   the    technique   of   using   it. 

So,   actually,   I  didn't   really  demonstrate  anything.      I  just 
simply  suggested    things  and  then  they  carried   it  out.     And  each  child 
and   each   parent  made   something  and   explored   it. 

Nathan:      And    then  did    they   take   it  home   and  do   the   baking  themselves? 
Asawa:        They  took   it  home    to   bake,   yes. 


84 


At  the  County  Fair,  1969 


Nathan:  Have  you  done  this  sort  of  thing  in  other  places,  at  fairs  and  at 
other  places? 

Asawa:   The  first  time  I  did  it  was  at  the  County  Fair  in  1969,  at  the 
Los  Angeles  County  Fair.   We  worked  for  17  days  and  we  worked 
every  day  from  ten  'til  ten,  from  ten  to  eleven  on  the  weekends, 
demonstrating.  When  we  were  through,  we  had  all  the  letters  of 
"Los  Angeles  County  Fair."  Each  panel  was  a  letter,  so  we  made 
L-O-S  A-N-G-E-L-E-S  and  so  on.  The  theme  was  everything  that  was 
at  the  Fair,  so  one  took  the  livestock,  and  one  the  circus,  and 
another  the  racetrack,  and  so  on,  and  then  the  foods,  the  canned 
foods,  and  the  fruit  exhibit.   So,  that  was  the  first  time. 

You  know,  the  panels  that  I  had  at  my  exhibit  last  year  were 
from  seven  different  schools,  seven  or  eight  schools,  where  I  did 
the  same  thing. 

Nathan:   I  see.  When  you  were  demonstrating  at  the  Fair,  would  people  stand 
around  and  watch?  But  they  wouldn't  do  it  at  that  time? 

Asawa:   They  didn't  do  it  at  that  time.  They  did  some  at  the  very  beginning, 
but  it  got  so  confusing.  There  were  too  many  people  and  we  didn't 
have  enough  material  there,  so  we  ended  up  demonstrating  and  working 
on  the  panels.  We  invited  a  few  to  come  and  put  something  on  at  that 
time  and  then  we  baked  them  at  the  Fair,  so  that  each  day  we  were  on 
another  letter,  so  that  people  came  back  several  times  to  see  our 
progress.  They  would  be  watching  and  they  would  say,  "We  were  there 
when  they  were  working  on  the  "0,"  and  we'd  be  on  the  "G"  somewhere, 
you  know.   So,  we  had  people  coming  back  several  times.   And  then 
the  Fair  people,  the  people  who  were  working  at  the  Fair,  would  come 
to  see  if  their  section  was  going  to  be  represented. 

Nathan:  How  large  were  the  panels  at  the  Fair? 

Asawa:   At  the  Fair  they  were  big  enough  to  fit  into  the  oven.   That  was  our 
limit.  So,  they  were  about  16  by  16,  or  14  by  14,  whatever  the  size 
of  the  oven  was. 


Letters  to  the  Artist:  The  Mermaid  Fountain 

Nathan:  Do  people  correspond  with  you  after  you  have  done  things  like  this? 

Asawa:   Oh,  yea.  I  get  a  lot  of  letters. 

Nathan:  How  can  you  handle  all  that  correspondence? 


1968 
Ghirardelli   Fountain,    Ghirardelli   Square,    San   Francisco 


Photograph  by  Laurence  J.   Cuneo,  Jr. 
Used  by  permission 


85 


A  sawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Some  of   them  you  don't  need   to  answer.      I  mean,  you  know,    It's  not   like 
the  movie  stars.      I  don't  need  a  secretary.      I  got   several  dozen, 
maybe   a  hundred    letters. 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 
Nathan: 
Asawa : 


That  seems  like  a  lot  to  me. 

I  did  get  from  the  exhibit  last  year  nice  letters, 
of  letters  when  the  Mermaid  Fountain  went  in. 

Oh,  did  you?  What  sort  of  people  wrote  to  you? 


I  got  a  stack 


Oh,   a  lot  of  women  wrote   to  me.     Some  wrote  me   long  letters  on   the 
meaning  of   the  circle  and   about  mythology  and  about  motherhood  and 
the   significance  or   the  symbolism  of   the  mermaid  and   the   frogs  and 
the   turtles.     They  went   into  all  kinds  of   things.      I  don't   remember 
them  any  more.      But   I  got  only  one  negative   letter  from  a  college 
professor.      [Laughter]      But   I  really  got  it  just  sort  of  from  very 
plain  folk. 

Do  you  keep   these   letters? 

I  have  all  of  them  somewhere,   yes. 

That  would  be   fascinating. 

I've  thought  of  putting  a  book  together  on  drawings  that  a  junior 
high   school  class  did.     They  went  and   they  sketched   the    fountain 
with   their  teacher.     His  name  is  Rob  McConnell.     He  was  a  junior 
high   teacher  at  Horace  Mann.     He  now  teaches  at  Galileo.     What  was 
interesting  about    that  was   that  the   students  made  a  drawing,   an   ink 
drawing,    and   then  they  wrote  about   the  fountain  whatever  they  wanted 
to  write.      In  several   instances   the  handwriting  was   illegible- -you 
know,   bad   spelling  and  print—but   the  drawing  was  very  accurate.    I 
mean,    the  perspective  and   the  brick  detail  around   there.      So,   it 
really  demonstrates   that   it's  wrong   that  we   grade   students  just  on 
handwritten  material  because  there  are  some  who  can't  write,  but   they 
can  draw.     This   indicates   that  when  they're  graded  on  only  one  thing 
and   they   fail   simply  because   they  have  misspelled  and  written  so 
badly,   I  think  it's  a  mistake.      I   think  that   that's  why  art  is   such 
an  essential  part  of  understanding  an  individual,  not  just   for  self- 
expression  and   all  of   that   that  people  go   into  now,   but   that    it  also 
is  a  part  of  the  development  of  a  person.     So,   I  think  it's  as 
essential. 

Now,   let's   see.     What  were  we   talking  about?     Back  to  Hawaii, 
we  cut  up  cardboard  and  then  gave  each  person  a  paper   towel   to  work 
on  so   that   it  wouldn't  stick  to   the   table  or   to  the  cardboard.     Then 
we  had  the   instruction  on  each   table.     Then  they  took  it  on;    they 
were   just  happy.      Families   came. 


86 


Nathan:     That's  what  you've  always  believed   in  anyway,    that   the    families  do 
things  together. 

Asawa:       Yes.     So,    it  was  really  very  nice. 


Properties  of  Clay  and  Dough 


Nathan:     Did  you  walk  around  among  the   tables  and   see  what  people  were  doing? 

Asawa:       Oh,  yes.     And  then  they'd   say,    "Can  you  help  me  with   this?"     Then 
I  would   say,    "Sure,"  and   then  I  would   suggest   that    they  could   use 
certain  tools   that   looked   like  nothing.     They  thought,    'Veil,  maybe 
you  just   stick  it   in."     I  used   it   to  make    textures.      And   then  a   lot 
of   them  came  because  they  were   interested  and   they'd  work  in  clay, 
but   couldn't   seem  to  get    the   thing  —  it's   quite  different. 

You  have   to  learn  its  properties,  you  know,    that   it  doesn't 
stand  up  vertically.      If  you  want  to  make  a  standing   figure,  you 
have  to  make  it  in  the   same  way  that  you  would  draw  it  on  a  piece 
of  paper.      You'd  have   to  draw   it   flat.      So,    instead   of  putting   legs 
up   this  way  [gestures],   you'd  have   to  put   legs  down  here   [horizontally] 
and  then  the  dress  and   then  the  head   this  way  [gestures]    instead  of 
trying  to  make   it  like   clay  because   it  would  just  collapse.     That's 
sort  of  the  difference  between  clay  and  dough. 

Nathan:     And  in  dough  can  you  not  make  a  sharp  edge? 

Asawa:       Oh,  yes.     You  can  make  a  sharp  edge.     You  can  cut.     You  can  do 

anything  with  it.     You  don't  have   to  stick  it  down  the  way  you  do 
with  clay.     Clay- -you  have   to  score   it  and  you  have   to  wet  it  and 
then  press  it  down  and   then  pinch  it  on  so  that  you  make   sure   that 
all   the  arms  and   legs  will   stick  when  it  dries,  whereas  with  dough 
all  you  have   to  do  is   lick  it  or  put  a  little  water  with  a  brush  and 
then  in  the  baking  it  all  sticks   together.      So,    it's   better  to  bake 
it   than  to  just  air  dry  it  because  all   those  joints  will  probably 
fall  off  if  they're  air  dried. 

Nathan:     Did  you  assemble  all  of   the  equipment,   all  of   the  pieces  of  cardboard 
and  the  paper  towels  and  pieces  of  tin  can? 

Asawa:       No.     Well,  we   saved  cans  and  we  cut  them  before.     You  see,    I  went 
one  weekend  before,   so  I  gathered  seed  pods  along  the  road  and  got 

the  beer  cans  and  the  pull   tops.     Then  the   school  had   towels,    so 
we  asked   them  for   towels.     We  brought   some  bowls   into  the  kitchen. 
They  had  bowls  in  the  kitchen,    so  we  used    their  bowls.      So,    it  was 
pretty  easy.     It  wasn't  too  complicated.     And  we  also   supplied   the 
dry  tempera,    the  paints;  we  got   them.     We  used  both  wet  and  dry 


87 


Asawa:        pigments.     The  poscer  paint   is  already  mixed  and   it's  not  as  good 

as   Che  dry  because   it  somehow  makes   the  dough  a   little  gummier,   but 
if  you  don't  have   the  other  you  can  use   it. 

Then  after  the  whole  project  was  over  or  a  table  was   through, 
then  we  gathered  all    the   little   bits  and  pieces  and   put   it  all 
together   into  a  ball   so   that  we  had  a  multicolored  batch.     With 
that  we  made  butterflies,    fish,    sort  of  tropical   fish,   and   sort  of 
fantastic.     They  were  beautiful.     They   looked   just  like   the  goldfish 
and,   you  know,    there's  a  variety  of  colors.     And  at   the  airport 
there  are   fish    that  big,   about  that   big—gold,   black,   orange,  white, 
purple,    blue,   all    the  colors-- so   that  now  they  can  look  at   the   fish 
and   just   see   that   they're  made   from  dough. 

Nathan:      If  you're  working  with  some  dough  and   it   starts   to  dry  out,   can  you 
bring  it   back? 

Asawa:       Well,    the  best  way  to  do   it  would  be   to  wet  your  hands,   just  use 

that  much  water,   and   then  knead   it  into  the  dough  and   it  will  come 
back.     The  best   thing  is   to  keep  your  dough   in  the  plastic  bags. 

Nathan:      You  can  make   it  ahead   of   time? 

Asawa:       Well,  not  much  ahead.     You  should  make  it  in  the  morning  you're 

going   to  work  and  not  make   the  afternoon  batch  until  after   lunch, 
so  that  you  make  a   fresh   batch  each  time.      If  you  try  to  keep  it 
over  night,    it  gets  very  sticky  and  gummy  and   it  may  be   that  the 
salt   is  breaking  down  and  becoming   liquefied.     So,    it's  better  just 
to  make  what  you're  going   to  use.      If  you're  working  with   little 
children,    if  you  were  making  tiny  figures,    it  would  be   six  or  eight 
children  who  could  get  something  out  of  that—you  know,   a  figure 
each. 

Nathan:     Out  of  one  batch,   yes,    I  see.      I  was   thinking   too  back  to  some  of 

the   letters  that  you  received.      I  don't  know  whether  it's  necessary 
to  keep  them  all,   but  certainly  some  of  them  would  be  very  interesting 
just  to  deposit  along  with  this  memoir  because   it  would  explain  the 
meaning   that   some  of  your  work  has  for  individuals. 

Asawa:       That's  an  idea,   yes.       We  were  at  the  fountain   in  Ghirardelli  Square 
one  day,    and   I  was  being   interviewed.     There  was  a  group  of  women. 
There  was   one  woman  who  came   up   to  me   and   said   that  all  her  life, 
when  she  was  a  child  and  her  parents   took  her  camping,   she'd  always 
sit  by  a   stream  because   she  was  hoping  that   she  would   see  a  mermaid 
come   out  because   she  knew  that   there  were  stories  about  mermaids. 
So,   she  said  now  she   is   so  happy  that   there's  one  here  because   it 
is  her  dream  come   true.      She   said   that   she  had   organized  a  group  of 
women  and   she   said   that   they  would  make   a  ring  around   the   fountain  so 
that  no  one  could  remove   it.      [Chuckle]      So,   anyway,   that  was  very  nice. 

Nathan:     That's   very  protective. 

Asawa:        I   think  she   was   from     Spain  or   South  America. 


88 


VII  SERVING  ON  ART  COMMISSIONS 


The  Nebraska  Art  Council  Idea 


Nathan:  With  all  of  this  going  on,  I  can  see  that  part  of  your  problem  is 
in  determining  how  much  private  commissioned  work  you  can  do. 

Asawa:  I  can't  really  do  much.  If  I  were  talking,  I  would  talk  to  a  group 
of  teachers  or  supervisors  or  something.  I've  done  that  this  year. 
I  have  about  three  commissions  now  that  I've  been  conmitted  to  do. 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Do  you  have  a  deadline  on  them? 

Well,  one  sort  of  has  a  deadline.  The  Nebraska  State  Art  Council 
asked  for  their  Bi-Centennial .   I  turned  that  down,  but  I  did  offer 
names  from  the  Art  Commission  as  potential  people  to  participate 
in  that  because  I  think  that  that  could  be  a  very  interesting  thing 
for  artists. 

Their  plan  was  to  commission  various  artists  to  produce  things? 

Produce  things  for  the  state.  You  see,  they  had  the  whole  state  of 
Nebraska  and  they  had  these  things  on  a  map  and  they  would  show, 
on  this  main  highway  (I  think  it  is  Interstate  80) ,  stopping  places 
for  people  going  cross-country.  They  would  like  major  pieces  in 
about  10  or  12  places. 

What  a  fascinating  idea.' 

Isn't  that  exciting?  If  I  weren't  involved  in  this  program,  I  would 
just--I  mean,  I  wouldn't  necessarily  be  chosen.  They're  selecting 
people  now  to  go  in.  But  I  would  certainly  like  to  do  such  a  thing 
as  that. 


YesJ  These  are  not  all  necessarily  sculptures? 

They  will  all  have  to  be  outdoor  pieces,  yes. 
anything  that  has  to  be  very  permanent. 


It  could  be  a  mosaic, 


89 


Nathan:     Because   it   geta  very  snowy  and  cold,  doesn't   it? 
Asawa:        Yes. 

S.F.   Art  Commission  and   BART  Council 


Asawa:        So,    I  think  that   I'm  probably  over-committed   on  being  on  the  Art 
Commission,    the   BART    (Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  District)   Council- 
Nathan:      The  BART  Council? 

Asawa:        I'm  on   the  BART  Council.     That's  to  select  art   for  the  BART   stations. 
Of   course,   at  this  point,    there's  no  money  yet,   but   that's   something 
for  the  future.      So,    there's  not  that  much  work;    there's  not  any 
work  in  it.     There's  not  really  very  much  work  in  the  Art  Commission 
or  any  of  these   things,   except    that  your  mind    is  on   it,  meaning   that 
you  have   to  be   there,   or  knowing  that  you're  going  to  have  a  special 
meeting  on  the  U.N.   Fountain  or  whatever  we're   involved    in. 

I   think  we  do  have  a  good  Art  Commission  now.  There  are  active 
members  who  are  very  good.     We're  not  represented  by  dance,   which   I 
think  we   should   be,   performing  arts.     The   theater   is  not   represented 
and   that   should  be   really  something  that    the   supervisors  should   just 
do  on  their  own.     They   shouldn't  have   to  be  asked   that.     They  should 
offer   that.     You  know,    that's  the  trouble  with   the   government.     They 
never  lead  anything;    they  only  react   to  pressure.     And   that's  why 
as   soon  as  our  program  begins  to  do  that,    I  don't  think  that  our 
program  will  be  effective  at  all.     We're  always  offering   this  and 
that. 

Nathan:     The   initiative  has   to  come   from  you. 

Asawa:       Yes,  yes.      I   think  that   that's  really  important. 

Nathan:     Does   the  mayor  name  people   to   the  Art  Commission? 

Asawa:  Yes.  But  there  has  to  be  a  change  in  the  charter  to  add  the  dance 
and  theater  people  onto  the  Commission.  We  need  to  become  an  Arts 
Commission,  an  Arts  Commission,  you  know? 

Nathan:      Right. 

Asawa:        Because   I  think  that   that's  going  to  be  very  important. 


90 


Advisory  Panel,   California  Arts  Commission 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 
Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 


You're  also  on  an  advisory  board  to   the  California  Arts  Commission. 

Yes,  I  am  one  of  the  panelists.  I  think  that  what  they're  going  to 
do  with  that  is  that  they're  going  to—nothing  is  really  formulated 
now.  We'll  have  a  meeting  in  April  to  make  those  decisions  or  hear 
what  they're  going  to  do. 

My  suggestion  was   that  maybe   a  certain   number   of   the   panelists 
be  new  and   some   stay  on,    so   that   there's  an  overlap   like    this 
[gestures],   as  we  do  on   the   San  Francisco  Art  Commission.      So,    I 
don't  know  what   they  will   do.      That  was  my   suggestion,    that  maybe 
two-thirds   stay  on  and   they  get   a  new  third   for   this   coming  year. 
Then  they'd  have   reviews  every   three  or  four  months,    for  applicants. 

Do  applicants   for  State  Arts   Commission  grants   come   in  all  year  long? 

That's  what   they're   going   to  do.      That's  what   they're  planning.      This 
is  a  sort  of  suggestion.      I   don't  know  what  decisions    they  will  make 
yet.      But  we    suggested   that   they  have    like  what   the  Oakland  Museum 
or   the  San  Francisco  Museum  or  De  Young  Museum  have,    sort  of   a 
clinic,   so   that   people  who  are  not   organized,    like   small    theater 
groups  or   small  neighborhood   people  who  are  not   into   the  whole   business 
of   it--would  have  a  place  maybe   once  a  month,    or  the    first  Friday  of 
every  month,   where   they  can   come  for  advice. 

On  how  to  make   a  proposal? 

On  how   to  make   a  proposal  and  what   they  need,   what   the   requirements 
are,   you  know,   all   of   that.     These  would   be  announced,    so   that   small 
groups  who  might   be  kind   of   timid   about   doing   it  would  have   a  place 
to  go.     They're  meeting  now,   you  know.      They're  meeting  downtown  at 
Golden  Gate  Avenue. 

Who  is? 

The  State  Arts  Commission  is  having  a  hearing  today. 

What  is  it  doing? 

It's  to  make  a  report.  James  Forward,  I  think,  was  appointed  by  the 
governor. 

Oh,  yes.  I  did  see  that  in  the  paper,  that  people  can  just  come  and 
testify. 

Testify  and  protest,  or  whatever  will  happen  today.   So,  it  will  be 
an  interesting  report  to  see  what  the  community's  response  to  the 
•election  of  the  people  is. 


91 


Nathan:     And   there's  going  to  be  a  hearing,   I  understand,    in  Los  Angelts. 

Asawa:        And  one  in  Los  Angeles,   yes.      I   think  this   is   to  get   input   from 

the   community  on  how  they   feel  about   it.     All  of   these   things  will 
then  be  brought  back  to  the  meeting  that  we'll  have. 

Nathan:     That's   to   the  advisory  group? 

Asawa:       That's  going   to  be  the  advisory  committee  and   the  commission. 
They're  all  going   to  meet    together. 

Nathan:      I  see.      About  how  big  is  this  advisory  committee? 

Asawa:       Well,   I  would  say   that  each  category  had  at   least   four  or   five  people, 
so   that  I  would   say   that    it  may  be  20  people.     There  may  be  20  or  25 
of  us  on   that.      I'm  not  sure  how  many  are  on  the  commission.      Gregorio 
wants   to  increase   it  and  William  Kent    is   saying  that   it  should  not 
be   increased.     I  just  got  a   letter   from  Gregorio. 

Nathan:     Do  you  have  any  particular  view  on   that? 

Asawa:       Well,    it's  better   to  have  a  smaller,   active  group  than  a   large 
membership  thing. 

Nathan:     Because  then  you'd  break  down  into  committees  anyway? 

Asawa:       Yes.     And  then  you  have   to  divide  and    then  you're  not  as  effective, 
I  don't   think.      I   think   that    it's   important    that    the  commission 
have  professionals  on  it,   not  just  people  who  are  concerned  with   it. 

Nathan:  Not   just   lay  people,    then? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  Now,  these  funds  are  state  funds  that  come  from  the  Gregorio  Bill? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  Does  California  get  any  funds  from  the  National  Endowment  for  the 
Arts? 

Asawa:   No.   I  think  this  is-- 

Nathan:  This  is  really  a  separate  enterprise? 

Asawa:   Yes,  it's  separate.   I  think  the  thing  is  if  you  could  get  state 
funding,  then  you  can  take  that  and  match  it  with  the  Endowment. 

Nathan:  Oh,  I  see.   But  you  need  to  get  your  state  funding? 


92 


Asawa:  I  think,  yes.  I  mean,  depending  on  what  category.  I  think  some 
have  to  have  a  match,  I  guess.  I  don't  know  that  much  about  it, 
but  some  things  don't  need  a  match. 

One  of   the   things   that  came  up   in  our  group  was   that   the  match 
is  very  difficult   for  a  lot  of  people. 

Nathan:     Right.     The  poorer  you  are,    the  harder  it  is. 

Asawa:       The  harder  it   is,  yes.      So,   you  know,   a   lot  of  people  give   so  much 
time   that   if  there   should  be  a  greater  consideration  for   "in-kind" 
service- 
Nathan:     Right,    that   "in-kind"  service   should  be  ranked   similar   to  actually 
matching   funds. 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  That  would  make  a  tremendous  difference. 

Asawa:  Yes.  Of  course,  $1  million  is  not  enough  for  the  state. 

Nathan:  No. 

Asawa:  That's  really  the  problem. 


New  California  Arts  Council  (1976) 


Nathan:  You  have  been  named  by  the  Governor  to  a  new  state  arts  commission, 
haven't  you? 

Asawa:   Yes. 

Nathan:  I  understand  you  had  a  phone  conversation  with  him,  is  that  right? 
Tell  me  a  little  about  that.  How  did  this  come  about  and  what  was 
in  your  mind? 

Asawa:  I  had  gotten  a  call  from  the  Governor's  office  to  ask  if  I  would  be 
on  the  council,  by  Jacques  Barzaghi. 

Nathan:  Do  you  know  him? 

Asawa:  I  know  him  now,  yes.  Before  that,  there  was  a  group  of  artists  that 
came  together  for  the  first  time  last  fall,  I  think  it  was,  or  last 
summer,  to  talk  about  finally  bringing  the  visual  artists  together. 
It  had  never  happened  before.  I  went  to  that  meeting.  Then  I  was  put 


93 


Asawa:        on   Che   steering   committee.      Then  on   the   steering  cotnnittee,   names 
were   recommended   for  the  council.      I  really  didn't   look  forward 
to  being  on  that,    so  I  did  not  put  my  name  on   the    list. 

I  finally  left  the   steering  committee,   but   I  said   I  would  help 
if  I  could   in  any  way.     But  I  didn't   feel  that   the  meetings  really 
were   important.      Anyway,  Mr.   Barzaghi  called  and  asked   if   I  would 
consider  being  on  the  council.      I   said   I  didn't  know  what   the  Governor 
had   in  mind,   and  he   said,    "He  doesn't  have  anything   in  mind."     I 
said,    'Veil,   he  must  have   some    thoughts  on   it." 

So,   another  commissioner  called  me  and   talked  a  while.      I  said 
I  really  had   to  talk  to  the  Governor  about    it.     That  was   the  advice 
that  Mr.  Zellerbach  gave  me.     He   said,    "Don't  get  on   the  council 
unless  you  first   know  what   is  happening."     (I  went  to  see  Mr. 
Zellerbach  about   it,    talked   to  him,    that   this  was  proposed.) 

So,  he  called    in  and  we   talked. 
Nathan:      The  Governor   called? 

Asawa:        Yes.     He  asked  me   to  come   to   the  breakfast,    the  Prayer  Breakfast. 
[Laughter] 

Nathan:     Marvelous.      So  you  went? 

Asawa:        Yes.      Somebody   picked  me   up  and    I  went   the  night   before   the  breakfast. 
Then  when  we  got   there,    the  Sufi  Choir  was   there. 

Nathan:     What  are   they   like? 

Asawa:        They're  a  very  interesting  group.     Allaudin  Matthieu,   one  of   the 
commissioners,    is   from  Cincinnati  and   trained   in  classical  music, 
with  the  piano,    I   think.     He   said   that  we  all  want   to  do  our  own 
thing;    this  is  an  important  point  because   the  Governor   is  very  open 
to  anything.     He  wants   the  best  solution   for  California;  he  wants 
the  council   to  be  effective. 

Nathan:     When  you  talked   to  the  Governor,    is   it  fair   to  ask  the  kind  of  things 
you  discussed,   or  what   impression  you  got   from  Brown  himself? 

Asawa:        I  asked  him  whether  he  was  going  to   run  for  the  presidency.     He  said, 
"I  can't   tell  you.      I  might."     I  said,   "What's  going  to  happen  to 
the  arts   council?     Just  get  it  all   started  and   leave   it?"     He  said, 
'Veil,   you  know,   I  could  get   beaten,   and   I'd  be  out  of  a  job.     But 
the   issue   is   right  now  and   I  have   to  deal  with   things  as  they  are 
now."     He  wants  to  get  our  priorities  and  get  what   is  really  important. 
He's   interested   in  education.      I  said,    "I'm  only  interested   in 
education;    that's  all   I'm  interested    in.      If   this  council   isn't  going 
to  be   involved   in  it,   then  I  shouldn't  be  on  this   council." 


94 


Asawa:  He  said   that   the  others  had  already   started  with    the  Department 

of  Education  in  art  education,   being  concerned  with  artists   in 
schools  and  art  education—not  "arts  education"  but   "artists   in 
education,"  which   is  quite  different,   and  artists   in  schools.     And 
also  the   idea  of  the   same   thing   that  we  were   trying  to  do   in  San 
Francisco --that  we  have  artists   in  Criminal  Justice,    in  Social 
Services,    in  the  Highway  department.     He's   allocated  $100   thousand 
for  highway  art. 

Nathan:     What   is  highway  art? 
Asawa:       Well,  murals   in— 
Nathan:     The   tubes? 

Asawa:       Different  places,   yes,   or  offices  or  whatever.     They're  setting  that 
up.     That's   from  advice   from  local  artists.      Some  of  them  met  with 
Jim  Buffalo  and  La  Raza,   RenS     Yanez,   and   they  had  met  with   the 
Governor  before.     You  remember   the  speaker  at  the  Council   for  Civic 
Unity  dinner  was  Ybarra?     He  was  already   telling  me  about  what  the 
Governor  was  doing  with  CETA  and  was  going   to   try  to  get  the  Governor 
interested   in  that   for  community  arts. 

These  are  all   ideas;  we  hadn't  met   formally  yet,   but   this  was 
just  in  conversation. 

So,    it's  not   that  he's   interested    in  what   I'm  interested   in,   but 
I   think  that  he  will   listen.      He  has  no   preconceived    ideas   about 
what  art  should   be.     He  said,   "I  don't  play  a  violin  like  Mayor 
Alioto."     [Laughter]      I  told  him  maybe  he   should   take   a   few   lessons 
in  pottery;   it  wouldn't  hurt  him.     He  said,    "Maybe  I  should."     He 
was  very  easy   to  talk  to. 

Somebody  was   talking  about  his  vetoing  the  privacy  [of  personal 
data]    bill   and  he  went   into   that.      I  don't   remember   quite  what  he 
said—why  he  vetoed   it.     He  said   that  it  was  just  going  to  build 
another  bureaucracy.     Every   time   you  changed   your  job,   you  were   going 
to  have   to   record    that,    and   the  whole   thing  would  have   been  a  big 
thing.     At   this  point  everything   is   separate;    the  departments  are 
separate,    so   that   it's  hard    to  bring   the    information  about   one   person 
together  anyway.     Now,    in  a  way  bureaucracy  is  an  advantage  on  this 
[Laughter].      But   if  you  got   the  whole   thing   together,    it  would   be   a 
massive,   massive   thing,    spending  millions   and  millions  of  dollars. 
And  also  he  said   it   exempts  the  police;    they're  the  only  ones   that 
are   exempt   from  it.     So  what  good   is   it?     That's  where  you  want   the 
privacy   to  be  most!     You  don't  care   about  your    insurance   company  or 
other   things,   but  that   the  police  can  scramble  through  your   files 
any   time. 

s 

So  he's  very  clear.  I  think  he's  surrounding  himself  with 
people  that  keep  him  informed. 


95 


Nachan:     Do  you  think  he'll   listen? 

* 

Asawa:       Yes,    I   think  so. 

Nathan:     Will    the  council,   as  you  understand   it,  be  making  allocations  of 
funds? 

Asawa:       We  have   to  decide;   we  have   to  decide  how   to  spend   the  money,  whether 
it  will  be   for  grants,  whether   it  will  be  for  institutions,  whether 
it  will  be   for  organizations- 
Nathan:     Or  individuals? 
Asawa:        --or   individuals.     However. 

Nachan:      So,    in  a   sense,   you  will  be   facing  from  the  other  side   this  whole 
business   that  you  were  speaking  of  earlier,   of  guidelines,   of 
allocations-- 

Asawa:       We're  making  the  guidelines.     There   is  legislation  already,  which  is 
very  flexible,  which  could   be  dangerous  and   it  could  also  be   free. 
But    that  really  is  a  risk  we  have   to  take. 

Nathan:     And  you're  hoping,    I  gather  from  what  you  have   said,    that  you  can 
avoid   the  kind   of  manipulation   that  you  sense  has   been  going  on? 

Asawa:       Right. 

Nathan:     That's  a  challenge,    isn't  it? 

Asawa:        It   is.     That's  why  it's  critical  who   the  council  members  are.     They 
have  to  be  very  knowledgeable  and   they  have   to  be  well   informed 
people,   and   open. 

Nathan:      And   they  have   to  care. 

Asawa:       Yes.     Open  people  with  no  personal  ambitions.     The  council  has  to  be 
without  anyone  who  wants  personal  gain  from  it. 

Nathan:     Do  you  know  the  other  council  members  yet? 

Asawa:  I've  just  met  about  four  of  them.  Gary  Snyder  and  Noah  Purifoy 
from  Los  Angeles  (the  Watts  area),  and  the  new  director,  Eloise 
Smith. 

Nathan:  That  should  be  a  terrific  experience. 
Asawa:  It  will  be  very  interesting,  I  think. 
Nathan:  How  long  is  your  term? 


96 


Asawa:   I  didn't  even  get  a  date.   I  got  a  certificate;  I  don't  even  have 
a  date  on  it. 

Nathan:  [Laughter]  You  have  an  open-ended  appointment? 

Asawa:   [Laughter]  No,  it's  probably  a  year.  That  all  has  to  be  spelled 
out  by  the  council. 

Nathan:  Have  you  yet  formulated  some  ideas  that  you  want  to  present? 

Asawa:   Yes. 

Nathan:  Is  it  something  that  you  would  want  to  talk  about? 

Asawa:  It  may  be  premature  to  talk  about  it.  But  basically  it  would  focus 
on  artists,  using  artists  to  effect  art  rather  than  institutions  to 
effect  art,  which  has  been  traditional. 

Nathan:   So  you're  thinking,  in  a  sense,  more  in  terms  of  the  individual 
rather  than  the  structure? 

Asawa:   Yes,  right. 

Nathan:  Will  it  build  in  some  way  on  the  experiences  that  you've  been  talking 
about? 

Asawa:   Yes.  So  that  instead  of  focusing  on  supporting  the  institution,  you 
focus  it  on  using  artists  to  change  the  institution.   I  think  that 
that  is  really  the  practical,  most  effective  way  to  do  it. 

Nathan:  It's  very  interesting  that  your  point  of  view  and  the  Governor's 
point  of  view  in  many  ways  are  in  harmony  to  begin  with. 

Asawa:   Sure. 

Nathan:     Will  you  be   leaving  the  San  Francisco  Art  Commission? 

Asawa:       Yes.     As   soon  as   somebody's  appointed,   I  will  leave.     They  need   to 
find  a  sculptor   to  replace  me. 

Nathan:     Is  there  something  else  that  comes  to  your  mind  about   this  opportunity 
at  the  state  level? 

Asawa:       I  don't  think  that  the  arts  council  as  a  body  need   ever  have   so  much 
money  to  dispose  of.      I  think  what   they  need   is  to  direct  the  money 
that   is  already  being  allocated   to  all   of   the  departments   and   all 
the   institutions   and    the   educational   institutions,    to   use   their 
money   in  a  different  way. 

Nathan:     So  you're  not   really  focusing  so  much  on  the  arts  council's  budget 
as  you  are  on  the   state  budget? 


97 


Asawa:        Right.     That's  what  I'm  interested   in.      I  think  that  when  a  school 
district   such  as   San  Francisco  has  $21  million  over  the  district 
funds   in  state  and   federal  money  to  bring  about  change,   that's  a 
lot  of  money.   So   that   the  arts  council  handling  a  million  dollars, 
that's  just  nothing;    that's  unimportant  how  much   the  arts  council 
gets.      I  mean  it  would  be  nice  to  have  more   to  play  with,    but   it's 
really  unimportant;    it's  how  we  are  spending  all   the   other  money 
that   is  critical. 

I   think  that   just   in  San  Francisco  alone,   in  this  program  that 

we've   been  talking  about,  this  $3.8  million   is  more  money   than  the 

entire  National  Endowment  [for   the  Arts]   has  for  artists   in  schools 
for   the  country. 


Public    Support    for  Artists 


Nathan:     You  were   saying  when  you  were  on  the  advisory  committee   that  you  would 
be  willing  to  move  off  if  another  artist  were  available. 

Asawa:        Sure,   I  would.      I  think   the  most   important   thing   in  the   long  run  is 
that  it's  a  mistake  that  I'm  not  used  as  an  artist. 

Nathan:     Right. 

Asawa:       Because  I   said    that   the   time   that  I  was  appointed   to  the  San  Francisco 
Art  Commission,  had   I  been  appointed   to  be  an  artist  for   the  city, 
the  city  would  be  much  richer  with  a  lot  of   things*     That's  why  I 
feel   that   the  city,    in  a  way--I  don't  know.      It's  a  very  hard  question, 
because  we  had    that  discussion  just  recently  about  should   the  artists 
unionize --some  said,    "Oh,  you  can  never,  never  organize   the  artists." 

But,   on  the  other  hand,   when  you  think  of  how  the  city  does  not 
use   its  artists,  you  know—they  hire  a  streetcleaner  if  the  street 
gets  worse,    they  hire  police   if  violence  comes   in,    if  crime   rises 
they  get  more  police,   and    if   the  office  work  gets  heavier,    then   they 
hire  another  clerk.     But   they  don't  have  one  artist  hired  by  the 
city,   except  with   the   two  percent    (of   the  cost  of  the  building--to  be 
used   for  art),  where  we  commission  an   individual  artist  to  do  a  piece. 
The  Symphony  is   subsidized,   and,   of  course,    the  Neighborhood  Arts   is 
a  subsidy.      It's  the  only  subsidy  that  we  have   for   the  arts. 

Nathan:      In  a  way,    I   suppose   the  Neighborhood  Arts  has  maybe   a  broader   intent 
than  just   support  of  a   fine  artist.     Does   it  have  a  social  element? 

Asawa:       Yes.      I  mean,   it  has  no  intention  of  supporting  an  artist.     There   is 
no  program  where   the  artist   is   supported   and   I   think  that   that    is 
indicative  of  where  our  mental  state—I  mean,    state  of  mind   or   level 
of  aesthetics  — is. 


98 


Nathan:     Yes,   it  certainly  shows   the  priorities,  doesn't   it? 

Asawa:       Yes.     But   that's  why  I  think  that   if  we  could  do   this  for  artists-- 
a  group  of  artists  who  can  work  with   children  would   be   in   that 
category.     And   there's  a  group  who  can't  work  with  children,   but   could 
do  something   for  a  school,   could  do  a  project  so   that  children  could 
watch  and  have   that  experience  of  a  muralist  painting  a  fresco  mural. 
I  think  that   that's  a   terribly   important   part  of  education,   part   of 
it,   and   it  would  be  much  healthier   for  a  city  to  have   that. 

Nathan:      I  suppose,    then,    in  a  sense,  you  could   say  that   your  participation 

on   the  city  commission  has   probably   educated   those   art   commissioners. 

Asawa:       Oh,  yes.      I   think  so. 

Nathan:  I  would  hate  to  have  you  think  that  your  time  was  wasted. 

Asawa:   Oh,  no.   Yes,  that's  right.   I  don't  regret  the  time,  but  I'm  just 
saying  that  I  think  it's  very  important  for  the  city  to  begin  to 
think  about  housing  for  artists,  so  that  within  any  housing  project, 
public  housing,  there  should  be  a  certain  number  of  studio  living  quartei 
allowed  in  it.  What  happens  is  that  an  artist  can  then  have  an  effect 
on  the  entire  project,  if  he  were  so  oriented. 

A  young  man  came  and  I  talked  to  him.  He  was  in  the  office  and 
I  talked  to  him  for  a  while.  He  said  that  during  the  Kennedy 
administration,  there  was  legislation  passed  saying  something  to  the 
effect  that  in  public  housing,  that  there  would  be  room  for  artists-- 
and  I  said  that  if  he  would  look  that  up,  then  if  it  is  indeed  law, 
we  would  begin  to  pursue  that  here  in  San  Francisco. 

We  hope  that  Fort  Mason  will  become  such  a  thing.   That's  the 
National  Park  Recreation  area. 

Nathan:  Is  there  going  to  be  housing  in  Fort  Mason? 

Asawa:   Not  housing,  but  studios.  Housing  is  one  thing  and  work  space  is 
another.   I  would  think  that  if  we  were  to  choose,  I  would  take  a 
studio  because  you  could  get  a  broader  spectrum  of  artists.  You 
would  affect  more  artists  that  way. 

Nathan:  So,  you  really  would  like  to  see  artists  hired  and  working  in  the 
schools  and  you'd  like  to  see  them  with  studio  places  provided  in 
public  housing.  You  would  like  to  see  them  hired  by  the  city. 

Asawa:   Yes.  Because  now  they're  not  used.  We  use  streetcleaners;  I  keep 

saying  the  streetcleaners.  We  need  streetcleaners,  but  there's  never 
anything  that  comes  from  that.  The  next  day,  it's  the  same  thing. 
But  when  you  use  artists  and  you  have  them  paint  a  mural,  it's  good 
for  20  years.   It's  a  much  sounder  investment  in  terms  of  what  you 
get  for  it,  and  I  think  it's  the  cheapest  investment  you  can  make. 


99 


Asawa:       You  could  do  studies  on  Che  problems  and  you  can  spend  $200,000  on  a 
study  of   the  problem.      But   if  you  had   spent  $200,000  on  a  group  of 
artists   to  talk  about   the   ugliness  of  the  city  or  the   ugliness  of 
the  Western  Addition  or   the  ghetto  or  something  and  you  put   them  Co 
work,    then  you  would  have   the   solution  and   the  study  all  at  once. 
Then   it  would  go  on  and   it  would  be  beneficial  beyond   the   study. 

So,   I  think  we're  too  study -oriented.      It's   just  a  delay  tactic 
to  avoid   the   issue.     You  see,  we  refuse   to   see   the   issues.     We  refuse 
to   face   the   facts  and   the  problems  are  very  simple   to   solve   if  you 
want  to.      I   think  that  we  have  gone  a   long  way   in  solving  the 
minority-ethnic  problems  of  a  city.      I   think  artists  are   in  every 
racial  group  —  that  has  nothing  to  do  with   race,    it's  not  a  group  of 
people,    but   it's  just   that   they  represent  a  part  of  each  person. 
They  are  a  "minority  of  one"  and   it's  how  one   can  save  one's  own 
individuality. 

Of  course,    the  argument  against  any  kind   of  subsidy  towards 
artists  is   that  they  say  they  abuse   their   freedom  and   then  you  get 
state  art,   national  art.      I  think  that    that  depends  on  the  artist 
that  you  get,   you  know.      In  Holland,    they  do  have  a  subsidy  for 
artists  and   I  guess   they  have  to  go   through  art   school  and   then  they 
have   co-- I  don't  know  what  the  residency  requirement   is.     You  have 
to  be  citizen  of  Holland,    I  think.     You  can't  be  an  outsider.      And 
then  you  do  so  many  pieces  a  year   for  the  city  or   for  the    state. 

You  know,    the  danger  of   that   is  it's  abused.      I  don't  know 
whether   it's   being  abused  now  or  not,    but,    I  mean,    in   theory  it's 
a  very  good   thing. 

Nathan:     Yes,    I  guess  it  would  depend  on   the  quality  and   the   integrity  of 
the  artist. 

Asawa:       Yes,   of  the  community  at   large. 

• 

Nathan:   "Gee,  I've  only  done  five  this  year.   I'll  have  to  whack  out  one 
more." 

Asawa:  [Laughter]  That's  right,  yes.  And  people  abuse  it,  but  nevertheless, 
I  still  think  that  it's  worth  doing.  It's  worth  trying.  I  would  like 
to  try  it  in  San  Francisco.  That's  what  I'm  interested  in. 

Personally,  I  like  my  own  independence  and  I'm  not  terribly 
interested  in  it  for  myself. 

Nathan:  You  don't  need  that  security? 

Asawa:   I  mean,  that  doesn't  interest  me  personally,  but  I  think  that  for  the 
general  good  of  the  city,  I  think  it  would  be  a  very  good  thing  to 
try  here.  Don't  you  think? 


100 


Nathan:     Yes.      I   think   it  does  have   great  appeal.      I  was   also  wondering  about 
that   two  percent,   which    seems  very   small,    really,    for   art   in  a 
public  building. 

Asawa:        Yes.      That's  not  mandatory;    it's  voluntary,    optional.      That's  why 
the  Art  Commission  has   gone   after   it.      If  you  don't   go  after   it, 

then- 
Nathan:     You  don't  get   it? 

Asawa:       And  if  it's  not  in  the  original  planning  stage  and   it's  not  asked    for 
at  the  very  beginning  when  the   architects  come   in   to  give   the  plan, 
then  you  don't   get   it. 

Nathan:     Has  the  provision  actually  been  utilized? 

Asawa:       Oh,   yes.     We  asked  about   the  airport.     We  asked  about  Market  Street 
beautif ication.     We   ask  about   any  utilities   building.      Even   if   it's 
a   sewage  plant,  we   ask,    "Vhy  not?"     I   feel   that   it   is  worth   it    to 
the  city  to  make   every  part  of   the  city  beautiful  on  its  own.     The 
public  won't   ever   see   that,    but    there  are   people  who  work  in   there 
and   I   think   that   that's   important,   any  and   all   of   it   to  have  happened 
in  the  city. 


The  Private   Sector   and    the  Arts 


Asawa:        I  think  private  businesses  are   beginning  to    realize   the   importance 
of   the  kind  of  pressures   that  are  put  on  their  employees.     We 
started  with  the  coffee  break,   right?     One   in  the  morning  and  one 
in  the  afternoon. 

Nathan:     Right. 

Asawa:        Now   they  have  a   lounge.      Now   they  have   bowling.      Now   they  are  beginning 
to  try  to  offer  all   these   things   to   their   employees.     Well,    I   think 
that   one  artist   thought   that   this  might   be   something   that  would   be 
very  good.      In  every  new  building  that  goes   up,    there  should  be  a 
floor   that  would   be   used    for  art,    and    this  was   something   that  a   radio 
announcer   said  when   I  was  doing   something  with  KYA  and   being  on   a 
panel  with  young   students.     He   said,    "I  would   just   love    to  have   a 
place   for  art."     So   if  you  were  a  businessman  or   if  you  were  an 
executive  and  you  were   in  this  high-powered,   pressure   thing,    then 
within   that   building   that  you  were  occupying,    there  would  be  a  place 
where  you  could   go  and   do   something. 

Nathan:     Maybe  a   little  studio  of  some  kind? 


101 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 


Studio,   or  a  place  where  you  could  go  and   be  able  to  work—and  you 
would  want   that.     You  would  want  that  space  and  you  would   use  it. 
Or  you  would  have  yoga,   or  you  would  have  kind  of  a  comprehensive 
kind  of  thing  within  each  building  that  you  could   really  develop. 
Then,    this  would   be  a  way   in  which  artists  can  serve   the  private 
sector  of  the  city  and   then   there's  another  way  that   the  city  could  do 
it    in  the  public   sec  tor --through   the   schools,   you  know,    so  that  all 
of   this  can  blend,   because  we're  all   beginning  to  realize   that 
something  is  wrong.     We   can't  stop  the  buildings   from  going  up,   and 
we  are  now  becoming  a   financial  center  and  all   of  the   tiny,    little 
businesses  are  being  pushed  out.     We're  becoming  a  service-oriented 
community. 


In  San  Francisco? 

In  San  Francisco,  yes. 
is  service. 


I  mean,  clerks,  waiters,  you  know.  Everything 


Nathan:      Insurance   too? 

Asawa:        Insurance.     Everything  is  service,    so   that  we  have   to  do  something 
for   those  people.     We  also  have   to  do  something  with  those  who 
commute   in  and   use   the  city  also.     We're  all   sort  of  half  satisfied 
in  every  area   that  we're  working,   you  know,   and  we're  doing  it  full- 
time  and  we  have  a   fraction  of  satisfaction. 

Nathan:     And   there's   something   that  hungers. 

Asawa:       There   is,  yes.     And  even,   going  off   the   subject  and  going  back  to 
what   I  said   before,   over  the   years   I've  seen  a   lot  of  people  in 
advertising,   or  people  who  are  doing  a  building,   or  designers,  who 
come   in  and  they're   in  this  high-powered  public   relations  and  they 
come  and   they  want   something  that   they  can  put   in  an  ad.      I  see   them 
when   they're  about  42   or  43  or  45  and   they're   the  people  who  are  a 
success,   you  know,   and   they're  beginning   to  be   replaced  by  a  new 
crop,   the  designers     who  are   coming  to  design.     You  begin  to  see  this 
pushing  and   these  are   the   people  who  have  given  their  best  years  to 
industry.     They're  really  used   to  a  high  salaried,    fast   life,   a 
turnover  in  clothes,    a   turnover   in  furniture.     They're   into  that 
always,   you  know,   cocktail  parties.     All   this   is  part  of  the  price 
you  pay  for   that  kind  of  life. 

So,    they  do  in  a  way  envy  the  peaceful,   kind  of  ordinary,   daily 
routine   that  an  artist  has   in  his   studio. 

Nathan:     And   they  feel  perhaps   that    they  have  missed  out  on   that. 

Asawa:       Yes,    that   they  have   sold  out   in  another  way.     But   I   think  that  we're 
now  going  to  have  to  get   into  doing   this.     Art   is  not   the   solution. 
I  mean,    it  really  isn't,    but   it's  the  closest.      It's  the   closest 


102 


Asaua: 

Nathan: 
Asawa : 


to  being  the  closest  to  yourself,    I  think, 
too   bad   that  people  aren't  used  this  way. 


I  just  think   that   it's 


Nathan: 

Asawa: 

Nathan: 

Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa : 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 


It's  curious  that  art  is  valued,  but  it's  very  hard  to  get  someone 
to  actually  put  out  money  for  artists. 

Sure.  Well,  you  see,  like  for  example,  a  big  business  like 
Standard  or  any  oil  company,  they  spend  millions  a  year  on  advertising, 
advertising J  These  are  things,  you  know,  that  you  throw  away,  like 
a  slot  on  TV.   It's  gone.1   It's  such  a  waste  I   But  if  they  would 
spend,  say,  $2  million  or  $3  million  a  year  on  works  of  art,  they 
would  be  here  today,  here  tomorrow  and  forever,  and  they  would  serve 
the  community.  Of  course,  maybe  that  doesn't  sell  gasoline.   It 
won't  sell,  but  I  think  that  if  you  were  investing  in  an  overall 
time,  I  think  that  should  be  their  service  to  the  community,  public 
service.   If  the  service  goes  on,  they'd  get  public  relations, 
person-to-person. 

Right. 

I  just  think  it's  such  a  misuse  of  people.     Don't  you  think? 

Yes,   I  do.      I   think  everyone  has   to  have   something   that  he   understands 
he's   living   for,   or   something   that   is   going   to  have   some    lasting 
quality.     Otherwise,    it  just  all   falls  apart. 

It's   not  enough,    yes.      I   think  we   should   remember   that  we're 
becoming  a   tourist  community.     We   should   remember   and  we   should 
think  about  why  people  come   to   San  Francisco  and  we  don't  have    to 
do   too  much   to  make   it  pleasant.      But,   on   the  other  hand,  we  have 
a  great  opportunity.      If   the  schools  become   so  exciting   that  they 
would   become   part  of  a  Grayline  Tour,    then  what   a   service  we'd   do 
for   the  whole   country.      Instead   of  hiding  our   schools,   we  would   get 
to  be  part   of  the-- 

Larger  picture? 

Yes.      I  don't   know  what  we're  going   to  do  with   the   reading   scores. 
[Laughter] 

Well,   you  have   some    fascinating   ideas   in  a  very   important   sector. 

Yes.     Well,    the   thing  is  the  reading  score   is  not  the   issue.      I 
mean,    that's   important.      I'm  not   trying   to  minimize   it. 

It  may  be  a   signal   that  many  other   things  are  wrong? 
That's  right. 


103 


Two  Percent  for  Art  and  the  S.F.  Art  Commission 


Nathan:  Can  we  talk  a  little  more,  if  you're  interested  in  it,  about  the 
requirement  that  the  two  percent  of  the  cost  of  a  public  building 
be  addressed  to  art? 

Asawa:   In  San  Francisco? 
Nathan:  Yes. 

Asawa:        Yes.   That  ordinance  came   in,    I   think--Bufano  and  Jeremy  Ets-Hokin 
are   the   two  that  I   think  are   responsible   for  getting  that   through 
and  that  was  when  they  were  art   commissioners  many  years  ago.      It 
hasn't  always  been  picked   up  and   used  and   I  think  we  have,    since 
I've  been  on  the  commission,   tried   to  use   it  as  much  as  possible. 
The  Hall  of  Justice   is  one  example,  where  we  have   the  Peter  Voulkos, 
and  we  have   Sid  Gordon,   and  we  have  Richard  Diebenkorn.     We  have  a 
lot  of  paintings   inside  and  we  have   two  major  sculptures,   Demetrius 
Aristedes  did  a  sculpture    for   that.      Ray  Sells  did   two  planters    for 
the  outside.     That  was  $145,000   that  we   spent  on  the  Hall  of  Justice 
project. 


Protest  and  Civic  Center  Design 


Asawa:        I  think  probably   the  way  I  got   into   the   Art  Commission  was  that,    I 

guess,  months  before  Mayor  Alioto  was  elected    there  were  three  of  us 
who  protested   the  use  of  money   for   landscaping  that  we   thought  was 
money  for  art  enrichment.     The  history  of   that  goes  back  before, 
when  Christopher  was  mayor  and  when  Brooks  Hall  was  put   in.     There 
was   $250 ,000--that  was    the  two  percent—which   was   supposed   to  go   to 
embellish   the  Civic  Center. 

Then,   at   that   time,    the  architects  on  the  Art   Commission  decided 
that  they  didn't   like   the  design   that  was  put  on  top  of  the  Civic 
Center  and   they  wanted   to  put  on  an  architectural  competition.      So, 
they  took  the  money  from  sculpture  and    they  made   it   into  a  competition, 
but  what   they  did  was,    they  invited  architects  to  submit.      Sculptors 
could  submit   too,   but  it  was  more  of  an  architectural  competition. 
They  spent  $50,000  promoting   that  all  over  the  world.     They  got  a 
winner.      I'm  not  sure  whether  he  was  Hungarian  or  what.     Then,  when 
the  competition  was  over,    they  found    that   that  would  cost  $1.5  million 
to  build.     They  had  only  $250,000  and   they  spent  $50,000  on  the 
competition--$25,000  or  $50,000  on  that—so  that  there  was  $185,000 
left,   I  think  it  was.      So,    that  went  out  the  window. 

Nathan:     Where  was   this   supposed    to  go? 


104 


Asawa:   The  Civic  Center.  You  see,  they  replaced  the  original  Civic  Center. 
It  was  beautiful--there  were  two  round  pools  and  there  were  entrances 
from  the  corner.  There  were  two  pools  where  the  grass  is  now.  The 
original  plan  to  replace  that  was  very  similar.   Doug  Baylis  worked 
on  it  for  a  long  time  with,  I  think,  Skidmore's  office.  They  made 
a  beautiful  plan  and  then  Christopher  somehow  got  word  that  something 
was  wrong  with  that.  He  canned  the  whole  design  and  told  them  to 
come  up  with  something  else  in  a  very  short  time,  seven  or  eight 
weeks.   In  a  very  short  time  they  had  to  come  up  with  this  design 
that  we  have  now. 

Nathan:  Those  little  flat  pools  with  the  little  jets? 

Asawa:   No.   It  was  like  a  rectangular  pool  in  the  center.   But  it  was 

unfinished.  There  was  still  $185,000  for  art  enrichment  and  the  Art 
Commission  was  responsible  for  doing  something  about  it,  but  they 
never  did  anything  about  it.  Then,  because  they  didn't  do  anything, 
it  went  back  into  the  General  Fund,  so  we  no  longer  have  that  money 
to  work  with. 

So,  that  summer  of  "67  we  were  there.   It  was  in  April  wh«n  we 
went  before  the  board  and  we  objected  to  changing  the  landscape. 
It  didn't  need  landscaping,  but  it  really  needed  sculpture  or  mosaic 
or  really  a  sculptural  focus. 

Nathan:  Who  were  the  other  two  who  joined  you  in  this? 

Asawa:   Gerald  Nordland,  the  director  of  the  San  Francisco  Museum  then,  and 
Joseph  Ehreth.  He's  no  longer  living.  We  went  and  spoke  and  that 
was  when  Martin  Snipper  said,  "You  artists  are  always  complaining 
and  you  never  do  anything.  You  can't  get  yourselves  together, 
organized  enough  to  put  any  kind  of  pressure  on  the  city,  and  you're 
too  independent."  He  was  furious.  He's  always  been  furious  with 
the  artists. 

Nathan:  Was  he  suggesting  political  action? 

Asawa:   Yes.  He  was  saying  that  if  the  artists  would  get  together  —  instead 
of  being  so  self-centered--and  work  collectively,  then  they  would  be 
a  voice  in  the  community.   I  think  you  can  see  that  happening  now. 

Nathan:  Right.  How  did  you  know  that  Gerald  Nordland  and  Joe  Ehreth  were 
interested,  or  had  the  same  feelings? 

Asawa:   Actually,  do  you  know  who  came  to  me?  Joe  came  to  me. 

Nathan:  Was  he  a  photographer? 

Asawa:   He  was  a  photographer.  You  knew  him? 


105 


Nathan:   Yes,  I  remember  him. 

Asawa:   He  worked  for  Che  wine  industry,  the  California  wine  publication-- 

you  know,  Wines  and  Vines.  And  then  he  worked  with  Lawrence  Halprin 
in  his  office. 

Nathan:  Oh,  right.  You  were  saying  that  Joe  Ehreth  came  and  talked  to  you 
about  the  Civic  Center  problem  at  the  time. 

Asawa:   Yes,  because  he  knew  that  there  was  money  left  that  the  city  had,  and 
a  new  design  was  being  presented.  Walter  Haas  had  given  Lawrence 
Halprin's  office  $6,000  to  do  a  study  on  it.  They  were  going  to 
present  it  before  the  Board  of  Supervisors  to  take  out  the  pool  from 
the  center,  make  that  a  brick  paving,  change  the  paving,  change  the 
trees.   It  was  essentially  really  doing  a  lot  of  trees  and  doing  the 
pool  and  putting  back  the  round  pools  to  the  original  site  where  the 
grass  is  now.   So,  it  would  have  been  a  major  change. 

But  actually,  since  the  trees  had  grown  up  that  high  and  the 
pool  was  there,  Joe  felt  that  there  was  no  reason  just  to  change  the 
landscape.  He  wanted  to  talk  to  some  people,  so  he  came  over  and 
talked  to  us  about  it.  We  talked  to  Nordland  about  it  and  the  meeting 
came  up,  so  I  called  Martin  about  it  too. 

Nathan:  You  had  known  Martin  from  before? 

Asawa:   Oh,  he  was  director  of  the  Art  Festival  in  1950,  so  I've  known  him 

since  1950.   I  think  that  Sally  Hellyer  was  an  art  commissioner  then. 
The  Art  Commission  wasn't  going  to  do  anything  about  it,  but  the 
money  was  only  good  until  July  of  1967.  Then  it  was  going  to  go  back 
into  the  General  Fund.  This  was  in  April  or  May,  so,  we  went  to  that 
hearing. 

Nathan:  This  was  an  Art  Commission  hearing? 

Asawa:   No,  the  Board  of  Supervisors'  hearing.  The  three  of  us  got  up  and 
spoke.   In  fact,  Joe  had  another  plan.  He  had  another  plan  for 
Van  Ness  Avenue,  which  would  have  made  the  traffic  go  underground 
from  Grove  to  McAllister,  and  there  would  have  been  a  plaze  or  mall 
that  would  connect  the  Opera  House  and  City  Hall.  At  that  time, 
they  were  also  talking  about  the  cultural  center  or  the  extension 
on  Franklin  Street  that  Skidmore  was  doing  and  Joe  was  objecting  to 
that  also.  You  know,  he  was  always  agitating.  He  was  always  into 
doing  something  outrageous.   But  I  really  thought  that  that  was  an 
excellent  idea  about  changing  the  traffic  flow  so  that  there  would  be 
some  connection  there.  On  top  of  that,  he  thought  that  we  could  do 
something  about  the  plaza  too.  He  was  a  very  good  friend  of  Bufano. 
He  was  concerned  that  we  could  get  a  Bufano  there,  that  we  could  get 
works  of  art  that  were  already  in  storage  and  begin  to  do  something 
with  them.   So,  he  had  sort  of  plans. 


106 


Asawa:  The   idea  seemed   sound,    so  I  thought   that  maybe  we  could  help 

him.      You  know,    I  had  no   interest   in   the  Art  Commission  or   any  of 
that.      It   simply  was  my  mind,   my  head,   wasn't   there. 

Nathan:     Was   it  hard   for  you  to  speak? 

Asawa:       Yes.      It  was  the   first   time  I  had  spoken  in  public  and  also  I  didn't 
like   it  because  Larry  was  a   friend,   you  know,   and   I  wasn't   interested 
in  trying   to  challenge  him  or  anything,   but   I  did   feel   that   it  was 
wrong  to  change   the   landscaping.      Then,    their   estimate  would  have 
cost  $234,000  to  do.     There  was  only  $185,000  to  do  that,    so   that   they 
couldn't  possibly  do  what  he  had   designed   anyway. 


Landscaping  or  Art 


Nathan:      At   this   point  was   there   some   thought   that  Mr.   Haas  would   contribute, 
would  make  a  gift   to  pay   some   of   the   expenses? 

Asawa:        I  don't   think  so.      It  was   just   that  he  gave   the   study  money  to  get 
this   changed.      But  the  design  didn't   seem  to  make   any  difference. 
It  wouldn't  have  mattered,   one  design  over  another.     There   still 
wouldn't  have   been  any  money   for  art   in   the   plaza. 

So,    the   thing  that  we   felt  was   that   that  money  should  go  to 
finish  the    fountain,   do  something  with   that,   put    in   sculpture   and 
do   something  with   that.      I   remember  William  Blake  was  a   supervisor 
then  and  he  was  very  outspoken,    in  a  way   supporting   us,   but  his 
thoughts  were   that  we  could  get   these   sort   of  white   copies   of-- 

Nathan:     Yes,   of  Greek  and   Roman   sculpture? 

Asawa:        From  Italy  we  could   import   these   for  about   $20,000.      That  would   be 
a  nice   thing   to  do.      I  mean,   whatever  his    taste  was,   he  began  to 
understand  what   it  would  mean  to  have   sculpture    in  the  plaza.     Doug 
Baylis's  argument,   and  he  was   right,  was   that    it  was   unfair   to  judge 
the  plaza  until  it  was   completed.      And   the  water  jets  were  only  put 
in  there   temporarily  until  the  works  of  art  would  be  put   in  there, 
sculpture  or  a  fountain,  whatever.     And  he  was  given  $1,200  or 
something   to  put   those   in.      So,    if  you  look  at   the   site  as   a   back 
ground,   you  could  actually  do   some   very  beautiful   things  with    it. 
So,    it's  not  the   shape  or  anything   else;    it's  just   that   it's   not 
finished.      So,    that  was  my  first  experience  with  City  Hall. 


107 


Art  Commission  and  Its  Role 


Nathan:  Did  you  feel  chat  the  other  supervisors  were  interested  in  the  point 
that  you  were  expressing? 

Asawa:   I  think  they  were.   I  can't  remember  who  else  was  on  it.   I  just 
remember  Blake  speaking  up  about  it.  Well,  then  I  said  to  Martin 
that  the  Art  Commission  should  make  some  kind  of  commitment.  They 
had  two  months  to  do  something  in.   I  think  at  that  time  he  and 
Sally  were  sort  of  always  clashing  or  something,  so  nothing  really 
happened.   I  think  Tony  de  Lap  was  on  the  Art  Commission  and  he  was 
a  sculptor  commissioner  when  the  Art  Commission  decided  to  make  this 
international  competition.  They  wanted  to  do  something  grand. 

Nathan:  Was  it  Christopher  who  named  you? 

Asawa:   No.  Mayor  Alioto. 

Nathan:   It  was  Alioto.  How  did  he  approach  you? 

Asawa:   Well,  I'd  never  had  any  contact  with  him.  He  asked  Alfred  Frankenstein 
and  Gerald  Nordland  to  send  a  list  of  people  that  they  thought  would 
be  good  on  the  Art  Commission  and  I  was  on  that  list.   I  don't  know 
who  else  was,  but  there  were  several  names. 

Nathan:  Can  you  say  what  you  feel  your  particular  mission  is  on  the  Art 
Commission?  (if  that's  not  too  strong  a  word) 

Asawa:   Well,  I  think  that  the  thing  is  for  the  city  to  become  aware  of  the 
advantages  of  having  an  active  Art  Commission  because  I  think  if 
you're  being  hard-nosed  about  it  and  objective,  it's  the  best 
investment—works  of  art  —  for  a  city.   It's  the  best  use  of  money 
because  if  the  money  is  commissioned  to  do  a  work  of  art,  that  is 
here  25  years,  50  years  from  now,  whereas  a  service  like  the  Police 
Department  or  social  service,  those  have  to  be  replenished,  and  the 
same  for  street  cleaning,  you  know.  That  never  adds  up  to  anything, 
but  a  wall  or  a  painting  or  a  tapestry  becomes  part  of  a  city's  art 
collection  and  a  lot  of  people  can  benefit  from  it  long  after  the 
money's  been  spent.   So,  a  thousand  dollar  investment  in  a  painting 
goes  on  and  on  and  it  can  even  appreciate  as  the  years  go  by. 

But  I  think  the  thing  that  is  important  is  that  the  artists 
in  the  community  be  used  and  I  don't  mean  exploited.   Actually  using 
their  service  is  probably  as  important  if  not  more  important  than  to 
solve  human  problems,  individual  problems  as  well  as  city  problems, 
as  well  as  social  and  economic  problems,  in  a  city.   It  doesn't  do 
that  much  to  increase  the  police  force  because  there's  more  violence 
and  there  are  more  drugs.   But  if  that  kind  of  money  could  be  spent 


108 


Asawa:        in  the  arts,    then  I  think  that   it's  a  better  use  because  then 

we're  dealing  with   real  human  needs  and  not  political  and   social 
needs,   but  human  needs. 

And   then  I   think  that  people  pretty  much  can   solve   their  own 
problems   if   they're  given  an  opportunity  or  a  better  environment   or 
are  able  to  participate   in  changing  their  neighborhood  or   their 
school  or  their  parks.      If  they  have   some   investment   in  it,    there 
would  be   less  destruction  because    that    same    energy  could   be   used   in 
building  up   instead   of  destroying.      I'm  really  more  concerned  with 
the  human  condition.      I  mean,    I'm  not  concerned  with  government. 
I'm  really  more  concerned  with  making   the  city  a  livable   place   for 
everyone.      So,   I'm  not  really  concerned   just  with  artists  and  art 
and    that.      I   think   that   all    the  parts  have   to   function  and   I   think 
that  we   can't   sort  of   ignore  Hunters  Point  or  Chinatown  or    the   Sunset 
or  the  Richmond.     We  can't  really  say,    "Well,  we'll  just  give   them 
federal  money,"  or,    "We'll   just  do  this  or  do   that."     It's   just   that 
they  need   to  bring  people   in  with   ideas   and    I   think   that   as   far  as    I 
can   see  the  Art   Commission   is--I  won't   say   it's    the   only  group,    but 
it   is   a  commission   that   is   ignored   by  the   city   and    it   should   be   used 
and    it   should   become   active   and   function. 


Studios,   Foundries   and  Hiring 


Nathan:     What   can  you   suggest  as   the  kinds   of   thing  you  would   like   to   see    the 
commission  do?     Of   course   it  does   certain  things  now,    like   the 
Neighborhood  Arts  Program,   and   the   festivals  and  so  on.     What  do  you 
envision  as  being  the  next   step   that  an  Art  Commission   like   San 
Francisco's  could   take? 

Asawa:       Well,   I   think  there   should   be  workshops,   big  operations,   not  just 
little  workshops  here  and    there,    but,   you  know,    like  we  have   the 
Department  of  Public  Works;    the  city   should  have  a   foundry  where 
artists  can  work.      And   I   think  the  museums   should  have   studios  within 
the  museum  so   that   there   is   some   connection  with    the   exhibit,    so   that 
people  don't  come   just   to  see   the    finished   product,   but   that   somehow 
there   is  an  opportunity  for  them  to  see   the  whole  process.     Also 
we  should  get  somehow  more   involved  with  all   the   other  agencies   in 
the  city,    that  we   should  not   feel  about   the  schools,    "That's   their 
business."     I   think  the   schools  are   our  business;    it's   everybody's 

business,   whether   it's  the  Art  Commission  or  Park  Service  or  Police 
Department. 

It's  not   just   bringing   in  a  police   car   and    letting  people   ride 
around   in  the  police  car  and   letting  them  get   friendly.      I  think 
that's   sort  of   superficial  and   I   think   there   should   be   a  greater 


109 


Asawa:        program  chat   is   interconnected.      I   think   the  Art  Commission  should 
definitely  help  the   schools  find  artists,    rather  than  their  being 
hired  by  a  personnel  office   that  knows  nothing  about  art. 

I   think  the  Art  Commission  and   the  business  community  should 
come   together  because  whether   they're  children  or  whether  they're 
citizens,    if  we  don't   really  produce  people  who  have  a   lot  of   skills, 
the  businesses   suffer  because   their  work  efficiency  is   so  low.     Then, 
with   the  unions  getting   stronger  and   stronger  and  demanding  more  and 
more   for   less  and    less  work,    it's  going   to  cost  more  and  more   for  a 
product.      So,    in   the   end,    the  poor  people  or  all  of  us  begin  to  suffer, 


Art  and  Independence 


Nathan:   In  what  way  would  an  increased  understanding  or  capability  in  art 
help  to  solve  that  kind  of  problem? 

Asawa:   Well,  I  think  that  from  a  young  person's  point  of  view  we're  talking 

about  self-confidence  and  not  being  afraid,  and  identity  and  awareness. 
Then  we  have  to  go  on  a  weekend  to  touch  people  and  say,  "You're 
okay.   I  love  you."  You  know,  all  of  this  sort  of  abstract  kind  of 
awareness  is  really  not  necessary  if  people  really  have  a  kind  of 
combination  of  self-confidence  through  being  able  to  take  care  of 
themselves. 

I  think  that's  primarily  what  I'm  interested  in,  making  it 
possible  for  people  to  become  independent,  as  independent  and  self- 
sufficient  as  possible.   That  has  nothing  really  to  do  with  just 
art,  except  that  through  the  arts  you  can  learn  many,  many  skills 
that  you  cannot  learn  through  books  and  problem-solving  in  the 
abstract.   I  mean,  for  example,  you  can  learn  to  tile  a  bath  or  you 
can  learn  to  design  a  mosaic.  That  whole  skill  can  open  up  the 
possibility  for  a  person.  A  child  doing  a  mosaic  project  in  school 

or  in  a  church  or  in  a  Park  and  Recreation  project  learns  something 
about  color,  about  design,  about  observing  objects  in  nature.   If 
you  want  to  do  chat,  that  would  grow  into  a  greater  awareness  of 

things  around  you,  and  then  you  also  learn  a  skill.  That  skill  can 
then  put  him  into  even  tiling  his  own  bathroom  or  going  into  the 
business  of  it  or,  if  he  decides  to  be  an  artist,  he  has  a  greater 
choice.   I  think  that  that's  really  what  art  can  do,  that  it's  not 
meant  to  produce  artists,  but  it's  making  people  more  flexible. 

Nathan:  And,  in  a  sense,  to  revive  this  sort  of  craftsman  capability? 

Asawa:        Yes.      And   I   think   that's   really   the    important    thing  of   using  the   body 
and   the  mind,  not  separating  it.     Actually,    there's  no  possible 
way  that  we  can  separate   it  because  we're  the  body  and  we're  the  head 


110 


Asawa:       too.      I  think  that  the  combination  of  both  of   them  will  make  people 
better,  more  highly  skilled   in   thinking  and    improving  whatever 
business  one   goes   into,   or  whatever   occupation.      It  makes   a  person 
broader  and  I   think  the  narrowness   in  which  we've  made  our  adult 
world   is   just   such  a--I  mean,   adults  are   such   a  bore. 

Nathan:     Compared   to  children? 

Asawa:       Well,  yes.     Compared   to  young  people,  who  are  still   open,   and  I  think 
that  one  of   the  dangers   is   the  kind  of  fear  that  we  pass  on  as  adults. 
We're  afraid   to  move.     We're  afraid   to  explore.     We're  afraid   to 
change  jobs.       We're  afraid   to  make  a  decision.     We're  afraid   to  say, 
"No,"  to  a  child.     We're  really  paralyzed  and  that   I  feel  very  much 
in  the  city  government  and   in  school  administration.      I've   spent  most 
of  my  life  not  wasting  very  much   time   on  people   or   things    that  don't 
amount  to  anything. 

Being  on  the  Art  Commission  and  working  in  the   schools,   I've 
had   to  be  very  patient  because  things  move   so  slowly  and   for  us   to 
have   to  discuss   things  30  different  ways   is   really  outrageous.      I 
think  that  anything  that  you  can't  make  a  decision  on  by  one  or  two 
phone  calls  or  one  or  two  meetings  you  shouldn't  bother  doing.     With 
my  own  work,    I  just   think  and   I  make    the  decision.      I'm  not   saying 
that   things   that   take   time — I'm  just  talking  about  making   a  decision. 
So,   I  just  think  people  are  really  victims,   I  think,   and   especially 
adults.     That's  why  I  feel  very  sorry  for  a   lot  of   teachers  and   a   lot 
of  people  who  are  afraid   to  speak  up. 

Nathan:     You  feel  that   this  kind  of  openness  you  find   in  children  could  be 
preserved  throughout  one's  whole  life? 

Asawa:       Oh,  yes.      I  think  the  problem  that  we're   facing  is  because  we  haven't 
done    this.      I  think  we  have   to  stop   funneling  people   into  one    train 
of  thought.     That's  why  I  think  an  artist  is  valuable,   because   they 
think  in  a  way  about   themselves --no,    that's  not    such  a  good—but   each 
person  is  capable  of  an  idea.     This  goes  back  to   the  approach,   and 
I  think  we've  probably  already  said   it,    in  the  way  that,   at  Black 
Mountain,  Albers   spoke.     He  presents  a  problem  and   then  each  one  of 
us  comes  with  a  solution  and  we  discuss  all  of  the   solutions  and  each 
one  of  us  goes  back  with   those   seven  or  eight   solutions  and  we  come 
back  with   another  mix,    so   that   each   one  of  us  has   to  be   responsible 
for  thinking  for  ourselves.      I  think  that  that's  the   important  thing 
and   that's  not  to  be  chaotic.     It  means   that  it  opens   up  new  options. 
As  jobs  get  scarcer  and   scarcer,    teaching  positions  are  not  going  to-- 
you  know,    there  are  no  teaching  positions   open. 

In  Hawaii   there  will  not  be  any  elementary   school  positions   open 
except   for  attrition  until  1980.     There  will  probably  be  only  72 
positions  open  in  secondary  and  only  68,    something   like  68,    for 
special  ed ,   which  would   be   compensatory,   gifted,   whatever.      So,    there 


Ill 


Asawa:        are  virtually  no  jobs.      But  nobody  talks   about   the  real   issue  of 

ideas.     They're   talking  about  jobs.      So,    the  School  of  Ed   (Education) 
should  close   up  if   that's   true.      If  they  don't  need   those   teachers, 
then  they  should   just  close   it  up  and  deal  with   real  problems.     The 
real  problem  is   that  people  are  going   to  have  to  stop   thinking  that 
they're   studying   to  be   teachers,   but   they  have   to  begin  to   think  that 
they're   going  to   start  studying   to  do  something.      I   think  that  that's 
the   important  thing. 

I  don't  expect    the  Art  Commission  to  do  all   that,    but  I'm  just 
saying   this   in   terms   of  my  interest   in  making  a  city  government  become 
more  active,  more  positively  active,    instead  of  being  hung  up, 
unwilling   to  give,    so  that   the  Art  Commission  has   to  keep  begging 
for  this  and   begging   for  that.     The  city  government   should   take    the 
leadership   in  really  making   the   two  percent  mandatory,    so  that   the 
artists  can  work  with  respect  and   be   useful   in   the  community. 

Nathan:     This   two  percent  for  art   in  public  buildings   is   simply  advisory  now? 
It   is   not   a  mandatory   requirement? 

Asawa:        No.     They  can  reject   it,   but   so  far  they  haven't   rejected    it. 
Nathan:     Who  would  do   the  rejection  if  it  were   rejected? 
Asawa:        I  guess   the  Board  of  Supervisors  maybe. 

Nathan:      I  see.     Do  you  have   the   feeling   that  your  general  views  are  matched 
by  those  of  some  others  on   the  Art  Commission? 

Asawa:        Oh,   yes.      I   think  we  have  a  good   commission  now. 


112 


VIII     PANELS  AND  CONFERENCES 


Schools  and  Arts 


Asawa:        I'm  on  the  Advisory  Panel   for   the  National  Endowment   for  Artists 

in   Schools  and  Wilson  Riles'   new  commission   for  better   schools.      I 
don't  know  the   title  of  that.      I  have   it   in  the  kitchen.      It's  called 
RISE--Reform  Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education. 

Nathan:      Is  that   the  one   that's  going  to  work  in  San     Francisco? 

Asawa:        It's  going  to  work  statewide  and   so  I  have   to  go   to  a  meeting  in 
Los  Angeles.      I  was  on  the  Visual  Arts  Panel  of  the   State  Arts 
Commission.      I   think  the    significant   thing  about   all   of   this   is   that 
they  for  the   first  time  asked   an  artist   to  serve. 

You  know,  Mr.  Zellerbach  was  president  of  the  San  Francisco 
Art  Commission  and  he  did  all  of   the  ground  work  of  getting  the   city 
persuaded   into  supporting  art  and  now  they  are   really  getting  a 
working  commission  going.     But   they're  actually  trying  to  find 
practicing  artists  to  serve  and  this  all  comes  about,    I  think,    through 
the  Neighborhood  Arts  Program  because   that  program  is   the   only  one, 
I  think,    in  the  country  as  far  along  as  it  is.      So,   I  think  San 
Francisco  really  has  done  a  great  deal. 

Nathan:     Right.     Now,   am  I  right   in  thinking  that   there  are   two  different 

state   level  commissions?     One  was   the  State  Arts  Commission  [later 

the  California  Arts  Council]    and  one   is  Wilson  Riles1    schools  commission? 


Riles  Cotrmission 


Asawa:       Yes.     Jmt  a  minute.      I  can  get  you  some  information.      [Pause  while 
searching  for  name.]      This  is  a  letter  from  Wilson  Riles--[  reading 
portion  of   letter] :      "--to  appoint  you  to  our   statewide   secondary 
education  reform  commission."     And  that's  going  to  meet   for   the  next 


113 


Asawa:        six  months.     And    that   is   [resumes  reading]:      "--a  re -examination  of 
the  role  and   function  of  our  junior  and   senior  high   schools   is 
long  overdue.     Although   some  secondary   schools  provide  excellent 
educational   programs,    far   too  many  fail  to  offer   learning  experiences 
geared   to  meeting  the  needs  of  high  school   students   in  the  latter 
half  of  this  century." 

Nathan:      I  see.     Do  you  yet  know  who  else  may  be  on  this? 
Asawa:       No,   I  don't  know. 

Nathan:     Do  you  have  any     knowledge  of  how  you  were  picked    for   this  RISE 
Commission? 

Asawa:        No.     Well,    I  don't  know.      Do  you  know  Miss  Goldman,   Richard   Goldman's 
sister? 

Nathan:     Yes.     Marianne? 

Asawa:  Yes.  I  don't  know.  She  may  be  involved  in  it  and  maybe  Lucille 
Abrahamson  (member  of  the  San  Francisco  School  Board).  I'm  sure 
it's  from  our  program,  the  Alvarado  program. 


Minneapolis  Conference   on  Textbooks 


Nathan:     You  have  just  gotten  back  from  Minneapolis? 

Asawa:       Yes.      I  went    to  a  book  conference  on   textbooks  on  minority  groups 
and  what   schools  use    for   texts   for   the   instructional  material. 
It   seems   to  be   inadequate,   although   the  publishers  are   trying  very 
hard   to  do   something  about   it  and   they're  asking  for  help. 

Nathan:     What  kind  of  help  do   they  want? 

Asawa:       They're   looking  for  people  with   information   that  might   be   useful. 

Nathan:     This   is   to  make  the   textbooks  reflect  accurately  the-- 

Asawa:       The  history.     The  American  Indians—they  call   them  native  Americans 
now—want  accurate  history.     The  Japanese  want    the  whole  internment 
to  be  accurately  recorded  and  what  actually  happened   to  the  people 
after   they   returned.      The  Chicanes  wanted   I  guess  more  material   in 
bilingual   education.     Each  side  bullying  the  other,   and   the  publishers 
seemed    to  be  the  bad  guys.     They  kept  talking  about   the  cost  of  paper 
and    the  rising  costs  of  printing.     And  yet   they  said   they  had   less 
money   to  spend   carelessly  now.      [Telephone] 


114 


Nathan:      I  just  wanted   to   repeat   that   this   was   Imogen  Cunningham  who  called 
you.     And   is   she  still  active? 

Asawa:       Oh,  yes.      She's  asking  about  going  to  Jacob's  opening  of  his 

photographs  at  the  DeYoung  Museum   tomorrow  morning,    and   she's   also 
calling  to  see   if  our  daughter  will  come   to  clean  her  house;    she 
cleans  once  every  two  weeks. 

Nathan:      I  see. 

So,  did  you  get  the  impression,  then,  that  the  publishers 
were  trying  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  boards  of  education  or 
the  community?  Because  they  have  to  sell  to  the  boards  of  education, 
don't  they? 

Asawa:   Yes.  Well,  that's  what  users  accused  them  of—always  compromising, 
coming  to  a  middle  ground. 


Grassroots  Materials 


Nathan:  Were  there  any  boards  of  education  represented  at  this  meeting? 

Asawa:   Well,  not  boards,  but  superintendents  of  schools,  very  big 

publishers.   There  were  many  publishers  who  had  taken  risks,  so 
that  things  that  might  sell  in  Chicago  would  not  sell,  of  course, 
in  Texas.  There  are  many  pockets  in  this  country  that  are  really 
very  isolated  yet. 

The  feeling  that  I  got  was  that  people  were  going  more  to 
printing  their  own  material,  so  that  the  local  communities  are 
xeroxing  things  and  organizing  their  own  groups  of  teachers  and 
administrators  together  to  design  something  that  would  be  useful 
to  them.  The  suggestion  was  that  there  should  be  some  vehicle  to 
get  these  isolated  projects  together  in  the  hands  of  publishers; 
a  group,  a  body  of  people  who  would  say  that  this  could  be  used 
nationwide,  or  this  is  only  a  local  matter.   As  for  money  that  is 
being  used  by  Title  IV  (I  can't  remember  what  title),  in  instructional 
material  and  preparation,  a  lot  of  school  districts  are  taking  that 
money  and  using  their  teachers'  time  and  money  to  prepare  material 
that  is  not  in  textbooks. 

There  were  two  or  three  people  from  HEW  (U.S.  Department  of  Health, 
Education,  and  Welfare)  one  from  the  National  Endowment  for  the 
Humanities,  wondering  why  there  couldn't  be  some  way  in  which  the 
publishers  and  the  government  could  come  together  on  collaborating, 
rather  than  publishers  competing  with  one  another;  possibly  one 
publisher  would  do  one  area,  so  they're  not  trying  to  fight  each  other 


115 


Asawa:        but   chey're  working   together  with  HEW   and  have  a   subsidy.      So  much 
of  the  money   is  now  going   to   instructional  materials   that  are  being 
done   locally. 

Nathan:     What  do  you  think  of  the  growth  of  the   sort  of  grassroots  creation 
of  materials? 

Asawa:        I  think  it's  possibly  the  way  we  have   to  go.      I   think  there   is  a 
danger   in  that  also,    if   there  aren't  people   there   that  are  highly 
qualified  at   the   local  level.      But   it's   still   closer   to  dealing 
with  the  problems   that  are   local.     And   I   think  the  thing  that  has 
to  be  defined,  whether   it's    local  or  national,    is  what   is  a  common 
thread    that   goes   through  what   is   necessary   information  that  everyone 
has   to  have,   regardless  of  what  economic,  what  social,   what  ethnic 
group.      There  are  certain  things,    I   think,    that  are  pretty  essential, 
These  can  be  done  nationally  or  regionally  or   statewide. 

Also,   sex  bias   is  one  of  the   big  issues.       Women- -they 're  one 
of  the  minorities   too.     And  then  there  were   representatives   from 
all --not   the  Filipinos     or   the  Samoans,   but   the  Black,    the  Chicano, 
the   Japanese,   Chinese. 

Nathan:     Was  anything   said   about  getting  together  again  at  a  given   time? 

Asawa:        They  may  do   something  as   a   body—not   all   of  us,    but   some—coming 
together  and   talking  about    something  that  we  can  do   federally 
with  HEW  helping. 

Nathan:     How  were  you  drawn   into   this?     Did   somebody  name   you? 

Asawa:       One  of   the  members --Seymour  Yezner  — is  on  the  panel  with  me  on   the 
National  Endowment  Artists  and   Schools   panel,   and  he  was   telling  me 
that   they  were  going   to  have   this   book  conference   in  Minneapolis. 
He  did  mention   something  about  multi-ethnic  material    that   they  were 
going  to  discuss  with  publishers.      I  just  said   to  him  that  a  lot 
has   to  be  done,   although   I  didn't   really  know  specifically.      So, 
they  invited  all   the   superintendents   from  all  over  the  country  and 
no  one  was  coming     from  San  Francisco,    so  they  invited  me. 

But   I  didn't   represent    the   school;    I  just  went  as  an  individual. 
Then  after  everybody  spoke  and   the  women's   spokesman  spoke   up,    then 
I  spoke  and    I  said,    'Veil,   I  guess   I  "m  a  minority  of  one,   and   I 
represent  the  artist  in  all  of  us."     Then  I  said   that   "since   I  had 
the  publishers  here,   I  make  a  plea   that  you  don't  put  out  books  on 
creativity  and   expect   that    to  be  the   textbook  for   teaching  art." 
Anyway,   that's   essentially  what  I  said. 

I  felt   it  was  too  bad   that   none  of  us  brought  any  texts  or  any 
materials   that  we  had  worked  on.      I   thought   that  was  a  foolish   thing- 
the  publishers  were  there. 


116 


Asawa:  But  the  next  meeting  they  have  will  be  that  kind  of   thing,   and 

the   thing  that   they  should   do  at   all   the  meetings   in   the   community 
would  be,   at  book  fairs,    that   there   should  be  a  specific  area  called 
multi-cultural,  multi-ethnic,  and  to   show   in  textbooks   the   sex  bias- 
girls  do   this  and  boys  do   that. 

But   I  also  said   that  you  can't  learn  anything  out  of  books. 
I  mean,   a   lot  of  what   is  happening  now  with   the  young  people    is    that 
they  are  not  getting  it  out  of  the  books,   they  keep  thinking  thac   if 
they  would  only  read  and  write,    then  they  will  be  able  to  do  other 
things,   but   I  think  other  things  precede   them. 

Nathan:      I   see.     Did  you  meet  people  who   impressed  you? 

Asawa:        Oh,   yes.      I  was  very   impressed  with   them,   very   impressed.      They  were 
very  much   in  tune  with  everything.     That's  what   they  all  decided 
afterwards—that   the   only  worthwhile   thing  was   that  we  met   some   new 
people. 

Can  I  make   you  some   tea? 
Nathan:     That  would  be   lovely.     Thank  you. 

We  were  talking  earlier  about   the   kinds  of  art  facilities  that   the 

next  generation  will  want.      Isn't   it  hard   to  try   to  predict  what    they 

are  going  to  want?     I  do  see  a   lot  of  campus  people—young  people  — 

who  seem  to  be   interested   in  museums,   dance,  operas.      But  whether 
that's  a  big  enough  audience,    I  can't   say. 

Asawa:        I  think  the   thing   that   this  generation  has   to  invest  in  is  really 
to   try  to  preserve   knowledge  and   information  and   skills   simply  by 
utilizing  people— not   so  much   in  putting   so  much  money   in--I   think 
it's   important  to  have   the  production,   because  I  think  if  we  lose 
a  grasp  of   that   total  production- 
Nathan:     This   is  an  opera  production? 

Asawa:       Yes.      I  think  more  people   should  be  given  a  chance   even  to  experience 
It  in  a  small  way.     That's  why  I  think  it  would   be  wonderful  if 
schools  would  have  a   little  opera,   or  have   the  experience  of  opera. 
I   remember   being  in  an  operetta  when  I  was    in  grade   school.      That 
didn't  make  me  an  opera  fan,   but  I  think  that   that  experience   is  a 
marvelous   thing  because  you  understand   and  you  respect  the  effort. 
So  I  think  all  of  those   things  are  very  important  to  do,   and   I 
think  it's   important   to  bring  people   in  who  understand  the  big 
picture  so  that  their  skills  aren't  lost. 

The  reality  of  what's   in  the  schools  and  the  attention  span 
and   the  direction,   or  the  non-direction,    is  something   that  we  all 
are  going  to  have  to  cope  with. 


117 


Nathan:     Do  you  feel   chat   in  a  sense   Che  challenge   is   really  not  only  to 
preserve  and  develop  some  of   these   forms,   but    co  make   sure  Chere 
is  more   participation  and  more   exploring? 

Asawa:        Yes,   because   I   Chink   Chat's  one   of   Che   real   problems  —  that    even 

in  a  movemenc  of  cultural  centers- -even   in  a  neighborhood --you  sec 
Chese  places   up,   buC   Chen  what  you  really  need  are  people,   and   I 
chink   that   if  I  had  money,    I  would   invest   in  people,    in  keeping 
them  active. 

Nathan:     Do  you   feel   these  neighborhood  cencers    cend   co  work  coward    chat 
direction? 

Asawa:        I  hope   they  do.      I   chink   that   just  Che  experience  at  Black  Mountain 
in  communicy  living--ic's  very  difficulc  Co   live   cogether.     And   the 
only   ching  that  made   that   place  worthwhile  was   that   these  people 
were  highly  skilled  and   individually  motivated.      I  think  the 

community  centers   should    try  co  gee  people  who  are  extremely  skilled 
and  have   something   to  contribute. 

Nachan:      There  would   be  a  very  high   quality  of   leadership  or   teaching   in  each 
cencer,    co  accract  people? 

Asawa:        Yes.      I   really  like    the  idea  of  having  in  a  city  a  symphony,   an 

opera,   a  bailee.      BuC  I   Chink  that  we   really  have   the  problem  that 
we're   split;    those   in   the  neighborhood  may  not   Chink   Chat   it's 
important.      I  think  it's   important  but  I   chink,   as  you  say,  we  don't 
know  what    is  going   Co   be   useful   Co   Che   nexC   generation--!  mean,    ic's 
coo   bad    if  we  had    coo  many  empty  houses  —  like   the  Kabuki  Theater, 
ic's  down,   and   Che  Chinese  Cultural  Cencer  is   sore  of  very  quiet   and 
inactive.      We   get   all   of   Che   buildings   together  and  we   can't   run 
them,    and  when   the  problem  ends   up   being  concerned  with   running 
them,    Chen  we   don't   have   enough  money  Co  deal  wich    the    inside   of   it 
and   che  program.      So  I  Chink  that  we  have   Co  be  very  careful. 

Nachan:     Yes.      I  see  your  point. 


Bi-Centennial   Selection  Committee 


Nachan:     This  may  cie   in  a   liccle    (cell  me   if  ic  does  or  noc)   wich   che 

Bi-Centennial   plans. 

Asawa:        Everyone    is  hoping   that   Che  Bi-Centennial  will  bring  Che   city   together. 
Nachan:      Are   Chere   plans    being  developed   now? 


118 


Asawa:       Yes.     Just   two  weeks  ago,   they  re-established   the  Arts  Committee, 
and   Roberto  Vargas   is  chairman;   Milton  Salkind  was  before.      Now   I 
think  many  organizations   are   going   to  come   under   that  —  the   youth 
organization,    education,   neighborhood   arts,    and  Fort  Mason. 

Nathan:      I  think  it's   the  Bi-Centennial  Arts  Committee  of   the  City  of 

San  Francisco.      Is   there  anything   that   you  would   like   to   say  about 
how  it's   going  or  what   the   plans  would  be? 

Asawa:        There  have   been  a   lot  of  meetings   about   it.      I   think  the   neighborhood 
people  kept   thinking  it  was   being  run  by  somebody   up  here—people 
in  Pacific  Heights,    the    financial  distrct.     The  people  didn't  want 
that   to  happen;   and   yet,    they  didn't  have   the   contact  with    the 
community.      So   the  logical   thing  was   to  have   the  Neighborhood  Arts 
program,   because    they're  already   in  tune  with   the   community.      And 
hopefully,    it  will  not  go  ethnic--!   think  all  of  it   should  be 
together,   but   it   should   not  polarize   and  have   each   ethnic   group 
saying  they  want   their   share  and  they  want   to  do  it   this  way,   and 
have  it   in  neighborhoods,   primarily  neighborhood   projects.      But  when 
that   is   said  by   somebody   in  a  Brooks  Brothers   suit,    then   it  doesn't 
go  over   too  well  with   the  neighborhood   people.      But   if    they   see   it   as 
a  collective   effort,    then  I   think—they  asked  me   to  be   on   their 
selection  committee   of  proposals,    so    that  way,    I'm  sympathetic  with 
both   sides. 

Nathan:      Right.     And  you've  never   been  known   to  wear  a  Brooks  Brothers   suit, 
either. 

Asawa:        [Laughter]      That's  right. 

Nathan:     Will   the  Bi-Centennial  celebration  have   representation   from  a  number 
of  different  art  forms? 

Asawa:       Music,    theatrical  performances,   dance,    pageantry,    parades   from 

neighborhoods;    they're   talking   about   tree-planting;    they're   talking 
about   beautification  of  neighborhoods;    they're   talking  about   schools. 
I'm  trying  to  generate   some   interest   in   using  the   names   of   schools 
that  relate  historically  to     San  Francisco's  and  U.S.  history. 

Nathan:     You  were  saying  I  think  that  you  were  at  Benjamin  Franklin  School? 

Asawa:       Yes. 

Nathan:  What  are  you  doing  at  Benjamin  Franklin? 

Asawa:   I'm  just  trying  to  set  it  up.   I  didn't  mean  to.   I  was  hoping  I 

would  go  there  and  be  an  artist,   working  on  my  work.   I'm  not  so  sure 
that  it's  possible,  just  realistically,  because  there  are  so  many 
things  that  need  to  be  done. 


NEIGHBORHOOD 
BI-CENTENNIAL  CELEBRATION 


Noe  Valley  Branch 
San  Francisco  Public  Library 

451  Jersey  Street 
10  am  to  4  pm 


10:00  am  MURAL  PAINTING  -  Nancy  Thompson  .....................  Front  Fences 

FELTPEN  PANELS  -  Ruth  Asawa  ......................  Children's  Room 

BREAD  DOUGH  SCULPTURE  -  Valerie  Ferrer  ...............  Adult  Room 

ORAL  HISTORY  TAPING  -  Roberta  Greifer  .................  Adult  Room 

COMMUNITY  GARDEN  SLIDE  SHOW  -  Roy  Swansea  .....  Meeting  Room 

(continuous) 

1  1:00  am  NOE  VALLEY  VICTORIANS  -  Judy  Waldhora  .............  Meeting  Room 

(Slide  Show  &  Walk) 

11:30  am  LIBRARY  TREE  PLANTING  -  Al  Lanier  ...................  Library  Front 

REMARKS  -  City  Librarian  Kevin  Starr  .....................  Library  Front 


" 


12:00  noon  PUPPET  SHOW  -  "Kerin  and  the  Spaghetti  Monster 

Joyus  Puppet  Theatre  ..................  Children's  Room 

1:00  pm  BANNER  MAKING  -  Valerie  Ferrer  ........................  Adult  Room 

NOE  VALLEY  VICTORIANS  -  Judy  Waldhoro  .............  Meeting  Room 

(Slide  Show  &  Walk) 
.     .  x 

2:00  pm  PUPPET  SHOW  -  "Kerin  and  the  Spaghetti  Monster" 

Joyus  Puppet  Theatre  ..................  Children's  Room 

CHAPLIN  and  LAUREL  &  HARDY  FILMS  -  Roberta  Greifer  .Meeting  Room 


Plus  ....  MUSIC FACE  PAINTING REFRESHMENTS 

Sponsored  by:  Twin  Bi-Centennial  Youth/Education  Committee 
Friends  of  Noe  Valley 
San  Francisco  Public  Library 
Friends  of  San  Francisco  Public  Library 


^PUBLIC 
^LIBRARY 

" 


119 


Asawa:  The   first  project  will  be  baker's  clay  involving  the  entire 

school,    to   bring  people   together   first.     Then  the  Black  Light 
Explosion  Company   from  the  Neighborhood  Arts  Program—that's   their 
area,    so  they  would   like   to  do   something  much  more  concrete  within 
the   schools.     There's  a  city  gardening  project  which  we  hope  will 
eventually  develop  into  a  garden  club  in  one  of  the   empty  lots 
there,   but   there   is  container  gardening   (which   is   inside)    that  could 
be  done.      But   that  has  to  be  done  with   inside   interest;   a  science 
teacher   really  has   to  take   that  on  as  his  project,   because   that 
hasn't  been   successful  where  parents  are  outside  and  people  come  in 
and    set   something  up  and   expect    it  to  continue.      It  doesn't  continue 
unless   there's   someone  who   truly  knows  gardening. 

Nathan:      I  believe  you  said  earlier   that   there  was  something  to  be   learned 

from  gardening  —  that  there  was  a   special  benefit,   I  think  you  said, 
in  the   experience  of  gardening. 

Asawa:       Number  one,    it's  a  very  small   investment  of  material  and    it  also 
teaches  what   is  going  to  be  pretty  essential.      I   think  gardening 
is  possibly  more    important  even  than  art;    I  mean,   I  wouldn't   say  one 
is  more  important   than  the  other,   but   I  think  that  gardening  is 
something  that  we  have  completely  lost  and   I   think  it's  a  very 
critical  thing  to   learn,   because   it   really  does   teach  you  respect. 

And   it's  pretty  miraculous  when  you  think  about   it,  when  you 
think  of  a  seed  growing  into  a  plant  and  then  you  eat   it.      It's   just 
a  real  Nature's  miracle   there   that  we  take   for  granted. 


120 


EC     TIME  AND  THE  ARTIST:     WORKS,   EXHIBITS,   AWARDS 


Beneficial  Use   of  People 


Nathan:      Is  your  work  on  boards  and    commissions-  something  you   felt  you  wanted 
to  evaluate   as,    let's   say,    compared    to  work  in  art?     What   does   it 
do  to  the  time  you  would  otherwise  perhaps  have   for  your  own  art? 
Are  you  ready  to  make  any  evaluation  of  some   of   this  work  that  you 
have  been  doing  in  the  past  few  years? 

Asawa:       When  all  this   is  all  over  with,    it  will  be  much  more   important   to 
be  used  as  an  artist  rather  than  to  be   used  on  the  boards  and 
committees.      I  think  we  have   to  begin  to  do   things   that  are 
beneficial --not  necessarily  profitable,   but   beneficial   to  people. 
If  there  were  city  jobs  to  be  gardeners,    it  would  be  much  more   useful 
to  the  city  than  a  lot  of  clerical  work  to  deal  with  problems  of  the 
city. 

I  think  that  a  lot  of  problem-solving  comes  out  of  real  activity, 
and  I  think  that  that   is  one  of  the   things   that  we  know  less  about 
now  than  we  ever  did   in  history.     People  are  used   in  a  very  useless 
way.     And  we   keep   thinking   that   by   serving  on  a  committee,   serving 
on  a  commission  or  going   into  politics,    by  doing   this   we  will  get 
changes.     And  we  hope  that  our  vote  will  count  and  we  hope   that  by 
signing  a  petition  we'll  make   changes.     Actually,   a  lot  of  people 
have  made  changes   through  this  method,   but   in   this  process,  we   really 
lose  what  we  value.     That's  a  hard   thing   to  explain,    isn't  it? 

Nathan:     What  would  be   the  alternative?     We  know  that  changes  need  to  be 
made,   and   there  are  some  drawbacks   to   the  petition,   voting,    and 
governmental  methods.      So  what  would   be  an  alternative   that  you  might 
see?     What  else  could  we  do? 

Asawa:        I  think--«nd   it  may  just  be  a  personal  desire  —  that   I  would   like   to 

do  very  simple  things  like  make  my  evenings  meaningful  or  my  weekends 
meaningful.  Maybe  the  thing  that's  happening—and  this  just  occurred 
to  m« — is  that  I'm  growing  old,  too,  so  that  my  needs  are  different 


121 


Asawa:        from  before.      But  actually,    I've  spent  my  younger  years  producing. 

I've  spent  20  years  producing,  whether   it's  children  or  whether   it'f 
work.      I  spent   those  years,   which  I  feel  were  very  valuable. 

And  I  would   like   to   see  young  people  have   that  opportunity  to 
spend    their    time  on  that  rather  than  on  petitions,   on  committee 
meetings  and    fighting  and   serving.      I  mean,   even  like  the  Neighborhood 
Arts  Program—a   lot  of  young  people's  energy  goes   into  doing  social 
work,    to   try  to  help  other  people.     Actually,    they  should  be  developing 
themselves   into  very  strong  people  with  developing  ideas,    so  that 
they  could  be  very  useful  and  helpful  with   information. 

That  goes   back  to   talking  about  how  we   use  people.      I  was   talking 
about  an  important  way  to  use  people   is  really  to  be  [pause] — it's 
mixed   up  now. 

Nathan:     These  are  not  easy  ideas.      I   follow  part  of  this.     So  you're   thinking 
about  the  development  of   the   individual  as  a  strong  and  productive 
person? 


Finding   Satisfactions 


Asawa:       Like  if  a  person  has   a  family,    the  parents  are  struggling,   are 

struggling—well,  maybe   to  survive.     They  don't  have   time   for   finding 
satisfying  responses.     The   thing  is,    there  are  very  easy  ways   to  be 
satisfied,   and   it's  hard   to   find   satisfaction.      I  mean,    it's  very 
easy  to  have  pleasure   eating  with  your   family,   and  that's  a  very 
simple   thing  to  do;    there  are  many  simple   things  to  do   that  we  don't 
know  how   to  do  anymore. 

Nathan:      It's   the  quality  of   life   that  you're   talking  about? 

Asawa:       Yes.      It's   so   fractured  now  that   it's  very  hard   to — I  was   talking  to 
a  teacher  yesterday.      She   said,    "From  the   time   I  say  something  and 
it  registers   in  the   student's  mind,    it's  very  hard   for   them  to 
understand  what  I'm  saying."     And  even  that  is  difficult.      So  when 
you  get  a  body  of  intelligent  people   together   (or  so-called;   a 
commission,    I   suppose,   are   supposed   to   be   intelligent—maybe   not 
always,   but  you're   there   for  a  reason),   and   they're  making  decisions, 
they're   still   influenced   by  where   they  come   from;    they  still  make 
very  bad  decisions. 

I  think  that   if  I  can  make  decisions  on  my  own,   I  make  much 
better  decisions.     My  decisions  are  much  stronger.      I   serve  many 
more  people  by  doing  certain  things.      I'm  trying   to  compare   the 
making  of  the  Fountain  as  compared    to  the  years  and  years  of  decisions 
that    I  made   on— and    I  always   lost—on   the  Embarcadero  Fountain,   on 


122 


Asawa:        the  Chinese  Bridge.      I'm  not   interested    in  Yerba  Buena;    that's   a 

great  mistake.     Well,    I'm  not   looking  at   it   from   the  hotel-businessman 
viewpoint.      I  look  at  it  as   sort  of  the   living  health  of   the  city; 
I'm  not   talking  about    the   business  health   of  the   city.      And   even,    I 
think  my  judgment  has   still   always   been  that  whatever   I  decided   to  do, 
it   still   benefited   people.     Whether   I  made  money  or  not  money  on   it 
is   sort  of   immaterial.      I   struggled  with   that   after.    But   decisions 
that  I  had  made  have  really  been  decisions   for  the  welfare  of   the   city. 
I'm  not  saying  that   I'm  a  social  worker;    I'm  just  saying  that   just 
being  an  artist   is  a  much  more   useful    function   for  me   than   serving 
on  a  committee,   because   that's   always  watered   down. 

Nathan:     That's   very   interesting.      I  can   see,    from  an  artist's   point   of  view, 
how  what  you  have  becomes  a   little  diffused  when  you're  working  in 
a  group. 

Asawa:       And   I  think  there  are  a  lot  of  people  who  could  do   that --make   those 
decisions. 

Nathan:      Perhaps,   but    they  wouldn't   be  you  and   they  wouldn't   know  what  you 
know,   and   they  wouldn't  have  your  interests.      It's   tough.     There 
should  be  several  of  you  [laughing]    but   there's  only  one. 

Asawa:        I  just  think  it's   really  very  easy   to  be  an  artist. 
Nathan:     It's   impossible  for  most  people,   I  think.      It's  very  rare. 

Asawa:       Maybe   it   is;    I  don't   know.      But  I   think  that   it's   important    for 
artists  to  show  how   to  be  an  artist. 

Nathan:      Exactly.      Yes. 

Asawa:        I  mean,   I   think  that  that's  really  my  function. 

Nathan:     Maybe   there's  a   little  bit  of  an  artist   in  each  person,   but  not  a 
complete  one. 

Asawa:        I  think  that  you're  born  with  all   the  tools.      If  you  grow   up 

normally--!  don't   think  one  person  has  more    than   the   other;    the 
ingredients  are   there.      That's  why  I   think  that   the   contact  you  have 
with  people   is  a  very  important   thing.     And   I  think  that   that's  the 
tragedy  in  the   schools  —  that   there  are  not   enough- 
Nathan:     People? 

Asawa:       No.     There  are  plenty  of  people  in  the   school  system.     We've  set  up 

a  system   that   doesn't  allow  people   to   function,    and   I   think  that   that's 
the  great   tragedy  of  our  schools.     People  are  willing   to  fit   into 

those  boxes;    the  minute    they  don't,   then   they  get    somebody   somehow 
who  will. 


123 


Nathan:  The  tyranny  of  the  structure. 

Asawa:  Yes,   yes.     We're  all  victims.      Can't  you  see? 

Nathan:  Of   course. 

Asawa:  All   these   good   people.' 

Nathan:     This    is  part  of   the   problem—you  have  got   to   tinker  with   the 

structure,  and  I  suppose  that's  where  the  voting  and  the  petitions 
and  the  wheel-spinning  and  the  meetings  come  in,  because  you  can't 
do  it  if  the  structure  doesn't  work.  You  have  to  hack  away  at  the 
structure,  I  suppose? 

Asawa:       Well,    I   think  that  that's  what   the  young  people  are  doing.     They're 

walking  out  of  it,   and   they're  grating  it  and   they're   scraping   it  and 
they're  knocking   it  down;    that's  what   they're  doing.     And   then 
people  in  the    structure  keep  replacing  it,   and  they  put    the  wood   up 
and   that  gets  broken,   and   they  put   up   fiberglass,   and   now   they're 
designing  it  without  windows,    so   that  now,   everybody  who  walks  in  it 
can't   see  out  anymore. 

Nathan:     That's   the  new  school  design? 

Asawa:       That's  right.      School  design  is  a  wall  and   interior   lighting--McAteer 
is   that  way—or  even  skylights  but  no  windows.      So  it   still  keeps 
this  oppression  with   them,   and   it's  very  easy  to  open  it  up. 

Nathan:      It   takes  a  little  courage   to  do   that. 

Asawa:       Well,    that's   an  element   that  we're  all  born  with   too.     That  doesn't 
mean   that  one   person   is  given  more;    it  depends  on  who  uses   it.      I 
mean,    it's  what  part  of  you  that  you  decide   to  use.     We've  gotten  so 
that  we   use  so  little  of  ourselves   that  we're  really  becoming  more 
and  more   incompetent.      I   really  know  very   little   about  how   it 
happened   but   I  know  where   to  go   to  get   something  done   if  I  need    it. 
That's  why  I  think  it's   important   to  use  people   in  their  own  skilled 
area  and  make  them  function.     We  don't  do   that   in  our  schools;   we 
don't  do   that   in  government;  we  don't  even  do  it  with  our   families. 

Even  with   reading,    getting  back  to  that  meeting   in  Minneapolis, 
I  said   that  a  lot  of  the  children  who  could   read  well  don't  read. 
It  happens   to  be  that  reading  doesn't   take  place   in  the  home,   so 
that  where   they're   good   readers,    they  read   at  home  or  parents   read 
to  their  children.     Nobody  really   faces  up   to  that,   because  I   think 
that's  the   reality  of  it. 

Nathan:     How  would  you  reach  back  into  the  homes  so  that  parents  who  were  not 
readers  would   read? 


124 


Asawa:       The  thing  is  that  we're  really  becoming   less  and   less   readers; 
we're  more  visually  oriented   and   that's  why   the  visual  arts   are 
so   important. 


Artist   as  Commissioner 


Nathan:     I  see.     And  now  are  you  thinking  you'd   like   to  say  a   little  more  about 
the  question  of-- 

Asawa:        About   being  on  commissions?     Well,    the   thing   that   to  me   is    interesting 
right  now  is  that  we've  always  had  commissions,   and    for    the   first 
time  we're   inviting  artists    to  be  on   them.      And   I   think  that's   the 
reason  that  being  there   interests  me.      And   they've   always  had 
superintendents  of   this,    or   so-and-so  of    this,   or  director   of   that, 
to  represent.      I  mean,  when  you   think  of   it,    the  Endowment  began 
with  people  who,    in  a  way,  were  not  all  artists.     Even  now,    there 
are  very   few  artists   even  on   the  Artists   in  Schools   panel,   except 
those  who  have  worked    in   the  program  as  artists.      But   I  don't  want 
to  be   swallowed   into   that   either,   because   they  get  caught   in  there 
and   then   they  organize  a  program.      They  were   originally  poets,    and 
they  got   into   this  and    they  had  a  bigger  idea  of  how  it  should  be 
done.   Then  they  got  drawn  into  that,    and   finally-- 

Nathan:     They're  not  poets  anymore? 

Asawa:       They're  not  poets  anymore;    they're  commissioners. 

Nathan:     That  is  very  well  put.     Can  you  keep  your   integrity  as  an  artist, 

or  whatever  you  are   originally,   and   still    function  as   a  member   of  a 
body? 

Asawa:       That  would  be  a  pretty  unique   thing   to  do.     But,   at  the   same  time, 
I  feel  that  all   this   is  very  important.      I'm  not  saying  that   one 
should  just  be  an  artist,   but  that  one   should  also  be  a  member  of 
the   community. 


Activity  and  Family 


Nathan:     Very  good.     You  said  earlier,    in  passing,    that  you  would  like   to 
make  your  evenings  meaningful,   or  your  weekends  meaningful.     What 
were  you  thinking  of? 

Asawa:        I'm  just   looking  back  on  how  I  used    to   spend  my  evenings.     When   the 
children  were  growing   up,    I  spent  a   lot  of   time  with   them  and    took 
them  to   the  beach,    the  museum,    the   park.      And   then   in   the   evenings, 


125 


Asawa:        I  worked.      I  would  work  until  midnight  or   two  or  whatever.     We 

worked  a   lot  on   the  house,  which   is   still   unfinished.      I  think  that 
was  a  very  nice  period,   and   I  would  like    that   spirit  or   that 
quality  of  evening   activity   to  be   possible  again  —  instead   of  going 
to  a  night  meeting  here  and  a  school  board  meeting  here,   and   fighting 
this  and   dashing  off  before  dinner—all  of  that.     You're  doing  it 
for  your   family,    and   in  the  end  you  destroy  what  you're   trying  to 
achieve;   you  lose   something,    or  you  take  something  of   that  away. 

Nathan:      It    is   just   a  permanent  dilemma. 

Asawa:       Yes.     At   the   same    time,    I'm  concerned  with   old  age  and  what  one  does 
when  one  grows  old  and   is  all  alone,   and   then  what  happens.      I'm 
speaking  of  different  periods   in  life,   but  having  been  active  when 
you're  young,   you  generally  remain  active  as  you  get  older  too. 
[Pause]      I  haven't   faced   that  quite  yet. 


Experience   and  Memory 


Nathan:     No.     But   that's   the  human  problem.      Is   there  a  danger   that    if  you 
don't  practice  your  art,    it  escapes  you? 

Asawa:       Yes.     Absolutely.     You  can  lose  everything.     You  can  rebuild   it. 
That's  why  I  think  it's   important   that   it  happen  while  you're 
young,   because  you  can  have  a  memory  of  it.      But   it's  also   important 
for  young  people   to  be   in  contact  with  people  who  are  actually  doing 
that.      They  won't   understand    it  when   they're  young,    but  when   they 
arrive  at    the  time  when  they're  going   to  produce   something  or  do 
something,    they  will  have  had   that  memory,   experience  or  example,    to 
understand   that. 

And  that's  why  I'm  just   saying,    from  a  parent's  point  of  view, 
that  the  experience  of  my  working  in  the  house  on  my  work  was  a  very 
good    lesson   for  my  children;    some  will    take   it,    some  won't   take    it. 
But   I  think  having  had   that,    they  understand  how  to  put  a  house 
together,    they  understand  you  get   up  at   seven  and  you  work  until 
four  or   five.     They  understand  certain  habits—working  habits.      If 
you  tend   to  wake  up  after  the  kids  have  gone    to  school,   you  set  a 
pattern  for  them  to  follow  when  they're  grown  up.      I  think  those 
are  the   things   that  I  keep   thinking  about.      I'm  not  talking  about  my 
behavior,    but   I'm   talking   about  certain  habits   that   I  would   like   to 
try   to  help  develop   in   them. 

I  don't   say  that   you  only  influence   your  own   family,   but  I 
think  that  whatever  you  do  —  like,    if  you  run  off  and  help  other 
people  out  here  and  you  neglect  your  own  children  — I  think  that  that's 
not   right.      I  don't   feel   that   I've  done  it,   but   I  feel  very  much, 
being  out  in  the  community,    that  you  do  sacrifice  something  personally. 
Don't  you  think  in   some   ways? 


126 


Nathan:      I  think  it's  a  very  fine    line,    to  do   justice   to  both. 
Asawa:       That's  right. 

Nathan:     Very  difficult.      In  some  ways,    the  more  giving  you  are  and  the  better 
you  are,    the  more  people  will   grab  you  to  do  what   they're   interested 
in. 

Asawa:        It's  really  hard   to  sort  out  what  is  essential  and  what  is  really 
helpful,   and  when  you're   being   used   for  some  purpose. 

Nathan:     Yes.     When  you  speak  of  each  person's  highest  and   best  use,    that 
applies   to  you  also.     That's  very  thoughtful,   and  I  think  many 
people   struggle  with   it   and  maybe   always  will.      I  don't  know  whether 
you  can  always   say,    "All   right.      I'll  give   so  many  years  for   this 
and   so  many  years   for   this."     Sometimes   it  has   to  all   go  on  at   the 
same   time. 

Asawa:       And  there  are  ways  in  which  you  can  stack  things  too,   and  I   think 
that   if  you  do  one   thing   that  will  help  many  people,    that's   an 
ideal  situation. 

Nathan:      Right.      In  a  way,   an  artist  has  a   special  opportunity. 
Asawa:        The  artist   is    the   one    that  can  do  that  most   efficiently. 


Winning  a  Poster  Contest 


Nathan:      I  did  want,    if  you're  willing,    to   think  of   some  of   the  exhibits- 
some  of  your  shows  and   some   of   the   awards--not  particularly  give   a 
list  of  them,  because  that's   easy  enough   to  do.      If  you  would  care 
to,  would  you  talk  about  what  any  of  them  have  meant   to  you?     Were 
there  any   that   somehow  gave  you  a   special   boost  or   inspiration   to  go 
in  a  certain  direction,    that   somehow   seem  particularly  significant 
to  you? 

Asawa:       Well,   I  won  a  poster  contest   in  the   seventh  or  eighth  grade. 
Nathan:     Ah.1     Now  that   is   interesting.  What  was   the  poster? 

Asawa:       Liberty.     Gee,   I  can't  remember  what   it  was.      It  was   sponsored  by 
the   bank  or  the  post  office  or  something  that  had   to  do  with   the 
United   States.      And   I  painted    the  Statue  of  Liberty. 

Nathan:     What  colors? 


127 


Asawa:        I  can't   remember   ic.      I  Chink  it  had  a  red   background.      I   really 

can't   remember,    but  I  juat  remember   that.     Also,   I  had  certain  people-- 
an  art   teacher,    both   in  elementary  and  high   school --grammar  school 
and  high   school.     Then  —  it's  all   in  the  catalog  —  but   I  remember  having 
been  interned  and  having  that   opportunity  really  to  work  side-by-side 
with  professional  artists  who  were  also   interned  at  the  time.     They 
turned   to   teaching   because    there  was  a  shortage  of   teachers.     Not 
all   children  responded   to  it    (but   I'm  talking  about   those  who  may  not 
have  had   the   opportunity,   or  who  were  too  afraid).      It  has  to  do  with 
a  combination  of  being  too  afraid  of  being  out    there  and  not  being 
secure  enough   financially.     Many  reasons,  many  things  enter   into  it. 

But   I   think  that   since  we  are  going   to   the  welfare  state  anyway, 
whether  you  work  as  a  civil   servant,   you  have  all    these  benefits, 
or  you  work  in  the  school  district  and  you  get  all   these  benefits, 
or  wherever  you  are,  we're  moving  in   the  direction  of  security,    such 
security  that   I  don't   think  that  young  people  should  be  concerned  with 
their  future.     There's  always  going   to  be  a  job   somewhere  out  there. 
That's  why  I  think  the  schools   should  be  a  time  when  we  can  explore 
and   experiment  and  make  mistakes.     Then,    there  will  be   less  likelihood 
of  a  person  feeling  compelled   to  go  into  a  secure   job   later  on. 


College  Exhibit 


Asawa:       Then,  when  I  was   in  college,   I  had  a  painting   selected   for  a  college 
exhibit  at  Addison  Gallery,  Massachusetts.     A  man  from  Holland   bought 
the  painting  and   then  later  on  gave  it  to  the  Addison  Gallery.      It's 
a  small,   little  painting  that   I  did—oil  on  blotter  paper. 

Nathan:     Oil  on  blotter  paper? 

Asawa:       That's  how  Albers  worked.      It  was  a  very  quick  way   for  the   paper  to 
absorb  the  oil  and  make   it  mat.     A  lot  of  his   early  things  are  done 
on  blotting  paper.     Then   that   show  was  reviewed   in  Time  magazine, 
and   I  think  they  mentioned  my  painting   in  that.     That  was   in    '48. 


The  First  Wire   Sculptures 


Nathan:     And    there  were   the  wire  sculptures? 

Asawa:        Yes. 

Nathan:  Those  were  the  first-- 

Asawa:   The  first  exhibit  I  had  in  1954  in  New  York.  Also,  Philip  Johnson 

bought  a  piece.  And  then  in  the  second  show,  others  bought--  Howard 
and  Jean  Lipman.  And  then  the  Lipmans  gave  theirs  to  the  Whitney. 


128 


Asawa:       Then  out  of   that,  works  were  sent  to  the  Art  Institute   in  Chicago, 
and   they  used   it  on  the  cover  of  that   catalog. 

Nathan:     Yes,   I've   seen  that. 

Asawa:        So  really  nice   things  happened  having  had   the  show,   but   I  didn't 

make  any  money  on  those;    it  all  went   into  shipping  and  announcements, 
the  cost  of  printing. 

Nathan:     Does  the  artist  have  to  bear  the   cost  of  the   catalog? 

Asawa:        No,   not  the   catalog,    but   the   announcements;    they  had    to  put   something 
into  it.     And  the   shipping,   of  course,    from  here   it's   tremendous. 


Fine  Arts  Award.   AIA 


Nathan:     You  said   earlier   that  you  are  going   to  Washington  because  you  got   an 
AIA  award? 

Asawa:       Yes.     That's   for   the  Fine  Arts  award. 
Nathan:     Oh.     Was   it  for  a  specific  work? 

Asawa:       Well,   I  think  primarily  for  art  in  public  places,  art  and 

architecture,    so   that   I  think  maybe   the  Ghirardelli  Fountain  and 
the  Hyatt  Fountain  are  probably  the  reasons   for  this   award. 

Nathan:     That's  very  lovely,    isn't   it? 
Asawa:       Yes. 

Nathan:      So,   it's  really,    in  a  sense,    for  a  group  of  contributions  rather 
than  one   specific   item? 

Asawa:       Well,  yes.      I  think  there  are  awards   for  architects   for   specific 

buildings   or   specific   planning,    you  know,   cities.      This  was,    I   think, 
a  general  Fine  Arts  award.     Last  year,  Harry  Bertoia  got   it.     He's 
a  sculptor.     And  then  the  year  before,   George  Rickey,  who's  a 
sculptor.     And   then  the  year  before   that,    I  think,   Richard  Lippold, 
who's  also  a  sculptor. 

Nathan:     Well,   it   looks   like   you're   the   first  woman   to  come   along   too. 

Asawa:        Oh,    I  think  it's   time.      I  guess   it's   because   I'm  a  minority  and   I'm 
a  woman. 

Nathan:      [Laughter]      I  think  the  quality  of  your  work  has   something    to  do  with 
it.1      I  don't   think  it's  all   calculated   quite    like   that. 


129 


Museum  Show  and   Peridot  Gallery 


Asawa:       Then,    I  guess  my   first   show  was  a  four -man  show,   or   four -woman  show 
I  should   say  now. 

Nathan:     Four -per son? 

Asawa:        Four-person  show.      [Laughter]      Goodness  me!      It's  confusing.     At   the 
San  Francisco  Museum  in  1954.     My  husband  designed   it,    and   then  he 
and  Dan  Grae ,  who's    the  husband  of  Ida  Grae,    installed   it.      It  was  a 
show  with  Merry     Renk,  Marguerite  Wildenhein,    Ida  Grae  and  myself. 
That's  when  Grace  Morley  was  still   there.      It  was  published    in  the 
Arts   and  Architecture,   that   show. 

Then  a  gallery  from  New  York  saw   it  and  contacted  me   to  represent 
me   in  New  York.      It  was  the  Peridot  Gallery.     They  had  a  very  small 
gallery,   and  so  everything  was  quite    limited;    I  had  about  three  shows 
there  in  1954,    '56,    '58.      I  decided   that  I  wasn't  interested   in 
sending  things   to  New  York,   although   they  sold  my  work,   and  many  nice 
things  happened   out  of   that   first   show:     Mrs.   Nelson  Rockefeller 
(the  first  one)    came  and   bought  a  piece  and  Mrs.   John  D.    Ill  brought 
a  piece  out  of  that   show.     These  were  sculptures;    it  was  only  a 
sculpture   show.     And  subsequently  I  wanted   to  do  a  show  of  drawings 
with  my  sculpture  and   the  gallery  felt   that  they  had  built  up  an 
image  of  me  as  a  sculptor;    they  didn't  want   to  cloud   the  issue.      So 
they  refused   to   show  my  drawings,  which  I  thought  was  too  bad. 


Reflections   on  Design  Offers 


Asawa:       Way  before  then-- "52--La  Verne  Originals,  which  was  a  fabric  and 

wallpaper  designer,  wanted   to  subsidize  me—retain  me   to  do  work-- 
and  I  was   supposed    to  sort  of  mass-produce  and   they  would  do  it  the 
way  Knoll  Associates  did   it  with  Bertoia.     As  I  said,   before,   I 
decided  I  didn't  want  to  go   that   fast  at   that   time.      It  meant  that 
it  would  have  disrupted  my  whole   family.      I  don't  know  what  would 
have  happened,    but  I  just  didn't  want  that.      Just  as  a  company  here 
wanted   to  pay  for  a  housekeeper  who  would  keep  my  house  and  everything 
and  take  care  of  the  children  so  I  could  work,  which  was  very  tempting, 
but  I  didn't  take   that  either. 

I  don't  know  if  I  would  do  it  now,   but  I  don't  think  I  would 
do  it--I  mean,   if  I  were  young  and   starting,   because  I've  seen  a 
lot  of  people  who  did   that.     They're  burned  out  and  they're  used  and 
used   until,   by  the   time   they're  about  35  or  40,    they're  used   up. 


130 


Asawa:       I  didn't  really  want  to  go  into  advertising,  mass  producing. 
I  tried  a  few  of  those  things;  they  were  disastrous.  We  did 
wallpaper  designs,  and  in  an  effort  to  see  how  we  could  make  a 
living  by  ourselves.   In  all  of  those  things,  it  was  better  to 
do  baby-sitting  at  night,  or  do  menial  work  or  clean  somebody's 
house;  it  was  much  better  for  me  to  do  that  than  to  pursue 
that. 

I  think  that's  the  danger;  that's  why  I'm  thinking  about  it, 
In  a  way,  you  have  to  be  sort  of  stubborn,  or  pretty  much  know 
what  you  really  want. 

Nathan:  And  what  looks  like  success  really  might  not  be? 


Albers,  Color  and  Relationships 


Asawa:   I  think  it's  just  a  very  temporary  thing.   I  think  one  of  the 
reasons  that  I  felt  this  way  was  that  I  had  direct  contact  and 
experience  with  people  like  Albers.   At  that  time,  he  was  55  or  60, 
when  I  knew  him  at  school.  He  was  still  working;  he  was  still  not 
recognized  on  57th  Street.  He  wasn't  like  Hans  Hofmann  or  all  the 
other  contemporaries. 

To  have  seen  how  a  single  person  produced  and  worked  on  an  idea 
was  to  me  very  impressive. 

Nathan:  That  was  what  you  saw  him  do? 

Asawa:   Yes.  He  worked  in  an  area  that  no  one  had  ever  worked  on.  He  was 
primarily  interested  in  color  and  the  relativity  of  color, 
relationship  of  color,  and  to  show  that  color  is  not  fixed;  it's 
relative  to  what's  next  to  it.  A  color  will  change  with  its 
neighbor. 

And  he  always  talked  about  the  same  thing  —  that  people  change, 
depending  on  who  their  neighbors  are;  people  are  very  relative  also. 
The  ability  to  relate  this  way  and  to  change  is  really  a  life 
problem.   So  it  was  very  interesting  how  all  these  things  always 
connected.  He  talked  about  color,  which  has  no  life,  and  becomes 
life  with  whatever  is  its  neighbor. 

The  other  thing  was  that  he  related  Taoism  and  the  oriental 
philosophy  very  much  with  black  and  white,  white  and  black,  and 
showing  that  even  black  will  change,  or  greys  will  change  or  whites 
will  change,  and  that  it's  much  better  to  be  flexible  than  to  be 
rigid.   It's  very  exciting.   I  don't  know  if  everybody  looked  at  it 
that  way,  but  this  is  how  I  interpreted  it. 


131 


Nathan:      It's  as   though   things  and  people  exist  only  in  context? 
Asawa:        Yes.      So   it's   a  very   important   life  problem. 

Nathan:     Wasn't  there  a  water   color  of  yours   in   that  show  at   the  San  Francisco 
Museum?     You  had  your  wire   sculpture  and   the  clay  figures  and   some 
water  colors.     And   there  was  one—was   it  a  chair?--that  was  defined 
by  what  wasn't  there? 

Asawa:       Yes.     That  was  one  of  the  problems   that  he  gave   in  school,  was 

never   to  see  anything  in  isolation;    that  you  can  define  space  and 
you  can  define  an  object  by  defining  the   space  around   it.     When  he 
talked  about  painting,   he  always   talked  about  a  bowl  of  fruit,   and 
he  was  always   talking  about   the   shadow  between   this   fruit  and   that 
fruit  and   this    fruit.     By  defining  this   little  space  in  here,  you 
would  define  three  objects.     He  was  always   saying,    "Use  as   little 
paint  as  you  can."     Even  the  way  he   used  his  own  paints,  he   squeezed 
his   paints  out,   only  what  he  was  going   to  use. 

I  didn't   inherit   that  kind  of  discipline,   but  anyway,   all   these 
things   impressed  me  very  much.     He  applied   it   to  the   lines  that  he 
used,   or   the  color   that  he  used;  he   used    it   in  every  way--in   the  way 
he   lived    (he   lived  very  simply).      I   think  all  of   those   things  are 
important,    and    they're  doubly  important  because  they  not  only  taught 
something  in  art  but   they  also   taught   something  in  attitudes  about 
living   too. 


Evolution  of  Tied-Wire   Sculpture 


Asawa:       Going  back  to   the   exhibits,    I  had  my  first  one-man  show  at   the 

de  Young  Museum  in   1960,   and   that  was  a  combination  of  drawings  and 
sculpture.      I   showed   about   the   same  drawings   two  or   three  years 
later  at   the   San  Francisco  Museum,   and   then  I  introduced   the   tied- 
wire   sculptures  here;    that  was   in    '62. 

Nathan:     How  did   the  tied-wire   sculptures  evolve   from  this  sort  of  interest? 

Asawa:       Actually,    it  was   just   sort  of  an  accident,   because  our   late   friend 
who  was  a  photographer—Paul  Hassel— and  his  wife,  Ginny,  went  on 
a  trip  to  Death  Valley  —  the  Mojave  Desert  or  Death  Valley;    I  can't 
remember.      Is  Mojave  Desert  and  Death  Valley  the   same? 

Nathan:      I'm  embarrassed   to  say,   but   I  really  don't  know  where  they  are,   but 
I'll  look  them  up.      [The  Mojave  Desert   is  in  Southern  California; 
Death  Valley  is   in  Eastern  California.] 


132 


Asawa : 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan : 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


Anyway,  they  brought  me  a  plant  back  to  draw.   In  trying  to  draw 
it  and  following  the  tangle  of  the  branches,  I  just  decided  that 
maybe  I  should  sort  of  take  a  bunch  of  wire  and  try  to  make  it. 
As  I  divided  it,  I  could  draw  it;  then  I'd  draw  the  next  thing 
and  the  next  thing,  and  it  just  came  out  that  way.   Then  I  began 
to  see  all  of  the  possibilities:   opening  up  the  center  and  then 
making  it  flat  on  the  wall,  and  putting  it  on  a  stand.  You  can 
go  on  and  on  with  it.  Then,  I  haven't  done  it  yet,  but  I  would 
like  to  use  faceted  glass,  if  I  can  get  somebody  to  do  the  faceted 
glass  in  the--(gestures). 

I  see --oh,  yes. 

That  may  be  sort   of  busy  work,   but  I  think  that  it   could   develop 
into  a  new  way  of  putting  glass  together. 

When   this   is  done—when   it's  hanging  there—will    it  have  much  more 
glass  in  it? 

Oh,   yes.      The  attempt  would   be   to  have  glass  going   in  all   directions, 
coming   from  this  way  and   this  way. 

i 

Have  you  ever  worked  with  glass,  other  than  — 

Not  really.   I  did  those  up  there  (points  to  windows  in  her  house) , 
but  it's  partially  painted  and  partially,  I  was  trying  to  do 
something  with  bottle  glass  — finding  a  way  to  use  it  so  that  we 
could  make  a  use  of  all  the  garbage  that  we  throw  away  and  that  you 
find  on  the  street. 

Do  you  have  other  thoughts  about  things  you  want  to  try  in  addition 
to  this  faceted  glass  in  wire  sculpture?  Are  there  other  things 
coming  in  your  mind? 

What  I've  done  is  I've  used  resin  at  the  tips.   I've  also  melted 
the  tips— heated  and  melted  little  metal  balls  on  the  tips.   You 
know  how,  in  the  winter,  how  the  water  hangs  loose  on  pine  needles 
and  branches?  I've  done  that  so  that  it  looks  like  water,  or  it's 
just  to  simulate  that.  And  then  all  these  circles  in  the  light 
reflects  all  the  colors. 


Curioaity  About  Material s 


Nathan:   I  see.  And  would  you  like  to  do  more  watercolor  or  more  oils? 

Asawa:   Oh,  yes.  My  favorite  time  is  when  I'm  doing  watercolors.   I  studied 
to  be  a  painter;  I  never  studied  sculpture.   I'm  actually  very 
ignorant  about  real  sculpture— about  the  use  of  clay  and  modeling 


133 


Asawa:        and   all    that.      But   I   think  my  main  curiosity   is  with   the  materials; 
how  to  use  materials   in  their  own  natural  way,    like  paper,    like  all 
the  paper-folding.     This  comes  directly  out  of  Albers'   design 
classes;    it's  just  an  extension.     Taking  that  paper,   and  casting 
in  concrete,    in  vacuum  forming  it  in  plastic,   and   then  casting  it 
in  bronze  —  like   this   [shows  piece  of  sculpture]. 

Nathan:      Isn't   that  handsome.' 

Asawa:       Now,    I'm  working  on  a  proposal   for  a   fountain  for   the   [San  Francisco] 
Japanese  Center,   and   it's  going  to  be  done   in  paper fold  and  cast 
either   in  concrete  or   steel,    if  we  can  get   the   steel. 

Nathan:     You  start  with  the  paper fold,    for  shaping  on,   and   then  you  cast   it? 
Asawa:       Yes. 

Nathan:     Are  you  doing   that  because    the  paper   folding   is  very  close   to  the 
Japanese   culture? 

Asawa:       Yes.      I   think  it  would  be  very  nice  because   it  would   be  related   to 
their   tradition. 

Nathan:     This   is   so  nice   to  handle. 

Asawa:       The  original   thought  was  that  if  I  could  get  a  wall --a  vertical  wall- 
that  would   be  done  with   paperfold. 

Nathan:     What   an  elegant   idea.1      So   this    is   something  that  you're  working  on 
right   now? 

Asawa:        I've  been  working  on  it   since   I  was   in  school,    in    '49  and    '47.      I've 
been   thinking  about   all   these   ideas  —  taking  one   simple   element  and 
carrying   that   idea   through  many,   many  materials   and    finally  coming 
out  with  a  new   form,    rather   than  going  and   getting  a  pattern  made 
in  wood--just  to  simply  efficiently  make   them  out  of  paper. 

Nathan:      Somehow  it  would  be  nice  to  have—maybe  next   to  it  or  near   it,  maybe 
in  a  case—an  exhibit  of  the  steps. 

Asawa:       That's  what  I  wanted    the  show  to  be.      I  wanted   the  show  at   the 
museum   to  be   like    that. 


134 


S.F.  Museum  Retrospective 


Nathan:  Which  show  is  this? 

Asawa:   This  was  the  San  Francisco  Museum  retrospective  show  last  year.   I 
wanted  to  kind  of  show  the  process,  not  so  much  to  show  the  best 
example  of  this  period.  I  really  wanted  to  take  the  original  —  the 
clay  raw,  and  then  shape  a  mould  in  wax,  and  then  shape  the  bronze. 

That  would  have  been  a  very,  very  interesting  show.   It  would 
not  have  been  a  museum  show,  but  a  very  interesting  show  for  people 
to  have. 

Nathan:  Yes.  I  thought  that  the  one  you  did  have  was  a  lovely  show.   I 

walked  around  for  a  while,  looked  and  listened  to  what  people  said. 
There  was  a  man  who  thought  he  had  to  explain  each  piece  to  people; 
[laughing]  he  was  a  volunteer. 

Asawa:   How  nice. 

Nathan:  It  was  charming  because  he  was  devoted  to  the  objects  and  he  wanted 
you  to  see  what  was  so  fine  about  each  one.   There  was  a  little 
girl  about  three  or  four  who  was  calling  her  mother,  "Come  and  look 
at  the  Christmas  tree."  It  was  one  that  hung  from  the  ceiling  and 
it  had  this  feeling  about  it,  in  the  larger  and  larger  circumferences 
of  the  branches.  Very  personal.  People  got  attached  to  things  and 
they  would  just  stand  there  and  they  wouldn't  leave. 

Asawa:   Actually,  what  we're  talking  about  is  just  an  entirely  different 
show.   But  I  actually  had  enough  work  to  carry  through  from  this 
form  to  the  next  form  to  the  next  form,  so  that  on  a  much  more 
developed  level,  it  did  happen.   It  did  happen  with  the  show 
chronologically  and  that  was  the  intent  of  the  curator,  Gerald 
Nordland,  who  curated  and  organized  it. 

Nathan:  Yes. 

Asawa:   Because  he  went  from  the  simple  one,  then  the  next  and  the  next, 
and  you  could  see  the  development  of  the  idea,  and  this  other  one 
would  have  been  just  a  technical  development.   I  don't  know  of 
anything  else  that  I've  done.   I  had  the  same  show  in  Pasadena.   It 
was  only  part  of  this  show  here. 


135 


Filming  a  Program 


Nathan:     Right.      I  was  just  glancing  at  another  note  about  Buckminster 
Fuller's   son-in-law  who  wanted    to  do  a   film.      Is   this  going  to 
come   about,   or  has   it  happened? 

Asawa:        He  had   applied    to  the  Endowment   for  it,   and  we  were  using  my  grant 
from  the  San  Francisco  Foundation  as  a  match   to  do   it.      It  all 
came  about  because  Mr.   Fuller  wanted  his  son-in-law   to  do  a  film 
on  me.      I  felt  that   it's  sort  of  hard   to  separate   it,   and  I  felt 
that   I  wasn't  so  sure   that  that  was  as   important  as   filming  the 
program.      So,    the   idea  came  about   that  maybe   something  could   be 
done  more  efficiently  by  doing  both  of  them  at  the  same   time. 

Nathan:     This  would   be  the  program  in   the   schools? 

Asawa:       Yes --the  Alvarado  Program.      I  don't  want  that  program  to  be  about 

me    in  the   schools;   I  want   it   to  be   the  program,   and  then  I  could   be 
part  of  it.     But   the  whole   essential   thing  of  how   it's   spread  has 
to  do  with  a  number  of  people  working  with  me  on  it.     We  have  a 
parent  who  is   coordinating  the   film—talking  and   planning  and 
selecting  the  places  where   things  would   be  happening. 

Nathan:      I   see.     And  is    this  going   to  happen  fairly  soon? 

Asawa:       Actually,    they're  coming  up  here  on  the    second,    third  and   fourth 
of  November.      It's   the  end  of  a  show   that  Fuller  is  having  at   the 
L.A.   County  Museum.      I  don't  know  whether  it's  the  science  museum 
or  whether   it's   the  county  museum;  he's  having  a  exhibit  of  his 
work.      So  he  will   be  up  here  and  they  will  do  some   filming.     And 
they  will  also  do  some   filming  in  the  school. 

Nathan:     And  how  will   this   film  be   used? 

• 

Asawa:       That  part  I  really  don't  know  anything  about.     Hopefully,    it  will 
be   used   in  schools. 


Additional  Awards    (1976) 


Nathan:      Since  we   talked   last,    I  know  you've  had  additional  awards  and 

recognition.     We  did  attend   that  Council   for  Civic  Unity  dinner  in 
your  honor.      I  know  you  don't   like   to   talk  about  this,    but  it's  part 
of  the  record.     Have  you  had   some  more? 

Asawa:        I  had   this   thing  with  women,   in  celebration  of   the   International 
Women's  Year,    the   San  Francisco  Women's  Round  Table. 


136 


Nathan:     And   it  has  that  symbol    in   the  middle. 
Asawa:        I  guess   that's  a  woman's   symbol,    isn't   it? 

Nathan:     Yes.     And   then  this   is   simply  a—it's  hard   to  find  a  sculptor   to 
do   something   for  you,    I  would   imagine. 

Asawa:        This  was  done  by  C.B.   Johnson,    and   it  was   sponsored   by—you  know 
the  group,  with  Pat  Montandon— a  group   of   civic  minded  women, 
and   the   U.N.    (United  Nations)   Association  also  co-sponsored   it. 

• 

Nathan:      It's   lovely.     You're  getting  quite  a  collection  there  on   top  of 
the  piano.     Your  American  Institute   of  Architects   award   and  — 

Asawa:        I   think  it's   a   lot  of  effort   for  nothing,    really. 
Nathan:      It  probably  makes  them  feel  good   too. 
Asawa:       Well,  maybe. 

F o untain  at   the   Japanese  Center    (1976) 


Nathan:     You  had  mentioned  very  briefly  that  you're  doing  new  fountains   for 
the  Japanese  Center,    is   that  right? 

Asawa:       Yes.     The  fountains  are  completed.     We're  just  waiting   for   it   to 
weather,   and  then  to  put  it  in. 

Nathan:     What  will   they  be   like?     Like  any  others   that  you've  done  before? 

Asawa:        No,    it's   an  experiment,    like   every   fountain's  been.      I   don't  know 

how   successful   it'll  be,    but   as  we   said   before,    it's   based   on  paper 
fold— origami— and   it  was   fabricated   in  Corten  steel,    Shrader  Iron 
Works.     Corten  steel— it's  the  kind   that  rusts,   the   steel   that 
rusts.     It's  used  on  highway  guard   rails. 

Nathan:     You  want  that   texture,    is   that  it? 

Asawa:       Well,   we  considered   copper  but   copper  was  out   of   the   question;    it 
was   too  expensive.      I'd  never  worked   in  Corten,    so   I   thought   I'd 
try  it.     That's  not   the  steel  that  we  used,   but   that's   sort  of  a 
trade  name   that's  well  known;    everybody  knows  what   that  means  when 
you  say  that . 

Nathan:     This  paperfold   interest  goes  back  to  your  Black  Mountain  experience, 
doesn't  it? 


1976 

Addie  Laurie  Lanier  holding  model  for  Buchanan  Mall  Fountain,  Nihon 
Machi,  San  Francisco. 


Photograph  by  Ed  Tin 
Ueed  by  permission 


Fountains  to  be  sand-blasted. 
Nihon  Machi,  San  Francisco. 


1976 


Sheet   metal    fountains    for   Buchanan  Mall, 


Photograph  by  Ed  Tin 
Used  by  permiaeion 


137 


Asava:       Yes,   and    it  goes  back  to  my  childhood    coo  when,   as  a  child,  we 
learned    to  make   little  things  in  paper. 

Then  when  I  went   to  Black  Mountain  and  Albers  brought   it 
from  the  Bauhaus,   which   is   from  the  whole  western  approach- 
European  approach --then  I  was  really  interested    in  it  because   it 
brought  my  past   into  the  present.      I've  been  interested   in  it,   and 
I've  cast  paper  in  concrete,    in  bronze  and   steel  and  plaster  and 
plastic.      So   I've  sort  of  always  been  interested   in  the  concept  of 
the   economy  of  a  piece  of  paper  —  going   from  a   flat  piece  of  paper 
into  a  structure.      So  I   think  that   there  are  many  possibilities 
with   it  now;    I'd   like   to  explore   that   further. 

Nathan:     Do  you  get  a  three-dimensional  effect? 

Asawa:       Oh,   yes.      It's  just   like  a  big   fan.      It  has   sort  of  the  quality  of 
a  chrysanthemum  or  a   flower,  has  that  kind   of  look  about   it;   not 
quite,    but  sort  of  the   idea  of  a  symmetrical   thing.      I  thought   it 
should  be   something   that  would  be  related. 

We  also  are  making   the  ends  of  the  benches  out  of  dough  and 
casting  them  into  concrete.     We  now  have   the   rubber  molds  made.      I 
had  about   eight  people  that  were  sort  of  connected   to  that   street- 
children  come --and   they've  made  a  few  things  on  it.     My  daughter  Aiko 
and   I  have  done  the  bulk  of   it,   but   there  are  pieces   that  they've 
made   for   it.     There  are  about  nine  benches,   and   they  will   be  Epoxied 
into  the   ends  of  those  benches. 


Nathan:     Where  will   this   be   located? 

Asawa:       At  Buchanan  and  Post,    between  Post  and  Sutter.      Buchanan  Street  has 
become  a  mall;    it's  closed  off  to  traffic  and  all   those   stores   front 
on  this  plaza.     This   is  the  group  of  Japanese  owners  that   fought 
redevelopment  and  did  manage   to  work  with   redevelopment  on  getting 
this;   otherwise,    they  would  have  gone   the  way  the  Japan  Trade  Center 
went.     This  group   resisted.      It's   been  a  long  struggle. 

Nathan:     What  a  very  interesting  way  for  this  to  come  up.' 

Asawa:       This   is  a  redevelopment  project,  with  a  very  low  budget   for  the 

sculpture.     There  was  money  for  sculpture.     They  needed  a  Japanese 
for  it. 

Nathan:      Is   this  part  of   that  one  percent  or   tvo  percent  for  art? 

Asawa:       No,  no.     This  has   to  do  with  a  federal  project.      It's   federal  monies 
that  are   in  this. 

Nathan:      I  see.      Is   this   something  unusual,    that   federal  money  is   used   in 
this  way—any  federal  money  is  used? 


138 


Asawa:       No,   I  think  that   there   is  money— I  don't  know  what  percentage   it 
is— that's  used   for  art. 

Nathan:     When  do  you  think  this  will  be  ready? 

Asawa:       Probably  February.     Next  month.      It  was   supposed    to  be  done   in 

December.     Now  they  want  to  have   it   ready  for   the   Spring   festival. 

Nathan:     When  is   that? 

Asawa:        Sometime   in  April.      Cherry  blossom. 

Nathan:     That's   lovely.     Will   there  be  jets   in   the   fountain? 

Asawa:  No,  no.  It's  going  to  be  very  little  water.  The  owners  are  very 
concerned  that  there  are  going  to  be  extra  expenses;  they're  very 
concerned  with  that  because  they  have  to  foot  the  bill  for  water. 
So  it's  just  a  little  trickle—hardly  any  water. 

Nathan:     And  then  do  they  pump  the  water  back? 

Asawa:        Yes.     We  have   two  pumps.     We  have   two  sculptures   for   the   price   of 
one.      [Laughter]      Instead   of  one,    they  wanted   two.     We  had    to 
stretch   it,   so  we  had  to  economize.      It's  a  little   lean. 

Nathan:  So   there  are  two  fountains? 

Asawa:  Yes. 

Nathan:  It's  always   the  artist  who  gets  the   squeeze,    somehow. 

Asawa:  Yes.     The  artist  always  pays   for  the  privilege  of  doing  it. 


The  Hyatt  Fountain 


Nathan:     You  were  just   talking  about  being  spread  out  and    feeling  the  need 
to  produce. 

Asawa:       There  are  two   things  I  think—you  either   isolate  yourself  when  you 
produce,   or  you  try   to   find   some   vehicle   to  be   productive   and  make 
use  of   the   resources   around   you.      I   think   that  was   one   of   the   reasons 
I  did   the   fountain;    I  thought  maybe   I'd  have  a  chance  to  do  that. 
It  nearly  killed  me,   but   it  actually  worked  out  fine. 

Nathan:     This   is  the  Hyatt  Fountain? 
Asawa:       Yea. 


1972 

Assembling   the  Hyatt   Fountain   in   the   Lanier 
back  yard.      Paul   Lanier  on   the   frame. 


Photograph  by  Laurence  J.   Cuneo,  Jr. 
Used  by  permission 


139 


Nathan:  And  you  were  doing  what?  You  were  bringing  people  together? 

Asawa:   Yes.   I  was  still  working  in  the  schools.   I  was  trying  to  stay 
involved  in  the  schools.   I  didn't  want  to  say,  'Veil,  I'm  going 
to  take  two  years  away  and  I'm  going  to  work  on  my  work."  So  by 
doing  this  and  by  really  involving  the  people  around  me,  so  that 
I  let  them  work  with  me,  that  way  I  just  stayed  in  and  really  did 
both.  Hopefully,  there  are  other  ways  in  which  that  can  happen; 
that  can  happen  with  everything,  really. 


140 


X     PERSONAL  PHILOSOPHY 


The  Need   to  be  Productive 


Asawa:  There  is  an  imbalance  now  in  our  society  or  our  community --the 
hunger  that  people  have,  and  there's  a  gap  between  what  people 
want  and  their  ability  to  produce  it.  You  know  what  I'm  saying. 

Nathan:      I  think  so.     What   is   it  that   they  want   that   they  can't  produce? 
You're  not   speaking  about  possessions,   are   you? 

Asawa:       No--just  the  ability  to  be  productive.      I'm  not  saying  an  object 
at   the  end,   but   to   be  productive.      People  hate   their  work,   eight 
hours  a  day.     They're   so  exhausted,    they  come  home,    sit  down  and 
relax,  have  a  beer,   and   there's  not  the  ability  to  make   those  eight 
hours  productive.     That's  what  I'm  talking  about. 

But   then  there   is   such  a  need.      Everybody   is  just   really 
searching   for  something,    right?     The  young  people  are   trying   to 
search   for  something  on  the   streets—ability  or   a  commune   or  whatever 
it   is--we  have  all   these    search   parties  going  on  all   over   the  place. 
[Laughter]      And   nothing   is   really  solid.      Of  course,   we    feel   secure 
in  those   things  that  are  established,    that  are  good  and  are   sound. 

But   I  don't   like  the   idea  of  being  root-bound;    I  like   the  idea 
of  being   really   flexible  and   able   to   fly  here  and    there  and   be   free 
to  do   things   because   I  think  that   really   is   the   spirit   of  modern 
life  and  modern  technology--just  everything.     We   shouldn't  be  root- 
bound.      This   is   something   that   [Buckminster]    Fuller   is  always   talking 
about.      Everybody   is  moving;   everybody's  moving  across   the   continent 
and  around   the  earth. 

I  always   say   to  him--if   everybody  is   traveling   and   somebody  has 
to   stay  home,    I'd   like   to  be   the  one   that   stays  home.     Then,   people 
would   come   through   and  drop   by  and   see  me   instead   of  my  having   to 
go   somewhere  else.      But   I  think   the   thing   is   that   although  we   know 
all   of   this--and   we  have   the  Xerox  machine   and  we  have    the   tape 
recorder  and  we  have  all   the  machinery   to  make   things  much  more 


141 


Asawa:        efficient,   and    Che   IBM,  and  we  punch  a  few  buttons  and   they  know 

whether  you  haven't  paid  your   last  month's  water  bill.     They  punch 
like   this   [clap]    and   they  see  your   records--you're   six  months 
behind.     And  then,   you're   in  a  store  and   they  know  whether  your 
bank  account   is  good.      I  mean,    they  have  fantastic  ways   to  record 
everything  and   to  know  exactly  where  we're  at.     And  yet,  we'rt 
bogged  down—we're   tied  down  so  badly  by  rules  and  regulations. 
The  kids  are  not  going   to  stay  in   this  anymore;    they're  going   to 
destroy  the  place.     And  people  have   to  move  quickly  to  know  how   to 
do  that,   and   they  refuse   to  change.      (I'm  getting  off  the   subject, 
aren't   I?) 

Nathan:      No,    I  don't   think  so. 


The  Dinosaur  Problem 


Asawa:        I  was  just   telling  this   friend,  when  I  begin  to  deal  with  organizations 
or   institutions  or  government  or  whatever,   you  just  have  a  feeling 
that   all   this   is  really  becoming  extinct  and  obsolete.      I  try  to 
parallel   it  with  what  happened   to   the  dinosaur.      [Laughter]      I  was 
saying   that  he  had  very   little  brain  and  a  great  big  body,   and    the 
tail  can't  come  back  and  hit   the  head   in  any  way  cause   it's   so  heavy, 
it's  holding   the  body  up. 

We're  victims  of   this  great  big  body.     That's  why,    in  a  way-- 
I  don't  want   to  get  caught    in  that  whole   thing.      I  told  him  I'd 
rather  be   the   insect   that's  buzzing  around  [laughter]    and   flying 
all  over.     There's  too   little   brain  and  too  much  body. 

Nathan:     How  can  we  change  that  balance,   do  you  think? 

Asawa:        I  think  that    is  an  individual  responsibility.     That's   something  that 
you  can't   say:      "Well,   there's  going   to  be  a   law  that   says   this  and 
this."     If   I  follow  that  pattern   that  everybody   fits  into,    then  I 
would  have   to   stop.     When  I  was  producing  a  work,   I  would  put   in 
about  an  18  or  20  hour  day.      Between  taking  care  of  the  family  and 
doing  whatever   I  had   to  do  around  and  doing  my  work,    it  was  about 
an  18   to  20  hour  day.      So   that's  really  using  up  your  24  hours  very 
well. 

Nathan:     Can  you  survive  with  only   four  hours  of  sleep  at  night? 

Asawa:        I  sleep   in  between.      I  used   to  nap  while  the  kids  were  playing.      I'd 
go  out  and   they'd  be  playing  in   the   sandbox  and   I  would   take  a  little 
nap.      I  could  do   that.      It's  not  that  you  have  to   sleep  eight  hours; 
that's  just  a  habit   that  we  have.      I'm  not   saying  that  I  do   that  now. 


142 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 

Asava: 

Nathan: 


Asava: 


Nathan: 


If  each  one  of  us  decided  that  we  were  going  to  put  in  eight 
hours  a  day-eight  hours  of  work  every  day-then  we  would  need 
fewer  workers  in  certain  areas,  and  then  we  could  have  this  body 
of  money  to  do  other  things  that  are  productive.  That's  what  I'm 
saying;  we  misuse  ourselves  and  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  misused, 
by  the  system.   The  system  says,  "Okay,  we  get  a  vacation  here;  we 
get  a  holiday  here."  We  just  love  it  because  it's  our  day  off  and 
we  get  paid  for  it  anyway.  And  if  I  were  in  the  swing  of  it,  then 
I  would  certainly  love  it  too  because  then  I'd  have  a  day  off  and 
I'd  get  paid  for  not  doing  anything.   I  think  about  those  things. 
I  don't  really  like  to  do  that,  because  in  a  way,  I  feel  as  though 
I'm  on  vacation  all  the  time  anyway,  while  I'm  doing  what  I'm  doing. 
It  doesn't  really  matter  whether  I  get  a  day  off  or  not.   I  think 
it's  the  separation  of  what  you're  doing  and  what  you  like  to  do. 
I  think  that  people  have  to  begin  to  bring  these  things  together. 

The  young  people  are  seeing  it.  They  want  t£  do  what  they 
want  t£  do.   Pretty  soon,  I  guess,  if  we  keep  it  up,  I  guess  we're 
all  going  to.   I  don't  know  where  we're  going  to  be  in  terms  of 
taking  care  of  ourselves.  The  thing  is,  I'm  not  advocating  an 
overthrow  of  government  or  anything  like  that;  I'm  just  saying  that 
if  you're  in  a  rigid  form  of  government,  that  government  should 
actually  be  responsible  for  what  it  should  do.  Talking  to  Elio 
[Benvenuti]  at  the  festival,  and  he  said,  "It  takes  twice  as  many 
men  to  do  the  same  amount  of  work  that  we  got  done  ten  years  ago 
because  people  are  weaker,  physically  weaker;  they  cannot  lift--" 
You  know,  that  really  hit  me  because  it  means  that  we  are  not 
producing  a  top  quality  person  out  of  the  system  that  we're  operating, 
although  we  keep  talking  about  benefits  and  we  talk  about  improving 
man's  situation  and  all  that.  We're  actually  destroying  the 
individual's  ability  to  make  decisions  and  ability  to  carry  on  and 
be  independent.  Don't  you  think? 

That  certainly  gives  me  pause.  Even  the  sort  of  "word  business." 
The  word  business  —  the  typist  or  the  clerical  or  the  secretary. 

About  half  the  students  who  came  to  Cal--this  is  a  lot--couldn' t 
write  well  enough  to  pass  the  Subject  A  Examination.   So  it  means, 
we're  not  doing  that  well,  teaching  people  to  write,  we're  not 
helping  people  to  be  physically  strong,  we're  not  helping  them  to 
be  creatively  strong  —  it  does  make  you  think. 


It  goes  right  down  the  line,  all  the  way  down  the  line, 
a  very  scary  prospect  for  the  future. 


That 's 


Do  you  feel   that  artists  are  more  aware  of  this  problem  than  other 
groups? 


Asawa:       No,   I  don't   think  the  artists  are  any  better  off, 


143 


Nachan:      I  would   like   to  generalize   from  you,   but   I  don't   think  it's 

possible.     Because  you  see   this,    I  wondered  whether  you  felt  other 
artists  also  did. 

Asawa:  Personally,  I  am  trying  to  think  of  the  people  that  I  would  most 
like  to  be  around --not  for  a  long  time,  but — I  like  to  be  around 
people  who  have  information,  like  the  welder,  like  a  cabinet-maker. 

Nathan:     You  mean  physical    information? 

Asawa:        Yes—physical   information.      In  terms  of  what  I  do,   I  don't   like  to 
be  around  people  who  are   talking  about   ideas;    that  doesn't   interest 
me.      I  mean,    I  shouldn't  say   it  doesn't   interest  me;   I   think  it's 
important.     But   it  has  to  be  a  combination  of  people  who  have   skills. 
Even  a  plumber  who  has   information,  who  has  a  skill,  who  can  produce. 
Do  you  know  what   I'm  saying? 

Teachers  are  collectively  a  very  uninteresting  group.      I 
would   say,   collectively,    that  a  group  of  artists  are  much  more 
interesting  people,   and   I've   found  that   they're  much  more  generous 
than  most  groups.     Maybe   it's  because   they  have  been  so  oppressed, 
or   they're  not  recognized,    that    they  have   to  work  much  harder   for 
any  kind  of  reaction. 

Nathan:     You  think  it  has  made   them  more   sensitive  to  other  people,   and   to 
what   they  need? 

Asawa:       Yes.     At   the   same   time,    they're  sometimes  more  opinionated  and  are 
much  more  petty.     Human  qualities  are  much  stronger,   but  at   least 
they  react. 

Nathan:     You  give  me   the   impression   that  you  think  they're  more  alive  in 
some  way  than  other  groups? 

Asawa:  They're  more  terrible  [laughter]  and  they're  more  wonderful  too. 
They're  more  whatever  quality  we  have. 

Nathan:     More  intensely  whatever.     That's    lovely.     At   least  they're  not  just 
kind  of  grey  and  blah. 

Asawa:        I   shouldn't  generalize.     There  are  a   lot  of  people  who  are--and 
I'm  dull,   except  when  I'm  talking  about  my  subject.     Socially,   I 
don't  have  very  much   to  talk  about.      I  talk  about  what  you  do, 
this  and   that,   you  talk  too.     But  when  the  subject   that  I'm 
interested    in  comes  up,    then  I  can  really  speak. 

Nathan:      It's   sort  of   like   the  human  use  of  himan  beings? 


144 


Asawa:        I'm  interested   in  each  person  using  himself  at  a  higher   level. 
Not  to  me,    but   to  himself.   That's  a  very   important   thing.      I 
think  that   only  by  doing  this   can  organizations   begin   to    function, 
because   to   restructure   the  Art  Commission  or  Department   of 
Recreation  or  restructure   the   city  government  or   restructure   the 
schools,    that's  just   spinning  wheels  all  over  again.      But,    if  you 
can  take   those   same   people   in  there  and  make   them  re  focus   on 
themselves-- 

Nathan:     Do  you  think  you  could  have  some   sort  of  in-service   training? 
Can  people  really  change? 

Asawa:       No.     People  can't  really  change  any  more   than  I  want  to  be  changed 
by  somebody.      I  don't  want   people   to  change  me;    I  would   like   the 
opportunity  to  do   things  more.      The  danger  of   in-service   like    that 
is   they  come    looking   for  an   idea;    they  can  use   it   themselves. 


Personal  Responsibility 

Nathan:     And   if  you  could   do  whatever  you  wanted? 

Asawa:        If  I  could   do  whatever  I  wanted,   gee,    I  would    try  to  make   people 

want  to  do   things   for   themselves.      That's   a  very  hard    thing   to  do. 
I  mean,    to  really  make   them  make  decisions  about   just   simply  what 
they  wear,  what   they  have   around   them,    that   they   even  are   responsible 
for  what   they  do.      We   always   live   in  a  mess,   but   I  never   throw   trash 
on   the    street.      That's   number  one.     When  I  can,    I  pick  it   up—other 
people's   trash.     And  we're  all  guilty  of  it:     we  all  put  our 
cigarette  butt  out   in  the   lobby  while  we're  waiting  and   crunch   it 
on  [the   floor].     All   those  things  no  one  thinks  about;    I'm  thinking 
about  very   simple    things   that   each  one  of   us  must  become  conscious 
of,    that  we   ourselves  can  do   something  about.      I'm  not  talking  about 
big  government;    I'm   talking  about   each   one  of  us.     Like  our  planters 
out    there   [along   the   street],    they  pull   everything   out.      So,  we 
haven't  planted  anything.     We're  going   to  get  kind  of  a  grill   so 
that  we   can  keep   the  dogs  out.      We  had    to  make    a   fence   because   the 
dogs  chopped   everything   up,    and  we   still  had   dogs   coming   from  the 
other  side. 

I'm  just   saying   that   if  we   took  care   of  our  own  pets   and  we 
took  care   of  a   tree   in  front  or  we   swept   occasionally   in   front 
of  our  house,  we  can   live  however  we  want  within  our  own  home.      I 
think  whatever   is  public  property,  we   begin  to   become   conscious   of. 
If  we  eat  in  the   cafeteria,   there's  no  reason  why  we  couldn't  pick 
up  our   empty  dishes  and  put  them  there   or   stack  them  for  whoever   is 
working.     All    these   things  are   just   simple  human  considerations   that 


145 


Asawa:        don't  take  time   out  of  our  day  to  do.      I'm  just   talking  about  very 
simple-minded    things.     That's  one  example;  you  could  go   into  deeper 
and  deeper   things. 

The  reason  we  put  those   trees  out  there  was  not  just   for 
ourselves,    but  we  hoped    the  whole  neighborhood  would   enjoy   them. 
And  we  put   those  planters  out   there  hoping  we'd  have   flowers.     We 
had   them,   and    they  rip   them  off;    they  take  plants.      It's   like, 
not  pulling   somebody   else's   plants  out  or-- 

Nathan:      Of   course. 

Asawa:       And   those   things  have   to  come  from  inside  you- -to  desire   to  do  that. 

Nathan:      I  wonder  how  you  get    inside  people  enough    to  get   them  started? 

Asawa:        I  would   say   that   if  people  had   the   experience  of  a  garden.     That's 
why  gardening  comes   back,   and  you  have  a  respect   for  having  done   it 
yourself,    and  you  have  a  respect   for  painting  a  mural  on  the  wall-- 
you  have  a  respect   for  having  done   it   and   you  want  other  people   to 
respect  it.     These  are   the  reasons   that  all  of   these   things  have 
a  value,   because  I  think  that  if  we  do   that,   experience   is   important, 

It's  not   to  make  artists  out  of  people,  but   since  you're 
doing   it,    if  you're  doing   it,    then  you  should   get   the  finest 
artists   to  work  so  that  you  have  not  only  potentially  teaching 
skills  at   the  highest    level,   but  you're  also   teaching  all   the  other 
things.      Somebody  has   to  organize  and   supervise   it,    and  you  should 
have   somebody  who's   skilled,    that's   interested   in  people,  who  has 
certain  qualities,    two  qualities:      that   is,   not  just  an  artist  who 
feels   that  he's   an  artist,   but   the  sort   of  person  who's   interested 
in  people   too.      I  think  that  that's  what  I  mean;  you  can  stack  it, 
you  can  stack  things.     The  more   things,    the  more  abilities  each 
one  of  us  has  or  develops   in  ourselves,   the  better  off  you  will  be. 

Nathan:     The  abilities  tend   to  give  you  respect   for  yourself  and   for  the 
community  and  the  work  of  others? 

Asawa:       That's   right.      I  think  putting  more  and  more   laws  to  try  to  make 
people  respect  you  is  really  trying  to  take  the  tail  to   the  head 
[laughter]    and   it'll  never  meet.      If  you  equalized   the  brain,    the 
body  and  the   tail   in  each  one  of  us,    then  I  think  that  you  can  have 
a  better  balance.      I'm  not   saying  you'll  be   successful,   that  you 
won't  know   troubles,   or   fight,   or  anything.     But   I  think  that  this 
has  to  happen.      I   think  the   responsibility  of  a  parent   is  to  know 
how  much  of  that    responsibility  he  has  to  his  child.     He  has  to 
take  his  part  of   that   responsibility  to  raise   that  child.      It's 
not  Just   the   federal  government;    it's  not  just   the  schools;    it's 
not   somebody  else;    it's   the  corporations  too.      It's  also  the   family 


146 


Aaawa:       and  it's  also  the  neighbors  and   it's  also   the    school.      I   think 
everyone   is   ignoring  his   share  of  it.      If  each  one  of   us  would 
just   take  a  slice   from  each  one   of   these  people  and  put   it   into  a 
sandwich,    it's  a  much  more   balanced   thing. 

Seeing  as  how   the  women's  movement   is  all   so  hot   on   fighting 
the  men,    that's   sort   of  an  unbalanced   sort  of   struggle,    so   that 
they  ignore   the    family.      And   then   the   school   inherits   these   children 
who  are  sort  of  completely  un-oriented.     You  try  to   stuff  them 
with  something;  you  try  to  give   them  a   little  pat  and  comfort. 
Finally  you  find  that   the  schools  are  exhausted   testing.     You  just 
don't  have   any   time   except   to   talk   to  them  because   nobody   is 
talking   to   them.      The   need   to   talk   is   so  great. 

I  think  all  of  this  has   to  do  with  not   knowing  how   to  put 
pieces  of   the  puzzle   together. 

Nathan:     When  you  work  with   these   children,   do  you   find   that   they  are   eager 
to   talk  and   that  they  come    to  you   for   this  warmth? 

Asawa:        Yes.      They  talk  about   the  whole    family  and   they   talk  about   everything. 
Nathan:     That's  a  load   for  you  to  hear  all   this. 

Asawa:       All  you  do  is   to  give   them  a  little   something  to  play  with,   and 
it's   the   first  sign  of  friendship   that  they've  had,    in  a  way. 
The  rest  of  the    time,    they're  breaking  their  pencil  or  their  ruler 
or  disrupting   the  class.      But   the   stories   are  pretty   incredible; 
those   should   be   recorded.      If  you  could   record   them,    then  you  would 
understand;   you  would   understand  where   a   lot  of  us  are   coming   from. 

Nathan:     Yes,  you're  right.     There   is   something  symbolic  about   this   little 
gift  of  the  clay   that  you  described.     A  receptive  ear   in  school 
has   always  had    this   importance,   but    from  what   you  say,    it  must 
be  much  more  needed  now. 

Asawa:        There  are   too  many  varied   needs.      No  one   is   saying,    "It's  my 

responsibility."     They  say,    "The  board   said   this,"   "The   superintendent 
said   that,"  "We  can't  do   that  because  the  principal    said    that."     If 
everyone  of  us  said,    "It   is  our  responsibility  to  do  this   and   this 
and   this,"  and   see  that   it  gets  done  —  if  it  means   that  we  have   to 
take  a  cut  in  salary,    if  it  means  that  we  have  to  take   something  out 
of   the  pension  plan,   or   if  we   take   that  money,   or   if  we   take   the  pay 
raise    (which   is  $5  or  $6  million)    and   put   it   into  program—any  one 
of   these   things  could    solve    the  problem,    if  you  really  want  to   solve 
the   problem. 

But  maybe   the   thing   is,   maybe   they  don't   understand   this.      I'm 
an  outsider,    so  I  shouldn't  say  because  I'm  not   inside.      I  would 
feel  differently  if  I  were  part  of   the  system. 


147 


"Stacking"  and  Multiple  Benefits 


Nathan:  Just  ene  more  question,  if  I  may.  You  have  used  the  term  "stack" 
and  I  think  I  understand  it,  but  maybe  you  could  say  a  little 
more  about  it.  You  do  one  thing  but  you  also  have  another  goal, 
or  something  else  is  happening  at  the  same  time? 

Asawa:   I'm  just  saying  that  in  the  way  we're  fractured  today,  no  one  has 
enough  to  do  a  good  job,  for  what  he  wants  to  do.  So,  one  example 
could  be  (we  could  talk  about  this  now),  the  hotel  field  is  very 
good  because  they  in  some  way  feel  that  they've  done  something  for 
the  schools. 

Nathan:  With  the  Hyatt  Fountain? 

Asawa:   They  haven't  done  anything,  really,  except  that  I  still  had  to  pay 
something  at  the  end  out  of  the  final  cost  of  it. 

Nathan:  No! 

Asawa:       Yes.      I  didn't   lose  money,    but   I  took  some  out  of  my  fee   to   finish 
the   fountain.     Anyway,    I'm  saying   that  by  my  taking  children   from 
the   school   to  participate   in  it,    I  did  my  job  and  did  something 
for   the   school,   did   something   for   the  hotel.     That's  one  way  of 
stacking. 

Nathan:     Yes,   I  see. 

Asawa:       Another  project  that  we've  done,  as  I  mentioned   earlier,   came  through 
the  Golden  Gate  National  Recreation  Agency.      They  had  a  building 
(that  building  down  on   the  waterfront)    and   they  needed   somebody  to 
paint   it.     Well,    they  could  have  commissioned  an  artist  to  do  it. 
They  asked  me   if   I  had   some   ideas,   and   they  wanted  children  from 
Hunters  Point  and   also—at   least  one   school   from  Hunters  Point  and 
another   from  another  neighborhood.      So,  we   took  a  school   from  the 
Marina  and  one   from  Hunters  Point. 

We  went   to  the  Maritime  Museum  with  one   class  on  a  field   trip 
and   involved    them.     We  got   the  school  art  program.     The  Park  Service 
paid    for  the  paints,  we  got   the  children;  we  did  a  project  that 
would  be  very  useful   to  those  children  forever.      It  was  a  great 
experience   for   them;    they  went   fishing,    they  bought  a  crabtrap  from 
a  fisherman,  we  went    fishing  afterwards,   and   took  the   fishing  pole 
the   second   day. 

When   things  are   done    this  way,   nobody  puts  very  much   into   it, 
but   they  all  get  credit   for   it.     The   same  way  with  mosaics  or  any 
project—murals,  where  a  child  puts  only  one  area  in,   and   if  he  were 


148 


Asawa:    to  do  that  by  himself,  it  wouldn't  have  much  meaning.  He  would 
take  it  home,  he'd  be  happy  with  it,  or  his  mother  would  give  it 
to  his  grandmother  or  something,  or  he  could  leave  it  at  the 
school.   But  when  he  does  a  collective  thing  like  that,  he  takes 
credit  for  the  entire  thing,  and  he  gets  the  same  experience  as  what 
a  mother  does  when  she  bakes  cookies  and  a  child  comes  in  and 
helps  beat  the  eggs  or  something  and  then  goes  out  to  play.   But 
then  when  the  child  comes  in  at  night  and  is  asked  by  his  father 
what  he  did,  he . says  he  baked  some  cookies.   And  he  takes  the 
credit  for  the  whole  thing,  but  he  only  does  one  part  of  it.  The 
thing  is,  if  when  we  do  things  like  that  in  a  very  simple  way-- 
with  a  garden  and  watering  —  if  a  child  remembers  that  he  had  to 
water,  then  he  remembers  he  had  a  beautiful  garden. 

We  don't  do  it  dishonestly.  We're  not  patronizing.  We're 
simply  finding  ways.   And  when  people  have  a  potluck  dinner,  you 
have  a  fantastic  dinner,  right?  When  you  do  it  alone,  you  just 
run  out  of  ideas.   I'm  not  for  potluck  dinners,  but  I  think  the 
thing  that  make  things  work  is  when  people  bring  a  little  bit  of 
something;  that  makes  it  work.   That's  why  petitions  and  all  that 
neighborhood  work  is  always  collective,  like  tree  planting.   Any 
thing  done  collectively,  everyone  shares  his  little  piece  of  it. 
Then  if  you  go  out  into  the  community  and  begin  to  say,  for  example, 
at  the  medical  center,  one  person  who  was  working  there  felt  he 
wanted  to  do  something.  We  met  and  felt  that  the  medical  center 
could  raise  a  little  money  and  commission  one  school  to  do  murals 
for  the  pediatric  ward.  In  return,  the  medical  center  should  buy 
paints  and  maybe  pay  for  an  artist  to  work  at  that  school.  The 
same  thing  is  happening  with  Crocker  Bank.   One  of  the  former 
employees  said  that  there  is  a  program  where  corporations  and 
businesses  give  an  employee  time  off  to  work  in  a  school  to  do 
something.  Well,  the  idea  came  up  that  maybe  they'd  sponsor  a  mural 
that  would  be  done  by  school  children,  that  was  related  to  the  bank. 
Then  the  bank  would  also  then  give  the  project  to  the  school.  They 
have  agreed  to  do  that.   So  they'll  have  hired  an  artist  who  used 
to  work  there.   Shoshanah  Dubiner  worked  in  our  program  as  a 
volunteer  for  a  while.   Then  she  worked  with  us  this  summer  and 
last  spring.   She  is  a  very  talented  artist.  But  for  her  to  be 
only  working  in  the  graphics  department  of  a  place  is  very  wasteful. 
But  this  way,  by  having  her  working  in  the  schools  with  children  and 
having  them  pay  for  it,  this  is  again  stacking — benefiting  the 
school,  benefiting  the  bank,  benefiting  the  artist,  so  that  no  one 
is  cheated  in  this  whole  population. 

Then,  in  a  way,  the  bank  has  a  good  image  of  themselves,  and 
they  are  doing  something  for  the  community,  and  they're  really 
spending  whatever  money  they  have  to  spend,  rather  than  having  a 
field  trip  to  the  bank  with  the  kids  looking  at  the  teller.   They're 
actually  doing  something  that  will  make  those  children  interested 
in  that  bank  when  they  grow  up. 


149 


Asawa:  Just   like   the   fountain,    those  children  will  always  be 

interested   in  the  Hyatt  Hotel.      If  they  were  ever  to  leave  and 
would  come   back   to   the  City,    they  would  probably  stay  at   the  Hyatt. 
All    these   things  are   beneficial  to  everyone.     Although   for   the 
time   that   I  put   in- -I  have  been  paid  and   repaid   back  just  by  the 
response   that  people  have  had   in  town.      Everyone  benefits   from  it, 
so   that  we're  not   talking  about  money;  we're  really  talking  about 
how    to  make  people   feel,    in  a  way,   good  about  themselves. 

You  could   still   be  in  your  old   silly  job,  but  there  are  ways 
in  which  you  could   really  be  made  to  feel  good.      If  artists  would 
really  and   truly  be   used    in  this  way,    they're  the  ones  with   the 
ideas.     Don't  you  think? 

Nathan:      I  do.     You've   expressed   it  beautifully. 

Asawa:       You  can't   "can"   this  and  you  can't    send  out  a  flier  on   this  because 
it  has  to  be  done—people  have   to  want  to  do   it.      I  think  one  of 
the  benefits  of  our  program  is  having   the   schools  begin  to  use  the 
resources  of  parents;    it's  such  a  rich  resource   that  they  have  not 
allowed   to  happen.      In  a  way,    it's   too  bad   that   they  have  kept 
getting  more   and  more  other  people   to  try  and   solve  their  problems 
when  really  the  solution  would  have  been   if   the  community  and 
parents  had  been  put   into  a  working  relationship  with  the   schools, 
rather   than  having  to  feel   that   they  are  confronted.     Hopefully, 
our  program  will  always  be  developed   that  way  rather  than  by  trying 
to  replace   somebody.      It  makes   everyone    feel  good,   and  parents 
feel  much  better  by  being  able   to  be  useful  and   to  know  what's 
happening  and   to  help  people  to  respond   to   that.     Everybody  really 
benefits   from  the  combination  of  parents  and  community  in  the 
schools. 

Nathan:     That's   really  no   small  achievement   if  you  can  really  make  people 
feel  good  about   themselves  and   come   together   in  this  way.     Very 
exciting. 

Asawa:        I  don't  know.     Maybe   it's  too   late. 

Nathan:      It's  never  too   late.      I  truly  don't  believe   it  is. 

Asawa:        I  don't   think  it   is  either. 


150 


The  Best  Place 


Nathan:     What  are  you  thinking  of? 

Asawa:        I'm  saying  that   if  you  know  what  you  want   to  do,    this  country 
is    the  best  place   to  do  it   in,    in  spite  of  all   this.      If  you 
know  exactly  what  you  want   to  do,   you  can  do  it  here.     You  can 
do  almost  anything   that  you  want  to  do  here,    if  you  have  an  idea. 
If  you  have  an  idea,   you  know  the  resources  are  here    (they're 
getting   tighter),   but  nevertheless      the    information   is  here,    the 
know-how,    the    freedom  to  move   and    to  go   and  call   and   pick  up   a 
phone   and   order   something.      It  might   take   two  or   three  weeks   or 
two  months,    but  you  can  do   it  here. 

Nathan:     Right.     [Laughter] 

Asawa:       That's  why  I  think  it's  wonderful,    really  wonderful   to   live  here, 
with  all   its  problems.     And  yet,    if  we  don't  take  care  of  these 
problems,    then  we'll   probably  go   under   too.      Out   of  what   I  said, 
about  the  weakness,  we'll  just  destroy  ourselves;  we  won't  be 
destroyed   by  other  people;   we'll   be   really  destroying   ourselves-- 
eating  our  own  resources   from  the    inside   and    letting   things  die 
in  ourselves. 

Nathan:      I  would   think  you're  one  of  the   best  demonstrations   that  it  isn't 
too   late. 


Skilled   People  Bringing  Change 


Nathan:     You  were  just  saying  that  you  were  sort  of  curious   to  see  how   far-- 

Asawa:        --how  far  a  group  of  people  can  go.     People   talk  about  politics 

and   people   talk  about   changing   things.     We  wanted    to   find   out  how 
far  a  group  of  people  who  had    in format ion --and   see  how  powerful 
information   is,    or  skills—can  go   toward   changing  a   system.      That's 
really  what  we're  interested   in. 

We're  interested   in  what   skilled  people  can  do   to  make  changes, 
especially  in  our   schools.     And  what  can  be  done   by   the   combination 
of  parents  and   skilled   people,    because  many  of   them  are   professional 
people.     That  has  never  been  explored.     We've  always  worked  with 
the  PTA   and  worked   at   the  bazaars  and  worked   at   the  community  relations 
meetings;   we've  worked   sort  of   in   the  way  people   expect   us   to  work. 
Then  we  decided   that  the   only  way  things  are  going  to  change  was   if 
we   offered   them  something   good,   and   deal  only  with   offering   something 


151 


Asawa:        that   is  good.      In  a  way,   you  can't  refuse   ic,  because   it  will  work. 
When  you're   really  honest  about   something,    it's  clear.     That's  why 
planting  is  a  very  honest  activity.     It's  right  there;   you  plant   it, 
you  water   it,   and  you  have  a  product.      If  you  plant   it  and  you  don't 
take  care  of  it,   it  dies. 

But   if  you  make   some   plans  and  you  meet  and  you  do  all   this, 
it  doesn't  matter  if  it  works  or  not,   really,   because  if  it  doesn't 
work,    then  we'll    find  another  plan  to  do. 

If  you  start  a  project,    then  in  order   to  make   it  complete, 
you  have   to  use   the  right  tools  and  right  methods   to  make  it  work. 
So   that   in  a  way,    everything   that  we've  done   is  very  straightforward. 
So  much  of  what  we  do   in  our  schools  is  not  straightforward,   and 
it's  not  really  honest;    I  mean,    it's  not  honestly  treating  teachers 
honestly,    it's  not   treating  principals  with   respect,    it's  not 
treating  anybody  with  respect.     The  system  doesn't  treat  people- 
grownups,   especially—with  any  kind  of  respect,    to  respect  their 
intelligence. 

There's  no  reason  why  somebody  can't  paint  a  wall.     What   is   so 
wrong  about  that?     Or  what   is   so  wrong  about  hanging   something  that 
is  nice?     Are  you  worried   about   the  holes   in   the  walls,   or  what  are 
you  worried  about?     Or  what   is  wrong   if  a  child  gets  up  on  a 
ladder;  what   is  wrong  about   that?     There's  nothing  really  wrong 
about   those   things.     And  what   is  wrong  about   using  a  tool?     Why  do 
you  keep   the  child—prevent  him—from  using  a  tool?     Do  you  worry 
about   liability?     Why  should  we  worry  about   lawsuits  all   the  time, 
to  keep   us  from  doing  anything?     Those  are  all  kinds  of  really 
destructive   tools   that  people   use   to  prevent  anything  from  happening. 
And    that's  really  in  a  way  what   I  want   to   talk  about. 

It   is   possible  to  garden  if  you  want   to,   right?     What  prevents 
people  from  doing  very,   very  honest  things?     The   system  is   filled 
with  dishonesty,   and  we  allow  ourselves   to  be  part  of   that.      I  think 
it's  very  wrong,   especially  in  education.      In  an  area  where  we're 
trying  to   teach  the  truth,  we're  keeping  everybody  from  really 
questioning  and   testing  the  truth.     Truth   should  be  constantly  tested. 
School  should  be  a  testing  ground  and  a   learning  ground. 

Universities  are  guilty  also,   because   they  produce  departments 
of  education,  which  are  absolutely  dishonest,   dishonest-- the  most 
dishonest  group,   not   individually,   but   the  whole  concept   is  dishonest. 
It's  all   the  way  from  the   top.     And   then  the  college   is   saying,    "We 
won't  accept  you  if  you  haven't  had   so  many  units  of  a  language,"  or 
chemistry  or  math.      So,  you  force   the   system  to  force   the  students 
to  go  into  something  that   is  just  really  a  dead  end  again. 


152 


Educating  Teachers 


Nathan: 


Asawa : 


Nathan: 


Asawa : 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


I  was   interested   in  what  you  were  saying  about  the   schools  of 

education.     How  do   you  identify   the  dishonesty  in   the   system? 

I  understand  you're  not  saying  individuals  are  dishonest,   but 
find  something  wrong  in  the  system? 


you 


Okay.     Let's   take  elementary  education—just  one  area.     The  only 
requirement  of  an  elementary  teacher   in  the  area  of  art    (I'm  not 
going   to   talk  about   everything;    I'm   talking  about   the   area   I  know)-- 
in  art  and  music,   all   they  have   to  have   is   six  weeks   or  one  semester 
of  music   in  order  to   teach,   because   they  don't  have  a  music 
specialist  or  an  artist.      That's  why  we   came   in,    because   of  that 
dishonesty.     We  can't   go  and   attack   the   universities,   but  we   can 
say  that   the   children  need   this  and   this,    and  we  will  provide   it 
regardless  of  whether  we  have  a  degree  or  not.     We  will   provide 
people  who  have   the   skills   that  can  teach  this.     That's  why,   more 
and  more,   we  are  not  going   to  need   the   university.      I  mean,   we 
need   the   university,    just   like  we  need    the   symphony  and   the    opera, 
but  we're  not  going  to  need  them  if  we're  not  preparing  an  audience 
and  we're  not  preparing  people   to  practice. 

It's  not  saying   that  the  cultural  centers  are  going   to  be 
better  than  the  performing  art  centers;    it's  just   that  we're  not 
preparing  anybody  for  anything.     That's  why  it's  really  very 
critical;    it's  a  very  critical  problem.     We're  not  talking  just 
about  art;  we're   talking  about   skilled  people. 

Right.     And  to  have  gone  through  the  mill  doesn't  mean  that  you're 
skilled. 

That's   right,    that's  right.      It's   a  very  big  problem.      (I   should 
really   spend    the   time   [ laughs] --I'm   spending  with  you  making 
pictures,  but--) 

I  see  your  point,   but  these  perceptions  are  very  crucial   too; 
they're  very  important. 

But  change  can  happen.'      It  can  happen  overnight;   what   I'm  talking 
about  can  change   if  people  want   to  change   it.     We  don't  have   to 
wind  down  and   say  it's  going   to  take   five  years.      In   the  whole 
school  system,    even   in  secondary   schools,   you  have  a  period  of  45 
minutes  to  try  to  teach  art?.'     That  has  nothing  to  do  with  art;    it 
has  to  do  with   somebody  who  designed   a   schedule  with   so  many   classes . 
so  many  units,   and   that   is   it. 

The  only  people  who  go  into  that  box  are  people  who  are  really 
not   terribly  changed,    because   they  will  allow  themselves   to  do   it. 
But  an  artist  will  not  do   it.     We  have  many  artists  who  have  tried 
It   and  who  have   really  given  up   because   they  could   not    take   it 
anymore. 


153 


Asawa:  It's    interesting   that   they  just    finally  have  new  positions  now 

for  people   to  work  in   the   schools.     And  we're  going  to  screen  them, 
not   so   that   they  go   in  because  of  the  affirmative  action  or   they 
need  a  job  or  because   they  know   somebody,   but   that  while   they  do 
the  work  of  relating   to   the   children,    that   they  have  a  skill   to  go 
in  with. 

Nathan:     Do  you  anticipate   that  you  will  be  able   to   find  people — enough 
people — with   skills? 

Asawa:       That's  the   thing.     As  we  get  bigger,    there  are  a   lot  of  people  out 
of  jobs,   and  people  are   looking   for  work.      But,    it  gets  harder  and 
harder  to  find  people  who  are  skilled.     And   if  they  have  skills, 
they  can't  do  the  other.     That's  why  it's  very  critical   that  we 
begin  to  train  young  people   to  at   least  know  what  they  want,   because 
there's  no  point   in   struggling  with  adults.      It's  a  great  waste  of 
time   to  try  and  convince   them,   because  they're  talking  about  the 
number  of  jobs  —  they're   talking  about  all   these  other  things  that 
they're  concerned  with.     But  the  kids  know,    they  have   the  time;    so 
it's  important   to   them.     And   they  will   be   the   teachers.     You  have 
to   teach  them  very  young  to  become  good   teachers,   and   I   think  that 
that's  really  important. 

That's  why  it's   interesting  to   see  how   far  we've  managed   to 
make  people  change  within   themselves  without  breaking  up  the  system. 

Parents  should  know   that   they  should  be  able   to  speak  up,   and 
teachers  should   speak  up  and  principals   should    take  a  stand,   and 
they  should  all    take  on  their   share,    instead   of   saying,    'Veil,   I 
have   to  go  to  a  meeting  now,"  and  not  discuss   the  problem.     That 
delays   it  another   six  weeks  or  another  eight  months.     But  they  can't 
make  a  decision  on   the   spot.      It's  difficult.     That's  why  commissions, 
committee  meetings—all    these  things  are  delay  tactics  we  use.  And 
these  could  be  vehicles   to  make  other  things  happen,   but  I  think 
that   they're  essentially  useless  now. 

We  have  hopes   in  the  Riles  Commission,  we  have  hopes   in   the 
National  Endowment   for   the  Arts,  we  have  hopes   for  the  Art 
Commission  and   the  BART  Art  Council --we  hope   that  all   these  things 
will  do   something.      I  hope   that  because   I'm  on  this  Art  Commission; 
I  don't   think  I'm  going   to   be  on   it  much   longer,    because   I  feel 
still   that   I  can  do  more  elsewhere.      I  think  I  did  more   in   the 
first   five  years  of   the  Alvarado  program,    I  mean,  made   it  happen 
by  doing   it. 

Nathan:     The  Alvarado  program? 

Asawa:       Yes.      I  think  now,    the  parents  have   taken  it  over,  which  is  pretty 
amazing. 


154 


Hopeful  Signs 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan : 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 
Nathan: 
Asawa: 

Nathan: 
Asawa: 


Nathan: 
Asawa: 


That's  splendid.  At  one  time  you  were,  I  think,  sort  of  wondering 
what  would  happen,  and  now  you  feel  the  transition  has  come  about. 
That's  very  complimentary  and  wonderful. 

It's  happening.     We're  pulling  from  Manpower  Act  and  we're   trying 
to  pull  Neighborhood  Arts,   or  any  group     together,    focusing  on 
the   schools.     We  helped    them  simply  by   opening   up   schools;  we   don't 
try  to  organize,   but  make  that  opening   for   each  one   of  them. 
Hopefully,   a  lot  of  the  money  that  has  been  spent   in   the   school 
district   is  now  going   sort  of   in  our   direction— not  necessarily 
by  our  doing   it. 

That  in  itself  is  a  change;    something  has  happened. 

Yes.      But   it's  very  slow,  very  slow.      I  think  it  gets  bigger  and 
bigger.      [Laughter] 

[Laughter]      You  are  holding  your  head. 

Now,   the  thing  is,   I   think   that  we  have  made  a  full  circle.      I 
think  now,   because  so  many  people  are  asking  —  they 've  always  asked 
if  they  could  come   to  the   studio  and  do  this   or  that.      In  those 
days,    it  was  just  a  field   trip.     But  now,   I  think  there  will   be 
a  reason  for  it. 

A  reason  for  people   to  come  and  observe? 

For  me   to  be  working   in  my  studio  on  my  work. 

In  the  school? 

No,  not  necessarily  in  the  school.      I  would  do   that,   but   I  don't 
think  that   that    is   really  my  role;    I   think  we   should   get   other 
artists  to  do   that   in  the  schools.     We  have  three  now   to  do   that. 

What  are  their  names? 

Earle  Curtis;  he's  a  potter  at  Everett  High.     Nancy  Thompson  at 
Mission  High   School;    she's  more  a  painter  but   she's  also  a   sculptor, 

and    she  has  worked    in  our  program  from   the  very  beginning,    so  she's 
finally  got  all   this  and    it   is   finally  to   this  point  where   she  is 
now  artist-in-residence. 

I  see.     And  then  who  are  the  other  ones? 

Henri  Marie-Rose;  he   is  a   sculptor  and  he's   going   to  work   in 
materials— clay.     He's  going  to  be  at  Edison. 


155 


Nathan:     That's   quite  an  achievement. 

Asawa:       Yes.     That's   the  National  Endowment.     And   the  Endowment  is   interested 
in  our  program  because  of  the  community  involvement,  which   they 
don't  have;    artists  are   isolated. 

Nathan:     Right.     Then  you  go   stacking  again. 


A 1 bers'    Use  of  Synergetic s 


Asawa:       Yes.      It's  all  doing  much  more   than  a   separate   thing.     They're 
going   into   this  one-to-one   tutoring,  whereas,   we  can  have  20 
children  doing   individual  work  of  their  own,   going  on,    if  the 
teacher   is  very  good   at  it.     You  do  all   these   things  and  you  bring 
them  together.     And  you  can  have  a  tough  kid  here  who's  put   there, 
and  another  one   in  here,   and   they  just   really  work  pn  their  own 
work.       Then  finally  something  nice  will  come  out  of  it. 

In  a  way,    it's  a   technique  we've   talked  about  before.     You  know 
the   idea  of  the   synergetics   to  learning  where  you  cluster  people 
and  make   them  make  decisions,   and  make   them   think  and  hold    them 
responsible   for   these  decisions,   even  if   it's  a  color  or  even  if 
it's  a  story  or  even   if   it's  anything  one  does. 

There's  an  interesting  man   in  Santa  Barbara  who  was   in  school 
with  us--Wervin  Lane—who  has  written  this  book,   Synergetics; 
An  Approach   to  Learning.     He  clusters  his  classes  with   several 
groups  of  five   students--f ive  or  six--and  he  drops   something  in  the 
pot,   and   they  swish   it  around  and  they  take   this  and  they  move   it 
there  and  back  here  and   they  swish   it  around   there,   so  that   each 
student  gets  the  benefit  of  40  students  rather  than  Just  himself. 
They  answer  and   they  correct,   so  that   it's  not  40  students  to  one 
teacher;    it's  40  students   to  40  ideas. 

This   is  the   idea  thst  Albers  used  at  school,  and   that's  the  way 
he  approached  his  classes.     He  dropped  problems  out;   you  came  with 
solutions;  you  discussed  all  the  solutions.     The  ones   that  were  no 
good,  we  threw  out  and  we   took  the  good  ones,   and   those  were  the 
new  problems.     We  took  those  and  we  made  new  solutions  and  stacked 
ideas  on  ideas.     Then  finally,   all  of  us  had   the   information  of 
every  one   of  us. 

That's  not  happening  now.     The   science   teacher   is  here,    the 
English   teacher   is  here,    the  art  teacher   is  here,    the  principal   is 
over  here. 


156 


Asawa:  Then  they're  talking   about   team  teaching,   and   that's   a   form 

of   it.      But   the    team  teaching  can  also   go   in   the   classroom  with 
the   students   too.     We   talked   about    sharing  —  the    sharing   time. 
The  words  are  all   there,   and   it  can  happen  very  easily. 

Nathan:      It's   interesting  how  the   ideas  you  learned  when  you  were  with 
Albers  keep   coming   up   again  and   again   in  your   life. 

Asawa:       They  also  go  back  to  my  childhood   too,   in   the  way  we  did   things 
there.    So,    in  a  way,   I  was  very  receptive  to  Albers'    ideas. 
Then,    in   turn,    in  return,   he  also   sort   of  defined   the  Zen  background 
and   brought    it   into  a  kind   of   intellectual,   visual   context,    so 
that   the  whole   thing   really   fits  very  well. 

I  don't  know   that    that   [is    something]    everybody  can   apply,    but 
it's  so  universal   that   it   should   be  useful. 


The  Future  and  Making   a  Living 


Nathan:     Would  you  care   to   say  anything  about  what  you  might   be   doing  next? 
I  know  you're   going   into  the  new   state  arts   council  now. 

Asawa:        I'm  hoping   to  go  back  to  making  a   living.      [Laughter] 
Nathan:      And  how  does   an  artist  make  a   living   these  days? 

Asawa:       Well,    I've  never  held   a  job,    so   I  would   just   do  my  own  work.      If   I 
sell  something,    I  sell   something;    if  I  don't,   then  I  don't.      If  I 
don't   sell    too  much,    then  I  grow  more   in  my  vegetable   garden  and 
live   on   less. 

Nathan:     This   is   really  what  you've   been   talking  about. 

Asawa:       There's  the   other  thing,  which   I  am  just  resisting  because   I  know 

that   it   is   an  easy  way   to  go,    to  go  on  sort  of   the    lecture   routine. 
I  could   jump   from  weekend    to  weekend,    from  university   to   university, 
to  do  all   that  —  talk  about   this  and   talk  about  that,   and   it  will 
fulfill   the  need  because  they've  gotten  an  endowment  grant   for   this 
lecture   tour   or   for  a  woman's   thing  here  or-- 

Nathan:     An  artist's  thing  here? 

Asawa:        You  know,   all   that.     That's  very   tempting   because   it's  very  easy   to 
do.     You  just  pick  up  and  you  have  your   speech   and   you  have   your 
slides,   and   you  talk.      But   I  don't   think   that   really   is    the   solution. 
I'd  rather  be   less  sure  and   really  explore   things  that  I  need   to 
explore  artistically,    than  to  do  that. 


157 


Nachan:      Is  this  back  Co  your  idea  of  each  person's  best  use? 

Asawa:       Yes.      I  don't  think  I   should  be   used   that  way.      I   think  there  are  a 
lot  of  people  who  could   do   that.      I  would   just   rather  people  came 
to  me,   not   for  any  reason  except  that  I  think  the  message   is 
right  here  and    it's  not  there. 

Nathan:      I  gather  that  people  already  do  this  a  great  deal;    they  do  tend 
to   come   to   you. 

Asawa:        Yes.     I've  been  asked   to  teach  at  Cal   for   three  weeks  or   something 
like   that. 

Nathan:     Does  that    interest  you? 

Asawa:       Well,    it  sort   of  does.     But  even   that   I  think  is   sort  of  busy  work. 

Nathan:     Of  course,    I  think  it  would  be  wonderful   for  Cal,   just   speaking 
very  selfishly. 

Asawa:  [Laughter]      They  need   a   lot  of  help.      It's  not   together. 

Nathan:  Would   this   be    in   the   education  department? 

Asawa:  Architecture. 

Nathan:  I   suspect   the   students  would   get   a  great   deal   from  you. 

Asawa:        I've  spoken   to  a  group  at  State  College  —  students.      I  don't  know 
what   the  class   is;    it's   sort  of  community,   and   there  are  art 
students   in  that   too.      But  the   students  need  direction.     They're 
not  getting   it.     They're  not  getting  it  because   those  who  are 
teaching  it  aren't   in  the  real  world.     The  universities  are  not 
in  the  real  world;    that's  why  they  may  collapse   too.     Just  as 
schools  are  not   in   the   real  world;    that's  why  they  may  collapse 
too.     Maybe   they  should  collapse.      I  don't  mean   "tear  it  down." 
I  just  mean  the   structure  has  to  be  — 

Nathan:      It's  hard   to  know  whether   institutions  can   revitalize  themselves; 
we  don't   know  whether    they  can. 

Asawa:        I  think  it's  already   in   the    first  place—schools  were  an  abstraction 
in  the  first  place;    they're  a  substitute. 

Nathan:      For  what? 

Asawa:       For  learning.      I  mean,   in  a  way  they  came  out  of  an  economic  need 
rather   than  an  educational  need. 


158 


Nathan:     What  would  an  alternative   be,   assuming  that  one  could  do  what   really 
was   best   for  students,    for   the  kids.     What  would  be  the  best? 

Asawa:       What  would  be  the   best?     There  have   to  be  more  people  doing  what 
they're  doing,   rather   than   talking   about  what   they're  doing. 

Nathan:     Teaching  by  demonstration? 

Asawa:       Yes,   right.     That's  happening,   I  know,    in  industry.     They  just  don't 
have   the  material;    they  can't  hire   people   because   they're  not   being 
trained;    they're  not  being  trained   and    they're   being  held   back  by 
unions  who  are  not   allowing    things   to  be   taught,    things  are  secret. 

Nathan:     Oh? 

Asawa:        Well,    the  painters   union,    the  plumbers   union — you  can't  get   in  to 

train   unless  you  have   a   friend   or   family  or   something   like   that,    so 
a   lot   of   information  that   should   be   passed   on,    is   not   being  passed 
on. 

Nathan:     Like  an  apprentice   system? 

Asawa:        Right.     The   thing   is,   we  need   that  whole   concept   to   return  because 
what   originally  we  did  was   father-son,    son-grandson,   passing  along. 
Mother,   daughter,   granddaughter,   grandchildren—all   these   things 
that  were  done  naturally  in  a   family  unit  were  done   then  in  the 
guild,   and   then  were  lost   in  the   Industrial  Revolution  where  now  the 
machine   takes  over --so  now   the  parent   is  no   longer  useful  and  we're 
geared   to  be  put   into  computers   and   to  machinery.      The  human  being 
in  a  way  is   getting  more   and   more   useless,    except   that  what  we're 
getting  out   of   the  machine   is   not  going   to   solve   our   problems   and 
is  creating  new  problems. 

Nathan:      In   this  connection,   we  were   talking   briefly  about   the  way  your 
father  received  his  guests.     He  wouldn't  stop  to  talk? 

Asawa:        People  who  used   to  come --salesmen  or   friends    that  would   come   over- 
he  would   just   keep  working   in  the   field;  he  wouldn't   come    into   the 
house.     He  would  go  on  and  he'd  continue  to  hoe  and   they'd  have  to 
walk  with  him.      And  when  they  got   to   the   end   of   the   line,    they 
went   off.      This  was  his  way  of  not   losing  any   time,   because  he 
couldn't  afford   to  s it  and  talk  to  anybody. 

I  just   think  that  we  are  at  a  point  now   in  our  society  that 

we   can't   sit   around  and   talk  any  more    (because   that   used    to  be   the 

luxury;    that   is   really  a   luxury)  and   that  we  have   to   begin   to  make 

every  minute   count.      That   is   one  of   the   greatest  wastes   in  government 
and   in  schools. 


159 


Asawa:  What  we  want   to  do  is  we  want   to  teach  our  young  people   to  be 

effective,    so   that  we   should   spend   less   time  at  meetings  and  more 
time  doing  the  activity.      So   that,    instead  of  having  teachers 
talking   to  a  classroom  of  kids,   and   they're   sitting  there  and  her 
talking,    there  has   to  be  another  kind  of  activity  that   teaches   them 
something.      It's   through  action  and  through  participation   that  we 
will   accomplish   something. 

I  could    show  you  a   fence  done   this  Christmas  by  our  three  sons; 
they  put  a   fence  up   for  us.     Our  son  just   fixed  all  of  our  windows. 
We  could   be   sitting  around    talking   to  psychiatrists  about  our 
family  problems,   but  we  could  also  be  really  utilizing  our  young 
people  and    teaching  them  skills. 

Our  son  in  Oregon  who's  a  student  at   the  University  of  Oregon 
formed  a  corporation  with   five  architecture   students  and   they  got 
a   loan  and   they're  building  a  house.     They  designed  a  house;    they 
bought   the   land.     They'll    find  out  whether  they'll  make   it  or  not. 
I  just   think  that   it's  great  that  he  has   that  confidence   that  he 
can  do  such  a   thing,    and   that's  just  through  working  on  this  house 
and   doing   a   lot  of   grubby  work  —  fences  and   decks  and   retaining 
walls  and  all    that.      It's  so  much  better   than  sitting  in  the  class 
studying  architecture  and  design.      I   think  that   the  real  world  has 
to  be  what  we  have  to  deal  with.      I  deal  with   it  every  day,    the 
real  world,    the   reality,    because  nobody  tells  me  what   to  do  in  the 
morning.      I  wake  up  and   I  have   to  make  my  plans. 

Nathan:     How  have  your  daughters   responded   to  the  kind  of  demonstration  of 
life   that  you've  given  them? 

Asawa:       They  love   the  home  and   they  cook  and   bake  and  sew   (I  don't  sew, 

but  they  sew).  My  daughter,  who  has  a  child  now,  just  enjoys  being 
at  home.  She  doesn't  need  to  fight  the  battle,  the  women's  battle. 
She  does  her  work. 

Nathan:     Are   they  interested    in  art  as  a  part  of  their  life? 

Asawa:       Yes.     They're  not  interested   in  shows  and  other  things-      They  say 
that   they've   seen  me  do  it,    so   they  don't  have   to  do  it   too.     We 
all  come   together  and  we're  still  very  close.      In  fact,    tonight 
they're   inviting  us   to  dessert  and   coffee.     We  have  a  very  nice 
family. 

Nathan:     Yes,   you  do.     You  were  saying  a  moment  ago   that  you  were  interested 

in  developing  a  studio  in  this  next  door  house   that  you  are  acquiring. 

Asawa:       Yes.     Hopefully  we'll  be  able   to.      It  will  take  probably  another  ten 
years. 

Nathan:     What   sort  of  space  do  you  want   for  your  work? 


160 


Asawa: 


Nathan : 


Asawa : 


Nathan : 


Asawa : 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


I  would   like   a  space   that   I  could   go   inside  and   outside,   with   a 
tall  ceiling  so  I  could  work  on  high   things;  have  an  adequate 
sink  and  a  place   for  a  little  burner--really  very  simple—where 
I  could  mix  cement   if   I  needed    to.      I  could  heat  wax  or   I   could 
pour  cement  or  do   some  heavy  work. 

And   then  you  would  need --what? --a  big  table  if  you  want   to  do 
your  water  color  or  other  structures? 

Yes.      I  would   separate   the  painting   from  the   main   studio   idea-- 
a  room  apart   from  that.      The  other   stuff   is   too   dirty  and   dusty 


Is   there  a  special   sort  of   light? 
your  painting? 


Do  you  need   a  north   light   for 


Nathan : 


No,  not  necessarily;  I'm  not  into  that.  I  may  eventually  need  to 
have  that.  But  the  way  I  work,  I  don't  really  need  that.  I  work 
out  in  a  field  too,  and  I  like  natural  sunlight  in  what  I  do. 

What   is   there  about  having  your   studio   close   to  your  home   that 
interests  you? 

Because   it   doesn't   separate  me   from  my  family.     That's   one  of   the 
things   that   I  insisted   on  when   the   children  were  growing   up  —  that 
I  would   be  able   to  go  downstairs  at  midnight,    after   they've  gone 
to   sleep,   or   I  could   go  back  and   forth;   or   they  could   be  playing 
outside,    I  could   be   inside.      Or  I   could  move    the   thing  outside   and 
be  with   them  when  I  was  working  at   something,    so  that   they  were 
always   involved   with  me  when   I  was  working   so   that   they   understood 
the  whole  cycle   of  work,    rather   than  my  going  off  and   getting   a 
babysitter.      "Going  off"  was   something   they  knew  nothing  about; 
then  resenting   it   because   I  was   away,   and   all   the   problems   that 
come  with  that  sort  of  build  up.     And  I,   in  a  way,  having 
been  on  the  Art  Commission  have    taken  a   lot  of   time  away   from  them. 
But   they  were  a   little  older. 

I  still   feel   that  being  at  home  when   they  come  home   really 
has   something   that's  very  important.     The  past  eight  years  have   been 
less  of   that   for  me.      Also,   one   of   the   things   is   they  haven't   seen 
me  work—except   I  did   do   the   fountain.      I  did  a   few  big   things,    but 
the  daily  things  I  haven't  been  doing. 

You  express  your  interest  and  deep   feeling  about  your   family  so 
beautifully.      It   reminds  me   that  I  should  probably  ask  you  if  you 
could   just  do  a  genealogy,    if  you  wish.      Just   the  names   of  certainly 
the  children,   and   then  your  husband  and  yourself,    and   if  you  would 
like,   of  your  parents,   as  far  back  as   it's  convenient   for  you,    if 
you  remember  your  grandparents'   names  and   if  you  remember  your   aunts 
and   uncles,   as  many  as  you  can.      If  you  would   like    to  do    that,  we 
often  do   for   these  memoirs.     Would    that   be   something  you  might  want 
to  think  about? 


161 


Asawa:    I  can't  remember  them  all. 

Nathan:     This  does  happen,   certainly.     There  could  be   "as  many  as   I  remember' 
or   something   like   that   to   indicate   that   it   isn't  a  big  research 
project.     But   it's  a  way  of  situating  you  in  a  family,   because  you 
really  are  a  very   family-minded   person. 


162 


XI     DEVELOPING  THE   STACKING   IDEA    (1976) 


CETA  Program   in   the   Schools 


Asawa:        What  do  you  want   to   talk  about    this  morning? 

Nathan:      I  had  a   few  notes,   and  maybe   you  will  have   some   things   also   that 
you  want   to  talk  about.      I  was  very  glad    to  see   this    booklet   on 
the  Alvarado   School  art  workshop  because   part   of  it  does    lead    into 
some    things   I   thought   you  might  want   to   talk  about.      The   last   time 
we   talked,    there  had    been  some   reference   to   the   CETA   people   in   the 
schools,   and   I  gather   that   is   included  here? 

Asawa:        That's   included    in   this   booklet. 

Nathan:      Good.     Would   you  care   to   say  what  you  think  may  have   been  accomplished 
so  far  by  the   use   of   the  CETA  people    in   the   schools? 

Asawa:        I   think  it's   not   just    in  the   schools   now.      I   think   it  was    the 

opportunity   to  bring  city  agencies   together   to  work  on  an   interagency 
program.      I  have   the  whole   thing  here    for   you,  which   goes    through 
the   proposal   and   the   positions   that  we   asked    for  and   the  people   that 
worked   to  put   this    together.      We  had   people    from  Public  Works, 
Community  Gardens,   Unified   School  District,   Alvarado  Community  Art 
Program,   Board  of  Education,   Eureka  Valley  Association,   a   community 
of  individuals  with  Sharon  Kidder,   and   the  Art  Commission  and  Friends 
of  Noe  Valley.      We   had   additional   organizations--the  Art  Commission 
and    the   other  city  agencies—represented   at   this   meeting  where  we 
wrote   this   proposal   to  Manpower. 

Nathan:      And  you  convened   the   group? 

Asawa:        We  met   right  here    (at  my  house)    to  work  on   it.      This  was  January  6th. 
In  November,    1975  when   I  was  at  Ben  Franklin  Junior  High  School, 
through    the   program  that    is   called   ESAA    (which   is   Emergency   School 
Aid  Act),    I  met  with    the   community  of  parents    there   and   suggested   a 
proposal   similar   to   this  —  the   idea  of  bringing  gardens   and   visual 
and   performing  arts    together.      They   sent    that    in,  which  was   rejected 


163 


Asawa:   by  HEW  as  not  meeting  the  criteria  for  reducing  racial  isolation. 
(You  know,  if  there  was  anything  that  would  reduce  it,  it  would 
be  these  three  things,  but  they  turned  it  down.) 

So,  after  the  Art  Commission,  in  December  or  November,  had 
gone  through  the  Manpower  program  to  hire  artists  (the  history  is 
certainly  known  to  John  Kreidler,  who  was  an  intern  for  the 
Neighborhood  Arts  Program) — 

Nathan:  Oh,  is  he  the  same  one  who  is  now  at  Alameda? 

Asawa:   Alameda  County,  yes.   John  Kreidler  I  guess  worked  for  the  Labor 
Department,  and  then  when  he  came  here  (I  guess  he  was  at  UCLA 
and  then  he  came  to  intern  with  the  Neighborhood  Arts  Program)  he 
read  the  legislation  and  said  that  certainly  artists  would  qualify, 
just  as  a  street  cleaner,  just  as  a  clerk  would  qualify.   So  the 
San  Francisco  Art  Commission  applied  for  I  think  24  positions,  and 
they  got  these  first.  Then  the  artists  began  to  work  on  murals  (most 
of  them  were  muralists,  I  think,  in  that  first  group).  What  happened 
was,  those  artists  who  had  been  working  on  murals  for  nothing  could 
finally  be  paid  for  their  work.  A  lot  were  in  the  Mission  District- 
several  in  the  Mission  District — and  I  can't  remember  the  other  areas. 

Anyway,  they  worked  in  the  Alvarado  program--!  was  on  an  oral 
board  to  interview  school  aides.  This  was  when  the  School  District 
cut  out  the  hall  guards.   Then  Dor ice  Murphy  and  a  group  of  parents 
I  guess  and  principals  all  felt  that  they  needed  the  positions  but 
the  people  didn't  want  to  be  termed  hall  monitors;  they  wanted  to 
redefine  the  job.   So  they  were  redefined  as  school  aides,  so  that 
they  would  not  be  used  just  to  monitor  bathrooms  and  halls,  but  they 
would  be  sort  of  qualified— they'd  have  more  qualifications  than 
just  a  heavy  hand. 

I  was  on  one  panel,  and  we  interviewed,  and  one  of  the  things 
that  we  asked  for  was  that  they  have  broader  experience.   So,  after 
seeing  that  happen  (I  think  they  had  seven  positions  for  that;  many 
of  them  were  re-hired  when  they  were  paraprofessionals  who  became 
CETA  aides),  then  we  felt  that  why  couldn't  we  ask  for  artists, 
since  the  Art  Commission  had  done  that.   Since  we  wanted  to  really 
work  on  the  gardening  curriculum,  we  thought  that  maybe  we  could  ask 
for  gardeners  too.   So,  we  decided  that  we  would  make  a  three  part 
interagency,  interdisciplinary  plan- 
Nathan:   Excuse  me.  When  you  say  "we"--? 

Asawa:   Well,  our  group  of  parents,  Leah  Forbes,  Joan  Abrahamson,  Sharon 
Litsky,  Lois  Link  —  sort  of  the  board  of  Alvarado. 


164 


Citywide  Educational   Beautif ication  Program 


Nathan:      Alvarado  was   the   core? 

Asawa:        Yes.      We  were   thinking,    "Maybe   if  we   could   get   one  gardener  and 

one  artist--"     Then  we    figured   out,    as    long  as  we're  doing   it,   we 
really   should   ask   for  people   that  we  would   need.     We  met  with 
Eunice  Elton  and   talked  with  Lucille  Abrahamson  about    it   to  see 
if   that  were  possible,    if  we   could   do   something   like    that.      So  we 
applied,   and  we   called   it   the   Citywide  Educational   Beautif ication 
Program,   and  we  made   a   request   for  60   positions. 

The   positions  were  city-school  planning,   where  we  wanted    to 
bring  in  an  urban  garden,    and   then  housing  projects-school  murals 
(that  was  20  positions),   and   performing  artists-in-residence ,  which 
would   be   the   dancers,   musicians,    poets.      We  didn't   figure   out  how 
we  were  going  to  get   the   supplies   on   that,    so  we  had   a  hard    time 
with   that.     We  didn't  get  any   supplies;   we   got   the   positions   but 
no  supplies    for   them. 

Nathan:     Was   there  a   reason  why  you  didn't   put   supplies   in? 

Asawa:        In  other  cities,    ten  percent   goes    to  materials;    I  mean,    the    federal 
funds --Manpower.      Ten  percent   goes    for   equipment   and  materials   so 
that   gardeners   or   clerks   or  maintenance   people  could  have   some 
material.      But    in   San  Francisco,   we  didn't  get   the    ten  percent.      I 
think  the    legislation  or   something  was   not   quite    there;   we  were 
anticipating,    but  we   never  got    it.      Finally   in  the   end  we  were 
getting   it   through    the   community  development   funds,    revenue-sharing; 
but   that's  many,   many  months   later    that  we've  gotten   it.      In   the 
meantime,   we  have   scraped   up  what  Alvarado  had   and   used    it   and  we've 
gone    to   the  Zellerbach  Family  Fund  and    they've  helped   us    twice  with 
materials   and   now   recently  with  getting  a   truck—maintenance   on   two 
trucks   that  Public  Works  will  give  us   if  we  will  pay  for  the  repair. 
So  we  now  have   two   trucks.      That's   getting  way  ahead   of   us. 

So  anyway,    going  back  to  the   rejection   of   the  HEW  ESAA   thing, 
we  went   into   this.      Because  of   the   bad   experience    that  Manpower  had 
with   the   school  district  and   the   school  aides,    they  didn't  want    to 
have  anymore  CETA  go   through   the   schools;    they  didn't  want   to  deal 
with   the   schools.      So   they   said   they  would   deal  with   the  Art 

Commission.      They  know   the  Art  Commission;    they  know   that    it   is   not 
•   big  hassle,    it's  not   going  to  be   complicated. 

We  asked    the  Art  Commission   to  take   the   60  positions    through 
them.      The  Art  Commission  at   the   same   time  were  asking   for  35  more 
positions.      So,  we  were   talking  about   95   positions.      The  Art 
Commission   said,  well,    it  was   going   to  be  difficult    to  just  keep 
it   separate.      This  was  a  marvelous   opportunity   for  another  agency 
to  deal  with   the   school  district  and   tie    it   in  with   housing,   because 


165 


Asawa:        our  proposal  asked    co  develop  a  program  which   is  highly  visible 

citywide   involving  children,    their  parents,   community,   and   school! 
to  work  on  adjacent   lots   to  schools  developing  a  curriculum  about 
farming  and  animal  husbandry.     Performing  artists  and  muralists 
would  give  workshops   for  children  and  adults  culminating  in  murals 
and   performances    in  the   schools  and  neighborhoods,   developing 
vocational  career  concepts   for   themselves  and    the  community. 

The  aim  is   to  have  gardens,  murals  and  performances   in 
cooperation  with   the  Hi-Centennial  planning   (we're  going  to  combine 
it)    and    there's  an   interagency  cooperation  and   a  commitment   for 
this   program   from   the   Park  and   Recreation  Department;    the   Department 
of  Public  Works;  Tree  Planting  and  Community  Gardens;    San  Francisco 
Art  Commission;    the  Bi-Centennial  Education  and  Youth  Community;    the 
San  Francisco  Unified  School  District   gardening  department;   Redevelop 
ment  Agency   for   facility  planning   (we  would   borrow   lands    from  the 
Redevelopment   [Agency]    that   are   adjacent   to  schools);    the  Housing 
Authority;   and   independent   community  groups.      So   these  are  all   the 
people   that  are   involved    in  proposal  writing. 

This  was  beginning  to  try  to  develop  a  network  where  government 
begins   not    to  compete  with   one  another  but   to  consolidate   services 
and   not  duplicate   services,    so   that  we  would   begin   to  see  what   our 
resources  were  and  we  wouldn't   be   fighting.      A   truck   that    is   idle 
could   be   used   by  another  department,    if  they  needed    it. 

It's   been  a  great   struggle   in  practice;    in   theory,    it   sounds 
very  nice  on  paper.      It's   logical.      It's   taken  months   to  get   this 
together,  with  a   lot  of  people  working  and  a   lot  of  people   finally 
putting  what  they  had   before   in   the  back  seat  and  beginning  to  work 
together,   and   realizing   that  this   is   the   only  way  a  city  is  going  to 
survive  now  at   this  point;    it's  very  critical.     Nobody  has  enough 
to  do  a  good   job.      Everybody  has   a   little   bit,    and  when  you  think, 
and  when   you  add   all   of   the  money   that   is  poured    into  youth   programs- 
chat's   private   and   public  and    federal   and    state  and    local  —  it's 
staggering,    staggering.      But   you  ask  any  group  [individually],   and 
they  don't  have   enough.      Just  an  example   is   the   amount   of  money   that's 
poured   into  the   schools   in  the  name  of  students.      It's   staggering, 
staggering.'     And    they  talk  about  a  deficit.     We'll  always  have  a 
deficit,    that's  all.      I  mean,    think  of  the  national  debt;   you  can't 
stop  having  children  because   they're   inheriting  a  billion  dollar 
deficit.     That's  what   I  was   told  when  I  was   in  college;   friends   said 
they  weren't  going   to  have  children  because   they  didn't  want   to  lay 
the   national  debt   onto  their  child. 

Anyway,    I  think  that's   really  essentially  why  we   tried    to  do 
this. 


166 


The  Alvarado  Idea 


Nathan:     How  did   you  get  people   to  come  at   this    from  an  entirely  different 
point   of  view?     Because   this   sort   of   territorial  protection  has 
been  going  on   for   so   long,   how  did   you  get  people    to  move   in   a 
different  way? 

Asawa:        We  got   these  people    together   to  say   that  maybe  we  could   try   it. 
It  was  non-threatening.      It  wasn't  money  out   of   their  budget;    it 
was  really  so-called   outside  money    (it's   actually  our  money  anyway; 
the  school  paid   for   it   in   taxes)    and  we   brought   it.     Well,   our 
simple   idea--the  Alvarado   idea—was,   now   that  we  had   worked    in   the 
schools,   now  we   really  have   to  work  with   the   children  where   they 
live.      Then  we   also  have    to  work  with   the   space   that's   between  the 
school  and   the  home,  which   are   the  parks   and   empty   lots,    and    the 
walk  between   the  home   and    the   school   also  had    to  be   incorporated 
into  this.      So,   we   felt    that  we   could  work  with   the  Housing  Authority, 
which   is   a  body   that    is   already  organized.      We   can't  work  with   every 
neighborhood   and   every  neighborhood   group,   but   the  Housing  Authority 
is   throughout   the  city.      They  work  with  many,   many    families.      The 
need   is  much   greater   for   them  than  any   other   group  of  people- 
residents. 

Also   the  work  we're  doing   in   the   schools   can   then  have  meaning 
for  the  parents,    so  that  what  we  do  in   the  schools   for   their 
children,   can  also  be  repeated    in   the  home.     Many  of   the  projects 
that  we  did   at   school  were  with   the    idea   that   these   children  would 
take   it  back—the  murals,   weaving—all    the   skills  we're   trying   to 
hopefully  put   in.      It  all   sounds   like   it's   grand   and    successful; 
it's   really  all  very  grubby  and  modest,    and   very  modest  with  what 
we  had   to  work  with.      But   the   idea   is   simple    to   translate   and   for 
many  people   to  do   because   all   they  now  have   to  do   is  have    the   desire 
for   it.     We're  hoping   to  create   that   desire    for   it,   and    then  we  would 
go  to  the  city  agencies. 

So  we  met  with  Housing.      We  met  with  Mary  Rogers   and  Western 
Addition  and  we  met  with  Ron  Mermal,   who  had   a  position  of   this 
kind—sort   of   trying   to  do   something  with   the  community  centers 
within  each  housing  complex.      And   Scott,  who's   an  assistant  to   I 
guess  Eneas   Kane;   he's  head   of  housing.     We   began   to   talk  about 
painting  murals   in  housing  projects   and    involving   the   artist   and 
the  performing   artist  and   the   garden,    to   try  to  build    that   up. 


167 


Development   of  Gardening 


Asawa: 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


We  had   several  gardens--!   think  a  garden   is   starting  in  Valencia 
Gardens,   and  Ping  Yuen.     Then  Fort  Mason  gave   us  a  piece  of  land 
there  adjacent    to  Galileo  West,  which   is   the   school   that's   in 
there,   and   they  have  been  able   to  draw  residents   from  that 
neighborhood,    from  the  Marina,    to  come   in.      It  was  an  impressive 
group  of  people;   about  20  people  I  guess  have  a   little  plot   there, 


Where  did  you  find   a  garden  around  Ping  Yuen? 
was  any  land   not   built  on. 


I  had  no  idea  there 


Nathan: 


Asawa: 


It's  one  of   these   interior  courts  where   the  grass   is--I  haven't 
been   to  that   one,    but   I  was   told  about    it.     We  did   this   instead   of 
setting  up  a  whole  new  gardening  program.     The  city  is  already  into 
gardening  with   the  community  gardens  through   the  Department  of  Public 

Works,   and    that  was  begun   in   1972  or    '73.      Before   that,    in  1971  or 
'72,    I  had  written  of   it.      I  have  a  very  good  friend,  Mai  Arbegast;  do 
you  know  her?     She's  a   landscape  architect.      She  has  recently  been 
in  the  planning  of  Filoli;    she  was  very  responsible    for  having  that 
turned   into  a  horticultural  educational   institution.      She   is    the 
landscape   architect    in  California  who   is  probably   the  most   knowledge 
able  of  every  plant  up  and   down  the  coast.      She  has   taught  at  Cal 
and  she  has  her  own  practice  here.     Mai  Arbegast--she 's  a  Japanese. 
Her   family  had    the   seed   company   in   San  Jose--Kitazawa  Seed   Company. 
Her   father  used    to  own  a  huge  seed  business;  her  brother  still  owns 
one. 

Anyway,    I  had   talked   to  her  about  getting  4H   into  San  Francisco; 
I   felt   that   through   the  nutrition  and  gardening  that  we  could  have   it. 
So   she  put  me   into   contact  with   people   in  California.      Then  we  were 
told   that   the   Supervisors  had   to  request   it.      I   guess   Bob  Mendelsohn 
was    the   Supervisor   that   became    interested    in   it,   and  4H   came    in    from 
San  Mateo.      There  was  Jim  Brenner,   and   Fay  Lee  who   is   also   in 
nutrition  and   the  domestic   part   of  4H.      Besides   that,   Sue  Reid  has 
now   been  hired   by  Public  Works   to  organize    the  community  gardens. 
Then  Rosemary  Menninger  and  her   friend    (whose  name    I  can't   remember) 
wanted    to  develop  an  ecology  center.      I  recommended   that;    they  got  a 
grant    from  the   San  Francisco  Foundation. 

So  all   these   things  were  sort  of  separately  happening  at  the 
same    time. 

I'm  curious   about  how  you  came    to  know  all   these   things  were   going 
on. 

They  weren't   going  on   until  we   started    it.     When  we   first   started 
Alvarado,    the   three   things   that  we  wanted   to  cover  were  gardening, 
performing  arts  and  visual  arts.      I  mean   it's  all   the  same   thing; 


168 


Asawa:   only  this  is  much  clearer  and  it's  much  bigger  because  we  now  have 
a  body  of  performing  artists  and  a  body  of  gardeners  and  a  body  of 
visual  artists,  whereas  at  that  time  we  had  a  little  dancer  come  in 
and  do  a  few  hours  here  and  a  mother  came  in  and  gardened  for  us. 
It  goes  way  back  to  1968  when  we  struggled  for  about  eight  months 
before  we  could  get  permission  to  garden.  We  couldn't  garden;  that 
was  illegal  in  San  Francisco. 

Nathan:   I  did  not  know  that. 

Asawa:   Oh  yes.   The  gardeners  union  had  to  trim  the  trees  or  trim  the 

bushes;  nobody  could  touch  the  land  around  the  school.   This  took 
us  months  for  permission,  to  get  that  done.  We  started  as  a  science 
program,  teaching  the  children  about  plant  life.  We  didn't  even 
start  the  Alvarado  program  as  an  art  program;  we  started  it  as  a 
science  program,  because  art  absolutely  would  not  work  into--I  mean, 
when  I  go  back  to  picking  out  all  the  little  steps  that  we  had  to 
take ! 

Then,  the  Park  and  Recreation,  I  went  to  them  and  they  gave  us 
two  flats. 

Nathan:  Of  little  plants? 

Asawa:   Yes--pansies  and  other  plants  that  they  gave  us  to  start  a  garden 
around  Alvarado  School.   Then  we  built  those  planters.  Mai  was 
extremely  interested  in  it  because  Mai  is  on  the  board  of  the 
Strybing  Arboretum  and  she  knows  Jack  Spring.   So,  all  of  these 
people  were  already  doing  these  things  in  the  city,  but  not  in  the 
schools.  The  school  department  is  separate  from  the  park  department- 
all  this  separation  of  departments.   So,  Mai  helped  me  get  in 
contact  with  the  Department  of  Agriculture;  somebody  named  Winlow. 
Then  he  referred  the  letter  to  somebody  else  in  San  Mateo  4H  and  4H 
called  me — all  these  things  came  about  just  by  sort  of  investigating. 
Nobody  really  knows  about  any  of  that  going  on  now.   The  Alvarado 
gardeners  went  to  the  community  gardens  and  sort  of  worked  together. 

There's  a  greenhouse  behind  the  Laguna  Honda  Hospital  which 
used  to  be  the  city's  greenhouse.   It's  not  used  as  much;  I  think 
now  it's  in  the  park.  But  this  used  to  service  the  entire  city. 
That  is  sort  of  the  headquarters. 

The  gardeners  are  very  highly  organized  because  they're  very 
sort  of  together  people.   There  are  many  that  are  in  organic 
gardening.   The  requirement  for  them  was  to  have  some  experience 
in  gardening—at  least  two  years  of  gardening,  or  two  years  of 
college.  We're  now  criticized  because  we  don't  have  enough  minorities 
gardening.   But  in  the  application  of  the  whole  thing,  we  had  only 
one  Black;  there  was  one  Korean  and  maybe  one  Japanese.   But  neither 
one  of  them  could  speak  English.  The  Black  applicant  was  only 
interested  in  the  maintenance;  he  wasn't  interested  in  gardening;  he 


Asawa: 


169 


was  interested  in  mowing  and  maintaining  a  gardtn.   So  they  vert 
really  disqualified,  and  they  were  the  minorities.  Well,  we  were 
more  concerned  with  getting  people  that  were  skilled. 


Nathan:  Were  there  any  women  interested? 

Asawa:   Many,  many  young,  attractive  women.  They're  very  energetic  and 
they're  full  of  ideas.  They're  very,  very  good.   So,  with  all 
this,  that  needed  a  lot  of  help  with  materials;  we  have  struggled 
with  that. 

Mayor  Alioto's  Bi-Centennial  Committee  gave  us  $2,000  for  a 
garden  in  the  Western  Addition.  Then  we  got  an  anonymous  donation 
through  the  Bi-Centennial  for  ten  gardens,  that  meant  that  each 
garden  got  $500.  That  was  the  beginning  for  ten  gardens. 

Then,  there  was  a  proposal  we  had  written  that  Anne  Theilen 
is  now  monitoring.   Anne  Marie  Theilen  monitors  all  the  CETA 
gardeners  and  artists.   She  was  one  of  the  original  people  from 
Alvarado.   She  began  Edison.  When  Alvarado  began,  she  came  to  us 
to  start  something  at  Edison.  Then  they  moved  with  basing.   She's 
been  one  of  the  strongest  people  in  the  program. 


Monitoring  and  Volunteering 


Asawa:   When  we  moved  into  the  Art  Commission,  then  she  was  made  the  monitor 
because  she  had  the  contacts  with  the  schools.   Then  Leah  Forbes 
became  a  full-time  director  of  the  Alvarado  program,  so  that  there's 
always  this  connection.  We  always  wanted  people  who  knew  where  things 
were  and  who  needed  this  and  weren't  ignorant. 

Nathan:   Is  the  monitor  a  sort  of  supervisor? 

Asawa:  Yes,  and  sees  that  those  people  get  there,  and  if  they  don't  work, 
then  sees  that  they  get  removed  or  have  a  fair  hearing.  It's  very 
demanding;  it's  the  key  person  in  the  success  of  this. 

We  had  a  little  trouble  with  the  Neighborhood  Arts  Program  not 
knowing  how  to  incorporate  it  with  their  organizers.   A  lot  of  the 
artists  are  highly  organized,  and  they  felt  that  the  organizers 
weren't  doing  their  job.   It  was  a  little  touchy  at  the  beginning, 
but  it's  all  worked  out.  People  understand  that  there's  no  one 
trying  to  push  anybody  out,  but  that  people  have  to  understand  what 
the  duties  are,  you  know,  and  be  able  to  work. 

It's  been  a  very  interesting  experiment  and  I  think  it's  going 
to  work  out.   It  has  been  done  in  a  non-political  way.   I  don't  feel 
that  it's  political.  But  it's  a  restructuring  of  what  is  all  there 


170 


Asawa:        anyway;   we're  not   replacing  anybody;  we're   just   redefining    the   role 
that   they  should   play.      In  a  way,    it's   still  very   informal   because 
it's  not  throughout  the  city;    it's   only  just  a   small  core   from  each 
department    functioning   this  way.      But   if   it  could   go  deeper   into 
each  department,    it  would   probably   save   our   city--I   think. 

Nathan:      Do  you  have   room  in   the   program   for   volunteers,    or   people  who  wish 
to  enter? 

Asawa:        Yes.      But  very  often   it's   a   lot  of  work  to  have   volunteers,    unless 
they're   steady.      They  might  come   twice   and    then  drop  out,    you  know. 
But  we  have    found   that   there  are   certain   ones,    like  Phoebe   Brown, 
who   is  retired    from     City  Planning.      She  has   been  an  asset    from  the 
very  beginning;    she's  worked.      But   she   found   somebody   she   liked    to 
work  with . 

You  can't   just   say,    "Go   to  this   school   this  morning,   go   to 
that   school   this  morning."     I   think  the   ideal   situation   for  a 
volunteer   is    to   find   somebody  that   you  can  work  with   and    be    in 
contact  with  a  person,   and    follow   that  person,    so   that   you're  not 
out   there  naked   every   time  you  go;    you're   sort   of  directed.      That's 
really   the   frustration  with  many  volunteers,    they  sometimes   volunteer 
and   they  get   there   and   nobody  knows  where    they   should   be   or  what 
room  they  should   be   in.      That's    frustrating   for    the  volunteer   too. 

Nathan:      You're   suggesting  the  relationship   is  very   important   for  volunteers. 
Asawa:        Yes. 

Nathan:      From  what   you  have  described,   do  you  think  this   kind   of   coming 
together  will   continue   in  the  city? 

Asawa:        I   think   that   it's   pretty  well   established   now.      Housing  now  wants 

artists.     We  have   artists  working   in  housing  projects:      North  Beach, 
Bernal  Dwellings,   Valencia  Gardens,   Ping  Yuen,    Sunnydale.      All   of 
these   artists  are   now  working  with   the   community   there.      Now   they 
want   those  centers    filled  with  activities,  where   before  NAP  was   so 
small   it  couldn't  do   it.     With   this  new  group  of  artists,    there's 
the  greater  possibility  of  something  happening.      It's   not   that   easy, 
you  know.      You  have   to  go   through   the  community  group  and   then  you 
have   to  go   through   the   board,    you  have    to  go   to   the  staff.      You  get 
all  of   the  scene—you  get  very  tired  of  that  whole  business. 

But  nevertheless,    I   think  hopefully  out   of  all   of   this  will 
come   a  decentralization  of   the  artists   so  that   each   department 
begins   to  ask   for  artists.      The  Park  and   Recreation  could   really  use 
artists,  Housing  could   really  use  artists,    Social   Services   could 
really  use  artists    to  work  on    the  waiting   rooms,    to  work  on  projects 
for   children  as   the  parents  wait    to   get    their   checks   or  work  on 
their  problems. 


171 


Talesplnners 


Nathan: 

Asawa : 

Nathan: 

Asava: 


Asawa:       One  of   the  most    touching  groups   is   the  one  with   the  senior  citizens. 
There's  a  group  of  artists;    they're  called  Taleapinners.     They're 
actors.     The  nice   thing  about   this  is  we  were  able   to  hire  senior 
citizens   through  CETA  at  half-time   instead  of   full-time.     We  had 
Tommy  Roberts  who   is  a  puppeteer;  he  goes  all  over  and  he  performs 
at  Cal   Berkeley  and  other  places. 

Oh,    I've   seen  him.'     He  has  a   little  knit  cap,   and  he  pulls   the 
puppets  out  of  his  bag? 

Yes,  right.  And  I  made  a  puppet  of  him,  a  Tommy  Roberts  puppet. 
[Laughter]  Did  you?  A  Tommy  Roberts  puppet.'  Is  it  a  hand  puppet? 

It's  a  little  hand  puppet,   and  he   uses   it   in  his  act  all   the  time. 
In   fact,    I  cast  his   face  at  one  of  the   festivals,   and   I  made  some 
sketches  while  he  was   performing   for  us.      He  works  with  Talespinners 
and    there's   a  group  of  about   five  actors. 

Nathan:      They're  all   old   people? 

Asawa:        No,   no;    they're  young.     There's  one  named   Sandy.     They  go  to  senior 
centers,   and   one  group  is  doing  oral  history  with  people  who  are 
in  the  housing  projects;    they're   interviewing  them.     They  have 
discovered    that   there  are  old  actors  and  old   spiritual  singers 
from  churches.      Then   they  have   brought   a    few  of   these   on   to  go   the 
next  place,   and   they  have   incorporated   them  into   the  group. 

One  of   the  actresses  has  a   little   baby,    so  the  baby  is   included 

in  the  act.  It  sits  on  the  stage  and  looks  around,  as  though  he 
knows  what's  happening.  [Laughter]  Now  they  have  recently  been 
able  to  hire  three  more  senior  citizens  through  CETA. 

So,    the   thing  is,    instead   of   the  usual  ways   of  helping  the 
senior  citizens   through   the  state  and  through   this  or  that 
organization,    through    this  volunteer  group  and   going   to  visit, 
suddenly   the   senior   citizens   are   becoming  performers    for   themselves 
and    for  each  other.      Suddenly  all   these   little  stories   that  are 
being  told,   you  know,    in   the  past  —  they  're  being  incorporated    into 
the  plays.      It's  just  an  incredible   thing.' 

So   that  the   thing   is,    suddenly   the  artist  is  used    in  every  way, 
so  that   it's  not   just   the  juveniles  here  and   the   senior  citizens 
here  and   the  prisoners  here.     Suddenly,   by  bringing  artists   into 
each  of  these  different  departments,    if   they  do  it   in  a  serious  way, 
I  think  we  can  really  change  the   social  structure  of  our   lives,  not 
only  here  but  almost  anywhere. 


172 


Nathan:      In  Institutions,   also? 
Asawa:        In  institutions,   yes. 

Nathan:      That's   the  hardest   thing  —  the   leavening   that  makes    it   all   start   to 

happen.     What  do   they  do  with    the   oral  histories  when   they   interview 
these  elderly  people? 

Asawa:       What   they're  doing   is   they're   interviewing   them  and   they're   trying 
to   find   a  way  in  which  they  can  compile   it.      See,    they  don't  have 
any  of   the  money   to  do  any  of   that;    they   only  have    the   salary   of 
the  person.      But  beyond    that    is   a   lot   of  work,   much  more    than   just 
the  taping.      Anyway,   what   they're   trying  to  do,    I   think,    is    they're 
trying   to   use   this  material   so  that   it   becomes   recycled   and 
incorporated    into   their  performances. 


Artists   and   Community  Life 


Asawa:        You  would  have   to   talk   to   those   people   in  order   to   get   sort   of   the 

feel  of   it.      Just   seeing   from  the   outside,    I'm  telling  you  the    things 
that   are   actually  happening  with   the   artists.      Things    that  we  had 
never   even  anticipated.'     We  were   thinking  of  murals   and   a   few 
performances   in  parks,   you  know,    to  get   the  kids   aroused.      Actually 
we're   really   talking  about   something  very   serious   and   in-depth 
because   I   think   the  artist   understands  all   these  human  needs   because 
that's  what   the  artist  deals  with  every  day  of  his   life.     The  Housing 
Authority,    if  they're  really  in  tune  with  this,    it's  to  their 
advantage   to  have   artists   living  within  a  housing   unit.      That   artist 
could   be   an  artist-in-residence,    could   be   utilized    in   the   community 
center,    could   be   used   to  work  on   beautifying.      They're  now  talking 
about  paint   for  the  entire  building. 

Nathan:      So   you're   integrating  artists   back   into   the    life   of   the  whole 
community? 

Asawa:        Yes,   and   using   them  just   as  you  use   street   cleaners  and   clerks 
and   secretaries  and    insurance  writers   and    lawyers   and   doctors. 
They  are   one  group   that   can   bring   so  much  pleasure    to  dealing  with 
the  problems    that  we  have.      People  want   to  keep    it   stirring   so   that 
they  can  maintain   the   status   quo,   maintain  more   jobs    for   the 
services   that  are  all  over  the  city. 

Just   in  one  case   of  one  young  boy  who's   a   friend   of  our  children. 
We   tried    to  get  his   social  worker   to  help  and  she   says,    "No,   I  just 
give    them  the  money  every  month."     That  was  her   job;    that  was  her 
duty.      Somebody  else   goes    in  and    takes   another  piece   of  him,    and 
another  person   is   going   to  do  something  else    for  him.      When  you  add 


173 


Asava: 


Nathan: 


Asava : 


all  chose  people  up,  ic's  costing  us  a  lot  of  money  just  to  ktep 
him  alive—maintain  him—without  any  help.  Had  there  been  a  way 
in  which  this  boy  could  have  continued  with  music,  which  is  what 
he  loved -- 

I'm  not  going   to  go  into  whether  art   can  help.      I'm  just 
simply  saying  that  had   there  been  maybe  more  of  a  possibility  of 
this  when  he  was   in  school  along   the  way,    it  may  not  have  changed 
him  but   there  would  have  been  an  option. 


An  option, 
together. 


Exactly.      It   is   exciting  to  hear  how  this  all  comes 


I   think  now   that    it's  all   set  up,    if  people  want   it,    it  will  work. 
There's   really  no  real  need   for  me   to  do  much  because   I   think  it's 
already  happening  with  a   lot   of  artists.     The   gardeners  are 
organizing   themselves  and   the  artists  are  organizing  themselves, 
and  so  much  of  what  we  had    to  do--a   little  bit  here  and  a   little  bit 
there—is   really  being  done  by  a  whole  group  of  really  concerned 
people.      I  think  that  maybe  the  next  crop  will  not  be  as  concerned 
because   it's  already  established  and   they  will  think  it's  always 
happened    this  way. 

The  gardeners  have  written  a  gardening  curriculum  that   they 
would   like   to  give   to  teachers.      Some  of   the  danger  of  all  of  this 
is   that,    if   it   is   taken  to   the   schools,    unless   it's  carefully 
planned,    the   teacher  will  leave   the  room  to  let   the  gardener  do  it. 
But   the   idea  —  since      this    is   really  a  very  temporary  program,    in 
a  way- -would   be    to  train   enough   teachers   that  would   be   concerned. 
There  are  many  teachers  who  are   really  concerned  and  would   really 
do   it,   but    there   could   be  a   tendency  that    they  would    think,    since 
they  know  nothing  about   it,    "Let   the   expert   do   it   and   I'll   go  correct 
my  papers."     They  don't  want   that   to  happen,   any  more   than  they  want 
that   to  happen  with  the  artist. 


In-Service  Training  and  Working  Together 


Asawa:        The   idea  is   for   the   artists   in  the   schools   to  work  with   the  students 
and   the  parents  and   the  teachers   in  the  same  room;    this   is   the   ideal 
way  to  do   in-service.      In-service  cannot  be  done   in  isolation;   you 
can't  get   a  group  of  25   teachers   together   and   tell    them,    "You  do 
this  and   this"  and    then  expect   them  to  take   it  back  to  the  classroom. 
What  you  have   to  do  is  to  teach    them  the  skill,   you  have   to  teach 
them  the  method,   and   you  have   to  also   show  how   children   learn.      It 
doesn't  necessarily  mean  that   they  have   to  be  quiet  or  that  they  have 
to  be   in  rows;   disorderliness   is  part  of  that  process.     This   is  what 
most   teachers   and  most   educational   institutions  don't  ever   tell   these 
people.      The  Department   of  Education   in  all   these   universities   are 


174 


Asawa:       worthless;    they  should  be   really  kicked   out    for   the  kinds   of  things 
they  are    teaching   the  young  people.      It's   getting  better   now;    it's 
beginning   to  happen  now   that   the   students   are   going   out    into   the 
community. 

But   the   students   can't   just   be   thrown   out;    the    teacher  has    to 
go  with   them,    to  work  in   the   schools    if   they're  going   to  go  out 
with   student   teaching.     They  can't  just  go  in  there  as  observers; 
they  have   to  really  participate   in  what   is  needed   and    in   the 
activities.      I   think  that  when   that  happens,    then  we  will   begin   to 
have   a  change   to  a  kind   of   teacher   that   understands  what  we're 
trying   to  do.     We  don't  have   a   lot   of   teachers    that   understand    this. 

Nathan:     Do   you  feel   that   the   newer,   younger   teachers   are   perhaps   a   little 
more   interested    in  your  vision? 

Asawa:        I  don't   really  know.      I  would   say   that   those   college   students    that 
were   exposed    to  people   like   Buckminster  Fuller  are   beginning    to 
understand   this   approach    to   learning.      But   then  we   still  have   the 
system  to  deal  with,   and   people  are  very   tired.      Maybe   the   step 
that  Dr.   Alioto   is   taking  now  might   open   it   up,   and    it  may  meet 
with  great  resistance. 

The   thing   in   the   school  district   is    that   they're  all  divided 

too.      The  administrators   are  fighting   the   teachers'    union,   and 

nobody's   paying  attention   to  the   kids;    it's   an  adult   battle.    It's   a 

greedy,   vicious   thing   that's  happening. 

Nathan:      And  you  think   that   possibly  Mr.   Alioto's   proposals  will  move    in 
a  better  direction? 

Asawa:        I  think  so.      I  don't   know.      I   think  any  program  can  work.      You  can 
work  it  right   in  the   system  that's    there  now,    if  you  have   competent 
people.      That's   all  you  need.      You  don't  need    the  building;    it's   not 
the   building,    it's   not   the  geography,    it's   not   the  way   the   sun  hits 
the  classroom—all    that   is   just   baloney,    really.      I   think  it's 
the   people.      I  keep   saying  you  can   teach   in  a   tent.      I   think  the 
sooner  we   get   to  recognizing  people   that   are   capable   of  doing 
something,   and   paying   them   (and   they,   again,   are    the    idea  people), 
beginning   to   really  use    them—not   just   ideas,   not   just   sitting   in   a 
vacuum,    sitting  around   down  at   the   Institute   somewhere   in   Santa 
Barbara  or  Stanford,    but   using   those   people  who  are   right   in  the 
heart   of   it  and  working  — those   are   the   people.      It   could   be   a  younger 
person,    it   could   be   a  mother.      It's  how   to  use   people  where   they 
•re --that   is  really   the   creative   thing   to  do.      It's   not   the   university 
person  who's   going  to   tell   you  what   to  do.      Those   are   all  constraints 
and   those   all  keep  people  who  have   a   little   information   from  giving 
it;    it   intimidates   people. 


175 


Asawa:  I  think  the   nursery  school  concept   of  bringing  parents   in 

and  working  with   the  children   in  the   situation,   so  chat   parents 
don't   feel  alone,    is  a  good   one.     A  woman  who  speaks  only 
Spanish  with  her  child,    staying  at  home,   doesn't  do  that  child 
any  good.      But   if   she   is  able   to  come    to  a  group  of  women,   she  can 
then  teach   the  other  women,    the  non-Spanish  speaking  women,   all 
her  cultural  background.     Then,    in  return,  her  child   is   learning 
to  speak  English,   and    then  he  can  socialize  and  come   together.     We 
can  utilize  all   the  people,   all   the  potential,   at  every   level.     This 
is   I  think  what  makes   a   family  work   too,  when   the   parent   utilizes 
all   the   skills.      I   think  that   that  sort  of   is   the  basis   for  learning-- 
to  understand  where  that   person  is  at  that  moment;    that   is  really 
the   important  thing--to  train  within  yourself  and    to  get   that  across. 

Nathan:      And   then   to  make   it   possible   for  each  person   to  contribute  what 
he  has   to  offer? 

Asawa:        Right,    right.      I  think  that   is   the  most   important   thing.      Government 
has    to  understand    that;   government  has    to  understand   that  a  neighbor 
hood    that  can  get   together  and  put   up  a   fence,    instead   of  waiting 
for    the  Department  of  Public  Works   to  put   up  the    fence,    is  going   to 
cost  us   far   less  and  going   to  make   that  community   far  more  responsive. 
We'll   save   the   city  millions   of  dollars,   and   that  money  can   then   be 
used   for   something  that's  more  productive   than  the  paperwork  that 
it   takes   to  get   the   permission   to  get   that   fence   up. 

There  are  a   lot  of  talented  people   in  this  city  who  can't   use 
their   talents   because   the    law   restricts   them.      It   says  you  can't 
do  it.     The  same  thing  with   the   school  district—you  can't  get  hired 
in  the   school  district  because  you  don't  have  a  California 
certificate.     There  are  many  constraints  that  are  going  on,   so  that 
I  as   an   individual   can't   be  hired   by  this   school  district   simply 
because   I  don't  have   a  degree.      Although   I  have  an  honorary  doctorate 
degree,    I  don't  have  a  B.A.   and  an  M.A.    and   I  don't  have  a  California 
teacher's  certificate.      [Laughter]      Can  you  imagine   that.' 

This  has   to  do  with  the   unions  protecting  their  own  crew.     Yet, 
at  the   same    time,  when  you  talk  to  a   teacher   in  a  classroom,    the 
teacher   is   powerless.      You  can't    imagine  why   they  wouldn't  have   any 
power,    simply  because   they're  such  a  powerful  organization.     They're 
organizationally  powerful,   but   they're   individually  powerless. 

I    think   that    this   is   the  whole   problem  with  everybody   in  our 
society;   we  have   given   up  our   individual   freedom   for   the   security 
of   the   group.      As  we   see    this    thing  happening  —  this  has  been  an 
observation    (and   I   really  believe   it)    of  my  friend  Effie   Schwarzschild , 
whose  husband   came   from  Wertheim  in  Germany.     He   fled  when  he  was    ten. 
They  were   invited   back  to  Wertheim  by   the   mayor   this  past   summer,   and 
so  the  whole   family  went.      She   sees   this  whole  process   that  we've 
been  going   through   in   the   school  district,    this   power lessness;   nobody 


176 


Asawa:        being  able   to  make  a  decision,   every  person   saying   "My  hands   are 
tied—but  don't   say  I  said   so,   because   I'm  not   in  a  position   to 
say   this.      But--"     She    said    that   this    is   absolutely  a   repeat   of 
Fascism  working  right   into   the  hands  of  this  country. 


The  Scramble    for  Funds 


Asawa:        It   could   be  deliberate,    from  the  government's  point   of  view  of 
giving  piles  of  money  without  any  order  or  organization,   and 
letting  all   these  poor  people   scramble   for   it   and    fight    for   it   and 
discover   that  they're  just  as  corrupt   at   the  low  level  as   they  are 
at   the   top   level.      It's   this  whole   thing  of   scrambling,    and   forcing 
them  to  have  guidelines   and    to   fit   into   these   guidelines   in  order 
to  get    that  money.      So   they're   compromising,    compromising,    compromisingj 
in  order   to  get  a   few  million  dollars   into   this  district  —  incredible. 
And   the  meetings   that   people  have   to   come    to  and   the  way   they   fight 
over   this  money   is   just   a  very   frightening,    frightening   thing.      We've 
watched   this   thing.      In  a  way   it's   fascinating,   but   it  is  really 
frightening. 

It's  divisive.  The  whole  thing  is  designed  to  keep  the  poor 
sort  of  fighting  amongst  themselves;  in  the  meantime  other  things 
are  happening.  This  little  piece  of  money  that  you  can  fight  over. 

Nathan:      Do  you  feel   it   is  almost   like   a  deliberate  plot,   or   is    it   ineptitude? 

Asawa:       Well,    it's  a  combination  of   both.      It's  a  combination  of  both,   but 

I'm  sure   that   in  the  meantime,   we  have   the  Pentagon  and   other  people 
who  are   absolutely   exempt   from  scrutiny.      All    these   things  are 
happening.      It  all   sounds    like   a  plot. 

Nathan:     One  wonders   if  these  things  happen  because  nobody  has  the   sense   to 
pull   it  together,   or   is   there  some   evil  genius  plotting?      It's  hard 
for  me   to  accept   that. 

Asawa:       Well,  obviously  if  we  go  back  to  Nixon,   I   think  that  he  was  really 
plotting- -he  was!     And  had  he  not   been  caught,   he   would  have  been 
successful. 

Nathan:     You  feel  there  is   a  real   suspicion  current. 

Asawa:        Oh,    it's  designed   to  make   people   suspicious  of  each   other—we 

discovered    that   in   this  proposal,    in   this  whole  ESAA   thing.     We 
are  given  $3.8  million   to  reduce   racial   isolation  and  minority 
tensions.      Do  you  know  how  much   of   that  money  was  put   into  materials, 
field   trips  and   consultants? 

Nathan:     How  much? 


176a 


Asawa:        Five   thousand   dollars. 

Nathan:     Where  did  all   the   rest  of  it  go? 

Asawa:  Personnel.  Jobs.  Training  the  teachers,  giving  them  increment 
pay,  increasing  their  pay  by  going  to  in-service  workshops  that 
are  worthless. 

Nathan:      It's  all   frittered  away  like   this? 

Asawa:       Here's   the  proposal.     This   is   the  proposal   for  it.     [Showing 

proposal]      By  writing  our  proposal   in  here --and   they're  accusing 
me  now  of  supplanting,    that   I'm  trying  to  get  money  for  my  program 
(they  never  refer   to  Alvarado;    they  call   it   the  Asawa  Project). 

Nathan:     Who  is   "they"?     The   federal  level? 

Asawa:       No,    the  ESAA  community  advisory  council,   and    the   staff.     The  staff 
talks  about   it  as  the  Asawa  Project. 

Nathan:     You  never  have  used    it  to  benefit  yourself. 

Asawa:        I've  never  gotten  anything  out  of  it   from  the  school  district;    I've 
.only  had  a  grant    from  the  San  Francisco  Foundation     for   the   last 
two  years.     They  haven't  kept  a  commitment   for   this  year,    so  I  don't 
want   to   take   it. 

Nathan:      The   San  Francisco  Foundation  has   not? 

Asawa:       No--the   school  district  has  not.     Their  match  has  not  been  made. 

So,   as  long  as   the   school  doesn't  do   it,   I  won't   take   the  match   from 
the   foundation.      But   I  think  that    the  thing  about  all  of  this,    it's 
really  a  vicious   thing.      (I  don't  know   if  it   should  be  on  tape, 
but  who  cares.) 

Nathan:     Well,    this   is    the  way  you  understand   it-- 

Asawa:        Sure. 

Nathan:   --and  unless  you  say  it,  who  else  is  going  to  say  it? 

Asawa:       Right.     We  were   told   up  at   those  meetings  all  of  this.     We  asked 
that  competent  people  be  hired,  we  asked    that  student-initiated 
programs  and   teacher-initiated  and  site-initiated  programs  be   the 
prime   emphasis,  within  gardening,   visual  arts  and  performing  arts. 
We  made  a  specific  area  we  were   talking  about.     They  have  written 
the  activities   in,    but   they  haven't  written  our  goals   in.      So   they 
are  asking  for  more  money.     We're  still  working  on  this. 


177 


Asawa:  See,  Alvarado  really  is  not   interested    in  staying  in  business 

anyvay.      It  was  just   sort  of  a  catalyst.     We  don't  own  anything. 
We  own  a   typewriter  and  we  own  a  few  tools.     We  don't  have  a  desk. 
We  don't  pay  anything   for  rent.     We  have  a  rubber  stamp   for  our 
return  address,  we  don't  have  any  stationery.     People  are  asking 
for  recommendations  on  our  stationery  and  we  just  have   to  use  a 
rubber  stamp;    that's  all  we  have.     We've  never  spent  anything  on 
it,   anything  other   than  bringing  artists  and  materials  to  the  kids. 

Nathan:      It's  more  a  method    than  a  structure? 

Asawa:        Right.      It's  not  an  organization  almost.     We  have  a  minimum  board, 
a  working  board   that  we  can  meet  with,   and  we  have  a  meeting  that's 
required  once  a  year.     We  never  spend  any  time   at  meetings;  we're 
always  out  there  working. 

It  seems   that   they  are  not   interested    in  children. 


Liberation  and  Learning 


Nathan:     And  yet   the  project  that  you've  been  describing  somehow  has 

stimulated  people    to  develop  on  their  own,   like   the  gardeners  and 
the  actors  group  that   then  developed   senior  citizens  and  brought 
them  in  —  there   is   so  much   vitality  there. 

Asawa:       The  artists   themselves  chose   the  areas  they  were  concerned  with,    and 
we   said,    "Go  ahead.     Do   it.'"     They're  the  ones.     We   talked  about   it. 
Youth  guidance  centers,    senior  citizens,  prisons—we've  talked  about 
all  this     sort  of   in  broad    terms  and  how  we  want  to  reach  all   those. 
But   the  artists,  having  been  already  in   the  community  and  having 
done   these   things,  were  attracted   to  it  because   they  felt   they  could 
work  in  the  areas  where  they  were;    it  was  just  a  natural.     That's 
why,   by  keeping   it  open,   I  feel  as   though   I  don't  do  any  work.      If 
you  let  everybody   function  in  their  capacity,    then  there's  no  work 
for  you  to  do. 

Nathan:     You  sort  of   liberate  them  to   function  as   they  can? 
Asawa:       Yes.      I   think  that   that's  really  what  learning  is. 

Nathan:      Is   that  why  it's  a  threat  to  administrators—because  if  you  do  it 
right,  you  do  yourself  out  of  a  job,    in  a  way? 

Asawa:        I   don't   even   see   them  as   being  out  of  work  because   then   they  become 
liberated   to  do  what  they  want.      It  could  be  a  useful   function  for 
the  total   thing.     And  many  of  them  are  very  frustrated  where   they  are, 
They  have  to  look  busy  if   they're  going  to  stay  there,   and   that   is 
sort  of  the  worst   state   to  be   in. 


178 


Asawa:  I  think  the  tragedy  of  all   this   is   that  that's  what  we  are 

teaching  our   children  —  to  cheat,    to   lie   and   be   dishonest   and 
compromise.     We're   teaching   them  all   of   the   bad    things,    and   it's 
all   legal  because   it's  all   in   the  guidelines.     To   fit    into   the 
guidelines    instead   of  making   guidelines   that   fit   the  needs  —  that 
is   just   the   thing   that  we've  got   to  get   rid   of,    fitting   into 
guidelines   that  have  nothing   to  do  with   us.     Maybe    (Governor) 
Brown's   less  government   and  more   responsibility  on   the   individual, 
that's  got  to  happen,    because   the  other  thing  is  killing  us.      It's 
going  to  destroy  all  of   us,   really.      I'm  not  emotional   about    it; 
it's  a  practical   thing. 

What   is   so   sad   about   it,    it's  destroying  that  person,   and   I 
just   think   that    that's   so   sad   really.      Even   the   sadder   thing   is 
that  we   are   in  a   period  when  we  have   the   freedom  to  be   even  more, 
because  we  have    less  demand   on   us. 

Nathan:      Physical   demand? 

Asawa:        Physical   and   social.      You  know,   you're  not   boxed   into   religion  and 
dress  code.      All   of   these   things— we  have   absolutely   total   freedom 
at    this  point,    and    the   sky's   the    limit,    for   the   first   time   in  our 
life.'     We're  not   utilizing   that  opportunity,   and   I   think  that   that's 
tragic.      Everybody's  writing  a  grant,    everybody's   begging   for  money; 
we  have   become   organized   beggars.      In  a  way,    this   is   another   form  of 
losing  our   freedom.      With   the    time   that    is   spent   to  write   this 
proposal,    those  people   should   be   in  the   schools  dealing  with   the 
kids;    then  we  wouldn't   need   this  money. 

Nathan:     That's  right. 


"How  Do  You  Live?" 


Asawa:   But  this  is  money  used  to  sort  of  keep  things  stirred  and  manipulated, 
manipulating  other  people.   I  just  feel  sad  that  all  those  hours 
that  the  citizens  have  to  spend  at  this,  they  truly  should  be 
spending  it  with  their  families,  instead  of  being  out  there  at  night 
every  week  for  five  hours. 

Finally,  I'm  really  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  way  to 
solve  the  problem  is  to  really  solve  your  own  problems.   It's  never 
going  to  be  solved  by  somebody  else.  How  to  get  to  that  point?  The 
simplest  thing  has  now  become  the  impossible  thing.   A  mother  with  a 
child  can  no  longer  take  care  of  herself,  so  that  we  have  to  build 
up  a  whole  organization  so  that  she  can  be  cared  for.  A  simple  thing 
like  taking  care  of  your  food  and  taking  care  of  your  child  and 
getting  him  here  and  getting  him  there  has  become  an  impossible  task. 


179 


Asaw«:        But   it's  easy  for  her   to  go  out  to  a  meeting  —  leave  her  child  at 

a   babysitter  —  and   organize   and    fight   and   protest   and   sign  petitions, 
which  we  have  become  so   skilled  at  doing  now,  when  really  the 
answer  to  all  of  it  is   to  find  ways    to  work.      I'm  not  a  spiritualist, 
but   I   feel   that   that's  what  all   these  groups   that  are  popping  up 
now  are  [doing],   trying  to   find    that   solution  of  how  does  one   take 
care  of  oneself.      I   think  that   that's   the  question   that   is  asked 
of  me;    that's  really  the  one  question.     They  say,    "How  do  you  do 
that   fountain?"  or   "How  do  you  do   this   technique?"     But   the   thing 
that   is  much  more   interesting  to   them  is,    "How  do  you  have  your 
family  and  how  do  you  do  your  work?     How  do  you  get   this  together?" 
I  think  that   that   really  is   the  most  critical  question  that  people 
should   be   asking. 

Nathan:      "How  do  you   live?" 

Asawa:       Yes,    "How  do  you  live?"     What  we've  done   is  we've  deadened  all   those 
things   that  give  us  pleasure.     We  don't  do   those   things  because  we 
don't  have   enough   time  any  more   to  do   those  things   that   solve 
problems.     We're   looking  for   solutions   that  are  not  workable. 

We  don't  want   solutions;    that's   really  what  I've  come   to 
conclude—nobody  wants   solutions.      If   they  wanted  them,    then  they 
could  have   them  very  easily;    it's  very  easy  to  have   solutions.     That 
could  be  challenged,   but   I   feel   that   there  are  many   things   that  give 
you  pleasure   that   absolutely  cost  you  no  money,    like  sitting  in  the 
sun,   or  getting  up  early  enough   to  see   the   sun  rise    (that's   free   for 
everybody),    the   sunset    (that's    free).      I  mean,    there  are  a   lot  of 
things   that  are   free   that  can  give  you  pleasure   that  people  have   sort 
of  stripped   out  of  their   lives  because  they  don't  cost  anything. 
They  think  by  getting   things   they  have  to  pay  for,    it's  going   to  give 
them  the  answers.     Those  answers  are  very  simple  and  very   free— most 
of  them,   many  of   them  are   free.     Of  course,  we  still  have   to  make  a 
living,  make  our  payments;  we  have  to  pay   for   the  car  and   the  mortgage 
and   the   trip  during   the   summer— all    these   realities.      I'm  not   ignoring 
this,   because   I  have   it  constantly. 

Nathan:      It   brings  us   to  what  you  were  saying  a   few  moments  ago  about  Governor 
Brown's  attitude   that  we  need    to   learn   to  do  more  with   less. 


Student   RISE  Forum:      Segregation  of  Adults  and  Children 


Nathan:      You  were   starting   to   talk  about   the  ESAA   application  and   the  way 

it's  been  re-worked  again,   and  then  you  were  getting  into  some  other 
ideas. 

Asawa:       The  reason  we  have  been   involved   in  the  ESAA   is  because   two  parents 
and   one   community  person   (Dorice  Murphy  and  Effie  Schwarzchild, 
who's   a  parent,    and  myself)    tried   to  work   through  ESAA.     We  had   our 


180 


Asava:    planning  meeting  and  getting  parents  together,  getting  students 
interested  and  excited  and  trying  to  get  students  involved  in 
making  the  ESAA  student  advisory  committee  active. 

We  also  supported  the  RISE  forum;  we  had  a  student  RISE  forum. 
Nathan:  RISE  forum? 

Asawa:   When  I  was  on  the  Wilson  Riles  Reform  in  Intermediate  and  Secondary 
Education  (RISE)  Commission,  I  recommended  that  throughout  the  state 
because  we'd  never  had  a  student  speak  up.   We  wanted  really  to  have 
students.  So,  at  McAteer  High  School,  the  parents  sponsored  a  RISE 
forum  and  all  the  commissioners  around  this  area  were  invited  to  be 
there. 

Nathan:   Are  you  on  the  Riles  commission  also? 

Asawa:   Not  on  the  Roth  commission  but  the  RISE  commission  that  was  completed 
last  May.  We  worked  for  ten  months  on  that,  and  I  was  the  only 
artist  on  that;  most  of  them  were  businessmen,  superintendents, 
principals,  teachers.  The  parents  and  students  got  a  meeting  together 
and  invited  us.  The  only  requirement  was  that  we  couldn't  talk—no 
adults  could  talk—which  was  very  good.   They  gave  us  a  list  of 
priorities  and  things  that  they  felt  were  important  to  the  students. 
So  it  was  a  very  exciting  meeting. 

Nathan:  Did  you  get  some  ideas  from  the  students? 

Asawa:   Oh  yes,  very  much.   Some  of  them  thought  that  teachers  should  live 
in  the  city;  if  students  had  to  live  in  the  city,  why  didn't  the 
teachers  live  in  the  city?  Which  is  very  logical. 

Nathan:  Of  course  it  is. 

Asawa:   And  about  bathrooms  being  segregated;  the  teachers  and  students-- 
they  should  not  be  segregated.  And  that  they  should  eat  together; 
there  should  not  be  a  separate  lunchroom  for  the  teachers  and  the 
students.   It  should  all  be  integrated.  They  were  really  talking 
sense  about  things  that  are  so  fundamentally  wrong  with  the  school 
system  right  now.   If  those  things  aren't  cleared  up,  no  matter  how 
many  millions  of  dollars  you  bring  in,  it  can't  get  corrected  because 
those  things  are  basically  the  things  that  keep  people  separated. 
The  real  problem  is  separation,  segregation,  not  among  the  Blacks 
and  the  whites  but  among  adults  and  children. 


181 


Federal  Guidelines:     Multi-Cultural  Activities 


Asawa:       With  ESAA,  we  had  worked  on  some  proposals   that  we  were  invited   to 

work  on  with   the  community.      I  had  worked  at  Ben  Franklin  and  Dorice 
and  Effie  worked  at  McAteer.     The  proposal  was  very  much  like   the 
one   that  started  gardening.     When  we  got   the  word   it  was  turned  down, 
we   said,    "By  whom?"     They  said,    "By  Washington."     "Who  in  Washington?" 
We  began  to  ask  questions  about  who  was  cutting   these  things  down. 
They  said,    "Washington  didn't   feel  that—what  had  gardening   to  do 
with   reducing  racial   tension?     What  has   that   to  do  with   it?" 

Anyway,    it   finally  got  cut  down.     Then  we  said,    "Why  don't  you 
talk  to  HEW?"     So  we  made  an  appointment  with  HEW- -Dr.   Aguirre  here, 
at  50  Fulton  Street—and  he   said,    "Veil,   you  know,    the  way  you  do 
it  is  you  have  to  speak  to  your   legislators  because  they  make   the 
law."     So  we  went   to  our  legislators.     We  went  to  John  Burton's 
office  and  we  went   to  Leo  McCarthy's  office.     We  wrote   letters. 

Nathan:     You  went  to  the   state   legislators  or  to   the    federal,   or  both? 

Asawa:       What  we  did  was,  we  wrote  a  letter   (kind  of  a  mean  letter;    they 
considered    it  mean)-- 

Nathan:     You  wrote  a  mean   letter?     I  find   that  hard   to  believe. 

Asawa:       Well,    "mean"  being   "frank."     We   sent  it   to  250  congressmen,    state 
legislators,   everybody.     We  got  a  response   from  some  of  them,    from 
Brademas  and   some  others.      Then   the   community  advisory  council  here 
was   indignant   that  we  didn't  go  to  them  first.     But  we're   independent. 
We're  just   concerned. 

Nathan:     Of  course  you  are' 

Asawa:        So,   everybody's  hands  are   tied,   so  we  didn't  want   to  go  anywhere  to 
go  over  it.     We  set   up  a  meeting  with  Dr.  Alioto  and  Gina  Pennestri 
from  John  Burton's  office  and  Dan  Waldman.     Our  first  meeting  was 
in  Burton's  office,  with  HEW  there  explaining.     HEW  said,    "We   can't 
force   the  school  district.     They  do  what   they  want   to  do."     So, 
we're  still  not  knowing  where   the  controls   are.     We   finally  got  a 
meeting  with  Robert  Alioto   (School   Superintendent)   and  he's   sort  of 
concerned,   and   CAC  is  angry  that   they  weren't  included   in   there.      It 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  CAC;    it  had   to  do  with  policy  and  more 
the   structure  at  the   top.     All   this  is  just  sort  of  going  on  back 
and   forth,   and  we've   taken  every  step.     The  office   that  has  been 
helping  us  most- -I  mean  completely—is  Dan  Waldman  and  Rick  Kropp 
from  Leo  McCarthy's  office.     They  have  helped   us  arrange  meetings 
with  HEW. 


182 


Asawa:  We've  asked    them  to  help  us  because  we  can't  get  through.      So 

they've  helped  us—assisted   us--in  every  step.     Finally  the  guidelines 
that  were  sort  of  reduced   to  paragraphs   that  we  could   fit   into,   are 
there.     Then,   on   that,  we  were   told   that    it  was   permissible   but   not 
required.      So   the   school  district  eliminates   part,    so   that  what  we're 
doing   is  permissible   but  not   required.     There  are   certain   things 
that   are   required.      So   they  have   taken  all   those   requirements   and 
just  sort  of  wiped   out.     They  say,    "We   can't   do   these    things   because 
of   federal  guidelines."     So  we've  had   a   re-definition  of   the   guidelines 
proposal,  which  is  multi-cultural  activities  and  programs    in  schools. 
It  deals  with   bringing  skilled   people   into   the   schools  with    the 
children. 

We've  also  been  in  contact  with  Yvette  del  Prado,  who    is   now 
the  curriculum  assistant  superintendent  in  curricula  or  programs, 
and  with  Dr.   Robert  Alioto;  we've  kept  him  informed   of  what  we're 
doing.     Actually,    this   could  make  him  be   very   effective;    this   could 
help  him  do  what  he's    talking  about. 

Nathan:      Is   this   still  pending? 

Asawa:        Oh  yes,    this   is  now  pending.      This   is  how   they  had  written   us   in 

here   into  this.      [Referring  to  proposal]      They've  written  just    the 
activities.     They  haven't   included   our   goals,   our   student   initiation-- 
and  we   feel   that   is  critical.     We  got  somebody  to  help  us  write   it 
in  their  "need,"  "activities,"  you  know. 

Nathan:     Format. 

Asawa:        Format,   yes.      So  we  have   to   follow.        They  have   the   gardening;    they 
didn't  change  that  at  all.     But   they  claim  that  all   this   is  going 
on;    it's   just  that   they  don't  have  money  to  do  it.     But  we  think  that 
it  can't  go  on  without   qualified  people.      They're  asking   for  more 
money,   but  we  don't  want  more  money;  we  want   this  program  intact. 
It's   just  a  way  of   using   that  money  better. 

Their  thrust  is  to  put  the  money  in   to  change  teacher  attitudes, 
if  you've  ever  seen  anything  as  vague  as  that.     But  what  we're   talking 
about  here   is   to  change   teachers'    attitudes  by  having  something   to 
work  with,   and   involving   the   teachers  and   the   students   in  it,    rather 
than  saying,    "We  have  this   reading  material."     Teachers  all    say  they 
need   reading  material,    so  they  respond   to  that  which  has  nothing 
really  to  do  with  the  children.     We're   talking  about   involving   the 
students;  we  want  everything   that  we've  written   to  go  directly  to 
the   students,  whether   it's  an  in-service,   whether   it's   a  workshop, 
whether  it's  a  field   trip  or  anything  else.     We're   saying  we  want 
children  to  be  actively  involved  in  it. 

That's  all  Alvarado  has  done,   to  utilize  the  children's  energy 
and  to   teach   them  a  skill  as   they  begin  to  contribute  to  their  own 
environment.     By  doing   this   they  contribute   to   tKe  entire  community 
because  the  community  sees  what   they've  done   so  that    they  know  what 
is  going  on. 


183 


Asawa:  What  we  wane   is   to   lee  people  know  what's  going  on.     We  don't 

want  all   this  mystery.     That's  why  the  paper-shuffling,   administrating 
and  all  of  that,    is  using  up  all    the  money  that  could  be  used   in 
producing  gardens    for   food  and  ethnic  gardens   for   festivals,    so  that 
people  could   come   together  and  make   food.     What  brings  people   together 
better  than  to  exchange   recipes  and   to  do  all   the  preparation? 

Nathan:      It's    so  natural. 


Counseling   and  Activities 


Asawa:        Yes.     And   this   is  not  a  program  for   reading  or   for  testing  or 

improving   the  reading   level.     They're  using   that,   saying  that   that 
is   the  way  people  will   feel  better--if  they  can  learn  to  read  better. 
But  we're  saying   that   if  we  can  bring  the  arts,   poetry,   and  all 
these   together,   and  combine   these   things,    then  you  teach   them  to 
read,   you   teach   them  to  draw,   and  you  teach   them  to  bring  a  thing 
into  a  logical   format,   and  you  teach   them  a  skill  in  the  meantime 
while  you're  doing  all   these   things.     We  don't   feel   that  we  can   look 
at   this  as  counseling,   as  community  involvement,   separately.     We 
feel  that  all    these   things   bring  all   these  things   together—that 
the  counseling  comes  out  of  the  nature  of  the  activity. 

Instead  of  counseling   (which   is  in  a  way  used    to  focus  on  problea 

children)  ,  ours   is  to  focus  on  the  entire   school  and  bring  the   so- 
called   "problem  children"   into   the  main  stream  so   they  will   fit   in, 
will    function,  will  contribute  at   the    level   in  which   they  can  do  it. 
They  can  go  through   this  and   then  come   out  not  necessarily  being 
able   to  be  successful   but   to  be  able  to  join  the  community. 

Nathan:     Just  make   it  organic    instead  of  fragmenting  it? 

Asawa:        Right.      So   that  everyone  becomes  a  counselor  and  it's   sort  of  back 
and   forth,   an  exchange.       Where  somebody  needs  help,   somebody  else 
is  ready  to  help.      It   doesn't  become  somebody  coming   into  a  desk  and 
saying,    "Now  what   is  your  problem,   Johnny?     What   is  it   really?     Is 
it  your   family?     Is   it  bad   friends?"     Instead   of  doing   that,  we  bring 
all  of  Johnny's   bad    friends   in  together  and  begin  to  put   them  into 
activities.      I'm  just  talking  about  energy;    that's  all  it  is.     We're 
not  passing  judgment  whether   it's  bad  or  good;  we're  just  simply 
using   that  energy  that's   there. 

Nathan:     As  you  are  working  with  Dr.   Alioto   in  the  schools,   is   the  change   in 

the  political   situation  going   to  make  very  much  difference?     There's 

a  new  school  board  president  now.      Is  that  going   to  make  any 
perceptible  difference? 


184 


Asawa:        I   think  it's  the  vote   that  counts,  not  really  who's   there.     He's 

in  a  better  position  as  president,    but   I   think  it's   the  composition 
of  the  board.      And   even   then,    they're  pretty  uninformed   of  day   to  day 
activities;    they  don't  know  what's   going   on.      I  think  the   critical 
thing  is  what's  happening  to   staff,    the  administrative  staff;    it's 
very  critical.      They're   the  ones  who   are  doing   things.      The   superin 
tendent   doesn't  know  what's   going  on  out   there,   and    the  principals 
are  doing  what   they  want   to  do   too;    it's   too   big,    in  a  way.      The 
principal  can  say,   "You  can't  do   this  because  the  law  says   this," 
or   the  principal   can  do  what  he  wants   to  do.      I've   seen  principals 
who  just  go  ahead   and   do   it--just  go   around   all  of   the  obstacles 
and   they  go  ahead   and   do   it. 

Nathan:      So  your  approach   is  more   school-by-school. 


Owning  or  Serving 


Asawa:        Yes.      But   that's  pretty  risky  too.      It's  all   risk,    but   I   think   that 
from  the   top  you  have   to   permit  things   to  happen.      As    soon  as  you 
permit  things   to  happen,   and  as   soon  as   the  board  begins   to  decide 
that   they  don't  own  the  schools   but  are  there  to  be   servants  —  that 's 
the  attitude   I  had   as   a  commissioner;    I  had   a   feeling   that   I'm  a 
servant  to  the  city.      It's  my  job.      I  think  the   board  has   to   feel 
that  way.     They  can't  use   it  as  a  springboard   for  another  position. 
They  really  have    to  serve   the   students.      The   superintendent  has   to 
feel   the    same  way.     When  all   these   people   begin   to   feel   that  way, 
then  the   attitude   of   the  principals  and   the   attitude  of   the   teachers 
will  change.     The  ones   that   I  believe   in  most  are  the    teachers. 

Nathan:     You  think  they  are   susceptible   to  change? 

Asawa:        They're  critical.      They're   the  most  critical   because   they're   the   ones 
with  the  direct  contact  with   the   students. 

Nathan:     So  you  try  to  reach  them. 

Asawa:       Yes--them  and   the  parents.     The  parents  are  critical   too;    it  can't 
happen  without   the  parents. 

Nathan:     Do  you  have  any   thoughts  about  whether   the  new  mayor    (George  Moscone) 
will  make   any  difference   in   the  kinds  of   things    that   you're   interested 
in? 


Asawa:        Oh,    I  hope   so,    because   I  think  his   outlook  is  very  much   to   try  to 

unify  this  city.     One  of   the  places  you  can  unify  a  city  is  with    the 
schools  because   every  child  has   to  go   to   school   and   every  neighborhood 
has  a  school.      And   every   child  has  a  parent  or   somebody—guardian.      I 
think  that  that's  sort  of  where  you  can  reach  everybody.     That's  why 
I  believe   that  where   the   schools   are,    that's   the   community. 


185 


Nathan:      Is   there  any  problem  in  the  fact   that,   presumably,    the  mayor   ts 
not   supposed    to  get  his  hands  on  the  schools,   according  to   th«-- 

Asawa:        The   charter? 

Nathan:     Yes,   because   the  schools  are  part  of  a  state  structure.      I'm  talking 
about   structure,   which  I  know  you  don't   terribly  like,  but  just 
thinking  of  it   in   that  way,    the  school  district   is  a  part  of   the 
state   structure  and   the  city  really  does  not  have  authority  there. 
Mayor  Joseph  Alioto  had   been  criticized    for  getting  into   the  busing 
controversy. 

Asawa:       Yes,  he  had  no  business   in  it.      I   tried   to  get  him  to  not  do  it, 
and   I  also   tried   to  get  him  to  reappoint  Laurel  Glass.     He  didn't 
like  her  either.     He's  a  very  bad  man  in   terms  of  education. 

Nathan:     But  you  feel  perhaps--!  don't  want   to  put  words   into  your  mouth, 

and   tell  me   if   I  haven't  got  it  right--!  gather   that  you  think  that 
Moscone's  attitude  will  be  helpful,   basically. 

Asawa:        Yes. 


L86 


XII     ALASKA:      RESIDENCY   IN  A  SCHOOL 


State  Arts  and  Corridor  Arts 


Nathan:      I  have  a  note   that  you  had  gone  to  Alaska  since  our  last  session. 
What  was  this  occasion? 

Asawa:       This  was  the  National  Endowment  for  the  Corridor  Arts,  which  is   for 
murals   in  public  places.      That's   in  the   schools  program.      It  was 
sponsored  with   the  Alaska   State  Arts  Council.      I  went   for  a   three- 
week  residency  in  one  of   the   schools--Sandlake,   a   school   in  Anchorage. 

We  worked   in  mosaics.      They  wanted    to  do  a  mosaic  mural.      They 
wanted   to  do  it  with  two  classes  and   then  let  the  rest  of  the  school 
help  out.     We   tried   to  figure  out  how   to  do   that.      So  we  did   quite 
a  few  things  while  we  were  there. 

Then   they  had  nothing   there,    so   that  when  I  got    there   I  had   to 
gather  everything.      I  brought  the   tools. 

Nathan:     What  kind  of  tools  did  you  bring? 

Asawa:       Well,   cutters,   a  hand  chisel  and  hammer   to  break  the   tile.      So  I 

had   all    those   fabricated  here—made  here  —  before   I  went,   and   I  picked 
them  up  just   the  day  before;    they  finally  got   them  done.      But   these 
all  had    to  be   specially  made.     Then  the  cutters   I  got  were  commercial 
cutters. 

Nathan:     Did  your  daughter  go  with  you? 

Asawa:       Our  daughter  Addie  Laurie  went.      She  had   just  graduated   from  high 
school  and  she  had   time  before  she  went  off   to  UCLA,    so   she  went 
with  me.      It  was  marvelous   to  have  her.      She's  very  competent  and   she 
really  helped  out. 


187 


Bakers'  Clay  Panels  and  Mosaic 


Asawa:       We  worked  with   one  school  and   then  we  did  a  bakers'   clay  project 
with   the  entire   school—made  panels   for  the  entire  school   to  hang 
in  their  hallway.     Then  we  did   a  4x16  mosaic   in  that  three  weeks. 
We  just  absolutely  dashed.     We  got  artists   that  were  going   to  work 
in  Alaska  who  came  and  worked  with  me,   so  we  had  about    four  artists 
working  on  this  project  as  sort  of  a  training.     Then  parents  came   in 
and  cut   tile.     The   second  and  sixth  grade  classes  —  two  classes- 
were  chosen   to  do   the  designing  of  it,    and   the  other  children  came   in 
to  help   them  fill   in   the  background.     Just  because  we  had   so   little 
time,   we  worked  with  a  sort   of   traditional   thing  of  Alaska  —  the 
animal   life  and   the   tundra  and    the   sea  life.      So  we  chose   something 
so   that  we  wouldn't  have   to  go  into  a  lot  of  planning  and  designing 
and  meetings;    these  were   things   that  were  being  studied   in  the 
classrooms.     We   tied   it   in  with  the  classroom. 

All  of   the  drawings  were  made  and   then  transferred.     The  sixth 
grade   children  transferred   the   second  grade  drawings  to  the  boards- 
panels.     They  just  simply  took  it  and   traced    the  original  drawing 
right  on   the   board.     We  had  a  room  that  we  worked  continuously  in. 
Then,    in  the  afternoon,  we  had  workshops    for   teachers   from  other 
areas. 

We  did  mask  making,   paperfolding,  milk  carton  workshop  and 
puppetry.     We  did  all   four  of   those  things.     These  were  actually 
school  projects.      So  we  got  a  lot  done. 

Nathan:     Were   there  Indian  children  also? 

Asawa:       A   few,  a  few.  Not  many.      It's   a  mostly  white   school.     We  had  a  child 

that  had   come  from  Deer,   Alaska- -way   up   there.      There   are  no  schools 

up   there;  his  family  came  down   for  the   school  year.     That's  what   they 
do  with  them.      I  don't  know  how  successful  that   is. 


Seeing  Alaska 


Nathan:      It's  difficult,   I'm  sure.     Did  you  get  to  see  Anchorage  and   other 

parts  of  Alaska  while  you  were  there? 

Asawa:       We  went  to   the  Portage  Glacier  and  we  went  to  Mount  McKinley  and 

went  on  a  beautiful  eight-hour  train  ride   to  McKinley  State  Park. 
We  went  up  then  and   saw  the  animals;  we   saw  a  wolf  and   the  white 
sheep. 

Nathan:     Did  you  see  the  red  fox? 


188 


Asawa:       We  didn't   see  a  red    fox.      We    saw  a  bear.     We   saw   the   ones  with   the 
big  horns--elk? 

Nathan:     Yes,   or  moose,   and   the  big  horned  sheep? 

Asawa:        Yes,   we   saw  the   sheep.      In  fact,   what  we   did   is  we   saw  a  whole 

family  crossing   in   front   of   us  on   this  highway  going   to   the   other 
mountain   range.     We   also   saw  a  wolf  chasing   them.      We   saw   the  whole 
experience  of  a  wolf  chasing  them,   and  this  was  never  seen  before 
by  any  of   those  people  who   guided  us — took  us  on  this  bus  ride. 
They  had  never   seen  that. 

Nathan:     Did  you  feel  like  yelling   to   the   sheep,    "Watch   out!      There's   a 
wolf." 

Asawa:        Yes,   yes.     We   saw  about   six  of   them  and  we   saw   the  wolf  going  across 
like   this   [gesture]    chasing   them.      Then,    they  came   over  and    they 
came   right   in   front   of   us,   and   that  was    the   thing   that   saved    them. 

Nathan:     Did   the  wolf  hold  back  then? 

Asawa:        The  wolf   ran  off   into   the  hills.      But  we  know   that   the  wolf  would 
not  take  anyone    that  was  healthy—only  the  ones   that  would    fall, 
that  would   be  his   food. 

Nathan:     Maybe   it's  not   fair   to   side   against   the  wolf. 

Asawa:        No,  no.      The  wolf   is  not   that  aggressive,   we  were   told.      Alaska   is 
so  beautiful.      It  has   so  many  problems.      The  people   are  really  very 
nice   there. 

Nathan:     Did   you  bring  back  some   experience   for  yourself   from     Alaska? 

Asawa:        From  Alaska?     Well,   I'd   love   to  go   back  there   to  do   some  water 
colors.      It's  £o  beautiful,   just   so   incredible. 

Nathan:     You  got  out  onto  Glacier  Bay?     Did  you  go  up   that   area   at   all? 

Asawa:        I  don't  know  quite.      I  went   to   the  Portage  Glacier  at   the   end   of 
Cook's   Island  —  that   area— and   saw   the  glaciers.      It  was  almost 
artificial   it  was   so   incredible.      You've   been   there? 

Nathan:     Yes.      But  again,    just  on  a  brief   trip,   and    there's    so  much  more   to 
see.     The   taiga  was  what   fascinated  me— all   those   little   tiny 
stick-like   trees. 

Asawa:       Oh,    those  are  old,  old   trees. 

Nathan:      Yes.      They're  old    trees,   but   because   of   the   permafrost,    they  can't 
grow  any  bigger.     We   saw  bluebells   that  were  bigger   than  old   trees. 
Plovers  come   up   in   the   Spring   like    this   [gesture]    above    the   trees. 


189 


Asawa:   Well,  and  the  cabbages  in  Che  backyard.  We  stayed  with  Clark  and 
Melinda  Gruening.   (Clark  is  a  legislator;  he's  the  grandson  of 
the  Senator  Gruening.)  They  had  a  garden  in  the  back.  They  had 
cabbages  this  big.  [Gestures] 

Nathan:  Really?  [Laughter]   Your  arms  are  about  two  feet  across? 
Asawa:   Well,  about  eighteen  inches. 
Nathan:  Did  they  have  potatoes? 

Asawa:   Delicious  potatoes.1  Delicious  cauliflower  and  brussels  sprouts  and 
zucchini.   It's  just  such  a  short  growing  period;  I  guess  they  plant 
in  May  or  June  and  then  about  the  end  of  September  it's  all  over. 
Everything  just  grows  and  grows  and  grows. 

Nathan:  Yes.  Did  you  feel  that  they  were  in  sympathy  with  some  of  your 
ideas  about  art? 

Asawa:   Oh  yes.   She  was  responsible  for  asking  me  to  come  there.   She 

wanted  me  to  come  and  she  also  wants  me  to  exhibit  something  next 
summer. 

Nathan:  Do  you  think  you  may  be  able  to  do  that? 

Asawa:    I'll  just  send  her  something,  yes. 

Nathan:   It  would  be  nice  for  you  to  take  it  up  yourself. 

Asawa:   [Laughter]   Actually,  they  asked  me  if  I  would  come  for  two  weeks, 
to  be  considered  for  a  two-week  thing  in  Juneau.  But  I  know  the 
summer  here  is  going  to  be  horrendous,  I  think.   I  just  didn't  want 
to  be  away  from  San  Francisco. 


190 


Nathan : 


Asawa : 


XIII     A  LOOK  AT  THE  LANIER  FAMILY 

Could  you  say  something  about  your  husband's   family? 

Some  of  it  may  not  be  accurate,    but  this   is  all   sort  of  word  of 
mouth,   although  Albert's    family  is  well  documented   and    they  have 
a  very   interesting   genealogy.   The  Lanier   family   left  France;    they 
were  Huguenots  and   they   left  because  of  persecution  and   went   to 
England.      They  were   court  musicians   for  one   of   the   kings;    I   can't 
remember  which  king—King  James?     They  came   to   this  country  in 
about   1670,   to  Virginia.      Albert's  great-great-great-grandfather 
was  Louis  Lanier,  who   fought   in  the   Revolution.     When   the  war  was 
over,   George  Washington  gave  his   sword   to  Louis  Lanier.      Louis 
migrated   to  Georgia  and   took  a  second  wife.      (Maybe   this   is 
incorrect;    if  it   is,  we  can  correct  it.     You  should  probably  ask 
him  to   tell   it   because  he  knows   it   so  much   better.)     He   is  descended 
from  Miss  Chamberlain,    the   second  wife   of  Louis  and   is   a  distant 
cousin  of  George  Washington. 

Sidney  Lanier  and  he  have  a  common  grandfather;    they're  cousins. 
His  grandmother—his   father's  mother --remembered   Sherman's  march 
through  Georgia. 

Nathan:     Marching  through  Georgia! 

Asawa:       Marching   through  Georgia.      They  came   and    they   took  everything.      But 
they  told   them  that  anything  that   falls  out  of   the  wagon— the  corn— 
they  can  keep.      So  she  went  under  and   shook  it  so  that   some   fell 
through   cracks.      This   is   one  of   the   stories.     He  has  a  very   interesting, 
interesting  sort  of  southern  background. 

His   father,  Hudson  Lanier,  was  district  attorney  for  many  years. 
His   sister   is  married    to  Lawton  Pearson,  who  has   I  guess  probably 
one  of   the   largest  peach  farms   in   the  world.     His    father  developed 
the  Pearson  Hialeah,   which  is   a  peach  which  has   become  one   of   the 
commercial  peaches   that's   shipped   to  the  east.      So   it's  a  very 
interesting  family. 

Nathan:      In  a  sense,   I  gather  that  your  husband  has  always  been  a  rather 

liberated  man;    that  he  was  not  one  that  held   to  the  old,    "the  wife 
must  be   at  home  and  must  not  do  other  things." 


191 


Asawa:   Oh  no,  no.  He  was  very  supportive.  That  was  one  of  the  Interesting 
things,  when  I  went  to  talk  to  Albers  and  when  Albert  went  to  talk 
to  Albers.   It  was  sort  of  at  the  end,  when  we  were  leaving,  and  I 
said,  "You  know,  I  really  want  a  large  family."  He  said,  "Fine." 

Nathan:   "He"  being--? 

Asawa:       Albers.      I  really  wanted   to  have  children  around.     He  said,   "That's 
fine."     And  when  Albert  went   to   talk  to  Albers,  Albers   said,    "Don't 
ever   let  her   stop  doing  her  work."     So ,    in  a  way,    it  was  getting 
two   things.      So  my  husband  has  been  very  supportive   throughout   the 
whole   thing.      In  fact,   it's  really  his   encouragement   that  has  been 
very  good,   and  also  his   knowledge  of  architecture.     Although  we've 
never  collaborated,  he's   the  one  who  finally  had   to  calculate  the 
curve  of  the  pattern   for   the  Hyatt  Fountain. 

Nathan:     Yes.      I  was  wondering  about   the  engineering  of  some  of  these   things, 
the  heavy  material   that  you  use. 

Asawa:       Well,  he  calculated  how   those  panels  were   to  be  built.     The  pattern 
maker  built   it,   but  there's  always   somebody  who  has   to  figure   things 
out  or   the  angles  of   the   fountain  or  just   the  way  it's   going  to  be 
put   together—all   those  things   that   in  a  way  I  can't  really  do  by 
myself. 

We  both    feel   that  we   should   utilize  all   the  resources  that  we 
can  get,    so  that  whenever  I  need  help  on  something  I  can't  cope 
with,    I  really  go   to   the  person  who  knows  how.     Like,    if   I  have  a 
certain  amount  of  money   for   a  project,    it  would   be  nice   for  me   to 
keep  all   that  money,    so  that   I'd   figure   things  out  and    sort  of  bump 
along.     But   it's  much  better   to  take   that  money  and  use   it  on  people 
who  know  how  to  do   ic--pay  them  to  get   it  done  so  that  you  get  a 
better  product.     Even  at  the  end,    if  there's  very  little  money  for 
myself,  we  have  a  good   thing  out  of  it.     If  each  person   feels  he's 
contributed  his,    then  we  will  produce  a  good   thing. 

Nathan:      If  you  show  a  respect   for  the  qualities  of  others? 

Asawa:       Right;    that's  very  important.     That's  really  all   I'm  saying  about  the 
schools  or  government,    is   that  we   really  should  use  our  resources. 
We   should  not  waste   them;  we  really  shouldn't  waste  people.      I   think 
that   that's  our  most   important   resource—not  money  but  people. 

Nathan:     Yes,    that's   true.     There   is  much  more  we  could   talk  about,   but  an 

artist's  time    is  particularly  precious.     Thank  you  for  sharing  your 
memories  and  experience,   your  ideas  and  vision.     Thank  you  for   these 
rewarding   interviews. 


Transcribers: 
Final  Typist: 


Lee  Steinback  and  Marilyn  White 
Keiko   Sugimoto 


192 


PARTIAL  INDEX  —  Ruth  Asawa 


Abrahamson,  Joan,  58,  75,  77 
Akimoto,  George,   26 
Alioto,  Joseph,   185 
Alioto,  Robert,  174,  181,  182 
Albers,  Josef,  29-30 
Albricht,  Elsa,  32 

Alvarado  School  Project,  176-177,  182 
beginning  art  program  at,  56-58 
concept  of  program,  166-167 
financial  support,  57 
parents'  participation  in,  58-59 
American  Friends  Service  Committee,   29 
Arbegast,  Mai,  167-168 
Aristedes,  Demetrius,   103 
art,  commissioned,  38-39,  88 
arts  and  artists: 

and  the  private  sector,  100-102,  172 
facilities  for,  108-109,  116 
skills,  109-111 
use  of,  97 
Asava  family: 

father,  Amakichi  Asawa,  3 
mother,  Haru  Yasuda,   3 
sister's  internment  in  Japan,  1939,  23 
Asawa,  Ruth: 

classes  given,  66 
education: 

elementary,   7-11,  14-15,  23 
art  and  music,  9-10,  126-127 
playground  equipment,   11 
high  school,  24 
colleges: 

Milwaukee  State  Teachers,  28,  32-33 
Black  Mountain,  29-30,  33,  36-37,  117 
University  of  Mexico,  30-31 
Escuela  de  Pintura  y  Escultura,   30 
exhibits  and  awards: 

Addison  Gallery,  Mass.,  127 
farm  life: 
Utah,  1 

California,  2-3 

California,  Norwalk,  7,  11,  14,  18 
fountains  in  San  Francisco: 

Ghirardelli  Square  (mermaids),  84-85,  87 
Hyatt  Hotel  at  Union  Square,  60,  191 


193 


manners  and  mores,   6-7,  17-19 
observations  concerning: 

art,  values  of,  46-47 

business  involvement  in  art,  55 

career  decisions,  37-38 

self-reliance,  51-52 

teaching  children,  35-36,  53-54 

work  at  home,  34-35 


Bachels,  Isabel,   22 

BART  (Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  District),  89 

Barzaghi,  Jacques,  92-95 

Bauhaus,   30,  36-37 

bi-cultural  learning,  13-14 

Blake,  William,   106 

Brenner,  Jim,   167 

Brooks,  Alan,  65 

Brown,  Edmund  G.,  Jr.  (Jerry),  92-93 

Bufano,  Beniamino,   103 

Burton,  John,   181 


California  Arts  Commission,  181 
grants,  54,  58 
membership  on,  90,  91 
Visual  Arts  Panel,  112 

Christopher,  George,  104 

Cowan,  Gwendolyn,   9 

Cristel,  Elizabeth,  32 

Cunningham,  Imogen,  114 


del  Prado,  Yvette,  182 
Depression,  1930,  15 
Diebenkorn,  Richard,   103 


earthquake,  1932,  19 
Ehreth,  Joseph,  104-105 


Feins tein,  Dianne,  22 
Ferrer,  Valerie,  61 
Forbes,  Leah,  169 
Fort  Mason,  San  Francisco: 

facilities  in,  98 
Frankenstein,  Alfred,   107 
Freibert,  Joe,  33 
Fuller,  Buckminster,   48,  174 


194 


Ghirardelli  Square,  San  Francisco,  85 

Golden  Gate  National  Recreation  Area,  45,  61,  147 

Gordon,  Sid,  103 


Haas,  Walter,  105-106 
Hagiwara  family: 

Tea  Garden,  San  Francisco,  22 

Plaque,   22 
Hellyer,  Sally,  105 


James  Lick  Junior  High,  San  Francisco,  65 
Japanese  relocation: 

burning  of  Japanese  objects,  25 

camp  classes ,  26 

family's  internment,  Santa  Anita  and  Arkansas,   25 

father's  internment,  New  Mexico,  24-25 

gardening,  27-28 


Lanier  family,  190 

Lee,  Fay,  167 

Levi  Strauss  &  Co.,   73,  75,  77 

Litsky,  Lev,   67 

Maritime  Museum,  San  Francisco,  45-46,  61 

McConnell,  Rob,   85 

McLaren  Society,  22 

MADDS  (Music,  Art,  Dance,  Drama,  Science  Festival),  San  Francisco,   73,  74 

Mermal,  Ron,   166 

Mission  High  School,  San  Francisco,  65 

Mime  Troupe,  72 
Moss,  Earl,  68 
murals : 

boathouse  at  Fort  Mason  Pier,  45-46,  61,  63 

mosaic,  Alaska,  186 

S.F.  Board  of  Education  Bldg.,  62-63 
Murphy,  Dor ice,  179,  181 


National  Endowment  for  the  Arts : 

for  Artists  in  Schools,  59,  79,  97,  112,  115,  124 

for  the  Corridor  Arts,  186 
Noe  Valley  neighborhood  tree  planting,   68 
Nordland,  Gerald,  104-105,  107 


195 


Orozco-Rivera,  Luis,   30 
Outpost,   26 


Pennestri,  Gina,   181 
play  dough: 

Christmas  figures,  12 
demonstrations : 

Hawaii,   78-83,  85-86 
L.A.  County  Fair,   84 
public  buildings: 

art  in,  80,  100,  103 

Reform  Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education  (RISE),  California,  112-113, 

179-180 

Rivera,  Diego,  31 
Rivera,  Freda  [Kahlo],  31 
Rogers,  Mary,  166 
Roth,  William  M. ,  57 


San  Francisco  Art  Commission,  57,  77,  89-90,  96,  107-108 

appointed  to,  1968,   56 

Neighborhood  Arts  Program,   73-77,  97,  112 
San  Francisco  Bi-Centennial  Arts  Committee,  117-119,  165 
San  Francisco  Board  of  Education: 

support  of  Alvarado  project,   57,  76 

San  Francisco,  Citywide  Educational  Beautification  Program,   164 
San  Francisco  Civic  Center: 

embellishment  of,  103-104 
San  Francisco  Foundation,  167,  176a 

Artists  in  Residence  grant,   55 
San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art,   57,  74 

San  Francisco  Park  and  Recreation  Commission,   22,  45,  77,  168 
San  Francisco  Police  Department,  45 
Schmitt,  Conrad  (family),  29 
schools,  San  Francisco: 

art  and  artists  in,   55,  76 

cooperation  and  stacking,  45 

decision  making  in,  40-43,  47-48 
by  children,  44-45 
by  consultants,  50-51 

issues  in,  41,  174 

parents  in,   58,  66-67,  174-175 

skilled  persons  in,  43-44,  47,  53 

volunteers  in,  169-170.  See  also  California  Arts  Commission;  Alvarado 
School  Project;  San  Francisco  Art  Commission;  San  Francisco  School 
Board;  Robert  Alioto. 


196 


Schwarzchlld,  Effle,  175,  179,  181 

Sells,  Ray,  103 

Sieverts,  Helmut  (family),  32 

Snipper,  Martin,  104 

state  arts  councils: 

Alaska,  186 

California,  92-96 

Nebraska,  88 
synergetics  and  problem  solving,  48-50 


Talespinners,  171 
textbooks  and  minorities,  113-115 
Theilen,  Anne  Marie,  169 
Thompson,  Nancy,  46,  56 


Von  Neumann,  Robert,  32 


Waldman,  Dan,  181 
wire  sculpture,  34-35 
Woodbridge,  Sally,  56 


Zellerbach  Family  Fund,  69,  112 
Zellerbach,  Harold  L.,  55,  57 


NOTE:  See  also,  Albert  Lanier,  "Architecture,  Gardens,  and  the  Individual" 
at  the  end  of  this  volume. 


1971 

Albert   Lanier   and  his  wife   Ruth  Asawa 
on   the   deck  at   their  home    in  San   Francisco 


Photograph  by  Laurence  J.   Ctmeot  Jr. 
Used  by  permission 


Albert  Lanier 
ARCHITECTURE,  GARDENS,  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 


All  uses  of  this  manuscript  are  covered  by  a  legal 
agreement  between  the  Regents  of  the  University  of 
California  and  William  Albert  Lanier  dated  3  March  1980. 
The  manuscript  is  thereby  made  available  for  research 
purposes.  All  literary  rights  to  publish  are  reserved  to 
William  Albert  Lanier  until  1  January  2019.  No  part  of  the 
manuscript  many  be  quoted  for  publication  without  the 
written  permission  of  the  Director  of  The  Bancroft  Library 
of  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley 

Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  publication 
should  be  addressed  to  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
486  Library,  and  should  include  identification  of  the 
specific  passages  to  be  quoted,  anticipated  use  of  the 
passages,  and  identification  of  the  user.  The  legal 
agreement  with  William  Albert  Lanier  requires  that  he  be 
notified  of  the  request  and  allowed  thirty  days  in  which 
to  respond. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  --  Albert  Lanier 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY  ± 

I  PARENTS  AND  EARLY  YEARS  1 

Wartime  Schooling  and  Service  2 

Art  Classes  and  Colleges  3 

Finding  Architecture  4 

II  VIEWS  OF  GEORGIA  6 

Houses  and  Churches  5 

A  Cemetery  Called  Rosemary:  Four  Generations  of  Laniers  7 

Mother's  Family  9 

Knowing  Black  People  in  the  South  9 

Teachers,  Gardens,  School  Plays  10 

III  A  YEAR  OR  SO  IN  SAN  FRANCISCO  14 

Marriage  and  Living  Space  14 

Architecture,  Satisfactions  and  Taste  15 

Family  and  the  Purpose  of  Sharing  18 

Rewards  and  Consistency  20 

Clients  and  Design  23 

Self-Knowledge  and  Folk  Gardens  25 

IV  SOME  FAMILY  RECORDS  29 

PARTIAL  INDEX  31 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY 


Time  and  Setting 
of  the  Interview: 

Conduct  of  the 
Interview: 


February  16,  1979 

1116  Castro  Street,  San  Francisco 

Albert  Lanier  was  interviewed  at  his  horn*.  When  a 
downstairs  power  tool  sent  buzzing  noises  into  the  tape 
recorder,  the  interview  shifted  from  a  rear  sunroom  to  the 
main  living  room.   In  the  nearby  kitchen,  women  family 
members  of  various  ages  had  gathered  at  the  long  table  for 
tea,  conversation,  and  laughter.  Throughout  the  session, 
Lanier  was  thoughtful,  at  ease,  and  quietly  amused.  He 
listened  with  careful  attention  when  his  two-year-old  grand 
son  ran  in  to  explain  how  he  would  build  and  grade  a  road 
for  his  toy  truck.  "He's  Just  amazing  to  watch,"  Lanier 
said  later. 

As  the  talk  turned  to  architecture,  he  praised  work 
that  was  unique,  internally  consistent,  and  a  direct  expression 
of  individual  vision  and  personality.  He  admired  John  Funk, 
Bernard  Maybeck,  Louis  Kahn,  and  Mies  van  der  Rohe,  and  the 
many  unknown  builders  of  barns  and  farm  buildings  in  Georgia 
and  California.  Lanier  pointed  out  the  special  delight  of 
gardens,  especially  "folk  gardens,"  some  beautiful,  some 
eccentric,  some  with  flowers  and  trees,  some  with  plaster 
figures,  but  all  at  the  opposite  pole  from  an  anxious  and 
careful  conformity. 

He  took  aim  at  some  architectural  absurdities.  When  he 
and  his  wife,  Ruth,  visited  a  white-painted  wooden  Georgia 
church  he  had  known  in  childhood,  they  laughed  helplessly 
at  the  sight  of  a  front  porch  and  exterior  stairs  carefully 
fitted  with  "livid  green  Astroturf."  He  shook  his  head  over 
San  Francisco's  devotion  to  Victorian  architecture  with  its 
ready-made  wooden  gingerbread  decorations  and  tiny  rooms. 
Must  new  city  houses  also  be  Victorian  in  order  to  "blend"? 
He  thought  not. 

When  it  came  to  building  a  life,  Lanier  said  that  he 
chose  consistency,  stability,  and  independence.  The  idea 
was  to  care  for  oneself  and  one's  family  and  then  do  a  little 
more — reach  out  into  the  community  to  work  with  others  on 
common  problems — and  manage  not  to  be  too  solemn  about  it  all. 
He  brushed  aside  the  notion  that  he  might  be  called  a  "liber 
ated  man"  because  of  the  way  he  has  participated  in  family 
life  with  a  wife  who  is  both  family-minded  and  a  celebrated 
and  hardworking  artist.  On  the  contrary,  he  said,  "I  think 
it  would  be  really  dreadful  to  be  stuck  with  a  wife  that 


ii 


didn't  have  her  own  interests,  some  of  them  divergent 
from  yours,"  someone  who  would  have  to  be  entertained. 

With  his  lean,  intelligent  face  and  trim  chin  whiskers, 
Lanier  has  been  told  that  he  resembles  a  patriarch  of  an 
earlier  day.   Smiling,  he  recalled  how  a  friend  once  sent 
him  a  letter  addressed  to  "Abe  Lincoln  of  Castro  Street." 
The  letter  was  delivered. 


Harriet  Nathan 
Interviewer-Editor 

December,  1979 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 

486  The  Bancroft  Library 

University  of  California  at  Berkeley 


I  PARENTS  AND  EARLY  YEARS 

[Date  of  Interview:   February  16,  1979] 


Lanier:   I  was  born  in  Candler  County,  Georgia,  in  an  old  town  called 

Metter,  in  1927.   I  was  the  fourth  child  of  Weylud  Hudson  Lanier 
and  Bernice  Bird  Lanier.  This  little  town  was  seventy  miles 
outside  of  Savannah.   Savannah  was  the  city.  My  father  was  and 
is  an  attorney.  My  mother — well,  she  was  a  mother  and  she  had 
six  children  of  which  I  was  the  fourth.   I  had  one  older  brother 
who  had  died  before  I  was  born  and  two  older  sisters.  Then  I 
had  a  younger  brother  who  is  now  deceased  and  one  younger  sister. 
My  father  is  still  living.  He's  ninety  years  old  and  won't  last 
much  longer.   I  grew  up  in  the  Depression,  was  unaware  of  the 
Depression. 

Nathan:  Was  this  farming  country? 

Lanier:   It  was  rural,  very  rural.   I  lived  in  the  county  seat.  My  father 
before  I  was  grown  became  the  equivalent  of  the  district  attorney. 
He  had  been  at  one  time  judge  of  the  city  court  and  then  he  became 
district  attorney  for  a  middle  judicial  circuit  of  Georgia,  which 
was  five  rural  counties.  My  mother's  big  interests  were  in  garden 
ing  and  she  probably  injected  that  in  me  at  an  early  age,  although 
at  the  time  I  think  I  hated  it  because  I  had  to  work  weekends 
picking  off  dead  pansies  or  cutting  off  dead  roses  or  turning  over 
the  soil  or  something  like  that.   But  both  parents  were  very  farm- 
garden-oriented,  although  that  interest  really  wasn't  embraced 
wholeheartedly  by  my  father  until  he  was  quite  old,  in  fact,  until 
he  was  elderly.   I  went  through  the  public  schools  in  that  little 
town. 

Nathan:   Could  I  ask  you  a  little  about  the  conversation  at  home,  since  your 
father  was  something  of  a  public  official?  Did  he  talk  about  com 
munity  affairs  or  state  politics? 


Lanier:  Not  so  much  state  politics  as  maybe  local  politics.   It  was  more  on 
a  local  basis.  You  see,  I  was  born  five  years  before  Roosevelt  was 
elected  and  was  grown  by  the  time  Roosevelt  died,  so  Roosevelt  was 
very  big  in  our  minds  and  the  New  Deal  was  very  big,  the  WPA  was 
very  big. 

Nathan:  Did  you  feel  that  your  parents  supported  Roosevelt? 

Lanier:   Supported  him?  Oh,  yes.   They  were  lifelong  Democrats,  both  of 
them.  They  really  were  not  rednecks — rednecks  in  the  sense  that 
much  of  the  South  has  been  caricatured.   They  were  both  college 
graduates.  My  mother  had  been  a  speech  teacher  and  I  guess  before 
I  came  along  had  even  worked  in  that  field.   By  the  time  I  came 
along  she  was  strictly  a  housewife  and  a  gardener.   My  father  was 
very  busy,  obviously,  earning  a  living  for  a  big  family. 

I  say  that  I  wasn't  aware  of  the  Depression.   I  think  I  wasn't 
aware  of  it  because  everybody  was  involved  in  it  and  there  really 
weren't  the  contrasts  in  a  little  town  like  that  that  you  would  find 
maybe  if  you'd  gone  up  to  the  city.   Everybody  was  moderately  poor, 
so  that  you  weren't  very  aware  of  the  rich  or  the  terribly  poor. 

At  a  very  early  age  I  became  interested  in  art.   I  don't  know 
where  that  influence  would  have  come  from  other  than  perhaps  my 
mother,  but  maybe  to  a  greater  extent  my  oldest  sister  who  didn't 
major  in  art  but  she  certainly  took  a  lot  of  art  courses. 


Wartime  Schooling  and  Service 


Lanier:  When  the  war  started,  which  was  1941,  I  guess,  I  was  by  that  time 
in  high  school,  and  the  summer  of  '42  I  spent  at  the  University  of 
North  Carolina  where  I  studied  drama.   It  was  a  program  for  high 
school  students  and  they  would  have  permitted  me  to  stay  there  and 
continue  college.  However,  I  went  back  for  one  more  year  of  high 
school  and  as  soon  as  I  was  out,  which  would  have  been  in  late 
May,  I  enrolled  in  Georgia  Tech  in  Atlanta  where  I  thought  I  would 
major  in  architecture. 

Nathan:  Was  this  your  first  venture  away  from  home  essentially? 

Lanier:  Other  than  the  summer  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina.  Then 
the  war  was  really  in  full  swing  and  there  was  great  concern  to 
get  me  educated,  I  think,  before  I  was  shot,  and  I  stayed  there 
until  I  was  eighteen.   By  that  time  I  was  a  junior  in  college. 


Nathan:  You  were  very  accelerated,  weren't  you? 

Lanier:  Yes,  but  I  had  started  college  when  I  was  barely  sixteen  and  I 

went  twelve  months  a  year.   There  were  no  summer  breaks.   It  was 
on  a  very  expedited  system  at  that  time,  you  probably  remember. 

I  enlisted  In  the  Navy  at  eighteen  because  I  was  going  to  be 
drafted  into  the  Army  if  I  hadn't  enlisted  in  the  Navy.  That  was 
a  marvelous  break  for  me  because  I  literally  had  had  no — I  don't 
think  I'd  even  had  adolescence,  I  was  so  pushed  into  getting  an 
education.   In  the  Navy  I  went  off  for  boot  camp  to  Great  Lakes 
in  Illinois  and  from  there  I  was  sent  over  my  protests  to  a  radar 
school  in  Florida.   After  I  was  through  with  the  radar  school,  I 
was  shipped  to  Miami  to  get  a  boat  to  be  the  radar  operator. 

Nathan:  Why  did  you  not  want  to  do  radar? 

Lanier:   I  had  been  in  a  technical  school.   I  was  totally  disinterested  in 
electronics,  radar.   Considering  the  alternative,  looking  back  on 
it,  I  was  very  lucky  that  they  had  insisted  that  I  go  to  radar 
school  because  the  only  other  thing  for  beginning  sailors  at  that 
point  was  hospital  corpsmen  who  landed  with  the  Marines.  They 
landed  without  guns  and  the  mortality  rate  was  astronomical.   At 
any  rate,  I  went  to  radar  school.   I  didn't  know  anything  about 
radar.   I  still  didn't  know  anything  about  radar  when  I  got  out. 
It  would  have  been  a  disaster  if  I  had  ever  been  a  radar  operator 
for  a  ship.   But  by  that  time  the  war  was  really  winding  down.   It 
was  a  matter  of  the  war  being  over  with  Japan.  The  war  was  over 
with  Germany.   It  was  still  continuing  in  the  Pacific,  but  I 
succeeded  in  getting  assigned  to  7th  Naval  District  Headquarters 
where  I  worked  for  the  library  and  planned  parties  for  the  Navy. 
[laughter]   I  worked  for  some  very  fine  people  like  the  Commander 
of  the  7th  Naval  District.  When  that  was  over  I  went  to  SUPERS 
in  Washington,  also  in  recreation.   From  there  I  was  discharged 
in  August,  1946. 


Art  Classes  and  Colleges 


Lanier:  While  I  was  stationed  in  Washington,  I  attended  American  University 
art  classes.   It  was  my  first  real  experience  with  a  museum,  the 
Phillips  Gallery.   I  saw  Paul  Klee  paintings  there,  thought  I  had 
discovered  this  unknown  painter.   I  saw  my  first  Henry  Moore 
sculpture,  drawings,  the  Air  Raid  Shelter  series. 


Lanier:   As  soon  as  I  was  discharged,  I  think  a  week  later,  I  was  back  at 

Georgia  Tech  to  complete  my  education,  except  it  didn't  work  nearly 
as  well  for  me  as  it  had  worked  before  going  into  the  Navy.   I  spent 
another  year  there  but  discovered  in  the  architectural  library  a 
catalog  of  Black  Mountain  College  and  discovered  that  the  chairman 
of  the  department's  son  either  had  gone  or  was  there  at  that  time. 
Several  of  us  took  the  weekend  and  went  up  to  see  the  college  and 
decided  on  the  spot  that  we  were  going  to  all  leave  Georgia  Tech 
and  go  to  Black  Mountain  College;  that  would  have  been  Si  Sillman, 
Forrest  Wright,  and  myself.   I  did  do  that  in  the  fall  of  '47. 

Nathan:  What  did  your  parents  think  about  this? 

Lanier:  They  knew  nothing  about  it,  but  if  that  was  what  I  wanted  to  do, 
then  that  was  okay.  I'm  sure  they  thought  it  was  a  mistake,  but 
they  let  me  do  it — they  paid  for  me  to  do  it. 

Nathan:  They  expected  their  children  to  go  to  college? 

Lanier:  Oh,  yes.  With  the  exception  of  myself,  they  all  got  degrees,  at 
least  one  degree  and  several  degrees  in  the  case  of  some.  At  any 
rate,  I  went  to  Black  Mountain  and  stayed  there  for  a  full  twelve 
months  which  would  have  been  a  school  year  plus  a  summer.   That  is 
where  I  met  Ruth.   Josef  Albers  was  a  teacher  that  I  studied  with 
there,  so  was  Buckminster  Fuller.   It  was  the  summer  of  '48,  which 
I  believe  was  his  first  teaching  experience;  he  had  never  taught 
before.   So  it  was  a  very  exciting  summer. 

Nathan:  What  did  he  do  for  you? 

Lanier:  Well,  by  this  time  I  was  preparing  to  leave  there  and  I  was  coming 
to  San  Francisco  for  a  year  to  work,  not  in  £  building  trade  but  I 
was  going  to  work  in  the  various  building  trades;  that  was  part  of 
my  graduation  plan  from  Black  Mountain  College.   I  was  going  to 
become  one  of  the  few  graduates  of  Black  Mountain  College.   I  was 
going  to  do  that  for  a  year  and  then  I  was  going  to  go  back  to 
Black  Mountain  College  where  I  would  graduate  and  I  don't  know  what 
I  was  going  to  do  then.   But  as  it  turned  out,  I  never  returned  to 
Black  Mountain  College  after  the  year  in  San  Francisco. 


Finding  Architecture 


Nathan:  Did  you  actually  have  a  chance  to  work  in  the  different  trades? 

Lanier:   I  worked  only  as  a  carpenter's  apprentice  and  the  rains  came  in 

November  or  December.   Work  was  virtually  unobtainable  and  finally 

in  late  December  or  the  first  of  the  year  I  went  to  work  for  an 


Lanier:  architect  and  found  it  terribly  exciting  and  I've  been  working  ever 
since.  I  went  to  work  for  Mario  Corbett  who  is  known  for  his 
domestic  architecture  and  he  was  interesting.  He  hired  good  people. 
He  lived  a  hand-to-mouth  existence  Just  as  architects  still  do.  But 
it  was  a  good  experience. 

Nathan:  What  was  there  about  architecture  that  appealed  to  you? 


Lanier: 


Nathan: 


Lanier: 


Well,  I  think  it  was  that  you  could  do  everything  that  you  could  do, 
say,  in  sculpture.  But  it  had  a  use.  When  I  grew  up  in  the  South, 
a  career  in  art  was  not  a  suitable  profession,  probably  still  isn't 
a  suitable  profession  for  a  man.  Art  was  something  that  your  maiden 
aunt  did,  but  men  didn't  go  into  art.   I  think  there  was  some  excite 
ment  about  building  too.  My  father  was  always  building  things  or 
having  things  built. 

Looking  back  at  the  time  that  I  started  architectural  school,  it 
was  a  terribly  small  department  because  everybody  was  in  the  Army, 
everybody  was  away,  so  we  had  a  very  high  ratio  of  teachers  to  the 
people  that  were  there.   It  was  a  very  fortunate  time  and  because 
they  were  so  short  of  students,  they  would  even  let  a  freshman  take 
sophomore,  junior,  and  in  rare  cases  senior  classes — it  was  a 
department  that  was  open  twenty-four  hours  a  day.  You  could  work 
straight  through.  You  could  work  all  weekend  if  you  wanted  to  and 
I  very  often  did.  There  were  some  stupid  courses  but  I  managed  to 
get  through  them.   I  never  graduated,  of  course,  from  anything  and 
came  to  feel  that  it  wasn't  really  Important  that  I  graduate. 


You  were  speaking  of  the  artistic  aspect, 
social  vision  in  architecture? 


Did  you  have  any  sort  of 


I  don't  think  I  had  very  much  social  vision.   If  I  did,  it  was 
certainly  a  very  naive  one.  No,  I  didn't  have  social  visions.   I 
didn't  think  I  was  going  to  be  of  great  service  to  humanity  by 
designing  buildings.   I  think  I  aspired  to  build  beautiful  buildings, 
but  I  don't  think  that  there  was  very. much  thought  about  social  good. 


II  VIEWS  OF  GEORGIA 


Nathan:  Is  there  a  very  strong  architectural  tradition  in  the  part  of 
Georgia  where  you  were? 


Houses  and  Churches 


Lanier:  No,  absolutely  no  tradition.   If  it  had  a  tradition,  they  had  long 
since  abandoned  it  and  the  tradition  would  have  been  of  strictly 
utilitarian,  very  crude,  very  primitive,  plain  buildings  and  that 
disappeared — began  to  disappear — I  think  even  in  the  Twenties.   In 
fact,  it  had  a  flurry  of  more  grand  type  buildings  in  the  Twenties 
but  by  the  time  the  war  was  over,  postwar,  it  totally  disappeared. 
Everybody  built  themselves  little  yellow  brick,  purple  brick,  red 
brick  bungalows  with  aluminum  sash  or  steel  sash  and  they  completely 
abandoned  the  dignity  that  had  been  found  in  their  farmhouses  or 
their  barns  or  their  utilitarian  buildings. 

Nathan:  How  about  courthouses  and  public  places? 

Lanier:  They  tended  to  hark  back  to  something  from  Virginia  or  had  columns 

or  a  clock  tower.   But  that  was  a  thing  apart.  Just  as  the  churches, 
beginning  probably  in  the  Twenties,  took  on  great  airs  of  style  and 
they  abandoned  the  little  white  frame  church  that  was  just  a  gabled 
roof  and  maybe  a  steeple,  a  front  porch  and  a  simple  flight  of 
stairs.  Those  got  abandoned,  and  they  had  social  halls,  Sunday 
school  wings,  lots  of  things  in  special  places.  They  could  have 
acoustical  tile  and  avoid  all  of  those  wooden  walls  that  had  to  be 
painted  and  repainted,  if  they  were  .ever  painted  in  the  first  place, 
and  there  are  a  few  of  them  that  are  still  unpainted.   But  those 
things  got  abandoned  because  we  wanted  to  be  just  like  the  rest  of 
the  country. 


Lanier: 


Nathan: 

Lanier: 
Nathan: 
Lanier: 


We  wanted  California  ranch  houses  to  live  in  and  California  houses, 
as  interpreted  in  the  South,  well,  they  aren't—California  shouldn't 
be  blamed  for  those.  They're  built  as  California  ranch  houses  but 
most  of  our  ranch  houses  have  nothing  to  do  with  California  ranch 
houses  either.  Their  interpretation  was  always  executed  in  brick 
because  brick  is  the  suitable  material,  that's  the  good  material, 
and  wood  frame  is  a  poor  material  in  their  eyes  and  a  brick  house 
was  a  status  symbol,  plus  brick  is  plentiful.  A  lot  of  it's  manu 
factured  there. 


You  were  speaking,  in  passing,  of  the  churches, 
very  strong  influence? 


Was  the  church  a 


Very  strong,  and  it  still  is  a  strong  influence  all  over  the  South. 
Is  that  Baptist? 

Oh,  it's  all  Protestant  denominations — Baptist,  Methodist,  Presby 
terian,  primitive  Baptist,  to  a  lesser  extent  Episcopalian;  or 
except  maybe  in  places  like  Charleston  or  Savannah,  Episcopalian 
would  be  big,  but  out  in  the  rural  areas  there  were  relatively  few 
Episcopal  churches. 


A  Cemetery  Called  Rosemary;  Four  Generations  of  Laniers 


Nathan:  Do  they  each  have  a  burial  ground  or  cemetery? 

Lanier:  They  did;  the  old  ones  did.   In  the  case  of  my  father's  family, 

there  are  many  generations  in  one  cemetery  which  is  called  Rosemary 
and  that's  out  on  a  sand  hill  and  when  Ruth  and  I  were  there  recently 
we  stopped  by  and  spent  a  few  minutes.  Did  I  tell  you  that  story 
about  that  little  church  that's  there?  It's  a  very  crude,  primitive 
church. 

Nathan:   Is  this  one  that  you  went  to  when  you  were  a  child? 

Lanier:  No,  I  only  went  there  for  funerals,  like  my  grandparents'  funerals. 
It  was  out  in  the  country.   But  the  little  old  church  sits  there, 
very  well-painted,  very  white.   [pauses]  Nothing's  really  changed, 
at  least  from  the  outside — didn't  go  inside — except  the  front  porch 
which  is  wood  framing,  and  the  two  flights  of  steps  are  carpeted  in 
a  livid  green  astroturf.   [laughter]  Ruth  and  I  stood  there  and 
laughed  and  laughed  and  laughed!   Someone  had  made  a  nice  contribu 
tion  and  they  had  "fixed  up"  that  front  porch,   [more  laughter] 


Nathan:  You  were  saying  that  there  were  several  generations  of  Laniers  there? 

Lanier:  Yes,  my  grandfather  and  my  great-grandfather  and,  of  course,  some  of 
my  father's  brothers  and  some  of  their  children,  so  it  has  to  be  four 
generations  that  are  buried  in  that  cemetery.   My  grandfather  would 
be  William  Lanier  and  his  father  was  Richard  Lanier.   I  don't  really 
know.   I  think  it  was  post-revolution,  maybe  the  1790s,  that  the 
Lanier  family  came  to  Georgia  and  they  came  in  stages  from  Virginia — 
at  first  to  North  Carolina  and  then  down  into  Georgia  which  my 
particular  branch  comes  from.   They  were  French  Huguenots.   They 
came  by  way  of  England  to  Virginia;  they  arrived  in  Virginia  in  1680. 

Nathan:  What  was  the  motive  for  their  leaving? 

Lanier:  Well,  they  left  France  over  the  Religious  Freedom  Act  and  they 
apparently  were  musicians  and  some  of  them  had  even  been  court 
musicians  in  England.   I  guess  they  wanted  to  reap  their  fortunes 
that  were  going  to  be  here  in  America.   I  really  have  studied  that 
history  very  little.   There  is  an  enormous  book  that  members  of  my 
family  have  on  the  Lanier  family,  but  I've  never  done  anything  more 
than  peruse  it. 

Nathan:  Were  there  others  who  followed  the  arts  besides  you? 
Lanier:   In  my  immediate  family? 

Nathan:   Yes.   You  spoke  of  the  musicians  and  I  wondered  whether  that  artistic 
interest  continued. 

Lanier:  No,  I  don't  think  so.   I  think  they  deteriorated  very  fast  into 
farmers  and  preachers.  My  father  liked  to  say  that  many  of  them 
were  in  the  penitentiary  and  more  of  them  should  be  [laughter]  when 
he  would  get  an  inquiry  from  a  very  fancy  lady  researching  her 
ancestry.  He  tells  them  that  they're  farmers,  a  few  lawyers, 
preachers,  many  of  them  in  the  penitentiary  and  more  of  them  should 
be.   [more  laughter]   And  he  never  gets  a  follow-up!   In  my  immediate 
family  there  are  teachers.   I  have  a  sister  who  teaches  journalism 
in  a  little  college  in  Georgia.   I  have  another  sister  who  is  also  a 
teacher  and  I  guess  her  specialty  is  something  like  home  economics, 
except  she  really  is  terribly  interested  in  the  arts  and  has  involved 
herself  in  that  in  recent  years.  That  older  sister  who  probably  had 
an  influence  on  me  as  a  child  still  paints  and  does  not  consider 
herself  a  professional  except  that  she's  not  a  maiden  aunt.  Certainly 
what  goes  for  art  or  art  involvement  in  much  of  the  South  or  in  the 
rural  South — charming  water  colors,  very  nice  little  drawings,  very 
unpretentious. 


Mother's  Family 


Nathan:   But  that  Impulse  is  very  strong? 

Lanier:  Unpretentious  things,  yes.  Probably  more  from  my  mother's  side  of 
the  family  than  my  father's  side.  My  mother's  side  were  Birds. 
Her  father  was  a  farmer.  Most  of  my  mother's  family  and  my  father's 
family  were  large  families,  like  eight  and  ten  children.  The  same 
land  has  been  in  my  mother's  family  maybe  for  five  or  six  genera 
tions. 

Nathan:  What  did  they  raise? 

Lanier:  They  raised  cotton;  in  later  years  (but  not  the  Bird  family)  tobacco. 
My  Grandfather  Bird  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  tobacco.  My  Grand 
father  Bird  was  an  interesting  man.   He  was  an  agnostic.   I  don't 
think  you  could  say  he  was  an  atheist,  but  he  was  certainly  an 
agnostic.   He  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  churches,  but  he  supported 
all  of  them — I  mean  he  contributed  heavily  to  them,  but  he  had  no 
involvement  with  them.  My  Grandmother  Bird  was  terribly  religious. 
She  was  a  Baptist,  but  she  had  to  go  strictly  alone,  except  Grandpa 
had  to  pitch  in  money. 

He  also  didn't  smoke.   He  didn't  drink.  He  didn't  travel. 
Neither  of  them,  for  instance,  ever  drove  an  automobile.  They  had 
to  have  a  chauffeur  because  they  never  mastered  that.   I  don't 
think  they  ever  even  tried.   But  he  was  an  interesting,  introverted 
man  who  simply  had  no  truck  with  organized  religion,  except  that  he 
contributed  money  to  them. 

Nathan:  Was  he  a  scholar,  by  way  of  being  a  reader? 

Lanier:  No,  I  don't  think  so.   I  don't  think  he  was  a  scholar.  He  really 
believed  in  taking  care  of  his  land  and  his  family  and  really  I 
don't  know  how  he  and  my  grandmother  ever  got  together  with  her 
religious  bent,  but  they  did. 

Nathan:  Maybe  she  early  had  dreams  of  bringing  him  around. 

Lanier:  I  think  music  was  important  to  our  family.   It  was  quite  important 
to  our  family.  Aunts  were  musicians — you  know,  southern  musicians. 


Knowing  Black  People  in  the  South 


Nathan:   I  see.  Growing  up  in  Georgia,  were  you  at  all  aware  of  racial 
differences? 


10 


Lanier:   Oh,  I  was  very  aware  of  the  differences.   I  guess  the  population 

would  have  been  very  close  to  50  percent  Black  in  that  part  of  the 
South.   It  may  have  even  at  one  time  been  higher  than  50  percent. 
But  we  had  a  relationship  with  the  people,  with  Black  friends.   I 
say  we  had  a  relationship  with  them;  I'm  very  aware  of  it  here  that 
we  have  very  little  relations  with  Black  people.   I  mean  you  may 
have  a  few  professional  friends  or  someone  that  you  know  slightly, 
but  there  I  knew  many,  many  Black  people. 

Nathan:  On  a  daily  basis? 

Lanier:  On  a  daily  basis.  Of  course,  they  were  doing  things  like  cooks  and 

farmers  and,  at  least  at  that  period,  I  don't  think  that  there  really 

was  a  great  problem.  For  instance,  I  was  tutored  in  Latin  by  a  Black 

kid  who  did  very  well  in  Latin,  much  better  than  I  ever  did. 

Nathan:  The  children  were  all  in  school  together? 

Lanier:   They  were  in  segregated  schools.   The  highest  position  for  a  Black 
person  would  probably  have  been  to  be  a  minister.   Maybe  the  under 
taker  would  have  been  important.   But  beyond  that,  the  teacher  was 
the  highest  that  you  could  go.   They  weren't  called  teachers;  they 
were  called  professors.   Many  of  them  were  very  devoted  people  and 
very  good  teachers.   I  often  wonder  and,  of  course,  dependent  on  who 
those  teachers  were,  if  the  Black  kids  weren't  getting  an  education 
that  was  superior  to  what  we  were  getting,  even  at  that  time.  Of 
course,  I  think  that's  another  problem,  that  even  in  the  white 
schools  the  teachers  were  very  devoted  people;  that  was  a  very 
important  job  that  they  had. 


Teachers,  Gardens,  School  Plays 


Nathan:  Were  they  relatively  well  trained  do  you  think? 

Lanier:   Oh,  yes,  they  had  to  have  degrees  and  their  credentials  and  all  of 
that,  but  they  were  also  very  devoted  and  they  were  terribly 
respected.   You  simply  didn't  mess  around  with  a  teacher  and  that's 
totally  changed  in  forty  years,  totally  changed.   I  mean  a  teacher 
is  like  a  postman  today.  Many  of  them  look  at  it  as  a  job  and,  in 
turn,  they  are  looked  at  as  any  other  workman.  The  teacher  is  not 
the  big  thing  that  the  teacher  was  when  I  was  a  kid. 


11 


Lanier: 


Nathan: 


Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 
Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Latin  was  not  something  that  you  chose  in  high  school;  you  took 
Latin.  You  certainly  had  to  take  Latin  if  you  wanted  to  go  to 
college.   It  was  unheard  of  that  you  would  go  to  college  if  you 
hadn't  had  Latin  and  that  was  true  not  only  in  the  white  schools. 
It  was  true  in  the  Black  schools. 

Of  course,  there  was  no  such  thing  as  "art"  in  those  schools  at 
that  time.  Music  was  a  big  thing  but  not  art,  not  visual  arts.   It 
was  limited  to  a  few  posters  and  maybe  a  little  lettering. 


How  did  you  make  contact  with  your  tutor? 
other? 


How  did  you  find  each 


He  actually  worked  for  my  mother  as  a  yard  boy.  He  worked  in  the 
garden.   It  was  a  part-time  job.  We  became  friends  and  he  helped 
me  with  Latin — not  while  he  was  working  in  the  garden.  When  that 
was  over  we'd  have  a  little  Latin  session  and  maybe  I  worked  with 
him  in  the  garden.   I've  forgotten.  Joe  McClain  was  his  name.  You 
see,  my  mother  tried  to  garden  so  much  that  she  had  to  have  help  in 
the  garden. 

How  big  an  area  would  that  have  been? 

I  guess  it  probably  wasn't  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  acre,  but  to 
me  it  seemed  just  enormous  and  our  house  was  on  a  much  bigger  piece 
of  land.  The  intensive  garden  was  probably  a  quarter  of  an  acre 
big  and  this  was  a  flower  garden. 

Not  vegetables? 

Those  were  separate  gardens'   [laughter]  Those  were  separate  gardens. 

So  your  house  must  have  been  full  of  flowers. 

Yes,  it  was  always  full  of  flowers.   She  supplied  flowers  to  the 
town  for  many,  many  years — to  the  town,  to  the  church.  That's 
where  you  displayed  your  flowers,  at  the  church — plus  the  flower 
shows,  of  course,   It  had  the  most  delicious  odor — the  house — when 
a  flower  show  was  impending  because  it  was  filled  with  all  of  these 
blossoms  getting  ready  to  go  to  the  flower  show. 

Did  you  perhaps  get  an  esthetic  view  from  this? 

Yes,  yes,  I  think  I  did.   I  crave  it  very  much  today,  a  garden  that 
size.   I'd  even  pick  off  dead  pansies,  except  I  still  don't  like 
pansies.   [laughter]   I  don't  like  pansies! 


Nathan:  They  come  and  go! 


12 


Lanier:  They  come  and  go  and  they  need  to  have  them  all  picked  off  every 

few  days  so  that  they  keep  blooming  and  I  really  don't  like  to  get 
into  that,   [laughter]   I'm  prejudiced  against  pansies. 

Nathan:   In  your  grammar  school  and  high  school  days  were  there  any  teachers 
who  you  felt  were — 

Lanier:  There  were  very  good  teachers,  terribly  good. 

Nathan:   Any  who  had  a  special  effect  on  you  or  who  meant  a  lot  to  you? 

Lanier:  One  was  an  English  teacher  who  ran  the  drama  for  our  school,  a 

woman  named  Evelyn  McNear,  and  I'm  still  in  very  loose  contact  with 
her.   Earlier,  a  marvelous  woman — who  finally  ended  up  teaching 
math — was  named  Dora  King,  a  marvelous  teacher.   We  had  a  much 
higher  percentage  of  teachers  who  really  reached  the  kids  than  I 
feel  we  have  today.   We  had  some  lemons  too.   We  had  some  awful 
ones,  but  the  percentage  of  the  good  ones  I  feel  was  much  higher. 
They  tended  to  be  women  because  fewer  men  went  into  teaching  at 
that  time  at  the  secondary  level.   But  they  were  very  good.   It 
was  their  career,  it  was  a  real  career  for  them.  Another  good 
English  teacher  would  have  been  Edna  Hendricks.   [pauses]   At  any 
rate,  there  were  many  of  them. 

Nathan:   Were  the  school  plays  important? 

Lanier:   Very  important,  a  very  important  kind  of  thing.   We  performed  for 
ourselves,  but  it  was  the  entertainment;  it  was  the  event.   I  mean 
we  didn't  have  the  choice  of  running  down  to  the  Alcazar  or  running 
to  the  Curran  or  whatever  was  happening.   The  only  things  that 
happened  were  what  we  made  ourselves,  except  maybe  for  the  competi 
tion  between  high  schools  which  took  place  annually. 

Nathan:   Do  you  mean  athletics? 

Lanier:  Well,  no.  „ 

Nathan:   Debate? 

Lanier:  Oh,  I  wasn't  involved  in  the  athletics  at  all.   Debate,  drama 

competitions,  one-act  plays.  Then  there 'd  be  the  annual  production, 
the  senior  play,  the  junior  play.   It  was  really  quite  intense  all 
year.   The  auditorium  in  the  town  was  the  school  auditorium.   It 
was  really  used. 

Nathan:  All  of  the  families  would  come? 


13 


Lanier:  All  families  came,  all  families  came.   It  was  the  event.  That,  I 
think,  has  totally  disappeared  even  in  the  South.   It  certainly 
happens  very  rarely  here. 

Nathan:   Did  you  have  any  touring  companies  coming  through  town? 

Lanier:  No,  I  don't  ever  remember  any.   Before  we  had  our  first  movie  house, 
sometimes  movies  toured.   I  don't  remember.  The  Dixie  Theater  came 
in  quite  early.   I  think  the  matinees  may  have  been  a  nickel.  There 
was  a  cheaper  price  for  the  matinee,  the  Saturday  matinee.   But  I 
think  evenings  maybe  were  a  dime.  You  maybe  got  in  at  half  price 
for  the  afternoon.  There  were  always  cowboy  movies  on  Saturday. 
Saturdays  were  always  devoted  to  cowboy  movies,   [laughter] 

Nathan:  Was  there  a  local  library?  Did  you  hang  out  at  the  library? 

Lanier:  Yes,  we  had  a  public  library  which  was  really  set  up  by  the  WPA. 
I  was  great  friends  with  the  librarians  who  were  women  I'd  known 
all  my  life,  neighbors.  Two  sisters  had  WPA  positions  and  they 
were  the  librarians  and  had,  I'm  sure,  absolutely  no  training  as 
librarians,  but  did  a  job.  There  was  a  summer  reading  program. 
When  you're  out  of  school  you  would  get  stars  for  how  many  books 
you  read  and  that  too  was  very  important,  much  more  important  than 
our  libraries  are  today.   I  think  maybe  that  in  lots  of  ways  there 
were  some  side  benefits  of  the  Depression. 

Nathan:  Was  there  much  visiting  back  and  forth  with  families? 

Lanier:  Yes,  Sundays  were  devoted  to  church  and  family.  There  was  lots  and 
lots  of  family.   Sunday  was  visit  day. 

Nathan:  Out  of  this  community  then,  you  got  into  the  Navy  and  to  Black 
Mountain  and  then  to  San  Francisco? 

Lanier:  That's  right,  I  jumped  all  the  way  to  San  Francisco. 


14 


III  A  YEAR  OR  SO  IN  SAN  FRANCISCO 


Nathan:  What  made  you  think  of  San  Francisco? 

Lanier:   I  had  a  friend  at  Black  Mountain  College;  her  name  was  Peggy  Tolk- 
Watkins.   Peggy  had  lived  in  San  Francisco  during  the  war,  was  a 
New  Yorker,  told  me  that  in  San  Francisco  and  North  Beach  you  could 
get  a,  I  don't  know,  a  four-course  dinner  with  a  bottle  of  red  wine 
for  seventy-five  cents  or  maybe  it  was  a  dollar.   Of  course,  that 
had  disappeared  by  the  time  I  arrived  there.   But  I  decided  to 
spend  a  year  in  San  Francisco. 

Nathan:  Were  you  and  Ruth  married  at  this  time  yet? 


Marriage  and  Living  Space 


Lanier:   No,  but  we  were  married  in  San  Francisco.   She  went  back  to  Black 

Mountain  for  that  year  that  I  was  here  and  at  the  end  of  the  summer 
of  '49  she  returned  and  we  were  married  here  in  a  loft  on  Jackson 
Street  which  is  where  Golden  Gateway  sits  today.  Out  on  Jackson 
is  where  we  lived  that  first  year  in  a  25  X  60"  loft  with  a  bathroom 
and  no  kitchen,  no  bedrooms,  only  one  big  space  and  a  bathroom.   We 
lived  there  for  a  year  until  babies  were  imminent  at  which  point  we 
moved  into  a  three-room  apartment  so  that  we  would  have  a  more 
normal  set-up  for  the  babies,  although  we  enjoyed  the  loft  very 
much. 

Nathan:  Yes,  that  sounds  wonderfully  romantic  and  right  for  young  people. 
Lanier:  That's  right. 


15 


Architecture.  Satisfactions  and  Taste 


Nathan:  You  were  already  involved  in  architecture  at  this  time? 

Lanier:  Yes.   I  just  continued  working  actually  for  maybe  a  year  and  a  half 
for  Mario  Corbett.  Then  I  left  and  maybe  for  eight  months  tried 
with  another  young  man  to  have  our  own  office.  When  that  became 
totally  impossible  I  then  went  back  to  work  for  an  architectural 
firm.   By  '52,  I  think,  1952,  I  went  to  work  for  John  Funk,  a 
terribly  good  architect.   I  worked  for  John  Funk  for  eight  years 
before  forming  my  own  office  for  a  second  time,  which  I've  been 
involved  in  ever  since — seventeen,  eighteen  years  now — since  I 
formed  a  partnership  with  Paul  Sherrill  which  is  still  the  partner 
ship  that  I'm  in. 

Nathan:  What  aspects  of  architecture  were  you  particularly  interested  in? 

Lanier:  Well,  always  design.  Obviously,  I'm  not  terribly  interested  in 
making  money  or  I  would  have  made  a  lot  more!   [laughter] 

Nathan:  Tell  me  what  you  are  most  interested  in. 

Lanier:   I  think  I'm  most  interested  in  gardening,  to  tell  you  the  truth, 
[laughter] 

Nathan:  You  find  gardening  satisfying? 

Lanier:  Well,  I  think  I'm  interested  in  satisfactions  I  derive  from  my 
work.   I  love  to  go  back  and  see  jobs  that  I  worked  on  twenty 
years  ago.   I  enjoy  the  relationship  that  I  have  with  people  that 
I've  done  a  good  job  for,  and  I've  come  to  realize  that  there  are 
many  compensations  that  I'm  going  after  other  than  money.   If  it 
had  been  very  important  to  me  I  would  have  done  something  about 
it  a  long  time  ago  and  I'm  doing  what  I'm  doing  because  that's 
what  I  want  to  do.  As  you  know,  architecture  is  very  unlucrative, 
certainly  in  small  offices  it  is.   In  bigger  offices  it  is  possible 
to  even  achieve  a  professional  income — in  the  big  offices. 

I'm  not  very  interested  in  planning.   I  really  am  interested  in 
the  specifics;  I'm  not  interested  in  the  general.   I'm  interested 
in  transforming  this  little  spot  into  something  complete.   It  would 
be  nice  if  it  relates  to  its  neighbors,  but  very  often  it  can't 
relate  to  its  neighbors.   If  it  related  to  its  neighbors  it  would 
just  be  another  dismal  building  and  that's  too  big  a  price  to  pay 
for  that  relationship.   I  think  you  can  still  be  kind  to  your 
neighbors  without  aping  them  or  without — a  term  that  is  very 
important  in  planning  or  very  loved  by  planners — "blending."  Very 
often  in  the  city  and  the  towns  in  any  urban  situation,  if  you 
really  blend  with  it,  you're  blending  with  cement  asbestos  shingle 


16 


Lanier : 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 

Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 

Nathan: 


and  I'm  not  willing  to  do  that.   Currently  in  San  Francisco  the 
concern  of  neighborhoods,  and  to  some  extent  the  planning  depart 
ment,  is  that  we  relate  everything  to  Victorian  architecture 
because  San  Francisco  still  has  so  much  Victorian  stuff  left  and 
it's  terribly  fashionable  to  love  Victorians. 

Do  you  love  Victorians? 

No,  I  don't  love  Victorians.   I  like  the  high-ceiling  space  in  them. 
I  hate  the  meanness  of  the  room  sizes.   I  can't  stand  all  those 
walls.   It  really  bothers  me.   If  I  was  given  my  choice  between 
three  mean  little  rooms,  I  will  opt  for  one  decent  room  anytime. 


Back  to  the  loft? 

Back  to  the  loft, 
very  big  spaces. 


I've  spent  practically  all  my  working  time  in 
[interruption] 


You  were  just  talking  about  your  preference  for  a  space — 

— space,  a  big  space.  Victorians  were  often  cluttered  up  with 
incredibly  ugly  features,  both  externally  and  internally — very 
busy,  ornate  things,  ugly  ornate  things.   I'm  not  going  to  be 
beholden  to  that  junk.   I'm  sure  in  Victorian  times  when  these 
things  were  built  there  was  the  equivalent  of  Goodman  Lumber 
Company;  that's  the  kind  of  thing  you  can  pick  up  off  the  shelves. 
You  know  how  we're  incensed  today  by  the  stuff  that  comes  off  the 
shelves  of  Goodman  Lumber  Company.   Well,  that  really  was  the 
Goodman  Lumber  Company  ornament  and  trim  and  features  of  the  time 
and  you  bought  them  and  you  had  them. 

So  I  think  there's  really  too  much  concern  with  faithfulness 
to  something  that  really  should  be  analyzed  on  its  own  merits. 
If  you  look  at  it  that  way — I  think  planning  is  a  hokey  thing;  I 
really  think  it's  a  hokey  thing,  a  hokey  thing  for  me.   It's  too 
general.   I  don't  like  it.   I  hate  guidelines.   I  think  that  good 
buildings  are  sometimes  done  despite  guidelines,  but  I  think  it  is 
almost  never  that  a  good  building  is  done  because  of  guidelines. 

Do  you  feel  that  the  creativity  gets  lost? 

That's  right.   I  guess  I'm  really  coming  off  as  a  real  anarchist, 
[laughter] 

You  sound  like  an  architect  more  than  a  businessman.   That's  the 
way  it  sounds  to  me  [laughter]  and  it  certainly  has  great  appeal. 
I  gather  you  do  not  like  Victorian  ornament.   Is  there  a  kind  of 
ornament  you  like  or  are  you  anti-ornament? 


1961 

Courtyard  of  Pearson  House, 
Fort  Valley,    Georgia 


Photograph  by  Randall  Partridge 
Used  by  permission 


17 


Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 

Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan : 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 


Lanier: 


No,  I'm  not  anti-ornament  at  all.   I  love  beautiful  ornament.   If 
you  can't  afford  beautiful  ornament,  I  think  it  batter  be  without 
it;  you're  better  off  without  it.  At  least  you've  got  the  space, 
the  volume.  But  if  you  can't  afford  really  good-looking  mouldings 
or  trim  or  features  or  ornament,  then  it's  better  to  have  none.  I 
believe  that  you  don't  do  it  in  a  spot.  You  don't  do  it  in  the 
front  entrance  or  in  the  living  room.  You  do  it  all  over  and  if 
you  can't  afford  to  do  it  all  over,  better  not  to  have  it  anywhere. 
I  think  a  building  has  to  be  consistent.  You  have  to  know  that 
you're  in  the  same  building  throughout  all  of  its  parts.  That's  to 
be  desired  as  far  as  I'm  concerned,  that  it  should  be  of  a  piece, 
not  a  Victorian  room  and  a  rustic  room  [laughter]  and  maybe  a  French 
Provincial  room. 

Of  the  things  that  you  have  done  that  give  you  satisfaction,  are 
there  any  particular  houses  or  buildings  that  you  like  especially? 


I  like  most  of  the 


I  like  my  sister's  house  that  I  did  in  Georgia, 
houses  that  I've  done. 

Have  you  built  in  the  San  Francisco  area? 

Yes,  very  many  in  San  Francisco.   I'm  working  on — I  don't  even  know — 
four  or  five  at  the  present  time  that  tend  to  be  small  houses.  We 
can't  afford  big  ones.  The  biggest  house,  I  guess,  that  I  ever 
designed  is  my  sister's  house,  which  is  down  in  Georgia  and  it  would 
be  impossible  here  except  for  someone  very,  very  wealthy.  They 
don't  seem  to  come  to  me.   [laughter] 

Are  there  any  architects  whose  work  you  especially  admire? 

I  admire  John  Funk's  work  very  much.   In  admiring  them  I'm  not  sure 
that  I  want  to  try  to  do  things  that  are  similar  myself,  but  certainly 
Maybeck  I  think  is  important  to  me.   In  big  buildings,  Louis  Kahn, 
I'm  very  interested  in.   I'm  even  interested  in  Mies  van  der  Rohe. 
[pauses]  And  I  like  those  farm  buildings  in  Georgia,   [laughter] 
I'd  like  them  in  California  too  if  you  can  still  find  one.   It's 
very  interesting  driving  through  the  countryside  here — how  beautiful 
barns  are  and  how  squalid  the  new  ranch  house  is.   I  mean  squalid 
to  me. 

Are  you  thinking  of  the  feeling  of  space  that  you  were  talking  of 
earlier? 

Simplicity  of  form  of  the  building  (the  barn) ,  not  a  complex  form, 
whereas  the  house  is  very  often  formless.  It's  an  assemblage  of 
Goodman  Lumber  Company's.   [laughter]   It's  green  stucco  or  it  has 
a  horrible  little  exterior  wainscoting  of  brick  or  lava  rock — Just 
awful;  not  of  a  piece  at  all.  Maybe  if  they  are  interested  in  things 


18 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Lanier:  Japanese  it  even  has  a  little  pergola  at  the  front  door.  Just 

awful  things.   It's  what's  fashionable  at  the  time  or  whatever  the 
farmer  considers  fashionable  to  show  that  he's  arrived  and  he's 
really  made  it.   He's  got  a  beautiful  barn  and  he  builds  just  a 
hideous  house  for  himself — and  it's  expensive.   You  can't  build 
anything  that  hideous  cheaply.   [laughter] 

What  do  you  think  of  Fuller's  geodesic  dome  idea? 

I  love  the  geodesic  dome.   I  find  it  very  difficult  to  use.   I 
would  be  personally  loath  to  try  to  adapt  them  to  anything  other 
than  their  simplest  statement,  which  is  enclosing  a  big  amount  of 
space  with  a  very  lightweight  structure.   I  couldn't  abide  one  made 
up  into  a  house  and  to  make  living  space  out  of  it,  I  don't  think. 

Nathan:   How  did  you  come  to  find  this  house  that  you  live  in  now? 

Lanier:  We  looked  for  a  couple  of  years.  We  were  very  cramped  in  our  little 
house,  our  little  1890  Victorian.   We  looked  and  a  friend  found  it 
for  us.  They  had  tried  to  buy  it  and  when  they  were  through  trying 
to  buy  it,  then  we  came  and  looked  at  it  and  bought  it  on  the  spot 
the  same  evening  that  we  looked  at  it . 

Nathan:  The  spaces  are  certainly  wonderful. 

Lanier:   We  had  been  looking  for  a  long  time  and  then  we  proceeded  to  work 
on  it  for  a  year  before  we  moved  into  it  because  it  was  in  very 
bad  condition,  very  bad  shape. 

Nathan:   Is  there  a  style  that  you  could-- 

Lanier:   I  think  this  room  certainly — this  room  and  the  dining  room,  the 
entrance — were  certainly  greatly  influenced  by  Maybeck. 

Nathan:   Yes.   Is  this  redwood? 

Lanier:  No,  it's  fir,  Douglas  fir  stained — stained  once  when  it  was  built 
in  1908. 


Family  and  the  Purpose  of  Sharing 


Nathan:  Thinking  of  the  many  things  that  you  have  done,  I  wonder  if  you 

would  care  to  speculate  how  it  was  that  you  were  a  "liberated"  man 
before  this  was  even  a  popular  term  and  long  before  other  young 
men  thought  the  same  way. 


19 


Lanier: 
Nathan; 


Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 


Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Liberated  in  what  way? 

In  the  role  of  the  family,  the  way  you  share  responsibilities, 
having  a  wife  who  is  an  artist  and  a  professional,  not  (as  you 
were  saying)  like  your  mother  who  was  very  much  a  mother  and  a 
gardener. 

Yes,  but  I  think  that  my  mother  was  probably  fairly  frustrated  in 
outlets  for  her  creativity.   I  think  she  would  have  been  much  nicer 
to  have  been  around  if  she  had  greater  outlets  for  it  and  I  don't 
think  that  can  be  laid  at  my  father's  feet  because  in  a  sense  he 
was  liberated  too.   I  guess  I  don't  really  consider  myself  terribly 
liberated  [pauses]  but  I  think  maybe  I  was  always  liberated, 
[laughter] 

That's  the  best  kind! 

I  think  in  a  way  my  father  was  liberated.   I  wanted  to  be  around 
someone  who  does  something,  preferably  in  the  arts,  and  I  realized 
that  she  (my  wife)  can't  do  that  unless — "help"  is  the  wrong  word — 
unless  I  help  to  make  it  possible.   I  mean  with  the  family  as  big 
as  ours  was,  she  simply  couldn't  do  that  and  take  full  responsibility 
for  the  household  and  the  bringing  up  of  the  children  all  by  herself. 
It  just  couldn't  work.  We  have  always  worked  together  and  we  have 
always  worked  separately. 

I  think  it  would  be  really  dreadful  to  be  stuck  with  a  wife  that 
didn't  have  her  own  interests,  some  of  them  divergent  from  yours 
so  that  in  old  age  (which  is  fast  approaching)  you  were  saddled  with 
someone  who  had  nothing  to  do,  who  had  no  interests,  who  you  had  to 
think  of  entertaining.   I  think  that  would  be  dreadful. 

Did  all  these  thoughts  go  through  your  mind  when  you  were  a  young 
person  in  college? 

Probably  not,  they  probably  weren't  well  formed  enough  to  consider 
them  thoughts,  but  I  think  they  were  there,   [laughter]  You  know, 
a  thought  is  something  concrete;  it  lurks  over  there  like  a  cloud, 
[laughter]   I  think  mine  was  more  kind  of  a  general  fog,  not  one 
nice  compact  cloud  but  a  fog  that  kind  of  moves  through  your  head. 
It  depends.   If  the  floor's  really  a  mess,  maybe  you  clean  it  up 
instead  of  waiting  for  someone  to  come  in  to  do  it  or  your  wife  to 
get  time  to  do  it  or  even  grab  some  of  the  kids  and  say,  "Let's 
clean  this  up." 

How  many  children  do  you  have? 
We  have  six. 


20 


Nathan:  Did  you  sort  of  make  up  this  number? 

Lanier:  This  magic  number?  No,  I  think  maybe  Ruth  made  up  that  number,  but 
I  didn't  make  up  that  number.   I  think  I  was  very  concerned  that 
maybe  there  were  too  many  children  or  we  were  having  too  many 
children.   I  don't  know  what  I  thought  was  the  perfect  number, 
whether  it  was  just  four  or  what,  but  I  never  started  out  to  have 
six  children.   I  think  maybe  Ruth  had  that  in  mind  all  along  or 
more.  She  really  wanted  a  lot  of  children. 

Nathan:   But  you  were  family-minded,  you  wanted  a  family. 

Lanier:   Oh,  yes.   We  knew  that  we  wanted  a  family  and  we  wanted  them  while 
we  were  young.  We  didn't  want  them  all  that  stretched  out.   I 
think  now  it  gives  us  a  chance  to  devote  some  time  to  other  than 
child-rearing  together.   So  far  we  haven't  [laughter]  but  I  keep 
thinking  that  we  will,  sooner  or  later. 

Nathan:   Well,  you've  both  been  involved  in  what  one  might  call  community 
activities.  Was  this  a  conscious  choice? 

Lanier:   Yes,  thinking  that  maybe  you  should  be  involved  a  little,  maybe  you 
should  do  something  for  your  town  or  your  part  of  the  town.   There 
again,  it's  tended  on  my  part  to  be  very  specific  until  recently  when 
I  went  on  the  Landmarks  Board  for  the  city.  Before  that,  I  went  on 
the  board  of  the  American  Youth  Hostels  which  is  broader  than  my 
immediate  community. 


Rewards  and  Consistency 


Nathan:  Was  this  out  of  a  feeling  that  one  should  contribute? 

Lanier:   Yes,  and  I  think  we've  been  very  specific  with  the  kids.   Really 
what  we're  expecting  of  them — or  hoping  for  them — we  hope  many 
things  for  them,  but  hoping  they'll  be  able  to  take  care  of  them 
selves  and  maybe  a  few  more,  do  a  little  more  than  take  care  of 
yourself.   I  do  think  that  taking  care  of  yourself  is  first,  but 
hopefully  there 'd  be  enough  energy  or  strength  to  take  care  of  a 
little  more — make  a  contribution,  get  gratification  out  of  what 
you're  doing,  don't  spend  most  of  your  life  in  a  dull  job  and  try 
to  liberate  yourself  at  forty-five.  That's  terribly  late,  I  think, 
to  start  liberating  yourself  from  a  job  you've  hated  all  those 
years.   It's  particularly  common  today,  awfully  common. 

Nathan:  To  be  in  a  Job  you  hate? 


21 


Lanier: 


That  you  hate;  and  to  find  youaelf  changing  courses  or  wandering 
around  looking  for  something,  at  what  I  consider  past  middle-age. 
Middle-age  for  me  is  still  thirty-five.   I'm  not  middle-aged  any 
more. 


Nathan:  You  take  a  biblical  stance? 

Lanier:  No,  I  think  the  life  expectancy  of  men  is  still  somewhere  around 

seventy.   So  the  middle  of  that  is  thirty-five;  after  that,  you're 
really  on  the  down  slope.   I  consider  myself  a  senior  citizen 
almost. 

Nathan:   So  you  do  advocate  this  liberation. 

Lanier:   I  advocate  liberation  and  I  still  think  it's  too  high-flown  or 

fashionable  a  word  for  whatever  I  have,  liberation.  As  I  said,  I 
don't  consider  myself  terribly  liberated. 

Nathan:   Back  again  to  your  point  of  the  age  of  forty-five,  about  taking  a 
new  direction — 

Lanier:   1  think  that's  distressing  to  me  that  at  this  late  date  you  have  to 

start  looking  for  a  new  direction.   I  think  that's  too  late  generally. 
Maybe  it's  because  I  don't  want  to  take  a  new  direction,  (laughter] 
I'm  not  looking  for  a  new  direction.   I  guess  with  people  who  need 
it,  it's  better  late  than  never. 

Nathan:   But  you've  found  your  general  direction. 

Lanier:   I  believe  in  consistency.   I  believe  in  following  a  straight  line. 
I  don't  believe  in  ten,  fifteen,  twenty  years  in  San  Francisco  and 
then  Phoenix  for  the  next  ten  and  maybe  if  that  doesn't  hold  your 
interest,  try  Minnesota  or  Virginia.   I  really  believe,  despite  the 
fact  that  I  left  my  roots  very  much  in  settling  in  San  Francisco, 
I  think  now  that  I  have  done  that  I'd  like  to  stick  with  it.   It's 
really  too  late  for  me  to  go  back  to  where  I  came  from.   It's  really 
too  late  for  me  to  do  that. 

Nathan:   Had  you  ever  given  thought  to  that  as  a  possibility? 

Lanier:   I  think  that  would  have  been  a  second  course  and  who  knows  how 

different  it  would  have  been.   I  think  San  Francisco  has  been  an 
infinitely  better  place  for  Ruth.   I'm  less  sure  about  my  own  work, 
whether  this  would  have  been  a  better  place  than  plugging  away  there 
in  the  South.   It  might  have  been  much  better  for  me — better  in  that 
I  would  have  done  more  substantial  work.  Why  would  I  have  done  more 
substantial  work?  Falling  back  on  family  connections,  the  familiar — 


22 


Nathan: 

Lanier: 

Nathan: 
Lanier : 


Nathan: 


Lanier : 


It's  true  that  you  break  new  ground  by  yourself,  but  it's  a  very 
difficult  thing  to  do. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  might  have  gotten  caught  up  in  that  church 
scene,  Kiwanis  Club.   It  might  have  been  just  a  dismal  thing  for 
me  as  a  creative  person. 

Do  you  feel  at  home  now  in  San  Francisco? 

Very  much  so,  and  I  don't  feel  not  at  home  there  when  I'm  there. 
It's  strange  and  I  tend  to  be  critical  of  things  there,  but  I  don't 
feel  not  at  home.   I  don't  feel  as  "not  at  home,"  as  I  do  in 
Southern  California,  when  I'm  in  Georgia.  Undoubtedly,  I  would 
find  places  in  the  suburbs  of  San  Francisco  where  I  would  feel 
terribly  not  at  home.   It  has  an  awful  lot  to  do  with  the  people 
you're  seeing  in  these  places,  whether  their  attitudes  make  you 
think,  "Where  am  I?   [laughter]  How  did  I  get  here?  I  must  be 
lost!" 

In  addition  to  having  the  opportunity  to  do  the  kind  of  designs 
that  you  want  to  do  and  have  an  interesting  and  certainly  rewarding 
wife  and  family,  what  else  do  you  look  for  in  the  setting  of  San 
Francisco? 

Well,  I  don't  take  advantage  of  them.   I  don't  take  advantage  of 
them  on  the  basis  of  time,  or  that's  the  excuse  I  give,  but  the 
music  is  here,  the  libraries  are  here.   I  rarely  spend  thirty 
minutes  in  the  horticulture  library  out  at  the  arboretum.   I  keep 
thinking  I'm  going  to  spend  Saturday  afternoon  out  there.   I've 
never  done  it,  but  it's  all  here.   It's  a  marvelous  place  and  I 
think  a  marvelous  place  to  bring  up  a  family,  right  in  the  city. 
I  think  it  has  to  be  a  fairly  close  family  for  that  to  work  well. 
I'm  not  sure  that  it  works  well  with  a  loose  family. 

By  "loose  family,"  what  do  I  mean  by  that?  I  mean,  well,  I 
really  mean  that  the  family  is  not  close  and  that  the  parents 
aren't  prompting  the  children,  helping  the  children  take  advantage 
of  what's  here.  We  have  an  awful  lot  of  that.  We  have  an  awful 
lot  of  families  that  operate  that  way,  that  look  at  the  schools  as 
the  custodians  of  their  children  for  X  number  of  hours  a  day,  X 
number  of  months  a  year.  We  never  have  looked  at  the  schools  here 
in  that  light.  We  look  at  the  schools  as  something  that  the  kids 
need  and  that  we  are  able  to  give  them.  We  aren't  looking  at  them 
in  terms  of  custodial  care. 


Nathan : 


You  spoke  of  "prompting* 
is  a  parental — 


children — is  that  basically  what  you  feel 


23 


Lanier:   I  think  Chat  you  have  to  exert  a  certain  amount  of  pressure  on 
children,  to  have  them  do  things,   [child  enters  and  says  "hi!"] 

Nathan:  Is  this  a  family  member? 

Lanier:  That's  my  grandson.  That's  Ken. 

Nathan:  Well,  he  shouldn't  have  to  be  quiet.  Can  he  come  in  and  say  hello? 

Lanier:  Yes,  come  and  say  hello  to  Grandpa,   [tape  interruption] 

Nathan:  We  should  have  left  it  on  to  get  his  explanation. 

Lanier:   [laughter]  Of  how  the  road  he  will  build  for  his  truck  is  going 
to  go  all  around. 

Nathan:  How  the  road  is  going  to  go  all  around  and  all  the  rocks  are  going 
to  be  taken  out.  He  has  a  real  sense  of  grading  because  he  was 
making  this  kind  of  a  rising,  swerving  gesture. 

Lanier:  Yes,  he's  just  amazing  to  watch.   I  just  love  watching  him. 

Nathan:  Yes.   I  was  interested  in  your  view  of  the  quality  of  life  and 
knowing  your  direction  and  what  satisfactions  you  look  for. 

* 

Lanier:   I'm  not  so  sure  that  I  knew  the  direction,  but  I  came  to  accept  it 
and  am  not  unhappy  with  it  and  try  to  get  a  little  satisfaction 
all  along  rather  than — 

Nathan:  Rather  than  delaying  everything? 

Lanier:  That's  right.   I  think  so.  Try  to  make  each  day  feel  that  there's 
something  good  about  it,  and  something  got  accomplished.   Sometimes 
it's  very,  very  slight.   [laughter]  You  have  to  look  very  hard! 
And  ignore  the  frustrations,  try  to  ignore  the  frustrations. 


Clients  and  Design 


Nathan:  Have  you  found  that  there  was  any  sort  of  activity  more  rewarding 
to  you  than  others?  Is  it  in  design? 

Lanier:  Well,  in  my  work  I  think  it's  design  and  to  some  extent  dealing 
with  the  people,  having  them  come  to  feel  and  be  specific  about 
what  it  is  they  want,  what  expression  they  want  the  building  to 
make  about  their  way  of  living  or  their  way  of  working,  and  that's 
very  gratifying. 


24 


Nathan:  So  there's  a  sort  of  rapport? 

Lanier:  Yes,  very  often  when  you  ask  people  for  a  program  they  give  you  a 
kind  of  badly  written  Sunset  article. 

Nathan:  When  you  say  program  you  mean — 

Lanier:  A  program  of  what  they  want  to  do,  either  how  they  want  to  alter 

their  house  or  how  they  want  to  build  their  new  one,  what  they  want 
their  new  one  to  do  for  them. 

Nathan:  Oh,  so  you  ask  your  client. 

Lanier:  Yes,  sure.   I  mean  you  don't  decide  what  that  person  should  have — 
or  I  don't.   We  have  to  discuss  it.   When  you  ask  them  to  write  out 
a  program,  which  is  one  way  of  working,  they  usually  give  you  a 
very  chewed  up,  badly  written  kind  of  check  list  from  Sunset. 
[laughter]  Very  often  you  never  get  a  program.  You  only  visually 
arrive  at  a  program  with  drawings. 

Nathan:   Is  it  because  they  don't  know  what  they  want  or  because  they  can't 
explain  it? 

Lanier:   They  don't  know,  they  don't  know.   They  haven't  thought  about  it. 
They  haven't  looked.  They've  read,  very  often  they've  read  a  lot 
of  magazines,  but  they  haven't  looked.  Particularly  in  domestic 
architecture,  there's  a  tremendous  amount  of  magazines  on  this  and 
it's  a  very  big  business — selling  furniture,  selling  appliances, 
having  family  rooms,  how  family  rooms  get  furnished.   Maybe  they'd 
really  just  rather  sit  around  the  table  than  have  a  plush  sectional 
sofa.   But  they  don't  think  that  way,  or  typically,  the  older 
people  have  done  more  thinking  than  the  younger  people  have. 
They've  had  more  experience. 

Nathan:  That  is,  more  personal  looking  and  less  reading  of  magazines? 

Lanier:  That's  right,  that's  right,  and  no  note-taking  when  we're  talking. 
Let's  talk  and  listen  and  look,  but  let's  don't  take  notes  while 
we're  doing  it.   I've  very  often  had  to  say  to  clients,  "Let's 
don't  take  notes.  You're  too  busy  writing  to  think."  Or  the 
person  who  is  concerned  as  to  whether  the  room  is  12  X  14  or 
whether  it's  16  X  18,  writing  down  those  dimensions  means  abso 
lutely  nothing  and  you  very  often  encounter  the  housewife  or  the 
wife  who  simply  wants  to  write  down  the  dimensions.   Well,  the 
dimensions  are  all  going  to  be  on  the  drawing  ultimately  anyway. 
You  really  have  to  think  about  what  the  space  is  going  to  do  and 
how  it's  going  to  work  for  you  rather  than  the  rug  size  that  you 
can  put  into  it! 


25 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 
Nathan: 

Lanier: 
Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


It's  sort  of  product-oriented,  isn't  it? 
[laughter]  That's  right. 

What  you  want  from  the  clients  is  for  them  to  say  what  they  like  to 
do  and  how  their  lives  are  actually  spent? 

That's  right. 


And  they  can't  tell  you  that? 


Very  often  they  can't.   Some  people  are  more  articulate  than  others. 
But  this  big  element  of  thinking  what  they  should  do  in  their 
economic  situation  or  this  period  of  life  or  whatever  achievement 
that  they've  made  that's  making  this  possible,  what  is  appropriate 
to  that  rather  than  what  it  is  that  they  might  want  or  that  they 
might  get  great  joy  from  seeing  and  using.   It  might  even  say  some 
thing  particular  about  them.  We  very  often  have  tried  to  get 
clients  to  do  something  specific — I  mean  physically  do  something 
in  their  Job,  maybe  carve  the  front  door  or  do  a  mosaic  somewhere. 
It's  very  hard.  They're  really  terribly  scared  to  reveal  themselves 
that  way  because  that  is  directly  traceable  to  them — not  the 
decorator,  not  the  architect — and  people  generally  don't  want  to 
take  responsibility  for  something  themselves. 

They  would  rather  be  advised? 

They'd  rather  be  advised,  rather  be  guaranteed  that  it's  going  to 
be  in  good  taste,  guaranteed  that  it's  in  good  taste  either  by 
Sunset  or  by  the  decorator  or  who  else  has  used  the  decorator  or 
even  a  trade  name.  A  trade  name  is  very  often  a  big  guarantee  for 
these  people. 

Can  you  encourage  people  to  take  risks? 

Yes,  but  there  are  some  people  that  simply  can't.  They're  not 
going  to  take  risks  but  you  can  encourage  them  to.  Of  course,  you 
have  to  tell  them  that  there's  a  gamble  in  it.   [laughter]   It  may 
not  work,  it  may  not  work!   It  might  be  a  dreadful  mistake. 


Self-Knowledge  and  Folk  Gardens 


Nathan:  What  you've  been  saying  has  sort  of  suggested  to  me  your  value  in 
self-knowledge  and  self-direction — whatever  your  taste,  just  go 
with  it. 


26 


Lanier:   That's  right.   I  love  folk  art.   I  love  folk  gardens.   I'd  like  to 
sometime  do  a  little  study  on  folk  gardens,  that  is  a  garden  that 
says  something  particular  about  the  person  who  built  it  or  who  made 
it. 


Nathan: 


Lanier : 


Nathan : 
Lanier : 


Nathan : 


Lanier : 


Nathan: 
Lanier : 
Nathan : 
Lanier : 


If  you  could  build  your  own  garden,  what  would  it  be  like?  Not 
necessarily  what  size,  but — 

I  think  it  would  have  to  depend  on  where  it  was,  very  much.   I  mean 
how  big  it  is,  what  the  climate  is,  what  the  limitations  are.   If 
I  were  building  a  garden  in  Georgia  that  I  was  going  to  maintain 
and  live  in,  it  probably  would  try  to  be  something  like  Monet's 
garden. 

Ah,  lily  ponds? 

Ponds  and  bridges  and  trees  and  vines  and  wisteria.   You  really 
need  the  kind  of  time  that  Monet  put  in  on  that.  He  put  in  forty 
years  on  his  garden.  Time's  running  out  for  me.   I  may  just  have 
to  make  my  garden  right  here.   [laughter] 

All  right,  then  let's  say  a  San  Francisco  garden  in  the  Noe  Valley. 
What  are  the  dimensions  roughly? 

[laughter]  Well,  I  actually  have  a  lot  of  land  here!   I've  got 
about  8,500  square  feet  of  land  here.   I  have  about  a  fifth  of  an 
acre.   [laughter]  Of  course,  a  lot  of  it's  covered  with  buildings, 
but  if  I  intensively  poke  things  in  all  the  crevices  of  rock  and 
clean  the  buildings  and  things  it  really  is  a  lot  of  land.   To 
exploit  that  completely  I  think  could  be  a  pretty  exciting  project. 
I  don't  know  who  will  maintain  it  when  I'm  gone.   Probably  nobody 
will  maintain  it  when  I'm  gone.  Low-maintenance  gardens  are  big 
things.   I  don't  want  a  low-maintenance  garden.   [laughter] 

You  want  a  high-maintenance  garden? 

I  don't  think  so.   [laughter] 

I  gather  you  want  lots  of  flowers? 


Well,  I  want  the  vegetables  too.   I  want  the  vegetables  too.   I 
mean  I  like  the  vegetables  to  be  pretty  because  I'm  really  not  that 
interested  in  eating  them  when  I  get  down  to  it. 
like  salad  very  much,  but  I  love  to  grow  lettuce, 
chard  at  all,  but  I  love  to  plant  it.   [laughter] 
but  I'd  love  to  have  cabbage  in  my  garden. 


I  really  don't 
I  don't  like 
I  hate  cabbage, 


Nathan:   These  are  esthetic  objects? 


27 


Lanier:  They're  esthetic  objects  and  ic  appeals  Co  me,  vegetables  appeal 

to  me,  not  because  I  want  to  eat  them,  but  because  I  just  like  the 
idea  that  you  could  eat  them,   [laughter]  And  Ruth  likes  them. 
My  father  did  that  when  he  was  still  able  to.  He  had  an  enormous 
garden  and  he  spent  all  of  his  time  cultivating  and  then  at  harvest 
he  spent  all  of  his  time  harvesting  it  and  giving  it  away. 

Nathan:  There's  something  very  delightful  about  that  whole  idea. 
Lanier:   It  kept  him  very  strong  until  he  was  almost  ninety. 
Nathan:  And  the  sharing  idea  is  nice.  Would  you  have  any  trees? 

Lanier:  Oh,  I  have  them  already.   It's  a  jungle  practically,  already. 
[laughter] 

Nathan:  Would  you  grow  rhubarb  because  it's  pretty? 

Lanier:   I  have  rhubarb.  Yes,  I  have  rhubarb,  I  have  Jerusalem  artichokes 
and  the  other  artichoke,  just  plain  artichoke.   I  have  a  grape 
vine  that's  bearing.   I  have  a  huge  olive  tree  that  bears.   I 
have  plum  trees  that  bear  very  heavily.   I  have  an  apricot  tree. 
I  have  a  lemon  tree  that  isn't  bearing.   I  have  found  an  avocado 
tree  in  San  Francisco  that  bears  very  heavily.   I  don't  know  if 
it's  possible  to  graft  from  that  tree  to  another  tree.   I  guess 
what  I'm  saying  is  that  I  really  like  to  torture  plants,   [laughter] 

Nathan:   If  you're  nice  to  people,  you  can  torture  plants,  that's  all  right. 

Lanier:  That's  right,  and  they're  very  sure  if  you  water  them,  if  you  water 
them  and  put  the  right  end  up,  it's  very  likely  to  grow,   [laughter] 

Nathan:  That  gives  you  the  satisfaction  for  the  day? 

Lanier:  That's  right.   It's  a  very  good  way.   I've  known  lots  of  people 
that  have  gone  in  for  gardening.  Marguerite  Wlldenhain,  the 
potter,  has  a  marvelous  time.  Hers  is  not  a  folk  garden  but  it 
certainly  should  be  photographed  while  she's  maintaining  it,  while 
she's  putting  it  in.   It  would  make  a  beautiful  photographic  essay. 

Nathan:  Have  you  ever  given  thought  to  doing  that? 

Lanier:  Yes,  I'd  like  to  do  that.   I  think  it  would  be  very  good  to  do  it 
on  artists.   It's  not  necessary  that  they  be  artists.   It  might  be 
a  postman  that  would  have  such  a  garden. 

Nathan:   You  call  them  folk  gardens? 


28 


Lanier:   Folk  gardens.   A  folk  garden  might  not  even  have  plants  in  it.   It 
might  be  like  the  one  up  in,  I  think  it's  Eureka,  that's  all  wind 
mills  and  wooden  flowers  that  this  guy  spent  years  building. 
[laughter]  And  then  there  are  people  who  work  with  stone.  There's 
one  here  in  the  city  where  a  man  casts  things  in  concrete  and  he 
gets  his  model  at  the  dime  store  and  then  comes  back  and  models  it 
life-size  in  concrete.   When  it's  a  tiny  little  knickknack  from  the 
dime  store  it's  not  so  ludicrous,  but  when  you  get  it  life-size  with 
his  interpretation — but  I  like  that.   [tape  interruption] 


29 


IV  SOME  FAMILY  RECORDS 


Nathan: 


Lanier : 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


Nathan: 


Lanier : 


Nathan: 
Lanier: 


You  were  saying  that  your  father  had  tape  recorded  an  oral  history; 
where? 

For  the  University  of  Georgia.  That  would  have  been  some  time  in 
the  last  few  years,  certainly  in  his  eighties.  That  was  done. 
Probably  some  prodding  on  my  sister's,  the  Journalism  teacher's, 
part  was  responsible  for  that  being  done.   I  don't  know. 

Have  you  heard  it  or  read  it? 

No,  I  haven't  heard  it,  but  he  was  also  very  big  on  the  use  of 
the  tape  recorder  anyway.  He  would  tape  interviews  in  his  legal 
work  so  that  there  is  probably  a  ton  of  tape  lying  in  the  office 
somewhere;  I  don't  know  what  will  happen  with  it.   I  guess  it  will 
get  thrown  out  or  be  stuck  in  someone's  box  for  years  until  they 
throw  it  out.   But  he  did  complete  his  own  oral  history.  Yes, 
that  was  done  completely.   I  never  heard  it  but  I  know  that  it's 
reposing  there  at  the  University  of  Georgia. 

That's  interesting.  Have  any  other  members  of  your  family  been 
taped  as  far  as  you  know? 

Well,  my  brother  who  practiced  law  was  also  taped  a  great  deal  and 
he  was  also  very  big  on  home  movies.  This  was  very  fortunate  be 
cause  he  and  his  wife  and  their  oldest  child  all  died  in  one  auto 
mobile  accident  maybe  fourteen  years  ago  and  so  the  younger  children, 
the  surviving  children,  now  have  those  and  they  really  know  their 
parents  primarily  through  those  home  movies. 

That's  something  one  wouldn't  think  of. 

In  recent  years  they  have  gone  through  the  whole  lot. 


30 


Nathan:  Did  they  take  the  movies  each  year? 

Lanier:  Yes,  he  took  many  movies  each  year,  and  they  treasure  them.  There 
were  years  where  they  did  not  see  them,  but  in  recent  years  they've 
gone  through  all  of  them. 

Nathan:   In  a  sense  there  is,  I  think,  a  value  in  these  oral  histories  too. 
You  can  reach  across  the  generations  in  a  real  way  and  this  big 
two-year-old  boy  who  came  in  to  see  us  will  be  reading  it  presently. 

Thank  you  for  reflecting  on  your  experiences  and  ideas,  and  for 
your  perceptions  about  the  quality  of  life.   Of  course  your  children 
..  and  grandchildren  will  enjoy  what  you  have  to  say,  and  so  will  many 
others  who  are  trying  to  find  their  own  way. 


Transcriber:   Michelle  Stafford 
Final  Typist:  Marilyn  White 


31 


PARTIAL  INDEX  —  Albert  Lanier 


Albers,  Josef,   4 

American  Youth  Hostels,   20 

architecture: 

and  design,   23 

California  ranch  house,   17 

California  style,   6 

Georgia  style,  6 

San  Francisco  Victorian,  16 

studies  in,   2,  5 

work  in,   5 


Bird  family,   9 

Lanier,  Bernice  Bird,   1 
Black  Mountain  College,  4 
Black-white  relationships,  10 


Corbett,  Mario,  5,  15 
Depression,  1930s,  1,  2,  13 


Fuller,  Buckminster,   4 
Funk,  John,   15,  17 


gardens,   1 

father's,   27 

Folk  Gardens,   25,  28 

mother's,  11 

San  Francisco,   26 


Hendricks,  Edna,   12 


Kahn,  Louis,  17 
King,  Dora,  12 


32 


Lanier  family,  8 

family  relationships,  19,  22 
records,  29 
Richard,  8 
Weylud,   1 
William,  8 


Maybeck,  Bernard,  17,  18 
McLain ,  Joe ,  11 
McNear,  Evelyn,  12 
Moore,  Henry,  3 


Phillips  Gallery,  3 


San  Francisco,  Landmarks  Board,   20 
Sherrill,  Paul,  15 
Sillman,  Si,  4 


Tolk-Watkins ,  Peggy,   14 
United  States  Navy,  3 
von  der  Rohe,  Mies,  17 


Wildenhain,  Marguerite,   27 

WPA  [Works  Progress  Administration],   2,  13 

Wright,  Forrest,  4 


Harriet  Siegel  Nathan 


Graduated  from  the  University  of  California, 
Berkeley,  in  191*!  with  an  A.B.  in  Journalism. 
Was  assistant  women's  editor  and  managing 
editor  of  The  Daily  Calif omian.  then  known 
as  the  Monarch  of  the  College  Dailies. 
Prepared  President  Sproul's  biennial  report 
to  the  legislature,  19^2-1*1*;  wrote  advertising 
copy;  edited  house  Journals;  served  on  local 
and  state  boards  of  the  League  of  Women  Voters , 
primarily  in  the  fields  of  local  and  regional 
government  and  publications. 
Returned  to  U.C.  for  a  Master  of  Journalism 
degree  in  1965. 

Wrote  for  the  University's  Centennial  Record. 
How  doing  research,  writing,  and  editing  for 
the  Institute  of  Governmental  Studies,  U.C., 
Berkeley. 


\ 


*,  .A* 

v./ 


/  \ 


V 

\ 


