AFRICAN-AMERICAN  ARTISTS  OF  LOS  ANGELES: 


Noah  Purifoy 


Interviewed  by  Karen  Anne  Mason 


Completed  under  the  auspices 

of  the 

Oral  History  Program 

University  of  California 

Los  Angeles 


Copyright  ©   1992 
The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


COPYRIGHT  LAW 


The  copyright  law  of  the  United  States  (Title  17, 
United  States  Code)  governs  the  making  of  photocopies 
or  other  reproductions  of  copyrighted  material.  Under 
certain  conditions  specified  in  the  law,  libraries  and 
archives  are  authorized  to  furnish  a  photocopy  or  other 
reproduction.  One  of  these  specified  conditions  is 
that  the  photocopy  or  reproduction  is  not  to  be  used 
for  any  purpose  other  than  private  study,  scholarship, 
or  research.  If  a  user  makes  a  request  for,  or  later 
uses,  a  photocopy  or  reproduction  for  purposes  in 
excess  of  "fair  use,"  that  user  may  be  liable  for 
copyright  infringement.  This  institution  reserves  the 
right  to  refuse  to  accept  a  copying  order  if,  in  its 
judgement,  fulfillment  of  the  order  would  involve 
violation  of  copyright  law. 


RESTRICTIONS  ON  THIS  INTERVIEW 


None, 


LITERARY  RIGHTS  AND  QUOTATION 


This  manuscript  is  hereby  made  available  for  research 
purposes  only.   All  literary  rights  in  the  manuscript, 
including  the  right  to  publication,  are  reserved  to 
the  University  Library  of  the  University  of  California, 
Los  Angeles.   No  part  of  the  manuscript  may  be  quoted 
for  publication  without  the  written  permission  of  the 
University  Librarian  of  the  University  of  California, 
Los  Angeles. 


Photograph  of   Noah  Purifoy  by  Katherine  P.   Smith; 
courtesy  of  Katherine  P.  Smith. 


CONTENTS 

Biographical  Summary vi 

Interview  History viii 

TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  Side  One  (September  8,  1990) 1 

Family  background- -Absence  of  art  in  early  life-- 
Education--Childhood  interests--Military  service-- 
Goes  into  social  work. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  Side  Two  (September  8,  1990) 19 

Interest  in  psychology  and  existentialism- -Six 
Birds --Discovering  the  interrelation  of  mind  and 
body- -Attitude  toward  religion--Father  Divine. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   II,  Side  One  (September  8,  1990) 27 

Begins  career  in  social  work--Attends  Chouinard 
Art  Institute- -Working  as  a  window  trimmer  and 
furniture  designer- -Begins  working  for  the  Watts 
Towers  Arts  Center- -Interest  in  music-- 
Relationships  with  women- -Becomes  a  "Sunday 
painter" --Edward  Kienholz. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   II,  Side  Two  (September  8,  1990) 46 

More  on  Kienholz--Confronting  contradictions  of 
his  philosophy--Niggers  Ain't  Never  Ever  Gonna  Be 
Nothin'--All  They  Want  To  Do  Is  Drink  +  Fuck. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   III,  Side  One  (September  9,  1990) 55 

Gives  up  window  trimming  to  work  on  his  art-- 
Assemblages--Developing  programs  at  the  Watts 
Towers  Arts  Center--The  Watts  riots--Leaves  the 
Watts  Towers  Arts  Center. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  Side  One  (September  22,  1990) 71 

"Arts  and  the  Poor"  conference  in  Gaithersburg, 
Maryland--Bringing  artists  together  for  "66  Signs 
of  Neon" --Using  found  objects--Individual  pieces 
in  "66  Signs  of  Neon" --Self ishness  versus 
cooperation . 


IV 


TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  Side  Two  (September  22,  1990) 90 

Exhibiting  "66  Signs  of  Neon"  at  various 
universities--Intent  of  "66  Signs" --Teaching  at 
University  of  California,  Santa  Cruz--The  Watts 
Summer  Festival--Challenging  formalist  notions  of 
art--Steve  Kent  and  the  Improv  Theater- -Layering 
pieces  to  achieve  depth. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   V,  Side  One  (September  22,  1990) 107 

Exploring  sexuality--Symbols  in  his  work--More  on 
the  Watts  Summer  Festival--Protest  art-- 
Impossibility  of  analyzing  art--Working  at  the 
Central  City  Community  Mental  Health  Facility. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   V,  Side  Two  (September  22,  1990) 126 

Programs  developed  at  the  California  Arts 
Council--Attempt  to  integrate  art  and  education-- 
Returns  to  doing  his  own  art. 

TAPE  NUMBER:   VI,  Side  One  (September  23,  1990) 138 

California  Arts  Council's  problems  funding 
minorities- -Community  agencies  that  funded  the 
arts  in  the  sixties--The  Watts  Summer  Festival 
and  the  Watts  Towers  Music  and  Arts  Festival-- 
Reasons  for  the  art  boom  of  the  sixties--Travels 
to  Nigeria  for  the  World  Black  and  African 
Festival  of  Arts  and  Culture  (FESTAC). 

TAPE  NUMBER:   VI,  Side  Two  (September  23,  1990) 157 

Homes  and  studios  in  Los  Angeles--Move  to  the 
desert- -Recent  artworks- -Distinction  between  art 
he  makes  to  exhibit  and  art  he  makes  to  sell. 

Index 174 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SUMMARY 

PERSONAL  HISTORY: 

Bom:   August  17,  1917,  Snow  Hill,  Alabama. 

Education:   B.S.,  Education,  Alabama  State  Teachers 
College;  M.S.W.,  Social  Service  Administration,  Atlanta 
University;  B.F.A.,  Chouinard  Art  Institute. 

Military  Service:   Carpenter's  mate  first  class, 
Seabees,  United  States  Navy,  1942-45. 

SOCIAL  SERVICES  EMPLOYMENT: 

Industrial  arts  instructor,  secondary  schools, 
Montgomery,  Alabama,  ca.  1939-42. 

Social  worker,  Cuyahoga  County  Department  of  Social 
Services,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  ca.  1950-52. 

Social  worker,  Los  Angeles  County  Hospital,  ca.  1952-54. 

Director  of  community  services.  Central  City  Community 
Mental  Health  Facility,  Los  Angeles,  1973-76. 

ARTISTIC  AFFILIATIONS  AND  ACTIVITIES: 

Window  trimmer,  Cannel  and  Schaffen  Interior  Designs, 
Los  Angeles,  mid-1950s. 

Furniture  designer,  Angelus  Furniture  Warehouse,  mid- 
1950s. 

Window  trimmer,  Broadway  department  stores,  Los  Angeles, 
mid-1950s-1962. 

Interior  design,  partnership  with  John  Smith,  Los 
Angeles,  late  1950s. 

Founder /director.  Watts  Towers  Arts  Center,  Los  Angeles, 
1964-66. 

Cofounder,  Joined  for  the  Arts,  1966. 

Cofounder /organizer.  Watts  Summer  Festival,  Los  Angeles, 
1966-74. 


VI 


Creator,  "66  Signs  of  Neon,"  1966. 

Instructor,  art  education  and  demonstration  workshops. 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles;  University  of 
California,  Davis;  University  of  California,  Santa  Cruz; 
Inunaculate  Heart  College,  Los  Angeles;  Thatcher  Boys 
School,  Ojai,  California,  1966-73. 

Cofounder,  Company  Theater,  Beverly  Hills,  1966. 

Member,  California  Arts  Council;  chair,  art  in  education 
subcommittee,  1976-87. 


SELECTED  EXHIBITIONS: 

"The  Negro  in  American  Art:  One  Hundred  and  Fifty  Years 
of  Afro-American  Art, "  University  of  California,  Los 
Angeles,  1966. 

"66  Signs  of  Neon, "  first  presented  in  1966  at  the  first 
annual  Watts  Summer  Festival  and  then  toured  to  nine 
universities  and  the  Gallery  of  Modern  Art,  Washington, 
D.C. 

"Microcosm  69,"  Long  Beach  Museum,  Long  Beach, 
California,  1969. 

"12  Afro-American  Artists,"  Nordness  Galleries,  New 
York,  New  York,  1969. 

"Niggers  Ain't  Never  Ever  Gonna  Be  Nothin'--All  They 
Want  To  Do  Is  Drink  +  Fuck, "  Brockman  Gallery,  Los 
Angeles,  1969. 

"Benny,  Bernie,  Betye,  Noah,  and  John, "  Scripps  College, 
1971. 

"Black  American  Artists/71,"  Chicago  Bell  Galleries, 
Chicago,  Illinois,  1971. 

"Contemporary  Black  Artists  of  America, "  Whitney  Museum 
of  American  Art,  New  York,  New  York,  1971. 

"Contemporary  Black  Imagery:  7  Artists, "  Brockman 
Gallery,  Los  Angeles,  1971. 

"The  Metal  Experience,"  Oakland  Art  Museum,  Oakland, 
California,  1971. 


Vll 


"Garbage  Needs  Recycle  Exhibit, "  United  States  Office  of 
Information,  Berlin,  1972. 

"Los  Angeles  1972:  A  Panorama  of  Black  Artists,"  Los 
Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art,  Los  Angeles,  1972. 

"Negro  Art, "  La  Jolla  Museum,  San  Diego,  California, 
1974. 

"Black  Artists  in  California,"  Governor's  office, 
Sacramento,  California,  1975. 

"19  Sixties:  A  Cultural  Awakening  Re-evaluated  1965-75," 
California  Afro-American  Museum,  Los  Angeles,  1989. 

"Noah  Purifoy:  A  New  Place  to  Be, "  Museum  of  African 
American  Art,  Los  Angeles,  1989. 


PUBLICATIONS: 

Junk  magazine.   Los  Angeles:  Joined  for  the  Arts,  1967. 

Contemporary  Black  Philosophy.   Pasadena,  California: 
Williams  and  Williams  Company,  1971. 


Vlll 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY 


INTERVIEWER: 

Karen  Anne  Mason,  B.A.,  English,  Simmons  College;  M.A., 
Art  History,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles. 

TIME  AND  SETTING  OF  INTERVIEW: 

Place:   Purifoy's  home,  Joshua  Tree,  California. 

Dates,  length  of  sessions:   September  8,  1990  (113 
minutes);  September  9,  1990  (44);  September  22,  1990 
(150);  September  23,  1990  (74). 

Total  number  of  recorded  hours:   6.35 

Persons  present  during  interview:   Purifoy  and  Mason. 

CONDUCT  OF  INTERVIEW: 

This  interview  is  one  of  a  series  on  African-American 
art  and  artists  in  Los  Angeles.   This  oral  history 
project  gathers  and  preserves  interviews  with  African- 
American  artists  who  have  created  significant  works  and 
others  in  the  Los  Angeles  metropolitan  area  who  have 
worked  to  expand  exhibition  opportunities  and  public 
support  for  African-American  visual  culture. 

The  interview  is  organized  chronologically,  beginning 
with  Purifoy's  childhood  in  Alabama  and  continuing  on 
through  his  activities  as  an  artist  in  the  Los  Angeles 
area.   Major  topics  covered  include  Purifoy's  work  at 
the  Watts  Towers  Arts  Center,  the  "66  Signs  of  Neon" 
exhibit,  his  work  with  the  California  Arts  Council,  the 
role  of  art  in  education,  his  individual  works  of  art, 
and  the  philosophy  of  human  development  that  has  guided 
his  approach  to  the  creative  process. 

EDITING: 

Steven  J.  Novak,  editor,  edited  the  interview.   He 
checked  the  verbatim  transcript  of  the  interview  against 
the  original  tape  recordings,  edited  for  punctuation, 
paragraphing,  and  spelling,  and  verified  proper  names. 
Words  and  phrases  inserted  by  the  editor  have  been 
bracketed. 


IX 


Purifoy  reviewed  the  transcript.   He  verified  proper 
names  and  made  minor  corrections  and  additions. 

Teresa  Barnett,  senior  editor,  prepared  the  table  of 
contents.   Rebecca  Stone,  editorial  assistant,  prepared 
the  biographical  summary  and  interview  history.   Novak 
compiled  the  index. 

SUPPORTING  DOCUMENTS: 

The  original  tape  recordings  of  the  interview  are  in  the 
university  archives  and  are  available  under  the 
regulations  governing  the  use  of  permanent  noncurrent 
records  of  the  university.   Records  relating  to  the 
interview  are  located  in  the  office  of  the  UCLA  Oral 
History  Program. 


TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  SIDE  ONE 
SEPTEMBER  8,  1990 

MASON:   The  first  question  we  always  ask  is,  when  and  where 

were  you  born? 

PURIFOY:   A  little  town  twenty  miles  from  Selma  [Alabama] 

called  Snow  Hill.   It  was  a  little  town  of--  I  don't  know 

how  many  people,  but  not  very  many.   It  was  a  farm  town. 

MASON:   What  year  was  that? 

PURIFOY:   In  1917. 

MASON:   Who  are  your  parents? 

PURIFOY:   George  [Purifoy]  and — 

MASON:   I  have  Mims  here. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  that  was  my  mother's  maiden  name. 

MASON:   Georgia  Mims  [Purifoy] .   Do  you  know  much  about 

each  of  their  families,  where  your  father's  family  was  from 

and  your  mother's  family  was  from?   Anything  about  that 

background? 

PURIFOY:   No.   Because  of  the  French  name  Purifoy,  I  guess 

the  family  eventually  came  from  Louisiana,  probably.   But  I 

have  no  recollection  of  that.   Nobody  ever  told  me  actually 

where  we  came  from  or  where  my  parents  were  born.   I  never 

thought  to  ask. 

MASON:   When  did  your  parents  pass? 

PURIFOY:   My  mother  died  around  1940,  and  my  father  died 

around  1943. 


MASON:   What  was  their  educational  level? 

PURIFOY:   They  were  farmers,  sharecroppers,  as  the  case 

was.   If  I  can  recollect  well,  my  mother  went  to  the  eighth 

grade,  but  my  father  had  little  or  no  education 

whatsoever.   I  think  my  mother  taught  school  in  the 

summertime  in  Selma.   That  was  twenty  miles,  as  I  said, 

from  where  I  was  born. 

MASON:   Do  you  have  any  brothers  and  sisters? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   There  were  thirteen  of  us.   I  only 

remember  eight,  two  brothers  and  six  sisters.   Among  the 

six  sisters  there  were  twins.   We  were  a  rather  close-knit 

family  from  the  time  I  can  remember.   I  was  looking  over 

some  old  stuff  I  wrote  some  time  ago,  and  I  started  to 

write  my  life  story.   I  didn't  get  very  far  on  it,  but  I 

wondered  if  you'd  be  interested  in  me  reading  that  into  the 

machine  in  our  spare--  You  know,  maybe  tonight  or  sometime. 

MASON:   Okay. 

PURIFOY:   It's  rather  lengthy.   I  would  like  for  you  to 

thumb  through  the  material  and  see  if  you  think  it's  the 

right  quality  for  what  you  want.   I  wasn't  sure. 

MASON:   Well,  it's  not  just  what  we  want.   It's  also  what 

you  want  or  what  you  think  is  important.   What  you  would 

like  the  world  to  know  about  you. 

PURIFOY:   It's  mostly  about  me  and  my  relationship  in  the 

family  unit,  my  early  childhood  experiences  in  school  and 


my  relationship  to  the  community. 

MASON:   Well,  those  are  some  of  the  things  that  we  want  to 

talk  about  today.   After  this  first  session,  we  can  stop 

and  look  through  it  and  maybe  if  there  are  some  other 

things  that  you  want  to  add  we  can  add  that  in  later. 

[tape  recorder  off]   You  were  talking  about  your  family, 

and  you  said  that  you  were  a  pretty  close  family.   Was 

there  any  one  or  another  person  with  whom  you  were 

particularly  close?   A  brother  or  sister?   Was  there  any 

extended  family  living  with  you,  or  it  was  just  your 

parents  and  your  brothers  and  sisters? 

PURIFOY:   No,  it  was  just  immediate  family.   I  was  first 

attached  to  the  twins,  but  since-- 

KASON:   You  should  give  us  their  names  too,  as  you 

remember . 

PURIFOY:   Mary  [Purifoy]  and  Rose  [Purifoy]  were  their 

names.   And  my  youngest  sister  [Esther  Purifoy],  who  is 

younger  than  I  am--in  fact  she's  the  last  one  of  us--I 

became  attached  to  later  more  than  the  twins  because  I  felt 

I  had  to  protect  her,  being  male  and  all,  in  addition  to 

the  fact  that  I  had  to  take  her  to  school  for  quite  a 

while. 

MASON:   Where  did  you  fall  within  the  order? 

PURIFOY:   I  was  the  second  to  the  last  one.   Actually,  I 

was  the  third  to  the  last  one,  because  I  remember  my  mother 


had  one  child  who  died.   So  I  was  the  third  to  the  last. 
My  kid  sister  was  the  second  to  the  last,  and  the  one  who 
died  was  the  last  one  of  us.   That's  the  line  in  which  the 
eight  living  sisters  and  brothers  now  take  place.   The 
others  I  don't  quite  remember,  except  my  two  brothers, 
which  makes  ten  of  us,  I  guess.   No,  six  sisters  and  myself 
makes  seven,  and  my  two  brothers  makes  nine,  and  the  one 
who  died  makes  ten.   They  are  the  ones  who  I  remember 
best.   And  there  was  probably  one  other  who  died  at  the  age 
of  eleven  or  twelve,  which  I  don't  recall  very  clearly.   So 
it  was  ten  members  of  the  family  that  I  have  recollection 
of ,  and  the  other  three  I  do  not . 

MASON:   What  about  the  community  in  Snow  Hill?   What  was 
the  community  like?   What  were  the  people  like?   What  kinds 
of  things  did  you  do?   I'm  sure  you  had  a  lot  of  work  to  do 
around  the  farm,  but  also  what--? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  was  under  three  years  old  when  we  moved 
to  the  city,  Birmingham,  Alabama.   I  don't  remember  too 
much  what  happened  in  the  country  except  picking  cotton.   I 
trailed  behind  the  family  as  they  picked  cotton.   I  got  in 
the  way  for  the  most  part  and  was  often  sent  home  on  a 
blind  mule  and  had  to  wait  at  the  door  until  somebody  came 
to  get  me  off.   But  I  don't  have  very  many  recollections  of 
what  was  taking  place  in  the  country. 
MASON:   As  a  child,  do  you  remember  it  as  a  particularly 


hard  life? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  life  was  hard,  but  I  had  no  consciousness 
of  that.   In  reflection,  I  can  sense  that  we  were  extremely 
poor,  but  it  wasn't  emphasized.   It  was  obvious,  but  we 
weren't  denied  the  things  that  the  family  could  afford  to 
provide  for  us.   So  therefore,  and  for  many  other  reasons, 
I  had  little  or  no  knowledge  of  absolute  poverty.   I  mean, 
that's  what  we  were  living  in,  but  I  had  little  or  no 
knowledge  of  that.   I  recall  once  we  moved  to  the  city  and 
being  three  or  four  years  old--  My  mother  worked  for  some 
white  folks  two  or  three  streets  over  from  where  we 
lived.   I  remember  she  brought  food  home  from  the  white 
folks'  kitchen.   But  my  father  was  always  working  at 
something  or  other,  and  he  was  a  fairly  good  provider. 
MASON:   So  you  moved  to  the  city  because  your  father  found 
another  job  there?   Or  your  mother?   Do  you  remember? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  I  think  it  was  my  father  and  my  brother 
[Clarence  Purifoy]  who  came  to  town  first,  to  the  city 
first,  and  they  found  work  and  sent  for  us. 
MASON:   What  other  memories  do  you  have  about  the  time? 
Because  I'm  just  thinking  that  around  this  time  the 
Depression  struck,  in  '29,  and  what  was  that  like  for  your 
family,  which  was  already  fairly  poor?   And  also  the  fact 
that  around  the  thirties,  the  mid- thirties,  during  the  WPA 
[Works  Progress  Administration] ,  all  these  artists  had  to 


get  fellowships  and  things  to  go  South,  to  places  like 
Alabama,  because  they  wanted  to  study  black  folk  culture  or 
whatever.   Is  there  anything  that  you  remember  about  so- 
called  folk  culture  in  the  South  then  or  anything  that  you 
remember  that  you  tend  to  deal  with  in  your  art  at  all 
today?   Nothing  really?   No  quilting  bees  or  Sunday  sermons 
or  anything  like  that  that  black  folklorists  usually  write 
about? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  when  you  mention  church,  we  were  encouraged 
to  go  to  church,  but  we  weren't  required  to  go. 
MASON:   What  denomination? 

PURIFOY:   Baptist.   Oh,  no,  Methodist  I  think.   Methodist, 
yeah.   However,  my  mother  prayed  constantly  in  a  singsong 
fashion  as  she  went  about  her  work.   I  was  highly 
influenced  by  that,  although  it  wasn't  particularly  meant 
for  us,  for  me,  or  the  children.   It  meant  that  she  was  a 
quite  religious  person.   I  think  she  practiced  her  religion 
more  than  the  average  person.   That  is  to  say,  she  was  an 
extremely  kind,  generous,  gentle  person,  in  direct  contrast 
to  my  father,  who  paid  little  or  no  attention  to  the 
management  of  the  family  as  such.   It  was  my  mother  who 
managed  the  family.   I  experienced  a  strong  female 
influence  as  a  child,  both  having  six  sisters,  as  well  as  a 
strong  mother.   So  those  things  influenced  me  a  great  deal, 
probably  shaped  the  kind  of  person  I  ultimately  became. 


That's  about  all  I  remember  in  terms  of  lasting  effect  and 
influence. 

As  far  as  art  is  concerned  and  the  Depression  during 
the  thirties,  I  was  not  in  any  way  exposed  to  any  art  forms 
of  any  kind.   I  took  to  the  movies  a  great  deal  at  the  time 
and  worked  on  Saturdays  to  earn  show  fare,  it  was  called. 
But  that  was  the  extent  of  my  artistic  experience,  with  one 
exception.   My  mother,  I  remember,  went  to  the  bank  and 
drew  out  her  last  penny  to  buy  my  brother  a  piano.   I  was 
about,  I  don't  know,  seven  or  eight  years  old  at  the 
time.   And  he  learned  to  play  by  rote,  I  guess.   I  heard 
some  rumors  that  he  was  taught  by  either  Ma  Rainey  or 
someone  of  that  ilk. 
MASON:   What's  this  brother's  name? 
PURIFOY:   Clarence. 

MASON:   Do  you  know  how  he  got  the  idea  that  he  wanted  to 
play  the  piano? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  he  was  associated  in  one  way  with  Bessie 
Smith,  the  blues  singer. 
MASON:   Okay,  they  would  come  through- - 

PURIFOY:   I  heard  that  they  were  in  our  vicinity.   I'm  not 
certain  about  this.   These  are  the  names  that  come  to 
mind.   Ma  Rainey  and  Bessie  Smith  were  associates  of  my 
brother,  who  probably  taught  him  to  play  piano  and  the 
blues,  as  the  case  was.   My  mother  sensed  my  brother  was 


problematic,  in  the  sense  that  he  drank  a  lot  and  he  fooled 

around  a  lot,  so  to  speak.   My  mother,  as  a  means  of 

keeping  him  home,  bought  this  piano.   Of  course,  when  she 

died  it  was  not  paid  for  yet,  and  it  had  to  go  back.   This 

I  refer  to  in  my  notes  about  my  childhood. 

MASON:   But  music  wasn't  really,  generally--  Well,  you  said 

your  mother's  singing  influenced  you. 

PURIFOY:   It  wasn't  emphasized.   It  was  present  but  not 

emphasized  as  an  art  form.   In  no  way.   We  weren't  astute 

enough  to  associate  music  with  art.   It  was  just  done.   My 

twin  sisters  sang  duets  in  the  church  and  stuff  like 

that.   But  we  just  did  it  because  it  came  natural-   It 

wasn't  construed  as  any  kind  of  art  form  or  folk  music  or 

anything  of  that  nature. 

MASON:   Were  there  any  craftsmen  around? 

PURIFOY:   Not  to  my  recollection.   In  other  words,  I  didn't 

get  to  the  idea  of  doing  art  in  my  childhood.   In  no  way. 

In  fact,  I  didn't  get  the  idea  of  doing  art  until  I  got 

unhappy  with  my  work  as  a  social  worker  and  decided  to  go 

to  Chouinard  [Art  Institute] .   I  had  given  little  or  no 

thought  to  it  prior  to  that. 

MASON:   We'll  talk  about  that  in  more  detail  soon.   I  have 

that  from  1939  to  1945  you  were  an  industrial  arts 

instructor  in  Montgomery,  Alabama. 

PURIFOY:   Nineteen  what? 


MASON:   'Thirty-nine  to  'forty-five. 
PURIFOY:   Yeah,  I  changed  college  in  about  1939. 
MASON:   Where  did  you  go  to  college? 

PURIFOY:   Alabama  State  [Teachers]  College  in  Montgomery, 
Alabama.   I  majored  in  history  and  education.   But  there 
were  no  jobs  available  in  history  or  education  or  the 
academics,  for  that  matter.   I  had  had  an  extensive 
experience  in  high  school  in  carpentry  and  woodwork,  so  I 
was  skilled  enough  to  teach  industrial  arts.   I  never  had 
any  basic  training,  except  in  high  school.   That's  the  kind 
of  job  I  took  in  1939,  after  I  graduated  from  college. 
MASON:   So  in  high  school,  the  industrial  arts--  I  guess  a 
lot  of  people  were  coming  in  from  rural  areas.   Was  that 
something  that  was  emphasized  in  the  high  school  because 
they  thought  it  was  a  practical  thing  to  teach  to  people, 
or  was  that  something  that  you  just  personally  were  drawn 
to  because  it  had  some  attraction  for  you? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  remember.   I  don't  remember  any  specific 
dialogue  having  to  do  with  "If  you  can't  do  your  academics, 
you  do  the  hand  training."   That  was  Booker  T.  Washington's 
philosophy,  which  I  don't  know  was  evident  in  the  high 
school  I  went  to  or  not.   I  went  to  high  school  in 
Birmingham,  and  it  was  a  very  modern,  contemporary  high 
school.   I  always  lean  towards  the  extracurricular  events 
and  experiences,  probably  because  I  didn't  do  well  with  the 


ABC's.   It's  likely.   So  I  sang  in  the  choir  in  high  school 

and  stuff  like  that. 

MASON:   Did  you  not  like  school? 

PURIFOY:   I  didn't  like  school  very  much.   No,  not  very 

much. 

MASON:   What  do  you  remember  not  liking  about  it? 

PURIFOY:   I  didn't  know  what  it  was  talking  about.   It 

didn't  relate  to  me.   I  mean,  it  just  sounded  foreign  to 

me.   My  life  experience  was  not  related  whatsoever  to 

education,  what  they  were  talking  about,  Lincoln  and  all 

that  stuff.   My  life  experience  was  on  the  street,  you 

know,  dealing  with  everyday  habits,  everydayness. 

MASON:   But  then  you  ended  up  majoring  in  history  or  had  a 

minor  in  history  in  college.   Did  you  change  your  mind 

about  that  or--? 

PURIFOY:   About  what? 

MASON:   About  history.   You  were  saying  that  Lincoln  and 

all  that  didn't  relate  to  you,  but  then  when  you  were  in 

college  you  ended  up  having  a  minor- - 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  but  that  was  just  the  easiest  stuff  I  could 

take.   It  didn't  have  anything  to  do  with  preference 

whatsoever.   I  mean,  I  didn't  have--  You  know,  I  did  very 

well  in  college.   With  the  time  I  had  to  study,  I  didn't  do 

too  badly.   It  was  just  in  high  school  and  elementary 

school  that  I  didn't  do  too  well  in  academics  because  I 


10 


didn't  know  what  they  were  talking  about.   But  in  college-- 
And  incidentally,  I  went  because  there  was  nothing  else  to 
do.   I  tried  to  get  into  the  military,  but  I  was  rejected 
for  one  reason  or  another.   That  was  when  I  was 
seventeen.   After  finishing  high  school,  I  had  nothing  in 
particular  to  do. 

MASON:   Wasn't  it  expensive,  though,  to  go  to  the  college? 
PURIFOY:   I  don't  know.   I  didn't  pay  anything.   I  made 
application  in  the  spring  of  1934,  and  then  I  went  to 
Tennessee  to  live  with  my  sister  [Ophelia  Purifoy]  during  the 
summer.   When  I  got  back,  I  received  a  letter  saying  that  I 
was  rejected  at  Alabama  State.   I  didn't  accept  that.   I  just 
went  on  down  there  anyhow.   I  packed  my  few  little  things  and 
boarded  an  interstate  bus,  I  think.   It  was  about  130  miles 
from  Birmingham  to  Montgomery.   I  told  them  my  story,  that  I 
didn't  have  any  money,  that  "You  rejected  my  application,  but 
I'm  here  anyhow  because  I  don't  have  anything  else  to  do." 
They  said,  "Well,  we're  sorry,  we're  filled  up."   I  hung 
around  for  about  a  week,  sleeping  wherever  I  could,  in  the 
dormitory,  in  the  hall,  or  anywhere.   And  finally  I  was 
accepted.   They  said,  "Okay,  you  can  come  on  in."   There  was 
a  program  called  NYC,  I  believe.  National  Youth  Corps  [NYA, 
National  Youth  Administration] .   The  president  put  me  on  that 
list,  and  I  received  some  moneys  from  them  for  my 
education.   The  rest  of  it  I  worked  out  in  the  maintenance 


11 


department  of  the  school .   That ' s  how  I  managed  for  four 
years.   I  didn't  have  to  pay  anything. 

MASON:   You  just  said  that  what  was  going  on  in  the  streets 
was  more  interesting  to  you.   What  was  going  on  in  the 
streets  that  you  were  involved  in  while  you  were  in  school 
that  was  more  interesting  than  what  you  were  doing  in 
school?   You  mentioned  that  you  tried  to  go  into  the  army 
and  they  rejected  you,  so  I  suppose  a  lot  of  your  buddies 
had  maybe  joined,  I  don't  know.   What  things  were  you 
involved  in  outside  of  school  that  were  important  to  you  or 
interesting  to  you? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  that  takes  in  a  lot  of  years.   While  you 
asked  the  question,  I  flashed  back  on  what  I  was  doing  in 
elementary  school,  and  there  wasn't  much  to  do.   There  were 
kids  to  play  with,  but  otherwise  it  wasn't  much--  We  played 
like  the  average  children  did.   We  made  things  to  play 
with.   You  see,  the  skateboard  was  something  that  highly 
resembled  the  skateboards  that  they  use  today,  except  they 
had  a  handle.   We  made  it  out  of  old  skates.   We  made 
wagons  to  play  with,  four-wheeled  wagons,  two-wheeled 
wagons  to  play  with.   Nearby,  in  back  of  where  we  lived, 
was  a  corn  mill,  and  they  threw  away  burlap  sacks  which  the 
corn  came  in  to  grind  it  up  into  meal.   So  I  collected 
these  burlap  sacks  and  spread  them  out  and  nailed  them  down 
underneath  the  house  where  we  lived,  and  I  had  a  place  to 


12 


retreat  when  I  felt  like  being  by  myself  or  inviting  kids 

to  come  in  and  we'd  play  house  and  things  like  that.   So  it 

was  average  kids '  play  that  involved  whatever  kids  did  at 

the  age  of  seven,  eight,  nine,  and  ten,  up  to  twelve  years 

old.   In  high  school,  I  had  a  couple  of  buddies,  but  I  read 

most  of  the  time.   I'd  go  to  the  library  and-- 

MASON:   What  kinds  of  things? 

PURIFOY:   I'd  check  out  a  whole  bunch  of  books  and  sit  on 

the  porch  and  read,  novels,  most  of  them. 

MASON:   What  was  your  taste  back  then?   Just  popular 

novels? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   Zane  Grey,  you  know,  stuff  like  that. 

MASON:   Then  you  went  to  the  teachers  college,  after 

teaching  industrial  arts. 

PURIFOY:   I  think  I  went  to  war  first. 

MASON:   So  you  were  drafted  eventually? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah. 

MASON:   Oh,  I  didn't  know  that. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  I  went  to  war  first.   Then  when  I  came  back 

I  entered  graduate  school . 

MASON:   What  year  were  you  drafted,  then? 

PURIFOY:   In  1942.   I  wasn't  drafted,  I  volunteered.   I 

volunteered . 

MASON:   And  where  were  you  sent  when  you  were  drafted? 

PURIFOY:   To  the  Pacific.   From  Port  Hueneme,  where  they 


13 


train  the  Seabees.   I  was  in  the  navy  Seabees,  the 
construction  battalion. 
MASON:   What  is  that  exactly? 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  you  build  airfields  and  Quonset  huts  and 
prepare  camps  for  the  marines,  facilities  like  they're 
doing  now  in  Iraq  or  Saudi  Arabia.   The  Seabees  have  just 
recently  left  Port  Hueneme  to  go  to  Saudi  Arabia  to 
construct  airfields  and  stuff  like  that. 

I  was  a  carpenter's  mate  first-class,  I  think, 
eventually.   While  I  was  in  the  military,  there  was  a  big 
stink  about  prejudice  and  segregation  and  discrimination. 
MASON:   Was  that  something  that  you  were  involved  in 
personally,  to  try  to  get  the  military  desegregated? 
PURIFOY:   Yeah.   I'd  lean  toward  controversy.   There  wasn't 
much  to-do,  except  we'd  just  talked  it  up  and  made  it  known 
that  we  were  unhappy  about  the  discrimination  and 
segregation,  where  we  were  being  managed  by  intellectually 
inferior  people.   I  had  a  degree  in  college  when  I  went 
into  the  military,  and  I  was  managed  by  some  white  cat  who 
hadn't  even  finished  high  school,  and  stuff  like  that. 
They  didn't  recognize  blacks  who  were  reasonably 
intelligent  and  could  manage  the  navy  better  than  the 
management  that  they  had.   So  we  made  it  known  that  we 
weren't  happy  with  that, 
MASON:   Did  anything  come  out  of  it? 


14 


PURIFOY:   They  had  some  investigations,  but  nothing 

inunediate  came  out  of  it  as  far  as  our  unit  was 

concerned.   Except  I  got  a  promotion  out  of  it  and  some 

changes,  I  think,  in  the  high  echelon.   The  captain  was 

moved  and  somebody  else  put  in  his  place.   Yeah,  some 

things  did  happen  of  a  small  nature  locally,  that  is,  where 

I  was  in  the  Pacific.   But  nationally,  I  think,  is  where 

they  commissioned  some  blacks  both  in  the  Air  Corps  as  well 

as  the  army.   I  don't  know  about  the  navy. 

MASON:   Is  there  anything  else  about  the  experience  in  the 

service  that  you  remember? 

PURIFOY:   No.   No,  nothing  unusual. 

MASON:   Overall  did  you  gain  skills  maybe  that  were  useful 

to  you  later? 

PURIFOY:   No.   I  used  the  skills  that  I  already  had  to  get 

promotions  and  to  have  soft  jobs.   I  was  in  the  water 

distillation,  so  I  had  a  soft  job.   I  watched  the  whole  war 

from  a  hilltop,  where  the  purification  units  were,  where  we 

made  the  water  for  the  guys  to  drink.   In  the  Pacific,  I 

saw  our  people  bomb  the  island  to  smithereens  and  ships 

split  apart  and  all  that.   But  I  was  above  it  all.   I 

experienced  little  or  no  danger  in  the  attack. 

MASON:   Then  after  that  you  decided  to  go  to  graduate 

school? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  I  came  home,  and  I  wanted  to  get  a  Ph.D., 


15 


but  I  was  embarrassed  with  the  idea. 
MASON:   Why?   Why  were  you  embarrassed? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  always  associated  Ph.D.'s  with  the  elite, 
and  I  wanted  to  avoid  these  associations  with  the  elite. 
MASON:   You  mean  like  the  bourgeoisie?   Okay.   What  was  so 
distasteful  about--? 

PURIFOY:   Because  it  was  a  white  thing.   I  had  experienced 
enough  prejudice  to  not  have  an  affinity  for  anything 
related  to  white  society,  and  education  of  that  ilk  was 
related  to  white  society. 

MASON:   So  you  didn't  want  to  be  part  of  the  "talented 
tenth"  or-- 

PURIFOY:   No,  I  actually  had  a  strong  affinity  for  blacks, 
and  I  wanted  to  experience  us  at  the  level  where  we  lived 
at.   That  [resulted  in]  my  self-imposed  poverty  in  my  art 
years.   I  did  not  want  lots  of  money  or  lots  of  clothes  or 
anything  like  that.   I  wanted  to  experience  what's  it  like 
to  be  poor.   I  could  have  been  not  poor,  but  it  was  self- 
imposed  poverty.   I  wanted  to  know  what  it  was  like.   I 
wanted  to  experience  all  the  ins  and  outs  of  poverty  so 
that  I  could  report  it  as  it  was.   Which  accounts  for  the 
media  I  used  to  express  my  feelings  about  the  aesthetics. 
MASON:   When  you  say  "report  it,"  report  it  to  whom? 
PURIFOY:   To  the  world.   To  anyone  who  would  listen. 
"Report"  meaning  any  way  you  express  yourself.   In  other 


16 


words,  it  was  through  art  that  I  chose  to  express  myself. 
But  I  think  we're  getting  ahead  of  the  story  here. 
MASON:   Okay,  all  right.   So  what  did  you  study,  then,  at 
the  teachers  college,  specifically?   What  degree  did  you 
get  and  what  did  that  allow  you  to  do? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  when  I  got  out  of  the  service,  I  went  to 
Atlanta  U[niversity] ,  where  I  studied  social  service 
administration,  social  work.   I  got  my  degree  in  social 
work,  and  I  worked  at  it  for  two  or  three  years,  or  three 
or  four  years,  in  Cleveland  and  in  Los  Angeles. 
MASON:   What  was  the  program  like  in  Atlanta?   I  was  going 
to  ask  if  you  knew  Hale  Woodruff  when  he  was  there.   You 
weren't  involved  in  the  arts  specifically  then,  but  the 
Atlanta  University  shows,  the  exhibitions  of  black  art, 
seem  to  have  been  kind  of  a  big  thing  back  then.   I'm 
wondering  if  that  ever  crossed  your  path  while  you  were 
there  at  all. 

PURIFOY:   No,  I  wasn't  interested  in  art  at  the  time.   I 
was  actually  interested  in  social  work,  because  I  figured 
it  was  a  means  by  which  I  could  help  black  people.   In 
other  words,  I  could  inject  here  that  I  was  programmed  to 
do  good,  and  that's  the  worst  kind  of  goodness,  which  we 
can  get  into  some  other  time.   My  whole  concept  of--  I 
think  my  mother  must  have  held  me  up  by  the  heels  when  I 
was  not  two  years  old  yet  and  said  that  I  had  to  be 


17 


somebody.   So  I  set  off  to  interpret  that  for  the  rest  of 
my  life.   And  my  schooling  was  a  means  by  which  I  thought 
that  I  could  best  express  myself,  if  I  was  educated  in  the 
field  that  I  chose  to  express  myself.   So  that's  why  I  took 
up  social  work.   Eventually,  after  doing  art,  I  was  able  to 
put  together  all  my  skills  and  become  reasonably  effective 
in  areas  of  doing  good.   We  can  check  up  on  that  later. 
^4AS0N:   So  what  was  the  program?   I  mean,  what  did  you  have 
to  do  to  get  this  degree  in  social  work?   Was  there  like  an 
internship  involved?   Or  do  you  remember  any  of  the  reading 
that  you  had  to  do  that  you  thought  was  helpful?   Or  do  you 
remember  any  professors  that  you  studied  with  that  were 
helpful  to  you  in  any  way?   Was  there  anything  about  it 
itself  that  was  interesting  for  you,  or  was  it  just 
something  that  you  just  thought,  you  know,  you  had  to  do  to 
get  through  so  you  could--? 

PURIFOY:  Well,  academically,  I  was  a  poor  student.  So  I 
was  helped  by  my  classmates  in  the  university  to  pass  the 
tests  and  whatnot.   That's  how  I  got  to  graduate. 


18 


TAPE  NUMBER:   I,  SIDE  TWO 
SEPTEMBER  8,  1990 

MASON:   You  were  saying  that  your  classmates  helped  you  get 
through  school  and  that  you  were  a  poor  student 
academically  but  you  got  help.   I  was  just  asking,  were 
there  any  professors  who  were  important  to  you  or  any 
reading  that  you  did  that  really  stuck  in  your  mind  or  that 
you  go  back  to  today? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   I  can  remember  now.   I  was  introduced  to 
psychology  in  graduate  school,  which  interested  me  a  great 
deal,  up  to  recent  years,  in  fact.   As  a  result  of  my 
education  at  the  university,  I  developed  an  interest  in 
Heidegger  and  Husserl ' s  concept  of  existentialism.   It  grew 
out  of  my  study  of  psychology  and  psychiatry.   Sigmund 
Freud  was  a  very  interesting  person  to  me  at  the  time.   And 
I  thought  that--  I  wanted  to  explore  the  possibility  that 
blacks  could  use  psychotherapy.   Of  course,  I  found  out 
later  that  uneducated  people  [find  it]  difficult  to  use 
that  discipline  for  good  health--for  health,  as  the  case 
may  be.   But  that  was  my  sustained  interest  after  my 
university  stint,  and  that's  my  sustained  interest 
throughout  the  years.   It  was  very  popular  in  art,  as  the 
case  was.   So  I  did  utilize  psychotherapy  as  an  art 
discipline. 

When  we  get  to  discussing  some  of  my  artwork,  as  you 

19 


intimated  earlier,  there  was  a  piece  that  I  did  called  Six 
Birds,  which  was  shown  at  the  [California]  Afro-American 
[Museum]  exhibition  ["19  Sixties:   A  Cultural  Awakening  Re- 
evaluated, 1965-1975"]  at  Exposition  Park  recently,  and  we 
can  talk  about  that. 

MASON:  Well,  we  can  talk  about  that  now,  since  you  brought 
it  up,  instead  of  waiting  for  it  to  come  along.  Let's  see, 
what  year  did  you  do  that? 

PURIFOY:   I  went  to  Atlanta  in  1946,  I  believe,  1945.   Wait 
a  minute.   It  must  be  down  there.   I  don't  quite  recall 
specifically.   It's  not  a  university-- 
MASON:   I  had  '48  when  you  got  your  degree,  I  think. 
PURIFOY:   A  '48  degree? 
MASON:   Yeah. 

PURIFOY:   So  I  must  have  gone  there  in  1946.   I  was  there 
two  years. 

MASON:   I  have  that  you  did  Six  Birds  in  '67. 
PURIFOY:   Uh-huh.   Six  Birds  was  one  of  many  pieces  I  did 
with  psychological  overtones.   It  was  a  very  somber 
piece.   Black  on  black  I  was  experimenting  with  at  the 
time,  where  across  the  front  of  a  screened  area  were  seven 
objects  that  looked  like  birds.   I  imagined  on  the  other 
side  of  this  screened  area  was  somebody  peeping  out,  maybe 
a  prisoner  someplace,  where  what  he  saw  was  confined  to  a 
small  area.   So  oftentimes  the  truth  is  not  evident. 


20 


because  if  he  had  been  outside,  he  would  have  counted  seven 
birds  instead  of  six.   The  caption  said  they  were  all 
different  colors,  but  they  weren't  all  different  colors-- 
it  was  just  one  color.   So  that  became  a  very  popular 
piece.   I  don't  want  to  use  the  word  "popular."   It  was  an 
extremely  significant  piece. 

I  recall  that  the  [Los  Angeles]  County  Museum  of  Art 
had  solicited  it  from  me  to  put  down  in  the  rental 
gallery.   Somebody  came  from  the  East  to  look  at  my  work, 
and  I  sent  him  over  to  the  rental  gallery  in  the  museum. 
He  saw  Six  Birds  and  beat  it  back  and  bought  it  right  away. 
MASON:   Who  was  this  who  came  from  the  East  to  look  at  your 
work?   What  was  his  name?   Was  it  a  private  collector  or--? 
PURIFOY:   No,  it  was  somebody  from  the  Whitney  Museum  [of 
American  Art]  in  New  York  [Robert  M.  Doty].   It's  down 
there  someplace.   Six  Birds,  Whitney  Museum.   And  it  was 
borrowed,  as  I  said  earlier,  from  the  Whitney  to  show  in 
this  Exposition  [Park]  exhibition. 
MASON:   That  was  the  "19  Sixties"  Olympics  exhibition. 

Was  Jung  at  all  popular  or  interesting  to  you? 
Because  I  know  he  became,  I  guess,  more  popular  in  the 
fifties,  with-- 
PURIFOY:   Carl  Jung? 
MASON:   Yeah. 
PURIFOY:   Yeah.   You  know,  in  the  fifties  we  all  were 


21 


interested  in  the  new  life,  so  to  speak,  the  new  concepts 
and  all.   It  seemed  as  though  the  sixties  movement  was 
vaguely  based  on  a  European  concept  of  freedom,  manifested 
by  Carl  Jung  and  Jean-Paul  Sartre.   These  people  were 
quoted  often  as  the  seekers  and  the  leaders  of  freedom.   I 
went  a  little  further  and  studied,  as  I  said  earlier,  from 
two  other  people  who  I  thought  had  gone  beyond  Carl  Jung 
and  Jean-Paul.   They  were  Heidegger  and  Husserl,  the 
fathers  of  existentialism.   Existence  and  existentialism 
were  so  closely  interrelated  with  each  other  with  an 
outstanding  philosopher  in  America,  whose  name  I  can't 
recall  at  the  time  [William  James] .   He  would  have  been  the 
father  of  existentialism  had  he  been  a  European.   Because 
he  had  written  earlier  about  the  freedom  of  the  mind  to  do 
what  it  was  inclined  to  do,  that  the  body  could  develop 
more  healthfully  if  the  mind  was  constructed  in  a  way  in 
which  it  had  knowledge  of  the  body  interrelated  with  the 
mind.   So  in  those  early  years  of  the  freedom  movement,  the 
body-mind  thing  was  then  thought  of  to  interrelate  with 
each  other,  to  be  equal  to  each  other.   To  me  that  was 
extremely  profound,  that  my  body  and  mind  had  been 
estranged.   It  gave  me  impetus  to  want  to  interrelate  them, 
to  become  one.   So  during  the  height  of  my  art  years,  I 
also  experienced  something  extremely  profound  in  that  I  had 
these  oceanic  experiences. 


22 


MASON:   I'm  sorry,  what  kind  of  experiences? 

PURIFOY:   Oceanic  experiences.   Are  you  familiar  with  that? 

MASON:   No,  not  at  all. 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  started  out  by  levitating.   Lying  on  the 

floor  in  the  morning  and  it  appeared  that  my  body  was  off 

the  floor.   I  could  lie  there  for  hours  on  end,  and  the 

time  passed  without  my  knowledge.   Sometimes  I'd  look  up 

and  I'd  been  there  four  hours  levitating. 

MASON:   Is  this  something  you  knew  you  could  do?   Or  did  it 

just  happen  once  or — ? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  it  was  interrelated  with  the  mind-body 

thing  and  art.   All  that  was  interrelated  with  itself,  with 

each  other,  with  my  study  of  existentialism  and  whatnot. 

It  brought  all  of  this  about. 

It  also  brought  back  my  childhood,  too,  and  my  basic 
self.   I  was  basically  a  good  person.   And  as  I  told  you 
earlier,  I  was  programmed  to  do  good.   But  a  good  person 
and  doing  good  are  not  the  same.   They're  different. 
Oftentimes  I  think  of  Martin  Luther  King  [Jr.]  as  a  person 
who  was  programmed  to  do  good.   He  couldn't  do  otherwise, 
because  his  name  was  Martin  Luther.   Martin  Luther  was  a 
Christian  of  the  earlier  years.   "King"  is  somebody  who 
wears  a  crown,   "Junior"  somebody:   belonged  to  somebody 
else.   So  he  was  not  himself,  he  wasn't  a  person.   He  was  a 
manifestation  of  someone  else's  idea.   Maybe  his  father  or 


23 


mother  Imbued  him  with  the  need  to  do  good  because  the 

black  race  which  he  belonged  to  needed  his  help.   Well,  I 

was  pretty  much  the  same  kind  of  person.   I  chose  to 

express  it  in  art,  rather  than  in  religion,  as  Martin 

Luther  King  did. 

MASON:   So  you  would  say  that  organized  religion  wasn't 

really  a  big  part  of  your  life  after  you  left  home. 

PURIFOY:   No,  I  abhorred  it.   I  abhorred  organized 

religion.   It  was  an  ugly  thing.   Particularly  manifested 

in  Catholicism. 

MASON:   How  did  you  come  into  contempt  of  Catholicism? 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  that  wealth  and  all  that  pomp  turned  me  off 

completely. 

MASON:   But  you  said  your  family  was  Methodist.   How  did 

you  come  in  contact  with  the  Catholic  church? 

PURIFOY:   The  media.   [laughter] 

MASON:   Okay,  okay.   I  didn't  know  if  you  had  a  friend 

maybe  you  went  to  church  with  or-- 

PURIFOY:   No,  no,  the  media.   And  being  interested  in  doing 

good,  you  want  to  be  knowledgeable  of  all  of  the  things  in 

life  that  are  supposed  to  do  good.   Well,  Catholicism 

wasn't  one  of  them. 

MASON:   What  about  Methodism  or  another  religion  that  you 

remember  from  back  then? 

PURIFOY:   No,  that  wasn't  one  either.   No  kind  of  organized 


24 


religion  was--  I  wasn't  interested  in  any  kind  of  organized 
religion  at  all.   I  take  that  back.   My  childhood 
experience  was  sprinkled  with  episodes  of  the  influence  of 
organized  religion.   I  remember  quite  distinctly  every  year 
Father  Divine  would  come  to  Birmingham.   Remember  Father 
Divine? 

MASON:   Yeah.   He  was  based  in  Harlem,  I  guess. 
PURIFOY:   Yeah.   He  would  make  a  yearly  trek  to  Alabama,  to 
Birmingham,  and  set  up  this  big  tent  where  everybody  came 
to  try  to  get  religion.   He  would  lay  on  hands  and  all  that 
stuff.   People  would  fall  out,  you  know,  with  the  spirit 
and  all  of  that.   Well,  every  time,  every  year  he'd  come, 
from  the  time  I  was  twelve  years  old  till  I  was  fifteen, 
I'd  go  to  these  meetings  and  try  to  get  religion.   I ' d  go 
up  there  and  bow  down  and  strain  hard  to  get  religion. 
Instead,  I  always  got  an  erection.   I  got  a  hard-on 
straining  to  get  religion.   That  was  the  manifestation,  the 
result  of  my  straining. 

So  I  developed  a  problem  that  took  me  years  and  years 
to  resolve.   I  had  a  conflict  between  sex  and  religion.   In 
later  years,  to  resolve  the  problem,  I  was  about  to  say  how 
often  I  went  to  church  on  Sundays,  different  kinds  of 
church,  looking  for  the  spirit,  looking  for  the  kind  of 
things  that  people  testify  about  on  Monday  morning.   They'd 
knock  on  everybody's  door  and  say,  "I  got  the  spirit,  I  got 


25 


religion."   You  must  be  familiar  with  that. 
MASON:   Yeah. 

PURIFOY:   Well,  yes,  that's  how  Christianity  influenced 
me.   Until  I  was  in  my  early  adulthood,  I  struggled  to 
attain  that  great  something  that  everybody  thought  was  so 
great  and  everything.   But  I  didn't  ever  succeed,  so  I 
abandoned  it.   In  other  words,  I  silently,  without 
announcing  it,  became  an  atheist.   You  know,  I  don't  know 
what  an  atheist  is,  except  one  who  does  not  believe  in 
God.   But  to  this  day,  I've  had  no  god.   I  wish  I  did 
sometimes,  but  I  don't.   And  that  probably  concludes  my 
religious  experience. 


26 


TAPE  NUMBER:   II,  SIDE  ONE 
SEPTEMBER  8,  1990 

MASON:   We  ended  up  talking  about  religion.   Is  there 
anything  else  that  you  wanted  to  add  to  that?   Because  I 
guess  the  next  thing  we'll  talk  about  is  your  work  as  a 
social  worker. 

PURIFOY:   After  I  got  my  degree  from  Atlanta  U[niversity] , 
I  came  back  to  Cleveland,  where  my  family  was,  and  got  a 
job  at  Cuyahoga  County  child  welfare  [Cuyahoga  County 
Department  of  Social  Services] ,  and  I  worked  there  two 
years.   My  responsibility  was  the  total  care  for  youth.   I 
had  mostly  infants  and  youth  in  early  childhood.   I  had  to 
find  them  a  place  to  live  and  provide  clothing  and  so 
forth--total  care.   We  also  were  an  adoption  agency,  so  I 
did  all  that.   It  was  an  interesting  experience.   I  put  my 
education  to  use  in  a  most  profound  way,  because  I  had  an 
opportunity  to  do  so.   I  felt  gratified. 

Now,  I  was  offered  a  job  at  another  institution,  where 
I  worked  for  about  three  months,  at  a  mental  institution, 
as  a  bibliotherapist .   Bibliotherapy  does  not  work  with 
mental  patients.   I  don't  know  why-- 
MASON:   What  is  bibliotherapy? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  know  why  they  felt  it  worked,  but  it  did 
not.   Not  because  I  was  a  failure,  but  because  the  whole 
program  was  a  failure. 

27 


MASON:   What  is  bibliotherapy? 

PURIFOY:   You  expose  adults  and  young  adults  to  books  that 
you  think  will  improve  their  mental  condition.   And  I  left 
there.   It  was  too  depressing  a  kind  of  a  job,  and  I 
couldn't  relate  to  those  people.   You  know,  it's  outside  of 
my  realm  of-- 

MASON:   The  patients  or  the  administrators? 

PURIFOY:   Patients.   So  I  left  Ohio  and  came  to  California, 
because  I'd  been  in  the  military  service  in  California,  and 
I  dreamed  of  returning,  because  it  was  a  very  pleasant 
experience. 

MASON:   I  just  wanted  to  try  to  get  some  more  detail  about 
the  social  work.   When  you  said  it  was  depressing  and  the 
program  was  a  failure,  what  did  you  mean  by  that? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  I  left  there  and  went  to  Los  Angeles  and 
got  a  job  at  the  [Los  Angeles]  County  Hospital,  where  I 
worked  for  two  or  three  years.   I  couldn't  get  along  with 
my  supervisors,  primarily  because  they  were  all  women.   I 
had  a  problem  with  that- -being  bossed  by  a  female.   I  never 
overcame  it  because  I  didn't  have  to.   I  just  went  from  job 
to  job.   But  I  had  a  tendency  to  work  fast  with  the 
patients,  and  I  was  in  charge  of  patients  who  had  problems 
accepting  medical  help,  mostly  religious  people.  Seventh 
Day  Adventists,  that  type  of  thing,  who  had  problems 
accepting  medical  help  sometimes.   And  I  had  mental 


28 


patients  as  well.   I  would  discharge  them  rapidly  because 
the  hospital  needed  the  beds.   My  supervisors  were 
concerned  about  my  being  able  to  discharge  people  so 
fast. 

And  also  I  didn't  like  my  coworkers,  because  social 
workers  have  a  certain  personality  type  that  believes  that 
they're  God.   It's  just  like  it's  their  money  instead  of 
the  state's  money.   Socially,  they  were  hard  to  get  along 
with  because  they  brought  their  work  home  with  them,  etc. 

So  I  finally  left  the  hospital  after  two  or  three 
years  and  made  application  to  Chouinard  Art  Institute,  just 
out  of  the  clear  blue.   I  passed  that  one  day  and  said,  "I 
think  I  want  to  go  to  art  school . "   And  I  was  accepted 
without  portfolio  or  anything, 

MASON:   Really?   Now,  that's  unusual  because--  Well,  the 
interview  I  did  with--  Well,  Bill  [William]  Pajaud  was  one 
of  the  earliest  black  people  to  go  to  Chouinard,  and  he 
talked  (well,  it's  in  a  book  [Robert  Ferine ' s  Chouinard,  an 
Art  Vision  Betrayed;   The  Story  of  the  Chouinard  Art 
Institute,  1921-1972] )  about  Chouinard,  about  the  prejudice 
that  Nelbert  Chouinard,  the  one  who  founded  the  art  school, 
had  toward  blacks.   They  didn't  want  blacks  to  go  to  the 
school . 

PURIFOY:   I  didn't  experience  that.   I  was  considered  the 
first  full-time  black  student.   I  didn't  experience  any 


29 


prejudices. 

MASON:   You  were  there  from  '52  to  '56,  I  guess. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah. 

MASON:   Well,  that's  interesting  that  they  accepted  you 

even  without  a  portfolio.   How  did  you--? 

PURIFOY:   I  was  the  poorest  student  there. 

MASON:   How  did  you  convince  them  to  let  you  in? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  know.   I  just  walked  in,  said  I  wanted  to 

go  to  school  there,  and  they  said,  "Okay." 

MASON:   That's  amazing!   When  did  you--? 

PURIFOY:   I  thought  it  was  par  for  the  course.   I  didn't 

know  that  it  was  unusual.   Mrs.  Chouinard,  I  was  on 

speaking  terms  with  her,  and  she  never  showed  any  signs  of 

prejudice  or  discrimination. 

I  started  out  majoring  in  industrial  art,  and  they 
discontinued  that  course  my  second  year  there,  so  I 
switched  to  fine  arts.   I  remember  my  ceramics  teacher  most 
of  all,  whose  name  was--  What  was  her  name?   Susan 
Peterson.   She  came  after  Peter  Voulkos.   I  never  got  a 
chance  to  study  under  Peter  Voulkos,  but  I  got  a  chance  to 
observe  his  work  and  all. 
MASON:   What  did  you  think  of  his  work? 

PURIFOY:   I  thought  his  little  stuff  was  great,  but  his  big 
stuff  was  just  terrible.   But  he  got  big.   Artists  have  a 
tendency  to  want  to  get  big  when  they're  successful  at 


30 


small  stuff.   He  was  very  successful  at  making  small  stuff, 
and  he  had,  at  the  time,  a  very  enviable  reputation.   Now 
he's  probably  world-known,  no  doubt.   But  I  rubbed  elbows 
with  those  people,  and  they  influenced  me  a  great  deal  in 
terms  of  accepting  me  as  a  student.   Now,  Susan  thought  I 
was  a  beautiful  person,  so  I  did  great  work,  although  I 
didn't  ever  want  to  be  a  ceramicist.   But  I  did  good  work 
because  she  was  so  amiable. 
MASON:   Do  you  have  any  of  those  pieces? 

PURIFOY:   No.   I  kept  one  piece  for  a  long  time,  and  I  sold 
it.   It  was  a  head--an  African  ceramic  head.   I  never 
bothered  about  trying  to  duplicate  the  human  image.   I 
always  had  an  opposition  to  that.   So  I  refused  to  draw.   I 
refused  to  learn  to  draw.   Today,  I  cannot  draw,  because  I 
was  afraid  I'd  get  stuck  with  the  human  image,  and  I  knew 
it  didn't  express  my  basic  feeling  about  nature  and  about 
being:   that  the  human  is  not  the  essence  of  being.   The 
human  in  relationship  to  the  world  is  the  essence  of 
being.   And  I  knew  that  even  then.   Therefore  I  had 
problems  trying  to  draw,  because  the  drawing  always 
includes  the  human  figure.   There's  the  model  sitting  there 
naked  and  whatnot.   You're  supposed  to  duplicate  that.   I 
thought  it  was  copying. 

So  I  never  did  go  for  landscape  or  anything  like  that, 
because  I  didn't  see--  You  can't  make  it  better,  so  I 


31 


didn't  see--  They  had  it  wrong.   The  creativity  was  not 
manifested  in  either  nature  or  human  nature,  because  it  was 
always  predictable.   So  I  didn't  see  art  as--  I  don't  know 
where  I  got  these  ideas  from  about  art,  but  I  found  in 
later  years  that  it's  as  close  to  the  creative  process  as 
any  thinking  ever  was.   I  don't  know  where  I  got  it  from, 
but  somehow  I  got  into  art  knowing  all  that  already.   I 
don't  know  where  I  got  it  from,  as  I  say. 

But  anyhow,  what  turned  me  on  to  art,  really,  was  art 
history.   That  probably  relates  to  where  you  are  at.   When 
I  got  to  study  how  art  is  formed  and  all  the  kinds  of 
manifestations,  it  gave  me  the  impetus  to  do  art.   Because 
I  had  these  things  inside  of  me  ready  to  be  expressed,  but 
I  didn't  have  a  media  through  which  to  express  them.   I 
tried  education,  that  didn't  work.   I  tried  social  work, 
that  didn't  work.   I'd  try  this  and  that,  didn't  work.   It 
didn't  communicate  to  the  people  my  deep  feelings.   So  I 
was  almost  always  at  a  loss  to  feel  that  I  was 
understood.   And  art,  being  a  nonverbal  language,  enabled 
me  to  feel  I  at  least  understood  myself,  if  others  didn't. 
MASON:   So  you  felt  it  was  through  this  ceramics  that  you 
did  that? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  Susan  helped  me  along  to  realize  my  full 
potential . 
MASON:   Did  you  have  a  personal  relationship  with  her  or 


32 


just  student- teacher? 

PURIFOY:   No,  she  was  just  a  good  person.   She  was  a  great 

person,  that's  all. 

MASON:   What  about  other  people  in  the  school?   Did  you--? 

Because  there  were  some  big  names  at  Chouinard.   Robert 

Irwin  was  there,  and  I  think  John  Altoon  was  there,  you 

know,  as  students.   Did  you  interact  with  these  students  in 

any  way? 

PURIFOY:   No,  I  didn't  have  much  time  to  fool  around, 

because  I  had  to  work  in  order  to  pay  my  tuition.   I  worked 

out  at  the  Douglas  Aircraft  [Company]  defense  plant  at 

night. 

MASON:   What  did  you  do  there? 

PURIFOY:   I  operated  a  shearing  machine  that  cut  metal  a 

certain  size  into  templates.   Then  after  I  couldn't  manage 

that  any  longer,  because  it  took  up  a  good  deal  of  time, 

going  to  and  fro  and  working  all  night  and  whatnot,  I  got  a 

job  at  Cannel  [and  Schaffen]  Interior  Designs  on  Wilshire 

Boulevard.   They  had  a  big  shop  on  Wilshire  Boulevard  full 

of  furniture.   I  was  a  window  trimmer.   So  I  could  set  the 

furniture  up  and  dress  it  off  and  whatnot. 

MASON:   Did  you  like  that  or  it  was  just  a  job? 

PURIFOY:   I  never  liked  to  work,  particularly  work  for 

somebody  else.   No,  I  didn't  particularly  like  it.   In 

fact,  I  got  fired  because  I  wanted  to  sell  furniture.   You 


33 


know,  I  wanted  to  be  an  interior  designer.   That's  what  I 

studied  in  school.   And  that  wasn't  the  right  place  to 

express  myself.   I'd  come  work  extra  on  Saturdays,  show 

customers  around  without  permission,  and  the  management 

didn't  like  that.   They  didn't  want  black  interior 

designers.   You  know,  they  wondered  where  I  got  the  gall 

from.   So  just  before  I  graduated  I  got  fired  from  that 

job. 

MASON:   What  kind  of  furniture  did  they  have?   Did  they 

have  a  lot  of  modern  furniture? 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  yes.   The  very  best. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  some  of  the  names? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   Heritage.   Are  you  familiar  with  the 

Heritage  line  of  furnishings?   Herman  Miller.   Boy,  those 

are  two  of  the  greatest  lines  in  the  country.   Still  are. 

[laughter] 

MASON:   Okay,  well,  I  don't  know. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   They  had  everything.   You  know,  from 

Biedermeier,  French  Provincial,  Louis  XV,  XVI --  They  had 

everything.   They  had  three  floors  stacked  with  every  kind 

of  furniture  you  can  name.   And  a  lot  of  great  interior 

designers. 

So  after  I  graduated,  I  didn't  go  into  interior 
design,  because  you  have  to  have  your  own  business  and 
whatnot.   Nobody  wants  to  hire  you.   I  had  woodworking 


34 


skills,  so  I  got  a  job  at  Angelus  Furniture  [Warehouse] 
company  designing  furniture. 

MASON:   So  you  ended  up  taking  your  degree  in  interior 
design?   I  mean,  you  went  from  industrial  arts  to  fine  arts 
to--? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  no.   No,  I  majored  in  fine  arts,  but  my 
skills  were  industrial  arts,  you  know,  because  of  my  high 
school  training  and  whatnot.   I  was  always  good  with  my 
hands,  and  I  could  operate  any  kind  of  machinery.   So  I  got 
this  job  designing  furniture.   But  I  couldn't  design 
anything  that  they  could  make  commercially.   It  was  too 
expensive. 

MASON:   What  did  they  look  like?   Or  what  was  the  concept? 
PURIFOY:   Modern  stuff.   Contemporary.   I  was  really  up  to 
snuff  because  I  was  going  to  school.   I  just  had  a  year  of 
industrial  design,  and  the  rest  of  it  was  spent  drawing 
this  and  that,  drawing  interiors.   I  took  all  my  drawing 
classes  where  I  could  draw  interiors.   The  rest  of  the 
class  weren't  drawing  interiors,  for  the  most  part.   They 
were  drawing  Louis  XV  and  Louis  XVI  interiors  and  excerpts 
from  interiors  and  whatnot,  but  basically  it  was  a  figure- 
drawing  class.   They  let  me  get  away  with  drawing  anything 
I  wanted  to  draw,  just  so  long  as  I  was  drawing. 
MASON:   I  was  just  thinking  that  Irving  Blum  came--  Do  you 
know  Irving  Blum?   He  had  a  gallery  [Ferus  Gallery;  Blum 


35 


Helmon  Gallery]  for  a  while.   When  he  was  in  New  York,  he 

worked  for  this  contemporary  art  store.   That's  kind  of  how 

he  got  his  start  in  the  arts.   I  was  just  wondering,  since 

you  were  interested  in  that,  if  you  had  had  any  contact 

with  him  at  all. 

PURIFOY:   No.   After  I  left,  I  took  a  job  operating  one  of 

the  machines,  after  they  couldn't  use  my  designs  at  Angelus 

Furniture  company.   They  still  exist,  of  course.   They  make 

cheap  furniture  and--  Nothing  of  consequence  now,  but  they 

used  to  be  a  leading  furniture  manufacturer  in  Los 

Angeles.   After  I  left  there,  I  started  doing  window 

trimming  at  the  Broadway  department  store. 

MASON:   Because  that  was  the  only  thing  you  could  find  or--? 

PURIFOY:   Related  to  my  skills,  yes. 

MASON:   When  you  graduated,  you  must  have  had  some  idea  or 

vision  of  where  you  wanted  to  go  with  your  life  then.   Do 

you  remember  what  that  was?   Did  you  have  any  plans? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  while  I  was  at  Chouinard,  I  met  a  student — 

a  part-time  student--whose  name  was  John  Smith,  and  he  was 

already  an  interior  designer.   He  was  a  mail  carrier  while 

he  studied  at  Chouinard  and  other  places  to  be  an  interior 

designer. 

MASON:   Was  he  a  black  guy? 

PURIFOY:   Uh-huh.   Finally,  he  was  able  to  just  exclusively 

do  interior  design.   I  went  in  with  him  more  or  less  and 


36 


did  the  things  in  interior  design  that  he  didn't  want  to 
do,  like  hanging  drapery  and  supervising  the  carpet  laying, 
and  all  that  type  of  thing,  in  my  spare  time  after  working 
eight  hours  at  the  Broadway,  with  the  idea  that  I  would 
eventually  go  into  interior  design. 

Well,  I  actually  became  a  better  designer  than  my 
friend,  but  I  couldn't  please  Mrs.  Jones.   You  know,  I 
would  go  and  hang  the  drapery  and  have  the  carpet  laid  and 
do  this  and  that,  tear  out  this  wall  and  design  furniture 
and  have  it  custom-made  and  all  that.   But  she'd  keep 
calling  me  back  about  something  wrong.   Now,  I  couldn't 
endure  that.   I  just  hated  that  kind  of  thing,  that  I  could 
never  complete  a  job.   I  mean,  they'll  call  you  back  to  do 
something  over.   So  for  those  reasons,  interior  design  did 
not  appeal  to  me  as  such.   It  was  exciting,  because  I  love 
color,  fabric,  and  that  type  of  thing.   But  I  couldn't  work 
with  the  people,  which  was  one  of  my  basic  problems  anyhow. 
MASON:   What  do  you  mean?   It  was  a  basic  problem? 
PURIFOY:   Dealing  with  personalities.   That's  when  Sigmund 
Freud  became  so  interesting  to  me,  that  he  dealt  with  these 
archetypes.   Carl  Jung  spoke  about  them  extensively. 
Psychology  has  a  tendency  to  put  people  in  pigeonholes- - 
categorize  them- -for  your  own  aggrandizement,  your  own 
satisfaction,  your  own  comfort  in  the  universe,  in  the 
world.   It's  better  to  deal  with  somebody  you  know- -or  at 


37 


least  you  think  you  know- -because  you  put  them  in  this 
little  box,  and  you  know  all  about  that  little  box  and 
what's  in  it.   So  you  put  them  in  that  little  box,  and  you 
could  deal  with  them.   You  see  them  coming  a  mile  away. 
You  know  what  they're  going  to  say.   You  know  what  they're 
going  to  do. 

So  I  had  a  tendency  to  interpret  psychology  in  this 
way,  and  I  made  a  fairly  good  adjustment  with  people  as  a 
result  of  doing  so,  knowing  full  well  it  was  unfair.   But 
for  my  own  peace  of  mind,  so  to  speak,  that's  the  way  I  got 
along  in  the  world. 

MASON:   So  you  were  finished  with  the  interior  design,  and 
then  what  did  you  do?   What  years  was  that?   Let's  see.   You 
graduated  in  '56.   You  were  at  the  Broadway  from  '56  to  '64. 
PURIFOY:   Uh-huh.   Then  came  Watts.   Eve  Echelman,  somebody 
who  worked  for  the  Watts  Towers  Committee  [Committee  to 
Save  Simon  Rodia's  Towers  in  Watts]--  They  had  hired 
someone  to  look  after  their  business  in  Watts,  look  after 
the  towers,  look  after  the  little  school  they  had.   They 
were  looking  for  somebody  with  an  art  degree  and  some 
experience  with  social  service,  which  was  me.   I  was 
unemployed  at  the  time,  and  I  said,  "Well,  that  sounds  just 
like  me."   And  I  split  for  Watts. 

MASON:   Where  were  you  living  at  the  time  when  you  were 
working  at  the  Broadway? 


38 


PURIFOY:   On  La  Brea  [Avenue] . 

MASON:   What  kind  of  community  was  that  there? 

PURIFOY:   On  La  Brea?   Well,  everybody  knows  about  that  old 

house  I  had.   I  had  moved  there  when  the  rent  was  $50  a 

month,  and  I'd  probably  been  there  twenty  years  or  fifteen 

years  or  so  when  I  went  to  work  in  Watts.   That  little 

place  where  I  lived  became  a  center  for  most  of  the  artists 

and  people  I  know  that  would  come  through  and  sit  and-- 

MASON:   This  was  after  you  started  to  work  at  the  center? 

PURIFOY:   No. 

MASON:   Oh,  it  was  before. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah. 

MASON:   Oh,  well,  we  should  talk  about  that,  then,  before 

we  get-- 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  got  interested  in  high  fidelity  and  sound 

and  record  collection. 

MASON:   What  kind  of  music?   I  know  there  were  some  jazz 

musicians  who  came  out  to  L.A. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   I  was  already  a  student  of  jazz,  and  I 

hired  a  tutor  to  teach  me  to  appreciate  classics.   Because 

I  had  little  or  no  classical  background.   I  felt  a  dire 

need  to  understand  the  classics,  because  I  hated  Beethoven 

or  anything  that  sounded  like  Beethoven.   Everybody  says 

Beethoven's  so  great  and  all.   If  I  can't  see  the 

greatness,  there's  something  wrong  with  me.   I  said. 


39 


"There's  definitely  nothing  wrong  with  me,  you  know,  never 
has  been.   There's  something  wrong  with  you  all  who  think 
Beethoven  is  that  great.   Don't  you  hear  the  overtones 
here?   That  music  is  only  for  a  few  ears.   It  doesn't 
relate  to  where  I  am  or  where  I've  been  or  where  I'm  going 
in  the  least.   It  doesn't  relate.   But  yet  I  have  to  know 
about  it."   So  I  bought  a  whole  bunch  of  classics  and  I  got 
a  tutor,  and  he  tried  to  teach  me  to  appreciate  classical 
music.   Failed  miserably. 
MASON:   Where  was  your  tutor  from? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  recall  who  it  was.   It  was  just  somebody 
that  I  knew.   It  wasn't  anybody  of  note.   It  was  just 
somebody  who  appreciated  the  classics  and  who  could  talk 
about  them  intelligently.   Well,  I  wasn't  satisfied  with 
just  the  sound  coming  out  of  two  speakers.   I  had  to  apply 
my  skills  and  construct  a  nine-foot  cabinet  to  hold  my 
instruments.   I  designed  my  own  speakers,  and  the  sound  was 
superb.   There  wasn't  anything  such  as--  I  forget  the 
terms.   But  anyhow,  I  had  the  latest  sounds  around.   And 
people  came  from  far  and  near  to  hear.   I  was  stepping  over 
people  over  the  weekend  whom  I  didn't  even  know.   They  were 
flopping  at  my  pad  all  day  and  all  night.   But  I  encouraged 
this  because  I  had  a  need  to  want  to  understand  people.   I 
had  a  problem  with  people.   You're  not  supposed  to  have  a 
problem  with  people  if  you're  going  to  influence  them.   So 


40 


I  had  a  need  for  people  to  gather  around  me,  and  they  came 
from  everywhere.   I  developed  some  interesting  friends  as 
the  results  of  that.   Harry  Drinkwater,  a  photographer,  was 
one.   We  still  are  friends,  wherever  he's  at. 

In  other  words,  although  I  liked  girls  a  lot,  I  didn't 
know  how  to  approach  them.   I  always  would  approach  girls 
as  though  they  were  my  sisters,  to  be  corrected  if  they're 
wrong.   That  didn't  strike  well.   So  I  had  real  problems 
with  girls,  not  only  with  people,  but  girls.   I  knew  that 
didn't  make  for  a  very  well  rounded  life.   I  knew  the 
cause,  basically,  of  my  inability  to  relate  to  women  was 
because  I  had  six  sisters.   I  couldn't  be  natural  around 
them.   I'm  acting  like  a  brother  all  the  time.   A  girl 
doesn't  want  a  brother,  she  wants  a  lover. 

I  thought  it  was  black  women  that  I  was  having  this 
problem  with,  so  I  started  going  with  white  women  because 
they  were  available  to  me.   And  I  did  a  little  better.   To 
say  the  least,  I  did  a  little  better.   Then  I  could  look  at 
a  black  woman  as  my  sister  and  it  was  okay.   If  I  have  sex 
with  her,  you  know,  I  feel  a  little  bit  guilty,  because  I 
feel  like  it's  incest.   You  know  what  I  mean?   But  I  waited 
too  long  to  relate  to  women  in  ways  in  which  I  could 
anticipate  marriage.   So  I  became  a  stud,  in  a  way.   Women 
who  were  ashamed  to  be  with  me  in  polite  company  would  come 
on  Saturday  morning  and  spend  the  day.   These  were  black 


41 


women.   I  felt  really  comfortable  with  these  women  whom  I 
could  relate  to  this  way  with  no  future,  no  anticipation. 
They  thought  they  were  getting  away  with  something,  and  I 
was  getting  away  with  having  a  satisfying  relationship  with 
a  black  female  without  any  attachments,  which  I  always  felt 
there  ought  to  have  been.   In  order  to  relate  intimately, 
there  should  be  some  projection  into  the  future,  like  where 
are  we  going,  etc.   So  this  went  on  for  years.   It  was 
gratifying. 

I  began  to  like  myself  better,  and  consequently  I 
could  go  on  and  do  my  work.   That's  when  I  started  to  do 
art.   I  quit  the  Broadway  department  store,  came  home,  and 
just  sat  around  for  a  year  thinking  about  doing  art.   I  had 
one  drawing  that  I  copied  somewhere,  and  that  was  the  focal 
point  with  everybody  who  came  to  talk.   I  had  a  studio 
clean  enough  to  eat  off  the  table.   I  never  did  a  lick  of 
work  there.   I  wasn't  in  the  studio.   I  had  a  beret  and 
all.   I  ate  cheese  and  drank  wine,  but  I  wasn't  an  artist 
yet  until  Watts.   That  made  me  an  artist. 

MASON:   I  want  to  hear  more  about  this  period  and  some  of 
your  other  friends,  because  it  seems  that  there  are  a  lot 
of  sort  of  bohemian  enclaves  for  artists  in  the  fifties, 
different  jazz  clubs  people  would  hang  out  at. 
PURIFOY:   I  wasn't  even  an  artist,  but  they  flocked  around 
me  anyhow  because  I  pretended  to  be  an  artist.   I'd 


42 


graduated  from  art  school,  and  I  had  ten  years  of 

experience  vaguely  with  artists.   So  I  was  accepted  as  an 

artist.   In  fact,  I  didn't  have  anything  to  show  for  it. 

^4AS0N:   Did  you  have  any  friends  who  called  themselves 

artists? 

PURIFOY:   Just  about  like  myself.   Sunday  painters.   That's 

about  the  extent  of  it. 

MASON:   Did  they  ever  go  on  to  practice  it  full-time  or 

not? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  after  I  started  doing  art,  then  the  artists 

came.   I  was  the  artist's  artist.   They  dug  my  work,  my 

mannerism  and  my  style,  more  than  the  people  did.   It  was 

the  artists  that  corralled  around  me  because  I  had  words  to 

say  about  art,  to  relate  to  art.   Having  three  academic 

degrees  by  then,  I  was  pretty  verbal  and  astute.   And  I  was 

also  extremely  knowledgeable  about  people,  because  I  had  so 

many  problems  with  them  in  growing  up  and  so  forth.   I  had 

a  whole  flock  of  people  around  me  all  the  time.   It  came  in 

real  handy  when  I  originated  "66  Signs  of  Neon."   I  had  all 

the  help  I  needed. 

MASON:   What  about  the  art  history?   Did  you  continue  to 

read  about  that  or  learn  about  that  or  visit  the  galleries 

and  the  museums? 

PURIFOY:   I  visited  galleries  and  museums  frequently. 

MASON:   Which  ones  did  you  go  to? 


43 


PURIFOY:   The  [Los  Angeles]  County  Museum  [of  Art]  I 
frequented  often  and  the  galleries  on  La  Cienega 
[Boulevard]  every  Monday  night.   That  was  before  I  was  a 
full-time  artist.   Simply  because  not  only  was  I  interested 
in  art--knowing  about  art--I  was  also  interested  in  what 
was  going  on.   So  I  went  down  to  Tijuana  once  a  week.   I 
was  interested  in  knowing  what  was  happening  in  the 
community  all  over  the  place.   I  went  to  UCLA  to  hear  all 
their  concerts.   Till  Stravinsky  died,  I  saw  every  one  of 
his.   So  I  was  just  knowledgeable  about  what  was  going  on 
all  over  the  place.   I  wasn't  participating.   I  was  just 
knowledgeable  about  it,  because  I  felt  responsible  to  know. 
MASON:   What  about  assemblage  art  in  particular?   There  was 
the  Ferus  Gallery  that  Ed  [Edward]  Kienholz  had,  and  he 
would  show  his  friends  assemblage  art. 
PURIFOY:   Well,  I  always  thought  I  was  better  than 
Kienholz,  simply  because  my  things  did  not  extract  from  an 
individual  that  which  he  didn't  choose  to  give.   Kienholz 
did  that,  and  I  didn't  like  that. 
MASON:   Extract  from  an  individual--? 

PURIFOY:   That  which  he  didn't  intend  to  give.   Pathos. 
That's  Kienholz.   Kienholz  has  all  the  characteristics  of 
the  Jew  that  wants  you  to  feel  bad  because  he  wants  you  to 
feel  bad.   His  hospital  scenes  and  all  are  evidence  of 
that.   And  I  didn't  like  that.   I  didn't  care  about  that. 


44 


We  both  showed  in  Germany,  but  I  never  did  like  Kienholz's 

stuff.   You've  probably  read  articles  about-- 

MASON:   Yeah,  they  compared  your — 

PURIFOY:   Right. 

MASON:   You  did  a  tableau  for  the — 

PURIFOY:   I  resented  that.   I  didn't  ever  do  it  publicly, 

but  I  resented  being  compared  with  Kienholz.   I  thought  I 

was  more  of  a  person  than  that,  to  do  stuff  like  that. 


45 


TAPE  NUMBER:   II,  SIDE  TWO 
SEPTEMBER  8,  1990 

PURIFOY:   When  the  U.S.  Office  of  Information  asked  me  if  I 

wanted  to  exhibit  in  Germany  in  a  recycling  exhibition  they 

were  having  over  there--  When  was  it?   Nineteen  something. 

MASON:   In  '67?   I  don't  see  it  right  away.   We  can  fill  it 

in  later.   It  was  around  '68. 

PURIFOY:   They'd  tell  me  who  was  going  to  be  showing,  you 

know,  and  give  me  a  choice  to  decide  whether  I  wanted  to 

show  or  not.   Because  of  the  title  of  the  exhibit,  some  of 

the  people  refused  to  show.   Among  them  was  what ' s-her- 

name,  who  does  these  shadow-box  things,  Louise  Nevelson. 

But  anyhow,  Kienholz  and  I  were  the  ones  who  committed 

ourselves  to  showing  in  Germany. 

MASON:   Okay.   I  have  it  here.   It  was  1972,  and  it's 

"Garbage  Needs  Recycling." 

PURIFOY:   Right.   Even  then  I'd  already  formulated  some 

concepts  about  Kienholz.   He  seems  to  be  the  subject 

here.   I  was  supposed  to  feel  like  something  showing  with 

him,  but  I  didn't.   It  didn't  matter  with  me. 

MASON:   But  you  knew  about  his  work  from  the  galleries 

prior  to  the  show. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  from  seeing  it. 

MASON:   You  didn't  like  it  then,  and  you  never  did  like  it. 

PURIFOY:   I  never  did  like  it,  no. 

46 


MASON:   Well,  we  should  talk  about  your  installation,  then, 
at  the  Brockman  Gallery,  even  though  we're  jumping  ahead. 
But  as  long  as  we're  talking  about--  Because  you  were 
compared  to  Kienholz  a  lot  with  that,  with  the  tableau, 
with  the  long  titles.  Niggers  Ain't  Never  Ever  Gonna  Be 
Nothin'--All  They  Want  To  Do  Is  Drink  +  Fuck.   Could  you 
talk  about  that  piece  and  what  you  were  trying  to  do  with 
it  and  anything  else  you  want  to--?  [tape  recorder  off] 
PURIFOY:   The  best  example  of  what  I'm  talking  about  has  to 
do  with  the  world  of  the  spirit,  Christianity,  and 
religion.   Now,  those  people  are  hard  sell.   They  want 
everybody  in  the  world  to  be  like  them,  so  that's  why  they 
spread  the  word.   Well,  artists  have  taken  on  some  of  the 
same  characteristics  as  religion,  and  I  think  it's  not  cool 
at  all.   It  has  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  the  creative 
process  as  it  is.   My  ideas  come  from  having  people  try  to 
influence  me  into  becoming  someone  other  than  who  I  am  at 
their  will  instead  of  my  own.   When  artists  begin  to  use 
their  work  to  communicate  something  that  they  think  people 
ought  to  be  or  feel,  I  think  it's  an  af f rontation,  and  I 
think  art  loses  its  real  essence,  based  on  the  creative 
process. 

The  creative  process  is  something  that  you  never  know 
enough  about.   Even  though  you  do  art  for  all  your  life,  or 
two  lifetimes,  you  do  it  without  a  knowledge  of  the 


47 


creative  process,  which  is  very  interesting.   So  I  made  a 
long  study  of  the  creative  process  and  attempted  to  relate 
it  to  art.   They're  two  different  extremes.   Art  and  the 
creative  process  are  not  one  and  the  same  thing.   My  idea 
is  to  interrelate  them  if  I  can,  like  I  attempted  to 
interrelate  my  mind  with  my  body  to  make  one  whole 
person.   I  think  most  of  the  things  in  the  world--idea- 
wise,  particularly--need  to  be  related  to  human  beings  or 
related  to  one  another.   In  other  words,  I  lived  almost  a 
half  to  two-thirds  of  a  lifetime  telling  other  people  how 
to  live  without  applying  it  to  my  own  self.   One  day  I 
turned  around  and  said,  "Is  what  I  know  applicable  to 
me?"   It  was  the  most  upsetting  idea  I  ever  had  in  my  whole 
life.   In  fact,  I'm  not  over  with  it  yet.   Because  all  that 
I  ever  was  was  not  applicable  to  me.   Because  I  thought  I 
was  okay.   "It's  the  world  that's  wrong,  not  me."   You  can 
imagine  what  it's  like  to  carry  that  around  with  you  all 
your  life  and  resort  to  art  as  an  escape.   That's  what  art 
was  for  me  to  begin  with,  at  the  beginning. 
MASON:   When  you  did  your  installation  at  the  Brockman 
Gallery,  that  was  in  '71,  and  people  were  really  moved  by 
it.   How  would  you  compare  what  you  were  trying  to  do  then 
with  what  Kienholz  was  trying  to  do  at  that  time? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  actually  I've  never  been  satisfied  with 
little  things  that  hang  on  the  wall.   That's  how  I  started 


48 


out,  because  that  was  the  best  way  I  could  express 
myself.   I  didn't  even  have  an  easel.   I  worked  on  this 
thing  for  a  week  or  two  lying  flat  on  the  table,  and  I 
never  really  saw  it  until  I  hung  it  up  one  day.   I  thought 
it  was  finished,  so  I  hung  it  up.   And  I  was  bowled  over 
with  the  idea  that  I  could  transfer  my  ideas  from  my  head 
to  a  board,  but  it  never  satisfied  me  as  an  expression.   I 
just  thought  there  was  some  absence,  some  lacking  in  it. 
As  a  result  of  that  opposition  to  flat  stuff  hanging  on  the 
wall,  I  went  to  the  environment.   It  was  a  likely  place  to 
go.   That  was  my  thinking  all  along,  and  still  is.   That 
accounts  for  this  piece  out  here. 

The  pieces  at  Brockman  were  the  first  and  the  last 
environmental  pieces  I  made  until  I  came  to  the  desert.   It 
was  probably  more  gratifying  than  anything  else  I've  ever 
done,  also,  and  the  least  creative. 

MASON:   Could  you  describe  it?   Because  I've  never  seen  any 
photographs  of  it  anywhere,  just  a  few  verbal  records. 
PURIFOY:   Yeah,  I  have  a  tape  of  it,  I  think.   Somebody 
filmed  it.   No  sound,  but--  Yeah,  I've  got  sound,  I 
think.   I  will  attempt  to  find  it  before  this  is  over  with. 

It  was  a  one-room  apartment  in  the  upstairs  section  of 
the  Brockman  Gallery.   Here's  the  bathroom,  and  here's  the 
kitchen,  and  the  rest  of  the  space  was  allocated  to  the 
bedroom.   So  there  was  one  bed  here,  and  the  rest  of  the 


49 


space  was  lined  with  pallets--that  is,  mattress  on  the 
floor  and  blankets  and  whatnot.   The  whole  place  was 
treated.   The  walls  were  treated  with  torn  wallpaper  and 
old  photographs  of  black  people  and  pictures  of  Jesus 
Christ,  implying  the  religious  overtones.   There  were  ten 
of  these  pallets  on  the  floor  with  mannequins  in  them, 
covered  over  with  blankets.   Here  were  people  lying  on  the 
floor--the  so-called  members  of  the  family--and  you  just 
saw  the  shape  of  the  person  because  they  were  mannequins  on 
mattresses.   I  got  all  this  from  the  junk  pile. 

But  in  one  bed  was  a  male  and  female,  called  mother 
and  father,  and  baby.   The  mother  and  father  were  having 
sex  while  the  baby  watched  on.   These  figures  were  animated 
to  move  up  and  down.   They  were  also  covered  with  blankets, 
so  you  could  just  see  the  movement  up  and  down,  that's  what 
you  could  see.   On  the  nightstand  beside  the  bed  were 
liquor  bottles  and  whatnot,  like  what  people  engage  in  in 
their  waking  hours.   Somewhere  was  a  television  splattering 
at  midnight  with  no  picture,  just  sound.   Somewhere  was  a 
radio  spieling  out  sound  simultaneously  with  the  TV,  as  is 
evident  among  poor  or  black  people.   In  the  kitchen  here 
was  a  sink  and  the  kitchen  table  with  chairs.   There  were 
roaches  crawling  on  the  kitchen  table  and  evidence  of  rats 
around.   A  refrigerator  that  had  an  astounding  odor  when 
opened.   This  was  the  entrance.   People  would  come  to  the 


50 


door  and  fall  back,  for  the  most  part.   [laughter]   They 
couldn't  endure  the  reality  of  what  was  going  on.   The 
bathroom  was  also  fetid,  in  every  regard.   I  didn't 
overlook  any  aspect  of  a  whole  apartment,  so  to  speak,  in 
trying  to  give  it  the  very  essence  of  poverty  and  the  way 
black  people  live.   So  therefore,  it  wasn't  creative  as 
such.   It  was  a  duplication  of  what  was  real. 
MASON:   This  was  what  you  had  seen  while  you  were  a  social 
worker . 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  during  my  course.   Now,  during  the 
reception  we  had  black-eyed  peas  and  corn  bread.   I  made  it 
myself.   The  music  that  was  going  was  my  voice  singing  the 
hymns  and  whatnot.   The  tape  was  going  all  the  time,  and  it 
was  really  a  great  scene.   [There  was]  very  little  light  in 
there.   Just  enough  to  show  off  what  was  going  on,  more  or 
less.   There  was  a  passageway  right  through  the  kitchen  to 
the  back  end,  where  people  would  go  through  and  come  out 
somewhere.   Few  people  milled  around.   Few.   But  some 
did.   But  most  people  came  to  this  point- - 
MASON:   Yeah,  the  entrance. 

PURIFOY:   --and  went  back  thataway.   Now,  this  was 
extremely  effective,  because  it  was  an  absolute  truth.   I 
wasn't  trying  to  communicate  anything  more  than  what  was 
real,  what  was  happening.   If  anybody  had  any  deep  feelings 
about  poverty,  it  was  unintentional.   That  is  to  say,  it 


51 


was  just  my  privilege--instead  of  prerogative--to  show 
this. 

And,  of  course,  I  express  my  appreciation  to  Alonzo 
[Davis]  for  giving  me  the  exhibit  and  all,  but  he  behaved 
just  like  everybody  else,  in  a  way.   In  other  words,  I 
expected  somebody  to  help  me  move  the  refrigerator  up  there 
at  least,  you  know--up  those  stairs.   Everybody  was  anxious 
to  see  it  complete.   Nobody  came  to  observe  the 
installation.   They  wanted  to  see  it  complete.   In  other 
words,  Alonzo  stayed  out  himself  and  kept  other  people  out 
until  it  was  all  finished. 

It  was  rather  gratifying.   I  don't  know  how  successful 
it  was,  with  one  exception.   People  still  remember  that 
exhibit  today.   You  know,  that's  part  of  the  essence  of  art 
is  that  aspects  of  it--seeing  with  the  eye  and  recognizing 
with  the  mind- -are  a  permanent  experience,  unforgettable 
experience. 

This  in  itself  was  incomplete.   There  was  another  part  in 
my  mind  to  put  with  this,  and  that's  Extreme  Object  D-E-D. 
Where  these  people  are  having  sex  and  having  a  ball  up 
here,  downstairs  I  had  hoped  to  have  two  white  people 
sitting  on  the  side  of  the  bed  opposite  each  other,  staring 
out  in  space,  with  the  space  all  decorated  with  French 
Provincial  and  whatnot  and  a  Rolls  Royce  parked  on  the 
outside.   William  Wilson,  the  art  critic,  his  comment  was 


52 


that  he'd  never  seen  this  kind  of  exhibit  before  in  all  his 
experience.   That's  what  he  wrote  about  it.   It's  in  one  of 
those  articles  you  probably  have.   He  said  the  only  thing 
that  was  absent  was  the  rest  of  the  exhibit  that  I  intended 
to  present.   I  didn't  know  how  he  knew  that,  but  that's  the 
statement  he  made.   That  the  only  thing  absent  about  the 
whole  exhibit  was  that  the  opposite  wasn't  on  display--you 
know,  the  elite  part.   For  years  I  had  hoped  to  do  that 
exhibit  over  with  this  whole  thing,  but  finally  I  abandoned 
it  because  I  abandoned  art  in  the  interim.   [tape  recorder 
off] 

MASON:   Okay,  there's  something  that  you  wanted  to  add 
about  the  exhibit. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   It  was  meant  for  black  people.   It  was  my 
continuous  zeal  to  communicate  to  black  people  some  idea 
about  who  they  were  really,  with  the  hope  that  they  could 
manifest  some  change  in  their  general  conditions  and 
status.   That's  really  inherent  in  the  title.  Niggers  Ain ' t 
Gonna  Never  Be  Nothin'--All  They  Want  To  Do  Is  Drink  + 
Fuck.   Now,  the  blacks  that  I've  interrelated  with  most  of 
my  life  know  nothing  else  other  than  what  I  described 
here:   all  the  poverty  and  how  you  escape  it  by  drinking 
and  having  sex.   What  I  meant  to  communicate  was  that 
there's  more  to  life  than  that.   I  don't  know  to  what 
extent  the  people  whom  it  was  meant  for  got  to  see  it. 


53 


because  they  don't  come  to  the  Brockman  Gallery.   But 
that's  to  whom  it  was  directed,  and  that's  part  of  my 
original  premise,  to  communicate  to  my  own  people  what  I 
think  they  need  to  know  in  order  to  better  themselves. 

In  Watts--  That  was  my  idea,  not  of  bettering  Watts, 
but  to  get  the  hell  out.   You  know,  find  some  means  by 
which  you  can  get  the  hell  out  of  here  and  go  somewhere 
else  where  you  can  be  influenced  by  some  other  elements, 
because  you'll  never  improve  yourself  here.   That  was  my 
idea  of  bringing  to  the  black  public  a  reminder  of  "This  is 
either  where  you  are  or  where  you're  going."   Being  on 
welfare  and  whatnot  is--  There's  a  better  life  than  that. 
"From  one  generation  to  another,  you  know,  you've  always 
been  on  welfare.   Well,  this  is  where  that  leads  to."   Now 
it's  drugs,  so  my  prediction  was  quite  correct.   I  was 
concerned  also  about  the  school  dropout  problem,  a  whole 
bunch  of  problems,  as  a  result  of  this  exhibit.   But  this-- 
no  matter  who  saw  it--gave  me  the  opportunity  to  express 
what  I'd  been  feeling.   That's  all  I  can  think  to  say  right 
at  the  moment.   Could  be  more  later. 


54 


TAPE  NUMBER:   III,  SIDE  ONE 
SEPTEMBER  9,  1990 

MASON:   Right  now  I  want  to  finish  up  talking  about  your 
post-Chouinard  [Art  Institute],  pre-Watts  [Towers  Arts 
Center]  years,  because  you  were  saying  yesterday  that  even 
though  you  didn't  feel  that  you  were  an  artist,  you  were 
still  trying  to  find  out  what  was  going  on  in  the  art  scene 
in  L.A.  and  that  you  were  going  to  galleries  on  La  Cienega 
[Boulevard] .   I  just  wanted  to  ask,  what  kinds  of  things 
did  you  see  that  made  an  impression  on  you  in  the 
galleries?   Were  there  any  black  artists  in  the  galleries, 
or  did  you--?  Well,  I'll  just  leave  it  at  that, 
[laughter]   You  can  start  there. 

PURIFOY:   I  wasn't  particularly  impressed  with  anything.   I 
just  wanted  to  be  knowledgeable  about  what  was  happening  in 
Los  Angeles.   I'm  trying  to  [recall],  through 
interpretation  of  who  I  thought  I  was  at  the  time,  what  was 
my  idea  and  attitude  toward  what  I  was  looking  at.   Was  I 
primarily  interested  in  art  in  order  to  be  intelligent 
about  what  was  happening,  or  was  I  really  interested  in 
becoming  an  artist  at  the  time?   Working  at  department 
stores,  being  a  window  trimmer,  was  reasonably 
gratifying.   I  was  receiving  a  fairly  good  salary,  and  I 
was  treated  well  on  the  job.   I  had  twelve  suits,  and  I 
wore  a  different  one  every  day.   I  was  doing  pretty  good,  I 

55 


thought . 

But  vacation  time  came  one  year,  after  being  there  for 
nine  years,  and  I  felt  comfortable  at  home  fidgeting  around 
the  newly  decorated  studio  with  nothing  in  it.   So  I 
started  working  on  some  collages,  which  was  something  that 
I  enjoyed  doing,  I  thought.   After  a  while  I  decided  I 
didn't  want  to  go  back  to  work,  so  I  called  and  said  that  I 
wanted  another  month's  leave.   They  said  if  I  didn't  come 
back  I  was  fired.   So  I  got  fired.   I'd  saved  some  money  in 
the  savings  plan  at  the  Broadway,  so  I  thought  I'd  spend 
all  my  money  just  hanging  around  the  house  and  trying  to 
fiddle  with  art  and  so  forth.   Fortunately,  a  friend  of 
mine  moved  from  Los  Angeles  to  Washington,  D.C.,  and  left 
me  all  of  his  art  equipment,  including  the  easel. 
MASON:   Who  was  that?   Was  this  John  Smith,  the  designer 
that  befriended  you? 

PURIFOY:   I'll  have  to  think  up  his  name  and  tell  you 
later.   But  anyhow,  that  gave  me  the  impetus  to  actually 
begin  to  do  art,  because  I  had  some  equipment  to  work 
with.   So  I  started  out  by  doing  collages.   I  was 
reasonably  pleased  with  what  I  was  doing. 
MASON:   What  did  the  collages  look  like? 

PURIFOY:   They  had  African  overtones.   An  abstract  figure 
of  a  warrior  with  spear  and  shield  was  the  first  one  I 
did.   The  second  one  I  did  was  oriental.   The  third  one  I 


56 


did  was  something  else  and  something  else.   It  kind  of 
represented  a  universal  concept  of  what  I  call  an  art 
motif.   The  reason  I  did  an  African  motif  is  that  it  just 
occurred  to  me  to  do  an  African  motif.   It  didn't 
particularly  have  anything  to  do  with  my  being  black  as 
such,  except  I  wanted  to  express  in  art  I  thought  at  that 
time--that  early  time--the  universal  conscience,  which  has 
enabled  me  to  do  something  in  African  and  oriental  and  so 
forth.   The  second  year  the  money  ran  out,  so  I  started 
doing  janitorial  work  at  nighttime  in  order  to  have  my 
daytimes  to  work  in.   And  by  that  time  I  got  called  to 
Watts,  I  think.   [tape  recorder  off] 
MASON:   This  is  1964? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  I  think  so.   You  asked  me  how  did  the 
pieces  look,  and  I  had  begun  to  describe  how  they  looked  in 
terms  of  essence.   But  more  specifically,  I  had  utilized 
found  objects.   So  the  very  first  things  I  made  as 
collages--  Or  actually  not  collages  as  such.   They  were 
assemblages  made  of  found  objects.   In  the  case  of  these 
first  pieces,  they  were  small  objects  that  seemed  to 
represent  what  I  wanted  to  represent,  such  as  the  shield, 
the  spear,  and  all,  and  the  African  motif  and  everything. 
They  were  objects  that  looked  like  a  shield  or  a  spear, 
etc. ,  as  was  the  case  in  most  of  my  things  over  the 
years . 


57 


I  mentioned  yesterday  about  how  the  Watts  Towers 
Coitunittee  [Conunittee  to  Save  Simon  Rodia's  Towers  in 
Watts],  who  owned  the  Watts  Towers,  had  employed  a  person 
to  go  to  Watts  and  try  to  create  some  happenings  around  the 
Watts  Towers.   Her  name  was  Eve  Echelman,  and  she  heard 
about  me.   I  went  out  and  thought  it  was  okay  if  I  started 
working  there.   There  was  another  person  in  the  community, 
who  was,  I  think,  teaching  school  in  one  of  the  elementary 
schools,  whose  name  was  Sue  Welch.   Sue  Welch  and  I  began 
to  explore  the  community  in  terms  of  designing  an  art 
program  in  a  house  that  was  rented  by  the  Watts  Towers  on 
107th  Street,  just  a  stone's  throw  from  the  towers 
themselves.   We  worked  for  weeks  on  end  trying  to  recruit 
youth  to  come  to  the  towers  to  experience  the  programs  that 
we  were  going  to  design.   So  after  many  weeks  and  on  to 
months,  we  had  designed  a  program  utilizing  all  of  the 
resources  that  we  could  find,  such  as  the  youth  programs, 
and  there  were  some  moneys  to  support  art  programs. 
MASON:   State  money? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  state  and  federal  dollars.   We  wrote 
proposals  to  get  these  moneys,  both  as  salaries  for  our 
people  and  for  equipment  and  so  forth.   I  also  ran  across  a 
person  who  gave  a  lot  of  assistance,  whose  name  is  Judson 
Powell.   So  Judson  Powell,  Sue,  and  myself  became  the  team 
to  create  an  art  program  in  Watts.   Eve  Echelman  did  not 


58 


participate  in  creating  the  program.   She  left  the 
community  for  points  east  and  returned  in  about  a  year  to 
see  how  well  we  had  made  out. 

I'd  like  to  say  that  I  founded  the  Watts  Towers  Arts 
Center,  which  it  eventually  became,  but  considering  the 
help  I  had  in  Sue  Welch  and  Judson  Powell  and  Eve  Echelman 
and  others,  it  was  a  group  effort,  I  would  say.   Rather 
than  single-handedly  having  created  an  art  project,  I  would 
say  that  I  was  a  cofounder  of  the  Watts  Towers  art 
school.   Considering  it  is  still  in  existence--and  run  by 
John  Outterbridge  now  and  has  been  for  years- -I  would  say 
that  it  was  definitely  a  group  effort  that  made  that  little 
school  possible. 

We  had  two  full-time  teachers,  whose  names  were  Debbie 
Brewer  and  Lucille  Krasne.   We  had  programs  designed  for 
kids  from  age  four  to  late  teenagers.   The  young  kids  would 
come  in  the  morning--those  particularly  who  weren't  going 
to  school--and  stay  till  about  nine  or  ten  o'clock,  where 
they  had  drawing  and  painting,  finger  painting,  and  so 
forth.   In  the  late  afternoon,  the  youths  would  come  from 
the  general  elementary  and  high  schools.   After  a  while,  we 
created  such  a  vital  program  that  we  were  actually  bulging 
at  the  seams.   The  little  children  oftentimes  did  not  want 
to  go  home  when  it  was  time  to  go  home,  and  we  had  to 
escort  them.   They  were  kids  mostly  from  the  immediate 


59 


community  or  107th  Street  and  elsewhere  close  by.   We  also 
recruited  kids  from  the  schools,  and  they  came  for 
workshops  during  school  hours.   So  we  were  rather  busy,  for 
the  most  part.   Judson  and  I  maintained  the  facilities, 
while  Debbie  and  Lucille  conducted  the  workshops. 

We  utilized  found  objects  to  teach  with.   Oftentimes 
we'd  take  the  children  on  trips  to  pick  out  objects-- junk 
and  etc. --and  bring  it  back  to  the  towers,  to  the  art 
center,  to  do  assemblages  and  collages  and  so  forth.   We 
were  interested  in  ascertaining  if  the  children  were 
interested  in  utilizing  objects  as  applied  to  some  form  of 
learning.   We  learned  that  it  was  rather  natural  and 
instinctive  for  the  kids  to  assemble  and  disassemble  an 
object,  with  the  idea  of  counting  the  parts  and  so  forth. 
So  this  was  a  profound  discovery  for  us,  which  put  us  onto 
a  direction  which  we  did  not  anticipate.   That  is  to  say, 
art  education.   [tape  recorder  off] 

MASON:   Let's  go  back  to  the  beginning.   Now,  who  is  Eve 
Echelman  exactly?   Was  she  a  part  of--?  Was  this  project  to 
go  into  Watts  to  work  with  the  community  part  of  the 
California  Arts  Council,  do  you  know?   I  mean,  why  did 
somebody  get  the  idea  all  of  a  sudden  that  they  wanted  to 
go  to  Watts  and  work  with  the  community  in  ' 64? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  as  I  said  before,  the  Watts  Towers 
Committee  had  bought  the  Watts  Towers  from  a  man  to  whom  it 


60 


was  left  after  Simon  Rodia  took  off.   He  left  it  in  charge 
of  someone  in  Watts  and  went  up  north  somewhere.   So  a 
group  of  people  in  Los  Angeles  formed  a  committee  to 
purchase  the  towers,  and  that  they  did.   They  already  had 
something  of  a  class  going  on  at  the  towers,  an  open-air 
project  of  some  nature,  where  the  kids  would  gather  around 
and  they  would  do  finger  painting  and  collages.   But  the 
towers  wanted  a  more  sophisticated  program  than  that,  so 
they  hired  Eve  Echelman,  who  was  an  astute  person  in 
organizing  and  so  forth,  to  see  if  she  could  come  to  Watts 
and  drum  up  some  people  who  could  create  an  art  school . 
And  that  she  did. 

MASON:   You  said  she  heard  about  you.   Do  you  know  how  she 
heard  about  you? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   I  was  unemployed  at  the  time,  meaning  that 
I  was  sitting  around  with  art  at  home,  and  I  was  ready  to 
do  a  project  of  this  nature.   So  therefore  I  accepted 
responsibility  to  do  the  project. 

MASON:   Now,  what  about  Judson  Powell  and  Sue  Welch?   Were 
they  both  artists  or  what  were  their  backgrounds? 
PURIFOY:   Judson  Powell  was  a  musician,  and  Sue  was  a 
school  teacher.   They  were  just  people  available  who  agreed 
to  work  on  the  project  with  me.   I  didn't  care  whether  they 
were  artists  or  not.   That  wasn't  my  concern.   My  reason 
for  selecting  them  was,  first,  they  were  available  and. 


61 


second,  they  were  dependable  and,  thirdly,  I  figured  we 

could  work  as  a  team.   At  the  time  I  wasn't  too 

discriminating  regarding  who  I  got  to  work,  because 

actually  there  was  no  money  as  such  to  pay  them  with, 

except  promises.   So  I  figured  if  we  were  successful  at 

organizing  our  school,  there  would  be  moneys  to  be  paid. 

Eventually  they  were  [paid],  and  so  was  I. 

MASON:   So  you  only  worked  with  Judson  Powell  in  this 

capacity,  or  was  he  a  personal--? 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  he  said--  He  asked  me--  Judson  was  a 

musician.   I  think  I  mentioned  that.   What  was  the 

question,  again? 

MASON:   Was  that  your  only  relationship,  or  were  you  also 

friends  outside  of  the  Watts  project? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  we  were  best  friends.   And  so  was  Sue. 

Best  friends.   I  don't  think  I  could  have  selected  a  better 

combination  of  people  to  design  this  project.   I  was 

surprised  at  their  determination  to  work  to  make  it 

successful,  because  generally  when  somebody  comes  to  work 

on  somebody  else's  idea,  they  have  a  tendency  to  do  what 

you  say  to  do  and  that ' s  about  all .   But  these  people  had  a 

great  deal  of  enthusiasm  for  the  project,  and  they 

contributed  greatly  toward  its  success. 

The  school  became  very  popular  for  one  reason  or 
another.   Maybe  because  it  was  in  Watts,  I  don't  know.   But 


62 


it  attracted  a  lot  of  people.   Among  them  was  an  educator 
called  Ron  [Ronald  H.]  Silverman.   He  was  an  artist  and  an 
art  educator  and  a  research  person,  so  he  solicited  a  grant 
from  the  government  to  do  a  study  on  black  youth  to 
determine--  What  was  his  objective?   Let  me  check  that 
out.   [tape  recorder  off]   I  don't  recall  the  objective  of 
the  program,  but  it  had  to  do  with  the  learning  process 
connected  with  art  education  of  some  nature.   This  I'll 
find  out  later.   The  name  of  the  project  was  "The  Aesthetic 
Eye,"  and  that  was  around  1950.   I'm  sorry  I  don't  have  the 
correct  date  here.   They  have  August  1976  here,  but  the 
project  was  actually  done  in  1964,  or  begun  in  1964.   So 
we'll  have  to  straighten  that  out  if  there's  any  problem 
with  that. 

MASON:   You  said  that  suddenly  you  found  out  about 
children's  creative  abilities  or  their  abilities  to  learn 
through  education.   There's  a  quote,  "Education  through 
creativity  is  the  only  way  left  for  a  person  to  find 
himself  in  this  materialistic  world."   That  was  one  of  your 
quotes  from  an  article  about  the  Watts  Towers  Center.   So 
in  other  words,  you  weren't  trying  to  train  kids  to  be 
professional  artists.   You  were  trying  to  train  them  simply 
to  express  themselves,  or  what  precisely  was  the--? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  as  a  rule,  black  kids,  particularly  poor 
black  kids,  have  low  self-esteem,  a  low  self-image.   The 


63 


object  here  was  to  raise  the  self-image.   We  believed  that 
an  art  experience  was  transferable  to  other  areas  of  their 
activity  and  so  forth  and  that  if  they  could  come  to  the 
towers  and  have  a  good  experience,  a  positive  experience, 
they  could  take  this  experience  with  them  wherever  they 
go.   It  improved  their  self-image,  and  this  would  make  a 
great  deal  of  difference  in  terms  of  their  ability  and 
capacity  to  grasp  whatever  the  objectives  were,  whether  it 
was  in  school  or  out  of  school .   Does  that  answer  your 
question? 

MASON:   Yeah,  that's  fine.   Well,  we  can  talk  about  the 
Watts  riots  that  happened  in  August  of  '65,  how  you 
experienced  that  and  maybe  things  you  remember  leading  up 
to  the  riots. 

PURIFOY:   I  want  to  inject  here  something  of  interest.   I 
attended  a  conference  in  Maryland--or  Washington,  D.C.,  as 
the  case  was--on  art  education.   It  was  the  first 
conference  held  by  the  NEA  [National  Endowment  for  the 
Arts]  back  in  1964.   I  don't  have  all  the  data  on  that,  but 
I  want  to  brush  up  on  that  for  next  time,  if  we  can  go  back 
to  it. 

MASON:   Okay. 

PURIFOY:   I'll  just  inject  it  right  here  because  it 
interrelates  with  this  "Asthetic  Eye"  art  program  that  Ron 
Silverman  did.   He  was  instrumental,  I  believe,  in  having 


64 


me  attend  this  NEA  conference  in  Washington.   So  I'll  write 
a  note  to  myself  to  refer  to  that  next  time. 

The  center  of  the  Watts  riot  was  on  103d  Street,  and 
the  Towers  Arts  Center  was  on  107th  Street.   Between  the 
towers  and  103d  Street  were  very  few  structures.   In  other 
words,  the  view  from  the  towers,  or  from  the  arts  center, 
as  the  case  was,  to  103d  Street,  where  the  event  took 
place,  was  clear  and  unobstructed.   We  could  see  clearly 
what  was  happening  on  107th  Street. 

Not  only  could  we  see  clearly  what  was  going  on  over 
there,  the  looters  came  right  down  by  the  towers  with  their 
booty  on  their  way  to  their  homes.   So  we  were  fairly  close 
to  what  was  happening.   We  did  not  have  to  go  to  103d 
Street  to  see  what  was  going  on.   We  could  experience  this 
from  our  back  door  of  the  Watts  Towers  Arts  Center.   The 
students  at  the  towers--particularly  the  adolescents-- 
participated  in  the  riot.   Most  everyone  did.   They  would 
loot  and  stash  their  loot  in  and  around  the  art  center.   We 
permitted  that,  because  this  was  an  extremely  unique 
experience,  and  we  thought  that  at  least  the  kids  were 
still  interested  in  what  was  happening  at  the  center. 
Merely  because  they  brought  the  loot  there  was  a  fact  that 
this  became  a  place  for  them,  a  center  for  them,  a  refuge, 
so  to  speak,  for  them.   So  we  did  not  discourage  it,  simply 
because  we  were  interested  in  actually  what  was  going  on. 


65 


and  they  could  bring  us  news  of  the  events. 
MASON:   When  you  say  you  could  see  it,  what  did  you  see 
exactly?   Just  people  running,  or  what  was  the--?  Was  it 
something  that  just  exploded  all  of  a  sudden,  or  do  you 
remember  anything  leading  up  to  it?   I  mean,  did  you 
realize  at  first  that  something  really  awful  was  happening, 
or  did  it  just  seem  like  something  that  may  be--?   I  mean, 
what  were  the  sort  of  first  impressions  of  the  riot? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  my  impression  was  that  it  was  certainly  a 
most  devastating  event.   Had  there  been  just  looting,  that 
would  have  been  one  thing.   But  there  was  not  only  looting, 
there  were  huge  fires,  smoke  that  permeated  the  whole 
community.   Those  were  the  sights  that  we  saw  from  our  back 
door.   We  saw  police  policing  the  place,  firemen  trying  to 
put  out  the  fires  unsuccessfully.   We  saw  crowds  and  crowds 
of  people  running  to  and  fro.   For  what  reason,  now,  you 
know--  It's  just  that  everybody  was  excited,  and  everybody 
was  participating  in  the  event.   Very  few  people  did  not 
participate.   Very  few  people  stood  on  the  sidelines  to 
watch. 

This  went  on  for  over  a  week.   And  107th  Street,  near 
the  Harbor  Freeway--  And  the  freeway  was  cluttered  with 
cars  and  police.   Later,  military  troops  were  brought  in  to 
subdue  the  riot.   But  none  of  us  worked  the  first  week. 
The  community  was  making  Molotov  cocktails  and  throwing 


66 


them  at  the  police  and  at  the  buildings  and  everything. 
They  were  buying  nails  and  tacks  from  the  hardware  store 
and  strewing  them  on  the  street  to  prevent  the  police  and 
other  motor  vehicles  from  coming  into  the  area.   So 
actually,  the  authorities  did  not  know  how  to  handle  the 
event.   It  was  a  unique  experience  for  everybody 
involved . 

By  the  second  day,  the  newspapers  were  full  of  events 
harking  back  to  the  possible  cause.   As  it  is  well  known, 
the  police  stopped  two  people  on  the  freeway  and  started 
molesting  them  in  one  way  or  another,  and  other  people  got 
involved.   So  that's  actually  what  started  that.   But  once 
the  hotbed  of  poverty--  And  my  idea  was  that  it  was  brewing 
all  the  time  without  us  knowing  it.   There  had  been  an 
underground  movement  such  that  had  there  not  been  an  event 
that  occurred  on  the  freeway  that  night,  there  possibly,  in 
my  own  opinion,  would  have  been  a  riot  anyhow,  because  the 
people  were  extremely  dissatisfied  with  conditions. 
Poverty  money  was  in  the  community,  but  it  was  mostly 
designed  to  keep  the  natives  quiet,  as  the  case  was,  or  as 
the  rumor  was . 

MASON:   What  is  this  underground  movement? 
PURIFOY:   Certain  revolutionary  persons  in  the  community 
were  already  talking  riot.   It  would  occur.   So  this  was  a 
mere  vehicle  to  enable  them  to  implement  their  own  ideas. 


67 


The  [Black]  Muslims,  who  are  present  today  in  Watts--  To 
what  extent  they  participated  is  not  specific  in  my  mind  at 
the  moment,  but  SNCC  [Student  Nonviolent  Coordinating 
Committee]  was  there.   There  was  general  unrest.   I  don't 
think  the  [John  A.]  McCone  report  [California  Governor's 
Commission  on  the  Los  Angeles  Riots  (1965)]  in  any  way  did 
justice  to  what  was  going  on,  because  they  actually  did  not 
know.   It  was  only  the  few  people  who  were  on  the  inside 
and  were  knowledgeable  about  what  was  happening  prior  to 
the  riot  and  what  stimulated  it  as  it  progressed. 
MASON:   Now,  what  about  the  "66  Signs  of  Neon"?   How  was 
that  conceived,  and  what  was  your  objective  in  assembling 
that  work? 

PURIFOY:   In  late  1964,  I  broke  my  leg  at  the  Watts 
Towers.   I  was  unloading--or  helping  to  unload--an  object 
that  we  were  going  to  put  on  display,  a  large  wooden  object 
of  a  description  I  don't  quite  remember.   But  I  broke  my 
leg,  and  I  was  laid  up  for  six  weeks.   It  was  an  extremely 
profound  experience,  because  everybody  rallied  round,  and 
while  I  was  in  the  hospital--  It  was  really  a  great 
experience  to  have  old  friends  renew  their  acquaintance  and 
make  new  friends  at  the  same  time.   I  recommend  that  during 
the  course  of  a  lifetime  everyone  should  break  his  left  leg 
below  the  knee. 

While  I  was  laid  up,  the  Watts  Towers  had  an  inkling 


68 


that  they  weren't  quite  satisfied  with  my  attitude 
regarding  what  should  be  going  on  at  the  Watts  Towers  Arts 
Center.   They  wanted  a  more  sophisticated  program.   Their 
more  sophisticated  art  program  was  to  include  people 
outside  the  community,  kind  of  an  art  school  where  people 
come  to  matriculate,  you  know.   They  wanted  to  be  known  as 
something  profound,  some  advanced  art  school  of  some 
echelon,  I  don't  know  what.   It  made  me  very  unhappy  about 
their  attitude,  because  they  didn't  fully  realize  that  that 
was  Watts.   That  you  can't  get  to  know  a  community  by 
having  a  sophisticated  arts  school  there  that  did  not 
include  the  community.   So  I  thought  they  were  dead  wrong, 
and  I  argued  with  them  for  hours  on  end  regarding  that. 
But  they  seized  an  opportunity  to  think  of  dismissing  me 
when  I  broke  my  leg.   So  when  I  returned,  there,  kicked  up 
on  the  desk,  wearing  a  pair  of  crutches,  I  found  that  they 
had  put  a  person  in  my  place  there  in  my  stead,  without 
announcing  who  she  was  or  what  she  was  doing  there.   It  was 
up  to  her  to  edge  me  out,  as  the  case  was. 

So  I  kind  of  got  the  idea  that  it  was  time  to  leave 
anyhow.   We'd  had  a  very  successful  two  years  there.   We 
had  many  extremely  interesting  projects  including  the  whole 
community,  one  of  which  was  outstanding  in  my  mind,  where 
we  painted  all  the  houses  on  107th  Street.   We  collected 
the  paint  from  the  paint  stores,  and  the  kids  donned  their 


69 


work  clothes,  and  we  invited  people  from  outside  the 
community  to  come  and  help  and  so  forth.   After  painting 
all  the  houses,  we  washed  the  street  down  and  had  a  party 
that  night  and  everybody  came.   The  whole  community  came. 
The  streets  were  so  crowded  we  had  to  spend  most  of  our 
time  directing  traffic.   For  the  open  house,  as  we  called 
it,  we  erected  a  mural  outside  with  some  painting  and 
sculpturing  and  whatnot.   That  was  the  highlight  of  my 
experience  there,  an  extremely  profound  experience.   But  I 
had  a  tendency  to  want  to  create  things  and  move  on,  so  I 
accepted  the  towers'  recommendation  that  I  should  retire. 

That  gave  me  the  idea  that  the  junk  that  we  collected - 
three  tons  of  junk  that  we  collected  that  was  in  the  back 
of  the  Watts  Towers  Arts  Center- -was  something  to  be 
utilized.   So  we  began  to  think  about  having  an  art 
exhibition.   It  was  at  the  Markham  [Junior]  High  School, 
just  a  stone's  throw  from  the  Watts  Towers  Arts  Center, 
where  we  gave  our  first  arts  festival.   That  was  in  the 
spring  of  1965. 


70 


TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  SIDE  ONE 
SEPTEMBER  22,  1990 

MASON:  You  wanted  to  talk  about  the  conference  that  you 
attended  in  Gaithersburg,  Maryland,  called  "Arts  and  the 
Poor."   I  don't  know  what  you  wanted  to  say  specifically 
about  the  conference,  but  you  said  it  tied  into  your 
experience  at  the  Watts  Towers  [Arts  Center]  and  your 
development  of  an  art  education  program  for  the  Watts  Towers, 
PURIFOY:   Yeah.   Ron  [Ronald  H.]  Silverman--!  think  he  was 
professor  at  Cal  State,  L.A.  [California  State  University, 
Los  Angeles] --was  instrumental  in  getting  me  invited  to 
Maryland  to  the  first  NEA  [National  Endowment  for  the  Arts] 
conference,  where  we  discussed  art  and  the  poor.   It  was  a 
week-long  conference  that  included  educators  from  all  over 
the  country.   There  wasn't  anything  profound  concluded  as 
such,  except  that  Ron  Silverman  a  couple  of  years  later 
received  a  grant  to  make  some  studies  at  the  Watts  Towers. 
I  derived  a  great  deal  from  it  simply  because  it  was 
my  first  experience  at  rubbing  elbows  with  high-powered 
educators  and  art  educators.   I  was  already  interested  in 
art  education,  because  I  had  a  feeling  that  blacks  like 
myself  really  didn't  necessarily  relate  to  art.   It  was 
removed  from  their  experience.   Although  blacks  have  some 
profound  characteristics  in  that  they  have  depths  of 
feeling,  this  is  not  applicable  to  anything  at  all. 

71 


Primarily,  it  was  exercised  in  their  spiritual  life,  rather 

than  any  other  experiences. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  some  of  the  people  that  you 

interacted  with,  that  you  met  there,  that  left  you  with  any 

kind  of  impression?   What  do  you  feel  overall  that  the 

conference--?  Do  you  think  it  accomplished  what  it  tried  to 

accomplish  or  do  you  think  things  were  maybe  not  well 

defined  enough  to  accomplish  anything? 

PURIFOY:   It  was  a  new  subject.   I  don't  think  heretofore 

it  had  been--  There  had  never  been  a  conference  on  such  a 

subject  as  this.   I'm  trying  to  think  of  a  name  of  someone 

else  whom  I've  met  there  that  left  an  impression  on  me,  but 

I  can't  recall  anyone  for  the  time  being.   Maybe  later. 

MASON:   Actually,  I  have  a  quote.   I  found  a  pamphlet  in 

the  library  that  talked  about  this  conference,  and  I  read 

that  — 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  Katherine  Bloom.   Some  of  the  directors  there 

were  impressive,  one  of  which  was  Katherine  Bloom.   I  think 

she  was  head  of  arts  and  humanities  for  the  federal 

government  at  the  time. 

MASON:   Well,  you're  quoted  in  this  pamphlet  they  put 

together  about  the  conference.   I  don't  know  if  you've  ever 

seen  it.   It  was  put  out  by  the  government. 

PURIFOY:   What  year? 

MASON:   It  must  have  been  '67.   Does  that  seem  right? 


72 


PURIFOY:   I  think  the  conference  was  in  '67,  so  it's  '66. 
Or  was  it  before  the  [Watts]  riot?   I  think  the  conference 
was--  I  don't  know  about  that. 

MASON:   Yeah,  I  think  it  was  in  '67.   You're  quoted  as 
saying,  "The  whole  point  of  the  conference  was  or  ought  to 
be  the  salvation  of  the  world,  not  just  the  poor,  through 
self-affirmation  on  the  part  of  the  nominal  giver,  the 
artist  or  teacher,  and  the  nominal  receiver." 
PURIFOY:   I  forgot  about  that. 

MASON:   Oh.   [laughter]   Is  that  something  that  you  would 
still  agree  with  today,  that  that  should  have  been  the 
point  of  the  conference? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   I've  changed  radically  since  then,  of 
course,  but  I  still  feel  that  it's--  To  direct  art  at  the 
poor  is  prejudiced,  the  same  as  [acting  as]  though  it  belongs 
to  the  elite.   That's  a  form  of  prejudice  also.   I  don't 
think  they  meant  it  to  be,  because  they  were  sincere  about 
finding  some  means  in  education  to  stimulate  poor  people. 
But  they  weren't  aware  that  art  is  about  the  last  thing  that 
poor  people  get  to.   They  weren't  aware  of  that.   Just  like 
psychotherapy,  which  I  experienced  at  the  mental  hospital  in 
Los  Angeles.   Blacks  cannot  utilize  psychotherapy  because 
it's  long-term,  and  blacks  are  more  susceptible  to  change  in 
short-term  experiences  rather  than  long-term  experiences. 
MASON:   So  as  far  as  their  using  art,  do  you  think  that 


73 


they  were  trying  to--well,  maybe  some  of  the  people,  not 
everybody,  but  some  of  the  people  involved  in  the 
conference- -use  art  somehow  in  the  ghettos  to  make  poor 
people  conform  to  some  kind  of  social  norm?   Is  that  what 
you're  saying? 

PURIFOY:   Not  these  people.   They  were  really  sincere  about 
the  dropout  problem,  basically.   That's  one  of  the  problems 
of  the  poor.   No,  I  have  the  utmost  respect  for  their 
sincerity.   However,  they  were  white  people  and  they  were 
just  misguided,  that's  all. 

MASON:   Okay.   In  our  last  session,  we  started  to  talk 
about  the  beginnings  of  "66  Signs  of  Neon, "  and  you 
mentioned  your  leaving  the  Watts  Towers  [Arts  Center] ,  the 
incident  about  breaking  your  leg,  and  how  they  kind  of  took 
advantage  of  your  being  in  the  hospital .   What  happened  to 
the  people  you  were  working  with.  Sue  Welch  and  Judson 
Powell?   Did  they  continue  to  work  there  when  you  left? 
PURIFOY:   Yeah.   They  weren't  fired.   They  continued  to 
work  there  for  several  years.   We  organized  Joined  for  the 
Arts  in  Watts  and  did  the  [Watts  Summer]  Festivals,  though 
he  [Powell]  wasn't  employed  by  the  Watts  Towers  Committee 
any  longer. 

MASON:   What  is  Joined  for  the  Arts?   What  kind  of 
organization  was  that?   What  were  your  goals  and  who 
belonged  to  it? 


74 


PURIFOY:   Well,  there  wasn't  a  steady  membership, 
actually.   It  was  an  idealistic  concept.   Our  goal  was  to 
build  an  arts  center  there  on  107th  Street,  which  was 
eventually  done.   But  in  the  interim,  we  started  to  manage 
"Signs  of  Neon."   We  had  collected  three  tons  of  debris 
after  the  riot.   We  fashioned  it  in  some  kind  of  a 
sculpture  and  whatnot.   That's  why  we  solicited  the  aid  of 
six  other  people.   We  didn't  feel  that  our  expression  alone 
would  be  sufficient  to  communicate  through  the  debris.   So 
we  invited  some  other  artists  to  come  in  and  cart  away  some 
of  the  junk  and  make  something  for  the  first  festival, 
which  was  at  Markham  [Junior]  High  School. 
MASON:   What  were  some  of  the  first  pieces  that  you  and 
Judson  made  before  you  called  in  the  other  artists? 
PURIFOY:   We  hadn't  made  anything.   This  was  a  part  of  the 
original  plan.   We  just  sat  down  and  talked  about  it  and 
said,  "Here's  all  the  stuff.   We've  got  the  time  to  do  it 
in  because  we  aren ' t  working  for  the  towers  anymore .   What 
would  you  like  to  do?"   We  decided  that  we'd  call  in  some 
more  people.   Among  them  were  Arthur  Secunda,  Gordon 
Wagner- - 

^4AS0N:   Max  Neufeldt? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  Max  Neufeldt  and  Debbie  Brewer  and  two 
others  there  in  the  magazine.   You  can  get  the  names  out  of 
the  magazine. 


75 


MASON:   Do  you  want  to  look  through  that  as  we  talk  about 

this? 

PURIFOY:   Okay.   [tape  recorder  off]   The  artists  were--in 

addition  to  the  ones  I  named- -Leon  Saulter  and  Frank 

Anthony.   Those  were  the  six,  I  believe. 

MASON:   How  did  you  decide  on  them?   Were  they  friends? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  recall.   I  don't  recall  how  we  came  up 

with  these  names. 

MASON:   No,  but  I  mean  you  must  have  seen  their  work 

before.   You  know,  like  Gordon  Wagner's  work?   No? 

[laughter] 

PURIFOY:   [laughter]   Well,  I  guess  we  must  have.   These 

were  people  who  had  a  reputation  for  utilizing  found 

objects,  and  these  were  most  certainly  found  objects. 

Junk-art  sculpture  is  utilized  mostly  as  assemblage. 

Assemblage  was  very  popular  at  the  time.   Well,  not  very 

popular,  but  popular.   Since  then,  it's  become  extremely 

popular  and  preferable.   But  at  that  time,  we  were  kind  of 

exploring  new  territory.   Of  course,  the  concept  was 

developed  at  the  beginning  of  this  century  by  Picasso  and 

Braque  and  others.   The  period  was  called  dada,  if  you 

recall.   The  history  most  certainly  would  include  the 

period. 

MASON:   Were  you  studying  that  at  the  time?   Because 

before,  you  said  that  you  were  interested  in  art  history 


76 


and  kind  of  familiarized  with  that. 

PURIFOY:   I  had  already  graduated  from  an  art  school. 
MASON:   Right.   You  went  to  Chouinard  [Art  Institute]. 
PURIFOY:   So  I  was  reasonably  intelligent  about  art 
history.   This  period  particularly  appealed  to  me  because  I 
basically  was  a  craftsman.   It's  allied  with  craftsmanship 
in  wood  and  metal . 

MASON:  Is  there  anything  specific  about  a  found  object 
that  has  kind  of  been  used  and  you're  recycling  it?  Is 
there  something  specific  about  junk  that  appeals  to  you 
aesthetically? 

PURIFOY:   Yes,  yes.   First,  it's  easily  accessible.   It's 
available,  and  that's  for  certain.   Everything  is 
recyclable  here.   But  in  large  cities,  junk  is  not  often 
disposed  of  in  junk  piles,  so  to  speak,  at  garbage  dumps. 
It's  exposed  out  oftentimes  in  communities  that  don't  care. 
MASON:   Like  Watts,  for  example.   [laughter] 
PURIFOY:   In  Watts  it  was  extremely  accessible.   Number 
two,  it  relates  to  poor  people.   Wherever  there  are  poor 
people,  there's  piles  of  junk.   People  bring  the  junk 
there.   In  Watts,  there  were  mounds  of  scrap  metal  all  over 
the  place  and  defunct  foundries  where  there  were  piles  of 
metal  and  junk.   Garbage  day  was  a  time  when  people  put 
their  trash  out,  but  it  was  often  not  picked  up,  and  so  it 
stayed  there  for  weeks.   In  some  places,  there  was  no 


77 


pickup  at  all.   People  would  buy  furniture  and  household 
appliances  cheaply,  but  they  had  to  throw  it  away  before 
they  got  it  paid  for.   So  these  are  characteristics  of  poor 
people  which  made  it  a  haven  for  me- -one  who  collects 
objects. 

There's  something  else  about  objects  that  appeals  to 
me--it  stimulates  my  imagination.   I  can  think  to  do 
something  with  it,  turn  it  into  something  else  other  than 
what  it  was  originally  designed  for. 

MASON:   Do  you  feel  like  you're  elevating  the  object  to 
art?   Elevating  junk  to  the  level  of  art?   Is  that  the  way 
you  look  at  it? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  Marcel  Duchamp  founded  the  concept  of  "as 
is,"   You're  familiar  with  that,  no  doubt.   "As  is,"  I 
think,  makes  the  assemblage  legitimate,  because  many  things 
that  are  designed  for  use--household  use  and  so  forth--are 
excellent  shapes  to  look  at,  particularly  in  the  early 
American  days.   People  hand  made  things  and  contributed  a 
great  deal  of  thought  to  the  structure.   However,  when  new 
things  come  into  being,  people  throw  away  the  old  things, 
and  these  are  things  that  are  oftentimes  well  designed. 
Duchamp  recognized  this  and  created  the  concept  of  "as 
is."   In  other  words,  he  had  a  tendency  to  display  an 
object  without  doing  anything  to  it  and  say,  "This  is  okay 
like  it  is. " 


78 


That  also  appealed  to  me  in  terms  of  junk  art.   It 
kind  of  trickles  down  from  "as  is"  to  junk  art,  because  in 
assemblage  I  try  to  enable  the  article  to  remain 
identifiable,  although  it's  intertwined  with  other 
objects.   The  more  it  becomes  identifiable,  the  more 
interest  I  believe  is  created  around  the  object,  the 
complete  object  d'art. 

^4AS0N:   Well,  let's  talk  specifically  about  some  of  the 
pieces  in  "66  Signs  of  Neon." 

PURIFOY:   Okay.   The  one  on  the  cover  here,  made  of  stove- 
pipes and-- 

MASON:   Maybe  we  should  identify  it.   We're  looking  at  Junk 
magazine,  which  was  published  by  "66  Signs  of  Neon, "  but  is 
that  just  another  name  for  Joined  for  the  Arts  in  Watts? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  it  was  published  by  us,  but  it  was 
underwritten  by  American  Cement  Corporation  of  Los 
Angeles.   There  should  be  a  date  somewhere  here  indicating 
when  it  was  published,  but  I  don't  see  it. 
MASON:   That's  all  right. 

PURIFOY:   It's  around  1968  or  '69.   This  object  on  the  fly 
sheet,  on  the  front  cover,  is  composed  of  stovepipes- -two 
joints  of  stovepipes  standing  about  thirty-six  inches  tall, 
with  a  part  of  a  roof  of  tar  paper  and  tin  mounted  on  its 
peak,  on  a  pedestal.   There's  a  brace--a  piece  of  metal 
brace  there--to  hold  it  up.   It's  called  Breath  of  Fresh 


79 


Air.   I  don't  know  why.   [laughter]   But  that's  one  I  did 
first  off. 

MASON:   Oh,  that's  the  first  one  you  did? 
PURIFOY:   I  don't  know. 
MASON:   Oh,  okay. 

PURIFOY:   When  I  say  "first  off,"  it  was  among  the  first 
ones  we  did.   I  don't  know  whether  it  was  the  absolute 
first  one  or  not.   Turning  the  page,  we  come  to  Sir 
Watts.   Sir  Watts  took  on  its  own  identity,  and  I  don't 
think  there  was  anybody  who  did  not  like  Sir  Watts  upon 
sight.   Some  feel  that  it's  done  tongue  in  cheek  simply 
because  it's  called  Sir  Watts.   It  was  said  that  I  have 
something  of  a  sense  of  humor  about  my  work.   I  don't  know. 
MASON:   Well,  that  seems  poignant  in  some  ways,  too, 
because  where  the  heart  should  be  there ' s  kind  of  an 
opening  with  safety  pins  coming  out,  and  it's  sort  of  cut 
away.   Then  for  the  face  there's  a  purse,  which  I've  seen 
opened  in  some  reproductions,  so  it  seems  to  be  sort  of 
saying  something  about  vulnerability,  even  though  it's  all 
metal.   There  seems  to  be  an  element  of  vulnerability  about 
it.   Is  that  something  that  you  had  in  mind? 
PURIFOY:   No,  it  was  kind  of  a  tongue-in-cheek  object,  a 
pun,  more  or  less.   I  enjoyed  doing  it.   It  was  something 
that--  The  finish  on  it--on  the  surface  and  all--was 
extremely  unique,  the  paint  and  whatnot.   The  objects  that 


80 


represent  the  arms  and  the  head  and  the  torso  consisted  of 
drawers  and  so  forth.   Juxtapositions  just  occurred  to  me, 
and  it  worked.   It  worked  quite  satisfactorily  as  a 
representation  of  the  human  figure.   Naming  it  Sir  Watts 
was  the  tongue-in-cheek  concept  that  I  oftentimes  can 
muster. 

There's  an  interesting  story  connected  with  Sir 
Watts.   During  my  exhibit  at  the  black  arts  museum 
[California  Afro-American  Museum]  on  Expo[sition 
Boulevard] ,  the  curator  there  was  so  anxious  to  find  and 
display  Sir  Watts.   I  was  of  little  or  no  help  because  I 
didn't  know  where  Sir  Watts  was.   She  asked  me  if  I  could 
make  another  one,  and  I  flipped  out,  because  it's  virtually 
impossible  to  duplicate  junk  art.   You  have  to  find  the  same 
objects;  you  have  to  be  in  the  same  mood.   [laughter]   And 
I  oftentimes  chuckle  to  myself  that  someone  would  be  so 
naive.   [laughter] 

MASON:   When  you  say  you  don't  know  where  it  is,  you  sold 
it  but  you  didn't  keep  track  of  it? 
PURIFOY:   That's  right,  yeah.   The  U.S.  Office  of 
Information  solicited  it  once  and  sent  it  to  Germany.   They 
sent  it  back  to  the  owner,  and  that's  the  last  I  heard  of 
it.   I  wish  now  I  did  know  where  it  was,  at  least  to  make 
it  accessible  to  the  public. 

The  next  page  of  the  Junk  art  magazine  shows  one  of 


81 


these  what  we  call  "signs  of  neon."   "Signs  of  Neon"  is  a 
little  confusing  unless  one  is  aware  of  where  the  exhibit 
got  its  title  from.   The  exhibit  got  its  title  from  the 
drippings  of  neon  signs  upon  the  ground,  formulating 
crystal-like  meltings,  mixing  with  the  sand  and  dirt, 
formulating  extremely  odd  shapes.   What  Judson  and  I  did 
was  simply  take  the  shapes  out  of  the  sand,  brush  them  off, 
mount  them  on  something,  and  sell  them.   They  went  like 
hotcakes.   Another  interesting-- 

MASON:   Who  were  you  selling  them  to?   Do  you  remember? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  yes.   Gregory  Peck  owns  one.   He  came  to 
the  festival  at  Markham  in  '66.   He  was  then  representing 
the  NEA,  and  he  participated  in  some  way  in  deciding  where 
the  grants  go.   He  ultimately  provided  a  grant  for  me  to 
ship  "Signs  of  Neon"  to  Washington,  D.C.   He  came  to  my 
house  and  brought  a  lot  of  people  with  him  who  were  on  the 
committee.   That's  how  he  happened  to  know  about  the 
exhibit  at  Markham. 

^4AS0N:   I  was  just  wondering  who  was  collecting  these  kinds 
of  pieces  then,  since  you  said  they  weren't  as  fashionable 
then.   I  just  wondered  who  would  be  interested  in  those 
kinds  of  things. 

PURIFOY:   Well,  we  had  no  problem  in  selling  them  once 
people  understood  where  the  source  was  from  whence  it 
came. 


82 


Another  interesting  object  on  this  page  is  the 
Phoenix.   The  Phoenix  is  simply  a  piece  of  bent-up  metal 
mounted  on  a  twelve- foot  pole  with  a  base  to  enable  it  to 
stand  up.   We  called  it  the  Phoenix  because  it  looked  like 
a  bird. 

MASON:   Who  was  this  done  by? 

PURIFOY:   This  piece  of  sculpture  on  this  page  [Max 
Untitled] --an  excellent  piece  of  sculpture,  made  of  heavy 
metal--was  done  by  Max  Neufeldt. 

MASON:   And  this  one,  the  Phoenix,  was  done  by-- 
PURIFOY:   The  Phoenix  was  a  group  effort,  Judson  and 
myself. 

MASON:   How  did  that  work?   Did  you  guys  talk  about  what 
you  wanted  to  do  beforehand? 

PURIFOY:   No.   We  seldom  talked  about  what  we  wanted  to 
do.   We  would  look  at  an  object,  segregate  it  from  the  pile 
of  junk,  study  it  for  a  while,  and  say--one  of  us,  more  or 
less;  it  didn't  matter  which  one  was  first-- "Oh,  I  know 
what  that  looks  like."   And  then  we'd  proceed  to  assemble 
it.   It  took  only  minutes,  for  the  most  part. 
MASON:   Now,  that's  by  Arthur  Secunda. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  this  is  called  City.   Arthur  Secunda  had 
collected  many  objects  embedded  in  plastic.   A  very 
interesting  concept. 
MASON:   All  round,  many  of  them. 


83 


PURIFOY:   This  is  called  Watts  Baby,  I  think.   I  don't 
remember.   Race  Baby  it's  called,  by  Ruth  Saturensky,  who 
was  one  of  the  artists  that  we  solicited  that  I  forgot  the 
name  of.   That  is  the  only  flat  piece  I  think  we  had,  only 
wall  piece.   One  of  the  few  wall  pieces,  I'd  say.   It's  not 
the  only  one.   It  has  photographs  of  black  kids  in  it,  more 
or  less,  and  you  could  call  it  a  montage,  I  guess. 

On  the  next  page  is  a  sculpture  by  Neufeldt  called 
Spoons,  one  by  myself  called  Sudden  Encounter- - 
MASON:   Is  this  glass? 

PURIFOY:   Sudden  Encounter  is,  yes,  a  windshield  mounted  on 
a  crosstie  upright,  with  a--  What  do  you  call  that?   A 
flit-gun. 

MASON:   A  flit-gun? 
PURIFOY:   Uh-huh.   For  mosquitos. 

MASON:   Oh,  I  don't  know  what  that  is.   Was  this  broken 
glass  in  any  way  a  reference  to  Duchamps,  his  Large  Glass 
[The  Bride  Stripped  Bare  by  Her  Bachelors,  Even]  or--? 
PURIFOY:   "As  is"?   You  see,  there  are  only  two  objects 
here,  so  that's  as  close  to  an  "as  is"  as  I'll  ever  get.   I 
have  a  big  piece  of  rubber  about  six  inches  thick  and  about 
twenty  by  twenty  square,  pure  rubber,  weighing  about  150 
pounds. 

Barrel  and  Plow  was  an  interesting  shape.   It's  simply 
a  beer  barrel  and  a  plow,  mounted  on  a  table. 


84 


MASON:   Oh,  so  it's  stationary.   It  doesn't  move. 

PURIFOY:   No,  no. 

MASON:   Was  there  any  idea  that  you  were  trying  to--?  Maybe 

a  reference  to  your  childhood? 

PURIFOY:   No.   The  shape  just  appealed  to  me.   I  oftentimes 

result  in  pure,  unadulterated  design,  with  no  overtones 

whatsoever,  with  no  tongue-in-cheek  or  anything.   I  prefer 

it.   Maybe  later  we  could  talk  about  that  in  reference  to 

some  of  my  protest  pieces,  if  you're  interested. 

MASON:   Well,  I  notice  that  round  shapes  often  appear  in 

your  work  in  some  significant  place.   Is  the  circle 

something  that--? 

PURIFOY:   No.   No.   No,  it's  just  a  basic  shape  that  I 

often  use. 

MASON:   It's  my  imagination.   Okay. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   But  no  particular  significance,  except 

it's  an  art  form.   I  mean,  it's  what  artists  do. 

MASON:   This  is  The  Sink,  which  is  another  group  effort  by 

David  Mann,  yourself,  and  Judson  Powell. 

PURIFOY:   We  often  did  things  together  because  we  wanted 

the  community  to  relate  to  each  other.   Poor  people--and 

particularly  black  people--have  a  tendency  to  not  want  to 

relate  to  each  other  on  an  equal  level.   We  are  inclined  to 

be  selfish  and  vindictive,  often  childlike,  as  the  case  may 

be.   Children  are  often  cruel.   However,  I  imposed  a  great 


85 


deal  of  poverty  upon  myself  to  learn  about  blacks.   That 
sounds  strange  coming  from  me.   But  I  went  to  Watts  not 
being  quite  colored.   I  had  a  lot  of  white  characteristics. 
MASON:   Like  what?   [laughter] 

PURIFOY:   First,  I  was  overeducated .   I  had  three  academic 
degrees.   And  nobody  in  Watts  had  a  degree  hardly,  even 
from  high  school.   So  in  order  to  understand  a  community,  I 
had  to  be  like  them,  I  thought.   I  had  one  pair  of  shoes  at 
the  time.   I  never  wore  a  suit.   I  didn't  own  one. 
However,  prior  to  Watts,  I  had  a  dozen  suits  or  more.   I 
never  wore  a  tie.   In  fact,  I  tried  to  emulate  the  people 
of  Watts  in  order  to  understand  their  plight.   Their  whole 
direction  here  is  justifiable,  so  to  speak.   [People  say] 
they're  selfish  and  uncooperative,  and  we  were  talking 
about  The  Sink  as  a  group  effort.   It  is  often  said  that 
blacks  spend  enough  money  in  America  to  have  their  own 
businesses  and  whatnot,  and  we  can  be  independent.   We 
don't  have  to  depend  on  white  people  to  assist  us. 
Considering  how  many  blacks  are  on  welfare  and  whatnot,  we 
thought  the  group  effort  would  demonstrate  how  blacks  could 
cooperate  with  each  other  and  become  independent.   The 
justification  for  selfishness  is  all  poor  people  are 
self ish--it ' s  not  just  blacks--because  they're  the  have- 
nots.   When  you  don't  have,  you  want,  and  in  the  wanting 
you  oftentimes  do  not  get,  and  therefore  you  internalize 


86 


all  of  this  woe  and  become  ostracized. 
MASON:   Well,  maybe  some  people  would  argue  that  poor 
people--  Maybe  not  in  urban  areas.   You  know,  to  talk  about 
poor  in  urban  areas  and  in  rural  areas  is  to  talk  about  two 
different  things.   Because  sometimes  when  you  think  about 
the  rural  poor,  they  don't  have  anything,  but  it  seems  that 
they're  always  willing  to  share  a  meal  with  somebody. 
PURIFOY:   Well,  overtly  that's  quite  true.   On  payday-- 
payday  meaning  when  the  welfare  check  comes--the  neighbors 
invite  me  in  for  a  drink  of  gin  early  in  the  morning. 
Despite  the  fact  that  I  don't  start  drinking  till 
nightfall,  I  would  take  a  drink  in  order  to  be  sociable.   I 
wanted  to  win  their  favor.   So  in  the  morning  when  I'd  take 
the  children  from  the  center--  (Because  they  didn't  want  to 
go  home.   They  liked  it  at  the  center  so  much,  till  we  had 
to  carry  them  home  sometimes  on  our  backs.)   If  the  welfare 
check  had  come,  generally  mama  had  a  pint  of  gin  on  the 
coffee  table,  and  so  she  was  rather  generous  in  offering  me 
a  drink  of  gin.   I  didn't  even  drink  gin,  really.   I 
preferred  bourbon.   Yes,  however,  blacks  collect  brown 
stamps.   They  expect  to  be  paid  back.   So,  you  see,  that  is 
not  the  generosity  that  we  like  to  feel  here.   Maybe  you 
don't  agree  with  that,  where  you  come  from.   I'm  talking 
about  American  blacks,  American  poor.   I'm  not  talking 
about  European  poor.   I  don't  know  what  they  do. 


87 


MASON:   I  don't  either. 

PURIFOY:   But  that's  where  blacks  have  an  excellent 
memory.   They  remember  everything  they  do  for  you,  and  they 
expect  remuneration.   They  expect  payback.   They'll  remind 
you,  "Remember  I  did  thus  and  so?   And  it's  time  to  pay 
back  the  favor."   So  when  your  check  comes--  That's  what  I 
mean.   So,  yeah,  blacks  have  a  tendency  to  be  generous,  but 
for  reasons--  Poor  people  are  exactly  what  it  says,  poor, 
poor  both  in  spirit  and  in  well-being. 

Oh,  yes.   We  were  talking  about  The  Sink  and  the  group 
effort.   The  group  effort  was  sustained  throughout  my  art 
experience  in  relationship  to  doing  workshops  wherever  I 
would  go.   UCLA  heard  about  the  group  effort  and  invited  me 
to  participate  in  one  of  its  festivals,  where  they  also 
invited  well-known  people  such  as  Marcel  Marceau  and 
Buckminster  Fuller.   Debbie  Brewer  was  there,  Judson  Powell 
was  there,  and  several  other  people,  to  stimulate  the 
building  of  a  large  piece  of  sculpture  where  any  student  or 
anybody  who  comes  by  can  participate.   The  philosophy  of 
group  effort  is  that  I  pay  attention  to  what  you  do  on  your 
side  so  that  I'll  balance  it  off  on  my  side.   This 
translated  into  existence  as  being  that  I  want  to  get  rid 
of  my  selfishness.   I  want  to  sense  my  relationship  with 
the  world  at  large,  you  included. 

The  last  page--second  to  last  page--in  Junk  art 


88 


magazine  is  an  object  called  The  Train.   It's  a  train 
mounted  between  a  freestanding  structure  and  a  lot  of 
objects  juxtaposed  on  four  sides.   It's  said  to  be  a  piece 
of  sculpture  with  a  pipe  hanging  out  the  top.   It  was 
featured  in  a  brochure  on  the  exhibit  we  had  in  Washington, 
D.C.,  in  1969,  I  believe,  '68  or  '69.   Walter  Hopps  was  the 
curator  [of  twentieth-century  painting  and  sculpture]  of 
the  Washington  modern  art  gallery  [Gallery  of  Modern  Art] , 
I  believe.  We  showed  there  in  1959,  I  believe,  or  '68.   I 
think  you  asked  me  earlier  to  say  something  regarding  what 
effect  art  had  on  a  community,  and  I  happened  to  think  of-- 


89 


TAPE  NUMBER:   IV,  SIDE  TWO 
SEPTEMBER  22,  1990 

PURIFOY:   Before  we  went  out  of  state,  we  exhibited  "Signs 
of  Neon"  at  nine  universities  from  '66  to  '69.   We  made 
available  to  the  spectators  a  pad  and  pencil  to  make 
comments.   And  we  kept  the  comments  for  years.   We  had 
stacks  of  them  made  by  students  who  either  liked  or  did  not 
like  the  exhibit.   The  things  that  we  displayed  were 
extremely  expressive.   It  isn't  particularly  evident  in 
this  magazine,  because  this  magazine  shows  specific 
objects,  specific  pieces  of  sculpture  on  one  page.   But  we 
assembled  the  exhibit  in  a  large  hall,  and  it  was  well  done 
and  quite  colorful  and  exciting  to  look  at.   We  always 
entertained  crowds  of  people.   I  remember  particularly  at 
[University  of  California]  Berkeley —  We  were  there  for 
nineteen  days  during  some  of  the  hottest  [most  turbulent] 
times  on  campus.   For  that  reason,  and  others,  no  doubt,  we 
had  crowds  of  people  coming  through  all  the  time.   When  we 
took  it  to  Washington  [D.C.],  they  wanted  us  to  stay  there 
and  utilize  their  junk,  too,  and  make  sculptures.   Of 
course  we  refused,  because  we  were  doing  great  like  we  were 
in  Los  Angeles. 

The  last  one  is  Sunflowers,  I  think  it's  called,  by 
Debbie  Brewer.  I  wanted  to  mention  that,  because  Debbie 
participated  in  "Signs  of  Neon"  by  making  things  and 

90 


sending  them  to  us.   We  sold  lots  of  stuff,  we'd  send  the 
money  back,  and  we  would  make  some  more  stuff.   So  we 
always  had  sixty-six  pieces  to  display,  but  there  were 
different  pieces  from  time  to  time  because  we  made  sales. 
That's  how  we  existed,  all  six  of  us.   Particularly  Judson 
and  me. 

We  had  some  horrible--  I  would  just  mention  this  in 
passing.   We  never  got  to  show  at  any  of  the  university 
galleries.   We  always  showed  in  the  student  union  hall  or 
someplace  like  that.   And  they  had  terrible  facilities, 
sleeping  quarters  and  so  forth.   They  were  just  terrible. 
People  felt  sorry  for  us  because  we  complained  a  lot  and 
put  us  up  in  their  homes.   I  remember  particularly,  at 
Berkeley,  again,  a  patron  from  Los  Angeles  came  up  and  saw 
how  deplorable  our  conditions  were,  so  she  put  us  up  at  the 
Hilton  hotel  for  a  whole  week.   And  we  were  delighted  at 
that. 

MASON:   Who  was  that? 

PURIFOY:   Lillian  Testie  was  her  name.   She  was  the 
daughter  of  a  well-known  piano  maker.   I  don't  recall  which 
one. 

MASON:   But  you  say  she  was  an  arts  patron,  so  to  speak? 
PURIFOY:   Yes. 

MASON:   Why  do  you  think  they  would  bring  the  show  and  not 
give  you  good  facilities? 


91 


PURIFOY:   They  were  just  concerned  about  activities,  you 

know,  rotating  activities  on  campus,  that's  all.   You're 

familiar  with  that.   Anything  that  they  felt  would  interest 

the  students  was  their  job.   Where  we  slept  and  all  was 

secondary  to  the  exhibit.   The  exhibit  was  excellent.   It 

was  really  good.   A  wonderful  exhibit,  professionally 

done.   I  was  a  curator  and  didn't  know  it. 

MASON:   I  just  want  to  ask  about  one  comment  that  I  read. 

When  the  show  went  to  Washington,  there  was  a  reviewer  for 

the  Washington  Sunday  Star  who  said  he  was  really 

disappointed  with  the  show  because  it  didn't  evoke  for  him 

the  excitement  or  the  horror  or  whatever  of  the  Watts 

riots. 

PURIFOY:   The  eyes  of  the  beholder.   We  had  the  objects 

there.   It  was  just  done  in  such  a  fashion  that  it  was 

really  creative.   Every  object  was  extremely  conducive  to 

creativity.   You  know,  done  well.   The  group  we  selected  to 

do  the  things  were  excellent  artists.   There  must  have  been 

some  positive  comments. 

MASON:   Well,  he  said  that  even  though  it  didn't  evoke  the 

riots  for  him,  his  attention  was  finally  drawn  to  the 

objects  as  objects,  so  that's  kind  of  where  he  left  off. 

PURIFOY:   That  was  our  intention. 

MASON:   Yeah.   But  he  didn't  quite  get  that. 

PURIFOY:   We  didn't  intend  to  provoke. 


92 


MASON:   Because  he  wanted  like  a  slide  show. 
PURIFOY:   It  wasn't  intended  to  provoke.   I  didn't  have 
that  in  mind  at  any  rate.   I  don't  know  about  the  other 
two.   I  don't  think  we  even  discussed  this.   But  the  pieces 
were  so  well  done,  and  done  in  such  good  taste,  that  it 
became  an  assemblage  show  of  terrific  art.   Everyone  said 
that.   As  mean  as  I  was,  I  did  not  care  whether  people 
reacted  in  a  hostile  way  or  not.   We  just  wanted  their 
reaction,  that's  all.   We  didn't  care.   We  didn't  want  to 
excite  a  riot  or  anything.   That  wasn't  the  object 
whatsoever.   But  had  it  excited  a  riot,  you  know,  so  what? 
MASON:   Is  there  anything  else  you  want  to  add  about  the 
"66  Signs"? 

PURIFOY:   No,  I  think  that  just  about  covers  it.   But  the 
old  stuff--  I  can't  think  of  any  other  piece  I'd  like  to 
speak  about . 

MASON:   Okay.   We  can  talk  about  the  workshops  that  you 
did,  your  teaching  experience,  from  '66  through  '73,  and 
the  works  that  you  were  doing  in  that  period. 
PURIFOY:   The  workshops? 

MASON:   Well,  your  teaching  experience  at  UCLA,  UC 
[University  of  California]  Davis,  Immaculate  Heart  College. 
PURIFOY:   And  particularly  [University  of  California]  Santa 
Cruz.   I  was  more  consistent  with  Santa  Cruz.   I  was  a 
visiting  teacher  for  four  years  intermittently.   I  want  to 


93 


also  mention  two  people  who  were  extremely  instrumental  in 
furthering  my  career.   They  were  Dr.  Page  Smith  and  his 
wife  Eloise  [Smith] .   I  developed  a  lifelong  friendship 
with  them.   I  was  visiting  recently. 
^4AS0N:   They  were  both  teachers  at  UC  Santa  Cruz? 
PURIFOY:   Page  was  the  provost  there,  and  he  resigned  after 
twelve  years  and  took  to  writing  history  books.   [tape 
recorder  off] 

^4AS0N:   So  we  were  talking  about  Page  and  Eloise  Smith  at 
Cowell  College,  right,  at  UC  Santa  Cruz? 
PURIFOY:   Yeah. 

MASON:   You  said  they  helped  your  career?   How  so? 
PURIFOY:   We  were  in  San  Francisco  in  1966,  I  believe,  when 
it  was  suggested  that  we  go  to  Cowell  College  at  Santa  Cruz 
for  some  reason  or  other.   I  don't  recall.   But  I  ended  up 
there  one  evening,  and  we  stayed  so  late  till  it  was 
suggested  that  we  spend  the  night .   We  didn ' t  have  anywhere 
to  sleep,  and  Eloise,  Page's  wife,  offered  to  put  us  up, 
especially  me.   She  got  familiar  with  our  philosophy, 
having  seen  photographs  of  our  work,  and  ultimately  she  got 
to  see  the  works  herself  in  Berkeley.   She  talked  Page 
Smith  into  inviting  me  to  do  a  workshop  at  Santa  Cruz.   We 
did  a  workshop  commemorating  their  second,  third,  or  fourth 
anniversary  from  the  time  the  school  had  opened- -Cowell 
College.   It  was  new  at  the  time.   Page  had  come  from  UCLA, 


94 


as  a  historian  there,  to  be  the  provost  at  Cowell 
College.   That's  how  I  got  to  meet  up  with  Page  and  Eloise, 
and  they  invited  me  back  each  year  for  four  consecutive 
years  to  do  a  workshop  in  the  spring. 

The  workshop  consisted  of  two  days  a  week,  and  I  was 
paid  extremely  well.   It  was  great.   One  day  a  week  we 
would  do  sculpture  in  Page  Smith's  garage.   (They  were 
living  on  campus. )   And  the  next  day  we  would  have 
classroom  discussion  of  how  art  related  to  education. 
MASON:   Was  this  for  art  majors? 

PURIFOY:   No,  this  was  for  anyone.   So  I  had  two  classes  a 
week  and  about  thirty  students  per  class.   We  went  into 
some  heavy  details  about  art  and  art  education  and  how  it 
interrelates  with  humans.   I  was  never  interested  in  art  as 
a  thing  in  and  of  itself.   So  we  were  talking  about  art  in 
relationship  to,  but  not  art  per  se.   The  one  day  we'd  do 
art  would  demonstrate  how  within  oneself  there's  a  creative 
process  going  all  the  time,  and  that  it's  merely  expressed 
in  an  object  called  art.   But  one's  life  should  also 
encompass  the  creative  process.   We  were  trying  to 
experiment  with  how  you  do  that,  how  you  tie  the  art 
process  in  with  existence.   We  called  it  art  and 
humanities. 

MASON:   Were  you  working  with  ideas  that  you  learned  at  the 
Watts  Towers? 


95 


PURIFOY:   Yes.   It  was  a  carryover.   I  was  primarily 

pushing  "Signs  of  Neon"  at  the  time,  so  it  was  convenient 

for  me  to  take  out  a  few  weeks  or  a  few  months  and  do  a 

workshop  in  Santa  Cruz. 

MASON:   We  can  talk  about  some  of  the  pieces  that  you  did 

after  the  "66  Signs  of  Neon."   Do  you  remember  the  first 

piece  you  did  after?   Or  did  you  constantly  use  the 

material  that  you  had  found  there  and  incorporate  it  into 

other  works? 

PURIFOY:   Eventually  "Signs  of  Neon"  came  back  from  some 

place  or  other,  maybe  Tennessee  or  Alabama.   It  got  down  as 

far  as  Tennessee,  I  believe.   I  don't  recall.   It's  listed 

there,  I  think,  in  the  resume  of  where  it  went  down  that 

way.   I  didn't  go  with  it.   But  from  Washington,  D.C.,  the 

exhibit  traveled.   About  1969  it  came  back  in  a  truck  just 

about  in  the  same  shape  it  was  when  we  found  it  in  Watts, 

in  the  smoldering  embers  of  the  Watts  riot.   In  other 

words,  that  was  the  end  of  "Signs  of  Neon. "   It  was  back  in 

its  original  state:   Junk! 

^4AS0N:   I'm  sorry.   Are  you  saying  that  the  pieces  weren't 

taken  care  of? 

PURIFOY:   Right.   Right. 

MASON:   Okay,  I  just  wanted  it  spelled  out  for  slow 

people.   [laughter] 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  no,  I  just  wasn't  being  too  exacting.   I  was 


96 


trying  to  be  poetic,  I  guess.   [laughter] 

However,  there  was  still  some  demand  for  the 
exhibit.   Some  people  wanted  to  create  a  black  museum  or 
something.   There  was  a  lot  of  talk  about  utilizing  an  old 
fire  station  in  central  Los  Angeles  to  house  the  exhibit. 
I  entertained  the  idea,  because  we  could  always  refurbish 
it  or  whatnot.   But  nothing  ever  came  of  it,  so  it  just 
deteriorated  in  somebody's  garage  someplace  in  Watts. 
That's  the  last  I  heard  of  it. 

Gordon  Wagner  was  concerned  about  his  pieces  that 
didn't  get  sold.   I  didn't  get  any  flak  from  Arthur  Secundo 
or  Neufeldt.   I  think  Ruth  Saturensky  was  a  little  bit 
unhappy  about  the  condition  of  her  piece,  but  all  in  all 
that  was  just  about  the  end  of  "Signs  of  Neon." 

I  had  to  go  and  do  something  else,  so  I  gave  up  art 
and  went  to  work  in  a  mental  institution.   I  said  "work, " 
not  [be  a]  patient,  work.   I  got  a  job  at  Central  [City] 
Community  Mental  Health  Facility  [Los  Angeles],  where  I  was 
able  to  utilize  my  art  experiences  as  well  as  my  degree  in 
social  service  administration.   So  I  experimented  with 
utilizing  art  as  a  tool  for  a  change,  for  mental  health. 
MASON:   Okay,  so  that  was  '73  to  '76  you  did  that. 
PURIFOY:   From  '71  to  '75. 

MASON:   But  before  you  did  that,  you  had  done  some  other 
work,  it  seems.   I  have  some  things  that  are  dated  before 


97 


then,  a  few  untitled  pieces  of  totem  with  feathers  and  fur, 
slippers.   [tape  recorder  off]   You  wanted  to  talk  some 
more  about  the  Watts  Summer  Festivals. 
PURIFOY:   Yeah.   Here's  a  brochure  that  you  might  be 
interested  in  which  describes  actually  how  sufficient  we 
were  and  how  adequate  we  were  as  curators.   Here  is  a 
brochure  we  did  in  1969  or  '70,  I  believe.   Inside,  there 
are  labels  for  the  artist  to  cut  out  and  paste  on  their 
works  and  so  forth.   It  gives  you  information  regarding  who 
is  eligible,  community  rules,  registration,  prize  awards, 
sales  of  works,  art  auctions,  and  other  categories. 
Usually,  I  would  open  up  the  place  where  the  artists  would 
drop  their  works  off  two  weeks  before  the  exhibit. 

Now,  why  would  I  do  that  two  weeks  before?   Nobody 
else  does,  of  course.   Well,  first,  I  had  the  time,  and 
second,  it  was  an  excellent  opportunity  to  sit  down  and 
talk  with  the  artists  as  they  brought  their  works  in  and 
see  how  they  were  thinking  and  actually  how  they  were 
doing.   So  I  became  familiar  with  all  the  community  of 
artists  by  allocating  this  time  before  each  festival.   I 
did  this  nine  consecutive  years,  and  I  got  very  familiar 
with  what  was  going  on.   Also,  we  would  stimulate  the 
artists  to  do  work  expressly  for  the  festival.   Not  only 
did  we  do  that,  we  went  around  to  all  the  schools  and 
collected  works  by  the  students. 


98 


MASON:   You  mean  the  art  schools  or  the  public  schools? 
PURIFOY:   Public  schools.   We  also  were  interested  in 
collecting  works  from  anyone,  all  students.   At  the  time. 
Chicanes  only  were  in  East  L.A.   They  weren't  all  over  the 
place  like  they  are  now.   So  we  consistently  went  over 
there  and  spoke  with  their  teachers  and  collected  their 
works  and  displayed  them.   As  results  of  that,  we 
stimulated  a  lot  of  kids  to  do  art.   Oftentimes,  the 
teacher  would  encourage  them  to  do  art  expressly  for  the 
festival.   So  we  got  to  stimulate  quite  a  number  of  people 
in  our  community,  thus  making  us  really  community 
artists.   We  weren't  artists  per  se,  like  artists  who  close 
themselves  up  in  a  studio.   We  really  got  out  on  the 
streets,  leading  the  people. 

MASON:   What  kind  of  art  were  you  commissioning?   Was  it 
assemblage  art,  or  did  you  have  any  preference? 
PURIFOY:   Oh,  no.   We  didn't  discriminate  whatsoever.   Any 
kind  of  art  they  brought  was  great.   We  had  a  lot  of 
categories,  as  you  see  in  this  brochure.   We  picked  people 
like  [John]  Outterbridge,  Alonzo  Davis,  and  Dale  [Davis], 
his  brother,  to  do  the  judging  and  whatnot,  people  that  the 
community  respected. 

I  think  calling  ourselves  community  artists  harks  back 
to  the  beginning  of  art  in  Cleveland,  where  at  the  Karamu 
House,  as  you  recall,  they  were  practicing  community  art 


99 


for  years.   They  were  usually  associated  with  other 
activities  in  a  building  that  was  concerned  about  social 
welfare  as  well  as  the  health  of  the  community  at  large. 
And  invariably  they  would  include  art,  both  performing  and 
visual  arts.   So  I  think  I  took  the  cue  from  having  lived 
in  Cleveland  for  a  while. 

MASON:   Oh,  you  did?   Did  you  know  Curtis  Tann,  who  came 
out  here? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  he  came  from  Karamu  House.   So  community 
art  has  a  certain  belief  system.   It  doesn't  believe  in  art 
for  art's  sake.   So  you  can  imagine  the  problem  one  would 
have  in  an  elite  community  like  Los  Angeles  with  this  kind 
of  belief  system.   And  yet  we  were  consistent  with  our 
idea.   We  didn't  have  any  confrontations  until  we  started 
dealing  with  the  [Los  Angeles  City]  Board  of  Education  and 
the  state  [California]  Arts  Council,  when  we  were  concerned 
with  art  education  and  art  as  a  tool  for  learning.   You 
asked  a  question  once  about  whether  or  not  I  influenced  the 
artists  or  the  artists  influenced  me  or  whatnot.   Well,  I 
think  I  was  more  popular  among  the  artists  than  I  was  among 
the  patrons,  because  I  always  had  something  to  say  about 
art.   At  the  time,  I  recall,  we  didn't  verbalize  much  about 
art.   We  insisted  that  art  speak  for  itself.   But  my 
attitude  toward  that  concept  was  that  it  was  elite  and  that 
poor  people  could  not  afford  to  feel  that  something  was  in 


100 


and  of  itself  because  of  their  basic  needs  and 

dependency.   So  what  I  was  insisting  upon  verbally,  as  well 

as  attracted  to  convey  it  in  my  work  through  the  group 

effort,  was  that  it's  an  elitist  concept  to  feel  that  art 

is  in  and  of  itself  art.   It  is  not  in  and  of  itself, 

because  it  interrelates  with  the  world  at  large.   We  tried 

to  say  this  in  "Signs  of  Neon." 

MASON:   In  other  words,  art  as  just  an  aesthetic  experience 

isn't  enough.   It  isn't  enough  to  just  explore  color  and 

line. 

PURIFOY:   It  doesn't  reach  blacks  at  all.   It  excludes 

blacks  and  poor,  and  it  just  burned  me  up.   Art  is  the  most 

uncontaminated  discipline  existing  in  the  world,  and  there 

was  excellent  opportunity  to  interrelate  it  with  even 

poverty. 

MASON:   Now,  you  started  a  theater  group,  too,  in  the 

sixties.   How  did  that  work  with--? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  because  I  was  interested  in  theater  from 

college.   Even  from  high  school,  I  think.   I'm  not  sure.   I 

had  a  theater  group  in  a  little  town  I  worked  in  called 

Tuscaloosa  [Alabama] ,  and  we  traveled  around  the  community 

doing  theater  pieces.   So  when  I  went  to  Watts,  I  met  Steve 

Kent,  and  he  was  from  Watts. 

MASON:   I'm  sorry,  who  was  that? 

PURIFOY:   Steve  Kent.   He  was  a  UCLA  drama  graduate  at  the 


101 


time.   Around  the  early  part  of  creating  the  Watts  Towers 
Arts  Center,  Steve  was  one  of  the  people  who  came  to  assist 
us  in  designing  a  program.   Included  was  drama.   It  wasn't 
the  kind  of  drama  that  you  get  on  the  stage- -say  your 
piece,  bow,  and  leave.   It  was  improvisation.   You  know, 
you  just  create  the  concept  on  the  spot.   I  thought  this 
was  an  excellent  media  to  relate  to  the  community,  so  I 
encouraged  it.   Steve  developed  a  wonderful  theater  with 
the  young  people  in  the  community,  as  the  case  was. 
Finally,  Steve  came  to  us  and  said,  "You  know,  we'd  like  to 
have  a  theater.   I  want  my  own."   I  said,  "Okay,  let's  do 
it."   So  we  went  to  Beverly  Hills  and  created  a  theater. 
MASON:   What  was  in  Beverly  Hills? 
PURIFOY:   A  theater. 

MASON:   There  was  a  stage,  you  mean? 

PURIFOY:   Improv.   Yeah.   It  was  housed  on  Robertson 
Boulevard  in  Beverly  Hills.   We  had  a  lot  of  help,  a  lot  of 
volunteers.   I  happened  to  check  here  in  this  book  when  you 
spoke.   It  was  called  the  Company  Theater  on  Robertson 
Boulevard  in  Los  Angeles.   They  had  a  repertory  group  and 
they  put  on  two  or  three  plays  a  year.   They  also  traveled 
to  the  festival  in  Edinburgh  in  1967.   Despite  moving  out 
of  the  community,  Steve  Kent  continued  to  work  with  the 
Watts  Towers  Arts  Center  theater  group.   The  name  was 
changed  to  the  Improv  Theater,  I  think,  and  finally  they 


102 


folded  up  about  three  to  four  years  ago. 

MASON:   So  there  were  young  people  involved  in  all  aspects, 

then?   In  set  design  and  costume  design?   Or  was  it  more 

minimal  than  that? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  no.   It  wasn't  that  kind  of  theater.   See, 

improv  pretends  you've  got  a  background,  pretends  this  is  a 

bedroom,  pretends  this  is  a  living  room,  and  there  are  no 

props.   That  was  the  beauty  of  improv,  that  the  audience 

has  to  pretend  that--  [pointing  to  photograph]  That's  Steve 

Kent. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  what  kinds  of  themes  people  usually 

dealt  with? 

PURIFOY:   Themes? 

MASON:   Yeah,  in  the  skits. 

PURIFOY:   Pregnancy,  teenage  kids'  concepts,  jealousy, 

intrigue,  sex,  every  subject  that  teenagers  are  interested 

in.   Oh,  I  want  to  mention  also,  I  don't  think  we  could  go 

past  the  improvisational  theater  unless  we  mentioned  Joyce 

Weddolf,  who  was  a  volunteer  who  assisted  the  "Signs  of 

Neon"  and  the  theater  a  great  deal.   She  was  our  resource 

person,  publisher,  etc.   You  asked  me  to  name  names.   I 

just  happened  to  think  of  that  name. 

MASON:   Okay.   Could  we  talk  about  some  of  your  work? 

PURIFOY:   Uh-huh.   What  work? 

MASON:   Well,  this  work  after  Watts  and  before  1970. 


103 


PURIFOY:   I'm  not  too  clear,  except  I  was  working  all  the 

time.   Even  when  I  was  working  with  "Signs  of  Neon, "  every 

time  I'd  come  home,  any  spare  moment,  I  was  doing 

something. 

MASON:   Was  the  material  still  stuff  from  the  riots  that 

you  had  stored,  or  did  you  look  for  new  materials  to  use? 

PURIFOY:   No,  once  we  used  up  that  material--and  we  used  it 

all  up  in  "Signs  of  Neon"  pretty  much--we  had  to  find  new 

sources  for  found  objects,  for  junk.   That's  available,  as 

I  said  before,  in  Watts  and  other  places  in  Los  Angeles. 

As  you  can  see,  this  [untitled]  piece  here  was  made  into  a 

postcard.   Samella  Lewis  did  that  [i.e.,  had  it  printed  on 

a  postcard],  and  that's  one  of  the  things  that  she  did 

best,  I  guess. 

MASON:   You  said  she  bought  that  piece  for  the  Museum  of 

African  American  Art.   Or  was  this  for  Contemporary  Crafts, 

the  gallery? 

PURIFOY:   No,  she  bought  it  for  herself  to  own.   She  liked 

it,  you  know,  and  hung  it  on  her  wall.   She  thought  it  was 

great.   I  hung  it  up  for  her  because  it  was  heavy. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  what  kinds  of  ideas  you  were 

exploring  in  this  piece?   It  seems  like  it  was  more  layered 

than  some  of  your  other  pieces. 

PURIFOY:   What's  that  word? 

MASON:   Layered.   Like  there  are  objects  on  top  of  one 


104 


another,  whereas- - 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  juxtaposed.   Okay,  I've  got  you.   Want  me  to 
say  something  about  that? 
MASON:   Yeah.   [laughter] 

PURIFOY:   Well,  as  you  know,  I'm  well  aware  that  the 
dadaists  utilized  juxtaposition  like  no  artists  ever  did  or 
ever  will  do,  no  doubt.   If  you'll  recall,  the  shapes  of 
things  that  came  out  of  that  period,  both  done  by  Braque 
and  Picasso,  were  a  great  deal  of  juxtaposition,  one  thing 
piled  on  top  of  another  to  create  depth,  etc.   Because  what 
they  were  protesting  most  of  all  was  perspective,  you  know, 
drawing  in  perspective  to  create  depth.   They  were  in 
opposition  to  that  altogether.   So  in  order  to  achieve 
depth,  they  would  juxtapose  one  object  on  top  of  another 
and  therefore  achieve  depth  without  perspective.   They 
thought  it  was  more  honest  to  do  it  that  way,  and  so  did 
I.   So  I  got  that  from  dada.   You'll  notice  in  this  piece 
here  I  did  not  discriminate.   Whatever  my  hands  came  to,  I 
put  it  in  there.   If  you  can  observe,  here  is  an  old  shoe, 
a  shovel -- 
MASON:   An  umbrella. 

PURIFOY:   See  the  shovel  in  the  left-hand  corner  here? 
Right  here?   Here's  a  handkerchief  or  a  scarf  and  more 
shoes,  more  shoes,  and  wood  objects.   I  didn't  have  a 
tendency--  The  less  I  discriminated,  the  more  successful  I 


105 


became  in  doing  junk  art. 

MASON:   Well,  shoes  are  an  object  that  reappears  in  your 
work.   Like  in  these  two  totems,  you  have  shoes  and 
shoehorns,  you  know,  and  slippers. 

PURIFOY:   They  were  just  accessible.   That's  what's 
available.   I  use  anything  that's  available.   I  think 
that's  part  of  the  creative  process,  that  you  don't 
discriminate.   I  do  more  discriminating  now  than  I  ever  did 
before. 

MASON:   I'm  looking  now  at  the  show  that  you  did  with 
Bernie  Casey,  Betye  Saar,  John  Outterbridge,  and  Benny 
Andrews,  curated  by  Samella  Lewis.   You  have  an  untitled 
metal  sculpture  with  kind  of  an  obvious  sexual  pun,  I 
guess.   I  don't  know.   It's  a  kind  of  anthropomorphic 
shape.   What  were  you  trying  to  convey  about  sexuality  in 
the  piece,  or  what  kind  of  ideas  were  you--?  Because  I  was 
saying  that  a  lot  of  your  metal  sculptures  seem  to  stand  on 
legs,  which  gives  them  a  kind  of  anthropomorphic  quality. 
So  how  are  your  metal  sculptures--?  I  mean,  besides  the 
fact  that  you're  blending  the  materials  together  through 
some  process,  you're--  [tape  recorder  off] 


106 


TAPE  NnjMBER:   V,  SIDE  ONE 
SEPTEMBER  22,  1990 

PURIFOY:   That  piece  of  sculpture,  incidentally,  Alonzo 
[Davis]  sent  it  to  San  Francisco,  I  believe  to  participate 
in  some  kind  of  metal  exhibit. 

MASON:   We're  still  talking  about  the  untitled  metal 
sculpture  with  the  phallic  symbol  or  penis  attached  to  it, 
in  the  show  by  Samella  [Lewis] . 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  went  through  a  period  where  I  did  a  lot 
of  them.   I  did  some  four- foot  penises  all  juxtaposed. 
They  never  got  shown,  however,  but  I  did  them  anyhow, 
papier-mache  and  whatnot.   They  were  real,  you  know, 
actually  real,  four  feet  tall  and  ten  inches  in  diameter. 
I  think  those  are  the  first  things  that  I  did  with  some 
idea  of  self-expression.   Usually,  I  didn't  look  at  art  as 
self-expression.   I  didn't  give  a  damn.   I  keep  repeating 
that  my  object  was  to  utilize  art  as  a  vehicle  to  gain  my 
self -certainty.   But  doing  those  large  penises,  and 
projecting  the  one  on  that  piece  of  sculpture  that  you're 
looking  at,  was  a  discovery  of  something  about  me  I've  been 
saying  all  the  time.   This  was  an  introspective  exploration 
of  an  attempt  to  improve  one's  inner  self. 

I  learned  that  I  was  sexually  precocious,  and  it 
becomes  evident  in  my  long  spiel  about  my  childhood.   If 
there's  anything  in  art  that  connects  with  my  childhood, 

107 


it's  when  I  got  the  nerve  to  express  myself  in  this  way, 
with  these  large  penises.   But  it  was  many  years  after 
that--after  making  those  pieces--that  I  had  the  opportunity 
to  actually  express  myself  in  a  more  profound  physical 
way.   One  who's  sexually  precocious  turns  out  to  be-- 
whether  he  or  she  knows  it  or  not- -erotic. 

So  I  spent  a  lot  of  time  thinking  about  my  eroticism 
and  trying  to  overcome,  in  one  way  or  another,  what  rode  on 
top  of  it,  religion  and  Christianity.   There  was  no  getting 
it  off  through  art,  which  I  can  testify  to.   I  did  not 
receive  any  great,  lasting  gratification  from  doing  art. 
While  I  was  doing  it  I  was  thoroughly  gratified,  but  that's 
what's  contagious  about  art:   you  just  have  to  keep  doing 
it  to  receive  the  same  gratification.   That's  what  becomes 
addictive.   However,  when  I  discovered  I  was  precocious,  I 
looked  around  for  such  a  person  who  was  also  precocious, 
with  the  idea  of  signing  a  contract.   This  was  the  way  in 
which  I  overcame  my  sexual  precociousness,  if  that's  the 
right  expression.   It  wasn't  through  art. 
MASON:   When  you  say  "signing  a  contract,"  you  mean  an 
actual  marriage  contract? 
PURIFOY:   A  verbal  contract. 
MASON:   Oh,  okay. 

PURIFOY:   A  verbal  contract.   A  verbal  contract,  like  "just 
describe  to  me  what  satisfies  you,  and  I'll  describe  to  you 


108 


what  satisfies  me,  and  let's  make  an  exchange."   Two  years 
of  that  enabled  me  to  overcome.   I  was  going  to 
pornographic  movies  up  till  then. 

MASON:   Yeah,  well,  there  was  a  lot  of  that  in  the 
sixties.   You  know,  the  free  love  period  and  a  lot  of 
people  exploring  their  sexuality.   Did  you  think  that  you 
were  somehow  different  from  those  people? 

PURIFOY:   I  didn't  know  about  those  people.   I  just  knew 
about  me.   I  didn't  know  why  they  were  doing  it.   But  I 
most  certainly  took  advantage  of  it.   Being  the  person  that 
I  am,  though,  I  can't  take  advantage  of  a  situation  without 
compensating  for  it.   At  [University  of  California]  Santa 
Cruz,  I  was  thrown  in  a  hotbed  of  young  females,  so  I  took 
advantage  of  the  opportunity,  but  not  without  paying  it 
back,  paying  something  back  in  return. 
^4AS0N:   You  mean  to  them  or  to  society? 

PURIFOY:   To  them,  to  them  directly.   Being  that,  you  know, 
"I'm  available  to  you  anytime  you  need  a  shoulder  to  cry 
on.   What  are  you  unhappy  about?"   Things  like  that. 
Despite  my  overtness,  I  experienced  some  high  spiritual 
times  during  that  time  where  communication  was 
phenomenal.   Like  an  experience  I've  never  had  before  or 
since,  where  you  don't  have  to  say  words  to  communicate. 
We  really  were  utilizing  art  at  the  time  to  create  a 
process  to  communicate  with.   And  it  was  extremely 


109 


profound.   I  can't  begin  to  describe  how  phenomenal  a  human 
being  we  became.   I  did  not  think  it  was  possible.   It's 
just  like  getting  religion.   I  described  the  [episode  of] 
Father  Divine  and  the  quest  for  getting  religion.   Well,  I 
finally  got  it,  but  not  in  a  Christ-like  way,  another  kind 
of  way  that  I  wasn't  familiar  with  whatsoever.   It's  when 
one  soul  talks  to  another  and  not  a  word  is  said,  a 
phenomenal  state  of  being.   I  enjoyed  that  for  a  long,  long 
time,  three  or  four  years. 

MASON:   This  is  when  you  were  still  having  the  oceanic 
experience,  or  was  that  a  part  of  it? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  know  if  that  was  before  or  after.   I 
think  it  was  afterward.   It  was  a  spillover  into--  That  was 
the  aftermath  of  the  oceanic  experience,  I'm  pretty  sure, 
because  I'd  already  had  the  Watts  experience,  so  the 
oceanic  experience  phenomenon  came  during  the  Watts  period. 
MASON:   Do  you  feel  like  that  was  the  first  step,  maybe,  in 
getting  in  touch  with  who  you  were  or  who  you  wanted  to  be? 
PURIFOY:   It  was  confirmed.   It  was  confirmation.   It  was 
the  absolute  certainty  that  I  not  only  was  the  person  that 
I  admired  most,  but  I  was  indestructible  and  I  would  live 
forever.   I  really  believed  that.   But  my  life-style 
implied  that  I  was  already  not  of  this  world,  so  to  speak, 
although  indulging  in  everything  common  to  the  world,  like 
drinking,  smoking,  and  having  sex.   But  it  was  done  on  a 


110 


rather  high  level  of  spiritual  conununication.   Like  alcohol 

was  an  ally. 

MASON:   You  say  it  was  an  ally? 

PURIFOY:   Uh-huh.   I  drank  a  fifth  a  day  for  twenty 

years.   It  did  not  make  me  addicted  because  I  quit  cold 

turkey  three  years  ago,  three  or  four  years  ago,  five, 

drinking  and  smoking.   I  just  started  back  smoking 

yesterday.   I  have  a  glass  of  wine  occasionally,  great 

wine.   You  can  buy  it  for  a  dollar  a  bottle  here,  and  it's 

great  wine. 

MASON:   But  it's  not  Thunderbird,  right? 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  no.   It's  great  wine,  blanc  de  blanc. 

MASON:   I  asked  you  about  Freudian  symbols  in  your  work, 

like  the  shoe  and  those  things,  which  sometimes  can  be 

construed  as  Freudian  fetish  objects. 

PURIFOY:   No,  no,  no.   I  never  looked  at  a  shoe  as  a  fetish 

or  a  phallic  symbol.   No,  never.   Shoes  are  a  black  man's 

fetish. 

MASON:   Why? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  know. 

MASON:   But  I  mean,  what  makes  you  feel  that? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  it's  a  fact.   It's  not  what  I  feel,  it's  a 

fact  that  shoes--  He  can  have  on  overalls,  you  know,  but 

his  shoes  are  patent-leather  shined.   And  Stacey  Adams. 

You  know,  he  may  not  have  the  next  meal,  but  he's  going  to 


111 


have  some  Stacey  Adams  shoes.   That  is  not  generally  known, 

but  that's  fact,  that's  a  fact.   Having  been  born  in  rural 

USA,  I  would  know. 

MASON:   You  were  saying  before  that  you  had  at  some  point 

gone  beyond  Freud . 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  I'd  rather  go  with  Carl  Jung.   He's  more 

dependable  than  Sigmund  Freud  when  it  comes  to  symbols. 

But  I  don't  go  for  either  one  of  them,  because  I  just  never 

dug  symbols.   If  I  use  them,  it's  unconscious.   I  know 

they're  important  in  art,  but  I  just  didn't  go  for  it. 

That's  a  funny  way  of  communicating.   I  don't  know  if 

everybody  understands  what  a  symbol  means.   You  have  to  be 

highly  intelligent,  and  I  wasn't  speaking  to  intelligent 

people  through  my  art.   I  was  trying  to  get  black  folks  to 

buy  it . 

MASON:   The  two  are  mutually  exclusive?   [laughter]   Okay, 

is  there  any  more  you  want  to  say  about  the  [University  of 

California,  Santa  Cruz]  Cowell  College  teaching 

experience?   Did  you  say  you  wanted  to  say  something  about 

Beatrice  Thompson? 

PURIFOY:   Who? 

MASON:   Beatrice  Thompson. 

PURIFOY:   No. 

MASON:   Okay.   Then  you  came  to  a  point  where  you  stopped 

being  involved  in  the  arts  and--  No,  actually  we  should 


112 


talk  about  something  before  that.   I  wanted  to  talk  about 
the  black  art  shows  in  the  sixties  and  the  galleries  just 
overall.   What  role  do  you  think  that  the  Brockman  Gallery 
and  Suzanne  Jackson's  gallery.  Gallery  32,  and  Samella 
Lewis's  Contemporary  Crafts  gallery--?  Do  you  think  they 
really  had  a  significant  impact  on  either  your  career  or 
the  career  of  any  black  artists,  in  terms  of  showing  people 
that  weren't  well  known  or  just  giving  black  artists  an 
outlet?   You  said  that  the  Watts  Towers  [Arts  Center]  was 
one  outlet  for  black  artists  to  show. 

PURIFOY:   One  thing  I  didn't  strive  for  while  I  was  an 
artist  was  reputation.   I  didn't  want,  I  didn't  need  a 
reputation  as  an  artist,  except  to  let  it  be  known  that  I 
was  in  fact  an  artist.   And  I  repeat,  art  was  a  vehicle. 
So  the  black  artists'  galleries,  Alonzo  [Davis's  Brockman 
Gallery],  in  particular,  did  not  help  my  career.   You  know, 
I  wasn ' t  concerned  about  a  career  in  art .   That ' s  when  I 
dropped  out.   However,  he  gave  me  an  opportunity  to  express 
myself  through  that  one-man  show.  Niggers  Ain ' t  Gonna  Never 
[Ever]  Be  Nothin'  [All  They  Want  To  Do  Is  Drink  +  Fuck] .   I 
wanted  to  do  that  very  badly.   And  visual  arts  is  somewhat 
like  performing  arts:   once  you  get  an  idea  you  have  to 
implement  it,  and  you  need  an  audience  to  tell  you  if  you 
were  on  the  track  or  not.   So  that's  what  that  exhibit  did 
for  me,  and  he  made  his  gallery  accessible  to  me  for  that 


113 


show.   However,  I'd  shown  there  several  times  before  in 
group  showings. 

But  Alonzo  was  quite  particular  about  who  exhibited 
there.   We  showed  things  at  the  Watts  Summer  Festivals  that 
nobody  else  would  show,  including  Alonzo. 
MASON:   Like  what? 
PURIFOY:   Like  church  art. 
MASON:   What's  that? 

PURIFOY:   Folk  art.   You  know.   Things  that  people  do  for 
church  decoration.   We  called  it  art,  but  Alonzo  wouldn't 
touch  it  with  a  ten- foot  pole.   But  we'd  show  it.   We'd 
show  anything  you  bring  us  and  show  it  a  very  prestigious 
way. 

I  would  have  to  say  that  the  festival  linked  itself  to 
overall  community  art  more  than  any  other  particular 
entity.   I  don't  take  credit  for  that  so  much  as  I 
attribute  it  to  Tommy  Jaquette.   To  put  on  the  Watts  Summer 
Festivals  every  year  for  nine  consecutive  years,  at  which 
time  I  participated  with  the  art  exhibits--  He  had  to  beg 
me  every  time,  because  I  was  busy  doing  other  things,  but 
every  time  I'd  break  down  and  do  it.   There  was  no  pay,  but 
we  made  these  sacrifices  in  order  to  do  the  festivals.   So 
we  were  the  major  outlet.   We  went  to  schools  and 
encouraged  teachers  to  have  students  produce  things  for  us 
for  the--  I'd  talk  to  artists  every  day,  "Do  something 


114 


professional.   Do  something  unique."   They  just  rallied 

around.   Everybody  participated,  except  a  few  like  Curtis 

didn't. 

MASON:   You  mean  Curtis  Tann? 

PURIFOY:   No,  people  like  that  didn't  participate,  but 

everybody  else  did.   Everybody  participated.   And  a  few 

years  we  took  in  some  art  from  out  of  the  community,  too, 

as  well,  black  and  white. 

What  else  did  I  want  to  say  about  the  festivals?   It 
was  usually  six  days.   And  we  had  problems  in  Watts  because 
of  the  riots.   Nobody  wanted  to  come  to  Watts  anymore.   So 
we  had  to  promise  them  if  they'd  come  they'd  be  safe.   In 
order  to  make  sure  they  were  safe  there  in  the  area  where 
we  were  displaying,  at  the  Will  Rogers  [State  Historic] 
Park  auditorium,  I  stood  there  eight  hours  a  day,  six  days 
during  the  week,  and  made  sure  there  was  order.   All  I  had 
to  do  was  turn  my  head  and  whatever  was  happening  stopped 
happening.   We  had  absolute  order  in  the  auditorium. 
People  who  were  afraid  to  go  to  their  cars,  we  would  escort 
them  to  their  cars  and  make  sure  that  they  were  not 
harmed.   Because  black  people  were  desperate,  you  know. 
They'd  just  come  up  to  you  and  say,  "Give  me  your  money," 
you  know,  "and  let's  don't  have  no  bones  about  it."   And 
the  cheapest  way  out  is  to  give  them  your  money.   So 
naturally,  people  didn't  want  to  come,  and  we  had  to 


115 


promise  them  that  they'd  be  safe.   So  we  had  good 
attendance,  and  we  sold  quite  a  bit  of  stuff.   As  curator, 
we  took  10  percent--that's  all--of  everything  sold. 
MASON:   Did  you  show  your  own  work  out  there? 
PURIFOY:   Oh,  absolutely,  absolutely.   Yeah,  I  showed  "[66] 
Signs  of  Neon"  for  several  years.   It  was  a  wonderful 
experience.   I  don't  regret  at  all  participating  in  the 
Watts  Summer  Festivals.   It  gave  me  a  good  feeling  that  I 
could  do  that  and  I  could  create  order  where  there  was  no 
order.   Absolute  order,  I  mean.   I  felt  good  that  I  could 
command  that  of  the  Watts  audience.   They  had  respect  for 
us,  for  the  artists,  because-- 

MASON:   Well,  you  knew  most  of  the  young  people. 
PURIFOY:   We  were  doing  good.   We  were  doing  good  things. 
MASON:   Did  you  ever  show  at  Suzanne  Jackson's  gallery  or 
Samella  Lewis's  gallery? 

PURIFOY:   There  wasn't  enough  time.   She  [Jackson]  was  only 
open  a  year.   It  was  a  nice,  clean  gallery,  but  small.   But 
a  clean,  beautiful  structure,  nice  building,  whatnot. 
MASON:   What  about  the  other  black  art  shows?   Like  "A 
Panorama  of  Black  Artists"  at  the  [Los  Angeles]  County 
Museum  [of  Art]  in  1972  and  ["Contemporary  Black  Artists  of 
America"]  at  the  Whitney  [Museum  of  American  Art]  in  '71. 
How  did  you  feel  about  participating  in  those  shows  when 
there  was  so  much  political  controversy  around  the  black 


116 


arts  show  and  what  is  black  art  and--? 

PURIFOY:   I'm  afraid  I  wasn't  there  in  spirit.   I'm  sorry, 
I  just  wasn't  there.   A  lot  of  things  that  bother  other 
people  didn't  bother  me.   I  was  protected  in  one  way  or 
another  from  all  the  trauma  connected  with  denial  and 
rejection.   It  didn't  phase  me.   I  was  busy.   I  was  very 
busy.   The  peace  of  mind  that  involvement  brings  is  just 
phenomenal.   I  haven't  been  at  that  place  before  or 
since.   So  I  was  not  there  half  the  time,  or  half  the  time 
I  was  gone  somewhere  else,  cloud  nine  or  someplace.   I  was 
just  having  a  ball.   Life  was  good.   I  was  exactly  where  I 
wanted  to  be,  doing  exactly  what  I  wanted  to  do.   Absolute 
freedom. 

MASON:   Then  you  said  you  did  some  protest  pieces  then, 

because-- 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  it  was  tongue-in-cheek,  because  other  guys 

were  doing--  It's  just  like  now.   I  did  Tar  and  Feathers, 

that's  one  I  wanted  to  mention.   That's  not  complete.   The 

feathers  on  it  there-- 

MASON:   Okay,  in  the  slide. 

PURIFOY:   The  pillow  hangs  off  of  it,  so  it's  not  complete 

in  that  shot.   But  I  did  Tar  and  Feathers  with  no  serious 

thought  of  protest.   Now,  it's  expected  that  a  collection 

as  big  as  mine  of  a  hundred  pieces  is  supposed  to  have  one 

protest  piece. 


117 


MASON:   Because  you're  black. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   Or  something.   [laughter]   So  Barrel  and 

Plow  was  kind  of  like  a  protest  piece,  but  not  serious. 

I've  done  one  as  recently  as  a  couple  of  weeks  ago,  but 

only  because  I  was  reading  about  David  Hanunond  and  his 

escapades. 

MASON:   What  were  you  reading  about? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  the  Malcolm  X  thing. 

MASON:   The  Black  Emergency  Cultural  Coalition  that  was 

going  on  in  New  York  in  the  seventies,  his  connection  with 

that?   Or  something  more  recent? 

PURIFOY:   No,  it's  the  article  you  read. 

MASON:   Oh,  in  Art  in  America? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah. 

MASON:   Oh,  okay.   No,  I  just  saw  it.   I  didn't  read  it. 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  okay.   It's  a  great  article.   David  permeates 

the  whole  book.   They've  got  his  picture  in  there  this 

time.   I  didn't  think  David  would  ever  get  old  like  me,  but 

he  did.   He  finally  got  old.   Suzanne  never  got  old. 

MASON:   Suzanne  Jackson? 

PURIFOY:   Uh-huh.   She  looks  just  like  she  always  did, 

beautiful.   I  saw  her  last  summer,  I  guess. 

MASON:   But  you  never  did  any  protest  pieces  in  the  sixties 

or  seventies. 

PURIFOY:   Oh,  yes.   Oh,  yes,  yes. 


118 


MASON:   Oh,  okay.   What--? 
PURIFOY:   I  did  lots  of  them. 

MASON:   Okay,  what  did  they  look  like?   Well,  could  you 
talk  about  the  ones  that  you  mentioned.  Tar  and  Feathers 
and  Burial  Ground,  and  how  they're  protest  pieces,  and  then 
how  they  relate  back  to  the  ones  that  you  were  doing  in  the 
sixties  and  the  seventies,  or  if  they  do  at  all. 
PURIFOY:   Protest  is  protest.   You  have  to  develop  a  theme 
that  strikes  people.   Something  that's  current  and 
recognizable  by  all.   Like  Malcolm  X,  everybody  knows 
Malcolm  X--that's  what  David  did.   They  eat  it  up.   But  I 
want  to  say  something  about  protest  art  in  general : 
protest  art  is  probably  one  of  the  highest  expressions  of 
sentiment  or  deep  feeling.   So  if  art  is  about  feeling, 
then  protest  art  is  legitimate.   But  I  don't  think  one  who 
has  nothing  to  protest  should  do  protest  art.   I  have 
nothing  to  protest.   I  have  less  now  than  I  ever  did.   I  am 
not  angry  about  anything.   I  promised  everyone  that  I  would 
resolve  my  anger,  and  I  did,  and  therefore  I  have  no  need 
to  do  protest  art. 

I  think  protest  art  falls  just  short  of  the  creative 
process,  just  slightly  short.   It's  identical  with 
political  art,  as  expressed  by  Cuba  and  other  countries  at 
large-- just  a  little  bit  short  of  the  creative  process. 
I'm  interested  in  the  application  of  the  creative 


119 


process.   Not  the  thing  itself,  the  application  of  it.   And 
the  application  of  the  creative  process  does  not  include 
protest  or  hostility.   There's  nothing  in  the  pure  creative 
process  that's  hostile.   It  has  no  extremes.   It's  neither 
hot  or  cold.   It's  not  either  angry  or  pleased.   It  just 
is.   That's  what  the  creative  process  is  about.   So  when 
you  do  protest  art  and  call  it  creative,  in  a  sense  it  _is^ 
creative,  because  you  think  of  something  that  strikes 
somebody  as  being  the  truth,  and  that's  supposed  to  be 
creativity.   But  there's  creativity  and  there's 
creativity.   There's  lord  and  god  and  master.   They  all 
have  their  separate  places,  but  one  is  higher  than  the 
other  one,  and  one's  lower  than  the  other  two.   So  in  pure 
creativity--  Which  is  what  I'm  interested  in,  it  was 
applicable  to  me.   It  resolved  my  basic  problem.   Then  it 
did  not  include  protest.   Protest  falls  just  slightly  off 
the  creative  process,  so  to  me  it's  undesirable.   I  only  do 
it  to  get  rid  of  my  prejudice.   That's  the  only  reason  I  do 
it.   If  you  make  a  life's  work  out  of  that,  you're  the  one 
who  suffers,  not  your  public.   I've  been  wanting  to  say 
that  a  long  time.   [laughter]   I  finally  got  it  out. 

I  would  get  a  lot  of  opposition  when  the  average  black 
person  says,  "Look  around  and  see  how  often  you're 
discriminated  [against] .   Can  you  go  to  this  golf  club  over 
here,  or  can  you  go  to  the  White  House  and  do  this  and 


120 


that?   Just  look  around  you,  boy,  and  you'll  find  reason  to 
do  protest  art  or  protest  in  some  overt  manner."   I  have  to 
agree  with  them,  but  I  don't  have  to  do  it  if  I  don't  feel 
it.   If  I've  transcended  it,  then  I  think  I  need  some 
applause  for  that,  but  I  don't  expect  it  from  a  hostile 
public  that  gets  its  kicks  out  of  seeing  other  people 
hurt.   I  might  take  that  back.   I'd  take  some  of  it  back, 
but  not  all  of  it. 

If  the  public  encourages  protest  art  because  it  makes 
somebody  feel  bad  and  guilty,  I  think  there  should  be  other 
means  by  which  to  solve  that  problem  and  not  use  art  to  do 
it  with.   And  keep  it  clean,  uncontaminated,  as  is,  for  our 
posterity,  for  our  children  that  are  coming  along.   They 
need  to  resort  to  something  that's  uncontaminated.   There's 
nothing  left  but  art.   It's  the  cleanest  discipline  we've 
got  or  ever  had.   You'll  notice  the  profound  philosophers 
of  our  times  and  any  times  refuse  to  analyze  art.   Even  the 
Freudians  don't  do  it. 

MASON:   Well,  Freud  tried  to  do  it.   I  mean,  he  wrote  his 
essay  on  da  Vinci  and-- 

PURIFOY:   Tell  me  about  that.   I'm  not  aware  of  that. 
MASON:   I  haven't  read  it. 

PURIFOY:   I'm  not  aware  of  it.   I'm  not  aware  of  it. 
MASON:   It  kind  of  spawned  a  whole  movement  in  art  history 
to  try  to  psychoanalyze  the  artist  through  particular 


121 


symbols  in  his  work.   And  it  usually-- 

PURIFOY:   Not  the  artist's  art.   The  artist  and  art  are 

different. 

MASON:   Right,  exactly.   [laughter]   That's  where  they  get 

into  trouble. 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  know  anybody  who'd  choose  to  analyze  art 

but  me.   I've  spent  $10  million  of  the  state's  money  trying 

to  do  it,  and  it  was  premature.   I'd  rather  say  it  can't  be 

done,  because  it  has  to  be  analyzed  to  be  utilized. 

MASON:   Well,  what  criteria  would  you  use  to  analyze  art, 

exactly? 

PURIFOY:   Art  itself.   The  art  process  consisting  of  the 

discipline,  and  the  discipline  of  art  is  nothing  more  than 

what  makes  art.   It  has  its  own  rules.   You  make  art  this 

way.   You  deal  with  vertical  or  horizontal  lines,  you  deal 

with  baselines.   Then  you're  dealing  with  this  or  that. 

You're  dealing  with  ground  lines,  you're  dealing  with 

organic  shapes,  or  what  are  you  dealing  with?   You  use  that 

to  analyze  art  and  to  understand  to  what  extent  it ' s 

applicable  to  human  beings  or  to  what  extent  human  beings 

are  governed  by  these  processes,  or  affected,  for  that 

matter.   You've  heard  people  say,  you  know,  "I  don't  know 

what  it  is,  but  I  know  what  I  like."   That's  for  lack  of 

knowledge  of  the  art  process.   This  applicability  is  my 

concern,  but  it  has  to  be  structured  first  before  it's 


122 


applicable.   We  spent  most  of  our  time  trying  to  see  to 
what  extent  it  was  applicable  to  learning  and  teaching. 
MASON:   This  is  when  you  were  teaching  at  Cowell  College 
and  Immaculate  Heart  College  and  the  other  places? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  I  was  trying  to  implement  it,  but  it  was  at 
the  California  Arts  Council  that  I  had  money  to  research. 
MASON:   What  happened  then  in  your  hiatus,  when  you  stopped 
making  art? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  was  trying  to  use  my  degree  in  social 
service  administration--to  use  all  of  my  education--to  see 
if  art  would  be  applicable  to  mental  health.   To  what 
extent  it  was  we  still  don't  know. 

I  convinced  my  agency  how  if  they  were  going  to  use 
therapy  on  black  people,  they  should  make  it  short-term, 
because  black  people  cannot  utilize  long-term  anything.   I 
mean  poor  people,  not  black  people. 

MASON:   Did  you  try  to  work  with  a  particular  program  that 
was  already  in  place  there? 
PURIFOY:   No,  I  created  it. 
MASON:   You  created  it,  okay. 

PURIFOY:   We  created  art  and  drama,  art  and  visual  arts. 
MASON:   So  during  the  same  period  you  went  to  Cornell 
[University],  then,  to  work  as  an  artist  in  residence,  in 
1973. 
PURIFOY:   No,  that's  a  misprint. 


123 


MASON:   Okay,  when  did  you  go  to  Cornell? 

PURIFOY:   I  never  have  been. 

MASON:   Oh,  I'm  sorry.   That's  in  your  resume  there.   Okay, 

so  when  you  were  at  the  Central  City  Community  Mental  Health 

Facility,  were  you  working  with  the  same  kinds  of  people  you 

were  working  with  at  the  other  mental  health  institution? 

PURIFOY:   In  Cleveland? 

MASON:   Yeah. 

PURIFOY:   No.   No,  they  weren't  the  same  kind  of  mental 

health--  Mental  deficiency  is  one  thing  when  acquired,  but 

another  thing  when  you're  born  with  it.   We  were  dealing 

with  hydrocephalics  and-- 

MASON:   I'm  sorry.   What  kind  of  people? 

PURIFOY:   Mental  deficiencies  in  young  children.   But 

that's  different  from  mental  deficiency  that's  acquired 

through  trauma. 

MASON:   You  said  you're  not  sure  what  came  out  of  it 

exactly. 

PURIFOY:   I'm  not  what? 

MASON:   You're  not  sure  what  came  out  of  it.   You're  not 

sure  whether  any  of  your  programs  were  successful  there,  is 

that  what  you  were  saying?   In  other  words,  when  you  left, 

you  felt  like  you  left  in  the  middle  of  something,  or  did 

you  feel  like  you  had  done  what  you  set  out  to  do  when  you 

had  started? 


124 


PURIFOY:   No.   There  weren't  enough  knowledgeable  people 
there  to  implement  the  program.   It  turned  out  to  be  just  a 
social  service  program  that  dealt  with  social  problems,  not 
mental  problems.   We  had  drawing,  dance,  drama,  and 
whatnot.   A  program  to  pass  the  time.   Nobody  got  well. 
MASON:   What  about  your  own  self  and  your  own  development 
during  that  time? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  got  a  big  charge  out  of  using  all  of  my 
resources  directed  at  one  specific  task.   I  was  able  to 
apply  my  social  service  degree,  my  acquisition  of  social 
service,  as  well  as  my  knowledge  about  psychiatry  and 
psychology,  as  the  case  was,  as  well  as  my  knowledge  about 
art.   It  all  went  together  easily  in  my  own  mind. 

But  to  implement  a  program  around  it,  you  need  people 
who  are  also  knowledgeable  and  believe  in  the  idea.   That 
wasn't  practical.   They  weren't  willing  to  hire  eligible, 
qualified  people.   So  it  just  became  that  I  was  another 
social  worker,  doing  the  job  of  a  social  worker,  that's 
sitting  at  a  big  desk  in  a  big  office,  waiting  till 
somebody  had  a  complaint.   We  got  the  implication  that  it 
would  work,  and  by  now  we  know  that  it  works,  that  art  is 
therapeutic,  but  there's  still  some  kinks  in  it.   We  still 
aren't  certain  about  art  as  therapy.   There  are  too  many 
doubters,  doubtful  Toms,  who  believe  in  a  direct  approach 
not  an  indirect  approach  to  mental  health. 


125 


TAPE  NUMBER:   V,  SIDE  TWO 
SEPTEMBER  22,  1990 

PURIFOY:   Now,  what  my  input  was--  We  had  weekly  meetings 
of  staff  people  to  receive  input  about  one  patient  or 
another.   My  beef  was  that  you  were  educated  in  the  white 
institution  where  they  told  you  that  psychotherapy  works  on 
people.   But  with  all  your  knowledge  about  psychotherapy, 
you  know  that  a  person  with  some  kind  of  schizophrenia 
would  have  to  go  years  and  years  before  he  had  any  signs  of 
getting  well.   But  black  people  have  a  short  attention 
span--that's  what  I  was  trying  to  convey  to  you--and  they 
cannot  use  long-term  therapy.   They'll  go  crazier.   You're 
just  making  them  crazier. 

Well,  after  talking  four  years  of  that,  I  finally  got 
through  that  they  needed  a  short-term  program.   They 
eliminated  the  hospital  beds,  and  they  started  really  to 
work  seriously  about  getting  people  well.   That's  what  my 
input  did.   That  was  the  level  on  which  I  was  effective, 
but  no  other.   When  I  left,  I  just  fell  out  of  touch, 
because  I  was  into  something  else.   I  don't  know  what 
they're  doing  there  now  or  what  they  did  over  the  years.   I 
really  don't  know,  but  I  derived  a  great  deal  of 
gratification  from  the  experiment. 

MASON:   How  long  was  it  before  you  felt  that  you  were  able 
to  go  back  and  look  at  it  in  the  way  that  you ' re  explaining 

126 


it  now?  You  said  that  you  derived  gratification  from  it, 
but  now  you ' re  saying  that  when  you  look  back  on  it  there 
were  a  lot  of  problems. 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  don't  harbor  problems.   I  find 
solutions.   That's  what  I'm  good  at.   You  see,  I  was 
looking  for  a  vehicle  by  which  I  could  find  ways  to  use  art 
as  a  tool  to  change  people.   When  I  couldn't  do  it  at 
Central  City,  I  joined  up  with  the  state  arts  council,  and 
there  we  designed  programs  that  attempted  to  integrate  the 
arts  into  the  learning  process. 

MASON:   You  were  a  chair  of  the  art  in  education 
subcommittee?   What  kind  of  programs  did  you  try  to 
design?   Who  were  some  of  the  people  that  you  worked  with 
there?   Just  how  did  it  work?   How  did  the  commission  work 
when  you  were  there? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  remember  sitting  up  nights  when  I  first 
got  on  the  program  in  1975.   I  think  it  was  '75  or  early 
'76.   Eloise  Smith--Page  [Smith] 's  wife,  whom  I  have 
referred  to,  from  Cowell  College  at  [University  of 
California]  Santa  Cruz--was  made  director  at  the  same  time 
I  became  a  member  of  the  council.   Governor  [Edmund  G. 
"Jerry"]  Brown  [Jr.]  had  reorganized  the  council  to  include 
artists  only.   We  had  nine  members,  and  we  were  all 
artists.   Among  them  were  Gary  Snyder  and  Peter  Coyote, 
with  whom  I  sat  to  design  a  battery  of  programs  for  the 


127 


arts  council.   Outstanding  among  the  programs  that  I 
participated  in  designing  were  programs  that  heretofore  had 
not  been  heard  of  funded  by  an  arts  council.   They  were 
called  "Artists  in  Communities,"  "Artists  in  Schools,"  and 
"Artists  in  Social  Institutions."   We  actually  placed 
artists  in  these  institutions  and  schools  and  communities 
to  work  directly  with  the  community,  with  people,  with 
students  and  so  forth.   There  were  three  separate  programs 
that  I  participated  in  designing.   A  fourth  program  had  to 
do  with  alternatives  in  education.   Attached  to  it  was  a 
research  component  where  the  object  was  to  explore  the 
possibility  that  art  can  be  integrated  into  the  subject 
matter.   It  was  called  "Integration  and  Correlation  of  Art 
Through  Education."   This  was  the  fourth  entity,  in 
addition  to  "Artists  in  Schools, "  "Artists  in  Communities, " 
and  "Artists  in  Social  Institutions." 

To  go  back  a  ways,  to  explain  more  clearly  what  these 
programs  meant,  was  that  we  actually  put  artists  in  prisons 
and  social  institutions  to  work  directly  with  prisoners. 
The  results  were  phenomenal,  particularly  in  prisons.   At 
present  these  programs  still  exist.   They  were  done  twelve, 
fifteen  years  ago. 

MASON:  What  were  the  artists  supposed  to  do  in  prison? 
PURIFOY:  Well,  the  artists  were  supposed  to  attempt  to 
integrate  or  correlate  the  art  into  whatever  was  happening. 


128 


the  process.   In  the  case  of  drama,  the  problem  that  the 
institution  was  facing  was  what  we  created  the  drama  around 
and  in  what  we  enabled  the  inmates  to  participate. 

Now,  this  was  done  reasonably  successfully  in  the 
prisons,  but  in  schools  there  was  seldom  the  application  of 
art  to  education.   It  was  art  in  education,  not  art  as 
education.   The  differences  are  that  art  in  education  is 
art  paralleled  with  education.   You  teach  art  and  then  you 
teach  education.   Art  as  education  is  that  you  teach  them 
simultaneously.   We  made  this  distinction,  but  the  artists 
were  never  really  able  to  apply  the  latter,  art  as 
education,  integration,  and  correlation,  into  the  ABCs. 

"Artists  in  Communities"  was  reasonably  successful, 
between  "Artists  in  Schools"  and  "Artists  in  Social 
Institutions."   The  program  was  fashioned  much  around  what 
we  did  in  Watts.   We  designed  programs  that  put  the  problem 
in  the  streets.   Put  it  where  it  belongs,  where  everybody 
can  see  it.   We  designed  art  projects  like  murals  and 
whatnot,  subject  matter  relative  to  what  was  going  on  and 
what  needed  to  be  solved  as  a  problem.   So  it  was 
reasonably  successful,  and  they  still  use  murals  as  a 
media. 

These  are  the  three  basic  programs,  funded  each  year 
to  the  tune  of  several  million  dollars--not  each,  but  in 
toto,  all  together.   The  last  word  I  got  was  these  programs 


129 


were  worth  a  million  dollars  or  so. 

This  fourth  program  was  a  research  project.   It  was  an 
extensive  project  that  had  artists  in  schools,  just  like  in 
the  "Artists  in  Schools"  program,  except  there  was  a  real 
serious  attempt  to  integrate  art  into  education,  to  teach 
them  both  at  the  same  time.   It  is  alleged  that  poor 
people- -particularly  black  people — can  learn  quicker  and 
better  if  art  is  integrated  into  the  subject  matter. 
Chicanes  can.   If  you've  got  a  problem- -a  language  problem- - 
it ' s  better  to  teach  the  language  through  art  than 
directly.   So  this  was  actually  going  on  in  ten  schools. 
MASON:   So  you  think  it's-- 

PURIFOY:   It's  a  research  project  which  included  ten 
schools. 

MASON:   Okay,  but  you  don't--  You're  saying  that  it's 
something  that's  racial?   It's  not  just  that  kids  learn 
better  through  art — it's  that  black  kids  learn  better  or 
Chicano  kids  learn  better?   Is  that  the  distinction  you're 
making? 

PURIFOY:   All  kids  learn  better.   All  kids  learn  better. 
But  some  kids  don't  need--  Their  intelligences  are  such 
that  they  don't  need  to  have  a  tool  through  which  to  learn, 
other  than  learning  itself,  direct.   Some  kids  learn  better 
if  the  learning  is  indirect.   In  other  words,  if  a  kid 
hates  school,  doesn't  like  to  come  to  school,  he'll  come  to 


130 


school  if  he's  going  to  be  in  a  play.   Now,  this  play  is 
teaching  about  Lincoln,  so  he's  learning  history  at  the 
same  time.   That's  integration.   That's  where  it's 
integrated  according  to  subject  matter.   This  was  done  in 
the  research  projects  but  not  generally  in  the  other 
"Artists  in  School"  programs. 

We  would  place,  on  an  average,  thirty  to  forty  artists 
a  year--new  ones.   The  old  ones  could  reapply  for  two 
consecutive  years  or  three  consecutive  years,  and  then 
they'd  have  to  drop  out  and  let  somebody  else  come  in.   So 
the  money  was  well  spent  and  still  is  being  well  spent,  but 
it's  most  visible  in  institutions  and  prisons.   The 
prisoners  who  utilize  this  program  don't  come  back.   It 
helps  to  overcome  drugs  and  whatever. 

MASON:   What  was  the  big  problem  with  the  schools?   Why 
didn't  the  "Artists  in  Schools"  project  work?   Were  the 
schools  resisting  that  kind  of  integration?   Because  before 
you  were  saying  that  they  thought  of  it  more  as  recreation. 
PURIFOY:   Well,  generally,  if  the  program  was  in  a  school, 
it  needed  a  school-accepted  program,  because  they  have  to 
pay  part  of  the  salary  of  the  artist.   They  have  to  pay 
one-third  of  the  cost  of  the  artist's  salary.   So 
generally,  there  was  one  person  or  principal  who  was  in 
favor  of  the  program,  but  if  the  teachers  aren't  in  favor 
of  it  you  don't  get  any  cooperation,  the  artists  don't  get 


131 


the  cooperation  from  the  teachers.   There's  prejudice, 
discrimination,  segregation,  and  ostracization.   The  artist 
is  in  strange  territory.   So  they  have  to  mend  their  way, 
use  creative  process,  become  one  with  the  unit  or  with  the 
teaching  staff.   So  that's  one  reason  it  didn't  work. 

The  other  reasons  were  that  the  artists  needed  to  be 
oriented  to  the  idea,  because  they  weren't  used  to  it. 
They  oftentimes  had  never  heard  of  integration  and 
correlation  of  art  into  education.   This  should  have  been 
one  of  the  criteria  by  which  we  selected  the  artists,  but 
there  were  so  few  artists  who  even  knew  about  education-- 
Till  the  program  needed  to  have  been  revised,  if  not 
abandoned,  in  terms  of  what  it  was  designed  for.   So  it 
never  reached  its  goal.   And  still,  till  today,  it's  not. 

In  four  years,  we've  used  up  all  the  money  for  the 
creative  research  project  called  "Alternatives  in 
Education."   We  used  up  all  the  money  in  four  years,  and 
then  we  spent  another  year  to  collect  the  results  and 
analyze  the  results  and  in  supervising  and  so  forth. 
MASON:   Did  you  publish  the  report,  or  was  it  just  an 
internal  document? 

PURIFOY:   We  got  reams  of  data.   Publication?   No.   Because 
there  were  no  results.   The  problem  was  that  there  is  no 
testing  method  designed  to  determine  if  art  in  fact  can  be 
used  as  a  tool  for  learning.   One  or  two  institutions 


132 


attempted  to  design  a  tool  that  would  test  for  integration, 
but  they  weren't  sure.   The  variables  were  of  such  a  nature 
that  you  create  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty.   So  we  could 
say  that  the  program  was  premature. 

Not  that  the  state  squandered  $10  million.   No,  I 
couldn't  put  that  in  the  record,  but  I  can  say  that  since 
we  designed  that  program,  a  lot  of  people  have  become 
convinced  that  we  need  something  to  encourage  kids  to  come 
to  school.   So  they  turn  from  sports  to  art  often,  in  many 
schools.   Sports  has  served  its  purpose  for  a  long  time, 
but  it's  short-lived.   The  results  are  short-lived.   Art 
has  a  more  lasting  potential  to  impress  children  that  you 
in  fact  see  something  unique  in  the  world  every  day, 
something  you  didn't  see  before,  although  you  pass  it 
daily.   That's  what  art  education  teaches  one  to  do,  to  see 
differently  and  to  feel  differently  about  what  you  see.   To 
verbalize  what  you  see  in  ways  in  which  a  listener  can 
understand.   Lots  of  kids  can't  do  that  even  after 
finishing  high  school. 

MASON:   Well,  you  can  see  how  important  that  is  for  kids 
growing  up  in  places  like  Watts  or  other  communities, 
because  there's  a  place  where  visualizing  things,  looking 
at  things,  is  definitely  blunted  or  stunted  because-- 
PURIFOY:   [inaudible] 
MASON:   Yeah,  that's  true.   I  mean,  you  don't  look  at-- 


133 


PURIFOY:   You're  taught. 

MASON:   Yeah,  you  don't  look  at  these  people,  because  you 
know  this  guy's  a  drug  dealer,  and  you  know  you  don't  look 
at  that  interaction  or  you  don't  look  at  these  buildings, 
because  they're  all  burnt  out,  or  you  don't  look  at  things 
because  they're  supposed  to  be  ugly,  and  you're  kind  of 
tuned  out . 

PURIFOY:   Even  to  a  sunset.   You  know,  like  appreciation, 
teach  art  appreciation.   But  to  what  extent  it's 
transferable  is  what  our  problem  is.   So  we  can  teach  a 
child  all  we  want  to  about  recognizing  a  Picasso  or 
recognizing  a  Rembrandt  and  so  forth,  but  how  do  you 
transfer  that  to  enjoying  a  sunset?   Looking  at  and 
appreciating  a  sunset  is  a  far  cry  in  a  poor  community 
and/or  black  one.   The  kids  just  don't  learn  to  appreciate 
the  simplest  things  because  they  can't  see  them.   They're 
too  busy  with  something  else,  whatever  they're  busy  with, 
[laughter] 

MASON:   Okay,  one  last  question  and  I  think  we  can  stop  for 
today,  unless  you  have  something  to  add.   In  this  hiatus, 
when  you  weren't  making  any  art,  was  that  a  conscious 
decision  that  you  made  or  was  it  something  that  just 
happened  because  you  felt  like  you  were  expressing  yourself 
in  a  different  role? 
PURIFOY:   That's  a  good  question,  because  it  gives  me  the 


134 


opportunity  to  explain  the  reason  why  I  was  looking  for 
another  vehicle  to  see  to  what  extent  one  single  person  can 
effect  change  in  the  large  world  that  we  live  in.   I 
thought  I ' d  found  another  vehicle  other  than  art .   I 
thought  I'd  found  the  California  Arts  Council  as  a  vehicle 
through  which  I  could  be  effective,  conununicate  my  ideas. 
It  didn't  work  through  art.   At  least  it  was  premature 
through  art.   But  I  thought  a  more  direct  approach  would  be 
through  a  state  arts  council  where  they  had  money  to  design 
and  implement  programs.   So  I  thought  I  had  found  my  life's 
work.   It  was  easy  for  me  to  give  up  art  and  never 
anticipate  going  back  to  that,  because  I  could  spend  the 
rest  of  my  life  trying  to  find  a  means  by  which  one  can 
synthesize  the  left  brain  with  the  right  brain  and  come  up 
with  some  kind  of  profound  concept  about  how  people  learn 
what  they  need  to  know  to  exist  in  the  world. 

But  after  eleven  years  and  $10  million,  this  too  I 
used  up  without  fully  realizing  my  objective  to  use  art  as 
a  tool  for  learning,  as  a  tool  for  change,  as  the  case  is, 
when  you're  not  in  school.   I  know  how  it  helped  me,  so  I 
figured  I  could  pass  this  on.   The  council  had  the  money  to 
do  it  with,  and  I  had  the  spiel  to  convince  them  that  they 
ought  to  be  doing  it,  they  ought  to  allocate  the  money  to 
do  it  with,  which  they  did. 

We  were  satisfied  that  the  idea  is  an  excellent  one. 


135 


Somebody  is  going  to  do  it  one  of  these  days,  but  while  we 
were  doing  it,  it  was  premature.   Other  people  over  the 
country  were  also  experimenting  with  it,  and  some  people  in 
other  countries  were  experimenting  with  the  idea.   But  none 
were  necessarily  successful  as  such,  profoundly  successful, 
that  is.   It's  such  a  wonderful  idea  that  we  are  certain  it 
will  come  to  pass  one  day.   The  Rockefeller  Foundation 
spent  millions  of  dollars  on  the  art  in  education 
concept.   The  foundation  is  spending  moneys  to  determine  to 
what  extent  art  can  be  utilized  for  learning,  but  not  as  a 
tool  necessarily.   They  have  a  program  that's  designed 
around  art  in  education,  parallel  with,  not  taught  at  the 
same  time,  simultaneously.   I  think  simultaneous  teaching 
of  art  and  education  is  a  lot  more  effective  than  the 
parallel  teaching  of  art  and  education,  which  I  hope  the 
[J.  Paul]  Getty  [Trust]  people  will  learn  about  at  some 
time. 

That's  why  I  came  back  to  art.   I  had  nowhere  else  to 
go  after  education.   I  am  not  particularly  sure--  I  mean, 
I'm  not  particularly--  Well,  I  can  admit  defeat  on  a  level 
where  I'm  not  struggling  with  the  idea  anymore.   I'm  not 
looking  for  a  vehicle  anymore.   I'm  closer  to  doing  art  for 
its  own  sake  now  than  I  ever  was,  although  I  don't  believe 
in  it  as  such,  just  because  of  circumstances.   The  people 
don't  dig  what  I'm  doing  out  here.   You  know,  they  don't 


136 


like  junk  art.   [laughter]   So  that  makes  me  doing  it  for 
its  own  sake,  because  I  can't  look  forward  to  selling  it 
anywhere.   But  I'm  at  a  place  now  where  that--  I'm  not 
serious  at  all.   I'm  not  overly  concerned  about  it. 
MASON:   Okay.   Well,  we  can  maybe  talk  more  about  that 
tomorrow . 


137 


TAPE  NUMBER:   VI,  SIDE  ONE 
SEPTEMBER  23,  1990 

MASON:   Today  is  Sunday,  September  23,  and  I'm  talking  with 
Noah  Purifoy.   We  just  wanted  to  clean  up  a  few  loose  ends 
before  we  start  to  talk  about  your  move  out  to  the 
desert.   We  want  to  talk  a  little  more  about  the  different 
organizations  in  Watts  that  sprang  up  in  the  sixties  and 
how  they  were  related  to  each  other.   And  you  want  to  talk 
more  about  Judson  Powell. 

PURIFOY:   Yes.   I  wouldn't  want  this  interview  to  end 
without  emphasizing  what  an  important  role  Judson  Powell 
played  in  the  projects  we  designed.   I  would  also  like  to 
mention  particularly  Sue  Welch,  Lucille  Krasne,  and  Debbie 
Brewer,  who  were  participants  in  the  project  at  Watts  and 
the  Watts  Towers  [Arts  Center] .   But  particularly  Judson, 
who  went  on  to  assist  me  in  the  finding  and  the  management 
of  "[66]  Signs  of  Neon." 

As  I  stated  yesterday,  I  believe,  around  1968  or  '69, 
the  "Signs  of  Neon"  exhibition  actually  no  longer  existed 
in  the  form  in  which  we  had  been  displaying  it  all  those 
years  prior.   As  a  result  of  that,  I  had  taken  another  job 
with  the  Central  City  Community  [Mental]  Health  [Facility], 
and  Judson  Powell  had  gone  on  to  try  to  create  a  community 
center  in  Compton  called  the  [Communicative]  Arts  Academy, 
I  believe.   I  didn't  participate  in  any  way  in  assisting 

138 


Judson  to  design  the  project.   I  understood  that  he  had 
inherited  from  some  politician  in  Watts  or  someplace 
$40,000  to  design  a  community  program.   So  he  proceeded  to 
do  that.   In  the  meantime,  I  started  working  for  the 
California  Arts  Council,  and  Judson  applied  ultimately  for 
funds  to  run  his  project.   But  because  of  the  complicated 
system  which  is  common  with  most  bureaucratic  agencies 
connected  with  the  state  government,  we  were  unable  to  fund 
Judson 's  project.   I  was  very  unhappy  about  that. 
MASON:   I  was  just  wondering  if  you  could  explain  a  little 
more  why  he  couldn't  comply  with  the  requirements  for  the 
funding. 

PURIFOY:   The  most  I  could  do  in  terms  of  assisting  Judson 
to  write  a  proper  proposal  was  to  advise  him  about  the 
guidelines  and  the  various  components  of  a  proposal,  which 
were  clear  in  our  guidelines,  stating  precisely  the  kind  of 
information  one  must  provide  in  order  to  get  a  grant. 
Oftentimes  people  did  not  comply  with  this  because  they 
thought  they  had  a  better  method  of  writing  proposals, 
which  wasn't  the  case.   Because  of  this  and  other  reasons, 
primarily  reasons  that  had  to  do  with  our  system  of 
selecting  proposals--  We  had  a  committee  to  select 
proposals  and  reject  proposals.   The  ones  who  complied  with 
the  guidelines  more  exactly  were  the  ones  that  were 
granted,  and  the  others  were  not  granted  from  year  to  year. 


139 


Now,  because  of  this  system  we  weren't  able  to  fund 
some  worthy  people,  particularly  blacks  and  Chicanes  who 
had  vital  programs  existing  in  the  community,  simply 
because  they  didn't  have  the  sophistication  necessary  to 
write  a  proper  proposal  to  get  funds.   This  concerned  me 
all  the  years  I  was  on  the  council.   As  a  result  of  that,  a 
couple  of  years  before  I  left--which  was  1987  probably, 
'86,  '87,  into  1988--the  council  was  trying  to  devise  some 
means  by  which  they  could  reduce  the  guidelines,  or  rather 
subdue  the  guidelines,  to  a  point  where  black  people  and 
Chicanes  who  had  vital  programs  could  qualify.   We  tried 
for  years  to  fund  American  Indian  projects  without  any 
success.   We  even  implored  an  American  Indian  on  the  staff 
to  advise  us,  but  we  weren't  able  to  get  to  those  people. 
It ' s  very  unfortunate  that  the  very  people  who  need  the 
assistance  most  have  not  been  funded  by  the  state  arts 
council  up  to  the  time  in  which  I  left,  which  was  1987  or 
'88. 

Now,  regarding  projects  in  Watts--  Aside  from  Judson's 
project,  which  happened  late  in  the  seventies  rather  than 
the  sixties,  there  was--  Westminster  [Neighborhood 
Association]  I  believe  is  the  name  of  the  community  agency 
which  resembled  Karamu  House  in  Cleveland  more  than  any 
other  organization  because  it  was  socially  welfare 
oriented,  as  well  as  an  accompaniment  of  some  art  projects. 


140 


MASON:   I'm  sorry.   What  do  you  want  to  say  about  that? 
PURIFOY:   Socially  oriented,  meaning  that  they  were 
concerned  about  the  social  and  physical  welfare  of  the 
people--and  the  financial  welfare  of  the  people--as  well  as 
the  aesthetic  welfare. 

MASON:   But  weren't  all  the  projects  concerned  in  some  way 
with  that  aspect  of  the  community? 

PURIFOY:   No,  no.   The  project  that  we  had  in  Watts,  the 
Watts  Towers,  was  not  specifically  concerned  about  the 
welfare  of  the  person  in  general.   Our  concern  was  the 
teaching  of  art  and  aesthetics,  primarily.   However,  at 
heart  we  had  strong  feelings  for  the  people,  and  we  had 
projects  that  linked  themselves  to  the  well-being  of  the 
community,  such  as  cleaning  up  the  street,  painting  the 
houses,  and  being  concerned  about  the  next-door  neighbor, 
as  the  case  was.   We  were  down  on  107th  Street,  and  we  had 
neighbors  next  door  and  across  the  street  and  so  forth. 
So  we  were  all  friendly  and  whatnot  and  shared  what  we 
had,  but  it  wasn't  a  community  project  in  the  least. 
MASON:   Okay,  so  how  did  Westminster  go  beyond  that? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  Westminster  was  partially  funded,  I 
believe,  by  the  state  and  the  city.   I'm  not  sure.   But 
anyhow,  they  were  kind  of  a  social  agency  that  had  some  art 
projects.   Their  emphasis  was  primarily  on  the  social  and 


141 


physical  welfare  of  the  conununity  rather  than  the 

aesthetics.   But  it  resembled  a  community  art  project 

similar  to  the  one  that  we  had  been  familiar  with  in 

Cleveland,  Karamu  House. 

^4AS0N:   Who  was  the  director  of  Westminster? 

PURIFOY:   I  don't  recall  who  was  the  director  at  the  time, 

but  I  think  it  still  exists. 

MASON:   Now,  what  about  Studio  Watts? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  Studio  Watts  was  short-lived. 

MASON:   That  was  on  Grandee  Avenue. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  yeah. 

MASON:   How  far  away? 

PURIFOY:   They  emphasized  drama  more  than  the  visual  arts, 

drama  and  poetry  more  than  the  visual  arts,  as  the  case 

was.   You  asked  me  earlier  about  to  what  extent  these 

organizations  cooperated  with  each  other.   We  didn't.   I 

want  to  mention  a  few.   There  were  more,  there  were  a  lot 

more,  but  I  don't  recall  them  at  the  moment.   There  was 

little  or  no  coming  together  except  during  the  festivals 

from  1966  till  1970.   Each  year  all  of  them  would 

participate  in  the  Watts  Summer  Festival.   So  that  was  the 

time  that  all  the  organizations  came  together  to  make  one 

large  one-week-long  event  for  the  community. 

MASON:   I  was  saying  the  other  day  that  I  was  confused 

about  the  different  Watts  festivals,  how  your  Watts 


142 


festival  that  you  had  over  in  Will  Rogers  [State  Historic 
Park]  auditorium  was  different  from  or  connected  with  the 
festival  we  associate  now  with  the  Watts  Towers  jazz 
festival.   Well,  the  Watts  Towers  Music  and  Arts  Festival. 
PURIFOY:   Maybe  it  will  become  more  clear  if  we  could 
separate  the  various  events  in  terms  of  years.   In  the 
sixties,  that  was  a  time  for  the  annual  yearly  festivals 
ultimately  managed  and  implemented  by  Tommy  Jacquette.   The 
other  major  component,  the  art  component,  was  managed  by 
me,  with  the  assistance  of  Judson  Powell  and  others. 

Those  were  the  only  events  happening  in  Watts  in  the 
sixties.   There  were  no  other  public  events,  events  that 
involved  all  the  people.   In  the  seventies,  when  John 
Outterbridge  became  director  of  the  Watts  Towers  Arts 
Center,  he  started,  I  believe--I'm  not  certain--the  drum 
festivals,  etc.,  the  music  festivals  in  general.   This  was 
taking  place  in  the  seventies  on  the  premises  at  the  Watts 
Towers . 

Now,  the  summer  festivals  were  given  at  the  Will 
Rogers  Park,  so  these  were  two  separate  facilities  that 
were  frequented  by  the  people  and  whose  setting  would  lend 
itself  to  these  events.   So  again,  the  Watts  Summer 
Festivals  in  the  sixties  were  at  the  Will  Rogers  Park.   The 
art  exhibitions  were  at  the  Will  Rogers  Park  auditorium, 
and  nothing  else  was  happening  in  the  sixties  of 


143 


consequence.   These  very  small  organizations  would  all  come 
together,  as  we  said  earlier,  and  participate  in  the 
festival,  but  they  themselves  were  not  giving  a  community 
event,  an  event  that  involved  the  community.   No  special 
organization  in  Watts  at  the  time  or  anywhere  nearby  was 
giving  any  special  events,  except  the  summer  festivals. 
In  the  seventies,  John  Outterbridge  had  begun  the 
music  festivals,  and  there  are  no  summer  festivals  now 
taking  place  at  Will  Rogers  Park.   There  were  just  the 
music  festivals  in  Watts  in  the  seventies  and  eighties. 
Those  are  the  only  public  events  that  I  can  recall  at  the 
moment.   They  were  separated  by  years  more  than  by 
events.   They  did  not  come  together  at  any  one  time  because 
they  were  given  at  different  times. 

MASON:   I  wanted  to  ask  you  how  you  would  account  for  this 
kind  of  art  boom  in  the  sixties,  or  the  kind  of  arts 
explosion  in  the  sixties,  where  there  were  all  these  art 
projects  going  on  and  your  projects  using  art  to  educate 
people,  whereas  it  seems  in  the  fifties  things  were  a  lot 
quieter  and  artists  were  kind  of  underground  and  sort  of 
suspect.   I'm  wondering  if  that's  your  perception  of 
things,  and,  if  so,  how  would  you  account  for  that 
transition? 

PURIFOY:   I  understand  your  question  to  be  asking  why  all 
these  art  projects  in  Watts  particularly.   Is  that  what 


144 


you're  asking? 

MASON:   Well,  yeah.   A  lot  of  them  were  in  Watts,  but  just 
the  whole  California  Arts  Council.   That  started  in  the 
mid-sixties.   Then  there  were  things  going  on  in  other 
cities,  in  Chicago  and  New  York.   But  especially  in  Los 
Angeles,  there  seemed  to  be  more  of  a  boom  in  the  sixties, 
whereas  the  fifties  seemed  to  be  a  little  more  quiet.   Do 
you  think  there  were  just  more  artists  here  working  or — ? 
PURIFOY:   No,  I  don't  think  that  was  the  case.   I  think  we 
just  came  out  of  the  woodwork.   We  were  back  there 
somewhere  doing  something.   But  I  think  as  a  result  of  the 
nationwide  riot  having  started  in  Los  Angeles,  in  Watts, 
and  then  spreading  over  the  country,  it  made  people  in  Los 
Angeles  and  the  vicinity  feel  guilty  sooner  than  the  people 
in  other  cities  as  the  result  of  the  events,  particularly 
connected  with  discrimination  and  segregation.   I  believe 
that  art  became  a  boom  because  people  were  feeling  guilty 
about  their  isolation  and  estrangement  from  each  other  in 
general .   I  sincerely  believe  the  riots  brought  on  those 
kinds  of  feelings  in  people  in  general,  particularly  in  Los 
Angeles,  if  not  the  whole  state  of  California. 

As  a  result  of  their  feelings,  I  imagine  they  said  to 
themselves,  "I  want  to  do  something."   In  fact,  I've  heard 
this  echoed  often  during  the  holocaust  and  those  times  in 
the  sixties.   "I  would  just  like  to  do  something,"  they 


145 


would  say.   These  are  mostly  white  people  talking.   So  they 
came  from  Beverly  Hills  and  here  and  thither,  all  over  the 
place,  to  Watts  to  do  something,  bringing  their  skills  with 
them.   And  the  result  was  the  Watts  Towers  Arts  Center,  as 
the  case  was.   People  came  from  everywhere  to  help  us  do 
what  we  were  doing,  whatever  it  was  we  were  doing.   I  have 
snapshots  of  crowds  of  people  on  that  one  little  street 
involved  in  carrying  food  for  the  kids  that  were  doing  the 
work  and  all  that.   I  think  they  just  felt  guilty  that  they 
had  been  so  separated  from  what  was  going  on  in  the 
community  at  large.   They  just  thought  they'd  come  and 
participate  or  see  if  they  could.   So  as  I  said,  they 
brought  their  skills  with  them  and  corralled  us,  so  to 
speak,  and  started  a  lot  of  projects.   I  can't  think  of  any 
projects  that  didn't  involve  a  goodly  number  of  volunteers 
that  came  from  outside  to  offer  their  assistance  as  well  as 
dollars,  moneys  to  assist  in  the  development  of  programs. 

I  think  this  was  evident  all  over  the  country.   When  I 
was  in  Washington,  D.C.,  with  the  "Signs  of  Neon,"  at  the 
Gallery  of  Modern  Art,  I  experienced  the  identical  same 
thing,  persons  wanting  to  utilize  art  to  demonstrate  their 
feelings  for  each  other,  so  to  speak.   As  I  said  before  in 
a  previous  interview,  I  was  asked  to  develop  some  projects 
there  in  Washington,  D.C.,  because  they  too  have  had  a  lot 
of  debris  as  results  of  the  rioting  there.   So  I  think  that 


146 


comes  pretty  close  to  my  opinion  regarding  why  the  upsurge 
of  art.   It's  just  that  I  think  that  during  hard  times  we 
turn  to  the  aesthetics  as  relief,  and  rightly  so. 

It  was  extremely  violent  times  in  Watts,  but  maybe--  I 
don't  know  what  would  have  happened  if  we  had  not  had  the 
art  projects  and  whatnot- -to  what  extent  the  people  getting 
involved  might  have  prevented  further  crime .   I  don ' t 
know.   I  really  don't  know.   I  know  that  Watts  was  slow  in 
building  itself  back  up.   Even  till  this  day.  Watts  is 
still  a  blighted  community,  so  to  speak. 

You  didn't  ask  me  what  resulted  from  the  efforts,  but 
if  you  were  to  ask  me  what  were  the  results  of  the 
tremendous  effort  that  was  poured  into  that  community 
during  the  riot--  Although  I  was  there,  I  could  not  tell 
you,  because  I  don't  know  what  would  have  happened  if  we 
had  not  had  it.   I  know  we  involved  a  few  people-- 
considering  the  large  population--that  otherwise  would  have 
had  nothing  to  do,  the  drama  class,  for  instance.   Those 
kids  were  just  ripe  for  some  kind  of  mischief.   But  as  a 
result  of  Steve  Kent  working  with  the  kids  and  all,  we  not 
only  got  them  to  participate  in  drama,  we  encouraged  them 
to  go  back  to  school  or  stay  in  school,  as  the  case  was. 
So  those  are  just  little  things  that  happened  as  results  of 
the  riot,  I'd  say,  and  as  a  result  of  people  coming  to  give 
a  hand . 


147 


MASON:   You  also  wanted  to  mention  your  trip  to  Africa,  to 
the  arts  festival,  in  the  late  seventies. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   As  early  as  1975,  I  would  say,  I  started 
getting  communications  from  what  was  called  FESTAC.   I've 
forgotten  what  FESTAC  means.   It  means  something  in 
particular  [World  Black  and  African  Festival  of  Arts  and 
Culture].   I  have  some  literature  on  it,  but  it's  not 
available  right  at  the  moment. 

To  anticipate  a  trip  to  Africa  was  a  little  confusing, 
to  say  the  least.   However,  during  the  course  of  two  years, 
I  received  correspondence  from  FESTAC,  located  in 
Washington  [D.C.]  and  New  York,  I  think.   I  complied  with 
every  request,  meaning  that  you  have  to  submit  certain 
slides  of  your  work  and  you  have  to  have  certain  health 
certificates  and  you  have  to  submit  birth  certificates. 
You  have  to  submit  a  whole  bunch  of  things  when  they  take  a 
responsibility  for  you  going  to  a  foreign  country.   I 
complied  with  every  request,  always  with  a  degree  of 
trepidation.   What  I  mean  by  that  is  I  had  seen  one  too 
many  Tarzan  pictures  with  black  people  with  large  disk  lips 
and  spears  and  shields  and  whatnot.   Savages,  so  to 
speak.   I  didn't  want  to  go  to  Africa  to  see  that.   I  was 
hoping  I  wouldn't  see  that  if  I  went  to  Africa,  and  yet  a 
free  trip  to  Africa  was  something  you  just  couldn't  afford 
to  turn  down. 


148 


So  I  just  sat  down  and  made  every  effort  to  qualify, 
and  finally  the  day  came  when  they  asked  us  to  meet  up  in 
San  Francisco  and  board  a  plane  from  there  to  New  York  and 
to  Spain  and  then  to  Africa.   I  had  already  shipped  my 
stuff  ahead  of  me--that  is,  my  art  work  that  I  was  going  to 
display.   And  I  had  a  companion  [Ann  Noriega] ,  also,  who 
had  become  eligible  for  the  trip.   We  boarded  a  plane  in 
San  Francisco.   I  don't  recall  quite  how  we  got  from  Los 
Angeles  to  San  Francisco,  but  anyhow  we  boarded  a  plane  and 
headed  for  New  York. 

MASON:   Do  you  remember  which  pieces  you  sent  over  there? 
PURIFOY:   No.   No,  I  don't  remember.   I  don't  think  they 
asked  for  more  than  two.   I  sent  two  pieces,  I  think.   But 
the  pieces  I  liked,  you  know.   In  1977  I  wasn't  doing  art 
then,  so  I  didn't  have  anything  new  that  I'd  done  that  year 
or  the  year  before,  but  I  still  had  some  pieces  around 
decent  enough  to  send  to  Africa. 

We  were  not  the  first  artists  to  arrive  in  Africa. 
There  were  several  other  planeloads  of  people.   I  think  the 
plane  that  we  were  aboard  could  carry  up  to  a  hundred 
people,  I'm  not  sure.   But  the  total  number  of  people  at 
the  festival  in  Africa  was  several  hundred,  coming  on  two 
ships  at  two  different  times  from  all  over  the  world.   They 
were  supposed  to  be  all  black  people,  but  they  weren't  all 
black  people. 


149 


When  I  arrived  in  Africa,  I  was  amazed  to  find  that 
Nigeria  looked  just  like  Los  Angeles  I   They  carted  us  to  a 
compound  already  designed  for  us  to  live  in,  and  they  were 
apartment  houses  made  of  concrete,  one-room  structures  with 
a  bath  and  all.   Some  of  them  were  incomplete,  but 
nevertheless  they  were  fairly  comfortable.   Except  for  the 
heat.   I  doubt  seriously  if  I  got  more  than  two  or  three 
hours  of  sleep  per  night,  because  there  was  no  air- 
conditioning  in  the  apartments.   Because  there  were  so  many 
people  there  from  all  over  the  world,  it  was  a  total 
involvement.   The  people  who  were  supposed  to  take  charge 
were  not  always  present,  so  there  were  many  times  when  I 
had  to  make  plans  on  my  own  to  get  to  see  what  I  wanted  to 
see.   I  was  mostly  interested  in  their  art  and  education, 
so  I  visited  the  university  and  the  museums.   Those  were 
places  I  went  on  my  own.   But  FESTAC  had  a  big  arena  where 
everybody  met  every  day.   That's  where  the  exhibits  were, 
and  that's  where  the  people  came  to  discuss  different  ideas 
and  things  like  that.   It  was  a  great  experience. 
MASON:   You  said  you  went  to  museums  and  then  there  were 
these  discussions.   I'm  just  wondering  if  there  was  any 
particular  thing  that  stands  out  in  your  mind  when  you  went 
to  the  museum.   I  guess  in  Lagos  [Nigeria] ,  you  know,  was 
there  a  particular  piece  of  artwork  or  anything  like  that 
that  stood  out  in  your  mind  or  in  these  discussions  that 


150 


took  place  among  all  of  these  artists?   Was  there  a 
particular  issue  or  a  certain  discussion  that  maybe  kept 
coming  up  that  everybody  was  interested  in  or  that  struck 
you? 

PURIFOY:   Unfortunately,  I  don't  have  my  notes  with  me  or 
some  literature  I  brought  back  from  Africa.   I  brought  a 
whole  bunch  of  film  back,  a  lot  of  data  on  the  events  that 
occurred.   But  the  answer  to  your  question  is  yes,  there's 
one  thing  that  stuck  out  in  my  mind  most  of  all,  and  it 
didn't  have  anything  to  do  with  art.   It  had  to  do  with 
politics. 

FESTAC  was  highly  politically  oriented.   In  fact,  the 
commander,  the  potentate,  the  high  chief,  you  know,  would 
come  on  the  premises  of  this  big  arena  and  lecture  to  us, 
because  we  were  asked  to  come  at  a  certain  time  of  day  two 
or  three  times,  we  were  asked  to  all  come  together.   The 
first  night  we  were  there  we  came  together  to  sit  in  this 
big  auditorium.   Although  I  didn't  fully  understand  the 
emphasis  that  was  placed  on  the  politics,  it  was  purely 
political.   FESTAC  was  designed  for  that  idea.   It's  to 
isolate,  separate  black  people  from  white  people,  and 
through  this  separation  demonstrate  that  black  people 
constitute  a  greater  population  in  the  world  than  white 
people  and  that  they- -black  people- -can  become  leaders  of 
the  world.   That  was  the  overtone  of  FESTAC.   That  was  what 


151 


I  interpreted.   It  was  a  political  event. 

MASON:   So  it  was  something  to  foster  black  nationalism  or 

maybe  black  internationalism  or  something. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  that's  the  way  it  felt  to  me.   But  I  admit 

that  I  didn't  thoroughly  understand  it,  because  I  wasn't 

interested  in  politics,  neither  then  or  now.   That's  an 

interesting  question,  though.   I  never  said  it  to  anybody 

because  it  was  of  little  concern  to  me,  but  those  were  the 

overtones . 

MASON:   But  even  in  spite  of  that,  I  mean,  was  everything--? 

You  said  you  got  to  do  some  things  on  your  own,  so 

everything  wasn't  orchestrated. 

PURIFOY:   Was  not  orchestrated? 

MASON:   Yeah,  because  you  said  you  got  to  do  some  things 

just  through  errors.   You  got  to  do  some  things. 

PURIFOY:   Well,  I  didn't  get  to  go  to  some  major  events 

that  occurred,  like  some  parties  that  were  given  at  certain 

people's  houses  that  were  recognized  in  the  community  and 

all  that.   But  I  did  go  and  visit  some  community  people  and 

saw  the  condition  in  which  they  were  living,  in  little  huts 

and  whatnot,  just  like  in  the  movies.   You  know,  that's  the 

kind  of  condition  in  which  some  of  them  were  living  out  in 

the  rural  communities. 

I  marveled  at  how  healthy  the  community  looked,  but 
when  I  started  visiting  the  homes  of  some  of  the  people  I 


152 


learned  that  they  hide  their  cripples.   They  don't  permit 
them  to  come  out  in  public,  and  that's  why  everybody  looked 
so  healthy.   I  would  come  out  there- - 
MASON:   You  mean  it's  just  for  the  festival. 
PURIFOY:   No.   They  hide  them.   They  hide  them  all  the 
time.   They're  ashamed  of  the  cripples.   So  when  I  went  to 
these  villages,  there  they  were,  hobbling  about.   It's  just 
like  anywhere  else  you  go.   In  appearance  the  communities 
look  healthy  and  vital,  but  they  had  their  health  problems 
just  like  everyone  else. 

MASON:   So  your  interpretation  was  that  Nigeria  was  trying 
to  promote  itself  as  the  leader  of  black  people  all  over 
the  world. 

PURIFOY:   I  got  that  feeling.   I  really  got  that  feeling, 
because  they  had  just  struck  oil  and  there  was  evidence  of 
money  all  over  the  place.   They  had  started  to  build  a 
hospital  and  for  some  reason  stopped.   All  the  exotic  and 
costly  equipment  was  lying  out  exposed  to  the  weather.   I 
was  unhappy  about  seeing  that.   Acres  of  equipment.   Beds, 
you  know,  exotic  beds  that  do  funny  things,  fold  up  in  the 
middle  and  all  that.   That  bothered  me  a  great  deal, 
because  it  just  indicated  the  absence  of  management.   I 
didn't  see  a  single  white  person  in  management  in  all  of 
Nigeria.   Not  a  single  one.   If  I  saw  one,  he  was  some  type 
of  mechanic  or  something,  dealing  with  some  complicated 


153 


instruments  that  otherwise  they  actually  didn't  have  the 
skills. 

MASON:   So  was  that  good  or  bad  that  there  were  no  white 
people  in  management  positions? 

PURIFOY:   I  can't  comment  whether  it  was  good  or  bad, 
because  I  didn't  try  to  determine  whether  it  was  good  and 
bad.   My  impression  was,  "Good,  they  got  rid  of  them."   But 
when  I  saw  the  waste,  underneath  that  waste  was  poor 
management.   I  said,  "If  the  presence  of  white  people  means 
good  management,  they  need  to  get  back  a  few  to  get  this 
city  on  the  road,  because  this  is  absolute  waste." 
Millions  of  dollars  worth  of  equipment  just  deteriorating 
in  the  sun.   They  stopped  building  the  hospital  for  some 
reason  or  another. 

Generally,  though,  my  stay  in  Africa  was  extremely 
pleasant.   The  communications  with  the  people  there  were 
superb.   I  saw  the  resemblance  of  my  whole  family, 
immediate  family  unit.   Women  that  looked  just  like  my 
sisters  and  men  that  looked  just  like  my  brothers.   "I  know 
where  I  come  from  now,"  I  thought.   "I  come  from  somewhere 
around  Nigeria,  because  the  people  look  so  much  like  me, 
flat  head  and  all."   [laughter] 

I  was  more  than  pleased  with  the  general  demeanor  and 
deportment  and  behavior,  I've  been  in  an  auditorium  where 
there  was  a  row  of  kids  twenty  or  thirty  deep,  and  one 


154 


adult  has  only  to  turn  around  and  look  and  they're  all  as 

quiet  as  a  mouse.   Every  adult  is  a  parent  in  Africa,  and 

every  child  belongs  to  the  conununity.   So  since  I  must  have 

been  in  my  early  sixties  in  19--  No,  in  my  late  fifties  in 

1977  — 

MASON:   Sixties. 

PURIFOY:   No,  I  was  in  my  sixties.   I  was  looked  upon  as  a 

father  person.   After  dark  I  was  carted  to  beer  joints  and 

had  beer  bought  for  me  all  evening.   Some  person  who  looked 

upon  me  as  a  father  person  and  would  hang  around  me  all  day 

the  next  day  to  see  if  I  would  drop  a  few  words  of  wisdom 

and  so  forth.   I  didn't  necessarily  encourage  that,  but  it 

was  interesting  to  observe  it  and  experience  it. 

MASON:   Does  any  of  this  experience  come  out  in  your  later 

work?   Either  an  object  that  you  picked  up  there,  maybe,  or 

some  relationship? 

PURIFOY:   No.   I  brought  some  ebony  back,  chips  of  ebony 

wood,  a  big  block  of  ebony  wood.   I  carted  it  all  the  way 

back  to  America,  six  thousand  miles.   And  a  club. 

MASON:   I'm  sorry,  a — ? 

PURIFOY:   A  club.   You  know,  an  adz  type  of  hammer,  a  stick 

that  an  adz  fits  in,  where  they  chop  wood  and  fasten 

wood.   Those  are  the  only  two  souvenirs  I  brought  back. 

But  I  could  have  brought  back  a  whole  population  of 
Africans  who  wanted  to  live  in  America.   It  seems  like 


155 


every  African  wants  to  come  to  America.   There  were  some 
youths  from  Chad--which  is  not  far  from  Nigeria--and  they 
were  having  a  little  war  there,  and  they  didn't  want  to  go 
home.   They  wanted  to  stay  in  Nigeria  or  come  home  with  me, 
as  the  case  was.   [laughter] 

I  didn't  develop  any  lifelong  friends  of  this  sort 
visiting  Africa,  but  it  certainly  turned  my  life  around, 
because  ultimately  I  knew  the  source  of  my  identity.   And 
the  Tarzan  pictures  that  I've  seen,  I  will  lay  them  to 
rest,  because  Africa  is  as  fully  civilized  as  the  rest  of 
the  world. 


156 


TAPE  NUMBER:   VI,  SIDE  TWO 
SEPTEMBER  23,  1990 

MASON:   Did  you  use  the  ebony  wood  and  the  club  in  your 

work? 

PURIFOY:   Uh-huh. 

MASON:   Which  pieces  did  you  use  that  in? 

PURIFOY:   I  can't  remember  specifically  because  I  used  up 

slivers  of  it  very  sparingly,  but  I  distributed  it 

throughout  my  works  for  quite  a  while.   That's  when  I 

started  back  to  work,  which  was  a  couple  of  years  ago.   I 

kept  it.   And  I  got  the  big  ad  on  one  of  my  things  that  I 

showed  at  the  [California  Afro- American]  Museum  on  Expo 

[Exposition  Boulevard] . 

MASON:   Okay.   Okay,  all  right.   So  you're  still  on  La  Brea 

[Avenue],  then.   When  did  you  move  to  Arlington  [Avenue]? 

No,  you  just  had  your  studio  on  Arlington. 

PURIFOY:   No,  I  lived  there.   The  house  on  La  Brea  I  lived 

in  for  thirty  years.   I  liked  that  place  because  a  lot  of 

things  happened  there  over  the  years.   I'd  go  off  to  Santa 

Cruz  and  spend  two  or  three  months  and  come  back  and  find 

the  place  occupied  by  my  friends  and  all  clean  and  spic  and 

span.   I  finally  concluded  the  place  didn't  belong  to  me, 

it  belonged  to  the  people  who  frequented  it.   A  lot  of 

delightful  experiences  happened  there,  and  a  lot  of  artists 

came  through  simply  because  that  was  a  meeting  place  for 

157 


artists  over  the  years. 

MASON:   People  like  John  Outterbridge? 

PURIFOY:   Yeah.   [tape  recorder  off]   I  think  I  would  like 

to  mention  again  and  include  in  my  discussion  my  companion, 

Ann  Noriega.   She  was  a  dress  designer.   At  least  that's 

what  made  her  eligible  for  the  FESTAC.   We  were  traveling 

partners  and  had  experienced  our  visit  to  Africa  together 

more  or  less.   I  didn't  want  to  conclude  about  Africa  until 

I  mentioned  about  Ann,  because  she's  been  a  lifelong 

friend. 

Now  what? 
MASON:   We  were  talking  about  La  Brea,  and  you  said  that-- 
PURIFOY:   Oh,  yes.   I  came  to  Los  Angeles  in  about  1950, 
'51.   I  lived  in  central  Los  Angeles  for  eight  or  ten 
years,  and  then  I  moved  to  a  little  space,  a  little  one- 
room  apartment  on  La  Brea,  in  about  19--  Oh,  it  must  have 
been  '58  or  '59.   It  was  attached  to  a  garage,  so  there  was 
unused  space  that  I  ultimately  expanded  into  a  three-room 
apartment  and  a  studio  in  addition.   So  I  had  made  the 
place  very  comfortable,  from  a  one-room  apartment  to  a 
three-  or  four-room  apartment.   It  had  a  garage  attached  to 
it,  so  that  was  the  space  I  utilized  to  build  these  extra 
rooms . 

Since  most  of  the  events  of  one  nature  or  another 
happened  to  me  while  I  was  on  La  Brea,  this  house  became  a 


158 


center  for  the  community  artists,  for  the  most  part. 
Because  here  was  a  place  we  could  discuss  our  lives  in 
connection  with  art.   We  could  plan  for  the  future  here, 
or,  as  the  case  was,  we  could  reexperience  the  past  and 
plan  for  the  future.   So  here  was  a  place  where  I  had  my 
most  profound  spiritual  experiences  as  well  as  art 
experiences.   I  would  go  away  for  two,  three  months  at  a 
time  up  to  [University  of  California]  Santa  Cruz  to  teach 
something  or  go  out  of  state  with  "Signs  of  Neon"  and  come 
back  and  find  that  the  place  had  been  occupied  by  friends 
who  cared  for  it  equally  as  much  as  I  did,  or  as  well  as  I 
did.   After  my  stint  at  Santa  Cruz,  students  would  come 
from  Santa  Cruz  on  weekends  and  spend  the  weekend  there, 
some  of  whom  I  did  not  know  or  had  not  met  while  in  Santa 
Cruz.   So  the  place  became  a  center  for  people  rather  than 
for  artists  as  such.   A  real  delightful  experience. 

Mrs.  Chew,  who  owned  the  place,  a  Chinese  woman. 
Oriental  woman,  whom  I  made  friends  with  over  the  years, 
decided  to  sell  the  place  and  go  back  to  China.   So  I  had 
two  weeks'  notice  to  move.   My  friend  Dorsey  Robinson,  a 
longtime  friend,  lent  me  his  assistance,  and  he  carted  me 
all  over  town  looking  for  a  place  to  move,  mostly  downtown 
L.A.,  where  we  could  find  a  loft  or  something  that  was 
suitable  for  an  artist,  so  to  speak.   We  finally  found  this 
place  on  Arlington,  which  was  extremely  expensive  according 


159 


to  how  much  I'd  been  paying.   I'd  been  paying  under  $200  a 
month  for  this  space  where  I  was.   And  it  had  a  big  patio, 
I  forgot  to  mention  that,  and  a  garden  in  back  and  all 
that.   An  extremely  pleasant  place  to  be,  although  it  was 
on  the  busiest  street  in  L.A. .   Because  of  the  trees  that 
surrounded  the  place,  it  was  totally  isolated,  and  I  could 
scarcely  hear  noise  from  the  street.   The  sirens  and 
whatnot  were  almost  not  audible.   The  freeway  was  not  far 
away,  and  I  could  scarcely  ever  hear  the  drone  of  the  cars 
there.   So  it  was  a  retreat  or  haven. 

When  the  time  came  to  go,  I  did  not  regret  leaving 
somehow.   I  don't  know  why.   Maybe  because  it  wasn't  the 
place  it  used  to  be.   The  artists,  after  spending  ten, 
twelve  years  on  the  [California  Arts]  Council,  stopped 
coming,  and  I  was  more  or  less  isolated  there,  without  much 
going  and  coming.   When  the  time  came  to  move,  I  didn't 
regret  it  much.   It's  just  that  I  was  a  little  leery  about 
paying  nearly  $1,400  a  month  for  rent.   But  it  was  a 
wonderful  space  upstairs  in  an  old  Masonic  lodge  on 
Arlington  in  Los  Angeles.   I  had  a  studio  and  a  gallery, 
which  I  made,  and  living  quarters  all  in  one  space.   Across 
the  hall  was  an  artist  who  occupied  the  whole  across-the- 
hall  space.   At  both  ends  were  also  studios  where  artists 
would  come  frequently.   So  all  in  all  there  were  six  of  us-- 
six  artists  there--and  we  began  to  establish  a  great 


160 


camaraderie  in  exchanging  ideas. 

MASON:   They  were  all  assemblagists? 

PURIFOY:   No,  no.   No,  we  were  all  doing  different  things, 

quite  different  things.   I  mentioned  Mary  Bonnie  because 

she  was  my  closest  neighbor,  right  across  the  hall.   She 

was  doing  exotic  things  with  an  oriental  motif.   You  know, 

kind  of  oriental-like  things. 

MASON:   Paintings  or  collages? 

PURIFOY:   Paint,  paint  on  wood.   I  just  mentioned  her  in 

passing  because  she  was  closest  and  we  spent  more  time 

together.   We  had  an  open  house,  and  I  sold  a  few  things, 

enough  to  pay  the  rent,  but  eventually  I  knew  I  would  have 

to  move.   My  first  alternative  was  a  loft  downtown  where  I 

could  get  space  for  half  the  rent,  but  even  at  $600  a  month 

it  was  still  expensive  for  me,  having  retired  and  all, 

drawing  Social  [Security]  income.   However,  business  begun 

to  pick  up  and  I  thought  I  could  make  it  if  I  hustled.   But 

upon  reflection,  I  am  not  a  hustler.   I  am  not  used  to 

hustling  my  work.   And  so,  as  a  result,  I  chose  to  move  to 

the  desert  with  my  friend  Debbie  Brewer. 

MASON:   Let's  talk  about  the  gallery  that  you  had  there. 

PURIFOY:   The  gallery  on  Arlington  at  the  old  Masonic 

lodge? 

MASON:   Yeah.   Did  you  have  a  name  for  it? 

PURIFOY:   Yes.   I  began  to  put  out  brochures,  and  I  had 


161 


some  cards  printed  up.   It  was  called  the  Gallery  at  the 
Old  Masonic  Lodge.   I  thought  that  was  quite  a  poetic  name 
for  it. 

The  open  house  was  an  exciting  evening.   There  was 
lots  of  food  and  all  my  friends  came.   Virtually  all  of  my 
friends  came,  meaning  nonartists  and  all.   And  open  house 
was  virtually  open  house.   The  Masonic  building--  All  the 
upstairs  floors  were  utilized  for  artists,  as  I  have 
aforestated,  and  everyone  had  his  door  open  that  day. 
There  were  a  lot  of  goings  and  comings  and  a  lot  of  oohs 
and  ahs.   I  was  the  only  one  who  sold  anything  that  day,  of 
course,  but  it  helped  toward  the  rent.   But  as  a  result  of 
the  open  house--for  which  we  sent  out  invitations  and  all-- 
there  were  a  lot  of  people  coming  back  from  time  to  time 
after  the  open  house.   And  my  friends  came  back,  too.   Many 
bought  stuff  that  they  couldn't  even  afford  to  buy. 
MASON:   How  much  were  you  selling  things  for? 
PURIFOY:   Well,  the  price  kind  of  went  up.   I  had  small 
things  for  as  little  as  $150 — well,  really  $90  to  my 
friends--but  other  things  went  up  to  $5,000,  for  one 
piece.   That  is,  a  triptych  set,  a  piece  called  Beige, 
Black,  and  Tan,  sold  for  $3,500,  a  three-panel  unit.   So  I 
had  a  good  day.   Now,  considering  that  I  hadn't  had 
anything  to  drink  or  smoke,  after  everybody  left,  I  broke 
out  a  quart  of  wine  and  I  got  myself  a  pack  of  cigarettes. 


162 


and  I  stayed  up  all  night.   It  was  lots  of  fun.   It's 
reexperiencing  the  art  world  after  having  been  away  for  so 
long. 

Now  that  I'm  in  the  desert,  it's  a  whole--  It's  quite 
a  different  life-style. 

MASON:   Can  we  talk  about  that?   We've  been  deferring  it 
all  day.   [laughter] 
PURIFOY:   Yeah. 
MASON:   So  finally. 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  quite  a  different  life-style.   My  friends 
were  quite  sympathetic  about  my  moving,  and  they  bought 
stuff  when  they  couldn't  even  afford  it.   I  had  enough 
money  finally  to  move  to  the  desert,  bring  all  my  stuff 
practically,  and  in  addition  money  to  build  a  studio.   So  I 
started  out  to  build  a  studio  almost  right  away.   By 
wintertime--  In  fact,  it  was  last  August  that  I  moved 
here.   I  think  a  year  ago  today  we  first  met,  you  and  I. 
On  August  1,  I  believe,  you  came.   So  I  moved  here  a  year 
ago  August  1 .   And  three  or  four  months  later  I  built  a 
studio.   It  was  all  finished,  as  finished  as  it  was  going 
to  be,  and  I  had  begun  to  try  to  start  work. 

I  wasn't  sure  I'd  like  the  desert.   I  made  visits  out 
here  from  time  to  time  to  see  my  friend  Debbie  and  to 
assist  her  with  her  new  house  and  all .   But  every  time  I 
came,  except  for  one  time  during  the  spring,  when  all  the 


163 


desert  was  blooming,  I  had  felt  forlorn  and  sad  for  some 
reason  or  other.   Because  of  the  vast  space  and  the  Joshua 
trees,  it  just  gives  the  impression  of  desolation  and  sheer 
poverty,  actually.   The  earth  is  poor.   It  won't  bring 
forth  green  stuff.   That's  what  I  miss  most  of  all  being 
here,  since  everything  is  brown  here  or  beige  or  purple,  as 
the  case  might  be.   But  having  lived  here  for  a  while, 
despite  the  severe  weather- -very  hot  in  the  summertime  and 
very  cold  in  the  wintertime--I ' ve  come  to  like  it. 

As  I  said  before,  I  look  up  less  often  in  antici- 
pation.  What  that  means  is  that  when  I  was  in  L.A.  as  an 
artist,  there  were  a  lot  of  comings  and  goings,  so  every 
little  noise  I'd  hear--  As  you  know,  most  artists  are 
extremely  sensitive  to  noise,  because  they  spend  quiet 
times  in  their  head.   All  the  time  it's  quiet  in  their 
heads,  and  the  least  drop  of  a  pin- type  noise  can  become 
extremely  disturbing  to  the  thought  process.   Here  in  the 
desert,  the  rabbits,  the  birds,  the  scorpions,  the  lizards 
all  run  quiet.   You  can  see  them  for  long  distances,  but 
you  can't  hear  them.   The  birds  squawk,  the  quails  squeak, 
the  buzzards  buzz,  or  whatever  they  do- -honk- -and  it's  a 
haven  for  wildlife,  because  I  live  six  miles  from  downtown 
Joshua  Tree,  the  only  town  this  side  of  Yucca  Valley, 
except  for  Twenty-nine  Palms.   To  go  to  the  store,  I  go  six 
miles,  give  or  take,  if  not  thirteen,  to  Yucca  Valley.   But 


164 


I  always  enjoy  the  trip,  because  it's  quiet  and  pleasant 
and  you  hardly  encounter  any  cars  on  the  road.   On  some 
roads  it's  so  infrequently  used  they  don't  even  have 
centerlines  or  markers.   I  have  learned  to  live  here,  and 
it's  rather  pleasant. 

MASON:   Of  course,  the  big  question,  the  obvious  question, 
is,  as  an  assemblagist,  how  do  you  adapt  to  the  desert? 
How  do  you  find  materials  to  work  with? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  it's  quite  different  here  when  it  comes  to 
finding  materials.   Everything  here  is  recycled.   They  have 
a  swap  meet  every  Saturday  and  Sunday  in  Yucca  Valley,  and 
you'd  be  amazed  at  the  stuff  that  is  exchanged  there, 
because  it's  stuff  that  people  in  Los  Angeles  throw  away. 
They  recycle  here,  resell,  because  everyone  is  in  a  state 
of  developing  something  here.   It's  a  pioneer  country, 
where  the  garbage--  You  take  it  to  the  garbage  dump 
yourself,  so  there's  no  garbage  day  as  such  where  you  go 
along  the  road  and  pick  up  stuff  people  throw  away. 
There's  no  such  thing  as  that.   At  the  garbage  dump,  you're 
not  allowed  to  rumble  through  the  trash  to  get  to  refurbish 
things  and  whatnot,  so  found  objects  are  hard  to  come  by 
here  unless  you  buy  it.   I  have  bought  most  of  the  objects 
that  I've  used  for  the  work  I've  done  so  far.   I'm  working 
on  a  piece  of-- 

I  have  two  and  a  half  acres  here,  incidentally,  that 


165 


I'm  living  on,  and  I  have  plans  to  develop  the  whole  two 
and  a  half  acres  into  a  large  art  piece.   I've  begun  to  do 
that  already,  just  kind  of  shaping  it  up.   But  now  I  have  a 
pretty  good  idea  of  what  two  and  a  half  acres  are.   It's 
big,  I  tell  you,  when  you're  thinking  about  spreading  it 
all  with  art.   I  already  have  a  f if teen-by- five- feet  piece 
of  sculpture  complete  on  one  end  of  the  lot. 
MASON:   What's  the  name  of  that? 

PURIFOY:   I  haven't  given  it  a  name  yet.   It  will  probably 
end  up  being  named  Tinker  Toy,  because  I  got  bells  that 
tinkle  all  the  time  in  the  wind.   I'm  not  sure.   But 
anyhow,  it's  a  Mondrianic-ef feet-type  thing  that  I  made, 
separate  pieces  of  sculpture  to  sit  inside  of.   It's  a 
walk-through,  kind  of  an  environment  thing,  like  I've 
enjoyed  doing,  for  the  most  part.   Flat  things  are  kind  of 
out  for  me  here.   However,  I  do  them  just  to  take  up  the 
time,  because  I  have  to  work  on  three  or  four  things  at 
once  in  order  to  make  anything  go. 

MASON:   Like  some  of  the  pieces  that  you  have  here  in  this 
living  room  are  pieces  that  you  just  did  to  take  up  time, 
or--? 

PURIFOY:   All  this  stuff  I  did  last  year  and  the  year 
before.   All  the  stuff  you  see  hanging  here  I  did  either  on 
Arlington  or  at  La  Brea.   The  new  stuff  is  all  out  in  the 
studio,  and  I've  only  got  two  pieces  out  there.   One's 


166 


finished.  It's  a  protest  piece,  incidentally.  The  Hanging 
Tree  it's  called.  I'll  show  it  to  you  when  we  go  back  out. 
MASON:   Okay.   Could  you  describe  it? 

PURIFOY:   The  Hanging  Tree?   Well,  it's  kind  of  a  pun,  like 
I  said  earlier.   If  it  had  a  second  title,  it  would  say, 
"He  was  merely  a  boy  and  guite  harmless,  and  he  was  also  a 
clown.   Can't  you  see  that?   Did  you  have  to  kill  him  after 
all?"   That  would  be  the  title  if  it  were  not  The  Hanging 
Tree.   So  the  description  of  what  I  just  said  was  that  it 
looks  like  a  figure--male  f igure--hanging  from  the  tree, 
but  he's  got  on  multicolored  pants,  multicolored  jacket, 
and  the  color  all  around  him  is  high  color.   It's  a 
delightful  piece  to  look  at.   If  you  didn't  know  that  that 
was  the  title,  it  would  be  guite  a  pleasant  hanging. 

That's  the  piece  that's  already  finished.   I'm  working 
on  another  piece  that  may  have  a  title  by  the  time  it's 
finished,  but  I  don't  know  what  it  will  be.   And  in 
addition  to  that--  See,  I  have  to  do  several  things  at 
once.   In  addition  to  that,  I'm  working  on  a  big  piece  of 
sculpture  eight  feet  tall  by  eight  feet  long,  different 
from  anything  I've  ever  done.   That's  that  white  piece  that 
I'm  working  on  with  the  curlicues  and  whatnot. 
MASON:   Could  you  describe  that,  the  material  and  how  it 
was  different  from  the  other  things. 
PURIFOY:   It's  a  combination  of  found  objects,  canvas. 


167 


paint,  and  wood.   I  found  an  old  bentwood  chair  on  the 
premises  when  I  first  came  here,  a  rattan- type  bentwood 
chair.   It  had  been  in  the  sun  for  years  on  end.   I'd  seen 
it  here.   It  occurred  to  me  that  that  could  be  a  piece  of 
sculpture.   So  I  stripped  it  down  and  started  using  pieces, 
and  it  began  to  formulate  this  shape.   I  can  hardly 
describe  it  because  it's  different  from  anything  I've  ever 
done  before.   It's  purely  organic,  with  shapes  moving  in 
and  out,  having  all  the  characteristics  of  a  piece  of 
sculpture,  and  yet  it  could  be  a  painting  as  well,  because 
it's  a  combination  of  canvas,  wood,  metal,  and  paint. 

I'm  nearly  finished  with  it,  or  half  finished  with  it, 
or  two-thirds  finished  with  it.   But  in  order  not  to  mess 
it  up--that  is,  overwork  it--I  have  to  be  doing  two  or 
three  other  things  at  the  same  time,  so  that  when  I  get  it 
to  a  certain  place  where  I'm  delighted  with  the  last  thing 
I  did,  I  have  to  let  it  set  for  a  day  or  two  and  sense 
whether  or  not  if  I  did  this  or  that  next  or  if  it  occurred 
to  me  to  do  thus  and  so  as  the  next  thing  to  do--  So 
invariably  it  will  strike  me  as  something  to  do,  but  if  I 
don't  let  that  something  that  strikes  me  to  do  gel,  it  will 
be  the  wrong  thing.   Therefore,  I'd  mess  it  up.   So  in 
order  to  safeguard  myself  from  messing  up  things,  which 
every  artist  is  capable  of  doing,  I  have  a  tendency  to  work 
on  several  other  pieces,  minor  pieces.   Nothing  fantastic. 


168 


just  a  minor  idea.   Not  a  major  idea.   It's  no  big 
masterpiece,  it's  just  a  minor  idea.   Two  or  three  of 
them. 

Now,  since  I  work  so  fast,  even  though  I  have  all  the 
time  in  the  world  out  here  in  the  desert,  I  also  do 
gardening  in  the  interim.   I  plant  cactus  and  desert 
plants.   I  have  built  awnings  around  the  place  to  create 
shade.   You  have  to  water  the  trees  and  whatnot.   So  I  stay 
busy  from  morning  till  night  here.   And  it's  a  rather 
pleasant  place  to  live  forever  at. 

MASON:   So  fundamentally,  I  guess,  how  would  you  say  your 
work  that  you've  done  here  is  different  from  the  flat  work 
that  you  have  hanging  in  your  living  room  that  you  said  was 
done  on  Arlington,  in  terms  of--?  Well,  you've  talked  a 
little  before  about  how  there's  a  kind  of  tension  in  your 
work  between  pieces  that  you  want  to  do  for  yourself  and 
pieces  that  you  want  to  do  for  a  market . 

PURIFOY:   Yeah,  I  did  mention  a  split  that  I  consciously 
designed,  so  to  speak,  or  implemented  or  acted  out,  as  the 
case  might  be.   Previously  when  I  was  doing  art,  I'd  have  a 
tendency  to  do  something  that  pleased  me  with  no  intention 
of  pleasing  the  public.   Then  I  would  do  something  that  I 
know  is  pleasing  to  the  public,  and  in  that  way  I  am  trying 
to  be  practical  in  that  I  know  that  this  piece  will  sell 
and  this  one  may  not. 


169 


MASON:   I'm  trying  to  understand  how  that  works  for  you. 
For  example,  here,  would  you  say  that  you  made  any  of  these 
pieces  to  sell,  or  were  they  all  works  that  you  wanted  to 
do? 

PURIFOY:   There  are  no  examples  here  of  what  I'm  talking 
about.   However,  the  piece  of  sculpture  outside,  the  large 
piece  that's  in  the  studio  that  I'm  working  on  now,  I  can't 
imagine  that  piece  in  somebody's  house.   So  that  kind  of 
piece  I  would  make  to  show.   Now,  those  little  pieces  that 
I'm  making  in  order  to  take  up  the  time  while  I'm  not  doing 
anything  else,  I  would  be  making  to  sell  if  I  were  in  a 
community  where  people  would  make  this  distinction. 
MASON:   So  it  has  to  do  with  scale,  then? 

PURIFOY:   No.   It  has  nothing  to  do  with  scale  so  much  as 
it  has  to  do  with  quality.   Whether  it  fits  over  Mrs. 
Jones ' s  mantelpiece  or  not  or  headboard  or  not  or  it  goes 
in  her  kitchen  or  not  or  in  her  hallway  or  not.   I  have  a 
sensing  (since  I'm  also  a  student  of  interior  design)  of 
what  Mrs.  Jones  wants.   So  maybe  that's  why  I  was 
successful  with  selling  things  my  last  stint  in  art, 
because  I  had  a  sensing  about  what  goes  in  the  house,  what 
goes  with  the  couch,  and  what  goes  in  the  dining  room,  etc. 
MASON:   Does  that  have  to  do  with  color  or--? 
PURIFOY:   Oftentimes  color,  yeah,  and  something  that's  more 
or  less  compromising,  I'd  say,  pleasant  to  look  at,  with  no 


170 


political  or  social  overtones  whatsoever.   [laughter]   The 
average  person  who  buys  stuff  doesn't  want  to  be  reminded 
of  the  problems  of  the  world  in  their  setting  at  home.   I 
can't  much  blame  them,  of  course.   Life  has  taught  me  the 
difference  between  the  kind  of  art  that  carries  a  social 
message  and  the  kind  that  doesn't.   In  fact,  I'd  prefer  to 
do  pure  design.   Pure  design  sells  better  than  protest,  for 
sure,  but  pure  design  often  doesn't  outsell  the  portrait  or 
picture  that  looks  like  somebody  I  know.   Having  been 
working  in  interiors  for  a  few  years,  I  have  a  keen  sense 
about  what  goes  with  a  house  and  what  does  not .   A 
collector  wouldn't  have  to  think  of  this,  however.   He 
wouldn't  have  to  think  about  the  color  of  his  sofa  and 
whatnot,  but  Mrs.  Jones  does,  who's  redoing  her  house  at 
$10,000  to  $100,000  a  throw.   If  she's  doing  her  living 
room  and  she  plans  to  spend  $50,000,  I  don't  think  she'd  go 
for  the  protest  piece  to  put  on  her  wall.   That's  the 
point.   So  as  a  consequence  of  my  knowledge  of  people's 
tastes,  I  developed  this  split  where  I  do  things  to  sell 
and  I  do  other  things  to  show,  if  that  answers  your 
question. 

MASON:   So  take  this  piece,  for  example.   What's  the  name 
of  this  piece  with  the  sun? 

PURIFOY:   That  has  no  name.   That's  untitled. 
MASON:   How  would  this  piece  be  different  from  something 


171 


that  you  would  make  to  sell? 

PURIFOY:   Well,  first,  this  is  a  big  piece.   This  piece  is 
eight  feet  by  four  feet,  and  the  couch  is  six  feet  long  and 
four  feet  deep.   I  mean,  three  feet  deep  or  twenty-six 
inches  deep,  etc.   So  this  wouldn't  go  with  the  couch--it 
would  extend  over  the  end.   And  Mrs.  Jones  does  not  want  a 
picture  to  extend  over  the  end  of  her  couch,  because  she 
wants  to  emphasize  the  couch,  not  the  picture.   So  that's 
eight  feet,  and  Mrs.  Jones  wouldn't  put  an  eight-foot  sofa 
on  one  wall.   She'd  turn  the  corner  with  it.   Pictures 
don't  turn  the  corner.   I'm  saying  this  with  tongue  in 
cheek.   [laughter]   And  Mrs.  Jones  may  have  an  eight-foot 
sofa,  too,  on  one  wall,  without  it  turning  the  corner, 
because  she  can  well  afford  it.   But  I  don't  think  she'd 
hang  this  picture  over  that  couch.   I  think  she'd  come 
closer  to  hanging  a  thinner  one  that-- 
MASON:   Maybe  like  this  one. 

PURIFOY:   Well,  it  could  be  eight  feet  long,  but  it  most 
certainly  wouldn't  be  four  feet  wide.   It  would  be  more 
spindly,  like  twenty-six  inches  by  seventy-two,  or  eighty- 
four  or  ninety-six.   Size  and  all  makes  a  difference. 
However,  people  are  more  inclined  to  buy  oil  paintings  on 
canvas  than  collages  or  assemblages.   You'd  have  to  have  a 
unique  house  to  buy  an  assemblage  in  the  first  place.   If 
Mrs.  Jones  is  so  inclined  to  put  one  in  her  house  because 


172 


she  wants  a  conversation  piece,  she  comes  to  me.   I  seldom 
use  canvas.   I  use  mostly  wood,  I  paint  on  wood.   I'm  just 
trying  to  describe  what's  most  likely  to  sell  in  this  day 
and  time  and  what  is  likely  not  to  sell  in  this  day  and 
time.   As  an  artist  I'm  well  aware  of  that,  and  I  paint 
with  it  in  mind.   No  matter  how  superficial  I  may  sound, 
that's  what  I  do,  because  survival  comes  first  and  survival 
transcends  superficiality  any  day. 

MASON:   All  right.   Is  there  anything  else  you  want  to  add? 
PURIFOY:   No.   I  think  we've  done  well. 


173 


INDEX 


"Aesthetic  Eye,  The,"  63, 

64 
Alabama  State  Teachers 

College,  9,  10-12 
Altoon,  John,  33 
American  Cement 

Corporation,  79 
Andrews,  Benny,  106 
Angelus  Furniture 

Warehouse,  35 
Anthony,  Frank,  76 
"Arts  and  the  Poor, "  71-74 
Atlanta  University,  17-19, 

27 

Barrel  and  Plow,  84-85,  118 
Beige,  Black,  and  Tan,  162 
Black  Emergency  Cultural 

Coalition,  118 
Black  Muslims,  68 
Bloom,  Katherine,  72 
Blum,  Irving,  35-36 
Bonnie,  Mary,  161 
Braque,  Georges,  76,  105 
Breath  of  Fresh  Air,  79-80 
Brewer,  Debbie,  59,  60,  75, 

88,  90-91,  161,  163 
Broadway  department  store 

(Los  Angeles),  36-37,  38 
Brockman  Gallery  ( Los 

Angeles),  47,  48-54,  113 
Brown,  Edmund  G.  "Jerry," 

Jr.,  127 
Burial  Ground,  119 

California  Afro-American 

Museum  (Los  Angeles),  20, 

81,  157 
California  Arts  Council, 

60,  100,  123,  127-36, 

139,  145,  160 
California  State 

University,  Los  Angeles, 

71 
Cannel  and  Schaffen 

Interior  Designs  ( Los 

Angeles),  33-34 


Casey,  Bernie,  106 
Central  City  Community 

Mental  Health  Facility 

(Los  Angeles),  97,  124- 

27,  138 
Chouinard,  Nelbert,  29,  30 
Chouinard  Art  Institute 

(Los  Angeles),  8,  29-33, 

36,  77 
Committee  to  Save  Simon 

Rodia ' s  Towers  in  Watts, 

38,  58,  60,  68 
Communicative  Arts  Academy 

(Compton,  California), 

138-39 
Company  Theater  (Beverly 

Hills,  California),  102-3 
"Contemporary  Black  Artists 

of  America, "  116 
Contemporary  Crafts  ( Los 

Angeles),  104,  113 
Coyote,  Peter,  127 
Cuyahoga  County  Department 

of  Social  Services,  27 

Davis,  Alonzo,  52,  99,  107, 

113-14 
Davis,  Dale,  99 
Doty,  Robert  M. ,  21 
Douglas  Aircraft  Company, 

33 
Drinkwater,  Harry,  41 
Duchamp,  Marcel,  78,  84 

Echelman,  Eve,  38,  58-59, 

60,  61 
Extreme  Object  D-E-D,  52 

Father  Divine,  25,  110 
Ferus  Gallery  ( Los 

Angeles),  35,  44 
Freud,  Sigmund,  20,  111, 

112,  121 

Gallery  at  the  Old  Masonic 
Lodge  (Los  Angeles),  161- 
62 


174 


Gallery  of  Modern  Art 
(Washington,  D.C.),  89, 
146 

Gallery  32  (Los  Angeles), 
113 

Getty,  J.  Paul,  Trust,  136 

Hammond,  David,  118,  119 
Hanging  Tree,  The,  167 
Heidegger,  Martin,  19,  22 
Hopps,  Walter,  89 
Husserl,  Edmund,  19,  22 

Immaculate  Heart  College, 

93,  123 
Improv  Theater  ( Los 

Angeles),  102-3 
Irwin,  Robert,  33 

Jackson,  Suzanne,  113,  115, 

118 
James,  William,  22 
Jaquette,  Tommy,  114,  143 
Joined  for  the  Arts,  74-75, 

79 
Jung,  Carl,  21-22,  37,  112 
Junk  magazine,  79,  80-81, 

88-89 

Karamu  House  (Cleveland), 

99-100,  140,  142 
Kent,  Steve,  101-2,  147 
Kienholz,  Edward,  44-45, 

46,  47,  48 
King,  Martin  Luther,  Jr., 

23-24 
Krasne,  Lucille,  59,  60, 

138 

Lewis,  Samella,  104,  106, 

113,  116 
Los  Angeles  Unified  School 

District  Board  of 

Education,  100 
Los  Angeles  County 

Hospital,  28-29 
Los  Angeles  County  Museum 

of  Art,  21,  44,  116 

Malcolm  X,  118,  119 


Mann,  David,  85 

Markham  Junior  High  School 

(Los  Angeles),  70,  75,  82 
Max  Untitled,  83 
McCone,  John  A.,  68 
Museum  of  African  American 

Art  (Los  Angeles),  104 

National  Endowment  for  the 

Arts,  64-65,  71 
National  Youth 

Administration,  11 
Neufeldt,  Max,  75,  84,  97 
Nevelson,  Louise,  46 
Niggers  Ain't  Never  Ever 

Gonna  Be  Nothin'--All 

They  Want  To  Do  Is  Drink 

->-  Fuck,  47-54,  113 
"19  Sixties:  A  Cultural 

Awakening  Re-evaluated, 

1965-1975,"  20,  21 
Noriega,  Ann,  149,  158 

Outterbridge,  John,  59,  99, 
106,  143,  144,  158 

Pajaud,  William,  29 
"Panorama  of  Black  Artists, 

A,"  116 
Peck,  Gregory,  82 
Peterson,  Susan,  30,  31, 

32-33 
Phoenix,  83 

Picasso,  Pablo,  76,  105 
Powell,  Judson,  58,  60,  61, 

62,  74,  82,  83,  85,  88, 

91,  138-39,  143 
Purifoy,  Clarence 

(brother),  5,  7-8 
Purifoy,  Esther  (sister), 

3-4 
Purifoy,  George  (father), 

1-2,  5-6 
Purifoy,  Georgia  Mims 

(mother),  1-8,  17-18 
Purifoy,  Mary  (sister),  3 
Purifoy,  Ophelia  (sister), 

11 
Purifoy,  Rose  (sister),  3 


175 


Rainey,  Ma,  7 
Robinson,  Dorsey,  159 
Rockefeller  Foundation,  136 
Rodia,  Simon,  61 

Saar,  Betye,  106 
Sartre,  Jean-Paul,  22 
Saturensky,  Ruth,  84,  97 
Saulter,  Leon,  76 
Secunda,  Arthur,  75,  83,  97 
Silverman,  Ronald  H.,  63, 

64-65,  71 
Sink,  The,  85-86,  88 
Sir  Watts,  80-81 
Six  Birds,  20,  21 
"66  Signs  of  Neon,"  43,  68, 

74,  75,  79,  82,  90-91, 

92-93,  96,  101,  103,  104, 

116,  138,  146,  159 
Smith,  Bessie,  7 
Smith,  Eloise,  94-95,  127 
Smith,  John,  36,  56 
Smith,  Page,  94-95,  127 
Snyder,  Gary,  127-28 
Student  Nonviolent 

Coordinating  Committee, 

68 
Studio  Watts,  142 
Sudden  Encounter,  84 

Tann,  Curtis,  100,  115 
Tar  and  Feathers,  117,  119 
Testie,  Lillian,  91 
Thompson,  Beatrice,  112 
Tinker  Toy,  166 

United  States  Navy,  13-15, 

17 
United  States  Office  of 

Information,  46,  81 
University  of  California, 

Berkeley,  90 
University  of  California, 

Davis,  93 
University  of  California, 

Los  Angeles,  93,  94,  101 
University  of  California, 

Santa  Cruz,  93-96,  109, 

112,  123,  127,  159 


Voulkos,  Peter,  30-31 

Wagner,  Gordon,  75,  76,  97 
Washington,  Booker  T. ,  9 
Watts,  115,  139,  145,  147 
Watts  riots,  64-68,  92,  96, 

115,  145 
Watts  Summer  Festival,  74, 

98-101,  114-16,  142 
Watts  Towers,  58,  60 
Watts  Towers  Arts  Center, 

59-64,  65-66,  69-71,  87, 

95,  102,  113,  138,  141, 

143 
Watts  Towers  Committee,  38, 

58,  60,  68 
Watts  Towers  Music  and  Arts 

Festival,  143 
Weddolf,  Joyce,  103 
Welch,  Sue,  58,  61,  62,  74, 

138 
Westminster  Neighborhood 

Association,  140,  141, 

142 
Whitney  Museum  of  American 

Art,  21,  116 
Will  Rogers  State  Historic 

Park  (Los  Angeles),  115, 

143,  144 
Wilson,  William,  52-53 
Woodruff,  Hale,  17 
Works  Progress 

Administration,  5-6 
World  Black  and  African 

Festival  of  Arts  and 

Culture  (FESTAC),  148-56, 

158 


176 


