Veteran: Officers and stuff from Fort Hood to come. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: [OVERLAPPING] And, um, and a new commander, uh, at Fort Hood. He was a three star general. He, uh, gave me one of his coins. [TECH TALK]

Veteran: They [UNINTEL PHRASE] come in and out, uh, savor those and have a meal. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: So JC, I'll be the one asking you questions.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: Um, you can just look at me while we do the interview.

Veteran: All right. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: Uh, JC, to start off, could you just introduce yourself and, um, let us know how old you are?

Veteran: My name's JC Alston and I'm 93 years old.

Interviewer: Uh, how old were you, um, at Pearl Harbor?

Veteran: Eight--18.

Interviewer: Do you think you could, uh, introduce yourself again and say that you're 18 at Pearl Harbor?

Veteran: Okay. My name's JC Alston and I was 18 in Pearl Harbor, December 7th, 1941.

Interviewer: Um, could you introduce yourself again and, and just let us know what ship you served on, and, uh, uh, what your role was on that ship?

Veteran: Uh, I was on the USS--oh, JC Alston, uh--

Interviewer: JC, if you don't mind, when you answer, if you, uh, could, uh, just try to look at me?

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: Uh, that'd be great. Uh, so yeah, let me know your, your first and last name and the ship that you served on.

Veteran: JC Alston, served on the USS California. I was in the deck section. There were--we, uh, took care of the big guns. I was the number two turret with the guys in the second division.

Interviewer: Uh, what year did you enlist in the Navy and what year were you discharged?

Veteran: I, uh, went in in 1941 in August, and I was discharged 1945 in October.

Interviewer: Um, and your birthdate is March 3rd, 1923, is that correct?

Veteran: No, May the 3rd.

Interviewer: Oh, May the 3rd.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Uh, May 3rd, 1923 is JC's birthday.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Uh, what rank were you when you, uh, were discharged? [TECH TALK]

Veteran: Second Class. Petty Officer.

Interviewer: Okay. [TECH TALK]

Veteran: Um, so tell me about enlisting in the Navy? What, what prompted you to sign up?

Interviewer: Well, I thought it was like, see, we--they had already started the 36th Division at [UNINTEL]. And I thought about going out there, and I said, "No, I don't know about that walking. I better ride." But you know what I said, uh, after Pearl Harbor was happening? I said, "I may have got in the wrong thing." [LAUGHS]

Veteran: What do you mean by that, uh, walking versus riding?

Interviewer: Ride--

Veteran: What--who walked and who, who got to ride?

Interviewer: Well, the Army walks, we ride on the ship.

Veteran: So you figured the Navy might be a, a, a better life?

Interviewer: Yeah. They paid a little more.

Veteran: And tell me about going out to that recruiting station, uh, that day. Uh, tell me that story, if you could?

Interviewer: Well, we went up there and went in and asked about signing up to join the Navy.

Veteran: How did you, uh--tell me how you got there.

Interviewer: Hitchhiking.

Veteran: And you, um, and you were in high school at the time, right?

Interviewer: No, I'd just got out.

Veteran: Okay, so you graduated high school or you dropped out of high school?

Interviewer: I dropped out.

Veteran: Um, so maybe if you could tell me, "Hey, I--you know, I, I dropped out of high school, wanted to join the Navy. So me and a couple of buddies hitchhiked over to the recruiting station."

Interviewer: Uh, through--me and two of my buddies hitchhiked to the recruiting station to join the Navy.

Veteran: What was going on, uh, in, in the world at that time?

Interviewer: Well, there was a lot of unemployment. It was pretty hard times. I worked for a little while, delivering, you know, delivering for a drug store, you know? Back then, they delivered to the house, prescriptions, medicines itself. But they didn't pay much. [LAUGHS]

Veteran: So you were joining up more, more to have a job?

Interviewer: Right.

Veteran: Tell me a bit about that. Why was it important to have a, a job at that time?

Interviewer: Well, you had to make a living.

Veteran: The Depression was, was still going on?

Interviewer: Yeah. Yeah, we were farmers out [UNINTEL], 1934. We didn't even make good tumbleweeds. That's the year that the [UNINTEL] killed a lot of cattles, because they couldn't go back and feed them. They took their young heifers and took them up north, so they could use them for re--for people to re-stocking their [UNINTEL], when the things got better. But they killed all the others. And they ate either buried [UNINTEL] them.

Veteran: I hear people talk about the, the dust bowl. What, what's the dust bowl, for, for those of us who, who don't know about that?

Interviewer: Well, the dust bowl was mostly up in Oklahoma. I don't know too much about the dust bowl. Of course, uh, we had a lot of wind and sand here, well, out in west Texas. Uh, when them sand [UNINTEL] start rolling, uh, if we're walking to and from school, we live three and a half miles from school, uh, we stayed between the fences. You get out there and you get turned around, you get lost.

Veteran: Was it exciting, to be joining the Navy? I mean, what was kinda going through your head, as an, as an 18 year old?

Interviewer: Well, I'd always kinda looked at the Navy as, if I was going to go in service, I believe that's where I'd go. You know? And then, when the time comes, I did go.

Veteran: What did you think that you would like about it? What was attractive to you about the Navy, when you were a young man?

Interviewer: Oh, why don't you know? The sailors had a girl in every port. You--didn't you ever hear that? [LAUGHS] But the--

Veteran: So you--I'm sorry--you're, you're about to, you're about to continue?

Interviewer: But that's not true. [LAUGHS]

Veteran: It's not? 14:#5:53:24

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: You didn't have a girl in every port?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: So you're in the Navy. When do you hear that you're going to be headed to Hawaii?

Interviewer: Well, I'd never been to Hawaii, and it's--really never heard of it, until I made that trip. That was my first, uh, voyage at sea, was going to Pearl for the long range [UNINTEL].

Veteran: Had you heard people talking about Hawaii, what kind of place it was? I mean, was there any kinda--anything in your head about what to expect there?

Interviewer: No, I had no idea. All I know, it was just all out in the middle of the ocean.

Veteran: What happened when you arrived there? What was it like?

Interviewer: It was kinda nice. The people were friendly. Of course, they had so much military--Army, Navy and Air Force and stuff, to [UNINTEL] running over one another. We were, you know, going ashore.

Veteran: It must've looked pretty different, um, than from what you're used to in Texas, huh?

Interviewer: Oh yeah.

Veteran: How was it different?

Interviewer: [UNINTEL], it rained nearly every day something. On, uh, [UNINTEL], that's where they--all the [UNINTEL] of water to drink and everything. It averaged 105 inches a year, the rain.

Veteran: What was the Hawaiian culture like? That was a bit different, too, right?

Interviewer: Right.

Veteran: Tell me how it was different.

Interviewer: Well, the food was different. And the--there were not many people, you know, to go out with, because too many service people. But we--you'd go to the Y, there wasn't much, uh--it was kinda, uh, cheap to--well, that's not--what we could afford to go stay in, to see the old [ONKAWANA?], and the--

Veteran: I'm going to pause one second. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: So we were talking about Hawaii. What, what did guys do for fun on Hawaii?

Veteran: Ah, some of them played ball. Uh, some boxed, swim, picture show, uh, that's about it.

Interviewer: What'd you like to do for fun? Did you like to go to the beach or the pictures or what?

Veteran: I, uh--the show.

Interviewer: What about, uh, Waikiki Beach? Did you ever go there?

Veteran: Oh yeah.

Interviewer: Tell me about being on Waikiki Beach?

Veteran: Well, it was a nice beach. And, uh, there'd be a few girls out there sun tanning. Uh, the old--now I can't think of the name of it now--hotel there that's Waikiki--

Interviewer: The Royal Hawaiian?

Veteran: The Royal Hawaiian.

Interviewer: Tell me about the Royal Hawaiian. What was that like?

Veteran: Well, the guy had flamingos that owned it. They got some kind of disease. He had to get rid of them. He painted everything pink, all the linen was pink, everything pink in the hotel. So if you're seeing the pink, you knew where it come from without asking.

Interviewer: Why did he, why did he paint it pink, again?

Veteran: Well, he had to [UNINTEL] way with his flamingos. You know, they're pink. Little--he had some and they got a disease and he had to get rid of them. Now I don't know if that's a true story. That's--was told always the same.

Interviewer: Uh, did you enjoy Hawaii, when you were based there?

Veteran: Well, yeah, I enjoyed it. I didn't go tan much. But I didn't have a chance. Some had duty, and, uh, and others was [UNINTEL].

Interviewer: Uh, what was work like on, on the ship? What did you have to do during the day?

Veteran: Well, uh, during the day? Well, we cleaned up. We swept. [UNINTEL] office. The speaker [UNINTEL]. We cleaned and sweep down four decks, doing it from the quarter deck, [UNINTEL]. And that's what we did. We had, uh--they--some kind of wood, I don't know, I think it was--it wouldn't rot. Cypress or something. The deck, the wooden deck, before the war. They took that off after the war started, the wooden deck. And we called [UNINTEL] the holy stone, and that's keep it, rub it down with quartz sand, with a half a brick. Make sure that it didn't have any spli--splinters in it, where you know, somebody, up there barefooted or something, get a splinter just--not only that, but it kept the deck kinda white.

Interviewer: Was there any kinda sense of danger about the place?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Why not?

Veteran: Well, we figured we'd take it [OURSELVES?], you know? And battle and of course, at that time, uh, the war wasn't going on over in the Pacific. So, we didn't have to worry about it, just like when we'd come in on Thursday, the last time, they'd, uh, tie up to the [UNINTEL] and the ones that was eligible to go ashore could go. The duty section had to stay aboard and do the work, keep things going there.

Interviewer: Did you hear at all about what was happening in Europe in the war?

Veteran: Well, yeah.

Interviewer: What kind of things did you hear?

Veteran: Germany taking over those countries over there. You know, you get that on the radio--Poland and all them little countries they was taking over.

Interviewer: What did you think when you heard about that, about what Germany was doing?

Veteran: I didn't think too much about it myself. I didn't know if we'd ever be in a war or not. Uh, so I didn't worry about it. It didn't bother me.

Interviewer: What about you--did you ever hear, uh, about what Japan was doing?

Veteran: Uh, well, [UNINTEL] strap-on they could get that we had, so they could run their equipment into the machinery, all metal.

Interviewer: What kind of things did you hear about Japan?

Veteran: I didn't hear much about Japan. They didn't say much.

Interviewer: Well, is a fight with Japan something that you thought about?

Veteran: You mean after the attack at Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: No, before.

Veteran: Before. Well, they had the liberty to come within so, so close to the--where [UNINTEL] or Pearl Harbor, you know? It was international waters. And, uh, uh, but I've never seen [UNINTEL] ship until December the 7th.

Interviewer: Did you think at all in the back of your head that you might have to fight Japan?

Veteran: Well, yeah, that was--because we had a [UNINTEL] ship--people on the ship that'd be in the Asiatic fleet up close to Japan.

Interviewer: And what did they tell you? Why did you think there might be a fight with Japan?

Veteran: Well, they said it--Japan was getting too big for their britches. They wanted to expand, but I didn't think anything about it.

Interviewer: What would that mean for the United States?

Veteran: Well, it meant that, uh, we were going to have to fight the Japanese once they cut off our oil to Japan. That's when they got busy. Before then, you know, we were letting them have some oil and letting it--the war machines or and cut that off. And the guy in Washington, two of them, Japanese, you know, it was on Sunday and they were supposed to tell it before they struck at Pearl Harbor, but they didn't. The guy wasn't there that they needed to talk to. And they struck before they could declare war on us.

Interviewer: What, what were they supposed to tell and who were they supposed to tell it to?

Veteran: The state--I guess the State Department.

Interviewer: Did Japan worry you at all as an enemy? Did, did you think it would be tough to fight them?

Veteran: I had no idea how tough it would be, because I didn't know anything about the Japanese. I know they was, you know, taking over the Port of China, but that's about all I knew about the Japanese at that time.

Interviewer: Was it something that worried you or kept, kept you up at night?

Veteran: No, no. It didn't keep me up at night. No.

Interviewer: Tell me about December the 6. Um, what, what kind of day was that? What day of the week was that, first of all?

Veteran: It was on Saturday--Sunday was the 7th.

Interviewer: What, what day was--

Veteran: The 6th was Saturday. We were in the [UNINTEL] section.

Interviewer: I'm sorry. Could you just re-state that, that--exactly what you said? Could you just re-state that again for me?

Veteran: December the 6th was on Saturday. When a lot was on the [UNINTEL] section. And I had to stay aboard and do duties and watch, well, and the afternoon, four to 12, it was, uh, four to eight, I'm sorry. Four to eight, I was on watch. And I watched the carrier [UNINTEL] pull out about sundown. And they were taking some planes somewhere, but I had no idea where. And then, uh, the next morning, I had the four to eight watch, where the old [UNINTEL] that make long patrols, they usually leave at seven o'clock in the morning, but the water was so slick that the pontoons drew enough suction that you couldn't get off of the water. 14:48:40 They, uh, they setup PT boat out there, and they made a few runs, rough the water, and he got off about eight a.m., uh, 20 minutes to eight, when he got off. Well, I was fixing to get relieved to go eat breakfast when it all started. They hit the ships behind us, first. And I heard the [UNINTEL] blow up, but I didn't know what it was at the time because it made some noise. They had, uh, armor piercing, and they went down through the tour down in the magazines, where all that powder was. And it blew up. The Tennessee was lucky. They had [UNINTEL] to go down there, but it didn't go off. It would've blew up.

Interviewer: Tell me about the evening of, uh, December 6. Uh, where were you? And, and what did you do?

Veteran: Well, I was on watch, and the watch was on the quarter deck. Okay, any time the officer--they wanted somebody or some visitors coming to see somebody, I'd go get them, for [UNINTEL PHRASE]. And then, I'd wake up the relieving watch for the [AOD?] and others. They had [UNINTEL] made them watch, too. Most of them [UNINTEL], and, uh, most of the day.

Interviewer: Tell me about waking up the, the next day. What, what was the date and the day of the week it, it, it was?

Veteran: Saturday December the 6th.

Interviewer: Um, the, the next day, though?

Veteran: Oh, the next day? Well, I woke up because I had to go on watch at four o'clock.

Interviewer: Could you just tell me, um, uh, that it was December 7th, and that it was a Sunday?

Veteran: Yeah. The--it was December the 7th, and it was Sunday. I went--was woken up--you wake them up 30 minutes early, so they dressed and everything, presentable to go and watch. And I was on watch, out on the quarter deck doing the same thing. And, uh, I had to wait--well, reveille, got them up, because we had the reveille at--so to wake up all the--everybody.

Interviewer: What time was revei--reveille?

Veteran: 7:30. On Sunday, they--it was later. Usually, we would get up at seven.

Interviewer: Could you just tell us what reveille is and what time they were going to do it on Sunday?

Veteran: Well, reveille is--they're blowing the bugle over the PA system. It reaches all the--all compartments all through the ship. Now the one going like, what [UNINTEL] midnight watch, he could sleep in, what they call the sleep-in. He could sleep an hour later. He don't have to get up.

Interviewer: Did it feel like a, a typical Sunday morning?

Veteran: A typical Sunday morning.

Interviewer: What was typical about it?

Veteran: Well, just all the routine things went on.

Interviewer: How did you first know that maybe things weren't as normal as they should be?

Veteran: When everything started happening, torpedoes flying and bombs and strafing. Of course, I still didn't know who it was because some--somebody, you know, was [UNINTEL PHRASE]. So [UNINTEL] that sun rises [UNINTEL] it was. I didn't--so I was told it was.

Interviewer: Who did you think might be attacking?

Veteran: Well, first I thought maybe it was practice, you know? But till they started, everything started blowing up, we thought all them planes coming in, you know, it'd be like a, a drill. But it was no drill. They say, uh, "General quarters," everybody went to their general quarter stations.

Interviewer: Did you think that it might be another country, other than Japan that was attacking Pearl Harbor? ALSTON: Well, I didn't really know.

Veteran: What did you do when you realized what was happening?

Interviewer: Well, I went to my battle stations. I stayed [UNINTEL] and said, "Abandon ship." And it was sinking, so we had to swim a little [PIECE?], you know, [UNINTEL PHRASE]. And I [UNINTEL] from the ship. It started burning and it was two tugs pushing on it to keep it from rolling over. They finally got the anchor chain around the [UNINTEL] and it sunk straight upright.

Veteran: How much time, uh, went by from when they called general quarters to abandon ship?

Interviewer: Oh, that'd be hard to say, but I'd say not more than 20 minutes, because as soon as they hit us--see, every fourth Saturday, the admirals inspection would come around and they'd check the [VOIDS?] on them. That's, uh, on the outside, it's hollow inside. And then, it's the main part of the ship. Well, we had to void covers off. So, uh, you know, it sank like a can with, uh, somebody cut the ra--uh, top out of it, like that. Well, I'm sure they knew all about that, too. That's why they rolled over so quick, [UNINTEL - OVERLAPPING VOICES]--

Veteran: So on, on Sunday December the 7th, around 7:55, the attack starts.

Interviewer: Right.

Veteran: The U.S.S. California on battleship row is hit with a few different torpedoes, and even a bomb, very quickly. And then, within 20 minutes, so about 8:25 or so, even earlier than that, there's a call to abandon ship.

Interviewer: Right.

Veteran: Do you think you could sort of say that all back to me in, in one piece? I mean, it, it's sort of, uh, amazing that the California was, was hit that quickly.

Interviewer: Well, they had 350 planes. [LAUGHS] Uh, the California was hit with two torpedoes and one bomb. Uh, I think maybe the third provided--hit the rudder, it didn't pe--penetrate the hull. And it started sinking and burned from the oil, and we abandoned ship with the--in about 25 minutes of the time it got hit. And the tugs pushing on it, and they got the anchor [UNINTEL] around the quay. It sank upright. Now the Oklahoma, it rolled over. They didn't--they were on the outside of another ship, and I think it was a--well, and after the [UNINTEL], they was tied up there outside the Maryland. So they just had tied up, of course, and when they started to roll, and it broke the cables and the sides of the other ship with. And it just rolled over. They are--cut a hole in the bottom of it and got a lot of sailors out. I don't know how many. I don't know how many they lost.

Veteran: Tell me about those first torpedoes hitting? What, what was that like? Do you remember the sound that they made and, and the feeling of that?

Interviewer: Yeah, ship to ship, when it's hit--blowed up.

Veteran: Where were you when they hit?

Interviewer: I was at the battle station, number two turret, [FORWARD?].

Veteran: What went through your head when you heard the call to abandon ship? I mean, that's a pretty unbelievable thing.

Interviewer: Well, I just got ready and left. I went over there and got on $4. That's what we were ordered to do.

Veteran: What was going on around you? I mean, men must've been in, in a panic.

Interviewer: Well, they were. Yeah.

Veteran: Tell me about what was happening.

Interviewer: Well, people were running this way and that way. Uh, you know, not only did they have a system. If you're going forward, you go up, forward. If you're going aft, you go down and aft. So that--all the confusion, people itself is going different directions, but they were getting to where they could abandon ship. And that was mostly the quarter deck, because it was the lowest, it was the closest to the Fort Allen and they didn't have that far to swim. They just jump off and out and went onto Fort Allen.

Veteran: You must've been in, uh, maybe some kinda--

Interviewer: Shock.

Veteran: Yeah, tell me about that.

Interviewer: Well, it was shock to me. And I'm sure it was to a lot of them. Not only the sailors, the [UNINTEL], too, you know, the guys--they were on the shore, most all of those. The admirals with, with the battle [GROUPS?] and stuff. I don't know if any admiral was on board or not during the attack. Now there was some captains aboard. I don't think our captain was aboard, but the West Virginia, when that bomb hit the Tennessee, what [UNINTEL] captain up on the bridge.

Veteran: I mean, you can--can't hardly believe it. I mean, here's the mighty California on a, on a regular Sunday morning, without much of a, a care in the world. And suddenly, there, there's a, an attack from Japan. And within 20 minutes, there, there's a call to abandon ship. What was kinda going through your head, as you know, as you made this realization?

Interviewer: Well, as I made the realizations, I was trying to get to the destination because the ship was sinking to get off of it so I wouldn't sink with it.

Veteran: How did you make your escape? Tell us about that.

Interviewer: Well, you go over the side, jump in the water. The quarter deck is not to far to the water or from the quarter deck. From the bow, it'd be quite a, quite a ways. But the quarter deck is not too, too far from the water, to jump in the water, made it to Fort Allen.

Veteran: Bring us back to being on top of the, the quarter deck, just sort of describe what you were seeing and what was going through your head before you jump.

Interviewer: Well, I just followed with the rest of them, all jumping over the side, heading for Fort Allen. That's what we was ordered to do, to reach the--oh, we had orders.

Veteran: Do you remember jumping off?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Tell me about that.

Interviewer: Well, the oil, oil was on the water, it wasn't a pretty site, but you didn't have no choice. You either go down with the ship or you jump in the water and go to Fort Allen. It was ordered.

Veteran: Were you scared? Were you, uh--was it just sort of adrenaline? Were you just kind of, um, you know, uh--

Interviewer: Sure, I was scared. Anybody who said they wasn't scared, something's wrong with them. [LAUGHS]

Veteran: I would be terrified, god. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: If a guy who lived--if a guy dealt with that and said he wasn't scared, what would, what would your response be to him?

Veteran: Well, I'd say he didn't--maybe he didn't realize he was as scared as he was. And you know, it'd bound to be a little bit scared, yeah. So I'd say that he didn't realize he was as scared as he was at the time, maybe.

Interviewer: Were you scared?

Veteran: Sure, I was. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: Um, so tell me about hit--hitting the water and what happened after you hit the water?

Veteran: Well, I hit the water, uh, swam over to Fort Allen. [UNINTEL] wall got kinda greasy.

Interviewer: What wall is this?

Veteran: The old oil that the ship burned. It's the last thing from crude oil, you have to heat it to pump it, and they burned it, make steam to run the ship. And that's why they can't raise the Arizona. They can't heat that old oil. They can't raise it.

Interviewer: Had the oil caught fire?

Veteran: Yeah. And tug was pushing on the, on the sides, kept keeping up, upright, and then, when they got that--and then, there was a smaller one, they got it--[UNINTEL] and got it round the quay and made it just sink upright.

Interviewer: Tell me about the flames that you were seeing, once you hit the water?

Veteran: It was up forward at the front of the ship.

Interviewer: Could you describe it to me?

Veteran: Well, it just started burning [UNINTEL] down the--one's down below that got hit before we did. And they're burning good back there. The whole smoke was just rolling out.

Interviewer: How tall were the flames?

Veteran: Oh, 12, 14 foot high.

Interviewer: Um, could you say, uh, could you say that again, but could you use, um, fire in your, in your answer?

Veteran: At about, uh, 12, 14 foot high, the flames, from that old oil that was burning and stuff, from the ship that--whenever they--the torpedo hit, [UNINTEL] and it blew up. That released the old oil. That's what they carried, the [UNINTEL]. So--

Interviewer: Were you scared that you would, that you would burn to death?

Veteran: Well, that's a possibility. Yeah. But I didn't think too much about that. I was thinking about getting off the ship.

Interviewer: Once your--you were in the water, what did you do?

Veteran: Swam to Fort Allen.

Interviewer: Were you a good swimmer?

Veteran: Not a--not the best swimmer, no. I was raised out in west Texas. You know, we didn't have a lot of places to go swimming like we do down here. [LAUGHS]

Interviewer: Was there fire? Uh, describe to me what was in the water when you were swimming?

Veteran: Well, there was fire [UNINTEL] on the ship. And it was working its way around slowly. And, uh, of course, that tug was fighting the fire. They used water from the bay, you know, a pump, used salt water for--to [UNINTEL] those fires with, and the--so--

Interviewer: Was there debris and, and shrapnel and things like that in the water, too?

Veteran: Well, they were, but I didn't see it.

Interviewer: Was there other men, uh, you know, thrashing around, swimming for their lives?

Veteran: Well, I didn't see any.

Interviewer: Did you have a sort of, uh, tunnel vision at that--at the time, is that how you put it?

Veteran: Having television?

Interviewer: Uh, tunnel vision.

Veteran: Oh, tunnel vision.

Interviewer: Were you just so focused on [UNINTEL]--

Veteran: [OVERLAPPING] Yeah, I was focused on getting to Fort Allen. That's what I was focused on.

Interviewer: Do you think, um--could you say that again for me? I was talking over you, about having, uh, tunnel vision and just being focused on a, a set--

Veteran: Well, I had tunnel vision and I was focused on going to, uh, Fort Allen. People around me, I didn't pay much attention to because they were doing the same thing.

Interviewer: What about the, the Japanese, uh, fighters, the, the zeros? Did you see them overhead?

Veteran: Yes, I did, after I got over at Fort Allen. I sure did. They had the rising sun painted on them.

Interviewer: Could you tell me a bit more about seeing, seeing the planes?

Veteran: Well, yeah. They were strafing, and of course, they were bombing, and they come in so low that they really had to give it all they had to get over the mast of the ship, that they were targeted, backing up torpedo flames, close to the water. They drop it too high by the boat or up--then that don't do any good. But, uh, they really had to put it up and, uh, standing on Fort Allen, you could see that Japanese grinning with gold teeth, in the cockpit one of them, they was that close.

Interviewer: You saw a pilot smiling?

Veteran: Yeah, one of them Japanese.

Interviewer: It was that close, that you could see?

Veteran: I could see him smiling, and he had some gold teeth and, uh, [UNINTEL]--

Interviewer: Gold teeth, huh?

Veteran: Yeah. [LAUGHS]

Interviewer: What went through your head, when you saw that the, the Japanese pilot was smiling with the gold teeth?

Veteran: Well, I thought--well, it's going to take a while, but, uh, we might remove them gold teeth from that smile. And we did. We went--the oil would last quite a bit longer if they'd have come back the third time and blown up the [UNINTEL] docks full of fuel tanks we had up there and stuff like that, because we'd have had to bring all the ships that needed repairing back to the station to repair them. And they didn't have no floating dry docks big enough to [UNINTEL] them ships. Before the end of the war, they had some, back when we went to New Zealand, to that little island to get repaired. They had a floating dry dock that we could get in, that could lift us up out of the water.

Interviewer: You had mentioned to me, um, that all the planes, it looked like a, a bunch of bees buzzing around.

Veteran: Yeah. Uh, it--I don't have a [UNINTEL] one another [UNINTEL], really.

Interviewer: Do you think you could say that for me now, with, with the cameras rolling, about what it looked like?

Veteran: Well, there, there were--the planes were so thick, it looked like they would fly into one another, even. They were that thick.

Interviewer: Like a bunch of bees or something buzzing around?

Veteran: Yeah. Yeah, a bunch of bees buzzing around.

Interviewer: Um, um, repeat and looking at me. Do you, um--could you tell me how they looked like bees again, but, uh, if you could just look at me when you say it, that'd be great?

Veteran: Oh okay. Yeah, uh, there were so many of them coming in there, it was just like a bunch of bees, you'd think that they would fly into one another, but, uh, maybe they did, uh, but I didn't see them, if they did.

Interviewer: What happened when you got to Fort Allen? Were you relieved? Were you--you were just trying to think?

Veteran: Yeah, I was relieved, and of course, they mustered everybody to see who may still be in the ship, you know? But then, after the report of missing in action, well, I was slow about getting out there and they were--reported me missing in action. But they took it off, at--in a little bit, after I got out there. They'd seen I was one of the bunch, bunch that got on Fort Allen. They took me off of that list.

Interviewer: How many guys on the California didn't make it to Fort Allen?

Veteran: Now that, I don't know. Well, I say, it was a--seemed like the best I remember, it was 98 and six officers didn't make it.

Interviewer: These were guys that were killed?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Could you tell me that again, and, and that they were--that, that they were killed?

Veteran: Well, there was 98 sailors killed and six officers killed on the California. They didn't, didn't make it that day.

Interviewer: Were these guys--any of these guys that you knew?

Veteran: No. Most of them--it was like down in the engine room, down in the [UNINTEL]. And, uh, they didn't get out before they got underwater. And the ones was up top sides, and the guns on the top sides and the big guns, they was up above, well, pretty well all of them got out, except the ones that was down in the magazines, passing--to pass ammunition up. Of course, everybody went to their battle stations. Of course, we would find the [UNINTEL], but that was our battle station, because of whenever they go to their battle stations, they la--lock down all the hatches, make it water tight.

Interviewer: When you got to the beach, were you injured? I mean, were you okay? What kind of state were you in?

Veteran: Right there. A piece of the old hatch, get down. That's all. A little scar right there.

Interviewer: After all that, just a scratch on the finger, huh?

Veteran: That's all. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: Uh, could you, could you show us again on your hands, so they could film it?

Veteran: A little scar right there. When I was abandoning ship, I got it caught on the [DOCK?] on the hatch, and it [UNINTEL] up a little bit. But there were so many people that was really injured, mine didn't amount to nothing. I put tape on it and go on. They had a dispensary on Fort Allen, but, uh, they bombed the thing, but we got stuff from there for, you know, the ship, abandon ship and stuff. Wounded and stuff. But, that's where they went, so they could get--go on the shore, where the big hospital was.

Interviewer: Could you tell me that, after all of that, you just had a scratch on your finger?

Veteran: After all of that, I just had a scratch on my finger.

Interviewer: When you were on the beach, were there other guys from the California coming up out of the water?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Describe to me them--

Veteran: Well--

Interviewer: --coming out, out of the water, the looks on their faces. What was that like?

Veteran: Well, I didn't have to take time to look at their faces or anything. I was worried about number one, and I was fighting it because I wasn't the best swimmer. I was fighting it to get to the be--uh, Fort Allen. And, uh, of course, everybody come out was wet, some of them had their shoes off. Some of them had them on. And their clothes was all wet. Some of them had a little oil on them, a little oil from the top of the water. And, uh, didn't, uh--they wanted us to line up and muster to see who's missing. And that's the way they got some of them reported missing that really wasn't--they just late getting over.

Interviewer: Were any guys, uh, burnt, that you saw?

Veteran: No, not from our ship, but they was, uh, burnt further back on them ships.

Interviewer: Uh, they must've been in a lot of pain.

Veteran: Sure, they were.

Interviewer: What did you--what did you see? Were they just screaming for help or--?

Veteran: Well, they was enough people that for them [UNINTEL], that's where they landed all the planes. And the [UNINTEL] bay and the [UNINTEL] and the crews for the [UNINTEL] to, uh, they knew where to take them, to show them where to go. And then, of course, the [UNINTEL], they went to work. Of course, the ones that were hurt the worst, had to have blood fusions and stuff, they went over to the hospital. And the nurses used Coke bottles to draw blood from another sailor to give it to somebody else.

Interviewer: How, how did they do that? How did they use Coke bottles? Tell me about that.

Veteran: How? Yeah, they'd put that tube in that Coke bottle and fill it full of blood, and then they'd put it in there, give it to the one that needed it.

Interviewer: What else was happening in the dispensary? What, what--did you go there?

Veteran: No, I didn't go there.

Interviewer: Okay. Um, were you--

Veteran: No, now this was a hospital-- [TECH TALK] JC_ALSTONT2 [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: There was a point in time where you thought you might die.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Could you tell me about that moment, uh, what--and what went through your head?

Veteran: Well, when that blade, blade dived on the ship, and the bomb went down, well, from where I was, I was on the 40 millimeter, just off the side of the ship. And if the bomb blew up, shrapnel would come up through the deck, I could be killed.

Interviewer: So bring me back to that thought process. What, what, what was that like, thinking that thought?

Veteran: Well, it wasn't a pleasant thought, but it did go off, so we lucked out. A lot of people didn't get killed that would've got killed if it had gone off.

Interviewer: People talk about, uh, right before, uh, people with near death experience, they talk about, um, you know, the light flashing before their eyes and things like that.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: What happened to you?

Veteran: Well, they didn't flash before my eyes, uh, because it was a--you know, it was a way from our guns a ways, but, uh, it could've blew up and sent shrapnel up through the deck. It was thick up there, you know, where it [WASN'T?]. And, uh, then that set the ship on fire, too. And--

Interviewer: Did you ever think to yourself for a moment, "Man, I wish I'd just stayed on the farm in Texas?"

Veteran: No. I didn't. Uh, [UNINTEL] and I had an idea that the way the country was going and building up, that it was building up for a war. But I didn't know when or where.

Interviewer: Over the years, I'm sure you've been asked a lot about what it's like to experience combat. How can you even explain it to people? What do you say?

Veteran: Well, we just do our job and maybe the guy standing next to you gets killed and you don't get touched. Some shrapnel or strafing or bomb blasts, torpedoes in the area.

Interviewer: Is it tough to think about why the lord might take one man, but spare another?

Veteran: No. I never thought about that too much, later on, and I thought, "Well, how could that guy get killed and me standing beside him, and I may not get touched?" But that's just war. Now see, the Army in all this, more likely to get more wounded than killed. The Navy, we [UNINTEL] got killed and not so many wounded, you know, whenever that happened. The, the bomb blast and things. It was not like with rifles shooting, shooting at one another. So I couldn't say I killed anybody. I was a gun crew, our crew was, was shooting down a plane, well, we weren't individually. We was a team that shot him down and killed him.

Interviewer: Later on in life, was that an unpleasant thought, to think about why the lord took one man but spared you?

Veteran: No, because that happens all the time during war. Uh, just like what we were at, uh, [UNINTEL], that was on a supply base. Okay. We were in there getting supplies, getting ready to go to Iwo Jima. Well, the carrier was anchored up in front of us. Now where in the world this Japanese, it hadn't come from a truck, as far as I know. Twin engine betty coming there and they flew right over the top of us, just barely missing us mast, to hit that carrier up in the front. Of course, we didn't really [UNINTEL] carrier hadn't been there. And we'd have got it and set it on fire and it blew up. I don't know how many they lost, but they didn't just--they had to go back to at least [UNINTEL] Pearl to get repaired, so they could come back out again. And I don't even remember the name of the carrier now.

Interviewer: Do you still think about those men that were lost?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Tell me about that, and how you come to think about that?

Veteran: Well, I think about it because it could've been me instead of one of them just as easy. You know?

Interviewer: Is that a thought that, uh, bothers you or is it just a thought?

Veteran: No, not now. It bothered me for a while, after the war was over, but I got over that. And, uh, I, I talk about it and everything. Some of them can't talk about it. But I talk about it because, hey, it's all over. And I'm here, pretty good health, so I don't have nothing bothering me at night, when I go to sleep.

Interviewer: That's good. How do you think it became a thought that once bothered you, to not bothering you?

Veteran: Oh, I'd say four or five years after I got out of the service, I did a lot--just kind of faded out. And never, ever thought about it much anymore. Of course, I still thought about it at times, but you know, every time I'd see somebody being buried or something, it comes in my mind.

Interviewer: Now because, um, they won't hear my voice, um, could you just tell me what it was that faded out?

Veteran: Well, uh, restless in my sleep. I guess you could call it a nightmare, you know? I'd wake up. And, uh, remember those that got killed around me. And then, after I woke up, uh, it'd be a little while before I'd go back to sleep. Of course, as time went on, well, it got less and less, so about five years, or, that's where it didn't bother me no more. Of course, always, I'd remember it every time I'd, you know, see somebody buried or something. It'd come to my mind, the ones we lost.

Interviewer: What was in the nightmare?

Veteran: Going to them quarters, [UNINTEL PHRASE].

Interviewer: Was it the, the same nightmare?

Veteran: Well--[UNINTEL]. See, at first, well, the Japanese tried to wear, wear us down. They'd send planes up, uh, let the radar pick them up, didn't think they was coming and everybody went to general quarters. Well, they were wearing us down, but they got one of [UNINTEL] through that. So then they went through air defense, and nobody except air defense went to their battle stations, and the others slept, and, uh, did, did what duty they were doing.

Interviewer: Do you still have that tissue by you? [SIDE CONVERSATION - GETTING TISSUE] [TECH TALK] JC_ALSTONT3 [TECH TALK]

Veteran: So you were talking about, um, nightmares after the war. Could you tell me what they consisted of?

Interviewer: Well, I'd just get restless, and, uh, remembered back, I guess, about when we got hit, and when we almost got hit, and it'd wake me up. Once I woke up, why, you know, it's all over, and I go back to sleep. But I did have a few nightmares along--maybe not as much as some of them, but. I worked at the VA, some of [UNINTEL] places from World War I was there, and some from World War II.

Veteran: Would you wake up, uh, panicked? I mean, if--

Interviewer: Well, I'd be sweating just a little. Not a whole lot, but a little. I guess because I was restless and I'd worked up a little bit of a sweat before I woke up.

Veteran: Would you be scared-- [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: So, um, after the--the California, what happened at the California that day?

Veteran: That day? Nothing. Couldn't, couldn't get the--all the ammunition they could get to was what was in the ready box. There was a three-inch on the bridge, and 50 caliber. They, they had put somebody on watch on them. But once they fired a few rounds, well, they was out of ammunition, so it was out of business.

Interviewer: What happened after it was out of business? What did they do with all the guys that were on the California?

Veteran: We went over to the hanger, over on Ford Island.

Interviewer: What ship did you eventually get assigned to?

Veteran: Well, I sailed on the California a while, then later on, I was transferred to the West Virginia. And I stayed on it until the end of the war.

Interviewer: The West Virginia also got hit pretty badly.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Um, when you got reassigned to the West Virginia, what was it like, going on to that ship?

Veteran: Well, all that oil, all that stuff, [PAPER?], stuff, as they pumped the water out. And they put seamen in the hole to get it to dry dock. They pumping the water out, and it raised while we cleaned a lot of that junk out, that old greasy stuff, and they have pockets of gas. Uh, officer, he had a meter, and he walked all the time, uh, checking out the pockets of gas. But it wasn't nothing in it, at this area, at this time, when he come through, but next time he come through, it was pocket of gas. So we had to get out of there, and also put white tape on the sleeve, if it turned-- So it turned red, pink, or purple, rather, get out of there.

Interviewer: So the West Virginia had been, had been damaged, and part of your first job of being assigned to it was to clean it up?

Veteran: Right.

Interviewer: Do you think you could say that back to me? Just, uh, in kind of a simple way, in your own words?

Veteran: Yeah. I was assigned to the West Virginia, to, uh, help cleaning it up as it was raised. Uh, well, while it was being raised, we, uh, we're seven days a week on it-- Trying to get it up and in dry dock, where they get it back to the States and repair it properly.

Interviewer: And JC, if you just want to do your best to try to look at me when you answer--

Veteran: Oh, okay.

Interviewer: No, no, you're doing great, thank you. Um, what kind of things did you find on the West Virginia?

Veteran: Well, furniture paper, material itself, had all went in on a--they loaded on a barge, I don't know what they did with it after that, [UNINTEL] and stuff. And if we, we'd run into a body, uh, we'd holler up topside, have a corpsman to come down, sack him up, put him in a gunnysack, we called it, and take him, see if they could identify him.

Interviewer: A body, why were there bodies there?

Veteran: Because it was killed in this raid. Yeah. And in the front of the West Virginia, they'd figured that they did that. They brought them to the bulkhead with something that was black. I don't know what they had. Of course, it was painted white. For 10 days, before they run out of options, in that compartment [UNINTEL] sealed off, [UNINTEL] don't know whether they drowned them or they tried to get them out, so, before they died, for black [UNINTEL].

Interviewer: So these were men that were trapped inside the West Virginia?

Veteran: Right.

Interviewer: Could you tell that to me again, just a little more clearly?

Veteran: They was being trapped on the West Virginia, the forward. It looked like that they marked the days that they lived before they run out of oxygen and died. They couldn't get them out, because if they tried to get them out, they drowned them. So it'd defeat the purpose. At least they identify them. There was no way of getting them out. Same thing in some of the other battleships where they were down in the bottom, where the powder was, for those 16-inch guns, and five inch.

Interviewer: Really horrible way to, to go

Veteran: Well, that's--no, it is, but that's better than being burnt to death. You just go to sleep, there's no oxygen.

Interviewer: Is that what happens when you run out of oxygen, you just--

Veteran: Yeah, you die.

Interviewer: Now, um, you said you discovered dead bodies. Had you seen the dead bodies before this?

Veteran: Not, [UNINTEL] taken over to, put over the dock that were dead. Some of them, you know, was burnt. They had, uh, put, tie a rope around a foot or something, where they could drag them in the water. They wouldn't try to pick them up. They'd drag them over, then try to pick them up and put them over the dock. I see them drag them over there with a boat. But I, I didn't see any on our ship that died at--I didn't see any bodies. Of course, I guess they died after I got out, I don't know.

Interviewer: What's it like being a young kid and seeing a, a dead body like that for the first time?

Veteran: Well, it wasn't pleasant, but [UNINTEL], uh, that a dead body--I mean, [UNINTEL] around when it happened. After a while, it kind of caught up with me. It bothered me.

Interviewer: What do you--this is later on?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: So describe to me how later on, it, it--

Veteran: Well, that [UNINTEL], you know? Same day.

Interviewer: What would happen?

Veteran: Well, you could just kind of feel that them people died, and, and couldn't get out. There was no way they could get them out, because it's always, when the ship sinks, some of them get trapped, and they can't get out, when they started abandon ship.

Interviewer: I think if saw these things, it might be part of my nightmares years later. Was it part of yours?

Veteran: Well, I guess it could have been. You know, I did have nightmares later on. But I really couldn't say. But I guess probably part of it was that.

Interviewer: You worked down at the VA. Did you ever hear them talk about, um, PTSD, or post-traumatic stress syndrome?

Veteran: Oh, yeah, they have that now. I had a lot of that from the, [CLEARS THROAT], over there, getting the legs blowed off and stuff.

Interviewer: Thinking back on it, do you think maybe you suffer from that at all?

Veteran: No that didn't, didn't bother me, because I knew what was happening, and I knew [UNINTEL] what was going to happen. So that the reason it didn't bother me much. Uh, I said, you know, wartime today is a lot different than it was back in my time.

Interviewer: How's that?

Veteran: More soph-, sophisticated equipment and everything that they operate. They got big guns and automatic loaders now, but we used to have to load them.

Interviewer: Do you think the, uh, emotions that come with war, the pain of it, affects men different now than it did in your time?

Veteran: Well, more of them seem to get wounded badly. Aboard the ship, mostly you either got killed, or you survived pretty good. You know, it wasn't like what they're having today, bunch of roadside bombs and all that kind of stuff, blow their legs off, shrapnel everywhere.

Interviewer: For those that don't know, could you tell me what PTSD is?

Veteran: Well, not really. I don't know what it is.

Interviewer: Did they have different words for it in your time?

Veteran: I didn't even hear of it in my time.

Interviewer: Did you ever hear of, uh--

Veteran: Battle fatigue, but I never heard of PSTD or whatever you said, I never heard of that word.

Interviewer: Since you were at the VA, and you learned about PTSD, do you think, uh, PTSD is similar to battle fatigue?

Veteran: Yeah, yeah. They have a connection.

Interviewer: Could you tell me about that, in your words?

Veteran: Well, you know, they come to the VA, and, uh, some of them still have nightmares, even after that long a time. Of course, I didn't work directly with the patients, but, uh, they [UNINTEL] watched in a while. So we come in, and one night I was a fireman in a fire station, and we had an ambulance that the Army left there. And we took one guy to Waco. They didn't have no place to put him, you know, he went berserk. And we took him up there.

Interviewer: Could you tell me that PTSD might be similar to what you guys called battle fatigue?

Veteran: Battle fatigue?

Interviewer: Could you say that to me?

Veteran: Yeah, I think PSD--

Interviewer: PTSD.

Veteran: PTSD is similar to battle fatigue, like in World War II, and [UNINTEL] World War I, I guess, too. But, uh, it's a lot different now, because more of them get wounded and get their legs blowed off. Most of them in my time, you either got killed or you didn't get wounded as bad. Now, the Army had more of that wounded, and getting shot individually than we did.

Interviewer: Going back to December 7th, is there, uh, one memory that stands out from that day?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Could you tell me what that is?

Veteran: Well, such a surprise that it happened, and have to abandon ship to go to Ford Island, that'll always be [UNINTEL], as long as I live.

Interviewer: It was a sneak attack.

Veteran: Huh?

Interviewer: It was a sneak attack.

Veteran: Yeah. Yeah, we didn't know the Japanese was attacking us until they was doing it.

Interviewer: What's it like being the victim of a sneak attack?

Veteran: Well, you lose a lot of your friends, and military personnel is what happened. And equipment. In this case, they was more interested in getting the ships as anything else. Because it would have--that guy really would have smiled [UNINTEL] go to if had been dropping a bomb, or a torpedo on a carrier. It left the night before. And he'd have got probably a Silver Star or something, the Japanese, whatever they give them.

Interviewer: It must feel pretty vulnerable to be in that position.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Tell me about what it feels like--

Veteran: Well--

Interviewer: And why, why you feel vulnerable.

Veteran: We'll feel vulnerable because we don't have no ammunition. It's all down, stored down below except for what's in the ready boxes. We didn't have the keys to the ready boxes, so we had to break them open. And, uh, well, after we used up what was in the ready box, which wasn't a whole lot. We [UNINTEL], we couldn't do nothing, just except watch them.

Interviewer: How did you feel about the Japanese in, in that moment?

Veteran: That I was talking about, you could see his face and his teeth grinning? Well, I thought he was pretty smug there. I just thought to myself, "Well, later on in the war, you might not have that smile no more." And I'm sure he didn't. [LAUGHS].

Interviewer: What about the days and weeks that followed, finding these bodies on the West Virginia. Did anger start to boil up?

Veteran: Well, no. We knew we was going to run into them. They told us that before we started work, you know, what to do when we run into one, and all that. And also, the tapes start turning purple, get out of there. But the guy with the meter, they had him walking all the time, and, uh--

Interviewer: But it sounded like--so you'd find these bodies, in the moment, it would necessarily affect you. Later that night, it would art to hit you, you'd start thinking about it--

Veteran: Yeah--

Interviewer: Was there a point where that started to turn towards anger, to getting revenge on the Japanese?

Veteran: Oh, yeah, sure.

Interviewer: Tell me about that, that process, going from shock to, to, to pain, to anger.

Veteran: To anger, seeing the body, it could have been me, uh, a sneak attack on us, it was--we had no warning. And, uh, kind of turned to anger. I wanted to get back at the Japanese. And we did during the war, took time. But-- [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: Yeah, I mean, I think that's an important point to make. Maybe you could say that again, I mean, going from shock to, to fear, or pain, to, to anger, if you could restate that for us that'd be terrific.

Veteran: Yeah. Because when they first hit us, why, were in shock, because we had no warning or nothing, as a sneak attack did. Went to, uh, pain, because so many people got killed, and then went to anger, when you run cross a dead body that we had to call this corpsman to come pick up, put the gunnysack so they could identify him, if they could, to bury him, because there's a lot of them they never did identify. They're unmarked over in Hawaii, in the Punchbowl.

Interviewer: How do you think the country reacted to this attack?

Veteran: They really acted good. They acted, they all turned out, when to work for whatever they needed for, and they kept equipment coming to us, ammunition and stuff, so we could take care of them Japanese.

Interviewer: What did that Japanese commander mean when we said, "We had woken a sleeping giant?"

Veteran: Well, he had been educated in this county, and he knew more about America than the Japanese, but he wasn't in an authority to say so. The emperor was, he's the man, whatever he said went. There wasn't no question. And that's what he said, [UNINTEL] we're just waking up a big giant. And they did, because everybody went to work, put out equipment, machinery and stuff that we had to use, ammunition, as we island-hopped all the way back to Japan. We'd bypass some, once they was in the area that they couldn't get no supplies or anything, we'd bypass just to save lives. They couldn't do nothing. They couldn't get off the island. They couldn't do darn nothing. And the reason Iwo Jima was taking was that's where they was going to make an airbase for the big bombers when it got hit by the [UNINTEL]. And that was far enough away where the fighters couldn't follow them and shoot at them. So they could patch them up, get them to where they could work them over [UNINTEL] right, and put them back into the air.

Interviewer: What did the Japanese hope to accomplish with Pearl Harbor?

Veteran: They thought that if they do enough damage, said we wanted a war, the Americans, that we would do anything because we didn't want to get into war. You [UNINTEL] always say, "We don't want in the war, we don't want in the war." So they thought that had happened, that we wouldn't do that.

Interviewer: Why didn't they think we wouldn't do anything? I've heard that the Japanese thought that, "Oh, the, the Americans, as a society, are kind of a, a pleasure-seeking nation, and they don't have the, the kind of the guts to deal with, with us."

Veteran: I don't know where they--

Interviewer: Is that true? What did they--that's their perspective.

Veteran: Well that was, in their mind, that that had happened, that's why they did Pearl Harbor.

Interviewer: What was in--tell me what was in their mind again.

Veteran: I think it was in their mind to hit us, and we wouldn't have enough, whole lot of equipment left, you know, to fight them back. And for a while, and that we just kind of settled down, and let it go. We wouldn't be, we wouldn't fight back. But that was wrong. We fought back, and we had unconditional surrender on our mind, and that happened.

Interviewer: Do you think there was, before Pearl Harbor, was the American public kind of lackadaisical about what might be going on in the world?

Veteran: Well, the people listened to the radio, and all that in Europe, they, they just wondered how far it'd go before he'd quit, you know, that [UNINTEL]. So if we hadn't got into the war, well, they'd have come over here and got us after they secured all of Europe, the Germans and the Japanese. And, well, what was his name? Italian.

Interviewer: Mussolini?

Veteran: Yeah, Mussolini. They probably had on the drawing board how they was going to divide up the U.S. for each country, three ways. [LAUGHS] I don't know, [LAUGHS].

Interviewer: Was--did Pearl Harbor represent a, a reality check for the U.S. public?

Veteran: Sure did.

Interviewer: You tell me that, how so?

Veteran: How so? Well, because all the, the machinery stuff went to, war machinery, and everybody was willing to work, work overtime, and everything, to, uh, defeat the Japanese, so that we wouldn't have to fight over our homeland.

Interviewer: After, uh, Pearl Harbor, um, what--I know you're involved, you were, you were in Iwo Jima.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: I was hoping you could tell us about seeing what happened at Iwo Jima, with the flag-raising. Could you tell us that story?

Veteran: Oh, yeah. But first, the Army personnel carrier started up the hill. I could see him, we was pretty close. We still [UNINTEL] shell, we'd look over across from where they was going up. And you'd see a puff of smoke. We know they got hit, because they stopped. But you couldn't tell where it was coming from. [UNINTEL], well, they finally got up the hill and secured enough of the island, that's when they raised the flag. Well, they wasn't satisfied where it was, so they moved it, raised it again. But I was sitting up right before the [UNINTEL] watching it. You know, there wasn't no Japanese planes there. We had fighter planes in there in case one stray got up, got that far up, so it wouldn't do no damage, they shoot it down. And we had a few, let's see, I don't remember the name of the carrier, but it, it was--they had night fighters up, and one--

Interviewer: What was it like, what was it like being on your ship, seeing that flag raised? Describe it to me.

Veteran: Well, you do, you knew that they made progress, and they were still going to take the island. Of course you know, I didn't know how many, you know, on the island, and even the brass didn't figure they had that many troops on that little rock. They had 21,000 troops not that cotton-picking rock.

Interviewer: Did it make you feel [UNINTEL]?

Veteran: Well, I didn't know that then. Yeah, it made me proud to see them stars and stripes flying, sure.

Interviewer: When did you see the photo of it?

Veteran: When did I see the photo of it?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Oh, it wasn't too long after they raised it. Some, somebody with long limbs from the ship, the guy that takes pictures of stuff on the ship, damaged stuff, he took it, he took it with a camera, and--

Interviewer: Describe to me that photo, and the scene of it.

Veteran: Well, it was just a showing of guys putting up the American flag. [CLEARS THROAT] And then I don't know who wasn't satisfied with where it was-- [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: But that suicider, he [UNINTEL] that down through the neck of the carrier. When all the night fighters was up, they couldn't land. They would go to run out of gas, so they designated an area for them to bail out, and they sent Destroyers over to pick them up where they landed.

Veteran: What's it like--that became such an iconic moment, and there's a famous statue modeled after that photo--

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: What's it like to be able to tell people years later that you--

Interviewer: That I saw it originally.

Veteran: Yes, tell--yes.

Interviewer: Yeah, I saw it originally. I didn't just see a picture. I, I was there, and I was part of it.

Veteran: Tell me about that. What would you say?

Interviewer: Well I just said, that's a picture, I said, "That's a good picture." I said, "That really happened. I saw it when it happened, and I saw them take it down, and I saw them put it up again. And the second raising of the flag." And I said, "I was proud to see Stars and Stripes flying over the enemy territory."

Veteran: It must have felt great to, well, first see such a triumph at the moment, and then years later, to realize that you had witnessed history.

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Could you talk about that to me, what it's like to witness history like that?

Interviewer: Well, it was something proud you've seen, that they've taken that part of the island, that, secured it, because they raised the flag. See, this still, little cage was up there. They had dug down in that [UNINTEL] rock by hand. They didn't have no equipment. They dug it down, three stories down, that [UNINTEL] rock. Well, we'd fired them 16-inch shells, which weighed 250 pounds, and put 330 pounds of powder behind it, and we'd used the fighter pilots for some spotters, and [UNINTEL] where they could see an opening in the cave, we'd try to put that 16-inch in there. Well, we helped kill some that--the Marines did lose because of that, and of course they were bombing at the same time with [UNINTEL] from the carriers.

Veteran: Do you think it was a sweeter moment for you because you had been at Pearl Harbor? Was it more significant because of that?

Interviewer: Yeah, the further we went, the most we lost at each island, pretty well. See, we lost 6740, I think, or in that neighborhood, on Iwo Jima. And when we went to Okinawa, we lost 13,000 and something. About as many Navy as that, because they sunk a lot of small craft that was patrolling. And so little larger ships, but most of the bigger ships, they survived. Anybody got hit, but they'd survive. Now, they had made a battleship with, uh, 18-inch guns on them, they made two of them. And it left Japan, heading for Okinawa, and when, uh, they got word it was heading that way, well, the planes took after it and bombing it, and of course, the Destroyers with the torpedoes, and they sank it. What they had planned, though, to just running aground and just fire at will until they couldn't fire no more, or didn't have nobody to fire.

Veteran: You witnessed history throughout, but there are two places in particular: the attack on Pearl Harbor, the start of the war, and the raising of the flag of Iwo Jima--

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Which translated to, you know, American success.

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: Could you tell us, in your own words, those two historic moments that you witnessed, Pearl Harbor and Iwo Jima?

Interviewer: Iwo Jima? Well, I was proud when they put up the flag, because I do--they had took that part of the island, and it would be just a matter of time until they secured the whole island, because there was no way they could--it was far enough away that fighters couldn't fly that far--

Veteran: But you must--did you also think about the guys that were lost at Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: Oh, well, always thought about the guys that, you know, we lost along the way, all the way, that it could have been me instead of them, day one, just, you know? That's the way war is. One survives, one dies. But as I said, you know, it's not like the Army, because they, you know, individually get shot, wounded, stuff like that. More of ours, we either got killed or we stayed alive.

Veteran: Why do you think it was even more satisfying for you to see that flag raised, being that you were at Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: Well, because we was taking care of our enemy that started the war, that's reason. And then when we went to Okinawa, that doubled it up. And then, uh, when Truman said, "Drop the A-bomb," we was glad to hear that. And then all them people, Army people from Europe coming over, they was already on their way over to Japan. They said they was going to send the First Marines in first, and they estimated it'd be 110 percent casualties, that meaning nobody would live out of that first wave, on account of there were caves and stuff on the main islands. So they figured it up, they said-- "Well, Japanese will lose as many people if we drop the bombs as they would if we took the islands by force. And if we took the islands by force, we would lose a lot of personnel." And so they dropped it. And they surrendered. We was glad to see that green plane come out there with that white cross on it, saying they unconditionally [UNINTEL], [LAUGHS], like I said, surrender.

Veteran: You can say that again for us.

Interviewer: We was glad to see that green plane with a white cross on it fly out there in Okinawa, because they accepted unconditional surrender.

Veteran: Could you must tell me, in your own words, you witnessed history in two places: Pearl Harbor and Iwo Jima. Could I hear you say that?

Interviewer: Yeah, I witnessed two--tell me again.

Veteran: You can take your time. "I witnessed history"--

Interviewer: I witnessed history in Pearl Harbor and Iwo Jima, and also Okinawa. That's history, that plane coming out there, surrendering. To me, that was the end of the war.

Veteran: Do you think you could say that one more time? Uh, just Pearl Harbor--

Interviewer: And--

Veteran: The attack at Pearl Harbor, and the flag-raising of Iwo Jima.

Interviewer: Okay. [CLEARS THROAT] I was part of history of Pearl Harbor, and also taking Iwo Jima.

Veteran: And you saw what happen at Iwo Jima?

Interviewer: Yes, raising of the American flag twice. They raised it, they wasn't satisfied with where the first one was located, so they moved it. [TECH TALK]

Veteran: The surrender, that's what they--it was supposed to send that plane out there, it was painted green, and it had a white cross on it. And they wouldn't shoot it down, you know, coming out there, from the mainland to Okinawa. They let it get through, because he was bringing surrender terms, unconditional. Then I don't know if it was second day or the first day, but anyway, we went from Okinawa--I guess it was third day, maybe time we got in there, were all this--not all the ships, one of the carriers went up--a lot of the ships stayed back, but a group of our ships, we heading up Tokyo Bay for them to sign the peace treaty. They signed it over in Missouri. It was upfront. Well, there was all these ships going in, these Japanese jumping over to water, just swimming for pleasure. Hey, that was kind of unbelievable that that had happened.

Interviewer: What was it like--tell us where you were when the Japanese surrendered, and what it felt like?

Veteran: When the Japanese surrendered, we were still at Okinawa. When they surrendered, that's--they surrendered, they brought the plane out, the terms, to Okinawa. Then, they went up there and signed peace treaty in, uh, Tokyo Bay on the Missouri.

Interviewer: Can you tell me, uh, where you were when they signed the peace treaty, and what it felt like, witnessing that moment?

Veteran: Well, it felt real good, because the war was over, everybody could go home, the wounded could be taken care of. You know, the VA here at Temple was an amputee hospital, and they brought them in by the carloads, train. They got a train [UNINTEL], running inside the VA, for the artificial legs, and arms, and stuff. That was their man duty. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: Of course, I didn't see it, because I was [UNINTEL], but they, the people who was here told me about it.

Veteran: What did it feel like hearing that the Japanese had surrendered?

Interviewer: Well, it took all the weight off. Said, "Well, now we'll make it back to the States, you know, all together."

Veteran: There must have been a relief, huh, after all that hardship?

Interviewer: Yeah, it was. And they brought prisoners of war that they took out of prison camps, put them on the ships, so the doctors could tend them and feed them, so they wouldn't eat too much, since they had been starved. All they had was rice and water.

Veteran: Why was it such a relief, after these hardships?

Interviewer: Because, took the pressure off. [LAUGHS], [CLEARS THROAT]. They had been on rice and water so long they could show you, they punch you and like that, you know, yours would come back out, but theirs wouldn't. [UNINTEL] water to myself, how that heath affected them in lifetime after that. That could have been me, yeah.

Veteran: Can you just tell me, uh, once again, where were you when they signed the Declaration of Peace?

Interviewer: I was in Tokyo Bay. I [UNINTEL], I don't know how far it was from our ship up to the Missouri where they signed it. A few hundred yards, maybe.

Veteran: Um, could you just say again for me, "I was in Tokyo Bay when they signed the Declaration of Peace."?

Interviewer: I was in Tokyo Bay when they signed the Decal ration of Peace on the Missouri. [TECH TALK] JC_ALSTONT4 [SLATE/TAKE 4]

Veteran: What's the--the experience of--of being in war like? I mean, how do you even explain that to--to someone now in today's world?

Interviewer: Well, there's still that loss. What you saw, maybe the next guy saw things different. I did. I'm sure the ones you've, uh, already took pictures of and talked to them had different--different things than I did, because that's just natural for that to happen. I just happened to be in the right place at the right time for things that I saw that happened and not get hurt. And... 'Cause maybe the ship behind us got sunk when we was going to the Philippines, and all them ships you can walk up on the quarterdeck, you could see our ships as far as you could see any direction. There was that big a group of ships going. Of course, they landed in different spots, but we were all--about a day and a half out, one lone Japanese plane downed--dived down through the deck of a converted carrier and it sank. Well, it would've sunk but they finished sinking it so there wouldn't be no fire on the horizon. Well, you know he radioed them and told them what was coming. And they knew what was coming, of course, but they couldn't do nothing about it anyway.

Veteran: Um, when you're--

Interviewer: And--

Veteran: When people--when school kids, um, ask you about what it's like to be in a war, what do you say to them?

Interviewer: I say, well, we have to do our duty and that's it. If we--we survive, that's real good but we still think about the ones that don't survive. They gave it all.

Veteran: It seems like you went from Pearl--this moment of Pearl Harbor where you were, uh, taken off guard and scared to these moments where the U.S. military triumphed over Japan.

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: What was it like going from fear and--and--and being, you know, surprised...

Interviewer: Well...

Veteran: ...to--to seeing that flag over Iwo Jima?

Interviewer: Well, it, uh, gave everybody confidence that we were going to win. We didn't know how many we'd lose in the process but we knew we were going to win and there would be no severe casualties in the States. And so...that was--on their utmost mind right there--that we wouldn't have no fights going on in our own country.

Veteran: Did you want revenge for the guys that died at Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: Sure.

Veteran: Tell me about why you wanted that?

Interviewer: Well, they're the ones who started the war. I didn't feel sorry for them when they dropped the A-bomb. I know they killed a lot of civilians but I... They started the war; we didn't. And they continued it. They had the opportunity to surrender and they would've have gotten bombed with the A-bombs. And [CLEARS THROAT] it would've saved a lot of their lives and they would--wouldn't have destroyed so much of their country with them. You know, that radiation [UNINTEL] lasted for a long time. But I didn't know that much about it at the time as I did afterwards.

Veteran: Now, the Japanese--the--the sneak attack that they committed at Pearl Harbor along with some horrible atrocities against, uh, U.S. POWs, the rape of Nanking... Did you ever think while that was happening how they were capable of doing such awful things?

Interviewer: Well, I didn't think, you know, that we had maniacs like that but whatever the emperor said, that it's an honor to die for him. He told them to go out there--and there was two men with rifles, 'cause he didn't have one, and then shoot him. That was his pleasure to die honor--to die for the emperor. They were just that way. That's their mindset. Man.

Veteran: What was it like facing an enemy like that?

Interviewer: You had people coming from--they'd heard all about the Pacific, the soldiers coming from Germany after they surrendered over there for the Japanese. And they--they was kind of worried because, you know, they knew what kind of mindset they had 'cause--with all that went on there. So they knew. You know, maybe one guy over in Germany brang 15 prisoners in. Them Germans'll give up. Not the Japanese. No. You have to kill them. One night when we was in the Philippines, the submarines told us that there was a 17-ship convoy, warships, coming through the China Sea. Well, the China Sea come up into the straits in the Philippines. Well, the captain says, [UNINTEL PHRASE] and go to your battle stations. We don't know what time they'll arrive but we'll be ready. Okay, you can't fire those big guns straight ahead--you'd blow up the decks. You have to [UNINTEL] them at least 25 degrees to one side or the other. But of course we were five battleships rode up out there where the side--broadside. And at about 2 o'clock, they came in. Well, we took them all but one. And it got up the straits a little ways. They [UNINTEL] it the next morning with aircraft. But the old battleship that was leading them was one that was in the taskforce that bombed Pearl Harbor. So, everybody gave it the old...we told them so. [LAUGHS] Well, I don't want to use the language. [LAUGHS]

Veteran: You can use the language. It's okay.

Interviewer: So, we told--we showed them...that we were going to keep fighting 'til we took care of them. [TECH TALK]

Veteran: What you said earlier about the Japanese jumping off the ship and swimming for pleasure, are you saying that was after the surrender?

Interviewer: Um, yeah, it was when you were going into Tokyo Bay, you were seeing Japanese swimming in the water there.

Veteran: Yes. Right.

Interviewer: Was that right--had--had they surrendered at that point? Had--had the--

Veteran: Yeah, yeah. When we went up there, the green plane came out with a white cross on it. That was the surrender terms. And they just went up in [UNINTEL PHRASE] and signed the surrender terms. [TECH TALK]

Interviewer: And like, where is it come--like, where was that green plane--is it coming from Okinawa to Tokyo Bay?

Veteran: No, it came from mainland to Okinawa.

Interviewer: Mainland where?

Veteran: Japanese mainland. It came...

Interviewer: It was a Japanese plane?

Veteran: It was a Japanese plane. They told them paint it green and put a white cross on it, or otherwise they'd shoot it down.

Interviewer: And that was going to land on...?

Veteran: Okinawa.

Interviewer: On one of your bases of one of the aircraft carriers?

Veteran: No, it landed on... They had a--a base on an island...

Interviewer: So how did all--all the enlisted men know this, that the green plane with the white cross would mean that it was the Japanese? Did they, uh--how did the rumor get out? Was there an announcement made to you?

Veteran: Yeah, over the PA systems of all departments. That--

Interviewer: Do you think you could--

Veteran: That, uh, we were looking for the green plane to come out with a white cross. That would be an unconditional surrender.

Interviewer: J.C., could you just, uh, bring us back to, uh, hearing that announcement and what was said in that announcement on board?

Veteran: Well, it said, uh, there'll be a green--that's the reason they had all the ships 'cause some ships [UNINTEL PHRASE] they might've [UNINTEL] ship deck with antiaircraft guns. So they wanted everybody to be aware of that, so that the plane would make it to Okinawa. And it wasn't no mess up, you know--mis--miscommunications.

Interviewer: So just the pure announcement that was made, what was said, and--and what did you hear?

Veteran: Well, they said there'll be a green plane with a white cross coming from mainland to land on Okinawa with the surrender terms. Oh, everybody hoot and hollered.

Interviewer: Could you just say that same--that was perfect. But, uh, it was announced that the Japanese would be in a green plane with a white cross.

Veteran: Cross. With a sur... [CLEARS THROAT] That the Japanese would be in a green plane with a white cross with the surrender terms, which was unconditional...to make sure that all was notified of...so they wouldn't shoot him down.

Interviewer: Do you guys think that's clear or...?

Veteran: J.C., if you could say it again looking at Spencer.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: Just 'cause we think this is a really cool story.

Interviewer: When they came over the PA system.

Veteran: Ah. They announced on the ship that a green plane from Japan mainland with a white cross would be coming to Okinawa with the surrender terms unconditional. And...then...after that, why, the ships went up in Tokyo Bay to sign the peace treaty of unconditional surrender. They wouldn't accept any other terms.

Interviewer: How--say this to Spencer, but how happy were you guys when you heard...?

Veteran: [OVERLAPPING] Oh, man. Happy. When the war was over?

Interviewer: Yeah. Say it to spencer.

Veteran: So, could--could you just say, um, you heard over the PA exactly like you did before, but could you say the Japanese would be flying a green plane?

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: Not just a green plane. Um, okay, go ahead. It was perfect, what you said.

Interviewer: All right. The Japanese [CLEARS THROAT] were...

Veteran: So, you heard--you heard over the PA...

Interviewer: PA. I heard it over the PA system.

Veteran: So--just so I'm not talking over you, I'm going to...

Interviewer: ...that Japanese...

Veteran: Um, so on the PA...

Interviewer: Over the PA system that a Japanese green plane with a white cross would be coming from the mainland to land on Okinawa for unconditional surrender. And the reason they wanted to notify everybody, they didn't want the plane shot down. That was in the negotiations, and a good one at that.

Veteran: What was it like seeing this plane? Tell me--tell me about that.

Interviewer: Well, seeing is believing. If you see it--of course, you know the Japanese [UNINTEL PHRASE] you know how they were about [GUYS?], whatever. We said, "Well, it's over now." We settled down and don't have to worry anymore about battle. It's all over. Of course, some of them throw their hats up, holler. And I saw a film of New York and the sailors would grab the women coming down the streets and kiss them and hug them and everything else. Back then it was on the news reels--they put that on the news reels. Sailors... [CLEARS THROAT] and Army, Marines, and Coastguard. But, uh, we didn't have nothing like that when we arrived. We arrived in San Diego and they had a train waiting for us to load us, to take us down here to Houston to discharge us. And they said, "Oh, you got--we're going to be here another hour." And some of them went here or there to get something to drink or something to eat--it wasn't far off. And the train started moving and they started running. And some of the guys didn't catch the train. They beat them down there. One guy crawled through the window off a motorcycle. He caught up with the train. [LAUGHS] And he crawls in the window of one of them [CLEARS THROAT] cars...

Veteran: How did you personally react when you saw that green plane in the sky?

Interviewer: Well, that was like having all the weight lifted off of you. It's over. Now we can get down to taking all these people back to the States. [THE SHIP LEFT?]. Took some.

Veteran: You must've thought--how it all started in Pearl Harbor. Did you think about that?

Interviewer: Yeah, I did.

Veteran: How so? Explain those thoughts to me.

Interviewer: Well... [CLEARS THROAT] I just says, well, now we're getting revenge for what you started 'cause of Pearl Harbor. You shouldn't have started it. And this is the end results.

Veteran: Now, as a Pearl Harbor vet, how would you like to be remembered?

Interviewer: How would I like to be remembered?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Well, I say remember those that sacrificed everything, that got killed first. And then they can say, well, the ones that are still alive, they called us heroes but we're really not. The ones that died was the heroes. We just did our job, what we were supposed to do.

Veteran: Why is it so important for Americans today to never forget what happened at Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: Because it could happen again. It sure could. And I'll tell you, them ISIS--the nut we've got a president won't close the borders. You know, some of them just come up here in this country right now. And they're going to do something just like that guy in that truck running over all them people. He had guns and all kinds of them. Grenades and everything else--bombs--in the truck. But he just used a truck. I mean, he killed 180?

Veteran: Do you think today's, uh, generation really understands the sacrifices that were made for them?

Interviewer: No, they don't. They don't teach it in school. We go to talk to a history class, they never heard of Pearl Harbor--a lot of them. And they're graduating seniors.

Veteran: Why is that so dangerous?

Interviewer: Why is that what?

Veteran: So dangerous?

Interviewer: So dangerous? Well, you let your guard down. You don't think about having another war. You say, well, we're just fighting them over there; they won't ever get over here. Well, it--that's not so. They can get over here.

Veteran: Along with letting, you know, your guard down and making sure that doesn't happen, is it also important that they understand that the liberties that they're enjoying weren't always guaranteed?

Interviewer: World War II was guaranteed, after we defeated those--that was a guarantee that they wouldn't be in a war, that they could raise their kids and move around just like they wanted to, like they always have. When over in Europe, they didn't do that. They didn't...they had to have a pass to go from one place to another, some of them.

Veteran: But in--in understanding our democracy and the things that are important to us as Americans, isn't it important that we know that people like you had to fight for these things?

Interviewer: Right. Yeah, freedom's not free. No. World War II, there was over 400,000 people got killed besides the wounded ones.

Veteran: Why was--why is war sometimes necessary?

Interviewer: Well, one thing--somebody has got their eye on something that they think they can [WHIPPLE?] the country and take over and do what they want to. And that was their ideas of what was going to happen. If they ever got Europe secured, uh, it'll be a matter of time before they come over here and take care of us in the U.S.

Veteran: When you got back to the--the Waco area, there was a community of guys that you kind of built up, right? Tell me a little bit about that.

Interviewer: A bit...

Veteran: Guys who were at Pearl Harbor.

Interviewer: Oh. Well, we just...tell our stories to one another, what we seen, 'cause we knew [UNINTEL] on one ship would see a lot of things that happened that I didn't see; and I'd see things that he didn't see. That way we know the [CLEARS THROAT]--the chapter would know what one another had did during the war. And as we talk to the schools, we--we mention that. See maybe something that he didn't see--he had saw--I would mention it, it happened.

Veteran: Would you talk about the nightmares you were experiencing with these guys?

Interviewer: Well, some of them. One guy, he said any loud noise, you know, like a bomb or something, why, if he was asleep, it'd wake him up and he'd hit his wife or something. You know, he'd come up fighting. But I never did that. I'd come up kind of sweating. But, uh...it affected them in different ways. Some of them went bonkers. Put them in the nut wards, a lot of them did. We had one in our division. He went bonkers and they had to send him off. I don't know where they put him--they put him in someplace like Waco.

Veteran: Why is it easier to talk about Pearl Harbor with those guys who've experienced it?

Interviewer: Well, because we know they experienced the same thing we did. And as we experienced...all of us, Army, Navy, all the military, Coast Guard--the job that we did to secure freedom for the U.S.

Veteran: You told me before that, um, you had nightmares but then they went away.

Interviewer: Well, they did. They just [UNINTEL] decrease, decrease, then they just went away. But it was about five years.

Veteran: Do you think, um, talking to other Pearl Harbor survivors helped these memories and these nightmares?

Interviewer: Yeah, I believe it did a little. Sure.

Veteran: Can you say that to me in your own words?

Interviewer: Yeah. I think it, uh--talking to other Pearl Harbor survivors and what they went through helped me in my endeavor of being at Pearl Harbor.

Veteran: Why is that?

Interviewer: Well, because the military--a ship is like a big family.

Veteran: You guys were taking care of each other.

Interviewer: Right. See, the aircraft carriers [UNINTEL] one of them. They usually lost a lot of personnel because they held about 6,000 on the carrier. Operate the planes [UNINTEL], repair the planes, refuel them and all that. That's like a little town.

Veteran: How many members of this Pearl Harbor family do you have left to talk to?

Interviewer: Well, best guess I've got is about 200 that we know of, that belong to the association. Now, some that didn't belong to the association, I don't know how many there are still living, because we had no contact or any way to count them.

Veteran: What about guys local to you?

Interviewer: What about what?

Veteran: Guys that are local to you?

Interviewer: Local to me? Well, [CLEARS THROAT] I've got one guy that lives in Temple; he got cancer of the lungs. We got one guy that just moved here lately to Troy. He drank--we all went out and drank coffee at 9 o'clock to 10 down here at the Backstreet Restaurant. There was about 16 of us. And there was one, two, three, four of us are--are World War II people. And he was in Pearl, he was in the Army. He's 95. And, uh, so we express our opinions to one another of what happened. And that these younger generations don't even know where Pearl Harbor is, much less a war.

Veteran: Do you--do you worry that you won't have other Pearl Harbor survivors to talk to at some point?

Interviewer: No, I don't think I will. If I see a Pearl Harbor survivor, I think he'll talk to me.

Veteran: But do you ever worry that--I mean, these guys aren't going to live forever.

Interviewer: No, they won't.

Veteran: So you ever think about not having someone who was at Pearl Harbor to talk to?

Interviewer: Well, I'm probably the youngest one in this group. [LAUGHS] Well, not in World War II, but I mean Pearl Harbor. I'm the youngest one of the bunch.

Veteran: So if they pass on and there's just you left, does that thought bother you?

Interviewer: No. I said I was going to talk about it and talk to the schools, be in the Fourth of July parades, I'll be in the, uh...veterans parade in Waco as long as I'm able. That's all I can do. To get it over to people that don't know.

Veteran: Why is that--why is that so important? I mean, we can read about history in history books and talk about it, but there is also something about having someone who actually experienced these things...

Interviewer: Right.

Veteran: ...to talk to you about it. Why--why is that so important, and what do we stand to lose if we don't have that anymore?

Interviewer: Well, uh, people that experienced it, when they tell it, well, they know it's not a story to--you know, just a made-up story. You know? That it actually happened because the person that's telling it actually was there and saw it.

Veteran: So what happens maybe, you know, 10 years on when there's no Pearl Harbor survivors left? What do we stand to lose?

Interviewer: Well, we stand to lose history.

Veteran: Why is that?

Interviewer: Because...we don't have Pearl Harbors around to talk about it or to visit a school and talk to the history class, or the parades, or anything else.

Veteran: Could you just restate that again? There won't be Pearl Harbor survivors around to talk about it.

Interviewer: There won't be Pearl Harbors around to talk about it.

Veteran: Pearl Harbor survivors.

Interviewer: Survivors are...uh...

Veteran: If you want to, uh, just restate that again saying survivors.

Interviewer: Okay. Because there won't be no sur- ...Pearl Harbor survivors around to talk about it.

Veteran: J.C., do you want to take a quick break or have a drink of water?

Interviewer: Okay. I'll go to the bathroom. [LAUGHS] You know, older guys have to go more than younger guys. [LAUGHS] So, y'all can look forward to that. JC_ALSTONT5 [TECH TALK] [SLATE/TAKE 5]

Veteran: When you were on the USS California and you experienced what you did at Pearl Harbor, did you ever imagine that 75 years later you'd be looking back on it?

Interviewer: No. I had no idea I'd reach this age. [LAUGHS]

Veteran: Could you just say that for me--that Pearl Harbor as a young kid, I couldn't imagine now being 75 years down the road? Could you say something like that to me in your own words?

Interviewer: Uh, being a Pearl Harbor survivor as a young man, I never thought I'd live to be this age.

Veteran: What's it like, um, being at this point in your life, looking back at what happened 75 years ago?

Interviewer: Well, it's hard to believe but it all happened, and a lot since military-wise action. My grand... I mean my--son-in-law, he was in Vietnam. He got shot in the head. He just got part of the sight in one eye left. He's still got the bullet in the back of his head, and they said it'd probably do more damage to take it out than it would to leave it in there and it'll just grow gristle around it. He can't drive. He's got a moped he can ride around town in. If it's under so many horsepower, he can ride it; but if it's over so many, he can't do that. He has to have a driver's license for it. But...he can't see enough to get a driver's license.

Veteran: Getting back to Pearl Harbor, do you think--how differently do you think of what happened there now than--how differently do you think about what happened there right now than you did then?

Interviewer: Well, uh, they were--the Vietnam people and the old Korean people, people would--they didn't think they should be fighting. Uh, but they were in the military and they was ordered to do so, so they did. But, uh, I think it's a shame that they act like they do about different wars. They think World War II was fine 'cause that kept them out of enemy hands. And, uh, Vietnam and Korea, they think that was, uh--that they shouldn't have had to do them wars. Let them do them themselves over there. Well, if they didn't help--help them countries, well, they'd take them over and then they'd eventually come to--to us.

Veteran: How do you view Pearl Harbor now compared to the way you viewed it just a few years afterwards?

Interviewer: Well, that's kind of a tough question. I viewed it as--if it wasn't for Pearl Harbor, there wouldn't have been no war. But since we had Pearl Harbor to happen and start the war that we finished, that kept military countries from sending troops in here and killing civilians and so on. I just...can't visualize that they didn't put it in history books and they really carried on down the line 'til now, but they haven't. You talk to kids--you can ask one, maybe he's graduating from college--Pearl Harbor, and he'd never heard of it. And he's a graduate of--of college and he never heard of Pearl Harbor.

Veteran: How do you remember Pearl Harbor now looking back on it?

Interviewer: Well, it's changed so much now. It don't even look like the same place.

Veteran: But the experience of it. Not the place. The things that you experienced on December 7th. How do you feel about those things now?

Interviewer: Well, I feel relieved that it was over, but going through the war like that for four years almost--that isn't too good. But it had to be done. That was part of my job.

Veteran: Now that you're nearing the end of your lifetime, do you look at things differently?

Interviewer: Well, yeah, I look at different things. Uh, that they didn't put it in the history books and--and tell these people as time went on about what happened and the reason for it. A lot of people think we're the one who started the war with the Japanese. Yeah, there's some like that.

Veteran: What's the one thing you want future generations to remember about Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: That those people and the rest of the military...win the battle and surrender from the enemy, that they don't have to worry about being killed in their own land.

Veteran: Of all the horrible things and all the painful things that you experienced during the war, do you think you have closure? Have you made peace with those things?

Interviewer: Yeah. I have. Because at my age, anything can happen. So...but until then, I'm still going to make the parades and talk to them. That's all I can do. [LAUGHS]

Veteran: Can you tell me in your own words that you've made peace with these painful memories you experienced in the war?

Interviewer: Yeah, I've made pe- ...peace with the memories of the war. But you know how it is--the Japanese soldier himself, he--he wouldn't have fought if the emperor hadn't told him to fight to the death. He told them that. So...

Veteran: You have a passage on your wall that I found interesting about what--about, uh, being a survivor.

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Could you tell me the significance of that and why you hang it on your wall?

Interviewer: Well, that's because, uh, we go in these parades and the children ask their parents "What is a survivor?" And that kindly explains it in somewhat terms.

Veteran: What--paraphrase what it says.

Interviewer: Well...

Veteran: Why is it so meaningful to you?

Interviewer: Well, because, uh, we try to get--keep it going and keep, uh, these younger generations to know about it, that that might happen to them someday and they'd have to do the same thing.

Veteran: In essence, what does that poem say?

Interviewer: Well, I hadn't read it over enough to really, uh, quote it. I read it over a few times after I got it and, of course, I just hung it up in there and I--I hadn't read it in a while. [LAUGHS]

Veteran: Do you feel as if you're a survivor?

Interviewer: Yeah, I'm a survivor. All of them were survivors.

Veteran: What makes you a survivor?

Interviewer: Put my--my neck on the line. That's why. That's why I say the ones that survive are not heroes; the one that gave it all is heroes. But we...come back and lived a normal life after, you know, a few years of getting over the war memories. And that's been good.

Veteran: When I read that poem, one thing I took away from it was that it was saying it's okay to be a survivor. God picked those men to--to die and you shouldn't feel guilty about living.

Interviewer: Yeah, I know. Well, I don't--I don't feel guilty about living.

Veteran: Did you at one time feel guilty about living?

Interviewer: No. I didn't. It's just a...what happened in the war. If you survive, you don't worry about that because, hey, you know it could've bene you but you just was not in the right place at the right time to get killed.

Veteran: But still, do you ever wonder why the Lord has a plan for one man and a different plan for another, and how he decides?

Interviewer: No, I don't know how he decides. Now, I can't--I can't answer that question. [LAUGHS] But they did. And why, I don't know.

Veteran: Um, now, I certainly consider you a hero and all the survivors of Pearl Harbor that I speak to are heroes to me. Why don't you consider yourself a hero?

Interviewer: Well, I was doing my job and I didn't get killed. I didn't pay the ultimate sacrifice. They're the heroes--they died. [CLEARS THROAT] Pearl Harbor survivors is, say, a group of people that survived the war and, uh, they're proud to, uh, tell people about what happened during the war so they'll know really what happened, because we were there.

Veteran: Do you think your--people in your generation were more selfless or willing to sacrifice than people now?

Interviewer: Well, I don't think so. 'Cause now they've got the whole volunteer, uh, military, so they're going in it on their own freewill. It's not like a draft.

Veteran: So, to finish up--this is a long interview. We've been talking to you for--for quite--quite a while. Just to summarize things, what's your final word on Pearl Harbor? And can you say, "My final word is..."?

Interviewer: My final word is on Pearl Harbor, this is the last anniversary that we'll have. There will not be no more. And what Pearl Harbor people are left, still go out and talk to the public and the schools. But we're so near the top of the ladder that it won't be long that there won't be any Pearl--Pearl Harbor survivors to talk about it.

Veteran: We're going to lose something when that happens. What--what will we lose?

Interviewer: Well, we'll lose history. We'll lose information of what happened during World War II.

Veteran: Thank you so much, J.C. Um, those are my questions. Is there something you wanted to talk about that we haven't?

Interviewer: Well...

Veteran: I mean, you talked a lot.

Interviewer: One thing I'll--I'll mention and then I'll quit.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: When we were at the [UNINTEL PHRASE] Islands--you may not know it, but I do--you know, they used prisoners. They told them "If you work on these ships, ammunition ships, and you survive, you will get, uh, a clear slate and turned back out in the public." Well, they did. But one ammunition ship that was in the harbor there--

Veteran: Now, who are the prisoners? These are--

Interviewer: Prisoners from like, the country or the federal. Prisoners that was in for like--

Veteran: These are American...?

Interviewer: Americans, yeah.

Veteran: ...inmates?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Okay, I've done something wrong and are...?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: Incarcerated. Uh...

Veteran: Do you want to maybe just make that point? Um, so people--I didn't--I didn't understand that when you said that.

Interviewer: Well, they, uh, used prisoners that was "carcerated" in our country to work on an ammunition ships, and if they survived the war, they were given a clean slate. And, uh, the reason I was telling this, because--that--nobody will never know what happened. If it was done accidentally, but that ship blew up with all that ammunition on it. It, uh, did damage to ships half a mile away. You know, [UNINTEL PHRASE] and there was shrapnel and stuff--it didn't do bad damage to them that far away, but it done damage, and it done a lot of damage to some of it that was closer. Of course they'll never know what caused the explosion. If somebody got mad and did it acc- ...on purpose, or if it was an accident, or what. You'll never know 'cause there's nobody living from that ship. And everything blew away. No, you know, evidence of stuff to try to put--piece together what happened.

Veteran: Why is this particular story so important to you in that you want people to know about it?

Interviewer: Well, I think them people that was incarcerated, I think they made a wise choice to, uh, do that and survive, and be, uh, a normal person back in civilian life and aid the war against the enemy.

Veteran: Guys, are there things that you think need clarifying? Any signposts?

Interviewer: I mean, he didn't say in a full sentence about like, seeing the green plane, what he thought.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: If you think that's important.

Veteran: Yeah. Um, just the green plane and what it was or the reaction to the green plane with a sentence?

Interviewer: Like, his personal experience of like, seeing the green plane.

Veteran: Okay. So, just for a moment, if you can kind of just imagine in your head that moment of being on deck and spotting that--that plane. And you have that memory in your head now?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Do you think you could just sort of tell us what you're thinking about and what that memory is?

Interviewer: Well, uh, we was expected it and, uh, the green plane of the Japanese mainland came to Okinawa with a white cross on it, uh, with the surrender terms [UNINTEL]--well, non... [UNINTEL PHRASE].

Veteran: No, no, you said all that. But more--just the moment in time.

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: You know, the--the sea breeze, the men around you, the--the excitement, the--you know, the--the green against the blue sky. That--that type of memory.

Interviewer: Yeah, that was a happy moment because what we were going to do is take it easy. We wouldn't have to be on watch so much, we wouldn't have to do all that. And laying that old smoke--keep them from seeing us. [UNINTEL] us.

Veteran: So, describe to me, uh, seeing the plane--the first moment that you saw the plane. What did you see?

Interviewer: I see that we completed our mission when it comes in sight. I said, we could now rest assure that we won't have to land troops on the main island. That they're coming to terms--unconditional terms.

Veteran: And what about--just describe what was in your sightline.

Interviewer: Well, really that's all. I wasn't looking for anything else. We were expecting it 'cause everybody that wasn't busy that had--was on watch or something, uh, they was out there looking.

Veteran: So just tell us again the story of seeing it.

Interviewer: Well, a lot of us that was on deck watching for the green plane coming from the Japanese main island to Okinawa for unconditional surrender. And, of course, all ships was notified and aircraft to not shoot it down. Let it land.

Veteran: And what did you see?

Interviewer: What'd I see? I seen it when it landed. And I said, "The war is over. We can relax now." To myself.

Veteran: Uh, could you just say for me, um, "I saw the green plane in the sky, and then I saw it land"?

Interviewer: I saw the green plane in the sky and I saw it land.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: Is that enough?

Veteran: Um, yeah, I think so. Guys, is he done?

Interviewer: That was awesome, yeah. It was awesome.

Veteran: That was great.

Interviewer: One word to describe Pearl Harbor?

Veteran: One word, just one, or one phrase to describe Pearl Harbor? Is there one that you can think of? What would it be?

Interviewer: What would it be? Well, when I come out from number two tour out from under and looked down the way, them ships was burning and [OKLAHOMA?] turned over, I said, "Golly, I didn't know all this could happen." But it did.

Veteran: That was great. Thank you so much, J.C.

Interviewer: Okay.