Veteran: [Interview begins mid-sentence] ...are about this big in size. Okay. About that thick. They had a little rod sticking up from the top. And what happened is that rod is the detonator, and we hit the rod and that detonated the mine and it blew us up pretty good. No one got hurt in there, but as you can see, it caused some serious damage to the tank. And then on the back it showed us working on it, trying to -- See, as you can see, there is nothing but desert out there. No -- hardly any rocks at all. But we were able to pull our track out and fix it and then catch back up with our unit. And after we caught back up with them, that's where we got into combat. But whenever we were stuck in the mud deal, we were stuck. And whenever we were stuck, all these Iraqis, they started popping up out of these bunkers, you know, and raising their little white flags and surrendering, because they were scared to death. You know, they saw all of us there and they were scared to death because they didn't want to die. So they just started popping up out of every place. We were able to get hundreds of prisoners of war and we just circled them up and put them inside a little fence and give them some food and they were happy. They were hungry, thirsty. They just looked pretty pathetic. They didn't look ready to fight. But we were able to get all that stuff ready. Now, the tanks over there just on the other side of the second mud deal, they had a lot of tanks that were buried as you can see, halfway buried in the sand. And that was called camouflage neck covering. And what that helps to do is obviously help to camouflage them and helps to sort of deter the radar as other planes flew over to try to camouflage their position. So what would happen was, see, they were buried in there, they were there to stay. Those mines were not -- Those tanks were not going to move away from them. So what we did we just started having target practice with them. And we were just shooting, blowing them up. This is one here, okay, that we just blew up. I don't think anybody was in there at the time. If they were, as you can see, they're not going to live. But we were able to make it through okay. Nobody got killed in my particular unit. It was pretty fun. Here we are at the end, this was a day after the war, and, you know, we're just playing cards. We dug a little table in the dirt and just having a little fun that way. And this was all for our unit. Because we were just a select few, okay, that were chosen, you know, to make these roads, these paths with the mine fields so that everyone else, you know, that was going to fight in Kuwait could get through there. So we had a very important job, okay, to make the lanes so that we can go in there and clear Kuwait of the bad guys, so to speak. So it was quite an issue. In these pictures here, this is a friend of mine, we went to boot camp and tank school and everything together, he is from Florida. But this is Kuwait -- Kuwait City is extremely modern. It is like Columbia. Okay. You've got highrise buildings, but their culture is even -- is very modernized. But there are some cultures who still take part in the veils, you know, in covering their face, but then you've got other people in Kuwait City that are, you know, just like you would see in downtown Columbia, wear pants, dresses and things like that. Any other questions you want to ask?

Interviewer: So these are friends of like your whole unit?

Veteran: Yeah. We became -- we became good friends, especially the guys that were on my tank with me, when I got there, you know, we had never met. And when you're that close everyday for 24 hours a day, you know, you learn a lot about -- you become real good friends, friends for life.

Interviewer: Did you keep in touch with your friends --

Veteran: You know, I haven't talked to them in a few years. We sort of, you know, gotten out of touch. But you know, I don't know if they are still -- I'm sure they are, but I don't know, but I'm sure they are. They are all around my age. Some are younger than me. They are in their, you know, late 20s or early 30s.

Interviewer: So like basically, y'all used machine guns and tanks?

Veteran: Yeah. In our tank we had the main gun is 105 millimeters, then we had a machine -- two machine guns. We had a 50 caliber machine gun, which the tank commander used, and an M16 machine gun, which was attached. It was to the side of the main gun tube, but it was fired from the inside, okay? And then we had just a regular rifle, an M16 rifle, and then I had a nine millimeter pistol. And those were the weapons that we used in that particular tank.

Interviewer: What did you do with prisoners of war?

Veteran: We just herded them into an area and we just put a little hasty fence around them. And there were -- as other units came through, MPs, military police, they stood guard. And you know, I don't know what happened to them, because we just continued on, you know, with our mission into Kuwait. So I don't know what happened to those prisoners of war. I just know that we just put them in a herding area, so to speak, herded them up like cattle.

Interviewer: What did you think about like war, when you went to fight?

Veteran: I was -- When I first got the call to go over there, you know, it's a little nervous, you know, a little nervous, but excited at the same time. You know, because you -- when I joined the military, you know, I didn't really think of a war at the time. You know, you don't really think of that. But in the Marine Corps, the Marine Corps, we're always considered the first to go. Just like right now in Afganistan, you know, who were the first people that they put on the ground over there? You know, they put the Marines on the ground, sort of, you know to get things started. Yeah, I was nervous at first, then I got used to it and whenever artillery started dropping around you, you're just nervous again, especially the day that we were going in, okay, the day the ground war started. And obviously you are nervous because you are of the unexpected. You know, you don't know what's going to happen to you. And luckily, you know, luckily we made it through unscathed, because after it was all over with, we were told that our particular unit, they were expecting 80 percent casualties. Okay. Eighty percent of us were expected to die. So we were -- we were very lucky to come back alive.

Interviewer: Did you have any wives or --

Veteran: No, I was single at the time. No wife. Didn't have a girlfriend, you know, so that's one reason why we were chosen. Because these guys that you see in that picture, we were all single. Yep, we were all single. And you know, that's one reason why they chose us, because they thought, hey, you don't have any family back home, you know, I mean, as far as a wife and a child is concerned.

Interviewer: How did you relax? What did you do?

Veteran: Relax? We played cards. Yeah, we played spades and hearts. We -- One of my buddies had a frisbee, you know, played frisbee. There was a lot of down time, because we did most of our training at night because that's when we were told we were going to enter, you know, was at night. So we did all of our training at night and you do it with no lights, okay, because if you have lights on, they're going to see you coming. So we did everything with no lights. We had night vision goggles, you know, you had to look through the goggles, comes up green, and in those you have no depth perception. You know, you can't, you know, tell where things are. You can see out of them, but you can't really tell a whole lot. So there was a lot of down time there.

Interviewer: Were you like particularly nervous or anything about your certain mission, like what you had to do?

Veteran: Yeah, we were nervous because of just being in a mine plow tank, because you knew you had to go through mind fields. And if you think of mine fields, you think of something that could happen to you, something that's pretty bad. Even though we did have plows on them, supposedly plow them out of the way, you know, those don't necessarily work all the time.

Interviewer: So like the plows, you wouldn't actually hit the mines, if the mines blow up --

Veteran: Yeah. There were different types of mines. You had antipersonnel mines, you know, obviously didn't do anything to the tank. They would just blow up and make a lot of sand, just blow a lot of sand up. But if a person actually stepped on those, then obviously it would, you know, get rid of a leg, an arm, because they're anti personnel. But then the anti tank mines, you know, obviously they can do a lot of damage. Luckily it didn't hit us underneath the tank. If it would have hit us underneath the tank, it would have caused a lot more damage, because underneath the armor is not very thick. You know, it is thicker obviously on the outside, you know, because that's where the rails are going to hit you, so it needs to be thicker, so that they do not penetrate the armor. But you know, I was pretty nervous. I would be lying to you if I said I wasn't.

Interviewer: Were the NVGs, like the Air Forces, are they all the same?

Veteran: I'm sure. These were ones that we used as far as outside, they were just, you know, binoculars. You know, just stuck them out there to your head. I'm sure they're all the same. Then as the driver, I had something that I would slide into one of my sights. Okay. In the M60 tank that I drove, there were three little windows that I looked out of. One up front, one to the right side, one to the left. And with the night vision site, I would pop out the window, pop that site in there, and it was like a periscope. Look out this way, come down and have a big green screen right here, that I had to put my face to it, you know, and drive like that. So I only saw, you know, right in front of me. I couldn't see anything to the sides, okay, when I had those sites in at night. So I'm sure they're similar to what the Air Forces are.

Interviewer: Would you have rather been like another part of the tanker or did you like being the driver?

Veteran: I loved being the driver. Yeah. It was a lot of fun. You know, as the more years I spent in the Marine Corps, you know, you move up.

Interviewer: It is based --

Veteran: On rank, basically. You start out as a loader. The loader is usually your privates, you know, your private first class. And then as you get to a Lance Corporal, you know, you move up to the driver. Then your next step would be the gunner, and then the next step up would be the tank commander. And that's where I ended up, as the tank commander.

Interviewer: Did you like feel lots of responsibility being the commander?

Veteran: Yes. Because I'm responsible for the crew. You know, I've got to tell the driver where to go, because a lot of times when they're down there, their vision is only so much, you know. So you've got to know what commands to tell the driver, you got to make quick decisions. You've got to make decisions about target acquisition, what type of round to put in, so it is a lot of responsibility to be a tank commander, a lot. But you know, you learn as you go. As you're in the tank, if you have good commander, you know, while you are out there, there is other levels and you learn from them. It just makes the transition easier, you know, when you have good commanders out there.

Interviewer: What was your most memorable moment when you were over there?

Veteran: It was when we were -- It was after the war, actually. We were just outside of Kuwait City and the Kuwaitis, a lot of them came to where we were parked, okay, where we were camped. And they came up and they were so excited. They were thanking us and hugging us and giving us all kinds of things and just thanking us that, you know, for giving them their city back, you know. And that really sticks in my mind, hey, you know, we did something good here, you know, we gave these people back, you know, what was theirs. And that's one of my most memorable moments.

Interviewer: Was it all like civilians?

Veteran: Yeah. They were civilians, yeah. We didn't -- I didn't see any -- I mean, I saw Kuwaiti soldiers there, but the ones that came to us were the civilians, yeah.

Interviewer: Did you have a lot of interaction with the Kuwaiti people?

Veteran: No. Not at all. Well, we had just very little interaction. We were in Kuwait. Once we, you know, liberated -- liberated the city, our camp was, you know, right there at the city, outside the city, and we were there for a month, you know. But we didn't have a whole lot of interaction with the Kuwaiti people themselves. Our commanders did, you know. They interacted with them a little bit more than we did. But we just sat around and played cards, you know, because there wasn't anything else to do, but just to play cards.

Interviewer: So like how long did the war last?

Veteran: The war lasted about, I think it was two or three days. I think it may have been three days at the max, as far as the ground war is concerned. You know, the air war started in -- I believe it started in January, but the actual ground war was just a few days. And we just got a lot accomplished. We got a lot accomplished during that time. Because we had been training so much, we knew exactly what we had to do, and we just got the job done and they just started -- the Iraquis started fleeing Kuwait. Whatever they could find, motorcycles, cars, trucks, military vehicles, and then we just started bombing them, you know, as they left. And that was a pretty gruesome sight. Because afterwards, I mean, we would go -- we went and looked at it. And all it was, just imagine clips of road, full of cars that had been blown up, and there were a lot of bodies, you know, all over the place and obviously loose -- you know, missing heads and limbs and things like that. That was pretty -- pretty gruesome.

Interviewer: Do you think like the war changed you or anything, seeing all those dead people?

Veteran: Not really. I wasn't really changed as far as seeing those people like that. It was just, you know, just an experience, just an experience.

Interviewer: What kind of stuff did you wear like -- just wear?

Veteran: We had to wear our -- We had to have our gas mask at our side all times, okay? Because at anytime the threat of chemical warfare was there. Gas. We always had to have that. If we didn't have that, we were going to be in some serious trouble. Okay. You were going to die. We wore what is called an NBC -- well, not an NBC, CBC suit, which is just a -- it's like a jumpsuit, just a green jumpsuit, which was -- it was fire retardant. It would repel fire. Because you are in a tank, you know, around it is just -- obviously, it is going to catch on fire, and that was going to give you a chance, you know, to get out before you burned up by wearing that suit. I always had my nine millimeter with me, you know, just in case. Because if you came in contact with anybody with any of the enemy, you wanted to have something you could fight with, with you. So I always had that with me. And I always had water. I always carried canteens of water, because the later it got, the hotter it got, obviously. When you think of the desert, you think of something that's hot, but the funny thing is when we were over there, it was wintertime. You know, because we were over there from, you know, November, December, January, February, it was pretty cold, believe it or not, at night, and then it seemed like it would get down in the 30s, because I slept with all my clothes on, all my boots on, covered up in my sleeping bag. One of those, you know, those military sleeping bags, where you can cover all the way up, just have a little hole in them, and I was still cold. Then during the day it would get sometimes in the 50s and 60s. Every once in a while it would pop up maybe in the 70s, but then later on the more we were in there, the longer we were there, started getting in the 90s, you know, in the 100s, in April. It was cold when we were out in the actual desert, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia.

Interviewer: Did you wear all that gear like all the time, even on your free time?

Veteran: Yes. We had to wear it at all times.

Interviewer: Do you have to have 20/20 vision to be a driver?

Veteran: No. No, you do not.

Interviewer: Did you ever regret like enlisting, like before or after the war?

Veteran: No, I never regret. I never regret it. I'm proud. I'm proud to have been in the Marine Corps at the time that this happened.

Interviewer: How many people were in the tank at a time?

Veteran: There were four people in a tank. The gunner, the loader, the tank commander and the driver. And the driver was in a compartment all to himself, okay? He was separated. He was separated from the other three. The part that turns, the part that rotates, that's where the gunner, the loader and the tank commander are, and the driver just stays in that one little compartment, you know, right up in there, that's where the driver is, and the other ones are within that compartment there.

Interviewer: What is the safest part of the tank?

Veteran: The safest part is the driver, in the driver's compartment.

Interviewer: What's the most dangerous?

Veteran: The tank commander's position, because he has --

Interviewer: What?

Veteran: The tank commander's position. He has -- The tank commander, he's in a position up here, a smaller little area up here where he sits and he is -- he has more of his body exposed because he is up high so he can see everything. So his position in the tank is the most dangerous of the four positions. We were over there, again, after the war, the morale was real low, and the commanders got together and said, hey, let's have some type of field day. So they got together the whole battalion and there were, you know, quite a few men in the battalion. We had a field day with different games, and it got out of hand. Because when you got a bunch of men together, it got out of hand and people started, you know, throwing things and it just, you know, it was pretty bad, pretty bad. It was a lot of fun

Interviewer: How long were you in there after the war?

Veteran: After the war, let's see, March -- I was over there approximately a month and a half after the war had ended.

Interviewer: Why did you need to stay after the war ended?

Veteran: Just to -- You know, I really don't know the reasoning why we were kept over there, because we really didn't have any mission, okay? We were just there in a camp. I really don't know why we had to stay behind. I was -- At that time, you know, I wasn't in any command area, so we were just kept out of the loop. They didn't tell us a whole lot. Whatever they told us they said, all right, we're getting your tank, you're going to go train, okay, you know, yes, sir. You know, you always had to say "yes, sir, no, sir" in the Marine Corps.

Interviewer: Did you always have the same position as the driver?

Veteran: Let's see. As the driver, when I was over there, I was always the driver. And then when I came back, then I moved up to the gunner. And then, you know, my last position was the tank commander.

Interviewer: Were you trained for all of them?

Veteran: Uh-huh. Well, in tank school you go through the different positions, you know, but you're mostly trained to be a driver and a loader in tank school. Because they know that when you get out of there, those are the two positions that you are going to be in, because you don't have the high rank that everybody else does. Then as you go along, you do all the positions, you know, you get in there and you learn all you can from the different guys in your tank, the gunner and the TC, and by the time it is your time to go to those particular positions, then you know what to do, you know -- Every year that we went to the range quite often, and we were all able, you know, to get in there and, you know, shoot the tank and everything, just work on skills, as far as target acquisition is concerned.

Interviewer: How long did tank school last?

Veteran: Tank school was nine weeks. And that was in Fort Knox, Kentucky. And I went during the summer, and it was extremely hot, extremely hot.

Interviewer: What kind of food and stuff did you eat while you were -- like during the war?

Veteran: We had what's called MREs. Anybody heard of MREs before? They are the little bags.

Interviewer: Hydrated food?

Veteran: Little brown plastic bags. And that was what we ate. And you know, that got old real fast, and it fills you up. You know, we ate -- we had enough for three meals a day, you know, but -- and I usually ate one to two, because they were so filling, you know. You know, they weren't very tasty. But the main concern there was water. You really had to ration your water, and -- because you never knew when you were going to get a new supply of water.

Interviewer: Where did the water come from, like the water that you had to bring it or --

Veteran: It was -- it was what's called the base camp, you know they had what's called a water bladder where they purify the water and they put it in these big trucks, and they would every so often they would come out to our camps and refill our water supply, and that's what we were able to get.

Interviewer: What were like the MREs like?

Veteran: We had tuna noodles, we had spaghetti with meat sauce. It didn't have meatballs, just had meat sauce.

Interviewer: So it just wasn't very flavor --

Veteran: Yes, it wasn't very flavorful. No. We had what's called Chicken Ala King, ham slice. Let's see, we had -- what was it called, oh, dried beef patty.

Interviewer: Ooh.

Veteran: What you would do now with that dried beef patty, you would add water to it, it would plump up and it would be okay. You know, it would be okay.

Interviewer: Would you just like build a fire and cook it on the fire or something?

Veteran: Yeah, during the day we would do that, but at night you couldn't have any fire because of the light. Yeah. Because you didn't want anybody to know where you were, at night. Most of mine I just ate mine just right out of the bag. You know, I didn't take the time to heat them. You just got used to it. It tasted the same whether it was hot or cold. It was all pretty nasty. Then you had little packs of Kool-Aid in there, some cocoa powder in there. Then you had the dried fruit, like strawberries. Strawberries, man, they were good. It was a little square thing, and there were about four by two inches and about half an inch thick, and oh, man, that stuff was delicious. I can see it and taste it right now. I was always hoping that every pack that I opened up would have the strawberries in it, would have the dried strawberries. Then you had the dried peaches, then you had fruit cocktail, you know, dried up fruit cocktail. That was pretty good.

Interviewer: Was there ice cream?

Veteran: No ice cream.

Interviewer: I wouldn't survive.

Veteran: No. Let's see. What else? You had little packets of coffee in there.

Interviewer: Did you drink the coffee?

Veteran: No. Because it was nasty. Let's see. What else was in those things? You always had the toilet paper in there. You had a little packet of toilet paper. You know, and they were in every one, and obviously you saved those packets of toilet paper.

Interviewer: So you got enough?

Veteran: Exactly. Let's see. And that was about it that was in there.

Interviewer: What time did it start getting dark? Did it get dark really before the days end or --

Veteran: Around what it is now, around 5:30, 6:00 o'clock. It was the same -- it was the same time.

Interviewer: Did you like it better during the daytime because you could like do more stuff or --

Veteran: It was actually boring during the day. Because I mean, we were ready to train, you know. That just got us in the day.

Interviewer: Were you allowed to sleep during the day?

Veteran: Yeah, you could take some naps, as long as you had someone on watch, you know, you could take a little nap here and there. Because whenever we -- whenever we stopped, we got -- we got into these large circles with everybody pointing out so that you could see what was coming, you know. You don't want to turn to the inside, you want to turn out, so that your tanks are ready for anybody coming, that's trying to get you, so to speak.

Interviewer: If you wanted to, could you have slept inside the tank?

Veteran: Yeah, but there was -- Inside those tanks is very, very small space, extremely small. We had one of our guys, he slept inside some. He made a makeshift hammock, where half his body would be in it. And I don't see how he was -- In a hammock, if half your body is in it, you're not very comfortable. I just looked in there and I just laugh at him. He was funny. No, the most comfortable spot for me was on the left front fender, you know, just sleeping there. You know, obviously it was metal, I just slept there.

Interviewer: How big was it, like width-wise?

Veteran: About that wide. I mean, because you were there, you know, you are laying out, you're looking at all the millions and millions of stars in the sky, and watching the planes fly over, and then hearing them drop their bombs. You know, you just relax, you just fall asleep. You wake up that next morning. It was fine. I always woke up in the same position that I went to bed.

Interviewer: You didn't hear when they dropped the bomb?

Veteran: Yeah, because you just get used to it.

Interviewer: I would be scared.

Veteran: You just get used to it.

Interviewer: Did you have trouble like the first few nights sleeping?

Veteran: I was -- The closer we got to Kuwait and everything, obviously the louder -- the louder it was. But the first night that we actually heard them all the time, we stayed up a good bit just to listen to it. You know, that was some sweet sounding stuff. Because we knew that they were taking care of business.

Interviewer: So it was the Americans dropping the bomb, I'm sure, right?

Veteran: Yeah, the Allied Forces. Yeah, it wasn't the enemies.

Interviewer: I doubt they would be going to sleep --

Veteran: That's right. At one point in time some mortar rounds, they were dropping mortar rounds around our position, and you know, that was a little scary. Because all of a sudden they just started boom, boom, boom, just started dropping around us. Where did that come from, you know, so we just got in our tanks, you know. That was the safest place at the time.

Interviewer: When you used hand grenades, did you use any of those?

Veteran: Hand grenades, we didn't use any of ours. After the war we went --

Interviewer: Target practice?

Veteran: We went to -- we went out from our camp into these different bunkers and, yeah, we found a lot of machine guns, AK 47s and grenades, and we were throwing grenades, their grenades, you know, at different things. Like there were some old cars, and things that we were throwing grenades and trying to blow them up and shooting their machine guns and -- Because we were bored. There wasn't anything to do, so we just went away from camp, and you know, and we got in trouble for doing that. Because when we came back, they made us dig a hole for two straight days, you know, taking turns, digging a hole. We dug a hole, it is probably maybe half the length from this wall to that wall, half that length, --

Interviewer: Oh my gosh.

Veteran: -- and it was pretty deep.

Interviewer: Did you sleep in it?

Veteran: No, because we had to fill it back up. They made us fill it back up.

Interviewer: Oh, gosh, how mean.

Veteran: So that wasn't -- you know, it was spur of the moment, we went and did all that stuff, you know, digging the hole and all that stuff, it wasn't too bad, you know.

Interviewer: But was it worth it?

Veteran: Yes, it was worth it. It was worth it.

Interviewer: Did you jump in the pile of leaves, pile of sand?

Veteran: Oh, yes. It was just everywhere.

Interviewer: Were you glad when you got home, like you were ready to go home and stuff?

Veteran: Yeah, we were all ready to come back home. It was nice to be on American soil again, see family and friends. It was nice.

Interviewer: How did your parents or any brothers or sisters react when they found out that you had to go to the war?

Veteran: Yeah. They got a little nervous, got a little scared, obviously. I was living in South Carolina at the time, and they, you know, they came up and visited, you know, just for a day or two, you know, because it was fast. They said, "Hey, you are going," you know, and then the next day, you know, we were packing our stuff up, getting our gear, you know, and going up to Camp Lejume to get everything processed. They were nervous, obviously, because, you know, of the unexpected. You know, you don't know what's going to happen.

Interviewer: When you heard about the Afganistan war, did you like think maybe, even if you're retired, you could still get maybe called back?

Veteran: Well, I thought about it, you know, since I'm out, I know they can't require me to go and make me go. I would have to sign back up, in other words, to go. And the thought had crossed my mind, because I'm still, you know -- I can still go, you know, I can still do the work. But you know, they got a lot of good people out there now, with a lot of highly trained Marines and other military personnel, and they will get the job done. I was excited at first, you know, but then I know that I couldn't go.

Interviewer: If you signed back up, would you have to go through all the training again?

Veteran: That's a good question. I don't think I would have to go through the bootcamp. I really don't know what would happen if I signed up again. It's been so long since I've been out. They might make me go back in, you know, do the bootcamp and everything like that.

Interviewer: How long did bootcamp last?

Veteran: Bootcamp was twelve weeks in the Marine Corps, twelve weeks down in Paris Island. You know, you did all kinds of things. You had classes -- You go to the classroom for the first -- It is broken down in different phases, like, first, second, third and fourth phase. Like the first phase is called the knowledge phase. You just go learn all about the history of the Marine Corps and different things. You do a lot of physical training, a lot of exercising.

Interviewer: Did you do any swimming in the ocean?

Veteran: No, didn't swim in the ocean. We swam in the pool.

Interviewer: Oh, cool. Even better.

Veteran: We did our training in the pool, with, you know, you train with full gear, you know, with shoes, your pack and rifle, everything, helmet. So you know, that's -- I mean, it was fun obviously, but it was a lot of hard work. Then you've got second phase. The second phase was rifle range. You go to the rifle range for three weeks, and become highly qualified in expert riflemen. Marine Corps spends more time than any other branch of service in there with the rifle range, and their weapons. And again, I'm cautious. I'm a marine, you know, I'm obviously biased, but that's the truth, I'm not just saying that, you know. Any of your father's in the military?

Interviewer: He is retired. Retired Marine and Reserve Air Force.

Veteran: Okay. Your dad is --

Interviewer: My dad is retired marine, my stepdad is reservist. My dad was a drill sergeant in the Army.

Veteran: Okay. Oh, good.

Interviewer: He got out after 20 years.

Veteran: So when did your dad get out of the Marine Corps? How long was he -- He retired from the Marine Corps?

Interviewer: I think a little after I was born, like a year or two afterwards.

Veteran: Oh, okay.

Interviewer: It was when I was real young. Was it really physically demanding over in Kuwait and stuff, like the whole --

Veteran: Physically demanding, not really. It wasn't physically demanding over there. Mentally, yes, you know, but not really physically.

Interviewer: Did you have to do water survival in the pool?

Veteran: Yeah, water survival. That's what it was, as far as the swimming is concerned. We spend a few days, you know, doing water survival and that's it. That's it.

Interviewer: Were you injured while you were over there?

Veteran: Let's see.

Interviewer: Get a Purple Heart?

Veteran: No injuries. No injuries. We were lucky, you know, because we could have been injured, whenever we hit that anti tank mine. But we were lucky. We were lucky. No injuries.

Interviewer: Do you have like any way to communicate with your family back at home while you were gone?

Veteran: We could write letters, and every so often, you know, someone would come and pick up the mail and give us mail.

Interviewer: So could you receive, like, care packages or did they have to scan all through it?

Veteran: Yeah, they didn't -- Care packages, they didn't come very often, because a lot of people tried to smuggle in like alcoholic beverages, and those were banned in Saudi Arabia. And so hardly any care packages were brought or sent. But we received mail every -- every week or so, we received mail. We were able to send out our mail whenever they brought it to us.

Interviewer: Was there any air conditioning like anywhere around there, anyway?

Veteran: No. No air conditioning, no. Nothing on the tank, you know, so it's pretty hot in there. Because whenever -- you fire the big gun, it creates a lot of heat, when it heats up the turn area. But there is no air.

Interviewer: Did you have to do a lot of running?

Veteran: Over there, no. We didn't do --

Interviewer: What was like the most physical thing you did?

Veteran: Over there, the most physical thing. Walking back and forth, to formation, you know, because we'd have a morning formation, a noon formation and an evening formation, and that was it. You know, we did some physical training on our own, you know, just to keep in shape basically, just push-ups and sit-ups, and things like that, you know. The main -- It was just, you know, staying up, you know, some sleep deprivation, stuff like that, that was a little demanding on our bodies, but that was it.

Interviewer: What exactly was formation? Like what did you have to do?

Veteran: What it is is everybody in the unit, we just come together and we would just get accountability, make sure everybody was here and still alive. That's all formation is. You just form up into a little group into lines and you just make sure everybody's there. That's all it is.

Interviewer: Kind of like a head count?

Veteran: Yeah, a head count.

Interviewer: What happens if someone is missing, you've got to find them?

Veteran: Yeah. Yeah. You've got to find them.

Interviewer: Was anybody ever missing?

Veteran: No, nobody was missing. There wasn't anywhere to go. You're out in the middle of the desert, you're not going to go anywhere. Now, we did have -- I take that back. Someone -- We had watch, someone had to watch at night, and at one point -- this was at the beginning, we were in a very large circle. There is a lot of distance between the tanks, and one guy did get lost in between the tanks, in between his watch, he wandered off and he couldn't find his way back. So the next morning when we had a formation, you know, he wasn't there, so we went and found him. He just wandered off, you know, he just got lost.

Interviewer: Did anybody like ever try to escape, from like the Army, did they try to like wander off and go back home?

Veteran: Whenever we were going to go over there, we had one guy who shot himself in the foot. He said his girlfriend shot him in the foot or whatever, and that was just his way of getting out of going overseas. So he was eventually kicked out, kicked out of the Marine Corps.

Interviewer: For lying?

Veteran: For -- yeah, for all of that stuff. So they found a way to discharge him. And I don't know what happened. He just -- He was no longer -- He was there one day, you know, and then after we heard that, then we never saw him again. Because we had another guy I know of, a friend of mine, he was in a different unit, he was down in Kings Bay, Georgia, it is a Naval base, and they -- he was a guard. He was guarding the waterfront where the submarines are. And something happened, there was some horseplay, and he lost a rifle, a weapon dropped in the water. And he never did tell anybody, because whenever it is his turn to go on duty, go on guard, he would borrow someone else's weapon. And then it came back to haunt him, whenever he had to turn in his weapon, whenever he changed duty stations, you know, he didn't have his weapon, and like I say the next day he was there -- one day he was there, and the next day he was out of the Marine Corps. They did something to him. They must have kicked him out. Obviously, that's a serious, serious offense.

Interviewer: Any other questions? [End of Tape (Tape Number 1); Conclusion of interview]