Interviewer: How you decided to go into the service, and how you decided to choose the Army, drafted?

Veteran: I was interested in going into one of the service academies when I was in high school. My uncle had gone to West Point, the class of 1959. I was interested in the Military Academy, Naval Academy, and Coast Guard Academy. I applied to all and got appointed to all, and I just decided for no specific reason to attend the Military Academy of West Point. In the first of July, 1980, I was 17 years old. It was obviously a challenging period ohime with about an 8 week basic training portion which they call B (inaudible) barracks at West Point. After that you transition into the academic year, I think in late August or September? I don't remember. The main instructors were the other cadets from either the other class or the senior class which was supported by active duty non-commissioned officers, and officers. I didn't have any severe challenges there that I remember [laughter], other than not being totally adaptive shall one say to everything that was required of me at that time. Which potentially caused me some difficulty which was...do to my own doing. However, I was in very good physical condition which allowed me to handle all the physical requirements and the mental requirements, which were do to good preperation. I spent probably the last half of my year, getting ready physically. I was on the track team and the cross country team. Running was a good thing. Also, they let me do my own training in gym class so I was excused. I trained for the items I knew I would have to do at West Point. I was the first person in my high school to ever go to West Point. There had been one person beforeme,a fewyearsbefore, thathadgone totheNavalAcademy...butthatwasit. Atthat time it was still relatively new for our high school.

Interviewer: You graduated in 1984 and from there where did you go? What started your service career?

Veteran: I went into the armor branch. I'm not sure why I did that? But, at that time at West Point they were mainly marketing the combat arms branches. I went to Fort Knox, Kentucky for the armor officer basic course. That started sometime around July, 1984. I actually reported to the Third Infantry Division in Germany. In Kitzingen, Germany on the 5th ofJanuary, 1985.

Interviewer: You went to Germany?

Veteran: Right. At that time, obviously that was the most sought after duty location in the armed forces due to the fact that the Cold War was raging. The unit I served in, the Third Infantry Division, was a vanguard unit which was responsible for one portion of the border between East and West Germany. I was in an M-1 tank battalion, which at that time were the new tanks. The new generation of tanks which were newly deployed to the armed forces and the Third Infantry Division was the first European division to receive those tanks.

Interviewer: So they were in good condition?

Veteran: They were in relatively good condition, but pretty catastrophic to maintain. I remember having a border call (inaudible) exercise and none of my tanks in my platoon meet it. They all broke down due to the complexity of the technology which was not fully mature at that time...mainly dealing with the turbine engine. That was the first turbine engine in any ground combat vehicle and obviously the technology was not yet to the point where it needed to be.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: That was one of the reasons that I chose to go there. I had the choice of really any, most of the duty locations that I wanted to go to. That was a sought after one, and that was the reason why. New tanks and a unit close to the border. [I] spent a total of 3 and half years in Germany.

Interviewer: 3 and a half years?

Veteran: I was also an executive officer for the division headquarters company for half of my tour. I had the same company commander a few times. That was also a good assignment in Virtz (inaudible) Germany. After that, I went back to Fort Knox, Kentucky for the armor officer advance course. At which time, I got orders to go to Korea and I did not want to go. I was ready to resign. But, I was able to trade a Korea assignment for a Germany, which then I traded for a Fort Knox, Kentucky assignment. I stayed there for 4 years. I was a company commander there at Fort Knox. I was also the assistant secretary to the general staff to the commanding general while I was there. That was during the Gulf War.

Interviewer: So what years would that be?

Veteran: I think I finished the company command in 1989. Then I finished the assignment with the general staff in 1991. So, (it was) during the entire period of the Gulf War. I reported to that assignment before the Gulf War started and then by the time it was finished, I moved to my next assignment after that. Which, I went to graduate school at The University of Texas for 2 years.

Interviewer: I didn't realize that.

Veteran: I was on the fully funded graduate school program. At that time, I transferred to acquisition corps which was a new corps in the Army. [It] was responsible for contracting and [I] was one of the first year groups to go into that branch.

Interviewer: That was new then?

Veteran: That was new. Right. The main reason I went is that I had the opportunity to go to a fully funded graduate school. I did have an assignment to report to West Point to be an admissions officer for the states of California, Oregon, and Hawaii which would have been very nice. But, I preferred to take the option where I got the fully funded graduate school. At graduate school, I opened my horizons a little bit and I would have liked to resign at that time. I had a great job offer with a big six accounting company as a senior consultant, but unfortunately I had to pay back my service obligation which would have been another 4 years duringthattime. So,aftergraduateschool,whichIgot anMBAfromtheUniversity ofTexas..

Interviewer: That's what I was going to ask, it was an MBA?

Veteran: Right. During that time, I also studied a lot of German. I overloaded during the academic semesters, and during the summer I took German 6 hours a day.

Interviewer: Wow! I wondered where that came from.

Veteran: Right. After that I went back to Germany as a contracting person. I was in the 21st Theatre Support Command in Kaiserslautern, Germany. As the chief of the contract administration division. As a new branch they weren't really prepared to utilize officers of my specialty at that time. We really didn't have any function for what I was supposedly trained to do. I stayed in the job for 18 months and then I got myself transferred to the US Army Contacting Command in Wurzburg(inaudible) Germany...in 1996? That was when the Bosnia campaign broke out, and I reported to Bosnia in August 1996, just a couple months after my son was born. I stayed there for 9 months. I was the Chief of the Joint Contracting Center at Tousla(?) Airbase.

Interviewer: What were your functions?

Veteran: I was responsible for all the contracting activity in theatre. So...supporting (at first), The First Armored Division. The entire division was there. Then after that, that was called IFOR-The International Force for Peacekeeping. Then it transitioned to something called SFOR-The Stabilization Force. The first IFOR was implementation force, then, the SFOR was stabilization force. Those were two separate campaigns. The SFOR was managed by the Third Infantry Division. I stayed for 9 months there, 272 days if I remember correctly. Then I flew back to Germany and finished my tour with the regional contracting office in Virksburg(sp?). Until 1999, where I then took a one year assignment in Kuwait. I worked for the Army Material Command with the combat equipment in Kuwait. This was a unit that was responsible for taking over the responsibility of all the prepositioned military equipment that was on a place called Camp Doha in Kuwait.

Interviewer: What year is it now?

Veteran: That would be September 1999. During that time we brought up this unit called Combat Equipment Battalion Kuwait. It was the first deployment of that unit, and it took over responsibilities from the garrison unit on Camp Doha for the maintenance and operations of the pre-positioned sets of combat equipment in Kuwait. Then in 2003, that same equipment was used during the deployment into Operation Iraqi Freedom, actually the attack into Iraq. During the time I was there, there was always a brigade size military presence that was deployed close to the Iraqi border in Kuwait. In support of ensuring the UN mandate on Iraq was overseen by the US forces.

Interviewer: So now, what?

Veteran: After that, I came back to Germany in 2000. I reported to the Defense Logistics Agency operation called Defense Supply Center Philadelphia European Region, and that is Mikeskastell(sp?) Germany or was in M, Germany. I became the Chief of Subsistence, and there I was responsible for the account management portion of the deployment of the subsistence prime vender (inaudible) contracts to southwest Asia. The original 2 contracts that support[edl it [were] mainly naval forces at the time in Bahrain, and UAE. With the advent of the Operation Iraqi Freedom, the Defense Logistics Agency expanded the requirement for an additional contract in Kuwait which expanded to operations in Iraq in 2003, and at the same time the contracts that we had in place supported Afghanistan after 2001 and 2002. I spent the majority of my time concentrating on supporting those activities in southwest Asia. I also deployed during that time to Kuwait and supported the initial of implementation of the prime vender, subsistence prime vender program in Iraq. I retired in 2004. I left service in April 2004, and actually retired in August of 2004.

Interviewer: Do you have any memories during those time that stand out, as far a working with other troops or relationships with civilians? Anything you can tell future generations about serving...

Veteran: I guess as a contracting person you have a great interaction with local populous, especially in Bosnia. We were very reliant on local contractors to provide the majority of the support activity. Especially if it had to do with commodity type items like gravel or any civil works that needed to be done in terms of physical improvements to land. So, you have to work with translators, you have to work with local vendors, you have to be very cognizant of local cultures and other people, what are sensitivities? At the same time be like cognizant of political sensitivities as well. How you interact with the local populous, whether that's meeting the goals of the US Forces campaign in that theatre of operations.

Interviewer: Did you have to know the language?

Veteran: Well, Serbo-Croatian in Bosnia was certainly used in Bosnia at that time. You had to have a translator with you. We had translators assigned to us, they were very important. Also, to use and trust them to be able to gage the mood and the intent of the other parties that you were dealing with. The intent is something, that in a capitalist type of operation that you are dealing with, you always have to insure that the intent of the other side is the intent that you need to get your mission done. Also, that is meeting the rules and regulations of how you are doing business.

Interviewer: Who were the translators? Were they military?

Veteran: No, they were Bosnian civilians under a US government contractor.

Interviewer: So, you had to be in good relationship with them too?

Veteran: Right. We had assigned translators that stayed with us. I had the same people the whole time that I was there. It was important to take care of them, so they took care of me. I was a little bit understaffed at the time. One time, I was down to just myself. As I was due some replacements, but they couldn't fly in due to the severe weather we had in the winter of 1996-97. There was no aircraft coming in, so I had my replacements waiting in Germany and then I had to wait for maybe about a week for them to get in, but the translators played a very important role in helping me keep things under control.

Interviewer: Have you kept up with any of your friends that you knew in the military?

Veteran: I haven't had too much of a desire or a need to. I run into people mainly due to my business now, where I recognized their name especially if they went to West Point. That happens quite frequently, and obviously that's a basis for engaging in commercial enterprise. Makes things a little bit easier...1have run into some people that I support on the military side, that I have served with in the past.

Interviewer: Before we leave your military active duty time, your military time, are there any other thoughts about that time you should add that future generations should know about? Did it help to form your opinions about the service?

Veteran: I think the most important thing it did for me was open my eyes a little bit. It's always great to you live somewhere else, and you work somewhere else in another country because it enables you to gain a little bit different perspective than what maybe may be the perspective that you would gain in your whole formative life in the United States. Potentially gives you a few more tools in life to be able to deal with international situations. Also, to be able analyze political situations for how they will be viewed overseas. I found how foreigners view Americans is very different from how we view ourselves often. That is very important to be able to maintain some balance especially in the business world. If you are in international business, you have to be very careful of how you present yourself, and how you present yourself as an American. Because people on the other side may have preformed opinions of Americans...

Interviewer: As we do of them?

Veteran: Exactly. Especially in the commercial world, so you have to be able to use your knowledge to make sure you can accomplish your mission. Sometimes you have to make sure that you are prepping the battle field ahead of time by knowing the other culture, knowing their prejudices, and opinions ofthings and keeping yourself informed. That's another thing that I learned in my service, especially my overseas service, to keep myself informed. You can learn foreign languages, read foreign language publications, to keep yourself informed by even reading American publications such as the International Herald Tribune, or even the Wall Street Journal Europe. It gives you a tremendous perspective of the day to day feelings of people outside of the United States.

Interviewer: Talk about what you did after you got out, what made you decide to take whatever jobs that you did, and how your background affected that. Post service what happened?

Veteran: I went to work for a company called Supreme Food Service, it was at the time a company based in Germany. It was at the time a company based in Germany to provided food logistics, and general logistic support, mainly to military customers in exigency environments.

Interviewer: You went to live there?

Veteran: I didn't have to move. My last duty station was in M(inaudible) Germany, which is part of eastbatteng. The company was located in Frankfurt, Germany so I basically was able to commute everyday from where I originally lived. This company, I'd never had any dealings with them in the past. Which was really for important me. I didn't really want to work with somebody that I had worked for within the government service. We were fortunate enough, about one year after I joined we got a large subsistence prime vendor contract. For which was the exact same thing that I used to support in the military to support Afghanistan.

Interviewer: Tell me the name of the company.

Veteran: It is called Supreme Food Service. Now we've changed it to Supreme Group. Currently, Supreme is still the subsistence prime vendor for Afghanistan. We provide all the food logistics for all the US forces in Afghanistan. The program has greatly increased in size since we started back in December of 2005. Almost 4 years into the program now. My duties have changed a little bit. I am no longer supporting the subsistence prime vendor program. I am dealing with other American programs in other logistics areas. Some in Afghanistan, some outside Afghanistan, but I'm doing the same thing since I've left. I've been with the company now for over 5 years.

Interviewer: The purpose continues to be supply the food?

Veteran: We supply food and general logistics service to any armed force for which we get a contract. Our biggest profile is in Afghanistan. We also have a wide range of commercial activity in Europe. We serve other militaries in other locations around the world, as well as organizations like the United Nations in Africa.

Interviewer: So it is not just for US troops?

Veteran: No, it is an international company. We have a large group with a fairly large number of companies, located around the world, and I am physically located in Switzerland right now. Which is a long way from Camden, New Jersey, where I was born 47 years ago [laugh].

Interviewer: Now you speak what language?

Veteran: I speak German fairly well. I use it in day to day. That is another important thing that I really took my time in the military and the educational experience that I had there, and I learned German quite well. Without my knowledge, I would not be able to have had the opportunity that I had after I left the armed forces.

Interviewer: That is important...

Veteran: That is extremely important.

Interviewer: Almost necessary.

Veteran: Right.

Interviewer: We are about to finish, are there any other topics you would like to make about life after the service. I think you've pretty well covered it. Are you going to continue to work for this company for the time being?

Veteran: I am. It is a good opportunity when you are young, to take advantage of all of the exciting things the armed forces have to offer. You can slow down a little bit more as you increase in years...which is part of the natural process of life. So, I guess my only advice is take advantage to the maximum step that you can, things that youth gives you. That includes service to your country which I find to be very important. I didn't particularly like serving in the armed forces, but I did. It's necessary when I view myself as a citizen of the United States that I have something to say. It is very difficult to say to me that I don't have a right to do so. It is something that the majority of the population of the United States has not done. That's another personal choice. Once again, it is very difficult for others to say you have never done something for anyone other than yourself. It doesn't matter where you are, where you are from in life, that is still a character trait that I look for. Especially, when I am hiring someone, a service in the armed force tends to tell me that you are willing to do something someone other than yourself..Jor a greater cause. As corny as that may sound, it is an important character trait especially when you need to depend on somebody, and you want somebody to be a team participant.

Interviewer: Very good words for kids in the future. I want to thank you Joe for taking the time, and thank you for your service.