Veteran: Today is Thursday, May 8, 2003. This is the beginning of an interview with Donald Ambrose at Earshot audio productions located at 48th and J Streets in Sacramento, California. Mr. Ambrose is 70 year old and was born in 1932, on -- I'm sorry, what was the date again?

Interviewer: Ninth of August.

Veteran: Ninth of August, 1932. My name is Jan Oliver. I'm with AARP and I will be the interviewer. Mr. Ambrose, we'll start the interview by talking about at first what you did before the service, how you got into the Marines, which was the branch of service in which you served, and then we'll talk about your activities in the service and then we'll wrap up about ten percent with what you did afterward and what affect it had on you?

Interviewer: All right. Fine.

Veteran: So tell me how you came to be a Marine?

Interviewer: In high school I joined the local Marine Corps Reserves and I joined basically to play basketball for the Marine Corps Reserve, and from then on -- I joined in March of 1950. The Korean War started June 1950. And our unit was activated in July, I think around July 15, 1950, and we were called to active duty for the Korean War. I was 17 at the time.

Veteran: So being a 17 year old, what made you decide to enroll? What made you get into it in high school. Let's go back just a little bit?

Interviewer: Well, basically I just -- maybe I just wasn't good enough to play high school basketball but the Marine Corps would let me play basketball. And truly it was about six of us in my class that joined this reserve unit. And we -- consequently we all got called to active duty and since then our high school won't even allow a recruiter in there.

Veteran: Oh, really?

Interviewer: No, they won't allow a recruiter there because all these boys were all called to active duty.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: We were very fortunate. Out of all of us that went none of us were wounded, nobody killed.

Veteran: Wow, that's incredible.

Interviewer: We had one Army -- one soldier friend of ours that was killed but other than that we were very fortunate.

Veteran: My goodness. That is fortunate. How long were you in Korea?

Interviewer: I was there 11 months.

Veteran: Okay. And tell me a little bit about what you saw in Korea for 11 months?

Interviewer: Okay. I was in a heavy weapons company.

Veteran: Is that where you started?

Interviewer: Yes, in Korea. That's what I trained in. I was trained in 3.5 rockets, anti-tank assault. And when we got to Korea there was virtually no enemy tanks and so they changed us and put us on machine guns, trained us all on machine guns, how to be attached to infantry companies, rifle companies. And in the whole time I was in Korea I fired three rockets and that was all in practice for familiarization. The rest of the time it was all carrying machine guns.

Veteran: Yeah. How long did it take them to decide that you would switch over, that your whole company would switch over?

Interviewer: Instantaneous.

Veteran: Really?

Interviewer: The minute I got to Korea because we were on the east central front of Korea. It was all mountains. Basically there is no tanks. There's no flat ground whatsoever. So that's -- that was the reason for training us in the machine guns and being -- we would reinforce rifle companies.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: So that was the reason for that.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: We always had the 3.5 rockets now. We had them but we never used them in combat.

Veteran: The three that you used for training was that in Korea or was that here?

Interviewer: Yeah, familiarization, just to make sure we didn't forget what we learned.

Veteran: Okay, okay. Good. So what was it like being in a very mountainous place there?

Interviewer: What was it?

Veteran: What was it like?

Interviewer: Oh, the hills. They called them hills. You're talking 800 meters, 700 meters, and we were in the assault phase. And I was very fortunate because I was never attached to a rifle company per se. If they were in the assault we were delivering overhead fire to them, in support of them. I wasn't in the actual part of going up this hill, mountain. It ain't no hill. They're mountains. And these poor fellas were crawling in everything they could to get to the top of this hill. So we would support them with our heavy machine guns and fire overhead to keep the enemy's head down. We never knew what we were shooting at. We were all being directed by forward observers.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: So like I say, kill ratio, I couldn't tell you if I killed anybody or not because you never saw what you were doing, where it was hitting.

Veteran: So how was it dealing with that? It's one thing if you know that you killed somebody. How is it dealing with the fact that you may or may not have?

Interviewer: It doesn't bother me one bit. He would have killed me if he got ahold of me. It didn't bother me. You don't like to see your own dead. Now that has a very bad effect on morale when one of your own -- when I say "one of our own," when I see a Marine that has been killed, it's something that you will never forget and it's always there in the back of your head.

Veteran: Is it still with you today?

Interviewer: Oh, sure. I don't like to see any -- I don't like to see a Marine dead, even this Iraqi war I don't, I don't like to see any of it; but it happens and you have to face it. It's going to be there.

Veteran: How do you face up to it? What do you do?

Interviewer: Accept it. You just accept it. You have to. Same with the wounded. You know, the wounded -- walking wounded are fine. You know those guys are a going to most likely -- it's the ones that are in a stretcher that got terrible wounds and -- they're the ones you worry about. And eventually if you were close enough to these people the word would get back. They make sure that you're told how his survival was, if he survived or if he died from wounds.

Veteran: So just by word of mouth?

Interviewer: It comes back to us through our commanding officers.

Veteran: Oh, really?

Interviewer: Yes. We have these what they call a little critique and we sit down and it passes right on down from the non-commissioned officers right down to us on a squad level and we know. They keep the word going. Keep us informed; that's what it is really.

Veteran: Okay. So when you say that you have to accept it, were there certain things that the troops used to do that -- did everybody go out for a drink, was it okay to cry?

Interviewer: Oh, yeah, you could. If you wanted to pull back -- say if a fellow is real close to you -- I'm going to use the term "foxhole buddy" or something like that, inseparable, the impact of that is trying; it's very trying. And I was -- I had lost two that were killed to artillery mortar fire. And you just don't get over it right away. You put it in the back of your head and it's there. He's replaced right away so you move up the ladder. The chain of command comes up and your last ammunition carrier moves up to third ammunition carrier and the third moves to second and so on and so forth. That's how the replacement is. And so in this case it was assistant gunner, and my first ammunition carrier moved up to assistant gunner. And he replaced the plan who was killed. And it was all due to shrapnel.

Veteran: So did both -- did both of these losses occur during the Korean War for you?

Interviewer: Oh, yes, yes.

Veteran: Okay. And let's see -- so one was an assistant gunner?

Interviewer: Uh-huh.

Veteran: What was the other one?

Interviewer: First ammunition carrier.

Veteran: First ammunition carrier. Okay. And what role were you playing at the time? What was your rank at the time?

Interviewer: I was a gunner.

Veteran: Gunner. Okay. Tell me what it's like to be a gunner?

Interviewer: Pardon?

Veteran: What it's like to be a gunner?

Interviewer: You work up to it, see. It's -- well, how can I say, it's a prestigious title. I didn't get the rank that went with it. It's supposed to be a corporal and I was a private first class. I won't to Korea as a private first class. I came home as a private first class. And we weren't screw-ups. We were a good bunch of boys but we were still anti-tank assaults, 3.5 rockets. They never considered us machine gunners even they though they attached us out.

Veteran: So let me clarify that and make sure I understand. So you were supposed to go in as the 3.5 rocket troop?

Interviewer: Uh-huh.

Veteran: And because of that, had you continued in that role you would have stayed a private first class but what happened was they changed what your responsibilities were and then you grew based on these new responsibilities, but they didn't give you the rank that they would normally assign to those responsibilities?

Interviewer: Right, that's very true.

Veteran: Oh, my goodness.

Interviewer: We never got the rank. None of us were ever promoted to corporal.

Veteran: Oh.

Interviewer: And our squad leader at the time was a PFC also and they just automatically when they found out about this boosted him right to sergeant. He skipped corporal and went to sergeant. But they passed us all over. I didn't care. I wanted to go home. It didn't make a difference to me. I was getting close to the time to go home, so I didn't really care. I was still doing a corporal's job and not getting paid for it.

Veteran: Well, oh, boy. So what was the job like? What was it like to be a gunner? I know you had to grow into it.

Interviewer: Well, okay, what I'm doing is I'll bring you up to when everything stopped. We had the peace talks going on at Panmunjom. And our line, our front lines were statics. We never moved. Winter came in, winter was coming in on us so we just dug in on a ridge. That's where we stayed. And the only thing that we would do, we would go out maybe on patrol. And we would be attached out to rifle companies. A rifle platoon would go out and they would send us out with them for extra fire power. We would ambush them. They would ambush us. It was a waste of time as far as I think. There was a lot of intelligence that we had to pick up. Try to capture them. They tried to capture us. So that's all it was like patrol action. Defensive. And you would dig your guns in, your machine guns that were all dug in. Fields of fire were cleared for you, in the event they come after us; and we were -- the guns were locked. See, we were in the water-cooled machine gun and you could lock so it wouldn't come up, you could lock side to side. And all you had to do is just move it, pull the trigger. And we had stakes set out, wooden stakes so that you could only traverse so far because you would be firing into our own lines, see; that's what they call fields of fire. So that's what that was. But that's how it ended up in the winter. We were stuck on a ridge.

Veteran: Was it very cold there?

Interviewer: Very cold, very cold. I was on the line, let me see, the day it snowed and that was in early -- late, late October and I was on line, let's see, Marine Corps birthday, Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's, we were all on line. And they relieved us some time, I'm going to say in the latter part of January they pulled us back. The Army troops, the Army personnel relieved us. But I saw every one of them holidays on the front line. And snow, snow like you can't believe, blizzards; and if we're just as miserable, they're miserable too. I don't forget those things.

Veteran: So Thanksgiving and Christmas up on the line there?

Interviewer: Yeah, they flew up turkey to us.

Veteran: Oh, they did?

Interviewer: Oh, sure. How they would do this is I had a seven man squad, so two men at a time, they set up a tent on the back side, the reverse slope of the ridge. And they flew in all this turkey for Thanksgiving and they had a warm up tent where you could sit down and eat. Only two at a time could go. Two could go eat and when they came back two more would go. Well, nine times out of ten the guys that went to eat would bring back their food just so it would speed things up. And it was snowing terrible. And I was very fortunate because when my turn came, the assistant gunner and myself, we went down there, got our food and came back, and a mortar round landed right on the tent. They just hit us, 120-millimeter mortar. Just tore that place apart, got all these guys in that tent. And God was with us. I don't know why we did but none of my people sat in that tent and ate that Thanksgiving dinner. They all came back.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: Very fortunate.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: But it wounded a lot of Marines in there.

Veteran: You're talking to somebody who has never been in the service and lots of other people who will hear these interviews as well, what does a mortar look like? You gave me the size of it, 120 millimeters?

Interviewer: Yeah, it's almost four inches around and it's, I'd say maybe two feet, maybe two and a half feet long and it goes into a tube, and it's a high angle, high angle weapon. And they can -- the Chinese were good. They could drop that -- well, how can I say? They were good. They were really good. It's all done with mathematics.

Veteran: Oh, really?

Interviewer: Yeah. Now it's different but in those days they did it with mathematics. And the Chinese were the best. Boy, they could lock that thing right in your lap. They were scary. It was really scary. There is an old saying that they say, the round that gets you you never hear. And if you hear them coming in, well, you know it's going to miss you. And you can actually, you get used to them. You can tell if it's going to go over your head or if it's going to drop short; but the closer it comes to you, you don't have that much time to hear it. It just shh and that's it. And that's close. That's real close.

Veteran: How many times did it come close to you?

Interviewer: It came so close it knocked me right in the hole.

Veteran: Really?

Interviewer: I was sitting right up on the parapet, my assistant gunner and me, and it was quiet, nothing going on, and we had a deck of cards and we were playing a game called Crazy Eight. And it was beautiful. Nothing going on. Nothing. All of a sudden a round came in. We didn't even hear it. And that round landed so close that the concussion knocked us into a hole and wounded all these Marines in back of us. And we never got a scratch.

Veteran: How many people were there in your unit?

Interviewer: In my company?

Veteran: Well, tell me a little bit about that actually. What's the difference between a company and a battalion and a division?

Interviewer: Okay. All right. Now, I was in a heavy weapons company, so in that company you have, you have anti-tank assault which is the 3.5 rockets; you have heavy machine guns which are all water-cooled guns; you have 81-millimeter mortars; and you have demolition and flame thrower. Now, that's four platoons in that company, heavy weapons. And we comprise about, I'm going to say maybe about 160 men in our company.

Veteran: In your company, okay. Was that evenly divided in each platoon?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: And then what's the next level after?

Interviewer: And then you have battalion and your battalion now has, okay, one weapons company and three rifle companies. And that totals I'm going to say approximately 1,200 men in a battalion.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: And then you keep going and then you'll have regiment and that's three battalion. See everything is in threes in the Marine Corps.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: So the regiments, you have three regiments we'll just say is 3,600 men. And then you have division; and then when you get to the division, oh, golly, you got all your supporting arms, and the Marine Corps we were reinforced so we're about 30,000.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: In the First Marine Division.

Veteran: Wow. So the company is the smallest?

Interviewer: If you want to break the company down then you have the platoon.

Veteran: The platoon is smaller than the company?

Interviewer: There's three platoons to a company. See everything is in threes. And you have three squads to a platoon, you see.

Veteran: Oh, three squads. Okay. So when you say that nobody who you were with was hurt or you had one fatality in there, are you referring to the squads or the platoon or the company?

Interviewer: Squad.

Veteran: Squad. Okay.

Interviewer: These were people I knew.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: A lot of them were wounded but the one that got me which is the one fellow, the one kid, 18 years old, was killed. And it hurt, it hurt us bad. When one of your own goes down, bad, bad. And he was from National City, California. He was a California boy.

Veteran: Oh.

Interviewer: Just too bad. You never forget it. It's there, but you got to go on.

Veteran: So how many in a squad then?

Interviewer: How many in a squad? Seven. Seven to a squad and then you got three squads, two platoons and then so on so forth. Three platoons to a company.

Veteran: So at seven you really get to know each other?

Interviewer: Oh, yes, you got to get along.

Veteran: What happens when you don't get along?

Interviewer: You just avoid them. That's all. You don't get too much of that. Somebody will get you upset, do something, and you bark at them and everything, but you got to get along. Your life depends on him and his life depends on you. So you got to get along. You don't play favorite, nope. Everybody is equal.

Veteran: So would you say you learned a great lesson in compromise when you were serving in Korea?

Interviewer: Oh, yeah. Sure, sure, sure. You make true friends. The guys over there, when you're there you eat, sleep and die together. You're just a close knit family. That is your family.

Veteran: Right.

Interviewer: Now, I'm speaking strictly on a squad level. Now, I can go up say from our position, from where we were, and we had Army -- not Army, Marines tied into us, infantry men, it might be hi, how are you, but didn't know them. Didn't even know their name. We only knew our own little group see. Like they might take us and attach us out to -- you had these three companies in the first battalion. Able Company, Baker Company and Charlie Company. I was attached to all through of them companies. Somewhere along the line they would use us to fill a gap in the line, but I never knew the other Marines but we depended on each other. We did our job. We did security for our machine gun, and they provided their security. But we never -- we weren't close there. You don't know who they were.

Veteran: Right.

Interviewer: It's funny, but if something happened to one of those it would affect us, even though you didn't know them.

Veteran: Right, because they're one of your own?

Interviewer: Oh, yeah; they one of our own, sure.

Veteran: Do the Marines -- do the Marines believe that more than the other branches of service?

Interviewer: Oh, okay, we have a motto. We do not leave our wounded or our dead. And a lot of people say sacrificial. I have been on patrols where a couple of Marines were left on this patrol. We had to leave them because we couldn't -- we were ambushed and we had to take off, but we would go back out there to get their body. And a lot of people say -- it was all volunteer. The platoon leader who was leading the recovery would ask for volunteers to go back and get those guys, and never had a problem. Guys always went out and brought them back.

Veteran: That's admirable. That's very admirable. Tell me about your -- one of your favorite stories because it means something to you. Everybody has a story.

Interviewer: Oh, yeah. New Year's. We were told that to be -- well, we knew better. Stay awake at midnight. We're right on the front line. And this was New Year's January 1952, January 1, and every gun in Korea, every artillery piece, every mortar, everything commenced firing. The sky was just lit up. And it's something I'll never forget. All these flairs were going and they just peppered every hill in front of us, artillery and our mortars, thousands of dollars of ammunition went.

Veteran: You're saying the American troops were doing this to celebrate?

Interviewer: Yeah, we didn't give them a chance to celebrate the Chinese New Year. We jumped the gun on them. But oh, what it site. Oh, it was a site. We really thought that we would get hit, you know, that would help them attack but they didn't, nah. It was snowing and they didn't want any problems. And then of course the Marine Corps birthday which is a big thing to the Marine Corps, November 10; and we flew our air, Marine Air, flew sorties right over in front of us and they dropped all these leaflets on the Chinese positions and some of these leaflets filtered back to us and I did get one, inviting the Chinese to come over and have cake and ice cream, that we're celebrating the Marine Corps birthday and that they would have safe passage. I never saw no cake and ice cream. Oh, well, it was something to think about though. No, they really did it up on those holidays. Christmas was very quiet. No, nothing happened Christmas, Christmas Eve, no. Everybody was awake. We'd do our watches but, you know, you're thinking about home.

Veteran: Yeah, what was it like to be away from your other family?

Interviewer: Well, you face it. You have to do that. It's just something that has to be and you accept it. You accept it. But Christmas, boy, did we have the snow that night. We really got it. That blizzard hit us and the snow would come into our -- hit us in the face. You had no protection. Either you put your arm over your -- your hand over your face because you did have gloves or mittens on but your eyelids, 'cause your eyes were watery, would freeze. They would freeze. And they would get sticky and you constantly had to rub your eyes to keep them from freezing shut.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: Oh, yeah. And that was just one of the little things to keep you awake, that would keep you awake.

Veteran: Yeah, I'm sure.

Interviewer: So, like I said, Christmas was quiet. The next day, Christmas Day, very quiet. We figured they would throw all kinds of stuff at us. They didn't. I think they were getting tired of the war too.

Veteran: Did you encounter any Koreans one on one while you were there?

Interviewer: Yeah, sure, captured one. I captured a North Korean. In fact, he outranked me. He was a sergeant. I thought that was so funny. But he was a lot shorter than me. But he was -- he was a defiant little son of a gun. And I had to take him back. We had covered this ground and I caught him and so my platoon leader told me, "You captured him, you walk him back to battalion," you see. And that's scary because you are going over ground that you had just fought for and took and there could be stragglers left in there. So you got to keep your eye on him and keep looking around to make sure there is nobody sneaking around around there. And we finally got over this hill and we came down into the battalion area and he saw these people, Marines coming toward us, 'cause he had his hands up in the air. And he stopped and he turned around and he spit right in my face. He spit right in my face. And he shouldn't have done that. And I poked him right in the backside with my bayonet. And he went down. Of course, I kicked him too. I was going to kill him. I really was. And this lieutenant comes up and, oh, man, he read me the riot act. What are you doing? Mistreatment of prisoners of war. And I told him, I said, that man spit in my face. And we had a Korean interpreter and he asked, he said, "Did he spit in your face?" I said, "Yeah, just when he saw you guys coming up here he stopped and turned around and spit in my face." And he asked him in Korean, "Did you spit in that man's face?" And he said, "Yes, I did." He rattled all that imperialist and capitalist American. Well, that old interpreter beat the hell out of him. He had a stick and he beat that man to pieces. He was still bleeding from the bayonet wound. They had to call a corpsman. Of course I didn't care. I hoped he'd die. Well, out of the whole thing I did get his ID card which I still have today with his picture on it and everything. He probably doesn't ever want to see me. I don't particularly care to see him either. He's got a scar right on his fanny.

Veteran: Do you see other people that you served with?

Interviewer: Oh, yes, every year. We have a reunion. Yeah, I was attached mostly to Baker Company; and every year we have a reunion. And, in fact, this year we're going to be in Boston and I've gone to six consecutive reunions I've gone to. And our ranks are thinning too as we get older. We all stay in communication. We're always on the phone talking, oh, hey, did you hear so and so has got cancer, so and so had a heart attack. And right down to their wives, we pass the word around. We're still very close, very close knit.

Veteran: We'll talk more about that at the end as well. So you mention some of the things that the North Korean soldier was calling you as an American.

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Was there propaganda given to the Americans about the Koreans or?

Interviewer: Well, okay, now we would drop leaflets. Our leaflets were dropped from airplanes, but theirs, they would leave leaflets for us but it's when they would come in and attack us on the hill. They would send their probing attack. And they would leave all of these leaflets for us and telling us to surrender and that we had safe passage and --

Veteran: Why did they say we should surrender?

Interviewer: Propaganda, that's all it is. I mean, if you say -- say somebody maybe was disgruntled and didn't want to go through anymore of that, we never had a problem but it does, it affects you. You say, okay, I'll quit, I'll surrender. And they did. We had 21 Americans that refused to come back from the Korean War.

Veteran: Really?

Interviewer: That's right. Turncoats. They weren't very well welcome either when they did come back.

Veteran: Oh, they did come back?

Interviewer: Some of them did. They were traitors, just like traitors as far as I'm concerned. I think there was -- if my memory is right, I think two of them actually stayed in China, married Chinese women, taught English and everything. Stayed there. But out of the 21 I think the majority of them came back.

Veteran: And was it an economic opportunity you think that kept them there or women?

Interviewer: No, no, in a Communist country? No.

Veteran: Why do you suppose they wanted to stay, the 21 that did?

Interviewer: Well, they turned their back on the United States and they had no choice. They might as well just stay there. And, of course, the United States is a forgiving country and it probably forgave all them people that came back. They probably had to change their identify, everything, because I don't know how they would get a job. I wouldn't have hired him. I wouldn't give them a job. But they probably worked into our system. In fact, some brought back Chinese wives, if I remember right too. But we were always -- you always watch your back. Being captured is one thing that's just scary. It's very scary.

Veteran: Did you ever come close to being captured?

Interviewer: No, no, no. I've had them right up in our position but they didn't make it, no.

Veteran: How about any of the people you served with? Were they captured and came back to tell you about it?

Interviewer: Okay, we had an outpost and yes, they captured three Marines. And they actually -- what they did they overcame the one Marine that was awake. He was standing watch. And the other three were in their sleeping bags and they were asleep. And they hauled them out. Probably beat the heck out of them, rendered them unconscious, and then just took them off, sleeping bag and all.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: And left -- and left the one there. But that's the only time I ever heard.

Veteran: Did they make it back?

Interviewer: No -- I don't know. In repatriation they might have. I didn't keep track. I didn't know them. I didn't know them personally.

Veteran: So one person would stand watch at night?

Interviewer: If the security was low, you know, they say, okay, you sit here for two hours instead of the regular four hours. And maybe they were doing one hour, see, and with four men so a guy stands for one hour and then he don't come back until four hours later, you see, stand another watch. So they might have been doing that if the security was low.

Veteran: Were you ever the one man to stand watch?

Interviewer: No, not in a machine gun. Mostly two men. Gunner and assistant gunner. Now, if I was relieved first ammunition carrier or somebody would come in when we're relieved, see; but then a lot of times the assistant gunner and myself wouldn't be relieved together. We never were. It always had to be somebody that knew that machine gun.

Veteran: What's the difference between a gunner and an ammunition carrier?

Interviewer: Okay, gunner carries the weapon. The gunner and the assistant gunner carry the weapon. And the ammunition carriers carry two boxes of ammunition which weigh 15 pounds a piece. Plus all his other personal stuff, his firearm, his own personal weapons. He carries all that. It's a big load, yep. I carried the water cooled that weighed -- let me see. The tripod -- gee, I'm going back on that. The tripod weighed 42 pounds.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: And the barrel and receiver I think was sixty pounds. I can't remember. Quite a load, quite a load. Now that's the water cooled. Imagine if you were carrying what we call the light machine gun which we used quite a bit; and the tripod was like 15 pounds and the barrel and receiver group I think was 31 pounds. Five pounds, ten pounds, it's all heavy, all heavy when you're moving.

Veteran: And the ammunition carrier, that's the starting rank or the starting position?

Interviewer: Yeah, you start as last ammunition carrier.

Veteran: Oh, last ammunition carrier?

Interviewer: Yes, you're not going to bump somebody else up the ladder. No, you start right in. You're a new replacement, you start as last ammunition carrier.

Veteran: So it's last or is there a first or?

Interviewer: Well, somebody has rotated home. That's how they did that. It doesn't necessarily mean your time. I skipped over two Marines that didn't want to have anything to do being with a gunner. They would rather stay as an ammunition carrier, and that was fine with me and it was fine with them. We did that with them. So consequently when they rotated home, we'll say I lost the first and second ammunition carrier. So then they give us two replacements to replace them. Well, the other two move up the ladder, and the two replacements are on the bottom, see. They're last ammunition carrier and second last ammunition carrier and they work their way up.

Veteran: So how many positions are there? Are there all the ammunition carriers and then assistant gunner and gunner?

Interviewer: Yeah, so you got four ammunition carriers, gunner, assistant gunner, and then you have your squad leader of seven men.

Veteran: Oh, okay, seven. Okay. Let's transition over, unless you would like to tell me anything else about your time in Korea actually. Let's talk a little bit more about what happened when you came home but were still in the service.

Interviewer: In Korea?

Veteran: No, in America?

Interviewer: Oh, when I came back from Korea?

Veteran: Uh-huh. Unless there is anything else you want to talk about.

Interviewer: No, like I say, I didn't venture around too much when I was in Korea. They would pull us to the rear and we did go to Pusan. We went to Pusan. And I stayed a day there. It wasn't worth it to me. That place was all blown to hell too, so we just decided to hitchhike and come back to our unit. We didn't venture off too much. And I never got to Seoul. And I could have. I could have gone to Seoul. We could have hitchhiked across and gone there. It didn't bother me. Stay close to home. So that's where that was. But when I left Korea, I'm trying to think. I think it was February, the first of February. And they put us on a beach and they were supposed to come in and pick us up and put us on a transport. And it was cold, winter. And they didn't come get us. Well, we were very upset. They took our weapons away from us and left us on the beach.

Veteran: Really?

Interviewer: Very, very upsetting. It was not happy campers over there. It was 1,200 of us on the beach with no protection.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: And the ship was supposed to come and it didn't -- LST is what it was, flat bottom come right in.

Veteran: LST?

Interviewer: LST, landing ship transport. So we had to sleep on the beach. They issued us a couple of blankets and gave us sea rations which was no way to heat them. You had to put them under your arm, tuck them in your jacket, put them under your arm. You carry these two cans under your arm. Your body heat would heat them.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: It wasn't bad 'cause everything else was frozen. Water frozen. So they next day they did come and get us, put us aboard. And we spent the night on the LST, and then the next day they took us out and we boarded a troop transport and went back to Japan. And that's a whole new story from there.

Veteran: Well, tell me about it.

Interviewer: Okay. When we got to Japan, the first thing they did was just issue us back our sea bags. They were all in storage there, our uniforms; and give us a big lecture about cutting us loose in the town of Kobe, VD; you know what I mean; the usual stuff. And I don't think anybody was paying any attention to it anyway. After being cooped up anywhere from ten to twelve months in Korea, those guys are going to go wild anyway. And they did and, of course, I was one of the few, I don't know why me, but my company drew MP duty; and I had to do four hours on MP duty. And they took us around in the Jeep and we would have to go check all these off limits places. It was a big hassle. But another experience.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: And then when we got off the four house, they take the MP band away from us and then guess who was in the off limits places? Me. Someone was there chasing me out. That's where all the fun was. But we had 24 hours there. Did some shopping and everything. And it worked out good. I would have loved to stayed in Japan a little longer but again, you got that incentive, let's get home, let's get home, I want to get home. And then back aboard ship, and we did go to Hawaii. We had Hawaiian troops with us and they gave us 24 hours in Hawaii. And I didn't like Hawaii. I didn't like the way -- the way the American troops were treated over there. It was before they were a state. And they hated us. The local people hated American troops. I think it was a carryover from World War II. And I didn't venture off Hotel Street which is a local drag, skid row. And the curfew was twelve midnight. We just waited for the paddy wagon to come by and give us a ride back. Let's go. We're all drunk, drunker than hell. Nineteen years old I was. Nineteen. I had my 19th birthday in Korea too.

Veteran: Oh, did you?

Interviewer: Yeah, that was quite a day too. Yeah. They called me The Kid. I was 18 and I was one of the youngest in my company. And they weren't going to give me any beer because I was a minor and all kind of stuff but it was all in fun. See, those are things I remember. I remember very well. I remember the depressed moments but it's behind me.

Veteran: And what about when you got back here as a young gentleman?

Interviewer: Okay. Now, we knew when we were going to be going to San Diego which is where we were coming, and we knew when the schedule was to dock. And I called my mother and father from Honolulu, and I remember I thinking it took two hours to get that call through, telling them when we would be docking in San Diego. And I remember my mother saying, Do you want me to come down and meet the ship? And I says, no, I think it will be too much confusion because I don't know if they'll even let us off the base. I don't know if we were going to be quarantined. Biggest mistake I ever made because when that ship came in hundreds of people were on the dock and signs up there, welcome home, and all this stuff. A Marine band was out there. It was really something to see. It was really great, all these people welcoming us home. We didn't have a parade. Of course, they took us off the ship, had buses waiting for us, took us right to the Marine Corps base San Diego and that was it. A lot of them had relatives that came. And I regretted that for years that I didn't allow my mother and father to come and meet me. And we were granted liberty right off the bat. Just enough to get -- well, we had our greens on, our winter uniform; so all we had to do was check in. They inspected all of our equipment. We had to unload our sea bags, make sure there is no firearms or crazy guy bringing hand grenades back, you know, all of that dangerous stuff. They weren't looking for dope. We didn't have any of that kind of stuff. And that was it. And once we were cleared they cut us loose in San Diego. And two fellas I linked up with were both World War II veterans. And again I'm The Kid, nineteen years old. And I'm trying to think, it was Broadway, Broadway is the main drag in San Diego. You have no idea how many bars and tattoo parlors are on Broadway; and these two guys just take me along with them into the bar and the bartender would say, Are you 21? And I would say, No, I'm 19. And he says, Yeah, I know, I know. You just came back from Korea. And you're only going to have one beer and you're going to move on. And he says, All right. Drink the beer and get the hell out of here. And that's what they did. Nobody ever turned me down. These two guys were holding me up, brought me back to the base. It was something else, yeah.

Veteran: And then I know earlier you said that you entered the reserves at some point?

Interviewer: Uh-huh.

Veteran: But were you in active service when you first returned to the country here for a while?

Interviewer: I stayed on active duty until end of February. They released me from active duty and then I went back into a reserve unit again, because here I am 19, and I said, oh, wow, I could be called back, hey, right up until I was 26. So I says why not stay in the reserve. And just keep -- protect your rank, you know, get ranked. And the funniest things about that was I don't know how they found out but I had never registered for the draft because I was 17. You're supposed to register when you were 18. Well, I was in Korea when I was 18. And I mean inside of a week I got a letter telling me to go to the registrar for the draft. And I got down there and I had my papers, release of active duty, and I told them, I said, I'm a veteran. I just came back from Korea, showed them all of my papers and they just automatically classified me a 4C discharge.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: So that ended that but I had to register. So that part. Then I stayed in the reserve, and that's how I attained the rank of staff sergeant.

Veteran: How did you do that? What did you do?

Interviewer: Well, the first thing I did is I wanted to get rid of that infantry military occupation specialty number which was -- see, I think I was 0351. I had 0334 too. That was anti-tank assault and then machine guns were 0351 I think or 0354. But anyway, when I got in the reserve I got into the small arms repair, the armory. And that's where I stayed. See, I got rid of that infantry MLS and I thought well, if there's going to be another war I'll stay fixing the weapons rather than be up there. That don't always work either.

Veteran: So what kind of input did you have to give to be in the reserves? How many hours a month?

Interviewer: Okay. We went, you know, I think it was one full weekend a month and then we had to go through training for two weeks on active duty. We were called to active duty. We basically went to Camp Pendleton down in Oceanside. And we trained right there with the regular Marines and everything.

Veteran: So even during the rest of the war you didn't have to put in more time than usual?

Interviewer: No, no. And those regular Marines they were good to us, especially if they knew you were a Korean War vet. They didn't give you any crap because you would bark at them, see.

Veteran: Uh-huh.

Interviewer: You were -- you were, how can I say it -- accepted as a, not as a hero, but you had respect because you were a Korean War vet. It was 1952 I would say. Even the people, all the people on HC when I would come after a drill, I would have my uniform on and I would stop at some bar and have a beer; you will be surprised at the people that would want to buy you drinks, a Korean War vet. No, there was a lot of patriotism. It's too bad. But then when they started speeding up in Vietnam and my enlistment to say to -- my enlistment was up in March of 1963. I was married then, and my wife told me if I reenlisted she would divorce me and I went through all that Korean stuff. We were alerted for the Nicaraguan campaign deal down there and the Cuban Missile Crisis. So I got out. And I was in divorce court six months later. Didn't work. Didn't work. I tried to get back in the reserve again and they -- they said they would take me but I would lose a rank, go back to buck sergeant. And when you're in the staff ranks in the Marine Corps you cannot accept dropping down, even though it's an administrative break, and they told me, oh, you'll have your staff rank back in six months. I said, I heard that stuff before. Come on, I've been in the Marine Corps too long. Come on, don't give me that stuff. So I never did pursue it, so I got out.

Veteran: And you just said you were told about the Nicaraguan conflict?

Interviewer: Oh, yeah, we were alerted. See when they went to Nicaragua, the Cuban Missile Crisis, we were packing up and we were reserve units and they were getting ready to go.

Veteran: But you never did go?

Interviewer: No, no, just an alert. We were fortunate.

Veteran: What was it like with your peers here in this country that haven't served? Did you still get respect from them as well, the men that were your age that --

Interviewer: Oh, we had a couple, I had a couple of friends I graduated with that went in the Air National Guard, California Air National Guard. I never got called to active duty in the Korean War. And they used to give us a hard time. You guys fought the war and we stayed here. That kind of stuff. But we got all the benefits and they didn't get any benefits.

Veteran: Like what?

Interviewer: GI bill for one of them.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: The GI bill is the greatest right there. Medical is another, see. Even today I use the VA facility for medical purposes. And I used my GI bill to -- for a home, to buy a home, education; and so it paid off. They didn't get any of that. So they had to really hump it on their own.

Veteran: And how were you with them?

Interviewer: Oh, we were all right. We were still kind of schoolmates, you know, classmates. No, there was no animosity. I didn't shine them. It didn't make a difference to me. I never got in arguments with them or anything. So it worked out good that way.

Veteran: Okay. But it affected your life in other ways. Your wife obviously didn't want --

Interviewer: Well, I had three children, and she vowed that she wasn't going to go through all that scare tactics is what she called it. And they were accelerating in Vietnam, and it was very possible I could have gone over there if I had stayed in the reserve. The first thing is is that I was trained in infantry and machine guns and then the small arms repair. They would say, oh -- then I had a staff sergeant, he's six, so I think I would have been there too. Your chances are pulling out on the second one, you luck out on the first, the second one will get you. But then come to find out they never did call the reserve.

Veteran: Oh, really?

Interviewer: No, they never call them. They didn't need them because of the draft. The Marine Corps accepted draftees so they didn't call the Marine Corps reserve in; but I didn't know that.

Veteran: Well, no way to know that. So you said that you say in touch with everybody. You go to the reunions. In what other ways are you still affected today from your service?

Interviewer: It's the greatest feeling in the world to meet all of your buddies, to see them again. The nicest people you'll ever meet. Everybody is so congenial. They're actually happy to see you. And we've all been through the same thing. You can always tell the same old stories over and over but they relate to it. And the wives they just -- they hear all that crap all the time so they go off in their little circles; but everybody is just like one big family. It's really, it's something, the comradery, you know what I mean?

Veteran: Did that start from the beginning upon your return or did it take a lot of years to get back in touch?

Interviewer: Okay. Now, I didn't know they were meeting until I think six years ago and I had gone to a division reunion in Las Vegas and I ran into two of my buddies that were with me in Korea.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: And they in turn got me in with this other unit, Baker Company, and I've been with them ever since. The First Marine Division Reunion you get ten thousand men there. And it's so massive. You run into one another. They got a locator board. You sign up. And this is -- you get 200 people and it's so much more easier to handle. And they're all -- and you communicate too every year. We all get Christmas cards and we write. Email is the thing and I don't have a computer. I have got a fax but no computer. But they really keep things going, yeah. But like I say, our numbers are thinning. As they get older, cancer kills most of them. It's too bad. But I got a reunion in September. It's going to be in Boston.

Veteran: So all over the country these are?

Interviewer: Oh, yeah. See, like we're east coast now. Well, we were in Cleveland last year and Boston this year. I was a little upset. I thought they should come back out to the west coast. So they will be in the west coast next year. They will be in Las Vegas which will be nice. That's good.

Veteran: So what can you say about the Marines and about your time in service that's the most important to you?

Interviewer: Well, I would say they taught me to be a man, self confidence, broke me away from my mother's apron strings. I never made a bed in my life until I went to the Marine Corps. I didn't have to do laundry. You have a mother that just takes care of you. Marine Corps teaches you how to -- you're going to do these things. How can I say that? You rely on yourself. That's what it is, reliance. There's nobody going to make your bed. Nobody going to wash your clothes. They strip you. When you go into the Marine Corps they strip you of any ties to civilian life. They always say there's the right way, the wrong way, and the Marine Corps way. And you do it their way. And you adhere to it, you adhere. The place where your morale goes down is in boot camp. Oh, they're going to break you. They never made me cry but they brought tears to my eyes. They can belittle you and just take -- try and break your will. And if you fight them it won't work. They're going to mold you the way they want you. You're not a robot. But they're going to teach you their way. And it works. It works. They teach you team work. You rely on each other and this kind of stuff. You do everything together. No individuality. You have a mind. You can still think, but you think as a group. No, no. I don't regret it. I do not regret it. I was a smart aleck kid, tough, tough. Boy, the Marine Corps knocked that out of me real quick. They taught me a few things. Seventeen, boy, I wasn't a juvenile delinquent but, boy, I could have been on the verge. And I thought I was pretty tough when I got in boot camp. I found out I wasn't that tough at all. And they'll get you. They'll get you. But I don't regret it. I don't regret it one bit. I never want to go through it again, boot camp, the training, that part. If I was younger I could handle that.

Veteran: Would you go through Korea again?

Interviewer: If I was told to I would, yeah, sure. If I was ordered to go I would go. I might not like it, but I would go. In fact, they have a thing in the Marine Corps right now -- I don't know how true it is -- I read something about it. But up to the age of sixty years old if you want to go back into the Marine Corps and I think it's on an instructor status you can, yeah; but you have to pay for all your own uniforms and everything. I don't know, I don't know if I would want that.

Veteran: Is there anything else that you would like to share with us?

Interviewer: Well, like I say, all the friends I met, you meet friends and these people, you can say buddies, buddies, these are lifelong friends. You've done everything together with them. You eat, you sleep, you fight, you die. You don't meet people like this. You don't meet people like that. These are people that you do so many things, whether right or wrong, but they're there for you and you never forget it. That's the thing about Korea. You never forget those people. Even when they're gone you don't forget them. Because when we get to reunion we say, oh, remember so and so what he used to do? Everybody, yeah, yeah. Yeah, it's an experience.

Veteran: Well, I would like to thank you very much.

Interviewer: Well, I appreciate doing this.

Veteran: Thank you for sharing. I've learned a lot.

Interviewer: I'm glad you have.

Veteran: And I hope it was enjoyable for you too.

Interviewer: Oh, yeah, I've enjoyed this. It brought back a lot of memories.

Veteran: Well, again, this was an interview between Jan Oliver from AARP and Mr. Donald Ambrose who was in the Marines, active in the Korean War. And again, thank you, Mr. Ambrose, thank you very much.

Interviewer: You're welcome.