Veteran: This is September 30, 2008. We are here with Mr. J.C. Alston, resident of Troy, TX. My name is Daniel Rowe. The other interviewer is Melanie Bailey. We're going to be asking Mr. Alston some questions about his experiences in World War II as part of the Veteran's History Project. So we're going to get started. Mr. Alston, can you state your name for me? JC

Interviewer: J.C. Alston.

Veteran: J.C. Alston, when were you born?

Interviewer: 5-3-23.

Veteran: And which theater of World War II did you serve in, Pacific or European?

Interviewer: South Pacific.

Veteran: Your branch of service and highest rank?

Interviewer: Navy.

Veteran: Did you enlist, or were you drafted?

Interviewer: I enlisted.

Veteran: Before the war?

Interviewer: I wouldn't have been at Pearl Harbor if I didn't.

Veteran: What year did you enlist?

Interviewer: Early'41.

Veteran: And you enlisted from West Texas? Is that where you were when you enlisted?

Interviewer: Uh-huh.

Veteran: What were you doing before you enlisted?

Interviewer: What was I doing?

Veteran: Yes, sir.

Interviewer: Oh, besides a little schooling, I did delivery for a drug store.

Veteran: So how old would that have made you when you enlisted?

Interviewer: 18.

Veteran: Unmarried when you enlisted?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: What was your reason for joining initially?

Interviewer: Well, the boys in our group, three of us, we decided that we would join the Navy. We decided we didn't want none of that walking; we wanted to ride. (Laughter) So we went to Dallas for our examination, and they accepted us and we went to San Diego for boot camp.

Veteran: Were these three high school friends? Were you related to any of these other guys?

Interviewer: I wasn't related to them.

Veteran: Just friends from back home?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: So what were your...about initially signing up, I'm assuming you were excited about it, what other emotions were going through you when you finally made that decision to commit to the Navy?

Interviewer: Oh, it's been so many years. I don't know if I can tell you. Well, we were a little bit excited. They accepted us, so. They told us not to bring any clothes or anything, because when we got there, the clothes we had would be given away to the Salvation Army, and we'd get our uniforms from the Navy. So, we got on that train and went to San Diego.

Veteran: Had you had any family serve in the military before, or were you the first one?

Interviewer: Uh, I'm the first one in our family who went into the service. During World War II, my brothers, they served, two of them. I guess they went like I did.

Veteran: Did you serve with any of your brothers on the USS California?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: In San Diego, what was your boot camp experience like?

Interviewer: Oh, it wasn't too bad. Or course, I was one of the lucky ones. I didn't have to do KP.

Veteran: You didn't have to do what?

Interviewer: KP.

Veteran: What does that stand for?

Interviewer: That's where you go to the chow hall and work. (Laughter) DANIEL

Veteran: So you didn't have to work your way through boot camp?

Interviewer: No. (Laughter]

Veteran: Good. What were some of the things you did to make it through boot camp? Anything specific that you did to get yourself through that time?

Interviewer: No, no. If we got in a little trouble, we'd have to get out on the grounds and walk for a few hours.

Veteran: But you behaved pretty well?

Interviewer: Yeah, I got out of that. I behaved. (Laughter)

Veteran: How long was your boot camp experience? How long did that take?

Interviewer: Eight weeks.

Veteran: Eight weeks? And when you were finished, you were sent where?

Interviewer: Well, they wanted to give us examinations. So we decided that we wanted to go aboard a ship. So we decided we would miss some of the questions so that they wouldn't send us to school. (Laughter) But uh, they took one of them anyway. He might not have did that, I don't know, but I did. But he didn't get on the same ship I did. To get on the California, from San Diego, we had to go up to Long Beach.

Veteran: What were your first days in the service like?

Interviewer: Well, shots. Clothes issued.

Veteran: Lots of paperwork?

Interviewer: Nah, not too much paperwork. See the Navy was a little different than the other branches. We got thirty-six dollars a month; they got twenty-one. So the first four months, we didn't get but twenty-one, and we paid for all our uniforms. After that, we got thirty-six a month, but we bought our own clothes. In the Army, they were issued theirs. Anything we got, we bought.

Veteran: So how long were you in Long Beach? Is that where the USS California was, in Long Beach?

Interviewer: Uh-huh.

Veteran: So, how long was the stay in Long Beach before you headed to Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: About a month.

Veteran: About a month. K. So we're talking...

Interviewer: We left October the 1st to go to Hawaii.

Veteran: In that month, what did you all do? We you all just training for, preparing for what might happen? Or what were y'all doing in that month before you all left?

Interviewer: Well, we were assigned gun mounts. We'd had training on loading them. After we got over there, we'd leave on Monday, and we'd come in Friday, spend the weekend in port. One section would have the duty. We had four sections on the ship. One would be the duty section. And uh, so, we would do the watches on the ship. Of course, there were a lot of divisions. The admiral would come by, with the speaker, announcing for them to stand at attention. We didn't have to salute him every time we saw him, we'd just salute him one time in the morning. The deck forces, they kind of did the maintenance on top. They'd clean, sweep it down every so often. We had a good deal, all ships didn't do that but ours. We paid a guy to take care of the chow. We had two tables, and he'd bring the food to the table, and we'd sit down just like at home and then get up and leave. And each man, there were twenty of them, would pay him a dollar apiece on payday, which was twice a month. But he made more money there than his regular salary.

Veteran: You had the weekends off in port?

Interviewer: Yeah, if we weren't the duty section.

Veteran: So, you were in Pearl Harbor for about two months prior to December 7th, correct? Can you walk us through the attack that day on December 7th? What it was like for you?

Interviewer: Yeah. Our section was duty section, and I had 4-8 watch in the afternoon. And the only aircraft we had in their pulled out about sundown and left. And I had 4-8 watch, and well I had 4-8 watch the next morning. Well, the PD takes long patrols, but they can fly a long ways. The water was so slick that morning. They were on pontoons. So he tried to take off and he couldn't make it. So he made three of four runs. When it was so slick, it made a vacuum on them pontoons. So they got a PT boat out there to run across. So, they had come out to raise the flag, and I was fixing to get relieved so I could go eat. I hadn't eaten breakfast when it started. We got three torpedoes and one bomb hit. One torpedo didn't hit the hub, it hit the rudder. They flooded the opposite side to keep it from rolling over like the Oklahoma. We evacuated the ship and went to the Island over to our stations. That's where all the planes landed. We were the closest ones to the island. Maybe from like here to the street is how far we had to go to the island. So we evacuated, then we went back aboard. That was the first wave. We got back aboard. We was sunk, but we was up. We still had some anti-aircraft guns that were still above water. We went aboard and we still thought it was going to roll over. About that time, the second wave come in. The Nevada was the only one that got in the way. They had come by about that time, so I know it saved some lives on the California because they looked after her. She run in the ground about two or three hundred yards from where we were, to keep it from blocking the channel. Of course it sunk. And we abandoned ship again the second time, went over to the Island. So, they were fighting the fire on the water and the ship, and they finally got the anchor chain around where we tied up, so it stayed upright. We went back aboard that night. Somebody shot, and when they did, well everybody started shooting. They shot down a couple of planes, didn't kill the pilots. They bailed out. They were mad as a hornet. Then, the next day, West Virginia was tied up out port, and the Maryland was in port. Well the Maryland got one bomb hit, but you couldn't hit it with a torpedo. So they pulled her out there, course they was trying to find places for everybody, so I went aboard the Maryland. And they blew the quay up, took the Tennessee out. It got a bomb hit. The bomb hit the middle gun on the Tennessee, and the shrapnel killed the captain over on the West Virginia. We came out, I didn't see it, I heard it, when the Arizona blew up. Course I didn't know that was what happened at the time, but it wasn't long before we figured it out. But it was a tanker. Pulled up in there right behind us, between us and the Maryland and the West Virginia. Now early that morning, 'course I didn't hear this until later, a destroyer out there started fighting with a sub, and they sank it. They never could find it until a few years ago. It wasn't where they thought it was, but they finally found it. And that was the first Japanese prison of war. It was one of them two-man subs. They didn't have much of a navigation system, because they followed a big one, the mother ship. And they run it up on the beach. So they didn't know where they was going. I stayed on the Maryland until it came back to the states in January to get repairs and put different guns on it. At that time we had 50s and 20 millimeters, but we didn't have no 40 millimeters. It's got 40 millimeters in a quad, thaf s 4 guns in a quad. Here is a picture of it.

Veteran: This is the Maryland or the California?

Interviewer: No, that's the USS West Virginia, after they redone it. I got transferred to it, and I stayed on it until the end of the war.

Veteran: You were transferred there in '42?

Interviewer: No, it was'43.

Veteran: So how long were you back in the states after Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: Oh, when they were working on that one, I got transferred to it. They kept most of the people over there as these ships come in when they were damaged. They use their personnel to build a crew back up, so they didn't have to bring people from the States all the way out there. And then some of the guys who'd been a long time, they'd come back and get new construction. Of course they'd have to test it before they left, all the guns and everything. See if they needed to do any more work on it before they went back out to the war zone. But, when we went to the Philippines. We could stand up on deck, and any direction you looked, you couldn't see nothing but ships. About 1:00, all these Japanese planes come out, all them radars on all their ships, we dove down through the deck of one of those converter jetters. We took some of the people on our ship, from different ones. Of course they sink it, there couldn't be no fire on the__(??) after dark. But that was the only plane come out. That was the only hit that was made. After we made the landings, we were up in___(??)gulf, and they brought General Doug in there. They sent him ashore, you know, taking the news reel with reporters, and all that. Well the first time, they didn't think it was good enough so they had to go back and do it over. We use those 16-inch guns to support the army, so if they needed a target, said they needed to take it out, so we'd take it out. Different ships that have their duty, that would be their duty for the day, whatever the army called for. Fire, why the ship would take it. The third day, we had to get kamikazes, and we finally had to go back up the straits a ways. We finally shot down the first four, the next one caught us. But we were still lucky, the plane crashed and the gasoline stuff only killed 9 people. The bomb went down on the third deck, and it split in two like a watermelon.

Veteran: So this is all in the Philippines?

Interviewer: Uh-huh. And, uh, and then that storm came in. and we all went out in the China Sea. Of course there was a couple of destroyers, and they ran out of fuel. We all seen them, because we couldn't control them, nobody could rescue them. So we lost them. That's when I decided I didn't want on one of them destroyers, get me on one of them little ones. (Laughter) All those waves coming up to the number two turret on there, about a forty to fifty foot wave. Them little ones, you just see the top of them every once in awhile.

Veteran: Now, 1 don't want to jump back too far, but I do want to hear a little more about Pearl Harbor.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: When you hear those sirens going off, telling you to get to yours battle stations, what's going through your head? What sort of emotions? Are you so trained that you're just all about your duty? Are you panicking?

Interviewer: Oh, no. We just go to our battle stations where we're assigned. And of course, they get down below first. And they said "this is not a drill," so we went to our stations. As far as I was concerned, I didn't expect, nobody expected anything. So until it hit the ship, you know well — anybody that says they weren't scared, well they're just not quite telling the truth. Of course it hits them after it's over more than it did at the time. The army had put up a radar, and they just missed training on it. And this guy told them that there was a bunch of planes coming in. They said "oh, we've got some big 17s coming in from the States, don't worry about it." He says, "There weren't any 17 planes in this bunch." And they just dismissed it. Of course they was in a different place than I was. They was a few minutes from hitting us whenever that happened. And they shot down some of the 17s because they weren't armed. They just ran them over there where they had bases for them at the time. Yeah. Lot of them, they got burned from the burning on top of the water. And they take em over on the dock and they buried them. Of course every time they talk, someone always adds to or takes away from the numbers of how many was killed, but around 2,600 roughly.

Veteran: Did you lose any close friends that day? JC

Interviewer: Yeah, I did. See we had what you call a peace time crew. After the war come along, we was carrying about 1,600 on a battleship. But the Pennsylvania was in dry dock when the bomb hit. There was two smaller ships in dry dock in front of it, and it destroyed them. And where the carriers were tied up, they sunk both of them, because they had maps and had their targets marked. They come over the ship, it was so low, you could see them just as plain as could be. In fact some of them had to really pull up to keep from getting__(??) their own ship. Well they raised the Nevada, West Virginia, and the California. The Oklahoma, it rolled over, and they raised it after the war. Some salvage company was towing it to the states, and they run into___(??). It sunk. They lost it. And of course the Arizona's still there, and the old Utah on the other side of the island, it's still there. It was a target ship for aircraft planes. They took the superstructure off, and it had a flat deck. It was remote control, it didn't have people on it, working on it. They sunk it, I guess they thought it was an aircraft carrier because it did kind of like it in a way. If s still there, it took part of it away, you won't hear nothing about it because not many got killed on it, I think 66 or something like that. They took part of it away so those super carriers could come down to Fort Island.

Veteran: So have you been back to Pearl Harbor since that day?

Interviewer: Oh yeah. I went back on the 49* and 50th anniversary. They took the USS Missouri over there. I don't know why they did that. I guess they was trying to get the Island, get visitors over there. They should have left it in Seattle, where most people would have saw it. Of course you know, during the war over there with Iraq, they use them. They put missiles on them, but it still took a bigger crew and it was slow.

Veteran: Whaf s it like going back? (Tape 1, Side B)

Interviewer: We just asked Mr. Alston what it was like going back to Pearl Harbor to visit again?

Veteran: ...and then Diamondhead. Really when you come in, thaf s the only two things I really could remember. You know it changed so much. When we were there, there was like a farm to market road going from the naval base to town. Now they got a six-lane highway. Little different. Of course, we went out there. Well, the people kept us, you know, signing autographs. The visitors was there in the visitors' center. We were there at the visitors' center where they had the ceremony.___(??) They buried anybody who was on the Arizona. If they wanted to be buried, they cremated them and put them in a little tube and take them down there and tie it down. And they buried three on the fiftieth anniversary that day. Now, used to, we had to___(??) the buried, and go__(??) over there at the landing, over at Fort Island. But now, they got a, well, they got a floating section in it. When the ships come around, they just unhook it and tow it around the ship and go on through. And you can drive over there for Fort Island. And then, we spent a lot of time signing autographs. They, uh, did give us coffee and donuts and stuff. (Laughter) And on the fiftieth anniversary, Colin Powell, he spoke there. And last time,___(??) his name right now, he made the talk. It was one of the Japanese, that was his twentieth year on the fiftieth anniversary. He comes back every year. He comes back every year. He brought his interpreter and gave the speech. He, uh, prayed for peace. And he was one of the pilots that day, on December the seventh. But he's become a Christian, and he comes every year on his own expense. And they let him get up there and talk with the interpreters. And he prayed for peace. I said well, I don't know how many, you know, converted to Christianity, the Japanese, but probably more than you'd think. They turned out to be a pretty good ally.

Interviewer: Going back to that day, at the end of that day, how did things change? The spirits of you and everyone around you? What changed? Knowing that the U.S. was entering the war at that point?

Veteran: Well, everybody was nervous. They thought maybe they would come back, but they didn't. You know, they went and made landings on the Philippines. They tried to destroy the fleet, what planes was in that area, and they figured by the time we got everything back going, we wouldn't have the will to fight. But they was wrong. That just really kicked things off when they did that. And the old admiral, he went to school over here. He says, "we woke up a giant." He didn't want to do it. He wasn't in favor of it, but he wasn't the one in charge, so. Well we had to eat over, they didn't tear of the mess hall or anything over there, but they did tear up the hospital on Fort Island, they hit it with a bomb.___(??), thaf s where everybody had to go eat, pretty well. You know, except the Maryland crew and the Tennessee, because they didn't have no space once they pulled the Maryland out and the Tennessee out, some went aboard them to kind of cut down on the personnel and eat over there. I'd say about ten days after that, a aircraft carrier the plane was taking off Fort Island, and somebody left the crane up in the air. And he flew into that crane, and that bomb on that plane went off when it hit the ground. And I, of course everybody looked and wondered what happened because we couldn't see it for the buildings where we were at the ship. I don't know if it killed anybody or not. But, here's the Arizona___(??) if you never have seen it up close. Now how much of a chance of a rainbow on December the seventh?

Interviewer: Hmm. December 7th, 1999. A rainbow right over the top of it.

Veteran: What a cool picture.

Interviewer: Who signed this one? Do you know, who would that be?

Veteran: No, I don't. That may be the guy that took the picture, I don't know. That's probably who it was. So they could make copies and give out.

Interviewer: So, you, in '43 joined the West Virginia, and you headed, what was the first campaign you headed out on the West Virginia? The Philippines or...?

Veteran: No,__(??) Islands, and then the Philippines, and then Iwo Jima, and then Okinawa.

Interviewer: Which of those is the most memorable? I guess you took them all at one time, but which of them is the most memorable campaign? Which one do you remember the most vividly?

Veteran: Um, well, we had a lot more trouble in the Philippines. See, when we were there, we was up in the straits. And one of our subs out in the China Sea said there was a fleet of seventeen ships from Japan, Japanese ships, coming, and they was going to come up the straits. Well the captain said," eat early, go to your battle stations, we don't know what time they'll arrive, but we'll be ready." So, they come up the straits, with those big guns, you've got to take them off at least twenty-five degrees to keep__(??) the deck so you get recoil from the gun, if 11 take part of it. And the ship and the water it'll take the rest of it. So, but knowing the Japanese, they didn't go by that rule at all. But we were broadsided, five of us battleships, waiting on them when they came in. And I think we fired 93 rounds, or 16 each__(?), 2,250 pounds. And I don't know how many the other ships fired. But we sunk them all but two, and they were crippled. And they went back up the strait a little ways, and the next morning, a plane sank them. But that was, you know, that wait was worse than the battle I think. You know, just waiting for them to come in. They come in about 3:00 in the morning. We were the last battle between big ships. And Iwo Jima, it was far enough in the mainland that those Japanese planes, most of them, couldn't fly that far. So they didn't.__(??) got hit one night. She had night fighters up. And, uh, of course it was burning, so they designate an area out there for them to bail out, had destroyers going out there to pick up the pilots. They lost planes, and they put out the fire on the ship. Uh, but they stayed, still stayed in operation. They didn't -didn't knock them out of operation. And, uh, we were using spotters from it, those planes off the carriers, for spotters, because they dug in them mountains way back in there. They'd be three stories maybe in some places down in the rock. Anywhere you could find an opening, our ships would try to put one of them in jail. I know we buried a lot of them alive, we didn't bury enough of them. I can't understand how come they had so many! And they didn't think they had that many troops. They had about 22,000 troops. They was taking it mainly while those big bombers if they got hit or something, and you know, and damaged a little bit so they could land and they wouldn't have to go all the way back to land. And it was far enough away from Japan that, you know, the planes wouldn't give you any trouble. So, I saw them put up the flag. I was sitting up there in the 40s watching what was going on. 1 could see these little old army carriers, personnel carriers,__(??) and it stop and got hit, stop. Because there wasn't that much cover on that little old island for people, you know, the ones landing and coming up. Well they were all__(??). We all lost a little more personnel, everyone. We lost about 6,050 on Iwo Jima. We lost about 13,000 on Okinawa. We lost 38 ships sunk and 43 damages from suiciders. Of course, people don't think about it, but at night, when the moon's shining, you can see a ship on the water just as good as you can in the daytime. But what we'd do is at night, we'd pull in there and anchor. And the most.... Ones hitting the water every once in awhile, boom! But we never did get hit. Another ship, just come back, been repaired, and come back and anchor right beside us, got hit the next night. So it, you know, you never know about them things.

Interviewer: So, did I hear you correctly, from where you were standing on the West Virginia, you saw the flag being raised?

Veteran: Yep, sure did.

Interviewer: Did you realize at that moment how important that would be in the public's mind? Those images in that battle?

Veteran: Oh, yeah.

Interviewer: What was going through your mind when you saw this?

Veteran: Well, when we saw that, well we knew that they didn't have it secure, but they was a long ways in securing the island. And it never got dark - because we used starshells. You know, it's kind like a, when it fires, it blows up, kind of like a fire with a parachute on it. Gets lit up. Well, all the ships were firing and that island never got dark, for I guess five days anyway. Of course, you know, we'd fire every so often, and then that ship would fire. And then you know, we'd just take it in alternation and kept it lit up.

Interviewer: How many ships were around Iwo Jima?

Veteran: Now that I couldn't tell you. They was all around. 1 couldn't tell you how many was on the opposite side from where we were.

Interviewer: What was your part during the combat on the ship? What was your duty?

Veteran: Loading the 40-millimeters.

Interviewer: Loading the 40-millimeters?

Veteran: Now, after they redone the ships, we had eight twin 5-inch mounts. They were anticraft guns, and of course after they got radar, you know, where they could kind of get the mileage, they set these__(??) of these things where they loaded them, as they loaded them in ~ at the height, with the planes coming in. And of course it burst up there, you know, in the shrapnel. Well, the Japanese planes weren't hard to shoot down, because they didn't have no armor on them. They wanted speed, but right after the war started, they put that bigger engine in the Navy fighters and they could outfly them and they had armor and everything. So, at first, they was having a ball, the Japanese was. Because ours would get after it, you know, they keep flying, and they'd kind of more stall out. Well, when they did that, that Japanese would come back on him, not from up above — come back on him. And they was having some pretty good luck at shooting them down. Well after they put that big engine in there, when they saw one of them coming, well they run.

Interviewer: This may seem like a silly question, but you said it was - the skies were constantly lit up for five solid days, how did you all go about sleeping and eating and just normal, like, things that you need during those constant battles?

Veteran: Well, uh, just so many would go eat at a time. They'd fix sandwiches and stuff. And, uh, take it back of there to our duty, to the gun, and eat. But we didn't have too many suiciders there, it was too far away from the mainland. So, like our ship, with the firepower, if one did come in and we got on him, most of the time we'd shoot him down. When we was in the Philippines, the first plane got close enough that the wing landed on the quarter deck. The next one, the motor hit the side of the ship. And then the third one, I guess it killed the pilot and of course he was coming down. He went down right beside the ship, in the water, didn't hit the ship. The fourth one he was a little further out. But the fifth one, it hit us. Now I'll give this. Where did I leave it?

Interviewer: Is that it there on the table?

Veteran: Here it is. That is a copy of the original peace treaty and this is the instruments of surrender that go along with it. Ya'H take that. I make copies to give to people that wants them...

Interviewer: Thank you.

Veteran: This was taken in 1942 after the war started. That was me.

Interviewer: Good looking man.

Veteran: Yeah. (Laughter)

Interviewer: I don't know about that. (Laughter)

Veteran: So you're around nineteen here?

Interviewer: (Nods)

Veteran: Hmm.. Well just some - we asked you about these before we started. I just want to get these on record. Were you ever a prisoner of war?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: And, uh, any medals or honors from your time?

Interviewer: Well, all the theaters we got ribbons for. And, uh, you know, we put five stars on the ribbons for each of the campaigns. Of course they had the Philippines medal. Each one of them had a set. They didn't give us the medals. We just got ribbons put on our chests.

Veteran: So you've given those away?

Interviewer: Yeah. I give them to grandkids a long time ago because I didn't figure I'd ever need them. (Laughter)

Veteran: Uh, now as you're out on the ship, how do you stay in touch with family and friends back home? Letterwriting?

Interviewer: The only thing they had was mail. They give us these little cards because they censored them, you know. They didn't want anybody telling where we were or nothing like that. If anything like that got in there they cut it out.

Veteran: So how often, how often did you receive mail from back home? Pretty infrequent, or...?

Interviewer: Not too frequent. There was a lot of times they'd be bringing the mail to a base where they refuel, ammunition, food, restocked the ships. And the ship might be called out to do a special duty and see he'd miss it. And he'd catch up later sometime.

Veteran: So you didn't pick the mail up____(??).

Interviewer: No, nuh-uh. Now they did bring some. They'd have a destroyer come around and make the ships with the mail. But that didn't happen too often.

Veteran: For those of us who haven't been on a ship before, how did you keep yourself entertained? How did the guys pass the time?

Interviewer: Oh, we had some old movies. We had a band on the ship.

Veteran: Hmm. Did you have a lot of downtime a day? Did it vary from day to day?

Interviewer: It varied a little. It would depend on the watches and where we were going and what we were going to do. From one island to the other, they had these little old radio control buttons and we'd___(??) on the way to the next campaign. Them things was hard to hit.

Veteran: That's pretty funny.

Interviewer: Do you remember any funny or unusual events that happened just in downtime or throughout your service?

Veteran: Uh, we picked up one pilot. He was from the carrier. When they start to land on them carriers, well sometimes they kind of make a vacuum and the plane would drop in the water at the back of the ship. 'Course they'd save the pilot Most times they'd lose the plane. But, they brought him over and got him some dry clothes. That was the third time that week that he had been picked up out of the water. (Laughter) I told him, I said, "I believe I'd tell them to put me on a different duty." (Laughter)

Interviewer: Had you, had you picked him up all three times?

Veteran: No. Just once. But I just - you know, he was the one that told it. (Laughter) "This is the third time." I said, "Third time's a charm." (Laughter) And then another incident that happened. One of our carriers. There was two Japanese planes that got lost and they tried to land on the carrier. And they waved them off, 'cause you know they wasn't making the approach right. And the second time they come around, they discovered they were Japanese planes. And they decide, they discovered that they was our ships and they flew on off. I don't know where they went. (Laughter)

Interviewer: Did you, uh, I'm assuming the time on that carrier with those men that you formed some pretty close bonds. Are you still in contact with any of the men that you served with on the West Virginia?

Veteran: We have a ship's reunion every year, but I -1 uh, lef s see. About ten years ago I went. We had it up here at Branson and I went. Most of the guys was there. I knew a few of them. Most of the guys that was there came on it after the war was over, you know, before they decommissioned it, so I didn't know them.

Interviewer: You showed us some pictures. Did you keep a written record or journal of your day- to-day activities?

Veteran: Nah.

Interviewer: You didn't? No time for that. Too much work? (Laughter) Do you remember the day that your service ended? Where you still out when the peace treaty was signed?

Veteran: We were in the, I went up in the harbor.

Interviewer: Where?

Veteran: Tokyo Bay...

Interviewer: Oh, really?

Veteran: ...when they signed it. Yeah.

Interviewer: Oh, wow.

Veteran: There were several ships that went in there.

Interviewer: So you were all they way up on the island.

Veteran: Well, we didn't go up on the shore, but we were in the straits there in the harbor. Uh, you know it's kind of funny in a way. Here are all these ships of ours cruising up the middle of it and here are all the Japanese jumping of in the, and they're swimming. When the old 'Moto said, "War's over," the fighting was over. They just went to normal activities. (Laughter)

Interviewer: So did you have any interaction with the Japanese public at all? I mean, were you guys received well. I, mean I don't...

Veteran: Well, we couldn't understand most of them. We couldn't understand Japanese. But there was one teacher. She could speak English, and she said, uh... Them big B29s, they didn't paint them, they were silver. But they'd start a fire big enough that they could see that glitter up in the sky. They was using incindiary bombs burning. I don't know why they didn't give up before they did. I guess that they thought they might not have to totally surrender. But man they, they didn't have nothing. And, uh, also the Army. We did go a bit over on the beach. And the Army had leads, and they'd take us up there where they had dropped them atom bombs. But, I didn't go. They didn't realize how dangerous it was or they wouldn't have been going either. (Laughter) But anyway, that was a long time. The prisoners of war that they had, we took them on different ships so that they could get medical and air transportation back to the States. They had been on water and rice so long that they could punch their (pointing to calf muscle) in like that and it would stay.

Interviewer: Oh, wow.

Veteran: I don't know what kind health, you know, in later years they had. I always wondered about it.

Interviewer: So, that day the treated was signed, was that the day your service ended?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Did you go back home after that, or did you...

Veteran: No. We stayed until everything was secure. We stayed in there, I don't know, fifteen or twenty days. And, uh, then the ships started leaving and going back. But every ship that went back, if it had any kind of room, it went by these islands and picked up passengers going back - bringing them back to the States. We stopped by the Philippines and picked up a bunch. I liked to have got electricuted. We stopped by Pearl Harbor. That's the first time I had been back in Pearl Harbor in three years. We stopped in there overnight. There was this guy welding. It had rained a bit and it was wet. That old cable with that rubber on it had a break in it. I didn't see it. I was just walking along and I stepped on the thing. I couldn't get off of it until he let off the torch. (Laughter)

Interviewer: So it took about a, I guess a month or so to get back from Japan? Is that about right?

Veteran: No. I think about ten days.

Interviewer: But, from the time the war ended you were probably gone a month? Give or take.

Veteran: Oh, yeah. Over a month. Of course, they one's whose time was out, they could go back. If you were a visitor on a ship, passenger, you just get what they'll give you.___(??) I said, "Nah, it don't make that much difference. I'm just going to stay where I am." Some of them did go off, and the ship got called off or something, and we beat them back to the States. (Laughter)

Interviewer: So when did you finally leave the Navy? When were you finally finished.

Veteran: October 28th.

Interviewer: Of forty...

Veteran: Forty-five. Yeah.

Interviewer: What was your, what were your feelings that day? Glad to be out? Or...

Veteran: Oh, yeah. I didn't, you know, 1 had done figured out it didn't want to make it my career.

Interviewer: So you had signed a four year agreement with the Navy?

Veteran: (Nodding)

Interviewer: Did you return home after that day?

Veteran: Yeah. We came on the train. From San Diego, we came on the train down to a little air base down there around Houston and got discharged. And we caught a ride back to Temple.

Interviewer: So what did you do? In '45 when you got back, did you get a job? Get married?

Veteran: No. My cousin lived out in Plainview, out there by Lubbock. He said he couldn't get nobody to help him, and it was time to cut the wheat. He said, "Oh, I'll pay you good." You know___(??) my cousin. So I said, "Okay. I'll try it." I went out there and worked a couple of months. I come back and, uh, I made an application to the VA hospital here in Temple and went to work. With service time and that I had thirty-eight and a half years when I retired from out there.

Interviewer: So you went to work at the hospital? Is that what you said?

Veteran: Uh huh.

Interviewer: Doing what there?

Veteran: Doing what?

Interviewer: What were you doing at the hospital?

Veteran: Well, first I drove a truck. Then I went into the fire department. We did guard work along with the fire department. Then we got some of those patients from Waco. (TAPE 2, SIDE A)

Interviewer: Mr. Alston just told us that he was working as a member of the firefighters. Go ahead.

Veteran: And, uh, separated us then. We had a guard house and used to lock them up. They did____(??) you know they were allowed to go to town. They'd get drunk and we'd put them in the guard house to keep them from, you know, disturbing the rest of them so they couldn't sleep. And some of the medical wards, Dr._____(??), that's the first thing he would do. He'd call us and say, "You'd better make a check tonight. I want to get some sleep." (Laughter) We'd check them wards down, you know. We'd find some whiskey pretty well every time. (Laughter) There was one guy. He was a double amputee. They had him over in the lockup ward for the mental patients. They couldn't keep him sober. We picked up the film after they had the show. We'd pick up the film and put it up at the gate for the film man to pick them up and leave the new ones. And as I started in -1 started out rather - here come this guy with a sack. "What you got in that sack?" He had eleven pints of vodka. (Laughter) I took him up there to the ward. He was kind of irresponsible anyway. I told the nurse, I said, "Now keep him on the ward. He's bringing stuff in here to somebody else." Well, when I started to take the film to the gate I met him again and he had three more. (Laughter) So that guy, he didn't get none that night. Him and his wife lived next door to us there for a while. He was a double amputee. He had an eye out. I know he had a lot of problems, medical problems from the war, but he wasn't solving any of them by being drunk all the time.

Interviewer: You were living where at this time?

Veteran: In Temple.

Interviewer: How have your experiences from the war affected you afterward?

Veteran: Well, I've had lots of nightmares and stuff over the years. Those five inch .38s were right there above where we were on the .40s, and it made me heard of hearing. They finally, uh, they told me they'd give me my medicine free and they give me my hearing aides. Well, I'd bought hearing aids from Martin Audiology. Cost me five thousand bucks. I could hear better with them when I first put them in, but then I'd sweat and I couldn't hear as good with them. And my ears got infected. First one thing then another on that account, so I quit wearing them. I told them if, you know, I couldn't wear them. Now I don't know whether if they use another type of material or what it might make a difference. But they told me anytime I wanted to try them to come on up there and they'd try to fit me with some. So, so far I....

Interviewer: So your hearing was affected by combat?

Veteran: Oh yeah. Them five inch right there over my head. Now the sixteen inch, they stuck out quite a ways. They had more of a rumble. They didn't have quite a crack like the five inch did.

Interviewer: So you said you had nightmares for a while. Did you, did those just go away?

Veteran: Not completely. I still have them at times.

Interviewer: Did you just kind of wait them out? Did you just let them go away? Did you seek help? Did the VA provide any help for stuff like that or were there just too many of you guys to...

Veteran: Nah. Too many of them. Well, I took medicine for them a while. And I didn't know if ya'll would ask me what that was. (Pointing across the room)

Interviewer: No sir, we haven't.

Veteran: That*s a Japanese flag from World War II. (Chuckles) I got it from another guy. I wanted to get a, to put it in the museum up at Fredericksburg but the guy died before we could get any information on how he got a hold of it. The Rising Sun. So, when we go to schools and everything, I take all of this stuff with us when we make talks to the schools.

Interviewer: Do you do that often?

Veteran: We've made about everyone in Waco. We've made, uh this little town over here, between here and Marl in. I can't think of the name of it right now, but anyway. We've been here twice at Troy. We've been to that Christian school on [FM] 93 three times. We've made the academies. You know, the military academies in Waco, all three of them - Navy, Marines, Army, Air Force. Well, four of them. Then this last year we went up to Region XII in Waco, and we did it on cameras.

Interviewer: What was that like? Different?

Veteran: It was different. It was alright except they didn't get to ask many questions or get many answers because it took too long. Of course, when we go to schools we lay it out to them and then let them as the questions.

Interviewer: So who are you traveling with? Which group are you with when you are making these talks?

Veteran: Well, another guy from Chapter 10 out of Waco.

Interviewer: Did you know him during war or did you meet him afterward?

Veteran: Huh?

Interviewer: Did you know him during your service or did you meet him afterward.

Veteran: No. He was on a different ship. I didn't know him.

Interviewer: What was his name?

Veteran: Frank Curry.

Interviewer: Frank Curry. Well, Mr. Alston, is there anything - we've exhausted our questions - is there anything about your experience that we haven't asked that you would like to tell us about?

Veteran: When we went to the Okinawa, you know, they had them people believing we was so mean that the women was going up on the high side and throwing the kids off in the ocean. But they found out pretty quick that that wasn't so, and then they got some help from the people that lived on the island somehow. And, uh, they discovered them and destroyed them. But, they had made a bunch of- rigged up a bomb on a little old, well like a motorboat. I don't know how well it was made. I didn't see any. And destroyed them because they was going to use them at night at try to hit the side of the ship with them. It would just be a suicide mission. And after the war was over we found out a lot of things. That, uh, they was working on a bubonic plague, and if they used the charge to, you know, to scatter them it killed them. They never did figure out a way to deliver them. We would have had a lot more trouble, they would have had trouble here in the States from that. They sent balloons up, you know, and they tried to set the forest fires up in the southwest - northwest, I mean, during the war. And these Japanese, they would - they built a torpedo where the guy could get in it. And he would guide it to the ship. Well, he's dead if he hit it and he's dead if he missed it. They couldn't, they couldn't retrieve him. After that was out a while it would kind of get rusty and it wouldn't, the little charge wouldn't kick it off every time. They'd bring the guy back in the sub, go in there, and clean that all up, and start that process again. Now can you imagine a man training for that? Now thaf s the kind of people we had to fool with.

Interviewer: So, help me understand. At Okinawa, the Japanese women - is this what you were saying - were throwing there children over the cliffs?

Veteran: Yeah. Yeah.

Interviewer: Why would they do that? Out of fear of the Americans?

Veteran: Yeah. That's right. They had them that scared. And you know, those Japanese, it was an honor to die for the emperor. It was a disgrace to get captured. We didn't get many of them captured. When we shot all of them ships, got all them ships and was going to the shore, they had hand grenades and stuff. Our Army Rangers had to shoot them in the water just coming out. They wouldn't give up.

Interviewer: But, from what you know of the Japanese people, they seem to really - once they found out more about Americans and appreciated...

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: them more.

Veteran: 'Cause they never was told anything except what they wanted them to hear.

Interviewer: Did you have any personal run-ins with Japanese citizens?

Veteran: Nah. No. They'd be some on Hawaii Islands when we'd go over there for anniversaries, and the oldest ones, you know, they'd just kind of duck their head, you know, and walk around us. They would, you know, walk right by us. Of course, the younger ones, they didn't know any different.

Interviewer: In America there was a lot of fear of the Japanese people. What was ya'll - what were the general feelings of the people in the service towards the Japanese people?

Veteran: Well, generally wasn't that bad. I mean, you know, the people as a whole, they just done what they was told. Just like any country, just like Germany over there and the Nazis. Most of them didn't want to fight. Of course there was some of them at did. They had a hard time convincing them Samurai to, you know, they wanted to keep on fighting. And, the guy was in our chapter up there. He was in the Marines. He was in the 1st Marines, and he said they were going to be the first ones ashore. They told them there would probably be 110% casualties. That meant none of them would probably make it out alive. I'm sure they had tunnels dug in the main island just like they did in these other places, and they'd have to bring them out of there. They would have lost more people on both sides. You know, they keep saying we shouldn't have dropped the atom bombs, but they would have lost more people and we would have lost a bunch of people if they hadn't dropped them. So, Harry, he was - he could see that, and everybody else could except the Japanese. (Laughter) Now what happened to the Marines on Okinawa, they had a tunnel dug through that rock. Uh, they'd make there way up there - fight all day and they'd get up there. Well, at night them Japanese came down that tunnel, reinforcements, and they'd push them back. (Laughter) So, they kind of figured out what was happening, and then they started blowing up the tunnels____(??) go up and down it.____(??) got caught in there, well that would be the end. My neighbors give me these. (Reaching for two minted coins) One of them is of 9/11. The other is of Pearl Harbor. There's something on both sides.

Interviewer: Oh, 1 see. Hmm.

Veteran: I didn't know who give them to me. You know, they had a party for my 85th birthday. I didn't know, I thought it was just our group going to eat out. I don't know where they got them, and I don't know how they found it was my birthday. (Laughter) But anyway, they brought them over here to me. They live over here in this house across the street.

Interviewer: Well, Mr. Alston, you sure have experienced a lot in your days. We really appreciate the opportunity to sit and hear a little bit from you.

Veteran: Yeah. Well, I don't want to keep you too long. (END OF TAPE)