Veteran: Okay. Now, you are going to start out and you are going to give me your full name, where you live.

Interviewer: Currently?

Veteran: Yeah, that's fine. Well, you were raised in Wilmington. You can tell me either Wilmington, Delaware, or --

Interviewer: I lived -- I was stationed more places in the military than I ever lived as a civilian. My father was a skipper on a dredge, and everywhere the dredge went, we went.

Veteran: Right. But okay. Just tell me for the record, Delaware -- [ Conversation between interviewer and videographer. ]

Interviewer: Just tell me -- you can say Wilmington or Rehoboth or wherever. Just --

Veteran: All right. My name is Alfred Charles Anderson. Nobody calls me Alfred. I never forgive my mother for that. To my family, I'm Al. To the military, I'm Andy or chief.

Interviewer: Now, tell me where you were born.

Veteran: I was born in Philadelphia. I don't let that out very often. I claim Wilmington primarily as my home because I lived in and around the Wilmington area from the time I was 5, until the time I was 14. At which time, I -- my family moved to a little town of Viola, Delaware. Population 105. My dad wanted to know if my mother would be happy there. And she was sure she would. And we had to keep a roster of people who wanted to visit us to go crabbing at Barkers Landing or be down in the country. We had what we called a house with a path, a path to the outhouse and a pump on the porch, and a cook stove in the kitchen which heated the whole house. We didn't open the living room in the winter, unless we had company coming.

Interviewer: When -- tell me about -- do you remember -- do you remember -- when I ask you this, you got to repeat what I'm asking.

Veteran: I understand.

Interviewer: Do you remember Pearl Harbor Day?

Veteran: Do I remember Pearl Harbor Day? Very vividly. I was at home in Viola, and as it happens, both my brothers were there, and we were stunned and shocked. I think -- I would say that we found out about 1:30, 2:00 in the afternoon is my recollection, and we hung on the radio for the rest of the evening and into the night. Very upset. Very alarmed. Of course, we -- the general consensus was that them little runt, blind suckers, we're going to clean their clock. So I remember Pearl Harbor Day very well. I was -- at that time, I was 16, I believe. Maybe 17.

Interviewer: How soon after that did you go in or --

Veteran: Well, from the -- of course, December the 7th -- I -- I didn't go in until February 19 -- February 19th, 1943. I had -- in the interim, I had brilliantly left my senior class in high school to go join the Navy. The Navy turned me down for being colorblind, and I decided the hell with them. I would wait until they drafted me. But having ultimately worked in the shipyard, as a tack welder, one rainy day, sleet and rain coming down, and every time I struck an arc with my welding rod, I was getting knocked down. So I threw it down, shut off the machine, went and looked for my brother, and said, I don't believe the Army can be this bad. And he said, boy, we better check out. We have to discuss this. You and I, we've done many things together, but I have to tell you, this I'm not going to do with you. I am not going in the damned Army. So we promptly went up to -- I think the draft board was at number four school. I would say it was on -- just off 8th and Washington Street. Tight as a tick. I went up and demanded to be drafted forthwith, and the suckers didn't take me for about four months. And then as much as I quit the yard that day, I drove my parents crazy for about four months with my drinking, carousing and general misbehavior. And finally, they caught me, and I was grateful to go. I left from Harrington, Delaware, in the -- went to the -- we went to Philadelphia, and then caught a bus across the river to Camden. The day before, some Delaware boys from up north in the city of Wilmington had torn up the bus on the way over to Camden. So I going the next day -- they had cops escort us across the river because us Delaware boys had a bad reputation. And at that time, you were given -- I forget, I will say 21 days after the induction to straighten up your affairs. And I told them I didn't want any 21 days. I want to go now, today. And I thought it was pretty audacious of the Marine Corps and the Navy to have men there to ask, did I want to join the Navy? And I politely informed them, no, they had had their opportunity and they missed it, and I was going all Army. I went to Fort Dix. There for a few days. And then we shipped out with the blinds drawn. The train, of course, was going to Wilmington. And we were all guessing what was going to happen to us, but the guy said, you notice the guys -- the regular Army guys, they got them Air Force patches off. You think we are going to the Air Force? I said, no, but I sure as hell hope so. When the train headed south, I would say a good two days, I believe -- I forgotten -- but we wound up in Miami Beach. I didn't know that Miami and Miami Beach were two different places. I've got to cough. { Cough } And I went with some Wilmington boys, but most of the boys were from North Jersey and New York City. They were a tough bunch. Excuse me. { Coughing }

Interviewer: Go ahead. Just take your time. Have another drink.

Veteran: Yeah, have another drink.

Interviewer: Yeah, you want another cigarette? Get him another cigarette.

Veteran: I was 18 at the time, and we were jubilant, and, you know, clowns and had a good time. But the -- the funny part is, I only did 18 days in basic training in Miami Beach. They put out a notice that anybody who would volunteer to be an aerial gunner would -- would be sent out to Buckley Field, Colorado, and Denver, Colorado, and attend armament school, and then we would go to gunnery -- aerial gunnery school. And we would also be made sergeants right away. And my -- my older brother, having been old Army, told me, said, kid, the only advice I can give you is don't -- repeat, don't volunteer for anything. Just pull your duty as it's posted. But being, at that time, 18, going to be a sergeant in six months, leather jacket, helmet, goggles, white scarf and wings, too much for this ego, 18-year-old ego. And, of course, I think most of us at that age go through the -- of wonderment. Have you got the gonads to do it? Do you think you could -- do you think you could fight in a war? We wanted to know. And so I succumbed and went to aerial gunnery school. Got my leather jacket, my sunglasses and my goggles and my wings and became a sergeant, and -- but I knew in my heart that I was going to pay dearly for that leather jacket and them goggles, and -- and I did pay. And I paid in spades. What else can I tell you?

Interviewer: When did you -- from there, where did you ship out to?

Veteran: Shipped out to Repo Depot, a replacement depot in Salt Lake City, Utah. And from Salt Lake City, we were assigned to different training bases. I was sent to what we used to call Moses Hole, Moses Lake, Washington. I didn't know there was a desert in Washington until I got there. I didn't know about the black sand and the rocks and the -- the tar paper shacks that they had for us to live in. And there we were assembled into crews, into individual air crew. We met our pilot, the copilot and we came in one at a time, so to speak, until we got a crew. It was interesting. One night we got our copilot, and I think we were in the lounge or somewhere. Anyway, the new fellow said -- introduced himself all around and said where they are from. He said, Andy, where are you from? I said, well, I guess I'm from Delaware. He said, no kidding! You are? He said, I'm Walter Krohl. I'm from Wilmington, and he became our copilot. We were only there -- I guess the weather stayed too bad to get any -- enough flying in, so we were transferred to Drew Field, Tampa, Florida. And I rode a train from the state of Washington, all the way to Tampa, Florida. It was -- it was an interesting train trip. That's the only time I slept with another man in the military, because the pullmans had upper bunk and a lower bunk for two and the upper bunk for one. And we went down to Florida for the -- for training. And sadly, the copilot, during a group one day said, listen, I've got a -- I'm flying local and my girlfriend Mary Ann is coming in from Wilmington. Gene, he said to the bombardier, would you meet her for me and entertain her, you know, until I get done flying local. Well, that night, the copilot, Walter, walks by and says, have you seen Gene? I said, no. He said, well, damn it, he's supposed to pick up my girlfriend. The ins and outs of it, I don't know, but Gene stole his girl. They had gone off somewhere. I don't know where. And he asked to be relieved from the crew. He didn't want to be on the same crew with Gene because of the hard feelings. And I understand Walter was lost over in Romania, flying with the 15th Air Force out of Italy, but he was a grand gentleman and he was a Wilmington boy. So we trained in Tampa, Florida, and then we went up to Langley Field, Virginia, to be radio trained. We were -- they called us the 4th Sea Search. We flew up and down the coast here for maybe two months. It was the first time I had an opportunity to come home. I had been gone, what, 10 months, and, of course, my family didn't have a telephone. A lot of families didn't have a telephone. So I got to bring some of my crew members home to Viola and meet my parents and train out of Langley. And I -- many nights we flew what they called cross-country training. We would fly from Langley to maybe Harrisburg, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, down the coast, and I could fly over my own home. And, of course, we were flying -- in them days, we were flying probably 8 or 9,000 feet. And I used to like to get in the tail and turn on the radio and listen to music and fly over and study the coastline. Sometimes it was day, sometimes it was night, but that was fun training. And then the ultimate word came that we were shipping out and we -- we flew out of Langley to Grenier, Grenier, New Hampshire, was the first stop. And then to Goose Bay, Labrador. And when we landed, the snow was so high on either side, it would probably be 12, 14 feet high on either side of the aircraft. The plane would disappear. Little did I know that maybe 15, 18 years later, I would be going to Goose Bay as permanent party. But we flew out of there, individual flights, to Meeks Field in Iceland, and got lost, had weather. And we -- when we landed at Meeks Field, we cut -- two of the engines stopped from fuel starvation. We were so nearly out of gas. And we spent the night there, and fueled up again, and then flew into Nutts Corner, Ireland. I never heard -- years after, I had never heard of anyplace called Nutts Corner, Ireland, but there we were split up and had to go to a place called Bovingdon, where we took -- listened to lectures from the guys who had already been flying, and from the British bomber crews, would lecture us on different aspects of what we were to expect. And my radio operator made a friend there. Oddly enough, I still remember the friend's name was Counts, C-o-u-n-t-s. He told our radio operator, he said, Max, shoot yourself in the foot. Do anything because your chances of living are nil. I said, geez, thanks a lot. You made it. He said, yeah, but damn few do! But one thing I -- in this, I want to cover is the fact that there were different eras flying out of the 8th Air Force over Europe. The boys who flew in 1943 caught hell. I mean, we -- they didn't have fighter escort. They were untrained -- or they were trained well, but they didn't have the experience of the 50, 60 below zero weather, and we lost a lot of aircraft. At the time I started, we were just beginning to get fighter escort. We found out that we couldn't do it the -- the -- we couldn't do the job just by the bombers by themselves, despite the fact that they had 12 or 13 guns on each plane. We still could not defend ourselves against fighters to the extent -- to make the survivability a practical thing. Excuse me. { Coughing } So as combat tours flying out of the 8th Air Force in England, it depended on what era you were in. The era that I am -- I was in was -- I certainly can't call it routine. It was quite exciting and frightening as hell, but we didn't have the losses that the early boys had. And as it -- after the -- what people don't realize or don't think about is that once the invasion took place, and the enemy was pushed back further and further to their own country, the antiaircraft guns were mobile. So when you had all of these aircraft guns to cover France, Germany, Holland, Belgium, as they moved back, they brought all of them guns back. So the antiaircraft fire at the individual targets became much more intense. And -- but for the grace of God -- for what reason, I don't know. I didn't -- I rarely ever fired my guns. I was more or less a passenger, albeit, a very tense passenger. I was still just a witness to it. I witnessed quite a few incidents with aircraft going down and what have you. But individual combat for my particular crew was virtually nil. I saw one of the first ME-262 German fighters that anybody saw, and he came through us, the formation, and everybody was saying, what the hell was that? It came through us so fast, and the pilots used to say that the rate of closure of today's aircraft is such that if you don't pay close attention, you are going to die all tensed up, because they -- they were breaking 400 miles an hour, or probably closer to 500 miles an hour. But -- I'm not intimating that it was easy. It wasn't. It was -- it was scary as hell, but --

Interviewer: How many missions did you do?

Veteran: I did 26. On the way over, my pilot became ill. We didn't -- I wasn't conscious of it. Dumb, young. But he had these blinding headaches. And it was determined that his -- I learned as I grew -- as I grew older -- I didn't realize it at the time, he having these migraine headaches had a lot to do with fear. My pilot was relatively wealthy. He had, at the time, what we thought was -- he had a $5,000 Pate violin, and he was a class operation. I mean, a gentleman's gentleman. Great gentleman. And he was -- he was -- of course, it took a lot of guts to ground yourself and to face your crew, which you've trained with for now almost a year. And he ground -- he was grounded and never flew a mission. So that meant that we became spares. Of course, we used to claim they didn't call for spares until they found out what the target was. And so we were spares individually. But that didn't -- I don't think -- I may have flown with maybe four strange crews. But it's not pleasant flying with a strange crew. Nothing wrong with them. It's just that they didn't know you, and they really didn't want to know you. Not that they weren't accommodating, but the potential for danger was great. And we finally picked up a pilot who had been a copilot on another crew, and he broke his leg during his -- he lost his crew. They put another copilot on. Then when he came back to flying duty, he checked out as an aircraft commander -- first pilot for want of a term -- and we flew our tour with him. And as it happens, he was a great pilot. Ballsy, gutsy guy, and very competent pilot. We had a great deal of confidence in him. And he -- as a matter of fact, he only died just about two years ago now. But he's the only guy -- one of the fewest. I was one of the -- myself, the radio operator and the pilot were the only ones who made a career of the Air Force. The radio operator already had in like six years, and the pilot opted to remain on active -- was enabled -- you know, when the war was over, we were all out. They allowed the officers to come back as master sergeants, which us enlisted people hated because I had been in outfits that had 18 master sergeants. Me, then as a married man, hoping to progress up the ranks, and here I got these 18 master sergeants ahead of me. But my pilot got to stay in, and he done his 30 years and retired as a lieutenant colonel. The other guy, the radio operator, I called him after he had retired in Kansas, and when he answered the phone, I said, hey, shoe salesman, how's it hanging? He said, Anderson, is that you? I said, yeah, Max, that's me. How's it going? He said, great. He said -- I said, you married? No, he said, you know, I never was -- my bottle is my buddy, you know. And the next time I called him, the bar answered -- it was at a bar, and when they answered, they said Max passed away. But -- but a great guy. He met his brother walking down the street in Virginia while we were at Langley. And my radio operator's name was Capps, Max Capps, C-a-p-p-s. And he met a Navy chief. He said, oh, Mr. Capps, how are you? And the Navy chief, said, hey, Capps, how are you? He said, yeah, have you heard from Joe or somebody? He said, no. He said, I ain't heard much from home lately. He said, well, nice to see you. Take care of yourself. And I said to him, who the hell was that? He said, that was my brother. I said, boy, tight, ain't you? He said, well, he's 10 years older than me, and we were never close. But the 26 missions I flew were because of the fact that when I arrived, the tour was 25 missions. Then it went to 30, and then it went to 35 with the advent of the invasion. Plus, we had gotten fighter escorts. So the losses lessened considerably. So as a spare gunner, your tour remained at 25, but when I picked up a crew, I was no longer a spare gunner. So when I flew my 25th, I went into ops and said, hey, { whistles } I'm out of here. He said, no. Nope. You're not out of here. Your pilot that you have been flying with, he has one more to go. So you have one more to go. So I had to fly, in my mind, two last missions. So when my Lieutenant French, my pilot, when he finished his 35th, then we became spares again, and we all had over 25. So having over 25 missions, we were allowed to come home. Of course, they said, if you fly more -- you know, Sergeant, if you fly four more missions, you will get a Distinguished Flying Cross. I said, I think I could live without that. So I opted to come home.

Interviewer: Now, did you get out then for a while and then went back in or -- A: { Coughing } Excuse me. No, I didn't. My parents had parted, and then my brother was -- George, Louise's husband, he was down in Florida or Chanute Field, or somewhere, and my older brother, he married a girl down in West Virginia. So I had no home to go to. And I thought, what the hell. I'll take another tour. And so I took another tour, and the end of that tour, I was married and living over on Guam. I married a local -- local Dover girl. And married ten days, honeymooned in Rehoboth, got my orders to ship out unaccompanied and I left. I was gone 15 months before I got my wife with me. And that was a tough --

Veteran: Was that before Korea or was that right after the war?

Interviewer: Before Korea. This was 1948. I went over -- I married and went over to Guam in '46. I did manage to get a flight back to The States in '47, and my wife was able to meet me in Pyote, Texas, Rattlesnake Field. I know you think the bomber always curling coming in broke down three times. She was there 10 days without anybody. But the air patch had arranged to have -- kept the officer's club opened. It was a closed airfield, and it was hundreds of aircraft there in the --in the state of what, I don't know, but they had accommodations. So I was able to -- people say, what was the happiest day of your life? I said, one of the happiest days, when I dropped out of the belly of that B-29, and there stood my 18-year-old bride waiting for me. And they had accommodations. When I was walking down the hallway, and my copilot leaned out the door, said, where the hell are you going? I said, to get a shower. He said, first? I said, yeah, Favor, first. So we had 15 days together, and then I had to leave her at what was then called -- hmm -- what's the big air base there in California now? Castle --

Veteran: March? No.

Interviewer: No. Isn't that funny, the years have gone by. It's the main port of embarkation for aircraft out of California. It's at -- it's at San Francisco. It had been -- originally been Castle Field, I think.

Veteran: It's not March, hmm?

Interviewer: No, not March. No. But anyway --

Veteran: Edwards?

Interviewer: No. No. But anyway, I left out of there to go back to Guam to face another year unaccompanied. And as it happens, the aircraft I was flying on had a -- had an

Veteran: G. tag on, indicating it's from Advocate Generals. And I was raising hell on the aircraft about having to go back without my wife. And I was half hitting the can and in the morning, as we approached Hawaii, he said, Sarge, what's your problem? I said, I will tell you what my problem is. You have a bunch of damn homesteaders in quarters over in Guam, and I'm a returnee. That means I'm combat, time overseas without my family. He said, that's why I'm going to Guam. And I happened -- I was back about five, maybe six months, and I got my wife over there, and that's when we considered our marriage began, is on Guam. It's a wonderful, wonderful experience.

Interviewer: Now, did you stay in this air crew for how long?

Veteran: I flew about five years. I was a central fire control gunner on a B-29, and I must tell you that I hated the aircraft because they were extremely war weary. B-29 was a pressurized aircraft, which means that you fly at 30,000 feet, the interior of the aircraft was about 8,000 feet. And it was me and my particular group, the 19th Bomber Group, that decided to clean out from underneath the floor boards of our particular aircraft. You stepped down on a small ribbon at the bottom of the aircraft, and my foot went through it was so corroded. And we had just come back from a practice bombing mission at 30,000 feet. Why we didn't blow up, I don't know, but all of those B-29s at the time were grounded. And why in the -- of course, I appreciated the fact that they wanted to bring them back into The States when the smart thing to do would have been to dump them off the cliff into the ocean because they were weary to the point that they had nothing to offer anybody. But I was happy to crew an aircraft back to get my wife. Then ultimately, I -- see, I had gone to Dover. When I reenlisted, it was a reenlistment choice. As I reenlisted -- I was in Mississippi. They didn't know how to reenlist anybody, so they sent me to Brooks, I think, Mobile, Alabama. They had civilians there that knew how to reenlist somebody. And I got my choice of bases, so I chose Dover foolishly. And when I arrived at Dover, that's when I met my wife and shipped out from there to Guam. And Guam, we went to Dow Field, Bangor, Maine. That's when I quit flying. I lost my 50% flying pay and my 20% overseas pay. So -- and my base pay was $96. With my wife's allotment, it amounted to about $150. So we went to Bangor, Maine, and we were there about a year. And I never -- oddly enough, in all the places I have been stationed, I was never anywhere I seriously disliked. Having roamed around as a civilian with my dad, I was used to going to different places. And I -- we liked Bangor very much. And then we shipped out to -- to -- Floyd Naval Air Station had an Air Force detachment there. And I was sent to that Air Force detachment in Brooklyn. And I can't say that was -- of my career, I can't say that was my favorite spot. But one morning, I was in air operations. I was an ops clerk, flight records clerk, and I was doing a report with a personnel guy. And he -- we worked a couple of hours. I said, Christ, let's take a break and get a cup of coffee. He said, damn, Andy, I forgot to tell you, you're shipping out. I said, oh, man, Korea. They are calling me back into them damn B-29s. He said, no, you are going to General Square in Jersey City as a recruiter. I said, oh, my God, I can't believe it. So I went to Jersey City, and once again, the coincidence you run into in the service, the commander's office was a major from over in Newark. And he came over to Jersey City to interview me -- not that purpose alone, but beings he would interview me while I was there. He said, Andy, where are you from? I said, I'm from Delaware. He said, damn. He said, I'm from Middletown. He said, you ever heard of Money's Markets outside of Middletown? I said, certainly. He said I'm Walter Money. He said, how are you doing here? I said, well, listen, I served with a lot of these guys, and they're great guys, but there's no use trying to sell somebody something who thinks they know it all already, and these North Jersey guys, and these Brooklyn -- and New Yorkers, they think they know everything already, and I would like to get the hell out of here. He said, we got to stick together, us Delaware boys. He said, as far south as I can get you is Asbury Park. I said, well, I tell you, I would be forever grateful. So he shipped me to Asbury Park. Asbury Park, Red Bank, and I served four years in recruiting there.

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: All during the Korean War. I fought the war in the basement of the post office of Red Bank, New Jersey. [ Conversation between interviewer and videographer. ] Q: Yeah, the missions. Where were they? Flown out of and where into?

Interviewer: Okay, those that I remember. Keep in mind, I turned 19 there, and I so wished that I had kept a record. I can tell you some of the targets. I know I went to Berlin once. I went to Hamburg I know two times. I know our most feared target was a place near Leipzig called Merseburg, and it was a synthetic oil refineries there, I think. The flak was so intense there. But we had a pilot -- one of the pilots in our group, his name was Messerschmitt, and he opted for a second tour because he had been a copilot, and he wanted to fly a second tour as a -- as a first pilot, as an aircraft commander. And his first mission was to a town called Karlsruhe. Karlsruhe happened to have -- my understanding or recollection is -- had a Messerschmitt factor there. And for the first time ever in my life, I witnessed a B-17 have all four engines quit at one time. And Messerschmitt is on -- is on V8 south cursing, saying, anybody dumb enough to fly a second tour has to be crazy. But I lost touch with him. And they were debating whether to bail out or dead stick, trying to find -- get as far as they can because we were, like, 27, 28,000 feet was our typical altitude. And he wanted to know if he was going to put her in a glide and keep -- to maintain air speed as long as he could and then give the crew the option to bail or crash land the aircraft if they could find an ideal place. What they did, I -- I never found out. Instead my aircraft was -- we all had names and -- [ Telephone ringing ] And mine was The Million Dollar Baby. [ Interview interrupted by a telephone call. ]

Veteran: But those --

Interviewer: Say that again about your aircraft was named --

Veteran: The Million Dollar Baby. We didn't name it. We acquired it. You -- once you got a crew, you got an aircraft, generally speaking. And I -- I can't pass an interview without commending the ground crews. In The States, as you can imagine, we're six months into service, and we're sergeants, leather jackets, scarves, hot shots. And the ground crews were not crazy about us. There wasn't any -- but it was just an attitude. You know, we were smart asses, and we weren't liked. But oddly enough, when we got in combat, nobody could be more accommodating than the ground crews to the air crews because they get to wash out the turrets and witness the bodies coming off the aircraft. And so it was considerably more -- even though we didn't mingle socially, not for any reason other than that we were -- the ground crew don't monkey -- don't monkey with the air crew because they are crazy. And many of us were pretty high strung. You know, we drink like fishes.

Interviewer: What base did you fly out of?

Veteran: A place called Rougham. It was outside of the city of Bury St. Edmunds. And my nephew and I visited it, what, three years ago, we went back -- I went back to England with my nephew and we visited the old air base. And their -- it's now an industrial park. The airfield is there. The runways are torn up and obscured. We did -- they have an organization there that's restoring the control tower as a memento, and it was great. They treated us royally. And we visited the Ducksford Air Museum. I don't know if you ever heard of Ducksford, but it's one of the finest British and American museums in England, and they have an American section. We visited the British Royal Air Force museum at a place called Hendon, and it was magnificent. Now, I'm -- we -- while at Hendon, I met two British pilots. They were about my age, and they looked a little older than me, but one was a wimpy Wellington pilot, an aircraft, and the other was a Lancaster pilot. Of course, we Americans admired the Lancaster because it was -- carried so much more than we do, went so much further than we do, and went so much faster than we did. So I had a great discussion with them. And we visited the -- the -- I guess the British Royal museum, which was fantastic, and visited Churchill's Underground, the command post. And it -- it was -- we only stayed 10 days, but I loved every minute. I saw the changing of the guard.

Interviewer: Right.

Veteran: And the young -- my, the young horsemen looked like kids, but they were magnificent. My God, they know -- you want to know about pomp and circumstance, they --

Interviewer: Oh, yeah.

Veteran: But, of course, I think my heritage is England -- English, and I think wittingly or unwittingly, we feel a kinship, I do, at least, to the English.

Interviewer: Right. [ Conversation between interviewer and videographer. ]

Veteran: Yeah, on one occasion, I watched 12 -- we were in 36 planes, 12, 12 and 12, and I -- the day we went to Merseburg, we lost so many aircraft that we couldn't put up 36 planes. So the group next to us, they couldn't put up 36 either. So they gave us 12 of theirs -- their crews during this, and we were not used to flying together. So, you know, when you went into a target, you didn't do an abrupt turn, but you did a distinctive turn at the I.P., the initial point, and then headed for your target. Now, once you headed for that target, you did not deviate. No deviation. Well, these guys weren't used to flying with us, so they turn wide, and I estimated between 160 and 180 German fighters hit them and shot all 12 of them down. Now, I'm too far away to shoot back because it's pointless. If they are over, like, 8,000 yards, something like that, there's no use you firing. You are not going to hit anything. But during that, I found out like 30 years later that one of them did get back. One of the aircraft got back. And then I saw it on a documentary, and it was kind of amazing. But in that melee, with all of those 20 abreast, they came, one P-51 went -- tangled into them like he owned them all. Tangled. I said, I don't know if he made it or not, but if he did, he was a miracle. Of course, we loved the P-51 and the Jug too, for that matter. But they were the ones that were our escorts. And, of course, they would come and talk to us and say, please stop shooting at us. So they wouldn't -- they would rarely approach us. And if they did, they would profile the aircraft to let us know it was them. And -- but --

Interviewer: Did you have any Tuskegee guys up there?

Veteran: No, they were in the 15th. I got a lot of respect for them. And I was really disappointed. I went to a fighter wing up in Bangor, Maine. And I was -- it hurt me to hear those -- these were World War II jocks. The first -- one of the first F-84 outfits, and the bulk of them were -- were World War II pilots. And how they denigrated the Tuskegee airmen's contribution, and it's sad because I thought, Christ, you can't give a sucker an even break, can you? You are so bigoted. And one incident up there in Bangor, Maine, too, we got a fresh group of pilots in, fresh out of aviation cadets. Four or five lieutenants. They lined up. My boss was a prince, p-r-i-c-k, prince. Mean! They reported in, and one of the guys says -- one of them stepped forward and said, sir, he said, I went through pilot training as an officer. And my boss looked at him and he said, well, ain't that peachy! You're still a second lieutenant, right? Get back in line. And where the hell are you from? He said, my name is Gibson, and I'm from Wilmington, Delaware. I often wanted to know what happened to Gibson because, see, you could go through aviation cadets as an officer. He happened to be commissioned, and then went through pilot training. So I went through as an officer. Ain't that peachy! You're still a second lieutenant, aren't you? Q: Which way do you want him? How many people -- how many -- in these typical formations when you attacked Berlin, how many airplanes were in the whole -- in the air at one time?

Interviewer: Probably 7 to 900. It was a train probably 100 miles long, maybe 40 or 50 miles wide. Just a train. Just in trail. And one of the things you had to be very careful of is if your group, 36 planes is flying here, and somehow or another you get in back of another group, and you get too close, you have extreme turbulence. Them bombs would flop on them racks. And that is -- I would say, in -- probably in -- it's harder -- July, August '44, we started to have the 700, 8,000 plane raids. And pretty low. Pretty low. Oddly enough, I think now as an adult, I hope somewhat sensitive, mature, adult, at that time and at that age, we didn't think about what we were doing. We're five miles up in the air. You know? You would -- we would have interrogation when you came back from your mission. They would say, so you think your bombs hit the target? How effective was it flak -- was the flak? Was it persistent? Intermittent? Would you call it heavy? Medium? Did you see any planes go down? Did you count any chutes? And, of course, I -- one of my guys would get irritated, and, of course, you are in a tense time. Rank, forget it. You said to a major -- it's just unfortunate the major happened to be Jewish. And the guy says, you dumb Jewish son of a bitch, he said, do you think I'm watching the plane at 28,000 feet go down with the exception of all other activity? You know, no, I didn't see him hit the ground. And he's apologizing. Have another drink. See, we got a couple jiggers of scotch when you got back. Now, everybody didn't take them. As a matter of fact, when we'd go out to the aircraft to leave, we'd be sitting on the ground. We wouldn't know where we were going until the officers came and told us. And the air crew, they couldn't be privy to where we were going. And, you know, chaplain came around. Anybody want to pray? No, nobody wanted to pray. You can pray later. Probably we all wanted to pray, but nobody would acknowledge that they wanted to pray. But --

Veteran: All right. How did you document target hits? Did you -- did somebody fly with this whole group and --

Interviewer: Photographs.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: This was mostly nighttime, right?

Interviewer: Oh, no, no. The British flew at night. We flew in the daytime. They thought we were crazy. And early on, we damn near were crazy until we got fighter escort. But the British flew at night, and the Americans flew in the daytime. And they had reconnaissance aircraft that would hit the target, view the target first, and then view it again after the raid or after the smoke had subsided. But we never -- now, guys did crack up. It wasn't common, but guys would -- they would crack up. Because -- I don't know why they would -- I know why they would crack up. I could have cracked up. But nobody else on the crew did. One guy had jumped, we probably -- maybe we would have all jumped, I don't know. But there's no mistaking that it was terrifying. It was -- especially, if you had wounded on board. And they had a case where they threw them out, because they knew that the Germans would take care of 'em, if they did land in the city. My little thing, I write, I says, we carried a .45 in a shoulder holster. And it was a great debate. Do you bail out, do you keep your .45? The recommendation, we would discuss it amongst ourselves, if you landed in the city, you better keep the gun because you have just hurt somebody and they could be unkind to you. So we figured that the Germans were very regimented and respected authority. If you could hold them off until the one police officer or one soldier got there, he would protect you, and that's true. You landed in the country, throw the gun away because you land out of the sky with a gun, you're an invader. If you land without the gun, you are just a mishappened American soldier. Now we had occasions where they stabbed us to death with pitchforks, and understandably. We had just killed their children. So you had a little pill you took, and it was -- you were told, don't take that pill or when you take that pill, you got about four to five hours. You got to find someplace to hide and sleep, because you are going to go out. It was kind of -- what it was, I don't know, but we all carried them. They were -- it was kind of a pep pill. And you needed that energy immediately upon hitting the ground to escape the area. So this pill would give you plenty of umph. But they said, after about four hours, you better find someplace to crawl in a hole because you were going to go out and sleep. Another thing that was interesting, I always thought, my group had a high percentage of walkouts. Guys, believe it, made it out of the continent. Most of them going through Spain, across the Pyrenees -- is it the Pyrenees? Yeah. And they would come back and they would talk to us. And they would say -- we'd be in a group, and the guy would say, well, as soon as I hit the ground -- I go, whoa! Wait a minute! Wait a minute! Before you get to the ground, get me out of that damned airplane to the ground. And most of the guys would say -- many of them would say, I -- I woke up floating. I don't know how I got out. Or the guy would say, well, I bailed. I was -- we had time enough to bail. Because, you see, if the aircraft maneuvered violently -- hell, I had been laid up on the ceiling of the aircraft, like a piece of -- like water in a bucket, and, you can't move. There's no way you can move. So you have to time it, in which she levels out and you drop to the floor. You got to get the hell out now before she goes into another maneuver and hangs you up on another wall. So they had an island off -- I think it was called Cooks Haven (ph), and they had like a flak boat there with maybe a couple of guns. Well, every time we crossed the coast, you would get a few bursts. We didn't really pay much attention to it. Well, one day, they nailed us. They blew a hole in the copilot's windshield, and the doors throughout the aircraft blew open, and I thought it was fire, but it was the glass made into dust, and we went out of control. And we were laying up on the side of it. And the first thing I hear -- Capps, help me. I'm hit. And then the pilot's saying, hold on, guys. We have -- Jimmy is hurt bad. Let me get this son of a bitch under control, and we'll take care of it. The flight engineer had to get out of the turret and help the pilot. And these little bastards down there, they are still throwing up at us, you know, but they can't -- they hit land behind us until we got far enough away and then we -- the copilot was badly injured, and the radio operator had gotten a piece of flak through his arm and didn't hurt anything. So I cut his sleeve up with -- excuse me -- a dinky knife and put the sulfur powder on it, wrapped it up and I broke out the shot to get a shot -- and he said, you are not going to put that thing into me. By this time, we are down below -- we are down 12, 13,000 feet and we could pull our masks off. Other times, you got the mask on and if, you know -- you had electrocuted suits, but you also had fur-lined clothing on also. And, you know, at 50, 60 below zero, you don't dare show any skin because it will turn black very quickly. Miss anything else?

Veteran: Nope.

Interviewer: The only worse other thing is England is famous for its bad flying weather. And one of the scariest parts -- two of the scariest things in the whole world are taking off with 36 airplanes on instruments and trying to assemble over England when you have upwards of 100 air bases with their airplanes circling around. And you had the big letter on your tail. We had a square "A" indicating we were third division. And I didn't -- I flew the first -- I don't know, honestly, maybe six, seven missions as a waist gunner. But the ball turret gunner, he didn't get in until -- you know, you are high enough, unless you are going to break out into the sunshine and then you start assembly. But meantime, it just looks like alphabet soup. You know, you've got a lead trailing a -- trailing flare behind his aircraft, and you've got a pattern to fly until you cut across and assemble as you can, but it's a very hairy time. Midairs were not common, but they did happen. Then on the reverse side is when you come back from the continent, and the weather, you can't see your hand in front of you. And they got guys at the end of the runway with flare pistols shooting up flares. So you take up the heading for the runway, and come at the flares and hope you break out with 150, 200 feet visibility tops, you break out and set her down. And it is hairy as hell to have just flown a mission, and you come back and your base is smothered in and you have to go to another base. Man, it's -- we used to have -- we used to have what they called the pucker a-hole syndrome. You were tight, man. I mean, very tight. The guy says -- the guy says -- we tell a joke about a guy's flying in Elmendorf in a jet. He says, I'm 30 minutes out, and I've got 15 minutes worth of fuel left. Request instructions. The guy says, repeat after me, Our father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name... [ Laughter ]

Veteran: All right. Okay. [ End of DVD. ]