Veteran: Good morning.

Interviewer: Good morning.

Veteran: Today is December -- I mean, February 2nd [sic], 2016. My name is Carlos Monarrez. I'm conducting an oral history interview at the Cameron County Courthouse in Brownsville, Texas with Miguel Angel Altamirano, Vietnam veteran, taking a history today with Corinna Garcia. Please state your name and address, city and state, for the record.

Interviewer: My name is Miguel Angel Altamirano. My date of birth [birthdate redacted]. I was born in Ciudad Valles, Mexico. I became a U.S. naturalized citizen while I was in my teens. I've lived in Brownsville most of my life and I am a post-Vietnam war veteran. So I did serve for over three years right after the Vietnam conflict.

Veteran: Okay. All right. Thank you for clarifying that.

Interviewer: Sure.

Veteran: Okay. What are the names of your parents and what were their occupations?

Interviewer: My mother, Maria Teresa Altamirano, she was a housewife. My father, Miguel Angel Altamirano, as well -- that would make me senior (sic) -- and he was an electrician by trade.

Veteran: Okay. And do you have any brothers and sisters?

Interviewer: I do. I have two brothers and two sisters. And in chronological order of birth, a sister, Maria Teresa; a brother, Jorge Alberto; and another sister, Angelica; and, finally, the last sibling, Javier Altamirano.

Veteran: Okay. Did any of them serve in the military as well?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Okay. Were you the first in your family to serve in the military?

Interviewer: I was.

Veteran: Okay. And what branch of the military did you serve in?

Interviewer: I joined the Marine Corps.

Veteran: Okay. What were you doing before you joined the Marine Corps?

Interviewer: I was in high school.

Veteran: Oh, okay. So straight out of high school you joined the Marine Corps?

Interviewer: That's correct.

Veteran: And what high school did you attend?

Interviewer: Hanna High School.

Veteran: Hanna High School. What year did you graduate?

Interviewer: '76.

Veteran: '76. Congratulations, man, for staying in Brownsville and being a big part of the community.

Interviewer: Thank you.

Veteran: So did you enlist or were you drafted?

Interviewer: I did enlist. I voluntarily enlisted.

Veteran: Okay. What was the process there of you enlisting? What motivated you to join?

Interviewer: I think that the motivation was a visit from military recruiters to our high school and I was just impressed by that. And I wanted friends of mine to see if they were interested in joining me and looking into it. I couldn't find anybody to join me and even entertaining the thought. So I did go on my own and, for some reason, I was only drawn to the Marine Corps, and, eventually, I was shipped out. I did qualify as far as the aptitude test, the physical screening and so forth, and that's how I did that.

Veteran: Now, give me an idea of how it was back in -- what year did you graduate?

Interviewer: '76.

Veteran: In '76. Give me an idea of, I guess, the atmosphere as far as people's -- what would you say, I guess, attitude towards the military and --

Interviewer: Thank you. Yes. The attitude in general was that of discontent and/or displeasure with the whole thought of the very, very recent Vietnam conflict. So there was a general dissatisfaction with the government's intervention so far away in Asia and there was, I think, a resentment and an overwhelming bitter taste in the mouths of the population, of the citizens in general to have anything to do with the military. So I think that they -- it was a time when it was hard for recruiters to do their job and to maintain the quotas that they had to get because of the unpopular conflict that had just occurred. And, of course, you had your people who disregarded all the politics and the casualties and the injured veterans and people who were just wanting to genuinely serve. But I think it was not the best of times for the military to reach out to people to consider joining.

Veteran: Do you remember the name of your recruiter?

Interviewer: I do.

Veteran: What was it?

Interviewer: Staff Sergeant Watson, Anglo, tall, poster board marine. And back in 1976 in South Texas and Brownsville, as you can imagine, there is not much diversity. For the most part, we're all Latinos. And if anything stands out in my military service, it is my indoctrination to the diversity that our country is. Our country is one of diversity in general. And I did bring a little bit of visual aids to illustrate the fact that South Texas and the Lower Rio Grande Valley has a minimal influence by diversity. It has for the longest time, it continues to have it today, and projections are that in another 30 or 40 years, this is one of those parts of the country that will continue to be the least affected by diversity in the country, which is really strange. Which is to say that if one is raised here in Brownsville or the McAllen area per se, we will have a minimal contact with other ethnicities, more so than the general population.

Veteran: And what are these visual aids that you have?

Interviewer: Thank you. Not long ago -- not long ago Starbucks published something about race. I think it was in reaction to the Ferguson racial problems and so forth. In 1960, as you can see, perhaps the East Coast, more than any other part of the country, had a more dense diversity or a more intense diversity of different populations.

Veteran: Let me -- if you could give me a chance here so that I can put some things on the record.

Interviewer: Sure.

Veteran: Just for the record, what we're looking at here is a poster board, probably about 3 feet by 4 feet. Would that be right?

Interviewer: That is correct.

Veteran: And it's been pasted -- there is photos of Mr. Altamirano taped onto this poster board and there is also -- he's showing me a USA Today Diversity Index, "What is the chance that the next person I meet will be different from me?" Sources from the NHGIS, University of Minnesota, and it has the -- from 1960, 2010 and 2016 a graph highlighting the scale of 0 to 100 the chance that two random people are different by race ethnicity, from 0 to 15, 16 to 30, 31 to 45, 46 and 55 and 56 to 100 in varying colors, as well as "Your race relations reality check. Where do you stand? Use these conversation starters with your family and friends," and there is ten different questions, as well as three starter questions: "How have your racial views evolved from those of your parents? Did you have a childhood friend of a different race that you've lost touch with? Why? What is America's greatest race challenge?" Okay. And there is photos as well.

Interviewer: Correct. And this was really -- basically was started out by the CEO of Starbucks months ago, this past year of 2015, because he wanted to have -- he wanted to initiate, have a catalyst as a beginning to check for people's general ideas or perspectives on race relations. It's one thing to learn about different races and different cultures in the classroom or through books, but I think that when you actually meet people and you have to work with them side by side or be part of a team with them, it really -- that is a different type of introduction to the diversity. And I remember that from being recruited by an Anglo recruiter, to getting on a bus in San Antonio and flying out to San Diego for my boot camp experience, just working along people from different backgrounds, socioeconomic and ethnic backgrounds, and it was very different.

Veteran: Let me ask you about that and we'll talk about that a little bit more. What were your parents' attitude about you joining?

Interviewer: Very negative. They, of course, did not want -- they didn't want me to join. And I didn't get their approval at the end. I went against their wishes.

Veteran: And your brothers and sisters?

Interviewer: They thought that it was extreme, radical and not a good idea. So I really didn't have much moral support from anybody, but that's okay. I was -- I was determined.

Veteran: You were determined. And where is it that you met up to catch your bus, train -- or your bus to San Diego? Like where did you congregate? Did you meet in San Antonio? Did you --

Interviewer: No. Actually, a trip to San Antonio is the first step because in San Antonio is where the Armed Forces Entrance Exam Station is. It's called AFEES, as an acronym. At the AFEES building people get screened for eligibility. And so basically the first step is an intent to join the military and you're grouped with a bunch of other would-be candidates that are going to get screened. So then there is a bus ride to San Antonio to find out if you are eligible mentally and physically. And after that, if you are good to go, then you are given a plane ticket for a flight from Harlingen airport to San Diego, where the first three months of your military enlistment will take place, the boot camp, the basic training.

Veteran: And do you recall your basic training?

Interviewer: Oh, absolutely

Veteran: How was that?

Interviewer: That was intense. That was crazy. It was very physically demanding and it was a transformation. If I may, I'd like to just show you very quickly that there are a few pictures that I brought that represent the training, the basic training. This photograph that I saw for the first time yesterday, because it was taken directly from a boot camp indoctrination book, with some photographs from our specific training and others that are just colored illustration of what the general recruit goes through. So it welcomes the incoming would-be Marines, or Marines, when they are received by the drill instructor at San Diego. This is an aerial photograph of the San Diego Recruit Training Depot, and it's a beautiful area but you don't get to see this beautiful scenery. You arrive probably late at night and we are housed in any one of these buildings.

Veteran: The barracks?

Interviewer: The barracks, where we are -- we'll undergo some of our training, which is to include basic classroom training, marching, familiarization with weapons. But then there are areas right outside of this area for training out in the hills, for training at the rifle range. And so basically these are the people that I lived with for no less than three months. And in alphabetical order, I would be the first person here. But these are just a couple -- a few pictures that give you an idea as to what you are going to -- what you're going to endure the first three months.

Veteran: Do you remember the company that you were in?

Interviewer: Yes, I remember the platoon number. I remember the friends. Each one of these people I remember. And, of course, you bond with only a few more than others. But this is a -- this is, more than anything, a complete, if I can say, brain washing or a stripping down and tearing down of you as an individual and then a building back up in the government style.

Veteran: Let me ask you, what was your platoon number?

Interviewer: 3137.

Veteran: Okay. And that process of being stripped down and built back up, was that something that was hard for you to, I guess, undergo?

Interviewer: It was. It was because it really shakes you down to your core and it questions your beliefs and it really -- you come to terms with where you are and what you have to do to get through it. Because very quickly you understand that if you do not keep up with any of the phases in training, it's only going to delay your stay there or you're going to be removed and/or dropped from the program and the military as a whole. And by that time, you're too far in to get out and you realize that it's almost impossible to get out. So it's extremely challenging but I think that it serves its purpose. And the ultimate purpose of basic training, I would say in any of the Armed Forces branches, is to be a devoted rifleman, a devoted soldier, a person that under duress and/or conflict will respond to orders appropriately. And I can see the method in the madness. You don't want any hesitations or any reservations and/or any insubordination. You have to have people that are going to follow orders.

Veteran: So, ultimately, if you could sum it up, what would you say your experience was at basic training, official, fruitful, exciting, horrendous? I mean, you tell me.

Interviewer: Yes. No, no, those adjectives are correct. It was all of those things and more. It was bittersweet, it was extremely physically and mentally demanding, it -- at the end, it had tremendous rewards. You are now part of a group that contributes, that has contributed in the past and continues to this day to contribute largely to the nation's defense. But if I could sum it up in a word, it's -- it did give me discipline, mental and physical discipline, which I carry on in part to this day, I believe.

Veteran: And you have pictures here of everybody that was, I guess, in your platoon?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: Did they help you through your basic training?

Interviewer: Yes. Ironically, it's difficult for -- if you look at this picture of my platoon, you'll notice that there are different colors and -- but, for the most part, it is Anglo and then there are several people of color, black Marines, not too many Hispanics, and those of -- those -- a couple of the Hispanics that joined with me in this platoon were not from my area. As a matter of fact, nobody was from Texas, from the state of Texas. So, ironically, I just reached out to the nearest Hispanic. I remember one in particular, a gentleman by the name of Del Rio, and he and Carbajal -- and I say the last name because that's all you hear in boot camp.

Veteran: Right, yeah.

Interviewer: I did have a couple of people that I could relate to. And it's very helpful because, you know, you really need the moral support and the -- and just the companionship of at least one or two people through this ordeal.

Veteran: When you finish your boot camp, what is your rank at that point?

Interviewer: At that point, unbeknownst to me, some people could come out of boot camp with E2. Most of us are E1, which translates to private. Private first class is an E2 rank because it goes -- and E stands for enlisted. E1 is private. E2 is private first class. E3 is lance corporal and so forth. But some people were guaranteed a private first class because possibly they had some college training, others because the military occupation that they entered was -- that they accepted or requested was in high demand and they were qualified for it. In my case, I had no guarantees of either a rank or a particular job description upon completion of boot camp, and that was the case for the majority of us. I guess we really didn't do our homework because we might have, if we had known and qualified, got a chance to pick a little bit as to where our duty station would be or what our military occupation would eventually be. Because, basically, the way it works is the first three months everybody undergoes the same basic training. And then with whatever rank you have at that point of completion, at the graduation of boot camp, in my case E1, which is the lowest rank, then you are assigned -- immediately before being shipped off to your next duty station, you're assigned a military occupation specialty, which is to say that the Marine Corps decides, unless it's already guaranteed to you in writing beforehand, what areas of expertise you will be training, in accordance to the needs.

Veteran: And what was yours?

Interviewer: Mine happened to be administration. So I had no idea what I was going to do in administration, but I was told upon completion of boot camp, when we were given our orders to report to our next duty station. Everybody went through this ordeal in boot camp together, but then immediately was shipped off for -- before a week or two of visiting home and then going on to your next duty station, we were assigned different training in different bases all across the country, depending on what it was. For mine it happened to be that I was going to come back to the Valley for a brief visit with family before going immediately back to the California area, to the West Coast, once again, not far from the recruit training base to training at a school's battalion in Camp Pendleton, California, where I was -- where I trained for a few months the job of service record book clerk, or administrative clerk, where I learned how to maintain the record books of the enlisted and officers attached to the unit that I was going to be in. So by the time I reached my duty station after my three months training after boot camp -- so it's three months of boot camp and three months of schools to train you in a particular military occupation specialty. That means that you were undergoing training for six months before you report as a full-fledged marine with your training to your first duty station. So I -- boot camp and three months of service record book clerk in California and then you get your orders again, where will you go for your next two-and-a-half years at least. And in this case I got to go to the opposite end of the country. I now had orders to go to the East Coast to right outside the Camp Lejeune, North Carolina area in a Marine Corps helicopter air station, part of the Marine Corps' Second Air Wing Division. So I learned as I went along how big the Marine Corps was, how many different bases all over the country it had, and in my case my job was to go after the proper training to be part of an administrative support team for my helicopter squadron. That's all I knew.

Veteran: Did you make friends in Camp Pendleton?

Interviewer: I did. I did. And I did because I learned in boot camp and in my school's training that I was -- that I was to be social, helpful and try to enlist the assistance and/or knowledge of those around me. And I think that, all in all, I was -- it was a good thing that I was assigned an administrative position because working in an administrative office, you get to work with people of high rank. And by that I mean lieutenants and coronals and higher grades of enlisted personnel. These are the people that I got to work with. And I thought I was very lucky to be around college graduates, around experienced Marines that had been in for quite a while because of the leadership that they -- that they inspired and that I learned from. So I was very, very happy to be a part of the team. Who knows what else might have happened had I not been assigned there. Because, of course, the Marine Corps, like any other large corporation, needs truck drivers, cooks, and anything -- all areas of work. So all in all, I think it was good. And later in my civilian life, some of those job skills translated a little, they sure did, from administration to my civilian jobs.

Veteran: So what stations, I guess, were you stationed at?

Interviewer: All in all, it was a six-month stint in California for my training and then two-and-a-half years, or roughly a little over two-and-a-half years, because my entire enlistment was three years and two months, five days. So I basically was in both coasts, six months in the California area and in North Carolina for a little over two-and-a-half years. I did not have the good luck or misfortune, however you want to see it, to go abroad to visit any foreign country, as I would say most Marines do, or at least half of them. Whether or not during -- whether or not they served during conflict. In my case I do emphasize that I never served in combat and that I didn't go overseas. And I have huge admiration for Marines or any military personnel that has ever served in a combat unit because today, as a civilian, one of the satisfactions that I have in life is that I am part of a couple of military peer group organizations that I joined very recently. And in these groups I get a chance to meet and share experiences with service members from different areas of life and branches, and many of them did serve in conflicts. So I stand in awe of their service. I would never try to misrepresent myself, but I can tell you that all Marines as a such, and other branches, I imagine, we have constant deployments and/or trainings that simulate going out into the field. And by that I mean either a battlefield and/or a hostile or a difficult terrain in which to train. We go out into the woods, into the jungle -- well, not jungle, but into the forest, into areas where we have to set up camp and set up our little tents and work as an office for the administrative section or the other logistics, you know, whether it's warehouse, ordinance, artillery, whatever you have to do. You have to deploy. That means you go in some large helicopters and you go out in some rough terrain and you practice using your gas masks, you practice different drills and it all makes sense because when there is a need to do just that in real life situations, you've got to have the training and you have to have done it before.

Veteran: So it's automatic?

Interviewer: Yeah. So we constantly do that just in the event that our unit is called out. So we get to have an idea as to what people in the front line are doing.

Veteran: Let me ask you, how did you stay in touch with your family during this time?

Interviewer: It was a different world back in the '70s, no cell phones to speak of and no e-mail. But there was constant letter-writing. I had that. The occasional leave or vacations that you get, you have to request it and approve it and if there is justification and if there is the ability to let you go and visit home, that would occur. So I did. There was a lot of letter-writing to my parents, who are now deceased. And through those letters, I have, in some cases what other people who did not enlist may not have, a lot of documentation of communication with parents. And so I think that's nice.

Veteran: Did their attitude change after --

Interviewer: It did. It did after I would -- I get the fear in many parents. And I think I overheard one present parent here, the parents have a concern that their children who decides to join the military might be in harm's way, that they may be changed adversely forever, whether it's mentally or physically, and/or that -- you know, the constant worrying. And I get all that. I understand that. But I think that my parents later developed a sense of pride and satisfaction that I, unlike -- there is others -- there are other children, my siblings', decided to do this, and I think it was one of the few in the extended family. And, by coincidence, there were about four that joined and all of them were the Marine Corps. And I think that is a testament to the -- the Marine Corps is a department of the Navy basically. And so we are in the Navy, just a part of the Navy that has more deployment, which is to say that we are moved more than the regular Navy. And the Navy, in large part, serves as getting Marines to where they have to go. And, of course, they have many areas, because the Navy is super large. What I meant to say a few seconds ago is that I think that it's no coincidence that in our extended family, four of us joined either the Navy or the Marine Corps, and I think it has to do with how one can be inspired to join the same branch and because all branches of the service have extreme pride, a very distinguished history --

Veteran: Their own history, yeah.

Interviewer: But I think it rubs off. And if your father joined the Army and served with distinction there, there is a good chance that his children might do just that, if they decide to join. And in this case, four cousins all joined, one the Navy and three the Marine Corps.

Veteran: You said earlier that you had asked for permission to go on leave. What would you do when you would come back home?

Interviewer: Visit with family, bring things that were associated with the Marine Corps, like -- the Marine Corps, like all other branches of the service, have commissaries. They're also called PX. They are stores that exclusively cater to the enlisted and the officers in their base and where you can get sweatpants, sweatshirts, caps and so forth with the insignia of your branch. And my family loved that and I really enjoyed bringing that to them and sharing my experiences with them. During my vacation I also had the opportunity to visit something I had never done before. I had never -- I had never -- the Marine Corps for me was the first of many things: The first time to live with and work with culturally different Marines, the first time to see snow, the first opportunity to buy my first car, the first time to travel by plane. So I can say that, wow, it was -- it was a first for many things.

Veteran: Any particular experience that sticks out in your mind as far as --

Interviewer: Yeah, I like -- I don't know if it's many -- but like some Valley residents, up until the time I joined, do not have a good tolerance for the cold. Heat we can tolerate because we are used to that or we assimilate to that here in South Texas. But I remember very difficult training up in the -- in some mountains in California that were extremely cold, extremely cold, even with all of our gear on. And I remember being in the snow, in heavy snow in North Carolina, whether on base or off base, because later, as you gain rank, you have a lot more accommodations or you can actually live off base as you gain rank or if you -- if you get married, you can also qualify for off-base housing. But the bottom line, one thing does stand out, is the different climate, the different scenery. The trees in North Carolina seemed so much taller. The leaves actually changed colors. You know, you have your different stations by seasons of the year as opposed to one constant summer in South Texas where it eases off in the winter months but -- and is incredibly hot in the summer months. I remember extreme cold. I remember comradery as I had never had it before and the sense of belonging that I had never really had before. I mean, you have your high school friends, you have your neighborhood buddies, but this takes it to a whole new level. And so I remember a first for many aspects of my life.

Veteran: Do you still keep in contact with any friends from when you were enlisted?

Interviewer: A couple, one that lives in Raymondville and has long since retired. In my case, I only served a few years and that was enough for me. I chose to return to civilian life and go to school and do other things. But, realistically, if at age 17 or 18 you join the military, which is what I did, and you serve for 20 years, you can, at 37 or 38, be a retired military retiree with all of the full benefits of such and ready to embark on a second career, if you wish. And I think that is awesome, that that is something that few corporations allow. I am so grateful for having served because I, with only a three-year enlistment and a two-year extension, basically qualify for a lifetime of medical service at the nearest VA clinic and a lot of other perks that go with being ex-military.

Veteran: You've said you went to school after you finished your service. Before I get into that, what was your highest rank that you achieved?

Interviewer: A corporal.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: And I was due for the very next rank of sergeant and I chose to get out. I could have extended a little bit further time and I chose to come home and start school here. But a corporal, E4, was my rank, and I think that for me it was very satisfying, very rewarding.

Veteran: And where did you go to school when you came back?

Interviewer: At Texas Southmost College.

Veteran: Okay. And you -- was that something that, I guess, the government paid for?

Interviewer: Yes, completely. So that is -- you know, the GI Bill has been modified throughout the years, but it still is one of the best ways to get a college education. I think that, in all honesty, if I had not had the GI Bill, I don't think that I would have moved on to get an associate's degree and then a bachelor's degree and then a lot of graduate courses that I did. I mean, I was never an outstanding student in high school and that didn't translate to being an outstanding student post-military, but I did have the determination to stick with it and stay there and earn my bachelor's degree in education, elementary education, where I later went on to teach for almost 10 years in the elementary grades, which is a challenge in itself, and -- but I am greatly grateful to having had the ability to get secondary or a post-high school education through the GI Bill. It's really helpful. There is no reason not to.

Veteran: Would you say you readjusted fairly quickly, transitioned back to civilian life? Because you referred to it as civilian life as opposed to military life.

Interviewer: Sure. Yes. Well, it is a big difference. And it takes -- it takes I think years, I think, to adjust because it is such a large impact. But I think to -- for the most part, yes, I did eventually assimilate and readjust to civilian life. Nowadays I would venture to say that there are a lot of programs that are in place to help a person leaving the military make the transition. Back then there was a lot less resources.

Veteran: Let me ask you, you said you were in veterans organizations. Which ones are you in now?

Interviewer: I am in a newly formed Warriors United We Serve Veterans Group. That is the name of it. And it's not very commonly known yet, but it's been in existence for about a year, a year-and-a-half. It was formerly known as Brothers in Arms and now it's Warriors United We Serve.

Veteran: You guys meet every first Monday of the month?

Interviewer: We meet the first Monday of the month. And just yesterday I visited a different group, Military's Last Patrol -- Last Patrol Unit. And I did that -- I was invited by somebody who is a member there, and I liked what I saw. And basically what they are doing constantly is organizing to serve in various community events, whether it be the upcoming Charro Days Parade, and to represent fallen veterans and/or retired veterans or just ex-military in general. They do a lot of community work, you know, participate in parades and assist in schools and/or projects. And so -- but the first and the foremost objective of veteran groups, I think, is to provide peer to peer support for military retirees and/or veterans in general and their families to deal with issues like post-traumatic stress and/or to give moral, financial support for veterans in need, which I think is awesome.

Veteran: Excellent, man. I have a list of different questions that they suggest that I ask, and just throughout the course of your narrative, you were just answering them all.

Interviewer: Okay. That's good.

Veteran: Let me ask you, your military experience, how has it influenced you as far as your perception of the military in general? Would you do it over again?

Interviewer: I would do it all over again, given what I had and what I knew back then. What did I have and know back then? Not much. Economically, my family was not going to really assist me in pursuing higher education. I was going to have to go to work somewhere. Also, and more importantly, I think, is that I was -- I had -- I was naive about how the world operates. I was naive about race relations. I was naive about politics to the degree that I understand or believe I understand now more. I was naive about how often a country goes into conflict with other countries without the best of reasons. And so, no, as a 40 -- or 56-year-old man that I am now, if I had the fitness and the ability to join, I would not. But back then, the country -- the defense needs young men and women as close to 20 years of age as possible who have the patriotism or the naivety to join, because they have to fill the ranks. And the United States spends an incredible amount on defense. And that is a double-edged sword. It's great because it does provide people entering the military with good programs. In other words, as a military person, you are adequately fed, dressed and taken care of medically, educationally and otherwise. But you are going to do exactly what they say, whether it goes against your beliefs and/or what you or those close to you may think is the right thing to do. And as you grow older, you understand that there is a lot of politics and sometimes unwise decisions. But it's your country, it's your military, and I think all in all, you must -- we have to embrace what is maybe not the best country in the world, as I've now come to accept may not be a reality, but one of the best, and it is what we have and we are citizens of this very good country.

Veteran: For better or worse, it's what we have, right?

Interviewer: It's what we have.

Veteran: Let me ask you, what message would you like to leave for future generations who will view or hear this interview?

Interviewer: Okay. I would say to listen to what -- to listen to what your heart says and what your passion is. My passion at that time was -- at the time that I enlisted was to get out of what was the ordinary for me, to see more of what I knew as my world, South Texas. And I felt that I had to get out. I wanted to -- I wanted a fast exit to my life, to my surroundings at that time. So basically what I did was I realized that the military was going to provide me a plane ticket out of here quick and for a duration and I wanted to enlist the company of others around me, which I found very difficult. They thought I was crazy. And my buddies, who I thought were really good buddies, said, "We'll see you back when you come back as a failure or wanting to opt out of it." And as I look back on that and I reflect on what I did, I have great pride in what I did. I'm glad I did it and I would recommend it. In other words, at 17 or 18, if a young man or a woman wants to go and join, I think that they would never regret it in hindsight. I think that they may not fully know what the challenges are at that time, but it's not something that they would regret. Because since then I've done other things in life. You know, I taught for 10 years in Texas public schools. I served two years in an AmeriCorps program in one of our local community clinics where we serve generally under-privileged and under-served populations. I've become a U.S. citizen by naturalization. These are things that have given me satisfaction, but not anywhere near to the degree of the satisfaction that I had and remember fondly today of having served in the Marine Corps. So I would say, oh, absolutely, go after -- go after what it is you want to do and if it's serving in the military, I have no reservation in recommending it highly to anyone.

Veteran: Let me ask you one last question. Is there anything you want to add that we didn't cover in this interview?

Interviewer: Everything that I described with great passion and with admiration and with fond memories does come at a price. There is always the chance for being in a battle zone, in a war zone; and/or even without having served in front lines, there are adverse and life-altering experiences in the military that people may have, such as traumas. And I think that I have a partial trauma, as I eventually was awarded by the VA service-related PTSD to a lower degree than other comrades have had. But there is always a risk, because I think that with great risks -- with great rewards comes great risks, you know. But I would like to say that I served honorably and I am glad for having done just that. And I will forever be a part of a team that I learned a lot of good things that translated to my civilian life. I feel good about that and always will.

Veteran: Well, I want to thank you, Miguel. Thank you for your service, of course. Thank you for taking the time to come here. I wanted to say this has been an excellent interview. Thank you for your words, thank you for your service, like I said earlier, and I hope to see you out in the general public. If you see me, come say hello. I'm happy to talk to you more.

Interviewer: I want to thank you and Corinna for two things. One of the things that I've learned with my experience in the military is to be more aware of your contributions. I've seen your face on billboards and I know about your campaign a little and you can bet that I'm going to explore a lot more now that I've met you. And for Ms. Corinna, I think that you working in the setting that you do is a big contribution, just like occasionally the average citizen gets the chance to serve in a jury. I think that what you do can be a little eye-opening, a little scary sometimes, but it's a great contribution. Somebody has to do this. Somebody has to do this for our justice system to work. And you're in here day in and day out and you're looking to do a job that is going to have a lot of sacrifice. I think that public servants, military aside, is a very unselfish act and that it's a thankless service sometimes, but it's something that you will always -- you will always feel a great satisfaction of having done when you look in retrospect. So thank you for the service that you do to our communities. I've been a part of our community much longer than I've been a part of our defense or our military and I now appreciate how the whole system works and how everybody makes their contribution. So I look forward to hearing more about you. And in the everyday operation of our justice systems, I'll remember your efforts, Ms. Corinna. And thank you in return.

Veteran: Hey, I appreciate that. Thank you so much, Brother.

Interviewer: All right. Thank you. [End of interview]