Veteran: Okay. Good morning.

Interviewer: Good morning.

Veteran: Today is August 27th, 2011. My name is Angela Nix. I am conducting an oral history interview of Jose Alvarez, Jr. in Brownsville, Texas. Please state your name for the record, Mr. Alvarez.

Interviewer: Jose Alvarez, Jr.

Veteran: And Mr. Alvarez, where do you live exactly?

Interviewer: Colorado.

Veteran: And that is in what City?

Interviewer: In Brownsville.

Veteran: Okay. And where were you born?

Interviewer: San Benito.

Veteran: San Benito, Texas? And your date of birth?

Interviewer: October the 16th, 1923.

Veteran: And the names of your parents, please?

Interviewer: Benita Casarez and Jose Alvarez.

Veteran: Do you have any brothers?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Do you have any sisters?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: You were an only child.

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: And did you grow up in San Benito?

Interviewer: Yes, more or less.

Veteran: Okay. And you enlisted, is that correct?

Interviewer: Yes, in Brownsville.

Veteran: Okay. And you were living at the time in San Bentio?

Interviewer: San Benito.

Veteran: Why did you enlist?

Interviewer: To serve my country, I guess. (Brief pause in proceedings)

Veteran: Now, Mr. Alvarez, I understand that when you were seventeen, you were in the Civil Conservation Corps.

Interviewer: That's right.

Veteran: And that was under President Roosevelt.

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: Okay. And from the Civil Conservation Corps, you enlisted in the Navy?

Interviewer: Right.

Veteran: Okay. And why did you pick the Navy?

Interviewer: I don't know, I guess I was just born for it.

Veteran: Was your family in the Navy or --

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: No?

Interviewer: Just me.

Veteran: And you just liked boats.

Interviewer: That's right.

Veteran: Do you recall your first days in the Navy?

Interviewer: Well, sort of.

Veteran: What was that like?

Interviewer: At the NTC.

Veteran: What's NTC?

Interviewer: Naval Training Center.

Veteran: The Naval Training Center. Where was that at?

Interviewer: San Diego.

Veteran: Here in Brownsville.

Interviewer: That was in San Diego, wasn't it, Honey?

Veteran: No. No, it was in Brownsville.

Interviewer: Okay. And do you remember your boot camp experience?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: No? Okay.

Veteran: That was in San Diego.

Interviewer: You did boot camp in San Diego?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Okay. Do you remember any of your instructors?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: How did you get through it? Was it tough?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Yeah? Any problems getting through it?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Which wars did you serve in?

Veteran: The second World War, the Korean War and Vietnam, two tours.

Interviewer: Two tours in Vietnam, okay. When you were serving in the second World War, where exactly did you go?

Veteran: All over, if I was on the USS Tennessee for, I don't know --

Interviewer: From '41 to '46.

Veteran: Yes, '41 to '46.

Interviewer: So from '41 to '46, you were in Tennessee doing what?

Veteran: USS Tennessee.

Interviewer: Oh, the USS Tennessee.

Veteran: The USS Tennessee.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: A battleship.

Interviewer: And so the USS Tennessee traveled through the Pacific Theater?

Veteran: Yes, the whole Pacific Theater.

Interviewer: Okay. And just for my purposes because I am not real good on geography, when we say the Pacific Theater, give me an idea of what kinds of places that covered.

Veteran: From the Philippines -- from the Philippine Sea to the -- what's the one up there in Alaska Aleutians?

Interviewer: Aleutians.

Veteran: And then down the Suarez, as far as the tip of South America.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: And Japan, and the whole Pacific. He was in 13 major battles.

Interviewer: 13 major battles in World War II?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: And you were never a prisoner of war, correct?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: And you were a Boatswain's Mate, First Class, right?

Veteran: Right.

Interviewer: So you saw a lot of combat. You saw a lot of combat.

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: I would imagine quite a few casualties.

Veteran: Yes. We had burials at sea practically every day. Burials at sea, the ones the kamikaze took out, a show of batteries, hit us a couple of times, so it was just very, very interesting.

Interviewer: Tell me about a couple of your most memorable experiences during World War II.

Veteran: My most memorable, serving aboard the Tennessee, you got to see the world. You went to port to port to port, and battled the battle whatever. The Aleutian battle was the toughest one because they were pretty well entrenched in there and it took a lot of fire power to blast them out, to take them, the Aleutians.

Interviewer: And do you recall your medals or the awards that you received in World War II?

Veteran: No, I know all the regular ones.

Interviewer: I have a list.

Veteran: Okay. Mrs. Alvarez is going to provide us with a list for that, is that right?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: And how did you stay in touch with your family during that period, Mr. Alvarez?

Interviewer: How did I what?

Veteran: Stay in touch with your family.

Interviewer: By trying the email --

Veteran: V-mail.

Interviewer: V-mail. What was V-mail?

Veteran: Communications --

Interviewer: It was little pieces of a letter with a lot of black ink on it.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Oh, they censored a lot of what you wrote, Mr. Alvarez?

Veteran: Oh, yes.

Interviewer: Okay. And what was the food like?

Veteran: Excellent.

Interviewer: Really? Aboard the Tennessee, it was pretty good? Aboard the Tennessee it was pretty good?

Veteran: It was very fine.

Interviewer: You had plenty of supplies.

Veteran: Plenty. We supplied -- we took supplies on every time we went to sea. We replenished everything, and took on the stores, sea stores, whatever you want to call them.

Interviewer: Did you feel any stress or pressure during that time?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Was there anything special you did for good luck?

Veteran: Keep out of the fire power, away.

Interviewer: How did -- what did y'all do for entertainment on the Tennessee?

Veteran: Oh, we had entertainers from different places come out.

Interviewer: Tell them about J.D. Wilson.

Veteran: Oh, J.D. Wilson, he was a character, and he imitated people. He was an imitator, and then he did the shuffle, bounced up and down and cart wheels and everything.

Interviewer: And this J.D. Wilson, he was a fellow shipmate?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Okay. Do you know where he was from?

Veteran: No, I think he said he was from Tacoma.

Interviewer: Washington.

Veteran: Washington.

Interviewer: Okay. Other than J.D., were there any other entertainers that visited the boat that you can remember?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: But some came.

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: And what did you do when you went on leave?

Veteran: There was no leave in the second World War.

Interviewer: No leaves.

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Do you recall any particularly funny event other than J.D. Wilson?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Tell them about the gun locker.

Veteran: The what?

Interviewer: Tell them about the gun locker.

Veteran: Oh, ha, ha, ha, we got hit on the gun locker, and it blew it up, more or less, to pieces, and we had to scrape and get all the faulty ammunition -- well, they we had to shove it overboard.

Interviewer: Oh, wow.

Veteran: It was pretty scary there for a while.

Interviewer: Yeah, well, I wouldn't think that would be very funny, because then you lost all your guns.

Veteran: I wasn't talking about that one. I was talking about J.D. Wilson making home brew in the gun locker.

Interviewer: Oh, this guy, he got a bunch of juice, and he wanted to make -- it fermented on him. And he was on deck when it blew apart and it went all over, and he was out there with a swab trying to swab it out to get rid of it, and the officer exec looked by and says, what's going on down there? He said, Nothing, sir. This is recall fluid that I'm swabbing up. And it wasn't, it was the home brew that blew up.

Veteran: Oh, my goodness. Did you keep a personal diary?

Interviewer: No, never did.

Veteran: And you've given us a couple of photographs, correct?

Interviewer: I what?

Veteran: You've given us a couple of photographs, correct?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: And in one photograph that you're pictured in, you're pictured on the right. Do you recall the gentlemen on the left by name?

Interviewer: No. COURT REPORTER: He is on the left?

Veteran: Oh, I'm sorry, you're on the left in the photograph?

Interviewer: No, he is on the right. If you looked at that long enough, do you think you could remember who it was?

Veteran: No, I don't believe so.

Interviewer: And when did your service end?

Veteran: He was formally discharged in 1972.

Interviewer: 1972. And where were you at the time you were discharged?

Veteran: San Diego.

Interviewer: San Diego.

Veteran: Okay. And what did you do in the days following your discharge?

Interviewer: Try to get adjusted to the civilian life.

Veteran: In San Diego, there's Harbor Drive. The ships are all at the 32nd Street Naval Station. He walked out of the 32nd Street Naval Station, walked down to 28th Street, walked into National Steel and went to work building ships.

Interviewer: Okay. You didn't want to be very far from the boats.

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: And that was working for who?

Veteran: National Steel and Ship Building Company.

Interviewer: National Steel and Ship Building in San Diego. Okay. Did you use any of the GI Bill for educational purposes?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Did you make any close friendships while you were in the Navy?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Who?

Veteran: Marty Martinez was a Boatswain Mate also. He shared the bunk above me, and I was below him.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: And we relieved each other on duty.

Interviewer: Marty got killed in Vietnam.

Veteran: Yeah, he got transferred from the ship that we were on and went to Vietnam, and he walked aboard ship, and the following day he got blasted out of the water by the Vietcong.

Interviewer: Are there any other friendships that you made while in the Navy that you still maintain close connection with?

Veteran: Oh, yeah, the whole ship, the whole USS Tennessee. We have a reunion every year.

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: Where do you have a reunion at?

Interviewer: All over. The members host it in -- we hosted one here back in 80 -- wait a minute and I'll think of it -- '84, '85, I can't remember right now. Anyway, we hosted; we had 400 people here for a week.

Veteran: Wow.

Interviewer: We took over the Fort Brown.

Veteran: So when is this reunion, every year?

Interviewer: It changes.

Veteran: The date changes?

Interviewer: Yes, the date changes, the place changes. We just -- they go all over the United States.

Veteran: Have you had it yet for 2011?

Interviewer: No, it's going to be -- it was last month. It was in New Orleans.

Veteran: In New Orleans. Did you go to that one?

Interviewer: No, we haven't been able to go for the last ten years.

Veteran: Oh, why not?

Interviewer: He has been quite ill.

Veteran: How are you ill, Mr. Alvarez?

Interviewer: Can I tell you?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: In 2000 -- in 1999, they discovered that he needed a valve replaced in his heart. On the 4th of January 2000, they replaced it. That night, he coughed and the wires came through his chest and he lost all his blood and he died. The doctor was standing right beside him in the CCR at Valley Regional. He reached in and pumped his heart. And Gracie, the night nurse, came in and plugged up the holes that she could, they got an operating room open, they got him in there, and they brought him back. When he came back, he was in a coma for nineteen days.

Veteran: Oh, my goodness.

Interviewer: During that time, he caught an infection, staff -- this antibiotic-resistant staff infection. He had a stroke. He had pneumonia. They had opened him up again to clean him out, but that was the third time, of course, that he had been opened and they couldn't get him closed. So they had to air lift him up to Methodist Hospital in Houston, and they did the skin graft and they got him closed. They brought him back. He was in the hospital ninety days all together. The following year, they discovered he had colon cancer. They operated on that and got rid of that. Then they gave him some medicine that was recalled after that, but that medicine almost killed him.

Veteran: Oh, my goodness.

Interviewer: He just swelled up like -- his stomach just kept getting -- I said, Honey, you can't fasten your pants, and he just kept -- and he passed out on the floor, and they took him -- and this was the result of that Statin drugs, and they recalled them. And then he has been getting better ever since, but it's just we don't leave home. We stay here because the doctors are here. We never know.

Veteran: Uh-huh. Earlier, Mr. Alvarez, Ms. Alvarez referred to the possibility that you were exposed to Agent Orange.

Interviewer: He was.

Veteran: That would have been in the Vietnam War?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: Do you recall where?

Interviewer: I was on the Mekong River. I was man-handling a salvage boat to get the small craft off of the beach to get them back to the base to repair them, the ones that had been blown up by the Vietcong. So it was quite an experience. I didn't think I was going to live through it, but I did.

Veteran: And how exactly were you exposed to the Agent Orange?

Interviewer: Out in the open. The planes come by and bombarded the foliage to get it out of the way, and that's what contaminated the rest of the stuff.

Veteran: And then you just breathed it in and got it all over you?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Now, Mr. Alvarez, you were also in the Korean War, correct?

Interviewer: Correct.

Veteran: And where were you serving in the Korean War?

Interviewer: In the Pacific.

Veteran: No, you were in France.

Interviewer: I thought you went to France.

Veteran: In France.

Interviewer: And that was to build some boat yards or some air fields?

Veteran: No, we built an air base there.

Interviewer: An air base, okay.

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Okay. And your job then at that time?

Veteran: Strictly maintenance. With whatever happened there, I could do it.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: Yes, but they also had him as the military police --

Interviewer: Yeah, I did.

Veteran: -- because he could speak the language.

Interviewer: Oh, okay. You spoke French.

Veteran: Yeah, a little bit.

Interviewer: What other languages do you speak?

Veteran: That's all.

Interviewer: English and French --

Veteran: And Spanish.

Interviewer: And Spanish.

Veteran: And French.

Interviewer: And a little bit of Sangiric.

Veteran: A little bit of what?

Interviewer: Philippine language.

Veteran: Ah.

Interviewer: And a little bit of the different dialects from South America. A little bit of this and a little bit of that, because he speaks --

Veteran: No Vietnamese?

Interviewer: No, I couldn't understand them and they couldn't understand me. To this date, I don't trust them.

Veteran: When you were in the Korean War, did you see any combat over there at that air field?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: And there were no casualties then?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: No, but what was there -- and it's pretty interesting to talk about, the communists, of course, were in charge of the town practically, and they would hold these big dances and everything. And being in the military police, he would have to go and make sure that his guys didn't get into fights and all that. And. And his counterpart in the communist part, he would stand there and they wouldn't say nothing. They would watch. Pretty soon this communist guy turned to him and he says, You are not trying to convert me to democracy, and all that stuff. And Jose says, No, you believe what you believe and I believe what I believe. And he got along very well with everybody. And when he got transferred, the town took up a petition and they all signed -- all the store owners and everything signed this petition and took it to the base to keep him there because he was very popular over there.

Interviewer: What did you eat when you -- what town is it that we were talking about that this --

Veteran: Chateauroux. Chateauroux, France.

Interviewer: Chateauroux, France. And so you were there from when to when?

Veteran: '50 --

Interviewer: Oh, my God.

Veteran: I would have to look on his DD-214 to tell you that.

Interviewer: About how many years?

Veteran: 28 months.

Interviewer: 28 months.

Veteran: 28 months.

Interviewer: Okay. And what was the food like when you were there at Chateauroux?

Veteran: Fine.

Interviewer: Yeah?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Was it French?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Okay. Do you remember anything in particular?

Veteran: No, I don't.

Interviewer: Nothing?

Veteran: You could tell them about getting the guys out of jail.

Interviewer: Yeah, I had to get a couple of bottles of Cognac and take them with me, and go to the jail and bail these guys out. They got into trouble with the locales there. So, that was pretty interesting.

Veteran: He told me that he would take a big loaf of bread and two bottles of wine, and he would go and he -- the French officials would be sitting at a table playing cards in the front part of the jail, and he would just go and put the bread and the wine on the table and go over in the corner and sit down, and wouldn't talk. And they would continue playing cards, and they would eat the bread and they'd drink the wine. And then one of them would say, Here is the keys, go get your guys and get out of here.

Interviewer: I'd take them home with me.

Veteran: Did the guys pay you back for the bread and the wine?

Interviewer: No, they were very ungrateful. The kept fouling up, as a rule.

Veteran: What did you do for entertainment in Chateauroux?

Interviewer: In France?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: Oh, nothing much to do. There wasn't any entertainment at all.

Veteran: Okay. I thought there were dances that you had to make sure the boys behaved.

Interviewer: Yes, we had a couple of dances.

Veteran: But you were always security? You didn't ever get to attend any?

Interviewer: He attended them, but he didn't participate.

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Fooey.

Veteran: He also had to go to the whorehouse and get his guys out there. He tells me that he sat in the kitchen and played poker with the madam's husband.

Interviewer: Yeah. He liked to play poker.

Veteran: Well, you know, I choose to believe what I choose to believe. It's okay by me.

Interviewer: Did you join a veterans organization?

Veteran: He belongs to all of them.

Interviewer: All of them.

Veteran: He belongs to the American Legion, the VFW, the Retired Enlisted Men's Association, the National Association of Uniformed Services. There is another one too, I keep forgetting. Oh, the VFW.

Interviewer: VFW, the main one.

Veteran: And Vietnam, you did two tours. Do you remember when that was?

Interviewer: That was in '66 to '68.

Veteran: Wow, the tail end of it.

Interviewer: Well, not really. It went on until what, '73?

Veteran: But '68 -- I was there in '68. My dad was working in Saigon, working at the base installations as a mechanical and architectural engineer. Other than the boat going up the Mekong, what else -- was that what you did in both tours?

Interviewer: Yes, that's the main thing that we did over there, to retrieve the small craft that had been damaged by the Vietcong and bring them back to the base, and I'd float them and start repairing them.

Veteran: And your ship at that time was still the Tennessee?

Interviewer: No, no, no.

Veteran: What was your ship during the first tour in Vietnam?

Interviewer: USS Lenawee.

Veteran: The Lenawee.

Interviewer: The Lenoway? L-E-N-O-W-A-Y?

Veteran: No, L-E-N-A-W-E-E.

Interviewer: L-E-N-A-W-E-E. Okay. And was that the same ship during both tours?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Okay. And you saw a lot of combat.

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: And a lot of casualties.

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Would you say more casualties than World War II or less?

Veteran: Well, a little bit more.

Interviewer: And before we started our interview, Mr. Alvarez, Mrs. Alvarez was telling us about a boat-to-boat high line rescue --

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: -- that you did because a fellow serviceman on another boat was injured and required emergency medical attention that could only be given on the boat you were on.

Veteran: Right.

Interviewer: Don't call them boats.

Veteran: I'm sorry, ship. Ship. I'm sorry, Mr. Alvarez.

Interviewer: A boat is something that's carried on a ship.

Veteran: A boat is something that's carried on a ship.

Interviewer: Right, and they salvaged boats that he ran up to work on that were carried on the Lenawee.

Veteran: Okay. I apologize. That ship-to-ship rescue, do you remember the name of the serviceman that you brought across the high line?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Was that a very scary experience?

Interviewer: Yes, it was.

Veteran: How exactly did you bring him across? Did you rig some kind of a basket?

Interviewer: Yes, we had a basket for him, and we high-lined him from the one boat to the other.

Veteran: How many -- what was the distance you think it was?

Interviewer: How far was it?

Veteran: Across the boat, how far? Ship.

Interviewer: The high line was passed from one ship to another, and we used the same line --

Veteran: How far was it, Honey?

Interviewer: How far were the two ships?

Veteran: They couldn't get together too close --

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: -- so they were, I would say, 250 feet.

Interviewer: Wow. And of course, the sea wasn't calm while would were doing this.

Veteran: No, it was pretty rough.

Interviewer: So, you would say that was a very stressful experience?

Veteran: Yes, it was.

Interviewer: After you were doing ship building in San Diego, what did you do after that?

Veteran: He retired.

Interviewer: You retired?

Veteran: I retired from there.

Interviewer: Okay. And then took it easy.

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: No?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: We went traveling. We had a 5th wheel and we went traveling so I could go somewhere.

Veteran: Where all did you travel to in the 5th wheel, Mr. Alvarez?

Interviewer: Well, going up and down the coast and --

Veteran: We went as far as -- in the 5th wheel we went -- we did the Grand Canyon. We did Reno. We did Las Vegas. We did Texas. We did Washington and Oregon and California and all of that. We went down to a little bit in Baja. And we came here and his momma was sick, so we left and took care of her for a while, and then she died. But by that time we bought a lot, so we just stayed.

Interviewer: And Mr. Alvarez, for the record, you have been married to Ms. Alvarez for 61 years?

Veteran: Yeah, that's quite a bit, a long time.

Interviewer: A long time. And how do you think your naval service affected your life?

Veteran: It just made a better man out of me.

Interviewer: In what way?

Veteran: In my way of thinking, and my way of expressing myself.

Interviewer: Can you be more specific?

Veteran: Well, I was more or less like a mediator, sort of, between the groups, the different people that came aboard ship at a different area.

Interviewer: Okay. And you think that your experience in the Navy caused you to be able to influence people to compromise?

Veteran: Yes, yes.

Interviewer: He learned to like a myriad of different people. He found out that people are great, and that shows in everything he does and everything he says.

Veteran: You would agree with that, Mr. Alvarez, that your exposure to all the different people and all the different cultures --

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: -- caused you to be more likeable of people in general.

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: More tolerant?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: Uh-huh.

Interviewer: I was NCO-IC of town patrol in Chateauroux, France.

Veteran: NCO means what?

Interviewer: Noncommissioned Officer.

Veteran: Noncommissioned Officer, responsible for the group.

Interviewer: Uh-huh.

Veteran: And I had to go get the guys, like she said, with a couple of bottles of Cognac or something and a loaf of bread or some cheese or something.

Interviewer: So the guys didn't ever resist you.

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: They would just cause some problems in the locals' --

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: -- opinions.

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: They would get drunk and loud.

Veteran: Is there anything that we have not covered in this interview, Mr. Alvarez, that you would like to cover?

Interviewer: No, no.

Veteran: Mr. Alvarez, thank you very, very much.

Interviewer: Why don't you ask him what he thinks of the United States of America?

Veteran: Okay. What do you think of the United States of the America, Mr. Alvarez?

Interviewer: The best country in the world, but I don't like the way it's going.

Veteran: What don't you like about it?

Interviewer: I don't like the intrusion in other people's lives, that we have created this mess, which is more or less a misinterpretation of things that happen. In other words, when we did something for the people on land and they took it backwards. They always took it backwards. They thought we were taking advantage of them every time. And we weren't. So we were trying to, more or less, democracize them, teaching them the right way to live.

Veteran: In both World War II and the Korean War and the Vietnam War?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: But the people were resistant to that.

Interviewer: There were people that were --

Veteran: Were resistant to democracy. But you feel that today we --

Interviewer: They weren't resistant to democracy. They were resistant to being forced into democracy.

Veteran: You feel, though, that today we are headed down the wrong road because we are interfering where we shouldn't be?

Interviewer: That's right.

Veteran: And that that's not a good thing?

Interviewer: No. I still think the same way.

Veteran: Would you say we need to be paying more attention to what is going on here at home? Is that what you would like to see?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: Mr. and Mrs. Alvarez, thank you so much for your time. The Library of Congress thanks you. I personally thank you.

Interviewer: We thank you for what you're doing and --

Veteran: It's coming a little bit late, we think, but yes, it definitely has to be done.

Interviewer: I keep calling the President and telling him what to do, and he doesn't do it. Makes me mad. I've got his number in my book. You never get to talk to him, you talk to some lady that answers the phone. But I keep telling them, Stop being such a wimp. Do something. Just bang the gavel down and do it. And I know that there is things he can do. You know, Roosevelt did it. Truman did it. So I don't see why he can't do it.

Veteran: Sure.

Interviewer: Maybe he'll listen.

Veteran: I told them last week, you know, and I still think it's a good idea, to take all the wires and the electricity carriers and all of that on the East Coast, when they were worried about this hurricane coming -- it's too late now, it was too late then, but do it now for the next time. Put them all underground. You dig big trenches, you put it in conduit so it don't get wet, and then you bury it. Okay? That puts lots of people to work. And I can't even see the Tea Party saying, No, we don't want our people to be with electricity, we want our people to have blackouts with no food and no refrigeration. I can't even -- I don't believe they can say that. And so that would be something that they would agree with, and then they could do it and put all these people to work doing that. And then they can just sort of sneak it across the country and do it everywhere, because it's a damn good idea.

Interviewer: And very needed.

Veteran: I told them that.

Interviewer: Thank you very much.

Veteran: Thank you.

Interviewer: I exercise my right to call him up.

Veteran: I certainly understand that, Mrs. Alvarez. (End of History)