Veteran: This interview is with Mary Margaret Amick, spelled A-M-I-C-K, Margaret was born on July 3, 1926 during WWII she served as a civilian working for the Arthur Hurt Machine Shop which made parts for the Boeing Aircraft Company. This interview is taking place on August 6, 2013 at [redacted] in Castle Rock, Colorado where Margaret currently resides. The interviewer is Larry Adams, a Veteran’s History Project volunteer for the Douglas County History Research Center at the Phillip S. Miller Library in Castle Rock, Colorado. Margaret’s son David Amick is also present during the interview. The interview is being conducted for the Veteran’s History Project at the Library of Congress. So let’s start with a little background information, Margaret, when and where were you born?

Interviewer: I was born in Denver, Colorado, ah, 1926.

Veteran: Were you born at home or in a hospital?

Interviewer: At home.

Veteran: Yeah, I guess that was customary in those days.

Interviewer: It was customary then, right.

Veteran: What were the names of your parents?

Interviewer: Harold A. Bradley and Helen M. Bradley.

Veteran: What were their occupations?

Interviewer: And my dad worked for ACME, ah, ACME Fast Freight.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: And, my mother was just a home maker.

Veteran: Did your dad drive the freight trucks or did he work at the, did your dad?

Interviewer: No, he worked at the, at the, what they called the docks.

Veteran: Okay where they brought in and shipped out various things.

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: What about brothers and sisters?

Interviewer: Okay, I had three (3) brothers, three (3) brothers?

Veteran: What were their names?

Interviewer: No, four (4) brothers [laughter] and three (3) sisters.

Veteran: Oh, four (4) brothers and three (3) sisters?

Interviewer: And three (3) sisters.

Veteran: What are your brother’s names?

Interviewer: My brother’s name was Hal was the oldest, than Bob John, who passed away, and Dick.

Veteran: And, Dick. What about the names of your sisters?

Interviewer: My sisters were Ruth and Dottie.

Veteran: Wow that was quite a family.

Interviewer: Uh-huh, really.

Veteran: Eight (8) of you in all.

Interviewer: Seven (7).

Veteran: Three (3) sisters and four (4) sons, brothers plus you that makes eight (8) in your family.

Interviewer: No, what am I sayin’ wrong? I have two (2) sisters, two (2) sisters.

Veteran: Okay, two (2) sisters. Okay, two (2) sisters, right, so there were seven (7) in your family. What about grand-parents, I noticed in your memoirs, you talk about your grandmother, Nana.

Interviewer: My Grandma Nana lived us off and on.

Veteran: Was she on your mother’s side or your dad’s side?

Interviewer: And, she was on my mother’s side.

Veteran: Can you tell us a little bit about your grandmother because you talked about her a lot in your memoirs. She’s an important person in your life.

Interviewer: My grandmother was the best grandma there ever was, yeah.

Veteran: Is that right?

Interviewer: She took us everywhere and did everything with us, she, ah -

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: Nana was, I think, she was, ah, had her own car and we went up and picked peaches and we did, we did everything.

Veteran: What was it like growing up in Denver; let’s talk about your elementary school, where was the elementary school located?

Interviewer: My elementary school was, ah, I can’t think of the name of the elementary school, Barnum, no, I didn’t go to Barnum, went to Lincoln.

Veteran: Oh, Lincoln, that’s right in your memoirs, I remember Lincoln.

Interviewer: Lincoln, yeah.

Veteran: Did you go through grades one (1) through six (6) at Lincoln?

Interviewer: Lincoln one (1) through six (6) and then junior high was, ah, Byers Junior High.

Veteran: And, I noticed you graduated at age 16 (sixteen), did you skip any grades?

Interviewer: I skipped one (1) grade.

Veteran: In elementary school?

Interviewer: Yeah, in elementary school.

Veteran: Was that customary in those days to advance students, to skip a grade, did you have to take a test to skip a grade?

Interviewer: You know, I don’t remember doing that but maybe, I don’t remember doin’ that. But I remember I skipped a grade because I -

Veteran: You did graduate early.

Interviewer: Yeah, I graduated.

Veteran: Did you like school, elementary school?

Interviewer: Oh, I loved school.

Veteran: Okay, did you have some favorite teachers?

Interviewer: An art teacher was Nicetrom [sp?], she was great. The, ah, English teacher I didn’t like at all, and of course, at that time they would, you didn’t step on the grass and you didn’t chew gum and you couldn’t do a lot of those things. Ah, chewing gum was one thing that I did one time and my teacher, Mrs. Putnam [sp?] put my under her desk [laughter] I’ll never forget it. I set under her desk because I chewed gum. [laughter]

Veteran: Did you have, you walked to school in those days?

Interviewer: I only walked to school.

Veteran: How far did you have to walk to school?

Interviewer: Oh my goodness, ah, elementary school probably about 6 (six) blocks.

Veteran: Okay, that wasn’t too bad.

Interviewer: And it wasn’t too bad.

Veteran: What about activities outside of school, holidays, what were some of your favorite holidays and how did you celebrate the holidays when you were a young child like that?

Interviewer: We always had a big doings at Christmas time and I always remember my dad with his rolled-up cigar, you know how they used to roll them up. And he’d sit there and smoke that cigar [laughter] my dad would. My mom did nothing but cook, boy she did a lot of cooking and she could cook!

Veteran: What about some of the other holidays, like 4th of July?

Interviewer: Oh, 4th of July we would buy firecrackers, daddy would go to the store and he’d buy all these firecrackers in a box and we’d set off. We went to Denver Country Club and they had fireworks there that were oh, fabulous. Denver Country Club was Speer Blvd and, where was it, University, I believe at that time. And, we’d always go there and celebrate 4th of July and the fireworks.

Veteran: What about Halloween?

Interviewer: And Halloween, yeah, we would go, we would go along, ah, oh, gosh what was that street, ah isn’t that funny I can’t remember the street.

Veteran: For trick or treating?

Interviewer: For trick or treating and we always went to these well-to-do houses and I can remember they had, ah, a whole box of things in the front and you could take, you could take, ah, big candy bars or you could take, they had all these things that you could take and they were the well-to-do in that, now where was it? It was down, ah, 6th Avenue, seemed to me it was 6th Avenue. I don’t remember.

Veteran: That’s okay. What about some of the other things you did, you mentioned camping trips, horseback riding, car trips with your grandmother?

Interviewer: Well, car trips with my grandma, of course, she always took us, I’ll never forget one time she took us up to Grand Junction to help a friend pick peaches. And if you’ve ever picked peaches, you have that fuzz all over you, it was terrible, terrible, but we was helpin’ this friend pick these peaches and my brother, Hal, and who else went Hal and my brother Hal and my brother I don’t remember Bob doin’ that. I don’t remember.

Veteran: Okay, well let’s move on to your middle school, what was it called, junior high?

Interviewer: Byers, Byers Junior High.

Veteran: Byers Junior High?

Interviewer: Un-huh.

Veteran: And, was that within walking distance, too?

Interviewer: Well, yeah, it was walkin’ distance [laughter] it was a long way but -

Veteran: You didn’t take the bus?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Okay, did you like junior high school?

Interviewer: Oh yeah.

Veteran: Was that fun?

Interviewer: I liked junior high.

Veteran: Now, by that time you were in ah, you had skipped a grade, I guess.

Interviewer: I had skipped a grade.

Veteran: You were younger than most of the students in your -

Interviewer: I was.

Veteran: Did you notice that or did it matter?

Interviewer: Well, it was, ah, it was whole, it wasn’t a whole grade that you skipped, you skipped a half grade so it was let me see, how did we do that? I do know that when I went to high school which was South High School I went to because all my family went to South High School. South High School was at, ah, University, I used to remember those streets so well and I don’t remember 'um now. South High?

Veteran: That’s okay, now, around that time, I think the depression was happening in this country, do you remember anything about the depression years?

Interviewer: No, I don’t remember that, ah, all I remember is that, ah, rationing, they did a lot of rationing of, ah, meat, ah -

Veteran: Was that during the depression or during the war that came later.

Interviewer: Oh, well that must have been -

Veteran: That was the war, you didn’t do any -

Interviewer: Not the depression, I don’t think I remember any of that.

Veteran: Okay, you don’t remember the depression, yeah, okay.

Interviewer: Because I was pretty young then.

Veteran: And your dad was still working, he didn’t lose his job during the depression years?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Okay so the depression didn’t really affect you. Okay let’s go to the high school years, this was South High School.

Interviewer: Un-huh.

Veteran: What were your favorite subjects in high school?

Interviewer: You know; I don’t know that I had any favorites other than math, I loved my math, I always liked math. Ah,

Veteran: But I understand, I thought I understood that they didn’t let you take math because you were a girl, is that right?

Interviewer: Oh no! They let you take math.

Veteran: Okay they let you take math?

Interviewer: Yeah.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: They let you take math.

Veteran: Did you take science courses?

Interviewer: And, some science though I didn’t particularly like science.

Veteran: You didn’t like science?

Interviewer: Maybe I didn’t like the teacher or something.

Veteran: Okay that often matters, yeah.

Interviewer: Then, then, in high school I went to what they called Opportunity School at that time and it was at on 14th Street.

Veteran: Was that Emily Griffith School, Emily Griffith Opportunity School?

Interviewer: It must have been, yeah.

Veteran: Let’s understand, you went to South High School?

Interviewer: But then I went to the Emily Griffith during school year because I was taking welding.

Veteran: Okay, so you went to two (2) schools?

Interviewer: Yeah, actually, and I was taking welding and what else did I take there isn’t that funny?

Veteran: Why did you take welding, it’s not common for a girl to -

Interviewer: I know it isn’t, I know it isn’t.

Veteran: Why did you take it?

Interviewer: But it was during the war.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: And, so you did anything like that that you could better yourself during the war.

Veteran: So you were preparing for graduations to become a welder, was it necessary to -

Interviewer: Not necessarily to become a welder but become, what they called at the machine shop, was ah, spot welding. Ah, I did some, I can remember welding, I did some welding but, ah -

Veteran: At, at Emily Griffith?

Interviewer: At Emily Griffith, yeah.

Veteran: Yeah, that was before you worked for the Hurt Company back -

Interviewer: Right, right.

Veteran: You probably valued you because you knew how to weld.

Interviewer: That’s it, they did and that’s why they hired me, I think in the first place.

Veteran: Well, before, go ahead.

Interviewer: I was only sixteen (16) at the time and he wouldn’t, he couldn’t let me do some of the things on the machines and so-forth until I got, what eighteen (18), no sixteen (16) you had to be at least seventeen (17) I think before you could do some of those things.

Veteran: Okay, okay before you graduate from high school, let’s talk a little bit about some of the fun things you did while you were in high school, did you go to the movies?

Interviewer: We went to the movies on South Broadway and Weber Theater and, also, and Mayan Theater was both on South Broadway in about the 200 block and Mayan was First Avenue, I think. And, ah, I remember my brother won a bicycle and we all thought that was great except they didn’t let us ride, the girls couldn’t ride the bicycle, just the boys.

Veteran: What was, what was the other theater you mentioned, you mentioned the Mayan, what was the other theater?

Interviewer: Mayan [pronounced "may on"] and Weber.

Veteran: Weber?

Interviewer: Weber, un-huh.

Veteran: Okay, and, ah, you mentioned in your memoirs that you used to distribute movie theater flyers around the neighborhood.

Interviewer: That’s what we did to be able to go to the movies, we would deliver these flyers that they had and we’d run up and down, up and down the block, ah, from Alameda to 1st Avenue and deliver these flyers, I’ll never forget that. And, then we’d get a ticket, a free ticket to the theater for something, you know, for a movie.

Veteran: Now, didn’t you also win prizes, you mentioned in your memoirs you had a what, a Shirley Temple Doll?

Interviewer: I won a Shirley Temple Doll at one of the theaters, they always gave away prizes at the theater and I won a Shirley Temple Doll once that I dearly loved and I don’t even remember what happened to that Shirley Temple Doll. But then, my brother won ah, bicycle, which of course to us kids, we were poor. We weren’t very wealthy, I’ll tell you and he won this bicycle.

Veteran: Did you, also, win tap dancing lessons?

Interviewer: And I worked, yeah, and I can still do them, I think.

Veteran: You can still tap dance?

Interviewer: Yeah, [laughter] I think I could ah, ah, "Roll Out the Barrel" I used to do that "Rollin’ Out the Barrel" and what was some of the other things we did? No I don’t remember.

Veteran: Okay, so now you’ve graduated from high school, you were sixteen (16) graduation was in what year, 1942?

Interviewer: ’43.

Veteran: Was it ’43?

Interviewer: Un-huh.

Veteran: I was looking at the "bio", okay, ’43. And, again, you skipped a grade that’s why you were able to graduate -

Interviewer: Un-huh.

Veteran: When you, at a younger age. And, so the war was going on and you’ve already been trained in welding and now you’re going to work at Arthur Hart, Arthur Hurt?

Interviewer: Hurt.

Veteran: Okay, did you start right away after you graduated?

Interviewer: Wasn’t long after I graduated that I started and, of course, Hurt and Company was just a half a block away from where I lived.

Veteran: Oh, really.

Interviewer: Yeah, on, it was on Kalamath Street and, ah, let’s see I lived at 283 South Kalamath Street and, and the Hurt and Company was at 218, I think, South Kalamath Street? Yeah, ah, and I started there.

Veteran: What did you start doing, were you welding right away or did you have to wait until you were eighteen (18) to do welding?

Interviewer: I couldn’t weld, I didn’t weld but I did run, ah, lathes, drill presses, spot welding, spot welding I did do. 'Cause we worked, ah, for things for Boeing Aircraft so we did a lot of, ah, a lot of things.

Veteran: Do you know what parts you made for the Boeing Aircraft Company; did you make parts for the B-17 Flying Fortress?

Interviewer: For the B-17 and I, I worked on, ah, drill, not a drill, it was, ah, it was, ah, gosh what were they called? They were bolts and they were five (5) they were very precise silver, I’ll never forget that, silver, ah, on these bolts just about, ah, about a half inch or, of the silver and it was, you what did you do? You, ah, I can’t remember.

Veteran: Do you know what, how they were used on the B-17?

Interviewer: And I don’t have it.

Veteran: The wings or the tail, you don’t have it?

Interviewer: I don’t have any idea.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: I do know that Art Hurt knew a lot of the Boeing Aircraft people would come in and, I’ll never forget, Nitta Downing, Nitta Downing and I went with Art to Elitches to swim what did we do that for? We just went swimming there, I guess. What was it that Elitches had ah, swimming pool or something 'cause it was at 39th and well, that’s where Art lived. 39th and Tennyson! Yeah. And, we, ah, took some of his friends from the Boeing Aircraft and we went swimming.

Veteran: During the work week?

Interviewer: During the war, yeah, it was, ah, Nitta and I went together, gosh, isn’t that funny I can’t remember.

Veteran: Do you know if you made any parts for the B-29 Super Fortress?

Interviewer: Oh, we made, we made parts for, of course, and a lot of things you didn’t know what you were making 'um for.

Veteran: Was it kind of secret?

Interviewer: Everything, secret.

Veteran: Could you talk to your friends outside of work what you were doing?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Okay, so every time you went to work you had to go kind of through security, nobody else could go in, you had a badge?

Interviewer: Ah, didn’t have a badge isn’t that funny that you mentioned it but I don’t remember havin’ a badge.

Veteran: But it was secret you couldn’t tell your friends what you were doing?

Interviewer: That’s right.

Veteran: Okay, yeah. Were there a lot of posters around where you worked, like "support the war, your boys are at work, at war" overseas?

Interviewer: Oh yeah, and if you had, ah, if you had brothers in the war, you had those flags that you put in your window that said, what did they say on there?

Veteran: They weren’t stars, they were flags, is that right?

Interviewer: Maybe they were stars, isn’t that funny, I can’t remember; seemed like they were flags.

Veteran: But back at work there were posters on the wall.

Interviewer: On the wall.

Veteran: Warning you to keep a secret.

Interviewer: Yeah, yeah.

Veteran: Any posters like that? That the enemy is listening?

Interviewer: Right and always all that stuff.

Veteran: So you were a "Rosie the Riveter"?

Interviewer: Yeah, what you would call.

Veteran: I think you would, did you have a "Rosie the Riveter" poster on the wall?

Interviewer: We may have at Art’s; but isn’t that funny I don’t remember.

Veteran: Now were most of the employee women at Arthur Hurt?

Interviewer: No, there were some men and the funny part of it was the men always got, even if they ran the same machine as you did, they got paid more than you did.

Veteran: Now a lot of men had been drafted to go off to fight the war so were there, there were fewer men there than usual?

Interviewer: There was men there, though.

Veteran: Were there more women than men?

Interviewer: More women.

Veteran: More women than men, okay well that makes sense.

Interviewer: The women ran machines like the drills [unclear] drill presses and, ah there wasn’t many women that would run the lathes or anything. I think I was probably one of the first that started runnin’ the lathe. And, Art taught me how sharpen my own tools to set up the lathe for work, ah, I did a lot of things with Art Hurt, he taught me a lot.

Veteran: How many hours a day did you work and how many days a week did you work?

Interviewer: And we worked six (6) days a week ten (10) hours a day sometimes which was a long day [laughter] now that I think about it.

Veteran: So you were, end of the day you were pretty tired, I guess?

Interviewer: Yeah, ah, there for a while I worked the swing the shift, what they called the swing shift and that was, ah, from 4 o’clock to midnight would that be right? Yeah, 4 (four) 'til midnight and when I worked the swing shift we’d work different shifts because you couldn’t, you just couldn’t do that all the time. Ah, and I would work there, come home, and we’d have puzzles set up, my mother would help me with those puzzles, workin’ those puzzles until she’d say; "I think you better go to bed."

Veteran: While you were working there did you have the patriotic spirit that you were helping to win the war with [

Interviewer: Oh, yeah] the work you did?

Veteran: Oh yeah.

Interviewer: Yeah, yeah.

Veteran: I definitely did and, ah, that was one thing when I went to South High School they had a scrap drive and all metal and everything they would set out on the front lawn at the high school. I’ll never forget the scrap drives and everybody brought everything you could imagine.

Interviewer: What, the students would bring in scrap?

Veteran: Bring in scrap and then they’d pick it up in big trucks.

Interviewer: Now, I understand that, ah, Arthur Hurt sponsored a soft ball team [

Veteran: Oh yeah.] for girls?

Interviewer: Yeah, yeah and he sponsored a soft ball team and we were we were pretty good, I must say. Ah, what was it called?

Veteran: What positions did you play on the team?

Interviewer: I played catch, catcher and and I also played first baseman.

Veteran: Were you -

Interviewer: Kind of ah "jack of all trades" when it came to it to the baseball team.

Veteran: Were you a good hitter?

Interviewer: And I thought I was pretty good hitter [laughter]. Yeah, I thought I was pretty good. Ah,--

Veteran: Arthur Hurt, also sponsor a men’s team?

Interviewer: No, he didn’t, but we won the State in the softball and then we were beat by Utah in the Regional for the Regional.

Veteran: Okay, now I assume there were not a lot of men’s baseball teams?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Because they were off to war [

Interviewer: Yeah.] and so mostly women played softball or baseball.

Veteran: Most of 'um were women.

Interviewer: And I know there was National but you played in the State of Colorado?

Veteran: Yeah, and there was, ah, down on Broadway there was what they used to call "Merchants Park" I don’t remember what it’s called now. But, we would play before the Denver Bears games which attracted a lot of people. We would, the Arthur J. Hurt would play there and we would play at Center, City Park I don’t even remember how we got there.

Interviewer: You had uniforms, softball uniforms?

Veteran: And we had uniforms, yeah, was black and white, I’ll never forget, black and white what the heck, I don’t remember what they said.

Interviewer: Now, you mentioned in your memoirs that you actually played German POW’s?

Veteran: We did play, they had, ah, ah, a German POW, we transported, that wasn’t, that wasn’t during [unclear] but we played the German POW’s and they were the nicest guys.

Interviewer: Where was the prison camp?

Veteran: And the prison camp was down on, ah, Cherry Creek, Cherry Creek and, ah, was it Broadway, or--

Interviewer: So, it was actually inside the City of Denver?

Veteran: Oh yeah, yeah.

Interviewer: Was it, fences around high wire?

Veteran: Oh they had, they had, yeah, they had barbed wire?

Interviewer: Barbed wire fences?

Veteran: Fences around.

Interviewer: Now, did you go inside the camp to play softball?

Veteran: We would go inside, yeah.

Interviewer: And did you talk with 'um, did you understand each other, did they speak?

Veteran: Well, we didn’t understand that much.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: But some of 'um could speak English, but a lot of 'um couldn’t.

Interviewer: How many times did you play against the German POW’s?

Veteran: Oh, and I don’t remember how many times.

Interviewer: But it was more than once?

Veteran: Oh yeah, it was more than once.

Interviewer: And did you win?

Veteran: You know, and at that time I don’t even remember but I know that they were thrilled to be able to do that. And, I think they were what they called 'um, trustees or somethin’ were the only ones that really got to play with you.

Interviewer: Oh, not all of them could?

Veteran: Yeah, not all of 'um could.

Interviewer: So you felt comfortable with them?

Veteran: Yeah, yeah.

Interviewer: Did they seem like the enemy or did they seem like normal human beings?

Veteran: No, they didn’t seem like the enemy to me, not at all.

Interviewer: Okay, let’s go on to meeting and the courtship with Rosco "Mick" Amick and we’ll call him "Mick".

Veteran: Un-huh.

Interviewer: Okay, when and where did you meet Mick?

Veteran: I met Mick, ah, I was babysitting his friend’s, ah, Roxie and, ah, Roxie and Milt Baldwin. And they lived just down the block from me, about, probably probably a half a block or so. And, I was babysitting them when I met Mick at that time. I’ve got a picture, I think, of me on, at Baldwin’s.

Interviewer: What attracted you to Mick?

Veteran: I don’t know, I don’t know.

Interviewer: But you liked him right away.

Veteran: Oh yeah, yeah, I did.

Interviewer: When did you start dating?

Veteran: Ah, we he went into the service just right away and so we really didn’t do a lot of dating. We used to go to dancing, a lot of dancing at Lakeside Ballroom and at Trocadero, which was Elitch’s Ballroom, we did a lot of dancing there.

Interviewer: How long was it from the time you met Mick until he went into the service, was it several months or weeks?

Veteran: It must have been several months, yeah.

Interviewer: Okay, you did, you went dancing?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: You, also, mentioned Glenn Miller came to one of those dances?

Veteran: Glenn Miller was there, right.

Interviewer: So you actually saw Glenn Miller?

Veteran: And Tommy Dorsey was there.

Interviewer: Was Glenn Miller in military uniform at that time, 'cause I know he went overseas to play for the troops?

Veteran: He wasn’t at that time when I was there, but he was when Mick was there, ah, on the, what did they call that--heck; I don’t remember what they called that.

Interviewer: You don’t mean leave when he came back -

Veteran: Pardon?

Interviewer: Did he come back on leave from the service?

Veteran: Oh well, he’s, he in one of his letters he sent me ah was it a poster or something that said that they were there, that they that Glenn Miller and -

Interviewer: So Glenn Miller came to visit the troops in the Pacific?

Veteran: Yeah, the troops.

Interviewer: Okay, the troops in the Pacific is what they did.

Veteran: Okay, but you and Mick danced to Glenn Miller back here in Denver?

Interviewer: Oh, we did, yeah, later on.

Veteran: Oh, after the war?

Interviewer: Yeah, after the war.

Veteran: Okay, but not during the war?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Okay, okay and, ah, did Mick volunteer to join the Marines?

Interviewer: Yeah, he and Gaylan who was a very good friend decided to join the Marines. You know they were drafting a lot people in the Army and they didn’t want to go to the Army so they both enlisted in the Marines.

Veteran: Right, I guess the Marines did not draft soldiers you had to volunteer [

Interviewer: You had to volunteer] to be a Marine. And so, in spite the risk, he wanted to join the Marines because [

Veteran: Yeah] they were always on the front line in the, in the Pacific Theater.

Interviewer: Yeah, they really were in the Pacific.

Veteran: Well, when he left what were your feelings, did you feel that you would marry him when he came back from the service, did you, were you that romantically attached to Mick at that time?

Interviewer: I was romantically attached.

Veteran: Okay.

Interviewer: And, I thought that I would, probably marry, if he came back, you know, you always wondered.

Veteran: Okay, well did he go to training some place in California or elsewhere before he was shipped over to the Pacific?

Interviewer: Oh yeah, he was at, ah what was the name, San Diego?

Veteran: San Diego?

Interviewer: San Diego, yeah, he was at San Diego.

Veteran: And did you get to see him before he left Denver?

Interviewer: My mother wouldn’t let me go [laughter] I was only 16 (sixteen) and she wouldn’t let me go.

Veteran: Well, she let you, well you saw him off from Denver?

Interviewer: I saw, I, yeah, I saw him off from Denver.

Veteran: But not from San Diego?

Interviewer: No, but I couldn’t go to San Diego.

Veteran: Okay, well let’s just back-track a little bit, where were you when you learned that the Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor?

Interviewer: Where was I?

Veteran: That was 1941 and you would have been, ah,

Interviewer: I must have been in that was before I graduated.

Veteran: Yes, it was.

Interviewer: It was before I graduated.

Veteran: Do you remember hearing it on the news and you remember what your feelings were when you heard that the Japanese -

Interviewer: Of course I don’t think we had, ah, maybe we had radio.

Veteran: Okay. I assume they talked about it at school because you were in school at the time.

Interviewer: Somebody, yeah, they must have announced it at school, at the time. That they’d bombed Pearl Harbor.

Veteran: And then about, so that was 1941 and you graduated in ah, 1943?

Interviewer: Uh-huh.

Veteran: And, when did you meet Mick, 1943 or ’42?

Interviewer: Oh, I had--don’t remember.

Veteran: But any rate after Pearl Harbor; is that when Mick decided to join the Marines?

Interviewer: Join the Marine Corp along with Gaylan, yeah.

Veteran: Okay, I guess a lot of boys were inspired or motivated to do -

Interviewer: Oh, yeah.

Veteran: After Pearl Harbor.

Interviewer: And they wanted to go they didn’t want to be drafted.

Veteran: So you and Mick exchanged letters during the war?

Interviewer: Un-huh, yes we wrote letters.

Veteran: How often did you write?

Interviewer: I would write, probably, every day and he would write whenever he could, which was not very often.

Veteran: Yeah, yeah, did you save any of the letters?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Do you wish you had?

Interviewer: I, I wish I had now, yeah, most of 'um were just "love letter" nothin’ -

Veteran: Well, I guess he couldn’t talk too much about what he was doing.

Interviewer: No, no he couldn’t -

Veteran: What could he write about that wasn’t censored, just kind of a love letter again, he really couldn’t talk about -

Interviewer: That’s all it was, it wasn’t -

Veteran: He couldn’t say where he was located or [

Interviewer: No] or what he was doing.

Veteran: Or where he was going or anything.

Interviewer: Were some of the letters censored, where they blacked out, or cut out, did they cut out words?

Veteran: No, he just wouldn’t even, he didn’t write 'um.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: I don’t remember 'um bein’ blacked out.

Interviewer: I imagine you were worried and fearful about -

Veteran: Oh yeah.

Interviewer: About Mick.

Veteran: And always wonderin’ and, of course, that time you didn’t hear very often, you didn’t, you didn’t get a letter from him.

Interviewer: Well, did you follow the war in the newspapers?

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: And the battles, especially in the Pacific, where, where Mick was.

Veteran: Yeah.

Interviewer: And so you got the newspaper every day to see what was happening?

Veteran: Well, I don’t know if we got one every day.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: I don’t remember if we got one delivered every day, ah -

Interviewer: Well, did you listen to the news on the radio about the war?

Veteran: Yeah, you’d all just sit around the radio, you know, and hear what was going on, what they were allowed to say.

Interviewer: What about movies? Did they have newsreels at the movies about the war?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: They didn’t, okay.

Veteran: Huh-ah.

Interviewer: Okay and you said they gathered around the radio to, to hear the news about the war. Did you ever hear FDR in one of his "fireside chats" during the war?

Veteran: Yes, one time we did maybe more once but FDR was a very favorite of ours. I think he was of a lot of people.

Interviewer: Yea, so you do remember listening to him on the radio?

Veteran: Un-huh.

Interviewer: Tell me about rationing, what was rationed during the war years?

Veteran: Well, what I remember is meat ah, butter, things like that, ah what else was rationed?

Interviewer: What about gasoline and cars and tires?

Veteran: And gasoline, of course, you, you would get so many gallon and my dad worked just down, down town and there would be, ah, there would be two (2) or three (3) of 'um riding in one car, you know, so you could use your gasoline stamps for several of 'um.

Interviewer: I remember in your memoirs you talk about, I don’t know if it was your Dad or someone else who would get a lot of flat tires and he’d have to repair the tires 'cause you couldn’t buy new ones.

Veteran: Oh yeah, my Dad did. [laughter] I even remember and once in a while we’d take a ride on Sunday up to the hills and he would, you’d never go anywhere that you wouldn’t have a flat tire. You know, they had those bladders in the tires and you and you scraped 'um off and they put, ah, rubber, or patches on 'um, I guess is what they called 'um and then pump up the tire. Get in and away we’d go for a little while.

Interviewer: So you dad wasn’t able to buy any new tires while the war was going on?

Veteran: No, not at all so you really made do.

Interviewer: Where did you get your ration stamps from, did they mail them to you or did you go to the post office to pick them up?

Veteran: I, you know, what did we do? They must of mailed 'um to us, I don’t remember goin’ to get any?

Interviewer: You’d get them once a week or once a month, or?

Veteran: Somethin’ like that, once a week, probably, but of course there was 7 (seven) of us kids so, you know we, at that time, we probably got a few more grocery stamps and things than most people but I don’t remember the stamps, isn’t that funny, I thought that I’d never forget that.

Interviewer: Now, I believe your brothers Hal and Bob also served in the military.

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: Could you tell us about where they were?

Veteran: Hal was in the Army and he was the oldest in the Army and he was fightin’ the Germans over in Germany he was at the battle, what they called "The Battle of the Bulge" which was one of the worst battles in Germany.

Interviewer: Did he write home about his experiences?

Veteran: Well, he couldn’t.

Interviewer: Again, it was censored.

Veteran: Censored, everything was censored, you don’t, you didn’t write about any of that.

Interviewer: Do you know if he was on the front lines during the "Battle of the Bulge"?

Veteran: We knew he was up there somewhere but didn’t know where.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: Yeah, and I know, ah, what the, see Hal started at Italy, I think he went up Italy and then went on up to Germany and fought. But "The Battle of the Bulge" was at Germany and, ah -

Interviewer: Did he stay in Europe until the war was over, he didn’t come home on leave, I guess, he stayed there.

Veteran: No, he didn’t get leave [laughter], at all.

Interviewer: What about your other brother, what was his name?

Veteran: Bob.

Interviewer: Bob, where did he serve?

Veteran: Bob was in the, ah, Merchant Marines, which, which protected the mostly the, ah, clear up to Alaska. Mostly the, what do I want to call it, Pacific what was it, the Pacific, ah goin’ up to Alaska? But he was in the Merchant Marines.

Interviewer: Did he write letters home?

Veteran: And he would write, too, but not, like I say everything was censored so you didn’t get the -

Interviewer: So, I assume, he wrote the letters to his mother, not to you, or to the whole family?

Veteran: No, yeah, to the family, not to his mother, probably.

Interviewer: Okay, let’s go on to the end of World War II, how did you hear about the end of the war in Europe, did you hear about it in school, oh, you were out of school by then. Did you hear it on the radio?

Veteran: My brother, we had it on the radio 'cause, I’ll never forget, we lived on Kalamath Street, my brother was home on leave -

Interviewer: From Europe, which brother?

Veteran: From, no, not the one in Europe the one on the coast.

Interviewer: Okay, in the Merchant Marines.

Veteran: Merchant Marines and he was home on leave and we lived, Kalamath Street was the thorough street that most everybody took from say downtown Denver to South Denver, there. And, I’ll never forget when the war was over, Daddy bought a bottle and every car that came down Kalamath Street, cause that’s the only way they had goin’ down to South Denver there where we lived would stop and everybody have a drink. And my brother, Bob, who doesn’t drink at all now, at that time got polluted along with my dad.

Interviewer: Now was this after the war in Europe ended or after the war in Japan, in the Pacific ended?

Veteran: Of Europe.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: Europe, yeah, yeah, and, ah

Interviewer: How did you celebrate the end of the war?

Veteran: Takin’ care of my brother and my dad who was both so polluted [laughter] I think that’s all we did my mother and us girls were just takin’ care of Daddy.

Interviewer: Well; how did you hear about the end of the war in the Pacific about the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, you remember the days that that happened, did they, they reported on the radio, I assume.

Veteran: It was on radio and, but I was workin’ at the machine shop at the time.

Interviewer: That’s right you were still working even after the war, you worked until 19 -

Veteran: Yeah, yeah, that was before I got sick.

Interviewer: Now, when the boys came home from the war, from the Pacific or from Europe they all, they kind of bumped a lot of the women out of the war plants. But you were able to keep your job?

Veteran: I did keep my job.

Interviewer: Did you, a lot of ladies that you worked with lose their job?

Veteran: Some of the ladies were still there, I can remember Mary Hamilton; she lived right there on Kalamath where I did and she worked, she did the drill presses.

Interviewer: So if you had some special abilities they kept you?

Veteran: They kept you.

Interviewer: But a lot of the other women, they were replaced.

Veteran: Well, they glad just to get out of there.

Interviewer: I guess they were.

Veteran: Yeah, really.

Interviewer: Okay, the war is over and, ah, when did you get married?

Veteran: We got married February 15th and we chose the 15th because we had 3 (three) days off with the 15th.

Interviewer: Was that 1946?

Veteran: ’46, was it?

Interviewer: See Mick didn’t come back from the Pacific -

Veteran: Yeah, ’46, it must have been.

Interviewer: Until like September of 1945 and then you got married in September -

Veteran: February.

Interviewer: Februray of ’50 -

Veteran: February.

Interviewer: February of ’46?

Veteran: 15th of ’46.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: At Redeemer Luthern Church, I’ll never forget it. On Mississippi and where was it? I don’t remember now.

Interviewer: Where did you and Mick live after you were married?

Veteran: And he wasn’t even workin’ at the time we were married. I was and he wasn’t but he got a job as ah, where did he get that first job? Guess at Martin Marrietta, did he, no--

Interviewer: Where did you work, now how long did you continue working for Arthur Hurt, you stayed there for a number of years?

Veteran: Oh, I stayed there for a number of years, until I got sick and then I was off because I had a brain tumor and--

Interviewer: So you were out of work for some time?

Veteran: I was out of work for some time and, of course, when I got back Art hired me again at the machine shop and I worked upstairs, I remember, doing what, what did I do up there?

Interviewer: Now I don’t assume you weren’t making parts for Boeing Aircraft -

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: Anymore, no military.

Veteran: No, not any more.

Interviewer: No more war time effort?

Veteran: No more war time.

Interviewer: But you eventually left Arthur Hurt and you worked somewhere else? You became a realtor, I believe?

Veteran: Oh, well, yeah I was a realtor when I came back, we moved out to Castle Rock.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: 'Cause we lived in Denver at that time and then we moved to Castle Rock oh, we lived at Castle Rock when I still worked at Art’s, didn’t we?

Interviewer: That was a long commute.

Veteran: Yes I did, too funny.

Interviewer: Anything you’d like tell us about your children during their growing-up years?

Veteran: I had David and Jim and David was, ah, oh always kind of the mild-mannered one. Jim was a little bit, ah, what do I say, Jim was independent more or less. Ah,

Interviewer: Well is there anything else you’d -

Veteran: David went to college at Northern, no CSU at CSU, David went college. But Jim didn’t want to go to college, he--

Interviewer: So how long were you a realtor, several years?

Veteran: I was a realtor several years, yeah.

Interviewer: Did you enjoy that?

Veteran: And I did enjoy it, yeah, I really enjoyed it and I--I knew a lot of, as a matter of fact I just met a lady that I had known down in Perry Park which was when I was realtor and Perry Park was just beginning to develop at that time. Perry Park and then most of Castle Rock area I worked with Metro Brokers.

Interviewer: Well, let’s see, let’s we’re going to close pretty soon now. Is there anything you’d like to tell us about your experiences on the home front during WWII, anything else that we can talk about?

Veteran: You know, at the present time, I can’t. I remember I have, ah, what, your annual, you know where my annual is--do you have it?

Interviewer: Well that’s okay, let’s close. I want to thank you for sharing your story; it will be archived at the Library of Congress and at the Douglas County History Research Center for use by future generations to help them understand what it was like experiencing the war years. Thank you very much.

Veteran: Thank you. [END OF INTERVIEW]