Interviewer: We are in San Diego, California. This is February 18, 2002. And I am Evelyn R. Anderson talking to Claude Taylor Anderson. Were you drafted or did you enlist?

Veteran: I volunteered for the Aviation Cadets in 1941.

Interviewer: And where --

Veteran: No, in 1942, sorry.

Interviewer: And where were you living at the time?

Veteran: I was in Knox College in Galesburg, Illinois.

Interviewer: And you joined because the war had already started?

Veteran: It started in September '41 or, no, December '41, two months after I started to college.

Interviewer: And why did you pick the service branch that --

Veteran: Oh, I think because it was a flying service (laughter).

Interviewer: Okay. And what do you recall about the first days of going into service? Did you wait awhile, or did you go in?

Veteran: Oh, I went to Chicago and took the test for aviation cadets. And they directed me to go back to college until they called me, which didn't happen until March of 1943.

Interviewer: Uh-huh. So they called you in March of '43, and your first days in the service were where?

Veteran: First station was the old San Antonio Aviation Cadet Classification Center (inaudible) ?not unlike the Air Force Base?.

Interviewer: Oh, okay. Were you -- as a military person you were stationed, right? Do you remember any of your instructors?

Veteran: Not by name. I don't remember anybody in basic training by name, but I remember the training very well (laughter).

Interviewer: Okay. And that lasted how long? Was it a nine month program?

Veteran: No. No. It was about six weeks, I think. We learned the Manual of Arms and to march without tripping the fellow in front of you and physical training --

Interviewer: And then where did you become (one word inaudible)--

Veteran: -- and a bunch of psychomotor tests to determine your ability to cope with flight training and sort out which branch -- navigation, bombardier, or pilot that you would go to when a school -- or when a class was available for it.

Interviewer: And so you were set for navigation then?

Veteran: Well, I qualified for all three, but the counselor at the end of the sorting session said that I had done best in the navigation section and recommended that I go that way because they were backed up for two years for pilot training anyway. And so I elected navigation.

Interviewer: And where were you -- where were you sent for the navigation program?

Veteran: Well, they were backed up for several months. The navigation course was 18 weeks long. So we were sent -- my class was sent to Arlington, Texas, to gunnery school for about six weeks to learn everything they had to teach us there (laughter) and then, finally, back to Harville (ph), Texas, to navigation school which was, like I say, was 18 weeks long.

Interviewer: After you graduated from navigation school, did you go overseas immediately or was there --

Veteran: No. We went -- we graduated the 24th of December in 1943, and then went to Alexandria, Louisana, to join the rest of the combat crew which was already assembled waiting for their navigators. And then we were there for about three weeks, I think, and flew some practice missions with our own crews. And then we were sent off to Grand Island, Nebraska, to pick up a new V17G and fly it to England.

Interviewer: Okay. And that took place in --

Veteran: That would have been in the winter of 1944 of Grand Island about February, and Newfoundland about a week later, and then on to England to first get briefed by crews that had completed their missions at Burlington, Fairgrove, (ph) just outside London. And there after a couple of weeks of briefings to appoint us with navigational leads. We went on to our own bases where we were assigned as replacement crews. And I went to the 95th -- 95th bomb group and the 13th Wing in the 1st Division -- or, in the 3rd Division of the 8th Air force in East Anglia near a town called Eye, e-y-e. And the nearby town of any size was Diss, D-i-s-s.

Interviewer: Okay. And you've told me you had how many combat missions?

Veteran: Thirty-five. They kept raising the ante. It was twenty-five when I got there. And halfway through, they raised it to thirty. And then before I could finish thirty, they raised it to thirty-five (laughter).

Interviewer: Okay. And most of those missions were over Germany?

Veteran: Most of them were. Some to -- Checkloslavakia, one mission to Checkloslavakia, two in the Falklands, Arab (ph), Romania, I remember one, and supplies to the ?Polish/British? Resistance on one occasion, and after the invasion, we flew several missions to interfere with the German replacement troops trying -- interfering with their rail transportation (inaudible word).

Interviewer: Right. Now I've had you write two of your stories which I will include in the archives, but I wonder if you could tell me one or two of your most memorable experiences in that period where you had to fight combat missions?

Veteran: Completing the 35th mission (laughter).

Interviewer: That was the memorable (laughter) --

Veteran: It was -- the crews that completed missions had a special table in the menicine.

Interviewer: And what did that consist of?

Veteran: A steak dinner.

Interviewer: Oh, that --

Veteran: They called it the Lucky Bastards' table.

Interviewer: I've never heard that one.

Veteran: They had a sign on the table, "Lucky Bastards".

Interviewer: Oh, that's --

Veteran: And every crew that finished (laughter) --

Interviewer: -- got to sit at that table? Tell me -- you didn't lose any of your crew; is that right?

Veteran: No.

Interviewer: One person got a bit of shrapnel?

Veteran: The bombardier got a little sliver of shrapnel on the leg on a mission to the North Shore of Lake Constance.

Interviewer: Uh huh. -- (inaudible words) awarded some medals or citations?

Veteran: I think I got the Air Medal five times.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: (Inaudible) ?which flying cross?

Interviewer: Okay. And I have a picture of you getting that from -- who is the Colonel?

Veteran: Colonel Witten, W-i-t-t-e-n, I believe.

Interviewer: Okay. Say a little bit about how you stayed in touch with your family? Did you use those, those --

Veteran: Well, the -- what do they call the -- the lower (inaudible) --

Interviewer: Yeah. Okay. That's the way you stayed in touch?

Veteran: And the officers on each crew had to censor the enlisted personnel's mail.

Interviewer: Oh my goodness. When you went on leave, was it mostly down to London?

Veteran: No, the routine in the Air Force in England at that time was somewhere in the middle of your tour, you were sent for a week of flak leave to ?report? on the west coast of England between Liverpool and Blackpool which was normally a resort area, and they had taken over the main hotel for Air Force personnel.

Interviewer: Oh, I didn't know that.

Veteran: Practically every night the local girls came in to dance and get acquainted with the Yanks.

Interviewer: That was your entertainment, okay. Now it asks about photographs, and we'll record -- well, we have four or five good ones. And one of your crew, right, and can you name any people that you can recall that are in those pictures?

Veteran: Yeah. The people in the graduating class of navigation school, we lived together in the same barracks for -- and in the same classroom for 18 weeks so I knew them all by name. But I didn't -- I had -- it worked out mostly alphabetically the people who I knew better, but --

Interviewer: In the A's?

Veteran: Yeah. Mostly the A's, well, the whole classroom was A's and B's.

Interviewer: Right. I see. Okay. Did you keep a personal diary or just the letters that went home?

Veteran: I just wrote home whenever I had the time and the inclination.

Interviewer: Right. Now, do you recall when service ended?

Veteran: When the service ended?

Interviewer: Yeah, the day your service ended?

Veteran: Oh, yes. I was --

Interviewer: When did you get sent back from England?

Veteran: Oh, I came back from England about the 7th or 8th of August in 1944.

Interviewer: Yeah. And then stayed in the service awhile longer?

Veteran: Oh, yes. I stayed in until after VJ Day.

Interviewer: Okay. And were you an instructor or what --

Veteran: I went from, well, within a week or so in harsh hotels in Miami Beach.

Interviewer: Oh, really?

Veteran: And were then assigned to active bases around the country. I went to Rapid City, South Dakota, as a navigation instructor to what quote, check out, unquote the navigators who had graduated but had not yet been overseas. And so I was there during the winter of '44 and into January '45 with the -- they had introduced the policy that returning navigators and bombardiers if they remained qualified for pilot training could then go to pilot training as an additional position. So I went in about March of '45 back to the Classification Center and qualified again for pilot training.

Interviewer: So then did you fly a bit?

Veteran: Well, from -- from the Classification Center I went to Arcadia, Florida, to a civilian base and for quote primary pilot school in the old Stillman primary trainer and completed that course and then went to Montgomery, Alabama, for basic training. And I didn't care about flying the AT6 and so after a week of, of --

Interviewer: Basic training?

Veteran: Well, it was -- yeah, I guess it was basic pilot school. I opted out and volunteered for tour (laughter) (inaudible words)?went into the service as a navigator?.

Interviewer: Oh, no, yeah, but, fortunately, the war ended when they sent you there?

Veteran: Well, then I went to Arlington Field to get briefed and brought up to speed on celestial navigation which was much more important in the Pacific than it had been in Europe and was ?in that? retraining period when V-E Day occurred in '45. And I decided it was time to get back to the civilian school after -- oh, when V-J Day came in August, why, I -- the course essentially dried up. And anybody who wanted to stay in had too volunteer for a long period, and I wanted to go back to college so I opted out of the Air Force. But I stayed in the Reserve from then on until I retired in 197().

Interviewer: So I want to ask a few questions about that. I know you used the G.I. Bill carefully to finish college to go to medical school?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: At Yale?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: And you also had the G.I. Bill plus scholarship?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: And got through med school. And when did you rejoin the Air Force? I mean I know you stayed in the Reserves, but then you rejoined the Air force.

Veteran: When I graduated from medical school in 1953, I went back on active duty but did my internship and residency at Cleveland City Hospital Civilian Institution but on active duty with the Air Force.

Interviewer: As a 1st Lieutenant at the time, right?

Veteran: I went back on active duty as the same 1st Lieutenant that I had been when I got out so (laughter).

Interviewer: And then they switched so that doctors became captains?

Veteran: Oh, they -- yes. The promotion schedule became very favorable after I was passed for it -- the time that I could benefit from it.

Interviewer: And so then as you were a physician you were stationed at the Air Force Academy, twice?

Veteran: I was at Scott Air Force Base first, then in the Air Force Academy, and then back to school in Rochester, New York, at the University in biology, and then back to Scott -- the headquarter's job as the nuclear safety officer for the transport command.

Interviewer: Okay.

Veteran: And then to -- it was all of us in the education department --

Interviewer: At Lackland, no not ?Lackland? --

Veteran: In the personnel center.

Interviewer: Yeah, the center (inaudible) --

Veteran: Outside of San Antonio, Texas.

Interviewer: And then you had three years running a hospital in (inaudible word)?Lackland/London? --

Veteran: From the four years at the -- in the surgeon general's office, and then my final assignment was the hospital commander and 3rd Air Force surgeon in -- just outside of London in England.

Interviewer: Until they closed that hospital, didn't they?

Veteran: They closed it in -- like the small dispensary operation there -- and moved the main clinical -- oh, what clinical facility we had had (inaudible) ?up to Lincoln D?.

Interviewer: Okay. While we are summarizing your later years, and in closing, how would you say your military experience influenced your thinking about war or military in general or life in general? I know so much of your years have been --

Veteran: Well, I think there is such a thing as a justifiable war and, in such, I was willing to go to Vietnam as a physician and did, in fact, offer to volunteer for the job. But they didn't accept my -- (tape cutoff). So I had no active duty there, and I was in school during the Korean Conflict which was --

Interviewer: Because your 80, yeah, okay. And then you had five children who had -- who traveled a lot in military base, and they were actively -- one of your children was actively involved in the military also for a few years. And so they had -- they had a lot of the experience of being in the family of a military?

Veteran: Oh, yes.

Interviewer: They learned to travel.

Veteran: Learned to travel.

Interviewer: I can't thank you enough for sharing as a Veteran your experiences. I know your family will appreciate having this recorded.

Veteran: You're welcome. (END OF INTERVIEW.)