Veteran: Today is March 26, 2014, and we're interviewing Rocky Altgilbers at the Illinois State Library (sic)(actually, Illinois Veterans Home.) Rocky is 64 years of age, having been born on [birth date redacted]. My name is Tracey Altgilbers, and I'll be the interviewer. Rocky, could you state for the recording what war and branch of service you served in.

Interviewer: Vietnam, United States Army.

Veteran: What was your rank?

Interviewer: I was a Specialist Fourth Class.

Veteran: Where did you serve?

Interviewer: Vietnam, Cambodia.

Veteran: Did you get immersed in the culture where you were stationed?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: If so, how? What, if any, mementos did you bring back with you?

Interviewer: I brought back my short-timers stick. It was a .50 caliber machine gun round. It's all brass and had the center out of a 105 Howitzer shell, and it was about that long, and you just polished it, brass, carried it with you.

Veteran: All right. Thank you. What was your job assignment?

Interviewer: Well, I went in, and I became an RTO. An RTO went out in the bush with the infantry. We hunted. Then we went to Cambodia. I was an RTO. We had a Recon Sergeant that faked malaria because he was petrified of being there. He got medevaced. I became the Recon Sergeant and the RTO, and we would go around; we would search and destroy. We would call artillery, aircraft, bombs. That was our job.

Veteran: Thank you. Did you see combat? And what were -- Were there casualties in your unit?

Interviewer: Yeah, I've seen combat, and, yeah, there was casualties in our unit. I lost all my friends. I haven't had friends except for -- closer to me than brothers since. They all died at one time in Cambodia; ambush out of -- Yeah, I've seen combat.

Veteran: Did you sustain any injuries?

Interviewer: I was hit in the left hand by shrapnel. It took me off the top of an APC, and if it hadn't been for that shrapnel hitting me in the hand and knocking me off balance, I would be dead, because the forward observer sat across from me. He took four rounds plus the brunt of the RPG, and it blew his body to pieces, and he was still alive, and he kept screaming and screaming, and people around me just started dying. It was an ambush. It wasn't a good time. I really want to say what's on my mind instead of just part of your questions. I've got a lot of other things to say --

Veteran: Were you a prisoner of war?

Interviewer: No.

Veteran: Were you awarded any medals or citations?

Interviewer: Yes.

Veteran: What did you receive them for?

Interviewer: What did I receive them for?

Veteran: Uh-huh.

Interviewer: Being good, being a good killer maybe, making decisions about people's lives that you don't even know. The only thing you got against them is they're trying to kill you. You don't know why, and you don't really think about it at the time, and you kill them. That's your decision; you make it in the dead of night. 19 years old: I learned how to kill people. I would have rather learned how to -- go to college, study, do something, relax, have fun in my life. My life ended, as I knew it, in Cambodia in 1970. I never got to come home. My body came home; my innocence is in Cambodia. My decisions to kill made me a different person.

Veteran: Stop?

Interviewer: No, I don't want to fucking stop. You get tired of killing people. You get tired of making decisions. You destroy what is there because, if you don't, they'll come back, and that night they kill you. We were in firefights sometimes a day, two days. Then there's days that you searched and found, found base camps, you found the training camp, you found whatever the hell was in the area, and then you planned to destroy it.

Veteran: How did you get along with the officers and fellow soldiers?

Interviewer: They were like brothers to me. And you don't understand officers over there. It's different over there. You are a brother to the officer. You would die for him; he would die for you. He will lead you into battle, and you got to have faith that that man made the right decision. If he didn't, then you have to do what is coming, but I have nothing to say. They're all heros to me. I'm here physically; I'm not here innocently.

Veteran: Did you keep a personal diary?

Interviewer: No. Only in my mind.

Veteran: Were you able to stay in touch with your family?

Interviewer: My family in the states? Is that what you want?

Veteran: Yes.

Interviewer: You could write them. You would send it out. You would have to wait for a helicopter to come in with supplies. You would put the mail bag on the helicopter and hope it didn't get shot out of the air, and then they would mail it, and then we would get mail back, and certain days in a month when we got resupplied they would bring the mail out, and you would protect those helicopters with everything you had, because they had their life's blood. They had your soda, your beer, your ice, your cigarettes, your candy. They had everything -- your mail. It was like bringing you a little store, and they could only do it when there weren't any firefights and the area was clear.

Veteran: Did you do or have something for good luck?

Interviewer: Yeah. I wore several different Saint Christopher medals around my neck. I would get 'em from priests at different base camps, and they would bless 'em. I would put 'em on, and after every firefight that I would have there was a Saint Christopher medal between my teeth, and I wouldn't realize that I put it there until the firefight was over, and I would chew them up so bad sometimes they would end up getting so thin they would just fall apart, and I never realized I kept 'em between my teeth.

Veteran: Did you have plenty of supplies?

Interviewer: Yeah. I had plenty of supplies except in Cambodia when we got pinned down. People couldn't get to us. We were firing powder out of the tanks. We didn't have enough charge to shoot two blocks, but we scared the hell out of them at night.

Veteran: What was the food like?

Interviewer: What was it like? Well, if you were in World War II, Korea and you ate the C rations, that's exactly what it was like because that's exactly what we got to eat. We would kill different things. Tiger scout would come in; we would skin it, we'd eat it, make some rice. But you always had C rations and K rations. I ate them so long that, if I ate anything, I would throw it up. I have ate pineapple out of Cambodia, I've ate snakes, I've ate a stupid monkey, tiger scouts. We hung out together a lot. Me, him and George. He was an enemy NVA covert colonel, was captured, came to our side because they paid more money. He knew everything there was about the enemy, how they worked, how they functioned, and he would kill them as well as he would have killed us because he was a soldier of fortune; he worked for the money. The money was a lot better on our side. And he knew how to cook anything, and he would teach us all kinds of stuff, because we lived in the bush. We didn't have a base camp. We didn't have anything except each other. What else?

Veteran: The next questions are about R and R. How did you entertain yourself? Were there any entertainers that came into your unit?

Interviewer: We had to go out in the bush to be entertained. We had to come to your base camp. If we were in your area, fighting your war, helping you with your situations and we get things under control, we would come out of the bush for two days every 30 to 45 days, and we'd stand down, so we would use your facilities for whatever we needed to do. We drank, we would fight, we would run women, we would do whatever we could on your base; that was our R and R. Might go in and get a bath; first bath you've had that month. Can't take a bath in the bush. Take a bath and the gooks find you the same way you find them, on the wind. They smell you; you smell them. So you got a bath when you come in, changed clothes. You wore the same clothes.

Veteran: What did you do when on leave?

Interviewer: I got five days in Da Nang, Camp Love. It was an R and R Center on the South China Sea. I came in, and they flew me in on a chopper. I went in there, and I had sheets, I had a mattress, I had a pillow, I had a blanket. I hadn't had any of that in almost a year. I slept, I drank, I swam in the ocean, I watched movies, I drank milk shakes, and I hadn't had a milk shake since the states. I had real food. I had a knife, fork, spoon, plate, cup, glass, and you run women. Then the five days is up, and you fly back into Saigon. The unit chopper picks you up, and you fly back to the bush, and that's your R and R.

Veteran: Did you travel while in the service?

Interviewer: Yeah. Traveled from base to base, traveled all over Vietnam, traveled eight miles outside of Phnom Penh, capital of Cambodia. We traveled every day all day, but I only travelled home when it was my time to fly on the freedom bird.

Veteran: Do you recall any particular -- particularly -- it's a hard word for me -- humorous or unusual events while you were on R and R?

Interviewer: Yeah. The movie Bullet come out -- I had never seen it, and we got to watch that -- with Steve McQueen, and to me that was a funny movie. A friend of mine was with me, and we had a good time. We laughed and played cards. I won his wife in hearts; we played hearts, and he had so many points he couldn't pay me, so I won his wife when we got home. I never collected, but I used to ride her and tell her not to talk too much to him cause she belonged to me now; she was my girl. I even had the paper where we did stuff for fun. We did stuff in the bush for fun, but I won't talk about that.

Veteran: What were some of the pranks that you or others would pull.

Interviewer: Well, we took my RTO. He would fall asleep every night. You couldn't go to sleep. You had to sit it out, because they were on guard duty at different times, and he would fall asleep every night with his eyes and mouth open, so we took a poncho and spread it across him and then drove an APC up on top of him, pinned him down so, when we screamed "firefighting!" and started shooting the guns, he couldn't move, and he thought he was dead, and we thought it was funny. I could see now it would be nerve wracking for him, but we had a ride out of it. We just got tired of him falling asleep. We put hot sauce in his mouth. He would just make a face and keep on sleeping.

Veteran: The following questions are about discharge and post-war. Do you recall the day your service ended?

Interviewer: Oh, yeah. I was totally naked in the bathroom at the gas station on Fort Carson, Colorado. I had gone civilian clothes from my underwear out, put the top down on my convertible, drove out the gate and flipped everybody on the way out off.

Veteran: Did the war come to an end, or had you fulfilled your military service?

Interviewer: The war never ended until 1975, April. I left September 1971. My service was done. I mustered out of active service.

Veteran: Were others discharged with you?

Interviewer: Sure. Lots of us left that day. I didn't know 'em. I didn't know anybody. I didn't want to know anybody. I didn't have any friends there. I didn't know people's names. I don't even remember the unit I was in. People tell me I was in such-and-such unit. I don't know where I was in; I don't care. The only unit I know is Vietnam; that's my unit, that's my love, that's my life, that's everything to me. The rest of it's bullshit. Just had to do the time. People said, "Rocky, what are you here for? What are you fighting for?" I said, "I'm fighting to go home. I don't know why I'm here, but I'm fighting to go home." I only killed people, if you tried to kill me.

Veteran: What did you do in the days and weeks afterwards?

Interviewer: After getting out?

Veteran: Uh-huh.

Interviewer: I understood what nightmares are, and understood what fear was, and understand how you see what happened and what you done with the clearest eyes that you could ever imagine. I live with my ghosts. That's what I've done, and that's what I do.

Veteran: Did you resume a job or start a new career?

Interviewer: Well, I started a job spray painting air compressors. Then I decided to go on the road with a show, and I done marionette shows from Key West, Florida, to International Falls, Minnesota, in schools, colleges, fine art groups, wherever wanted to pay their money, traveled the United States, couldn't stay still, couldn't stand a lot of people telling me what to do, how to do things. I knew how to do things. I knew more about life than the people telling me, because I knew what real life was. Just been hit. It was a different life than people live, and they just didn't know mine, and I didn't want to --

Veteran: Did you go back to school, and, if you did, did you use your GI bill for your education?

Interviewer: Yep. I went to mechanic school for a year for diesel and gasoline engines, got my degree and opened a shop, worked 16, 18 hours a day. Then it got on my nerves, people telling me "I want you to do this. Call me up; I need you to come now." You know, and I got to thinking, I'm tired of people telling me, and I want to drive semis so I could be alone. Nobody would be around me. I rode with God. He'd come at night and rode with me, but then you can think. You can try to work over your problems, try to work through your head, try to make sense out of things. I'm going to be 64 next month, and I can't think through certain things yet. I've only coped with life. I could -- never got to live it. I just coped with the cards that's on the table at the time and deal with it.

Veteran: Did you make any close friendships while in the service? Do you continue any of those relationships, and do you attend any reunions?

Interviewer: Yeah. I told you in the beginning I had friends -- well, not even friends. It's closer than your brothers; closer than your dad, your mother. It's "I depend on you to save me, and you depend on me to save you," and I failed, and they died. I couldn't help them. I was behind them instead of with them or in front of them. I didn't see it coming, and I lost all my friends. I cried for three weeks I hurt so bad. I never hurt like that before, and it hurts me that bad today. And when they come to see me, they're still who they were. They don't get older. They never got to be a dad. They never got to be a husband. They never got to have children. Yeah, that's my friends. They come see me; they don't say much. They just die again, but at least I wake up before it explodes. I don't make friends. Friends just die.

Veteran: You don't have to finish.

Interviewer: No. I want to finish this.

Veteran: Has anyone ever thanked you for serving our country?

Interviewer: Yeah. Yeah, some way they say it. People come up, "Thank you for your service." Where in the hell were they at when I stepped on this earth December 1970!? Why didn't they thank me then!? Why didn't they give a shit then!? Why didn't they fucking care!? I was the lowest piece of shit that come home. They called me a baby killer, and I defended their right to live and breathe, and I didn't know why I was there. I know the United States made a lot of money off of drugs when I was there. I crossed into a foreign country other than the one I was in while I was there. I didn't have permission to do that, and we killed people there. I'd been there 30 days before that lying-ass Nixon said, "We just crossed the Cambodian border." I had already lost my friends; they were gone. Yeah, I've seen a couple since I've been back, and we grew apart. They got their venture in life; they got their sorrows; I've got mine. They're not the same. Everybody's war is different. My war was different than the person next to me. It affected me different, but nobody ever gave a shit. They said, "When you get back, they're going to ask you, 'Are you sick; is there something bothering you?' If you tell them yes, they will take you right then and there to a hospital, and you will spend whatever time of your leave at that hospital. I suggest you don't tell them a thing. You say, 'I'm fine.'" My mind wasn't fine! I had been killing people! Now you put me in a place, and these sons-of-bitches piss me off. Well, the first thing I want to do is kill that mother-fucker, and you tell me I can't. Nobody told me I couldn't there. They was proud of me. They wanted me to kill them, which, if we didn't, they was going to kill them. They didn't give a fuck if I got killed as long as we stopped them. People don't understand; nobody wins a war. All you do is kill your young: 19 years old! I could have been a football player in college. My parents didn't have the money to send me to school. I couldn't say, "Hey, I need a college deferment." No, that didn't happen for me. I learned everything I learned through my life by myself. I done a lot of things, and I've been a lot of places, because this is the longest I've ever been here. I finally could settle down, and my mind races day and night. I can't read books a lot of times because I just read the same paragraph because my mind is racing. I can't stop it; I don't know why.

Veteran: Would you encourage young men and women to enlist today?

Interviewer: Yes. I have children in the United States Air Force, and I'm proud of them. I've got a son-in-law in the United States Army, and I'm proud of him. I've got a granddaughter in the United States Air Force, and I'm proud of her, and my sons that are in the Air Force and a daughter in Tampa in the Air Force. Yeah! I'm having them get what I didn't get. I told them how to go in and get the education, get the training, be who you want to be. There's not all this "I'm sending you." They're sending poor fighting men time after time after time after time into harm's way and wonder why the suicide rate on young soldiers is so high. What the hell do you expect!? You wore me out! I spent nine months in the jungle; I was only supposed to spend four. They wore me out. They're wearing my son-in-law out. They'll be wearing my kids out. My son's special forces, and he picked that because he knows he's all man, and he'll stand his ground like I stood mine; all my kids will. But I want them to have everything I didn't have. I want the service forced to give them things they never offered me, and these young men and women are finally getting it. When I come out nobody gave a shit about you or where you were. They just wanted a body.

Veteran: And this is the last question: What is your opinion of war/history taught in school today.

Interviewer: I don't know what war/history is taught today. Young kids have asked me about Vietnam, and I ask them, "What do you know about it?" "Well, nothing. Our history books don't really cover it." So I haven't seen a history book. I don't know what it says, but I would imagine they covered it up and they don't say much about it because it wasn't a likeable war. They started it. We sent into a country been fighting from day one, and we were sent for no reason. They had nothing to offer. There's nothing in the country unless you like rice and rubber trees. What the hell did I go for? Why was I fighting this war? The north and the south separated at the DMZ. It's like North and South Korea. Who gives a shit!? Let them fight! Why the hell you got me over there trying to be protecting one side or the other? It wasn't my business; it's not our business. It's not our business being in Afghanistan, Iraq, none of that shit. They just poke their face into shit; ain't got no business there. I think war sucks, and if you've never been there, don't condemn anybody that has, because you don't know what the fuck you are talking about.

Veteran: The last question: Is there anything you would like to add or say before the interview is over?

Interviewer: I would like to say, if you see my face -- because I'm going to look you dead in the eye -- I'm going to be 64! I never got to come home! If anybody hears this, watches this, if you are young people, understand, when you kill people, your life will change, your memories will change. War is not what the hell they tell you it is. It's in your mind all the time; war never stops. You are never innocent again. I watched my family from outside in. I don't feel part of any thing. I don't have a warm, fuzzy feeling. A lot of times when I got home I didn't have sympathy. If you were dying on the ground, I didn't give a shit. Just get out of my way; don't bother me with it. Understand this country will put you places you don't want to be, and you always notice the ones that are putting you there are not with you, because their balls ain't big enough to be where you are. That's all I got to say.

Veteran: Thank you. (Interview concluded)