Transcript of Taped Interview 
with 


VIRGINIA JENCKES 


Taped 1967 


Indiana State Library 


Indiana Division 


Oral History Project 


1972 


The following is an interview with Mrs. Virginia Jenckes, 
former Congresswoman from the Sixth District in Indiana. She 
served from 1933 to 1939 as a Democrat. The tapes that you 

are about to hear were made on October 11 and 12, 1967, in 
Terre Haute, Indiana. They were made at the Terre Haute House, 
the place where Mrs. Jenckes stayed on her campaigns and during 
the primary race back in the thirties. Mrs. Jenckes at the 
time of the tape was approaching her ninetieth birthday. She 
tells of her family heritage that begins in Vincennes, her 
interest in flood control in the Wabash Valley near her home in 
Terre Haute and the fact that it eventually led to her bid for 
politics and the nomination in the '33 primary. There is a 
summary of her terms in office, her fight for state flood con- 
trol, repeal of prohibition, the anti-communist stand she took, 
her friendships with the many top officials in Washington and 
her efforts in later years as a resident in Washington, D.C. 
The tape contains many interesting stories and other memories of 


her time in Congress. The interviewer is Tom Krasean, Field 


Agent for the Indiana State Library. 


VJ: Hans Christian Anderson said, "Let's begin at the beginning." 
The beginning begins with my great grandmother who was 
born in Vincennes in 177......in Ft. Sakville rather, in 
1775. She was Francoise Conoyer, daughter of French 
immigrants and was being prepared after her birth to go 


to Detroit to be educated. My great great grandfather 


was born in Troy, New York, of Dutch parentage and belonging 
to the Episcopal Church, the Church of England. He was a 
Captain in the Forest Rangers at the age of eighteen in New 
York Colony, New Amsterdam. When the Revolution was approach- 
ing and the Continental Army was being formed, he joined. 
Later he was captain in the Continental Army and met with 
Washington when he disbanded his army and called all his 
officers together. These officers formed the Society of the 
Cincinnati named after the great Roman general, who when he 
was retired after the Carthagenian War, said that he would 
rather go home and be a farmer and turn his swords into plow- 
shares. They named the society the Society of the Cincinnati 
and every officer gave of his own private income the equival- 
ent of a month's salary which became the first pension fund 
in the United States. John Jay who was Chief Justice under 
George Washington, President George Washington, appointed 

my great grandfather to be the first circuit judge of the 
Northwest Territory. He came west on horseback over the 
mountains and held court once a year in Vincennes, in Kas- 
kaskia, Illinois, which is now extinct, and Detroit. He rode 
the marshes and the country with just one body servant and 
never was attacked by the Indians. When he got to Vincennes 
and saw this little French girl he fell desperately in love 
with her and in 1790 they were married. My great grandmother 
could neither write nor read but great grandfather taught 

her both and taught her sufficient law to be able to settle 


neighborhood disputes while he was away holding court. As 


their children grew they lived on a five acre tract 

outside of the fort which the government had ceded or 
granted to great grandfather. It is now a part of Burnett 
Heights. One day great grandfather was away from home 
holding court and the Indians were on the warpath, and 

the path took them right past where my great grandmother 

and her children were housed and the old brave started to 
climb in. He was going after their scalps. Great grand- 
mother picked up the axe and chopped off his hand. It en- 
raged and hurt him so that he fell back among his braves 

and that gave the soldiers a chance to come up and protect 
the family. Otherwise, | wouldn't be sitting here talking 
to you today. They had ten children and none of the boys 
ever left any heirs or died natural deaths. Washington 
irving in his “Bonneville” stories tells the story*of one 

of the sons who was in the Indian fur trade under Astor and 
he was chased and treed by the Indians on one of his expe- 
ditions. He fell down inside the tree and how they happened 
to know what became of him...later they found his notebook 
and the brass buttons from his uniform. So you see coming 
on down, their youngest daughter was Frances Sidney Vandiver 
and she married Joseph Somes, S-O-M-E-S, who had been born 
in Wallingford, England, and came to Vincennes in 1828 to 
teach medicine at the University of Vincennes. He was a 
doctor. He doctored all of the Gimbles. The first family 
of Gimbles lived on a lot right back of my grandmother's and 
grandfather's house and all of their children were of 


corresponding age so that I've always...The Gimbles! first 


store was in Vincennes. Grandfather Somes after he gave 

up teaching became a practicing physician there and lived 

in Vincennes for a great many years. They had ten children. 
My Uncle Harry was the oldest one and my father was the 
youngest one. My father was James Ellis Somes who had 

the appointment for Annapolis and his mother wept and he 
gave it up, went to Vincennes University and graduated as 

an apothecary. He later was appointed analyst of drugs 

at the Port of New Orleans right after...shortly after the 
Civil War. My father was born in 1848. He married Mary 
Oliver of Hopkinsville, Kentucky in 1875 and | was the 
younger of two daughters born to them. My older sister died 
when | was a little girl so | have always felt tha | was the 
only child and that | have just grown up with Terre Haute. 

| can remember one amusing little anecdote. An aunt of 

mine was unmarried and she lived with father and mother and 
in those days they had great parties here at the Prairie 
House which was the Terre Haute House and one fall she went 
to a party and went home after the dance and threw her dress 
on the foot of the bed. Something crossed her nose. She 
threw it to one side and when she got up in the morning 
there was a dead mouse on the bed. So you see my memory 
goes back a long ways in the civilization and the culture 
and comfort of Terre Haute. After | grew up | married Ray 
Greene Jenckes who was the youngest son of the Jenckes 
family that had come to Indiana in 1816 and had bought a 


great deal of land and many acres around the county here 


and in the adjoining county, among them the site of the 


present Highland Lawn Cemetery where my husband and daughter 
are buried within fifty feet of the spot where he was born. 
The Jenckes were old New England people. Mr. Jenckes'! 
grandfather or great grandfather was colonial Governor of 
Rhode Island appointed by King George Ill and in 1730 he 
signed a paper appointing one William Greene to be a justice 
of the peace and all the duties that went with it. William 
Greene became my husband's great grandfather when his 

father and mother were married at the home of Henry Clay. 
General Nathaniel Greene of Revolutionary fame was a son of 
that union. I mean the Governor and his wife. The old 
Greene Homestead in East Greenwich, Rhode Island, is now 

the home of the Historical Society of Rhode Island. Mr. 
Jenckes was the first miller of corn, commercial miller of 
corn in the United States. None of my family were particular- 
ly interested...they were interested in good government but 
not in participating and bringing it about. But after Mr. 
Jenckes and | were married and his death | was interested 
more in flood control and repeal of prohibition because | 
knew the un-economic side of both. Prior to 1918 when 
prohibition became the law of the land, a little better 

than eighty-eight thousand bushels of corn were used [?] in 
Terre Haute on the river bank every twenty-four hours and 
anyone knows that that's a big loss to the farmer. And, 

of course, we had a good deal of farmland and | saw corn 


go from $1.40 a bushel down to $.10 a bushel and when it 


TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 
Vi: 


was .10 a bushel ! was paying .05 to have it hauled to town 
after having paid .06 to have it harvested. 

| think it would be interesting to know what your schooling 
was and what.... 

| went tO...l was the youngest pupil that ever entered at 
the time, ever entered Wiley High School. | entered Wiley 
High School when |I was eleven years old. And | went there 
until September...! would have graduated in February but 

| stopped and went down to Coates College. | went there 

a couple of years and then | thought | knew enough. 

Right. 

And | stopped because | was having a very grand time 

going to parties and things. And after all, in those days 
college educations weren't considered necessary for girls 
and | wanted to be a doctor. | wanted to be a professional 
woman and my family ridiculed me and everybody else did 
because in those days women doctors didn't have any stand- 
ing and they didn't have a chance. So, as | said, after 
Mr. Jenckes and | were married | became interested... | 

had to become interested in business because | had all 

this farm land and | was responsible for paying the debts 
and paying the taxes and keeping things going. And you 
couldn't do it with the situation then. Incidentally, 

the Eighteenth Amendment is the Prohibition Amendment. 

The Nineteenth Amendment gave us women the right to vote. 
We...when the Eighteenth Amendment was presented to the 


country all of our youth was in Europe. All of our women 


didn't have a vote so the vote for prohibition was a very 
limited one, | mean as to the people that had the opportunity. 
And after all, if you had been in my position...Mr. Jenckes 
was ill for three years and | wasn't anyplace during the 
time prohibition was new and when | first started to 

see things | knew that it was not only an economic failure 
but that it was an impossible thing. And when you realize 
that the law was made for other people, not for the men 

who made the law, you can understand why it was a failure. 
And then there never was any penalty for buying the liquor; 
the penalty was all paid by the poor devil that was making 
the living selling it. (That wasn't a good one to put in 
there.) So then I had this farm land that was subject to 
overflow and while | was at home and my evenings were long 
| did queer reading for a woman at that time. | read about 
flood control, business, things of that sort. And I found 
that the United States Government through the Army Department, 
Chief of the Engineering Department, had the right...did 
own the Wabash River and that they could say what would 
happen to it. They were taking care of the Illinois River 
and all these rivers around and we were losing a couple of 
million dollars a year by floods. So | started out and 
organized the Wabash-Maumee Valley Improvement Association. 
| got ten thousand paid-up members when the Republicans 
decided they wanted possession of the organization and we 
called a meeting at the Masonic Temple here when, oh, Jim 


Watson, Charlie Greathouse, the National Committeeman of 


TKS 
VJ: 
TK: 
VI 


the Republican Party all came and they were fighting for 
the control of the organization. 


This would be about what year, about what year? 


1928. 
About 1928? 
'27. I'm sure it was '27. Well, anyway they elected 


Charlie Greathouse president, Louis Stevenson, from 
Bloomington, Illinois, father of Adlai and son of the 
Vice-President vice-president of the organization and me, 
secretary-treasurer. Well, they didn't know that was the 
job | wanted. In all river organizations the secretary- 
treasurer is the one that controls things so that was the 


thing | wanted. | kept still but it was one of the bitter- 


est fights that | think | have ever seen witnessed politically 


because the Pennsylvania Railroad maintained an agent here, 
a man named Straus [?], their claim agent from Rockville, 
was kept here for years to fight anything that | would do 
to try to get navigation on the Wabash River. It went on. 
We got headquarters in the Chamber of Commerce here and 
the Republicans put in a chap named Harold Wisehart from 
Clinton as secretary to me and one day Mr. Wisehart dis- 
apppeared with the automobile, the typewriter and all of 
the card index. He took them down to Washington to Jim 
Watson and, of course, that was kind of a blow. But never- 
theless, we survived and the Army Engineers had made these 
surveys and the recommended that eighteen million dollars 


would cover the costs of flood control in Indiana. There 


were times...One year about 1927 when we had nine floods 

in fourteen months in the Wabash. And in the flood in 
February down in Gibson County the animals froze to death 
standing in the stalls. It went on. | kept on the fight 

in spite of the loss of my typewriter and automobile. Always 
| had furnished all the expense of this thing myself. | 

paid my own expenses. | used my car and | went through 

the thing without anything. And as I said, got a member- 
ship of ten thousand paid up members who backed me from 

Ft. Wayne in the northeastern corner down to Mt. Vernon 


and down in that corner. 


The Wabash River arises in St. Mary's, Ohio, Lake St. Mary's, 
Ohio, and it comes down. The Maumee River flows into Lake 
Erie just opposite the opening of the Erie Canal in Pennsyl- 
vania. Now then, the idea of the Army Engineers and a few 
of us was to cone up the Wabash and a fifteen mile dredged 
canal from the Wabash to the Maumee would carry both into 
the Maumee. The Maumee flows into Lake Erie. There'd 

be never any question such as the dispute as they had in 
Illinois when they were canalizing the !]linois River. 

When | say...Just one little digression...At that time it 
used to cost five times as much to ship a piano from New 
York to Chicago as it cost to ship a piano from New York 

to San Francisco. Those were the things that made our 
proposition...and the Army Engineers were very enthusiastic. 
So was President Hoover when he was Secretary of Commerce. 


He saw our plans and our blueprints. | went down to 


Washington to try to see Senator, oh, the man | mentioned 
a minute ago...well, | went down to see him and as | went 
in... he knew | was coming and as | went ħ the front door 
he came out the back door...or went out the back door. And 
he was working with the Pennsylvania Railroad to stop any 
progress or any help from the government on our Wabash. 
General Herbert Deakyne who was chief of engineers told 

me in his office in Washington that the Wabash River was 
entitled to first place for relief. It was the most im- 
portant river in the United States at that time and that it 
should have taken precedence and that he had the authority 
to do anything he wanted to with it. And he was the man 
who authorized the survey and later helped us get the 
recommendation of the eighteen million dollars. Time went 
on and | didn't get much. | went to the Houston Convention 
that nominated Al Smith and presented the reciamation 
resolution to the resolutions committee which they accepted 
word for word as | read it to them and they promised, 
promised us help. Hoover promised us help. But when the 
Ohio River was a completed unit this nine foot channel 

and the Army Engineers chartered a boat to go from Pittsburg 
to Cairo, | was invited to go along and | did. When we got 
to Cincinnati, President Hoover came on the boat and went 
with us overnight but | wasn't even allowed to speak to 

him nor could | get a word in anyway. And when he was 
President he didn't give us any assistance at all. It went 


on for four years. Things with the farmers as you all know 


got lots worse. There just wasn't any hope. After the 
Democratic Convention...| had my nomination before President 
Hoover...but President Roosevelt was nominated by the 
convention and | campaigned on the program of flood control 
and repeal. By that time the people were waking up to the 
fact that repeal was not the moral support that they had 
expected and certainly the economic situation was terrible. 
In regard to getting the nomination...oh, in March some of 
the county agents from the old Fifth District came down 

and asked me to run for Congress. 

TK: This would be in 1931? 

VJ: 132. 

TK: '32, right. All right. 

VJ: | said, "Oh, | can't. I'm a Democrat and the farmers are 
all Republicans and | can't afford to make an independent 
campaign. And | wouldn't have the support of the organi- 
zation." Well, these men sat there. They stayed...Well, 
"7'1] tell you, come out as a farm laborite and we'l] 
finance your campaign." Well, of course, | never told that 
to many people. | didn't tell it to anybody at that time 
but | said, "I can't, boys. | believe a leopard can't 
change its spots and | believe fully in the principle of 
Thomas Jefferson that no one has the right to do that 
which is not good for the governed." And | said, "I 
believe I'm that kind of a Democrat and | always will be." 
So we went along and | didn't say anything to anybody. 


The Beck-Linthicum Bill was presented to the House and 


the Senate for a vote and Court Gillen who was the Represen- 
tative of the old Fifth District on the Democratic ticket, 
Jim Watson and our other United States Senators all boomed 
out "No" when they were put up for a roll call on the 
Beck-Linthicum. That merely gave you and me the opportunity 
to express our ideas on prohibition. Of course, Court 
Gillen had promised the Terre Haute merchants that he would 
vote for anything that looked like a referendum. Well, 

when he boomed, "No", it made our merchants here and the 

men who had not supported him but had given him an opportun- 
ity to run, made them angry and one night | came in about, 
oh, half past ten and my daughter said, "Mother, some men 
have been calling you every fifteen minutes tonight. They 
said they'd get you before you went to bed." Well, they 
called about midnight. "Hello, is that you?" And it went 
on down through fourteen voices, came back to the first one. 


It was Dick Werneke and he said, "We want to know if you 


won't run for Congress." "Oh", | said, "Yes, thank you, 
i'i] be glad to." Jim Powers came on the telephone, "You'd 
better think it over, Virginia. It's a big job." "Oh", 

| said, "That's all right, Jim, I'll get there. I['11 be 


up at the paper in the morning and tell Bill Cronin my 
statement and 1'1] be ready and as soon as | get my house 
straight 1'1] go out campaigning." Well, | did. These 
men, you see, didn't know the support that | had on my own 
and from this Wabash River. Vigo County in that first 
primary gave me a majority of better than twelve thousand 


out of only fourteen thousand votes cast. Well, of course, 


Vigo County nominated me. The ten counties...you see, 


this district had been gerrymandered, and Fred Purnell, 

who represented the old Ninth District, and Court Gillen, 
who represented the old Fifth District, were both sitting 
members. Well | had to defeat Court Gillen in the primary 
which was easy, and then | had to defeat Fred Purnell in 
the fall. Well Fred Purnell was not particularly popular 
with his Republican friends, with the Republicans on the 
floor and Senator [?] Beck, a Republican from Pennsylvania, 
sent me Fred Purnell's record on the disbursing office. 

He had seventeen members of his family on the federal pay- 
roll. He had his father-in-law on, aman of eighty-five, 
as a page in the House. He also had him on as a chemist. 
He had his wife on as Secretary of the Corn Borer Associa- 
tion. He had his two sons on as inspectors on the Corn 
Borer. The rest of them | can't remember but nevertheless, 
| didn't choose...This is the first time | have ever told 
that publicly or for use. | never told it once in the cam- 
paign. | went on my campaign with the principle that if 

| couldn't say, "Elect thyself", | didn't want to defeat 

a non-entity and today that thing is very true. We need 

to build up, we need to find the good and not bring hatred 
and malice into everything that we have. Well, the cam- 
paign went on...Shall ! tell some of the amusing incidents? 
| was going up one day...| had my nomination and | was 
going up to Warren County which at that time had more buffalo 


sod in it than any other county in the United States and 


it was very, very pro-Republican. There was only one... 

in one precinct there was only one Democratic vote and I was 
going up to meet the county chairman and see if we couldn't 
get that precinct committeeman...to get that one voter to 
be a precinct committeeman. | was going up what is now 

63 and it had just been oiled. And | was kinda! mad be- 
cause | heard the pebbles hitting the fenders and it was 
bad for the car but | went along and every person | met, 

! said, "I'm going up to West Lebanon to meet Ura Seegar. 
Do you know Ura?" Well, some of them did and some didn't 
but anyway I was on the right road. Finally this poor old 
man came out of his barnlot driving his team back to the 
field to do the afternoon plowing and | stopped him and | 
said, "I'm going up to West Lebanon to meet Ura Seegar. 

Do you know Ura?" "Oh, yeah, Ura's a Democrat." "Hum", 

| said, "So am | a Democrat." He said, "So am I." 1 said, 
"Good, I'm your candidate for Congress." "Oh, hell, you're 
that widow woman.. I'm a widower. Ain't it hell to be 
lonesome?" [Laughter] And | said, "It certainly is. 
Goodbye." That was one of the amusing incidents of the 
campaign and one of the happy things. Well, in that campaign, 
of course, Paul was a candidate. Paul McNutt was a candidate 
too and he and Fred Van Nuys...Now, my vote in the fal] 
election...See, | had my nomination before the state con- 
vention so | was the elder really of the candidates. And 
after they got nominated they didn't like the idea of 


having a woman on the ticket. They thought | was going to 


TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 


hold them back but that was May and | went along without... 
letting them alone and asking them to let me alone 'cause 

| had an idea of what | could do in the Sixth District 

and the national convention came and Roosevelt, of course, 
was the principal nominee and my daughter and | went to 

the convention but we didn't stay through it. We came 

back home and listened in on the radio and when it was 

made unanimous, we went along, went along on the convention, 
along on the campaign. Paul...Governor McNutt campaigned 
in the district quite a bit and so did Senator Van Nuys. 
And in '34...this is skipping a little bit at a time but 

| wanted to tell it, Paul was Governor and Shea Minton was 
the candidate for the Senate, we were having a meeting in 
Attica and after that we were going to have a torchlight 
parade in Crawfordsville for the candidate for the Senate 
and | had to be there. Well, it was known that Virginia and 
| were going along the road and it was about twilight. We 
saw this old flivver coming toward us with two men on 

the front seat, heard a report, a shot, | felt a sting on 
my cheek. And the bullet had come through the windshield 
of the car and caught me just...just missed my glasses 

by not even a fraction of an inch. Have | talked enough 
about the campaign and the politics? 

Not yet. You keep up. That's very good. It sounds 
interesting. 


Hum? 


It sounds interesting. What happened then after that? 


15 


In the car, the shot, you know? 

VJ: Well, nothing, | didn't tell it. 

TK: You didn't say anything? 

VJe No. | think the idea was to intimidate me and that | would 
go into Crawfordsville hysterical. 

TR: ) See. 

Vis Now, you know there was very little blood there. Now, it 
grazed my cheekbone, and did make a scratch. 

TK: | see. Maybe at this point we'd like to ask you what your 
appraisal was of Paul McNutt? As long as we're on the 
subject or have mentioned him, you... 

Vo: Well, of course, Paul and | weren't friends. He read me 
out of the party. 

TK: He did. 

VJ; Um-huh. 

TK: When was this now and how did this come about? 

VJ: This was about '34. | made the comment that we had an 
entirely Indiana delegation, thirteen Representatives and 
two Senators. That was '35 because Shea Minton had succeeded 
to the Senate by that time and | made the remark...! wrote 
and told Paul that if he would call our Indiana delegation 
together and work with us, let us work with him that we'd 
go so far. We could do so much for Indiana and they took 
it out as criticism of Paul, which it was. [Laughter] And 
he read me out of the party so that was a... 


TK: In other words, you were not on his team? 


VJ: Hum? 


TK: 


Vis 


TK: 


VJE 
TK: 
VJe 


You wouldn't necessarily say that you were on his team, 

in other words. You can't say that you were on his team? 
You were not friends? 

Oh, we just weren't friends. | never had any words with 
him. | never believed in fussing with anybody because 
after all, you're apt to say things you don't want to 

say if you get mad. 

What are your thoughts on the various changes that he 

made when he first came into office? 

You mean in the method of government? 

Yes, uh-huh. 

Well, | personally don't believe in the dole. | believe 
that everybody should be self-supporting and | think that 
when you make people subservient and try to give them a 
living, you're making a nation of paupers. That was the 
way | felt when the New Deal was enacted. The first 

bill that was presented to me to vote on after | was sworn 
in was the so-called Economy Act and | boomed when | was 
called, my name was called, | said, "No". | was scared 

to death, the clerk reading the roll, "Jenckes", "No", 

and the third time he called, | was supposed to be an 
ingenue without an ideal. The only thing that | had gotten 
out of the debate was the fact that it would cut the 
pension of the poor soldier fifteen percent and he was 
only getting thirty dollars a month anyway and | couldn't 
quite see how he could live on $25.50. And | had promised, 


the one time | was heckled in my whole first campaign was, 


"What would you do on veterans' legislation?" It was in 
a meeting over in West Terre Haute among the miners and | 
said, "I don't know. | don't know what your legislation 
is", but | said, "t'll promise you this that 1'1] never 
vote to take away any of the things that you now enjoy." 
And when they took that four dollars and a half off, | 
thought that was...and of course, it kind of never...the 
administration...Harry Hopkins and those people never did 
get adjusted to my ideas and my way. And before we were 
sworn in the organization of the state delegation was called 
by Arthur Greenwood, who was the dean of the Indiana Dele- 
gation. Now we were thirteen Democrats in the House but 
he didn't call me to that meeting. He called all twelve 
men. And the next morning | heard about it. They were 
called to decide on a member of the steering committee. 
Indiana and Michigan were supposed to work together under 
one steering headman. Michigan had twelve votes and we 
had thirteen so the next morning | met Joe Burns. (You 
know he was later speaker) in the hall, and | was giving 
Arthur Greenwood a piece of my mind. | told him what | 
thought of the crookedness of calling a meeting and not 
calling all of the Democrats. Well, Joe Burns came along 
just at that time and he took a hand too, he said, "Now, 
if you need any help, let me know, I'll be right there." 
They had the meeting that morning and Arthur Greenwood 
stood up and he said, "Congressmen and Congresswoman", 


and | stood up and |! said, "Now, Mr. Speaker, let me tel] 


you: When my vote is cast, nobody will know whether it was 
a woman or aman that cast it. And hereafter, I want to 

be considered the Representative of the People of the 

Sixth District and nobody else." Well, | cast my individual 
vote in the caucus. Of course, | always intended to vote 
with Indiana but | had to hold my own. 

TK: Well, let's get back, then, to the campaign. Did your, 
shall we say, opponents ever attempt to... 

VJ: Well, he said, you know we had these dinners in Rockville 
when the candidates for both tickets...all the tickets had 
to appear on the same platform at the same time and Fred 
Purnell...If it had been a time when we were together, he'd 
always made me go first and he made me go first in Rockville 
and | told about the extravagance of the agricultural commit- 
tee and the George Peek Committee, and how they paid 
ninety thousand dollars for their conference table and 
what all the wheat and corn that they were storing was 
going to amount to. And...but | didn't tell the story 
about Fred Purnell's family on the federal payroll. So 
when he came in and sat down right in front of me...and 
when | saw him he was rigging up a loud speaker. This 
meeting was out of doors and the man was very confusing 
and very...trying to talk before him so when | saw Fred 
Purnell] come in and the loud speaker wasn't quite ready, 
| said, "Oh, here's Mr. Purnell, 1'1] just sit down now 
and let him tell you because he wants to and he knows so 
much." Well, | sat down...1 had to sit on the platform 


and | sat down and Fred Purnell got up and said, "You know 


if you elect that woman to Congress, it']1 be two years 
before she knows where to hang her hat." Now, he says, 
"That woman", and he pointed over his shoulder at me, 

"Is a creature with a small fund of information and the 
curse of the nation today is the small fund of information 
that her citizens have." Well, the next time | got to my 
feet | said, "You know Fred Purnell says | don't know, 

you know | don't know and so do I know | don't know. Well, 
how would I? | haven't been down there sixteen years 
while the farmers were getting poorer all the time." | 
said, "But if you all elect me, |'11 go down and sit through 
the short session that | may learn as much from observa- 
tion maybe faster than if | had responsibility attached." 
Well, in the fall election...Oh, one interesting thing, 

my first campaign for the primary cost me around $550.00. 
My fall election cost around $1500.00. Now, that included 
my hotel bills when | had to go around the district and 
stay away from my apartment overnight. It included my 
daughter's expenses with me, our gasoline, and, of course, 
we didn't have any billboards but we did have cards to 
dispense and we did have to have advertising in the news- 
papers and those were the two, $550.00 and around $1500.00 
for the expense of my first campaign. Well, the story... 
and everybody knows | got it...elected on about the same 
majority, averaged the same majority as the President, 

the Governor and the Senator. And when the first of 
December came and the short session was about to be... 


their last "lame duck" session was about to be opened, my 


daughter and | started down to Washington. And on the 

way down, | saw this beautiful red hat in the window. Why 

| bought that red hat | don't know, but | did. It was a 
soft felt and it was a beautiful shade of red and | put it 
on. The Clerk of the House had written and said that if 

I'd come to his office he'd take Virginia up in the balcony 
and he'd take me on the floor. Well, of course, members- 
elect, or members who had been elected always have the 
courtesy of the floor. So | went to South Trimball's office 
and he took Virginia up in the gallery and then he took me 
on into the Democratic coatroom and he said, "You hang your 
coat here." And he didn't say a word about that red hat. 
And | went out on the floor with the red hat on, sat down... 
Joe Burns, Henry Rainey, Sam Rayburn, Bill Bankhead, all 
these old-timers who had known and followed the campaign, 
because | was an ingenue and they went on the principle 

that you couldn't defeat something with nothing, that | 

must have something back. So they all came up, "Virginia, 
let me show you where to put your hat." "Oh", I said, “Are 
we going to be here long? It's light, it's mot bothering 
me.'' And they let me sit there, why, | don't know. They 
let me sit there on the floor because there was an unwritten 
regulation that women members can't go on the floor of the 
House with a hat on. Well, after the session adjourned, 
this woman, a Mrs. Effie Wingo, who had succeeded her hus- 
band from Arkansas, came up. "jid like to know how you got 


by." "oh", I said, "What did 1 do | shouldn't have done?" 


2] 


TK: 
VJe 


TK: 
VJ: 


"Well", she says, "We're not allowed to wear our hats on 
the floor and here you sat through the whole session with 
your..." Well, Everett Watkins, who represented the 
Indianapolis News, had sent for me to come to the door and 
he heard her say that to me. "Oh", | said, "You know Fred 
Purnell said | wouldn't know where to hang my hat; it would 
take me two years to find out." Everett Watkins sent 

that cable around the world on an Associated Press telegram 
and I have a copy of a Tokoyo newspaper with it. [Laughter ] 
Were there many other women in the House? 

There were four or five. | was the first woman to go in 

on my own. Mary Norton, who had been there for a good 
while, was appointed by Frank Hague to finish an unexpired 
term in the beginning. Florence Kahn was succeeding her 
husband when he died. Edith Nourse Rogers had succeeded 
her husband. I've forgotten the other woman but during 

the period while | was there at the short session, Lady 
Astor came over from the British House of Lords and the 
five women in the House were going to have a luncheon for 
her in the Speakers! dining room and they told me | could 
come along if | wanted to. Well, of course, | wanted to 
but when we got there, they were humorous. Theyhad a high 
chair for me to sit in, and | ate my lunch from that high 
chair because | was the baby of the Congress. 

| see. 

At the same election a maiden woman from Kansas was elected, 
but she very shortly married the man that she defeated. 


[Laughter ] 
22 


VJ: 


TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 


VJ: 


Oh, let's see, now in '32, let's go off now to a little bit 
Of the... 

You asked a question there...United Mine Workers were always 
friends of mine. They...In the first place, we had a coal 
mine under the farm up here at the end of Thirteenth Street, 
the Submarine Mine, which was the first coal mine to tunnel 
under any river and the shafts were on the west side and we 
were on the east side of the river. Labor was...they weren't 
unfriendly but they didn't go out of their way in the first 
campaign, but afterwards they were friendly and wanted to 

be helpful. When we had the strike, that labor holiday at 
the Columbian Enameling and Stamping Mill, they wanted me 

to come home and be an arbitrator for them but the banks and 
the Columbian Enameling and Stamping Mill wouldn't let me. 
That sounds like an interesting story. Why wouldn't they 

let you come? 

They just wouldn't. 

They just wouldn't let you? 

Yes, Mr.[Timpannik?] at the banks knew that | knew what was 
crooked here. 

Oh, I see. 

And they wanted to get me out as much as possible. 

| see. Now, | think maybe we might go back for a minute 

to your campaign, and so forth. And I was wondering what 

was the support of the organized labor or was it an important 
element in your victory in '32, 134, 136? 

Well, organized labor was always a friend. They used to have 


meetings and help me in any way they possibly could. And 


TK: 


VJs 


TK: 


VJs 


TK: 
VJs 
TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


then as | said a little while ago when we had the labor 
holiday here they wanted me to come out and be the arbitrator 
and business or the banks and the Columbian Enameling and 
Stamping Mills wouldn't listen to it. 

Um-huh. Did you see...Did you notice if there was any more 
help maybe after '32, once you'd been in office? 

They kept on helping me or not opposing me because | was for 
their legislation and for helping them. | recognized that 
we'd have to have, and must have happy relations between 
industry and labor. 

| see. O.K. I think...it was interesting here that in 1932 
the Indiana delegation did not, of course, back FDR. 

No, there never was a particularly close connection between 
Indiana...Indiana voted against Roosevelt. The Sixth 
District was the one district in Indiana that instructed the 
delegates to the convention to vote for Roosevelt. 

You were then? 

Uh-huh. 

You did? 

Yeah. | had the nomination then and when...you see, you have 
to have the representatives nominated and all of the precinct 
workers elected before you can call a district convention. 

| see. 

You understand how our Indiana law works, I'm sure. When | 
first went to Washington, as | said, | was an ingenue and 

| carried on this campaign on my own. I'd gotten elected 

and | was sort of a queer person; | think nobody quite knew 
what | was going to do and when...after Roosevelt was elected 


| was invited to the White House more than all the rest of 


of the Indiana delegation put together. | was invited the 


first year | was a member to the Supreme Court dinner which 
was the greatest dinner of the government officials that the 
government has and | sat right next to Homer Cummings who 
was Attorney General and who was a very good friend of mine 
and he and |...and he got me to introduce the bill to make 
it mandatory that all people owning firearms register them 
the same as we register our automobiles. And you can not 
possibly imagine the opposition and where it came from -- 
lawyers and judges opposed to a simple thing like that. One 
man who was a judge over here in Boone County had three sons 
who were lawyers and | never got worse letters from people 
in my life than | got from those three protesting the idea 
of registering their shooting arms. Well, you only have to 
read the papers today to know the importance. The Indiana 
delegation didn't work together. Of course, maybe the fact 
that they didn't take me in was my fault because | was so 
interested in Indiana and in doing things. For instance, 
the first summer | was elected after | was sworn in, we were 
building a new bridge in Washington across Calvert Street 
and over Rock Creek and the delegate from that district de- 
cided he wanted to go on a junket. So he begged me to get 
Indiana Bedford Stone into that contract and the building... 
the bridge built with Indiana Limestone. Then another big 
controversy and this pertains to communism...The Sisters 

of Providence had the school at St. Ann's Parish and they 
were renting a shotgun house, a little frame two-story, 


e22 balea with a door in the front and a door in the back 


and a stairway coming down right by this great big pot- 
bellied iron stove. Well, if they'd ever had a fire there, 
not a nun and not a child would ever gotten out of that 
second story alive. Well, when | went to Washington the head 
of the convent came down and asked me to help. They had 
entered into a contract with the school board to rent a dis- 
used public school building right next door. The building 
had been stripped; it didn't have a desk, it didn't have any 
plumbing facilities, didn't have a furnace and every window 
was broken. The nuns were going to repair it and pay the 
school board $500.00 a year rent. The president of the 
schoo] board was a woman named Mrs. Henry Gratton Doyle, who 
was a member of St. Ann's Parish. The attorney for the school 
board was Henry Quinn, likewise a member of St. Ann's Parish 
but they allowed the Superintendent of Schools, Frank W. 
Balleau, who had at that time been run out of the schools 

of Boston, his resignation demanded before he left the room. 
He disappeared for four years and came back and was superin- 
tendent of the district schools. Well, he said that the 
Catholics had too much influence and he couldn't have that 
school. They had too many schools around Washington. Well, 
of course, the poor Sisters of Providence were very much 
distressed. They couldn't keep on in the school they had; 
their school was growing and it was a risk. So they came 

to me and I got a petition signed by about a hundred or a 
hundred and fifty members of the House, Jews, infidels, Gen- 
tiles, anybody that would sign it, I got to sign it. And 


then | presented it...asked for permission to present it to 


the school board and they weren't even polite enough to ask 
me to sit down, this woman who was a member of St. Ann's 
Parish. It went along and | stayed in Washington all that 
summer to get that school question straightened out and 
finally I got an appointment with the commissioner, Hazen, 
president of the commission, and | wasn't getting anyplace. 
Quinn was there, the lawyer for St. Ann's, the lawyer for 
the Sisters of Providence and me, and we went on talking 
and finally | was terribly down, "Oh", | said, "Mr. Commis- 
sioner, when America wakes up next winter and they're read- 
ing their morning paper and they see the holocaust, so many 
people in Washington, so many children burned to death, so 
many nuns burned to death, how are you going to feel when 
you know it's all your fault? | walked out with the school 
in my hands. [Laughter] But that was the beginning...that 
was in the early days of communism. This man Balleau was 
bringing to Washington to teach the District of Columbia 
school teachers how to teach character education to the 
indigent child a man named Charters, not the historian, but 
a man named Charters from Ohio State University, who was 
listed in the Faculty of the University as Liaison Officer 
for Moscow University. 

Can we skip to another subject just for a moment? Can you 
give us some kind of an idea of what the feeling of the 
people in your district for the New Deal; and this was a 
social change, you know? 

Well, of course, in the very beginning when you realize the 


situation tnat up here in Vermillion County around Clinton 


in the coal mines, those men hadn't had a nickel, | mean a 


nickel, in their pockets in months. And when public works 
was put out and that first Saturday night after they were paid 
and they walked...these coal miners who hadn't been able to 
get a job or anything, walked down Main Street in Clinton, 
they had their hands in their trousers! pockets and were 
rattling the nickels. Of course, that made them great 

friends of the New Deal. You take the farm program when 

they killed all the little pigs and cut down the crops, many 
of the farmers claimed that they had more pigs that they 

had killed than they could have laid out on their farms. 

Those programs built up the idea of...that the government 

owes support. My ideal: | owe my government support but my 
government owes me protection. The mail that I got...1! had 
the reputation of having the heaviest mail of anybody in 

the House. If | may go back a minute...that so-called Economy 
Act which was Roosevelt's answer to his promise to curtail 
expenses...and he automatically was to cut off fifteen percent 
from every article of expenditure in the government. Well, 

| knew | couldn't run my house that way and then as | said 

a minute ago, my promise to the veteran not to take away 
anything that he had then, made me say, "No", but the...| 
stayed in Congress long enough to vote for the repeal of 
every single provision in the Economy Act...it took...1 was 
supposed to get ten thousand dollars a year when | was elected. 
I| was supposed to have five thousand dollars a year clerical 


hire and a hundred and twenty-five dollars a year for 


stationery allotment, no telephone and no telegrams. | was 
allowed one ticket from Terre Haute to Washington and re- 
turn during each session at the rate of ten cents a mile 

so you can... 

TK: | was going to say, as indicated by your mail what issues 
you think were of basic importance to your constituents 
back... 

VJ: Well, the only issues people wrote about were wanting jobs, 
the post offices and seeing what they could get. There were 
very few at that time, very few informed letters and 
suggestions, and, of course, | got a great deal of mail 
against the bill to register firearms. That probably was 
one of the biggest issues that we had. 

TK: You got a lot against it? 

VJ: Yeah, against it and they're not going to get anyplace with 
it this time either. 

TK: Well, my...often some other points too here are...what, 
other than direct correspondence, what channels of communi- 


cation did you have with your constituents? | mean how did 
you contact them or get to them? 


VJ: With who? 

TK: With your constituents -- newsletter, radio, newspaper... 
| mean how did you get to them? 

VJ: Well, everything. 

TK: Uh-huh. You used everything? 


VJ: l, well, we didn't have radio so much then. The only time 


| had radio was when i'd come out here to Terre Haute. We 


990 


didn't have it from Washington. 
TK: Right, but you could talk to them when you came out here. 
VJ: Yes. Well, I had to depend upon the letters and as | said 


a minute ago, my mail was considered the heaviest in the 


House. | was interested and | tried never to turn anyone 
down... 

TK: | see. 

VJ: If they asked for help, even the Ogalala Sioux Indians were 


my good friends. 

TK: These people asking you for help, were they primarily 
applicants for jobs or what were they... 

VJ Primarily asking for jobs. You see...oh, you have no idea. 
A man dropped dead on the street here from starvation in '32. 
Well, the situation was terrible around here. 

TK: And they expected or hoped that you would find them some 
kind of work. 

VJ: They wanted jobs and, of course, all the fuss for the post 
offices, this doesn't need to be on record. All the fuss 
for the post offices...if you gave it...you had to give it 
to one and everybody else then turned out to be your enemy. 

TK: | Um-huh, um-huh. What was your relationship with the press 
in your district. If you wanted the space on a particular 
subject, could you get an interview or could you get edi- 
torial support for something... 

VJ: Well, anybody that wanted to ask me any question they were 


most welcome to do it. Most of the press was friendly. Some 


of them were very much opposed to me. 


30 


TK: | see, because you were a woman or...or because of what you 
stood for? 

VJ: Well, because they couldn't control me. 

TK: | see. 

VJ: Well, you see, as | said now, you take the Terre Haute Tribune 
and Bill . He belonged to the school that wanted 
to control. They wanted the things in their own hands and when 
| got that eighteen million dollars, which is another story, 
and it was allocated and | came out here for the announcement 
in the paper. And the next morning Tom O'Mara...!s this 
being recorded? 


TK: I don't think so. 


VJ: Tom O'Mara called me into his office and he held up his hands. 
"Gee, Virginia, eighteen million dollars is a hell of a lot 
of money." I'm going to tell part of this story, he asked 
me, "Who's going to control it?" Well, | said, "Tom, if | 
have my way, the Army Engineers are going to boss the job." 
And that day they organized a group to go down to Washington 


and tell the Chief of Engineers we didn't want their control. 


Now, I'm not going to mention who some of the men were that 


went. 
TK: All right. 


VJ: And there's a printed record in the Government Printing Office 


of that hearing of those men before the Board of Army 


Engineers. 
TK: Uh-huh. 


VJ: So my story can be very well proven. 


TK: | see. Skipping around a bit again, who were some of the most 


Outstanding delegates with you during your terms in office? 
Can you name any of them that you... 

VJ: Well, my best friends in the House of Representatives were 
Speaker Henry Rainey, Speaker Joe Burns and Bill Bankhead 
was the salt of the earth and Speaker Sam Rayburn, all of 
those men excepting Henry Rainey came into the Sixth District 
to campaign for me. And when Mr. Bankhead was here we had 
a rally at the gymnasium. He was kept on the platform 
sitting there until after 11:00 o'clock before he was ever 
introduced. Tom O'Mara was just as drunk as anything. 

TK: Were there some of the others? Have you got stories that 
you might be able to tell about some of your experiences with 
some of these delegates in Washington at the beginning any- 
way at the first... 

VJs Well... 

TK: ...getting to know them or... 

VJ: I was chairman of this...! was a member of the District of 
Columbia committee, the Committee on Mines and Mining. | 
was offered a place on Agriculture but when | found what was 
to be the policy of the administration, | didn't take it 
because | couldn't go along with it. I don't believe in 
prosperity by curtailment. | think our trouble with our 
agriculture is not overproduction but it's mal-distribution. 
| have no ideas to suggest as to a better way to distribute 
our crops but that's what's got to be found in order that 
the farmer can get his own and that the people can get what 
they need to eat. On the Education Committee | came into 


the effort to fight communism and that was the thing that 


29 


had the green light no matter what happened. No matter 

what | was doing if there was something that came up that 

the communists wanted | had to get out and fight it. For 
instance, {| introduced a bill in '35 to make it mandatory 
to display the American flag. Now when Hoover was President 
and all those new buildings were put up along Pennsylvania 
Avenue, the flag poles were put at a 45 degree angle. Well, 
the American method of displaying the flag is head-up, 
pointed to the sky. And | stood in a window overlooking 

the federal buildings on Pennsylvania Avenue one day and 

| didn't see a single American flag flying any place so | 
introduced this bill and | had a very difficult time 
getting...it was handed to the Judiciary Committee of which 
Hatton Sumners of Texas was chairman. And he didn't want 

to grant us a hearing but finally the women made a good 

deal of a fight...1 mean the Ku Klux Klan women and the 
women in organizations got after it and we finally got a 
hearing and Julia Dent Grant [?], President 
Grant's daughter, was one of my first witnesses. And the 
next day now... and you know she was a pretty good Repub- 
lican but the next day she sent out ten thousand letters 

to Republican women asking them to vote for me. Well, it 
took a long time and finally the communists took the thing 
up. | tried to get a flag pole put on the Supreme Court 
building on the top. Now, those...there are two forty 
thousand dollar bronze flag poles standing in front. They're 


beautiful but in the early days when the Indians were around 


33 


here our flag wouldn't have been protected at all if it 

was outside of the building. That's the way our colonial 
ancestors started the flag from a pole on top of the 
building. Well, these two flag poles were there and | 
tried to get the judges...first ! tried to get the architect 
to put a flag pole on top of the building and he wouldn't 
even answer my letter. | then appealed to the judges, the 
justices. They didn't answer my letter so after about 

five or six weeks, | made the letters public. And 

[?], who was editor of the Washington tabloid, came out 
with a little paragraph in the middle of the front page. 
"Evidently, Mrs. Virginia Jenckes, (D-Ind.) has forgotten 
that the display of the American flag has gone to the limbo 
of forgotten things." Well, that was pretty bad but the 
communists picked it up and they telephoned to the office 
very frequently and they told my daughter that | didn't 
need to worry about the flag pole, those flag poles in 
front of the Supreme Court building; that I'd see their 
flag, the hammer and sickle flying from those flag poles. 
Well, in about a month the telephone rang at 7:00 o'clock 


in the morning and the fireman said, "Mrs. Jenckes, we're 


coming for you." Well, | said, "What for?" | said, "| 
can't put the fire out." "well, we want you to see us do 
it." And then they came for me and here were these, one 


on each flag pole, claw and hammer tied at the top of these 
forty foot flagpoles. That was what the communists had 
done. Of course, we put up the aerial ladder and burned 

them down and had a grand time doing that. But that was back 


TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 
VJs 
TK: 
VJ: 


in '34 or '35, '35. Now, this... couldn't waken people 
then but they've got to wake up today to what this sub- 
versive element is trying to do to our country. 

| think we'll come back to that in a little while. We can 
just come...just for one moment here, | was wondering 

if you can give an opinon on what was the effectiveness 
of the Indiana delegation in various committees at the 
time. Were they very effective at all or not very 
effective? 

| don't want to say so. 

You don't want to? All right. 


Listen, don't ask me to say derogatory things. 


Uh-huh. 0O.K. 


They weren't any good. Now, Louis Ludlow from Indianapolis 
was chairman of the Sub-committee on Appropriations for the 
Post Office and he never turned anybody down and he was 

a very helpful member to the individual but he couldn't 
speak to save his soul. Now, he wrote very well. He was 

a newspaperman, you know, and he was a loss to the Indiana 
delegation. He just hadn't had much when he went down 
there. None of them had the background that | had. | mean 
they didn't have that intelligence back of them, Gene Crowe 
from Bedford and Finly Gray from...! think he was from 
Marion and a Dr. Larrabee and Arthur Greenwood had been 
there twenty-odd years. He was the man who called the 
meeting and left me out and they didn't have...they weren't 


sought after much. Larrabee was the man that was chosen 


30 


as steering committee man from the two states but it took 


my vote to get it for him. 


TK: And that concluded the first day's taping session with 


4 Mrs. Jenckes. 


` om & - 


GYA 


This is the second interview with Mrs. Virginia Jenckes, former 


Congresswoman from the Sixth District of Indiana. 


TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


Did you have any special problems either at home or in 
Washington deriving from the fact that you were a lady 
Congressman? 

Well, the only trouble that | had was with our own delega- 
tion. Our Indiana delegation ignored me in the beginning 

and had a conference, a caucus without calling me. But 

they were told in no uncertain terms by Joe Burns and Speaker 
Rainey that that didn't go; that they never did things 

like that in the Democratic caucuses and otherwise, | never 
found any handicap as | told Arthur Greenwood when | was 
fussing about having been left out that when my vote was 
counted, when any vote was counted nobody knew whether that 
vote was cast by a man or a woman. It was the result that 
counted. And that was the thing that | wanted to have done. 
In other words you had no special problems at all? 

| had no special problems. The leading men were extremely 
helpful and gave me many opportunities to be of service. 

And one day | was invited down to lunch at the White House 
one Saturday. Mrs. Roosevelt was entertaining sixty o* the 
leading Democratic women from the country. And a bill was 
under discussion and subject to vote on the floor. And the 


Speaker telephoned the White House and the White House 


A ke |} 


TK: 
Vise 


TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 


sent me up to the capitol to vote in the White House car 


and bring me back and let me finish the lunch. And when | 
got up, when we got back, and after lunch and speeches were 
being made, Mary Dewson, who was Mrs. Roosevelt's great 
friend and she had been secretary of the national committee, 
stood up and she said, "Women have made a great deal of 
progress under Franklin Roosevelt and it's time now for us 
to think of having a woman as President. Now we have in our 
midst such a woman, she's wonderful, she's capable, she's 

got everything she needs." She went on talking like that 
for about five minutes and sat down. Mrs. Roosevelt stood 
up and said, "Hee Hee Hee, Hoo Hoo Hoo". Didyou ever hear 
her laugh on the telephone? 


No. 


So, as | say, | had the Speaker...| was out here in the midst 
of the campaign and when Sam Rayburn was Speaker and he had 
a petition he wanted signed, he telephoned out here for me 


one morning at 7:00 o'clock to catch a plane and come down 


and sign the petition. | drove to Indianapolis, caught a 
plane, got to Washington at 2:00 o'clock, was on the floor 
for a half an hour. | didn't even go over to my office, 


caught the plane back and was back here at 9:00 o'clock. 


Hum. That's really something. 


It's satisfaction to feel that people had that much confidence 


in me. 
Well. | think you're correct in saying that you didn't have 
9 


any real problems then. 


Ve 
TK: 


VJ: 


| didn't have any trouble with anybody. 

Yeah. Well, that's good. As a second point here, we'd like 
to talk about the reciprocal trade agreements of 1934. You 
were opposed to these agreements and we'd like your reasons 
as to why you were against such agreements. 

Well, in the first place things were coming into this country. 
Our army was being fed by...with beef from Argentina when we 
couldn't sell our own cows to the market. Out in the Dakotas 
and out west where the army was encamped were these great 
pens marked "Argentine beef". You see the best beef at 

that time was packed in Argentina because they didn't have 
freezing facilities and if a ship left with good beef in the 
larder they had to do something with it because they couldn't 
keep it until the next ship so they canned it. And then our 
army bought it. Well, | was objecting and on the floor one 
day | was talking and | said | didn't...of course, Argentine 
beef was shy in calcium. Their pastures down there don't 
have as much calcium as ours do. So I said | didn't see why 
we were developing a weak-kneed army. And then from another 
viewpont when the reciprocal trade treaty was put into effect 
_..before that the Davis gardens, which at that time was the 
biggest under-glass acreage in the world, are here in Terre 
Haute and they grew tomatoes and cucumbers and had...all 
through the depression they had paid better than twenty-five 
hundred dollars a year income tax. They were employing about 
That was pretty good for that time and 


five hundred women. 


when the reciprocal trade treaty came in and this fruit, 


39 


TK: 
Nils 


TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 


cucumbers and tomatoes, mushrooms and all were allowed to 
come in from Puerta Rico and Cuba free of duty and our people 
had shipped a consignment of stuff down to New York, instead 
of being able to ask the prices they needed, they had to meet 
the price from Cuba. Now, Cuban products were developed... 
they didn't use commercial fertilizer. They used human fer- 
tilizer and slave labor, peon labor and that, our people 

had to use commercial fertilizer and pay a good...for that 
time a fair wage. Well, of course, the Davis people had a 
terrible time. They just pretty nearly went broke. They're 
still in business but they're not doing anything like they 
did before that. And those two items alone would have con- 
vinced me that we needed to think about ourselves. 

What type of opposition did you run into as far as yourself? 
Well, all of the administration, Agriculture and State 
Departments, the White House. Of course, they were under 
cover with their opposition but they objected to what | was 
trying to do and we made a big fight for these Davis people 
but we never did get their stuff where they could get it 
down there satisfactorily any more. 

What kind of opinion did you have from the people in your 
area, constituency? 

They didn't know. They weren't interested. 

They weren't interested? 

Of course, the Davis people were. And | didn't get any 

help from the Chamber of Commerce. You know, | don't know 
why people were particularly lethargic and uninterested in 
things, even things...Now, that concerned everybody in 


Terre Haute. Mr. Davis, the originator of the hot houses, 


came here from lowa. After looking over many, many places, 

he found more days of sunshine here in Terre Haute than 
anyplace else. And he came here because of that and be- 

cause of the railroad facilities and you would have thought 
that Terre Haute needed that industry. You would have thought 
that the people would have gone to the rescue but nobody... 
nobody ever called up and said they would be glad to help 

me. And | didn't get any help from the indiana delegation. 

TK: This was what | was going to ask you next. What type of... 
you didn't get any... 

VJ: No, they didn't care. 

THK: You didn't...nothing at all. 

VJ: They were...well, it meant something to the whole state 'cause 
other industries were up against the same thing. You take 
this Argentine beef. All the army beef...think of the 
army buying that when they were killing and slaughtering 
the pigs and steers here. 

TK: What would you use as arguments as far as the nation goes 
in the reciprocal treaty? What arguments for the whole 
nation not to have... 

VJ: Well, I don't think they had very many. 

TK: Uh-huh. No arguments. No arguments at all? Well | think 
if we have no more on that subject...can you think of 
anything else that you wanted to add to that at all? 


VJ: No, those were the two fights that | had. 


TK: Um—huh. 


VJ: You see, that was the only thing that really concerned the 


41 


TK: 


Vii 


TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 


Sixth District. 

| see. 

The Davis Gardens...and the son-in-law, Keith Owen, came down 
to Washington a number of times and we went before the 
Agricultural Committee. | don't mean the committee in the 
House; | mean in the Department of Agriculture. But Henr y 
Wallace was set on anything that was un-American. 

Um-huh. I see. And that's what... 

Now, while | make that statement | want to clarify it. He 
afterwards came out with an article in the paper, after he'd 
been a candidate for President on the Communist ticket, he came 
out and said that he realized he'd made a mistake. | wanted 
to bring that in right there. 

Well, 0.K., now, we have no more comments as far as recipro- 
cal trade, no more coments? 

No. 


Do you think that... 


No, there wasn't anything in connection with communism and 
the reciprocal trade. It was just simply...of course, Henry 
Wallace was...when he was...When he was Secretary of Agri- 
Culture, he was a communist and it was...The development of 
the first communist cells were in the Department of Agriculture. 
That's where Alger Hiss and Whitaker Chambers got their 
training. 

| think the next point that we want to cover is, did you feel 
that the U.S. recognition of the Soviet Union late in 1933 


was desirable and perhaps you might also mention was the House 


involved in any way in this? 
yJ; | was decidedly opposed to the recognition of the Soviet 
Union. Before | ever got to Washington | was opposed to 
it. And that summer that...Roosevelt's campaign, this 
woman in Washington who had great social position and political 
influence went to the Amtorg Association in New Nork. You 
know they were the distributing agency for all Russian caviar 
and vodka, and Russia made beautiful linens and things lee 
that and this Amtorg Association under that guise had... 
did business in New York, but they were also putting out an 
awful Jot of propaganda. And this woman in Washington is 
dead now, but she went to the head of this Amtorg and she 
said, "Now, | feel that our country should recognize you, 
your country, and | have a great position in Washington, both 
social and political", which she did have and she said, "I'm 
perfectly willing and want to use it to that end to get you 
recognized but 1'11 have to be reimbursed, have to be paid." 
So they agreed, the Amtorg man and this lady on fifteen 
thousand dollars, a three thousand dollar retainer fee and 
twelve thousand dollars when, as and if, we recognized the 
Soviet Union. The three thousand dollars were three one 
thousand dollar bills and she couldn't use them. Thousand 
dollar bills are very hard to get rid of so she put them in 
She couldn't even put them in her bank 


her safety deposit. 


account. She put them in her safety deposit and Ickes came 
along and through his efforts and a letter, the recognition 
of the Soviet Union was accomplished. Well, I was in the 


bank, in the Riggs National Bank in Washington talking with 


the vice-president and a woman friend and | told the story 

I've just told you about this three thousand dollars with a 
little addition which I'1] add, and the woman didn't believe 

me. Mr. Carr, the vice-president, said, "Oh, yes, it's true. 
That happened in this bank." When this woman kept after the 
Amtorg for her twelve thousand dollars, after about a year 

they gave her twelve one thousand dollar bills. And she 

waited some little time and finally, wanted something badly. 

She went to her safety deposit and took out one and took it 

up to the teller in the bank, handed it to him and asked 

him to change it for her. He looked at it, both sides, and 
said, "Where did you get this?" And she didn't hear him. 

He said, "Wait a minute." And he went away, about fifteen 
minutes he was back and he said, "The president wants to see 
you." And she went to see him and he said, "Where did you get 
this?" Well, she had to tell him. He said, "It's counterfeit." 
The first three were good because they knew they hadn't 

gotten what they wanted, but the last twelve were bad. When 
Senator Borah, whom you know by name, William A. Borah, died, 
Mrs. Borah, the Senator and Mrs. Borah were living at 2100... 
2101 Connecticut, which was the swankest address in Washington 
at the time. And Mrs. Borah thought she didn't have enough 
money to continue to live there, but when they opened his 
accounts, his safety deposit and things, they found five 
hundred thousand dollars in one thousand dollar bills. That 
was the man that had the confidence of the American people. 


When | went to the Interparliamentary Union they had gone to 


Ly 


Russia on a paid trip. The Russians paid them and paid all 
of their expenses and gave them this trip to the Soviet 
Union. They offered me one. 

TK: They did? 

VJ:  Um-—huh. 

TK: They offered you a trip, did they? Did they offer you a 
trip? 

VJ: They offered me two hundred thousand dollars and a free trip 


for myself and daughter to Russia if I'd stop my fight against 


communi sm. 
VJ: I've never been to Russia and I've never seen two hundred 


thousand dollars. 

TK: You might, just for a second, tell me...tell us what the 
Interparliamentary Union was. 

VJ: Well, Grover Cleveland in 1885, 1895, when he was President, 
organized the Interparliamentary Union. At that time it had 
about forty of the civilized nations of the world. To be 
eligible for membership one had to have been elected to the 
congress or the parliament of their own country, and, of 
course, when | was there in '37, none of these new nations 

had come into it. The United States was the biggest country 

that belonged. Russia didn't belong. 1| don't know whether 


they do now or not. | have forgotten, but our Congress had 


never sent a woman before and | was very anxious to go. | 
wanted to see what was going on, what the world was and we 


met...this session was in Paris. We met in the senate wing 


LE 


of the Luxembourg and one afternoon...! was about the only 
one...there were sixteen...there were thirty-one delegates 
from our Congress, sixteen ...there were thirty-one dele- 
gates from our Congress, sixteen from the Senate and fifteen 
from the House but...and Barkley was president of our American 
branch. Most of the members...well, they...most of them had 
the headache and they didn't go very often. But | rarely... 
| don't think | missed a session because in the first place, 
| could understand enough French and most of the translation 
was in French. And then | made a little speech and |, among 
other things, asked the delegates to tell] their wives and 
sisters and sweethearts that we American women were tired 

of furnishing fodder for cannons and that we wanted peace 
and wanted the world to live together. And when | finished 
and took my seat the speaker of the session came down and 
thanked me and said it was the best speech. Now, I've got a 
record of part of that. | haven't got the record of the 
speaker coming down to speak to me, but I've got a record 

of my speech in the record of that session of the Inter- 
parliamentary Union. And while we were there the Spain, the 
troubles in Spain were just starting and the Spaniards, the 
Communist Spaniards had gotten into the chamber over there 
and elected their own delegates and they locked the door and 
kept the other people out. Well, both delegations came 

to Paris and believe you me, they fought like Kilkenny cats. 
You weren't safe going out because they were shooting and 
things like that. And the Italians were doing the same 


thing, they were the Communists and the Democrats, | think, 
g 


TK: 


VJe 


is what they called themselves, were fighting each other 

for seats and recognition on the floor and one afternoon 

in particular, one of the Italians offered a resolution which 
was very communistic and somebody else didn't like it and 
they took out their guns and commenced shooting and you 
should have seen me get down in the pigeon-hole under the 
desk. But the guards came and they didn't let it last long. 
But that was a beginning. They had never had anything like 
that before in the Interparliamentary Union, this fighting. 
It was a beautiful experience. It was something you'd 
remember and something to be proud of that | was able to go 
and while my message didn't carry far, at the same time it's 
on record that we didn't want any more war. 

Right. Is there anything more that you want to add to that 
at all about the Interparliamentary Union, nothing else? 

| don't know of anything interesting. After | left the 
conference, these people who had had the deck chairs next 

to mine on going over, had invited me, they were driving... 
they were Gulf Oil people and they were driving a Lincoln 

12 and they invited me to join them. They wanted me to go 
right from the boat but | had an official passport and | had 
this duty in Paris but | joined them in Munich and from '34 
| was on Hitler's mailing list. | got all of the propaganda 
that he sent out and he wrote me a little letter thanking me 
and congratulating me on the fight | was making against 

He didn't know that | didn't care whether it was 


communism. 
Communism or naziism or what...so long as it was un-American 


47 


and that man that worked with him that died over here in 
Baltimore recently, but not so very recently but lately was 
quite...he was in the office once. I went to Washington 

a local person. | thought that we...l was an isolationist. 
| thought America was here with the ocean on both sides; 
that we didn't need anybody. We could produce everything 
here that we needed but spices. Well, it didn't take me long. 
| now number five Chinese children who call me great-grand- 
mother and their families...their parents! families were all 
liquidated by the Chinese Communists. | number among my 
friends Hungarians, who were refugees first from Hitler and 
the Germans and then after the communists took over, others 
got out. And it's quite...keeps you alive. 

Right, 1'1] bet it does. You mentioned something about the 
fact that the Russians or the communists offered some money 
to you. How did they go about doing this? | mean... 

They went to the clerk in my office. 

: They just actually came right up and... 

Came right out. 


... and asked you? 


: Well, after Ickes brought about the recognition, they opened 


the Soviet Embassy. They never had anything there | wasn't 


invited to and if they had a dinner, Troyanovsky was the first 


ambassador and Troyanovski had been in power in this country, 


in the blowing up, in the explosion of the river towns in 


New Jersey in World War I. Troyanovsky's wife was eligible 


for membership in the DAR. [Laughter] | started to say 


everything they did at the embassy, they always invited me 


and if it was a dinner, | was always seated next to Troyanov- 
sky on his right and Sumner Welles on my left. And the two 
of them just played communism for a fare-ye-well to me. | 
said to the ambassador, | said, "Well, Mr. Ambassador, 
you know Russia can have any kind of government they want 
and | won't interfere, but", | said, "you promised, your 
country promised if we would give you recognition and admit 
you that you wouldn't do what you're doing." 
TK: Why did the communists, shall we say, pick on you, that is... 
VJ: Well, because | was the most active one in the House. 
TK: You were the most active? 
VJ: | was the most active. Well, in the first place, | don't 
know whether I've mentioned what was going on ... yes, | did 
this morning in the district schools, the effort to spread 
communism and to gain these poor children...and...they were... 
| was...they introduced a resolution, tied it to an appropria- 
tion bill, making it mandatory that every teacher before she 
could get her salary, should swear that she had not advocated 
communism that month. You never heardsuch a rumpus in all your 
life. Now we didn't have an "aye and nay" vote; we had a 
teller vote on that. You know what a teller vote is? The 
Speaker appoints a Democrat and a Republican, one of each 
party, we'll say; and they stand in the middle aisle, one 
on either side. At first he calls for the "ayes" and the 
people who are in favor of whatever's under discussion go 
And they are counted one at a time. It beats 


through. 
counting by hand and yet it doesn't put anybody on record. 


TK: | see. Right. 


Vise 


TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


Now, at that particular time that I'm speaking of and this 
resolution that we were trying to get through to stop 
communism in the district schools, Munsey's Magazine came 

out with an article on "The Commonwealth College in Ardeena, 
Kansas". It's a small college. [| don't know where Ardeena 
is, but it's in Arkansas and the parents of some of the 
children issued a warrant for the arrest of their own 
children and the president of the college. The sheriff 

went with the warrant and the president opened the door. And 
the sheriff handed it to him. He said, "Come in. There they 
are." On the floor, on mattresses, were twenty-five mattress- 
es with a boy and a girl on each mattress. That's the rea- 
son the parents had...And all of this literature that...] 


don't know whether your library has that old copy of Munsey's 


but I've got one. That's why | would so much rather have 


you down than have this down in Washington because these 
things...|'ve got a lot of the proof down there and then 


it's another thing just to sit up here and talk it like 


this. 

Yeah, that's right. 

Now, going back to the communists, Harry Hopkins was one 
of them. 

He was? 


Oh, yes, decidedly. And he was...when he first came to 


Washington, the first dinner that | was invited to at the 
White House, he was sent, he and Mrs. Hopkins came in the 


White House car for me to go down to the dinner and that 


was before Diana was born, just a little while. 


TK: That would be what date? 


VJ: Huh? 
IK: Approximately what date would that be? 
VJ: eee 


TK: About '33. 

VJs '34. Yeah. 1l was elected late in '32 so it would be '33 
or '34, maybe '33 but Diana wasn't here. But coming home 
Mrs. Hopkins said, "Harry, if I'm to go to the White House, 
l'll have to have a new fur coat." And | never heard a man 
curse a woman in my life as he cursed her, with all the 
foul language, "How do you think | can get you a fur coat 
when I'm a poor...nothing but a poor social service worker?!! 
Well, it was very uncomfortable for me to sit there in the 
back seat with them, but anyway another time that he expressed 
himself, we had an appropriation bill up for WCA[?] and 
Harry was in the Speaker's office, private office, while 
the debate was going on the floor and some of us were sent 
in there once in awhile to talk to him and keep him from 
being lonseome. And when my turn came to be one of them, 
there were about ten other members in the room, and | said, 


"Well, Harry, I'm going to support this appropriation but 


I'd like to know who's going to have the say in the Sixth 
District as to who shall get the benefits of the labor." 
"It's none of your God damned business." Now, this isn't 
pretty language but it isn't mine. "All under the sun that 


Congress is good for is to appropriate the money and then 


51 


TKR: 


VJ: 


TK: 


Vos 
TK: 
VJs 
TK: 
VJ 


go home and let me spend it as | God damn please." Now, 

that was the man that for years was running the country. 

He was A-] with Mrs. Roosevelt. So, as | Say, | don't 

like to use those words but after all, | can't give it 

unless | say them, unless | tell you. 

That's right. Tell it the way it was and the truth, that's 
right- 

If I just said that Harry said that all Congress was good 

for was to go home and let me spend the money as | want to, 
it would sound very frail, wouldn't it? 

Yes, it would. It wouldn't mean as much. Now, that's right. 
| think we'll go back once again to the first part of this... 
In other words, you felt that the recognition of the Soviet 
Union right at the beginning was undesirable. You didn't want 
to have anything to do with it? 

| didn't ever want to have anything to do with it. 

Oh. 

You can't trust them. 

And you knew this. | mean you could see this. 

| knew it. Before | ever went to Washington, Hamilton Fish 
had had a hearing, had conducted a hearing and had it printed 
on the communist effort and somehow that thing came into 

my hands and | read every word of it so that when | went to 
Washington, | was prepared for a great deal. And then as | 
say, | saw this thing and | saw this money distributed. Prior 
...While | was in Congress, | knew what was going on and 


prior to '39 better than seventy-nine million dollars a year 


52 


was brought into this country for propaganda purposes. Well, 
now who gets it? You can depend upon the Italians and the 
Russians and the Germans; England did a little bit; France 
did a speck; but the big aggressors and the enemies of the 
country were Italy and Russia and Germany and Japan. Now 
they're all clever, every last one of them. And who did 
they go after with this money. The school teachers, the 
newspapers and the preachers. Those are the three most 
underpaid lines of endeavor that we have in this country. 
Those were the ones. That's the reason that you found so 
much communism in the district in public schools, or in 
colleges, that's the reason you find it in the colleges to- 
day. Look at the spies, look at this thing that's just 
come out about the association of...the science foundation. 
{| don't know whether you've seen that in the paper but | 
expect you have. Now, those are the people that are getting 
the benefit of this money that's coming in from other 
countries. Of course, Japan isn't doing any of it now, but 
why they ever let that Japanese situation grow the way they 
did. They knew...and when a man like George Marshall can 
occupy that kind of position and the next week not remember 
where he was that Saturday night... 

TK: What... 

VJ: | made a speech in November after | came back from the 
Interparliamentary Union. The State Department and the 
Navy gave me information that they wanted spread. So | 
got an invitation to speak to the Daughters of the American 


Revolution. At that time | belonged to the society. 


Ex-Lieutenant Commander Farnsworth was serving a sentence 
in Atlanta for having sold our secrets of defense to 

Japan. And the time was ripe for him to be paroled and 
Roosevelt wanted to parole him. You could fairly go out 

in the parks and pick the Japanese money off the trees that 
they were spreading to create a demand for Farnsworth's 
parole. Well, the State and Navy didn't want him paroled 
so they asked me to make a speech that would put out some 
information...Now, this was six weeks before the Panay 

was sunk. The Panay, do you remember, was sunk about four 
years before Pearl Harbor and it was sunk in Chinese waters 
by Japanese. And | made this speech to the DARs and told 
them about how the Japanese had made a traitor of this fine 
American citizen and why did they, if they were so friendly, 
why did they want to be...know our way of defense? Now, 
the thing he sold...He played poker at the Japanese Embassy. 
He'd take his brief case with his papers in it and always 
won at the poker table, check his brief case with his over- 
coat and while he was playing poker just as Senator Borah 
played pinocle on the top floor of the Russian Embassy and 
always won, Farnsworth was playing it at the Japanese 
Embassy and always winning. And while he was playing these 
papers would be microfilmed. Well, he was found guilty 

and | told the DARs that and asked them for a resolution to 
ask the President not to parole him. Do you believe it, 
that | was damned for everything you could think of. Now, 

| said, | was a DAR but would they support me? 


| was, as 


ch 


TK: 
VJ: 


No. And that night on his radio program, Bob Carter came 

out, Bob Carter, do you know him? Well, he was a comentator 
in the, oh, from all through the '30's. He claimed to be 
British and he spoke with a very strong British accent. 

His father was British. His father and mother were British, 
but theywere sent from Liverpool to Baku, Russia, by the 
chamber of commerce and that's where Bob was born. That's 
how he got his name and he was always pro-Russian and pro- 
Japanese and the night after | made this speech he devoted 
his whole fifteen minutes to me. He just said that | was 

a sob-sister; that it showed that women weren't fit for 
public office and that | wanted to chop down those beauti- 
ful cherry trees and oh, a lot of poppyrot like that. Well, 
of course, | had the privilege of an hour on the floor and 

| could say anything in that and not be sued for it. So | 
got the Immigration Department to give me his record. He 

had never taken out citizenship in this country until I think 
the early '30's. Anyway he had made these numerous trips 
back and forth bringing Japenese into the country illegally 
through Tampico, Mexico. And he was a communist from the 


very word, go. The communists finally ended his life. 


Is that right? 
They fed him strychnine or some kind of slow poison but after 


and oh, you know, at the time that I'm speaking of, he had 


the contract with General Foods, a marvelous contract at 


that time, loads of money in it for broadcasting. Well, 


after | got through with him, he lost that contract and he 


never got another one. He'd get one and then I'd send them 


TR: 


VJ: 


TK: 


Vole 
TK: 
MJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 


a copy of his national record and then he wouldn't get it 
renewed. He never got one for over three months at the 
time after that, but he was as wholly un-American and as 

| tell you, he was coming in and backwards and forwards and 
he never supported his wife. | think he had two sons, 
never supported his wife and his children until after the 
Roosevelts came in and then in the last few years they lived 
in luxury until he got to going too strong and | was a sob- 
sister. [Laughter] 

But that was it, huh? 

So you see my Congressional experience, you asked if it was 
controversial... 

Yes, | can see your point. Now, can you tell me how much 


of the House was involved in the recognition of the Soviet 
Union? | mean... 


None. 


| mean, no one? 


No, you see in the first place, the House has no voice 


according to the Constitution. Peace treaties must be rati- 


fied by the Senate. 
Right. 
The House has nothing to do with it. The House has no 


voice in foreign policy. The Senate Foreign Relations 


Committee is the thing. 


| see What was the...What | sort of meant was, what was 


the feeling of some of the other House members besides 


yourself on this... 


56 


VJ: 
TR: 
Vedie 


TK: 
VJ: 


They didn't say anything. 

They...not too many of them said? 

Well, when | made the speech against him, I had a full 

House. 

Well, you couldn't find anyone else to back you? 

You know, people were just unconscious of it and it's queer. 
Now there was a man named Andy May from Paducah, Kentucky, 
who had been there a good many years and during World War |! 
he became involved with the Garcite [?] Brothers in an effort 
to rob the government...or to do the government in medicine 
through this concern in Connecticut and he was charged with 
it, tried, found guilty and sentenced and was serving a 
penitentiary sentence for having cheated the government and 
his birthday came around. Now, he was drawing a salary, 

| mean he was drawing a pension for having been a Congress- 
man. They passed that law after | was out of Congress and he 
was drawing his pension and had been a congressman for a 
good many years and do you know that leading members on 

both sides of the aisle, the Democrats and Republicans, oh, 


probably a half a dozen of each stood up and praised that 


man? Now, you know to my mind things are either black or 
white. He had done wrong in more ways than just that one 
time. | happen to have known. This man, [Boycutt?], who 


recently was tried and found guilty and served a sentence, 
somebody last winter introduced a bill to reimburse him for 
the money that he had been forced to pay back to this... 


Now, they shouldn't...People should have faith in their 


57 


TR: 


vIe 
TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 


“MJ: 


representatives but their representatives should demand 
honesty from their own kind. 

Very good. Now is there anything else that you want to add 
to that then as far as the recognition of the Soviet Union 
goes? 

| don't know of any. 

Any other little comments at all? 

Well, of course, in the middle of this Hungarian Revolution 
recently, we were up against the Soviet Union but that 
didn't come until after | was out of Congress. 

Well, we'll come onto that a little later on then. All right. 
Let's switch to another question here. When did you first 
feel that the Soviet Union constituted a serious threat to 
our security? 

Well, I told you when...before | ever went to Washington, 
when | read this hearings before Hamilton Fish but when 
Hamilton Fish, after ! was down there...and when Hitler was 
on the coming up, Hamilton Fish had a son who delivered the 
morning Post in Washington and every edition of the Post 
that son of Hamilton Fish's delivered had Hitler's propa- 
ganda in it and, of course, you know Hamilton Fish's frank 
was used to send out Hitler propaganda and instead, Hamilton 
it off onto his secretary and the secretary went to the 


put 
penitentiary. You see, it's a criminal offense to use 

your frank for anything but official business and the 
secretary was putting out this Hitler propaganda. Of course, 


it was Hamilton Fish that was doing it. And now that was 


58 


TK.: 


VJs 


TK: 


VJe 


TK: 


VJs 


TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


Hamilton Fish, was the son, grandson, great grandson of the 


signer of the Constitution. 

Well, I think maybe we've covered that fairly well, then 

as far as posing a threat to our security. | think you've 
probably covered this somewhat too but you may have some 
things which you want to add. 

That, | think it is pretty well covered by the efforts 

that |I made. 

The various speeches and so on that you made, the various 
speeches that you made. 

The speeches that | made and the efforts and, of course, it's 
not just this thing of taking...Bob Carter off the air was 

a big thing because he was spreading his propaganda and the 
DARs from out here when | made that speech all wrote protest 
letters to me. Bob Carter was so inspiring. He was so 

full of things. Of course, he was inspiring. 

Were there actually any...! don't know whether you've 
mentioned it or not. Were there actually any threats on 
your life because of the stand you took? 


Oh, yes. 
Well, can you mention any of them that you can recall that 


are interesting or anything? 


Well, wasn't the shot that was put through my windshield in 
my car when | was in it one? 


That's one, yes. 
And | couldn't tell you how many telephone calls even 


59 


TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 


VJ: 


after | was out of Congress for about three years, | had 
these telephone calls and threats and letters telling me that 
| could watch out and while my daughter was living she'd get 
them and they'd tell her that | didn't need to worry; that 
I'd find her and myself both face up in the Potomac. 

Well... 

It used to worry her a great deal. 

But not you? 

No, | just didn't think they'd ever dare. 

| see. 

But it was hard to make her think that. 

Yeah, | suppose. Well, we'll go to another point. Was 
being anti-communist a difficult role for a Democrat member 
of the House in the middle '30's or | suppose for any real 
member of the House in the '30's, being anti-communist? 
Yeah, it was quite difficult at times because there were 
liberals there who didn't approve of the things ! was doing. 
And, of course, it was very diffidult with Mrs. Roosevelt. 
Was it? Well, can you talk about that a little bit and 
make... 

Well, as | said in the beginning there never was...|I was 
invited to the White House more than most anybody else 
because...well, not because it was Virginia Jenckes but it 
was this: 1I was an ingenue; | had never done anything 
political; | didn't come from a family of politicians. 
Nobody knew the story | just told you about the county 
agents wanting me and offering to finance my campaign was 


the reason that | got there because the politicians didn't 


want me and then this work on the Wabash River but when it 
was announced that the eighteen million dollars which was 
recommended by the engineers had been allocated and the 
Terre Haute Tribune carried the eighteen million dollars in 
a streamer across the top of the page on Sunday morning, | 
flew out to be here that day and Mrs. Roosevelt flew out on 
the same plane. Whether she knew | was going on it or not 

| don't know but she went on west. Wherever the plane stopped, 
of course, she got off. It was known she was on the plane 
and she got off and then | had to follow. When we got here, 
| said, "Now, Mrs. Roosevelt, this is my home town and I'm 
here for that eighteen million dollars. I'm going first." 
[Laughter] Which was probably bad policy but nevertheless... 
and then the committee, some of the people out there with 
great huge bunches of American Beauty roses for both of 

US. And, of course, she made the fatal error of giving me 
her bunch. She should have taken it. And she never made a 
speech that she didn't get fifteen hundred dollars for. And 
you were asking about labor...Colgate came to, you know, the 
president of the Colgate Soap Company, who are operating down 
in Southern Indiana now in a plant, came to Terre Haute and 
wanted to put the plant here and Mr. Colgate came into the 
office to see me about it and we talked about it and he was 
very much enthused about coming here and he came out and 


„at that time a man named [Milton Hurs?] was operating 


he went. 
what is, | believe now, Aldens' down here in this block, ready- 
to-wear shop, and he went to several of the merchants around 


6] 


and they told him they didn't want any new industry in 
Terre Haute; that they didn't want anybody coming in here 
that would make them pay more for their help than they were 
paying. And | was negotiating, or rather the clerk in my 
office was negotiating with Colgate for me to make a fifteen 
minute talk once a week on radio. You know Malvina Thompson, 
who was Mrs. Roosevelt's secretary, heard of it and went to 
Colgate and said Mrs. Roosevelt would take it, fifteen hundred 
a week. And, of course, | didn't have a chance. 

TK: While you're on the topic or the subject, apparently you 
knew Mrs. Roosevelt fairly well. What was she like really? 
Can you give me some kind of an estimate? 

VJ: Well, she was a peculiar woman. | never liked her. Well, 


in the first place, take their marital record, the marital 


record of the family, eight or nine divorces among five 
children. Now, there was something wrong there somewhere. 
Of course, when you came in, now, did | tell this this morn- 
ing about saying that if Virginia had studied her history 
the way | wanted? Well, when it came in that Roosevelt's 
nomination had been made unanimous... 

TK: This was in when now, '32? 

VJ: Yeah, '32, that was the year. We were all in the sunroom 
down at our house and a lot of Virginia's young friends were 
there. My friends thought when | entered politics that ['d 

just gone to the devil and Virginia said, "Mother, you're 

And she said, "What's the matter?" "Well", 


very quiet." 
| said, "I hoped we'd nominate a Democrat." "Why, mother, 


62 


TK: 


VJ: 


Mr. Roosevelt's been twice Democratic Governor of a great 
state like New York. He's a fine gentleman." | said, "I'm 
not going to debate the question of his being a gentleman", 
but | said, "If you'd studied your American history the way 

| wanted you to, you would have known that Theodore Roosevelt 
wrecked the Republican party for his ambition", and | said, 
"If we live long enough we'll see Franklin Roosevelt do 
exactly the same thing because once a Roosevelt always a 
Roosevelt." And that was true. Theodore Roosevelt, when 

he couldn't get the nomination for that second term, created 
the Bull Moose and Ickes went with him and | don't remember 
who the other Bullmoosers were but nevertheless, the division 
gave Woodrow Wilson the opportunity to be President. Other 
wise, Grover Cleveland was the only Democratic President 
since the days of the Civil War. 

Now, are there any other thoughts about Mrs. Roosevelt that 
you might mention, reasons why you didn't like her? 

Well, | didn't like her because | thought she made a 
mistake. Her children were ill-mannered and | didn't want 
to see her President. We had in the House a member named 
Caroline O'Day from New York. Do you remember the name? 
Well, she was one of Mrs. Roosevelt's bridesmaids. Can 

She was one of Mrs. Roosevelts bridesmaids and 


you see it? 


she was a nice woman. She was a Georgia woman married to 


this old man O'Day of Standard Oil fame, and, oh, so much 
money nobody knew how to spend it. And she...Mrs. Roosevelt 


elected her. Well, there neve was a time that she didn't 


go down the line for anything that was communist. For 


LA 


instance, she was trying to get the people in California 

to free that man out there that was arrested and held for 
throwing the bomb into the crowd, things like that. And she 
was one of the first people who dyed her hair blue and some 
of the older members on the floor came over: "Virginia, 
what's the matter with Caroline's hair?" "Well", | said, 
"She just went to the beauty parlor and they fixed her up." 
"Well, ask her why she always wears her gloves." She never 
went on the floor without gloves on. Somebody had told 
her...and oh, they tried very hard to make her but she didn't 
get re-elected. She had done all these communistic things 
that Mrs. Roosevelt wanted done and many, many a time that 
people thought they heard Mrs. Roosevelt on the air, they 


were listening to Caroline O'Day. Their voices were just 


exactly alike. 


| 
| 


TK: 


VJs 


This beins the third tape with Mrs. Virginia Jenckes, a 

former Congresswoman from the Sixth District of Indiana. 

Now, Mrs. Jenckes, could you tell us your appraisal of FDR 

as a man and as a President and leader of the United States? 
Well, he was a very likeable person. He was jolly. He 

liked a good joke but he liked to play a trick like he did 

in the case of sending Joe Kennedy to England as an ambassador. 
He had promised Ira Morris of Chicago, who was one of the 

rich men in Chicago, the Nelson Morris Packing Company. He 
had promised him the portfolio to St. James, if elected. 

Mr. Morris had given him sixty thousand dollars for his 
campaign. Mr. Morris had likewise given J. Ham Lewis, the 
Senator James Hamilton Lewis, ten thousand dollars to watch 
his interests and to use in his campaign for the Senate. 

Well, Roosevelt after his election...Mr. Morris didn't hear 
from him and he didn't hear from Senator Lewis so he asked 

me to look after Mr. Lewis and | got into the picture that 
way and Mr. Roosevelt before election had definitely promised. 
Now, Ira Morris was our candidate to Denmark during World 

War |, | mean our ambassador, and he was decorated by every 
one of the allies of the United States. He was decorated 
particularly for his humane efforts in the exchange of prison- 
ers of war. Now, he was a Jew; he was the son of the Nelson 
Morris that came to this country from France before the Civil 
War and he settled in Chicago and made a great fortune and 
Ira didn't like being a Jew and he didn't like the meat 
packing business so he became a statesman and he made this 


marvelous record as an ambassador to Denmark. Well then, he 


voted Democratic and he asked Roosevelt for the portfolio 

to St. James and Roosevelt promised it to him. Then Roose- 
velt said he thought it would be a good joke to send an 
Irishman to England because the English and the Irish hated 
each other so. So he sent Joe Kennedy. While Mr. Kennedy 
was there he was playing with Hitler and everything against 
the British and the British asked our country to call him 
home. So you couldn't...Mr. Roosevelt suffered extremely 

and if he promised you somethingin the morning and somebody 
else came along with another proposition, he'd forget his 
promise to you, which | don't think goes well with a politi- 
cian, with anybody in any sphere of life but that Kennedy 
story is a very...| knew Ira Morris quite well after that and 
| had occasion to believe what he said. And when he was so 
disappointed...Again when Sherman Minton wanted to be on the 
Supreme Court and Roosevelt gave him an impression that he 
could have it, and turned around and gave it to Hugo Black. 
We were all in this same trip to the conference at the Inter- 
parliamentary Union and when we came...Sherman Minton behaved 
scandalously and pouted so on the boat going over but when 

we got back...And Black was going up the steps of the Supreme 
Court building one of the Washington papers had the cleverest 
cartoon you can imagine. Here was Black going up the steps 
with his judicial robes on and below his black robe a line 
of white about like that and on it "KKK", [Laughter] So 


they...Mr. Roosevelt played both ends against the middle and 


he never had been a success as a lawyer. 


TK: He wasn't? 

VJ: Huh-uh. Does that cover your... 

TK: Well, | thought anything that you want to comment on Roosevelt 
at all, anything that you might want to say about him. 

VJ: Well, | think... 

TK: That's about it? 


VJ: Well, |! couldn't say much more than that he didn't keep his 


word. 


TK: No. He did seem to be quite a humanitarian | mean as far 


as policy in the New Deal? 

VJ: He suffered...oh, | know what | started to say. He suffered 
extremely and if he'd promise someone something in the day- 
time and Mrs. Roosevelt would go in there just before he went 
to bed, he'd forget his promise and she'd get the thing she 


wanted and really she and Harry Hopkins ran the government. 


And Harry Hopkins and Ickes...Ickes was having a meeting in 
his office in the early days of CWA to see what could go on 
to help the people and restore their confidence in their 


country and business and | was one of them called down there. 


There were fifteen of us. And | said, "Well, Mr. Ickes, the 


thing that..." "Now, that's enough. You can't tell me any- 


thing about the Wabash River that | don't already know." So 


| didn't get my little say in about the Wabash. 


TK: You didn't get it in at all? 


VJ: Huh-uh. But we did get...it was through WPA or CWA, one of 


those things that the eighteen million dollars was allocated. 


And that was what the Army Engineers had said would be 


67 


TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


necessary. And after | made this announcement here and Tom 
O'Mara wanted to know who was going to spend it and they 
organized this group to come down to Washington and tell the 
Army and they went down there with an appointment with Lytle 
Brown, who was Chief of Engineers, and told him that they 
didn't want Wabash River Flood Control. And [ ?] 
from Vincennes was one of the ones and he had farmland under 
water more times than almost anybody but he was listening to 
Dick Werneke and all these people who said if they allowed 
that to go through that it would make me the most powerful 
person in Indiana and they couldnt have that. Now, | 
wouldn't give a snap for power. The thing I'm interested in, 
this is the country my grandparents and my great grandparents 
fought the Indians for. They worked for it. My great grand- 
father helped...think of travelling this country through 

here when the Indians were around with just a Negro body 
servant...But they wouldn't let it go. And they never have 
gotten flood contro! and the engineers tell me they never 


will. 


What was the reason? What arguments that your opponents 


used against flood control? Why didn't they want it? 
Well, because, they said it would make me...if they let my 


efforts go through and this eighteen million dollars be 


used and comfort come to the people, it would make me the 


most powerful person in Indiana. 


| see. No others advocated the flood control then? 


Oh, they all...I had the organization of ten thousand members. 
, 


They all wanted itz 


TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 


VJ: 


You were the first actually? 

| was the first one to start the movement and... 

And it carried on after you? 

And, of course, they're carrying on to a certain extent now 
but they're not very active in it and the same political 
situation is bound to be under cover. 

What would be the reasons today that we don't have? 

Well, | don't know. They just don't... don't think they 
work together enough. Now in...we had a flood, as | say we 
had nine floods in fourteen months and | had this farm of 

260 acres up in Parke County, 100 acres in the river bottom, 
which was under a company dike, levee and the river went over 
the top and we had a Jot of trouble and it went over the 

top of my levee down here at the other farm. And | built 

a levee with a dragline and put in three thousand sand bags 
overnight in one weak spot. So these farmers, these eighty- 
five men that owned land up in Parke County, asked me to come 
to the meeting. When | got to the meeting they elected me 
to the board and then the board elected me president. Imagine. 
And we were walking the levee. There was eight miles of it. 
We were walking it and there was one place that needed re- 


And the engineer that they had engaged was 


pair badly. 
there. Well, | said, 'That's not the place to put that 
thing." "Well, where would you put it?" "Well, | don't know 


but that's not the place to put it." "Well, what would you 


do?" "Well, I'd ask the Army Engineers." "Where are they?" 


| said they were in Washington. "Well, how we going to 


69 


ST. TTT re revenge 


see them? Well, would you go down there?" "Oh", | said, 

"It would cost an awful lot of money to go down there." 

They said, "How much?" "Oh'', | said, "It would cost at 

least a hundred and fifty dollars." "Well, I'll tell you, 
We'll each one give you two dollars and you go down there." 
Well, it was their confidence more than the question of the 
money and Everett Sanders who was secretary to Coolidge 

and he had been a memoer of the House. And before he went 

to Washington he was a clerk in our lawyer's office here so 

| wrote Everett that | was coming down and that | wanted 

an appointment with the Chief of Engineers. Oh, he couldn't 
get that. Well, | said, "You have to, | have to have it." 

So | went down and | went to the White House to see him and 
we made the appointment with this General Lytle Brown, who 
was a peach, and the next day my appointment was 10:00 o'clock 
in the morning and Everett sent the White House car to the 
hotel for me and | went over to the Army Engineers's office. 

| never was so scared in all my life. The Munitions Building 
is about a thousand feet long and the White House car stopped 
at the far end from where | wanted to be and these blueprints 
just shook up and down like that. But when | got in I started 
talking and General Deakyne said, "There isn't a wod you've 
said that | don't know is perfectly true", and he said, 

"You haven't told me half." And | says, "I'll tell you", and 
got a notice out from his desk, a printed copy of a bil] 
listing the rivers in the United States that were entitled 


to the federal help. Now, he says, "The Wabash River should 


70 


TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 


RJ: 


take precedence over all of them. It's the most principal 
connection in the states", but he said, "Here it is listed 
alphabetically", and he said, "Nobody will ever live long 
enough to see them get to it." But he said, "| have the 
authority to put it first." And he sat down and sent a 
telegram to the Louisville branch to meet me at Clinton and 
do anything ! wanted done. And that was the beginning of 

the effort to get federal help on the Wabash River. Our 

Jim Watson and our many representatives had never done a 
thing about it. And it was a lot of satisfaction to have 
that man...amd then as | said it used to amuse my mother a 
great deal. She didn't have any sympathy with my agricultural 
efforts. And when people would ask me how many people were 
in our White [River?] Dike and Levee Association, | always 
says, "0h, seventy-five men and me." But it was working with 
those farmers and you know forty years ago the farmers were 


a different class of people. They hadn't merged into the 


outside world the way they have today. | digressed when | 
brought that in. 


That's all right. 
But that was one of my pre-congressional efforts that really 


was a satisfaction and it was a great thing to have done. 


it gave me more...they were the people who helped defeat 


the machine. 
Well, then besides your anti-communist stand in Congress, what 


else would you feel you accomplished, that you stood for? 


Well, I got the flag bill put through and | got a post office 


FA 


AS See aN — 


TR: 
Vd: 
TK: 
VJs 
TR: 
VJ: 


TK: 


VJe 


in Danville and Rockville and Crawfordsville, and that one 
over there...that one over there had been started under... 
Noble Johnson and the depression came along and the contractor 
had overdrawn his account and there wasn't any money left 

to finish it. It was boarded up, the post office paying 
three thousand dollars a year for this building right here 

so the first thing | had to do was to go get new appropria- 
tions to finish this building, but we got that. I got a city 
hall here and a penitentiary down south of town and an army 
chemical something or other up at Newport. I| don't know 
right off. Did I Say a post office in Greencastle? 

| don't believe so. No. 

Well, all those post office buildings. 

Well, that's quite an accomplishment. 

Oh, and rural electrification. 

Um—-huh. 

| worked very hard with Congress to get the bill put through 
and in return for my efforts, the first county in the United 
States to have rural electrification was Boone County. So 
that's another thing for the district. 

| imagine many of your constituents would agree with you on 
that, for the bill. Many of your constituents would probably 
agree on that, wouldn't they, on the bill? 

Well, they, of course, you know the ingratitude...! shouldn't 
say ingratitude...the lack of gratitude, the lack of appreci- 


ation of people for efforts put forth in their behalf... 


you'd be surprised. If one was looking for a reward it'd 


be very much disappointing. 


eT 


TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 


Well, we've fairly well covered your time in Washington, 
then. Is there anything else that you would want to comment 
about that happened during your time in Washington. 

Well, after | was out of Congress, there were several things, 
like for instance, my connection in that Hungarian Revolution. 
Well, o.k. 

We'll] take that tomorrow. 

Well, we'll get to that in a minute. | thought maybe you 
might want to...in finishing up this then you might want to 
tell why you lost the election in '38? Anything you want 


to say? 

Well, I didn't lose. They took the ballots out of the box. 
They took the ballots out? 

The ballots were taken out of the box and aman in Attica 
printed the ballots that were put back and it took them from 
Tuesday until Friday to announce that | wasn't elected. 

When I was going back to Washington I stopped at Democratic 
Headquarters in Indianapolis, and Sherman Minton was there 
and he said, "Well, Virginia, it looks now as though you 
were defeated. The thing for you to do is to go home and 
keep your mouth shut and get ready to run next time.' And 

t said, "I don't intend to do either one." | said, "There's 
no use under the circumstances of ever making the effort to 
run again with the spirit that is over there and the control. 
| got to Washington and the New York Times and St. Louis 


Globe Democrat, the Cincinnati Enquirer and the Chicago 


Tribune offered me space on the front page for a statement 


72 


TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 


which | refused. | said, "If | raise a rumpus, they wiil 
say, 'women can't take defeat'." And I said, "I'm not 

going to hurt other women by weeping now." | wasn't like 
Joe Martin. 

When you say, "they took the ballots out of the box", who 

do you mean? 

Well, who do | mean? 

When you say, "they took the ballots out?" 

Huh? 

When you say, "They took the ballots out"? 

Dick Werneke and Tom O'Mara and Jim Fagan and Jerry Shandy, 
the Democrats here who were controlling the election. There 
was aman from Clinton whose name | have forgotten came down 
to the house in one of the campaigns. | had a great big 

fat colored cook and as | said we had made my house int two 
apartments. And upstairs between the kitchen and the sun 
room, | had a deep window so that we could pass things out 
from the kitchen and eat in the sun room. And my daughter 
was living and she saw the shape of a gun in this man's 
pocket. He had come down to tell me that they had decided 
to let me be elected and my confidential clerk was there 
in the room with this Clinton man and myself and Virginia 
went to the kitchen. And this great big fat colored girl 


opened the window from the kitchen into the sun room and she 


stood there with a butcher knife like this in her hands. 


[Laughter ] 
Did he leave then? 


74 


ees 


Se n 


Vd: 


TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 


Vd: 
TK: 
VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 
VJ: 


He stayed long enough and then he left. He didn't look very 
comfortable with that butcher knife up there in the window. 
Now, who did win in '38? 

Noble Johnson. 

Was he a Democrat? 

Well no, he was a Republican. 


All right. A Democrat didn't win that time. They should 


have had you running. 


Well you see ! was the Democrat. This was not the primary. 
This was the fall election. 
| see, 


And... 
Well, why would the Democrats take your ballots out of the box 


and allow a Republican to win? 


Because they didn't want me down there. 
They didn't want you at all? 
They couldn't control me. 


Oh, I see. 
And they could control the...Look, they never would give me 


a job. I've never had any recognition from the party, nor 


any help. Noble Johnson was appointed to an Appellate Court 


in Washington by Harry Truman and Noble Johnson was just like 


that with Pendergast. He was invoived...he was working with 


Pendergast. You know Tom Pendergast by name? 


Yes, oh yes, by name. 


Tom Pendergast. Of course, | didn't know him except by name, 


but prior to '32, there was a very wonderful Senator from 


TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 


Missouri named Jim Reed. He was very capable and a good 
man and Pendergast wanted him to do something but Jim Reed 
refused. Pendergast said to him the same thing they said to 
me. "You can't go back." And Pendergast made this statement 
that in order to make Reed's defeat as ignominious as 
possible, he got an absolutely unknown to make the race 

and the unknown was Harry Truman. And Harry Truman was in- 
volved...or Pendergast was involved with the rum runners. 

He was the head of the rum runners out of St. Louis. 

Well, that fairly well, then, covers your terms in office as 


far as you're concerned. You don't think of anything else that 


you want to... 


Not now. 


...Comment on? Now, this is a little aside then...but you 


might...whether or not you have any opinion on the role of 
the press then and maybe today, whether or not you attempted 


to tell the public everything. | imagine this would be 


probably your line of thinking, wouldn't it or not? 


Well, some of them were all right and some of them weren't. 


We've got one man here that's a whiz and that's Larry Sawyer. 


He won the medai or the citation for being the fairest editor 


in the United States. And you know to my mind that could be 


one of the greatest things in the world. He was a splendid 


man. Of course, the Star is Republican and I'm talking about 


a Republican now. 


i is j i i uestion here. 
Let's see. | think this is an interesting que ere 


What was your philosophy of representation; that is, did you 


VJ: 


TK: 


VJ: 


TK: 


VJ: 
TK: 
VJ: 


TK: 


feel that you were to be the agent of the majority opinion 
within your district or did you vote as you judged each 

issue and try tobring the voters to your position? 

| always felt with Jefferson that a public office is a public 
trust, and that if you have the confidence of the people 

and they give you a public office, you owe them the best of 
everything you've got. As | said in speaking of my connec- 
tion at the time with Arthur Greenwood, the Constitution in 
speaking of the Congress as the Senate and the House of 
Representatives, and | have always wanted to be called the 
Representative. To me, to represent the people really had 

a meaning, and when they commenced and talked about Congress- 


men and Congresswomen, that just didn't go. We were all 


Representatives. 


I think that pretty well sums up, then, your philosophy of 
representation. 

Well, as | said, to be the Representative of three hundred 
thousand people was a big responsibility and a great honor. 
Well, | think maybe then that we'll attempt to do some 
reminiscing about the period after your term in office. 


We'll reminisce a little bit on the period after your term 


in office... 
Yeah. 
... tomorrow. 


Well... 
[ BREAK] 
Now, | believe there's some stories that you wanted to tell, 
3 


while you were still in office and this might be a good time 


br Hew | 


Vu? 


to do it. 


In 1928 before | ever had any idea of making a race for 
Congress, |I was working under the George Peek Committee. 

| was head of the Independent Equality for Agriculture in 
Indiana among the women. And | went in one day to Danville 
to Speak to the committee and to work with the committee 
and the committee chairman met me at the station and she 
said, "Now, we don't want you to mention prohibition. That 
is a dead issue here and don't cause us any trouble." Well, 
| said, "Oh, you don't have any trouble with your students 
here? | happen to have known that on the Sunday before a 
group of the students from Central Normal were over on 40 

in one of the hot spots dancing on the table and having 

a grand time, but she said they didn't have any trouble. 
Well, | said, "You know | think prohibition is one of the 
breakdown of our laws." She said, "What do 


causes of the 


you mean?" {| said, "I mean this, that when your children 


started to school, you said to them, 'Now, it's all right 
for mother to make this home brew, but don't say anything 


about it at school'. "How do you know | make home brew?" 


| said, "I didn't know it but | just happened to fall onto 


it." | said, "When you tell your children not to say 


something about what you're doing, you're putting in their 


eyes and minds the thought of not obeying the law." Well, 


she didn't like it very much and after all, that was one 


of the things, the men who had passed the prohibition law 


like Senator James Watson and some of those people were 


W ree: ee 


a 
ee 
RA —— 


--— Ate. 


TK: 


VJ? 


enjoying all the privileges and all the benefits of an 
Organization that they had created and Jim Watson went to 
Evansville in one of the campaigns later and he stood on 

the platform and said, "Everybody should be happy. The wets 
have their liquor and the drys have their law". He didn't 
know why everybody wasn't happy. Isn't that enough on 
prohibition? 

Yeah, | think that's probably pretty good. Now, I think 
that we can carry on now into some point... 

And later after | was out of Congress, | went to Europe, 
went to England and France in 1951. Now the Labor government 
had been in England for six years and on the ship going over 
| was travelling with Mrs. Ira Morris who was the widow of 
our Ambassador to Denmark and we sat at the captain's table 
and, of course, with some of the British people and | was 
given an introduction to Lord Salisbury. Lord Salisbury 

was the minority leader in the House of Lords in the British 


Parliament. And when | got to London he asked me, he 


telephoned and asked me to have lunch with him and said 


he'd take me on the floor. Well, | said, "Please, your 


Honor, let me wait until just before | leave London. I'm 


ready to go on and then 1'll be happy to come. But | think 


1'1] know more then than | do now. So he waited until the 


day before | was to leave London when | went up to the 


House of Lords. And the six weeks that we were there | 


spent riding the tops of the busses in London, just up on 
one and back on another and asking questions of everybody 


that | could find. And, of course, the people who rode the 


Á 


busses were the laboring people. There were great holes 


from the war where buildings had been torn down after the 
bombing raids but London was showing still the effect of 
the 1941 to '45 disaster. And everybody was dissatisfied. 
The English people had enough food but it was starchy. They 
didn't have any proteins. They were only allowed one egg 
a week. | could go into a restaurant anywhere in London 
while | was there and have two eggs for breakfast every 
day in the week if | wanted it. But the English people 
couldn't and they observed the law. Well, when | went up 
to the House of Lords to meet his Excellency, | said, "You 
know, Lord Salisbury, | believe if you call an election in 
October, you'll be successful." And perhaps it isn't out 
of order here to describe his office to you. He had one 
Now, mind, he was second in command in the House of 


room. 


Lords. He was the minority leader. He was the Charlie 


Halleck of the House of Representatives. He had one room. 
In that one room was one stenographer with one typewriter, 
two desks, a carpet lounge, two chairs and a railing. Well, 
we had lunch and met a good many of the members and then 
went back to his office and sat on this carpet lounge and 


talked and I again repeatedly, | said to him, "If you call 
an election, | think you'll be successful." "Oh no", he 


says, "It couldn't be." And i went on to tell him what 


| had been doing, how I'd asked everybody, I'd stop anybody 


on the street that looked kind of tired and worn out and 


ask them a question in order to get them into conversation. 


TK: 
VJ: 


So he did call the election and everybody knows that it was 
successful. And very shortly after election he wrote me a 
very beautiful note thanking me for what | had...the courage 
and hope that | had given him in this experience of going 
from one person to another and finding out how they felt. 

And the man who put in the Labor government in 1945 had been 
in the Sixth District of Indiana in the '34 and '36 campaign 
and he spent many, many nights as guest at the White House. 

| think you have another... 

Oh, about the people living in London, excuse me...! was 
entertained one Sunday night in this six weeks | was there 

at Lord Castle Stewart's house. He lived out in the country. 
His wife was a Gugenheim, Solomon Gugenheim's daughter from 
New York City and, of course, a very well-to-do woman and 

a very charming person. They had given two sons as sacrifices 
in the '4] to '45 war. They had an estate of about two 


hundred and fifty acres with their own cattle, milk cows, 


chickens, everything the heart could desire but under the 


Labor government, they couldn't use the cream from their 


cows. It had to go into the government pool. They couldn't 


have any more eggs than the man in the street who couldn't 


afford to buy one. Sunday night we were invited out there 


for dinner and they were allowed to have only one servant 


in this great big house and he answered the door in his 


shirt sleeves and his shirt was dirty. When it came to 


coming to the table we were given food that had been shipped 


by her mother from America. 


TK: 


VJ: 


| think there's another point that we might want to bring 
about, about the Hungarian freedom. 

In 1956 the Hungarian nation was celebrating the 500th 
Anniversary of the victory of the Christians over the 
Saracens. We had in Washington at that time the...five 
representatives of the Paulist [?] Order. The Paulist [2] 
Order was a group of priests, who in...the founder of the 
order in 1914...in the Fourteenth Century, | mean, had 

gone to Rome, he was a Spanish grandee with a lot of money. 
And when he got to Rome, he saw the poor ragged little boys 
on the street with the big stomachs because they were 
underfed, and not any clothes on. And he went to the Pope 
and asked for permission to feed and clothe these children 
and to educate them. The Pope took it under advisement and 
finally told him that he might do it but that he would have 
to finance the thing himself and he would be independent 

of the Pope. He could do it but it would be on his own. 
Well, he started what was known then as the Paulist [7] 
Fathers who had been prisoners of the Russians and had 
gotten out of prison and gone on to Lisbon, were milling 
around Lisbon without any money and their application for 
admission to the United States was being held up by the 
State Department because they said they were security risks, 
ple who had been prisoners of the 


security risks of peo 


Russians and had suffered all of the tortures that could 
have been put upon them. A young priest from Buffalo, New 


York, of Hungarian parentage came down to Washington and 
y 


visited next door to friends of mine and they called me... 


asked me to come out for dinner. And the man said, Father 
Said...he told me what he was down here for to try to get 
the State Department to recognize these men and Jet them 
in. "Oh", | said, "That's easy". And he looked at me and 
he said, "You don't know what you're talking about." Well, 
| said, "It might surprise you if | told you that you don't 
know what you're talking about. And you might not like it, 
but I'm telling you that in proportion to the number of 
employees there are as many communists in Catholic welfare 
as there are in the State Department." Well, that wasn't 

a very popular thing but it was the truth. Well he said, 
"Since you know so much, what would you do?" Well, I said, 
"I don't know tonight what we'll do but tomorrow you and | 
will go down to the State Department and we'll go in the 
front door. We may be kicked out the back door but we'll 
know where we've been and so will they know that we've 
been there." Well, the next afternoon we went down and 

we stayed...we started in the front door and Father Zabo 
told my friend what he wanted and what he knew. "Oh", she 
says, "You want to talk to Mr. Alexander.'' So she called 
Mr. Alexander and we went over to his office. Before we 
left his desk, all five of those priests had been cleared 
and the cable had gone to Lisbon to admit three of them the 
next day. Now those men are among our great teachers today. 
They're working with the science foundation. They have a 
school in Buffalo that will take care of any extra bright 
They won't take a child who has an I.Q. under 


youngsters. 


135. He has to have three years of science and three years 


of foreign language and they'11 give him an education 
free. All that has to be done js to have his transportation 
paid. Well, we went back going back to this celebration... 


I think that's enough about the Paulists [72]. 


Going back to this celebration, those who stayed in 
Washington formed a committee and we were celebrating the 
night of the Revolution. We knew the Revolution was going 
on and for a time, you may remember that it looked as 
though it was successful. Well, then during the time that 
the Russians were out, Cardinal Mindzenty got out of prison 
and took refuge in our American Embassy. Well, it happened 
that he was a friend of this young priest whom | know... 
knew, and he telephoned to Washington every afternoon at 
half past two from the embassy to tell my friend what he 
wanted...what was needed in Hungary. Now, Hungary didn't 
want aman...Father...Cardinal Mindzenty said, "What we 
need...what is needed here are ten thousand carbines and 
ten thousand bazookas." Now those firearms were stored in 
Vienna right across the barbed wire fence practically from 
Hungary. Cardinal Mindzenty went on to say that if they 
were put by the barbed wire fence, the Hungarians would 
And those poor Hungarian students that gave 


pick them up. 


their lives because they had nothing but Molotov bombs 


with which to fight the tanks of the Russians when they 


came back into Hungary would have saved...their lives would 


have been saved and Christianity would have paid...would 


have profited very greatly by the effort. But it went on. 


When Cardinal Mindzenty telephoned every day and told this 
friend of mine what was needed, he telephoned me and | was 
able personally to deliver that message to Secretary Wilson, 
the Secretary of Defense. We formed a little committee 
which | signed as chairman and sent a night letter to 
President Eisenhower. This was in November just before 
election. We had a Sunday afternoon demonstration. The 
Hungarians came from Chicago and New York, Connecticut, 
Philadelphia, every place, and we demonstrated before the 
White House. President Eisenhower promised to come out on 
the porch and speak, give them a little courage. We had 

the arrangements for loud speakers, for television. Then 
my telegram would have had some effect because | was to tell 
what I had done and ask the Hungarians to put pressure on 
the administration and on the State Department. The Presi- 
dent went back on us and he didn't come out, and, of course, 


there was no object in having the rest of the program so 


we had to give that up. And in February...now, mind, this 


was November, early, and in February | had a letter from 


the State Department saying that the President had forwarded 


my letter to them and they were investigating. When the 


Hungarian Freedom Association celebrated their Tenth 
Anniversary last year...the Tenth Anniversary or the Revolu- 


tion, they awarded me the Freedom Award for the work that 
9 


I have just described. 


When | first went to Washington, before | had been...even 


before the observation period, | had known a good deal 
e 


about what the communists were trying to do in this country 
and | knew how they were trying to get hold of the DAR so 

| asked a newspaper woman to go to the President General 

of the DAR and ask for a resolution from them asking 
Roosevelt not to recognize the Soviet Union. Well, he 
didn't get very far because Mrs. Magna told this friend that 
she'd take it up under advisement. She was the President 
General. She'd take it up under advisement with her advisor. 
It happened her advisor was the President of the Scott 
Tissue Paper Company in New Hampshire. Now, he said when 
she asked him, he said, "You know, all of our wood pulp for 
our toilet paper comes from Russia. How long do you think 
we'll stay in business if you recommend a resolution to keep 
us from recognizing them?" So it went on. The DAR didn't 
pass the resolution that we'd like to have had. And when 
Marian Anderson was having all the trouble and they were 
having the trouble, the DAR had just one regulation that 

was particularly pertinent to the situation; that is, that 
they would rent their hall to only one organization a day, 


for instance, one couldn't have it in the afternoon and 


another one in the evening because they didn't have time 


to get it cleaned and taken care of. So when Marian Anderson 


wanted to sing there, her manager of her campaign tours, 


or her singing tours was a white Russian who had gotten 


in trouble in Stalingrad and had been sent to this country 


to create trouble for us. Now, he knew the dates...he 


had a list of the dates on which the DAR was engaged 


ither in the afternoon or in the evening...Constitution Hall, 
e 


TK: 


VJ: 


and he wouldn't take any other date than one of those that 
he could only get for a half day. Now, all under the sun 
Mrs. Becker had to do was to cite the law or the regulation 
that | have mentioned and that would have shut up all of 

the criticism and all of the fussing. It would have stopped 
Mrs. Roosevelt from... But, no, she didn't tell that. She 
just let the thing go on and as everyone knows, Marian 
Anderson gave her concert from the steps of the Lincoln 
Memorial. 

As a sort of a wrap-up, then, of our two-days' discussion, 

| wanted to ask this question: Spending a great deal of 
your ninety years active in politics both national and 

state you've seen many changes come about in our history. 
Can you arrive at anything as far as the future is concerned 
in our country? 

Well, that's a big question to be answered in a few words. 


First, | would suggest that we get back to the Ten Command- 


ments. They're fundamental. The Father in Heaven gave 


them to Moses without any question and one of the most im- 


portant ones today to be observed is, "Honor thy father and 


thy mother that thy days may be long in the land which the 


Lord, thy God, giveth thee." Now, God gave us this great 


country and it's the greatest land in the world. There's 


no where in the world that people have the comfort, the 


freedom, the opportunities that they have in this country 


but they're not going to have them alway 
tion of law and order. You've got to re- 


s unless they come 


down to a recogni 


spect your mother and father. They have lived longer and 


L anita af uhat. powell, in order to know something, in 
RAN b eee 


order to live today, you have to have known yesterday. 
You have to have lived yesterday and you have to have a 
hope, something to build for for tomorrow. That's what 
makes today. Today well lived makes every tomorrow a 
happy anticipation. And so we go back to practical facts. 
Our youth today has got to respect. They've lost respect 
for everything pretty near. You see these youngsters, 
just wonderful people with a wonderful amount of energy 
but it's got to be directed right or this country won't 


have a future. We'll follow the Roman Empire. Thank you. 


[END] 


88 


