FALL 2011 


Navy’ Me 


Official Magazine of U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Medicine 


FIGHTING 


urt ANIM 


“RESSIUN bs 
GRIEF desp ‘suffering pee aS pense 


AIf “otic 
‘Sret 
ub OU bi 


sadness. We 
heartack 


imental 


— wy ack Oh 


ut 
| e@vante 
MOE conce. 
"REHENSIC 
ymbe 
RES 
Trauma e 


-dshi’ 


\EGRL. 
disap~intme: 
ORN 

RUS 

AIG 


uicid 

=MPTY 

2nsiol 

nguisus AGO? 


4ATEdi- 


Navy Medicine wages 
a\warfar from the 
hattlefield | 28 


Alternative 
Comfort 


Therapy 
18 


The Best 
Medicine 


Navy Medicine 7 EE 
Official Magazine of U.S. Navy and | ( S | | [4 
Marine Corps Medicine a_i 

Vol. 103 + No.1 SPECIAL ISSUE 


na ces n every issue 


Vice Adm. Adam M. Robinson, Jr, MC 


Deputy Surgeon Genera 4 ADMIRAL’S CALL 
Rear Adm. Karen Flaherty, NC 
6 FORCE NOTES 
48 INNOVATIONS/R&D 
Public Affairs Officer 
Capt. J.A. “Cappy” Surette, APR 52 A LOOK BACK 


Deputy Public Affairs Officer 
Shoshona Pilip-Florea 


a 
Managing Editor | Features  _s_si| 


Paul R. Ross 


NAVY MEDICINE is the professional magazine of the Navy Medical 8 RADIATION H EALTH 


Department community. Its purpose is to educate its readers on Navy 

Medicine missions and programs. This magazine will also draw upon the 

medical department’s rich historical legacy to instill a sense of pride and 10 MINDFEULN ESS TRAINING 
professionalism among the Navy Medical Department community and to 

enhance reader awareness of the increasing relevance of Navy Medicine 

in and for our nation’s defense. 14 CLOSING THE SCHOOL DOORS 
The opinions and assertions herein are the personal views of the authors 

and do not necessarily reflect the official views of the U.S. Government, 

the Department of Defense, or the Department of the Navy. 

The fies of a name of any specific Hen Tctarer caramel product, 16 A G UID | N G H AN D 

commodity or service does not imply the endorsement by the 

Department of the Navy or the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. 

NAVY MEDICINE, (ISSN 0895-8211 USPS 316-070) is published quarterly 24 TRAINING WITH SOLDIERS 
by the Department of the Navy, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, 

Washington, DC 20372-5300. Periodical postage paid at Washington, DC. 


Pose ee the Navy has determined that this publication is 26 REDEFINING OPERATIONAL 


necessary in the transaction of business as required by law. NAVY 
was cite published from appropriated funds by satherity of the M EDICAL TRAIN | NG 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery in accordance with Navy Publications and 
Printing Regulations P-35. 

32 PUBLIC HEALTH IN ACTION 
Guidelines for submission to NAVY MEDICINE. 
Assout Navy MEpicine: 
NAVY MEDICINE is published quarterly Winter/ Spring/ Summer/ Fall. 34 ONE DAY AT A TIME 


Please contact Shoshona Pilip-Florea (shoshona. pilip-florea@med. navy. 

mil) for deadline of present issue in progress. 

Supmssion REQUIREMENTS: 5 

Articles must be between 600-1,000 words. 

All articles must be present tense/ active voice. 40 WH AT I VE LEARNED 
Photos must be minimum 300 dpi. 

Photos showing action are preferred. 


Epa Tite esa cal by a caption and photo credit. 42 HONORING A FALLEN SON 


Scuttlebutt: Stories about activities at MTFs and the field. 
Photo Album: Action shots from across Navy Medicine. 
Feature Articles: Stories featuring interesting contributions of Navy 

Medicine to military operations including everything from combat 46 PREVENTING DENGUE FEVER 
support to Humanitarian Relief/ Disaster Response will be considered. 
Please contact Shoshona Pilip-Florea (shoshona. pilip-florea@med. navy. 
mil) for current theme of issue in progress. 

R & Dand Innovations: Any new processes and/ or research and 
development news. 


Force Master Chief 
FORCM(FMF) Laura A. Martinez, USN 


Quality Care: Anything that improves the quality of care for our e rie 
patients. 
IT, QA: Any articles showing how Navy Medicine is utilizing the electronic : 
A U.S. Navy Hospital Corpsman : = See = 


age. 
Shipmates: Anything interesting about our shipmates working in the 
healthcare field in the Department of the Navy. 

All submissions must be accompanied by complete contact information 
for author. In the event there is more than one author please assign one 
author to be primary correspondent. 


Geolnaghncen ALTERNATIVE THERAPY 18 


Navy Medicine continues to fight 
post traumatic stress disorder, 
which effects a large population 
of service members who have 
suffered traumatic events, both 
overseas and stateside. 


Feedback Welcome 
NAVY MEDICINE Magazine 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
Communications Directorate 
2300 E Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20372-5300 
E-mail: BUMED-PAO@med. navy. mil 


Subscriptions are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents 
Subscriptions may be ordered online, via phone, fax, or e-mail, 
or postal mail. 
To order online, visit the U.S. Government Printing Office bookstore 
at http:// bookstore. gpo. gov 
To order by phone, call toll-free 1-866-512-1800 or, in the DC metro 
area, call 202-512-1800 
Send e-mail orders to contact center@gpo. gov 
Send mail orders to: 
U.S. Government Printing Office 
P.O. Box 979050 
St. Louis, MO 63197-9000 
Annual cost: $23 U.S.; 2.20 Foreign (4 issues/ year). 


Photo by Cpl. Nathan McCord 


Address Changes (Please include old address): Vi 5 | = d a | 
Petia Nits isit us online at www.med.navy.mi 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
Public Affairs Office 
2300 E Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20372-5300 
E-mail: BUMED-PAO@med. navy. mil 


© Twitter: twitter.com/NavyMedicine 


£ Facebook: U.S. Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery Fall 2011 3 


Admiral’s Call 


The 


As we enjoy this Fall season with our 
friends and family, I'd like to focus this 
Admiral’s Corner on a serious health 
issue affecting our Sailors, Marines, and 
their families. I’m talking about the 
dangerous health effects of Spice and 
other synthetic designer drugs. 

I would like to take this opportu- 
nity to educate and inform all Navy 
and Marine Corps personnel not only 
of the potential adverse health effects, 
but also the legal consequences. It is 
paramount all Navy Medicine personnel 
are aware of the adverse effects of these 
drugs. Commanding Officers must be 
fully engaged in synthetic drug abuse 
prevention and do everything in their 
power to increase awareness within their 
commands of the serious health conse- 
quences and legal ramifications if caught 
using, possessing, manufacturing, pro- 
moting, or distributing Spice and other 
synthetic designer drugs. 

I hope this will help providers advise 
their patients, and provide facts and 
figures that our Military Treatment 
Facilities should communicate to their 
personnel in order to provide training, 
counseling, and increased awareness for 
all hands. 

The Navy’s zero tolerance policy for 
drug abuse includes possession of sub- 
stances or designated products that con- 
tain synthetic cannabinoid compounds, 
including Spice, fake marijuana or fake 
pot, herbal incense or potpourri, salvia 
divinorum, bath salts, Skunk, Genie, 


angers of 


and many others. Navy and Marine 
Corps personnel who wrongfully pos- 
sess, use, promote, manufacture, or 
distribute designer drugs or products 
containing synthetic cannibinoid 
compounds such as Spice or parapher- 
nalia may be subject to punitive action 
under Articles 92 and 112a of the 
UCMJ, adverse administration action, 
or both. Consumption of any of these 
products meets the criteria for 
drug abuse and is prohibited. 
On March 1, 2011, the 
Drug Enforcement Agency 
issued a final rule placing 
five synthetic compounds 
used to manufacture 

Spice on the controlled 
substance list. This ac- 

tion makes the wrongful use, posses- 
sion, distribution, and introduction of 
these substances unlawful under 112a, 
UCMJ. 

Spice and other Synthetic Drug use 
such as bath salts, plant food products, 
and other herbal products is on the rise 
in our Navy and Marine Corps, are 
readily available, and falsely marketed 
by manufacturers as a safe way to get 
high while avoiding drug detection. 
Manufacturers constantly change prod- 
uct ingredients and market products 
under new names. In the past year 
alone, hundreds of Sailors were held 
accountable for use or possession of 
Spice or a Spice derivative. One time 
use is enough for discharge. These in- 


Blaze, Dream, Spike 99, Ex-Ses, Spark, — cidents are not restricted to one type of 
Fusion, Dark Knight, Yucatan Fire, K2, platform, command, or location either. 


Most offenders are E-5 and below. De- 
tection through confession of use and 
reporting of behavior has been the most 
common. (First offender caught reports 
of others’ use within the command.) 
Spice looks similar to marijuana or 
oregano and is used for psychoactive or 
hallucinogenic effect. The product con- 
tains organic leaves coated with chemi- 
cals. It is not FDA approved for human 
consumption, and there is no oversight 
of the manufacturing process. Unlike 
marijuana, the synthetic chemicals in 
Spice-type products are more potent 
to the brain and other organs because 
they bind themselves more permanently 
to receptors. Spice could have multiple 
unknown chemicals including harmful 
metal residues, with unknown potency 
potentially five to 200 times more po- 
tent than the THC in marijuana. Users 


Navy Medicine 


are also experi- 
menting by com- 
bining different 
products which 
can dramatically 
change or increase the 
effects. Rapid tolerance in 
some users can lead to increased 
dosage and addiction, either physi- 
cal or psychological. According to the 
DEA, increased use of Spice and other 
synthetics has led to a surge in emer- 
gency room visits and calls to poison 
control centers. 

The signs and symptoms will cer- 
tainly vary with users. However, typical 
effects onset within five to 10 min- 
utes include relaxation and sedation, 
marijuana-like effects such as euphoria, 
giddiness, bloodshot eyes, impaired 
short-term memory and concentration. 
There is also a morning after hangover- 
like effect. Other more serious signs 
and symptoms that may durate for 
eight to 10 hours may include internal 
unrest, tremor, panic attacks, delirium, 
impaired coordination, sleeplessness, sei- 
zures, palpitation, agitation, headache, 
diarrhea, nausea and vomiting. Some 
have even reported paranoid hallucina- 
tions, confusion, mood disorders, loss of 
consciousness and psychotic symptoms 
that can last for days or even months in 
some cases, and can become debilitating. 

The Navy is working with the 
Armed Forces Medical Examiner System 
(AFMES) to develop testing for new 
substances. The AFMES has developed 
the capability to test for a limited num- 
ber of these products. This is a moving 
target and detection is not currently 
available using the Navy’s routine drug 
testing program. Only six compounds 
are on the DEA’s Schedule I list on 
controlled substances, while there are 
100 or more synthetic compounds that 
underground chemists can and will 
continue to use to design new synthetics 
to optimize effects and improve their 


To deter drug 
abuse, I urge all 
commanding officers 
and others in positions 
of leadership to be fully 
engaged in their command’s 
implementation plan to continu- 
ally communicate and educate all 
hands as to the Navy’s zero tolerance 
policy on Spice and other synthetic 
designer drugs. Each command’s aggres- 
sive awareness and education campaign 
should begin during indoctrination and 
be reinforced throughout the year. We 
cannot over-communicate this issue. Ac- 
countability for those who abuse these 
substances will help deter their abuse. 
Given the rise in usage, deterring Spice 
abuse must be an all-hands effort. We all 
need to look out for each other and our 
shipmates and report known violations. 


Spice 
represents 
a real and 
present danger 
to our Sailors’ and 
Marines’ mental and 
physical health, as well as 
their military careers. Please 
help me get the word out to all 
hands. Navy Medicine will con- 
tinue to shine a light on this growing 
concern by delivering sustained, coordi- 
nated, aligned and targeted messages to 
leadership and to the deck plates. Thank 
you for everything you do and thank 
you for your service. It is my honor and 
privilege to represent you as your Sur- 
geon General. 


--Vice Adm. Adam M. Robinson, Jr. 


“Spice represents 
a real and present 
anger to our Sailors’ 
and Marines mental 


marketability by advertising their lack of 
detectability. 


and physical health.” 


Fall 2011 


Force Notes 


The Importance of 


NAVY MEDICINE 


Suicide Prevention 


Across all services September was 
recognized as Suicide Prevention and 
Awareness Month. While suicide num- 
bers in the military tend to be lower 
than their civilian counterparts, suicides 
within all branches have increased. This 
disconcerting trend has prompted lead- 
ers within the Department of Defense 
to reemphasize the importance of service 
members, veterans, and their families 
maintaining proper emotional, physical, 
and psychological health. 

Existing resources are available to 
enhance local suicide prevention pro- 
grams and inform service members of 
programs available to them. The DoD 
and VA have established a partnership 
dedicated primarily to providing educa- 
tion, counseling, and treatment in an 
all-hands effort at suicide prevention; 
anyone can access this resource by visit- 
ing www.suicideoutreach.org. 

Above all, as Shipmates, we have a 
duty to look after one another. It is our 
moral imperative to seek professional 
guidance when our loved ones, co-work- 
ers, or friends manifest warning signs 
such as vocalizing an intention to harm 
their self, exhibiting social withdrawal, 
or otherwise showing uncharacteristic 


changes in behavior. If the situation 
should arise, we must have the courage 
to act; ask if they are planning to harm 
themselves, care for them by actively lis- 
tening and removing any means for self- 
injury, and ensuring they are escorted to 
treatment as soon as possible. 

As the Force Master Chief and Direc- 
tor of the Hospital Corps, I am fully 
aware that many Sailors believe there is 
a stigma attached to seeking help for 
both depression and stress. Such 
thinking, however, could not 
be further from the truth. In 
fact, it is a sign of strength to 
seek help and strength in all 
areas of fitness is critical for 
not only personal wellbeing, 
but for military readiness as 
well. One of our chief duties, then, is 
to eliminate the stigma associated with 
seeking help and to become stewards 
for those resources available to all of us. 
Organizations like Military One Source, 
Fleet and Family Service Centers, and 
your local commands offer robust 
resources toward identifying suicidal 
behaviors and offering pathways toward 
treatment. Additionally, the National 
Suicide Prevention hotline is immedi- 


Even one suicide is one too 


many, it is our duty and sacred 


obligation to look after one 


another at hom 


e and abroad. 


ately available to service members by 
dialing 800-273-TALK (8255) and 
choosing “1”. 

As we continue to fight wars on mul- 
tiple fronts, deal with the uncertainty 
of frequent deployments, and the chal- 
lenges of reintegration with our families, 
there has never been a time more critical 
for re-familiarizing ourselves with the 
tenets of suicide prevention. Even one 
suicide is one too many, it is our duty 
and sacred obligation to look after one 
another at home and abroad. Our cho- 
sen occupation has inherent stressors 
that are not commonplace in the civil- 
ian sector and we must be increasingly 
vigilant in identifying those Sailors 
manifesting a desire to do self-harm and 
seeking treatment before the desire is 
acted out. Please take care of yourselves 
and each other. 

-- Force Master Chief 
Laura Martinez 


Navy Medicine 


MAKING A 
DIFFERENCE 


SEER EPY | PE Li es 


< 


CARIBEEANISES Navy Medical Corps personnel are conducting humanitarian 
and disaster relief assistance as part of Operation Unified Response after a 
7.0 magnitude earthquake struck Haiti on Jan. 12, 2010. 


A GLOBAL FORCE FOR GOOD" 


By Cmdr. Ted St. John 


Executive Officer, Naval Medical Research Unit, San Antonio 


Radiation Health 


key in Japan disaster relief 


ortunately, there are very 

few opportunities for radia- 

tion health professionals to 

take leading roles in disaster 

response. Radiation is one of 

those things that relatively 
few people know much about, so when 
operational commanders’ humanitarian 
assistance efforts are confounded by ra- 
dioactive fallout, they need the kind of 
expertise that the Navy Medical Service 
Corps can provide. 

Radiation Health Officers (RHOs) 
and Radiation Health Technologists 
(RHTs) are trained to understand and 
explain the risks and benefits of radia- 
tion; they do it routinely in hospitals 
and wherever radioactive sources are 
used for industrial applications. 

Risk communication is just a small 
part of what nearly half of the Navy’s 
RHO Community and several RHTs 


have been doing since the Japanese 
reactors in Fukushima Prefecture made 
world headlines. The plant suffered ma- 
jor damage from the 9.0 earthquake and 
subsequent tsunami that hit Japan on 
March 11, 2011. Within a few days, the 
Navy Surgeon General was being briefed 
by Cmdr. Chad Mitchell, the RHO 
Specialty Leader, about how he intended 
to engage Navy RHOs to support the 
Sailors and Marines who were stationed 
in Japan and those aboard ships steam- 
ing within range of the expected radio- 
active plume. The operation was dubbed 
“Operation Tomodachi.” Tomodachi, 
which means “friends” in Japanese, is 
the U.S. military mission to support 
the government of Japan and the Japan 
Self Defense Forces’ humanitarian relief 
efforts. 

Mitchell presented a plan that in- 
cluded the deployment of 10 RHOs to 


Courtesy Photo 
A Radiation Health Officer decontaminates an air-filter housing. Although the levels of radiation did not pose any 
immediate danger by direct exposure, precautions were taken to prevent inhalation or ingestion of radioactive particles. 


Japan to provide on-sight monitoring of 
radioactive fallout, counseling to those 
affected and advice to Navy and Marine 
fleet and force commanders as well as 
Marine commanding generals and com- 
batant commanders in the Pacific Area 
of Responsibility. 

RHOs normally fill a variety of 
diverse operational and support billets 
within the Navy and Marine Corps. 
These billets require expert knowledge 
of all aspects of radiation and radioactive 
materials, such as personnel dosimetry 
throughout the Navy; RH programs in 
all Naval hospitals, on carriers, subma- 
rine tenders and shipyards; management 
of the Navy’s master radiological materi- 
als program; radiological education, 
training and research; radiation safety; 
health care including nuclear medicine, 
radiology and radiation oncology ; pub- 
lic health; medical intelligence; policy 


Navy Medicine 


and oversight. 

Most of the RHOs who were tasked 
to respond did so within 48 hours of 
being contacted. The RHOs were wel- 
comed with open arms by command- 
ing officers (COs), many of whom had 
never dealt with any kind of radioactiv- 
ity. The most important and immediate 
impact that these RHOs had was the 
assurance they provided that personnel 
and equipment were not in any immedi- 
ate danger. Without that assurance, COs 
might have been uncertain about their 
ability to meet their mission require- 
ments and their crews would have been 
subjected to high levels of stress that 
comes from fear of the unknown. Before 
that day, the only thing that many of 
them knew about radiation was either 
what they might have been told in a 
hospital (if they had previously had a 
medical procedure involving radiation) 
or what they had seen in the movies 
(where it is usually portrayed as the 
thing that causes fantastic mutations 
and impossible transformations). 

Knowing that you may be in the 
path of a radioactive plume can be very 
frightening even if the experts back in 
the U.S. say that you are safe. But if a 
subject matter expert joins you on board 
your ship or station with radiation mon- 
itoring equipment and explains the risks 
face to face, as the RHOs did, you can 
rest assured that it is safe to continue 
doing your job without worrying about 
an invisible threat. 

Radiation Health technicians 
(RHTs), the enlisted counterparts to 
RHOs, also joined the effort to assist 
with monitoring, decontamination, do- 
simetry issue, etc. After monitoring the 
ships and stations for contamination, 
RHOs and RHTs trained and led ship’s 
crews in decontamination procedures. 

Navy RHO Cmdr. Ted St. John was 
assigned to the commanding general 
Marine Forces Pacific and the Pacific 
Command (PACOM) Joint Radiation 
Health Working Group at Camp Smith, 
Hawaii. They worked with Army and 
Air Force Radiation Health experts and 
established the hub of communications 
for a world-wide network of radiation 
health experts, including Navy RHOs 
in the U. S., representatives from Naval 
Reactors, Army and Air Force Public 


Fall 2011 


Courtesy Photo 


Radiation Health Officers provided training to ships’ personnel and conducted surveys 
to determine the extent of surface contamination topside as well as throughout the 
ship. In this photo, a contamination probe is being used to count a “swipe”. Any posi- 
tive results would require decontamination procedures. 


Health Centers and all of the RHOs 

in theater. They collected, shared and 
analyzed data, advised the PACOM Sur- 
geon and recommended guidance and 
policies for U. S. forces in Japan. 

Lt. Cmdr. Thad Sharp arrived in Ja- 
pan with two RHTs and began working 
with Lt. Donald Ordinario, the RHO 
already stationed at Naval Hospital Yo- 
kosuka. Together they finalized plans for 
issuing dosimetry when it arrived and 
conducted area radiation monitoring. 
They also worked in concert with the 
Air Force Radiation Assessment Team 
(AFRAT), which was designed specifi- 
cally for this kind of event. The AFRAT 
responded as designed, and provided 
Electronic Personal Dosimeters (EPDs) 
to Marines who were required to operate 
in the “warm zone” or the “hot zone” 
until the Navy’s dosimetry arrived. The 
cooperative efforts of multiple services 
were key factors to the success of this 
mission. 

The Naval Dosimetry Center in 
Bethesda, Md. was not designed for 
this type of event, but Cmdr. Lisa Ken- 
nemutr, officer-in-charge, directed her 
staff to meet unprecedented require- 
ments — to anneal (or re-zero), package 
and ship 13,000 Thermo-luminescence 
Dosimeters (TLDs) to Japan in a matter 
of weeks while keeping up with their 


normal full-time customer load. 

The immediate response phase lasted 
nearly six weeks. By then, it was clear 
that there was no significant health 
risk due to radiation and several RHOs 
returned to their regular jobs. However, 
in order to determine the long-term risk 
and to provide documented evidence 
that those Sailors and Marines did not 
ingest any significant quantities of radia- 
tion, several RHOs were assigned the 
monumental task of conducting internal 
monitoring and dose reconstruction of 
all personnel that were in the area at 
the time of the accident and those who 
provided humanitarian assistance. Three 
whole-body counters and 30 portable 
scintillation counters were sent to Ja- 
pan while CONOPS and a dosimetry 
algorithm at PACOM were written. Lt. 
Cmdr. Reed Selwyn provided technical 
assistance on the dose algorithm from 
USU in Bethesda. 

As of the writing of this article, 
months following the initial accident, 
RHOs were still in theater conducting 
extensive monitoring and follow-on ac- 
tions. Thanks to the combined efforts of 
all Radiation Health Professionals who 
supported Operation Tomodachi, there 
were no incidents or mission degrada- 
tions attributable to radiation or even 
the fear of radiation exposure. © 


A role player mourns over an injured local national after a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device left his spouse disabled during a 
training scenario at the Infantry Immersion Trainer at Camp Pendleton, Calif. The role players act as the human element, which may be one 
of the most valuable pieces of intelligence that can be encountered overseas. 


iL 


Story by Naval Health 
Research Center Public Affairs 


Photos courtesy of 
U.S. Marine Corps 


Marines and sailors 
from Combat Logistics 
Battalion 7, Combat 
Logistics Regiment 1, 
1st Marine Logistics 
Group perform a security 
patrol during an Infantry 
Immersion Trainer scenario 
at Camp Pendleton, Calif. 


x 


10 ¥ oe] 


. — 
A 


Navy Medicine 


| 


A vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonates after Marines and Sailors from Combat Logistics Battalion 7, Combat Logistics 
Regiment 1, 1st Marine Logistics Group enter a simulated town of Afghanistan during an Infantry Immersion Trainer scenario at Camp 


Pendleton, Calif. 


he Naval Health 
Research Center's 
(NHRC) Warf- 
ighter Perfor- 
mance Depart- 
ment is engaged 
in a first-of-its 
kind resilience re- 
search effort with 
the Ist Marine Ex- 
peditionary Force (I 
MEF) at Camp Pendleton, Calif. 
Sponsored by the Office of Naval 
Research (ONR) and the Navy Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery (BUMED), 
the study, “Mindfulness Training for 
Warfighter Performance,” is designed 
to evaluate the potential stress inocula- 
tion effects of the Infantry Immersive 


Fall 2011 


e 


Trainer (IIT), identify neural mecha- 
nisms that underlie elite warfighter 
cognitive functioning, describe the 
efficacy of mindfulness-based mental 
skills training to enhance warfighter 
performance and identify risk and re- 
silience factors in warfighters exposed 
to combat stress. 

In order to achieve this, NHRC is 
comparing the stress-resilience effects 
of an eight-week (20-hour) mindful- 
ness-based mental fitness (MMFT) 
training course against a non-training 
control group to determine whether 
specific neural mechanisms that confer 
an adaptive advantage during stress 
exposure are modifiable through 
mindfulness training. This collabora- 
tive research effort between ONR, 


HERO IRWE: 


BUMED, USMC, I MEF, NHRC, 
UCLA and UC San Diego is intended 
to develop, through novel approaches 
to neuroscience measurements, a bet- 
ter understanding of the processes of 
resilience, the underlying mechanisms 
of resilience, and whether risk factors 
can be mitigated through resilience 
training such as mindfulness training 
that is designed to optimize opera- 
tional performance. 

“The U.S. Marine Corps remains 
committed to building mental tough- 
ness and resistance to injury in all Ma- 
rines prior to the onset of psychologi- 
cal stress,” said Rear Adm. Michael H. 
Anderson, U.S. Navy Medical Officer 
of the Marine Corps. “We are com- 
mitted to developing programs and 


11 


oC AGil 


Logistics Regiment. \ 
~ Logisties Group drag a Mai 
_-simulated being injured by; 
= .during the- Infantry Im S| 


12 


initiatives that make our Marines more 
resistant to the stress of combat, more 
resilient when psychological trauma 
occurs, and better able to recover rap- 
idly from injury. Training the mind, 
similar to training the body, strength- 
ens individual Marines, making them 
more resistant to stress, more resilient 
after trauma, and better able to adapt 
to rapidly changing demands on and 
off the battlefield. We need proof-of- 
concept demonstrations and studies 
to help us decide the way forward in 


using advances in the neurosciences to 
develop stress resistant, psychologically 
resilient, mentally adaptive Marines -- 
21st century tough Marines.” 

The objective of resilience-focused 
training of any type is to provide 
the best skills and tools available to 
Marines and their leaders so that they 
can better cope with the challenges of 
combat and the rigor of life as a Ma- 
rine, both deployed and in garrison. 

Understanding the neural mecha- 
nisms that make a Marine more resil- 


- George Solhan, deputy chief of Naval Research, Expeditionary 
Maneuver Warfare and Combating Terrorism, Science and 
Technology, Department Office of Naval Research 


ient will allow NHRC to determine 
if those mechanisms can be modified 
through mindfulness training. Evalu- 
ations in the study include assessing 
training performance, gathering data 
on saliva, blood, neuropsychological 
assessment, heart-rate, behavioral per- 
formance data, and underlying neural 
mechanisms of changes as a result of 
mindfulness training. 

The study utilizes cutting-edge 
approaches to measurement, balanced 
by the imperative to provide warfight- 
ers with tools they can use to miti- 
gate stress and optimize operational 
performance. The intent of the study 
is to provide a potentially beneficial 
mental skills training tool for warf- 
ighters, as well as to capitalize on the 
IIT as an opportunity to practice 
newly acquired stress mitigation and 


Navy Medicine 


performance optimization skills such 
as mindfulness training in a simulated 
operational setting. 

“Our goal is to understand the 
‘how’ and ‘why’ of this type of train- 
ing through a disciplined and scien- 
tific approach, informing the Marine 
Corps/Navy team on the value of the 
training, and ultimately improving the 
training,” said George Solhan, Deputy 
Chief of Naval Research, Expedition- 
ary Maneuver Warfare and Combating 
Terrorism, Science and Technology, 
Department Office of Naval Research. 
“This supports the commandant’s 
goals of effective and resilient Marines, 
unit cohesion, and keeping faith with 
Marines and their families.” 

Much of the recent interest in 
stress-resilience comes from seminal 
studies by the National Center for Post 


Fall 2011 


Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). 
After decades of researching combat 
stress, trauma, and PTSD, a group of 
investigators decided to examine fac- 
tors that predicted an individual doing 
well after trauma rather than develop- 
ing stress-related pathology. Given 
this background, it can be helpful to 
think of stress-resilience and PTSD as 
opposite ends of a continuum of stress 
adaptation. Therefore, stress-resilience 
and PTSD are distinct but related 
constructs, and findings from one 
domain of research often inform the 
other. 

“NHRC’s program of stress-resil- 
ience research and training is unique 
in that it is based on a translational 
neuroscience approach,” said Dr. 
Douglas C. “Chris” Johnson, lead 


scientist for Warfighter Performance, 


- Rear Adm. Michael H. Anderson 
U.S. Navy Medical Officer of the Marine Corps 


A Marine with Security 
Platoon, 7th Engineer 


of a potential danger 


Immersion Training. 


NHRC. “By ‘translational neurosci- 
ence’ we mean that the program uses 
neuroscience technologies (e.g., fMRI 
and bio-markers) to identify the un- 
derlying mechanisms that distinguish 
someone who adapts well to stress 
from someone who is more vulnerable 
to stress-related injury.” 

It is known that mindfulness 
training approaches work under the 
conditions that have been tested so far. 
The “why” and “how” questions are 
critical to improve and institutional- 
ize the resilience training. The antici- 
pated outcome of the training project 
is to provide the Marine Corps with 
scientific information and facts that 
will inform decisions about whether to 
continue with this type of mindfulness 
training approach to fostering resil- 


iency in the USMC warfighter. © 


area during the Infantry 


Support Battalion, Combat 
Logistics Regiment 1, 1st 
Marine Logistics Group 
signals to the lead vehicle 


13 


14 


Hospital Corps’ premler training 
facility closes tts Aoors 


From Navy Medicine Support Command Public Affairs 


he Hospital Corps’ premier training facil- 

ity closed its doors July 28, following a 

disestablishment ceremony aboard Naval 

Station Great Lakes, Ill. The facility, 

which has provided initial training to the 

U.S. Navy’s enlisted medical profession- 
als for nearly a century, is relocating to Fort Sam Houston, 
Texas. 

Rear Adm. Eleanor Valentin, commander, Navy Medicine 
Support Command and director, Medical Service Corps; 
presided over the ceremony and addressed Sailors, civilians 
and attendees of the important role the facility has played in 
training an estimated 4,200 corpsmen annually. 

“Your students have gone far, saving countless lives in 
harm's way on the battlefield, on board ships at sea, and at 
clinics and hospitals across the globe,” she said. “They have 
gone on to help shape Navy Medicine as we know it today, 
and they have made significant contributions to the establish- 
ment of the METC (Medical Education Training Campus), 
ensuring Navy requirements are met in the joint environ- 
ment. We know that the corpsmen you have trained are well 


prepared with the right capabilities to support our war fighters 
and their families. To each of you, well done for carrying-on 
the traditions of excellence and commitment passed down to 
you from your predecessors.” 

More than 200 Sailors, faculty and invited guests attended 
the event which included remarks from Valentin and Force 
Master Chief Laura Martinez, director of the Hospital Corps. 
NHCS staff also rolled the school’s colors - a tradition which 
companies or platoon-sized elements carry to signify their unit 
designation and corps affiliation for the final time, something 
Valentin said marks both a beginning and an end. 

“Today marks the end of an era, so we pause to recognize 
the rich legacy of your past, reflect on your accomplishments, 
and highlight your future legacy at METC in Fort Sam Hous- 
ton, Texas,” she said. “Each of you have and will leave a legacy 
in the form of the hospital corpsmen you have trained. 

Your legacy is and will be training those who ensure the 
medical readiness of the greatest naval force in the world.” 

Naval Hospital Corps School Great Lakes Commanding 
Officer Capt. Theresa S. Gee echoed Valentin’s sentiments, say- 
ing that serving as the commanding officer of the U.S. Navy’s 


Navy Medicine 


ee 
P 
an Yvette 
Hospital Corpor akes colors dU 
N 


Master Chie HcS) Gre! 


f 
Cores school ( 


largest “A” School remains a definitive marker in her career. 

“T have such respect for the corps; what they do, how 
they manage to do it and why they do what they do,” she 
said. “This all began when I, as a young (lieutenant,) taught 
corps school in San Diego, and I feel my career has come full 
circle coming back to the school that made such an impact 
on me. 

The decision to disestablish the school and relocate all 
military enlisted medical training to Texas came in 2005 from 
the Base Realignment & Closure Commission, something 
Valentin said will echo the shifting face of U.S. involvement 
in contingency operations around the world. 

“Our history illustrates that we moved, transformed, and 
changed over time in response to and anticipation of how we 
fight wars,” she said. “Our move to METC is another such 
move and transformation. When our Sailors and Marines in 
the fight are hurt, we apply all of our training resources to 
provide rapid care, and almost everything we do is in partner- 
ship with our sister services. This is how we fight today’s wars, 
and that is why we are committed to one integrated inter- 
service education and training system that leverages the assets 
of all defense health-care practitioners.” 

Gee said the advent of the new training facility at Fort 
Sam Houston, Texas, will provide a unique learning environ- 
ment while instilling a sense of pride and professionalism 
to what has become one of the most heralded ratings in the 
United States Navy. 


Fall 2011 


Hospital © 
or an’ disestabli 


orpsman 
Gehment cere 


“This does not mean that our corpsmen will not be 
corpsmen any longer,” she said. “Each service is unique, and 
each must retain those things that make sense in their unique 
environments. It is important we retain what makes our 
corpsmen Sailors - our customs and traditions. I believe we 
can work side by side as corpsmen, medics and technicians 
doing the same functions for our patients in a standardized 
way to meet quality guidelines yet still retain all the unique- 
ness’s that make us Sailors, Airmen and Soldiers.” 

The Naval Hospital Corps School initially opened in 
January 1917, one month before the onset of World War I, 
and bears the distinction of being one of the first two schools 
established at Naval Training Center Great Lakes. The school 
was closed in 1921 after World War I, but subsequently re- 
opened two decades later to facilitate corpsman training for 
USS. involvement in World War II, remaining active since. 

In 1997, the Navy’s remaining hospital corpsman ‘A’ 
schools were consolidated and NHCS Great Lakes became 
the Navy’s sole training facility for basic enlisted hospital 
corpsman training. 

Navy Medicine Support Command, headquartered 
aboard Naval Air Station Jacksonville, Fla., provides a single 
point of accountability for all support services within Navy 
Medicine, and exercises command and control, and financial 
management oversight over subordinate commands and en- 
sures the economical and effective delivery of Navy Medicine 
enterprise-wide support services. @ 


15 


16 


By Paul Dillard 


U.S. Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery Public Affairs 


PHOP Offers Assistance to Returning Reservists 


An intoxicated Marine sits in his 
dark bedroom -- hand trembling as it 
wraps tight around a pistol. The weap- 
on is facing inward at the man's heart 
— an empty spot since returning from 
Iraq a year earlier. He pulls the trigger 
hoping for release from his inner-tur- 
moil. Shaking badly, he misfires and 
the bullet plunges into his shoulder. 

The Marine survives his wounds 
-- both physical and mental — through 
support from friends, family and the 
Navy and Marine Corps Reserve Psy- 
chological Health Outreach Program. 

This Marine is one of many Reserve 
service members who must face im- 
mense culture changes and the chal- 
lenges of reintegrating into civilian life 


after returning home from deployment. 

In fact, many Reservists live in 
remote geographical areas that render 
finding support or counseling services 
for themselves or their loved ones diffi- 
cult. Due to this, it’s easy to understand 
why some Reservists may feel as though 
they are part of an overlooked popula- 
tion. 

“The initial relief of being home and 
being with loved ones can give way in a 
few weeks or months to feelings of isola- 
tion, which can exacerbate any psycho- 
logical health issues stemming from the 
stress of being mobilized,” said Paul A. 
Finch, director of psychological health 
Reserve programs for the Navy Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery (BUMED). 


p= 
ELA _—— = 


Photo by Mass Communications Specialist 3rd Class Charles Oki 


According to Finch, Reservists also face 
access to care challenges, since their eli- 
gibility and access to military or Veteran 
Affairs health care is dependent on a 
number of factors. 

This is where the BUMED Navy 
and Marine Corps Reserve Psychologi- 
cal Health Outreach Program (PHOP) 
comes in. 

“The PHOP teams work every day to 
ensure Reserve Sailors and Marines get 
the same quality of care with regards to 
their mental health as an active duty ser- 
vice member because their sacrifices are 
just as great,” said Shelly S. McDowell, 
the PHOP project manager. 

PHOP was initially developed in 
2008 to fill a gap in services identified 


The Navy and Marine Corps Reserve Psychological Health Outreach Program assist Reserve service members who face culture 
changes and the challenges of reintegrating into civilian life after returning home from deployment. 


Navy Medicine 


for the Reserves by BUMED leadership. 
It was piloted first in the Naval Reserves 
(NR) and then expanded to include the 
Marine Forces Reserve (MFR) in fiscal 
year 2010. The program is designed to 
ensure that Reservists have full access 

to appropriate psychological health care 
services, to facilitate recovery from any 
stress injuries, and to increase resiliency 
among deploying Reservists. 

“PHOP is primarily marketed as a 
safety net for psychological health,” said 
McDowell. “But to really understand 
what we do, you have to think outside 
the traditional psychological support 
box. If there is anything that can impact 
a Reservist or their family, either posi- 
tively or negatively, or anything that can 
support or detract from their readiness, 
PHOP can assist them.” 

This means that outreach team mem- 
bers help Reserve Sailors and Marines, 
as well as their families with problems 
in ways that go beyond the usual per- 
ception of mental health treatment, 
often tackling concrete issues that need 
to be alleviated before the traditional 
psychological or mental health treat- 
ment efforts can even begin. Embed- 
ded with NR or MER units regionally, 
all of the five to six members in each 
PHOP team are licensed mental health 
providers. They are also experts in find- 
ing and connecting with military and 
local resources that effectively support 
Reservists. 

“T recall a time when a service mem- 
ber came back from deployment and 
discovered that his employer was no 
longer in business,” said Linda Green- 
Baskett, a member of the PHOP team 
in the Northwest Navy Reserve Com- 
ponent Command (RCC) in Everett, 
Wash. “We explored what type of work 
he enjoys, what skills he felt were his 
strongest and what he could imagine do- 
ing for his life’s work moving forward. 
We were able to connect him to specific 
resources for employment and education 
and he made the decision to return to 
college in order to complete his educa- 
tion.” 

According to Green-Baskett, this is 
but one example of PHOP helping to 


Fall 2011 


Paul A. Finch is the director of psychological health Reserve programs for the Navy 


Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. 


determine the needs of a client and then 
putting them in touch with a broad 
range of resources to meet those needs. 
They can and have helped service mem- 
bers locate resources closer to home to 
reduce travel time. They can help service 
members look for jobs, continue their 
education or deal with marital problems. 

The help and resources PHOP teams 
offer are not restricted to service mem- 
bers; they frequently deal with family 
members as well. They can offer services 
such as finding resources for new parent 
support, emergency food, employment, 
engaging family members in coping 
with deployment and much more. 

“Our program is a resource for ev- 
erything that can have a stressful impact 
on a service member's life including 
help finding employment, health care, 
transportation, education, even home 
repairs,” said Green-Baskett. “We want 
every service member to know that the 
PHOP program provides support and 
referrals for everything that impacts a 
service member or family member's well 
being and is not limited to dealing with 
just the mental health issues that accom- 
pany life’s changes.” 

At full capacity the PHOP program 
has 55 staff members and consists of 
11 teams assigned throughout the 
United States. Teams are embedded at 


each of the five Navy RCCs and at six 
geographically-centered MFR home 
training centers. 

According to Finch, during fiscal 
year 2010 the PHOP teams conducted 
mental health screenings for more than 
1,500 reservists, made outreach calls to 
over 5,000 demobilized reservists, fol- 
lowed up on more than 3,601 referrals 
from Reserve commands, family mem- 
bers and others, and conducted approxi- 
mately 400 site visits to Reserve units 
throughout the country, providing psy- 
chological health training to more than 
38, 000 Reservists and staff members. 
They also made approximately 40,000 
other contacts—successful follow-ups 
with current clients and collateral con- 
tacts with commands, all while serving 
as facilitators for all of the Yellow Rib- 
bon Returning Warrior Workshops. 

“Many times folks can be misled by 
the name Psychological Health Out- 
reach Program and believe that all we 
might offer is referrals for counseling,” 
said Green-Baskett. “Yes, we can certain- 
ly provide referrals and client manage- 
ment for mental health and counseling 
needs, but we also do so much more.” 

For further information on the 
PHOP program or for contact informa- 
tion visit http://www.navyreserve.navy. 


mil/pages/phop.aspx ® 


Photo | by Paul Dillard 


17 


18 


Ss 


YY 
Yl, | 
% é Y) 


N 


\ 


By Anna Hancock 
Naval Hospital Camp Lejeune Public Affairs 

A heavy metal song was blaring 
throughout the art studio. A Marine 
initiated small talk about past combat 
experiences filled with roadside bombs 
and six-hour long firefights. Several 
others chimed in sharing their stories; 
comparing notes. Paintings of blood- 
ied Kevlar helmets, rocket-propelled 
grenade launchers, HUMVEEs and 
patriotic tones were scattered in the 
room. Marines and Sailors, who can be 
expected to discuss weapons and war- 
fare, wrapped up their conversation by 
deciding on illustrating their experience 
with either a pencil or a paint brush. 

This was not your conventional art 
class. 

It was a weekly studio art therapy 
group session at Naval Hospital Camp 
Lejeune’s (NHCL) Central Intake and 
Referral Center (CIRC). 

The art therapy program continues to 
be one of the most effective Post-Trau- 
matic Stress Disorder (PTSD) treatment 
programs offered by CIRC. Patients 
with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) also 
benefit greatly from art therapy. 

The goals of art therapy are many. 
According to the American Art Therapy 
Association, by integrating the fields 
of human development, visual art, and 
the creative process through models 
of counseling and psychotherapy, art 
therapy helps patients who have been 
diagnosed with PTSD or TBI resolve 


conflicts, develop interpersonal skills, 
manage behavior, reduce stress, increase 
self-esteem and achieve insight. It also 
assists in rehabilitation by developing 
hand-eye coordination and increasing 
focus and concentration. 
Knowing your chances 
and getting help 

Research conducted by the DoD 
Center for 
Deployment 
Health Re- 
search shows 
that service 
members who 
deploy have 
an increased 
risk for PTSD 
symptoms and 
or exposure 
to instances 
causing TBI. 
Marine Corps 
Manpower 
and Reserve 
Affairs reports 
that between 
2001 — 2010, 
about 276,500 
Marines have 
deployed in 
support of 
Operation 
Enduring 
Freedom or 
Operation 
Iraqi Freedom. And in 2011, Marine 
Corps Base Camp Lejeune deployed ap- 
proximately 23,000 Marines and Sailors. 

One can expect the high number of 
deployed Marines and Sailors to cor- 


The black tear in this chalk drawing represents 
when the patient feels depressed. The patient 
explains that the colors that surround it show 
the good feelings that the patient wants to have. therapy.” 


Ss 


relate with NHCLs volume of patients 
being treated with PTSD or TBI, but 
those who do not feel comfortable 
admitting they need help, have trouble 
communicating their feelings, or have 
difficulties recognizing something in 
them has changed, may still not be re- 
ceiving the treatment they need. 

“There is a stigma that exists with 
admitting you are 
dealing with stress 
from exposure 
to a traumatic 
event. Service 
members often 
feel exposed, 
weak or even 
defeated. Some 
feel like they were 
not successful at 
accomplishing 
their mission,” 
explained Gayla 
Elliott, Master’s- 
level art therapist 
and founder 
of NHCL art 
therapy program. 
“Hopefully art 
therapy can reach 
the patients reluc- 
tant to undergo 
other, more tra- 
ditional, forms of 


Marine Corps 
leadership and Navy medicine providers 
across the board are urging Marines and 
Sailors to realize they are not defeated. 
They are not weak. They should not 
be ashamed. It is okay to ask for help. 


Navy Medicine 


And the providers at NHCL agree that 
striving to approach military medicine 
on a comprehensive, more holistic ap- 
proach is the best way to do so. Holistic 
medicine provides options for service 
members to get treatment when they 
need it, using a method that works best 
for them, while feeling comfortable do- 
ing so. 

“War deployments expose ser- 
vice members to unique, life-altering, 
traumatic events that one can never be 
fully prepared to handle. That’s just the 
nature of the beast,” stated Elliott. “But 
it’s the process of reintegrating into life 
outside of the combat environment and 
learning how to cope with the trauma 
that is crucial to moving forward in a 
positive direction.” 

No skills required 

For many patients in the art therapy 
program, they noted how difficult it was 
to embrace traditional one-on-one ses- 
sions with a mental health therapist. 

NHCLs art therapy program treats 
an average of 40 patients per week who 
are referred for care from their Primary 
Care Manager, and have been identified 
as patients that may respond well to this 
non-traditional form of therapy. The 
group and individual sessions augment 
traditional therapy and give voice to 
thoughts and feelings that the service 
member may have difficulty expressing. 
Elliott lauded the patients for being ded- 


Fall 2011 


icated and focused in their art therapy 
sessions and driven to progress. 

Art therapy groups are also offered 
on the inpatient psychiatric ward at 
NHCL. Each session typically begins 
with a discussion lead by Elliott. The 
patient briefly talks about their experi- 
ences or about something that is weigh- 
ing heavily on their minds. Then Elliott 
or the group chooses a theme to depict 
through art, and each patient decides on 
the medium for their artistic creation. 
Elliott has pencils, paints, chalk, pastels, 
clay and collage materials available for 
the patients. 

“The great thing is that you don't 
need to be good at art,” explains Elliott. 
“Unconscious material is shown through 
art, even if the drawing is not mechani- 
cally perfect.” 

Elliott continued to say that the 
drawings, paintings and sculptures are 
powerful because the content has deep 
meaning for the patient. Once the art is 
put on paper, the patient can see both 
the art and the problems face to face. 
Then Elliott assists the patient in under- 
standing the images and discussing the 
best method to overcome or deal with 
what is depicted. 

“A new problem or a new feeling or a 
new way to heal unfolds every time a pa- 
tient explains the picture, whether it is a 
scribble or a highly developed painting,” 
said Elliott. 


In this chalk drawing 
the mountains 
represent a patient's 
PTSD. The reflection in 
the water represents 
the illusions and 
self-deception used 

to avoid the pain of 
traumatic memories. 
The metaphor allow 
the patient to see his 
goals of confronting 
the immensity of the 
challenge, climb the 
mountain and reach 
the hope and power 
symbolized by the sun. 


Moving forward 

One benefit that is not typically re- 
searched as an attribute of art therapy is 
how it influences individuals beyond the 
treatment of PTSD or TBI. 

After gaining insight from each artis- 
tic piece created in the CIRC studio art 
therapy group and learning from other 
wounded service members overcoming 
similar challenges, several patients de- 
cided to give back to who they call their 
“wounded warrior family.” 

“T donated one of my favorite art 
pieces to be sold at an auction held to 
raise money for the family of an explo- 
sive ordinance device technician I once 
served with. He was wounded overseas,” 
noted Marine Corps Staff Sgt. Jason 
Jensen, art therapy patient who was 
wounded during a deployment to Iraq 
in 2006. “As a wounded warrior, I feel 
honored to give a piece of my artwork to 
help another wounded warrior family.” 

Many of the members in the group 
session also donated pieces to be auc- 
tioned off to assist the family in need. 

All agreed that Jensen’s work and 
artistic ability supersedes their own. All 
agreed his work will bring in the most 
donations for the family. 

A positive, clear and supportive way 
of thinking that demonstrates how art 
therapy assisted with the rehabilitation 
for patients overcoming the life-chang- 
ing experiences of combat. ® 


19 


Naval Hospital Jacksonville 

(NH Jax) Nurse, Ensign Chelsea 
Godfrey (left), takes a moment to 
say hello to Teddy, a pet therapy 
puppy and his handler, NH Jax 
Associate Director for Nursing 
Services Cmdr. Debroah Roy 
(right). The hospital’s Canine 
Corps pet visitation therapy 
supports a healing environment 
by bringing aspects of home 
into the hospital to 
reduce anxiety 
for patients and 
staff alike. 


Qa 


Morgan 


20 


Photo by HM1 Scott 


By Tami Begasse 
Naval Hospital Jacksonville Public Affairs 
Over the past 60 years animals have been 
used to benefit patients of all ages and ailments 
in coping with the medical and psychological 
challenges that face them. Research suggests 
that visits with animals may improve patient 
outcomes, decrease length of hospital stay, help 
with confusion, depression and manage pain 
symptoms. And today, dogs and other pets can 
be found in hospitals, convalescent homes and 
residential care facilities around the world—in- 
cluding at Naval Hospital Jacksonville. 
Understanding the value four footed thera- 
pists bring to the healing process, Naval Hospi- 
tal Jacksonville established its Canine Corps—a 
pet visitation therapy program—in 2008. The 
volunteer-based program currently boasts eight 
certified dogs with seven 
human handlers 
who see up to 
100 hospi- 
tal patients, 
visitors and 
staff each 
time they 
visit. 


“Our Canine Corps provides patients and 
staff alike with a feeling of companionship and 
unconditional love which can create a sense of 
calm, emotional comfort and safety,” explains 
Naval Hospital Jacksonville Associate Director 
for Nursing Services, Cmdr. Deborah Roy, who 
also heads up the program. “Visiting animals can 
help people feel less lonely and less depressed. 
Patients and their families often talk to the dogs, 
sharing personal thoughts, feelings and memo- 
ries. 

Along with boosting patients’ spirits, en- 
couraging interaction and reducing stress, pet 
visitation therapy has been shown to reduce 
blood pressure, increase sensory stimulation and 
decrease pain perception during and after visits. 
These benefits can accelerate recovery times and 
ease the burden of being in a hospital. Animals 
also provide a socially acceptable way to satisfy 
the human need to touch and be touched. 

Roy’s two cavalier spaniels, Molly and Teddy, 
are active in the program. Illustrating the posi- 
tive affect dogs have on patients, Roy recalled a 
visit to the hospital’s immunization clinic where 
she saw a number of young children waiting 
for shots. After noticing an especially anxious 
5-year-old girl, Roy had her dog Molly stay with 
the girl the entire time, providing her with com- 
fort while serving as a much-needed distraction. 

While assigned to another military hospital 
where she participated in a similar program, Roy 
brought her dog Molly to visit a woman who 
had suffered a stroke. “After placing the women’s 
unaffected hand on Molly, the women began to 
move her hand to pat her coat. It was the most 

interaction the woman had shown to that point 
in her recovery,” said Roy. 

“This program helps support a healing en- 
vironment by bringing aspects of home into 
the hospital to reduce anxiety—whether in our 
patients or our staff,” said Roy. “Our patients 
and staff understand that our Canine Corps 
volunteers and their dogs aren't asking for any- 
thing. They are simply offering companionship. 
When our dogs come in, people cheer up—even 
if just for the moment—while they get their 
dose of puppy love.” 

The dogs in NH Jax Canine Corps have 
been screened for health, temperament, and 
obedience with all dogs having obtained their 
Canine Good Citizen certification through the 
American Kennel Club and must be at least 12 
months old. Human handlers are not certi- 
fied therapists, and do not provide therapy to 
patients. Volunteers commit to no less than 
one hour per month to the program. For more 
information call 904-542-7583. ® 


Navy Medicine 


Petty Officer 2nd Class Tyreen S. McRae and Petty Officer 3rd Class Tina A. Leet, participants in neurologic music therapy, perfect 
their harmonica skills at Naval Medical Center San Diego Feb. 28. Wounded Warriors use music therapy to improve motor function, 


memory retention and stress management. 


Story and photo by Lance Cpl. Lisa M. Tourtelot 
Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, Calif. 


“One day I was really mad and Tina 
was depressed,” said Petty Officer 3rd 
Class Elisa M. Wyatt, a participant in 
the neurologic music therapy group at 
Naval Medical Center San Diego. “We 
started writing the ‘Medical Hold’ song 
and then we couldn’ stop laughing. 
Everyone in the group got into it. They 
started coming up with dances, like 
the crutch dance. It just spread. People 
related to it.” 

Wyatt and Petty Officer 3rd Class 
Tina A. Leet, are Wounded Warriors. 
The group is the neurologic music ther- 
apy group at NMCSD where they play 
music to aid the healing process. 

Neurologic music therapy uses music 
- learning to play various instruments, 
sing, read sheet music and write songs 
- to help patients achieve non-musical 
goals in their recovery, such as improved 
motor skills, speech articulation, memo- 
ry improvement and stress reduction. 


Fall 2011 


“(Music therapy] has been one of the 
most helpful things they have here,” said 
Wyatt. “We get to contribute [in song 
writing] and be part of a team, which is 
why we joined the military.” 

The Wounded Warriors share com- 
mon experiences as service members to 
communicate as a group. “[Group mem- 
bers] have a look of relief when they say 
something and someone else says they 
know what the other person is talking 
about,” said Rebecca Vaudreuil, a board- 
certified neurologic music therapist with 
Resounding Joy, Inc. “They feel more 
comfortable opening up in the future. 
It’s a support system.” 

Vaudreduil began the first eight-week 
session in October 2010 and subsequent 
groups have recorded CDs and per- 
formed their songs at private ceremo- 
nies, including military graduations and 
celebrations at local music museums. 

Wounded Warriors participating in 
the group decide whether they want to 
write music, record CD’s or perform 
live, explained Vaudreuil. 

The needs of the group dictate the 
direction each eight-week session takes, 
but the overall goals of pain and stress 


management, memory retention and 
improved motor function remain the 
same. 

Patients work on relevant stress and 
pain control tools when they are learn- 
ing to play the various instruments. For 
example, patients focus on deep breath- 
ing techniques while learning to play the 
harmonica. 

Deep breathing, Vaudreuil explained, 
can help patients avoid angry outbursts 
when in a stressful situation. 

Leet explained that she now turns 
to her favorite positive music when the 
anxiety begins to take hold, and has 
even found that her pain lessens when 
her stress is under control. 

Vaudreuil explained that while play- 
ing instruments is vital to the therapy, 
song writing remains one of the most 
important aspects of music therapy be- 
cause of its cathartic effect on patients. 

“Every time I listen to our songs it 
brings tears to my eyes,” said Wyatt. “It 
brings that sense of camaraderie back.” 

Those interested in purchasing a CD, 
donating or volunteering can contact 
Vaudreuil at rvaudreuil@resoundingjoy- 
inc.org. ® 


21 


By Tami Begasse 
Naval Hospital Jacksonville Public Affairs 


Naval Hospital Jacksonville is piloting an evoca- 
tive new treatment modality to improve the emo- 
tional, psychological, and social wellbeing of its 
post-deployed service members. Called Equine-As- 
sisted Therapy, this emerging therapy approach uses 
horses to help participants experience themselves 
differently and discover new ways of dealing with 
difficult situations. 

Naval Hospital Jacksonville Deployment Health 
Center Clinical Psychologist Tracy Hejmanowski is 
collaborating with Licensed Mental Health Coun- 
selor StarrLee Heady of PX Equine Enterprises to 


Animal-assisted therapies recognize that the 
bond between animals and humans can encourage 
emotional healing. Developing a relationship with a 
horse has been shown to help people overcome fears, 
to problem solve and develop coping techniques, 
while building trust, respect, confidence and com- 
Passion. 

Rather than riding the horse, equine-based activi- 
ties are performed on the ground, and include such 
things as grooming, haltering, leading and overall 
relating to the horse. During the process of working 
with the horses, Hejmanowski and Heady and her 
staff — all certified or trained in the Equine Assisted 
Growth and Learning Association (EAGALA) model 
of Equine Assisted Psychotherapy — verbally engage 
with service members to process feelings, behaviors 
and patterns. The ultimate goal is to build skills such 
as assertiveness, patience, effective non-verbal com- 
munication, confidence in novel or tense situations 
and better self-control. 


pushing, kicking, biting, squealing, grooming one 
another and grazing together. These encounters 
can help people learn about themselves and their 
own family and friends. As “prey animals” horses’ 
hypervigilance makes them amazingly sensitive. 
They pick up on body language, instinctively flee 
from fear, and some can actually pick up on cer- 
tain feelings. 

Naval Hospital Jacksonville's new intensive 
day treatment program to help service members 
with PTSD and post-concussive symptoms is 
expected to be launched early 2012. Along with 
the successful equine-assisted therapy, it will bring 
together other treatment approaches involving 
creative arts, physical and recreational activities, 
desensitizing activities, cognitive retraining and 
group processing - both in traditional and unique 
settings, such as the National Cemetery and Me- 
morial Wall. 

Hejmanowski adds, "We know that healing the 


wd A servicemember 


=== walks his horse 
around the facility 
as part of an 
equine-assisted 

» therapy program. 


Naval Hospital 
Jacksonville is 

=, piloting a new 

. treatment program 
= to improve 

4 the emotional, 
psychological, and 
social well being of 


offer this pilot program to six service members. The Heady explains why the use of horses as an ad- 

12 sessions have been taking place at a 30-acre facil- junct to psychotherapy is so effective. “Horses com- 

ity in Green Cove Springs, Fla. bine fearfulness and power. They aren't judgmental, 
“This form of animal-assisted therapy continues and don’t care what you look like. They mirror 

to gain support among mental health profession- human moods, and respond negatively to nega- 


deeply felt wounds of war to help service members 
find greater peace of mind happens most meaning- 
fully in an experiential treatment program where 
participants can heal alongside their comrades.” 
For more information contact NH Jax’s De- 


22 


A servicemember 
walks his horse 
through a barricade 
during an equine- 
assisted therapy 
program. Naval 
Hospital Jacksonville 
is piloting a new 
treatment program 
to improve 

the emotional, 
psychological, and 
social well being of 
its post-deployed 
servicemembers. 


als as an effective therapeutic approach, address- 
ing a number of mental health concerns, including 
depression and anxiety, self esteem, post traumatic 
stress and relational problems,” said Hejmanowski. 
“Our long-term goal is to combine equine-assisted 
therapy with other traditional and non-traditional 
therapies as the basis for an immersive day treat- 
ment program we will make available to service 
members diagnosed with PTSD and post-concus- 
sive syndrome.” 


tive emotions. This helps participants understand 
that their own behavior can affect others, making it 
necessary to modify their behavior in order to work 
successfully with the animal. And only through mu- 
tual trust and respect can a human and horse bond,” 
she said. Something as simple as the size differential 
between horses and people actually creates an oppor- 
tunity to overcome fear.” 

Horses can be stubborn or defiant, playful or 
moody, while exhibiting herd dynamics such as 


Photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Jacob Sippel 


Navy Medicine 


ployment Health Center at 904-542-3500, ext. 
8115 or 8724 or PX Equine at 904-529-7999. ® 


Acupuncture 


By Tammy Eskew 
Naval Hospital Lemoore Public Affairs 


The use of various forms of comple- 
mentary healthcare is being integrated 
into the military to help ensure mission 
readiness. One such valuable service now 
available to active duty military mem- 
bers is acupuncture. 

Naval Hospital Lemoore Hornet 
Health Clinic is one of the locations 
offering the unique treatment to service 
members. 

Lt. Cmdr . Chris Hardy, the staff 
Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine physician, was one of the first 
active-duty Navy doctors to be trained 
in acupuncture. 

“It was a great opportunity and in- 
credible learning experience to receive 
this training. I now have an additional 
tool to help my patients; many whom 
have tried other traditional modalities 
without success.” 

Acupuncture has been practiced for 
5,000 years, originating in China. Tra- 


Fall 2011 


ditional acupuncture has been practiced 
as a complete system of medicine, with 

introduction to the United States in the 
1970's. 

“The last 10 to 15 years have seen 
tremendous progress in the understand- 
ing of how acupuncture actually works, 
especially for pain relief,” said Hardy. 

Acupuncture is currently being 
utilized by Navy physicians in combat 
environments with promising results. 

“The greatest benefit has been seen in 
pain management, as acupuncture pa- 
tients are often able to use less narcotic 
pain medication for pain resulting from 
their injuries,” said Hardy. “Acupuncture 
and electroacupuncture (adding a small 
electrical current to the needles) stimu- 
late the release of our body’s own pain 
relieving chemicals from the brain and 
spinal cord.” 

Conditions that typically respond 
well to acupuncture include: headaches, 
chronic back pain, and other chronic 
musculoskeletal pain. 


Photo courtesy of Naval Hospital Lemoore 
“Acupuncture has also shown early 
promise in stress-related conditions such 

as PTSD. It is important to realize that 
acupuncture is not a ‘cure-all’, but rather 
a valuable adjunct to a comprehensive 
treatment program for chronic pain and 
stress-related psychiatric issues,” said 
Hardy . 

Acupuncture services at Lemoore 
Hornet Health Clinic are being offered 
only to active duty members by consul- 


tation from their Primary Care Manager. ® 


its post-deployed 
servicemembers. 


23 


Story and photos by Spe. Trisha pe 
ial " 

a ee 1 UR 
. é. | : 


‘ : ' 


Naval candidate,Petty Officer 3rd’Class Toby 

League straps a casualty onto a litter with the help 

of staff support as part of Combat Testing Lane 3 ~ 
for the.2011 U.S. Army Europe Expert Field*Medical 
Badge Standardization.and-Testing Aug. 3, 2011.* » 


ir hissed Naples, Italy, are participating in a group of Army,” said 


between in the Expert Field Medical 
the teeth Badge, or EFMB, testing in 
of Hospital order to further improve the 
Corpsman __ overall standard of care for 
3rd Class wounded personnel on the 
Toby League _ battlefield. 

as he maneu- “It broadens your scope,” 
vered under a Keating said. “Everyone does 


barbed wire fence obstacle as 
part of Combat Testing Lane 
3 during the 2011 U.S. Army 
Europe Expert Field Medical 
Badge Standardization and 
Testing here, Aug. 3. 

Navy Corpsmen are rarely 
seen training with U.S. Army 
Soldiers, however, League and 
Seaman Corey Keating, both 
from Naval Support Acitivity 


their patient assessments and 
field exams differently so you 
can pick and choose between 
different things and build a 
larger knowledge base.” 

Working with Soldiers 
brought about a new way of 
thinking for the two Sailors 
participating in this event. 

“T didn’t know what to 


Keating. “I got to meet a lot 
of these guys and you hear 
stories here and there but 
meeting them and working 
with them really changes your 
mind about it.” 

League, who has two 
combat deployments under 
his belt, found he had a lot 
in common with his fellow 
Army candidates. 

“These guys, a lot of them 
are combat deployed like my- 
self,” he said. “We've seen a 
lot of different things that we 
relate to since weve been in a 
lot of the same places.” 

As Sailors, League and 


expect as a corpsman out here Keating faced several difficul- 


ties adjusting to the Army 
requirements. 

“The one that I’m really 
worried about is the land 
navigation,” League said. 
“We don't really get to do 
that much since in the Navy 
there’s not much land in the 
ocean.” 

Keating expects to run 
into some difficulties when 
he performs his run-through 
of the EFMB’s Combat Test- 
ing Lane 3, which is heavily 
focused on basic Soldier skills 
that are not as familiar to 
medical professionals who 
work in a naval environment. 

“T’'m expecting some of the 
more difficult points to be the 


Navy Medicine 


extraction from the vehicle,” 
he said. “The radio as well 
will be hard, because I haven't 
really dealt with that at all.” 

While run-throughs and 
demos of all required tasks 
are performed several times 
before testing, the EFMB still 
remains a serious challenge, 
regardless of military branch. 

“Most of my Marine bud- 
dies would probably laugh 
about this, but [EFMB] is 
pretty serious,” League said. 
“They push these guys real 
hard. Just look at the pass fail 
rate. Only half of these guys 
are going to make it.” 

“Tm not even sure I will, 


honestly,” said League. © 


Fall 2011 


Above - Naval 


candidate Petty 
Officer 3rd Class 
Toby League 
straps a casualty 
onto a litter with 
the help of staff 
support as part of 
Combat Testing 
Lane 3 for the 2011 
U.S. Army Europe 
Expert Field 
Medical Badge 
Standardization 
and Testing Aug. 
3, 2011. 


Left - Petty Officer 
3rd Class Toby 
League, Naval 
candidate for 

the 2011 U.S. 
Army Europe 
Expert Field 
Medical Badge 
Standardization 
and Testing calls 
for an evacuation 
of casualties as 
part of Combat 
Testing Lane 3 
Aug. 3, 2011. 


26 


Redefining Operational 


Navy medical professionals deploying 
to the busiest military trauma center 
in the world will receive a new pre- 
deployment training course as early as 
February 2012, according to members 
of a Navy Medicine Support Command 
(NMSC) August 30-31 planning meet- 
ing held in Jacksonville, Fla. 

The meeting, organized to enhance 
existing training doctrine and programs 
for service members scheduled to spend 
six, nine or 12 months at the North 
American Treaty Organization (NATO)- 
run Role 3 Hospital at Kandahar Air 
Field in Afghanistan, resulted in a plan 
to further integrate the Navy Expe- 
ditionary Medical Training Institute 


(NEMTI) in the training pipeline for 
Kandahar Role 3 Hospital-bound Navy 
Medicine personnel. 

The term "Role" describes the tiers 
in which medical support is organized, 
with Role 3 describing the capabilities of 
a theater-level hospital. 

Service members and civilian 
employees from the Navy Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery (BUMED), 

Fleet Forces Command (FFC), NMSC, 
Navy Medical Center Portsmouth, VA, 
Navy Medicine Manpower, Personnel, 
Training and Education (NM MPT&E) 
Command, the Naval Operational Med- 
icine Institute (NOMI) and NEMTI 
discussed the feasibility of integrating a 


By Mass Communications Specialist 
1st Class Bruce Cummins 
Navy Medicine Support Command Public Affairs 


Medical [raining 


training mechanism designed to provide 
a well-rounded approach to medical 
professionals preparing for a tour of 
duty at the military's most active battle- 
field hospital in more than four decades. 
According to NMSC Lean Six Sigma 
Program Management Office Director 
Capt. Kathryn Summers, Nurse Corps, 
providing a training evolution to prepare 
medical professionals for an arduous 
tour of duty remains a cornerstone of 
NMSC leadership. The majority of 
these professionals have not experi- 
enced this level of combat trauma, and 
this training is something she said will 
directly benefit the hundreds of patients 
the Kandahar Role 3 Hospital will un- 


Photo courtesy of the NATO Role III Medical Center 


Navy Corpsmen take an injured patient to the NATO Role III Medical Center in Kandahar, Afghanistan. 


Navy Medicine 


doubtedly see. 

"The medical team that Navy 
Medicine will be sending to Kanda- 
har in February will have an incredible 
responsibility to provide critical life 
and limb saving health care to our most 
precious asset - our Sailors, Soldiers, 
Airmen and Marines," she said. "It is 
our leadership responsibility to train our 
staff so they can continue to optimize 
health outcomes for our wounded war- 
riors and Navy Medicine Support Com- 
mand leadership takes the responsibility 
of providing world-class pre-deployment 
training with great pride." 

FFC, which maintains oversight of 
Navy Individual Augmentee Combat 
Training (NIACT), remains the final ap- 
proval authority for the additional train- 
ing medical professionals en route to 
Kandahar Role 3 Hospital will undergo. 
Individuals charged with developing the 
curriculum said incorporating scenarios 
closely approximating what person- 
nel could expect remains paramount. 
While at the same time ensuring that 
all requisite training, both combat skills 
and medical unit training, for U.S. Navy 
personnel entering the U.S. Central 
Command (USCENTCOM) area of 
operations is completed. 

"Tt is critical that we provide 
as much realism as possible, said 
Navy Medical Center, Portsmouth, Va., 
Simulation Center Director Capt. Jim 
Ritchie. "This helps manage the expec- 
tations of the staff and will, through 
team work, build stronger resilience as 
they provide the life-saving medical care 
in such a challenging environment." 

The U.S. Navy assumed responsi- 
bility for the Kandahar Role 3 Hospital 
operations from Canadian forces in 
August 2009, and a newer, more mod- 
ern $60 million facility was opened in 
May 2010. Previous training for medical 
personnel deploying to the Kanda- 
har Role 3 hospital centered primarily 
around combat skills, a necessity for 
deployed service members. Program 
managers, however, recognized the need 
to integrate medical training scenarios to 
expand upon the knowledge and skills 
required to fill positions at the Kanda- 
har Role 3 facility, a far cry from the 
standard operating procedures at most 
military treatment facilities. 


Fall 2011 


“It Is critical that we 
provide as much realism 


In response to feedback from previ- 
ously deployed personnel, including the 
past and current commanding officers 
of the Role 3 Kandahar Medical Facility, 
and other identified gaps in training, 
CENTCOM published the USCENT- 
COM 2012 Non-Standard Forces Train- 
ing Requirement Document which adds 
specific medical training requirements 
for medical units deploying to the area 
of operations. 

New requirements include specific 
trauma team training, care of mild 
traumatic brain injury, clinical practice 
guidelines (best clinical practices devel- 
oped in theater), sexual assault forensic 
examinations and training on the clini- 
cal computer systems used in theater. 

According to NMSC Deputy Chief 
of Staff, M5, Pat Craddock, with medi- 
cal team training now recognized as a 
CENTCOM requirement, Navy Medi- 
cine's training structure is making plans 
to provide the much-needed training 
to the next wave of personnel destined 
for Kandahar Role 3 Hospital. She said 
NOMI Detachment NEMTI, located 
at Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, 
Calif., will serve as an intermediate stop 
after medical professionals complete 
NIACT requirements at military train- 
ing sites such as Fort Dix, N.J. or Fort 
Jackson, S.C. 

Craddock added that this addi- 
tional medical team training is estimated 
to last 8 to 10 days, but stressed that no 
time would be added to the length of a 
service member's deployment. 

She also said this training effort, 
designed to continue providing the 
life-saving care and treatment of service 
members actively engaged in contin- 
gency operations in Afghanistan, is the 
result of numerous entities working 
together to ensure the estimated 200 


- Capt. Jim Ritchie, 
Navy Medical Center, Portsmouth, Va., 
Simulation Center Director 


members staffing the hospital each 
deployment - 60 of whom are Navy Re- 
servists - are expertly trained and ready 
for what can be a challenging mission. 

"Tt will take a team effort to execute 
the full training schedule with such a 
large group in a compact time period," 
she said. "But I have no doubt that 
NEMTI will accomplish this training by 
capitalizing on partnerships with Navy 
Medicine as well as through receiv- 
ing support from the Defense Medical 
Readiness Training Institute for trauma 
instructors and other Navy Medicine 
MTFs [Medical Treatment Facilities] for 
assistance in simulation exercises." 

Summers also said the importance 
of partnerships during this effort could 
not be understated, citing NEMTI as 
instrumental in the thrust for this revi- 
talized training pipeline. 

"Team training on equipment and 
the latest life saving protocols such as 
the Joint Theater Trauma guidelines are 
essential tools to arm our medical team 
with in advance of their deployment," 
she said. "NEMTI has worked exten- 
sively with key stakeholders to tailor the 
training curriculum to include topics 
such as trauma management, combat 
stress, and management of total brain 
injury, setting the stage for a seamless 
turnover of responsibility to the new 
Navy Medicine team." 

NEMTI reports to Navy Medicine 
Support Command, headquartered 
aboard Naval Air Station Jacksonville, 
Fla. NMSC provides a single point 
of accountability for support services 
within Navy Medicine, and exercises 
command and control, and financial 
management oversight over subordinate 
commands and ensures the economical 
and effective delivery of Navy Medicine 
enterprise-wide support services. @ 


27 


All 


‘oub 


kiety * 


cain Se 


imentai 
flict 
MOrrc 


AN( 


=-MoOticin WouND 


FIGHTING 


GRIEF és, suffering 


strair 


'gret .RN 
oubt 


a 


wrt anime. 


ate \EGRE 


disap~intme: 

ORN ‘a©rt 
LTO 
piritl 
IRDE! 


snsiol curbr 
IAT AGOPY 


TEdi« 


Navy Medicine wages a war far from the battlefield 


28 


By Paul R. Ross 


U.S. Navy Bureau Bie 


war is being fought far from the arid, dusty 


eserts of Iraq and many miles from the 


ountainous battlefields of Afghanistan. 


unseen enemy creeps into the minds 


of our nation’s warriors and attacks from 


within causing recurring nightmares filled with 
trauma and despair. 

Service members become disconnected from 
those around them and are left with feelings of 
shame, guilt and hopelessness, which can lead to 
destructive behavior including alcoholism, drug 
abuse and in the most severe cases -- suicide. 


dicine and Surgery Public Affairs 


The foe is Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) 
and it affects a large population of Sailors and Ma- 
rines who have experienced traumatic events. Navy 
Medicine is combating the disorder in a variety of 
ways in order to gain a better understanding of how 
to heal its troops. 

“PTSD occurs when the mind and body are 
forced to respond to an overwhelming stress -- a 
stress that by its very nature threatens the life or the 
body integrity of the affected individual,” said Cmdr. 
Curt West, psychiatrist and assistant deputy com- 
mander for Behavioral Health, Walter Reed National 


Navy Medicine 


A U.S. Navy Hospital Corpsman takes a knee while on a security patrol in Afghanistan. 


Military Medical Center. “The disorder breaks down 
into three parts: re-experiencing, arousal, and avoid- 
ance. Conceptually, I teach patients that it is the first 
two that lead to the third group of symptoms.” 

According to West, re-experiencing involves 
nightmares, intrusive thoughts, physical reactions to 
reminders, and in severe cases dissociative episodes 
or flashbacks. Arousal includes exaggerated startle re- 
sponses, hyper-vigilance, sleep problems, irritability 
and anger outbursts, and problems staying focused. 
Avoidance, the most crippling group of symptoms 
comes as an attempt to minimize the intensity of 
re-experiencing and arousal symptoms. It includes 
staying away from people and situations, avoiding 
talking or thinking about the experience sometimes 
to the point of blanking all or parts of it out. Avoid- 
ance also includes a sense of detachment or numb- 
ness from relationships and the world, and a sense 
that there is little or no future. 


Fall 2011 


Photo by Cpl. Nathan McCord 


“In my experience it is this group of symptoms 
that represents the greatest impairment for PTSD 
sufferers,” said West. “They cannot seem to get back 
into their life.” 

Navy Medicine has deployed a wide variety of 
treatments for PTSD including those that are pri- 
marily evidence-based. 

“Through collaboration with such organizations 
as the Center for Deployment Psychology, we have 
trained hundreds of providers in proven therapies,” 
said West. “All of these include a combination of 
exposure to traumatic memory and methods to 
modulate the increased arousal that these memories 
generate.” 

The most common therapies in use today are 
Cognitive Processing Therapy, Prolonged Exposure 
Therapy, and Eye Movement Desensitization Re- 
processing therapy. 

“All (of these therapies) use some form of al- 


29 


lowing the patient to tell themselves the story of 

the trauma in a controlled, safe setting,” said West. 
“Then the patient and therapist work to take power 
away from the memory and restore it to the patient.” 

Along with various therapies, medications are also 
used in order to treat specific symptoms of PTSD. 

“Antidepressants, such as sertraline (Zoloft) and 
fluoxetine (Prozac) are the most common agents 
used,” said West. “They effectively help the patient 
to self-modulate arousal better. Treatment is typi- 
cally nine months to a year, and often longer de- 
pending on the response. Other medications can be 
added to help with sleep and nightmares.” 

While the majority of service members being 
treated for PTSD have combat-related symptoms, 
there are also those who have experienced other 
traumatic events including sexual assaults, witness- 
ing the death or someone close to them or other 
tragic incidents. But the most typical story of PTSD 


A U.S. Navy Hospital Corpman fires at insurgents in Iraq. 


diagnosis is that of the young Sailor or Marine be- 
tween deployments. 

“He or she has been back for three months from 
Iraq or Afghanistan but just can seem to feel right,” 
said West. “They most commonly come in because 
their spouse tells them they must do something. 
They are edgy and irritable, worse in crowded public 
situations, and tend to not sleep well at night. When 
they come home there can be a ‘perimeter sweep’ 
in which they check the locks and exterior of their 
house. They sometimes need three or more drinks at 
the end of the day to wind down and hopefully fall 
asleep, but sometimes this doesn’t work, they drink 
too much and end up dissociated.” 

The family is relied upon greatly in certain 
instancesto help those suffering from PTSD symp- 
toms. 

“Hopefully their spouse or friends is able to keep 


them contained, reorient them, and keep them from 


Photo by Samuel Peterson 


Navy Medicine 


getting into trouble,” said West. “Sometimes not, 
and then they have an alcohol-related incident.” 

There is a large amount stigma and shame 
involved with PTSD, which may cause people to 
never seek treatment. 

“T had a patient who always had a ‘John Wayne’ 
persona,” said Lt. Cmdr. Russell Carr, psychiatrist, 
integrated service chief Adult Outpatient Behavioral 
Health Clinic Walter Reed National Military Medi- 
cal Center. “They experienced combat in Afghani- 
stan — killing people and seeing people killed. It was 
very shocking and overwhelming for him. Instead of 
being able to turn to his battle buddy he felt shame 
and isolation for not living up to that John Wayne 
stereotype.” 

In the Navy a large portion of service members 
treated for PTSD are medical personnel such as 
corpsman, nurses and physicians, who have wit- 
nessed traumatic events on deployment. 

“Combat PTSD, Sexual assault-related or PTSD 
related to other traumatic events involves anxiety, 
anger, sadness,” said Carr. “The real problem comes 
with the experience people are left with. They have 
a need to process these emotions with other people 
but can’t. That’s when it becomes traumatic. They 
become isolated, alone and feel shame.” 

Various medical treatment facilities across the 
Navy Medicine enterprise have different treatment 
programs for the disorder. The programs vary widely 
as more and more research is being completed to 
determine the best way to treat patients. 

“Camp Lejeune has Pathway which is a com- 
bination of groups and individual therapies,” said 
Carr. “Portsmouth has something similar as does 
Camp Pendleton. One thing that’s unique to the 
Navy is that San Diego has a residential program for 
PTSD. The patients stay on the grounds for 60 days 
and receive various therapy techniques.” 

Another area of Navy Medicine leading the way 
in PTSD treatment is the Naval Center for Combat 
& Operational Stress Control (NCCOSC): 


“There are a number of innovative ways that 


Fall 2011 


- Cmdr. Curt West, psychiatrist and deputy 
commander for Behavioral Health, Walter 
Reed National Military Medical Center 


NCCOSC is working on the PTSD Front,” said 
Capt. Scott Johnston, director of the NCCOSC, 
“We're studying the possible causes of the disorder, 
designing programs that streamline the treatment 
process, and we're helping researchers determine the 
most effective treatments.” 

Education is also key in leading service members 
toward treatment. 

“We also have a very active outreach program to 
teach Sailors how to recognize stress in themselves 
and their shipmates,” said Johnston. “A big part of 
that education focuses on building psychological 
skills so Sailors are less susceptible to stress injuries of 
any kind.” 

According to West, one of the challenges in get- 
ting people into treatment for PTSD is overcoming 
avoidance. It is not unusual for patients to avoid 
seeking treatment, particularly if they expect they 
will have to tell the story. 

“The most important thing to do is tell them you 
care, and that you can see that there is a problem,” 
said West. “Identify behaviors or actions that you 
observe and how you can see that they are struggling. 
The key is to focus on what you observe. Tell them 
you care and that you can see they are uncomfort- 
able. If you are a senior and see this in one of your 
subordinates, offer to assist them in getting to help. 
Some of the best outcomes are when the command 
supports and the patient feels they have an advocate 
in their chain of command.” @ 


Navy Medicine , 
Public Health in Action 


32 


The Campania region of Italy has 
experienced numerous challenges associ- 
ated with trash collection; open burning 
of uncollected trash and illegal waste 
disposal practices which forced the Navy 
to modify its operations in the Fall of 
2008. 

In response to health concerns ex- 
pressed by U.S. Navy personnel, the 
commander, Navy Region Europe, Afri- 
ca, Southwest Asia (CNREURAFSWA) 
contacted the Navy and Marine Corps 
Public Health Center (NMCPHC) to 
conduct a comprehensive public health 
evaluation to assess the potential health 
risks for U.S. personnel living in the 
Naples area. 

The completion of the Naples Public 
Health Evaluation (PHE), both in scope 
and complexity on foreign soil in a host 
nation, is unprecedented for the U.S. 
Navy and has never before been at- 
tempted within the Department of De- 
fense (DOD). The posting of the Final 
Report for the PHE, on the NSA Naples 
Website, brings to an end a formal study 
that began in January 2008 to assess 
health risks associated with potential 
exposure to chemicals and microorgan- 
isms in the environment resulting from 
the area’s waste disposal practices. 

NMCPHC has the right mix of 
multidisciplinary experts to conduct 
these unique evaluations in OCONUS 
locations where no specific public health 
risk policy exists to address potential 
health risks from host nation-generated 
pollution, both on and off-base. Hay- 
ing these experts and contractors (e.g., 
human health risk assessors, risk com- 
municators, toxicologist, occupational 
& environmental health physicians, 
epidemiologists) enables NMCPHC to 
integrate the multiple lines of evidence 
gathered in these investigations to pro- 
vide a broader holistic assessment of 
the potential public health risks. In all, 


a wide range of subject matter experts 


By Dr. Paul Gilloo 


worked on the Naples PHE, represent- 
ing a variety of U.S. commands and or- 
ganizations and private sector agencies. 

The PHE focused on the Naples and 
Caserta provinces of Campania where 
U.S. Navy personnel work and live. 
Since the geographical area that was 
investigated was very large, the study re- 
gion was segregated into nine geographi- 
cal study areas covering 400 square 
miles. Because a PHE of this scope takes 
more than a year to complete, a phased 
approach was used. Phase I focused on 
areas of Campania where the potential 
for detecting chemicals, based on Ital- 
ian maps presenting trash and chemical 
dump sites, was greatest. Phase II sought 
to improve the spatial/geographic dis- 
tribution of the sampling locations and 
to delineate clusters of residences that 
exceeded risk criteria during Phase I. 

The study involved the collection of 
tap water, irrigation water, soil, soil gas 
and ambient (outdoor) air samples from 
Government facilities and private rental 
homes because approximately 50% 
of the population lived off base in the 
Study Areas. Approximately 200 chemi- 
cals were analyzed in each sample and 
a total of 344,000 laboratory sample 
analyses were conducted. In total, 543 
off-base residences and 10 Government- 
related sites were sampled. 

An ambient air sampling and 
monitoring evaluation was performed, 
spanning one year. Four epidemiologi- 
cal studies—focusing on birth defects, 
cancer and asthma —and a food study 
were completed. An extensive review 
of Italian scientific literature and media 
reports was also conducted. 

Because attitudes and expectations of 
our service members and families have 
evolved over the years to expect equiva- 
lent public health protection while on 
PCS assignment overseas, to the extent 
possible, the PHE was conducted in ac- 
cordance with USEPA and USN Risk 


I 
Navy and Marine Comes Public Health Center 


Assessment Guidance. Therefore, the 
PHE team chose to compare environ- 
mental testing results to USEPA Maxi- 
mum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) for 
tap water; USEPA Regional Screening 
Levels (RSLs) for tap water, air, soil, and 
soil gas; and USEPA National Ambient 
Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for air, 
rather than Italian or European Union 
environmental regulatory standards. 

Predominant among the findings are 
chemical and bacterial contamination 
of tap water (primarily from non-per- 
mitted, private wells) and the potential 
for vapor intrusion of volatile organic 
chemicals at off-base homes. In response 
to these findings, the Navy implemented 
a number of health protective measures, 
including issuance of a bottled water 
advisory in 2008, relocating families to 
other homes when health risks at the 
home could not be reduced, and es- 
tablishing New Lease Suspension Zone 
(NLSZs) areas that are off-limits for new 
leases. 

Although the formal study has ended, 
enduring processes will be in place to 
ensure the health of our military and ci- 
vilian families continues to be protected: 


* Bottled water advisory 

¢ Health protective lease clauses for 
off-base rentals 

e Maintain NLSZ areas 

¢ Health information updates on the 
Naples Community Health Awareness 
website 

¢ Education and counseling at the 
U.S. Naval Hospital Naples Environ- 
mental Health Information Center 
(EHIC) 

Additional measures under develop- 
ment include: 

¢ More robust health risk education 
programs for U.S. personnel. 

* Modifications to Housing’s data- 
base system to distribute reminders to 
residents and landlords about cleaning 


Navy Medicine 


Evaluation 


Courtesy photo 


é aS, ublic 


4, 
— Potential Sources of Public Water 
ASupply Contamination 


Dr. Paul Gillooly (right) discusses public health evaluation results with Capt. Craig Bonnema, U.S. Naval Hospital commanding officer, Naples, 


while Mr. Tony Carotenuto, public health specialist from NMCPHC discusses results of water testing with residents at an Open House. 


and disinfecting the home’s water hold- 
ing tank every six months. 

¢ Naval Hospital Naples will con- 
tinue the monitoring of Italian environ- 
mental and health-related information 
and make public health information 
available to U.S. personnel. 

From the very beginning, risk com- 
munication has been an integral and 
critical part of the NPHE. To develop a 
sustainable and focused risk communi- 
cation program NMCPHC partnered 
with CNREURAFSWA and NSA Na- 
ples Public Affairs. The communication 
program proactively served to inform 
stakeholders about project activities 
and findings, communicate health risks 
and mitigation actions, and provide op- 
portunities for stakeholder involvement. 
Moreover, risk communication activities 


Fall 2011 


were designed to allow USN person- 
nel and their families to make informed 
choices for themselves and be active 
partners in their own health protection. 

Important to this concept was, for 
the first time in Navy Medicine, the es- 
tablishment of the EHIC at U.S. Naval 
Hospital Naples. The EHIC was estab- 
lished as a resource to conduct one-on- 
one health consultations, as a repository 
of sampling results and informational 
materials (e.g., fact sheets) for handout 
and discussion, and to inform residents 
who participated in the sampling pro- 
gram of their sampling results. 

In recognition of their efforts, the 
CNREURAFSWA/NMCPHC public 
affairs risk communication team was 
selected by the Chief of Naval Informa- 


Award for Excellence in Navy Public Af- 
fairs for calendar years 2008 and 2009. 

The Phase I and II report and associ- 
ated Fact Sheets can be found on the 
NSA Naples Community Health Aware- 
ness website at http://www.cnic.navy. 
mil/Naples/About/HealthAwareness/ 
index.htm 

US. personnel who have health- 
related questions should contact the 
Environmental Health Information 
Center at U.S. Naval Hospital Naples in 
Gricignano. The phone number is 08 1- 
811-6299 (commercial) or 314-629- 
6299 (DSN). 

For more information on environ- 
mental health risk assessment and risk 
communication, visit the NUCPHC 
website at http://www.nmcphc.med. 


tion for its prestigious Thompson-Ravitz navy.mil/Environmental_Health/. ® 


33 


34 


One Day at alime 


By Douglas H. Stutz 
Naval Hospital Bremerton 
Public Affairs 


SARP program seeks Sailors willing to help Sailors 


Substance Abuse Rehabilitation 
Program (SARP) counselors want other 
Sailors to help with recovery -- one day 
at a time. 


“What we do doesn’t make the ship 


move, land an aircraft, or kill the enemy. 


But we save lives and that’s important. 
SARP can salvage nearly destroyed 
careers, and help us be a more mission 
capable and healthier military force,” 
said Patrick W. Graves, NHB SARP 
Counselor and Tobacco 


Facilitator. 

Navy SARP is now actively recruiting 
Sailors to help with delivering drug and 
alcohol screening and outpatient treat- 
ment to active-duty members, retirees 
and adult family members. The mission 
is to treat problems stemming from 
alcohol and substance abuse, improve 
operational readiness, and promote 
healthy lifestyles. Program counselors 
design treatment guidance to meet the 
individual needs of active duty service 


Cessation members and their families. Addition- 


ally, Sailors learn about basic life skills, 


S| stiesieuanagenent and the 
Progen Idea \decs . 


substance abuse disor- 
ders (SUDs). 
“We want qual- 

ity Sailors to do 

this type of work 
for a rewarding 
shore/sea rotation, 
and we also want 
the commands we 
serve to know 

exactly what 
our SARP 


coun- 


effects of alcoholism and 


Lectures’ re auce \ Grog Ovtnge ‘noop Outings MA 


\Fe rishy iit. 


Hospital 
Corpsman 
2nd Class 


lends a hand in NHB's 
SARP screening 
process, using 
his mental health 
training to help 
counselors 
assess program 
clients and 
be part of 
the overall 
treatment 
team. 


Steven L Guittar, NHB 
psychology technician, 


selors do and the services we provide,” 
said John T. Vaughan, of NHB’s SARP/ 
Mental Health Department. “Prospec- 
tive counselors are initially screened for 
two weeks at their nearest SARP to get 
an idea of the work and dedication that 
is required to become a counselor. We 
also screen to insure they would fit in 
this profession. Then, there’s a required 
10-week Navy Drug and Alcohol Coun- 
selor School at Pt. Loma, Calif.” 
Aviation Maintenance Administra- 
tionman Master Chief Angela Mattison- 
Lindbom became a SARP 
counselor to continue 
her Navy career ina 
more personal way. 
“I was searching 
for orders and 
becoming a SARP 


counselor 


Navy Medicine 


sounded very interesting. It was a new 
field and a new area. I was excited about 
the opportunity.” 

Mattison-Lindbom already had 
honed many of the intangible skills 
needed from her years advancing to the 
rank of master chief. She knew she was 
a good communicator and had good 
listening skills. She had supported her 
Sailors in handling personal issues. She 
considered herself compassionate, and 
able to share empathy without enabling. 
She knew she could help make a differ- 
ence. 

“Alcohol abuse can damage lives. I 
felt I could help others overcome that 
and put such behavior in permanent 
remission so they can continue to serve 
in the Navy,” Mattison-Lindbom said. 
“SARP provides them with hope to 
cope. We let everyone know that they 
are not alone. We have them understand 
the ramifications of alcohol abuse.” 

But before even becoming a coun- 
selor, Mattison-Lindbom recommends 
that any prospective candidate has to 
be comfortable in their own skin and 
be able to step back to critically look at 
themselves before they help others. A 
counselor also has to be willing to walk 
along with the person they are assisting, 
a day at a time if necessary. 

“This is not independent duty. It’s a 
clinical environment,” said Mattison- 
Lindbom. 

For Graves, the decision to become 
a counselor was a result of wanting 
to move on from being a respiratory 
therapist and a desire to help people in 
crisis. After the intensive screening and 
qualification process, Graves passed 

the training course which qualified 
him to take a certification exam after 
a year of internship. “There’s also 
follow-on training in mental health, 
which really equips you to deal with 
patients and help salvage their lives 
before they end up on life support,” 
said Graves. 

Graves took over three years ago as 

the command’s Tobacco Cessation Fa- 
cilitator and considers himself uniquely 
qualified being a prior RT as well as 
with SARP for almost six years. “It com- 


bines both worlds,” he said. 


Fall 2011 


“Alcohol abuse can 
damage lives. | felt | could 
help others overcome that 
and put such behavior in 
permanent remission so 
they can continue to serve 
in the Navy.” 


- Master Chief Angela Mattison-Lindbom 
SARP counselor 


According to Vaughan, compiled 
statistics show that if a person quits to- 
bacco when they quit alcohol, they have 
a 30 percent greater chance of remaining 
abstinent from both. 

“Our Tobacco Cessation program has 
been clinically run by SARP counsel- 
ors since1998 when it was recognized 
that nicotine dependence was a SUD, 
like alcohol or any other substance and 
it needed to be treated as such,” said 
Vaughan, who voluntarily developed 
the Tobacco Cessation program to treat 
tobacco similar to the way alcohol and 
drugs are treated. 

We have had the longest running 
and most successful TC Program in the 
Navy,” said Vaughan. “We are the only 
Navy SARP that treats nicotine depen- 
dence for the whole catchment area and 
Graves is our dedicated alcohol/drug 
counselor that has been specially trained 
for nicotine dependence.” 

But the primary focus of NHB SARP 
is on drug and alcohol issues. To that 
end, psychology technicians assigned to 
the Mental Health (MH) department, 
along with NHB social workers and 
psychiatrics are being trained to assist 
with the SARP screening process and 
facilitate alcohol awareness classes. 

“We primarily treat alcohol and drug 
problems,” said Vaughan. “If there are 
additional issues that are getting in the 


way of our clients getting clean and 
sober, we will address them. We treat 
co-occurring disorders, family of origin 
issues and other problems along with 
their substance dependence. We also 

are seeing more individuals with co- 
occurring disorders such as depression, 
anxiety, and Post Traumatic Stress Disor- 
der due to being deployed in a theater of 
operations.” 

SARP is a division under the Mental 
Health Department, and as such, relo- 
cated from Naval Base Kitsap Bangor to 
NHB’s Seventh Floor in September. 

“Mental Health and SARP work 
hand in hand to facilitate a total treat- 
ment regime,” said Hospital Corpsman 
1st Class (Fleet Marine Force) Cameron 
Wink, MH Leading Petty Officer. “Ma- 
ny personnel have co-occurring issues 
that may not arise until after treatment 
programs are instituted. Identifying 
the issue is step one. Once they iden- 
tify these problems, many times after 
only a few sessions, the treatment team 
moves into action. The communication 
and cooperation between the separate 
departments allows for the individuals 
to achieve coping skills, life skills and 
overall better mental health.” 

For more information on SARP and 
application guidance, please contact 
John Vaughan at 360-475-4219 or stop 
by their offices at NHB. ® 


35 


Providing Gomrort _ 


Operation Continuing Promise provides humanitarian 
assistance to the Caribbean, Central and South America =~». 


Above - Service members and civilians em- 
barked on board USNS Comfort (T-AH 20) 
are transported by boat to the Killick Haitian 
Coast Guard Base surgical screening site 

in Port-au-Prince, Haiti during Continuing 
Promise 2011 (CP11). CP11 is a five-month 
humanitarian assistance mission to the 
Caribbean, Central and South America. 
(Photo by Mass Communication Specialist 
2nd Class Eric C. Tretter) 


Right - Hospital Corpsman ist Class Darwin 
Flores, from San Salvador, El Salvador, 
performs a dental cleaning at the Terminal 
Varroux medical site in Port-au-Prince, Haiti 
during Continuing Promise 2011. (Photo by 
Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class 
Eric C. Tretter) 


Middle - Lt. Cmdr. Timothy Mickel examines 
a patient at the Killick Haitian Coast Guard 
Base surgical screening site in Port-au- 
Prince, Haiti during Continuing Promise 
2011. Photo by Mass Communication Spe- 
cialist 2nd Class Eric C. Tretter) 


a 

A 
1 q (vA minnie 
— 


_ Silla men 
m> 


Fall 2011 


- 


Above - Hospitalman Cherie Williams 
holds a patient at the Terminal Varroux 
medical site in Port-au-Prince, Haiti 
during Continuing Promise 2011. (Photo 
by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd 
Class Eric C. Tretter) 


Left - Lt. Cmdr. Andrew Sellers, from 
Chesapeake, Va., reviews an X-ray at the 
Killick Haitian Coast Guard Base surgi- 
cal screening site in Port-au-Prince, 
Haiti during Continuing Promise 2011. 
(U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. Alesia 
Goosic) 


Hospital Corps- 

» man 2nd Class 
Amanda Fletcher, 
from Lancaster, 
Calif., conducts an 
eye exam at the 

® Killick Haitian Coast 
Guard Base surgical 
screening site in 
Port-au-Prince, Haiti 
during Continuing 
Promise 2011. (Air 

_ Force photo by Staff 
Sgt. Alesia Goosic) 


Above - Capt. William Todd, director of surgical services 

on board USNS Comfort (T-AH 20), carries a patient to a 
waiting area at the Killick Haitian Coast Guard Base surgical 
screening site in Port-au-Prince, Haiti during Continuing 
Promise 2011 (CP11). (U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. 
Alesia Goosic) 


Below - Project Hope orthopedic surgeon volunteers 
embarked aboard USNS Comfort (T-AH 20) review X-rays of 
a 2010 Haitian earthquake victim on board USNS Comfort (T- 
AH 20) as part of Continuing Promise 2011 (CP11). (U.S. Air 
Force photo by Staff Sgt. Courtney Richardson) 


Personnel embarked on board USNS 
Comfort (T-AH 20) walk toward the 
Terminal Verreux medical site for 

site breakdown in preparation for 
Tropical Storm Irene.in Port-au-Prince, 
Haiti during. Continuing Promise 

2011 (CP11). CP11 is a five-month 
humanitarian assistance mission to the 


‘Caribbean, Central and South America. 


(Photo by. Mass Communication e 
Specialist 2nd Class Eric C. Tretter) 


Lt. Cmdr. Tim Mickel, right, from Piedmont, Calif., and 
Hospital Corpsman 2nd Class Amanda Fletcher, from 
Lancaster, Calif., perform a burn contracture release surgery 
aboard USNS Comfort (T-AH 20) in Port-au-Prince, Haiti 
during Continuing Promise 2011 (U.S. Air Force photo by 
Senior Airman Kasey Close) 


» 


Above - Cmdr. Laurie Hale, from Green Cove Springs, Fla., 


examines a patient at the Terminal Varroux medical site in Port- 
au-Prince, Haiti during Continuing Promise 2011 (CP11). (Photo by 
Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Eric C. Tretter) 


Left - Aviation Boatswain’s Mate (Handling) 2nd Class Rocio Luna, 
attached to Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron 26, marshals an MH- 
60S Knight Hawk helicopter toward a pallet of supplies for trans- 
port from USNS Comfort (T-AH 20) to shore in Port-au-Prince, 
Haiti. (U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. Courtney Richardson) 


Navy Medicine Fall 2011 


40 


Navy Medicine 


Fall 2011 


Vice Adm. Adam M. 


Robinson 


Things I’ve learned 


When I was growing up | always wanted to be a doctor. My dad was a doctor and most children will emulate 
their parents. But I ended up getting a degree in political science and taking a lot of courses in German -- com- 
parative literature courses, and also Anthropology courses. But during that time I found that I was called, for 
some reason, to do medicine. I decided that I would never be satisfied unless I became a physician. 


I came into the Navy as a way to finance my medical education. The year I was accepted in 1972 was also the 
first year of the Health Profession’s Scholarship Program. So I was in the first class of Health Profession Scholars 
and that is how I paid for my medical education. 


I don't know if there’s one overwhelming influence in my life, but I think that my father and my mother 
would be influences -- great influences. My grandfather -- my father’s father -- would be a great influence. My 
background in terms ef being raised in a religious household was very instrumental in helping me understand 
that I needed to think beyond me as a person. I needed to start thinking about others and about the community 
and about a higher, perhaps even more spiritual calling, that we're not here just to garner rewards for ourselves. 
We're here to help other people. 


The memory of my patients and what I have learned from them is that care and caring for them was not only 
beneficial to them as human beings, but it was also a tremendous benefit to me. In the process of giving to oth- 
ers, you also receive a lot for yourself. 


We can always be there for our patients from an emotional, physiological and even spiritual perspective so 
that they never feel abandoned or alone. I learned from my patients that even when you couldn't cure them, you 
could certainly be with them. 


Navy Medicine is in a wonderful position. The physicians, nurses, dentists, medical service corps officers, 
allied health professional, the corpsmen, all of the civilian employees and the volunteers that actually make up 
what we call Navy Medicine are some of the brightest, most devoted and impassioned people I have ever met. I 
know as I leave that same level of passion and service commitment will always be there. 


Patient and family-centered care is a commitment to all who we have the privilege to serve. That is our duty 
and obligation. 


The reason I stayed in the Navy after I came on active duty was that I had never found a better group of men 
and women who were dedicated to service and dedicated to one and other — men and women who had an ethos 
of honor, courage and commitment, which in the civilian side probably sounds trite and maybe even as slogan- 
eering, but on the military side is a commitment and a framework by which we live and do our work on a daily 
basis. I had never experienced that before in my life. 


The men and women of Navy Medicine are the essence and heart and soul of Navy Medicine. I have been 
incredibly privileged and honored to lead them and I have enjoyed every moment of that experience. Navy 
Medicine is about the men and women who carry on the hard work, who labor in the vineyards, who deploy 
with our troops into harm’s way on a daily basis. It’s about the men and women who deploy on our carriers and 
other surface ships, submarines and aircraft through the world on a daily basis, who do the hard work to make 
sure that freedom reigns throughout this country and in many other countries to make sure that the commit- 
ment that we make to others, as being a nation to help win the peace as well as winning the wars, is captured 
and to make sure that when we have people who are in need of medical care, psychological care and when we 
find people in need, we're there to help them and to make their lives better. I only want to thank them from the 
bottom of my heart for allowing me to be a part of such a great group of individuals. ® 


41 


42 


Photo by Cpl. Thomas Provost 
Cmdr. Bill Krissoff in 2009 joined the Navy Medical Corps after his son, 1st Lt. Nathan Krissoff, died in Iraq from wounds he had suffered 
from a roadside bomb explosion. He will be deploying with Combat Logistics Battalion 4, 3rd Marine Logistics Group, to Iraq 


Honoring a fallen son 


By Staff Sgt. Brian Buckwalter 


to sit inside the Beltway at a think tank and write about 
1st Marine Expeditionary Force Public Affairs 


foreign policy without having actively participated in its 
execution.” 

Austin followed his brother, joining the Marine Corps 
in 2006 after he graduated college. He was at officer candi- 
date school about to graduate when he got the news about 
his brother. 

Their service was an inspiration to Krissoff. After his 
son’s death he started to prefer the company of people who 
understood the sacrifice and valor that comes with serv- 
ing. “There’s almost a chasm of those people who serve or 
who have families who are in the service and those who are 
not,” he said. He thought about joining himself. 

That idea solidified when Nate’s commanding officer, 
Lt. Col. Bill Seely, spent a few days in town visiting fami- 
lies who had lost Marines. Seely talked about the battalion 
surgeon who took care of his Marines forward. Such a role 
was appealing to Krissoff. 

Joining the Navy wasn’t a decision made lightly. He 
talked it over with his wife, Christine, and Austin. He 
sought the advice and support from friends too. 

“The friends that we had were very encouraging ... I 
only had one doc that I knew fairly well in Reno that told 
me I was crazy. And he had been in the Navy, so maybe he 
knew something | didn’t,” Krissoff said. 

Once Krissoff decided to join, he faced another chal- 
lenge: his age. 


Although the Navy desired his professional skills, and 


he Navy was never where Cmdr. Bill Krissoff thought he'd 
be. Not at 18, and certainly not at 60. But, in fall 2007 
he shuttered his orthopedic practice in a mountain resort 
town near Reno, Nev., and donned the uniform he stills 
wears today. 

It wasn’t that life in Truckee, Calif., was bad. For an avid 
outdoorsman, it was the perfect spot for Krissoff and his 
wife Christine to raise their two sons. 

“We were close growing up,” said Austin Krissoff in 
an email. “Dad, Nate and I took frequent summer trips 
together. We established a pretty fun trio for doing ‘man 
things’ - powder skiing, whitewater kayaking and travel- 
ing. 
No, life in Truckee was good. Until Dec. 9, 2006 - the 
day his youngest son Nathan, a Marine first lieutenant, 
was killed in action near Fallujah, Iraq. The 25-year-old 
was the counterintelligence officer for 3rd Reconnaissance 
Battalion. 


Call to service 

Krissoff said the events of 9/11 deeply affected both 
of his sons and they both responded to the call to service. 
Nate, who majored in international relations at Williams 
College, joined the Marines in 2004. 

“He joined because he deeply believed in the impor- 
tance of service and for citizens of this generation to do 
their part,” Austin said of his brother. “He was not content 


Navy Medicine 


he was physically fit, the recruiter wasn’t sure he could get “He was not content {0 Sil inside 


a waiver to join someone nearly 15 years past the cut off 
age. 

The breakthrough came when former President Bush, 
who often met with families of the fallen, was in Reno in 
2007. There Krissoff asked former President Bush directly 
for the wavier. It was only a matter of days after that Kris- 
soff had the paperwork he needed. 

Krissoff didn’t join the Navy for closure. “Closure” is a 
term he takes exception to — a word people who've never 
experienced loss use, he said. For him, being a Navy doc- 
tor meant a chance help a group of people he has endless 
respect for stay in the fight. 

“It’s their strength of character, courage, their unit cohe- 
sion, their bravery, their skills and their dedication that 
are unimaginable to people who do not know about our 
military,” he said. 


> 


Training Ground 

Just over a year after receiving his commission, Krissoff 
deployed to Iraq. His son Austin was also in theater. “I felt 
like in my mind, we were finishing what Nate started up,” 
he said. 

“This was a non-kinetic and different mission than 
when Nate was there in 2006, but it was important in 
order to strengthen the security gains made during the 
[Anbar] awakening and the surge,” Austin said. “I vividly 
remember turning off the lights and closing the door to my 
office, which I thought was symbolic of concluding years 
of rotations of Marines whom had bled and sweat to make 
our eventual departure possible.” 

After experiencing deployment from both sides — home 
and away - Krissoff said deployments are harder on the 
families to a certain extent. “The deployed person is work- 
ing. They're focused. But the family has a lot of emptiness 
in those evening times.” 

Austin agreed. “It was difficult for my mom because 
Dad and I were gone at the same time. I didn’t appreciate 
how hard this was, to be at home, until Dad departed for 
Afghanistan in 2010.” 

Almost immediately after returning from Iraq, the op- 
portunity to deploy to Afghanistan arose. Although the 
timing wasn’ ideal, Krissoff volunteered to go. 

Never to be duplicated 

Krisoff’s deployment to Afghanistan started at Camp 
Bastion, a major base in southern Afghanistan for the Brit- 
ish and Marine Forces. 

Blast injuries, especially from improvised explosive 
devices were the main injuries Krissoff saw. Second were 
gunshot wounds, and then third was “everything under the 
sun.” 

Whatever the injury, Krissoff and his team provided the 
best care they could. He says it was a new experience being 
a part of a multi-national team but “the busier we got, the 
better we functioned.” 

“The best care is: you come to Bastion’s hospital with 
a heartbeat as a Marine, you have a 99 percent chance of 
surviving and leaving Bastion alive... These numbers are 
truly remarkable in the history of combat trauma surgery,” 
Krissoff said. 


Fall 2011 


the Beltway at a think tank and 
Write about foreign policy without 
having actively participated in its 
execution.” 


- Austin Krissoff, son of Cmdr. Bill Krissoff 


During the second half of his deployment, Krissoff 
served in western Helmand province at Forward Operating 
Base Delaram Two as part of a shock trauma platoon and 
forward resuscitative surgical team. 

Even though the team was very mobile — everything 
they needed could be crammed into a conex box — Krissoff 
said they had ER capability supported by several general 
surgeons and ER doctors. 

The forward location revealed to Krissoff the lack of 
medical care available to the population in Afghanistan. 
People would show up at the front gate with injuries from 
car wrecks, bus wrecks, bomb blasts, or snake bites, he 
said, because there just wasn’t any place else to go. His 
team took care of them all. 

There were times the person they were treating was 
likely the enemy — stories sometimes didn’t match injuries. 
“Tt’s difficult. [But] you do what you need to do. That’s 
part of our job, and we give the best care to our enemies. 
That’s what we do. We do not prioritize, and we do not 
hold back on the care,” said Krissoff. 

Despite the challenging conditions and situations, Kris- 
soff said he was fortunate for the opportunity to deploy. 

“Afghanistan, as I told my surgical team as we left Bas- 
tion, was never to be duplicated,” Krissoff said. “It was 
probably the most rewarding time of my orthopedic career, 
and it was intense, and horrific, but satisfying as well ... 
sometimes at the same time.” 

The road ahead 

Krissoff is now at Naval Hospital Camp Pendleton 
treating patients, mostly Marines, doing what he did for- 
ward: getting them back to duty. 

He recently received a promotion to commander at a 
ceremony in the Pentagon. Maj. Gen. Larry Nicholson, 
who was Nate’s regimental colonel in Fallujah, presided 
over the ceremony. Christine and Austin pinned on the 
rank. Friends, family, and some of those whom he de- 
ployed with were there too. 

Krissoff says that his time in the military is probably 
winding down, but he'd still like to do some short terms 
deployments as a reservist — maybe to Africa, Ukraine or 
on the Navy’s hospital ship USNS Mercy. He'd also like 
to continue doing orthopedic evaluations for reservists re- 
turning from deployments — something he enjoys. 

Although the death of his son changed the course of his 
life, Krissoff says what came out of it was an unexpected 
opportunity. 

“T’m just a doc that was fortunate to be able to use my 
surgical skills in a deployed setting to care for injured Ma- 
rines, sailors and soldiers,” said Krissoff. “Pll be sad when 
Pll hang up the uniform, I’m sure.” © 


43 


THE! 


44 


. By Sgt. Bryan A. Peterson 
Shipmates Moribe cae Base Camp Lejeune 


On March 5, 2010, while conducting combat 
operations in Helmand province, Afghanistan, Capt. 
Matthew Kutilek’s life would change forever. 

While on patrol in Laki, Garmsir District, an 
enemy sniper sighted in on one of Kutilek’s Marines. 
However, the enemy’s high velocity round strayed 
just inches away from his Marine’s face below him 
and struck Kutilek’s right leg. Kutilek immediately 
dropped on top of one of his corpsman, and with- 
out hesitation, the corpsman immediately applied a 
tourniquet to stop the blood loss. The round severed 
his tibia bone, two out of three arteries, took out 
half of his calf muscle and nine centimeters of 
his tibia nerve — all open compound — and 
resulted in massive amounts of blood 
loss. 

With his life in serious doubt, 

Kutilek was medically evacuated to a ‘. 
Forward Resuscitative Surgery System 

at Forward Operation Base 

Dwyer for further lifesav- 

ing treatment, then to ‘\ 
Landstuhl Regional 

Medical Center in 

Germany before end- 

ing up at the National Naval 

Medical Center in Bethesda, 

Md., for the next eight | 


months for treatment if 
that he said, “Is the j 
olen aa® 
best medicine” he io 
has ever received. | 


In fact, he said he 

would, “Take Navy 
surgeons and doctors 

over the highest paid 
civilian doctors any day of 
the week.” 

Since that horrific day, Ku- 
tilek has undergone at least 10 
surgeries, more than 90 hours of 
physical therapy and pain manage- 
ment appointments among many 
other rehabilitation procedures. 
With his most recent surgery, 
doctors removed a 16-inch 
plate previously placed in his 
right leg at the Landstuhl Re- 
gional Medical Center, insert- 
ed a metal rod and rotated his 
knee cap back to its normal 

Capt. Matthew Kutilek on patrol 


in Afghanistan before being 
wounded by a sniper’s bullet. 


ST MEDICINE 


Marine captain praises Navy Medicine for life-saving efforts 


position at the Naval Medical Center Portsmouth in 
Portsmouth, Va. 

He is attached to the Wounded Warriors Battal- 
ion-East aboard Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune 
as a patient while he makes a full recovery. As a 
patient, he does not idly sit by while he recovers. 

He wants to let those who have helped him recover 
know they are appreciated. 

On June 16, he told doctors, physicians and 
nurses how much Navy medicine has had an impact 
on his life at a weekly medical meeting at the John 
Westfield building on the campus of Naval Hospital 

Camp Lejeune aboard MCB Camp Lejeune. He 


“ did so at the invitation of his pain manage- 


ment doctor and friend, Cmdr. Jerry Foltz. 

Not suspecting anything besides another 

weekly Power Point, Navy medical staff 
members were honored by the words of 

Kutilek. 

“There’s a running joke about Navy 

medicine,” said Kutilek, as he opened 

.__ his speech. “It’s the lowest bidder, the 

~)) cheap alternative to real medicine, 


~ which is off base. The fact is, if 


it weren't for naval medi- 
: cine, youd be talking to 


i 


a dead man.” 
Kutilek de- 
scribed his corps- 
man’s quick, 
30-second 
reaction that 
saved his life. 
’ He said if 
the corpsman 
waited another 
20 seconds, he 
would have 
died. 
“Tt really ir- 
ritates the life out of me 
ls when I hear people talk like 
» that about Navy medicine,” said 
the Bronze Star Medal with 
Valor recipient. “These people 
obviously never have received 
' any treatment from the Navy, 
vy or let alone military, because 
\ 


if they did, they would have 
a totally different opinion. 
: es They're ignorant.” 
‘’ 
! 


Navy Medicine 


Kutilek believes he can talk about the positive 
exploits of naval medicine in good faith, as he has 
encountered, according to his medical records, ev- 
erything from neurologists and physical therapists to 
X-ray technicians to podiatrists. He even can attest 
to the delivery rooms as he and his wife have three 
daughters. He believes he has received a Navy hospi- 
tal’s virtual tour since he’s been injured. 

Kutilek knows medical staff not only have the 
stress of saving lives and giving sound medical advice 
to their patients, but also, as he described the stress 
of “unappreciative patients,” is not something they 
should focus on. 

“Dont focus on those who give you all a black 
eye,” said Kutilek. “Instead, focus on those who have 
great attitudes, ones you've developed a relationship 
with.” 

Kutilek feels Navy medical staff goes far beyond 
what is required of them. His wife was eight months 
pregnant with their third child when he was wound- 
ed, and during the course of his recovery, doctors 
consoled his wife as she felt the pain as well. He said 
those things were just as consoling to him. 

“In addition to the top-notch medical care you all 
provide, do one more thing,” said Kutilek. “There 
are Marines who come from abusive backgrounds, 
broken homes. Give them preferential treatment. 
Don’t just be their doctor or therapist, be their friend 
and help them through their tough times. I came 
from a positive home with parents who are still mar- 
ried to this day. I have a beautiful wife and three 
beautiful girls. I have a lot to be thankful for.” 

He ended his talk for those in his audience with 
the hope they draw a parallel from a bit of advice 
he provided a young Navy nurse from his Sunday 
morning church group who is deploying to the Hel- 
mand province. She has never seen combat nor has 
she ever deployed. She asked him what she should do 


in country. He didn’t know how to answer her ques- 


Fall 2011 


“The fact is, if it 
weren't for naval 
medicine, you'd be 
talking to a dead man.” 


- Marine Capt. Matthew Kutilek 
tion other than what he experienced. 

“Go as far forward as possible, go to the front 
lines. Volunteer yourself to those who you will 
serve,” said Kutilek. “Yes, you will see dead Marines 
and sailors, you will see wounded Marines, but they 
will need you. I couldn't tell how many bruises I 
left on the nurses’ and doctors’ arms because of the 
pain I was in. They didn’t care what rank I was ... 
to them, I am a Marine. That's all that matters to 
them.” 

Those in attendance were completely awe-struck 
about his experiences and thankful for his kind 
words. 

“Wow,” was all Cmdr. Marnie Buchanan, the 
head of the Staff Education and Training Depart- 
ment, NHCL, said. “He’s truly an amazing Marine 
and person. For him to say all these nice things 
about what we do really means a lot.” 

Navy doctors, nurses and corpsmen all have 
made an impact on Kutilek and his family. He is an 
advocate for Navy medicine and for wounded Ma- 
rines. He is thankful for those who have helped him 
and his family through the tough times. To Kutilek, 
it’s not about him. It’s about those who are still in 
harm’s way. It’s about the forward-deployed Navy 
medical personnel and the brave Marines they will 
make an impact on. 

“T am doing my best to be an advocate and voice 
for wounded Marines and Navy medicine,” said Ku- 
tilek. “It’s all about them, not me.” @ 

Capt. Matthew 
Kutilek receives 
treatment from 
Orthopedic 
Trauma Surgeon, 
Dr. Robert 
Gaines at Naval 

| Medical Center 
Portsmouth, Va. 
Kutilek was injured 
7 by asniper’s 

= bullet while 
serving in the 


Helmand province, 
Afghanistan. 


Photos courtesy of Capt. Matthew Kutilek 


45 


46 


| i x La » Z 


Lt. lan Sutherland, Navy Environmental and Preventive Medicine Unit No. 6 (NEPMU-6) 
entomologist, inserts a mosquito into a test tube to start the process of molecular analysis 
for dengue fever. The U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit No. 2 Pacific and NEPMU-6 teamed up 
to assist the State of Hawaii with an outbreak of dengue fever that hit the islands. 


a hen a possible dengue 
Meee = threat hit Hawaii earlier this 
ee | | year, personnel from Joint 
rey | Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam 
yl contributed their expertise 
s | to help given the potential 
impacts. 

“Dengue Fever can be a 
debilitating mosquito-borne disease,” said Naval 
Medical Research Unit No. 2 Pacific microbiologist 
Lt. Dustin Harrison. “Although not often fatal, it 
causes severe headaches, muscle, eye, and joint pain.” 

But he explained when multiple forms of the 
dengue virus are introduced into an area, there is an 
increased risk for an even more serious form called 
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF). “Because Ha- 
waii has mosquitoes that are capable of efficiently 
transmitting the virus and there is no specific treat- 
ment for infection, it is important to quickly identify 
and respond to any potential outbreak as soon as 
possible.” 

NAMRU-2 Pacific and Navy Environmental and 
Preventive Medicine Unit No. 6 (NEPMU-6) had 
teamed up to assist the state of Hawaii after reports 
of dengue fever in the islands in February. 


reventing 


Story and photos by Chris Aguinaldo 
Naval Region Hawaii Public Affairs 


Cai = ow , £ | we 
fa =. Ds, @ j 4 P 
| 7 J ; & 


5 | g \ | ( f 
+ ' ra 


Back then, the state Department of Health 
confirmed four cases of dengue fever on Oahu. 

These initial cases were reported to have no his- 
tory of travel to a dengue endemic area and were 
localized to a single neighborhood in Pearl City, a 
short distance from the U.S. Marine Corps Manana 
Housing Area. 

Since February, NAMRU-2 Pacific and NEP- 
MU-6 have been assisting with the outbreak by pro- 
viding informational pamphlets to Manana Housing 
residents, educating the public on ways to control 
mosquitoes around their homes, and conducting 
mosquito trapping and dengue testing. 

“Prevention is the key to reducing mosquito 
bites,” said Lt. Ian Sutherland, NEMPU-6 ento- 
mologist. “Eliminating sites where mosquito larvae 
can grow is the single most effective step.” 

Residents can help reduce the risk by remov- 
ing debris which could accumulate water, including 
discarded bottles, cups, and cans. Things like potted 
plants and open containers 

such as garbage cans missing their lids can quickly 
fill with water and become “mosquito factories,” 
Sutherland said. 

“Nearly anything that can hold water for five 


Navy Medicine 


——_ 


U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit No. 2 (NAMRU-2) Pacific microbiologist Lt. Dustin Harrison, watched by Lt. lan Sutherland, Navy 


Environmental and Preventive Medicine Unit No. 6 (NEPMU-6) entomologist, prepares a sample for molecular analysis. The tests may take 
between 2-4 hours to determine if mosquitoes are carrying the dengue virus. NAMRU-2 Pacific and NEPMU-6 teamed up to assist the State of 
Hawaii with an outbreak of dengue fever that hit the islands. 


days can serve as a source of mosquitoes. Inspect and 
repair window and door screens to keep mosquitoes 
from entering homes. Wearing lighter colored, long- 
sleeved clothing as well as personal insect repellent 
containing DEET can also effective at reducing the 
risk of mosquito bites,” he added. 

Both Sailors agree that if one suspects a dengue 
infection to call a physician or medical care provider. 

Of the almost 100 suspected cases of dengue 
fever, 42 have tested negative with the rest awaiting 
testing, which is being done by the joint NAM- 
RU-2/NEMPU-6 lab, the Hawaii State Labs and 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 
Atlanta. The samples have been collected from all 
over Oahu. 

The NAMRU-2/NEMPU-6 staff have collected 
and identified 1,905 Aedes albopictus females (the 
vector for dengue virus in Hawaii) from three sites 
set up by the NEMPU-6 Entomology Department 
and one site set up by the state of Hawaii. The mos- 
quitoes are being analyzed using a proto-type dip- 
stick test for dengue virus that is being field tested 
and evaluated in conjunction with Walter Reed 
Army Institute of Research. 


Fall 2011 


This type of testing is only one of the many 
things that the JBPHH units are involved in. 
NAMRU-2 Pacific conducts research on infec- 
tious disease agents throughout the Pacific and 
South East Asia. Anything that has mission 
abortive potential — including diarrhea, malaria, 
dengue fever, leptospirosis, influenza, to name a 
few — is the focus of their research. 

“Our goal is Force Health Protection, protecting 
warfighters from disease so they can complete their 
missions,” Harrison said. 

“NEPMU-6 maximizes combat readiness of 
operational forces for the entire Pacific region by 
providing specialized environmental and preventive 
medicine support,” Sutherland said. “Our team con- 
sists of public health professionals, including medi- 
cal entomologists, industrial hygienists, environmen- 
tal health officers, physicians, and microbiologists.” 

NEPMU-6 oversees prevention and control 
strategies against insect-borne diseases, water-quality 
problems, and any other conditions threatening the 
health of Pacific Sailors and Marines. 

“We are the Pacific region’s front line preventive 
health specialists,” Sutherland said. © 


47 


Innovations/ R&D 


NSMRL Tests New 
Eyewear for Submariners 


a rae 


Naval Submarine Medical Research 
Laboratory Public Affairs 


A research team from the 
Naval Submarine Medical Re- 
search Laboratory (NSMRL) 
tested a new improved eye- 
wear design to support Naval 
Oph-thalmic Support and 
Training Activity’s (NOS- 
TRA) search for a replace- 
ment of the outdated and 
uncomfortable “granny” P3 
glasses. 


NOSTRA worked with 


NAMRU-Dayton 
» Investigates Neural 
Localization of 
Spatial Processing 


NAMRU- 
Dayton’s Visual 
Vestibular 
Sphere Device 


48 


a vendor to develop new 
submarine duty glasses that 
would be functional, attrac- 
tive, comfortable and easily fit 
inside submarine emergency 
breathing apparatus used dur- 
ing drills and emergencies. 
After satisfactory analysis of 
the glasses at NOSTRA, Ms. 
Alison America, an NSMRL 
researcher, began test-ing the 
eyewear for fit and comfort 
with Submarine Indepen- 
dent Duty Corps-men (IDC) 
volunteers from the Naval 
Undersea Medical Institute. 
“The IDCs provided posi- 


Submariner wearing new and improved submarine duty glasses. 


tive feed-back and comments 
on the initial evaluation of 
the eyewear, citing good fit 
and attractive appearance,” 
said America. Based on their 
favorable comments, she pro- 
ceeded with testing on sub- 
marines, providing eyewear 
pro-totypes to 57 volunteer 
submariners on the USS 


“| determined 
that 95 percent 
of submariners 

wanted the glasses 
available.” 


- Alison America, 


Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory researcher 


be 


Hampton; USS Philadelphia, 
SSN 690; and USS New 
Hampshire, SSN 778. The 
volunteers wore the glasses for 
up to nine months, then pro- 
vided their evaluations and 
com-ments to America. 

“During my last deploy- 
ment I found the new glasses 
to be lightweight, com-fort- 
able and extremely easy to 
wear in breathing protection. 
A vast improvement over the 
old glasses,” said Cmdr. Chad 
Hennings, former executive 
officer, USS Hampton, SSN 
767. 

“I determined that 95 per- 
cent of submariners wanted 
the glasses available, saying 
that the new eyewear was 
an improvement, and the 
thin yet sturdy metal frames 


Photo courtesy of NSMRL 


permitted a tight seal and 
easy fit within the full-face 
masks EABs,” America said. 
“Also, the design avoided the 
uncomfortable pinching at 
the temples and resulting skin 
creases.” 

After successful testing, 
NOSTRA adopted and began 
issuing the new frames to 
submariners. The new glasses 
are now available at local op- 
tometry clinics. 

Established in World War 
II to conduct mission-critical 
studies in night vision, sonar 
sound discrimination and 
personnel selection, NSMRL 
continues to serve the fleet 
by taking the lead in under- 
sea human factors, sensory 
sci-ences and operational 
medicine. ® 


Navy Medicine 


~ 


A High Density Array EEG system in UDRI Human Fac- 


tors Group lab. 


Story and photos by Naval Medical Research 
Unit-Dayton Public Affairs 


Establishing orientation in one’s envi- 
ronment is necessary to perform virtual- 
ly all aspects of normal behavior, so it is 
not surprising that spatial disorientation 
(SD) poses a significant hazard during 
physically and cognitively demanding 
activities such as aviation. The Naval 
Safety Center cites this cognitive threat 
as the principal contributing factor in 
class A aviation mishaps. 

Recognizing the need to develop 
countermeasures for SD, the Naval 
Medical Research Unit-Dayton (NAM- 
RU-Dayton), in collaboration with the 
University of Dayton Research Institute 
(UDRI), is pursuing innovative research 
aimed at advancing our understanding 
of the human brain’s spatial orientation 
system. 

Previous laboratory research es- 
tablished the existence of a network 
of specialized neurons within specific 
brain regions that integrates visual and 


Fall 2011 


vestibular (motion) signals, creating an 
“anatomical spatial display” that oper- 
ates much like a compass and perhaps 

a gyroscope, orienting an animal to its 
position within an environment. In 
humans, a recent clinical study utilizing 
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
({MRI) techniques found similar neural 
processes in participants engaged in a 
simulated spatial awareness task. How- 
ever, {MRI imaging requires participants 
to remain physically motionless, which 
limits our interpretation of how humans 
process spatial awareness and SD in real 
world/operational settings. 

To overcome this limitation, a novel 
project is underway at NAMRU-Dayton 
that incorporates recording neural activ- 
ity with simultaneous subject motion in 
human participants. 

Recently, NAMRU-Dayton research- 
ers, led by Dr. Richard Arnold and Lt. 
Stephen Eggan, met with UDRI scien- 
tists and engineers to begin integrating 
UDRI’s advanced 256-channel dense- 
array electroencephalography (dEEG) 


(VVSD) will 
be used to 


orientation 
: stimuli. 
technology with NAMRU-Dayton’s 
unique Visual Vestibular Sphere Device 
(VVSD). Unlike standard EEG technol- 
ogy, which measures gross neuroelectri- 
cal activity at the scalp, dEEG provides 
high-resolution neuroelectrical signals 
that can be reconstructed in three-di- 
mensional space and localized to specific 
anatomical brain structures. 

Additionally, dEEG allows for par- 
ticipant motion during recording, over- 
coming the limitation of fMRI. NAM- 
RU-Dayton’s VVSD will introduce 
combinations of visual tracking tasks 
and participant motion during record- 
ing, allowing researchers to distinguish 
between visual and motion influences 
on spatial processing. 

Findings from this collaborative re- 
search could identify techniques for fu- 
ture applied NAMRU-Dayton research 
designed to measure SD during flight 
simulations and will lay the groundwork 
for developing future methods of detect- 
ing SD and countermeasures to reduce 
the risk of aviation-related SD mishaps. ® 


produce spatial 


Innovations/ R&D 


50 


Rickettsial Research: Fighting the 
Bite of Fleas, Lice, Mite 


Woy 


Modified Diff-Quik File: Diff-Quick staining of rickettsiae in three different types of cells (DH82, S2, Vero). Arrow indicates cell 
containing rickettsia. 


By Dr. Alison Luce Fedrow 
Naval Medical Research Center 


The bacteria that are responsible for 
rickettsial diseases are transmitted by 
fleas, lice, mites and ticks, and are ca- 
pable of debilitating deployed military 
personnel. Symptoms associated with 
rickettsial infections are flu-like and can 
range from mild to lethal. Biomedical 
research that contributes to the preven- 
tion, diagnostic effort, and vaccine de- 
velopment is an important component 
of Navy Medicine. To date, no vaccine 
for the protection against rickettsial 
infections is available. 

Epidemic typhus, scrub typhus, 
spotted fevers, and ehrlichioses have af- 
fected the military during World War I, 
World War I, the Korean conflict, and 
the Vietnam conflict. Current research 
efforts are underway to determine the 
prevalence of these diseases among 
troops serving in Operation Enduring 
Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi 
Freedom (OIF). 


Since 1984, more than 14 new 
types of rickettsial species have been 
discovered. In 2002, a bacteria named 
Candidatus Rickettsia andeanae was 
identified during an investigation 
of a febrile (fever) outbreak in the 
area around the town of Sapillica in 
northwestern Peru. The bacteria were 
detected in two different species of ticks 
which were collected from two domestic 
horses. The DNA from the Candida- 
tus Rickettsia andeanae was compared 
to the DNA of other known rickettsial 
species and was found to be similar, but 
not identical to any known rickettsial 
species. Consequently, Candidatus R. 
andeanae was determined to be a novel 
rickettsial agent, with the potential for 
causing disease in humans. In 2010, 
Candidatus R. andeanae was detected in 
a tick collected by researchers from Old 
Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia, 
near the Portsmouth River. 

One of the challenges faced by our 
research team at the Naval Medical Re- 


— 
92 
¥: 


cx 


| 


Vero). Arrow indicates cell containing rickettsia. 


search Center was finding suitable cells 
to grow the bacteria, which could then 
be used for future experiments. The 
Candidatus R. andeanae from the tick 
collected by Old Dominion University 
was used to infect three different types 
of cells in our laboratory. Infections 
were confirmed using a technique called 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
(qPCR). Additionally, transmission elec- 
tron microscopy and different cell-stain- 
ing techniques were used to produce 
images of the Candidatus R. andeanae 
that could be used to determine the size 
and the location of the bacteria within 
each type of cell. 

Since November 2010, these infec- 
tions have been continuously main- 
tained in the laboratory. This first 
successful cultivation of Candidatus 
R. andeanae in three distinct cell lines 
represents a major step towards better 
characterizing and understanding the 
potential virulence of this emerging 
rickettsial species. ® 


Navy Medicine 


Ss and Ticks 


NAMRU-3 Supports Force Health 
Protection in the Horn of Africa 


By NAMRU-3 Public Affairs 


Camp Lemonnier, established in 
Dji-bouti in 2002, is the only fixed U.S. 
base under the Africa Command (AF- 
RICOM) and is also home to the U.S. 
Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of 
Africa (CJTF-HOA). 

Originally focused on counter-terror- 
ism operations, the camp’s mission has 
now expanded to include strengthen-ing 
partnerships and contributing to sta- 
bility in East Africa. This serves as part 
of a comprehensive approach to increase 
African partner nations’ capacity to 
main-tain stable environments for their 
citizens. 

The increasing role of U.S. military 
personnel in the region is also important 
from a force health protection perspec- 
tive. Lt. Cmdr. Peter Sebeny, a U.S. 
Naval Medical Research Unit No. 3 
(NAMRU-3) research clinician who has 
worked in the region, said, “With the 
growing presence of U.S. personnel in 
Africa, there is a need to better under- 
stand infectious dis-ease threats in the 
region, which can be challenging since 
little surveillance data and public health 


and laboratory diag-nostics are the cor- 
nerstone to gaining a better understand- 
ing.” 

NAMRU-3 initiated a diarrheal 
surveil-lance project at Camp Lemon- 
nier’s Expe-ditionary Medical Facility 
(EMF) in 2007 with plans to integrate 
the surveillance to include other ill- 
nesses, including influ-enza-like illness 
and acute febrile ill-nesses such as ma- 
laria. NAMRU-3’s re-search activities 
are under an umbrella protocol aimed at 
detecting health threats among deployed 
military personnel and are executed in 
accordance with the NAMRU-3 Mili- 
tary Infectious Disease and Operational 
Health Surveillance Network. 

The importance of a surveillance sys- 
tem is that it can identify new disease 
trends or infectious disease outbreaks. 
For example, during the early period of 
the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic, 
the EMF, with direct support from 
NAMRU-3, utilized the existing surveil- 
lance system to identify an outbreak 
of seasonal influ-enza A (H3N2). That 
surveillance also identified the first con- 
firmed pH1N1/2009 influenza cases in 
the Horn of Africa among U.S. service 


been important in identifying common 
etiologies of acute gastroenteritis in the 
region, including En-terotoxigenic E. 
coli (ETEC) and norovi-rus. Recent 
findings from this surveillance were pre- 
sented by NAMRU-3 at the European 
Command and AFRICOM Sci-ence 
and Technology Conference in June 
2011. 

Limited laboratory capacity within 
the EMF remains a challenge, but 
NAMRU-3 is currently working with 
camp leader-ship and the French mili- 
tary (who have well-established clinical 
laboratory facili-ties in Djibouti) to 
solve this problem. 

“Establishing better local laboratory 
capabilities in Djibouti will be impor- 
tant for current surveillance efforts as 
well as to conduct more advanced stud- 
ies to under-stand the causes, burden 
and impact of gastroenteritis, one of 
the most common illnesses in deployed 
populations,” said Sebeny. 


It is through efforts such as these that 


NAMRU-3 has built valuable profes- 

sional relationships with the EMF and 
the CJTF-HOA staff and continues to 
play an im-portant role in force health 


capacity exists. Im-proved surveillance 


members. Ongoing surveillance has also protection in Africa. ® 


Navy Researcher Places in International Young Investigator Competition 


By NAMRU-San Antonio Public Affairs 


Lt. Leedjia Svec , principal investigator with the Naval 
Medical Research Unit-San Antonio (NAMRU-San Anto- 


nio), was invited to compete in the Space Medicine Associa- 


tion’s international young investigator competition. 

Researchers who study aviation medicine or aviation 
performance and who are still young in their careers were 
invited to participate. Io compete, Svec had to write a 
manuscript and present her research for judging during the 
82nd Aerospace Medicine Association’s (ASMA) annual 
conference in Anchorage, Alaska. The finalists in this year’s 
competition were selected from 175 contestants. Svec was 
awarded fourth place in this tough international competi- 
tion. 

According to Dr. Jeffrey Myers, after whom the award is 
named; “Lt. Svec’s presentation was judged to represent the 
top of the performances at the conference.” 

Svec presented current research in laser eye protection 


(LEP) and mathematical modeling. Her research was titled, 


Fall 2011 


“Predictive models of visual behavior in the military envi- 
ronment, and was coauthored by Dave Freeman, M.A.; 
Tom Kuyk, Ph.D. TASC; and Lt. Col. Martin LaFrance, 
Ph.D./O.D. 

Svec is especially grateful for her dedicated team of col- 
leagues and said, “I could not have achieved this accom- 
plishment without their help; this is their award, too.” 

Within the Directed Energy Biomedical Research De- 
partment, Svec and her colleagues identify, understand and 
manage the bio-behavioral effects and risks associated with 
human exposure to radiofre-quency, microwave, optical 
radiation (laser) and low-frequency injected current direct- 
ed-energy sources. Part of that program is LEP and visual 
effects such as color vision or glare. 

NAMRU-San Antonio's mission is to conduct medical, 
dental and directed energy biomedical research that focuses 
on ways to enhance the health, safety, performance and 
operational readiness of Navy and Marine Corps personnel 
and addresses their emergent medical and dental problems 
in routine and combat operations. @ 


51 


A Look Back 


Sam Stone came home, 
To his wife and family 
After serving in the conflict overseas. 

And the time that he served, 
Had shattered all his nerves, 

And left a little shrapnel in his knee. 

But the morphine eased the pain, 
And the grass grew round his brain, 
And gave him all the confidence he lacked, 
With a Purple Heart and a monkey on his back. 


“Sam Stone” lyrics by John Prine 


By Richard Ginn and a monkey on his back,” and descended into 

Col., MSC, U.S. Army (Ret.) ; re 

Article originally appeared in The GROG a downward spiral of drug addiction and death 
from a drug overdose. 

When Johnny Cash sang “Sam Stone,” he sang —_ As we discussed in recent Grog articles, the 
about another war and era that echo in the chal- 1 BUMED oral history project is helping to pre- 
lenges faced by our military today. If we ignore _ serve the stories of Sailors and Marines who are 
the effects of the inevitable stresses of combat making history today. One of the areas we are 
and deployment, and if we leave people who are concentrating on is Navy medicine’s efforts to 
having problems unattended, then the outcomes control and treat combat and operational stress, 
can be as sad as the story of this veteran who a program squarely aimed at helping the Sam 
came home from Vietnam “with a Purple Heart — Stones of our “Long War” in Iraq and Afghani- 


ED Navy Medicine 


stan. In a series of interviews, we are recording 
the stories of people who are engaged in this 
important effort. We are collecting the personal 
experiences of Navy psychiatrists, psychologists, 
chaplains, social workers, hospital corpsmen, 
psychiatric technicians, and other members of the 
mental health team who day-by-day build and 
expand combat stress control initiatives, while 
also treating sailors and Marines who need help. 
The effects of combat stress, ranging from 
mild to severe, are pervasive, but accurate statis- 
tics are elusive. A RAND Corporation study in 
2008 estimated that of the 1.7 million service 
members who had deployed to OEF and OIF at 
that point, over 300,000 had developed PTSD 
or major depression, a number that does not 
include the full range of stress-related disorders. 1 
Indeed there are estimates that 30 percent of the 
population from OEF and OIF may be affected 
by post-traumatic stress symptoms.2 Whatever 
the actual numbers turn out to be, they cannot 
be relegated to simply statistics, which are, after 
all, “people with the tears wiped off” The fact is 
that no one is unchanged by their deployment, 
and our oral histories move from the realm of 


Fall 2011 


Wounded in the hand and 
suffering from nervous exhaus- 
tion, this Marine is still able to 
walk back to a first aid station 
with a little assistance from a 
fellow fighter. There was not 
far to walk for this casualty 
this was the battle of Tarawa, 
where "rear lines" were back in 
the fleet lying offshore and the 
front was the whole island. 


Drawings by Kerr Eby. 
Courtesy of the Navy History 
and Heritage Command. 


numbers into the real world of human beings, as 
told in their own words. Often their stories are 
gripping, as reflected in a few vignettes. 

There is the story of the Marine corporal, re- 
deploying home with his unit, who learned that 
the buddy he had last seen in Iraq “stacked like 
cordwood on a Humvee” was in fact alive and 
would be present for homecoming celebrations at 
Camp Lejeune. The corporal sought help from a 
psychiatrist for the dilemma that was tormenting 
him. “Doc, my family will be there. Who should 
I hug first, my buddy or my family?” This poi- 
gnant encounter deeply moved the medical of- 
ficer, and drove home a fundamental insight. 

“Why don’t we give the wounded the op- 
portunity to spend some quality time with their 
brothers in arms before the contamination, if you 
will, of the reunion? And I say contamination be- 
cause the mental mechanisms of depression, sup- 
pression, and denial are so great. I think at that 
point I really learned that any work that needs to 
be done really needs to be done before individu- 
als set foot back on their soil.” 

In another example, a psychologist who de- 
ployed to Iraq as part of an effort to bring mental 


53 


- | a bl x = _ 4 a 


— a - — 


The artist often wondered what the infantryman thought as he looked over his handiwork. This Marine searched for water for his 
friends on the still-smoking beach during the Battle of Tarawa in 1943. The fight was still going on farther down the island. 


health support to the operational unit level, 
volunteered to participate in a mounted patrol 
“outside the wire.” He found it physically ex- 
hausting and emotionally fatiguing. “The initial 
excitement wears off, and then youre left with 
hours of just sheer boredom and monotony. But 
you have to maintain vigilance. So you talk about 
your families and cars and football, any type of 


“The initial excitement wears 
Oli, and then you're leit with 
hours of just sheer boredom 
and monotony. But you have to 
maintain vigilance.” 


- Anonymous psychologist who deployed to Iraq 


54 


small talk you can think of, smoke cigarettes, 
and drink that ever present water that you keep 
in the back of the Humvee. Then you get those 
moments of sheer terror when the police come 
by and everybody’s getting riled up thinking 
there’s going to be a fire fight. I began to realize, 
though, it’s as much the overall wear and tear 
and constant stress and strain as any one incident 
that really has its impact.” While this episode 
entailed no direct combat exposure, it was an 
example of the stress caused by being in a combat 
theater itself. “I began to realize there are trau- 
matic events, but that daily wear and tear does a 
lot to people as well.” 

A third example comes from the experience of 
another mental health professional whose deploy- 
ment illustrated an aspect of operational stress 
that involved neither direct combat or the fact 


Navy Medicine 


of being in the theater, but the deployment itself. 
His flight included a layover at a remote airfield 
in the wee hours of the morning. As he talked 
about his weariness, the routine stop, and the de- 
serted airport, he was suddenly overcome and un- 
able to continue. As he regained his composure, 
he described how he and his fellow sailors were 
surprised when they were warmly welcomed by a 
group of volunteer greeters who routinely met all 
service members who came through the airport. 
For this caregiver, some powerful emotions that 
were just under the surface had emerged during 
our interview and taken center stage, perhaps for 
the first time. 

Our interviews illustrate that operational 
stress is both the result of combat as well as the 
operational deployments themselves. Injury may 
occur even if the individual has not been directly 


Fes = 


Faces tight with strain, hospital corpsmen watch breathlessly to see the effect of the blood plasma they have injected into the veins of 
a Marine casualty at Tarawa. Silence cloaks the onlookers as Destiny balances the delicate scales: Will it be life or death? 


Fall 2011 


involved in combat or single dramatic incident, 
but as the result of constant stress. Often, a key 
to relief is the chance to talk to someone. As 

one medical officer put it, enlisted Marines and 
Sailors “will walk through hell in gasoline pants, 
but they want respect; they want someone to 
listen.” Our interviews are also underscoring the 
need to care for the caregiver, such as the mental 
health professional who found that in the process 
of helping others he was coming to grips with his 
own need for help. Those who listen also need 
someone to listen to them. 

About the Author: Colonel Richard V.N. Ginn, 
an oral historian under contract with the Navy 
Medical History Office, is a retired Army Medical 
Service Corps officer. He is the author of In Their 
Own Words: The 498th Medical Company (Air 
Ambulance) in Iraq. * 


+ 
= 


55 


DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY 

BUREAU OF MEDICINE AND SURGERY 
COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTORATE 
BLDG 1, RM 1217 

2300 E STREET NW 

WASHINGTON DC 20372-5300 


OFFICIAL BUSINESS 


Periodical 
Postage and Fees Paid 
USN 


USPS 316-070 


