NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES 

OFFICE OF ARCHIVES AND HISTORY 



Transcript of an 

Oral History Interview with Karen Willis Amspacher 

SHE.OH.015 
December 11, 2019 



Interview Information: 


Interviewer: Ellen Brooks 

Interview Loeation: Markers Island, North Carolina 

Interview Runtime: 01:27:26 

Transeribed By: Matthew Waehner, Mareh 2020 

Reviewed By: Ellen Brooks, April 2020 

Summary By: Gretehen Boyles, July 2020 

Colleetion: “She Changed the World” Oral History Projeet 

Interview Summary; 

This oral history interview with Karen Willis Amspaeher eovers her general life history with a 
foeus on her work with the Cove Sound Waterfowl Museum and Heritage Center in Markers 
Island, North Carolina. Amspaeher has served as an edueator in sehools, and she helped found 
The Mailboat, an oral history journal, and serves as an editor for several other publieations. She 
has eompleted numerous projeets, eoordinated exhibitions, and partieipated in several 
doeumentary projeets. She was a founding member for the Board of Direetors and is the 
Exeeutive Direetor for the Cove Sound Waterfowl and Heritage Center. 

Amspaeher was born and raised in Carteret County, North Carolina. She reeeived her higher 
edueation degrees in North Carolina (Appalaehian State University, East Carolina University). 
After her undergraduate edueation, she served as a teaeher in Buneombe County before returning 
to Carteret County. There she married her seeond husband, Jimmy; they had two ehildren, Casey 
and Katie. 

In the interview, Amspaeher discusses growing up, family, and attending school in Carteret 
County. She talks about her college experiences, and she details the time she spent in the 
mountains during college and as a teacher. 

Amspaeher describes her work in oral history, museums, and heritage preservation, with 
particular focus on her work with Markers Island history and heritage through the Cove Sound 
Decoy Guild and the Cove Sound Waterfowl Museum and Heritage Center. Amspaeher 
discusses the gendered experiences in the culture of Markers Island life. She describes challenges 
she faced, including the many storms and hurricanes that have set back the Cove Sound 
Museum, her position as a woman, and her definition of success. Amspaeher continues to serve 
on the Board of Directors and as Executive Director for the Cove Sound Waterfowl Museum and 
Heritage Center. 

Biographical Sketch: 

Karen Eynn Willis Amspaeher (nee Willis) was born on May 22, 1955 in Sea Eevel, North 
Carolina to Wanda Hill Willis and Ikie William Willis. She attended Atlantic Christian College 



(1973-1974), Appalachian State University (1979-1981; BS in Elementary Edueation) and East 
Carolina University (1982-1984; Gifted Edueation Certifieation). She married James William 
Amspacher, and the eouple had two children, William Casey Amspaeher and Sarah Katelyn 
Amspaeher. Amspaeher has taught in publie sehools, founded The Mailboat and edited both The 
Mailboat and other publieations, partieipated in and partnered with exhibitions, projeets, and 
doeumentaries, and was a founding Board of Direetors member for the Cove Sound Waterfowl 
Museum and Heritage Center. At the time of the interview, she was serving as the Executive 
Direetor for the Cover Sound Waterfowl Museum and Heritage Center, and her work has been 
reeognized through several awards and honors. 

Archivist’s Note: 


Transeriptions refleet the original oral history reeording. Due to human and maehine 
fallibility transeripts often eontain small errors. Transeripts may not have been transeribed from 
the original reeording medium. It is strongly suggested that researehers engage with the oral 
history reeording as well as the transeript. Timestamps are approximate. 




[Beginning of SHEOH_015_01_Amspacher] 

Brooks: Today is December 11, 2019 This is an interview with Karen Willis Amspacher, 

who is the executive director at the Core Sound Waterfowl Museum and Heritage 
Center, which is where we're conducting this interview today, and the interview is 
being conducted for the North Carolina State Archives She Changed the World 
Oral History Project and the interviewer is Ellen Brooks. So we are going to just 
start at the beginning, if you can tell me where and when you were born? 

Amspacher: 1 was born in 1955, and 1 was — the first year of my life 1 was actually in 

Havelock while my mama and Daddy built the house here on Harkers Island. 

And 1 grew up in a house on family land that was — that is still in my family. 

Brooks: Great, and what did your parents do for a living? 

Amspacher: My daddy worked at Cherry Point, Mama was a homemaker until 1 was out of 
high school, and then she went to work with the REA, which was the power 
company here in the island. Rural Electrification Administration, that is now the 
Electric Membership Co-op. She worked there, and she was a big church 
volunteer, school grade mother, she opened scallops some, but anyway she was 
pretty much at home. 

Brooks: And what is Cherry Point? 

Amspacher: Cherry Point is the Naval air rework facility in Havelock about thirty-five miles 
west of here. It was like the economic salvation of this area. Pishing was king, 
but after World War II, that facility was built, there was also one at Camp Eejune, 
and many of the men - and my mama worked there before she was married - but 
many of the men went to worked there and then they would quit and come home 
and shrimp, or fish, whatever but it became a big part of the economy of the 
island. 

Brooks: And do you have any siblings? 

Amspacher: I have a brother. He's nine years younger, and he teaches math at the local high 
school. 

Brooks: So, tell me a little bit about what type of kid you were? 

Amspacher: I was the one who tried to please everybody. I just — that what I was supposed to 
do. Went to church, made straight A's at school, tried to say out of trouble. I was 
pretty boring, actually, but — that's the way I was raised, you did what you were 
told to do, didn't ask a whole lot of questions. So, it was pretty traditional for that 
time and this place. Daddy working at Cherry Point put us at an advantage over 


1 



some people who were just still reliant on boat building and fishing, but it was 
still very mueh, with Mama not working, and Daddy's job at Cherry Point was 
basieally unskilled labor, finaneially it was always a struggle. Speaking of Cherry 
Point — 

[Helieopter sound] 

Brooks: Yeah, helieopter -1 just saw it. 

Amspaeher: We are in the fly zone, so it will be done in a minute. 

Brooks: Okay, we ean wait for a see. So, you said you got straight A's, did you like 

sehool? 

Amspaeher: I loved sehool. I — on Markers Island there was no kindergarten. I started sehool 
in '61, and it was the same twenty-five or thirty people every elass, beeause there 
was only one first grade and one seeond grade. So the people, the ones of us who 
went to elementary sehool together, we were very elose beeause we were together 
year after year, and we played on the same teams, were the same eheerleaders, 
and we were either kin, or we went to the same ehureh, or we lived in the same 
neighborhood, or some eombination of those faetors. So, ehureh on Markers 
Island is very eomplieated, there are a lot of ehurehes. So — some ehurehes were 
more akin to others, whieh is a whole other eoneept. But anyway, the people you 
grew up with, you just grew up with them, I mean literally. The only people who 
ehanged were the preaeher's kids beeause preaehers would eome and go. And so, 
somebody might show up in the fourth grade that you didn't know, but he was a 
preaeher's kid. 

[00:05:00] 

Brooks: So whieh ehureh did you go to? 

Amspaeher: I went to the Methodist Chureh. 

Brooks: And about how big was Markers Island, how many people when you were 

growing up? 

Amspaeher: Probably as a ehild the population was twelve, fifteen hundred, maybe twelve 
hundred or fourteen hundred. In the sixties it grew. It maxed out to maybe 
eighteen hundred around 1990s, 2000. Sinee then the population has been 
dropping. Beeause the priee of land here, families eannot stay here. A working- 
elass family eannot stay here, and the land is going to retirees, whieh is in a whole 
different priee range. And that has impaeted the sehool beeause there are very 
few sehool age kids here. In faet three years ago they had to reorganize and 
reshuffle the sehool distriets, all down east Carteret County, beeause Atlantie 
Sehool and Markers Island Sehool, if it had been restrieted just to its sehool 


2 



Brooks: 


Amspacher: 


footprint, there probably would have been fifty kids or less. So now it's shuffled, 
and Markers Island is a K-5 school, Atlantic is a K-5 school, and on the middle 
school, kids go to Smyrna. So there's a lot of bus routes moving kids across these 
thirty-some miles. So, land values have completely changed the dynamics here. 
But you know the school, when I was in school, there was anywhere from 275 to 
300 children in the eight grades. And the businesses on this island, there was like 
eight scallop houses, four fish houses, five restaurants at one time, three or four 
motels, I mean there's less commerce on Markers Island now than I've ever 
remembered, which is really surprising to some people because there's a lot of 
wealth here now, but it’s not community wealth, it’s wealth that comes and goes. 

Yeah, maybe we can talk a little bit more toward the end about Markers Island 
now and the community and the landscape. But I want to follow your path. So, 
one thing I'm always curious about is whether there was a point in your childhood 
where you thought about what you want to be when you grew up? And do you 
remember — 

Oh, always. I remember in the sixth grade - they would never allow you to do 
this - but in the sixth grade we had these little tiny posters across the front of the 
room and it had everybody's name, their height, their weight, and what they were 
going to be when they grew up. And at that point I was going to be a beautician. 
So, who knows, but school was the common factor on the island. Like I say, 
families were divided, you were either part of a family or you weren't. And the 
churches divided the community, but the school was common ground, and it was 
a big part of everything we did — like in every small rural community it provided 
lots of activities beyond just learning. But anyway, I ended up, this is 
complicated, but I ended up only going to school here seven years. The county 
school system at that time, which was, for the years '67, '68, and '69, that's when 
like gifted and talented education became a thing. The way Carteret County 
handed that, they put their whole AG resource into the eighth grade. And so the 
top students from the eighth grade of all the schools went to the high school early. 
We didn't skip a grade, but we went to the high school early, we changed classes, 
we had high school teachers. It was like to give us a head start, and also to get us 
into a classroom where everybody was operating on the same level. And I was 
the token from Markers Island. I was the only one from Markers Island, Atlantic 
had two, and Smyrna had five. Those were the down east schools. Everybody 
else was from Beaufort. I never quite - and I want to go on record -1 never quite 
understood how the gene pool fit, but I know how the politics were. But anyway, 
it was probably the most consequential year for me in public school because all of 
a sudden I got with people who were more experienced, more well read, they 
were a lot of teacher's kids, a lot of kids from Duke lab, and the competition there 
was positive, but we all learned from each other. And we all still are connected in 
a lot of ways, because we were all in the eighth grade, we were in one group and 
we stayed as a class that whole eighth grade, and then we split into grade levels. 
But the class that I left on Markers Island - it was a very hard decision to leave 
Markers Island early - Tm not sure they ever forgave me. Because I know there 


3 



[00:11:09] 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


has been a couple of reunions of my eighth-grade class, and I didn't get invited, 
which is a whole indicator of Markers Island. But anyway, I was glad I did. It set 
my course, and I ended up teaching gifted education when I got out of college. 


Was it scary going there without knowing anyone? 

Oh, yeah. Because culturally, in 1968, being from Markers Island was very sub — 
that was a sub-culture. Because we didn't know people in other communities. It 
was long distance phone call from Markers Island just across the bridge. Now we 
had local calls to Beaufort because the phone cable came under the water, and we 
can see Beaufort from Markers Island, but Beaufort was a whole other culture. 
That's where all the money was, that's where all the political power was. Beaufort 
always threw off on down east, there's still — that is a wedge that is still very real. 
But yeah, I mean. East Carteret was very intimidating. Very intimidating. 

What were you — what did you excel at in school in terms of grades? What 
subjects did you like? 

I loved math. But I excelled at — I would say I wasn't the smartest one in that 
class, which was a whole new realization. What I excelled at was people. And 
having to prove myself, because when you're from Markers Island, you had to 
prove yourself, and I learned that quick. You got to do more, you got to do it 
better, and you can't quit. So, I learned that quick. And I loved East Carteret, I 
was probably too social, too interested, too competitive. I should have pushed 
harder academically, but it was a great experience, and I still feel very attached to 
the people I went to school with. But we all scattered. Very few, at that time, for 
down east - ‘cause there is down east and then there's Beaufort. I know out of my 
class on Markers Island, me and one other person were the only ones that finished 
college. I would say out of the eighth grade, the down east students, maybe five. 

And that was pretty normal, those numbers were pretty consistent? 

Well, the different communities down east had different emphasis, different 
commitments to education. Atlantic, the community of Atlantic was totally 
college bound. Marshallberg, the community where my mother was from, they 
were committed to schoolteachers. Where like Atlantic had doctors, lawyers, and 
Indian Chiefs. Markers Island was not so much toward education, they were 
toward fishing and boat building. So, your family experience was very 
consequential to what you did. My daddy saw no need for me to go to college. I 
wanted to go to Carolina, and I got accepted at Carolina, but Mama wouldn't let 
me go because it was too big. So, then I really wanted to go to Appalachian, 
because I wanted to go to the mountains, but she wouldn't let me go there because 
it was too far. So, I ended up at Atlantic Christian College, and I hated it, I only 
stayed one year. 


4 



Brooks: 


And where is that? Is that in Atlantie? 


[00:14:58] 

Amspaeher: 


Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 


Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 


It's in Wilson, it’s Barton eollege now. I went there for a year and was going to do 
a like two-year business degree. Beeause I was dating my high sehool sweetheart. 
We ended up — I dropped out and got married, I put him through sehool and then 
he left. It happens. So, then I went to Appalaehian, and I think then is when I 
beeame who I am. It was — when I was married to Mike, we lived in Roeky 
Mount, he graduated from Wesleyan, and I went to work in a textile plant there. I 
was in the offiee. But I learned a lot there. That was my first exposure to 
American business, corporate thinking. It was my first experience in an African 
American community, because the plant was 85 percent or 90 percent black. A lot 
of Pembroke Indian, all cultures. Because here, everybody is white. And East 
Carteret, there was a black population, and we were all friends, we were all good, 
but at that point, they had their community and we had ours. So Rocky Mount 
Texfi was a big education and I made up my mind then that I was going back to 
school. So, before Mike even graduated that spring I had already applied and had 
my plan in place. We parted friends and life goes on. But Boone was my healing 
place. 

Did you know what you were going to study? 

I went to be a teacher because I loved school, and my degree is in elementary 
education. But one of my work study programs was transcribing oral histories. 
And I kept sitting, it was on an IBM Selectric typewriter, with foot pedals and 
earphones and the whole business I knew nothing, I did not even know what oral 
history was. And I started transcribing those interviews and I was saying to 
myself the whole way, why isn't somebody down there talking to my crowd. 
Because at that point, there had been very little work done here. So, by now it’s 
'79, 80, 81 and that just planted seed, and I graduated there in two and a half 
years. I did not want to come home. I got a job in Buncombe County, taught 
school there for a year. But I had come home for the summer after I graduated 
because I was broke, I worked two jobs and thafs when I got hung up with 
Jimmy, the husband now. But I went up to Buncombe County and taught in 
Asheville, because I just wanted to be in the mountains. But we got married and I 
moved back home and that was the right thing to do, I still wonder if, I wonder 
what if, and I still go to Boone every chance I get, because there's a piece of me 
still there. But I came home and taught school in Havelock until we started 
having children. 

And Jimmy is your husband? 

Uh huh, Jimmy's the husband. 


5 



Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

[00:19:49] 


And is he from here? 

He was a preacher's kid. Amspacher is not a down east name, but his daddy was 
the Methodist preacher down to Atlantie, so that's where he was raised. He was in 
the last graduating class in Atlantic in 1965, before it all merged into East 
Carteret. So, he grew up in a fish house pulling crab pots, and - so, he’s as 
invested in down east as I am. 

What does he do for a living now? 

He's retired, he was an engineer at Cherry Point. And he's a boat builder, he's 
teaching boat building at the eommunity college and he does whatever needs to be 
done. 

What was your job, did you say you taught? 

I taught school in Havelock, and then I was out with Casey was born in '84, and 
he was a difficult baby, he was sick a lot, and we had eonseiously decided that no 
matter what the saerifice or how many jobs Jimmy had to work, I was going to 
stay home with the children. So we did, he was born in '84, Katie was bom in '87 
and in the middle, by the time she was — I was pregnant with her when we did the 
Harkers Island cookbook. And that was the beginning. 


The Harkers Island Cookbook and the Core Sound Deeoy Festival were bom the 
same year, and I just got pulled into all that, and that was about the time Harkers 
Island really began to go downhill in my opinion. The Park Serviee had been here 
since '66, so we're twenty years in to being a national park, people were moving 
in, buying up the land. Lots and lots more “summer people” — that's what we 
always called them. And commercial fishing was hitting some hard places, so 
there was a growing sense of loss and fear, for eultural things and stories and the 
way it was, so the timing was right. The Decoy Festival was a pieee of it. The 
Decoy Festival beeame what is the museum — they still have the Deeoy Festival, 
but the museum evolved out of that. The Harkers Island Cookbook was an oral 
history project, actually, that became a revival of sorts. My friend Joel and I — he 
also grew up on Harkers Island — we started publishing The Mailboat, which is an 
oral history journal, and it was interviews and old newspaper elippings and letters 
and all that. And I was involved with other publications. So, that's how I got in to 
what I do, is that everybody over that first ten years, and still to some degree, 
we're desperately trying to document and salvage and hold on because they can 
feel the roar of progress, and they didn't like it. So that's how I got — that's how I 
got in on this mess. 


6 



Projects have evolved, and opportunities have emerged, and the museum was 
established by the Guild, by the carvers, in 1992. And I ended up being a key 
person in that, and what evolved out of it was I was out interviewing decoy 
carvers and photographing collections and dragging UNC-TV out to Core Banks 
in hunting camps, you know. But what emerged out of that was an interest in all 
things Core Sound. Not just ducks, but work boats and commercial fishing, you 
know, salt marshes and so the museum took on a much larger mission, and that 
was not without pain. Because the carvers were interested in carvings. And if you 
get into the carving world, then there's the old bird people and the new bird 
people. And then if you get into old birds and new birds, then you've got people 
who collect North Carolina decoys and people who collect Virginia and its very 
substrate. And at the end of the day, what matters is the big picture. And I took a 
pretty heavy duty — and still am — a very heavy duty beating because we are more 
than a decoy museum. We love decoys, and we just had the Decoy Festival, but 
we're equally interested in music traditions, and cooking traditions and I think 
we've made great strides in helping the community realize that. Even though 
nobody was ever a full-time carver, or a full-time hunter, or a full-time fisherman, 
they were whatever they needed to be at the time. And that's kind of the way it 
still is. I mean, my husband builds boats, and somebody else's husband might 
carve decoys, and somebody else might do something else, but it's all attached to 
this place. And that's been my passion, is place. 

And when you say “place” that includes how people interact with that place, but 
also how that place is taken care of culturally, but also as a natural resource, 
which has opened the door for the museum to be involved with all kinds of 
environmental education programs, wetlands restoration. We got a project just 
launched this week the Fig Project documenting all the different kinds of figs, and 
then taking that to who cooks figs, and preserving figs, and fig cake. Because 
food is hot right now. We've tried to be what people wanted it to be. We've spent 
a lot of time planning exhibitions that I'm not sure are ever going to get built, 
because when the museum got destroyed, got tom up in Florence, we had an 
exhibit that was all about hurricanes. And the historic role that hurricanes have 
played in shaping these communities and the landscape and the inlets, and then on 
this side of the building we had an exhibit about sea level rise of all things. And 
the two of ‘em kind of merged when Florence hit. 


[00:25:25] 


And we're expanding on that exhibition so when we open in the spring that 
exhibit, that exhibition will include aspects of all of it, and what Florence has 
done to this community and the communities around it. And now Dorian in 
Ocracoke. So, it's a constantly evolving story. 

Brooks: Mm-hm. How did you feel when you left the classroom? 


7 



Amspacher: 


Brooks: 


Amspacher: 


[00:30:11] 


I miss teaching. I loved teaching. I loved middle school. I love teaching the gifted 
kids, I loved the kids with the attitude 'cause I could trim them down in a 
heartbeat. I miss it. I could not survive in the classroom now. That was before the 
end of grade testing. I taught at Havelock Middle School. We had the first 
computer in that school, only the gifted kids had a computer, because there was 
no software. They were Tandy's out of Radio Shack, and we had to learn our own 
DOS programming. So, it was the right thing for me -1 love going in classrooms. 
I'm doing a big program in January - but this, this is where I was supposed to be. 
And as hard as its been, I think it has taken all of those experiences, including in 
the classroom, and in the mountains, and in a very vibrant culture that I found to 
be much more similar to down east - in culture - mountain culture and coastal 
culture are based on the same elements. Independence, isolation, self-reliance, so 
I felt very at home. And I got to see another culture very similar to mine with 
outside eyes. So, I think it too all my, all those experiences to help shape whaf s 
here. Plus, I learned that you can do hard things - because down east people have 
a tendency to give up before you get started, and I have no capacity for that. 

Don't tell me I can't do something. And I leaned that by being a woman on my 
own that most women who grew up here don't have. It was a hard, when I came 
back and started working in the church and the community and everybody kept 
saying, "Well you can't do that." I said, "Watch me, watch me," and I was battling 
the crowd I grew up with. And all of a sudden I was riding down the road, I know 
exactly where I was and it came to me - they've never lived anywhere that they 
had to go get the lights turned on, or that they had to find out where the doctors 
were. They had left their parent's house and into a trailer in the back yard, or a 
house down the road. There had never been that — now my exposure was very 
limited, but I learned quick I could do what needed, you know, if you want to do 
it bad enough, and you're willing to pay the price, and you're willing to hold your 
ground, you can do it. So - 

Do you remember any specific instances in which people were telling you that 
you couldn't do something? 

Oh yeah, before the Markers Island Cookbook, that was back in the days of 
country crafts, and bazaars, that was '86. And this was before I got pregnant with 
Katie, I just had Casey, and we decided we were going to do a bazaar at the 
Markers Island Methodist Church. So, they wanted me to be in charge, so I said 
OK. It's easier to be in charge than it is to follow -1 mean, that's who I am. So I 
know all these people who knew how to do all these crafts. So, what we did was, 

I had friends who owned craft shops, so we would buy craft supplies, and like 
starting in June, we had a craft class every week. So, I had ten or twelve of the 
women come and learn how to do quilt top baskets. And we provided all the 
supplies, they made them, and we had twelve, or ten, ever how many people 
showed up quilt top baskets, and we put them in a closet. 


8 



Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


The next week we would something different, and so we were building inventory 
for this bazaar. Well, the old women, Merele Lee Salter and Annie Ray Poole, 
they kept looking at this staek of — I mean it was like a gift shop, you know, this 
eloset was fdling up with this stuff And they would tell me every —beeause we 
work Monday and Tuesday nights — "you'll never sell that stuff" I said. Yes, just 
- whatever. So, November eame, it was the Saturday before Thanksgiving, and I 
got somebody to design a poster — there was no Faeebook or email or any of that 
kinda stuff — got a story in the paper. We were sold out in an hour and forty 
minutes. Seventy-two hundred dollars in less than two hours at one bazaar. 

That’s amazing. 

And so the next January - that was November -1 went to the women's meeting, 
and I started talking about what we were going to do the next year, and that we 
needed more of this, and we were need to start earlier and we need to do that, and 
they said, "No, we're tired of bazaars, we don't want to do that anymore." Well, 
they hadn't even done the work. It [eonfounded ??] me. That was one of my first 
major disappointments in eommunity work and I said. All right. 

But then Jan Gillikan, another lady in the ehureh, had this vision for a eookbook. 
So, we took a thousand dollars from what we had made, and that beeame the 
down payment on the eookbook. So, I had sent all of these — espeeially Pass the 
Plate out of New Bern, and there was another loeal book that had been down here, 
where people put little stories between the reeipes. So, that beeame the oral 
history projeet. And I brought in my friend Connie Mason and taught the women 
in the ehureh how to do oral histories. And in the meantime, I found out I was 
pregnant and started throwing up, so I like threw up on someone. And so, we 
started out, we were gonna print 500. And as people heard about it, you know, 
they were like, "Well I want one, I want one." Got a story in the paper again, with 
my friend Tabby who worked at the paper then, and we started getting all these 
orders, and we said, OK, well we will up it to a 1,000. And then, I kept telling 
people. We're going to need more books than this. And so, we had this big eome- 
to-Jesus meeting at the women's meeting one night. This is about September, I 
said, "We've got to print more books," they said, "We don't have any money." 

And I said, "I ean't help it, we've got to print more books." And they almost 
abandoned the eookbook projeet then beeause it was going to be too mueh. So 
there were three of us that agreed that we would — and we signed a paper that we 
would go to the bank and borrow the money to pay for these eookbooks to print 
2000. And by the time we got them, there were 2,017 books on the first shipment, 
they were every one sold before they got here. But they were sold to people off 
the island beeause the erowd on the island wouldn't buy it until they saw it. And 
so then, I was ready to have the baby, I was ready to have Katie. She was born 
twenty-seeond of Deeember. And somebody on a loeal TV program got a hold of 
it and started advertising it. And the orders were eoming from everywhere and 
we were totally out of books. And so then the night before I went to the hospital 
to have her we had this big — another eome-to-Jesus meeting, and we said. Well, 


9 



Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


[00:35:03] 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 


we'll print one more time to fill these orders, and that was thirty one years ago, 
and the cookbooks are still selling. 

Wow. So, it was a profitable - 

Shoot man, tens of thousands of dollars, and I mean - 

— you made your back? Yeah. And does that go to the women's club then? 

It goes to the church. Yeah, the women do it, and that's another whole story we 
won't get into it. But, I mean, it — hundreds of thousands of dollars are coming in. 
But there's still people on the island who are upset about it because they say it's 
just bringing more strangers. So there's this whole — and I'm as bad as anybody, 
there's a love-hate relationship with the people coming. But I will say this - and 
you can print this in bold letters - the people who are coming now are different 
from the ones who came at first. And I hear that at Ocracoke and Hatteras. The 
people who are coming into those coastal communities now are looking for real 
estate investments. The people who came when I was a child they were coming 
because it was different, because it was community. They came generation after - 
they came and bought a house, and then their children kept the house, and then 
their children kept the house, so you had a relationship with the summer people. 
Now they come and go, and you don't even know their name. So, it's very 
different. But like I say, I intimidate people. 


And are you okay with that? 

Yeah, I mean, it — I don't mind intimidating people. I think they've learned 
enough that over the past thirty years that they've learned that Tm going to do 
what I say Tm going to do. So, I think I have built some trust. What hurts is 
when they try to undo what I've done, [distant voices, door closing] Sorry. 

That's okay, for anyone listening in the future, there is some construction 
happening in your building here. 

Reconstruction. 

Reconstruction, yes, from Florence. Which we can talk about too. But I just want 
to make sure - and correct me if I'm wrong - but when you started with all this 
community and history work, was it all volunteer based? 

Yes. 

You were just doing like community service kind of, for lack of a better word? 


10 



Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 


I mean here, that's what's expected. Church work never gets paid. The museum, 
the Guild — I volunteered for years and years. And when it got to the point where 
my children were going to sehool, I went to the board ehairman and I said. Look, 

I got to go back to teaching, because I can't raise two children by myself, on one 
salary, whatever. And my husband has been more than supportive because he's 
taken up the finaneial slaek. But so they agreed, I think the first salary I had was 
$25,000 a year. It's not a whole lot more than that now. 

Was there an official title for that position? 

Yeah, I was their director. They didn't know what that meant. 

Sure. 

But- 

Okay, 1992 was when - 

Yeah, see that's, when we were in the old museum in the beginning, they paid me 
$1,000 a month and I paid out of that, I think I eleared 684, and I was paying 
somebody out of that money 500 dollars to go sit in the building and answer the 
phone and do clerieal work, so I eould work the streets and do what had to be 
done. So it’s never been about the money. Whieh kind of disheartening at this 
point, at sixty-four, no retirement, no benefits, but that's the ehoice I made. 

Tell me a little bit about the carvers and the decoy community for someone like 
myself or anybody listening who doesn't know anything about - 

It's very similar to the pottery community. In fact, in my work with the Arts 
Council, with Wayne Martin and George Holt, you know the Pottery Museum in 
Seagrove has gone through the very parallel struggles, the museum versus the 
potters and I think there is two festivals, two groups, it's — and I work with — I 
know of other arts groups, artists have a tendency to only see their own medium, 
and that's what it’s been with the carvers. Their definition of a museum was an 
old house corked and erammed full of old birds. And that's where the education 
element fits in. And it’s also the eeonomic element, beeause there are not enough 
carvers in the world to keep decoy museums in existence. The largest decoy 
waterfowling museum on the east coast is in Salisbury, Maryland, but it’s a part 
of Salisbury State and it is not only the old carvings and the waterfowling history, 
but it's also the art form, the wood seulpture, and that's the home base for the 
world competition. So, earving is its own eult, and not in a bad way — there are 
people who eat and breathe and sleep deeoys, whether its carving them, or 
colleeting them, or some of both. So, you know, and its primarily along the 
flyways, up and down the East Coast fiyway, and there's a Mississippi flyway, 
there's a California flyway, wherever the birds migrate, that's where the hunters 
are drawn. And so down east was very mueh a hunting community. Over at Core 


11 



Brooks: 

[00:40:07] 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Banks there were hunt clubs, I mean it's just a rich history, a very interesting 
history. But the people here, they might have been hunting guides in the winter, 
but they were fishermen in the summer, or they worked with — everybody here 
multitasked. There are very few professions where you just do one thing. 

Because thafs the eeonomy. 

We talked about carving, and working making boats and things like that, it sounds 
like those are mostly traditionally jobs done my men. 


Yes. 

And so, what do the women around here typically do? 

Cook. So, in the boat building industry, it was primarily men, absolutely. 

Carving historically has been men. Women had the jobs in the hunt — like a lot of 
people opened up their homes in the wintertime for hunters to come from off, and 
the women ran bed and breakfasts, of sorts. Now, in the seafood industry, the 
men mostly fished, but the women were the processors. They're the ones that 
headed shrimp, opened the scallops, you know, got the stuff ready for market. 
They — that was their role. Women, their job was to be the leaders. They owned 
the businesses, they ran the stores, they ran the sehool, they ran the ehureh, you 
know did an interview years ago with Alicia Rouverol, talking about leadership. I 
said, "I never considered it anything different for women to be in charge." You 
know, the most successful of them were the ones who put a man up front, and he 
was smart enough to listen to her and do what she said, because people wanted to 
follow the men, but the women were the nuts and bolts behind the scene making it 
happen. Beeause like here, all day long, even when I was growing up. Daddy was 
gone all day. The fishermen were gone all day and all night. The people who 
were in the coast guard were gone, so it was a female economy. And that was 
good, that was what I saw. I saw women taking hold of things and making things 
happen. 

Did you feel like the leadership was valued? The women's' leadership? 

No, no. It was taken for granted. Thafs what they were supposed to do. 

Was that ever diseussed, between you and friends, or you and your husband, or 
you and your parents? 

No, it was aceepted. Yeah, I mean the men, like at the ehureh — thafs the 
institution I know the best. In the ehureh, the men were all — as a ehild, the men 
all served on the administrative board, but the women were the ones doing the 
work and ealling the shots. Thafs all they knew. My grandmother was very 
active in the ehureh at Marshallberg, and thafs how she operated. She was the 


12 



Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

[00:45:17] 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


wheels in my family, and I live in her house now. Any Granddaddy was lazy as a 
— I mean, he was just plain lazy. He had no ambition whatsoever. She's the one 
that picked crab meat, and she needed a henhouse built, she built it. So, its — 
leadership runs in families, I think. I don't know how much of that is genetic, and 
how much is environmental, but women have always been the key to raising 
children and running businesses and making things happen. They still are. 

Is any of that something you've imparted to your own kids about women's roles 
and the value - 

Yeah, Katie - I've got a son and a daughter- and Katie will take no prisoners. And 
Casey doesn't know anything else either. And I've got a husband who is pretty 
progress - somewhat progressive. Because people say to me - because I'm never 
home, they say, "Well, does Jimmy cook?" and I say, "Well, does Jimmy eat?" 
Duh. I said it many times, I didn't take him on to raise. Now my mother thought 
she had to have supper on the table at five-fifteen every night. Wrong. You 
know, I think a lot - for psychoanalysis -1 think I am a lot of the way I am in 
reaction to the way my mother was. Because this whole mother-daughter thing is 
complicated, but Mamma let everybody else make her decisions, and she was — 
she resented it. I wasn't going to let that happen to me. 

So, you saw that, and you said, "I don't want that." 

No, no. Not gonna happen. But that's — I was lucky enough that I had the — I had 
enough — Granny, her mother. Granny waited on people too. That was a hundred 
years ago, but I had seen enough, and I was just stubborn enough that I was not 
going to - just won’t happen. 


And Katie's not going to let it happen either. And Jimmy was secure enough that 
he didn't — people, they’ll honestly ask him, "How do you handle this?" And he 
says, "I don't." Because there are still churches and families here where it is very 
much a man's world. 

Let's talk a little more about the museum, and just kind of like how it developed, 
and how your role developed, and maybe some of the challenges you faced. 

There was plenty of challenges. I mean, the evolution was the Guild, the carvers 
wanted a museum, they made the serious mistake of asking me to get involved, 
because I was involved with them from the beginning, and I was doing oral 
histories, and doing promotions, because my thing was I was about the people, I 
wasn't about the duck, I wasn't about Mr. Homer, or Hilton, or Jewell, and all that 
crowd, so I got, you know, I got pulled into it. And so we started out, we were 
formed in '92, we moved into a temporary location in '93, which was an old 
doctor's office right next door to the fire department. And from the beginning we 


13 



were very much about heritage, we didn't have the term ‘heritage tourism,’ but 
that's what we were doing, and promoting decoys, and promoting model boats. 

We were a gift shop with a museum stuck in the back because it was just rooms. 
We did a lot of school programs, a lot of outreach stuff, you know, we were at the 
Museum of History doing this, we went to all the DU [Ducks Unlimited] 
banquets, just trying to drum up interest and money and all that for the museum. 
We went through a whole planning process for the museum, which is on Park 
Service land, which the Park Service and Markers Island have had a rocky 
relationship from the beginning, and there were many who said that we would 
never get permission to put a building here. But we did. 

Brooks: Is it a state park? 

Amspacher: National park. Cape Lookout National Seashore. So we have an MOU 

[Memorandum of Understanding] for sixteen acres on federal property, because 
there again — the Graveyard of the Atlantic Museum, which is in Cultural 
Resources now, but it is located on Cape Hatteras National seashore property, and 
I knew about that, so I went to them, and said. How did you do it? And went and 
trekked back and forth until we pulled in the politics and got this. Because then I 
started learning about politics. And politics is how things get done. And so, we 
started raising money, went through a planning process, well everybody wanted 
this, this, and this, and we ended up with this design. 22,000 square feet. And 
we've got a fireplace, and we got a kitchen, and we got a meeting hall, and we've 
got an archive, and we got all these things, but this is a lot of money. And there 
was nothing to do but find the money to make it happen, and that took a while. 

But the plans were developed in '96, we went on the street, went to work raising 
the money, by the time we got about 900 — just less than a million dollars, when 
we broke ground. Didn't have enough money to finish it but we broke ground, 
and I mean, the timeline is impossible, but we just kept beating the drum, keep 
pushing, pushing, and borrowed some money, and we opened this side of the 
building in 2003. There was big drama about, okay we've got — are we going to 
build all the building and not finish it, or are we going to build half the building 
and finish it? And I screamed and hollered, did the homework of all these places 
that built half of something, and that's all it ever was. So we built the whole thing, 
and it took us ten years to finish it. So, we moved in this 2003, and we moved 
into the gallery in 2009. The building's story, you can tell that story in dollars and 
cents and timeline but building the museum — the quote—unquote museum was 
about people, and what we did. And how we did it. It’s about how we did it, and 
about the community nights, and that the second-floor exhibits were curated by 
the community, it's their stuff they brought in and put in their community. It was 
about going to the Smithsonian in 2004, and what that did for this community at 
large that Barkers Island boat builders are going to build a boat on the National 
Mall. That's pretty humbling. 


[00:50:20] 


14 



Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


So, it was build the building, build the institution, keep the movement moving. 
Lots of reunions, lots of events, lots of whatever it took. Lots of erab dip and 
seallops, lots of food. And lots of friends. I mean, there are some people who 
have got serious money invested in this plaee. and then eventually we had to 
borrow money again beeause we had gotten HUD money, we had gone to DC and 
got HUD money and we were going to lose it if we didn't finish it. So, we did 
that, in 2009, and that's when the market fell, and it was lean times. But we 
finished the gallery in 2009, and ten years, nine years later, Florenee hit. And the 
storm — I mean, the building has always been a struggle to maintain it, to operate 
it, it was more than we could handle, we were severely understaffed at that time it 
was only two full-time people and some part-time, so the building was not 
maintained like it should have been. We had a storm six years ago that took off 
shingles off the front of the building, insurance would only pay half We didn't 
have the money to do the other half, and Florence got that whole back of the roof, 
and thirty inches of rain, and ten days with no power, and mold took the building. 
So, 85% of the sheetrock was ripped out, 95% of the flooring, parts of the 
electrical. We were smart enough, and experienced enough, that we had wrapped 
and packed the entire collection and all of the exhibits, so we did not lose any of 
the ingredient — you know, equipment or any of that, but the building took a 
major blow. And so Florence came in on a Thursday, Friday, Saturday, stayed 
here thirty-six hours. At first, I thought we were all right, because I was worried 
about the tide, I was worried about trees falling on it. Tide wasn't the problem, it 
was rainwater. When we got here Sunday the power was still out, but there was 
enough sunlight I realized how much water there was. And the mold was already 
starting to grow. So, we had Servepro [restoration services] here, called them on 
Monday, they were here Wednesday, and had equipment here Friday. And they 
said, “You've got to empty the building." So we emptied 22,000 square feet in 
three and a half weeks. And there was nowhere to store stuff because there's so 
many damaged homes, businesses, everybody was scrambling for storage, so we 
ended up storing it from Marshallberg to Kinston. It was — I had damage at my 
house, Pam had damage at her house, and in the meantime my Mamma had 
evacuated, she was sick, I had sent her to Cary, she had a stroke, she was in 
Raleigh in the hospital, I was here, the roads were out between here and there, cell 
phone was out part of the time, I mean it was just like, you can't even put all the 
pieces back together hardly of what we went through. And it was everybody. We 
— Servepro was amazing. 

Who are they? 

Servepro is a mold remediation. And they just came in, they came with a fleet of 
eighty people, started scrubbing down and trying to get the mold out of here. And 
we held our annual event last year in this building with nothing but two by fours, 
and concrete. But that was again proof to the people — and again, it has always 
been about proving to the people, and between — our first plea went out for 
community relief- because we had done that in Isabel. We worked through the 
community schools. Our members donated and we helped get people back in 


15 



their homes. That was the first thing. The seeond thing was to keep the museum 
moving, and we ended up with a temporary loeation in Morehead, whieh is one of 
our storage loeations, but we're running the gift shop and doing programming, and 
gallery work and everything there now. And then the third thing was we got to 
put this building baek together, so the question was the roof ‘Cause it was 
shingled. And Pam who works — we just made up our mind, it was going to be a 
metal roof, or we were walking. 


[00:55:04] 


And insuranee, went through private adjusters, the whole thing, and insuranee was 
going to pay us $109,000 for shingles. And so, a metal roof was going to eost 
three hundred [thousand dollars]. So, we put out our Raise the Roof eampaign, to 
raise $200,000, we raised $350,000. It's beeause people saw that we were just not 
going to let it beat us down. And we're still heatin' that drum. The yearbook that 
I gave you tells that story, and it's like. No! No shingles. Period. Noshingles.lt 
was a three-and-a-half-hour board meeting, but I got my metal roof. And I mean 
you just — you ean't take the easy road. So, we're getting ready to haul baek here, 
and we're getting ready to move baek in in April. That's just the way it's going to 
be. ‘Cause we ean't lose another season, beeause last year we weren't here, and 
people wonder. Where's the museum? You know, and we - 8-0-6 in Morehead - 
that's the address, 8-0-6 - it's a beautiful 7,000 square feet historie home, 
wraparound poreh, and we have turned that into a mini museum, you know, 
eultural eenter, but we've got to eome home. And now we're hoping to hold onto 
that beeause that's been sueh an outreaeh. So, that's the lemonade in these 
lemons, but its baek to the people, and its determination, and to me, that's the 
story of this eommunity. 

My grandmother moved off Shaekleford Banks in 1903. That's where she lived, 
Shaekleford beeause of storms, and her father had bought sixty aeres on Marker's 
Island for sixty dollars. I don't know where he got sixty dollars in 1903, and 
Mamma's house is still on that pieee of land. And you take what you've got, and 
you do what you've got to do with it. And that's still the story. And so anyway, 
that's to me what the museum is about, is eelebrating who we are and what we do, 
whether that's deeoys, or surviving hurrieanes, or singing alto in the ehureh ehoir, 
or quilting, or , I mean, it's just the whole, Tm just a wholistie thinker. It’s the 
whole thing. And this plaee, and I've been very involved with the whole water 
quality issues as it relates to fisheries, and eommunity health, and land use, and 
there's lot going on — this eommunity is very mueh stressed with growth and 
ehange and eeonomies and there’s a weariness here now from the storm. There 
was a mild role of PTSD when Dorian headed this way. Beeause progress has 
been so slow, beeause the damage has been so great, and there's not enough 
skilled labor, so everybody's tired, but you ean't give up, tired don't eount. 

Brooks: So, the roof — Tm assuming that's a preeaution against future storms, having a 

metal roof? 


16 



Amspaher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


[ 01 : 00 : 00 ] 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


That’s right. 

Are there any other improvements that have been put in? I don't know anything 
about, like, hurrieane proofing a building. But I’m just wondering if there’s - 

The roof is a key thing, we've reworked some of the windows, for wind and rain, 
we have redone a lot of siding. Storm specifie, the roof was the key thing. We 
have never had tide in this building, we are on a eement slab, but the elevation is 
eleven feet, and that's high land here. The roof was the main thing. You know 
we learned a lot about the building, we made some ehanges, you know, with 
where our power comes into the gallery, because the plugs before were always in 
the wrong plaees, now we know since we've been in here so — We've upgraded 
some things, done some maintenance, but I think, what we've gained from the 
storm is realizing that they're not freak oeeurrenees, they're constant. And we 
adjust accordingly. We're not leaving — but we're dealing with it. 


Do you have a favorite exhibit you folks have done, or a favorite educational 
activity? 

I think the most meaningful things we have done have been the events, and what 
it does to people. We are part of, like, the Coast Guard here was very mueh a big 
part — everybody here, when they got drafted, went in the Coast Guard. Beeause 
they had the skills. So we are very mueh involved with an annual reunion for the 
Coasties. I had mentioned that my grandmother had moved off of Shaekleford, 
Those eommunities were ealled Diamond City, and we have Diamond City 
homeeoming every five years, it’s been a hundred twenty years sinee they left, but 
the grandehildren, and great grandehildren and the great-great grandchildren still 
gather in August. Every fifth year in August, to go back to the eemetery over 
there, and acknowledge our relationship with that place. Even though it’s part of 
the National Park Service, and its washing away, just rekindling that. I think what 
we do in this building is irrelevant if the people do not believe it, understand it, 
and feel it. We don't want to be a museum about glass and thing you can't touch. 
So, I think that's what sets us apart. 

Are there any suecess stories you can share? 

Eots of successes. 

Yeah. 

I don't know, there's so many, for me personally, one of the suecesses was in the 
proeess of planning the museum and researehing other plaees, Wayne Martin at 
the Arts Council took us to Smith Island in the middle of the Chesapeake Bay, 


17 



because a colleague of his who worked with the Maryland State Trust had helped 
build a cultural center there. And the minute I went into the harbor there I knew 
that that place was very connected to who I was. And that relationship has 
continued to grow, we go back and forth, they've done programs here. I've helped 
in their school there. It's the relationships. We have a very deep relationship with 
Ocracoke and Hatteras, we've done regional work with the scenic byway and all 
that. After Dorian — well, okay, can go back to Florence - Florence, people from 
Hatteras came here and helped us, and Dorian we went to Ocracoke, that whole 
regional — concept of region which is somewhat different from what it used to be, 
because used to it was, like, Hatteras, Ocracoke, down east, but now we're 
realizing that in the new world, we've got to depend on each other collectively. 

To me, I think it’s the lasting success. To me, it's about the people, it's about what 
we do, it's about what happens to people as a result of what we can help make 
happen, and it doesn't even have to be about the museum. The museum is 
involved in a lot of different things. We don’t - you know, you can do a lot if you 
don't care who gets credit, and Tm all about that. We're there to help community 
projects succeed, because when they succeed, we succeed. I’ve said over and 
over, if the only thing left of the commercial fishing industry or the down east 
communities, or anything that we're about, if the only thing left in twenty-five 
years is what's hanging in this museum, then we failed. 

Brooks: Because you want people to carry it with them? 

Amspacher: I want them to carry it — I want them to live it. That's the good thing about the 
decoys, you know, there's a whole new crop of people doing decoys, we're trying 
to cultivate a whole new crop of young boys building wooden boats, and not 
plywood - wood. Traditional plank, strip plank boat building, so they can 
appreciate when you say that's an Ambrose Fulcher boat from Atlantic of that's a 
Brady Lewis boat from Barkers Island, and they know what that means. You 
know, one of the best successes for the Markers Island cookbook is not that they 
sold a load of them, but it’s at Christmas on Facebook and I see this whole next 
generation - What are you cooking? And talking about. Well, I fixed Polly 
Evelyn's Apple Cake. Because people's names are attached to those recipes, and 
people are cooking them. That whole circle. 

You know it's like — I've got a young guy, he graduates from State next spring, 
and he's into figs, and he's leading my fig project, and he baked ten fig cakes for 
an event we had in Raleigh for Ocracoke, because Ocracoke is all about figs too. 


[01:05:10] 


So, I feel more — it doesn't take much for me to be encouraged, but Tm 
encouraged that Kenny at the age of twenty- two cares about figs and Landon at 
the age of eighteen cares about wooden boats, that's important. I don't know if we 
were not doing what we're doing if that would be happening. Most of what we 
do, we do informally. Down east people are not planners, they don't want to go to 


18 



class, they don’t want to — but you have to kind of sneak it in on them. Get them 
involved. 


Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 


Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 

Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 


Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 


Brooks: 

Amspaeher: 


And what are your kids doing today? 

My son went to school [for ??] science and math, graduated Colombia University, 
and he works in the development office at the Whitney. My daughter is, she 
graduated from Peaee, and she's a full-time photographer. Getting ready to build 
a house, on family land. 

Wow, here? 

She bought the last pieee of land that mamma had before she died. And so, she-1 
have one ehild that I can't hold onto and one I ean't get rid of. But Casey will be 
home Christmas. 

That's great, that's really great. Have you been to visit New York? 

Oh, many times. I mean, he's been up there, he went over there in 2002. So, I've 
been up there a lot. I haven't seen him for a year. After mamma died — he and 
mamma were very close - and this year, with the storm - he eame home last 
Christmas, and he was going to eome home this summer, and he's travelled, and 
then we were going to meet in DC to go to the museum again before it elosed, and 
one of his very elosest friends eommitted suieide the week before we were 
supposed to go, so. It's been one of those years. 

Yeah. Well, it’s almost over. 

And so, but anyway, I got the best of both worlds with children. I say that Casey 
is a man of the world, and Katie is a woman of the heart. Katie is very mueh 
ingrained in this culture. Casey not so much, but Jimmy keeps saying when he 
grows up, he'll be back, but I don't think so, and that's okay, because there's a part 
of me that wishes I was in New York. 

I was going to ask if you liked it when you visited. 

Oh, I love New York, love New York. Love going and traveling. As soon as I get 
this museum put back together. I'm going across the pond. Always wanted to go, 
got to go. Gotta have a new knee and gotta get this building finished. 

But, yeah, I mean, Barkers Island people are very eomplicated. Many of them are 
eomplicated. I grew up - like, one of my best friends is Joel Hancoek. He's three 
years older than me, off the radar smart. He did 1470 on the SAT in 1971 when 
nobody had a Kaplan book to study, let me tell you [construetion noise]. And 
graduated master's degree in history from East Carolina with a four-oh [4.0 grade 
point average], he wouldn't leave Markers Island. So, he eame home, he's got six 
ehildren, he’s a state-wide leader in the Mormon ehureh. So he made his ehoiee. 


19 



[01:10:03] 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Ampacher: 

Brooks: 


He eould have — he should have been a professor, but he wanted to raise his 
family here. Very attaehed to his family, very grounded, and he said to me two 
weeks ago — he had seen - beeause we're on Faeebook - that Doris Kearns has a 
series of elasses that you ean take online about presidential history and stuff and I 
sent a link to him, and he said, “Yes, my greatest desire is to be a full time student 
again." And I said. Me too. But he is, as part of their mission, he, and his wife 
Susan, who is one of my very best friends, are teaehing at East Carolina. They 
were up in Virginia, but he is the eollege professor that he should have been. 
Through the chureh, but I mean — and they've been all over the world. But he's so 
grounded in this plaee. So, we're very contradictory, it's like, I love this plaee, but 
I really want to go somewhere, I really got this go bug, you know? 


And, I mean, the people here are smart. They're book sense, they've got book 
sense. They may not be formally edueated, but they really love learning. And 
they write, they ean write musie, there's such a music tradition here, and they 
wouldn't know a sheet of musie if it hit them in the face, but they write musie. 
They ean't read it, but they ean write it. Big tradition of theater, I mean they — 
they ean do anything. And I don't want to lose that. One of the big purposes in 
the Barkers Island eookbook was to prove to people that we were more than boat 
builders. Because Markers Island and boat building are synonymous, you know, 
you thought that's the only thing they eould do, well that's not the only thing they 
ean do. So, there's been a lot of smart people eome out of Down East in general. 
PhDs, and law degrees, and fabulous teachers, and writers, and very surprising 
when people now eome here and thi nk we’re just poor fishermen. And that's not 
the ease. And that's what this museum is about too, giving loeal people voiee and 
place and opportunity. 

Do you have any of those hobbies, do you — 

I don't do anything. 

No? Eike you ean't, or you don't have time to? 

I sing a little bit, but I'm not a singer. I don't play the piano. I don't earve. I don't 
paint. I try to write. 

Do you eook? 

I eook, yeah, I ean eook. When I want to. I'd rather eook for a hundred people 
than two. I love eooking events — 

Entertaining, yeah. 


20 



Amspacher: 


Brooks: 


Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

[01:15:00] 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 


Amspacher: 


I like, you know, I'm the lemon pie person. But when I bake pies, I want to make 
twenty. I don't want to mess up a pot for four, or three, or two, or whatever. But I 
try to write — I want to be a writer, but I'm not. I'm a preacher. I said that in an 
end of a book — Barbara Blake and I did a book about the scenic byway, that 
really in my mind wasn't about the scenic byway, it was about the cultural 
connections with the communities along the byway, which included from North 
River Bridge East of Beaufort all the way Ocracoke and up Hatteras Island. And I 
said, you know. I'm not a writer. I'm a preacher, because that's what I grew up in 
was the church. Because to me it’s so hard, writing is the hardest work of all. 

How do you capture what you see and feel and hear into little words? So, I don't 
know. I like to think that what I've done personally has allowed everybody else to 
do what they do. I guess I'm a facilitator. I'm an enabler. I think I'm a vision 
person. And vision is so hard to find. So, yeah. This museum has been my life. 
I'm ready for it to grow up and be its own thing. We're working on a transition 
plan. I’m tired [voice heavy with tears]. 

Yeah, I bet. It’s been a long time. Yeah. Um, on your form that you filled out for 
us, you said that you wanted to talk about the women in this community. Do you 
feel like — 

Right. I've got to think through that. I know that Carolyn Mason is one that 
needs to be nominated. What I need to do is get — I'll take that link and pass it 
around, but Carolyn Mason - also local girl saved the wild horses on Shackleford 
Banks. She took on the federal government and she won. 

Oh, wow. 

She took on the federal government, she won. She has a very — there was a big 
article about her in Our State magazine several years ago, so I would definitely 
include her, off the top of my head. 


And on your form you said that we need to talk about the role of women in this 
community past and present? 

We did, about the store owners, and that they were the ones who saw that things 
got done. 

Right. I just wanted to make sure that you felt like we covered that, and I thi nk 
we did. Yeah, it’s an interesting part of this project is kind of focusing on the idea 
of women in leadership, and what types of struggles women in particular face 
because they're women in leadership. And I think talking about how the value 
goes unrecognized, or at least went unrecognized — 

Absolutely. 


21 



Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

[long pause] 
Amspacher: 


— as the community leaders. 

And a big part — and I don't want to go back into it, but a big part of the struggle 
of the museum with the decoy carvers was the fact that I was female. 

Yeah, and the carvers, the Guild, is that a local organization? 

It's a local — Core Sound Decoy Carver's Guild. They have a building just across 
the bridge. It was seven carvers - and you can Google it, the history is all written 

- it was seven carvers who got together and wanted to have a decoy show. 
Basically, to sell decoys. That — you know, and they wanted the young folks. 

And they've been very successful. I worked with them from the beginning until — 
and right on in until the museum became my obsession. But they have done an 
excellent job, and they continue to cultivate the carving community, they do youth 
classes. And there's a big part of them that volunteer with us. We're very careful 
though to all stay in our own playgrounds. And that's a shame, because we all 
should be overlapping and intertwining, but you've got to work what you got. 

And I learned in museum work, everybody's got their footprint, it's best to stay 
out of it. And that's okay, that way maybe everything gets done. But the female 
factor is there, and some women use it as an excuse, and other women take it as a 
challenge, but it's there. 

Do you see that changing anytime soon? Or anytime at all? 

I think — it’s going to take some generations. And it's better than it was, 
absolutely. But equal pay for equal work, probably not. This community at large 
is very much a traditional community, and it's still a factor, it's still real, 
absolutely. It’s just a matter of are you going to let that stop you, or are you going 
to work harder and smarter, and get it done? And if you've got to play the game 
of letting the boys think they figured it out, so be it. Sad but true, but you learn 
that you've got to pick your battles. And deciding who gets credit is a battle Tm 
just not going to play; I just want to get it done. 

I have a couple questions that I like to ask everybody so we can kind of tie 
everyone's interviews together, but is there anything else you want to cover? 

I've said too much already. I hope this is not opened until fifty years after I die. 

Well, we can talk about that. I'll ask you these questions, and if anything else 
comes up, we can take time for that too, but what is your definition of success? 


That's hard. 


22 



Brooks: 


I know. 


Amspacher: 


[ 01 : 20 : 24 ] 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 
[long pause] 
Ampacher: 


I'm never satisfied, so that's real eomplieated. But I think sueeess, is an internal 
faetor. Did you do the best you eould with what you had? And was it worth what 
you went through? That's kind of my measure. I'll never get all I want out of 
anything, it’s my nature. But if it made a differenee, if it moved the needle 
forward, if it eaptured something that would have been lost - I think sueeess has 
to be sealed and relevant to what you're — you know, sueeess in life, sueeess in 
relationships, but I think it's just doing the best you ean with what you've got. 

And being realistie. 


Beeause there was a quite on a high sehool annual a eouple years before I 
graduated that said, "Disappointment is measured not in what you get, but what 
you expeeted." I'm always disappointed beeause I expeet too mueh. So, I have to 
seale that baek. 

But you know that about yourself, so you ean kind of- 

Oh yeah, I do, and everybody else does too. It's like I'll obsess on something that 
went wrong rather than celebrate what went right. I try to do better with that, but 
it's hard. 

And then the other question is, what is a notable woman? 


Notable is somebody who stands their ground. Who puts their energy behind 
something they truly believe in. My favorite quote, it's going to be on my 
tombstone: Kahlil Gibran, "Work is love made visible." And when I think of 
notable women, I think of Betty Ray McCain or people who did not let 
cireumstanees, disappointments, failures, politics, life, deter them from what they 
knew their purpose was. They aeeomplished what they set out to aeeomplish. 

Had a big discussion on Facebook yesterday. I love Faeebook, I hate it too, but — 
they're redoing the Methodist ehurch on Barkers Island and they're changing 
everything. Taking out the organ and the piano, taking out the sloped floor, all the 
things — taking out the altar rail, how ean you have a ehureh without an altar rail? 
So anyway, there was a eouple of us old folks on there talking, and this name 
Polly -1 mentioned her - Polly Evelyn was her name. Polly was probably one of 
the strongest women I ever knew. She left here, went to Wilmington to go to 
nursing sehool, in the '50s. She had a beautiful alto voiee. Now when Polly 
Evelyn said it, you knew that it was true. And we talked about Polly, the 
standards that Polly held for that ehoir, beeause I sang in the choir, and you were 
not to wear earrings, your hair was supposed to be — there were standards. Your 
skirt eould only be just so short, you had to be there every Sunday Morning, every 


23 



Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

[ 01 : 25 : 02 ] 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 

Brooks: Okay. 
Amspacher: 

Brooks: 

Amspacher: 


Sunday night, every Wednesday night, there were expectations. It wasn't like you 
drifted in and drifted out, not with Polly Evelyn, and we talked about how that's 
missing now. That teachers, notable teachers that held the bar, now everybody 
has to make the principal's list every ten minutes, and they have to awards four 
times a year, and it's like. When do they work? When do they learn something? 
So, notable is the people who set the bar just beyond the reach, and they push us 
all to reach. To me that's notable. Notable is what difference they made and what 
they accomplished despite all kinds of reasons why they shouldn't have. But they 
made a difference, they were positive, they pushed other people. I guess, I think. 

I never thought about that either, these are good questions. 

They're meant to be kind of big questions to kind of wrap things up and see what 
different people react — how different people react to them. 

I'll be interested to read these someday. 

Yeah, yeah. Definitely. Anything else you want to add while we're still recording? 


No, I'm glad you came, Tm glad the State of North Carolina realizes there's a lot 
of great women out there. I hope they hit all the good ones. 

Trying. 

I'm sorry you missed Kay Hagan. 

Yeah. Yeah. 

She was such a delight. She was terrific. But we've got interviews with Beverly 
Perdue, we've got a lot of women interviews in our collections. And there was a 
project that Alicia — I mentioned that Alicia Rouverol did for the Arts Council 
about women in leadership it was done sometime between '93 and '82 because 
she interviewed me in the old museum, but you should look those up. 


Alicia is in California now. She was looking for women in small communities 
who had taken a leadership role. She interviewed me and I can't remember who 
else. 

Yeah, I’ll look into it. What's her last name? 

Rouverol, R-O-U-V-E-R-O-L. Sally Peterson in the Arts Council would 
probably, and Wayne definitely could. Sally Council was involved in that project, 
and I think they're at UNC. 


24 



Brooks: Was that the — on your resume "Women of NC Outstanding Leaders" Southern 

Oral History Doeumentary? 

Amspaeher: Yeah. Because I think she interviewed Janice Smith down in Atlantic, and I know 
I tried to get her to interview Ellen Cloud over in Ocracoke, so I don't know who 
she ended up with, I'd love to know, that was twenty years ago. 

Brooks: I’ll see if I can find that list. Yeah, it would be nice to — if it has been twenty 

years ago, it would be nice to track those women down and see what's changed. 

Amspaeher: I'll be glad to help you track down the people down this way. That's when the 
museum was just started, I would love to hear what I had to say then, but we 
hadn't even broken ground yet. 

Brooks: I'm going to go ahead and turn this off. We can keep chatting too. 

[End of Interview] [01:27:26] 


25 



