Cal Bertram. ps 


Rtert Sworn 


nated Tapes Collection antec sti 
kland Neighborhood History Project 

g ¥ j Oakland Public Library 
Oakland History Room 


77 | HUTCHISON, 
! 


» Car Bektkan uct< bs c Ta ana ~ © re Wr @! IETS ALS» 
(narrator) (interviewer) 


o hereby give to the Oakland Neighborhood History Project 
or such scholarly and educational uses as the Project Director 


hall determine the ppetins tape-recorded interview(s) 


recorded on (date yc lS as an unrestricted gift and 


dransfer to the Camron-Stanford House Preservation Association 
egal title and all literary property rights including 

This gift does not preclude any use which we may 
ordf{ngs ourselves. 


opyright. 
ant to make of the information in the,r 


| teeeeatiea AE DE OES Tk HO SS 


Signature of narrator 


| Cc B Ha telson 


@ Name of narrator ; 
; NARRATOR — 0 DB» Court FAD 
AGATESS F< Akad, Ch RoI 


1 . 
Mate . Cee igs 
A mature of interviewer 
Solder Ht - Cl. M/S tres BSE 
Name ‘eft sae eg 


| INTERVIEWER 1bOf-bott ee Oik liad 4 ita; 


| . (dated) S4 di 5 SG hes 


Address of interviewer 


(dated) May 5, 1¢4 f 


| Accepted for the Oakland Neighborhood History Project 


O00 OF” -asKCRE——-_ ae 
is) (Project Director) Dated) 


Donated Tapes Collection woe ' 
e . ° 3 : t 
Oakland Neighborhood Ct ~ 
outcry Project vO , Lo 
4 


General thptc of Interview Life in ‘Oakland (and San Francisco) from 1903 
Date May 5 | Place 4030 Panama Ct.. $215, Oakland Length - 4 x nf ; 
Narrator afte Interviewer 
Name___Jorgen H, Christiansen 00 


Addréss 4030 Panama Ct. $215 a 1. Address 769 « 60th St,, Oakland 94609 | 
2 


Relationship to narrator [friend,-neighbor, etc. ] 
©... friend 


Birthplape _T4pton, CA Length of acquaintance 25 years 
Birthdate Decenber 25, 1887 Oceasion of interview 
peor Retired salesman for Baker & Hamilton, Wholesale Hardware » SF. 
| , Interview Data 
Subjects covered, in approximate order, spelling out names of persdéns and places mentioned 


bstinatda Time ‘on Tane Contents Mother: Catherine (Cassie)Loretta Buck Hutchison 
. Father: John Everett Hutchison 
ke . . 


Rochdal Sto Sam Brannan 
move to Oakland (2903), Abrahamson Bros, le StorerSan 


Baker & Hamilton, Wholesale Hdwe., S.F. 


‘gt ane 


i 
‘ 
‘ 


\ Ist Nat. Bank : Pres Har y r d 
\ : became Admiral in U.S. Navy 
vy Frank Mott 


| "+1906 earthquakes temp, home of B& Haind & Berry Ste, 
2 Lenhart's store. Initiation in paper, Robert Hutchison, architect 
ps Emin, HCA on Telegraph = Ceci) Martin, Australian, physical dir, 


Use back of sheet if necessary - _ (OVER) 


| 


I think it was sometime in the summer of 1903 that we moved to Oakland. Father 


RECOLLECTIONS OF CARL BERTRAM HUTCHISON ( /2-25-/¢°7 ¢s 4-11 s099 


boys to look after. Everett was in his 2oth year, I was just 14, Ralph 114, Bob 


i 
about 6, and Mark, 4, We were living in Calistoga where father had been the manae 


was ie 45 when he died in January, 1902. Mother was 41 and she had five of us 


geyt| the Rochdale store. Everett had been working there with him, keeping books 

and clerking. He ran the store(after father's death) until they got a new manager 

and then stayed on at the job. Ralph and I did a little prune and grape picking 
during school vacation, and mother took in some summer vacation boarders, Ralph 

and Ii were dish washers, and we hated it; with the boarders there were a lot more 
dishes, and it seemed to me that we were always arguing as to whose turn it was to 
wast [them That was the worst job with all the greasy pots and skillets. I don't 
know/how much money we took in, but we got along. The directors of the Rochdale Store 
helped us out, and others, too, I think. We stayed there for about a year, and 

then] mother went on the train to Oakland to visit the Shains, who we had known in 


Fresho, She looked around for a couple of days, and then came back and said," There 


1s no chance for you boys here; we are moving to Oakland", 


e lived for about three months on 18th Street just west of San Pablo Avenue, 
and other started right away looking for a house to buy. Mr. Shain told her it 
was cheaper to rent, but she said maybe it was, but she wasn't going to pay rent 
all jher life, She had $1000.00 and bought a house at 531 - 20th Street for $2500.00, 
and {we paid off the mortgage in about eight years, 


at 


erett went to work for the Rochdale Wholesale Co. in SF. Ralph and I started 
he Emerson School at 10th and Alice, but only went there for a few days, for we 


got; jobs and went to work. My first job was with Abrahamson Bros, at 13th and Wash. 
n, and Ralph at Kahn Bros, Dept. Store at 12th and Washington, as packagé dee 


livery boys on our bikes; the pay was $3.00 a week for full time. When Bob and Mark 


got; old enough to do it, theygot as much for after school and Saturdays. Later on 
got a job with M.J. Keller Co., the jeading mens Tailoring and clothing store, 
Then he got me on there, too, and we both worked there for a while. The psy was 


| 
| 


- PAGE 2 - 
fifty cents more a week. Then I got a job with the Oakland Cream Depot at 18th and 
©. cain. Jack Schreiner lived next door to us, and he drove a wholesale butter 
Wagon around town. It was a snappy rig, a panel top wagon nicely painted red and 
black with a fine team of grey horses. We called on the grocery stores (no super 
markets then, of course) and while Jack talked to the boss I would check the amount 
of butter in the box, and they would tell me how much to put in. It was a good job, 
especie ly when I could drive the team. The stores didn't sell milk then; it was 
delivered by the dairies and creameries early in the morning. I don't remember what 
happenéd to that job. It seems to me that Walter Smith drove the wagon for a while; 
he lat was the butter maker there, Anyhow, one day he took me to the Tivoli in S.F. 
to see; "Floradora", the first show of that kind I ever saw. 
Everett took me to see Mr. John Diggs at Baker & Hamilton about a job to learn 
the ware business. No jobs (available) just then, but he took my name, Then I 
. on © work for the telephone company as a messenger boy. I got acquainted with the 
head switchboard man and he was going to get me in to learn that work, but a call . 
came d om B. & H., so I went to work there. They were an old, well established firs, 
and you knew where you were with them, but-this telephone business, no telling whether 
it wo amount to anything or not. Of course, I never had such weighty thots about it, 
working in S.F. and crossing the bay every day, that was something. I don't think I 
even dsked what the pay was. One of the fellows asked me, and when I told him I didn't 
know, |he said, "It's $15.00 a month", and he was right."After six months, if you are 
not fired, you get a five dollar raise", It was about the first of June, 1905 that I 
started there, so I got my raise about the first of the year. 

A Jot of books have been written about San Francisco of those days, and a lot more 
could; be told. The store was at the corner of Pine and Davis and Market Streets, and 
was aj four story building. Boys starting in went first into the bolt eceller where 

@. Capurro held forth, and where they learned about all kinds of bolts, axes, 
Sledges, wedges, and handles for all such tools, We really learned about such things 
and this day it makes me mad when I read a story of a riot in the papers, and a 
reporter says that the men used axe handles for weapons, If you hit a man with an 


’ ! - PAGE 3 - 
axe e maybe you would make him mad, but if you used a pick handle you would 
probably put him in the hospital. THE From there to the third floor whose the shovels, 
forks, ete., and some shelf hardware, then to the second, and then to the order depart. 
ment, land sO on, 

On 
fishing tackle, cutlery and bicycles, This was out of bounds to all but those who 


the fourth floor was the sporting goods department with guns an ammunition, 


worked there. There also were wagons, buggies harness, etc. On the first floor was 
the tpol department, sales floor and offices. The iron warehouse was somewhere near 


3rd Townsend; then there was the Sacramento store, and the Benicia iron works, 


The streets in this part of town were paved with cobble stones, and when the big drays 


moved) along they made plenty of noise, The drays were made with low flat beds, only a 
foot two above ground so heavy things could be more easily loaded from the sidewalks. 


Wa crossed the bay on the S.F. ferries, The Key System was not built until several 


years later. When the crowds came off the boat, especially the boats that connected with 


the trains at the Oakland Mole, there was a welcone committee of the runners from the 
© hote Se and hack drivers. The hotel busses would be backed up to the sidewalk, and 
the vers would be calling out the name of their hotel, and the hack drivers looking’ 


for fares, the competition was keen, and a cop was there to keep them from getting too 


sale 


zal sometimes two drivers would be trying to drag aman two ways at once. The city 
en traveled around town by horse and eg there were not always hitching 
posts where they had to stop, they had a cast iron weight that they snapped, with the 
strap attached, to the bridle, and so anchored the horse. A few years ago some started 
a di foussion as to what they called these weights, but I don't think they ever found 
whether there was a name for them or not. 
bnetimes we worked overtime; our regular hours were from 7330 am to 5:30 pm, with 
&5 utes for lunch. Overtime was about two hours, I think, and we got 50 cents for 
dinner. Pork and beans and a piece of pie cost about a quarter, so we made about a 
® aa on the deal, 
ere were @ lot of oyster beds in the bay then; pollution was many years in the 
future, and oysters were plentiful, cheap and good, If you missed a late ferry, there 
was pn oyster house a bléck up Market Street where you could get an oyster stew of 


. 4 - PAGE & = 
half a boven fried, and sometimes you didn't hurry to catch the boat; they were good. 
There Were other things such ag Hangtown fry, which, I think, was oysters and scrambled 
@ eggs, and an Oyster loaf, which, I think, was a loaf of bread hollowed out and filled 
with Mee, and other stuff. I never tried them, so can't tell about them. But » then 
I forgat, I'm writing now about the time when I was getting $15.00 a month, and, of 
course, I didn't get any of that fancy food then. 

My st job (at B. & H.) was as weight clerk, The boss, for some reason, wanted to 
know the weight of goods shipped to our customers, so I was there at the scale to mark 
down the weights in a book. Right next was the nail cellar, that part of the cellar 
under pre sidewalk on the Davis Street side. There were kept nails and rope. "Henry. 
the nail slinger" (I don't think I ever heard his name) was in charge there. He was 
a to | little guy from the Bowery. I don't think he weighed over 120 pounds, but he 
could (throw 106 pound kegs of nails all day, stacking them four high, and always 

at top speed. He took a shine to me and started to teach me to box. He was 
very fast, and it was not often that I could touch him, 

& We jhad settled down in Oakland. Everett, Ralph and I were working and mother made 
a little money sewing, and when Bob and Mark got old enough they did the same. Most 
of % we made went into the family kitty, and mother kept us well fed and clothed, 
and pgyed on the mortgage. No welfare, and we were hot under-priviliged.It was a 
nOreay thing then. Every month Everett bought a list of food from the Rochdale store 
as lone as he worked there. Canned salmon was the cheapest meat, and we got a case of 
it evéry month, and mother knew a lot of ways to cook it, and it was good, too. Nowa- 
days 4t is a lumury, almost. I was talking to Larry Knight a few years ago, and told 
of starting at Baker and Hamilton's, and he said, "You guys at Baker's were aristo. 
crats; you got $15.00 to start, we only got $12.00", Norman Allinger told of how his 
mother used to make clam chowder, and when there were no Clams, she made it with bacon, 

There were always a number of express wagons at the city hall plasa in Oakland /it 
you ted to move you just went down there and hired one. In the park was a cannon, 


about four o'clock in the morning, and made a fine noise, and broke a few windows, I 


phy of the Spanish war, and one Fourth of July someone loaded it and fired it 


don't think they ever found out who did it, but they filled it with cement so it 
co ‘t happen again, ; 


ae 
| 


- PAGE 5 « 


We had some celebrities, too, Jack London, for one, We had read some of his 
@ stories, Tales of the Fish Patrol, which had been published in Youth's Companion , 
I think. And I think he had the Snark moored at the foot of Broadway before he 
started his cruise to the South Pacific, I remember it ~- Everett, Ralph and I 
went fom to see it, When I was working for M.J. Keller I delivered a suit to 
hin abyeiat at about 30th and Grove, but I don’t remember whether he was there, 


| 


or who took the package, 
Then bey was Joaquin Miller; I think his name was Cincinattus Heone Miller - 
no wqnder he changed it to Joaquin, I remember seeing him one day on Washington 
sie te across from Keller's store, long hair, big felt hat and boots, which he 
wore/at all times, I think, A number of years later I went with a crowd of young 
a from the First Methodist Church to see him, It had been the custom to have 
a short meeting and breakfast on Thanksgiving morning, and then go for a-hike, 
and this day we went. to his place, When we got there, there was no one in sight, 
@ so Harry Hollidge and I went to look for him, We went to the house, and as the 
~ was open looked in and Joaquin was there in bed, We told him that he had 


callers, so he kicked off the corerre put on his hat, and was ready to go, He 


was jfully clothed, even had his ‘boots on, 


i 
then there was Borax Smith, who had made his money in the borax mines (Twenty 
Mule Team Borax), and then moved to Oakland, and was in the streetcar and real 
estate business, Jack London's novel, Burning Daylight, was based, in part, I 
belfeve, on his life, Ina Coolbrith was the Librarian, and was state poet lau- 
repte, and Robert Louis Stevenson lived here for a while. I don't know the dates, 
dat! there is a lot of history here, 
I don't know where the boundry lines of Oakland were when we came here, ‘ 
re were a number of small towns; out at Telegraph Ave, and fiftieth was Teme. 
& s¢al, not really much of a town, but there were some stores and a hotel, and a 
canmery, I think, Mostly it was Italian truck gardens and dairies, I remember 
gping out there in the butter wagon, and Jack took me to lunch at the Italian 


a. The place where I live now (480 Clifton St.) was a creamery, and a brother 


| - PAGE 6 - 


{ 
4 


of Walter Smith was a butter maker there, Out to eastward there were Fruitvale, 
Dimqnd, Allendale, Melrose, and Elmhurst, They were taken into Oakland over a 
a petiod of years, San Leandro was the "Cherry City” and was a good place to go 
in the summer, 

Tre main thing 1 remember about the amusement parks is the scenic railways, 
tho Why they called them that I don't know, for there wasn't much "scenic" about 
thejn, but they were fun to ride, There gan /eeenes one at Idora Park out on 
Telegraph Avenue, At the "Chutes" in San Francisco you would "shoot the chutes" 


i 


in | square ended flatboat which was hauled to the top of a long slide covered 
with water, and then slide down with everyone yelling squealing till they hit 
the [pool at the bottom, bounced a few times, and then came in for the next lot, 
Out {at the beach was Sutro Baths and another park, and up on the hill was Sutro 
Gardens, Shell Mound Park in Emeryville was the place where the German Schutzen 
socketies held their picnics and target shooting matches; Mike Housner, a Salesman 
at Baker & Hamilton's had one of their guns, and used to shoot there, These guns 
wer! heavy, long barreled rifles with fancy carved stocks, and were beautifully 
uh No good for anything else, but that's what they’ were made for, I think I . 
a there once at a picnic, but I don't remember anything about it, Then there 
was the baseball park there, too, 

| “BASEBALL TODAY", A big voice came booming down the street, and a man in a 
baseball uniform, riding an old horse, came down the street announcing the game 

the down 

| the day, "Fog Horn"Murphy, I think they called him, and he rode around/town 
section of town on game days for many years, The Coast League was one of the best 
winor leagues in the country, and the Oakland Oaks and the S.F. Seals were among 
the best, Many young players went from here to the majors, This was probably the 

Ly place in the country where there were games every weekend, as if the Oaks 

re away, the Seals would be here, and visa versa, On Sundays they would play 

4 game at Emeryville in the morning, and at San Francisco in the afternoon, 


f year, when the Oaks had won the P.C, pennant, Bud Sharpe, the manager, was 
the hero of the day, One ef our neighbors gave Mark a pup, and he named it Bud 


po 


{ 


m4 - PAGE 7 = 
Sharpe, A good dog he turned out to be, too, 
Itjseems to me that in the time before the First World War there were more good 
@ shows|than at any time after, Plays, light operas, and grand operag the Gilbert 
and giitlivans, of course, I remember especially seeing De Wolf Hopper in the Mi- 
kado,! They would always call him back for curtain calls until he gave them "Casey 
at The Bat", Then the Red Mill, Student Prince, Soring Maid, Merry Widow, Choco. 
late Soldier, etc,, and best of all, the grand operas. A number of the fellows I 
' 
worked with at Baker and Hamiltons were nuts, opera nuts, that is, and when they 
came to town we saw all of them that we could, When we had money we sometimes took 
a girl friend to see a play or a light opera, but never a grand opera,They wouldn't 
appreciate it, O£ course, the mairreason was that when a troup came to town for 
two or three weeks, they would put on several operas, and we wanted to see all of 
then! that we could, and so climbed the stairs to the top gallery where the air was 
oreeay pretty fragrant of garlic, but the audience there was always very enthusi- 
@ astic with cheers and applause - it was lots of fun, | 
i of the older fellows told me that they used to get jobs singing in the 
charus at the Grand Opera House at Fourth and Mission before the fire, Harry Bult- 
wl and Jim Greenwell were two of them, They both had good voices, and did quite 
a a of alaging: One of them told me that someone found a way to get into the 
enpty loft just across a narrow alley from the scene loft of the opera house, 
and) they got a long plank to cross to a window above the stage, ey ee when 
they were not in the cast, they would sit above the stage and take in the show; 
thet one night one of them dropped his cap right in the middle of a scene, and 
later that window was nailed shut, 
| im Gréenwell started as a salesman in the North Beach section, where a lot of 
hig customers were Italians,Jim was a big, good looking fellow with dark, curly 
hair, and he had a fine voice, and of course knew a lot of the opera stars, A 
@ ae time after he started, there was a big Italian celebration of some kind, 
a he got started singing some of the songs; he didn't speak Italian, but sang 


those songs in good Italian, and made a big hit; the people didn't find out till 
later that he was singing the names of his customers, and that sure made a hit with them, 


- PAGE § - 

But to get back to the story, We lived*on 20th Street from about 1903 until 
1912,! The main retail district was centered at 14th and Broadway, and most of the 
big gtores were within a few blocks of that point, The old city hall was right 
wherg the present one is, and the county courthouse and hall of records were 
acrogs the street from wach other at 5th and Broadway. 

ajl was going well with us, and then on the 18th of April, 1906, at about 5:15 
in the morning, the earth began to shake, and how it shook, WS had, of course, 
cert] a number of earthquakes before, and hadn't thot much about them, they were 
just' one of those things that happened, but this one was different, Ralph and I 
werd sleeping in a room that had been added to the back porch of the house, and 
we eee rolled violently in the bed, There was a toilet on the porch with an over~ 
read water tank, and most of the water was shaken out of it, Ralph said something 
abott it having been a rough one, and we were going back to sleep when mother 
c to see if we were all right, She told us that the cilaimney on Schreiner's 
houBe next door had fallen, and the bricks had banged aeuinee our house, Then Ever- 


and , 
ett came in and he had been out/told of the new Baptist Church at 21st and XM6L 


ie had been damaged, the belfrey on the dome was spread all over the street, 
He lsnut off the gas at the meter, We decided that we had betterget up and have a 
look. 

i don't remember what we did about cooking ~ it wasn't safe to use the stove 
until the chimneys were rebuilt, some people moved their stoves out into the yard, 
orjon the sidewalks, and cooked there, Anyhow, we got some breakfast, and Everett 
and I started to work, We both worked in San Francisco, and traveled on the S,F, 
Ferries, There were two steam trains running to the ferries; one to the Alameda 
Pier came up Webster Street to 14th and Franklin, and the other on Seventh Street 
rd to the Oakland Mole, 

We found that the Alameda line wasn't running, the tracks across the Alameda 

rsh were all out of line, and it took several months to get it running again, 


went on down to Seventh Street and the trains were not running on schedule, 


Ajtrain came in from S.F, loaded with the first refugees that we had seen, some 


1£ dressed and carrying bundles; one fellow had lost his hat and was waving 


~ PAGE § - 
his atms and telling us that San Francisco was all afire, We thot he was crazy, 
but when we got on the ferry boat a little later we could see fires all over town, 
Everett got up to the place where he worked and helped save the books and some 
other stuff, I tried to get up to Davis Street, but the buildings on both sides 
of the street were burning, so I didn't get very far from the ferry building, 
Market Street waS a mess; the cable car tracks were solidly built of concrete, 
and hadn't moved, but the cobble stone pavement along side was all waves where 
it had sunk, There were new light quakes every little while, and bricks falling 
fromithe buildings still standing, 
Ij hadn't any lunch with me , and, of course, there was no place to get any, 
and pore specially a drink of water, so I went home early in the afternoon, There 
was Quite a lot of damage to buildings in Oakland, of course, but no big fires, so 
we lot off fairly easy, All the chimneys on our street, I think, were down; the 
ma men had plenty of work for some time, 
tried to go to S,F, again the next day, but they had the National Guard out, 
andino one could go without a pass, On the way home I stopped at the creamery where 
I had worked a few years before, to get a drink of buttermilk, and the boss came 
in and asked me what I was doing, When I told him I had just been burned out of 
@ job, he told me to hop on the special delivery wagon, so I drove that for a 
couple of weeks until I saw a notice in the paper for all Baker and Hamilton 
employees to report, so I went over to see what they were doing, They had acted 
prokapt iy, leasing a lot at Third and Berry streets; they had bought a lot of 
luspber from one of the yards that had not been burned out, and hired some carpen- 
tede, and were putting up an office building on the corner, We worked with the 
catpenters as others all over town did, and a lot of fellows kept/ working as 
carpenters, as there was plenty of work for a long time, We framed up a big ware~ 
house extending out on to the wharf, and a lot of the fellows were working in the 
ed out iron warehouse getting out sheets of corrugated sheet iron to cover it, 


t we put in wooden boxes for shelving, 


| They began shipping surplus stock from the Sacramento store, and the eastern 
manufacturers extended unlimited credit, so in a few months new stock began 


- | ~_PACEIG ~ 


i 
rolling in, The stuff from Sacramento was shipped on small river steamers that 


could tie up at our wharf and unload, In the meantime, orders from all over the 
© state| and the store which normally handled business from here north, were getting 
the business from all over the state, and were swamped with work, so they sent 
a lot| of us young fellows there to help out. I was 18, and most of them were not 
much jolder, and we had a great time, 

I had been getting twenty dollars a month, and they raised it to thirty five, I 
rainy it was, and all the others the same, so we could get along, and we did very 
nicely, Room rent was about 2 dollars a week, and we doubled up - that wasn't too 
bad,/and a Japanese restaurant served meaks for 15 to 25 cents; ‘a stock company 
theater show was 10, 20 and 30 cents, I remember The Count of Monte Cristo there, 
and L remember the cool milkshakes we would get in the evenings; the man had a big 
bl of ice, and would shave off the ice with a little metal box with a cutter 


like a plane, and put it in a big glass of milk and syrup and shake it with a 


band cranked machine, It really was a shake, and was nice and cool, 

Yd] ‘We were there for about three months, and then came home; the raise in pay stayed. 
on, {50 that helped, The city was getting re-organized, and water, gas and electric 
service had been restored in XH part of the city, and streetcars were running, 
The; next few years were pretty rugged ~ ashes and dust flying around until winter 
rains turned it into a gooey mess, and ruins everywhere - great holes of basements 
full of bricks and rubble of all kindg, The warehouse that we had put up for a tem 
vonbes store was not a good place for hardware - too damp, and it was a cold and 

drafty place to work, We got chillblains on our hands and feet, and the hardware 

suffered, too, Saws and other tools rusted, and brass fittings turned green from 
the fumes from the creek, so we had to clean up all the stuff before shipping it, 
and in spite of all we could do it looked awful, After a couple of years they 


moyed to a new building on Brannan Street ~ a new brick building, and that was 


@ mut better, 


oe meets we bli. | ee eT 


i | P a 
7 ~- PAGE Tl « 


a city had been in the grip of crooked politicians and grafters, and the 
earthquake showed up some of their work, The new city hall, which had just been 
built| at enormous cost, and which looked strong enough to stand most anything, fell 


in ts Concrete pillars, instead of being solid concrete, were thin shells 


filled with rubble, In the graft prosecutions which followed, Hiram Johnson sent 


= Schmitz and Abe Ruef, the political boss, and others, to prison, and made 


such ja name for himself that he was later elected governor, 


he, nee manera 
A ean AlN a npn 


NE ON A lS IRM cee eencione xi 


