TRANSCRIPT—LAVONIA WHITSON 
Interviewee: Lavonia Whitson 
Interviewer: Tealey Ellis and Judith Robertson 
Interview Date: March 4, 2019 
Location: | Taylor Road, Fairview Public Library 
Length: 1 digital recording; 00:28:38 
Transcriber: Rev.com 
Transcription Date: November 22, 2022 
Abstract: Lavonia Whitson recalls her experience moving to Fairview in the early 1970s, 


in particular a significant flood in 1973. 


Tealey Ellis: My name Tealey Ellis and I am a volunteer with the Fairview North 
Carolina Library Oral History Project. Today, March 4th, 2019, I am interviewing 


Lavonia Whitson at the Fairview Library. Thank you, Miss Whitson for this interview. 


Judith Robertson: This is Judith Robertson recording the oral history of Lavonia Whitson 
at the Fairview Library at 10:30 on March the 4th, 2019. The condition of use form for 


sound and video recordings has been signed by the interviewee. 


TE: Prior to the recording starting, you had indicated, Lavonia, that you were not from 
Fairview and that you had moved here at some time. So maybe that's where we could 


start with when you moved here and maybe why you came to Fairview. 


Lavonia Whitson: Okay. We moved to Fairview in May of 1973 and we were from the 


Asheville area and was looking to go to country. We thought we wanted country because 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 2 


we'd always lived basically in town so we wanted to go country. I woke the next morning 


to the sound of cowbells, that was so unusual because in town you don't hear cowbells. 


And so, the next morning we woke up to the sound of cowbells and that's just always 
made an impression on me because that's something you don't hear today. And at that 


time, it was unusual for me. 


TE: Sure. 


LW: To wake to sound of cowbells. I woke many mornings to the sound of Rupert Miller 
calling, "Soo cow, soo cow." He would get out early of the morning and he would call his 
cows in to milk and so I woke many mornings to that. And this generation gets their milk 
out of a bottle, so they have no idea what that was. But Rupert would get out and he lived 
across from us and so many, many mornings, we awoke to the sound of Rupert getting 


out and saying "Soo cow, soo cow." He's calling his cow in. 


JR: Okay, you want to continue. 


TE: If it pertains to why you moved here. 


LW: Well, the next, it was the flood of 1973. It occurred one week. 


TE: Let's get to that a little bit later. 


LW: Little later, okay. 


JR: Because we'll be very interested in hearing about that. 


LW: Okay. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 3 


TE: Okay. When you moved here, what area of Fairview, did you move to? 


LW: Old Fort Road. 


TE: On Old Fort Road. 


LW: Yes. 


TE: And you still have that property there today? 


LW: Still have that property, still live there today. 


TE: Okay. And from your opening comment there, you were not disappointed at having 


moved to Fairview? 


LW: No. 


TE: So very pleased- 


LW: No, not at all. Very pleased. 


TE: ... overall. And I'm assuming that you still are today? 


LW: Very pleased. 


TE: From the '73 to now, what kind of changes have you seen in Fairview? 


LW: Well, I've seen 74, that went from a two-lane road to what it is today. Let's see what 


other kind of changes that I've seen. 


JR: What was the sense of community like when you moved to this area? 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 4 


LW: Okay, I have that down, I don't know if I should insert it here or not. But my 
daughter, when we moved here was 10 years old. There was a country store up the road 
on up Old Fort Road and it was Sheet's Grocery. So, my daughter and her dog walked to 
the store every day, she went to get candy and ice cream and stuff like that. There was no 
sense that she was unsafe, it was just a good community and we just felt like it was safe. 
There wasn't a lot of traffic. She and the dos sometimes walked to the store and back 
without seeing a car or anything like that. And just had that sense of being safe and 


protected and- 


TE: Traffic wise, it's certainly different today, isn't it? 


LW: It is very different today. 


TE: And very fast traffic. 


LW: Very fast traffic going Old Fort Road, yes. 


TE: How would you describe Fairview today in terms of a child maybe going out to walk 


to a store? 


LW: Oh, no. There would be no way that I could let a child walk from my house to a 
store today, no. The traffic is just, it's not bumper to bumper, but it's fast and there's a lot 
of it. And so, it's changed dramatically from the time that she could walk to the store at 


10, 11 years old to what it is today. 


TE: In '73, in addition to feeling that your child was safe in doing what you described. 


What was the sense of welcoming or neighbors? Did you feel welcome? 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 5 


LW: Felt welcome the day that we moved in, Mrs. Peak was my neighbor across the 
road. She came over and she said, "I have cooked." They called it dinner at that time. It 
wasn't lunch, it was dinner. She said, "I have cooked dinner for you folks." She 
introduced herself to us and she said, "I have dinner ready, you're to come across the road 
and eat dinner with us." And so, very welcoming. On Sunday, we went to church in 
Fairview Baptist Church, very welcoming, very open arms. We were embraced by the 


community. It was just a sense of you belonging from the start. 


TE: On a scale of one to 10, with 10 being high and positive, I would assume that that 


would be your sense of welcoming and it was a 10. 


LW: 10. 


TE: A perfect 10. What do you think about today? In terms of if there are any new people 


from out of Fairview or out state, out of town moving in. What do you think? 


LW: I don't think it would be as welcoming today. I have neighbors that, I guess you 
could say I basically not met. And on my part that's not because I didn't try but that's 


because they didn't want to be bothered in that sense. 


TE: Got you. 


LW: That have moved in that just can remember one that I just... You know, you go and 
you're just standing there, you're not invited in and you just say, "Wanted to welcome 


you." And it's not too receptive. 


TE: Right. You said your daughter was 10. 


LW: She was 10 when we moved here on Monday, on Saturday she turned 11. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 6 


TE: Oh, 11. How would you describe her experiences from a parent's point of view at the 


Fairview School? 


LW: (phone interrupts) I'm in my interview. 


Speaker 4: Oh, okay. 


TE: From a parent's point of view of her experiences in Fairview community at the 


school and friends. 


LW: It was positive. She just started school, didn't know anybody and so she was 


welcomed by the teachers and the students. And so, she... 


TE: What did you think about the school, Fairview Elementary School? Do you 
remember maybe some particular things that you liked about it? Because she had gone to 


school in Asheville? 


LW: Yes. 


TE: Before coming here. 


LW: No, I can't really think of anything that stands out. I just remember that I guess it 


was smaller and I just remember that I was happy with the school. 


TE: You felt welcome. 


LW: Yes, I felt welcome. 


TE: And that's key for sure. When you bought the property that you're still living on 


today, did you do any farming? 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 7 


LW: We did. 


TE: Any crops? 


LW: Yes, we raised a garden. We raised what we called back then, a corn patch. So yes, 


we did do gardening. 


TE: Do you have any livestock? 


LW: We did. We bought our daughter a pony. She had a pony and so that was different 


that- 


TE: Any fresh eggs. Did you have chickens? 


LW: We didn't have chickens until later on. Not when we first moved, no. 


TE: Okay. But later you did. I think we've probably covered most of it in and maybe one 
of your opening statements about the best aspects of living in Fairview and I think you 
did a really good job of describing that. What do you think are the best aspects of today 


of living in Fairview? Memories are part of it, I know. 


LW: Yeah. 


TE: When you've lived in a place for a while. And I guess maybe if I clarified a little 
more in terms of, if you knew someone well who was going to move to Fairview, what 


would you tell them? 


LW: Well, I would say that we still have that sense of living in the country, even though 
it's not country as it was in 1973. But we still have that feeling of being in the country 


that you can still have a little bit of land and you're not right in on top of your neighbor. I 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 8 


would say that is still a positive. I would say another positive is being close to Asheville, 


that you're close to town. 


TE: Did you lock your doors when you first moved here? 


LW: No, we didn't lock the doors. No. 


TE: Did it change? Do you lock your doors? 


LW: Yes. Oh yes. 


TE: Roughly, when do you think that changed? 


LW: When do I think that changed? Let's see. We moved here in 1973, probably in the 


latter '80s. I'm just guessing on that, probably the latter '80s. 


TE: What brought that on? 


LW: Just hearing about crime in the community that we haven't ever necessarily 
experienced anything. But just hearing it happened over here, it happened over there. And 


just hearing that crime was and so you felt like that. 


TE: Became aware of. 


LW: Became aware. 


TE: Of things that were going on. 


LW: Of things that were going on in the community. 


TE: And that's certainly a good reason. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 9 


JR: Could I ask a couple of questions. 


TE: Sure, jump right in. 


JR: This is kind of like going back a little bit, if you don't mind. I see that you were born 


in Madison County? 


LW: Yes. 


JR: Is that where you were raised? 


LW: Yes. 


JR: Were you raised on a farm? 


LW: Yes. 


JR: And your parents were farmers? 


LW: My parents were farmers. We raised tobacco and all that, yes. 


JR: Okay, so, you really were a country girl. 


LW: Yes. 


JR: So,were you retired when you moved to Fairview? 


LW: Oh no. We were... Let's see, '73. That would've been 44, 4, 64, I was 29 years old. 


JR: Oh, so you had moved from Madison County to Asheville? 


LW: Yes. 


JR: And I assume you and your husband both were working? 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 10 


LW: Yes. 


JR: In Asheville. Where did y'all work? 


LW: He worked at Ball Corporation, he retired from there. Only job he ever had. 


JR: The glass- 


LW: Yes. 


JR: ... jar factory. 


LW: Yes. And I worked at Sears. 


JR: At Sears, wow. And did you continue working there after you moved to Fairview? 


LW: Yes. 


JR: And you retired from both of those places? 


LW: No, I didn't retire from Sears. 


JR: Okay. 


TE: When you moved to Fairview in '73, do you have memories of what ethnicities were 
here in Fairview? Was everyone white? Were there people of different color? What was it 


like in "73 for that? 


LW: You didn't see many colors, I remember that. And I think I'm telling this correctly 
that my daughter had one Black student in her class but no, it didn't. Ethnics didn't come 
in until later on, it was primarily white. But I do remember that she did have one Black 


student in her class but that's all I can remember when we first came to Fairview. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 11 


TE: Let me ask you at this point so that we don't get totally off track, you have some 
items there that you want to share with us. So, would you like to share some of those now 


and we'll see how they tie in with this? 


LW: Okay. The flood of 1973, I don't know if anybody has mentioned that. 


JR: Yes. And I'm dying of curiosity and I've been trying to research a little bit and finding 


it difficult to get information. 


LW: I went online to make sure just that I had the dates and all correct. Couldn't find 


anything about it. 


JR: Did you get May 31st? It was Memorial Day weekend, 1973. 


LW: No. 


JR: That's what I've come up with is May 31st. 


LW: Well, I've got dates. I did go on Google and got dates for these. I thought I had it 
correct and when I went on Google and I did have that correct. But the flood of 1973 
came one week after we moved to Fairview. We moved in on a Monday and on Sunday 
night the flood comes. So, it came one week later after we moved and should I give 


names here or just call it my neighbor or what? 


TE: As long as it's positive and just in identifying things, I don't see a problem with 
giving a person's name because most of the other people we've interviewed certainly do 


that in talking about experiences. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 12 


LW: Okay. I wasn't sure about that and I didn't call to verify it would be okay to do it. 
But my neighbor, Raymond Pressley, waded water to his neck trying to rescue his 
hunting dogs. He had hunting dogs. And s,o the flood came so quickly and all that. He 


waded water to his neck trying to rescue those dogs. 


JR: Was that water in Cane Creek? 


LW: Yes. 


JR: So, Cane Creek got way out of its banks. 


LW: Cane Creek got way out. That's Cane Creek that goes down by my house and so it 


got way out of banks. 


JR: And it came up into Mr. Miller's pasture, I guess. 


LW: Yes. And so, Raymond waded water to his neck trying to rescue his hunting dogs. 
Raymond and Betty's bridge that was going across Cane Creek, flooded out. So, they're 
on the side of the mountain there and there's no access into their house because they lost 


their bridge there. 


During the night, we heard this terrible, terrible noise. We could tell, it sounded like 

something hitting but we couldn't identify it and of course the lightning and the rain and 
all. Oh, it was just incredible, but we kept hearing this noise. So the next day we learned 
that Raymond's big rock truck, he's a rock mason, and his big rock truck that he has had 


washed away in the flood. 


JR: Oh, my goodness. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 13 


LW: And so, we determined that it was that truck hitting the rocks and the trees as it went 


downstream, was the noise that we were hearing. 


JR: My Lord. 


LW: It was incredible. My neighbor, Archie Peak, which lives or did live directly across 
from me, his fence washed away. And Mr. Peak was probably in his 70s at that time and 
was a diabetic. So, he was so concerned that his cows was going to escape the pasture 
because there was no fence. And my husband had that day off because it was Memorial 
Day weekend and he had the day off so he helped Mr. Peak's son. Mr. Peak wasn't 
physically able to build a fence, so my husband helped his son build the fence, restore the 


fence so that they could keep the cattle back in the pasture. 


JR: How nice. 


TE: Did you lose electrical power during that time? Because you mentioned the heavy 


rain and thunder and lightning and so forth. 


LW: I don't remember losing power. We didn't even lose power during the blizzard of 


1993. We very seldom lose power. 


TE: Fortunate. 


LW: Yes, very, very fortunate so we very seldom ever lose power. So, I don't remember 
losing power during the flood. I just remember that it was incredible. I do remember and I 
don't know if you would want this or not, but we had a friend that lived at Candler. And 
he had a trailer park at that time and his entire trailer park was destroyed and he said that 


he lost a $100,000 without insurance and that was 1973. Now, he wouldn't get a trailer 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 14 


park today for a $100,000. But he lost his entire trailer park, mobile home park in 1973 


and he lost a $100,000 at that time. 


TE: Do you recall how long it took for the water to recede in this flood in '73? 


LW: I don't recall on how long it took it to recede or anything. I think we were just in 
such a state of shock that we had just moved in, was trying to get everything straightened 
out and here this comes on top of us. And I really don't remember how long it took for 


the water to recede. 


TE: Just curious. 


JR: Did many people lose livestock? 


LW: I don't remember many people losing livestock, but I had a distant cousin that lost 
her life in it. She lived over on Mills Gap Road and I think it was her and the two 


children that died in that same flood. 


JR: Oh, my goodness. How tragic. Well then this is much more widespread than just 


Fairview. This was all of Western North Carolina? 


LW: Well, I don't know if all Western North Carolina, but she lived on Mills Gap Road. 


JR: Buncombe County. 


LW: Yes. And it was just a very small stream that went by her house. She lived in a 
trailer park and they said what happened, that there was some kind of debris or something 


and it stood up this way. 


JR: Made a dam. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 15 


LW: And the water just dammed up against that. And she and her children were trying to 


get out and she lost her life. 


JR: Wow, how tragic. 


TE: It is. 


JR: Yeah. 


TE: That is tragic. 


JR: All right. 


TE: Other items you wanted to share? 


LW: No, the only other item was about my daughter and what a safe environment it was 


for her and that that was all of- 


TE: Okay. 


LW: ... the other that I had down. 


TE: And I'm keeping an eye on the time because I know you have another appointment 
and that you have to be somewhere. If we could take a couple minutes, when you moved 


here in 1973 to Fairview, was it a shock as to stores not available? 


LW: I don't think it was a shock because I drove back in to town, see. 


TE: Okay. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 16 


LW: So, I don't think that I found that as a shock. And then we had the little grocery store 
right up above, a Sheets grocery store that my daughter could walk to and so she could 


get her candy and she could get her a popsicle and stuff like that. 


TE: Right. 


LW: So, I don't remember feeling a loss as to the stores. 


TE: Well as you said, you were back in Asheville every day. 


LW: I was back in there every day. 


TE: So, you could do shopping. 


LW: Yes. 


JR: On the old two-lane Road. 


LW: Yes, on the old two-lane Road. 


TE: Judith, it's 11:00 o'clock now and I don't want it cut it short if you have some other 
things you want to share. I think you've given us some very helpful, good information. 
And this information about the flood in 1973, that it was very, very good to have. Do you 


have some more questions? 


JR: Well, I would like to ask, what did you do for fun? 


LW: What did we do for fun? My husband had always been an outdoorsman, was always 
an outdoorsman. So, he had what was called back in those days, trail bikes. So, we would 


pack up, say on a weekend, and we would head over to Davidson River and we would 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 17 


camp out and ride trail bikes and we had other families that met us there and stuff like 


that. 


JR: That was good. 


TE: That was good fun. 


JR: Really good stuff. 


LW: Yeah. And I remember one time in particular, we had gone, we were staying longer 
than just say, the weekend. And we'd had a couple of days of rain and got up that 
morning, oh, the sun was just beautiful. So, I said, "I'm going to hang our cover out. I'm 
going to hang it out. It can air out today, it can sun dry and all that." And so he said, 
"Okay." And he told the area that we was going to ride into that day. So I said, "Okay." 
So I hang all the cover and all that out in the sun and I'm thinking, "Oh, we're going to 


come in. It's going to be all this." 


So, we get on the trail back and he has my daughter sitting in front of him and I'm on the 
back. So, we head into this area that was really remote and we get there and I don't 
remember what we were doing there. I mean as far as entertainment, if we were seeing 
something special or whatever. But anyway, we get there and all of a sudden, I look back 
toward camp and I see this dark looking cloud. So needless to say, it came a downpour. 
We came back and we just had to pack up and come in because all of our cover was wet 


and all that. So, we just had to pack it. 


JR: Had to give it up. 


LW: Yeah. Had to give it up. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 18 


TE: Does your daughter live in Fairview? 


LW: She does, yes. 


TE: Okay. 


JR: And has she continued with the outdoor activities? 


LW: No. 


JR: She doesn't like it. 


TE: She had enough of it. And does she have children? 


LW: She does. And we built a house on the property. We rented the house that was on it. 
We never ever lived in it, we rented it the whole time. We built a house on the property 
and when she got married, she found property down on Cane Creek and she built on Cane 
Creek, but she didn't feel like he was big enough. It was a two-bedroom house they built 


and she didn't feel like he was big enough. 


So, my husband was coming up, facing retirement and he said, "Well, we need to 
downsize." So, what happened? She bought our house that was larger. We went, moved 
on down the property and we built a smaller house on the property. So, she lives on the 


property today, I live on the property today. 


TE: Okay. 


JR: Oh, that's wonderful. 


TE: And how old is your grandchildren? 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 19 


LW: I have one that she just turned 21 and the other one will turn 26 in May. She's got 


about two and a half months till she gets her BSN in nursing. 


TE: And so, they went to Fairview Elementary School? 


LW: No. 


TE: No. 


LW: They didn't. Let's see, Brynn, she went to third grade and she has dyslexia. So, they 
told her in third grade that they could no longer help her and that they needed to seek 
other help for her. So, they put her in a Christian school, private school. So, she went 
there until 10th grade. And by that time, the resources in public school had changed. And 


so, she was able to get help, went to Reynolds, graduated with honors. 


TE: Wonderful. 


LW: And so now she's got two and a half months left until she gets her BSN. 


JR: Fantastic. What a great story. 


TE: That is a wonderful story. 


JR: Yeah. 


TE: I'm glad you shared that with us. 


LW: And then the other one, she went to Fairview Kindergarten. She went there, 
kindergarten was all she went and it was just so hard but my daughter kind of get the 


other one to this school. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 20 


TE: Sure. 


LW: And this one here, and she said, "I'm just going to pull Bailey out when she gets 


through kindergarten and put them both in the same school." 


TE: That's understandable. That's certainly understandable. Well, it's five after 11:00 and 
I know you have to be somewhere. I just wanted to mention again that if you have any 
photographs of, as Judith had described earlier, buildings, not necessarily family photos, 
but buildings that show what Fairview was in '73 and so forth and so on. Documents of 


any kind that would be of interest. Just call, events- 


JR: Events, things that you went to here. 


LW: Okay. 


TE: And so just call the library and tell them that you were interviewed. And Jamie 


McDowell is the library manager, J-A-I-M-E McDowell. 


LW: Events, you said Events. 


TE: Events. 


JR: And pictures. 


TE: Pictures, if you had any flood pictures or natural things that have happened, what 
roads looked like. If you have any pictures of all '74, things of that nature. Just call the 
library and tell them that you were interviewed and you have some things you'd like to 


have scanned and they'll make the arrangement for you. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 21 


LW: I was thinking that if I could come up with a picture of my daughter and her dog 


walking that that would be nice. 


TE: That would be. 


LW: Because I just saw on the- 


JR: That's the type of thing we'd really love to see. 


LW: ... internet this morning, little 11-year-old was found dead that she'd gone missing 
and was found dead. And I thought, now I really need to see if I've got any pictures of 


Donna and her dog in the store. 


JR: And you would have the rough date on it and everything. And so that would be very 
nice. So again, it's not a rush rush but just take your time if you see if you find some of 


those pictures. 


LW: Well, if you need to continue, I'll call and see if- 


JR: And if you're in doubt about something, bring it because Jaime will sort through and 


decide. 


LW: You say that is Jamie. 


JR: J-A-I-M-E. 


TE: McDowell. 


LW: McDowell. 


TE: And she's here most of the time. And if not, just leave a message for her. 


LAVONIA WHITSON Page 22 


LW: Jennifer was the one that suggested that I do this. 


JR: Oh, good. 


TE: Okay. So, you'd call her too anytime. So, thank you so much, Lavonia, for sharing 


this information with us today. 


LW: Well, thank you. And I wish I could have been more helpful in- 


TE: No, you were very helpful. 


JR: Oh, no, this is wonderful. 


TE: Everyone- 


JR: You can turn it off. 


TE: Everyone that we've interviewed--. 


END OF INTERVIEW. 


