Grannie Annte 


Historical Family Stories 
Written and Illustrated by Young People 


yo 


Ee = 2 


Ne ; hy ] 


2 


from 
The Grannie Annie 


Family Story Celebration 


Vol. 8 


The Grannie Annie 
Family Story Celebration 


Welcome to the 2013 Grannie Annie celebration 
of family stories! Students in U.S. grades 4 through 8 
and homeschooled or international students 9 through 
14 years of age are invited to interview their family 
storykeepers and write a story from their family’s history. 
The Grannie Annie experience leads young people to 
strengthen family and community bonds, encounter 
history in a personal way, and polish their writing skills. 
Students are encouraged to illustrate their story and then 
share their work with their family, school, community, 
and The Grannie Annie. 

The works of thirty-five young authors and twelve 
young artists, chosen to represent the submissions 
received this year, are included in this eighth annual 
volume of Grannie Annie. This book is also available as a 
PDF edition. 

The Grannie Annie mission—to inspire young 
people to discover, write, illustrate, and share historical 
family stories—springs from a belief in the trans- 
formative power of “story.” The simple, genuine family 
stories in this book can help us connect with people 
in today’s world and with people from times past. In 
unexplainable ways, these stories foster feelings of unity 
with people whose lives may seem very different from 
our own. Quietly, surely, the world moves one step closer 
to peace. 


Grannie Annie 
Vol. 8 


Historical Family Stories from 
The Grannie Annie Family Story Celebration 
Written and Illustrated by Young People 


Saint Louis, Missouri 


The Grannie Annie welcomes—and desires to receive and publish— 
family stories from students of every race, ethnicity, national origin, 
religion, and creed. 


Because the stories in Grannie Annie, Vol. 8, were captured from the 
oral tradition, they represent a unique blend of history, legend, and 
opinion. Accuracy—historical or otherwise—is not guaranteed, and 
the views represented are not necessarily those of the authors, 
directors, or publishers. 


Cover illustration by Maggie Morse. 


Particular thanks to fiber artist Elda Miller, graphics specialists Josh 
Hagan and Jeff Hirsch, and researchers Bert Francis and Doug Nolte. 


Financial assistance for this project has been provided by the 
Missouri Arts Council, a state agency. 


PDF anthology copyright © 2013 by The Grannie Annie. All rights 
reserved with these exceptions: The purchaser is permitted to view 
this PDF book on more than one device and to print one copy for 
personal or classroom use. In addition, individual stories may be 
printed for classroom use, or by the authors and illustrators, who 
also retain the copyrights to their works, printed here with 
permission. 


Your tax-deductible donation will enable more young people to 
take part in The Grannie Annie, and will make the remarkable 
Grannie Annie published stories more widely available. 


Published in the United States of America by Connie McIntyre, 
P.O. Box 11343, Saint Louis, Missouri 63105; in conjunction with 
Portico Books, P.O. Box 6094, Chesterfield, Missouri 63006, 
www.GrammarAndMore.com. 


In memory of Ann Guirreri Cutler, 
whose passion for saving family stories 
inspired The Grannie Annie 
1944-2007 


In memory of 
Jens Peder and Kirstine Jensen Pedersen 
of Hvam, Denmark, who in the early 1900s 
saw three of their nine children 
sail to new lives in America— 
Honored by donors Louise and Jack McIntyre 


Contents 


The Grannie Annie Family Story Celebration 1 


Story Settings Maps 9 


A Word from Grannie Annie 11 


Note to Parents and Educators 13 


Surprised at the 1904 World’s Fair (1904*) 17 
Orion F. Jones; Pennsylvania, USA 


No Child Left Behind (1919) 19 
Rivka Abedon; Maryland, USA 


Remember Me? (c. 1926-1928) 21 
Miles R. Bassett; Missouri, USA 


The Bootlegger (c. 1930s) 24 
Jenna Pardieck; Missouri, USA 


America, Here I Come? (c. 1930-1964) 26 
Sophie Pomeranz; Colorado, USA 


The Pilot (c. 1935) 29 
Tripp Gatch; Missouri, USA 


The Storm That Erased a World (September 21, 1938) 31 
Dede Driscoll; Alabama, USA 


Kicked Out of Home (c. 1940) 33 
Ella Hartman; Alabama, USA 


Passing By (c. 1940s) 35 
Makayla Matvick; Minnesota, USA 


The Great School Escape (1941) 37 
Helen Ann Stone; Missouri, USA 


* The time setting of each story is noted in parentheses here and also on the story 
pages. Where the exact year is unknown, “c.” (circa) indicates the approximate year. 


6 


Raining Bombs (December 7, 1941) 40 
Anna Cathryn Brown; Alabama, USA 


Sugar, Stamps, Bikes, and Metal (1942) 42 
Natalie Rose Schuver; Missouri, USA 


Saved by the Blink of a Statue’s Eve (1942-1944) 45 
Yaakov Reches; Maryland, USA 


Bravery in Battle and Beyond (c. 1943) 47 
Nili Hefetz; Maryland, USA 


The Miracle That Gave Me Life (April 8, 1945) 49 
Megan Trushenski; Minnesota, USA 


Living with the Enemies (c. 1946) 51 
Melina Huang; New Jersey, USA 


The Basketball Hoop (c. 1950) 53 
Zach Stehr; Missouri, USA 


Mr. Camper’s “Secret” Candy Bars (c. 1950) 56 
Jala Ehrenfried; Ohio, USA 


Blizzard Sunday (1952) 58 
Benjamin M. Brock; Colorado, USA 


Tump and the Monster of Summer (1952) 60 
Drennen Weems; Alabama, USA 


Spudnut Saturday (c. 1954) 62 
Audrey Herman; Ohio, USA 


The Police Circus (c. 1957) 64 
Sean Britt; Missouri, USA 


Way Too Close (c. 1960s) 66 
Nathan He; New Jersey, USA 


Apartheid (1962) 68 
David Friedman; Colorado, USA 


The Wolbach Whale (1966) 70 
Cade Grossart; Nebraska, USA 


Turtle Trouble (c. 1970s) 72 
Haley Singer; New Jersey, USA 


My Dad, Immigrating to the U.S. (November 20, 1971) 74 
Dominic Cavezza; New Jersey, USA 


Attack of the Polar Bear (1972) 77 
Daniel Volobuev; Missouri, USA 


The Kmart Disaster (c. 1975) 79 
Shaun Slamowitz; Colorado, USA 


Stuck to the Ground (1978) 81 
Hailey Peterson; Missouri, USA 


A Miscommunication (c. 1984) 83 
Rebecca Tan; Missouri, USA 


The Game-Winning Shot (1984) 85 
Connor Wood; Nebraska, USA 


Hands Across America (1986) 88 
Jocelyn Crossley; Ohio, USA 


The One-Ticket Escape (June 5, 1989) 90 
Julia Hu; New Jersey, USA 


Toyota Tercel Trouble (2000) 93 
Belle Sara Gage; Missouri, USA 


Illustrators of Volume 8 95 


Grannie Annie Storykeepers 2013 96 


Invitation to Participate 99 


Praise for The Grannie Annie 100 


SOLIO}S JO 
sloquinu a3sed oe 
deur uo siaquinn, 


Ssumy}oS AI01S 


61 ze 
vensy yj 
. anid Sse 
zi LZ LL 
2 EAs “Xs 


zoe 


SO1I0}S JO 


stoquinu osed ore 
deur uo siaquiny 
ssujosg AI0}S 


A Word from Grannie Annie 


Some Native American nations so valued their 
histories that they designated a tribal storykeeper. My 
mother filled that role in our family for decades, and 
before that, our family storykeeper was Mom’s mother, 
my grandmother Randazzo. 

Gramma Randazzo lived with us when I was a 
child. She didn’t speak English well; however, at an 
early age I learned to say “Tell me a story about the Old 
Country” or “Tell me again the story about the baker’s 
daughter who had dough under her fingernails.” Then 
she would begin, in her broken English that made the 
stories even more fascinating to me. She told me stories 
about the olive groves on the family estate in Italy, about 
Grampa Randazzo’s brothers and all their escapades, and 
about the family’s early years as immigrants in Brooklyn. 
Mom carried on the tradition with her own repertoire 
of stories—about teaching in a one-room school, about 
blizzards and floods on the farm, and about rolling up 
the rug and inviting the neighbors over to dance. 

I was fascinated by their tales and still am. I 
have written down many of their stories, saved them 
in keepsake books so they won’t be lost. They’re a 
treasure to read now, just as I had hoped, but I find I 
saved more than the stories themselves. Listening had 
been a way to be close to Gramma Randazzo. When I 
read Gramma’s stories now, I remember sitting near her, 
hearing the stories from Gramma herself. When I read 
Mom?’s stories now, I remember aunts and uncles and 
cousins gathering around the kitchen table to listen. By 


11 


sharing their stories, Gramma and Mom created a sense 
of family, a sense of closeness and security, that will stay 
with me forever. 


Ann Guirreri Cutler 
The Original Grannie Annie 
April 2006 


12 


Note to Parents and Educators 


Crawl under, climb through, and run for your life 
with the family members whose stories are captured in 
this eighth volume of Grannie Annie! 

In addition to engaging tales about clever youngsters 
and life way back when, this year’s collection provides 
plenty of adventure. Explore new heights jumping on the 
first trampoline. Hide, quickly—in your closet, deep in 
the woods, under a stack of mattresses or, miraculously, 
in a hole in the ground. As disaster approaches, shout 
Nooooo!—in English or Chinese. “Share” your home with 
soldiers. Survive war; stand up for peace. 

These thirty-five historical family stories span 
nearly one hundred years, from the debut of cotton candy 
at the 1904 World’s Fair to the hilarious antics of one of 
the greenest dads of the new millennium. The stories circle 
the globe, taking place in North America, Asia, Europe, 
and Africa. The maps on pages 9 and 10 will help you 
locate each story’s setting. You can also find the stories 
and their illustrations in the identical PDF edition and on 
the Grannie Annie website. 

A celebration of families everywhere, this volume 
is designed for you and your family. You may wish to read 
the stories, however, before sharing them with sensitive 
or younger readers. 

Weare so honored to be sharing these remarkable 
family stories with you. Our hope is that you will be 
entertained and inspired, and that you will join us again 
for next year’s Grannie Annie Family Story Celebration! 


Connie McIntyre and Fran Hamilton 
Directors of The Grannie Annie 


Listening is an act of love. 
—Dave Isay, StoryCorps 


Grannie Annie, Vol. 8 


Surprised at the 1904 World’s Fair 


1904* 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA 


In 2013 the Internet has become a dominant part 
of our lives. I can’t even imagine life without the Internet. 
The Internet was invented before I was born, but to my 
parents and grandparents, it’s still a very new toy. 

Back in the early 1900s, all of your news was from 
newspapers, as even the TV had not yet been invented. 
People were isolated from everything that happened 
outside their home state. So imagine the wonders that the 
people of St. Louis experienced when the 1904 World’s 
Fair came to town. My great-great-aunt Mary and her 
cousin Nell were eleven and sixteen at that time. 

“I can’t believe that my mom said yes!” Mary 
shouted. 

“Yes, isn’t it grand that we’re going to the 1904 St. 
Louis World’s Fair? And just the two of us!” exclaimed 
Nell. 

Two days later they were on their way to the fair 
with high hopes. When they arrived, they decided to 
travel down the Pike. The Pike was a mile-long walkway 
where you could eat anything and just have fun. Mary 
and Nell tasted their first-ever hot dogs, hamburgers, 
ice cream cones, and iced teas. They also enjoyed 
something completely new called “cotton candy.” How 
could they ever convince their parents that cotton was 


* The setting of each story is noted below its title. In cases where the exact year is not 
known, “c.” (circa) indicates that the year given is approximate. 


17 


now a candy! The girls strolled down the Pike, trying a 
little bit of everything—basically stuffing themselves 
and then eating even more. Along the Pike they also saw 
international stations, including an “Eskimo Camp” and 
the “Geisha Girls,” which thrilled them. By the time they 
got to the end of the Pike, Mary was feeling a bit queasy 
from eating too much. 

Then they saw the Ferris wheel. 

The girls hurried over and excitedly gave the carny 
50 cents admission for two rotations. They climbed into 
a car with fifty-eight other people, the doors closed, and 
the Ferris wheel started its rotation. They sat together 
on fancy twisted-wire chairs, holding hands, anticipating 
the ride of their lives. In 1904 no one had been very far off 
the ground, because skyscrapers and airplanes had just 
been invented, so their ride up to 264 feet both thrilled 
and terrified both of them. At the top, they searched 
intently for their neighborhood and their houses in the 
skyline of St. Louis. Unfortunately, Mary’s stomach 
started churning because of all of the food she’d eaten on 
the Pike. The conductor on their car was very nice and 
offered her some water. The ride was really long, taking 
forty minutes for them to complete two rotations before 
they were let out of the car. 

Mary shared this memory with my grandmother 
Catherine, who passed it to me. Neither Mary nor Nell is 
with us anymore, but they live on in our hearts through 
these loving stories. 


Orion F. Jones 
Pennsylvania, USA 


18 


No Child Left Behind 


1919 
Bilozirka, Ukraine 


The date was January 15, 1913, the day my great- 
grandmother was born: Rebecca (Ruth) Shochet. It was 
such a happy day for Mr. Label and Mrs. Mariam. 

Years later, in Russia,* it wasn’t so restful. 
Ruth was with her family and her cousins. They were 
having their Sabbath day meal when all of a sudden an 
ear-piercing gunshot interrupted their meal. They heard 
screams of terror coming from neighbors. Ruth and her 
family peered out of their snow-covered window, which 
revealed a horrifying sight. Everybody was running out 
of their homes, screaming in terror to take shelter from 
the Cossacks. 

Papa said, “Those mischievous Russians! They 
always steal, and kill everyone that doesn’t believe in 
their religion.” He sighed. “Everyone! Go and run away!” 
he cried. “We want everyone to be safe!” 

“But, Papa,” Ruth heaved. “I don’t want to leave 
our home.” Ruth began to cry. 

“Don’t worry, Ruthie. We will come back. Now, 
everyone! Let’s go!” 

They all ran with all their might, stomping on soft 
snow, making footprint by footprint. Mama was carrying 
baby Fagie. She glanced over her shoulder to find the 
Cossacks running after them, shouting in Russian. 


* When this story took place, Bilozirka was spelled Belozirka and was located in 
Russia. 


19 


Ten minutes later, they all were gasping for breath 
as they entered a cave with dark walls and horrifying 
echoes. While everyone was hoping they could grab more 
of the cold air into their lungs, they heard faint cries, 
coming from... Mama? 

“Mama, why are you crying?” asked Ruth. 


Mama sniffled and said, “Fagie . . . Cossacks 
chasing us... running... Fagie’s cries...snow...” She 
started wailing. 

“Do you mean... ?” asked Papa. 

Mama nodded sadly. 


They gasped and started talking all at once. “The 
baby—” “She dropped her in the snow???” 

“We have to go back!” Ruth cried. 

“No, we can’t. The Cossacks could still be looking. 
We must stay in the cave,” Papa said. 

Hours later they peered out of the cave. The 
Cossacks were gone. They crept out of the cave. They ran 
and ran until they found baby Fagie. They all thanked 
G-d* that she was still alive, but she lost her hearing. 

Now always remember: No child left behind. 

Rivka Abedon 
Maryland, USA 


* This incomplete spelling is a show of respect. 


20 


Remember Me? 


c. 1926-1928 
Warsaw, Poland; 
Brooklyn, New York, New York, USA 


“Gertrude, they’re going to kill you!” Gertrude’s 
friend shouted frantically. 

“I don’t care!” Gertrude Bloustein answered 
abruptly. Then Gertrude walked off to the very small one- 
room schoolhouse with a gorgeous facade of oak wood. 
The wood came out of the facade into an arch. Under the 
oak arch there was a moderate-size rusty brass bell. 

Then the petite sixteen-year-old Jewish girl with 
brown hair, pale skin, and big brown eyes reached for 
the rusty old brass doorknob. She turned the knob and 
walked in. She gaped at the willowy teacher with pale 
skin, green eyes, and gray hair in a bun. The teacher 
turned toward her and asked, “What do you want?” Her 
voice was like a cat’s claws on a chalkboard. 

Gertrude went into her best posture and answered, 
“I want to learn.” 

The teacher pointed to an old oak desk as she 
responded, “Go sit down then.” 

Gertrude walked over to the old oak desk and 
learned. 

A couple of years later a Polish man from the New 
World came to find a bride from the shtetl, meaning 
“small Jewish village.” The man, whose name was 
William, had brown hair and hazel eyes. He was tall and 
slender. William, from America, had arranged to marry 
Gertrude’s cousin, but when William looked at Gertrude, 


21 


Autumn Caito 


it was love at first sight. The two lovebirds eloped, and by 
the time Gertrude was eighteen, she was packing to go to 
the New World. 

As Gertrude approached the monstrous ship, 
she held her protruding stomach and thought about her 
unborn baby. She gazed upon the huge steel steamboat. 
Then she looked up at a large smokestack that was puffing 
black smoke. She boarded third class, or steerage, which 
was exceptionally cramped. She looked down at the old 
red wood and realized that she did not feel well and 
started vomiting. 

As three days passed, the hurling got worse. So 
she went to see the captain. She gazed at the captain 
with his gray beard, green eyes, and large scar next to 
his right eye. She looked him in the eye and spoke with a 
firm voice. “I want to be moved to first class.” 

The captain was shocked at the tiny Jewish girl. 
“Okay then. You will be moved from steerage to first 
class.” 


22 


Later that day, she got to sit at the captain’s table 
with all the other first-class passengers. She thought 
about her life in the New World. 

They eventually made it to Ellis Island. When 
Gertrude arrived, she couldn’t find William. She realized 
that he was in the third-class steerage line, and she was 
in first class. So Gertrude took a lengthy walk and saw 
William. She tapped him on the shoulder and whispered, 
“Remember me?” 


Miles R. Bassett, great-grandson of Gertrude 
Missouri, USA 


23 


The Bootlegger 


C. 1930S 
Harrisburg, Illinois, USA 


Bootleggers. They fit right up there with robbers 
and gangsters. Bootleggers had very interesting jobs. 
They made liquor illegally. My great-great-grandpa 
Ira T. Kingsley did just that in Harrisburg, Illinois. He 
started working on making whiskey in his basement, but 
he did not know much about the process. As he figured 
out more and more, he became very good at what he did. 
After a while he moved the “business” into the middle of 
the woods and went underground.* 

Being a bootlegger was no cup of tea! First off, they 
were always being chased by the authorities. Second, 
they had to learn how to draw the tax stamp that the 
government put on legal liquor,** because back then, if 
the liquor had no tax stamp, there would sometimes be 
no sale. Third, they had to perfect their liquor-making 
skills. 

Making liquor was illegal because of Prohibition, 
the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution, banning the making of and sale of alcohol. 
Even though it was illegal, my great-great-grandpa did 
it anyway. The reason why is because bootleggers made 
a lot of money. Back then, $25 seemed like about $325 
today. So if bootleggers sold each bottle of whiskey for, 
let’s say, $10, they would be rich! 


* Went underground means “took extra steps to keep the operation hidden.” 


** The only legal liquor during Prohibition (1920-1933) was for medical or scientific 
purposes or for religious observances. 


24 


After a while in the liquor business, my great- 
great-grandpa was caught and sent to prison for five 
years. Near the end of his term, the warden had to make 
sure that my great-great-grandpa had a home and a job 
to go back to. My great-great-grandpa had both, so he 
was free to go. 

Not long after being released, he got an offer to sell 
his liquor recipe to Jack Daniel’s, a big liquor company 
in Tennessee. My great-great-grandpa never accepted. 

My grandpa said he found out about all this 
when he discovered the liquor-making equipment in the 
basement where it all started. My grandpa is not proud 
of what his grandfather did, but it will always be part of 
our colorful family history. 


Jenna Pardieck 
Missouri, USA 


25 


America, Here I Come? 


c. 1930-1964 
Drohiczyn, Poland; New York, New York, USA; 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 


When my great-grandfather Hershel Steinberg 
moved to America, he decided that he wanted to bring 
all his siblings over to America as well. He bought boat 
tickets for all his siblings, but he couldn’t get one for his 
brother Levi.* 

“Hershel, when will I get to come to America?” 
Levi wrote in a letter. 

“Very soon,” Hershel replied. Hershel tried but 
could not succeed. 

He wrote back to Levi, saying, “Levi, go to the port 
on Wednesday. I have contacted my friend Aron Maksym 
to take you to America.” 

The next day Levi went to the port, and Aron was 
already there. 

“Hello. Iam Aron,” he said. 

“Hello. ’'m Levi, Hershel’s brother.” 

“All right. ’'m glad to meet you. Now, since the 
ship doesn’t leave port for three days, you will be living 
with me until then.” 

Levi enjoyed three days of living with Aron, and 
Levi lost track of time. But Aron didn’t. 

“Levi, the ship leaves today!” 

“Let’s go!” Before they left, Aron took out an 
empty suitcase and told Levi to climb in. 


* Pronounced LAY-vee. 


26 


“What? I’m not climbing into a suitcase!” 

“You have to!” 

“Okay, fine.” Levi climbed into the suitcase. They 
went to the port, and Aron boarded the ship with two 
suitcases. 

The boat ride lasted about one month. 

“Hello, Aron!” Hershel greeted when they arrived 
in New York. “Safe journey for both of you?” 

“Levi is in the other suitcase,” Aron replied softly. 

“Thank you, Aron,” said Hershel. 

“Of course.” And with that, Aron left. 

After about four months of living in America, Levi 
was getting pretty used to his lifestyle. One day, when he 
was driving, he was pulled over by a police officer. 

“Hello, sir,” Levi said. “Can I help you?” 

“Yeah, you were speeding! Show me your driver’s 
license!” the cop said. 

“Sir, I don’t have a driver’s license.” 

“Well, that’s a problem. Fortunately, I’m also part 
of the Immigration Department. So I guess we'll just 
have to deport you to Canada. If you try to sneak back 
into America again, we will deport you again, and then 
you won't be able to get a license or become a citizen at 
all.” 

“Yes, sir.” 

“Now go pack. You go to Canada tomorrow.” 

“Yes, sir.” Then Levi drove back home. 

After the plane ride to Canada, Levi found a place 
to stay. Then Levi called Hershel. Hershel flew to Canada 
with an empty suitcase, found Levi, and flew home. When 
they got back, Levi went into hiding under the name “Joe 


Levy.” 


27 


He married a woman named Sylvia Klempner, 
and they had a daughter named Judy. How Levi became 
a citizen, on July 2, 1964, is still a mystery. Somehow he 
came out of hiding and received all the legal documents 
he needed to use his real name, not his fake name. 

Levi died in 2009. 


Sophie Pomeranz 
Colorado, USA 


28 


The Pilot 


c. 1935 
St. Louis County, Missouri, USA 


When my step-grandfather Jim was five, he loved 
planes. His mom and dad would always take him to old 
Lambert Airport. It was a treat for him. One day at the 
airport when watching airplanes take off and land, he 
decided he would learn how to fly planes and buy his 
own. 

So for sixteen years he waited and waited to finally 
get a plane. Then when he was twenty-one years old, he 
went to old Lambert Airport and signed up for a private 
class. He took nine lessons, and on his tenth lesson the 
actual pilot said, “I am going to go get a soda. You will 
fly the plane, and you will take off three times and land 
three times.” Then the pilot left. 

Jim was very scared. Then he heard something 
on the radio. It was the control tower: “You are clear for 
takeoff.” 


Mikael Fett Schultheis 


Jim couldn’t go—he was too scared. He started 
thinking about all the bad things that could happen to 
him—like if he would get lost and never see his family 
again, or crash the plane and die. Then he heard the 
radio say again, “Sir, you need to go. There is a great big 
plane that needs to land.” 

So eventually Jim pushed on the gas and lifted 
into the air. 

He did it! He was flying! He was surprised. So he 
did what he had been told, and he lifted off and landed 
three times. 

Then he went into a room and got a paper. It was 
an examination about everything he had learned. 

Later a man came into the room and told my 
grandfather that he had passed the written part of the 
examination. Then the man took Jim outside, and they 
got into the plane. He now had to do some maneuver 
testing. He got up into the air and did all the maneuvers 
very well. They were up there for about an hour. Then he 
landed the airplane and saw his instructor writing on a 
clipboard. 

Jim was nervous. Had he done something wrong? 
Then there was a moment of silence. “Congratulations. 
Here is your license.” Jim was so excited he couldn’t 
believe it. His dream had come true. 

So now his saying is “Regardless of what you do, 
never give up.” And he never did. 


Tripp Gatch 
Missouri, USA 


30 


The Storm That Erased a World 


September 21, 1938 
Watch Hill, Rhode Island, USA 


It was a perfect afternoon—September 21, 1938— 
as my grandmother, eight-year-old Cathy Moore, was 
walking home from a perfect day at school. The wind 
blew at her strongly, but Cathy didn’t think about it. 
When she got home, her mother was talking to her father 
urgently. 

“What’s wrong, Mother?” Cathy inquired. 

Her mother knit her eyebrows, looking out the 
window. “Jim is here.” She paused. “His family is not 
with him.” 

Just then Jim, their neighbor, burst into the 
house. “My family is all gone—all gone, Catherine,” he 
said to Cathy’s mother. 

Cathy realized the winds had picked up. The 
house was shaking. She was going to point it out to her 
mother when the storm struck. The Great Hurricane of 
1938* was beginning its path of pure destruction. 

Cathy and her family bolted up the stairs to the 
attic as a wall of water swept into the first floor. Cathy 
watched as her father tried to hold the door closed against 
the sea. It was the first time she believed that her father 
couldn’t protect her from everything—not everything. 

The whole room shook, but to Cathy it felt like 
the world was splitting apart. The four walls around her 


* This hurricane, which hit without warning, has been called the greatest weather 
disaster ever to hit Long Island and New England, killing more than 600 people and 
permanently redrawing coastlines. 


31 


broke, leaving behind only the floor, with slippery pipes 
sticking out. Her family members desperately held on to 
the pipes as they were thrown into the angry sea on their 
attic-floor raft. 

“Hello, Polly! Hello, Polly!” Cathy's pet parrot 
flew down to their raft, joining the family. Cathy cried 
when she realized her dogs had not come with them. 

Geoffrey, her older brother, yelled, shaking her 
out of sadness immediately. “Sharks! I can see sharks!” 
he cried out. Just like he said, two hammerheads were 
circling their makeshift raft. Cathy wondered if they were 
there because the storm blew them in, or if they followed 
the scent of blood. She didn’t want to find out. 

After several terrifying hours, her father sighted 
land. They didn’t know it, but they had drifted from their 
home in Watch Hill, Rhode Island, to Barn Island, just off 
of Connecticut. Cathy was exhausted after their desperate 
paddling had pulled them to the island. She sank to the 
ground just to realize there was uncomfortable, scratchy 
straw beneath her. She and her family looked back 
on where they had come from. They saw a glow in the 
distance. The fires of New England lit up the eerie, silent 
night. 

Cathy woke to find her family shouting for rescue. 
Geoffrey discovered a shard of broken mirror in the 
rubble. He sent up SOS signals by catching the sunlight 
on the mirror. A fisherman in a small beaten-up rowboat 
saw the signals, came to the island, and took everyone to 
the mainland. Cathy’s home was in pieces. 

The Great Hurricane of 1938 passed, and in its 
wake stood nothing. It was the storm that erased my 
grandmother’s world. 

Dede Driscoll; Alabama, USA 


Kicked Out of Home 


c. 1940 
Lydda, Palestine 


My grandmother Rose Fawal was kicked out of 
her hometown, Lydda, Palestine, now known as “Lod 
Airport,” when she was only six years old. 

Rose was one of nine children, and her father was 
a merchant. He was saving up money to be able to build 
a big house large enough for his whole family. It took a 
while, but one day he finally did. 

When the war* broke out, Israeli soldiers barged 
into their house, put guns to their heads, and said if 
they did not give them the second floor of their house 
for a lookout, then they would shoot the family. Since 
her father was unarmed, he gave in. Rose was worried, 
because “bad guys” were staying with their family and 
she couldn’t do anything about it. 

A week or two later the soldiers came from the 
upstairs and devastated the whole family by saying, 
“Give us the whole house, or youre all dead.” The whole 
family stood frozen and frightened, watching their father 
think and worry. 

Still unarmed, her father hesitated and said, 
“Please don’t take our home. We worked so hard for it.” 

But the soldiers refused violently. 

Rose’s father decided that he would rather his 
family be alive but have to move, than be dead. He was 
furious. He went to grab a mattress so that on their long 


* Israelis and Palestinians fought because both believed they were entitled to the 
same land. 


33 


trip they would have a place to stop and sleep, and olive 
oil so they could cook on their way. 

But the Israeli soldiers said they couldn’t take 
anything. They also said that Rose’s father couldn't take 
his truck, because they wanted it. And they didn’t want 
the family on the highway, clogging up the way. 

Rose’s father was so angry that he opened his 
pocketknife and sliced open the can of olive oil. The 
soldiers gave him a dirty look. Reluctantly, he got his 
family gathered and started on the road to Ramallah. 

My grandmother and her siblings wanted to stay 
and build another house in Lydda, but they moved for 
their lives. They were headed toward the road, but the 
soldiers said they had to take the mountains. 

As they were walking out of the house, Rose was 
still confused—not positive what had just happened and 
not sure what would happen next. She walked out and 
asked her mom, “Mama? Where are we going?” 

Her mother sighed and responded, “I don’t know.” 

They walked up and down the mountains and 
passed pregnant women, babies, and elders who didn’t 
make it. Rose was worried that she wouldn’t make it. My 
grandmother and her siblings didn’t want to leave, but 
they did it for their lives. 

When they got to Ramallah, they started their life 
all over. After thirteen years the war got worse. It was 
time to leave Palestine altogether and go to America. 
Even though my grandmother would have preferred 
to stay in Palestine, desperate times call for desperate 
measures. 


Ella Hartman 
Alabama, USA 


34 


Passing By 


c. 1940s 
Warsaw, Poland; 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA 


My great-great-great grandfather lived in Warsaw, 
Poland. He saved up money to send his wife and children 
to the United States to have a better life, but he did not 
have enough money to send himself. He stayed behind in 
Poland and saved up more money so he could later move 
to the United States. 

In the United States my great-great-great-grandma 
got tired of waiting. She saved up money to visit my 
great-great-great-grandfather as a surprise. By this time 
in Poland my great-great-great-grandfather had saved 
up enough money to move to the United States to be with 
his family. My great-great-great-grandparents were on 
separate ships and crossed each other’s paths at sea but 
did not even know it. 


Ww 
Molly Andersen 


My great-great-great-grandma got to Poland and 
found out that my great-great-great-grandfather had 
gone to the United States. She could no longer go back to 
be with him because of the Iron Curtain.* 

Before my great-great-great-grandparents had left 
the United States and Poland, they had written letters to 
each other, saying that they would be coming to be with 
each other. However, back then it took several months 
for the mail to travel overseas, so my great-great-great- 
grandparents did not receive the letters before they left 
to get on the ships to go where they were going. My great- 
great-great-grandparents never saw each other again. 

Makayla Matvick 
Minnesota, USA 


* Iron Curtain is the name for the blocking of contact between people in Communist 
and non-Communist countries in Europe from 1945 to 1990. It was not a physical 
curtain. 


36 


The Great School Escape 


1941 
Overland, Missouri, USA 


Helen Meives lived across the street from her 
school and church. “Presentation” was the name of her 
parish. I want to tell you a story about Helen—and when 
living across the street from school had its disadvantages. 

Helen’s first day of school was full of excitement. 
It was difficult to be quiet when she was surrounded by 
all of her friends. 

“Delores! What are you eating for lunch today?” 
Helen asked her best friend. Sister Justa Marie’s eyes 
met Helen’s in the middle of her question. Helen froze 
and then flashed an innocent smile. 

“Whew!” thought Helen, dodging that bullet. 

Grabbing Jimmy’s flashy new pencil, Helen tried 
to whisper, “Nice pencil, Jimmy. Where’d you get it?” 

A large, but gentle, hand rested on Helen’s left 
shoulder. A whisper said in Helen’s ear, “Helen, please 
stop talking.” It was the voice of Sister Justa Marie. 

Helen apologized and promised to not talk, but 
she wondered if Delores would like to walk home with her 
after school. She would ask her just one more question, 
and then she would not talk for the rest of the year. 

“Pssst! Delores. How about walking home with 
me?” Delores’s eyes almost popped out of her head. 
“Well?” Helen continued to wait for an answer. 

Sister had been standing right behind Helen 
the entire time. “Um, Helen. You will have to stay after 
school a little while for talking too much.” 


37 


be 


iE i the 
Nguyet Nguyen 


The class lined up at dismissal with Sister Justa 
Marie leading. Helen stayed at her desk nervously. When 
the rest of the class exited, Helen made a dash for the 
back door, toward her home. Helen zoomed straight to 
her closet and closed the door behind her. 

Ding! Dong! Mrs. Meives stopped her laundry to 
open the door to find Sister Justa Marie on the porch. “Is 
Helen here?” 

“No. Isn’t she at school?” Mrs. Meives asked in a 
concerned way. 

Ed, Helen’s little brother, came running into the 
room yelling, “She’s in her closet! She’s in her closet!” 

Sister explained to Mrs. Meives, “I’m sorry, but 
I have to bring Helen back to my classroom. She was a 
little too chatty today and must stay after. She may look 
through her books at her desk while I grade some papers 
and clean up.” 

Helen wound up leaving her closet on her own and 
walked back to school holding Sister Justa Marie’s hand. 


38 


She realized, on the walk back to school, that living right 
across the street might not be all that it is cracked up to 
be. She may be able to get to class faster than anyone 
else, but her teacher can get to her house faster, too! 


Helen Ann Stone, granddaughter of Helen Meives 
Missouri, USA 


39 


Raining Bombs 


December 7, 1941 
Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, USA 


Imagine: It’s a chilly day in early December. 
The cloudy sky shadows above as you notice the palm 
trees, wet with dew and rain from the day before. Your 
pregnant mother is hanging washed garments on the 
clothesline to dry as you and your two-year-old brother 
watch with boredom. Your father, a doctor for wounded 
soldiers at the U.S. Naval Base near your home in Pearl 
Harbor, Hawaii, is getting ready for work. It’s December 
7, 1941, a day that changes the world forever, and you are 
in the worst place possible. 

The previous paragraph describes that tragic 
morning from my grandfather’s point of view—the 
morning Japan attacked Pearl Harbor and launched 
America into World War II. My grandfather was only five 
years old at the time, but miraculously he and his family 
lived through it all. 

On that day, at approximately 7:55 a.M., my great- 
grandmother looked up from hanging clothes and saw 
white planes flying above, with large red dots on their 
wings. Originally from the South, and with poor vision, 
she mistakenly cried out, “Look, Carl! Some planes are 
here with some Florida oranges!” 

My great-grandfather Carl ran out and saw the 
planes, immediately realizing they were Japanese. He 
grabbed his children and wife, and took them inside 
while the first bomb dropped. There were screams, but 
he didn’t flinch; he wanted to keep his family safe. He 


40 


gathered up all the mattresses in the house and piled 
them onto his family. Also, giving his wife a gun, he 
said, “If the Japanese come for you, shoot the kids and 
yourself. It'll be better than becoming slaves for them.” 

By now, my grandfather, his brother, and his 
mother had all grasped the awfulness of the situation. 
The young boys were both in tears, and she was shaking. 

Carl had to leave, because he knew that the 
injured needed him, so he kissed his family one last time, 
knowing he may never see them again. “I love you” was 
all they heard as he dashed out the door. 

Immediately the pregnant mother started feeding 
her children and herself, because she knew there was 
a chance they wouldn’t eat again for a long time if they 
were captured by the Japanese. Once they were all 
stuffed, they huddled down into the mattress mass 
again. They waited there for hours, listening to the 
screams and gunshots and every other violent sound you 
could think of. 

Finally they heard someone walk in. My great- 
grandmother shakily reached for the gun and prepared to 
shoot her firstborn child—when they heard their names 
being called in a familiar, warm voice. It was Carl! 

He was reunited with his family. He knew they 
couldn’t live in Hawaii anymore, so he moved his family 
to the safest place possible that he knew of—Huntsville, 
Alabama. My grandfather, his wife, and some of my 
cousins still live there today. 


Anna Cathryn Brown 
Alabama, USA 


41 


Sugar, Stamps, Bikes, and Metal 


1942 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA 


I was eight, and it was the time of World War II. 
This is the story of one week of my life when my country, 
the United States, was fighting. My name is Al Siwak. If I 
had written a diary, this is how it might have read. 


July 1, 1942 


Today my friends and I collected metal. We 
knocked on doors of the houses in our neighborhood 
and asked for anything metal: chicken wire, tin cans, 
or aluminum foil from gum wrappers, which we saved 
in balls till they were large enough to be collected. 
Then a truck drove by, and we put all the metal 
in the truck. The truck driver takes the metal to a 
collection site, from where it is used to build tanks, 
ships, planes, and bombs for the war that’s going on. 
My friends and I plan to do this every day until the 
war stops. 


July 2, 1942 
What’s really a problem is that most of the metal 
our country has is being used for weapons, not for cars, 


so my parents can’t buy a car, even though they want 
to. Also, we are only allowed to buy a certain amount 


42 


of food, because the government is sending most food to 
the soldiers. We have to use food stamps to buy meat, 
tea, cheese, and sugar. Once our food stamps are 
gone, we can’t buy that kind of food anymore.* I am 
craving a big, meaty, delicious steak. Ugh... 


July 3, 1942 


Today my mom sent me to the store with a 
sugar stamp to buy sugar. I couldn’t wait to taste 
my mom’s brownies! I was on my way, skipping, when 
the stamp fell down on the concrete sidewalk. I 
didn’t notice that I had dropped the stamp, so I kept 
skipping to the store to get the sugar. I went down 
the aisle, pulled the sugar down, and happily walked 
to the checkout lane. 

The clerk said, “Where’s your stamp?” 

I reached into my pocket, and it wasn’t there. 
“I’m sure I had it!” I cried. 

But the clerk said no. So I sadly put back the 
sugar and walked home with my head down. I told my 
mom my story, and I guess that’s the end of brownies. 


July 4, 1942 


Today is the day I’m old enough to ride a 
bicycle. It’s my birthday! But all metal is being used 


* Each person was allowed a certain amount of each rationed food per month. 


43 


for weapons, so I thought I wouldn’t get one. But then 
Grandpa Dave found somebody to make a bicycle for 
me out of used bicycle parts. Grandpa Dave is a little 
worried that it won’t hold up, but I’m not. I love my 
new orange bicycle, and I’m so excited to get outside 
and show my friends. 


That’s a week of my ordinary life during World 
War II. Now I’m a grandfather myself, and I just bought 
my granddaughter a new pink bike. And I told her these 
stories, which she has written here. 


Natalie Rose Schuver 
Missouri, USA 


=) 
beep Wig 
KBr oO \ 
isa 


BY: Say og fH) f FG = { , 
W!VW®AVMDE ILL 


Maggie Morse 


44 


Saved by the Blink of a Statue’s Eye 


1942-1944 
Mosciska, Poland 


Close your eyes and imagine having to live in a 
small, dirty, bug-infested hole in the ground with seven 
other people for two years. 

My grandfather lived in Mosciska, Poland, in the 
1930s. His name was Mark Reches. He had a brother 
named Henry, who is my great-uncle. Their parents, 
Clara and Saul Reches, were my great-grandparents, and 
this is their story. 

In the fall of 1942 the Germans decided it was 
time to free Mosciska of all Jews. My great-grandmother 
knew the Germans were coming and that she had to 
make a game plan. 

She went to her neighbors, who had a farm, and 
asked if her neighbors’ family could hide them. The 
neighbors said, “We have to ask our mom, and she will 
get back to you next week.” 

My great-grandmother knew there was no time 
and that she needed to have an answer right away. She 
ran home. The next day she layered herself with her 
furry, warm coats. She was going to use the coats to bribe 
the people to let them stay. 

When she got there, she asked the girls if she could 
speak to their mother right away. The mother, Rosallia, 
said, “As a good Christian, I want to do the right thing. 
I stayed up all night and prayed to the Virgin Mary for 
advice. When the eyes of the statue blinked at me, I knew 
that the Virgin Mary was telling me I had to hide you.” 


45 


There were two other people, a brother and a 
sister, who found out that my family was going to be 
hidden and insisted they come along in order to survive. 
The brother owned a watch store, and it was going to 
come in handy. 

On the way to the farm they were caught by 
soldiers. The brother rolled up his sleeves and bribed 
the soldiers with the watches. The soldiers said, “Go with 
G-d,*” and let them continue on. 

By the time the beautiful sun rose, they had all 
made it safely to the farm. No Germans in sight. 

Rosallia did not know where she was going to hide 
them. My great-grandmother insisted that she could dig 
a hole in the barn. That is how the nearly two years in the 
hole began. 

There were eight people that lived in the hole: my 
great-grandparents, my grandfather, my great-uncle, my 
other great-grandmother Rivka Gerber, my other great- 
uncle Mordechai Gerber, and the neighbors who were 
brother and sister. 

They suffered in the cramped, dark hole. They 
could only sit, not stand. The bathroom was a bucket 
that was emptied every night. Sometimes it wasn’t safe 
to empty it, so they left it, and the smell was unbelievably 
bad. 

After almost two years, in July of 1944, the 
Russians marched into Mosciska and freed the Jews. 
They freed Mosciska of German control. All eight people 
that were hiding survived this horrific experience. 


Yaakov Reches 
Maryland, USA 
* This incomplete spelling is a show of respect. 


46 


Bravery in Battle and Beyond 


c. 1943 
Germany 


My great-grandfather Murray Dronsky was a 
United States soldier in World War II. He entered the 
army when he was only eighteen years old, in 1943. He 
was a foot soldier in the 86th Infantry Division of the 
army, the Blackhawks. He fought against the Japanese 
in the Philippine Islands and the Germans in Europe. In 
Germany he liberated the Dachau concentration camp 
and captured Hitler’s hideaway in Berchtesgaden, where 
Hitler spent most of his time during the war. My great- 
grandfather was awarded the Purple Heart medal for 
being wounded while fighting and received the Bronze 
Star medal for bravery in battle. 

One very scary morning in Germany, Murray and 
his fellow soldiers were ready for another dangerous day 
in the beaming hot sun. The sky was gold with a few blue 
stripes through the clouds. The men got in their army 
jeep. Everything was quiet until they turned the corner. 
Something very frightening caught their tired eyes. It 
was a fire from a German bomb. Immediately they knew 
what was going to happen. They saw a German sniper 
aiming at them, so they quickly jumped out of the jeep to 
go under it to protect themselves. It was too late, because 
as Murray got out of the car, he got shot in his behind 
and suddenly dropped to the rocky ground. He was able 
to crawl under the jeep so he would not get shot again. A 
German soldier was sent to make sure that none of the 
U.S. Army soldiers were still alive. As the German soldier 


47 


came up to Murray, they locked eyes. Then the German 
soldier turned around and told his commander that all of 
the soldiers were dead. Murray thought, “Maybe not all 
the Germans are bad after all.” 

Murray was eventually taken to a safe place, where 
he waited with other wounded soldiers to be taken to the 
hospital. They were sitting around a campfire. Suddenly, 
a German bomb fell in the middle of them and killed all 
of the soldiers, except for Murray, right in front of his 
eyes. Luckily, Murray jumped back as soon as the bomb 
fell and did not get injured. By the time the bus got him 
to the hospital, his wound was already closed, and the 
bullet stayed in his body for the rest of his life. 

After the war was over, Murray stayed in Germany 
to help translate for the American army in the displaced 
persons camps, because he spoke Yiddish. When he got 
home, he married Marion Davidowitz and had three 
children. He was involved in organizations that helped 
Holocaust survivors, and he became a post commander 
in the Jewish War Veterans. 

Some people think that the Germans were 
responsible for the Holocaust, but Murray felt that the 
Nazis were the ones who were responsible and not all of 
the German people. He traveled back to Germany many 
times in his life. 

I am very proud to be the great-granddaughter of 
a Jewish American hero. 


Nili Hefetz 
Maryland, USA 


48 


The Miracle That Gave Me Life 


April 8, 1945 
Mannheim, Germany 


Miracles can happen anytime, anywhere. We 
can see them if we just take the time to look for them. 
One miracle can change the destiny of many lives. The 
miracle that certainly affected my life is the story of how 
my grandpa survived World War II. 

It was a normal spring day on April 8, 1945. My 
grandpa Bernard Bermel was with the American troops 
about forty miles from Mannheim, Germany. They were 
chasing the German soldiers through brush and fields. 
Grandpa was near the front of the line. He was assigned 
to carry a “BAR” with a tripod. (This was a Browning 
Automatic Rifle.) It was heavy, it could shoot many 
shells, and it could shoot them fast. The Germans always 
tried to shoot the soldier carrying this gun, since it could 
do a lot of damage to their troops. 

It was around 5:00 p.m. when an enemy’s bullet 
hit Grandpa’s shell clip. The bullet went through his hip 
and stomach, and then lodged close to his spine. Grandpa 
fell to the ground, bleeding to death. A medic treated his 
wound by trying to stop the bleeding. When the medic 
was done, he warned Grandpa not to move or he may 
start bleeding again and could die. He said someone was 
coming to get another soldier and assured Grandpa that 
they would get him, too. 

Grandpa lost consciousness. When he woke up, 
the sun was up, and there was a foggy mist hovering 
around the clearing he was in. Off in the distance he saw 


49 


several deer. Grandpa thought he had died and was in 
heaven. It didn’t take long for his pain to kick in and for 
him to realize he was alive. He figured he had been lying 
there for about fifteen hours, and he realized that there 
wasn’t anyone coming back to get him. He had been left 
on the battlefield to die. Remembering that the medic 
had told him not to move and risk dying, he had to make 
a decision. He could lie there and die, or get up and try to 
find someone to help him. 

Grandpa got up, and for three fourths of a mile 
he pushed himself from tree to tree until he came to a 
road. He saw people and cried out for help. Thankfully, 
they were friends instead of enemies, and they got him 
to a makeshift hospital, where they performed surgery 
and saved his life. When he was well enough to travel, 
he was shipped back to the United States. Grandpa was 
honorably discharged from the army and was given the 
Purple Heart medal. 

It was a miracle that Grandpa didn’t bleed to 
death on the battlefield almost seven decades ago. If he 
had, I would not be here today to tell you this amazing 
story. It fills me with pride to be the granddaughter of 
such a brave, honorable, and wonderful man. 


Megan Trushenski 
Minnesota, USA 


50 


Living with the Enemies 


c. 1946 
Guangdong Province, China 


It was quiet as it had always been. The bright 
summer sun was shining down on the village in 
Guangdong Province, China, in 1946. Little Ting Lee, 
my grandfather, was being a regular infant, crawling on 
the dirt floor and babbling in baby language. Suddenly, 
screaming and yelling sounded from the village, and Ying 
Jung, my great-grandmother, peered out of the wooden 
door. Fear and worry flooded her face as she ran to her 
son, gathering him in her arms. She ran to a corner of the 
small four-roomed house and heard muffled shouting 
occurring again in Japanese. 

With an unexpected blow the door burst open, 
several soldiers standing in the doorway. They each wore 
a long coat with a cap and dirt-covered leather boots. 

“Spare me and my son!” Ying Jung shouted with 
panic and terror. The Japanese soldiers looked at her 
and my grandfather Ting Lee intently, a soft expression 
crossing their faces as they scanned the mother and her 
child. Expecting a punishment for her outburst, Ying 
Jung cowered, protecting her son—but instead, the 
soldiers walked towards the two and bent before Ting 
Lee, reaching out to his pint-sized face. 

“Look at his little face,” one said in Japanese. 
They laughed as he rolled out of his mother’s arms, 
crawling towards them. Ying Jung shouted for her son to 
return, reaching out for him, but he just kept crawling to 
the soldiers, who were viewed as dangerous and deadly 


51 


by his mother. The soldiers continued to laugh, picked 
Ting Lee up, and turned him back to his mother. Ying 
felt relief wash over her, but at the same time, confusion. 
She questioned why these soldiers were so amiable 
towards her and her son, as they were supposed to be 
the hazardous invaders. With Ting Lee in her arms, 
she slowly walked to the kitchen, aware of the soldiers 
watching her every move. They followed, their weapons 
clinking at their side, and filled the small home. 

They cooked for themselves, respected the 
furniture and the house, and wondrously, didn’t harm 
Ying or her son. For approximately a month, they did the 
same thing: cook, eat, and play with little Ting Lee, while 
occupying the home. Maybe the soldiers weren’t really 
as murderous as people implied they were, or maybe it 
was luck. Although nobody in my family knows why the 
soldiers acted the way they did, they are grateful. 


Melina Huang 
New Jersey, USA 


52 


The Basketball Hoop 


c. 1950 
Oran, Missouri, USA 


If you want to play basketball, you have to practice 
constantly, and you have to have a basketball hoop. When 
my grandpa was in grade school, he wanted a basketball 
hoop. He could not go buy one at the store, so Grandpa 
decided to make his own hoop. My grandpa knew he 
could make a backboard and a rim for the basketball 
hoop, but was not sure how to construct a pole to hold it 
up. 

The next day at school, Grandpa thought and 
thought, but he could not come up with a solution until 
he told his friend. My grandpa’s friend had a good idea. 
He said, “I tell you what. Come over to my farm on 
Saturday, and we'll cut down a tree to make a pole.” 

On Saturday, Grandpa went to his friend’s farm. 
The farm was big, with wide farmland and deep woods. 
My grandpa and his friend searched the woods for the 
perfect tree. There were many trees, but none of them 
were good for a basketball pole. They kept looking at 
trees of all different sizes—big ones and short ones—until 
they found the perfect tree. 

Grandpa and his friend got a handsaw and sawed 
it down. It took a long time to saw it, but it worked! 
They picked up the tree and carried it a long way out 
of the woods. When Grandpa and his friend finally left 
the woods, they put the perfect tree in a carriage, and 
a horse pulled it to Grandpa’s house. Grandpa’s friend 
charged him only three dollars for the pole. My grandpa 


53 


was really excited when he got the tree to use for the pole 
of the basketball hoop. 

The very next day, Grandpa was going to finally 
put up the hoop. Grandpa cut out a square piece of wood 
for the backboard and painted lines on it. He used a 
round piece of metal for the rim and some netting for the 
net. My grandpa had his dad help him put up the pole 
and connect the backboard to it. 

The basketball hoop was finally finished! My 
grandpa got out his basketball and took a shot. He 
missed, but that’s what practice is for, isn’t it? 


Zach Stehr 
Missouri, USA 


54 


,’ A 


April Turner 


Mr. Camper's “Secret” Candy Bars 


Cc. 1950 
Toledo, Ohio, USA 


I spoke to my grandma and asked if she had any 
stories to share. She has three sisters, and her mother 
lived to be ninety-eight, so I was excited to hear some 
of her history. She told me a wonderful story about 
a kind man who lived in their neighborhood. It is a 
heartwarming story, and I could see much emotion in 
my grandma as she told me about Mr. Camper. 

It was 1950, and my grandma was seven years 
old. She lived in a small, friendly neighborhood. There 
was a generous man on her block named Mr. Camper. 
He wore overalls, was round and huggable, and had gray 
hair and a laugh that was full of life. He didn’t have any 
grandchildren, but the children in the neighborhood saw 
him as a grandpa and respected him and Mrs. Camper. 
They would share their large garden with the neighbors, 
and whenever the circus was in town, he would take the 
neighborhood children. Everyone loved Mr. Camper, but 
he had a special place in his heart for children. 

One day when my grandma was in Mr. Camper’s 
garage, he asked her what was her favorite candy bar. 
She said it was a Baby Ruth. He told her whenever she 
wanted a Baby Ruth, she could open up the second 
drawer in his file cabinet and there would be one waiting 
for her. He told her to keep it a secret. She nodded her 
head. 

The next day, after playing, my grandma snuck 
into Mr. Camper’s wooden tool garage. She had to jerk 


56 


open the second drawer of the rusty metal file cabinet, 
because it was old. Sure enough, there was a large Baby 
Ruth on top of some old magazines. (In 1950, large candy 
bars cost five cents.) She went behind his bushes to eat 
the candy bar, then quickly shoved the wrapper into her 
pocket. For years my grandma went to the garage after 
school and on Saturday mornings after working around 
the house. No one knew their secret, and she loved the 
special treat that was just for her. 

Many years later, her older sister told her she was 
getting a Clark bar from Mr. Camper. Her secret spot 
was behind some rags in his garage. There were several 
other children getting candy bars from him, too. As my 
grandma grew up, she naturally stopped going to get her 
Baby Ruth. Recently my grandma asked her two younger 
sisters about Mr. Camper. To her surprise, they both said 
he had given them candy bars, too. 

Asan adult, my grandma remembers Mr. Camper’s 
kitchen window facing the garage. It must have been 
a joy to watch the kids come and go to get their candy 
bars. My grandma will always remember generous, kind, 
loving Mr. Camper and their secret. 


Jala Ehrenfried 
Ohio, USA 


57 


Blizzard Sunday 


1952 
near Marquette, Kansas, USA 


Saturday night was bath night. That’s the way it 
was for my grandpa when he was a boy. Growing up on 
a farm meant you worked hard—not just doing chores, 
but for the little things like bathwater. You didn’t turn on 
the faucet. There wasn’t a hot or cold knob. There was no 
running water. My grandpa pumped his own bathwater 
from an outdoor cistern, which is kind of like a modern- 
day well. He would bring in buckets of water for my great- 
grandmother to heat on the stove. The bathtub was in 
the living room. It wasn’t like the ones we have today. It 
was a large steel tub. Grandpa was lucky if he got to take 
his bath first. They didn’t have the luxury of changing the 
water between baths. Everyone shared! Bath night meant 
that Sunday was coming and it was time for church. 

Grandpa woke to a frigid and blustery Sunday 
morning in the winter of 1952. It would have been nice 
to stay cuddled in a warm, cozy bed, but it was Sunday 
and time for church. But first my grandpa had to do his 
chores, which meant going out in the cold. Living on a 
farm was hard work. You had to milk the cows and feed 
the livestock—all before the sun came up. But once he 
finished his chores, he could go to church! 

It took a long time to get to church—longer than 
most Sunday mornings because of the snow. There was 
so much snow it was hard to see the church. Grandpa’s 
church was a one-room white building that looked like 
a barn, and it blended in with the falling snow. If there 


58 


were tracks in the snow, you couldn’t see them. The 
church was on a hill, and it had snowed so much Great- 
Grandpa had to park the car at the bottom of the hill, and 
the family walked the rest of the way. That didn’t bother 
my grandpa. He was excited about the bell. Church had a 
bell tower, and every Sunday when the children arrived, 
they took turns ringing the bell. It was such a big bell 
that when you rang it and hung on to the rope, your feet 
would be lifted right off the floor. 

There was an unwritten rule that the first people 
to arrive built the fire in the wood-burning stove to heat 
the church. Dry matches, tinder, and wood were always 
waiting, so Great-Grandpa started the fire that morning. 
Slowly the church warmed, but nobody filled the pews. 
Only my grandpa and his family sat faithfully waiting 
for service to begin. Not another family joined them that 
snowy morning. A faithful servant to the end, my great- 
grandpa put out the fire in the stove and slowly drove his 
family back to the farm during the blizzard of 1952. 


Benjamin M. Brock 
Colorado, USA 


59 


Tump and the Monster of Summer 


1952 
Trussville, Alabama, USA 


His real name was Rupert, but everyone just 
called him Tump. He had raven hair and green eyes that 
were like fresh grass. My grandfather was best friends 
with him when they were in the fourth grade. Tump was 
nice, polite, wouldn’t hurt anybody’s feelings, and always 
said clever things that made people laugh. He was very 
popular, smart, and extremely fast. Someone once said 
that he was as fast as a champion racehorse running 
downhill. 

Now there was a terrible monster in those days. 
My grandfather called this monster “The Polio.” He said 
nobody was safe from The Polio. Even the president of 
the United States was attacked by this monster and left 
crippled. But most often, The Polio would attack young 
boys. Grandfather remembered that as a boy he couldn’t 
see or hear this monster, but he knew it was there. The 
Polio was actually a tiny germ that destroyed the muscles 
in your arms, legs, or sometimes both. It was horrible 
if it got in your chest muscles, because that meant that 
you would have to be put in an iron lung, a machine that 
breathed for you. People who had to get in an iron lung 
would usually have to stay in one their whole life. 

In 1952 The Polio was worse than ever. Everyone’s 
parents kept their children inside and would not let them 
go outside or even play with friends the whole summer. 
There were no parties, sports, or even sleepovers. Still, 
almost 58,000 people in the United States were caught 


60 


by The Polio that summer—and Tump was one of them. 
When my grandfather returned to school, Tump wasn’t 
there. 

Months passed, and finally Tump came to school 
in his father’s arms. My grandfather said that he looked 
like a puppet without strings, and he could hardly speak 
or even move. There was no football, soccer, running—or 
any sports—for Tump. The fastest kid in school would 
never run again. 

As horrible as it was, it was the beginning of the 
end for polio. My grandfather said that not a single kid in 
school got it the next year, and soon doctors had a vaccine 
that defeated The Polio forever. Tump completed school 
and became a skilled artist, but the best thing was that 
he never lost his ability to say clever things that made 
people laugh. 


Drennen Weems 
Alabama, USA 


61 


Spudnut Saturday 


Cc. 1954 
Tampa, Florida, USA 


Back then, in 1954, everything was good in 
Tampa, Florida. Gas was 20 cents per gallon. Candy bars 
and Coca-Cola were 5 cents, and cars were 1,500 dollars. 
Everybody wanted that kind of stuff. Everybody had a 
job, too. You either worked with your parents or in the 
yard, or did chores. TV didn’t even come on till 4:00 P.M. 
It was always funny, too—no murder shows or survival 
shows, not to mention it was in black and white. That’s 
when a well-known paperboy got an idea. 

Every Saturday was payday for the little paper- 
route boy, who was only around ten years old at the time. 
He rode around on his Schwinn bike, and threw one of 
his forty to forty-five customers a newspaper. The lady 
caught him. At first he thought that she was going to yell 
at him because he had thrown the paper at her bushes, 
but instead she asked the boy to go buy her a Spudnut if 
she gave him some money. A Spudnut is like a doughnut, 
but it’s made out of potatoes. So he thought, “Why not?” 
When he came back from the local corner store called 
“Mom-and-Pop,” she gave him a quarter. 

Back then, a quarter would be like 2 dollars now. 
The Spudnuts didn’t cost that much. That’s when the 
little paperboy got an idea: If he sold Spudnuts on every 
Saturday morning, he’d have a fortune. So he did. He 
wasn’t afraid to ask anybody anything. So when he went 
to deliver his paper to his customers and asked if they 
wanted any Spudnuts, most of them said yes. So every 


62 


Steven Griggs 


Saturday morning he’d go to the corner store, buy some 
Spudnuts by the dozen, and sell them to his customers. 
He made about 10 dollars a week and was known as the 
kid with all the money. 

His brothers were jealous of him because he had 
all the money. So when they wanted something, they 
went to him. The little salesman still works as a salesman 
at a local car dealership today. That’s the story of how my 
grandpa sold Spudnuts to make money. 


Audrey Herman 
Ohio, USA 


63 


The Police Circus 


Cc. 1957 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA 


It all started when a friend of my great-grandpa’s 
invented trampolines. My grandma had the first 
trampoline in the St. Louis area. She exploded with 
excitement and happiness. All of the neighborhood kids 
would line up to get their turns on the trampoline. Even 
my great-grandma would jump on the trampoline in 
the backyard. My grandma and her brothers and sisters 
played on the trampoline every day after school. 

My great-grandpa was a lieutenant in the St. Louis 
Police Department. He and some fellow officers were 
asked to serve on the Police Circus Board of Directors. 
Several weeks before the circus was to start, my great- 
grandpa found out that one of the acts had to cancel. He 
tried really hard to find another act to fill in, but he was 
unable to find one. He asked my grandma and her oldest 
sister to take the place of the trampolinist. My grandma 
and her oldest sister trained at the police station every 
day after school for hours at a time. 

A few months later, my grandma arrived at the 
circus, which was held at the St. Louis Arena. Because she 
was still in high school, Grandma had to take a break to 
perform. She was shocked when she saw that she got her 
own dressing room! My great-grandma could not afford 
to buy costumes, so she sewed sequins to swimsuits 
instead. My grandma talked to the world-famous Flying 
Wallendas and many other circus acts during her time 
with the circus. 


64 


Katy Montgomery 


My grandma and her sister put on a great show. 
After the show, they got to go on the trapeze and ride 
camels. Their act was so successful that they were asked 
to perform in the circus for three more years. They were 
also rewarded with two more trampolines to keep. 

After performing in the police circus, Grandma 
also had many public appearances at children’s hospitals. 
Grandma even had to perform on the busy street of 
Kingshighway while sick children watched from their 
windows. She and her sister also taught trampoline at 
summer camp for several years. 

My grandma is an amazing lady and has such 
great stories to tell. Her circus stories are my favorites. 
It’s amazing that she did all of this at such a young 
age. My grandma and two of her sisters still have the 
trampolines from the police circus, and I have jumped 
on them myself. My grandma hasn’t jumped in years, but 
she still insists she can do the tricks. 


Sean Britt 
Missouri, USA 


65 


‘Way Too Close 


c. 1960S 
Guangzhou, China 


It was a normal summer’s day in Guangzhou—the 
sun beating down on the city like a photon sledgehammer; 
the buses and cars screeching, honking; and the drivers 
raging. Little did my grandma know that my uncle would 
nearly perform the most disgusting act of his life: eating 
poo. 

Grandma was in the kitchen, steaming bok choy 
and preparing dinner. Uncle Cong was in his baby crib, 
playing with rattles and other irritatingly noisy baby toys. 
He also had a diaper on—not some fancy diaper made of 
the strongest cloth available, but a Chinese diaper, made 
out of paper. Paper. It was because Grandma, at the time, 
was in the “upper lower class.” She used to have lots of 
money from making good investments, but then came 
the Communist Party, and then some corrupt dictator 
caused massive inflation by telling the Chinese mint 
to go crazy printing cash. Anyway, those diapers were 
incredibly thin, and just about anything could penetrate 
them, especially what the diaper was meant to hold in. 
*HINT* 

Meanwhile, while Grandma was cooking, Uncle 
Cong plopped out a piece of poop. It tore through the 
diaper like a bullet through paper. Then he laughed. 
He reached out a hand to grab the poo. Then he started 
moving it toward his mouth. That was when Grandma 
turned around to see what he was laughing at. As soon as 
she saw the brown in the crib and the brown in his hands, 


66 


she screamed, “NOQOOOOOOOOOO!” Well, in Chinese, 
of course. She ran as fast as her legs could carry her, and 
when she reached the crib, she snatched up Uncle Cong, 
jostling the poop out of his hands right before he could 
eat it. Quickly turning on the water, she threw him into 
the bath to scrub him clean for the next fifteen minutes. 
Then she went back to cooking, after washing her own 
hands clean. 

It was then that Grandpa came home from his 
daily jog. “Anything exciting happen?” he questioned. 

“Nope,” Grandma replied. 


Nathan He 
New Jersey, USA 


67 


Apartheid 


1962 
Cape Town, South Africa 


Apartheid*—a policy enforced by the South 
African government separating whites from darker- 
skinned citizens. It was a word I had heard my grandpa 
Herz] say, but I never understood the full depth of it until 
he told me his story. 

In 1962 Herzl was student-body president of the 
University of Cape Town in South Africa. The one big 
problem student-body presidents faced was apartheid. 

Because the university had a lot of white and 
“Coloured”** students, Herzl had said, “My goal as 
student-body president is to see that all students be 
treated equal. Not to be excluded because they look 
different.” And that was how things happened at the 
University of Cape Town. Herzl shut down white-only 
student organizations and societies. He did this so no 
nonwhite students were excluded. He did many things; 
this was just one attempt at racial equality. 

In another major attempt, Herzl sent out 
invitations to every student leader and hundreds of 
students from all over Cape Town, asking them to join 
him in a protest against apartheid and the South African 
government. The day arrived, and not one person did not 
show. There were hundreds of students from all over with 


* Apartheid (pronounced uh-PART-hite or uh-PART-hate) involved many kinds of 
discrimination against nonwhites. 


** Tn South Africa, Coloured refers to people of mixed-race descent and does not 
suggest disrespect, as colored does in many other parts of the world. 


68 


the same goal of racial equality. Herzl got up in front of 
these hundreds and said, “I am glad you all could join me 
today; we are going to execute a legal protest. I expect that 
all of you are aware of the law that no whites and darker- 
skinned citizens are allowed to have social interactions 
within ten yards of each other. We are going to protest 
against that law. You have all been given torches; once 
we step outside, you will all light your torches. One 
person will walk exactly ten yards off campus, then stop. 
The next person of opposite race will walk ten yards past 
him and stop. This will continue to happen until we have 
a line of torches going a few miles into downtown.” 

They stepped outside, and as leader, Herzl went 
first. He lit his torch, walked ten yards, then stopped. 
Then the second person did the same. But before the 
third person could do the same, they heard WE-WOO- 
WE-WOO. “We are the police. Nobody else is to cross 
that gate.” And a cop came and cuffed the gate closed. 
“Hand the torches to me!” yelled a cop. 

“Nothing we are doing is illegal!” a student 
shouted back. 

Hours went by, but they held their ground. When 
the clock struck 1:00 A.M., four hours into their protest, a 
policeman came up, gun raised, and took the torches and 
yelled, “Go home, kids. You lost.” 

And that’s what they thought—they had lost. But 
later that night, while Herzl was in bed listening to the 
news on the radio, he heard, “Earlier tonight a student 
protest was illegally stopped. Were the police breaking 
the law?” And they had won. 


David Friedman 
Colorado, USA 


69 


The Wolbach Whale 


1966 
Wolbach, Nebraska, USA 


It is 65 feet long, weighs 70,000 pounds, and is 
112 inches in diameter. It came into town on two flat 
railroad cars. It took two days, half a dozen men, several 
tractors, and some large jacks to move it onto the cement 
cradle. It was on October 19, 1959, that my great-grandpa 
Vic Grossart installed a 30,000-gallon propane tank in 
Wolbach, Nebraska. Because it is as heavy and as huge as 
a whale, everybody thought it was permanent, stationary, 
and unmovable. 

But six years later, on August 12, 1966, Wolbach 
got a major blow from Mother Nature. Wolbach received 
a downpour of rain, resulting in a flash flood. 

When the storm hit, Great-Grandpa Vic and his 
family were on vacation in Silver Dollar City in Missouri. 
As they were all having fun, Vic happened to watch the 
television news. He was amazed to hear that Greeley 
County in Nebraska had received seventeen inches of 
rain. 

After hearing the weather report, they had to hurry 
up and get back to Wolbach to see what damage had 
been done. When they reached the tank, they discovered 
that the water had pushed the tank up onto a bank along 
the creek, south of Wolbach. The tank had 9,000 gallons 
of propane in it when the flash flood of water had come 
through and picked it up. It broke all the lines, and all of 
the gallons of propane had leaked out. That huge, heavy, 
permanent, stationary tank had moved! 


70 


As the tank had been rushing down the flooded 
creek, several people had seen it and later said, “It 
sounded like a whale!” It sounded like a whale, because 
when it was going down the river, it was turning and 
rolling. Every time the propane leak was on the top side, 
it sounded like water coming out of a whale’s blowhole, 
and when the leak was pulled under the water, it sounded 
like a whale was blowing gigantic bubbles in water. 

A few days later, my grandpa Steve, being only 
fourteen years old, had to go to the propane tank, open 
the manhole, and climb down into the tank and clean it 
out. He had to haul mud and water out, one bucketful at 
a time. Then when he finally got it cleaned out, they had 
to figure out how to get the tank back to its original spot. 
They finally had to build a road over the train track, and 
then they had to have a company out of Omaha come and 
haul the whale of a tank back. 

Finally, after doing all of that, it was back to its 
original place. The tank is still in use today. My family 
uses it in our propane business. We fill our two trucks 
with propane from the huge tank and then deliver it to 
customers’ homes and businesses. 

Now our area is suffering from a huge drought, 
but at least we don’t have to worry about our “whale” 
swimming away in a flood. 


Cade Grossart 
Nebraska, USA 


71 


Turtle Trouble 


c. 1970S 
Wayne, New Jersey, USA 


“Mom, I’m going down to the lake!” I slammed 
the door shut and rode my bike down to the curb by the 
path to the lake, about ten minutes from my house. 

“Look,” I said to myself, “there is a turtle.” I bent 
down to pick it up, and it tried to nudge me, but it missed. 
I rode home as fast as I could with the turtle in my bike 
basket. 

When I showed my mom, she shrieked with fright, 
but I asked if I could keep it anyway. She replied, “Let the 
turtle go back to the lake. If it comes back to you, you can 
keep it.” 

I decided to be smart about this, because I really 
wanted this turtle. I went up to my bedroom and put 
the turtle down. I reached over to my desk and grabbed 
a Sharpie marker. While humming to myself, I wrote 


Hannah R. Anderson 


on the turtle’s shell If lost, please return to Michael 
Singer. After that, I wrote my phone number and address. 
Before it got too dark out, I put the turtle near the curb. 
Remembering that turtles are very slow, I figured it 
should be back by the lake in the morning. 

The next day I was so exhausted from bike riding 
for so long the day before that I decided to sleep in a little 
longer. As I reached to shut off my alarm, I heard my 
mom scream, “Michael, get down here!” I would have 
taken a longer time, but she seemed really mad. 

“Is this your turtle from yesterday?” My mom 
looked like she was going to cry, she was so mad. 

I answered truthfully, “Yeah, I wrote on its shell 
so I could find it again.” 

My mom looked at me and at the guy with a black 
jacket and blue hat at the door holding the turtle. She 
told him thank you, took the turtle, and shut the door. 
My mom told me that since it came back, I could keep 
it, but I—and only I—would take care of it. I agreed and 
proudly marched up the stairs with my new pet turtle. 


Haley Singer, daughter of Michael 
New Jersey, USA 


73 


My Dad, Immigrating to the U.S. 


November 20, 1971 
Mannheim, Germany; 
Queens, New York, New York, USA 


This story is told from the view of my dad, Jim Cavezza. 


When I was only six years old, my dad, mom, and 
I moved to America. The year was 1971 when I was first 
told I was moving, and I felt very afraid, because I didn’t 
know what to expect to find in another country so far 
away from mine. I didn’t speak any English, and I was 
leaving my friends and extended family behind. 

On the plane ride to America I kept asking my 
mom, “Where will I go to school? Where will we live?” 

My mom said we would live in an apartment 
in New York City. I didn’t know how to make friends, 
because I didn’t speak English and I didn’t know how 
to play any games. I didn’t even know what games they 
played or what they were called. 

When I started school, I didn’t know what to 
do and I didn’t even understand what the teacher was 
saying. It was like I was deaf. I sat in the corner all day, 
playing with Legos and thinking, “Let me out of this 
place. I want to go home.” When school was finally let 
out for the day, I ran all the way home, not even stopping 
or looking back. 

One day I was walking back from school in the 
snow. I ran into the neighborhood bully. He was about 
fourteen years old and about six feet tall. He started 
coming after me. Eventually he cornered me. He started 
punching me and kicking me. After he knocked me down, 


74 


I had bruises everywhere. I even had a broken nose. I 
limped home, and when my mom and dad saw me, they 
almost had a heart attack. 

“Hi,” I said. 

“What in the world happened to you!” they 
exclaimed in unison. 

“The neighborhood bully cornered me and beat 
me up. He even broke my nose.” 

My dad rushed out the door and in a couple 
minutes came back with the bully. My dad started 
smacking him and saying, “If you are to touch my son 
again, I will smack you even harder and in a much more 
painful place!” My dad smacked him one more time and 
then threw him out the door. 

“All right, Dad,” I groaned. 

After a few hours had passed, there was a knock 
at the door. My dad went and opened it. There were two 
policemen, the bully, and his dad. “Um... sir, did you hit 
this man’s son?” the policeman asked. 

“Yes, and you want to know why? Come take a 
look at my son!” my dad exclaimed. My dad led them 
upstairs, where I was lying on the couch. “This is what he 
did to my son!” 

My mom was holding an ice pack over my head. 
The policeman studied me for a second and then said to 
the bully’s dad, “I’m sorry, sir, but you can’t press charges 
against this man.” 

“Of course you can’t press charges against me,” 
my dad said in a sarcastic way. After the policeman left, 
my dad took me to the hospital. I came back a few hours 
later and felt better than I had before. I even wanted to 
go back to school. I couldn’t wait for tomorrow. 


Dominic Cavezza; New Jersey, USA 


Attack of the Polar Bear 


1972 
Olenegorsk, Russia 


It was 1972 in Olenegorsk, Russia. My mother, 
Kate, was only two years old at the time. Her sister, who 
was five years old, had joined her for the most exhilarating 
sled ride down a gigantic hill! They jumped off the sled a 
little dazed, and had a massive snowball fight. After that, 
my mother’s sister forgot about her and went inside. My 
mom did not notice. 

My mom started wandering around the forest’s 
edge. She went inside the forest. When she was about ten 
feet inside, she heard two frightening booming footsteps 
behind her. She turned around, and about fifteen feet 
away from her was a startling 350-pound man-eating 
polar bear! 

She did not know what to do, so she called out 
her mother’s name. No response. Then she called out her 
father’s name a little bit louder—but still no response. 
After that, she heard the polar bear growl. She screamed 
out her sister’s name at the top of her lungs, and the bear 
roared. She started to whimper and burst into millions 
of wet tears. The polar bear finally noticed her boisterous 
crying and roared. It started coming closer little by little. 
My mom screamed and screamed, but still nobody heard 
her. 

Back at the house, everybody was worried about 
my mom outside all alone, and they started a search 
group to find her. Minutes passed, and the polar bear 
was about six feet away now. The polar bear and my 


77 


mom noticed a rustling in the bushes. Three seconds 
later a very angry mob of about six to seven people came 
screaming and swatting the bear away. The monstrous 
polar bear stood up on its hind legs, roared at the top of 
its lungs, and ran away as fast as a bull. 

The angry mob went over to my mom, picked her 
up, and cheered as loud as they could! My mom, along 
with the angry mob of people, paraded back to the house 
in a triumphant march. They ate a glorious breakfast 
that included warm boiled eggs and sizzling bacon. 

When my mom told me this story, I was in shock 
for a long time, because it is extremely rare to be seen 
and almost attacked by a polar bear. If the angry mob of 
people had been just one minute later, my mom would 
have been an angry polar bear’s breakfast. 


Daniel Volobuev 
Missouri, USA 


78 


The Kmart Disaster 


c. 1975 
Des Plaines, Illinois, USA 


It was my uncle’s senior year in high school. For 
eight months he had been working for Kmart. Little 
did he know what was in store for him one day. He was 
working in the gardening department. He was stacking 
cement mix with a forklift.* That was when it all started. 

When my uncle was on the forklift, he put the 
forklift too high, and it hit the water pipe. SPLASH! 
The water came out! Since it was winter in Chicago, the 
water had green water-freeze protection. “Nooooo!” 
screamed my uncle. “I am going to lose my job.” He ran 
to the emergency phone. “We have an emergency!” he 
screamed. That was when he saw that hitting the pipe 
had turned on the water sprinklers. That would not have 
been so bad if they hadn’t been going off in the whole 
store. The green water was spraying everywhere. 

My uncle ran out the door just in time to see two 
fire trucks, two cop cars, an ambulance, and his father. 
Surprisingly, his father had been driving by when he 
saw the incident. He wanted to see what had happened. 
“What happened here?” said the fireman. 

“It’s a long story,” said my uncle. 

Of course, he lost his job a week later. He ended 
up ruining all the products in the store. The whole cost 
was over a million dollars, but he was not charged for the 
merchandise, because it was an accident. 


* A forklift is a machine with fork-like prongs used to lift and move heavy objects. 


79 


The reason I tell this story is because if you ever 
have an “accident,” it won’t be as bad as this. You should 
never feel bad for a mistake like this. It happens to the 
best of us. Despite this, my uncle grew up to be the dean 
of Stanford University for twelve years. 


P.S. In his next job he dropped a knife in a meat grinder. 


Shaun Slamowitz 
Colorado, USA 


80 


Stuck to the Ground 


1978 
Oakville, Missouri, USA 


It was a sunny day in May 1978. The birds were 
chirping, the lawns on Sky Hill Drive in Oakville, 
Missouri, were all green from the April showers. A 
mischievous eight-year-old boy named Bryan Lucas had 
just told a doozy of a lie at his Catholic grade school, and 
it was on this day that the “coin prank” became legendary. 

Before Bryan was read his rights by his mom (my 
grandma) he was asked to bring the brown trash can up 
from the curb. As Bryan walked to the side of the house, 
breathing in the fresh air for his last time for the next 
couple days, he suddenly had a brilliant idea. Bryan 
would have some fun while being “grounded.” 

Bryan went into the garage with a smirk on his 
face. He proceeded to grab superglue out of the rusty 
old toolbox and a quarter out of his mom’s powder blue 
Chevette. Walking proudly, chest out, Bryan strolled 
down the sidewalk. Bryan squirted a big glob of glue onto 
the bumpy concrete. Next he pressed the quarter into 
the glue with all his might. Bryan stood up and brushed 
his hands together as if he had succeeded at the biggest 
prank ever. 

When Bryan went back into the house, he happily 
went back to his room to begin his grounding sentence. 
At this point, Bryan had no idea how long he was going 
to be grounded, but he knew his entertainment for the 
duration of the sentence. With his green eyes focused on 
the sidewalk, with the quarter shining in the sunlight, 


81 


Bryan awaited his first victim. Bryan had a great eye- 
level view from his bedroom as he sat in his beanbag 
chair. 

A person came by and noticed the quarter, bent 
over, and picked and picked, trying to grab the lucky 
coin. No luck. Then more and more children and adults 
came by—people walking their dogs, kids stopping on 
their bikes—all attempting to become twenty-five cents 
richer and luckier. Some people shook their head and 
laughed when they realized the coin was a prank. 

My grandma heard lots of laughter coming from 
Bryan’s room and could not imagine what he was up to 
now. Grandma went into his room, and Bryan confessed 
to his latest prank. Grandma was unable to be mad, 
because she thought it was a pretty clever idea. Bryan 
did receive a lecture and a threat to never lie at school 
again. Bryan and my grandma sat together looking out 
the window with their dog Pepper by their side, enjoying 
the entertainment of all who walked by. 


Hailey Peterson, niece of Bryan 
Missouri, USA 


82 


A Miscommunication 


c. 1984 
Guangdong Province, China 


It was the winter break of my dad’s junior year 
in high school and the time to join his parents, who had 
gone to Foshan to visit his ailing grandparents. 

His parents’ friend bought the ticket for him and 
sent a telegraph to Foshan about the arrival time. At 
age fifteen, it was going to be my dad’s first time on a 
train all by himself. He took a very thick book and fifteen 
pounds of tangerines with him, which were from his 
mom’s workplace and signified good luck for the coming 
Chinese New Year. 

The twenty-hour train ride was smooth, but he 
could not fall asleep, because there wasn’t room to lie 
down. To keep himself busy, he read the book, written by 
Mikhail Sholokhov. 

Finally he arrived at the Guangzhou station. 
Pushing and shoving through crowds of people, he 
craned his neck to search for his parents. He knew exactly 
where to expect them, since he had gone through this 
train station several times with his parents on vacations. 
After being jostled by countless people passing through 
the station, he finally got to the exit. They weren’t there! 

“Maybe the traffic is bad,” he thought. 

Trains came and went in a flash, and so did crowds 
of people. A long, hopeful hour and a half later, there 
was still no sign of his parents. He was getting anxious. 
Searching his memory, he vaguely remembered how to 
get to Foshan, which was twenty miles away. He started 
to ask almost everyone he came upon. 


Several confusing bus transfers later, he finally 
got to where the buses to Foshan were supposed to be. 
They were gone! People told him that the bus station 
had been moved to the west end of the city, because the 
city’s center couldn’t handle the heavy flow of holiday 
passengers. Suddenly, it started raining, and he had no 
umbrella. He was soaked and was stuck with two not- 
so-attractive backpacks, making him look almost like a 
hobo! 

An hour later at the western suburb, my dad was 
once again disappointed. The last bus had just left, and 
it was getting dark. He was starting to think of how to 
spend the night in the city when some motorcyclists 
came and offered people rides. My dad had seen these 
makeshift taxis many times before but didn’t know if he 
could trust them. In addition, they were asking for twelve 
dollars, whereas the bus fare was two dollars. With no 
other choice he decided to “roll the dice.” 

My dad didn’t know his uncle’s address but 
remembered howto get there from the small town’s main 
theater. After the ride in pouring rain, he finally got to his 
uncle’s house and could soak his aching feet in boiling 
hot water. As it turned out, his uncle had misunderstood 
the telegraph and thought he would arrive the next day. 

My dad would never forget that long rainy day, 
the feeling of growing up, and being able to handle the 
unexpected. 


Rebecca Tan 
Missouri, USA 


84 


The Game- Winning Shot 


1984 
Spalding, Nebraska, USA 


My dad came to the basketball game like it was 
like any other game. But it wasn’t. It was the district 
finals—the game that determined which team would go 
to the state tournament. 

Dad’s team, the Greeley Bulldogs, was playing 
their archrival, Spalding Academy, who had already 
beaten them twice—by fifteen points each game. 
Spalding was rated fifth in the state, and everybody 
thought Greeley didn’t have a chance. Spalding even 
thought it was going to be an easy game. But boy, they 
were so wrong! 

When the game started, Spalding took an early 
8-0 lead, and everybody thought it was going to be a 
blowout. At the end of the first quarter, Spalding was 
winning by twelve points! Dad’s team had their heads 
down, and their confidence was even lower. Their coach 
said, “Don’t worry! It is only the first quarter, and we 
still have time. Now get back out there and get back in 
this!” 

Greeley started the second quarter hot. They 
made five of their first six shots, cutting the lead to two 
points. But then the gym hushed. Greeley’s best player 
went down in agony. He was so injured that he couldn’t 
play. Somebody had to go in for him, but the coach didn’t 
know who. He looked up and down the bench. Then he 
finally stopped, looked right at my dad, and pointed at 
him. 


85 


Kelsie Waggoner 


At halftime, Spalding was ahead 38-36. Dad’s 
coach told them, “Just keep doing what you're doing; 
play your game, not theirs. This is our game!” 

In the third quarter, Greeley scored ten points in a 
row. However, Spalding answered back and tied the game 
within minutes. But before you could even blink, Greeley 
was up by six points again. Surprisingly, Spalding would 
get back into the game. At the end of the third quarter, 
Greeley was ahead 50—45. Greeley’s coach encouraged, 
“Just one more quarter!” 

At the start of the fourth quarter, the gym noise 
was earsplitting. Greeley scored the first points of the 
fourth quarter. Greeley’s momentum was grand, but 
Spalding didn’t quit. They ended up taking the lead with 
one minute left in the game. The score was 78—76, but 
then Greeley made a three-point shot and was ahead by 
one point. Spalding called a timeout, and in the huddle, 
Dad’s coach said, “We need to hold them! Get a steal and 
hold on to it. Don’t let them get easy points.” 


86 


Greeley made a two-pointer to make them lead 
by three points. Spalding struck right back with a three- 
pointer, and the score was tied with ten seconds left in 
the game. Greeley threw the ball in. Dad grabbed the ball 
at the three-point line and shot! The ball sank into the 
basket as the buzzer went off! Greeley won. Greeley was 
going to the Nebraska state basketball tournament! The 
final score was 84-81. That is what I call a great game- 
winning shot! 


Connor Wood 
Nebraska, USA 


87 


Hands Across America 


1986 
Toledo, Ohio, USA 


When my mom was just about my age, almost 
eleven, she saw a commercial promoting Hands Across 
America. She knew instantly this was something she 
wanted to do. 

Hands Across America was a charitable cause to 
help the homeless and fight hunger right here in America. 
There were commercials and even a song! The vision 
of Hands Across America was a line of people holding 
hands from coast to coast (New York to California). In 
order to reserve your place in line, you had to make a 
ten-dollar donation. My mom was very excited, because 
she remembered how the song “We Are the World” 
made a huge impact on her and the rest of the world. 
My mom thought this would be an amazing opportunity 
to participate and be part of something big! She can 
remember being over the moon when she received her 
location and totally cool T-shirt in the mail. 

Unfortunately, she never got to wear the shirt. 
My mom’s cousin Pete, my second cousin, was a 
marine stationed in Hawaii at the time, so he could not 
participate. Pete was home on leave the week before the 
colossal event. He saw my mom’s shirt proudly displayed 
in her room, just waiting to be worn. He loved it! Pete 
said it would be a great conversation piece back at the 
barracks. My mom figured since he was serving our 
country, the least she could do was give him the shirt. So 
that’s exactly what she did! 


88 


Elizabeth ‘Adams. 


There were approximately 6.5 million people 
holding hands! The line was 4,152 miles long! It was May 
of 1986 when Hands Across America took place. My mom 
said she didn’t think there were enough people to make 
an unbroken chain, and she could see broken links from 
where she was, but it didn’t matter. It was monumental 
to my eleven-year-old mother. My mom and grandma 
watched the news later that night. The newscaster had 
said that even though hands were not held everywhere, 
if each person stood four feet apart with their hands 
stretched out to their sides, from heaven it would look 
like one continuous line. 

In conclusion, I think Hands Across America was 
a pretty unique and fantastic experience for my mom 
to see and for me to hear about. To see our country 
participating in something so humanitarian rather than 
being at odds with one another would be wonderful. 
Maybe sometime in my lifetime, our society will come 
together again for the aid of our own. 


Jocelyn Crossley; Ohio, USA 


The One-Ticket Escape 


June 5, 1989 
Beijing, China 


June 5, 1989. My mother, father, and four of their 
colleagues were anxiously huddled in worry and fright in 
an old subway station. Chaos surrounded the six college 
students as they struggled to remain together despite 
being jostled by the crowd. All the buses were down, and 
outside nothing but tanks seemed to be running—rolling 
across the unpaved roads in rhythmic parade. 

The six colleagues were desperate. They needed 
to escape the panic of Tiananmen Square,* and their 
only option was the subway. Everything was gated in, 
including the waiting area and the ticket booth. But what 
were they to do with the one ticket they could afford? The 
adventure began. 

“All right,” my mother, Wenli, suggested, “how 
about we send one of us with the one ticket to climb over 
the gate and purposely be caught? We have a ticket, and 
the excuse can be we didn’t know about the gate opening.” 

The other five looked uneasy at the idea. 

“What if we aren’t allowed past? What if we’re 
caught?” 

Firmly, Wenli answered, “Well, is there anyone 
willing to try?” 

A long moment of silence ensued. Then abruptly 
her girl colleague, Hong, bravely responded, “I'll do it.” 


* Tiananmen Square was the center of a seven-week student protest against the 
Chinese government—to which the government responded with military force. To 
learn more, read “Tiananmen Square Crackdown” in Grannie Annie, Vol. 6. 


90 


“But what if youre caught?” my father asked 
uncertainly, concerned about the overall safety of his 
friends. 

“We can do it,” Hong replied boldly. “We will get 
out of Beijing and to a place of safety.” 

Thus the plan was hatched. Hong was to climb 
over the fence and distract the conductor, who would 
open the gate to talk to her. When the gate was opened, 
the other five were to sneak in and board the train. A 
simple, but dangerous, plan. 

Dexterously, Hong climbed up and over the fence 
with no trouble. 

“Hey!” the one and only conductor yelled. “What 
are you doing?” 

The conductor rushed over, opening the gate at 
the same time. Hong feigned confusion as she looked at 
the approaching conductor’s stern figure. 

Meanwhile, the other five stealthily headed toward 
the gate opening, blending into the crowd and remaining 
alert. They hid their anxiety and hoped for success. 

“If you have a ticket, why didn’t you go through 
the gate door?” the conductor was demanding of Hong. 

Hong innocently answered, “I didn’t know there 
was a door. The crowds hid it from my view. I thought I 
needed to climb over.” 

Reluctantly the conductor let the girl through, 
and with the other five successful in their part, the entire 
plan was officially a success. Relieved, they boarded 
the train, and today they all live in America with this 
unforgettable memory as part of their history. Often, 
my parents reminisce about the terror and nervousness 


91 


during the historic event. They will forever be grateful 
for the survival of their friends and themselves. 


Julia Hu 
New Jersey, USA 


92 


Toyota Tercel Trouble 


2000 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA 


My dad is an environmentalist. In fact, he is the 
greenest guy I know. He keeps his carbon footprint small 
as an atom and reuses almost everything. My dad bikes to 
work every day, wears socks that my dog has chewed till 
there are no socks, and owned the same car for twenty- 
one years. 

In 1980, he took ownership of that car, a Toyota 
Corolla Tercel, one of the “greenest” white cars with blue 
pinstripes of the time. My dad remembers the car well. 
He bought it in twelfth grade for $6,120, with the money 
he earned by scooping ice cream at Baskin-Robbins 
for two years. The beloved car had a stick shift, only 
two doors, and a hatchback. It traveled thirty miles per 
gallon—pretty green for back then! My dad drove it to 
college in northern California, to medical school in San 
Diego, to Arizona, and then from Arizona to St. Louis! 

After sixteen years, the car started getting hard 
to start in cold weather. On freezing days my dad would 
spray stinky starting fluid into the carburetor to start 
the rickety car. A couple years later, the passenger door 
broke. It was too expensive to fix, but my dad made the 
best of the event, and of course, the green guy kept the 
car. 

In 2000 my dad drove the twenty-year-old car 
to the dentist. When he parked at the dentist’s office, he 
tried to get out of the aging car, but to my dad’s dismay, 
the driver’s door had joined the passenger door in the 


93 


land of being stuck. “Well, that’s all right. I'll just open 
the window and climb out that way,” my dad thought. So 
he unrolled the driver’s window and climbed out. At that 
point, my dad realized that, unfortunately, if he didn’t 
want his stereo to be stolen, he would need to close the 
window. So he reached into the open window, cranked 
up the window halfway, then pulled his arm out. Then 
he opened the hatchback, which opened and closed 
only from the outside, and crawled in. He landed on the 
seats that were spilling over with foam like a glass of 
overflowing root beer. Next he rolled the driver’s window 
up from inside the car, scooted back to the hatchback, 
climbed out the hatchback, closed the hatchback, and 
joyfully marched to his dentist appointment, basking in 
the pride of his success. 

After the appointment, which wasn’t as pleasant 
as he had anticipated, he sighed, and then got to work. 
First he climbed into the car through the hatchback and 
then rolled down the driver’s window. Next he climbed 
out the driver’s window, closed the hatchback, climbed 
back into the car through the open window, rolled up the 
window from inside the car, and drove away. 

My dad didn’t give away that beloved Toyota 
Tercel until 2001, when, in addition to becoming 
donated, reusable metal scraps, it had also become the 
place that an ant colony called home. 


Belle Sara Gage 
Missouri, USA 


94 


EERE bebe & & E 


Illustrators of Volume 8 


Autumn Caito; Missouri, USA 
Mikael Fett Schultheis; Missouri, USA 
Molly Andersen; Missouri, USA 
Nguyet Nguyen; Missouri, USA 
Maggie Morse; Missouri, USA 

April Turner; Missouri, USA 

Steven Griggs; Missouri, USA 

Katy Montgomery; Missouri, USA 
Hannah R. Anderson; Missouri, USA 
Madison Grady; Missouri, USA 
Kelsie Waggoner; Missouri, USA 


Elizabeth Adams; Missouri, USA 


95 


Grannie Annie Storykeepers 2013 


Congratulations to the following young people for discovering, 
writing, sharing, and submitting a story from their family’s history! 


Rivka Abedon « Yisroel Arnson « Eli Asarch « Yordanose Atanaw 
Jane Ann Baggett « Sebastian Baker « Miles R. Bassett 
Graeme Baxley ¢ Evan Beck « Shelby Behnk « Tyler Beilsmith 
Joseph R. Berglund « Amy Betancourth « Emma Biermann 
Eliza Black « Shannon Bock « Haleigh Borich » Taylor Brady 
Reese Brambrink « Sophie Braun « Sean Britt * Benjamin M. Brock 
Anna Cathryn Brown « Yoni Brown « Jake Bruenning 
Matthew Bruenning * Hunter Bruno « Jackson Bry 
Nicholas Bryant « Keely Butcher * CJ Canfield + Lelia Carlson 
Julian Scott Carroll « Alexis Carson » Dominic Cavezza 
Chloe Cedergreen « Michael Chamdi ¢ Talon Chapman 
John Christen « Phil Christodoulou « Ryan Cilli * Sophie J. Clody 
Mason Clynes « Gracie Cohen « Audrey Craig * Jocelyn Crossley 
Clark Cytron * Mitchell Dade « Allison Davis » Hope Davis 
Madei Davis « Elizabeth DePalma « Lincoln Dibler 
Giuseppe Di Cera * Owen Diettrich » Gavyn C. Dockery 
Matthew Donnelly « Dede Driscoll * Matthew Dubowski 
Sophie Dudeck « Jack DuMont * Hannah Dwyer 
Jessica Eastlund « Thomas Eck « Jala Ehrenfried * Savannah Evers 
David Fitzgerald « Tony Follmer * Madi Foonberg 
David Friedman « Kamryn Fuegner « Belle Sara Gage 
Anabel Gallagher « Mary Frances Gaston « Tripp Gatch 
Adam Gaughan « Gila Gershman « Emily Giannotti * Liam Goggins 
Jill Goldwasser * Dacey Goodwin « Cade Grossart « Michael Guber 
Mia Gugino « Chris Guo « Noah Hankins « Katie Hannan 
Annesley Haring « Eli Harris » Ella Hartman * Nathan He 
Nili Hefetz « Megan Heim « Alex Held « Anya Helmer 


96 


Ethan Hennix » Audrey Herman « Tommy Herr 
Shelby Herrington « Abbey Hilger « Matt Hippe * Gabi Hoag 
Summer R. Hock « Drake Honaker « Daniel Hu « Julia Hu 
Melina Huang « Kate Huber « Harriett Hudspeth « Ryotaro Ikeda 
Megan Jansen * Connie Jiang * Madeline Jin » Aaliyah Johnson 
Cameron Jones (Missouri) * Cameron Jones (New Jersey) 
Orion F. Jones * Ryann Jones « Daniel Jung « Ashley Juniewicz 
John Jurek » Grady Kadel « Kaylee Kahl ¢ Jack Kahn 
Aylin Kahraman « Asher Kark « Reese Kark 
Jonathan Katsenelson « Reegan Kehres « Brendan Kenny 
Hannah Kinnison « Nicky Klein « Nick Kline * Rebecca Knopf 
Elisabeth G. Knutson « Ruth K. Knutson « Matthew Koffman 
Karleen Kolar « AB Kowal « Jonathan Krause * Anna Kulczycka 
Mindy LaMore « Grace Lane » Gina LaPilusa « Alek Ledvina 
Max Lefebvre « Gabrielle Lewis » Naudia Lewis Olivia Lewis 
Jason Li « Lauren Linden « Naftali Lipman « Rachael Livingston 
Elliot Loitman « Kate Lorenz « Erin Lyden « Patrick MacLean 
Emmanuel C. Martin « Kesem Masa ¢ Makayla Matvick 
Zane McNeill « Hannah Merenstein « Hope A. Middaugh 
Reid Miller « Josephine Miller-Davis » Katie Minkler 
Chester J. Mlcek « Mirabelle Rose Mockler « Sydney Mueller 
Lauren Muhr « Louis Myers « Melanie Nacincik « Kenneth Nadeau 
Ethan Nettler * Sara Nigro « Ayden Novick « Brianna O’Brien 
Jack O’Connor « Elizabeth O’Dowd « Kenny Oelkers 
Lindsay Origliasso * Payton Palazzolo « Jenna Pardieck 
Jenna Parmentier ¢ Michael Patterson * Luke Paulus 
Hailey Peterson « Aidan Pierce « Sophie Pomeranz * Noah Posey 
Adam Present Lily Qiu » Taylor Radke » Aishu Ramaswami 
Jackson Rasmusson ¢ Yaakov Reches * Matthew Redding 
Christian Reller » Olivia Rhodes « Elia Grace Rios 
Miles Robinson « Saida Robles-Razzaq « Hunter Roggero 
Kylie Ross « Kayla Rother » Ben Rovner « Rebecca Sachs 


97 


Miles Sandbothe « Grace Sander » Amanda Sangalli 
Tommy Schefers « Parker Schell * Jenny Schmitt 
William Schneider « Natalie Rose Schuver « Roy Schwartz 
Brandon Schweid « Gretchen Schwent « Saadia Seiferas 
Esha Shah « Robin Shareshian * Tommy Sheehan « Mayson Sheeks 
Jacob Sheldon « Jessica Sheldon » Matan Shiller 
Henry Silberstein * Emma P. Singer « Haley Singer « Eva Singleton 
Lorie Skroch ¢« Shaun Slamowitz « Alex Smith « Leo Sniechota 
Michael Stafford * William Stappenbeck « Zach Stehr 
Jessica Steidemann « Zach Stern « Helen Ann Stone « Alyssa Stouch 
Rosie Strum « Dayton Swanson « Emma Sweeney « Jacob Tackes 
Nahom Tadesse « Rebecca Tan « Samantha Teta « Eyob Tewelde 
Will Theilacker * Jack Thessen » Emma Thorsten « Seth Tinkham 
Kern Toczylowski ¢ Lili Toledano « Max A. Topelson 
Tyler Torluemke * Wyatt Trammell « Harrison Trelz 
Megan Trushenski « Shaindel Turniansky « Rachel Tyburezy 
Jimmy Vandervort * Daniel Volobuev » Caroline Waldman 
Landrie Walz « Kenny Wang « Isabel Warner « Max Wasserstrom 
Michael Wayne * Max Webb « Drennen Weems 
Hannah Weinstein « Layne Welch « Angela Weng 
Danielle Werdes « Josh Willenbrink « My’kyle Williams 
Madison Woemmel « Schuyler Louise Loughran Wolf 
Lucie Wolfson « Connor Wood « Danielle Wu « Taryn Yaggie 
Ben Yao « Julia Young « Katherine O. Zoellner * Natasha Zoellner 
Tuvya Zonenberg 


98 


Invitation to Participate 


Please join us for the 2013/2014 Grannie Annie 
Family Story Celebration. The submission deadline for 
Grannie Annie, Vol. 9, is February 1, 2014. Complete 
details, including the required submission form, are 
available at www.TheGrannieAnnie.org. 


99 


Praise for The Grannie Annie 


Year after year, my fifth-grade students are eager and 
excited to submit their work to The Grannie Annie. The experience 
of submitting a manuscript—with the hope of publishing—gives 
newfound meaning to their learning. The students stand taller 
when they become cognizant that the world is benefiting from their 
contribution. 


Rebecca Friedman, Teacher; Maryland, USA 


Orion’s writing a family story was extremely important to 
his grandmother, who had a serious illness. When he called her to 
tell her that his story was going to be published, she was as happy as 
anyone had seen her in months. She read the story to anyone who 
would listen. I can’t even begin to tell you the positive impact that 
this has had on our family. 


Andrew Jones, Parent; Pennsylvania, USA 


The Grannie Annie is doing a wonderful job of getting kids 
more interested in reading, writing, and learning more about their 
families and their past. 


Bert Francis, Parent; Missouri, USA 


Thank you so much for creating such a wonderful writing 
opportunity for young people. I look forward to the students 
participating each year and reading the published stories. 


Amy Del Coro, Teacher; New Jersey, USA 


I am always on the lookout for ways to share my students’ 
writing and am thrilled to have discovered The Grannie Annie. 
Everyone had so much fun finding out about past family events, and 
I’m proud of the stories the students produced. 


Beverly Miller, Teacher; Alabama, USA 


100 


This book should be on the bookshelves in all elementary 
and junior high schools. 


The Reading Tub™, www.TheReadingTub.com 


I would like to thank you for giving Yifu such an 
encouragement, and working diligently to publish his first article! 
Our families in China are very happy to hear about this. It is an 
amazing experience to me that I witness that a part of my family 
heritage is being connected from my father to my son through the 
event you support! Thank you! 


Yuxing Feng, Parent; Missouri, USA 


Writing for The Grannie Annie helps my students feel 
confident as writers, which in turn provides their imaginations with 
a comfortable setting in which to create. 


Katelin Moquin, Teacher; Missouri, USA 


My son “harvested” several stories from my father, including 
one that appeared in Grannie Annie, Vol. 1. My father has since 
passed away, and I am forever grateful that my son recorded these 
stories before it was too late. I doubt he would have done so if it had 
not been for The Grannie Annie. 


Karen Metcalf, Parent; Tennessee, USA 


The Grannie Annie challenged my students to go beyond 
their comfort zone, to write for a broader audience, and to see that 
learning goes beyond the four walls of a classroom. 


Ann-Marie Harris, Teacher; Maryland, USA 


The Grannie Annie is a good start for kids to get published. 
And I love the way The Grannie Annie helps people understand their 
family history. It also helps children get closer to their families. 


Andrew Malphurs, Author of the Grannie Annie, Vol. 5, story “Grandpa’s 
Saddle” 


101 


Since first becoming involved with The Grannie Annie, 
we look forward every year to the truly unique and heartwarming 
stories each student brings to the classroom. 


Brian Billings and Laura Amburgey, Teachers; Ohio, USA 


Stories connect people in families and communities, giving 
them a common language and understanding of the present as well 
as the past. Through The Grannie Annie, generations connect as 
students take time to listen to the stories of their older relatives— 
and learn from them. Then, as the students write and share their 
stories, the connections multiply. 


Amy Glaser Gage; Children’s author, writing teacher, and consultant to 
The Grannie Annie 


The Grannie Annie is remarkable in its goals and in 
its approach. Recording and sharing the stories of preceding 
generations goes to the heart of education—it teaches us who we are 
as family members, citizens, and members of human civilization. 


Matthew Lary, Co-author of Victory Through Valor: A Collection of World War IT 
Memoirs 


The Grannie Annie is all about connection. As it hearkens 
back to the original Grannie Annie, it continues her tradition of oral 
storytelling to link generations and cultures. Grannie Annie family 
stories written by young people illuminate a long span of history, 
often revealing family values honed from adversity or triumph and 
tempered by humor and love. 


Janet Grace Riehl, Author of Sightlines: A Family Love Story in Poetry & Music 


Perhaps the greatest value of the Grannie Annie stories is 
something not written in the book. When a child interviews an older 
relative, the child gets to know a person he or she may have taken 
for granted. The relative gets to tell a story that might have been lost. 
A bond is created or strengthened. A story is recorded for posterity. 
New memories are woven, and—just maybe—a writer is born. 


Lulu Delacre, Author/illustrator of Salsa Stories 


102 


As I’m sure is the objective of The Grannie Annie, this was 
a lovely experience, and now memory, for Andrew and his grandpa. 
There are no words for that. 


Susan Barton Malphurs, Parent; Georgia, USA 


The Grannie Annie offers my students an excellent 
opportunity to record and share stories from their family 
histories. By interviewing relatives, the students learn to 
appreciate and experience the triumphs and the troubles of their 
ancestors. These stories should be preserved for these students 
and for future generations, and The Grannie Annie provides this 
worthwhile opportunity that benefits all generations. 


Susan Jewell, Teacher; Nebraska, USA 


It is a privilege to be a part of The Grannie Annie Family 
Story Celebration. This wonderful anthology helps to shape our 
children’s identity by providing them with the opportunity to 
understand and value their ancestry. 


Jodi J. De Luca, Ph.D., Parent; Florida, USA 


When kids learn details about what life was like decades 
ago, the past comes alive for them. History becomes real—and they 
want to know more! The Grannie Annie provides an opportunity 
for kids to be inspired by their own family’s history—and to share it 
with the world. 


Florrie Binford Kichler, Patria Press, www.PatriaPress.com 


Although most students in our Eastern European village live 
next door to family members from earlier generations, The Grannie 
Annie prompted them to talk with their grandparents in new ways— 
and to discover the customs and challenges of times past. In addition, 
stories from the Grannie Annie books have given my students a 
glimpse of the world outside their village, where differences may 
abound but the underlying human condition remains the same. 


Martin Ellinger-Locke, Peace Corps volunteer in Glodeni, Moldova 


103 


Thank you for starting such a heartwarming project 
where all the kids are winners, whether their stories are published 
or not. 


G-g Metzger, Teacher; Texas, USA 


We had an incredible time working on [our daughter’s 
Grannie Annie] story. It was a great way for Amy to learn about the 
rich heritage from which she comes—and to get more writing 
experience to boot. 


Ruth Whitaker, Parent; Texas, USA 


The Grannie Annie proved to be a valuable experience for 
the students in my school. ... When the children shared the stories, 
some students who are normally quiet or reserved got to shine 
because of something really neat that they wrote about. 


Dianne Elson, Teacher; Indiana, USA 


Our son’s oma is overwhelmed that her “story” is in print in 
Grannie Annie. She is thankful for the opportunity to tell it! Every 
family member and family friend has a signed copy. 


Karie Millard, Parent; Indiana, USA 


Taking time away from your technology-filled life to join 
in The Grannie Annie is like trading fast food for Sunday dinner at 
Grandma’s. 


Debra K. Shatoff, Ed.D., Family therapist and author of In-Home Child Care: A 
Step-by-Step Guide to Quality, Affordable Care 


Teachers and parents, if you want to motivate students to 
love writing, ask them to write for The Grannie Annie. 


Bonnie M. Davis, Ph.D., Author of How to Teach Students Who Don’t Look Like 
You: Culturally Relevant Teaching Strategies, www.EducatingF orChange.com 


104 


Grannie Annie Order Form 


Grannie Annie, Vol. 8 — Paperback edition 
$14.95 each for 1—4 copies; $10 each for 5 or more; 
$10 each for participating parents and teachers 


Vol. 8 (Paperback) 


Qty. Total price 
Grannie Annie, Vol. 8 — PDF edition 
$5 each 
Vol. 8 (PDF) 
Qty. Total price 


Previous vols.: $10 each; $25 for a set of Vols. 5-7; 
$50 for a set of Vols. 2-7 


Vol. 2 Vol. 3 Vol. 4 


Vol. 5 Vol. 6 Vol. 7 
Qty. Qty. Qty. . 


Qty. Qty. Qty. Total price 


Domestic shipping: $5.00 for one book; $.50 for each 
additional book up to $17.50 maximum. (For international Shipping 
shipping, contact order@thegrannieannie.org) 


Total Due 
The Grannie Annie is a nonprofit organization. Any 
amount included above your Total Due is tax deductible. 
Thank you for your support! 
Donation Amount 
Total Enclosed 


Check or money order enclosed (to The Grannie Annie) 


Print name, shipping address, and contact information 


Name 

Street 

City State ZIP 
Phone (day or evening?) E-mail 


Mail form to The Grannie Annie, P.O. Box 11343, St. Louis, MO 63105. 
You may also order and donate online at www.TheGrannieAnnie.org or 
through Portico Books: phone or fax (toll free) 888-641-5353. 
Purchase orders are welcome. Orders placed through Portico Books by 
customers in Missouri, Texas, or Kansas will be subject to sales/use tax. 


The Grannie Annie 
Family Story Celebration 


Young People Learning and Sharing Family Stories 


The Grannie Annie invites students everywhere to discover 
and share stories from their family’s history, and publishes 
collections of their work. The Grannie Annie experience leads 
young people to strengthen family and community bonds, 
encounter history in a personal way, and polish their writing 
skills. 


“Year after year, my fifth-grade students are eager and 
excited to submit their work to The Grannie Annie. The 
experience of submitting a manuscript—with the hope of 
publishing—gives newfound meaning to their learning. The 
students stand taller when they become cognizant that the 
world is benefiting from their contribution.” 

—Rebecca Friedman, Teacher; Maryland, USA 


“Orion’s writing a family story was extremely important to 
his grandmother, who had a serious illness. When he called 
her to tell her that his story was going to be published, she 
was as happy as anyone had seen her in months. She read 
the story to anyone who would listen. I can’t even begin to 
tell you the positive impact that this has had on our family.” 
—Andrew Jones, Parent; Pennsylvania, USA 


