University  of  California  •  Berkeley 


Regional  Oral  History  Office  UCSF  Oral  History  Program 

The  Bancroft  Library         Dept.  of  Anthropology,  History  &  Social  Medicine 
University  of  California,  Berkeley     University  of  California,  San  Francisco 


The  UCSF  Oral  History  Program 

and 
The  Program  in  the  History  of  the  Biological  Sciences  and  Biotechnology 

The  Bancroft  Library 
University  of  California,  Berkeley 


Herbert  W.  Boyer,  Ph.D. 
RECOMBINANT  DNA  RESEARCH  AT  UCSF  AND  COMMERCIAL  APPLICATION  AT  GENENTECH 


With  an  Introduction  by 
J.  Michael  Bishop,  M.D. 


Interviews  Conducted  in  1994  by 
Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Ph.D. 

Nancy  Rockafellar,  Ph.D.,  Editor 
Kathleen  Zvanovec-Higbee,  B.A.,  Editor 


Copyright  ©  2001  by  the  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


Since  1954  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  has  been  interviewing  leading 
participants  in  or  well-placed  witnesses  to  major  events  in  the  development 
of  northern  California,  the  West,  and  the  nation.  Oral  history  is  a  method 
of  collecting  historical  information  through  tape-recorded  interviews  between 
a  narrator  with  firsthand  knowledge  of  historically  significant  events  and 
a  well-informed  interviewer,  with  the  goal  of  preserving  substantive 
additions  to  the  historical  record.  The  tape  recording  is  transcribed, 
lightly  edited  for  continuity  and  clarity,  and  reviewed  by  the  interviewee. 
The  corrected  manuscript  is  indexed,  bound  with  photographs  and  illustrative 
materials,  and  placed  in  The  Bancroft  Library  at  the  University  of 
California,  Berkeley,  and  in  other  research  collections  for  scholarly  use. 
Because  it  is  primary  material,  oral  history  is  not  intended  to  present  the 
final,  verified,  or  complete  narrative  of  events.  It  is  a  spoken  account, 
offered  by  the  interviewee  in  response  to  questioning,  and  as  such  it  is 
reflective,  partisan,  deeply  involved,  and  irreplaceable. 

************************************ 

All  uses  of  this  manuscript  are  covered  by  a  legal 
agreement  between  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California  and 
Herbert  W.  Boyer  dated  August  7,  2001.  The  manuscript  is  thereby 
made  available  for  research  purposes.  All  literary  rights  in  the 
manuscript,  including  the  right  to  publish,  are  reserved  to  The 
Bancroft  Library  of  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley  and 
the  University  of  California,  San  Francisco  Library  and  Center 
for  Knowledge  Management.  No  part  of  the  manuscript  may  be 
quoted  for  publication  without  the  written  permission  of  the 
Director  of  The  Bancroft  Library  of  the  University  of  California, 
Berkeley  or  the  Director  of  the  UCSF  Library  and  Center  for 
Knowledge  Management. 

Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  publication  should-be 
addressed  to  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  486  Bancroft 
Library,  Mail  Code  6000,  University  of  California,  Berkeley 
94720-6000,  and  should  include  identification  of  the  specific 
passages  to  be  quoted,  anticipated  use  of  the  passages,  and 
identification  of  the  user.  The  legal  agreement  with  Herbert  W. 
Boyer  requires  that  he  be  notified  of  the  request  and  allowed 
thirty  days  in  which  to  respond. 

It  is  recommended  that  this  oral  history  be  cited  as  follows: 

Herbert  W.  Boyer,  "Recombinant  DNA  Research  at  UCSF  and 
Commercial  Application  at  Genentech,"  an  oral  history 
conducted  in  1994  by  Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Regional  Oral 
History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley,  2001. 

Copy  no . 


Herbert  W.  Boyer,  1990s. 


photo  credit:  Eliot  Holtzman 


Cataloguing  information 


BOYER,  Herbert  W.  (b.  1936)  Biochemistry  professor/industrialist 

Recombinant  DNA  Science  at  UCSF  and  Its  Commercialization  at  Genentech,  2001, 
xvi,  188  pp. 

Pennnsylvania  family  background;  education  at  St.  Vincent  College,  University 
of  Pittsburgh;  postdoctoral  research  on  restriction  enzymes,  Yale,  1963-1966; 
assistant  professor  to  professor,  University  of  California,  San  Francisco, 
1966-1991;  recombinant  DNA  research:  collaboration  with  Stanley  N.  Cohen, 
biohazards  controversy,  development /diffusion  of  recombinant  DNA,  NIH  research 
guidelines,  UCSF  politics/biosafety  policy;  Genentech,  Inc.:  founding, 
financing,  staffing  the  company  with  Robert  Swanson;  the  somatostatin, 
insulin,  and  growth  hormone  projects;  university  relations /reactions ;  Boyer- 
Cohen  recombinant  DNA  patents;  comments  on  scientific  approach,  Gordon 
Tomkins,  writing /publishing  papers,  self -assessment. 

Introduction  by  J.  Michael  Bishop,  M.D.,  Chancellor  &  Professor  of 
Microbiology /Immunology,  University  of  California,  San  Francisco. 

Interviewed  in  1994  by  Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Ph.D.,  Department  of  the 
History  of  Health  Sciences,  UCSF  and  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS --Herbert  W.  Boyer 

BIOTECHNOLOGY  SERIES  HISTORY  by  Sally  Smith  Hughes  i 

BIOTECHNOLOGY  SERIES  LIST  vi 

INTRODUCTION  by  J.  Michael  Bishop,  M.D.  vii 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  by  Sally  Smith  Hughes  xii 

CURRICULUM  VITAE  xv 

I  EDUCATION  1 
St.  Vincent's  College,  Latrobe,  Pennsylvania  1 
Graduate  Student,  University  of  Pittsburgh,  1958-1963  1 

Interest  in  Microbial  Genetics  1 

The  Genetic  Code  3 

Mentors  and  Colleagues  4 

The  Department  of  Microbiology  at  Pittsburgh  5 

Postdoctoral  Fellow  at  Yale  University,  1963-1966  7 

Interest  in  Bacterial  Plasmids  7 

Postdoctoral  Work  on  Gene  Mapping  of  E.  coli  Strains  8 

Evidence  of  DNA  Restriction  and  Modification  11 

DNA  Recombination  Research  at  Yale  13 

II  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SAN  FRANCISCO,  1966-1991  16 
Faculty  Member,  Department  of  Microbiology,  1966-1975  16 

Deciding  to  Come  to  San  Francisco  16 

Teaching  Medical  Students  17 

First  Impressions  of  UCSF  19 

Colleagues  in  the  Department  of  Microbiology  20 

The  Department  of  Biochemistry  22 

William  Rutter  and  Gordon  Tomkins  22 
Boyer 's  Associations  with  the  Department  of  Biochemistry     24 

The  Division  of  Genetics  25 

Boyer  Joins  the  Department  of  Biochemistry,  1975  26 

Collegiality  in  Biochemistry  28 

Recombinant  DNA  Research  30 

Splicing  Plasmids,  1972-1973  30 

Stanley  N.  Cohen  and  the  Plasmid  Meeting  in  Hawaii,  1972  31 

Research  Prior  to  the  Boyer-Cohen  Collaboration  32 

Technical  Breakthrough:  Characterizing  DNA  Fragments  34 
Boyer  and  Cohen  Collaborate  on  Prokaryotic  and  Eukaryotic 

DNA  Experiments  36 

The  Biohazards  Problem  37 

Cloning  Successes  39 

Considering  Commercial  Applications  41 

The  Research  Moratorium  43 

The  Singer-Soil  and  Berg  Letters  43 

Thoughts  on  Potential  Biohazards  44 


The  Asilomar  Conference  on  Recombinant  DNA  Molecules, 

February  1975  45 

Diffusion  and  Development  of  Recombinant  DNA  Technology  46 

Research  on  Halobacterium  halobium  49 

Distributing  Plasmids  50 

Revisiting  the  Biohazard  Issue  50 

NIH  Guidelines  for  Recombinant  DNA  Research  50 

Opponents  of  Recombinant  Research  51 

The  Role  of  the  American  Society  of  Microbiology  52 

Concerns  for  Safe  Technique  53 

Potential  Cloning  Experiments  55 

Blunt-end  Ligation  56 

Collaboration  with  John  Rosenberg  on  Protein-DNA  Interactions  57 

Nucleic  Acid  Sequencing  59 

The  Smithsonian  Magazine  Article  and  the  NIH  Guidelines  60 

The  pBR322  Episode  62 

Use  of  an  Approved  but  Uncertified  Plasmid  62 

The  Senate  Hearings,  November  1977  63 

Announcing  the  Cloning  of  the  First  Human  Gene  65 

The  UCSF  Biosafety  Committee  66 

Risk/Benefit  Analysis  69 

P-3  Facilities  at  UCSF  69 

The  Q  Fever  Scare  70 

III   GENENTECH,  INC.  AND  THE  COMMERCIALIZATION  OF  RECOMBINANT  DNA 

TECHNOLOGY  71 

Formation  in  1976  71 

Chemical  Synthesis  of  DNA  73 

Somatostatin:  Demonstrating  the  Technology  75 

Expanding  to  South  San  Francisco,  Recruiting  Scientists  77 

Human  Insulin  78 

The  Race  for  the  Gene  78 

Joint  Ventures  with  Eli  Lilly  and  KabiGen  79 

Genentech's  Primacy  in  Biotechnology  81 

Somatostatin  Studies  83 

More  on  Early  Recombinant  Research  at  Stanford  and  UCSF  84 

Genentech's  Early  Goals  and  Philosophy  87 

More  on  the  Joint  Ventures  with  Lilly  and  KabiGen  88 

Boyer's  Decision  Not  to  Participate  in  Genentech  Research  89 

Promoting  and  Recruiting  for  Genentech  90 

Comparing  Industrial  and  Academic  Science  92 

More  on  Early  Corporate  Goals  93 

Development  and  Scaling  Up  94 

Repercussions  on  the  UCSF  Campus  96 

Issues  Arising  from  Faculty  Relationships  with  Industry  99 

Boyer  Speaks  Out  at  the  Gordon  Conference,  June  1973  102 

Publicizing  Scientific  Results  Before  Publication  103 

Details  of  the  Cohen-Boyer  Collaboration  105 

Authorship  105 

Recombinant  Experiments  with  Eukaryotic  DNA  107 

DNA  Fragment  Closure  Rates  110 

The  Species  Barrier  111 


Preparing  Purified  Plasmid  DNA  111 

Diffusion  of  Recombinant  DNA  Technology  112 

Effect  of  the  NIH  Guidelines  113 

Commercializing  Reagents  114 

The  Boyer-Cohen  Patents  115 

The  Process  Patent,  December  1980  115 

The  First  Product  Patent,  August  1984  118 

IV    SUMMARY  COMMENTS  119 

Boyer's  UCSF  Laboratory  119 

Key  Technologies  for  Biotechnology  121 

Safety  Measures  122 

Boyer's  Approach  to  Science  123 

Defining  Good  Science  126 

Writing  and  Publishing  Papers  127 

Self -Assessment  128 

TAPE  GUIDE  130 
APPENDIX 

A  Biographical  Information  and  Bibliography,  Herbert  W.  Boyer  131 

B  Cartoon  from  a  Slide  Courtesy  of  Stanley  N.  Cohen  145 

C  Cloning  Diagram  from  a  Slide  Courtesy  of  Stanley  N.  Cohen  146 
D  Documents  Concerning  Potential  Biohazards 

Singer-Soil  Letter,  Science  Magazine,  Sept.  21,  1973  147 

Berg  Letter,  Science  Magazine,  July  26,  1974  148 
"'Fail-Safe'  Plan  on  Gene  Research,"  San  Francisco 

Chronicle,  February  28,  1975  149 
"Genetic  Manipulation:  Guidelines  Issued,"  Nature  Magazine, 

July  1,  1976  151 
E  UCSF  Biosafety  Committee 

UCSF  News  Release  on  Creation  of  a  Campus  Biosafety 

Committee,  October  5,  1976  154 
Chancellor's  Letter  on  Events  in  "Modern  Biology," 

March  16,  1977  156 
F  Sculptures  Depicting  the  Initial  Meeting  of  Swanson  and  Boyer 

in  Late  1975,  with  the  Living  Originals  159 
G  UCSF  News  Release  on  the  pBR322  Incident,  September  26,  1977    160 

H  UCSF  News  Release  on  Somatostatin,  December  2,  1977  162 

I   Genentech  News  Release  on  Human  Insulin,  September  6,  1978  166 

J  UCSF/Industry  Relations,  Circa  1980  172 
K  Genentech,  Inc. 

Time  Magazine  Article,  October  20,  1980,  on  Genentech 's 

Initial  Public  Offering,  1980  177 
"Genentech 's  Herbert  Boyer,"  Time  Magazine  Cover, 

March  9,  1981  178 

Excerpt  from  1981  Genentech  Annual  Report  179 
L   Selected  Honors 

National  Medal  of  Technology,  1989  181 

National  Medal  of  Science,  1990  183 

INDEX  185 


BIOTECHNOLOGY  SERIES  HISTORY- -Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Ph.D. 


Genesis  of  the  Program  in  the  History  of  the  Biological  Sciences  and 
Biotechnology 

In  1996,  a  long-held  dream  of  The  Bancroft  Library  came  true  with  the 
launching  of  its  Program  in  the  History  of  the  Biological  Sciences  and 
Biotechnology.   For  years,  Bancroft  had  wished  to  document  the  history  of 
the  biological  sciences  on  the  Berkeley  campus,  particularly  its 
contributions  to  the  development  of  molecular  biology.   Bancroft  has  strong 
holdings  in  the  history  of  the  physical  sciences—the  papers  of  E.G. 
Lawrence,  Luis  Alvarez,  Edwin  McMillan,  and  other  campus  figures  in  physics 
and  chemistry,  as  well  as  a  number  of  related  oral  histories.   These 
materials  support  Berkeley's  History  of  Science  faculty,  as  well  as 
scholars  from  across  the  country  and  around  the  world. 

Although  the  university  is  located  next  to  the  greatest  concentration 
of  biotechnology  companies  in  the  world,  Bancroft  had  no  coordinated 
program  to  document  the  industry  nor  its  origins  in  academic  biology.   For 
a  decade,  the  staff  of  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  had  sought  without 
success  to  raise  funds  for  an  oral  history  program  to  record  the 
development  of  the  industry  in  the  San  Francisco  Bay  Area.   When  Charles 
Faulhaber  arrived  in  1995  as  Bancroft's  new  director,  he  agreed  to  the  need 
to  establish  a  Bancroft  program  to  capture  and  preserve  the  collective 
memory  and  papers  of  university  and  corporate  scientists  and  the  pioneers 
who  created  the  biotechnology  industry.   He  too  saw  the  importance  of 
documenting  the  history  of  a  science  and  industry  which  influences 
virtually  every  field  of  the  life  sciences,  generates  constant  public 
interest  and  controversy,  and  raises  serious  questions  of  public  policy. 
Preservation  of  this  history  was  obviously  vital  for  a  proper  understanding 
of  science  and  business  in  the  late  twentieth  century. 

Bancroft  was  the  ideal  location  to  launch  such  an  historical 
endeavor.   It  offered  the  combination  of  experienced  oral  history  and 
archival  personnel,  and  technical  resources  to  execute  a  coordinated  oral 
history  and  archival  program.   It  had  an  established  oral  history  series  in 
the  biological  sciences,  an  archival  division  called  the  History  of  Science 
and  Technology  Program,  and  the  expertise  to  develop  comprehensive  records 
management  plans  to  safeguard  the  archives  of  individuals  and  businesses 
making  significant  contributions  to  molecular  biology  and  biotechnology. 
It  also  had  longstanding  cooperative  arrangements  with  UC  San  Francisco  and 
Stanford  University,  the  other  research  universities  in  the  San  Francisco 
Bay  Area.   The  history  of  biotech  project  was  to  provide  a  basis  for 
continuing  collaboration  among  the  three  institutions  in  the  documentation 
of  recent  science  and  technology  through  oral  history  and  archival 
collection.   The  only  ingredient  missing  was  funding. 


ii 


In  April  1996,  the  dream  became  reality.   Daniel  E.  Koshland,  Jr. 
provided  seed  money  for  a  center  at  The  Bancroft  Library  for  historical 
research  on  the  biological  sciences  and  biotechnology.   Thanks  to  this 
generous  gift,  Bancroft  has  begun  to  build  an  integrated  collection  of 
research  materials—primarily  oral  history  transcripts,  personal  papers, 
and  archival  collections  —  related  to  the  history  of  the  biological  sciences 
and  biotechnology  in  university  and  industry  settings.   One  of  the  first 
steps  was  to  create  a  board  composed  of  distinguished  figures  in  academia 
and  industry  who  advise  on  the  direction  of  the  oral  history  and  archival 
components.   The  Program's  initial  concentration  is  on  the  San  Francisco 
Bay  Area  and  northern  California.   But  its  ultimate  aim  is  to  document  the 
growth  of  molecular  biology  as  an  independent  field  of  the  life  sciences, 
and  the  subsequent  revolution  which  established  biotechnology  as  a  key 
contribution  of  American  science  and  industry. 

UCSF  Library,  with  its  strong  holdings  in  the  biomedical  sciences,  is 
a  collaborator  on  the  archival  portion  of  the  Program.   David  Farrell, 
Bancroft's  curator  of  the  History  of  Science  and  Technology,  serves  as 
liaison.   In  February  1998,  Robin  Chandler,  head  of  UCSF  Archives  and 
Special  Collections,  completed  a  survey  of  corporate  archives  at  local 
biotechnology  companies  and  document  collections  of  Berkeley  and  UCSF 
faculty  in  the  biomolecular  sciences.   The  ultimate  aim  is  to  ensure  that 
personal  papers  and  business  archives  are  collected,  cataloged,  and  made 
available  for  scholarly  research. 


Project  Structure 

With  the  board's  advice,  Sally  Hughes,  a  science  historian  at  the 
Regional  Oral  History  Office,  began  lengthy  interviews  with  Robert  Swanson, 
a  co-founder  and  former  CEO  of  Genentech  in  South  San  Francisco;  Arthur 
Kornberg,  a  Nobel  laureate  at  Stanford;  and  Paul  Berg,  also  a  Stanford 
Nobel  laureate.   A  short  interview  was  conducted  with  Niels  Reimers  of  the 
Stanford  and  UCSF  technology  licensing  offices.   These  oral  histories  build 
upon  ones  conducted  in  the  early  1990s,  under  UCSF  or  Stanford  auspices, 
with  scientists  at  these  two  universities.1  The  oral  histories  offer  a 
factual,  contextual,  and  vivid  personal  history  that  enriches  the  archival 
collection,  adding  information  that  is  not  usually  present  in  written 
documents.   In  turn,  the  archival  collections  support  and  provide  depth  to 
the  oral  history  narrations. 


Hughes  conducted  oral  histories  with  Herbert  Boyer,  William  Rutter, 
and  Keith  Yamamoto  of  UCSF,  and  with  Stanley  Cohen  of  Stanford.  To  date, 
the  first  volume  of  the  oral  history  with  Dr.  Rutter  is  available  at  the 
Bancroft  and  UCSF  libraries;  transcripts  of  the  other  interviews  are 
currently  under  review  by  the  interviewees. 


ill 


Primary  and  Secondary  Sources 

This  oral  history  program  both  supports  and  is  supported  by  the 
written  documentary  record.   Primary  and  secondary  source  materials  provide 
necessary  information  for  conducting  the  interviews  and  also  serve  as 
essential  resources  for  researchers  using  the  oral  histories.   The  oral 
histories  also  orient  scholars  unfamiliar  with  the  field  or  the  scientist 
to  key  issues  and  participants.   Such  orientation  is  particularly  useful  to 
a  researcher  faced  with  voluminous,  scattered,  and  unorganized  primary 
sources.   This  two-way  "dialogue"  between  the  documents  and  the  oral 
histories  is  essential  for  valid  historical  interpretation. 

Beginning  with  the  first  interviews  in  1992,  the  interviewer  has 
conducted  extensive  documentary  research  in  both  primary  and  secondary 
materials.   She  gratefully  acknowledges  the  generosity  of  the  scientists 
who  have  made  their  personal  records  available  to  her:  Paul  Berg,  Stanley 
Cohen,  Arthur  Kornberg,  William  Rutter,  and  Keith  Yamamoto.   She  also 
thanks  the  archivists  at  Bancroft,  UCSF,  and  Stanford  libraries,  and 
personnel  at  Chiron,  Genentech,  and  Stanford's  Office  of  Technology 
Licensing,  for  assistance  in  using  archival  collections. 


Oral  History  Process 

The  oral  history  methodology  used  in  this  program  is  that  of  the 
Regional  Oral  History  office,  founded  in  1954  and  producer  of  over  1,600 
oral  histories.   The  method  consists  of  research  in  primary  and  secondary 
sources;  systematic  recorded  interviews;  transcription,  light  editing  by 
the  interviewer,  and  review  and  approval  by  the  interviewee;  library 
deposition  of  bound  volumes  of  transcripts  with  table  of  contents, 
introduction,  interview  history,  and  index;  cataloging  in  UC  Berkeley  and 
national  online  library  networks  (MELVYL,  RLIN,  and  OCLC) ;  and  publicity 
through  ROHO  news  releases  and  announcements  in  scientific,  medical,  and 
historical  journals  and  newsletters  and  via  the  ROHO  and  UCSF  Library  Web 
pages. 

Oral  history  as  a  historical  technique  has  been  faulted  for  its 
reliance  on  the  vagaries  of  memory,  its  distance  from  the  events  discussed, 
and  its  subjectivity.   All  three  criticisms  are  valid;  hence  the  necessity 
for  using  oral  history  documents  in  conjunction  with  other  sources  in  order 
to  reach  a  reasonable  historical  interpretation.1  Yet  these  acknowledged 
weaknesses  of  oral  history,  particularly  its  subjectivity,  are  also  its 
strength.   Often  individual  perspectives  provide  information  unobtainable 
through  more  traditional  sources.   Oral  history  in  skillful  hands  provides 
the  context  in  which  events  occur- -the  social,  political,  economic,  and 


'The  three  criticisms  leveled  at  oral  history  also  apply  in  many  cases 
to  other  types  of  documentary  sources. 


iv 


institutional  forces  which  shape  the  course  of  events.   It  also  places  a 
personal  face  on  history  which  not  only  enlivens  past  events  but  also  helps 
to  explain  how  individuals  affect  historical  developments. 

An  advantage  of  a  series  of  oral  histories  on  a  given  topic,  in  this 
case  molecular  biology  and  biotechnology,  is  that  the  information  each 
contains  is  cumulative  and  interactive.   Through  individual  accounts,  a 
series  can  present  the  complexities  and  interconnections  of  the  larger 
picture.   Thus  the  whole  (the  series)  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  its  parts 
(the  individual  oral  histories),  and  should  be  considered  as  a  totality. 

Emerging  Themes 

Although  the  oral  history  program  is  still  in  its  infancy,  several 
themes  are  emerging.   One  is  "technology  transfer,"  the  complicated  process 
by  which  scientific  discovery  moves  from  the  university  laboratory  to 
industry  where  it  contributes  to  the  manufacture  of  commercial  products. 
The  oral  histories  show  that  this  trajectory  is  seldom  a  linear  process, 
but  rather  is  influenced  by  institutional  and  personal  relationships, 
financial  and  political  climate,  and  so  on. 

Another  theme  is  the  importance  of  personality  in  the  conduct  of 
science  and  industry.   These  oral  histories  testify  to  the  fact  that  who 
you  are,  what  you  have  and  have  not  achieved,  whom  you  know,  and  how  you 
relate  has  repercussions  for  the  success  or  failure  of  an  enterprise, 
whether  scientific  or  commercial.   Oral  history  is  probably  better  than  any 
other  methodology  for  documenting  these  personal  dimensions  of  history. 
Its  vivid  descriptions  of  personalities  and  events  not  only  make  history 
vital  and  engaging,  but  also  contribute  to  an  understanding  of  why 
circumstances  occurred  in  the  manner  they  did. 

Molecular  biology  and  biotechnology  are  fields  with  high  scientific 
and  commercial  stakes.   As  one  might  expect,  the  oral  histories  reveal  the 
complex  interweaving  of  scientific,  business,  social,  and  personal  factors 
shaping  these  fields.   The  expectation  is  that  the  oral  histories  will 
serve  as  fertile  ground  for  research  by  present  and  future  scholars 
interested  in  any  number  of  different  aspects  of  this  rich  and  fascinating 
history. 


Update,  September  2001 

In  early  2001,  the  Program  in  the  History  of  the  Biological  Sciences 
and  Biotechnology  was  given  great  impetus  by  Genentech's  generous  pledge  of 
one  million  dollars  to  support  documentation  of  the  biotechnology  industry. 
At  an  initial  meeting  of  Genentech  and  Library  personnel  in  November  2000, 
it  was  agreed  that  the  initial  phase  of  the  Genentech-supported  project  in 
the  company's  twenty-fifth  anniversary  year  should  focus  on  oral  histories 


with  current  and  former  Genentech  employees.   Archival  collection,  on  the 
other  hand,  was  designated  as  a  long-term  process  because  of  the  greater 
necessity  to  gather  oral  documentation  while  minds  are  clear  and  because  of 
Genentech' s  present  need  to  retain  many  corporate  documents  for  legal  and 
other  reasons. 

On  October  15,  2001,  The  Bancroft  Library  will  celebrate  Genentech' s 
twenty-fifth  anniversary  and  acknowledge  its  generosity  to  the  Program  by 
formally  presenting  the  oral  histories  of  Herbert  W.  Boyer  and  Robert  A. 
Swanson,  the  company's  founders.   Oral  histories  are  currently  in  progress 
with  the  following  individuals  presently  or  formerly  at  Genentech:  David 
Goeddel,  Arthur  Levinson,  Fred  Middleton,  Richard  Scheller,  and  Daniel 
Yansura.   Oral  histories  are  also  completed  or  in  progress  with  individuals 
at  Chiron  Corporation  and  Tularik,  Inc.   The  next  phase  will  expand 
documentation  to  other  biotechnology  companies. 


Location  of  the  Oral  Histories 

Copies  of  the  oral  histories  are  available  at  the  Bancroft,  UCSF,  and 
UCLA  libraries .   They  also  may  be  purchased  at  cost  through  the  Regional 
Oral  History  Office.   Some  of  the  oral  histories,  with  more  to  come,  are 
available  on  The  Bancroft  Library's  History  of  the  Biological  Sciences  and 
Biotechnology  Website:  http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/BANC/Biotech/. 


Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Ph.D. 
Historian  of  Science 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 
University  of  California,  Berkeley 
October  2001 


vi 


October  2001 
ORAL  HISTORIES  ON  BIOTECHNOLOGY 

Program  in  the  History  of  the  Biological  Sciences  and  Biotechnology 

Paul  Berg,  Ph.D.,  "A  Stanford  Professor's  Career  in  Biochemistry,  Science 
Politics,  and  the  Biotechnology  Industry,"  2000 

Herbert  W.  Boyer,  Ph.D.,  "Recombinant  DNA  Science  at  UCSF  and  Its 
Commercialization  at  Genentech,"  2001 

Arthur  Kornberg,  M.D. ,  "Biochemistry  at  Stanford,  Biotechnology  at  DNAX, "  1998 

"Regional  Characteristics  of  Biotechnology  in  the  United  States:  Perspectives  of 
Three  Industry  Insiders"  (Hugh  D'Andrade,  David  Holveck,  and  Edward  Penhoet) , 
2001 

Niels  Reimers,  "Stanford's  Office  of  Technology  Licensing  and  the  Cohen/Boyer 
Cloning  Patents,"  1998 

William  J.  Rutter,  Ph.D.,  "The  Department  of  Biochemistry  and  the  Molecular 
Approach  to  Biomedicine  at  the  University  of  California,  San  Francisco,"  1998 

Robert  A.  Swanson,  "Co-founder,  CEO,  and  Chairman  of  Genentech,  1976-1996,"  2001 

Oral  histories  in  process: 

Stanley  Cohen 

David  Goeddel 

Daniel  Koshland 

Marian  E.  Koshland  retrospective 

Arthur  Levins on 

Fred  Middleton 

Richard  Scheller 

Keith  R.  Yamamoto. 


vii 
INTRODUCTION  by  J.  Michael  Bishop 


It  was  Herb  Boyer's  bad  luck  that  Arnold  Palmer  was  born  in  Latrobe, 
Pennsylvania.   Otherwise,  Herb  would  be  the  most  famous  person  to  hail  from 
that  remote  part  of  the  universe.   No  matter:  there  is  glory  enough  to  go 
around.  Arnie  may  have  swung  a  golf  club  well  and  led  a  small  army  around 
when  he  was  in  his  prime.   But  he  never  invented  a  revolutionary  technology 
nor  founded  an  entire  new  industry,  and  he  will  never  see  his 
accomplishments  produce  immeasurable  advances  in  human  health  and  welfare. 
All  those  credits  go  to  Herb  Boyer.   Granted,  Herb  had  a  little  help  from 
others,  as  he  tells  in  the  pages  that  follow.   But  he  was  the  constant  in 
the  story. 

I  first  met  Herb  when  I  arrived  at  the  University  of  California,  San 
Francisco  (UCSF)  in  1968  as  a  newly  minted  assistant  professor.   He  had 
preceded  me  by  little  more  than  a  year,  so  we  were  immediate  brethren  in 
the  joys  and  deprivations  of  being  junior  faculty.   My  starting  salary  was 
14,000  dollars,  Herb's  may  have  been  even  worse—he  was  not  then  much  of  a 
bargainer.   In  the  years  to  come,  however,  he  would  do  vastly  better  than  I 
in  compensating  for  our  impecunious  start.   (It  may  be  fantasy,  but  I 
recall  that  Herb  did  offer  me  one  main  chance- -the  opportunity  to  be  an 
early  investor  in  Genentech;  I  declined—it  seemed  a  dubious  scheme  to  me.) 

Herb  was  (and  remains)  twice  my  size,  he  was  enormously  friendly,  and 
he  knew  ever  so  much  more  about  how  to  do  research  than  I  did.   I  would 
have  been  a  fool  not  to  have  liked  him  and  not  to  have  listened  to  him.   I 
did  both  and  profited  immensely.   How  could  I  return  the  favor?  Herb  says 
here  that  I  "provided  some  scientific  stimulation"  and  "was  just  good 
company."   No  one  could  ask  for  better  praise  (although  the  qualifiers 
"some"  and  "just"  give  me  pause  for  thought) . 

I  was  chagrined  to  read  in  these  interviews  that  certain  unnamed 
denizens  of  the  floor  on  which  I  worked  at  UCSF  banished  Herb  because  of 
fear  that  the  bacteria  required  for  his  experiments  would  contaminate  the 
premises,  damaging  academic  careers.   Herb  was  consigned,  instead,  to 
inferior  quarters,  bereft  of  virtually  all  professional  amenities.   Could  I 
have  been  among  the  baleful  lot  that  issued  the  edict?   Certainly  not! 
Herb  was  well  ensconced  in  his  decrepit  exile  by  the  time  that  I  arrived  in 
San  Francisco.   Herb  took  at  least  modest  revenge  for  his  ostracism, 
destroying  several  pieces  of  the  expensive  equipment  that  he  regularly 
borrowed  from  his  oppressors.   And  since  like  attracts  like  in  science,  one 
of  his  early  graduate  students  managed  to  earn  the  sobriquet  "auto- 
destruct." 


viii 

However  poor  his  quarters,  Herb  did  wondrous  things,  and  for  a  while, 
no  one  knew.   In  fact,  for  much  of  his  career,  he  remained  "something  of  an 
outsider,"  as  he  describes  himself.   I  certainly  did  not  appreciate  the 
astonishing  potential  of  what  Herb  was  doing  in  those  early  years.   Nor  did 
he,  by  his  own  admission.   He  was  simply  following  a  trace  of  curiosity 
that  originated  in  his  fascination  with  genetics  as  a  high  school  student; 
that  first  materialized  in  his  graduate  thesis  (a  bold  but  doomed  effort  to 
ascertain  the  nature  of  the  genetic  code  by  mutagenesis  alone,  anticipating 
by  several  years  the  more  successful  experiments  of  Sydney  Brenner  and 
Francis  Crick) ;  that  evolved  into  an  interest  in  how  chemical  modifications 
of  DNA  can  change  the  behavior  of  genes;  and  that  culminated  in  path 
breaking  studies  of  restriction  endonucleases,  the  development  of 
recombinant  DNA,  and  the  launching  of  the  biotechnology  industry. 

Is  there  anyone  in  modern  biology  who  does  not  know  about  that 
fateful  evening  in  a  Honolulu  delicatessen,  when  Herb  Boyer  and  Stanley 
Cohen  sealed  the  deal  that  led  to  the  cloning  of  DNA?  Why  is  it  that  no 
one  ever  names  the  place?   I  searched  in  vain  for  it  even  in  these 
interviews.   Wherever  it  occurred,  the  moment  was  so  portentous  that  it  is 
now  enshrined  in  sculpture  on  the  Genentech  campus.   And  how  easy  it  is  to 
forget  the  daring  of  what  came  next:  move  genetic  material  from  one  species 
to  another,  across  billions  of  years  of  evolution,  and  have  it  propagate. 
It  proved  to  be  ridiculously  easy,  once  a  few  technical  problems  were 
solved.   The  first  sign  of  success  overwhelmed  Herb:  "I  can  remember  tears 
coming  into  my  eyes,  it  was  so  nice."   I  was  just  down  the  hall  when  this 
happened,  I  am  certain,  but  I  missed  the  moment. 

It  was  nice,  it  was  powerful,  and  for  some,  it  was  worrisome.   Alarms 
sounded.   What  mischief  might  ensue  such  meddling  with  the  natural  order? 
Before  long,  the  research  community  had  implemented  a  voluntary  moratorium 
on  research  with  recombinant  DNA  until  the  issue  of  safety  could  be 
resolved.   In  December  of  1974,  concerned  parties  met  at  the  Asilomar 
Conference  Center  in  Pacific  Grove,  California,  and  drafted  the  first  of 
several  sets  of  guidelines  by  which  recombinant  DNA  could  be  pursued.   The 
matter  was  soon  in  the  hands  of  the  federal  government,  and  molecular 
biologists  knew  for  the  first  time  the  full  force  of  bureaucracy. 

For  Herb  Boyer,  the  Asilomar  conference  was  a  "nightmare,"  an 
"absolutely  disgusting  week,"  and  the  biohazard  committees  that  the 
conference  sired,  "an  incredible  waste  of  time  and  money."   Harsh  words, 
but  I  too  was  at  Asilomar,  and  I  can  vouch  for  the  distemper  of  the  event. 
Unlike  Herb,  however,  I  saw  value  in  the  caution  with  which  the  research 
community  proceeded,  even  though  I  too  was  never  convinced  that  we  faced 
any  substantive  hazard  from  recombinant  DNA.   Cynics  now  say  that  much  of 


ix 

the  fuss  disappeared  once  molecular  biologists  belatedly  came  to  understand 
the  fundamentals  of  bacterial  ecology,  as  authentic  microbiologists  had 
long  understood  them.   Twenty  years  downstream,  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
delay  cost  humanity  very  much  by  way  of  progress,  and  it  helped  preserve 
some  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  scientific  community.   Herb  Boyer  puts  it 
more  bluntly:  "In  five  years,  it  probably  didn't  make  a  hell  of  a  big 
difference. " 

Having  disturbed  the  precepts  of  the  natural  order,  Herb  proceeded  to 
rattle  the  precincts  of  the  academic  fraternity.   According  to  his  account, 
it  all  began  because  he  was  second  on  Bob  Swanson's  alphabetical  list  of 
individuals  who  might  have  intellectual  property  that  would  be  useful  in 
the  commercialization  of  recombinant  DNA.   (The  first  person  on  the  list 
apparently  said  no.   Herb  suspects  that  the  naysayer  was  Paul  Berg,  but  I 
have  it  on  good  authority  that  this  is  not  correct.)   Swanson  got  no 
farther  down  the  list.   Genentech  was  born. 

Those  who  believe  that  Herb  Boyer  played  only  a  casual  role  in  the 
creation  of  Genentech  should  read  these  interviews,  because  they  provide 
clear  evidence  of  the  thoughtful  attention  that  Herb  gave  to  the  science, 
the  personnel,  and  the  ethos  of  the  infant  company.   His  imprint  persists 
to  this  day,  making  Genentech  one  of  the  premier  employers-of-choice  among 
scientists  seeking  a  career  in  biotechnology,  and  one  of  the  crown  jewels 
of  an  industry  that  seeks  to  advance  human  health  and  welfare. 

Commercialization  of  biological  discoveries  was  far  from  novel  at  the 
birth  of  Genentech:  Big  Pharma  had  been  doing  it  for  a  long  time.   But  for 
a  member  of  the  academic  community  to  be  so  intimately  involved,  that  was  a 
sea  change.   No  one  had  thought  much  about  the  rules  for  how  this  might  be 
done.   So-  there  were  repercussions,  particularly  among  the  faculty  of  UCSF 
--a  hue  and  cry  over  potential  conflicts  of  interest.   It  was  a  harrowing 
time  for  Herb  Boyer,  best  grasped  through  his  own  words  in  these 
interviews . 

Times  have  changed,  as  Boyer  ruefully  notes.   Most  of  his  former 
critics  now  traffic  with  industry  as  if  it  had  always  been  so.   But  make  no 
mistake,  the  issues  of  professional  conduct  that  arose  during  the  infancy 
of  biotechnology  persist  today.   We  have  still  to  perfect  the  rules  of 
play,  even  as  the  demand  mounts  to  accelerate  the  transformation  of 
biomedical  discoveries  into  practical  applications,  and  even  as  the  academy 
grows  ever  more  eager  and  needful  for  the  revenues  that  commercialization 
can  bring. 


Herb  Boyer  emerged  from  Latrobe  as  a  naif.   That  was  to  become  a 
precious  legacy.   He  consistently  tried  big  things  without  knowing  whether 
they  could  or  should  work.   His  graduate  thesis  was  an  impossible 
undertaking  with  a  germ  of  genius.   His  decision  to  purify  and  characterize 
restriction  enzymes  brought  him  into  competition  with  some  of  the  most 
formidable  scientists  on  the  face  of  the  globe.   His  partnership  with  Bob 
Swanson  was  driven  mainly  by  a  desire  to  acquire  more  funding  for  his 
laboratory  and  junior  colleagues --the  personal  financial  gains  that  lay  in 
the  offing  were  beyond  his  "wildest  dreams".   His  desire  to  use  recombinant 
DNA  for  the  production  of  human  proteins  was  fueled  in  part  by  the 
possibility  that  his  older  son  might  require  an  extremely  scarce 
medication,  growth  hormone.   His  expectation  that  such  production  could  be 
scaled  up  to  industrial  levels  had  no  basis  in  fact.   Herb's  explanation: 
"I  think  we  were  so  naive,  we  never  thought  it  couldn't  be  done." 

In  due  course,  Boyer  lost  his  naivete  and  gained  celebrity.   He  was 
awarded  the  National  Medal  of  Technology  and  the  National  Medal  of  Science, 
in  successive  years.   He  has  been  honored  as  an  inventor  and  as  a  scientist 
in  many  other  ways.   He  has  been  featured  in  People  magazine.   Through  it 
all,  Herb  has  remained  bemused  and  unpretentious.   This  is  not  to  say  that 
he  is  oblivious  to  his  opportunities.   I  once  asked  Herb  to  identify  his 
favorite  site  for  fly  fishing.   I  expected  a  recognizable  name  from 
somewhere  in  North  America,  but  Herb  named  a  river  in  Patagonia.   So  far  as 
I  knew  at  the  time,  the  last  scientist  to  visit  Patagonia  had  been  Charles 
Darwin. 

As  a  scientist,  Herb  was  generous  with  precious  reagents:  some  say 
that  he  shipped  off  the  makings  of  a  Nobel  Prize  in  mailing  tubes.   As  a 
person  of  wealth,  he  has  been  generous  with  his  philanthropy.   But  he  has 
become  more  discriminating  with  his  philanthropy  than  he  was  with  his 
reagents,  and  his  discrimination  reflects  his  loyalties.   Seeking 
postdoctoral  training  many  years  ago,  Herb  was  rebuffed  at  Stanford  but 
accepted  at  Yale.   It  is  Yale  that  now  boasts  a  Boyer  Hall,  not  Stanford. 
Perhaps  his  most  renowned  act  of  generosity  was  to  direct  all  his  personal 
income  from  the  patents  on  recombinant  DNA  to  his  department  at  UCSF.   (I 
hear  tell  that  Stanford  again  did  not  fare  as  well,  but  that  would  not  have 
been  Herb's  doing.)   The  eventual  yield  was  52  million  dollars,  to  be  used 
for  graduate  education  and  other  good  purposes  at  UCSF- -all  this  above  and 
beyond  the  university's  direct  share  of  the  patent  income.   A  portion  of 
the  UCSF  Medical  Center  also  bears  the  Boyer  name  in  recognition  of  an 
additional  gift. 

Herb  Boyer  made  another,  more  recent  discovery:  "There  is  a  life 
after  science."   He  retired  from  the  UCSF  faculty  in  1991.   Pursuing  his 


xi 

personal  mantra  to  "lighten  up,"  he  has  been  patron  to  both  a  repertory 
theatre  and  a  formula-one  racing  team  (the  latter  in  support  of  that  older 
son,  who  never  did  require  growth  hormone);  he  learned  to  fly  and  pursued 
his  romance  with  classic  cars;  he  has  attempted  to  emulate  Arnold  Palmer  on 
the  golf  links;  and  he  has  fished  in  every  hemisphere.   His  story  is 
archetypically  American- -a  testimony  to  the  power  of  egalitarian 
opportunity,  individual  freedom,  and  noble  ambition.   And  as  the  story  is 
told  here,  it  ends  in  a  quintessential  Boyerism:  "So  that's  about  all  I 
have  to  say."   It  is  said  well  and  it  should  be  read. 


J.  Michael  Bishop 

Chancellor 

University  of  California,  San  Francisco 

San  Francisco,  CA 
September  26,  2001 


xii 
INTERVIEW  HISTORY--Herbert  W.  Boyer 


Most  people  are  lucky  to  make  their  mark  in  one  area  of  professional 
life.  Herbert  W.  Boyer  has  made  his  in  three:  science,  business,  and  the  law. 
In  science,  he  and  Stanley  N.  Cohen  of  Stanford  University  are  celebrated  for 
their  development  of  recombinant  DNA  in  1973-1974.  In  the  business  world,  Dr. 
Boyer  is  remembered  as  co-founder,  with  Robert  Swanson,  of  Genentech,  the 
first  company  founded  on  recombinant  DNA  technology  and  the  harbinger  of  a  new 
industry.  And  in  the  legal  field  he  is  associated  with  the  Boyer-Cohen  cloning 
patents  which  set  precedents  for  intellectual  property  law  in  biotechnology. 
Although  Boyer  mentions  the  patents  in  this  oral  history,  his  interest  lies  in 
the  basic  science  of  recombinant  DNA  and  the  formation  of  Genentech.1 

A  highlight  of  this  oral  history  is  Boyer 's  detailed  narration  of  the 
research  up  to  and  including  the  critical  experiments  with  Stanley  Cohen, 
culminating  in  the  technology  subsequently  named  recombinant  DNA.  (The  term 
does  not  appear  in  the  three  papers  published  in  1973-1974  by  the  Boyer  and 
Cohen  laboratories.)  In  addition  to  details  of  the  science,  Boyer  addresses 
the  biohazards  controversy  and  the  now-famous  Asilomar  Conference  on 
Recombinant  DNA  Molecules  of  1975  and  the  safety  precautions  for  recombinant 
research  which  UCSF  and  other  research  universities  adopted  in  Asilomar 's 
wake. 

Another  high  point  is  Boyer 's  discussion  of  events  leading  to  the 
formation  of  Genentech  in  1976.  He  prefaces  the  oft-told  tale  of  his  first 
meeting  with  Robert  Swanson  with  the  less-known  fact  that  he  had  already 
envisioned  commercial  applications  of  recombinant  DNA  before  ever  meeting  the 
young  entrepreneur.  He  goes  on  to  describe  why  somatostatin,  rather  than 
insulin,  became  Genentech's  first  project.  There  were  some  tense  moments,  as 
Robert  Swanson 's  oral  history  also  describes,  in  which  it  was  not  clear  that 
recombinant  DNA  would  prove  to  be  useful  in  pharmaceutical  production2.  The 
successful  cloning  and  expression  of  the  human  gene  for  somatostatin  had 
heartening  repercussions  for  the  future  of  an  industry  based  on  the  new 
genetic  technologies  and  for  the  struggling  young  company  which  Boyer  and 
Swanson  had  just  founded. 


•'The  Cohen-Boyer  patent  is  discussed  at  length  in  the  oral  histories  in 
process  with  Stanley  N.  Cohen  and  Thomas  D.  Kiley,  first  general  counsel  at 
Genentech.  (At  Stanford  it  is  the  "Cohen-Boyer"  patent;  at  UC  the  "Boyer- 
Cohen"  patent.) 

2Robert  A.  Swanson,  "Co-founder,  CEO,  and  Chairman  of  Genentech,  Inc.," 
an  oral  history  conducted  in  1996-1997  by  Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Ph.D.,  Regional 
Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley, 
2001. 


xiii 


The  Oral  History  Process 

I  conducted  five  interviews  with  Dr.  Boyer  in  1994.  It  was  almost  a  year 
after  our  first  meeting  before  Dr.  Boyer  was  ready  to  schedule  the  initial 
interview.  Although  he  had  retired  from  UCSF  in  1991,  he  was  busily  engaged  in 
activities  ranging  from  board  memberships  to  fishing  trips  to  attending  a 
son's  car  races  around  the  country.  Once  Dr.  Boyer  had  agreed  to  the  first 
interview,  scheduling  subsequent  sessions  fell  easily  into  place.  Despite 
aversion  to  self-aggrandizement,  he  gave  every  appearance  of  being  fully 
engaged  in  and  enjoying  the  interview  process. 

The  interviews  were  conducted  in  the  Boyer  home  in  Mill  Valley  with  its 
spectacular  outlook  from  the  slopes  of  Mt.  Tamalpais.  (In  recent  years,  Dr. 
Boyer  and  his  wife  Grace  have  moved  to  Rancho  Santa  Fe  in  southern  California 
to  be  close  to  one  son  and  a  new  grandchild.)  The  walls  of  the  living  room 
where  we  sat  were  hung  with  modern  art  and  embellished  with  sculpture, 
guarded,  using  the  term  loosely,  by  Ralph  the  remarkable  cat.  Although  Dr. 
Boyer  projected  a  "laid-back"  California  manner,  underlined  by  his  glowing  tan 
and  attire  of  slacks  and  short-sleeved  shirt,  his  answers  were  thoughtful, 
direct,  and  at  times  technical.  For  reasons  explained  in  the  oral  history,  he 
has  always  kept  his  involvement  at  Genentech  at  arm's  length,  although  he 
continues  to  be  a  member  of  its  board  of  directors. 

I  did  the  initial  editing  of  the  interview  transcripts  and  sent  them  to 
Dr.  Boyer  in  1994.  Because  of  other  obligations,  he  did  not  review  the 
transcripts  for  some  years.  In  1996,  I  returned  to  my  permanent  position  at  UC 
Berkeley  and  began  work  on  the  Bancroft  Library's  Program  in  the  History  of 
the  Biological  Sciences  and.  Biotechnology.  Nancy  Rockafellar  at  UC  San 
Francisco  and  I  at  UC  Berkeley  revived  the  Boyer  project  in  1998-99,  with  Dr. 
Boyer' s  subsequent  agreement  that  the  interviews  would  be  produced  in  both  the 
UCSF  oral  history  series  and  in  the  Bancroft  Library's  Program  in  the  History 
of  Bioscience  and  Biotechnology  at  UCB.  Willa  Baum,  former  director  of 
Berkeley's  Regional  Oral  History  Office  and  Kathy  Zvanovec-Higbee,  also  of 
ROHO,  adeptly  coordinated  work  on  the  two  campuses.  The  resulting  oral  history 
volumes  have  identical  pagination  but  different  accompanying  pages,  consistent 
with  the  standards  of  each  institution.  I  am  grateful  to  Dr.  Boyer  for  the 
time  and  energy  expended  on  this  project  and  to  Cookie  Lupacchini  for 
graciously  smoothing  the  way.  We  particularly  thank  Chancellor  Bishop  for 
writing  an  informative  and  graceful  introduction  to  an  oral  history  of  a 
friend  and  former  colleague.  Shannon  Page  served  as  expert  transcriptionist. 
I  also  thank  the  Genentech  Foundation  for  Biomedical  Science  which  underwrote 
the  interviews  and  Genentech,  Inc.  for  its  support  of  final  production  of  the 
UCSF  and  UCB  volumes. 

Dr.  Boyer 's  modest  and  revealing  account,  when  used  with  the  oral 
history  in  process  with  Dr.  Cohen,  provides  the  most  complete  description  in 
existence  of  the  origin  of  recombinant  DNA  technology  and  the  nature  of  the 


xiv 

collaboration  of  the  Boyer  and  Cohen  laboratories.  In  addition,  with  the 
availability  of  the  Boyer  and  Swanson  oral  histories,  we  have  the  first 
comprehensive  history  in  the  words  of  the  founders  of  the  genesis  and  early 
years  of  Genentech. 

The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  was  established  in  1954  to  augment 
through  tape-recorded  memoirs  the  Library's  materials  on  the  history  of 
California  and  the  West.  Copies  of  all  interviews  are  available  for  research 
use  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and  in  the  UCLA  Department  of  Special  Collections. 
The  office  is  under  the  direction  of  Richard  Candida  Smith,  Director,  and  the 
administrative  direction  of  Charles  B.  Faulhaber,  James  D.  Hart  Director  of 
The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley.  The  catalogues  of 
the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  and  many  online  oral  histories  can  be 
accessed  at  http://library.berkeley.edu/BANC/ROHO.  Online  information  about 
the  Program  in  the  History  of  the  Biological  Sciences  and  Biotechnology  can  be 
accessed  at  http://library.berkeley.edu/BANC/Biotech/. 


Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Ph.D. 
Historian  of  Science 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 
University  of  California,  Berkeley 
October  2001 


XV 


Curriculum  Vitae 

Herbert  W.  Boyer 


Birthdate:         July  10,  1936 
Birthplace:       Derry,  Pennsylvania 


Education 

St.  Vincent  College,  Latrobe,  PA  B.A.  1958 

University  of  Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh,  PA  M.S.  1960 

University  of  Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh,  PA  Ph.D.  1963 

Yale  University,  New  Haven,  CT  Postdoctoral  1 963-66 


Honors  and  Societies 

V.D.  Mattia  Award,  Roche  Institute  of  Molecular  Biology  1977 

Doisy  Lecturer,  University  of  Illinois  1 979 

Fellow,  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences  1979 

Albert  Lasker  Basic  Medical  Research  Award  1980 

Honorary  Doctor  of  Science  Degree,  St.  Vincent  College  1981 

American  Academy  of  Achievement,  Golden  Plate  Award  1981 

California  Inventors  Hall  of  Fame  1982 

Industrial  Research  Institute  Achievement  Award  1982 

National  Academy  of  Sciences  1 985 

Distinguished  Alumni  Award,  University  of  Pittsburgh  1 987 

Fellow,  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  1988 

Cetus  Corporation  Award  for  Research  in  Biotechnology  1988 

Moet  Hennessy-Louis  Vuitton  Prize,  Biotechnology  Prize  1988 

City  of  Medicine  Award,  Durham,  NC  and  Duke  University  1988 

First  National  Biotechnology  Award  1 989 

National  Medal  of  Technology  1 989 

National  Medal  of  Science  1990 

Helmut  Horten  Research  Award  1 993 


Lemelson-MIT  Prize 
Biotechnology  Heritage  Award 


XVI 


2000 


1996 


Professional  Positions  Held  at  the  University  of  California,  San  Francisco 

Professor  Emeritus  1991  -present 

Professor,  Department  of  Biochemistry  and  Biophysics  1 976- 1991 

Investigator,  Howard  Hughes  Medical  Institute  7/76-6/83 

Director,  Graduate  Program  in  Genetics  7/76-9/81 

Associate  Professor  of  Biochemistry,  Dept.  Of  Biochemistry  &  Biophys.  12/75-6/76 

Associate  Professor  of  Microbiology,  Dept.  Of  Microbiology  1971-1975 

Assistant  Professor,  Department  of  Microbiology  1966-1971 


Academic  Committees  and  Extramural  Activities 

Medical  Student  Research  Committee,  UCSF 

Faculty  Council,  School  of  Medicine,  UCSF 

Co-Founder  and  Board  of  Directors,  Genentech,  Inc. 

Consultant  to  UNIDO 

American  Academy  of  Achievement,  Executive  Board 

Board  Member,  Radiology  Research  and  Education  Foundation 

Board,  Marin  Theatre  Company 

Board  Member,  St.  Vincent  College 

Dean's  Council,  Yale  University  School  of  Medicine 

President's  Circle,  National  Academy  of  Sciences 

Director,  UCSF  Foundation 

Member,  UCSF  Capital  Campaign  Committee 

Board  Member,  Allergan  Corporation 

Chairman  of  the  Board,  Allergan  Corporation 

Member  of  the  Board  of  Trustees,  Keck  Graduate  Institute 

Member  of  the  Board  of  Trustees,  Scripps  Research  Institute 


1973-1976 

1975-1976 

1977-present 

1980-1982 

1982-1986 

1985-1995 

1986-1995 

1986-1995 

1989-1997 

1989-present 

1992-1995 

1992-1995 

1994-present 

1998-present 

1999-present 

1999-present 


INTERVIEW  WITH  HERBERT  W.  BOYER 


I  EDUCATION 

[Interview  1:  March  18,  1994 ]##' 

St.  Vincent's  College,  Latrobe.  Pennsylvania 

Hughes:    I  know  where  you  were  born  and  raised,  but  for  the  sake  of  the 
recording,  please  tell  me. 

Boyer:     I  was  born  in  western  Pennsylvania  in  1936,  grew  up  in  a  small  town 
there,  Derry,  Pennsylvania.  Went  to  public  schools,  and  attended  a 
liberal  arts  college  nearby  in  Latrobe.  We  were  known  as  day  hops  if 
we  commuted  from  our  homes  to  the  school,  St.  Vincent's  College.  I 
graduated  from  St.  Vincent's  in  1958,  and  went  on  to  the  University 
of  Pittsburgh  for  a  graduate  degree  in  microbiology.2 

Graduate  Student,  University  of  Pittsburgh.  1958-1963 
Interest  in  Microbial  Genetics 

Hughes:    Explain  how  you  became  interested  in  microbiology. 

Boyer:     Well,  I  had  more  of  an  interest  in  genetics  as  an  undergraduate,  and 
even  in  high  school  I  had  an  interest  in  genetics  from  the  biology 
course  we  had.  When  I  applied  to  the  University  of  Pittsburgh  for 
graduate  school,  I  expressed  an  interest  in  genetics  and  was  told 
that  there  was  a  new  faculty  member  there,  Ellis  Englesberg,  who  was 
interested  in  microbial  genetics.  It  was  a  new,  hot  field  at  that 
time,  and  I  found  it  to  be  interesting.  I  went  to  talk  to  him,  and 
became  very  much  interested  in  what  he  was  doing.  So  that's  how  I 
got  into  microbiology. 

Ellis  Englesberg  was  at  the  University  of  Pittsburgh  for  a  number  of 
years  after  I  left,  and  then  he  went  to  UC  Santa  Barbara.  I  think  he 


'//#  This  symbol  indicates  that  a  tape  or  tape  segment  has  begun  or  ended. 
A  guide  to  the  tapes  follows  the  transcript. 

2For  more  on  Herbert  Boyer 's  early  life  see  his  oral  history,  recorded 
May  29,  1975,  in  the  Recombinant  DNA  Controversy  Oral  History  Collection, 
Institute  Archives  and  Special  Collections,  MIT. 


must  be  retired  by  now,  but  I  couldn't  say  for  sure.  So  actually, 
the  University  of  Pittsburgh  had  a  department  of  biological 
sciences,  and  then  they  had  divisions  within  that,  including  a 
microbiology  division.  So  I  couldn't  tell  you  exactly  whether  the 
degree  was  in  microbiology  or  biological  sciences  with  a  specialty 
in  microbiology,  but  essentially  the  training  was  in  microbiology. 

Hughes:    What  was  happening  in  microbiological  genetics  at  that  time?  It  was 
a  pretty  hot  period,  wasn't  it? 

Boyer:     Well,  it  was.  It  was  the  post-Watson-Crick  discovery  era.1 
Hughes:    You  were  too  young  to  have  their  discovery  make  an  impression? 

Boyer:     No,  it  did  make  an  impact  on  me.  When  I  was  in  undergraduate  school, 
I  was  taking  a  physiology  course,  and  there  was  a  new  textbook  which 
seemed  very  interesting.  Maybe  it  was  just  the  shiny  new  pages  more 
than  anything  else.  But  the  textbook  was  Geise's  new  Cell 
Physiology.  During  the  semester,  the  physiology  course  curriculum 
required  that  each  student,  and  there  were  maybe  fourteen  or  fifteen 
students  in  the  class  as  best  as  I  can  remember,  give  a  half -hour 
lecture  or  so  on  one  of  the  chapters.  So  we  were  to  read  and  prepare 
ourselves. 

I  can't  remember  whether  I  was  assigned  or  whether  I  chose  the 
chapter  which  dealt  with  DNA  as  a  genetic  material,  which  sort  of 
summarized  the  Watson-Crick  discoveries  and  some  of  the  other 
pertinent  findings  of  the  time.  I  thought  it.  was  great.  I  was  so 
enthusiastic  about  it,  I  got  a  pretty  good  grade  on  the  lecture.  But 
that  was  my  first  introduction  to  DNA  and  the  Watson-Crick  era. 

Hughes:    Did  you  follow  it  from  then  on? 

Boyer:     Well,  I  had  a  strong  interest.  We  had  a  great  old  professor  who  was  a 
Benedictine--St.  Vincent's  was  a  Benedictine  liberal  arts  school  —  and 
this  guy  was  just  so  great,  very  kind  and  thoughtful  and  a  dedicated 
man.  I  remember  we  talked  about  the  genetic  material.  One  time,  in  a 
laboratory  setting,  he  was  discussing  the  nature  of  the  genetic 
material,  and  he  expressed  his  belief  that  it  had  to  be  protein.  I  can 


'James  Dewey  Watson  and  Francis  Harry  Compton  Crick  proposed  a  "double 
helix"  structure  for  the  DNA  molecule  in  1953.  In  1962  they  were  awarded  the 
Nobel  Prize  in  Physiology  or  Medicine. 


remember  him  talking  about  how  proteins  had  to  be  the  genetic 
material,  and  he  talked  about  viruses  replicating  and  so  on  and  so 
forth.  This  was  probably  in  1956.  So  the  Watson-Crick  discovery  hadn't 
made  the  impact  into  the  small  liberal  arts  schools  and  other  schools 
which  didn't  have  sophisticated  faculty  doing  research. 

Hughes:    Of  course,  the  hypothesis  that  the  genetic  material  was  protein  wasn't 
a  crazy  idea. 

Boyer:     No,  no,  it  had  been  proposed.  But  then  when  I  read  this  chapter,  it 
all  made  sense  that  DNA  was  the  genetic  substance.  These  were  the 
questions  that  were  floating  around  at  the  time. 


The  Genetic  Code 

Hughes :    What  year  did  you  give  the  chapter  presentation? 
Boyer:     That  would  have  been  1957,  I  believe. 
Hughes:    So  the  code  had  not  been  broken. 

Boyer:     No.  When  I  went  to  graduate  school,  the  genetic  code  was  a  focus  of 
investigative  activity  and  something  in  which  I  was  interested.  My 
Ph.D.  dissertation  research  was  directed  toward  that  end.1  It  was  an 
ambitious  project,  and  a  lot  of  people  were  attempting  to  get  at  the 
nature  of  the  code  at  that  time  by  doing  what  we  called  fine  structure 
genetic  analysis.  Essentially  we  just  tried  to  saturate  a  gene  with 
mutations  and  determine  the  linear  arrangement  of  mutational  sites  and 
characterize  them  as  best  as  possible—the  size  of  the  gene  compared 
to  the  protein,  et  cetera,  et  cetera.  It  was  a  laborious  and  extremely 
difficult  task. 

Hughes:    Which  you  didn't  realize  when  you  chose  the  topic? 

Boyer:     Well,  of  course  not.  [laughs]  You  don't  want  to  take  on  easy  projects. 
But  it  was  very  exciting. 

Hughes:    Did  it  work? 


'Herbert  W.  Boyer,  "Studies  of  Base-Analogue  Induced  Mutations  in  a  Small 
Region  of  the  L-Ribulokinase  Structural  Gene  of  Escherichia  coli"  (Ph.D.  diss., 
University  of  Pittsburgh,  1963). 


Boyer:     Eventually  work?  It  would  have  taken  many,  many  years  from  that 

approach.  From  what  we  know  today,  it  might,  but  much  of  what  we  know 
today  is  based  on  knowing  the  genetic  code  from  other  means,  so  it's 
hard  to  say  we  would  have  ever  come  to  the  same  conclusions  that  we 
have  at  this  particular  time. 

The  approach  involved  using  what  were  described  as  specific  mutagens, 
mutagens  which  one  thought  caused  certain  changes  in  the  genetic 
material.  You  would  study  the  mutation  rates,  you  would  isolate 
mutations ,  determine  their  linear  arrangements ,  and  then  you  would 
try  to  analyze  revertants  to  further  analyze  what  the  initial 
mutational  change  might  have  been.  So  if  you  could  mutate  it  with  one 
mutagen,  and  then  reverse  it  with  another,  that  might  be  some 
confirmation  of  the  type  of  change.  If  you  converted  it  with  the 
mutagen  that  was  thought  to  just  cause  AT  [adenine-thymine]  to  GC 
[guanine-cytosine]  changes,  then  you  should  be  able  to  revert  it  with 
one  that  was  supposed  to  just  cause  GC  to  AT  changes.  So  it  was  that 
type  of  approach,  and  it  involved  a  lot  of  work,  long  hours, 
isolating  mutants  and  characterizing  them. 

Hughes:    Was  this  in  the  division  of  microbiology? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    You  could  have  been  in  a  lot  of  places,  couldn't  you? 

Boyer:     There  were  a  number  of  laboratories  interested  in  this.  I  couldn't 
tell  you  how  many,  but  the  individual  who  sort  of  spearheaded  this 
particular  approach  was  a  phage  geneticist  by  the  name  of  Seymour 
Benzer,  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  molecular  biology  school. 

Mentors  and  Colleagues 
Hughes:    Is  that  where  you  had  gotten  the  idea? 

Boyer:     I  think  I  got  the  idea  because  I  was  told  about  it  by  my  advisors  and 
my  mentors . 

Hughes :    They  were  doing  this  sort  of  research? 

Boyer:     Yes.  Well,  Ellis  Englesberg  was  interested  in  control  mechanisms,  and 
he  was  using  a  microbial  system  which  had  multiple  steps  in  the 
pathway.  One  could  control  by  the  substrate  the  amount  of  these 


enzymes  being  present.  They  were  inducible  enzymes.  So  he  was  working 
on  this  system  and  mapping  mutational  sites,  doing  the  enzymology  and 
so  on  and  so  forth. 

Then  there  was  another  young  assistant  professor  who  came  into  the 
department  whose  name  was  Roger  Weinberg,  and  he  wanted  to  use  this 
particular  system  to  try  to  get  at  the  genetic  code,  as  I  just 
described  in  brief  outline.  So  the  two  of  them  worked  together,  and  I 
primarily  worked  with  Roger  Weinberg  on  the  mutational  side  of  things. 
But  we  did  a  lot  of  collaborative  work  with  Ellis,  and  he  was  part  of 
the  immediate  mentorship  that  I  had. 

He's  a  very  forceful  man,  very  critical.  He  could  put  the  whip  to  you 
pretty  good.  He  used  to  be  very  critical  of  people  who  lived  in  the 
suburbs  of  Pittsburgh  and  commuted  back  and  forth  to  the  university, 
rather  than  living  in  the  tenements  nearby  and  spending  all  their  time 
working.  But  most  of  us  worked  pretty  long  hours. 

Hughes:    You  were  not  commuting  at  that  stage? 

Boyer:     No,  we  lived  in  Pittsburgh.  Within  I  think  the  last  year  I  was  in 
graduate  school,  we  moved  out  from  Pittsburgh,  because  my  wife 
Marigrace  was  working  at  Mellon  Institute  near  Monroeville. 

Hughes:    When  did  you  get  married? 

Boyer:     I  got  married  after  my  first  year  of  graduate  school  [1959].1 

The  Department  of  Microbiology  at  Pittsburgh 

Hughes:    By  then,  did  most  departments  of  microbiology  have  a  genetic,  phage 
approach?  They  weren't  just  doing  classical  microbiology? 

Boyer:     I  don't  know.  This  department  had  a  large  contingent  of  more 

traditional  microbiologists.  They  weren't  of  significant  reputation. 
But  I  remember  one  individual  who  was  interested  in  crown  gall.  You 
can  cause  tumors  in  plants  with  bacteria.  I  remember  going  to  seminars 
by  this  guy.  Years  later,  it  became  one  of  the  crucial  things,  with 
identification  of  the  causal  agent  as  actually  a  plasmid  within  a 


'Herbert  W.  Boyer  and  Marigrace  Hensler  were  married  in  1959. 


bacterium  which  causes  the  tumor,  and  it's  a  pathogenic  effect.  That 
particular  plasmid  has  served  as  the  basis  for  a  lot  of  the  plant 
genetic  engineering  that  is  taking  place  today. 

Hughes:    Little  did  he  know. 

Boyer:     Well,  he  didn't  have  the  tools  or  the  background.  It  took  years  to 

find  out  what  was  going  on  there.  The  fellows  that  I  worked  with  were 
just  continually  trying  to  get  at  this  guy.  They  couldn't  believe  that 
it  was  a  bacterium  and  were  always  trying  to  shoot  down  his  research. 
But  it  never  went  anywhere  because  he  just  didn't  have  the  tools  or 
the  resources.  It  wasn't  a  subject  of  interest  at  the  time  to  funding 
agencies.  Plant  biology  didn't  attract  a  lot  of  research  unless  you 
were  doing  plant  tissue  culture.  All  he  did  was  rub  dirt  on  the 
plants,  and  they  would  get  tumors. 

Hughes:    It  wasn't  cutting  edge. 

Boyer:     That's  right. 

Hughes:    Well,  what  about  funding  for  your  field,  for  genetics? 

Boyer:     Well,  this  was  an  era  when  the  funding  was  just  starting  to  take  off. 
I  can  remember,  Englesberg  had  some  funding  from  the  Naval  Research 
Laboratories  to  do  a  study  with  Salmonella  typhiwurium,  and  he  was 
doing  the  same  type  of  genetic  analysis  on  it  as  he  was  with  the  E. 
coli  system  that  I  alluded  to  before.  He  wanted  to  get  out  of  the 
Salmonella  system.  First  of  all,  you  could  get  sick  working  with  it.  3 
remember  one  guy  who  did  come  down  with  some  typhoid  symptoms  and  had 
to  be  treated,  and  he  worked  in  this  lab. 

So  Ellis  eventually  phased  that  out.  But  he  had  funding  from  NIH  and 
the  Naval  Research  Labs,  and  I  got  a  research  fellowship.  I  was  paid 
$2,500  a  year  to  work  in  the  lab. 

Hughes:    And  you  could  really  make  it  on  that  amount? 

Boyer:     Just  about.  With  a  little  bit  of  help  from  my  wife,  we  could  do  it. 

Hughes:    She's  a  scientist? 

Boyer:     She  was  a  scientist,  yes.  She  had  an  undergraduate  degree  in  science, 
and  she  worked  in  the  Mellon  Research  Laboratories.  They  primarily 


did  contract  work  with  companies  to  test  various  chemicals  for  their 
safety,  things  like  that. 

Hughes:    So  she  was  a  chemist? 

Boyer:     No,  she  was  a  biologist. 

Hughes:    Do  you  want  to  say  something  about  politics? 

Boyer:     I  was  apolitical  at  that  time.  Really  had  no  interest  in  politics.  My 
dad  was  a  Democrat,  and  in  the  high  school  mock  elections,  I  always 
voted  Democratic.  But  other  than  that,  I  really  couldn't  have  cared 
less . 

Postdoctoral  Fellow  at  Yale  University.  1963-1966 

Interest  in  Bacterial  Plasmids 
Hughes:    Is  the  next  step  then  Yale? 

Boyer:     After  University  of  Pittsburgh,  yes.  I  did  a  postdoctoral  fellowship 
at  Yale. 

Hughes:    How  did  that  come  about? 

Boyer:     When  I  was  finishing  my  graduate  degree  [1963],  there  were  a  lot  of 
people  doing  interesting  things.  So  I  started  to  try  and  identify 
people  in  places  where  I'd  like  to  go  do  a  postdoctoral  fellowship.  I 
had  developed  an  interest  in  bacterial  plasmids. 

Hughes:    How  had  you  developed  that  interest? 

Boyer:     Largely  through  reading  scientific  papers,  attending  seminars  by 

visiting  scientists.  There  was  a  scientist,  Dr.  Charles  Brinton,  at 
Pittsburgh  who  had  a  peripheral  interest  in  plasmids. 

Hughes:    Why  did  they  intrigue  you? 

Boyer:     Well,  they  were  small  mini-molecules.  They  were  like  mini-chromosomes . 
They  could  be  manipulated,  they  were  fun,  and  they  carried  a  number 
of  genetic  determinants  that  could  easily  be  utilized.  Plasmids 
were  shown  during  this  period  of  time  to  be  the  causative  agent  of 
sexual  conjugation  in  bacteria.  These  elements  were  transferred  from 
one  cell  to  another,  had  similarities  with  viruses,  and 


things  of  that  sort.  So  they  were  interesting  from  a 
phenomenological,  biological  point  of  view. 

And  I  had  an  interest  in  recombination  of  DNA  based  on  what  1  was 
doing  with  the  mapping  of  these  mutations.  So  I  applied  to  Charlie 
Yanof sky's  laboratory  at  Stanford,  and  he  didn't  have  room  for  me. 
This  was  a  polite  way  of  saying  no,  I  guess.  I  had  an  opportunity 
to  go  to  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  with  a  scientist  who  was 
doing  some  very  nice  protein  work,  looking  at  mutations  in  a 
particular  protein  and  the  suppressor  mutations  affecting  those. 

But  I  decided  to  go  to  Yale  because  of  the  interest  in  plasmids. 
Yale's  an  interesting  place,  intellectually.  And  it  was  a  lot 
different  than  it  is  today.  The  nature  of  New  Haven,  for  example, 
was  much  different  than  it  is  now.  But  the  scientist  who  offered  me 
a  place  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  went  to  Yale  the  year 
after  I  went  to  Yale. 

Hughes:    Were  you  going  to  Yale  to  work  specifically  with  one  particular 
individual? 

Boyer:     Yes,  I  went  to  work  with  a  wonderful  man,  Ed  Adelberg,  who  had  just 
come  back  to  Yale.  He  had  done  an  undergraduate  degree  at  Yale,  and 
he  got  his  Ph.D.  there  too,  if  I  remember  correctly.  He  had  been  at 
the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  in  the  microbiology 
department  there,  and  then  he  went  to  chair  the  department  at  Yale. 
A  lot  of  old  Yalies  end  up  their  careers  there  or  go  back  at  some 
point.  He  was  just  a  wonderful  guy,  was  very  supportive. 

Postdoctoral  Work  on  Gene  Mapping  of  E.  coli  Strains 

Boyer:     The  work  I  did  there  I  brought  with  me  from  my  graduate  school 
research.  The  whole  basis  for  my  interest  in  research  in  the 
restriction  and  modification  of  DNA  came  from  work  that  I  did  as  a 
graduate  student.  I  didn't  know  what  it  was  at  the  time,  but  it  was 
intriguing.  I  had  independently  discovered  the  effect  on  the 
conjugal  transfer  of  bacterial  DNA,  so  I  always  had  a  very  personal 
relationship  with  this  phenomenology. 

Hughes:    You  had  discovered  restriction  and  modification? 

Boyer:     I  didn't  discover  it;  I  had  discovered  a  phenomenology  which  had  as 
its  basis  restriction  and  modification  of  DNA.  I  didn't  know  that 


until  after  I  got  to  Yale  and  continued  to  do  some  research,  and  to 
read  the  literature  and  talk  to  people  and  finally  put  two  and  two 

together. 

Hughes:    Tell  me  a  little  more,  what  was  the  phenomenon? 

Boyer:     I  detailed  it  a  little  in  the  "Winding  Your  Way  Through  DNA 

Symposium."  I  may  have  skipped  over  it  because  the  time  was  short, 
but  anyway,  I've  written  about  it.1  I  was  doing  the  genetic  analysis 
of  these  mutations  in  E.  coll.  The  particular  model  system  that 
Englesberg  was  using  involved  the  fermentation  of  L-arabinose.  It's 
a  pentose  sugar.  We  were  isolating  mutations  in  this  array  of  genes 
involved  in  the  fermentation  of  arabinose. 

We  got  to  the  point  where  we  were  stymied  by  the  techniques  we  were 
using  to  carry  out  recombination.  We  were  using  a  form  of 
recombination  methodology  called  PI  transduction,  which  was  just 
absolutely  murderous.  You  had  to  grow  bacterial  viruses  on  all  the 
mutant  strains  you  had,  carry  out  crosses,  and  it  was  not  very 
efficient.  So  we  all  knew  about  bacterial  conjugation,  but  the 
strain  of  E.  coli  that  we  were  using  didn't  have  a  sexual 
conjugation  system.  The  basis  of  that  involved  plasmids,  which  was 
how  I  got  interested  in  plasmids. 

But  there  was  a  related  strain  of  E.  coli,  a  more  conventional 
strain  called  E.  coli  K-12,  which  had  a  conjugational  system,  and 
you  could  get  high  numbers  of  recombinants,  very  high  frequencies-- 
a  thousand  times  better  than  what  you  could  get  with  some  of  the  PI 
transduction  types  of  conjugation.  So  I  decided  that  what  I  would 
do  is  get  hold  of  some  E.  coli  Hfr  strains,  and  use  them  to  convert 
the  B  strains  we  had  into  a  sexual  conjugation  system.  We  had  to 
convert  them  into  Hfrs  and  F-minuses,  to  use  the  terminology  of  the 
time. 

So  I  wrote  to  the  fellow  that  I  went  to  do  the  postdoctoral 
fellowship  with,  Ed  Adelberg,  and  asked  him  for  some  strains,  which 
he  sent.  We  corresponded,  and  he  told  me  about  them  and  gave  me 
some  information  on  them.  So  I  started  to  convert  the  E.  coli  B 
strains  into  a  sexual  mode. 


'Later  work  along  these  lines  was  pursued  at  UCSF.  Herbert  Boyer  and 
Daisy  Roulland-Dussoix,  "A  Complementation  Analysis  of  the  Restriction  and 
Modification  of  DNA  in  E.  coli,"  Journal  of  Molecular  Biology  41  (1969):  459- 
472. 


10 


Hughes:    Now  that  was  just  a  cookbook  sort  of  procedure? 

Boyer:     Yes,  it  was  pretty  much  a  cookbook.  The  way  to  do  it  had  been 

published.  It  had  not  been  described  for  converting  the  B  strains. 
This  had  all  been  done  in  E.  coli  K-12. 

So  when  I  started  to  do  this,  I  noticed  a  particularly  reproducible 
result  when  I  crossed  the  E.  coli  K-12  strains  with  the  B  strains. 
When  the  K-12  DNA  would  be  donated  to  the  female  B  strains,  the 
efficiency  of  conjugation  was  severely  reduced.  And  when  I  looked 
at  the  linkage  of  markers  in  the  recipients,  that  also  was  greatly 
reduced.  Then  when  I  started  doing  some  back  crosses  from  some  of 
the  recombinants  I  did  get,  I  found  that  particular  effect  totally 
disappeared. 

Eventually,  I  mapped  a  gene  on  E.  coli  K-12  and  E.  coli  B 
chromosome,  which  was  responsible  for  that,  and  as  it  turned  out  it 
was  very  close  to  this  arabinose  gene  locus  that  we  had  been 
studying.  So  when  I  was  selecting  for  that,  I  would  also  bring  in 
this  other  allele,  because  it  was  very  close.  So  I  had  mapped  this 
gene  near  the  arabinose  locus  and  several  genes  for  threonine 
biosynthesis.  I  thought,  well,  this  was  pretty  exciting,  but  it 
didn't  have  much  to  do  with  my  dissertation  research. 

ft 

Boyer:     After  I  had  made  the  appropriate  strains,  I  did  a  lot  of  fine 
structure  mapping  of  the  arabinose  gene  loci,  and  so  on  and  so 
forth.  We  never  really  got  anywhere  with  our  attempts  to  break  the 
genetic  code,  because  right  in  the  middle  of  all  this,  it  was 
broken  [laughs]  by  the  groups  at  NIH  by  other  means.  But  we 
continued  because  there  was  still  an  interest  in  the  structure  of 
genes,  and  what  you  could  determine  by  doing  recombination. 

Hughes:    So  your  ultimate  goal  had  been  to  break  the  genetic  code? 

Boyer:     As  a  cog  in  a  wheel  of  a  laboratory,  yes.  As  a  graduate  student, 

you  sort  of  adopt  what  your  advisors  are  doing.  You  definitely  have 
to  have  an  interest  in  it,  but  I  don't  think  that  you  necessarily 
have  to  have  an  overriding  interest  in  what  you're  doing.  But  I  was 
very  interested.  It  was  exciting  doing  research,  to  someone  like 
myself  who  had  nothing  but  instructional  laboratory  exposure  before 
that.  It  was  great.  It  was  just  a  lot  of  fun. 


11 


Hughes:    You  were  in  a  department  of  microbiology,  but  you  were  essentially 
doing  genetics.  Were  you  thinking  of  yourself  as  a  geneticist? 

Boyer:     Yes,  I  didn't  really  think  of  myself  as  a  microbiologist,  because  I 
wasn't.  I  had  to  take  courses  in  microbiology,  but  I  wasn't 
particularly  interested  in  microbiology.  Now,  there  were 
interesting  aspects  to  it,  and  microorganisms  are  a  very  bizarre 
collection  of  living  things  that  do  weird  things,  and  most  people 
don't  realize  they  exist.  But  no,  I  thought  of  myself  as  a 
geneticist,  or  perhaps  more  as  a  molecular  geneticist,  which  had  a 
better  ring  to  it. 

As  Erwin  Chargaff  once  said,  "Molecular  biologists  are  nothing  more 
than  people  practicing  biochemistry  without  a  license."  [laughter] 

Hughes:    He  had  a  pretty  sharp  tongue,  didn't  he? 
Boyer:     Yes,  he  did. 


Evidence  of  DNA  Restriction  and  Modification 

Hughes:    Tell  me  what  happened  when  you  went  to  Yale. 

Boyer:     Well,  when  I  was  at  Yale,  I  got  involved  with  a  project  in  Ed 

Adelberg's  lab.  It  was  really  tough.  I  didn't  get  too  interested  in 
it,  and  we  didn't  have  a  good  handle  on  it.  We  had  some  observations, 
Remembering  back  on  the  nature  of  it,  I  think  that  we  were  actually 
looking  at  transposons,  which  was  years  before  they  really  became 
understood. 

But  I  had  this  strong  interest  in  the  observations  I  had  made  at  the 
University  of  Pittsburgh,  and  I  described  them  to  Ed  Adelberg,  who 
had  an  interest  in  bacterial  conjugation,  and  in  fact  had  written  a 
very  nice  review  with  John  Clark  at  Berkeley  on  sexual  conjugation 
in  bacteria  involving  plasmids,  et  cetera,  et  cetera.  So  he  was 
very  interested  in  the  observations  I  had  made,  and  encouraged  me  to 
go  on  with  this.  Then  when  I  made  the  correlation  between  the 
research  findings  and  the  restriction  and  modification  of  DNA  and 
demonstrated  that  was  the  case,  I  published  a  paper  while  I  was 


12 


there.1  This  was  the  first  determination  of  the  location  of  the  genes 
for  research  and  modification  of  the  E.  coli  B  strains  and  E.  coli 
K-12  strains.  And  on  the  basis  of  my  observations,  I  was  able  to 
show  that  the  DNA  that's  transferred  by  sexual  conjugation  was 
restricted  and  modified,  and  that  these  were  the  effects  that  it  had 
on  the  recombination  frequencies  and  gene  linkages. 

What  was  important  to  what  I  did  there  at  the  University  of 
Pittsburgh  came  from  a  paper  published  in  1962,  but  which  I  didn't 
see  until  after  I  got  to  Yale.  It  was  a  seminal  paper  by  Werner 
Arber  and  Daisy  Roulland-Dussoix  in  Geneva  in  which  they  were  able 
to  show  that  the  end  result  of  the  restriction  of  DNA  in  phage 
systems  was  that  the  DNA  was  degraded  into  small  pieces.2  So  the 
hypothesis  was  that  the  enzyme  involved  in  restriction  of  DNA  was  an 
endonuclease  which  had  the  ability  to  recognize  a  unique  sequence  of 
DNA. 

Hughes:    And  that  was  a  new  idea? 

Boyer:     Yes,  that  was  a  new  idea,  enough  for  a  Nobel  Prize  for  Werner  Arber. 
So  I  became  intrigued  with  the  idea  of  trying  to  identify 
restriction  endonucleases  and  the  modification  methylases,  which 
would  be  a  methylase  also  capable  of  recognizing  unique  sequences  of 
DNA. 

Hughes:    Was  it  a  logical  extension  to  assume  that  different  bacteria  would 
have  different  endonucleases? 

Boyer:     Well,  there  was  developing  at  the  time  an  identification  of  and 

knowledge  about  different  types  of  nucleases  in  bacteria.  But  all 
the  ones  that  had  been  described  at  that  time  were  pretty  much 
random  in  their  cutting  of  DNA.  They  would  just  break  down  the  DNA 
to  small  pieces,  and  it  involved  no  specificity  other  than  they 
recognized  DNA  per  se.  There  was  no  recognition  of  unique  sequences 
of  DNA. 

So  this  hypothesis  about  there  being  these  enzymes  was  appealing  to 
me,  and  I  thought  they  would  be  wonderful  things  to  purify  and  study 


'Herbert  W.  Boyer,  "Genetic  Control  of  Restriction  and  Modification  in 
Escherichia  coli,"  Journal  of  Bacteriology  88  (1964):  1652-1660. 

2Daisy  Dussoix  and  Werner  Arber,  "Host  Specificity  over  Acceptance  of  DNA 
from  Infecting  Phage  1,"  Journal  of  Molecular  Biology  5  (1962):  37-49. 


13 


and  characterize  because  they  were  somewhat  unique.  At  that  time, 
there  were  just  a  few  laboratories  in  the  world  working  on 
restriction  and  modification  of  DNA.  I  had  very  little  background  in 
purifying  enzymes.  I  had  worked  with  enzymes  as  a  graduate  student 
and  done  assays  and  things  like  that,  but  I  had  never  purified  an 
enzyme.  So  I  spent  some  time  at  Yale  trying  to  learn  how  to  purify 
enzymes . 

Hughes:    Were  there  people  in  the  department  who  could  teach  that? 

Boyer:     Actually,  I  went  across  town  to  do  that.  I  continued  to  do  research 
in  my  own  laboratory,  but  I  would  spend  the  days  working  with  a 
faculty  member,  Bruce  Carlton,  across  town  in  the  Klein  Biology 
Tower.  We  in  the  department  of  microbiology  were  in  the  medical 
school.  Bruce  had  actually  come  from  Charlie  Yanof sky's  lab  and  had 
experience  in  purifying  and  characterizing  enzymes.  So  I  went  and 
worked  with  him  and  learned  how  to  purify  the  enzymes . 

At  the  same  time,  I  was  trying  to  establish  an  assay  for  a 
restriction  endonuclease.  There  was  no  assay  for  such  an  enzyme;  one 
did  not  exist,  and  we  had  to  try  to  develop  our  own.  I  used  to  spend 
the  evenings  trying  to  do  that,  back  in  the  microbiology  department 
at  the  medical  school. 

Hughes:    So  the  other  groups  hadn't  come  up  with  an  assay  either? 
Boyer:     No. 

DNA  Recombination  Research  at  Yale 

Hughes:    Were  you  in  pretty  close  communication  with  the  other  laboratories? 

Boyer:     Not  real  close.  There  wasn't  the  same  type  of  communication  you  have 
today.  We  didn't  have  e-mail,  and  telephone  calls  were  expensive, 
and  letters  took  a  long  time.  As  a  graduate  student  and  postdoc--in 
those  days,  anyway- -you  didn't  make  a  lot  of  overtures  to  people  who 
were  unknown  to  you,  with  whom  you  didn't  work.  At  least  I  was 
somewhat  reticent  about  approaching  people  for  an  idea. 

But  at  Yale  people  were  extremely  kind,  and  I  always  appreciated  the 
camaraderie  and  fellowship  at  Yale.  People  were  very  helpful,  and 
they  would  help  me  with  things  I  was  interested  in,  try  to  help  me 
with  design.  The  people  there  had  a  strong  interest  in  DNA 


14 


recombination  at  a  molecular  level,  and  I  was  exposed  to  all  that 
thinking.  I  think  it  was  very  important;  that  was  sort  of  the 
beginnings  of  my  interest  in  in  vitro  recombination  of  DNA,  being 
exposed  to  that,  and  thinking  about  recombination- -or  thinking  about 
restriction  endonucleases .  I  thought  that  there  might  be  some 
utility  in  having  those  enzymes  to  dissect  plasmids  and  viruses. 

So  while  my  mentor  was  on  sabbatical  in  Paris,  I  was  doing  this  dual 
thing,  learning  how  to  purify  enzymes  and  trying  to  work  with 
restriction  and  modification  of  DNA  assays.  But  oh,  it  was  so 
frustrating,  looking  for  ways  to  do  this.  I  had  not,  for  example, 
made  radioactive  DNA,  which  we  eventually  ended  up  doing  at  UCSF.  We 
used  that  as  an  assay. 

Hughes:    Why  not  at  Yale? 

Boyer:     We  weren't  set  up  for  it  in  that  particular  laboratory,  and  there 
weren't  a  lot  of  people  really  doing  it  as  far  as  I  can  remember. 
There  were  laboratories  around  the  country  that  were  doing  that.  I 
did  make  some  radioactively  labeled  DNA,  but  it  wasn't  a  phage  DNA, 
which  was  what  we  really  needed  to  do.  So  it  just  took  some  time- 
trial  and  error  approaches  to  things . 

Hughes:    Do  you  think  your  lack  of  progress  with  the  radioactive  tagging 
relates  to  what  you  were  saying  about  communication? 

Boyer:     I  think  that  looking  back  on  it,  the  thing  you  do  is  you  go  to 

somebody's  lab  who  has  done  it  and  say,  "Can  I  come  to  your  lab  for 
a  week  and  learn  how  to  do  it?"  Later  on,  that's  what  we  used  to  do 
all  the  time.  People  would  come  to  my  laboratory  or  we'd  go  to 
another  lab,  and  somebody  would  show  us  how,  or  somebody  would  give 
us  things,  or  we'd  give  things  to  people. 

But  being  a  very  naive  postdoc  and  coming  from  an  atmosphere  like 
the  University  of  Pittsburgh  where  we  almost  were  a  self-contained 
group,  we  didn't  have  a  lot  of  colleagues  that  we  interacted  with. 

Hughes:    But  the  technology  was  there?  People  elsewhere  had  it? 
Boyer:     I  can't  remember  exactly,  but  I  don't  think  it  was  routine. 

See,  in  the  assay,  we  needed  to  be  able  to  detect  an  enzyme  that 
would  make  just  a  few  breaks  in  the  DNA.  So  we  had  to  be  able  to 


15 


detect  the  conversion  of  a  molecule  of  a  given  size  to  a  molecule  of 
a  slightly  smaller  size  so  we  could  look  at  solubility.  I  remember 
spending  many  hours  trying  to  do  viscosity  assays.  Viscosity  assays 
were  just--  I  found  them  to  be  abominable,  just  horrible.  And  there 
we  had  these  old  viscometers  around  the  laboratory  left  over  from 
God  knows ,  and  I  got  those  out  and  tried  to  use  them  and  set  up  a 
model  system.  It  was  just  very  hard  to  do. 

Then  the  other  problem,  which  we  eventually  found  out,  which  we 
would  never  have  been  able  to  predict,  is  that  the  organisms  and  the 
type  of  restriction  enzymes  we  were  going  after  in  those  days  were 
just  terribly  complex,  structurally  and  enzymatically. 

Hughes:    They  cut  in  too  many  places? 

Boyer:     No.  It  turns  out  that  the  cof actors  at  that  time  were  extremely 

bizarre.  In  addition  to  divalent  cations,  the  enzymes  that  we  were 

focusing  on  required  ATP  [adenosine  triphosphate]  and  S-adenosyl-L- 
methionine  to  be  active. 

Hughes:    And  you  didn't  know  that  at  the  time? 

Boyer:     Oh,  we  didn't  know  that.  We  were  trying  different  things.  There  was 
some  suggestion  that  it  might  require  ATP,  but  the  first  observation 
of  that  was  made  by  a  group  at  Harvard,  Matt  Meselson  and  Bob  Yuan. 
Then  once  we  had  that,  we  were  able  to--  But  this  was  all  at  UC  San 
Francisco.  It  took  a  while.  And  again,  there  weren't  too  many  people 
actually  trying  to  purify  these  enzymes,  because  there  was  still  not 
a  lot  of  interest  there. 

The  phenomenology  itself  goes  back  to  the  very  early  days  of 
virology— Frederick  W.  Twort  and  Felix  d'Herelle,  the  original 
phageologists .  I  can't  remember  which  one  it  was,  or  both  of  them, 
who  had  made  the  observation  that  the  ability  of  viruses  to  grow  on 
a  particular  host  bacterial  strain  was  adaptable.  That  is,  you 
infected  a  bacterium  with  a  virus  from  another  source,  and  it 
wouldn't  grow  very  well,  but  if  you  took  the  progeny,  they  would 
grow  better,  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  These  observations  were  in  1918 
or  1920,  something  like  that.1 


'During  World  War  I,  London  investigator  Frederick  W.  Twort  noticed  that 
vaccinia  virus  could  cause  "glassy  transformation"  in  bacterial  cultures, 


16 


Hughes:    With  no  explanation. 

Boyer:     No,  there  wasn't.  In  those  days,  people  were  still  using  Lamarckian 
type  of  thinking:  it  was  just  an  adaptation.  The  phage  just  became 
adapted.  Well,  in  a  sense,  the  restriction  and  modification  of  DNA 
is--I  wouldn't  call  it  Lamarckian- -but  a  phenomenology  which  sort  of 
demonstrates  the  idea  of  Lamarckianism,  although  it  really  isn't. 

And  then  a  lot  of  the  early  pathogenic  microbiology  work,  the  typing 
of  microbial  strains  and  the  identification  of  microbial  strains  of 
one  type  or  another  as  being  pathogenic,  was  done  by  phage  typing, 
which  had  its  basis  in  restriction  and  modification  of  DNA.  It  was 
these  observations  which,  to  the  molecular  biologists  of  the 
fifties,  molecular  geneticists,  sort  of  indicated  that  maybe  this  is 
some  sort  of  primordial  Lamarckian  mechanism.  That's  what  got  the 
attention  of  the  molecular  biologists  in  the  fifties.  Salvador  Luria 
or  Max  Delbruck,  or  maybe  both  of  them,  got  a  few  people  interested 
in  doing  some  experiments  along  these  lines. 


II  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SAN  FRANCISCO,  1966-1991 
Faculty  Member,  Department  of  Microbiology,  1966-1975 
Deciding  to  Come  to  San  Francisco 

Boyer:     When  I  was  finishing  up  my  postdoctoral  tenure  at  Yale,  I  went  to 

talk  to  Ed  Adelberg  about  looking  for  a  job,  and  got  his  advice.  So  I 
went  to  look  at  a  few  positions  and  opportunities.  He  said,  "You 
know,  there's  a  position  opening  up  at  UC  San  Francisco.  A  friend  of 
mine,  chairman  of  the  department  of  microbiology,  Ernie  Jawetz--" 
Jawetz  was  a  friend  of  Ed's;  they  were  colleagues,  of  course,  when  Ed 
was  at  Berkeley.  Ed  and  Ernie  Jawetz  and  another  guy  had  written  a 


eventually  killing  them.  In  his  only  publication  on  the  subject,  Dr.  Twort 
noted  that  one  explanation  for  this  phenomenon  was  that  he  had  identified  a 
lethal  virus  of  bacteria.  In  August  of  1915,  Canadian  bacteriologist  Felix 
d'Herelle  noticed  clear  "plaques"  in  bacterial  cultures  and  began  to  work  on 
this  group  of  viruses  which  he  named  bacteriophages.  He  published  his  work  in 
1917  and  continued  to  work  on  phage  replication  cycles  and  promoted 
bacteriophage  therapy  for  bacterial  illness. 


17 


microbiology  textbook  for  medical  students--!  can't  remember  the  name 
of  the  series.1 

But  anyhow,  Ed  said  that  there  was  a  position  opening  up  in 
microbiology  at  UCSF,  and  that  he  knew  that  the  university  was 
committed  to  developing  the  basic  sciences  at  UCSF,  and  that  there 
wasn't  much  there  at  this  time.  But  he  said,  "You  should  look  at  it, 
and  it  would  be  an  interesting  opportunity  to  go  there .  It  should  be 
developing  as  a  very  good  center  for  the  basic  sciences." 

I  had  always  wanted  to  come  to  California.  I  had  tried  to  come 
earlier  and  go  to  Charlie  Yanof sky's  lab.  I  had  read  about 
California,  and  of  course,  was  a  movie  fan  and  watched  all  the  movies 
about  California.  So  I  came  out  to  San  Francisco  for  the  first  time, 
I  think  it  was  probably  late  '64,  early  '65,  something  like  that. 

It  was  a  much  different  place  than  it  is  today.  It  was  pretty 
exciting.  I  thought  it  was  great.  San  Francisco  was  so  different  from 
the  East  Coast.  California  is  so  different  from  the  East  Coast.  This 
was  great.  So  we  decided  to  come  here. 


Teaching  Medical  Students 

Hughes:    I  looked  at  the  records  in  the  Department  of  Microbiology,  and  I  know 
that  one  of  the  conditions  was  that  you  agree  to  come  in  the  fall  of 
1965  as  a  visiting  assistant  professor  to  teach  a  series  of  ten 
classes  in  microbiology  for  medical  students.  Do  you  remember? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    The  medical  class  that  year  had  been  expanded,  so  additional  teachers 
were  needed.  And  then  you  went  back  to  Yale  and  didn't  officially 
come  to  UCSF  as  assistant  professor  until  July  of  1966. 2 


'Ernest  Jawetz,  Joseph  L.  Melnick,  and  Edward  A.  Adelberg,  Review  of 
Medical  Microbiology  (Los  Altos,  CA:  Lange  Medical  Publications,  1954).  This 
textbook,  first  published  in  1954,  went  through  nineteen  editions.  In  1998  it 
was  entitled  Jawetz,  Melnick  and  Adelberg' s  Medical  Microbiology. 

2Ernest  Jawetz.,  M.D. ,  Ph.D.,  Department  of  Microbiology:  Annual  Report 
on  Academic  Year  1964/65.  Records  of  the  Department  of  Microbiology,  UCSF.  See 


18 

Boyer:  Yes. 

Hughes:  Had  you  done  much  teaching  at  that  point? 

Boyer:  No. 

Hughes:  Was  that  your  first  experience? 

Boyer:     No,  I  had  done  a  little,  mostly  in  laboratories.  Graduate  students 
were  never  required  to  learn  how  to  teach  or  know  anything  about 
teaching.  I  was  a  horrible  teacher.  I  guess  I'd  never  had  a  great 
deal  of  interest  in  presenting  lectures.  I  had  to  correlate  with 
textbooks.  I  enjoyed  teaching  science  better,  enjoyed  working  with 
graduate  students  and  postdoctoral  fellows  at  the  laboratory,  and 
talking  about  experiments,  criticizing  experiments,  interpreting 
data,  that  sort  of  thing.  But  teaching,  particularly  teaching  medical 
students—God,  I  dreaded  that.  It  just  put  the  fear  of  God  into  me  tc 
face  that  group  of  iconoclastic  individuals.  And  they  had  no  interest 
in  bacterial  genetics,  and  I  didn't  know  how  to  make  it  interesting, 
didn't  spend  the  time  to  learn  how  to  make  it  interesting.  It  was  a 
chore.  It  was  something  I  thought,  "Let's  get  it  over  with  so  I  can 
get  on  doing  research." 

Hughes:    Did  you  have  to  write  those  ten  lectures? 

Boyer:     Yes,  I  did.  And  I  couldn't  tell  you  what  they  were  about.  But  it  was 
a  little  traumatic,  dealing  with  this  group.  Giving  a  seminar  is 
about  the  only  type  of  teaching  experience  graduate  students  get;  we 
always  had  to  give  a  couple  of  seminars  a  year.  We  had  seminar 
courses  in  which  you'd  take  a  particular  scientific  topic  and  each 
member  of  the  class  would  present  a  particular  research  paper  and 
discuss  the  background  and  results  and  so  on.  But  you  had  an  audience 
which  had  an  inherent  interest  in  what  you  were  talking  about,  so  you 
had  their  attention,  and  there  was  a  lot  of  give  and  take. 

This  doesn't  happen  when  you  go  into  a  formal  classroom.  These  people 
going  into  microbiology,  unless  they're  learning  about  pathogens  and 
what  causes  disease,  and  if  they're  not  thumping,  probing,  and 
listening  [laughter]  it's  just  not  relevant. 

You  have  to  remember,  at  this  time,  we  were  just  in  the  throes  of 
curriculum  revolt  and  reform,  so  it  was  extremely  difficult  for  me. 
As  I  said,  I  know  I  was  never  a  good  teacher.  Ernie  Jawetz  would  take 


also  "Interview  with  Ernest  Jawetz"  (San  Francisco:  UCSF  Campus  Oral  History 
Program,  UCSF  Library  and  Center  for  Knowledge  Management,  Archives  and  Special 
Collections,  forthcoming,  hereafter  cited  as  UCSF  Library). 


19 


me  in  and  try  to  critique  my  presentation,  and  I  thought,  Oh,  my  God, 
oh,  no.  Hard  on  the  old  ego  to  be  told,  "Well,  you  better  get  it 
together  here."  I  never  did  manage  to  get  a  handle  on  giving 
lectures. 

Hughes:    Were  you  forced  to  give  lectures  all  the  way  through? 

Boyer:     Well,  it  was  part  of  your  responsibilities,  yes.  We  gave  some 

graduate  courses  and  conducted  seminar  classes.  Those  were  a  little 
bit  better. 


First  Impressions  of  UCSF 

Hughes:    What  did  you  find  when  you  arrived  in  the  Department  of  Microbiology? 
#1 

Boyer:     What  did  I  find?  Well,  thinking  back  on  it,  I  think  of  all  the 

negative  impressions  I  had,  but  I'm  sure  I  also  felt  the  excitement 
of  having  my  first  job,  being  independent,  going  off  to  do  my  own 
research,  moving  to  a  new  city,  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  It  was 
exciting. 

But  I  do  remember  some  of  the  problems  I  had.  I  had  been  promised 
laboratory  space  in  the  new  Health  Sciences  East  [HSE]  Building,  on 
the  fourth  floor.  When  I  got  there,  I  found  out  I  had  been  reassigned 
to  the  Medical  Sciences  Building.  The  reason  was  that  the  people  in 
Health  Sciences  East  were  doing  tissue  culture  work,  and  they  didn't 
want  anybody  growing  bacteria  over  there.  So  I  got  reassigned  to 
these  laboratories  which,  when  you  compared  them  to  what  they  had  in 
HSE--how  can  I  say  it?  The  labs  in  Medical  Sciences  weren't  very  well 
designed  for  doing  the  research  that  I  was  involved  with. 
Essentially,  the  laboratories  had  been  designed  to  stain  slides  of 
bacterial  specimens  and  other  pathogenic  organisms. 

Well,  fortunately,  we  did  have  an  autoclave,  and  that  was  about  it.  I 
had  no  cold  room,  which  I  would  have  had  in  the  other  building.  There 
was  no  ice  machine.  Outside  of  the  autoclave,  there  was  no  core 
facility  available  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  my  lab.  So  in  order 
to  do  any  biochemistry  or  enzyme  purification,  I  had  to  walk  over  to 
HSW  or  HSE  and  establish  all  my  purification.  Then,  of  course,  the 
people  there  weren't  too  thrilled  about  me  being  there  anyway.  So  it 
was  extremely  difficult. 


20 


We  had  to  go  over  to  Health  Sciences  West  to  get  large  buckets  of  ice 
every  morning  to  bring  back  to  our  laboratory  so  we  could  have  some 
ice  in  which  to  store  our  specimens.  We  had  a  small  preparative 
centrifuge  that  we  got  on  our  grant,  but  we  desperately  needed  an 
ultracentrifuge,  but  I  didn't  have  the  money.  But  people  in  Health 
Sciences  East,  Leon  Levintow  and  Mike  Bishop,  were  very  gracious  and 
I  could  use  their  ultracentrifuges .  But  still,  it  meant  walking  a 
couple  hundred  yards  quite  a  few  times  during  the  day.  It  was 
extremely  difficult  to  carry  out  research. 

So  eventually,  I  got  some  funding  to  install  a  cold  room  in  one  of  my 
labs,  so  there  goes  your  laboratory  space,  but  we  needed  the  cold 
room.  I  got  some  equipment,  but  the  laboratories  were  up  and  down  the 
hall.  It  was  okay;  we  functioned.  But  things  were  not  as  easy  or 
efficient  as  they  could  have  been. 

Hughes:    How  had  the  shift  to  the  basic  sciences  occurred?  As  you  well  know, 
UCSF  was  not  historically  a  research  institution. 

Boyer:     I  don't  know.  Holly  Smith  would  be  someone  who  probably  has  the  best 
sense  of  that;  he  was  there  for  that  time.  As  I  understand  it,  in  an 
attempt  to  revitalize  the  medical  school,  they  brought  in  several 
people.  They  brought  in  Holly  Smith  from  Harvard  as  chairman  of  the 
Department  of  Medicine;  Bert  Dunphy,  Department  of  Surgery;  Julius 
Comroe  was  director  of  the  Cardiovascular  Research  Institute.  I  think 
Comroe  and  one  of  his  associates,  Isidore  Edelman,  were  very 
instrumental  in  first  getting  a  couple  of  good  clinical  guys  in 
there,  and  then  in  turn  they  realized  the  need  to  also  get  the  basic 
sciences  going.  So  I  think  that  was  the  germination  of  that  move.1 

Colleagues  in  the  Department  of  Microbiology 

Boyer:     When  I  was  recruited,  there  was  one  sympathetic  faculty  member,  Leon 
Levintow,  who  just  retired  this  last  year.  Leon  had  retired  from  NIH 
[National  Institutes  of  Health]  and  took  a  position  here.  He  had  a 
background  in  animal  virology  and  tissue  culture  work.  He  ended  up 


JSee  the  UCSF  Campus  Oral  History  Program's  interviews  with  Isidore 
Edelman,  Richard  J.  Havel,  Clark  Kerr,  and  Lloyd  "Holly"  Smith  for  a  variety  of 
accounts  of  the  mid-1960s  transformation  of  the  UCSF  campus  on  Parnassus 
Avenue . 


21 


recruiting  Mike  Bishop  who  in  turn  brought  Harold  Vannus.  Warren 
Levinson  was  also  newly  recruited  at  the  time.  He  was  working  on  Rous 
sarcoma  virus. 

When  I  got  here,  Levintow  and  Warren  Levinson  and  Joel  Goodman  were 
here  in  the  Department  of  Microbiology.  There  was  one  person  in 
biochemistry  who  had  a  background  in  molecular  biology,  Jim 
Ofengand.  But  when  I  got  to  UCSF,  there  wasn't  a  hotbed  of 
scientific  excitement.  It  was  extremely  frustrating  to  not  have  a 
sympathetic  ear.  Leon  was  very  kind  and  helpful,  but  he  wasn't  that 
interested  in  what  I  was  doing,  from  what  I  could  perceive.  But  he 
really  was  very  helpful. 

Hughes:    Dr.  Jawetz  was  a  pretty  classical  microbiologist? 
Boyer:     Yes,  he  was  a  classical  microbiologist. 
Hughes:    Was  he  sympathetic  to  what  you  were  doing? 

Boyer:     No.  I  liked  Ernie,  although  we  had  our  differences,  and  got  into 

some  disputes  over  a  number  of  things.  I  never  felt  that  Ernie  was 
particularly  helpful.  He  did  not  try  to  provide  me  with  any  help  so 
far  as  my  research  went.  He  just  never  was  interested. 

Hughes :    Why  did  he  recruit  you? 

Boyer:     I  think  he  was  mandated  to  do  so.  He  was  just  doing  what  he  had  to 
do. 

Hughes:    So  you  had  trouble  getting  support  for  the  things  that  you  needed? 

Boyer:     Yes.  He  pointed  out  some  funds  that  could  be  available,  but  I 
never  had  the  impression  that  he  was  supportive  or  even 
particularly  wanted  me  there. 

Hughes:    Well,  the  other  people  that  were  more  interested  in  the 

molecular  aspects,  Bishop  and  Varmus  and  Levintow  and  Levinson 
and  Ofengand-- 


22 

Boyer:     Bishop  came  about  a  year  or  two  after  I  did  [1968].  Within  a  year,  I 
was  looking  at  other  positions.  I  was  very  dissatisfied  with  things 
and  felt  that  there  were  other  places  where  I  might  have  more 
stimulation  and  support.  But  the  lack  of  a  core  of  hard  basic  science 
at  UCSF  necessitated  me  to  go  to  Berkeley  a  lot,  to  talk  to  people, 
to  hear  seminars,  because  we  just  didn't  have  a  good  seminar  program. 
I  went  to  Stanford  occasionally  to  hear  seminars  there  and  talk  to 
people. 

But  when  Mike  came,  he  provided  some  scientific  stimulation.  Mike  and 
I  worked  pretty  hard  in  those  days .  We ' d  be  there  in  the  evenings ,  on 
the  weekends.  He  was  just  good  company. 

Hughes:    Were  you  the  only  two  working  late  into  the  night? 

Boyer:     These  are  the  two  I  remember.  There  weren't  many  others  that  had  the 
same  sort  of  crazy  work  habits  we  had. 


The  Department  of  Biochemistry 

William  Rutter  and  Gordon  Tomkins 

Hughes:    Of  course,  Dr.  Rutter  hadn't  yet  come,  so  there  was  not  much 
happening  in  biochemistry?1 

Boyer:     No.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  was  very  frustrating.  Of  course, 
being  an  assistant  professor,  I  was  not  privy  to  any  of  the  things 
going  on,  other  than  I  knew  the  fact  that  they  were  looking  for  a 
chairman  of  the  department,  and  I  knew  they  were  having  trouble.  I 
did  talk  to  some  of  the  candidates,  went  out  to  dinner  with  them  with 
a  larger  group  of  people.  Earl  Stadtman  looked  at  the  job,  and  Sol 
Spiegelman-- those  are  the  two  I  can  remember  at  the  moment,  but  there 
were  a  series  of  candidates  —  and  Gordon  Tomkins  came  through.  I  was 
just  so  terribly  disappointed  when  Gordon  turned  down  the  job, 
because  he  was  so  exciting  and  supportive  and  stimulating. 

Hughes:    Is  that  why  people  here  talk  so  much  about  him? 


'After  a  long  recruitment  effort  (1962-1969)  for  a  new  chair  of 
Biochemistry,  conducted  by  UCSF  faculty  committed  to  advancing  the  basic 
sciences,  Dr.  William  Rutter  agreed  to  come  to  San  Francisco  to  chair  the 
department  in  1969.  The  department  was  renamed  Biochemistry  and  Biophysics  in 
autumn  of  1968  at  Dr.  Rutter's  request,  (Dean's  Office  Records,  AR  90-56,  UCSF 
Library).  For  details  of  the  recruitment,  see  William  J.  Rutter,  "The 
Department  of  Biochemistry  and  the  Molecular  Approach  to  Biomedicine  at  the 
University  of  California,  San  Francisco,"  an  oral  history  conducted  in  1992  by 
Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  2001. 


23 

Boyer:     Yes,  probably. 

Hughes:    Ideas  flowing  all  the  time? 

Boyer:     Yes,  his  ideas  and  his  eclectic  interests.  He  could  just  talk  to 

anybody  about  their  research,  and  if  not  genuine,  at  least  express  an 
interest,  but  I  think  it  was  very  genuine.  I  would  go  talk  to  him, 
and  he  would  get  all  excited  and  say,  "Gee,  this  is  great,"  and  we 
talked  about  a  lot  of  different  things  and  possibilities  and 
directions  of  research.  Nobody  else  did  that.  There  was  nobody  else 
around  that  really  got  enthusiastic  about  what  we  were  doing. 

Hughes:    Why  did  he  turn  the  job  down? 

Boyer:     I  think  I've  heard  Gordon  say  he  didn't  want  to  take  on  a  management 
role.  His  strength  was  not  in  organizing  and  being  political,  which 
took  a  lot  of  savvy  and  insight  to  the  politics  of  the  university  and 
that  institution  [UCSF] .  It  was  so  important  to  be  politically  savvy 
and  to  succeed,  at  least  to  run  a  department  or  build  a  department. 
So  Gordon  turned  down  the  chairmanship. 

Then  Bill  came  and  looked  at  the  chairmanship,  and  we  got  all  excited 
about  Bill,  and  Bill  turned  it  down.  Then  he  called  back  and  said  he 
had  thought  about  it  some  more,  and  he  said  yeah,  he  wanted  to  do  it. 
He  had  talked  Gordon  into  coming.  That  was  a  big  turnaround.  That  was 
a  big  change . : 

Hughes:    Had  he  known  Dr.  Tomkins? 
Boyer:.    I'm  sure  he  did,  yes. 


'Although  Gordon  Tomkins  turned  down  the  proffered  chairmanship  of  the 
Department  of  Biochemistry  in  the  mid  1960s,  he  agreed  to  come  in  1969  as  vice 
chair.  Dr.  Isidore  Edelman  recalls  his  attempt  to  get  both  men  to  "recruit" 
each  other  by  hosting  a  get-together  in  his  San  Francisco  home.  See  "Interview 
with  Isidore  Edelman"  CSan  Francisco:  UCSF  Campus  Oral  History  Program,  UCSF 
Library,  forthcoming),  p.  48. 


Hughes :    How  did  they  work  as  a  team? 

Boyer:     Well,  I  don't  recall  much  about  it.  It  seems  to  me  that  they  had  a 

lot  of  mutual  respect,  and  I  think  they  worked  well  together.  I  think 
Bill  was  very  much  aware  of  the  effect  that  Gordon  had  on  younger 
scientists  and  with  his  own  peers.  His  reputation  was  stellar.  He 
knew  everybody.  He  was  very  knowledgeable  about  all  areas  of  science, 
so  he  was  the  perfect  guy  to  come  in  and  provide  some  sort  of  broad 
support  for  the  department  and  the  school. 

Hughes:    Well,  what  convinced  you  to  stay? 

Boyer:     Things  got  better.  Research  went  well.  There  were  more  people  to  talk 
to.  But  I  continued  to  be  unhappy.  The  space  was  very  confining  and 
constricting,  and  I  felt  I  deserved  better,  and  I  wasn't  being 
recognized.  I  had  opportunities  to  go  elsewhere,  but  the  disruption 
and  facing  a  new  set  of  problems  wherever  you  go,  and  leaving 
California- 
Hughes  :    Were  you  also  beginning  to  see  that  things  might  change  for  the 
better  at  UCSF? 

Boyer:     Yes.  Oh,  absolutely.  Once  Rutter  started  to  develop  the  Department  of 
Biochemistry  and  Biophysics,  it  was  a  much  different  place. 

Boyer 's  Associations  with  the  Department  of  Biochemistry 

Hughes:    Did  you  have  a  lot  of  interchange  with  Biochemistry  prior  to  1975 
when  you  actually  joined  the  department?1 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes. 

Hughes:    So  you  were  attending  seminars-- 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes. 


*In  December  1975,  Boyer  left  the  Department  of  Microbiology  to  become 
associate  professor  of  biochemistry  in  the  Department  of  Biochemistry  and 
Biophysics . 


25 

Boyer:     In  fact,  one  of  Bill's  earliest  recruits,  Howard  Goodman, 
came  [in  1970  as  assistant  professor]  and  we  had  a  common 
interest.  We  started  a  collaboration,  which  was  extremely 
productive,  when  Howard  came  to  the  department.  Howard  and  I 
spent  a  lot  of  time  thinking  about  common  things .  We  worked 
together  in  each  other's  labs.  We'd  be  working  at  night  and 
on  the  weekends  together,  interacting  with  the  other  people. 
It  got  to  be  a  very  exciting  place  in  the  early  seventies  for 
me. 


The  Division  of  Genetics 
[Interview  2:  March  28,  1994]  ## 

Hughes:    I  asked  you  off -tape,  Dr.  Boyer,  if  you  knew  about  the 

rationale  behind  the  formation  of  the  Division  of  Genetics  in 
the  Department  of  Biochemistry  in  1975.1 

Boyer:     I  did  know  at  one  time,  but  I  just  can't  recall  the 

circumstances  around  which  the  division  was  formed.  There  were  a 
number  of  geneticists  on  campus,  and  they  had  an  interest  in 
putting  together  a  Division  of  Genetics,  I  think  for  graduate 
student  purposes,  and  being  able  to  grant  a  degree  in  genetics. 
Charlie  Epstein  was  there,  and  people  in  biochemistry  and 
microbiology.  There  were  people  in  different  departments  with  an 
interest  in  genetics. 

Hughes:    Were  there  others  in  the  Division  of  Genetics? 

Boyer:     There  were  others  involved.  I  think  we  had  maybe  two  or  three 

appointments  in  that  division.  I  know  Charlie  Epstein  was  very  much 
involved.  And  [in  1978]  we  hired  Tom  Kornberg  and  John  Sedat.  I 


'From  1976  through  1981  Dr.  Boyer  was  Director  of  the  Graduate  Program  in 
Genetics.  William  J.  Rutter,  "Report  On  The  Department  Annual  Report  1975," 
Department  of  Biochemistry  and  Biophysics,  (UCSF,  May  1976).  By  1985  Genetics 
was  an  interdepartmental  graduate  program  that  was  included  in  the  Program  in 
Biological  Sciences,  funded  by  a  $13  million  grant  from  the  Lucille  P.  Markey 
Charitable  Trust.  Papers  relating  to  the  genetics  program  are  found  in  Dean's 
Office  Records,  AR  90-56,  UCSF  Library. 


26 

don't  know  who  else  had  affiliation  with  the  division  in  the  early 
days. 

Hughes:    Which  implies  that  you  weren't  having  a  lot  of  interaction  with 
whoever  else  was  in  the  division? 

Boyer:     No.  It  didn't  have  a  formal  structure  to  it  all  that  much.  We  had  a 
part-time  secretary.  To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  think  it  was  just  an 
ancillary  component  of  the  biochemistry  department,  which  had  some 
semblance  of  autonomy.  But  it  really  wasn't  autonomous;  it  was 
still  very  much  under  the  control  of  the  biochemistry  department 
and  Bill.  I  think  he  wanted  the  division  to  be  in  biochemistry 
rather  than  in  another  department  so  that  he  could  try  to  maintain 
the  quality  of  the  basic  science.  I  don't  think  he  had  any 
Machiavellian  aspirations  regarding  that  particular  division  or  the 
space.  I  think  it  was  just  a  genuine  concern  on  his  part  that  we 
continue  to  have  good  scientists  around,  and  the  best  way  to  do 
that  would  be  to  have  the  division  under  the  umbrella  of  the 
biochemistry  and  biophysics  department.  That's  a  bit  of 
speculation;  I  can't  say  for  sure. 


Boyer  Joins  the  Department  of  Biochemistry,  1975 

Hughes:    I  thought  maybe  the  division  was  set  up  to  lure  you  into  the 
department. 

Boyer:     No,  I  don't  believe  so.  I  don't  know  of  any  overt  luring  [laughter] 
on  the  biochemistry  department's  part.  I  just  had  a  sort  of 
dissatisfaction  with  microbiology,  and  saw  this  Division  of 
Genetics,  which  included  new  space  in  the  Health  Sciences  East 
Building,  as  an  opportunity  to  get  some  new  and  more  efficient  lab 
space.  I  had  always  had  a  certain  resentment  about  the  fact  that  I 
didn't  get  the  space  I  was  promised  when  I  went  to  UC.  I  mentioned 
that  in  my  talk.1  I  threw  in  a  little  jab  there,  [laughter]  But 
that  was  one  of  the  reasons  I  was  interested  in  going  to  the 
Department  of  Biochemistry. 

Hughes:    Do  you  remember  who  approached  whom  about  the  move? 


lAt  the  time  this  interview  was  conducted,  Dr.  Boyer  had  recently  given  a 
presentation  at  the  symposium  for  William  J.  Rutter's  retirement,  "The 
Beginning  of  Biotechnology.  The  New  Biology:  A  Symposium  in  Honor  of  William  J. 
Rutter  and  His  Scientific  Contributions  During  a  Quarter  of  a  Century  at  UCSF," 
18-19  March  1994,  UCSF. 


27 


Boyer:     I  think  I  approached  Bill  Rutter.  I  don't  think  there  was  any  overt 
move  on  their  part  to  do  it.  Why  should  Biochemistry  use  up  its 
space  for  somebody  who  was  already  there,  when  Bill  could  have 
hired  another  person? 

Hughes:    But  he  did,  so  Biochemistry  must  have  found  you  of  some  advantage. 

Boyer:     Yeah,  I  suppose.  I  guess  at  the  time  that  I  switched  over  to 

Biochemistry,  I  was  fairly  in  the  forefront  of  all  the  recombinant 
stuff,  and  I  was  still  teaching  a  lot  of  people  how  to  do  it.  I  had 
a  lot  of  people  coming  through  my  labs,  and  I  provided  a  lot  of 
help—well,  not  a  lot  of  help—but  help  for  other  people  around 
campus.  So  I  had  a  certain  visibility. 

Hughes :    What  difference  did  it  make  to  be  in  the  biochemistry  and 

biophysics  department,  other  than  the  fact  that  you  now  had  space 
in  HSE? 

Boyer:     I  probably  had  more  interaction  with  people  in  Biochemistry  from  a 
scientific  point  of  view. 

Hughes:    Was  that  a  matter  of  proximity?  Although  you  weren't  really  very 
proximate,  were  you? 

Boyer:     No.  It  had  nothing  to  do  with  proximity.  But  I  never  felt  I  had 
support  from  Microbiology. 

Hughes:    I  know  that  you  had  been  collaborating  with  Howard  Goodman. 
Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Did  it  make  any  difference  to  the  collaboration  that  you  were  now 
within  the  department? 

Boyer:  No,  I  don't  think  it  changed  anything,  other  than  the  fact  that, 
from  my  perspective,  I  got  into  some  new  lab  space,  and  had  more 
lab  space.  It  was  a  better  situation  for  my  own  laboratory. 

Hughes:    Did  you  have  access  to  greater  resources? 
Boyer:     I'm  not  sure  what  you  mean  by  resources. 


28 


Hughes:    When  you  needed  equipment,  for  example,  were  there  certain  things 
that  the  department  itself  would  provide? 

Boyer:     No,  I  don't  think  there  was  any  advantages  with  respect  to 
equipment.  Whatever  collegiality  existed,  existed  beyond 
departmental  lines ,  and  you  could  use  equipment  if  you  needed  it . 
Of  course,  it  all  depended  on  how  much  it  was  being  used  by  the 
person  you  borrowed  it  from  or  imposed  upon. 

Hughes:    I  went  over  to  talk  with  Mary  Betlach,  your  former  technician,  who 
said  that  Dr.  Jawetz  had  an  ultracentrifuge. '  Am  I  right? 

Boyer:     No,  it  was  just  a  preparative  centrifuge. 

Hughes:    He  would  not  allow  anybody  in  your  group  to  use  it,  except  very 
occasionally . 

Boyer:     Yes.  Except  we  used  to  sneak  in  after  five  o'clock,  after  everybody 
was  gone,  and  use  it  surreptitiously,  [laughter]  Well,  the 
differences  were  a  question  of  style.  I  had  great  admiration  for 
Ernie  Jawetz.  We  didn't  quite  hit  it  off  around  the  laboratory, 
because  we  were  continually  bumping  into  each  other.  He  wasn't 
terribly  sympathetic  towards  my  needs  in  terms  of  doing  research. 

Hughes:    Was  that  largely  because  he  was  a  classical  microbiologist  and  you 
were  thinking  molecularly? 

Boyer:     I  have  no  idea.  It  was  just  a  clash  of  styles. 


Collegiality  in  Biochemistry 

Hughes:    In  1975,  the  year  that  you  arrived  in  Biochemistry,  the  first 

annual  research  meeting  of  the  department  occurred  at  Asilomar.2 
Did  you  go? 


'See  oral  history  of  Mary  Betlach,  Ph.D.,  interviews  conducted  in  1994  by 
Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  process.  Betlach  was  a  technician  in 
Boyer 's  lab  from  1972-1993  and  in  the  late  1970s  was  involved  with  recombinant 
DNA  and  plasmid  development .  She  later  earned  a  doctorate  in 
biochemistry /molecular  biology  at  UCSF. 

2William  J.  Rutter,  "Report  on  the  Department,  1975,"  Department  of 
Biochemistry  and  Biophysics  Annual  Report,  1975. 


29 


Boyer:     I'm  not  sure  whether  I  was  a  member  of  the  department  or  not  at 
that  time  [October  1975]. 

Hughes:    According  to  the  annual  report,  you  didn't  officially  make  the 

transfer  until  December  of  1975.  But  there  probably  had  been  some 
prior  negotiations. 

Boyer:     No,  there  weren't  any  negotiations.  The  whole  thing  depended  on 
when  the  lab  space  was  finished.  I  believe  that  the  Asilomar 
meeting  was  in  the  fall  of  '75.  Do  you  know  the  dates? 

Hughes:    Was  it  usually  in  the  fall? 

Boyer:     Yes,  when  the  new  graduate  students  arrived. 

I  have  the  impression  that  there  was  a  meeting  actually  very  close 
to  where  we  are  at  the  moment  [Mill  Valley,  California],  at  the 
Ralston  Retreat.  I  recall  being  at  this  Ralston  Retreat  with  the 
Biochemistry  faculty.  I  can't  remember  whether  I  was  a  member  of 
the  faculty  then  or  just  proposed,  or  unofficially  a  part  of  it. 
But  we  met  right  down  below  us.  It  was  a  small  group;  it  was  just 
the  full-time  faculty.  I  have  the  impression  that  the  retreat  was 
what  gave  us  the  idea  for  doing  Asilomar,  that  we  should  have  a 
larger  meeting.  That  could  be  totally  wrong,  but  that's  what  I 
think. 

The  first  Asilomar  meeting,1  and  subsequent  ones,  were  to 
familiarize  students,  postdocs,  and  the  faculty  with  each  other, 
with  the  work  they  were  doing,  to  promote  interaction,  get  to  know 
each  other  socially,  I  guess.  Faculty  members  from  other 
departments  were  invited  to  come  and  talk  about  what  they  were 
doing  as  well.  It  was  a  two,  two-and-a-half -day  meeting. 

Hughes:    What  was  the  atmosphere? 

Boyer:     The  first  couple  were  very  good,  as  far  as  I  remember--a  lot  of 

interactions.  I  just  remember  them  being  very  good.  Later  on,  they 
got  to  be  overwhelming  because  of  the  numbers  involved.  They  got 


'The  departmental  meetings  were  held  at  Asilomar,  a  Pacific  Grove, 
California  conference  site  frequently  used  for  University  of  California 
retreats.  These  should  not  be  confused  with  the  Asilomar  conferences  (Asilomar 
I  in  January  1973,  and  Asilomar  II  in  February  1975)  that  dealt  with  the 
potential  hazards  of  biological  research. 


30 


too  long  and,  after  a  point,  I  didn't  go  every  year.  It  got  to  be  a 
show-and-tell  type  of  atmosphere,  and  I  didn't  particularly  care 
for  that.  So  I  didn't  go. 

Hughes:    Well,  another  institution  that  I  read  about  is  the  Chelsea  Pub. 
You  may  think  these  are  strange  questions  on  my  part,  but  it's 
of  great  interest  where  scientists  meet  to  discuss  science,  even 
in  the  most  casual  of  circumstances.  Was  the  pub  indeed  a 
fixture  of  life? 

Boyer:     It  was  for  a  period  of  time,  but  I  think  it  was  more  a  fixture 
for  the  postdocs  and  graduate  students.  Occasionally  faculty 
would  be  there. 

Hughes:    You  didn't  go  very  often? 

Boyer:     I  can  remember  being  there  a  number  of  times.  I  don't  remember 
anything  very  significant  being  discussed,  but  I'm  sure  there 
was.  [laughing]  Probably  too  many  drinks.  But  it  was  a  place  to 
unwind,  and  a  lot  of  times  people  would  go  later  in  the  evening, 
if  they'd  been  working  in  the  lab,  and  just  hang  out  there  a 
little  bit. 

Hughes:  This  pattern  started  in  the  Department  of  Microbiology? 

Boyer:  Not  to  my  knowledge.  I  .can't  remember  doing  that  then. 

Hughes:  It  was  a  Biochemistry  custom. 

Boyer:  I  think  so,  yes. 

Recombinant  DNA  Research 

Splicing  Plasmids,  1972-1973 

Hughes:    I  think  the  best  way  of  starting  to  discuss  your  research  would 
be  to  describe  what  led  up  to  the  recombinant  DNA  research 
reported  in  the  1973  paper  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  National 
Academy  of  Sciences,  What  had  to  have  been  established  before  you 
could  do  that  work? 


31 

Boyer:     There  were  two  papers,  one  in  '73  and  one  in  '74.1  I  don't  think  you 
want  to  discuss  one  without  the  other.  Bob  Helling  was  a  fellow 
graduate  student  of  mine  at  the  University  of  Pittsburgh.  He  came  out 
to  my  lab  on  a  sabbatical.  I  think  this  was  summer  of  '72,  and  this 
was  when  Stan  Cohen  and  I  actually  got  together.  I  was  interested  in 
doing  in  vitro  recombination  of  DNA,  and  I  had  been  for  some  time, 
realizing  that  restriction  enzymes  would  be  important  for  that.  We  had 
been  working  with  restriction  enzymes  for  a  number  of  years. 

Bob  and  I,  as  part  of  his  sabbatical,  were  trying  to  do  in  vitro 
recombination  with  a  lambda  fragment  and  a  plasmid  that  was  called 
lambda  DV  Gal.  It  was  a  plasmid  derived  from  a  bacteriophage,  lambda, 
which  had  a  beta-galactosidase  gene  in  it.  We  were  trying  to  use  that 
as  a  plasmid  vector,  recombining  that  with  another  piece  of  DNA.  We 
were  not  getting  anywhere. 

We  didn't  have  good  assays  yet  for  monitoring  restriction  digests 
with  ethidium  bromide  staining.  We  were  doing  gel  electrophoresis, 
but  we  were  still  using  radioactive  labels.  It  was  a  very  tedious 
procedure.  We  were  not  getting  anywhere.  As  it  turned  out  later,  the 
Eco  Rl  site  in  lambda  DV  Gal  disrupted  the  origin  of  replication.  We 
didn't  know  that  at  the  time. 


Stanley  N.  Cohen  and  the  Plasmid  Meeting  in  Hawaii,  1972 

Boyer:     So  Bob  and  I  had  been  working  on  that  that  summer  [1972],  and  I  had 
been  working  with  Stan  Falkow.  I  had  known  Stan  for  some  time,  and 
got  together  with  him  and  Stan  Cohen.2  Stan  Falkow  introduced  me  to 
Stan  Cohen. 

Hughes:    Is  this  the  deli  meeting  in  Waikiki  in  November  1972? 

Boyer:     No.  This  was  prior  to  that.  We  were  just  discussing  our  interests. 

They  told  me  about  the  upcoming  meeting  in  Hawaii.  It  was  a  Japan-US 
meeting  to  be  held  in  Hawaii  [in  November  1972]. 

Hughes:    On  plasmids? 


1S.  N.  Cohen,  A.  C.  Y.  Chang,  H.  W.  Boyer,  and  R.  B.  Helling, 
"Construction  of  Biologically  Functional  Bacterial  Plasmids  In  Vitro," 
Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America 
70,  no.  11  (1973):  3240-44,  and  J.  F.  Morrow,  S.  N.  Cohen,  A.  C.  Y.  Chang,  H. 
W.  Boyer,  H.  M.  Goodman,  and  R.  B.  Helling,  "Replication  and  Transcription  of 
Eukaryotic  DNA  in  Escherichia  coli,"  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America  71,  no.  5  (1974):  1743-47. 

2For  Cohen's  perspective  on  the  meeting  and  many  other  topics  see  the 
oral  history  of  Stanley  N.  Cohen,  interviews  begun  in  1995  by  Sally  Smith 
Hughes,  ROHO,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in 
process. 


32 


Boyer:     On  bacterial  plasmids,  yes.  And  since  we  had  just  done  some  work  on 

two  restriction  and  modification  enzymes  controlled  by  plasmids,  they 
felt  that  we  should  come  and  talk  about  that . 

Hughes:    It  wasn't  a  meeting  that  you  routinely  went  to? 

Boyer:     Well,  this,  I  think,  was  the  first  one  ever  held.  Japan  had  a  large 
interest  in  plasmids.  They  had  a  lot  of  scientists  working  on 
plasmids  because  they  had  a  major  problem  with  bacterial  resistance 
to  antibiotics,  and  these  were  all  caused  by  plasmids. 

Hughes:    More  problems  than  elsewhere? 

Boyer:     It  was  very  prevalent  there.  I  don't  know  whether  it  was  ever 

monitored  that  carefully  elsewhere,  but  apparently  Japan  was  not  so 
judicious  in  its  medical  use  of  antibiotics,  as  I  understood  it, 
which  would  have  promoted  resistance.  More  indiscriminate  use  of 
antibiotics  would  lead  to  accumulation  of  the  resistant  organism. 


Research  Prior  to  the  Boyer-Cohen  Collaboration 

Boyer:     So  we  went  off  to  Hawaii.  We  had  done  sequence  work  on  the  site 

cleaved  by  the  enzyme.1  We  knew  from  the  work  of  Ron  Davis  and  Janet 
Mertz,  who  worked  in  Paul  Berg's  lab  at  Stanford.  We  had  given  some 
of  our  Eco  Rl  enzyme  to  Paul  Berg.  He  gave  some  to  those  people.  They 
had  shown  physically  that  when  the  Rl  enzyme  cleaved  DNA,  that  the 
ends  would  reanneal,  that  they  were  what  we  call  sticky  ends. 

And  this  was  the  same  time  that  we  determined  the  sequence  of  the 
cleavage  site,  so  we  could  tell  from  the  sequence  of  the  termini  that 
we  would  have  short  sticky  ends  of  four  overlapping  base  pairs.  The 
thing  that  was  somewhat  interesting  at  the  time  was  that  we  knew  that 
cohesive  ends  existed  naturally  in  bacterial  viruses,  like  lambda, 
had  twelve  overlapping  reannealable  nucleotides,  and  that  these  were 
stable  at  room  temperature.  But  it  was  somewhat  surprising,  at  least 
to  me,  that  reannealing  would  occur  so  efficiently  with  just  four 
nucleotides  involved,  albeit  at  slightly  lower  temperatures. 

Hughes:    Why  were  you  surprised?  Because  of  the  lower  number? 


1J.  Hedgpeth,  H.  M.  Goodman,  and  H.  W.  Boyer,  "DNA  Nucleotide  Sequence 
Restricted  by  the  Rl  Endonuclease, "  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America  69,  no.  11  (1972):  3448-52. 


33 

Boyer:     Lower  number  and  the  lower  energetics  involved;  it  just  wouldn't  be 
stable.  But  probably  what's  happening  is  that  even  at  room 
temperature,  there  would  be  a  lot  of  these  forming,  but  they  were 
thermodynamically  unstable;  they  wouldn't  stay  annealed;  they  were  in 
a  constant  state  of  flux,  of  closing  and  opening,  closing  and 
opening.  If  you  could  add  another  enzyme,  DNA  ligase,  then  you  could 
catch  the  reannealed  configuration  in  a  protein-DNA  complex  and  re- 
ligate  the  bonds  and  then  they  would  be  stable. 

As  it  turns  out,  you  can  take  these  fragments  of  DNA  with  Rl  ends  and 
transform  them  into  a  bacterium,  and  the  enzyme  in  the  bacterium  will 
actually  reseal  them.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  when  we  published  our 
first  paper,  we  found  that  you  didn't  have  to  treat  it  with  ligase. 
You  could  recover  recombinants  just  by  mixing  the  fragments  and 
taking  them  up  into  the  bacteria  without  treatment  with  the  ligase. 

So  we  had  the  preliminary  information  available  when  we  went  off  to 
Hawaii.  We  heard  Stan  Cohen  at  that  time  describe  a  small  plasmid 
that  he  had  been  working  on  called  pSClOl.  It  carried  the  gene  for 
resistance  to  one  antibiotic,  tetracycline.  He  talked  about  a  number 
of  other,  larger  plasmids  that  had  a  number  of  drug  resistance 
markers  on  them. 

Hughes:    Which  he  also  had  developed? 

Boyer:     He  had  characterized  them.  Stanley  thought  he  had  developed  the 

pSClOl  from  a  larger  plasmid,  but  people  at  the  time  thought  that  he 
had  just  isolated  a  natural  one  in  the  course  of  his  experiments. 

So  in  any  case,  since  it  had  one  antibiotic  marker  on  it,  and  the 
fact  that  it  was  so  small,  it  could  be  transformed  into  bacteria. 
This  seemed  to  be  a  very  interesting  plasmid  to  see  if  it  could  be 
cleaved  by  the  Eco  Rl  enzyme,  and  also  to  look  at  the  structure  of 
other  plasmids  by  treating  with  the  Rl  enzyme. 

Boyer:     At  that  same  meeting  [in  Hawaii],  I  tried  to  talk  Stan  Falkow  into 

collaborating  on  trying  to  dissect  various  bacterial  plasmids,  and  he 
wasn't  too  interested.  He  was  more  interested  in  the  medical  end  of 
things,  so  he  suggested  that  Stan  Cohen  and  I  get  together  and  do  this. 
So  Stan  and  I  set  up  the  collaboration,  that  we'd  first  look  at  cleavage 


34 


patterns,  and  then  we'd  try  to  do  the  in  vitro  recombination  of 
those  various  fragments  of  plasmid.1 

#1 

Boyer:     In  general  terms,  I  think  we  knew  how  significant  this  work  would 
be.  It  became  more  apparent  as  we  were  doing  experiments.  But  I  do 
believe  I  had  a  fairly  good  handle  on  it.  I  didn't  realize  the 
wide-range  impact,  that  it  would  be  very  significant  if  one  could 
do  that. 

Hughes:    Were  you  thinking  only  scientifically,  or  were  other  applications 
coming  to  mind? 

Boyer:     I  think  it  was  primarily  scientific. 
Hughes:    You  weren't  thinking- - 

Boyer:     Well,  I  want  to  set  the  stage  here,  because  we  were  just  talking 
about  recombining  bacteria  and  viruses  and  bacterial  plasmids  and 
bacterial  chromosomes.  That's  what  our  focus  was  there,  and  we 
didn't  even  know  if  we  could  do  it. 


Technical  Breakthrough:  Characterizing  DNA  Fragments 

Boyer:     We  came  back  from  that  meeting  and,  before  we  got  started  on  the 

collaboration,  I  went  to  Cold  Spring  Harbor,  where  Joe  Sambrook  and 
Phil  Sharp  showed  me  the  staining  of  DNA  fragments  that  they  had 
been  separating  in  a  gel  based  on  size  and  had  stained  with 
ethidium  bromide.2 


Appendices  B  and  C  for  a  cartoon  representing  the  Waikiki  deli 
meeting  and  a  diagram  of  the  molecular  cloning  procedure. 

2  The  use  of  ethidium  bromide  stain  combined  with  agarose  gel 
electrophoresis  is  described  in  P.  A.  Sharp,  B.  Sugden,  and  J.  Sambrook, 
"Detection  of  Two  Restriction  Endonuclease  Activities  in  Haemophilus 
parainfluenzae  Using  Analytical  Agarose -Ethidium  Bromide  Electrophoresis," 
Biochemistry  12  (1973):  3055-63. 


35 

It  was  such  a  breakthrough  in  terms  of  how  fast  we  could  move.  If 
we  had  to  do  this  research  with  the  techniques  prior  to  that,  it 
would  have  just  taken  forever.  When  I  saw  those  gels  back  in  Cold 
Spring  Harbor,  I  was  just  so  excited  I  couldn't  wait  to  get  home, 
get  back  to  the  laboratory. 

When  I  came  back,  I  told  Bob  Helling  about  it,  and  suggested  that 
he  work  out  the  variables  and  the  parameters  involved  in  looking  at 
the  separation  of  fragments  on  gels  based  on  size,  and  the  various 
staining  approaches .  So  he  did  a  lot  of  work  on  that  and  did  a 
wonderful  job.  We  could  show  that  there  was  a  relationship  between 
the  size  of  the  fragments  and  their  mobilities  in  the  gels,  and 
they  could  be  stained  in  a  couple  of  minutes.  You  could  see  the 
results  from  your  experiments  in  a  couple  of  hours,  and  you  could 
essentially  do  endless  experiments. 

Hughes:    What  had  you  had  to  do  before? 

Boyer:     Prior  to  that,  we  primarily  did  ultracentrifugation  analysis  of 
cleaved  DNA,  in  which  the  resolution  was  terrible.  We  had  to 
fractionate  sucrose  gradients.  We  would  do  something  like  five-  to 
six-hour  ultracentrifugation  runs,  and  then  you  had  to  remove  the 
tubes.  You  punctured  the  bottom  of  the  tube  with  a  needle  and  you 
collected  drops  on  little  pieces  of  paper.  You'd  get  about  fifty 
pieces  of  paper  per  tube.  Then  you  would  dry  those,  put  them  in 
scintillation  vials  with  scintillation  fluid,  and  count  them  in  the 
scintillation  counter.  Then  you'd  have  to  count  each  one  for  two  to 
three  minutes.  This  is  using  radioactively  labeled  DNA,  so  you  had 
to  prepare  radioactive  DNA,  which  was  a  mess.  You  had  to  be 
careful.  No  matter  how  careful  you  were,  you  always  had  accidents; 
you'd  get  stuff  on  the  floor. 

Hughes:    What  was  the  radioisotope? 

Boyer:     We  would  use  tritiated  thymidine  and  some  P%2  phosphorus,  ~P^2~ 

labeled  DNA.  So  it  was  just  a  terrible  job  preparing  that  stuff.  It 
was  valuable  substrate,  and  you  hated  to  use  it  up,  and  every  time 
you  goofed  up  an  experiment,  you'd  be  so  depressed,  because  you'd 
wasted  all  this  time  and  effort  and  money.  But  with  the  gel 
electrophoresis  and  the  ethidium  bromide  stain,  you  didn't  have  to 
make,  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  radioactively  labeled  DNA.  You 
could  just  take  DNA  and  it  was  so  much  easier. 


36 


Boyer  and  Cohen  Collaborate  on  Prokaryotic  and  Eukaryotic  DNA 
Exeriments 


Boyer:     So  once  we  got  a  handle  on  that,  which  didn't  take  too  long,  we  did 
the  experiments  with  Stan's  lab,  in  which  we  took  a  couple  of 
plasmids  that  he  had.  The  pSClOl  plasmid  we  could  cleave  was  cut 
one  time  by  the  Rl  endonuclease .  We  could  cut  up  other  plasmids 
with  the  enzyme,  and  essentially  cut  out  fragments  which  had  the  Rl 
termini,  and  some  of  these  fragments  would  contain  antibiotic- 
resistant  genes.  So  we  could  recombine  them  in  a  test  tube  and 
transform  the  bacterium,  select  for  various  antibiotic  resistance 
markers ,  and  take  the  bacteria  that  carried  these  various 
combinations  of  markers.  We  could  purify  the  plasmids  from  those 
strains,  cut  the  plasmid  DNA  with  the  Rl  enzyme  again,  and  then  run 
those  plasmids  in  gel  electrophoresis  alongside  the  original  ones 
that  were  cut  with  the  same  enzyme. 

Well,  what  we  didn't  know  is  whether  or  not  we  could  do  the  same 
thing  with  eukaryotic  DNA.  Let  me  point  out  that  what  we  were  able 
to  do  in  this  bacterial  plasmid  work  was  simplified  somewhat 
because  we  could  select  for  recombinant  plasmids  through  antibiotic 
resistance  of  transformed  E.  coli. 

We  could  show  identity  between  the  fragments ,  and  then  show  for  the 
first  time  that  there  were  certain  fragments  of  plasmid  that 
contained  the  antibiotic  resistant  marker.  So  that  was  the  first 
paper.  But  at  that  time,  we  knew  you  could  do  in  vitro 
recombination,  we  could  transform  bacteria,  and  we  .could  recover 
the  in  vitro  recombined  plasmids. 

Now,  the  number  of  recombinants  that  you  got  was  a  fraction  of  what 
you'd  get  if  you  did  not  cleave  the  DNA.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there 
were  several  logs  difference,  if  I  can  recall.  And  so  you  were 
looking  for  a  fairly  rare  event.  It  wasn't  out  of  the  question,  but 
it  was  somewhat  rare.  But  if  you  didn't  have  the  ability  to  select 
for  those  genes,  it  would  have  been  a  nightmare,  and  nobody  would 
have  done  it  in  the  first  place. 

The  next  question  we  asked  was  whether  we  could  do  the  same  thing 
with  eukaryotic  DNA.  Could  we  put  eukaryotic  DNA  into  bacteria? 
And  would  it  replicate?  And  could  we  recover  recombinant  plasmids 


37 


with  eukaryotic  DNA  if  we  had  no  way  to  select  for  the  recombinant 
event?  There's  a  subtlety  there  I  don't  think  a  lot  of  people 
appreciated  at  the  time.  Once  you  could  do  it,  it  was  great,  and 
nobody  thought  of  how  much  time  we  worried  about  that.  And  we 
actually  did  some  subsequent  experiments  to  maximize  the 
efficiency  of  recombination. 

Hughes:    Is  it  pertinent  to  go  into  how  you  did  increase  the  efficiency? 

Boyer:     No,  I  don't  think  it's  terribly  relevant.  We  spent  a  great  deal  of 
time  looking  at  the  parameters.  You  look  at  the  ratio  of  the  ends 
of  the  fragments  of  DNA,  the  concentration,  and  how  long  the  DNA 
molecule  is.  You  could  have  done  this  experiment  the  wrong  way.  We 
didn't  know  ahead  of  time;  we  just  sort  of  assumed  that  we  could 
force  it  in  one  direction,  just  on  general  principles.  But  if  you 
take  a  very  short  DNA  molecule,  it  can  find  its  own  end  and  form  a 
circle  very  easily.  And  the  shorter  it  is,  the  more  easily  it  can 
find  its  end. 

So  you  can  effectively  calculate  the  concentration  of  the  ends  of 
a  molecule  relative  to  itself.  So  if  you  had  a  short  molecule  that 
you  wanted  to  recombine  with  a  fairly  large  plasmid,  and  you 
didn't  have  an  excess  of  these  small  ones  relative  to  the  large 
one,  they  would  all  close  on  themselves,  and  the  recombinant  event 
would  be  rare. 

Hughes:    Is  this  in  retrospect? 

Boyer:     This  was  after  the  initial  experiments,  and  we  published  a  paper 
on  that.  There  was  a  formula  describing  that.  It  all  had  to  do 
with  the  flexibility  of  DNA.  At  some  point,  when  a  molecule  gets 
too  short,  it  can't  bend  enough  to  find  its  own  end. 


The  Biohazards  Problem 

Boyer:     At  that  time,  we  were  facing  up  to  a  general  awareness  in  the 

scientific  community  about  the  "hazards"  of  this  type  of  research. 
People  were  concerned  that  maybe  we  would  put  the  wrong  kind  of 
gene  into  a  bacterium  if  we  tried  using  eukaryotic  DNA.  In 
particular,  if  we  carried  out  recombination  between  a  bacterial 
plasmid  and  an  animal  virus  that  caused  cancers  in  various 
laboratory  animals ,  they  worried  that  we  might  end  up  with  a  sewer 
full  of  bacteria  carrying  genes  that  would  cause  cancer,  and  that 
sort  of  thing. 


38 

Hughes:    Was  this  a  concern  before  you  had  done  the  Xenopus  work? 

Boyer:     Yes.  There  was  a  general  awareness  about  that,  if  I  remember 
correctly.  We  obviously  hadn't  had  the  Asilomar  conference  on 
recombinant  DNA  yet,  but  there  was  some  awareness.  I  can  remember 
years  before  we'd  had  a  little  discussion  at  an  European  Molecular 
Biology  Organization  (EMBO)  meeting  in  Europe  regarding  using 
molecular  genetics  and  so  on  and  so  forth  in  biological  warfare 
experiments.  So  the  thing  was  floating  around. 

And  also,  the  other  thing  that  was  very  evident,  there  was  concern 
in  the  scientific  community  because  of  large-scale  production  (these 
are  all  relative  terms)  by  laboratories  of  large  amounts  of  SV40  and 
polyoma  viruses.  This  was  something  that  actually  came  out  of  the 
focus  that  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Laboratory  took  on  viruses  such  as 
SV40,  polyoma,  and  the  adenoviruses.  There  was  a  concern  and  outcry 
by  a  number  of  people  at  that  time;  I  can't  remember  who.1 

Hughes:    There  actually  was  an  Asilomar  conference  on  that  very  subject  in 
early  '73.2 

Boyer:     Yes.  Out  of  that  came  a  book  which  was  called  Biohazards  in 

Biological  Research,  which  was  published  by  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Press 
actually.3  Jim  Watson  took  a  very  cautious,  even  negative,  position 
on  doing  research  with  these  elements,  if  I  remember  correctly.  In 
contrast,  he  did  a  big  turnaround  by  the  time  recombinant  DNA  work 
came  along.  Probably  out  of  having  just  thought  about  it  more,  and 
having  some  experience  behind  him,  I  think  he  changed  his  position. 

But  nevertheless,  there  was  a  major  problem.  We  didn't  want  to  work 
with  an  animal  virus  for  those  reasons. 


'For  a  detailed  account  of  these  events,  see  Sheldon  Krimsky,  Genetic 
Alchemy:  The  Social  History  of  the  Recombinant  DNA  Controversy  (Cambridge:  MIT 
Press,  1985). 

2The  first  Asilomar  conference,  held  January  22-24,  1973  (also  called 
Asilomar  I)  dealt  with  the  general  biohazards  of  biological  (viral)  research. 
Asilomar  II  held  on  February  24-27,  1975,  provided  the  philosophical  and 
practical  basis  for  the  development  of  NIH  guidelines  for  recombinant  DNA 
research.  For  the  views  of  the  scientist  who  organized  Asilomar  I  and  II,  see 
Paul  Berg,  Ph.D.,  "A  Stanford  Professor's  Career  in  Biochemistry,  Science 
Politics,  and  the  Biotechnology  Industry,"  an  oral  history  conducted  in  1997  by 
Sally  Smith  Hughes,  ROHO,  The  Bancroft  Library,  2000. 

3The  full  citation  is,  A.  Hellman,  M.  Oxman,  and  R.  Pollack,  eds., 
Biohazards  in  Biological  Research:  Proceedings  of  a  Conference  on  Biohazards  in 
Cancer  Research  at  the  Asilomar  Conference  Center,  Pacific  Grove,  California, 
22-24  January  1973  (New  York:  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Laboratory,  1973). 


39 


Cloning  Successes 

Boyer:     For  the  next  set  of  experiments,  what  we  really  needed  was  a  small, 
well-defined  piece  of  eukaryotic  DNA  that  we  could  characterize  and 
with  which  we  could  show  without  going  through  massive  amount  of 
efforts  that  we  had  actually  cloned  a  piece  of  eukaryotic  DNA. 
Animal  viruses  were  well  characterized  because  they  could  be 
purified  and  were  small,  and  you  could  characterize  the  DNA  with  a 
restriction  enzyme. 

Let's  say  you  took  total  mouse  DNA,  and  you  tried  to  carry  out  the 
cloning  experiments.  Let's  say  you  got  some  recombinants  and  you 
looked  at  them.  Then  you  had  to  go  through  a  fairly  rigorous 
procedure,  at  least  at  that  time,  to  identify  that  as  a  piece  of  the 
mouse  chromosomal  DNA.  So  we  were  looking  for  something  that  was 
well  defined. 

The  problem  was  in  those  days,  before  you  could  do  the  in  vitro 
recombination  and  cloning  thing,  there  wasn't  that  much  around.  You 
had  the  animal  viruses.  There  was  some  work  being  done  with 
mitochondrial  DNA,  but  it  was  a  fairly  large  piece  of  DNA.  I  was  at 
a  Gordon  conference  [June  1973]  where  I  described  the  work  that  Stan 
and  I  had  done  with  the  bacterial  plasmids.  There  was  a  graduate 
student  there  from  Paul  Berg's  lab,  John  Morrow.  I  was  talking  to 
John,  and  I  said,  "Well,  the  next  thing  to  do  is,  we've  got  to 
recombine  a  piece  of  eukaryotic  DNA  to  the  plasmid,  and  show  that  it 
can  replicate,"  and  blah  blah  blah.  "And  we're  looking  for  the 
right--" 

He  says,  "Oh,  I  have  some  amplified  ribosomal  DNA  from  Xenopus 
laevis,"  that  he  had  gotten  from  Don  Brown.  With  the  enzyme  we  had 
given  to  Paul  Berg,  John  had  shown  that  this  DNA  could  be  cleaved  by 
the  Rl  enzyme.  So  it  looked  like  that  might  be  a  good  source  of 
eukaryotic  DNA  that  we  could  recombine  into  plasmids. 

So  John  checked  with  Don  Brown  and  asked  him  if  it  would  be  okay 
if  we  could  use  that.  So  John  said,  "Well,  I'll  just  give  you  some 
of  that  DNA."  I  said,  "No,  no,  I'd  be  happy  to  put  you  on  the 
paper  if  you  gave  us  the  DNA."  So  he  gave  us  some  DNA,  and  what  we 
showed  is  that  you  could  cleave  this  amplified  toad  DNA  into  a 


couple  of  different  pieces  of  DNA.  So  we  then  took  that  and 
recombined  it  with  the  plasmid. 

The  big  question  was,  how  could  we  recover  it?  We  could  cleave  the 
bacterial  plasmid,  which  carried  a  tetracycline  resistant  gene;  we 
could  cleave  the  ribosomal  DNA,  and  we  could  mix  them  together  in 
a  test  tube.  They  could  be  treated  with  DNA  polynucleotide  ligase. 
They  could  be  transferred  into  E.  coli,  and  then  once  you 
transformed  the  bacterium,  you  could  select  for  tetracycline 
resistance.  And  that's  what  you  had. 

Then  you  had  to  take  all  those  colonies  that  were  resistant  to 
tetracycline  and  remove  plasmid  from  them.  Then  the  question  was, 
how  frequently  could  you  recover  a  plasmid  with  a  piece  of  the 
eukaryotic  DNA  in  it?  And  we  could  tell  that  by  purifying  the 
plasmid,  cutting  it  with  the  enzyme  and  running  it  on  gels,  and 
comparing  them  with  the  original  reactants  or  fragments  of  DNA 
that  we  put  into  it. 

So  it  turned  out  that  we  were  able  to  recover  at  a  fairly 
reasonable  frequency.  I  can't  remember  exactly  what  it  was --maybe 
10  to  30  percent  of  the  transformants  carried  recombinant  DNA. 

Hughes:    How  did  this  compare  with  the  bacterial  system? 

Boyer:     Well,  in  the  bacterial  system,  the  comparison  of  several  different 
orders  of  magnitude  difference  in  frequency  was  relative  to  the 
uncut  plasmid.  If  you  compared  those  two  transformations,  we  had  a 
fairly  significant  recovery.  Anyhow,  it  didn't  take  us  long  to 
find  a  half  a  dozen  or  more  of  these  recombinant  plasmids,  and  we 
just  characterized  them  and  showed  that  they  contained  the 
fragments  that  we  had  started  with.  Then  we  showed  that  you  could 
actually  make  the  ribosomal  RNA  in  the  bacterium,  and  that  it 
would  hybridize  to  the  Xenopus  ribosomal  DNA.  So  that  was  a  little 
bit  of  icing  on  the  cake  that  confirmed  that  we  had  cloned 
eukaryotic  ribosomal  DNA. 

Hughes:    You're  telling  this  very  soberly.  Was  it  pretty  exciting  at  the 
time? 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes.  Actually,  I  think  the  most  exciting  moment  was  when  we 
did  the  first  experiments  with  the  recombined  plasmid  DNA.  Bob 


41 

Helling  and  I  looked  at  the  first  gels,  and  I  can  remember  tears 
coming  into  my  eyes,  it  was  so  nice.  I  mean,  there  it  was.  You 
could  visualize  your  results  in  physical  terms,  and  after  that,  we 
knew  we  could  do  a  lot  of  things.  There  were  some  unanswered 
questions,  but  I  think  that  was  the  key.  That  was  the  key. 

The  frequency  of  recombination  was  one  thing,  the  fact  that  we 
could  recover  it,  and  secondly,  we  went  on  to  spend  some  time  on 
this,  to  show  that  eukaryotic  DNA  in  a  bacterium,  when  it  did 
replicate,  replicated  very  faithfully.  There  are  some  types  of  DNA 
that,  because  of  their  structure,  don't  do  that,  but  those  are 
very  rare. 

Hughes:    How  did  you  show  that  it  indeed  did  replicate  faithfully? 

Boyer:     This  was  done  in  some  subsequent  work.  I  don't  think  a  lot  of 

people  questioned  that  seriously.  I  think  a  few  people  did,  and  we 
did.  Because  if  you  had  a  piece  of  eukaryotic  DNA  that  replicated 
in  a  bacterium,  unless  it  replicated  faithfully,  you  didn't  have 
much. 

Hughes:     [laughs]  That's  right. 

Boyer:     We  had  a  postdoc  who  came  from  Gal  Tech--Wes  Brown,  who  went  on  to 
work  with  Alan  Wilson  at  UCB  (molecular  clock).  He'd  been  in  Jerry 
Vinograd's  lab  there  at  Cal  Tech,  and  he  had  worked  on  the 
electron  microscopy  of  rat  mitochondrial  DNA.  So  we  cloned 
fragments  of  rat  mitochondrial  DNA  in  bacteria,  and  grew  them.  We 
would  grow  cultures  for  long  periods  of  time,  and  subculture, 
subculture,  subculture.  After  many  generations  of  replication,  you 
can  ask  then  by  reannealing  the  cloned  mitochondrial  DNA  with  bona 
fide  rat  mitochondrial  DNA  if  there  are  a  lot  of  irregularities  in 
the  reannealed  DNA.  We  essentially  could  pick  up  any  differences 
after  many,  many  generations.  Of  course,  this  is  a  real  key  for 
anything  in  genetically  engineered  biopharmaceuticals. 


Considering  Commercial  Applications 

Hughes:    Were  you  beginning  to  think  that  this  technology  might  have 
commercial  applications? 

Boyer:     Yes. 


42 

Hughes:    Is  the  Xenopus  work  what  really  prompted  thinking  in  commercial  terms? 

Boyer:     Yes,  I  think  we  were  thinking  about  it  at  that  time.  Not  in  any 
grandiose  ways,  but  sitting  around  the  laboratory  talking  about, 
"Well,  now  if  you  can  clone  eukaryotic  DNA,  you  can  clone  the  gene  for 
human  insulin  or  human  growth  hormone  or  whatever  you  can  think  of, 
and  you  should  be  able  to  make  it  in  a  bacterium." 

Problem  was,  we  didn't  know  how  to  isolate  those  genes.  If  you  just 
randomly  isolate  the  pieces  of  DNA  from  any  organism,  how  do  you  know 
what  you  have?  You  have  to  do  a  lot  of  analysis,  or  you'd  have  to  have 
some  way  of  identifying  the  gene  that  you  wanted. 

There  was  a  lot  of  subsequent  work  by  other  laboratories  which  allowed 
you  to  do  that.  One  was  that  people  were  able,  around  the  same  time,  to 
purify,  to  a  certain  extent,  messenger  RNAs .  If  you  had  the  right 
assay,  you  could  take  RNA  from  a  particular  tissue,  let's  say  pancreas 
or  liver  or  what  have  you.  By  using  in  vitro  translation  of  the  message 
with,  let's  say,  a  radioimmunoassay  for  a  particular  protein,  you  could 
purify  with  those  techniques,  or  at  least  enrich  a  messenger  RNA 
population  for  a  particular  protein.  So  if  you  had  that  messenger  RNA, 
you  could  then  make  a  cDNA  [complementary  DNA]  copy  and  clone  that,  and 
characterize  the  resultant  clones  and  ask  if  they  actually  did  have  the 
sequence  for  that  particular  DNA.  So  that  was  an  approach  used. 

The  other  approach  was  just  to  reverse  that,  which  would  be  to  clone 
the  genomic  DNA,  large  numbers,  and  then  use  your  enriched  messenger 
RNA,  have  it  radioactively  labeled,  and  then  look  for  colonies  or 
clones  of  DNA  that  would  hybridize  with  your  particular  messenger  RNA. 
So  those  were  some  of  the  things  around.  In  those  days,  purifying 
messenger  RNAs  was  a  tough  job. 


The  Research  Moratorium 

#1 

The  Singer-Soil  and  Berg  Letters 

Boyer:     If  I  remember  correctly  we  published  this  work  on  Xenopus  in  "74.1 
presented  that  at  a  Gordon  Conference  on  Nucleic  Acids  that  year, 


'J.  F.  Morrow,  S.  N.  Cohen,  A.  C.  Y.  Chang,  H.  W.  Boyer,  H.  M.  Goodman, 
and  R.  B.  Helling,  "Replication  and  Transcription  of  Eukaryotic  DNA  in 
Escherichia  coli,"  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the 
United  States  of  America  71,  no.  5  (1974):  1743-47. 


43 

which  was  the  year  after  the  other  one  I  referred  to  when  I  talked  to 
John  Morrow. 

Boyer:     At  that  conference,  there  was  a  letter  drafted  by  a  few  scientists 

which  I  signed;  I  had  mixed  feelings  about  it.1  There's  a  footnote  in 
the  paper  that  Stan  and  I  wrote  suggesting  that  people  should  think 
cautiously  about  cloning  eukaryotic  DNA  at  random,  and  so  on  and  so 
forth. 

Hughes:    Is  that  really  in  there?  I  read  that  you  had  at  first  wanted  a 

cautionary  footnote,  but  you  took  it  out.2  I've  got  the  source,  [tape 
interruption  while  Boyer  reads  the  document.] 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  didn't  remember  correctly.  We  were  thinking  about  putting  a 
little  note  in  there,  but  decided  not  to  do  it. 

Hughes:    Do  you  remember  why? 

Boyer:     I  didn't  think  it  was  appropriate  for  a  scientific  paper,  for  a  few 

scientists  to  come  to  any  judgment.  I  didn't  feel  qualified  to  do  it.  I 
mean,  why  create  a  controversy  when  one  didn't  exist  at  the  time?  But 
convening  the  Asilomar  conference  I  think  came  out  of  the  original 
letter  from  the  Gordon  conference. 

Hughes:    Let's  talk  about  the  Gordon  conference,  where  you  first  discussed 
your  work  on  recombinant  DNA.  The  Gordon  conference  was  in  June 
1973,  and  the  first  paper  on  your  recombinant  research  did  not  come 
out  until  November.  The  way  I  read  it,  you  presented  the  material, 
and  it  fell  somewhat  flat  until  somebody  later  in  the  session 
commented,  saying  something  to  the  effect,  "Well,  now  we  can  splice 
just  about  any  DNA."  As  a  result  of  that  realization,  Maxine  Singer 
added  a  half -hour  discussion  at  the  end  of  the  Gordon  conference  on 


'Dr.  Boyer  refers  to  the  so-called  Singer-Soil  letter.  For  more 
discussion  of  the  Berg  letter  see  Krimsky,  83-84.  See  Appendix  D  for  the 
Singer-Soil  and  Berg  letters  as  they  appeared  in  Science. 

2For  Dr.  Boyer 's  views  on  the  biohazard  issue  in  1975,  see  the  oral 
history  recorded  just  three  months  after  Asilomar  II.  Oral  history  with  Herbert 
Boyer,  May  1975,  p.  26.  Recombinant  DNA  Controversy  Oral  History  Collection, 
MIT. 


44 


the  potential  hazards  of  such  research.  From  that  came  the  Singer-Soil 
letter,  which  was  published  in  Science  and  which  called  for  a  committee 
to  be  set  up  to  study  the  problem  and  to  recommend  research  guidelines.1 
Do  you  remember  all  that? 

Boyer:     Yes,  vaguely. 

Hughes:    Do  you  remember  that  reaction? 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  don't  remember  that  chronology.  There  was  another  letter  written 
by  Berg,  I  think,  and  Maxine  Singer,  and  then  a  number  of  us  signed  it, 
calling  for  that  Asilomar  conference.  But  I  had  forgotten  about  the 
Singer-Soil  letter.  They  were  the  organizers  of  the  Gordon  conference. 

Hughes:    Right,  and  the  Singer-Soil  letter  asked  for  the  formation  of  a  committee 
of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  to  consider  the  problem  of 
recombinant  DNA  research,  and  from  that  came  the  so-called  Berg  letter. 
How  did  that  work?  The  scientists  who  signed  the  letter  didn't  actually 
meet?  Berg  drafted  the  letter,  and  then  circulated  it  for  suggestions  and 
approval? 

Boyer:     Yes,  that's  my  recollection.  I  wasn't  particularly  privy  to  that  inside 
work;  I  was  just  asked  to  sign  the  letter.  I  think  primarily  Paul  Berg 
and  Maxine  had  taken  that  task  upon  themselves.  I  was  never  politically 
savvy  enough,  even  in  the  scientific  community,  to  think  about  those 
things.  We  were  pretty  busy  at  that  time  doing  a  lot  of  different  things. 

Thoughts  on  Potential  Biohazards 

Boyer:     If  I  can  recall  my  own  feelings,  I  felt  that  this  question  of  potential 
biohazards  should  be  addressed.  I  never  thought  it  was  a  significant 
problem.  I  thought  it  was  overblown  by  the  scientists,  and  it  was  picked 
up  on  by  the  media,  and  the  whole  thing  got  out  of  control  and  was  very 
unfortunate.  I  don't  think  it  served  any  real  purpose. 


*See  Appendix  D.  For  a  journalistic  account  of  these  events  see  John 
Lear,  Recombinant  DNA:  The  Untold  Story  (New  York:  Crown  Publishers,  1978,  69- 
94. 


45 

Hughes:    And  yet,  you  must  have  been  uneasy  enough  to  halt  those  experiments, 

because  your  technician  Mary  Betlach  told  me  there  were  certain  types  of 
recombinant  experiments  that  you,  as  she  put  it,  "put  on  the  shelf."1 

Boyer:     We  were  uneasy  about  them  because  we  had  the  wrath  of  a  large  majority  of 
the  scientific  community  come  down  on  our  heads. 

Hughes:    Why  weren't  you  particularly  concerned  about  doing  that  kind  of 
experiment? 

Boyer:     I  think  it  was  a  rather  informal  accumulation  of  pieces  of  scientific 

information.  I  couldn't  put  them  down  in  any  particular  order,  nor  could 
I  claim  that  I  had  any  major  insight  at  the  time.  It  was  an  impression  I 
had,  but  I  just  couldn't  imagine  some  of  the  scenarios  happening.  But  it 
was  hard  to  know  what  it  was  all  about.  It  was  just  an  impression  I  had 
more  than  anything.  I  couldn't  argue  it  forcefully,  although  some  people 
did.  You  could  make  any  number  of  cases  for  the  fact  that  these  things 
[recombinant  organisms]  would  not  survive  in  nature.  But  there  was  always 
the  "what-if"  scenario  which  you  couldn't  counter.  The  problem  that  most 
scientists  have  hanging  over  their  head  is  they  can  never  say  nothing  can 
happen.  You  always  leave  yourself  an  out.  We're  trained  that  way.  You 
can't  say  anything  with  certainty,  [chuckles] 

The  Asilomar  Conference  on  Recombinant  DNA  Molecules,  February  1975 

Boyer:     I  thought  the  Asilomar  conference  was  a  nightmare.  I  thought  it  was  so 
emotionally  charged  that  it  was  counterproductive.  There  were  a  lot  of 
accusations  and  shouting  from  the  floor.  I  found  it  to  be  an  absolutely 
disgusting  week. 

Hughes:    What  had  you  expected  would  happen? 

Boyer:     I  couldn't  say.  I  don't  know  if  I  had  any  expectations. 


'See  previously  cited  ROHO  oral  history  of  Mary  Betlach. 


46 

Hughes:    There  were  several  working  groups.1  Were  you  asked  to  join  one? 

Boyer:     Yes,  I  can't  even  remember  which  one. 

Hughes:    There  was  a  plasmid  working  group.  Was  that  it? 

Boyer:     I  don't  remember.  I  don't  remember  much  about  it.  It  was  an  exhausting 
week.  I  was  so  upset  that  I  couldn't  sleep.  I  didn't  enjoy  it  at  all. 
[laughs]  I  think  that  the  whole  thing  was  counterproductive. 

Hughes:    Well,  the  people  who  look  back  on  that  conference  seem  to  feel  that  the 
intent  was  to  end  the  research  moratorium.  There  had  been  a  voluntary 
moratorium  that  followed  the  Berg  letter,  which  lasted  roughly  a  year. 
Did  the  moratorium  affect  your  research?  Did  it  hold  you  up? 

Boyer:     I'm  not  sure.  It  might  have.  I  could  be  very  cynical  and  imagine  that  the 
moratorium  gave  everybody  a  chance  to  get  on  the  same  playing  field. 
There  were  a  lot  of  people  learning  how  to  do  this  [recombinant  DNA 
technology]  during  that  time. 

Hughes:    And  you  were  teaching  some  of  them,  were  you  not? 

Boyer:     Yes,  to  a  certain  extent.  These  impressions  I  have  would  be  very  cynical. 
Scientists  are  strange  people,  [laughter]  They  don't  have  any  more 
strength  or  less  weaknesses  than  other  people. 

Hughes:    So  in  a  sense,  the  moratorium  could  have  worked  against  you,  by  letting 
people  more  or  less  catch  up? 

Boyer:     Well,  that's  possible,  but  there's  only  so  much  one  laboratory  can  do. 
I'm  not  sure  we  would  have  done  anything  differently  than  we  did. 

Diffusion  and  Development  of  Recombinant  DNA  Technology 

Boyer:     I  think  that  the  great  thing  about  this  technology  was  that  it  was  very 
straightforward,  very  simple,  and  it  didn't  take  much  to  transfer  this 
technology  into  every  laboratory.  It  just  became  so  widespread  in  a 


'The  three  groups  were  the  Plasmid  Working  Group,  the  Eukaryote  Working 
Group,  and  the  Virus  Working  Group.  Sheldon  Krimsky,  Genetic  Alchemy:  The 
Social  History  of  the  Recombinant  DNA  Controversy  (Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  1982), 
107-8. 


47 


very  short  period  of  time,  and  an  amount  of  good  things  came  out  of 
it.  What  more  could  you  ask  for? 

It's  had  a  big  impact,  and  it's  nice  to  know  that  I  was  involved  in 
the  early  stages  of  it  and  contributed  to  it.  But  every  scientist 
brought  his  own  little  specialty,  and  his  own  insights.  They 
improved  it;  the  improvements  just  came  at  a  remarkable  pace.  We 
spent  a  lot  of  this  time  developing  a  better  plasmid,  and  developed 
a  plasmid  that  became  very  widespread. 

Hughes:    Which  one? 

Boyer:     It  was  called  pBR322,  and  that  was  actually  a  fun  thing  to  do.  It 
made  life  a  lot  easier. 

Hughes :    Would  you  tell  me  about  the  development  of  plasmids ,  and 
specifically  that  one? 

Boyer:     Well,  I  just  talked  about  how  each  scientist  brought  his  own 

specialty  and  interest  into  play.  The  pSClOl  plasmid  that  we  used  in 
the  original  experiments  was  a  good  plasmid,  but  it  wasn't  perfect. 
Each  cell  would  carry  maybe  a  couple  of  those  plasmid  molecules  for 
bacterial  chromosomes,  so  the  ratio  of  plasmid  to  bacterial  DNA  was 
fairly  small.  Purification  was  that  much  more  difficult  because  of 
that. 

Hughes:    Why  did  the  cell  only  carry  a  little? 

Boyer:     It  just  has  to  do  with  the  intrinsic  replication  properties  of  the 
plasmid. 

Now,  in  contrast  to  that  plasmid,  Don  Helinski  and  his  colleagues  at 
UC,  San  Diego  and  some  other  people  had  been  working  with  another 
bacterial  plasmid  which  didn't  carry  what  one  would  consider  a 
useful  antibiotic  resistant  marker.  It  carried  a  gene  that  made  a 
protein  called  a  colicin,  which  would  kill  other  bacteria,  and  which 
in  turn  carried  the  gene  that  made  the  cell  that  carried  this 
plasmid  resistant  to  colicin. 


48 

Now,  the  interesting  thing  is  that  this  particular  bacterial 
plasmid,  if  you  inhibited  protein  synthesis  in  the  bacterium  that 
carried  this  plasmid,  the  bacterial  chromosomal  DNA  stops 
replicating,  but  the  plasmid  replication  just  continues.  So  you  can 
amplify  this  plasmid.  Now,  as  it  turned  out,  that  plasmid  was 
smaller  than  pSClOl,  so  it  was  even  better  to  work  with,  because  the 
ratio  of  a  plasmid  to  any  cloned  DNA  would  be  much  more  valuable. 

I  had  known  Don  because  he'd  been  at  the  Hawaii  conference,  and  we 
all  sort  of  knew  about  these  things.  Don  says,  "Oh,  we  ought  to  try 
taking  apart  colicinEl  and  analyze  it  with  restriction  enzymes.  I 
can't  remember  exactly  what  the  project  was,  but  I  think  we 
published  a  paper  on  this.1  One  of  the  things  that  came  out  of  this 
original  experiment  was  that  we  found  that  by  treating  with  the  Rl 
enzyme,  we  could  make  what  we  called  a  mini-ColEl,  which  didn't  make 
colicin  but  was  still  colicin-resistant.  This  was  a  very  small  piece 
of  DNA.  We  actually  used  that  at  one  point  as  a  cloning  vehicle, 
because  you  could  use  colicin  resistance  to  select  for 
transf ormance,  and  then  you  could  amplify  the  DNA;  you  could  get 
massive  quantities  of  it. 

Mary  Betlach  worked  on  mini-ColEl  extensively.  We  introduced 
tetracycline  gene  into  the  mini-ColEl.   And  then  two  postdocs,  Herb 
Heyneker  and  Paco  Bolivar,  came  along  and  said,  "Well,  there's 
another  fragment  of  plasmid  DNA  that  has  a  restriction  site  in  the 
antibiotic  resistance  gene,  so  we  can  select  for  one  gene  and  then 
just  screen  for  the  other  one  to  ask  if  it's  been  blocked  out,  and 
then  we'll  know  we  have  recombinants ;  we  won't  even  have  to  analyze 
the  DNA."  So  they  went  ahead  and  developed  that  in  the  laboratory. 


Hughes:    Now,  that's  pBR322? 
Boyer:     That's  pBR322. 
Hughes:    What  about  pMB9? 


'V.  Hershfield,  H.  W.  Boyer,  C.  Yanofsky,  M.  A.  Lovett,  and  D.  R. 
Helinski,  "Plasmid  ColEl  as  a  Molecular  Vehicle  for  Cloning  and  Amplification 
of  DNA,"  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  United  States 
of  America  71,  no.  9  (1974):  3455-4359. 


Boyer:     That  was  the  one  with  tetracycline  resistance.  It  was  the  mini-ColEl 
tetracycline,  and  we  used  that  to  make  322,  and  so  on  and  so  forth. 

Hughes:    How  much  during  this  period  were  you  concentrating  on  developing  the 
technology  and  methodology,  as  opposed  to  doing  science  with  it? 

Boyer:     We  were  working  a  lot  on  the  methodology.  We  really  didn't  do  too 
much  else  at  that  time,  because  we  were  so  busy  working  on 
methodology.  And  of  course,  you  couldn't  do  much  at  that  time, 
because  of  the  moratorium.  My  focus  had  been  on  restriction  and 
modification  enzymes  before  that,  so  I  was  not  particularly 
interested  in  trying  to  find  a  particular  field  that  I  could  exploit 
with  this  technology.  I  had  a  few  people  come  through  the  lab  that 
would  try  to  do  some  things,  but  it  just  never  really  got  to  the 
point  where  it  became  an  interesting  part  at  my  own  laboratory. 


Research  on  Halobacterium  haloblum 

Boyer:     Subsequent  to  that,  we  got  into  working  with  Halobacterium,  its 

purple  membrane.  Once  I  got  involved  with  Genentech  [1976],  I  stayed 
away  from  doing  any  research  that  looked  commercially  connected. 

Hughes:    What  were  you  doing  with  Halobacteriuml 

Boyer:     We  had  a  friend  in  the  Department  of  Biochemistry,  Bob  Stroud,  and 
there  was  another  colleague  there,  Walther  Stoeckenius,  who  worked 
in  this  area.  They  were  interested  in  cloning  the  gene  for  purple 
membrane  in  order  to  be  able  to  manipulate  it  and  do  structural- 
functional  relationships.  We  were  interested  in  doing  the  same  thing 
with  the  EcoRl  restriction  endonuclease. 

With  the  EcoRl  endonuclease  we  subsequently  went  on  to  make  a  lot  of 
mutations  in  that  enzyme,  and  to  work  on  its  structure  with  a  group 
at  the  University  of  Pittsburgh  and  ask  how  the  different 
substitutions  in  the  protein  would  affect  its  enzymatic  activity  and 
its  structure  and  function.  It  came  along,  but  by  that  time,  I  was 
sort  of  thinking  about  retiring.  We  eventually  lost  support  for  the 
program,  which  was  one  of  the  things  that  instigated  my  getting  the 
hell  out  of  there.1  [laughter] 


Hughes:    And  it  was  this  structural- functional  research  that  you  were  doing 


'Herbert  Boyer  retired  from  UCSF  in  July  1991. 


50 

at  that  point? 

Boyer:     Yes.  Pat  Greene  was  doing  most  of  that  work  in  my  lab,  and  a  couple  of 
postdocs.  It  just  didn't  do  well;  it  wasn't  productive.  It  was  a  tough 
problem.  Now,  I'm  not  a  structural  biologist  by  any  means,  and  we  were 
working  with  the  group  back  in  Pittsburgh,  so  the  interaction  was 
extremely  impeded  by  lack  of  communication,  although  we  tried  to  get 
together  a  couple  times  a  year  and  we  talked  on  the  phone  a  lot.  Doing 
x-ray  crystallography  is  long-term  business. 


Distributing  Plasmids 

Hughes:    Well,  go  back  to  the  plasmid  story,  if  you  don't  mind.  I'm  interested 
in  the  distribution,  because  you  were  doing  a  lot  of  that,  from  what  I 
understand.  How  did  that  system  work?  Were  there  restrictions? 

Boyer:     There  weren't  any  restrictions.  All  we  asked  for  was  a  letter  that 

they  would  comply  with  the  NIH  guidelines  for  recombinant  DNA.1  That's 
all. 

Hughes:    Anybody  in  the  world  could  ask  for  plasmids? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    During  the  moratorium,  did  you  stop  distributing  plasmids? 

Boyer:     No,  I  think  we  gave  them  out,  with  the  understanding  that  they  had  to 
comply  with  the  guidelines  of  the  moratorium. 

Revisiting  the  Biohazard  Issue 

NIH  Research  Guidelines  for  Recombinant  DNA  Research 

Hughes:    Talk  about  the  guidelines,  because  as  you  well  know,  they  were  fairly 
stringent  when  they  were  first  set  up  [1976],  but  by  the  late  1970s, 
1980,  they  were  pretty  relaxed. 

Boyer:     They  weren't  real  relaxed.  I  mean,  you  still  had  [university] 

biohazard  committees,  so  everything  [research  proposals]  had  to  go 
through  there.  An  incredible  waste  of  time  and  money.  But  that's 
bureaucracy  for  you. 


'See  Appendix  D  for  a  copy  of  the  NIH  guidelines  as  published  in  Nature 
in  July  1976. 


51 

Hughes:    The  biohazard  committees  were  a  waste  of  time? 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes.  In  retrospect.  I  think  there  was  the  gradual  realization  by 
most  people,  not  everybody- -there  are  still  a  few  zealots  out  there, 
neo-Luddites,  who  like  to  think  this  could  be  the  end  of  the  world  if 
they  turn  these  crazy  scientists  loose.  But  I  think  there  was  a 
gradual  realization  there  was  no  real  threat  [from  recombinant  DNA 
research]  to  life  on  our  planet. 

Hughes:    The  emphasis  of  Asilomar  was  on  the  potential  biohazards. 
Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Gradually,  as  the  practical  applications  of  this  technology  became 
evident,  focus  shifted  to  the  commercial  possibilities.1 

Boyer:     I  don't  know  if  that  had  any  real  impact.  It  was  a  rationalization 

that  could  be  used.  But  at  some  point  you  could  say  that  there  were  x 
number  of  benefits  of  recombinant  technology  and  there  were  no  known 
incidents  of  anything  harmful.  It  didn't  matter  to  the  logic  of  the 
conclusion,  I  think,  that  was  used  in  the  politics  of  the  rhetoric. 


Opponents  of  Recombinant  Research 

Hughes:    Well,  one  formidable  opponent,  or  I  presume  he  was  formidable  by  his 
standing  in  science,  was  Robert  Sinsheimer.  He  was  particularly 
worried  about  genetic  engineering  "breaching  the  species  barrier."  Do 
you  remember  that  argument? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Did  you  think  there  was  any  validity  to  that  argument? 

Boyer:     No,  I  didn't.  I  think  it  was  a  specious  argument.  I  think  the  species 
barrier  is  an  assumption.  I  don't  know  how  you  would  define  it  or  how 
you  would  support  it.  There  was  an  old  genetic  observation  that  you 
couldn't  get  a  viable  offspring  in  conjugation  of  two  different 
species,  with  notable  exceptions,  one  being  the  jackass.  But  I  don't 
understand  the  applicability  of  that  general  notion  to  recombinant  DNA 
technology. 


'See  Susan  Wright,  "Recombinant  DNA  Technology  and  Its  Social 
Transformation,  1972-1982."  Osiris  1986,  2:  303-60. 


52 


Hughes:    I  think  it  was  more  an  emotional  one,  rather  than  a  scientific,  in 

that  nature  has  set  up  what  man  has  defined  as  different  species,  and 
to  cross  the  line  separating  them  was  crossing  into  some  unnatural 
area. 

Boyer:     Yes.  I've  never  seen  Bob  Sinsheimer  emotional,  [laughter]  I  can't 
understand  why  he  took  this  stand.  I  think  he  had  a  certain 
philosophical  bent  to  him  which  may  have  accounted  for  this  position, 
I'm  not  sure.  But  he  was  an  outspoken  critic,  and  everybody's  entitled 
to  their  own  opinion. 

Hughes:    Then  there  was  George  Wald. 

Boyer:     George  Wald,  yes,  well.  He's  a  little  different  than  Bob  Sinsheimer. 

Hughes:    In  terms  of  emotion,  are  you  thinking? 

Boyer:     [laughs]  I  have  no  idea.  I  could  never  understand  the  guy.  Or  her 
[Wald's  wife,  Ruth  Hubbard] . 

The  Role  of  the  American  Society  of  Microbiology 

Hughes:    Why  wasn't  the  American  Society  of  Microbiology  [ASM]  pulled  into  this 
debate?  Or  was  it?  The  regulatory  apparatus  seems  to  have  been  located 
in  NIH,  which  is  probably  appropriate  as  the  major  funder  of  research, 
but  why  wasn't  the  American  Society  of  Microbiology  more  directly 
involved? 


Boyer:     Let  me  put  it  this  way:  I  think  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  had  a 
cross-section  of  scientists  in  many  different  areas  that  could  be 
called  upon.  Microbiologists  were  involved  in  the  Asilomar  conference, 
and  the  subsequent  NIH  guidelines,  and  so  on  and  so  forth—people  like 
Stanley  Falkow  and  a  number  of  other  people.  Stanley  had  a  reputation 
in  the  medical  microbiology  field  and  was  listened  to. 

But  I  can't  see  any  major  problem  with  the  ASM  not  being  there  in  the 
debate.  They  probably  didn't  want  to  be  involved,  [laughing]  I  don't 
think  the  organization  was  set  up  for  that.  It's  not  an  advisory  body 
to  the  government  like  the  Academy  of  Sciences.  So  I  don't  see  any 
big  glaring  omission  in  their  absence  from  the  deliberations.  Now,  I 


53 


think  they  had  a  number  of  conferences  and  things  like  that,  and 
discussions  which  dealt  with  it.  But  as  a  deliberative  body,  no. 


Concerns  for  Safe  Technique 

Hughes:    There  are  indications  of  tension  that  arose  at  Asilomar  between  those 
with  a  molecular  biological  orientation  and  those  with  a 
microbiological,  particularly  in  terms  of  appropriate  microbiological 
technique  and  safety  issues.  There  were  implications  that  molecular 
biologists  did  not  have  training  in  microbiology  and  were  not  using 
proper  technique.  Was  that  a  subtheme  of  the  recombinant  debate? 

Boyer:     I  think  it  was  part  of  the  rhetoric,  part  of  the  concern.  There  were 
some  microbiologists  who  probably  were  overly  concerned  about  putting 
E.  coli  into  the  sewer,  which  would  be  like  peeing  in  the  ocean,  as 
some  say.  When  I  was  a  graduate  student,  postdoc,  I  used  to  grow  ten 
liters  of  bacteria  and  put  the  effluent  down  the  drain.  And  you  would 
sonicate  bacteria  in  the  laboratory  without  even  taking  great 
precautions . 

Now,  if  you're  working  with  a  serious  pathogen,  you're  working  with 
Bacillus  anthracis ,  which  causes  anthrax,  then  you're  not  going  to  do 
that,  because  you'd  only  do  it  once  and  you  would  be  gone.  So  there 
would  be  a  strong  selection  against  people  who  were  that  dumb, 
[laughter]  Just  prior  to  that  [the  recombinant  debate],  there  was  the 
whole  concern  about  growing  large  amounts  of  animal  viruses,  and  in 
particular  animal  viruses  that  caused  cancer  in  animals.  And  you 
could  see  that  there  would  be  some  concern  about  that.  I  had  concerns 
about  a  lot  of  laboratory  techniques  when  I  was  a  graduate  student 
and  postdoc. 

Hughes:    Were  you  instructed  in  safe  techniques? 

Boyer:     You  were  only  instructed  in  sterile  techniques,  because  you  needed  to 
conduct  your  experiments  under  sterile  conditions  in  order  to  be  able 
to  get  definitive  or  interpretable  results.  But  I  can  remember  as  a 
graduate  student  and  as  a  postdoc  one  of  the  preferred  ways  for 
rupturing  bacterial  cells  was  to  use  sonication.  I  have  tinnitus  and 
hearing  problems  today  because  of  sitting  in  the  cold  room  sonicating 
bacteria  for  long  periods  of  time,  and  nobody  ever  thought  to  buy  ear 


54 


plugs,  which  I  did  when  I  got  my  grant.  That  was  one  of  the  first 
things  I  did. 

But,  you  know,  just  exposure  to  some  solvents  carries  some  danger. 
When  I  was  a  graduate  student  or  postdoc,  some  fellow  was 
electrocuted.  He  was  doing  some  paper  electrophoresis,  and  the  tank 
broke  and  he  was  flooded  and  electrocuted.  Subsequently,  I  remember 
Howard  Goodman  had  safety  procedures  and  techniques  which  he  had 
designed  in  his  laboratory  at  UCSF.  So  those  things  impacted  us.  A 
lot  of  people  were  aware,  but  I  don't  think  there  were  ever  any 
serious  problems  caused  by  growing  bacteria  in  a  laboratory.  We 
didn't  talk  about  large  quantities;  we  were  talking  about  ten  liters, 
twenty  liters.  Which  is  nothing,  when  you  think  of  the  industrial 
fermentations . 

But  I  think  it  was  just  the  usual  ego  and  academic  backbiting  that 
was  going  on.  And  that's  what  I  found  distasteful  about  the  whole 
thing.  There  were  a  lot  of  personality  interplays,  and  people  were 
trying  to  dominate  and  make  a  place  for  themselves.  That  is  my 
interpretation,  anyway. 

Hughes:    You're  talking  now  specifically  about  Asilomar? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Not  the  whole  episode? 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes.  Universal.  Transcends  all  meetings  and  episodes;  it's 
nothing  new. 

I  am  a  great  fan  of  Marie  Curie's  story,  or  even  Albert  Einstein's 
biographies,  or  Robert  Oppenheimer ' s,  and  the  backbiting  there--  It 
happens  all  the  time.  Major  confrontation.  People  won't  talk  to  each 
other. 

Hughes:    It's  probably  a  function  of  reaching  a  certain  position  of  power, 
regardless  of  what  field  you  are  in. 

Boyer:     Or  trying  to  reach  it. 
Hughes:    Or  trying  to  reach  it. 


55 


Boyer:     Thank  God  I  don't  have  to  worry  about  that  any  more.  I  found  it  more 
distracting  than  anything. 

Hughes:    The  distraction  from  science,  I'm  assuming,  is  what  you're  talking 
about.  Did  that  begin  with  Asilomar? 

Boyer:     No,  I  found  Asilomar  to  be  one  of  those  emotional  encounters  that  you 
have  every  so  often  in  your  lifetime.  But  no,  I  found  there  was  more 
tension  and  dissension  after  I  started  Genentech.  That  was  a  much 
more  difficult  problem. 

Hughes:    Well,  let's  save  that  for  next  time. 
Boyer:     Yes,  tune  in  again  next  week. 

Potential  Cloning  Experiments 
[Interview  3:  April  7,  1994  ## 

Hughes:    Dr  Boyer,  we're  looking  at  a  letter  that  you  wrote  to  Dr.  Fink.1  Who 
was  she? 

Boyer:     I'm  not  sure,  [laughing]  She  was  probably  a  project  officer.  She  may 
have  been  involved  with  the  recombinant  guideline  office  [Recombinant 
DNA  Advisory  Committee] . 

Hughes:    That's  what  I  suspected.  She  was  at  the  NCI  [National  Cancer 

Institute].  This  letter  was  written  in  March,  1976,  and  it  contains  a 
list  of  experiments  that  you  were  planning  to  do  but  didn't 
necessarily  do,  all  involved  with  cloning.  I  wondered  if  these 
experiments  were  representative  of  the  sort  of  research  you  were 
doing  in  the  mid-1970s. 

Boyer:     I  think  some  of  the  experiments  on  there  were  things  that  we  thought 
we  could  do,  but  we  just  didn't  have  the  wherewithal  to  do 
everything.  In  some  cases,  other  laboratories  focused  on  the 
projects.  We  just 


'Herbert  Boyer  to  Dr.  Fink,  Division  of  Cancer  Research  National  Cancer 
Institute,  22  March  22  1976,  (AR  86-7,  UCSF  Library). 


56 


didn't  feel  that  we  could  do  everything,  and  couldn't  compete  with  a 
lot  of  laboratories  that  focused  on  one  thing  or  another.  So  we  were, 
I  guess,  looking  at  a  lot  of  different  genes  that  could  be  studied 
and  cloned,  but  I  don't  think  we  had  the  size  of  laboratory  or  number 
of  people  that  would  be  necessary  to  do  that.  I  think  after  a  few 
years,  we  tried  to  re-focus  our  activities  because  we  were  just  doing 
too  many  different  things . 

Hughes:    I  went  through  the  annual  reports  of  the  Department  of  Biochemistry 
and  Biophysics,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  your  research  focuses  over 
time  were  protein-DNA  interactions  and  then  Halobacteriuml  Were  those 
really  the  two  themes? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    It  also  seemed  to  me  that  it  was  very  basic  research.  Was  this 
deliberate,  so  that  there  would  be  no  question  of  commercial 
application? 

Boyer:     No,  I  don't  think  so.  I  just  think  that  was  our  interest  in  the  lab, 
and  we  certainly  did  not  have  the  capacity  to  explore  anything 
commercial.  It  was  being  done  in  biotech  companies,  and  the  amount  of 
energy  and  resources  you  need  to  do  something  like  that  were  way 
beyond  what  we  had  there  in  the  lab  at  the  time. 

Hughes:    I  noticed  on  that  list  in  the  letter  to  Dr.  Fink  that  there  were  two 
shotgun  experiments,  which  generally  were  a  particular  worry  to  those 
concerned  about  the  possible  consequences  of  recombinant  research. 

Boyer:     Oh,  I  think  that  was  a  concern  raised  originally,  but  by  the  time  we 
were  doing  it,  the  guidelines  were  fairly  clear  about  what  you  needed 
to  do  to  accommodate  the  guidelines,  so  I  don't  know,  some  people 
could  have  been  worried  about  them,  but  we  were  following  the 
guidelines . 

Hughes:    Did  the  guidelines  specifically  mention  shotgun  experiments? 
Boyer:     I  can't  remember  now,  but  I  think  they  did. 

Blunt-end  Ligation 

Hughes:    In  the  annual  report  of  1976,  I'd  like  to  quote  from  something  you 
wrote . 


57 


Boyer:     Sure. 

Hughes:    "Most  notably,  we  introduced  the  use  of  chemically  synthesized 

restriction  endonuclease  substrates  which  can  be  covalently  joined  to 
DNA  through  'blunt-end'  joining  with  T4  ligase."1  Why  was  this 
particularly  notable? 

Boyer:     I'll  have  to  try  to  put  it  in  some  context.  There  was  a  report  early 
on  in  the  literature  that  blunt-ended  DNA  could  be  ligated.  It  really 
wasn't  followed  by  other  laboratories  until  a  year  or  two  after  the 
publication  when  Wally  Gilbert  confirmed  it.  Because  the  sticky  ends 
were  available,  people  weren't  considering  blunt-end  ligation  too 
seriously. 

But  in  our  collaboration  with  [Arthur]  Riggs  and  [Keiichi]  Itakura  at 
City  of  Hope  [National  Medical  Center] ,  we  were  able  to  blunt-end 
ligate  some  chemically  synthesized  DNA  that  contained  an  Rl  site  that 
we  had  available  to  some  chemically  synthesized  DNA  that  they  had, 
which  was  the  lac  operator.  In  essence,  what  we  were  able  to  do  was 
to  make  sticky  ends,  or  put  restriction  sites  on  any  piece  of  DNA 
that  we  wanted  to.  Rather  than  rely  on  the  random  distribution  of 
sites  in  the  natural  DNA,  we  were  able  to  introduce  them  at  unique 
sites.  So  that  was,  I  think,  a  pretty  significant  step  forward  at  the 
time  in  terms  of  being  able  to  manipulate  genes  and  rearrange  them. 

Hughes:    Is  there  any  particular  advantage  of  blunt-end  ligation  over  sticky- 
end? 

Boyer:     It  just  gives  you  a  lot  of  versatility  which  you  didn't  have  before. 
Hughes:    Because  you  can  ligate  virtually  anything? 
Boyer:     Yes. 


Collaboration  with  John  Rosenberg:  Protein-DNA  Interactions 

Hughes:    Is  there  anything  you  want  to  say  about  your  work  with  John  Rosenberg 
on  £coRl? 


'Department  of  Biochemistry  and  Biophysics,  UCSF,  Annual  Report,  1976,  p. 
27. 


58 


Boyer:     Well,  I  had  met  John  Rosenberg  at  the  City  of  Hope,  when  we  were 
collaborating  with  Riggs  and  Itakura.  Rosenberg  was  actually 
interested  in  protein-DNA  interactions,  and  in  particular  the 
structure  of  protein-DNA  interactions.  The  group  down  there  had 
synthesized  the  lac  operator  and  was  trying  to  get  a  co-complex  of 
the  lac  operator  with  the  lac  represser  protein  in  order  to  determine 
its  structure. 

That  really  didn't  progress,  and  John  and  I  got  to  talking  one  time 
about  the  possibility  of  using  the  JJcoRl  endonuclease  and  a 
chemically  synthesized  or  some  derivative  of  chemically  synthesized 
Rl  site  as  a  model  system  for  protein-DNA  interactions .  Through 
collaborative  efforts,  we  were  able  to  get  large-scale  quantities  of 
the  protein  and  the  DNA,  and  John  was  able  to  crystallize  the  complex 
of  the  DNA  and  the  protein,  and  work  on  its  structure. 

Then  we  entered  into  a  fairly  long-term  collaboration  to  try  to  use 
that  structure  to  examine  the  contacts  made  between  the  protein  and 
the  DNA,  and  to  dissect  out  some  of  the  specifics  of  unique  protein- 
DNA  interactions.  It  was  very  slow  work.  I'm  not  quite  sure  where  it 
stands  now.  We  have  collaborated  for  a  number  of  years  now.  I  haven't 
talked  to  him  for  some  time,  so  I'm  not  quite  sure  where  that  project 
stands,  or  if  he's  still  even  working  on  it.  But  we  made  a  lot  of 
mutants  of  the  Rl  endonuclease  in  our  lab,  site-directed  mutagenesis, 
and  analyzed  those  changes  with  respect  to  the  function  of  the 
enzyme--its  ability  to  interact  with  DNA.  Unfortunately,  we  were 
unable  to  keep  the  funding  going  in  our  lab  to  follow  that  up.  So  we 
dropped  that  research,  and  then  I  retired  [July  1991]. 

Hughes:     [laughs]  The  two  might  be  connected. 

Boyer:     The  two  are  probably  connected,  yes.  Research  funding  was  limited  in 
the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s,  and  we  didn't  have  enough  money  to 
really  run  an  aggressive  project;  we  just  had  a  few  people.  It  was  a 
little  disappointing  that  we  couldn't  follow  up  with  that.  But  life 
goes  on,  and  there  are  other  model  systems  around,  and  nobody  seems 
to  care  too  much  about  how  these  proteins  interact  with  the  DNA  at 
the  molecular  level.  They  are  good  tools,  but  as  a  model  system,  they 
just  weren't  that  exploitable.  People  are  more  interested  in  other 
types  of  proteins  that  have  more  relevance  to  protein-DNA 
interactions  and  control  mechanisms,  whereas  this  was  just  a  straight 
model.  But  it  was  a  fruitful  collaboration;  we  got  a  number  of 
publications  out  of  it. 


59 


Hughes:    Do  you  think  your  funding  problems  are  indicative  of  the  trend 
towards  research  having  foreseeable  application? 

Boyer:     Yes,  I  think  it  is. 
Hughes:    How  do  you  feel  about  that? 

Boyer:     Well,  I  think  there's  enough  basic  research  now  to  keep  things  going. 
I  don't  know  how  I  feel.  There's  a  limited  amount  of  money  available. 
Science  is  good  enough  today  that  you  can  do  good  molecular  work  with 
a  very  complex  organism,  even  humans  and  other  multicellular 
organisms,  which  have  more  direct  relevance  to  science.  So  I  don't 
know  if  it's  good  or  bad. 

Hughes:    That's  interesting  that  you  say  that,  because  I  think  of  your  work-- 
I  mean  recombinant  technology- -evolving  from  very  basic  research- 
bacterial  genetics,  endonucleases . 

Boyer:     Yes.  Well,  I  don't  quite  know  how  to  respond  to  that.  The  stuff  we 
did,  whole-gene  genetic  engineering  technology,  I  think  opened  up 
everything  else.  But  that  doesn't  mean  that  there  aren't  some  very 
interesting  phenomenologies,  and  in  microbes  or  other  model 
organisms.  .But  you  can  certainly  work  with  the  human  immune  system, 
and  the  amount  of  information  you  can  get  out  of  it  with  technology 
and  knowledge  that  we  have  today  is  very  good.  So  I  think  by  using 
more  relevant  model  systems,  you're  not  compromising  anything  in 
terms  of  the  basic  research. 

Hughes:    You're  saying  that  recombinant  technology  is  one  of  the  ways  making 

it  possible  to  investigate  systems  that  are  more  directly  relevant  to 
humankind  ? 

Boyer:     Yes.  Well,  it's  the  standard  tool. 


Nucleic  Acid  Sequencing 

Hughes:    In  these  annual  reports,  I  noticed  that  at  one  point  you  said  that 
you  used  sequence  analysis  using  both  the  Sanger  and  the 
Maxam/Gilbert  techniques.  Why  would  one  use  both  techniques? 


60 


Boyer:     I  can't  remember  many  of  the  specifics  now,  but  they  both  had  their 
advantages  and  disadvantages.  Some  cases,  it  made  sense  to  use  one; 
some  cases  it  made  sense  to  use  the  other.  I  think  it  depended  on  the 
type  of  templates  you  had  around  in  order  to  carry  out  the 
experiments.  I  don't  even  know  what  the  standard  procedure  is  today. 
I  think  Maxam/ Gilbert  may  be  the  standard  form  now,  just  because  of 
improvements  in  the  technology. 

Hughes:    Was  John  Shine  doing  all  this  work? 

Boyer:     Oh,  there  were  a  number  of  people  doing  it.  John  did  sequencing,  but 
it  got  to  the  point  where  most  of  the  people  in  the  laboratory  were 
able  to  do  it.  It  was  not  really  difficult  once  you  got  some 
experience  in  it.  The  toughest  part  was  figuring  out  all  the 
parameters  for  the  gel  electrophoresis  and  the  resolution  of 
nucleotides  of  different  lengths.  The  chemical  reactions  were  pretty 
straightforward- -after  they  were  worked  out,  of  course.  That  was  a 
very  nice  piece  of  work  on  the  chemistry  that  led  to  [Allan]  Maxam 
and  [Walter]  Gilbert's  method,  and  [Frederick]  Sanger's  work  was  just 
another  unique  thing  that  Sanger  did. 

Sanger  was  an  interesting  guy.  He  got  two  Nobel  Prizes,  both  for 
sequencing,  one  for  sequencing  proteins,  and  one  for  sequencing 
nucleic  acids.1  He  was  the  first  to  sequence  a  protein,  insulin.  Then 
he  worked  out  sequencing  for  DNA.  Very  nice  guy,  unassuming,  not 
arrogant,  very  helpful. 


The  Smithsonian  Magazine  Article  and  the  NIH  Guidelines 

Hughes:    The  public  recombinant  DNA  controversy  arose  in  the  mid-1970s,  and 
feeding  into  that  was  the  reporter  from  the  Smithsonian,  Janet 
Hopson,  who  spent  three  months  in  your  laboratory  in  1976.  How  did 
she  come  to  be  in  the  laboratory? 

Boyer:     I  can't  remember  the  details.  I  think  she  said  she  came  with  the  idea 
of  writing  a  story  about  recombinant  DNA  technology. 


Frederick  Sanger  won  the  1958  Nobel  Prize  in  chemistry  for  his  work  on 
protein  structure.  In  1980  he  won  again  for  his  contributions  to  the 
determination  of  base  sequences  in  nucleic  acids.  He  shared  this  second  Nobel 
with  Walter  Gilbert  of  Harvard  and  Paul  Berg  of  Stanford. 


61 


Hughes:    She  was  actually  doing  a  little  research. 

Boyer:     Well,  I  think  she  tagged  along.  I  don't  think  she  did  a  lot. 

Hughes:    The  problem,  of  course,  was  that  at  one  point  in  her  article, 

which  was  not  all  negative,  she  said  that  some  of  the  people  whom 
she  encountered  at  UCSF  were  rather  casual  about  their  adherence 
to  the  NIH  guidelines,  which,  with  the  inflamed  atmosphere  on  the 
public  level  concerning  recombinant  research,  stirred  things  up  a 
bit  further,  I  suspect.1 

Boyer:     I  think  it  was  a  little  more  complex  than  the  way  she  described 
it.2  What  I  recall  at  the  time,  a  lot  of  serious  scientists  did 
not  think  there  was  anything  dangerous  about  cloning  and 
genetic  engineering.  They  really  couldn't  see,  except  for  maybe 
some  rare  instances,  that  there  might  be  something  really 
dangerous.  When  people  have  that  attitude  and  when  people  have 
that  perception,  you  have  a  hard  time  enforcing  regulations 
that  you  don't  think  are  necessary. 

So  I  think  there  was  a  lot  of  discussion  on  the  part  of  many 
people,  and  they  were  very  denigrating  of  the  guidelines,  and 
they  talked  about  it  freely  with  her.  But  as  far  as  I  know, 
they  went  through  the  guideline  procedures  when  they  were  doing 
experiments.  I  don't  know  of  any  instance  where  people 
blatantly  violated  them.  What  she  means  by  "casual,"  I  don't 
know.  But  I  think  people,  particularly  the  postdocs,  were 
fairly  cynical  about  it  all.  But  we  tried  to  make  them  follow 
the  guidelines,  and  as  far  as  I  know,  they  did. 


'Janet  L.  Hopson,  "Recombinant  Lab  for  DNA  and  My  95  Days  in  It," 
Smithsonian  8,  no.  3  (1977):  54-62. 

2Boyer  responded  to  Hopson' s  article  with  a  letter  to  the  Smithsonian 
that  corrected  the  "factual  misrepresentations"  in  the  article.  Smithsonian  8, 
no.  5  (1977) :  10. 


62 


I  had  the  same  reservations.  I  think  we  discussed  them  before. 
I  don't  think  there  was  anything  really  dangerous  about 
recombinant  DNA  research,  but  you  had  to  go  through  these 
procedures  in  order  to  satisfy  the  guidelines. 

Hughes:    Did  the  discipline  in  which  a  person  was  trained  affect  degree 
of  adherence  to  the  guidelines? 

Boyer:     I  don't  think  it  made  any  difference.  Microbiologists  have  a 
long  history  of  working  with  virulent  organisms.   But  I  think 
the  procedures  for  handling  virulent  organisms  in  some  cases 
were  more  rigorous  than  the  ones  imposed  by  these  guidelines . 

Hughes:    But  there  was  not  that  history  in  biochemistry. 

Boyer:     I  understand  your  point.  I  don't  know  if  that  had  any  effect  or 
not.  Of  all  the  scientists  I've  ever  encountered  or  worked  with 
or  had  come  through  my  lab,  I  don't  think  any  of  them  ever 
worried  about  any  danger  to  themselves,  which  is  the  first  level 
of  concern  everyone  would  have.  I  think,  as  I  said,  people 
followed  the  guidelines,  but  I  don't  think  anybody  was  ever 
worried  about  anything. 

Use  of  an  Approved  but  Uncertified  Plasmid 

Hughes:    Well,  related  to  what  we're  discussing  is  the  pBR322 

episode  in  which  this  plasmid  was  used  in  research  at  UCSF 
before  it  had  gone  through  the  entire  NIH  approval 
process.1  It  had  been  essentially  approved,  but  not 
certified,  and  the  certification  had  to  come  from  the 
director  of  NIH,  Donald  Fredrickson.  In  the  confusing 
period  in  the  mid-1970s  when  the  Recombinant  DNA  Advisory 
Committee  and  the  guidelines  were  being  set  up  and 
communication  was  largely  oral,  not  by  letter,  the  plasmid 
was  used  and  insulin  sequences  actually  obtained.  It  was 
your  lab,  of  course,  that  supplied  the  plasmid.  Mary 


a  popular  account  of  the  pBR322  incident  and  other  aspects  of  the 
"race"  to  clone  the  insulin  gene,  see  Stephen  S.  Hall,  Invisible  Frontiers:  The 
Race  to  Synthesize  a  Human  Gene  (Redmond,  Washington:  Tempus  Books,  1987).  For 
an  account  of  the  Stevenson  hearings,  including  transcripts  of  testimony,  see 
Lear,  Recombinant  DNA,  181-272.  The  transcripts  of  the  Boyer-Rutter  testimony 
are  in  UCSF  Library,  AR  86-7  Carton  2,  Folder  82. 


63 


Betlach  told  me  that  she  was  very  clear  that  it  was  not  certified 
and  that  she  did  tell  everybody  who  asked  for  a  plasmid  the 
difference  between  approval  and  certification.1 

Boyer:     I  have  no  direct  knowledge  that  the  plasmid  was  used 

surreptitiously  before  it  was  certified.  This  work  was  done  in 
Howard  Goodman's  lab,  and  at  that  time,  Howard  and  I  had  separated 
our  joint  grant  into  two  halves.  We  were  not  collaborating 
together,  because  of  personal  differences.  So  I  had  no  information 
about  what  was  going  on.  They  were  very  secretive  about  it  because 
of  the  big  race  to  clone  the  insulin  gene.  So  I  had  no  direct 
knowledge  of  what  happened.  All  the  information  I  have  is  hearsay, 
which  is  essentially  what  you  stated  before.  So  other  than  that,  I 
really  don't  know  anything. 


The  Senate  Hearings,  November  1977 

Hughes:    You  were  on  the  spot  during  the  Senate  hearings  on  recombinant  DNA 
research,  which  came  along  in  November,  1977. 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    You  and  Dr.  Rutter  were  called  in  to  testify.  Why  you?  Goodman 
would  have  seemed  to  have  been  the  logical  candidate. 

Boyer:     Well,  I  don't  know.  I  guess  maybe  I  had  more  visibility. 
Hughes:    He  may  have  been  on  sabbatical  still  too. 
Boyer:     That's  very  true.  It  could  well  have  been. 

We  got  a  request  from  that  subcommittee  [on  Science,  Technology  and 
Space]  which  Adlai  Stevenson  III  chaired.  They  asked  us  to  come  back, 
and  hell,  we  even  had  to  pay  our  own  way  to  testify  for  that  hearing. 
Best  I  can  remember,  they  wanted  to  understand  what  was  going  on. 
They  were  thinking  about  legislation  to  regulate  recombinant  DNA 
research,  and  they  wanted  our  thoughts  about  it,  et  cetera,  et 
cetera.  So  I  went  back  there  all  prepared  to  tell  them  what  I  thought 
about  it,  and  I  read  a  statement.  In  essence,  I  expressed  the  concern 
that  I  just  told  you  about,  that  if  they  were  going  to  impose 


'See  previously  cited  ROHO  oral  histories  of  Mary  Betlach  and  William  J. 
Rutter. 


64 


guidelines,  make  sure  that  the  guidelines  fit  the  risk,  because  if 
you  didn't  do  that,  people  were  not  going  to  follow  the  guidelines.1 

Well,  they  didn't  care  anything  about  what  I  had  to  say.  They  were 
looking  for  headlines.  That's  just  another  one  of  those  lessons  that 
you  get  in  life. 

Hughes:    Dr.  Rutter  said  that  you  didn't  make  elaborate  preparation  for  the 

hearing,  and  the  questioning  on  the  Senate  floor  was  aimed  at  finding 
fault  with-- 

Boyer:     It  was  an  inquisition;  there  was  no  question  about  it. 
Hughes:    Which  you  hadn't  expected. 

Boyer:     I  certainly  wasn't  prepared  for  it,  and  I  certainly  didn't  have 

enough  presence  of  mind  to  respond  the  way  I  would  have  liked  to  .  I 
should  have  told  them  what  I  thought.  But  I  was  a  pretty  naive  guy 
going  up  there.  It  was  the  first  time  I'd  ever  been  before  a  Senate 
hearing,  so  I  didn't  know  how  to  respond.  So  we  just  sat  there  and 
took  our  licks  and  got  out  of  there  as  soon  as  we  could.  You  never 
feel  the  same  about  politicians  after  you  experience  something  like 
that. 


Hughes:    I  read  that  after  seeing  drafts  of  the  Senate  hearing  testimony,  you 
and  Dr.  Rutter  wrote  letters  to  Senator  Stevenson.2  I  didn't  find 
your  letter,  but  Dr.  Rutter  wrote  that  he  came  to  the  hearing  to  give 
information  and  was  resentful  of  its  "inquisitional  manner." 


testimony  is  summarized  in  Lear,  Recombinant  DNA,  181-214.  Another 
description  of  this  incident  appeared  in  Science  in  September  of  1977.  Nicholas 
Wade,  "Recombinant  DNA:  NIH  Rules  Broken  in  Insulin  Gene  Project,"  Science  192 
(30  September  1977):  1342-5. 

2William  J.  Rutter  to  Adlai  E.  Stevenson,  Chairman  Subcommittee  on 
Science,  Technology  and  Space,  22  November  1977,  (AR  86-7,  UCSF  Library). 


65 


Boyer:     I  was,  too.  If  we  had  known  that  was  going  to  happen,  I'd  have  had  a 
lawyer  there.  We  thought  it  was  going  to  be  the  same  sort  of  give- 
and-take  that  scientists  are  used  to.  Scientists  aren't  beyond  being 
devious  and  Machiavellian  by  any  means,  but  we  don't  go  into  things 
like  that  expecting  to  have  an  august  body  such  as  the  Senate  trying 
to  carve  you  up  for  their  political  platter.  We  thought  we  were  doing 
great  things.  We  were  doing  molecular  biology  at  the  cutting  edge  of 
technology,  and  doing  beneficial  things,  and  here  were  these  guys 
trying  to  nail  us  to  the  cross. 

Hughes:    You  might  have  said  it  discreetly,  but  somehow  or  other  the  word  was 
gotten  to  the  Senate  floor  that  the  somatostatin  gene  had  been 
cloned. 

Boyer:     We  hadn't  published  it  yet,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  but  I  had  told 
Paul  Berg  about  it,  and  he  wanted  to  know  if  he  could  mention  it.  I'm 
very  vague  on  the  details,  but  I  remember  I  talked  to  Paul  Berg,  and 
he  may  have  told  Philip  Handler  [president  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences].  I  think  they  used  that  as  an  example. 

Hughes:    Of  the  practical  benefits  that  might  come  out  of  recombinant 
technology? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Did  that  make  any  impression? 

Boyer:     I  don't  know;  I  wasn't  there  when  he  did  it.  It  probably  didn't.  It 

made  the  newspapers,  some  headlines.  I  remember  Handler  describing  it 
as  an  achievement  of  the  first  order,  and  I  remember  that  because  our 
patent  attorney  at  Genentech  said,  "Ah."  He  underlined  that  and  said, 
"This  will  be  used  in  the  patent  application."  [laughter] 

Hughes :    Nicholas  Wade  wrote  an  article  which  appeared  in  Science  right  before 
the  Senate  hearing.1  It  described  disturbing  elements  of  the  pBR322 
episode,  which  we've  already  discussed.  He  also  referred  to  a 


'Nicholas  Wade,  "Recombinant  DNA:  NIH  Rules  Broken  in  Insulin  Gene 
Project,"  Science  192  (30  September  1977):  1342-5. 


66 


nonprofit  corporation  called  the  California  Institute  for 
Genetic  Research,  which  he  said  the  insulin  team  had  set  up. 

Boyer:     I  think  Bill  Rutter  set  this  up.  I  can't  remember  the  purpose. 
Hughes:    Was  it  to  commercialize  recombinant  insulin? 

Boyer:     I  just  don't  know.  I  remember  hearing  about  it,  but  I  don't 
remember  what  it  was  about . 

The  UCSF  Biosafety  Committee 

Hughes:    As  I  understand  it,  there  was  no  formal  biosafety  committee  at 
UCSF  before  the  recombinant  question  came  up. 

Boyer:     No,  not  that  I  know  of.  There  was  the  radiation  safety  arm  at 
the  university  which  monitored  disposal  of  isotopes  and 
contamination  in  the  laboratories,  things  of  that  sort.  There 
was  a  committee  to  review  clinical  studies,  to  make  sure 
patients  had  informed  consent  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  That  was 
the  backdrop.  I  think  it  was  those  examples  that  brought  forth 
the  idea  of  having  a  biosafety  committee. 

Hughes:    You're  right  about  the  precedent.  In  June  of  1976,  Vice 
Chancellor  Leslie  Bennett  appointed  a  campus  biohazards 
committee  which  he  suggested  might  use  the  Committee  on  Human 
Use  as  a  prototype.1 


Appendix  E  for  papers  relating  to  creation  of  a  UCSF  biosafety 
committee.  For  further  information  on  the  background  for  and  foundation  of  the 
committee,  see  (AR  86-7,  UCSF  Library). 


67 


Was  there  anything  unique  about  the  structuring  of  the  human 
use  committee? 

Boyer:     I  don't  know  anything  about  that  committee.  I  don't  know  how  it 
was  structured  or  what  sort  of  review  they  did.  I  think  they 
devised  a  consent  form  and  things  of  that  sort,  and  they  had 
some  medical  ethicists  on  the  committee. 

Hughes:    Well,  that  might  have  been  it,  because  that  became  true  of 

biosafety  as  well.  Do  you  remember  that  Al  Jonsen  was  on  it? 

Boyer:     Yes.  The  committee  served  its  purpose,  and  essentially  what  it 
did  was  channel  all  of  the  recombinant  DNA  experiments  through 
one  committee,  so  one  was  aware  of  what  was  going  on  throughout 
the  department.  It  became  standard  operating  procedure  that  it 
would  go  through  that  committee  before  a  grant  request  was 
made,  if  the  grant  request  was  involving  that  sort  of  thing 
[recombinant  research]  and  hadn't  been  an  existing  grant 
request.  In  those  cases,  you  had  to  tell  biosafety  what  you 
were  doing. 

Hughes:    This,  of  course,  was  a  university  committee.  Had  there  been 
some  federal  mandate  that  an  institution  doing  recombinant 
research  establish  a  biosafety  committee? 

Boyer:     I  think  so.  I'm  not  sure,  we  may  have  set  this  up  before  the 

guidelines  came  out;  I  can't  remember  the  chronology  on  it.  It 
seems  to  me  we  were  in  the  forefront  of  that. 

Hughes:    The  NIH  guidelines  came  out  in  July  of  "76. 


68 


Boyer:     Essentially,  the  committee  was  just  a  clearinghouse.  You  had 

checkpoints  on  a  piece  of  paper;  people  told  you  what  they  were 
doing;  yes,  that  conforms  to  the  guidelines.  It  really  didn't 
do  anything  other  than  that.  I  think  at  one  point,  Dave  Martin, 
who  chaired  that  committee  for  a  while,  looked  into  some  of  the 
activities  of  the  insulin  group,  but  other  than  that,  I  don't 
think  there  was  much  to  it  other  than  a  perfunctory 
organization. l 


Resulting  Controversies 

Hughes:    Apparently,  some  people  felt  that  it  was  a  waste  of  time. 
According  to  the  minutes  of  a  meeting  in  1978,  Christine 
Guthrie,  a  member  of  the  biochemistry  department,  resigned, 
stating:  "In  view  of  the  recent  decision  by  NIH  to  remove 
essentially  all  power  from  the  hands  of  the  local  committee,  I 
cannot  justify  deflecting  further  time  or  energy  from  my 
scientific  research."  Do  you  know  what  she  was  talking  about? 
It  sounds  as  though  something  had  happened  at  the  level  of  NIH, 
weakening  the  power  of  the  local  biosafety  committees. 

Boyer:     I  don't  remember  anything  about  that. 

Hughes:    Did  the  biosafety  committee  have  to  deal  with  any  of  the 

neighborhood  groups,  one  of  which  was  in  the  vicinity  of  UCSF? 

Boyer:     I  don't  recall. 

Hughes:    There  wasn't  an  organized  neighborhood  protest  group? 

Boyer:     I  can't  recall  anything  like  that.  Later,  during  the  Laurel 

Heights  controversy,2  [Chair  of  Medicine]  Holly  Smith  was  asked 
to  explain 


'In  a  letter  of  protest  to  Donald  Fredrickson,  director  of  the  NIH,  on  14 
April  1978,  Dr.  James  E.  Cleaver,  Chair  of  the  UCSF  Biosafety  Committee,  argued 
that  too  much  authority  was  vested  in  Bethesda.  Cleaver  to  Fredrickson,  14 
April  1978,  (AR  86-7,  Carton  2,  UCSF  Library). 

2In  the  mid-1980s  UCSF  purchased  the  100,000  sq.  ft.  Fireman's  Fund 
complex  in  Laurel  Heights,  and  Chancellor  Julius  Krevans  announced  the 
university's  intention  to  relocate  a  variety  of  academic  programs  including 
some  research  activities  from  the  School  of  Pharmacy  to  this  new  location. 


69 


the  type  of  research  going  on  at  UCSF,  and  someone  accused  UCSF 
and  him  of  introducing  AIDS  into  the  population.  It's  not  easy 
to  deal  with  that. 


Risk/Benefit  Analysis 

Hughes:    One  of  the  stumbling  blocks  in  the  early  days  of  recombinant 
research  was  how  to  assess  risk/benefit  before  there  was  much 
data. 

Boyer:     There  was  a  lot  of  discussion  about  that.  I  don't  think  anybody 
ever  could  put  a  quantitative  handle  on  it.  But  people  talked 
about  risk  factor  ratios  ad  nauseum,  but  never  said  anything. 

Hughes:    How  could  you,  before  you  had  done  sufficient  recombinant 
research? 

Boyer:     Well,  everything  we  knew  about  plasmids  and  microorganisms 
pertained.  We  knew  these  constructions  that  we  made  in  the 
laboratory  weren't  that  easy  to  maintain.  You  had  to  be  very 
careful  about  them,  because  you  would  lose  the  plasmids  if  you 
didn't  check  them  and  put  the  selective  force  back  on  them.  So 
all  the  microbiological  work  on  virulence  that  had  been  done 
led  to  a  very  low  expectation  of  disaster.  But  it  made  good 
copy. 


P-3  Facilities  at  UCSF 

Hughes:    Do  you  want  to  comment  on  the  P-3  facility,  which  was  created 
in  the  biochemistry  department  in  the  mid-1970s?  I  think  there 
were  only  five  labs  that  were,  at  least  in  the  beginning, 
permitted  to  use  it,  presumably  those  that  were  doing 
recombinant  work. 

Boyer:     I  think  it  was  available  to  anybody  that  wanted  to  use  it.  We 
had  one  built  on  the  ninth  or  tenth  floor  of  Health  Sciences 
East  in  a  little  space  up  there  very  early  on,  even  before 
the- -well,  I  guess  after—the  guidelines  came  into  effect.  Then 
we  put  one  up  on  the  fifteenth  floor. 


70 


Hughes:    These  were  both  P-3? 

Boyer:     Yes.  But  when  we  got  the  one  on  the  fifteenth  floor,  I  think 
they  may  have  dismantled  the  other  one.  I  can't  remember.  It 
eventually  got  to  the  point  where  the  guidelines  became  refined 
with  respect  to  containment,  and  experience  was  gained  in  doing 
this  type  of  work.  So  a  lot  of  these  experiments  were 
declassified,  and  the  P-3  facility  wasn't  used  that  much, 
wasn't  required,  wasn't  needed.  I  don't  know  if  such  a  facility 
is  around  any  more.  I  don't  even  think  anybody  at  UCSF  works 
with  any  virulent  viruses  any  more. 


The  Q  Fever  Scare 

Boyer:     But  I'll  tell  you,  one  of  the  worst  things  that  happened  to  us 
at  UCSF  was  on  the  fourteenth  floor,  right  below  my  laboratory. 
We'd  get  off  the  elevator  and  walk  past  the  fourteenth  floor 
laboratories  and  then  up  the  stairwell  to  the  fifteenth  floor. 
You  could  take  the  Medical  Science  [Building]  elevator  to  the 
fourteenth  floor,  but  that  was  all,  and  then  you  could  walk 
over  to  Health  Sciences  East.  These  people  were  working  with 
sheep  embryos  and  grinding  them  up  in  Waring  blenders.  A  whole 
bunch  of  us  came  down  with  Q  fever,  which  is  caused  by  a 
rickettsial  virus.  One  of  the  guys  who  worked  on  the  elevator 
in  the  animal  tower  got  it.  I  think  he  died  from  heart  failure, 
but  it  was  related  to  the  stress.  This  was  about  1980,  or  1981, 
something  like  that . 

I  sort  of  figured  it  out.  My  dishwasher  came  down  with  this 
syndrome.  It  was  a  high  fever,  achiness--it  was  miserable, 
because  I  got  it  also--and  she  was  actually  hospitalized.  I  got 
a  call  from  the  doctor.  When  they  asked  her  what  she  worked 
with,  she  told  them  she  worked  with  bacteria  and  recombinant 
DNA.  They  called  me  up,  and  asked,  "You  work  with  recombinant 
DNA?"  And  I  said,  "Yes,  but  I'm  sure  it's  nothing  related  to 
what  we're  doing  in  our  laboratory." 

Then  I  found  out  that  she  had  been  diagnosed  as  having  Q  fever, 
and  they  couldn't  figure  it  out,  because  usually  people  who  live 
on  farms  get  this,  not  in  the  city.  And  I  knew  what  they  were 
doing  on  the  fourteenth  floor,  so  I  wrote  a  letter  to  the 
chancellor  telling  him.  It  turned  out  that  when  he  got  my 
letter,  he'd  gotten  a  notification  from  the  public  health 
department  in  San  Francisco  that  they  had  traced  a  whole  bunch 
of  cases  of  Q  fever  to  UCSF,  located  on  the  fourteenth  floor.  I 
had  it;  it  was  terrible.  That  was  the  worst  thing  that  ever 


71 

happened  to  me  in  my  career  as  a  scientist,  getting  infected 
with  a  rickettsia. 

Hughes:    It's  ironic,  isn't  it,  after  all  the  scare  about  what  you  were 
doing  with  recombinant  DNA? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    I'm  impressed  that  Q  fever  was  diagnosed. 

Boyer:     Well,  they  were  totally  stumped,  and  they  ran  a  whole  bunch  of 
tests,  and  finally  did  a  fluorescent  antibody  test  on  her  blood. 

Hughes:    Was  there  publicity? 

Boyer:     Yes.  Not  much,  but  it  got  some  flak. 


Ill  GENENTECH,  INC.  AND  THE  COMMERCIALIZATION  OF  RECOMBINANT  DNA 
TECHNOLOGY 

Formation  in  1976 

Hughes:    Well,  the  next  step  as  I  see  it  is  the  formation  of  Genentech.  Had 
Bob  Swanson  approached  anybody  before  he  came  to  your  laboratory? 

Boyer:     He  said  he  took  a  list  of  names  associated  with  the  publicity  on 

Asilomar  and  went  through  it  alphabetically,  which  means  Paul  Berg 
must  have  turned  him  down.  I  suppose  I  was  next  on  the  list.  It  was 
a  telephone  introduction.  He  wanted  to  talk,  so  I  had  him  come  to  my 
lab  on  a  Friday  afternoon  at  quarter  to  five.  He  introduced  himself, 
talked  about  what  he  wanted  to  do.  Did  I  think  the  technology  was 
ready  to  be  commercialized?  He  said  he  had  access  to  some  money,  and 
I  thought  it  would  be  a  good  way  to  fund  some  postdocs  and  some  work 
in  my  laboratory,  because  we  always  needed  some  money  to  do  that.  We 
spent  a  good  deal  of  time  that  evening  talking  about  it.1 

Hughes :    Had  you  on  your  own  before  you  met  him  thought  in  any  concrete  way 
of  doing  something  like  this? 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  had  thought  about  the  technology  being  ready  to  be 

commercialized,  and  had  discussed  it  with  at  least  one  drug  company 
that  I  can  recall,  but  they  weren't  really  very  interested  in  it.  I  got 


'See  Appendix  F  for  a  sculptor's  representation  of  the  initial  meeting 
between  Herbert  Boyer  and  Robert  Swanson. 


72 


Miles  Laboratory  to  start  making  some  restriction  enzymes.  I  went 
there  and  showed  them  how  to  do  it,  make  Rl  endonuclease.  But  I  had 
been  thinking  about  it. 

I  got  an  idea  for  this  when  my  oldest  son  was  tested  for  growth 
hormone.  He  was  on  the  lower  end  of  the  growth  curve,  and  the 
pediatrician  wanted  to  test  his  growth  hormone  levels.  So  my  son 
went  in  and  did  the  overnight  hospital  stay,  and  did  the 
somatostatin  block-release,  and  that  measured  the  release  of  growth 
hormone  in  a  twenty-four  hour  cycle.  It  turned  out  he  had  normal 
levels  of  growth  hormone,  and  the  pediatrician  said  that  he  felt 
that  he  would  grow  to  an  acceptable  size  based  on  that,  and  even 
though  he  was  in  a  lower  percentile,  it  was  nothing  to  get  too 
worried  about.  I  didn't  even  know  that  kids  were  treated  with  human 
growth  hormone.  Then  he  told  me  how  difficult  it  was  to  get  human 
growth  hormone  to  treat  dwarfism.  I  think  at  the  time  I  may  have 
even  told  my  wife,  "You  know,  we  could  make  human  growth  hormone; 
all  we  have  to  do  is  isolate  the  gene."  And  this  was  before  Bob  had 
gotten  in  touch  with  me. 

So  I  had  had  these  little  seeds  of  thought,  fantasy  more  than 
anything.  But  I  had  no  idea  how  you  would  start  a  company,  and 
where  you  would  go,  what  you  would  do.  Of  course,  in  my  position  on 
the  faculty  at  that  time,  I  wouldn't  do  anything  like  that;  it 
would  have  been  counterproductive,  no  question  about  it.  But  when 
Bob  came  along,  he  explained  venture  capital  to  me.  He  had  this  . 
desire  to  start  a  company  of  his  own,  and  he  didn't  want  to  start 
out  in  the  usual  fields  in  the  Bay  Area  at  the  time,  computers  or 
running  shoes  or  other  things  that  were  popular  at  that  time.  He 
wanted  to  do  something  different,  and  that  was  why  he  was  looking. 
He  had  read  a  lot  about  the  technology,  and  thought  it  might  be 
useful. 

I  said,  "Sure,  why  not."  We  formed  a  partnership,  and  during  the 
partnership,  we  put  together  a  business  plan.  He  got  some  money.  He 
was  with  Kleiner  &  Perkins  and  Associates,  which  did  venture 
capital  deals,  so  he  knew  about  that  end  of  it,  and  he  had  watched 
a  number  of  companies  develop  by  virtue  of  his  participation  on 
boards  and  things  like  that . 


73 

So  he  quit  that  job,  and  he  got  a  little  office  in  the  corner  of 
the  Kleiner  &  Perkins  outfit  and  paid  rent  on  that.  I  think  our 
original  funding  was  $50,000.  That  paid  his  salary  and  rented  the 
telephone,  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  We  designed  the  first 
experiments,  which  we  contracted  to  my  lab  and  the  lab  at  the  City 
of  Hope  and  also  at  Cal  Tech,  because  one  of  the  scientists  that 
was  involved  with  that  was  a  student  at  Cal  Tech,  although  he  was 
working  at  the  City  of  Hope  [Richard  Scheller].1  I  insisted  that  Bob 
go  to  the  Contracts  and  Grants  office  at  Berkeley  and  set  this  up 
under  the  prescribed  guidelines  that  they  had  in  effect,  which  he 
did.  He  was  very  careful  about  all  that,  and  did  all  that  work. 
Then  we  started  out. 


Chemical  Synthesis  of  DNA 

Boyer:     Our  first  plan  was  to  synthesize  human  insulin.  We  were  going  to  do 
it  chemically  because  I  had  had  experience  with  chemically 
synthesized  DNA  by  that  time.  So  we  had  the  sequencing,  chemical 
synthesis  of  DNA,  and  genetic  engineering  and  the  cloning  thing. 
All  of  that  was  available  either  in  my  lab  or  I  had  access  to  it.  I 
thought  it  was  very  important  that  we  have  chemically  synthesized 
DNA,  no  matter  what  we  did.  I  thought  that  was  the  key. 

Hughes:    Why? 

Boyer:  In  order  to  identify  genes,  in  order  to  adapt  genes  into  different 
vectors,  to  modify  them  so  that  you  could  get  maximum  production-- 
any  number  of  reasons.  At  that  time,  it  wasn't  that  easy  to  purify 
messenger  RNA  and  make  cDNA;  you  need  the  gene.  And  so  with  the 
chemical  synthesis  of  DNA,  all  you  needed  to  know  was  the  sequence 
of  the  protein,  and  then  you  could  make  the  gene. 

So  we  were  going  to  start  out  with  human  insulin,  and  when  we 
started  out  I  told  Bob,  "The  key  to  this  is  to  have  chemically 
synthesized  DNA."  I  told  him  about  Riggs  and  Itakura.  So  I  called 
Art  Riggs,  and  he  said  yes,  he  was  interested  in  doing  this.  So  we 
gave  Riggs  and  Itakura  stock  in  the  company. 

Hughes:    Are  they  the  only  ones  that  had  synthetic  DNA  technology? 

Boyer:     No,  there  were  a  couple  of  other  labs  around  at  the  time.  I  think 

Itakura  was  a  postdoc  or  a  student,  I  can't  remember  which,  in  [Saran 


lRichard  Scheller  became  Vice  President  of  Research  at  Genentech  in  March 
2001. 


74 


A.]  Narang's  lab,  who  had  trained,  I  believe,  with  [Ear  Gobind] 
Khorana.  Khorana  had  done  the  first  major  chemical  synthesis  of  DNA 
at  the  University  of  Wisconsin,  and  chemically  synthesized  DNA  was 
part  of  the  approach  to  breaking  the  genetic  code.  Then  there  was 
[Marvin]  Caruthers's  laboratory  at  the  University  of  Colorado, 
Boulder.  Actually,  Dave  Goeddel  was  getting  his  Ph.D.  in  that 
laboratory,  and  went  on  to  become  one  of  our  best  scientists  at 
Genentech. 

But  there  were  not  very  many  labs  around  doing  this.  Narang's 
laboratory  developed  new  techniques,  and  it  was  the  phosphotriester 
method  rather  than  a  phosphodiester  method-based  synthesis  that 
made  it  more  efficient  and  faster. 

ti 

Boyer:     The  problem  with  chemically  synthesized  DNA  was  that  you  could  make 
a  vial  full  of  this  stuff,  but  then  you  did  experiments  and  you'd 
use  it  all  up,  and  then  you'd  have  to  start  all  over  again.  People 
didn't  particularly  care  to  keep  synthesizing  DNA  because  it  wasn't 
all  this  interesting  to  do.  And  not  only  that,  once  you  had  a 
synthesized  piece  of  DNA  in  substantial  quantity,  it  was  not  pure. 
There  were  a  lot  of  improper  pieces  of  DNA  in  there.  It  wasn't  as 
pure  as  one  would  like  for  a  chemical  reagent. 

The  cloning  of  chemically  synthesized  DNA  brought  a  new  approach  to 
that,  because  we  could  chemically  synthesize  something,  clone  it, 
and  then  you  would  have  it.  We  could  grow,  make  large  amounts  of 
it,  and  every  molecule  would  be  chemically  identical  for  all 
intents  and  purposes. 

So  there  weren't  a  lot  of  laboratories  interested  in  chemically 
synthesized  DNA,  for  some  of  those  reasons.  Plus  it  took  a 
dedicated  laboratory  facility.  You  heard  the  story  I  told  at  the 
Rutter  symposium.  I  went  to  Rutter  to  try  to  get  him  to  do  that 
[start  a  facility  for  the  chemical  synthesis  of  DNA]  in  the 
department,  and  he  sort  of  said  no  by  telling  me  to  go  ahead  and  do 
it  in  my  lab,  and  get  my  own  money. 


75 


So  we  got  those  guys  [Riggs,  Itakura,  Goeddel]  signed  up,  and  I 
think  that  was  one  of  the  key  events.  I  think  that  gave  Genentech 
probably  a  five-year  lead  in  the  industry,  because  we  were  able  to 
do  things  that  nobody  else  could  do.  They  tried  to  do  them  in  a 
much  more  difficult  way,  and  weren't  that  successful  at  it. 


Somatostatin;  Demonstrating  the  Technology 

Boyer:     To  backtrack  a  little  bit,  the  first  plan  was  to  synthesize  two 

genes  for  insulin,  actually  one  for  the  A  chain  and  one  for  the  B 
chain- -which  we  eventually  did.  But  when  Bob  and  I  talked  to  Art 
Riggs  about  this,  he  convinced  us  that  there  was  a  faster  and 
easier  way  to  demonstrate  the  technology,  and  the  product  might 
have  some  commercial  benefit.  Turned  out  it  really  didn't.  But  he 
had  already  proposed  to  NIH  that  the  NIH  fund  a  project  in  his  lab 
in  which  they  would  synthesize  the  gene  for  somatostatin  and 
express  it  in  bacteria. 

Hughes:    Why  somatostatin? 

Boyer:     Well,  somatostatin  is  a  small  protein.  It's  only  fourteen  amino 
acids  long.  It  would  be  easy  to  synthesize  the  gene  for  that.  At 
that  time,  it  was  still  a  laborious  and  time-consuming  thing.  And 
also,  we  would  make  it  as  a  part  of  a  larger  protein  which  we  could 
chemically  cleave  away  from  the  majority  of  the  protein,  and  there 
was  a  very  sensitive  radioimmunoassay  for  the  protein.  So  it  was 
much  more  straightforward  as  a  model  than  doing  insulin.  What  we 
needed  to  do  was  to  show  that  we  could  actually  make  a  human 
protein  in  bacteria,  and  that  was  key  to  the  next  level  of  funding, 
to  get  an  independent  laboratory,  and  hire  people  and  so  on  and  so 
forth. 

Hughes:    Had  the  rat  insulin  gene  been  expressed  at  this  point? 
Boyer:     No.  I  don't  think  so.  This  was  before  that.1 


'Walter  Gilbert's  group  at  Harvard  expressed  the  rat  insulin  gene  in  E. 
coli  in  May  1978;  the  Genentech/City  of  Hope  team  held  a  press  conference  to 
announce  the  synthesis  of  the  somatostatin  gene  on  1  December  1977.  The 
somatostatin  work  had  been  accepted  for  publication  when  the  press  conference 
occurred  and  was  published  in  Science  (9  December  1977). 


76 


Hughes:    So  nobody  really  knew,  once  you  got  a  clone,  whether  it  could 

actually  produce  the  protein.  Were  you  worried  about  expression? 

Boyer:     No.  You  could  imagine  some  potential  scenarios,  but  they  were  so 
extraordinary  that  I  didn't  feel  that  they  were  a  problem.  But  we 
were  aware  of  the  guidelines;  we  were  working  under  the  guidelines 
at  the  time.  The  guidelines  said  nothing  about  chemically 
synthesized  DNA,  chemically  synthesized  genes.  In  addition,  we  had 
the  protein  attached  to  a  large  bacterial  protein,  and  then  cleaved 
it  off  chemically.  It  would  never  be  functional  being  made  the  way 
we  constructed  it. 

Hughes:    Was  it  an  oversight  that  chemically  synthesized  DNA  wasn't  included 
in  the  guidelines? 

Boyer:     No,  I  don't  think  so.  I  think  the  big  concern  at  the  time  was 

shotgun  cloning  of  eukaryotic  DNA.  We  would  never  have  gotten  it  in 
those  days,  trying  to  do  it  that  way.       < 

So  we  did  the  somatostatin  thing,  and  as  it  turned  out,  if  the 
somatostatin  is  made  de  novo  or  with  just  a  short  sequence,  it's 
degraded  by  the  bacterial  cell  immediately.  You  can't  protect  it. 
It's  made,  but  it's  just  not  protected.  The  solution  to  this 
problem  was  to  precede  the  somatostain  protein  with  a  large 
protein.  So  that  was  a  major  step  forward  in  terms  of  going  to 
venture  capitalists  to  get  them  to  put  more  money  into  it.  So  we 
had  a  benchmark  that  we  had  established. 

Hughes:    Was  the  actual  research  itself  fairly  straightforward? 

Boyer:     It  was,  yes.  Well,  there  were  a  number  of  little  setbacks  along  the 
way.  We  designed  the  gene  by  using  the  amino  acid  sequence  of 
somatostatin,  and  just  using  the  genetic  code,  you  could  design 
that  gene.  But  the  way  it  was  synthesized  was  that  you'd  make  one 
strand,  and  then  you'd  have  an  overlapping  strand,  and  then  you'd 
make  several  of  those  and  put  those  all  together,  and  then  you'd 
clone  them. 

Well,  it  turned  out  a  lot  of  the  things  we  cloned,  because  of  the 
imperfections  in  the  chemical  synthesis  methodology,  led  to 
defective  genes.  They  would  have  a  nucleotide  missing  here  or  there 
when  we  would  analyze  them,  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  But  eventually, 


77 


we  got  the  right  ones,  and  we  put  it  into  a  vector  in  which  we  had  a 
short  sequence  of  the  beta-galactosidase  gene  in  front  of 
somatostatin  so  that  it  was  read  in  phase,  and  you'd  have  a  bi- 
complex.  There  was  only,  I  can't  remember  the  exact  number,  I  think 
there  were  eight  amino  acids  in  front  of  somatostatin. 

Now,  the  key  to  this  was  something  that  Art  Riggs  identified,  and 
that  was  that  somatostatin,  being  so  small,  had  no  methionine 
residues  in  it.  So  what  we  did  was  have  L-methionine  codon  in  front 
of  somatostatin.  So  when  you  took  that  hybrid  protein,  you  could 
treat  it  with  cyanogen  bromide  and  cleave  the  somatostatin  at  the 
methionine  residue,  so  you'd  end  up  with  the  somatostatin  protein 
plus  what  was  in  front  of  it,  and  those  could  be  purified  from  one 
another. 

But  when  we  did  our  first  experiment,  we  couldn't  detect  anything. 
So  we  went  back  and  checked  everything.  Then  we  knew  that  small 
pieces  of  protein  and  bacteria  were  degraded  by  a  system  that  people 
had  studied  for  a  number  of  years .  So  we  surmised  that  we  needed  a 
larger  piece  of  protein  in  front  of  the  somatostatin  so  that  it 
would  form  a  more  or  less  natural  protein  structure  and  would  not  be 
degraded.  So  we  put  a  big  piece  of  protein  in  front  of  it,  and  that 
worked  fine,  and  we  were  able  to  detect  somatostatin. 


Expanding  to  South  San  Francisco,  Recruiting  Scientists 

Boyer:     That  was  the  benchmark  we  needed.  And  at  that  point  we  got 

additional  funding;  I  can't  remember  what.  We  rented  some  space  down 
in  South  San  Francisco  where  the  company's  based  now.  Bob  got  a 
secretary,  and  we  hired  three  scientists.  There  was  Dennis  Kleid  and 
Dave  Goeddel  and  Herb  Heyneker. 

Hughes:    Now,  who  found  people  such  as  these? 

Boyer:     I  found  the  first  people,  although  I  think  Bob  actually  somehow 

connected  up  with  Kleid  and  Goeddel.  I'm  not  quite  sure  what  that 
connection  was.  They  were  at  Stanford  Research  Institute,  which  is  an 
independent  contracting  body.  They  were  thinking  about  synthesizing 
genes,  because  of  Dave's  background,  and  actually  Dennis  Kleid  had  at 
one  time  been  in  Khorana's  laboratory.  Then  the  first  director  of 
research  was  an  ex  postdoc  in  my  laboratory,  Herb  Heyneker.  He  had 
left  as  a  postdoc,  and  we  went  over  to  the  Netherlands  to  talk  him 


78 


into  coming  back,  and  he  did  so.  So  those  were  the  first  three 
scientists  that  we  had. 


Human  Insulin 

The  Race  for  the  Gene 

Boyer:     Dave  spearheaded  the  cloning  of  the  A  and  B  insulin  chain  genes, 

with  the  chemical  synthesis  being  done  at  the  City  of  Hope.  And  then 
we  brought  the  chemical  synthesis  of  DNA  into  Genentech  per  se.  We 
got  one  of  the  postdocs,  Roberto  Crea,  who  was  in  Itakura's  lab  at 
City  of  Hope,  to  come  up,  and  he  set  up  the  chemical  synthesis  lab 
and  hired  a  number  of  chemists,  and  we  were  on  our  way. 

Hughes:    The  race  for  the  human  insulin  gene  has  a  lot  of  drama  to  it.  There 
was  the  Rutter-Goodman  competition  at  UCSF,  and  then  there  was  Wally 
Gilbert  and  his  group  at  Harvard.  Both  groups  moved  out  of  the 
country  to  escape  the  NIH  guidelines.  You  didn't  have  to  because 
synthetic  DNA  did  not  fall  under  the  guidelines.  How  much  of  a  race 
was  it? 

Boyer:     Well,  you  know,  it  was  a  significant  one.  The  Goodman  lab  and  the 
Rutter  lab  and  the  Gilbert  lab  were  able  to  clone  cDNA,  but  it 
didn't  mean  anything  unless  you  could  make  insulin.  Their  approach 
was  to  try  to  enzymatically  manipulate  the  insulin  gene,  the  human 
or  the  rat  gene,  into  a  plasmid  which  would  allow  its  expression.  Of 
course,  they'd  be  making  proinsulin  or  preproinsulin  and  they'd 
still  have  to  have  some  way  to  convert  it  into  insulin 
enzymatically,  which  is  actually  the  way  it  is  done  now.  But  that 
was  in  the  very  early  stages  in  the  biotechnology  game,  and  they 
just  couldn't  get  it  expressed,  and  the  key  was  to  express  it. 

Once  we  had  the  A  and  B  chains  independently  made,  they  could 
be  mixed  in  the  test  tube  after  they  were  purified  under  conditions 
which  would  allow  the  sulfhydral  bridges  to  form  and  you  could  make 
active  insulin.  I  always  felt  that  we  had  the  best  approach,  because 
it  was  direct.  I  don't  know  whether  or  not  it  would  have  made  in  the 
long  run  a  big  difference  with  respect  to  what  Genentech  did-- 
insulin  is  not  the  only  product  around.  But  it  certainly  added  a 
great  deal  of  credibility  to  the  company,  from  the  scientific  point 
of  view.1 


a  description  of  this  and  related  events,  see  Hall,  Invisible 
Frontiers . 


79 


Joint  Ventures  with  Eli  Lilly  and  KabiGen 

Hughes:    Well,  credibility,  and  also  the  association  with  Eli  Lilly,  right? 
Boyer:     Yes,  Lilly  was  funding  it. 

Hughes :    And  Lilly  was  not  only  funding  the  Genentech  team,  but  it  was  also 
funding  the  Goodman-Rutter . 

Boyer:  Yes. 

Hughes:  Now,  did  anybody  think  that  was  a  bit  odd? 

Boyer:  No. 

Hughes:  No? 

Boyer:     You  know,  if  you've  got  the  money  and  you  can  afford  it,  cover  all 
your  bets. 

Hughes:    [laughing]  You  bet  on  both  horses. 

Boyer:     Yes.  When  Bob  and  I  started  out,  I  had  suggested  that  we  try  to 

establish  some  joint  ventures  and  have  established  pharmaceutical 
companies  fund  what  we  were  doing  in  order  to  defray  the  costs. 
Although  we  had  access  to  venture  capital  money,  they  were  still 
treading  water  with  respect  to  their  comfort  factor.  So  we  went  to 
KabiGen  in  Sweden  and  got  them  involved,  because  they  were  the 
world's  supplier  of  human  growth  hormone,  more  or  less,  outside  of 
NIH. 

And  then  we  got  involved  with  Lilly.  We  knew  we  could  never  compete 
with  Lilly.  They  had  more  or  less  the  lock  on  the  market  for  insulin 
since  the  thirties,  when  William  Banting  and  Charles  Best  did  the 
original  experiments.  It  wasn't  a  big  hit  on  their  budget  to  fund 
the  projects  we  were  doing—pretty  insignificant  amounts.  So  we  took 
that  approach  early  on.  That's  how  we  got  a  lot  of  our  funding. 

Hughes:    Why  would  Lilly  be  interested?  Wasn't  there  plenty  of  insulin  around 
from  traditional  sources? 


80 


Boyer:     There  were  some  problems  with  it.  Lilly  was  concerned  about  the 
supply  of  cattle  pancreas,  and  also  the  fact  that  there  was  some 
immunological  response  in  a  significant  population.  I'm  not  quite 
sure  what  it  was,  but  if  I  remember  correctly,  it  was  that  a 
reasonable  number  of  people  had  immune  reactions  to  bovine  insulin, 
and  so  it  would  become  less  effective.  And  this  also  led  to  problems 
associated  with  immune  reactive  complexes  like  that.  It  just  didn't 
work  that  well  in  some  people.  And  if  you  have  human  insulin-- 

So  I  think  Lilly's  approach  was,  well,  we'll  give  these  guys  some 
money,  and  if  they  can  do  it,  good.  It's  not  a  big  hit  for  our 
budget.  If  it  turns  out  to  be  successful,  we've  got  ourselves 
covered.  What  Lilly  would  be  concerned  about  was  if  we  could  have 
demonstrated  that  it  was  possible  to  make  insulin  this  way,  they 
would  have  a  major  competitor. 

Hughes:    What  was  the  result  when  you  did  get  expression?  Did  that  make  for  a 
longer-term  relationship  with  Lilly? 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  can't  remember  the  details  of  the  contract,  but  the  way  a  lot 
of  these  things  were  set  up  is  that  you  had  benchmarks.  When  you 
cloned  the  gene,  they  would  pay  you  so  much  money;  when  you  had 
expression,  you  made  so  much  money;  when  you  had  a  certain  amount  of 
purified  material,  there  was  another  benchmark.  So  each  benchmark 
triggered  a  more  extensive  slippage  into  bed  with  them. 

When  you  set  up  a  contract  like  that,  the  company  is  obliged  to 
develop  it.  What  they  could  do  is  they  could  have  access  to  the 
organisms,  and  buy  them  for  a  fixed  amount,  and  then  never  use  them, 
and  then  you're  stuck.  You  don't  get  anything  for  what  you've  done. 
So  there  was  a  triggering.  They  went  into  a  massive  development  that 
Genentech  could  never  have  done  by  itself.  It  was  a  good  move.  I 
think  their  first  facility  to  manufacture  recombinant  human  insulin 
that  they  made  was  a  $60  million  investment.  I  think  80  percent  of 
the  world's  supply  of  insulin  today  is  human  insulin. 

Hughes:    Is  that  so? 

Boyer:     At  the  market  use,  anyway.  But  they  have  a  new  process  now. 


81 


I  think  we  were  set  up  so  that  even  if  they  developed  beyond  what  we 
did,  if  they  had  another  approach  to  it,  we'd  still  get  the 
royalties.  So  we're  still  getting  a  royalty  stream.  I  don't  know  how 
long  that  lasts,  but  it  has  a  fixed  lifetime  on  it. 

Hughes:    Was  it  common  procedure  at  that  time  for  big  pharmaceutical  houses 
to  contract  with  smaller  companies? 

Boyer:     I  don't  believe  so.  We  were  the  first  in  the  biotech  thing.  There 
could  have  been  similar  arrangements  in  the  electronics  industry.1 


Genentech's  Primacy  in  Biotechnology 

Hughes:    Is  Genentech  the  first?2  The  only  other  competitor  that  I  can  think 
of  for  that  honor  would  be  Cetus . 

Boyer:     Yes.  Cetus  preexisted  Genentech.  Cetus  grew  out  of  some 

instrumentation  that  was  developed  at  UC  Berkeley  by  Don  Glaser.  Don 
Glaser  was  a  physicist  who  got  a  Nobel  Prize  for  thinking  up  the  idea 
of  the  bubble  chamber  to  trace  subatomic  particles.  Then  after  he 


'For  further  information  on  the  role  of  industrial  partners  in  the 
commercialization  of  UCSF  innovations,  see  Interviews  with  John  Clements,  (San 
Francisco:  UCSF  Campus  Oral  History  Program,  UCSF  Library,  1998)  p.  72  and 
Interviews  with  Lawrence  Crooks  (San  Francisco:  UCSF  Campus  Oral  History 
Program,  UCSF  Library,  forthcoming). 

2See  Appendix  K  for  public  reaction  to  Genentech's  IPO  in  1980. 


82 


won  the  Nobel  Prize,  he  got  interested  in  molecular  biology.  That  was 
the  heyday  of  microbial  genetics. 

His  idea  was  to  build  a  machine- -he  used  to  refer  to  it  as  a  smart 
dumbwaiter- -which  involved  screening  of  microorganisms  for  production 
of  certain  things,  in  particular  antibiotics.  This  machine  would  scan 
Petri  dishes  for  extraordinary  events.  So  you  could  put  tens  of 
thousands  of  Petri  dishes  into  this  machine,  and  it  would  analyze 
everything  and  tell  you,  "Well,  there's  a  mutant  in  plate  29,  row 
30,"  whatever. 

He  had  NIH  funding  to  develop  the  machine.  I  guess  it  worked  okay.  I 
don't  know  if  any  academic  laboratory  ever  used  this  except  his. 
Then,  I  think  the  NIH  decided  not  to  fund  that  anymore;  probably 
didn't  think  there  was  much  use  for  it.  That's  when  he  used  that 
machine  to  start  Cetus.  They  mainly  contracted  with  pharmaceutical 
companies  that  made  antibiotics  and  looked  for  improved  production  of 
antibiotics,  where  they  would  mutate  organisms  to  look  for  a  higher 
yield  of  an  antibiotic,  or  maybe  screen  for  new  ones.  And  that  was 
how  Cetus  got  started.  But  they  were  not  involved  in  genetic 
engineering  when  we  started  Genentech,  as  far  as  I  know. 

Hughes:    So  biotechnology  in  a  more  restricted  sense,  meaning  genetic 
engineering,  in  that  sense  Genentech  would  be  the  first? 

Boyer:     I  think  so,  yes.  It  was  certainly  the  first  one  to  demonstrate  that 
the  technology  was  feasible. 

Hughes:    Does  Syntex  figure  in  this  picture? 

Boyer:     No,  only  sort  of  as  a  role  model  to  a  certain  extent.  They  got 

involved  in  it  later.  We  may  have  talked  to  them,  but  I  don't  think 
we  ever  came  up  with  a  joint  program.  I  do  remember  when  Bob  and  I 
were  in  the  early  throes  of  starting  the  company,  and  I  guess  the 
word  got  around,  Stan  Cohen  came  to  me  and  tried  to  talk  me  out  of 
that  and  to  become  a  consultant  with  Cetus.  He  was  consulting  with 
Cetus  at  the  time,  and  I  don't  think  they  had  gotten  into  the  genetic 
engineering  business  yet.  I  said,  "No,  I'll  stick  with  Bob."  Stanley 
took  me  to  lunch  to  talk  me  out  of  that.  He  said,  "I've  heard  that 
just  a  gofer  anyway."  [laughs] 


83 


Hughes:    You  got  the  Albert  Lasker  [Basic  Medical  Research]  Award  [1980]  for 
the  somatostatin  work,  right? 

Boyer:     No,  it  was  for  the  recombinant  DNA  work,  with  Berg  and  Dale  Kaiser 
and  myself  and  Stan. 

There  was  another  award,  V.  D.  Mattia  Award,  which  was  1977. 
Hughes:    And  that  was  for  what? 

Boyer:  That  was  given  to  Stanley  and  me  for  recombinant  DNA  work,  although  I 
talked  about  the  somatostatin  there.1  No,  I  don't  think  I  ever  got  an 
award  for  the  somatostatin  research. 

Somatostatin  Studies 

Hughes:    The  expression  of  somatostatin  obviously  was  an  achievement  that  had 
tremendous  implications  in  terms  of  commercial  biotechnology.  What 
did  it  mean  scientifically? 

Boyer:     Scientifically  it  demonstrated  that  you  could  chemically  synthesize  a 
gene  and  express  it  in  bacteria  and  recover  a  human  protein  from  the 
bacteria. 

Hughes:    So  it  was  quite  an  achievement  on  both  fronts? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Did  people  in  the  scientific  world  pay  attention  to  that  research? 

Boyer:     That's  an  interesting  question;  I  haven't  thought  about  it.  We  just 
dropped  it  after  that.  We  didn't  follow  up. 

I  thought  it  would  be  interesting  to  look  at  the  somatostatin  gene, 
because  it's  so  widespread;  it  occurs  in  the  most  elementary 
multicellular  organisms.  It  controls  the  release  of  proteins  from 
cells.  It's  a  feedback  mechanism.  I  thought  it  would  be  interesting 
to  compare  the  evolution  and  to  look  at  associated  genes  around 


'In  later  years,  Dr.  Boyer  won  both  the  National  Medal  of  Science  and  the 
National  Medal  of  Technology.  See  Appendix  L. 


84 


somatostatin.  We  tried  to  isolate  somatostatin  cDNA  from  pigeon 
pancreas,  of  all  places,  [laughter]  Somatostatin  is  not  only 
expressed  in  the  pancreas,  it's  also  expressed  in  the  lining  of  the 
gut  and  in  the  brain.  We  were  interested  in  seeing  if  there  were 
different  genes  involved  in  the  production  of  somatostatin  in 
different  tissues.  A  lot  of  these  things,  you  have  an  idea,  and  you 
get  an  eager  young  graduate  student  or  postdoc  who's  willing  to  try 
this.  They  try,  and  if  it  doesn't  happen,  then  you  go  on  to  something 
else. 


More  on  Early  Recombinant  Research  at  Stanford  and  UCSF 
[Interview  4:  April  20,  1994]## 

Hughes:    Dr.  Boyer,  last  time  you  mentioned  receiving  the  Lasker  Award  with 
Dale  Kaiser,  Paul  Berg,  and  Stanley  Cohen.  How  did  Kaiser's  and 
Berg's  work  relate  to  what  you  were  doing  in  recombinant  research? 

Boyer:     How  much  of  a  factor  it  was,  is  how  I  would  rephrase  your  question. 
Hughes:    Yes,  that's  fine. 

Boyer:     A  lot  of  Dale  Kaiser's  research  on  the  bacterial  virus  lambda  dealt 
with  the  naturally  occurring  sticky  ends  that  these  molecules 
encountered  during  their  life  cycle.  They  were  able  to  show  that  one 
could  form  circular  molecules  from  the  linear  molecules  by  virtue  of 
reannealing  procedures,  and  that,  I  think,  was  a  seminal  finding. 

Then  there  was  work  going  on  by  other  groups  in  which  enzymes  were 
being  used  to  put  homopolydeoxyribonucleotides  on  the  end  of  DNA 
molecules.  One  could  make  poly  A  [adenosine]  and  poly  T  [thymidine] 
ends  under  certain  conditions  on  these  molecules,  and  you  could  get 
them  to  reanneal.  Berg's  work  took  off  from  that,  and  they  used  that 
procedure  to  reanneal  a  linearized  SV40  [simian  virus]  DNA.  I  think 
that  those  papers  were  seminal. 

Now,  we  had  been  working  on  trying  to  do  similar  things  with  quasi- 
plasmids,  lambda  DV  Gal  for  example,  and  had  not  had  any  success  with 
that. 

Hughes:    What  happened? 


85 


Boyer:     Well,  first  of  all,  we  later  found  out  that  the  Rl  site  that  cut  the 
lambda  DV  Gal  actually  cut  it  in  the  replicon,  if  I  remember 
correctly,  and  so  it  wouldn't  replicate.  I'm  not  sure  about  the 
chronology  of  that.   But  when  we  were  trying  to  do  some  in  vitro 
recombination  experiments,  we  were  trying  to  use  a  polymerase 
reaction  to  put  tails  on  these  molecules.  We  didn't  know  at  that  time 
the  sequence  cleaved  by  the  Rl  endonuclease.  I'm  pretty  sure  that 
chronology  is  correct. 

So  I  think  these  types  of  experiments  and  this  background  did  relate 
to  our  work.  When  Berg  published  his  paper,  we  had  determined  the 
sequence  of  the  DNA  cleaved  by  the  Rl  endonuclease.1  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  I  think  those  papers  appeared  simultaneously  in  the  same  issue 
of  the  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Hughes:    Which  was  deliberate? 
Boyer:     No,  I  don't  think  it  was. 
Hughes:    Happenstance. 

Boyer:     Yes.  Of  course,  some  of  the  work  in  Berg's  lab,  Janet  Mertz  and 

another  faculty  member  there,  Ron  Davis,  had  used  some  of  our  enzyme 
and  had  found  that  DNA  cleaved  by  the  Rl  endonuclease  was 
reannealable.  This  was  very  critical  to  spurring  us  along  to  do  the 
in  vitro  recombination  experiments.  Of  course,  at  that  time,  that  was 
helpful  in  our  determination  of  the  sequence  cleaved  by  the  Rl 
endonuclease,  so  I  think  that  work  was  critical  to  what  we  did. 

Hughes:    Were  you  talking  directly  with  Berg's  lab,  or  was  this  only  through 
publication? 

Boyer:     No,  we  had  communications,  primarily  because  we  were  very  generous  in 
giving  them  the  Rl  endonuclease.  We  gave  them  what  amounted  to  about 
a  bucketful  at  a  time. 

Hughes:     [laughs]  A  lot  of  endonuclease. 
Boyer:     Yes. 


'J.  Hedgpeth,  H.  M.  Goodman,  and  H.  W.  Boyer.  "DNA  Nucleotide  Sequence 
Restricted  by  the  Rl  Endonuclease,"  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America  69,  no.  11  (1972):  3448-52. 


86 


Hughes:    Well,  anything  more  to  be  said  about  this  part  of  the  history? 

Boyer:     Well,  as  any  scientist  will  tell  you,  his  own  work  is  built  upon  the 
foundation  laid  by  many,  many  people  and  many  experiments  and 
findings,  and  to  a  large  extent,  what  any  one  individual  does  depends 
on  what  was  done  before. 

Hughes:  It  is  a  continuum.  I  remember  what  you  said  last  time  about  your 
recombinant  work  making  research  possible  in  areas  that  had  been 
closed  before. 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    There  was  so  much  happening  in  recombinant  research  from  the  mid- 
1970s  on.  Did  you  ever  feel  that  the  technology  was  outstripping  the 
theory? 

Boyer:     Well,  people  will  argue  that  this  is  a  cycle  of  science,  and  that 
science  has  plateaus  and  quantum  leaps .  The  quantum  leap  comes 
through  technology,  and  then  there's  a  plateau  in  which  a  lot  of 
information  is  gathered  and  stored,  and  nobody  quite  knows  what  to  do 
with  it.  And  then  this  plateau  goes  on  until  another  technology  comes 
along,  although  the  plateau  after  the  recombinant  DNA  research  I 
don't  think  was  very  flat.  I  think  it  was  reasonably  steep.  The 
discoveries  and  the  amount  of  information  that  have  come  along  have 
been  incredible.  It  certainly  amazed  me.  I  find  it  difficult  to  keep 
up  with  what's  going  on  in  science  today,  and  I  also  am  continually 
amazed  by  the  excellence  in  the  biomedical  scientific  research 
community. 

Hughes:    You  think  more  so  in  recent  years? 

Boyer:     It's  cumulative.  Well,  let's  see.  How  long  has  it  been?  Thirty-some 
years  of  being  somewhat  close  to  research,  you  get  a  little  jaded,  I 
suppose.  But  if  I  look  back  at  when  I  started  in  molecular  biology, 
it's  unbelievable  how  it's  come  along. 

Hughes:    You're  living  in  a  golden  age. 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes.  It's  been  a  wonderful  experience,  no  question  about  it. 


87 


Genentech's  Early  Goals  and  Philosophy 

Hughes:    Well,  we  talked  last  time  about  the  origins  of  Genentech.  You 

mentioned  that  in  one  of  the  very  early  meetings  with  Bob  Swanson  you 
worked  out  a  business  plan.  I  was  wondering  how  it  was  comprised,  how 
detailed  it  was,  and  how  accurate  it  turned  out  to  be. 

Boyer:     Well,  I  don't  know  if  there's  any  record  anywhere;  I  don't  know 

whether  Bob  ever  kept  anything.  A  lot  of  this  was  sketched  on  note 
paper  and  outlined.  Bob  would  type  up  some  of  these  things. 

But  when  I  say  a  business  plan,  we  set  out  with  a  philosophy  for  the 
company.  We  set  out  with  a  self-imposed  mandate  that  employees  would 
share  in  anything  that  came  out  of  the  company,  in  terms  of  holding 
stock  in  the  company.  I  insisted  that  we  have  the  scientists  publish 
their  research  in  journals.  Any  proprietary  information  would  have  to 
be  covered  by  patents.  I  felt  this  was  extremely  important  for 
attracting  the  outstanding  young  scientists  in  the  community  that 
were  interested  in  doing  research  in  an  industrial  setting. 

I  also  wanted  to  bring  in  scientists  that  were  outstanding  and  have 
them  have  an  opportunity  to  establish  their  own  reputation,  get  their 
own  recognition.  So  we  tried  to  set  up  an  atmosphere  which  would  take 
the  best  from  industry  and  the  best  from  the  academic  community,  and 
put  them  together.  And  then  we  set  up  some  goals,  one  of  which  was  to 
demonstrate  that  the  technology  was  feasible. 

I  think  I've  told  you  about  the  City  of  Hope  collaboration  on 
somatostatin. 

Hughes:    Yes. 

Boyer:     There  was  potential  that  with  the  first  demonstration  in  which  we 

made  somatostatin  in  microorganisms  that  this  small  peptide  hormone 
might  have  some  commercial  success.  But  it  never  really  panned  out, 
even  though  it  had  a  rebirth  at  Genentech  at  one  point.  Someone 
thought  that  there  might  be  some  potential  for  it,  and  I  can't  even 
remember  what  application  it  was  now.  It  was  called  Project  Phoenix, 
[laughter]  But  that  never  really  panned  out. 

Hughes:    The  main  point  of  the  somatostatin  project  was  to  demonstrate  the 
feasibility  of  the  technology,  wasn't  it? 


88 


Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    If  you  got  a  product  out  of  it,  that  was  fine,  but  not  the  main 
point? 

Boyer:     Yes.  And  then  we  went  on  to  start  a  research  project  to  synthesize 
human  insulin,  which  you  and  I  covered. 

Hughes:    This  was  still  part  of  the  business  plan? 

Boyer:     Yes,  that  was  part  of  the  original  business  plan. 

More  on  the  Joint  Ventures  with  Lilly  and  KabiGen 

Boyer:     Also  part  of  that  plan,  in  order  to  fund  all  of  this  research,  I 

suggested  to  Bob--I  think  it  was  my  suggestion—that  we  collaborate 
with  established  pharmaceutical  companies  that  had  interest  in 
products  developed  through  recombinant  DNA  research.  So  that's  why  we 
went  to  Lilly  with  the  human  insulin.  They  funded  the  research,  and 
we  had  benchmarks  for  achievements,  and  there  were  cash  payments  and 
rewards  for  that.  That  helped  the  funding.  So  rather  than  getting 
exclusive  funding  and  essentially  giving  away  most  of  the  stock  of 
the  company  for  funding,  we  did  this  through  collaborations  and  joint 
ventures  with  companies. 

Hughes:    Was  that  a  new  thing? 

Boyer:     I  don't  think  so.  Actually,  I  think  that  joint  ventures  had  been 

worked  out  between  companies,  but  I  don't  know  whether  it  was  done  at 
this  level.  I  just  don't  know  enough  about  joint  ventures  in  other 
companies  at  that  period  to  say. 

Hughes:    Joint  ventures  weren't  prevalent  in  the  biomedical  sciences,  were 
they? 

Boyer:     No.  I  think  that  there  used  to  be  contracts  between  pharmaceutical 

companies  and  individuals  and  laboratories  and  universities  even,  but 
I  don't  think  that  there  was  this  small  company-large  company 
relationship.  I  don't  think  it  was  too  prevalent;  it  could  have  been, 
I  just  don't  know. 

We  went  off  to  Sweden  to  talk  to  KabiGen.  They  had  been  marketing 
human  growth  hormone,  which  they  purified  from  pituitary  glands 


89 


obtained  from  cadavers.  So  we  approached  them.  There  was  a  fellow 
Bertil  Aberg  there  at  KabiGen  who  was  very  much  interested.  I  guess 
he  played  an  avuncular  role  in  the  early  days  of  Genentech.  Then  we 
set  up  a  collaboration  with  them,  and  they  were  going  to  fund  us  to 
make  the  human  growth  hormone.  We  went  in  with  a  scientific  plan,  and 
so  on  and  so  forth.  And  then  we  talked  to  some  companies  about 
vaccines  and  things  like  that.  We  established  a  number  of 
collaborations . 

Hughes:    Were  the  two  of  you  both  doing  this,  actually  getting  on  planes  and 
meeting  with  these  groups? 

Boyer:     Yes.  We  would  set  it  up  around--if  I  had  a  meeting  in  Europe  or 

something  like  that,  I  would  go.  And  that's  essentially  the  role  I 
played  in  the  early  days;  I  never  did  any  research  at  the  company. 
Other  than  the  contract  in  my  laboratory,  I  never  participated  in 
research  there  at  Genentech.  And  so  after  those  initial  excursions,  I 
sort  of  backed  off.  Once  we  got  going,  once  we  did  the  insulin  thing, 
we  hired  people  to  do  all  that  stuff.  Fortunately,  I  didn't  have  to 
do  it  any  more. 


Boyer 's  Decision  Not  to  Participate  in  Genentech  Research 

Hughes:    Was  it  a  conscious  decision  from  the  very  first,  that  you  would  not 
participate  directly  in  the  research  of  the  company? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes :    Why  did  you  make  that  decision? 

Boyer:     There  were  several  reasons  for  it.  One  is  I  wanted  to  continue  my  own 
research,  which  I  couldn't  do  at  the  company.  It  just  didn't  mesh, 
although  I  had  a  contract  for  a  while  from  the  company,  a  modest 
contract  to  support  some  postdoctoral  fellows.  Part  of  their  effort 
went  into  developing  some  clones,  but  it  was  never  any  high-powered 
direct  project  that  would  lead  to  a  product;  it  was  sort  of  an 
accessory  thing.  So  that  was  one  reason. 

Another  reason  was  I  didn't  want  to  manage  a  large  group  of 
scientists.  I  had  enough  of  a  taste  of  doing  that  at  a  small  level  to 
know  that  I  didn't  like  it. 


90 


And  third,  as  I  said  before,  I  wanted  to  make  sure  that  the  young 
scientists  at  the  company  were  getting  the  recognition.  I  didn't  want 
to  have  my  figurehead  overshadowing  anything  they  did.  So  it  was  a 
conscious  decision,  and  I  think  a  good  one. 

And  I  don't  think  I  had  the  interest  to  work  on  the  development  of 
products.  Although  it's  extremely  exciting,  I  just  don't  think  at  the 
time  that  I  could  have  played  the  role  of  managing  that.  And  frankly, 
Bob  and  I,  we're  great  friends  and  everything,  but  I  don't  think  we 
would  have  worked  well  together  in  an  intimate  setting  like  that. 


Promoting  and  Recruiting  for  Genentech 

Hughes:    I  read  that  you  have  a  real  facility  for  translating  science  to  the 
public.  Is  that  a  talent  that  you  began  to  develop  after  the 
foundation  of  Genentech?  I  imagine  that  you  had  to  sell  the  science 
that  you  wanted  to  do  to  the  investment  community.  Am  I  right? 

Boyer:     Well,  it's  kind  of  you  to  say  that,  [laughter]  I'm  not  sure  how  good 
I  am  at  that.  But  I  know  we  did  a  lot  of  dog-and-pony  shows. 

Hughes:    Well,  tell  me  a  little  more.  How  would  that  happen? 

Boyer:  In  various  ways.  In  the  early  days,  it  was  essentially  talking  to  the 
venture  capitalists.  I'd  just  give  a  little  lecture  on  a  blackboard 
in  a  venture  capitalist's  office—draw  the  circles,  and  the  sticks, 
and  the  enzymes,  and  all  this  stuff,  and  explain  it  to  him.  I  guess 
in  order  for  me  to  understand  something,  I  have  to  reduce  it  to  the 
most  simple  terms  anyway,  [laughter] 

Hughes:    Well,  I  don't  know  about  that. 

Boyer:     It  just  seemed  to  happen.  I  suspect  that  maybe  some  people  would  have 
a  more  difficult  time  with  it  than  I  did.  And  then  we  got  to  the 
point  where  we'd  visit  other  companies  in  which  you  could  get  a 
little  more  scientific,  and  people  had  backgrounds  that  didn't 
require  a  lot  of  introductory  remarks.  But  it  was  interesting  for  a 
while  doing  that.  We  had  a  lot  of  fun. 

Hughes:    It's  interesting  to  me  that  you  could  do  this,  because  you  said 
before  that  you  didn't  particularly  like  the  teaching. 


91 


Boyer:     Yes.  Well,  you  know,  adults  and  professionals  aren't  nearly  as 

critical  to  your  face  as  students,  [laughter]  They  don't  get  in  your 
face  and  jeer,  yell  at  you. 

Hughes:    I'm  also  interested  in  this  recruiting  process.  That  took  a  bit  of 

selling.  After  all,  you  were  selling  a  new  concept  to  most  biologists 
from  an  academic  setting.  What  would  you  tell  a  Heyneker  or  whomever 
you  were  trying  to  convince  to  take  what  must  have  appeared  at  that 
time  as  a  risky  step? 

Boyer:     I  don't  know.  I  think  there  was  a  certain  amount  of  risk  in  it  for 

those  individuals,  although  they  were  young,  and  I  don't  think  it  had 
a  big  impact  on  their  career- -although  it  could  possibly  have  had 
that.  I  must  tell  you,  I  did  not  do  a  lot  of  active  recruiting.  We 
actively  recruited  Heyneker;  I  was  involved  in  that.  He  was  a  postdoc 
in  my  lab,  knew  about  the  company,  knew  about  Bob,  knew  what  we  were 
doing,  and  he  had  gone  back  to  the  Netherlands.  We  went  over  there  to 
talk  to  him  about  it.  He  was  going  to  be  the  first  VP  of  research. 

He  was  enthusiastic  about  it  before  he  went  back.  I  think  that  he 
went  home  for  family  reasons.  He  was  interested  in  staying.  So  we 
went  over  and  talked  to  him,  and  he  came  back.  He  saw  more 
opportunities  at  Genentech  than  in  an  academic  setting.  He  was  an 
extremely  gifted  scientist,  with  a  wonderful  sense  of  humor. 

Then  I  was  also  involved  in  recruiting  at  the  same  time  Dennis  Kleid 
and  his  collaborator,  Dave  Goeddel.  We  did  all  of  our  recruiting  with 
Dennis  Kleid.  I  remember  Bob  and  I  took  him  out  to  dinner  and  talked 
to  him  about  coming  to  Genentech.  He  was  at  the  Stanford  Research 
Institute,  just  started  there.  They  were  writing  grant  requests  at 
that  time.  He  had  interests  along  the  lines  that  were  congruent  with 
Genentech' s  interests. 

We  didn't  even  talk  to  Dave.  I  didn't  meet  Dave  until  after  he  joined 
the  company.  I  think  Dennis  went  back  to  Dave  and  said,  "Gee,  I  don't 
know  about  this  place,  Genentech,"  and  Dave  said,  "I  think  we  ought 
to  do  it . "  I  think  Dave  was  the  one  who  encouraged  Dennis  that  they 
go  up  together  to  Genentech. 

Dave  has  become  a  very  good  friend.  We  enjoy  fishing  together,  and  we 
even  share  a  ranch  in  Montana  where  we  go  fishing.  I  think  Dave, 


92 


along  with  Bob,  were  largely  responsible  for  recruiting  a  lot  of  the 
other  people  that  came  in  after  that .  Which  is  the  way  it  should  have 
been.  I  may  have  talked  to  a  few  people  here  and  there.  I  didn't 
actively  do  that.  I  was  pretty  busy  myself.  But  there  were  certain 
individuals  along  the  way  that  I  helped  recruit. 

Hughes:    Was  it  the  technology  itself  that  excited  these  scientists? 

Boyer:     I  think  there  was  a  change  in  attitude  around  this  time.  I  think 
there  were  many  factors  involved.  I  don't  know  how  real  they  were, 
and  how  much  each  of  them  impacted  on  the  decision-making  process. 
But  I  noticed  around  this  time  a  change  in  certain  young  scientists, 
with  respect  to  doing  pragmatic  applications  of  their  research.  They 
were  interested  in  making  contributions  to  medical  sciences, 
biomedical  sciences,  and  they  thought  joining  Genentech  was  an 
interesting  way  to  do  things.  There  were  diminishing  funds  available 
to  support  research  in  universities;  there  were  diminishing  numbers 
of  positions,  and  a  lot  of  competition. 

Opportunities  at  Genentech  involved  not  only  a  very  good  salary  and 
opportunity  to  share  in  the  success  of  the  company  through  purchase 
of  stocks,  but  it  also  offered  them  facilities  and  resources. 

## 


Comparing  Industrial  and  Academic  Science 

Boyer:     One  of  the  keys  to  research  is  the  collaboration  between  different 

groups.  I  think  research  was  much  more  efficient  at  the  company  than 
at  a  university,  much  more  efficient.  One  of  the  things  I  find 
particularly  gratifying  is  the  number  of  scientific  contributions 
that  have  come  out  of  the  company  since  its  inception.  It's  a  major 
source  of  scientific  contributions. 

Hughes:    How  would  you  define  the  differences,  if  indeed  there  are  any, 

between  the  science  that  is  done  in  a  place  such  as  Genentech,  an 
industrial  setting,  as  compared  to  science  in  a  university? 

Boyer:     I've  never  been  able  to  clearly  define  in  my  own  mind  what 

differences  there  are.  Having  been  associated  with  both  institutions, 
I  find  them  remarkably  similar.  In  an  academic  setting  you  apply  for 
research  funding  from  a  government  agency  or  some  other  funding 
agency,  and  you  make  the  case  for  the  research,  why  it  should  be 


93 


funded  and  what  your  research  goals  are,  and  you  present  your 
credentials,  and  a  decision  is  made. 

The  only  difference  in  an  industrial  setting  is  that  you  have  fewer 
areas  of  science  to  which  you  can  make  application,  so  you  have  to 
fit  your  research  within  the  overall  goals  of  Genentech,  although 
there  are  a  number  of  scientists  that  have  made  enough  contributions 
that  they  are  essentially  allowed  to  work  on  their  own  in  some  area 
that  they  find  interesting.  The  company  management  feels  confident 
that  they  will  work  towards  something  that  will  eventually  benefit 
the  company.  I  think  a  number  of  the  scientists  there  have  a  certain 
percentage  of  their  time  where  they  can  pursue  things  that  they  find 
interesting.  But  I  think  in  both  situations,  you  have  to  mold  your 
research  into  whatever  is  currently  favored  by  the  funding  agencies. 

Hughes:    Is  it  your  perception  that  a  paper  that  is  published  by  a  scientist 
at  Genentech  is  received  by  the  scientific  community  with  the  same 
credibility  as  one  that  came  from  UCSF  or  wherever? 

Boyer:     If  it's  a  good  paper,  certainly. 

Hughes:    There  is  no  stigma  to  the  science  that  comes  from  industry? 

Boyer:     I  don't  believe  so.  Many  of  the  papers  that  come  out  of  Genentech  are 
collaborations  with  scientists  in  universities  and  other  academic 
settings . 


More  on  Early  Corporate  Goals 

Hughes:    Well,  you  mentioned  goals  in  connection  with  that  original  business 
plan.  Were  those  broader  than  production  of  somatostatin  and  insulin 
and  the  various  benchmarks  that  you  set  up?  Did  you  have  some 
overarching  goals? 

Boyer:     Yes.  There  were  some  goals,  relative  to  the  amount  of  cash  flow,  etc. 
We  always  had  a  goal  of  trying  to  break  even,  which  I  think  for  most 
of  the  years  the  company  has  been  in  existence,  we  managed  to  do.  And 
we  had  goals  in  terms  of  cash  flow  and  employees  and  so  on  and  so 
forth.  I  can't  remember  much  about  those. 

Hughes :    Was  there  any  stipulation  about  the  general  sort  of  contribution  that 
you  wanted  to  make  in  terms  of  products? 


Boyer:     Well,  I  can't  remember  the  exact  wording,  but  Bob  would  always  say, 
"I'm  not  interested  in  hula  hoops  and  tennis  shoes."  So  we  had  very 
idealistic  and  altruistic  goals  in  terms  of  making  products  that 
would  somehow  benefit  society.  That  was  part  of  the  original  goal. 

Hughes:    Did  Bob  Swanson  come  to  you  with  some  foundation  in  science,  or  did 
he  have  to  pick  that  up? 

Boyer:     Well,  Bob  had  an  undergraduate  degree  in  chemistry,  and  then  he  got 
an  M.B.A.  at  Sloan  Business  School.  And  then  he  went  into  venture 
capital.  He  always  said  he  never  had  a  green  thumb;  he  never  did  well 
in  the  laboratory.  But  Bob's  a  very  bright  guy,  and  he  could  talk 
technology.  He  was  very  eager  to  learn,  and  would  always  ask 
questions,  and  very  good  questions. 

He  didn't  have  the  grasp  that  someone  had  that's  been  in  the  field 
for  a  long  time.  I  can  remember  very  early  on  telling  him  we  needed 
to  hire  people  in  cellular  biology,  and  I  had  to  work  a  long  time  on 
him  to  convince  him  that  cellular  biology  was  an  important  thing  to 
have  represented  at  the  company,  but  now  it's  a  big  component. 

Hughes:    His  thinking  was  that  it  should  all  be  done  on  a  molecular-- 

Boyer:     He  was  very  focused;  what  we  needed  were  genetic  engineers  and 
chemists  to  synthesize  DNA. 

Hughes:    And  that  was  it. 
Boyer:     Yes. 


Development  and  Scaling  Up 

Boyer:     Talking  about  the  science  at  the  company,  there's  a  whole  other  level 
of  science  which  is  different  from  the  university,  but  extremely 
important,  and  that's  in  the  development  area.  This  is  something  that 
gets  overlooked.  A  lot  of  the  success  in  the  development  end  of 
biotechnology  comes  from  the  interaction  between  the  people  in 
manufacturing  and  development  and  basic  sciences.  They  work  very 
closely  together,  and  the  accomplishments  in  the  manufacturing  of 
biopharmaceuticals  in  the  last  twenty  years  is  just  unbelievable. 

When  I  was  a  graduate  student,  if  you  could  get  a  couple  of 
milligrams  of  pure  protein,  you  did  a  good  job.  Some  guys  could  get 


95 


a  Ph.D.  thesis  for  that,  and  then  analyzing  the  protein.  But  in  the 
commercial  setting,  when  you  have  to  make  hundreds  of  kilograms  of  a 
protein  pure  enough  to  pass  the  critical  eye  of  the  FDA,  that's  a 
major  step  forward.  I  think  that  has  had  a  big  impact  on  the  basic 
sciences  as  well,  because  it's  made  available  large  quantities  of 
pure  protein  for  structural  work  and  other  things  that  can  be  done. 
So  that  is  different,  because  that's  very  directed  research  in  which 
your  goal  is  to  make  large  amounts,  pure  amounts,  and  so  on. 

Hughes :    Did  you  anticipate  the  problems  that  would  be  encountered  in  scale- 
up? 

Boyer:     We  were  so  naive  we  never  thought  it  couldn't  be  done.  We  knew  that 
the  pharmaceutical  industry  had  a  history  of  scaling-up  products 
like  antibiotics  and  amino  acids,  things  of  that  sort.  But  this 
involves  a  whole  different  technology.  I  think  the  group  at 
Genentech  probably  has  been  a  leader  in  the  field  for  developing 
manufacturing  processes  for  biopharmaceuticals .  There  are  still 
companies  today  that  don't  quite  have  that  capacity,  and  they're 
still  on  the  learning  curve.  And  we're  on  a  learning  curve  there 
also,  but  I  think  far  ahead. 

Hughes:    Did  you  in  retrospect  make  certain  naive  assumptions?  I  believe  that 
there  was  the  assumption  that  E.  coli  could  do  anything,  and  that 
turned  out  not  to  be  the  case. 

Boyer:     I  don't  know.  I  think  from  our  first  experiments,  we  had  some 

indication  that  E.  coli  was  not  going  to  be  universal.  And  in  those 
days,  everybody  had  their  favorite  organism  they  pushed  as  the 
choice.  As  it  turns  out,  you  can  do  certain  things  in  bacteria,  and 
you  can  do  certain  things  in  yeast,  and  you  can  do  certain  things  in 
tissue  culture.  So  yes,  it  might  have  been  naive,  but  what's  amazed 
me  is  just  how  efficient  and  how  productive  tissue  culture  is.  Years 
ago,  if  you  grew  ten  liters  of  tissue  culture,  that  was  a  major 
effort.  It  took  up  all  your  space  and  a  lot  of  technical  support. 
Today,  they  grow  ten,  twenty  thousand  liters  at  a  time,  and  have 
maximum  production  of  a  protein.  I  always  maintain  that  the  best 
attribute  we  had  was  our  naivete. 

Hughes:     [laughs]  Anything  was  possible. 


96 


Boyer:     Yes,  right.  I  think  if  we  had  known  about  all  the  problems  we  were 
going  to  encounter,  we  would  have  thought  twice  about  starting. 

I  once  gave  a  little  talk  to  a  group  at  a  Stanford  Business  School 
luncheon,  and  I  took  off  on  the  title  of  a  book  by  Jacques  Monod.  He 
was  discussing  evolution.  The  title  of  his  little  monograph  was-- 
pardon  my  French- -Chance  et  Necessite.  The  title  of  my  talk  was 
"Chance,  Necessite,  et  Naivete." 

Hughes:     [laughs]  Very  apt. 

Boyer:     Naivete  was  the  extra  added  ingredient  in  biotechnology. 


Repercussions  on  the  UCSF  Campus 

Hughes:    Well,  let's  talk  about  how  these  developments  were  perceived  in  the 
Department  of  Biochemistry  and  Biophysics,  on  the  campus  as  a  whole, 
and  in  the  wider  scientific  community. 

Boyer:     I'm  not  sure  how  accurate  my  reflections  are.  But  at  this  point,  my 
perception  is  that  there  was  mostly  a  negative  reaction  in  the 
department  towards  what  I  was  doing.  There  were  criticisms  that 
there  was  a  big  greed  factor,  that  I  was  compromising  my  research,  a 
big  conflict  of  interest.  I  had  critics  within  the  department,  I  had 
some  friends  in  the  department  who  tried  to  talk  me  into  leaving, 
just  dissociating  myself  with  Genentech  altogether.  One  colleague 
commented  that  he  wouldn't  touch  what  I  was  doing  with  a  ten- foot 
pole.  There  were  articles  in  Synapse  [UCSF  student  newspaper].1 

Bill  Rutter  was  fairly  supportive.  I  had  gone  to  talk  to  him  when  I 
was  first  thinking  about  founding  Genentech,  and  I  told  him  what  I 
was  going  to  do  and  asked  him  what  he  thought.  You  heard  my  comment 
at  the  symposium  in  honor  of  Bill  Rutter. 

Hughes:    Say  it  again  for  the  record. 

Boyer:     I  said,  "Bill,  I'm  going  to  do  this  [found  Genentech].  What  do  you 
think?"  He  said,  "I  think  it's  fine,  and  you  should  do  it.  Good 
luck.  I've  always  wanted  to  start  a  company  myself." 


'See  for  example  Synapse,  14  April  1977  and  "Ire  over  School-Industry 
Meeting,"  Synapse,  A  March  1982. 


97 


After  becoming  aware  of  the  comments  of  colleagues  in  the  department 
and  elsewhere  on  campus,  the  administration  and  the  Academic  Senate 
took  a  look  at  this.  It  was  Chancellor  [Francis  A.]  Sooy  at  the 
time,  and  Juli  [Julius]  Krevans  was  dean.  My  take  was  that  they 
looked  at  everything  we  had  done,  and  we  had  done  it  by  the  book.  As 
usual,  the  Academic  Senate  waffled  back  and  forth,  waffled  on  it  as 
only  it  can  do. 

Hughes:    Let's  stop  for  just  a  second,  [tape  interruption]  Dr.  Boyer,  you 

just  looked  at  some  documents  related  to  the  Academic  Senate  and 

biosafety  committee  reviews.  How  did  the  issue  come  before  the 
Senate?1 

Boyer:     I  really  don't  know.  I  suspect  that  Keith  Yamamoto  wrote  a  paper- -he 
was  probably  the  most  critical  faculty  member- -maybe  also  Bruce 
Alberts  and  Brian  McCarthy.  I  can't  say  for  sure;  I  can  only  surmise 
that  from  some  of  the  letters.  There  were  probably  others  that  had 
the  same  problem.  I  really  don't  have  access  to  that  information. 

Hughes:    One  of  the  letters  is  from  Laurel  Glass  to  Sheldon  Wolff,  who  was 
chair  of  the  Committee  on  Rules  and  Regulations  of  the  Academic 
Senate.  Was  that  just  a  formality?  She  didn't  have  any  real  function 
in  this  other  than  to  convey  the  complaints? 

Boyer:     I  don't  think  she  was  instrumental  in  initiating  it. 
Hughes:    The  issue  arose  around  the  somatostatin  research? 

Boyer:     I  think  that's  probably  when  it  started.  I  think  Bob  [Swanson]  was  very 
noticeable.  He  would  come  around  the  laboratory.  I  was  on  the  fourth 
floor  of  the  Medical  Sciences  Building  at  that  time,  [the  location  of 
the  microbiology  department] .  Although  I  was  a  member  of  the 
biochemistry  department  [located  on  the  ninth  floor],  I  was  still  on 


'Laurel  Glass,  Ph.D.,  M.D.  to  Sheldon  Wolff,  Ph.D.,  11  January  1979,  and 
Report  of  the  Committee  on  Rules  and  Jurisdiction,  San  Francisco  Division  of 
the  Academic  Senate,  6  August  1979,  (AR  86-7,  Carton  2,  Folder  94,  UCSF 
Library) . 


98 


Hughes ; 
Boyer : 


Hughes ; 
Boyer: 


Hughes : 
Boyer: 


the  fourth  floor.  So  it  wasn't  as  if  we  were  walking  through  the 
middle  of  the  biochemistry  department,  and  I  don't  know  where  all 
the  observations  came  from,  because  a  lot  of  those  people  didn't 
come  down  to  the  fourth  floor.  There  were  some  other  microbiologists 
around.  There  were  a  lot  of  postdocs  coming  around  the  laboratory 
from  other  laboratories  in  biochemistry. 

Bob  was  in  a  suit,  and  you  know  how  scientists  dress.  So  he  stood 
out.  He  was  all  excited  and  enthusiastic  about  this,  and  talked  to 
people  in  my  lab.  There  may  have  been  people  that  resented  the  fact 
that  others  in  my  lab  were  on  this  contract,  and  they  weren't. 

But  it's  hard  to  go  back  and  recreate  the  situation.  It  was  very 
difficult  for  me.  I  had  a  lot  of  anxieties  and  bouts  of  depression 
associated  with  this.  Here  I  thought  I  was  doing  something  [laughs] 
that  was  valuable  to  society,  and  doing  something  that  would  make  a 
contribution,  and  then  to  have  the  accusations  and  criticisms,  it 
was  extremely  difficult.  I  think  I  got  a  $500-a-month  consulting  fee 
at  that  time,  which  was  a  big  help  when  it  came  to  getting  by  on  an 
associate  professor  salary,  whatever  it  was.  And  I  got  support  from 
Genentech  for  some  research  in  my  laboratory,  support  for  a  couple 
of  the  postdoctorate  fellows. 

For  Herb  Heyneker? 

Herb  Heyneker  and  Paco  Bolivar.  And  I  think  we  had  a  little  bit  of 
support  for  the  general  operating  funds  of  the  laboratory.  But  it 
was  difficult  to  deal  with  the  criticisms  and  the  tension  and  the 
notoriety.  It  was  very  distracting  to  me. 

Did  it  interfere  with  your  research? 

It  may  have.  Over  a  period  of  time,  I  felt  ostracized.  I  resented 
the  treatment  that  I  got  in  the  department.  There  were  people  that 
were  supportive,  so  it  wasn't  universal.  John  Watson  and  Dan  Santi 
were  very  supportive.  But  it  wasn't  easy. 

I  can  imagine . 

It  wasn't  easy.  And  the  way  the  attacks  went,  I  felt  like  I  was  just 
a  criminal.  But  I  always  felt  that  what  I  was  doing  was  right.  I 
didn't  think  I  was  doing  anything  unethical  or  immoral.  I  never 
dreamed  that  the  financial  rewards  would  amount  to  what  they  did.  The 


99 


potential  was  there,  but  I  never  thought  about  it.  Bob  and  I  had 
started  out  with  50  percent  of  the  stock  apiece,  and  then  it  got 
diluted  out.  But  I  never  in  my  wildest  dreams  ever  thought  it  would 
amount  to  anything.  That's  another  example  of  my  naivete. 

But  the  money  was  not  a  driving  factor.  To  me,  it  was  the  excitement 
and  challenge  to  do  something  like  this .  It  was  an  opportunity  to 
take  the  technology  and  the  science  to  some  pragmatic  level,  which  a 
lot  of  people  never  had  the  opportunity  to  do.  So  I  didn't  have  the 
same  perception  that  my  critics  did  of  what  I  was  doing.  Of  course, 
[laughs]  you  never  agree  with  your  critics. 

But  nevertheless,  for  whatever  reason,  rightly  or  wrongly,  it  did 
create  a  lot  of  anxiety  on  my  part.  I  don't  think  there  was  a  lot  of 
dissension  in  the  department.  I  think  all  the  dissension  was  directed 
at  me,  so  I  don't  think  that  there  were  factions  that  were  neutral, 
anti,  and  pro,  that  were  going  at  each  other.  I  think  larger  groups 
of  people  that  thought  I  was  doing  the  wrong  thing  would  get  together 
and  bitch  and  moan  about  things.  But  that's  my  recollection  of  the 
situation. 


Issues  Arising  from  Faculty  Relationships  with  Industry 

Hughes:    Were  there  policy  changes  that  came  out  of  the  Academic  Senate 

investigation?  Was  there,  for  example,  definition  of  the  relationship 
that  a  faculty  member  should  have  with  a  commercial  concern? 

Boyer:     I  think  you  should  ask  all  the  other  members  of  the  department  that 
have  started  companies,  [laughter]  And  those  that  have  commercial 
relationships.  I  would  imagine  that  many  of  them  are  involved  today. 

Hughes:    I  was  actually  meaning  in  a  more  formal  sense.  Did  the  university  set 
up  guidelines  about  consultancies  and  corporate  relationships? 

Boyer:     I'm  not  sure  there  have  been  any  formal  changes.  I  should  know  about 
that  as  a  director  of  the  UCSF  Foundation.  There  has  been  some 
discussion,  if  a  company  is  born  out  of  a  university  laboratory  and  a 
university  faculty  member,  that  the  university  should  be  rewarded 
with  a  stock  position  in  the  company.  I  think  that  must  have  its  own 
problems  associated  with  it  as  well,  but  the  evolution  has  been 
towards  a  more--I  hate  to  use  the  word  liberal—interpretation  of  the 
relationship  between  the  scientists  and  the  companies. 


100 


I  would  be  the  critic  now  to  say  that  one  has  to  be  on  guard  about 
conflicts  of  interest  in  industrial  relationships.  I  think  the 
conflicts  are  there,  especially  on  the  clinical  side.  I  think  there 
are  big  problems  on  the  clinical  side,  and  that  has  been  dealt  with 
in  the  past.  I  think  there  are  occasional  examples  of  real  conflicts 
of  interest  between  industry  or  pharmaceutical  companies  and 
universities,  but  I  don't  think  they  are  any  more  numerous  or 
prevalent  than  the  instances  of  plagiarism  and  scientific  misconduct 
solely  within  the  context  of  the  university.  It's  just  humankind's 
nature  to  do  misdeeds  and  cut  corners  and  things  like  that.  You  only 
have  to  guard  against  them. 

Hughes:    When  you  talk  about  potential  problems  in  the  clinical  area,  what  are 
you  thinking  of? 

Boyer:     I  think  there  have  been  some  changes  in  regulations,  and  I'm  not  sure 
at  what  level,  whether  it's  just  at  the  university  or  whether  it's 
done  by  NIH.  But  the  potential  and  the  actuality  of  conflict  of 
interest  have  been  in  cases  where  a  company  will  engage  a  clinical 
department  or  professor  at  a  university  hospital  to  conduct  clinical 
trials.  If  the  clinicians  are  given  the  opportunity  to  obtain  stock 
options  or  whatever,  that's  a  real  potential  conflict.  I  think  there 
have  been  some  guidelines,  rules,  regulations,  legislation--! 'm  not 
sure  exactly  to  what  extent  —  to  guard  against  that.  There  have  been 
some  charges  that  I've  read  about  in  which  this  has  occurred.  I  don't 
know  how  real  it  is,  but  the  potential  is  certainly  there. 

That  sort  of  thing  is  not  going  to  go  on.  My  feelings  in  relation  to 
scientific  misconduct  are,  if  a  scientist  or  clinician  or  whatever  is 
going  to  falsify  or  plagiarize,  that  type  of  activity  will  not  go 
unnoticed.  If  his  publication  or  whatever  is  going  to  have  any  impact 
at  all  in  science,  you  immediately  find  out  whether  it's  right  or 
wrong.  And  if  the  guy  is  falsifying  his  data,  or  if  he  continues  to 
falsify  his  data  and  passes  it  off  in  the  scientific  literature,  he 
gets  the  reputation  of  either  not  knowing  what  he's  doing  or  actually 
falsifying  material.  And  then  he's  essentially  eliminated  from  the 
scene.  There's  a  certain  waste  of  money,  but  I  don't  know  how  to 
guard  against  it. 

## 


101 


Hughes:    I  think  the  major  concern  of  the  Academic  Senate  committee  was  the 
potential  for  impedance  of  the  flow  of  information.  Have  you  been 
aware  that  with  the  rise  of  the  biotech  industry  there  has  been  a 
change  in  information  flow  in  academia? 

Boyer:     My  general  perception  is  that  this  is  not  an  attribute  of  the 

institution  but  of  individuals.  I've  known  scientists  in  academic 
institutions  that  won't  tell  anybody  what  they're  doing,  and  they 
swear  their  laboratory  assistants  and  fellows  and  students  not  to  say 
anything  to  anybody  until  the  work  is  published,  because  they  don't 
want  to  be  scooped.  I'm  sure  there  are  instances  in  pharmaceutical 
companies  and  other  industries  in  which  people  don't  want  their 
competitors  to  know  what  they're  doing  until  they've  done  it.  I  think 
it's  a  matter  of  choice,  and  I  think  any  individual  or  any 
institution  has  the  right  to  do  that. 

I  think  the  idealistic  attitude,  which  I  agree  with--I  do  it  myself -- 
is  to  openly  discuss  ideas  and  results  with  people.  Sometimes  you 
tell  people  what  you're  doing.  I'm  not  talking  about  myself,  but  I 
know  of  instances  where  people  will  hear  information  and  they'll  run 
back  to  their  laboratories,  and  they've  got  a  major  group  of  people 
that  they  can  put  on  a  problem,  and  they'll  solve  the  problem  before 
the  source  of  the  information  has  an  opportunity  to  do  it.  That's 
happened  on  numerous  occasions,  I'm  sure. 

So  the  give  and  take  in  science  is  a  choice.  It's  an  extremely 
efficient  way  to  conduct  science.  One  of  the  most  enjoyable  things 
about  science  is  talking  to  other  scientists  about  what  you're  doing. 
Their  criticisms,  their  reactions,  are  extremely  valuable  in  terms  of 
how  you  conduct  your  research:  You  didn't  think  of  this;  you  didn't 
think  of  that.  Those  interactions  are  extremely  valuable  and  aid  the 
process  of  scientific  investigation  immensely. 

But  everyone  has  the  right  to  be  secretive  about  what  they're  doing. 
Anything  I  did  at  UCSF  based  on  a  contract  with  Genentech  was  not 
secretive,  I  can  assure  you  that.  Herb  Heyneker  talked  to  everybody. 
He'd  talk  to  the  guy  on  the  street  corner  waiting  for  a  bus  about 
what  he  was  doing. 


102 


Boyer  Speaks  Out  at  the  Gordon  Conference.  June  1973 

Hughes:     [laughs]  Well,  you  have  that  reputation,  too,  at  least  according  to 
Mary  Betlach.1  She  also  discussed  the  Gordon  Conference  on  Nucleic 
Acids  in  June  of  '73  when  you  first  publicly  talked  about  what  has 
become  known  as  the  Cohen-Boyer  experiment.  I  read  that  you  and  Dr. 
Cohen  had  an  arrangement  that  neither  of  you  would  talk  about  any  of 
this  work  until  it  was  published  in  the  PNAS  [Proceedings  of  the 
National  Academy  of  Sciences].2  But  you  did.  So  I  asked  Mary  about 
that,  and  she  said  something  to  the  effect- -and  I'm  paraphrasing- - 
"Well,  Herb  always  wanted  to  talk  about  what  he  was  doing.  He 
probably  got  enthusiastic  and  just  talked  about  it."  Do  you  remember 
that? 

Boyer:     I  don't  remember  that  arrangement  with  Stan.  However,  Stanley  was 
reasonably  secretive  about  what  he  was  doing. 

Hughes:    That  was  his  general  demeanor? 

Boyer:     That  was  his  nature,  and  he  didn't  want  to  talk  about  it  until  it  was 
in  print  or  published.  I'm  sure  I  told  him  that  I  was  going  to  talk 
about  this.  This  was  an  important  meeting,  and  this  was  the  sort  of 
place  where  you  wanted  to  talk  about  things  like  that;  you  wanted  to 
get  the  feedback.  I'm  sure  I  probably  told  Stanley  I  was  going  to  do 
it,  that  I  wanted  to  talk  about  it. 

Hughes:    I  wasn't  really  meaning  to  pinpoint  you  on  that  particular  point- - 
Boyer:     No,  no,  I  understand. 

Hughes:    --but  rather  to  ask  if  your  general  way  of  handling  scientific  data 
was  to  be  open  with  it. 

Boyer:     I  have  a  hard  time  not  talking  about  something  like  that. 

Hughes:    Isn't  the  point  of  the  Gordon  conferences  to  share  information  in  an 
informal  setting?  Was  there  a  stipulation  that  you  couldn't  talk 
about  what  wasn't  published? 


:See  previously  cited  ROHO  interview  with  Mary  Betlach. 

2John  Lear  reports  that  Dr.  Boyer  "got  up  and  spilled  the  beans"  at  a 
Gordon  conference  session  titled  "Bacterial  Restriction  Enzymes  and  the 
Analysis  of  DNA."  John  Lear,  Recombinant  DNA,  69-70. 


103 


Boyer:     No. 


Publicizing  Scientific  Results  Before  Publication 

Hughes:    Do  you  remember  the  article  in  the  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  in 
which  Stanford's  press  agent  talked  about  gene  cloning  by  press 
conference?1 

Boyer:     I  don't  remember  that. 

Hughes:    Well,  it  was  a  reaction  not  just  to  Genentech's  press  conferences; 
there  had  been  several  others.  Biogen  had  had  a  press  conference  in 
relation  to  the  interferon  work,  and  UCSF  had  had  press  conferences 
about  gene  cloning.  The  point  he  made  was  that  the  pattern  in  science 
up  until  that  time  was  that  research  should  be  published  in  a  peer- 
reviewed  journal  before  it  was  released  to  the  press. 

Boyer:     I  think  that  was  generally  accepted.  I  couldn't  swear  to  this,  but  I 
thought  the  paper  on  somatostatin  had  been  accepted  for  publication. 
I  remember  one  press  conference  at  UCSF,  and  there  was  one  at  City  of 
Hope.  I'm  pretty  sure  that  the  one  at  UCSF,  the  paper  was  in  print  or 
had  been  accepted. 

Hughes:    Well,  I  can  give  you  the  dates-- 

Boyer:     You're  not  going  to  go  out  on  a  limb  and  hold  a  press  conference 

unless  you  know  the  work  has  been  accepted  or  will  be  published.  I 
don't  think  we  ever  did  that.  I  don't  know  about  other  press 
conferences.  And  I  think  I  only  did  one. 

Hughes:    Genentech  held  a  press  conference  to  announce  the  first  complete 

synthesis  in  bacteria  of  a  human  protein,  somatostatin,  on  1  December 
1977. 2 

Boyer:     I  don't  know  when  that  paper  was  published,  but  I  do  believe  it  had 
been  accepted,  because  I  remember  being  in  Washington  at  the  Science 
office  going  over  galley  proofs,  I  think  it  was  November  [1977].  I 


Andreopoulos,  "Gene  Cloning  by  Press  Conference,"  New  England 
Journal  of  Medicine  302,  no.  13  (1980):  743-45. 

2The  somatostatin  press  conference  took  place  1  December  1977.  The 
Science  paper  was  published  eight  days  after  the  press  conference  and  one  month 
after  the  Stevenson  committee  hearings.  K.  Itakura,  R.  Crea,  et  al., 
"Expression  in  Escherichia  coli  of  a  Chemically  Synthesized  Gene  for  the 
Hormone  Somatostatin,"  Science  198  (9  December  1977):  1056-63. 


104 


had  already  talked  about  the  work  at  the  Roche  Institute  [of 
Molecular  Biology]  when  Stanley  and  I  got  the  V.  D.  Mattia  Award  in 
1977. 

Hughes:    On  September  6,  1978,  there  was  another  press  conference,  which  I 

believe  was  held  at  the  City  of  Hope,  on  the  expression  of  the  gene 
for  human  insulin.1 

Boyer:  Yes. 

Hughes:  Were  you  there? 

Boyer:  I  was  there.  I  didn't  say  anything,  but  I  was  there. 

Hughes:  What  was  the  atmosphere? 

Boyer:     A  circus,  [laughter]  I  can't  remember  much  about  it.  We  had  Dennis 
Kleid  and  Dave  Goeddel  and  Art  Riggs  and  Itakura  and  some  other 
people  who  were  involved  in  that  research.  I  was  not  involved  in  it. 
I  was  not  a  co-author  on  that  paper.  It  was  held  at  the  City  of  Hope 
to  give  the  City  of  Hope  a  little  P.R.  For  some  reason  or  other, 
Dennis  Kleid  was  talking  to  the  press  and  answering  questions.  I 
think  he  gave  them  a  description  of  what  was  going  on.  We  had  to  get 
him  off  the  podium,  because  he's  such  a  loose  cannon,  [laughter] 
Dennis  sometimes  just  doesn't  think  before  he  answers  questions;  he 
gets  it  all  screwed  up.  So  we  were  trying  to  get  him  off  the  podium 
and  get  somebody  up  there  to  take  over. 

There  were  some  officials  from  City  of  Hope,  and  there  was  a 
physician-scientist  at  City  of  Hope--I  can't  remember  his  name  now-- 
but  he  was  one  of  the  father  figures  in  the  field  of  insulin  and 
insulin  therapy.  He  got  up  and  gave  a  little  spiel. 

This  sort  of  thing  was  more  for  the  company's  recognition  and  for  the 
institution's  recognition.  I  always  hated  these  things.  I  couldn't 
stand  to  do  that.  I  sort  of  got  talked  into  it. 


Bronson,  "Bacteria  Induced  to  Produce  Insulin  Identical  to  Human" 
The  Wall  Street  Journal,  7  September  1978,  p.  17.  The  press  conference  is 
described  in  Hall,  Invisible  Frontiers,  266,  267. 


105 

Hughes:    So  the  message  was  for  the  public  and  for  investors? 

Boyer:     That's  what  I  meant.  It  was  for  the  public  and  the  investors.  Also 
for  the  institution. 

Hughes:    It  was  not  the  way  you  would  address  the  scientific  community. 

Boyer:     No.  Now,  hell,  you  see  all  the  time  UCSF  and  other  institutions  have 
press  conferences  and  news  clips  and  whatever.  I  don't  have  any 
problem  with  that.  I  think  you're  always  confronted  with  the  issue  of 
trying  to  educate  the  public. 

Hughes:    Well,  you  ran  into  trouble  because  you  were  a  pioneer  in  these  areas. 
It  took  people  awhile  to  come  around  to  these  ideas. 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    So  you  got  the  flak. 

Boyer:     Yes,  I  got  the  flak,  [laughter]  Well,  that's  all  right.  Looking  back 
on  it,  as  difficult  as  it  was,  I  wouldn't  change  anything.  I  never 
thought  about  being  a  pioneer  at  the  time,  if  that's  the  correct 
description  of  what  I  did.  I  wouldn't  change  anything.  And 
disregarding  all  the  angst  and  depression  associated  with  it,  it  was 
pretty  exciting,  too.  It  was  a  real  manic-depressive  time. 

Hughes:    Well,  that's  a  good  point  to  stop. 


Details  of  the  Cohen-Boyer  Collaboration 

[Interview  5:  July  22,  1994 ]## 
Authorship 

Hughes :    Were  there  ever  problems  coordinating  what  was  going  on  in  your  lab 
and  Dr.  Cohen's? 

Boyer:     No,  the  coordination  was  quite  good,  actually,  because  one  of 

Stanley's  postdoctoral  fellows,  Annie  Chang,  lived  in  the  city.1  She 
would  bring  materials  and  take  things  back,  and  that  sort  of 
arrangement  worked  very  well.  No,  it  wasn't  difficult  at  all.  We 
each  did  certain  parts  of  the  experiments,  and  then  we  got  together 
and  wrote  the  paper.  The  only  problem  we  ever  had  was  when  we  were 


LAt  the  time,  Annie  Chang  was  a  laboratory  technician.  She  later  earned  a 
doctorate. 


106 

trying  to  decide  the  authorship  of  the  paper.  We  had  some  serious 
discussions  about  how  to  do  that.  But  it  all  worked  out. 

Hughes:    Do  you  care  to  elaborate  on  the  order  of  authors? 

Boyer:     Stanley  wanted  to  have  a  very  prominent  place  in  the  list  of 

authorships.  I  felt  there  were  several  ways  to  deal  with  it.  So  we 
ended  up  with  a  compromise,  but  it  was  no  big  deal. 

Hughes:    Why  is  Annie  Chang  second  author? 

Boyer:     I  can't  remember  how  we  decided  to  do  it.  Usually  the  two  positions, 
or  at  least  in  bygone  days,  the  positions  of  recognition  were  either 
the  first  or  the  last.  So  I  think  what  Stanley  and  I  compromised  by 
putting  our  names  in  the  middle.  I  can't  even  remember  what  the 
order  was  now. 

Hughes:    The  order  on  the  first  paper  is  Cohen,  Chang,  Boyer,  and  Helling. 

And  for  the  second  paper,  it's  Morrow,  Cohen,  Chang,  Boyer,  Goodman, 
Helling. 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Was  there  a  logic  to  the  first  order? 

Boyer:     No.  I  don't  remember  anything  about  it.  It  didn't  make  any 

difference,  because  the  laboratories  were  both  equally  represented. 
Subsequent  attribution  of  the  work  was  to  Stan  and  myself,  so  it 
really  didn't  make  any  difference.  It  was  sort  of  silly,  but  that's 
the- way  people  are.  [laughter] 

I  don't  know  whether  anybody's  interested  in  this,  but  Howard 
Goodman's  name  wasn't  on  the  first  paper,  because  Stan  Cohen  was 
very  insistent  that  it  not  be  on  there.  And  actually,  Howard  really 
didn't  do  anything  with  respect  to  the  actual  laboratory  work. 
Howard  and  I  had  a  collaboration,  and  Howard  had  the  expectation 
that  his  name  would  go  on  every  paper  regardless  of  whether  he  was 
actually  involved  with  it  or  not.  Stanley  was  very  insistent,  since 
Howard  hadn't  done  anything  on  the  first  paper,  that  his  name  not  be 
included. 

On  the  second  paper,  I  insisted  that  he  put  Howard's  name  on  the 
paper,  even  though  he  didn't  really  do  anything.  That  was  a  very 


107 


significant- -we  talked  about  it  occasionally.  I  said,  "We've  got  to 
put  it  on  there,  because  that's  the  arrangement  that  I  have  with 
Howard."  And  subsequently,  Howard  and  I  went  our  separate  ways.  To  a 
certain  extent,  that  was  part  of  how  it  came  about. 

Hughes:    The  friction  created  by  these  encounters  caused  you  to  stop 
collaborating? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes :    Was  it  usual  in  science  to  put  your  name  on  a  paper  to  which  you 
really  hadn't  contributed? 

Boyer:     No,  it's  not  that  usual,  but  it  does  happen,  although  most  people 
would  not  do  that.  All  the  work  that  Howard  and  I  did  together,  we 
published  together.  Prior  to  this  particular  set  of  experiments,  he 
had  been  involved.  I  can't  remember,  but  I  think  since  I  set  up  the 
collaboration  with  Stan  that  we  just  did  it  ourselves  in  my  own  lab, 
and  Howard  wasn't  involved  with  it.  I  can't  remember  why.  But  yes, 
that  led  to  some  problems. 

I  think  scientists  do  have  a  lot  of  problems  with  collaborations. 
For  example,  Howard  had  a  collaboration  with  Mike  Bishop,  and  a  lot 
of  times  they  put  Howard's  name  on  their  papers,  and  they  didn't  put 
me  on.  So  I  tried  to  point  out  to  Howard—but  Howard's  idea  was  that 
that  was  different,  [laughter]  So  you  know,  the  weaknesses  and 
differences  in  personalities,  whatever.  It  happens.  A  lot  of  egos 
and  jealousies. 

Hughes:    It  happens,  and  it  also  influences  science  at  times. 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes,  it  slows  it.  You  see  it  all  the  time.  People  are  always 
fighting  about  things  —  recognition,  egos. 


Recombinant  Experiments  with  Eukaryotic  DNA 

Hughes:    Well,  I  was  interested  in  the  conclusion  to  that  first  paper,  and 
I'll  quote  if  you  don't  mind. 

Boyer:     Sure. 


108 


Hughes:     [reading]  "The  general  procedure  described  here  is  potentially 
useful  for  insertion  of  specific  sequences  from  prokaryotic  or 
eukaryotic  chromosomes  or  extra  chromosomal  DNA  into  independently 
replicating  bacterial  plasmids." 

What  interests  me  about  that  statement  is  the  mention  of  eukaryotic 
chromosomes.  Obviously,  you  were  thinking  several  steps  ahead. 

Boyer:     Yes.  Actually  we  had  been  thinking  of  it  even  before  we  did  those 
experiments,  trying  to  rationalize  and  develop  technologies  for 
recombining  DNA  in  vitro.  It  was  something  that  at  least  I  had  been 
thinking  about .  It  was  fairly  obvious  at  that  stage  when  we  did  that 
first  set  of  experiments  that  it  was  possible.  But  there  were  a 
couple  of  serious  questions  that  had  to  be  dealt  with,  which  we  did 
deal  with  in  the  second  paper. 

Hughes:    I  can  see  that  the  actual  recombinant  procedure  itself  would  not  be 
a  theoretical  problem.  Presumably,  DNA  would  splice  with  any  DNA. 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    But  was  not  actual  replication  in  E.  coli  a  question  in  your  mind? 

Boyer:     Well,  there  were  several  issues  that  we  had  to  deal  with.  One  was 
whether  or  not  eukaryotic  DNA  had  some  signal  or  sequence  in  it 
which  would  prevent  it  from  replicating  in  E.  coli.  There  were  known 
to  be  certain  variations  in  eukaryotic  sequences  not  present  in 
prokaryotes,  for  example.  And  that  was,  I  think,  the  most 
theoretical  component  of  it.  I  never  had  any  doubt  that  it  would 
replicate. 

The  big  problem  we  had  in  those  days  was  that  when  we  did  the  first 
paper,  where  we  recombined  plasmid  fragments,  we  selected  for  genes 
from  the  two  different  plasmids,  so  we  could  pull  the  needle  out  of 
the  haystack  very  nicely.  Now,  we  didn't  know  the  frequency  of  the 
events  for  molecular  recombination.  So  when  we  went  to  eukaryotic 
DNA,  at  least  in  the  early  days,  we  couldn't  select  for  recombinant 
plasmids  in  bacteria  that  carried  the  eukaryotic  DNA.  So  we  had  a 
concern  about  just  how  efficient  the  in  vitro  recombination  would 
be,  and  how  easily  we  could  recover  a  recombinant  plasmid,  since  we 
could  only  select  for  the  plasmid  DNA. 


109 


So  if  you  have  a  million  plasmid  DNA  molecules,  you  can  select  for 
those  after  you  recombine  them  with  themselves.  But  we  didn't  know 
when  those  plasmids  transform  the  bacteria,  how  many  would  carry  the 
eukaryotic  DNA.  So  we  just  did  a  blind  screening.  We  selected  for 
the  plasmid,  and  then  we  would  take  the  resulting  transformants  and 
examine  them  for  a  piece  of  the  eukaryotic  DNA,  which  had  been  well 
characterized  so  we  could  identify  it  quite  handily. 

Hughes:    How,  precisely,  were  you  making  the  identification?  Because  you 
didn't  have  sequencing  techniques  yet,  did  you? 

Boyer:     Yes,  the  sequencing  data  was  available,  although  we  didn't  do  it. 
The  choice  of  eukaryotic  DNA  was  critical  in  this  case.  We  just 
didn't  take  a  random  DNA.  The  reason  we  took  the  frog  DNA,  the 
Xenopus  laevis  DNA,  was  because  at  certain  stages  in  the  development 
of  the  frog,  there  is  an  amplification  of  the  ribosomal  DNA  genes. 
They're  repeated  hundreds  of  times  over.  Because  of  the  differential 
in  the  base  composition  of  that  amplified  DNA,  it  could  be  purified 
away  from  the  background  of  chromosomal  DNA. 

This  work  had  been  done  primarily  in  Don  Brown's  lab  at  Carnegie 
Institution  in  Baltimore.  He  had  given  some  of  that  DNA  to  John 
Morrow,  who  was  at  Stanford.  He  was  a  graduate  student  of  Paul 
Berg's.1  When  I  presented  the  first  work  at  the  Gordon  conference 
[June  1973],  John  was  there.  He  was  still  finishing  up  his  thesis. 
We  were  talking  after  the  discussion  of  my  paper,  and  I  said,  "The 
next  thing  I  want  to  do  is  clone  some  eukaryotic  DNA.  But  we  have  to 
find  the  right  type  of  DNA."  We  didn't  want  to  use  DNA  tumor  virus, 
which  would  have  served  the  purpose  equally  well,  because  of  concern 
regarding  the  potential  biohazard. 

John  said,  "Well,  I've  been  looking  on  Xenopus  laevis  amplified 
ribosomal  DNA.  I  know  it's  cut  with  the  Rl  enzyme,  and  you  get 
discrete  fragments  of  known  size."  So  I  said,  "Gee,  that's  great. 
That's  a  potential  eukaryotic  DNA  fragment  to  be  cloned."  John  said 
he'd  give  us  some  of  the  DNA.  I  said,  "Well,  since  you  did  some  of 
the  original  work,  why  don't  you  join  us  on  the  paper?"  I  asked 
Stanley  about  it,  being  sensitized  that  way.  [laughter]  And  Stanley 
agreed  to  that.  Of  course,  John  was  at  Stanford  also.  So  that's  how 
we  chose  the 


'For  Berg's  view  of  this  episode,  see  the  previously  cited  ROHO  oral 
history. 


110 


Xenopus  laevis  DNA- -because  it  had  been  characterized  with  respect 
to  size. 

And  then  the  other  thing  we  had  was,  since  it  was  a  gene  for 
ribosomal  RNA,  we  could  hybridize  ribosomal  RNA  to  the  plasmids  and 
show  that  they  indeed  were  carrying  the  genes  for  the  ribosomal  RNA. 
So  that  was  the  key  thing. 

And  it  turns  out  that  in  those  experiments ,  we  tried  to  set  up  the 
in  vitro  recombination  so  that  it  had  a  good  chance  of  working,  but 
we  just  didn't  know  for  sure  how  good  that  was.  But  I  think  about  5 
to  10  percent  of  the  plasmid  transformants  actually  carried  the 
fragment. 


DNA  Fragment  Closure  Rates 

Boyer:     See,  the  problem  with  in  vitro  recombination  is--this  is  a  little 
technical—it '  s  all  based  on  the  concentration  of  ends  of  the  DNA. 
So  if  you  have  a  very  small  piece  of  DNA,  it  can  close  on  itself 
very  quickly,  because  of  the  fact  that  one  end  is  always  close  to 
the  other  in  the  concentration- -the  shorter  the  molecule,  the  higher 
the  concentration  of  the  ends  within  a  molecule. 

So  what  you  have  to  do  is,  if  you  know  the  sizes  of  the  fragments  of 
DNA  or  have  some  estimate  of  them,  you  try  to  match  the 
concentration  of  the  ends  of  the  plasmids  with  the  ends  of  other 
fragments,  so  that  they'll  have  a  very  high  probability  of  finding 
another  fragment  of  DNA  and  ligating  together,  rather  than  closing 
up.  If  you  have  very  small  molecules,  they  just  close  up  so  quickly, 
you  can't  put  anything  into  them.  So  that  was  the  problem  that  most 
seriously  concerned  us. 

Hughes:    Had  that  problem  arisen  in  the  earlier  experiments? 

Boyer:     No,  because  we  could  select  for  the  molecule,  so  you  could  get  one 
in  a  million  certainly  very  easily.  So  that  was  it. 

Actually,  Howard  and  myself  and  a  postdoctoral  fellow,  Achilles 
Dugaiczky,  published  a  paper.1  We  did  a  whole  series  of  experiments 
on  closure  rates  and  intramolecular  collisions. 


'A.  Dugaiczky,  H.  W.  Boyer,  H.  M.  Goodman,  "Ligation  of  £coRl 
Endonuclease-generated  DNA  Fragments  into  Linear  and  Circular  Structures, 
Journal  of  Molecular  Biology  96  (1975):  171-84. 


Ill 


The  Species  Barrier 

Hughes:    Implicit  in  the  Xenopus  work  is  the  breach  of  the  conceptual  barrier 
between  the  prokaryotes  and  the  eukaryotes.  Was  that  an  issue  at 
all?  Was  it  an  issue  for  you? 

Boyer:     It  wasn't  an  issue  of  mine.  I  think  that  barrier  is  largely 

artificial  and  just  based  on  precedent  and  prejudice.  Prokaryotes 
and  eukaryotes  are  supposed  to  be  different,  but  how  different?  All 
living  organisms  share  some  common  origin.  Prokaryotes  and 
eukaryotes  diverged  a  long  time  ago.  The  question  I  had  was  whether 
or  not  there  was  something  in  the  eukaryotic  DNA  sequence  which 
couldn't  be  replicated  by  the  bacteria. 

Hughes:    Yes.  So  nobody  looked  at  this  work  as  being  iconoclastic,  tearing 
down  this  old  concept? 

Boyer:     No.  I  think  that  concept  went  back  to  the  animal  husbandry  days  in 

which  a  species  was  defined  as,  if  two  organisms  that  appeared  to  be 
related  could  not  produce  offspring,  they  would  represent  two 
different  species.  So  this  species  barrier  was  sort  of  an  artificial 
Linnean  concept. 

Hughes:    The  idea  that  the  species  barrier  is  supposed  to  be  inviolate  crops 
up  a  bit  later,  as  we  have  discussed,  in  some  of  the  arguments 
against  recombinant  technology. 

Boyer:     I  think  it's  a  specious  argument --pardon  the  pun. 


Preparing  Purified  Plasmid  DNA 


Hughes:    Did  the  technicians,  Annie  Chang  and,  in  your  lab,  Mary  Betlach, 
play  any  more  significant  role  in  this  work  than  was  customary? 

Boyer:     No,  but  their  expertise  and  technical  skills  were  critical.  In  those 
days,  preparing  purified  plasmid  DNA  was  a  chore.  Now  you  can  make 
plasmid  DNA  from  a  few  microliters  of  bacterial  cells;  in  those  days 
we  did  liters.  It  was  a  major  undertaking,  a  lot  of  work. 

Hughes:    Why  was  it  made  in  such  large  amounts? 


112 


Boyer:     We  just  didn't  know  how  to  do  it  on  a  small  scale.  It  came  quickly, 
but  in  the  early  days,  that  was  the  way  everybody  did  it.  If  you 
wanted  to  make  plasmid  DNA,  you  made  a  couple  of  liters  of  cells  and 
did  the  purification.  Everything  improved  very  quickly  after  that. 
Once  everybody  had  to  do  it,  then  everybody  was  trying  to  figure  out 
a  faster  way  to  do  things. 

Hughes:    Including  your  lab. 
Boyer:     Yes. 

Diffusion  of  Recombinant  DNA  Technology 

Hughes:    Do  you  remember  which  specific  lab  groups  took  up  this  technology  in 
the  very  earliest  days? 

Boyer:     Oh,  I  can't  think  of  all  of  them,  but  there  were  some  people  I  knew 
who  got  involved.  Don  Helinski's  lab  at  UC  San  Diego  immediately  got 
in  touch  with  me  and  he  sent  some  people  up  from  his  lab,  because  he 
had  been  working  with  a  small  plasmid  called  colicine  El.  We 
developed  from  that  plasmid  replication  bases  for  the  series  of  pBR 
plasmids  that  became  the  standard  cloning  vector  for  many,  many 
years.  We  developed  those  in  my  lab.  So  Helinski's  lab  was  one  of 
them.  [Mark]  Ptashne's  lab  sent  a  postdoc  out  for  a  summer  or  a 
little  bit  more.  A  number  of  people  came  through  my  lab  who  I  can't 
remember.  Gordon  Tomkins  jumped  on  it. 

But  there  was  a  certain  hesitation,  because  of  the  Asilomar 
conference,  the  pending  NIH  guidelines  —  a  lot  of  laboratories  didn't 
jump  in  right  away,  but  soon  thereafter,  within  a  year  or  so. 

Hughes:    Was  coming  to  your  lab  to  get  hands-on  instruction  the  way  to  go? 

Boyer:     It  was  probably  the  fastest  way  to  go  early  on,  probably  for  the 
first  year.  Obviously,  not  everybody  could  come  through  the  lab. 
We  spent  a  lot  of  time  with  people  coming  and  trying  to  clone 
various  things.  We  got  involved  in  a  lot  of  collaborations  which 
were  distracting.  But  within  a  short  period  of  time,  a  year  or 
so,  the  techniques  were  commonplace.  And  then  once  people  started 
it,  other  people  made  significant  advances.  I  can't  remember 
exactly  who  it  was,  but  somebody  cloned  cDNA.  They  made,  I 


113 


think  it  was,  a  rabbit  hemoglobin  cDNA.  That  was  done  in  somebody 
else's  lab. 

And  then  [Thomas]  Maniatis  did  a  human  genome  bank,  and  they 
developed  phage  vectors  and  packaging  vectors.  It  just  sort  of 
exploded  after  about  a  year  or  two.  Although  it  might  be  that  the 
explosion  wasn't  quite  as  extensive  as  I  imagined.  But  I  have  a 
recollection  that  it  was  fairly  quick. 


Effect  of  the  NIH  Guidelines 

Hughes:    Did  the  static  after  Asilomar  put  a  damper  on  research  and  diffusion 
of  the  methodology? 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes,  no  question  about  it. 
Hughes:    Was  that  a  disappointment  to  you? 

Boyer:     It  wasn't  a  real  disappointment.  I  felt  that  it  did  slow  things 
down.  I'm  not  sure  that  it  mattered.  In  five  years,  it  probably 
didn't  make  a  hell  of  a  big  difference.  But  at  the  time,  there  was  a 
lot  of  frustration.  We  had  a  lot  to  do  anyway.  We  could  operate 
within  the  guidelines.  So  it  wasn't  that  we  didn't  have  anything  to 
do. 

Hughes:    You  said  that  you  spent  a  lot  of  time  on  developing  the  methodology. 
Was  that  somewhat  because  it  was  difficult  to  do  some  kinds  of 
research  and  it  was  a  safe  way  out  to  focus  on  methodology? 

Boyer:     The  methodology  that  we  focused  on  was  to  develop  what  was 

euphemistically  referred  to  as  a  containable  plasmid,  to  do  cloning 
in  viably  compromised  cells.  So  we  worked  to  develop  a  plasmid  that 
would  have  diminished  capacity  to  replicate  outside  of  certain 
bacterial  cells.  Then  we  used  bacteria  that  just  couldn't  survive  in 
the  real  world.  You  could  grow  them  in  the  laboratory,  but  they 
could  never  compete  if  they  got  out  of  the  laboratory. 

Hughes:    The  weakened  bacterial  strain  was  developed  elsewhere,  wasn't  it? 

Boyer:     Yes,  the  weakened  bacterium  was  E.  coli  chi  1776.  Roy  Curtiss  and 
his  lab  had  done  that.  He  proposed  that,  and  then  we  did  all  the 
testing  of  the  plasmids  in  those  bacteria--it  was  terrible.  It  was 
such  a  mess  to  work  with  those  things. 


114 


Hughes:    Why? 

Boyer:  They  were  barely  even  viable  in  the  laboratory.  To  try  to  work  with 
them  was  just  miserable--your  efficiencies  were  reduced,  and  it  was 
difficult. 

Hughes:    Was  it  a  struggle  to  keep  the  cultures  alive? 

Boyer:     All  you  needed  to  do  was  keep  the  plasmid.  You  could  make  plasmid 
preps  and  store  them  frozen. 

But  in  the  long  run,  I  don't  think  the  NIH  guidelines  made  a  big 
difference. 


Commercializing  Reagents 
Hughes:    Could  somebody  learn  the  technology  adequately  from  your  papers? 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  don't  think  there  was  any  question  about  that.  Part  of  the 
problem  in  those  days  was  that  a  lot  of  the  reagents  were  not 
available  commercially,  like  restriction  enzymes,  and  that's  what  we 
had.  We  had  a  number  of  key  restriction  enzymes  and  ligases,  and  we 
had  been  purifying  plasmids  and  developing  plasmid  vectors.  So  those 
are  key  things.  And  then  once  the  technology  got  going,  there  was  a 
need  to  provide  these  things  commercially.  Nobody  purifies  their 
restriction  enzyme  today;  they  buy  them.  They  buy  the  cloning  kits, 
and  the  vectors,  and  all  of  that.  It's  a  big  business  now. 

Hughes:    Was  there  more  than  one  company  that  came  in  initially  with  those 
products? 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  can't  remember  which  one  was  first.  I  actually  went  back  to 

Miles  Laboratory,  and  I  think  they  were  the  first  ones  to  supply  the 
Rl  enzyme.  I  went  back  and  showed  them  how  to  make  the  Rl  enzyme, 
because  I  was  tired  of  giving  it  to  everybody,  [laughter]  I  wanted 
to  get  somebody  else  to  do  it  for  me. 

Hughes:    And  they  did  commercialize  it? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    And  probably  very  successfully,  in  a  monetary  way. 


115 


Boyer:     I  don't  know. 

Hughes:    Do  you  remember  when  that  was? 

Boyer:     That  must  have  been  '74,  '75.  I  went  back  to  Elkhart,  Indiana,  for 
three  or  four  days. 

And  then  one  of  the  other  key  things  that  happened  soon  thereafter 
was  that  Rich  Roberts  at  Cold  Spring  Harbor  screened  microorganisms 
for  different  restriction  enzymes  and  came  up  with  a  large  number  of 
different  types.  So  these  then  became  available  commercially  as 
well,  and  that  was  a  big  breakthrough. 

Hughes:    Well,  anything  more  on  recombinant  DNA? 
Boyer:     No,  I  think  we've  probably  overworked  it. 

The  Boyer-Cohen  Patents 

The  Process  Patent,  December  1980 

Hughes:    Now,  the  patents.  I  assume  that  the  activity  surrounding  the  patent 
application  was  centered  at  Stanford,  and  that  Niels  Reimers  was  the 
one  who  pushed  the  idea? 

Boyer:     Well,  the  story  is  as  follows:  After  we  had  published  our  paper,  I 

think  it  was  the  eukaryotic  paper,  the  Daily  Stanford  did  a  story.  I 
think  it  was  Niels  Reimers  in  the  patent  office  there.1  He  called 
Stanley  up  and  said,  "You  know,  you  should  try  to  get  a  patent  on 
this."  Stanley  said,  "We  can't  get  a  patent  on  this;  the  research  is 
supported  by  NIH."  So  Niels  pointed  out  to  him  that  that's  not  a 
restriction,  that  every  university  and  every  institution  has  a 
patent  agreement  with  NIH. 

Then  Stanley  called  me  and  said  that  the  Stanford  office  wanted  the 
patent  on  it.  I  said,  "Stan,  you  can't  patent  that;  we're  funded  by 
NIH."  I  had  the  same  misconception  that  Stan  had.  So  he  explained  to 
me,  he  said,  "No,  Niels  tells  me  that  it's  certainly  patentable."  Of 


'Boyer  refers  to  Stanford's  Office  of  Technology  Licensing.  For  Niels 
Reimers 's  perspective  on  the  Boyer-Cohen  patent  see:  "Tiger  By  the  Tail," 
Chemtech  17  (August  1987):  46A-71  and  Niels  Reimers,  "Stanford's  Office  of 
Technology  Licensing  and  the  Cohen/Boyer  Cloning  Patents,"  an  oral  history 
conducted  in  1997  by  Sally  Smith  Hughes,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The 
Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1998. 


116 


course,  the  UC  patent  office  didn't  consist  of  much  in  those  days.  I 
won't  comment  on  what  I  think  it  consists  of  these  days. 

But  in  any  case,  Stanford  got  in  touch  with  the  UC  patent  office, 
and  they  agreed  that  the  Stanford  office  would  handle  the  patent.  I 
can't  remember  the  name  of  the  lawyer  who  did  it.  They  had  a  patent 
attorney  in  the  South  Bay,  Bert  Rowland. 

And  that's  how  it  got  started.  It  was  certainly  not  Stanley's  idea 
or  my  idea  to  do  it.  Very  few  molecular  biologists  knew  anything 
about  patents,  their  place  in  science  and  business,  or  even  in  the 
vitality  of  our  country. 

So  we  initiated  this  and  Stan  and  I  spent  a  number  of  hours 
explaining  what  we  did  to  the  patent  attorney,  and  going  through  the 
technology  and  the  terminology  and  how  things  were  done,  and  helping 
him  with  the  prior  art  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  It  took  a  long  time 
to  write  the  patent.  It  was  a  ground-breaking  patent  in  a  way.  (In 
2001,  Stan  and  I  were  inducted  into  the  National  Inventor's  Hall  of 
Fame . ) l 

Hughes:    Right.  Were  you  very  aware  when  you  were  writing  it  that  this  was 
going  to  set  precedents? 

Boyer:     Yes,  Niels  told  us  it  would  probably  be  the  first  patent  that 

everything  involving  recombinant  DNA  would  encompass.  But  since  we 
had  published  a  paper  without  filing  a  patent,  it  was  not  viable 
outside  the  United  States,  or  maybe  North  America.  But  certainly  the 
patent  wouldn't  be  recognized  in  Europe;  it  was  only  viable  for 
things  done  in  the  States.  But  it's  been  a  very  lucrative  patent 
nonetheless. 

I  must  admit,  I  didn't  have  a  lot  of  patience  with  patent  law  and 
trying  to  figure  it  out.  So  I  just  told  Niels  everything  I  knew,  and 
the  guy  went  ahead  and  did  it.  Stanley  helped  him  out  quite  a  bit; 
they  were  always  working  on  it  together.  I  tossed  in  a  few  ideas. 

Hughes:    Has  it  stood  the  test  of  time? 

Boyer:     Oh,  yes.  I  don't  think  it's  been  challenged.  It  only  has  three  more 
years  to  run.  The  seventeen  years  is  almost  up. 


'Boyer  added  this  sentence  during  review  of  the  transcripts, 


117 


Hughes:    Was  your  only  hesitation  in  filing  a  patent  application 
the  legality  concerning  NIH? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    So  even  though  this  wasn't  something  that  was  done  in  molecular 

biology,  there  was  no  feeling  that  it  was  somehow  inappropriate? 

. 

Boyer:     No,  we  were  just  ignorant.  But  the  rest  of  the  scientific 
community  was  just  all  over  us,  because  they  were  ignorant 
also. 

Hughes:    For  patenting? 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  can  remember  going  to  a  meeting  on  the  East  Coast, 

perhaps  1976,  and  it  was  the  subject  of  conversation.  I  think 
Stan  was  there,  actually.  Both  of  us  were  there.  We  gave 
talks,  and  people  were  jumping  up  and  yelling,  "Is  it  true 
you're  patenting  recombinant  DNA?  How  can  you  do  that?"  Now 
everybody  has  been  educated  towards  that. 

Hughes:    What  was  their  main  concern? 

Boyer:     They  thought  that  once  it  was  patented,  that  they  couldn't 
use  it  in  their  laboratory.  It  was  just  gross  ignorance.  I 
was  ignorant  as  well  to  it,  but  necessity  called  me  to  learn 
something  about  it. 

Hughes:    I  read  that  the  licensing  fees  are  relatively  low,  and  that 
that  was  done  for  a  purpose. 

Boyer:     This  was  a  strategy  that  the  Stanford  office  came  up  with 
in  order  to  encourage  companies  to  recognize  the  patent, 
and  also  to  start  cash  flow  very  early  in  the  lifetime  of 
the  patent.  It  took  years.   Now  there  are  fairly 
substantial  worldwide  sales  based  on  this  technology,  but 


118 


that  didn't  start  until  about  ten  years  ago.  So  the 
Stanford  office  wanted  to  get  some  cash  flow  coining,  so 
for  a  fee,  the  companies  could  sign  up,  and  then  they  were 
guaranteed  that  they'd  have  a  very  reasonable  royalty  on 
any  products  they  sold.  So  it  was  negotiated  ahead  of 
time.  They  didn't  know  whether  it  was  going  to  work  or  not 
for  a  lot  of  products,  so  the  risk  fee  was  up  front  —  it 
was  like  taking  an  option.  Still  it's  been,  in  terms  of 
money,  the  best  patent  that  UC  and  Stanford  has  had. 

Hughes:    Oh,  by  far  and  away,  isn't  it? 
Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Well,  what  we've  been  talking  about  is  the  process  patent, 
right? 

Boyer:     Yes. 


The  First  Product  Patent,  August  1984 

Hughes:    And  then  there's  the  product  patent,  which  I  understand 
was  expected  to  be  awarded  approximately  two  years  later 
[1982].  And  wasn't.  There  were  several  problems. 

Boyer:     I  don't  remember  the  details. 

Hughes:    One  of  them  was  that  Helling  thought  his  name  should  be  on 
the  patent. 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    And  then  there  was  also  a  question  of  a  paper  which  had  been 
published  in  New  Scientist  on  October  25,  1973,  one  year  and 
one  week  before  the  patent  application  was  filed.1  The  paper 
was  not  written  by  any  of  the  authors  of  the  patent,  but  by 
Edward  Ziff.  This  surprised  me,  because  I  naively  assumed  that 
in  patent  law  'prior  publication1  meant  by  those  intimately 
concerned  with  the  research,  not  by  a  bystander. 


'See  Edward  Ziff,  "Benefits  and  Hazards  of  Manipulating  DNA,"  New 
Scientist  (25  October  1973):  274-5,  and  John  Elkington,  The  Gene  Factory: 
Inside  the  Genetic  and  Biotechnology  Business,  (New  York:  Carroll  &  Graf 
Publishers,  1985),  35-36. 


119 


Boyer:     No,  not  necessarily.  That's  a  strange  thing  about  patent  law. 
Hughes:    You  weren't  really  involved  in  that  problem? 
Boyer:     No. 

Hughes:    Of  course,  the  denouement  was  that  in  1984,  the  product  patent 
was  issued. 

Boyer:     Yes.  Well,  patents  are  important,  although  a  patent  position  is 
not  guaranteed.  As  one  of  my  lawyer  friends  says,  it's  nothing 
more  than  a  key  to  the  courthouse  door.  It  doesn't  guarantee 
anything.  You  have  to  defend  it,  because  it  will  certainly  be 
attacked.  But  this  one  wasn't,  I  think  because  once  people  paid 
the  fee  up  front,  that  was  sort  of  a  recognition  of  the  validity 
of  the  patent.  Patents  are  such  a  standard  operating  procedure 
now.  People  became  sensitized  to  the  value  of  patents,  the  value 
to  the  university  and  to  themselves,  and  so  now  they  are 
standard  operating  procedure. 

Hughes:    You  alluded  to  the  undeveloped  state  of  the  UC  patent  office. 
Did  this  business  accelerate  its  development? 

Boyer:     Yes,  it  did.  I  won't  say  any  more. 

Hughes:     [laughs]  I  gather  that's  a  sensitive  subject. 

Boyer:     Yes,  it  is. 


IV  SUMMARY  COMMENTS 
Boyer's  UCSF  Laboratory 

Hughes:    Well,  let's  move  to  what  I  hope  is  not  a  sensitive  subject,  and 
that's  the  general  atmosphere  in  your  laboratory  at  this  period. 
Could  you  characterize  it? 

Boyer:     Overall? 

Hughes:    Yes,  in  terms  of  the  pace  of  the  work,  and  the  degree  of 
communication  that  was  occurring. 

Boyer:     I  found  it  to  be  very  stimulating.  I  think  most  of  the  people,  not 

only  in  my  laboratory  but  other  laboratories  at  UC,  were  excited  about 
the  potential  of  the  technology,  and  all  the  things  going  on,  the 


120 


recognition.  People  worked  hard.  We  were  there  for  long  days  and  on 
weekends,  and  we'd  go  in  in  the  middle  of  the  night  to  look  at 
things.  Well,  we  talked  before  about  the  condition  of  the 
laboratories.  They  were  just  antiquated,  very  difficult  places  to 
work.  But  nevertheless,  it  was  very  exciting.  It's  probably  worse 
today,  but  the  space  constraints  were  difficult  then.  We  used  to 
put  boards  over  the  sink  so  people  would  have  a  place  to  run  gels 
and  do  experiments . 

Hughe  s :    Ama  z  ing . 

Boyer:     At  a  [laboratory]  bench  about  the  size  of  this  sofa  where  you're 
sitting,  you  had  three  people  working  there. 

Hughes:    People  willingly  gave  up  their  private  lives?  This  was  just  what 
one  did? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    The  whole  lab? 

Boyer:     Yes.  Some  people  were  more  intense  than  others.  Some  people  worked 
a  regular  day,  but  most  people  were  driven  to  extraordinary 
efforts.  There's  a  certain  drive  involved  with  this.  I  think  you 
have  a  feeling  that  you  have  to  beat  your  competitor,  and  the  only 
way  you  can  do  that  is  by  working  twice  as  hard  or  running  twice  as 
fast.  So  we  did. 

Hughes:    Yes,  you  did.  [laughs]  How  tight  a  rein  were  you  keeping  on  people 
in  your  laboratory? 

Boyer:     I  was  never  one  to  micro-manage.  In  those  days,  I  would  spend  a 
lot  of  time  talking  to  people  about  what  they  were  doing,  and 
we'd  go  over  results.  We  would  have  lab  meetings  to  talk  about 
problems  and  organization  of  the  lab. 

Hughes:    Were  they  regularly  scheduled? 

Boyer:     I  can't  remember;  I  think  they  were  at  one  point.  I  can't 

remember  much  about  the  timetable  for  that  sort  of  thing.  But 
every  day,  you  were  always  talking  about  the  experiments  to  be 
done. 


121 


Hughes 
Boyer: 
Hughes : 

Boyer: 

Hughes : 
Boyer: 
Hughes : 
Boyer: 


Was  communication  stressed  in  other  laboratories,  too? 
Yes. 

Is  this  characteristic  of  molecular  biology  in  general,  or 
is  this  a  UCSF  attribute? 

I  think  it's  fairly  characteristic  of  most  universities 
and  research  institutions.  I  think  it's  the  fuel  that 
feeds  the   engine  —  the  interaction  and  the  communication. 

At  many  levels. 

Yes. 

But  beginning  with  the  laboratory  group  itself? 

Yes. 


Hughes : 


Boyer: 


Hughes ; 


Boyer: 


Key  Technologies  for  Biotechnology 

Well,  are  there  technological  developments  that  were 
critical  in  the  recombinant  work?  You've  alluded  to  some 
of  them. 

Well,  I  believe  in  some  of  our  other  sessions  that  I've 
talked  about  the  three  key  technologies  for  biotechnology- - 
recombinant  DNA,  DNA  sequencing,  and  chemical  synthesis  of 
DNA.  So  those  were  the  three  key  ones  in  my  mind.  And  then  a 
lot  of  the  other  things  were  improvements  in  efficiency, 
opening  up  some  new  approaches  that  didn't  exist  before.  We 
developed  vectors  in  which  you  could  actually  select  for  a 
recombinant  molecule  rather  than  trying  to  screen  it.  And 
hybridization  techniques.  It  goes  on  and  on. 

You  mentioned  in  an  earlier  interview  that  there  were  problems 
working  with  messenger  RNA.  I  believe  you  were  talking  about  the 
period  in  the  mid-1970s. 

Well,  the  big  problem  early  on  was  stability.  It's  still  a  problem, 
but  not  like  it  used  to  be.  The  sensitivity  of  recovering  recombinant 
molecules  is  so  efficient  and  sensitive  now  that  some  of  those  early 


122 


problems  have  gone  by  the  wayside,  just  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that 
the  cloning  technologies  have  improved. 

Hughes:    Was  it  a  matter  of  messenger  RNA  breaking  down? 

Boyer:     Yes,  once  you  would  open  up  the  cells,  there  were  enzymes  that  would 
degrade  it  very  quickly.  Axel  Ullrich,  a  postdoc  at  UC  San  Francisco, 
worked  out  some  of  those  techniques,  to  very  quickly  lyse  the  cells 
and  inactivate  the  nucleases . 


Safety  Measures 
Hughes:    Did  you  increase  safety  measures  in  the  laboratory  after  Asilomar? 

Boyer:     I  think  we  always  felt  we  were  pretty  good  microbiologists .  I  don't 
think  that  more  than  a  handful  of  microbiologists  really  thought  any 
of  this  was  dangerous.  But  everybody  was  willing  to  comply  with  the 
guidelines.  If  you  complied  with  the  guidelines,  you  would  avoid 
legislation  which  would  have  been  disastrous.  The  key  thing  for  the 
Asilomar  conference  was  to  avoid  legislation. 

Hughes:    That  possibility  was  a  factor  in  your  testimony  and  Dr.  Rutter's  when 
you  were  called  in  front  of  the  Senate,  was  it  not? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    At  that  point,  there  were  several  bills  in  both  houses,  which  of 

course  came  to  naught,  but  there  was  a  fear  that  the  pBR322  episode 
might  trigger  legislation.  Do  you  remember  that  being  in  your  mind? 

Boyer:     Absolutely.  I  don't  think  there  could  have  been  anything  more  deadly. 

Hughes:    That  was  a  pretty  universal  feeling  in  the  scientific  community,  was 
it  not? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes:    Scientists  didn't  want  regulation  imposed  by  government? 

Boyer:     Guidelines  are  guidelines.  They  are  things  you  should  do.  If  you  don't 
do  them,  you  don't  break  any  laws.  But  I  think  everybody  essentially 
followed  them.  I  immediately  had  gotten  some  funds  and  help  from 


123 


the  Department  of  Biochemistry  to  build  a  containment  laboratory  where 
all  the  experiments  could  be  done,  so  we  had  this  done  very  early  on, 
soon  after  the  Asilomar  conference. 

Hughes:    The  P-3  lab? 

Boyer:     Yes. 

Hughes :    Where  did  those  funds  come  from? 

Boyer:     I  can't  remember.  I  think  either  from  the  department,  or  we  got  them 
from  the  School  of  Medicine.  Bill  always  had  these  mysterious  sources 
of  money. 

Hughes:    Why  did  the  threat  of  legislation  diminish? 

Boyer:     Passage  of  time  and  experience.  Nobody  ever  got  sick;  nobody  ever 

died.  More  people  died  from  electrophoresis  accidents  than  they  did 
from  recombinant  DNA.  And  I  think  that's  the  bottom  line. 

Hughes:    What  about  the  promise  of  the  technology?  You  were  right  at  the  core, 
showing  that  this  technology  really  did  have  benefits  for  society. 

Boyer:     Nevertheless,  regardless  of  how  many  benefits  you  have,  it  you  have 
some  technology  that  is  going  to  cause  serious  health  problems,  like 
radiation,  toxic  chemicals,  you  don't  ignore  the  proper  handling  and 
use  of  that  material.  You  aren't  sloppy  just  because  there  are  great 
benefits.  It  was  like  a  defense  attorney's  argument,  that  the  promise 
couldn't  be  ignored—which  it  couldn't.  But  it  didn't  mean  that  if 
there  were  potential  dangers,  if  there  were  real  dangers,  that  you 
should  not  be  aware  of  them  and  do  something  about  them. 

Working  with  microorganisms  is  intrinsically  dangerous.  If  you  isolate 
pathogenic  organisms  from  patients  or  animals,  if  you're  not  careful, 
you  can  die  very  easily.  People  have.  There's  no  question  about  it. 
Several  people  in  Yale's  virology  laboratory  died  from  Rift  Valley 
fever. 


Boyer 's  Approach  to  Science 

Hughes:    You  are  known  as  a  fine  experimentalist.  Can  you  make  any 

generalization  about  how  you  approach  a  research  problem?  What  sort  of 
steps  do  you  take? 


124 


Boyer:     I'd  have  to  think  about  that.  My  favorite  quote  for  postdocs  and 

students,  technicians  was,  "If  you  know  the  question,  you  know  half." 
Which  I  didn't  originate,  but  I  always  thought  was  a  very  thoughtful 
way  to  go  about  science.  You  have  to  raise  the  question  just  right, 
raise  a  good  question  about  phenomenology,  an  idea  that  you  can  define 
ways  in  which  to  get  an  answer. 

The  other  key  thing  about  doing  science  is  to  be  critical,  and  not  to 
prejudice  yourself.  If  you  have  a  bias  towards  the  outcome  of  an 
experiment,  you're  setting  yourself  up  for  disaster.  So  I  always  tried 
to  teach  people  in  my  lab  to  look  at  an  experiment  as  getting  an 
answer,  yes  or  no.  And  regardless  of  whether  you  got  a  yes  or  no,  it 
was  very  useful  information,  if  you  did  the  experiment  right.  Now,  the 
key  is  doing  the  experiment  right.  But  those  were  some  of  the  guiding 
principles  that  I  had. 

The  amazing  thing  about  science  is  that  you  really  don't  operate  in  a 
vacuum.  You're  always  going  to  your  colleagues,  your  students,  your 
postdocs,  and  you  try  out  an  idea  or  they  try  out  an  idea  on  you,  and 
you  try  to  find  a  hole  in  the  approach  to  the  problem,  or  what  we  call 
a  control  which  has  been  overlooked;  you  haven't  controlled  all  your 
variables.  So  it  gets  to  be  a  game:  How  do  you  convince  this  person 
that  you've  done  everything  you  can  do  to  get  a  good  solid  answer, 
whether  it's  yes  or  no?  And  if  you  haven't,  they'll  point  it  out  to 
you.  So  you  go  back  and  you  do  it.  But  that  interaction,  that  constant 
feedback,  is  very  critical  for  science. 

Hughes:    Was  that  feedback  occurring  within  the  lab  group  on  a  day-to-day 
basis? 

Boyer:     Yes.  Absolutely. 

Hughes:    Who  else  did  you  talk  with? 

Boyer:     Oh,  whomever  you  bumped  into  in  the  hall.  But  if  you  had  a  technical 
problem,  or  you  needed  equipment,  you  would  go  and  talk  to  the  person 
that  had  the  technology.  Or  if  you  needed  a  reagent,  you  would  go 
borrow  some,  trade  or-- 

Hughes:    And  were  people  pretty  good  about  giving  reagents? 
Boyer:     Some  people  weren't,  but  most  people  were. 


125 


Gordon  Tomkins  was  a  remarkable  man  because  he  was  always  willing  to 
listen  to  what  you  were  doing,  and  he  was  enthusiastic  and  excited 
about  it.  So  you  could  go  to  him  just  to  bounce  ideas  off  of  him. 
There  were  a  lot  of  people  like  that  around. 

Hughes:    Did  he  get  you  thinking  in  different  directions? 

Boyer:     Oh,  absolutely.  When  he  first  came  to  UC,  before  Stanley  Cohen  and  I 
got  together  [1972],  we  used  to  talk  about  restriction  enzymes.  In 
those  days,  there  just  weren't  very  many  people  around  interested  in 
them,  but  Gordon  was.  He  found  them  fascinating,  and  so  it  was  fun  to 
talk  to  him.  I  can  remember  just  the  two  of  us  having  a  discussion 
after,  I  think  it  was,  a  biochemistry  faculty  meeting,  and  talking 
about  wouldn't  it  be  wonderful  if  restriction  enzymes  made  staggered 
breaks,  because  you  could  get  the  sticky  ends  to  recombine. 

Hughes:  Before  the  fact? 

Boyer:  Yes. 

Hughes:  Can  you  remember  when  that  might  have  been? 

Boyer:  Oh,  probably  about  1970,  '71. 

Hughes:  That  was  Janet  Hertz's  contribution,  was  it  not? 

Boyer:     Well,  sticky  ends  were  known  a  long  time  before  that,  because  a  number 
of  viruses  will  generate  staggered  breaks  in  defined  places,  usually 
at  the  end  of  the  genome.  I  can  remember  when  I  was  at  Yale  writing  my 
first  grant  request,  talking  about  the  sticky  ends  of  lambda  [phage] , 
and  different  ways  you  could  generate  molecules  of  DNA  with  sticky 
ends  and  put  them  back  together  again.  That  was  before  restriction 
enzymes  were  discovered,  but  that's  what  I  wanted  to  do. 

So  those  are  some  of  the  things  that  are  important  for  doing  science. 
I  just  can't  overemphasize  the  value  of  interaction.  Few  scientists 
today  sit  down  and  think  of  something  new  on  their  own.  They  may  have 
an  idea,  so  that  the  concept  is  there,  but  really  to  work  it  out,  it's 
usually  a  team  effort. 


126 


Hughes:    And  then  there's  the  team  that's  preceded  you.  Ideas  are  related  to 
past  ideas. 

Boyer:     Yes.  You  can  only  build  skyscrapers  from  starting  with  the  foundation, 
no  question  about  that. 

Hughes :    What  about  the  role  of  luck  or  serendipity  or  the  irrational  elements 
of  science? 

Boyer:     I  think  serendipity  does  play  a  role,  but  I  can't  really  think  of 
anything  in  my  own  research  career  which  could  be  characterized  as 
serendipitous.  Luck  and  hard  work,  being  in  the  right  place  at  the 
right  time  —  if  that's  serendipity,  then  there's  a  lot  of  that. 
Serendipitous  usually  means  that  you  add  the  wrong  reagent,  and 
something  fantastic  happens. 

Defining  Good  Science 

Hughes:    What  about  a  definition  of  your  idea  of  good  science? 

Boyer:     Good  science?  Oh,  gosh.  1  guess  good  science  is  repeatable  science.  If 
you  can  repeat  the  experiments,  that  would  probably  be  the  key. 
Depends  on  what  you  mean  by  good.  Are  you  talking  about  major 
contributions  ? 

Hughes:    No,  I  meant  on  a  routine,  day-to-day  basis,  what  does  the  term  "good 
science"  mean?  What  are  the  elements? 

Boyer:     I  think  first  of  all  it  has  to  be  repeatable  by  people  who  just  read 
your  description  of  how  you  did  the  experiment.  Good  science  would  be 
an  experiment  or  series  of  experiments  which  lead  to  a  new  question  or 
a  new  insight.  It  would  have  to  include  something  novel,  not  just  a 
repetition,  or  a  me-too,  or  a  wannabe  as  a  reason  for  the  experiment. 
We've  always  seen  a  lot  of  that.  You  have  several  labs  working  on  a 
similar  project,  and  both  labs  will  publish  a  paper  within  a  couple  of 
weeks  or  months  of  one  another.  I  guess  that  has  some  value  in  terms 
of  an  independent  confirmation  of  a  finding. 

My  criticism  of  science  today  is  that  it's  fairly  redundant,  in  the 
sense  that  you  have  the  same  types  of  experiments  done  over  and  over  and 
over  again,  but  with  a  different  gene,  a  different  system,  a  different 
animal.  I  guess  some  of  us  are  responsible  for  that,  because  it's  done 
with  recombinant  DNA  technology.  You  see  a  lot  of  data  gathering, 


127 


and  it's  not  too  often  that  you  get  a  synthesis  of  all  of  that  data 
which  leads  to  a  new  understanding  of  a  biological  mechanism  or 
phenomenon. 

You  pick  up  a  journal,  and  you  find  you've  sort  of  heard  it  all  before, 
but  there's  just  a  new  twist  to  the  story.  But  sometimes—those  twists 
make  a  big  difference.  Newspapers  have  articles  that  interest  people  so 
that  they'll  buy  more  newspapers,  and  journals  exist  because  they 
publish  papers,  and  if  they  don't  publish  papers,  they  don't  serve 
their  function.  They're  not  going  to  make  any  money. 


Writing  and  Publishing  Papers 

Hughes:    Well,  speaking  of  publication,  how  good  were  you  at  writing  up  your 
work? 

Boyer:     Well,  I  got  better  as  time  went  on.  Experience  is  great. 
Hughes:    Did  you  have  any  particular  plan  of  attack? 

Boyer:     Some  papers  were  a  lot  easier  to  write  than  others.  Some  you  could 

write  in  a  couple  of  days;  others  would  take  weeks  or  months.  Sometimes 
you'd  start  working  on  the  paper,  and  you'd  realize  you  had  to  do  a 
couple  more  experiments.  Sometimes  that  would  change  the  whole  nature 
of  the  paper. 

I  can  remember  a  couple  of  occasions.  One  was  when  I  was  a  postdoctoral 
fellow,  and  my  mentor  Ed  Adelberg  was  guiding  me  through  writing  my 
first  paper  by  myself.  I  was  the  sole  author.  His  comment  was, 
"Remember,  you  always  have  to  lead  the  reader  down  the  garden  path,"  or 
words  to  that  effect.  You  have  to  be  very  logical  and  explain  things  in 
depth. 

Then  the  other  occasion  I  remember  very  well  is  when  I  wrote  probably 
one  of  the  most  personally  rewarding  papers.  I  submitted  it  to  the 
Journal  of  Molecular  Biology;  it  was  my  first  paper  in  the  Journal  of 
Molecular  Biology.  It  was  reviewed  by  Gunther  Stent,  who  was  the 
editor-in-chief.  Gunther  sent  me  a  note  saying  that  I  should  rewrite 
certain  parts  of  it,  because  when  he  read  it,  it  gave  him  mental 
diarrhea,  [laughter]  He  always  had  a  way  with  words.  I  didn't  think  it 
was  that  bad,  but  it  was  not  an  easy  paper  to  write. 


128 


Writing  papers  was  never  easy,  but  some  were  written  faster  than 
others. 

Hughes:    What  were  your  criteria  for  choosing  journals  to  submit  a  paper  to? 

Boyer:     Several.  One  was  based  on  subject.  One  was  how  quickly  you  could  get 
it  published.  Some  journals  have  a  little  more  pizzazz  than  others; 
some  have  a  different  readership.  If  you  had  a  dull,  technical  paper, 
you'd  put  it  in  one  journal;  if  you  had  something  you  felt  was  really 
exciting,  you'd  go  with  another  one;  if  you  wanted  it  fast,  to  beat 
the  competition,  you'd  go  to  another.  Numerous  criteria. 

Hughes:    Did  you  ever  have  trouble  getting  a  paper  published? 

Boyer:     Yes.  I  think  we  always  ended  up  publishing  them.  If  it  was  a  "me-too" 
paper,  like  a  student  had  done  a  lot  of  work  on  something,  then  I'd 
always  make  them  write  up  the  paper.  If  they  were  slow  doing  it, 
sometimes  they'd  get  beaten  out.  So  if  it  was  a  "me-too"  type  of 
paper,  you'd  go  to  some  obscure  journal,  [tape  interruption] 

Self -Assessment 

Hughes:    I'm  wondering  how  you  think  of  yourself.  How  do  you  categorize  who  you 
are? 

Boyer:     Oh,  that  changes  almost  every  day.  [laughter] 
Hughes:    Well,  how  about  today? 

Boyer:     I've  always  taken  a  great  deal  of  pride  in  not  taking  myself  too 
seriously.  I  know  that  I  was  involved  in  a  couple  of  significant 
things  in  the  biological  sciences  and  biotechnology.  That's  all  in  the 
past.  So  I  feel  a  great  sense  of  gratification,  and  I've  been  amply 
rewarded.  But  I  don't  dwell  on  it.  I  have,  as  you  know,  a  number  of 
things  that  I  like  to  do,  and  I  enjoy  doing  them.  They  don't  include 
science  that  much  anymore.  And  I'm  not  unhappy  about  not  doing  science 
anymore.  There  is  a  life  after  science. 

But  I  try  not  to  take  myself  too  seriously.  One  of  my  favorite 
contemporary  authors  is  Tom  Robbins.  He  wrote  Even  Cowgirls  Get  the 
Blues  and  Another  Roadside  Attraction,  which  were  his  earlier  works, 
and  very  good.  But  one  of  his  later  works  is  called  Jitterbug 
Perfume.  It's  a  fantasy,  as  most  of  his  works  are.  The  protagonist 


129 


in  this  story  travels  the  world  over  to  find  the  secret  of  life,  and 
somewhere  in  a  foreign  country  he ' s  looking  for  this  person  who ' s 
supposed  to  know  the  secret  of  life.  He  never  meets  up  with  this 
person,  but  he  happens  to  come  upon  an  old  dusty  farmhouse  where 
this  person  had  lived.  So  he  searches  it  to  see  if  there  were  any 
clues  about  the  secret  of  life. 

He  walks  in,  and  the  mantelpiece  is  all  covered  with  dust.  There 
written  in  the  dust  are  the  words,  "Lighten  up."  [laughter]  Which  he 
took  to  mean  the  secret  of  life.  I've  always  enjoyed  that  little 
piece.  So  that's  about  all  I  have  to  say. 

Hughes:    Well,  I  thank  you  very  much. 


Transcribed  by  Shannon  Page 
Final  Typed  by  Jessica  Stern 


130 
TAPE  GUIDE--Herbert  W.  Boyer,  Ph.D. 


Interview  1:  March  18,  1994 

Tape  1,  Side  A  1 

Tape  1,  Side  B  10 

Tape  2,  Side  A 
Tape  2,  Side  B  not  recorded  19 

Interview  2:  March  28,  1994 

Tape  3,  Side  A  25 

Tape  3,  Side  B  34 

Tape  4,  Side  A  42 

Tape  4,  Side  B  52 

Interview  3:  April  7,  1994 

Tape  5,  Side  A  55 

Tape  5,  Side  B  64 

Tape  6,  Side  A  74 

Tape  6,  Side  B  not  recorded 

Interview  4:  April  20,  1994 

Tape  7,  Side  A  84 

Tape  7,  Side  B  92 

Tape  8,  Side  A  100 

Tape  8,  Side  B  not  recorded 

Interview  5:  July  22,  1994 

Tape  9,  Side  A  105 

Tape  9,  Side  B  121 


APPENDIX 

A  Biographical  Information  and  Bibliography,  Herbert  W.  Boyer  131 

B   Cartoon  from  a  Slide  Courtesy  of  Stanley  N.  Cohen  145 

C  Cloning  Diagram  from  a  Slide  Courtesy  of  Stanley  N.  Cohen  146 
D  Documents  Concerning  Potential  Biohazards 

Singer-Soil  Letter,  Science  Magazine,  Sept.  21,  1973  147 

Berg  Letter,  Science  Magazine,  July  26,  1974  148 
"'Fail-Safe'  Plan  on  Gene  Research,"  San  Francisco 

Chronicle,  February  28,  1975  149 
"Genetic  Manipulation:  Guidelines  Issued,"  Nature  Magazine, 

July  1,  1976  151 
E  UCSF  Biosafety  Committee 

UCSF  News  Release  on  Creation  of  a  Campus  Biosafety 

Committee,  October  5,  1976  154 
Chancellor's  Letter  on  Events  in  "Modern  Biology," 

March  16,  1977  156 
F  Sculptures  Depicting  the  Initial  Meeting  of  Swanson  and  Boyer 

in  Late  1975,  with  the  Living  Originals  159 

G  UCSF  News  Release  on  the  pBR322  Incident,  September  26,  1977  160 

H  UCSF  News  Release  on  Somatostatin,  December  2,  1977  162 

I   Genentech  News  Release  on  Human  Insulin,  September  6,  1978  166 

J  UCSF/Industry  Relations,  Circa  1980  172 
K  Genentech,  Inc. 

Time  Magazine  Article,  October  20,  1980,  on  Genentech1 s 

Initial  Public  Offering,  1980  177 
"Genentech' s  Herbert  Boyer,"  Time  Magazine  Cover, 

March  9,  1981  178 

Excerpt  from  1981  Genentech  Annual  Report  179 
L   Selected  Honors 

National  Medal  of  Technology,  1989  181 

National  Medal  of  Science,  1990  183 

INDEX  185 


APPENDIX  A 

Ganentech,  inc. 
Goneniech,  Inc. 
Genentech,  inc. 
Genentech,  Inc. 

Genentech,  Inc. 


HERBERT  W.  BOYER 

MEMBER,  BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS 

Herbert  W.  Boyer,  Ph.D.  has  served  as  a  director  of  Genentech,  Inc.  since  he 
co-founded  the  company  in  1976  with  Robert  A.  Swanson,  a  venture  capitalist.  He 
also  was  a  vice  president  of  the  company  from  1976  to  1990.  A  biochemist  and 
genetic  engineer,  Boyer  had  demonstrated  the  usefulness  of  recombinant  DMA 
technology  to  economically  produce  medicines,  which  laid  the  groundwork  for 
Genentech's  development. 

In  addition  to  his  role  at  Genentech,  Boyer  was  a  professor  at  the  University 
of  California  at  San  Francisco  and  an  investigator  for  the  Howard  Hughes  Medical 
Institute.  At  the  time  Genentech  was  formed,  Boyer  was  a  professor  of  biochemistry 
and  biophysics  at  the  University  of  California  at  San  Francisco  as  well  as  the  director 
of  the  graduate  program  in  genetics.  He  has  taught  in  the  microbiology  department 
as  well. 

In  1996,  Boyer  and  Dr.  Stanley  N.  Cohen  of  Stanford  University  were 
awarded  the  Lemelson-MIT  Prize,  the  world's  single  largest  cash  prize  for  American 
invention  and  innovation,  for  discovering  recombinant  DNA  technology.    In  1993, 
Boyer,  along  with  Cohen,  was  awarded  the  prestigious  Swiss  Helmut  Horten 
Research  Award  for  their  pioneering  use  of  research  in  the  use  of  gene  technology 
in  medicine.  In  1985,  he  was  elected  to  the  California  Inventors  Hall  of  Fame  and  is 
an  elected  member  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences.  Boyer  received  the 
Golden  Plate  Award  from  the  American  Academy  of  Achievement  in  1981  and  the 
Albert  Lasker  Basic  Medical  Research  Award  in  1980.  He  is  a  Fellow  in  the 
American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences  and  received  the  Industrial  Research 
Institute  Achievement  Award  in  1982.  Boyer  is  on  several  Editorial  Boards  of 
scientific  publications  and  has  written  or  co-written  over  100  scientific  articles. 


-  more  - 


132 
2- 


Boyer  received  his  bachelor's  degree  in  biology  and  chemistry  in  1958  from 
St.  Vincent  College  in  Pennsylvania.  He  received  his  master's  and  doctorate 
degrees  in  1960  and  1963  respectively,  from  the  University  of  Pittsburgh. 

He  is  professor  emeritus  of  biochemistry  and  biophysics,  University  of 
California,  San  Francisco,  and  chairman  of  the  board,  Allergan,  Inc.,  a  technology- 
driven  global  healthcare  company. 

7/13/99  ### 


133 


Carol  Fox,  News  Director 

Source:   Robert  Sanders   (A15)  476-2557 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 
December  1989 

HERBERT  WAYNE  BOYER,  PHD 

Genetic  engineering  pioneer  Herbert  W.  Boyer,  PhD,  53,  professor  of 
biochemistry  at  the  University  of  California,  San  Francisco,  co-discovered  the 
techniques  of  recombinant  DNA  that  led  to  the  current  revolution  in  biology 
and  the  boom  in  biotechnology. 

In  collaboration  with  Stanley  N.  Cohen,  MD,  of  Stanford  University,  they 
demonstrated  that  genetic  material  from  bacteria  can  be  recombined  with 
foreign  genes  and  introduced  into  other  bacteria  as  hybrid  chromosomes. 

Boyer  joined  with  venture  capitalist  Robert  Swanson  in  1976  to  found 
Genentech,  Inc.,  to  bring  the  fruits  of  this  revolutionary  development  to  the 
marketplace.   Genentech  was  the  first  and  is  still  the  largest  gene  splicing 
firm.   Since  its  founding  it  has  produced  and  is  either  testing  or  currently 
marketing  genetically  engineered  human  insulin,  interferon,  growth  hormone, 
clotting  factors  and  numerous  other  biological  products. 

Today  hundreds  of  biotechnology  firms  employ  the  Cohen/Boyer  technique  or 
similar  techniques  to  produce  drugs,  hormones,  vaccines  and  other  useful 
products,  and  the  technique  is  an  invaluable  tool  in  basic  research  labs 
throughout  the  world. 

Boyer  and  Cohen  first  took  a  gene  from  one  bacteria  and  inserted  it  into 
another  in  1973,  but  genetic  engineering's  promise  truly  became  evident  the 
next  year,  when  they  took  a  gene  from  a  higher  species — a  toad — and  put  it 
into  bacteria. 

In  1976  they  and  other  groups  around  the  world  showed  that  synthetic 
human  genes  could  be  put  into  bacteria  as  well,  and  the  next  year  they 
succeeded  in  turning  these  bacteria  into  "factories"  to  produce  large 
quantities  of  a  potentially  useful  human  hormone,  somatostatin.   This 
work  was  done  in  collaboration  with  the  City  of  Hope  Medical  Center  in 
Duarte,  California,  as  was  the  production  in  1978  of  human  insulin 

(more) 
RSSlrsboyer 


134 
Herbert  W.  Boyer,  PhD  —  page  2 


from  bacterial  "factories."  This  work  made  possible  the  inexpensive,  large 
scale  production  of  numerous  human  proteins  like  insulin  and  human  growth 
hormone,  as  well  as  vaccines  and  other  medical  products. 

Boyer  was  born  in  Derry,  Pennsylvania,  near  Pittsburgh,  on  July  10, 
1936.   He  received  his  undergraduate  education  at  St.  Vincent  College, 
Latrobe,  Pennsylvania,  (BA  1958)  and  did  graduate  work  in  bacteriology  at  the 
University  of  Pittsburgh  (MS  1960,  PhD  1963).   Following  post-doctoral  work  in 
microbial  genetics  at  Yale  University  (1963-66),  he  came  to  UC-San  Francisco 
in  1966  as  an  assistant  professor  of  microbiology.   He  is  now  a  professor  of 
biochemistry  at  UCSF. 

Boyer  has  received  numerous  awards  and  honors,  including  the  National 
Medal  of  Technology  in  1989  and  the  prestigious  Lasker  Award  for  Basic  Medical 
Research  in  1980,  both  of  which  he  received  along  with  Cohen.   The  Lasker 
Award  is  the  highest  honor  bestowed  in  the  United  States  for  basic  and 
clinical  research  in  medicine.   He  also  is  a  member  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  and  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences.   He  was  awarded  the 
V.D.  Mattia  Award  of  the  Roche  Institute  of  Molecular  Biology  in  1977,  again 
with  Cohen,  and  the  two  were  elected  to  the  California  Inventors  Hall  of  Fame 
in  1982.   Both  received  the  Moet  Hennessy-Louis  Vuitton  Prize  in  1988  from 
France's  Institut  de  la  Vie,  and  the  first  ever  City  of  Medicine  Award  from 
the  city  of  Durham,  North  Carolina,  and  Duke  University.   Boyer  also  was  a 
Howard  Hughes  Medical  Institute  Investigator  between  1976  and  1983. 

He  currently  is  on  the  board  of  directors  of  Genentech,  Inc. 
(more  details  below) 

Boyer 's  principal  research  interest  has  been  restriction  nucleases — 
enzymes  that  cut  double-stranded  DNA  at  highly  specific  sites.   More  than  100 
different  nucleases,  each  specific  for  a  different  DNA  sequence,  have  been 
isolated  to  date  from  bacteria,  which  use  them  to  cut  up  and  destroy  foreign 
genes . 

This  interest  in  restriction  nucleases  dates  back  to  Boyer 's  graduate 
student  days,  when  he  studied  how  genes  control  the  process  in  Escherichia 
coli ,  a  human  intestinal  bacterium.   He  subsequently  moved  to  UCSF  as  an 
assistant  professor,  and  in  1969  he  and  graduate  student  Robert  Yoshimori 
isolated  and  purified  E.  coli  RI  (Eco  RI),  at  the  time  a  unique  restriction 
nuclease  because  it  turned  out  to  have  an  unusual  property — after  cutting  the 
twin  strands  of  DNA,  it  leaves  one  strand  dangling  longer  than  the  other. 
This  "sticky  end"  readily  latches  onto  a  complementary  sticky  end  of  another 
piece  of  DNA,  efficiently  joining  the  two. 

Boyer  and  Cohen  both  recognized  the  potential  of  Eco  RI .   The  sticky  ends 
could  help  insert  foreign  genes  into  strands  of  DNA  by  facilitating  linkage 
between  two  pieces  of  DNA.   Cohen  and  others  had  been  working  towards  this  end 

(more) 


135 
.Herbert  W.  Boyer,  PhD  —  page  3 


for  some  years,  hoping  to  insert  genes  into  small  free-floating  rings  of  DNA 
called  plasmids.   Plasmids  are  found  in  all  bacteria  and  typically  contain 
only  a  few  genes,  while  the  bulk  of  the  other  4000  genes  bacteria  like  E.  coli 
contain  are  carried  in  a  much  larger  ring  structure.   He  and  his  colleagues  at 
Stanford,  and  researchers  elsewhere,  had  developed  a  way  of  inducing  bacteria 
to  take  up  foreign  plasmids  and  accept  them  as  their  own,  to  the  extent  that 
they  even  replicated  when  the  bacteria  replicated. 

Cohen  and  Boyer  decided  to  work  together,  proposing  to  snip  open  a 
plasmid  with  Eco  RI ,  use  the  sticky  ends  to  insert  a  foreign  gene,  and  then 
securely  lock  the  gene  into  the  plasmid  with  the  enzyme  DNA  ligase.   They  then 
could  use  Cohen's  method  to  induce  bacteria  to  accept  the  "recombinant" 
plasmid. 

Boyer  and  Cohen  succeeded  in  1973  with  the  insertion  of  bacterial  genes 
conferring  resistance  to  antibiotics.   Results  published  that  year  reported 
the  transfer  of  genes  from  salmonella  and  staphylococcus  bacteria  to  the 
bacteria  E.  coli,  creating  in  the  recipient  bacteria  resistance  to 
streptomycin  and  several  other  antibiotics. 

The  era  of  recombinant  DNA  truly  began  the  following  year,  however,  when 
they  successfully  spliced  non-bacterial  genes  (from  the  toad  Xenopus  laevis) 
into  a  bacterial  plasmid.   When  taken  up  by  bacteria,  the  recombinant  plasmid 
replicated  as  if  it  were  a  normal  part  of  the  bacteria's  genome.   This  was  the 
first  instance  of  replication  and  transcription  of  eukaryotic  DNA  (i.e.  genes 
from  higher  organisms)  in  a  bacterium. 

The  field  progressed  rapidly  following  these  breakthroughs,  but  the 
research  also  engendered  an  unprecedented  public  debate  about  possible  risks 
in  the  experimental  manipulation  of  genes.   Many  scientists  participated  in 
these  discussions,  including  Boyer  and  Cohen.   Not  long  after  the  successes  of 
1974,  Boyer,  Cohen  and  others  joined  in  calling  for  the  temporary  voluntary 
postponement  of  recombinant  DNA  work  until  the  potential  hazards  had  been 
evaluated.   This  led  to  a  conference  at  Asilomar  in  1975,  in  which  Boyer 
participated,  and  resulted  in  NIH  guidelines  for  the  conduct  of  such  research. 

1976  saw  the  publication  by  Boyer 's  group  and  other  groups  around  the 
country  of  major  research  which,  in  Boyer ' s  words,  took  "recombinant  DNA 
technology  out  of  the  area  of  basic  science  and  into  the  area  of  practical 
application."   This  work  demonstrated  that  chemically  synthesized  human  genes, 
as  distinct  from  genes  pulled  out  of  animals  or  bacteria,  could  be  inserted 
into  bacteria  using  plasmids,  and  the  genes  could  function  as  natural 
bacterial  genes. 

These  accomplishments  signaled  the  real  possibility  of  the  economical 
production  of  scarce,  medically  useful  biological  substances. 

This  possibility  was  realized  sooner  than  anyone  expected,  and  again 
Boyer  was  involved.   In  December  1977,  the  first  successful  production  in 
bacteria  of  a  medically  useful  hormone — somatostatin — was  announced.   This  was 
accomplished  by  Boyer  and  other  scientists  at  UC-San  Francisco  and  the  City  of 
Hope  Medical  Center  in  Duarte,  California. 

The  scientific  team  used  recombinant  DNA  techniques  to  introduce  into 
bacteria  a  synthetic  gene  for  somatostatin,  which  is  involved  in  regulating 
levels  of  growth  hormone  in  humans.   The  bacteria  subsequently  produced  pure 
biologically-active  somatostatin. 


(more) 


136 
Herbert  W.  Boyer,  PhD  —  page  4 


This  work  demonstrated  that  bacteria  could  be  used  safely  as  "factories" 

to  produce  medically  needed  materials.   It  also  showed  that  bacteria  could 

produce  proteins  that,  as  far  as  the  body  could  tell,  were  identical  to 
natural  human  proteins. 

In  September,  1978,  scientists  at  Genentech  Inc.  and  the  City  of  Hope, 
using  these  techniques,  successfully  transformed  bacteria  into  "factories"  for 
insulin.   This  has  made  possible  the  inexpensive,  large-scale  production  of 
insulin  chemically  identical  to  natural  human  insulin. 

Boyer  has  continued  his  work  at  UCSF  on  restriction  nucleases, 

concentrating  primarily  on  the  nuclease  he  discovered  in  1969,  Eco  RI .   Before 
he  got  side-tracked  into  exploring  the  uses  of  recombinant  DNA,  he  was 
studying  the  manner  in  which  Eco  RI  recognizes  and  binds  to  DNA.   Now,  using 
these  same  recombinant  DNA  techniques,  he  can  pursue  this  question  by  actually 
making  genetic  changes  in  the  nuclease  and  studying  the  effect. 

In  conjunction  with  John  Rosenberg  of  the  University  of  Pittsburgh,  who 
determined  the  structure  of  the  nuclease  using  x-ray  crystallography  and 
subsequently  developed  a  computer  model  of  it,  Boyer  and  his  coworkers  select 
sites  at  which  to  make  point  mutations  in  the  gene.   The  resultant  effect  on 
the  structure  or  function  of  the  nuclease  gives  clues  to  the  function  of  the 
area  mutated.   They  have  shown,  for  example,  that  the  structure  of  DNA  is 
kinked  when  the  nuclease  binds. 

Boyer 's  group  also  is  studying  the  primitive  bacterium  Halobacterium 
halobium,  using  a  genetic  approach  to  determine  how  its  purple  pigment, 
bacteriorhodopsin,  acts  as  an  ion  pump. 


137 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1 .  Boyer,  H.,  Englesberg,  E.,  and  Weinberg,  R.  Direct  Selection  of  L-Arabinose 
Negative  Mutants  of  Escherichia  coli  Strain  B/rl.  Genetics  47,  417-425,  1962. 

2.  Englesberg,  E.,  Anderson,  R.L.,  Weinberg,  R.,  Lee,  N.,  Hoffee,  P., 
Huttenhauer,  G.,  and  Boyer,  H.  L-Arabinose-Sensitive,  L-Ribulose  5-Phosphate  4- 
Epimerase-Deficient  Mutants  of  Escherichia  coli.  J  Bacterial.  84,  137-146,  1962. 

3 .  Boyer,  H.W.  Genetic  Control  of  Restriction  and  Modification  in  Escherichia  coli. 
J.  Bacterial.  88,  1652-1660,  1964. 

4.  Weinberg,  R.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Base  Analogue  Induced  Arabinose-Negative 
Mutants  of  Escherichia  coli.  Genetics  51,  545-553,  1965. 

5.  Boyer,  H.  Conjugation  in  Escherichia  coli.  J.  Bacterial.  91,  1767  -  1772,  1966. 

6.  Sesnowitz,  S.,  Adelberg,  E.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Proflavin  Mutagenesis  in  Bacteria. 
Bad.  Proc.,  p.  26,  1966. 

7 .  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Carlton,  B.C.  Production  of  Two  Proteolytic  Enzymes  by  a 
Transformable  Strain  of  Bacillus  subtilis.  Arch.  Biochem.  Biophys.  128,  442-445, 
1968. 

8 .  Boyer,  H.,  and  Roulland-Dussoix,  D.  A  Complementation  Analysis  of  the 
Restriction  and  Modification  of  DNA  in  Escherichia  coli.  J.  Mol.  Biol .  41,  459- 
472,  1969. 

9 .  Roulland-Dussoix,  D.,  and  Boyer,  H.  The  Escherichia  coli  B  Restriction 
Endonuclease.  Biochim  Biophys  Acta  195,  219-229,  1969. 

10.  Mamelak,  L.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Genetic  Control  of  the  Secondary  Modification  of 
Deoxyribonucleic  Acid  in  Escherichia  coli.  J.  Bacterial.  104,  57-62, 1970. 

1 1 .  Ford,  E.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Degradation  of  Enteric  Bacterial  Deoxribonucleic  Acid 
by  the  Escherichia  coli  B  Restriction  Endonuclease.  J.  Bacterial.  104,  594-595, 
1970. 

12.  Boyer,  H.W.  DNA  Restriction  and  Modification  Mechanisms  in  Bacteria.  In  Ann. 
Rev.  Microbiol.,  vol.  25.  C.E.  Clifton  (ed.),  Annual  Reviews,  Palo  Alto,  1971,  p. 
153-176. 

13.  Boyer,  H.,  Scibienski,  E.,  Slocum,  H.,  and  Roulland-Dussoix,  D.  The  In  Vitro 
Restriction  of  the  Replicative  Form  of  W.  T.  and  Mutant  fd  Phage  DNA.  Virology 
46,  703-710,  1971. 

14.  Cleaver,  I.E.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Solubility  and  Dialysis  Limits  of  DNA 
Oligonucleotides.  Biochim.  Biophys.  Acta  262,  116-124,  1972. 

15.  Hedgpeth,  J.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  The  DNA  Nucleotide 
Sequence  Restricted  by  the  RI  Endonuclease.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  69,  3448- 
3452,  1972. 

16.  Yoshimori,  R.,  Roulland-Dussoix,  D.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  R  Factor-Controlled 
Restriction  and  Modification  of  Deoxribonucleic  Acid:  Restriction  Mutants.  /. 
Bacterial.  112,  1275-1279,  1972. 


138 

17.  Slocum,  H.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Host  Specificity  of  Salmonella  Typhimurium 
Deoxyribonucleic  Acid  Restriction  and  Modification.  /.  Bacterial.  113,  724-726, 
1973. 

18.  Boyer,  H.W.,  Chow,  L.T.,  Dugaiczyk,  A.,  Hedgpeth,  J.,  and  Goodman,  H.M. 
DNA  Substrate  Site  for  the  EcoRJ  Restriction  Endonuclease  and  Modification 
Methylase.  Nature  New  Biol.  244,  40-43,  1973. 

19.  Hedgpeth,  J.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Hydrolysis  of  Adenosine  Triphosphate 
Accompanying  Interaction  Between  Escherichia  coli  B  Restriction  Endonuclease  and 
Unmodified  Deoxyribonucleic  Acid.  Biochim.  Biophys.  Acta  331,  310-317,  1973. 

20.  Cohen,  S.N.,  Chang,  A.C.Y.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Helling,  R.B.  Construction  of 
Biologically  Functional  Bacterial  Plasmids  In  Vitro.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  70, 
3240-3244,  1973. 

21.  Williams,  P.H.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Helinski,  D.R.  Size  and  Base  Composition  of 
RNA  in  Supercoiled  PlasmidDNA.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  USA  70,  3744-3748,  1973. 

22.  Dugaiczyk,  A.,  Hedgpeth,  J.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  Physical  Identity 
of  the  SV40  Deoxribonucleic  Acid  Sequence  Recognized  by  the  EcoRI  Restriction 
Endonuclease  and  Modification  Methylase.  Biochemistry  13,  503-512,  1974. 


23.  Dugaiczyk,  A.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  Demethylamination  of 
Methyldeoxyadenosine  by  Commercial  Spleen  Phosphodiesterase  Preparations. 
Biochem  Biohys.  Res.  Comm.  56,  641-646,  1974. 

24.  Morrow,  J.F.,  Cohen,  S.N.,  Chang,  A.C.Y.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Goodman,  ELM..,  and 
Helling,  R.B.  Replication  and  Transcription  of  Eukaryotic  DNA  in  Escherichia  coli. 
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  71,  1743-1747,  1974. 

25.  Boyer,  H.W.  Restriction  and  Modification  of  DNA:  Enzymes  and  Substrates 
(Symposium  FASEB,  April  20,  1973).  Fed  Proc.  33,1125-1127,  1974. 

26.  Helling,  R.B.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Analysis  of  Endonuclease  R- 
EcoKL  Fragments  of  DNA  from  Lambdoid  Bacteriophages  and  Other  Viruses  by 
Agarose-Gel  Electrophoresis.  /.  Virol.  14,  1235-1244,  1974. 

27.  Greene,  P.J.,  Betlach,  M.C.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  The  £coRI 
Restriction  Endonulcease.  In  DNA  Replication  (Methods  in  Molecular  Biology),  R. 
B.  Wickner  (ed.),  Marcel  Dekker,  Inc.,  New  York,  1974,  7,  p.  87-105. 

28.  Hershfield,  V.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Yanofsky,  C.,  Lovett,  M.A.,  and  Helinski,  D.R. 
Plasmid  ColEl  as  a  Molecular  Vehicle  for  Cloning  and  Amplification  of  DNA.  Proc. 
Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  71,  3455-3459,  1974. 

29.  Godson,  N.,  and  Boyer,  H.  Susceptibility  of  the  dX-Like  Phages  G4  and  G14  to  R- 
EcoRl  Endonuclease.  Virology  62,  270-275,  1974. 

30.  Cohen,  S.N.,  Chang,  A.C.Y.,  Morrow,  J.F.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Goodman,  H.M., 
Helling,  R.B.,  Chow,  L.,  and  Hsu,  L.  In  Vitro  Construction  of  Bacterial  Plasmid 
Replicons  Containing  Procaryotic  and  Eucaryotic  Genes.  In  Mechanisms  of  Virus 
Disease,  W.S  Robinson  and  C.F.  Fox  (eds.),  W.A.  Benjamin,  Menlo  Park, 
California,  1974,  p.  403-419. 

31.  Chow,  L.T.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Tischer,  E.G.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  Electron 
Microscopic  Mapping  of  the  Attachment  Sites  on  SV40  DNA  during  Lytic  Infection. 
Cold  Spring  Harbor  Symposium  on  Quantitative  Biology  39,  109-1  17,  1974. 


139 

32.  Roulland-Dussoix,  D.,  Yoshimori,  R.,  Greene,  P.,  Betlach,  M.,  Goodman,  H.M., 
and  Boyer,  H.W.  R  Factor-Controlled  Restriction  and  Modification  of 
Deoxyribonucleic  Acid  In  Microbiology  1974.  David  Schlesinger  (ed.),  American 
Society  for  Microbiology,  Washington,  D.C.,  1975,  p.  187-198. 

33.  Boyer,  H.W.,  Greene,  P.J.,  Meagher,  R.B.,  Betlach,  M.C.,  Russel,  D.,  and 
Goodman,  H.M.  The  Methylation  of  DNA  as  the  Biochemical  Basis  of  Host 
Controlled  Modification  of  DNA  in  Bacteria.  FEES  Symposium  (1974).  Budapest, 
Hungary,  1975,  v.  34,  p.  23-37. 

34.  Dugaiczyk,  A.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  Ligation  of  EcoRI 
Endonuclease-generated  DNA  Fragments  into  Linear  and  Circular  Structures.  J. 
Mol.  Biol.  96,  171-184,  1975. 

35.  Greene,  P.J.,  Poonian,  M.S.,  Nussbaum,  A.L.,  Tobias,  L.,  Garfin,  D.E.,  Boyer, 
H.W.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  Restriction  and  Modification  of  a  Self-Complementary 
Octanucleotide  Containing  the  EcoRI  Substrate.  J  Mol.  Biol.  99,  237-261,1975. 

36.  Polisky,  B.,  Greene,  P.,  Garfin,  D.E.,  McCarthy,  B.J.,  Goodman,  H.M.,     and 
Boyer,  H.W.  Specificity  of  Substrate  Recognition  by  the  EcoRI  Restriction 
Endonuclease.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  72,  Proc.  3310-3314,  1975. 

37.  Mantei,  N.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  Mapping  Simian  Virus  40  Mutants 
by  Construction  of  Partial  Heterozygotes.  J.  Virology  16,  754-757,  1975. 

38.  Garfin,  D.E.,  Boyer,  H.W. ,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  Sequences  Spanning  the  EcoRI 
Substrate  Site.  Nucleic  Acids  Research  2, 1851-1865,  1975. 

39.  Bulkacz,  J.,  Roulland-Dussoix,  D.,  Boyer,  H.W.  Deoxyribonucleic  Acid 
Modification  by  Intermediate-Type  Modification  Mutants  of  Escherichia  coli  K-12  and 
B.  /.  Bacterial.  124,   1395-1402,  1975. 

40.  Brown,  W.M.,  Watson,  R.M.,  Vinograd,  J.,  Tait,  K.M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  The 
Structures  and  Fidelity  of  Replication  of  Mouse  Mitochondria!  DNA-pSClOl  EcoRI 
Recombinant  Plasmids  Grown  in  E.  coli  K12.  Cell  1  517-530,  1976. 

41.  Betlach,  M.,  Hershfield,  V.,  Chow,  L.;  Brown,  W.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  and  Boyer, 
H.W.  A  Restriction  Endonuclease  Analysis  of  the  Bacterial  Plamid  Controlling  the 
EcoRI  Restriction  and  Modification  of  DNA.  (FASEB  Symposium,  April  1974) 
Fed.  Proc.  35,  2037-2043,  1976. 

42.  Hershfield,  V.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Chow,  L.,  and  Helinski,  D.  Characterization  of  a 
Mini-ColEl  Plasmid.  J.  Bacteriol.  126,  447-453, 1976. 

43.  Boyer,  H.W.,  Tait,  R.C.,  McCarthy,  B.J.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.   Cloning  of 
Eucaryotic  DNA  as  an  Approach  to  the  Analysis  of  Chromosome  Structure  and 
Function.  In  Genetic  Improvement  of  Seed  Proteins,  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.,  1976. 

44.  So,  M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Betlach,  M.,  and  Falkow,  S.  Molecular  Cloning  of  an 
Escherichia  coli  Plasmid  Determinant  That  Encodes  for  the  Production  of  Heat-Stable 
Enterotoxin.  /.  Bacteriol.,  128,  463-472,  1976. 

45.  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Shine,  J.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Rosenberg,  J., 
Dickerson,  R.E.,  Narang,  S.A.,  Itakura,  K.,  Lin,  S.,  and  Riggs,  A.D.  Synthetic 
Lac  Operator  DNA  is  Functional  In  Vivo.  Nature  263,  748-752, 1976. 


140 

46.  Tait,  R.C.,  Meagher,  R.B.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  The 
Production  of  Proteins  by  Bacterial  Plasmids  Containing  Eucaryotic  DNA  Fragments. 
In  Molecular  Mechanisms  in  the  Control  of  Gene  Expression  (ICN-UCLA  Symposia 
on  Molecular  and  Cellular  Biology,  Vol.  V),  D.  P.  Nierlich,  W.  J.  Rutter,  and  C.  F. 
Fox  (eds.),  Academic  Press,  New  York,  N.Y.,  1976,  p.  507-512. 

47.  Brown,  W.M.,  Watson,  R.M.,  Vinograd,  J.,  Tait,  K.M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and 
Goodman,  H.M.  The  Fidelity  of  Replication  of  Mouse  Mitochondrial  DNA-pSClOl 
Recombinant  Plasmids  Grown  in  E.  coli  K12.  In  Molecular  Mechanisms  in  the 
Control  of  Gene  Expression  (ICN-UCLA  Symposia  on  Molecular  and  Cellular 
Biology,  Vol.  V),  D.  P.  Nierlich,  W.  J.  Rutter,  and  C.  F.  Fox  (eds.),  Academic 
Press,  New  York,  N.  Y.,  1976,  p.  487-493. 

48.  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  Bolivar,  F.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and    Betlach,  M. 
Construction  and  Characterization  of  Cloning  Vehicles.  In  Molecular  Mechanisms  in 
the  Control  of  Gene  Expression  (ICN-UCLA  Symposia  on  Molecular  and  Cellular 
Biology,  Vol.  V),  D.  P.  Nierlich,  W.  J.  Rutter,  and  C.  F.  Fox  (eds.), 
Academic  Press,  New  York,  N.  Y.,  1976,  p.  471-477. 

49.  Dugaiczyk,  A.,  Tischer,  E.G.,  Nasser,  D.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  McCarthy,  B.J.,  and 
Goodman,  H.M.  Cloning  of  Drosophila  Melanogaster  EcoRI  DNA  Fragments.  In 
Molecular  Mechanisms  in  the  Control  of  Gene  Expression  (ICN-UCLA  Symposia  on 
Molecular  and  Cellular  Biology,  Vol.  V),  D.  P.  Nierlich,  W.  J.  Rutter,  and  C.  F. 
Fox  (eds.),  Academic  Press,  New  York,  N.  Y.,  1976,  p.  543-552. 

50.  Goodman,  H.M.,  Greene,  P.J.,  Garfin,  D.E.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  DNA  Site 
Recognition  by  the  EcoRl  Restriction  Endonuclease  and  Modification  Methylase.  In 
Nucleic  Acid-Protein  Recognition,  P  &  S  Biomedical  Sciences  Symposia,  Nucleic 
Acid-Protein  Recognition,  HJ.  Vogel  (ed.),  Academic  Press,  N.  Y.  1977,  p.  239- 
259. 

51.  Meagher,  R.B.,  Tait,  R.C.,  Betlach,  M.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Protein  Expression  in  E. 
coli  Minicells  by  Recombinant  Plasmids.  Cell  10,  521-536,  1977. 

52.  Scheller,  R.H.,  Dickerson,  R.E.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Riggs,  A.D.  and  Itakura,  K. 
Chemical  Synthesis  of  Restriction  Enzyme  Recognition  Sites  Useful  for  Cloning. 
Science  196,  177-180,  1977. 

53.  Tait,  R.C.,  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Altered  Tetracycline 
Resistance  in  pSClOl  Recombinant  Plasmids.  Molec.  Gen.  Genet.  151,  327-331, 
1977. 

54.  Sugino,  A.,  Goodman,  H.M.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Shine,  J.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and 
Cozzarelli,  N.R.  Interaction  of  Bacteriophage  T4  RNA  and  DNA  Ligases  in  the 
Joining  of  Duplex  DNA  at  Base-paired  Ends.  /.  Biol  Chem.  252,  3987-3994, 
1977. 

55.  Boyer,  H.W.,  Betlach,  M.,  Bolivar,  R.,  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Shine, 
J.,  and  Goodman,  H.M.  The  Construction  of  Molecular  Cloning  Vehicles.  In 
Recombinant  Molecules:  Impact  on  Science  and  Society,  R.F.  Beers  and  E.G. 
Bassett  (eds.),  Raven  Press,  New  York,  1977,  pp.  9-20. 

56.  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  Tait,  R.,  Shine,  J.,  Bolivar,  F.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Betlach,  M., 
and  Boyer,  H.W.  Characterization  of  Tetracycline  and  Ampicillin  Resistant  Plasmid 
Cloning  Vehicles.  In  Molecular  Cloning  of  Recombinant  DNA,  vol.  13,  Academic 
Press,  New  York,  1977,  pp.73-84. 


141 

57.  Itakura,  K.,  Crea,  R.,  Hirose,  T.,  Riggs,  A.D.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Bolivar,  F.,   and 
Boyer,  H.W.  Expression  in  Escherichia  coli  of  a  Chemically  Synthesized  Gene  for 
the  Hormone  Somatostatin.  Science  198,  1056-1063,  1977. 

58.  Bolivar,  F.,  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  Betlach,  M.C.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Construction  and 
Characterization  of  New  Cloning  Vehicles:  I.  Ampicillin  resistant  derivatives  of  the 
plasmid  pMB9.  Gene  2,  75-93,  1977. 

59.  Bolivar,  F.,  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  Greene,  P.J.,  Betlach,  M.C.,  Heyneker,  H.L., 
Boyer,  H.W.,  Crosa,  J.H.,  and  Falkow,  S.  Construction  and  Characterization  of 
New  Cloning  Vehicles:  n.  A  multipurpose  cloning  system.  Gene  2,  95-113,  1977. 

60.  Meagher,  R.B.,  Shepherd,  R.J.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  The  Structure  of 
Cauliflower  Mosaic  Virus:  I.  A  restriction  endonuclease  map  of  cauliflower  mosaic 
virus  DNA.  Virology  80,  363-375,  1977. 

61.  Bolivar,  F.,  Betlach,  M.C.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Shine,  J.,  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  and 
Boyer,  H.W.  Origin  of  Replication  of  pBR345  Plasmid  DNA.  Proc.  Natl  Acad.  Sci. 
USA  74,  5265-  5269,  1977. 

62.  Poon,  R.,  Neumann,  K.H.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Dozy,  A.M.,  Temple,  G.F.,  Chang, 
J.C.,  Kan,  Y.W.  Cloning  Human  Globin  Genes  in  Bacterial  Plasmid.  Blood  50, 
124,  1977. 

63.  Tait,  R.C.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  On  the  Nature  of  Tetracycline  Resistance  Controlled 
by  the  Plasmid  pSClOl.  Cell  13,  73-81,  1978. 

64.  Tait,  R.C.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  Bolivar,  F.,  Covarrubias,  A., 
Betlach,  M.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Tetracycline  Resistance  Conferred  by  pSClOl, 
pMB9,  and  Their  Derivatives.  In  Microbiology  1978  ASM,  Washington,  D.C., 
1978,  pp.  174-176. 

65.  Fouts,  D.L.,  Wolstenholme,  D.R.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Heterogeneity  in 
Sensitivity  to  Cleavage  by  the  Restriction  Endonucleases  EcoRl  andHindHL  of 
Circular  Kinetoplast  DNA  Molecules  ofCrithidia  acanthocephali..  J.  CellBiol.  79, 
329-  341,  1978. 

66.  Rosenberg,  J.M.,  Dickerson,  R.E.,  Greene,  P.J.  and  Boyer,  H.W.     Preliminary  X- 
ray  Diffraction  Analysis  of  Crystalline  £coRI  Endonuclease.  /.  Mol.  Biol.  122, 
241-245,  1978. 

67.  Greene,  P.J.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Bolivar,  F.,  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  Betlach,  M.C., 
Covarrubias,  A.A.,  Backman,  K.,  Russel,  D.J.,  Tait,  R.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  A 
General  Method  for  the  Purification  of  Restriction  Enzymes.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  5, 
2373-2380,  1978. 

68.  Tait,  R.C.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Restriction  Endonuclease  Mapping  of  pSClOl  and 
pMB9.  Molec.  Gen.  Genet.  164,  285-288,  1978. 

69.  Poon,  R.,  Kan,  Y.W.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Sequence  of  the  3'-noncoding  and 
Adjacent  Coding  Regions  of  Human  q-globin  mRNA.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  5,  4625- 
1978. 

70.  Backman,  K.,  Betlach,  M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Yanofsky,  S.  Genetic  and  Physical 
Studies  on  the  Replication  of  ColEl-type  Plasmids.  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Symp. 
Quant.  Biol.  43,  1979,  pp.  69-76. 


142 

71.  Rodriguez,  R.L.,  West,  R.W.,  Heyneker,  H.L.,  Bolivar,  F.,  and  Boyer,  H.W. 
Characterizing  Wild-type  and  Mutant  Promoters  of  the  Tetracycline  Resistance  Gene 
inpBR313.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  6,  3267-3287,  1979. 

72.  Boyer,  H.W.  The  Age  of  Molecular  Biology.  APLA  Quarterly  Journal  7, 185-189, 
1979. 

73.  Joseph-Bravo,  P.,  Charli,  J.L.,  Sherman,  T.,  Boyer,  H.,  Bolivar,  F.,  and 
McKelvy,  J.F.  Identification  of  a  Putative  Hypothalamic  mRNA  Coding  for 
Somatostatin  and  its  Product  in  Cell-free  Translation.  Biochem.  Biophys.  Res. 
Commun.  94,  1004-1012,  1980. 

74.  Dijkema,  R.,  Dekker,  M.M.,  van  Ormondt,  H.,  de  Waard,  A.,  Maat,  J.,  and  Boyer, 
H.  Gene  Organization  of  the  Transforming  Region  of  Weakly  Oncogenic  Adenovirus 
Type  7:  the  Ela  region.  Gene  12,  287-299,  1980. 

75.  Greene,  P.J.,  Gupta,  M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Brown,  W.E.,  and  Rosenberg,  J.M. 
Sequence  Analysis  of  the  DNA  Encoding  the  EcoKL  Endonuclease  and  Methylase.  /. 
Biol.  Chem.  256,  2143-2153,  1981. 

76.  Rosenberg,  J.M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Greene,  P.  The  Structure  and  Function  of  the 
EcoEl  Restriction  Endonuclease.  In:  Gene  Amplification  and  Analysis,  Vol.  1 
Restriction  Endonucleases,  J.G.  Chirikjian,  ed.,  Elsevier-North  Holland,  New  York, 
1981,  pp.  131-164. 

77.  Dijkema,  R.,  Maat,  J.,  Dekker,  B.M.M.,  van  Ormondt,  H.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  The 
Gene  for  Polypeptide  IX  of  Human  Adenovirus  Type  7.  Gene  13,  375-385,  1981. 

78.  Betlach,  M.,  Pfeifer,  F.,  Friedman,  J.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Bacterio-opsin  Mutants  of 
H.  halobium.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  80,  1416-1420,  1983. 

79.  Pfeifer,  F.,  Betlach,  M.,  Martienssen,  R.,  Friedman,  J.,  and  Boyer,    H.W. 
Transposable  Elements  of  Halobacterium  halobium.  Molec.  Gen.  Genet.  191, 
182-188,  1983. 

80.  Jen-Jacobson,  L.,  Kurpiewski,  M.,  Lesser,  D.,  Grable,  J.,  Boyer,  H.W., 
Rosenberg,  J.M.,  and  Greene,  P.J.  Coordinate  Ion  Pair  Formation  Between  EcoRl 
Endonuclease  and  DNA.  /.  Biol.  Chem.  258,  14638-14646,  1983. 

81.  Backman,  K.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  Tetracycline  Resistance  Determined  by  pBR322  is 
Mediated  by  One  Polypeptide.  Gene  26,  197-203,  1983. 

82.  Pfeifer,  F.,  Friedman,  J.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Betlach,  M.  Characterization  of 
Insertions  Affecting  the  Expression  of  the  Bacterio-opsin  Gene  in  Halobacterium 
halobium..  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  12,  2489-2497,  1984. 

83.  Frederick,  C.A.,  Grable,  J.,  Melia,  M.,  Samudzi,  C.,  Jen-Jacobson,  L.,  Wang,  B.- 
C.,  Greene,  P.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Rosenberg,  J.M.  Kinked  DNA  in  crystalline 
complex  with  EcoRl  endonuclease.  Nature  309,  327-331,  1984. 

84.  Grable,  J.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Samudzi,  C.,  Jen-Jacobson,  L.,  Lesser,  D.,  Greene, 
P.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Itakura,  K.,  and  Rosenberg,  J.M.  Two-Fold  Symmetry  of 
Crystalline  DNA-£coRI  Endonuclease  Recognition  Complexes.  /.  Biomolec.  Struct. 
&  Dynamics  1,  1149-1160,  1984. 

85.  Betlach,  M.,  Friedman,  F.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Pfeifer,  F.  Characterization  of  a 
Halobacterial  Gene  Affecting  Bacterio-opsin  Gene  Expression.  Nucleic  Acids  Res. 
12,  7949-7959,  1984. 


143 

86.  McClarin,  J.A.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Grable,  J.,  Samudzi,  D.T.,  Wang,  B-C,  Greene, 
P.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Rosenberg,  J.M.  Structural  Studies  of  a  DNA-EcoRI 
Endonuclease  Recognition  Complex.  Proceedings  From  the  Fourth  Conversation  in 
Biomolecular  Stereodynamics,  1985. 

87.  Pfeifer,  F.A.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Betlach,  M.C.  Restoration  of  Bacterio-opsin  Gene 
Expression  in  a  Revertant  of  Halobacterium  halobium.  J.  Bact.  164,  414-420, 
1985. 

88.  Betlach,  M.C.,  Leong,  D.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  1986.  Bacterio-Opsin  Gene 
Expression  in  Halobacterium  halobium.  System.  Appl.  Microbiol.  7,  83-89,  1986. 

89.  Betlach,  M.C.,  Leong,  D.,  Pfeifer,  F.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  1986.  Bacterio-opsin 
Gene  Expression  in  Halobacterium  halobium.  In:  Archaebacteria,  O.  Kandler  (ed.). 
Fisher  Verlag,  Stuttgart.  In  Press. 

90.  Betlach,  M.,  Leong,  D.,  Pfeifer,  F.,  and  Boyer,  H.W.  1986.  Bacterio-opsin  Gene 
Expression  in  Halobacterium  halobium.  In:  Microbiology  1986,  S.  Silver  (ed.). 
American  Society  for  Microbiology,  363-369. 

91.  Betlach,  M.,  Leong,  D.,  and  Boyer,  H.  1986.  E.Coli  Expression  Vectors  for 
Bacterio-opsin.  Nauka  (Russian  Journal),  In  Press. 

92.  Kuhn,  I.,  Stephenson,  F.H.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and  Greene,  PJ.    1986. 

Positive  Selection  Vectors  Utilizing  Lethality  of  the  EcoRL  Endonuclease.  Gene  42, 
253-263. 

93.  McClarin,  J.A.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Wang,  B-C.,  Greene,  P.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Grable, 
J.,  and  Rosenberg,  J.M.  1986.  Structure  of  the  DNA-EcoRI  Endonuclease 
Recognition  Complex  at  3  A  Resolution.  Science  234,  1526-1541. 

94.  Betlach,  M.,  Leong,  D.,  and  Boyer,  H.  1987.  E.coli  Expression  Vectors  for 
Bacterio-opsin.  Proceedings  from  the  Second  International  Conference  on  Retinal 
Proteins.  VNU  Science  Press,  The  Netherlands,  pp.  317-331. 

95.  Rosenberg,  J.M.,  McClarin,  J.A.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Wang,  B-C.,  Grable,  J., 
Boyer,  H.W.  and  Greene,  P.  1987.  Structure  and  Recognition  Mechanism  of 
EcoRI  Endonuclease.  Trends  in  Biochemical  Sciences  (TIBS)  12,  #10,  395-398. 

96.  Rosenberg,  J.M.,  McClarin,  J.A.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Grable,  J.,  Boyer,  H.W.  and 
Greene,  PJ.  1987  Structure  and  Function  of  the  EcoRI  Restriction  Endonuclease. 
In:  Gene  Ampliation  and  Analysis,  Vol.5,  Restriction  Endonucleases  and 
Methylases,  J.G.  Chirikjian,  ed.,  Elsevier  Science  Publishing  Co.,  Inc.,  New  York, 
pp.  119-147. 

97.  Rosenberg,  J.M.,  McClarin,  J.A.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Wang,  B-C.,  Boyer,  H.W., 
Grable,  J.  and  Greene,  P.  1987  The  Structure  and  Function  of  £c0RI  Endonuclease. 
In:  Biological  Organization:  Macromolecular  Interactions  at  High  Resolution,  R.M. 
Burnett  and  H.J.  Vogel,  eds.,  Academic  Press,  Inc.,  Orlando,  pp.  11-43. 

98.  Yanofsky,  S.D.,  Love,  R.,  McClarin,  J.A.,  Rosenberg,  J.M.,  Boyer,  H.W.  and 
Greene,  PJ.  1987  Clustering  of  Null  Mutations  in  the  EcoRl  Endonuclease. 
Proteins:  Structure,  Function  and  Genetics  ,  Vol  2,  #4,  273-282. 


8 


144 

99.  Greene,  P.J.,  Yanofsky,  S.,  Reich,  N.,  Day,  J.,  Hager,  P.,  Boyer,  H.W., 
McClarin,  J.A.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Wang,  B-C.,  Grable,  J.,  Love,  R.,  and 
Rosenberg.,  J.M.  Protein  Structure,  Folding  and  Design.  UCLA  Symposia  on 
Molecular  and  Cellular  Biology,  New  Series,  Vol.  69.  Dale  Oxender,  ed.,  Alan  R. 
Liss,  Inc.,  New  York,  1987. 

100.  Greene,  P.J.,  Ballard,  B.T.,  Stephenson,  F.,  Kohr,  W.J.,  Rodriguez,  H., 
Rosenberg,  J.M.  and  Boyer,  H.W.  1988  Purification  and  Characterization  of  the 
Restriction  Endonuclease  Rsrl,  an  Isoschizomer  of  EcoRl.  Gene  68,  43-52. 

101.  Harley,  C.B.,  Lawrie,  J.,  Betlach,  M.,  Crea,  R.,  Boyer,  H.W.  and  Hedgpeth,  J. 
Transcription  Initiation  at  the  tet  promoter  and  Effect  of  Mutations.  1988.  Nucleic 
Acids  Research  16  #15,  7269-7285. 

102.  Leong,  D.,  Pfeifer,  F.,  Boyer,  H.  and  Betlach,  M.  1988.  Characterization  of  a 
putative  second  gene  involved  in  bacterio-opsin  gene  expression  in  a  halophilic 
archaebacterium.    J.  Bacteriol.  170,  4903-4909. 

103.  Leong,  D.,  Boyer,  H.  and  Betlach.  1988.  Transcriptional  analyses  of  genes 
involved  in  bacterio-opsin  gene  expression  in  a  halophilic  archaebacterium. 
J.  Bacteriol.  170,  4910-4915. 

104.  Needels,  M.C.,  Fried,  S.R.,  Love,  R.,  Rosenberg,  J.M.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  and 
Greene,  P.J.  Determinants  of  EcoKL  endonuclease  sequence  discrimination.  PNAS. 

105.  Reich,  N.,  Hager,  P.,  Day,  J.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Rosenberg,  J.,  and  Greene,  P.J. 
Probing  Glutamic  Acid-DNA  Interactions  in  the  EcoEl  Endonuclease  Using  Aspartic 
Acid  and  Glutamine  Replacements.  Submitted  to  J.B.C. 

106.  Ballard,  J.,  Stephenson,  F.,  Boyer,  H.W.,  Rosenberg,  J.,  and  Greene,  P.J. 
Sequence  Analysis  of  the  Rsrl  endonuclease.  Gene,  in  press. 

107.  Hager,  P.,  Reich,  N.,  Day,  J.,  Greene,  P.J.,  and  Rosenberg,  J.   Sequence 
Discrimination  by  EcoRI  Endonuclease  is  Enhanced  by  Review  of  the  Nicked  DNA 
Intermediate.  In  preparation. 


RELATED  PAPERS  FROM  BOYER  LAB 

Pfeifer,  F.  and  Betlach,  M.  1985  Genome  organization  in  Halobacterium  halobium:  A  70 
kb  island  of  more  (AT)  rich  DNA  in  the  chromosome.  Mol.  Gen.  Genet.  198:  449-455. 

Rosenberg,  J.M.,  Wang,  B-C.,  Frederick,  C.A.,  Reich,  N.,  Greene,  P.J.,  Grable,  J.  and 
McClarin,  J.  1987  Development  of  a  Protein  Design  Strategy  for  EcoRI  Endonuclease. 
In:  Protein  Engineering,  D.L.  Oxender  and  C.F.  Fox,  eds.  Alan  R.  Liss,  New  York,  pp. 
237-251. 

Betlach,  M.C.,  Shand,  R.F.,  Leong,  D.M.   1989  Regulation  of  the  bacterio-opsin  gene  of 
a  halophilic  archaebacterium.  Can.  J.  Microbiol.  35:134-140. 


145 


APPENDIX  B 


lif 

x  -  w:\r^r^^w^- ,'  ^- ' 

-^•...rrft  V-^-w,  Jl^l--^:>V*i7^S'^  /'    .^•-"-J  •; 


Cartoon  of  the  November  1972  discussion  in  a  Honolulu  delicatessen.  Stanley 
Cohen  and  Herbert  Boyer  agreed  to  collaborate  in  experiments  resulting  in 
recombinant  DNA. 


Copy  from  a  slide  courtesy  of  Stanley  N.  Cohen,  MD 


146 


APPENDIX  C 


MOLECULAR  CLONING  PROCEDURE 

pSC101  PL  ASM  ID 

REPLICATORS \       Eco  Rl 

.CLEAVAGE        FOREIGN  DNA 
SITE 


REPLICATOR 


Eco  Rl  ENDONUCLEASE 


Irn 


REPLICATOR 


ANNEALING 

REPLICATOR 


LIGASE 


TRANSFORMATION 


TRANSFORMED 
E.  coli 


CHROMOSOME 


147  APPENDIX  D 


LBTTEHS 

Guidelines  for 

DNA  Hybrid  Molecules 

Those  in  attendance  at  the  1973 
Gordon  Conference  on  Nucleic  Acids 
voted  to  send  the  following  letter  to 
Philip  Handler,  president  of  the  Na 
tional  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  to 
John  R.  Hogness,  president  of  the  Na 
tional  Institute  of  Medicine.  A  major 
ity  also  desired  to  publicize  the  letter 
more  widely. 

We  are  writing  to  you,  on  behalf  of  a 
number  of  scientists,  to  communicate  a 
matter  of  deep  concern.  Several  of  the 
scientific  reports  presented  at  this  year's 
Gordon  Research  Conference  on  Nucleic 
Acids  (June  11-15,  1973,  New  Hampton, 
New  Hampshire)  indicated  that  we  pres 
ently  have  the  technical  ability  to  join 
together,  covalently,  DNA  molecules  from 
diverse  sources.  Scientific  developments 
over  the  past  two  years  make  it  both 
reasonable  and  convenient  to  generate 
overlapping  sequence  homologies  at  the 
termini  of  different  DNA  molecules.  The 
sequence  homologies  can  then  be  used 
to  combine  the  molecules  by  Watson- 
Crick  hydrogen  bonding.  Application  of 
existing  methods  permits  subsequent  co- 
valent  linkage  of  such  molecules.  This 
technique  could  be  used,  for  example,  to 
combine  DNA  from  animal  viruses  with 
bacterial  DNA,  or  DNA's  of  different 
viral  origin  might  be  so  joined.  In  this 
way  new  kinds  of  hybrid  plasmids  or 
viruses,  with  biological  activity  of  unpre 
dictable  nature,  may  eventually  be  created. 
These  experiments  offer  exciting  and  in 
teresting  potential  both  for  advancing 
knowledge  of  fundamental  biological  pro 
cesses  and  for  alleviation  of  human  health 
problems. 

Certain  such  hybrid  molecules  may 
prove  hazardous  to  laboratory  workers 
and  to  the  public.  Although  no  hazard  has 
yet  been  established,  prudence  suggests 
that  the  potential  hazard  be  seriously  con 
sidered. 

A  majority  of  those  attending  the  Con 
ference  voted  to  communicate  their  con 
cern  in  this  matter  to  you  and  to  the 
President  of  the  Institute  of  Medicine  (to 
whom  this  letter  is  also  being  sent).  The 
conferees  suggested  that  the  Academies 
establish  a  study  committee  to  consider 
this  problem  and  to  recommend  specific 
actions  or  guidelines,  should  that  seem 
appropriate.  Related  problems  such  as  the 
risks  involved  in  current  large-scale  prep 
aration  of  animal  viruses  might  also  be 
considered. 

MAXINE  SINGER 
Room  9N-I19,  Building  10, 
National  Institutes  of  Health, 
Belhesda,  Maryland  20014 

DIETER  SOLL 

Department  of  Molecular  Biophysics 
and  Biochemistry, 
Yale   University, 
New  Haven,  Connecticut  06520 


Science  Magazine,  September  21,  1973 


148 


LETTERS 

Potential  Bioliazards  of 
Rccombinant   DNA    Molecules 

Recent  advances  in  techniques  for 
the  isolation  and  rejoining  of  segments 
of  DNA  now  permit  construction  of 
biologically  active  recombinant  DNA 
molecules  in  vitro.  For  example,  DNA 
restriction  cndonuclcases,  which  gen 
erate  DNA  fragments  containing  co 
hesive  ends  especially  suitable  for  re 
joining,  have  been  used  to  create  new 
types  of  biologically  functional  bac 
terial  plasmids  carrying  antibiotic  re 
sistance  markers  (/)  and  to  link 
Xenopus  laevis  ribosomal  DNA  to 
DNA  from  a  bacterial  plasmid.  This 
latter  recombinant  plasmid  has  been 
shown  to  replicate  stably  in  Escherichia 
coli  where  it  synthesizes  RNA  that  is 
complementary  to  X.  laevis  ribsomal 
DNA  (2).  Similarly,  segments  of 
Droxophila  chromosomal  DNA  have 
been  incorporated  into  both  plasmid 
and  bacteriophage  DNA's  to  yield  hy 
brid  molecules  that  can  infect  and 
replicate  in  E.  coli  (.?). 

Several  groups  of  scientists  are  now 
planning  to  use  this  technology  to 
create  recombinant  DNA's  from  a 
variety  of  other  viral,  animal,  and 
bacterial  sources.  Although  such  experi 
ments  are  likely  to  facilitate  the  solu 
tion  of  important  theoretical  and  prac 
tical  biological  problems,  they  would 
also  result  in  the  creation  of  novel 
types  of  infectious  DNA  elements 
whose  biological  properties  cannot  be 
completely  predicted  in  advance. 

There  is  serious  concern  that  some  of 
these  artificial  recombinant  DNA  mole 
cules  could  prove  biologically  hazard 
ous.  One  potential  hazard  in  current 
experiments  derives  from  the  need  to 
use  a  bacterium  like  E.  coli  to  clone 
the  recombinant  DNA  molecules  and 
to  amplify  their  number.  Strains  of 
E.  coli  commonly  reside  in  the  human 
intestinal  tract,  and  they  are  capable 
of  exchanging  genetic  information  with 
other  types  of  bacteria,  some  of  which 
are  pathogenic  to  man.  Thus,  new 
DNA  elements  introduced  into  E.  coli 
might  possibly  become  widely  dis 
seminated  among  human,  bacterial, 
plant,  or  animal  populations  with  un 
predictable  effects. 

Concern  for  these  emerging  capabili 
ties  was  raised  by  scientists  attending 
the  1973  Gordon  Research  Confer 
ence  on  Nucleic  Acids  (4),  who  re 
quested  that  the  National  Academy  of 

26  JULY   1974 


Sciences  give  consideration  to  these 
matters.  The  undersigned  members  of 
a  committee,  acting  on  behalf  of  and 
with  the  endorsement  of  the  Assembly 
of  Life  Sciences  of  the  National  Re 
search  Council  on  this  matter,  propose 
the  following  recommendations. 

First,  and  most  important,  that  until 
the  potential  hazards  of  such  recom 
binant  DNA  molecules  have  been  better 
evaluated  or  until  adequate  methods 
are  developed  for  preventing  their 
spread,  scientists  throughout  the  world 
join  with  the  members  of  this  com 
mittee  in  voluntarily  deferring  the  fol 
lowing  types  of  experiments. 

*•  Type  I:  Construction  of  new, 
autonomously  replicating  bacterial  plas 
mids  that  might  result  in  the  introduc 
tion  of  genetic  determinants  for  anti 
biotic  resistance  or  bacterial  toxin 
formation  into  bacterial  strains  that  do 
not  at  present  carry  such  determinants; 
or  construction  of  new  bacterial  plas 
mids  containing  combinations  of  re 
sistance  to  clinically  useful  antibiotics 
unless  plasmids  containing  such  com 
binations  of  antibiotic  resistance  de 
terminants  already  exist  in  nature. 

^-  Type  2:  Linkage  of  all  or  seg 
ments  of  the  DNA's  from  oncogcnic  or 
other  animal  viruses  to  autonomously 
replicating  DNA  elements  such  as  bac 
terial  plasmids  or  other  viral  DNA's. 
Such  recombinant  DNA  molecules 
might  be  more  easily  disseminated  to 
bacterial  populations  in  humans  and 
other  species,  and  thus  possibly  in 
crease  the  incidence  of  cancer  or  other 
diseases. 

Second,  plans  to  link  fragments  of 
animal  DNA's  to  bacterial  plasmid 
DNA  or  bacteriophage  DNA  should  be 
carefully  weighed  in  light  of  the  fact 
that  many  types  of  animal  cell  DNA's 
contain  sequences  common  to  RNA 
tumor  viruses.  Since  joining  of  any 
foreign  DNA  to  a  DNA  replication 
system  creates  new  recombinant  DNA 
molecules  whose  biological  properties 
cannot  be  predicted  with  certainty, 
such  experiments  should  not  be  under 
taken  lightly. 

Third,  the  director  of  the  National 
Institutes  of  Health  is  requested  to  give 
immediate  consideration  to  establishing 
an  advisory  committee  charged  with 
(i)  overseeing  an  experimental  pro 
gram  to  evaluate  the  potential  biologi 
cal  and  ecological  hazards  of  the  above 
types  of  recombinant  DNA  molecules; 
(ii)  developing  procedures  which  will 


minimize  the  spread  of  such  molecules 
within  human  and  other  populations; 
and  (iii)  devising  guidelines  to  be 
followed  by  investigators  working  with 
potentially  hazardous  recombinant 
DNA  molecules. 

Fourth,  an  international  meeting  of 
involved  scientists  from  all  over  the 
world  should  be  convened  early  in  the 
coming  year  to  review  scientific  prog 
ress  in  this  area  and  to  further  discuss 
appropriate  ways  to  deal  with  the 
potential  biohazards  of  recombinant 
DNA  molecules. 

The  above  recommendations  are 
made  with  the  realization  (i)  that 
our  concern  is  based  on  judgments  of 
potential  rather  than  demonstrated  risk 
since  there  are  few  available  experi 
mental  data  on  the  hazards  of  such 
DNA  molecules  and  (ii)  that  adherence 
to  our  major  recommendations  will 
entail  postponement  or  possibly  aban 
donment  of  certain  types  of  scientifical 
ly  worthwhile  experiments.  Moreover, 
we  are  aware  of  many  theoretical  and 
praclical  difficulties  involved  in  evaluat 
ing  the  human  hazards  oE  such  re 
combinant  DNA  molecules.  Nonethe 
less,  our  concern  for  the  possible  un 
fortunate  consequences  of  indiscrimi 
nate  application  of  these  techniques 
motivates  us  to  urge  all  scientists  work 
ing  in  this  area  to  join  us  in  agreeing 
not  to  initiate  experiments  of  types 
1  and  2  above  until  attempts  have  been 
made  to  evaluate  the  hazards  and  some 
resolution  of  the  outstanding  questions 
has  been  achieved. 

PAUL  BERG,  Chairman 

DAVID  BALTIMORE 
HERBERT  W.  BOYER 
STANLEY N.  COHEN 

RONALD  W.  DAVIS 

DAVID  S.  HOGNESS 

DANIEL  NATHANS 

RICHARD  ROBLIN 

JAMES  D.  WATSON 
SHERMAN  WEISSMAN 
NORTON  D.  ZINDER 
Committee  on   Recombinant   UNA 
Molecules  Assembly   of  Life  Sciences, 
National  Research  Council, 
National  Academy  of  Sciences, 
Washington.  D.C.  20418 

ReFcrcnces  and  Notes 

1.  S.  N.  Cohen,  A.  C.  Y.  Chang,  H.  Bayer,  R.  B 
Hcllins,  Pmc.  Nail.  Acail.  Sci.  U.S.A.  70,  3240 
<  197:1);  A.  C.  Y.  Chang  and  S.  N.  Cohen,  ibid 
71,    1030  (1974). 

2.  J.   F.   Morrow,  S.  N.   Cohen,  A.  C.   Y.   Chang, 
II.    Boyer,    H.    M.    Goodman.    R.    B.    Helling. 
ihitl.,  in  press. 

3.  D.    S.    Hogness,    unpublished    results;    R.    W. 
TXivis,  unpublished   results;  H.  W.   Boycr,  un 
published  results. 

4.  M.  Singer  and  D.  Soil,  Science  181,  1114  (1973). 

303 


Science  Magazine,  July  26,  1974 


149 


*  *  *  F'i..  Fob.  28.  1  975 


'Fail-Safe'  Plan 
On  Gene  Research 


»y  [tiii'til  I'frliitwt 


Drj.  Eoj-er  «wl  Berg  pined  in  3  cjl!  fo-r  a  itlf-impoicd  half  h>  pohwifialry  Kaiirtloui  rewareh 


Pacific  Grove 

An  international  working  group  of  biologists 
agreed  yesterday  on  a  historic  set  of  safety  principles 
to  govern  their  research  into  the  promising  but  po 
tentially  hazardous  area  of  genetic  engineering. 

The  guidelines  they  set  for 
themselves  will  permit  them 
to  resume  many  experi 
ments  they  had  voluntarily 
halted  last  July  —  but  to  re 
sume  them  under  new  and 
stringent  safeguards. 

A  few  experiments  with 
the  most  dangerously  infec 
tious  types  of  viruses  will 
continue  to  be  deferred  until 
the  scientists  themselves  are 
far  more  certain  lliat  Hie 
hazards  can  be  completely 
Contained. 

The  nature  -  of  the  safe 
guards  the  scientists  recom 
mended  are  in  themselves 
remarkable  and  unprece 
dented.  They  call  for  the  de 
liberate  creation  of  new 
man-made  microbes  that 
can  thrive  in  the  laboratory 
but  will  die  instantly  should 
they  accidentally  escape. 

The  biologists  will  use 
these  "self-destructing"  mi 
crobes  for  any  significantly 
dangerous  genetic  experi 
ments  from  now  on  to  pre 
vent  the  germs  from  infect 
ing  people,  animals  or  even 
plants  in  the  world  at  large. 

And   several  teams  of  co- 
Budc  Pnyc  Col.  .7 


San  Francisco  Chronicle,  February  28,  1974:  Al 


150 


GENETIC  RESEARCH 


DR.  SIDNEY  BRENNER 
ritllh  bioiegjif 


STANFORD'S  DR.  STANLEY  COHEN 
He  w.inicd  to  balance  luiardi  ag.iimi  boncllti 


From  Pttt  1 

operating  scientUu  igri«d 
iitre  that  they  cm  cresu 
the  first  of  ItitM  "loft"  ex 
perimental  gtrini  swiftly - 
wlthln  Iho  next  ftw  dajr«  or 

H'fCkl. 

The    major  experiments 
under  consideration  hero  are 
part   of  an  explosive  new 
urea  of  genetics  thai,  as  the 
scientists  declared,  "prom 
ises  to  revolutionize  molecu 
lar  biology,"  and  create  a 
"significant  impact"  In  fu 
ture  benefits  for  mankind.  ; 
The-  mirk  Involves  creat 
ing  what  the  scientists  them 
selves    term    "novel    b  i  o- 
types"    —   in  other  words, 
new   forms    of    microscopic 
life  mad*  by  combining  the 
Styes  of  widely  different 
organisms.    These    genes 
could    be  .dangerous,    and 
could,    for  example,   cause 
virulent  infectious  diseases, 
or  spread  unwanted  resist 
ance  to   anll-blollcs  among 
the  imputation. 

But  there  is  little  question 
among  the  iw  emlnom  biol 
ogists  who  gathered  here  for 
four  days  and  nights  of  In 
tensive  and  at  times  vigor 
ous  debate,  tiiat  the  benefits 
will  be  imposing. 

First  is  a  great  increase 
in  fundamental  scientific 
knowledge  about  the  inti 
mate  mechanisms  of  he 
redity  —  knowledge  to  help 
unravel  the  precise  chemi 
cal  groupings  thai  govern 
nil  .the  inherited  character 
istics  of-living  things. 


Beyond  that  is  the  Immi 
nent  prospect  of  more  pract 
ical  results: 

Manipulating  the  gen«s  of 
bacteria  to  make  them  grow 
huge  <|iiantlties  of  cheap 
anti-biolics.  vaccines  or 
medically-netfded  hormones, 
like  iniuLin.  is  one  example. 

Creating  genetically  a  l- 
lered  bacteria  that  can 
thrive  at  the  roots  of  food 
plants  to  manufacture  ferti 
lizer  from'  the  'nitrogen  of 
the  air,  is  another. 

Probing  the  puzzles  of 
cancer  viruses  —  and  per 
haps  even  solving  them  —  is 
»  third,  more  remote,  prom- 
lie. 

All  these  prospects  stem 
from  research  that  cli 
maxed  i  tithe  late  IWOs  when 
teams  of  scientists  —  one 
headed  by  Dr.  Herbert  Dov 
er,  of  the  University  of  Cali 
fornia  at  San  Francisco  — 
first  iliscnvorcd  n  class  of 
cnr.vinii.s  that  could  snip 
apart  the  plant  molecules 
that  form'ed  the  penes  of  all 
living  cells. 

Then1  *i>-r;illc»l  "restric 
tion  enzymes"  were  lator 
used  hy  other  scientists  ui 
transfer  sesments  of  genetic 
r.uten.i!  from  one  species  of 
organism  into  the  tjenoK  of 
other,  unrelated  species. 

One  .  such  set '  of  experi 
ments,  performed  at  Stan 
ford  in  1972  by  Dr.  Stanley 
Cohen  and  his  colleagues, 
transferred  the  hereditary 
ability  to.  resist  antibiotics 
from  one  set  of  common 
bacteria  to  another. 


That  same  year,  still  an 
other  group,  headed  by  Dr. 
Paul  Berg,  of  Stanford,  used 
similar  enzymes  to  insert 
genes  from  a  monkey  virus 
into  the  genetic  materl&l  of 
a  bacteria  called  Escheri- 
chia  coli.  which  normally 
lives  in  the  human  digestive 
tract. 

They  wanted  the  world 
wide  community  of  biolo 
gists  to  weigh  the  unknown 
itazards  of  this  work  against 
its  benefits,  and .  to  design 
safety  measures  to  minimise 
the  dangers  to  Die  public 
and  the  global  environment. 

They  classified ,  experi 
ments  according  to  their  de 
gree  of  potential  hazard. 
They  recommended  rigor 
ous,  and  in  many  cases  high 
ly-expensive,  modification  of 
laboratories  in  order  to  keep 
genetically  altered  experi 
mental  germs  from  escap 
ing. 

And  they  set  standards  for 
matching  (he  hazards  and 
Ihe  safety  measures  accord 
ing  to  a  graded  scale. 

they  also  urged  biologists 
and  geneticists  i  n  every 
courtry  to  develop  within 
thei"  own  traditions  the  pro 
cesses  by  which  safely  con 
trols  can  be. self-imposed  or 
regulated  without  blocking 
furtier  research. 


Experiments  like  these 
impelled  Berg.  Cohen  and 
Boyer  and  several  other  sci 
entists  to  call  on  their  col- 
lenpues  last  summer  for  an 
unprecedented  self-imposed 
halt  in  much  of  this  re 
search. 

The  meeting  that  ended 
here  yesterday  under  Berg's 
chairmanship  was  the  first 
major  step  toward  that  goal. 

The  ISO  scientists  who 
gathered  at  the  Asilolniir 
Conference*  Grounds  under 
the  auspices  of  the  National 
Academy  of  Sciences  repre 
sented  16  countries.  Among 
tficm  were  virtually  ail  the 
teaniirs  in  tltis  new  field  or 
mierobial  genetics. 

And  although  Illeir  labora- 
lprie<  compete  as  bitterly  as 
baseball  teams,  for-  first 
place  In  the  discovery  race,- 
they  reached  near- 
unanimous  agreement  o  n 
their  general  guidelines  for 
public  safety  in  their  future 
experiments. 

To  these  scientists.  Dr. 
Sidnsy  Brenner,  a  distin 
guished  British  biologist 
frorr  Cambridge,  declared 

"V.'c  have  created  a  new 
set  of  principles  here.  But  it 
Is  your  individual  judgment 
and  your  individual  behavior 
which  will  determine  what 
yon  do. 


"We  ourselves  haVe  no 
imwer  oilier  than  Ihe  moral 
suasion  we  ran  cxerrisf* 
amonc  our  colleagues." 

To  I  his  ihnucht  Dr.  A.  A 
Ba.vcv.  of  the  Institute  of 
Molecular.  Biologv  in  Mos 
cow,  declared  lhat-  Soviet 
•x'icnlists  "fully  realize  the 
b:ohazard<"  in  experiments 
»"ith  2enetioally-hybrid  or- 
canisms.'and  accept  theob- 
Illation  to  act  with  ••prud- 
fn«  for  Hie  safely,  of  our 
laboratory  workers,  man- 
land  anil  the  nvironmfnt." 

The  lone  and  complex 
draft  of  the  conference  rec- 
.ommendafions  will  now  be 
formalized  in  greater  detail 
by  Berg  and  his  colleagues 
for  official  approval  by 
American's  National  Acade 
my  of  Sciences 

Beginning  today  in  San 
Francisco,  a  special  advi 
sory  committee  of  the  Na 
tional  Institutes  of  Health 
will  undertake  the  difficult 
job  of  drafting  detailed  safe 
ty  standards  that  will  offi 
cially  regulate  the  experi 
ments  of  American  scien 
tists  working  in  this  new 
frontier  field  of  biology. 


151 


Nature  Vol.  262  July  1  1976   \ 


Genetic  manipulation:  guidelines  issued 

The  NIH  ground  rules  for  genetic  manipulation  experiments  may  not  mark  the  end  of  an 
unprecedented  debate  within  the  scientific  community.  Colin  Norman  reports  from  Washington 


A  FTER  two  years  of  controversy  and 
•^uncertainty,  the  National  Institutes 
of  Health  (NIH)  last  week  issued  a  com- 
plex  set  of  guidelines  governing  the  use 
of  a  powerful  new  technique  for  mani 
pulating  genes  in  living  organisms.  The 
guidelines  establish  safety  rules  for 
experiments  which  may  revolutionize 
biology,  but  which  also  provide  man 
with  unprecedented  ability  to  alter  the 
characteristics  of  living  things.  They 
are,  however,  far  from  being  the  final 
word  on  whether,  and  under  what  cir 
cumstances,  such  research  should  be 
allowed  to  go  ahead,  for  they  are  al 
ready  being  overtaken  by  events  in 
some  places. 

On  July  7,  for  example,  the  City 
Council  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  will  vote 
on  a  resolution,  proposed  by  the  Mayor, 
which  would  ban  for  two  years  all  such 
experiments  at  Harvard  and  MIT.  And 
months  of  bitter  debate  at  the  Univer 
sity  of  Michigan  have  resulted  in  the 
adoption  of  regulations  there  which  are 
more  strict  than  those  issued  by  NIH 
last  week.  The  focus  of  the  debate  is 
clearly  shifting  from  Washington  into 
the  university  communities  where  the 
research  will  take  place. 

Nevertheless,  the  NIH  guidelines  will 
provide  important  ground  rules  for 
genetic  manipulation  experiments  in 
many  institutions,  and  their  impact  will 
extend  far  beyond  the  borders  of  the 
United  States,  for  they  are  likely  to 
influence  the  establishment  of  guide 
lines  in  many  other  countries.  They 
have  been  developed  by  an  extra 
ordinary  process  of  self-regulation  by 
the  scientific  community. 

The  process  began  in  1973,  when 
scientists  familiar  with  the  nascent 
technique  began  to  worry  about  poten 
tial  hazards  associated  with  its  use. 
Their  concerns  led  a  committee  of  the 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  to  issue 
a  public  statement  in  July  1974,  urging 
scientists  around  the  world  to  defer  two 
types  of  experiments  until  the  hazards 
have  been  defined.  The  moratorium 
lasted  until  last  February,  when  it  was 
Partly  replaced  by  general  guidelines 
recommended  by  an  international  group 
of  geneticists  which  met  at  Asilomar, 
California.  Then  an  NIH  advisory 
committee,  consisting  of  scientists,  took 
centre  stage.  It  laboured  hard  during 
most  of  last  year  trying  to  cast  the 
Asilomar  guidelines  into  more  specific 
rules,  completing  its  task  by  hammer 
ing  out  a  set  of  complex  proposals  last 
December.  The  proposals  went  to  NIH 
Director  Donald  S.  Fredrickson,  who 


called  a  public  meeting  to  discuss  them, 
solicited  the  views  of  numerous  scien 
tists  and  non-scientists,  and  asked  the 
advisory  committee  to  reconsider  some 
of  its  suggestions.  The  guidelines  issued 
last  week  represent  Fredrickson's  dis 
tillation  of  the  conflicting  advice  pre 
sented  to  him. 

They  differ  a  little  in  detail,  but  not 
in  philosophy,  from  the  recommenda 
tions  of  the  advisory  committee.  They 
will  allow  most  planned  experiments 
to  go  ahead,  albeit  under  strict  safety 
controls,  outlawing  only  a  handful  of 
the  more  hazardous  types  of  experi 
ments.  They  are,  however,  stricter  than 
the  Asilomar  guidelines,  a  fact  which 
Fredrickson  suggested  means  that  "the 
research  will  go  forward  in  a  manner 
responsive  and  appropriate  to  hazards 
that  may  be  realised  in  the  future". 
And  Dr  DeWitt  Stetten,  Deputy  NIH 
Director  for  Science  and  chairman  of 
the  advisory  committee,  argued  last 
week  that  "the  issuance  of  the  guide 
lines  is  in  no  sense  an  opening  of 
the  floodgates,  rather  it  is  a  closing  of 
the  leaks  (in  the  Asilomar  guidelines)". 

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  guidelines  are 
not  even  NIH's  final  say  on  the  matter. 
Their  publication  falls  under  the  terms 
of  the  National  Environmental  Policy 
Act,  which  means  that  NIH  must  pre 
pare  an  assessment  of  the  potential 
impact  of  the  research  on  the  environ 
ment.  A  draft  assessment  should  be 
ready  by  September,  and  since  it  will 
be  opened  up  for  public  comments 
before  being  cast  in  final  form,  another 
round  of  discussion  of  the  risks  and 
benefits  of  the  research  is  in  store.  In 
the  meantime,  the  guidelines  will  take 
effect,  governing  NIH's  support  of  the 
research. 

New  dimension 

Why  have  the  guidelines  taken  so  long 
to  produce,  and  caused  so  much  strife? 
The  answer  is  that  the  research  offers 
a  spectacular  mix  of  potential  benefits 
and  possible  hazards,  and  it  opens  up 
an  entirely  new  dimension  in  biology. 
The  experiments  consist,  in  short,  of 
snipping  genes  from  the  DNA  of  any 
organism  and  splicing  them  into  the 
DNA  of  another,  perhaps  entirely  un 
related,  organism.  The  resulting  mole 
cule — a  recombinant  DNA  molecule — 
is  copied  (cloned)  eacfi  time  the  new 
host  reproduces,  producing  large  quan 
tities  of  the  transplanted  genes.  The 
technique  offers  a  powerful  tool  for 
probing  the  working  of  genes  and  their 
arrangement  in  complex  organisms  and, 


more  distantly,  it  may  offer  a  means 
of  constructing  special  micro-organisms 
for  a  variety  of  medical,  commercial 
and  industrial  uses. 

But  the  worry  is  that  the  technique 
allows  biologists  to  breach  genetic 
barriers  between  species  which  have 
evolved  over  thousands  of  years.  In 
short,-  it  allows  biologists  to  by-pass 
the  processes  of  evolution.  More 
specifically,  foreign  genes  inserted  into 
an  organism  may  cause  that  organism 
to  behave  in  a  dangerous,  and  perhaps 
unpredictable,  manner.  The  guidelines 
thus  seek  to  ensure  that  micro-organ 
isms  bearing  transplanted  genes  are 
contained  in  the  laboratory. 

They  spell  out  our  levels  of  physical 
containment  to  be  used  in  such  experi 
ments,  designated  PI  to  P4,  ranging 
from  use  of  standard  microbiological 
techniques  (PI)  to  the  use  of  specially 
equipped  facilities  akin  to  biological 
warfare  laboratories  (P4).  And,  as  a 
second  line  of  defence,  they  spell  out 
three  levels  of  biological  containment, 
EKI  to  EK3,  which  must  be  used  for 
experiments  involving  the  insertion  of 
genes  into  a  strain  of  the  common  gut 
bacterium  E.  coli — the  organism  which 
will  be  used  for  most  experiments.  The 
levels  are  as  follows: 

•EKI— use  of  standard  £.  coli  KI2, 
a  laboratory  strain  of  E.  coli  which 
has  been  used  for  genetic  experiments 
for  decades.  Foreign  genes  are  inser 
ted  into  the  bacterium  by  splicing 
them  into  a  plasmid  (a  ring  of  bac 
terial  DNA  which  reproduces  inde 
pendently  from  the  bacterium's 
chromosomes)  and  reintroducing  the 
recombinant  into  the  bacterium,  or  by 
splicing  them  into  the  DNA  of  a  bac- 
teriophage  which  then  infects  E.  coli 
K12. 

•EK2 — the  use  of  specially  mutated 
strains  of  E.  coli  or  bacteriophage 
which,  according  to  laboratory  tests, 
are  virtually  incapable  of  surviving  out 
side  the  laboratory  so  that  the  recom 
binant  DNA  will  have  less  than  1  in 
10""  chances  of  surviving  in  the  natural 
environment. 

•EK3— the  same  as  EK2  except  that 
the  survivability  has  been  tested  in 
animals,  plants  and  other  environ 
ments. 

•  The  guidelines  assign  specific  physical 
and  biological  safety  levels  to  various 
types  of  experiments  on  the  basis  of 
their  potential  hazards  (see  box).  They 


Nature  vol.  Ml  July  I  yy/6 

also  spell  out  safety  rules  for  experi 
ments  involving  recombinants  formed 
by  splicing  genes  into  the  DNA  of 
animal  viruses,  which  are  then  grown 
in  cell  cultures  to  provide  multiple 
copies  of  the  foreign  genes.  The  final 
guidelines  alter  some  of  the  contain 
ment  levels  proposed  by  the  advisory 
committee,  but  no  substantial  altera 
tions  have  been  made. 

Cautious  approach 

How  did  Fredrickson  arrive  at  his  final 
decision  when  confronted  with  such  a 
wealth  of  conflicting  advice?  His  first, 
and  most  fundamental,  consideration 
was  simply  whether  the  research  should 
be  allowed  to  go  ahead  at  all,  in  view 
of  the  potential  hazards.  The  majority 
of  the  commentators  on  the  guidelines 
recommended  that  it  should,  but  he  was 
advised  to  take  an  extremely  cautious 
approach  by  two  of  the  most  eminent 
of  the  commentators,  neither  of  whom 
intends  to  conduct  experiments  with 
recombinant  DNA. 

Dr  Robert  Sinsheimer,  chairman  of 
the  Department  of  Biology  at  Califor 
nia  Institute  of  Technology,  argued  in 
a  letter  to  Fredrickson  that  the  experi 
ments  present  a  serious  hazard  if  they 
breach  the  genetic  barrier  between 
higher  organisms  (eukaryotes)  and 
lower  organisms  (prokaryotes).  "One 
need  not  continue  to  spin  out  potential 
horror  stories",  he  wrote,  "the  point 
is  that  we  will  be  perturbing,  in  a 
major  way,  an  extremely  intricate  eco 
logical  interaction  which  we  understand 
only  dimly".  As  for  the  guidelines 
themselves,  Sinsheimer  stated:  "I  can 
not  believe  that  under  these  proposed 
guidelines  the  organism  can  be  con 
tained.  If  the  work  is  going  on  in  a 
hundred  laboratories  about  the  United 
States,  performed  by  technicians, 
graduate  students,  etc.,  the  organism 
will  inevitably  escape — and  will  enter 
into  the  various  ecological  niches 
known  to  be  inhabited  by  E.  coli."  He 
therefore  proposed  that  all  work  with 
recomhinant  DNA  should  be  per 
formed  under  maximum  containment 
conditions  at  a  single  institution  in  the 
United  States,  and  that  there  should 
he  an  intensive  effort  to  seek  a  micro 
organism  more  suitable  than  E.  coli 
for  the  work. 

The  other  eminent,  though  more 
flamboyant,  critic  of  the  guidelines, 
Erwin  Chargaff  of  Columbia  University, 
recommended  that  all  work  on  recom 
binant  DNA  should  be  halted  for  at 
least  two  years  to  allow  time  for  the 
hazards  to  be  assessed.  Chargaff  asked, 
in  a  letter  published  in  Science,  "Have 
we  the  right  to  counteract,  irreversibly, 
the  evolutionary  wisdom  of  millions  of 
>ears.  in  order  to  satisfy  the  ambition 
and  the  curiosity  of  a  few  scientists?" 
The  advisory  committee  did  not  con 
sider  Sinsheimer's  or  Chargaff's  pro- 


152 


Guidelines  in  detail 

The  guidelines  define  four  levels  of  physical  containment,  designated,  in  order  of  in 
creasing  stringency,  PI  to  P4,  and  three  levels  of  biological  containment,  EK.I  to  EK.3,  and 
assign  experiments  to  them  on  the  basis  of  potential  risk.  The  following  is  a  summary  of 
containment  levels  specified  for  various  sources  of  DNA. 


a.  Shotgun  experiments  using  £.  coli  as  the  host 
Non-embryonic  primate  tissue 
Embryonic  primate  tissue  or  germ  line  cells 
Other  mammals 
Birds 

Cold  blooded  vertebrates,  non-embryonic 
embryonic  or  germ  line 
If  vertebrate  produces  a  toxin 
Other  cold  blooded  animals  and  lower  eukaryotes 

If  Class  2  pathogen*,  produces  a  toxin,  or  carries  a  pathogen 
Plants 

Prokaryotes  that  exchange  genes  with  E.  coli 
Class  I  agents  (non-pathogens) 
Low  risk  pathogens  (for  example,  enterobacteria) 
Moderate  risk  pathogens  (for  example,  5.  lyphi) 
Higher  risk  pathogens 

Prokaryotes  that  do  not  exchange  genes  with  £.  coli 
Class  I  agents 

Class  2  agents  (moderate  risk  pathogens) 
Higher  pathogens 


P3+EK3  or  P4-f  EK.2 

P3  +  EK2 

P3  +  EK2 

P3+EK2 

P2  +  EK2 

P2+EK.I 

P3  +  EK2 

P2+EK.1 

P3  +  EK2 

P2+EKI 

PI  +  EKI 
P2+EKI 
P2  +  EK2 
banned 

P2  +  EK2orP3  +  EKl 

P3  +  EK2 

banned 


In  all  above  cases,  if  DNA  is  at  least  99%  pure  before  cloning  and  contains  no  harmful 
genes,  either  physical  or  biological  containment  levels  can  be  reduced  one  step. 


b.  Cloning  plasmid,  bacteriophage  and  other  virus  genes  in  £.  coli 
Animal  viruses 

If  clones  free  from  harmful  regions 
Plant  viruses 

99%  pure  organelle  DNA,  Primates 
other  eukaryotes 
Impure  organelle  DNA:  shotgun  conditions  apply. 

Plasmid  or  phage    DNA    from  hosts  that  exchange  genes 
with  £.  coli 

If  plasmid  or  phage  genome  does  not  contain  harmful  genes 
or  if  DNA  segment  99  %  pure  and  characterised 
Otherwise,  shotgun  conditions  apply. 

Plasmids  and  phage  from  hosts  which  do  not  exchange  genes 
with  £.  coli 

Shotgun  conditions  apply,  unless  minimal  risk  that  recom 
binant  will  increase  pathogenicity  or  ecological  potential 
of  the  host,  then 

NB.  cDNAs  synthesiscd  in  vitro  from  cellular  or  viral  RNAs 
categories. 

c.  Animal  virus  vectors 

Defective  polyoma  virus  +  DNA  from  non-pathogen 

Defective  polyoma  virus  +  DNA  from  Class  2  agent 
If  cloned  recombinant  contains  no  harmful  genes  and  host 
range  of  polyoma  unaltered,  reduce  to 

Defective  SV40  +  DNA  from  non-pathogens 
If  inserted  DNA  is  99%  pure  segment  of  prokaryotic  DNA 
lacking  toxigenic  genes,  or  a  segment  of  eukaryotic  DNA 
whose  function  has  been  established  and  which  has  pre 
viously  been  cloned  in  a  prokaryotic  host-vector  system,  and 
ifinfeclivityofSV40in  human  cells  unaltered 

Defective  SV40  lacking  substantial  section  of  the  late  region  + 
DNA  from  non-pathogens,  if  no  helper  used  and  no  virus 
particles  produced 

Defective  SV40  +  DNA  from  non-pathogen  can  be  used  to 
transform  established  lines  of  non-permissive  cells  under  P3 
provided  no  infectious  particles  produced.  Rescue  of  SV40 
from  such  cells  requires 


P4+EK2orP3+EK3 
P3+EK2 

P3  +  EKI  orP2  +  EK2 
P3  +  EKI  or  P2  +  EK2 
P2+EKI 


PI  +  EKI 


P2+EK2or 

are  included  in  above 


P3 
P4 

P3 
P4 


P3 

P3 

P4 


d.  Plant  host-vector  systems 

P2  conditions  can  be  approximated  by  insect-free  greenhouses,  steiilization  of  plant, 

pots,  soil  and  runoff  water,  and  use  of  standard  microbiological  practice. 
P3  conditions  require  use  of  growth  chambers  under  negative  pressure  and  routine 

fumigation  for  insect  control. 

Otherwise,  similar  conditions  to  those  prescribed  for  animal  systems  apply. 
'Classes  for  pathogenic  agents  as  defined  by  the  Center  for  Disease  Control. 


posals  during  its  public  meetings,  but 
Fredrickson    alluded    to    them    in    a 
lengthy  statement  published  along  with 
the    guidelines.    Recognising    that    the 
breaching    of    genetic    barriers    might 
pose  a   hazard,   Fredrickson   neverthe 
less  argued   that   the   research  can   be 
controlled    so    that    it   .is    carried    out 
safely.   Noting  that  "the  international 
scientific    community    ...    has    indi 
cated  a  desire  to  proceed  with  research 
in   a   conservative   manner",   and   that 
"most  of  the  considerable  public  com 
mentary  on   the  subject,   while  urging 
caution,  has  also  favoured  proceeding", 
Fredrickson  pointed  out  that  there  is,' 
in   any  case,   no  way   to   prohibit   trie 
research  throughout  the  world.  "There 
is,"  he  added,  "no  reason  to  attempt 
it." 

Having  decided  that  there  should  be 
no  flat  proscription  on  the  research, 
Fredrickson  turned  to  some  of  the 
chief  concerns  raised  by  the  critics  of 
the  guidelines.  The  most  prominent 
concern  arises  from  the  fact  that  most 
work  with  recombinant  DNA  will  take 
place  with  the  E.  coli  KI2  bacterium. 
Since  E.  coli  is  a  common  inhabitant 
of  the  human  gut,  many  observers 
have  considered  it  a  dangerous  choice 
for  the  research.  In  particular,  a  group 
of  scientists  from  the  Boston  area 
urged  that  a  different  host  for  trans 
planted  genes  be  developed,  and  that 
the  use  of  E.  coli  be  phased  out  as 
swiftly  as  possible. 

Fredrickson    argues,    however,    that 
since  the  bacterium  has  been  used  for 
decades  as  the  geneticists'  workhorse, 
there    is    extensive    knowledge    of    its 
behaviour  and,  moreover,  there  is  good 
evidence  that  it  is  unlikely  to  survive 
for  long  ,in  the  environment  in  com 
petition  with  wild  strains  of  E.  coli.  In 
other  words,  E.  coli  K12  itself  provides 
a   level   of  biological   containment.   "I 
believe  that  because  of  this  experience, 
E.  coli  KI2  will  provide  a  host-vector 
system    that  .is   safer   than   other   sys 
tems",    Fredrickson    argued,    and    he 
declined    to   set   a    limit   on    when    it 
should  be  phased  out  of  the  research. 
Another  area  of  concern   with   the 
proposed    guidelines    centred    on    how 
they  should  be  implemented,  and  that 
section    has    been    extensively   revised. 
The   guidelines   strictly   apply  only   to 
research  supported  by  NIH,  and  inves 
tigators  must  comply  with  them  before 
they  can   receive  a  grant.  Some  com 
mentators  suggested   that  principal  in 
vestigators   be    required   to   obtain    in 
formed    consent    from    all    laboratory 
personnel   before   proceeding   with   re 
combinant     DNA     experiments,     but 
Fredrickson      opted      instead      for     a 
requirement     that     the     investigators 
simply   inform   all   laboratory   workers 
of    the    real    and     potential    hazards 
associated  with   the  experiments. 
The  guidelines  also  require  that  each 


153 


institution  where  recombinant  DNA 
experiments  will  be  conducted  should 
establish  a  biohazards  committee,  to 
ensure  that  facilities  meet  specified 
requirements,  training  is  adequate  and 
so  on.  The  advisory  committee  had 
firmly  recommended  that  such  com 
mittees  should  not  be  responsible  for 
determining  the  containment  condi 
tions  for  specific  experiments,  but 
Fredrickson  deleted  that  prohibition, 
leaving  the  matter  up  to  individual 
institutions. 

A  final  point  concerning  implemen 
tation  which  is  clearly  worrying  many 
people  is  that  the  guidelines  do  not 
apply  to  industry.  Early  last  month, 
however,  Fredrickson  briefed  officials 
from  various  industries  on  the  guide 
lines  and  received  from  them  expres 
sions  of  support  for  their  intent  and 
their  general  provisions.  Some  officials 
expressed  reservations  about  specific 
items,  however,  such  as  the  provision 
prohibiting  large-scale  experiments 
with  recombinant  DNA,  and  the  Phar 
maceutical  Manufacturers'  Association 
has  decided  to  convene  a  committee 
to  review  whether  the  guidelines  are 
applicable  to  the  drug  industry. 


Effect  of  guidelines 

Now  that  these  guidelines  have  been 
issued,  how  do  they  affect  academic 
scientists  conducting,  or  hoping  to  con 
duct,  recombinant  DNA  experiments? 
First,  they  specify  that  many  experi 
ments  should  use  EK2  or  EK3  bio 
logical  containment,  and  until  crippled 
micro-organisms  which  meet  those  cri 
teria  are  available,  such  experiments 
should  not  be  conducted.  The  advisory 
committee  which  drafted  the  guidelines 
is  responsible  for  certifying  -whether 
crippled  strains  meet  the  criteria. 

A  strain  of  E.  coli  produced  by  Roy 
Curtiss  of  the  University  of  Alabama 
(called  V-I776)  has  been  proposed  as 
an  EK2  system  with  two  specific  plas- 
mids  (pSCIOl  and  Col  El-kan).  Curtiss, 
who  has  'built  many  crippling  muta 
tions  into  the  bacteria  in  an  effort 
which  took  the  best  part  of  a  year, 
has  provided  the  committee  -with 
reams  of  data  on  its  survivability.  Last 
month,  a  subcommittee  voted  unani 
mously  that  the  strain  mee-ts  the  EK2 
specifications,  and  the  full  committee 
is  expected  to  approve  it  in  the  next 
few  weeks.  That  would  pave  the  way 
for  many  experiments. 

But  a  confusing  situation  has  deve 
loped  with  respect  to  two  other  can 
didate  EK2  strains.  At  its  last  meeting 
in  April,  the  committee  approved  a 
strain  of  bacteriophage  lambda,  deve 
loped  by  Philip  Leder  of  NIH  as  an 
EK2  strain.  But  a  subcommittee  which 
met  last  mon.th  to  consider  a  second 
candidate  strain,  developed  by  Fred 
Blattner  at  the  University  of  Wis 
consin,  was  divided  on  a  matter  which 


Nature  Vol.   262  July  I   1976 

affects  both  strains,  fn  short,  two  sub 
committee  members  refused  to  en 
dorse  the  use  of  either  phage  as  an 
EK2  system  unless  they  are  used  in 
conjunction  with  crippled  bacteria. 
The  fuU  committee  will  take  up  that 
thorny  issue  when  it  next  meets  in 
September.  Curtiss's  E.  coli  strain, 
incidentally,  is  resistant  to  infection 
by  phage  A. 

Many  of  the  objections  and  reserva 
tions  which  critics  have  levelled  at  the 
guidelines  are  now  beginning  to  crop 
up  in  local  debates  in  and  around  the 
universities  where  the  research  will  be 
conducted.  In  that  regard,  the  situa 
tion  brewing  in  Cambridge,  Mass., 
may  be  an  indication  of  things  to 
come.  It  began  quietly  a  few  months 
ago,  when  some  researchers  at  Harvard 
proposed  that  a  laboratory,  meeting 
P3  requirements,  be  established  in  the 
Harvard  Biology  Labs.  The  facility, 
which  would  cost  some  $350,000, 
would  have  involved  converting  some 
existing  laboratory  space,  and  the  in 
tent  was  to  undertake  a  variety  of 
work  in  it,  including  some  recombinant 
DNA  experiments. 

The   proposal    met   with   opposition 
within   Harvard,   however,   largely  be 
cause  the  biology  labs  are  old.  infested 
with  cockroaches  and  with  a  species  of 
at>t  which  has  so  far  evaded  attempts 
at    eradication.    In    short,    critics   sug 
gested  that  the  building  is  unsuitable 
for    a    P3     facility.    Their    criticisms 
broadened  into  an  assault  on  the  pro 
posal    to    conduct    recombinant    DNA 
experiments  at  Harvard,  however,  and 
the  dispute  spilled  over  into  the  city 
when    the    matter    was    reported    at 
length  in  Boston's  weekly  newspaper. 
Approval  of  the  laboratory  by  the 
Harvard  authorities  was  all  but  assured, 
since   the   concept  had  been   endorsed 
by  a  biohazards  committee.  Harvard's 
Committee    on    Research    Policy,    and 
the  Dean  of  Arts  and  Sciences.   But, 
when  he  read  about  the  dispute  in  the 
newspapers,     Cambridge     citv    Mayor 
Alfred  Velucci  stepped  in.  He  called 
a  council  meeting  on  June  23 — ironic 
ally  the  day  the  NIH  guidelines  were 
issued — to  discuss  the  matter,   and   a 
string  of  scientists  testified  about  the 
potential   hazards   and   benefits  of   re 
combinant     DNA     research.     By    all 
accounts,   the  atmosphere  was  highly 
charged,   and    there   was   considerable 
heated  discussion. 

The  matter  has  now  gone  well 
beyond  the  issue  of  whether  the 
laboratory  should  be  built,  however, 
for  Velucci  has  introduced  a  resolution 
which  would  prohibit  all  recombinant 
DNA  experiments  in  Cambridge- 
even  those  deemed  to  have  minimal 
risk — for  two  years.  The  council  will 
vote  on  the  resolution  on  July  7,  and 
the  outcome  will  be  closely  watched 
around  the  country.  d 


APPENDIX. E 


y  of  California  San  Francisco        1475  Fourth  Avenue  San  Francisco.California  94143       Telephone:(415)  666-25 


Michela  Reichman,   Campus  Director 
News  Services  and  Publications 


For  more  information  contact 
Michela  Reichman,    666-2557 


FOR  IMMEDIATE   RELEASE 


SAN  FRANCISCO,   Oct.    5  —  A  new  biosafety  committee  has  been  created  at  the 

I 

University  of  California  San  Francisco  to  inventory,  monitor  and  maintain 
safeguards  for  research  in  genetic  engineering,  known  as  recombinant  DNA, 
it  was  announced  today  by  Francis  A.  Sooy,  M.D.,  Chancellor.   The  13-member 
committee  includes  two  public  members  in  addition  to  UCSF  researchers  and  a 
professor  of  bioethics,  Chancellor  Sooy  declared. 


Chairman  of  the  Committee  is  David  Martin,  Jr.,  associate  professor  of  medicine, 
biochemistry,  and  biophysics,  who  is  not  involved  in  DNA  research  himselfC 
Three  scientists  on  the  committee  are  doing  the  work;  Boyer,  Goodman  and  ^ 
McCarthy.  '^l^iHHU 


Members  of  the  committee  include: 

Herbert  Boyer,  Ph.D. 

James  Cleaver,  Pn.D. 

Louis  Diamond,  M.D. 

Howard  Goodman,  Ph.D 

Christine  Guthrie,  Pn.D. 

Keith  Hadley,  Ph.D. 

Albert  Jonsen,  Ph.D. 

David  Martin,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Chairman 

Brian  McCarthy,  Ph.D. 

Harold  Vannus,  Pn.D. 

Francis  Curry,  M.D. 

Thomas  W.  Mellon 

(To  be  Appointed; 


Biochemistry  >  v^i£  i» 

Radiobiology  '"ft^;.;^^. 

Pediatrics/Cancer  Research  Institute 
Biochemistry/Biophysics    :  .  •  ;'   , 
Biochemistry/Biopnysics  :.;  :^--  ^ 
Laboratory  Medicine/Microbiology  • 
Bioethics/Health  Policy  Program  /  r 
Medicine/Biochemistry/Biophysics 
Biochemistry/Biophysics  :   . 

Microbiology     •^>:^^''^_^  Jf 
Public  Health  (Former  Director) 1 
Public  Member  (Outgoing  CAO  for  S.F.) 
Public  Member 


The  charge  of  the  committee, which  function? through  the  Academic  Senate 

according  _to  Chancellor  Sooy,  is  to  conform  .to  reoulations  issued  by 

Department  of  Health,  education  and  Welfare  in  connection  with  any  research  1lea|US 

with  genetic  engineering,  in  order  to  protect  both  the* public  and  laboratory  wo£k—i 

.-:'-.'.  •-'/^'•y^:|f 
ers  against  any  possible  contamination.   Tne  specific  charge  is  to: 

10/5/76 


-V ' 

r  ••/  155 


UCSF  Biosafety  Committee  -  page  2  ' 
1)  Advise  tne  institution  on  policies. 


2>   Soks6  a"d  maintain  a  central  reference  file  and  library  of  catalogs, 
books,  articles,  newsletters  and  other  communications  as  a  source  of 

«!??  *"!  ^ference  regarding,  for  example,  the  availability  and 
£S««?    ^  Safety  equipment'  the  availability  and  level  of  bio 
logical  containment  for  various  host-vector  systems,  suitable  training 
of  personnel,  and  data  on  certain  recombinant  DNA's 


Xr^AS?fSty  and  °perations  manual  *>r  facilities  maintained  by 
the  institution  and  used  in  support  of  recombinant  DNA  research? 


Softer   ^af?  °"  a^lications  *>*  "search  support  and  annually 
and  e^feJtLf  J  I?         "^  PrOcedures  ^d  Practices  "and  the   training 

~  been  reviewed 


156 


UC&z 

University  of  California^^B  San  Francisco 


A  letter  from  the  Chancellor:  Recombinant  DMA 

March  16, 1977 
TO:  Members  of  the  campus  community  and  friends  of  UC-San  Francisco 

D   My  original  intention  in  starting  this  newsletter  was  not  simply  to  keep  you  abreast  of 

developments  in  our  building  program,  but  to  take  the  opportunity  from  time  to  time  to  go  Into 
broad  Issues  of  mutual  concern  and  interest  in  the  areas  of  education  and  training  of  health 
professionals,  patient  care  and  community  outreach,  research  and  the  delivery  of  health  care  —  as 
they  affect  this  campus,  the  city,  the  state  and  the  nation.  I  would  like  to  spend  some  time 
therefore  to  discuss  in  depth  what  is  happening  today  in  modern  biology. 

D   The  speed  of  new  knowledge  in  the  biomedical  sciences  Is  astounding.  With  all  modesty  I  must 
point  out  that  because  of  work  done  on  our  campus,  tiny  babies  all  over  the  world  are  being  saved 
who  before  would  never  have  achieved  a  normal  life;  thousands  of  persons  born  deaf  may  soon 
hear  almost  normal  speech;  people  with  tumors  the  size  of  a  pin-head  on  their  pituitary  glands 
are  being  operated  on  successfully  without  damage  to  their  brain;  a  fundamental  mechanism  in 
the  development  of  certain  skin  cancers  is  now  known;  and  bacteria  that  convert   sunlight  into 
energy  have  been  discovered. 

But  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the  search  for  knowledge  and  for  control  of  our  world  has  been 
a  continual  struggle  with  the  unknown  and  with  our  own  fears  and  ignorance.  Each  new  discovery 
necessarily  has  led  us  into  unknown  situations  and  exposed  us  to  new  risks  and  dangers. 
Madame  Curie  died  of  X-rays  she  gave  the  world;  our  own  Karl  Meyer  was  criticized  for  working 
with  psittacosis  because  it  was  so  dangerous,  but  it  is  because  of  his  work  that  people  are  not 
dying  of  it  today. 

It  is  in  this  context  that  I  would  like  to  discuss  with  you  some  of  the  issues  in  the  current  public 
discussions  about  the  exciting  new  research  tool  in  genetics  called  "recombinant  DMA"  by  the 
scientists  and  "gene  splicing"  or  "genetic  engineering"  in  the  press.  It  is  appropriate,  for 
scientists  on  this  campus  have  been  in  the  forefront  in  developing  the  technique  that  has  made 
this  possible  as  well  as  in  developing  maximum  safety  guidelines  and  regulations,  just  as  our 
campus  took  leadership  some  years  ago  in  developing  guidelines  for  Committees  on  Human 
Research,  which  now  have  become  routine  procedure  for  research  institutions  in  this  country. 

What  is  "DNA"?  It  stands  for  the  initials  of  the  chemical  substance  which  forms  the  long, 
alphabet-like  blueprint  for  building,  duplicating,  operating  and  repairing  the  genes  of  cells  in 
nearly  every  living  thing.  It  is  a  particular  segment  of  DNA  which  defines,  for  example,  whether  a 
cell  will  become  a  muscle  or  an  eye. 

D    Some  five  years  ago,  scientists  at  UCSF  and  Stanford  developed  a  simple  technique  which  made 
It  possible  to  split  apart  and  then  splice  together  DNA  from  different  genes  (or  segments  of  genes) 
in  bacteria,  and  thereby  "recombine"  them.  In  so  doing,  they  were  duplicating  in  the  test  tube  the 
process  of  genetic  exchange  which  nature  has  been  carrying  out  in  bacteria  (and  all  higher 
organisms  —  including  humans)  since  the  beginning  of  life ...  in  short,  what  bacteria  do  to 
themselves  by  the  billions  daily. 


FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  "'"  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  "*"  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY 

UCSF  Library  &  Center  For  Knowledge  Management  Archives  &  Special  Collections  Department 


157 


However,  the  scientists  at  that  time  were  troubled  enough  by  the  possible  hypothetical  hazards 
(still  not  identified)  to  impose  a  temporary  moratorium  on  their  own  activities  while  they  studied 
the  situation.  The  dangers  from  improper  laboratory  safety  measures  were  a  concern. 
In  February,  1975,  leading  geneticists,  molecular  biologists,  biochemists  and  others  from  all  over 
the  world  met  at  Asilomar  to  iron  out  safety  guidelines.  Some  reporters  were  invited,  and  the 
meeting  was  published  widely  in  the  lay  press.  These  voluntary  guidelines  were  extended  through 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health  and  made  mandatory  for  all  recipients  of  NIH  grants.  However, 
they  did  not  apply  to  laboratories  not  funded  by  NIH,  nor  did  they  apply  to  industrial  or  commercial 
laboratories.  There  was  considerable  controversy  in  the  scientific  press  over  whether  or  not  these 
guidelines  were  adequate.  The  official  NIH  guidelines  finally  were  issued  by  the  Director  in  July, 
1976.  While  not  yet  law,  they  carry  enormous  weight,  since  most  scientists  are  dependent  upon 
NIH  funding  to  carry  out  their  research. 

D    Under  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  guidelines,  experiments  in  genetic  manipulation  in  living 
organisms  call  for  facilities  with  varying  degrees  of  physical  containment  capability,  ranging  from 
"P-1 "  to  "P-4",  according  to  the  degree  of  potential  hazard  involved. 

On  our  UCSF  campus  there  are  several  "P-1"  laboratories,  one  "P-2"  laboratory  and  one"P-3" 
laboratory,  which  is  where  our  recombinant  DNA  work  is  carried  out.  The  latter  is  limited  at 
present  to  use  by  the  five  investigators  and  their  properly  trained  staffs,  and  conducted  under  the 
most  rigorous  interpretation  of  the  NIH  guidelines. 

The  guidelines  also  set  a  series  of  biological  levels  of  control  which  are  by  far  the  most  effective. 
They  allow  only  those  strains  of  bacteria  to  be  used  which  cannot  survive  outside  the  test-tube. 
They  also  classify  all  artificial  recombinant  DNA  experiments  on  the  basis  of  potential  hazard,  and 
forbid  the  use  of  any  dealing  with  dangerous  human  pathogens  or  unauthorized  release  of 
artificial  organisms  into  the  biosphere;  and,  finally,  they  require  the  establishment  of  broadly 
based  committees  on  all  campuses,  containing  both  scientists  and  non-scientists,  charged  with 
certification  and  monitoring  of  all  this  work,  as  well  as  exchanging  information  on  and  off  campus. 

D    Last  year  UCSF  established  a  Biosafety  Committee  with  the  responsibility  of  ensuring  strict 
adherence  to  guidelines  established  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  for  all  work  they  fund  in 
recombinant  DNA.  Indeed,  the  committee  has  gone  farther  than  the  NIH  regulations,  and  also  has 
assumed  the  same  responsibility  for  work  done  in  other  areas  of  biological  research. 

It  consists  of  UCSF  scientists  and  one  technician  plus  several  public  members,  including 
Thomas  J.  Mellon,  the  former  Chief  Administrative  Officer  for  the  city  of  San  Francisco,  Francis  J. 
Curry,  M.D.,  the  former  Director  of  Public  Health  for  San  Francisco  (who  now  is  a  member  of  the 
faculty  of  UCSF),  and  Lucy  McCabe,  an  attorney  who  has  been  active  with  the  California  Rural 
Legal  Assistance.  The  campus  officer  for  Health  and  Environmental  Safety  is  an  ex  officio 
member.  Chairman  is  David  W.  Martin,  Jr.,  M.D.,  a  medical  geneticist  and  biochemist  not  involved 
in  recombinant  DNA  work,  and  Vice-Chairman  is  Albert  R.  Jonsen,  Ph.D.,  Associate  Professor  of 
Bioethics  at  UCSF,  who  is  a  national  leader  in  public  policy  discussions  on  many  aspects  of 
medical  and  scientific  bioethics. 

D    The  UCSF  Biosafety  Committee  has  made  a  strong  effort  to  do  its  work  in  the  public  spotlight 
and  to  educate  the  public,  other  Institutions  and  the  campus  community  about  safety  precautions. 

Public  announcements  were  made  at  the  time  of  the  formation  of  this  committee;  its  meetings 
and  minutes  are  open  to  the  public.  It  is  now  in  the  process  of  making  an  inventory  of  all  biological 
research  on  campus  (not  just  recombinant  DNA  technology)  for  which  safety  guidelines  are 
applicable. 

Many  of  our  people  are  acting  as  resource  to  individuals  and  legislative  bodies  attempting  to 
develop  constructive  regulations  which  will  meet  the  problems  raised  without  destroying  the 
ability  to  perform  this  important  research.  Both  Herbert  Boyerand  Professor  Jonsen  testified  in 


**••* 


FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  •""  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  "" 

UCSF  Library  &  Center  For  Knowledge  Mansgement  Archlvts  &  Special  Collections  Department 


158 


Sacramento  before  the  Keene  hearings;  Dr.  Boyer  participated  in  the  recent  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  seminar  in  Washington,  D.C.;  and  Dean  Julius  R.  Krevans  of  our  School  of  Medicine 
served  on  a  national  committee  created  by  NIH  to  review  its  guidelines  and  make  recommen 
dations  for  improvement  and  implementation.  Dr.  Boyer  was  one  of  the  original  group  of  scientists 
responsible.for  the  Asilomar  conference. 

In  addition  to  the  public  members  on  our  Biosafety  committee,  I  personally  have  informed 
Mayor  Moscone,  Chief  Administrative  Officer  Boas,  President  Kopp  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors 
and  Acting  Health  Director  Dr.  Smookler  of  our  activities. 

n    UCSF  and  Stanford  scientists  who  first  developed  the  recomblnant  DNA  technology  proposed  to 
their  respective  institutions  and  NIH  that  a  patent  be  applied  for  —  primarily  to  ensure  that  the 
same  regulations  would  be  enforced  by  industry  and  private  firms  engaged  in  commercial 
exploitation  of  this  knowledge. 

D    In  July, 1976,  the  Cambridge  City  Council  held  heated  and  highly  publicized  public  hearings  about 
work  proposed  at  Harvard  and  MIT,  after  which  it  instituted  a  temporary  moratorium  on  these 
experiments  while  a  panel  of  scientists  and  lay  persons  studied  the  situation.  After  much  study, 
the  City  Council  advised  Harvard  to  go  ahead  with  recombinant  DNA  work,  and  Harvard  is 
proceeding  with  the  construction  of  a  new  building  for  such  a  facility,  under  regulations  set  by  the 
city  as  well  as  NIH. 

Other  cities  and  at  least  two  other  states  have  been  studying  DNA  research  activity  in  theirareas. 
Both  Sen.  Kennedy  and  Sen.  Dale  Bumpers  will  have  national  regulatory  legislation  before 
Congress  this  session.  The  city  of  San  Diego  looked  closely  at  UC-San  Diego's  projects  and  now 
has  agreed  that  that  institution  may  go  ahead.  Berkeley  City  Council  is  beginning  to  study  its 
situation,  primarily  with  regard  to  private  and  commercial  development,  and  DC-Berkeley  has 
offered  to  help  the  city  in  this.  The  legislation  proposed  by  State  Assemblyman  Keene  after  his 
joint  committee  hearings  calls  for  regulation  of  commercial  as  well  as  academic  laboratories 
engaged  in  this  work. 

Specifically,  it  calls  for  the  establishment  of  a  17-person  commission  to  establish  temporary 
guidelines  by  February,  1978  and  permanent  guidelines  by  March,  1978  for  "all  hazardous 
biological  research  in  the  state,"  and  would  require  all  researchers  to  apply  to  the  commission  for 
certification  of  research  in  which  they  are  involved  —  industrial  and  commercial  as  well  as 
.  academic.  The  guidelines  would  have  to  be  "no  less  stringent"  than  those  of  the  NIH. 

D  A  number  of  questions  have  been  raised  about  research  in  recomblnant  DNA,  and  scientists  have 
testified  and  written  on  both  sides  of  these  Issues.  Safety  is  a  prime  concern.  Another  concern  is 
the  need  to  apply  the  same  guidelines  to  regulation  of  commercial  exploitation  of  this  knowledge 
as  is  applied  now  to  NIH-funded  academic  laboratories. 

Other  concerns  expressed  range  from  the  ethics  of  tampering  with  the  genetic  pool,  to  the 
possible  results  if  such  information  were  placed  in  the  wrong  hands.  Some  people  are  calling  for 
a  ban  on  all  research  done  with  recombinant  DNA  technology  because  of  what  "might  happen"  in 
the  future. 

I  should  emphasize  that,  unlike  some  of  the  other  scientific  research  done  all  over  the  world,  most 
of  the  "dangers"  in  recombinant  DNA  work  are  hypothetical,  as  Prof.  Jonsen  points  out  below. 
The  safety  precautions,  on  the  other  hand,  which  are  covered  by  the  NIH  guidelines,  are  parallel  to 
similar  regulations  initiated  in  previous  years  when  similar  concerns  were  identified  about  work 
in  radioactive  materials,  viruses  and  other  biomedical  research  and  therapy. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  intense  concern  about  recombinant  DNA  research,  shown  by  some 
scientists  and  some  members  of  the  public,  reflects  in  part  a  suspicion  of  science  and  technology 
which  is  a  spin-off  from  what  is  seen  as  improper  use  in  prior  times  of  the  results  of  developments 
in  nuclear  physics  and  chemical  and  bacteriological  warfare.  In  connection  with  this  it  should  be 
pointed  out  that  it  was  the  Scientists  who  warned  the  public  of  the  dangers  in  both  these  areas. 


FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  "•"  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  ""* 

UCSF  Library  &  Center  For  Knowledge  Management  Archives  &  Special  Collections  Department 


Sculptures  depicting  the  initial  meeting  of  Swanson  and  Boyer  in  late 
1975.   With  the  living  originals. 


-'  160  .  APPENDIX  G 


VSXJ 


'ers"y  o(  Ca(i<°""'"* 

Michela  Reichman,  Campus  Director 
News  Services  and  Publications 

'   For  further  information  call        .  F°R  IMMEDIATE  RELEASE 

666-2557  September  26,  1977 


University  of  California  San  Francisco  spokesmen  declared  today  that 
the  premature  use  of  a  plasmid  vector  in  recombinant  DNA  experiments  before 
the  plasmid  was  certified  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  was  in  no  way 
||   hazardous,  and  the  NIH  since  then  has  certified  the  plasmid  (PBR322)  as  being 

uj  (5      •  • 

entirely  safe  for  this  research. 


o" 

u-ra 
.  o 

:  S 
•  in 

>•> 

J  to 


According  to  Williain  o.  Reinhardt,  M.D.  ,  Acting  Dean'  of  the  School  of 
||   Medicine,  the  plasmid  was  used  for  a  short  time  early  this  year  in  the  UCSF  P3 
I  laboratory  in  experimentation  with  the  rat  insulin  gene. 

jl       T*e  UCSF  Biosafety  Committee  is  continuing  to  investigate  this  incident 
j  and  is  taking  steps  to  prevent  such  an  episode  from  happening  again,  Dean 
^  Reinhardt  declared. 

.|      "The  premature  use  early  this  year  of  pBR322,"  Dean  Keinhardt  declared, 

||  "was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  researchers  understood  that  it  had  been  approved 

j]|  for  use  by  the  NIH  Hecombinant  DNA  Connnittee. 

I     "  When  the  investigators  learned  a  few  weeks  late  that  the  plasmid  had  not 
in  fact  been  certified,  they  stopped  the  cloning  experiments  with  pBR322. 
Subseguently."  oean  Beinhardt  declared,  "the  exp^i^ts  Uere  carried  out  with 
a  Plasmid  (pMM)  that  was  certified,  and  the  results  were  co^unicated  in  an 
article  in  Science  Magazine  of  June  17,  1977."   (A  full  stateMnt  is  attached.) 
under  the  »!„  guidelines  for 


a  national  NIK  co^ttee  must  give  approval,  followed  by  written  certification,  of 


161 
Plasmid  vector          2-2-2-2 


any  plasmid  vector  before  it  can  be  used.   Plasmids  are  small  circular  bits  of  * 
DNA  (the  material  containing  genetic  information),  which  can  reproduce  themselves 
within  host  bacteria.   Bits  of  DNA  containing  genes  from  plants,  animals  or  other  " 
bacteria  can  be  spliced  onto  these  plasmids.   The  foreign  genes  are  then  reproduced, 
along  with  the  plasmids,  in  a  process  called  "cloning". 

The  announcement  in  June  of  the  cloning  of  the  rat  insulin  gene  by  the  UCSF 
team  received  world  attention,  for  it  opened  the  possibility  of  eventually  being 
able  to  mass  produce  human  insulin,  Dean  Reinhardt  declared,  and  has  made  possible 

developments  with  the  potential  for  much  social  good. 

i 

The  incident  is  described  in  an  article  published  in  Science  Magazine  this 


u 

week. 


FOR  REFERENCF  I  ISP  nm  V  ««~«  cno  occce 


I 


162 


.APPENDIX  H 


liversity  of  California 


San  Francisco 


1475  Fourth  Avenue  San  Francisco.CA  94143    (415)  666-: 


Michela  Reichman,   Campus  Director 
News  Services  and  Publications 

For  further  information  contact: 
Sydney  J.    Keith  or  Saul  W.   Abel, 

City  of  Hope,    (213)    626-4611; 
Joel  Gurin,   UC-San  Francisco,    (415)    666-2557 


FOR  YOUR  INFORMATION 

NOT  FOR  RELEASE  UNTIL  FRIDAY,    A.M. 
DECEMBER  2,    1977 


Memo  to:  Science  Writers,  Assignment  Editors 
Subject:  This  announcement  will  be  made  by  City  of  Hope 
at  a  press  conference  they  have  scheduled  for 
Thursday,  December  1;'  1977  at  1:00  p.m.  in  the 
Cordovan  Room  of  the  Biltmore  Hotel,  dowr'-cvn 
Los  Angeles. 

The  press  conference  is  being  co-ordinated  by 
Sydney  Keith  and  Saul  Abel  of  the  City  of  Hope; 
they  can  be  reached  at  the  above  number  or  -t 
the  Biltmore,  (213)  624-1011,  on  the  day  of  the 
conference. 

Those  who  cannot  attend  this  press  conference,  but 
who  would  like  to  interview  Dr.  Boyer  in  San  Francisco 
before,  should  contact  Joel  Gurin  at  UCSF.   We 
will  be  happy  to  arrange  this  for  you. 

A  team  of  scientists  working  at  the  City  of  Hope,  Los  Angeles,  and  at  UC- 
San  Francisco  say  that  their  successful  production  of  the  hormone,  somatostatin, 
in  bacteria  demonstrates  that  bacteria  can  be  used  safely  as  "factories"  to 
produce  much  needed  medically  useful  biological  materials. 

The  researchers  used  recombinant  DNA  techniques  to  introduce  an  artificial 
gene  into  bacteria,  which  were  "commanded"  by  the  gene  to  produce  the  mammalian 
hormone  somatostatin — the  first  time  that  a  medically  useful  hormone  has  been 
produced  in  bacteria.  The  genetic  engineering  feat,  reported  in  the  December  9 
issue  of  Science,  has  been  described  as  "a  scientific  triumph  of  the  first  order" 
by  Philip  Handler,  President  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Especially  significant  are  the  special  safety  features  incorporated  into 
this  experiment,  which  the  investigators  will  describe  at  the  press  conference. 
According  to  the  researchers,  virtually  identical  techniques  could  be  used 
safely  in  bacteria  to  produce  complex  biological  substances  ringing  from  insulin 
and  other  hormones  to  the  enzymes  used  in  industrial  fermentation. 

Present  at  the  press  conference  will  be  th~  three  principal  authors  of 
the  paper: 

Keiichi  Itakura,  Ph.D.,  City  of  Hope; 

Arthur  D.  Riggs,  Ph.D.,  City  of  Hope; 

Herbert  W.  Boyer,  Ph.D.,  UC-San  Francisco. 

Rachmiel  Levine,  M.D.,  Executive  Medical  Director  of  the  City  of  Hope 
National  Medical  Center  and  a  diabetologist,  will  be  present  to  discuss  possible 
clinical  implications  of  the  somatostatin  experiment. 


11/23/77 


163 


San  Francisco 


^la  Reichman,  Campus  Director 
>w  Services  and  Publications 

/For  further  information  contact: 
/  r  -dney  J.  Keith  or  Saul  W.  Abel, 

City  of  Hope,  (213)  626-4611; 
Joel  Gurin,  UC-San  Francisco,  (415)  666-2557 


NEWS  SERVICES  /  PUBLICATIO 


1475  Fourth  Avenue  San  Francisco.CA  94143    (415) 


NOT  FOR  RELEASE  UNTIL  FRIDAY,  A.M., 
DECEMBER  2,  1977 


Released  Jointly  by  City  of  Hope  National 
Medical  Center,  Los  Angeles  and  the  University 
of  California  San  Francisco  in  connection  with 
publication  in  Science  Magazine  of  December  9,  1977. 


A  team  of  scientists  working  at  the  City  of  Hope,  near  Los  Angeles, 
and  at  UC-San  Francisco  said  today  that  their  successful  production  of  the  hormone 
somatostatin  in  bacteria  demonstrates  that  bacteria  can  be  used  safely  as 
"factories"  to  produce  much  needed  medically  useful  biological  materials. 

The  genetic  engineering  feat,  reported  in  the  current  issue  of  the 
magazine  Science  (December  9,  1977) ,  was  described  as  "a  scientific  triumph  of 
the  first  order"  by  Philip  Handler,  President  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences 
in  testimony  before  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Commerce  hearings  on  research  with 
Recombinant  DNA  on  November  2. 

Keiichi  Itakura,  Ph.D.,  and  Arthur  D.  Riggs,  Ph.D.  of  the  City  of  Hope, 
and  Herbert  W.  Boyer,  Ph.D.  of  UCSF,  were  spokesmen  for  the  group,  which  includes 
Tadaaki  Hirose  and  Roberto  Crea  of  the  City  of  Hope,  and  Herbert  L.  Heyneker 
and  Francisco  Bolivar  of  UCSF,  all  Ph.D. 's. 

The  researchers  used  recombinant  DNA  techniques  to  introduce  an  artificial 
gene  into  bacteria,  which  were  "commanded"  by  the  gene  to  produce  the  mammalian 
hormone  somatostatin.   Since  the  experiment  included  special  safety  features, 
the  scientists  said  that  it  not  only  represents  "the  first  demonstrated  practical 
benefit  from  recombinant  DNA  technology,"  but  also  shows  that  such  benefits 
can  be  achieved  safely. 

The  reason  that  the  technique  developed  by  the  City  of  Hope-UCSF  team  is 
so  safe,  they  said,  is  because  bacteria  are  made  to  produce  an  inactive  precursor 
of  the  hormone.  Once  the  protein  is  extracted  from  the  cell  (a  process  whcih  kills 

the  bacteria),  it  is  transformed,  using  a  simple  chemical  procedure,  into  the 
active  form,  which  is  somatostatin. 

11/23/77  (more) 


164 


Xitin  3-3-3-3 

/ 

^eo  the  bloodstream,  it  is  a  valuable  tool  for  the  study  of  hormone  action  — 
ind  it  may  prove  useful  in  the  treatment  of  diabetes,  acute  pancreatitis 
(inflammation  of  the  pancreas) ,  and  the  hormone  disorder  acromegaly. 

According  to  City  of  Hope  and  UCSF  researchers,  other  scarce  but  important 
ic-nnones  «  such  as  insulin  and  growth  hormone  —  now  theoretically  could  be 
produced  with  recombinant  DNA  techniques,  perhaps  in  quantities  previously 
onavailable.  Experimental  and  clinical  work  with  growth  hormone  has  been  slowed 
yy  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  it  from  natural  sources;  if  it  were  more  readily 
ivailable,  the  researchers  said,  growth  hormone  might  be  used  to  treat  cases  of 
pituitary  dysfunction. 

The  work  with  somatostatin  represents  the  coming  together  of  two  of  the 
aewest  fields  in  biochemical  research:  artificial  gene  synthesis  and  the  use  of 
recombinant  DNA  techniques. 

Six  years  ago  Har  Gobind  Khorana  of  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology  synthesized  the  first  artificial  gene.   It  contained  genetic  information 
that  normally  makes  a  certain  kind  of  RNA  in  yeast.  An  alternate  method  of 
chemical  synthesis  ~  the  method  used  in  the  somatostatin  experiment  ~  was 
developed  by  Itakura  and  his  colleagues  at  the  City  of  Hope. 

Recombinant  DNA  techniques  -  which  provide  the  technology  for  transplanting 
artificial  and  natural  genes  from  any  species  into  bacteria  ~  have  been  developed 
since  1973.  Stanford's  Paul  Berg  and  Stanley  Cohen,  and  Boyer  at  UCSF,  are 
credited  with  originating  the  methods  of  recombinant  DNA  research.  Boyer  is  an 
investigator  of  the  Howard  Hughes  Medical  Research  Institute.    * 

•The  scnatostntin  work-at  both  Cityc*' Konr  and  UCSF. -was'  funded  by  contracts 

•  •   -  •  •"  *  * 

from  Geh^ntech,    Inc. 


Details  of  the  somatostatin  experimental  procedure  are  given  below. 

Recombinant  DNA  technology  provides  methods  of  using  enzymes  to  join  DNA 
from  different  species.   (DNA  is  the  double-spiral,  threadlike  substance 
heredity,  and  genes  are  sections  of  DNA.)  With  the  new  techniques,  scient 
now  can  "snip"  DNA  apart  and  "sew"  it  together  with  the  precision  of  a 

tailor-  (more) 


165 


4-4-4-4 

The  first  step  in  the  City  of  Hope-UCSF  experiment  was  the  chemical 
/thesis  of  a  gene  for  somatostatin.   Since  they  knew  the  fourteen  amino  acids 

make  up  th^  hormone  and  the  order  in  which  they  are  linked  together,  the 
fesearche-rs  wera  able  to  synthesize  a  piece  of  DNA  containing  the  correct  gehetic 
''../code.   Elements  were  added  to  provide  restriction  sites,  where  enzymes  acted  to 
produce  biochemically  "sticky"  ends  that  facilitated  later  reassembly. 

Next,  th3  scientists  '-,-  "  to  insert  theit  gene  into  a  plasmid  vector  — 
the  circular  ring  of  bacterial  DNA  that  would  carry  the  gene  inside  E.Coli 
bacteria.  They  used  a  modified  form  of  the  plasmid  pBR322,  into  whicn  a  natural 
gene  called  the  lac  operator  had  been  spliced  with  enzymes.   In  nature,  the  lac 
operator  is  a  ganetic  switch  that  turns  on  and  turns  off  the  genes  that  make 
a  certain  enzyme  in  bacteria.   The  researchers  hoped  that  they  could  turn  on  the 
gene  for  somatostatin  ~  and  cause  the  bacteria  to  make  the  hormone  —  by  putting 
the  artificial  gene  next  to  the  lac  operator  in  the  plasmid. 

The  design  for  the  experiment  included  built  in  safeguards  that  virtually 
eliminated  any  risks  of  dangerous  effects.  The  synthesized  gene  was  deliberately 
formulated  to  produce  a  large  precursor  molecule  —  a  hybrid  of  somatostatin  and 
a  bacterial  enzyme  —  which  is  inactive  until  treated  with  the  chemical  cyanogen 
bromide . 

This  hybrid  yielded  pure  synthetic  somatostatin  after  chemical  treatment. 
Several  tests  s'lowed  that  this  synthetic  hormone  had  the  same  chemical  properties 
and  biological  activity  as  natural  somatostatin  isolated  from  animals.  The 
researchers  concluded  t'   .  they  had  achieved  "the  first  expression  of  a  peptide 
product  from  a  gene  of  chemically  synthesized  origin." 

The  work  with  somatos '.  .tin  was  carried  ^ut  in  a  P3  containment  laboratory 
according  to  guidelines  established  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health. 


•  t 


166 
'scanner  Ready  --  Courier 


APPENDIX  I 


REGIS  McKENNA  PUBLIC  RELATIONS 
343  Waverley  Street 
Palo  Alto,  California   94301 
Regis  McKcnna  (415)  329-0810 

For : 

GENENTECH,  INC. 

460  Point  San  Bruno  Boulevard 

So.  San  Francisco,  California   94080 

Robert  Swanson  (415)  952-0123 


FOR  RELEASE  12  NOON 
SEPTEMBER  6,  1978 


FIRST  SUCCESSFUL  LABORATORY  PRODUCTION 
OF  HUMAN  INSULIN  ANNOUNCED 


SO.  SAN  FRANCISCO,  CA,  September  6,  1978 — Genentech,  Inc. 
and  City  of  Hope  National  Medical  Center,  a  private  research 
institution  and  hospital  in  Duarte,  California  today  announced  the 
successful  laboratory  production  of  human  insulin  using  recombinant 
DNA  technology. 

Insulin  is  a  protein  hormone  produced  in  the  pancreas 
and  used  in  the  metabolism  of  sugar  and  other  carbohydrates.   The 
synthesis  of  human  insulin  was  done  using  a  process  similar  to  the 
fermentation  process  used  to  make  antibiotics.   The  achievement  may 
be  the  most  significant  advance  in  the  treatment  of  diabetes  since 
the  development  of  animal  insulin  for  human  use  in  the  1920's.   The 
insulin  synthesis  is  the  first  laboratory  production  of  a  significant, 
widely  needed  human  hormone  using  recombinant  DNA  technology. 

Recombinant  DNA  is  the  technique  of  combining  the  genes 
of  different  organisms  to  form  a  hybrid  molecule.   DNA  (deoxyri- 
bonucleic  acid),  the  substance  genes  are  composed  of,  contains  the 
chemical  record  in  which  genetic  information  is  encoded. 

(more) 


Genentech,  Inc.   ^^         167 
*2-2-2-2 


Scientists  at  Genentech  and  City  of  Hope  inserted 
synthetic  genes  carrying  the  genetic  code  for  human  insulin, 
along  with  the  necessary  control  mechanism,  into  an  E.  coli 
bacterial  strain  which  is  a  laboratory  derivative  of  a  common 
bacteria  found  in  the  human  intestine.   Once  inside  the  bacteria, 
the  genes  were  "switched-on"  by  the  bacteria  to  translate  the 
code  into  either  "A"  or  "B"  protein  chains  found  in  insulin.   The 
•separate  chains  were  then  joined  to  construct  complete  insulin 
molecules . 

The  development  of  the  genetically  engineered  human 

insulin  was  funded  by  Genentech.   However,  the  work  was  a  coopera 
tive  effort  between  Genentech  and  City  of  Hope.   The  synthesis  of 
human  insulin  gene  was  accomplished  by  four  scientists  at  City  of 
Hope  Medical  Center  led  by  Roberto  Crea,  Ph.D.,  and  Keiichi  Itakura, 
Ph.D.    Scientists  at  Genentech,  "led  by  David  Goeddel,  Ph.D.  and 
Dennis  Kleid,  Ph.D.,  joined  the  genes  that  were  made  in  sections 
and  inserted  them,  along  with  the  control  mechanism  into  the  E.  coli 
bacterium.   Arthur  Riggs,  Ph.D.  at  the  City  of  Hope  and  Dr.  Goeddel 
of  Genentech  were  responsible  for  developing  the  final  assays, 
purification  and  joining  techniques. 

Approximately  1.5  million  diabetics  take  injections  of 
insulin.   At  present,  this  insulin  is  extracted  from  the  pancreas 
glands  of  swine  and  cattle  slaughtered  for  food.   It  takes  about 
3,000  pounds  of  animal  pancreas  glands  to  produce  one  pound  of 
insulin.   The  new  process  will  produce  ample  quantities  to  meet  the 
growing  demand,  and  more  importantly,  produce  a  chemically  identical 
human  insulin. 

(more ) 


•Gone  n  tech,  Inc. 
•3-3-3-3 


One  of  the  advantages  of  producing  insulin  using 

the  reconbinant  DtlA  method  is  to  reduce  the  dependency  on  animal 
glands.   Also,  by  using  insulin  that  chemically  is  identical  to 
human  insulin,  scientists  hope  that  certain  allergic  reactions  by 
some  diabetics  to  insulin  derived  from  animals  can  be  eliminated. 

"The  development  of  human  insulin  demonstrates  the 

viability  of  using  recombinant  DNA  technology  to  produce  products 
with  practical  application,"  said  Robert  Swanson,  president  of 
Genentech . 

"While  extensive  testing  and  refinement  of  the  process 
is  needed,  we  want  to  see  human  insulin  and  other  genetically 
engineered  products  benefiting  the  people  who  need  them  in  the 
shortest  possible  time,"  said  Swanson. 

Genentech,  a  privately  financed  corporation,  and 
City  of  Hope  have  established  a  "joint  cooperative  program  to 
conduct  basic  research  to  develop  commercial  application  of 
molecular  genetic  technology.   Less  than  one-year  ago,  Genentech 
announced  its  first  product,  the  hormone  somatostatin  which 
was  developed  in  a  cooperative  program  with  City  of  Hope  Medical 
Center  and  the  University  of  California  San  Francisco  Medical 
Center. 

«#*« 


(GZN-003) 


'Technical    Suoplon^L  169 

•  » — — 

* 

HOV;  THE  HUMAN  INSULIN  WAS  MADS 

Insulin  is  a  protein  hormone  composed  of  two  chains 
of  amino  acids:   an  "A"  chain  and  a  "B"  chain  linked  together  by 
two  disulfide  bonds.   The  "A"  chain  is  composed  o.f  21  amino  acids 
and  the  "B"  chain  of  30  amino  acids,  each"  arranged  in  a  uniquely 
ordered  sequence.   (See  Exhibit  1) 

Proteins  are  made  by  translating  the  genetic  information 
which  is  carried  in  a  cell's  genes.   Scientists  synthesized  in  the 
laboratory  genes  for  the  two  insulin  "A"  and   "B"  chains.   This  was 
accomplished  by  chemically  linking  together  small  pieces  of  DNA 
sequence  and  then  joining  them  in  a  specific  manner  to  form  complete 
genes.   (See  Exhibit  2) 

Once  the  genes  were  synthesized,  they  were  stitched  into 
circular  DNA  strands  called  "plasmids"  using  special  enzymes  to 
perform  the  molecular  surgery.   Plasmids  are  rings  of  DNA  which  are 
found  within  the  cell.   The  newly  constructed  plasmids  containing 
the  transplanted  genetic  material  were  introduced  into  a  benign 
E.  coli  bacterial  strain. 

Once  inside  the  bacteria,  the  genes  were  " swi tched-on" 
by  the  bacteria  to  translate  the  code  into  either  the  "A"  chain  or 
the  "B"  chain  proteins  found  in  insulin.   The  process  is  the  same 
as  that  used  by  the  bacteria  to  produce  its  own  proteins.   When  the 
cells  produced  sufficient  amounts  of  the  "A"  and  "B"  chains,  they 
were  harvested  to  isolate  these  proteins  from  the  bacteria  and  purify 
it.   The  two  chains  were  then  combined  chemically  in  the  laboratory 
to  form  the  complete  Insulin  molecule  which  is  identical  to  that 
produced  by  the  human  body. 


170 


g  —  O 

—  z  O 


»  00 


V) 


CO 


03 


0) 


33 


> 
CO 


CO 

m 


m 


CO 

m 

33 


CO         ^ 

m      > 


m 


H 
X 
33 


CO 
U) 

o 


ft) 


CD 

^S 
J     '  = 


Qs 

^ 
f 

,c 


r^' 

3  V  o 


ICff 

o 

I  VJL'"1 

3  >ft 


-CO-l  •<     1- 


Fl. 


Q    JN> 


^3S  K> 


=T   JJS 

^n>^ 


CO 


m 
X 

I 

S 

H 


•o 


C 
2 
> 


2 
to 

C 


m 
n 

c 
r~ 
m 


3)8 


171 


EXHIBIT  2.        DIAGRAM  OUTLINING  HOW  THE  INSULIN  WAS  MADE 


"A"  chain  genetic  code 


"B"  chain  genetic  code 


DMA 
sequence 


Gene  synthesis 


Plasmid 


Insertion  of  gene  into  circular 
DMA  called  plasmids  to  form 
hybrid. 


Insertion  of  hybrid  plasmid 
into  the  E.  coli  bacteria  cell. 


E.coli 

bacteria 

cell 


Protein 
synthesis 


Separation  & 
Purification 


Plasmid 


1  "A"  chain 

OCCCOQ3OOOO 


•V  / 


O~Iasmid 
"B"  chain 

occccoocccoco 


( — I       c-J 

~x  > 


The  cell  is  "switched  on"  to 
translate  the  genetic  informa 
tion  contained  in  the  plasmid 
into  an  A  or  B  chain  protein. 


A  and  B  chain  are  separated 
from  the  cells  and  purified. 


"A"  chain      OOOCXXXXCOO 


COCCCCCCCCCCQ     "B"  chain 


If 


A  ond  B  chain  combined 


cccccccccco 

I     I 

f  f 

S    5 


A  and  B  proccins  are  com 
bined  to  form  human  insulin 
molecule. 


Insulin  molecule 


172  APPENDIX  J 


.A; 

""" 


REPORT   OF 
COMMITTEE   ON    RULES    AND   JURISDICTION 


The  Committee  on  Rules  and  Jurisdiction,  of  the  San 
Francisco  Division  of  the  Academic  Senate  met  several  times 
in  response  to  the  charge  presented  in  a  letter  transmitted 
by  Laurel  Glass,  Vice-Chairperson  of  the  Senate  to  Sheldon 
Wolff,  the  chairman  of  the  committee  (see  attachment). 

The  committee  agreed  to  report  to  the  senate  on  the 
matters  in  the  charge  as  they  pertain  to  any  possible  dis 
ruption  of  the  academic  functions  of  the  university,  i.e., 
the  teaching  and  research  functions  of  the  faculty.  It 
decided  to  think  of  the  organization  of  Genentech  and  its 
relation  with  the  campus  only  as  an  example  of  the  type  "of 
contract  that  could  lead  to  Dr.  Glass's  letter. 

The  first  person  to  meet  with  the  committee  was 
Vice  Chancellor  Chater  who  assured  us  that  the  contract  with. 
Genentech   had  been  examined  by  the  general  counsel  .of 
university,  was  a  legal  contract,  and  conformed  .'to  univ<|r 
sity  rules. 


Before  proceeding,  the  committee  decided  to  ascertain,; 
for  itself  if  the  way  in  which  the  contract  was  carried 
did  indeed  disrupt  the  academic  function  of  the  Depar  tine  n; 
of  'Biochemistry  where  the  work  was  performed.  oTo  this  end/5; 
several  people,  ranging  from  senior  full  professors  ^o/^^ari/ 
assistant  professor,  were  interviewed.  The\';c'pronii'''ttee'''.ihet' 
with  Professors  Bruce  Alberts  and  Brian  McCarthy,  who  A£  re" 
acting  co-chairmen  of  the  department  this 
Herbert  Eoyer,  who  is  the  principal 
research,  Professor  Howard  Goodman,  who  ci 
research  independently,  and  assistant 
mamoto,  who  had  been  a  postdoctoral  v  .fellow 
department  and  now  was  a  junior 


With  the  exception  of  Professor  Boyer ,'^al.l 
that  the  manner  in  which  the  particular,  contractors  •carried. 
out  led  to  serious  disruption  within  the  department."7'  '//Pr'^1 
fessor   Boyer   himself  acknowledged  that  he  was  aware  of  .t 
sensitivity  provoked  by  the  situation. 


.....          ..  ..    .. 

As  the  committee  could  reconstruct   the   situation, 
seems   that  about   four  years  ago  Professor  Boyer  founded  a  ', 
company,  Genentech,  of  which  he  is  Secretary,   a  member  of   ; 
the  Board,  a  rcajor  stockholder,  and  a  paid  consultant.   The  ; 
purpose  of  this  company  was  to  utilize  recombinant  DNA  tech-")* 
no  logy.y« 


.. 


. 

UGSF  Library  &  C«nt»r  For  Knowtedga  MantgMTMnt  Arcttvat  &  SpecUl  Col«otlont  D«p«f«Mn| 


173 

Rules  and  Jurisdiction  -2- 


ntanufacture  various  hormones  and  other  phariraceuticals.  The 
company  raised  money  and  then  let  a  contract  to  the  univer 
sity  for  work  to  be  performed  in  Professor  Boyer's  labora 
tory  for  initial  experiments  to  incorporate  structures  of 
DNA  known  to  code  for  the  desired  proteins  into  plasmids  so 
that  the  human  gene  products  could  be  manufactured  in  bac 
teria.  Experiments  were  to  be  performed  to  see  if  control 
of  gene  functions  could  be  carried  out,  i.e.,  if  the  genes 
could  be  turned  on  and  made  functional.  The  resultant  tech 
nology  was  to  be  patented  by  the  university,  which  would 
receive  2%  royalties  in  accord  with  its  patent  policy. 
Approximately  one-half  of  this  would  revert  to  Professor 
Boyer  and  others  who  developed  patents. 

The  principal  representing  Genentech  in  contractual 
matters  dealing  with  changes  in  the  budget,  protocols  of 
experiments,  etc.,  was  Robert  Swanson,  Genentech 's 
President.  The  principal  representing  the  university  was 
Professor  Boyer. 

An  exclusive  license  to  use  any  patentable  material  was 
given  by  the  university  to  Genentech.  Because  Genentech  did 
not  have  any  operable  laboratories  of  its  own,  initially  the 
experiments  were  carried  out  by  Professor  Boyer  and  two 
postdoctoral  fellows  in  laboratories  within  the  department. 
Mr.  Swanson,  in  accord  with  the  contract,  would  on  occasion 
cojne  to  the  laboratory  and  examine  the  laboratory  notebook  s . 
I n_  addition.  as  a  result  of  the  publicity  attendant  w i  t  hi" 
this  research,  television  crews  were  in  the  laboratory  on 
occasion.  "l-^v .;• 

•  'V .   '•*  •  J'  :  '•'.ff'.  .'•-" 
-  :  -•'.,  '  "".-.-  'j' -:•:; 

The  most  serious  matter  heard  by  the  committee  was  that 
this  type  of  research,  when  carried  out  in  a  universi ty 
en3LJJLOj">ment ,  stifled  academic  communication.  A  recurrent 
th eme^was  that  people  were  loathe  to  ask  questions  and  gi ve 
suggestions  in  seminars,  or  across  the  bench  for  there  was  'a 
feeling that someone might  take  an idea  and  patent  it,  6 r 
individual's  idea  iiilyhl  be  taken  Lo  make  money  ^  ffpr 


someone  else/ 

The  situation  is  better  now  since  Genentech  has  Cinoved 
its  research  off  the  campus.  Two  of  the  persons  interviewed 
expressed  the  opinion  that  the  charge  to  the  committee  dame 
two  years  too  late,  as  earlier  it  was  a  very  serious  ma tterV> 
but  has  since  calmed  down.  The  people  interviewed  were  'hot 
unanimous  in  their  appraisal  as  to  whether  or  not  there  is  a 
residue  of  disruption,  but  all  agree  the  academic  atmosphere 
is  better  than  it  was. 

The  committee  believes  that  the  problems  attendant  to 
this  contract  are  likely  to  come  up  again  in  the  future  as 
biological  research  has  more  and  more  industrial  worth.  In 
the  past,  academicians  in  electronics,  for  instance,  faced 
these  types  of  problems  and  went  out  and'  formed  their  own 

**—  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  "•"  FOR  REFERENCE  I  ISP  nui  v  •— .  CAn 


174 

Rules  and  Jurisdiction  -3- 


companies.  This  is  a  relatively  new  matter  for  biology.  A 
large  part  of  the  unhappiness  seems  to  stem  from  the  philo 
sophical  perception  of  many  basic  scientists  that  pure 
research  as  carried  out  in  the  university  should  be  altruis 
tic,  idealistic,  and  not  pursued  from  a  profit  motive.  It 
seems  to  many  of  these  people  that  it  is  within  the  academic 
spirit  to  give  freely  of  ideas  and  suggestions,  if  they  are 
used  to  advance  our  knowledge  (and  even  eventually  to  bene 
fit  mankind) .  It  is  not  all  right  to  do  the  same  if  another 
person  is  to  make  money  out  of  it,  even  if  by  so  doing  he 
also  helps  mankind.  The  philosophical  difference  is 
extremely  important  as  it  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  idealis 
tic  beliefs  of  the  purposes  of  a  great  university. 

Not  all  of  the  faculty  is  that  idealistic,  however,  and 
the  committee  believes  that  the  situation  was  exacerbated  by 
simple  jealousy.  The  principals  in  the  contract  could  pos 
sibly  make  millions  of  dollars,  which  is  very  different  from 
the  usual  psychological  rewards  of  peer  acceptance  in 
national  and  international  scientific  circles. 

The  committee  believes  that  in  order  to  carry  out  .its 
function  the  university  must  keep  its  rules  flexible  enough 
to  encourage  the  faculty  to  make  professional  contributions 
to  society.  Thus,  the  committee  believes  that  there  is  no 
need  to  amend  old  rules  or  make  new  ones  to  cover  contracts. 
It  furJ±i£JC_b-elieves  that  feelings  of  jealousy  were  intensi 
fied  by  the  fact  that  the  research  was  carried  out  by  a  per 
son  "wHcT  is  a  paid  consultant,  as  well  as  a  major  officer  and 
stockholder  of  the  company  involved.  In  addition,  those 
postdoctoral  fellows who  worked  on the  project^were  subse- 
quentj^y_Jiired  by  Genentech  at  salar ies_ccmsiderably  hlghe^ 
th a n  those  avaTlabTe"  to  ot'n"er  posTdoctoral  fellows  in  the 
department. 

The  committee  acknowledges  that  nothing  illegal 
occurred  and  that  all  was  in  conformity  with  university 
rules.  Furthermore,  it  believes  that  one  cannot  legislate 
against  jealousy  and  other  personal  foibles  in  the  faculty. 
Nevertheless,  because  a  disruption  in  the  academic  function 
ing  of  a  department  did  occur,  and  because  this  type  of 
situation  could  possibly  occur  in  the  future  as  biological 
research  begets  the  possibility  of  making  large  amounts  of 
money,  the  committee  urges  that  the  existing  rules  be  admin-, 
i s te r ed  with  an  increasing  sensitivity  to  the  procedures 

that^ led  to  so  much Demotion   in   the  present  case.    TRis 

should^ be   done  at  all  levels  trom  that  of  the"UftaTrcellorJ s 

o f f i ce  and  the  Dean's  of f ice, "'down  to  the  individual  depart- 
ment  f^ha  i  rm^n_s^hn-.ir.u?:±—  Jie__on  t-hf»  alprt  for  Situations  ttLa"t , 
even  if_J1egjl,  can  disrupt  the  smooth  acadpmir  fiinrj^inng  of 
the' departments.  In  a  university  the  teaching  and  research 
and  scholarly  functions  should  take  precedent  over  the  func 
tions  of  making  contributions  to  public  and  professional 
service,  as  important  as  these  latter  two  are.  The 


FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  ""•  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  —•  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY 


175 


Pules  and  Jurisdiction  -4- 


administration   should  be  _on 

could  engender  large  scale  'serious  jealousies  on  the  part  of: 

its  Tac~u~nfy7~  "TfT r'esp'ec t "to""  the  Tatfter , th~e  comir.iTtee 

believes  that  in  the  future  it  would  be  wise  to  refrain  from 
making  ^contracts  in  which  work  will  be  done  by  a  university 
faculty^member  who  also  has  a  major  fin'a'ncTal  interestrTn  a 
concern, ~  as  this  ajnounts~'_to  a  contract  between  the  person 
a  nd^  himself ,  with  thejjn  i  veTsTty ;'T~r oYeTon  Ty~b~e~fng incidefi- 
tal.  This  will  become  more  important,  as  one  can  foresee 
situations  where  even  more  than  one  company  is  represented 
in  a  department.  As  more  arid  more  information  is  con 
sidered  to  be  proprietary  information,  communication  could 
completely  cease,  which  is  contrary  to  academic  ideals  and 
traditions. 


One  need  for  administrative  action  that  should  be  taken 
now,   concerns   the   confusion  over   inconsistencies  in  the 

rules  regarding  the  retention  of  consuTEalT^~  fees   and the 

confusion as   to  what   is   expected  of  the  faculty  ijT^tJxi s 

regard. The  committee  notes  that  the  clinical faculty can 
retain  consultant  fees  in  accord  with  an  approved  campus 
income  assessment  arrangement.  The  basic  scientists  in 
pre-clinical  fields  are  not  accorded  the  same  privilege,  in 
that  the  rule  states  that  they  shall  not  retain  any  net 
income  from  consultation  (except  federal  governmental  con- 
sultantships  in  the  nature  of  service  on  grant  and  contract 
review  committees) .  The  strict  full-time  agreement  signed 
by  the  basic  science  pre-clinical  faculty  has  been  ambiguous 
in  this  respect  as  it  refers  to  "professional  services"  but 
not  .^s_poc_i f  ically  to  income  trom  consultation.  The  committee 
belTeves that a uniform set of  rules  would  prevent  some 
serious  jealousies  that  could  develop,  not  only  in  regard  to 
future  contracts,  but  also  in  the  general  day  to  day  func 
tioning  of  the  UCSF  faculty.  It  further  believes  that,  in 
some  instances  at  least,  the  confusion  and  ambiguities 
accompanying  the  consultantship  rules  has  led  to  their  not' 
being  adhered  to  in  their  strict  sense.  It  might  be  time  to 
change  the  rules  and  drop  some  of  the  restrictions,  espe 
cially  as  retention  of  such  professional  fees  is  acceptable 
according  to  university  regulation  4  which  states  that  the 
faculty  may  retain  such  consultant  fees  unless  prohibited 
from  doing  so  in  the  terms  of  their  employment. 


Respectfully  submitted, 


Sheldon  Wolff       *S f 
Chairman,  Committee.'On 
Rules  and  Jurisdiction 


FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  ""•  FOR  REFERENCE  USB  ONLY  "" *  FOR  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY 

I  Ihrarv  R.  Opntor  Pnr  k'nnuulaHno  Mamnnmnnt  Arrhlua.  A  QnA/*lal  rntl^Hn™.  ri~--.*~~~. 


176 

-5- 


Members,  Committee  on  Rules  and  Jurisdiction 


S.  Wolff,  Chairman 

T.  Christie 

P.  Nassey 

R.  Mitchell 

T.  Tozer 

R.  Creasy 

M.  Dunlap 

J.  Greene 


F°R  urF£R,E£CEI^EONLY  '""  TO"  REFERENCE  USE  ONLY  "•»  FOR  REFEMNCt  Uil  OWLV 

UCSF  L-brary  &  Center  For  Knowledge  Management  Archives  &  Special  ColteliorS  D8MrSl^i        Y 


177 


APPENDIX  K 


Economy  &  Business 


Investors  Dream  of  Genes 

Genentech,  a  pioneer  in  daring  DNA  research,  goes  public 


The  list  of  products  by  Genentech.  a 
four-year-old  San  Francisco-based 
firm,  reads  like  a  cornucopia  of  blessings 
for  mankind.  It  includes  a  hormone  that 
may  stimulate  human  growth,  mass-pro 
duced  human  insulin  that  could  reduce 
the  cost  of  treating  diabetes,  and  inter- 
feron  (TIME.  March  3D.  which  may  be 
used  to  treat  everything  from  cancer  to 
the  common  cold.  Shares  of  Genentech 
are  expected  to  go  on  sale  soon  on  the 
over-the-counter  market,  and  investors 
are  queuing  up  to  buy  what  some  believe 
will  be  one  of  the  strongest  new  issues  of 
the  '80s.  A  few  brokers  are  already  tout 
ing  Genentech  as  the  next  Polaroid  or 


obtain  DNA  for  a  desired  product,  such  as 
human  insulin,  and  insert  it  into  the  DNA 
of  a  laboratory  strain  of  a  common  in 
testinal  bacterium.  The  bacterium,  follow 
ing  directions  from  the  new  DNA,  then 
produces  the  insulin.  Scientists  believe 
that  the  technique  can  be  used  to  form  a 
number  of  health-care,  agricultural  and 
industrial  products  more  cheaply  and  eas 
ily  than  ever  before  (see  MEDICINE). 

There  has  been  concern,  however, 
over  the  safety  of  the  new  technique.  At 
one  point,  researchers  were  so  worried 
about  the  potential  hazards  of  microbes' 
escaping  from  the  laboratory  and  caus 
ing  new  illnesses  that  they  formulated  a 


President  Robert  Swanson  (left)  with  modern  alchemists  in  their  San  Francisco  lab 

The  company  produces  a  chemical  cornucopia  for  ills  from  the  common  cold  to  cancer. 


Xerox.  Says  Financial  Analyst  Peter 
Smith  of  E.F.  Hutton:  "The  expectations 
of  the  people  doing  research  are  mighty 
exciting.  But  for  now  we  are  selling  sizzle 
— there  is  no  steak  around  now." 

As  Genentech  itself  states  in  its  pro 
spectus,  the  stock  involves  a  high  degree 
of  risk.  It  is  also  Likely  to  have  a  very 
high  price-to-earnings  ratio.  The  offering 
price  is  expected  to  be  525  to  $30  per 
share,  even  though  Genentech  earned  a 
meager  le  per  share  during  the  first  half 
of  1980  for  its  private  backers.  The  rea 
son  for  all  the  excitement  among  analysts 
is  that  Genentech  is  one  of  four  leading 
companies  in  the  world  doing  recombi- 
nant-DNA  research,  a  phenomenon  that 
has  had  the  scientific  and  investment 
communities  elated  for  several  years. 
Genentech  is  the  first  of  the  four  firms  to 
offer  its  stock  to  the  investing  public. 

Recombinant  DNA.  or  gene  splicing, 
is  a  kind  of  modern  alchemy.  Scientists 


set  of  safety  guidelines  to  control  exper 
iments.  These  guidelines  have  been  re 
fined  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health. 

Genentech  was  founded  in  1976  by 
Herbert  Boyer.  a  biochemistry  professor 
at  the  University  of  California  at  San 
Francisco  and  a  pioneer  in  recombinant 
DNA.  and  Robert  Swanson,  a  financier 
who  finds  backers  for  new  companies.  Al 
most  immediately,  the  firm  began  an 
nouncing  a  series  of  breakthroughs.  The 
first,  in  1977,  was  the  production  of  a  brain 
hormone  called  somatostatin,  which  may 
be  used  to  treat  certain  hormonal  disor 
ders.  In  1979  the  company  developed  thy- 
mosin  alpha- 1,  which  is  now  being  tested 
by  the  National  Cancer  Institute  for  pos 
sible  treatment  of  certain  types  of  brain 
and  lung  cancer.  Genentech's  gross  reve 
nues  have  risen  from  $856,335  in  1978  to 
$3.5  million  for  the  first  half  of  this  year. 

With  their  success,  Genentech's  foun 
ders  have  also  generated  controversy  in 


the  scientific  community.  The  company 
has  worked  closely  with  the  University 
of  California,  sharing  laboratory  space 
and  sometimes  employees.  When  Genen 
tech's  manufacture  of  the  human-growth 
hormone  duplicated  results  published  by 
university  staff  members,  there  were  ac 
cusations  that  the  company  was  secretly 
using  the  research.  Genentech  agreed  last 
June  to  pay  the  university  $350.000. 

Other  genetic-engineering  companies' 
have  found  large  established  firms  to 
bankroll  their  research  efforts  rather  than 
going  to  the  stock  market  for  capital. 
Berkeley-based  Cetus.  the  oldest  and  larg 
est  of  the  firms,  raised  money  by  selling  a 
microorganism  it  developed  for  penicillin 
production  to  Schering-Plough,  a  drug 
and  cosmetic  company.  It  also  obtained 
backing  from  National  Distillers  & 
Chemical  Corp.  for  a  method  to  speed  the 
manufacture  of  ethanol,  which  can  be 
used  with  gasoline  to  make  gasohol. 

Genex  Corp.  of  Rockville.  Md..  an 
other  fast-rising  entry  in  the  field,  was 
founded  three  years  ago  by  Molecular  Bi 
ologist  Leslie  Glick  and  another  profes 
sional  raiser  of  venture  capital.  Robert 
Johnston.  Though  the  company  is  secre 
tive  about  its  projects,  Bristol-Myers  re 
vealed  that  Genex  is  working  for  it  on 
the  production  of  interferon. 

Biogen  S.A..  which  is  based  in  Ge 
neva.  Switzerland,  was  the  first  firm  to  de 
velop  bacterial  interferon.  Founded  in 
1978.  it  is  operated  by  a  multinational 
board  of  directors  and  scientists.  Scher 
ing-Plough  last  year  invested  $8  million 
in  Biogen  in  return  for  exclusive  world 
wide  manufacturing  and  sales  rights  to 
three  of  its  products.  Biogen  has  also 
found  a  second  way  to  make  interferon 
and  is  working  on  chemicals  to  cure  foot- 
and-mouth  disease,  hepatitis  and  malaria. 

Genentech.  like  the  other  major  genet 
ic-engineering  firms,  faces  serious 
problems  in  profiting  from  its  research. 
Obtaining  approval  for  new  products 
from  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration 
is  expensive  and  time-consuming.  Notes 
Cetus  President  Peter  Farley:  "The  lag 
time  between  discovery  and  marketing  for 
a  pharmaceutical  product  is  five  to  20 
years."  In  addition,  the  four  tiny  DNA 
pioneers  will  be  competing  soon  with 
such  multinational  giants  as  Du  Pont,  Up 
john  and  General  Electric.  Although  the 
U.S.  Supreme  Court  decreed  this  summer 
that  new  life  forms  could  be  patented,  the 
U.S.  Patent  and  Trademark  Office  has  yet 
to  rule  on  any  of  the  100  or  so  recom- 
binant-DNA  patents  already  submitted. 

Thus  while  brokers  are  heralding  the 
birth  of  a  new  growth  stock,  scientists  are 
more  circumspect.  Says  Walter  Miller,  a 
University  of  California  researcher:  "To 
buy  stock  in  these  companies  right  now 
would  require  an  enormous  leap  of  faith 
and  an  assumption  about  which  company 
will  be  most  successful."  Nevertheless,  in 
vestors  are  expected  to  rush  to  grab  the 
first  shares  of  Genentech.  • 


72 


TIME.  OCTOBER  20.  1980 


To  Our  Shareholders: 


179 


During  1981  Genentech  continued  to  deliver 
on  its  promises,  meeting  both  internal  and  con- 
tractural  benchmarks.  It  was  a  fast-paced  year  for  the 
Company.  Four  of  the  human  pharmaceutical 
products  developed  by  Genentech — human  growth 
hormone,  human  insulin  and  two  types  of  human 
leukocyte  interferon — are  now  moving  through 
various  phases  of  clinical  testing,  the  last  stage  prior 
to  marketing.  Two  of  our  agricultural  products — 
bovine  growth  hormone  and  foot-and-mouth 
disease  vaccine — began  their  initial  animal  testing. 
Our  scientists  announced  the  development  of 
microorganisms  to  produce  six  new  products.  We 
added  further  strength  in  management  and  began 
the  expansion  of  manufacturing  facilities  that  will 
accelerate  Genentech's  transformation  into  a 
company  that  both  manufactures  and  markets  the 
products  of  its  own  research. 

Operations 

In  1981 ,  for  the  third  consecutive  year,  the 
Company  finished  in  the  black,  reaching  its  goal  of 
operating  at  or  near  the  break-even  point  in  these 
start-up  years.  Seventy  per  cent  of  the  Company's 
revenues  came  from  operations — income  from 
licensing  or  collaborative  research  and  from  prod 
uct  sales  to  industrial  partners. 

During  1981,  our  second  reporting  year 
since  we  went  public,  total  revenues  were  $21.3 
million  compared  with  $9  million  in  1980. 
Operating  revenues  increased  to  $15.2  million 


from  $6.5  million  in  1980. 

As  we  have  said  before,  until  a  number  of 
Genentech's  products  reach  the  market  in  the  next 
several  years,  we  do  not  expect  substantial  earnings 
nor  do  we  expect  quarterly  results  necessarily  to 
reflect  accurately  the  progress  being  made  during 
the  year.  There  may  be  wide  swings  in  quarterly 
results  due  to  the  timing  of  research  benchmark 
payments.  Because  of  the  unpredictability 
of  research  and  development,  results  do  not  come- 
neatly  packaged  in  three-month  periods  as  do 
quarterly  reports.  For  this  reason  a  longer-term 
view  will  better  measure  Genentech's  progress  as 
we  complete  our  transition  to  a  fully  integrated 
manufacturing  and  marketing  company. 

Science 

The  year  brought  increased  awareness  by  tin- 
academic  community  of  the  high  quality  science 
under  way  at  Genentech — in  a  corporate,  for-prolii 
environment.  Our  scientists  published  (after 
appropriate  attention  to  patent  issues  )  3 1  papers 
in  some  of  the  best  scientific  journals.  Broad 
interaction  with  other  scientists  and  a  continued 
flow  of  seminars  and  lectures  at  Genentech  help 
to  spawn  a  creative,  innovative  environment. 
The  interaction  among  many  scientific  disciplines 
working  together  under  one  roof  helped  speed 
research  results. 

Our  research  was  also  extremely  productive 
in  generating  new  products.  During  the  past  year 


From  left  to  right:  David  S.  Tappanjr,  David  Packard,  Robert  A.  Swanson,  Herbert  W  Boyer  (standing), 
Thomas  J.  Perkins  (seated)  and  Donald  L  Mtirfin, 

24 


180 


GENENTECH,  INC. 


our  scientists  announced  the  development  of 
microorganisms  to  produce: 

a  Human  immune  interferon  which  many 

scientists  believe  may  be  the  most  promising  of 
the  interferons. 

D  Human  calcitonin,  a  hormone  important  in  the 
treatment  of  several  bone  diseases. 

n  Human  serum  albumin,  a  blood  protein  that  can 
be  used  to  re-establish  normal  vascular  fluid 
levels  after  blood  loss  in  surgery  and  accidents. 

Q  Bovine  and  porcine  growth  hormones  for 
accelerated  weight  gain  by  livestock  and  milk 
production  by  cows  without  the  requirement  of 
additional  feed. 

n  A  vaccine  for  foot-and-mouth  disease  so 

potentially  important  to  the  world's  meat  supply 
that  U.S.  Secretary  of  Agriculturejohn  Block 
announced  its  development. 

During  the  past  year  our  scientists  also  refined 
earlier  processes  and  developed  new  ones  to  allow 
us  to  maintain  our  development  lead  time.  They 
have  increased  product  yields,  refined  purification 
processes  and  made  strides  in  industrial  scale-up. 

Corporate  Development 

By  the  end  of  1981  Genentech  had  grown  to 
a  company  with  3 18  employees.  Ninety  per  cent  of 
them  are  shareholders.  Growth  has  continued  with 
more  than  350  employees  now  on  board. 

During  the  year  we  concentrated  on  building 
depth  in  management.  We  continued  to  fill  out  our 
organization  at  middle  management  levels  with 
talented,  experienced  people  carefully  chosen  for 
their  ability  to  grow  with  the  Company. 

Two  additions  to  our  Board  of  Directors 
during  the  year  also  contributed  significantly  to  our 
resources: 

n  David  S.  Tappanjr,  is  President  of  Fluor  Corp 
oration,  a  major  engineering  and  construction 
firm.  Fluor  owns  about  four  per  cent  of 
Genentech's  shares.  In  1980  Genentech  and 
Fluor  agreed  to  cooperate  in  exchanging 
technical  information  and  to  explore  opportun 
ities  for  developing  scaled-up  processes  and 
design  plants  based  on  Genentech-developed 
technology. 

n  David  Packard  is  Chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Hewlett-Packard  Company,  a  leader  in  the  elec 
tronics  industry.  Mr.  Packard  is  a  co-founder 
of  Hewlett-Packard  and  played  a  key  role  in  that 
company's  successful  transition  from  a  small 
organization  to  its  present  eminence.  From 


1969  to  1971  Mr.  Packard  served  as  Deputy 
Secretary  of  Defense. 

An  Eye  on  the  Future 

Genentech  is  building  the  organization  nec 
essary  to  maintain  our  leadership  position.  Not 
only  do  we  intend  to  remain  outstanding  in  the 
development  of  novel  microorganisms  for  produc 
tion  of  new  products,  we  intend  to  remain  the 
best  in  scaling-up  that  production.  Laboratory 
creation  of  a  new  product  is  the  first  step.  It  only 
begins  to  count  when  the  product  is  purified  and 
packaged.  Our  ability  to  move  products  through 
scale-up,  GMP  manufacture  and  clinical  trials  will 
be  a  key  advantage  for  Genentech.  Our  strategy 
is  being  implemented  with  our  investment  in  the 
construction  of  a  new  72,000  square-foot  manu 
facturing  facility  which  will  be  completed  in 
1982.  The  new  facility  should  provide  us  with  the 
capacity'  to  meet  most  of  our  production  needs 
through  the  late  1980s. 

This  coming  year,  1982,  marks  the  beginning 
of  our  transition  into  the  marketplace.  In  the  future, 
contract  payments  will  decline  as  a  percentage 
of  revenues,  more  and  more  of  which  will  come 
from  products  manufactured  and  marketed  by 
Genentech  itself —  thus  capturing  greater  value 
from  our  substantial  investment  in  research. 

We  are  pleased  with  our  shareholder  support. 
We  will  continue  to  build  value  in  our  Company 
while  focusing  on  the  unique  opportunity  our 
technology  provides. 


Robert  A.  Swanson 

President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer 


Thomas  J.  Perkins 

Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors 

March  17, 1982 


25 


181 


APPENDIX  L 


University  of  California,  San  Francisco 


Carol  Fox,  News  Director 

Source:   Robert  Sanders   (415)  476-2557 


513  Parnassus  Avenue  Room  S101 

San  Francisco,  CA  94143-0462 

(415)476-2557 

FAX  (415)  665-8668 

FOR  IMMEDIATE  RELEASE; 
Wednesday,  October  18,  1989 


PRESIDENT  BUSH  AWARDS  NATIONAL  MEDAL  OF  TECHNOLOGY 

TO  UC  SAN  FRANCISCO'S  HERBERT  BOYER  AND  STANFORD'S  STANLEY  COHEN 


WASHINGTON,  DC  —  UC  San  Francisco's  Herbert  W.  Boyer,  PhD,  and  Stanford's 
Stanley  N.  Cohen,  MD,  the  fathers  of  genetic  engineering,  were  awarded  the 
National  Medal  of  Technology  by  President  George  Bush  today  in  a  ceremony  in 
the  East  Room  of  the  White  House. 

Boyer  and  Cohen  were  cited  "for  their  fundamental  invention  of  gene 
splicing  techniques,  which  allowed  replication  in  quantity  of  biomedically 
important  new  products,  and  beneficially  transformed  plant  materials." 

The  discovery  of  gene  splicing  technology,  also  called  recombinant  DNA, 
revolutionized  basic  biological  research  around  the  world,  and  has  changed  the 
face  of  biotechnology  in  this  country. 

The  medal  is  awarded  annually  by  the  President  of  the  United  States  to 
recognize  individuals  or  companies  that  have  made  exceptional  contributions  to 
the  well-being  of  the  nation  through  the  development  or  application  of 
technology.   Six  other  individuals  also  were  honored  at  today's  ceremony. 

Boyer,  53,  professor  of  biochemistry  at  UC  San  Francisco,  and  Cohen,  54, 
professor  of  medicine  at  Stanford  University,  first  demonstrated  the 
techniques  of  gene  splicing  in  1973,  when  they  took  genetic  material  from 
bacteria,  recombined  it  with  foreign  genes,  and  introduced  the  "recombinant 
DNA"  into  other  bacteria  as  hybrid  chromosomes. 

In  1976  Boyer  joined  with  venture  capitalist  Robert  Swanson  to  found 
Genentech,  Inc.,  to  bring  the  fruits  of  this  revolutionary  development  to  the 
marketplace.   Genentech  was  the  first  and  is  still  the  largest  gene 
splicing  firm.   Since  its  founding  it  has  produced  and  is  either 
testing  or  currently  marketing  genetically  engineered  human  insulin, 
interferon,  growth  hormone,  clotting  factors  and  numerous  other 
biological  products. 

(more) 


mailed:   10/18/89 


RSS:rsPmedtech 


182 

National  Medal  of  Technology  —  Page  2 

Today  hundreds  of  biotechnology  firms  employ  the  Cohen/Boyer  technique  or 
similar  techniques  to  produce  drugs,  hormones,  vaccines  and  other  useful 
products,  and  the  technique  is  an  invaluable  tool  in  basic  research  labs 
throughout  the  world. 

The  citation  accompanying  the  medal  acknowledges  as  well  "the  innovative 
and  aggressive  patenting  of  this  technology  put  in  place  by  the  University  of 
California  and  Stanford  University,"  which  it  says  is  expected  to  bring  in 
royalties  from  around  the  world  of  $106  million  by  the  time  the  patent  expires 
in  1997. 

Boyer  was  born  in  Derry,  Pennsylvania,  near  Pittsburgh,  on  July  10, 
1936.   He  received  his  undergraduate  education  at  St.  Vincent  College, 
Latrobe,  Pennsylvania,  (BA  1958)  and  did  graduate  work  in  bacteriology  at  the 
University  of  Pittsburgh  (MS  1960,  PhD  1963).   Following  post-doctoral  work  in 
microbial  genetics  at  Yale  University  (1963-66),  he  came  to  UC  San  Francisco 
in  1966  as  an  assistant  professor  of  microbiology. 

Boyer  has  received  numerous  awards  and  honors,  including  the  prestigious 
Lasker  Award  for  Basic  Medical  Research,  which  he  received  along  with  Cohen  in 
1980.   He  was  awarded  the  V.D.  Mattia  Award  of  the  Roche  Institute  of 
Molecular  Biology  in  1977,  again  with  Cohen,  and  the  two  were  elected  to  the 
California  Inventors  Hall  of  Fame  in  1982.   Both  received  the  Moet  Hennessy- 
Louis  Vuitton  Prize  in  1988  from  France's  Institut  de  la  Vie,  and  the  first 
ever  City  of  Medicine  Award  from  the  city  of  Durham,  North  Carolina  and  Duke 
University. 

Boyer  is  a  member  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  and  the  American 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences.   He  was  a  Howard  Hughes  Medical  Institute 
Investigator  between  1976  and  1983,  and  currently  is  on  the  board  of  directors 
of  Genentech,  Inc. 

Forty  individuals  —  including  Boyer,  Cohen  and  the  six  others  who 
received  medals  today  —  and  one  company  have  received  the  National  Medal  of 
Technology  since  it  was  first  awarded  in  1985.   Recipients  are  recommended  by 
a  committee  selected  by  the  Secretary  of  Commerce,  and  the  winners  are  chosen 
by  the  President. 

### 


183 


University  of  California,  San  Francisco 


Carol  Fox,  News  Director 

Source:   Robert  Sanders   (415)  476-2557 


513  Parnassus  Avenue  Room  Si 

San  Francisco  CA  94143-04' 

(415}  476-25' 

FAX  MIS;  665-eei 


FOR  IMMEDIATE  RELEASE; 
Tuesday,  November  13,  1990 

GENETIC  ENGINEERING  PIONEER  HERBERT  W.  BOYER  AWARDED  NATIONAL  MEDAL  OF  SCIENCE 

WASHINGTON,  DC  —  UC  San  Francisco's  Herbert  W.  Boyer,  PhD,  co-discoverer  of 
the  gene  splicing  techniques  that  revolutionized  biological  research  and 
sparked  the  biotech  boom,  was  honored  today  with  the  nation's  highest  award  in 
science,  the  National  Medal  of  Science. 

The  medal  was  presented  this  afternoon  by  President  George  Bush  in  a 
ceremony  in  the  East  Room  of  the  White  House.   A  professor  of  biochemistry  at 
UCSF,  Boyer  was  one  of  20  scientists  to  receive  the  medal.   Ten  other 
scientists  and  engineers  were  awarded  the  National  Medal  of  Technology,  which 
Boyer  received  last  year. 

The  National  Medal  of  Science  is  given  annually  by  the  President  of  the 
United  States  to  recognize  individuals  for  their  contributions  to  knowledge  in 
the  physical,  biological,  mathematical,  engineering,  social  or  behavioral 
sciences . 

Boyer,  54,  and  Stanley  Cohen,  MD,  professor  of  medicine  at  Stanford 
University,  first  demonstrated  the  techniques  of  gene  splicing  in  1973,  when 
they  took,  genetic  material  from  bacteria,  recombined  it  with  foreign  genes, 
and  introduced  the  "recombinant  DNA"  into  other  bacteria  as  hybrid 
chromosomes . 

In  1976  Boyer  joined  with  venture  capitalist  Robert  Swanson  to  found 
Genentech,  Inc.,  to  bring  the  fruits  of  this  revolutionary  development  to  the 
marketplace.   Genentech  was  the  first  and  is  still  the  largest  gene  splicing 
firm.   Since  its  founding  it  has  produced  and  marketed  gentically  engineered 
human  insulin,  growth  hormone,  and  blood  clotting  factors,  and  is  currently 
testing  numerous  other  biological  products. 

Today  hundreds  of  biotechnology  firms  employ  the  Cohen/Boyer  technique  or 
similar  techniques  to  produce  drugs,  hormones,  vaccines  and  other  useful 
products,  and  the  technique  is  an  invaluable  tool  in  basic  research  labs 


mailed  &  transmitted:   11/13/90 


(more) 


RSS:rsPmedsci 


184 
Boyer  receives  National  Medal  of  Science  —  Page  2 


throughout  the  world. 

Boyer  was  born  in  Derry,  Pennsylvania,  near  Pittsburgh,  on  July  10, 
1936.   He  received  his  undergraduate  education  at  St.  Vincent  College, 
Latrobe,  Pennsylvania,  (BA  1958)  and  did  graduate  work  in  bacteriology  at  the 
University  of  Pittsburgh  (MS  1960,  PhD  1963).   Following  post-doctoral  work  in 
microbial  genetics  at  Yale  University  (1963-66),  he  came  to  UC  San  Francisco 
in  1966  as  an  assistant  professor  of  microbiology. 

Boyer  has  received  numerous  awards  and  honors,  including  the  prestigious 
Lasker  Award  for  Basic  Medical  Research,  which  he  received  along  with  Cohen  in 
1980,  and  the  National  Medal  of  Technology,  which  he  received  last  year.   He 
was  awarded  the  V.D.  Mattia  Award  of  the  Roche  Institute  of  Molecular  Biology 
in  1977,  again  with  Cohen,  and  the  two  were  elected  to  the  California 
Inventors  Hall  of  Fame  in  1982.   Both  received  the  Moet  Hennessy-Louis  Vuitton 
Prize  in  1988  from  France's  Institut  de  la  Vie,  and  the  first  ever  City  of 
Medicine  Award  from  the  city  of  Durham,  North  Carolina  and  Duke  University. 

Boyer  is  a  member  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  and  the  American 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences.   He  was  a  Howard  Hughes  Medical  Institute 
Investigator  between  1976  and  1983,  and  currently  is  on  the  board  of  directors 
of  Genentech,  Inc. 

Since  the  first  medal  was  awarded  in  1962,  the  National  Medal  of  Science 
has  been  given  to  284  individuals,  including  this  year's  honorees.   Recipients 
are  recommended  by  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  the  winners  are 
chosen  by  the  President. 

### 


185 


INDEX- -Herbert  W.  Boyer 

Aberg,  Bertil,   89 

Adelberg,  Ed,   8-9,  11,  16,  17,  127 

AIDS,   69 

Alberts,  Bruce,   97 

American  Society  of  Microbiology, 

52-53 

Arber,  Werner,   12 
Asilomar  conferences  on  biosafety, 

38,  43,  45-46,  51,  53,  54,  55,  112, 

113,  122 


bacteriophage,   15-16 

Banting,  William,   79 

Bennett,  Leslie,   66 

Benzer,  Seymour,   4 

Berg,  Paul,   32,  39,  42-44,  46,  60, 

65,  71,  83,  84-85,  109 
Best,  Charles,   79 
Betlach,  Mary,   28,  45,  48,  62-63, 

102,  111 
Biochemistry,  UCSF  Department  of. 

See  University  of  California,  San 
Francisco 
Biogen,   103 
biological  warfare,   38 
biosafety,   37-38,  42-46,  50-55,  56, 
60-62,  63-65,  67,  69,  70-71,  78, 
113-114,  122-123.   See  also  NIH 
guidelines,  recombinant  DNA 
biotechnology,  technologies  for, 

121-122 

Bishop,  Michael,   20-22,  107 
Bolivar,  Paco,   48,  98 
Boyer-Cohen  recombinant  DNA  patents, 

115-119 

Boyer,  Herbert  W. 
awards,   83,  104 
collaboration  with  Cohen,   31-37, 

103-110 

dissertation  research,   3-4,  7-16 
Gordon  conference,  1973,   39,  42- 

44,  102-103,  109,  118 
Hale/bacterium,  research  on,   49- 

50,  56 

protein-DNA  interactions,  research 
on,   56,  57-58 


Boyer,  Herbert  W.  (continued) 
UCSF  laboratory,   119-121 
views  on  science,   49,  124-128 

Boyer,  Marigrace,   5,  6 

Brinton,  Charles,   7 

Brown,  Don,   39,  109 

Brown,  Wes,   41 


Cal  Tech,   73 

Carlton,  Bruce,   13 

Caruthers,  Marvin,   74 

Cetus  Corporation,   81-82 

Chang,  Annie,   30-31,  42,  105,  106, 

111 

Chargaff,  Erwin,   11 
City  of  Hope  National  Medical 

Center,   57-58,  73,  75,  78,  103,  104 
Clark,  John,   11, 
Clements,  John,   81 
cloning  research.   See  recombinant 

DNA 
Cohen,  Stan,   82,  83,  84,  125 

collaboration  with  Boyer,   31-37, 
102-110 

recombinant  DNA  patents,   115-116 
Comroe,  Julius,   20 
Crea,  Roberto,   78,  103 
Crick,  Francis  H.C.,   2,  3 
Crooks,  Lawrence  E.,   81 
crown  gall  research,   5-6 
Curtiss,  Roy,   113 


Davis,  Ron,   32,  85 

Delbruck,  Max,   16 

d'Herelle,  Felix,   15 

DNA 

chemical  synthesis,   57,  73-77, 

78,  83,  121 
ethidium  bromide  staining,   31, 

34-35 

fragment  closure  rates,   110-111 
radioactively  labeled,   14,  31,  35 
sequencing,   32,  59-60,  109,  121 

Dugaiczky,  Achilles,   110 

Dunphy,  J.  Englebert,   20 


186 


Edelman,  Isidore,   20,  23 
Eli  Lilly  &  Co.,   79-81,  88 
Englesberg,  Ellis,   1,  4,  6,  9 
enzyme  purification  and 

characterization,   13,  14,  19-20 
enzyme  restriction  and  modification, 

8-9,  11-13,  14-16,  31-37,  49,  109. 

See  also  restriction  enzymes 
Epstein,  Charles,   25 
European  Molecular  Biology 

Organization,   38 


Falkow,  Stanley,   31,  33,  52 
Fredrickson,  Donald,   62 


gene  mapping,   8-10 
Genentech,  Inc. 

benchmarks ,   80 

business  plans,   72,  87,  88 

corporate  goals,   93-94 

corporate  philosophy,   87 

development  and  scaling  up,   94-95 

financing,   72,  79,  90 

foundation,   55,  71-73 

press  conferences,   103-105 

publication  policy,   87,  103-103 

staff  recruitment,   77-78,  87,  91- 
92,  94 

stock,   73,  88,  92 

UCSF  sponsored  research  agreement, 
73,  89,  98,  101.  See  also  growth 
hormone,  insulin,  somatostatin 
genetic  code,   3—4,  5,  74,  76 
Gilbert,  Walter,   57,  59,  60,  75,  78 
Glaser,  Don,   81-82 
Glass,  Laurel,   97 
Goeddel,  David,   74,  75,  77,  78   91- 

92,  104 
Goodman,  Howard,   54,  63,  78,  79 

collaboration  with  Boyer,  25,  27, 

63,  106-107,  110 
Goodman,  Joel,   21 
Gordon  Conference  on  Nucleic  Acids 

(1973),   39,  42-44,  102-103,  109,  118 
Greene,  Pat,   50 
growth  hormone,   72,  88-89 
Guthrie,  Christine,   68 


Handler,  Philip,   65 

Havel,  Richard,   20 

Helinski,  Donald,   47,  48,  112 

Helling,  Robert  B.,   31,  35,  40-41, 

106,  118 
Heyneker,  Herbert,   48,  77-78,  91,  98, 

101 

Hopson,  Janet,   60-61 
Hubbard,  Ruth,   52 


insulin,   73,  75,  78-81 
Itakura,  Keiichi,   57,  58,  73,  75,  78, 
104 


Jawetz,  Ernest,   16-17,  18-19,  21,  28 
Jonsen,  Al,   67 


KabiGen,   79,  88 

Kaiser,  Dale,   84 

Kerr,  Clark,   20 

Khorana,  Har  Gobind,   74,  77 

Kleid,  Dennis,   77,  91,  104 

Kleiner  &  Perkins  and  Associates,   72- 

73 

Kornberg,  Tom,   25 
Krevans,  Julius,   68,  97 


laboratory  infections,   6,  70-71,  123 
Lamarckianism,   16 
Levinson,  Warren,   21 
Levintow,  Leon,   20-21 
Luria,  Salvador,   16 

Maniatis,  Thomas,   113 

Martin,  Dave,   68 

McCarthy,  Brian,   97 

Mertz,  Janet,   32,  85,  125 

Meselson,  Matt,   15 

Microbiology,  UCSF  Department  of.   See 

University  of  California,  San 

Francisco 

microbial  genetics,   1-3,  82 
Miles  Laboratory,   72,  114 
Monod,  Jacques,   96 
Morrow,  John,   31,  39,  42-43,  106,  109 


187 


Narang,  Saran,  A.,   73-74 
National  Inventors  Hall  of  Fame,   116 
NIH  guidelines  for  recombinant  DNA 
research,   50-51,  52,  56,  60-62,  63- 
65,  67,  69,  70,  78,  113-114,  122.  See 
also  biosafety 


Ofengand,  Jim,   21 


patents.   See  Boyer-Cohen  recombinant 

DNA  patents 
plasmid 

distribution,   50 

pBR322  episode,   62-65,  122 

R&D,   5-6,  7-10,  14,  30-37,  46,  47- 

48,  69,  108-110,  111-114 
Project  Phoenix,   87 
Ptashne,  Mark,   112 


Q  Fever,   70-71 


Ralston  Retreat,   29 
recombinant  DNA 

and  species  barrier,   51-52,  111 
basic  research,   27,  30-42,  55-57, 
59,  .74,  76,  84-85,  86,  121-122, 
125 
commercial  application  of,   34,  41- 

42,  51,  71-72,  121-122.   See  also 
Genentech 

legislation,   122-123 
reagents,   114-115 
technology  development  & 
dissemination,   27,  46-49,  112-113. 
See  also  biosafety,  NIH  guidelines 
Reimers,  Niels,   115-119 
restriction  enzymes,   72,  85,  114-115, 
125.   See  also  enzyme  restriction  and 
modification 
Rift  Valley  Fever,   123 
Riggs,  Arthur,  57,  58,  73,  75,  77,  104 
Roberts,  Richard,   115 
Roche  Institute  of  Molecular  Biology, 

104 
Rosenberg,  John,   57-58 


Rowland,  Bert,   116 

Rutter,  William,   22-24,  25,  26,  27, 

28,  62,  63-65,  66,  74,  78,  79,  96, 

122 


Sambrook,  Joe,   34 

Sanger,  Frederick,   60 

Santi,  Dan,   98 

Scheller,  Richard,   73 

science  in  industry  and  academia,   92-93 

scientific  publicity,  publication, 
103-105 

Sedat,  John,   25 

Sharp,  Phil,   34 

Shine,  John,   60 

Singer,  Maxine,   43,  44 

Sinsheimer,  Robert,   51,  52 

Smith,  Lloyd  "Holly",   20,  68-69 

somatostatin,   65,  73,  75-77,  83-84, 
87-88,  93,  103 

Sooy,  Francis  A.,   97 

Spiegelman,  Sol,   22 

St.  Vincent's  College,   1,  2 

Stadtman,  Earl,   22 

Stanford  patenting  &  licencing 
office,  115-117.   See  also  Boyer- 
Cohen  patents 

Stent,  Gunther,   127 

Stevenson,  Adlai  III,   63,  64 

Stoeckenius,  Walther,   49 

Stroud,  Robert,   49 

Swanson,  Bob,   71-73,  75,  77,  79,  82, 
87,  90,  91-92,  94,  97-99 

Syntex,  82 


Tomkins,  Gordon,   22-24,  112,  125 

transposons,   11 

Twort,  Frederick  W. ,   15 


Ullrich,  Axel,   61,  122 

university /industry  associations,   96- 

101,  103-105 
University  of  California  patenting  & 

licensing  office,   81,  116,  119. 

See  also  Boyer-Cohen  patents 


188 


University  of  California,  San  Francisco 
Academic  Senate,   97,  99,  101 
basic  science  at,   17,  20,  22 
biosafety  committee,   66-68,  97 
Committee  on  Human  Use,   66-67 
Committee  on  Rules  and 

Regulations,   97,  99,  101 
Department  of  Biochemistry,   22-30, 

49,  56-57,  74,  96,  123 
Department  of  Microbiology,   16-22, 

24,  27,  30 

Division  of  Genetics,   25-26 
P-3  facilities,   69-70,  123 
press  conferences,   103-105 
University  of  Pittsburgh,  1-3,  5,  11, 
12,  14,  31,  49,  50 


Varmus,  Harold,   21 
Vinograd,  Jerry,   41 


Wade,  Nicholas,   64-66 
Wald,  George,   52 
Watson,  Jim,   58 
Watson,  John,   98 
Weinberg,  Roger,   5 
Wilson,  Alan,   41 
Wolff,  Sheldon,   97 


Yale  University,   7-16,  17,  123,  125 

Yamamoto,  Keith,   97 

Yanofsky,  Charles,  "Charlie",   8,  13, 

17,  48 
Yuan,  Bob,   15 


Ziff,  Edward,  118 


Sally  Smith  Hughes 


Graduated  from  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in 
1963  with  an  A.B.  degree  in  zoology,  and  from  the  University 
of  California,  San  Francisco,  in  1966  with  an  M.A.  degree  in 
anatomy.   She  received  a  Ph.D.  degree  in  the  history  of 
science  and  medicine  from  the  Royal  Postgraduate  Medical 
School,  University  of  London,  in  1972. 

Postgraduate  Research  Histologist,  the  Cardiovascular 
Research  Institute,  University  of  California,  San  Francisco, 
1966-1969;  science  historian  for  the  History  of  Science  and 
Technology  Program,  The  Bancroft  Library,  1978-1980. 

Presently  Research  Historian  and  Principal  Editor  on  medical 
and  scientific  topics  for  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley.   Author  of  The  Virus:  A 
History  of  the  Concept,  Sally  Smith  Hughes  is  currently 
interviewing  and  writing  in  the  fields  of  AIDS  and  molecular 
biology /biotechnology. 


79Ro 


