vy 


'OfrU^ 
<7 


f 


P\ 


\ 


University  of  California  •  Berkeley 


\ 

/ 

& 

$-' 

/ 

>, 

\ 


/ 


'^** 

/'\ 


^v 


\  X 


*          * 

^Sfo        ^ 

\s 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
The  Bancroft  Library 


University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California 


University  History  Series 


Roy  L.  Shurtleff 

THE  UNIVERSITY'S  CLASS  OF  1912,  INVESTMENT  BANKING, 
AND  THE  SHURTLEFF  FAMILY  HISTORY 


With  an  Introduction  by 
Eugene  A.  Shurtleff 


An  Interview  Conducted  by 

Harriet  Nathan 

in  1981 


Copy  No. 
Copyright  (c\  1982  by  the  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


All  uses  of  this  manuscript  are  covered  by  a  legal 
agreement  between  the  Regents  of  the  University  of 
California  and  Roy  L.  Shurtleff  dated  July  8,  1982. 
The  manuscript  is  thereby  made  available  for  research 
purposes.   All  literary  rights  in  the  manuscript, 
including  the  right  to  publish,  are  reserved  to  The 
Bancroft  Library  of  the  University  of  California  Berkeley. 
No  part  of  the  manuscript  may  be  quoted  for  publication 
without  the  written  permission  of  the  Director  of  The 
Bancroft  Library  of  the  University  of  California  at 
Berkeley. 

Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  publication 
should  be  addressed  to  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
486  Library,  and  should  include  identification  of  the 
specific  passages  to  be  quoted,  anticipated  use  of  the 
passages,  and  identification  of  the  user.   The  legal 
agreement  with  Roy  L.  Shurtleff  requires  that  he  be 
notified  of  the  request  and  allowed  thirty  days  in  which 
to  respond. 

It  is  recommended  that  this  oral  history  be  cited 
as  follows : 

Roy  L.  Shurtleff,  "The  University's  Class  of 
1912,  Investment  Banking,  and  the  Shurtleff 
Family  History,"  an  oral  history  conducted  in 
1981  by  Harriet  Nathan,  Regional  Oral  History 
Office,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley,  1982. 


ROY  L.  SHURTLEFF 

Photo  by  Rartsook,  San  Francisco 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  —   Roy  L.  Shurtleff 


PREFACE  ! 

INTRODUCTION  by  Eugene  A.  Shurtleff  v 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY  vi 

I   NEVADA  CITY  TO  BERKELEY  1 
Grammar  School 

Jobs  and  Leave  from  High  School  4 

Walking  through  "the  Sewers  of  Berkeley"  5 

II  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  8 

The  Daily  Californian  8 

Some  College  Friends  11 
Drilling  with  the  Reserves 

Professors  and  Education  18 

Campus  Life  22 

Mandolin  Club  26 

III   FAMILY  MEMBERS  28 
Immediate  Family 

Genealogy  and  a  Book  29 

IV  BUSINESS  DEVELOPMENT  34 

Louis  Sloss  &  Co.,  the  Sacramento  Area  34 
The  Russ  Building,  San  Francisco 

Sales  in  Investment  Banking  36 

V  BLYTH,  WITTER  &  CO.,  AND  BLYTH  &  CO.,  INC. 
Bankers  for  PG&E 

Branch  Offices  42 

Office  Management  43 

Friendship  and  Competition:  Utilities  43 

Steamship  Companies  45 

Blyth  Zellerbach  Committee  47 
Trading  Department 
Organization  and  Reorganization 
Utilities  and  Nuclear  Power 
Life  Insurance  Companies  in  the  Market 

Carquinez  Bridge  5^ 


VI   COMMENTS  ON  BART  AND  ITS  PROBLEMS  59 

VII   COMMUNITY  INTERESTS  AND  CLUBS  61 

St.  Francis  Hospital  61 

Civic  Light  Opera  and  Opera  62 

Clubs,  and  Bohemian  Club  Memories  63 

Fishing  64 

PARTIAL  INDEX  66 


PREFACE 


Under  a  continuing  grant  from  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley 
Foundation,  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  has  been  conducting  a  series  of 
interviews  with  persons  who  have  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the 
development  of  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley.  Many  of  the  inter 
views  receive  additional  support  from  University  departments  and  offices, 
special  alumni  groups,  and  individuals  who  wish  to  honor  a  particular 
memoirist.   A  list  of  University  History  interviews  is  appended  including 
an  earlier  group  conducted  in  cooperation  with  the  Centennial  History  Project, 
directed  by  Professor  Walton  E.  Bean  and  later  by  Verne  A.  Stadtman,  Univer 
sity  Centennial  Editor.   The  University  History  interviews  have  also 
benefited  greatly  from  the  expert  advice  and  assistance  of  Richard  E.  Erickson, 
Assistant  Chancellor,  Development;  and  J.  R.  K.  Kantor,  University  Archivist. 

The  oral  history  process  at  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley 
consists  of  tape-recorded  interviews  with  persons  who  have  played  significant 
roles  in  some  aspect  of  the  development  of  the  West.   The  purpose  is  to 
capture  and  preserve  for  future  research  their  perceptions,  recollections, 
and  observations.   Research  and  the  preparation  of  a  list  of  proposed  topics 
precede  the  interviews.   The  taped  material  is  transcribed,  lightly  edited, 
and  then  approved  by  the  memoirist  before  final  processing:   final  typing, 
photo-offset  reproduction,  binding,  and  deposit  in  The  Bancroft  Library  and 
other  selected  libraries.   The  product  is  not  a  publication  in  the  usual 
sense  but  primary  research  material  made  available  under  specified  conditions 
to  researchers. 

The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  is  under  the  administrative  supervision 
of  Professor  James  D.  Hart,  the  director  of  The  Bancroft  Library. 

Willa  K.  Baum,  Department  Head 
Regional  Oral  History  Office 

Harriet  Nathan,  Project  Director 
University  History  Series 


February  1980 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 
Room  486  The  Bancroft  Library 
University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California 


ii 


UNIVERSITY  HISTORY  SERIES 


Adams,  Frank,  Frank  Adams,  University  of  California  on  Irrigation,  Reclamation,, 
and  Water  Administration.   1956,  491  p. 

Birge,  Raymond  Thayer,  Raymond  Thayer  Birge,  Physicist.  1960,  395  p. 

Blaisdell,  Allen  C. ,  Foreign.  Students  and  the  Berkeley  International  House, 
1928-1961.   1968,  A19  p. 

Chaney,  Ralph  Works,  Ralph  Works  Chaney,  Ph.D.,  Paleobotanist,  Conservationist. 
1960,  277  p. 

Corley,  James  V.,  Serving  the  University  in  Sacramento.   1969,  143  p. 

Cross,  Ira  Brown,  Portrait  of  an  Economics  Professor.   1967,  128  p. 

Cruess,  William  V.,  A  Half  Century  in  Food  and  Wine  Technology.   1967,  122  p. 

Davidson,  Mary  Blossom,  The  Dean  of  Women  and  the  Importance  of  Students. 

1967,  79  p. 

Dennes,   William  R. ,  Philosophy  and  the  University^  Since  1915.      1970,   162  p. 
Donnelly,   Ruth,   The  University's  Role  in  Housing  Services.      1970,   129  p. 
Ebright,    Carroll  "Ky",   California  Varsity  and  Olympics  Crew  Coach.    1968,    74.  p. 

Evans,   Clinton  W. ,   California  Athlete,   Coach,  Administrator,   Ambassador. 

1968,  106  p. 

Foster,   Herbert  B. ,   The  Role  of  the  Engineer's  Office  in  the  Development  of 
the  University  of  California  Campuses.      1960,   134  p. 

Gordon,   Walter  A. ,  Athlete,   Officer  in  Law  Enforcement  and  Administration, 

Governor  of  the  Virgin  Islands.      Volume  I:   1979,    397  p.    Volume  II:   1980,   244 

Grether,    Ewald  T. ,      (In  process) 

Hamilton,   Brutus,  Student  Athletics  and  the  Voluntary  Discipline.      1967,   50  p. 

Harris,    Joseph  P.,      (In  process) 

Hays,  William  Charles,   Order,   Taste,   and  Grace  in  Architecture.      1968,   241  p. 

Hildebrand,   Joel  H. ,   Chemistry,   Education,   and  the  University  of  California. 
1962,    196  p. 


iii 


Hutchison,  Claude  B.,  The  College  of  Agriculture,  University  of  California, 
1922-1952.   1962,  524  p. 

Johnston,  Marguerite  Kulp  and  Mixer,  Joseph  R. ,  Student  Housing,  Welfare, 
and  the  ASUC.   1970,  54  p. 

Kerr,  Clark,   (In  process) 

Lehman,  Benjamin  H. ,  Recollections  and  Reminiscences  of  Life  in  the  Bay  Area 
from  1920  Onuard.   1969,  367  p. 

Lenzen,  Victor  F. ,  Physics  and  Philosophy.   1965,  206  p. 
Lessing,  Ferdinand  D. ,  Early  Years.   1963,  70  p. 

Mclaughlin,  Donald,  Careers  in' Mining  Geology  and  Management,  University 
Governance  and  Teaching.   1975,  318  p. 

Merritt,  Ralph  P. ,  After  Me  Cometh  a  Builder,  the  Recollections  of  Ralph 
Palmer  Merritt.   1962,  137  p. 

Meyer,  Karl  F. ,  Medical  Research  and  Public  Health.   1976,  439  p. 
Miles,  Josephine,  Poetry,  Teaching,  and  Scholarship.   1980,  274  p. 
Mitchell,  Lucy  Sprague,  Pioneering  in  Education.   1962,  174  p. 

Mixer,  Joseph  R. ,  and  Johnston,  Marguerite  Kulp,  Student  Housing,  Welfare, 
and  the  ASUC.   1970,  54  p. 

Neuhaus ,  Eugen,  Reminiscences:  Bay  Area  Art  and  the  University  of  California 
Art  Department.   1961,  48  p. 

Neylan,  John  Francis,  Politics,  Law,  and  the  University  of  California. 
1962,  319  p. 

Olney,  Mary  McLean,  Oakland,  Berkeley,  and  the  University  of  California, 
1880-1895.   1963,  173  p. 

Pepper,  Stephen  C. ,  Art  and  Philosophy  at  the  University  of  California, 
1919-1962.   1963,  471  p. 

Porter,  Robert  Langley,  Robert  Langley  Porter,  Physician,  Teacher,  and 
Guardian  of  the  Public  Health.   1960,  102  p. 

Richardson,  Leon  J. ,  Berkeley  Culture,  University  of  California  Highlights, 
and  University  Extension,  1892-1960.   1962,  248  p. 

Robb,  Agnes,  Robert  Gordon  Sproul  and  the  University  of  California.  1976,  138  p. 


iv 


Shields,  Peter  J. ,  Reminiscences.     1954,  107  p. 

Shurtleff,   Roy  L. ,   The  University's  Class  of  1912 ,  Investment  Banking,   and 
the  Shurtleff  Family  History.      1982,   69  p. 

Sproul,    Ida  Wittschen,   Duty,   Devotion  and  Delight  in  the  President's  House, 
University  of  California.      1961,   103  p. 

Sproul,   Ida  Wittschen,   The  President's  Wife.      1981,    347  p. 

Stevens,   Frank  C. ,   Forty  Years  in  the  Office  of  the  President,   University 
of  California,    1905-1945.      1959,   175  p. 

Towle,  Katharine  A. ,  Administration  and  Leadership.      1970,   369  p. 

Treadway,  Walter,   Correspondence  and  Papers  on  Langley  Porter  Clinic. 
(Bound  in  Langley  Porter  interview.)     1960,    37  p. 

Underbill,   Robert  M. ,   University  of  California  Lands,   Finances,   and  Investment. 
1968,    446  p. 

Waring,   Henry  C. ,  Henry  C.    Waring  on  University  Extension.      1960,    130  p. 
Vessels,    Glenn  A.,   Education  of  an  Artist.      1967,    326  p. 
Wilson,   Garff,   The  Invisible  Man.      1981,   407  p. 

Witter,   Jean  C. ,   The  University,    the  Community,   and  the  Lifeblood  of  Business. 
1968,    109  p. 

Woods,   Baldwin  M. ,   University  of  California  Extension.      1957,   102  p. 

Wurster,  William  Wilson,   College  of  Environmental  Design,   University  of 

California,   Campus  Planning,  and  Architectural  Practice.      1964,    339  p. 


I 


INTRODUCTION 


It  is  a  rewarding  experience  to  read  the  story  of  a  Class  of  1912 
University  of  California  graduate  whose  business  career  has  spanned  two 
major  world  wars,  the  devastating  Depression  years  of  the  early  1930s, 
and  the  prosperous  expansion  era  of  the  first  two  decades  after  World 
War  II.   One  is  privileged  to  learn  firsthand  of  details  relating  to  the 
capital  formation  process  that  financed  the  early  development  of  the 
California  public  utility  industry,  and  provided  the  initial  public 
offering  of  securities  in  1925  for  the  California  Toll  Bridge  Company. 
It  is  also  interesting  to  reflect  that  during  his  active  years,  the 
company  also  provided  original  capital  in  1918  for  those  manufacturing 
enterprises  that  were  to  become  the  Caterpillar  Tractor  Company.   They 
also  handled  security  offerings  in  1954  for  Ampex  Corporation,  in  1956 
for  the  Ford  Motor  Company,  and  in  1958  for  Hewlett-Packard. 

Roy  Shurtleff  was  born  in  Nevada  City,  California,  in  1887.   Three 
years  later,  his  father  died  an  accidental  death  and  in  1897  he  moved  with 
his  mother  and  two  sisters  to  Berkeley.   As  a  youth  he  assisted  in 
providing  support  for  his  family  and  for  his  own  education.   As  a  success 
ful  business  manager  for  the  campus  newspaper,  The  Daily  Calif ornian, 
he  was  able  to  accumulate  a  modest  savings  upon  his  graduation  from 
the  University  of  California  in  1912. 

In  1914,  together  with  Charles  Blyth,  Dean  Witter, and  George  Leib, 
Roy  Shurtleff  participated  in  the  founding  of  Blyth,  Witter,  and  Co., 
which  was  to  become  Blyth  and  Co.,  Inc., and  one  of  the  nation's  leading 
investment  banking  firms.   During  the  years  until  his  retirement  at  the 
age  of  seventy-five,  Roy  Shurtleff  was  actively  involved  in  building  the 
nationwide  organization  and  influencing  its  direction  and  activities. 
For  all  of  his  years  he  has  devoted  himself  to  a  personal  discipline 
committed  to  hard  work,  integrity  and  a  deep  respect  for  the  structure 
and  the  people  of  our  society.   He  believes  that  the  greatest  rewards 
are  earned  by  the  most  productive,  placing  a  premium  on  enterprise  and 
creativity. 

It  is  hoped  that  for  future  generations  this  oral  history  will 
contribute  to  the  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  people  of  this  time 
and  the  conduct  of  their  business  activities. 


I  give  credit  here  to  my  wife  Betty,  my  sister  Nancy  and  her  husband 
Willard  Miller,  and  my  brother  Lawton  Shurtleff  and  his  wife  Anneka,  for 
their  share  in  making  this  project  possible. 


Eugene  A.  Shurtleff 


3  June  1982 

San  Francisco,  California 


vi 


INTERVIEW  HISTORY 


Roy  Lothrop  Shurtleff  provided  four  interview  sessions  for  his  oral 
history  memoir:  on  May  22  and  29,  June  5,  and  November  12,  1981.   Inter 
views  were  conducted  in  his  office  at  Blyth  Eastman  Paine  Webber  on  the 
forty-third  floor  of  the  Bank  of  America  Building  in  San  Francisco, 
usually  from  10  to  about  11:30  in  the  morning. 

The  first  three  interviews  were  transcribed,  lightly  edited,  and 
submitted  to  Mr.  Shurtleff  for  review  and  approval  in  preparation  for  the 
fourth  session.   He  then  reviewed  and  approved  the  full  transcribed 
manuscript  and  provided  written  corrections  and  supplements. 

Seated  at  his  desk,  Mr.  Shurtleff  was  impeccable  in  the  discreet 
tailoring  appropriate  to  San  Francisco's  financial  district.   He  spoke 
dismissively  of  his  ninety-four  years  which  he  said  had  recently  begun  to 
limit  his  energies  and  activities.   His  manner  of  speaking,  clarity  of 
perception,  candor, and  lack  of  pretense  coupled  with  quick  humor  revealed 
a  lively  spirit  apparently  impervious  to  time. 

When  asked  about  his  role  in  the  investment  banking  enterprises  that 
supported  the  building  of  the  West,  Mr.  Shurtleff  waved   away  so  grand  a 
notion  and  said  with  a  smile,  "We  were  just  trying  to  make  a  living."  He 
recalled  with  equal  equanimity  what  he  regarded  as  errors  and  successes, 
the  latter  including  a  masterly  move  that  brought  him  credit  for  saving  the 
firm,   Blyth  and  Co.,    during  the  Depression.   He  had  traveled  to 
the  branch  of fices  and  required  them  to  clear  their  inventories  just  before 
the  1929  stock  market  crash;  other  firms,  still  loaded  with  such  inventories, 
suffered  severe  losses.   "It  happened  to  be  a  timely  thing,"  he  said,  "but 
that  was  sheer  luck."  Among  his  warmly  remembered  colleagues,  he  praised 
many  for  business  acumen  and  skill  and  singled  out  for  both  civic  and 
business  leadership  his  long-time  associate,  Charles  R.  Blyth. 

A  member  of  the  renowned  Class  of  1912  at  the  University  of  California 
at  Berkeley,  Mr.  Shurtleff  spoke  with  animation  of  his  Daily  Californian 
and  other  activities,  and  of  his  high  regard  for  distinguished  professors 
whose  guidance  and  abilities  remain  fresh  in  his  memory.  After  retirement, 
some  of  Mr.  Shurtleff 's  scholarly  interests  found  expression  in  compiling 
and  publishing  a  major  genealogy  of  the  Shurtleff  family,  whose  younger 
descendants  continue  to  interest  him  profoundly. 


vii 


Tracing  his  experiences  that  included  watching  his  mother  pay  for  a 
purchase  with  a  bag  of  gold  dust,  to  boyhood  walks  "along  the  sewers  of 
Berkeley,"  to  mandolin-playing  and  study  at  the  University,  to  a  view- 
filled  skyscraper  office  on  California  Street,  Roy  Shurtleff  reflected  on 
and  chuckled  at  many  of  his  California  memories.   He  also  evoked  a  unique 
era  in  the  state's  growth  when  a  group  of  brash  young  men  grasped 
responsibility  for  major  capital  formation,  not  knowing  for  sure  how 
they  could  fulfill  their  commitments.   The  fact  that  they  succeeded,  in 
a  hard-headed  but  exciting  adventure,  set  in  motion  consequences  that 
continue  to  this  day. 


Harriet  Nathan 
Interviewer-Editor 

10  June  1982 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 

486  The  Bancroft  Library 

University  of  California  at  Berkeley 


I  NEVADA  CITY  TO  BERKELEY 


Nathan:     Would  you  like  to  start  with  your  early  days,  maybe  thinking  of 
yourself  as  a  little  boy  in  Nevada  City  before  you  came  to 
Berkeley?  Can  you  picture  yourself  as  that  little  boy? 

Shurtleff:   [laughs]   Well,  I  haven't  tried  that  for  a  good  many  years.  My 
mother  was  a  widow.   She  and  my  sister,  Nettie  Meek,  my  half 
sister,  lived  in  Nevada  City  and  I  started  school  there,  walking 
perhaps  a  half  or  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  school.   In 
Nevada  City  through  the  earlier  grades,  starting  with  the'  first 
grade,  I  can  remember  the  school  yard  covered  with  locust  trees 
that  used  to  be  in  blossom  in  the  springtime. 

I  guess  it  was  1897  when  my  mother  decided  to  move  to 
Berkeley  in  order  to  put  my  sister,  Nettie,  in  college.   She, 
through  correspondence,  rented  some  rooms,  I  don't  know  whether 
two  or  three,  from  a  widow  by  the  name  of  Middlehoff.  We  moved 
there  and,  as  I  say,  I  think  it  was  1897. 

Nathan:     How  did  your  mother  know  about  the  University  at  Berkeley?  It 
hadn't  been  established  long  by  then,  had  it? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  know.   I  just  have  no  idea  how  she  knew  of  Berkeley, 
except  she  knew  it  was  the  University  of  California. 

Nathan:     Where  was  Mrs.  Middlehoff 's  house? 


Shurtleff:  On  Euclid  Avenue.  No,  wait  a  minute;  on  Ridge  Road  above 

Euclid  Avenue.   Interestingly  enough,  it  was  across  the  street 
from  where  a  girl  lived  whose  name  was  Henry  (the  last  name 
was  Henry)  and  she  was  a  college  girl  who  afterwards  married 
Professor  Reinhardt. 

Nathan:     Oh,  this  was  Aurelia  Henry? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  her  name  was  Henry;  her  last  name  was  Henry.   She  married 
Dr.  Reinhardt  and  she  became  the  president  of  Mills  College. 
As  I  remember  her,  she  was  just  a  young  girl.  Dr.  Reinhardt 
was  one  of  my  instructors  when  I  was  in  the  freshman  class  at 
the  University  of  California. 

Nathan:     What  was  his  field? 

Shurtleff:   I  think  he  was  a  doctor,  a  medical  man,  because  he  died  after 
operating  on  himself  in  the  neck  for  a  boil. 

Nathan:     When  you  lived  there  on  Ridge  above  Euclid,  were  there  just 
a  few  houses? 


Grammar  School 


Shurtleff:  No,  it  was  a  fairly  well  settled  community  there.   It  was  a 

new  part  of  Berkeley,  I  think.  It  was  not  very  extensive,  but 
fairly  well  settled.  I  remember  I  had  to  walk  to  the  Whittier 
School  which  was  quite  a  way  off  west  of  Shattuck  Avenue. 

Nathan:     Yes,  that  was  quite  a  good  walk.   If  you  wanted  to  take  any 
other  transportation,  was  there  anything  at  all? 

Shurtleff:  No,  just  going  on  foot.   I  entered  there  in  the  fourth  grade, 

as  I  remember,  having  finished  the  other  three  grades  in  Nevada 
City. 

Nathan:     Do  you  remember  any  of  your  teachers  in  grammar  school? 
Shurtleff:  Yes.   Do  you  mean  in  Nevada  City? 
Nathan:     Yes,  both. 

Shurtleff:  No,  not  in  Nevada  City  I  don't  remember  any.   I  was  only  nine 
years  old  when  I  left  there. 


Nathan: 


Was  that  a  one-room  school  in  Nevada  City? 


Shurtleff :  No,  it  had  several  rooms  in  it.   I  don't  remember  how  many. 

I  remember  in  Berkeley  the  principal  of  my  school  was  a  woman 
by  the  name  of  Miss  Keefer.   [spells  name]   I  can  remember  being 
disciplined  a  few  times  by  her,  too.  We  were  just  a  bunch  of 
dirty  little  kids,  I'm  sure  of  that!   [laughter]  Dirty  in 
language  and  everything  else . 

Nathan:     Did  she  seem  like  a  strong  authority  to  you? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes. 

Nathan:     Was  there  a  playground  for  you  there? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  we  played.  We  used  to  play  tag  in  what  we  called  the 
backhouse,  too.  We  played  and  crawled  all  over  the  place.   I 
can  remember  I  had  a  classmate  who  was  the  smartest  person  in 
the  class.   She  was  a  girl.   I  was  a  wiggly  kid  and  I  can  remem 
ber  once  she  stood  up  in  back  of  me  and  put  her  hands  on  my 
shoulders  to  hold  me  down!  The  funny  little  things  that  return 
to  memory. 

Nathan:     Do  you  remember  her  name? 
Shurtleff:   Fanny  Armstrong. 

Nathan:     It's  amazing  that  you  remember  those  names.  Was  there  any  class, 
any  subject,  that  you  liked  especially  as  a  child? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  think  I  had  any  favorite  subjects.  Oh,  I  was  a  fairly 
good  storyteller  and  frequently- -or  sometimes  in  any  event — 
the  teacher  would  call  on  me  to  recite  a  story  to  the  class. 
I  don't  know  whether  I--I  presumably  made  the  stories  up  as  I 
went  along.  Also,  I  stuttered  as  a  little  boy  and,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  it  got  worse  as  I  got  older  until  I  left  school,  I 
guess  about  the  seventh  grade,  and  went  to  a  stammering  school 
in  San  Francisco  where  I  guess  I  was  a  semester  or  so.   Finally, 

when  I  was  through  high  school,  I  went  back  to  Detroit  with  the 
Mandolin  Club  at  the  University  of  California  and  I  spent  two 
months  there  in  a  stammering  school.  With  the  two  schools  that 
I  went  to,  I  learned  a  little  bit  of  how  to  correct  myself. 

Nathan:     It  is  remarkable  that  you  were  able  to  stand  up  in  front  of 
the  class  and  tell  stories. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  it  was  reading  that  chiefly  bothered  me.   I  could  look 
ahead,  when  the  class  was  reading—when  people  were  reading 
in  the  class—and  I  could  see  that  when  it  got  to  my  place  I 
was  going  to  start  a  sentence  with  a  d_  or  a  b_  which  just 
bothered  me  to  beat  the  band.   It  was  more  of  a  stammering  than 


Shurtleff:  a  stuttering,  I  think  although  some  of  both.  But  fortunately 
in  due  time,  I  outgrew  it.   So  by  the  time  I  got  to  college 
I  was  not  entirely  past  it,  but  pretty  near  it. 

Nathan:     Have  you  kept  up  your  interest  in  this  problem  of  speech?  Have 
you  maintained  an  interest  in  the  way  people  overcome  a  stammer? 

Shurtleff:  Not  particularly. 

Nathan:     You  just  sort  of  went  on  from  there? 


Jobs  and  Leave  from  High  School 


Shurtleff:  Yes.   I  stayed  out  of  school  as  a  result  of  it.   I  worked  in 
a  fruit  store  in  Berkeley,  Sills  Brothers  I  think  it  was. 

Nathan:     Was  it  in  high  school  that  you  stayed  out  for  a  while? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  and  to  show  how  wonderful  the  teachers  were  in  those  days, 
when  I  decided  to  go  back  and  graduate  from  high  school,  I  went 
back  and  had  a  talk  with  the  principal  of  Berkeley  High  School. 
He  didn't  remember  me  at  first.   But  I  talked  with  him  a  little 
while.  He  finally  said,  '"All  right,  Roy,  if  you  say  you  came 
in  those  days,  I'll  take  your  word  for  it  and  I'll  give  you 
a  graduation  from  Berkeley  High  School,"  which  he  did. 

While  I  was  working,  I  worked  for  a  newspaper  called  the 
Berkeley  Independent,  which  was  started  then  by  this  Eugene 
R.  Hallett,  who  was  at  that  time  about  to  graduate  from  the 
University  of  California.   I  think  it  was  1906.   I  worked  for 
him.   In  connection  with  the  paper  was  a  print  shop  that  was 
run  by  a  man  by  the  name  of  Odell.   [spells  name]  They  were 
sort  of  partners  running  the  newspaper  and  the  print  shop.   I 
worked  with  them  sort  of  doing  everything,  I  guess,  that  I  could 
do;  whatever  I  was  asked  to  do. 

Nathan:     It's  interesting  the  kinds  of  jobs  that  help  you  get  along  through 
school.  You  mentioned  that  you  had  dropped  out  of  Berkeley 
High  because  of  the  stammer.   I  wondered  whether  that  was  your 
decision  or  did  the  school  advise  you? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  no,  that  was  my  decision.   I  had  heard  of  a  stammering  school 
in  San  Francisco  and  I  just  went  over  and  applied. 

Nathan:     What  sort  of  training  did  they  give  you? 


Shurtleff:   Speech  training  in  classes.  You  would  line  up  and  stand  on 

the  floor  and  talk  in  measured  tones.  You  would  move  your  hands 
like  this  and  try  to  talk  in  a  regular,  measured  tone. 

Nathan:     Did  they  teach  you  breathing? 

Shurtleff:  Yes.  Oh  yes,  I  think  it  was  a  pretty  good  course.  Then  I 

mentioned  that  later  I  went  back  to  Detroit  and  took  another 
course  when  I  went  East  with  the  Mandolin  Club. 

Nathan:     Was  it  a  two-year  course? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  remember;  two  terms,  I  guess. 

Nathan:     By  then  had  you  mastered  the  problem? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  think  I  ever  mastered  it  completely,  but  it  was  better 
so  that  I  could  get  along. 

Nathan:     You  have  no  difficulty  now. 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  I  do  a  little  bit.   But  I  can  get  up  and  make  a  speech  and 
it  doesn't  bother  me  anymore. 

Nathan:     That's  impressive. 


Walking  Through  "the  Sewers  of  Berkeley" 

Shurtleff:   I  went  to  grammar  school  in  Berkeley  with  Sam  Stephens.  We 
used  to  brag  about  how  we  used  to  walk  through  the  sewers  of 
Berkeley,   [laughter] 

Nathan:     Did  you  really  do  it? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  Strawberry  Creek  ran  under  Berkeley  and  we  used  to  call 
that  the  sewer.   It  was  a  sort  of  a  sewer. 

Nathan:     So  you  two  little  boys  went  walking  along  the  sewers! 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes,  we  used  to  walk  in  there.   It  is  funny  how  kids  like 
to  do  things  like  that. 

Nathan:     How  far  could  you  go? 
Shurtleff:  Through  town. 


Nathan:     All  the  way  through? 

Shurtleff:   We  would  come  out  down  by  the  Berkeley  Library.   It  was  several 
blocks. 

Nathan:     I  don't  think  anyone  could  do  that  now. 

Shurtleff:  I  doubt  it,  but  we  used  to  do  it.  He  was  a  very  close,  old 
friend  of  mine.  He  and  his  wife  both  died  a  few  years  ago. 
I  had  known  them  so  long. 

Nathan:     You  have  seen  Berkeley  change  from  a  small  town  to  a  medium- 
sized  town? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes.   I  think  it  was  about  20,000  in  population  then.   I 

think  I  have  told  you  about  the  first  person  who  met  my  mother 
and  sister  and  I  when  we  got  off  of  the  steam  train  at  Berkeley, 
It  was  an  old  Civil  War  veteran  who  was  driving  an  express 
wagon  and  it  was  the  only  way  we  had  that  we  were  going  to  go 
up  Euclid  Avenue  in  Berkeley  up  in  the  hills.  He  took  us  up 
in  his  wagon. 

Nathan:  Was  it  drawn  by  a  horse? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes. 

Nathan:  What  is  an  express  wagon? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  an  express  wagon  was  a  delivery  wagon. 

Nathan:  Did  it  have  wooden  sides? 

Shurtleff:  Yes.   I  can  remember  we  drove  up  Hearst  Avenue,  where  I  later 
lived,  and  the  President's  Mansion  I  don't  believe  was  there 
then.   President  Wheeler  was  the  first  president  whom  I  knew, 
I  think,  then. 

Nathan:     The  edge  of  campus  was  right  along  Hearst  as  it  is  now? 

Shurtleff:  Yes. 

Nathan:     So  you  went  right  up  there? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  and  that  old  cement  wall  with  the  flowers--geraniums-- 
were  there  then  just  as  they  are  now. 

Nathan:     Were  the  roads  paved? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  think  that  road  was  paved. 


Nathan:     Then  you  went  down  the  hill  to  go  to  grammar  school? 

Shurtleff:   I  went  west.   It  was  about--!  should  guess  maybe--about  three- 
quarters  of  a  mile  that  I  had  to  walk  to  school. 

Nathan:     The  campus  must  have  looked  very  different  then,  very  sparsely 
built. 

Shurtleff:  The  Le  Conte  oaks  were  there.  Are  they  no  longer  there? 

Nathan:     I  don't  think  so.   I  think  there  may  be  a  plaque  there.   I  will 
have  to  look.  Were  they  right  along  Hearst? 

Shurtleff:  No,  they  were  on  the  path  up  from  Center  Street. 
Nathan:     Oh,  yes,  I  know  where  that  would  be. 

Shurtleff:  They  were  beautiful,  old  oak  trees.  There  were  several  of  them 
there. 

Nathan:     There  still  are  oaks  along  that  west  entrance,  so  perhaps  some 
of  them  are  still  there. 

Shurtleff:   I  haven't  been  over  there  for  a  long,  long  time. 

Nathan:     Even  though  there  are  many  buildings,  the  campus  is  still  very 
beautiful,  still  green,  still  leafy. 


II  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 


Shurtleff:   Because  Eugene  R.  Hallett  thought  he  saw  something  in  me  that 
was  worthwhile,  he  encouraged  me  to  go  to  college. 


The  Daily  Californian 


Shurtleff:  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  was  the  one  who  had  been  the  manager 

of  the  Daily  Cal .  At  that  time,  Jack  McClellan  was  the  manager 
when  I  showed  up.  He  was  a  Delta  U  at  California  when  I  first 
visited  him.   I  guess  it  was  1908.  The  Daily  Californian,  as 
I  remember,  had  been  off  campus  for  a  while.   I  don't  know  why 
or  anything,  but  it  wasn't  being  published  in  the  University 
until  Jack  McClellan  became  the  head  of  it.  Then  he  brought 
the  Daily  Cal  back  to  the  ASUC,  the  Associated  Students  of  the 
University.  He  offered  me  a  job  to  solicit  advertising  for 
the  Daily  Californian,  which  I  did,  and  apparently  was  successful 
because  I  began  to  make  a  fair  amount  of  money  for  a  school 
kid. 

Nathan:     Did  you  split  the  income  from  the  ads?  How  did  you  get  paid? 

Shurtleff:   I  got  paid  a  percentage  of  the  amount  I  collected  from  the  ad 
vertising,  twenty  percent  as  I  remember  was  mine.   [laughter] 

Nathan:     What  kinds  of  places  gave  you  ads? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  anybody  that  had  a  business  in  Berkeley  or  Oakland  or,  I 
imagine  in  San  Francisco,  that  I  could  entice  to  put  an  ad  in 
the  University  of  California  daily  paper.   It  was  fairly  success 
ful  because  at  that  time  a  man  by  the  name  of  Milton  Farmer 
was  the  manager  of  the  Associated  Students  of  the  University 
of  California.  He  took  an  interest  in  me  for  some  reason  or 
other.   In  any  event,  Jack  McClellan  either  retired  or  resigned 


Shurtleff:   or  got  married  or  something.   But  Milton  Farmer  called  me  and 
asked  me  if  I  would  like  to  be  the  manager  of  the  Daily  Cali- 
fornian  and  I  only  had  been  working  for  them  a  couple  of  years 
by  that  time.   So  I  accepted  it  and  he  gave  me  a  proposition 
where  I  got  one-half  of  the  profits  of  the  paper.   Since  the 
paper  had  just  started  back  on  its  own  after  having  been  off 
campus  and  since  Jack  McClellan  had  been  a  pretty  successful 
manager  and  I  came  along  working  like  the  dickens,  I  made  quite 
a  lot  of  money  out  of  getting  half  of  the  profits. 

Nathan:     Were  there  other  students  soliciting  ads  the  way  you  had  done? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  one  of  the  men  who  worked  for  me  when  I  became  the 
manager  was  a  man  by  the  name  of  Ned  Lipman.  Ned  Lipman's 
father  was  the  president  of  the  Wells  Fargo  Bank  in  San  Fran 
cisco.   Incidentally,  his  father  was  a  tenant  of  Frank  H.  Lawton 
who  became  my  father-in-law.   So  I  got  to  know  Mr.  Lipman 
through  him  before  I  ever  came  to  San  Francisco. 

Then  when  I  graduated,  Ned  Lipman  became  manager  of  the 
paper  in  my  place.  After  he  graduated,  I  happened  to  become 
a  member  of  Louis  Sloss  §  Co.,  an  investment  banking  firm  where 
I  worked  for  Eugene  R.  Hallett  in  San  Francisco.   I  tried  to 
get  Ned  Lipman  to  come  to  work  for  me,  but  he  said,  "No,  I'm 
going  to  work  for  the  Emporium  in  the  merchandising  business," 
and  he  did.  He  became  the  manager  of  the  Emporium  in  San 
Francisco  and  for  some  years  I  knew  him  pretty  well.  He 
finally  died.  He  was  a  pretty  prominent  man  in  San  Francisco 
in  the  merchandising  business  because  he  became  the  real  head 
of  the  Emporium.   I  think  through  his  efforts,  the  Emporium 
merged  with  H.C.  Capwell  Company  of  Oakland  and  became  Emporium- 
Capwell. 

Nathan:     Could  I  go  back  a  little  to  the  management  of  the  Daily  Cal? 
Did  you  recruit  people  to  work  for  you? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  I  recruited  Ned  Lipman  and  several  others  to  work  for 
me. 

Nathan:     How  did  you  find  the  people  you  wanted? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  chiefly  classmates  or  members  of  the  class  below  me  or 

something  like  that  or  maybe  Ned  Lipman  solicited  me.   I  just 
don't  remember  exactly  how  it  was. 

Nathan:     Did  you  have  much  to  do  with  the  editorial  side? 
Shurtleff:  Nothing. 


10 


Nathan:     When  you  were  working  with  the  Daily  Cal  as  business  manager, 
where  was  the  Daily  Cal  office?  Was  it  back  on  campus  then? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes. 

Nathan:     Do  you  remember  the  building? 

Shurtleff:   I  would  say  that  it  was  in  North  Hall,  but  I  can't  just  pick 
it  right  out.   I  spent  most  of  time  where  it  was  printed  down 
at  Berkeley  at  the  Berkeley  Independent  office,  as  I  remember. 

Nathan:     So  you  were  watching  the  actual  production? 
Shurtleff:   Yes. 

Nathan:     Let's  say  you  obtained  an  ad  from  a  business,  did  you  then  write 
the  ad  also? 

Shurtleff:   Sometimes  I  would  offer  to  write  the  ads  for  them. 
Nathan:     Would  they  write  their  own? 

Shurtleff:   Frequently  they  wrote  their  own.  That  wasn't  a  regular  pro 
cedure.  The  main  thing  was  to  get  the  cash!   [laughter] 

Nathan:     Then  did  you  design  the  ads? 

Shurtleff:  No,  the  printer  did  that,  the  printing  company  did  that.  They 
had  designers,  people  who  would  set  up  the  ads. 

Nathan:     By  this  time,  some  of  the  income  from  the  Daily  Cal  was  going 
to  the  ASUC,  is  that  right? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  it  was  owned  by  the  ASUC.  As  I  said,  the  way  I  got 
the  job  was  through  Milton  Farmer,  the  head  of  the  ASUC. 

Nathan:     Was  he  president,  do  you  think,  or  manager? 
Shurtleff:  He  was  the  paid  executive  in  charge  of  the  ASUC. 
Nathan:     Was  he  an  older  person? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  he  was  at  least  two  years  out  of  college,  I  think.  When 
he  found  that  I  had  taken  hold  and  was  doing  a  good  job,  he 
just  kept  me  on  there.   I  was  the  only  one  that  ever  stayed 
for  two  years—two  whole  years.  As  I  say,  it  was  very  profit 
able  because  at  that  time,  it  had  never  made  any  money  and  I 
made  a  deal  with  Milt  Farmer  for  half  of  the  profits. 


11 


Nathan:     That's  pretty  good!  You  were  doing  well  right  then. 

Shurtleff:   I  guess.   In  any  event,  I  graduated  from  college  with  I  guess 
a  couple  of  thousand  dollars  in  the  bank. 

Nathan:     Were  you  living  at  home? 
Shurtleff:  Yes. 

Nathan:     Did  the  Daily  Cal  participate  in  anything  like  a  publication's 
council  with  other  campus  publications? 

Shurtleff:  No. 

Nathan:     Did  you  have  anything  to  do  with  the  business  managers  of  the 
other  publications? 

Shurtleff:   I  knew  the  manager  of  the  Pelican  and  I  can't  think  of  the  name 
of  the  other. 

Nathan:  Was  it  the  Occident? 

Shurtleff:  The  Occident,  that  was  it. 

Nathan:  I  have  the  name  of  Arnie  Hoisholt.  Was  he  the  editor? 

Shurtleff:  I  think  so. 

Nathan:  And  for  the  Pelican,  Monroe  Dinkelspiel?  Albert  Evers? 


Some  College  Friends 


Shurtleff:  You  asked  me  about  Ed  Einstein  here  [on  the  interview  outline]. 
Ed  was  in  my  class  in  college,  a  Jewish  gentleman,  and  I  have 
often  thought  how  utterly  devoid  I  was  of  any  sense  of  there 
being  Jewish  people  that  I  didn't  care  for  because  two  of  my 
closest  friends  in  college  were  Ed  Einstein  and  Monroe  Dinkel 
spiel,  both  of  whom  I  knew  after  we  graduated.  Ed  Einstein 
became,  I  would  say,  one  of  the  most  prominent  men  of  our  class 
and  he  was  the  first  one  that  I  knew  that  became  interested 
in  radio.   We  all  had  just  started  to  hear  about  radio  and  we 
had  these  little  crystal  sets.  Ed  Einstein  became  interested 
in  radio.   I've  forgotten  just  what  his  capacity  was,  but  he 
was  interested  in  it.  Monroe  Dinkelspiel,  the  other  one  of 
my  classmates  that  I  was  intimate  with,  went  to  work  with  the 
Zellerbach  Paper  Company  and  they  moved  him  to  New  York  where 
he  died  fairly  early  in  life. 


12 


Shurtleff: 

Nathan : 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


I  was  not  a  fraternity  man.   I  was  invited  to  one,  but  the  ones 
I  really  wanted  I  never  got  an  invitation  to!   [laughs]   So 
I  was  not  a  fraternity  man. 

What  was  UNX? 

[hearty  laugh]   Well,  that's  a  product  of  I  guess  you  might 
call  it  the  healthy  mind  of  a  bunch  of  kids,   [more  laughter] 
I  used  to  play  around  with  the  same  bunch  of  fellows.  One  was 
the  man  by  the  name  of  John  R.  Quinn,  who  was  yell  leader  and 
quite  a  prominent  fellow  at  college,  and  Tod  Wheeler  (Charles 
Stetson  Wheeler,  Jr.,  who  was  the  president  of  our  class),  and 
Jimmy  Arnold  who  was  a  classmate  of  mine  and  a  member  of  the 
Bachelordon  Club,  as  was  also  Earl  Warren,  whom  I  knew  at  the 
Bachelordon  Club. 

There  was  a  song  at  that  time  that  we  kids  used  to  sing. 
I've  forgotten  the  words,  but  amongst  other  things  were  the 
words,  "and  the  eunuchs  all  were  there!"   [laughter]   So  we 
called  it  the  UNX  and  nobody  knew  what  it  meant. 


It's  all  over  the  Blue  and  Gold  in  your  listing, 
something  very  respectable. 


It  looks  like 


Well,  that  was  all  it  was!   I've  forgotten  how  many  of  us  there 
were,  but  six  or  eight  or  so  and  we  used  to  go  down  to  Oakland 
and  drink  beer  and  we  used  to  go  over  to  San  Francisco.   I 
never  drank  anything  worse  than  beer,  but  John  R.  Quinn,  who 
was  the  yell  leader  and  who  was  kind  of  the  leader  you  might 
say  of  our  gang,  he  liked  his  whiskey,  even  just  as  a  kid. 


Nathan:     We  have  lots  to  talk  about  on  the  University,  but  could  I  go 
back  to  the  newspaper,  the  Berkeley  Independent?  Before  that 
paper  was  started,  was  there  a  Berkeley  paper? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  there  were  two  Berkeley  papers.  The  old  paper,  I  guess 
the  one  that  was  still  in  business  there,  was  the  Berkeley 
Gazette.  Then  there  was  the  Berkeley  Reporter,  another  paper 
that  I  worked  for  at  one  time.  The  chief  thing  I  remember 
about  the  Berkeley  Reporter,  I  called  on  a  person  to  solicit 
his  subscription  down  on  Grove  Street  in  Berkeley  and  the 
young  man  that  answered  the  door  was  Newton  Drury.   It  was  the 
first  time  I  had  ever  seen  him.  His  father  had  moved  to 
Berkeley  and  brought  Newton  and  Aubrey  Drury  with  him  and  that's 
the  first  time  I  met  Newton.  I  didn't  see  him  again,  I  guess, 
until  we  got  to  college  in  the  same  year. 


Nathan: 


Did  you  get  together  in  college  then? 


13 


Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  knew  him  pretty  intimately  in  college.  Then,  of  course, 
after  we  graduated,  we  had  so  many  friends  together,  including 
Tod  Wheeler  and  Herman  Phleger  who  is  still  around.  Herman 
Phleger  was  a  very  close  friend  of  Newton's,  very  respectful 
of  Newton.   Then  Aubrey  was  Newton's  younger  brother.  He  died 
some  years  ago.  Newton  I  think  only  died  this  last  year. 

Nathan:     Yes,  he  also  has  an  oral  history,  Newton  Drury. 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  does  he? 

Nathan:     Yes,  you  might  like  to  see  it  sometime. 

Shurtleff:  He  would  do  it  very  well,  I  think,  as  would  Aubrey.   Did  Aubrey 
ever  have  one? 

Nathan:     I  don't  know  of  any. 

Shurtleff:  He  was  a  very  bright  young  fellow.  Al  Evers  I  knew  pretty 

intimately.  He  and  I  had  been  at  Berkeley  High  School  together. 
Then  I  knew  him  in  later  years,  too. 

N'athan:     Did  you  help  each  other  or  work  together  at  all? 


Shurtleff:  Not  particularly,  I  don't  think.   I  think  we  were  more  com 
petitors  for  business. 

Nathan:     Yes,  I  wondered  about  that.   When  the  ads  that  you  had  sold 
were  set  up  and  printed,  did  you  proofread  them  at  all  to  be 
sure  they  were  correct? 

Shurtleff:  Of  course,  the  Berkeley  Independent  had  professional  proof 
readers.   But  I  imagine  that  I  must  have  checked  them  over. 

Nathan:     Did  you  have  any  other  jobs  while  you  were  at  Cal  besides  this 
big  money-making  job  of  yours? 

Shurtleff:   I  think  not.   I  think  I  was  pretty  much  concentrated  in  the 
Daily  Cal  management. 

Nathan:     I  wondered,  too,  in  the  Commerce  Club  and  the  Economics  Club, 
did  you  meet  business  people? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  remember  really. 

Nathan:     We  might  just  glance  over  some  of  these  names  of  students. 


14 


Shurtleff:   I  don't  remember  why  or  how  I  knew  Max  Thelen  pretty  well. 

He  was,  of  course,  older  and  he  was  in  law,  but  I  think  I  must 
have  belonged  to  some  club  that  he  belonged  to  at  one  time  or 
another.   But  of  course,  he  was  a  very  top  individual  and 
always  took  an  interest  in  the  University.  Then  afterwards 
I  can  remember  that  he  became  a  member  of  a  law  firm  in  San 
Francisco  and  he  also  handled  the  finances  or  advised  in  the 
financing  of  some  wealthy  family.   I  used  to  pester  him  to  try 
and  get  him  to  buy  bonds  during  the  Second  World  War  with  only 
mediocre  success!   [laughter]   But  he  was  quite  a  fellow. 

Newt  Drury,  of  course,  was  an  intimate  of  mine.  David 
Barrows,  of  course,  I  knew.  He  became  the  president,  didn't 
he,  of  the  University  of  California? 

Nathan:     Right,  he  certainly  did. 

Shurtleff:   Farnham  P.  Griffiths  was  one  of  my  close  friends  and  his 

brother's  picture  is  right  here,  Mansel  P.  Griffiths.   Farnham 
was  his  older  brother  and  they  were  sons  of  a  minister  in 
Eureka  and  they  moved  to  Berkeley,  as  I  remember.  Horace 
Albright  I  used  to  see  a  great  deal  when  we  were  young  grad 
uates  and  he  was  flitting  around  all  over  the  country.  He 
used  to  come  in  and  see  me  in  my  office  in  San  Francisco 
quite  frequently. 

Nathan:     Did  he  try  to  interest  you  in  national  parks  and  conservation? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  of  course,  he  did  and  so  did  Newt  Drury's  brother,  Aubrey 
Drury.  They  were  very  interested  in  those  things  and  they 
were  after  me  and  I  guess  I  must  have  participated  with  them 
a  little.   But  I  wasn't  really  enthusiastic  about  it.  Bob 
Sproul,  of  course,  I  knew. 

Nathan:     How  did  you  happen  to  know  him? 

Shurtleff:  He  was,  as  I  remember,  a  class  behind  me  at  Cal .   I  think  he 
was  '13.  One  of  the  chief  things  I  remember  fleetingly  about 
Bob  Sproul  is  that  after  I  moved  to  New  York  my  son,  Eugene 
Shurtleff,  was  in  California.   I  wanted  to  transfer  Eugene  to 
Cornen,  I  guess  it  was,  back  East  so  that  he  could  be  back 
there  with  us,  with  my  wife  and  me.   I  saw  Bob  Sproul  at  the 
Bohemian  Grove  when  I  came  out  that  summer  and  I  said,  "Bob, 
how  come  you  won't  transfer  Eugene  Shurtleff?"  "Oh,"  he  said, 
"We've  got  to  keep  a  Shurtleff  in  California!"  [laughter] 


15 


Shurtleff :  One  of  the  chief  things  about  Bob  was  that  commanding  voice 
of  his.   When  he  spoke,  his  voice  would  boom  out.  His  son  I 
know  fairly  well — he  belongs  to  the  Fly  Casting  Club  that  I 
belong  to--and  the  only  resemblance  I  see  between  him  and  Bob 
is  that  booming  voice  of  his.   [laughter] 

Nathan:     Were  you  in  any  of  the  same  classes  in  the  College  of  Commerce 
with  Bob  Sproul? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  remember,  so  I  am  going  to  say  no.   I  just  don't 
remember. 

Nathan:     That  voice  was  exactly  as  you  described  it. 

Shurtleff:  He  was  a  very  good  influence  on  the  University  of  California, 
and  I  still  belong  to  Sproul  Associates.   I  give  them  a  little 
money  each  year. 

Nathan:     Perhaps  I  might  ask  you  in  what  ways  do  you  think  that  he  in 
fluenced  the  University  that  you  approved  of? 

Shurtleff:   I  think  he  was  good  for  the  students.  He  understood  the 

students,  could  get  them  to  do  things  that  he  thought  was  right, 
He  was  young  enough,  of  course,  to  be  almost  one  of  them.   I 
knew  his  wife  slightly  and  there  again  my  friend  Nelson  Hackett 
was  closer  to  Bob  Sproul  than  I  was. 

Then  you  have  Clint  Evans  down  [in  the  outline].  He  was, 
of  course,  in  my  class  and  he  was  an  athlete.  He  was  a  base 
ball  player.   I'm  not  sure  he  wasn't  a  football  player,  too. 

Herman  Phleger,  of  course,  I  have  always  known,  at  least 
since  I  went  to  Cal,  Herm  and  his  older  brother,  Cap. 

Earl  Warren  I  can  remember.   I  can  remember  particularly 
his  coming  to  my  house  and  we  went  to  Golden  Bear  together  one 
night. 

Nathan:     Did  any  of  these  men  give  evidence  of  special  leadership 
qualities? 

Nathan:     Of  course,  with  Charles  Stetson  Wheeler,  his  father  was  a  very 
active  man  and  a  good  public  speaker  and  they  were  pretty  well- 
to-do,  I  think,  and  he  followed  right  along  after  his  father. 
He  became  one  of  my  closest  friends.  He  was  elected  president; 
I've  forgotten  whether  it  was  the  senior  class  or  the  class 
after  graduation  or  maybe  it  was  the  same  thing.  Then  there 
was  a  girl  from  Santa  Barbara  by  the  name  of  Chase  who  was 
the  first  vice-president  and  I  became  the  second  vice-president 


16 


Shurtleff:   of  the  class.  That  was  the  permanent  line-up  after  graduation 
of  the  class.   Tod  was,  of  course,  in  law  but  his  heart  was 
in  the  farm.  He  was  a  fanner  and  he  bought  a  place  up  in 
the  Sacramento  Valley  where  he  and  his  wife  moved.  He  had  one 
son,  Charles  Wheeler  III,  I  guess,  who  married  an  Irvine. 
I  used  to  go  up  to  Tod's  place.  Then  after  his  first  wife 
died,  he  married  Mrs.  Breeden,  also  a  California  girl.  Now 
they  are  all  gone. 

Nathan:     Did  the  idea  of  farming  appeal  to  you? 

Shurtleff:  No. 

Nathan:     Are  you  more  of  a  city  person? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  think  so.  I  never  even  owned  a  farm  and  we  own  now  a 
half  interest  in  a  little  country  place  up  in  Sonoma  County, 
but  there  is  no  farm  really  connected  with  it. 

John  Calkins  and  his  brother  Allard  Calkins  I  knew.  They 
were  [class  of]  '11.   I  think  he  used  to  be  president  of  the 
Anglo  Bank  if  I  am  not  mistaken.   I  used  to  do  business  with 
him. 

Nathan:     Were  any  of  the  women  in  your  class  you  remember  as  being 
interesting? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  there  was  a  girl  by  the  name  of  Elaine  Standish.   She 
used  to  go  to  Lowell  High  when  I  went  to  Berkeley  High  and  I 
thought  she  was  pretty  near  right.  They  moved  to  Berkeley  and 
she  went  to  Berkeley  High.   But  she  had  another  boy  friend 
that  she  afterwards  married. 

Of  course,  I  often  have  spoken  with  one  of  the  most  beauti 
ful  girls  I  ever  knew,  Mildred  Porter,  who  became  Mildred  Rowe, 
Albert  Rowe's  wife.  We  have  always  been  close  friends  and  she 
is  still  alive. 

Nathan:     Were  you  aware  of  the  girls  in  class  as  competing  for  grades? 
Did  that  happen  in  your  classes? 

Shurtleff:  Not  particularly.   I  think  there  were  enough  grades  to  go 

around!   [laughter]   I  don't  think  that  if  one  went  up,  some 
body  else  went  down  particularly. 

Nathan:     At  the  time,  did  you  feel  under  any  pressures  to  make  good 
grades?  Did  that  come  into  your  mind? 


17 


Drilling  with  the  Reserves 


Shurtleff:  Not  particularly  as  I  remember. 

Of  course,  when  I  was  in  Cal,  too,  we  had  the  drill.  We 
belonged  to  the  Reserve  Corps  or  something. 

Nathan:     Oh,  was  it  ROTC,  Reserve  Officers  Training  Corps? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  think  it  was.   I  don't  remember  whether  it  was  called 

ROTC.  No,  I  think  it  was  before  that.  As  part  of  our  college 
education  we  had  to  have  two  years,  as  I  remember  it,  in  the 
drill. 

Nathan:     Did  you  have  uniforms? 

Shurtleff:   I  think  we  had  uniforms  that  we  wore.  As  I  remember,  they  were 
grey,  with  a  button-up  collar  and  all. 

Nathan:     What  did  you  learn  in  the  drill? 

Shurtleff:  Well,  I  guess  how  to  march!   [laughter]   I  don't  think  we  took 
it  very  seriously.   Some  of  my  class  went  on  and  joined  the 
regular  army  afterwards.   But  most  of  us  didn't  take  it  very 
seriously. 

Nathan:     Where  did  you  do  your  drilling? 

Shurtleff:  On  the  campus.   In  those  days,  down  below  Boalt  Hall  and  down 

toward  the  old  track  down  there  where  it  was  flat- 
Nathan:     Yes,  there  was  a  meadow  there  for  a  long  time. 
Shurtleff:  Yes. 

Nathan:     Yes,  I  think  partly  where  Dwinelle  Hall  is  now  I  remember  some 
drilling  even  later  going  on  there. 

Shurtleff:  But  it  never  took  very  much  with  me!   [laughter] 

Nathan:     I  see.   I  was  just  glancing  at  this  list,  noting  several 

people  who  stayed  with  the  University.  David  Barrows  became 
the  University  president,  Sproul  did,  Evans  became  a  coach, 
a  baseball  coach,  and  Calkins.  At  one  time  wasn't  he  the 
attorney  for  the  University? 

Shurtleff:   I  imagine  he  was.   I've  forgotten  whether  it  was  John  or  Allard. 


18 


Nathan:     I  think  it  was  John.  That  was  a  rather  impressive  class. 

Shurtleff:  I  have  heard  it  said  that  it  was  one  of  the  good  classes  of 
that  era,  chiefly  I  suppose  because  of  Earl  Warren  who  went 
on  to  become  an  important  man  in  the  U.S.A. 


Professors  and  Education 


Nathan:     Yes,  he  did.   Perhaps  we  can  talk  about  him  later. 

You  spoke  a  little  earlier  of  having  six  months  of  training 
for  your  first  job  in  investment  banking. 

Shurtleff:  That  was  in  Louis  Sloss  5  Co. 
Nathan:     Did  your  schooling  at  Cal  help  you? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  I  think  so.   I  had  a  fine  education  at  Cal.   I  was  in 

the  economics  department  and  there  was  a  professor  who  I  connect 
some  way  or  another  with  the  Metropolitan  Life  Insurance  Company. 
After  he  left  the  University,  he  must  have  gone  to  Metropolitan 
Life.   In  any  event,  he  was  a  top  man. 


Nathan:  Was  the  professor  Charles  Derleth? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  no,  he  was  in  civil  engineering. 

Nathan:  Right.  George  Stratton?  No.  Adolph  Miller? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  Adolph  Miller. 

Nathan:  So  he  was  one  of  your  economics  professors? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  and  he  was  awfully  good.  He  wasn't  just  a  professor.  He 
was  stimulating  you  all  of  the  time  to  take  part  in  the  econ 
omics  of  the  country. 

Nathan:     How  would  you  take  part  in  the  economics  of  the  country? 

Shurtleff:   I  suppose  by  keeping  up  with  what  was  going  on  and  what  kind 

of  things  were  being  passed  by  Congress.   I  can  remember  walking 
home  at  night--our  budget  in  the  United  States  was  only  a  few 
hundred  thousand  dollars  in  those  days--and  mulling  it  over 
and  seeing  how  it  was  growing  and  things  like  that.  As  young 
sters  we  never  even  thought  of  it.   But  he  had  us  take  part 


19 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 

Nathan : 
Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 
Nathan : 


in  the  affairs  of  the  country  in  our  thoughts,  what  was  going 
on,  what  the  country  was  doing.  Of  course,  that  was  long  be 
fore  the  First  World  War.  We  were  very  insular  in  this  country. 
We  didn't  pay  much  attention  to  the  rest  of  the  world. 

Do  you  think  this  helped  develop  your  interest  in  the  industry, 
building  up  the  West,  financing  it,  as  you  did  later? 

I  am  not  conscious  of  that  helping,  but  I  think  it  must  have. 
I  think  the  main  thing  and  what  we  were  doing  then  was  just 
trying  to  make  a  living. 

Right,  the  fancy  ideas  come  later,  don't  they?   [laughter] 
That's  very  helpful. 

Then  there  was  another  top  professor  at  California  by  the  name 
of  Daggett.   Do  you  remember  Daggett? 

Yes.   Stuart  Daggett. 

He  was  an  economics  professor  and  an  expert  on  railroads  as 
I  remember. 

Yes,  that's  right. 

Then  there  was  another  man  by  the  name  of  Hatfield.   I  can 
remember  Henry  Rand  Hatfield  as  a  red-headed  man  who  would  get 
so  excited  when  he  was  lecturing  that  he'd  rub  his  chalky  hands 
all  through  his  red  hair. 

But  they  were  all  influential  in  giving  me  an  education. 
I  think  I  had  a  good  education.   I  graduated  with  sort  of  honors. 
I  was  appointed  to  membership  in  the  Economics  Club  which  was 
I  guess  the  precursor  of  the  present  Graduate  School  of  Business. 
I  am  a  member  of  the  Graduate  School  of  Business,  I  think.  No, 
I  can't  be  because  I  wasn't  a  graduate  student. 

You  were  in  the  College  of  Commerce? 

I  was  in  the  College  of  Commerce  and  I  became  a  member  of  this 
School  of  Business.   In  any  event,  I  send  them  a  thousand 
dollars  a  year,  I  think. 

I  see.  You  were  also  in  the  Commerce  Club. 


Yes,  I  guess  so. 

But  you  are  perfectly  right, 
into  the  School  of  Business. 


The  College  of  Commerce  developed 


20 


Shurtleff:  Then  mine  is  just  School  of  Business. 


I  had  an  English  professor.  I  think  his  name  was  Chauncey 
Wells.  He  was  affable,  very  intelligent,  and  was  very  helpful 
to  the  freshman  class  in  English. 

I  can  remember  that  I  wrote  an  English  essay  and  he  looked 
over  his  glasses  and  he  said,  "I'm  glad  that  you've  seen  all 
of  the  universities  in  the  world  and  that  you  know  that  the 
University  of  California  campus  is  the  most  beautiful!"   [laugh 
ter]  A  little  element  of  sarcasm  in  it,  but  it  was  very  good 
for  me! 

Nathan:     Were  there  other  courses  outside  of  economics  and  commerce, 
besides  English,  that  'you  felt  were — 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  I  took  a  course  on  contracts  in  the  law,  in  the  regular 
law  college,  and  I  found  it  very  helpful  to  me  in  analyzing 
what  could  be  done  and  what  couldn't  be  done.   I  thought  it 
was  of  great  value  to  me. 

Were  these  courses  in  economics,  the  ones  that  you  spoke  of 
earlier,  Daggett,  for  example-- 

--On  railroads. 

So  transportation  was  always  his  major  interest? 

Yes,  I  thought  he  was  excellent  as  a  professor.  Then,  of 
course,  we  had  Charles  Mills  Gayley,  who  was  a  great  friend 
of  my  close  friend,  Nelson  Hackett.   They  were  very  close  to 
gether.   I  was  personally  not  as  close  to  Charles  Mills  Gayley 
as  he  was.  They  became  good  friends.  An  interesting  thing 
is  that  one  of  my  domino  companions  that  I  play  with  is  the 
son-in-law  of  Charles  Mills  Gayley.  He  married  Charles  Mills 
Gay ley's  daughter.   I  think  that's  correct.  He  is  either  the 
son-in-law  or  grand-son-in-law,   [laughs]   I  can't  be  entirely 
sure.   But  I  think  that's  it,  son-in-law. 

Of  course,  I  had  studied  his  Classic  Myths  as  everybody 
else  did  in  high  school  in  those  days.  Then  I  loaned  my  book, 
Charles  Mills  Gayley's  Classic  Myths,  to  the  mother  of  one 
of  my  closest  friends  in  high  school  and  I  never  got  it  back, 
so  I  have  no  copy. 

Nathan:     Thinking  of  the  ways  that  your  education  prepared  you  for  your 
later  business  life,  do  you  have  any  views  of  the  way  the  educa 
tional  program  in  business  administration  is  working  now  on 
campus? 


Nathan : 

Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 

Shurtleff: 


21 


Shurtleff:   I  really  am  not  close  enough  in  touch  with  it  to  be  able  to 

answer  that  question  intelligently  because  I  don't  go  back  over 
there  any  more  to  Berkeley.   I  don't  even  go  to  the  Golden  Bear 
meetings.   I  started  to  return  to  those  meetings  when  my  elder 
son  was  in  college  and  I  kind  of  thought  if  I  worked  along  with 
him,  he  might  get  to  be  a  Golden  Bear.   But  he  didn't.  He  was 
a  baseball  player  and  pretty  good,  too. 

Nathan:     If  a  student  were  to  ask  you  the  way  to  prepare  for  work  like 
the  kind  you  have  done  in  investment  banking,  how  would  you 
answer?  What  sorts  of  courses  would  be  the  most  helpful? 

Shurtleff:  There  again,  I'm  not  familiar  with  the  courses  that  they  now 

have,  but  I  can  remember  that,  for  instance,  there  was  a  mathe 
matics  course  that  had  to  do  with  the  theory  of  probability 
that  I  thought  at  the  time  was  very  good  for  analyzing  things. 
I  don't  know  whether  they  still  give  that  course  or  not. 

Nathan:     Probably  under  the  name  of  statistics.   Did  you  take  any  foreign 
languages?   I  see  later  on  you  had  dealings  with  Peru  and  I 
wondered  if  you  had  any  Spanish. 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  I  studied  Spanish  but  I  was  never  a  real  linguist.   I 
have  a  grandson  who  speaks  fluently  German  and  French  and 
Japanese  and  lived  in  Japan  for  a  long  time.   But  he  seems  to 
take  to  languages  very  easily.   I  never  did.   I  remember  when 
I  was  in  Peru,  I  would  look  up  the  telephone  number  and  I  would 
memorize  it  long  enough  to  call  it.  But  if  the  line  was  busy, 
I  was  sunk--not  very  good!   [laughter] 

Nathan:     It  was  interesting  that  you  were  able  to  take  a  course  in  the 
law  school. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  don't  remember  how  I  was  able  to  do  that.  But  I  did 
take  this  one  professional  law  course. 

Nathan:     Did  you  have  any  interest  in  graduate  study? 

Shurtleff:  No,  I  never  did.  My  elder  son  did.  He  went  back  to  Harvard 
Business  School,  kind  of  an  interesting  story.  My  wife  and 
I  had  moved  to  New  York  by  that  time.  We  moved  in  '36.   I 
think  he  was  back  there  shortly  thereafter.  He  went  up  to 
Harvard  with  letters  of  introduction  from  my  New  York  doctor 
to  check  into  the  Harvard  Medical  School  and  he  came  back 
[laughs]  a  member  of  the  Harvard  Business  School. 


Nathan: 


He  undoubtedly  knew  what  appealed  to  him. 


22 


Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  think  for  young  fellows  of  that  time  where  they  had  a 
choice  of  so  many  things  that  they  could  do,  it  wasn't  easy 
for  them  to  make  up  their  minds  on  what  they  wanted  to  do. 

Nathan:     Did  you  feel  as  a  young  man  that  you  had  many  choices  also? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  think  so.   I  think  I  just  went  along  as  I  told  you  in 
my  connection  with  Eugene  R.  Hallett.  He  influenced  me  and 
he  was  in  the  investment  business  and  just  participated  with 
Charles  R.  Blyth  in  managing  the  new  firm  of  Louis  Sloss  §  Co. 
So  I  just  kind  of  went  into  that  as  a  matter  of  course.  Then 
he  went  up  to  the  Bohemian  Grove  that  summer  of  1912  or  '13, 
got  pneumonia  and  died,  this  close  friend  of  mine. 

So  after  that,  my  closest  friend  at  first  in  Louis  Sloss 
§  Co.  was  Dean  Witter  whom  I  had  known  in  Berkeley. 

Nathan:  Dean  Witter  had  been  at  school  at  Cal. 

Shurtleff:  In  1910  at  California. 

Nathan:  So  he  was  two  years  ahead  of  you. 

Shurtleff:  Yes. 

Nathan:  You  looked  up  to  him  as  an  older-- 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  and  he  came  in  from  being  a  salesman.  He  came  off  the 

road  and  became  an  officer  of  the  company.   I  think  he  was  sales 
manager  if  I  am  not  mistaken.  Then,  of  course,  there  was 
Charles  R.  Blyth.  Then  Charles  Blyth,  as  I  told  you,  and  Dean 
Witter  started  the  firm  of  Blyth,  Witter  §  Co.  and  invited 
Hartigan,  Leib  and  Shurtleff  to  join  them. 


Campus  Life 


Nathan:  Right,  I  do  want  to  get  into  that.  I  would  like  now  to  take 
you  back  again  to  the  campus  to  give  an  idea  of  what  some  of 
the  activities  were.  For  example,  did  you  take  part  in  what 
used  to  be  called  Labor  Day  when  trails  would  be  cleared? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes.   I  can  remember  my  friend  who  afterwards  became  my 

brother-in-law,  Harry  Lawton,  was  very  active  in  one  of  those 
Labor  Days  and  I  was  along  with  him.  He  was  really  taking  the 
lead  in  things  to  do.   I  think  we  were  up  around  the  Big  C  doing 
something. 


23 


N'athan:     Yes.   I  was  thinking  also  of  many  theatrical  performances. 
Shurtleff:  No,  I  didn't  take  part  in  them. 
Nathan:     Did  you  attend  them? 

Shurtleff:  Not  very  much.  I  wasn't  much  interested.  My  friend,  Nelson 
Hackett,  was  in  several  of  those  things  and  I  think  he  wrote 
some  of  them,  but  that  was  not  one  of  my  activities. 

Nathan:     I  see  you  were  involved  in  many  of  the  social  events,  the  class 
dances,  from  the  time  that  you  were  in  your  sophomore  year, 
You  were  organizing  class  parties.  You  were  on  committees  for 
that.  How  did  you  get  into  this  side  of  school  life? 

Shurtleff:   [laughs]  Oh,  I  don't  know,  just  drifted  into  it,  I  guess. 

Nathan:     Where  were  the  parties  held,  like  the  Soph  Hop  and  the  Junior 
Informal?  Were  they  on  campus? 

Shurtleff:  At  the  Harmon  Gym,  yes. 

Nathan:     So  you  did  not  go  off  campus  for  these  events  much? 

Shurtleff:   Some,  I  think,  of  the  smaller  events,  yes.   I  can  remember 

coming  over  to  the  Fairmont  Hotel  to  I  think  it  must  have  been 
the  senior  party.  Then  we  used  to  go  to  a  hall  in  Oakland. 
But  I  can't  now  recall  the  name  of  it. 

But  the  main  place  was  the  Harmon  Gymnasium.  That  was 
for  the  big  dances  like  the  Freshman  Glee,  was  that  it? 

Nathan:     That  sounds  right,  and  then  the  Soph  Hop. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  and  the  Junior  Prom.  Oh,  yes,  I  was  fairly  active  in 
those,  I  guess. 

Nathan:     Did  you  like  to  dance? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  but  after  a  while  [laughs]  I  just  got  so  I  waddled 
instead  of  danced; 

Nathan:     Why  was  that? 

Shurtleff:   I  just  got  that  way,  that  was  all.  Now,  of  course,  I  am  so 
crippled  with  arthritis.  My  wife  is  an  excellent  dancer  and 
loves  to  dance.   So  it's  a  disappointment  to  her  that  I  don't 
dance  any  more. 


Roy  L.  Shurtleff  with  his  mother, 
Charlotte  Avery  Shurtleff,  at  their 
Berkeley  home,  2128  Hearst  Avenue, 
in  1912 


Roy  L.  Shurtleff  seated  on  the  Senior 
Bench,  North  Hall,  UC  Berkeley,  1912 


24 


Nathan:     Did  you  have  faculty  advisors  for  these  activities?  Do  you 
remember  them? 

Shurtleff:   I  think  I  remember  faculty  advisors,  but  I  can't  remember 
individuals  amongst  them. 

Nathan:     Were  there  rallies,  football  rallies,  rallies  for  athletic 
events? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  most  of  our  big  football  rallies,  of  course,  were  held 
in  the  Greek  Theater. 

Nathan:     Yes.  Was  there  much  building  going  on  on  campus  while  you 
were  there? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  I  think  a  good  deal,  yes.   I  think  the  big  library  was 

built  then  and  Boalt  Hall  I  think  was  built.   I  believe  there 
was  a  new  engineering  building  or  I  guess  it  was  mining  and 
engineering. 

Nathan:     Was  that  the  Hearst  Mining  Building  do  you  think? 
Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  think  it  was. 

Nathan:     Did  you  feel  that  it  was  easy  or  not  easy  to  meet  people, 
your  fellow  students? 

Shurtleff:   Oh,  I  think  it  was  easy  enough  to  meet  people.   I  can  remember 
the  Senior  Bench,  for  instance,  there  that  used  to  be  within 
the  steps  of  North  Hall.  We  would  go  up  there  and  sit,  it 
seemed  to  me  for  long  times  when  the  sun  was  shining,  and  other 
people  would  come  in  and  we  would  sit  and  chat. 

Nathan:     Did  you  ever  use  the  swimming  pool? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes.   I  lived  on  Hearst  Avenue  in  Berkeley  which  was  just 
west  of  the  campus  and  it  was  a  pretty  good  hike  up  to  Straw 
berry  Lake  up  there. 

Nathan:     So  it  was  Strawberry  Lake  then. 

Shurtleff:   I  swam,  not  I  would  say  a  lot,  but  I  remember  hiking  up  there 
and  taking  a  plunge  in  that  cold  water  every  once  in  a  while. 

Nathan:     You  were  on  campus  from  say  1908  through  '12  probably.  Were 
the  students  aware  of  international  developments?  Did  they 
know  that  there  was  a  war  brewing?  Did  you  talk  about  that? 


25 


Shurtleff:   I  don't  think  that  we  had  much  interest  in  it.   I  can  remember 
very  well  that  when  the  First  World  War  was  declared,  Benjamin 
Ide  Wheeler,  then  president,  called  a  meeting  and  the  students 
went  down  to  the  Berkeley  High  School  auditorium  and  had  this 
meeting.   I  can  remember  that  Benjamin  Ide  Wheeler  said,  "You 
will  find  that  when  you  go  over  there,  if  you  do,  that  these 
German  boys  are  very  much  the  same  kind  of  kids  as  you  are." 
He  wasn't  at  all  enthusiastic  about  the  war,  as  I  remember, 
at  the  start. 

Nathan:     Did  the  faculty  members  speak  of  it  to  you? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  remember.  The  First  World  War,  when  did  it  start? 
Was  it  1914? 

Nathan:     Yes,  and  there  must  have  been  rumblings  earlier,  so  that  every 
body  would  be  aware  that  this  probably  was  coming. 

Shurtleff:   I  graduated  in  1912  and  I  married  in  1913.   So  by  the  time  that 
we  got  into  the  war,  which  was  1917,  I  guess,  I  was  a  married 
man  with  a  child  and  I  was  not  one  of  the  first  to  go.   I 
didn't  go  at  all,  as  a  matter  of  fact.   I  was  to  be  drafted 
and  Charles  R.  Blyth  and  I  had  decided  that  we  would  just  sit 
and  wait  for  the  draft  to  come.  Our  partners  all  went  to  war 
or  most  of  them  did. 

Nathan:     How  did  you  meet  your  wife?  Was  she  a  student  on  campus  with 
you? 

Shurtleff:   She  lived  in  Berkeley  and  we  both  grew  up  in  Berkeley. 
Nathan :     What  was  her  name? 

Shurtleff:  Hazel  Lawton,  and  she  was  the  sister  of  one  of  my  closest 
friends  who  was  Harry  Lawton. 

i 

Nathan:     Yes,  I  recognize  the  name. 

Shurtleff:   Interestingly  enough,  when  I  was  a  kid  in  Berkeley  High  School, 
I  used  to  work  on  Saturdays  and  I  drove  a  butcher  wagon.  When 
one  of  Hazel's  friends  heard  that  she  was  interested  in  me  and 
I  in  her,  this  was  a  girl  by  the  name  of  Elizabeth  Stitt,  she 
said,  "Oh,  he  used  to  be  our  butcher  boy!"  [laughter] 

Then  I  was  a  member  of  Golden  Bear  and  Winged  Helmet. 
Nathan:     Yes,  how  did  this  come  about?  Were  you  an  athlete  also? 


26 


Shurtleff:  No,  but  I  was  the  manager  of  the  Daily  Californian  and  so  be 
came  a  member  of  the  Golden  Bear—first  of  Winged  Helmet  and 
then  of  Golden  Bear.   It  was  that  connection  with  them  that 
made  me  a  friend  of  so  many  of  the  prominent  people  at  Cal, 
including  Einstein  and  Dinkelspiel. 


Mandolin  Club 


Nathan:     How  did  you  get  started  with  the  Mandolin  Club? 

Shurtleff:   When  I  was  a  young  boy  in  Berkeley,  we  had  an  organ  in  the 
house  and  my  mother  had  me  take  organ  lessons,  and  I  didn't 
like  it.   Then  she  bought  a  little  upright  piano.   She  wasn't 
wealthy  by  any  means.   I  started  to  take  lessons  on  the  piano, 
but  I  wasn't  any  good  and  I  didn't  practice.   Finally,  I  said 
to  her,  "Why  don't  you  let  me  take  mandolin  lessons?"  She  did 
and  I  can't  remember  who  the  teacher  was,  but  I  can  remember 
sitting  in  our  parlor  on  Hearst  Avenue  in  Berkeley  there  by 
myself  and  just  playing  the  mandolin  over  and  over  again,  the 
popular  pieces  and  the  pieces  that  we  all  sang  and  everything. 
I  got  so  I  could  play. 

This  is  also  kind  of  interesting,  I  think.   I  was  the 
manager  of  the  Mandolin  Club.   Finally,  a  classmate  of  mine, 
Kenneth  Monteagle,  whose  father  was  a  prominent  real  estate 
man  and  a  wealthy  one,  said  to  me,  "If  you  will  resign  as 
manager  of  the  Mandolin  Club  and  let  me  be  the  manager,  my 
father  will  send  us  to  Hawaii."  So  it  was  no  sooner  said  than 
done!   [laughter]   I  said,  "Of  course,  I'll  resign." 

In  any  event,  he  became  the  manager  and  his  father  did 
send  us  on  a  ship  to  Hawaii. 

Nathan:     Wonderful,  what  a  lark!   Did  you  play  in  Hawaii? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes.  Of  course,  there  was  all  the  nerve  for  a  bunch  of 
college  kids  to  go  over  with  stringed  instruments  to  Hawaii, 
but  it  worked  and  we  got  in  touch  with  a  graduate  who  was  over 
there  who  was  apparently  interested  in  the  college  still.  He 
entertained  us  and  got  us  all  of  our  commissions  to  play,  and 
we  played  pretty  much  all  over  the  islands. 

Nathan:     What  did  you  wear?  Did  you  have  a  uniform? 
Shurtleff:  No,  just  shirt  sleeves. 


27 


Nathan:     Did  you  play  at  schools? 

Shurtleff:   Oh  yes,  then  and  after  we  came  back  from  that  trip.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  it  was  as  members  of  that  Mandolin  Club  who  went  with 
the  Glee  Club  to  the  East  one  year  that  I  went  and  went  to 
Detroit  to  go  to  that  stammering  school. 

I  remember  so  well  when  I  first  walked  into  a  sleeping 
car,  the  first  time  I  had  ever  seen  one,  all  of  this  beautiful, 
polished  mahogany.  We  got  in  this  car  and  we  were  taken  and 
we  played  all  along  the  way.   I  think  the  president  of  the 
Santa  Fe  Railroad  was  the  father  of  one  of  the  Glee  Club  men 
and  we  played  a  great  number  of  places,  Arizona  and  New  Mexico. 
But  it  was  a  great  lark  for  a  bunch  of  college  kids. 

Nathan:     Oh,  that's  delightful. 

I  wanted  to  thank  you  for  answering  my  note,  and  saying 
that  the  UC  professor  who  helped  you  when  you  were  figuring 
out  the  general  petroleum  issue  in  1921  was  Henry  Rand  Hatfield. 
I  wondered  if  you  had  gone  back  to  talk  to  any  of  your  other 
professors  on  business  questions? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  recall  having  done  it  more  than  that  once. 

Nathan:     Here  is  another  question  about  the  campus.  There  was  a  report 
that  in  about  1909  or  1910,  there  was  some  discussion  of  bar 
ring  women  from  the  ASUC .  They  didn ' t  want  women  to  be  members 
of  the  ASUC.   If  you  cast  your  mind  back,  do  you  remember 
hearing  anything  about  that? 

Shurtleff:  No,  I  don't.   I  doubt  if  it  was  very  serious!   [laughter] 
Nathan:     It  is  one  of  those  interesting  points  that  comes  up  occasionally. 


28 


III  FAMILY  MEMBERS 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff : 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 
Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 


Immediate  Family 

Did  you  want  to  say  anything  more  about  your  wife  and  about 
your  children  and  your  grandchildren? 

Of  course,  I  am  very  happy  with  the  children  and  the  grand 
children  that  came  along.   I  have  been  blessed  by  three  very 
fine  young  children.  They  have  been  loyal  to  me  and  friends 
of  mine  right  along  and  their  children  have  been  well  brought 
up;  very  fine  young  people.   I  am  blessed  by  that. 

Do  they  live  in  the  area? 
One  lives  in  Australia. 
One  of  your  own  children? 

One  of  my  grandchildren,  the  daughter  of  Gene.  She  went  over 
to  Australia  to  teach  school.  I  guess  six  or  seven  years  ago 
or  more.  She  married  and  has  two  children  and  lives  in  Mel 
bourne,  in  a  suburb  of  Melbourne.  Gene's  other  daughter  lives 
in  Colorado.  He  and  his  wife  went  back  last  night  to  see  her 
and  helped  finance  a  house  for  them. 

That's  a  satisfaction,  isn't  it? 

Yes.  But  in  the  main,  in  their  own  way,  each  one  of  my  grand 
children  are  doing  very  well  and  their  spouses  are  in  the  main 
pretty  well  and  are  fine  young  people. 

Are  any  of  them  in  investment  banking? 


Family  photo  taken  on  Roy  L.   Shurtleff's    90th  birthday,   Bohemian  Grove, 
September  1977.     The  group  includes    (not  in  order) : 

Mr.   and  Mrs.    Roy   L.   Shurtleff 

Mrs.   Shurtleff's  niece  Margaret,  her  husband  William  Desmond,   and 
children:     Susan,   Barbara,  William,   and  John 

Roy  Shurtleff's  oldest  son  Lawton,  his  wife  Anneke,   and  children: 
William  with  his  wife  Akiko,   Jeffery  with  his  wife  Annie  and 
daughter  Linda 

Roy  Shurtleff's  second  son  Eugene,  his  wife  Betty,   and  children: 
Robert,   Kathleen  with  her  husband  Peter  Armitage,   Christine  with 
her  husband  John  Baker  and  daughter  Cara  Rose 

Roy  Shurtleff's   daughter  Nancy,   her  husband  Willard  Miller,    and 
children:      Sandra  with  her  husband  Peter  Rowe  and  children: 
Merideth,    Bentley,   Courtney,   and  Perrin;   Stephen  with  his  wife 
Terry  and  children:      Stephen,    Kevin,    Scott,    and  Lorraine; 
Roy  with  his   daughter  Nancy 


29 


Shurtleff:  Gene  is,  right  here  in  this  office.   Well,  my  Nancy's  husband 
has  been  the  president  of  Dean  Witter  §  Co.  He  is  sort  of 
reaching  retirement  age.  He  is  not  as  active  as  he  has  been. 
It  seems  strange  to  me  that  my  children  are  reaching  retirement 
age!  Gene  is  not  very  active  in  Blyth  anymore.  He  spends  most 
of  his  time—He  is  just  about  through  with  the  University  of 
California,  I  think,  as  head  of  their  money  raising  fund — 

Nathan:     The  UC  Berkeley  Foundation? 

Shurtleff:  Yes.   I  think  he  is  just  reaching  the  age  of  retirement  now. 

But  he  does  other  things,  too,  other  activities  that  he  takes 

part  in.  He  is  not  idle  by  any  means.   I  think  Gene  is  a  good 
citizen. 

Nathan:     There  was  one  grandson  that  we  spoke  of  briefly,  the  one  who 
had  lived  in  Japan.  You  were  saying  that  he  had  become 
interested  in  tofu? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  he  founded  a  company.  He  and  his  wife,  who  is  Japanese, 
are  quite  active.   They  lecture  pretty  much  all  over  the  world 
on  tofu  foods  and  they  have  published  I  think  a  half  dozen 
books. 

Nathan:     Is  his  name  Shurtleff  also? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  he  is  Bill  Shurtleff.  He  is  my  elder  son's  elder  son. 
He  is  by  way  of  being  a  linguist.  He  has  spent  some  time  in 
Germany  and  he  speaks  German  fluently  and,  of  course,  he  is 
very  fluent  in  Japanese  because  he  lived  there  for  some  years. 
He  and  his  wife  are  both  very  active  in  tofu  foods. 


Genealogy  and  a  Book 


Nathan:     I  noticed  that  you  were  interested  in  family  history,  in 
genealogy.  You  mentioned  a  Benjamin  Shurtleff  who  had,  I 
guess,  started  the  family  genealogy.   Is  that  right? 

Shurtleff:  Yes. 

Nathan:     How  did  you  come  to  pick  it  up  then? 

Shurtleff:   When  I  retired  in  November  of  '63,  I  was  looking  for  an  activity 
to  keep  me  moving.   I  didn't  want  to  just  go  home  and  go  to 
bed!   [laughter] 


3C 


Nathan:     Good  for  you. 

Shurtleff:   So  I  made  a  study  of  the  orchid  business.   I  was  thinking  of 

going  into  raising  orchids  because  I  had  always  been  a  gardener. 
Then  I  began  to  review  some  of  the  correspondence  I  had  had 
with  Benjamin  Shurtleff  years  ago  and  I  found  out  that  his 
sister  was  still  alive.   She  lived  in  Medford,  Massachusetts 
and  Mrs.  Shurtleff  and  I  went  back  and  called  on  her.   I  wanted 
to  get  a  feel  first  if  she  would  talk  with  me.   Benjamin  Shurt 
leff  had  died  some  years  before. 

Nathan:     How  was  he  related  to  you? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  very  distantly,  very  distantly.  We  had  to  go  back  to  the 
eighteenth  century  to  find  a  common  parent.   I  came  down  from 
the  elder  son,  from  William  Shurtleff,  and  he  came  down  from 
the  younger  son.   In  any  event,  it  was  way  distant.  When  I 
was  in  college,  I  got  a  form  letter  from  him,  as  he  was  writing 
to  all  Shurtleff s  to  know  something  about  them  and  who  their 
parents  were  and  so  forth.   When  I  told  him  that  my  name  was 
Roy  Lathrop  Shurtleff,  he  wrote  back  to  me  and  said,  "It  is 
not,  it  is  Roy  Lothrop  Shurtleff."   [laughter]  He  said, 
"Lothrop  is  an  old  family  name."  So  I  changed  it.   But  he  was 
pretty  close  to  the  start.  He  mentioned  several  times  that 
his  uncle  Will,  I  think  it  was,  was  still  alive  and  he  was  one 
of  the  sons  of  the  original  Shurtleff  who  came  from  England. 
But  even  he,  with  all  of  that  background  and  all  of  that  close 
ness  to  the  start  of  things,  never  found  out  (and  I  never  was 
able  to  find  out)  how  Will  Shurtleff,  the  ten-year  old  boy  who 
was  here  in  1634,  how  he  got  here—who  his  parents  were  or  what 
ship  he  came  on.  That  was  just  a  closed  book.   Later  I  learned 
that  there  were  many  people  who  left  England  to  escape  religious 
persecution  or  for  any  other  reason  and  they  didn't  tell  why 
they  left  or  how  they  came.  They  just  came. 

So  it  was  more  or  less  a  matter  of  luck,  I  guess,  if  one 

found  out  who  their  ancestors  were  or  when  they  came  over.   I 

read  and  did  a  lot  of  research  on  that.   But  we  never  were  able 
to  state  definitely. 

Nathan:     Were  you  tempted  to  go  to  England? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  we  did  go  to  England.  My  wife  and  I  went  to  England  and 
my  elder  son,  not  for  that  reason,  but  incidentally  he  went 
to  Sheffield  because  he  was  in  the  small  tool  manufacturing 
business  himself  and  he  went  over  there  to  make  some  contacts 
to  import  things  from  Sheffield  for  his  business.   Incidentally, 
he  called  on  a  man  I  had  looked  up  in  the  telephone  book  and 


31 


Shurtleff:   as  I  remember  there  were  quite  a  few  Shurtleffs  in  the  tele 
phone  book.  They  were  spelled  S-h-i-r-t  though,  most  of  them; 
some  were  S-h-u-r-t. 

When  my  son  went  over,  he  called  on  them  including  the 
man  I  had  had  a  telephone  conversation  with.   When  Lawton  came 
back--Lawton  and  his  wife  said  that  this  man  was  quite  sure 
that  we  were  related.  He  said,  "I  am  too  because  he  looks  like 
you!"  [laughter]  He  died  before  we  were  able  to  pursue  it 
very  far  to  find  out.  We  never  carried  along  after  that  with 
them,  although  my  son's  wife  (who  was  Barbara  Shurtleff,  she 
since  has  died  too) ,  sent  me  a  history  of  Sheffield  that  picked 
up  some  of  the  Shurtleffs.   But  we  were  never  able  to  make  a 
definite  connection,  even  from  that  history  book  of  Sheffield. 

But  it  isn't  surprising.   It's  a  long  time  ago,  1634! 

Nathan:     Yes,  when  you  consider  the  age  of  this  country,  that  was  a  long 
time  ago.   So  you  had  been  in  correspondence  with  Benjamin 
Shurtleff. 

Shurtleff:  He  had  written  me  as  he  and  later  I  wrote  to  innumerable  Shurt 
leffs.   The  way  I  got  the  names  of  the  Shurtleffs,  I  just 
walked  up    the  street  here  to  the  telephone  company  library. 
It  had  all  of  the  telephone  books  in  the  country.   I  began  to 
look  for  Shurtleffs  and  I  looked  through  all  of  the  telephone 
books  of  the  United  States. 

I  finally  had  a  mailing  list  of  I  think  it  was  around 
2,800  Shurtleffs,  that  I  got  in  part  from  the  telephone  books, 
and  then  from  correspondence  with  these  people  I  picked  up  some 
non- Shurtleffs  who  were  members  of  the  family. 

Nathan:     Out  of  these  say  2,800  names,  and  I  suppose  2,800  letters  that 
you  sent  out,  about  how  many  responses  did  you  get? 

Shurtleff:   I  had  to  keep  writing  and  writing  and  writing.  Then  after  I 
stopped,  some  of  them  began  to  write  me  to  know  where  the 
books  were  after  they  were  all  gone,   [laughter]   I  took  kind 
of  a  pleasure  in  reminding  them  that  they  hadn't  answered  me. 

Nathan:     How  many  copies  of  the  genealogy  did  you  publish  then? 

Shurtleff:  Eight  hundred  and  fifty.   I  started  out  with  250  and  then  I 

kept  expanding  it  and  finally  got  the  printer  to  make  an  addi 
tional  printing  and  the  final  amount  was  850.   I  distributed 
those  finally  in  1976  when  I  closed  the  thing  down  and  my 
secretary  partially  retired.   I  think  she  is  pretty  close  to 


32 


Shurtleff:   eighty  now  herself.   [laughs]   But  she  worked  at  it.   I  would 
never  have  been  able  to  accomplish  it  without  the  systematic 
effort  that  she  put  in  on  it. 

Nathan:     The  fact  that  you  actually  pulled  it  together  and  did  publish 
it  is  quite  wonderful. 

Shurtleff:   It  was  the  result  of  having  a  job  and  staying  with  the  job, 
that  was  all.   I  just  got  the  objective  and  stayed  with  it. 
I  came  to  the  office  every  day  just  as  though  I  was  working 
for  Blyth.  My  secretary  and  Gene  helped  me  a  good  deal,  too-- 
not  through  writing  letters,  but  he  helped  me  contact  the 
printer  that  I  finally  got. 

Nathan:     Who  was  the  printer,  a  local-- 

Shurtleff:   It  was  a  local  party  here.  They  worked  very  well  with  me  and 
then  not  only  the  printer  but  the  bookbinder  and  all  those 
things  —  it  was  a  continuous  job,  just  continuous.  But  it  was 
finally  done. 

Nathan:     Have  you  deposited  any  copies  with  historical  societies? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  I  looked  up  all  the  libraries  that  had  Benjamin's 

books.   Benjamin  had  made  a  list  which  finally  came  into  my 
hands.   Interestingly  enough  toward  the  end,  Benjamin  was  in 
constant  correspondence  with  the  wife  of  a  Shurtleff  who  was 
a  Mormon.   Of  course,  with  the  Mormons,  that's  part  of  their 
religion  to  keep  track  of  families.  They  believe  the  families 
are  united  eventually.   So  she  had  planned  on  carrying  on  the 
record.  But  by  the  time  I  got  in  touch  with  her,  and  went  over 
to  Salt  Lake  City  to  see  her,  she  decided  that  she  wasn't  well 
enough  to  do  it  and  she  gave  me  her  blessing  and  all  of  the 
names.   She  had  a  book  from  Benjamin  that  carried  on  after  he 
published.   So  she  gave  me  a  good  start  on  this  thing.   It  was 
interesting,  the  various  people  I  had  cooperating. 

She  is  gone  now  and,  of  course,  Benjamin's  sister  is  long 
since  gone.   Benjamin  published  in  Revere,  Massachusetts.   It 
was  interesting  to  follow  this  family.   I  made  some  friends 
in  it  too,  friends  or  people  who  became  close  enough  for  me 
to  carry  on  a  friendship  with.   It  is  sort  of  ebbing  now,  but 
it  carried  on  for  a  while. 

Nathan:     Did  you  find  that  the  family  had  spread  all  over  the  country? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  they  were  also  up  into  Canada.  My  own  father  was  born 
in  Quebec,  Canada,  because  you  see  what  people  did:  they  moved 
from  New  England,  they  just  went  up  the  Connecticut  Valley  and 


33 


Shurtleff:   the  first  thing  they  knew  they  were  in  Canada.  They  didn't 

know  that  there  was  a  border  between  Canada  and  the  colonies, 
and  there  wasn't  a  border  actually.  This  was  before  the  Revolu 
tionary  War.  They  were  all  separate  colonies  of  England.  There 
were  some  French  in  Quebec,  too,  but  there  was  quite  a  colony 
of  Americans  who  had  gone  north  to  Canada.   I  tried  to  follow 
them  and  I  did  to  some  extent,  but  it  wasn't  easy.  The  records 
at  Newfoundland  were  very  sketchy.   The  records  in  New  York 
were  pretty  sketchy  too,  but  Massachusetts  was  better  and 
Connecticut  was  better.   It  was  interesting  when  I  could  trace 
somebody  in  New  York  to  see  how  they  went  from  one  part  of  the 
state  to  another,  from  Massachusetts  to  New  York  and  then  up 
into  Canada.  They  were  a  restless  bunch.   I  guess  everybody 
was  in  those  days.   It  was  a  new  country  and  they  were  free 
to  do  what  they  wanted  to  and  they  just  did. 

Nathan:     Did  you  discover  whether  they  were  farming  people  or  had  other 
ways  of  making  a  living? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  one  was  a  mayor  of  Boston.   [laughs]   There  were  quite 
a  few  attorneys  and  doctors.   I  think  they  leaned  to  being 
professional  people.  Others  were  just  plain  people. 

Nathan:     Were  you  able  to  discover  whether  the  Califomians  came  with 
the  Gold  Rush  or  when  they-- 

Shurtleff:  They  came  after.  My  own  father  came  down  from  Canada  to  Kentucky 
about  the  start  of  Civil  War  and  he  married  a  Kentucky  girl. 
I've  forgotten  just  when  he  came. 

Nathan:     I  see.  Before  we  leave  the  genealogy,  can  you  let  me  have  the 
title  of  your  book? 

Shurtleff:   It  is  Descendents  of  William  Shurtleff,  1976  edition. 
Nathan:     Thank  you. 


34 


IV  BUSINESS  DEVELOPMENT 


Nathan:     Turning  to  some  of  your  business  interests,  I  wondered  why  your 
friend  Eugene  Hallett  felt  that  he  could  start  another  paper 
in  Berkeley.   Do  you  know? 

Shurtleff:  He  was  just  naturally  an  ambitious  young  fellow.  He  graduated 
from  college  and  he  had  had  this  experience  on  the  Daily  Cali- 
fornian  and  I  guess  it  was  natural  for  him  to  want  to  start 
his  own  paper.   I  remember  his  wife,  too,  but  I  can't  remember 
her  name  now- -Helen,  I  think. 


Louis  Sloss  §  Co.,  the  Sacramento  Area 


Shurtleff:  Then,  after  I  started  to  college  or  maybe  it  was  before  I 

started  to  college,  he  left  the  Berkeley  Independent  and  came 
over  to  San  Francisco  and  went  to  work  for  N.W.  Halsey  &  Co., 
investment  bankers.  He  was  very  successful  at  that  and  then 
he  and  Charles  R.  Blyth--who  had  been  working  for  H.S.  Burr 
in  San  Francisco,  a  commercial  paper  house—left  their  respec 
tive  firms  and  went  to  work  for  a  new  firm  just  starting,  by 
the  name  of  Louis  Sloss  §  Co.   Sloss  was  an  old  family  in  the 
Alaska  commercial  business.  They  were  developing  land  up  on 
the  Sacramento  River;  the  Natomas  Company,  the  predecessor  of 
the  present  Natomas  Company.   Louis  Sloss  §  Co.  incorporated 
and  went  to  work  chiefly  selling  first  mortgage  bonds  in  the 
Natomas  Consolidated,  which  was  a  gold-dredging  company  up 
toward  Folsom. 

Then  they  also  started  a  company  called  the  West  Sacra 
mento  Company,  that  afterwards  incorporated  a  reclamation 
district  called  Reclamation  900  and  afterwards  incorporated 


35 


Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


the  Sutter  Basin  Company  owned  by  J.  Ogden  Armour.  They  went 
broke.   Land  was  a  wonderful  thing,  excepting  it  was  on  the 
downbeat  in  those  days. 

Was  gold  mining  still  important  in  California  at  that  period? 

Yes,  the  remnants  of  it  were  active.  There  were  a  couple  of 
mines  still  operating.  There  was  the  Idaho-Maryland  in  Grass 
Valley  that  was  owned  by  the  Coleman  family,  the  son  of  whom 
became  the  owner  of  the  Russ  Building  later  on  in  life. 
S.  Waldo  Coleman.   I  will  make  a  little  aside  here  that  is 
interesting  to  me;  whether  it  would  be  to  you  or  not,  I  don't 
know.   When  my  mother  became  a  widow  from  her  first  husband 
before  I  was  born,  she  inherited,  I  guess  from  her  husband, 
some  money  which  was,  as  I  remember,  $1,000  in  gold.   She 
went  to  Grass  Valley  and  negotiated  for  a  store  there  that  was 
the  home  of  the  Grass  Valley  Union  which  was  the  Grass  Valley 
newspaper.   She  took  my  sister  with  her,  the  one  that  was  in 
college  later.  When  she  pulled  out  the  sack  of  gold  to  pay 
for  the  store  property,  my  sister  said,  "Why  Mommy,  you  told 
me  you  didn't  have  any  money!"   [laughter]  Mr.  Coleman,  the 
father  or  uncle  of  S.  Waldo  Coleman,  turned  to  my  sister  and 
said,  "Well,  you  can  have  this  then,"  and  he  gave  her  a  $5.00 
gold  piece.   I  thought  it  was  kind  of  an  interesting  story  of 
the  time  in  Nevada  City  and  Grass  Valley. 


Yes,  it  certainly  was. 
in  a  bag? 


So  your  mother  had  actual  gold  dust 


Oh  yes,  she  had  taken  the  gold  out  of  the  bank,  I  guess,  and 
put  it  in  a  sack  and  took  it  to  Coleman  from  whom  she  bought 
this  property.  Then  years  later  when  I  lived  in  San  Mateo, 
I  knew  this  S.  Waldo  Coleman,  the  son  of  this  same  man.   I  knew 
him  pretty  well.   I  used  to  ride  up  to  San  Francisco  with  him. 
We  lived  in  Burlingame  then  and  I  knew  his  father  and  uncle 
slightly  who  worked  with  Louis  Sloss  §  Co. 


The  Russ  Building,  San  Francisco 


Shurtleff:  Going  back  just  a  minute,  the  firm  of  Blyth,  Witter  $  Co., 
investment  bankers,  which  we  founded  in  1914,  became  one  of 
the  underwriters  of  the  stock  of  the  Russ  Building.  We  financed 
the  building  of  the  Russ  Building.   It  went  broke  along  with  a 
lot  of  other  people  at  that  time  and  it  went  through  a  reorgan 
ization.   I  can  remember  the  Russ  Building  stock--!  can  remember 


36 


Shurtleff:  selling  some  at  $2.00  a  share.  In  any  event,  S.  Waldo  Coleman 
finally  came  along  and  bought  the  control  of  it.  Then  finally 
he  bought  it  all  and  owned  the  whole  Russ  Building. 

Nathan:     So  eventually  it  was  successful? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  oh  very,  and  he  sold  it  at  a  very  material  profit.  Then 
the  man  who  bought  it  from  him  sold  it  at  a  still  higher  profit. 
It  was  a  terrific  success.   It  was  at  that  time  the  finest 
building,  I  guess,  in  San  Francisco.  That  was  before  this 
building  [the  Bank  of  America  Building]  was  built  and  at  about 
the  same  time  the  telephone  building  was  built. 


Sales  in  Investment  Banking 


Shurtleff:   When  I  graduated  from  college  I  determined  that  I  would  come 
over  to  San  Francisco  and  see  Eugene  R.  Hallett  and  ask  him 
for  a  job.   But  before  I  did  that,  I  deliberately  called  first 
on  another  man  whom  I  knew  (whose  name  I  have  now  forgotten) 
who  had  also  started  an  investment  banking  house.   I  think  it 
was  called  Smith,  Tevis,  Hanford. 

In  any  event,  I  went  in  and  asked  him  first  for  a  job  and 
he  gave  me  a  job.   It  didn't  amount  to  anything.   I  was  just 
going  to  go  out  and  solicit  customers,  that  was  all,  and  get 
a  commission;  no  salary.   But  when  I  got  to  Eugene  R.  Hallett, 
I  asked  him  for  a  job  and  he  offered  me  one.  When  I  told  him 
I  was  thinking  of  going  to  work  for  this  other  fellow,  why, 
he  became  indignant  with  me,  that  I  would  think  of  going  to 
work  for  anybody  but  him. 

Nathan:     This  was  sort  of  what  you  had  planned,  wasn't  it? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  actually!   [laughter]  Anyway,  I  went  to  work  with  him 
for  $50.00  a  month  having  graduated  from  California  in  the 
spring  of  '12  and  this  was  in  July  or  August  of  '12. 

Nathan:     Fifty  dollars  a  month? 

Shurtleff:  Yes. 

Nathan:     Did  you  get  commissions  beside  this? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  I  did  after  I  started  to  sell,  but  there  was  six  months 
of  training  before  I  ever  got  out  to  sell.  Dean  Witter  was 
then  a  salesman  in  the  Sacramento  Valley  and  a  fellow  by  the 


37 


Shurtleff:  name  of  Jack  Hartigan  whom  I  knew  in  Cal.  He  was  a  wonderful, 
entertaining  fellow.  He  was  a  salesman  for  the  company  and 
also  a  fellow  by  the  name  of  Bob  Moulton  who  had  graduated  from 
Cal.  Louis  Sloss  went  broke  very  shortly  thereafter,  along 
with  Natomas  and  West  Sacramento  and  all  this  land  just  caved 
in  up  in  the  valley. 

Nathan:     Was  it  a  recession?  Was  it  like  a  depression? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  it  was  a  decided  depression,  yes.  People  were  going  broke 
all  over  the  place,  I  guess!  I  think  that  was  about  1913  per 
haps.  I  think  it  was  the  depression  that  followed  1915. 

In  any  event,  Bob  Moulton  was  moved  to  Los  Angeles  for 
Louis  Sloss  £  Co.  and  after  Louis  Sloss  5  Co.  went  broke,  he 
stayed  in  Los  Angeles  and  started  his  own  firm  of  R.H.  Moulton 
§  Co.  which  became  a  prominent  municipal  house  and  I  think  it 
maybe  still  is.   I  don't  know  whether  it  is  still  R.H.  Moulton, 
but  he  has  long  since  died.  He  had  a  brother  and  I  don't  know 
whether  he  is  still  there  or  not—Ferris  Moulton. 


38 


V  BLYTH,  WITTER  §  CO.,  AND  BLYTH  §  CO.,  INC. 


Shurtleff:   In  any  event,  Dean  Witter  and  Charles  Blyth  then  decided,  after 
Louis  Sloss  §  Co.  went  broke,  that  they  would  start  a  firm  of 
their  own.   So  it  was  Blyth,  Witter  §  Co.  They  invited  Jack 
Hartigan,  George  Leib  and  Roy  Shurtleff  to  come  over  with  them 
and  they  promised  us,  although  they  forgot  it  afterwards,  that 
we  would  each  have  a  ten  percent  interest  in  the  business.   I 
think  it  was  about  $12,000  that  the  firm  had  made  that  first 
year.  We  went  to  them  and  said,  "We'll  take  our  interest.  Give 
us  stock  now."  After  some  argument,  they  did  give  us  each  ten 
percent  interest  in  the  firm. 

Nathan:     When  you  joined,  did  you  have  to  make  an  investment  in  the 
firm? 

Shurtleff:  No,  I  didn't  have  anything  to  invest!   [laughter]   I  didn't 

have  anything  worth  a  hill  of  beans.   I  had  a  wife  and  a  baby. 
Those  were  my  assets.  Then  after  that,  the  First  World  War 
came  along  and  Dean  Witter,  George  Leib  and  Hartigan  went  to 
war  and  some  others. 

Nathan:     Was  that  still  Blyth,  Witter? 

Shurtleff:  Blyth,  Witter  in  1914.*  Louis  Sloss  had  gone  out  of  business 
then  and  they  turned  over  to  Blyth,  Witter  §  Co.  all  of  their 
files.  They  didn't  have  any  use  for  them  any  more  and  Frank  B. 
Anderson,  the  president  of  the  Bank  of  California,  loaned  us 
$50,000.   Dean  Witter's  mother  loaned  him  $10,000  and  Charles 
Blyth  sold  his  car  for  $10,000  and  that  was  all  the  money  that 
went  into  Blyth  right  there. 

Nathan:     During  this  period  or  later,  had  you  taken  an  interest  in 
politics,  supporting  any  particular  candidate  or  party? 


* Blyth,  Witter  &  Co.  became  Blyth  &  Co.,  Inc.  in  1928, 


Ol 
LO 


•P    -H 
O    0) 


i  0 

4->  00 

•H  O 

CQ  O 
C3 
ri 

rt  JT" 


CO  *~H 

CQ  CQ 

rt  • 

^j  Q^ 

§  „ 

C/3  O 
i— I 

r  co 


o   o 

CJ    rH 


X  X 
4->    W 

X 

1—  I     • 
CQ   — 


O  00 
>  .H 
•H  ^ 

s  o 


4->  M-t 


39 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan : 


Well,  I  supported  Earl  Warren  for  a  long  time  when  Blyth  began 
really  raising  money  for  him  very  energetically.  Then  Warren 
turned  against  what  we  thought  was  our  interest  when  he  went 
to  the  Public  Utilities.  Commission  and  had  us  kicked  out  of 
being  the  managers  for  the  PG§E  and  put  it  up  for  competitive 
bidding  and  we  didn't  like  it.   So  there  later  developed  a 
coolness  between  Blyth  and  Shurtleff  with  Warren. 


This  must  have  been  a  very  interesting  episode, 
managing-- 


You  had  been 


Bankers  for  PG5E 

Shurtleff:  We  had  been  the  bankers  for  PG&E,  and  that  developed  in  an 
interesting  way  for  a  bunch  of  young  kids.   PGSE  started  a 
campaign  to  sell  their  preferred  stock  to  the  public.   Blyth, 
Witter,  was  a  brand  new  firm  and  stepped  in.   It  must  have  been 
1916,  I  guess,  and  we  were  only  in  business  a  couple  of  years. 
Anyway,  we  went  down  to  the  PG§E  office  to  talk  to-- I  guess 
it  was  Mr.  Dunn.  Their  campaign  wasn't  going  very  well  so  we 
offered  to  buy  all  the  stock  they  had  left,  which  was  $3  million 
worth.   We  bought  it  and  started  to  sell  it  and  it  didn't  sell 
very  well . 

Nathan:     But  you  didn't  have  $3  million? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  no,  we  didn't.  Anyhow,  we  kept  marking  the  price  down,  but 
our  costs  didn't  go  down.   So  we  were  selling  the  stock  at  a 
loss,  but  we  kept  on  selling  it  and  finally  cleaned  it  out. 
PG$E  were  pretty  impressed  with  a  bunch  of  kids  that  would 
stay  with  a  job  like  that  [chuckles],  so  they  gave  us  the  finan 
cing  of  the  business.  We  had  that  for  some  years. 

Nathan:     Did  this  mean  that  you  were  underwriting-- 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  we  were  underwriting. 

Nathan:     Why  did  Warren  believe  that  this  should  be  changed? 

Shurtleff:   Well,  he  was  hell  bent  on  competitive  bidding  of  public  utility 
bonds.  So  he  just  didn't  pay  any  attention  to  the  fact  that 
we  were  friends  and  supporters  of  his  and  I  guess  it  was  right 
that  he  shouldn't,  but  I  think  he  went  a  little  further  than 
he  needed  to  do. 


40 


Shurtleff :   I  can  remember  that  we  had  a  hearing  before  the  Public  Util 
ities  Commission.   I  think  we  had  a  hearing  in  court  on 
whether  competitive  bidding  would  take  place  in  California  or 
not.  John  Francis  Neylan  was  employed  by  the  state. 

Nathan:     Perhaps  Neylan  was  then  chairing  the  State  Board  of  Control? 
You  were  saying  that  your  firm  was  participating  in  a  hearing 
about  this  question  of  competitive  bidding  for  public  util 
ities  financing. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  and  I  think,  as  I  remember  it,  Herman  Phleger  represented 
us.  But  anyway,  we  lost. 

Nathan:     Was  this  one  of  the  early  cases  with  respect  to  competitive 
bidding? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  it  was  right  when  it  was  being  initiated. 
Nathan:     So  you  were  almost  a  test  case. 
Shurtleff:   We  were,  yes. 

Nathan:     That's  very  interesting.  On  what  basis  was  it  ruled  that 
competitive  bidding  was  required? 

Shurtleff:  Well,  because  the  State  of  California  passed  the  law!   [laugh 
ter]  As  I  remember  it,  Earl  Warren  was  the  guy  who  was  re 
sponsible  for  it. 

Nathan:     Was  he  attorney  general  at  that  time? 

Shurtleff:   I  think  he  was  governor  by  then.   I'm  not  sure  about  that. 

Nathan:     Ever  since  that  time  in  the  state  has  competitive  bidding  been 
required? 

Shurtleff:  Pretty  generally  for  utility  bonds.   I'm  not  sure.   I  think 

they  have  gotten  exemption  from  it  when  conditions  were  so  bad 
that  they  couldn't  get  competitive  bids.   Stocks  have  not  been-- 
either  preferred  stocks  or  common  stocks—have  not  been  subject 
to  competitive  bidding  generally.  The  bankers  for  PG§E--we  are 
one  of  the  bankers--it  has  gotten  so  big  and  their  public  util 
ities  have  had  to  finance  so  often,  that  it  is  very  hard  to  get 
a  syndicate  together  to  buy  the  securities  any  more  because  the 
market  has  been  flooded  with  public  utility  securities,  particu 
larly  of  a  growing  company  like  PGfjE  that  has  come  to  the  market 
consistently  year  after  year  two  or  three  times. 


Nathan: 


Did  your  firm  ever  again  bid  for  the  bond  issues? 


41 


Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  we've  formed  syndicates  and  have  bid  and  sometimes  have 
bought  them,  too,  and  also  Edison. 

Nathan:     Is  that  Southern  California-- 

Shurtleff:  Southern  California.  But  now  they  are  so  happy  to  find  buyers 
for  it  and  we  are  so  happy  we  can  get  a  successful  issue,  too. 
They  are  not  as  frequently  a  success. 

[discussion  of  tickets  with  visitor] 

Nathan:     I  might  just  ask  how  you  happen  to  be  distributing  baseball 
tickets? 

Shurtleff:   When  the  Giants  moved  out  here  from  New  York,  we  were  all 
interested—very  much  interested—and  we  took  a  box.   Ever 
since  they  came  out  here  we  started  to  have  a  box  and  we  all 
went.  There  were  eight  seats  in  a  box.   I  have  kept  on  with 
it,  the  only  one  left,  the  rest  have  all  either  died  or  lost 
interest.   I  don't  go  anymore.   So  I  keep  buying  the  tickets 
and  this  man  who  is  the  head  of  our  mail  department  and  one 
of  his  associates  go  all  the  time. 

Nathan:     That  is  delightful.   I  am  sure  people  enjoy  this. 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  it's  a  kind  of  nice  thing  to  do.  It  is  also  fortunate 
for  me',  having  the  tickets,  that  I  have  people  that  are  inter 
ested. 

Nathan:     Yes,  that  is  nice. 

Shurtleff:  Jim  Taylor  comes  to  work  at  five  in  the  morning  and  he  lives 

out  near  the  Presidio  in  the  Marina.  The  other  morning  a  fellow 
came  at  him  with  a  pistol  and  took  his  wallet  away  from  him 
and  his  money  and  his  tickets  and  everything  that  he  had  in 
his  wallet.   So  he  is  now  trying  to  consider  what  to  do  next. 
He  doesn't  want  to  come  in  the  morning  when  it  is  dark. 

Nathan:     Yes,  I  can  understand  that. 

You  were  talking  about  the  question  of  securities  for 
public  utilities.  Has  this  been  an  interest  of  yours  particu 
larly,  public  utilities  issues? 

Shurtleff:   When  we  started  in  business,  there  wasn't  very  much  available 
for  a  new  firm,  and  public  utilities  were  being  financed.   So 
we  went  after  them,  not  only  on  the  coast  here  but  also  in  the 
East,  got  into  the  public  utility  business  and  became  fairly 
active  in  it. 


42 


Nathan:     So  you  built  up  a  certain  expertise,  I  would  imagine,  in  this 
area.  Perhaps  next  time  we  can  get  into  some  more  of  your 
views  on  the  development  of  the  firm.  We  do  have  some  infor 
mation  on  that  from  the  book,  [The  Blyth  Story]  of  course. 


Branch  Offices 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 


Would  you  like  to  say  something  about  the  development  of  the 
firm's  branch  offices? 

Yes.  The  first  branch  office  of  Blyth, Witter  §  Co.  was  opened 
by  David  J.  Babcock,  a  University  of  California  graduate  whom 
we  all  knew  well.  This  was  done  in  1916.  Then,  during  the 
war,  when  Charles  Blyth  plus  a  few  employees  were  running  the 
shop  we  sent  one  of  our  few  remaining  salesmen  to  New  York  for 
the  purpose  of  selling  a  block  of  City  of  San  Francisco  muni 
cipal  bonds  from  our  inventory.  This  was  Lloyd  Gilmour,  a  very 
active  young  man  who  did  not  go  to  war.  He  was  successful  in 
this  mission  and  we  later  had  the  effrontery  to  send  him  per 
manently  there  to  open  our  second  branch. 

Our  third  branch  was  started  by  Chas.  E.  Driver  in  Seattle, 
Washington.  Then,  when  our  associates  returned  from  the  war, 
Mansel  P.  Griffiths,  one  of  our  early  salesmen,  was  sent  to 
Portland.   Shortly  thereafter,  Chas.  E.  Driver  went  to  Chicago. 
That  completed  our  branch  office  expansion  for  a  little  while. 

That  is  interesting.   I  know  there  is  a  good  deal  of  detail 
presented  in  The  Blyth  Story  also.  That  was  a  very  useful 
publication.   Were  you  active  in  getting  that  book  together? 

No,  that  was  handled  by  a  man  by  the  name  of  Stewart  S.  Hawes 
in  New  York,  one  of  our  original  employees  that  some  of  us 
had  hired  when  we  first  started  in  business.  He  became  the 
president  of  the  company  in  New  York  after  I  retired  and  after 
George  Leib  and  I  were  the  only  ones  of  the  founders  left  by 
that  time.   Lloyd  Gilmour  had  left  by  then.  We  decided  that 
we'd  have  one  of  the  younger  men  take  over  as  president  of  the 
company.  Hawes  did  and  he  was  the  one  that  was  active  in 
putting  together  the  book. 

There  had  been  a  book  before  that  we  had  published  some 
years  before  and  this  was  just  carried  along.  What  I  did  was 
to  answer  questions  as  I  am  doing  now. 

What  was  the  purpose  of  the  book,  would  you  say? 


43 


Shurtleff :   I  think  the  organization  had  grown  so  and  people  were  coming 

into  our  various  offices.   It  was  a  book  to  tell  them  what  the 
firm  was  all  about  and  who  had  started  it  and  what  the  ideals 
were  and  so  forth.   I  think  it  was  a  good  thing  to  do.   I 
guess  probably  we  idealized  it  a  good  deal  though. 


Nathan:     In  reading  The  Blyth  Story,  which  I  did  find  very  interesting 
and  a  useful  record—every  now  and  then  there  is  a  remark  that 
someone  is  "loyal  to  the  firm."  What  is  meant  by  that? 

Shurtleff:  Well,  I  suppose  just  what  it  says.  Along  the  way,  as  I  look 

back,  there  were  people  who  thought  their  chances  for  advance 
ment  were  in  leaving  us  and  starting  in  business  for  themselves 
or  going  with  some  other  firms.   Quite  a  few  dealers  along  the 
way  in  this  community  were  started  by  Blyth  people  who  left 
us  and  became  principals  themselves  and  that  must  refer  to  that, 


Office  Management 


Nathan:     I  see.   I  notice  that  you  had  a  good  deal  to  do  with  recruiting 
and  training  people.  What  did  you  look  for  in  the  people  you 
recruited? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  know  that  I  was  conscious  of  looking  for  anything  par 
ticularly,  except  for  hard  work  and  business  sense  and  consist 
ency  of  work.  We  worked  harder  in  those  days.  We  even  had 
meetings  on  Saturdays.   We  would  have  people  come  in  from  Sacra 
mento  and  Stockton  and  so  forth  and  we  would  hold  meetings  in 
the  office  and  then  we  would  all  go  out  to  lunch  together. 
Half  of  Saturday  was  a  work  day.  As  I  look  back  on  it  now, 
I'm  astounded  that  we  would  do  that.   [laughter] 

But  I  just  looked  for  people  who  had  business  sense  and 
wanted  to  work,  that  was  all. 


Friendship  and  Competition:  Utilities 


Nathan:     Was  there  any  area  that  you  took  particular  interest  in?   I 
was  thinking  of  the  utilities  or  transportation  or  building? 

Shurtleff:  No,  I  think  anything  that  was  financeable  was  grist  for  the 

mill.   [laughter]   We  did  do  a  lot  of  utility  business  though, 
because  utilities  were  expanding  very  rapidly  then  and  I  think 


44 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan : 


Shurtleff: 


I  told  you  that  we  developed  our  PGSE  business  early  in  the 
game  and  stayed  with  it  and  are  still  amongst  the  bankers  for 
PG5E.   So  that  was  good. 

Then  in  Portland  we  had  the  Portland  General  Electric  and 
still  have  it.   We  are  bankers  for  it. 

Yes.  And  then  there  was  Southern  California.   I  had  a  note 
about  Los  Angeles  Gas  §  Electric  and  Southern  California  Gas 
also. 

Oh  yes,  that  was  the  Pacific  Lighting  Corporation.  We  had  that 
because  Pacific  Lighting  Corporation  was  a  holding  company  owned 
by  C.O.G.  Miller,  or  controlled  by  C.O.G.  Miller  here.  We  were 
all  friends,  particularly  Charles  R.  Blyth  was  a  very  close 
friend  of  C.O.G.  Miller.  Through  him  I  became  close  to  C.O.G., 
and  I  used  to  go  over  there.  When  they  wanted  some  financing, 
we'd  get  in  touch  and  did  the  business.  That  was  all. 

Then  Bernard  Ford  became  a  partner  of  Blyth  and  he  was 
the  son-in-law  of  C.O.G.  Miller.   So  we  were  pretty  close  there. 
But  later  when  Bob  Miller  moved  his  office  from  here  to  Los 
Angeles,  we  drifted  apart.   It's  no  longer  our  business  except 


as  we  compete  for  it,  we  sometimes  get  it. 
considered  Blyth  business. 


But  it's  no  longer 


Nathan : 


As  you  speak,  I  begin  to  get  the  feeling  that  a  good  deal  comes 
out  of  personal  relationships  and  friendships.   Is  that  still 
true,  do  you  think? 

Yes,  but  ability  too.   One  of  the  things  that  has  happened  in 
recent  years  is  that  Merrill  Lynch,  for  instance,  has  expanded 
and  become  so  efficient  and  so  powerful  as  investment  bankers 
that  they  have  taken  some  business  away  from  us.  There  was 
Morgan  Stanley,  of  course,  the  successors  of  J.P.  Morgan. 

One  of  the  accounts  that  I  always  handled,  was  the  Broadway 
Hale,  now  Carter  Hawley  Hale.  After  I  had  retired  from  the 
firm,  while  I  was  still  on  the  board  of  Carter  Hawley  Hale, 
Mr.  Carter  who  was  the  chairman  of  what  was  then  Broadway  Hale, 
felt  that  the  standing  of  his  firm  would  be  improved  if  Morgan 
Stanley  were  known  as  their  bankers.   So  he  took  his  business 
away  from  us  and  gave  it  to  Morgan  Stanley.  We  were  still  in 
the  business,  but  they  handled  the  business.  That  was  a  very 
hard  blow  for  me  to  take.   [laughs]   But  it  was  natural  for 
people  to  want  to  be  on  the  Morgan  list.   It  gives  them  a 
standing  nobody  else  had. 

Were  you  on  the  board  of  other  companies? 


45 


Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  I  had  a  few.   It  was  the  custom  in  those  days.  Now 
people  are  very  reluctant  to  go  on  a  board  because  their 
liabilities  are  pretty  great  and  they  have  to  perform  on  the 
board.   It  is  no  longer  sort  of  an  honorary  situation.   I  was 
on  the  board—up  until  fairly  recent  years—of  the  Consolidated 
Freightways .      We  always  considered,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
that  we  were  going  to  do  the  financing.  All  of  a  sudden,  they 
had  a  chief  executive  officer  of  the  company  who  decided  that 
they  would  go  with  some  other  firm  and  it  made  me  so — I  realized 
then  that  I  had  lost  my  influence  with  the  company,  so  I  re 
signed  right  then;  quit.  As  I  look  back  on  it  now,  while  it 
was  a  natural  thing  to  do,  it  wasn't  a  justified  thing  to  do 
because  no  concern  who  has  to  finance  has  to  feel  tied  to  one 
investment  banker.  They  have  got  to  be  good  enough  to  hold 
them  friendshipwise  and  otherwise.   But  in  those  days  it  was 
the  custom  to  hang  on  to  things  like  that. 

Nathan:     Of  course,  as  a  board  member  you  would  tend  to  be  informed 
about  the  operation  of  a  company. 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes. 

Nathan:     Were  there  other  boards  that  you  were  a  member  of  that  you  care 
to  mention? 

Shurtleff:   Well,  there  were  other  boards.   I  can't  right  off  pull  them 
out  of  the  air  though.   I  was  on  a  number  of  boards. 


Steamship  Companies 


Nathan:     Did  board  membership  require  any  particular  effort  on  your 
part? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  we  had  to  keep  up  and  know  what  was  going  on  and  be 
able  to  make  an  intelligent  vote. 

I  had  a  big  debate  with  the  Consolidated  Freightways  and 
finally  went  along  with  what  their  president  wanted.   It  was 
to  buy  this  big  steamship  company. 

Nathan:     Matson? 

Shurtleff:  Gosh,  my  mind  doesn't  pull  things  out  of  the  air  pretty  much 
anymore.  Anyhow,  I  didn't  want  to  buy  it  and  I  told  them  why, 
but  everybody  else  on  the  board  was  willing  to  go  along  so  I 
finally  went  along.   I  knew  it  was  a  mistake  because  I  knew 


46 


Shurtleff:  more  about  the  steamship  business  than  some  of  these  other 
people  did.   I  had  been  connected  with  the  Dollar  Steamship 
Company  at  one  time  here  and  so  I  knew  something  about  the 
business;  it  turned  out  to  be  a  mistake  and  they  lost  a  holy 
fortune!   [laughter] 

Nathan:     It's  nice  to  be  right  sometimes. 
Shurtleff:   Yes. 

Nathan:  When  you  were  on  some  of  these  boards,  were  there  represen 
tatives  of  other  investment  banking  firms  on  the  same  board 
at  the  same  time? 

Shurtleff:  No,  not  usually. 

Nathan:     Can  you  tell  me  a  little  about  your  relationship  with  the  Dollar 
Steamship  Company? 

Shurtleff:   Stanley  Dollar  was  a  near  neighbor  of  mine  in  Piedmont  and  a 
very  close  friend.  He  was  the  son  of  Robert  Dollar  and  his 
son  grew  up  with  my  youngsters.  We  were  just  close  friends, 
that  was  all.  The  Dollar  Steamship  Company  was  taken  over  by 
the  government  for  some  reason  that  is  beyond  me  now.  Then 
the  employees  of  the  company  wanted  to  buy  it  back  from  the 
government.  They  came  to  Blyth  and  Company  for  help  and  I 
worked  on  that.  As  I  remember,  we  were  not  successful.   It 
was  taken  over  by  another  group.   During  that  time,  I  learned 
something  about  the  steamship  business  and  some  of  the  problems 
in  connection  with  it.   But  our  efforts  were  not  successful 
as  I  remember. 

Nathan:  This  gave  you  a  rather  interesting  combination  of  knowledge 
about  transportation.  You  knew  something  about  steamships, 
something  about  trucking  lines.  How  about  railroads? 

Shurtleff:   I  never  had  any  interest  in  railroads. 

Nathan:     Airplanes?  Vultee  was  handled,  wasn't  it,  by  the  firm? 

Shurtleff:   Yes,  that  was  not  in  the  airplane  business  —  it  was  the  airplane 
building  business. 

Nathan:     Yes,  of  course  that  is  different. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  those  were  things  that  you  just  had  to  know  about  because 
they  were  things  that  were  being  financed  and  our  business  was 
financing.  So  any  time  that  we  got  a  chance  to  get  in  with 


47 


Shurtleff:  a  business  that  was  to  be  financed,  like  the  utilities—for 

instance,  Mr.  Hockenbeimer,  the  president  of  PG5E,  was  a  friend 
of  mine  that  I  cultivated  and  worked  on.  Jack  Beckett—Do  you 
know  who  Jack  Beckett  is? 

Nathan:     Yes,  I  do. 

Shurtleff:  His  father  was  the  secretary  for  Hockenbeimer  and  we  got  very 
well  acquainted  down  there.  We  hung  on  to  that  business  with 
great  competition  for  it. 

Nathan:     Yes,  I  can  believe  that.   Were  you  involved  with  Crown  Zeller- 
bach? 

Shurtleff:   Well,  yes;  I  had  been  a  friend  of  Dave  Zellerbach  in  college. 
He  was  '13  at  Cal  and  I  was  '12  and  I  knew  him  there.   But  I 
was  nowhere  near  as  close  to  Dave  as  time  went  on  as  Charles  R. 
Blyth  was.   We  were  the  bankers  for  Crown  Zellerbach  until  after 
Charles  died.  They  finally  drifted  away  from  us. 


Blyth  Zellerbach  Committee 


Shurtleff:  There  was  a  committee  in  this  town  of  doers;  if  anybody  wanted 
anything  done  in  San  Francisco,  they  came  to  one  of  these 
people. 

Nathan:     Was  this  the  Blyth  Zellerbach  Committee? 

Shurtleff:   Blyth  Zellerbach.   I  became  a  member  of  it  after  Charles  died, 
but  he  was  the  big  influence.  He  was  a  terrific  influence  in 
this  firm  because  he  had  great  standing  in  town,  standing  for 
honesty,  integrity  and  for  doing  what  he  said  he  would  do  and 
so  forth.  He  was  a  great  leader  and  it  was  due  to  his  leader 
ship  and  I  guess  the  continued  loyalty  of  the  rest  of  us  to 
him  that  gave  this  firm  the  start  it  had. 

Nathan:     I  was  interested  in  your  mentioning  a  group  of  "doers"  in  the 

city.  What  sorts  of  things  were  they  interested  in?  The  Market 
Street  Development  or  the  Golden  Gateway?  Was  that  an  out 
growth  of  that  group  or  were  there  other  things? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  I  think  just  that  anytime  anybody  wanted  something  done 
in  San  Francisco  they  would  go  to  one  of  these  people.  One 
was  Bert  Mattey,  for  instance,  who  was  the  president  of  the 
Honolulu  Oil  Company.  Another  was  Jim  Lochead  who  was  the 
president  of  what  was  then  the  American  Trust  Company.  One 
was  a  neighbor  of  mine  (and  I  am  having  trouble  pulling  that 


48 


Shurtleff:   name  out  of  the  air).  He  was  one  of  the  top  officers  in  the 
Crocker-Anglo  Bank.  He  is  dead  though.  He  was  gone  a  long 
time  ago.  There  were  others  like  that.   Jim  Black,  the  presi 
dent  of  PG§E  was  then  on  all  of  these  things.  They  were  people 
who  were  devoted  to  things  that  were  for  San  Francisco  or  the 
state. 

Charles  Blyth  was  a  great  help  to  Warren  for  years  until 
Earl  Warren  finally  became  more  interested  in  his  political 
advancement  than  he  was  in  holding  on  to  his  friends.   [laughs] 

Nathan:     Do  you  have  the  feeling  that  there  is  now  a  group  of  doers  in 
San  Francisco  in  the  same  sense? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  think  there  is  anybody  with  the  influence  that  these 
people  had.  Anything  that  these  people  would  take  hold  of-- 
Well,  yes,  there  is  one  who  was  then  one,  too,  and  that's  the 
builder- 
Nathan:     Cahill? 

Shurtleff:  No.  He  is  the  big  engineering  firm,  one  of  the  biggest  in  the 
world. 

Nathan:     Bechtel? 

Shurtleff:   Bechtel.   Steve  Bechtel  was  one  of  the  crowd,  just  as  young 
Steve  today  is  the  closest  to  a  successor  of  those  people  of 
anybody  I  can  think  of. 

Of  course,  there  were  the  Cahills  as  you  mentioned,  but 
the  public  spirited  ones  of  that  family  and  some  of  their  chil 
dren  have  died  since  then  or  are  getting  too  old.   I  think  John 
is  still  alive,  but  I  haven't  seen  him  for  a  long  time.  He 
was  a  great  friend  of  mine,  too.  They  never  did  any  public 
financing.   I  would  call  on  John  Cahill  time  and  time  again 
and  try  to  get  him  to  let  us  sell  some  of  his  stock  to  the 
public,  but  he  kept  it  right  in  the  family. 

Nathan:     It  was  a  family  corporation? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  just  like  the  Bechtels--the  family  and  their  employees- 
nobody  else  owns  any  stock. 

Nathan:  Even  today? 
Shurtleff:  Even  today. 
Nathan:  With  the  great  size  they  still  are? 


49 


Shurtleff:  They  still  are  and  not  only  that,  they  now  are  talking  about 
taking  over  Dillon  Reed,  the  big  investment  banking  firm.   I 
don't  know  whether  that  is  going  to  be  accomplished,  but  it 
was  discussed  and  it  was  in  the  paper.  They  must  have  great 
management  ability  within  the  organization,  not  only  the  family 
but  young  Steve--he  is  no  longer  a  young  man  [laughs] --he  is 
a  very  able  man. 

Nathan:     Were  there  other  businesses  centered  in  this  area  that  you 

were  particularly  interested  in?  Of  course,  this  wouldn't  be 
centered  in  San  Francisco,  but  I  noticed  the  Imperial  Irriga 
tion  District.  Your  company  apparently  handled  some  of  their 
financing.  Was  that  part  of  your  own  interests? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  believe  so.   I  think  that  must  have  been  handled  to 
whatever  extent  we  were  in  it  by  our  Los  Angeles  office. 


Trading  Department 


Nathan:     Yes,  that  would  be  reasonable. 

I  did  want  to  ask  you  about  a  term.   It  was  said  in  the 
Blyth  book  that  the  national  trading  department  became  very 
important. 

Shurtleff:   It  was. 

Nathan:     Could  you  tell  me  what  that  was?  How  would  that  function? 

Shurtleff:  Well,  trading  is  part  of  investment  banking.   It  is  only  active 
for  the  investment  bankers  who  actually  own  inventory.   In  its 
rudiments,  one  of  our  offices  in  San  Francisco  would  have  a 
block  of  City  and  County  of  San  Francisco  bonds  and  then  some 
body  in  the  East  would  have  an  order  for  San  Francisco  bonds 
and  we  would  trade  among  the  investment  bankers  —  sell  from  our 
inventory  to  theirs--and  they  would  effect  the  sale  to  the  ul 
timate  buyers. 

Nathan:     In  order  to  obtain  this  inventory,  would  you-- 

Shurtleff:  We  had  what  we'd  call  a  trading  inventory.   It  came  under  a 
very  successful  head  of  our  national  trading  department.  He 
would  sense  when  to  buy  and  we  would  load  up  our  trading  inven 
tory.  About  the  end  of  the  year,  for  instance,  a  lot  of  people 


50 


Shurtleff:  would  sell  bank  stocks  to  end  the  year  with  cash  and  we  would 
just  load  up  on  bank  stocks.  Then  after  the  first  of  the  year, 
bank  stocks  went  up  always.   [laughs]   We  would  sell  at  a 
profit. 

We  had,  I  guess,  amongst  the  biggest  trading  departments, 
the  most  successful  of  anybody  in  the  business  due  to  this  man 
who  was--His  name  was  Paul  Devlin.  He  is  still  alive.  He 
retired  before  I  did,  I  think,  or  about  the  time  I  did.  He 
lives  down  in  Florida.  He  was  a  very  successful  man. 

Nathan:     Is  this  trading  department  still  active? 

Shurtleff:  Oh  yes,  but  nothing  like  it  was.  There  had  been  some  terrific 

losses  taken  and  people  buying  and  trading  inventory  and  hanging 
onto  it.  One  of  my  contributions  to  Blyth  §  Company  down 
through  the  years:   as  soon  as  the  thing  won't  sell,  that's 
the  time  to  get  out  of  it  because  you  don't  want  to  hang  onto 
inventory  and  let  it  just  freeze. 

* 

I  don't  know  whether  it  was  in  The  Blyth  Story  or  the 
one  before  that,  they  gave  me  a  great  deal  of  credit  for  saving 
the  firm  because  I  would  have  just  insisted  on  them  getting 
out  of  everything.  It  happened  to  be  a  timely  thing  just  before 
the  1929  crash.   But  that  was  sheer  luck.  Charles  Blyth  and 
I  went  back  to  New  York,  went  up  to  Seattle,  and  back  to  Chicago 
and  so  forth.   We  had  a  chance  to  look  at  the  inventories  of 
all  of  these  offices  and  I  was  just  scared  to  death.   We'd  got 
too  much  inventory.  Nobody  was  paying  any  attention  to  it. 
So  I  put  on  a  great  big  sales  campaign  and  got  rid  of  it  at 
any  price,  just  to  get  out  of  it.  A  lot  of  firms  went  broke 
at  that  time  and  we  didn't.   [laughs] 

Nathan:     The  way  you  explain  it,  it's  perfectly  logical  but  apparently 
nobody  else  was  thinking  along  those  lines. 

Shurtleff:  Our  firm  wasn't  as  well  organized  as  it  later  became.   Each 
office  was  pretty  much  its  own  boss.   We  supervised  it,  but 
we  let  them  do  pretty  much  what  they  wanted.  Then  in  the 
thirties,  George  Leib  went  back  to  New  York  and  he  became  the 
head  of  the  firm  back  there  and  the  New  York  office  became  the 
leading  office  even  though  Charles  and  I  were  here.   But  then 
George  was  a  very  persuasive  person  and  he  finally  got  me  to 
go  to  New  York,  too.   [laughs] 


*Ed.  note.   It  was  in  The  Blyth  Story. 


51 


Nathan:     You  stayed  a  couple  of  years? 

Shurtleff:   Three  years.  Then  we  hired  Charlie  Mitchell,  who  had  been  the 
head  of  the  National  City  Company  to  come  in  with  us  and  be 
chairman  of  the  board.   It  shows  how  big  Charles  R.  Blyth  was. 
He  was  willing  to  sit  back  here.  He  was  still  the  voice  that 
they  all  listened  to,  but  he  allowed  the  active  management  to 
be  in  New  York  until  I  came  back  here  and  then  we  moved  it  back 
here. 

Nathan:     Was  there  any  advantage  to  having  the  center  in  New  York? 

Shurtleff:  All  firms  have  their  centers  in  New  York.   Dean  Witter  was  the 
last  one  to  have  its  chief  office  here  in  San  Francisco.   But 
when  they  merged  with  this  other  firm,  with  Reynolds  §  Company, 
and  more  of  the  ownership  became  scattered  into  the  East,  they 
had  to  move  their  head  office  to  New  York,  too.  That  is  where 
business  is  run  in  the  investment  banking  business.   So  you 
have  to  be  there. 


Nathan:     I  have  one  or  two  further  questions  about  the  business.  The 
Blyth  book  indicated  that  the  firm  entered  the  New  York  Stock 
Exchange  in  1928  and  then  withdrew  in  1930.  Did  it  ever  join 
the  stock  exchange  again? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  we  are  members.  The  successor  firm  is  a  member  of  the 
New  York  Stock  Exchange  now. 

Nathan:     That  would  have  been  about  the  time  of  the  crash  when  the  firm 
withdrew.   Do  you  recall  why  it  withdrew  then? 

Shurtleff:   I  don't  specifically  recall,  but  I  think  it  was—You  see,  we 

were  largely  a  trading  house.   We  would  buy  for  our  own  account 
and  inventory  and  sell.  We  were  more  interested  in  trading 
profits  than  in  making  a  commission.  As  I  said,  we  developed, 
for  those  times,  one  of  the  largest  and  most  profitable  national 
trading  departments  of  any  of  the  investment  bankers. 

We  were  a  very  considerable  trading  house  and  we  were 
underwriters,  much  more  than  we  were  brokers.  We  liked  to  posi 
tion  stocks  and  bonds  and  make  a  profit  by  holding  them  for  a 
while  and  then  selling  them.   I  would  say  that  our  trading 
department  was  a  very  close  second  to  our  underwriting  business 
in  those  days. 


52 


Organization  and  Reorganization 


Nathan : 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan : 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan : 


Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


What  sort  of  reporting  system  did  you  have?  Did  the  branches 
report  fully  to  you,  to  the  central  office,  or  were  they  rather 
independent? 

Oh,  they  were  pretty  independent.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  when 
I  went  back  to  New  York,  I  pulled  them  together  and  was  head 
of  the  whole  thing.  They  had  then  largely  almost  independent 
offices,  but  we  got  that  corrected  when  we  adopted  a  national 
program. 


Do  investment  bankers  like  to  be  independent? 
of  independent  people? 


Are  they  sort 


Oh,  I  think  so,  yes.  I  think  there  is  a  tendency  toward  local 
independence.  But,  of  course,  that  has  pretty  much  evaporated 
in  this  day  and  age.  Everything  is  managed  from  New  York.  In 
those  days,  Blyth  £  Co.  was  pretty  much  a  Pacific  Coast  house. 
Dean  Witter,  who  split  off  of  Blyth  remained  a  coast  house  until 
pretty  recent  years. 

You  have  seen  various  amalgamations  and  companies  coming 
together.  The  name  of  this  company  shows  Blyth,  Eastman,  Paine, 
Webber.  Were  you  involved  in  any  of  these  groupings,  these 
new  organizations? 

That  all  happened  after  I  retired.   When  I  retired  from  Blyth 
S  Co.  and  took  my  money  out,  all  of  these  changes  happened 
afterwards.   I  was  no  longer  a  member  of  the  firm. 

I  assume  there  are  benefits  as  well  as  disadvantages? 

Of  course,  Blyth  §  Co.  was  a  firm  that  was  owned  by  the  chief 
operators  of  it;  they  owned  it.  Charles  Blyth  and  George  Leib 
and  Roy  Shurtleff  and  on  down  the  line—even  Mansel  Griffiths 
and  others  that  had  lesser  parts  of  it.   But  that  was,  I  guess, 
a  natural  outgrowth  of  the  way  the  firm  had  started.   It  was 
all  by  the  operators  of  it  and  always  had  been  until  Charles 
Blyth  died  and  then  I  retired  and  later  on  George  Leib  retired. 
So  there  wasn't  enough  capital  left  in  the  business  to  keep 
it  a  thriving  concern.  Wexall  were  so  close  of  an  age.  When 
one  of  us  quit,  then  there  was  nobody  to  succeed  us. 

We  had  a  group  that  was  our  intermediate  group  who  came 
along  and  developed.  All  of  those  fellows--Limbert ,  Driver, 
and  Gilmour--were  of  a  similar  age,  and  when  the  older  ones 
were  retired,  it  just  took  too  much  capital  out  of  the  business. 


53 


Nathan : 
Shurtleff : 

Nathan: 

Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 

Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 

Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 

Shurtleff: 

Nathan : 


Shurtleff: 


Does  it  take  more  capital  now  to  succeed  in  this  business  than 
it  did  when  you  started? 

Oh,  yes;  oh,  much  more.  We  built  up  our  capital  from  nothing 
until  it  got,  I  think,  it  was  around  $34  or  $35  million. 

That  seems  incredible,  doesn't  it? 
Just  through  hanging  on  to  it . 

Thinking  back  again  to  the  time  when  you  and  Charles  Blyth 
decided  that  you  wanted  to  make  this  tour  of  the  branches,  what 
gave  you  the  idea  that  you  should  do  that? 

Well,  I  just  felt--we  both  felt--we  needed  it.  We  could  tell 
that  we  were  losing  control  of  the  various  offices,  so  we  felt 
we  better  get  going  on  it  and  we  did-- just  in  time! 

Yes,  that  was  the  right  time.   Is  it  your  feeling  now  that  this 
company  now  is  strong  in  underwriting? 

Oh,  yes,  Paine  Webber  has  developed  into  a  pretty  sizeable  com 
pany  with  several  branches,  quite  a  few  branches.   The  Blyth 
Paine  Webber  part  of  it  in  their  underwriting  business  has 
developed  into,  I  think,  a  pretty  sound  firm. 

Blyth  then—when  it  was  still  Blyth--was  it  a  bond  house  when 
it  began?   In  the  early  days  would  that  be  correct? 

Chiefly,  yes,  I  think  so. 


Then  you  also  dealt  with  common  stocks? 

Yes,  common  and  preferred  stocks  and  bonds, 
gamut—and  municipal  bonds. 


We  ran  the  whole 


Can  you  think  now  how  you  decided  to  handle  these  various  kinds 
of  offerings?  Was  there  a  moment  at  which  you  decided,  "Now, 
we  are  going  to  go  into  common  and  preferred  stocks."  Was 
there  a  management  decision  like  that? 

I  suppose  it  was  a  decision  of  an  issue  rather  than--For  in 
stance,  we  first  got  interested  in  PG£E,  Pacific  Gas  and  Elec 
tric  Company.   We  sort  of  forced  our  way  into  that  underwriting. 
The  company  undertook  to  handle  it  themselves  and  Charles 
Blyth  was  a  good  friend  of  Charles  Dunn. 


Nathan: 


Charles  Dunn  was  in  PG5E? 


54 


Shurtleff:  Yes,  and  we  finally  bought  all  of  the  PG&E  stock  they  had.  We 
couldn't  afford  to,  but  we  did!   [laughs]  As  I  said  earlier, 
we  started  to  sell  it  and  the  market  kept  going  off  and  we  kept 
selling,  and  we  took  a  considerable  loss  on  it.   But  that  loss 
fastened  us  into  the  PG§E  business  so  that  we  pretty  much 
always  had  it  after  that,  including  now.  We  are  one  of  the 
people  that  handle  the  PG§E  business. 


Utilities  and  Nuclear  Power 


Shurtleff:   It  doesn't  seem  to  me  that  it  is  a  very  well  managed  company 
now.  They  made  such  a  mess  of  this  Diablo  [Canyon]  thing.   I 
think  the  utilities  had  no  idea  what  they  were  getting  into 
in  this  nuclear  power.  You  see  them  all  over  the  world  begin 
ning  to  realize  that  they've  got  a  bear  by  the  tail. 

Nathan:     That's  interesting. 

Shurtleff:  They  got  into  it  so  easily  and  so  innocently,  into  something 

they  knew  nothing  about.   PG§E  has  made  an  awful  mess  of  Diablo. 
They  not  only  have  the  opposition  of  the  anti-nuclear  people, 
but  what  they've  done,  they  haven't  handled  very  well. 

Nathan:     With  this  strange  problem  of  the  blueprints  apparently  being 
reversed  in  the  construction,  it's  difficult  to-- 

Shurtleff:   It  doesn't  look  as  though  their  engineering  department  is  very 
alert. 

Nathan:     Yes,  that's  a  good  way  to  put  it. 

Shurtleff:   But  I  lost  interest  personally  in  PGSE.   I  sold  all  of  my  PGSE 
stock  at  the  time  that  they  failed  to  get  Diablo  power  estab 
lished.  My  wife  hung  on  to  hers,  but  I  sold  mine,  fortunately. 

Nathan:     Yes,  you  have  a  very  good  time  sense. 

Shurtleff:  I  knew  that  there  were  some  problems  ahead  of  them  and  I  just 
thought  I'd  be  out  of  them,  that's  all.  There  were  plenty  of 
other  things  to  invest  in. 

Nathan:     At  this  point,  I  gather  you  would  be  cautious  about  supporting 

further  development  of  nuclear  power  on  the  part  of  these  public 
utilities? 


55 


Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  think  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  it  now.  There  is  this 
great  fiasco  up  north  where  these  public  power  outfits  have 
gotten  themselves  in  trouble  with  nuclear  power.  They  have 
gone  into  it  heavily  and  they  have  had  construction  problems. 

Nathan:  Are  you  thinking  of  northern  California  or  the  State  of  Wash 
ington? 

Shurtleff:   I  am  thinking  of  Washington,  yes.  Oregon  has  Portland  General 
Electric  and  they  have  one  successful  nuclear  plant  that  has 
been  in  operation  fairly  steadily  since  it  was  built,  but  I 
think  it's  the  only  one. 

Nathan:  What  you  are  describing  is  happening  in  a  widespread  area--as 
you  say,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  builders,  the  question 
of  whether  this  is  a  valid  development. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  or  whether  it  is  economical  and  will  continue  to  be. 
Nathan:     Are  there  still  issues  offered  to  finance  nuclear  development? 

Shurtleff:   I  think  there  are  some  they  are  trying  to  pull  together  up 

there  in  Washington,  but  I  don't  know  whether  they  are  being 
actively  offered  now  or  not.   But  they  may  be  or  are  in  pros 
pect. 


Life  Insurance  Companies  in  the  Market 


Nathan:     There  was  another  development  I  wondered  whether  you  would  care 

to  comment  on.   In  the  fifties,  when  the  major  life  insurance 

companies  began  to  compete  with  investment  bankers,  the  major 

life  insurance  companies  became  active  in  the  market. 

Shurtleff:   Do  you  mean  making  loans? 
Nathan:     Yes. 

Shurtleff:  For  a  long  term  investment,  the  life  insurance  companies  have 
frequently  been  in  the  market  to  buy  securities  direct,  some 
times  through  investment  bankers  but  sometimes  they  will  make 
their  contacts  directly  with  the  companies.  There  has  always 
been  some  competition  there. 

Nathan:     Is  there  any  action  that  an  investment  banking  house  would  take 
to  try  to  counteract  that  development? 


56 


Shurtleff:  No,  I  don't  think  so  particularly.   I  think  they  have  just  been 
competitors  and  it  has  been  known  that  some  life  companies 
would  deal  directly  with  the  issuing  concern. 


Carquinez  Bridge 


N'athan:     I  see.  You  also  apparently  were  interested  in  the  building 

of  the  Carquinez  Bridge.   Did  that  bring  you  back  to  the  West? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  that  was  my  business. 
Nathan:     That  was  yours? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  there  were  a  couple  of  men.  One  was  named  Hanford  and 
one  was  named  Clapp;  Hanford  §  Clapp.  They  owned  the  ferry 
business.  They  owned  two  ferries- 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


These  people  had  developed  the  auto  ferry  business  across  the 
Carquinez  Straits.  They  had  also  developed  the  auto  ferry  busi 
ness  across  the  Golden  Gate  and  a  smaller  operation  across  from 
Antioch  to  the  San  Joaquin  River.  They  conceived  the  idea  of 
building  a  bridge.   I  have  forgotten  whether  I  went  to  them 
or  they  came  to  Blyth,  but  in  any  event,  it  ended  up  in  my  lap. 
We  eventually  agreed  to  finance  the  building  of  these.  This 
was  purely  construction  business  excepting  that  there  was  an 
income  from  the  ferry  business. 

You  spoke  earlier  of  Charles  Derleth.  We  got  Derleth  to 
design  the  bridges.  This  was  the  Carquinez  Bridge  and  the 
Antioch  Bridge  and  he  was  one  of  the  designers  of  the  Golden 
Gate  Bridge  which  came  along  later.  The  reason  I  am  so  familiar 
with  that  is  that  my  sister  was  his  secretary  over  at  U.C. 

Your  sister  was  his  secretary  at  Cal? 

At  Cal.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  her  name  was  Nettie  Meek,  she 
was  my  half  sister.  The  students  in  the  civil  engineering 
department  used  to  tell  me  she  was  the  whole  engineering  de 
partment!   [laughter]   Derleth  had  great  confidence  in  her  and 
she  in  Derleth,  too. 

I  see.   Did  you  visualize  these  bridges  as  toll  bridges? 

Yes,  that  was  the  purpose  of  them,  toll  bridges.  We  sold  first 
mortgage,  seven  percent  bonds,  and  second  mortgage,  eight  per 
cent  bonds  to  the  public,  and  raised-- I've  forgotten  what  the 


57 


Shurtleff:   amount  was—eight  or  ten  million  dollars  to  build  the  two 

bridges.  We  had  a  lawsuit  that  was  developed  out  of  it.  We 
had  great  problems.  Things  are  not  done  easily  in  the  con 
struction  business.  Then  we  had  the  bridge  all  completed  and 
the  United  States  government  came  along  and  said  that  there 
would  have  to  be  some  new  supports  put  in  around  the  piles  to 
make  it  safer.  We  had  to  go  and  raise  more  money.   I  think 
we  must  have  sold  some  notes  or  something.  Anyhow,  we  did  it, 
but  none  of  it  was  easy. 

Nathan:     How  did  the  lawsuits  arise? 

Shurtleff:   It  was  my  fault.   We  had  taken  into  an  account  with  us  an 
eastern  firm.   It  wasn't  very  good,  but  it  was  a  firm  that 
was  willing  to  go  into  that  second  grade  financing.  We  had 
a  meeting  over  in  the  office  of  Hanford  and  Clapp.  They  de 
livered  an  ultimatum  that  either  we  would  do  so  and  so  or 
else.  They  were  going  to  take  over  the  management  of  the 
account.   I  said,  "All  right,  you're  out  then;  you're  no 
longer  in  the  business"--which  I  had  no  right  to  do.   It 
wasn't  my  business;  it  was  the  toll  bridge  business. 

So  in  any  event,  they  turned  around  and  sued  Blyth  for 
being  eliminated  from  some  business  and  sued  us  for  what 
their  profits  would  have  been.   It  was  really  a  serious  law 
suit  because  they  hired  a  good  law  firm  in  New  York  and  we  had 
to  hire  a  law  firm  in  New  York,  a  very  responsible,  fine  firm. 
We  fought  it  for  a  while  and  then  we  agreed  to  settle.   I 
think  it  cost  us  $80,000  or  some  minimal  amount. 

Anyhow,  we  got  out  of  it.  But  I  still  kept  hold  of  the 
toll  bridge  business  because  I  was  finally  able  to  sell  the 
toll  bridge  company  to  the  State  of  California,   [laughter] 

Nathan:  How  did  you  do  that? 

Shurtleff:  I  don't  remember,  but  anyway  it  was  done. 

Nathan:  Was  this  one  of  the  first  bridges  then  that  the  state  owned? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  guess  it  was. 

Nathan:     I  have  a  note  that  it  was  started  in  1925  and  then  sold  in 
1940.   Is  that  about  right? 

Shurtleff:  That  sounds  about  right,  yes.   But  there  was  another  person 
who  owned  it  in  the  meantime.   I  think  I  sold  it  twice.  The 
man  who  had  been  the  president  of  the  First  National  Bank  in 
Berkeley  when  I  was  manager  of  the  Daily  Cal  whose  son  is  still 


58 


Shurtleff:   around  here  and  is  a  very  close  friend  of  my  son's.  He  formed 
a  company  and  I  think  that  Hanford  and  Clapp  and  I  had  some 
thing  to  do  with  it;  sold  the  toll  bridge  to  him  in  I  think 
the  second  sale.   I'm  not  one  hundred  percent  sure  of  this, 
but  I  think  the  second  sale  was  to  the  state. 

Nathan:     Did  the  toll  bridge  company  own  both  the  Carquinez  and  the 
Antioch  Bridges? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  we  built  them  both. 

Nathan:     Were  you  or  your  company  involved  in  funding  the  Golden  Gate 
Bridge? 

Shurtleff:  That  was  really  A. P.  Giannini  who  did  that.   We  were  in  it  in 
a  minor  way.  That  was  A.P.'s  deal. 

Nathan:     Were  you  at  all  involved  in  the  Oakland-San  Francisco  bridge 
or  any  of  the  other  bridges  throughout  the  bay? 

Shurtleff:  I  wouldn't  be  surprised  but  what  we  might  have  sold  some  bonds, 
but  we  were  not  instrumental  in  putting  it  together  or  anything 
like  that. 


59 


VI  COMMENTS  ON  BART  AND  ITS  PROBLEMS 


Nathan:     Did  you  have  anything  to  do,  for  example,  with  BART? 

Shurtleff:  No.   Well,  our  sales  manager,  Art  Dolan--who  was  our  sales 
manager  and  is  still  with  Blyth,  he  is  just  semi-retired-- 
became  the  first  manager  of  BART.  That  was  because  he  was  a 
good  politician  and  Charles  Blyth  got  him  into  it.   [laughs] 
But  we  didn't  have  anything  to  do  with  that.  That  was  done 
by  a  partner  of  S  §  W--Sussman  $  Wormser.   I  can't  think  of 
his  name,  but  he  just  worked  his  head  off  to  start  BART.  Then 
I  think  there  were  technical  difficulties  in  putting  it  together, 
so  that  they  didn't  do  a  good  job.   [tape  interruption:  tele 
phone  rings] 

Nathan:     We  were  trying  to  remember  the  name  of  the  person  from  Sussman 
§  Wormser  who  was  active  with  BART. 

Shurtleff:   If  there  is  anybody  from  Sussman  §  Wormser  it  was  Adrien.   I 
think  he  retired  from  business  in  order  to  promote  BART. 

Nathan:     Right,  I  remember  Adrien  W.  Falk  was  prominent  in  the  develop 
ment  of  it. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  it  wouldn't  have  been  done  without  him.  He  just  worked 
his  head  off  on  that  thing  getting  it  going.   I  never  have 
known  quite  why,  with  our  good  friends  from  Bechtel  in  that 
thing,  Bechtel  and  Parsons,  another-- 

Nathan:     Parsons,  Brinckerhoff ,  Tudor,  and  Bechtel --wasn't  that  the 
combine? 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  never  understood  how  that  firm  let  that  thing  get  so 

far  afield  excepting  that  they  were  in  uncharted  waters.  No 
body  had  ever  built  that  kind  of  a  transportation  system  before 
with  the  lightweight  cars  and  the  speed  that  they  were  supposed 
to  run,  and  under  a  bay  and  all  that.  Nobody  had  ever  built 
that  kind  of  thing  before. 


60 


Nathan : 


Shurtleff: 


Shurtleff:  They  were  throwing  away  all  of  their  old  type  of  business  like 
we  used  to  have  on  the  old  Key  Route  with  the  heavy  cars,  heavy 
rails.   It  was  all  to  be  changed  and  this  was  to  be  all  light 
weight.  They  got  into  a  business  that  they  didn't  understand. 
I  am  sure  that  even  the  Bechtel  engineering  slipped  up  a  little 
or  maybe  they  had  no  control  over  Parsons.   I  have  never  under 
stood  how  the  Bechtel  name  could  be  tied  in  with  such  a  bungled 
thing. 

Apparently,  the  way  it  was  set  up  there  was  no  separate  control. 
In  other  words,  the  people  who  were  doing  it  were  also  trying 
to  supervise  and  maybe  that  is  an  impossible  situation. 

I  think  the  chief  thing  was  they  hired  people  to  build  these 
cars,  the  San  Diego  people,  who  were  airplane  builders  amongst 
other  things.  They  had  never  had  any  experience  building  inter- 
urban  cars . 

Nathan:     That  is  an  interesting  observation.   So  they  were  throwing  away 
what  they  knew,  trying  to  do  something  new  and  unknown. 

Shurtleff:  That's  right.  Other  cities  came  along.   I  think  Washington, 
D.C.  that  followed  us  had  similar  problems  building  an  inter- 
urban  system. 

Nathan:     We  had  great  hopes  for  this  one  in  the  Bay  Area. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  but  there  were  some  fundamental  mistakes  made.   I  think 
they  were  cheap  on  this.  They  didn't  provide  any  way  for 
switching  from  one  way  to  another.   If  there  was  a  breakdown 
on  the  system,  it  was  bedlam  and  that  was  all  there  was  to  it! 
No  way  to  get  around  it . 

It  was,  of  course,  a  very  expensive  type  of  thing  to 
build,  too.   I  guess  it  is  operating  fairly  well  now,  but  I'm 
glad  I  don't  have  to  ride  on  it.   [laughter] 

Nathan:     Yes,  it's  all  right  if  you  don't  have  an  appointment. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  but  I  used  to  ride  on  the  Key  Route.   I  lived  in  the  East 
Bay  and  that  was  a  very  fine  transportation  system.  Even  in 
the  fog  those  little  Key  Route  boats  would  run  and  did  pretty 
well. 


Nathan: 


You're  right.  That  was  a  reliable  system. 


61 


VII  COMMUNITY  INTERESTS  AND  CLUBS 


St.  Francis  Hospital 


Nathan: 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 


Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 

Nathan: 
Shurtleff: 

Nathan : 


Can  we  talk  about  some  of  your  other  activities  like  St.  Francis 
Hospital?  How  did  you  get  interested  in  it?   I  gather  you 
were  a  fund  raiser  for  the  hospital? 

I  was  on  the  board.  That  really  happened  because  of  my  doctor, 
Dr.  Herbert  Moffitt.  He  became  the  president  of  the  St.  Francis 
Hospital  and  he  invited  me  to  come  on  the  board—that  was  way 
back  in  the  sixties--!  did,  and  I  was  always  associated  with 
it  after  that  until  I  finally  retired  last  March.   I  was  a 
limited  member  of  the  board  by  that  time. 

Were  you  interested  in  certain  problems  or  policies  of  the 
hospital? 

Oh,  yes,  on  the  board  I  was  a  fairly  active  member.  You  get 
to  know  the  doctors  and  have  something  to  do  with  the  hiring 
of  the  manager.  St.  Francis  is  a  very  well-managed  hospital 
with  good,  hard-working  employees. 

Does  it  specialize  in  some  particular  care? 

Yes,  I  would  say  their--Bothin  is  a  wealthy  family  and  they 
established  a  department  there  for  a  burn  center. 

Oh,  yes,  I  have  heard  of  that. 

It  became,  I  think,  quite  famous  as  a  well-operated  division 
of  the  hospital.   It  still  operates,  it  still  runs,  the  Bothin 
Burn  Center. 


Were  you  active  in  fund  raising  for  the  hospital 


also? 


62 


Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  was,  in  the  60s.   I  was  one  of  the  active  fund  raisers. 
I  went  out  and  solicited. 

Nathan:     Good  for  you! 

Shurtleff:   But  they  haven't  had  drives  of  recent  years  where  they  called 
everybody  together  and  told  them  to  go  out  and  get  some  money. 

Nathan:     Does  the  Bothin  Fund  still  support  the  hospital? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes  the  Bothin  Fund  does.  The  Bothin  family  supports  it. 

Nathan:     I  wondered  whether  they  supported  just  the  burn  center  or 
whether  they  supported  the  hospital  in  other  ways. 

Shurtleff:  No,  just  the  burn  center  I  think. 


Civic  Light  Opera  and  Opera 

Nathan:     I  see  you  were  also  involved  with  the  Civic  Light  Opera  for 
some  time. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  when  I  retired,  my  son,  Eugene  Shurt 
leff,  who  is  also  with  the  firm,  took  my  place  on  the  board 
of  the  Civic  Light  Opera.  He  is  quite  active. 

Nathan:     So  are  you  a  music  buff?  Do  you  enjoy  musical  performances? 
Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes.   [pause] 

Nathan:     We  were  just  talking  about  the  opera. 

Shurtleff:  We  are  now  debating  whether  to  go  Tuesday  to  Aida. 

Nathan:     Oh,  is  that  the  famous  production  where  Pavarotti  is  singing? 

Shurtleff:  Yes.   I  have  long  since  decided  I  would  just  as  soon  not  go 
any  more,  but  I  have  kept  on  going  because  my  wife  likes  it 
and  doesn't  have  many  activities  any  more.   So  I  have  tried 
to  pull  myself  together  to  go.  We  get  a  driver  and  go  the  easy 
way  and  then  we  leave  early.   So  we  may  go  Tuesday.   I  don't 
know.  We  are  discussing  it. 

Nathan:     Have  you  enjoyed  the  season  so  far? 


63 


Shurtleff:  Well,  not  particularly.  Neither  Mrs.  Shurtleff  nor  I  care  for 
what  is  his  name,  the  head  of  the  opera? 

Nathan:     Adler? 

Shurtleff:  Adler,  we  don't  care  for  him,  never  have  cared  for  him,  and 

when  he  insists  on  conducting,  which  he  does,  it's  a  mess!   He's 
too  loud  and  we  don't  think  he  knows  his  business.  We  went 
to  Austria  at  just  the  time  that  he  came  to  the  San  Francisco 
opera  and  we  found  that  the  people  in  Austria  with  whom  we  met 
didn't  like  Adler  either.   [laughter]   So  it  cemented  us  in 
our  ideas  that  we  didn't  care  for  him. 

Nathan:     It  does  make  a  difference,  I  think,  if  you  are  in  sympathy  with 
the  musical  director. 

Shurtleff:  And  for  so  many  years  now  he  hasn't  given  us  any  of  the  old 
operas.  He  delights  in  digging  out  unknown  stuff  and  making 
it  a  project  of  the  San  Francisco  Opera  Company  to  put  it  on, 
and  I  would  rather  have  heard  some  of  the  old  favorites. 

Nathan:     Are  there  are  special  ones-- 
Shurtleff:  Traviata  is  the  number  one. 

Nathan:     Oh,  yes,  I  love  it,  too.   I  am  also  waiting  for  another  Don 
Giovanni. 

Shurtleff:  Well,  that  is  not  one  of  my  special  favorites  but  it  is 
pleasant. 

Nathan:     It  will  be  interesting  to  see  how  the  new  management  does. 
Sometimes  interesting  things  happen. 


Clubs  and  Bohemian  Club  Memories 


Nathan:     I  was  looking  at  your  list  of  clubs  and  I  don't  know  that  I 

have  them  all  —  the  Bohemian  Club,  the  San  Francisco  Yacht  Club, 
and  are  there  others,  too? 

Shurtleff:  The  Pacific  Union  Club. 

Nathan:     Oh,  yes.   Did  you  find  that  you  met  interesting  people  through 
these  club  contacts? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes,  sure.   I  am  the  oldest  member  of  the  Bohemian  Club. 


64 


Nathan:     You  are?  Congratulations! 
Shurtleff:   I  joined  in  1916!   [laughter] 
Nathan:     Has  it  changed  much  since  then? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes,  of  course,  it's  changed,  but  it  is  still  the  Bohemian 
Club.   It  is  still  a  good  club. 

Nathan:     Do  you  go  to  the  encampments? 

Shurtleff:  Not  any  more.   I  haven't  been  up  to  the  Grove  for  I  guess 
fifteen  years. 

Nathan:     There  are  some  very  eminent  people  who  have  gone  there.   I 
understand. 

Shurtleff:  Yes,  I  can  remember  Herbert  Hoover.  He  was  always  an  enthusi 
ast.  He  has  been  to  our  camp  at  the  Grove.  We  have  been  to 
his  camp.  Yes,  I  have  some  nice  old  associations  there.  When 
people  ask  me  if  I  go  any  more,  I  say,  "No,  I  would  rather 
remember  it  as  it  was  when  I  was  hale  and  hearty  and  could 
walk  from  camp  to  camp  and  keep  it  up  for  hours."  I  wouldn't 
want  to  try  it  any  more. 

Nathan:     Do  you  remember  other  people  besides  Herbert  Hoover  especially 
from  those  days? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes,  I  had  some  fine  old  friends  there.  One  of  them  just 

died  the  other  day,  Ed  Crossen.  He  was  the  head  of  the  biggest 
insurance  company  here  in  San  Francisco. 


Nathan: 


Shurtleff: 


Nathan : 


Fishing 

Would  you  want  to  say  anything  about  your  interest  in  fishing, 
where  you  like  to  fish?  Do  you  go  into  Oregon  for  your  fishing? 

Yes,  we  go  up  to  the  McKenzie  River  in  the  spring  and  fish. 
Last  year  is  the  first  year  we  haven't  gone.  We  usually  have 
three  or  four  days  on  the  McKenzie  River  and  then  we  come  home. 
But  our  regular  fishing  place  is  up  on  the  Truckee  River.  We 
belong  to  the  club  there,  the  Ply  Casting  Club. 


These  are  dry  flies? 
I  understand. 


This  is  a  very  highly  skilled  technique, 


65 


Shurtleff:  Yes,  it  is  pretty  skilled.   It's  dry  flies.   It's  also  wet 

flies.   If  they  don't  take  dry  flies,  why  then  they'll  some 
times  take  a  wet  fly.   But  it's  a  demanding  thing. 

Nathan:  Does  your  wife  fish  also? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes,  she  is  an  excellent  fisher.   I  taught  her.   [laughter] 

Nathan:  You  should  be  proud. 

Shurtleff:  She  took  to  it  beautifully. 

Nathan:  Do  you  stand  in  the  water? 

Shurtleff:  Oh,  yes,  wade  the  stream. 

Nathan:  That  is  delightful,  to  be  right  there  in  the  water. 

Shurtleff:  Well,  have  we  about  covered  things? 

Nathan:     I  think  we  have.  Thank  you  for  sharing  some  of  your  memories 

and  perceptions  of  your  long  and  interesting  life  in  California, 


Transcriber:  Michelle  Stafford 
Final  Typist:  Catherine  Winter 


66 


PARTIAL  INDEX  —  Roy  L.  Shurtleff 


Albright,  Horace,   14 

Anderson,  Frank  B.,   38 

Antioch  Bridge,   56,  58 

Armour,  J.  Ogden,   35 

Armstrong,  Fanny,   3 

Arnold,  Jimmy,   12 

Associated  Students  of  the  University  of  California,   8,  10 


Babcock,  David  J.,   42 

Bachelordon  Club,   12 

Barrows,  David,   14 

Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  District  (BART),   59-60 

Bechtel,  Stephen  (Steve),   48 

Beckett,  John  (Jack),   47 

Berkeley  Gazette,   12 

Berkeley  High  School,   4,  13,  25 

Berkeley  Independent,   4,  10 

Berkeley  Reporter,   12 

Black,  James  (Jim),   48 

Blyth  &  Co.,  Inc.,   38,  46,  52 

Blyth,  Charles  R.,   22,  25,  34,  38,  44,  47,  51,  53,  59 

Blyth  Story,  The,   42,  50 

Blyth,  Witter  and  Company,   22,  35,  38 

Blyth  Zellerbach  Committee,   47 

Bohemian  Grove,  and  Bohemian  Club,   14,  63-64 

Burr,  H.S.,   34 


Cahill,  John,   48 

Calkins,  Allard,   16 

Calkins,  John,   16-18 

Carquinez  Bridge,   56-58 

Carter  Hawley  Hale,   44 

Coleman,  S.  Waldo,   35,  36 

Commerce,  College  of,  University  of  California,   19 

Consolidated  Freightways,   45 

Crossen,  Ed,   64 


Daggett,  Stuart,   19 

Daily  Californian,   8-9,  10,  26 

Derleth,  Charles,   56 


67 


Devlin,  Paul,   50 
Dinkelspiel,  Monroe,   11 
Dollar,  Stanley,   46 
Dollar  Steamship  Company,   46 
Driver,  Charles  E.,   42 
Drury,  Newton,   12 
Dunn,  Charles,   53 


Einstein,  Ed,   11 
Emporium-Capwell,   9 
Evans,  Clint,   15 
Evers,  Al,   13 


Falk,  Adrien  W. ,   59 

Farmer,  Milton,   8-9,  10 

Ford,  Bernard,   44 

Foundation,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,   29 


Gayley,  Charles  Mills,   20 
Giannini,  A. P.,   58 
Giants,  San  Francisco,   41 
Gilmour,  Lloyd,   42 
Golden  Bear,   15,  25-26 
Golden  Gate  Bridge,   56,  58 
Grass  Valley  Union.   35 
Griffiths,  Farnham  P.,   14 
Griffiths,  Mansel  P.,   14,  42 


Hackett,  .Nelson,   15,  20,  23 

Hallett,  Eugene  R.,   4,  8,  9,  22,  34,  36 

Halsey,  N.W.  and  Company,   34 

Hanford  and  Clapp,   56,  57 

Hartigan,  Jack,   37,  38 

Hatfield,  Henry  Rand,   19,  27 

Hawes,  Stewart  S.,   42 

Hoover,  Herbert,   64 


Idaho-Maryland  Mine,   35 


Keefer,  Miss  (Whittier  School),   3 
Key  Route  trains,   60 


68 


Labor  Day,  University  of  California,   22 

Lawton,  Frank  H.,   9 

Lawton,  Harry,   22 

Lawton,  Hazel  (Shurtleff),   23,  25 

Leib,  George,   38,  42,  50 

Lipman,  Ned,   9 

Lochead,  James  K.  (Jim),   47 


McClellan,  Jack,   8-9 
Mandolin  Club,   26,  27 
Mattey,  Bert,   47 
Meek,  Nettie,   1,  56 
Miller,  Adolph,   18 
Miller,  C.O.G.,   44 
Moffitt,  Dr.  Herbert,   61 
Monteagle,  Kenneth,   26 
Moulton,  R.H.  (Bob),   37 


Natomas  Company,   34 
Neylan,  John  Francis,   40 
North  Hall,   24 
nuclear  power,   54-55 


Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  Company  (PG&E) ,   39-40,  53-54 

Pacific  Lighting  Corporation,   44 

Parsons,  Brinckerhof f ,  Tudor  and  Bechtel,   59-60 

Phleger,  Herman,   13,  40 

Porter,  Mildred  (Rowe) ,   16 

Portland  General  Electric,   44,  55 

Public  Utilities  Commission,  California,   39,  40 

public  utilities,  securities  for,   41 


Quinn,  John  R.,   12 


Reclamation  900,   34 
Reinhardt,  Aurelia  Henry,   2 
Russ  Building,   35-36 


St.  Francis  Hospital,  Bothin  Burn  Center,   61 

Senior  Bench,   24 

Shurtleff,  Benjamin,   29,  30,  32 

Shurtleff,  Eugene,   14 


69 


Shurtleff  family,   1,  28-29,  35 

genealogy,   29-33 

Shurtleff,  Roy  L.,   1-12,  14,  16-27,  30-32,  36,  38,  44-46,  50,  56-57,  61-64 
Sills  Brothers,   4 

Sloss,  Louis  and  Company,   9,  18,  22,  34,  37 
Smith,  Tevis,  Hanford,   36 
Southern  California  Edison,   41 
Sproul,  Robert  Gordon  (Bob),   14,  15 
Standish,  Elaine,   16 
steam  train,  Berkeley,   6 
Stephens,  Sain,   5 
Strawberry  Creek,   5 
Strawberry  Lake,   24 
Sutter  Basin  Company,   35 


Thelen,  Max,   14 
trading  department,   49 


UXX,   12 


Warren,  Earl,   12,  15,  39 
Wells,  Chauncey,   20 
West  Sacramento  Company,   34 
Wheeler,  Benjamin  Ide,   25 

Wheeler,  Charles  Stetson,  Jr.  (Tod),   12,  13,  15-16 
Whittier  School,   2 
Winged  Helmet,   25-26 
Witter,  Dean,   22,  36,  38, 
and  Company,   29 


Zellerbach,  David  (Dave),   47 
Zellerbach  Paper  Company,   11 


Harriet  Siegel  Nathan 


Graduated  from  the  University  of  California, 
Berkeley,  in  19^1  with  an  A.B.  in  Journalism. 
Was  assistant  women's  editor  and  managing 
editor  of  The  Daily  Calif ornian,  then  known 
as  the  Monarch  of  the  College  Dailies. 
Prepared  President  Sproul's  biennial  report 
to  the  legislature,  19^2-M;  wrote  advertising 
copy;  edited  house  journals;  served  on  local 
and  state  boards  of  the  League  of  Women  Voters , 
primarily  in  the  fields  of  local  and  regional 
government  and  publications. 
Returned  to  U.C.  for  a  Master  of  Journalism 
degree  in  19o5- 

Wrote  for  the  University's  Centennial  Record. 
Now  doing  research,  writing,  and  editing  for 
the  Institute  of  Governmental  Studies,  U.C., 
Berkeley. 


