Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Jhuma Acharya
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/jhuma-acharya
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/14VBChhM9C7qvtvneEpsOudFg617-I6zp/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Jhuma Acharya
Interviewed by Sakhi Shah through Zoom, 06/18/21
Narrator Location: Columbus, Ohio
Interviewer Location: Egg Harbor Twp, NJ
Transcribed by Sakhi Shah, 06/19/21
(0:03)
Sakhi:
This is Sakhi Shah interviewing Jhuma
Acharya on June 18, 2021. The
interview is taking place through zoom. So to get started, can you please tell me
where you're from?
(0:15)
Jhuma:
I'm originally from Bhutan, but I live
in Columbus, Ohio.
(0:20)
Sakhi:
What was it like growing up in Bhutan?
(0:24)
Jhuma:
Growing up in Bhutan, I don't know that
much of reﬂect uh
recollection of my childhood. Although I spent early 13 years of my life, 13-14 years of
my life in Bhutan, I grew up in a very small countryside. My parents were farmers, I
went to a local private school, government school, walking almost two hours from
my home to the school. And two hours back from the school, so it was kind of life
urban, very very, I mean, very, very rural life where I think it was it was a different life
than what I see today. Because we didn't have any locomotive where you can take
buses or anything like that. So we have to walk all the way. But it was growing in a
very beautiful environment, had a very good family support of educating me.
(1:19)
Jhuma:
Being a son of a farmer, I have to work
help my parents and my and my
everyday life course. So, it was, it was not a bad memory. It was good growing up
together with parents and my siblings.
(1:34)
Sakhi:
So like you said, you walked two hours
to school every day. So was that
like, ﬁve days a week? You would walk?
1

(1:41)
Jhuma:
Five days a week yes, ﬁve days a week. Monday to Saturday. So our
Sundays were off, Saturdays were half days. So every day.
(1:52)
Sakhi:
Wow. Did you have any siblings growing
u p ?
(1:55)
Jhuma:
Uh, yeah, I am the fourth son of my
parents. We were all together ﬁve
siblings. I was the fourth one. My youngest is ﬁve years difference to me. So we didn't
go school together. But I have other cousins who went school together with me. And
we also have a lot of students from the village we all, we all walk together to the
school and came back.
(2:19)
Sakhi:
So did you have a big family like with
um like cousins and other relatives
growing up?
(2:23)
Jhuma:
Yeah, we, right now is biggest. We are
very big family because we grew
up exponentially. But back growing up in my childhood, my, my dad has only one
brother, so we were...I mean, we were ﬁve siblings, and my uncle had four kids. So we
were all nine together altogether. But we grew up in a very close, kind of single
family home, living together. And we all grew up together.
(2:54)
Sakhi:
And what kind of impact did religion
have on your childhood?
(2:58)
Jhuma:
Religion plays a very important role
in my life and most of our families
life, because I, I am a...Brahman which is which I hate to say but that is the real reality.
Our community - society is divided into strata like Kshatriyas,, Brahmins, Shudras.
And also, fortunately, and unfortunately, at 1.4 g...unfortunately, I'm in from the
Brahmin family. So my parents would prefer to teach most of the religious part of the
life at home. So we sit with my dad early in the morning, recite Gita together with
siblings and my cousins. And once everything is being done, then I have to follow
what other religious rituals are there in the family to go up. So those were very
important part of my everyday growing, including my siblings, so that actually has a
real life to me. And today what I see religion is so much different than what I learned
in childhood, but it is not a negatively it is more like positive aspects. I see in
modernization of religion, but at the same time, it was very essential component of
growing together, learning about life, what humanity is, how can you serve in many
things better as you go or. So those were all the gifts that my parents and
grandparents gave me.
(4:16)
Sakhi:
So from Bhutan, where did you end up
going?
(4:19)
Jhuma:
So I grew up I was born raised for my
early 13-14 years of my life in
Bhutan. During that time, Bhutan, I did not know at that time, because I was too
2
young to know Bhutan was undergoing a lot of political turmoil inside, there was a
plan by the king to do our ethnic cleansing, where they would like to eliminate all the
Nepali speaking people inside the country because the king thought that these are
the people from foreign land from Nepal. So they got to go back to Nepal or else if
they want to live in Bhutan, they have to act like Bhutanese, dress like Bhutanese,
have a fate like Bhutanese, like follow Buddhism. Wear their dresses, follow their
culture norms, forget all Nepali or Hindu cultures and things like that. Those were
going on when I grew up but I didn't know the reality because I was too young to
know. And and the other part was I was in the central part of the country where I
went for my schooling. So I did not uh after, when I was in my seventh grade, we
heard a little bit because there were no TVs. There, there was one single newspaper
that was circulated around the country, but our school would get a late news like last
week newsletter we get this week so you don't know what happened currently. So
we got we used to get but the school banned all newspaper in this school building.
So we didn't get any news. There were no TV, no news. Later, after we I knew that
there was the disturbance was going on in South Bhutan where we live. And the
government was planning to, like, close all the schools at the southern border and
send all students should not inside mix in this school where they don't have any
Nepali speakers, things like that. So that I knew early when I was in eighth grade,
which was I think I was 14-15 years old. So there after, we were very badly, very
differently treated in this school, like because we speak Nepali. So we were always
considered always told, like we were the, we were the children of terrorist, childrens
of Milopses, which means like people who do not belong to the country. And they
always suspect us for any simple reason. So one evening, the principal invited all the
Nepali students in a.. in a dining hall and gave a lecture saying that our parents are
planning to leave the country. So we were supposed to join them. So the next day I
was called to the ofﬁce, it was asked to leave the school. So I left the school. I didn't
know what was going on in reality, because we could hardly understand what was
going on.
(6:59)
Jhuma:
And maybe because I was too young to
understand those that climate.
So I left. I took a bus, I went back to my hometown. After the bus dropped me, I have
to walk around another two half, two and a half hours to reach my village. When I
walked to my village on the way I was interrogated by police lot of time because they
were asking me where I was going, where I was coming from, why I was walking by
myself, things like that. And I keep telling them I'm from school, I'm going back to
the village because my parents want me to back back home. And sometimes I was
told “Well, your parents may not be there because they might have already left the
country”. I was just 15 years old. You can just think how was a 15 year old can catch
those kind of torture when I realized later on. When I went home, things were so
different. I my I asked my dad what how things are going on. He hesitated to tell me
because he doesn't want to torture young brain. But I live in a village for next two
3
months. Within the two months, I have witnessed a lot of killing of people, like the
army from the government used to come to the village and burn house, burn people
alive. We have witnessed that several times. And because of that fear, we left the
village. We were actually asked to leave the village time and again. So we left the
village, we went to a little easier part of the town. And we were even asked to leave
there. So thereafter we left for Nepal. And that was in 1992, June.
(8:27)
Sakhi:
So you said you were stopped by the
police on your way home from
school. Did that happen often or did it - was it just a couple of times?
(8:35)
Jhuma:
That was often, I think that happened
to pretty much all the people in
the village. That was the intention of the military force in the village. There are a
couple of cops and there are a couple of reason why they are deployed in the village.
One was to create a fearful life for the citizens, so that they will feel themselves that
they cannot live anymore and they will get out of village by themselves. The other
one was our Bhutanese armies. At that time, were allowed to do anything they like.
You [Bhutanese soldiers] can come to your house, kill your animal and eat. You can
they can come to your house, destroy anything they have. You have they can come to
your house, rape your...like a sister, Sister in law's mother in front of your eyes, they're
allowed to do anything they like. That was the order from the government, they will
say all the time, this is what we're supposed to do. So that the people there is there is
a create our own sense of environment of fear. And people will not overstand that
and live by themselves. So there's a kind of policy they would like to make so that
people are not forcefully evicted, but they are living by themselves so but the reason
behind living themselves. This is all in the background like so, even though come
multiple attempts are made to rape my mother, my grandmother, and my sister in
law - whose husband was put to jail. So these are all the various reasons why people
are leaving. So I left with my parents. I was the only English speaking person my
family because my youngest brother was in his school in Northern Bhutan. My
another elder brother was a school teacher, was not even aware of what was going
on because he was northern most part of the country. So then we left, we left around
midnight. And we reached Nepal the next day.
(10:16)
Sakhi:
What was your journey like, traveling
to Nepal?
(10:20)
Jhuma:
So one of the Indian merchant was kind
enough to rent us a truck, a
big, we used to call Punjab-bhole truck. I don't know how much you understand.
They are more like a trailer truck. So these are the trucks that have the high bar so
people all can get inside. So ﬁve families, ﬁve now Bhutanese, Nepali speaking
families, we all mounted the same truck. You can just imagine there were 27 people
all together. So we took that bus and we took that truck early in the morning from uh
bordering Indian state. Then they drove us all the way to West Bengal - Assam, West
4
Bengal - then ﬁnally came to India and then Nepal. The journey was, for me, it was
one of the longest journey I've ever taken. And especially with parents, my grandma
was probably seventy years by then. So, it was a different experience, uh a experience
of unknown, where you are going, like there was no destiny. Well, there was a destiny
as we're going to Nepal, but we were not sure what is life going to be? How are we
going to make up our life there? And how can we survive without even having
anything with us? Because we left pretty much everything in terms of property, land,
belongings, everything. We just ran away. So I was, although I was young, but I was
constantly thinking of what's going to happen. What, how are we going to make life
because we have never been to Nepal before, though we speak same language,
everything was common. But still we were...the journey of unspeciﬁc, you know,
intense and where to go. And the other thing was I was exciting also because we
were the big group of people together. So well, if something happens to me, there
are people who can support me. Things like that were in the mind. So that was the
part of my journey. That is what I still remember.
(12:09)
Sakhi:
When you reached Nepal, how did your
family get settled in?
(12:14)
Jhuma:
So at that time, that was early 1992.
Since 1990, UNHCR started
sponsoring refugees in the refugee camp. So there were already pre-established
refugee camps, people were already in the refugee camp. When we entered the
border checkpost of India, Nepal, we were taken to a registration post where you
register as a refugee - Bhutanese refugee. That memory is still very vivid in my mind
and very much torturing to me every time when I talk about refugee refugee issues.
How a person can become a refugee in a split second. A second before I was
Bhutanese in a truck with my parents still thinking, I belong to Bhutan. I have a land.
I have a home and a place to call home. But once again, after I cross Nepali border to
Indian border and cross to Nepal, then we were registered as refugee. We were given
a number. Okay, this is your refugee registration number. That was so most painful,
and it's still painful. That became like a lifelong password for me that I will never
forget. You know. So we registered. There all family members registered. We were 27
- 28 people in the same truck. But there were lots of people coming at that time. The
inﬂux was very high, Bhutan was sending, kicking people, so many at that time. So
the inﬂux was very high, we have to wait six hours in the line to get registered. And
after getting registered there at Calculetta, which are the checkpost. Jhapa at West
Bengal in India, West Bengal and Nepal border, then we have to take another, an
hour long drive to go to a refuge nearby refugee camp where we will be then given a
small hut to live in there after for the rest of the life. So we went to the refugee camp
after registration, that was late evening. And that was the day Nepal received the
heaviest number of refugees. So there were around 59-60 trucks like ours. Some
were bringing multiple families in the same truck. We were like ﬁve families in our
5
truck. There were trucks with carrying 10 families together of small size. So that's how
I register as a young refugee boy in Nepal in 1992.
(14:19)
Sakhi:
What was your experience like growing
up in the refugee camp?
(14:24)
Jhuma:
Refugee camp happened to be a common
home for people like me.
Like we grew up together. There are lots of people that I know before because some
of them were from the same village where they...we went to the same schools but
there's so many strangers. So we grew up in a group of strangers and non people
together. Growing up in refugee camp was very much challenging. Challenging at
the beginning, because like it was to adopt to a new place. Although the culture,
climate, everything was pretty much the same, but the way you live, because you
used to live in a house, but now you're going to live in a six by six square foot tent.
You know, for the rest of your life, there could hardly be a bed for you to sleep. You
have to sleep on the muddy ﬂoor, just put a blanket at the top of the ﬂoor and sleep.
Or like have your brother sleep for half of the night and you you stay awake, then you
sleep for the rest of the night. So things were like that challenging at the time, like
food supplies are very, very much limited. People were given food, but then you don't
have place to store them. Because you're given such a small tent where you are
keeping all your belongings, your clothes, your kids, your kitchen, your dining, your
sleeping, everything. And on top of that, the sanitation of the care was terrible.
Because of the lot of people living in a closed area you can just imagine. It was it was
a slum-like area. And I know we lived. I think growing up there, we learn so many
things, so many skills to adopt your life that you grew up, I think, I started knowing
how to live in scarcity because there was a scarcity of water. There was a scarcity of
food, there was a scarcity of everything, actually. And so I think the best thing I
learned about my 20 years of refugee life is how to handle your life in a very
desperate situation. How to cope up in terrible situations. Those were the learning
lesson, but life was not easy at all. I can now when I see a red ﬂag back those days. I
can hardly think how people made those 20 years there and how people are living
there now. It was, it was quite an experience.
(16:32)
Sakhi:
How many people lived in your speciﬁc
hut?
(16:36)
Jhuma:
In my speciﬁc hut, the beginning we
were nine because we were nine
altogether. Okay, our family, but then later after our family grew. So we were given
two huts six by six, two huts, we were altogether 19 people.
(16:53)
Sakhi:
And from the refugee camp, were you
given an education? Did they
have teachers?
6
(17:00)
Jhuma:
So actually, I am one of the pioneer person to start education refugee
camp. Particular in the camp where I lived, it was called Beldangi. It was one of the
refugee camp in Jhapa, a district of Nepal. So at the beginning, we were in different
refugee camp. Very close to India. But later after when the population of that came
grew so much, UNHCR decided to open up a new camp and build it which was like
30 miles away from there. So we were transported to a second camp. And that was
the camp that was initially started for the people who just were transferring from a
previous camp. So that camp education was not there at that time because we were
the ﬁrst people to be resettled, and that I mean to be settled at that camp. So we
started the school. I, along with some of my volunteer friends, I was 16 years old. I
along with my volunteer friends, we started running the school, we started going
from hut to hut collecting students and asking parents to trust us and send their
kids to us so that when it is...bring them back home. So we had around 100
registering the ﬁrst day. And the next day we have another 100 like in a week time we
get around ﬁve, around 500 students. And that blew up every week as new refugees
were coming and living in the camp, they the trust started growing more. So more
and more student coming. By the end of the month, we had around 5000 students
and another 50 volunteer teachers were all...who were all in schools back home in
Bhutan, like me. So I was the, probably I was the least educated group, but were
people who are in college or in high schools. So they all started voluntarily teaching
these children under under the tree in the scorching sun of monsoon heavy rain. We
used to like get kids back to the refugee camp to their hut sometime and when it's
dry, take them back under the tree and teach them whatever you can. So that is how
the education started in refugee camp.
(18:55)
Jhuma:
And I was, I considered it as a ﬁrst
member to start the school for the
children. And I had many of my students that I started teaching them at the age of 16
are my peers today, are my coworkers today. And they appreciate a lot that we
started that initiation. So that's how education started. But down the road after ﬁve,
six months when the refugee number of students were growing and UNHCR the
sponsoring agency saw that we're doing that volunteer work, they took up that
charge and started building like test hut for school. So we have a long school
building made of bamboo and hay and we start teaching them. Then there were
more and more teachers. UNHCR started paying money to the teacher 700 rupees. I
think you know what rupees is now okay. So 700 rupees for it was 500 actually, the
ﬁrst salary I ever got in my life was 500 rupees. That was after volunteering for a year
long. So that was the ﬁrst time they start paying teachers 500 rupees per month, and
then after a year or so they increased that is 700 and the last time I taught refugee
camp was 2003. At that time I got, I think 1100. That was how the raise was made. But
no teachers were trained at that time. They all volunteered later, after you initially
started providing some basic training to teachers.
7
(20:16)
Sakhi:
So when you were teaching in the refugee camp, what subjects did you
teach? And were you given any like supplies to do so?
(20:25)
Jhuma:
So at the beginning, I was teaching
kindergarten group, because that
was my capacity. I was an eighth grade student, so I can only do kindergarten. So, so I
started teaching kindergarten. And then after one year, they promoted me to teach
ﬁrst grade and second grade. That's how I grew up, but material wise, at the
beginning, there were no material, no supplies were given. We were given a small
slate board like the size of a laptop, and we hold the laptop or we hold the slate and
uh write with the chalk, and teach them. That was the only thing that we ever had for
a year, more than a year. But after a year, when that small test building were being
made, UNHCR provided a bigger chalkboard, so we use chalk and blackboard to
teach our children and our students. They didn't have supplies at the beginning. So
they wouldn't be, they are given a mat, rug. They will come with a rug, sit on the ﬂoor,
and the teacher will teach. There are no furniture. The only thing in the classroom
was a blackboard...And like we would we would wipe the board with a cloth, piece of
cloth. And, but after about two years, UNHCR start funding school with a supplies like
books and copies and pencils, and ink and pens, things like that. And after another
year, we were provided the next adventure. So our simple student desks and
benches. So that is, that was the beginning was with nothing, but slowly started
getting better.
(21:54)
Sakhi:
Wow. So while you were teaching, did
you, since you stopped your
education at eighth grade, or at the age of like, 15- 16, did you continue to learn too
while you were at the camp?
(22:06):
Jhuma:
I did I did. So for the ﬁrst few
years, I did not because I was the I am,
since my eldest brother, we supposed to be the head of the household after my dad.
My dad was chronically ill all the time. So because of that he could not take
responsibility, family responsibility. So I was and my my immediate elder brother,
what has never been...he doesn't know anything about writing or like doing making
reports and things like that. So I have to help him. And my eldest brother was
supposed to be the caregiver of our entire family, was put to jail by the government
of Bhutan. So we're missing him. And his kids were growing, he had four boys, they
were not very far apart to each other. So it was a challenging time for us to, for me to
go to school. And at the same time, I didn't have any, we didn't have any resources
like entire refugee students, they didn't have any resources to go back to school. You
can go to a regular refugee camp school, but our school was only up to sixth grade.
So there is no point of going back to that sixth grade school. So higher higher
education, school opportunities were very nil. And like, even if you, if we. I at one
point thought to go to Nepali private school and do education, but then they would
8
not allow Bhutanese refugees to come to their school because their schools are
funded by the government.
(23:22)
Jhuma:
So we didn't have but after after ﬁve,
six years, that was 1999, probably,
we, some of us were teaching in the school decided we heard about NASPA open
school system in India, which was called NYS at the time, just local school. So we
went to nearby a district...get connected with one of the school and ask the principal
if we can enroll and he was very happy to help us because they knew the story of
Bhutan and how Bhutanese are being evicted and how education has been
dismantled. He said, “Okay, I'm more than happy to help you guys come and register.
I can open as many slots as there are students. This is open, you can take materials at
home, prepare, come back for the exam, you guys can do”. So we established that
relationship and I register for my 10th grade. So but we never, I never went to school
because I was teaching. I had to teach because there was no other way otherwise.
Then, while I was teaching, I was also learning. We after the school is over, teachers
get together and have their own lesson, like read your own stuff, do your work, get
each other help each other. Somebody is good at math, so they will help you math,
somebody is good at English, they will help in English. Somebody is good at science.
So we all have a mutual standing of knowledge during that time.
(24:42)
Jhuma:
So we prepare ourselves and I give
my 10th grade exam. I was lucky
enough to get through. Similarly, I gave my 11th and 12th grade exam after two years.
I got through but never had an opportunity to go back to a formal school. And that's
how I got my 10th grade class. 11th grade 12th grade cleared and after that I went to
India. I mean, I went to Sikkim to get the bachelor's degree. I was always fascinated
to become a doctor. When I was a small child, I always wanted to be a doctor. For I
don't know why I wanted to be a doctor, at that time, having no knowledge about
what a doctor is. And I always like to be like, study science become a doctor. So after
having my higher secondary exam, I went to Sikkim and got enrolled for a BSc
program, bachelor of science in geology. And that was a three year program. I didn't
do well in the ﬁrst year, and I was totally understanding of what I will be doing in the
ﬁrst year because it was so challenging. I never had a school experience. I didn't have
a direct instruction of like any core subject in my entire high school life. So it was
challenging for me to challenge myself to be a science student without University.
But then ﬁrst year, second year was tough. Finally, I couldn't. I did well, on third year, I
got graduated. So that was my that was summer 2001. 2002, I ﬁnished my bachelor.
But I was still teaching in that camp, whenever the school is break, I come back, still
continue teaching. So my teaching profession never stopped.
(26:17)
Sakhi:
Was there an opportunity for your family
to leave the refugee camp?
9
(26:23)
Jhuma:
There was not. That, you are not allowed to leave the refugee camp.
Refugee, every refugee is provided a stipend - stipend in the form of, not in the form
of cash, but in the form of kind, like they will provide...they will provide rice, lentils,
some vegetable. So if you leave the camp without permission, then you don't get
those when you come back. So just to say that also, you have to leave the camp and
there was no place to go because we didn't have any documents saying where we
can live. Like if you go and try to live in Nepal, local areas in Nepal, refugees are
treated as the I don't know I don't, I still don't ﬁnd a word which would be
appropriate to call ourselves at that time. You ﬁnd a trash, when you pick up
something from the ground that's a trash, you decide by your your your intellectual
capacity will help you to decide whether you put in recycle or you put in trash bag,
right? Then you decided to put them either, either of the box but refugees were not
even ﬁt for either of those. We didn't ﬁt in the trash and in the recycle. We were taken
like that. If you if they identify you as refugees, they will kick you right there. They will
send you home. They will say “Okay, leave it right down and go away or you're going
to face difﬁculty.” That people are scared of leaving, even if they will invite you to work
for them in the ﬁeld. And I suppose at the end of the day, they negotiate like they will
charge they will at the beginning they'll say we’ll give you 20 rupees and at the end,
they’ll give you 15 rupees. We ask for the ﬁve rupees, then they’ll say okay, if you want
to survive, just get out. Otherwise you won’t be coming back here tomorrow. So just
for the fear of leaving, also people have to accept anything that comes. So refugees'
lives, especially living inside the camp was okay in comparison to living outside the
camp. They know you as refugee.
(28:04)
Jhuma:
But it's very hard for them to identify
how whether or not you're a
refugee because we look so much alike. We speak the same language, we have
everything is so much common. But the bad bad luck is if they identify you as
refugees, and that is the worst day, I have faced several challenges in my life. I was
teaching after I graduated my my bachelor’s degree. I went to Western Nepal to
teach in a private school. The reason why I went is I want to make money and go for
my highest studies. My nephews were growing. I have to send them to school too.
They were doing their 10th grade. So after 10th grade, there was no education again,
so I will have to send them to 11th 12th grade. So I was making money to send my
nephews to the school. So I went to Western Nepal to teach. I taught there for four
years altogether. But the second year when I was there, they for they were verifying
documents like your educational credit and stuff. And all my educational credentials
have Bhutan as my place of birth. Because I cannot hide because that is the reality. I
was born in Bhutan. And then when they saw that I was from Bhutan, they said that
I'm a refugee and a refugee is not entitled to work outside and not entitled to cheat
people like that. So they put me in a truck. The truck was transporting goat for
slaughterhouse in Jhapa. So they put me in a truck that was carrying this around 100
goats for a slaughterhouse slaughterhouse and the group of the activists from the
1 0
local area, they put me in that truck and asked me not to come out of the truck until
my ﬁnal destination come. And they even advise the driver not to let me even a cup
of water on the whole 24 hour journey.
(29:46)
Jhuma:
So I traveled with these animals for
24 hours. That was the that was
the brutal treatment they would give you if they identify you as a refugee. You
cannot imagine worse than that. You are living, sleeping with the stools and urine of
these goat for 24 hours. Next morning when I went home, it was early in the
morning. I walked all the way from Dhama to the refugee camp, which is like 45 to
50 minutes walk. My mom was just waking up when she saw me. In the door I was
standing smelling like the goat urine. She say “what's happening? Why are you here
this early? And why are you smelling so bad?”, but I have to tell lie to her because she
would not otherwise allow me to leave next time. So I just told her, I don't know,
because I travel a long time with like, the truck might have carried ghosts, blah, blah,
blah. I was about to concern my mom. So that is the treatment you would get
outside refugee camp. So the question of going outside or having an opportunity
outside is not at all. So they will not welcome you. But they will welcome you as in
abuse labor, if they want to use as in labor. They will pay, competitor you will get 10%
of the labor charge, if the charge that will be charged the local labor's like even
Neplai laborer comes to the ﬁeld to work, they will charge 100 rupees but for refugee
they pay $20 - 20 rupees, that is how we were treated.
(31:09)
Sakhi:
And did religion play in any impact
while you were in the camp? Like
were people still very religious there?
(31:17)
Jhuma:
Yes, religion. I think religion was
one of the key thing to connect
people together, either your local Nepali or refugee Nepali, Bhutanese Nepali
because I think in front of, when I see that in front of the God, I don't think God will,
like differentiate you as refugee and non refugee. If you are useful or if you believe in
him. But because of that common commonality between the religion, I think there
were some situations where people would not feel that hostile, they will feel they
should like you're welcome at that particular segment only. But outside that
ceremony, again, it's the same story. Like say, suppose you have a Purana, you have a
seven days of Purana, in local Nepali house. If you go, they will treat you well, because
that is their pious ceremony. But seven days after, on the eighth day if you go to the
same house, they will still treat you worse than the dog. So religion did play to some
extent, but not all people who take religion as a part of their social life and like a
component that will connect each other. A component that will help humanity. But
within the camp within the camp, people started learning more about religion.
(32:28)
Jhuma:
And like getting the people because
it was a lot of free time people
started going to temples, Mandirs, and like get together make that congregation
1 1
together. That was a huge growing up of the knowledge about religion within the
refugee camp a either it is Buddhists, or Hindus or Christian. There were churches, I
have never heard of churches back in Bhutan, I only heard was some temples,
Mandirs, and...the Buddhist temples. But in refugee camp, there was a little liberty,
people can practice any religion. So there was a development of Christianity. The
Western ministries went to refugee camp, and they started preaching Christian,
which is good, because people start learning more about religion and they have the
liberty to go to whatever they believe. In terms of Hinduism, there are lots of local
Nepali temples making connection with the refugee can come in the camp, not
priest, but maybe getting people connected together. So it was a I think people learn
a lot. I learned a lot about religion during my refugee life, because I had free time. I
have free time to attend Puranas, I have free time to attend Pravachan and things
like that. At the same time, there were some schools schools where they would teach
you basic mantras and things like that.
(33:46)
Sakhi:
Do you feel like your personal relationship
with like religion and
spiritual faith strengthened while you were at the camp?
(33:53)
Jhuma:
It does, it does. It is one of the
greatest strengths I ever had. And my
parents would always teach us the same thing they taught us back in Bhutan. In the
morning, get up, get fresh, come back and sit together with me read this verse
before you go out. So like that was more like a practice of our life. This is what I was
taught that that is what my brother was taught. And my brother teach the same
thing to me, I would teach the same thing to my brother. And as our nephews and
nieces were growing, we would teach the same thing to them, to have them. This is
our source of custom. This is our ritual. This is what we need to learn. This is what life
is. This is how you grow as a proper human being rather than just going out in the
street. So that connected, that was a very connecting link between my personal life
and what I learned when I'm from my parents. And it was not only my parents, I think
most of the families in the refugee camp decided to do and they did that. So that our
youth generation, people of my age are still interested in religion, they still have that
faith in God.
(34:53)
Sakhi:
Wow, and from the refugee camp, when
did you end up coming to
America?
(35:00)
Jhuma:
It was in 2011. So we arrived in 2011.
That was January 3 of 2011. Well,
the process took quite a long time, comparatively with other refugees in the world,
our process were pretty quick because we were one of the priority refugee cases
because we live in refugee camp for so long. We actually applied, our family applied
for resettlement back in 2009, early 2009. But I think 2008 but because my father
passed away, so all of our process started, like we have to change, reapply again,
1 2
because it changes the demographic. And then I got married at the meantime. So I
have to transfer my wife's information from my in laws to mine. And that all took little
bit of time. But then we applied in 2008. Our ﬁrst interview was completed in 2009.
And my brother, one of the brother was in jail, came after 10 - 5 years in refugee
camp. And his case was expedited because he had some torture cases so you'd get
more medical need address. And then, for us, from 2008 to 2011 2010. In in order to
ﬁnish the process, but we came in 2011. We were resettled in Rhode Island,
Providence. Rhode Island, because our brother was resettled there. So we are his
cross reference. Yes. So we came, we arrived to US in 2011, early 2011.
(36:30)
Sakhi:
I'm going back a little, what made
your family apply for resettlement?
(36:37)
Jhuma:
Now, can you repeat that question again?
(36:39)
Sakhi:
What made your family apply for resettlement?
Like, why did you guys
want to come to the US?
(36:44)
Jhuma:
Oh, okay. Okay. For us, refugee resettlement
was not a choice, it was
the only available option. Many refugees, some represent some are located in some
part of the world without option for repatriation, resettlement. Third countries that
have an integration. For us integration and repatriation were totally closed. The only
available door was third country resettlement. So the reason why we applied to
United States is because United States was taking more number of refugees than
other countries. So it would make us more sense that we will be living in a closer
community when we were resettled here. And also, at that time, other countries
were not on my radar to consider. I never considered European countries to go. Is all
because I was the only English speaker in my family. And then handling family of
17-18 with one language speaker was already a challenge. It was already a kind of
challenge to me when I come but then going to Europe and learning new language
there. It is going to be a different experience. So I thought that America is better. And
also also, the other reason is that I work for some American volunteers in
Kathmandu, when I was doing my master's program. I learned a little bit more about
job opportunities and like lifestyle in America. So that when we were applying like
many people were applying to United States. My in laws all applied for the United
States, so that it was more like a family all together, let's go to the other, let's be in
the same country at this, we can move around within the same country. That was
one of the factors.
(38:24)
Jhuma:
The other factor was I think America
was taking more number of
refugees, which means we'll get a better approval, better opportunity to come here.
But to be honest, not not many refugees were like need to know more about
America before they come. Many of them, they just blindly applied, because they just
1 3
want to get out of the refugee camp. Another factor was actually the same thing. I
don't want to be refugee for rest of my life. I don't want to raise my kids and have the
name refugee after their name, you know. So that was I was always thinking when in
my life, I can take the refugee tag out of me so I can walk so freely with like a human
being. Not like you're not Bhutanese refugee, but I want to be called Jhumana that's
it. Because back in Nepal, that they will ask you about a country then when you say
Bhutan, oh, you're a refugee. Like the way they call you refugee is today we call
refugees to so many people who are here in United States, but the tone of the word
saying refugee we have a sort of sympathy or empathy in the word. When I say
someone says I'm a refugee status, I would I would take that in a different way. Oh,
you have a refugee status in a very respectful honoring way, because I like to honor
the word refugee because that word refugee has impacted our life so much. Most
former refugees are refugees. We're living as refugees, the word refugee impacts in
so different dimension. So coming here, my main intention was take the refugee tag
out and live very freely. And I'm so lucky today I have I no longer consider myself as a
refugee, but I always considered myself as a former refugee because my route is
refugee.
(40:02)
Sakhi:
Did many of the other people at the
camp also choose to like get
resettled somewhere and leave the camp?
(40:11)
Jhuma:
Yeah. Many many people. At the beginning,
I think at the beginning of
2007 when the revote for the resettlement came people were not interested because
at the very understanding is that people did not know about United States. People
would know about India. People would know about Nepal, Bhutan, but these people
have never gone out of that bubble. Like I have never traveled by train in my entire
life. Can you just imagine? I don't know what that train journey is. If someone asks
me how is the train trip, I would I can never explain because I've never been to. And
people if they if they ask about America, do you want to go to America, people will
say no because you know nothing about America. So people were very much like
reluctant to choose the country but the opportunity was so quick that the initial was
60,000 refugees should be coming out of 120,000. 60,000 will be coming to United
States. so that is a big number. So that big number of people thought that if I select
United State, if I get the opportunity to go there I think there is a bigger community
tomorrow to grow. So even if I don't speak English, at least I have a neighbor that I
can speak to in Nepali to or maybe we all can maybe together can go together and
live in the same town the city. That was people intentions. But people did not
welcome at the beginning because it was going far away far away without in a
country where you know nothing about their living style and where they think the
western countries are all Christian countries so Hindu people coming to Christian
countries would lose their religion, identity, things like that. It was a very fearing,
feeling among people. And even cultural beliefs and things like that like what if I
1 4
don't get a chance to celebrate Durga Puja. What if I don't get chance to celebrate
Diwali. What if I don't get chance to celebrate the wedding that I celebrate here.
Things like that. So that was very very large hesitancy was there in 2007 but few
families were resettled in early 2008 in United States. They start sending their
message to refugee camps saying that hey it is okay to live here. It is far more better.
Life is so different here. It is not like Nepal or Bhutan but deﬁnitely far more better. It
is like it’s different. You are more than welcome to come and apply. So that message
from few families to the extended families in refugee camp inspired them to apply
and among them one of that is me.
(42:35)
Jhuma:
My family, extended family, who came
early 2008, my in laws came in
2008 and 2009. They actually inspired me. They said well its far more better come
here let's live together here. So at that message reached to the entire refugee camp,
UNA started hosting a TV show like a documentary so that they take take
documentary of Bhutanese refugees who were resettled here. And then that
documentary was like telecasted there in the refugee camp. So people would come
and watch that thing and they feel oh its better. They get everything there. Oh we
get the same potatoes there, we get the same onions, we get the same peppers, we
get the same meal. Why not? Because the most important thing is food. If you don't
get your own food, if you don't get your own meals, you think that you are dead.
Because those things and your religion, that is so hard to disconnected, otherwise.
So that was there but like late 2008 and early 2009 people expressed more interests
to come to the US and the process was quicker because there was more UNIR, DHS
staff working for US applicants. And the process was quicker. The other reason was
people were saying okay if I apply to US, the process is quicker and I can go quicker. If
it is Australia it is going to take 2 years. If is Netherlands, it is going to take 3 years. If it
Canada, 4 years. Because there was less staff from those countries to work in those
IM, I mean UNS posts down there in Nepal. So because of that people were more like
since the process was getting faster and more and more people were leaving the
camp. People start feeling like well I need to do it. I have to go. So thats how people
started selecting and choosing. But not many people had the idea that I'll be living in
United States for the rest of the life. Some of them they just thought well this could
be for a couple of years. Maybe I'll be be back to Nepal, things like that.
(44:27)
Sakhi:
Wow, and what was your journey like
going from Nepal to the US, like
just traveling and your experiences?
(44:36)
Jhuma:
It was, for me, personally, it was
not a big thing, because I mean well
big thing because I've never taken such a long ﬂight. The longest ﬂight I've ever
taken was 45 minutes from Ukartford to Jhapa. Otherwise, I've never taken a ﬂight.
So to ﬂy that 18-20 hours over, was a challenging in that high altitude but at the
same time, coming with the family, and I was made a team leader, when was
1 5
traveling, we have 36 r
efugees traveling together from Nepal to United States so I
was supposed to be taking care of all of them because there a couple, a few people
who spoke english. Beginning, when we left Nepal, I think when we left Jhapa to
Raykurtwandu was not a big thing because although we are ﬂying we are happy
because we are leaving refugee camp and then we are thinking of...you know
everybody high dreams of coming to new place and coming to United States.
Anyone who is planning to come to United States, they always have the high dream.
When you come here, then your dreams shatter sometimes and it take time to grow.
Same thing happens with all refugees. Everybody is so excited to leave at one point
so I was excited too because I was coming with my family. Little sad because I left my
mom and brother back but they were in the process to come, they would eventually
be joining me. But then I went out, ﬂight took off from Nepal airport. I feel very sad. I
really feel sad. One reason is I live in the I lived in the country for 20 years, I taught
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of students there. I gave a good part of my
life to the families in Nepal, either in refugee camp or on local schools. But I thought
that I would be never back coming to Nepal. And I would miss each of them. On top,
I would miss the most religious country of the world. Our ﬂight was just...and people
in our in our cabin, were all crying. They were all saying Oh God, please help me to
come back once again to get your blessing. That was very much emotional moment
to me. But then I control, I thought well, maybe we will be back. He was not a grace
to come back and bow my head to you. But ﬂying from there, I had all those. I, the
entire 20 years of you're not earning but you're making of your relationship, how
many people you have met each other, your life in refugee camp in local area. I was
leaving everything, my entire 20 years of my I should say like networking, your
earning and everything.
(47:12)
Jhuma:
Because we're allowed to bring 20 kg
of your belonging to US when
you ﬂy from Nepal. That was the limit for every refugees, how much you can put your
20 years, putting together in 20 kg. All together was emotional, leaving emotional
departure of people or friends families, and then not knowing what would happen.
When I was coming from Nepal and Bhutan to Nepal, it was a country where as
where I can speak the language, no difference culture, food and everything. I was still
scared. I was scared it took time for me to get me adopted. Now I'm going to the
country where my language doesn't play the role. My culture, belief, my my
everything my family system, my social system, does not does not work together. So
how I'm going to live there. How I'm going to handle my family, my I have a burden
of taking care of my families too. At the same time how long this will be. Will I be
coming back? Can I veer like real American, then thereafter? Can I have my own
house? Are we I will I be living in a refugee or in a rented house for rest of my life?
Those things all together accumulating and creating kind of either daydreaming,
well I might be, I might get a better opportunity. But at the same time I might not.
What kind of work I should decide? Those things were very much lingering in me.
1 6
Throughout my journey, I was thinking about all those things. But by the time I came
to...we landed to New York, it was different because you know, we've got so much in
here, now we are back in the land. So when in during the entire journey there are a
couple of transit point where we have people who help us to transit from one system
to another ﬂight and things like that. But when we came to New York, there are
people who greeted us in Nepali saying like Welcome to United States.
(49:06)
Jhuma:
That was the ﬁrst impression. You
know, a country, a country
welcomes you in your own language. I had a fear that nobody will speak my
language. But the very ﬁrst time I was visiting the airport was welcomed to United
States in Nepali. And somebody had that Nepali region scribble that served. That was
the greatest thing I could ever dream and think. Like the thing that we don't even
imagine are already existing here. So that made me feel much more better. Sorry
about this. Then. So that was that was emotional burden, emotional resting then we
came we were then we transition to Rhode Island, Providence city, where I joined my
brother's family. It was exciting because after living there for so many years, so many
months of being apart, but it was quite a different experience. Sometime
emotionally very sad but sometimes, like kind of. I feel that sometimes I acted like a
mentally ill person. Super excited sometimes and very depressed sometimes. But I
could balance together. But yeah, many people were the people who came with me
together when we departed in in New York. They were all saying like, okay, at least
you know how to speak English. But what about me when I go to Georgia who is
going to help me, things like that. There are families who came to Georgia, Texas, and
other states that came together, we depart from there. Yeah, it was a different
experience. When I go to New York, I always get reﬂected back that, you know, I feel
that.
(50:40)
Sakhi:
Yeah. And what do you remember from
like your ﬁrst week in
America? Do you have any like vivid memories?
(50:47)
Jhuma:
I do. I had the vivid, two memories.
I have the snow. The day we came
to United States, and the third of January, we came to Rhode Island, that was the day
Rhode Island received the heaviest snowfall. They have never received after that.
There was six feet of snow. I've never seen snow in my life - so close. So to hold that
snow by my hand, was my ﬁrst experience in my life. I always think is like as hard as
ice, but they were as soft as cotton. So that was one experience I could always
remember. I always tell to my new coming refugee families like that is what I felt so
everybody will feel pretty much the same. The other memories, next day after our
arrival, my caseworker took us to the Social Security ofﬁce to apply for social security
card. On the way, we were stopped at trafﬁc light. It was snowy morning, on either
side of the street, there were two, a man and a woman, holding a homeless card. And
there is snow out there. I looked at them. And it was it was really I could not
1 7
comprehend that so much at that time. And I asked my caseworker, what are these
people, that Oh, they're homeless. What do you mean by that? Do America have
homeless? Oh, yeah, there are so many homeless. I've never heard that there are
people called homeless in United States, because outside United States, what we
think of US is the richest country in the world, everybody's happy and well living. But
there are people on the street who are homeless, who doesn't have a home in their
own country, who doesn't have food on their plate in their own country. So for us
coming from a distant far away, like overseas, and being feeling of that is very, very
common that I realized, well, if I have a day where I have to stay like homeless, I
should be able to digest that because people who have grown up here, who had
their own ancestry here are homeless today means I can be to that spot. But I have
to be very much understanding that this is not happening here. This is happening
here. That is my vivid memory. I still get an understanding when I see so many
homeless, I do have volunteer, I do a volunteer job in homeless shelters sometime.
But that is why I go because I have a connection there. I feel that I was homeless
once upon a time. I lived in refugee camp, the heart didn't belong to me. My own
country kicked me out. My country of my ancestor did not let me in. I was homeless
for 20 years. So why not help? So that is how I feel that I need to do something. I
volunteer once or twice every year, every now and then, to the homeless shelter.
(53:20)
Sakhi:
Wow. Yeah. And when you arrived in
the US, were you like, were you
given resources and support from like family members and other people living
nearby? Did you ﬁnd like a community?
(53:33)
Jhuma:
Yes, Rhode Island was very Rhode Island
either Buddhist refugee
community or Buddhist Nepali community. Rhode Island was very small. There were
only 11 families when we come came, including my brother's family. But all families
are very much welcoming. We didn't know those families before, I only knew was my
brother's family. But they all came and greeted us in the airport. Then there were a
lot of volunteers who came and greeted us in the airport. And after that they start
coming to your house, helping us, taking us around, like taking us to go around the
city and the town, identify grocery stores, taking a drive - driving us to a grocery
stores to get our groceries, helping us to take the public transportation, sometime
taking to the historical places explaining what those places are. And Rhode Island
has a very beautiful, very dynamic, very diverse community that is so much
welcoming for refugees. It is such a beautiful place to live in. So I was we were
fortunate to have that support from the resettlement agency, from the school, from
the community around. There is a big group of volunteers who actually come go to
the airport in a periodic basis to greet refugees and welcome refugees at different
time. These people are professors, lecturers, teachers, doctors, social workers, all
together forming a community of welcoming community. And they created that
environment there and I was fortunate to be welcomed by those people and I still
1 8
have the connection. We still keep in contact sometimes the visitors sometimes we
visit. We create a kind of community and family and later after we start celebrating
holidays together like American holidays together Nepali holidays together. So we
created a small our own community, a small, diverse community, international
community in Rhode Island. That was so good. So we have a lot of support. They
provided resources like our family four of us, we all were teachers back home, my
wife, my brother, his wife. So when we went to the refugee resettlement agency, they
were saying, Okay, you guys, we are very happy to have you because at the same
time, lucky to have you because you all speak English, you can help other non
English speaking, Nepali speakers. So we volunteer, we give our time and resources
to the center, but at the same time, we got a lot of resources from them, ﬁnding
housing, helping us to pay the rent, applying for beneﬁts and things like that. They
did a wonderful job, they help us. They, they, they actually gave us a way to help
others. So it was a it was a great place to live in.
(56:14)
Sakhi:
That's great to hear. And in Rhode
Island, were you able to ﬁnd a way to
practice your religion or ﬁnd others who did, who practiced the same religion?
(56:25)
Jhuma:
Exactly. Yes, yes, we were. So Rhode
Island. Before I came to Rhode
Island, a friend of mine actually was from Rhode Island, who used to work together
with me. She actually gave me a little bit of information about Rhode Island. So she
was originally from Bhurnam, but she lived in Rhode Island. So she was about to tell
me more about Rhode Island. So in Rhode Island, there are lots of religious centers
like for...there's a it is a big international community, either you are Sikh, either you're
a Hindu, either you're Muslim, or you are any other religion, there are places to go. So
there is I don't think there is any religion that would not ﬁnd a spot there, is such a
beautiful place. So when we came we were greeted by a group of priests from local
temple. Two days after our arrival, they came to our house to greet us and they said
okay, we are here to help you. Feel free, this is your own temple. So we will invite you
to our temple. So we're invited to the temple, we went to the temple, the temple
became our own temple, you know, that is that is the biggest thing, when you have a
place to call your own, then you have a sense of belonging, then when you have a
sense of belonging that you belong there, and when you belong there, then you are
happy. That is how our network was created. Rhode Island has that place. So
there...Providence has it by the center Providence has a Hindu temple. Providence
has a community of Hindus who get together during Holi, Diwali, and celebrate
together in an university Brown University complex and also in Rhode Island
University complex so and we started getting connected with other people who
admire in the religion and like one of the professors from Rhode Island University. He
became a family friend of ours...my we, in one of our like, we have a month long
Saustani celebration, she came every week when we're reading the book, and she
wanted me to translate that to her. At the end, what she did is after two years, she
1 9
did the visitation, study translation from Sanskrit to English, that itself speaks to how
many people are there to help you and to support you. And she became a very good
friend of ours. Not only that, there are so many other people, there's a big Indian
community they are who are very helpful. When they hear about a new refugee
coming from Nepal, they will come to the airport, greet them, provide them food,
bring some like our food to their to the family. We have some Nepali food already in
our apartment when we move because these are all given by those Indian
community. So there is a very nice community there, in a very good place to practice
your religion like we never feel offended.
(59:10)
Sakhi:
Wow. Yeah, that's great. And so you
say that you're in Rhode Island, but
currently you're living in Columbus, Ohio. So how did you end up going from Rhode
Island to Ohio?
(59:21)
Jhuma:
So we lived in Rhode Island for one
year. My brother was already there
since 2009. But the community in Rhode Island, Nepali community in Rhode Island
was very small. We're like around 60 people altogether, just living in a very small kind
of complex area. So when my mom joined us in June of 2011, she started feeling very
lonely of not having her own like kind of close people around. And one of our uncle
used to live in Columbus and another uncle used to live in Pennsylvania area. So my
mom would always say, Okay, I need to go either to the uncle who lives in Columbus
or the uncle who lives in Pennsylvania because I cannot live just staying home all the
time, I need someone to talk to me. Because we all have to go to school or work and
she be all the time at home. So she feel so lonely, and there are no Nepali families
within walking distance. So that was one factor. But other factor was we started
looking at the future, because my nephews and nieces were all in school. Everybody,
were looking for a future to grow themselves, professionally, also, educationally. So
then we decided to think well, eventually we have to move from Rhode Island, but
we don't know where to move. So we started making a short trip to the Middle West.
Once we came to the we went to Vermont, that was not Midwest but still we went to
Vermont to see our families. But we liked the place. It was a little small because we
thought that people started moving to other places from Vermont. So then we
started moving. We came to Pennsylvania to see visit my uncle, I didn't like the place
then eventually we came to Columbus to visit the other uncle. The very ﬁrst day I
came to Columbus, I fell in love I exited more slowly than I started feeling that this
could be my future home.
(1:01:13)
Jhuma:
And I just drove I met we met our
uncle and stayed for a couple of
days, learned about the place. They are not many Nepali families in Columbus at that
time, just newly arriving families where there is early 2012. So not many people were
like moving the secondary migration. So we went back and decided to come to
Columbus, because my uncle said, either you take me to Rhode Island or you come
2 0
here, so we decided to come here to join him. Unfortunately, my mom could not
survive long, she was not ill. But as we move we moved in she moved in April. In May,
she passed away. So it was quite a sad time. But then she united us with our uncle
and then we lived here. After that I was the last person to move to Rhode Island from
our family. I migrated the rest of them earlier. And I ﬁnally came because me, my
wife, my brother and his wife, were waiting for our green card's ﬁngerprint
appointment. So after we had our ﬁngerprint, we moved from there to here. And
then since then, we have been here and Columbus is another beautiful place to live.
It is. It is a small, like a place where you can call this is my community. I am okay
living here. I feel comfortable and safe.
(1:02:32)
Sakhi:
Yeah. And so you mentioned that while
you were living in Rhode
Island, you were working a job? What kind of jobs have you been like working since
you ﬁrst got settled here to like currently?
(1:02:43)
Jhuma:
So early is early in 2011 in April,
I my age started taking the ﬁrst job I
took was working as a hotel as a housemen hotel, housekeeping job. It was, I have
never done that job. I've never known in my entire life, that there is a job called
housekeeping. Because I've never had that experience of working in hotel. So that
was my ﬁrst job. It was not hard. I was able to handle it. But I didn't think that I'll
make my future in housekeeping profession. And so then in the meantime, when
one evening I was back from my work, I was a little tired. It was a one hour bus drive.
When I was back home with one of our volunteer tutors, who would come and tutor
my niece was there at home and she was also our volunteer. She looked at me and
say actually, Jhuma you look so tired, so annoyed today. What happened, share me.
And then I didn't have any, like good thing to say about I told her that I don't think
this job is going to make me live longer. Then next day I was off. She took me to
Providence public school and she requests she asked if there is job opening. The staff
at the desk said they're hiring bilingual staff to be a teacher's assistant in the
building. So then she encouraged me to apply for that position, but they were
requiring a license. So that very day, she took me to a community college, registered
from her own money, she paid $100. I have not yet returned that money, she would
never take that back from me. So she register me for that teacher's training program.
So every day after I come from the work, I would drop, change my bus from the bar
downtown, go to the college, do my evening class three hours of my class for 13
weeks, and I got graduated. Then I got the job. I was hired before I was graduated. So
then I moved from housekeeping job to a teacher assistant was more like my own
profession back home. But teaching in refugee Nepali school system and American
school system is so much different.
(1:04:50)
Jhuma:
So it took some time for me to adapt
but it was a very good
transition. I could make it, I was happy. I was working full time in school. I was very
2 1
well respected because I help a lot in all different school buildings though I was
assigned to one building but I volunteered to work. Help them in any capacity, I
guess. So, we I was happy, but then we decided to move to Columbus. So then I left
the job, I gave them a very well advanced notice saying I'm going to Ohio. Then,
when I came here, the current job that I'm working, I applied for this position. I
actually went to the agency to get some secondary, there was a program at that
agency would provide some help to secondary migrant. So I went to seek that help.
But they asked me if I was willing to work for them. And I said, Yeah, absolutely. I like
to work for a refugee program. And then they asked my resume, I dropped the
resume a week after they invited me for an interview. But unfortunately, the
interview date was so much conﬂicting with the death day of my mom, so I couldn't
do and my mom passed that very day. I called them back and told them that I
couldn't come because my mom passed away. And I that interview was rescheduled
on my own availability after 24 days. So I came back, they did the interview, they
hired me, and I've been working with them since then. It has been 10 years now.
(1:06:12)
Sakhi:
Wow. And what do you do working for
this agency?
(1:06:16)
Jhuma:
So I am a case manager, I work with
newly arrived refugees. I am a
resettlement case manager, pretty much predominantly that job is to provide
immediate support services to newly arrived family. So providing them housing,
helping them ﬁnding housing, getting their kids enrolled in school, getting
connected to medical services, providing transportation in any important cases, like
emergency cases, to provide some case, whereas when provide them, help them to
get resettled, ﬁnd job, connect them to the job and employment services. So that is a
that is what I do what is assigned by RNP program, the refugee reserves and
placement program. So I work with families from all around the country all around
the world. Now, I predominantly started with Nepali families, but then I want to
extend my capacity to other families. I started working with Congolese then Somalis,
that Iraqis, Iranian, Syrians, like pretty much everybody now. I have been working
with Russia. Currently, I have a couple of cases from Russia, some from South
American countries. So is is a good place to work. That I not just because I came to
the same program I went to work, but is is a place where you can feel satisﬁed with
what you do. Because people need help. I was helped by someone when I came, see
if I can be that person, I think that makes better sense to people. So that's what I do.
(1:07:42)
Sakhi:
Yeah, that's great to hear. And I
have one last question. So imagine
that someone's listening to this oral history in 100 years, what do you hope they take
away from it?
(1:07:55)
Jhuma:
The The hope is to my hope would
be like, the journey of people is so
much different. Everybody comes to this country through different routes, they have
2 2
different experience. Nobody comes to this country just for leisure, they have a
reason to come here. And when they come to this country, they come and work here.
They did not just make a living, but they also contribute a lot to this country. I wanted
to let people know that. I'm not different than any other people. But my way of
thinking is maybe different from other people. I am. I'm here today, because this was
the opportunity given to me. Maybe this was the right call at the right time to make
a decision to come here. If I was living in refugee camp, I would, I would not have
been surviving also because thats so different, but to why refugees come to this
country, why America invites refugees and immigrants has its own story. There is a
background, there is a foundation for this. And all refugees, they come with a bag of
experience, bag of knowledge, have that given opportunity, that person to explore
that knowledge and share that knowledge to others, rather than just rather than just
assuming Oh, it could be like that, you know, not don't make an assumption or like
don't make a judgement, listen to them. When you hear the story from a real person,
you really hear the truth. And when you really hear the truth, then you can make your
own conception you can always understand better. If I say that mango is very sour to
you, you will understand that, but if I give a piece of mango to you and have you taste
it, you will know what mango actually tastes. I want to give that, let the people hear
that. Let 100 years after this when my grandkids when my grand generation, younger
generation, at the time hear my story. Let them feel Why did I make that choice to
come to United States? What sacriﬁce did I make? That they will learn that let them
share that with their peers and friends. Hey, my granddad came here to United
States and he had this journey. Why don't we struggle and make this country a
better place. So we all want to make a place where we live a safer, better place to live.
That is my dream. That is my goal.
(1:10:16)
Sakhi:
Yeah, thank you so much for telling
your story. I know I deﬁnitely got
that from hearing this. And is there anything else you'd like to add?
(1:10:28)
Jhuma:
Not very speciﬁc. But I'm so thankful,
I am so thankful to have this
opportunity. I'm so thankful to be the citizen of this country. I'm an American citizen.
I didn't have the refugee tag anymore. As I said earlier, my entire family is American
citizen. We feel that we are in a safer place. I didn't have a citizen for 43 years of my
life. So for 43 years of my life, I was not a citizen of anywhere, I will not even belonging
to a no man's land. But now today, I am very proudly saying that I am an American
citizen, I traveled with my American passport. I keep my American ﬂag in front of my
house. But at the same time, I'm a Nepali. I have my identity inside. I am Nepali, I
speak the Nepali language, I practice my Hindu religion. That is very sacred to me,
that is very important to me. That is what I teach to my kids. I think that liberty exists
here in United States. There is a liberty for people to practice your own religion. But at
the same time, practice in a safer way. You don't disturb others, you respect others at
the same time. So and at the same time, it is a land of opportunity. I it took 10 years
2 3
for me to come get a degree here. I had a master's degree back back home, but I
went to school two years ago. Recently, last two weeks before I got graduated with a
master's degree in social work. I'm planning to go for a PhD. So there is no age limit
here. So you can this is a country of explorers and you can explore, you can make
your life better. So I wish people would make life better here, be a very integral part of
the society. We are very educated, very literate citizen, because that is how we can
create a better country, a better place to live. If I am happy, I want to make my
neighbor happy. If we both are happy. I think we share a better neighborhood.
(1:12:20)
Sakhi:
Yeah, thank you so much for doing
this. I'm going to end the
recording now.
E n d
2 4