Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Amina Ahmad
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/amina-ahmad
Transcript URL: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WRSIZO_4Q_vUkh2Tbq4nC4cylBppDrNxZU6riFcBSYI/edit?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

﻿Amina Ahmad


Interviewed by Shanaz Deen in White Plains, NY, on 08/8/19
Transcribed by Hannah Reynolds on 12/12/20 




(00:00) Shanaz Deen: This is Shanaz Deen, interviewing Amina Ahmad on August 8th, 2019 in White Plains, New York. So why don't you start by telling me where you were born, who did you grow up with, and what was it like?


(00:17) Amina Ahmad: Um, my name is Amina Ahmad, I am from Syria, I was born in Syria in 1971. I grow up there in Syria in Aleppo city.


(00:35) Shanaz Deen: Who were the members of your family that you lived with? Who did you live with? Parents, grandparents?


(00:41) Amina Ahmad: With my family, with my parents and six siblings.


(00:45) Shanaz Deen: Six siblings, wow. 


(00:47) Amina Ahmad: Yeah.


(00:49) Shanaz Deen: How many brothers and sisters?


(00:50) Amina Ahmad: I have two brothers and four sisters. Two sisters passed away last year. We have, now, I have two sisters, me three. 


(01:05) Shanaz Deen: What was it like growing up in Syria? What was school like? What was a day in your childhood like? Describe that.


(01:16) Amina Ahmad: My childhood? It was hard life in my childhood. We...I grew up in the village in the beginning of my life. I grew up without a father. My father passed away in 1975. My mom, she was farmer. We were a farmer family. I go to school until sixth grade, then we decided to move to Aleppo. It was 1988. Then, we survived in Aleppo, so we start a new life, and that was our life.


(02:10) Shanaz Deen: So what was that change like, from village and farm life to a city like Aleppo?
(02:13) Amina Ahmad: Village is like a limited income, we had the trees, the olive trees, we had a lot of things, grapes, many things. So as all the farmers. In Aleppo, we worked. I worked in the factory, my brother was working in Lebanon, he goes to Cyprus. We moved, the purpose of our moving was to get a better life, that was our purpose. And we worked very hard. 


(02:55) Shanaz Deen: And what did you do in the factory?


(02:57) Amina Ahmad: I am tailoring. It was sewing. 


(03:01) Shanaz Deen: Oh. And how often did you work?


(03:03) Amina Ahmad: I was working, I started to work in 1991. And so far, I'm working. Till now I'm working. Yeah, but since I got my [INDECIPHERABLE], I just stay home for kids. 


(03:21) Shanaz Deen: Wow. Did you have multiple jobs in Aleppo, or were you just working there?


(03:28) Amina Ahmad: Aleppo?


(03:29) Shanaz Dean: In Aleppo, were you just working in the clothing factory?


(03:31) Amina Ahmad: Yeah, just working in the clothing factory, nothing else. We worked on sporting clothes, like Nike, something like that. We were working and we export to the French country. So yeah, I worked in the factory. And in the beginning, I worked there, but after a few years, I was administration. I was administration like of two lines of the machine. So I was organizing for the job and people were working and I just directed and gave them jobs of what to do. 


(04:20) Shanaz Deen: Could you tell me a little bit more about your life outside of work, like what did you like to do in free time? Did you spend time with your family and friends? [INDECIPHERABLE]


(04:27) Amina Ahmad: Mostly I was working 6 days a week, 12 hours a day. It was a very long time job. Mostly, we don't have free time except Friday is the weekend in Syria. So me and my sister, we'd go to do shopping, we buy stuff, whatever we want. We visit our friends. My sisters, which they get my... we visit them and we just have fun together. We go to picnics. Yeah, as all the people, normal, like yeah.


(05:11) Shanaz Deen: What was your favorite thing to bring to a picnic?


(05:15) Amina Ahmad: Food. My favorite thing was to go out and have fun. That's what was favorite thing, and if I had a friend, we'd take a barbecue with so many things. Yeah, we did.


(05:35) Shanaz Deen: Is your family religious?


(05:38) Amina Ahmad: Not really. My mom, she was. But we keep cultural more religious. My mom, she was religious, but not me. I wasn't really religious. I was praying and fasting, also. At the beginning, I would cover my head. Then, I take off, I didn't put scarves. I wasn't wear short sleeve or pants. It was cultural - religious also - but cultural. They don't allow me to wear that. But then, I like struggled about that, so I took off and I got more free. 


(06:42) Shanaz Deen: Could you tell me a little bit more about that? Like, what provoked your decision to stop wearing a scarf, to not be so religious?


(06:51) Amina Ahmad: As I said, it wasn't religious because our family is not a religious really family. It's cultural - in the village, it's a shame if they see the girl, her hair is short, or if the girl wears the pants or short sleeve, it was shame, you know? I mean, how she's grown and how she can wear short sleeve or not put scarf. That was the problem, not religious. Religious says should we cover our head or something, but in my family it was cultural. You know?


(07:32) Shanaz Deen: Okay, so did that change happen when you moved from the village area to Aleppo?


(07:37) Amina Ahmad: Um, not really. When my brother, he was in the Cyprus, so I visit him, I saw his wife. She doesn't cover her head. So I said, why she doesn't cover and why do they want me to cover? I really don't like to cover my head. So that time, I decided to take off. It was 1994. Since that, I just take off. I was wearing short sleeve and pants.


(08:19)) Shanaz Deen: Okay. How did your family react after that trip, when you came back?


(08:23) Amina Ahmad: It was normal. It was a big challenge for my culture, because when I visit my brother, I was alone. I go to Cyprus. It was a really big deal for our social something, like how she can travel alone or how she can go? But my brother, he was there with his family. It was good thing, and I always liked to do something special. I want to break this routine. I don't want to follow the people, I want to be, have my own life, you know? I don't want "if they're religious, should I follow them? Or if they have a special culture, should I follow them?" I like to do whatever I believe or I think is right. I do that. And if something really not as usual over, I can change a little bit. But mostly I'm just, this routine, I don't want to follow it every day in general. That's what has happened.


(09:41) Shanaz Deen: So when did you decide or when did you know that you needed to settle to the United States? What was that like?


(09:48)) Amina Ahmad: We were in Malaysia, we travelled to Malaysia, 2012? We get there and we [INDECIPHERABLE], United Nations. So after two years and a half almost, I know I will come to America. We resettlement, 2016. The end of 2016, or beginning, I'm not sure about that.  


(10:30) Shanaz Deen: So what was the change like, moving from Aleppo to Malaysia, first?


(10:39) Amina Ahmad: We moved for the war situation happening in Syria. Change a lot of things, we missed a lot of things. New life, new situation, new challenges, new things with the family with the three kids, with the different country, with the different people, different... a lot of things, it was a very big challenge for us, until two years. After two years, we become a little bit, we're used this people, we see them, and we get a little bit okay. But we had a lot of anxiety about resettlement, because we’re Kurdish in Syria. We lived in Syria and we had a special situation, so we were very anxious about that and we were afraid they would return us to Syria. Malaysia, it was our future there. You know? We're illegal. So we're illegal, we don't have any rights. If my kids have to go to school, they cannot go to school, we cannot go to a hospital. You have to pay everything, you know? And mostly, when you go to government, I have to put my kids so they have a visa, which we don't have. So it was a very big challenge, very big, hard situation.


(12:16) Shanaz Deen: So those, like three, four years in Malaysia -


(12:20) Amina Ahmad: Five years, yeah.


(12:21) Shanaz Deen: Five years. How were the people around you? How did they treat you?


(12:28) Amina Ahmad: People, most of them, very kind people, very helping people, very nice people. But like all the countries, maybe you can find 90 percent people good, 10 percent is not good. That's happening everywhere, maybe. But mostly, they are very nice people. 


(12:53) Shanaz Deen: So the people were kind, but the services were just hard to... 


(12:58) Amina Ahmad: Yes. You have to pay and when you're a refugee, you cannot work illegal and a lot of problem we had.


(13:07) Shanaz Deen: So you said you had a lot of anxiety in Malaysia? Was that, were you worrying for family at home, the situation? Fearing that return?


(13:14) Amina Ahmad: Many things. First thing, it was for resettlement. We don't know what was happening. Will we get resettlement or will they reject us? It was very big anxiety in Malaysia we had. And a big part was resettlement. Second thing, also in my country, we lost everything. My home, my furniture, my family, separate everywhere. My brother going to Turkey. My sister going to Turkey. My two sisters in Syria. It was very bad, dangerous area. My other brother, he goes to Vienna. It was very hard for us. 


(14:09) Shanaz Deen: So was that split between your siblings very hard?


(14:12) Amina Ahmad: We, you know, in our country, we used to always meet each other. Like, Friday we would meet in my mom's home and we really were close with each other. We have very strong relationships, and it's our home. When you grow up 40 years in this country, it's not easy to forget or just ignore it. The situation happening in Syria, it's our people, you know? Happening in my area, most of people I know there. Each family, they lose something. It's kind of sad, you know? What's happening? Why is it happening, this situation? We don't know. Those terrorists over there, I'm thinking about Syrian people. We weren't like that. We are not really a religious people in Syria. Syria is not a religious country. Why they do that? What is the purpose of that? A lot of things, you know? It's part of our life. The forty years we lived there is not easy to ignore. It was hard for us.


(15:34) Shanaz Deen: Do you still keep in contact with people in Syria?


(15:36) Amina Ahmad: I still contact with my sister and most of people I knew them, they get out of Syria. Many people go to Germany, Europe, and America. All over the world, they go. But I'm still in touch with my sister.


(16:00) Shanaz Deen: So, going back to Malaysia, how was that cultural change from Syria to Malaysia?


(16:05) Amina Ahmad: Malaysia is a Muslim country. For me, I don't care about religious. Just I'm looking at people about how they are kind or bad. You know? That, I just decide if they are okay or not. But I don't care about religious. 


(16:36) Shanaz Deen: So, you said you moved to the United States towards the end of 2016. 


(16:40) Amina Ahmad: I moved to the United States 2017. 


(16:44) Shanaz Deen: Oh, 2017.


(16:45) Amina Ahmad: Yes, I moved here, but I don't know when we got resettlement. I think it was the end of '16 or the beginning of '17, yeah.


(16:57) Shanaz Deen: Got it. So, how was that move from Malaysia, to where were you immediately resettled?


(17:04) Amina Ahmad: Where were you settled?


(17:08) Shanaz Deen: Like, do you remember what town or city you were resettled to?


(17:14) Amina Ahmad: No, just before we moved, we have a cultural orientation, so they tell us until that, we didn't know anything. It was the last step before we come, fifteen days, twenty days, something like that? So we know we will come, we didn't know anything about that. 


(17:40) Shanaz Deen: Could you tell me a little more about the cultural orientation, like what did they explain to you?


(17:45) Amina Ahmad: In Malaysia? It's an office of UNHDR, any resettlement people and families, they have a cultural orientation. They're talking about this country, American country. They're speaking about rules here, about laws, about many things and we have to follow whatever they are. So yeah, that's in general, a general idea they give us, should we follow. Then also they say, for to get something cheap, is a new life, and how to start, and that's what they're trying to explain to us.


(18:29) Shanaz Deen: Did you find it helpful at the time?


(18:32) Amina Ahmad: Yes, it was helpful.


(18:36) Shanaz Deen: So when you finally came to the United States, what was your first thought, when you were moving in with your family?


(18:42) Amina Ahmad: When we were - ?


(18:44) Shanaz Deen: When you first arrived in the United States, what were some of your thoughts?


(18:48) Amina Ahmad: It was also kind of an anxiety, when we came. So I will start from new, from zero. It's a new life, new people, new country, you know? So, it was easier from Malaysia. If I want to compare, it was easier for me, this country, because I found many people around us, the HIAS organization, they really helped. In the beginning, when I came, I was always worried about that, but when we saw those people around us, the sponsors, it was very nice. They made a place for me, they find jobs, they find apartments, they bring all the furniture and stuff we need, they brought everything. For kids to school, for health insurance, for many things, all the things, they help us, for English class, how to start to work, so many things. 


(20:10) Shanaz Deen: So HIAS helped you get started?


(20:13) Amina Ahmad: Yes, HIAS, they helped us.


(20:16) Shanaz Deen: So you've been here for almost two years now, do you still keep in contact with HIAS? 


(20:22) Amina Ahmad: Yes, I'm still talking if I need something, if I have questions, if I have questions, I am still talking to them. I'm still talking with my supervisor and all the group have become our friends of our family and then still we contact each other, we visit each other, we invite each other. They're really nice people. It's become like a, our family. Especially Susan Davis, she's super nice lady, yeah. 


(20:59) Shanaz Deen: Were you surprised that those connections were like immediately there for you and people were so supportive?
(21:05) Amina Ahmad: Um, I'm not surprised but it was good for me. Good feeling, gave me more, I don't know, more love. It's not like in Malaysia, it's more nice, more good for us. Nice people.


(21:35) Shanaz Deen: So what was the biggest cultural change that you've experienced here?


(21:42) Amina Ahmad: Nothing changed. I have still some challenges, like cultural with my kids, so they start to ask many questions, like why are we like that and why cannot do that and why we have to follow this, like we're Muslim. We mostly eat Halal food. So especially meat, we don't eat the pork. They ask me many questions, which I don't have an answer sometimes, I don't want to answer, not I don’t have an answer. I don't want to answer to be something really religious, you know? So I sometimes, I'm circling around. So you know, it's also kind of a challenge, but it's easiest. It will be okay, fine.


(22:42) Shanaz Deen: Could you speak a little bit more about your kids? Like, how has this changed for them, how old are they?


(22:49) Amina Ahmad: I have three kids. I have a boy and two daughters. My son, he's eleven years old. My daughters, she's ten and little one, she's eight years old. My son, he had education problem, not problem, he was behind a little bit. Because Malaysia, it wasn't really school, you know? It wasn't really regular school. His school did support him. They're really nice teachers, so it was good for him. My daughters, they don't have any problems with the language. They speak perfectly, like American accents. But, I have a problem because they start to speak English, but they're forgetting our language, you know? So I'm trying to keep those things as like a cultural language, like many things I try to keep, but it's really hard because they're speaking mostly English. Even each other, they speak in English at home. I try to say, why don't you speak Kurdish? So, it's hard a little bit. But we have to. 


(24:14) Shanaz Deen: Do they ever have troubles making friends, speaking to other kids?


(24:18) Amina Ahmad: No, my kids are very friendly, very lovely, and make friends easy and everywhere, even in the park, in the supermarket, in the shopping... everywhere they can make a friend, it's very, they're very lovely. They like the friends. 


(24:41) Shanaz Dean: Okay, so, a couple of more little like abstract questions. Where would you say home is now?


(24:51) Amina Ahmad: Home?


(24:52) Shanaz Dean: Yeah, if you had to pick a place in the world, where you describe as home?


(24:56) Amina Ahmad: I didn't get it, can you?


(24:57) Shanaz Deen: If you had to pick a place in the world that you feel at home?


(25:03) Amina Ahmad: America. Yeah, when I have peace, I will pick that. When people are kind, it will be my home. You know? Even though I have my own home, I want to survive in the peaceful place. We need peace. Only that, we need it. Now I am in America, I'm happy in this country. It is a nice place, it is a nice people. I didn't have any problem with any people around me, my neighbor, my neighborhood, my shopping. Anywhere, I didn't have a problem. I have a problem with my language. (laughs)


(25:50) Shanaz Deen: So if Syria, if the situation ever got better and it was peaceful in the future, would you ever go back?


(25:59) Amina Ahmad: I would go visit. I cannot go survive there, because my kids are here, their future is here. It will be my home, you know, my second home. It is hard to go to Syria and just start a new life. It's hard. I can't. Maybe I will visit only. 


(26:28) Shanaz Deen: Have you, do you know any other Syrian families in the area in the United States?


(26:35) Amina Ahmad: No, no, Syrian families. Even Arab families, I never see here. Not around me. 


(26:45) Shanaz Deen: Do you find that lonely, or are you okay with it?


(26:47) Amina Ahmad: Sometimes I feel lonely, because in Malaysia, our condominium, most of them, it was Arab. I didn't feel like lonely. But here, really, sometimes we need to go out. I want to talk in my own language. So sometimes, I feel that. But it's okay. I am just, when I get busy, I'm forgetting. For a few minutes or something, I feel that, but I make myself busy with my other stuff. 


(27:22) Shanaz Deen: And what would you say was your greatest challenge, resettling to the United States? Do you wish anything was different? I know HIAS was great and there for you, but could any of it have been better? 


(27:37) Amina Ahmad: I don't think it, something that would be different, is always worrying. We worried, because it's a new life, new things are happening, new things are coming up. So when we came, after we came here, often when you start, it's not easy to start. To go to work, speak a different language, see different people, but mostly it's fine. It just takes a little bit of time, until to be okay everything, you know? 


(28:14) Shanaz Deen: Could you imagine that some kind of therapy service would have been helpful in the first couple months, just to help you express some of these worries and anxieties?


(28:24) Amina Ahmad: Anything support your life, it will be helpful. Work is helpful, finding jobs is helpful, if you see people around you, they support you and direct you. This is really big helpful. To start learning English is helpful, health insurance, a lot of these things and also, in the beginning, they support, they pay part of rent, also, that's really big helpful also. 


(29:09) Shanaz Deen: Is there anything about your experience that we didn't get to?


(29:16) Amina Ahmad: Experience in this count-?


(29:18) Shanaz Deen: Anywhere.


(29:19) Amina Ahmad: Anywhere. My experience, I like, I want to say that life everywhere is life, but something is different, you know. When the language is different, when the people is a different culture. A lot of things are different, but we have to keep struggling to survive and to be in peace. But it will be fine in the end. When we start to work, we just keep everything behind, you know? Even we will remember or something like that, but it will be fine. It's over our hand, we cannot control all bad situations in the world. We have to survive, we have to think about future, we have to think about our kids, we have to think about many things coming up. It's a life. We cannot control everything. I want to ignore all of the problems, don't be in anxiety or worry. I know it's hard, the challenge to ignore it, but we have to. Sometime we have to.


(30:39) Shanaz Deen: So that's about the end of it, but I want to thank you again for sharing so much.


(30:45) Amina Ahmad: Thank you so much for you and for your project!