Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Pri Paw
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/pri-paw
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1rsWF1ecVmTS0cxLV0Mdq5eYAUiC9QVqn/view
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Pri Paw
, Korean Refugee
Interviewed by Irene
Irene
00:01
Hi, um, do you wanna start with your name and how old you are and where you're from?
P r i
00:05
Okay, my name is Pri Paw. I'm like 24 years old and I'm actually from I was born in Burma,
but I grew up in Thailand. So yeah.
Irene
00:15
Oh, okay. Um, so tell me a little bit about Burma like, and what you remember about it.
P r i
00:20
Uhh Burma? I don't think I remember anything about that because I was born there. But I
do like growing there so I have no idea I was only a baby when my parents when they ﬂeed
from the war and the Burmese soldiers from the village. So yes, I don't remember anything
about Burma at all. So yeah.
Irene
00:40
Do you remember anything about Thailand?
P r i
00:43
Thailand? Yes. Because I grew up there. So I have been living in Thailand for about like 15
years. That's before I moved to United States I was like 15 years old so I moved here.
Irene
00:56
Oh cool.
P r i
00:56
1

It's like, it's a refugee camps you know so when I was there it's not that it's not there's
there's not so many houses yet but now after like when I heard they were people go back
right to Thailand. And when they come back here they say stuff start to get crowded now in
the [Indecipherable] refugee camp at the combat from Mila the climber like me like camp
so it's not there's there's a different camps in Thailand. There is no Nepol, there is Opia this
time Hey, and then there's Mila Mila that's where I'm from Mila Mila well I can't say yes the
different camps so yeah.
Irene
1:31
What was life like in the camps?
P r i
1:36
In the camp I'll say later so I still have my memories a little bit memories but it's not there
alot. So it was so in there like you can say there's no no no like my health let you know that's
kind of stuff the medical stuff and then the food. The Thai people like the UN sometimes
they, I mean it's still now, they still bring food to the camp like rice, like [Indecipherable] the
color ﬁsh paste that and an oil and coal and low bamboo this sort of stuff that they bring
into the camps that to give to let the refugees come in there so some and some people
that they do work outside the camps. They go work at [Indecipherable] off and like the farm
like outside a camp so that and when I was little I was like you can go to school you know,
they have school but some some schools you have to pay to go in you know to go to and
some are like I mean it's not you can say it's not free but you have to pay a little bit but it's
not that you know. But in here like there's a private school right but they don't have a
private or like public it's just different school. That you can- It's up to you you can go like to
like that one that you like or you could just go like anywhere that you want some school
that did teach like English, Thai and Burmese and at the school that I went to, uhh they
didn't teach Burmese, they only teach Thai and English. And yup that's what I always I can
understand Thai a little bit but not alot. The refugee camp it's you can say it's not that bad
but it's not that good like in America you know, in here, you have like water and stuff like
that the bathroom is like it's still there in Thailand. In Thailand, the bathroom, the bathroom
the color toilet, like in here they call it bathroom so when I ﬁrst got here I was like how do
you know I said a toilet but my teacher he told me that we say we don't call it the toilet in
here we call it the bathroom. I didn't know there's there's that language barrier that's there
so the that's the the bathroom and stuff so it's not like this. The houses are not like this the
house the houses they're like made of bamboo and the roof is made of leaves and stuff.
Something like wood, they build with wood or bamboo. Yeah that's how and we don't really
have electricity or let the rich people you know they can just care like they like they
electricty because they rich so they had like money. Some like, they like, they have money,
that's something like. Like you can say poor poor so you, we would just use a candle like you
know to to see, to light up the house. And you're inside but some people they don't really
have like TVs and stuff like that. So they just have like good like movie theater. But it's not
that big like in here, in here you have like the screen like this but entirely the movie theater
2
is just like you know the TV. Like the TV that we have. Like, you like, you know like the old,
the old TV like the one big.
Irene
05:00
Is it like a box one?
P r i
05:00
Yeah, the big box one. Yeah, and so they have and they use like the CD player and desktop.
Yeah. That's I remember those but I don't know about now though. I think that's changed
now, like people start to have I, when I, when I was in Thailand, I didn't really buy Wi Fi and
Facebook, stuff like that and computers that those are expensive to buy. So like, I don't even
know how to use those. And we don't have there. Somewhere they do have other and the
camera, just I think one or two houses that they have, you know, that have computers, if,
even if it was a used computer to like, go and pay them to use computers and stuff like that.
And also the phone and for the phone thing, like, you know, to call from it in here like
international to call you need like, there's some kind of, you know, or what do they call it?
The SIM card. Yes, in Korea. In, in, in Thailand when I was a little over there. I still remember
we do have like the SIM card. So you have like go to the house and have a SIM card and you
have like pay them to like know when to call...if you have friends or family members in
United States. You know, when they call the number when you go and they have a paid
them to so yeah, so they had to pay them. So my in here, so when I was little I don't even
know like we didn't know anything about Facebook and stuff [Indceipherable] because we
didn't have Internet or like computers. Our phone you know the old phone like Nokia, the
nokia phone, and so we use the Nokia phone. and we use it all for a lot of Nokia for the
Nokia the Nokia phone Yes, that's the real but those will use those Nokia phone. So we
didn't have like social media we didn't need like formula or anything about social media. I
didn't know anything about social media outside 910 That you don't even know TV, we have
TV, cable, watch TV, we just like go outside and play. That's all we do. That's all we did. And
they want us later. So have no now started to change. You know, now like we will still have
phones, cell phones, like you know the with the camera and ﬁnd the bag and stuff to
highlight Wi Fi and internet and stuff like that. So they can just, you know, use this as a
medium to call FaceTime each other. So yeah, that's that is changes.
Irene
07:16
So so when you were in Thailand in the refugee camps, like were you with your family? Like
how did you stay connected with other people?
P r i
07:25
The other people? Sorry. So like, like I say, like, most of my family members are like in Burma
in the Burma village, villages in there. So to get a child touch sometimes they came to
Thailand for through the light bus, like do we have like the bus but it's like the bus that is in
here. They call it like lega they call it lega. That's how we call it, but it's like that it's like bus.
3
Like, it's not like the big one that has like the top and bottom it's not that just the one. It's
just like a truck you know? So they just they sit on them. That's how they become and also
[Indecipherable] see how how get connected. They say like the the phone thing that
internationally like Burma Burma to when you call like not only that the people they have a
cell phone, they have a SIM card, you can just say you know when they call you know you
give you give that that that's the person that's a cell phone, the phone number and when
they call and they call the person that the person I have like go to your house to ask for you.
And they were like, oh your relatives are callig you and they lead you here they go to their
house and so after like after you stop and after you're done down you have like pay them
and that is depends on the minute they use and so that a pay them. Yeah, that's how they
decide. And now like like last in Burma's they have a Wi Fi and internet stuff like that. So
you could just say use communications right now like in here like we just this is how we use
baseball and stuff like that. When I was in Thailand and maybe maybe else later. Like, I
didn't know anything I do. We do have a we don't even have internet and stuff like that. So
yeah, just..
Irene
07:58
What was difﬁcult about growing up in the refugee camp?
P r i
09:19
For me, I don't know about me like, there's not that difﬁcult because my parents didn't
provide me like school and stuff like that. So I don't think I mean from from my perspective,
there it's good but it's not, it's not that good. You know? Like compared to in here in
America. Like when you move to here you start they have like schools, and learn English
and stuff like that. And they have food. Ohh that's another one. The food but in there like
you know, you have money so you do have like, you do have money to buy food and stuff
like that. So you don't even like not good food. But in here you could just say you have
money you just go buy. And when it ﬁrst came, we just broke up with them, you know,
that's that, you know, that provide us with the food and stuff like that in Thailand. Now
that's the thing, you have to to have money to buy stuff. So only when you have money, you
just buy food, even though they're just say that's how you food.
Irene
10:24
So like, what was the process for you guys to like move to the United States?
P r i
10:29
Uhh the process? Just like applied, like they call it UN, like sometimes the UN like they
come to the camps, you know, to ask whether you want to come to United States, Canada
or like Europe. You know, that's they ask, you know. And if you want to you just like apply,
and if like, if you apply, right you apply then they if they like the with the came to the when
they come to the camp, they put out the the list of people by the name, the name. If you
see your name, they have like go to the go from the for the interview, and that interview,
4
you have like go for a checkup, is that a [Indecipherable] (name of organization), a
[Indeccipherable], or like I think the one I went to is the [Indecipherable]. Like, they give you
a shot and like all day to check up you know. The checks up, they check out like before, like
they check if you have any like diagnosis, you know, like all those kind of yeah. So that's how
after that after, after, if you like the own apply to check, you know, if you clean, if you don't
have a you know, any like, any kind of disease, you know, this kind of stuff after that, they
could just put it like. And after that they also after they put your name on the list and you
see your name, they have to go to like, interview that but other one its different, it's totally
different. That's when after that. So you get that interview, they teach you like how the life
was in here like in America. They teach you, they teach you about like, Fire truck, how to call
it, how to call 911. You know, like emergency police. They teach you those and they also
teach you that the toilet, the bathroom? Not the one of use but the bathroom and like this
the toilet, like, you know, they had the fresh water in there. It was kind of soft tissue, though.
So yeah, after that. So after that, and then after that interview that it's not like it's a interview
is it just like a training, at the desk kind of training. After that, you they actually saw you and
after that, it also puts a name and the date that you know, that's the day you have to like
leave, you know, to the leave and go to the United States or Canada. They put a date. That's
the day they have to go and have to prepare for yourself. And when for the training, they
teach, they teach you like when it comes to plane, what to bring and what not to bring in
and on the bag. You can bring like two bags and what bags depends on you, you know. So
that's how Yeah, that's they teach you this stuff and yeah. So yeah, they teach you that.
Irene
11:48
How did it feel when you guys like found out you're moving to the United States?
P r i
12:38
It's kind of exciting. You know, like, it's it's exciting because, I, you know, you want to
experience new stuff and you want to see like, how Americans, Americans in America looks
like you know? Experience new stuff and this so you kind of excited, like you tell you like you
know your friends. Oh, [Indecipherable], I go to America and they say goodbyes and stuff
like that. And some people like they have like a prayer before they leave. So like you invite
like your relatives, like the pastor to come to your house and pray for my mom, my parents
that are Buddhist. So they act like the monks to come to the house. So and after that you
could just come come to the United States.
Irene
13:50
That's so cool.
P r i
13:52
Yeah.
Irene
13:52
5
So what did you think of the states when you ﬁrst came?
P r i
13:56
When I, so like, before you came to you before you came here? Yes, I ﬂew right on and on an
airplane. So that was, the one I ﬂew back home to like I did [Indecipherable] Japan. That's
the [Indecipherable] like, big. I mean, that's what you guys depend on. You know, we never
been to Japan so like it's kind of excited to, you know. When it ﬁrst, like start, the ﬁrst time in
Japan so we see Japan it's like it's it's kind of a big city and stuff like after Japan for like New
York City. Oh my god your cities. Was [Indecipherable] there? It was so bad. That New York
City that's that's my ﬁrst time in a decade before I didn't know that the name you know, the
name of the airport. Just it is an airport in New York City. That's like now, oh, that is JFK.
They call it JF Kennedy airport thing? Yeah. So it's when they after they will ﬂy to New York
City to Syracuse, Syracuse. That's where like the people that work here that the caseworker,
they like go and go to the airport to pick you up after they're there. Bring you to the house.
So when I ﬁrst got here, I mean to Eureka, my parents, we don't really even know like,
anything about the house and stuff like that. It's like, we came without the dark. So people
are like sleeping in a quiet. And I feel like my parents were like, maybe we might be like, the
only house that you know, they have the light on and realize, like quite. I'm not quite like,
you know, like, noisy that's what I call when we got here. And when we were on the plane,
was like, we didn't know what to say, like what to eat, you know, like the name of the food
and stuff like that. So we just said, you know, really anything. So when we ﬁrst got in here.
So they only provide the rice and noodle. You know, like Mama, the noodle. They are in a
packet. You have to, they have those. We just, we ﬁrst got here, we just cook those because
it's already in there. That's... it's just like Thailand, those three foods. So we just cook those
and have to eat it. It's kind of quiet though when I ﬁrst got here. I mean, when I ﬁrst came it
was like October so it's kind of cold. Yup, and then the next day it was really and then we
didn't see anybody. And then, we were like wondering where are, were are those, were are
those people? Like, where are they? Maybe it's too quiet. It is nobody like came out of the
house. It just, I think they just stay inside and when I look out the window, I didn't see
anybody. I was like when you say oh, so yeah, that's...
Irene
16:33
The ﬁrst impression?
P r i
16:34
The ﬁrst impression. Yeah. Yep.
Irene
16:38
So was it like hard to adjust to like the new life in the States?
P r i
16:42
6
For me, when I ﬁrst came here, it wasn't that hard. Why? Because that's when my neighbor,
they are Korean too. So like, so you just like get to know them. And then they also like told
you were to go and they help you in store, because they've been here for about like, seven,
eight years. So they'll be more than 10 here and more than that, so they know where to go
and stuff like that. So it's not that hard. Yeah, so and they also have an interpreter we you go
to the hospital, like the clinic, so it wasn't that hard. Except school. When I ﬁrst got, when I
ﬁrst went to school. I didn't know anybody though, but there's still some correct kids at
school. So it wasn't that bad. That, its just like, make new friends and stuff like that here.
Irene
17:27
What was it like, like going to American public school for the ﬁrst time?
P r i
17:33
I mean, it's not that bad. Because there's like, like there's Korean people in there like and
then they put, they put them. Like we didn't speak English so they put us in same group
like Korean, Spanish, and like African you know? They put like they put them together. So
there's certain [Indecipherable]. For, for the English speaking, speaking English it was
[Indecipherable] Yeah, like some people like like some Korean people, they know like, they
know how to speak English so they just teach you that you were to go and sometimes I
couldn't ﬁnd my classes you know? Like it's kind of amused like, you know for the high
school is kind of big too. So they just show me where to go you, just show you a schedule
and to just show you where to go. They also have a teacher, like the TA, that show you like
you know the ofﬁce, your class and there's this class and they just go with you and help you
and stuff like that. Yeah, no, it wasn't that bad.
Irene
18:31
Did you enjoy like going to school and being able to learn?
P r i
18:35
Oh, yeah, that's all I did in high school. Like, I just just go to school and then come back and
that's all I did. I didn't do any activity and stuff like that. So I did, I did, I did like it. I did like a
bit of the school, I just have like, instead of learning the English and stuff like that. Now
there's [Indecipherable], there's like science and history and stuff like that. So that's, it's
good.
Irene
18:59
Yeah. You mentioned earlier that like your family's Buddhist.
P r i
19:04
Yeah.
Irene
19:04
7
And so when you ﬁrst came to the United States, did, were you able to connect with like
your religious community?
P r i
19:12
Oh when I, when when we ﬁrst got here. This maybe there must be like Korean Buddhist
and in Eureka but we didn't know anything about them. So I don't know how my dad got, I
don't know how he got connected with like other like Korean people, Buddhist. But me,
when we ﬁrst got here we went to that temple, Cambodian temple on Cambodia
[Indecipherable] I think is or at least Cambodian. Like on student street, that's where we
ﬁrst went there, and then we met like those like, other, other like Korean people. I don't see
like some, like they don't, do like we didn't really have a temple yet. Yeah, so just went to
that the Cambodian temple and we met there and after they I think like they just, I don't
know how that's it. Is there too much? My dad, that's how he met like, new Buddhist that
the new people. Now they decide to have like their temple and a community, yeah, the
boys community. Yeah.
Irene
20:08
Yeah. Was was like, did religion shape the way you adjusted to your new life in the States?
P r i
20:18
No, I don't think so. When I ﬁrst got here, right, because we didn't really have a temple yet.
Yeah. So I think me, just only me though, I went to like the, the bad teachers. After that, I
was like SDA and SDH. And after then, after like, we started to have a temple. That's when I
start like go to temple and get involved in community. And as for the Buddhist, I don't think
they care. They're my friends. So it is. Yeah, it isn't.
Irene
20:50
Oh, can you tell me a little bit about like, um, like, I guess like graduating from high school
and what you did after that?
P r i
20:57
Umm, graduate, after like I graduate from high school I just went to college. Yeah, that's
that's my goal. And it's good, like you know, I got ﬁnancial aid and like to pay for my tuitions
and all my books and stuff so I'm so, I'm so grateful for that, you know. They just like pay for
my school and then I have to have an opportunity to go to college. So they helped me a lot.
It helped me a lot because I'm, only my dad works and but he got paid only like minimum
wage. So it's not that a lot. So I'm glad that you know, they have the ﬁnanical aid system to
help to help us. So, yeah. How did you enjoy college? College is It's big. It's exciting. When I
ﬁrst you know, when I ﬁrst go there. But I have friends from high school, like went to the
same, the same col- It's a community college in here in Eureka. [Indecipherable] and VCC.
So there's a lot of Korean people in there. So, too, so it's not that hard, it's exciting to go to
college. You met like new new people. Is the gate test or there's like international student
8
like they're from Japan, China, China, China. So you made those your friend there. So yeah,
so it's kinda excited that you met like. Well, when we're in Thailand, we didn't, we never met
like, Japanese or Chinese. Right. So when we ﬁrst got here and go to college and then start
to get like, met like Japan and in high school too, I didn't know like African American. Yeah,
those we don't even know about Russia and Spanish and stuff like that. Those people are
like, when only when I ﬁrst got in here and go to school. They said, Oh, there's like African
American and Spanish and the Russia and the Bosnia and it was the the people in high
school. I mean in college, I just met like Japanese, Chinese. And then people fro like
international. So yeah, that's a good, that's good.
Irene
22:48
The U.S. is deﬁnitely, like, so diverse.
P r i
22:51
Right? Right. So diverse, yeah. You know, not just like American, there's like different
ethnicity. So that's good here.
Irene
23:01
So what do you do now? And what are some of your goals for the future?
P r i
23:06
Right now I'm just taking a year off from school. I'm just doing a job like, to be like, to get to
get money to pay for my tuition because I already got my BS. So I think for like ﬁnancial aid
after your done with your bachelor degrees, they not gonna like provide you with ﬁnanical
aid anymore. So after like, you got to go to Master's, you have to like work and like pay for
your tuition or you can just like take a loan and stuff like that. So yeah, that's, that's my goal,
like to get you off and later have a work and money to get I mean, just save money for my,
to go on my master degree. So I kind of, I kind of want like go to like the medicals, not a
medical school, but you know, like in health, health ﬁeld. So I want to learn more like health
stuff.
Irene
23:50
So what made you interested in like health?
P r i
23:54
Tell it, all you know, when I was working with the people, I used to work in the, it's not
nursing home, it's called a nursing home like that. There's a lot of people that you know,
they need help and it's kind of like the help, helping others. Like my mom, my mom health
conditions, health condition is not that good. And I hate to see her like that. You know, like, I
hate to see her in pain. And also, I used to wear a PCE. So my clients, she's like, Oh, too, but
she's nice. I took it over like everything. So it's kind of it made me sad that you know, she
passed away. Now, when I saw it, like she has a niece that she said or and so when I when I
9
saw her like, you know, do something due to her lack of interest in in what she or she did
you know, so that's why I'm kind of interested in the health stuff. Like helping people,
people and those it's yeah, this it's good. You feel good. Not only that, not only that, but in
my community, you know, some people they can't speak English right. So like, so to help
them, like sometimes they have conditions that they didn't know anything about it, they
didn't know how to like that, how to prevent it. So that's another, another reason I would
like to be in health. To help them to in community here.
Irene
25:10
Oh so you're saying that like you help a lot of like the current people access healthcare?
P r i
25:15
Yeah, that's so true. Yeah, that's what a lot of people need. Yeah, the healthcare and also
because like the social and ofﬁce you know that. Because because sometimes they do have
like interpreter but they have like, ask for, not ask for like, you know, but sometimes to go
there like have if you have some questions because you and yourself you can't speak
English so you need someone that can speak English with. So to go with you to the hospital
or like to the Social Ofﬁce that ask questions, so then you like [Indecipherable]. Yeah. Yeah.
Irene
25:51
I guess like kind of to wrap things up like well, what would you want people to know about
your refugee experience in and your just, your life story.
P r i
26:02
Um, to my life story and as a refugees. I don't even know how to say that.
Irene
26:22
Well, like what is like maybe like one thing you want people to know about refugees.
P r i
26:30
Oh, refugees. So like our our race is like Korean so sometimes they mix it for like Korean and
if it's a Korean minority group in Burma so sometimes when they when they ask you like
where you from, we say Thailand and they go "ohh you [Indeciperbale] be Thai" and stuff
like that. No, we are, we are not Thai, we are just like Korean people that you know, that we
do have our countries so we just say move because of the Burmese soldier but there so we
just move from Burma to Thailand. So even though we have a Thailand but we're not like
Thai so just like Korean like there's a minority groups. Stuff like the people like they mistake
me with the Thai or like Korean so that we know there's more not, not a lot of people know
about us like Korean refugees. Only when they came here that only the people that you
know get to know us that that's when it started. No all you guys are Korean for is a minority
group in Burma because of the war in Burma. You have like you because you have like they
had to ﬂee from the soldier to come from to look to locate on the in the Thailand refugee
1 0
camp. So yeah, that's how I was, that's how we became a refugees. Because we like, we ﬂee
from the war in Burma, so.
Irene
27:45
I guess like, what would you hope for, like Korean people?
P r i
27:50
In the future, I hope that, you know, I hope that many people will start to notice us and then
know more about us, you know, more know more about Korean people. Where are they
from? And then, you know, all those experiences that they have to go through, not just
Korean to be honest, that there's like other race, you know, other people they have, like go
through the same as us to like to ﬂee, to become refugees. So yeah.
Irene
28:19
Any last thoughts?
P r i
28:20
Uhh, no that will be all. Oh, thank you.
Irene
28:23
Thank you so much.
P r i
28:24
Yeah.
1 1