Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Jihan Daman
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/jihan-daman
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1kyJ6xOYJmcL1uSsfLIlA2me3n7nYTXR7/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Jihan Daman,
Iraqi Refugee
Interviewed by Uma Menon in Winter Park, FL, 10/26/2020
Transcribed by Uma Menon, 10/28/2020
00:03
Uma:
 This is Uma Menon interviewing Jihan Daman
on October 26, 2020. The
interview is taking place virtually with Ms. Daman in Michigan. Tell me about where
you're from.
00:17
Jihan:
 I am originally from Iraq. I am Chaldean
Catholic. We left Iraq when I was
13 years of age, along with my family - my three younger siblings - brothers. Around
1981, we had witnessed - 1980, we had witnessed one year and a half of the war
between Iran and Iraq. My father was very concerned about drafting my brothers
because, at that time, they didn't know when the war will end. So he started to get
rumors. He used to work for the Department of Human Services, so things will get
really - rumors will travel really fast at that time. He was pretty concerned for about a
year. Around June - around June time - we arrived in Greece, where my uncle used to
be there. We applied for the - I believe it was the UNHCR - however, at that time it
was the Red Cross. So, I remember my dad always speaking about the Red Cross, the
Red Cross, so that's where we registered in 1981. At that time, we were about 250 or
300 families that attempting to settle in the US as refugees due to persecution. My
father, at that time, was, due to religion and due to - they wanted him to join
Saddam's party, he was not interested. So, things were getting very unsettled. They
were unsettled, there was fear. So, that's when he decided to leave. We arrived to
Greece in 1981. We stayed there for four-and-a-half years. During that time, I was the
oldest - I had to work, along with my two youngest brothers. The youngest one was
about two years old. He was just an infant at that time. However, we had to work to
support the family. We lost our school times, until 1985. Whatever the Trump
administration is doing right now for refugees and blocking, putting so many
restrictions and policies in the immigration arena - it was the same thing when
Ronald Reagan was. That's why we got stuck there for four-and-a-half years. When
we arrived here in 1985, which was in Michigan, and we've been here ever since.
03:26
Uma:
 Awesome, thank you. So you talked about
the four-and-a-half years
where you were stuck, between the time before you could come to the United
States. What were you thinking during that time? Were you expecting to come
much sooner? How was that time period for you all?
1

03:41
Jihan:
 Well, I was too young. I didn't know. I was a kid - I was 13 years old. Now
that I look back, we had lost a lot of time. We had lost schooling, we had lost high
school, we had lost time to make friends, which is where people in this age - that's
where they develop their social skills, their friendships with others. We never had that
opportunity. Our job was us just working and just doing things at home. So, basically,
I used to feel a sense of loss, not being like everybody, since we had to work at an
early age. I had to be an adult at age 13. And for most refugees, this is what it is. They
are forced to be adults - children are forced to be adults - due to their circumstances.
My parents were not able to work; however, they were helping in different areas. Me
and my two brothers - we were working to support the family throughout that
four-and-a-half years. When I arrived here, my only intention was just to compensate
for that time that I lost - we lost. So, going picking up school, we were running out of
time, like we were running against time. I had to be - I was 17-and-a-half, and I was in
the ninth grade. So, it was a struggle. We couldn't speak English. We didn't have the
technology that people have now. We didn't have phones. We didn’t have – all we
had is basically a dictionary - just a normal dictionary. My mom, at the time, was
better in English. So, we used to have a hard time reading. And learning – like we
were learning a language, at the same time, we were required to perform like
everybody else in the school. We had to do homework. If homework was not - a test,
we had to get a grade. They don't care. I remember an incident - she's one of my
favorite biology teacher, Ms. David. It was our ﬁrst or second week that we had to give
- we started in September, so we were like - she wanted to know how well people
know about the human body. So, I was sitting right next to my brother and I'm like,
what is this? Like, I haven't seen human body. And I'm like, is this for real? She wants
us to write it? And it was an ESL class. I still see her until now, I love her. And my
brother was like, hey, just write it in Arabic. So, knowing her, she can read Arabic. We
wrote not like everybody - we wrote it in Arabic and we just gave her our papers, like,
it was some kind of quiz. She wanted to know the level of everybody in that class.
Until now, about 35 years later, I see her, I know her family - and she still remembers -
she was like, remember when you gave me the letter? You know, the form? I still
have that written in Arabic. But that was the struggle of refugees. And it doesn't
matter then with services and now -- not having – not being able to speak the
language - that right there is a struggle.
07:51
Uma:
 
Absolutely. So, going back to when you
were 17, when you ﬁrst came to
the US - was that the ﬁrst time you were in the United States? And how was that
experience compared to what you expected? How did the resettlement services also
help you with that?
08:10
Jihan:
 Well, when we arrived here, I remember,
that was 1985 in Michigan. Even
though there was a lot of Chaldeans, there was not services. We didn't have any
services. Some of, like, what we have right now is tremendous - a lot of people who
have. 1985 Iraqis were not considered refugees, so until 2008, they started to become
refugees. So, services for them was not - there was a couple of agencies that, they
would provide social services, but we didn't know any. We had only one car. We
didn't have a case manager. I don't remember whether we had a case manager from
the IOM, I believe. The only thing I recall is us, when we arrived here, because we had
my uncle as a sponsor, so we didn't get that many services. What happened is,
2
because my uncle was our sponsor, they just took us to have our physical - when
every refugee arrives, they're supposed to have physicals - that's when it is. I was
overwhelmed. We were lost, let's put it that way. Now I remember - I go back
sometimes and I think when I see somebody that reminds me of me. We didn't have
anyone to teach us. We didn't have anybody to let us know that you can do this, you
cannot do this. We didn't have options. So, for me, to take me and my brother, who is
a year younger than me, and to put us in a high school, in the ninth grade - that was
not an option for us. We had to follow that. Looking back right now, we didn't have a
lot of options and opportunities like refugees have right now in Michigan. So, it was
something that we have to learn by trial and error. Like, we had to make a mistake,
we have to pay for it, and then we learn. So this is how we learned, like, sometimes I
tell my daughter - right now, she was born here - she has a different mindset. She'll
be like, let me make that mistake. I'll be like, no. If you follow this path, you're going
to make that mistake. I've done it, and I'm trying to make her avoid it. Then I learned,
she has to make her own mistakes as well, but my mistakes are different. I wish we
had somebody to guide us. I wish we had an opportunity for people to let us - to lay
down the options for us. To let us know that you have this, you have that, you have -
no. So, I could've been in a different spot, you know. Things happened. I was delayed
already, four-and-a-half years. When I got here, somebody had told me, you can take
English classes in a community college for your age, and then you can enter college.
I could've been in a different set. I could've been in a different - I don't know. Probably
my life could've been different. But because I already lost four-and-a-half years due
to policies - immigration policies of the government, at that time - I come here with
not that many options. I lost another three years in high school, so when I graduated,
I was twenty-one years old. And Detroit Public Schools - there's not that much
education. We had to go to ESL classes. So basically, when I went to college, when I
went to Wayne State, and I remember one of my professors - a biology professor - I
was telling him how difﬁcult it was for me to read. And he said to me, well, if you
graduated with a 3.7 average GPA, and you are admitted here, then you are qualiﬁed
to be here. He didn't care if I didn't speak English. He didn't care if I held the book
and I spend an entire day just reading a few pages because I have to literally translate
every paragraph to get the best out of it.
13:14
Uma:
 Deﬁnitely, that makes a lot of sense.
So when we talk about home and
community, what do you think of? What do those words mean to you?
13:24
Jihan:
 Michigan and US is my home. Comparing,
I cannot see myself living
anywhere else. Like I have freedom of speech. I learned, because I came young, I
picked up. I can walk with my cross on. I can go to church. I can pray. I can object, you
know. I can -- Like my daughter was going to a Catholic school. Her and I, when she
was in the ninth grade, we went to Pro-Life March of Life. To me, that's a privilege. To
see that, to advocate that. I don't see myself that I can live anywhere else because of
the politics. I have two centers in Iraq, in the northern of Iraq, and I worked with one
of the priests - a good friend of mine - we established mental health clinics in the
northern of Iraq after the invasion of ISIS. When I went there twice, the ﬁrst time I
was really all excited, because it's - oh my god, I'm going to see my homeland, I'm
going to see my village, which I've never seen after literally 35 years of me leaving
Iraq. It was the excitement of the moment. The second I was, no - because I started
3
to pick up on things. I couldn't drive, I couldn't go get stuff, I was not free. I did not -
there was a lot of restrictions. Here - there's not. Here, it's like, it's freedom. If you can
excel, in school. Probably, if I was in Iraq, or any other, I could have not ﬁnished school.
But here, I was given an opportunity - despite my age, despite of difﬁculties, despite
the struggles, we managed. We failed, we had to repeat classes, we had to
disconnect from school and go back. So the doors always open here, for people to
come in and start over. And I cannot see this anywhere else. I don't see it in Europe, I
don't see it anywhere else here. You can start over. I have a good friend of mine who I
just met about a year ago, and he's a neurophysiologist, and he just came from Iraq.
Sometimes, like, we were working in the yard the other day, and he said, I'm thinking
to go back. And I'm like, no. That's not an option. Which is - he's hurt. His best friend
betrayed him. And my friend and I helped him. And now he works from a
neurophysiologist to a nursing aid. Look at the difference. But he's putting, like,
literally, he's working twelve hours. He worked twenty days straight - twenty days,
twelve hour shifts, okay. He's living on the minimum right now. But I told him, you
have an option. Here, you can excel. You have to start studying. And I asked him - I
said to him, did you lose motivation? He was like, no. I'm like, okay! So, if he's an MD,
neurophysiologist, he knows everything about here, the brain, they don't lose
interest. I said to him, then let's get on it, you know. He was like, I'm 47. And I'm like,
that's ﬁne. I said to him, I was 21 when I graduated from high school. I said to him,
here, there's no time limit. This is the beautiful thing that everybody loves here. That
doesn't mean we don't have struggles. But the next morning, it's a new day, the sun
shines, and you start over again. Other places, there's fear. You don't know if you're
going to get up in the morning. You don't know if somebody's going to go and come
in inside and kill you, or people are watching you. I don't think of these things, you
know. When I went to Iraq, and I was walking with a priest, you know, so the priest
has his collar. And I said to him - I was walking, like, literally in the northern of Iraq,
and I said to him - do I need to hide my cross? And he was like, nope, you better not
hide the cross. So, to me, he was trying to tell me, do not be afraid. Because I was in a
Muslim country, I was afraid to keep my cross in. And there's like Turkey - Turkey, if
you go visit, you cannot have your cross out, because then you're going to be
discriminated against. Here, it's home. It gives me a sense of security, sense of hope.
It gives me - everyday, I'm not going to be afraid. I know my daughter will leave, she
can come back, like she travels with her friends. I know nothing's going to happen.
She's going to come back. You know, it's just that sense of comfort with everybody.
19:29
Uma:
 Absolutely, that's so meaningful. So you
talk about how fear - there's such
a lack of fear here. Can you talk a little bit about - I know you were very young when
you were in Iraq - were there any fears that you had in your mind even at that young
age, and how did they change when you came?
19:44
Jihan:
 Well, yeah, of course. Remember, I said
we lived one year - I remember
one incident, actually, when my dad decided to leave. The year prior to that, we had a
house. So, my dad had to sell the house. I was, like, about twelve years old at that
time. I remember our house had a huge lot that's separated, like - my house, like,
you'd go from west side and this side. So, the backside of the house was a huge lot
that leads you to a different alley and different route of the street. I remember at that
time, my dad did not sleep all night. My parents were rotating back and forth, and he
4
was - I remembered, it was - when was it? It was around this time, around fall time,
and my dad was like, somebody needs to be up all night. And all of a sudden, I heard
dogs barking, and my dad was downstairs. He noticed people - because there was
people who knew that we sold the house - they knew there was money in the house.
They were about to rob us. Because there is no banks, no wiring, all that good stuff
that we have here. My dad was really, like, strong and very - you can - he's not a timid
person. So he just went outside and - that was about 40 years ago, he had a riﬂe -
and he started hitting with the riﬂe. That was, like, some kind of signal to the thieves,
that we have a gun here. So, immediately, within a week or so, we had to move to a
different city, and then we lived in that different city for - we rented the house for
about a year. That year, where the Iran and Iraq War broke down. Which I remember
my dad - we still, my dad has passed away four years ago - but my brothers still mock
him by saying, oh, you need to walk close to the wall. You need to walk, because what
happened, there was always air attacks by the Iranians. So when we had to go to
school, the airplane - the pilot - if he sees things moving, he will attack. So we were
instructed by the government that everybody has to walk along with the walls, so
they won't tell if there is something moving or not. I've seen planes being hit
together, and then they attack each other and an explosion, as 11, 12 years old. I used
to hold my brother's hand, I used to like cry - literally cry - and he'd be like do not cry.
And I'd be like, well, they are going to attack us. And we would come back from
school - that image - my brother would, like, oh, we have to go and bring bread from
the store. We had to walk a long distance and bring bread for my mom. Or
sometimes she would send us to - it's called bazaar - it's like some kind of like, you
know, there's these long streets and these small people - just like a market, and
Eastern Market or something like that. People will - farmers will - come in, bring their
food, and we had to go and shop for my mom. And it just - fear of always - and that's
all by walking, we never, there was no transportation. I remember, one time, my dad -
we had to go to my dad, and we got lost. We didn't even know how to ride the bus to
come back home. We start jumping from one number and then I remember we
went downstairs and there was an escalator - a tunnel - we went to that tunnel and
we came back. I told my brother, weren't we just here? We just came from the other
side, literally from the other side. It just, you know, like, we had to ﬁght our way. I
don't know, here, I look at my daughter, and I compare myself to her a lot of times. At
16 years old, she was able to drive. She was able to work in a mall. She didn't get lost -
yeah, she'd get lost, but she has GPS. You know, just the convenience of things with
her - it's the same experience, however, not -- with us there was nothing, there was
no resources. It's a different generation, of course, but still. It makes a big deal when,
here, you're able to navigate the system. There, you cannot navigate. So, it's life.
26:15
Uma:
 Yeah. So your friends and family - extended
family, while you were in Iraq -
were you able to keep in contact with them? Were any other friends or family able to
also get access to resettlement, or were they having to stay there?
26:29
Jihan:
 No. As I said, I didn't have that many
friends, so I didn't have any. When I
left, I was 13, so I did not have any friends to begin with. But cousins, families, they all
- after 1990 - when the invasion of Kuwait and Iraq - again 1992, 1990. Everybody left,
and they all went to Jordan, or Syria, or Turkey, and they resettled here. So they're all -
most of them are in Michigan.
5
27:08
Uma:
 Were you able to stay in contact with them throughout your journey as
well as after?
27:13
Jihan:
 Yeah. Most of them, we had phone calls.
We had to make phone calls,
there was letters. My mom had to visit Iraq in 1988. She stayed there for about 3
months. People would go back and forth, but it's not the same anymore. It's not the
same as right now.
27:41
Uma:
 Okay, great. So let's talk a little a bit
about how your religious and faith
background has helped you through the journey. So, can you tell us a little bit about
your religious and spiritual background?
27:51
Jihan:
 Well, I am a Catholic - very devoted
Catholic. All my life, I really relied - if it
wasn't because of my faith, I would've not been what I am today. During my
struggles, at times, I had lost my way, or I probably stopped. I was angry at God at
times. I was resentful for all the struggles. I didn't understand his will. I didn't know
how to surrender, because when you surrender to God and leave things in God's
hands, that's when you're not anxious anymore. That's when you're not afraid
anymore. Because you have that trust. I did not know that trust. It was a journey that
I had to learn way back, and it took a lot of good people around me to teach me that.
We have our Bishop of Michigan, Bishop Francis Kalabat. He was a priest, and I met
him in 2005, which was extremely, extremely bad, bad years. Two years prior to that -
three years prior to that, I went through a divorce. I was completely lost, like my mind
was not with it. If you come in and tell me what happened between 2002 and 2004, I
won't remember anything. That was a time I had a little girl, I wanted to make sure
that I needed to be safe, I needed income, I had only a bachelor's degree in
psychology, which does not do much in the 1990s. My family helped me, they stood
up by me, with me and my daughter. But still, you know. As I was always, I learned to
depend on myself. I rely - even though we are close family, and if one of us fall, we all
contribute - I had to do this by myself. And 2005 was really bad, it was, like, I kept
losing my job. It was really - now I look at it and I lost my job like three times, I
worked. It was something that somebody said, you need to speak to a priest. So
that's when I went and I start speaking to Father Frank then - now he's our Bishop. I
was just talking to him the other day and I said, do you remember when you met
me? You had that long stick and you would take me. I would hyperventilate because
I was so anxious. I was scattered, I was anxious. I didn't know - there was no
explanation why things are happening to me, why I had to struggle. He was like,
yeah. And I said to him, see, I still come in every month and when I go through a
rough time, he's the ﬁrst person I reach out. I'll be like, I'm struggling. I'm not
understanding something. Even though I pray the rosary, before COVID, I would go
to mass every Sunday. I am a Eucharistic Minister, so I distribute the Eucharist. I do
Adoration. So, I'm pretty involved in the church. Still, the devil manages to play in my
head. And throughout that, I honestly I can say, if it wasn't because of my faith in God
- and he was very patient with me, you know, as he is with a lot of people - I would've
not been what I am. Yes, I've been upset, I've been all kind of stuff. I've been mad, I
did not talk to him. But still I come back, you know. It's part of me. I don't think I can
separate. And I think for a lot of refugees, religion is one of the things that holds
them together when they ﬁrst arrive here.
6
33:10
Uma:
 Yeah, absolutely. What was your religious practice like before moving to
the US, and how did it change during your early years here and over time?
33:21
Jihan:
 Well, I was the same. We were Catholic,
and I took my ﬁrst communion in
Iraq. And I would go to church - me and my brother, we would go to church. It was
like walking distance, and come back. We would go to Catechism. Then after that,
when my parents when to church to mass, we would go. When we came here, there
was a church - we lived in the metro Detroit area - and that's where most of the
Chaldeans resided at that time. So, I would walk to church. I would teach - one of my
teachers in school was a nun, so also, she would teach Catechism - so I always
showed interest, and she said, come on in. So, I always - any time the church needs
something, I feel like I go and I give my hand. If they need something, I help. I'm
always volunteering, doing Catechism, helping with ﬁrst Communion, children. I
attend Bible Study before COVID, all that stuff, you know. Things changed with
COVID. So, it gives me peace. It gives me assurance that God has not forsaken us. Yes,
sometimes we get out of control. We don't, as a human being - our emotions take
over. But this is that test that we go through. That's why I have to - I have to. I'm a
therapist, I'm a clinical therapist. I cannot see a therapy. I cannot go see a therapist,
because a therapist is going to give me all the information that I already know, like I
give my patients. So, I need something more concrete that gives me positive energy,
to help me push to the other side. And that's when - I have this monthly sessions
that I go and I talk and I try to get a reason why things, or why life is the way it is
sometimes. Like answers. Even though he doesn't have them. But somehow, when
you talk to religious people, they always try to bring you down. They have this thing
that they help you. You'll leave their ofﬁce - your problem's still there - but you are
perceiving it differently.
36:21
Uma:
 Deﬁnitely. So, how did the greater diversity
- religious diversity - and
greater religious freedom in the US - how did you experience that when you ﬁrst
came, and how did that affect your practice and how you connected your life?
36:37
Jihan:
 Okay. This is the same as the previous
question, wasn't it? The same?
36:44
Uma:
 Yeah, it was pretty similar. So, if you
want to move on to the next question
instead - okay, sounds good.
36:50
Uma:
 So, I read your article in Newsweek and
you talked about the
organization you created - St. Rita's Hands of Hope. So, how did your own experience
inﬂuence your creation of this organization?
37:02
Jihan:
 Well, this was something that I was -
I wanted to do when I was doing
my grad school. I said, I will help help others with my master's if I can when I ﬁnish. I
had an opportunity to establish my own business with this program that I have to
focus working with refugees. I have a lot of my own experience and I see the same
struggles, even though probably the circumstances or the reasons of why these
people are refugees is different than mine. But coming here and struggling is the
same thing, as refugees. A lot of them were traumatized. Many of my patients had
their children killed, their husbands killed, anybody that was traumatic, you know.
7
Really, they had persecution of Christianity in Iraq was really, really, really bad from
1990, before that, all the way to, until they came. So, killing Christians was increasing.
When they come here, it's really difﬁcult. I had one of my patients - she said her
husband was killed by Muslims, militia Muslims. And her neighbors in here - in the
apartment, like across from her - they were Muslims. So, she said, even though they
are different and I know they are not - and they have their own struggles - she said,
Jihan, I could not talk to them. I could not even say good morning to them. Because
her husband and her brother were killed by the militia. So, helping them see the
other side was part of me contributing to them, helping them. That's why I
established the two agencies. Of course, people are not the same. Some people are
bitter, even despite - I'm not saying all refugees are angels. You know, there are
people who are bitter, people who are angry and resentful to life. People are not
accepting what they have here. People, no matter what you do to them, they're still
angry. It's a personality. We work everyday not to please people. It's to heal people.
Our goals here and in Iraq is to heal one person at a time. If I can heal one person
from me helping, that's enough, you know. I'm not going to change the entire world,
I know. My daughter is studying social work right now - she's in social work - and I
told her, I said to her, one thing they are going to teach you - you, as a social worker,
you're not going to be saving the world. You come out from school, you're thinking
that you're going to save the world, but then, reality hits and it tells you that, oh, I can
do so much. When I went to Iraq, I remember I had to e-mail the Bishop. And I said
to him, there's so much work here. He said to me, don't look at how much work there
is. Look how - take one day at a time, and don't try to accomplish a lot. You're not in a
race. So, it's a learning. I have to learn also. Sometimes, I don't have to tell them that I
am a refugee. Sometimes, because, you know, they think that, oh, because we are
refugees, then you're going to cut them some slack. So, I had to learn how to work
with each one of them.
41:46
Uma:
 Deﬁnitely. So, a lot of resettlement organizations
today are faith-based
organizations. So, what do you think is the role, the importance of these
organizations and how they connect their mission? What impact can they have?
42:02
Jihan:
 I don't know. You know, I know there
is nine big faith-based
organizations, that they get federal funding. And I don't know what it is - it's because
it's a policy, I don't know what it is. I cannot answer the question, because, truly, yes,
they are all faith-based, but why they are all faith-based and why they get the big
money? I have no idea.
42:44
Uma:
 Yeah, no problem, no worries. So, in terms
of government policy, as
opposed to the organizations themselves, so how did the government policy - the US
government policy at the time of your arrival - impact your journey? And the
differences now - how do you perceive these differences and where should we go
next? Where does the US government need to go next?
43:03
Jihan:
 Well, I think it's the same. It's the
same. I don't think it's going to - it's
impacting people not coming, yes, but once they get here, they don't have. Yes, they
do have their own struggles, but there's a lot of services as well. Things from forty
years ago - where we didn't have anything - now, services. Like, there was no WIC.
8
There was my agency, like, there was no programs that help pregnant moms and
newborn babies. There was no Medicaid, transportation. In Michigan - I'm just talking
in Michigan - in Michigan, there's tons and tons of agencies and services. And people
who are working toward policies - our senators, our representative, are
well-connected to our - to the Chaldean community. A lot of them, when they come
in, they do get. However, them getting stuck there, that's where [INDECIPHERABLE].
And now, President Trump - if he wins - he's going to reduce the number of
immigrants from 18,000 to 15,000, so even less. So that's where a lot of people are
seeking other alternatives, like going to Australia, to Canada, to different parts of the
world, because they cannot go back to Iraq.
45:01
Uma:
 Do you think the accessibility of being
able to gain refugee status - is that
something that was difﬁcult for you? Is it still difﬁcult?
45:11
Jihan:
 Yeah. It was difﬁcult, and still difﬁcult.
Yes. Especially people - they know
coming here is like, they can survive and life is much better. Even though it takes a
lot of hard work, a lot of people who arrive here they get shocked - system shocked.
They'll be like, whoa. Is this what the US - and, like, yeah! You know, working 12 hours,
life is fast here. You do things here. So, yeah. It is. It was, and it has been very difﬁcult
to come in to the US. Other than during the Obama administration - the 8 years - no.
There was a lot, it was a 120,000 refugees per year. 
46:04
Uma:
 Okay, that totally makes sense. Also, how
has the - there's been a lot of
anti-immigrant and anti-refugee rhetoric recently. How has that affected your
experience and people you have worked with?
46:21
Jihan:
 Well, these people are - with or without
immigration - I always had
people who would say something that makes you feel you are not - you don't have
blue eyes and blonde hair, you know. Just because of your accent, just because of the
way you look - your black hair. So, this has not gone. Actually, right now, during
Trump, it has increased. So, people think refugees are the bad ones - which is, yes,
probably that's 5%. But there's 95% who are hard workers, who work very hard, who
go to school, who support their family, who are very well, productive, and they
contribute to society. I learned to disconnect from people like that. I cannot change
their mind. They're entitled to their opinion. They have their own agenda, their own
policies, but it doesn't mean that they are - just stay away. I stay away. I don't get
involved with creating friction and debate that is going to get me nowhere. Trying to
convince someone that refugees are good. I'm not going to get anywhere unless
that person sees who I am. What I have contributed. How I help. That's when they're
going to know, is by modeling. By them seeing. If they're going to just talk and just
saying. There was, actually, my next-door neighbor. For a long time, I think they
thought that we were - I don't know, but he was really, like, weird. He would do some
weird stuff in their yard. And my brothers would talk to him, and my dad would talk.
And, four years ago, when my dad passed away, and he knew that he passed away,
he cleaned our - during the snow time - he cleaned the driveway. So, during
Christmas, out of courtesy, I just bought something, and I made sure it was sealed. I
got it from the store, it was sealed. And I just went, and I knocked, and his wife. And I
said to her, this is for you guys. Thank you, just let your husband know. Thank you for
9
doing the yard. I don't know, this guy, I can never change his mind, because then, our
fence - something happened with the fence. And all of a sudden, he went and he
reported us to the city. He has a very weird personality that's really weird. I've noticed
also, one of my friends in the same city, but different blocks. And I would go. During
COVID, people were like walking and saying hello. My street barely said anything. You
would look at people face-to-face and only one neighbor would say something. The
other blocks - they would wave, even if you drive, they would wave - that shows me
people's personality. Even though the city I live in is rated very high in discrimination,
actually, in Michigan and in the state for a while. But, I've learned not to engage with
people like that. By the few months ago, somebody gave me, from the church, a
huge Holy Mother from the church. So I was like, whoa, this is really nice. So I was
inside my backyard. So I said, okay, let me get it out. As soon as I got it out, two, three
neighbors, they start saying hello to me. So, I don't know what it was. I walked in, and
I'm like, that was weird. The Holy Mother, they thought that - I don't know what they
thought I was, but, hey, I'm not going to. Now, she talks to me. You know, people are
afraid. You don't blame them. People, like, what happened September 11, and Boston
Marathon, a lot of these tragic events that happened here were caused by a refugee,
by somebody who was - and we cannot say - what is it, that school, who killed 23
children - what was the name of that?
51:46
Uma;
 Parkland?
51:47
Jihan:
 What was it? Yeah. I don't remember what
it was called.
51:49
Uma:
 Oh, Marjory Stoneman Douglas.
51:50
Jihan:
 Yeah. Well, he wasn't a refugee. You
know, he was a white person. So,
associating always tragic events and bad events with refugees - that's a really bad
impression. It leaves vulnerable - the rest of the general population - vulnerable,
thinking that, oh, yeah, probably. You know, she speaks -- she has an accent, she
could be a terrorist. You know, I've seen it. I've heard it, I've seen it. But then, I just
learned not to let it bother me anymore.
52:33
Uma:
 If you could say something, a few sentences,
to these people who have
this negative perception. Or if they're politicians, are there any policies you want
them to adopt? Is there anything you would want to say to these people?
52:44
Jihan:
 You know what? Get to know them. Get
to know who refugees are. Just
because they are different, it does not make them bad people. They are different to
us. Americans - whoever was born here, generation after generation - if you go back
in history, they were refugees, like from the Germans, from England. So, if we really
want to say who is the 
right 
American, they're going
to be the American-Indians.
These are the people who are truly here. So, if you have blonde hair and blue eyes,
don't think, just because I have a different skin color, that makes me different. You
are just - like my daughter, her kids, her grandkids - my grandkids - they're going to
be here third generation, and they cannot say no, just because. They're going to look
at somebody else and they're going to say, oh, we are American, but no, they're
grandparents - they're Chaldeans. They are. So, get to know people. Get to know us.
1 0
You're going to learn a huge - a lot - from our heritage. Have an open mind. Don't be
such a closed-mind, thinking that. Like, I've worked 12 hours. I've worked 16 hours, so
many years, during my divorce. I never - I don't discriminate, because every culture,
every person is that person. If I hurt you, then yes, you and I. But don't generalize that
just because one person was bad. In every society, there is good and bad. In every
culture, there is good and bad. But that doesn't mean the bad is going to take over.
So, my advice to them - do not let politicians play in your heads. Because this is how
they want to win the vote. If you have a neighbor, or if you work with somebody who
is a refugee, or who is from a different country, get to know them. Get to know them.
And you're going to learn a lot from them. I am 100% positive.
55:49
Uma:
 That was amazing. Thank you. Just as a
ﬁnal note, is there any way that
the COVID-19 Pandemic, or the current racial justice movement, or even the 2020
election, has affected your experience or the experiences of those you know?
56:05
Jihan:
 Have - I'm sorry - have what?
56:08
Uma;
 The COVID-19 Pandemic, or the racial justice
movement, or the 2020
election - have these affected, like, the experience of refugees you know, or have they
affected your own experience in big ways? Anything you'd like to share about that.
56:19
Jihan:
 Well, you know what? Of course, it has
changed. COVID changed a lot of
people. It changed how you look at things, how you do things. It's something that
everybody has been hit with. The elections is the same thing. It brings you - it opens
up your horizon to a lot of things, even the Black Lives Matter, the injustice. That
there is truly injustice happens. You see things happening and you cannot do
anything to them. It's really sad. Like, with COVID - COVID hits everybody. Everybody
has lost loved ones during this pandemic. For Black Lives Matter, that's truly, truly
hurtful to see how people die just because of their skin color. That brings me - get to
know people. Do not, do not discriminate. Just because, if I open my mouth and I
have an accent, you assume that I am a bad person. Or just because this person, he's
Black, you assume that they are not good. The election - it's unfortunate that the
elections are - they play with people's head. Like the Trump administration. I'm very
sad to say that he is not - I cannot say that he is a president. He doesn't care. He has
nothing. He was born with a golden spoon in his mouth. He doesn't know the
meaning of a struggle. He doesn't know what a single parent is, what a refugee is. He
has nothing. He doesn't even know. Joe Biden is the same thing. He is a politician.
Yes, he is hitting on, oh, I am Catholic. I don't know. I don't know. You know what? I
don't trust neither of them at this point, because they just want to get that seat. And
once they get that seat, what are they going to do? I don't have faith right now with
the candidates. It's really sad. It's really sad. We'll see.
59:17
Uma:
 Yeah, thank you. Is there anything you'd
like to add, that you'd want
people to hear at the end of this interview?
59:24
Jihan:
 Well, I just want to say that, as a former
refugee, the general public
should judge people not based as a general. If somebody - if that person mistreated
you - then deal with that person. But do not say that, oh, an entire globe or entire
1 1
race or an entire generation is bad. So, if you living or you encounter a refugee, or you
encounter somebody who doesn't look like you, doesn't have blue eyes and blonde
hair, give them a chance. Get to know them. And teach your children the same thing.
If you can teach your kids that we are all the same, regardless, I think life will be
much less stressful.
1:00:32
Uma:
 Thank you so much for those amazing words
and for sharing your story.
1:00:35
Jihan:
 Thank you, thank you.
E n d
1 2