Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Abdul Nazari
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/abdul-nazari
Transcript URL: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nJcqnCfP_pWy9ImWA9W00wvNA9ovpMrGb37anDweBeE/edit
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

﻿Abdul Nazari


Interviewed by Amna Amin in Raleigh, North Carolina on 07/02/19
Transcribed by Sakhi Shah, 10/09/21




(0:14) Amna: Sorry it took us a second...with all the fancy equipment...


(0:43) Amna: Okay. This is Amna Amin interviewing Abdul Nazari on July 2, 2019, and the interview is taking place in Raleigh, North Carolina. So I was wondering if you could start by telling me where you lived before coming to the United States.


(1:14) Abdul: Yes, I come from Mazar Sharif, Afghanistan and come to Charlotte, October 2017.  Until January 2018 I was in Charlotte. But that is happen my daughter is sick and she had liver problem. And the doctor said you have to move to Durham to university hospital. That's why I came here last, like six months maybe.


(1:59) Amna: And what was your life? What was your life like in Afghanistan? Growing up?


(2:07) Abdul: Afghanistan, my life was in Afghanistan. Okay, you know, in Afghanistan a lot of war. Yeah.


(2:19) Amna: And what made you decide to move to the United States? 


(3:13) Translator: Yeah, he says you know (indiscernible talking) after he was they were after him. And they said, you know, like, his life was in danger...family. That's why he just came to United States. The people supported him...for his own life. Saved, his life is saved.


(3:47) Amna: So he was working with Americans?


(4:07) Amna: I'm just going to repeat the translation into the microphone. But so he was living in Afghanistan and working with Americans. And the Taliban found out and his life is under threat. So then he decided to move to America with the help of the Americans he was helping. And then do you know, how is it moving to the United States? How is Charlotte?


(4:33) Abdul: Charlotte was okay, when I came Charlotte, they give me for uh three months to make house free, and everything's free. It was excellent.


(4:47) Amna: Yeah. Do you know the organization or agency that helped you when you came to the United States?


(4:53) Abdul: Yeah but one is has name then it was ARO something like that. They're helping me, yeah.


(5:06) Amna: How were they with helping you?


(5:10) Abdul: They’re helping me with a lot. They worry about my house and my doctor appointment everything. Beautiful.


(5:20) Amna: That's good yeah. And did your entire family come over at the same time?


(5:25) Abdul: No. I went with my kids and my wife that's all.


(5:29) Amna: Okay. Do you still have family in Afghanistan?


(5:32) Abdul: Yeah in Afghanistan, I have my three sister in Afghanistan lives with my mother and brother is in Afghanistan...


(5:43) Amna: Okay. And then how was how did how was your treatment in the United States?


(5:57) Abdul: They are very good very good, they are helping me very nicely.


(6:02) Amna: Okay. Yeah. And then do you have a job in the United States?


(6:09) Abdul: For at the moment, no. I had before job in Charlotte. But it was...and I was working in a lot food truck


(6:26) Amna: Yeah. How was it?


(6:29) Abdul: It was good. 


(6:31) Amna: Yeah, what how is the food in the food truck?


(6:34) Abdul: The food truck like is was very hard work. And well then a very busy place in Charlotte downtown. Was like, some Friday, Saturday, they're like 700 customers, 600 customers were served.


(6:53) Amna: Yeah. And were you taking any classes while you were in Charlotte?


(6:58) Abdul: No, but I wanted to go for English class. I had no time because I was working at nighttime and daytime...and my kids appointment me and my wife with uh I got one little daughter she when she come out of appointment with my wife, she was pregnant with the yeah I was very busy and yeah.


(7:28) Amna: Do you have a lot of medical appointments when you came to the US? 


(7:34) Abdul: Yes. 


(7:35) Amna: Oh, why did you have the medical appointments?


(7:39) Abdul: Because they make uh checkup all of my family and dentist and the medical checkup and the vaccination for my kids. My wife was pregnant, every first month every month. Then after six months, a week,  a month, a week one appointment. Every week appointment. After my daughter's born, a lot of appointments because she getting sick all the time to go to hospital.


(8:24) Amna: Why is she getting sick? 


(8:26) Abdul: I don’t know. When she born after one week, two weeks she made came to her eyes yellow and I took her to the hospital. And then the doctor said this is normal. After one month she cannot move. Yellow face and all the body everything. And then doctors make an hospital one two weeks. In hospital she was, after they're released her from hospital to go home. Especially getting day by day getting back up. Doctors said my daughters said it was too good to….she need to have a liver transplant.


(9:18) Amna: Has she already had the liver trans...?


(9:20) Abdul: Yeah, she had like three months ago. 


(9:26) Amna: Okay. Is she doing better?


(9:28) Abdul: She much better


(9:31) Amna: Good. And how was how was the move from Charlotte to Durham?


(9:37) Abdul: The first time I bring my daughter all my family on one night or two night in a little bit hopefully late on with her for me and must go after that the (indiscernible) sisters come helping me out. Everything for my kids. I say thank you thank you from the Islamic Relief. Thanks for the World Relief, they are helping me out a lot. There are other brothers come here helping man of Muslim people and American people. Mr. Bill is passed away. He died. He was...he was helping me a lot. 


(10:44) Amna: Yeah. How did you find these people who helped you?


(10:49) Abdul: Sisters. 


(10:56) Amna: And how has the rest of your family, like your wife and your sons, found the United States?


(11:06) Abdul: Yeah its good. I’m sorry if I’m boring. 


(11:12) Amna: No no no, it's perfect, it's great. And, You're Muslim?


(11:19) Abdul: Yes I am.


(11:20) Amna: So how is being Muslim and Islam important to you?


(11:29) Abdul: This Muslim is my religion. Is very important for me to keep, follow my religion. 


(11:37) Amna: Did Islam and being a Muslim help you when you were struggling? 


(11:45) Abdul: Yeah, I think so. I believe. I believe.


(12:03) Amna: And how have you, have you met a lot of other Muslims here in the United States?


(12:10) Abdul: There was, I met a lot of Muslim...they was very good for calling me, what do you need, and come, sometimes bring food, some thought for my kids. It was really really good. 


(12:29) Amna: Do you like the community here and the people here? 


(12:34) Abdul: Yes, I do like it. I do. I like that they are helping, I like it.


(12:48) Amna: Oh, yeah. So like for your daughter’s liver transplant when that happened, how did that happen? Like, who helps you through that?


Translator Talking


(13:23) Abdul: First time, one lady came to me in Charlotte. That was, name is Nastreem. Helping me a lot, she come with me. After that I come here, there's the World Relief helping me a lot. Other Muslim brothers with a career. Mr. Bill, he is, was in charge of church. I saw her forget the another sister was Sargua, our sister Sakina is with me to welcome to keep, take care of my kids. When I was my daughter hospital with my wife and I go to hospital for five or six hours to care of my kids that came to stay with my kids go to a hospital until I come back. The sister must Sargua and sister Sakina. I think is that was sister Joan called my….introduced me to the...


(14:55) Translator: We have a big Muslim community here. So first we are we connect with Nathreem. Nathreem is one of the volunteer from the Muslim community in Toronto and she moved with the family here to hospital then she called me and told me about the situation with a family and then we have a Facebook page called Client getting Muslim. We have all the volunteers on this page so I wrote about the situation of the family here because they didn't have a house to live in, like apartment or any house here. They didn't have the power, they didn’t have food, anything. They just moved here from Charlotte hospital to the hospital by the ambulance. Yeah. So I connected I contacted the World Relief and church here because I know that they have a guest house and this way it was great the $100 bill helps a lot in cleaning and preparing the house for the family to move and then our Muslim volunteers start coming bringing food many items from their homes. Sister said well one of the issues from day one till now. 


(16:23) Abdul: [Speaking in another language]


(16:52) Translator: Yes, and then he said, you know the first time I came here with they kids, they have no room for us and the kids weren’t allowed to go inside the hospital even on the waiting area, you know, in the hallway. And I don't know what to do with one side you know, like my kid is sick and I can see my two sons you know, they're lying down and how we have their hospital. They had nowhere to go away. You know, no one I know. It's true. We don't know nobody. And then the other like that introduces the sister Joan to her. We got to know a lot of people in community through that and then I found out I'm not I don't feel lonely anymore. And I feel for everybody to be there for me. And I remember the night of surgery we all there, we all sitting next to them and we spent the night through all night all of as we sit there with them you know and let him to sleep at least take a rest. Which is, it's nice you know to at least you know you guys if you feel like he’s home now because it's hard to come from different states in the new place and you don't know, Alhamdulillah everything is worked out and he’s very happy for that and he is grateful for everything.  


(18:15) Abdul: [talking in another language]


(19:04) Translator: He said that I'm really thankful for the community. In the name, by name Rob here, she was from Parkistan, and she came to me and she said whatever you need, just ask for it. She did a lot of help you know like many ways oh you know like clothing, anything food anything you know, like she been very very helpful. I'm really thankful for that. I didn't really know community Pakistani, Indian Pakistan, or Indian Muslim. All of them, they come to me and they helped me a lot and really lucky to have them around. I feel like a lot there's like sister and brothers to me and my family.


(19:41) Abdul: [talking in another language]


(20:10) Translator: And also you know Samiha whenever there's a woman you know she was very helping them you know pay, pay for the people to sit and babysit the kids while they're out for appointment or staying at a hospital and they were helping me. I'm really thankful for that you know like you know a lot of you like everything I need you just, she keep calling – what else you need, what else you need? She keeps helping she, keeps helping me and it means a lot to me I'm really thankful for having her on my side. And also she said the other day in the lobby, she could save some money, collected some money for me to finally I can purchase a car for myself. And with that money, it's really this is something that I stopped my life…(indiscernible)...and I’m really grateful for everything done for me. 


(21:07) Amna: Just one question like, what like now that you’re here in the United States, now what hopes and dreams do you have for your future for your family and for your kids?


(21:17) Abdul: [talking in another language]


(21:42) Translator: And he said I had another opportunity in Afghanistan to go to school and finish his diploma to get to high education because he the oldest in the family and he has to support his family and that was you know one of his dream to go back to school and study and be somebody. He wanted to get kids future Inshallah to be good. He just wants to working hard for them to continue their education and my dream you know to come through with them you know. I wanted to see my future in both of them Inshallah, so I can continue my education and be with them whenever I wanted to be. And the same thing would be the future by my three kids Inshallah so they go to the right way, the right directions and be educated. 


(22:31) Abdul: [talking in another language]


(22:43) Translator: Inshallanah and also he saying my wife never go to school before in Afghanistan you know, most of the girls that they couldn't go to school. But now she's here, they want her to go to school. And be educated continue or did you too because I'm sure she has a lot of really, I'm really grateful for that to see, you know, the mentors coming from that side of the world. You know, they had open minded about the wife, you know, we're going to school and learn how to drive and he's really talking to me, I'm really proud of him when he's talking about his wife like it's, it's, it's wonderful. It's wonderful.


(23:34) Amna: Is there like, is there a particular memory you have from when you moved here that you could talk about?


(23:44) Translator: [talking in another language]


(23:51) Abdul: [talking in another language]


(25:42) Translator: He saying like one memory which is it bothered me at night was still, you know, as I can keep me sometimes you know, be upset about the night I came from Charlotte to hospital for Marianne to you know, be attended in the hospital. And they told me your kids not allowed to be inside the hospital. I told them what do you want me to do with my kids? You want me to throw them away? Outside, I can't do that. They have to be with me. Because they don't know no one in here. Just me. And they said, this is not the rule and the regulation of your hospital. We cannot allow you to bring the kids in. In that time you know, I get very upset. I get very sad. Because you know, like, if you are in my position like the doctor in my position. What do you do with your kids? And your wife is there...She doesn't know how to talk English and I have to be next to her and I supported her and I have to be there to support her. Because it's emotional time for us. In the meantime, I don’t know what to do with my kids. This is the worst memory I have here. I know this is the rule and they're right about your rules. They have to follow that. But for me in that night, it's hard to accept. 


(27:02) Abdul: [talking in another language]


(27:31) Translator: And also yeah one more you know like like he said, it's not I'm not gonna say it's bad memory but something you know has bothered him and because he just got his driver's license, the day I guess we went there on Thursday, we got a driver license in like two days later, he just wanted to bring the kids and wife from the hospital to home and he got into an accident. And, you know, like because this is the worst thing that's happening to me because you know, like, I wasn't ready for that. And I was like, shocked. I was shocked and you know, like the car company they towed. And you know like we had a bad memory from that time too.


(28:15) Amna: I guess I just have one more question. If there was anything you could tell people who are trying to help refugees or about the refugee experience, what would you tell them?


(28:29) Translator: [talking in another language]


(28:40) Abdul: [talking in another language]  


(29:19) Translator: Yeah he's saying how like as a refugee, as you know, I just found out you know, like, if somebody is coming in this country, if I have to do, it's not about money, to give money to somebody. Is about you know what you can do beside the money, and you definitely need love. They need heart. They need support. And that's what you know, like your family, that kind of position to help somebody. I'm going to pause, I'm going to do stop with whatever I'm doing. I'm just going to try to help. If they call me at night or day, I'm going to be there for them, not just for the money, money is nothing but you know, like emotionally they need it. They need support in many ways, and I do whatever I can to help you know somebody else in my position if I find out any other families. I will do the same thing they did for me and this community that I'm going to pay it back and I'm going to try to help as much I can.


(30:13) Abdul: [talking in another language]  


(31:35) Translator: He also mentioned that you know like sometimes you know, like when I'm calling somebody, I'm not asking for something to something more like you have to help me give me money, give me that, give me that. First they have to know what I want actually, sometimes I just need an address. Sometimes I just need a telephone number. But when I calling them that, that what I'm going to get the answer, sometimes they just ignore me and then send the message they're not going to respond it to me or I'm going to call them and they speaking in different language. Like you know, I don't know who you are. And this is hurts me a lot sometimes because you know, I'm just I need help until I wanted to be on my feet. I'm not the type of person I'm not I don't want to work. I, all my life I work, I support my family in Afghanistan and I want to I want to support my family in here. Not to just easy money come for me to I spend it. I want to work hard for this and I'm able to do that. I'm younger than that but until now a kid has to go to school you know they're going to school help you know...helping us getting better. Definitely I need help but some people show me happy face and you're like helping face but some people ignoring me. Some people are showing you know you don't care you know like you are looking see me like a downside. Like you know who are you but I'm a human being too. I respect them, I respect myself. I'm not you know like because I come from Afghanistan, I'm nobody. I was somebody in there. I am still somebody and you know that's what he's saying you know like it's sometimes it hurts but a lot of people helping but some people are ignoring too.


(33:18) Abdul: [talking in another language]     


(34:08) Translator: Mostly, he said, when I need to go to hospital, I need to have to, you know, get somewhere and he doesnt know how to get there. And that's what he just asked me. You know, I know you since then. I know. I can call you at midnight. I can call you in the morning. You always answer. I really answer. Even though it was midnight. I'm answering. I don't care. I told them already. The first day I met him. I said, just call me no matter what time of the night. It's just that John was there. No matter what time of day is what time of night is just call me. Ask me a question, text me, I can come watch your kids. I could go with you hospital, wherever. But if this is my something, it makes me happy. You know, like it's this is something every human do. I told him a couple of times. If I'm in your situation, you’d do this same thing for me. We have to do it for each other is nothing to be happy about no brag about. Oh, I did this for you I – no, we have to do that without any getting something back from them. Nothing you know like, unconditionally you help somebody, not you know with the condition so I can help you you have to give me back this. No. Unconditionally. In theory, you know he has such a wonderful family. The wife is wonderful person and the kids in all of them. I love them. Like you know, like I'm coming home with them, like brother and my son. They call me Mom, which is I am the mom. I wanted to be their mom. But I can do like as much I want it to be but you know like, which is wonderful too you know they they get slowly on their feet and Alhamdulillah slowly you know everything gonna go away. And this is going to be story we can tell the story that here that what happen right now. They need help and they need to be somebody next to them.


[Indiscernible talking]


(36:34) Amna: Thank you. 


(36:35) Abdul: Thank you so much for coming. 


(36:37) Amna: Thank you for helping...


End