Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Basla Rubaiye
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/basla-rubaiye
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Rxc1sytLLmMIPfptwUP5fx75VrQ8PgaE/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Basla Rubaiye
Interviewed by Chesley Chan via Zoom, 08/24/2020
Translated by Kinda Laﬁto
Transcribed by Myla Wailoo, 06/23/2021
00:05
Chesley Chan:
This is Chesley Chan interviewing
Basla Rubaiye on August 24,
2020. The interview is taking place virtually via Zoom. I am in NYC, and Bosla and
Kinda are in Dallas, TX. We are accompanied by Kinda Laﬁto. She is the coordinator
and our translator for this meeting. So to get started, Basla, can you tell me about
where you’re from?
00:35
Basla Rubaiye:
I’m from Iraq. Baghdad.
00:38
Chesley Chan:
Okay. Can you tell me more about
when you were born and
your ﬁrst home?
00:46
Basla Rubaiye:
My ﬁrst home was in Baghdad,
Iraq. I was born on December
23, 1968.
00:55
Chesley Chan:
And do you have any sensory memories
or evocative moments
that you recall from your childhood in Iraq?
01:35
Kinda Laﬁto:
Yes, she said her simple life
was very simple. Mother, father. She
used to play outside with friends. It was a very simple life.
01:50
Chesley Chan:
And Basla, how would you describe
your religious or spiritual
background?
02:09
Kinda Laﬁto:
She’s not [INDECIPHERABLE]. She’s
not conservative.
02:15
Chesley Chan:
Okay. But her religion speciﬁcally,
can you talk a little bit more
about that?
1

02:56
Kinda Laﬁto:
For Basla when she was in Iraq, practicing religion was not
difﬁcult-- it was easy. Because she said in the neighborhood where she grew up, all
people were the same religion.
03:11
Chesley Chan:
Okay, I see. I will be asking
more questions about your religion,
Basla, in a few moments. Keep in mind. But to kind of move on, I was wondering--
you were talking about your childhood before. Was there anything that prepared you
for your resettlement process moving from Iraq to America?
04:12
Kinda Laﬁto:
For Basla it was not easy to move
and to come to America. But
she had medical reasons that forced her to move to America.
04:25
Chesley Chan:
Did you say medical reasons?
04:27
Kinda Laﬁto:
Yeah.
04:29
Chesley Chan:
Oh, okay. Can you speak more about
these medical reasons if
you can?
04:54
Kinda Laﬁto:
So she has Leukemia and in Iraq
she went over all places and
they told her the only place you can recover is to go to America, and that’s why she
decided to move to America.
05:11
Chesley Chan:
So your story, Basla, is quite
different from a lot of other people,
because from what I know many people move from the Middle East to America
because of external pressures like war or something else. So how did your health
reasons-- how did that shape your resettlement process?
06:23
Kinda Laﬁto:
For Basla she faced a lot of challenges
when she moved to
America, like a different culture, different people, different even work. Different ﬁeld
of work. And language. When she moved she didn't speak the language.
06:47
Chesley Chan:
Basla, how were you able to adapt
to all of these challenges--
you said that the culture in America in general was very different from what you
experienced in Iraq. How did you learn-- what resources did you use to adapt?
07:33
Kinda Laﬁto:
So number one for Basla, she has
brothers here in the states, and
the second reason made her stronger, she has three children that came with her so
she wanted to be responsible and strong.
07:55
Chesley Chan:
I see. And just to slow down,
I was wondering if you could talk
more about how you felt when you ﬁrst found out that you had to come to America.
Leaving Iraq must have been a very hard thing to do because that's where you were
born, that's where you grew up. Where were you when you found out that you had to
move and how did you process that? What were the things that you really wanted to
do before you left for America?
2
09:20
Kinda Laﬁto:
When she moved to the states it was a visit. A visit just for 3
months to do the check ups and her treatment. But when she moved to the United
States everything changed in her country and stopped her from going back. So the
plans changed.
09:44
Chesley Chan:
So I guess just to ask a follow
up question-- you didn't know
that you’d be staying in America for the long term. Is that correct, am I
understanding that?
09:52
Kinda Laﬁto:
Yes.
09:55
Chesley Chan:
Wow. Once you found out that you
couldn't go back, how did
you feel and how did you tell that to your children?
10:54
Kinda Laﬁto:
About the kids, about her children--
they preferred to stay here in
America because there are more opportunities for them, number one. Number two,
they don't have memories in Iraq like their memories here now in America. So for
these reasons she feels okay about her kids.
11:21
Chesley Chan:
I'm curious to know more about
how you maintain their Iraqi
identity. I think it's hard to do so when you're in a different country. So, do you have
any rituals or traditions that you have carried over from your childhood in Iraq and
then now raising your children-- whether that's through food, through stories that
you tell them about your family and your life at home in Iraq?
13:36
Kinda Laﬁto:
So for Basla, talking more with
her kids about the cultures in
general. She talks with them about the two cultures. But in particular, the youngest
child when he came to the United States, he was 5 years old, so he doesn't know
anything about Iraqi culture or anything, so he grew up here. So he's the only one
she has difﬁculty dealing with. That one, he's 5 years old. But also she said that even
when she talks to them, even she understands the different culture, and as a mom
she also tries to be open. For example, she said with relationships at school, if he
comes and says mom I have a girlfriend she will be open to this, but she will also tell
him "there are rules." We also have rules-- like we don't have [INDECIPHERABLE]. We
have not to pass this [INDECIPHERABLE].
14:43
Chesley Chan:
I see. Ok. And I guess I would
like to ask a little bit more about
your life in Iraq, Basla, if that's okay. I just wanted to understand what shaped you to
be the person you are today. Before you came on, Basla, Kinda said that you are a
very strong woman, and I can tell just from the way that you tell your stories and the
way you hold yourself. How did you become such a strong woman, if that makes
sense? Do you have any stories, anecdotes of when you were a child or a teenager in
Iraq dealing with hard struggles that shaped you to be the person you are today?
17:16
Kinda Laﬁto:
So when she was young, Basla,
she received support. Her mom
used to tell her always, “You are strong, you are very like-- just strong,” you know? She
kept telling her “Strong, strong,” she said “it made it stick in my mind.” And also, her
dad was in the military, also she said probably from her dad. And at school she
3
participated in many activities at school and she was also a leader. So she said maybe
these are the reasons that help her become a strong woman.
18:02
Chesley Chan:
Okay I see. And I want to ask
a bit more about religion. How did
religion tie a role into making you a stronger person-- if it did at all. It didn't have to,
but if it did, do you have any stories about yourself as a child? I know you were really
young, but do you remember aspects of your religious routine that kind of made you
more conscious of being Muslim when you hadn't been before (or of being
different)?
19:37
Kinda Laﬁto:
When she was in Iraq, Basla, she
was practicing religion-- she's not
conservative-- she practiced religion like anyone. But when she moved to America,
she started to practice her religion more, and the reason why was because she has
three children. It was as if she felt more responsible to teach them their religion. So
she started practicing more than before.
20:15
Chesley Chan:
I see. So how did that change
your religious routine? Because
some people-- they go to the mosque every week, sometimes you pray more at
home. What did having a stronger relationship with your religion mean to you and
how did that change your routine?
21:36
Kinda Laﬁto:
So for Basla, she wants to be
a real model for her children. She
said "I keep reading the book, Quran, every day, and especially when they are
present." I want them to see their mom practicing her religion, number one. Number
2, prayers. For example, she doesn't enforce them, but she's trying to be a real model.
She practices her prayers at home, when she's in the car and the radio is playing
music and the prayer starts calling she turns off the radio. That means the prayer is
now. So they respect that and they know that now. For Ramadan, she teaches them
that they have to fast for 30 days.
22:37 She's very strict about this area. And Eid. In Eid, we usually go to mosque. So
she said I'm not strict making them pray, just with fasting, reading Quran, and for Eid,
I like for them to join me when I go to prayer.
23:01
Chesley Chan:
So, you said that your relationship
with your religion became
stronger after you came to the United States because you want to be a role model for
your children. Was it more so to be a better role model and to have some cultural
continuity because it seems like your religion was a big part of your life in Iraq. Does
that question make sense? Was it a mixture of being a model and also maintaining
your culture, or was it more so just being a model?
23:42
Kinda Laﬁto:
Sorry, can you say that again?
The question?
23:45
Chesley Chan:
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm just interested
to know how much of a
factor was cultural continuity in having a stronger connection to your faith after
moving to the United States.
4
24:01
Kinda Laﬁto:
How it became stronger? How she became stronger, to have
faith?
24:07
Chesley Chan:
Yeah. Like what were the reasons
behind practicing more
religion after moving to the United States. It seems like a lot of it was to be a better
role model for her children, but was it also because she wanted to maintain a
connection?
24:28
Kinda Laﬁto:
Ok, got you.
24:30
Chesley Chan:
Was it completely just to-- Do
you know what I mean?
24:34
Kinda Laﬁto:
Yeah yeah yeah. Got you. Got you.
So this is a very deep question.
27:09 So she said that when she was in Iraq-- in Iraq it's much easier for kids to grow
up and understand about their religion because of the culture. Because education is
everywhere. Everywhere they go they tell them about religion. But when it comes to
America, it's different. The responsibility is number one for the family. The parents.
Because of her case, I think Basla, she did it by herself. Her husband still, he lives in
Turkey. So she's the one responsible. She's the father. She's the mother. This is
number one. So she felt more responsible. Number two, she felt the need for God
because of her medical problems. She became closer to God and it helped her a lot.
Number three, her friends. Her friends around her also encouraged her to keep in
touch with God. Number four, she said she feels good when she goes back to God.
Just, she feels good.
28:26
Chesley Chan:
Okay, that makes a lot of sense.
Basla, you talked about your
friends encouraging you to maintain your relationship, and even strengthen it-- how
did that impact your experience as a refugee? I guess, your story is a bit different
because you came to the United States for medical reasons, but how did your
stronger relationship with God impact your resettlement process in the United
States?
29:51
Kinda Laﬁto:
So every time she used to pray
to God she felt that he sends her
[INDECIPHERABLE] good people, and later they become friends. Sometimes he
sends her messages, for example medicaid or assistance from here... assistance from
there. So also when she was in Iraq, she prayed to God and he helped her to come to
the US. So she feels like every time she prays she sees that goal, the answer.
30:28
Chesley Chan:
So with everything you've been
through, Basla, what does your
faith mean to you today-- just reﬂecting on your relationship to God and Iraq, and
then how that relationship really ﬂourished and strengthened in the United States
today as you're sitting in your chair. What does God mean to you-- what is that
belief?
31:47
Kinda Laﬁto:
So she believes that God is like
a father. He listens to her and he is
responsible. Like, she's not feeling well today and she knows that she trusts him that
5
he will help her to feel better tomorrow. And everything happens for a reason-- she
believes in that.
32:12
Chesley Chan:
Okay. And just to talk a little
bit more about your relationship to
God. You were speaking about how when you feel good or bad you kind of speak to
God and try to maintain that feeling, or change it for tomorrow. Are there moments
where you feel God's presence the most? Is it when you go to a mosque, or in private
worship where you feel really close to your faith in God?
32:41
Kinda Laﬁto:
You are asking about her when
she feels close to God?
32:45
Chesley Chan:
Yeah. The speciﬁc moments where
she feels the most close to
God. Is it when she is physically in a mosque, or is it very, very internal. It depends on
her internal mood and feeling that makes her feel close to God?
34:02
Kinda Laﬁto:
So for Basla, she keeps close
to God when she's by herself. By
herself. So because she feels closer, and nobody is watching her. So she can cry, she
can talk to him, she can express herself the ways she wants without people seeing.
34:51 So she says I feel strong when I go to the mosque and I see people. I feel like I
belong to the community. I'm not the only person in this community.
35:03
Chesley Chan:
Yeah I really want to ask more
about community-- for her and
for her children. But before we go there, I was wondering: are there any particular
Muslim prayers that are especially resonant for you during private worship? You say
you feel the best when you're alone-- you feel the most connected to God when
you're alone. Are there any prayers in speciﬁc that make you feel even closer?
35:36
Kinda Laﬁto:
I think because in Islam we have
only one prayer-- I will ask her
the question, I don't know if she can answer.
36:29 So yeah, for the prayers we have ﬁve prayers in a day. And for Basla she feels
closer to God when she prays at dawn. The ﬁrst one. This is when you wake up before
the sunrise.
36:49
Chesley Chan:
Basla, can you explain more about
why it is at dawn-- why you
feel the most close.
36:58
Kinda Laﬁto:
I think she told me that.
37:37 She said because in general people are asleep and quiet. Everything is quiet
and people are asleep so she feels closer to God. She feels more like-- there's a word
in English-- I'm trying to remember. She feels closer to God. Reverence. And
reverence.
38:21
Chesley Chan:
Okay, I understand. And to talk
more about community. Earlier,
Basla, you said that in Iraq as a child it's very natural for you to learn about your
religion in a lot of places, like in school, maybe in your family. For your children today
6
in America I would assume that it's not as natural-- like you don't learn about your
religion in school (in Ameri-- it depends, of course) but I was wondering how having a
community of your faith-- how did that shape the upbringing of your children--
especially your third child. Your son, who has never been in Iraq. How did that
community help him understand his identity more?
39:36
Kinda Laﬁto:
She's [Basla’s] asking about the
community helping him to
understand his religion or his identity?
39:46
Chesley Chan:
I guess that is-- it's complicated,
right? Because your religion
can be a part of your identity. Or it might not be. And she can only speak so much for
herself and for her son, but I guess identity in general and religion separately.
40:05
Kinda Laﬁto:
Identity-- let's say identity,
right?
40:07
Chesley Chan:
Yeah.
40:33
Kinda Laﬁto:
For the youngest child, he feels
like he's more American-- his
identity, he's American. So the three, they believe that they are half American half
Iraqi. But it looks like the youngest, he belongs more to this community. But you
asked her how the community helps him, right?
41:03
Chesley Chan:
Yeah, speciﬁcally his community
of faith. So after coming to the
US, Basla became very close to her religion, and she did that so that these morals
and values could trickle down into her children. How did this community, like being
able to celebrate Eid with her Muslim community, how did that help her children
especially her third child reconcile his identity as both an American and an Iraqi. You
said that he identiﬁes more as an American, but I'm sure a part of him knows that
he's Iraqi. So how did that community help him reconcile the both sides of him?
41:51
Kinda Laﬁto:
You mean the community as in her
friends, right? The friends, the
Iraqi community? Or the school?
42:00
Chesley Chan:
I was talking more about the,
say, the community at the
mosque.
42:04
Kinda Laﬁto:
Okay. Community at the mosque.
43:48 So for her children, especially the youngest one, the child, she said she noticed
him practicing prayers and asking important questions more than the older or other
brothers, and what happened-- he has Tiktok. This tiktok program-- the app, yes-- so
he sees some prayers so he comes to his mom and asks her a question: what's this
what's this? So he's understanding through asking questions. He keeps asking
questions. Also she said the refugee community is getting bigger now, not like
before. So, at school he has people from Iraq, from Syria, not only from Iraq but other
countries, so he's learning from them as well. From neighbors.
7
44:48
Chesley Chan:
That's interesting that the app-- the social media app-- is
causing him to ask more questions about his faith. That's really cool. And as a side
question, for Basla speciﬁcally, after all these years being in the United States, what
does home mean to you? Does it mean-- is it like an identity-- you know, your Iraqi
identity or is it very physical, is it like safety? It can be very abstract or very tangible
(you can hold it, you can be there).
46:45
Kinda Laﬁto:
So safety. For Basla, safety is
number one, and she said I can get
the house, I can get the neighborhood, community, but safety is number one. So she
feels home where safety is there.
47:01
Chesley Chan:
So with that in mind-- safety--
if I were to ask Basla where do
you feel most at home today, where would it be?
48:12
Kinda Laﬁto:
Oh, okay. Yeah. So she lived in
Iraq for 48 years, and it was safe.
When she was there Iraq was safe, and she felt the safety over there for some time.
So she says for her to say here is her home is difﬁcult. Yeah, just it's difﬁcult. Maybe it's
easier for her kids, for her children, but not for her. Because she has memories, and
she felt safe when she was in Iraq. When she was young.
48:53
Chesley Chan:
Okay. And just one last question,
we are running close to 2:30...
for me, 1:30 for you... I'd like to ask Basla to reﬂect on today-- how have the current
events impacted your family-- you and your family. So, with the coronavirus and also
with the protests I know that health is a very important thing to you. Yeah, so how
have the coronavirus and the protests impacted you and your family?
51:09
Kinda Laﬁto:
Okay. She, for her family-- Basla
and her family here in the United
States, they are practicing social distancing as anyone. And at home, they feel lonely.
They feel stressed, depressed, as well. They feel depressed. And she said because they
are refugees they don't have activities, they feel lonely in g-- oh, what happened--
they feel lonely in general, and now they feel very, very-- sorry I don't have anyone in
my house I wonder what happened, okay-- haha-- okay they feel this loneliness. They
feel it… Sorry I can't hear you.
52:03
Chesley Chan:
Oh sorry. Okay. Do you want to
check what's going on?
52:08
Kinda Laﬁto:
You are recording, right?
52:10
Chesley Chan:
Yeah it's okay. There can be a
break.
52:13
Kinda Laﬁto:
Okay one second.
53:03 Sorry I don't know what happened. I have no idea. I just... yeah. Sorry for that.
53:10
Chesley Chan:
No worries. But those are all
the questions that I have prepared
for you Basla, is there anything that you would like to talk about, any stories that you
would like to share from Iraq from your resettlement process or from America that I
didn't get to ask about?
8
53:46
Kinda Laﬁto:
No she's okay.
53:48
Chesley Chan:
Okay great. Let me end the recording
right here.
E n d
9