Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Rasha Mohamed
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/rasha-mohamed
Transcript URL: https://docs.google.com/document/d/12jGl-XVVFg15E3wYl2EES63oa3aIttSE/edit
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

﻿Rasha Mohamed 


Interviewed by Irene Hsu at Lell Thin’s home, 07/24/2019
Transcribed by Kennedy Walls, 01/22/2022


(0:00) Irene: Okay, can you start with your name and your age and where you're from?


(0:05) Rasha: Yeah. So, my name is Rasha Mohamed. I am from Sudan. And I am now 41 years old. Yes.


(0:15) Irene: Can you tell me a little bit about Sudan? And what you remember about it?


(0:20) Rasha: Sudan, I can't tell you all about Sudan, because Sudan’s also like, different. So, you asked about the country so, the first time will tell you [INDECIPHERABLE]. So, like, different you know, like, different. There's so lot like, biggest country in Africa, you know, biggest country in Africa. So, I don't know. But I'm actually from North Sudan. I’m from Darfur. Yeah, Darfur. Darfur is a kind of state, one state of Sudan. And the biggest state, yes, Khartoum. And you can know that for if you focus it, but because there was a lot of problem in it. [laughs] Yeah, just keep fighting for a long time just fighting for basic needs. For the people over there in that state. Isn't it like just like, food, lamb, health…Yeah, just fighting for that one, no, no more. Yeah.


(1:29) Irene: So why did you have to leave your country?


(1:33) Rasha: I left my country because a lot of problem you know, a lot of problem and then I moved to Egypt. I do, also I lived in Egypt like refugee. Yeah. So refugee in Egypt. And I spent like over there, like, for six years? Yeah. And after that, also, I came here as refugee. So, it’s refugee, refugee [laughs]. Yeah…


(2:00) Irene: So, can you tell me a little bit about like your time in Egypt?


(2:05) Rasha: My time in Egypt is a little bit different than here. Yes, in Egypt. I feel not safe. But I feel like more free in Egypt, really! And I tell you that. Yes, in Egypt I can, I was really. I work at an organization, and I work as a teacher, and I work as, like helping refugees. And I have my own charity to work in. Yeah. And I feel close to my country. Like if my family came, or anyone came from Sudan, I can visit, and I can talk and easy to come, you know, from Sudan to Egypt. So, I can meet my family over there. But when I move here, I can’t meet my family, you know, I can’t see them. I can’t just so go buy a ticket and say, “Oh, let's come to meet here.” So, that I feel like here is a bit… it is safe, but it's not free. Since I came here, I feel like nothing. So yeah, so that was completely different.


(3:14) Irene: Why did you come like, move from Egypt to the States?


(3:20) Rasha: I came as refugee too, just for a better life. Yeah, for a better life. I saw when you come here, you can make your paper easy. Or my paper I can make my paper easy. And after that, I feel like I'm free. And I'm safe, I thought I can do my paper and travel to my country and visit my family and come back. But when I came here, yeah, just because they keep holding my paper till now. Seven years, and I feel like no reason to hold my paper, but I can't talk, you know. Yeah, I find [INDECIPHERABLE] and keep denying my paper for no reason. But I don't know. Yeah, for visa, for refugee to…supposed to when you came here as refugees supposed to give you like green card for one year. But and I ask, “Why,” they say, “Oh, just like some security OSHA, you have to wait.” And I keep waiting. Waiting. Waiting. No, seven years. Yeah, so.


(4:26) Irene: Wow. So, you've been in the state for seven years?


(4:29) Rasha: Seven years.


(4:30) Irene: Did you always live in Utica?


(4:32) Rasha: Yeah, always. Since I came here. 


(4:36) Irene: What was your first impression?


(4:39) Rasha: My first impression? I feel like so good. You know, when I came here like, “Oh, it's clean” and then I feel like save I feel like [INDECIPHERABLE] when I can do that. I can help my family over there. But suddenly, just everything no. It's okay. You know it's not bad to study. But if you don't have paper it doesn’t feel safe, you know. If you don't have your paper in your hand, so I don't have any paper.


(5:14) Irene: Oh, what were some of the difficult things that you experienced when you first came?


(5:20) Rasha: Difficult thing to… do just like… I don't know how to speak English well [laughs]. Yeah, and I have small kids, so I have to stay home. Yeah, I have to stay home with the kids. And one of us supposed to study and another one have to hold the kids. So, my husband chose to study. And I chose to stay home. So, I stay home with my son for two years. Yeah. And after that, I said, “Oh, no, I have to get up to do something.” So yeah, and after that, I start studying. Yeah.


(5:55) Irene: Oh, so what do you study?


(5:58) Rasha: I'm now a nursing student at St. Elizabeth College of Nursing. Yeah. Yeah. But I did start from level one English, ESL English at MVCC. That was 2015. Yeah. 2015. And I did as far as my ESL, and I did my general study also at MVCC. And that after that, I moved to San Jose. Oh, and…


(6:27) Irene: What were you studying again? In nursing? 


(6:31) Rasha: Nursing. Yeah. 


(6:33) Irene: What made you want to go into nursing?


(6:35) Rasha: What was that? 


(6:37) Irene: What made you want to be a nurse?


(6:39) Rasha: Really just for health, you know, for health. I grew up in a family like just like, not all my families, but the most of my family just work as health field. My father was also medical doctor. And I have my mom, my mom also was a nurse. She passed away 2012. But she was a nurse, and just a born in hospital and then grew up in hospital and guess I feel like I belong to that. Yeah, I did my education, all my education in my country. And I have like, five-year scholars. I graduated already and I walked [INDECIPHERABLE]. Yeah. [laughs] But when I came here, I start all over again. And I checked my majors incompletely. Yeah, I changed my mind. Yes. And I said, I've got a smart thing to do, like, nursing for the work here. You can work easy. Yeah, because for, for me, I'm agriculture. I graduate from science. So, if you're looking for that thing, I can't find like, easy to work or I have to move to different place to find better job. But for nursing. Yeah, anytime or anywhere. I will do Yeah, that is why I want to try. I don't know if I can make it or not, but I'm gonna try. Yeah…


(8:10) Irene: Can you tell me a little bit about like your culture and your people?


(8:14) Rasha: My people, my people. [laughs] Do you mean my culture here or in country my country. My country. My country has allowed traditional another culture different. So, it’s so different culture, my country. Like, so there are a lot of tribes. Yeah, so if there's a lot of tribes, so that means a lot of cultures. Like [INDECIPHERABLE] different culture. So that's me, like many cultures that make the Sudan so beautiful, you know? Yes, but the best thing is to that or the one also that is people know, just like the world to say, like Sudan is the generous people. Yeah, if you go over there like you feel just your family if you want so you at the straight or outside say, “Oh, hi hello, you can come to my home and you can eat and you do whatever you want.” Yeah, just like feel free anywhere in Sudan, anywhere you want. Yeah, I just wanna visit so that you can feel like completely different. I can’t describe really, I can’t. Yes, but traditional for the clothing that all people just for women you have to wear something called tob. Yeah, talk like sari. You know, like Indian sari. Yeah, but also that is people you have to cover your hair. You do not put down. You have to cover your hair. So that's so beautiful. Yeah, everyone knew so you were that close? You know that “Oh, you are from Sudan.” Yes. So, so different. And for men, you have to wear something called “jalabiya.” Yeah, jalabiya- also like jilbab like cover all from up to down so called jalabiya. But now there's like different, people like different…no, no just wear everything you want in Sudan too. Yeah, people in Sudan do not like, so…You see, my culture is so different also a lot I can’t describe to you now.


(10:33) Irene: Yeah, do you guys have like religion or practice anything?


(10:39) Rasha: Yeah, yeah [INDECIPHERABLE] is there like most of Sudanese people Muslim. Most of them not all, but they’re Christian. Yes, yes two- just Muslim or Christian. Yeah, but the most of them's Muslim. Yeah, especially we live in North Sudan, most of them Muslim. And then all the people in South Sudan not all but most of them in South Sudan id like Christian those are some Muslim but like I think there's not a lot of…


(11:15) Irene: Would you say you practice Islam?


(11:18) Rasha: Islam? Yeah, I practice Islam. Yeah, for what to pray. You have to pray five days, five times a day you have to pray. Yeah, there's like [INDECIPHERABLE], Surah Al Maghrib, Al Isha. You have to play like five times, and you have to do like [INDECIPHERABLE] you have to practice Allah you have to know Quran don't have to know all the must have a Quran or the book of Quran you have to know like some Quran to practice how to pray. So, if you want to pray you have to know some Quran so yeah, and I know I don't know here is like a little bit difficult for the Muslim people to memorize the Quran. But in my country, even the child like three years or two years to start the practice Quran and by the age of five- memorized Allah Allah. Yeah, but now like my daughter, we live in Egypt she was six years as you know, like almost half of Quran and only move here just see keep forgetting for now. I try to make her memorize so much she can she does memorize some. Yeah, some to pray, to practice how to pray something like that. Yeah. Okay. I love that. Yeah.


(12:44) Irene: Did you find a Muslim community here when you came?


(12:48) Rasha: Yeah, there's a lot of Muslim community. Yeah, there’s large, large. Large Muslim community that's coming here next door here in Campbell Israel, a Masjid mosque that people go to pray and then there's like Quran and Arabic class for the kids. Like it's Sunday yeah Sunday and there's like Bosnian mosque also there are Muslim Mosque also I’ve seen like two. Yeah, now they grow up, really. Yeah, grow. When I came here, I still just like one or two but now a lot. Oh, yes. A lot of mosques so then, yeah. Even for the Muslim people are so community or so. So, like grow up, grow.


(13:43) Irene: Yeah. So, what was it like raising a family here?


(13:50) Rasha: You know, that depends to the mom, the mom and dad you know, if the mom and dad is strict and then good. The familiar service good, you know? Yeah, independent family. It's not to say oh, the street and the school make the kids bad. But that's I don’t feel that’s true. Really. Yeah, as good they take something from school but don't they came home and then tell them that's wrong. They stop. Yeah. So, I didn't know what I believe I'm gonna raise my kids. So yeah, yes. So


(14:29) Irene: Are there any things are very different about raising them here in the states than in raising them like…


(14:35) Rasha: Yeah, different, different. So different. In my family, it was… there's no different I didn't show them there's a difference. If I want to slap them, I’m gonna slap them. If I do. Yeah. But the kids learn something different from school, or I don't know who shows them that. Say “Oh, if they their mom like Rasha slaps them.” They say “Oh, I'm going to called police.” Why you call police because yeah, you raise your voice at me. And that is why I don't know something like that. So no, no, you have to raise your voice. And you have say stuff that that's wrong and you have to tell them that's wrong. But it just leaves them say, “Oh, because I'm scared tell [INDECIPHERABLE], is our government gonna take my kids?” Why is it that your kids… no there's no reason to take your kids if you let them good and show them the right way. So no, nobody, nobody in the house says that's wrong or that's right. You decide that's wrong or right. Nobody decides for you. So you have to decide to learn new skills what's the right and what is wrong. Yeah, yeah. They say, “Oh, gotta call bullies.” Why you scared from bullies? Just shows them they’re right. I know this, I think even when you call bullies and you come and boys come home so strong say, “Ah my mom tells me that.” Even though they say no see your mom you have to tell you what's right and what is wrong. Yes. I don't know but she'll tell me sometimes like very angry. Very sad. And when you go some family and visit my friend I said, “Oh,” and I saw like some kids like doing like bad stuff and when I asked her “why don't tell them to stop?” She says, “Ah they are just scared for their dad.” They're scared for was I don't know not scared of me they’re scared of their dad. Why? Why this while the dad in house kids stay stuck doing bad stuff? One dad known house doing bad stuff say of course. Nice. No, you have to show them that is right or wrong. It’s your kids is not the other kids. Yeah. Yeah. So, I don't know how to talk. But I feel bad yeah, I feel bad.


(17:05) Irene: Yeah, are there any other things are very different between American culture and the culture you grew up with?


(17:15) Rasha: Yeah, my culture, I grew up like it's the person in the street if you do something wrong, they tell you that is wrong. Don't do that. That is wrong. Any person's history. But now here you can’t tell. You can tell this is wrong, you can't tell. Yeah, this is a big difference between my culture. Okay, you can see that. Yeah, different, different culture different…Yeah, so different.


(17:59) Irene: Yeah, what are some other different things?


(18:03) Rasha: A lot of different. Even the clothes or the people how to wear. Yeah, you have to wear something at least cover you… but it's not your hand or your leg. But yeah after this you feel like comfortable. Some people [INDECIPHERABLE] This is the person who wears that you feel is not feel comfortable. But the word because why it wasn’t modern. So what’s modern? What's the kind of the modern? You can show everything in your body and say, “Oh, are you comfortable?” [laughs] Yeah. So, so different! So that is why I want to just show my kids it’s not just wear no, it's not just a buy or a scarf or something like that. But no, just wear something. Yeah, yeah. I think just show respect. Yeah. For the workers at least. Yeah. I'm not worried about someone just cover your hair, or something like that. But just so to be. Yeah, this is a different culture. Really! [laughs] Yeah. So yeah, there's a lot of difference really. Yeah, a lot of difference. So…


(19:16) Irene: So, have you been back to Sudan?


(19:19) Rasha: No, no. No, I wish. I wish, yeah, I wish I could go, so then to see my family. My mom passed away, but my father now is alive. Yeah. Yeah, I wanna, I'm gonna try. I'm gonna try to visit them, but they told me “No, you can’t visit you can't travel until your paper,” but I'm gonna try. I'm gonna try. If I come back, let me in. It's okay if they'll let me in. It’s ok, yeah… [takes a phone call]


(20:40) Irene: Just like a few more questions, what do you miss the most about Sudan?


(20:56) Rasha: My gosh, I miss, I miss. Oh, sorry I miss my family. Oh my gosh, I’m going to cry for this one, I miss everything. Yeah, everything really.


(21:10) Irene: So, when you chose to come here, they chose to stay back or were they able to come to you?


(21:17) Rasha: My family no was not able to come. No, nobody able to come here. So, you know it's America you have to have paper, or you have to someone make some paper to you to come so yeah, if I have paper I can make some. Yeah. I come in my father some people from my father to come here to visit me or my, yeah, my younger sibling but now I can’t for me. Yeah. Yeah, this is everything for me. Oh my gosh. Yeah, so hard because for no reason. So, I'm gonna wait. I don't know for how long but maybe after I graduate, I'm gonna move back to my country. That's what I’m thinking about. I'm gonna move back. I’m gonna take my [INDECIPHERABLE]. I’m gonna take my kids and just move back to my country to start new life. Yeah…


(22:21) Irene: So, is your country very different from when you left?


(22:27) Rasha: Yeah, different was more than since 2006. Yes, it’s, now this is 2019, so different. Yeah.


(22:42) Irene: Yeah, to wrap it up, what is something you would want people to know about being a refugee?


(22:53) Rasha: Being refugee? I don't know. It means like refugee here or refugee there? Oh okay, just as a generally. Being refugee not destroy everything. Yes. Not mean refugee mean, like refugee. No, you have to understand refugee is definitely a person. You are a person. Refugees are people. So, you have to start to  live. You have to get up on yourself live, do something. At least study something. Don't just come here and just work by $9. And when you ask yourself, you say, “Oh, because I'm refugee, I don't do that, I can't do that.” No, you can do everything. Yeah, you can do everything. Refugees, that mean just that you don't know anything. No! You have to start. You have to start and do something. Yeah. Yes. Forgot about that name. I’m refugee? No. When you come here just, yeah, the same as anyone in this country. And you have, you know, if you became refugee, you have choice. I think that more than the people live here. Yeah, we got a lot of help as refugees. So, if refugee doesn't just mean that “Oh I’m refugee, I'm gonna get a lot of help, I'll just sit down.” No, no. Okay, let's get help for other people too. Yeah, you can be refugee. You have to start, and you have to start work, and you have to get up. And just, yeah, at first you can take some help, but after that, you have to help you. You do have to help you have to help others. So yeah. As refugees, doesn’t just mean refugees, yeah yes. Just, yeah…


(24:37) Irene: Do you have any last thoughts that you would like to share?


(24:43) Rasha: I don’t know my last thoughts [laughs]. So just for me, I love to study. Really. Yeah, I love to study. No matter what your age. Now I'm 41. So my husband is 57, no, like 52 and he just graduates from MVCC. Yes. And he got like, now he works like $28 or almost $30. Yesterday, he just he worked the $9 something for more than five, six years he worked just like for $9.25 or something like that instead children’s home as housekeeping. So now just see he just keep push, push. And he’s like before he is teacher you know, Arabic, Arabic teacher. And he just changed completely from Arabic teacher to science. And he keeps pushing and pushing and doing and not impossible, you know? It was possible he graduated from respiratory care and now he was thorough service headed to his bar exam and he passed that one. And now he worked at Upstate Syracuse Hospital that was the hospital. He works and also just, yeah, just I feel like this suddenly change everything gonna change. Yes. So just keep push, keep looking for a better life. They say “Oh, I found a job $12.75, I'm gonna stick with that.” For how long you gonna just work as housekeeping or work as food service and food service worker now at MVCC? So, if I don't push and just keep studying, so I'm going to forever work as food service. And nobody. Yes, I show respect. But you have to take more respect for yourself as the person so you have to push, you have to push [INDECIPHERABLE]. I know so difficult and so hard so heavy. I know a lot of my friends say “no, I don't want to headache.” Yes, headache but you have to get headache because after this couple of years then just done. Yeah, and say “Oh, I can't do all this law for seven years.” No, because you stay here so no way. Yeah, if you are alive, don't die, don't pass away, just keep. Yeah, keep, nothing gonna stop you just if you die. It's okay. There's no way but if you're alive, just keep push and keep looking for a better life. Yeah. 


(27:22) Irene: That’s really awesome. Yeah, thank you so much. 


(27:28) Rasha: My English I know is upside down.


End