Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Khadija Al Ahmad
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/khadija-al-ahmad
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1u7Kt_62kirtGhY7loPqbCWB7Jedcd397/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Khadija Al-Ahmad
Interviewed by Alice McGuinness on Zoom, 7/20/20
Narrator location: Hamden, CT
Interviewer location: Milwaukee, WI
Transcribed by Alice McGuinness, 9/3/20
(00:00)
Alice:
Okay, there we go. The recording is
started and just to let you know
again, Khadija, you are welcome to talk about whatever you would like to talk about
regarding your resettlement process. I'm so grateful to have a chance to speak with
you. So just to introduce ourselves, my name is Alice McGuinness. I’m in my home in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. And I'm speaking with Khadija Al-Ahmad, who is in her home
in New Haven, Connecticut. Is that right?
(00:45)
Khadija:
Yes, actually in Hamden.
(00:48)
Alice:
Perfect, in Connecticut. And we are
speaking via Zoom call. I'm so, so
grateful to have a chance to speak with you this afternoon Khadija .I've really been
looking forward to speaking with you. Do you think maybe to start, you could tell me
a bit about where you are from and what that was like before you resettled in the
United States?
(01:18)
Khadija:
Yes, sure. Absolutely. So, my name
is Khadija. I'm from Aleppo, in Syria.
I have a husband, Mohammed, and four children. You'd like to hear my story in the
beginning?
(01:37)
Alice:
Yeah, I would love that, whatever you'd
like to share.
(01:42)
Khadija:
Yeah, thank you so much. So, I started
to write this one year ago, this
is my story. One day I was in my country with my family and with my loved ones. I
used to live with as anyone does. I always found someone near me in my happy and
sad moments until I lived through a harsh experience. It's immigration. Our journey
away from home begin with in Turkey. My husband, in Syria, he had been the
manager of a small factory that made leatherbacks. In Turkey, he continued this
work, managing a workshop there. Our surrounding in Turkey looked familiar. We
understand the language, the religion. Culture and also the food were similar. But we
knew that we were no longer home and that all had changed.
1

(02:44)
Khadija:
Yeah. And then we didn't start learning a foreign language until
January 22, 2017 and our way to the United States, to here. So, while we were in the
plane, President Trump was holding his pen and destroying Syrian refugees’ dreams,
no more refugees.
(03:04)
Alice:
Oh my gosh.
(03:07)
Khadija:
Yeah, that day. I feel that my family
and I were not welcomed in the
United States. You know, feeling like, yeah. Despite my feeling, we were warmly
welcomed by volunteers from JCARR. They took care of us by ﬁnding us home,
ﬁnding school for kids, doctors. That makes our life is, it was easy, in the beginning, to
have some friends helping us in a difﬁcult time. I remember, during our ﬁrst day in
America, I used to look up from my window, I open the curtains, closed them several
times, wishing that the appearance street will change and look like my old street. For
a moment I felt I was in a dream, and things around me were not real. But as soon as
I came back to reality by hearing my son telling me, Mommy, I want a pizza. I
remember that everything changed. Khadija, you are in America. You know that
feeling is different. Just in the beginning here. Also, we had studied English in Syria,
but I had very little practice speaking. I was the contact person for our family. I had to
help my husband understand all that was being said in conversation that I was
having difﬁculty following. You know, it's difﬁcult for him also, changing from being a
manager to a worker. And from working as a craftsman to working in the industry.
You know, this change already changed his relationship to himself. Also, it's difﬁcult
for all my family. And also, one of my sons, I told you about him, Ahmed, he is
disabled. He had never been out of our home for very long. He wants to go to school,
and before coronavirus to school hours a day away from home. He's doing well now
with this change. I think he's the best person in my family, you know, he's loved this
change.
(05:48)
Alice:
With the coronavirus?
(05:49)
Khadija:
No, to go to school. He didn’t go
to school in Syria or in Turkey. But it
was a large adjustment for me to not having him always at my side, it's really difﬁcult.
(06:02)
Alice:
I can imagine. How old is he now, Khadija?
(06:08)
Khadija:
He's 11 years old.
(06:11)
Alice:
11 years old. So, how old was he when
you ﬁrst moved from Syria to
Turkey?
(06:23)
Khadija:
We moved to Turkey; we ran away from
Syria to Turkey in 2015. Now
eleven, so you can do the math [
both laughing
]. He’s
smart, but they don’t accept
him at school because we need some documents, doctors’ documents also
government documents. So, we had a difﬁcult time to ﬁnd school that ﬁts his
situation. And also, they want us to pay for schools, but we couldn’t do that, so I keep
him at home. And I do practice with him. I taught him a lot of Practice, but you know
he needs school, he needs teachers.
2
(07:24)
Alice:
Right.
(07:25)
Khadija:
But my other kids, they are enrolled
in Hamden School here. So, they
made friends, they get things comfortable learning from their teachers.
(07:39)
Alice:
That's wonderful.
(07:41)
Khadija:
Yeah, you know, our family grew,
and we welcomed a baby, baby girl.
(07:49)
Alice:
Wow, congratulations! When was that?
(07:53)
Khadija:
In July 2018. Her birthday is next
Monday, the 24
t h
.
(08:02)
Alice:
Happy early birthday!
(08:03)
Khadija:
Thank you so much. And as you know,
she's already an American
citizen. It's not like us. We have a difﬁcult time to wait until ﬁve years to apply for
passport to be citizen, We are happy for her. This birth of our new daughter forced us
to think about how much space we needed. We found an apartment in a new
building, across town in Hamden. And then when we moved during the school year,
I'm talking about 2018, we were told by Hamden School Board that since we moving
to a new district, our children would go to a different school, more change for us. It’s
very difﬁcult. I had to do all this paperwork and at this point, I knew that I was tired of
all these changes. I knew I had to ﬁght this change. I wrote to the school board and
petitioned them to allow our kids to study where they are. Thank God, I won to leave
them that year. Also, I ﬁght for my disabled son to receive more one-on-one therapy. I
won again. It’s about it's a longer story, to ﬁght and go to the places and a lot of
applications. Some people, they need more information about you. Sometimes, you
are not feeling comfortable. Sometimes, t's okay. But yeah, thanks God and won and
got one-on-one at home.
(09:56)
Alice:
Oh, good. I'm so glad. It sounds like
it must have taken a lot of courage,
standing up for your children and for your family in many ways.
(10:12)
Khadija:
I decided to try my hand at a job
and started catering. I do catering
and sharing my food of our home in Aleppo, from Syria. Even though when the
phone would ring with ﬁrst orders, I remember, I was afraid to answer, worried that I
would not understand the conversation. Language can be complicated to translate
and create a problem sometimes. I don't know if you’d like to hear this little example
about what's happened with me.
(10:56)
Alice:
Yeah, I'd love to hear.
(10:58)
Khadija:
One time, when I was talking to this
social security, to update some
information. You know that every year, we should do that. I was talking to them and I
said to the employee, I'm talking behind my husband. This in the beginning, when
we arrived in America. She was shocked and told me to give the phone to my
3
husband. I told her, I meant to apologize, I meant to say on behalf of him, not behind.
She didn't believe me. She closed the phone call. I want to say that the immigration
is a bittersweet experience. It's harsh and difﬁcult but honestly, it has taught me
many things I would not have learned, if I were still in my country. Immigration is not
the end, but maybe the beginning of that impressive success. When you suddenly
ﬁnd the courage in yourself.
(12:00)
Alice:
Yeah, absolutely. It seems like starting
your catering business also took a
lot of courage. Do you feel like you growing up in in Aleppo and throughout your
time in Turkey, you have always felt that kind of courage? Did it feel like a new thing
when you arrived in the United States?
(12:29)
Khadija:
No, absolutely. It's a new thing.
In Turkey, also, even if we had a similar
religion or culture or food. But it’s still, the biggest feeling or different feeling is when
we arrived here. Everything is not the same. It's not even like Turkey or Syria. The
mosque there. We hear the, I don't know if you know that, the adhaan, to pray ﬁve
times a day. We miss that here; we don’t hear it. It’s a little bit difﬁcult here.
(
13:22)
Alice:
May I ask you a question about your
time in in Turkey?
(13:26)
Khadija:
Sure, yes please.
(13:28)
Alice:
Did it feel, when you moved to Turkey
in 2015 in terms of your religious
practice, did it feel like you were able to do most of the same practice that that you
did in in Aleppo? Or did you feel like your religious practice had to change in Turkey?
And then how has it changed since you arrived in in Connecticut in 2017?
(14:02)
Khadija:
Actually, in Turkey, yes, I can do
most of my same practice that I did
in Aleppo. And also, the people there more respect us, as we are Muslims and Arabic.
I don’t know why, not all people there, but most people. Some of them, they are
happy to have refugee in Turkey, some not. About the religion, I completely feel
comfortable to do and practice. All my religion practicing. But here I feel like a little
difﬁcult. In the beginning, I told you, we don't hear the adhaan ﬁve times to pray.
Yeah, it's a little different. We downloaded an app in our phones so that’s what
happens now, to pray ﬁve times in our home. It's a little bit like the same feeling in
Aleppo and Turkey, it’s not like before.
The mosque here, it’s not the same, it's not looks like that in Turkey or in Syria. The
people not speaking Arabic. They are from Pakistan, Afghanistan, and some from
Morocco, in different places. So, they use English, not Arabic. Most people in Turkey,
they speak Turkish, but they use the Arabic, the people in the mosque, the people
there. I don't say in the street, but in the mosque, they are speaking classic Arabic. So,
we can talk to them easily, not like here. I would like to send my little boy, my son, to
learn some Arabic here, but I'm thinking if I send him, they will be able to speak to
him in English, not Arabic. We found it a little difﬁcult here to practice or do some
courses in Arabic.
(16:32)
Alice:
Right, yeah, that that makes a lot
of sense. How have you felt your
experience has been raising your children in the religious practice in the United
4
States? Have there been other things like the Arabic classes that have been difﬁcult
to ﬁnd or easy to have access to, when it comes to like a religious or Arabic education
for your children?
(17:03)
Khadija:
Yeah, we do most of that at home.
My husband and I we teach them.
We sometimes use YouTube, yeah, many lessons on YouTube and courses. Yeah, we
tried, but when the father and mother teach their kids, it's not the same teacher or
outside. We try a lot, but it’s very difﬁcult.
(17:32)
Alice:
Yeah, absolutely, that makes a lot
of sense. Well, your children are
obviously very lucky to have you as their mother. Khadija, would you mind sharing
more about your catering business, and how you decided to set that up and
everything?
(17:57)
Khadija:
Yeah, sure. Absolutely. Thank you
for asking me for that. Our family
grows, and my husband, he has an accident at his work, three years ago. He did two
surgeries, and he has a difﬁcult time to ﬁnd a job after that. So, I thought, like what
about if I do catering, I know the people here. They love food. They keep searching
now about the healthy food and what I'm thinking like Syrian food or especially
Aleppo food is healthy. It’s not like fried, or from a restaurant from like fast food, it's
different. So, I studied, and I took a course and I passed the exam. And then I do the
certiﬁcate and you know the documents and everything. And I called my business
Khadija’s Kitchen. My daughter, she's very perfect with this technology, as you said,
like technology she created the website for me. She designed the business cards; she
downloaded many apps and helped my business to grow. She’s perfect with that.
She’s almost 13 years old, but she's perfect, she loves to do art, so that pushed her to
say Mom, I can help you, I know how to do these tasks. And also, my husband helped
me. He has business in Syria and Turkey, so he helped me to, I’m not good with math.
So, he’s doing the math one, percentage or how much this costs, how much you
should take. I know how to cook and talk to people. So yeah, I do that, the catering.
Before coronavirus, it was going very well, then I stopped. Then now I do, I have an
idea to make just for four people, menu. The people are not meeting, so this idea
came to have just a small group of people. And yeah, I do weekly menu that I send to
my customers every Monday. The people are very happy to know new foods, new
culture, and they came and asked me, how delicious and what a new thing we tried.
They are very happy.
(21:30)
Alice:
Wow, that’s amazing. And so, you had
said the coronavirus has had an
impact on your business. How has it been with your life and family in general, I
assume your kids have not been going to school for a while?
(21:52)
Khadija:
Yeah, we all have a difﬁcult time
because of them. They want to go
outside, and we are scared to take them outside every day because we live in the
building. And, you know, a lot of people around us. We try to ﬁnd many ways to make
fun for them like practice, do hide and seek, music. Especially for the baby and
especially for Ahmed who is disabled. It is very, very difﬁcult for him to stay home
away from school, he misses school a lot.
5
(22:39)
Alice:
Yeah, I’m sure. And what has it been like having everyone at home
together for so long?
(22:50)
Khadija:
You know, that is the difference
between Syria, the culture. I'm
talking about the culture, not people. The family is very important in Syria. I think in
the Middle East, not just in Syria. But we have to stay together for a long time. It's not
a problem for us, you know, we meet every day at lunch or dinner, sometimes with
breakfast. We had parties, a lot, a lot of parties between women, so the difference is
just because kids stay home, not just because they stay with us. The mother as you
know, the father works in Syria or the Middle East, they work. But the mom stays
home, some mothers are not working. It’s not difﬁcult for us to have them, it’s just
because they don't go to school.
(24:04)
Alice:
Right.
(24:05)
Khadija:
We feel sad about that. Now, I know
it's difﬁcult for fathers and
mothers in America. I hear from my friends, they [the children] stay with us for a long
day. We spend a long time with them, it’s not like before. I’m surprised I say oh, it’s
okay for me, because we’re used to having this, not a problem. We’re also scared
about coronavirus. Some people respect the social distancing, some people do not.
That makes a problem for us.
(24:57)
Alice:
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. Khadija,
I'm wondering how your
religious practice has been changed by the coronavirus at all. Before the pandemic,
were you going to a mosque often?
(25:13)
Khadija:
Sure, we went. It's not for women
to go to mosque a lot, but for men,
like my husband. Especially every Friday, he should go to pray. But they stopped, it’s
very difﬁcult now. And also, my son, the small son, he, he went with his father every
Friday. And nothing happens now. So, it’s a little difﬁcult, yes.
(25:49)
Alice:
Yes, that sounds very difﬁcult, I’m
sorry.
(25:53)
Khadija:
Thank you. No problem. This corona,
it’s across all the world, not just
here. Even if we were in Syria or in Turkey, no mosque.
(26:06)
Alice:
Right, that’s so true.
(26:09)
Khadija:
Yeah, yeah. So, it's a little difﬁcult.
Even if you were at your country, it
makes the same, what the war did for us in Syria. Make social distance between all
people, all families, father and mother, kids, you know, grandfather and
grandmother, it's very difﬁcult for them to not having their kids around them.
(26:44)
Alice:
Absolutely, yeah.
(26:46)
Khadija:
So, it's like a war but it's different
war.
6
(26:49)
Alice:
Yeah, yeah, that's a very good analogy, that makes a lot of sense. Could
you tell me a little bit about what your community is like now in Connecticut? I know
you said many of the people who go to your mosque are not from Syria, they're from
Pakistan or Afghanistan. Could you just tell me a little bit about friends you have
made, through JCARR or through your catering business. What is your community
like now in Hamden?
(27:36)
Khadija:
Now the community is with, telephone,
Zoom. Yeah, when we miss
each other, we open Zoom meeting, we have meeting, and we talk. It’s a little bit
more on the phone, but it's a little easy. We have this technology now. Not like, okay,
social distance, nobody can meet in a real meeting. But I have some friends from the
mosque. Also, I have Syrian friends, not just from different country, and we talk by
phone, Zoom video, WhatsApp. And also, with JCARR, I have a lot of friends. I know
most people in JCARR. And they are friends with us, not just with me, also my
husbands and my kids.
(28:34)
Alice:
Yeah, how has the JCARR community been
since you've arrived? Do
you still feel very much like a part of a part of that community since you were
resettled in 2017?
(28:55)
Khadija:
Yes. We don't have any family here,
or any friends in the beginning.
So, in the beginning, we feel like we’re scared. We don't have any…We had said this in
Syria. If you don't have like old person, you should go and buy an old person to advise
you. We feel like JCARR is our family here. When we had any problem problems or
even just, we want to talk about anything, we talked to them. We have many friends
and they have different education, like doctors and social. If I have any problems, I
just call them, and they are very, very kind and amazing people. They answer me and
try to help me and continue to help me until I want in everything I want. They help
us a lot. Often many things for kids-- now in difﬁcult time, toys. They know that they
don't go to school. They keep asking us-- What do you want Khadija, what do the
kids need with, with Mohammed they know that he's in a difﬁcult time, not having a
job. They are very kind and amazing people. We are grateful to them.
(30:37)
Alice:
That makes me so happy to hear, that
they continue to have a positive
impact.
(30:43)
Khadija:
Yeah, as you know, IRIS is the head
of immigration services. They
asked groups like JCARR to stop helping people, new families, after six months. But
JCARR, they continue to help us, they are like our family here.
(31:07)
Alice:
That's amazing, that makes me so glad.
Okay, if I may rewind a little bit
to your process of resettlement and your journey from Aleppo to Turkey, and then to
New Haven. Could you talk about the role religion has played for you throughout that
journey? We have talked about different religious practices and education. And I'm
wondering if you have any thoughts on the purposes of religion throughout your
journey.
(32:03)
Khadija:
You mean in Turkey?
7
(32:05)
Alice:
Mhm, throughout the whole journey,
from Turkey to your life now in
Hamden.
(32:15)
Khadija:
Yeah, so it's changed. Everything's
changed. I don't know if you know,
the week in Syria also starts on Sunday. But the Friday is very important day for us as
Muslims. We have most meetings and parties. Celebrations happen on Fridays, all
Fridays, most of the things like that. For example, if we woke up on Friday, the family
went to the mosque to pray early in the morning. They come back, it’s vacation. It’s
like Sunday here, no work. Just holiday. You know, so it's different between Aleppo
and Istanbul, Turkey. We don't have on all Fridays because they have the holidays on
just Saturday and Sunday.
So, a little bit different and change for us not to have the family meeting on Friday.
My husband will work. On Friday, we don't have this breakfast together or lunch. Just
a dinner, because it’s a workday, not a holiday. So, the weekend in Syria, it's Friday
and Saturday, but in Turkey, like as here, Saturday and Sunday. It changed for us to
live in Turkey, just because that day is important for us. It changed our relationship
between us, like father and mother, kids. The rules on Friday, going to the mosque
together, my sons and my husband and waiting for them to come back, and we have
lunch together. So, this all is different in Turkey. And also, here. Most of the practice,
we do at home here, in America, not at the mosque.
(34:42)
Alice:
Even without the coronavirus a lot
of your practice was at home with
family?
(34:49)
Khadija:
Yeah, because of the special day
of Friday is a workday. So that
makes us, oh, we are not in Syria. We don't have this Friday. I talked to my family.
Today is Monday, I talked to them Friday, and they have a holiday there. No, it's a
workday here. Yeah, I feel like okay, I should live with this change.
(35:23)
Alice:
Absolutely, that that makes a lot of
sense. Khadija, in the beginning, you
talked about a very poignant memory of yourself looking out of the curtains of your
window in your house. I'm wondering, and you can say no, if you have any other
speciﬁc memories of emotions you felt any point during your journey between
Aleppo and Hamden.
(36:03)
Khadija:
We have a lot of memories. Some memories
are scary memories.
Like when we cross the border. We meet dangerous people. Before we cross the
border between-- because we run away. It's not legal, between Aleppo and Turkey,
they have borders. We met one group of bad people there. I still remember this, it’s
bad, it’s a scary memory. When we want to cross, they stopped our car before we
arrive to the border. They ask us to look to the bodies on the ﬂoor. They ask us to look
to bodies on the ﬂoor. They cut their heads. I remember, it’s a very bad memory, I
close my kids’ eyes. I don't want them to see that, you know, it's very bad. For me, not
just for me but for my husband, my kids. I close their eyes, and I don't want them to
see that. I don't want them to see what I said I see. Yeah, it's very scary. And then we
cross the border, you know, I keep crying for one month. I want this memory to go
away from my mind. But thanks God, it’s okay now.
8
(37:56)
Alice:
Thank you so much for sharing this,
Khadija.
(38:03)
Khadija:
Yeah. Thank you. We need to do that
because it’s for our kids. We
need to live in a safe place, in a good place. Not see what we saw in Syria and before.
(38:21)
Alice:
Yeah, absolutely, that makes a lot
of sense.
(38:28)
Khadija:
Maybe I pray to forget this memory,
but I remember. I’m sorry to say
because I know it's a very hard and bad memory. It’s making me feel because this is
the last picture I saw in my country, when we ran away from Syria. This is the last
picture I remember. I would like to have a good memory, a good picture from that
time.
(39:02)
Alice:
Yeah, of course. Absolutely. And you
said that prayer helped you process
the memory? Has your religious practice been important in in helping you forget the
more negative memories or work through others? Could you talk a little bit about
that?
(39:27)
Khadija:
Sure, I believe God needs for us
the good things. Even if something
bad happened to us or something we would not like to have. But I am thinking, and I
keep talking to myself like everything, even if it’s bad, you can look Khadija and
search about the good things that you will ﬁnd it. Thank God, any problems I had, I've
found after that, a little happiness. I found solutions. Sometimes, I found good ends,
even if the start is not good. More practice is good for me, more prayer is good for
me. I feel God stays with us anywhere. Not just in Aleppo or Turkey or here, any place
in the world.
(40:31)
Alice
Yes, thank you so much for sharing,
Khadija. I have one more question
for you. But ﬁrst, are there any other memories, stories, feelings, or anything else you
think is important for you to share during this interview?
(
41:00)
Khadija:
The memory is also when I say goodbye
to my family across the
border. Yeah, it's very sad. My father and my mother crying and, you know, this is the
last time I saw them. And even now, when we have, after maybe 15 days we have Eid.
It's a celebration for Muslims. Because we cannot see them, it makes a lot of things
for us, not to have family and visit them. It’s hard and sad in the same time, but I'm
sure, in the future, I'm sure. And I believe God will help all these people in Syria and in
any war, to give them a good life in the future. He can end this war in Syria. And I pray
for that.
(42:10)
Alice:
Deﬁnitely, yeah, that's very beautiful.
How do you think of your concept
of home? Does home mean to you where your family is , or in Hamden and in
Aleppo?
(42:36)
Khadija:
Yeah, I know what you mean. It's
absolutely the home here. Here, the
house looks different. It’s made from wood and in Syria it’s from stone, different
things. Also, the design of homes is a little different. I designed our home to be a
9
similar to Syria. I tried, but it looks a little similar. I put some pictures from places in
Aleppo. I put on the wall, in my kids’ room, in the living room. We keep watching
Arabic channels. I have had time to teach my little son Arabic, how to write. We do
what we can to keep our language, our version growing up here. Not forget that. In
Ramadan, I don't know if you know this month, we fast for one month. This
happened two months ago. I tried to turn on some-- it's not music, it’s religious
practice, singing to feel like we are in Aleppo, in Syria here by YouTube, not real
people. And as you know, our food, it's still the same, Syrian food or Arabic food. So,
this makes us feel like, okay we are Arabic people, we are not in Syria, but we try to do
what we can for our kids, too, to keep this memory in their mind. We have different
culture, we have different practice, but we are happy to live here in this safe place, in
America. The important things for me are for my kids to stay in a safe place.
(45:06)
Alice:
Yeah, absolutely. And have you have
you done those things ever since
you arrived in Connecticut?
(45:18)
Khadija:
Sorry, what do you mean?
(45:21)
Alice:
Sorry, it was a confusing question.
I mean, have you been able to like to
listen to the Arabic channels and play the YouTube videos and eat the same food
ever since you arrived in in Connecticut?
(45:39)
Khadija:
Yes. I watch American channels, but
I need my country and my
home. I turn on some channels and we watched ﬁlms and cartoons with kids,
speaking Arabic. We have the Arabic food around us, and we took a lot of pictures to
remember in future. We try to make the life as easy as we can. We miss a lot of
things, like meeting family, meeting friends. They communicate in Syria, and it’s
completely different, it’s not like here. You can ﬁnd a big family, like a grandfather or
grandmother. They have a weekend, you can meet your aunts, your uncles, every
week, every two weeks. Not like here, we miss everything like family. Not like before.
15 days we have this Eid, this celebration. When we were in Syria, in one day we met
20 to 25, sometimes 30 people a day. We would celebrate together. We went from
home to another home and then after two days, they come to us visit us. We have
ma’amoul, cookies stuffed with dates. It's very important to have, it is also very
important to have Arabic coffee. And also, I miss, and my kids miss I’m sure, it’s called
Eidiyah. When you go to visit your grandfather and family, like uncle and aunt. You
kiss them, you say Eid Mubarak, and they give you a gift card or money. My kids miss
that, like oh, when were in Syria, we had a lot of money in our pockets. We don't have
family, and we don't have friends here. Each person should give kids a lot of candies
or money to buy toys or play in parks. My kids keep asking me, we don’t have family
here, we don’t go to say Eid Mubarak to anybody, so give us some money, Mom. I say,
God willing, in future, when we have a lot of friends to go meet. And also, we give to
the kids.
(48:47)
Alice:
Do your kids talk about a lot of memories
with you from Syria and from
Turkey?
1 0
(48:59)
Khadija:
My oldest daughter, yes, she did. She remembers Syria and Turkey,
but Ahmed who is disabled, he doesn't speak. And I know him. He remembers when
I show him some pictures, and he smiles and looks at me to my eyes. I'm sure he
remembered some memories is his mind. But my son was, when we arrived to
Turkey, he's eight months old, so all his memory is in Turkey. He doesn’t know
anything about Syria. I talked to him. He asked me, Mom, what does Syria mean,
where is Syria? Do we have family there? Just by videos I show him or talk to our
family there by videos so he can know them. He knows them through the Internet,
not like real meeting. Especially my oldest daughter, she wants to go back to meet
family, her friends.
(50:15)
Alice:
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. That
makes sense. I'm so grateful that
we've been able to speak. It’s been really wonderful for me to be able to listen to you
and learn from you.
(50:38)
Khadija:
I am so happy to talk to you talk
about my religion practice or my
story. Thank you. Thank you for so much for listening to me, and I also apologize for
any words that are not good in English.
(50:55)
Alice:
Oh my gosh, no, this has been perfect,
you’ve been very clear. Do you
have any ﬁnal thoughts or reﬂections that you would like to share?
(51:13)
Khadija:
Thank you so much. No, I wish the
war would stop in my country and
people live in safety. I wish, if I could meet my parents, it's been long time that I didn't
see them, it's very difﬁcult. My sisters and brothers.
(51:36)
Alice:
I wish that for you as well.
(51:40)
Khadija:
Thank you. I wish my son, he will
be good here. We came here for
him. We came because we need to change our life, but also for him to have school,
doctors, to ﬁnd a solution for his medical problems. I wish if he could ﬁnd that here.
(52:05)
Alice:
Yeah, absolutely. Well, I'll deﬁnitely
keep him and your entire family and
my thoughts and prayers. Thank you.
(52:16)
Khadija:
Thank you so much, Alice
(51:19)
Alice:
Thank you so much. Of course, I'm going
to stop the recording.
E n d
1 1