Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Ifrah Ahmed
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/ifrah-ahmed
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1_myjnKXQ1EKEM1GopQVVESWYQGkN--Ka/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Ifrah Ahmed
Interviewed by Grady Trexler via Zoom 07/06/20
Transcribed by Grady Trexler 08/27/20
[00:00] 
Grady Trexler:
This is Grady Trexler, interviewing
Ifrah Ahmed on July 6, 2020.
The interview is taking place over Zoom. So, can you just start off by telling me about
where you're from?
[00:14] Can you just start out by telling me about where you're from?
[00:27] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
My name is Ifrah Ahmed, and I
was born and raised in Kenya. I
lived in a refugee camp before I came to the U. S. I was ﬁrst resettled in Kansas City,
Missouri.
[00:47] 
Grady Trexler:
 Can you tell me about some
of your earliest memories, or the
earliest things people have told you about -- about growing up in Kenya? 
[00:53] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 The earliest -- about what?
[00:58] 
Grady Trexler:
Growing up in Kenya. And your
earliest memories from that
time.
[01:04] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
I -- I remember as a child, I
loved it. I loved it, and we played
outside more than we were inside, which was fun, and a lot of times we'd make our
own toys, make our own little dolls and make [indecipherable] and stuff like that, and
it was more like a -- almost everybody in your neighborhood was kind of like your
family. I remember we would stay outside until almost 7, I would say almost 6:30
when the sun was setting, and, yeah. 
[01:52] 
Grady Trexler:
 And, I know you mentioned in
our previous call too, you spent
some time in Uganda as well? Could you talk a little bit about that?
[02:03] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
I was in Uganda -- my family
moved to Uganda -- and the
refugee camp. I liked it, too. I really liked it. I enjoyed it. It was beautiful, and things
were very simple. Yeah, there wasn't a lot of luxury, or anything of that, but it was
more about family, and connection, and I got my ﬁrst job in Uganda, and I was
1

working for the U.N., but I was working as an interpreter, which was pretty
interesting. Then, I ended up learning that everybody had -- working with a lot of
refugees, everybody had a story that was worse than mine. I ended up learning how
to appreciate every single day as it came, being that there's always somebody who
has -- who's in worse of a situation than you are.
[03:03] 
Grady Trexler:
And what -- sorry.
[03:04] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
-- in fact, that you may think
you might be at your lowest,
somebody else is worse.
[03:12] 
Grady Trexler:
And what year was it when you
went to Uganda?
[03:14] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Many moons ago. I believe it
was somewhere close to 2 -- it was
a little bit after 2005. No -- yeah. There. When I ﬁrst moved there.
[03:35] 
Grady Trexler:
And how old were you at that
point?
[03:37] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
When we ﬁrst moved there --
barely ﬁnishing -- I was actually in
high school. Then I ﬁnished high school, and went to a college there. Got a
scholarship to go to a college, so then I got a scholarship to go to university, and then
came back to Uganda after earning my anthropology degree, and started working --
then I realized, there wasn't much you could do with anthropology, unless you
earned a PhD or something, and you were teaching, or if you had the resources --
mind you, I was a refugee girl so there's no way I had the resources for that. And, so, I
started working as an interpreter, it was also -- very much fulﬁlling because I was
able to work with different cultures, be exposed to different people, be exposed to
different stories, which was the reason why -- in the ﬁrst place -- I wanted to be -- to
study anthropology. To understand different cultures and people. So, yeah. And then,
in 2012, we ﬁnally had our resettlement accepted, but unfortunately my mother was
not accepted, so it was just me. My sisters went to different countries. My sisters were
in Europe. They were sent to Europe. So, I came to the U.S., and I remember that
when I ﬁrst -- after your health, physical health, you have to go through this process,
where you get interviewed, and get vetted, and it's a very long process -- mind you,
that I was pretty much on the refugee camp. And so, by the time I came here, I was
almost 20 something. I was in my twenties. My early twenties. We got posted. First
you had to go through the health screening. After you passed through the interview
and everything, and go through the health screening, then you have another waiting
period. So, ﬁnally when the period came and we were posted, I was posted, my
mother wasn't posted. So, it was just me coming to the U.S., and, I could think, it was
like -- because I've never heard of Kansas, and I was coming to Kansas. And I was like,
"Okay. Wait. What is going on? I don't know." And I'm like, "Where is Kansas?" So, I go
to my -- to this -- the guy who was helping me with my health screening, he was
from the U.S., so I was like, "What do you know about Kansas?" And he looks at me,
and he says, "I think that's where Dorothy's from." And, I'm thinking, "Who's
Dorothy?" I have know idea who is this lady. I'm like, "Okay," and he's like, "Oh, I think
they have really good barbecue." And I'm like, "I don't know what a barbecue is,
either." He's like, "Well, I think they're famous for their tornadoes." And I'm like, "Okay.
2
That doesn't sound like fun." But -- so I went back home, and I prayed, and it said -- so
it's like, it says Kansas City, Missouri. Where are you getting just the Kansas from? I'm
like, "Okay." And I'm like, "Missouri. So it has to be nice, Mama, because, if you think
about it --" Missouri, in my language means good. Like, literally. Missouri means good.
And, so she's like, "Deﬁnitely. It is -- anything is better than here. You will be okay." So,
long story short, I ﬂew in -- came to the U.S., and it was fall. February, it was February.
And I don't think I was dressed appropriately, because, mind you, I have never seen
winter. It never snows. I'm freezing. We get to the airport and our case worker and
comes and picks us up, and there was me, and seven other women who were from
different backgrounds and everything. Different countries. So, we were -- he came
and he picked us up. And, I remember I looked out the window, and I could see all
the trees were dead. Like, the fall. And I have never seen anything like that in my life!
And so, I asked the guy now, "So, do you mind if I ask you a question?" He's like, "Yeah,
go ahead, ask me," and I'm like, "Did the tornado happen?" And he's like, "What?" I'm
like, "Did the tornado happen? Is that why the trees have fallen? Is that why the
leaves are dead but the tree's still standing?" And he's like, "No, no, no, no, no, no,
that's what we get in different seasons. It's fall. It wasn't fall, it was winter." And I'm
like, "Oh, okay, I guess." And I'm like, "I've never seen anything like this." I thought it
was a big disaster, and yet, it's so beautiful.
[08:42] So, and, that's how -- he took us to our home and he put us in the house, this
small house, with seven women who speak different languages from different
perspectives, from different cultures. It was very fun, and a very interesting
experience. So, do you have any -- 
[09:10] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah, I wanted to backtrack
a little bit. You mentioned that
when you moved into Uganda, you were still in high school. So, could you talk a little
bit about what it was like moving like that at a relatively young age? And what it was
like to ﬁnish out your high school in a different context?
[09:31] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 I think once you're born in a
refugee, you kind of detach yourself
from belonging somewhere, because you never seem to belong anywhere, so being
born in Kenya, I never belonged. You know? So, the Kenyan children would always
look at me and be like, "Oh, but your parents are Somalian, which means you are
Somalian," and they're like, "You're not Kenyan." And then, you can't call Somali your
home because it's such a unstable situation, and I've never been there, so I didn't
know enough to be able to call it home, other than my parents. And so, I always had
this -- I guess, this uncertainty of where you belong. Not being able to completely say
that this is where I belong, this is where I'm supposed to be. And, I think the ﬁrst time
that I ever felt like I belonged anywhere was when I ﬁrst became a citizen. For the
ﬁrst time, I was ofﬁcially accepted somewhere. And, in the same way, in Uganda,
you're a refugee. And so, a lot of my friends were refugees, a lot of the people that I
hang around were refugees, so I didn't really speciﬁcally get attached to the country
or the people. However, you -- you get to -- it was an easy transition, because I was
ﬁnally in school. And in primary school, mostly I was home schooled by my mother,
and so I was ﬁnally going to school. I was making friends, and then all of sudden we
had to move, because Kenya was unsafe all of a sudden for us, or Kenya wasn't being
the best choice for us, so my mother had to pack up and leave. So, we then came to
3
Uganda, which was -- it was a new transition. I had to do it again -- Finally get to
establish another friendship, get to know the people, and it was like, this thing that
you just worked hard for was taken away from you. It wasn't hard -- it wasn't easy, but
at the same time it had its moments.
[11:55] 
Grady Trexler:
 And what about going to university
there? What was that like?
[11:56] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 What was it like?
[11:58] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah, for going to university
there.
[12:01] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 It was incredible. It was good.
It was just like a regular university
here. It was -- it was really just pretty much similar to here. We had lectures, we had
professors, we had different groups and different clubs, and yeah. I loved my uni
time. Being in the uni was incredible because it was the ﬁrst time that I felt like I was
ﬁnally independent, I was staying -- I wasn't at home. I was in the uni, being -- I
thought I was an adult. I get to make my own decisions now. 
[12:50] 
Grady Trexler:
And I also wanted to ask about
-- you mentioned when you got
resettled to the U.S., it seems like your family was split up. Could you talk a little bit
about what that was like?
[13:03] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
It was heartbreaking. And --
well, because my family has always
been together, and then, all of a sudden, it was like, we had to go different paths.
Which was not very popular with a lot of refugees. Most of the time, they put families
together. They like -- the idea of being separated was very -- most people would be
like, "Well, I think they usually put them together," but, in our case, that was not what
happened to us. And I have always been with family, and then all of a sudden, I had
to be by myself. It wasn't even just me because the person who got affected the
most was my mother. Because she lost all of her children at once. They all left. And
it's like, oh. I guess it -- all three of her daughters went away, every one in a different
continent, knowing -- not knowing where they are, what they're doing, what is going
on, not being able to hold your children or hug your children. I think that was the
hardest part. And for us, the hardest part was that -- knowing that you were alone.
It's a foreign country, you were new, you have no idea the cultural shock there, there
is -- what do you do? Do you do this, do you not do this? How do you talk, like, if you
come home today -- how do I tell -- how do I -- I can't share with my sisters how my
day was, because I don't know these people well enough to share that. And, it was -- I
was homesick. I remember I used to come home almost every single night -- I would
cry myself to bed. But at the end of the day, I knew that this was a better opportunity
-- I can be who I want to be, I can be the person that I choose to be. There's no
opportunity in my country, regardless of how educated you might be or how much
education you might get. At the end of the day, it's who you know, not what you
know, pretty much. And it's really -- it really is about who you have a good
relationship with, or, the person who is a native born who is not a refugee is more
likely to get a job than you, so, opportunity was very slim, very, very slim. And, so, I
came to the U.S. with a dream in my heart like every other American. And I'm still
working on that American dream.
4
[15:42] 
Grady Trexler:
Could you talk a little bit
about your religious experience in the
two camps?
[15:52] 
Ifrah Ahmed
: In the camps, there's sections.
They put different sections of it.
So, where we lived was mostly where the Somalian people would live. And, in those
areas, the major religion was Islam. The majority of the people were Islam. So, there
wasn't a big religious difference. However, we had exposure to other religion, and it
wasn't just Islamic. Because, I remember that -- I remember that in school, we would
also study CRE, which meant Christian Religion Education. It would go with our --
they just to call it GHD, which was, Geography, History and Religion. So we started
the Christian religion, and so, my mother didn't have a problem with that, because,
at the end of the day, when we would come home, we would study the Islamic
religion, and at school, we would study the -- the school was mostly Catholic. And so,
we would study the Bible, and get to know more about the religion, the Bible, the
Christianity, the religion, Catholicism, and what it was. Stuff like that. Growing up, I
always had an understanding of the Christian religion, just as much as I have it over
Islamic religion. And, I think, because of that, it kind of made me assimilate easier,
when I came to the U.S., with my Christian friends, and the exposure that I would get
with the people that I met. And so, if I needed to talk to the Bible, I knew something
about the bible that I could talk about. If I -- if there were Muslims, I could talk about
the Islamic religion. It was a lot easier. I also had an interest in the Hinduism, so I -- in
the uni, I studied a little bit. I took a course of the world religions, so I had an
exposure of different kind of religions. So, yeah. But I grew up as a Muslim and that's
my religion. 
[18:01] 
Grady Trexler:
 And what was the community
of Muslims like in the camps?
Like, how was it organized -- that sort of thing.
[18:13] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Just like every other religion
-- we had a religious leader, we had
the imam, we had the sheikhs, and we -- there was an adhan -- we prayed ﬁve times
a day. There was the adhan, there was the mosques, and we studied the Qu'ran. Have
you been in an Islamic nation?
[18:40] 
Grady Trexler:
Sorry, say that again?
[18:41] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Have you ever been in an Islamic
region?
[18:43] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah, yeah, when I lived in
Indonesia, I was in Jogja.
[18:49] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Yeah, it's -- it was very Islamic.
We had a lot of Islam related --
everything was mostly halal, and you'd hear the adhan every morning when you
woke up. And everybody was pretty much the same religion as you, and then you'd
celebrate Ramadhan together, you'd fast together, you had your friends who were
also fasting. Eid was celebrated with everybody, celebrating the religions, the
religious Eid. So yeah, it was as Islamic as it could get.
[19:27] 
Grady Trexler:
 Now I wanted to move to your
ﬁrst experiences in the U.S., so,
5
can you tell me a little bit about what your ﬁrst few weeks were like in Kansas City?
[19:43] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
My ﬁrst week was -- when I ﬁrst
came, I remember, right away I
was involved in an ESL, English as a Second Language -- and, mind you that I was
already speaking English, I was interpreting and I was going to school and
everything. I already spoke English when I ﬁrst came to the U.S. And yet, because we
were refugees, they automatically assumed that we needed ESL. So, I went to those
ESL classes, I would go every morning -- eventually, the teacher pulled to the side
one day, and he told me, he's like, "I suggest that you don't come back." And I'm like,
"Why?" And he's like, "Well, I just suggest that you don't come back because--" He
says that I would try to answer the question before he would even ask, and he didn't
see the point of me coming, et cetera. So, I was like, "Okay, so now I can't go to the
ESL." He's like, "If you want, you can, but I would recommend that you don't." So at
that point, I knew that he was pretty much telling me that I don't need -- I shouldn't
come back. So, I stayed home, and I decided, okay, so now what do I do? And then I
tried to go back to school. I realized that my -- my education -- my prior education
wouldn't be accredited for. So, I had to start from the beginning, so I rejoined the
university. They were like, "No, we can not. You need to make sure you have a proper
high school diploma or a university certiﬁcation." None of mine were accredited for in
that they were from a refugee camp, and also they didn't accept some of the
universities in Africa. So I was like, "Okay, that's ﬁne." So, I enrolled for the GED, and
with the GED -- so, I used the same organization that helped me resettle. They were
Jewish -- JVS -- Jewish Immigrational Service -- and, so they started using me as an
interpreter there. So I would work there, as an interpreter, and then in the evening I
would go to my GED classes. A little bit into the GED I decided to take the exam. I
was like, "Okay, I'm prepared for this." And, I did and I got my GED. And then, I
enrolled in a community college. Is that what you were asking?
[22:12] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah, yeah, and can I also
ask how -- or if you were able to keep
in touch with your family during those ﬁrst couple months?
[22:23] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Well, right when I came, the
ﬁrst morning that I got -- as an
interpreter I was being paid. The ﬁrst money that I got -- right when I ﬁrst came I
couldn't get in touch with them. I had this little phone. It was this little Sony MSM
kind of a phone. It didn't work. When I ﬁrst came, it did not work, in the U.S., so I
couldn't call anybody. But, luckily, one of the different girls who were staying with me
had a cell phone. And, so I was able to use my social media to get in contact with a
friend to tell her that I was safe. The lady went and told my mother, and then the
next day, I asked her if she could take a phone to my mother so I could call her. And
so, she did, and then I ended up talking to my mother, and I was able to
communicate with my sisters -- usually, sometimes they would call me on
[indecipherable] phone, and then once I got my ﬁrst paycheck, I went straight to
those -- what are they called? Those -- the phones that you pay for it right away, and
then you have a SIM card and everything. It's little --
[23:35] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah, like the ﬂip phones?
[23:37] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Yeah, they had a name didn't
they? Payphones or something
6
like that. Yeah, I got one of those. That was cheap, and affordable, and I could make
international calls. So, I used that for a while until I could get a better phone. 
[23:55] 
Grady Trexler:
 And, what was it like practicing
your religion in a new place
when you ﬁrst got back? Were there any differences that stood out to you, or?
[24:09] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 No, not really. And, it wasn't
difﬁcult, because I feel like --
America was -- had an exposure to Islam in people, and in the neighborhood that we
lived, there was a lot of African Americans, and there was a lot of Somalians, a lot of
African people, so it wasn't difﬁcult to practice my religion. The only thing that was
kind of a little bit challenging was there was this thing like, when we would be told --
"Oh, every -- you have to -- reading every single label of whatever you buy." You have
to try to see if there is gelatin in it, if there is pork in it, and it's like -- I would go to the
supermarket, and I would stay there for almost an hour or so, just reading through
the labels, to see what I can eat and what I can not eat. Because back at home
almost everything was halal. And, I think that was the most challenging thing. And,
yeah.
[25:10] 
Grady Trexler:
Could you talk me through a
little bit when and why you
moved from Kansas City into west Kansas?
[25:20] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
So, when I was living in Kansas
City, I was -- I was not doing bad
but I was hungry for family. I really needed that family connection. I felt like I did not
ﬁt in. No matter how much I tried, I couldn't ﬁt in. And, I wanted to be a part of
something. I was always -- I was always a social butterﬂy. Being -- I felt a little bit
isolated. I didn't ﬁt in most of the time. I didn't have friends, and I had a cousin that
was in Garden City. So at that point I wasn't aware of Garden City, of Western Kansas,
of any of that. So, I called her and she's like, "Well, come over here, I guess, and you
can stay with me until you get on your feet." And, hearing that, hearing that
somebody who has the same background as me, is somebody who is from my
family, is somebody that I can relate to, and I can share this with her -- that was joy in
itself. And so, she also told me that there was a company here that hires people, and
so I applied, and I got hired right away so I moved here. So, now, a few weeks in, she
comes and she picks me from Kansas City, brings me to Garden City, and I came here
and it was so different, it was so -- I was like, "Okay, I don't know how long I'm going
to stay in Western Kansas. Perhaps I'll stay like for a year or so, and then I'll probably
move to Minnesota." Because Minnesota was more diversiﬁed when it comes to my
Somali people, when it comes to Muslims, when it comes -- there was more, a lot of
things that were easier to ﬁnd in Minnesota. But then, living in Western Kansas, in
Southwest Kansas was incredible. I fell in love with the people. Like I said, I'm a social
person, and my purpose is being of some kind of service, and I was able to achieve
my purpose here in Garden City, here in a small town where I felt like there was a
very large number of refugee people, a very large number of people who were of
diverse background. A lot of people needed my help, and I could aid them somehow,
guide them, and show them what they needed to do, where to go, the same way
that somebody did that for me when I ﬁrst came to the U.S. So that's one of the
reasons why I stayed.
7
[28:06] 
Grady Trexler:
 And what speciﬁc ways are you helping people there? Could
you talk a little bit more about that?
[28:16] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 So, resources -- being that there's
an ethnic empowerment
group, that I am part of it. And so, being the president of it, we ﬁnd other ethnicities,
and we try and identify a leader from each ethnic group. And from there, we ﬁnd
information like, how do we distribute this information, how do we get -- how do we
connect people to resources? Pretty much, how do we guide people? This is what
they need to do, especially when you ﬁrst come to the country, so, what I do usually
is, just like, be there for the people, like, if they need a question, if they need to know
where they can ﬁnd for their food stamps, if they need to know where they can go for
Medicaid, if they need to know -- or even like, educating people about the
importance of having a doctor, the importance of going to the hospital, you don't
need to always go to the emergency room, you can establish a physician and have a
family practice. And so, basically, helping people understand -- oh, and also talking
about credits, because a lot of times people don't understand the importance of
credit, and owning a better credit score, and why you shouldn't sign for somebody,
the leasing rule of a rental. Basically -- just the basic stuff that a lot of new refugees
wouldn't understand. And all meant for school -- children should have -- it's okay to
send your children to extracurriculars at school. It's okay to encourage your children
to participate in sports. It's okay to go and talk to your teachers, because a lot of
them -- they never built a relationship with the teacher and the parent, and so they
don't understand here in the U.S., you need to go and try to talk with your teacher,
your children's teacher, and understand how your child is doing in school. Are they
improving, what is going on, and sometimes people just come to me, and just give
me a letter, and be like, "Hey, I got this letter in my mail, what is it telling me?" Or...
going for the DMV, getting their driver's license, you are able to get an acceptance
where we can have an interpreter while doing the test -- the DMV test. And so, it's
those little stuff that seem little but matter a lot to a newly arrived refugee.
[30:43] 
Grady Trexler:
 Yeah, and lastly here you mentioned
earlier that you were still
working on achieving your American dream. Could you talk to me a little about your
future, what your plans are, what you're excited for?
[31:00] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Well. I'm studying for the LSAT
right now, and I have always
been passionate about social justice, I've always been passionate about helping
people, and I think that being able to study the law will help me better aid the
people that need the most. So, I'm currently studying for it, and I'm going to take my
test in November, so wish me luck, and I guess I'm going to start applying to law
school.
[31:33] 
Grady Trexler:
Awesome, yeah, good luck. And
you mentioned in our ﬁrst call
that you might have some photographs that we could look at together. Do you have
those?
[31:42] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 M-hm.
[31:43] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah, could you just show me
the ones you have and maybe
8
talk through a little bit -- the context of them, and who's in them, that sort of thing?
32:01 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 This was at my graduation. 
[32:08] 
Grady Trexler:
Oh, is that the graduation
in Uganda or the graduation in the
U.S. here?
[32:14] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
In Uganda.
[32:19] That was me and my sister. Back at the refugee camp. Oh, this was in Kenya.
You'll ﬁnd a lot of people who will dress us up as maasai. That's a cultural Kenyan
outﬁt.
[32:38] 
Grady Trexler:
And who is that in that picture?
[32:42] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 My sister and I. That, that is
my mother and all of us. That was in
Kenya.
[32:51] 
Grady Trexler:
And do you know about how old
y'all were in this picture, or?
[32:58] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Oh, we were young. I think I
was like ﬁve years old. No, four years
old.
[33:12] Yeah, my mother was mainly the one who raised us. My father was killed in a
political war, so we grew up with just -- we grew up with just my mother. 
[33:41] Me and my siblings.
[33:45] 
Grady Trexler:
And is that in Kenya as well?
[33:49] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Yes.
[33:49] 
Grady Trexler:
Very cute.
[33:52] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 We were so happy. The thing is
that -- we didn't have a TV -- oh,
that was -- that was the last -- that was me in high school, but you can barely see
which one was me. It's very old.
[34:15] It was parents' day, and I -- my mother couldn't come, but my best friend's
family came for me. And so, I didn't have my family there, but I had my friend's family.
It was -- every year, we would have this day called parent's day, where once a day the
parent would come -- the parents would come, and they would bring food and hang
out with you -- the child, and get to know the teacher. Just like the parent-teacher
conference in the U.S.
[34:48] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah, same sort of thing.
[34:51] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Yeah. 
9
[34:59] That's my mother and me. 
[35:05] 
Grady Trexler:
And do you know about what
year that is?
[35:10] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Ooh. That was like in, two thousand
and -- no, I think it was in
2000 or 2001.
[35:15] 
Grady Trexler:
 Gotcha.
[35:17] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Many, many, many moons ago. Bet
you you weren't even born
yet.
[35:22] 
Grady Trexler:
 That's older than me, yeah.
[35:25] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Yeah. 
[36:04] This was the last picture that I took right before I left with my mom.
[36:08] 
Grady Trexler:
Oh, hold on one second, you're
frozen here. Let me see if I can
-- oh, there -- you're good, if you want to show the picture again.
[36:17] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Yeah, the last picture that I
took with my mother before I left.
[36:21] 
Grady Trexler:
Could you tell me a little
bit what that day was like? Just
knowing that this will be the last time you're with her for a while?
[36:31] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
It was the saddest day of my
life, and also the happiest day of
my life. You experience two emotions at the same time. I was happy to go to a
country where, as a woman, my voice mattered. I was also sad because, not only was
I leaving my mother, but my best friend, my conﬁdant, my -- she was my protector,
my everything. And God knew when I was going to see her -- I actually haven't gone
back yet, to go see her. I was planning on going this year, and then COVID happened,
so, that was impossible. 
[37:13] 
Grady Trexler:
 Yeah.
[37:24] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 This was the neighborhood kids.
Me and my neighborhood
kids. 
[37:30] 
Grady Trexler:
And you said you all spent
a lot of time outside together?
[37:33] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Yeah, and -- we spent a lot of
time -- we would always play
outside, from dawn to dusk, it would be outside. By the time we would be back
home, we were so tired we'd just crash right away. That's -- I think that's one of the
best parts of our childhood, is that we were active, and we were -- we were not -- not
like with this new generation, they're constantly -- like, with the technology, and the
phones, and the TVs, and -- we actually went out there and made our own toys
because we didn't -- we couldn't afford to have toys, or buy toys. So we made things
1 0
up, and I think it was part of the best creativity, child's creativity, you know? Being
able to -- to be a child. But also make your own toys. It was incredible.
[38:32] 
Grady Trexler:
 Yeah, I mean, what sort of
things would you make together? I
don't know if you can remember that far back.
[38:37] 
Ifrah Ahmed
: We -- I remember, I remember.
We would make little boxes, or
collect boxes, and then in the boxes we would collect the little matchsticks that
people throw away, and we would make a little house -- matchstick box houses. Or,
we would put like -- we would get the tops of the sodas, but like, tan sodas. Have you
seen those little crowns that they have? 
[39:01] 
Grady Trexler:
 Yeah, yeah, I know what you're
talking about.
[39:03] 
Ifrah Ahmed: 
And so, we would make a hole
in it, and then get the boxes,
make another hole, and then make wheels and pretend like that's a car. So we would
put a stick in one end and then the other stick, and then put them, and then put it --
a little boxcar. 
[39:19] 
Grady Trexler:
Yeah.
[39:21] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
And then sometimes we would make
our own -- dollies? Dolls?
[39:25] 
Grady Trexler:
 Yeah.
[39:26] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 And like [indecipherable]. And
then we would get a tree and tie
it, and make mud, make the head out of a -- mud, stuff like that. And go get pieces of
clothes that nobody was using, cut them up, tie it.
[39:44] 
Grady Trexler:
Gotcha. So --
[39:44] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
 Children can be creative.
[39:47] 
Grady Trexler:
 Yeah, absolutely. Well, I've
asked pretty much everything that I
wanted to ask, but obviously this is -- this is your story. Is there anything that we
haven't discussed today that you think is important or worth knowing that I missed?
[40:09] 
Ifrah Ahmed:
Mm. I believe that everybody's
life has a story, and that we
should always let -- we should always listen to other people's story. And that, despite
the adversity, if you always focus on the positive part, good things come out of it. We
all go through some form of hardship, in life, you know. At the end of the day, it's our
choice what we try to -- get out of it. Like, for example, if you focus -- if I was to focus
only on the fact that, my refugee status. If I focused -- that, oh, I have different
religion. Or if I -- the fact that nobody's going to be understanding of my religion.
Then, that is my reality is -- is going to be that negativity. So, we have to be positive at
all times. Even at our lowest, we have to ﬁnd a way to think, like, "It's going to be okay.
This is a learning point for me. I'm going to learn from this, but I'm going to
persevere." If people don't understand -- you asked me earlier, how does it feel for
1 1
your religion? Not -- coming to a new country and having people not understand
your religion. Then that means its my responsibility to educate people about my
religion. And it's perfectly normal for people to be scared of what they don't know.
But, it's my responsibility to say, "No, it's not how the media portrays my religion.
There is more to it." Okay? Ask me any question and I will answer you. And, believe
me, I'm not going to be offended -- as a matter of fact, I'll be offended if you don't ask
me. If you don't show curiosity. If you don't want to learn. So, before you assume
anything, before we assume that I will not be [indecipherable], because I look
different, I have a different -- I have a different faith, I am from -- I have an accent.
People are not going to accept me? No. I will make people accept me because I will
talk to them. I'm not going to wait for someone to come up to me, I will walk up to
you. And ask you how you're doing, how's your day going. It's -- humanizing aspect.
We have to humanize each other. And, as long as there's humans, there's going to be
an error. As long as there's humans, there's going to be a misunderstanding. It's our
responsibility to clarify the misunderstanding. And so, that's when I told you that -- I
never encountered issues with my religion, because I don't allow it to be an issue. If I
tell you how it is, and you're not okay with it, that's okay. You're entitled to your
opinion. But it's not going to change how I feel.
[43:00] 
Grady Trexler:
 Okay, well, well thank you
very much. I'll end the recording.
E n d
1 2