Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Napoleon Akeyezu
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/napoleon-akeyezu
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1T_p5CSOmGpAArTQthMKH4ZynqKqg4Ymp/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Napoleon Akeyezu
Interviewed by Katherine Clifton in Washington, D.C., 09/22/20
Transcribed by Kate Macakanja, 04/30/21
(00:04)
 
Katherine
:  Alright, so, this is Katherine
Clifton, and I am interviewing
Napoleon Akeyezu, is that right? Akeyezu? Alright, I am currently in Washington, D.C.,
Napoleon is in Kentucky, and today is September 22, 2020. Alright, so, my ﬁrst
prompt for you is just could you tell me about where you are from?
(00:40)
 Napoleon
: As you said, my name is Napoleon
Akeyezu, and I am originally
from Rwanda.
(00:47)
Katherine:
 Right originally from Rwanda, so
can you tell me about what led
you to leave Rwanda and your experiences coming to the US?
(01:00)
Napoleon:
 The ﬁrst time I left my country
was during the war. It was 1994, my
[INDECIPHERABLE] in my country. I had to leave my country, and come back to my
country for two years, and then I had to leave again. [INDECIPHERABLE] security,
national security wasn't granted, so I had to leave the country again. It was 1998,
[INDECIPHERABLE]. (01:48) Yes, as you know, in 1994, there was war going on in my
country, and genocide happened, and in that time I had to leave my country. Went
to the Congo, spent two years there, and after that I came back to my country, and
genocide was stopped but security conditions were not really good for me and I had
to leave the country again. I went through a couple of countries, Uganda, Kenya,
Mozambique, South Africa, Germany, before I came to the United States.
(02:42)
Katherine:
 And during this time, can you talk
about the role that religion
played in your life? And maybe start with your religious identity and how religion has
inﬂuenced your life in Rwanda, and then during your journey away from Rwanda.
(03:04)
Napoleon:
 I was born and raised Catholic,
went to Catholic school until grade
twelve, so I am a strong Catholic believer. And as you know, well we Catholics we
always have rosaries especially in difﬁcult moments, all the time my mom had given
me a rosary, which I carried in my pocket every time, and every time the situation
was really bad, I just took my rosary and started praying for my brothers, my sisters,
my parents, my friends, everybody. (03:48)  It didn't happen as I wished, because I
lost so many friends, I lost most of my direct family. But I survived. Yes, religion is not
the time only even now, religion is always plays a big part in my life. So any time any
1

decision I want to take, big or small, I say God is great.  My God is going to lead me in
all I do, he's going to tell me what decision to make, so religion plays a big big big
role in my life.
(04:35)
Katherine:
Thank you Napoleon. I wonder if
you can think of a particular
instance when you were challenged after leaving Rwanda, and you were in so many
different countries and you went through so many different transitions, and if there's
a particular instance when you remember, as you described, pulling out your rosary
and praying, and if you can talk. about what led you to that moment and the
circumstances and how it made you feel to pray?
(05:16)
Napoleon:
 There was a particular time that
I cannot forget in my life.  It was
one morning, we spent the night hiding in the bushes, and the next morning
[INDECIPHERABLE] we were attacked, our small group, [INDECIPHERABLE] started
slaughtering and at that time I said to my God, I don't want to see this again, I don't
want to see people killing each other. God, please help me, and I don't want to be in
this situation again, and I can tell you, yes that the war continues, yes atrocities
continued, but I personally didn't face atrocities like those again, like seeing people
[INDECIPHERABLE] with guns and killing each other in front of me. (06:32) So that's
why I say, whenever I pray, God answers. Absolutely. Absolutely. Since that day, I
heard about many atrocities, even I heard about [INDECIPHERABLE] seeing people
kill each other in front of me, since that day, I have never been in that situation again.
(07:04)
Katherine:
 And you've told me before what
your name means, but perhaps
could you describe why your parents chose your name for you?
(07:17)
Napoleon:
 I was a very, very tiny baby when
I was born. My current dad -- you
know, in Rwandan culture, many kids don't carry their parent's name, their dad's
name. Kids are named according to the circumstances in which they are born. So
since I was a little baby, a tiny baby, my mom and dad said this is [INDECIPHERABLE]
it means
A k e
is a possessive determinant,
Yezu
  i n
Rwanda means Jesus. So Akeyezu
simply means a baby, or someone, who belongs to Jesus. [INDECIPHERABLE] cannot
forget my name, because it's close to Jesus! So there's no way you can forget my
name, so Akeyezu means someone belonging to Jesus.
(08:28)
Katherine:
 That's a beautiful story. I wonder
if you can talk a little more about
your family's religious identity. You discussed growing up in a Catholic family in
Rwanda, I wonder what the religious landscape was for you when you were growing
up, and the role that religion played in your family's life and in your culture, the
culture of your community.
(08:59)
Napoleon:
 Yeah, Rwanda is 80-85% Christian,
and in 1994 I would say, I may
be mistaken, 60% of those 80% were Catholic. So I grew up in a Catholic society, and
as I said I attended Catholic schools, but my younger brother attended a Baptist
church school. So growing up, my mom, and by the way my dad went to the
seminary, he was about to be a priest, maybe he changed his mind, but he went to
the seminary, so I was [INDECIPHERABLE] by Catholics. (09:54)  Everything,
attending church every Sunday, at school attending church on Wednesdays, my high
2
school, in my high schools studies we would have prayer every morning, wake up
6:30 in the morning, go to the chapel before we got to breakfast, so it was an every
day life that before you start a day you need to put yourself in Jesus's hands.
[INDECIPHERABLE] good health, in a good spirit.
(10:41)
Katherine:
 And then you passed through so
many different countries, and
they have very different religious histories and religious identities than Rwanda, you
mentioned Mozambique, South Africa, Germany. I wonder how you held your faith in
those moments, and if there were any challenges or moments of opportunity when
you were in a culture that was dominant in a different religion that your own or
around people that identiﬁed differently than you did.
(11:29)
Napoleon:
 To be honest, there's a part of
my life when I didn't have a big
opportunity to attend churches or join worship. If you are traveling from Rwanda to
South Africa it's around 3,000 miles, so I didn't have a plane ticket, part of my trip was
made by foot, and the other part of the trip was by buses. So sometimes you just
struggle, you survive, so except my rosary, I didn't have time to think about joining a
community, so it was just surviving, surviving, until I got to South Africa
[INDECIPHERABLE] (12:42) I would join a Christian community in Pineland. I was
living in Cape Town, so there was a neighborhood called Pineland, where my friend
Mary took me to her church, and I used to pray with that group until I left South
Africa. So for me, being in a church, in God's house, it's the same way that it's a
Catholic church or a [INDECIPHERABLE] if it's called God's church, I mean God's
house, and we worship together, the name of the religion doesn't count for
me.(13:29) What matters is getting together and praying, that's what matters for me.
So many, many, many things are similar whether your country is Baptist or
Presbyterian. So the vibe is the same, except maybe some interpretation, but I didn't
feel discriminated as a Catholic, no. So I just went there and prayed with others. It
was for me just praying God, and give thanks to God, because I was able to survive,
while many of my family members -- I lost my mom, I lost my siblings, and it was a
very difﬁcult time for me, but on the other hand I say, my Lord, you served me,
probably I would have time to tell my family's story.(14:38) So for me it was about
worshipping, it was about giving thanks to God, no matter what church I attend.
(14:45)
Katherine:
 Thank you Napoleon. At the end,
you said something about it
helped you to tell your family's story? Or it helped you to pave the path where you
could share the family history, even those that you lost during the war. What do you
mean by that?
(15:13)
Napoleon:
 It's very difﬁcult, when you lose
a close member of your family, and
you don't know even where their bodies are, you can't bury them, you keep telling
yourself maybe, at a certain point at a certain time, I'm going to see them again. And
year after year, you don't see them, people come and say we're sorry to tell you that,
but your mom, your sister, your brother, were killed. (15:58) So you live with that, it
keeps hurting you, you can't mourn them, because you didn't know
[INDECIPHERABLE] so whenever you have time to talk about it, it's a kind of therapy,
and you tell yourself oh okay, I still remember you, I haven't forgotten about you, so
I'm telling your story [INDECIPHERABLE] that it keeps hurting you your whole life.
3
Until now, when I'm really missing my mom, when you wake up it's a nightmare, my
mom is not there, I'm gonna see my brothers [INDECIPHERABLE].(16:48) That's why I
told you, whenever I have time to talk about it, it's a kind of therapy for me.
(16:56)
Katherine:
 Well thank you for speaking with
me about it now, Napoleon.
(17:05)
Napoleon:
 It's a pleasure for me to talk about
i t .
(17:07)
Katherine:
 Thank you, it's certainly a pleasure
for me to hear. So you went
from South Africa to Germany, and then from Germany to the US, is that right?
(17:15)
Napoleon:
  Y e s
(17:18)
Katherine:
 Okay. And what led you to leave
South Africa to go to Germany, and
then to leave Germany to go to the US?
(17:25)
Napoleon:
 There's two points. In South Africa,
I could live normally, but when
there is no structures, when there are no steps, there's a law that says refugees
should have documents, should have travel documents and everything, but at that
time, it wasn't really organized in South Africa. They could accept you, the state knew
we lived there, but we didn't have a vote permit or anything that showed that you
are a refugee and you live here. (18:12) It took me up to two years to get a document
that shows that I was a refugee in South Africa. I heard when I left, after I left, things
were much better organized, but at the time I said I cannot continue to live in this
situation, I need to go in a country where I will be able to continue, and ﬁnish my
studies, and not living in a situation where no on knows I'm here, the state doesn't --
how am I going to continue my studies, if I don't have documents? So, that's what I
thought to myself. I need to [INDECIPHERABLE] to be able to travel to Europe. That
was my goal, go to Europe, try to get refugee status, and if possible continue and
ﬁnish my studies.
(19:10)
Katherine:
 And during this process, were you
still sort of practicing your faith?
Were you able to either go to religious institutions or churches, were you part of a
religious community, was it mostly individual practice?
(19:34)
Napoleon:
 [INDECIPHERABLE]
(19:36)
Katherine:
 Sorry, what was that?
(19:36)
Napoleon:
 Sorry, you mean in South Africa?
(19:40)
Katherine:
 Right, and Germany.
(19:40)
Napoleon:
 Oh yes, oh yes, in Germany, things
were much better because in
Germany I was able to join a Catholic community there. I had two kids in Germany,
they were baptized there, so in Germany things were much better, I had a
community. I lived in a small city called [INDECIPHERABLE], it's 20 miles east of
Frankfurt, and then I moved to another city when I had my son. It's a city called
4
[INDECIPHERABLE] and I had the opportunity to join beautiful community, and I
recently, I think I lost the birth certiﬁcate for my son, and I go to the church in
Germany, and I say can you please send me the certiﬁcate for my son. And they said
yeah no problem, and they sent it, and I was so happy. (20:44)  And that was seven
years after we left? So it was a beautiful community, and they took care of us, that
was their spirituality, and we were very happy to be among them.
(21:02)
Katherine:
 I'm glad that you found that community
in Germany. What do you
mean by "they took care of you?" In what ways were they supportive of you and your
family?
(21:12)
Napoleon:
 When you arrive somewhere, of course
people will be curious and
asking you where are you from? And when I say I am from Rwanda, there was a
priest who was from Nigeria, "oh yeah, I'm sorry, I heard about what happened in
Rwanda," and many other parishioners came to me and said We heard you're from
Rwanda, how did you survive? Some questions like those. (21:45)  And we had some
kids who wanted to know where is Rwanda, and we have to give them an
explanation, and we go to the cork map and we say Oh see, it's a tiny country and it's
in Africa, and you feel welcome, people are interested to know your story, your
family's story. (22:12)  They, people, were [INDECIPHERABLE] We can do something to
help you, in prayers and whatever you want us to help in, we were happy to join in
and have [INDECIPHERABLE] Feel that we are welcomed, feel that there are people
who do care about you, and we have people who feel really sorry about what
happened to you, and it's very very important in one's life. Especially when you're
starting a new life, in a new land.
(22:45)
Katherine:
 Yes I agree, I'm glad that you
were met with curiosity and
compassion. So, from Germany you get refugee status and then you come to the US,
right?
(22:57)
Napoleon:
  Y e s
(22:57)
Katherine:
 Okay. And I wonder, if this helps,
if you can close your eyes, if you
can just imagine what you were doing or what your ﬁrst thoughts were when you
got off the airplane for the ﬁrst time in the US. Who you were with, what the weather
was like, what you were wearing, how you felt, how you might have been surprised.
I'm curious what your ﬁrst experience and encounter with the US was like.
(23:37)
Napoleon:
 I usually talk about it with my
student, I used to teach French in
the University of Louisville. And some student asked the same question, what was
the ﬁrst experience when you arrived in the United States. And I said, okay ﬁrst thing
is it was my favorite season of the year. It was April 10, the beginning of the spring.
And I say for me, reaching the US was my dream becoming reality. Because I always
learned about the United States. When I was in middle school, they said the United
Nations headquarters are in New York, and New York is in the United States of
America. In America (24:50) [INDECIPHERABLE]
 
Freedom
comes. And I said, I want to
be in that country! Especially when you grow up and then you see the country you
grew up in is broken, from the war, you say, I want to be in a freedom country. So
5
when I got here, in the United States, I say here I am, I was [INDECIPHERABLE] I
didn't have enough money to pay a ticket for my whole family, at that time I had
three kids and a wife, and I had to come here ﬁrst to look for a job and collect some
money and buy a ticket and they will come. So the ﬁrst time I got here, the ﬁrst thing
you see, the different culture here, is what I call the American Smile. (25:37) I don't
know if people call it that here, this kind of smile people give you even when they
don't know you. It goes fast, but it's a smile. I said to myself, oh, people are nice here,
and I'm in good hands. So that's the ﬁrst thing I had when I got here, the smile. And I
say, yes, that's what I expected, people welcoming me with a smile. (26:11) As I said, it
was spring, April 10, the sun was shining outside. When I got to Philadelphia it was
around 1 o'clock, 1:30, [INDECIPHERABLE] my friend waiting for me, I said, yeah, here I
am. We used to talk about Uncle Sam, and I say here I am, I'm in Uncle Sam's
country, so I felt really happy that day.
(26:47)
Katherine:
 I'm so glad you had a positive
ﬁrst experience. The ﬁrst couples of
months that you were in Kentucky, what formed your community? Which people,
which organizations, how did you start to feel more at home in the US?
(27:14)
Napoleon:
 My ﬁrst step of Dayton, Ohio, again
I came here through the
[INDECIPHERABLE] visa, I think you heard about that, what they call Green Card. You
know, when you come with Green Card, there's no CWS to organize, or other
resettlement agencies to welcome you at the airport and show you the housing, as
we do for our client here. So I know that doesn't exist for someone who arrived here
on a Green Card ticket. (27:59) That, my friend, [INDECIPHERABLE] church, in Dayton
Ohio, it's downtown, in Dayton. The community welcomed me, and right there I was
introduced to the church pastor. My friend who told the pastor, his name was Father
Lee, he said this gentleman is coming here in this country, he leaves his family
behind, he's gonna need a shelter. And Father Lee said, yeah, he can come and live,
we have a small shelter at the parish, and he can come and live and wait for his
family whenever they come to rejoin him there. (29:03) So, when I say, he is my God,
he is my God's answer. And I lived there, of course I spent some days with my friends,
catching up after many years of separation. And then after that I went to my shelter. I
had to renovate, paint it a little bit, because it had been there [INDECIPHERABLE] to
start the renovation work, but it was ﬁt in a couple days. So I lived in a parish shelter
close to the church. So from my home to church was three minutes walk. So I was
kind of part of the church staff. It was perfect for me. (30:04) [INDECIPHERABLE] go
and chat with the pastor, see if there's something to do at the church, whether
preparing or doing some housekeeping. I would ask my pastor just to help. I'd tell the
community, I met members of the community, there was [INDECIPHERABLE] in
service of the poor, in French, and that community helped me a lot. Of course I
started a job, three weeks after I arrived in the United States. [INDECIPHERABLE]
community assisted me in bringing my family here in the United States, because
they collected the rest of the money to buy the plane tickets for my family. So already
I was welcomed, warmly welcomed, but also they assisted me ﬁnancially. (31:27) If
someone gives you a shelter, and they assist you in bringing your family to the
country in which you are, I don't see what else [INDECIPHERABLE] expect from a
community in which you live in. So it was a very good experience for me in the
United States.
6
(31:50)
Katherine:
 Thank you Napoleon. I'm so glad
they were so welcoming to you.
So you mentioned you had a job three weeks from when you arrived, which is really
great. How were you able to ﬁnd employment so quickly?
(32:07)
Napoleon:
 Friends, friends, there was a company
called Product Action, I
don't know if they still exist, but they were hiring [INDECIPHERABLE] I could speak a
little bit of English, and I used my English to apply for a job, which I got. We were
called Product Inspectors, and it was a well-paid job, working at a factory in
Marysville, in Ohio, and that job really helped me collect some money. It was hard
because I would drive, get to my work, take a car, drive to the factory for two hours,
work for twelve hours, and then drive two hours back home. (33:08) It was kind of
hectic and hard, but that's what I needed, because I needed money. I told myself,
even if I have to work twenty hours, I don't really mind. I have a goal to collect money
as soon as possible so that I can bring my family here. So, for me, it was okay. It was
good.
(33:38)
Katherine:
 And when the church helped to collect
money for the plane
tickets for your family, did you all then live in Dayton, Ohio together?
(33:51)
Napoleon:
  Y e s
(33:54)
Katherine:
 Okay
(33:54)
Napoleon:
 Yes, as I said I arrived in April,
and my family arrived in June, so
three months. That's not a long time compared to some of my clients who have waits
longer than that: a year, two years. So for me, again, the Lord is great. Three months,
my family was there. And when my family was there, I said, let's think about studies.
So I started to apply for different colleges, and I was accepted at University of
Louisville. (34:38) And I came here to do my Masters, to ﬁnish, and when I ﬁnished,
one of my professors told me, so do you want to be an adjunct? And I said, why not,
let me try. She ended up being my daughter's godmother, she became my friend,
and she referred me to the dean of the French department at the university, Indiana
University Southeast. And I started teaching, and I said to my wife, I got a good job
here, so [INDECIPHERABLE] to Kentucky. (35:28) When I was a student it was really
hard for me, I would be working night shifts and going to school during the day. And
on Saturday morning I would drive to Dayton, Ohio, which is two and a half hours,
spend the weekend with my family, and come back to Louisville, Kentucky, every
weekend.
(35:55)
Katherine:
  W o w
(35:55)
Napoleon:
 That was not easy. But worth it,
because of what I was pursuing. I
was pursuing ﬁnishing my Masters and then start looking for a better job, which I
got. After three years, back in 2010, I told my wife, let's move on, let's go. I know we
have good friends here, I know we have a good community in Dayton, it's going to be
hard to leave all that behind, but let's try where I got a job and see if we can start a
new normal life as a family. (36:44) I was lucky, my wife said okay. I keep following
7
you, let's go. And that's how we moved to Louisville, Kentucky, and ten years we're
still here. No complaints.
(37:02)
Katherine:
 Can you speak about the ﬁrst days
or months when you were in
Louisville, with your whole family, as you all kind of resettled again to Louisville. What
was the experience like, and who made your community?
(37:20)
Napoleon:
 There was a Rwandan community here,
in Louisville, and they were
the ones who welcomed me here during my whole process of application. And even
after I moved my family here, they were the ones who helped me move the stuff,
move in. When you move out, I had a little girl who was born here in 2009, so it was a
family of six, so moving all those people with their belongings wasn't easy. It's not a
one person job. So I had many friends who helped me move stuff from Dayton, Ohio
to Louisville and looking for a house. They also introduced me to their worship
community. (38:22) The community still exists, [INDECIPHERABLE] We used to
gather and pray. And also, I found a part-time job as an African consultant with an
organization called Ofﬁce of Multicultural Ministries. It's a Catholic church
organization, and I would serve as a liaison between community and the
organization. We used to organize prayers, worship, and [INDECIPHERABLE]
something we called prayer for African victims of war and violence, and it happens in
April. (39:27) So together we, OMM, we organized that, and we invited people
regardless of their faith. Whether they were Christian, Muslim, or Mormon, the
religion you attend or believe in doesn't count. What counts is get together and pray
for the victims of war and violence in Africa. And I was really really involved in that
preparation, and it helped me meet different people and extend my network here in
Louisville. I met very good people, very wonderful people, who really care, who show
compassion to suffering people. (40:22) So again, that was my opportunity to pray
every member, not only my family members, but also all of those victims in my
country and in surrounding countries, you know I come from what they call the
Great Lake Region of Africa, meaning Rwanda, Congo, Burundi, Uganda, Tanzania,
where in those four countries we have suffering, wars, especially Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi, those three countries, since the 90s we haven't had peace. Which means,
each year, each month, each day we have victims of war and violence. So it was for
me an opportunity to join others in praying, remember those people who lost there
lives and those who are suffering in this day. (41:25) Right now we're speaking, I was
listening to news from the region, in South [INDECIPHERABLE] there's still killings.
People are dying, people ﬂeeing their homes. So whenever I got a chance, I tell my
community, please pray. Pray for our countries, pray for all those victims. And now I'm
a parishioner, my parish is [INDECIPHERABLE] Community, and my kids go to their
school. In April, every time I talk to my pastor, I say Father would you pray for my
family members and other victims in Africa, and it's always welcome. I'm happy I can
do that, with my community.
(42:25)
Katherine:
 Thank you Napoleon. I'm so glad
you were able to ﬁnd that
position as a consultant. It seems like you were just the perfect person for the job,
and I'm sure your community really beneﬁted from having your leadership.
(42:44)
Napoleon:
 I try my best.
8
(42:46)
Katherine:
 Wonderful. I wonder if you've had
moments of doubt with your
religion, moments of feeling like you pray but nothing changes, or moments of
uncertainty of whether or not you really believe in the Catholic tradition.
(43:13)
Napoleon:
 To be honest, my mom and my sisters
and my nephews died in
November '96. And I kept praying, maybe we're going to recover their bodies. It didn't
happen. And then in '98, my brother was killed. At that moment I said, oh Lord, why
me. You took my mom, at this time you become kind of a righteous rebel. You ask,
maybe it's my fault. I don't pray the way I should be doing, or even if I pray, maybe
God doesn't listen to me. Maybe he's busy listening to other people who do it better
than me. (44:16) There's always, when you are in a big sorrow, big despair, sometimes
you think, am I doing the right things? Am I talking to my God correctly, in an
appropriate way? Or am I missing something? Or God just doesn't listen to me? But
at that point, you say, Oh no, do I have the right to doubt on the capacity, on the
almighty God? And then you say, no, I'm not going to give up. And then you go back
to church and you continue to pray. But to be honest, there are some moments of
that. (45:01) If you're not strong enough, like some of my friends, said If really God
exists, why did this happen to my family. [INDECIPHERABLE] So in those moments, if
you're not really strong enough to say it's God-willing, let me keep praying for those
who lost their life, and also those suffering, then yeah it may bring you some serious
moments of doubt in your life.
(45:44)
Katherine:
 So why do you think that even though
you had those moments of
doubt you didn't, like your friends, you didn't lose faith? Even though you had doubt,
you still held on to your faith. Why do you think --
(45:57)
Napoleon:
 Because when I was a little kid,
I remember the pastor saying in
the funerals, the pastor said, God always takes the best. Maybe he took my mom
because she was the best. I say okay, if she took my mom because she was one of the
best, so let me keep praying. I know my mom is looking at me down here and she's
going to pray for me so that I can be the best. So that belief from childhood keeps
me going, and life goes on. That's the way it is. I keep saying, the Lord is not going to
abandon me, nope, not now.
(46:57)
Katherine:
 Is that something you've been able
to share with your family, with
your wife and your children?
(47:04)
Napoleon:
 Yes, my family, my kids know that.
Whenever we talk about -
because of that, I need my kids to understand what happened, to understand my
family's story. They're the ones who are going to keep it when I'm no longer here in
this world. They're the future generation, so it's important to me to tell them that, yes
there are those sad moments and those moments of incredible sorrow, but you keep
your faith and you survive. Lose your faith, you get lost, as well. So yeah, it's
something I have mentioned whenever we have time, family time to talk about
those years of adversities and unrest.
(48:12)
Katherine:
 Most of the experiences you've
described so far in the US of getting
9
to know a church community and having friends and moving from Dayton to
Louisville, most of it has been fairly positive. You found a job, and you found housing,
and your family came after three months. I wonder if you've had, I mean I'm sure
you've also had negative experiences, I wonder if you can speak about some of those
and ways that you were able to overcome them.
(48:48)
Napoleon:
 Yes, when I left my country, I was
about to get my Bachelor's
diploma, and at that level you [INDECIPHERABLE] a better life, a better future, with
your studies, using your studies. Of course when I arrived in the United States, I said I
need to ﬁnd money to bring my family here, and I need to ﬁnd a job. It's a job, a very
good job, it's entry-level, so it's take it or leave it, because there's no ofﬁce job for you,
right? And you walk in the warehouse, I can be honest the ﬁrst days are not really
easy. (49:59) Yes, you need that job because you need money, but at a certain point
you tell yourself, this is not my job, this is not what I'm supposed to be doing right
now. It's a bit of disappointment. It's discouraging in a certain way. But I wouldn't say
it was going to break me down, because I knew what I was looking for. So yes,
disappointed, but not really broken. So I kept doing it. And even when I went back to
University of Louisville, working on my Masters, yes I went back to the warehouse at
the airport. (50:43) I used to work for UPS, loading and unloading aircraft. I'm working
at my Masters, but still I'm working here, in the warehouse. So, disappointing, but not
really breaking me up. So that's what we call in French, les arrières de l'histoire. So,
things that come in your life that look disappointing, but if you know what you're
looking for, you just keep going. Just keep going.
(51:30)
Katherine:
 And you've lived in so many different
places, so I wonder how you
would deﬁne home. What does home mean to you, after so many different moves?
(51:45)
Napoleon:
 It's really difﬁcult to describe.
(51:51)
Katherine:
 Yes, it is.
(51:52)
Napoleon:
 But there's a saying, let's say
where you feel better, it's your home.
Where you feel good, it's your home. I think I'm in that philosophy, in that way of
thinking. I'm here in Louisville, Kentucky. I have my family. My kids go to school here,
they were born - their culture is Kentuckian, it's not Rwandan. So, I feel good here.
Then this is my home. So the deﬁnition of home is where you feel good, you feel
welcome, and you feel accepted, and where you can do something, and you are
allowed to give back to your community. Then you call that place home. Otherwise,
there's no meaning to live. (52:59) So that's my deﬁnition of home. Home is where
you feel good, where you can live peacefully, and being able to participate and give
back to your community. That's my deﬁnition of home.
(53:16)
Katherine:
 That's a beautiful deﬁnition.
I wonder how your family, the
Rwandan community, your religious community, how you've all been affected by
COVID over the past six months?
(53:35)
Napoleon:
 You mean here in Louisville?
1 0
(53:36)
Katherine:
 Right, in Louisville. I should have clariﬁed.
(53:39)
Napoleon:
 In the beginning -- my wife is a
nurse. So back in March, it was
hard for everybody. Because we knew, every time she left home, we knew she was
going to confront, maybe to meet people with COVID. And there was so many
informations -- good ones, bad ones, rumors -- we didn't know exactly how COVID
can be destructed. And how people really get COVID, how COVID is treated. And
knowing that my wife is going to go to work -- you ask yourself, is she coming back?
(54:37) And by the way, when COVID started, I was in Thailand. I was attending a
three month training in Thailand. We attend a rotary peace and conﬂict resolution
training. This all started when I was in Thailand, and I was reading news, and I said we
have the ﬁrst case in Louisville, Kentucky, at Brownsborough Hospital. That's where
my wife works. And I was like, my god, what is happening to me now? (55:22) And I
called my wife, and I said are you okay, and she said yes, and I said did you read the
news, and she said I know what you're talking about, we have one case of COVID. Are
you safe? It wasn't easy for me, and she kept telling me, don't worry, we got all we
need, like protection, what they call PPE. We got [INDECIPHERABLE] we don't have
so many cases. And I say, honey still it's concerning. And then we had to ﬁnish the
program earlier, they gave us 48 hours to catch the next plane. (56:11) I came home,
and my ﬂight was through Tokyo, like a hot spot of COVID, and when I got home I
had to do fourteen days quarantine, which my daughter didn't understand. I mean
she's ten, but she said to me, Dad, you went in Thailand, spent three months, you
come back home, and you can't give me a hug? What's going on here? And she was
talking to me through the door because there was no contact. So I arrived home, just
knocked on the door, my wife opened it, and then she went back to her room. And
then she said, your room is there. (57:11) So I actually highjacked my son's room, and I
spent fourteen days, after three months without seeing my family. I'm home and I
can't see my kids, I can't see my wife, this is terrible. But I followed the rules, and after
fourteen days I went out, still concerned about my wife as every night she leaves,
because she works night shifts. Every evening she leaves I say be safe, be safe, and
she says I know, I know, I'll be okay. So as a family it was concerning, but my wife
loves her job. She didn't get any COVID so far, and my family didn't get any,
everybody's safe. (58:04) So again, we need to give thanks to the Lord. So far we are
safe, and hopefully, we survive.
(58:17)
Katherine:
 And how has your religious identity,
or maybe religious practice,
changed during this time or social distancing and quarantine?
(58:30)
Napoleon:
 One of the most joyful moments for
my wife or family is attending
church on Sunday. Then we would have brunch together. So when there was
lockdown, no church. And that was kind of painful for her, not being able to attend
church. But we kept following mass online, on TV. Thanks to the new technology, we
were able to virtually attend mass every Sunday and kept praying. But that wasn't
good, we didn't like it. We just enjoyed attending Sunday masses -- and my parish is
really good for kids because after church they have donuts. (59:35) So it's a motivation
for kids, and after church they get a donut. They say Daddy we go to church? And I
say okay yeah! So we missed that moment, but fortunately now we can attend
church again, even if there's kind of measures to take so that we can protect
1 1
ourselves and protect the others. But it's better than a virtual mass.
(1:00:07)
Katherine:
 I remember seeing on your resume
that when you worked for
Seven Counties, you mediated between two community leaders, and I wonder, what
did that involve? What was the story behind that?
(1:00:28)
Napoleon:
 So there was a grant, ORR grant,
or the Burundian community, it
was for both the Somalian and Burundian community. At that time, there were two
gentlemen calling themselves leaders of the Burundian community. So they didn't
agree on how the grant would be used. So then the community went divided. One
leader said, we want to do this with that money. The other leader said no, we want to
do this and this. (1:01:15) Then because the two leaders couldn't get together and
agree on certain things, the grant was given to Seven Counties services to manage it.
And that's how I got contacted by Seven Counties, and at that time I was working
with a small organization called St. Jude and I was serving communities with people
in need, in the worst part of Louisville. And one of my friends approached me and
said, we heard you've been working in this ﬁeld for many years. Because even in the
refugee camp, I used to work with humanitarian organizations. (1:02:13) And they say,
so here we have a problem, we have two leaders who can't understand each other, so
we need a mediator or someone who's going to help them to manage their grant
and do something for the community. I said, why not? And I took an appointment, I
did my interview, and I got the job. It wasn't really easy, because when the two
leaders learned that I got the job, each one wanted me to work with him, and only
with him. (1:02:54) And I said no, that's not what I got hired for. I got hired because I
need to make sure that each member of your two communities beneﬁts from this
grant. And to do so, I said, let's do this. We know we have a high number of
pre-literate people, that people need to learn something, learn to write some words
of English, read some words of English. Why? Because when we send them to
regular ESL classes, they don't learn anything because - even if they spend a year
there, they don't know what the teacher's talking about. (1:03:39) And I say, let's
create this class, when we have in the system a teacher who speaks Kirundi who will
be there in class and explain to the students what is happening in class, what the
teacher wants them to do. So we will have another speaker, an American, teaching
ESL, but assisted by another teacher, speaking Kirundi explaining to the students.
That's how I got the two leaders to say, oh yeah, maybe this is a good thing for the
community. So they sent people to class and we started that ESL class. And that was
a tremendous experience for me, I was happy I could do that. That's how I got
involved with those two leaders.
(1:04:31)
Katherine:
 It sounds like you're a natural
mediator. That's such a great
solution, that really does beneﬁt all of the students learning English, whatever age.
(1:04:42)
Napoleon:
 Let's say I had people, when people
suffer, and I had conﬂict. And
that was another good experience, me going to Thailand, because I got to learn that
Thai people, they don't look for conﬂict. Which is different, in my region. People like
to confront each other. The Thai people, they try to avoid conﬂict. If you're talking to
two people and they see that you are using your voice, they just disappear, they just
look for ways to cool the situation down. (1:05:31) So that's the kind of person, if I'm
1 2
talking to you, and I realize that you aren't getting what I'm saying, and maybe you're
getting a little bit upset, immediately change the topic or I just simply ask for your
opinion. What would you like? How do you like it to be done? Let's meet together
and get things done. So even in my family, we're human beings sometimes and
don't agree with how we want to do things, and my wife says, no that's not how we
want to do things, and I say, okay honey, bring your ideas, I bring mine, so we just see
how we can do it without confronting each other. (1:06:27) And sometimes we make
it like a joke and we bring the kids, hey let's vote! Mom thinks this, and my idea is this.
So which ideas do you think are the best? Most of the time I lose because I have one
son and I have three girls, so we are the minority, but we end up ﬁnding a common
solution, and try to avoid conﬂict, useless conﬂict. My dad always taught me, avoid
starting a war or conﬂict. Because you don't know, even if you feel strong, you don't
how it's going to happen. You don't know if you're going to be the winner. (1:07:20) So
the best strategy is not starting a conﬂict or a war. Just avoid it. If you can avoid it,
just avoid it, don't start it. Because you don't know who is going to win. So that's my
philosophy, that's how I conceive life. Be kind to people, and they will be kind to you.
(1:07:52)
Katherine:
 What a wonderful philosophy,
Napoleon. I agree. Now I wonder if
you could speak about your work with the Kentucky Refugee Ministries, as a case
manager, and the role of religion within that organization. And then perhaps the role
of religion in the clients' lives who you advise and who you welcome into Louisville.
(1:08:24)
Napoleon:
 Our policy says we don't treat
people based on belief, we need to
be neutral. But I would say that the majority of people coming from Africa are
Christian, except Somalis who are Muslim and people coming from Southeast Asia
mostly are Buddhists. But I always respect people regardless of their religion, and in
my work at KRM (1:09:15) - you know, refugees, when they arrive in the United States,
when they are settled, one of the ﬁrst things they ask, Is there any worship
community here? How can I join a church or a mosque or a temple? That's one of the
ﬁrst questions they ask, after of course I help you with housing, food, they've started
school, those are the ﬁrst things, those are one of the ﬁrst questions that come, I'm a
Muslim, I'm a Christian, I'm Presbyterian, I'm Catholic, I'm a Buddhist, I need to get in
contact with my community. (1:10:05) So, that's one of my ﬁrst jobs, look for a
community, and say, okay here are people who worship, you know, Sunday, or
Saturday evening. I put them in contact with my clients, so that they can feel really
really welcome. And I've seen that the worship community, no matter what religion
you are in, brings a kind of peace. Most of the time they were saying, on Monday, they
would say, Thank you so much, we went to church, or we went to mosque, we went
to temple, with my community, it was good, I even met people I haven't seen for
twenty years, so thank you so much, I'm happy I was able to pray. (1:11:06) You can see
a change in their life, they say, okay there's a community, I have my community in
this town, so this is a good city, this is a good place to be. That's where you see that
religion plays a big part in our clients' lives. So beside all other services we give,
information about their community is very important. So when I receive information,
pre-arrival bios for a client, I just look at their religious afﬁliation and say, oh they are
Baptist, I know a Baptist pastor who can help [INDECIPHERABLE] on Sunday, or
whatever day they go worship. (1:11:59) And then when they arrive I say,
[INDECIPHERABLE] It's very important in their life.
1 3
(1:12:13)
Katherine:
 Thank you for that, I'm glad
to hear that you're able to connect
them with spaces where they feel comfortable.
(1:12:23)
Napoleon:
 And we are lucky at KRM because
most of our church people - we
like to have a church whose religion is the same as the client, [INDECIPHERABLE], so
that becomes pretty easy, because they will take the clients, every Sunday or every
Saturday, take them to church, and you can see how the family is happy. It's a big
luck for us at KRM.
(1:13:07)
Katherine:
 Thank you so much Napoleon. I
don't want to take up too much
of your time. I guess I wonder if there's anything you wish I had asked, or anything
you'd like to share?
(1:13:23)
Napoleon:
 I would like to say that working
at KRM has energized me in a way
that whenever I meet with clients coming from those regions -- war-torn regions --
we speak about experience, and we tell each other, how did you survive? Were you
able to help people who are more vulnerable than you? (1:14:14) What did you do to
get rid of trauma, or to just ﬁght trauma? Those questions you share with the clients,
and I use it to refer some of my clients to mental health services. You talk to them,
some don't really want to talk to you, especially women, and I know this especially in
the Congo, women who have been sexually assaulted many times, they won't talk to
a man. They won't talk to, they don't know. I just use my experience. I understand, I
understand you, I fully understand. (1:15:03) Because my mom died in the same
circumstances. And they say, oh your mom was there? And I say, yeah my mom was
there. She died in a horrible way. So here you have people who can help you, and I
can help you, get in contact with those people. So when I do that
[INDECIPHERABLE] I'm going to tell you a story of when I started at KRM, back in
2012. I started with a really serious and sad case, of a lady who had been raped. Who
was raped by ﬁfteen militia men. And she got her private part damaged. She was in a
wheelchair. (1:15:59) It took me like three weeks to get her conﬁdence and refer her to
better services. She had to undergo three or four surgeries, and one day - I knew she
was in the wheelchair, and one day, someone knocked on my door, on my ofﬁce, and
who I see? The lady. Using a walking stick. Is this true? Am I awake? Am I dreaming?
And that lady was walking, using a walking stick, yes, but walking, no longer in a
wheelchair. (1:16:52) And I said to myself, [INDECIPHERABLE]  thank you so much.
Thank you so much. So this lady showed me again that if you listen, you can help. So
from that time, in my job, when I can bring slight help to those broken hearts, I say,
KRM is my place. I can do something in other people's lives. (1:17:28) So, I just wanted
to share that experience with you and tell you that I'm blessed to be able to do what
I'm doing at KRM, and it's a kind of blessing. And of course as I said, I beneﬁt from it,
because it's a kind of therapy, telling the story of my family.
(1:17:50)
Katherine:
 Thank you so much Napoleon. I'm
sure that you do beneﬁt from
this, as you say, and I'm also positive that you are just such a good case manager and
that KRM really beneﬁts from having you be part of their team. It's, I'm sure, so
comforting to people who are newcomers to Louisville to be able to speak with you
about how far you've come since you ﬁrst arrived. It's a kind of hope, and maybe
1 4
inspiration, that you uniquely can provide, so I'm so grateful that you're doing this
work.
(1:18:29)
Napoleon:
 Many people can provide that,
not only me. We are a strong team.
I used to call my colleagues, we are the winning team, I used to joke around and say,
we are the winning team. Yes, we have wonderful people at KRM. John, our director,
who I've known for so long. I started here at KRM he was my supervisor
[INDECIPHERABLE] caring about each other, very compassionate colleagues. KRM is
like a family here, so we do care for each other, [INDECIPHERABLE] complicated
moment, to care for each other. So it's a second family to me.
(1:19:22)
Katherine:
 That's a amazing, I'm so glad
you found that second family.
(1:19:29)
Napoleon:
 Yeah, it's beautiful. It's beautiful
to have people you call family. It
doesn't happen to many countries, there's somewhere you go and feel like you're a
stranger, you're not wanted there. So it's a blessing to be...
(1:19:53)
Katherine:
 Well thank you so much for speaking
with me. Do you have any
questions?
(1:19:59)
Napoleon:
 How do you like my presentation?
I think it's a kind of
presentation.
(1:20:05)
Katherine:
 Okay, well -
(1:20:08)
Napoleon:
 Did I meet your expectations?
(1:20:10)
Katherine:
 Oh my goodness, I didn't have
such expectations, but I really
loved speaking with you. I'm going to stop the recording now and we can keep
chatting.
E n d
1 5