Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Hamdi Farah
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/hamdi-farah
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-KrOt83mxz23OJhsstcTgATMWxPSOuJM/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Hamdi Farah,
Daughter of Somali Civil War Refugees
Interviewed by Serena Alagappan in Syracuse, NY, 08/07/20
Transcribed by Jackie Namala, 10/08/21
(00:01)
Interviewer:
Okay, so we're here in Syracuse
with Hamdi Farah, and she will
share her settlement story. Thank you so much for your time and your willingness to
share with us a part of your life if you want.
(00:22)
Hamdi:
Okay. My name is Hamdi Farah. Today
is August 8 2020. I mean
August 7, I apologize. So I am Somali; my nationality is Somali. And I was born in
Kenya. My mother had migrated from Somalia when the civil war happened. So I
don't know anything from my [UNDECIPHERABLE] my nationality country. I just
know through the stories and experiences that my mother and my father had both
shared with me. I was in Kenya until I was twelve years old, and I was resettled in the
United States with my whole family. What I remember about Kenya is I used to live
with my grandma. So I think back then we were, we were nine kids. So I used to live
with my grandma, and my aunt and my uncle. And I was basically like the spoiled kid
in the house. And I used to get away with a lot of things. For example, I wasn't a fan
of going to school; they do had schools in the camp. But I didn't like going to school.
And my grandma had never pushed me to go to school and learn and all that stuff.
So when I came to the United States with my family that had to change, I had to
attend school.
(01:42)
Interviewer
: Okay, so do you mind sharing
a little more about camp itself?
(01:48)
Hamdi:
Camp? Okay, so like, when I was, when
I was a kid in the camp, I didn't
like really thought of it much about it. Like, to me, that was the only world that I
knew. I didn't have TV to see the other side of the world. I didn't had other girls to like,
look up to that were in school, or that were - what's it called - motivated about
working and making living for themselves. Like, I was just a kid who wakes up. We
did had food. I never like slept hungry. But like, it didn't had opportunities. And we
1

were dependent on what my father makes and brings, and what my uncle makes
and brings for our family. It was...it was like, we didn't have like streets and stuff. We
had like sand. I don't know what they call like the street ﬂoor over here outside. tv.
Yeah, we didn't have pavements, we had sand. We didn't have like ﬂoors, we had like
houses that's just built on the ﬂoor. I mean, like, we didn't have stairs and stuff. To me,
like at that time, like that was the best life I could have. I had friends, I had my
grandma, I had my uncle, I had my whole family around me. I was raised with so
much love. So I didn't really thought that I was missing much about the world. I was
living my best life. And I just thought that you know, it was just me. And you know, I
have everything I could ever ask for. And the camp that I lived in, I lived in like where
there was like a lot of Somali people there. And there wasn't like other kinds of like
other people from other countries. So I like I was seeing white people. I will see
different people for example, white. And like it used to fascinate me but like I did not
used to see a lot of the Kenyans cause they lived in the cities and stuff. I didn't see
like other people from like other countries. I never like saw Asian people. I didn't saw
any Arab Muslims, like I just thought like, you know, at that time, I felt like we were
the only Muslim existing people. I mean, it's kind of weird, but yeah, that's that's just
what I saw. And that's just what I believed in. I wasn't attending school as well, like I
would, my grandma would force me to go to like school and I would pretend for like
two days and then I would stop attending. So yeah, that was, that's what I remember
(04:13)
Interviewer:
So I just want to understand
something better. You said you felt
it was best life without TV and video games?
(04:20)
Hamdi:
[INTERVIEWER CHUCKLES] Yeah, like,
without TV without games.
Like there wasn't like nothing to like waste my time at and like people be like, “Oh,
(04:28)
Interviewer:
Did you know that it exists?
(04:29)
Hamdi:
No, I didn't...I mean I did. But like
I did knew that there was such a
thing as TV because we had, they, in the camp, they had like a movie theater. It
wasn't like compared to America, the ones that we have now. But there was such a
thing as a movie theater. But as a young girl you're not allowed to attend especially
as a girl as a Muslim. You're not allowed to attend movie theaters, because it's usually
like a bunch of boys watching soccer games or like watching movies that are
translated into Somali so like, I would get a peep of it, but like, it wasn't nothing that
you know, I was asking for, like, it was like, I need to watch this, I need to watch that. It
was nothing like that.
(05:09)
Interviewer:
Okay, so it wasn't allowed by
family?
(05:11)
Hamdi:
It wasn't allowed by family; it was
taboo. Like you won't see girls
around the movie theater.
2
(05:16)
Interviewer:
Okay
(05:17)
Hamdi:
Because like, it's just like, you
know, there's a bunch of guys there. It
just looked at, I don't know how to say like, it was kind of embarrassment. Yeah. So
like, we weren't, like I wasn't allowed to, like, be around that area at all. And I had
uncles, so they're, like, make you...they’re like, “You can't be there.” And I wasn't
actually interested in it. Maybe it's because I wasn't exposed to it either. So and, like, I
get people that come to, that come up to me, and it's like, “Oh, my God, you lived in a
camp” and it must have been this and that, and it's like, not really, because to me,
like, at that time, that was what I was exposed to. So it was the best for me, like I had
a good childhood. Maybe if I go back, and I have to live there. I think it would be
completely different.
(06:06)
Interviewer:
Now, when you experience life
in America
(06:08)
Hamdi:
Yeah, now that I experience life in
America or like, now that I've seen
the other side of the world, it would be completely different.
(06:16)
Interviewer:
So you mentioned nine kids,
right?
(06:18)
Hamdi:
Yeah, we were nine kids. Now we're
eleven kids. But back when I lived
in Kenya, and I was the third oldest, but I was raised with my grandma. And my
mother, I remember in like 2006, she started the process of like, applying to come to
America and stuff. And I used to live with my grandma. But my dad was like, my
mother wanted to leave me with there cause she took me when I was like, really
young. And she said, I'll raise her, I'll take care of her. And my mom wanted me to
leave with my grandma. But my dad was like, “I don't want to leave any child behind.
I want all my childrens to have the same opportunities, since she's already hard
headed and not going to school [BOTH GIGGLE]. I think she’ll give her grandma a
really hard time. So I think it's best that we take her with us.” So that's how I was able
to come to America, but there was also slightly chances that I could have stayed with
my grandma and stayed back in the camp.
(07:11)
Interviewer:
Okay. So do you remember how
that process was of applying
and then
(07:18)
Hamdi:
Little bit. Okay. So I remember it
that, I just remember that my mom
would be like, "Oh, we have an interview; we gotta go to sleep early" and stuff like
that. And we would wake up in the morning, we would take, we would take a bus. It
was a couple of minutes away. Like it wasn't an hour, it was like a 45 minute like a 15
minute away. And it would be like so much questions for my mom. Like they'll take
her to a room. They didn't really ask me much, maybe because I was young. But
yeah, that's about that's what I remember. And my mom used to like cook food at
3
night and prepare food, because it will be like a whole day thing. Like literally the
whole day - God - like we will leave early in the morning and come back like around
sunset. So yeah, that's
(08:07)
Interviewer:
Okay and anyone have that same
opportunity to apply in camp
or it was selective, somehow, or was it any limitations who can apply?
(08:22)
Hamdi:
I think it was anyone. Anyone could
apply to the camp. So I
remember we, there was this family that I used to live next to, and they had this they
were applying with us and we used to go to the same interviews and everything. And
at the end we were chosen to come and they were not and they still live in the camp.
So yeah, that's that's pretty sad. But I think it's anyone that's not a citizen of Kenya
could apply.
(08:51)
Interviewer:
Okay. And what is approximate
time do people stay in camp?
(08:58)
Hamdi:
Okay, so my mother came to the camp
in like 1991, 1992. She came
here when she was like, a really young person, like she was like 13 years old, and then
she lived there until 2009 until we were able to come to America. There were friends
that came with her. And there were people that she ran away with from Somalia that
came to the camp with her and they still live there till this day. Yeah. So it's like you
don't have nowhere to go to. You just kind of stuck there.
(09:31)
Interviewer:
So it's ten, ﬁfteen years, twenty
years problem.
(09:34)
Hamdi:
Probably. And it's probably going
to continue because Somalia I
don't think it's looking any good for them to go back at this time. So yeah, there were
people that were like tired of the camp and they said we can't live this so we'll just go
back to the Civil War.
(09:50)
Interviewer:
So a little bit more about the
settlement itself and you get
approved. How the process coming here look like?
(10:03)
Hamdi:
So when I got approved to come, I
remember the day that my mom
told me: I was really excited; I was like jumping around. I was like, I'm gonna go to
America. And I'm like, not washing dishes because I heard that we had like, robots to
help us wash the dishes [INTERVIEWER LAUGHS] and sound like I no longer have to
wash the dishes.
(10:23)
Interviewer:
So this is, this was based on
the Hollywood movies, or?
(10:27)
Hamdi:
No, it was based on what people said
around me.
4
(10:29)
Interviewer:
Okay.
(10:30)
Hamdi:
So like, people would be like, you
know, they don't have grass; they
don't have sand. It's like, all levels of stairs and buildings. Like, the food, like the robot
would come and serve you like it was just all these crazy. And then it's like, if you
leave alone, like if we were walking around, like you might get kidnapped, and like,
get your livers out in stop. Like, it was like, it was both like good news and bad news.
So I was really excited to like, come to America, but then I was also sad to like leave
my grandma and my aunt and everyone else behind.
(11:08)
Interviewer:
So what happened when you came?
(11:09)
Hamdi:
Okay, so we had to leave the camp
to go to Nairobi. And that was like
an eight hours of drive. And I remember in the process of leaving the camp to
Nairobi, I was vomiting, because I have nausea. I get nauseated when I'm in a car for
a long time. And that was really hard for me. And then we had to stay in, like, when
we got to Nairobi, we had to stay in like on this, like this building like this one place,
we had to stay there ten days before we were able to come to America. So I
remember they used to, like serve us food. I didn't really had to wash dishes there
because like, there were people that serve us food and we just have to like turn our
dishes and stuff. And then after like, actually the ten days, we were able to like, leave
there and go, I don't remember much about I just remember like, in the process of
leaving that building, going to the airport. I just remembered seeing like bunch of
different people and just looking up and down and say what is this? Like people like
just different people that look different. Yeah.
(12:25)
Interviewer:
And then when you came, you came
to JFK?
(12:28)
Hamdi:
Yeah, I did came to JFK. I came when
we arrived in like, we arrived in
like New York City. And I remember my, it was all of us, and we were tired. And we
arrived in New York City Airport, and we were all tired. And we couldn't just stay
awake any longer. So like, we all like kind of slept on the ﬂoor. And this lady came to
us. She was super nice. Um, she came to my dad and she was like, "Is this like your
family?" He was like, "Yes, it's my ﬁrst time in the country." We had like, other people
that were coming to America as well with us like from the camp. So like they were
able to like make conversation with this woman and she gave my dad $40 and was
like, “Oh my god, like you have a really big family like nine kids. Like I hope this... I
don't have much, but I hope this does something for you.” Yeah, my dad tells that
story all the time.
(13:23)
Interviewer:
Oh, that's, that's amazing.
(13:25)
Hamdi:
Yeah.
5
(13:27)
Interviewer:
Yeah, many people like that
are willing to help. Really welcome
you.
(13:33)
Hamdi:
Yeah, like especially on the ﬁrst
day, we didn't know much about it.
And then when we got settled in Buffalo, and then we got when we were settled in
Buffalo literally our caseworker she was on a vacation. So there was someone else
that had to come pick us up from the airport, and then bring us to our house. And I
like I don't remember much like we were all tired. So the ﬁrst night like we all kind of
like went to sleep. And then the second day, the guy came to us that came to pick us
up from the airport and he was just like basically telling my parents about all these
other rules and how to turn on the stove and what not to do and what to do. And it
was just like exhausting because like we were like exhausted from the airplane and
everything so yeah. I remember we were in the house for like two days and we didn't
get out; it was in March and we would...all we would do is just look through the
window and like see the snow and stuff and like just look through the outset and just
see like people crossing the street walking on the street just minding their business.
That was fascinating to us but also like I remember it being scary for my mom and
her just crying saying, "Oh I don't know if this is something you know, we should
have done. I don't know if we should have came to all the way here. I don't see any
Somali people. I don't see Muslim people. What is this? Who are these people?
Anything could happen to us." She was just panicking. So like us watching her go
through that was kind of scary for us children.
(15:03)
Interviewer:
Okay, so was that ﬁrst time
for you to see snow? How long you
stay in Buffalo? What happened then?
(15:14)
Hamdi:
Okay, so we stayed in Buffalo for
two years. It was my ﬁrst time seeing
snow. There was deﬁnitely no robots to help us wash dishes. We had to do it our own.
(15:25)
Interviewer:
Okay. Was that disappointing?
(15:27)
Hamdi:
Yeah, that was a big disappointment.
I was like [UNDECIPHERABLE]
"Where's the robots?" I remember, after like a month later, someone came to my
mom to explain to her that our siblings had led from the house that we lived in
building over and that was okay. And then I just remember my mom breaking down
on the ﬂoor, because she doesn't know what like the lead. She thought like it was
some type of horrible disease. So, like, she didn't know what it was; they didn't really
explained it to her very well. And it was like very sad for her to like, accept the fact
that her kids all had lead. Then my mom was like, “Okay, I can't stay in this house any
longer. I have to move out.” And we were able to talk to these other Somali people
that lived in Buffalo. They were moving to a different state. And they said, you know,
"Our house is very good. We'll leave some of our stuff for you; we’ll leave our bedding
6
and everything for you, like come in, and everything." And then the house, we had to
sign a contract. And my parents signed a contract after six months. Like after six
months of being in America, we had to ﬁnd a house and you know, we had to sign
the contract for two years and move into the house. And the house had bedbugs
when we moved into it so the ﬁrst night literally when we slept in the bed, we
couldn't didn't know what a bed bug was being had that in Kenya, maybe it's
because of a different environment, different weather. We couldn't stay in the bed.
So we had to come out of the bed and sleep in the living room. And my dad was able
to talk to the caseworkers and the people that were helping us. But we couldn't
move because we signed a contract. So we had to live in a house full of bed bug for
two years.
(17:10)
Interviewer:
Was it also in Buffalo?
(17:13)
Hamdi:
For a year and a half. Yeah. And it
was really bad. I remember even one
night, it got so bad that we couldn't sleep in the living room any longer. So we had to
move to the kitchen, sleep in the kitchen because the living room had a rug so it's
much worse on the rug than on the kitchen ﬂoor. So yeah, we had to stay there for a
while. And then my mom was like, “I can't live here. I can't live in Buffalo.” And the
reason why we moved to Syracuse is because she had people from the camp that
she used to live with that lived in Syracuse, so she was able to be connected with
them. And that's how we made the transition from the camp to Syracuse. Not camp,
I'm sorry. From Buffalo to Syracuse, yeah.
(18:00)
Interviewer:
So it was after two years?
(18:02)
Hamdi:
Yea, after two years, we were able
to move to Syracuse.
(18:05)
Interviewer:
So that we don't skip any part,
here, while you were living in
Buffalo, were you able to connect with anyone there? Were you able to ﬁnd any
Somalis or any Muslims or community?
(18:19)
Hamdi:
It wasn't as big as Syracuse community
was, but we were able to
connect with the...there was a mosque. And there was this Somali man who was
married to this Pakistani lady. And he was really helpful. His wife was also helpful. His
wife and my mom couldn't really communicate because of a language barrier. She
spoke Pakistani and English, and my mom only spoke Somali. So it was very hard for
her to communicate, but they were able to speak and hang out and eat together.
And you know, they were able to relate in some ways.
(18:53)
Interviewer:
How you connected with them?
7
(18:55)
Hamdi:
How would we connected with them? We couldn't speak with his
children too because they spoke English and they speaked very little Somali. So we
connected with his childrens by trying to teach them Somali, trying to teach them
their dad language. They spoke little, but not so much. And then the mother, she
would like sign to my mom. And yeah, just by her helping us like transition
everything her helping us and telling my mom like where's the bus stop and where
to take the bus from and stuff like that. That's how we were able to communicate
and we were able to talk to their dad very well. He was also was [UNDECIPHERABLE]
So he helped us and he helped my dad get connected with the masjid and he met
other Somali men from that used to come to the masjid. And you know, that's how
my dad was able to like form a relationship and ﬁnd a job and everything. And they
also like the men from the masjid also taught him how to drive the car and
everything. So like after a year later my dad was able to get a car and drive us around
and stuff like that. So it was good, but I think that one bad thing that we had was the
house issue. Also, my mom didn't really had much friends; it was just my dad with his
guy friends and like, my mom was just like, wanted to like people to connect with. So
that's why she wanted to move to Syracuse.
(20:21)
Interviewer:
Okay, so was Syracuse a better
experience then?
(20:26)
Hamdi:
Syracuse was a better experience for
everybody, I think. My dad
wasn't a fan of it; he stayed behind to work at his job because he was like, you know,
"It was so hard for me to ﬁnd a job. I ﬁnally found it. It doesn't pay a lot, but I don't
want to leave it." You know, "I don't know what great things that Syracuse has for you
that you're really dying to move there. But you are welcome to move there. It's just
I'm gonna stay behind and like try to secure this job while you guys are trying to
navigate there." When we came here, we were really happy because we did saw
some people that we used to live in the camp with and we were able to get
connected with them. And we were able to like start because I think I was in eighth
grade, or seventh grade. So we were able to like start school, like we got into the
school bus, but not far from us, or we would walk there. Like I had, I made friend.
Okay, so in Buffalo, I didn't had friends in school because I didn't speak the language.
I would get bullied. There was not a lot of Somali people in my class. So it was really
hard to like, communicate with people over there. I remember I used to just sleep
throughout the whole day, get nauseated in the bus coming home. And yeah, it was
really, really hard trying to like connect with people in like the school and stuff.
(21:41)
Interviewer:
I'm sorry to hear that.
(21:43)
Hamdi:
Yeah
(21:43)
Interviewer:
I can imagine how hard that was.
8
(21:45)
Hamdi:
Yeah.
(21:45)
Interviewer:
Do you recall any experiences
? Bad experiences or?
(21:48)
Hamdi:
I remember, like hating the food so
much; food was so bad, I wouldn't
eat at all. And in school, I would stay. I would eat from home, I would go to school,
and then come back and eat from home. Okay, and like just the food smelled bad to
me at the time, it smelled bad, but now it doesn't. What else I remember, I used to
get bullied by this girl. She would make fun of like, the way I tried to speak and stuff.
It was hard to like speak to the teacher. I didn't like school either. I wasn't happy at
home as well because like I was raised by my grandma. So like, when I came to
America, I had to live with my family. So I was put into a lot of responsibilities, like
taking care of my younger siblings, sharing stuff, sacriﬁcing stuff, and that was like a
lot for me. And then I would go to school, and then I would face this and then I would
come home and then I would have ﬁghts with my siblings and stuff. I had to share
rooms; I had to share bed; I had to share everything. Yeah, I didn't like it. But now I
get used to it. Now, I like it. Now, I know my territory. So yeah, it's not as bad.
(23:01)
Interviewer:
Was it just adjustment or?
(23:03)
Hamdi:
Yea, it was adjustment.
(23:05)
Interviewer:
What helped you navigate that
and get used to it?
(23:10)
Hamdi:
So I think what had helped me was I
would always call back my
grandma. And she would always be like, you know, "In life, you'll always have to share
things. I'm not there to help you. I don't want you crying all day. So I want you to try
to talk to your siblings and try to tell them, don't touch this instead of like, crying or
like, cursing at them, like try to be a little bit nicer and explain to them like, why you
don't want to share this or why you don't want to do this." Like they knew how to do a
lot of things. I just knew how to wash dishes, they knew how to cook. Like, they were
a lot responsible than me: I had a sister who's a year younger than me and she could
do a lot of things that I couldn't do. So they would make fun of me for that too.
(23:49)
Interviewer:
Okay
(23:50)
Hamdi:
Yeah, I just had to learn what they
knew to kind of catch up and stuff.
So like, they wouldn't be able to like, you know, like, look down on you in a way. So
yeah, but then I was also able to build up my social skill. I was able to learn how to
share and stuff like that. So I was grateful for that. And we were able to build a
relationship and grow stronger together. I deﬁnitely became more responsible, more
grown, more mature than before.
9
(24:21)
Interviewer:
Okay, that's great. So then tell us more about Syracuse
experience.
(24:28)
Hamdi:
So Syracuse, for me, it was good,
Syracuse. I went to seventh grade.
When I came here – we came here like in February – we came to Syracuse in
February 2010. And I went to middle school. And I lied, sorry, I meant 2011. I went to
middle school and then I met this girl and you know she was able to help me
navigate; she spoke Somali as well. And we weren't...we were from like the camp but
we weren't from same area. We lived like an hour and thirty minutes away from each
other, but we didn't know each other. So we were able to share experiences from
that. And then she was able to connect me to the Northside Learning Center
because she lived close to the Northside Learning Center. At the time the Northside
was on...it was not where it was right now. It was in a different place. She lived right
next to the Northside; so I was able to come to the Northside, and meet other Somali
girls, and share connections with them and everything like that. And then I told my
mom about it. And then my mom came there and she was able to learn her
alphabet. Because my mom, when she was younger, in Somalia, she used to know
how to read and write. But because of everything that had happened, she lost her
knowledge. And like English – I mean she lost her knowledge of reading and writing
in Somali because the Somali alphabet is similar to the English alphabets. So for her
not to stay home to babysit; for her to bring all of us together to come to the
Northside Learning Center; for her to go to school and have her own time to learn
was really great for her. I remember, like four years, three years later, she would drag
me to translate for her as always, and they would say something in English. And as
I'm trying to translate for her, she would respond it back, because now she could
understand what they were saying. So that was kind of amazing to see that she was
able to learn because back then I used to, like, look at her like, like, you know, she's
older now, you know, she can't learn; it's so hard for her memory to memorize all
these stuff. But then, years later, after attending the Northside Learning Center, she
was able to learn and she was able to learn how to drive; she made so much friends,
she got a job, and all that.
(26:50)
Interviewer:
That's amazing.
(26:50)
Hamdi:
Yeah. I think that the important thing
was like having that
community over there to help her. I remember when I was in middle school, I would
watch TV all day, no, I would go to school, come home, I would watch TV after from
coming from the center. And then I would go to bed. And it was just that cycle. And
then as she learned more about education, and like the importance of education,
she kind of cut that habit of us of watching TV all the time. So she would be like, "No,
do your homework or like, no help this kid with this or like no do this." So like, it was
very important for my mom to have an education and go to school, so that she can
help us push us towards getting better and stuff like that. So that's good.
1 0
(27:35)
Interviewer:
How you coped with the new habits
that you had to go to
school?
(27:45)
Hamdi:
[BOTH LAUGH] Oh, I didn't have a choice
cause I had to go this time.
Like, I couldn't make excuses. I couldn't make excuses. I would try to pry my way out
of it. And my mom be like, "No, you have to go for us. Like, the people are gonna
come and take you away." And they're going to be like, "Oh, you don't go to school.
You're a bad girl. So you get like all these detentions and stuff." But after a while, it
became my favorite place to be at. School was always frustrating for me because it
was hard for me to understand everything. Like reading, writing - it was not easy, but
it was a way out for me from home and everything else. Not that home was bad. It's
just like, when like, I feel like for my parents, like they were newcomers. So they were
so focused on like, like, working and like staying home and taking care of all of us
that we had this opportunity of going out of home and like going to different places.
Like for example like going to the park and stuff like that was not really them to like,
you know, let's just take the kids out for this and that but the school really took that
position for me. So it would be like ﬁeld trips: it was a way for me to hang out with my
friends. Like it was a way for me to like, get all my frustration out and stuff like that.
So school had became my favorite place to be at. Although I hate doing work. Like I
love being there and like socializing and all that. Yeah.
(29:14)
Interviewer:
That's great. And you already
mentioned community here in
Syracuse. So I'm hearing Northside Learning Center is one really important place
where you found that community.
(29:29)
Hamdi:
Yeah.
(29:30)
Interviewer:
Were you able to connect with
the mosque at all?
(29:38)
Hamdi:
Yeah, I was able to connect with the
mosque. So when the Northside
Learning Center moved closer to the masjid, I was able to - like Kasina did - I was able
to volunteer at the masjid and I was able to like pass out the food. I was also able to
get my siblings to come and to connect with the masjid too. It was just really nice
seeing multiple... a place that was for all because the masjid kinda included all of us
like the girls, the boys. We were able to be active and help out in the community and
participate in all these other different events. For example, when I was at the
Northside Learning Center, I had the opportunity to raise money to buy a new van for
the center; it was like $40,000 and we got into this program called Community
Foundation classroom and we were going to that classroom for like every Saturday
for a whole year. So I was able to go to the masjid, cook food with the people that I
was volunteering with to raise the money and sell it to the people that would come
1 1
for prayers after prayers. So that was really good to talk to people and ask them to
donate and stuff like that and ask them to buy stuff and like fundraise. Yeah.
(31:04)
Interviewer:
That's great. How we feel about
that?
(31:07)
Hamdi:
We were able to raise the money; we
were able to buy the van and it
felt so rewarding and so great. It just feels like people are there for you and like you
just got to be presented. You just got to see them, just gotta go and there's just so
many people that's gonna give you a hand out and be like you know, "Let me help
you like; come talk to me; come talk to my daughter; she's in middle school." It's just
like... it's a way to connect with people and it just feels like home; feels like, "Okay, this
is where I'm supposed to be." So yeah.
(31:39)
Interviewer:
Especially I can imagine how
it feels rewarding to be helping or
do something for kids who had similar experiences as you have.
(31:51)
Hamdi:
Yeah.
(31:52)
Interviewer:
And I know that, so there are
many Somali families and many
others who probably came from a camp or other places.
(32:00)
Hamdi:
Yeah, I was also able to connect with
these girls straight from Somalia,
like straight from the civil war. And it was like "Wow, like you like you saw the country
my parents always talk about; you've been there; you lived there." You know they
have all these trauma of like hearing guns and ﬁghting tribal issues and all that stuff.
So I was able to connect with these girls and talk about all these other great things
and I hope to one day visit the country that my parents were from and born in.
(32:36)
Interviewer:
Okay, so do you remember having
any organization behind you
coming to Buffalo and your settlement?
(32:45)
Hamdi:
Don't unfortunately remember having
t h e
(32:47)
Interviewer:
Okay so probably your parents
would know.
(32:49)
Hamdi:
Yeah, my parents, my mother would be
the best person to ask that
question. I don't remember any organization. I just remember coming here and like
the only organization that I remember is the Northside Learning Center because like
that was a big part of my life. I started there as a student and now I'm a teacher and
like so that's the only organization that I remember now
(32:56)
Interviewer:
I recognize the Northside Learning
Center as probably one of the
best places here for many.
1 2
(33:27)
Hamdi:
Yeah, I believe that too. Because like
for example, I believe that I'm a
product of the center. I feel like if the center was not there, I would not be here
talking to you today; I would not be so into education; I would not be so like
expressing myself. I feel like the center like... because I am still learning English
although I've been in this country for so long. Reading it's hard for me because like I
didn't make that a habit of it; writing it's hard for me because it wasn't a habit of it.
And like school, like I feel like all I did in high school was focus on like, you know,
passing regents, passing exams and like they don't teach you like, how to study they
don't teach you all these other things. They don't teach you about leadership. So I feel
like the Northside Learning Center was there to teach me all these other things that
school was leaving out. And after I graduated from high school, I went to a
community college, and I spend there for four years trying to like just get my
associate degree. But every time I want to quit I would always come to the Northside
Learning Center and I will see the students that like I see them they're younger than
me they're in middle school and I just see myself in them you know what I mean? So
it's like I know it's harder for them so it just kind of gives me this hope of like you
know, I can do it. You know, if I graduate maybe, maybe they'll look at me and be like,
you know, “She did it. She graduated; she went through this whole process of going
to the Northside; she went through the whole process of going to college and she's
over here now. She got her degree in everything.” So the Northside had helped me,
like, had helped me build my conﬁdence up and it taught me so much about
socializing, studying, prioritizing time management, the importance of having my
education, the points of being like a community leader and being there for these
girls. So yeah, I really do appreciate the center being there for people like me. Yeah.
Newcomers.
(35:22)
Interviewer:
Thank you so much for sharing
that. I'm sure you are inspiration
for many.
(35:30)
Hamdi:
I mean, I look at them, and it's like,
you know, they actually motivated
me. So every time I want to give up there, I see them working hard and it's like I want
to be example. So they actually motivated me to become...when I became a teacher
at the center, it had helped me so much that it got rid of all my thoughts of
becoming a teacher in the future, because now I'm in Oswego, in the education
program. So like seeing those students and seeing the help the center had gave my
family - my mother, for example - just motivates me to become someone in the
teacher. Inshallah.
(36:08)
Interviewer:
Inshallah. I wish you luck with
that, all the best inshallah. May
Allah make it easy for you.
(36:12)
Hamdi:
Thank you.
1 3
(36:18)
Interviewer:
So if it's okay, a few more questions.
(36:22)
Hamdi:
No, that's ﬁne. I'm ﬁne with your
questions.
(36:25)
Interviewer:
So you being a teacher at the
Northside Learning Center. You
explained already motivation behind that. So do you feel that it's also partially giving
back to Northside Learning Center for everything you have there?
(36:44)
Hamdi:
Yeah, I do feel like that. At ﬁrst,
it was just like, you know, I didn't
thought of it from that angle. You know, to me, it was just like, you know, I was a
student here, now I'm a teacher. But now that I look at it, it just seems a lot more
than that. Like, the students, I feel like they can relate to me. Because when I was a
teacher... when I was a student, I mean, I used to see like, all these astute tutors, and
like all these other teachers that were born here, and, you know, went to school here
and everything. But like, now I can relate to my students. Like, you know, I'm from
the camp. You know, I've been to all the City School District. And I feel like it's a way of
giving back to my community. And it deﬁnitely got me a lot more connected with
the community
(37:35)
Interviewer:
And if I'm hearing correctly,
it is also your private community.
(37:41)
Hamdi:
Yeah.
(37:42)
Interviewer:
So you feel good there. You want
to go back.
(37:44)
Hamdi:
Yeah. Yeah.
(37:46)
Interviewer:
And there are many other things
that just come along with with
that
(37:51)
Hamdi:
Yeah.
(37:54)
Interviewer:
So what is your American dream?
(37:59)
Hamdi:
What is my American dream? I didn't
really thought about that, okay. I
mean, I want to be able to graduate and get my bachelor's. I want to be able to...I
want to become a teacher inshallah; I want to be able to help students and you
know, offer [UNDECIPHERABLE] programs like the Northside Learning Center
maybe, hopefully, expand the program. I want to be able to also have another job, or
maybe have a business job so that I can afford my family. In 2016, I had the privilege
to go back to my country, Kenya, where I was from where I was born in with my
mom. And I sought the girl that was in the same process of trying to come to
1 4
America with me that wasn't able to come to America. And she had three children.
And I used to play with this girl, like she was my age and everything and she didn't
go to school. And she didn't have like a really like something to look forward to. She
didn't have a dream for her kids. So I want to be able to have enough to go back and
help out. Because I came back feeling guilt, like, you know, like, why was I chosen to
come here? Like, am I making good out of my time? Like, am I taking this
opportunity? Like maybe it would have been better if other students got it because
you know, they would have maybe made so much progress. Like it just made me feel
a lot like guilt because I felt like I wasn't taking as many advantages as I could. So I
want to be able to go back and help and give others a voice and tell them that you
know, there's another side to this world; there's a better side to it. It's okay to dream.
It's okay to have ambitions and it's okay to get a job as a girl. It's okay to watch a
movie maybe? Yeah. Yeah, movies,
(40:06)
Interviewer:
Is it okay to have robots washing
dishes?
(40:09)
Hamdi:
[BOTH LAUGH] Hopefully I would tell
them that part don't exist, but
maybe you'll be good enough to, like, you know, invent something like that.
(40:17)
Interviewer:
Okay. And do you think that I
mean, it would be great to create
opportunity for all these people to come. It's not most likely reality for all to come.
But as you mentioned, everyone deserves to have some kind of dreams in life is that
the American dream is to have dreams and to dream about better about new
opportunities. So do you think that we can probably create something new? You said
you want to help them. So do you have in mind how, how to help them? What would
be the best way to help them to help those who are not able to come here?
(40:59)
Hamdi:
I feel like, okay, so I feel like when
I was younger, in Kenya, if I had seen
a lot more girls that were in the education that were motivated to go to school, that
we're, I mean, pushed to go to school, I feel like it would have helped me like, think
about other things as a girl, because I didn't have a dream. It was like, "Okay, now I
want to grow up, maybe I'll get married." And that was it. So like, I feel like having
examples, like people that made it in life, that would be nice. And then to like, give
them more job opportunities to give them skills, because a lot of the jobs that are
offered in the camp are like manual. So it's more like, hard jobs that a lot of guys can
do, not so much for a girl to go to school, and then ﬁnish and then you know
[UNDECIPHERABLE]. So having programs, that helps them come up with jobs,
because now it was in 2016, it was a lot different than when I was there in 2009. They
had TVs in the camp, they had all these other things. So maybe creating jobs over
there, creating more schools that are friendly and welcoming for girls to be part of, I
think that would change it, since they're not going back to Somalia. And since they
can't go to Kenyan cities because they need citizens to go there. Maybe make them
make a life over there.
1 5
(42:28)
Interviewer:
When you were talking about your
American dream, one thing
that you mentioned was expanding, probably most of them except for the programs
that are offered there. Do you think that that expansion can entail something around
camp as well?
(42:41)
Hamdi:
I think that's a really good idea.
I mean, yeah, I think so I'm having, like,
one thing that I always hoped when I was in high school, or like, when I was young
was he was able to, like, get an internship to go back and like, volunteer over there,
but I really haven't really found certain programs that I can go through to do that. So
I think it would be really interesting to have these young girls, you know, um, these
young boys in the community now, to actually go back to like, the place that they
used to live in, or similar situations like that, and, you know, help out and get
connected. I feel like it's actually even gonna help them be more motivated, and you
know, more like ambitious about education and like, just in life, you know, it's just
like, you know, you were like this, make something out of what you have, you know,
be grateful for what you have be grateful for being, you know, going to school, and
like seeing girls and boys that are in school that made it in life. So I think, maybe.
(43:38)
Interviewer:
Maybe, yeah. So, dreams often
come true.
(43:44)
Hamdi:
Inshallah.
(43:45)
Interviewer:
And I'm sure as you said, after
you went there in 2016 that it
helped you be more grateful. Take advantage of what you have. So you're right, for so
many can be inspiration. And then they can think even how they can create more
opportunities for those who don't have opportunities as we have. Because in reality,
all these kids, they're smart, right? So it's just how much opportunity you have to use
those skills or attributes that you have and then what you're going to do with it for
some, the dream is to get married, right? They don't think about jobs.
(44:34)
Hamdi:
Yeah, they don't think about
(44:35)
Interviewer:
But maybe there is opportunity
for us to help them at least
navigate thought process and just expand their dreams.
(44:50)
Hamdi:
Deﬁnitely.
(44:53)
Interviewer:
Do you have anything else that
you want to share?
(44:57)
Hamdi:
I just want to say thank you for giving
me the opportunity to share my
experience and that if anything that I said didn't make sense or like if the people that
are writing this up have questions, they can reach out to me and I will try to explain.
1 6
Maybe I'll be more clear in writing an email or like, so yeah, that's it. I don't have
anything else to add – at the moment.
(45:20)
Interviewer:
Thank you. Thank you for sharing.
I really appreciate that. Your
story is really amazing story. Just wondering how many stories like this is out there
that are never heard. So creating these opportunities is really great. So thank you for
sharing that. It's unique. It's inspiring and don't worry, it makes sense. And if there is
anything that you mentioned that you want to clarify later, you will have opportunity
to do that.
(45:55)
Hamdi:
Okay
(45:55)
Interviewer:
So thank you so much for your
time.
(45:57)
Hamdi:
Thank you.
E n d
1 7