Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Bohdan Kantor
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/bohdan-kantor
Transcript URL: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AvuVSDvhH9vXNNDN79zW4HzUr3BcCfeIDvtNdKHic9c/edit?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

﻿Bohdan Kantor 


Interviewed by Simone Wallk in Alexandria, Virginia






(00:00) Simone Wallk: [indecipherable]


(00:02) Bohdan Kantor: We'll start with my index card from the International Tracing Center. And since my father readily didn't tell me this story, I had to recreate it from documents at the International Tracing Service that are accessible at the U.S. Holocaust Museum here. Then there's the Center for Migration Studies, where there are other records, more on this side of the Atlantic. But when I looked at this, it was just like a mystery here - what are these numbers? ZM? What is this number? And my name, and it's spelled in Polish, and I'm stateless - Ukraine, that's where I figured out my date - the day I was born, in '47, and then I figured this out - it was the street that I was born in. The number. And there's the camp number. So, there's all this rich metadata here that being an employee from the Library of Congress you appreciate these access points. And then, it tells the next camp I went to, and then there's these codes that I don't know - remarks that they kept - and then, from this first one, which was UNRRA, United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Agency, which was primarily geared to have people repatriated back to their countries. That's how these camps were organized, then it transitions to IRO, International Relief Organizations, so you see that on the card. This time they spelled my name the way I spell it, and then, now I'm not stateless, I'm Ukrainian now, because they're not gonna punish the family and send us back, and then Bad Aibling, and then it has "children's center." So that was the official name, but actually, what they preferred to call it was "children's village." It was an orphanage, but they didn't want to call it "orphanage," but "children's village." The military said, "Children's village? This is a barracks from the Nazi air force, with camouflage around here. There's no way that it's a children's village." And, the first camp that I was in was actually a village. It was Cornberg. It was based on the English garden concept. And here's a picture of the camp that I was born in. You could see that there was hills, and there's streets that are curved - 


(03:29) Simone Wallk: It looks like a village.


(03:30) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, it's a little village, and this is the UNRRA -


(03:37) Simone Wallk: So this was in Hungary?


(03:38) Bohdan Kantor: This was in Germany. And so, this was actually what I would call a village. Something that - euphemisms sometimes happen, depending on what you want to hide, or what you want to accentuate. 


(04:01) So you see that the index card - then, you see it traced all the way to my sponsor, [indecipherable], and then the street that I went to, in Philadelphia, I didn't even know. You see here that there's CM - again. It's code. CM, and a number. What I'd learned was - like here, you see this stamp here? It's CM, and there's a number, and then I figured with that F, it meant family! So this is how - this number was on my sister's, and my father's, index card so that's how they kept the family together. You know, that's the problem right now, with the refugee system. Where they're at when they're separated. And then this is my unique ID number. There's all this history that people do not know, and even, involvement in the Nazi system, was not only German industry. It was IBM. They had these punch cards that they track labor. If they needed somebody in the trains - there was Ford and the others. I'm not gonna name these. But the mess that we're in with these disasters and people who become refugees - and I'll show you the application for being a refugee. Right here. The questions were, "What is your nationality?" Here, Ukrainian - [indecipherable], stateless. Then they ask, "Why don't you want to go back to your native country?" And then, this is my mother, she wrote, "Because there are communists there." And then, there's another question of, "For what reason do you want to - why don't you want to go?" And then this document says that they're being persecuted because of race, religion and political viewpoint. Instead of saying yes or no, like my father put, she puts crosses [laughs] on the answers, so you could tell that she's more religious than he is. And then it says, "How are you persecuted?" "By the Nazis." And she says, "They didn't allow me to go to church." So this is part of the records from the International Tracing Service. So now that I had all the bureaucracy out of the way, now we're going to get to personal documents.


(07:50) The story really starts in Philadelphia, where I eventually became an orphan in an orphanage there, in Philadelphia. And there was - camps, in Germany, and there were volunteers on both sides of the Atlantic, trying to help these refugees. And early - right after the war, there was an orphanage in Philadelphia called Saint Basil's, where I eventually went to, and the children collected money for school supplies for the orphans, and they gave it to the Bishop there. The Bishop was so moved that he signed a check for five thousand dollars and sent it to a Vatican official, I guess he was probably here in Washington, D.C. And he also sent a letter to the chaplain of the third army in Germany. It was in the USL - and then he mentioned Ukrainian families who did not want to be repatriated. Also, there were lots of priests that were leaving communist countries. And I just wanna tell you about projects that I think are relevant even today. Take for instance, a shoebox project. Schoolchildren on this side of the United States collected toys and school supplies - and I'll just list one shoebox, and what it had. It said, "There were balls, dolls, marbles, tops, games and cards, nice smelling soap, washcloth, toothpaste, toothbrushes and sewing kits. Fancy bracelets and necklaces, candy and chewing gum, pencils, tablets, pocket-sized books, rulers, crayons, paintboxes." These are all things that children and refugees need, and even in Ukraine today, there are internally displaced refugees. And they asked the people in Arlington to help with school supplies. I went to a local school and told them - it was not the first time asking. 


(10:51) So I want to show a little bit about life before my parents were forcibly moved to Germany. My father was in the Polish army, so there's a picture of him - and there's his dog tags. As a prisoner. So, he was in Lager 4, and then there's his number. These numbers to track people are pervasive. He's right in the middle, there. And while he was a prisoner of war - now, I'm not sure if this is true, but I - one time, I took him to outside of Philadelphia, to a veteran, and it was Christmas time. He sang at a Christmas tree. He has a powerful voice that impressed this veteran. And then he mentioned that he was a prisoner of war, and he celebrated Christmas in the Julian calendar, and in the camp, he sang the Christmas songs. And then the Nazis came with rifles pointed at his head, but he kept on singing. And he said - he thought to himself - he says, "If I can't sing, life is not worth living." So then somebody said, "You know, he's not rebelling - it's just his Christmas." And then the Germans brought the beer, and the wurst to him. They appreciated the singing. And even in the camp that I was in, Cornberg, here are utensils we used. And Americans made my father work for this - it was a half a credit - it wasn't very much to get this spoon. I didn't realize this until I researched. I said, "I wonder what this is." 


(13:27) Simone Wallk: How do you have these?


(13:28) Bohdan Kantor: Well, my father, he just gave them to me - he didn't say what it was-


(13:38) Simone Wallk: He kept them.


(13:39) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah. He kept them, so. He had these chocolate boxes - like, this Whitman sampler, that had these pictures -


(13:53) Unknown: That's from the [indecipherable] camp.


(13:53) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah! And we had to earn - there was certain points for certain things, for extras. You received your basics - there were essentially care packages that they had that were good for - about every fourteen days, everyone would get another care package. Being that this was not a typical refugee camp, my parents lived in a home with running water, a wood-burning stove, and a garden in the back where they could throw things - I think they earned it more because they were connected with Buchenwald survivors. Americans liberated Buchenwald. There were Ukrainian political prisoners there, and some of them were musicians and opera singers. I think maybe my father, with his talent for music, somehow got in touch with them and they also learned that the Soviets were gonna take over the town that was liberated. A lot of people do not know that after Buchenwald was liberated, the Soviets used Buchenwald as a concentration camp. So even though they were liberated, there were other political prisoners put in there - but then, that's not the story, that's a deviation - but these people in concentration camp, particularly the Ukrainians, they were multilingual. So they knew - sometimes they were asked to translate for the camp people. Sometimes they had access to documents about the prisoners and their nationality, or other things, so they even were involved in a spy network so that they knew what was coming, if the Soviets were to have that territory. So they organized some people and moved out to what was to become the U.S. zone. So the first camp that my parents were in was in Hollendorf, and there were Poles, and Russians, and all kinds of nationalities but the Ukrainians didn't get along with the Poles nor the Russians. And I think they were really closest to the Jews, because they were stateless. People think of the Jews and the Ukrainians as being these enemies, but when I started looking at it, they had more in common with each other than differences. So when they were there, the Soviets would come in Jeeps and have people repatriated back to what they called Rodina, Soviet home. But the Ukrainians knew what life was under the communists. They didn't want to have anything to with it. And being that these people from Buchenwald were very politically organized, they would have the women and the children go into the church and barricade themselves. The young people would go and overturn the jeeps of the intelligence community from the Soviet, create a diversion. The Americans were so impressed with how they were organized, and also their singing - I don't know what was more, maybe it was a combination of both -  they said, "Well, it's getting cold, and you're gonna need to be in a warmer place, and have your supplies," so that's how we moved thanks to the Third Army, U.S. Third Army, to this model city of Herman Goering's, for mine workers. It was a copper mine, very strategic and important. So they gave the residents forty eight hours to vacate, and they could only take their eating utensils [laughs]. At Cornberg, they had everything anyone would need, they had the firewood already chopped down, ready, and so the Ukrainians moved, and they were pretty much given self government. They said, "Well, you want to go to a democratic country, you better start practicing it, and elect your council and your leader," and the additional thing that the camp didn't have was a stage for performing. So, the American troops gave them lumber and said, "Here, build it. You're gonna need a storehouse. We have a lot of supplies nearby, but you're gonna have to store it." They did build that. 


(20:11) Of course, that time, they were just thinking that they could go back to Ukraine and we would be liberated and a lot of people did not know that Ukraine was fighting the Soviets in guerrilla warfare until about 1954, until Stalin died, so there was some hope, but it didn't pan out. From that camp, my family had to move because the residents said we're only supposed to be there six months, and it's been three years. They moved us to Leipheim, which was more of a typical - it was another - before I finish with Cornberg, because the thread is Jewish and Ukrainian relationships. Another camp that was nearby was Eshwege. It was totally Jewish. There were synagogues started. There were Zionists there. They were doing agricultural work to prepare them to go to Palestine. And so it was similar in the Ukrainian camp. They knew how to grow things. The first institution that they put in - and now I'll get into the topic of the church - was, in addition to the warehouse and the stage, they built churches and schools, because they wanted to educate the younger generation and schools and churches were important. The churches were Catholic and Orthodox and Baptist, and they got along together, and they even worshiped in the same church that they built. Through music and performing - they were able to perform in the red cross gatherings and thanksgiving. At a lot of these gatherings, they would throw chocolate and cigarettes at the stage. They'd barter for a bell, so the religions were in the same facility. Of course, there were minor differences - the Catholics would go first, because they were the majority, and then Orthodox would go later, but then they would turn their icons around because they had different symbolism [indecipherable]. So there was this accommodation going on. I don't know that much about what was happening in the Jewish - it was probably similar. It was more - UNRRA was repatriation, nationalism, all these things, but then, in the second camp, it was a transition - it became internationally "refugee organization" - so you could see that in this camp, which was called Camp Leipheim, which was also an Air Force base [indecipherable]. They were the first to go to Leipheim, so they had their schools and synagogues and classes, but in Leipheim they started - in addition to teaching Hebrew, which was a modern language rather than Yiddish and the others - they did also have English lessons. They were trying to get skills that would be helpful. There was a Jewish organization called ORT - Organization for Rehabilitation and Training. So there were these skills in addition to sewing, like my father. There were electronics and modern technologies. When the Ukrainians came - when the Jews left the camp to go to Palestine. A lot of them that were there were on the ship that launched the nation at Exodus. There's a film about that. Then, a lot of people don't know that there's a film called Mike and Stefani, about the Ukrainians in this camp, and it gives you a real feel for the life. That's where I became an orphan. My mother just couldn't take care of her children due to postpartum depression. I would make demands on her. She would escort me out the room - "Get out!" - or spank me. I spent a lot of time outdoors, and I wasn't gaining weight. My sister was not gaining weight. She was in another camp that was more progressive - and actually in the hospital. She was worse off than I was. She was getting the best medical attention, but even that didn't help. So, I'll skip over from that camp to the camp where we actually did start to flourish. It was Bad Aibling, which was another Air Force camp. But it was more on the international bent - instead of preparing people for going back to their countries, and nationalism, and religion, and all the divisive and emotional things that are baggage that these have - they were pretty much organized by the American Friends Service Committee that had a very ecumenical bent. They were trying to establish home-life atmosphere for these children, because they wanted them to adjust, and unlike, I guess, my father, and the Germans, their mentality was to suppress what happened in the past and just forget it. They wanted to listen to our stories and they had a counselor in all the blocks. And here's -- they even had a camp newspaper, that we were encouraged to tell our stories. And some of these people, I know - there's the Boykos. There - they live in Virginia. Somehow I found their names. And then there's [indecipherable] who did the drawings for this, and he became an art professor in Baltimore. So, you could see the Quakers facilitated contact between the children and the international relief organization workers. They had weekly meetings about me. They would say, "What do Bohdan like?" and "What can he do well?" and "What talents does he have so we can prepare him for the future?" I really appreciate that, the volunteers. Then they also had ORT, the organization that was in the camp before teaching trades. Of course, I wasn't ready to learn the trade, I was just ready to learn English and to play.


(30:09) Simone Wallk: How old were you?


(30:11) Bohdan Kantor: When I went to this camp, by then I was about three and a half. At the time in between that -- the middle time -- my sister and I were just not eating. And in the camp that I was in at that time, they did not have a nursery. But we were sent to Quaker children's nutrition centers, where they got some additional food from the National Catholic Welfare Conference. My sister was younger than me. She went to this children's village earlier than I did. When she was there, just the care in the nursery - she started laughing and making sounds with neighboring kids in the crib because they had this care of the house parents. Unlike the other camps, where they didn't want Germans in there to remind them of their traumas, they invited German kindergarten teachers to come -- and German house parents to stay with us -- to try to make home life. Of course, I was in the quarters, not in the long barracks that were below, but I was in the officers' quarters on top of the hill, with sand pits, a play area. So, to make home life, in addition to calling us by our names, they would make rooms that were more like living rooms, or they would put sofas, curtains, a radio in there, board games, and we'd have play things. So instead of going through cafeteria lines, we would be sitting at these dining room tables that only had four people. And the older kids would take our orders and serve them, and be all proper and practice their etiquette and their skills. So, in addition to this home life, there were skills that were learned there. Even learning English -- they had the latest technology. There were these records that were brought in from a firm in London, Linguosphere, that had these record players that you could crank up, and they had variable. You would hear the phrase, and then there would be silence, and you would repeat the phrase, and then you would hear it again, and then later on -- I can show you how I recreated that digitally. I talked to information providers, since I became an IT specialist, and I said, "Here's how you could do this" or "You could synchronize my voice with highlighted text." And Microsoft and Google came and listened to it. But let me go --


(34:23) [indecipherable] in Bad Aibling - but sorry for jumping around. I put this here just for you. This is a picture -- and I showed you a picture of my father -- and this is her with her sister before she came -- and it's almost like a --


(34:40) Simone Wallk: Your mother.


(34:41) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, my mother. She's over here. It's almost like a selfie [laughs]. You put the heads together. Even in that time. And then, she crocheted a lot, so you see her crochet, and a necklace that they had. I'll just show you her talents right here. She embroidered this, I guess 1947, that's when I was born, so it was probably when she was expecting me. You can see the colors are as vibrant today as they were then. Here she is. Such a happy person. I think she's up front here, in this crowd here, at this Cornberg day, when the [indecipherable] came out. So, here's the happy times. And then, the less happy in that middle camp, you know, Mike and Stefani. And you could see that - and there's a priest in there, there's a service. People, I guess, in all the camps had political dignitaries come --and religious dignitaries that came. I found out that a Congressional committee came to the first camp that I was in, in Cornberg, investigating conditions in the camp. And they wrote and report, and in the report they praised the people in Cornberg and Feldafing, which was a Jewish camp near Eschwege. They went to Eschwege because it was right next -- but they mentioned how industrious -- they were growing their own things, they were reusing materials and doing crafts, like my mother would do. And I think the Congressional committee, well, I've been spending a lot of time on that side of the ocean, but there was Citizens for Displaced Persons, a committee, I can give you the exact name. They were a group formed in Philadelphia by Rosenwald who was, I guess an executive in the Sears catalog, which was based out of Philadelphia. It was originally born in Chicago, but they moved to Philadelphia. And then there was a lawyer at the University of Pennsylvania, Harrison, who did a report about conditions. And they said that these Americans should know about it, and they said that these Congressional committees should go visit, and so they followed their own advice and visited and I have diaries of people in the camp, that I always say, and then they had the questions that they were asked. At one point, the translator, who was Polish, said, "You know, we have thirteen hundred farmers, farms in the Northern United States that do not have workers. We could use talented people like you." And so, the executive in the council said, "Take the whole camp! We'll go as a group." So, it just took a little educating Americans in the conditions over there and then they joined in and they did have the Displaced Persons Act of 1948. That's how I came.


(39:16) And I didn't really realize how I came here until I looked at the ship manifest in the ship that I was in -- Manifest of Inbound Passengers. I saw my name here, and next to my family members' names I saw NCWC. So I said, "What is that?" And so I found it, and then I found out that they had an archive in New York. I contacted the archivists and received some documentation and so I know the whole process of what it takes to become a refugee -- immigrant -- a refugee turned into an immigrant, here. Many steps. I think somebody in the New York Times mentioned there were like thirty steps to go through, because people even then, like now, were concerned about the political contagion of communism coming in here and subverting our country and I read somewhere that even though all the steps to go through -- people who really knew most about screening people, you know, who were subversives and other sorts, can't -- residence themselves! You know, you're sitting there years there, you learn about this. So, this is what I want to show you, is, someone greeted us there when we came to New York. And they had tickets in here. And here was our sponsors address, and I didn't realize -- and I saw here -- and this was in one of the boxes my father had, you know, I have more documents like that -- but then I saw here: "War Relief Services National Catholic Welfare Conference," and so I figured, "Okay, there it is." Ship manifests, and then I have this. So this is how we came to Philadelphia, to a Ukrainian neighborhood in the tenements. Of course, as you noticed here, we arrived somewhere near three a.m. And of course, there was nobody there - our sponsor was not there -- all that greeted me there at this address that's here - 823 North Franklin St. -- was piles of garbage. It was just [indecipherable]. It was a trash haulers' strike. And my father, he remembers me saying "Why are we waiting here? Let's go to America!" [laughs]


(42:33) Simone Wallk: Oops!


(42:34) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah. And the bishop that was there -- there were these organizations to help the refugees and the sponsor was the National Women's League of America for Ukrainians. So, there was -- I found out, that's who she worked for. And they required a janitor. So, they wrote a letter, I guess, to the bishop there, down the street, "We need a janitor for our co-op store." And so they would forward that letter to NCWC Headquarters in New York, and then they would send it to Germany, to try to match up. Even at that time, we were there in the camp until they actually closed in 1951. That's due to my mother's condition of postpartum depression. No country would accept a refugee family because of -- if someone was disabled, I mean, there's stories of people being blind, they wouldn't let them come. We were welcoming, but we weren't welcoming disabled people. We were labelled as hardcore, you know, difficult to repatriate or to resettle. And so, what the officials recommended to my father was that he divorce my mother. I didn't know this, because in the beginning of this process, the paper that I have here, you know, he's married, and then the National Catholic Welfare, they noticed at the end of the paperwork, he's divorced, and I said, "It was because they said that for the betterment of the children's life that he should divorce" -- he had to choose between the children or his wife. And so he made that choice, and he just left her, and that was just really hard for her. I thought that she died, because, in my father's eyes, she did die. And he never contacted her, but that's another story, but eventually just going back to the tracing service. In this documentation I have, I see who accessed the records there in Germany. And there was some notations of 1968 and all that. That was actually my mother trying to connect with her family here. Her condition improved, thanks to drugs, and she became productive, and she told her therapist that she would never be right until she knew that her children were being taken care of. That Red Cross tracing service contacted the German Red Cross, Geneva International Red Cross, and then contacted the American Red Cross, and then they learned through the Ukrainian Social Service that we were well-respected members of our community, and that I was doing well in college, starting college, and my sister just graduated from high school, and so they sent word to my mother that we were well. I can show you my citizenship papers. I became a citizen -- took the oath of allegiance in a Federal building overlooking Independence Square, and the judge handed a pen to my father, and he said, "Now you will sign -- " I grabbed the pen out of the judges hand and said, "I can sign my name." So you can see my little scroll here. Just like I had to sign some of these papers for this.


(48:06) Simone Wallk: Looks the same.


(48:08) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah. I think I gave you the long version. I didn't think that I was doing this, but you can see I signed it in two places. Right here and over here. And so I became a productive citizen and did service for our country at the Library of Congress and then I visited my mother later on and here's a picture of her, my mother, and son. So here's the story. But then, let me show you some other things. My father had a happy life as a singer. He joined the Cathedral choir, and here's the mass, very religious, that he took part in. Here's the picture of him and I don't know which one. He was in two choirs. It was this church choir, and then there was the [indecipherable] choir. There were two different directors. I'll have to look at this one. But you see they have -- like you have that recorder here, they were recording them there on the stage in the Philadelphia neighborhood, and here's a picture of me in the orphanage, and I was in a lot of productions on the stage here. So here's the orphanage, and the stage was here, and the orchestra would play here, and I'm here on the end here. So, what happened in those camps happened on this side of the Atlantic. When I was researching, I found the names -- in addition to the priests in the camp, there were choir directors. And I found a recording of one of them that I put on there, but it's later, and it's very political, and it's post-Chernobyl. It's like a satire -- well, it's longing for the homeland, but they mentioned that we do not need to grow more nuclear power plants, but more food like buckwheat. And that's what I really loved as a child, to get that buckwheat flavor. So I'll leave it at that, and then you can ask some more questions. 


(51:05) Unknown: Do you know what order of the nuns they were?


(51:07) Bohdan Kantor: St. Basil's.


(51:08) Uknown: St. Basil's. 


(51:10) Bohdan Kantor: Yes. What I can tell you about the order, was, it's not just a Ukrainian order. It's an order that was throughout Eastern Europe. Going way back to the early founding of Christianity, they helped orphans, and they were involved in education, so, when the bishop  welcomed a lot of refugees and also priests, they established new parishes in the United States. And the conditions that the bishop said -- if you build a new church, you also so build a school. And the schools were run by the Basilian order, just like in the camps I was mentioning, the first Ukrainian institutions were churches and schools. So, this happened -- thanks for asking that questions because it's very relevant, and I spent at least twelve years of my life with the Basilian nuns, and they were very kindly and they had a big workload and I helped them fundraise. I was a good dancer. I could do fundraising. But of course, there aren't the orphanages now in the United States, but there still are in Ukraine. So, these Basilian nuns --


(53:14) Uknown: Were they primarily teaching through the Order of St. Basil?


(53:19) Bohdan Kantor: Well, what they primarily did -- yeah, it's a good question because it brings -- in the orphanage, they had a printing press, so they were publishers, and this ties in with my family. The printing presses that they had in Joquo outside of Dieviel, where the Basilian order -- there were monks and nuns there -- and this order interacted with the Jews, because there was a Jewish synagogue in Joquo. One of the finest synagogues -- of course they -- the Holocaust just disseminated all of it so it's just there, but -- so they had the printing, and then they also did embroidery. You saw that shirt that my father -- that was made for my father, when I was born. The nuns would make the vestments for the priests, and they would put the year on it. People -- I went to the Metropolitan Museum in New York and they said, "You know, it's very unusual that someone would put a date onto some embroidery," but that's what they did for the bishops. They would put dates -- it would be embroidered. 


(55:18) Simone Wallk: I think that was a great way to kind of go through the chronology of the story, and see some tangible artifacts from it. So, thanks for sharing all that. 


(55:29) Bohdan Kantor: Okay, [indecipherable].


(55:34) Simone Wallk: Oh, the pictures.


(55:36) Bohdan Kantor: If there's any other questions I'll use this as a little prompt, if I have to.


(55:46) Simone Wallk: Maybe you can start by filling in a little bit -- like, how did your parents end up in this first camp that they were in? What was the situation in which they were migrants from Ukraine?


(56:01) Bohdan Kantor: My father was in the Polish army and he was -- his regiment was one of the first regiments captured by the Nazis. So they took him as prisoner of war -- and there's a whole tragic story about how they were housed in a square, and searchlights -- they were told to put their -- to lie down and don't get up, or else you'll be machine gunned down. And at night, there was a noise somewhere, and it spooked the horses, and they ran across and a lot of people were trampled to death. So that was his first tragic consequences of the Nazis. And then they started shooting with machine guns. Imagine them going off at four -- they would start and shoot -- because they were cross-firing. You know, in violent situations, you never know what's going to happen. They weren't given medical attention. But, he was taken to a camp in Germany, and that camp had the first political prisoners from the Sudentenlands in Czechoslovakia that they captured at some resistance there. They were put into a tent city there, some of these Czech troops, and so the Germans ran into the -- my father's regiment. They said, "Well, winter is approaching. You could stay in these tents, or you could build your own barracks." And I have a picture of the thing. So, they chose to build their own barracks. I guess my father learned from that how to build. So, he was in that camp, but after a while, he was just there, and due to the Geneva convention, they could not force the prisoners to work. They just had to be noncombatants. So, to get around Geneva convention, what they did was they just liberated them, the prisoners. But the liberation gave them two choices -- you can either work in a forced labor camp, or you can go to a concentration camp. So, of course my father wanted to live, and continue singing, I guess [laughs]. So, he chose to be a forced laborer, and he was sent to Altenburg. And I have documents here, you can even see his work papers and all that. And so, my mother in the meantime was still in Ukraine, in the Carpathian mountains, just a very beautiful, open place. She sang, she danced, as you saw in the pictures. She was taken as a slave laborer and somehow she was also put in the forced labor camp where my father was, and that's how they got to know each other. They were fortunate -- a lot of Ukrainians, and particularly, younger ones were forced to work in munitions factories in Leipheim. Underground, and particularly children, their fingers were nimble, they could pack gunpowder in the cartridges and things. That's the journalist friend that I had earlier. He was in one of those camps where he was doing -- so that's how they met there, and then I guess after Buchenwald was liberated, since both of them were good singers, they somehow came to be in contact with Buchenwald survivors. So that's how they met, and married, and I know --


(1:01:08) Uknown: How long was your father [indecipherable]?


(1:01:09) Bohdan Kantor: '39 to around early '41, so about a year or two. 


(1:01:20) Simone Wallk: So you and your sister were both born in camps.


(1:01:24) Bohdan Kantor: Yes, so the first camp was Allendorf, where there were different people of different backgrounds. The Ukrainians didn't really like -- I mentioned earlier, they didn't get along with the Poles and the Russians. But there was a Polish-American administrator from Chicago, Lucy Dunn, who worked with the U.S. Army. She was a UNRRA officer, and she came to Cornberg, with the refugees from Allendorf, and that's the camp that I was born in -- I'm guessing it was at '39 Burgstrasse. And I actually googled that address, and you can actually see it in 3D, you can see there's a backyard. That's whats happening now with the digital tools out there and that's what I encourage researchers to -- use these tools. So, I was in that camp and I don't remember much, because I was happy -- maybe just the trains. It was a strategic camp, in the center of Germany. There was a bale-line, Autobahn, the new highway the Germans built. And of course, there was the American base nearby, where a lot of repatriated people were being put on trains to go back to the Soviet Union. They had a rail depot we called Bebera, that lingers. There are stories of that. Looking at memoirs, I know a lot about the daily life of the camp. I don't remember it personally, but it makes sense, what was happening, and how the -- I think the ongoing story that goes through all the camps is: Leaders, they're more interested in politics and religion and getting adherence. People in the camps just want to have a better life for their family. And so, there would be these political leaders that would come the camp, religious leaders, and I think, you know, they were more working for their agenda rather than -- but I think that the Catholic priest -- by the way, he became priest here in Washington, D.C. -- tended to have this journey, you know, all the camps. It was a component of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church that was helping both the refugees and the priests who were refugees in the camps. Until my sister and I and my father moved to the orphanage in Children's Village at Bad Aibling where there was more of an ecumenical and international perspective. There were workers -- Belgian, Czech -- refugees of all nationalities. The majority of them were Jewish and Ukrainian, because they lost the most -- their family members. There were more orphans, I guess, for Jewish and Ukrainian -- just the whole journey through, and even to the Basilian orphanage that I was in in Philadelphia, that I went to, they accepted refugees from other faiths and other nationalities. To the extent -- imagine a three-story row house, a couple of them, having a hundred orphans in there, and then as more refugees came, it became a hundred more, two hundred fifty, and the building was condemned. And they had the capability to buy land in North Philadelphia where there used to a Jewish orphanage, African-American orphanage, a German town hospital there, a Quaker house where the refugees were there until they built an orphanage specifically for the purpose of orphans. And we were up on the second and third floor, the first floor was an orphanage school. I would say throughout all of this there was that -- professionals, and, wanted to advance them, and the professionals helped in that orphanage. The dentists who took care of you was a volunteer. There were barbers that came, student teachers. There was La Salle University, a Catholic university, student teachers came. So we had help, from, I guess you would say the big people, the professionals, but also there were the people who were like peasants in Ukraine that were more interested in just a better life for their children, and at that time, being that my father was a single parent, in Ukrainian culture, you're an orphan if you don't have a mother. I guess the fathers are useless in the families. So, I said this as a joke, but [laughs.] 


(1:08:36 )That's what people need to know, that all refugees -- they're not here to take your job away from you, or... they just want a better life like anybody else, and that was what my father needed. He put us in an orphanage, because at that time if you accepted public assistance, you could be deported, which is unlike now, I don't know all the things, but I know at least for ninety days, you get help. But at least at that time, the only help that I had was from the National Catholic Welfare Conference. They gave -- we came pretty much penniless, but they gave a dollar to me and my sister. And we bought creamsicles, and banana ice cream. 


(1:09:34) Unknown: Good choice. 


(1:09:36) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah. And I have some in the freezer, if you want to taste that. But that was the reality then. So, I think I have a lot of insights, from a point of view of someone receiving this assistance from, I would say, from 1947 to about 1961. That was in the orphanage. That was pretty much the same situation all the way through.


(1:10:19) Simone Wallk: So your father would come and see you --


(1:10:23) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, on Sundays. And that's when we noticed we had better food, on Sundays. Because my father visited. He would come. The nuns, they believed in separating -- that was the one thing that I have against them -- they separated the girls from the boys. We were on one wing, so I only got to really see my sister on Sundays, along with my father. So I was an orphan from even my orphan sister there.


(1:10:54) Simone Wallk: And, do you remember what kind of religious education they gave you, if that was different or similar to how your parents had started to raise you religiously?


(1:11:07) Bohdan Kantor: Well, I think the education was really two-fold. When we were inside the house, we had to follow the nuns' rules. It was all, "Do not do this, do not do that." But when we were outside, we had these projects, and we were pretty much allowed to do anything we wanted. We'd go to the university dump and find things and make these projects, and the nuns, they were like grammarians, they taught me how to diagram a sentence -- you know, verb, preposition. And that really helped in artificial intelligence, how to do that, and how to do basic math and subjects. It was more like a road to education. You'd come in there, and [indecipherable]. And then there was a resident priest who edited a missionary journal. And he would come every once in a while and give catechism lessons. And if we answered the question right he'd give us these prayer cards, where there'd be an icon on one side and a little prayer on the other. And I was a pretty good student, so I would get these cards, and I would give it to the nuns -- he really took care of us, he really appreciated them. That was that education. But the student teachers who came, they taught us how to do things, not what not to do. You know, "Thou shalt not," that religious thing. One of them said, "Boy, you're a math whiz! Here's -- you keep you formulas over there." And they would teach us -- learn by doing. Say, it would be Christmastime, and we'd have to put the Christmas trains going around, and they'd say, "You know, there's friction if you go with sandpaper on the tracks, and you do the angles of the tracks a certain way, the train will..." And they'd teach with strings and chalk, and I got a very good education from, I guess, both of them, but it was for different purposes. And even the multilingual training that I had. The religious education, we would go to mass everyday, and we would have these prayer books in old church Slavonic. It was a combination of Cyrillic and Greek, so just hearing that and seeing that, I just had an ear for languages. And later on, instead of going to a Catholic high school, I was labeled as "talented" and "gifted," so the lawyer who came and gave advice told my father, "He should go to the school for talented kids," which was right next to orphanage. It was called Central High. And then it was Girls High, too. So, the grammar school that I went to separated the girls from the boys, and even the high school separated that. I don't know, maybe that was it -- not to have distractions. Well, in school, when it was co-educated. Now that I'm thinking about it, it was such a good education. I went to the high school that was attached to the orphanage and did very well there, and that high school was classical and scientific. So they taught about ten languages, including the ancient languages like Hebrew and Greek, which were unheard of -- Latin -- and they all knew that all these languages were for a purpose. They said, if you wanted to study religion, you would study Hebrew. If you wanted to study science, it would be German. If you want to be a lawyer, it would be Latin. So they had definite ideas, but being that I already knew German, and being that it was -- this was the age of the Sputnik, the anniversary of the moon launch. I actually, in the orphanage, saw the satellite go by, and we knew about Sputnik that night. I had this thanks to the Catholics, the friends, and the high school that I was in. They had professors from the colleges in Philadelphia that came and taught us. There was kind of an education that wasn't the rote learning that I was used to. It was more inquiry. So, I always was inquisitive and tried to do new things. And sometimes I was punished for that. And even in government service, I would have these ideas of things, and it would take bureaucrats three years to realize that something was changing. 


(1:17:49) Does that give you an idea of my education? In the camps? So it was more learning something that's appropriate for you. In the camps, there would be these political things that I couldn't understand -- I didn't see the reason. I didn't even see a reason to learn Ukrainian. [Indecipherable] so why do I need to know that? That language? So I was stubborn in my way but I did get an education, and maybe that's how I could step back, unlike my friend -- well, even my friend Daren, he was more in the culture, with the family of Ukrainians, and his uncle was a priest, too, so maybe he'll get interested in his story sometime, but we'll try to focus on me. 


(1:18:52) Simone Wallk: Can you tell me more about the religious, specifically, the landscape -- like, would your father and mother speak in that language to you? And you said that your mom was more religious, so from what you remember how did those values take shape in your family?


(1:19:13) Bohdan Kantor: I would say my mother, since I didn't really get to know her, she I'm sure went to the church service in Cornberg and Leipheim, and even the application -- instead of putting yes or no she put crosses on it. She specifically mentioned that she was persecuted by the Germans. They wouldn't allow the Ukrainians to associate with it, particularly to go to church. Things like that. She definitely missed that, and my father was more -- I got to know him through, well -- the church permeated my whole life in the orphanage because it was run by Catholic nuns. But on Sundays, sometimes, I would go to the church that my father went to, and he sang in the choir, so my sister and I could be in the choir loft, [indecipherable], overlooking the whole church. I remember just a sense of peace in there because you would see the icons. There were these icons that weren't really realistic, they were more representational. And you'd see them, and that's the way the church was. I can show the album cover.


(1:21:01) Simone Wallk: This is the church.


(1:21:02) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah. This is the church my father sang in, Grand Catholic Cathedral Choir of Immaculate Conception Philadelphia, PA. So you see the dome -- the dome sort of represented heaven. And then, the other part was like a cross. So Earth was down here, and as you went up, maybe, you had some saints down below. So imagine this sound that was just made by human voice, harmonious -- I gave you a link, but it's most different, I did that quickly. So, you're kind of transformed into another world. You see these icons, you have incense going, and it was just so calming.


(1:22:05) Unknown: The view is beautiful. 


(1:22:06) Bohdan Kantor: Oh, yeah. If you go there, you'll see there's different stained glass coming in there. But, the church service in the Quaker camp that I was in -- of course, they allowed people to worship according to their faith, and they even organized for priests to come to the camp. But they were more interested in just God within, and being quiet, and contemplative. So, the Easter service we had in the camp in Germany was like a moment of silence, but they played the bells -- I mean, the bells were really important. They had recorded bells -- it was military camp, so you didn't have the church bells. Then, going to right now, I actually -- during this time in the camp, the church was going under a transition, from the old Slavonic that I was used to -- there was political pressure to have the service in the native language, in Ukrainian. So, some of the churches would have people changing the prayer books to the native Ukrainian, or the others, some of them had the old calendar, like Julian calendar, which is thirteen days later. So, even in Washington there were three Ukrainian churches. And that's the one thing you have to know about religion in Ukraine. The bell towers. They're always odd numbers. They're all very symbolic -- three is, of course, the trinity. And five is maybe the four evangelists, plus Jesus. So you have five, and that's, I guess, the church tower in Baltimore. [indecipherable]. So there would be all these odd numbers. So I visited all of them, and attended them. There's an orthodox church that's right next to it, is it Muslim -- what do you call it, the imam -- mosque. So, they get along with the neighbors, pretty much. There is a holy trinity out, and the church is a wooden church, just like the ones in the Carpathians. And, as thanks for the help that we got from the American government, someone did a model of that church and gave it to President Truman as thank you. So that was a gift. And then, there was the holy family --


(1:25:59) Uknown: I remember very well, in the, sort of vestibule in the parish following [indecipherable]  beautifully lacquered, quite large, about maybe that big. There for years.


(1:26:16) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, and so, that was the third, the Catholic one, the shrine -- and that was specifically done for the refugees. There was so many of them coming to Washington, and his uncle was the pastor then. He came up with the name. He said, "I have devotion to the holy family," and he told the bishop, "Let's call it Holy Family." And that's what it became. And that's just -- in your neighborhood, I don't know if you --


(1:26:52) Simone Wallk: I walk past it every day. [laughs] With the gold domes, I think it's on Hairwood Road.


(1:27:02) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, so that's the one. And I was very good in math, so the numbers meant something to me, and I think the one religious lesson that I had that's relevant to all of this that I'm talking about is the Christian virtues of faith, hope, and charity. That's what I knew in the orphanage, because we accepted a lot of charity. But I guess the family, and the others, they would call it faith, hope, and love. And the second pastor, it was father Polipech, who actually visited all the camps that I was in except for Bad Aibling, because the church had him come over here earlier than I. We were hardcore, his family was not hardcore. His family -- his wife was killed by a bomb in Ukraine. He was a priest there, and when I was researching that, I didn't know whether it was a German bomb or whether it was a Soviet bomb. It was a plane that went into the church garden, where his wife was gardening, and the bomb fell, so he lost his wife. I knew that you were coming today. I contacted some people who were in the camps, and were connected with the religious -- and Father Polipech's second wife, her name -- and she's still alive, she came as a priest family to Pennsylvania, the same place that I went to. So, her name is Vira Nadiya Lyubov Polipech. If you know Ukrainian, Vera means faith, 


(1:29:31) Uknown: Oh my god. Nadiya is hope.


(1:29:33) Bohdan Kantor: Nadiya is hope. And then lyubov is love. So, that hit me -- and she, in that orphanage that I was in, she's ten years older than I am. She went to Saint Basil's Academy that became -- it's now Manor College, in Jenkintown, Pennsylvania. And the girls in that high school would come to the orphanage in Saint Basil's to be with the children on Saturday, to play games, and she may have -- I may have met her -- well, she said she didn't go because she didn't have transportation, so her friends were there. So, now, that university now only has very few Ukrainians. But they have about 500 ethnic groups from all over the country that attend that, and now they're establishing contact with the Ukrainian Catholic University in Lviv, and with the Ukrainian culture. So, that's what they say -- what goes around, comes around [laughs]. So, that permeated that. 


(1:31:22) I don't think people are interested in that story, I don't know, so maybe this will help it. So maybe that's -- I have somebody here that I'm recruiting, and I think he'll be interested in this, because I've learned how to research. Even my cell phone, the pictures that are in there, I took with this cell phone. But I learned to get the most out of it, I learned something called night sight where I could prop myself against the wall, put my black background there and hold it and it'll then grab that information. But my technology is another story. But that's what I maybe have for people your age that are young. Not only can I give you content, but I can give you technology methods for how you can -- you know, if you don't know the languages, then once you capture it, you can capture the image and have it convert it into text, and then use machine translation from companies that I talked to -- Microsoft, Google. There's just so many possibilities, and, of course, with your interests -- I have more interest in doing this. This is more demand based. If somebody was interested, then I would research something like I did the twenty pager which is asking a lot for people to read, but I figured that some researchers would benefit -- if not you...


(1:33:16) Simone Wallk: Yeah, I think so. 


(1:33:21) Uknown: I wanted to give you my -- I have a business card, with some --


(1:33:26) Simone Wallk: Your information.


(1:33:29) Bohdan Kantor: Yes, so see how --


(1:33:30)  Simone Wallk: Would you be interested in doing an interview like this?


(1:33:33) Uknown: Yeah.


(1:33:35) Simone Wallk: Okay, great. I'm only here for a week, so.
(1:33:37) Uknown: Oh, you're only here for a week.


(1:33:38) Simone Wallk: A week more. I've been here for the summer.


(1:33:42) Bohdan Kantor: Yes, of course. 


(1:33:43) Simone Wallk:  We could also do a phone, like FaceTime, or remote interview, if you don't want to do it this week.


(1:33:49) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, and being that the project says three years along the way, who knows.


(1:33:53) Simone Wallk: For someone else who's here this summer can do it also.


(1:33:57) Bohdan Kantor: Let's leave it up to -- that's what I was good at -- in the orphanage, I was like a diplomat, facilitating something, whenever the nuns needed some help or something like that, they would send me outside, and I would --


(1:34:11) Simone Wallk: Take care of it.


(1:34:12) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, I would say, yeah, here... I was the only one with a paying job. They sent me out to get the newspaper. So they realized the talent. Just like the Quakers realized that I had talents, they realized that. So this makes my day -- to have them connect.


(1:34:37) Unknown: Oh, I've got pages of notes that I took on all of the things that you were saying. I might have stolen some of your --


(1:34:44) Bohdan Kantor: Oh, yeah, stole my little thing there. Well, it may be put up on some website somewhere.


(1:34:59) Simone Wallk: You can listen again.


(1:35:00) Bohdan Kantor: But in the meantime, we can communicate and tell things that you probably don't know that happened in Germany, and here. Okay.


(1:35:18) Unknown: Okay, yeah. My book's available on Amazon. It's not very long read, only like 140 pages, and most people who read it say it just zips right along. Yeah, I think all of the kind of topics -- like, I get into, maybe a little bit more general, but also, I go from general to specific. I do sort of historical sections, and then go immediately into personal sections, like, what did the history actually mean on people's lives. So, it'll be maybe two pages of history on what's going on -- Hitler's policies, or Stalin's policies, or American policies, towards the Eastern world. Then I'll get into the lives of the family and how they're having to adapt and trying to figure out how to understand what's going on. Genuine dramas when the Soviets arrived. Their very strong, atheistic, very aggressive policies. My uncle, actually, I mean, my grandfather was the head of a -- the head pastor of a Ukrainian religious school for girls. And so, the communists come, and none of the people don't know what actually is going to go on. They think that they're under Rome, and there are confrontations, and they have to deal with those confrontations. So the story that I tell is more to illustrate what the typical life would be for the average citizen as a result of the cataclysmic things happening in Eastern Europe.


(1:37:15) Simone Wallk: That sounds really interesting. So that's in your book.


(1:37:19) Bohdan Kantor: And I think he's working on another one, a three-plus series, so what I've been saying goes more with the second part.


(1:37:29) Unknown: Exactly.


(1:37:29) Simone Wallk: The personal --


(1:37:32) Unknown: My wife is very much on me to get to the areas that you were talking about.


(1:37:37) Bohdan Kantor: And the story that I'm telling, those in Cornberg wanted that story to be told also. When I was doing the research, I found three instances of demonstrations that they had in Cornberg. The demonstrations all started in the church that they built, because I think at that time the Allied authorities didn't want to antagonize their Soviet allies. So, they said, "Do not do political things." But, I mean, the first one was against repatriation. That scene in Allendorf actually repeated itself in Cornberg, where the Americans, under the influence of the Soviets wanted to review the applications, and that's why I saved a couple of applications here --


(1:38:49) Uknown: The Soviets wanted to review these.


(1:38:50) Bohdan Kantor: No, no, not the documents, they wanted to review the list of the names at the camps. The Americans, they didn't let them, they said, "This is confidential." When the Soviets came to the camp -- no, this was actually the Americans came to do the screening, because the camp people were wise, politically. So they said, "No, we're not going to let you do a screening," and they all went on a hunger strike, and a work stoppage, and this was before I was born, just before I was born, and they went on a hunger strike, and the Americans came with troop transport and a tank. So here, the Americans are our friends, coming in there. So, they did the same tactic, women and children into the church, barricaded the church, black banners outside the buildings. And the Americans then just saw that they were going to do something to overturn the tanks -- they were going to do the same thing that they did to the Soviets, to the Americans --


(1:40:28) Unknown: There's a famous painting of the Don Cossacks, the ones who surrendered to the English, and the English -- on the condition that they would grant them asylum, and the English said, "No, we have an agreement with the Russians," and they turned them over to the Russians.


(1:40:51) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, well that's something we should talk about --


(1:40:53) Unknown: I think that was Allendorf.


(1:40:53) Bohdan Kantor: But that would be later. Okay, so maybe --


(1:40:58) Unknown: I think that was Allendorf.


(1:40:58) Bohdan Kantor: We'll get together and do it. But, just to finish this part of how committed these camps were, they didn't discriminate against any political -- if it was the Americans who were acting the wrong way, they -- so, this hunger strike went on for about five days, then it got press coverage, even the German newspapers, they were following this. I found things. And, I guess, in a sense, being in my mother's womb, I was part of this protest, because they refused milk for the children. So everybody, so people had to go to the hospital, the hospital, the nearby hospital was full. The school that they built was turned into a hospital with intravenous feeding happening. This showed, maybe that's why we stayed longer. The Americans said, "Don't mess -- let's let these people be Ukrainians." And then, the second time they did a mass protest, that started in church was they did a protest on the fifteenth anniversary of the forced famine that the Soviets had in the winter of '32 and '33. Paraded -- started in the church, parade through there, had speeches, everything else. So, that was -- I have the exact dates. I even have a picture of that. And then, the third time was just before they closed the camp. And they were really pushing the extent of political goodwill, of the Americans. Not only did they start in the church, but they invited the Russian immigrants, the Poles, the Hungarians, all to take part in this. So they organized the groups around the camp, to come and participate, what they called the prison of nations. It was going directly against the Soviet authorities. And so, all these events were in the press. When I talk to some of my Ukrainian friends, they know nothing of it, because it was in Hessa province, where we were, up there, and most of the camps were in Bavaria, where they were. And so, while we're on the subject of books, the last camp I was in, Christian Hoeschler, a German, wrote Homeless, and the IRO Children's Village Bad Aibling. So, he wrote a book on that. And all the proceeds go to UNICEF, for this. So people know now about children's village, but they do not know about Cornberg. There's photographs that I have of the camps, and I could even talk more about what Congress saw, the industries in the camp that I was born, and then also in Eschwege, where the Jews were, which was something like thirteen kilometres away, which was nearby, which was where Congress went. They saw how the Jews and Ukrainians planted their own food. There were a lot of aluminum plane parts around, that they converted into their own light fixtures. I think the Jews dyed the army blankets black, and they made winter coats on there. And even Eleanor Roosevelt heard about this, and she said, "Rather than them just being there, we should give them supplies so they can make things." In fact, even I have documentation of a camp commander saying that they can produce items, that they could have for sale, and I guess that's the lesson for today -- that you can put refugees who are being persecuted in detention centers, and someone should look at what it costs to maintain someone in a detention center, rather than, after you have the screening, letting them -- after the First World War, they had the Madison Convention, I don't know if you're familiar with that. They allowed refugees to have a refugee passport, and if a country would accept them, they would have a year to find a job and establish themselves, and I think it was nominated for Nobel Peace Prize, just like the Quakers in the camp that I was in. In 1948 they earned the Nobel Peace Prize, along with their counterparts in the British friends -- they both co -- and that was the lesson of war. Right in '45, where even this country with 9/11 -- they wanted to have revenge against those who perpetrated this. But, the Quakers, at the end of the war, they wanted to reconcile the peoples. They wanted to have the Germans be reconciled with the victims. Maybe they couldn't do that, but that's what they were -- they said, "You shouldn't just give food to refugees. Give it to the Germans." They were devastated -- the people were devastated just as much as the refugees, so they gave aid to both of them, and even the first story that I read about the Quakers. In the area that Darian and I were in, there were these multi-ethnic groups in the camps, and so what they did was, they approached the pastor of a church in Neukirch there and said, "Well, let's put on a Christmas pageant." And what they did -- they invited all the religions and nationalities to participate in this, and some would give the excuse -- "We're Orthodox, we don't celebrate Christmas on the 26th." But then the Quakers would say, "Well, if it were up to us, we would celebrate Christmas every day of the year!" So, then they joined, and even in the camp. But, just starting that, they had -- the church didn't have electricity, it would go off periodically, but they would have rehearsals in that church. So, this was getting back to the faith-based -- where somebody would be playing the piano there, or the organ, and they would heat up their hands, with the lamp, and the pastor's wife donated curtains, blue curtains, for Mary, and they had -- they used those same blankets to partition the stage there, and they somehow got these diverse religions and nationalities to be peaceful for a day. The children, they recited, they sang and they recited something about the last refugees, in about all the languages that I know, plus some others. 


(1:51:25) So, that is, I guess what I'm most thankful for, people, like the organization that you're interning in, that they're trying to reach out, and trying to find out what was good. So, I'm looking forward to hearing other stories that are relevant to now, to treat people as humans first. Rather than, they're terrorists, or they could take my job away, there's room for all of us in this country. It's just, trying to, through acts of kindness, letting people have a chance to better themselves, rather than continually being persecuted. Most of the Ukrainians that were in Europe at the time, most of them that were repatriated, I don't think that they were happy. 


(1:52:52) Unknown: I think there were like --


(1:52:53) Bohdan Kantor: I was one of the few


(1:52:57) Unknown: 3.2 million who escaped and hope to get to the West, that three million were repatriated. And most of them wound up in firing squads, or comas, or things like that. Horrendous.


(1:53:11) Bohdan Kantor: Well, my figures are a little bit lower than that, there were 2.4, but within five to seven months, there were 240,000 that remained in the camps, and just to circle what my parents said, they knew what was going on. Even though, they weren't, and part of that poem --


(1:53:45) Unknown: The most popular political book in the camps was Animal Farm by George Orwell. They understood what was going on, and very sadly people -- I had intended to stay only for an hour, but I was so fascinated by this, so I'm gonna be -- so thank you so much, Bohdan, that's so kind of you.


(1:54:09) Bohdan Kantor: And just on the Animal Farm, the only foreword that George Orwell did was in Ukrainian, because that was the audience that he had in mind. Because somebody from the camp read it, and said, "Can I translate this?" And this person who read it, as a young student, he was in contact with him. He did the translation. He later became a scholar at Harvard, and knew a lot of languages. But, 5,000 copies of that book were printed in either Ulm, which is near Leipheim, that's a part of that district, or another town, but I met this person's granddaughter, and we talked about this, and she has a copy of this that her uncle gave to her, and half of those copies were confiscated by the Army and burned, or given to the Soviets. I'm sure the Soviets burned them. But, some refugees have them, and there's a copy in the Library of Congress Rare Books Division.


(1:55:46) Unknown: No kidding. Wow.


(1:55:48) Bohdan Kantor: That book. There is that story too.


(1:55:55) Unknown: Yeah, all of those are amazing stories. He couldn't get it published for a long time. People thought it was too radical, for a while. Orwell had always [indecipherable] publishing it. That became one of the greatest political books of all time.


(1:56:15) Simone Wallk: We'll be in touch. 


(1:56:16) Unknown: We will be in touch. We'll work out an agenda for what you're interested in, and I'll prepare. Great.


(1:56:24) Simone Wallk: Really nice to meet you.


(1:56:26) Unknown: So long, Bohdan. Good to meet you.


(1:56:28) Simone Wallk: You too,


(1:56:28) Unknown: Okay, bye-bye.


(1:56:30) Simone Wallk: Bye! Is there anything else that you want to add in? I'm probably gonna have to head out in a couple of minutes, about five. But if there's something else that you want to add. No pressure. You also don't have to. [laughs]


(1:56:46) Bohdan Kantor: No, just if there's -- one of your fellow students is interested in pursuing this, the one thing I want to add -- the research stories that I like the most, are, when I went to the -- what is it, the Center for Migration Studies. I was heartened that there were college students that came that were actually looking at these records of the family immigrants. And the ones who were shy, they just looked at these reports, and they wrote papers. But the ones like you, who were not shy, they actually did oral histories of them.


(1:57:48) Simone Wallk: Well that's good to know. I don't know about that.


(1:57:49) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, so that's something you could tell to the Catholic Bishops Conference. If they want somebody to do research -- well, they did the oral history, but if they want to have access to those records, and do a story --


(1:58:11) Simone Wallk: They could get to them.


(1:58:12) Bohdan Kantor: I could learn more about it, because I only have a few. When I was there, I was doing the research, and that's where I had the newsletters that we actually did, and just a few of the papers. But I'm sure that there's more. But that's the only thing that I could add.


(1:58:39) Simone Wallk: My boss -- it's supervisor, Todd, who you were emailing with, he writes articles, he's kind of an education person in the policy office. And he writes articles for the Center for Migration Studies. So I wonder if he knows about these archives.


(1:58:56) Bohdan Kantor: Yeah, because that's what I found out when I was over there in New York. They said that the policy wonks are in D.C. and Georgetown, and Catholic U. But the archives are there. And he may not know this -- but that's what you could tell him. All the statistics -- we were arguing about numbers, and things like that -- don't mean a thing if there isn't a story behind it that is credible, because people aren't interested in facts. So I want a good story, but --


(1:59:47) Unknown: If you want the pass --


(1:59:48) Bohdan Kantor: Oh yeah, the pass, thanks.


(1:59:50) Unknown: I'll leave it right here.


(1:59:55) Bohdan Kantor: So even if -- I can go, and I'd like to meet your boss, if he wants to come and see the actual stuff, I have a neighborhood pass for parking, so he doesn't have to take the metro. If he has a car, he could do that. So that's about it.