Source: Princeton RFMI Oral History Archive
Name: Hassina Adams
URL: https://www.rfmi.princeton.edu/oral-archive/hassina-adams
Transcript URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/14jH4M5cZshnf8A7tCcE7D40kKLvGaEKr/view?usp=sharing
Type: Refugee Oral History
============================================================

Hassina Adams, Daughter of Asylum Seeker
Interviewed by Serena Alagappan in Syracuse, NY, 08/07/20
Transcribed by Jackie Namala, 10/17/21
(00:03)
Interviewer:
Okay, so we're here in Syracuse
with Hassina Adams. Today is
August 7, I believe. And Hassina will share her refugee experience and resettlement
in the United States. So Hassina, thank you for your time. And I look forward to
talking to you today.
(00:27)
Hassina:
Thank you. My name is Hassina Adams.
I'm originally from Uganda.
But I was raised in Syracuse, not in but Syracuse, in Johannesburg, South Africa. And
my family was resettled to Syracuse in 2015. I moved here with my four siblings, both
my parents unfortunately passed away. My dad ﬁrst, he died in 1999. He worked for
the Ugandan government, but was accused of treason. And shortly thereafter, was
executed. My mom ﬂed Uganda and ended up ﬁnding asylum in South Africa, where
she then raised me and my siblings. During the thirteen years that we were in South
Africa, about ﬁve or six years, was spent applying for resettlement to different
countries. My mom had hoped to resettle in Canada, but ended up getting an
interview with USCIS. And from there she started the process of resettlement
through UNHCR. But unfortunately, just when she was about to receive conﬁrmation
from USCIS immigration, she passed away from tuberculosis. So my siblings, and I
ended up sort of continuing the application. And we ended up getting selected and
had an interview with a DHS ofﬁcer. And not long after that, we were accepted for
resettlement and ended up coming to Syracuse.
(02:21)
Interviewer:
Sorry about that. I can imagine
how hard it was to grow up
without both of your parents. Can you tell me a little bit more about that?
(02:34)
Hassina:
Yeah. So I think not having like
my dad around sort of didn't hit me
as hard as it did when my mom passed away because I didn't know him – he died
when I was two years old. So I have like this abstract idea of what my dad looked like
– what he was, what he did – but because I didn't meet him, I don't have that
emotional connection to him. But with my mom - she was there throughout, you
1

know, my childhood. So when she fell sick, it was sort of very hard to come to terms
with, because now like, you see someone you love, slowly dying, and you don't have
like, any control over it. So coming to terms with her death was really hard. And it also
hit me even more, because it was like the beginning of the school year. So literally,
the ﬁrst day of school, when we're supposed to go to school, we had like a knock at
the door. And it was like family friends coming to let us know that she had passed
away. So sort of, you know, starting the school year off on a bad note was hard
enough, and then coming to terms with that she had died and you don't have a
parent anymore. Now you have to sort of parent yourself, and then also look after,
like, my siblings and stuff. So that was really, really hard. And it happened when I was
in eleventh grade. So I was sort of, I don't know, hitting like my adolescent years, you
know, like, at the prime of my adolescent years, but at the same time, I'm still a kid;
sixteen, ﬁfteen, some where there. So I was really young. So it was..yeah, it was a really
new reality that I had to come to terms with because I had no control over it. But it
nonetheless, was very painful. It was really hard.
(04:29)
Interviewer:
And your siblings, they were
younger than you?
(04:32)
Hassina:
Well, I had an older sister...well,
I have [UNDECIPHERABLE] I have
an older sister. And then it's my brother and my youngest sister. But I think for them,
it was easy to like, sort of process the emotions because they're very like, I don't
know, expressive. Whereas with me, I'm very withdrawn and reserved. So even when
we visited the morgue and we saw her body, they were all crying and I was just
sitting there, standing there. I don't know; I didn't know how to process anything. I
was...it hit me, but not as hard as I thought it would like, a few months after she had
passed away because in the beginning, you're sort of in denial. And then as time
went on, and you know, you come home from school, and you don't have your mom
around anymore, that like reality sort of sinks in. And, yeah, I wasn't ready to. Because
I mean, she had been sick for a long time, but I always hoped that she would get
better. So that hope that she'll make it, and then her not making it, like, you know,
clashed with what I was seeing. So, yeah, no, it was it was really, really hard and
taking care of my siblings, because my sister then had to work to sort of take care of
us. So I was the mom of the house now. Having to explain to my youngest sister
when my mom wasn't around anymore was also hard because she was around nine
or ten years old when it happened. So that was also like a hard conversation to have
and then going to school. And because, like I went to like a private school, and we
were like a tight knit community, so now having to like face my friends and my
teachers, and they would have to like tiptoe around me when they were talking to
me, you know what I mean? Like that, that was sort of like an environment that I
didn't like being in, because then I was always looked at, like sympathy. Like, oh, you
know, her mom, just died type of thing. And it just brought unneeded attention. I felt
like at the time, because again, like, I'm reserved, I'm very introverted, I like to keep to
2
myself. And then here is this, you know, big news, like, "Oh, like, my mom passed
away." And now everyone, sort of like, "Oh, you know, let's go easy on her" or whatever
it is. I just, it was just like an amalgamation of a lot of things happening all at once.
And I didn't know how to, like, navigate this, this new life. But I also know that, you
know, my mom, if anything would have wanted like us to be happy to, you know, to
remember her in a positive note, and not like the sick years of her life. And I think her
hope of giving us a better future propelled us to want a better future for ourselves
too; to not let her death be in vain. And to also like, you know, make her dream come
true. She wanted to like resettle, it was always her dream, like, I want to give my kids
a good life. So I want them to be in a good environment that'll sort of nurture that. So
the fact that she died and didn't experience what we are now experiencing, makes it
even more like, sad to say, this was her dream, sort of, and now we're living it for her,
which isn't, is not a bad thing. But it would have been nice to sort of have her around,
share these moments with her. So yeah. And like our mom was very, she was very,
very religious. So I think we took a lot of the faith that we have, was the foundation
that we have now was built, you know, through her through her example. She always
always prayed like, on time, she was always helping out at the masjid. She was always
in contact with the community, someone died, she was always there for them. So
when she died, like a lot of people, even many that we didn't know had been
touched by her came and, you know, they cried. I remember this one, like really close
friend of hers, who had two twins that had like, immigrated to Canada, when she had
heard that, like, my mom passed away, she didn't believe it because the news hadn't
gotten to her until a month later. So when she came, she like got into the house and
she sat down and just started crying. Because it was hard for her too. So I know that
you know, if anything, like her good example, helped a lot of people. So it helps me to
know that where we are now is where she would have wanted us to be. So do you
have like any other..
(09:37)
Interviewer:
That's...thank you for sharing
that. It's really important. It's this
kind of combination of motivation that you feel inspiration as well, but in the same
time knowing that if your mom is around that she would be happy, but she's not
around. So how you as a young person? How you navigate that? Do you ever think
about that? Do you think that you overcame the trauma that you had or that loss
that happened before you resettled?
(10:26)
Hassina:
No, I don't think people learn to
deal with the trauma, but you don't
overcome it, especially with grief too. You learn to live with it; you sort of learn to
accept the reality of things. And you also learn to sort of deal with, like, the emotions
that accompany the grief and the trauma, because I know like, every now and then,
I'll feel sad, like if I see someone with the mom, like, you know, that's, that's
something I'll never experience sort of. So I'm learning to come to terms with it; I'm
learning to live with it. You learn to live with it; you learn that it's a part of who you
3
are, a part of your identity. But you also don't let it sort of consume you. Because I
know like, a few months after my mom passed away, I didn't think I'd be sad at all.
Not because I didn't want to express myself in that way. Like, I didn't want to be
vulnerable, right? I didn't want to cry like most people cry. I thought, like, "Oh, I'm
going to honor her legacy and her memory by doing the things that she would have
wanted me to do." So I felt secure in my understanding of how to deal with grief. But
a few months later, like when you're living that reality, it's sort of hits you like it's not,
you know, as much as you want to cherish the legacy of this person, you've got to
mourn the fact that physically they no longer with you, right? So you learn to live
with that fact. So every now and then, like, of course, I'll cry. But I also know like, if I let
myself become too vulnerable, I'll sort of plunge into grief and depression. And I
don't personally... I don't think I'd be able to survive it. So I focus more on like, the
positive things that my mom, you know, taught us and left behind, and everything
that she has instilled in me, that makes me who I am today. And not so much in the
fact that she's gone. And I'll never, like see her again, sort of thing. So yeah, it's hard,
like dealing with trauma. But I do think that, to some degree, like the trauma, or at
least the grief of not having been around, has taught me to be very... to cherish the
things that I have around me; to be, you know, cognizant of the fact that, yeah, I'm
not going to be around forever, my siblings are not going to be around forever. Like, I
need, if I love something, I should do it, you know, wholeheartedly with full
conviction, full faith, put in all the effort that I need to put in, because tomorrow we
might be gone, which is what happened with my mom, like one day, she's there,
next moment, she's not. So I have learned to deal with how ﬂeeting certain things
can be.
(13:30)
Interviewer:
So now, I'd like to go back to
resettlement. So even thinking
about that without variances is hard. And I'm sure you didn't do it on your own. So
can you share more about that, how that happened after you spoke with ofﬁcers?
How that process was?
(13:54)
Hassina:
Yeah. So after our mom had passed
away, she had worked with a
counselor in South Africa, through like, a program called CSVR - Center for Violence,
Trauma and something along those lines. She had formed a really good relationship
with one of the counselors there and when the counselor heard that our mom had
passed away, she reached out to UNHCR. And she told them about it. She said, "I
understand that, like the case had been opened by you know, her, but is there any
way we could allow it to continue and instead of like starting from scratch?" because
my mom had gone through the whole process of getting interviewed, getting like
intake completed traveling to and from the city where the headquarters of like the
UN was because we lived in Johannesburg, but UNHCR was in Pretoria, and it was
like an hour and a half travel to and from, right? So it was really, really hard to sort of
start that process from scratch; so when she put in that word, and she reached out to
4
the Commissioner of that program, so they came to visit us, and they were really
heartbroken by, you know, my mom's death and everything, because she...I don't
know why, though, cause I mean, a lot of people go through this process. There's
no...you know, thousands of people that got processed. And not many get visited by
the Commissioner of like the UNHCR. So that was surprising to us. But I guess that's
also God's way of sort of opening doors that, you know, was shut before, I guess. So
yeah, when we were visited by the commissioner, she told us that we could continue
like, the process. But we would have to do it as minors, so they would have to change
the case. And it would be processed without our mom in it. So we went through like,
second half of the process where we got interviewed by like US immigration, and the
men that we met the one of the DHS ofﬁcers was really, really nice. We thought it'd
be intimidating sort of sitting, you know, with this person from America, because our
like conceptualization of America was just like, "Oh my God, this, this land where, you
know, all these successful things happen for people." So we're afraid like coming from
like a small...I mean Johannesburg is a big city, but we're like, you know, we're kids. So
yeah, it was intimidating. But he was so nice. He made us feel welcoming. He like
brought... he had his assistant bring us juice to make us feel comfortable. He was like,
"Brieﬂy talk to me as if you were talking to someone you know" type of thing. And he
asked us like a series of questions: why we want to immigrate to the US?; what it
would mean for us; what we would do if we came. Yeah, and we answered, we
answered it to the best of our abilities. I know that, you know, it's been a, it was a
while, but I know we had talked about how like, you know, we don't have, we won't
have like a lot of the opportunities we would like to have, if we stayed in South Africa,
especially being refugees with the social network, like the social services system isn't
in place to help people from other countries. So we wouldn't have the same
opportunities, we would have there if we were to come here. And we talked about
how we would work hard, you know, go to school, further education, get a good job,
and be functioning members of society, and give back to. So I don't know if anything
that we said had resonated with him, but it sort of did, I guess, because we ended up
getting like a call back from them like a few weeks later, letting us know that we had
been approved and that we're going into the next step of the application. We would
have like the medical screening done, and then from the IOM would like, help us
collect our packets and, and we would come so yeah, it was a long process like it was
my mom started in, like 2001. And, you know, she didn't hear back from them. Until
she had passed away. I mean, she went through the process and everything. But it
wasn't conﬁrmed until she had passed away. So that was really hard for us to sort of
continue this process without the person who started it. But I think we had learned a
lot from having done it for so long. That when it came for us to do it on our own, like
it wasn't as intimidating. It wasn't as frightening. Yeah, it was an easy obviously, like
it's it's a long process with a lot of things back and forth like traveling uncertain, a lot
of questions, traumatic experiences too, reliving them. But, you know, I understand,
like, vetting process is important to sort of get the right people in the country. So I
5
respect the whole system and everything. But yeah, it's sad that, you know...I think
my biggest regret is that like our mom didn't get to see it through.
(19:19)
Interviewer:
And then when it was approved,
you said you were minors. So
how did that work? Did someone join you, from your family or your organization?
"We'll help you resettle here." How does that part work?
(19:39)
Hassina:
No, no one joined us. It was just
the four of us.
(19:42)
Interviewer:
So all minors?
(19:43)
Hassina:
Mmph. Well, my sister was 21.
(19:45)
Interviewer:
Okay
(19:45)
Hassina:
So I don't know if she's considered
a minor. But we were like on our
packet, it was written or...was she 20 she was really young too...but they had put on
our packet "unaccompanied minors." So when we did land here, We were greeted by
people that work at JFK, sort of facilitating the movement of people being resettled.
So when we got to JFK, we were welcomed by someone who then connected us to a
ﬂight here in Syracuse, and then we were welcomed by a caseworker. So even when
we arrived, we weren't necessarily alone, because there was like, you know, people
sort of helping us navigate where we needed to be.
(20:26)
Interviewer:
And was any organization behind
that?
(20:27)
Hassina:
Catholic Charities
(20:28)
Interviewer:
Catholic Charities. Okay. That's,
that's important.
(20:32)
Hassina:
Yeah, so carefully. I think everyone
who gets resettled is either put in,
like connected with Catholic Charities or interfaith works, that could be other
organizations that I'm not aware of. But those are the two that that come to mind a
spring to mind when I yeah, when I think of like supplements and stuff, but we
ended up being connected with like, Catholic charity caseworkers and stuff. Oh,
yeah. Yeah, we had a, we had a great group, like in South Africa, we had this one lady
who worked for UNHCR; her name is Alyssa. So she helped facilitate things over
there. And then God has connected with the Catholic Charities casework over here.
So you know, the transition was less like, I don't know, difﬁcult, in essence, because of
that. But yeah, I can only imagine how frightening it is, you know, for people who are
doing it on their own. I think we were lucky because we also like, spoke and
understood English, which was a big advantage of this. Yeah, at the time. Yeah. Even
6
now. So like, our ability to, like, communicate with people, right? Like, made the
transition and made the process smooth. Whereas for most families, I can only
imagine how difﬁcult it is, especially because of that language barrier.
(21:54)
Interviewer:
So you learn language in school
in South Africa?
(21:58)
Hassina:
Yeah, yeah. Right off the bat, like
from ﬁrst grade, you're taught
English, and a second language. So I took Afrikaans and from like, ﬁrst grade, up until
12th, grade, and even into university like you learn English, because English is the
second like, language ofﬁcial language in South Africa.
(22:19)
Interviewer:
That is spoken? Spoken language...
(22:21)
Hassina:
Spoken and taught in school. So it's
English ﬁrst. And then secondary
languages, after. All the native languages are considered secondary languages. But
English is the medium of instruction. So they teach you everything in English.
(22:34)
Interviewer:
Okay. Yeah, that's good. That's
why you were able to
communicate.
(22:39)
Hassina:
Yeah, yeah. So I think that helped
us a lot, being able to sort of, you
know, talk to the people, know what to expect. Be aware of what you should be
doing to help, you know, smoothen the transition in the process and everything. So
yeah. Speaking English helped a lot.
(22:56)
Interviewer:
That's wonderful. And then
so you said someone connected
you...helped you get to the right ﬂight. [UNDECIPHERABLE] Case work in Syracuse.
So you came straight to Syracuse. And can you talk about that part? So meeting your
case, so you got to know your caseworker before you arrived? But then you ofﬁcially
met when you came here?
(23:22)
Hassina:
Yeah, we hadn't..we had corresponded
before we arrived. That whole
part is a little blurry, but I knew that we would be meeting someone from like
Catholic Charities when we arrived so that we knew off the bat. And then when we
arrived, we were welcomed by Kelly who worked at Catholic Charities
[UNDECIPHERABLE] . And she drove us to our apartment and sort of showed us
around and you know, helped us acclimate to our new home, essentially. And, again,
being able to speak English, we're able to sort of talk to her about our needs and
stuff. And, you know, she helped to the best of her abilities to accommodate that.
And then a few weeks after we came, we had to take a few classes with them to sort
of learn about the things that we have to do like you have to get shots and
screenings and all this stuff. So I did that. We did that. And also took like a few classes
7
because when we came in the the end of summer was sort of, no, it was almost
summer but like it was in the middle of the school year and we couldn't start school.
So we were we had to go to like Catholic Charities to sort of know what to expect if
we were to start school so they had like a pseudo sort of school system going on.
They were they would have like pre K, go into a classroom, learn pre k stuff. And then
like older students, depending on like your level of like, proﬁciency in English, you
would be put with a select group. So, yeah, that helped us sort of, like, you know,
keep us busy until we could ofﬁcially start school. But I think one thing that I'll forever
be grateful for, that Kelly did was connect us with like, community members in our
faith group. So when we came like, I mean, I don't even know how to describe it. But
like four kids in a new place, don't know anyone and now sort of have to learn to live,
you know - it's very, very hard. Like, we were isolated from everything that we knew
everything that we had grown up with. And here we are in this new land, like, okay,
now what do I do? Like, you experience a sense of isolation, and you develop like
depression because you're alone. Like, what do you do? Who do you talk to? Where
do you go, we don't have a community; it's frightening. So Kelly, like drove around to
the different mosques in Syracuse taking us to each and every one until we found
one that we were most comfortable with. So we started out with
[UNDECIPHERABLE] : we went there and it was great, but I think, for me, I didn't see
people that I could connect with because they didn't have or at least I didn't see a lot
of like people like black people. So it's like, "I don't know if this is like my place yet."
And then we went to Masjid Bilal; and ﬁnally we ended up at Masjid Isa and we were
just like walking around, looking around. She let us like she stayed and let us pray.
And then we came out as we're coming out like she was showing us around because
she told us like, "Oh, this is a newly like built mosque," sort of giving us the history
behind it. And that's when like one of the caretakers of the Masjid came out and he
introduced himself and from there we sort of established like, you know, like relations
with him and he then took over sort of the role that Kelly had played previously: so
he helped us sort of you know, go he drove us to like buy groceries, showed us
around, connected us with people who would help us further our aspirations. So
yeah, I credit them for like taking into consideration like our religious beliefs and then
helping us connect with the people who should be helping us then move forward.
Yeah so, I'm thankful for that. So when we met like, I don't know if I should be saying
his name because I think I should get permission but when we met the Masjid
caretaker, he had ﬁrst like, just was oblivious to like what was happening because
people usually just went in the mosque and then you know, went home type of
thing. You go in, you come out type of thing. So like us, like wandering around, he
was just curious, like, "Oh, what are they doing? Why are they with this white lady?"
Like, this weird.
(28:19)
Interviewer:
He was just there?
8
(28:20)
Hassina:
Yeah, he had just gotten there and he sees us just looking around
and and like, "Oh, can I help you? " Probably thought we were people from out of
town or something, or newly resettled people who was just looking around and stuff.
But Kelly explained, like, "Oh, you know, these kids came unaccompanied and they
were looking around; they were sort of trying to ﬁnd, you know, a place where they
felt comfortable, where they could come and pray. So I'm showing them around."
And then she asked him about his role, what he does at the church and everything.
And he like explained to her he's the Masjid sort of caretaker. And from there she was
like, "Okay, cool." I mean, we would go there regularly, so we sort of establish that
relationship with him. And from there like, yeah, like I said, he would take us grocery
shopping, he would show us around, he'd give us advice. I remember when I was
taking like my GED, because I didn't want to go to high school and sort of restart that
whole process. Because when I left South Africa, I was in 12th grade. So I was already
doing the work that a lot of the students were already doing or had already done,
and I didn't want to restart that whole process. So he suggested I take the GED. And I
took it, I passed all of the, like, mandatory, like subjects I'm supposed to pass, but
ended up failing math. Because like, that's a weakness for me. And I remember
being so depressed; I was so so sad because I was like, so hopeful like okay, yeah,
now, I'll start college and everything will be ﬁne. But when I failed that math exam by
nine points too, I was just like, "Oh my gosh, like, should I retake it? I know I'm not
good at math, it was really, really hard and I took it. Should I even be bothered?" But
he was really uplifting and he encouraged me to retake it and told me to have faith
and all that stuff. And I retook it, and I ended up passing it. So yeah, we're really, really
lucky to have had, you know, everywhere we were in all stages of resettlement
people to sort of guide us. So even though like, yeah, we didn't, like we didn't have
parents to take on those roles. Like, God, always put someone there to help us in a
way. So, yeah, I think that helped our transition too and like, development of our faith;
like having people in our faith community, who understood where we were coming
from, and also took the initiative to understand where we wanted to be and where
we were going, and provided us or at least, like steered us in the right direction to
ﬁnd those resources to help us then materialize in our aspirations.
(31:19)
Interviewer:
So I have few questions, but
I'll start with one: so you mentioned
that you were [UNDECIPHERABLE] when you arrived, so how did that work? Who
sponsored that? Was it also with Catholic Charities, or?
(31:34)
Hassina:
Yeah, so when you ﬁrst arrive,
like Catholic Charities helps facilitate
all that they ﬁnd an apartment for you, they furnish it, they essentially make it ready
for like, you know, the new family coming in. Since we were kids, they really didn't
have to do much, I guess. But it was really cute. It was really nice. They bought us like,
you know, like animated blankets with like, Mickey Mouse and all that stuff.
9
(32:02)
Interviewer:
[GIGGLES] Did you like it?
(32:03)
Hassina:
Yeah, it was really, really, really
nice. It was really nice. Yeah, they
brought us pots and pans, and like cutlery and all that stuff. So when we arrived, I
mean, we were comfortable; we had everything we needed, in terms of like, getting
by and everything. But I do feel like, even with all of that, when you don't have people
to talk to or when you're not connected by, you know, by something that keeps you
grounded. So for us, like, right then and there, it was like just getting people that we
could connect with either from like an ethnic point, or like, yeah, religiously. So we
couldn't ﬁnd anyone from South Africa or Uganda. So the ethnic part of it was sort of
erased. But what we ended up ﬁnding was like a faith group to sort of connect with
so that helped. But yeah, the furniture and everything was, I mean, it was great.
(33:09)
Interviewer:
So do you feel that connection
through faith community is -
based on your experience - is a central part of resettlement? Or do you think that
people are able to resettle without those connections, either ethnic or religious?
(33:33)
Hassina:
I think just based off of my experience,
taking into account like, you
know, the resembling family's ethnic or religious sort of, I don't know, beliefs or you
know, helps them transition better. Because when you ﬁrst come, you don't know
anyone, there's no one to talk to, there's no one to sort of help you navigate through
this new environment. One distinct, like, you know, experience that you can talk
about is like, the adhan. Something so simple. But it was something we were
accustomed to and cherished all the way in South Africa because there is different
mosques and all of them going at the same time you listen to...
(34:22)
Interviewer:
Say what adhan is so that...
(34:22)
Hassina:
Oh, like the Muslim call to prayer,
yeah. So having that, you know,
growing up around that, sort of forming friendships, you know, based off of like, "Oh,
you go to this mosque, you go to that mosque"; visiting those different mosques, like
that's how we formed our relationships with people back in South Africa and then
coming here where you don't hear that. Majority...you know, like, you don't know any
of these things. Where do I go to pray? With who do I talk to that's in my faith
community or my ethnic community? Those are things that help people transition
better, right? It's part of the identity, it's part of what makes them who they are. And
without you sort of chipping away that person's, right? Not chipping away, but like,
there's an erasure of that person's identity because of that; because they don't feel a
connection to anything now, right? So I do believe that keeping or at least taking
into account people's level of religiosity or like, their religion and ethnicity and
whether or not they want to be connected with, you know, faith group, or an ethnic
group helps them as they move forward. I know, like for a lot of like, communities,
1 0
like Somali communities, Ethiopian communities, they stick together, they band
together, right? So that community came together because, you know, there's a
realization that we are like a minority, so let's stick together preserve, like, you know,
ethnic values, and traditions and all that stuff. Likewise, with the Muslim community,
something similar, like occurs, right? So when you're able to sort of tap into that
community and feel welcomed and, and integrate, you then are able to, like, you
know, actualize your own sort of aspirations. I got connected with my Muslim
community and because of that, I was able to get connected with like, people in my
faith group who motivated me, and I landed where I am right now, sort of, so there's
like, I don't know, it's not a linear path. But it's sort of like sets off like a trajectory of
how successful a person will be sort of, because it's who they are, it's part of what
they uphold and value and stuff. So it would be great if other faith communities, or at
least I mean, resettling agencies took into account whether or not these, like the
people they were settling, would like to be connected with people that share the
same interest as them.
(37:02)
Interviewer:
So I'm hearing the word "community"
[HASSINA GIGGLES]
(37:04)
Hassina:
Yeah
(37:05)
Interviewer:
So a little bit more about the
community.
(37:07)
Hassina:
Yeah, I mean, in South Africa, like
you identiﬁed based off of like, your
community; you're part of that, you know, sort of close knit group of people, you
identify, based off, like, similar interests and values, traditions, whatever it may be,
right? Whether it's Islamic, or like, ethnic. And then coming here where a lot of
things are very individualistic. It's very hard to, like, integrate, right? Because for a
long time, you were part of the collective. And now here you are taken out from the
collective and thrown into a pool full of just me me me's, right? So how do you like
navigate this new environment, like, for me, like my identity was closely tied to the
group that I associated with. And now that I'm here, it's like, "Who do I associate
with?" I don't see a mirror of me, from the person that I'm looking at right now.
Because they don't share the same sort of, you know, traditions or like practices as I
do. So that that was hard, but then again, like, the fact that our case worker - and this
might be like an individual experience - the fact that she was able to sort of be
cognizant of that, and like, you know, these kids being alone might need people that
they can mirror themselves off to see a reﬂection of themselves to help them as they
like, continue, may help, you know, sort of bridge that gap, where they feel isolated
and alone. And when that happened, like yeah, you know, we're able to then
integrate better but I think looking back now I don't know what our life would have
turned out to be had we not met the people that we've met now, it would have been
very, very different. So I'm grateful that they were very considerate of of our needs.
1 1
And then took an initiative to help us right ﬁnd a place where we belonged. Because
that sense of isolation is as a direct result of not feeling like you belong any way at all.
(39:34)
Interviewer:
How long it took you to start
feeling that sense of belonging, to
overcome isolation that you had?
(39:42)
Hassina:
Not long. Literally after we met
[UNDECIPHERABLE], we thought
like we were at home. Cause I don't know... there's like a feeling of hope you sort of
develop when you meet people that sort of, you can mirror yourself, right? You can
see yourself in like...I don't know, it was just like, "Oh, wow, like, he understands us,
right? He understands where we come from. He understands like our values and our
practices and our traditions. And here he is helping us sort of, you know, transition to
like our new life." So that sense of isolation and a little like, feeling of abandonment
disappeared, after we like, got to know him, and he got to know us type of thing.
Hopefully don't use his name, I just like blurted it out.
(40:43)
Interviewer:
And so I'm sure then through
him, you were able to ﬁnd many
others in that same Masjid, in the same faith community, or similar situation;
probably not from Uganda or South Africa, but who came from all sorts of places.
(41:02)
Hassina:
Yeah
(41:03)
Interviewer:
And were going through similar
experience.
(41:05)
Hassina:
Yeah. I know when like when we started,
like, the masjid is connected
to the school, the Northside Learning Center. And that's where we went to sort of
meet people of our age group. So that helped us even integrate even better, like, "Oh,
wow, not only have we met this person who's now sort of acting as, like a mentor, you
now can now connect with, like, people of our age group who have been here for
maybe a while or a little bit, but they've like interests and, you know, shared beliefs
that we can relate to with them" Right? So that helped a lot too. That's how I met,
like [UNDECIPHERABLE] through the Northside Learning Center, right? So even
though we don't share the same traditional practices, we're not from the same like
ethnicity, we have shared beliefs, like, you know, we're Muslim, we're females, we are
black. So those like, you know, like markers of identity. Even though a little bit there's
some differences, there were so many similarities in them that you overlook the
differences and you sort of feel home, right? When I stepped into the Northside
Learning Center, seeing people who looked like me, I was like, "Oh, wow, I've found
my community. I found where I belong." to sort of, I mean, it's great to like, you know,
integrate people into the American society, like, Oh, yeah, you know, you've come to
America, you sort of have to acclimate, you have to integrate, but at the same time,
like, people cannot integrate unless they feel a sense of belonging at the same time,
1 2
right? Like coming from a country that's very different, like South Africa, like, again,
communities a big, big thing for a lot of people and having grown up in you know, a
very collectivist society, and then moving to the US where it's very individualistic.
There's like friction between the two identities. And sometimes you can even, like,
you know, feel a sense of like, cognitive dissonance, where you're like, "How do I
navigate this new reality?" So having communities, faith communities, ethnic
communities, wherever they may be, help these people, especially in my case helped
me integrate better like, it made me feel like okay, yeah, this this is a place now I can
call home. I see people who look like me, who shared the same values as me like
yeah, I don't feel alone.
(43:43)
Interviewer:
So that's, that's great. Looks
like that case worker did a great job
with connecting you to this community. And before interview, we spoke about this
faith increasing, decreasing - going up and down. So now if you're reﬂecting back on
experience, even now, what would you say about that? So when you found
community, the community help you nurture and grow your faith, or it stayed the
same? You're just maintaining that? How you feel about that? And was it did you feel
the ﬁrst place of fate being driving force to certain extent in everything that you were
going through?
(44:45)
Hassina:
I think from the get go, like I've
always had, like, you know, a good
foundation when it came to my faith. Like my, like our mom helped instill that in us
from a very young age. We would go to like Islam school. So we got that like
education that we needed from a young age and then and also in South Africa like
access to Islamic education is really really easy right? There's always after school
programs so like in terms of like my practices, I was like always on top of like you
know everything and then coming here I don't know if it's a difference of like
environment but it just seems very different like the way people practice is very
different. So at ﬁrst, when we ﬁrst ﬁrst came in, we didn't know anyone; it was really,
really hard because now you're dealing with like a new environment and then your
faith and like, you know, adapting it's there's just so many things going on at once
that you sort of develop like a sense of hopelessness in what you're living sort of but
like right off the bat again when we met and found our community like our faith
increased because now we are in an environment that fosters that; we are around
people who can then like... being youngsters obviously,you're impressionable. You
learn by example, not only through like teaching like you will look at what people are
doing and you sort of mirror that. So having like great leaders, you know, like for the
use of in the community mark, all these people who have you know, established
themselves and are leading by example, like you look at that and you want to
emulate that. So I do think that the upbringing that I had coupled with like meeting
people here helped strengthen my iman, if anything, and I like the fact that I'm not I
don't I live right across the masjid too. So during Ramadan, like, we would have iftar -
1 3
so the breaking of the fast - and this was like, every day for 30 days, so we'd have
people from the community cook food, bring it to the mosque. Everyone who came
in would break fast with us. So again, you you build that like, you know, like
community around religion, right? So I love that. I think for everyone like faith
ﬂuctuates, especially even for me, every now and then I'll feel low; sometimes I'll feel
really motivated, uplifted. So it's very different, but I don't know what... I'm scared to
think of what I would have become had we not been connected with the community
that we have now. I feel like I would have... I'm not saying I'm not strong, but I think it
would have been easy for me to sort of feel disconnected from my faith because
there was nothing to anchor me to it, right? But now sort of being in a community
the practices the same things that I practice and doing the same things that I love
and upholding you know, religious like principles and stuff it's easy for me to develop
my iman from there because I see people doing things that I cherish and so I can
emulate that. Like feeding people during Ramadan: that's something especially, for
30 days every day for 30 days, like that's unheard of, right? So even though it's like a
30 day thing like for me that boosts my iman a lot because I feel like I'm closer not
only to the people that I'm serving but also to God in a sense right? So it does help
boost my iman and everything. Yeah...I don't know.
(48:50)
Interviewer:
Yeah, that's great. So we'll
need... some says that religious
community with signiﬁcant role that's very important for settlements so that's great.
And when it comes, you just mentioned you live close to Masjid. Is it that initial
apartment or you moved to this place?
(49:10)
Hassina:
Yeah, good question. So [UNDECIPHERABLE]
owned that house. So
the Masjid caretaker owned that house. And like we would go to the Masjid everyday
just to be around people that we could talk to and and connect with. Right. That
sense of isolation we felt at home disappeared when we were in the mosque. So I
think him being cognizant of that was like maybe I should bring them closer
because we lived really, really far about like 30 minutes from the mosque so walking
to and from there was really really hard especially in March when it's really, really cold.
So he offered like the house that we're living in now that's right across the mosque,
and he was like, "You know, I understand that right now things might be hard and
you may not be able to like know afford a lot of things but I would at least like to
make one thing in your life a little easier: other than having to walk to and from, I can
let you guys rent this house. And you can be closer to like people around you that
feel comfortable around." So we ended up moving. So we got to that apartment we
came here in March. We stayed in that apartment until June and then like June the
15th, we moved into the house. So, yeah.
(50:23)
Interviewer:
Were you able to do that through
Catholic Charities? Or it was
kind of independent decision?
1 4
(50:30)
Hassina:
No, that was an independent decision.
But our caseworker helped
us sort of get the assistance that we needed in order to move.
(50:39)
Interviewer:
They supported it. That's good.
(50:40)
Hassina:
Yeah.
(50:43)
Interviewer:
And do you still have connection
with Catholic Charities? Did
you stay in touch with the caseworker? Do you stay in touch with the organization?
(50:54)
Hassina:
For a little bit, I did. But I think
part of the process of bringing people
here and getting them integrated is sort of to help them be independent, and you
know, move forward with their lives. So I'm not as connected to Catholic Charities as
most people would be, I don't know. But that's also because, like, I'm able to, like,
take care of myself. So I know most people who would go back like those that you
know, continue to need help, especially with like English classes and stuff, but since
I'm sort of okay, from that, I don't know. I don't see the reason to go. And I don't know
there was one caseworker we had worked with too; she's was amazing, just like Kelly;
she was like top of her game in terms of you know, providing the services that people
need. But then she passed away a few years later like I think it was 2015, 2016 from
cancer. So it is really...I don't know like death for me really hits me when it happens to
someone that like I I know, right? So when she passed away it was weird going back
to Catholic Charities and sort of being in that building and like, "Oh, wow, like
someone"...because I associate things with the people I know. So I remember
Catholic Charities like through her. So when I go there it's sort of like oh, like good
memories I sort of here when we ﬁrst came we'd go play there with eat mufﬁns.
Right? Like all these fun things, but at the same time, like oh, like this one person
who helped me a lot when I was at my lowest is no longer around. So I don't know I
sort of get sentimental when I'm there. But I'll be forever grateful to Catholic
Charities for like, know all the things that they have done to help me and my family
get to where we are today. Like it all spawned from there; it started from there. Yeah,
so even though I don't go there physically, like obviously, you know, spiritually
Catholic Charities is always like, in my mind, so
(53:13)
Interviewer:
Have you considered giving back?
Probably this person does.
[UNDECIPHERABLE] you ever offered yourself being that person who would?
(53:31)
Hassina:
Help them transition?
(53:33)
Interviewer:
Do you author that? Do you consider
that?
1 5
(53:36)
Hassina:
Yeah, when we were still in contact with Kelly. We did do that for two
families that... no, three families, that came... three, four? Maybe four. I want to say
but only three like resonated with me. And one of the families was actually like
orphans like us that came too
(53:54)
Interviewer:
Okay
(53:55)
Hassina:
So, you know, we're able to, like
help them transition too. But recently
because it's like, you know, Trump and production and like settlement numbers and
everything, it's, it's really hard to sort of get connected with these people. But
anytime like I ﬁnd out these people that I've been resettled, that are close by that I
can actually go and see and help, I do. Because I know ﬁrsthand the experiences
that they are having, having lived them myself and now being where I am today, like
I know that they some assistance that I can give them. It may not be physical, but
you know, any advice I can offer any services I can refer them to sort of makes things
a little easier because I am I can advocate for myself but I can also advocate for them.
Right? So yeah, so one story that stands out is of this family that moved in, literally
across the street from where we live now and during like the Fourth of July
celebrations a lot of people will light ﬁreworks and stuff. Now that for us is fun, but for
that family, they like experienced war, they saw the brutality of war, people dying and
everything. So when the mother in the house was, you know, hearing these
ﬁreworks, she had like a traumatic experience where she was brought back to the
time when she was seeing people getting killed, and she heard the ﬁreworks as
gunshots. So she started hyperventilating; she couldn't breathe; she passed out. We
called like, 911 got her to the hospital. She couldn't speak English. So we translated in
Swahili. And like, you know, she was discharged, like, the day after. It wasn't like
anything major, but like seeing someone experience PTSD, that's something I'm
not..I personally have never seen. So sort of helping her, right, made me feel like, "Oh,
like, it's not like my presence, sort of helping her, right?" So yeah, that was, I think
that for me will forever be a moment in my life where I'm like, “Even though I've had
things be really, really hard, it hasn't gotten to the point where it's like that.” So
anytime I can give back I do. I work at the Northside Learning Center and I help out
students there as a teacher. So yeah, even if I'm not connected to Catholic Charities,
I'm still helping my community, which is what...Yeah, propels me.
(56:31)
Interviewer:
That's great. And I'm sure they're
grateful for your help with these
families. So that's great. God bless you for that. Do you have any ﬁnal thoughts?
Something that we didn't mention? Something that you wanted to emphasize or
anything that you would like to share before we ﬁnish?
(56:55)
Hassina:
I worked with Interfaith Works a
while ago; they had like a Spirit of
America program that they had. So they would invite different like people from the
1 6
community, and have them sort of go to these very afﬂuent, like, you know, areas to
talk about their refugee experience. And I remember going to a few churches and
talking to the people there, because a lot of the rhetoric that I was receiving was,
some of these people look at refugees as sort of, I don't know, not very, like, not in a
positive light, right? They view us as people who take away from society rather than
giving back. Right? And it shocked me because a lot of the people that I know work
really, really hard, even though they don't speak English, right, to give themselves a
good future, but to also contribute to, like the American society and everything. And
it's weird, though, cause now that I think about it, it was everything that I've done
this far, something connected to my faith, right? So even though I'm talking to these
people who are different from me, in all aspects, be it economic, and social, and all
these things, were somehow connected through the faith because I'm talking to
them in their like place of worship. And I remember just, you know, going to like the
synagogue and talking to these Jewish people who later came to me and were like,
you know, like, for a long time, I had harbored these very negative thoughts about
refugees. But listening to you talk, I could see a lot of similarities between us, even
though a lot of the things that I believed in, had elements of like, you know,
differences that sort of overshadowed similarities. So rather than looking at you as
someone different, I can resonate with your story now, because of like, our faith and
stuff. So that moved me a lot. All these, a lot of the things that people know about
refugees are very, very negative. But once you get to talk to someone, and you listen
to the life story, you sort of see like, we're not as different as we think we are. Right?
So I think participating in the program helped me see that the barriers that exist
between, you know, like, my community, and other communities is not so much just,
you know, off of face value, like, "Oh, me, like, being helped by the system to get by or
whatever." It's also the fact that like, the shared experiences that can bring us
together. I don't know if that makes any sense.
(59:44)
Interviewer:
Of course, [UNDECIPHERABLE]
(59:45)
Hassina:
[LAUGHS] Yeah, so yeah, I'm grateful
to Interfaith Works for having
created that, you know, program because I'm sure like, you know, having talked to
some of these people, like I changed their view of me, but they changed my view of
them. Because what I got out of it was, here are Americans living in America, having
been born in America, not having access to the services that refugees are getting.
Right? So it's like, "Oh, it seems like we are taking more than what they should be
getting." But then talking to them, it's like, "I understand where you're coming from
now." Right? You see your people suffering and then you see the government sort of
bringing in more people who are then suffering too. And it's like, there's no end to
the cycle. But when you listen to like each other, and you sort of try to ﬁnd common
ground, you learn about the shared experiences, like yeah, we've both been through
difﬁcult things. But at the same time, we're both trying to get by. So there's beauty in
1 7
learning about other people and their experiences and the things that make them
who they are.
(1:01:08)
Interviewer:
Thank you so much for sharing.
I really appreciate that.
(1:01:13)
Hassina:
Thank you. This is great. I hope
it helps. And I hope that some of my
responses make sense
E n d
1 8