rnt.erview with casey Hayden, october L'l , L994, Tucson, Arizona

Q: why in vol-ved

d,on I t we start, with explaining how you became in

the movement.

A:
well r came from a very conservatiwe family. Texas was so. - -but I never understood that until I was a senior in college.
The schools were segregated by 1aw and so my reaction to that was that it was kind of in sulting.
[Cat screams...pause] So that was sort of my orientation. My mother was a single mom so r had a lot of church...so f came out. of this southern liberal tradition. But r was raised by my grandparents until r was twelve. My grandfather was a sheriff, very, very traditional, so r kind of got both sides. So r went into the University of Texas with all of these things happening to me....and then the church was a very strong influence too. so r got t.o the universiLy, r went to
,funior college two years and then my mother, r guess r should say this too, my mother worked for this guy who owned this chain of movie theaters in south Texas. He was a Christian Scientist, and he employed the only Mexican who was in a management position....
So she had this working relationship with this black guy who was a good friend of hers, so that was very important because Mexican
Americans and blacks... The Latinos went t.oschool with us but at the same time socially j-t was very taboo to mix. so r had that happen to me. Then when I went to the University f wanted to join a sorority, but r didn't get. int.o the sorority r wanted. so r got involved and became active in the y tywcAl, and the y was sort of

,

r had graduated in

a hold over from the social central gospel theology, and. of course the Y helped women, provided housing for them and helped them to get jobs in of fices. So those two things, and then it was integrated. At that point the University of Texas was int.egrat.ed but the housing was not. so in the y r met most of the black students and then r lived at the Christian....
'59 a ndwent back to school in the spring of ,60. I had taught public school a semester then I went back to school. I went back to get my masters in English. so r had by now become a national student Y officer.
In these regional meetings in the national Y meetings they were liberal so they had these sections of study-
One was on peace, one was on race, one was on meaningful workplaces. So I got all this training and started training thinking about this stuff.
r met a 1ot of black kids, and r got it on a personal level. so r was already very involved with all this stuff. So f got into the sit-ins.
from Connie Curry who went out recruiting for her southern student.
relations group. She got a big grant through the national student association and it was for Connie to recruit, I think she took sixteen southern student leaders over the summer and went to a human relations seminar which was run by the national student association. She was recruitingi me to go to that, but when I met her she told me all about the sit-ins and I remember we sat in this restauranL in Austin and cried while she telling me about. the sit-ins. So I was well- into it by then. And then we had a woman who was chairperson of the Y, a black woman...I didn't sit in, I can't remember who sat in...
So then that summer that I went to
Connie's seminar which was in Minneapolis Saint Paul for students.
And afterwards I went to (in audible). Well Connie can te11 you

I heard about it first

J

more about what the seminar was l-ike. But it was pretty regional oriented. rt really captured the mind of the souLh, a lot of close relationships and anthropology, and just a lot of stuff target.ed aL race relations in the south. And then at the conference the big d.ebate at the nat.ional student congress was whether to support the sit-ins, and I was on this panel of southern white st.udents t.otalk about the sit-ins. well r gave this big speech and it was a matter of whether we had the vote, so all the sudden r was like this heroine. From that r sort of got.
swept into this liberal caucus which was this thing that A1 Haber organized at the congress to support the liberal sides of issues at the National Student Conference. And that's where I met.
everybody. That's basically where the people who formed SDS found each other. So Tom Hayden was there and A1 and a 1ot of people.
I'm blanking out. So there was sort of a movement to draft me to run for national vice president of NSA and Tim Jenkins was there who's a black guy (in audible) " But I thought it would be better if fim ran.
important for a woman to run.
black man to run. So he went on Lo lead and that gave him some leveragie and he later argued stuff, training for some of the SNCC orientation. Then I went back to the University of Texas and
Connie and Jane Stembridge and Ella Baker were organizing the
Atlanta the second SNCC meeting, and called and said t should come and they sent me some money. So I already knew a 1ot of SNCC people because they had come to the NSA meet.ing to try and get support for their activities.
McDew who was the first chairperson was in Connie's Seminar so T knew Chuck very well. So I already knew guite a few people.

I don't think it occured to me that it would be
It just seemed important for a

So I had met them there. And Chuck

Q: How did you know ElLa Baker?
r think r had met El1a somewhere around the y stuff, but lm
A:
not sure. At christmas r went to see Tom in Ann Arbor and we put together a food drive and a fund-raiser for SNCC. The food was for farmers and people who were registering to vote in western
Tennessee. And then on spring break r drove up from Texas and he drove down from Michigan with all this food. These trucks full of stuff and we took it to these people. And then r accepted ....At the midterm f took a teaching a ssistantship at the University of rll-in ois and went up to run the Y. r thought f would be closer to
Tom. That shows you how parochial r was. rt was hours away from
Ann Arbor. Then we got engaged. The Y offered me a job in the beginning of the fall working for El-la, travel-ing to southern campuses (in audible). So Tom and f goL married in the fa11 in
Austin. That sunrmer we spent in New York (in audible) SDS ran this"
(phone rings) So then we to Atlanta. We did this study group and we went to the conference. So f was workinq for Ella and t.raveling. so r would go on campuses like a bl-ack campus and got.o the meetings and I would recruit people for race relations workshops. So it was all very sort of underground. So we got to
Atlanta and then was when Bob's southern Mississippi efforts were just blowing up. And we knew all these people because Tom was speaking and I was traveling. So I knew all the SNCC people. And we were having a lot of meet.ings and we were just. like
(in audible) . There wasn't much staff and Ella was there al-l the time. So it was rea11y like the Y was there but doing SNCC stuff.
I was taking the minutes of all the meetings. I guess Bob was
(in audible) So we did the Freedom Rides to Albany always there.
and Tom and we sat in the courtroom. I can't remember if Tom was

with us. we were both pretty much lj-ving on my y salary because
Tom was the SDS secretary.
Were you tlrere wlren the Port Huron statement was drafted,?
Yes, yes r was. But I'm trying to remember when that was. r think it. must have been '62 " But we both rea11y involved with both. Then we stayed in Atl-anta that year r did my stuff and traveled with the y. And that. summer r think we might have gone back to New York. r think we both went to the NSA conference.
Tom went back to school that fal1 of ,62 and we wenL to Ann Arbor but then I 1eft. That fa1l there was a SDS national convention and r stayed in (in audible) , and then r went back to Atlant.a and start.ed get.ting paid by sNCC. r had actually been on the staf f before but r was getting paid by the y.
that much but r did get an apartment. And r got the title of northern coordinator and what I did was organize the Friends of
SNCC on campuses and sent out mailings and press releases. r put together Friends of SNCC materials and r helped get a rot of personal contacts up in New york and chicago. so r d.id that and then Bob was sitting at the (in audible) and he had a big plan to do this literacy project in Mississippi which was designed t.o create self-instruction. And r was an English major so r thought this was my kind of project. Doris Dorby, Heren o'Neil, John o'Nei1, rr€, and this white guy from somewhere in the northeast, and this philosophy teacher. So f went to Mississippi and started getting paid by this lit.eracy project.
(in audible) Helen, and
Doris, and I lived in this house. It was standard operations for
SNCC and it was called the Freedom House and we stayed there unt.il
'66. so r was there for the beginnings of the Freedom Love and all that. After the literacy project we or ganized the summer

r didn't rearly get paid

t

f can't guite remember the

r helped put t.ogether the summer project.. The main

project.
thing r worked on was researching the challenge to the seating.
Get.ting hold of the stuff (in audible) and training al1 the
(in audible) to do that. And somewhere in there was the March on washington. somewhere in there was a big vietnam ral1y.
Was that with SDS?
r think that was with sts.
circumstances, but I got arrested. So that was through the summer of ' 64. rn the fal1 of '64 peopl-e l-ef t who were all- sort of at loose ends trying to figure out. what to do next. After the challenge we didn't know what to do...it was awful. So r was living at the Toogaloo literacy house and Mary King was there,
Elaine Baker, Emmy schrader, .Tane stembridge. you know f found out subsequently that a1l these white peopre who just stayed, got hired. Eighty-five people got hired by a staff meet.ing. So suddenly we had all these people on staff, mostly whi:epeople.

Q: You werenrt present at this meeting?
A: No. r think Elaine was there. you know, El-aine Baker would be a good person to talk to. Elaine was teaching at Toogaloo and she wasn't in sDS, bul she's just really a good person total-k to.
She came down with a bunch of people from Radcliff and Harvard to be the summer staff at Toogaloo College in ,63, ,64. She kind of got. drafted to help with some stuff on the sufirmer project. Those were the women who were all at the literacy house. E_aine was aL the meeting in,Jackson. But Elaine wrote this memo that Mary King and f wrote. Elaine was in that too. rn fact r think she wrote that for SDS.

Q:

Ttre first memo?

A: Yeah. Yeah. And I think Emmie Schrader was involved in that too. We put it together in the literacy house. I always remember it as this group effort, but r sent out my very first...when sarah was writing her book, Mary found me and said this woman is writing this book she really wants to talk to you. so r read this and r thought...and Sarah had originally thought that Ruby Doris wrote the memo. But r knew r wrote part of it but it seemed to me rike a whole bunch of us worked on it.
so r sent ouL a mairing to everybody that was at roogaloo and said, "Do you remember this memo?. Here's a copy of this thing. Did you write part of this?"
Nobody ever responded. so then Mary wrote a book and she had her version of how it. al-lhappened. But now Elaine j-sback, who hasn't even thought about all this stuff.
that all this history has been written, or anything. ft's so funny when people write these books. r read Mary's book in first draft and Tom's in first draft. People don't know a nlzthing.
Nobody remembers anything, so they just pad it.
you read these books and you think r could never write a book like this, they remember all this stuff. But no, nobody remembered anything. we can't even remember how we supported ourselves, and it's hysterical.
sounds like this is the way it really was. people just pat.ch it.
together. They go around and ask other people. Or they send drafts to other people and ask them to fix it, and they do. I mean T wrote tons of Mary's stuff and Tom's. So historians are reading some of this and getting the t.otalry wrong idea. But it wasn't what happened. That's why we have to write this book. Get everyone to write their own story. But anyway, that's why it would be good to talk to Elaine. r can never understand about

rt is just hysterical. And then you read it and it

she doesn'teven know

that memo because it was Marywho...it was about a1l that stuff in
Atlanta, and Mary wasn't in Atlanta. She was in Mississippi. And nobody was telling her al1 this stuff because people weren't talking to each other in the fall of ,64. r mean black people weren'ttalking about it.
int.erview black women and get. any in formation. But Elaine was at the meeting, at t'he Atl-anta meeting, and that.'s wtrere we got all the in formation. so this memo says oh, this and this, and this happened, because she was there so that's where al_r of this came from. I could never figure that out.

f mean you couldn't g,oaround. and

rn trer book, Mary said that this all started because
Q:
the two of you, and Dorothy were tal_king about the second class citizenship of women.
A: well- a lot of people were talking about it.
rL wasn'tjust us. well you see the Y, the YMCA was a women's organization. so
Mary and f both had experience in a women's organization, where it was run by women. Sarah's notion of safe space is quite good. r think what happened was that we had safe space. fend of tape]

Yeah. r think that. But we were all into it at the Toogaloo literacy house that was really where it started. Here we were, five or six young students living there all who were talking about deep stuff. Elaine came up with the draft.. you should talk to her.
I have something that. she wrote about it that's very specific about what. led her to that, but r don't think r shoul-d talk about. But you could ask her about it. Now r think iL's true that Elaine drafted it.
st,uf f . rt was probably just to get it of f our chests and get it

I was rea11y bothered with structure

out in the open. I think it said, "H€!, happening." rt was sort of a nightmare. r don,tthink it was meant to so lve anything. I was more concerned about what we were going to do next. That was more where T was.

look at whaL's

IIow did you see the future of SNCC at that time?
Q:
A: wel1, w€ didn't know what to do. r didn't know what to do.
r had just finished running this challenge and it was over, so it was like, now what am r supposed to do? And that.'s what r saw was wrong with sNcc at the time. But in retrospect., r don't think that's afl it was. That wasn't a problem who worked. in
Mississippi, just southwest Georgia. r don't know why we kept all that Mississippi staff. we had just done the Mississippi summer project and that was over, and we just had the Challenge which had fail-ed. so did we really want to keep doing voter registration?
P1us, the summer project was over, so all of the logistics and al1
the work that was involved just trapped folks.

it was over?

In your opinion, what was the sLaffrs reaction,

f think as long as the summer wenL, I think as long as it

Q:
especialJ-y black staff members, to the summer project after
A:
ended and went away, it would be okay. you see Lhe problem was that everybody didn't go home" Then we had--so we couldn't go back to the way it was before, which isn't the way it was supposed to be. People just stayed and evidently -- r can't quite sort it out.
I can't find anything written about it that answers my questions of how it happened that all these people got put on sNCC staff. Previously, people got put on SNCC staff in real1y

there and there didn't seem

different ways. But basically project directors decided who that wanted on staff. But somehow that was not the case that the project directors hired these people. so you had the black staff,
Mississippi staff that been project directors, so now they were project leaders, and they had staff.
so it should. have been that they coul-d decide whether or not those people got hired. But in fact that was not the case. Because by the time we goL to
Waveland, all these people were still to be any way to get rid of them, and r don't rea11y understand rt was just a big mess. so that was making everybody crazy.
it.
Elaine knows all the positions. she has all the papers and local_
staff meetings in Mississippi that sufllmer. She was called Federal
Projects coordinator. Her job was to help people understand how to get people off welfare--all the federal projecLs that. were supposed to be happening. so she was traveling. so she was at all these meetings and has all these papers. There were al-l these people there, and it was like what are all these people sti1l doing here? And the other thing was that there was no money.
Nobody was paid. So had could they have all these people?
Meanwhile, you see this was the other thing r saw that was the problem at that point was that we weren't get.ting a nymoney for anything. 'Jim Forman bought this huge office buitd.ing and this professional printing press and that.'s where the money went that was supposed Lo be coming to the workers. Jim had his own a gend.a and he had this idea of how the or ganizat.ion should be. He good take all- the money and do what he wanted with it.
so those were the things that seemed Lo me to be the problem. There was a l-ot, of anger and hostility and we didn't know what. to do with it.

1.1"

formed during ttre summer

r had a l-ot of sex with a lot. of brack

tension have anything to do with the inter-

Q: Did this raciaL reLationstrips that proj ect ?
A: wel1, there were definitely inter-raciar- relationships in
SNCC. No doubt. about it. Lots of 1ot.s of relat.ionships and sex.
Not meaningless either.
guys and so did most of the other women. Certainly the woman who were in Mississippi prior to the suilrmer had relations with lots of black male staff members. My impression was that when people came down for the summer project there wasn't so much of that because
---the way r think about is severalways, four or five different ways. It started out with ,Jane and me and Dorothy, sort of sudden. Then Dottie (in audible). Then there were volunteers. My impression i-sthat the volunteers didn't have a lot of sex with black guys because it was too tricky then. But priva-,-e1y.... We were all living together and we were aII very close. We all lived in a house the size of this room. So if there was no bed, "Hey you can share my bed". It was like that all the way around. you have to oq>ect that because of what you are about is breaking segregation the rule of segregation is sexual- separateness. If you get a bunch of people that are set on breaking a :aboo of segregation, it going to happen. The only place the line was drawn was homosexual relations. The only place where a lot of flack happened was Jim Forman' srelationship. There hias a lot of flack.
that was a big problem. I guess there weren't a lot of successful marriages. I remember in the wake of the.Jim mess, he got on my case. You see Dinky took my position as northern coordinator and she sent the Freedom Singers on a tour that lost a 1ot of money.

(in audible) But that's the only one I really heard of

so part of the rumor of what was happening was that she was being allowed a lot of flack for having lost money and that was really part.ly had to do with her and .lim. part of the flack she was getting really originated f rom her and .fim being t.ogether. And so most. people's reactions was to take sides. so at waveland, r remember Jim--that was the first. time he decid.ed to get on me about being high on freedom, acting impulsive and irresponsible and then complaining that the people that come after don't have what it takes to do the job. But he was talking about me you see because r had left Mississippi. rt was just in accurate. she should have just done it. How hard was it? you just had to write letters.

rt was just a routine job. so r thought wow, .fim is coming down hard on me because of this stuff with Dinky. But that's the first time the term Freedom High was used.. See so that.
had t.o do with sexual tension. But I don't really remember a lot..
When things got hearry with int.er-racial hostilities, what happened was that people stopped talking to each other. so that if there was hostility so there have been hostility

later, r didn't hear about it.

that I was never a ware of.

Q: So after Waveland,, what did you do?
A: well those of us at the literacy house...well aft.er waveland nobody stil1 talked. The same problems were sti1l all there. so we--what it looked like to us had happened was that everybody had left Mississippi and Mississippi stil1 didn't have a subscript or support. So there were a lot of pieces to that, but one piece was the photographers had left and there were no more black photographers l-eft in Mississippi. There was no darkroom. so we decided to start a photography project. so we started all working

(in audibl-e) But the problem was that people had

in photography. our idea was to raise money to set up the darkroom and teach bl-ack Mississippians photography and assign them to projects. see our idea was to strengthen local projects because no one was spending any money anymore on them. so my id.ea was to --see r had come through the y and r had come through relations, human relations stuff, so my idea of struct.ure was very t.ask oriented and was very small group oriented. My idea of what we should have done at waveland was break into small groups and come up with what we wanled to do. These tasks giroups could then send someone to the general group which would provide a plan to get control. That's what r thought we shourd do, which is very structured. rt's not like we weren'tstructured, we were. But we were not into a hierarchical structure. We wanted a smal1 g:roup task force.
problems that they felt needed to be solved immediately, and so it just started all over again. So what we wanted t.o do was this photography thing. We went to Mississippi t.o be trained to be photographers. Mary King, Emmie Schrader, and me. Emmie wanted to make filmstrips. She made filmstrips about making co-ops for farmers. We started trying to turn out material to be used for or ganizl-ng and raise money for photographers. The other part of this idea of structure was that communities in the north had a greed to send money send money directly to the town or projects they were sponsoring. So what we were trying to so was circumvent this large hierarchical system. We were into a different. kind of structure. So would couldn't get that. That. just got. to be cat calls, and we left. Elaine went off to Batesville. Jane
Stembridge organized a poetry workshop. Mary went off with Dennis to this (in audible) project. But after the Atlanta meeting it was

1.4

r came

Black power had come in, but.

cl-ear to me that whites were in the way. Between waveland and
Atlanta the people who were for a more centralized structure they were in power positions--and by the time we got back together in
Atlant.a there was so much hostility.
the general sense was --it was a different orientation.
out of this human relations, spiritual position, and SNCC had been that. That is what SNCC had been for me, and then that's not what it was anymore. No matter how much SNCC changed that is what it once was for me. It wasn'tthat anymore, it was something else.
so it looked to me at that point that the best thing to so was to
(in audible) . So I cuL a deal with SDS and Jim Forman that SNCC would sti1l pay me, but r would go to the SDS office and work there. so r went t.ochicago and spent the summer of ' 65 in chicago. By then r was older. The women from Toogaloo were now in New York city.

so r went t.ovarious places for two years.

Q: Could you tell me more about your overlap with SNCC and SDS?

A: wel-lthere was a lot of overlap in the national council.
Dorothy was there. A lot of the same people were involved loca11y, but it was SNCC who ran things. Bob Zellner was in both.
Charl-ie Cobb, fvanhoe. . . .

Q: wtrat did members of each organization think about the other group?
A: well sDS thought that sNCC was favorable partners. They were the existent.ial- group, they were someone to emulate--that's where the ERAP come in. Tom's idea was (in audible).
It was trying to build a white constituency that could jive with sDS's philosophy.

Tom went to Atlanta with me because we got married. and. I ha6 a job there. r was making the money. Tom couldrr't have ever gotten in because the sNCC people didn't like Tom. He was very ambitious.
They didn't like him because he wrote that pamphlet and. SDS sold it and kept the money even though it was about sNcc. Forman didn't. like Tom either. when we went d.own to those Georgia counties to take that food, Forman was there. And Forman was with this other faction. There was always sort of this tension between
Jim and Tom. Jim was an old right guy" The new left was more about indigenous America. SNCC was more spiritual and more regional. r approached sNcc and sDS as a segregationist. r was sort of a liaison between sNcc and sDS. sDs --both werevery male dominated. They were both macho. SNCC had a lot of female influence because it was nonviolent, because southern rural culture was feminine, it was nurturinq. But, the guys who got the glory were the b]ack guys who got out. there and sacrificed their bodies. After Diane Nash died, it was rea1ly more about how gutsy you were. And for me, I couldn't be that because as a white woman f was just never willing to endanger people with whom I was working. So I always
(in audible).

it was like when I chose to not
It was more like support in the background act.ivity,

doing research and training people, all that. But the way I'm reported hist.or ically with Bob Zellner (in audible), so it rea11y is a traditionally was more like--writing speeches, and arguing positions.
civilized.

female role. The same thing in SDS. fn SDS it

It was

Q: The women were arguing and presenting papers?

1,6

r wasn't

r think sara is right that once ERAP happened

A: No the guys were. They werevery theoretical.
interest.ed in it.
women came to support sDS. ERAP was task oriented instead of strict.ly theoret.ical and that's what, attracted the women.
(in audible) So f think that.'strue. Once we left that theoretical, macho debate sty]e, women could be more effective.
But also in SDS you have projects, for in stance in Chicago we were organizing welfare women and Winnie Davis was there. Winnie Davis had to deal with these juvenile delinquents who were ;errorizing'
her welfare women. So the project was a l-ot of in coherence around class, race, and sex. And also because r courd see (in audibl-e) .

Q: Was SDSrs term participatory appJ.ied int,ernally or was it
America?

and,

democracy meant to be externaL phiLosophy for

A: Both. Well, I don't think there was that kind of sp1it.
lend of tape]

I think what it reall-ymeant was non-alienation. Alienation was a big thing, a big idea for existentialists. A sense of our own distance from outsiders, how at odds we were with the socially and
(in audible) So I think what it rea11y cultural norms of so ciety.
did talk about was the opposite cult and for a minute in our personal lives it was a sense that we were fu11y engaged. rt was a sense of being honest and straightforward and willing to alter power. (in audible) Tom wel1...r guess the best way to explain it is that I went to this SDS reunion a few years ago and Connie
Brown was there and we had a women's session. rt was supposed to be a workshop, but it was a whole day long thing. we talked about

)'

what it was like for us as women when we were in sDS, and how we viewed our politics now that we were all sorL of preveluted in women's culture and how we as women have access to what our issues are and our probl-ems, and expectations--all that stufi. But from that perspective had we reall-yworked? rt was just a kind of long healing, sharing special end. And Connie Brown, she was talking about what was happening to her then and she said the stuff I was hearing, she said, "yeah, people were talking about all the guys in SDS were so macho and inte11ectua1. The stuff I was hearing:, the style was awful but the cont.ent was true."
Especially Tom's stuff--he was such a great writer. so there was a 1ot of community and inter-person loyalty. And there was a 1ot of sex there t.oo. We used to have this saying (in audible) . And it. did. Every was just very incestuous. And there weren'L very many of us. That's the other thing when r look back. There were so few of us. we were so young. r can't believe we did all that.
And so I think that inter-sexual stuff was in a 1ot of ways rea1ly a part of it. That's where we lived it out. you knovr when you have a lover there is a lot of energy. There was just so much energy bouncing around. sexual energy. so that.'s what of part of what we are doing--we're going back and working it all out.. See, we were all sleeping with the same guys but we weren't t.a lking t.o each other about. it. That's part of the problemwe trying to fix at this workshop. So now we go back and reassess these guys, and it's that then. Part of what is happening is healing stuff up.

like a breakthrough. Women didn't talk to each other like

Q: How would you assess relationslrips had on other

the effect

these unspoken

women Ln

SNCC and SDS?

L8

it's

A: well, in my own personal life taken me thirty years to work through what happened then. For me, given my personal plan in life--what was going on there? so needless to say, r fell a drift. A11 of those things has rearly bruised all of our pasts.
But it also was an expression of camaraderie and our love for each other. we all loved each other and (in audibl-e) . There really were just each other. so it was a bond and it. just kind. of naturally flowed that we took each other to bed. And. everybody did it unprotected. And also another thing you have to understand is that we had the pi1l. Just like all the sudden you could do this kind of thing and not. get pregnant. ft was like whoa the 1id was off. And that all happened and there it was. we were the first generation. So that was a major, major part of it.
involved everybody in any setting. we happened t.o be in this setting, so that's what we were doing. we were all traveling a lot, we were having all of the in tensive e><periences t.ogether, w€
learning adult strengths in a 1ot of ways so we were more ready to do this. And then we were reading about married sexual lives and stuff. The women that were heroines were the women who never married and weren't constrained by marriage. Previously women had to be more cautious because they were the ones who got pregnant.
like oh, we can be like the guys. Except that the
But now it's guys' sex was part alienated. But we, it was very hard for us because the difference in the sexual experience--but we didn't know that. So we thought that once we were in dependent we would be fine. But that wasn'ttrue" As you can see thirty years lat.er we are crazy and seeing psychiatrists. what. happened back there?
we didn't know. rt was so weird. Anc it wasn'tjust us either.
I mean everybody was doing the same thing. Any woman that got

so sex

hold of the pi11 was like whoa" nobody knew what to do with her.
r sti11 don't think people understand the impact of that.
rt's like a basic cultural switch just like that. Women can control in a sexual capacity. For us it's taken all this time to figure out.
we all got together at this reunion we were a1l saying,, "oh, wow!
rt happened to you too! " Maybe it was the pi1l? r mean the answer to these things are so simple. And all these books make it so complicated with all these theories, and it's simple. rt's oLher, and it's

things like the pil1, people stopped taiking to each

just real basic.

real.-yvery

Q: But then the rear question becomes why did peopre stop talking to each other? Why did you stop talking?
A: we]r r think that the structure guestion was something to so othe the super ego. I think it was a scapegoat for real problems. People had problems to so lve and they didn't know how to do it. We had all these black people (in audible). There wasn't the money when we needed it.
so if you didn'L have money
(in audibl-e) . we had all these white people who we couldn't qet rid of . we couldn't. function. And we didn'L know what to do. so we all stopped functioning. Why couldn't we so lve these problems?
My perspective on all of this was that we needed to be in smal1
groups--it was very sI-mple. Plus, ideologically we were stuck.
We couldn't identify what tactics to use and which areas to at.tack next.
It was awful. And then all these white people that had somehow got on st.aff, it was like how do we get rid of them? I don't even know how they g-ot on staf f in the first place. I reallywant' to find out.
the minutes of that Atlant.a staf f meeting, that's where it

I'11 tel-l you where you could find it

happened. Plus there were all these other people who weren't on st.aff who were just there.
ft's not that, r don't believe that the problem, see those black staff people werevery strong. The black Mississippi st.aff werevery st.rong. And when r read. in the books how the whites were dominating, I don't believe that. First of all because the whites idealized these black st.af f . And secondly, because these black guys werevery strong. r just don,t buy it.
r think it was that there were some people who somehow got to stay after the summer that you couldn't get. rid of. And that's where f think this notion of whit.epeople leading came from that's the problem. We had very different ideas about what we

were doing. You see r didn'L realize this until r read Jim
Forman's book. r felt that we just thought that.Tj_m was this militant revolutionary, centralist Stalin. Then f read his book and found out, yeah he rea11y was militant centralist. And he real1y did Lhink SNCC should be a mass membership organization to create a revolution in the ghettos or something. And that's what he was doing buying that building and buying that printing press and all that stuff. Which wasn't at all what I thought we should be doing. That's a power conflict. And when r read .Tim's book that's when I rea]-:-zed that after Waveland he realized he had a power conflict on his hands. He identified. what was happening as a faction fight and he went around and badmouthed people and lied to everybody--lied to the field st.aff in order to have this centralized power. So by the time we got together at that Atlanta meetj-ng there had been a l-ot of badmouthing and racial stuf f .
It was the worst. thing that ever happened to me. r could. have died and r 1eft.. rt was my whole life.
ft was awful. Nobody was on our side. we just all withdrew. But

people wouldn,ttalk to me.

t

-'

dr

21,

in term of id.eas like

then r go back and read these books and it's ridiculous. That r dominated and filibustered. Give me a break! r was a human relations expert. That r wasn'tsensitive to black people? you have to be kidding!
I ran race relations workshops. This Stoper book was the worst. she did all- of her interviews in ,68. r come up so unding 1ike...there were all these terms like hard-liners.
They were all involved in fact.ion fights--a11 this stuff that.
never happened. who was fighting? rt's so in accurate. The two things that r think are really important--the two big glaring pieces are the way history gets written --how much people know when they start out.. And the other thing is the level_ of which people address these issues. so it's structure--well that wasn'treally it. That wasn'texactly the issue. But rea11y it was about what were we doing. rt's about very simple goals--and mass movements are like that.
unifying tradition to get together and try and solve these problems and then it fal1s a part. rt's just the nature of movements. Somehow we stopped moving in the right direction" But these theories and structure don't explain it. What ever you call it--non-violent direct action, it was a certain mord --and all these discrepancies like Are we building a revolution or are we supposed to (in audible)? Is part.icipat.ory democracy and external idea? The thing was all that was part of it.
rt was the unifying experience internally working. But no one was willing to keep doing that.. we stopped talking. The one central thing that was happening to me had to do with unifying your sense of in ternal and external power. rt happened in sDS and sNCC. r used to think--r went through this period around the time of the Trinity conference, and f really took the position that sNcc was great

rt's a

.

.fr at

before while sDS was paralyzed. But now r think that both of them had this macho ego but in different ways, and that women could be more affective in sNcc because it was more person to person and task related. sDS did ERAP. rn sNcc there wasn,t much writing.
rn sDS all the men did it.
r was a guard.eLt.te. That.,swtrat we all decided we were. Dorothy and me, and Leni, and sharon--
guardettes.