A llama Mashriqi & A llama Iqbal: The Pride of Asia 


By Nasim Yousaf 

Allama Inayatullah Khan Al-Mashriqi and Allama Sir Mohammad Iqbal are regarded as 
legendary personalities of Asia. The two men have much in common; both graduated from the 

University of Cambridge and were illustrious 
thinkers, philosophers, writers, intellectuals, and 
politicians. They reached the highest pinnacles of 
fame and prominence in their respective fields. Both 
were also not without their controversies; this piece 
provides an introduction to these two men. 

Mashriqi and Iqbal were both Punjabis whose 
ancestors were converts to Islam. Mashriqi was born 
in Amritsar in British India and died in Lahore, 
Pakistan, while Iqbal, a British India native, was born 
in Sialkot and died in Lahore. After high school, both 
men attended Christian educational institutions, 
Mashriqi went to Church Mission College (Amritsar) 
and Iqbal went to Scotch Mission College (later 
named Murray College) in Sialkot. Mashriqi also 
subsequently attended Foreman Christian College 
(F.C. College) in Lahore and Iqbal was admitted to 
Government College Lahore. 


Mashriqi obtained his M.A. in Mathematics, while 
Iqbal obtained an MA in Philosophy. From 1907 to 
1912, Mashriqi studied at the University of 
Cambridge and finished four Triposes in five years, breaking many previous academic records 

and stunning people in both the East and West. 
British newspapers sho| wered him with praise - The 
Star, London, 1912 wrote: “It was hitherto 
considered not possible at Cambridge that a man 
could take honours in four Triposes in a short 
period of five years but it is credit to India that 
Inayatullah Khan of the Christ’s College has 
accomplished the feat.’’' In the 1920s, Mashriqi was 
inducted into several prestigious academic societies 
of Europe. Iqbal also graduated from Cambridge 
with a Bachelor of Arts; he later became a barrister- 
at-law from Lincoln’s Inn (England) and also 
obtained a PhD from a German University. The two 
men developed a strong command over multiple 
languages, including Arabic, English, Persian, and 
Urdu. During their lifetimes, both also taught at 












































































































educational institutions and published poetry. They also competed for the prestigious Indian 
Education Service (IES) during their respective periods; Mashriqi was inducted into the said 


Mashriqi and Iqbal both became well-known for their 
literary works. Mashriqi’s Tazkirah (a scientific look at the 
Holy Quran) was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature 
by learned men from the East and West (see Mashriqi's 
biography in Al-Islah, Aug 30, 1935. p. 11). Iqbal’s Asrar-i- 
Khudi and Mashriqi’s Tazkirah were translated by the same 
well-known Cambridge University Professor, Reynold A. 
Nicholson. As Mashriqi and Iqbal gained prominence in 
British India, they were not spared from criticism. Many 
conservative religious leaders labeled them as kafirs 
(infidels) because of their progressive views on Islam. 
Despite their critics, both men continued to push forward on 
their agendas and emerged as top Muslim public figures in 
the Indian sub-continent and abroad. 

It was clear that the two men had much in common. 
Mashriqi and his Khaksar Movement brought about a 
revolution in India, while Iqbal’s poetry inspired vitality and 
high spirits amongst the people. Both Mashriqi and Iqbal 
also seemed to agree that Islam was being widely misinterpreted. According to Dr. Shabbir 
Ahmed, in his publication Islam: The True History and False belief, “Various great minds have 

named this degenerate Islam variously...Allama Sir 
Muhammad Iqbal... termed it Ajami (Alien) 
Islam...Allama Inayatullah Khan Al-Mashriqi ...called it 
Maulvi Ka Ghalat Mazhab (The Mullah's Wrong 
Religion)...” Ultimately, both men inspired the masses in 
India as well as many others around the world. 


Along with their many similarities, Mashriqi and Iqbal 
certainly had their fair share of differences. Mashriqi was 
not a follower of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan and, like his father 
(Khan Ata Mohammad Khan), did not agree with Sir 
Syed’s way of promoting English education. Mashriqi felt 
that Sir Syed’s approach was spreading British influence in 
the country and destroying domestic traditions and culture, 
ultimately creating an inferiority complex among the 
people of the sub-continent. On the other hand, Iqbal was 
profoundly inspired by Sir Syed and his movement. 


Mashriqi and Iqbal differed in their methods as well. 
Mashriqi believed that the key to freedom and regaining 
lost Muslim glory was through direct action, which he 



service, but Iqbal was denied. 




















































































































implemented using his Khaksar Movement. Meanwhile, Iqbal tried to revive Muslim glory 
through his poetry. Although Mashriqi wrote some poetry, he strongly felt that words alone 
would not be sufficient to achieve his goal of bringing about an end to British rule in India and 
instead would perpetuate inaction among the populace. Thus, Mashriqi built a private army of 
over 5 million Khaksars (along with countless supporters) to lead a massive independence 
movement. During his fight for freedom, Mashriqi remained under close watch by the British 
authorities and was arrested (or his movements were restricted) many times. Meanwhile, Iqbal 
emerged as a renowned poet. Additional scholarly studies are needed to examine their differing 
methods and the best path forward for the nation. 


Perhaps the biggest difference between 
Mashriqi and Iqbal was their thoughts on a 
separate state for the Muslims. Mashriqi was 
opposed to partition, which he assessed to be 
primarily a British plan that was supported 
by only one Muslim party and some non- 
Muslim leaders. Mashriqi believed that the 
people of India could live together as a 
single, free and strong nation and that an 
independent judiciary and constitution were 
enough to protect the rights of Muslims, 
Hindus, Sikhs, Christians and all other 
communities (Mashriqi published The 
Constitution of Free India, 1946 A.C., parts 
of which were incorporated into the Indian 
constitution after partition). Mashriqi also 
feared that partition would tear Muslims 
apart and result in the slaughter of innocent 
Muslims and non-Muslims and destroy 
peace in the region. Mashriqi felt that the 
arguments in favor of partition (namely that 
Muslims would be suppressed by the Hindu 
community in a united India and that Islam 
would be in danger [history of Muslim rule in united India and Muslim-Hindu co-existence for 
centuries negates both these arguments]) were merely ploys to scare Muslims and gain political 
support for a divided India. In contrast to Mashriqi, Iqbal (per many historians) supported the 
Two-Nation Theory and the creation of a separate homeland for the Muslims. He is considered 
the spiritual father of Pakistan. 

Despite their differences, both Mashriqi and Iqbal maintained respect for one another. For 
example, while Mashriqi was Under Secretary of Education in the British Government, the 
Government used to seek Mashriqi’s recommendations on candidates for Knighthood, filling job 
vacancies, and other matters. During his tenure, Mashriqi recommended Iqbal (among others) for 
a vacancy in a Government position and also for Knighthood. According to Mashriqi’s book, 
Hareeme-Ghaib (page 296), “...several [people], for example, Dr. [Allama] Iqbal, Nawab 
Zulifiqar Ali Khan, Sardar Joginder Singh... received the title of Sir with his [Mashriqi’s] help.” 

















































Iqbal also held Mashriqi’s intellect and achievements in high regard. Iqbal used to discuss 
Mashriqi and his book Tazkirah at gatherings (at his house and in public) and in his 
correspondence with others (examples available at: www.iqbalcyberlibrary.net/txt/3540.txt). 
Poet Hafeez Jullandhri (who wrote Pakistan’s national anthem) disclosed in a speech, “One day I 
was sitting with Dr. Iqbal and some anti-Mashriqi people came with Tazkirah and asked Dr. 
Iqbal to write against it. Dr. Iqbal smiled and said, ‘Would I write against the Quran?’” Iqbal was 
inspired by Mashriqi and used some of Mashriqi’s thoughts in his poetry. On October 24, 1958, 
The Pakistan Times (Lahore) also reported on a photo of Allama Mashriqi, Quaid-i-Azam 
Jinnah, and Allama Iqbal together (the photo was published by the daily “Shahbaz” in British 
India). On a more personal note, Iqbal’s daughter, Munira Bano, also used to visit Mashriqi’s 
house in Icchra to play with Mashriqi’s daughter, Masuda Yousaf. 

Following Mashriqi and Iqbal’s deaths, the mutual respect continued amongst their families. 
Both figures’ sons (late Engineer Hameedud Din Al-Mashriqi and late Justice Javed Iqbal 
respectively) and daughters-in-law (Dr. Sabhia Arshad and Justice Nasira Iqbal) met during 
different periods. Nasira Iqbal was also gracious enough to visit the Khaksar Tehrik 
Headquarters to condole the death of Hameedud Din Al-Mashriqi. 

Allama Mashriqi and Allama Iqbal were two of the most prominent men in Asia’s history. Both 
were highly educated thinkers and provide a source of pride for all of Asia. Their lives mirrored 
each other’s in many ways and, despite their differences and critics, the two maintained a mutual 
respect for one another. Many books have already been written about these two men individually 
- and many more could be written comparing their lives and ideologies. 

Mashriqi passed away in 1963 and Iqbal in 1938. Both men are buried in the historic city of 
Lahore, Mashriqi at the Khaksar Tehrik’s headquarters in Icchra (from where he started his 
Movement in 1930) and Iqbal in Hazuri Bagh. 

For more information, see: “Allama Mashriqi and Allama Iqbal” (https://www.facebook.com/ 
AllamaMashriqi.Allamalqbal) 

Nasim Yousaf a grandson of Allama Mashriqi, has been conducting research and writing books 
for nearly two decades. He brings a fresh perspective to the freedom movement, as his 
knowledge comes not only from historical archives, but also directly from his family and 
Khaksars, who had firsthand experience of India’s fight for freedom. 

Copyright © 2018 Nasim Yousaf 


Facebook Page: 


https://www.facebook.com/AllamaMashriqi.AllamaIqbal 


Published by: 


Muslim Mirror , April 12, 2018 
Pakistan Christian Post , April 12, 2018 








Kashmir Images , April 13, 2018 

State Times , April 13, 2018 

Rising Kashmir, April 13, 2018 

World News Network (WN.com) April 13, 2018 

Isma Times , April 13, 2018 

The Siasat Daily, April 13, 2018 

Capital Times , April 13, 2018 

Make Pakistan Better , April 13, 2018 

Kashmir Paradise , April 13, 2018 

State Times , April 14, 2018 

/tas/ Kashmir , April 14, 2018 

The Fact Express , April 16, 2018 

The Companion Magazine , April 21, 2018 



