Lessons from India’s Partition 

By Nasim Yousuf 

The itartition of 'India led to slaughter, rape, and countless atrocities in the region; it further resulted in the 
Kashmir issue and hitter rivalry between a nuclear Pakistan and India. The tragic episode provides a 

lesson for the world to learn from. 

In Pakistan and India, the history of the freedom movement has been written under the influence of the All- 
India Muslim League (AIML) and Indian National Congress (INC) parlies respectively, to which the 
British transferred power in 1947. According to the traditional narrative propagated by these two parties, 
partition was inevitable and the two parties were responsible for bringing freedom to British India and the 
creation of Pakistan and India as separate states. But historical documents strongly suggest that the leaders 
of both parties did not have the power to demolish British rule. In fact, the reality is that the leaders of the 
AIML and the INC were playing into the hands of the British rulers. Ultimately, partition has only 
produced harsh consequences and unending hostility within the region. 



In order to understand why partition was ill-advised from the outset, one must first understand why Muslim 
League and Congress leaden., who were responsible for partition, ultimately contributed to British interests. 
During the years leading up to partition, the British were seeking to maintain their rule over India, and thus 
pursued a policy of Divide and Rule. In other words, they sought to perpetuate divisions amongst the 
Muslims and Hindus, so that the Muslims and Hindus would not be able to rise up against British rule. 
There are countless examples of the British pursuit of this policy. Rather than forming a united front to 
undermine the British. Muslim League and Congress leaders instead added fuel to the lire by legitimizing 
and inflating the political differences between the Muslims and Hindus, ultimately blowing the conflict out 
of proportion. It is not difficult to see why this policy was in the interests of the Muslim and Hindu leaders. 
At the time, the British were very powerful and had the ability to sideline any leader who did not fall in line 
with their agenda. Thus, it was incumbent upon Muslim League and Congress leaders to perpetuate the 
Muslim-Hindu conflict, or risk losing their own political careers. 

Throughout his political endeavors, freedom fighter Allama Mashriqi repeatedly sought to expose the 
vested interests of the prevailing Indian leadership. Mashriqi could foresee that the Muslim and Hindu 
leaders’ divisive words and actions were setting the stage for the partition of the nation. He recognized that 
partition would be devastating to the nation and would bring about everlasting hostility in the region. In a 
monumental press statement in early 1947, he categorically warned. “1 see massacre of at least one million 
people." He also sent a telegram to Lord Mountbatten (Viceroy of India) “foreshadowing murder and ruin 
of at least ten million Indians...” Envisioning the serious repercussions of partition. Mashriqi worked 
tirelessly to bring about the liberation of a united India. This struggle almost cost him his life, and he was 








slabbed and arrested in Delhi, where the AIML was holding a meeting ai the Imperial Hotel (on June 09, 
1947) to accept a truncated Pakistan. 


With the partition of India, Mashriqi’s dire w arning came to fruition. Partition brought unthinkable tragedy, 
as at least one million Muslims, Hindus, and Sikhs were brutally killed and countless young Muslim and 
non-Muslim females were raped or abducted. Parents, children, and spouses witnessed the slaughter of 
loved ones and were forcefully separated. There are countless heartbreaking stories such as these that speak 
to the atrocities that befell innocent people as a result of the country's division; these Muslim anil non- 
Muslim civilians were the unfortunate victims of the politics of the AIML and Congress (their deaths were 
not a necessary sacrifice for independence, as has been suggested by some writers and speakers). Beyond 
the direct human toll, partition also produced a host of other far-reaching consequences in the region, 
including the Kashmir conflict, four wars, countless border clashes, and the spread of terrorism in the 
region. Perhaps most importantly, a nation comprised of communities that had co-existed for centuries has 
now been transformed into two nuclear-armed hostile neighbors. The regional and global instability caused 
by partition has had immeasurable consequences, and the people of the two nations continue to suffer from 
these consequences even today. 


It is clear then that the partition of India w as one of the biggest blunders of the 20 ,h century. Yet instead of 
condemning the policies of the political parties that actually created this partition, historians and writers 
liave presented partition as an inevitable occurrence. They project AIML and Congress leaders as heroes, 
while ignoring the fact that their actions resulted in tremendous human tragedy and everlasting hostility 
within the region. Furthermore, writers neglect to mention that partition would not have occurred, had it not 
been in the interest of the ruling power at the time. While bolstering the pro-partition perspective of those 
in power, mainstream writers have simultaneously distorted the views of Mashriqi (and others who strongly 
favored a united India). The print and electronic media (including television) further contribute to this 
distortion, as they do not publish or allow discussion of facts that are contrary to the traditional narrative of 
partition. In both Pakistan and India, they promote the leaders of the AIML and Congress respectively. A 
lack of independent researchers and scholars in these countries has also contributed to the problem. It is no 
surprise then, that the true history of the nation is unknown to people of both countries. In fact, the history 
of both countries, as currently written, is biased and does not reflect reality. 

Despite the false narrative that has been portrayed in books 
and the media, it is not too late to change the status quo. 

The people of Pakistan and India must learn from the errors 
of the past and stop endorsing partition, as it only leads to 
continuing hostility between the two nations; the concocted 
and exaggerated stories regarding the freedom movement 
must come to an end. History can still be restored through * 
independent writing and thought; educational institutions 

must also be reformed to encourage new ideas and research. ^ ' a 

Ultimately, the people of Pakistan and India must strive not 

onlv for better relations, but also to unite the two countries. ' —* - [Z ~ 

' - - - 







The reunion of over a billion people in Pakistan and India would be an unprecedented action. By returning 
to Allama Masluiqi's selfless ideology and vision of a united India, we could undo the devastating effects 
of partition. The Kashmir issue would be resolved, the potential for nuclear war between the two 
neighboring countries would disappear, and the threat of terrorism could be eradicated jointly. Unification 
would thus finally bring much-needed political, social, and economic stability to the South Asian region, 
and have far-reaching benefits for the world at large. 

Nasirn Yousuf is a scholar and historian who has presented papers at U.S. conferences 
and written many articles and hooks. He has also contributed articles to the "Harvard 
Asia Quarterly" and the "World History Encyclopedia (USA). " His forthcoming book, 
"Mahatma Gandhi <6 My Grandfather. Allama Mashriqi, " discusses the role of Mashrit/i 
and Gandhi in the freedom movement, their political differences, and the true driving 
force behind the liberation of British India in 1947. 

Copyright ©2011 Nasim Yousaf 

Published in: 

News from Babgladesh, July 01. 2011 
http://bangladesh-web.com/view.php7hidRecord-358766 

Counter Currents (India). July 01.2011 
http://www.countercurrents.org/yousafl) 10711 .him 

Make Pakistan Better. July 03. 2011 
http://www.makepakistanbetter.com 

World Press Org (USA). July 03. 2011 
http://www.worldpress.org/Asia/3770.cfin 

India Gazette (Australia). July 03. 201 I 

http ://story. indiaga/ette.com' index .php/ci/9/cid'701 ee96610c8 84a6/id/46583646/ 

The London Post, July 04. 2011 
http://www.thelondonpost.net/JulyO42011000S9.html 

The Kashmir Monitor (India), July 04. 2011 

hUp:,7kashmirinonitor.org , krkashminnonitor/070420l l-ND-lessons-from-india.s-partition-7919.aspx 
Indian Muslim Observer (India). July 04. 2011 

http://www.indianmuslimobsener.com/2011/07/lessons-from-indias-partition.html 
The Eastern Post (weekly, Kolkata. India) July 2011 

http://www.theeastempost.orgshow_news.php?ol?age 21&headLine Lessons-from-India n /o27s-Partition 
Global Politician (USA). July 11.2011 

http:Z'www .globalpolitician.com 26965-india-pakistan-partition-muslims-hindus 

Wisdom Blow (Delhi, India). July 12. 2011 
http:/Avww.wisdomblow.com/?p"2051 

Sasnoddy (July-September 2011 | Volume 3 Issue 3 | ISSN 2075-7077) 
http://www.sasnoddy.com 


Oye! Times (USA). July 14. 2011 





http://www.oyetimes.com/views/columns/12537-lessons-from 


**» 

Photos courtesy: 

http://news.bbc.co.Uk/2/shared/spl/hi/pop_ups/06/south_asia_india0s_partition/html/l.stm 




