a HER - Q—— e ` 
^ AN HARDO WALT FOR MY Da! GHTER— AND ALL OUR CHILDREN AND GRANOCHILDREN— 


TO READ THIS BOOK —ALICE WALKER Al THOR OF THE « OLOR PU ROLE 


An Oral History of tbe Civil Rights 
Movement from tbe 1950s through the 1 980s 


2 ` ^P TO OG K 
HENRY HAMPTON and STEVE FAYER 


EE ` pm 


puo awods apg Lau Wäi pou pe qeu suenmpoxdxo poma peu At qu 
WM OPE qo pur Apos pour) aqu po ow toya ou qeu qno Dain! Zu a 
'1961 [^ ronis pn “uoj o» Heute np pue '996 ul (mr VUN uy 
ASRIRITIS iy 
Somuny YOJO SALA 10] duin YN JS ada sonduayo "snp pur oy my 
MN on ur said dui WAN pe poppe onu YAI peu o4 $961, 11 y supiy 
Wino, CUPP D euros A3 Mutz alt role ou Ua peg DD ny LIT 
Im SO erp A dui ioagop ee rodnn Np poms opun “if ny ipn | 
TUN pues) Up SONUS pte) S4" mesoj qe WAN MUKUD DI 


RIOT RT Méi REN VSDTGOTUTTEEOEET 
JO imam oup ped ipoyreur suite uonenues Stu at Aung 


- x 


JQVIHV SAYA LINIIAAIG 
AWOS LOD FA AM,, 
8961-2961 
AAVSNAQ LSVT] S ONIM 


DC 


— —— — — 


Dina og pue EXTTITITTED HIT pupillo HITIUTIWATIIIIE 
br an Alte c ELLET SATE UNI RT [rrt saepe oos Samson 
^p WNUNHUK porso ovn porwie u ASOV 
Wey vr Dat pops) Datt ge quai sem sorps xongng qo 
Nun “pain popa ee posos qoas nponpr pepy 

SUS «4 "p 
Map eo CUPP Ue parapan tnos o wen spinna SNImopins Y ope peg 
VIII PEE EOP se TANK HN HUE HIT asqeipsmiur 
pe onsem quedo pue INE une OZ FES am" ) [n4 
THEME Oy WAAT IK IK T HIS one DO pT Strato yp were Hit 


VIII NM VU OR persaulsopiwsw sim Hse TTT TT Hun VJ 


WOU EE]. iz, EOXIGOA 


LIN 


H 


(OE DEAN An, 
but LA An "jl waj toj pree MENAN) AM put DEDITI ALA n 


: [ 

SUOS HOU pue stänn drm sey H ase WI 008 Op A tuno i. 
: Bm 

podpry II PQ GP vr Hatt awto squapnis ops oni UM Zen, 
: i 1 


HOR QOS OF A une aq TOT yo sava qno Alt op ua sin 
POSE OG rddississiy 0) op stops up iuri op porn l 
AUNO Ui n WII 
ur sup ur spoon Data: ase Tam agp Am Wat Dit pue 
nho pou po» A[[U tony MAN Jain uuo SPU BL A0 Sspusuinad WI 
quoundasod propo oup Aq Sib yo spuesnogr pue spoipuny 
Mp our poziprsqus. 242. st) Juan Og] 2490. sanas 
pue "son "satt oup ur "tddississr ur uloisás uoneueqd pn 
"uragsAs odepuogq peny e sem HW opm puy "Aupy paam je nura 
Jo An Mp yo snm xg ‘Uo yoo jo UOTE ZIL opu onl jo RAAM 
suonepuepd. og jjo poysnd Juag aram Kou p Hunt: 2125 
aood al mp OAV) A0 HRIWIL H Ditt you pio» yey) Solty ALA 
94281] Ie) AAG OF uous A, woa 3jdood 133 0) prey Arda sem 
Hp osaepnop OM) pep QALY uaaa upip oum iddississiy ur aydood 
943A 2420] uos d aad saejjop Om) uaaa Aey pue sduieis poo] 
01 YS oy uedoq noA uam puy ‘addy sem n—pooj q3noua poo3 
usem M poop udnous Apta ul Lupip—Asnoy sem Am jo 
Hotdog oui jo wg ën d uonnquiasip sonipouruio2 aui apt 
PUY "uonnqensip sou un uod) sduiejs pooJ ot 4340 3unnjs 
SEM JUDUA jep ayy awon OU pey oym iddississiy 
ur adod Mam VAJ UOLIS UIAA ‘waduny Jo sunjqoad olew 
Tutaput 242 Day "totu | Jeans sem ual urapqoad ysaddiq 041 


NVW EHC UI RA NVIHVIN 


HOS MET or sura ppor 
onm o agp pno pou gp poaddississiy us suonipureo poept 
AOAC uo apo quis s aappmu g deque PONG ap aog 
poutisat ^s ut qo yep ossi ue pie pura asuja qe qq 2v VN 
ui qn anope xor unn ep uermw 7796] ey uy 


ATHOOS Unopioury ur poumnbor sem jeu J? 
MAL Datt orpeaoturap p pets e pioa am jo asuas pood ap 
AOPISUOO Dit 1 np per "suen Wës Laag Aur unt Any Wl 
AHTI AVY SAU AU Luut uosto quip Atäst33nl Ioj DALL (ix un 
prom a uonuow jou pip p Mommy ong) oi] youd umo AU ul 


Ist N96| L96| VST) ISVIS, ONIN y 


"papol H 


"prn poo rdv Ab p puy Toston D' dip Sosto Sun 
i Adojoase nd proper asn puppnom 201 Appio inp, pads ng 
d op a[grssoooe pur apqepies opin ad ipo SULLO] UU 
M jid noA qna gessa app Ava puep nes pm eos adesso suji 
ase noA OP ail sf 10] STILE e pet Huy adq puy í'odessonn 
IT asvad noA op vol "qur op oae At nos non 
e wand o noA UJA UO EX 10 yo pue yros prre oco tir bitzt) 
JE poup one pue SUOS MAM 


uo ado» 


woje 
ree oop SUG Al A1 10] poon Mp neq att Au dq on 
"AIDIDUN ) 0 pot H WM SUES P UU PRED ppnoo oV "aper ad up uos] 
aAtssa ndo id Ann FOP PAPE EE Op v se qne auo quipp von p presos 
ITU OU KI Op pey 10A APP OS UU Di opis min ene 
Mp duet» OP pey noA pg Aan jepret e dun qe ONT UID 
OP peu noA jen p Apieqisuodsor Aur qnomm sgol aqp "sub dins 
apogr onn pied WD otl poaojn ji Ju porno vn 
vg tt AA but ppnoo noA D amps (rue nl a jo put 
wapp € avy 0) pei HOA Im Dua Hm p Apos Urn LAN 
Jo sampans ap 2uiduego annbar ppiow “ister nono 
qsipoqe or !ApioAod iqsrjoqe o) qe pej ou mege por SAM 
A ‘OPP SUP JO SISA KN on tr dur Hp CPE SUOIIPS TO NU t 


NOTONIIHVER- LEVEE HI 


anssi MESS ssnosip o &qieqnidar Lan 
Wap deeds e sogno qoieasar siny ag uo povos vove 
uo mA ap audsur e Hutltat qe ponpon uüasosg sem gun n 
Poysequal pboiaonuy AM) 504 000 At ln "ut gp por N 


Me yw Dt erst si DITE. 

pue D at sog pazor oj WI roniony n sadi o dutt 20 
Pur ssecdiiuo [uror sg og on dip ime quodis og pompe vali 

Aq es ditt dit sel 11? 

pue pani os ut) dogs Dit ay pado stinn pep tmm lato 

Wy Any portu ut DO Ain 201 NIBIL puros enn onn WU DAN 

AV wi np on TEET soaproddns ITT i prat ra verd qeu DRITTER 

Ul WAHL LATENT sI H MNNM TIAA popol WU Di TEN HA "ji 
"o puoadap Hoop ou ppioo qpourasson oq p onm mn d 

UosIIRqo( nopus p amopisoig Mutt au anser mt br vim? 

Np pouwa pue "SHneonpieeo wpsounep pium sonqed qenemnimmi TEE bog 


bit . i 
"ponte. ideis Ghnye "ma wd dnm al annhe spego oey 


ANCGQHUOL EH [Ho 8S EO ET "a 


ss \ Vinc d si o1 ERIT bon 


vonie shower dhan vou want H von cant walk, ceawl, but keep 
E i? 

He was read dower that day [shortly alter the visit with 
kennedy Pohon Ewalked in, sitting in his office, and he was like 
every body at (lut Um: — Kennedy al me and all ol us concerned 
about the poor and what was happening to civil rights and the 
Commies Im map sell away Brom it; about what we were going to 
do next And P told him that Bobby Kennedy said he ought to 
Lu ut the poer people to Washington, And as simply as Bobby 
Kennedy bhad sid it, King instinctively belt diat that was righi 
and treated ime as iE wats an emissary ol grace here, or something 
that brought hin some tight, Out ol that, the Poor People's 


Campaimn was born 


Wull Rotherford a black Chicago native and skilled public 
vebatiens man who bad spent much of bis adult life abroad, had 
eigranmzed the Frends of SCLC in Europe in 18966. In the sum 
imer ob 962 Kang appointed bion esecutive director ol SCLC. 


Wii tian Hut HEORD 


Ehe stall was really quite busy and quite involved in things when 
Di ku: looked up and in his reasoning- Fm paraphrasing, ol 
course he said; “Pine, we now have the right to vote. Fine. We 
CD nnn gro It ans estantan, amy hotel, anypla e we want to in 
America, but we don't have the means. So what good does it do 
Jor people de po to any restaurant in the world ib vou don't have 
ln: money to qas For a meal?" So, he says, we've pot to attack the 
Whole issue ob poverty and economic deprivation And that was 
Ius thinking. his reasoning tor pushing tor a Poor People's Cam 
pa It obeonmise when this has to impact on people that have 
been lighting to pet people registered and into polling places, 
people who have been lighting to pet education, people who have 
been hpbhiing For the right to go into public accommodations, the 
idea ob att Lu: something as vastand as amo phous as poverty. 
ob comise; wasii AHA appealing So Fd say that basically almost 
noone ondhe Sal thought that the nest priority, the nest majo 
movement, Should be Focused on poor people or the question ol 


poverty am Aunerica 


KING'S LAST CRUSADE, 1967. 1968 455 


Andiew Young was by this tine executive vice president ol 
SCLC. 


ANDREW YOUNG 


SCLC was always a battle of egos. We were like a team of wild 
horses. Each one had very strong opinions and their own ideas 
about the way the movement should go, and Dr. King encouraged 
that. And our meetings were loud and raucous, and he sat quietly 
by until we fought issues out, and then he would usually decide. 
James Bevel wanted to keep us in northern cities in à movement 
to end slums. Hosea Williams felt as though we should stay in the 
South and do voter registration. Jesse Jackson was beginning to 
develop Operation Breadbasket, which was an attempt to orga- 
nize nonviolently to get jobs. I was probably more inclined to stay 
south, because people forget that SCLC at that time had a budget 
of less than a million dollars. 


SCLC board member Marian Logan also was not enthusiastic 


MARIAN LOGAN 


When I first heard about it, | was really very apprehensive. | 
thought that as it began to develop, as 1E heard about how it was 
developing, it was becoming much too big and unwieldy for us 
to be able to handle. And also, considering the tenor ol the times, 
| wasn't sure that we could be a success. | wasn't sure that 
Congress, and the powers that be in Washington, D.C., would be 
welcoming—' cause it wasn't like 63, which was such a glorious 
march, and glorious day. This bringing ol poor people to the scat 
of government was like throwing it in their faces, and [don't think 
loo many ol the officialdom of Washington was gonna take that 
with any great grace. So I had many reservations about it. 


In caly December, King announced, without specili s; SCECS 
Intention to bring poor people ol all tz vs to Washington iueund 
April andto “stay until America responds ^ Plans remained to 
be formulated 


—— E 


po Vonis Ob Er d DOM 


people whoa necessaniby had been altuned to the problems ol the 
black poor ain Amera at that time Se one has to have someone 
to ibt the window: After the young: people lebt at the end ol the 
Summer ol 64, the problems were still lt. They were dillerent. 
(lun were changing We had begun to make a difference. But 
there was so much sullering that remained to be alleviated. So 
one was ting to Bid new ways to capture the imagination and 
attentional the Americam public, Therefore, E went to see il I 
could pet the senators to see that it was still bad, and indeed was 
petung worsen many ways, and that hunger was growing, even 
though we had the right to vote. The cost of that for many is that 
thev pot kicked off the plantations and lost that litle bit of money, 
unt as itas, that they had had to survive. And so we had to 
put another means in place 

hl the committee, please come and see for yourselves, 
because they didit quite believe me when Talked about how the 
conditions ol lile, the poverty, was getting worse and the people 
really didit have enough to eat in Mississippi. So they came, and 
Bobby Kennedy came with them, and while they were there to 
examine the impact ol the poverty program on Mississippi blacks 
and whites; bused tas anopportunity to tell them about growing 
hunger im the Delta, And they were shocked and, happily, one oi 
two ol the senators agreed to stay over and to go up in the Delta 
to see for themselves whether it was (ue that. people. were 
staving Bobby Kennedy agreed to be one of those senators. 

Ewasvery moved by what Bobby Kennedy did when we went 
tor visit [a black Family] in Cleveland, Mississippi. Without cam: 
eras because he was Bobby Kennedy some newspapermen had 
come alonp we went inside à very dark and dank shack. It was 
very Filthy and very poor and when we walked Chrough from front 
to back topether, there was in the kitchen a mother who was 
Scrubbing ia tu pub, washing clothes. There was a child sitting 
on adit oor Bililiv And there was very litle light there, and he 
pot down on lis haces and he tied to talk to the ¢ hild and get a 
response Brom the child. He kept poking or fecling the « hild aud 
living do gel some response. And E remember watching him in 
near tears, because T had this complicated Feeling. Ewas moved 
bs it and wondering whether would have gotten down on that 
dits Foor But deeply respecthal that he did. He could do alinos 
anything alter that and Etusted him Brom that time on, pastas a 
haman beige And then he went out to the backyard where the 


KING'S LASI CRUSADE, 1967 19608 An) 


reporters were waiting. And he was correctly angry. But trom that 
moment on, FE knew that somehow he would be a major It in 
trying to deal with hunger in Mississippi lor children. 


Later that summer, alter watching President Johnson announce 
the government's military response to the civil disorders in 
Detroit, Robert Kennedy told an aide, "Ws over The president 
is just not going to do anything mare, That's it. He's through 
with domestic problems, with the cities, |. Hes not going to do 
anything. And he's the only man who*can." 

In August, with urban uprisings still sweeping through 
America's inner cities, Marian Wright visited Kennedy at his 
Virginia home, Hickory Hill, on her way back to Mississippi. 


MARIAN WRIGHT EDELMAN 


It was a gorgeous day and he was lounging out around the pool 
at Hickory Hill, and we went through our usual small chat about 
what was going on. And when I was leaving ` E had also told him 
| was going to stop back through Atlanta and see Dr. King he 
said, "Tell him to bring the poor people to Washington.” That it's 
time for some visible expression of concern For the poor. E had 
been expressing to him my frustration that hunger was still going 
on, and obviously he was still frustrated that the Agriculture 
Department. was so slow in doing something about it or the 
Johnson administration was hesitant to move, so he thought that 
there really needed to be some push, some national visible push. 
But it was a very simple suggestion: Tell Di. King to bring the 
people to Washington. 

This was a period of white reaction and backlash. H was à 
period when the war was becoming a much more divisive lorce, 
where the problems of black and poor people were being left 
behind and people thought they were annoyances, and we'd had 
a lot of violence in northern cities. And Martin King was really 
depressed. One of the things 1 always remembered about hin 
fiom my early student days was how he was able to share his 
uncertainties, share his not knowing what to do next. Eremember 
his Founders’ Day speech when Ewas a senior at Spelman College, 
when he talked about taking that one step even il you can't scc 
the whole way and how you just have to keep moving, even il 


Kee 


WK Voter s or Pinon KING'S LAST CRUSADE, 1967. 1968 A89 


arr asas From nonviolence, so lie was being attacked tor being in siippertol the strikers King recognized the chance to link the 


boe mt ol a Dun rt Foo ul pamby Nol willing to really 
hpbt back Not willing to use force apatmst racism. On the other 
band he was being attacked by Lyndon Johnson, and even by the 
Hubert Humphrey hi berals; [or poing too liu to the lebt: For being 
m ghe mit 01 movement. for taking put in the Apiil 1967 
demieonstiatbion att the war in New York. And lE had the feeling 
Hhat Tis sense was That the number ol people who really sup: 
ported bui now bad really sunk very much. 

Within that contest, we then talked about the Poor People's 
Campaign lira sense, the Poor Peoples Campaign was certainly 
neo repudiation by Di: King of his opposition to the war, but it was 
an attempt to then po back amd refocus on basics, and perhaps 
nene imper Lat. to mobilize à mass movement. 

Ehe state ob preparation For the poor people's march was very 
huett That was typical of Di. King Call organization and 
planning was not hus strong suit, He was a genius at improvising, 
What he did understand was that his strength was in his appeal 
to masses el people. That he had to mobilize those masses given 
the deflections he felt both to his right and his left. And what I 
sud to him at diat mecting was whatever else we do, what we 
have to dois we have to come up with some demands that we can 
actually win on That we cant ask for the moon, or we can ask 
lor the moon and should ask for the moon, but we should also 
make some demands; and Edont remember the precise ones that 
Purged, but they would have been winnable demands in terms of 
legislation And Ewould say this is something where Dr. King and 
FE always ayreed Phat part of his genius was to understand that 
van could not hase a movement simply based on promises ol the 
tutue Plat vou had to deliver And he had delivered on voting 
iphts He had delivered on public accommodations. He had 
delivered on the Montgomery bus boveott, and so many other 
(ut And hie understood now, above all; was the time to deliver. 


In fv buat. aux. Au teen hundied sanitation workers; nearly all ol 
them black; went on stoke im Memphis Angered by the citys 
o chu twenty iwo bhac k workers home without pay because of 
un brun ot weather fu but workers Were not sent home amd thes 
ous il pas ) the stakers were demanding Chat then union bec 
ieeognmized SCTG s Dares Lu sant now pastor ol Centemiuv 
Metbeodess € hon lian Memphis, un tel King do speak ata valls 


economic conditions of the strike with the civili iphismovement 
andartived in Memphis on March (8 to addiessa HSS HOO Hing 


ANDREW YOUNG 


Nhe staff was really disturbed that Martin would even consider 
going to Memphis. We had charted out fifteen cities that we were 
going to try to organize, We were trying to organize poor whites, 
Hispanics, southern blacks, northern blacks— tm san, there was 
just a tremendous organizing job, and E didit know how you 
could take on anything else. And he said, "Well, Jim Lawson has 
been around for so long and here are garbage workers on strike, 


he just wants me to come in and make a speech and UI be right 
back." 


Bill Lucy, an organizer for the American Federation of State, 


County, and Municipal Employees, had come to Memphis to 
work with the strikers. 


But. Lucy 


In March, when the issue began to be discussed about inviting 
Dr. King to come to Memphis, it grew out ol the frustrations of 
the city and, I guess, maybe the media really putting a lid on what 
was taking place in Memphis. We were lorty-seven days into the 
strike and nobody knew it except us and the city of Memphis. Roy 
Wilkins had come to town, Bayard Rustin had come to town to 
speak in support of the strike, but still there was no undo Stand- 
ing beyond the city as to what was taking place. The invitation to 
Di. King to come was that we beliewed that he would not only 
lend his moral support to the strike, but he was in the midst ol 
"rganizing the Poor People's Campaign, and we just. really 
Hough that that would be a good movement lor him to identity 
With, that there would be national media with him that would, 
"n ellect take an interest in what was taking place. 

What Eeemember trom that night of that fist speech was the 
Meredible ability that King had to understand and iiteiiet the 
Sues and what was taking place. He had not been there belore 
and he had had the most minimal ol brichngs But he TM 


"T Mii p sob d er d on 
Coni LIA Scott KING 


During: the tall pet id he worked very hard, and all into the early 
part ob the year And in the spring he went all over this country 
kv: about it and promoting the idea, and most people who 
Eacw hin Felt that he was working as il this was going to be his 
Last qob Finean, we were very CONCI ned about him, but the fact 
that be could see, E ink, a way that this could: all come 
ropethen, and he fel very confidenat that this could be areal test 
ab haw nonviolence can work to change the lives of people 
economically When the president asked him, "Dr. King, what il 
vou Fab" he said, "I will not be Martin King, Jr., who failed. li 
wall be America that Failed ^ He believed very firmly, realli med 
bus commitment in nonviolence as the most important weapon 
available to these people. And he said, 7H E be the sole person on 
earth who clings to the belief and practice ol nonviolence, | will 
be that person ^ 

twas almost like a political campaign three hundred and 
giay five days of the vear but vou never take a break, it never 
ends. is continuous, vear alter vear. And that's the Poor People's 
Campaign: Hi was onc ol those hantic periods, where it seems 
that Martin was just continually going, and he had so much 
anxiety about all this working out and making it happen suc- 


cesstully 


Ratu AULANALENY 


We did a queat deal of planning and work while organizing lor 
the Poor People's Campaign. We used cars, and we used small 
Chartered airplanes, and we went all over the states ol Mississipp! 
and Alabama where poor people lived, trying to organize and get 
them aroused 

In Marks, Mississippi, Ewell remember, we visited a day-care 
center And Di King was moved to tears there, There was one 
apple, and they took this apple and cut it into flour pieces bor low 
hunpiy waiting students. And when Dr. King saw that, and what 
is all that they bad [or lunch, hie a tually ended up crving. phe 
tears came seaming down his cheek. And he had to leave the 


[ENTE] 


KING'S LASI CRUSADE, 1967. 1968 457 


Plans foi the campaign began to take shape over the winter 
Daniel Schon, then A reporter for € BS, attended à press conler 
ence King held in Washington on Febiiary 7, 1968 


DANIEL SCHORR 


At this press conlerence network reporters, including myscll, 
constantly pushed him to try to say something as militant as 
possible. We were interested in getting the kind of sound bites 
that would get on the evening news. And in fact, as | went back 
over the script of that day, I realized that we did get him to say 
things like the first phase of this march would be educational and 
then if that didn't work that it would be disruptive, that they were 
going to stay in Washington until they got a response. 

When the press conference was over, | was waiting for my 
camera crew to pack up and saw Reverend King sitting there 
looking somewhat disconsolate. And I walked up to him, sitting 
at the table there, and asked why he seemed to be so mourntul 
and he said, “Well, it's because of what you people in television 
aie doing. Edon't know if you are aware ol it, but you keep driving 
people like me, who are nonviolent, into saying more and more 
militant things, and if we don't say things militantly enough foi 
you, we don't get on the evening news. And who does? Stokely 
Carmichael and H. Rap Brown. By doing this, you are, first of all, 
selecting the more militant black leaders to be civil vights leaders, 
because everybody sees your television programs. And secondly, 


vou're putting a premium on violence." That gave me a lot to think 
about. 


MICHAEL HARRINGTON 


The last meeting of the research committee that E attended in 
the early spring of 1968, we did two things. One was we dis- 
cussed the general political situation, which we always did at 
those meetings. And it struck me that Dr. King was very pessi- 
mistic, deeply disturbed at the way thin s were going. On the 
one hand, he was being increasingly attacked trom within the 
black movement. There was a surge of nationalism. The Black 
Panther s had begun to come on the scene. There was SNCC, the 
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. There had been a 


Li EH 


V. D KING'S LASI CRUSADI . 1967 1968 iis 
Viene pis 0105 ERIT UON 
Ar, 4 


That night, King was back in Atlanta at the home of Ralph 


aside that he really | 
ampia: Phat this wasana ul su Lt el King w 


tan Peoples d : SPOT Ic 
(un Pon | xhioakdui have taken III fon But 


lut have Game for e 


IL adong bo ud bite nd lu did BLE l 

| | ! | | | j k DH k DH E . H ' 

| 4 GAARA | T tal ed al ul vhat (mi MIL happi ninj 
W gn IU 1 " ID Hi \ s 


uid he saw this asa tremendous setba k bow his 


JUANITA ABERNATIIY 


pared ie dë, ad criticized 
Horis im Washington He knew that those who had 
[| nds P 4 


i ve ' Y nt SUC " 
hus developing idu Pow Pi ph * D |^ H LI 


i 223 » ing all ol 
bus is when wall happen in Washington, D.C., il youl d à Wé 
GE Plata lat Situation will occur And he | 


He wanted to come here because il you go toa restaurant, then 
you gol to answer questions about, well, what happened to the 
march? Why the violence? And he was notin the kind of mood 
to deal with answering those questions, because Dr. King was 
very sensitive about anything that was in opposition to what his 
philosophy was. And he didn't want anybody identifying him with 
the violence that had taken place, 'cause you know some of il was 
done by us, by blacks. And that hurt. And he just sort of felt that 
part of his reputation had been damaged and tarnished a bit. So 
he didn't want to have to deal with answering questions on that. 
phoned her And coming here, he would not encounter that. So we sat that 

night. And talked about light things. And talked about me. And 

talked about Ralph. We talked about each other. Talked about 

MARIAN LOGAN the movement. And just chitter-chat. But nothing serious. And 
we did not talk about Memphis. The news came on. And when- 


— here 
these qn ophi Lm l Aha ^d d 
people ploating who were in opposition tothe | | 

Soe 4 ‘ d 


UNTER H 


e lave 
mr was among the millions who had seen lootag 


Marran doy EN E 
[othe days events on the evening news (hut night, E 
[E] (IK " 


id seen the expression on his face, and I 


t because FE hii 
E was upset because I | | gyp end 
" Ralph, of course, who was with him, he was distress 
SW ‘ " ` 


out ol Memphis ol M "m 
Aud he said, “Well, darting.” he said, "vou know w 


keep pornp, Hus is oni movement "E 
Paid. "Bot vou havent prepared those ga bag 


IU ML yt cd d (DA Ul IDN. MANU? sel [ Y [111 I aya . 


4 ized | vi dence and 
| ` lino lopet people oàpaniz d Im DOHIN | 
au vil We bak i 


and i it 
i ; id these 
make them understand how impor tant it was. At 


e . y DÉI 2 yolyglot 
winunkers were nol mained like that And it was really a | 
Ai) | 


i | actin wouldnt 
ol men; dd was a union movement, But Marti 


i Id 
ited and prove that he coul 


pre in, because he just had t0 go back diia o 
Lutmu hol par bage workers in Mem : 
load a nonstolen ‘ 4 


sec; ur 968 


i «v enee tin 
Bang loh Memphis alter a press conberem : 
y i “ane 
March Int owing te retinn For another men e 
) us aci 
mate wondd he overseci by SCEC staffers 3 


+ 
TIE amcc V 
ug dn adv; 
ve at te 1 tang Sessions and working 


LET al In mnn ship 


: next dav. | ridas. 
Bur this new 
condi ting 
ub ihe 


ever there was a flash on TV about it, he got very quict and he 
was really, really sort of depressed. And | think he was more 
depressed that night, I believe, than I'd ever seen him. 


On Saturday, King held an emergency staff meeting. One of 
those in attendance was Jesse Jin kson, who had been working 
with SCLC since the Chicago campaign 


JESSE JACKSON 


He had this vision we should wipe out poverty, ignorance, and 
disease, that you couldn't do it on an ethnic basis. That it dx 
Never poing to be in the plan to wipe out black poverty that would 
leave the Hispanics in poverty, or whites or women in nore 
Native Americans in poverty, so we had to pull people together 
And on this Saturday morning he said, “lve had a migraine 
headache lor three days, and sometimes because our movement 
n e l lel like turning around, just quitting, or maybe 
TEM D RUDI o Morehouse ( allege And then he said, as 

mmething struck him, "But we will alwavs be able to tun a 


wo Void 8S or Fg d poM 


understood that the steapple was really about à new kind of 
people: people who worked forty hours à week and still lived in 
poverty and lie was able to arrange his presentation to demon- 
Sate do the crowd that he understood this, and to give them a 
vense (lt then stupide Wasit lopatinate stuggle, thal they had 


every (lt to carry on 


Phe cred at Mason Temple numbered Heen thousand. King 
was sete ced by thea tt up that he decided to vin to 


Mat: to dead a manh 
King came back on Match 28. Bernard Lee and Ralph 


Abconathy were at his side when the march took an unexpected 


In 


Ii uNARD S. bas 


Iwas a Dh: upset that he didit have some of our national staff 
in the mus bh organizing prior to its beginning. It was just a mass 
ol people Edomt think the leadership of the march was ever in 
contol, As we marched, Ebegan hearing these noises behind me 
ol plass, broken glass, taking place. And as I continued to look 
back. and ty to jump up over the crowd and see what was going 
on, Ecould see and hear that there was tremendous disturbance 
not vers Lu Brom us; behind us, in the march. And the people in 
te marc hiwere breaking store windows. And finally we marched, 
| puess maybe about a block, might have gone two blocks, but I 
made adecision that Martin Lather King didn't need to be in that 
march because it bad become disruptive. B had become violent 
internally and the leadership needed to deal with that march and 
Martin Latba King needed to leave the march. 


Raru AmuHnHauiin 


A (hat moment, Bermud Scott Lee, who was Dr. Kings traveling 
assistant, stopped acu and asked the young lady if he could use 
this car to pet Di, Abernathy and Di. King out of this situation 
And the vounp lady agreed, and she got over, and Bernard Lee 
became our diver: Aud we were taken down to the river, the 
Mississippi River Aud we stopped the motorcycle police at that 
poi amd asked them il we could use their service to pet Dr. King 


KING'S LAST CRUSADE, 1967 1968 dòl 


out ol the arca. And a policeman said, "Where do you want to 
go?” 

And I said, "The Peabody Hotel.” 

And he said, "We cannot go to the Peabody Hotel, because 
there's nothing but violence over there.” 

And we said, “Well, what about the Lorraine Motel?” 

And the policeman said, “We cannot go to the Lorraine Motel 
because there's nothing but violence over there. And tear gas is 
everywhere.” And he said, "Well, | will take you to a place.” 

And undoubtedly they had radioed ahead, because he took 
us to the headquarters hotel of the Holiday Inn. His on the banks 
of the Mississippi River, and it's a plush hotel. They already had 
wailing for us a suite that had a living area and two bedrooms, 


and one was for Dr. King, and one was for Bernard Lee and 
myself. 


Many stores along the march route were damaged, 280 people 
were arrested, 60 people were injured, and a black sixteen-year- 
old boy was killed by police gunlire. Later, the FBI circulated a 
memorandum to newspaper editorial ollices across the country 
citing the breakdown of the nonviolent march in Memphis as a 
precursor to possible violence during King's Poor People's Cam. 
paign in Washington. Several papers wrote stories that followed 
the FBIs logic. The Sr. Louis Globe- Democrat virtually reprinted 
the FBI memorandum as an editorial against the Poor People’s 
Campaign. 


BERNARD S. Lee 


We went to the motel. He didn't say anything. He just asked where 
was Jim, Jim Lawson. Jim, lm sure, was out there Irving to deal 
with the march. 1 think Andy was with us as well, if Vin not 
mistaken. But he just, he got on the bed and just rested, just went 
to sleep. E recall Ralph Abernathy getting à spread and putting it 
over him and he just slept through it. He just slept. He slept his 
discontent oll. But E knew he was terribly, ter ibly moved, teiibly 
upset hy the events of this march, because deep in his heart and 
his mind, he knew that he would be criticized loi the violent 
outburst ol the march. And he was a victim ol circumstances. Hec 
had been advised not to go to Memphis in the beginning, that we 
needed to be going to Washington to try to mobilize and des elop 


of thoupht to: D told about his personal experiences, both high 
l wove into ita message that the strikers 


(ett: and Jow ports 
heir Straggle, and certainty entitled to 


wore entitled to continue | 
the broad base of support that they had built across the city. Me 


to talk about the vision that he saw both for them 
and foi himsell And it was one of the most dramatic speeches 
ward. Howas not negative, it was really very, very high 
led the entire church at Mason Temple just went wild 
etl excitement 1 mwan, hie had touched a chard that was so 
deeply rooted in albo the people: it went fai beyond the strikers 
and he had shared with them his view ol 


then went on 


Duc cewa ! 


When in cnm 


po conmnimivy people 
not only himscell but his role in society. 


Ehe Reverend Fames E Smith was one ol ihe Memphis ministers 


Supporting the stikers 


janis E. SMIN 


anovercoming spiritin Mason Temple that night. We knew 
cat we were going to win Dr. Aber nathy spoke well. But we were 
waiting for Di: King. And because he was in town there was an 


mood, an overcoming spirit in that place. When Dr. 
There 


IuwAs 


ONAA AE 
King spoke that night we knew that we were going to win. 


was something about Di. King. A man who could walk with kings, 
but he was just as simple when he spoke that all of us understood 


hun Never met a man like that belore. 


ANDRI Ww YOUNG 


as inthe federal court, trying to testify to gel the 


Ehe next day baw 
amarch. E was in court all 


ut tion Lifted so laut we t ould have 
das long, on the witness stand a good part ol that day. 
We pot the injunction thrown out and we got our permission | 
fomarch, and Eguess about Inn thirty or five o'clock E came back 
Motel and E found Martin and A.D. IKingl and 
athered there, and they'd been cating, had 
in, 
and 


po the Luut A1" 
Ralph and everybody g 
lunch, and were talking and clowning. And when 1 came 
Martin just grabbed me and threw me down on the bed 
farted beating me with a pillow. EF mat, he was like a big kid. 


and he was fussing because E hadot reported to him, and Et 

to tell him E was on the witness stand, Fm here in tlie ic al 
court, and he was just standing on the bed swinging the pillow o 
me, and Uu trying to duck with him saving, "You have to let Hu 
know what's going on.” [Langh | And finally Esnatehed the pillow 
and started swinging back and everybody ` it wassortol like alter 
you make a touchdown and everybody piles on everybody. I 
mean, people just started throwing pillows and piling on top ol 
every body and laughing and going on. And then he stopped AN | 
said, “Let's go, you know we're due at dinner at six," and it Se 
at that time about six o'clock. And he went on up i his room ee 
put on a shirt and tie. E went out in the courtyard wailing for him 
and started shadowboxing with James Orange, who is about 
six-five and two hundred eighty pounds. E mean, James contd slap 
me on the ground with his litle linger. But I was a aM EURI 
with him and Martin came out and asked, "You think 1 need a 
coat?" And we said, “Yeah, it's pretty cool and you've had a caki 
you better go back and get a coat.” And he said, "b dont know 
whether I need a coat." And the next we know, a shot— well, | 
thought it was a car backfiring or a firecracker. aa | 


RALPH ABERNATHY 


| hear d what sounded like a firecracker. And EH jumped. And when 

| jumped I saw only his feet laying on the balcony. And l imme- 
diately rushed to his side and I started patting his cheek, saying 

Maitin, Martin, Martin. Don't be afraid. Don't be afraid This is 

ve This is Ralph. This is Ralph." And I got his alienion. And 

nd down. His eyes were moving and he became very, very 

e finally Andrew Young came up the steps and said, "Oh 

-Oh God, Ralph. Ht is over.” 
" béie Arad angry with Andrew Young and said, "Don't vou 
at, . Dont vou say that. His not over.” 

: Na: Hilly Kyles, whom we were going to eat with, came up 
i ns d Hed pet me an ambulance. And Eheard nothing but 
sicca V eni room. And l said, “Billy, keep yoursell 

. Vwant an ambulance. 


And he sill | "pn. | « ‘ 

said, "Ralph, all ol the | 
* £ s Iines a M | D " 
ate busy.” we busy. All ol the lines 


Wee Vott db S ob ERE E DOM 


mines nto a plus. We can in a stumbling block to a step 
pinpstone — Sometimes my works feel lo De in vain but then 
the Holy Spirit comes, Din revived again,” He preached himself 
out ob the depression. He said; “het us move on trom here to 


DI 


Memphis 


Oo Somlay, March 34, President Jobnson announced to the 
nation Chat be would not be a candidate hn reelection in No 
ve unn ku: bound some bope in Jolinsoms announcement 
Porhaps someone more active in helping the poor would soon 


beamnstalled in the White House 

On Wednesday, Apol Y, King and Abernathy retuned to 
Memplhas te meet with bn Al leaders about the new march, 
now tentatively scheduled for And 8. That afternoon, a tem: 
porav resting order was imposed against the march SCIC 
Planned to challenge t im court the next day. King announced 
he wouk lead the mus bh whatever the outcome. That evening. 
hing was supposed to address à crowd at Mason Temple. 


Hat rri An RNATITIEN 


Fiere was a tornado warning in Memphis that evening. And it 
Was naning, raining and wind was blowing everywhere. | believe 
a tittle tornado came to Memphis also. And he knew that there 
would not bea bip crowd. And he said to me, in the meeting, with 
the stall around, "E want you to go and speak this evening at the 
mass meeting c He had become so accustomed to large crowds, 
and Lan “Oh no, dont send me. Send Jesse or Andy or one of 
the other fellows ` And be said, “Ralph. there is only one per son 
imi the wold that can speak for me. And that is Ralph David 
Abernathy Will vou po^" And I said, "Yes, FE will go.” And sol 
went [Bar] when E got dn and was seated, 1 knew that those 
Photopraphers and those cameramen were looking lor Dr. King. 
Aud it was not meant for me Andsolasked, "Where is the nearest 
telephone?” And FEdecided that Ewould go find that telephone and 
call for Di ku And Di King said, “Okay, Ralph, E will be right 
thoe ` And Emade A second pitch. t said, “Martin, you know | 
would not ask vou to come ordinarily, but these people want ie 
hear vou, and they want to sec vou,” and be said, "David, that is 
net tu tot Pwill be there Have Fever told vou that E would 
do anmvtling that Edid not do? Ewill be there as soon as the cat 


KING'S LASI CRUSADE. 1967- 196R 445 


can bring me over.” And when he pot over there to the church, in 
fifteen minutes, the cameramen were glad to see him, and the 
people were glad to see him, and the presiding officer says to me, 
“Which one of you wants to be first tonight?" 


Abernathy gave a lengthy introduction ol his hiend, who then 
delivered a sermon that was to become known as the mogpntain- 
top speech. King spoke ob the need to manh again in Memphis, 
of the importance of ministers being socially active in what he 
termed "a relevant ministry.” “I's all Hight to talk about "long 
white robes over yonder, in all of its symbolism. But ultimately 
people want some suits and dresses and Shoes to wear down 
here. Ws all right to talk about ‘streets lowing with milk and 
honey,’ but God has commanded us to be concerned about the 
slums down here, and his children who can't eat three square 
meals a day. U's all right to talk about the new Jerusalem, but 
one day, God's preacher must talk about the new New Youk, the 
new Atlanta, the new Philadelphia, the new Los Angeles, the new 
Memphis, Tennessee.” 

He spoke in some detail about the need for the black 
community to launch an economic withdrawal from its oppres- 
sors. He listed products foi his listeners to bovcott, banks people 
of goodwill should support, black insurance companies who 
should teceive the policies of black clients. 

His aides had heard versions of it on other oc vasions, but 
for the strikers and their supporters, his last words that evening 
were new: "Well, HF don't know what will happen now. We ve got 
some difficult days ahead. But it really doesn't matter with me 
now, because I've been to the mountaintop. And I don't mind. 
Like anybody, | would like to live a long life. Longevity has its 
place. But lm not concerned about that now. E just want to do 
God's will. And He's allowed me to go up to the mountain. And 
Ivv looked over. And I've seen the promised land. Panay not get 
there with vou. But 1 want you to know tonight, that we, as a 
people, will get to the promised land. And Vin happy tonight Vm 
not worried about anything. Uu not teas ing any man Mine eyes 
have seen the glory of the oming ol the Lord.” 


Bui. Lucy 


l guess that you could say the mountaintop speech was perfect 
lov the kind of speech that it was. U wasan inspiring speech, one 
that Dr. King had really piven what appeared to be à good deal 


25 


RESURRECTION City, 1968 
“THE END OF A MAJOR BATTLE” 


It had always been a tenet of the civil tights movement that it could not 
surrender to violence and survive. Students and veteran activists on the 
Freedom Rides were beaten neatly to death, and others rode in to take 
their places. There were deaths in Mississippi; still move demonstrators 
tame, There were deaths in Selma; still more marched 

Just lour weeks after the April 4 murder of Martin Luther King, Ji., 
SCLCS new head, Ralph Abernathy, set out liom Memphis to lead the 
lust group of marchers to Washington, D.C., opening the Poor People's 
Campaign. By bus, cai, loot, and mule tain, poor people moved up out 
9É the South, across liom the west, and down hom New Yoik City to 
lake up residence on the Mall near the Lincoln Memorial, where only 
live years earlier a crowd of 250,000 had gathered to hear King share 
his d cam 

In Memphis, as the mai hers set out, Abernathy said, "For any of 
"n who would linger in the cemetery and tany around the grave, E have 
news lor yon, We have business on the road to freedom. ` ` We musi 


Vonis or PRE EE IM 


prese to white America that veu can kill the leader but yeu cannot kill 


the dicam ` 

On May F3, on the 
(unn ten settlement he 
ione far the city ab tents and sheds on public 
undertaking lor many who sull mourned them absent leader 


Mall ii Washington, Abernathy welcomed the 
cduistened Resurrection City It was a brave 
land, and a dl ut 


RaP AM RNAIIY 


Eel that Pad lost a part of me. Eelt that | had to walk this 
lonesome valley now by myself. E knew all ol the people ol the 
Southern Chistian Leadership Conference, the stall, 1 knew 
them well And thad worked with them. thad hired most of them. 
And E knew their weaknesses and E knew their strong points. But 
Lich that would have to walk the valley of life the rest of my 
days by myself without Martin Luther King 

Well, we vowed that we were going to stand together and 
stick together Jim Bevel, speaking for the stalf of the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference, said, “I loved Dr. King. In many 
respects Eloved Dr. King more than I love Jesus. But Dr. King is 
now dead. But we have our leader. And our leader is Ralph David 
Abernathy And we are going on to Washington, but by the way 


H 


ol Memphis ` 


WitttAM RUTHIE REL ORT 


The purpose and the goal of the Poor People's Campaign was to 
focus the attention ob the nation and the world on poverty. The 
technique, the tactic being used, was to gather the poorest ol ihe 
poor in the nation's capital, the heart of the wealthiest country 
in the world, to camp them, these homeless, hungry people, in 
the heart of this city and its fabulous malls situated between the 
Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument, take the plea 
and the complaint of the poor to each ol the government agencies 
Lo take them to the Department of Agriculture, where they deal 
with tood To take them to the Department ol Justice, where they 


deal with haws and the application of laws. To take them 


Department of the Interior, where the Chicanos and the Native 


Americans have very serious problems of land tenure and so OP 
Ehe thrust, the tactic ol the Poor Peoples Campaign ? 


lo ihe 


yas in 


RESURRECHON CLLY, 1968 


dealing with our own government to focus and attract the atte 

tion of the world on these problems, which are ever Wesce ' ! f 

which by and large are largely ignored by the masses i e » 

or which are not really focused on by the ee ol Se 
' ans. 


HARRY MCPHERSON 


The reacti . i 
she r a E the White House was à very unhappy one to the 
We people coming across the bridge in their wagons and 
D [ . H 3. H H 
deii: du the Mall, camping in Lafayette Square just across 
: | sy dën kar d from the White House, that image ol lun 
dreds and hundreds of people repr i PM 
e representing the poor but i 
isla DEN | A I t also 
id E lobe the tools of a political leadership that was seeking 
S m on the government to bring about change that 
could not be brought about i 
c overnight. Our shoulders s; 
enlace did ii shoulders sagged. 
: E were Hii S ask for things that we couldn't provide They 
cre going to make a lot of pe | 
cople mad, people wl 
Eechen i0 were alread 
growing restive. The first effects ei 
elects of the affirmati i 
A l ve action pro- 
grams were being felt in the c i : 
| Ihe country. A lot of white work 
iip da e workers were 
E sore SCH SE that they were being bypassed not 
1 any fault of their « i | 
own, but in order to advanc 
e rm advance blacks 
hes Son held down. So the temper was not a good one 
‘an te ithi inp 
—. is you that from within the White House, sitting in 
m SCH go Mà the windows open, you could hear people 
nging "We Shall Overcome" i i 
me in the tents in Lat '$ 
Which was mixed i i i ut 
ed in on occasion wi 
! sion with the sounds of 
ir nds of people 
ge Ge. SS Ae Avenue, “Hey, hey, LBJ, how wi 
' you kill today?” So ; i f 
j y? ou had the antiw; ‘oles 
"ger Ser y i C antiwar protesters o 
sylvania Avenue i ` anti S 
Square. Bot h SCH uc M antipoverty protesters in Lafayette 
el en T ing lor immediate change. And out in 
ou had the public opini 
Mo, Hit polls chanpi . 
radically and people ge anatase eU 


ling more an 
more looking lor a pre sri cel i ade 


cid a eslik sident who would bi ing the war to a quick 
sident who would enforce order in the cities 


ANDREW YOUNG 


Resune 


ction € 
"unde 


it z D . i 
a Y Was a community that was designed for filteen 
4 L i i d 
manv, many more people than that showed up 


Whe 
Vowere [i 
il JE H ' " 
teen hundic d M cll Ur At), WW ell dis iplined demon 


f... 


Vinc ps or ERI IM 

IL 

eie tobe recruited hom around the hae ie 
RE Bb his process Martin Father King was ki E ion 
imi die middle ob t jg ^ taining and imn building ol Kostet 
(ut serus back, mier tobe à part ol the Poor Peoples ( We 
dod ora cd i^ death The Funeral was the same way, We 
papo altes Mat » A vg $ ten, hheen thousand d a en 
pon dere d tree been all we could handle. 1 efe s i 
Se i s S a hundred thousand people, and yet we made 
pireobably chose : 


, [MI Uu ( [| VIS [E] L 


1 Cle 
D D E | i H rä D ( i l D ^ 
housen handle, tlbi UWI peop +n : D iin : VW Io W 
ut D e 
| $ 


LI LI a | * i le. 
i ID = 


à ` [ si 
W k |] ul (hens NV t 2, cil n 
M us] "ud te: Vet 1) D II henas d Sone Y0 ft ^ Iun 


Uni alive nit (alts u UV ven | [ES hin 

t tin imn ) ) H | af ul al M d ) 

Li II was also DI group ol about 100 ULE hiite " D V 
I LMES D Š w ^ but nuin 


H LI LI II b and 
| | Ur Y li ID In il D Ch 
af Ac d [1T IT! il th u the h n M VEU U nt i voll * 


stayed only biiclly 


Ii RNARD S. bat 


wound i all; it rained every day. Every day iren 
S v ach from the rain on the soil, which was vs 
ge e te isell just created a doe pee War ` 
ive wow : E e ` | Say, -M, 
GENEE oul problems. I Londres Ad 
hadn't MM dee bius Ru created to an oca 
that, the n We i pon it was very muddy. Sometimes, s) d 
ec rima f iced boards on the ground as à pam do id | 
, (Uu D * e x . . 
uk a still some would wind up in the s pape SE 
m H vs Jer iene s d nd iiie bes, So ib was 
muddy And some of the resit ents di i 
really, dit was an awlul experience. as a result of their having 
But the dividends were there as a p ior Peoples Cam 
ted amd been in Washington in URET an activity ihat 
poc lividends did come, and i£ was not an at S dit 
Mu ji pu "d h id those human problems, im ae i 
aS UL KA ainuc SE e 
pe s toour people, and ib was long E ipee 
pet the money to get some ol ne T rne laci that history 
needed But we established a city, and thi 


we could 
s really 


RI SURRE HON Cty, 1968 477 


must always recall. That foi good or bad, whatever, however it i 
perceives it, we did establish a city and people did live in that city, 
And we had all of the Problems that any urban city would have. 


People would get anpry with cach other and they would commit 


violence against each other. All ol the social and an ban problems 
rested tight in that city. We 


saw the reenactment of a city. We had 
created it. And in my estimation that was good. I mean, just as 
you have in the city of Washington or any othe 
those human problems that existed. Some 
ellective leadership. Some felt th 
and it did create proble 
about it. But we carrie 
better for it, 


r city, there were 
did not think we had 
at we had too much leadership 
ms within the city, there's no question 
don, we did persevere. And (link we were 


MICHAEL HARRINGTON 


I was invited to Resurrection Cily. When | Bot lo Resurrection 
City, | already knew from reading the newspaper reports that 
there had been a lot of violence, a lot ol disorganization. That the 
beloved community was not there by the Washington Monument. 
And I lectured. Everything was give 
And it was called the Poor People 
City. It was a group of people 
lectures dui ing the day. 

A group ol people were sitting on the ground gathered 
wound and a black man among them, I think with emotional 
problems, decided that | was the incarnation of white racism, 
And he wanted to know why I, who had been in the process ol 
giving a talk attacking racism, talking about what was needed in 
"der to end racism and poverty in the United States, was in lavor 
ol racism and poverty in the. United States. And he got very 
9RHated. And I became concerned that he could physically attack 
"me. The meeting sort ol came to a very unhappy ending, where 
My message didn't Bel across, and it's very hard to concentrate on 
Your talk When you're worried that somebody might be about to 
lump you. The man lett, and IH left to go and catch a plane and to 
me back to New Yen k, and literally ran away liom the meeting. 


éd | | 
anted ty pet as faraway trom this place as 1 could. On the one 


T 
we l was delighted that 1 was out of this miserable situation 
"d |a | 


onger had to be literally physically tearful. Bui on the 


n rather impressive names. 


's University ol Resurrection 
who were coming down and giving 


a 


aiher Band; u dawned on me that this was an end ol an vull 
period ob is lile that went back to 1954 when E had joined the 
Harter NAACP, sight altes Brown versus Board of Education, the 
deseprepation opinion And that ane of the most marvelous 
merica in the Form which it took undei 


political movements in Ai 
1955 to 1968 had come to an end. And 


Martin Luten Ring hom 
that the beloved Community wats pone lorevetr 


Hs bas ne Mm tan Wiiphit had moved to Washington 


MARIAN WiIGHE EE MAN 


hart ex All specific plans lor the Poor People’s Campaign. They 
were coming to Washington out of a general and urgent need, 
they were hungry, there was prowing poverty, but they had lost 
their leader, We were a bit bediaggled as the campaign began, 
aud when E began to meet with them when they came here, it was 
very cleat that the specific position papers and what they would 
ask cach agency to do oi what they would ask the president to do 


needed to be Heshed aut. So V got miysell an instant job ol 


developing those position papers. 
We were all very hurt, We had lost Di. King. We were trying 


We were determined that the poo would 


very haud to cary 0n 
be seen and heard. B was such a struggle. 1 mean, what | 


iemember most about Resurrection City was the mud and the 


ram which came along with the poor people, how haphazard the 
logistics were, and how hard it was to go oul and try to gel them 
to be witnesses but how willing and open they always were ina 
abont poiny to do this Aud t always have felt 


ep v Hey selling, 
because on one hand, going out to 


somewhat sn It zent tut 
Restieection City to identify and talk to witnesses, at the same 


tine to try It oralt what they said in a wav in which Washington 


Lan eu äs can heat d. So Fran this back-and-forth thing hom 


sot ob Ia ut out at Resurrection City to hear trom them what 


was needed and then bac k over to the Pitts Motel, where SC LI 
stall were staving, where Dr. Abernathy was staying. But Ht Wi" 


both a struggle and the poor were so moving, and apa 
| so 


and 


D so) 


determined to try todo what they could, and so needy, anc 
PRESS HY expectation was just Fo sort of pet through the day 
to pet them heard, to see it the country cant respond. 


0589 A UON UIID, LYDON 


DANIEL SCHORR 


IC D y u H 


ily 
ry now and 
thing for them 


On this day, late i 
Pel E late in May, the Reverend Jesse Jackson. ol 
d not been aware before this date, took three hundred 


ol them, they marched up to the Depariment of Agric i 

took them down to the cafeteria. They picke A 
Jackson tell them to go through the lin ae 
to him. And so, one by one, they 
checkout counter, and they 


d up trays. | saw 
and to give all the checks 
i took food, they went through the 
ee ae mn Aaah alah who was standing 
ee i, ja : Sé smiling, and they said, He's got the 
Sia ee do d when they'd all gone through the line 
a megaphone and he announced to everybody, 


"Oka Ze he Sí H DI e 
s y said, this government owes us a lot. And herves 
gun to pay a little bit of it with this lunch.” pompis 


Three wecks ` i 

Wie dus after the opening of Resurrection City, the P 
Se e d ampaign lost a powerful ally. Robert Kenne 
atally shot in the carly moming hours of June 


- e * H 
[E We ick I 


(nn 
dy was 
5. having just 
al primary. He died on 


ANDREW YOUNG 


Followi ; 

ing Mi TI. i 

the koania wë Luther King's death, immediately alice wei life 

e de | r we had a meeting and we said that il vou let neonle 
P the dream when the dreamer is sl; didici 


ape people lo keep on killin "e 
g our br T bea d 
By eadership. So the most 


So we didn't Wett id tie Parere and keep it going. 
Mantin Luther Kin We k d aon iani ave Uno reset. 
Pushed ourselves Ge , ad to go on with his work. And so we 
and inte; nally on the vc Ven A eege probably all emotionally 
ben on through the c ede AM we pustied'ouiselves 
WU then on the si AY days of the Poor People's Campaign. 
loth of sel pce Vie right alter Martin's death d Be 
“ervthing to a hat and I eg assassination: just broda 
e began to grieve about Martin 


ee 


Vend 8 0b biti om 
IAN 


I 4 ) y’ RET ) b Ui sc Bobby 
| LI [ "wl ol Ih ibl \ Kenned S alSSalS! nali n 8 Coal 

"ELI ily LT | ; i , 

II), IA ol Ws lx poni Io KINN L] li p LI vU t i 

brane (NIR a 


a | l b, 
i 4) 1) II t \ H Ur 


Wi UIAM RUDD REORD 


; "i as a faili AUSE 
uk the impression that Resurrection ee ee ae 
occured probably two oir three weeks ie i ; Ca Stm eh 
is, we had anticipated a reaction on the par nd had hoped to 

dp under the impact of the publicity that we | a i us 
publi te, that would have helped achieve the goal » Geet: 
CHC, 1 à 2 a | 
inn on the plight ol the poor in gei saa 
EE alter the demonstrations at the Depi - 
Vini en Wes at the Department ol dpe at 
e ji it became more and more clear that this ie e pe the 
ing, i was not about to Eech Soe iet kanci 
lmi ation ol the Poor Peoples Campi t . 4 od 
P pps the hundreds and thousands of Violin 
anm hom all parts of the country, who had dis ce hal in 
ho were deeply buried in poverty and ini pesa e left com- 
whe "Mie : People's Campaign, and were left c 
poverty despite the Poor People vivors of what could be de- 
Hetely stranded —they were the ee déiten BCEE? 
à ribed as the Little Bighorn ol the civil Pants sem garg 
 lunk the spirit went out ol people. UM K Séis Wann. 
who had no place to go. People vu: nad db Iho " and who 
had come to Resurrection City, witha preal dea : A de civil 
had none felit When E say it was the Litle Bip i cunt ebbe 
le movement, in Fact it was the end ol the Bupos SE — 
a many many people who bad come from "i m je E 
country to participate. TE wasa Weg eier oa The city 
mye scene altogether We had tern ible gie a Et 
was bopped down in inud and rain. HORE tio (hic calis 
as any battleheld there could have been in any : 
withthe Foot soldiers slogging through ng oe um wople with 
There were really very sad scenes. There we eg e ae 
lace to pochinging to these hame shanties. I was n Y 
no plac l l » lew possessions, pool § 
Shantvtown there People with very | 


] 1 . DEINE cou 
"n thinps VI) wonder WW hy Ul hos HI Juan bei t 
"A8 ^u : AJ 


c 


When Resurrection City was 
betrayal, a sense of 
in Memphis and the 
Which was to fee 
together 
m 
lime E had eve 
City. The 
Dr. 
the 


With an 


RESURRECTION City, 1968 481 


have their total worldly goods ve 
most nothing. Friends saying good-bye, Iriends being separated. 
Strangers who had become friends during the wee 
People’s Campaign and Resurre 
and miserable scene from eve 
ol the weather, the re 


duced to such a small lot of al- 


ks of the Poor 
ction City. It was a very unhappy 
ty point ol view —the point of view 
sults ol the campaign, and so on. 

The last day of Beau rection City—1 can continue this simile 
about à camp at the end of a battle ora war— thc camp was largely 

abandoned, very few people were left. They had been warned. 

They had been given a delay to leave the premises and they were 

being in effect evicted by the Capitol and Park Police. There was 
a cap that went off and it sounded like ; 


à shot. Of course, everyone 
was very apprehensive and nervous about possible violence. And 
of course it was not a shot. I don't know re; 


ally what the noise was, 
perhaps a firecracker. But the police in this long blue line moved 
forward and they actually fired tear gas, and we got a good whill 
of tcar gas, those of us who were supervising or sciving as 
observers for the evacuation of the camp. And there was the 
smoke from the tear Bas rising from the ground, again, like an 
abandoned battle 


field. As you moved forward across the site, it 
they had lost. 


attle, a battle of the poor, and 


Resurrection City was torn down on June 


24. 1968. Jessc Jack. 
son had served as its unollici 


al mayor, 


JESSE JACKSON 


closed down there was à sense of 
abandonment. The dreamer had been killed 
re was an attempt now to kill the dream itsell, 
d the hungry, which was to bring the people 
| and rather than come forth with a plan to wipe out 
alnutrition, they were wiping out the malnourished. The first 

r really experienced teas gas was in Resurrection 


Y drove us out with tear Eas. They gassed us. They shot 
King. Now il 


determined to keep 
Struggle moving—il you will, to keep hope alive. Eleh there 


awlul sense of betrayal and abandonment. 


In] Vorbis 01 FREEDOM 
Roger Wilkins lad been involved in Justice Department negoti 


anons wih canmpapn leaders 


Roci a WIH KINS 


Huch alter Resuriret tion City was emptied out, | was told to go 

out t0 Fourteenth and U by the attorney general because there 

was an incipient riot, When | got there the intersection was all 

Lea with volatile young people who clearly wanted to start ati iot. 

And E looked around, and up on the back of a flatbed truck there 

was young Jesse Jackson, who was about twenty-six years old at 
the time. And he was preaching. And he was saying, "I am 
somebody. H youre somebody, you don't riot. Say after me, ‘Lam 
somebody ^H you are somebody, you go out and you build strong 
black people. Say after me, 'I am somebody." What Jesse was 
doing was preaching the riot out of those people. He's preaching, 
really, pride. "M you are somebody, you build up, you don't tear 
down. Say after me, “bam somebody." He kept on preaching, he 
kept on preaching. He was taking quite a risk. ‘Cause to preach 
nonviolence and to preach no rioting to à group of kids who 
wanted to tear the place down was taking a risk that you'd be 
called an Uncle Tom. Jac kson took the risk, he preached the 
people down. They became calm, they went home, there was no 


riot, I was quite à remarkable performance for a (went y-six-vear- 


old kid 


MARIAN WRIGHT ptf MAN 


When Resurrection City was done, E nevei thought about giving 
up. thought about how do I get up and figure out à new way to 
keep poing ! don't think anybody ever has a right to give up on 
children or give up on the poor The needs remain. The needs 
prow. b wax raised at a time by black adults 119 daddy was a 
preacher like Di. King- where, il you saw it need, you ried to 
respond. And they showed us by personal example how to (€ 
spond Ini mv little hometown in rural, segregated South Caro: 
lina, there was ne playpround where black kids could go and plav. 
because we were segregated. So my daddy built à playground 
behind the church. There was no black home for the aged in 
South Carolina to take the elderly. 50 my daddy and mama 


RESURRECTION City, 968 


started one, i di 
So we GE ee taught to serve and clean and cook. 
ECH Na TD responsibility to take care ol the 
somebody else GE MEYER why, il there was a need, should 
et eege) UR We were taught to ask, Why dont 
be at bier Fa hee Young and others ol 
through his ' pints ane ene struggled and went 
pen A be. was olten discouraged. He was often 
day, despite the larger void E. he was going to go from day to 
so siot eiit uid e dien or what was right for America, and 
bis onae and cé i i c not to uy to carry on? None of us had 
and certainly not his goodness, but in our own 


n Vene p S or der DOM 


on thre other hand. a ane ed lor perspective EH never torget, Ewa 
ganding. At one pont. nest de a reporter from the New York 
Im ul hec was oln ously saddened by Di King’s death Ile 
eas an important weiter bor the Tute, Recalling an artic le on 
Vietnam and Di ku, an editorial very critical and highly mis: 
Lulu which helped to fan the Hames ol discontent with Martin, 
PTT him as anpatiienie. making people quite angry with him 
amd the movement, Beant not helpbut tell him that this grievous 
ament was in part the result ob a climate of hate and distortion 
that the New York Tut: and other papers had helped create, In 
vii ul the way the Washington Post wrote its editor ial on Dr. 
King and Vietnam Ht was misleading. lC was punitive. It was à 
preat disservice to à great CAUSE, Aud at the funeral when 1 said 
His. Edidit say it to him as a personal accusation. I said il 
because I wamed him to understand that no one could be ex- 
empted hom responsibility il in the protection ol special inter- 
ests we abandoned moral responsibility, Just coming to grieve 
the loss was no cleansing of guilt. History would remember what 
the Washington Post; the New York Times, and other journals had 
done to make this moment realizable. E told him that the time 
would come again when his powe and that ol his paper would 
be put to the test New leaders obviously are going to come. 
There's going to be à new wave ol need for revolt, a new wave ol 
demand and it would even be global. 


a ey montlis belare his assasstiation, King had spoken to his 
conmprepation ab Lbhenezet Baptist Chiich in Atlanta and ollered 
weit end be des iibed as his own eulogy 

Every en amd hen d uk about iiy own death; and ! 
(uk about iiy ow Lucy Al And Ubau) think ob i nn a morbid 
sense Evers now and then t ask invsell What is i that E would 
eant sand ^ And Heave the ward to veu this morning 

"Mans ol von ne team when FE have to meet my dav. L 
dont want A long fung al And d vou pet somebody te deliver 
the eulos tell then not to talk too long Everv now and then ! 
wondor what U uamt them ber sats Pell them net to mention that 
Khave a Nobel Peace Puze. (at rant napor tant Fell them (n 
to me nien that have three i Lan hundeed ether awards. thats 
not inpertant Bell hin not to mention where Ewent test houl 

"Vd libe Somebody to mention that das that Marten pul! 
Lu hound tee pave bus hhe serving ethicis (d like [TIT] DUU 


(wu ter sar daat das; that Mat Butler King. ty ied to deve 


KING'S LASI CRUSADE, 1967 1908 


somclx 
"is iei dg e to say that dav, thor E tied to be night on 
try to feed the hun gie E to be able t0 say that day, that Edid 
I did try, in my WR tux Wisin et to d able to say that day, that 
x CW WCC m D = 
to say, on that day, that I did try to visit itaqae dee Wem 
you = say that FE tied to love and serve ef: eege 
was a peel sats greng that 1 was a dium major, say that I 
a jor ton postie e; say that | was a dium major foi 
ek tere de tae oi righteousness. And all ol the other 
behind. E won't have " bei I won't have any money to leave 
behind. But In ve fine and luxurious things ol lile to leave 
just want to leave a committed life behind.” 


[When an ambulance a tv |b wert with him, rade oi 
Im mu the back ob the ambulance: And | committed « ivil eg : | 
thence and Ewoeuld iot leave the operating room. And ipn Y [ S 
doctor came over to me and said; "You are De Abernathy? He wi 
fe will be an act of merey, because he would be 


nob suni | 
paralyzed Eom his waist down. You may have your last moments 


with hun ` 8 | 
And E went over and took him in iy aims. And he breathed 


hus Let breath 


Wib one ob bis colleagues, Wallin Rathertord had lelt Mem 
plis alter an alternoon stall mecting with King 


Witt AM Hu REORD 


We returned to Atlanta by plane. We arrived in Atlanta Sen 
took a taxi to the SCLC office, and it was a scene of total 
pandemonium as we anived at the office on Auburn Aue ie: 
People were screaming and fainting and literally rending gen 
selves, tearing thei clothing and so on and so forth, and we said, 
“What on cath is happening?” And some young woman 
scieamed at us, "Di. King has been shot. Dr. King has been och 
E said, “Well, thats hardly possible. We just left him. Just left 
him” So E went in the office and attempted to Mui e o 
Memphis, and olcourse Eeouldant get through lor hours. eier vi 
we had the radio on and we began hearing the radio broac gen 
(ut reported not only that he had been shot, but that he pus y 
had died: That was the way we learned of his death, having e d 
um All ol the senor stall was with hin in Memphis, either at 
the (mie ob bas death or very shortly belore. | 
Oh, i took me apes and ages to accept the fact that Dr King 
was delbinitely dead He was such an active man. He was such i 
torce and a presence, and it was just unbelievable and, I si 
psychologically unacceptable that he would not be coming n S 
Aud inthe midst of all this chaos and pandemonium in the SC d 
office and headquarters, © kept expecting Dr. King to wal 
(lu: nh the door at any minute saying, "All right, come on, this 


d H D Sg A X Lo 
IS queat But why dont we stop the nonsense now and get back 


work” 


Sore keene. ITT OKT, ant 


As news of King's assassination Spread, black communities 
across the country reacted with violen Disorders broke out in 
FIO cities, more than seventy five thousand National Guards 
men were called out, and thirty nine people were killed 


HARRY BELAFONTE 


The giving in to the loss of Dr. King erupted, but only in moments. 
The real sense of grieving about him did not come for me, and I 
think for my wife and a lot ol others, until much later, When I 
Ilew immediately to Atlanta, there was this bewildering invasion 
of people, all these faces that we had never seen before, never 
knew before. All kinds of people, many of whom had come to this 
tragic moment as if ij was a photo opportunity, E don't mean to 
discredit many who came out of real, genuine concern and 
goodwill, but there were others who saw in it a time that could 
be manipulated. So we had to do what we could to sort out those 
who came with an agenda, who were going to be the manipula- 
tors, from those who wanted to help move on with Dr. King's 
mission, who felt that the momentum of the movement should 
not falter. In a private conversation I had with Coretta King, we 
talked about going to Memphis, being there, to meet up with the 
garbage workers, to carry on the campaign and to do so imme- 
diately even before Dr. King was laid to rest. Everybody in the 
family agreed that it was appropriate. So I arranged for a plane 
and the necessary support to give Coretta and others mobility to 
do what had to be done. It was important that this nation know 
that even in the midst of our grief we were still committed to the 
objectives of the movement and that the fallen Dr. King did not 
leave behind a movement that, inthe midst of this great tragedy, 
would lose its Courage or its vision. 

There was a sense at Dr. Kings funeral that we were ata 
moment in history that was unique. All those hundreds of thou- 
sands of people who came there had a sense of oneness that I've 
never quite experienced anywhere else again. 

Ws interesting about death. At the March on Washington, a 
major convening of very diverse groups, Dr. King was alive and 
we had à great sense ol ourselves and our power. It was another 
thing to be in this other environment, equally dramatic. Dealing 
With this huge and undefinable loss, very diverse groups ol 
People, on the one hand, feeling close to their fellow humans and 


T l 


